2
0
0
2
 
n
a
J
 
5
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
m
o
t
a
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
0
5
0
1
0
2
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Precision Optical Measurements and
Fundamental Physical Constants

Savely G. Karshenboim⋆

D. I. Mendeleev Institute for Metrology, St. Petersburg, Russia
Max-Planck-Institut f¨ur Quantenoptik, Garching, Germany

Summary. A brief overview is given on precision determinations of values of the
fundamental physical constants and the search for their variation with time by
means of precision spectroscopy in the optical domain.

1 Introduction

The electron and proton are involved in various phenomena of diﬀerent ﬁelds
of physics. As a result, fundamental physical constants related to their prop-
erties (such as electron/proton charge (e), the electron and proton masses
(me and mp), the Rydberg constant (Ry), the ﬁne structure constant (α)
etc), can be traced in various basic equations of physics of atoms, molecules,
solid state, nuclei and particles etc. Until recently most accurate measure-
ments came from radio frequency experiments only, which supplied us with
precise values of most of the fundamental constants and accurate tests of the
quantum theory of simple atoms (bound state QED). The optical measure-
ments delivered to us a value for the Rydberg constant, but were not accurate
enough to provide any competitive test of the QED.

During the last decade the status of the optical measurements changed

dramatically because of

• advances in atomic spectroscopy, for example, Doppler-free two-photon
spectroscopy of atomic hydrogen, with signiﬁcantly increased resolution;
• advances in the technology for measuring optical frequencies. New fre-
quency chains routinely deliver the high accuracy of the microwave ce-
sium radiation (related to the deﬁnition of the second ) to the optical
domain.

Two-photon methods were developed for hydrogen spectroscopy at Stan-
ford, Oxford, LKB (Laboratoire Kastler Brossel), Yale and MPQ during two
last decades (see a review in [1]). Improved accuracy of the Rydberg constant
by few orders of magnitude is supplying us with a precision test of the theory
of the Lamb shift in hydrogen and deuterium atoms (see [2] and references
therein). The accuracy of these tests is even higher than from traditional
microwave measurements. We discuss that in detail in Sect. 2.

⋆ E-mail: sek@mpq.mpg.de

2

Savely G. Karshenboim

The progress with the spectroscopy of the 1s − 2s transition [3] and with
the development of a new type of frequency chain [4] was so large, that
the transition oﬀered also an opportunity to search for a variation of the
fundamental constants with time. The appearance of the new frequency chain
developed at MPQ [4] and successfully applied at several laboratories (MPQ,
JILA [5], NIST, PTB) has greatly changed the situation with the optical
measurements (see a review in [6]). This is important for metrology and
the design of new frequency standards, for the search of variations of the
fundamental constants and for numerous other applications. We consider the
application to the search for such variations in Sect. 3.

2 Rydberg Constant and the Lamb Shift in the

Hydrogen Atom

The discovery of the Lamb shift in the hydrogen atom was a starting point
of the most advanced quantum theory — Quantum electrodynamics (QED).
This theory predicts a number of quantities with a great accuracy. There
are only a few examples where an accurate theory also allows precise mea-
surements. Those are [7,8] the anomalous magnetic moment of the electron
and muon and some transition frequencies in simple atoms (see e.g. Fig. 1).
Most success was obtained with the study of the hydrogen atom. However,
the progress of traditional microwave measurements has been quite slow and
reached the 10 ppm level of accuracy only for the hydrogen Lamb shift
(Fig. 2).

It turned out that the two-photon Doppler-free spectroscopy of gross
structure transitions (such as 1s − 2s, 1s − 3s, 2s − 4s etc) allowed access
to narrower levels and could deliver very accurate values sensitive to QED
eﬀects. But to interpret those values in terms of the Lamb shift, two problems
had to be solved:

• the Rydberg constant determines a dominant part of any optical transi-

tion and has to be known itself;

• a number of levels are involved and it is necessary to be able to ﬁnd
relationships between the Lamb shifts (EL) of diﬀerent levels. Otherwise
the experimental data would be of no use because the number of unknown
quantities exceeds the number of measured transitions.

The former problem has been solved by comparison of two transitions
determining both: the Rydberg and the QED contributions. Presently the
two best results to combine are the 1s − 2s frequency in hydrogen and deu-
terium [3,9] and the 2s − 8s/d transition in the same atoms [10]. The latter
problem has been solved with a help of a speciﬁc diﬀerence [11]

∆(n) = EL(1s) − n3EL(ns) ,

(1)

Precision Measurements and Fundamental Constants

3

fine structure

2p3/2

    grand average

Lamb splitting

2p1/2

comparison  Garching - Paris

  averages

LS

FS

OBF

two-photon transition

(gross structure)

theory

2s1/2

1s1/2

Fig. 1. Example of diﬀerent tran-
sitions in hydrogen atom. Tran-
sitions within the ﬁne structure
and Lamb splitting are in the mi-
crowave range, while the 1s −
2s two-photon transition lies in
ultraviolet domain. The Lamb
splitting is the diﬀerence of Lamb
shift of 2s1/2 and 2p1/2 levels.

1057 800 kHz

1057 850 kHz

1057 900 kHz

Fig. 2. Present status of the Lamb split-
ting in hydrogen (2s1/2 − 2p1/2). The
ﬁgure contains values derived from vari-
ous experiments. LS stands for the Lamb
splitting measurements (see Fig. 1), FS is
for the ﬁne structure, and OBF stands
for optical beat frequency (simultane-
ous measurement of two optical transi-
tions). The theoretical estimation is taken
from [14]

which can be calculated more accurately than the Lamb shift of the individual
levels.

A successful deduction of the Lamb shift (Fig. 2) in the hydrogen atom
provides us with a precision test of bound state QED and oﬀers an opportu-
nity to learn more about the proton size. Bound state QED is quite diﬀerent
from QED for free particles. The bound state problem is complicated itself
even in the case of the classical mechanics. The hydrogen atom is the sim-
plest atomic system; however, a theoretical result for the energy levels is
expressed as a complicated function (often a perturbative expansion) of a
number of small parameters [7] (see review [13] for a collection of theoretical
contributions):

• α, which counts the QED loops;
• the Coulomb strength Zα;
• electron-to-proton mass ratio;
• ratio of the proton radius to the Bohr radius.

Indeed, in hydrogen Z = 1, the origin of the correction is very important and
the behaviour of expansions in α and Zα diﬀers from each other. In particular,
the latter involves large logarithms (ln(1/Zα) ∼ 5) [7,12] and big coeﬃcients.
It is not possible to do any exact calculations and one must at least use
expansions in some parameters. In such a case the hardest theoretical problem
is not to make the calculation, but rather to estimate the uncalculated terms
related to higher-order corrections of the expansion.

4

Savely G. Karshenboim

The other problem is due to the proton size [14] which lead to a dominant
uncertainty of the theory. The ﬁnite size of the proton leads to a simple
expression, but to obtain its numerical value one needs to determine the
value for the proton charge radius. Unfortunately no such measurements are
available at the moment. It happens now that the most accurate value can
be obtained from a comparison of the experimental value of the Lamb shift
derived from the optical measurements of the hydrogen and QED theory [14].
The other quantity deduced from the optical measurements on hydrogen
and deuterium is the Rydberg constant. The recent progress is clearly seen
from the recommended CODATA values of 1986 and 1998 [15]:

Ry86 = 10 973 731.534(13) m

−1 and Ry98 = 10 973 731.568 549(83) m

−1 .

The former value was derived from one-photon transitions (Balmer series)
and was slightly improved later (by a factor of 4.5), but all further progress
that led to the 1998’s value (30 times improvement) was a result of the
study of two-photon transitions in hydrogen and deuterium. Fig. 3 shows a
comparison of several recently published values for the Rydberg constant.

]

1
−

m

 

[
 
8
6
5
.
1
3
7
3
7
9
0
1
 
−
 
y
R

 

8·10−4
7·10−4
6·10−4
5·10−4
4·10−4
3·10−4
2·10−4
1·10−4

0

CODATA

1992

1994

1996

1998

2000

Date of publications

Fig. 3. Recent progress in the determination of the Rydberg constant (mainly at
MPQ and LKB)

Some other fundamental constants can also be determined by means of
laser spectroscopy. To complete the overview let us mention determination of

• the muon-to-electron mass ratio from three-photon ionization of the ground
state of muonium at a resonance point of the two-photon excitation of
the 2s state [16];

• the ﬁne structure constant α derived from the helium ﬁne structure;
• the ﬁne structure constant deduced from Raman recoil spectroscopy of
the cesium D1 line [17]. For this evaluation a precise value of the absolute
frequency of the D1 line is also necessary.

Precision Measurements and Fundamental Constants

5

3 Optical Measurements and Variation of the

Fundamental Constants with Time

After the success with understanding of the electromagnetic, weak and, in
part, strong interaction we arrived at some sort of threshold of new physics.
Naturally, it is not clear on which front one is most likely to discover new
physical phenomena. The present-day attempts to discover new physics are
rather a kind of a random search for a hidden treasure. Unfortunately, lacking
of theoretical predictions there seems to be no better method up to now. One
of few directions of such a search is related to the variation of the fundamental
constants with time. There is no common model for such a phenomena, but
the accepted picture of the evolution of our universe strongly implies for that.
‘Variation’ means a slow drift or oscillation of parameters of the interaction
and particle properties (like their masses). We commonly believe that during
a small fraction of the very ﬁrst second our universe came through a number
of phase transitions and the interactions and particles as we know them now
did not exist before those transitions. So, philosophically speaking, we have to
acknowledge the variation of constants as some kind of trace of the early great
changes. Physically speaking, we understand that the critical question for a
detection of the variation is the rate at which it occurs, because variation
rates of 10−10 yr−1 and 10−20 yr−1 are not the same. Variation of, e. g.
the ﬁne structure constant, at the former limit would have already been
detected a few decades ago, while the latter rate will rather be a challenge
for physicists in a few decades. Present-day searches are related to a level of
10−13 − 10−15 yr−1, which corresponds to a fractional shift of the constants
smaller than than 10−3 − 10−5 for the life-time of the universe.

There are a number of possibilities for such a search, but the optical mea-
surements play a speciﬁc role, because of their clear interpretation. However,
the fact of variation is more important than the accurate interpretation. In
the case of a negative result no limitation for a variation can be assigned
without a reasonable interpretation. From the theoretical point of view we
have to expect simultaneous variations of all coupling constants, masses and
magnetic moments. If one wishes to ﬁnd a solid interpretation, some reduc-
tion of all variable quantities to a very few is important. However, nuclear
properties are the result of the strong interactions and involve eﬀects, that
cannot be calculated. Only optical transitions are completely free from this
problem.

We summarize a comparison of diﬀerent searches in Table 1 [18]. Let us

discuss brieﬂy the speciﬁc features of the diﬀerent methods.

• To detect a variation one needs to compare some quantity A(t) measured
at time t and t + ∆t. However, the obvious estimation of the variation
rate ∆A/∆t is valid only in the case of a slow drift. In the case of oscilla-
tions, and such oscillations were suggested because of some astrophysical
reasons, the estimate must be rather ∆A/T , where T is the half-period of

6

Savely G. Karshenboim

Table 1. Comparison of diﬀerent kinds of searches for a variation of fundamental
constants. Here T is a half-period of oscillations and ∆t is a time separation for
a comparison. The Laboratory search contains all laboratory measurements, while
Optical transitions are for comparison of only optical transitions. The limitation
expected in 1-2 years are also presented.

Geochemical
study
∆t > T
−
−
sensitive
+
−
−
−
−17 yr

10

−1

Astrophysical
observation
∆t > T
important
essential
not sensitive
+
+
+
−
−15 yr

10

−1

Laboratory
search
phase - ?
−

sensitive
+
+
+
+
−15 yr

−1

10

Optical
transitions
phase - ?
−
−
not sensitive
+
−
−
−
−13 yr
−1
10
10−14 yr−1

Oscillation
Space
Statistics
Strong Int.
α
me/mp
gp
gn
Limitations
In 1-2 years

the oscillation (∼ 108 yr). That makes astrophysical (δt ∼ 1010 yr) and
geochemical (δt ∼ 2 · 109 yr) estimates much weaker, while in the case of
any laboratory experiments we arrive at the question of the phase of such
an oscillation. One sees the laboratory search and a search over time (and
space) are two diﬀerent kinds of experiments and serve diﬀerent purposes.
• Astrophysical data owe two features diﬀerent from others. First, we can
observe the object separated from us both in space and time as there
might be a correlation between time- and space- variations. Secondly,
the astrophysical data are hard to interpret on an event-by-event base.
They used to be treated statistically and it is necessary to study the
correlations of the data.

• Another important question for interpretations is involvement of the
strong interactions. In the case of geochemical data that is the main
eﬀect and there is no reasonable interpretation of such data at all. In
the case of laboratory measurements, the strong interaction is important
because of the nuclear magnetic moments (see below).

• We can look only for variations of dimensionless quantities such as a
ratio of two frequencies and we need to reduce them to a variation of few
dimensionless constants, which are the ﬁne structure constant α, electron-
to-proton mass ratio, g-factors of proton and neutron. That is possible
because of two reasons, which are

– known non-relativistic dependence of any transition frequency on the

fundamental constants;

– the Schmidt model predicts nuclear magnetic moments for odd Z;
• Non-relativistic theory in particular predicts (see [18] for details), that

Precision Measurements and Fundamental Constants

7

– any gross structure transition frequency depends only on the Rydberg

constant (∼ Ry);

– any ﬁne structure transition frequency is proportional to α2Ry;
– any hyperﬁne structure transition is proportional to α2(µ/µB)Ry,
where µ is the nuclear magnetic moment and µB is the Bohr magne-
ton.

• The Schmidt model predicts the magnetic moment of nuclei with odd
mass number A as a result of the spin and orbit contribution of a single
nucleon (the remaining protons and neutrons are coupled in pairs and
do not contribute). Indeed that is a very rough model, but there is no
other way to reduce all magnetic moments to few quantities (me/mp, gp,
gn). The problem of interpretation is now related to the inaccuracy of
the Schmidt model because of the strong interaction which is not under
control.

The present-day level of limitations is diﬀerent for various methods and
the optical experiments do not look as a good choice in general and in com-
parison with other laboratory experiments. However, the discussion above
explains in part that there is no clear interpretation of the geochemical data
and there are some doubts in the astrophysical data. There is a single labo-
ratory result in Table 1 that is better than 10−13 yr−1: a comparison of the
hyperﬁne splitting in Rb and Cs [19]. This experiment could be a search for a
variation of gp. Such an interpretation is valid only if the Schmidt model can
be applied, but unfortunately there are essential deviations from the Schmidt
model due to the strong interaction (mainly in Cs). The actual interpretation
remains unclear.

We brieﬂy discuss optical laboratory experiments below. The current lim-
itations are quite weak (∼ 10−13 yr−1) because most of the results were
obtained recently on a level of a fractional uncertainty of 10−14 (see Table 2).
These limitations were obtained either after a short-term monitoring or after
a comparison with a previous less accurate result. Future limitations based
on reproduction of the recent experiments in 2000-2001 must easily deliver
limitations better by an order of magnitude.

Since all the transitions in Table 2 are related to the gross structure
one could wonder how to obtain any information about a variation of the
ﬁne structure constant if all of them are proportional (in the non-relativistic
approximation) to the Rydberg constant. The signal is due to the relativistic
corrections. Their importance (for the hyperﬁne structure) was ﬁrst pointed
out in [23] and they were later calculated for a bunch of the optical transitions
in [24]. The transition frequency is now equal to c Ry Frel(α) and a non-trivial
relativistic factor Frel(α) is a key point to look for a variation of the ﬁne
structure constant by optical means. The sensitivity κ = ∂ ln Frel(α)/∂ ln α
to a variation of α is given in Table 2 accordingly to [24].

8

Savely G. Karshenboim

Table 2. Some results of recent precision optical measurements (H, 1s − 2s, 40Ca,
3P1 − 1S0, 115In+, 5s21S0 − 5s5p3P0, 171Yb+, 6s22S1/2 − 5d22D3/2, 199Hg+, 2S1/2 −
2D5/2), their fractional uncertainty δ and their sensitivity to a variation of the ﬁne
structure constant κ = ∂ ln Frel(α)/∂ ln α

Atom

H
Ca
In+
Yb+
Hg+

Frequency
[Hz]

2 466 061 413 187 103 (46)
455 986 240 494 158 (26)
1 267 402 452 899 920(230)
688 358 979 309 312 (6)
1 064 721 609 899 143 (10)

Place and date
of measurement
MPQ, 1999, [3]
NIST, 2000, [20]
MPQ, 1999, [21]
PTB, 2001, [22]
NIST, 2000, [20]

δ
[10−14]
1.8
5.7
18
0.9
0.9

κ
[24]
0.00
0.03
0.21
1.03
-3.18

A comparison of two optical frequencies can be performed directly (like
e.g. an Hg-Ca comparison at NIST [20]) or indirectly (via a comparison of
both frequency to cesium standard).

A direct comparison of two distinct optical frequencies is now possible
using the newly developed femtosecond frequency chains. This approach has
the advantage of a high short-term stability as compared with cesium stan-
dard. This allows for a simple time structure of the experiment [18] with
a few direct comparisons. A comparison with cesium often involves some
secondary standard with a high short-term stability. Such a clock being an
artefact that is not related to any transition should involve an unknown drift
with time as the constants are drifting. Their short time stability cannot be
actually proved. A common reason for a statement on the good short-time
stability of such a standard (like a hydrogen maser for example) is that the
scattering of their frequencies with time is small. But there is no idea about
a possible common mode rejection. The stronger reason to believe in a good
short term stability is a comparison between diﬀerent clocks. But still there
might be a common mode rejection as it should be the case for a variation of
the constants. A direct comparison of two optical transitions allows to avoid
this problem and oﬀers a new opportunity to securely derive a limitation for
a variation of the ﬁne structure constant or maybe even to detect such a
variation.

4 Summary

Nowadays, optical spectroscopy of atoms provides an essential input for the
determination of the fundamental physical constants, including the most ac-
curately known fundamental constant, the Rydberg constant, which plays an
important role in atomic physics. The so-called atomic unit of frequency and
energy are related to this constant being c · Ry and h · c · Ry respectively.
A deﬁnition of the second , attractive from a general point of view, could be

Precision Measurements and Fundamental Constants

9

based on a ﬁxed value of the Rydberg constant. This would be practically
acceptable after the following steps are achieved:

• the completion of a frequency chain that connects the optical with mi-
crowave domain and, at the same time allows for a comparison of any
optical transition with the 1s − 2s frequency on in hydrogen (done at
MPQ [4] and used now also at NIST, JILA, PTB);

• accurate measurement of the 1s − 2s transition (done at MPQ [3] with
an accuracy compatible with any other optical transition but not yet
competitive with cesium and rubidium fountain clocks);

• proper QED theory of the Lamb shift (essentially developed within the

last decades but it still needs more progress);

• determination of the proton charge radius (not known with suﬃcient

accuracy, but a promising experiment is in progress [25]).

The hydrogen atom was a candidate for the primary frequency standard in
the 1960ies because of the hyperﬁne splitting, but this attempt failed for a
number of reasons. Now it is time for a strong competition of new frequency
standards and the hydrogen atom has its second chance.

Actually there is one more fundamental constant, which is associated with

the optical measurements. That is the speed of light which is equal to

c = 299 792 458 m/s

(2)

because of the deﬁnition of the meter . Despite this constant is ﬁxed by def-
inition there is still an uncertainty related to a practical realization of the
meter . The problem is that the second is deﬁned with the help of the ce-
sium hyperﬁne transition, while the meter is related to the optical domain.
The accepted recommendations for its realization is based on optical transi-
tions [26]. In the case of any direct application of (2) one meets three sources
of uncertainty

• a realization of the second in the microwave domain;
• a realization of the meter in the optical domain;
• a bridge between both realizations to the same transition (i.e. the fre-

quency chain).

After recent progress in frequency chain metrology and a long-term develop-
ment of the microwave standards, present-day limitations come mainly from
the optical standards, which however are developing in a very promising way.
The old-fashion frequency chains, which really presented the state of art
in the ﬁeld just few years ago, appear now as some kind of dinosaur, which
should very soon disappear. Those chains are much bigger, much more ex-
pensive, much more complicated in construction and in use and at the same
time less accurate, than the new frequency-comb chains. The main disadvan-
tage of the old technology was a limited possibility in use. The old chains
were designed as a single-problem chain and it was necessary to redesign it

10

Savely G. Karshenboim

with adding some more items to adjust it to new transitions. The new chain
provides us with a possibility to measure any optical transitions and some
measurements like the cesium D1 line for example needed for the determina-
tion of the ﬁne structure constant [17] are now a routine problem. The chain
oﬀers new horizons for precision optical spectroscopy and we look forward for
soon reproductions of recent experiments [3,20,22] which must deliver new
secure limitations for a possible variation of the ﬁne structure constant with
time on a level of 10−14 per year.

Acknowledgement

I met Ted H¨ansch for the ﬁrst time at ICAP’94 and became a frequent visitor
to the MPQ. I have been always impressed by the free and fruitful atmosphere
of his lab. Starting as a pure theorist I am now trying to be between theory
and experiment and I enjoyed lots of discussions with Ted H¨ansch and his
collaborators, which were really stimulating. During the 8 years around the
MPQ, a highlight of our cooperation certainly was the organization of the
Hydrogen Atom, 2 meeting [8], in which both of us were involved. I was
always feeling his support without which the project could not be realized.
Personally, he did only a few adjustments. But those were the crucial things
that I had missed, and that was one more chance to see how eﬃcient he is. I
do really wish to thank him for the support and hospitality he extended in
Garching and especially in Florence.

References

1. F. Biraben and L. Julien, this volume
2. M. Weitz, A. Huber, F. Schmidt-Kaler, D. Leibfried, W. Vassen, C. Zimmer-
mann, K. Pachucki, T. W. H¨ansch, L. Julien, and F. Biraben, Phys. Rev. A
52, 26641 (1995)

3. M. Niering, R. Holzwarth, J. Reichert, P. Pokasov, Th. Udem, M. Weitz, T.
W. H¨ansch, P. Lemonde, G. Santarelli, M. Abgrall, P. Laurent, C. Salomon,
and A. Clairon, Phys. Rev. Lett. 84, 5496 (2000)

4. J. Reichert, M. Niering, R. Holzwarth, M. Weitz, Th. Udem, and T. W. H¨ansch,

Phys. Rev. Lett. 84, 3232 (2000);
R. Holzwarth, Th. Udem, T. W. H¨ansch, J. C. Knight, W. J. Wadsworth, and
P. St. J. Russell, Phys. Rev. Lett. 85, 2264 (2000)

5. S. A. Diddams, D. J. Jones, J. Ye, S. T. Cundiﬀ, J. L. Hall, J. K. Ranka, R.
S. Windeler, R. Holzwarth, Th. Udem, and T. W. Hnsch, Phys. Rev. Lett. 84,
5102 (2000)

6. Th. Udem and A. Ferguson, this volume
7. S. G. Karshenboim, in Atomic Physics 17 (AIP conference proceedings 551)

Ed. by E. Arimondo et al. AIP, 2001, pp. 238–253.

8. S. G. Karshenboim, F. S. Pavone, F. Bassani, M. Inguscio and T. W. H¨ansch.
Hydrogen atom: Precision physics of simple atomic systems (Springer, Berlin,
Heidelberg, 2001)

Precision Measurements and Fundamental Constants

11

9. A. Huber, Th. Udem, B. Gross, J. Reichert, M. Kourogi, K. Pachucki, M.

Weitz and T. W. H¨ansch, Phys. Rev. Lett. 80, 468 (1998)

10. C. Schwob, L. Jozefowski, B. de Beauvoir, L. Hilico, F. Nez, L. Julien and F.

Biraben, Phys. Rev. Lett. 82 (1999) 4960.

11. S. G. Karshenboim, JETP 79, 230 (1994); Z. Phys. D 39, 109 (1997).
12. S. G. Karshenboim, JETP 76, 541 (1993)
13. M. I. Eides, H. Grotch and V. A. Shelyuto, Phys. Rep. 342 (2001) 63.
14. S. G. Karshenboim, Can. J. Phys. 77, 241 (1999)
15. P. J. Mohr and B. N. Taylor, Rev. Mod. Phys. 72, 351 (2000)
16. K. Jungmann, in [8], pp. 81–102
17. J. M. Hensley, A. Wicht, B. C. Young, and S. Chu , in Atomic Physics 17
(AIP conference proceedings 551) Ed. by E. Arimondo et al. AIP, 2001, pp.
43–57

18. S. G. Karshenboim, Can. J. Phys. 78, 639 (2000)
19. C. Salomon, Y. Sortais, S. Bize, M. Abgrall, S. Zhang, C. Nicolas, C. Man-
dache, P. Lemonde, P. Laurent, G. Santarelli, A. Clairon, N. Dimarcq, P. Petit,
A. Mann, A. Luiten, and S. Chang, in Atomic Physics 17 (AIP conference pro-
ceedings 551) Ed. by E. Arimondo et al. AIP, 2001, pp. 23–40

20. Th. Udem, S. A. Diddams, K. R. Vogel, C. W. Oates, E. A. Curtis, W. D. Lee,
W. M. Itano, R. E. Drullinger, J. C. Bergquist, and L. Hollberg, Phys. Rev.
Lett. 86, 4996 (2001)

21. J. von Zanthier; Th. Becker, M. Eichenseer, A. Yu. Nevsky, Ch. Schwedes, E.
Peik, H. Walther, R. Holzwarth, J. Reichert, Th. Udem, T. W. H¨ansch, P. V.
Pokasov, M. N. Skvortsov, and S. N. Bagayev, Opt. Lett. 25 (2000) 1729
22. J. Stenger, Ch. Tamm, N. Haverkamp, S. Weyers, and H. R. Telle, e-print

physics/0103040

23. J. D. Prestage, R. L. Tjoelker, and L. Maleki, Phys. Rev. Lett. 74, 3511 (1995)
24. V. A. Dzuba, V. V. Flambaum, and J. K. Webb, Phys. Rev. A 59, 230 (1999);

V. A. Dzuba and V. V. Flambaum, Phys. Rev. A 61, 034502 (2000).

25. R. Pohl, F. Biraben, C.A.N. Conde, C. Donche-Gay, T.W. H¨ansch, F.J. Hart-
mann, P. Hauser, V.W. Hughes, O. Huot, P.
Indelicato, P. Knowles,
F. Kottmann, Y.-W. Liu, V.E. Markushin, F. Mulhauser, F. Nez, C. Petitjean,
P. Rabinowitz, J.M.F. dos Santos, L.A. Schaller, H. Schneuwly, W. Schott,
D. Taqqu, and J.F.C.A. Veloso, in [8], pp. 454–466
26. T. J. Quinn, Metrologia 30, 523 (1993); 36, 211 (1999)

