2
0
0
2
 
n
a
J
 
6
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
m
o
t
a
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
4
3
0
1
0
2
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

An Intense Source of Cold Rb Atoms from a Pure 2D-MOT

J. Schoser, A. Bat¨ar, R. L¨ow, V. Schweikhard, A. Grabowski, Yu.B. Ovchinnikov, and T. Pfau
5.Physikalisches Institut, Universit¨at Stuttgart, Pfaﬀenwaldring 57, 70550 Stuttgart, Germany
(Dated: February 2, 2008)
We present a 2D-MOT setup for the production of a continuous collimated beam of cold 87Rb
atoms out of a vapor cell. The underlying physics is purely two-dimensional cooling and trapping,
which allows for a high ﬂux of up to 6 · 1010 atoms/s and a small divergence of the resulting beam.
We analyze the velocity distribution of the 2D-MOT. The longitudinal velocity distribution of the
atomic beam shows a broad feature(FWHM≃75 m/s), centered around 50 m/s. The dependence of
the ﬂux on laser intensity, geometry of the trapping volume and on pressure in the vapor cell was
investigated in detail. The inﬂuence of the geometry of the 2D-MOT on the mean velocity of the
cold beam has been studied. We present a simple model for the velocity distribution of the ﬂux
based on rate equations describing the general dependencies.

Cold atomic beams are needed for many applications
in atom optics [1, 2] or in the ﬁeld of atomic clocks
based on atomic fountains. Especially the process of
evaporative cooling [3] demands a high atom number as
a starting point for reaching quantum degeneracy. This
requires an intense source which can eﬃciently load a
magneto-optical trap (MOT) fast.
For this purpose sources with a small divergence of the
atomic beam are favorable. The longitudinal velocities
in the beam should be within the capture range of the
3D-MOT. As long as the cross section of the beam is
smaller than the spatial capture range of the MOT the
ﬁgure of merit for optimized loading into a MOT is the
total integrated ﬂux up to its capture velocity.
Besides background gas loading and pulsed loading
mechanisms like chirped slowers or double-MOT systems
many experiments use Zeeman slowers as a continuous
source [4]. A Zeeman-slower decelerates an intense
thermal atomic beam along the propagation axis of
the beam by radiation pressure, while the spontaneous
emission processes give rise to a transverse heating of
the atoms. This emerges in a strongly diverging beam
with a ﬂux of up to 1011 atoms/s.
In some cases the
slowing light on axis or the magnetic ﬁelds involved
disturb the consecutive MOT.
Lu et al. [5] have realized a low velocity intense source
(LVIS) of atoms by creation of a dark channel in one
of the six MOT-laser-beams. Due to the imbalance
in the radiation pressure along one axis a continuous
beam of cold atoms is coupled out of a trapped cloud.
This source provides a small thermal background and
a narrow velocity proﬁle at velocities below 20 m/s.
However it does not reach the high ﬂux of a Zeeman
slower.
A new approach is 2-dimensional magneto-optical
cooling and trapping. This technique has ﬁrst been
used to extract very slow atoms out of a cooled atomic
beam by Riis et al. [6] and was later reﬁned to produce
a beam of slow atoms with velocities from 2 to 10 m/s
[7, 8]. An alternative is to collimate and compress a
slow atomic beam like realized by [9, 10]. Finally it has
been demonstrated that an atomic funnel, applied in
diﬀerent conﬁgurations, produces a beam of cold atoms

out of a vapor cell [11, 12, 13]. Dieckmann et al. have
realized a 2D+-MOT which produces a total ﬂux of
9 · 109 Rb87-atoms/s. The plus-sign stands for a pushing
laser beam on axis copropagating with the atomic
beam. This setup uses small cooling laser powers and
retroreﬂection of the laser beams. The vapor pressure
7 mbar)
reaches up to saturated vapor pressure (≃ 10−
at room temperature.
Pure 2D cooling does not require light on the axis of the
atomic beam compared to a Zeeman slower, an LVIS
or a 2D+-MOT. Hence there is less disturbance of the
consecutive 3D-MOT setup. Radial cooling collimates
the outgoing beam while the allowed cooling time,
which depends on the geometry of the cooling region,
inﬂuences the possible longitudinal velocities of atoms
in the beam. The resulting ﬂux is comparable to the
one of a Zeeman slower. Moreover it oﬀers a small
beam-divergence. In our system we could achieve a ﬂux
of 6·1010 atoms/s with a beam-divergence of 32 mrad.
The ﬁgure of merit characterizing the performance of
our system is the integrated brightness which is about
2 · 1012 atoms/(s·srad). On the other hand one needs to
accept a rather high mean velocity of the cold beam and
a relatively broad velocity distribution depending on the
chosen geometry. The mean velocity of the atoms in
our apparatus is ≃50 m/s. We plan to capture most of
the atoms up to a capture velocity of 60 m/s by a large
volume, elongated 3D-MOT in a UHV-chamber which
the atomic beam enters at a small angle with respect to
the long axes of the elongated MOT.

This paper is organized as follows:

in section I we
explain the basic principle of a two-dimensional MOT.
We discuss the inﬂuence of geometry, laser power and
pressure in the vapor cell on the atomic beam. Based
on rate equations we derive a model for the longitudinal
velocity distribution. Section II gives a detailed descrip-
tion of the setup and the measurement techniques used
for the characterization. We present the results and
discuss the applicability of our model in part III. We
summarize and give an outlook on future steps in our
experiment in section IV.

I. PRINCIPLE OF OPERATION AND
THEORETICAL MODEL

The basic geometry of the experimental setup (see
Fig. 1) is given by a vapor cell separated from a UHV-
chamber by a diﬀerential pumping tube which is also
the aperture for the output beam of cold atoms. A
two-dimensional magnetic quadrupole ﬁeld is produced
by four coils with rectangular shape. The axis of both,
the cell and the tube, coincide with the line of zero
magnetic ﬁeld. Four perpendicularly counterpropagating
laser beams with orthogonal circular polarisations in the
usual MOT-conﬁguration enclose a cooling volume along
the axis of zero magnetic ﬁeld (z-axis). The center of
the MOT laser beams is positioned about 4 cm in front
of the diﬀerential pumping tube. The cooling volume
extends to the entrance of the tube. Atoms in the vapor
cell which enter the cooling volume are slowed down in
the two radial dimensions and are compressed to the
z-axis. The atoms’ velocity in the longitudinal direction
is not cooled. Hence the atoms experience a skew
trajectory into the center of the 2D-MOT, according to
the equation of motion of a damped harmonic oscillator,
while propagating along the axis. This produces a thin,
dense, well collimated atomic beam in two directions,
namely in the positive and negative z-direction. We
constrict ourselves to one beam travelling in the positive
z-direction, where it passes through the diﬀerential
pumping tube. The other beam is lost after it hit the
back wall of the glass cell.
The atoms in the vapor cell have to fulﬁll three criteria
simultaneously in order to contribute to the ﬂux of
laser-cooled slow atoms at the exit of the diﬀerential
pumping tube:
a) The initial radial velocity component needs to be
smaller than the transverse capture velocity of the
2D-MOT.
b) The interaction time of the atoms with the light ﬁeld
needs to be long enough so that the trajectory of the
atom hits the entrance of the diﬀerential pumping tube
(the radial velocity is suﬃciently cooled) such that its
divergence is small enough to make it to the exit of the
tube.
c) The mean free path in the vapor cell should be larger
or comparable to the length of the 2D-MOT, so that the
cooling of the atoms has not suﬀered from collisions.
At ﬁrst we consider the collision-less regime. Here the
density is low enough that the mean free path in the
vapor cell
is larger than the dimensions of the cell.
In this case we can assume that the thermal atoms
start on the walls and no collisions take place in the
volume. The geometry of the tube and the glass cell
is designed in such a way that the opening angle of
the diﬀerential pumping tube does not accept atoms
starting on the side walls without being transversely
cooled.
In this conﬁguration thermal atoms are only
transmitted if they start on that part of the back wall
of the glass cell which lies within the acceptance angle

2

of the diﬀerential pumping tube. This choice limits the
thermal background.
For an understanding of the total ﬂux and its depen-
dence on the geometry, the longitudinal velocity proﬁle
of the atomic beam needs to be investigated. This
information is given by the range of accepted velocity
classes and its dependence on external parameters. The
concept of a capture velocity, well-known from 3D-
magneto-optical-traps, must be modiﬁed to embrace the
2D-MOT-conﬁguration. Since the cooling is restricted
to transverse velocities, we deﬁne a radial capture
velocity. In spherical 3D-MOTs the capture velocity has
a constant value depending only on detuning, laser beam
size and intensity and on the magnetic ﬁeld gradient.
However, in a 2D-MOT a ﬁnite cooling time is necessary
to collimate the atoms onto the beam axis. Atoms
which travel too fast along the z-direction can not be
suﬃciently cooled and are ﬁltered out by the aperture.
A main parameter is therefore the cooling time τ = z/vz
which is given by the longitudinal velocity vz and the
distance z from the tube at which the atom enters
the cooling volume of the 2D-MOT. Thus the eﬀective
transverse capture velocity becomes a function of z
and vz. For small vz the radial cooling time dominates
and the capture velocity should be simply a constant
vc0 determined by the parameters of the cooling laser
beams and the magnetic ﬁeld gradient.
For larger
vz the capture velocity should fall oﬀ as 1/vz. The
velocity range between these two asymptotes depends
additionally on the position z where atoms enter the
cooling volume. With increasing cooling length one
should expect more atoms with high axial velocities
to be transversely cooled and transmitted through the
tube.
The cooling time τ determines the ﬁnal transverse
τ
velocity: vr,i − vr,f = 1
0 Fsp(x(t), v(t))dt. Here Fsp
is the spontaneous scattering force, vr,i the initial, vr,f
the ﬁnal radial velocity and m the mass of a Rb-atom.
By that the divergence of the atomic beam (if it is not
limited by the acceptance angle of the tube) is shaped
depending on the mean length of the cooling volume.
Radial cooling within a ﬁnite cooling time increases the
portion of atoms with small vz in the beam. This is
the reason why the velocity distribution of the atomic
beam is non-thermal and is shifted to much lower
values than a thermal distribution at room temperature
(h v i≃275 m/s) although there is no longitudinal cooling.
A typical time scale for the cooling time is 1-2 ms. As
will be described in part II, a usual length of the cooling
volume in our setup is about 60 mm. This gives a rough
estimation for the mean velocity in the atomic beam
between 30 and 60 m/s.
The inﬂuence of the MOT-laser intensity is reﬂected
in the eﬃciency of the transverse cooling. The capture
velocity should increase with intensity and saturate at
some value when the saturation parameter dominates
the spontaneous force.
The vertical beam size, in combination with detuning

m R

and magnetic ﬁeld gradient, determines the radial
capture velocity vc0. An increase of the length of the
2D-MOT increases the upper limit of the longitudinal
velocities which are trappable. Additionally, the size
controls the mean longitudinal velocity in the beam of
cold atoms which increases with increasing MOT-length.
Hence the total ﬂux should grow with the length of the
2D-MOT. In the limit of an inﬁnitely long 2D-MOT
the longitudinal velocity distribution of the atom beam
becomes equal to a thermal distribution.
Without collisions the number of trappable atoms and
thereby the ﬂux increases with a higher pressure in the
vapor cell.
Let us now discuss the eﬀect of collisions. At higher
pressures their evolution creates a thermalization of the
atoms in the volume of the vapor cell. Thereby atoms
can now start not only from the walls but also from
within the vapor cell. This increases the background
of thermal atoms in the atomic beam. Moreover back-
ground gas collisions in the vapor cell and light assisted
collisions of excited atoms in the beam with the back-
ground gas are mechanisms that limit the ﬂux when the
MOT-length increases. The mean number of collisions is
given by the product of an ensemble averaged collision
rate Γ = n σ hvi and the mean time τ = hzi/vz which
the atom spends in the cooling volume. n is the density
in the vapor cell, σ the collision cross section and hvi
the mean thermal velocity in the vapor cell. The longer
the MOT is, the longer becomes the time of propagation
which the atoms spend in the vapor cell. Therefore the
higher is the probability for losses due to collisions such
that a further increase of MOT-length does not produce
a higher ﬂux. In this simple picture the ﬂux is supposed
to saturate as a function of MOT-length. The mean
velocity should increase since atoms with small vz are
more vulnerable by collisions.
For a given MOT geometry an increasing pressure will
decrease the eﬀective length of the cooling volume.
Therefore one should expect an optimum pressure for a
given geometry of the 2D-MOT, namely when the mean
free path in the vapor cell becomes comparable with
In addition higher
the length of the cooling volume.
densities in the vapor cell lead to a higher absorption of
the light beams and decrease the cooling eﬃciency.

For a theoretical description of the ﬂux of cold atoms
from a 2D-MOT source we resort to a simple rate model
which was introduced in [14] for vapor-cell MOTs and
later expanded for atomic beam sources in [12]. Based
on that model for the total ﬂux we derive a model for the
longitudinal velocity distribution of the atom ﬂux.
We deﬁne a function ˆΦ which describes the integrated
ﬂux per velocity interval [vz, vz + dvz]:

ˆΦ(n, vz) = R

L

0 R(n, vz, z) · exp (cid:16)−Γcoll(n) z
1 + Γtrap(n)

Γout

vz (cid:17) dz

(1)

Here Γtrap is the loss rate out of the trapped cloud due

3

to background gas collisions, Γout determines the out-
coupling rate from the captured vapor in the 2D-MOT-
trapping region into the atomic beam. L is the total
length of the cooling volume and n is the density of Rb-
atoms in the vapor cell. R is the loading rate of 87Rb
atoms into the 2D-MOT. The eﬀect of light assisted col-
lisions between the background gas and the cold atoms
in the atomic beam on the way to the tube (described by
the collision rate Γcoll) is implemented by an exponential
loss term.
In our setup the cooling region extends di-
rectly to the diﬀerential pumping tube. z/vz is the time
of ﬂight for the atoms through the MOT-volume.
The total ﬂux, which gives the number of atoms per time
interval integrated over the output area of the source, is
given by the integral of ˆΦ over all longitudinal veloci-
ˆΦ(n, vz) dvz. Only positive values for vz
ties: Φ =
∞
0
R
are taken into account.
In order to derive the loading rate for a 2D-MOT, one
needs to consider the ﬂux of atoms through the surface of
the cooling volume. Since we are interested in the load-
ing ﬂux through the side walls, we need to consider only
radial velocities, weighted with that part of the Boltz-
mann distribution which is trappable according to the
discussion above. The loading rate is proportional to the
density in the vapor cell and to the surface area of the
cooling volume. For simplicity we take a cylindrical cool-
ing volume. We deﬁne a loading rate per velocity interval
[vz, vz + dvz]:

R(n, vz, z) =

n d 16√π
u3

v2
u2 (cid:17) ·
exp (cid:16) −
z
v2
u2 (cid:17) dvr
r

v2
r exp (cid:16) −

vc(vz,z)
0
R

(2)

2kB T

x + v2

the diameter of

Where d is
the cooling volume,
m is the most probable velocity of the Maxwell-
u = q
Boltzmann-distribution with kB denoting the Boltz-
mann constant and T the temperature of the vapor,
vr = qv2
y is the radial velocity. The integral’s up-
per limit vc is the capture velocity which is generally a
function of the longitudinal velocity vz and of the atom’s
distance z from the aperture.
To satisfy the two asymptotic behaviors at low vz
(vc → vc0 = const) and at high vz (vc ∝ 1/vz) we model
vc as:

vc(vz, z) =

vc0
1 + vz
vcr

(3)

vc0 is the radial capture velocity which lies usually in
the range of 30 m/s. vcr is the so called critical velocity
above which the cooling time is limited by the longitu-
dinal motion and the capture velocity falls oﬀ as 1/vz.
The capture velocity is nearly equal to vc0 below vcr.
We choose vcr via the equality of the mean longitudinal
ﬂight time L/(2 vcr) and the radial cooling time which
we approximate by d/vc0.
In this approximation the
explicit z-dependence drops out of vc. This results in:
vcr = L vc0/(2 d).

This gives for the ﬂux per velocity interval:

ˆΦ(n, vz) =

nd

1+

Γtrap (n)
Γout

16 √π
u3

vz
Γcoll

exp (cid:16) −

v2
z
u2 (cid:17)

(4)

(cid:16)1 − exp (cid:16)−Γcoll

L
vz (cid:17)(cid:17) R

vc
0 v2

r exp (cid:16) −

v2
r
u2 (cid:17)

7 mbar.

7 mbar the
At residual vapor pressures of a few 10−
typical lifetime of a MOT loaded from atomic beams is
about 100 ms. From that we conclude a collision rate
1 for this vapor pressure. As
Γtrap on the order of 10 s−
will be discussed in part III the typical cooling time is in
the range of ms therefore the order of magnitude for Γout
is 103 s−
1. The collision rate for light assisted collisions
is given by: Γcoll = n hviσ. hvi is the mean velocity in
the vapor, σ is the eﬀective collision cross section for
light assisted collisions between background gas atoms
and atoms in the cold beam. Following [12, 15] we
assume that this process can be described by resonant
dipole-dipole interaction and follows a C3/R3 potential.
R is the inter-atomic distance.
When ﬁtting the experimental results with this theoret-
ical model we obtain Γtrap/Γout = 0.012 at a pressure
of 10−
This agrees well with the observed
lifetimes. For the eﬀective collision cross section we get:
12 cm2. This value matches within a
σef f ≈ 1.8 · 10−
factor of two with the measurement of Dieckmann et al.
[12].
When comparing the theoretical results with the experi-
ment, equation (4) needs to be multiplied by an overall
eﬃciency factor. The ﬁt to our measured data yields
3. This takes into account
an eﬃciency factor of 5 · 10−
the diﬀerent intensities, the Gaussian beam proﬁles and
the absorption in the Rb-vapor. Equation (4) describes
the longitudinal velocity distribution in the cold atomic
beam. A comparison of this model with the measured
results will be given in part III.
Let us summarize the expected general behavior:
1) An increasing MOT-length should lead to:
a) a higher ﬂux. Faster atoms can be captured with an
increasing L. Due to collisions the expression of ˆΦ(n, vz)
becomes independent of L for large values of L. The
ﬂux shows a saturation for lengths above L > h
b) an increasing mean velocity in the atomic beam.
Above an optimum MOT-length every increase in length
will only add faster atoms to the beam, thus increasing
the value for the mean velocity.
2) An increasing density of Rb-atoms in the vapor cell
should lead to:
a) a linear increase of the total ﬂux at low pressures.
n
The loading rate is proportional to
1+Γtrap(n)/Γout
which is linear in the density for low pressures. At
higher pressures the term 1/Γcoll(n), which is inversely
proportional to n, dominates. For a given length of the
MOT-beams there exists an optimum pressure above
which the ﬂux decreases with increasing pressure.
b) an increasing mean velocity. The necessary momen-
tum transfer to be pushed out of the beam is smaller for
the slow atoms, leaving a higher fraction of hotter atoms

vz
Γcoll(n) .
i

4

FIG. 1: Schematic view of the setup. Rectangular coils pro-
duce a 2-dimensional magnetic quadrupole ﬁeld. The line of
zero magnetic ﬁeld coincides with the long axis of the glass
cell. Four perpendicular laser beams with circular polariza-
tions in the usual MOT conﬁguration cool the atoms in two
dimensions. The atomic beam travels horizontally through a
diﬀerential pumping tube. Analysis of the beam is done by
a time-of-ﬂight-method. A plug beam shuts oﬀ the atomic
beam and a probe-laser is shone in perpendicularly to the
beam. The ﬂuorescence is detected by a calibrated photode-
tector.

in the beam.

II. EXPERIMENTAL SETUP AND
DIAGNOSTICS

As discussed in the previous section the main param-
eters leading to a high ﬂux are the length of the cooling
volume and a high vapor pressure. In our apparatus we
tried to optimize these parameters.
Our setup consists of a 2-chamber vacuum-system
separated by a diﬀerential pumping tube. The tube is
conically shaped, 133 mm long and has a diameter of
6 mm which widens at the UHV-end up to 9.6 mm.
It
maintains a pressure drop of three orders of magnitude
between a vapor pressure cell and two UHV-six-way-
crosses used as analyzing chambers. Compared to other
setups we use a rather large aperture for the diﬀerential
pumping tube. The vapor cell is a glass cuvette (135mm
x 35mm x 35mm) whose long axis (z-axis) is horizontally
aligned. The geometry is chosen in such a way that
the opening angle of the tube does not permit atoms
starting on the side walls to be transmitted without
transverse cooling. The purpose of this tube is mainly to
separate the cold atomic beam from the thermal atoms.
Electric heating rods around the glass cell provide
homogeneous and stable heating thus allowing to work

6 mbar.

7 and
at relatively high vapor pressures between 10−
3 · 10−
Four rectangularly shaped, elongated
magnetic coils are placed around the vapor-cell pro-
ducing a two-dimensional quadrupole ﬁeld. The zero
magnetic ﬁeld line is along the axis of the glass cell. We
work with a ﬁeld gradient of 17 G/cm. A schematic view
of the setup is depicted in Fig. 1.
Cooling laser light is provided by a Ti:Sapphire-laser.
The laser is red-detuned by 1.9 Γ from the 5S1/2,F=2
−→ 5P3/2,F=3 transition. To repump atoms back into
the cycling transition an external cavity diode laser
is employed which is stabilized to the 5S1/2,F=1 −→
5P3/2,F=2 transition. For the analysis of the atomic
beam another diode-laser is used. This probe-laser is
locked on resonance to the 5S1/2,F=2 −→ 5P3/2,F=3
transition.
The light of the cooling laser is split into four separate
beams which are expanded in spherical and cylindrical
telescopes placed in sequence up to a beamsize of roughly
95x15 mm (horizontal waist radius wz ≈ 25 mm, vertical
waist radius wρ ≈ 6 mm). Two pairs of horizontally
and vertically counterpropagating beams are overlapped
in the center of the glass cell. The repumping light
is overlapped with two horizontal beams.
In order to
work at high vapor pressures it is necessary to use four
diﬀerent laser beams. Retroreﬂection of the light beams
would lead to a strong imbalance in the light pressure
due to the high absorption in the vapor.
The cooling volume extends to the front of the diﬀer-
ential pumping tube. The center of the 2D-MOT is
about 40 mm in front of the entrance edge of the tube.
There is no dark distance which the atoms travel at
background pressure without being transversely cooled.
This upholds the good collimation of the beam until it
leaves the vapor cell.

Diagnostics

7 mbar [17].

The measurement of the Rb-pressure in the cell is accom-
plished by absorption measurement. The frequency of a
small laser beam whose intensity is below saturation is
swept across resonance. The measurement is calibrated
by the absorption of Rb-vapor at room temperature
whose vapor pressure is 10−
Information about the transverse capture velocity of
the 2D-MOT can be obtained by Doppler-spectroscopy
perpendicular to the atomic beam. For that purpose
a probe-laser beam with a diameter of 1 mm is aligned
through the atomic beam orthogonally to its axis onto a
photodiode. When sweeping its frequency across reso-
nance the Doppler-proﬁle reveals a Gaussian-shape due
to the thermal velocity distribution of the atoms with
two dips symmetrically centered around the maximum.
Atoms of the velocity classes corresponding to the dips
have been cooled and therefore the height of the central
part corresponding to the cold atoms increases. Division
by the ﬁtted Gaussian-proﬁle shows this structure
clearly (Fig. 3). Half of the width between the minima
corresponds to the capture velocity.

5

The transverse beam proﬁle is investigated in the
UHV-part of the setup. A probe-beam with a diameter
of 1 mm is directed orthogonally on the atomic beam.
Perpendicular to it a CCD-camera images the ﬂuores-
cence signal. From the increasing width (FWHM) of the
signal when moving the probe beam along the z-axis the
divergence of the atomic beam is quantiﬁed.

The analysis of the longitudinal velocity distribution
of the atomic beam is done by a time of ﬂight (TOF)
method. A fraction of the MOT-laser intensity is split
apart and shone into the vapor cell directly in front of
the tube perpendicular to the atomic beam axis. This
beam has a diameter of ≈ 8 mm, and its intensity was
held at 150 mW throughout all measurements. It deﬂects
all atoms with a longitudinal velocity lower than 130 m/s
and hence plugs the atomic beam for all smaller veloc-
ities. After a ﬂight-distance of 145 mm a light-sheet of
1 mm width from a probe laser is irradiated on the atomic
beam in the UHV-chamber orthogonal to the atom beam.
A fraction of the repumping light is overlapped with the
probe-laser. A calibrated photodiode detects the ﬂuo-
rescence of the atoms. After plugging the atomic beam
the ﬂuorescence signal fades out. From this signal infor-
mation about the velocity distribution of the atomic ﬂux
can be derived according to:

Φ(vz) =

η
dprobe

l
vz

dS
dt

(5)

Where S is the signal from the photodiode, dprobe the
width of the probe-beam light-sheet,
l the distance
between plug-beam and probe-beam and η contains
calibration parameters of the detection system.

III. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS

At ﬁrst we give information about the characteristics
of the 2D-MOT: its loading time and its capture velocity.
This is followed by a discussion of the properties of the
atomic beam. The inﬂuence of laser power, length of the
cooling volume and of the pressure in the vapor cell is
studied.
The two-dimensional
laser-cooling produces a about
2 mm thin, 90 mm long, line of high intensity of ﬂuo-
rescence light in the glass cell along the axis of zero
magnetic ﬁeld which is clearly visible at low vapor
pressures. A picture of the ﬂuorescence light in the
2D-MOT is shown in Fig. 2.

A measurement of the radial capture velocity in the
above described way yields the maximum transverse
capture velocity vc0 in equation (3). The capture velocity
depends merely on the intensity of the laser beams, the
detuning and on the magnetic ﬁeld gradient. Figure 3
displays the dependence of vc0 on the laser intensity.
The inset shows the Doppler-spectroscopy signal from
which the capture velocity is inferred. In the intensity

6

1.

probe laser than with the MOT light. The 1/e-time of
this increase is about 2 ms. This gives the characteristic
time scale for the cooling process. From that we can
estimate the value for the outcoupling rate Γout
in
equation (4) to be on the order of 103 s−
The emerging atomic beam is well collimated. From
our transverse beam proﬁle measurement we deduce a
beam-divergence of 32 mrad. This is about a factor of
2 less than the geometrically allowed divergence by the
diﬀerential pumping tube of 59 mrad. This means that
the beam of cold atoms is not hindered by the aperture.
It is possible to further suppress the thermal background
by diminishing the aperture of the diﬀerential pumping
tube without decreasing the ﬂux of cold atoms in future
experiments.

FIG. 2: Picture of the ﬂuorescence in the 2D-MOT with a ﬂux
of 3.5 · 1010 atoms/s. The vapor pressure in the glass cell is
about 7 · 10−7 mbar. A beam of approximately 90 mm length
and a thickness of 2 mm develops. The cooling region extends
to the diﬀerential pumping tube which is sketched on the left.

range which we apply, it extends from 28 m/s to 38 m/s.
For high laser powers above 160 mW per beam (which
corresponds to an intensity of ≃17 mw/cm2) it saturates
at a value of 38 m/s. This value matches well with an
estimation when equating the frequency shift due to the
Zeeman eﬀect with the detuning of the laser, which gives
the linear capture range - in our case 35 m/s.

FIG. 3: Transverse capture velocity of the 2D-MOT. The
inset shows the normalized Doppler-spectroscopy signal, i.e.
the measured signal divided by a ﬁtted Gaussian distribution.
The width between the two minima corresponds to twice the
capture velocity. The main graph shows the dependence of the
capture velocity on the intensity in the cooling laser beams.
The line serves merely to guide the eye. The capture velocity
saturates at high intensities at a value of 38 m/s.

For measuring the loading time of the 2D-MOT we
directed a 1 mm thick probe laser beam through the
center of the atomic beam onto a photodiode. When
switching on the 2D-MOT cooling light the absorption
decreased abruptly because the F=2 −→F=3-transition
is driven by the MOT laser. The absorption increases
again and reaches a steady state when the atoms are
transversely cooled and closer in resonance with the

FIG. 4: Distribution of the atomic ﬂux versus the longitudinal
velocity. The laser power in the cooling beams was varied
from 30 mW to 170 mW. The pressure for this measurement
−6 mbar, the length is 92 mm. A small shift of the
is 1.6 10
mean velocity to higher values with increasing laser power is
visible. The velocity distribution is centered around 50 m/s
and has a width of about 75 m/s.

The time-of-ﬂight measurements give information
about the distribution of the atomic ﬂux versus velocity.
A typical set of velocity distributions is depicted in
Fig. 4. The varied parameter for the single curves is
the power in the laser beams. We observe a relatively
broad feature with a peak velocity of around 50 m/s
and a width of roughly 75 m/s. An increase of the
peak velocity with increasing laser power is visible. The
transverse cooling works more eﬃciently with increasing
laser intensity. Therefore atoms with a higher velocity
in the z-direction contribute to the beam. The integral
of the ﬂux-distribution gives the total ﬂux of atoms per
unit time. This is displayed in Fig. 5. The total ﬂux
saturates for laser powers above 160 mW per laser beam.
We observe a maximum ﬂux of 6·1010 atoms/s at a laser

7

FIG. 5: Dependence of the total atomic ﬂux on the cooling
laser power per beam. The total ﬂux in atoms/s is given by
the area under the curves in graph 4. It ranges from 1 · 1010
to 6 · 1010 atoms/s. The total ﬂux depends strongly on laser
power and saturates at values of 160 mW per laser beam.

power of 160 mW per laser beam and at a vapor pressure
of 1.8 · 10−

6 mbar.

In addition to the ﬁeld gradient and the detuning, the
size of the MOT-beams determines the capture range
of the MOT. As discussed in part I the length of the
cylindrical MOT-beams strongly inﬂuences the ﬂux of
cold atoms. Fig. 6 shows the distribution of the atomic
ﬂux versus velocity when the length of the beams is var-
ied. The upper part shows the result of our theoretical
model. The lower part displays the TOF-results. This
measurement was done by successively blocking a part
of all four cylindrical MOT-beams starting on the back
side of the glass cell while simultaneously increasing the
laser power per beam. Thus the total power shining on
the atoms is kept constant and it is ensured that we see
a pure inﬂuence of the MOT-length. With increasing
length the ﬂux grows and the maximum velocity shifts to
higher values. Fig. 7 shows the total ﬂux as a function of
the MOT length. The total ﬂux is expected to saturate
for a cooling volume above an optimum length which
is given by the mean velocity and the collision rate
Γcoll(n) as discussed in part I. However, for the pressure
range of this measurement no saturation of the ﬂux is
visible even at the maximum MOT-length of 92 mm.
The discussion of the geometry dependence of the total
ﬂux clearly reveals the advantage of utilizing the whole
laser power across a long cooling volume compared to
increasing the laser intensity in a usually sized MOT.
The longer the MOT the longer is the interaction region
for the atoms to be transversely cooled. Therefore also
higher velocity classes can be gathered into the beam.
This explains that the maximum velocity is shifted
towards higher values with increasing MOT-length.

FIG. 6: Dependence of the atomic ﬂux on the length of the
MOT-beams. The upper graph shows the prediction by our
model. The experimental result is plotted in the lower graph.
The power per laser beam is held constant at 21 mW and the
−6 mbar. The peak of the velocity distri-
Rb-pressure is 1.6·10
bution is shifted to higher values for a longer cooling volume.
The atomic ﬂux increases with the length of the cooling vol-
ume. In this measurement an increasing part of the MOT-
beams is blocked while the laser power is adjusted so that the
total laser power incident on the atoms stays constant.

With an increasing length the mean velocity becomes
larger. For an inﬁnitely long 2D-MOT and low vapor
pressures the velocity distribution should approach a
thermal distribution.
In applications like loading a
3D-MOT, the choice of the 2D-MOT length is limited
by the 3D-MOT’s maximum capture velocity.
Our model is in good agreement with the measurements
and predicts the essential features that we observe. Only
the width of the velocity distribution is not accurately
predicted.

The variation of the Rb-vapor pressure is done by
in a con-
changing the temperature of the glass cell
It is possible to raise the vapor pressure
trolled way.
6 mbar. Fig. 8 demonstrates
from 1·10−
the dependence of the velocity distribution on the

7 mbar to 3·10−

8

FIG. 7: Dependence of the total ﬂux on the length of the
cooling volume. The experimental parameters are the same
as in Fig. 6. The dark spots show the theoretical the bright
circles the experimental data.

vapor pressure. The upper part shows the behavior
as described by our theoretical model, the lower graph
displays the TOF-measurements. The ﬂux increases with
6 mbar
increasing pressure, reaches a maximum at 1.5·10−
and decreases again for higher pressures.
In the high
pressure regime the mean free path of Rb-atoms in the
vapor cell is on the order of a few cm and is comparable
to the dimensions of the atomic beam in the 2D-MOT.
This means that collisions start to limit the atomic ﬂux
as is discussed in part I. Above the optimum pressure
value the total ﬂux decreases again. The optimum
pressure depends on the length of the 2D-MOT. The
longer the 2D-MOT the smaller is the value for the
optimum pressure. Our value for the optimum pressure
agrees well with the prediction of Vredenbregt et al [16].
The maximum velocity of the distribution shifts towards
higher values with increasing pressures. This is revealed
in the experiment and also in the theoretical curves.
longitudinal velocity are more
Atoms with a small
vulnerable by collisions because a small transverse
momentum transfer already produces a large enough
divergence so that the atoms collide with the tube. A
higher pressure leads to a larger mean velocity in the
atomic beam.
The total ﬂux as a function of vapor pressure is shown
in Fig. 9. The linear increase of the ﬂux at low pres-
sures and the existence of an optimum pressure is well
described by our model.

In addition to the Doppler-cooling laser light we
shone in a laser beam of the same detuning on the axis
copropagating with the atoms (pushing beam). This
setup comes close to the 2D+-MOT of Dieckmann et al
[12]. The new longitudinal velocity distribution is shown
in Fig. 10. A narrow (width ≈7.5 m/s) and intense peak
at low velocities (centered around 25 m/s) rises. The

−7 mbar to 3.5 · 10

FIG. 8: Distribution of the atomic ﬂux versus the longitudi-
nal velocity. The pressure in the vapor cell was varied from
−6 mbar. The upper graph shows the re-
10
sults of our model. The experimental results are plotted in
the lower graph. The model describes an increase in the peak
velocity with increasing pressure and also a growing ﬂux with
higher pressures which is in accordance with the experimental
results. Above an optimum pressure the ﬂux decreases again.
This is also visible in the dashed line both in the model and
in the measurement.

width of this feature increases and its position is shifted
towards higher values when the power in the pushing
beam is increased.
Since there is no magnetic ﬁeld
gradient on the axis, the axial beam addresses only a
certain velocity class of atoms. The data indicates that
a group of atoms propagating in the negative z-direction
is slowed down and their direction of propagation is
turned around into the positive z-direction. At the same
instance the very slow atoms are pushed out of the
beam. The velocity distribution shows almost no atoms
at velocities below 15 m/s. The total ﬂux stays nearly
constant when shining in the pushing beam. Only for
high powers (above 15 mW) in the pushing beam the

9

FIG. 9: Dependence of the atomic ﬂux on the Rb-pressure in
the vapor cell. The dark spots mark the theoretical results
whereas the bright circles describe the experimental results.
The measurement was done at full length of the MOT laser
beams (92 mm) and at a laser power of 170 mW. At low pres-
sures the atomic ﬂux increases linearly whereas it ﬁnds a max-
−6 mbar and decreases for higher values.
imum at about 2·10
The mean free path in the cell reaches the value of the length
of the MOT at the pressure for the maximum ﬂux - a clear
hint that collisions limit a further increase of the atomic ﬂux.
The theoretical model agrees well with the experimental data.

2D-MOT is too much disturbed and the ﬂux decreases
as is shown by the curve for 30.7 mW in Fig. 10. A
diﬀerent detuning in the axial beams from the usual
MOT-laser beams could address the high velocity classes
and increase the number of slow atoms in the beam.
This slowing eﬀect can be used to increase the ﬂux
at low velocities which might be useful when loading
conventional 3D-MOT conﬁgurations with capture
ranges around 30 m/s.
We veriﬁed the results of the TOF technique with
the method of Doppler-spectroscopy directly on the
atomic beam. For that purpose another light sheet
from the probe laser was aligned counterpropagating
to the atomic beam at an angle of 3.5◦ to it. When
scanning the laser-frequency one obtains Doppler-
proﬁles which conﬁrm the longitudinal velocity proﬁles
of the beam obtained by the TOF-measurements.
In
this measurement we could verify that the thermal
background transmitted by the diﬀerential pumping
tube is negligible compared to the high ﬂux of cold atoms.

FIG. 10: When a laser beam is shone on the axis copropa-
gating with the atomic beam, the longitudinal velocity dis-
tribution changes dramatically. A narrow peak rises up at
velocities between 20 m/s and 40 m/s. Its width and position
on the vz-axis depends on the intensity in the pushing beam.
Atoms at very low velocities below 15 m/s are pushed out
of the beam or are accelerated. The total ﬂux stays nearly
constant.

high ﬂux with a small divergence we work at high vapor
pressures and with a long cooling region. The length of
the 2D-MOT provides good collimation (divergence ≈
32 mrad) and a mean velocity of 50 m/s. The high vapor
pressure assures a large loading rate and thus a high ﬂux.
6 mbar
To be able to work at pressures in the range of 10−
we work with four separate counterpropagating cooling
laser beams. The total ﬂux is in the range of several
1010 atoms per second. A maximum ﬂux of 6 · 1010
atoms/s was obtained at a 2D-MOT length of 90 mm,
laser intensity of 160 mW per beam and a vapor pressure
in the glass cell of 1.6 · 10−
This alternative source of atoms provides a total ﬂux
comparable to a Zeeman slower with less total length,
less material throughput and without disturbing light
and magnetic ﬁelds for a consecutive MOT in a UHV
system and therefore provides a very good starting point
for further laser and evaporative cooling experiments
and BEC-generating apparatus [18, 19].
In a consecutive experiment we loaded the beam into a
3D-MOT with a capture velocity of about 50 m/s which
traps a large fraction of the atoms.

6 mbar.

IV. SUMMARY AND OUTLOOK

Acknowledgement

We have realized and investigated a novel setup for an
intense source of slow atoms. The underlying physics is
pure two-dimensional cooling and trapping. To reach a

This work was supported by the Schwerpunktpro-
gramm:
“Wechselwirkung in ultrakalten Atom- und
Molek¨ulgasen” (SPP 1116) of the Deutsche Forschungs-

gemeinschaft and by the European Research Training
Network: “Cold Quantum Gases” under the contract

No: HPRN-CT-2000-00125.

10

[1] C.S. Adams, M. Sigel and J. Mlynek, Phys. Rep. 240,

143 (1994).

[19] E. Mandonnet, A. Minguzzi, R. Dum, I. Carusotto, Y.
Castin and J. Dalibard, Eur. Phys. J. D 10, 9-18 (2000).

[2] H.J. Metcalf, P. van der Straten, Laser Cooling and
ISBN 0-387-

Trapping, Springer, New York (1999),
98728-2.

[3] W. Ketterle, N.J. van Druten, Evaporative Cooling of
Trapped Atoms, Adv. At. Mol. Opt. Phys., 37, 181
(1996).

[4] W. Phillips and H.J. Metcalf, PRL. 48, 596-599 (1982).

[5] Z.T. Lu, K.L. Corwin, M.J. Renn, M.H. Anderson, E.A.
Cornell, and C.E. Wieman, Phys. Rev. Lett. 77, 3331
(1996).

[6] E. Riis, D.S. Weiss, K.A. Moler, S. Chu, Phys. Rev.

Lett. 64, 1658 (1990).

[7] T.B. Swanson, N.J. Silva, S.K. Mayer, J.J. Maki, D.H.

McIntyre, JOSA B 13, 9, 1833 (1996).

[8] H. Chen, E. Riis, Appl. Phys. B 70, 665 (2000).

[9] J. Nellessen, J. Werner, W. Ertmer, Opt. Comm. 78,

300 (1990).

112, 136 (1994).

[10] J. Yu, J. Djemaa, P. Nosbaum, P. Pillet, Opt. Comm.

[11] P. Berthoud, A. Joyet, G. Dudle, N. Sagna, P. Thomann,

Europhys. Lett. 41, 141 (1998).

[12] K. Dieckmann, R.J.C. Spreeuw, M. Weidem¨uller and

J.T.M. Walraven, Phys. Rev. A 58, 3891 (1998).

[13] A. Camposeo, A. Piombini, F. Cervelli, F. Tantussi, F.
Fuso, E. Arimondo, Opt. Comm. 200, 231 (2001).

[14] C. Monroe, W. Swann, H. Robinson and C. Wieman,

Phys. Rev. Lett. 65, 1571 (1990).

[15] A.M. Steane, M. Chowdhury and C.J. Foot, JOSA B, 9,

2142 (1992).

[16] E.J.D. Vredenbregt, K.A.H. van Leeuwen, H.C.W.

Beijerinck, Opt. Comm. 147, 375 (1998).

[17] M.H. Hablanian, High-Vacuum Technology, M. Dekker,

New York (1990), ISBN 0-8247-8197-X.

[18] W. Ketterle, D.S. Durfee, and D.M. Stamper-Kurn,
Proceedings of the International School of Physics
”Enrico Fermi”, Course CXL, IOS Press, Amsterdam,
1999) pp. 67-176.

