Coherent light transport in a cold Strontium cloud

Y. Bidel,1 B. Klappauf,2 J.C. Bernard,1 D. Delande,3 G.
Labeyrie,1 C. Miniatura,1 D. Wilkowski,1 , ∗ and R. Kaiser1

1Laboratoire Ondes et D´esordre, FRE 2302,

1361 route des Lucioles F-06560 Valbonne, France

2Now at: Optoelectronics Research Center,

University of Southampton, SO17 1BJ Southampton, United Kingdom

3Laboratoire Kastler Brossel, Universit´e Pierre et Marie Curie, F-75252 Paris, France

(Dated: December 5, 2013)

Abstract

We study light coherent transport in the weak localization regime using magneto-optically cooled

strontium atoms. The coherent backscattering cone is measured in the four polarization channels

using light resonant with a Jg = 0 → Je = 1 transition of the Strontium atom. We ﬁnd an

enhancement factor close to 2 in the helicity preserving channel, in agreement with theoretical

predictions. This observation conﬁrms the eﬀect of internal structure as the key mechanism for

the contrast reduction observed with an Rubidium cold cloud (see: Labeyrie et al., PRL 83, 5266

(1999)). Experimental results are in good agreement with Monte-Carlo simulations taking into

account geometry eﬀects.

PACS numbers: 42.25.Fx, 32.80.Pj

2
0
0
2
 
b
e
F
 
5
 
 
]
h
p
-
m
o
t
a
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
6
1
0
2
0
2
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

∗Electronic address: wilkowsk@inln.cnrs.fr; URL: http://www-lod.inln.cnrs.fr/

1

During the past twenty years, the outstanding development of mesoscopic physics led

to a critical inspection of coherent eﬀects in wave transport. First motivated by electronic

transport in conducting devices [1], the underlying physical ingredients proved to be relevant

to any linear waves and in particular to light. This triggered active research in the ﬁeld of

optics during the past two decades [2] leading to the observation of coherent backscattering

[3] and universal conductance ﬂuctuations [4] to quote a few. A challenge in this ﬁeld is

still the observation of strong localization of visible light. It was recently reported for near-

infrared light using semi-conductors powders [5], but the interpretation of the experiment

in term of Anderson localization was questioned [6]. Cold atoms have been quite recently

considered as promising scattering media to achieve strong localization [7].

Indeed, they

constitute perfectly monodisperse samples of resonant point-dipole scatterers with large

cross-sections. Moreover high spatial density is achieved by adequate trapping techniques

[8, 9].

In this letter we report the observation of coherent backscattering (CBS) of light on

cold strontium atoms in the weak localization regime kl ≫ 1 (k is the light wavenumber

and l the elastic mean free path). CBS is an interferential enhancement of the average

scattered intensity reﬂected oﬀ a disordered scattering medium [10]. It originates from a two-

wave constructive interference (near exact backscattering) between waves travelling along

a given scattering path and its reversed counterpart. For classical scatterers, bearing on

general symmetry arguments valid in the absence of any magnetic ﬁeld, the CBS interfering

amplitudes have been shown to have equal weights at exact backscattering in the so-called

parallel polarization channels [11]. In the linklin channel the incoming and detected light

ﬁelds have same linear polarization.

In the hkh channel, both light ﬁelds are circularly

polarized with the same helicity, that is opposite polarizations (because the CBS signal is

emitted in the backward direction).

In the perpendicular channels, nothing ensures the

equality of the two interfering amplitudes and the contrast of the interference is decreased.

The single scattering events require a separate treatment as the direct and reversed paths

coincide and do not contribute to the CBS enhancement in the backward direction. For

spherically symmetric scatterers, single scattering does not contribute in the lin ⊥ lin and

hkh channels. Thus, the CBS contrast (peak to background ratio) is predicted and has

been observed to be exactly 2 in the helicity preserving polarization channel hkh [12]. Using

an atomic gas at resonance, a dynamic breakdown of the CBS eﬀect can occur due to the

2

scatterers motion during the transit time of a photon inside the medium. This restricts

the RMS velocity δv below a critical velocity given by vc = Γ/k (where Γ is the width of

the atomic dipole resonance), a condition which is well fulﬁlled for a laser cooled atomic gas

[13]. The quantum internal structure of atoms has also severe consequences for coherent light

transport in atomic media. A degeneracy in the groundstate induces a dramatic scrambling

of the CBS eﬀect [14]. This has been ﬁrst experimentally observed with a cold Rubidium

sample on a Jg = 3 → Je = 4 transition [13]. These results highly motivated the use of

nondegenerate groundstate atoms, like strontium, to beneﬁt from full interference eﬀects in

coherent transport.

The cold strontium (Sr) cloud is produced in a magneto-optical trap (MOT). The trans-
verse velocity of an eﬀusive atomic beam, extracted from a 500◦C oven, is immediately

compressed with a 2D optical molasse. A 27 cm long Zeeman slower then reduces the

longitudinal velocity to within the capture velocity range of the MOT (∼ 50 m/s). The

Zeeman slower, molasses, MOT, and probe laser beams at 461 nm are generated from the

same frequency-doubled source. Brieﬂy, a single-mode grating stabilized diode laser and a

tapered ampliﬁer are used in a master-slave conﬁguration to produce 500 mW at 922 nm.

The infrared light is then frequency doubled in a semi-monolithic standing wave cavity with

an intra-cavity KNbO3 crystal. The cavity is resonant for the infrared light while the second
harmonic exits through a dichroic mirror providing 150 mW of tunable single-mode light,

which is then frequency locked on the 461 nm 1S0-1P1 strontium line in a heat pipe. We

use acousto-optic modulators for subsequent amplitude and frequency variations. The MOT

is made of six independent trapping beams of 5.2 mW/cm2 each, red-detuned by δ = −Γ

from the resonance. The saturation intensity is 42.5 mW/cm2 and the natural width of the

transition is Γ/2π = 32 MHz. Two anti-Helmoltz coils create a 100 G/cm magnetic ﬁeld

gradient to trap the atoms. A small population loss to metastable states is repumped to the

ground state using two additional red lasers. The best achieved optical thickness of our Sr

MOT is b ≈ 3. It is deduced from transmission measurements of a resonant probe through

the cloud shortly after switching the MOT oﬀ. Note that because the optical thickness of the

atomic cloud is larger than one, the imaging of the cloud does not yield a signal proportional

to the atomic density (ﬂattening at the center) and the whole process thus overestimates the

size of the cloud (see discussion below). The number of trapped atoms N ≃ 107 is derived

from the MOT ﬂuorescence signal. From a CCD image the RMS radius of the cloud has

3

been estimated at 0.65 mm yielding a mean free path l ≈ 0.5 mm (kl ≃ 7000). The RMS

velocity of the atoms is less that 1 m/s, well below the critical velocity vc = 15 m/s.

The detailed experimental procedure for the CBS observation has been published else-

where [13]. For the Sr experiment, the signal is obtained using a collimated resonant probe

beam with a waist of 3 mm. To avoid any eﬀects linked to the saturation of the optical

transition (non-linearities, inelastic radiation spectrum) [15], the probe intensity is weak

(saturation parameter s = 0.02). The scattered light is collected in the backward direction

by placing a CCD camera in the focal plane of an achromatic doublet. The angular resolu-

tion of our apparatus is 0.1 mrad, roughly twice the CCD pixel angular resolution. To avoid

recording the MOT ﬂuorescence signal while recording the CBS signal, a time-sequenced

experiment is developed. The trapping beams and the magnetic ﬁeld gradient are switched

oﬀ during the CBS acquisition sequence (duration 100 µs) and then switched on to recap-

ture the atoms (duration 95% of the 6 ms total cycle time). This procedure also eliminates

any possible unwanted nonlinear wave mixing processes. The whole time sequence is then

repeated as long as necessary for a good signal-to-noise ratio (typically 15 minutes in the

experiment). During the CBS sequence, the image ﬁeld is opened (and then closed during

the MOT sequence) thanks to a mechanical chopper. During the CBS probe interaction

time, each atom scatters about 200 photons on average but always remains in resonance

since the mean atomic velocity increase is far below vc. Consequently, most of them are

recaptured during the following MOT sequence. The CBS images (see Fig.1) are ﬁnally

obtained by subtracting the background image taken without cold atoms. This background

image is recorded in the absence of the magnetic gradient during all the acquisition time.

We thus checked that the ﬂuorescence signal from the residual Sr atoms was negligible.

In the helicity preserving channel (hkh), the enhancement factor is found to be α =

1.86 ± 0.10 with an optical thickness of b = 2.9 (see Fig. 2), slightly lower the theoretical

prediction α = 2. Several experimental issues can explain the diﬀerence. First, the ﬁnite

angular resolution of the detection apparatus lowers the CBS enhancement factor by an

amount evaluated to δα ≈ 0.06. Because single scattering contributes more than 90% of

the total signal in the two authorized channels (see Table I), the reduction of the cone

contrast due to imperfect polarization channel isolation in the hkh is not negligible. We

have measured, in the limit of low optical thickness where single scattering dominates over

multiple scattering, the fraction of detected light in the forbidden hkh channel with respect

4

to the total scattered light. We found a channel isolation about 5.10−4 leading to δα ≈ 0.03.

Note that single scattering depolarization induced by stray magnetic ﬁeld acts here like

an imperfect polarization isolation. For this reason, its impact on the cone reduction has

been minimized during the channel isolation procedure. Another possible source of contrast

reduction is a Faraday eﬀect induced by the residual magnetic ﬁeld [16]. It turns out that,

despite the huge Verdet constant in the atomic gas medium [17], its eﬀect should be smaller

than the previously discussed ones. We also checked that the ﬁnite transverse size of the

laser beam has no signiﬁcant inﬂuence on the signal. Taking into account the systematic

errors, we ﬁnd that the CBS enhancement factor should rather be α =1.91, consistent with

the measured value. A remaining (but yet uncontrolled) source of error in determining α is

certainly an imperfect estimation of the background level measured at angles large compared

to the cone width θ ≫ ∆θCBS.

In the other polarization channels, we observe lower enhancement factors as predicted by

the theory (see table I). In the linklin and h ⊥ h channels, the small enhancement factors

are mainly due to the strong single scattering contribution – see the relative incoherent back-

ground values given in table I – which is very important since the optical thickness is not very

large. In the lin ⊥ lin channel (where single scattering is absent), the relatively high contrast

value is explained by the low optical thickness. Indeed, in this situation, short scattering

paths dominate and double scattering is known to exhibit full interference contrast in all

polarization channels [18]. In Table I, we also show data obtained with a Monte-Carlo (MC)

calculation, where the amplitude of a multiple scattering path is computed as a function of

the initial and ﬁnal polarizations and of the geometrical positions of the various scatterers.

We use a Gaussian distribution for the spatial density of scatterers and take into account

the spatial variations of the mean free path during the photon propagation. Our numerical

method is tantamount to computing the integral involved in the conﬁguration average using

a MC procedure. Given a spatial conﬁguration of the scatterers, we compute simultaneously

the various scattering contributions at diﬀerent scattering orders using the ”partial photon”

trick [19]. Typically, it is enough to launch less than 1 million photons on the medium to get

a good signal/noise ratio for the CBS peak. For all polarization channels, there is a good

agreement for the cone height between experiments and MC simulations adjusted to take

into account the polarization channel isolation and angular resolution eﬀects.

The experimental values ∆θCBS of the FWHM CBS angular cone width are systematically

5

higher (by a factor 1.4) that the ones given by the MC simulation using the measured

optical thickness b and size of the atomic cloud. As discussed above, our experimental

procedure slightly overestimates the size of the cloud. Modifying the size of the cloud

(keeping b constant) results only in a global multiplication of the angular scale, keeping

identical both the enhancement factor and the cone shape. We are thus inclined to think that

the actual RMS radius of the cloud is 0.45 mm instead of 0.65 mm. With this corrected value,

we observe an excellent agreement between MC and experimental data in all polarization

channels (see Fig. 2 and Table I). The angular dependence of the cone shape in the linear

channels reﬂects the anisotropy of the scatterer’s pattern [18]. In the linklin channel, an

elliptical shape with major axis parallel to the incident polarization is predicted and indeed

observed (Fig. 1c). In the lin ⊥ lin channel, the directions of maximum scattering are tilted
at 45◦ from the incident polarization, yielding a ”clover-leafed” CBS cone shape (Fig. 1d).

To summarize, we measured the coherent backscattering cone in four diﬀerent characteris-

tic polarization channels. Our results are in good agreement with a Monte-Carlo calculation.

The restoration of a full interference contrast in coherent multiple scattering with atomic

gases (as exempliﬁed by the maximum enhancement factor of 2 obtained in the helicity pre-

serving channel) has interesting potentialities for wave localization experiments with cold

atoms. For example, in the quest for Anderson localization (which could be obtained only

at high density where kl ≈ 1) where interferences play a crucial role, a Jg = 0 → Je = 1

transition appears to be a good choice, since a degenerate internal structure is known to

scramble the interference [14]. A maximum enhancement factor of 1.2 was found in Rb

experiment [13].

Is it now possible to increase the cloud density to reach the Anderson

localization threshold? For this purpose, cooling strontium with the intercombination line

in a dipole trap appears to be a promising technique [8].

The authors thank the CNRS and the PACA region for their ﬁnancial support. Lab-

oratoire Kastler Brossel is laboratoire de l’Universit´e Pierre et Marie Curie et de l’Ecole

Normale Sup´erieure, UMR 8552 du CNRS.

—————————————————————-

[1] D.K. Ferry and S.M. Goodnick, Transport in Nanostructures, Cambridge University Press,

New York (1997); S. Datta, Electronic Transport in Mesoscopic Systems, Cambridge Univer-

6

sity Press, Cambridge (1995).

[2] V.L. Kuz’min and V.P. Romanov, Physics-Uspekhi 39, 231 (1996); M.C.W. van Rossum and

Th.M. Nieuwenhuizen, Rev. Mod. Physics 71 , 313 (1999).

[3] P.E. Wolf and G. Maret, Phys. Rev. Lett. 55, 2696 (1985); M.P. Van Albada and A. Lagendijk,

Phys. Rev. Lett. 55, 2692 (1985).

[4] F. Scheﬀold and G. Maret, Phys. Rev. Lett. 81, 5800 (1998).

[5] D.S. Wiersma, P. Bartolini, A. Lagendijk and R. Righini, Nature 390, 671 (1997).

[6] F. Scheﬀold, R. Lenke, R. Tweer, G. Maret, comment on the citewiersma97 paper, Nature

[7] Th. M. Nieuwenhuizen, A.L. Burin, Yu. Kagan and G.V. Shlyapnikov, Phys. Lett. A 184, 360

398, 207 (1999).

(1994).

[8] T. Ido, Y. Isoya and H. Katori, Phys. Rev. A 61, R061403 (2000); H. Katori, T. Ido, M.

Gonokami, J. Phys. Soc. of Jap. 68, 2479 (1999).

[9] Ultracold Atoms and Bose-Einstein condensation, K. Burnett ed., OSA Trends in Optics and

Photonics Series 7 (OSA, 1996).

[10] E. Akkermans, P.E. Wolf, R. Maynard and G. Maret, J. Phys. (Paris) 49, 77 (1988).

[11] B.A. van Tiggelen and R. Maynard, in Wave Propagation in Complex Media, IMA 96, edited

by G. Papanicolaon (Springer, New-York), 252 (1997).

[12] D.S. Wiersma, M.P. van Albada, B.A. van Tiggelen and A. Lagendijk, Phys. Rev. Lett. 74,

[13] G. Labeyrie, F. de Tomasi, J.C. Bernard, C. M¨uller, C.A. Miniatura and R. Kaiser, Phys.

Rev. Lett. 83, 5266 (1999); G. Labeyrie, C. M¨uller, D. Wiersma, C. Miniatura and R. Kaiser,

J. Opt. B : Quantum Semiclass. Opt. 2 , 672 (2000).

[14] T. Jonckheere, C.A. M¨uller, R. Kaiser, C. Miniatura and D. Delande , Phys. Rev. Lett. 85,

4269 (2000); C. M¨uller, T. Jonckeere, C. Miniatura and D. Delande, Phys. Rev. A 64, 053804

4193 (1995).

(2001).

[15] V.M. Agranovich and V.E. Kravtsov, Phys. Rev. B 43, 13691 (1991); A. Heiderich, R. May-

nard and B. van Tiggelen, Opt. Comm. 115, 392 (1995).

[16] R. Lenke and G. Maret, Eur. Phys. J. B 17, 171 (2000).

[17] G. Labeyrie, C. Miniatura and R. Kaiser, Phys. Rev. A 64, 033402 (2001).

[18] M.P. van Albada, B. van Tiggelen and A. Lagendijk, Phys. Rev. Lett. 58, 361 (1987).

7

[19] R. Lenke and G. Maret, in Scattering in Polymeric and Colloidal Systems, edited by W. Brown

and K. Mortensen (Gordon and Breach, Reading, 2000), p. 1-72.

8

FIG. 1: Isocontours of the coherent backscattering cones obtained on a cloud on cold Strontium

atoms in the four polarization channels. We plot the CBS signal after substraction of the incoherent

background, as a function of the backscattering angle. All cone heights have been scaled to 1. For

better signal/noise the image have been symmetrized. The total angular range is 1 mrad. The

lowest isocontour correspond to roughly 20% of the peak intensity. For the linear channels, the

incident polarization is horizontal.

FIG. 2: Angular scan of the CBS cone for the hkh polarization channel. The optical thickness

is b = 2.9. The experimental data are represented with open circles. For better signal/noise

we perform an angular averaging of the original image. The solid line is the result of a Monte-

Carlo calculation taking into account the geometry of the atomic cloud (Gaussian distribution of

the atomic density with variance 0.45 mm) and experimental imperfections like the polarization

channel isolation and angular resolution eﬀects. The agreement is clearly excellent. The measured

width of the cone is ∆θCBS = 0.50 ± 0.04 mrad.

9

TABLE I: Comparison between the CBS enhancement factor and peak width measured in the

experiment with the results of a Monte-Carlo calculation, for optical thickness b = 2.

In each

polarization channel, the experimental enhancement factor α is given with a ±2σ error bar. For

linear polarization channels, the ∆θCBS values are only given for scans parallel to the incident

polarization. The results of MC simulation (noted MC) are given for a Gaussian distribution of

the could with a variance 0.45 mm. The experimental imperfections like the polarization channel

isolation and angular resolution eﬀects have been taken into account in the MC simulation values
noted MC∗. The “Background” column show the relative contribution of the channel of the total

incoherent scattered intensity in the backward direction.

Channel

Background

∆θCBS (mrad)

Exp.

7.5%

1.77 ± 0.13

0.52 ± 0.07

hkh MC
MC∗

7.8%

7.8%

h ⊥ h MC
MC∗

92.2%

92.2%

linklin MC
MC∗

95.5%

95.5%

lin ⊥ lin MC
MC∗

4.5%

4.5%

Exp.

92.5%

1.17 ± 0.03

0.71 ± 0.10

Exp.

96.0%

1.17 ± 0.03

0.9 ± 0.2

Exp.

4.0%

1.59 ± 0.20

0.5 ± 0.3

0.48

0.52

0.69

0.75

0.92

0.98

0.48

0.49

α

2

1.87

1.20

1.19

1.24

1.22

1.74

1.62

10

a

h // h

b

h ⊥ h

 

 

 

 

c

lin // lin

d

lin ⊥ lin

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

P

 

 

 

 

