2
0
0
2
 
b
e
F
 
7
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
m
o
t
a
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
7
6
0
2
0
2
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Brillouin propagation modes in optical lattices: interpretation in terms of
nonconventional stochastic resonance

L. Sanchez-Palencia, F.-R. Carminati, M. Schiavoni, F. Renzoni and G. Grynberg
Laboratoire Kastler-Brossel, D´epartement de Physique de l’Ecole Normale Sup´erieure, 24, rue Lhomond, 75231, Paris Cedex
05, France
(December 16, 2013)

We report the ﬁrst direct observation of Brillouin-like prop-
agation modes in a dissipative periodic optical lattice. This
has been done by observing, in both theoretical and exper-
imental work, a resonant behaviour of the spatial diﬀusion
coeﬃcient in the direction corresponding to the propagation
mode with the phase velocity of the moving intensity modula-
tion used to excite these propagation modes. Furthermore, we
show theoretically that the amplitude of the Brillouin mode
is a nonmonotonic function of the strength of the noise corre-
sponding to the optical pumping, and discuss this behaviour
in terms of nonconventional stochastic resonance.

05.45.-a, 42.65.Es, 32.80.Pj

The last decade has witnessed dramatic progress in
laser cooling techniques and nowadays in several labora-
tories around the world atoms are routinely trapped and
cooled at very low temperatures and high densities [1].
Most of the current eﬀorts within the cold atoms commu-
nity are directed to reaching the regime of quantum de-
generacy in both bosonic and fermionic samples, in order
to investigate the properties of the quantum gases thus
obtained, and realizing an atom laser, the matter wave
analog of the laser. Cold atomic samples also constitute
an ideal system for the study of complex nonlinear phe-
nomena. This turns out to be especially true if the cold
atoms are ordered by the light ﬁelds in periodic struc-
tures, so-called optical lattices [2,3]. These are obtained
by the interference of two or more laser ﬁelds: the light
imposes its order on the matter via the dipole force [4],
creating a periodic structure of atoms.

Among the most signiﬁcant studies of nonlinear dy-
namics in optical lattices, we recall here the observation
of mechanical bistability in a strongly driven dissipative
optical lattice [5] and the realization of the kicked rotor
and corresponding detection of chaotic motion in a far
detuned lattice [6]. Furthermore the macroscopic trans-
port of atoms in an asymmetric optical lattice without
the application of external forces has been observed [7].
This corresponds to the realization of an optical motor,
i.e. a ratchet for cold atoms, a well-controlable model sys-
tem for the molecular combustion motor [8]. Brillouin-
like propagation modes of atoms in a dissipative opti-
cal lattice have also been theoretically studied to explain
the nonlinear optical properties of optical lattices [9,10].
In this Letter, we report on the ﬁrst direct observation

of these modes. Furthermore we will discuss the prop-
agation mechanism associated with these modes, com-
pletely diﬀerent from the one encountered in dense ﬂuids
or solid media. Indeed in dilute optical lattices the in-
teraction between the diﬀerent atoms is completely neg-
ligible, therefore the mechanism for the propagation of
atoms cannot be ascribed to any sound-wave-like mech-
anism. While a sound wave corresponds to a propagat-
ing density wave without a net transport of atoms, the
Brillouin-like resonances analyzed in this work consist of
a net motion of the atoms. In fact, the propagation of
atoms through the lattice are determined here by the in-
teraction with the light. The light ﬁelds determine both
the potential wells where the atoms can oscillate, and
whose vibrational frequency determines the velocity of
the propagation modes, and the escape from the poten-
tial wells, which allows the propagation of atoms. We
also show theoretically that the amplitude of the Bril-
louin mode is a nonmonotonic function of the strength of
the noise corresponding to the optical pumping, and dis-
cuss this behaviour in terms of nonconventional stochas-
tic resonance [11,12].

2

2θ

probe

1

3

4

2θ

y

O

z

x

FIG. 1. Sketch of the experimental setup.

We consider a three dimensional (3D) lin⊥lin near
resonant optical lattice, as in previous work [13]. The
periodic structure is determined by the interference of

1

four linearly polarized laser beams, arranged as in Fig.
1. This arrangement results in a periodic modulation
of the light polarization and light intensity, which pro-
duces a periodic modulation of the light shifts of the
diﬀerent ground states of the atoms (optical potentials)
[3]. The optical pumping between the diﬀerent atomic
ground states combined with the spatial modulation of
the light shifts leads then to the cooling of the atoms [14]
and to their localization [15] at the minima of the optical
potentials, thus producing a periodic array of atoms.

After the cooling phase, characterized by a signiﬁcant
reduction of the atomic kinetic temperature and by the
creation of a periodic spatial order, the atoms keep in-
teracting with the light undergoing optical pumping cy-
cles. The optical pumping may transfer an atom from
a potential well to a neighbouring one, giving rise to a
variety of transport phenomena [13,16]. Among these,
there are modes which correspond to the propagation of
atoms through the optical lattice in a given direction.
They consist of a sequence in which one half oscillation
in a potential well is followed by an optical pumping pro-
cess to the neighbouring well, and so on. One can es-
timate their velocity by vi = λiΩi/(2π) where λi is the
lattice constant and Ωi/(2π) the vibrational frequency in
the i−direction [10]. These modes were ﬁrst identiﬁed
through Monte-Carlo simulations in Ref. [10] and shown
to produce resonance lines in the nonlinear optical re-
sponse of optical lattices. However up to now no direct
observation of these modes has been reported. This is
achieved in the present work by observing a resonant be-
haviour of the spatial diﬀusion coeﬃcient in the direction
corresponding to the propagation mode with the phase
velocity of the moving intensity modulation used to ex-
cite these propagation modes.

The modulation scheme for the excitation of the prop-
agation modes is completely analogous to the one used in
previous investigations of the nonlinear optical response
of optical lattices [9]. An additional laser ﬁeld linearly
polarized along the y-axis is introduced with the z-axis
as propagation direction. This probe ﬁeld interferes with
the copropagating lattice beams, creating an intensity
modulation. The interference pattern consists of two
propagating intensity waves moving with phase veloci-
ties ~vj = ~njδ/|∆~kj| (j = 1, 2) with ~nj = ∆~kj/|∆~kj|,
and ∆~kj = ~kj − ~kp the diﬀerence between the j-th lat-
tice beam and the probe (p) wavevectors [17]. Here
δ = ωp − ωL is the detuning between the probe (ωp)
and the lattice (ωL) frequencies. According to the nu-
merical simulations for the atomic trajectories presented
in Ref. [10], for δ = ±Ωx, the propagation modes along
x are excited by the driving ﬁeld, with the atoms eﬀec-
tively dragged by the moving intensity modulation [18].
Intuitively, the dragging of atoms by the two propagating
intensity modulations should result in an increase of the
spatial diﬀusion coeﬃcient Dx in the x-direction. There-

fore it should be possible to detect these Brillouin prop-
agation modes by monitoring Dx as a function of the
detuning δ. The propagation modes are then revealed
by a resonance in Dx around δ = ±Ωx. We tested the
validity of this reasoning with the help of semiclassical
Monte-Carlo simulations [19]. Taking advantage of the
symmetry between the x and y directions (see Fig. 1),
we restricted the atomic dynamics in the xOz plane. Our
calculations are for a Jg = 1/2 → Je = 3/2 transition,
as customary in numerical analysis of Sisyphus cooling,
of an atom of mass M . We expect our 2D calculations
to reproduce the dependencies of the diﬀerent quantities
associated with the real 3D atomic dynamics to within a
scaling factor corresponding to the diﬀerence in dimen-
In the numerical simulations, we mon-
sionality [16].
itored the variance of the atomic position distribution
at a given value of the probe ﬁeld detuning. We veri-
ﬁed that the spatial diﬀusion is normal, i.e. the atomic
square displacements h∆x2i and h∆z2i increase linearly
with time. Accordingly, we derived the spatial diﬀusion
coeﬃcients Dx and Dz by ﬁtting the numerical data with
h∆x2
i i = 2Dxit (xi = x, z) . Results for the spatial diﬀu-
sion coeﬃcients as functions of the probe detuning δ are
shown in Fig. 2. Two narrow resonances, centered ap-
proximately at δ = ±Ωx, appear clearly in the spectrum
of the diﬀusion coeﬃcient along the x-axis. In contrast,
Dz does not show any resonant behaviour with the driv-
ing ﬁeld detuning. This demonstrates the validity of the
detection scheme based on the measurement of the diﬀu-
sion coeﬃcients.

2πMDx/h
2πMDz/h

z
D

 
,

x
D

 750

 500

 250

   0

−5

−4

−3

−2

−1

1

2

3

4

5

0
δ/Ω

x

FIG. 2. Numerical results for the spatial diﬀusion coeﬃ-
cients in the x and z directions as functions of the probe ﬁeld
detuning. The lattice beam angle is θ = 300, the lattice de-
0 = −200ωr.
tuning ∆ = −10Γ and the light shift per beam ∆
Here Γ and ωr are the width of the excited state and the
atomic recoil frequency, respectively. The amplitude of the
probe beam is 0.4 times that of each lattice beam.

′

In the experiment 85Rb atoms are cooled and trapped
in a magneto-optical trap (MOT). The MOT laser beams
and magnetic ﬁeld are then suddenly turned oﬀ. Simulta-
neously the four lattice beams are turned on and after 10
ms of thermalization of the atoms in the lattice the probe
laser ﬁeld is introduced along the z-axis. We studied the

2

transport of atoms in the optical lattice by observing the
atomic cloud expansion with a Charge Coupled Device
(CCD) camera. The procedure to derive the diﬀusion
coeﬃcients has been described in detail in previous work
[13], and we recall here only the basic idea. For a given
detuning of the probe ﬁeld we took images of the ex-
panding cloud at diﬀerent instants after the atoms have
been loaded into the optical lattice. From the images
of the atomic cloud we derived the atomic mean square
displacement along the x- and z-axes.

−3

−2

−1

1

2

3

2πMDx/h
2πMDz/h

1500

z
D

 
,

x
D

1000

 500

  5

   0

0
T
/
)

0
T
−
T
(
 
x
 
0
0
1

0
δ/Ω
x

0
δ/Ω
x

  −5

−3

−2

−1

1

2

3

FIG. 3. Experimental results for the spatial diﬀusion coef-
ﬁcients in the x and z directions as functions of the probe
ﬁeld detuning. The experimental parameters are:
lattice
detuning ∆/(2π) = −42 MHz,
intensity per lattice beam
IL = 3.5 mW/cm2, lattice angle θ = 300. These parame-
ters correspond to a vibrational frequency in the x- direction
Ωx/(2π) ≃ 55 kHz. A probe transmission spectrum is re-
ported for comparison, T and T0 being the intensity of the
transmitted probe beam with and without the atomic cloud.
The two resonances at δ = ±Ωx correspond to stimulated
light scattering by the Brillouin propagation modes. The
two resonances at larger detuning are Raman lines [3] in the
z-direction (δ = ±Ωz), which do not correspond to propa-
gation modes. For the measurements of the diﬀusion coeﬃ-
cients, the probe beam intensity is Ip = 0.3 mW/cm2; in the
transmission spectrum Ip = 0.1 mW/cm2.

We veriﬁed that the cloud expansion corresponds to
normal diﬀusion and derived the diﬀusion coeﬃcients Dx
and Dz. The procedure has been repeated for several dif-
ferent values of the detuning δ of the probe ﬁeld. Results
for Dx and Dz as functions of δ are shown in Fig. 3. The

3

probe transmission spectrum is also reported to allow
the comparison of the position of the resonances in the
spectrum of the diﬀusion coeﬃcients and in that of the
probe transmission. We observe two narrow resonances
in the diﬀusion coeﬃcient along the x-axis centered at
δ = ±Ωx. In contrast, no resonant behaviour of Dz with
δ is observed. This is in agreement with the numerical
simulations and constitutes the ﬁrst direct observation of
Brillouin-like propagation modes in an optical lattice.

We turn now to the analysis of the mechanism be-
hind these propagation modes. Brillouin-like propaga-
tion modes have been widely studied in condensed mat-
ter and dense ﬂuids [20]. However in the present case
the mechanism associated with these modes is clearly of
a diﬀerent nature, as in dilute optical lattices the inter-
action between atoms is negligible and therefore sound-
wave-like propagation modes cannot be supported. On
the contrary, in a dilute optical lattice the propagation
of the atoms is determined by the synchronization of the
oscillation within a potential well with the optical pump-
ing from a well to a neighbouring one, as ﬁrst identiﬁed
in the numerical analysis of Ref. [10]. This dynamics can
be interpreted in terms of noise-induced resonances: the
probe ﬁeld induces a large scale moving modulation of
the periodic potential of the four-beam optical lattice,
with the optical pumping constituting the noise source
which allows transfer from a well to a neighbouring one.
It is then natural to investigate the dependence of the
amplitude of the Brillouin mode on the strength of the
noise, i.e. on the optical pumping rate. We studied, via
semiclassical Monte-Carlo simulations, the atomic cloud
expansion for a given depth of the potential well at diﬀer-
ent values of the optical pumping rate Γ′
0, proportional to
the rate Γ
esc of escape from the well [21]. This has been
done by varying the lattice intensity I and detuning ∆ so
as to keep the depth of the potential wells U0 ∝ I/∆ con-
stant while varying Γ′
0 ∝ I/∆2. The diﬀusion coeﬃcient
in the x-direction has been calculated both for a probe
ﬁeld at resonance (|δ| = Ωx) and for a probe ﬁeld far oﬀ-
resonance (|δ| ≫ Ωx). The two diﬀusion coeﬃcients will
be indicated by Dx and D0
x respectively. To character-
ize quantitatively the response of the atomic system to a
noise strength variation, we introduce the enhancement
factor ξ deﬁned as

′

ξ =

Dx − D0
x
D0
x

.

(1)

Numerical results for the enhancement factor ξ as a func-
tion of the optical pumping rate at a given value of the
potential well depth (i.e.
for ﬁxed light shift per beam
∆′
0) are shown in Fig. 4. At small pumping rates, ξ in-
creases abruptly with Γ′
0; then a maximum is reached,
corresponding to the synchronization of the oscillation of
the atoms within a well with the escape from a well to
the neighbouring one; ﬁnally at larger pumping rates this
synchronization is lost and ξ decreases. This dependence

recalls the typical behaviour of stochastic resonance [11],
with the noise enhancing the response of the atomic sys-
tem to the weak moving modulation. It should be noted
that the system analyzed here has one important pecu-
liarity with respect to the model usually considered in the
analysis of stochastic resonance. Stochastic resonance
is in general understood as the noise-induced enhance-
ment of a weak periodic signal with a frequency much
smaller than the intrawell relaxation frequency within a
single metastable state. In contrast, in the present case,
the noise synchronizes precisely with the intrawell mo-
tion of the atoms. This corresponds to a nonconventional
stochastic resonance scenario [12].

This work was supported by CNRS, the European Com-
mission (TMR network ”Quantum Structures”, contract
FMRX-CT96-0077) and by R´egion Ile de France under
contract E.1220. Laboratoire Kastler Brossel is an ”unit´e
mixte de recherche de l’Ecole Normale Sup´erieure et de
l’Universit´e Pierre et Marie Curie associ´ee au Centre Na-
tional de la Recherche Scientiﬁque (CNRS)”.

[1] H.J. Metcalf and P. van der Straten, Laser cooling and

trapping, Springer-Verlag (Berlin, 1999).

[2] P.S. Jessen and I.H. Deutsch, Adv. At. Mol. Opt. Phys.

[3] G. Grynberg and C. Mennerat-Robilliard, Phys. Rep.

Ip/IL=2.25 %
Ip/IL=16 %

37, 95 (1996).

355, 335 (2001).

ξ

1.0

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

0.0

0

10

30

40

20

Γ

0’/ω
r

FIG. 4. Numerical results for the enhancement factor ξ
as a function of the optical pumping rate, for a given depth
of the optical potential wells. Parameters for the calculations
′
0 = −50ωr and θ = 300. The two data sets correspond
are: ∆
to diﬀerent intensities of the probe beam. For comparison,
′
0 ≃ −60ωr and
we recall that in the experiment (Fig. 3) ∆
Γ

0 ≃ 8.5ωr.

′

In summary, in this Letter we introduced a scheme
for the detection of Brillouin propagation modes in opti-
cal lattices and we reported on their direct observation.
Furthermore, we studied via Monte-Carlo simulations the
amplitude of the Brillouin mode, as characterized by an
increase of the diﬀusion coeﬃcients due to the presence
of the probe ﬁeld, as a function of the rate of escape from
the potential wells. The Brillouin modes examined in this
work diﬀer from their counterparts in solid state or dense
ﬂuids as they are sustained by a medium of noninteract-
ing particles. From our analysis it turns out that in the
presence of noise the Brownian motion of a system of par-
ticles in a periodic potential can be turned in a motion
at a well-deﬁned velocity by the application of a weak
moving modulation. This represents a quite unusual sit-
uation in statistical physics and may constitute a model
for many biological phenomena, like the transmission of
weak signals in neuronal systems [22].

We thank Franck Lalo¨e for his continued interest in our
work and David Lucas for comments on the manuscript.

4

[4] R. Grimm, M. Weidem¨uller, and Yu.B. Ovchinnikov,

Adv. At. Mol. Opt. Phys. 42, 95 (2000).

[5] G. Grynberg, C. Trich´e, L. Guidoni and P.M. Visser, Eu-

rophys. Lett. 51, 506 (2000).

[6] M.G. Raizen, Adv. At. Mol. Opt. Phys. 41, 43 (1999).
[7] C. Mennerat-Robilliard, D. Lucas, S. Guibal, J.W.R. Ta-
bosa, C. Jurczak, J.-Y. Courtois and G. Grynberg, Phys.
Rev. Lett. 82, 851 (1999).

[8] R. Bartussek, P. H¨anggi and J.G. Kissner, Europhys.

Lett. 28, 459 (1994), and references therein.

[9] J.-Y. Courtois and G. Grynberg, Adv. At. Mol. Opt.

Phys. 36, 87 (1996).

[10] J.-Y. Courtois, S. Guibal, D.R. Meacher, P. Verkerk and

G. Grynberg, Phys. Rev. Lett. 77, 40 (1996).

[11] L. Gammaitoni, P. H¨anggi, P. Jung and F. Marchesoni,
Rev. Mod. Phys. 70, 223 (1998); L. Fronzoni and R. Man-
nella, J. Stat. Phys. 70, 501 (1993). R. L¨ofstedt and
S.N. Coppersmith, Phys. Rev. Lett. 72, 1947 (1994);
L. Viola, E.M. Fortunato, S. Loyd, C.-H. Tseng, and
D.G. Cory, ibid 84, 5466 (2000); T. Wellens and A. Buch-
leitner, Chem. Phys. 268, 131 (2001).

[12] M.I. Dykman, D.G. Luchinsky, R. Mannella, P.V.E. Mc-
Clintock, N.D. Stein, and N.G. Stocks, J. Stat. Phys. 70,
479 (1993).

[13] F.-R. Carminati, M. Schiavoni, L. Sanchez-Palencia,
F. Renzoni and G. Grynberg, Eur. Phys. J. D 17, 249
(2001).

[14] J. Dalibard and C. Cohen-Tannoudji, J. Opt. Soc. Am.
B 6, 2023 (1989); P.J. Ungar, D.S. Weiss, E. Riis and
S. Chu, ibid 6, 2058 (1989).

[15] Y. Castin and J. Dalibard, Europhys. Lett. 14, 761

(1991).

[16] L. Sanchez-Palencia, P. Horak and G. Grynberg, Eur.

Phys. J. D (2002), in press.

[17] To induce a propagating wave in a single direction a
slightly more complicated setup would be needed, with
two additional laser beams, independent of the lattice
beams, creating the moving intensity modulation.
[18] We recall that in this geometry the Raman excitation of

the Ωx vibration mode is forbidden [10].

[19] K.I. Petsas, G. Grynberg and J.-Y. Courtois, Eur. Phys.

J. D. 6, 29 (1999).

[20] Y.R. Shen, The principles of nonlinear optics, (Wiley-
Interscience, New York, 1984); R.W. Boyd, Nonlinear
optics, (Academic Press, New York, 1992).

[21] J.-Y. Courtois and G. Grynberg, Phys. Rev. A 46, 7060

[22] I. Hidaka, D. Nozaki, Y. Yamamoto, Phys. Rev. Lett. 85,

(1992).

3740 (2000).

5

