2
0
0
2
 
b
e
F
 
4
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
m
o
t
a
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
3
4
0
2
0
2
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Optical shielding of cold collisions in blue-detuned near-resonant optical lattices

J. Piilo1 and K.-A. Suominen1,2
1Helsinki Institute of Physics, PL 64, FIN-00014 Helsingin yliopisto, Finland
2Department of Physics, University of Turku, FIN-20014 Turun yliopisto, Finland
(January 16, 2014)

We report Monte Carlo wave function simulation results for two colliding atoms in a blue-detuned
near-resonant J = 1 → J = 1 optical lattice. Our results show that complete optical shielding of
collisions can be achieved within the lattice with suitably selected and realistic laser ﬁeld parameters.
More importantly, our results demonstrate that the shielding eﬀect does not interfere with the actual
trapping and cooling process, and it is produced by the lattice lasers themselves, without the need
to use additional laser beams.

32.80.Pj, 34.50.Rk, 42.50.Vk, 03.65.-w

I. INTRODUCTION

as a preliminary stage.

At

In laser cooling and trapping of neutral atoms spatial
variations in the polarization and intensity of light can
be eﬀectively turned into potentials for atoms [1]. Op-
tical lattices are an important application of this tech-
nique [2]. By using suitable laser ﬁeld conﬁgurations and
parameters one can achieve localization of atoms into lat-
tice sites, at least for some period of time on average.
In practice there are two distinct cases of optical lat-
tices. For near-resonant light the lasers are responsible
for both cooling and trapping of atoms, usually achieved
by a strong scattering of photons (energy dissipation).
The basic example is the Sisyphus or polarization gra-
dient cooling mechanism [3].
In contrast, with far oﬀ-
resonant light we obtain only a conservative lattice po-
tential without the cooling mechanism, with a strong re-
duction in photon scattering. This allows many delicate
experiments involving quantum coherences, such as Bose-
Einstein condensation [4–7].

suitably large atomic densities,

about 1012
atoms/cm3, the atom-atom interactions are expected to
become important in laser cooling and trapping [8,9].
For far oﬀ-resonant lattices their role can be easily con-
trolled, and one can even consider studying controlled
collisions [10], or using the atom-atom interactions to
study quantum computing and entanglement [11,12]. Re-
cently it has become possible to make densely occupied
far oﬀ–resonant lattices [13]. For near-resonant optical
lattices the situation is more complicated, because the
main atom-atom eﬀects are light-assisted inelastic col-
lisions, which interfere with the laser cooling process.
Another aspect is that although strong photon scatter-
ing leads typically to eﬃcient dissipation and cooling,
in suitably dense atomic gases the reabsorption of scat-
tered photons causes also unwanted heating of the atomic
cloud. Experimentally the case of densely populated
near-resonant lattices has not been studied very much
so far, as high occupation densities are hard to produce
due to the above-mentioned problems. These problems
are present also in basic magneto-optical traps (MOT) so
one does not get much gain in density by using a MOT

For near-resonant laser light we have two situations de-
pending whether the laser frequency is slightly above the
atomic transition (blue-detuned light) or slightly below it
(red-detuned light). In the more commonly applied red-
detuned case one obtains the lattice structure rather eas-
ily, and can go below the Doppler limit for laser cooling
due to the Sisyphus cooling mechanism. For densely pop-
ulated lattices this means, however, the above-mentioned
appearance of strongly inelastic collisional radiative pro-
cesses that cause heating and loss of atoms [9].

In this paper we look at the case of near-resonant
blue-detuned lattice, which is diﬀerent from the red-
detuned case.
It is not straightforward to construct a
blue-detuned lattice with an eﬃcient cooling mechanism.
There are, however, schemes for doing this, based on ap-
plying an external magnetic ﬁeld [14,15], and we have
adapted one of them as the basis of our studies. The
important beneﬁt of using a near-resonant blue-detuned
lattice is that the photon scattering is reduced strongly
compared to the red-detuned case. This diminishes the
role of photon reabsorption as a heating mechanism, and
thus increases the relevance of the light-assisted collisions
in the complicated thermodynamics of the atomic cloud.
With blue-detuned light the nature of the light-assisted
collisions is also changed, and instead of strong inelastic
processes we have optical shielding of collisions [9]. For
weak ﬁelds this mechanism is incomplete and can lead to
some heating of atoms, but barely to any strong loss. For
stronger ﬁelds the inelastic contribution disappears, also
in the sense that optical shielding forbids close ground-
ground encounters which can lead to atom loss or heating,
in addition to the light-assisted processes. Optical shield-
ing has been studied both experimentally [16–20] and
theoretically [21–23] with laser cooled atoms in magneto-
optical traps, but not in optical lattices to our knowledge.
None of the theoretical studies so far have treated the
cooling process and the shielding process simultaneously.
Thus we expect that, a priori, it is better to use blue-
detuned lattices for eﬃcient cooling while aiming at an in-
crease in the atomic density in lattices. Matters are, how-
ever, complicated by the presence of the Zeeman states

1

with diﬀerent energies. Also, the mixing of cooling and
collisions may produce unexpected eﬀects if the two pro-
cesses are not separable. Finally, there are indications
in previous MOT studies that at very strong ﬁelds oﬀ-
resonant processes can become important. Thus, by us-
ing the technique of our earlier study [24,25], we have
examined the dynamics of two colliding atoms in a one-
It turns out
dimensional blue-detuned optical lattice.
that all the above-mentioned aspects,
incomplete and
complete shielding, and the oﬀ-resonant processes, are
present also for the blue-detuned lattices. But more im-
portantly, it turns out that the shielding mechanism and
the cooling and trapping mechanism can coexist without
interfering with each other.

This paper is constructed as follows. First we brieﬂy
review in Sec. II the basic properties and construction of
blue-detuned optical lattices, and in Sec. III the optical
shielding process in collisions. In Sec. IV we present how
to treat the two situations within the same dynamical
model with Monte Carlo wave function (MCWF) simu-
lations. The results are given in Sec. V and ﬁnally dis-
cussed in Sec. VI.

II. BLUE-DETUNED NEAR-RESONANT
OPTICAL LATTICES

The light shifts of the sublevels of the atomic ground
state energy states are positive for blue-detuned light.
The stronger the coupling, the larger is the light shift,
and the higher the level lies in energy. Therefore the opti-
cal potential minima may occur when the atomic ground
state Zeeman sublevel is minimally coupled to the ex-
cited states. This implies that it should be possible to
trap atoms with laser ﬁeld polarization gradients around
those points in space where there is no coupling to the
excited state. For example, if the ground and excited
states have an equal total angular momentum quantum
number J, the ground state sublevel with angular mo-
mentum projection state mg = J is not coupled to the
excited state when the light is σ+ polarized. The cou-
pling strength and the optical potential increases when
the atom moves away from the totally dark point, in this
case away from the point of σ+ light polarization.

→

In the schemes for optical lattices which use e.g. only
J),
one ground and one excited state manifold (J
one of the light-shifted eigenstates is in fact a completely
dark state which is not coupled to the excited state at
any point of space. It would be ideal for trapping atoms
but unfortunately the optical potential for this state is
ﬂat. This state can be used for eﬃcient laser cooling [26],
and the photon scattering is about two orders of magni-
tude smaller than in other near-resonant laser cooling and
trapping schemes. In order to achieve a lattice structure
one can add a magnetic ﬁeld [14,15], which modiﬁes the
energy of the initially ﬂat dark eigenstate in a periodic
way. Instead of applying a magnetic ﬁeld one can also

-1                      0                    +1

me 

L

0

+ 1
2

1
2

+ 1
2

1
2

1
2

0

+ 1
2

-1                      0                    +1

mg

FIG. 1.

The level structure of a single atom with the

Clebsch–Gordan coeﬃcients of corresponding transitions.

avoid the ﬂat dark state problem by using two diﬀerent
excited state hyperﬁne manifolds [27].

→

In our study we consider the magneto–optical J

J
lattice proposal of Grynberg and Courtois (GC) [14]. The
numerical simulations for dynamical collision studies in
optical lattices are very demanding [24,25], and the GC
scheme allows us to do numerical simulations with pa-
rameter values that are also experimentally realistic. We
limit our study to the case where Jg = Je = 1.
It is
possible to ﬁnd a level scheme like this in 87Rb which
has F = 1 hyperﬁne states for both the 5S1/2 ground
and for the 5P1/2 excited state [15]. We label the three
g±1 >,
ground state sublevels with
g0 >, and the three
|
|
excited state sublevels with
e0 >, where the inte-
e±1 >,
|
|
ger subscripts indicate the angular momentum projection
quantum number m, see Fig. 1. We use the atomic mass
of 87Rb in our simulations.

The laser ﬁeld consists of two counter–propagating
beams with orthogonal linear polarizations and with fre-
quency ωL. For a zero magnetic ﬁeld the laser detuning
ω0, where ω0 is the atomic frequency. The
is δ = ωL −
total ﬁeld has a polarization gradient in one dimension
and reads (with suitable choices of phases of the beams
and origin of the coordinate system)

E(z, t) =

0(exeikr z

ieye−ikr z)e−iωLt + c.c.,

(1)

E

−

E

where
0 is the ﬁeld amplitude and kr the wavenumber.
With this ﬁeld, the polarization changes from circular σ−
to linear and then to circular in the opposite direction σ+
when z changes by λL/4, where λL is the wavelength of
the laser light.

The intensity of the laser ﬁeld and the strength of the
coupling between the ﬁeld and the atom is described by
0/√2¯h where d is the atomic
the Rabi frequency Ω = 2d
E
dipole moment of the transition between the ground and
excited states.
In the level scheme used here all the
allowed transitions are equally strong and the absolute
value of the corresponding Clebsch–Gordan coeﬃcient
has been included in the deﬁnition of the Rabi frequency
Ω above.

The magnitude of the light shift is [3] (when taking

into account the current level and coupling scheme)

U0 =

¯hδs0,

1
2

(2)

2

w
w
d
-
-
-
s +

s −

s +

s −

=+1
m
g

=−1
m
g

−
+hW

B

y
g
r
e
n
E

0

−−hW

B

0

0.25

0.5

1

1.25

1.5

0.75
z (l )

FIG. 2.

Schematic view of the optical potentials for the
two trapping ground state Zeeman sublevels. The periodic
polarization gradient of the laser ﬁeld creates the lattice struc-
ture and we indicate the points of circular polarizations σ+
and σ−
. The dashed lines give the Zeeman shifted energy
levels which the light ﬁeld modiﬁes.

where s0 is the saturation parameter given by

s0 =

Ω2/2
δ2 + Γ2/4

.

(3)

The magnetic ﬁeld B is applied in the z–direction,
B = Bz, which is also the quantization axis. The
ground state mg = 0 is not Zeeman shifted but the states
mg =
= ¯hΩB into opposite di-
µB
|
rections with respect to each other. Here µ is the mag-
netic moment along the z–axis of the corresponding state.
Thus the energy separation between mg =
1 states due
to magnetic ﬁeld is 2¯hΩB.

1 are shifted by

±

±

|

If the light shift dominates over the Zeeman shift,
¯hΩB < U0, the lattice is paramagnetic [14]. The atoms
are trapped in potential wells located 0.5λ apart, either in
the points of σ+ polarization or in the points of σ− polar-
ization, depending on the direction of the applied mag-
netic ﬁeld. If the Zeeman shift dominates, U0 < ¯hΩB,
the eigenstates of the system correspond to Zeeman sub-
levels onto which the light ﬁeld induces perturbations. In
this case the atoms are trapped in both σ− and σ+ light
polarization points in space and the lattice behaviour is
antiparamagnetic [14].

We have done our simulations in the antiparamag-
netic regime where the Zeeman shift dominates over light
shifts, U0 < ¯hΩB. The polarization gradient of the laser
ﬁeld modiﬁes the lattice potential as in the Sisyphus
scheme [3], see Fig. 2. The atoms are cooled by opti-
1 and
cal pumping, and are trapped into the mg =
mg = +1 ground sublevels. Without the magnetic ﬁeld
there would be no cooling or trapping for Jg = Je = 1
system due to the dark state and the lack of motional cou-
pling between the dark state and the coupled states [2].
1 and mg = +1 are
in opposite directions, their eﬀective detuning from the
resonance is not equal and consequently they experience

Since the Zeeman shifts for mg =

−

−

3

TABLE I. Laser parameters for the simulation series with
ﬁxed detuning, and the corresponding lattice properties: De-
tuning δ, Rabi frequency Ω, Zeeman shift ΩB, lattice mod-
ulation depths U0, U−, and U+. The atomic photon recoil
energy is Er =

¯h
2M , and Γ is the atomic linewidth.

2
r

k

2

δ(Γ)
5.0
5.0
5.0
5.0
10.0
10.0
10.0
10.0

Ω(Γ)
1.5
2.0
3.0
5.0
2.0
4.22
8.0
10.0

ΩB (Γ)
1.25
1.25
1.25
1.875
1.25
1.875
3.125
3.75

U0(Er)
178
316
712
1980
159
710
2554
3990

U−(Er)
236
419
943
3120
182
873
3704
6359

U+(Er)
143
254
572
1447
141
599
1948
2905

TABLE II. Laser parameters for the simulation series with
ﬁxed lattice depth U0, and the corresponding lattice proper-
ties: Detuning δ, Rabi frequency Ω, Zeeman shift ΩB, lattice
modulation depths U0, U−, and U+.
δ(Γ)
1.5
5.0
7.0
10.0

U−(Er)
1126
943
865
873

U+(Er)
489
572
605
599

U0(Er)
710
712
712
710

ΩB (Γ)
0.8125
1.25
1.25
1.875

Ω(Γ)
1.72
3.0
3.54
4.22

diﬀerent optical potential modulation depths U− and U+
respectively. The value of U0 gives the optical potential
modulation depth when the Zeeman shift is large com-
pared to the detuning. This is the value which both U−
and U+ approach when U0 is kept ﬁxed with increasing
detuning. We show the schematic view of optical poten-
tials for ground sublevels in Fig. 2. The relevant lattice
properties along with simulation parameters are given in
Tables I and II. We have performed a series of simula-
tions for two ﬁxed values of detuning, with a changing
Rabi frequency, and another series for a ﬁxed value of
U0, with a changing detuning and Rabi frequency.

III. OPTICAL SHIELDING

A. Collisions in the present of near-resonant light

Two slowly colliding atoms form a quasimolecule.
When a laser ﬁeld is present the quasimolecule may be
resonantly excited at long range at the Condon point RC
where the ground and excited molecular states become
resonant. In this case the nature of the atomic collision
depends on the sign of the detuning of the laser [9].

For a red-detuned laser the excitation is followed by
an acceleration of the quasimolecule on an attractive ex-
cited state. The collision becomes inelastic when spon-
taneous decay back to the ground state occurs and the
pair of colliding atoms gain kinetic energy. The shared
energy increase corresponds to the acceleration on the

excited state. This is the radiative heating and escape
mechanism. In addition the atoms may also gain kinetic
If the
energy by a ﬁne-structure changing mechanism.
atom pair survives on the excited state to very small in-
ternuclear distances and there is a level crossing between
two excited ﬁne-structure states, the pair may change
their internal state. When coming out of the collision on
a ﬁne structure state which is asymptotically below the
state on which they entered the collision, the kinetic en-
ergy of the quasimolecule increases by the corresponding
amount. For a review see Ref. [9].

When the laser ﬁeld present is blue-detuned the situ-
ation is diﬀerent. The resonant excitation of the quasi-
molecule at RC occurs now to a repulsive molecular state.
The atom pair is prevented from approaching close to
each other due to the reﬂection of motion on the repulsive
state at the turning point Rtp, see Fig. 3. If the transfer
of population back to the ground state is not complete
when the quasimolecule traverses RC again the atom pair
may gain kinetic energy. In this case the shielding is in-
complete and the collision is inelastic. If the population
transfer between the states is adiabatic and there is no
time for spontaneous emission to occur during the pro-
cess, shielding becomes complete and the laser-assisted
collision between atoms is elastic.

It should be noted that despite strong localization of
atoms into lattice sites, atoms still move from site to site
to some extent. This is because the ﬁnite spatial extent of
atomic wave packets and optical pumping process. Thus
the localization does not mean that weak long-distance
atom-atom interactions at relatively ﬁxed atom-atom dis-
tances now dominate over the more stronger cold colli-
sions between moving atoms.

B. Shielding of ground state processes

Eﬃcient optical shielding can suppress the rates of un-
wanted processes which occur at short internuclear dis-
tances even in the absence of laser ﬁelds [9].
Inelastic
ground–ground processes are suppressed because com-
plete shielding simply empties the quasimolecule ground
state at RC and in principle the quasimolecule can never
reach the internuclear distances R < RC . Since for near-
resonant light the values for RC are typically hundreds
or thousands of ˚Angstroms, any small-distance molecular
process such as a change of a hyperﬁne state or Penning
ionisation, is prevented.

In the past the optical shielding and suppression has
been studied experimentally e.g.
in the following con-
suppression of heating and escape of atoms in
texts:
MOTs [16], shielding of photoassociative ionizing colli-
sions [17], shielding of ionizing collisions of metastable
xenon and krypton [18,19], and optical suppression in
two-photon “energy pooling” collisions in Rb MOTs [20].
Theoretical methods used for shielding studies include
MCWF simulations [21], Landau–Zener [21] and three–

(R)

U
e

incomplete

complete

Ug(R)

R

tp

R
C

R

FIG. 3. A schematic semiclassical representation of opti-
cal shielding. The quasimolecule is excited resonantly to the
repulsive molecular state at the Condon point RC. Then it
reaches the classical turning point Rtp, and is ﬁnally trans-
ferred back to the ground state when arriving at RC again.
If the transfer back to the ground state is not complete, the
atom pair may gain kinetic energy as it is further accelerated
by the excited state potential. In this case shielding is incom-
plete and the collision is inelastic. If the population transfer
between the states is adiabatic, shielding is complete and the
collision between the atoms is elastic.

dimensional Landau–Zener theory [22], and quantum
close–coupling calculations [23]. It should be noted that
shielding does not help very much in achieving Bose-
Einstein condensation as it involves actual resonant ab-
sorption and subsequent emission of photons, with the
corresponding recoil momentum eﬀects.

C. Shielding in optical lattices

When studying optical shielding in blue-detuned near-
resonant optical lattices, there is no need for additional
shielding lasers. The blue-detuned lattice laser itself acts
as a shielding laser. Eﬃcient shielding in blue-detuned
lattices would make it possible to increase the occupa-
tion density even in the case of near-resonant lattices and
without the problems arising from light-assisted inelastic
collisions and photon reabsorption. This would be in
contrast to the case of red-detuned near-resonant optical
lattices where the inelastic processes dominate when the

4

occupation density increases and atom–atom interactions
are accounted [24,25].

Our simulation scheme and collision model is similar
to the one we have used previously for collision stud-
ies in optical lattices and the details can be found in
Ref. [25]. The simulations require very large computa-
tional resources and we note again that we ﬁx the position
of one of the two colliding atoms in respect to the lattice.
The small number of scattered photons means that in a
high density atom cloud the radiation pressure due to re-
absorbed photons decreases. This means that our purely
collisional model becomes more realistic in the context of
the thermodynamics of the atom cloud, compared to our
previous studies of the red-detuned case [24,25].

IV. FRAMEWORK FOR SIMULATIONS

A. Product state basis and Hamiltonian

We formulate the problem in position space and use
the two–atom product states [28]. We do not use the
adiabatic elimination of the excited states [29] since we
want to account for the dynamical nature of atomic inter-
actions in the presence of near-resonant light. The basis
vectors are

j1m1
|

1
i

j2m2
|

2,
i

(4)

where j1 and j2 denote the ground or excited state and
m1, m2 denote the quantum number for the component
of J along the quantization axis z for atom 1 and 2 respec-
tively in our Jg = Je = 1 system. The total number of
6 = 36. In the current coupling
states in principle is 6
and level scheme it is possible to simplify the problem
and use only 9 states, see below.

×

We have to ﬁx the position of one atom, and the binary
system wave function depends now only on the position
z2 of the moving atom 2

ψ(z2, t)
i
|

= X

j1,j2,m1,m2

ψj1,m1

j1m1
j2,m2 (z2, t)
|

j2m2
|

2. (5)
i

1
i

The atomic spatial dimensionality of the problem is re-
duced from numerically impossible two to numerically
treatable one, see Ref. [25] for more discussion. The rela-
zf where
tive coordinate z between atoms is now z = z2
zf is the position of the ﬁxed atom.

−

In the atomic product state basis [28], our system

Hamiltonian is

HS = H1 + H2 + Vdip.

(6)

Here, Vdip includes the interaction between the atoms.
H1 and H2 are the single atom Hamiltonians for atoms
1 and 2 respectively in product state space.

The single atom Hamiltonian for atom α (α = 1, 2)
in respective Hilbert spaces is, after the rotating wave
approximation,

p2
α
2M −

Hα =
e

¯hδPe,α +

Uα.
e

Vα +
e
em|

1
Here, Pe,α = P
m=−1 |
between a single atom α and the ﬁeld is

emiα αh

, and the interaction

(7)

Vα = i
e

sin(kzα)

e0

{|

iα αh

g−1

+

|

e1
|

iα αh

g0

|}

cos(kzα)

e−1

{|

iα αh

g0

+

|

e0
|

iα αh

g1

|}

+ h.c., (8)

¯hΩ
√2
¯hΩ
√2

+

where zα is the position operator of atom α. The dipole–
dipole interaction potential Vdip is the same as used in
Refs. [24] and [25]. The sum over the quantum number
m in Eq. (12) of Ref. [25] goes now from m =
1 to
m = +1 for the level scheme Jg = Je = 1 studied here.

−

The interaction of atom α with the magnetic ﬁeld B

in Eq. (7) is

Uα = X
e
i

i
mi¯hΩBi |

i
iα αh

,
|

(9)

where the sum over i includes all the ground and ex-
cited states, and the Zeeman shift factors ΩBi are for
1 equal to ΩB, see Tables I
the ground substates m =
and II.

±

The description of optical shielding is usually given in
terms of molecular potentials, see Sec. III. We note that
we use the two-atom product state vectors due to their
simplicity in treating quantums jumps for the current
case. Molecular potentials can be obtained by diagonal-
izing Vdip in Eq. (6).

In the antiparamagnetic regime of the GC optical lat-
tice the values of detunings are such that the Zeeman
shifts are not negligible in all simulations. The mg =
1
−
level is closer to resonance than the mg = +1 level for
the magnetic ﬁeld orientation we use. Thus the optical
potential modulation depth may also be diﬀerent for the
two states. The values of modulation depth U− and U+
for levels mg =
1 and mg + 1 respectively and Zeeman
shifts are presented in Tables I and II. In the constant
detuning simulations it is necessary to increase the Zee-
man shift when going for stronger laser ﬁelds and deeper
lattices, in order to stay in the antiparamagnetic regime.

−

B. Aspects of the simulation method

We use the MCWF method to solve the equation of
motion for the density matrix of the two-atom system
interacting with semiclassical light ﬁelds [8,30,31]. A di-
rect quantum mechanical solution of the density matrix
master equation by other means is not feasible due to
the large size of the density matrix and the coupling of
atoms to a large number of vacuum modes of the elec-
tric ﬁeld. The variant of Monte Carlo (MC) methods we
use was developed by Dalibard, Castin and Mølmer [32].
Application of the MCWF method for the study of cold

5

collisions in optical lattices is not straightforward and we
have given the details in our earlier publication [25]. As a
result of simulations we obtain a momentum distribution
for an atom in the lattice. This distribution is the most
informative result when studying optical shielding in the
context presented here.

±

±

1.
The laser ﬁeld couples only states where ∆m =
The Clebsch–Gordan coeﬃcient between the states mg =
0 and me = 0 is zero in the level scheme.
It follows
that optical pumping rapidly moves population to the
ground levels mg =
1 which are coupled only to the
excited level me = 0. Thus there is population on only
three levels for both of the colliding atoms, Λ scheme,
and number of the used product state basis vectors can
be reduced from 36 to 3
3 = 9. This simpliﬁes the
×
problem considerably. The simulations take less compu-
tational resources and are much faster to perform. The
dipole–dipole interaction does not change the scheme and
it is conﬁrmed by the results of the full simulation which
includes all 36 states. From molecular potential point of
view this means that only one attractive and one repul-
sive state is relevant instead of all four diﬀerent attractive
and four diﬀerent repulsive states.

The number of collisions should be the same for sim-
ulations with diﬀerent parameters for the results to be
comparable with each other. The number of collisions
is dictated by the number of spontaneously emitted pho-
tons. We ﬁx the simulation time to constant value 120, in
units of 1/Γs0. This guarantees that the average number
of spontaneously emitted photons and the number of col-
lisions remains roughly the same for all simulations. We
have performed all the simulations for the 1D occupation
density of 25% of the lattice, i.e., every fourth lattice site
is occupied on average.

a)

b)

−100
c)

−50

0

50

100

−50

0

50

100

−100
d)

−100

−50

50

100

−100

−50

50

100

0
 )
p (p
r

0
 )
p (p
r

FIG. 4. Momentum probability distributions for δ = 5Γ
case. The Rabi frequencies are: a) Ω = 1.5Γ, b) Ω = 2.0Γ,
c) Ω = 3.0Γ, and d) Ω = 5.0Γ. Dashed line is for interacting
and solid line for non–interacting atoms. When Ω increases
the regime changes from incomplete shielding, a) and b), to
complete shielding, c), and ﬁnally to oﬀ–resonant heating in
d). The momentum distributions also get wider due to deeper
lattice with increasing Ω.

a)

b)

−100
c)

0

100

0

100

−100
d)

V. RESULTS

We present the momentum distributions of three sim-
ulation series in Figs. 4, 5, and 6. We do two simula-
tion series with the constant values of detuning δ and
changing the Rabi frequency Ω. We have δ = 5Γ and
δ = 10Γ, in Figs. 4 and 5, respectively. Figure 6 gives re-
sults for a constant optical potential modulation depth,
U0
710Er, and changing δ. We compare the results
between interacting and non–interacting atoms.

∼

A. Constant detuning

For the smallest values of Ω, the constant detuning
simulations show that optical shielding is not complete.
Wide wings towards large momentum appear, Figs. 4a)
and b), 5a) and b). The resonant excitation process at
Condon point RC is not adiabatic and some atoms can
move apart on repulsive molecular state after the colli-
sion. If the process terminates for spontaneous decay at

−100

100

−100

100

0
 )
p (p
r

0
 )
p (p
r

FIG. 5. Momentum probability distributions for δ = 10Γ
case. The Rabi frequencies are: a) Ω = 2.0Γ, b) Ω = 4.22Γ,
c) Ω = 8.0Γ, and d) Ω = 10.0Γ. Dashed line is for interacting
and solid line for non–interacting atoms. When Ω increases
the regime changes from incomplete shielding, a) and b), to
complete shielding, c), and ﬁnally to oﬀ–resonant eﬀects in
d). The momentum distributions also get wider due to deeper
lattice with increasing Ω.

r > RC the atom pair gains corresponding amount of ki-
netic energy by acceleration on repulsive molecular state,
see Fig. 3.

The wings get narrower when we increase the value of
Ω and nearly vanish when the point of complete shielding
is reached, Figs. 4c) and 5c). The resonant excitation
process for the repulsive state at RC becomes adiabatic
and hardly any change in p–distribution is visible when
compared to non-interacting atoms. When atoms try to
occupy the same lattice site, they collide elastically in
this parameter regime.

6

a)

b)

VI. CONCLUSIONS

−100
c)

0

100

0

100

−100
d)

−100

100

−100

100

0
 )
p (p
r

0
 )
p (p
r

FIG. 6. Momentum distributions for ﬁxed U0 ∼ 710Er.
a) δ = 1.5Γ b) δ = 5.0Γ c) δ = 7.0Γ d) δ = 10.0Γ. The
oﬀ-resonant processes play a role at the small detuning, a).
In the intermediate detuning shielding may become complete
and the collisions between atoms are elastic, b). For larger
detuning the shielding is incomplete, c) and d).

When we further increase the Rabi frequency, the oﬀ-
resonant eﬀects come into play, Figs. 4d) and 5d). The
momentum distribution begin to deviate again from the
result for non–interacting atoms, and the qualitive char-
acter of momentum broadening is now diﬀerent when
compared to the small Ω results. This indicates that the
heating process does not arise from incomplete shielding.
Additional shoulders that appear in both the interacting
and non–interacting cases arise due to the diﬀerence in
the depth of the two lattice potential wells, U±1. When
we increase δ, we note that the point of complete shield-
ing moves towards larger U0. In our case from δ = 5Γ
and U0 = 712Er to δ = 10Γ and U0 = 2554Er.

B. Constant lattice depth

∼

Figure 6 shows results for the case of constant opti-
cal modulation depth U0
710Er and varying detuning.
When the detuning is small the oﬀ-resonant eﬀects heat
the atomic cloud and small wings appear in momentum
distribution, see Fig. 6a). For an intermediate detuning
value the point of complete shielding is reached, Fig. 6b).
Increasing δ further makes the shielding incomplete and
subsequently wide wings appear in the momentum dis-
tribution, Figs. 6c) and d). This is in agreement with the
study of oﬀ-resonant eﬀects of the laser ﬁeld in cold col-
lisions in MOTs [33]. Keeping the lattice depth constant
and increasing the detuning means decreasing the ratio
Ω/δ, which reduces the role of oﬀ-resonant eﬀects. Simu-
lation studies reported in Ref. [33] show that for collisions
in uniform blue-detuned laser ﬁelds the oﬀ–resonant ef-
fects vanish when Ω/δ decreases until for small values
of Ω/δ the shielding eﬀect is again incomplete. This is
accordance with the optical lattice results presented here.

Our simulations demonstrate clearly that optical
shielding should be present
in blue-detuned near-
resonant optical lattices. The shielding process is not
expected to be always perfect but with an appropriate
choice of the detuning and the intensity of the trapping
laser it is nevertheless possible to strongly suppress the
rate of inelastic collisions. For example, with a detun-
ing δ = 5.0Γ and a Rabi frequency Ω = 3.0Γ, giving
U0 = 710Er in our scheme, the optical shielding process
is practically complete, see Fig. 4c). If the parameters are
not chosen correctly, the shielding process can be either
incomplete or reduced by the oﬀ-resonant excitation of
the quasimolecule states related to attractive atom-atom
potentials [33].

We have studied here the antiparamagnetic regime of
a GC–lattice [14]. In this case the cooling and trapping
mechanism resembles the traditional Sisyphus mecha-
nism [3], making comparisons between our previous study
of the red-detuned case more appropriate. In this scheme
the lattice depth depends on the intensity of the laser.
The value of detuning for eﬀective shielding increases
when the laser intensity and thus the optical potential
modulation depth U0 is increased. Thus for shallow
lattices eﬀective shielding occurs at small detunings, in
which case the two trapping potentials are not identical
because of the non–negligible Zeeman shift compared to
the detuning of the laser.

In the paramagnetic regime of a GC–lattice the lat-
tice depth U0 is dictated by the strength of the mag-
netic ﬁeld more than by the laser intensity. This leaves
more freedom for using both the intensity and detuning
of the laser to optimize optical shielding for a given lat-
tice depth. This is an interesting subject for possible
future studies of collisions in blue-detuned near-resonant
optical lattices.

Together with the reduced photon scattering and thus
reduced heating of dense atomic clouds by photon reab-
sorption, optical shielding opens a way to achieve higher
occupation densities and lower temperatures in blue-
detuned near-resonant optical lattices, compared to the
red-detuned case. Unlike in the red-detuned case, two
atoms trying to occupy the same lattice site will at the
worst case only repulse each other in an elastic process.
It should be noted that optical shielding was originally
introduced to e.g. suppress the hyperﬁne state changing
ground-ground collisions during cooling and trapping of
alkali-metal atoms [16], and this additional beneﬁt is nat-
urally present in blue-detuned lattices as well. More im-
portantly, the strong Penning ionisation for metastable
rare gas atoms [18,19] should be suppressed as well in
blue-detuned lattices. An important beneﬁt here is that
all three processes, trapping, cooling and shielding, are
produced by the same set of laser beams.

Considering what is already known about blue-detuned
optical lattices, and about optical shielding in magneto-

7

optical traps, our results appear rather obvious. How-
ever, they could have been diﬀerent. Firstly, previous
theoretical studies of optical shielding have excluded the
actual cooling process [21–23]. Our results show that the
two can coexist at least in blue-detuned lattices without
apparent problems even in the saturation limit, although
the oﬀ-resonant excitation of quasimolecule states re-
duces the shielding eﬃciency. In experiments in magneto-
optical traps shielding has been implemented typically
with an additional catalyst laser, with the red-detuned
cooling and trapping lasers either oﬀ or on. If the red-
detuned cooling and trapping lasers are on, the near-
resonant shielding studies become practically impossible
due to the strong and usually unfavourable mixing of the
two processes [19].
In other words, we hope that our
work serves as a motivation for experimentalists to per-
form shielding studies in near-resonant blue-detuned lat-
tices in the presence of the cooling process. Although the
densities that have been available so far have been rather
low, the use of e.g. metastable rare gas atoms could pro-
vide useful information due to the clear ion signal that
marks collision events [18].

Secondly, very few theoretical studies of shielding with
near-resonant light have been done so far, as the interest
has been mostly on the large-detuned laser ﬁelds. This is
because the theoretical treatment is simpliﬁed when we
can ignore the spontaneous emission (at large detunings
the excited state potential is so steep that the resulting
fast dynamics and slow spontaneous emission decouple
trivially from each other).
In an earlier near-resonant
study [33] the possibility of spontaneous emission from
the excited repulsive quasimolecule state during the slow-
down of the relative motion of the two atoms was found
to be suppressed by re-excitation, until the atoms had
ﬁnally turned around, i.e., the eﬃciency of shielding in-
creased without limit with laser intensity. Similarly, in
our study there does not seem to be any evidence for
breakdown of eﬃcient shielding due to such a sponta-
neous emission eﬀect.

Thirdly, experiments show clearly that the shielding
eﬃciency of inelastic ground-ground collisions can sat-
urate to some ﬁnite value as we increase the laser in-
tensity [18,19]. The reason for this is still unclear.
It
has been attributed to various processes, in addition to
the above-mentioned premature termination of shield-
ing via spontaneous emission [21]. Other possibilities
include counterintuitive or oﬀ-resonant processes involv-
ing diﬀerent partial waves or other processes that simi-
larly involve multiple states (in contrast to the basic two-
state approaches [9,19,22,23]), or oﬀ-resonant excitation
to the attractive molecular states [18]. We ﬁnd that oﬀ-
resonant excitation is indeed present in our studies, where
δ
10Γ, i.e., our detuning is small in general and com-
parable to the Rabi frequencies. This is in agreement
with the much more simpliﬁed three-state study done
earlier [33]. When Ω/δ
1, the steady state formation
can surpass the dynamical resonant excitation process at
suitably low collision velocities, and we see that indeed

≫

≤

it is the near-zero region of the momentum distribution
that gets depleted in Fig. 4(d), and not the near-average
velocity region as in the red-detuned lattice case. How-
ever, as discussed before, this oﬀ-resonant process can
not explain the observed saturation of shielding, as that
happens at very large detunings, for which Ω/δ
1, but
Ω is large enough for the situation to correspond mainly
to Fig. 4(c), the case of complete shielding. There is no
evidence of saturation of shielding in our studies, but due
to the limitations of our model (one dimension only, and
ignoring the very small scale molecular processes), we can
not state conclusively that it would not be present in any
experiments.

≪

Thus, we have demonstrated that eﬃcient optical
shielding should be possible in near-resonant blue-
detuned optical lattices. More precisely, it is mediated
by the trapping and cooling lasers themselves but it does
not interfere with the cooling process, unlike in basic
magneto-optical traps created with strong red-detuned
lasers. Especially, we have theoretically demonstrated
optical shielding within a level scheme which is more com-
plicated (and realistic) than the two-state models used so
far [9,21]. Our approach is fully quantum, takes sponta-
neous emission into account, and is applicable even for
strong ﬁelds. Finally, our results show that by a suit-
able choice of lattice parameters it should be possible to
obtain eﬃcient cooling and trapping, together with eﬃ-
cient optical shielding of collisional processes, and yet to
avoid any contributions from oﬀ-resonant excitation to
the attractive quasimolecule states.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

We thank Kirstine Berg-Sørensen for helpful discus-
sions. J.P. and K.-A.S. acknowledge the Academy of
Finland (projects 43336 and 50314) and the European
Union IHP CAUAC project for ﬁnancial support, and the
Finnish Center for Scientiﬁc Computing (CSC) for com-
puting resources. J.P. acknowledges support from the
National Graduate School on Modern Optics and Pho-
tonics.

[1] H. J. Metcalf and P. van der Straten, Laser Cooling and

Trapping, (Springer, Berlin, 1999).

[2] P. S. Jessen and I. H. Deutsch, Adv. At. Mol. Opt. Phys.
37, 95 (1996); D. R. Meacher, Contemp. Phys. 39, 329
(1998); S. Rolston, Phys. World 11 (10), 27 (1998); L.
Guidoni and P. Verkerk, J. Opt. B 1, R23 (1999).

[3] J. Dalibard and C. Cohen-Tannoudji, J. Opt. Soc. Am.
B 6, 2023 (1989); P. J. Ungar, D. S. Weiss, E. Riis, and
S. Chu, J. Opt. Soc. Am. B 6, 2058 (1989).

8

[4] W. K. Hensinger, H. H¨aﬀner, A. Browaeys, N. R. Heck-
enberg, K. Helmerson, C. McKenzie, G. J. Milburn, W.
D. Phillips, S. L. Rolston, H. Rubinsztein-Dunlop, and
B. Upcroft, Nature 412, 52 (2001).

A 55, 1191 (1997).

B 34, L231 (2001).

[23] R. Napolitano, J. Weiner, and P. S. Julienne, Phys. Rev.

[24] J. Piilo, K.-A. Suominen, and K. Berg-Sørensen, J. Phys.

[5] M. Greiner, O. Mandel, T. Esslinger, T. W. H¨ansch, and

[25] J. Piilo, K.-A. Suominen, and K. Berg-Sørensen, to ap-

I. Bloch, Nature 415, 39 (2002).

pear in Phys. Rev. A March 2002.

[6] S. Burger, F. S. Cataliotti, C. Fort, F. Minardi, M. Ingus-
cio, M. L. Chiofalo, and M. P. Tosi, Phys. Rev. Lett. 86,
4447 (2001); P. Pedri, L. Pitaevskii, S. Stringari, C. Fort,
S. Burger, F. S. Cataliotti, P. Maddaloni, F. Minardi, and
M. Inguscio, Phys. Rev. Lett. 87, 220401 (2001).

[7] O. Morsch, J. H. M¨uller, M. Cristiani, D. Ciampini, and

E. Arimondo, Phys. Rev. Lett. 87, 140402 (2001).

[8] M. J. Holland, K.-A. Suominen, and K. Burnett, Phys.
Rev. Lett. 72, 2367 (1994); Phys. Rev. A 50, 1513 (1994).
[9] K.-A. Suominen, J. Phys. B 29, 5981 (1996); J. Weiner,
V. S. Bagnato, S. Zilio, and P. S. Julienne, Rev. Mod.
Phys. 71, 1 (1999) and references therein.

[26] M. Weidem¨uller, T. Esslinger, M. A. Ol’Shanii, A. Hem-
merich, and T. H¨ansch, Europhys. Lett. 27, 109 (1994).
[27] H. Stecher, H. Ritsch, P. Zoller, F. Sander, T. Esslinger,

and T. W. H¨ansch, Phys. Rev. A 55, 545 (1997).

[28] C. Cohen–Tannoudji, B. Diu, and F. Lalo¨e, Quan-
tum Mechanics Vol. I (Wiley–Interscience, Paris, 1977),
Chapter II F.

[29] K. I. Petsas, G. Grynberg, and J.-Y. Courtois, Eur. Phys.

J. D 6, 29 (1999) and references therein.

[30] B. Garraway and K.-A. Suominen, Rep. Prog. Phys. 58,

365 (1995) and references therein.

[31] K.-A. Suominen, Y. B. Band, I. Tuvi, K. Burnett, and

[10] D. Jaksch, C. Bruder, J. I. Cirac, C. W. Gardiner, and

P. S. Julienne, Phys. Rev. A 57, 3724 (1998).

[32] J. Dalibard, Y. Castin, and K. Mølmer, Phys. Rev. Lett.
68, 580 (1992); K. Mølmer, Y. Castin, and J. Dalibard,
J. Opt. Soc. Am. B 10, 524 (1993).

[33] K.-A. Suominen, K. Burnett, and P. S. Julienne, Phys.

Rev. A 53, R1220 (1996).

P. Zoller, Phys. Rev. Lett. 81, 3108 (1998).

[11] G. K. Brennen, C. M. Caves, P. S. Jessen, and I. H.
Deutsch, Phys. Rev. Lett. 82, 1060 (1999); G. K. Bren-
nen, I. H. Deutsch, and P. S. Jessen, Phys. Rev. A 61,
062309 (2000); I. H. Deutsch, G. K. Brennen, and P. S.
Jessen, Fortschr. Phys. 48, 925 (2000).

[12] D. Jaksch, H.-J. Briegel, J. I. Cirac, C. W. Gardiner, and
P. Zoller, Phys. Rev. Lett. 82, 1975 (1999); H.-J. Briegel,
T. Calarco, D. Jaksch, J. I. Cirac, and P. Zoller, J. Mod.
Opt. 47, 415 (2000).

[13] M. T. DePue, C. McCormick, S. L. Winoto, S. Oliver,
and D. S. Weis, Phys. Rev. Lett. 82, 2262 (1999); A. J.
Kerman, V. Vuleti´c, C. Chin, and S. Chu, Phys. Rev.
Lett. 84, 439 (2000).

[14] G. Grynberg and J.-Y. Courtois, Europhys. Lett. 27, 41
(1994); K. I. Petsas, J.-Y. Courtois, and G. Grynberg,
Phys. Rev. A 53, 2533 (1996).

[15] A. Hemmerich, M. Weidem¨uller, T. Esslinger, C. Zim-
mermann, and T. H¨ansch, Phys. Rev. Lett. 75, 37 (1995).
[16] S. Bali, D. Hoﬀmann, and T. Walker, Europhys. Lett. 27,
273 (1994); V. Sanchez-Villicana, S. D. Gensemer, K. Y.
N. Tan, A. Kumarakrishnan, T. P. Dinneen, W. S¨uptitz,
and P. L. Gould, Phys. Rev. Lett. 74, 4619 (1995); S. R.
Muniz, L. G. Marcassa, R. Napolitano, G. D. Telles, J.
Weiner, S. C. Zilio, and V. S. Bagnato, Phys. Rev. A 55,
4407 (1997).

[17] L. Marcassa, S. Muniz, E. de Queiroz, S. Zilio, V. Bag-
nato, J. Weiner, P. S. Julienne, and K.-A. Suominen,
Phys. Rev. Lett. 73, 1911 (1994).

[18] H. Katori and F. Shimizu, Phys. Rev. Lett. 73, 2555
(1994); M. Walhout, U. Sterr, C. Orzel, M. Hoogerland,
and S. L. Rolston, Phys. Rev. Lett. 74, 506 (1995).
[19] K.-A. Suominen, K. Burnett, P. S. Julienne, M. Walhout,
U. Sterr, C. Orzel, M. Hoogerland, and S. L. Rolston,
Phys. Rev. A 53, 1678 (1996).

[20] C. I. Sukenik, D. Hoﬀmann, S. Bali, and T. Walker, Phys.

Rev. Lett. 81, 782 (1998).

[21] K.-A. Suominen, M. J. Holland, K. Burnett, and P. S.

Julienne, Phys. Rev. A 51, 1446 (1995).

[22] V. A. Yurovsky and A. Ben-Reuven, Phys. Rev. A 55,

3772 (1997).

9

