2
0
0
2
 
b
e
F
 
5
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
m
o
t
a
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
6
4
0
2
0
2
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Hanle eﬀect in Coherent Backscattering

G. Labeyrie∗+, C. Miniatura∗, C. A. M¨uller∗, O. Sigwarth†, D. Delande† and R. Kaiser∗
∗ Laboratoire Ondes et D´esordre, FRE 2302 CNRS, 1361 route des Lucioles, F-06560 Valbonne.
† Laboratoire Kastler Brossel, Universit´e Pierre et Marie Curie, 4 Place Jussieu, F-75005 Paris.
+ e-mail : labeyrie@inln.cnrs.fr
(February 2, 2008)

We study the shape of the coherent backscattering (CBS)
cone obtained when resonant light illuminates a thick cloud
of laser-cooled rubidium atoms in presence of a homogenous
magnetic ﬁeld. We observe new magnetic ﬁeld-dependent
anisotropies in the CBS signal. We show that the observed be-
havior is due to the modiﬁcation of the atomic radiation pat-
tern by the magnetic ﬁeld (Hanle eﬀect in the excited state).
PACS numbers: 42.20-y, 32.80.Pj

When a multiply scattering medium is illuminated by
a laser beam, the scattered intensity results from the in-
terference between the amplitudes associated with the
various scattering paths; for a disordered medium, the
interference terms are washed out when averaged over
many sample conﬁgurations, except in a narrow angu-
lar range around exact backscattering where the average
intensity is enhanced. This phenomenon, known as co-
herent backscattering (CBS), is due to a two-wave con-
structive interference (at exact back-scattering) between
waves following a given scattering path and the associ-
ated reverse path, where exactly the same scatterers are
visited in the reversed order [1]. The maximum enhance-
ment is obtained when the amplitudes of the interfering
paths are exactly balanced. For a convenient choice of
polarization, time-reversal symmetry directly implies the
equality of the interfering amplitudes. More generally,
the interference phenomenon is very robust and quali-
tatively insensitive to most characteristics of the sample
and illuminating wave.

However, applying a magnetic ﬁeld on the sample
breaks the time-reversal invariance.
It was predicted
[2], then experimentally observed [3] and theoretically
studied [4,5] that it results in a decrease of the CBS en-
hancement as well as some rather complicated behavior
of the cone shape. In our current understanding of CBS,
two ingredients are essential : the individual scattering
event, characterized for example by the radiation pattern
of each scatterer (this is the single scattering ingredient),
and the propagation in the medium between scattering
events (this is the ”average eﬀective medium” ingredi-
ent). Of course, these two ingredients are not indepen-
dent since the optical theorem links the propagation in
the medium to the individual scattering. In the presence
of a magnetic ﬁeld, both ingredients can be aﬀected. For
the propagation, this is well known under the name of
Faraday eﬀect (and the Voigt or Cotton-Mouton eﬀect)
and can be described by the modiﬁcation of the com-
plex refractive index by the magnetic ﬁeld. The magnetic

ﬁeld-induced variation of the radiation pattern is much
less studied, because it is very small in usual magneto-
optically active materials; it is responsible for the ”pho-
tonic Hall eﬀect” predicted by van Tiggelen [6] and later
observed experimentally [7].
In this paper, we show a
novel situation where it is experimentally and theoret-
ically possible to discriminate between the two ingredi-
ents and where the modiﬁcation of the radiation pattern
dominates the propagation eﬀects.

In our experiment, we analyze coherent backscattering
of resonant light by a dilute gas of laser-cooled rubidium
atoms. Some features of this medium diﬀer markedly
from those used in previous CBS experiments. First,
the cold atomic cloud constitutes a monodisperse sam-
ple of point scatterers, highly resonant in the vicinity of
the optical transition. This implies a dramatic increase
of the scattering cross section at resonance, but also a
great sensitivity to any external perturbation like a mag-
netic ﬁeld. Typically, few Gauss are enough to bring the
atom completely oﬀ resonance, in sharp contrast with
previous studies where Teslas were needed to induce sig-
niﬁcant eﬀects [3]. Concurrently, a giant Faraday eﬀect
is observed in the cold atomic cloud [8]. Another impor-
tant diﬀerence with classical systems is the presence of
a quantum internal structure, which has been shown to
strongly reduce the coherent backscattering interference
[9]. Obviously, the addition of a magnetic ﬁeld will af-
fect the contrast of the CBS cone in various ways, and
we have indeed observed new behaviors that will be de-
scribed somewhere else. In the present Letter, we focus
on the shape of the cone rather than its intensity.

The experiment has been described elsewhere [9]. We
use the J = 3 → J ′ = 4 transition of the D2 line of
Rb85 (wavelength λ = 780 nm, natural width Γ/2π = 5.9
MHz) where J here denotes the hyperﬁne angular mo-
mentum. We show in Fig. 1 some CBS cones obtained
in the linear polarization channels, for diﬀerent values
of the magnetic ﬁeld and laser detuning. After scaling
and substraction of the incoherent background (average
intensity in the wings of the peak), we plot the detected
far-ﬁeld intensity isolines. The horizontal and vertical
coordinates correspond to the two azimuthal scattering
angles. The magnetic ﬁeld B is orthogonal to the plane
of the ﬁgure, like the backscattered light wavevector kb
which points towards the reader. The incident light po-
larization is parallel to the vertical axis of the ﬁgure.
Since we will care about the sign of magneto-optical ro-

1

tations, we have to precise our conventions. A positive
magnetic ﬁeld is parallel to the incident light wavevector
ki(= −kb) with the same orientation. A positive an-
gle corresponds to a counterclockwise rotation when ki
points towards the observer.

 

a

P

 

//

b

 

 

 

 

⊥

B < 0

FIG. 1. Experimental CBS cones. The far-ﬁeld backscat-
k
tered intensity is plotted as a function of the two azimuthal
 b
scattering angles (maximum intensity at center; we use a log-
arithmic scale for the isolines for a better visualization of the
wings where the anisotropy is more pronounced; the lowest
isoline corresponds to roughly 10% of the peak value). The
total angular range is 2 mrad. P denotes the incident po-
lin ⊥ lin; (b)
larization. (a) B = 0, top:
both cones in lin ⊥ lin, top: B = −8G, bottom: B = +8G;
note the 90◦ ﬂip when B changes sign. (c) B = +10G and
δL = −2.6Γ, top: lin k lin, bottom: lin ⊥ lin.

lin k lin, bottom:

B > 0

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

For resonant light (laser detuning δL = ωL − ωA = 0
where ωL and ωA are the laser and atomic frequencies
respectively) and zero magnetic ﬁeld B = 0, we obtain
in the lin ⊥ lin channel a cushion-shaped cone with a
four-fold symmetry shown in Fig. 1(a) (bottom). In the
parallel channel (top), the cone has an elliptical shape
with its large axis parallel to the incident polarization.
In the presence of a magnetic ﬁeld, we observe in the
lin ⊥ lin channel (b) that the cone has now an elliptical
shape with an inclination of 45◦ from the incident po-
larization, which does not depend on the magnetic ﬁeld
strength.
It is remarkable that, when the sign of the
magnetic ﬁeld is reversed, the cone ﬂips by 90◦. In the
lin k lin channel, the shape of the cone does not signiﬁ-
cantly change with the magnetic ﬁeld. When the laser is
detuned with respect to the zero-ﬁeld atomic transition,
the cones in both the lin k lin and lin ⊥ lin channels be-
come isotropic, as shown in Fig. 1(c).

To understand the features observed in Fig. 1, we need
to remember that the CBS cone shape is closely linked to
the distribution of distances between ﬁrst and last visited
scatterers in the sample. In fact, it is the Fourier trans-
form of the transverse intensity proﬁle of the scattered
light when the sample is illuminated by a narrow light

⊥

⊥

2

beam [3]. Thus, any scattering asymmetry inside the
medium immediately results in a cone shape asymmetry.
For the discussion of the observed eﬀect, it turns out (see
below) that the internal structure (Zeeman sublevels) of
the atom is not crucial. We thus ﬁrst consider the sim-
plest case where the atomic transition is J = 0 → J ′ = 1.
The Zeeman eﬀect induces a splitting of the atomic res-
onance line in 3 components separated by µB where B
is the magnetic ﬁeld and µ/2π = 1.4 MHz/G is the Zee-
man shift rate. As soon as the Zeeman shift is compa-
rable to the resonance width (magnetic ﬁeld of the order
of 4 Gauss), the scattering cross-section of the atom is
strongly modiﬁed. For simplicity, we restrict the discus-
sion to a resonant excitation δL = 0. In this case, the
response of the atom to a linearly polarized ﬁeld is that
of a dipole rotated from the incident polarization by an
angle ϕ = arctan(2µB/Γ), in the plane perpendicular to
c
B. This rotation is responsible for the well-known ﬂuo-
rescence dip curve observed in typical Hanle experiments
in the excited state [11]. The eﬀect of the magnetic ﬁeld
on the average eﬀective medium is also well known:
in
the direction of the magnetic ﬁeld, it induces the Fara-
day eﬀect, i.e. a rotation of the electric ﬁeld around the
magnetic ﬁeld. For a weak magnetic ﬁeld µB ≪ Γ, the
Faraday angle θF per mean-free path is : θF ≃ −µB/Γ
It is crucial to note that it has a sign opposite to
[8].
that of the atomic dipole rotation. As CBS involves both
propagation and individual scattering, the experimental
observation of the sign of the rotation makes it possible
to determine the dominant eﬀect. In our case, we will
show that the rotation of the atomic dipole leads.

⊥

//

 

 

 

 

 

We propose a simple model which explains the ob-
served cone shape behavior, taking into account only the
rotation of the atomic dipole. We will restrict the dis-
cussion to the case of double scattering, as it is known to
be dominant in our experimental conditions and because
anisotropy eﬀects are expected to decrease for higher or-
der scattering. Due to the exponential attenuation of
light inside the sample, the ﬁrst and last scatterers of
most paths lie in a ”skin layer” of thickness approxi-
mately one scattering mean-free path under the surface
of the sample. Thus, we will assume that all propaga-
tion takes place in the transverse plane, orthogonal to
the incident wave vector. In addition, we will neglect all
propagation eﬀects (i.e. Faraday and Cotton-Mouton).
Let us now consider an initial polarization vector P.
The ﬁrst scatterer radiates a wave at an angle Ψ from
P towards the second atom, which then radiates in the
backscattering direction where the ﬁeld is analyzed along
the polarization A at an angle α with P. The angu-
lar dependence of the interference term between reverse
paths is readily given by sin2(ϕ − Ψ) sin2(ϕ + Ψ − α).
This formula (valid for resonant light) allows us to under-
stand most of the observed behavior of the CBS interfer-
ence pattern. Using a general symmetry argument, one
can show that the CBS cone should remain symmetric

with respect to the bisectors of the incident and detected
polarizations directions.
Indeed, the expression given
above is invariant by the transformation Ψ → α − Ψ.
In a polar plot, it exhibits two orthogonal pairs of lobes
along the two bisectors. Each pair has two symmetric
lobes, and the intensity ratio R between the two pairs
is R = tan4(α/2 − ϕ). Thus, in most cases one lobe
pair dominates over the other, yielding a cone with an
elliptical shape along one of the bisector. When varying
the value of α/2 − ϕ (either by scanning the magnetic
ﬁeld or rotating the analyzer), the intensity of the dom-
inant lobe decreases while the smallest lobe grows, until
α/2 − ϕ = π/4, where they are of equal intensity (a four-
fold symmetry of the cone is there recovered). Above
this threshold value, the roles of the two pairs of lobes
are interchanged: one thus observes a ﬂip of the CBS
cone orientation by 90◦. Moreover, in the lin ⊥ lin chan-
nel (α = π/2), B → −B ﬂips the cone as observed in Fig.
1(b). In our model, the value αf corresponding to the
ﬂip threshold is simply related to the magneto-optical ro-
tation through αf = 2ϕ + π/2. So far, we have neglected
all propagation eﬀects. However, note that the Faraday
rotation due to the propagation of the light through the
”skin layer” separating the sample surface from the ﬁrst
scattering event [5] would have the same inﬂuence on the
cone shape as the dipole rotation ϕ. As it will be dis-
cussed later, our results indicate that the dipole rotation
dominates in this experiment.

b c

B < 0

B > 0

a

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

FIG. 2. Theoretical CBS cones (double scattering).

(a)
and (b) use the J = 0 → J ′
= 1 transverse plane model
described in text (same parameters as in Fig.1). (c): cones in
lin k lin (top) and lin ⊥ lin (bottom) for a J = 3 → J ′
= 4
transition and B = 0 (semi-inﬁnite medium); the cones shapes
are rounded oﬀ compared to (a), but the symmetry properties
are identical.

Figure 2 shows some examples of the double scatter-
ing CBS cones obtained in the linear channels with this
model. (a) and (b) correspond to the same parameters
as in Fig. 1. One clearly sees ((a), bottom row) the

3

 

 

g1, mg2 → m′

distinctive clover-leaf shape in the lin ⊥ lin channel at
B = 0 with 4 lobes along the bisectors (at 45◦). At
non-vanishing magnetic ﬁeld one of the lobe pairs is fa-
vored depending on the sign of ϕ (b). The comparison
between Fig. 1 and 2 conﬁrms that the CBS cone tilt ob-
served experimentally is consistent with the sign of the
dipole rotation, and that our simple model catches the
essential part of the physics. For oﬀ-resonant excitation
δL 6= 0, the picture becomes more complex since the in-
duced dipole is elliptical. However, if the Zeeman split-
ting is large enough µB ≫ Γ and if the laser frequency is
tuned to resonance with one of the circular components
δL = ±µB, then the dipole is essentially circular and the
cone is isotropic in agreement with the data in Fig. 1(c).
We now discuss the eﬀect of the internal structure
in the ground state, which is neglected in the previ-
ous model. Due to its internal structure, the rubidium
atom does not behave like a pure dipole scatterer. More
speciﬁcally, the radiation pattern depends on the ground
state magnetic sublevels mg and m′
g respectively before
and after the scattering event. To determine the total
CBS signal, one has to sum over all possible transitions
(mg1 → m′
g2) of two atoms. We have com-
puted numerically the total CBS signal in this case and
found that, for moderate B values (up to a few Gauss),
the symmetry of the CBS pattern is only weakly modiﬁed
compared to the J = 0 → J ′ = 1 case. Indeed, in this
regime, the CBS signal is dominated by the ”Rayleigh”
transitions mg → mg, yielding the same behavior as in
the J = 0 → J ′ = 1 situation. Thus, and this is the
important point, we can still use the results of the simple
J = 0 → J ′ = 1 model with an average dipole rotation
ϕ to describe the cone behavior for the J = 3 → J ′ = 4
transition of rubidium. One illustration of the eﬀect of
the internal structure is given in Fig. 2(c) where we
plot the double scattering CBS signal at B = 0 in the
lin k lin (top) and lin ⊥ lin (bottom) channels for the
J = 3 → J ′ = 4 transition and a semi-inﬁnite geome-
try. The main eﬀect of the internal structure in this case
is a rounding-oﬀ of the cone features. The comparison
with the experimental cones of Fig. 1(a) yields a nice
agreement. In order to make a quantitative test of our
model, we have experimentally measured the dipole ro-
tation ϕ (open squares in Fig. 3(a)) by analyzing the
polarization of resonant light scattered by an optically-
thin atomic cloud (optical thickness 0.05). In this regime,
Faraday rotation and multiple scattering are negligible.
The solid line in Fig. 3(a) corresponds to the theory for a
J = 3 → J ′ = 4 transition and agrees well with our mea-
surements. In a diﬀerent experiment, we have measured
the Faraday rotation per mean free path θF (solid squares
in Fig. 3(a)) by recording, as a function of B, the polar-
ization rotation of light transmitted by a cloud of ﬁxed
optical thickness 1. When the magnetic ﬁeld increases,
the total scattering cross-section decreases yielding an
increasing mean-free path. Thus, in order to keep the

factor in the presence of a magnetic ﬁeld.

We thank the CNRS and the PACA Region for ﬁnan-
cial support. Laboratoire Kastler Brossel is laboratoire
de l’Universit´e Pierre et Marie Curie et de l’Ecole Nor-
male Sup´erieure, UMR 8552 du CNRS.

180

C
B
S
 
f
l
i
p
 
a
n
g
l
e
 
α

[1] B. A. van Tiggelen, A. Lagendijk, and A. Tip, J. Phys.

Condens. Matter 2, 7653 (1990).

 
f

90

[2] A. A. Golubentsev, Zh. Eksp. Teor. Fiz. 86, 47 (1984).
[3] F. A. Erbacher, R. Lenke and G. Maret, Europhys. Lett.
21, 551 (1993); R. Lenke and G. Maret, Eur. Phys. J.
B 17, 171 (2000); R. Lenke, R. Lehner and G. Maret,
Europhys. Lett. 52, 620 (2000).

 
(
°
)

[4] F. C. MacIntosh and S. John, Phys. Rev. B 37, 1884
2
(1988); A. S. Martinez and R. Maynard, Phys. Rev. B
50, 3714 (1994); B. A. van Tiggelen, R. Maynard, and
T. M. Nieuwenhuizen, Phys. Rev. E 53, 2881 (1996).
[5] D. Lacoste and B. A. van Tiggelen, Phys. Rev. E 61 ,

0

4

4556 (2000).

[6] B. A. van Tiggelen, Phys. Rev. Lett. 53, 2881 (1996).
[7] G. L. J. A. Rikken and B. A. van Tiggelen, Nature 381,

[8] G. Labeyrie, C. Miniatura and R. Kaiser, Phys. Rev. A

54 (1996).

64, 033402 (2001).

[9] G. Labeyrie, F. de Tomasi, J.-C. Bernard, C. A. M¨uller,
C. Miniatura and R. Kaiser, Phys. Rev. Lett. 83, 5266
(1999); G. Labeyrie, C.A. M¨uller, D.S. Wiersma, C.
Miniatura and R. Kaiser, J. Opt. B: Quantum Semi-
class. Opt. 2, 672 (2000); T. Jonckheere, C.A. M¨uller,
R. Kaiser, C. Miniatura and D. Delande, Phys. Rev.
Lett. 85, 4269 (2000); C. A. M¨uller, T. Jonckheere, C.
Miniatura and D. Delande, Phys. Rev. A 64, 053804
(2001).

[10] M. P. van Albada, M. B. van der Mark, and A. Lagendijk,

Phys. Rev. Lett. 58, 361 (1987).

[11] W. Hanle, Z. Phys. 30, 93 (1924); W. Rasmussen, R.
Schieder, and H. Walter, Opt. Commun. 12, 315 (1974).
[12] contrarily to what was stated in [8], where the depen-
dence of the scattering mean-free path with magnetic
ﬁeld was overlooked.

optical thickness constant one has to increase either the
density or the size of the cloud. We emphasize that the
sign of the Faraday rotation is indeed opposite to that of
the dipole rotation (i.e. negative). We also note that the
Faraday rotation per mean-free path increases with the
magnetic ﬁeld due to the increasing mean-free path [12].
The dotted curve corresponds to the theory for a 3 → 4
transition and is again in excellent agreement. Finally,
the triangles in Fig. 3(b) show the measured angle αf
for which the dominant lobe of the cone in the lin ⊥ lin
channel ﬂips by 90◦, as a function of the magnetic ﬁeld,
compared with our model taking into account the in-
ternal structure (line). The measurement is unpractical
above B = 4 G due to poor cone contrast. The excel-
lent agreement between the experiment and our model
on both the sign and magnitude of the magneto-optical
rotation in the CBS signal indicates that the Faraday
rotation through the ”skin layer” is negligible in our con-
ﬁguration, and conﬁrm the magnetic ﬁeld-induced dipole
rotation as the mechanism underlying the observed CBS
anisotropies.

)
°
(
 
s
n
o
i
t
a
t
o
r
 
l
a
c
i
t
p
o
-
o
t
e
n
g
a
m

0
B (G)

b

a

-10

-50

10

50

-4

-2

-5

5

0

 

0
 B (G)

FIG. 3. Magneto-optical rotations. (a): measured dipole
rotation ϕ ((cid:3)) and Faraday rotation per mean free path
θF ((cid:4)).
The curves correspond to the theory for a
J = 3 → J ′ = 4 transition (see text for sign conventions).
Note that the two rotations have opposite signs. (b): mea-
sured CBS ﬂip angle αf (N) compared to the J = 3 → J ′
= 4
model neglecting all propagation eﬀects (solid line).

In conclusion, we reported in this paper the observa-
tion of various anisotropies in the shape of the coher-
ent backscattering cone from cold rubidium atoms in a
magnetic ﬁeld. The observed behavior diﬀers radically
from previous work on magneto-optically active samples
where the cone features were determined by the Faraday
eﬀect during the propagation between scatterers. In our
situation, the observed anisotropy is due to the modiﬁ-
cation of the atomic radiation pattern by the magnetic
ﬁeld. This observation illustrates the new regimes that
are accessible through the use of cold atoms as a scatter-
ing medium for light. Some more elaborate modelling is
needed to understand in detail the roles of propagation
versus individual scattering eﬀects in our sample, in par-
ticular to explain the behavior of the CBS enhancement

4

