2
0
0
2
 
r
a

M
 
7
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
m
o
t
a
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
7
7
0
3
0
2
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Resonant nonlinear magneto-optical eﬀects in atoms∗

Department of Physics, University of California, Berkeley, CA 94720-7300 and
Nuclear Science Division, Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, Berkeley CA 94720

D. Budker†

W. Gawlik‡

A. Weis§

Instytut Fizyki im. M. Smoluchowskiego, Uniwersytet Jagiello´nski, Reymonta 4, 30-059 Krakow, Poland

D. F. Kimball, S. M. Rochester, and V. V. Yashchuk

Department of Physics, University of California, Berkeley, CA 94720-7300

Depart´ement de Physique, Universit´e de Fribourg, Chemin du Mus´ee 3, CH-1700 Fribourg, Switzerland

(Dated: January 27, 2014)

In this article, we review the history, current status, physical mechanisms, experimental methods,
and applications of nonlinear magneto-optical eﬀects in atomic vapors. We begin by describing
the pioneering work of Macaluso and Corbino over a century ago on linear magneto-optical eﬀects
(in which the properties of the medium do not depend on the light power) in the vicinity of
atomic resonances, and contrast these eﬀects with various nonlinear magneto-optical phenomena
that have been studied both theoretically and experimentally since the late 1960s.
In recent
years, the ﬁeld of nonlinear magneto-optics has experienced a revival of interest that has led
to a number of developments, including the observation of ultra-narrow (1-Hz) magneto-optical
resonances, applications in sensitive magnetometry, nonlinear magneto-optical tomography, and
the possibility of a search for parity- and time-reversal-invariance violation in atoms.

Contents

I. Introduction

II. Linear magneto-optics

A. Mechanisms of the linear magneto-optical eﬀects
B. Forward scattering and line-crossing
C. Applications in spectroscopy

1. Analytical spectroscopy and trace analysis,

investigation of weak transitions
2. Measurement of oscillator strengths
3. Investigation of interatomic collisions
4. Line identiﬁcation in complex spectra and search

for “new” energy levels

9
5. Applications in parity violation experiments
9
6. Investigations with synchrotron radiation sources 10
10

D. Related phenomena

1. Magnetic depolarization of ﬂuorescence:

Hanle-eﬀect and level-crossing

2. Magnetic deﬂection of light
3. The mechanical Faraday eﬀect

III. Linear vs. nonlinear light-atom interactions

A. Perturbative approach
B. Saturation parameters

IV. Early studies of nonlinear magneto-optical eﬀects 14
14

A. Optical pumping

2

3
3
4
6

6
7
8

10
11
11

12
12
13

B. Magneto-optical eﬀects in gas lasers
C. Nonlinear eﬀects in forward scattering
D. “Rediscoveries” of the nonlinear magneto-optical

eﬀects

V. Physical mechanisms of nonlinear

magneto-optical eﬀects
A. Bennett-structure eﬀects
B. Coherence eﬀects
C. Alignment-to-orientation conversion

VI. Symmetry considerations in linear and nonlinear

magneto-optical eﬀects

VII. Theoretical models

A. Kanorsky-Weis approach to low-power nonlinear

magneto-optical rotation
B. Density matrix calculations

VIII. Nonlinear magneto-optical eﬀects in speciﬁc

situations
A. Buﬀer-gas-free uncoated vapor cells

1. Basic features
2. Peculiarities in the magnetic ﬁeld dependence
3. NMOE in optically thick vapors

B. Time-domain experiments
C. Atomic beams and separated light ﬁelds,

Faraday-Ramsey Spectroscopy
1. Overview of experiments
2. Line shape, applications
3. Connection with the Ramsey separated oscillatory

26
26
27

∗This paper is dedicated to Professor Eugene D. Commins on the
occasion of his 70th birthday.
†Electronic address: budker@socrates.berkeley.edu
‡Electronic address: gawlik@uj.edu.pl
§Electronic address: antoine.weis@unifr.ch

ﬁeld method

D. Experiments with buﬀer-gas cells

1. Warm buﬀer gas
2. Cryogenic buﬀer gas
E. Antirelaxation-coated cells

1. Experiments

15
16

17

18
18
19
20

21

22

22
23

24
24
24
25
25
26

28
28
28
28
29
29

2. Theoretical analysis

F. Gas discharge
G. Atoms trapped in solid and liquid helium
H. Laser-cooled and trapped atoms

IX. Magneto-optical eﬀects in selective reﬂection

1. Linear eﬀects
2. Nonlinear eﬀects

X. Linear and nonlinear electro-optical eﬀects

XI. Experimental techniques

A. A typical NMOE experiment
B. Polarimetry
C. Nonlinear magneto-optical rotation with

frequency-modulated light

D. Magnetic shielding
E. Laser-frequency stabilization using magneto-optical

eﬀects

XII. Applications

A. Magnetometry

1. Quantum noise limits
2. Experiments

B. Electric-dipole moment searches
C. The Aharonov-Casher phase shift
D. Measurement of tensor electric polarizabilities
E. Electromagnetic ﬁeld tomography
F. Parity violation in atoms

XIII. Closely-related phenomena and techniques

A. Dark resonances
B. “Slow” and “fast” light
C. Self-rotation

XIV. Conclusion

Acknowledgments

Appendices

A. Description of light polarization in terms of the

Stokes parameters

B. Description of atomic polarization

1. State multipoles
2. Visualization of atomic polarization

C. Abbreviations

References

I. INTRODUCTION

30
30
30
31

31
31
32

32

33
33
34

34
35

35

36
36
36
37
38
39
39
40
40

40
40
41
42

42

42

42

42

43
43
43

44

44

Magneto-optical eﬀects arise when light interacts with
a medium in the presence of a magnetic ﬁeld. These
eﬀects have been studied and used since the dawn of
modern physics and have had a profound impact on
its development.1 Most prominent among the magneto-
optical eﬀects are the Faraday (1846a,b, 1855) and the

1 Magneto-optics were listed among the most important topics in
Physics at the World Congress of Physics in Paris in 1900 (Guil-
laume and Poincar´e, 1900).

2

FIG. 1 The Faraday rotation eﬀect. Light, after passing
through a linear polarizer, enters a medium subjected to a
longitudinal magnetic ﬁeld Bk. Left- and right-circularly po-
larized components of the light (equal in amplitude for lin-
early polarized light) acquire diﬀerent phase shifts, leading
to optical rotation. A diﬀerence in absorption between the
two components induces ellipticity in the output light. A
particular polarization of the transmitted light, depending on
the orientation of the analyzer relative to the polarizer, is
detected. Analyzer orientation varies with the type of exper-
In forward-scattering experiments
iment being performed.
(Sec. II.B), the analyzer is crossed with the input polarizer,
so that only light of the orthogonal polarization is detected.
In the “balanced polarimeter” arrangement (Sec. XI.B), a po-
larizing beam splitter oriented at π/4 to the input polarizer
is used as an analyzer. The normalized diﬀerential signal
between the two channels of the analyzer depends on the ro-
tation of light polarization while being insensitive to induced
ellipticity. The Voigt eﬀect is similar except that instead of a
longitudinal magnetic ﬁeld, a transverse ﬁeld B⊥ is applied.
Here optical rotation and induced ellipticity are due to dif-
ferential absorption and phase shifts of orthogonal linearly
polarized components of the input light (Sec. VI).

Voigt (1901) eﬀects,
i.e., rotation of light’s polariza-
tion plane as it propagates through a medium placed
in a longitudinal or transverse magnetic ﬁeld, respec-
tively (Fig. I). The near-resonance Faraday eﬀect is also
known as the Macaluso-Corbino (1898a; 1899; 1898b) ef-
fect. The Voigt eﬀect is sometimes called the Cotton-
Mouton (1907; 1911) eﬀect, particularly in condensed-
matter physics.

The remarkable properties of resonant (and, par-
ticularly, nonlinear) magneto-optical systems—as com-
pared to the well-known transparent condensed-matter
magneto-optical materials such as glasses and liquids—
can be illustrated with the Faraday eﬀect. The mag-
nitude of optical rotation per unit magnetic ﬁeld and
unit length is characterized by the Verdet constant V .
For typical dense ﬂint glasses that are used in commer-
cial Faraday polarization rotators and optical isolators,
10−5 rad G−1 cm−1. In subsequent sections, we
V
will describe experiments in which nonlinear magneto-
104 rad G−1 cm−1
optical rotation corresponding to V
is observed in resonant rubidium vapor (whose density,
109 cm−3, satisﬁes the deﬁnition of very high vac-
∼
uum). Taking into account the diﬀerence in density be-
tween glass and the rariﬁed atomic vapor, the latter can
be thought of as a magneto-optical material with some

×

≃

≃

×

3

3

3

FIG. 2 An F = 1 → F ′ = 0 atomic transition. In the pres-
ence of a longitudinal magnetic ﬁeld, the Zeeman sublevels
of the ground state are shifted in energy by gµBM . This
leads to a diﬀerence in resonance frequencies for left- (σ+)
and right- (σ−) circularly polarized light.

1020 greater rotation “per atom” than heavy ﬂint.

In this paper, we brieﬂy review the physics and applica-
tions of resonant linear magneto-optical eﬀects, and then
turn to our main focus—the nonlinear eﬀects (i.e., eﬀects
in which optical properties of the medium are modiﬁed
by interaction with light). We will also discuss various
applications of nonlinear magneto-optics in atomic va-
pors, and the relation between nonlinear magneto-optics
and a variety of other phenomena and techniques, such
as coherent population trapping, electromagnetically in-
duced transparency, nonlinear electro-optics eﬀects, and
self-rotation.

II. LINEAR MAGNETO-OPTICS

In order to provide essential background for under-
standing nonlinear magneto-optical eﬀects (NMOE), we
ﬁrst review linear magneto-optics of atoms and molecules
near resonance. (See Sec. III for a discussion of the dif-
ference between the linear and nonlinear magneto-optical
eﬀects.)

A. Mechanisms of the linear magneto-optical eﬀects

At the conclusion of the 19th century, Macaluso and
Corbino (1898a, 1899, 1898b), studying absorption spec-
tra of the alkali atoms in the presence of magnetic ﬁelds,
discovered that the Faraday eﬀect (magneto-optical ac-
tivity) in the vicinity of resonance absorption lines also
has a distinct resonant character (see also work by Fork
and Bradley III, 1964).

The principal mechanism of the linear Macaluso-
Corbino eﬀect can be illustrated by the case of an F =
F ′ = 0 transition (Fig. II.A), where F, F ′ are the
1
total angular momenta.2 Linearly polarized light inci-
dent on the sample can be decomposed into two counter-
rotating circular components σ±.
In the absence of a

→

FIG. 3 The dependence of the refractive index on light fre-
quency detuning ∆ in the absence (n) and in the presence
(n±) of a magnetic ﬁeld. Shown is the case of 2gµB = ¯hΓ
and a Lorentzian model for line broadening. The lower curve
shows the diﬀerence of refractive indices for the two circular
polarization components. This is the characteristic spectral
proﬁle of linear optical rotation.

±

magnetic ﬁeld, the M =
1 sublevels are degenerate and
the optical resonance frequencies for σ+ and σ− coincide.
The real part of the refractive index n associated with the
atomic medium is shown in Fig. II.A as a function of the
light frequency detuning ∆ (the dispersion curve). The
refractive index is the same for the two circular compo-
nents.

When a magnetic ﬁeld is applied, however, the Zeeman
shifts3 lead to a diﬀerence between the resonance fre-
quencies for the two circular polarizations. This displaces
the dispersion curves for the two polarizations as shown
in Fig. II.A. A characteristic width of these dispersion
curves, Γ, corresponds to the spectral width (FWHM)
of an absorption line. Under typical experimental con-
ditions in a vapor cell this width is dominated by the
Doppler width and is on the order of 1 GHz for opti-
cal transitions. The diﬀerence between n+ and n− (Fig.
II.A) signiﬁes a diﬀerence in phase velocities of the two
circular components of light and, as a result, the plane
of polarization rotates through an angle

ϕ = π(n+ −

n−)

l
λ

.

(1)

Here l is the length of the sample, and λ is the wavelength
of light. In addition to the diﬀerence in refraction for the
two circular polarizations (circular birefringence), there
also arises a diﬀerence in absorption (circular dichroism).
Thus linear light polarization before the sample gener-

2 Throughout this article, we designate as F, F ′ total angular mo-
menta of the lower and the upper states of the transition, respec-
tively. For atoms with zero nuclear spin, F, F ′ coincide with the
total electronic angular momenta J, J ′.

3 The connection between the Faraday and the Zeeman eﬀects was
ﬁrst established by Voigt (1898b), who also explained the obser-
vations of Macaluso and Corbino (Voigt, 1898a).

4

ally evolves into elliptical polarization after the sample.
For nearly monochromatic light (i.e., light with spectral
width much smaller than the transition width), and for
zero frequency detuning from the resonance, the optical
rotation in the sample as a function of magnetic ﬁeld B
can be estimated from Eq. (1) as4

However, it can be dramatically enhanced by creating a
nonequilibrium population distribution between Zeeman
sublevels. This can be accomplished by optical pumping,
a nonlinear eﬀect that will be discussed in detail in Sec.
IV.A.

ϕ

≃

2gµB/¯hΓ
1 + (2gµB/¯hΓ)2

l
l0

.

(2)

B. Forward scattering and line-crossing

Here g is the Land´e factor, µ is the Bohr magneton, and
l0 is the absorption length. This estimate uses for the
amplitude of each dispersion curve (Fig. II.A) the reso-
nance value of the imaginary part of the refractive in-
dex (responsible for absorption). The Lorentzian model
for line broadening is assumed. The Voigt model (dis-
cussed by, for example, Demtr¨oder, 1996), which most
accurately describes a Doppler- and pressure-broadened
line, and the Gaussian model both lead to qualitatively
similar results. The dependence of the optical rotation
on the magnitude of the magnetic ﬁeld [Eq. (2)] has a
characteristic dispersion-like shape: ϕ is linear with B at
small values of the ﬁeld, peaks at 2gµB
¯hΓ, and falls
oﬀ in the limit of large ﬁelds.

∼

For atoms with nonzero nuclear spin, mixing of diﬀer-
ent hyperﬁne components (states of the same M but dif-
ferent F ) by a magnetic ﬁeld also leads to linear magneto-
optical eﬀects (Khriplovich, 1991; Novikov et al., 1977;
Papageorgiou et al., 1994; Roberts et al., 1980). The con-
tribution of this mechanism is comparable to that of the
level-shift eﬀect discussed above in many practical situa-
tions, e.g., linear magneto-optical rotation in the vicinity
of the alkali D-lines (Chen et al., 1987). For the Faraday
∆hfs, the amplitude
geometry and when gµB
≪
of the rotation can be estimated as

¯hΓ

≪

ϕ

≃

gµB
∆hfs

l
l0

,

(3)

where ∆hfs is the separation between hyperﬁne levels.
Since hyperﬁne mixing leads to a diﬀerence in the mag-
nitude of n+ and n− (and not the diﬀerence in resonance
frequencies as in the level-shift eﬀect), the spectral pro-
ﬁle of the rotation for the hyperﬁne-mixing eﬀect corre-
sponds to dispersion-shaped curves centered on the hy-
perﬁne components of the transition.

There exists yet another mechanism in linear magneto-
optics called the paramagnetic eﬀect. The populations of
the ground-state Zeeman sublevels that are split by a
magnetic ﬁeld are generally diﬀerent due to the diﬀer-
ence in the Boltzmann factors. This leads to a diﬀerence
in refractive indices for the corresponding light polariza-
tion components. For gaseous media, this eﬀect is usu-
ally relatively small compared to the other mechanisms.

4 Explicit formulae for n± are given, for example, in Mitchell and
Zemansky (1971, Appendix VII); analogous expressions can also
be obtained for induced ellipticity.

Magneto-optics plays an important role in the study
of resonant light scattering in the direction of the in-
cident light (forward scattering, FS) whose detection is
normally hindered experimentally by the presence of a
strong incident light beam that has identical properties
(frequency, polarization, direction of propagation) as the
forward-scattered light. In order to investigate this ef-
fect, Corney, Kibble, and Series (1966) used two crossed
polarizers (Fig. I). In this arrangement, both the direct
unscattered beam and the scattered light of unchanged
polarization are blocked by the analyzer. Only the light
that undergoes some polarization change during scatter-
ing is detected. If the medium is isotropic and homoge-
neous and there is no additional external perturbation or
magnetic ﬁeld, the forward-scattered light has the same
polarization as the primary light and cannot be detected.
The situation changes, however, when an external mag-
netic ﬁeld B is applied. Such a ﬁeld breaks the symmetry
of the σ+ and σ− components of the propagating light in
k)
the case of B
and results in a nonzero component of light with opposite
polarization that is transmitted by the analyzer.

k (and π and σ components when B

⊥

k

In the late 1950s, it was determined (Colegrove et al.,
1959; Franken, 1961) that coherence between atomic sub-
levels (represented by oﬀ-diagonal elements of the den-
sity matrix, see Sec. VII.B) aﬀects lateral light scattering.
For example, in the Hanle (1924) or level-crossing eﬀects
(Colegrove et al., 1959; Franken, 1961), the polarization
or spatial distribution of ﬂuorescent light changes as a
function of relative energies of coherently excited atomic
states. Another example is that of resonance narrow-
ing in lateral scattering (Barrat, 1959; Guichon et al.,
In this striking phenomenon the width of reso-
1957).
nance features (observed in the dependence of the inten-
sity of scattered light on an applied dc magnetic ﬁeld or
the frequency of an rf ﬁeld) was seen to decrease with
the increase of the density of the sample; this appeared
as an eﬀective increase in the upper state lifetime despite
collisional broadening that usually results from elevated
density. This eﬀect is due to multiple light scattering (ra-
diation trapping) which transfers excitation from atom to
atom, each of the atoms experiencing identical evolution
in the magnetic ﬁeld (a more detailed discussion is given
by, for example, Corney, 1988).

In lateral scattering, the resonance features of inter-
est are usually signatures of interference between various
sublevels in each individual atom. In forward scattering,
the amplitudes of individual scatterers add in the scat-
tered light (Corney et al., 1966; Durrant, 1972). Thus

forward scattering is coherent, and interference can be
observed between sublevels belonging to diﬀerent atoms.
The forward-scattered light has the same frequency as the
incident light. However, the phase of the scattered light
depends on the relative detuning between the incident
light and the atom’s eﬀective resonance frequency. This
leads to inhomogeneous broadening of the FS resonance
features; at low optical density, their width (in the mag-
netic ﬁeld domain) is determined by the Doppler width
of the spectral line.5 For this reason, the corresponding
FS signals associated with the linear magneto-optical ef-
fects can be regarded as Doppler-broadened, multi-atom
Hanle resonances. Here the Hanle eﬀect is regarded ei-
ther as a manifestation of quantum mechanical interfer-
ence or atomic coherence, depending on whether it ap-
pears in emissive or dispersive properties of the medium
(see Sec. II.D.1).
If the optical density of the sample
increases to the extent that multiple scattering becomes
important, substantial narrowing of the observed signals
results, interpreted by Corney et al. (1966) as coherence
narrowing. Forward-scattering signal narrowing was ob-
served in Hg by Corney et al. (1966) and in Na by Kro-
las and Winiarczyk (1972). Further exploring the re-
lation between manifestations of single- and multi-atom
coherence, Corney, Kibble, and Series analyzed the phe-
nomenon of double resonance in the context of FS. This
is a two-step process in which ﬁrst optical excitation by
appropriately polarized resonant light populates atomic
states. Subsequently, transitions are induced among the
excited states by a resonant radio-frequency (rf) ﬁeld.
Corney, Kibble, and Series also studied double resonance
in the limiting case in which the upper states have the
same energy, so that the second resonance occurs at zero
frequency. Such a zero-frequency resonant ﬁeld is simply
a constant, transverse magnetic ﬁeld. Thus the double-
resonance approach is applied to the Voigt eﬀect in an
unorthodox manner.

The fact that in forward scattering light scattered by
diﬀerent atoms is coherent makes it possible to study
the phenomenon of line crossing. Whereas in level cross-
ing (Colegrove et al., 1959; Franken, 1961), signals in
lateral light scattering are observed when diﬀerent sub-
levels of single atoms cross (for example, in an external
magnetic ﬁeld), in a line-crossing experiment interference
occurs due to crossing of sublevels of diﬀerent atoms.
This eﬀect was ﬁrst demonstrated by Hackett and Se-
ries (1970). These authors observed interference in the
FS signals due to crossing of Zeeman sublevels of dif-
ferent Hg isotopes contained in one cell. Church and
Hadeishi (1973) showed that line crossing occurs even
when atoms of diﬀerent kinds are contained in separate
cells. Hackett and Series (1970), Church and Hadeishi
(1973), Stanzel (1974a), and Siegmund and Scharmann

5 Obviously, homogeneous broadening (e.g., pressure broadening)

also aﬀects these widths.

5

(1976) investigated the possibility of applying the line-
crossing eﬀect to precise measurements of isotope shifts.
This idea is based on the fact that line crossings occur
when the applied magnetic ﬁeld is such that the Zeeman
shifts compensate for the initial ﬁeld-free isotope shifts.
It was hoped that strong coherence narrowing of the line-
crossing resonance would signiﬁcantly increase precision
of such measurements. However, these authors found
that various complications (arising, for example, from
pressure broadening of the signals), render this method
impractical for isotope shift measurements.

Forward-scattering signals for weak-intensity light can

be written as

IF S =

1
4

ξ(ω)

e−

A

ωl

+
c

A− ωl
c

2

dω

e−

−

Z
h
ξ(ω) sin2

(n+ −

n−)

(cid:26)

i
e−

ωl
2c

(cid:27)

+

Z

(A

+ +A−)ωl
c

dω,

(4)

where ξ(ω) is the spectral density of the incident light,
A± and n± denote amplitude absorption coeﬃcients and
refractive indices for the σ± components of the incident
light beam, respectively, and l is the sample length. We
assume ideal polarizers here.

In general, there are two comparable contributions to
the FS signal, represented by the two terms in Eq. (4).
The ﬁrst term is due to diﬀerential absorption of the σ+
and σ− components of the incident light (circular dichro-
ism), and the second term is due to diﬀerential disper-
sion (circular birefringence). The two contributions have
diﬀerent frequency dependence. This can be illustrated
F ′ = 1 transition,
with the simple case of the F = 0
for which the σ± resonance frequencies are split by a lon-
gitudinal magnetic ﬁeld (Fig. II.B). While the function
in the ﬁrst integral goes through zero at ω = ω0 (since
the function in the square brackets is anti-symmetric with
respect to detuning), the second (birefringence) term is
maximal at zero detuning (for small magnetic ﬁelds). For
a narrow-band light source, it is possible to eliminate the
dichroic contribution by tuning to the center of the res-
onance. One is then left with only the second integral,
n−)ωl/(2c) is
representing Malus’s law, where ϕ = (n+ −
the Faraday rotation angle [Eq. (1)].

→

When the density-length product for the medium is
suﬃciently high, the range of variation of ϕ can easily
exceed π, and intensity transmitted through the appara-
tus shown in Fig. I oscillates as a function of the magnetic
ﬁeld (Fig. II.B). These oscillations are clearly seen de-
spite the proximity of the absorption line because the
refractive indices drop with detuning slower than the ab-
sorption coeﬃcients. When ξ(ω) represents a narrow
spectral proﬁle, the modulation contrast can be high,
particularly when the magnetic ﬁeld is strong enough
to split the A± proﬁles completely. Such case is shown
schematically in Fig. II.B(c).

At the center of a Zeeman-split resonance, absorption
drops oﬀ with the magnitude of the splitting much faster
than optical rotation does. Thus, using a dense atomic

6

FIG. 4 Spectral dependences of the circular dichroic (A+ −
A−) and birefringent (n+ − n−) anisotropies that determine
the forward-scattering signal for a F = 0 → F ′ = 1 transition.
The σ+ and σ− resonance frequencies are split by a longitu-
dinal magnetic ﬁeld B. For curves (a) and (b) the magnitude
of the splitting is equal to the resonance width Γ. For the
curves (c), it is ﬁve times larger.

vapor in a magnetic ﬁeld and a pair of polarizers, it is
possible to construct a transmission ﬁlter for resonant ra-
diation, which can be turned into an intensity modulator
by modulating the magnetic ﬁeld (Aleksandrov, 1965).

C. Applications in spectroscopy

Magneto-optical eﬀects can be used to provide useful
spectroscopic information. For example, given a known
atomic density and sample length, a measurement of
Faraday rotation for a given transition can be used to
determine the oscillator strength f for that transition.
Conversely, when f is known, Faraday rotation may be
used to determine vapor density. Vliegen et al. (2001)
found that Faraday rotation measurements with high al-
1015– 1016 cm−3) are free from cer-
kali metal densities (
tain systematic eﬀects associated with measurement of
absorption. An earlier review of applications of magneto-
optical rotation was given by Stephens (1989).

∼

1. Analytical spectroscopy and trace analysis, investigation of
weak transitions

An example of an application of magneto-optical rota-
tion to molecular spectroscopy is the work of Aubel and
Hause (1966) who, using a multi-pass cell, demonstrated
that the magneto-optical rotation spectrum of NO is eas-
ier to interpret than the absorption spectrum. Molecu-
lar magneto-optical spectra are in general much simpler

FIG. 5 Forward-scattering signals I(B) observed on the
sodium D1 [(a),(c)] and D2 [(b),(d)] lines by Gawlik (1975).
Curves (a) and (b) are signals obtained with a conventional
spectral lamp (single D line selected by a Lyot ﬁlter). Curves
(c) and (d) are signals obtained with single-mode cw dye-laser
excitation. The laser is tuned to the atomic transition in all
cases except the one marked (×). Curve (×) was recorded
with the laser detuned by about 600 MHz to demonstrate the
inﬂuence of residual dichroism. In plot (a), ﬂattening of some
curves at high ﬁelds is due to detector saturation—the dashed
lines represent calculated signals.

than the absorption spectra (see discussion by Herzberg,
1989, Ch. V,5). This is because signiﬁcant magneto-
optical eﬀects are only present for transitions between
molecular states of which at least one has nonzero elec-
tronic angular momentum. In addition, since molecular
g-values decrease rapidly with the increase of the rota-
tional quantum number J (see discussion by Khriplovich,
1991, Ch. 7.2), only a small part of the rotational band
produces magneto-optical eﬀects. Magneto-optical rota-
tion has been used to identify atomic resonance lines in
Bi against a complex background of molecular transitions
(Barkov and Zolotorev, 1980; Roberts et al., 1980).

Magneto-optical rotation, in particular, the concept of
forward scattering, was also applied in analytical spec-

troscopy for trace element detection. This was ﬁrst done
by Church and Hadeishi (1974), who, using FS signals,
showed sensitivity an order of magnitude higher than
could be obtained with absorption measurements. The
improved sensitivity of magneto-optical rotation com-
pared to absorption is due to almost complete elimination
of background light and a corresponding reduction of its
inﬂuence on the signal noise. Such noise is the main limi-
tation of the absorption techniques. Following this work,
Ito et al. (1977) also employed both Faraday and Voigt
eﬀects for trace analysis of various elements.

The detection of weak transitions by magneto-optical
rotation (with applications to molecular and analytical
spectroscopy) was spectacularly advanced by employ-
ment of lasers. Using tunable color-center lasers, Litﬁn
et al. (1980) demonstrated 50 times better sensitivity in
detection of NO transitions in the vicinity of 2.7 µm with
magneto-optical rotation compared to absorption spec-
troscopy. Similar results were obtained by Yamamoto
et al. (1986) who obtained 200-fold enhancement in sen-
sitivity over absorption spectroscopy in their work with
a pulsed dye laser and the sodium D2 line. Another in-
teresting result was reported by Hinz et al. (1982) who
worked in the mid-infrared range with NO molecules
and a CO laser. These authors also demonstrated that
magneto-optical rotation improves sensitivity in either of
the basic conﬁgurations, i.e., in the Faraday as well as the
Voigt geometry.

The advent of high-sensitivity laser spectropolarime-
ters, allowing measurement of optical rotation at the level
of 10−8 rad and smaller (Sec. XI.B), made possible the
sensitive detection of species with low concentration.6 It
is important to note that, while it is beneﬁcial from the
point of view of the photon shot noise of the polarime-
ter to operate at a high light power, great care should
be taken to make sure that the atoms of interest are not
bleached by nonlinear saturation eﬀects (Sec. III.B). As
a practical way to optimize a trace analysis setup, we
suggest the use of a buﬀer gas to pressure-broaden the
homogenous width of the transition up to the point when
this width becomes comparable to the Doppler width.
This way, the linear absorption and Faraday rotation are
not compromised, but the light intensity constraints due
to nonlinearities are relaxed by many orders of magni-
tude.

Due to its high sensitivity, the magneto-optical ro-
tation method can also be applied to the study of
weak transitions, such as magnetic dipole transitions
with small transition magnetic moments (Barkov et al.,
1989b).

7

2. Measurement of oscillator strengths

Fork and Bradley III (1964) performed some of the
earliest work in which resonant magneto-optical rota-
tion was used to measure oscillator strengths.7 They
measured dispersion of Hg vapor at about ﬁve Doppler
widths from the center of the 253.7-nm line. They used
an electrodeless discharge 198Hg lamp placed in a solenoid
as a light source tunable over eight Doppler widths and
measured the vapor dispersion using a Mach-Zehnder in-
terferometer. In addition to the observation of Faraday
rotation in excess of 7 rad, they also demonstrated the
inversion of the sign of the dispersion of a vapor with
inverted population, and the feasibility of using Faraday
rotation for narrow-band modulatable optical ﬁlters.

The advent of tunable lasers has enabled signiﬁcant im-
provement of magneto-optical-rotation methods for mea-
suring absolute and relative oscillator strengths. This is
illustrated by the results, shown in Fig. II.B, of an exper-
iment performed by Gawlik (1975). Here curves (a) and
(b) refer to a FS experiment performed with a sodium
spectral lamp and a Lyot ﬁlter that selected one of the
Na D lines. The light from the lamp had an asymmet-
ric spectral proﬁle with some self-reversal (a line-proﬁle
perturbation due to re-absorption of resonance light at
the line center) and FWHM of about 8 GHz. From the
results for the D1 and D2 lines, one can see how the mod-
ulation period depends on the product of atomic density
and oscillator strength of the investigated transitions and
how the oscillatory birefringent contribution (Fig. II.C.2)
becomes overwhelmed by the structureless dichroic one,
particularly at small magnetic ﬁelds. Figures II.B (c) and
(d) represent results from the same experiment but with,
in place of a lamp, a narrow-band cw dye laser tuned to
the centers of gravity of the Na D1 and D2 lines, respec-
tively (Gawlik, 1977; Gawlik et al., 1979). Several impor-
tant changes are seen: ﬁrst, the modulation depth is now
100%—this allows accurate determination of ϕ(nl, ω, B),
where ω is the light frequency (Fig. II.C.2); second, the
dichroic contribution can be fully eliminated by appropri-
ately tuning the laser (this is because the dichroic eﬀect
has a nearly dispersive spectral dependence which goes
through zero when the Faraday rotation contribution is
nearly maximal); third, as seen by the envelope of the os-
cillatory pattern, total absorption exp [
(A+ + A−)ωl/c]
plays a role only for small B, in agreement with the above
considerations [see Figs. II.B(c) and (d)]. Fast oscilla-
tion in the region of low total absorption makes it possible
to determine the absorption proﬁle (envelope) simultane-
ously with the measurement of ϕ. This technique allows
one to simultaneously determine the real and imaginary
parts of the complex index of refraction, which is useful
for measuring collisional parameters, for example.

−

6 Detection of on the order of hundreds of particles per cubic cen-

7 Early measurements of oscillator strength are described in a

timeter was reported by Vasilenko et al. (1978).

monograph by Mitchell and Zemansky (1971).

density is hence a central issue in absolute measurements.
On the other hand, these methods can be very useful for
high-precision relative measurements.

8

3. Investigation of interatomic collisions

→

The eﬀect of pressure broadening on the magneto-
optical rotation spectra of resonant gaseous media was
theoretically analyzed within the impact approximation
by Giraud-Cotton et al. (1975). Later, collisional eﬀects
in magneto-optical rotation in a F = 0
F = 1 atomic
transition were treated with the density matrix formalism
by Schuller et al. (1987). This work considered atomic
motion and light ﬁelds of arbitrary intensity (and thus
included nonlinear eﬀects), but was limited to optically
thin samples. The case of high optical density appears to
be particularly diﬃcult. This is because for high atomic
densities, the impact approximation is not appropriate;
the eﬀect of quasi-molecular behavior of the perturbed
atoms becomes signiﬁcant. Consequently, optical transi-
tions contributing to the rotation spectra can no longer
be regarded as isolated. This situation was addressed in
an experiment by Kristensen et al. (1994) with the D2
line of Rb atoms, which were highly diluted in Xe buﬀer
1020 cm−3. The authors observed
gas at densities of
about 10% reduction of Faraday rotation due to onset
of the Born-Oppenheimer coupling of Rb-Xe long-range-
collision pairs. Born-Oppenheimer coupling is the locking
of the total electronic angular momentum to the collision
axis at densities at which the mean free path falls below
about 1 nm. Such angular momentum locking hinders
the Larmor precession, and hence reduces Faraday rota-
tion.

∼

Faraday rotation spectroscopy is now widely used for
measuring collisional broadening and shift of spectral
lines. For example, Bogdanov et al. (1986), Bogdanov
and Kanorskii (1987), and Bogdanov et al. (1988) used
this method to study broadening and shift of the 648-
nm magnetic-dipole transition in Bi and self-broadening,
foreign-gas-broadening and shift, and electron-impact
broadening of transitions between excited states in Cs.
Barkov et al. (1989b, 1988b) studied buﬀer gas broaden-
ing of transitions in atomic Sm. One of the important
advantages of this method is that it provides the ability
to modulate the signal by changing the magnetic ﬁeld,
thus distinguishing the signal from the background.
The characteristic Macaluso-Corbino spectral

line
shape for an isolated line has two zero crossings (Fig.
II.A). The separation between zeros is linearly depen-
dant on the Lorentzian width of the transition even when
this width is much smaller than the Doppler width of the
transition.

An experimental study of collisional broadening of Ry-
dberg spectra with the use of Faraday rotation was per-
formed by Warry et al. (1994). This work demonstrated
that the resonant Faraday eﬀect and the FS technique
can be used for studies of collisional perturbations of

FIG. 6 (a) Signals obtained by Gawlik et al. (1979) from
forward scattering of single-mode cw laser light tuned to the
Na D1 line. (b) Magnetic ﬁeld dependence of the Faraday
rotation angle ϕ obtained from the extrema of the I(B) curve
of ﬁgure (a).

A number of experiments have measured oscillator
strengths by scanning the light frequency (at a ﬁxed mag-
netic ﬁeld). For example, employing synchrotron radia-
tion and superconducting magnets, oscillator strengths
of ultraviolet lines of Rydberg series of several ele-
ments were determined by Garton et al. (1983), Con-
nerade (1983), and Ahmad et al. (1996). An interest-
ing experimental method, employing pulsed magnets and
UV lasers, was developed by Connerade and cowork-
ers for studies of Faraday rotation in autoionizing res-
onances and transitions to Rydberg states (Connerade
et al., 1992; Connerade and Lane, 1988) and of collisional
broadening (Warry et al., 1994).

It should be remembered that most dispersive methods
measure not just the oscillator strength but the product
of f and the optical density.8 Knowledge of the optical

8 One interesting exception is the early work of Weingeroﬀ (1931)
who devised a method of measuring the Lorentzian line width in-
dependently of the optical density. The method relies on using a
white-light source and recording the intensity of light transmitted
through an optically dense medium placed between two crossed
polarizers in a longitudinal magnetic ﬁeld B. When B 6= 0, the
spectrum of the transmitted light has the form of a bright line on
a dark background (the Macaluso-Corbino eﬀect), but when the
polarizers are uncrossed by an appropriate angle, the line merges
with the background. For a given atomic transition and magnetic
ﬁeld, the value of the uncrossing angle allows determination of
the Lorentzian width without prior knowledge of density.

Rydberg states with much greater precision than that
of earlier photoabsorption experiments.

Magneto-optical rotation of a weak probe light pass-
ing through a gas discharge is a useful tool for studying
amplifying media in gas lasers. Early examples of this
are the papers by Aleksandrov and Kulyasov (1972) who
observed large rotations in a 136Xe discharge and by Men-
zies (1973) who determined population and polarization
relaxation rates of the Ne levels making up the 3.39 µm
laser transition. The technique is applicable to transi-
tions which exhibit light absorption as well as ampliﬁ-
cation depending on particular population ratios. Since
the Faraday angle is proportional to the population dif-
ference for the two levels of a transition and changes sign
when population inversion is achieved, such studies allow
precise determination of population diﬀerences and their
dependencies on parameters such as gas pressure and dis-
charge current. An example is the work of Winiarczyk
(1977) who studied the 632.8-nm Ne line. Due to its sen-
sitivity, this method is useful for optimizing the eﬃciency
of gas lasers, particularly those utilizing weak transitions.

4. Line identiﬁcation in complex spectra and search for “new”
energy levels

We have already mentioned the utility of magneto-
optical rotation for identiﬁcation of molecular spectra
and for distinguishing atomic resonances from molecu-
lar ones. Another, more unusual, application of Fara-
day rotation spectroscopy was implemented by Barkov
et al. (1989b, 1987, 1988b). They were looking for opti-
cal magnetic-dipole transitions from the ground term of
atomic samarium to the levels of the ﬁrst excited term of
the same conﬁguration whose energies were not known.
A study of the spectrum revealed hundreds of transitions
that could not be identiﬁed with the known energy levels
(most of these were due to transitions originating from
thermally populated high-lying levels). Drawing an anal-
ogy with infrared transitions between the ground term
levels for which unusually small pressure broadening had
been observed by Vedenin et al. (1986, 1987), Barkov
et al. predicted small pressure broadening for the sought-
after transitions as well. They further noticed that in
the limit of γ
ΓD (where γ and ΓD are the Lorentzian
and Doppler widths, respectively), the peak Faraday ro-
γ−2 (in contrast to absorption, for which the
tation is
amplitude is
In fact, at high buﬀer gas pres-
sures (up to 20 atm), the magneto-optical rotation spec-
tra showed that almost all transitions in the spectrum
were so broadened and reduced in amplitude that they
were practically unobservable. The spectrum consisted
of only the sought-after transitions, which had unusually
small pressure broadening.

γ−1).

≫

∝

∝

9

5. Applications in parity violation experiments

Magneto-optical eﬀects have played a crucial role in
experiments measuring weak-interaction induced parity-
violating optical activity of atomic vapors.9 Parity-
violating optical activity is usually observed in the ab-
sence of external static ﬁelds near magnetic-dipole (M1)
transitions with transition amplitudes on the order of a
Bohr magneton. The magnitude of the rotation is typi-
cally 10−7 rad per absorption length for the heavy atoms
(Bi, Tl, Pb) in which the eﬀect has been observed.

The Macaluso-Corbino eﬀect allows calibration of the
optical rotation apparatus by applying a magnetic ﬁeld
to the vapor. On the other hand, because the parity-
violating optical rotation angles are so small, great care
must be taken to eliminate spurious magnetic ﬁelds, since
sub-milligauss magnetic ﬁelds produce Macaluso-Corbino
rotation comparable in magnitude to the parity-violating
rotation, albeit with a diﬀerent lineshape. The lack of
proper control over spurious magnetic ﬁelds apparently
was a problem with some of the early measurements of
parity-violating optical activity in the late 1970s whose
results were inconsistent with subsequent more accurate
measurements.10

The origin of the parity-violating optical rotation lies
in the mixing, due to the weak interaction, of atomic
states of opposite parity,11 which leads to an admixture
of an electric-dipole (E1) component to the dominant
M 1 amplitude of the transition. The observed eﬀect
is the result of the interference of the two components
of the amplitude.
In general, there is also an electric
quadrupole (E2) component of the transition amplitude.
However, there is no net contribution from E1–E2 inter-
ference to the parity-violating optical rotation, since the
eﬀect averages to zero for an unpolarized atomic sam-
ple. Nevertheless, knowledge of the E2 contribution is
crucial for accurate determination of the parity-violating
amplitude, as it aﬀects the sample absorption and the
Macaluso-Corbino rotation used for calibration. In addi-
tion, this contribution is important for interpretation of
the parity-violation experiments, since the E2/M 1 ratio
can serve as an independent check of atomic theory. For-
tunately, investigation of Macaluso-Corbino lineshapes
allows direct determination of the E2/M 1 ratio (Bog-
danov et al., 1986; Majumder and Tsai, 1999; Roberts
et al., 1980; Tregidgo et al., 1986). These measurements
exploit the diﬀerence in the selection rules for these two

9 See, for example, a review of early experiments by Khriplovich
(1991), and more recent reviews by Bouchiat and Bouchiat
(1997) and Budker (1999).

10 The most accurate optical rotation measurements to date
(Meekhof et al., 1995; Vetter et al., 1995) have reached the level
of uncertainty of ∼1% of the magnitude of the eﬀect.

11 Parity-violating interactions mix states of the same total angular
momentum and projection. As a consequence of time-reversal
invariance, the mixing coeﬃcient is purely imaginary, which is
the origin of the chirality that leads to optical rotation.

types of transitions, and more generally, the diﬀerence
between line strengths for diﬀerent hyperﬁne components
of a transition.

6. Investigations with synchrotron radiation sources

Synchrotron radiation has been used for a number
of years as a source of ultraviolet radiation to study
magneto-optical eﬀects in transitions to high-lying Ry-
dberg and autoionization states (as in work by, for ex-
ample, Connerade, 1983; Garton et al., 1983).

−

In recent years, with the advent of synchrotron sources
of intense radiation in the extreme ultra-violet (¯hω =
250 eV), and soft x-ray (¯hω = 250 eV to several keV)
30
ranges (Attwood, 2000), the studies and applications of
resonant magneto-optical eﬀects have been extended to
atomic transitions involving excitation of core electrons.
Linear polarizers in this photon energy range are based
on polarization-selective reﬂection at near-Brewster
angles from multi-layer coatings (see discussion by
Attwood, 2000, Ch. 4.5.5), while additional polarization
control (for example, conversion of linear polarization to
circular) can be achieved using magneto-optical eﬀects
themselves (Kortright et al., 1997, 1999).

Resonant magneto-optical eﬀects, due to their element-
speciﬁc character (Kortright et al., 1995) are proving to
be a useful tool for the study of heterogeneous magnetic
materials (Hellwig et al., 2000; Kortright and Kim, 2000).

D. Related phenomena

1. Magnetic depolarization of ﬂuorescence: Hanle-eﬀect and
level-crossing

Apart from magneto-optical rotation, much attention
has been devoted to studies of polarization properties
of resonance ﬂuorescence and its magnetic ﬁeld depen-
dence. In particular, Wood (1922) and Wood and Ellett
(1923, 1924) noted strong magnetic-ﬁeld dependence of
polarization of the 253.7-nm resonance ﬂuorescence of
Hg. These studies were continued and interpreted by
Hanle (1924).12 Hanle interpreted his observations in
terms of the induced dipole moments precessing in an
external magnetic ﬁeld. A weak ﬁeld causes slow Lar-
mor precession, so the dipoles have no time to change
their orientation before they spontaneously decay. Con-
sequently, re-emitted ﬂuorescence preserves the polariza-
tion of the incident excitation light. On the other hand,
in a high ﬁeld, fast precession causes rapid averaging of

12 An English translation of the Hanle’s paper as well as interesting
historical remarks can be found in a book edited by Moruzzi and
Strumia (1991). Hanle (1926) also observed the inﬂuence of an
electric ﬁeld on the polarization of resonance ﬂuorescence.

10

FIG. 7 (a) An F = 0 → F ′ = 1 atomic transition.
In the
presence of a longitudinal magnetic ﬁeld, the Zeeman sub-
levels of the exited state become nondegenerate. This leads
to a magnetic-ﬁeld-dependent phase diﬀerence for σ+ and σ−
circular-polarization components of the re-emitted light and
to the alteration of the net re-emitted light polarization. (b)
Dependence of the re-emitted light degree of polarization P
on the applied longitudinal magnetic ﬁeld B.

the dipoles’ orientation, i.e., there is eﬃcient depolariza-
tion of the re-emitted light. The degree of polarization
depends on the rates of spontaneous decay of the induced
dipoles and Larmor precession. Hence, the product of the
excited state lifetime τ and the Land´e factor g can be de-
termined by measuring the magnetic-ﬁeld dependence of
the degree of polarization.

Figure II.D.1(a) shows the energy-level scheme of the
Hg 253.7-nm transition between the ground state with
F = 0 and the excited state with F ′ = 1 (and Zee-
man components M ′ = 0,
1). Light linearly polarized
±
along a direction perpendicular to the quantization axis
(solid arrows) excites the M ′ =
1 sublevels; sponta-
neous emission of σ+ and σ− light (dashed arrows) fol-
lows. When B = 0 and the excited state is degenerate,
the relative phases of the σ+ and σ− components are the
same and the re-emitted light has a high degree of polar-
ization P [Fig. II.D.1(b)]. When B
1
±
sublevels are split and the σ± components acquire a B-
dependent phase diﬀerence which alters the net polariza-
tion of the re-emitted light and reduces P . The width
of the P (B) dependence is inversely proportional to the
product τ g.

= 0, the M ′ =

±

The interpretation of the Hanle eﬀect in terms of a
classical Lorentz oscillator was far from satisfactory as
it did not explain, for example, why D2 lines in atoms
with one electron above closed shells exhibited the Hanle
eﬀect, while D1 lines did not.
(The modern explana-
tion is that the upper state of D1 lines has J = 1/2 and
thus, neglecting hyperﬁne interactions, polarization mo-
ments higher than orientation do not occur, while D2
lines have J = 3/2 in the upper states and alignment
is possible.) This and other diﬃculties inspired many
eminent theoreticians to analyze the Hanle experiment.
Bohr (1924) discussed the role of quantum state degen-
eracy and Heisenberg (1925) formulated the principle of
spectroscopic stability. Other important contributions
were made by Oppenheimer (1927), Weisskopf (1931),
Korﬀ and Breit (1932), and Breit (1932, 1933).

The Hanle eﬀect can be viewed as a generic example
of quantum interference. In the basis in which the quan-

6
tization axis is along the magnetic ﬁeld, the two circular
components of the incident light coherently excite atoms
to diﬀerent Zeeman sublevels of the upper level. Due to
the Zeeman splitting, light spontaneously emitted from
diﬀerent sublevels acquires diﬀerent phase shifts, leading
to magnetic-ﬁeld-dependent interference eﬀects in the po-
larization of the emitted light. The time-dependence of
the ﬂuorescence polarization is referred to as quantum
beats (Alexandrov et al., 1993; Dodd and Series, 1978;
Haroche, 1976).

The Hanle method was also extended to degenera-
= 0, which is the basis of level-
cies occurring at B
crossing spectroscopy (Colegrove et al., 1959). Level-
crossing spectroscopy has been widely used for deter-
mination of ﬁne- and hyperﬁne-structure intervals, life-
times, g-factors, and electric polarizabilities of atomic
levels (Alexandrov et al., 1993; Moruzzi and Strumia,
1991). An advantage of the level-crossing method is that
its spectral resolution is not limited by Doppler broaden-
ing because it measures the frequency diﬀerence between
two optical transitions for each atom.

2. Magnetic deﬂection of light

A uniaxial crystal generally splits a light beam into
two distinct light beams with orthogonal linear polariza-
tions. This eﬀect (linear birefringence) vanishes when
the k-vector of the incident beam is either parallel or
perpendicular to the crystal axis.

If, instead of a preferred axis, an axial vector a (also
called a gyrotropic axis) determines the symmetry of the
medium, another type of birefringence occurs. Here, a
light beam is split into linearly polarized beams propa-
gating in the (ˆk, ˆa) and (ˆk, ˆk
ˆa) planes, respectively.
The birefringent splitting in this case is maximal when
k is perpendicular to a. Examples of media with such a
gyrotropic axial symmetry are isotropic media in an ex-
ternal magnetic ﬁeld or samples with net spin orientation
(magnetization).

×

The dielectric tensor of a medium in a magnetic ﬁeld

B is given by (Landau et al., 1995)

εij(B) = ˜n2δij + i˜γǫijkBk,

(5)

where ˜n is the complex index of refraction in the absence
of the magnetic ﬁeld. The real and imaginary parts of ˜γ
are responsible for the circular birefringence and circular
dichroism of the medium, respectively. A straightforward
calculation yields the direction of the Poynting vector P
of a linearly polarized plane wave in the case of a weakly
absorbing medium (Im ˜n2,

Re ˜n2

1):

ˆk + Im ˜γ sin β

P

∝

(cid:16)

Im ˜γB
|
| ≪
B cos β + ˆk

≃

B sin β

,

(6)

×

(cid:17)

where β is the angle between the polarization and the
ﬁeld. A transversely polarized beam (β = π/2) will thus
be deﬂected by an angle α
Im ˜γB. This results in a
≃
parallel beam displacement upon traversal of a sample

11

with parallel boundary surfaces. The eﬀect was ﬁrst ob-
served in resonantly excited Cs vapor in ﬁelds up to 40
G (Schlesser and Weis, 1992). The small size of the ef-
fect (maximal displacements were a few tens of nanome-
ters) impeded the use of low light intensities, and the
experimental recordings show a strong nonlinear compo-
nent, presumably due to optical pumping. These nonlin-
earities manifest themselves as dispersively shaped reso-
nances in the magnetic ﬁeld dependence of the displace-
ment, which are similar to those observed in the nonlin-
ear Faraday eﬀect (see Sec. V). Unpublished results ob-
tained by A. Weis at high laser intensities have revealed
additional resonances—not observed in magneto-optical
rotation experiments—whose origin may be coherences
of order higher than ∆M = 2. A theoretical analysis of
the results of Schlesser and Weis based on the Poynting-
vector picture and the density matrix method described
in Sec. VII.B was attempted by Rochester and Budker
(2001b). It was found that, while the theory reproduces
the magnitude and spectral dependence of deﬂection at
low light power reasonably well, it completely fails to
reproduce the saturation behavior. This suggests exis-
tence of some additional nonlinear mechanism for deﬂec-
tion, perhaps at the interface between the vapor and the
glass.

As mentioned above, a spin-polarized medium has the
same symmetry properties as a medium subjected to an
external magnetic ﬁeld; beam deﬂection was observed
in a spin-polarized alkali vapor by Blasberg and Suter
(1992).

×

The magnetic-ﬁeld-induced displacement of light bears
a certain resemblance to the Hall eﬀect—the deﬂection
of a current j of electrons (holes) by a ﬁeld B in the
direction j
B—and might thus be called the “pho-
tonic Hall eﬀect.” However, this term was actually used
to designate a related observation of a magnetic-ﬁeld-
induced asymmetry in the lateral diﬀusion of light from
condensed-matter samples in Tesla-sized ﬁelds (Rikken
and van Tiggelen, 1996). Recently, the description of the
propagation of light in anisotropic media in terms of a
Poynting-vector model was questioned following a null
result in a magneto-deﬂection experiment on an aqueous
solution of Nd3+ (Rikken and van Tiggelen, 1997). More
experimental and theoretical work is needed to clarify
these issues.

3. The mechanical Faraday eﬀect

Since the eﬀect of applying a magnetic ﬁeld to a sam-
ple can be interpreted, by Larmor’s theorem, as a ro-
tation of the atomic wave function, a question can be
raised: can optical rotation be induced by macroscopic
rotation of the whole sample? If the electrons bound in
the sample “feel” the macroscopic rotation, a mechani-
cal Faraday eﬀect results. This rotation can only be felt
if strong coupling exists between atomic electrons and
their environment. The mechanical Faraday eﬀect has

6
been demonstrated in a rotating solid-state sample by
Jones (1976) (see also Baranova and Zel’dovich (1979)
for a theoretical discussion), but there is still the ques-
tion of whether one can rotate atoms in the gas phase.
Nienhuis and Kryszewski (1994); Nienhuis et al. (1992);
Woerdman et al. (1992) found that an isolated atom can-
not be rotated but if diatomic complexes are formed dur-
ing its interaction with the environment (collisions), me-
chanical Faraday rotation may be possible. Such binary
complexes in high-density atomic vapor were observed in
the experiment of Kristensen et al. (1994) described in
Sec. II.C.3. These authors observed spatial locking of the
electronic wave function that could possibly be used for
a demonstration of the mechanical Faraday eﬀect. Esti-
mates by Nienhuis and Kryszewski (1994) show that the
ratio of the rotation due to the mechanical and magnetic
eﬀects, when the angular velocity equals the Larmor pre-
cession frequency, is of the order of the collision frequency
multiplied by the duration of the collision. As far as the
authors of this review are aware, such eﬀect has not yet
been observed in the gas phase.

III. LINEAR VS. NONLINEAR LIGHT-ATOM
INTERACTIONS

In its broadest deﬁnition, a nonlinear optical process is
one in which the optical properties of the medium depend
on the light ﬁeld itself. The light ﬁeld can consist either of
a single beam that both modiﬁes the medium and probes
its properties, or of multiple beams (e.g, a pump-probe
arrangement). In certain situations, light-induced modi-
ﬁcations of the optical properties of the medium can per-
sist for a long time after the perturbing light is turned oﬀ
(these are sometimes referred to as slow nonlinearities).
In such cases, the pump and probe interactions can be
separated in time, with the eﬀect of the pump interaction
accumulating over a time limited by the relaxation rate
of the slow nonlinearity. This is the situation in optical
pumping (Sec. IV.A), and in much of the NMOE work
discussed in this Review. In this Section, we provide a
classiﬁcation of optical properties based on the perturba-
tive approach, and introduce saturation parameters that
are ubiquitous in the description of nonlinear optical pro-
cesses near resonance.

A. Perturbative approach

The classiﬁcation of atom-light interactions in terms
of linear and nonlinear processes can be done using a
description of the atomic ensemble by its density matrix
ρ. The knowledge of ρ allows one to calculate the induced
polarization P (the macroscopic electric-dipole moment)
using the relation

P = Tr ρ(E)d,

(7)

which is the response of the medium to the optical ﬁeld
E, where d is the electric-dipole operator. The evolution

12

FIG. 8 Perturbative evolution of the density matrix of two-
level atoms interacting with an optical ﬁeld. Note that for
any given order, the primed quantities label any of the mag-
netic sublevels or coherent superpositions thereof which may
be reached from the previous order by a single interaction re-
specting the angular momentum selection rules. The set of
all ρaa′ also contains ρaa.

of ρ is described by the Liouville equation, which is lin-
ear in the Hamiltonian describing the interaction of the
ensemble with the external magnetic ﬁeld and the optical
ﬁeld. As discussed, for example, by Stenholm (1984) and
Boyd (1992), the solutions ρ of the Liouville equation can
be expanded in powers of the optical ﬁeld amplitude

ρ =

ρ(n)

n.

E

∞

n=0
X

(8)

Figure III.A is a diagramatic representation of this per-
turbative expansion for light interacting with a two-level
atom, in which each level consists of a number of degen-
erate Zeeman sublevels. In the absence of light and in
thermodynamic equilibrium, the density matrix contains
only lower-level populations ρaa. The lowest-order inter-
action of the light ﬁeld with the atomic ensemble creates a
linear polarization characterized by the oﬀ-diagonal ma-
trix element ρ(1)
ab . This polarization is responsible for the
linear absorption and dispersion eﬀects, such as the lin-
In the next order of perturbation,
ear Faraday eﬀect.
excited-state populations ρ(2)
bb and coherences ρ(2)
aa′ and
ρ(2)
bb′ in the ground and excited states appear. They are
needed to describe ﬂuorescence and quantum interference
eﬀects (e.g, quantum beats), excited state level crossings
and the Hanle eﬀect (Sec. II.D.1). Generally, even-order
terms of ρ are stationary or slowly oscillating, while odd-

In particular, the next order ρ(3)
ab

order terms oscillate with the frequencies in the optical
range.
is the lowest
order in which a nonlinear polarization at the optical fre-
quency appears.
It is responsible for the onset of the
nonlinear (saturated) absorption and dispersion eﬀects,
such as the nonlinear Faraday and Voigt eﬀects. The ap-
pearance of ρ(4) marks the onset of nonlinear (saturated)
ﬂuorescence and the nonlinear Hanle eﬀect. In terms of
quantum interference (Sec. II.D.1), these eﬀects can be
associated with opening of additional interference chan-
nels (in analogy to a multi-slit Young’s experiment).

The Liouville equation shows how subsequent orders

of ρ are coupled (see discussion by Boyd, 1992):

˙ρ(n)
ab =

−

(iωab + γab)ρ(n)

i
¯h

ab −

d

E, ρ(n−1)

,

(9)

·

−
h

ab
i

where ¯hωab is the energy diﬀerence between levels a and
b. The density matrix ρ to a given order ρ(n) can thus
be expressed in terms of the elements ρ(n−1) of the next
lowest order. Odd orders of ρ describe optical coherences
and even orders describe level populations and Zeeman
coherences [according to Eq. (9) the latter are the source
terms for the former and vice-versa]. The magnitude of
the linear absorption coeﬃcient, governed by ρ(1)
ab , can be
aa . Similarly, ρ(3)
expressed in terms of the populations ρ(0)
ab ,
which determines the lowest-order saturated absorption
and the lowest-order nonlinear Faraday eﬀect, is driven
by ρ(2)
bb (excited- and ground-state populations),
ρ(2)
bb′ (excited-state coherences) and ρ(2)
aa′ (ground-state co-
herences).

aa and ρ(2)

In the language of nonlinear optics, the induced polar-

ization can be expanded into powers of E:

∞

∞

P =

P(n) =

n=1
X

n=1
X

χ(n)

E n,

·

(10)

where the χ(n) are the n-th order electric susceptibilities.
Expression (10) is a particular case of the general expan-
sion used in nonlinear optics in which n optical ﬁelds E i
oscillating at frequencies ωi generate n-th order polariza-
tions oscillating at all possible combinations of ωi. In the
present article, we focus on the case of a single optical
ﬁeld oscillating at frequency ω. Here the only polariza-
tions oscillating at the same frequency are of odd orders
in P . Coherent forward scattering is governed by P and is
thus directly sensitive only to odd orders of ρ or χ. Even
orders can be directly probed by observing (incoherently
emitted) ﬂuorescence light. Linear dispersion and ab-
sorption eﬀects such as the linear Faraday eﬀect are χ(1)
processes, while the nonlinear Faraday eﬀect arises ﬁrst
as a χ(3) process.

In forward-scattering experiments, the absorbed power
E
, which is given in (odd) order
i
χ(l)I (l+1)/2, where I is the light

is proportional to
E
l by (χ(l)

˙P
h

E l)

·

·

·

∝

13

intensity.13 Forward-scattering in lowest order (l = 1)
involves χ(1) and is a linear process in the sense that the
experimental signal is proportional to I. In light-induced
ﬂuorescence experiments, the scattered power is propor-
tional to the excited-state population, which, to lowest
order [ρ(2)
bb ] is also proportional to I. We adopt the follow-
ing classiﬁcation (which is consistent with the commonly
used notions): Processes which involve ρ(1) and ρ(2) will
be called linear processes, while all higher-order processes
will be referred to as nonlinear processes.14

This perturbative approach is useful for understanding
the onset of a given eﬀect with increasing light power.
It works well in most cases involving nonresonant light
ﬁelds.
In the case of resonant laser excitation, how-
ever, caution must be used, since there is no way to
make meaningful distinctions between diﬀerent pertur-
bative orders once the transition is saturated [the series
(9) and (10) are non-converging and all orders of these
expansions are coupled.]

This discussion is generalized in a straightforward
manner to the case of pump-probe experiments (i.e., in
which separate light beams are used for pumping and
probing the medium). Here the signals that depend on
both beams are, to lowest order, proportional to the
product of the intensities of these beams and thus corre-
spond to a χ(3) nonlinear process.

B. Saturation parameters

Nonlinear optical processes are usually associated with
high light intensities. However, nonlinear eﬀects can
show up even with weak illumination—conventional spec-
tral lamps were used in early optical pumping exper-
iments with resonant vapors to demonstrate nonlinear
eﬀects (Sec. IV.A).
It is important to realize that the
degree of nonlinearity strongly depends on the speciﬁc
mechanism of atomic saturation by the light ﬁeld as well
as the relaxation rate of atomic polarization.

A standard discussion of optical nonlinearity and sat-
uration for a two-level atom is given by Allen and Eberly
(1987). The degree of saturation of a transition is fre-

13 This follows directly from the Maxwell’s equations in a medium

(see discussion by, for example, Shen, 1984).

14 The formalism of nonlinear wave mixing (see discussion by Boyd,
1992; Shen, 1984) allows one to describe linear electro- and
magneto-optical eﬀects as three- or four-wave-mixing processes,
in which at least one of the mixing waves is at zero frequency.
For example, linear Faraday rotation is seen in this picture as
mixing of the incident linearly polarized optical ﬁeld with a zero-
frequency magnetic ﬁeld to produce an optical ﬁeld of orthogonal
polarization. While this is a perfectly consistent view, we prefer
to adhere to a more common practice of calling these processes
linear. In fact, for the purpose of the present review, the term
nonlinear will only refer to the dependence of the process on
optical ﬁelds. Thus, we also consider as linear a broad class of
optical-rf and optical-microwave double-resonance phenomena.

κ1 =

d2
2
0
E
¯h2γ2
0

.

(12)

IV. EARLY STUDIES OF NONLINEAR
MAGNETO-OPTICAL EFFECTS

quently characterized by a saturation parameter of gen-
eral form

κ =

excitation rate
relaxation rate

.

(11)

The saturation parameter is the ratio of the rates of co-
herent light-atom interactions (responsible for Rabi oscil-
lations) and incoherent relaxation processes (e.g., spon-
taneous decay).

Consider a two-level system in which the upper state
decays back to the lower state and light is tuned to res-
onance. The saturation parameter is given by

Here d is the transition dipole moment,
E0 is the am-
plitude of the electric ﬁeld of the light, and γ0 is the
homogeneous width of the transition. (For simplicity, we
assume that γ0 is determined by the upper state decay.)
0 /(¯h2γ0), and the relaxation
The excitation rate is d2
2
rate is γ0.

E

When κ1 ≪

1, the spontaneous rate dominates. Atoms
mostly reside in the lower state. Occasionally, at random
time intervals, an atom undergoes an excitation/decay
cycle; the average fraction of atoms in the upper state is
1, atoms undergo
κ1. On the other hand, when κ1 ≫
∼
regular Rabi oscillations (at a rate much greater than
that of spontaneous emission), and the average popula-
tions of the upper and the lower states equalize.

If the upper state predominantly decays to states other
than the lower state of the transition, the character of
saturation is quite diﬀerent. If there is no relaxation of
the lower level of the transition, light of any intensity will
eventually pump all atoms out of the lower and upper
states into the other states. When there is lower-state
relaxation at rate γ in the absence of light, the saturation
parameter is

κ2 =

d2
2
0
E
¯h2γ0γ

.

(13)

Here the excitation rate is the same as for κ1, but the
relaxation rate is now γ. In many experiments, γ is much
smaller than γ0, so that nonlinear eﬀects can appear at
lower light intensities than for systems characterized by
κ1. Note that the parameter κ1 is also signiﬁcant for
open systems as it gives the ratio of the populations of
the upper and lower states.

When the upper and lower levels of the transition are
composed of Zeeman sublevels, the relevant saturation
parameter for nonlinear eﬀects depends on the speciﬁcs
of the transition structure and the external (optical and
other) ﬁelds. For example, if a “dark” state is present
in the lower level, the system is eﬀectively open (atoms
are pumped into the dark state in a process known as
coherent population trapping; see Sec. XIII.A), and the
optical pumping saturation parameter κ2 applies. For an
F ′ = 1/2 transition pumped with linearly
F = 1/2

→

14

polarized light, on the other hand, there is no dark state
and the saturation parameter κ1 applies.
If circularly
polarized light is used for optical pumping, however, or if
a magnetic ﬁeld is used to break the degeneracy between
transitions for right- and left-circularly polarized light,
the transition becomes eﬀectively open and the parame-
ter κ2 applies.

The parameters κ1 and κ2 are also of use in the char-
acterization of the magnitude of power broadening and
of light shifts of the transition.

In this Section, we trace the development of the study
of NMOE from the early optical pumping work of the
1950s to the experiments with tunable lasers carried out
in the 1980s and early 1990s that led to the formulation of
quantitative theories of magneto-optics in simple systems
and in the alkalis (Kanorsky et al., 1993).

A. Optical pumping

Research on polarized light-atom interactions (Sec.
II.D.1) initiated by Hanle (1924); Wood (1922); Wood
and Ellett (1923, 1924) was not pursued much further
at the time. Twenty-odd years later, Kastler (1950)
had the idea to make use of angular momentum con-
servation in light-matter interaction (Rubinowicz, 1918)
to create spatially oriented atomic angular momenta by
absorption of circularly polarized light (optical pump-
ing). Anisotropy created by optical pumping can be de-
tected by monitoring of the intensity and/or polarization
of the transmitted light, monitoring of the ﬂuorescence
intensity and/or polarization, or state selection in atomic
beams. For transmission monitoring, either transmission
of the pump beam or of a probe beam can be recorded.
The latter method has been most often applied with res-
onant probe beams for absorption monitoring (Dehmelt,
1957). In particular, Bell and Bloom (1957, 1961) em-
ployed Dehmelt’s method for detection of the ground
state coherence induced by an rf ﬁeld and by an intensity-
modulated pump beam.

It was soon realized that probe transition monitoring
could be used with oﬀ-resonant light for dispersion de-
tection. Gozzini (1962) suggested observing the rotation
of the polarization plane of a weak probe beam to de-
tect the population imbalance in atomic sublevels cre-
ated by optical pumping. This rotation (which occurs
in zero magnetic ﬁeld) is caused by amplitude asym-
metry between the σ+ and σ− refractive indices, anal-
ogous to that occurring in paramagnetic samples (II.A);
hence it is sometimes called the paramagnetic Faraday

eﬀect.15 Many experiments were performed using this
idea (reivewed by Happer, 1971). For optical pump-
ing studies, oﬀ-resonance detection of dispersive prop-
erties has the advantage over absorption monitoring that
the probe beam interacts only weakly with the pumped
atoms. Thus high probe-beam intensities can be used,
enhancing the signal-to-noise ratio of the detection, with-
out loss of sensitivity due to power broadening. On the
other hand, a probe beam detuned from exact resonance
could induce light shifts16 of the atomic energy levels,
which may not be acceptable in high-precision work.

Because the optical properties of the atomic vapor are
altered by the pump beam, and these changes are de-
tected by optical means, optical pumping is classiﬁed as
a nonlinear processes. However, it should be realized
that in most of the pre-laser cases, the eﬀect was due
to the cumulative action of several optical pumping cy-
cles, i.e., sequences of absorption and spontaneous emis-
sion, occurring on a time scale shorter than the lower
state relaxation time, but longer than the upper-state
lifetime. Thus no appreciable upper-state population was
produced.

Nonlinear eﬀects related to upper state saturation can
arise even with classical light sources, however, provided
that the light intensity is strong enough. An example
of this can be found in the work of Schmieder et al.
(1970) who investigated level-crossing signals in the ﬂu-
orescence of Rb and Cs vapors. At high light intensities,
narrow features appeared in the magnetic ﬁeld depen-
dence near B = 0. They were ascribed to the appearance
of the ground-state Hanle signal in the excited-state ﬂu-
orescence due to nonlinear coupling of the ground- and
excited-state coherences. As with the Hanle experiment
(Sec. II.D.1), the width of the resonance depended on
the relaxation time of the atomic state; however, in con-
trast to the original Hanle eﬀect, here it was the ground-
state relaxation, rather than the upper-state relaxation,
which was relevant. Very narrow widths (on the order
of 1 µG) were seen by Dupont-Roc et al. (1969), who
observed the ground-state Hanle eﬀect in transmission.
In this work, rubidium atoms contained in a paraﬃn-
coated vapor cell (see Sec. VIII.E) were optically pumped
by a circularly polarized beam from a Rb lamp, and

15 Strictly speaking, the paramagnetic Faraday eﬀect is not a
magneto-optical eﬀect, since it occurs even when there is no mag-
netic ﬁeld present. Still, it aﬀects atomic dispersion, and so can
play a role in magneto-optical eﬀects.

16 The quantum theory of light shifts in the context of optical
pumping was developed by Barrat and Cohen-Tannoudji (1961)
(also see discussion by Cohen-Tannoudji, 1968). A simple clas-
sical derivation by Pancharatnam (1966) indicated a relation to
atomic dispersion by showing that the light shift is given by a
convolution of the spectral proﬁle of the light ﬁeld with the real
part of the atomic susceptibility (refractive index). Since the real
part of the refractive index is an anti-symmetric function of the
light detuning from atomic resonance, the light shift vanishes for
resonant light beams.

15

thus acquired macroscopic orientation (magnetization) in
their ground state. In the transverse-magnetic-ﬁeld de-
pendence of the pump beam transmission, there was a
Lorentzian resonance due to the ground-state Hanle ef-
fect. In order to get a dispersive resonance whose steep
slope near the zero crossing could be used to detect small
magnetic ﬁeld changes, Dupont-Roc et al. applied mod-
ulation to the magnetic ﬁeld and performed lock-in de-
tection of the transmitted light intensity at the modu-
lation frequency. The ground-state Hanle eﬀect studied
was applied to ultra-sensitive magnetometry by Cohen-
Tannoudji et al. (1969); Dupont-Roc (1970), providing
sensitivity

10−9 G Hz−1/2.

Bouchiat and Grossetete (1966) performed experi-
ments that were an important precursor to later NMOE
work with lasers (particularly, that which utilized sepa-
rated pump and probe light ﬁelds). They illuminated an
alkali vapor cell subject to a magnetic ﬁeld with pump
and probe lamp light sources in order to carry out de-
tailed studies of spin-relaxation and spin-exchange pro-
cesses. An interesting feature of this setup is that the
pump and probe light ﬁelds could be resonant with diﬀer-
ent transitions of the same atom, or even with transitions
in diﬀerent isotopes or species. In the latter cases, atomic
polarization induced by the pump light in one isotope or
species is transferred to the other via spin-exchange col-
lisions.

∼

B. Magneto-optical eﬀects in gas lasers

When a magnetic ﬁeld is applied to a gas laser medium,
several nonlinear magneto-optical eﬀects can be observed
by monitoring laser intensity or the ﬂuorescence light
laterally emitted from the laser tube.17 These eﬀects
include nonlinear Hanle and level-crossing eﬀects (Sec.
II.B) and also a speciﬁc coherence eﬀect, known as mode
crossing. Mode crossing occurs when the frequency sep-
aration between two laser modes matches the Zeeman
splitting of a pair of magnetic sublevels. The two sub-
levels are then coherently driven by the two laser modes,
resulting in a resonance feature in the magnetic depen-
dence of the output power (Dumont, 1972; Hermann
et al., 1977; Hermann and Scharmann, 1972; Schlossberg
and Javan, 1966). Mode crossing is an example of a three-
level coherence resonance, related to various eﬀects de-
scribed in Sec. XIII.A.

Most gas lasers have tubes with Brewster windows and
so possess high polarization anisotropy. Such lasers are
sensitive to magneto-optical eﬀects since the inﬂuence of

17 Such eﬀects were extensively studied in the early days of
laser physics, both experimentally (Culshaw and Kannelaud,
1964a,b,c; Dumont and Durand, 1964; Fork et al., 1964; Kru-
pennikova and Chaika, 1966; Schlossberg and Javan, 1966; Tom-
linson and Fork, 1967) and theoretically (Dyakonov and Perel,
1966; van Haeringen, 1967; Sargent et al., 1967).

light polarization on the laser output intensity is strongly
enhanced by the cavity. Thus even minute changes in po-
larization are transformed into easily detected intensity
variations. Early experimental demonstrations of such ef-
fects were described by Hermann and Scharmann (1967,
1968, 1972); Le Floch and Le Naour (1971); Le Floch and
Stephan (1972).18

It is possible to use a gas laser as a magnetometer by
minimizing anisotropy in the cavity and applying a longi-
tudinal magnetic ﬁeld. The eigenmodes generated by the
laser are two oppositely circularly polarized components
with diﬀerent frequencies (dependent on the magnetic
ﬁeld).
If the two components have the same intensity,
the resultant output of the laser is linearly polarized, with
the direction of polarization rotating at half the diﬀerence
frequency between the modes. The time dependence of
the intensity transmitted through a linear analyzer gives
a measurement of the magnetic ﬁeld (Bretenaker et al.,
1995, 1992).

C. Nonlinear eﬀects in forward scattering

Forward scattering in the linear regime was discussed
in Sec. II.B. At high light intensity, nonlinear eﬀects ap-
pear in FS [the quantities A and n in Eq. (4) become in-
tensity dependent]. There are two principal mechanisms
for the nonlinearity. One is velocity-selective modiﬁca-
tions of the atomic population distributions by narrow-
band light (see Sec. V.A); the other is related to light-
induced coherences between Zeeman sublevels. Often,
both of these mechanisms operate simultaneously.

In the early 1970s came the advent of the tunable
laser, an ideal tool for optical pumping and generation
of atomic coherences. The creation of atomic coherences
by a strong light ﬁeld was extensively analyzed, and is re-
viewed by several authors (e.g., Cohen-Tannoudji, 1974;
Decomps et al., 1976; Gawlik, 1994).

The ﬁrst observations of laser-induced coherences in FS
(as well as the ﬁrst observations of the nonlinear Faraday
eﬀect with lasers) were by Gawlik et al. (1974a,b), who
used both cw and pulsed lasers. Very strong dependence
of the FS signal intensity on the magnetic-ﬁeld depen-
dence was observed (Gawlik et al., 1974a), in contrast to
the prediction of the linear theory and earlier observa-
tions with spectral lamps (Corney et al., 1966; Durrant
and Landheer, 1971; Krolas and Winiarczyk, 1972). The
observed curves, reproduced in Fig. IV.C, are measures
of ϕ2(B) if the optical density is not too high.

The structures reported in (Gawlik et al., 1974a) were
subnatural, i.e., they were narrower than would be ex-
pected if they were due to the natural width of the op-

18 Additional information on magneto-optical eﬀects coupled to
intra-cavity anisotropy can be found in a book by Voytovich
(1984) and in a topical issue of Journal of Optics B (Semiclassical
and Quantum Optics), 3 (2001).

16

FIG. 9 Forward-scattering signals (FS intensity versus mag-
netic ﬁeld) from the sodium (a) D1 and (c) D2 lines (note
the additional broad structure arising from excited state co-
herence) obtained for various laser intensities by Gawlik et al.
(1974a). Plots (b) and (d) show signals near zero magnetic
ﬁeld

tical transition (Sec. II.D.1). They were also not sub-
ject to Doppler broadening. This indicates that these
structures were associated with ground-state coherences
whose eﬀective relaxation rate was determined by the ﬁ-
nite atomic transit time across the light beam.

The amplitude of the signals depended nonlinearly on
the light intensity and the signals were easily power-
broadened. They were also quite sensitive to small buﬀer-
gas admixtures, which indicated that optical coherences
played a role in their creation [collisions destroy optical
coherences faster than they do populations and ground-
state coherences (Gawlik et al., 1974a)]. The observed
FS signals exhibited a complex structure that was simi-
lar to that seen by Ducloy (1973) in ﬂuorescence. Ducloy
attributed this structure to hexadecapole moments (as-
sociated with the coherence between the M =
2 sub-
levels of the F = 2 ground-state component; see Ap-
pendix B.1 for a discussion of atomic multipoles). The

±

experiment of Gawlik et al. (1974a) was initially inter-
preted in terms of such multipoles. This interpretation
raised some controversy since, as pointed out by Giraud-
Cotton et al. (1982a, 1985a),19 signals like those ob-
served in Gawlik et al. (1974a) could be explained by
third-order perturbation theory (see Sec. III.A) in which
quadrupoles are the highest-rank multipoles, i.e., without
invoking the hexadecapole moment. On the other hand,
under the conditions of the experiment of Gawlik et al.
(1974a), perturbation theory was clearly invalid (Gaw-
lik, 1982). Moreover, hexadecapole moments were un-
ambiguously observed in several other experiments with
ﬂuorescence detection (Ducloy, 1973; Fischer and Hertel,
1982; Warrington, 1986) performed under similar condi-
tions as those of Gawlik et al. (1974a). An intriguing
question arose: do the higher-order multipoles aﬀect the
FS signals, and if so, why are simple perturbative calcu-
lations so successful in reproducing the experimental re-
sults? Answering this question was not straightforward
because higher-order multipoles exist in systems with
high angular momenta, and thus a large number of cou-
pled sublevels. Hence, it took quite some time until the
above controversy was resolved.  Lobodzi´nski and Gawlik
(1996) performed detailed nonperturbative calculations
for the Na D1 line, taking all possible Zeeman coher-
ences into account. They found that hexadecapoles can
indeed aﬀect FS signals but only when a single hyperﬁne
F ′ = 2
structure (hfs) component is selected (F = 2
in the case of the Na D1 transition). Other hfs com-
ponents of the Na D1 line are largely insensitive to the
hexadecapole coherence.
In later work by  Lobodzi´nski
and Gawlik (1997), this result was interpreted in terms
of two competing trap states (Sec. XIII.A) contributing
to the forward-scattered signal.

→

Apart from the above-mentioned nonlinear magneto-
optical eﬀects at near-zero magnetic ﬁelds, some atten-
tion was also devoted to high magnetic ﬁelds. Gibbs
et al. (1974) investigated Faraday rotation in the vicin-
ity of the Na D1 transition under the conditions of cw
saturation and, in a separate set of measurements, un-
der the conditions of self-induced transparency (McCall
and Hahn, 1969). These experiments were done at mag-
netic ﬁelds in the range 1–10 kG. Gibbs et al. found that
Faraday rotation in these nonlinear regimes is actually
similar to the rotation in the linear regime. The utility
of the nonlinear regimes is that they aﬀord a signiﬁcant
reduction in absorption of the light, making it possible
to achieve large rotation angles [in excess of 3π/2 rad in
the work of Gibbs et al. (1974)]. Agarwal et al. (1997)
studied the inﬂuence of propagation eﬀects (high opti-
cal density) and high light intensity on the FS spectra
taken at high magnetic ﬁelds. This analysis is important
for precision measurements of oscillator strengths (Sec.

19 This was also discussed by Holmes and Griﬃth (1995); Jungner

et al. (1989); Stahlberg et al. (1990).

II.C.2).

17

D. “Rediscoveries” of the nonlinear magneto-optical eﬀects

Some ten years after the ﬁrst investigations of nonlin-
ear magneto-optical eﬀects in forward scattering (Gaw-
lik et al., 1974a,b), similar eﬀects were independently
“rediscovered” by several groups, in certain instances in
a somewhat dramatic manner.20 For example, Davies
et al. (1987) passed a linearly polarized laser beam tuned
near an atomic resonance through a samarium vapor cell
placed in a longitudinal magnetic ﬁeld. The direction
of light polarization after the cell was analyzed. Nor-
mally, a small amount of buﬀer gas was present in the
cell; the resulting magnitude and frequency dependence
of the Faraday rotation were well understood. However,
rather accidentally, it was discovered that, if the buﬀer
gas was removed from the cell, the magnitude of the peak
rotation changed sign and its size increased by some three
orders of magnitude! The frequency and magnetic-ﬁeld
dependences of the rotation also changed radically. Sim-
ilar observations were made by other groups, but a con-
sistent explanation of the phenomenon was lacking. In
order to clarify the situation, Barkov et al. (1989a) per-
formed an experiment on several low-angular-momentum
transitions of atomic Sm and identiﬁed two mechanisms
responsible for the enhanced rotation: Bennett-structure
formation in the atomic velocity distribution and Zeeman
coherences. The latter eﬀect produces a larger enhance-
ment of rotation in small magnetic ﬁelds; Barkov et al.
104 times larger than that
(1989a) observed rotation
∼
due to the linear Macaluso-Corbino eﬀect. These experi-
mental results were subsequently compared to theoretical
predictions, showing good agreement (Kozlov, 1989; Zetie
et al., 1992). At about the same time, precision measure-
ments and detailed calculations of the nonlinear Faraday
eﬀect on the cesium D2 line were performed (Chen et al.,
1990; Kanorsky et al., 1993; Weis et al., 1993c). Because
Cs has hyperﬁne structure and high angular momentum,
the situation was somewhat more complicated than for
transitions between low-angular-momentum states of the
nuclear spin-less isotopes of Sm (see Sec. VII for a de-
scription of the theoretical approaches to NMOE). Never-
theless, excellent quantitative agreement between theory
and experiment was obtained.

20 These “rediscoveries” prompted systematic investigations of the
nonlinear magneto-optical eﬀects, both experimental (Badalyan
et al., 1984; Baird et al., 1989; Barkov et al., 1989b; Buevich
et al., 1987; Chen et al., 1990; Davies et al., 1987; Drake, 1986;
Drake et al., 1988; Lange et al., 1986; Stahlberg et al., 1990, 1985;
Weis et al., 1993c) and theoretical (Fomichev, 1987; Giraud-
Cotton et al., 1985a,b; Jungner et al., 1989; Kanorsky et al.,
1993; Schuller et al., 1987).

V. PHYSICAL MECHANISMS OF NONLINEAR
MAGNETO-OPTICAL EFFECTS

When a nonlinear magneto-optical eﬀect occurs, the
properties of both the medium and the light are aﬀected.
Our description of the physical mechanisms that cause
NMOE deals with the eﬀects on the medium and the
light separately, ﬁrst detailing how the populations of
and coherences between atomic states are changed (opti-
cal pumping) and then how the light polarization is sub-
sequently modiﬁed (optical probing). If, as is the case in
many of the experiments discussed in Sec. IV, a single
laser beam is used for both pumping and probing, these
processes occur simultaneously and continuously. How-
ever, comparison with full density matrix calculations
and experimental results shows that the essential features
of NMOE can be understood by considering these pro-
cesses separately.

As discussed above, we distinguish between two broad
classes of mechanisms of NMOE: ﬁrst, Bennett-structure
eﬀects, which involve the perturbation of populations of
atomic states during optical pumping, and second, “co-
herence” eﬀects, which involve the creation and evolution
of atomic polarization (although in some cases, with a
proper choice of basis, it is possible to describe these ef-
fects without explicit use of coherences, see Sec. VII.A).
In the case of nonlinear Faraday rotation, the pri-
mary empirical distinction between these two eﬀects is
the magnitude of the magnetic ﬁeld Bmax at which op-
tical rotation reaches a maximum. This magnetic-ﬁeld
magnitude is related to a line width by the formula [see
Eq. (2)]:

Bmax =

¯hΓ
2gµ

.

(14)

The smallest achievable line width for Bennett-structure-
related NMOR corresponds to the natural width of the
atomic transition (typically 2π
1–10 MHz for allowed
optical electric-dipole transitions). In the case of the co-
herence eﬀects, the line width Γ is determined by the rate
1
of atomic depolarization. [Depolarization rates
Hz have been observed by Budker et al. (1998a) for atoms
in paraﬃn-coated cells.]

2π

∼

×

×

A. Bennett-structure eﬀects

The ﬁrst class of NMOR-causing mechanisms that we
consider, the Bennett-structure eﬀects, are caused by op-
tically pumped “holes” and “peaks” in the atomic veloc-
ity distributions of the ground state sublevels (Bennett,
1962). We consider a simple case of Bennett-structure-
related (BSR) NMOR in which optical pumping and
probing are performed in separate regions (Fig. V.A).
In this example there is ˆz-directed magnetic ﬁeld Bprobe
in the probe region (Bpump is set to zero). In the pump-
ing region, atoms interact with a near-resonant, linearly

18

FIG. 10 Conceptual two-region experimental arrangement
with separated optical pumping and probing regions used to
treat Bennett-structure eﬀects in NMOR. Pump and probe
light beams are initially linearly polarized along x, the atomic
beam propagates in the ˆy direction, and the magnetic ﬁelds
are oriented along the direction of light propagation (ˆz).

≫

x-polarized, narrow-band laser beam of saturating in-
tensity [the optical pumping saturation parameter (Sec.
0 /(¯h2γ0γt)
2
III.B) κ = d2
1, where d is the transition
E
dipole moment,
E0 is the optical electric ﬁeld amplitude,
γ0 is the natural width of the transition, and γt is the
rate of atoms’ transit through the pump laser beam]. In
the probing region, a weak (κ
1) light beam, initially
of the same polarization as the pump beam, propagates
through the medium. The resultant polarization of the
probe beam is subsequently analyzed.

≪

i

±

1/2

M =
|

Consider an F = 1/2

F ′ = 1/2 transition. This
→
system is especially straightforward, because it exhibits
no coherence eﬀects with linearly polarized light. Thus
NMOR in this system is entirely due to Bennett struc-
tures. Suppose that the upper state decays to levels other
than the ground state. For atoms in the resonant veloc-
ity group, the
lower-state Zeeman sublevels
are depopulated by optical pumping, creating “holes” in
the atomic velocity distributions of the two states [Fig.
V.A(a)]. Consequently, there are sub-Doppler features
(with minimum width γ0) in the indices of refraction
n− and n+ for right- and left-circularly polarized (σ−
and σ+, respectively) light.
In the probe region [Fig.
V.A(b)], a small magnetic ﬁeld Bprobe < ¯hγ0/(2gµ) is
applied. (For simplicity, the Land´e factor for the upper
state is assumed to be negligible.) The indices of re-
fraction n− and n+ are displaced relative to each other
due to the Zeeman shift, leading to optical rotation of
the probe beam. In the absence of Bennett structures,
this gives the linear Faraday eﬀect. When Bennett holes
are produced in the pump region, the resultant Faraday
rotation can be thought of as rotation produced by the
Doppler-distributed atoms without the hole (linear Fara-
day rotation) minus the rotation that would have been
produced by the pumped out atoms. Thus the rotation
due to Bennett holes has the opposite sign as that due
to the linear eﬀect.

As described in detail by Budker et al. (2002a), the
mechanism of BSR NMOR depends critically on the

19

B. Coherence eﬀects

The coherence eﬀects can produce even narrower
widths than the Bennett-structure-related NMOE, thus
leading to signiﬁcantly higher small-ﬁeld Faraday rota-
tion (Arimondo, 1996; Gawlik, 1994). At low light power,
the eﬀect of the pump light can be conceptually separated
from that of the magnetic ﬁeld, so that the coherence ef-
fect can be thought of as occurring in three stages. First,
atoms are optically pumped into an aligned state, causing
the atomic vapor to acquire linear dichroism; second, the
atomic alignment precesses in the magnetic ﬁeld, rotat-
ing the axis of dichroism; third, the light polarization is
rotated by interaction with the dichroic atomic medium,
since the alignment is no longer along the initial light
polarization. The third, “probing,” step does not require
high light intensity, and can be performed either with a
weak probe beam or with the same pump light as used
in the ﬁrst step.

1

−

i ± |

M =

M = 0
|

Consider atoms with total angular momentum F = 1
that are not aligned initially subject to linearly polarized
laser light with frequency corresponding to a transition
to a F ′ = 0 state. One can view the atoms as being in
,
an incoherent mixture of the following states:
i
)/√2. The ﬁrst of these states can
(
M = 1
i
|
be excited to the F ′ = 0 state only by z-polarized radia-
tion; it is decoupled from x- and y-polarized light. Sim-
ilarly, the other two states (which are coherent superpo-
sitions of the Zeeman sublevels) are y- and x-absorbing
states, respectively. Suppose the laser light is polarized
along the x-axis. Optical pumping by this light causes
depletion of the x-absorbing state, leaving atoms in the
“dark” y- and z-absorbing states.21 The medium be-
comes transparent for the x-polarized radiation; however,
it can still absorb and refract light of an orthogonal po-
larization. The medium is aligned 22 (Appendix B.1) and
possesses linear dichroism and birefringence.23

In the presence of a magnetic ﬁeld, the atomic align-
ment axis precesses around the direction of the ﬁeld at
the Larmor frequency [precession of atomic alignment in
a magnetic ﬁeld is explained in detail in, for example,
Corney (1988, Ch. 15)]. One can understand the eﬀect
of this precession on the light polarization by thinking of

FIG. 11 The Bennett-structure eﬀect on a 1/2 → 1/2 tran-
sition in which the upper state decays to levels other than
the lower state; Bpump = 0, Bprobe 6= 0. (a) In the pump
region, monochromatic laser light produces Bennett holes in
the velocity distributions of atoms in the lower state |+1/2i,
|−1/2i sublevels. Since there is no magnetic ﬁeld, the holes
occur in the same velocity group (indicated by the dashed
line) for each sublevel. (b) In the probe region, a magnetic
ﬁeld is applied, shifting n+ and n− relative to each other
(upper trace). The real part of the indices of refraction are
shown; so that the features in plot (a) correspond to disper-
sive shapes in this plot. The shifted central detunings of the
BSR features are indicated by the dashed lines. Polarization
rotation of the probe laser light is proportional to the diﬀer-
(lower trace). Features due to the Doppler
ence Re
distribution and the Bennett holes can be seen. Since the Ben-
nett related feature is caused by the removal of atoms from
the Doppler distribution, the sign of rotation due to this eﬀect
is opposite to that of the linear rotation.

n+ − n−

(cid:0)

(cid:1)

details of the experimental situation. Depending on
whether a magnetic ﬁeld is present in the pump region,
and whether the excited state decays to the ground state
or other levels, BSR NMOR can be due to holes, (and
have one sign), be due to “peaks” generated by sponta-
neous decay to the ground state (and have the opposite
sign), or not be present at all.

Note also that mechanical action of light on atoms
could, under certain conditions, lead to redistribution of
atoms among velocity groups, thus deforming the Ben-
nett structures and modifying the nonlinear optical prop-
erties of the medium (Kazantsev et al., 1986).

21 This process is known as coherent population trapping (Ari-
mondo, 1996) because, as a result of optical pumping by linearly
polarized light, atoms in the |M = ±1i substates are not com-
pletely pumped out as would seem to be the case at ﬁrst glance
(see Fig. II.A), but largely remain in a dark coherent superposi-
tion.

22 In general, alignment can exist for an F ≥ 1 state even when
there is no dark state [i.e., for F → F + 1 transitions (Kazantsev
et al., 1984)].

23 The linear birefringence turns out not to be important for the co-
herence eﬀect because the refractive index is unity on resonance.
Note however, that at high light powers, circular birefringence
emerges as a dominant eﬀect responsible for nonlinear Faraday
rotation (see Sec. V.C).

HaL

j

z

B

z

B

j

z

B

j

x

y

x

y

x

HbL

j

z

B

j

z

B

j

z

B

x

E

y

x

E

y

x

E

20

y

y

FIG. 13 (a) Sequence showing the evolution of optically
pumped ground-state atomic alignment in a longitudinal mag-
netic ﬁeld for an F = 1 → F ′ = 0 transition at low light
powers (time proceeds from left to right). The distance from
the surface to the origin represents the probability of ﬁnding
the projection M = F along the radial direction (Appendix
B.2). In the ﬁrst plot, the atoms have been optically pumped
into an aligned state by x-polarized light. The magnetic ﬁeld
along ˆz creates a torque on the polarized atoms, causing the
alignment to precess (second and third plots). This rotates
the medium’s axis of linear dichroism, which is observed as a
rotation of the polarization of transmitted light by an angle
ϕ with respect to the initial light polarization. (b) Sequence
showing the evolution of the same ground state atomic align-
ment in a longitudinal magnetic ﬁeld for high light power. The
light frequency is slightly detuned from resonance to allow for
a nonzero light shift. The combined action of the magnetic
and light ﬁelds produces orientation along the ˆz axis.

et al., 1993), even when complicated by the presence of
transverse magnetic ﬁelds (Budker et al., 1998a). To ac-
count for transverse ﬁelds, the model must include two
independent atomic subsamples with alignments corre-
sponding to polarizers with transmission axes directed
mutually perpendicularly. These subsamples arise due to
optical pumping through diﬀerent hyperﬁne transitions.
For zero transverse ﬁeld, the NMOE dependences on the
longitudinal magnetic ﬁeld for each of these subsamples
have symmetrical dispersive shapes of the same widths,
but of diﬀerent signs and magnitudes. Thus the resulting
sum curve has a symmetrical shape. If a transverse ﬁeld
is applied, the features for the two alignments acquire
diﬀerent asymmetrical shapes. This leads to the asym-
metrical sum curve seen in the experiments of Budker
et al. (1998a).

FIG. 12 An optically thin sample of aligned atoms precess-
ing in a magnetic ﬁeld can be thought of as a thin rotating
polaroid ﬁlm that is transparent to light polarized along its
axis (Ek), and slightly absorbent for the orthogonal polariza-
tion (E⊥). Ek and E⊥ are the light electric ﬁeld components.
The eﬀect of such a “polarizer” is to rotate light polarization
by an angle ϕ ∝ sin 2θ). The ﬁgure is drawn assuming that
a magnetic ﬁeld is directed along ˆz. Adapted from Budker
et al. (1999b).

the atomic medium as a layer of polarizing material like
a polaroid ﬁlm (Budker et al., 1999b; Kanorsky et al.,
1993). It is easy to show that the rotation of the “po-
larizer” around the z-axis causes the linear output po-
larization to be rotated by an angle proportional to the
optical density of the sample and to sin 2θ, where θ is
the angle between the transmission axis of the rotated
“polarizer” and the direction of initial light polarization
(Fig. V.B). In order to describe optical rotation of cw
laser light, one has to sum the eﬀect of atomic “polariz-
ers” continually produced by the light, each rotating for
a ﬁnite time and then relaxing.24 Using this model, one
can show (Kanorsky et al., 1993; Weis et al., 1993c) that
for suﬃciently low light power and magnetic ﬁeld, the ro-
tation due to the coherence eﬀect is once again described
by Eq. (2), but now the relevant relaxation rate is that
of the ground state alignment.

Calculations based on the rotating polarizer model re-
produce the magnitude and the characteristic details of
the low-power line-shape of NMOE quite well (Kanorsky

24 In the “transit” eﬀect, at low light power, this time is the atoms’
time of ﬂight between pumping and probing, either within one
laser beam (Sec. VIII.A) or between two (Sec. VIII.C). In the
“wall-induced Ramsey eﬀect,” atoms leave the laser beam af-
ter optical pumping and travel about the cell, returning to the
beam after colliding with the antirelaxation-coated cell walls
(Sec. VIII.E). The relaxation time is thus ultimately determined
by collisional relaxation and spin exchange.

C. Alignment-to-orientation conversion

In Sec. V.B, the coherence NMOE were described as
arising due to Larmor precession of optically induced
atomic polarization [Fig. V.C(a)]. However, for suﬃ-
ciently strong light intensities—when the light shifts be-
come comparable to or exceed the ground state relaxation

rate—a more complicated evolution of the atomic polar-
ization state occurs (Budker et al., 2000a). Under these
conditions, the combined action of the magnetic and op-
tical electric ﬁelds causes atoms to acquire orientation
along the direction of the magnetic ﬁeld, in a process
known as alignment-to-orientation conversion (AOC). As
discussed in Sec. II.A, an atomic sample oriented along
the direction of light propagation causes optical rotation
via circular birefringence, since the refractive indices for
σ+ and σ− light are diﬀerent.

→

The evolution of atomic polarization leading to AOC-
F ′ = 0
related NMOR is illustrated for an F = 1
transition in Fig. V.C(b).
In the ﬁrst plot, the atoms
have been optically pumped into an aligned state by
x-polarized light (they have been pumped out of the
“bright” x-absorbing state into the dark states). If the
atomic alignment is parallel to the optical electric ﬁeld,
the light shifts have no eﬀect on the atomic polarization—
they merely shift the energies of the bright and dark
states relative to each other. However, when the mag-
netic ﬁeld along ˆz causes the alignment to precess, the
atoms evolve into a superposition of the bright and dark
states (which are split by the light shifts), so optical-
electric-ﬁeld-induced quantum beats occur. These quan-
tum beats produce atomic orientation along ˆz (appearing
in the second plot and growing in the third plot) causing
optical rotation due to circular birefringence.

×

The atomic orientation produced by AOC is propor-
E, where P is the macroscopic induced
tional to P
E is
electric-dipole moment (Eq. 7). The quantity P
proportional to the light shift, which has an antisymmet-
ric dependence on detuning of the light from the atomic
resonance. Thus (in the Doppler-free case), net orien-
tation can only be produced when light is detuned from
resonance. This is in contrast to NMOR at low light pow-
ers, which is maximum when light is tuned to the center
of a Doppler-free resonance.

×

It turns out that in applications to magnetometry (Sec.
XII.A), the light power for which optimum magnetomet-
ric sensitivity is obtained is suﬃcient to produce signiﬁ-
cant AOC, so this eﬀect is important for understanding
the properties of an NMOR-based magnetometer. For
example, if two atomic species (e.g., Rb and Cs) are
employed in an NMOR-based magnetometer, AOC gen-
erates a longitudinal spin polarization. Spin-exchange
collisions can then couple the polarizations of the two
atomic species. [Related AOC-induced coupling of polar-
ization of diﬀerent ground-state hfs components in 85Rb
was studied by Yashchuk et al. (1999b)].

Although the phenomenon of AOC has been studied in
a variety of diﬀerent contexts (Dovator and Okunevich,
2001; Hilborn et al., 1994; Kuntz et al., 2002; Lombardi,
1969; Pinard and Aminoﬀ, 1982), its role in NMOE was
only recently recognized by Okunevich (2000) and Bud-
ker et al. (2000a). However, as is usual with “new”
phenomena, a closely related discussion can be found in
the classic literature (Cohen-Tannoudji and Dupont-Roc,
1969).

21

VI. SYMMETRY CONSIDERATIONS IN LINEAR AND
NONLINEAR MAGNETO-OPTICAL EFFECTS

The interaction of

light with a dielectric medium
is characterized by the electric polarizability of the
medium, which may be equivalently described by vari-
ous frequency-dependent complex parameters: the elec-
tric susceptibility (χ), the dielectric permittivity (ε) and
the index of refraction (˜n). The imaginary parts of these
quantities determine light absorption by the medium,
while their real parts describe the dispersion, i.e., the
phase shifts that a light wave traversing the medium ex-
periences. For isotropic media, the above parameters
are scalar quantities and the interaction of the medium
with the light is independent of the light polarization.
In anisotropic media, the interaction parameters are ten-
sors, and the incident optical ﬁeld and the induced elec-
tric polarization are no longer parallel to each other. The
induced polarization acts as a source of a new optical
ﬁeld with a polarization (and amplitude) that diﬀers from
the incident ﬁeld and which adds coherently to this ﬁeld
as light propagates through the medium. This leads to
macroscopic phenomena such as dichroism and birefrin-
gence. Thus linear and nonlinear magneto-optical eﬀects
in vapors can be regarded as the result of the symme-
try breaking of an initially isotropic medium due to its
interaction with an external magnetic ﬁeld, and for the
nonlinear eﬀects, intense polarized light.

An incident light ﬁeld propagating along k can be writ-
ten as a superposition of optical eigenmodes (i.e., waves
that traverse the medium without changing their state
of polarization, experiencing only attenuation and phase
shifts) determined by the symmetry properties of the
medium. Suppose that the medium is symmetric about
k, and that the light is weak enough so that it does not
aﬀect the optical properties of the medium. Then there
is no preferred axis orthogonal to k, so the optical eigen-
modes must be left- and right-circularly polarized waves.
If, in addition, the medium has the symmetry of an ax-
ial vector directed along k (generated, for example, by a
magnetic ﬁeld in the Faraday geometry), the symmetry
between the two eigenmodes is broken and the medium
can cause diﬀerential dispersion of the eigenmodes (cir-
cular birefringence) leading to optical rotation, and dif-
ferential absorption (circular dichroism) causing the light
to acquire elliptical polarization (Fig. I).

If the medium does possess a preferred axis orthog-
onal to k (generated, for example, by a magnetic ﬁeld
in the Voigt geometry), the eigenmodes must be ﬁelds
linearly polarized along and perpendicular to the pre-
ferred axis. There is clearly asymmetry between the two
eigenmodes; the medium possesses linear birefringence
and dichroism.25 Since changing the sign of the mag-

25 The eﬀect of deﬂection of a linearly polarized light beam by a
medium with a transverse axial symmetry was discussed in detail

netic ﬁeld does not reverse the asymmetry between the
eigenmodes, there should be no magneto-optical eﬀects
that are linear in the applied ﬁeld. Indeed, the lowest-
order Voigt eﬀect is proportional to B2.

If the light ﬁeld is strong enough to alter the medium
susceptibility, it imposes the symmetry of the optical ﬁeld
onto the medium, i.e., if the light is linearly polarized, the
eigenmodes are linearly polarized waves. In the absence
of a magnetic ﬁeld, the input light ﬁeld is an eigenmode,
and no rotation or ellipticity is induced. However, if a
weak magnetic ﬁeld is present (and the light ﬁeld is not
too strong), it eﬀectively rotates the axis of symmetry
of the medium, changing the polarization of the eigen-
modes. The input light ﬁeld is no longer an eigenmode,
and rotation can occur. At high light powers, the com-
bined optical and magnetic ﬁelds cause a more compli-
cated evolution to occur (Sec. V.C).

Consideration of the symmetry of the medium can be
used to choose the quantization axis that is most conve-
nient for the theoretical description of a particular eﬀect.
The choice of the orientation of the quantization axis is
in principle arbitrary, but in many situations calculations
can be greatly simpliﬁed when the quantization axis is
chosen along one of the symmetry axes of the system.
Thus for the linear Faraday and Voigt eﬀects, a natural
choice is to orient ˆz parallel to the magnetic ﬁeld. For the
nonlinear eﬀects with low-power linearly polarized light,
on the other hand, it may be advantageous to choose the
quantization axis along the light polarization direction.

VII. THEORETICAL MODELS

The ﬁrst theoretical treatment of NMOE was per-
formed by Giraud-Cotton et al. (1982b,a, 1985a,b, 1980)
who obtained expressions to lowest order in the Rabi fre-
quency (atom-light coupling) for the nonlinear Faraday
eﬀect.
In this perturbative approach NMOR is viewed
as a χ(3) process (Sec. III.A), and the NMOR angle
is hence proportional to the light intensity. Although
the model presented by Giraud-Cotton et al. is valid for
arbitrary angular momenta, it can not be directly ap-
plied to alkali atoms, because it considers only open sys-
tems, i.e., two-level atoms with Zeeman substructure in
which the excited states decay to external levels. For
alkali atoms under monochromatic excitation, repopu-
lation and hyperﬁne pumping eﬀects have to be taken
into account (only the depopulation eﬀects were consid-
ered by Giraud-Cotton et al.). Chen (1989); Chen et al.
(1990) applied the perturbation method developed by
F ′ = 0
Drake (1986); Drake et al. (1988) for F = 1
transitions to the multilevel case of Cs. They extended
the results obtained by Giraud-Cotton et al. by including
repopulation eﬀects, i.e., the transfer of coherences from

→

in Sec. II.D.2.

22

the excited state into the ground state by ﬂuorescence,
allowing the ﬁrst quantitative comparison of theoretical
predictions with experimental data. The agreement was
only partially satisfactory, since hyperﬁne pumping pro-
cesses were not properly treated—the important role they
played was not realized at the time. These processes were
later properly included in a calculation by Kanorsky et al.
(1993) (see Sec. VII.A), which turned out to be extremely
successful for the description of the coherence NMOE at
low light powers.

The steady-state density matrix equations for a transi-
tion subject to light and a static magnetic ﬁeld (Cohen-
Tannoudji, 1974) can be solved nonperturbatively to ob-
tain a theoretical description of the transit, Bennett
structure, and linear eﬀects for arbitrary light power.
This was done for systems consisting of two states with
low angular momentum (F, F ′ = 0, 1/2, 1) by Baird et al.
(1989); Davies et al. (1987); Fomichev (1991); Holmes
and Griﬃth (1995); Izmailov (1988); Kozlov (1989);
Schuller et al. (1987, 1989); Schuller and Stacey (1999);
Schuller et al. (1995). Good qualitative agreement with
experiments in samarium was demonstrated by Baird
et al. (1989); Davies et al. (1987); Kozlov (1989); Zetie
et al. (1992). The nonperturbative approach was general-
ized by Rochester et al. (2001) to systems with hyperﬁne
structure for calculation of self-rotation (Sec. XIII.C)
in Rb. This calculation (discussed in Sec. VII.B) was
applied to Faraday rotation, and quantitative agreement
with experiment was demonstrated (Budker et al., 2000a,
2002a).

A. Kanorsky-Weis approach to low-power nonlinear
magneto-optical rotation

The ﬁrst quantitative agreement between theory and
experiment for NMOE was achieved by Kanorsky et al.
(1993), who calculated Faraday rotation assuming both
a weak magnetic ﬁeld and low light power. Under these
conditions, the Bennett-structure (Sec. V.A) and lin-
ear (Sec. II.A) eﬀects, as well as saturation eﬀects and
alignment-to-orientation conversion (Sec. V.C) are negli-
gible. With these approximations, and with an appropri-
ate choice of quantization axis (Sec. VI), it is possible to
perform the calculation making no explicit use of sublevel
coherences. Optical-pumping rate equations for the sub-
level populations are solved, neglecting the eﬀect of the
magnetic ﬁeld, and then precession due to the magnetic
ﬁeld is taken into account. This procedure is a quanti-
tative version of the description of the coherence NMOE
as a three-stage process (Sec. V.B).

As described by Kanorsky et al. (1993), the complex
index of refraction for light of frequency ω and polariza-
tion ˆe can be written in terms of level populations:

˜n

1 =

−

2π
¯h

ρF M |h

F ′M ′
ˆe
|
∆

·
−

2
i|

,

d
F M
|
iγ0

XM,M ′

(15)

where d is the electric-dipole operator, ∆ is the light

frequency detuning from resonance, and ρF M are the
ground state Zeeman sublevel populations. The rotation
angle is given by

ϕ = Im

˜n⊥

sin 2θ,

(16)

˜nk −
(cid:0)

ωl
2c

(cid:1)

where l is the sample length and θ is the average orien-
tation of the axis of dichroism with respect to the linear
polarization. The angle θ is calculated by time-averaging
the contributions of individual atoms, each of which pre-
cesses in the magnetic ﬁeld before relaxing at rate γt,
with the result

ϕ = Im

˜n⊥

˜nk −
(cid:0)

(cid:1)

ωl
2c

x
x2 + 1

,

(17)

where the dimensionless parameter x = 2gµB/(¯hγt).

B. Density matrix calculations

23

an eﬀective area, and that the passage of atoms through
the laser beam can be described by one eﬀective relax-
ation rate γt. The time evolution of the atomic density
matrix ρ is given by the Liouville equation (see discussion
by, for example, Stenholm, 1984):

dρ
dt

1
i¯h

1
2 {

−

}

=

[H, ρ]

Γ, ρ

+ Λ,

(18)

·

d

−

where the square brackets denote the commutator and
the curly brackets the anticommutator. The total Hamil-
tonian H is the sum of the light-atom interaction Hamil-
E (where E is the electric ﬁeld vector,
tonian HL =
and d is the electric dipole operator), the magnetic ﬁeld-
B (where B is
atom interaction Hamiltonian HB =
the magnetic ﬁeld and µ is the magnetic moment), and
the unperturbed Hamiltonian H0. The Hamiltonian due
to interaction with a static electric ﬁeld can also be in-
cluded if necessary. Γ is the relaxation matrix (diagonal
in the collision-free approximation)

−

µ

·

This section describes a nonperturbative density ma-
trix calculation (Budker et al., 2000a, 2002a; Rochester
ξ′J ′ in the
et al., 2001) of NMOE for a transition ξJ
presence of nuclear spin I. Here J is total electronic an-
gular momentum, and ξ represents additional quantum
numbers. The calculation is carried out in the collision-
free approximation and assumes that atoms outside the
volume of the laser beam are unpolarized. Thus the cal-
culation is valid for an atomic beam or a cell without an-
tirelaxation wall coating containing a low-density vapor.
It is also assumed that light is of a uniform intensity over

→

ξJF M
h
ξ′J ′F ′M ′
Γ
|
h

ξJF M
Γ
|
|
ξ′J ′F ′M ′
|

i
i

= γt,
= γt + γ0.

(19)

Λ = Λ0 + Λrepop is the pumping term, where the diagonal
matrix

ξJF M
h

Λt
|

ξJF M
|

i

=

γtρ0
(2I + 1)(2J + 1)

(20)

describes incoherent ground state pumping (ρ0 is the
atomic density), and

ξJF M1|
h

Λrepop

ξJF M2i
|

= γ0

(2J ′ + 1)(2F + 1)

J F I
F ′ J ′ 1

2

(cid:27)

(cid:26)
J ′, M ′
|

1ih

XF ′
×

1,M ′
XM ′

2,q

J, M1, 1, q
h

J, M2, 1, q

J ′, M ′
2i
|

ρξ′J ′F ′M ′

1,ξ′J ′F ′M ′

2

,

(21)

. . .
h

describes repopulation due to spontaneous relaxation
from the upper level (see, for example, discussion by
are the
Rautian and Shalagin, 1991). Here
Clebsch-Gordan coeﬃcients and the curly brackets rep-
resent the six-J symbol. A solution for the steady-state
density matrix can be found by applying the rotating-
wave approximation and setting dρ/dt = 0. For the
alkali-atom D lines, one can take advantage of the well-
resolved ground-state hyperﬁne structure by treating
transitions arising from diﬀerent ground-state hyperﬁne
sublevels separately and then summing the results.

. . .
i

|

The electric ﬁeld vector is written (see discussion by,

for example, Huard, 1997)

E =

1
2

E0eiφ(cos ϕ cos ǫ
h
1
+
2

−

i sin ϕ sin ǫ)ei(ωt−kz) + c.c.

ˆx

i
E0eiφ(sin ϕ cos ǫ + i cos ϕ sin ǫ)ei(ωt−kz) + c.c.
(22)
i
h

ˆy,

where ω is the light frequency, k = ω/c is the vacuum
E0 is the electric ﬁeld amplitude, ϕ is the
wave number,
polarization angle, ǫ is the ellipticity (arctangent of the
ratio of the major and minor axes of the polarization
ellipse), and φ is the overall phase (the ﬁeld can also be
written in terms of the Stokes parameters—see Appendix

24

(24a)

(24b)

(24c)

(24d)

A). By substituting (22) into the wave equation

ω2
c2 +

d2
dz2

E =

4π
c2

d2
dt2

−

P,

(cid:18)

(cid:19)

(23)

where P = Tr ρd is the polarization of the medium, the
absorption, rotation, phase shift, and change of ellipticity

per unit distance for an optically thin medium can be
found in terms of the density matrix elements:

dϕ
dz
d
E0
dz
dφ
dz
dǫ
dz

=

=

=

=

−

−

2πω
E0c
2πω
c
2πω
E0c
−
2πω
E0c

sec 2ǫ[cos ϕ(P1 sin ǫ + P4 cos ǫ) + sin ϕ(

P2 cos ǫ + P3 sin ǫ)],

[sin ϕ(

P1 sin ǫ + P4 cos ǫ) + cos ϕ(P2 cos ǫ + P3 sin ǫ)],

−

sec 2ǫ[cos ϕ(P1 cos ǫ + P4 sin ǫ) + sin ϕ(

P2 sin ǫ + P3 cos ǫ)],

[sin ϕ(P1 cos ǫ + P4 sin ǫ) + cos ϕ(P2 sin ǫ

P3 cos ǫ)],

−

−

−

where the components of polarization are deﬁned by

P =

1
2

h
+

(P1 −
1
2

(P3 −
h

iP2)ei(ωt−kz) + c.c.
i

ˆx

iP4)ei(ωt−kz) + c.c.
i

ˆy.

(25)

Since we neglect collisions between atoms, the solutions
for a Doppler-free medium can be generalized to the case
of Doppler broadening by simply convolving the calcu-
lated spectra with a Gaussian function representing the
velocity distribution. In addition, an integration along
the light path can be performed to generalize the thin-
medium result to media of arbitrary optical thickness.

VIII. NONLINEAR MAGNETO-OPTICAL EFFECTS IN
SPECIFIC SITUATIONS

In preceding sections, we have outlined the basic
NMOE phenomenology and the methods used for the-
oretical description of these eﬀects. In this section, we
discuss the speciﬁc features of NMOE in a wide variety
of physical situations.

A. Buﬀer-gas-free uncoated vapor cells

1. Basic features

There have been numerous studies of NMOR in buﬀer-
gas-free vapor cells without antirelaxation coating (by,
for example, Barkov et al., 1989a; Budker et al., 2000a;
Kanorsky et al., 1993, and references therein). In alkali-
atom cells at room temperature, the atomic density is low
enough so that the mean free path of the atoms is orders
of magnitude larger than the cell dimensions. In addition,

because collisions with the walls of the cell destroy atomic
polarization, atoms entering the light beam are unpolar-
ized. In such cells, the coherence NMOR (Sec. V.B) is
due to the “transit” eﬀect—the pumping, precession, and
subsequent probing of atoms during a single pass through
the laser beam [Bennett-structure-related NMOR (Sec.
V.A) can also be observed in these cells]. Only the re-
gion illuminated by the light beam need be considered
in a calculation, and the relaxation rate of atomic coher-
ence is determined by the transit time of atoms through
the beam. Since velocity-changing collisions rarely oc-
cur, the atoms have a constant velocity as they make a
single pass through the light beam. Thus when calculat-
ing NMOR spectra (Sec. VII), averaging over the atomic
velocity distribution is equivalent to averaging over the
Doppler-free spectral proﬁles. At suﬃciently low light
power, the coherence transit eﬀect is well described by
the Kanorsky-Weis model (Sec. VII.A). At higher light
powers, where saturation eﬀects and the alignment-to-
orientation conversion eﬀect (Sec. V.C) are important, a
density-matrix approach (Sec. VII.B) can be used to de-
scribe both the coherence and Bennett-structure eﬀects
in uncoated cells.

In addition to being many orders of magnitude greater
for small ﬁelds, NMOR can have a considerably diﬀer-
ent spectrum than linear magneto-optical rotation (Sec.
II). One of the signature features of the low-light-power
NMOR transit eﬀect is the dependence of the sign of
optical rotation on the nature of the transition (Fig.
VIII.A.1). The sign of optical rotation for F
1, F
→
−
transitions is opposite to that for closed F
F + 1 tran-
sitions (for ground states with the same Land´e factors).
This is because linearly polarized light resonant with
F
1, F transitions pumps atoms into an aligned
dark state (see Sec. V.B), while atoms are pumped on
F + 1 transitions into a bright state which in-
F

→

→

−

F

F

→

25

many years. All theories described in the literature pre-
dicted the shape of the ϕ(B) dependence to be a disper-
sive Lorentzian [Eq. (17)], linear near the zero crossing at
B = 0. However, experimental measurement of ϕ(B) for
small B revealed a slight deviation from this anticipated
behavior: the signal had higher than expected derivative
at B = 0.

This observation was later explained as follows. The
shape of ϕ(B) was expected to be Lorentzian as a con-
sequence of an assumed exponential relaxation of atomic
coherences in time. In room-temperature buﬀer-gas-free
vapor cells, however, the width of the NMOR resonance
was determined by the eﬀective relaxation due to the
ﬁnite interaction time of the pumped atoms with the
light beam. The nonexponential character of this ef-
fective relaxation led to the observed discrepancy. The
simplicity of the theoretical model of the NMOR tran-
sit eﬀect developed by Kanorsky et al. allowed them to
treat these time-of-ﬂight eﬀects quantitatively by aver-
aging over the Gaussian-distributed light beam inten-
sity and the Maxwellian velocity distribution. Their
approach produced quasianalytical expressions for ϕ(B)
which were beautifully conﬁrmed in an experiment by
Pﬂeghaar et al. (1993).

3. NMOE in optically thick vapors

For a given medium used in studies of near-resonant
NMOE, the optimum optical thickness depends on the
light power employed; if most of the light is absorbed
upon traversal of the medium, there is a loss in statisti-
cal sensitivity. At low light power, when the saturation
parameter κ (Sec. III.B) is not much greater than unity,
it is generally useful to use samples of no more than a
few absorption lengths. However, at high light powers,
the medium may bleach due to optical pumping, and
greater optical thicknesses may be used to enhance the
NMOE without unduly compromising statistical sensitiv-
ity. Nonlinear Faraday rotation produced by a optically
thick vapor of rubidium was studied by Matsko et al.
(2001b); Novikova et al. (2001b); Novikova and Welch
(2002); Sautenkov et al. (2000). Novikova et al. (2001b)
used a 5-cm-long vapor cell containing 87Rb and a 2.5-
mW, 2-mm-diameter laser beam tuned to the maximum
of the NMOR D1-line spectrum. They measured max-
imum polarization rotation ϕmax (with respect to laser
frequency and magnetic ﬁeld) as a function of atomic
density. It was found that ϕmax increases essentially lin-
1012 cm−3. At higher densities,
early up to n
dϕmax/dn decreases and eventually becomes negative.
The maximum observed rotation,
10 rad, was obtained
with magnetic ﬁeld
0.6 G. (This shows the eﬀect of
power broadening on the magnetic-ﬁeld dependence; at
low light power, the maximum rotation would occur at a
magnetic ﬁeld about an order of magnitude smaller.)

3.5

∼

≃

∼

×

FIG. 14 Comparison of experimental NMOR spectra ob-
tained by Budker et al. (2000a) to density-matrix calcula-
tions performed in the same work for a natural mixture of
Rb isotopes contained in an uncoated buﬀer-gas-free vapor
cell. Dots – data points, solid curves – theory (without free
parameters). Oﬀset vertical bars indicate the central frequen-
cies and calculated relative contributions of diﬀerent hyperﬁne
components (F → F ′) to the overall rotation. Laser detuning
is relative to the D2 line center. Magnetic ﬁeld is ∼0.1 G (at
which NMOR is relatively large and coherence eﬀects dom-
inate), laser beam diameter is ∼3.5 mm, and Rb density is
∼1010 cm−3. Residual discrepancies between data and theory
may be due to nonuniform spatial distribution of light inten-
sity. Note that at low light power (a), the sign of rotation for
F → F + 1 transitions is opposite to that for F → F − 1, F
transitions, whereas at high light power (b) the sign of rota-
tion is the same for all hyperﬁne transitions.

teracts with the light ﬁeld more strongly (Kazantsev
et al., 1984). Thus when the magnetic ﬁeld causes the
ground-state alignment to precess, the transmission of
light polarized along the initial axis of light polariza-
tion decreases for F
1, F transitions, and in-
F
creases for F
F + 1 transitions. By considering the
“rotating polarizer” model (Fig. V.B), one can see that
the sign of rotation is opposite in the two cases (for an
F
F + 1 transition, the initial “polarizer” is crossed
with the light polarization). At higher light powers at
which alignment-to-orientation becomes the dominant
mechanism for NMOR (Sec. V.C), the sign of optical
rotation is the same for all types of transitions.

→

→

→

−

2. Peculiarities in the magnetic ﬁeld dependence

A peculiar property of the NMOR transit eﬀect sig-
nal, observed by Chen (1989), remained unexplained for

A model theory of NMOR in optically thick media,
accounting for the change in light power and polariza-

tion along the light path and for the high-light-power
eﬀects (see Sec. V.C), was developed by several authors
(e.g, Matsko et al., 2002a; Rochester and Budker, 2002,
and references therein). However, a complete theoreti-
cal description of NMOR in dense media must also con-
sider radiation trapping of photons spontaneously emit-
ted by atoms interacting with the laser light. Matsko
et al. (2001b, 2002a) concluded that for densities such
that the photon absorption length is comparable to the
smallest dimension of the cell, radiation trapping leads to
an increase in the eﬀective ground-state relaxation rate.

B. Time-domain experiments

In many NMOE experiments, the same laser beam
serves as both pump and probe light. More complex ex-
periments use separate pump and probe beams that can
have diﬀerent frequencies, spatial positions, directions of
propagation, polarizations, and/or temporal structures.
A wealth of pump-probe experimental techniques in the
time and frequency domains have been developed, includ-
ing spin nutation, free induction decay, spin echoes, co-
herent Raman beats or Raman heterodyne spectroscopy,
to name just a few.26 In this section, we give an exam-
ple of an experiment in the time domain; in Sec. VIII.C
we discuss frequency domain experiments with spatially
separated light ﬁelds.

Zibrov and Matsko (2002); Zibrov et al. (2001) applied
two light pulses to a 87Rb vapor in sequence, the ﬁrst
strong and linearly polarized and the second weak and
circularly polarized. A particular elliptical polarization
of the transmitted light from the second pulse was de-
tected. When a longitudinal magnetic ﬁeld was applied
to the cell, the resulting intensity displayed oscillations
(within the duration of the probe pulse) at twice the
Larmor frequency. The authors interpreted these exper-
iments in terms of Raman-scattering of the probe light
from atoms with coherent Zeeman-split lower-state sub-
levels.

Here we point out that the “rotating polarizer” pic-
ture of coherence NMOR discussed in Sec. V.B can be
used to provide an equivalent description of these experi-
ments. The linearly polarized pump pulse induces align-
ment and corresponding linear dichroism of the atomic
medium, i.e., prepares a polaroid out of the medium. The
polaroid proceeds to rotate at the Larmor frequency in
the presence of the magnetic ﬁeld. Circularly polarized
probe light incident on such a rotating polaroid produces
linearly polarized light at the output whose polarization
plane rotates at the same frequency. This is the same
as saying there are two circularly polarized components
with a frequency oﬀset.

26 For a detailed discussion we refer the reader to a comprehensive
overview of the underlying mechanisms and applications in a
book by Suter (1997).

26

FIG. 15 Faraday rotation technique utilizing separated light
beams and an atomic beam. The resonance line width is
determined by the time-of-ﬂight between the pump and the
probe beams. Variations of this technique include the use of
circularly polarized light both for pumping and probing, and
the detection of absorption or induced ellipticity instead of
polarization rotation.

C. Atomic beams and separated light ﬁelds,
Faraday-Ramsey Spectroscopy

In the coherence eﬀects (Sec. V.B), the resonance
width is determined by the relaxation rate of ground-
state polarization.
In the transit eﬀect, in particular,
this relaxation rate is given by the time of ﬂight of atoms
between optical pumping and probing. When one laser
beam is used for both pumping and probing, this time can
be increased, narrowing the resonance, by increasing the
diameter of the beam. Another method of increasing the
transit time, however, is to use two beams, spatially sep-
arating the pump and probe regions. For this technique,
the model (Sec. V.B) of the coherence eﬀects in terms
of three sequential steps (pumping, precession, probing)
becomes an exact description.

As this experimental setup (Fig. VIII.C) bears some
similarities to the conventional Ramsey arrangement (see
Sec. VIII.C.3) and as the coherence detection in the
probe region involves polarimetric detection of polariza-
tion rotation, this technique is called Faraday-Ramsey
spectroscopy.

1. Overview of experiments

Several experiments studying NMOE using spatially
separated light ﬁelds have been performed, using var-
ious detection techniques. The ﬁrst atomic beam ex-
periment of this sort was performed by Schieder and
Walther (1974) with a Na beam using ﬂuorescence de-
tection. Mlynek et al. (1988) observed Ramsey fringes
in a Sm beam on the 570.68-nm F = 1
F = 0 tran-
sition using Raman heterodyne spectroscopy, a technique
involving application of both light and rf magnetic ﬁelds
to the atoms (as in work by, for example, Suter, 1997),
with light beam separations of up to L = 2.2 cm. The
fringe widths were found to scale as L−1 with the beam

→

separation, as anticipated, but signal quality was strongly
degraded as L increased (Mlynek et al., 1987).27

The ﬁrst beam experiment with a long (34.5-cm)
precession region was done by Theobald et al. (1991)
using D2-line excitation on a Cs beam with ﬂuores-
cence detection.
In similar work, using detection of
forward-scattered light rather than ﬂuorescence moni-
toring, Schuh et al. (1993); Weis et al. (1993b) applied
pump-probe spectroscopy to a Rb beam using D2-line
excitation. Two experiments were performed with in-
teraction lengths of L = 5 cm (Schuh et al., 1993) and
L = 30 cm (Weis et al., 1993b), respectively. Improving
the sensitivity by going to longer interaction lengths is
diﬃcult because of signal loss due to the ﬁnite atomic-
beam divergence. This can be counteracted by laser col-
limation of the beam (this technique is being used in
work towards a 2-m apparatus at U. Fribourg), or by
using atoms that are free-falling from a magneto-optical
trap or an atomic fountain (Sec. VIII.H). Hypersonic
and laser-slowed beams can also be used to increase the
atomic ﬂux and transit time, respectively.

2. Line shape, applications

In Faraday-Ramsey spectroscopy, one measures the
magneto-optical rotation angle ϕ of the linearly polar-
ized probe beam. For a beam with Maxwellian velocity
distribution, the magnetic-ﬁeld dependence of ϕ is ob-
tained from the three-step model discussed in Sec. V.B
in a manner similar to that described in Sec. VII.A:

ϕ(B)

∞

sin

B
R
0

1
u

(cid:18)

B

∝

0
Z

(cid:19)

+ 2θpp

u2e−u2

du.

(26)

where θpp is the relative orientation of the pump and
probe polarizations, u = v/v0 is the dimensionless veloc-
ity, and v0 is the most probable velocity in the atomic
beam oven, and

R
0 =

B

¯hv0
2gµL

(27)

is a scaling ﬁeld (L is the distance between pump and
probe beams). The line shape is a damped oscillatory
Ramsey fringe pattern centered at B = 0 (the scal-
R
0 is a measure of the fringe width). Figure
ing ﬁeld

B

27 Other examples of early work in the ﬁeld are the work of Bertuc-
celi et al. (1986), who used ﬂuorescence detection to observe non-
linear level-crossing Ramsey fringes in a metastable Ca beam, the
work of Nakayama et al. (1980), who observed Ramsey fringes
on the D1 line in a Na vapor cell using laser beams separated
by up to 10 mm, and an experiment performed by Borghs et al.
(1984) in the time domain using a monokinetic Ba+ beam, which
showed a large number of higher-order fringes, normally damped
in thermal beams due to the large velocity spread. This last ex-
periment determined the ratio of g-factors of the 5d 2D3/2 and
5d 2D5/2 states of Ba+.

27

FIG. 16 Experimental Faraday-Ramsey signal from a thermal
Cs beam (T = 400 K) and a precession length of L = 30 cm.
Polarimetric detection of the rotation angle ϕ of the probe
beam is used.

VIII.C.2 shows an experimental Faraday-Ramsey spec-
trum recorded with a thermal Cs beam (T = 400 K) with
R
0 = 170 µG.
a precession region of L = 30 cm, for which

B

Faraday-Ramsey spectroscopy has proven to be an ex-
tremely sensitive tool for investigating spin-coherence
perturbations by magnetic and/or electric28 ﬁelds under
collision-free conditions. Any additional external pertur-
bation which aﬀects spin coherence will lead to an ad-
ditional phase shift in the fringe pattern given by Eq.
(26). Faraday-Ramsey spectroscopy has been applied in
a variety of situations, including an investigation of the
Aharonov-Casher eﬀect in atoms (Sec. XII.C), a preci-
sion electric ﬁeld calibration (Rasbach et al., 2001), and
a measurement of the forbidden electric tensor polariz-
abilities (Sec. XII.D) of the ground state of Cs (Rasbach
et al., 2001; Weis, 2001). Applications of the technique
of Faraday-Ramsey spectroscopy with atomic beams to
the search for parity- and time-reversal-invariance vio-
lation, in particular, for a permanent electric dipole mo-
ment (EDM, Sec. XII.B) have also been discussed (Schuh
et al., 1993; Weis et al., 1993b). Note, however, that
a competitive EDM experiment would need a very in-
tense optically thick atomic beam, such as the source
built for experiments with atomic thallium by DeMille
et al. (1994).

28 Electric interactions do not couple to spin directly; however, they
aﬀect the orbital angular momentum. Thus spin coherences are
aﬀected by an electric ﬁeld via spin-orbit and hyperﬁne interac-
tions.

3. Connection with the Ramsey separated oscillatory ﬁeld
method

Faraday-Ramsey spectroscopy is in fact a Ramsey
double-resonance technique (Ramsey, 1990) without os-
cillating ﬁelds.
In conventional Ramsey spectroscopy,
a spin-polarized beam traverses two identical spatially-
separated regions in which the particles are exposed to
phase-locked radio-frequency magnetic ﬁelds B1(t) oscil-
lating at the same frequency. The whole arrangement
is in a homogeneous ﬁeld B0.
In the ﬁrst rf region a
π/2-pulse tips the spins to an orientation perpendicu-
lar to B0. After precessing freely the spin is projected
back onto its original direction in the second region. The
rf regions thus play the role of start/stop pulses for the
spin precession. The polarization recovered in the second
rf region depends on the phase accumulated during the
precession.
In Faraday-Ramsey spectroscopy, the start
pulse is provided by an optical-pumping light pulse (in
the atomic frame of reference) which orients the spin so
that it can precess, and the weak probe pulse detects
the precession angle. In Ramsey spectroscopy the rela-
tive phase φrf of the rf ﬁelds determines the symmetry
of the fringe pattern (absorptive for φrf = 0, dispersive
for φrf = π/2), while in Faraday-Ramsey spectroscopy,
this role is played by the relative orientations of the light
polarizations θpp.

D. Experiments with buﬀer-gas cells

1. Warm buﬀer gas

Early studies of NMOR by Baird et al. (1989); Barkov
et al. (1989a); Davies et al. (1987) on transitions in
Sm showed that nonlinear eﬀects are extremely sensitive
to the presence of buﬀer gas. The Bennett-structure-
related eﬀects (Sec. V.A) are suppressed when the peaks
and holes in the velocity distribution are washed out
by velocity-changing collisions. Generally, coherence ef-
fects (Sec. V.B) are also easily destroyed by depolarizing
buﬀer-gas collisions. However, a very important excep-
tion is eﬀects with atoms with total electronic angular
momentum in the ground state J = 1/2, e.g., the alkali
atoms. For such atoms, the cross-sections for depolar-
izing buﬀer-gas collisions are typically 4 to 10 orders of
magnitude smaller than those for velocity-changing colli-
sions (Walker, 1989; Walker et al., 1997). This suppres-
sion allows long-lived ground-state polarization in the
presence of buﬀer gas and also serves to prevent depolar-
izing wall collisions (Happer, 1972). Recently, coherent
dark resonances (Sec. XIII.A) with widths as narrow as
30 Hz were observed by (Brandt et al., 1997) in Cs and
by (Erhard and Helm, 2001; Erhard et al., 2000) in Rb
using neon-buﬀer-gas vapor cells at room temperature.

Novikova et al. (2001a); Novikova and Welch (2002);
Zibrov and Matsko (2002); Zibrov et al. (2001) have re-
cently studied NMOE in buﬀer-gas cells; spectral line

28

shapes of optical rotation quite diﬀerent from those seen
in buﬀer-gas-free cells and atomic beams were observed
(Novikova et al., 2001a). This is because of a diﬀerence
in the way atoms in diﬀerent velocity groups contribute
to optical rotation. A similar eﬀect, discussed in Sec.
VIII.E, has been observed by Budker et al. (2000b) in
paraﬃn-coated cells.

2. Cryogenic buﬀer gas

Cold-buﬀer-gas systems are currently under investiga-
tion by Hatakeyama et al. (2002, 2000); Kimball et al.
(2001); Yashchuk et al. (2002b) as a method of reduc-
ing collisional relaxation. At low temperatures, atomic
in
collisions approach the S-wave scattering regime,
which spin relaxation is suppressed. Theoretical esti-
mates of spin relaxation in spin-rotation interactions by
Sushkov (2001), based on the approach of Walker et al.
(1997), suggest that for the Cs-He case, a reduction of
the relaxation cross-section from its room temperature
value by a factor of
20–50 may be expected at liquid-
Nitrogen temperatures. Recently, Hatakeyama et al.
(2000) showed experimentally that at temperatures be-
low approximately 2 K, the spin relaxation cross-section
of Rb atoms in collisions with He-buﬀer-gas atoms is or-
ders of magnitude smaller than its value at room tem-
perature. The results of Hatakeyama et al. imply that
relaxation times of minutes or even longer (correspond-
ing to resonance widths on the order of 10 mHz) can
be obtained. Such narrow resonances may be applied
to atomic tests of discrete symmetries (Sec. XII.B) and
to very sensitive measurements of magnetic ﬁelds (Sec.
XII.A).

∼

The crucial experimental challenge with these systems
is creating, in the cold buﬀer gas, atomic vapor den-
sities comparable to those of room temperature exper-
iments, i.e., on the order of 1010–1012 cm−3. To ac-
complish this, Hatakeyama et al. use light-induced des-
orption of alkali atoms from the surface of the liquid
He ﬁlm inside their cell [this is presumably similar to
light-induced desorption observed with siloxane (by, for
example, Atutov et al., 1999) and paraﬃn (Alexandrov
et al., 2001; Kimball et al., 2001) antirelaxation coatings].
Hatakeyama et al. can successfully29 inject Rb atoms into
the He gas by irradiating the cell with about 200 mW of
(750-nm) Ti:sapphire laser radiation for 10 s. Yashchuk
et al. (2002b) use a signiﬁcantly diﬀerent method to in-
ject atoms into cold He buﬀer gas—laser evaporation of
micron-sized droplets falling through the gas (see also
discussion by Kimball et al., 2001).

29 It turns out that the injection eﬃciency decreases with repeti-
tions of the injection cycle. It is found that the eﬃciency recov-
ers when the cell is heated to room temperature and then cooled
again. Hatakeyama et al. (2002) report that they cannot inject
Cs atoms with their method.

29

collisions.30 In antirelaxation coated cells, the precession
stage of the three-step coherence eﬀect process (Sec. V.B)
occurs after the atom is optically pumped and then leaves
the light beam. The atom travels about the cell, undergo-
ing many [up to 104 (Alexandrov et al., 1996; Alexandrov
and Bonch-Bruevich, 1992; Bouchiat and Brossel, 1966)]
velocity-changing wall collisions, before it ﬂies through
the light beam once more and the probe interaction oc-
curs. Thus the time between pumping and probing can
be much longer for the wall-induced Ramsey eﬀect than
in the transit eﬀect (Sec. VIII.A), and the correspond-
ing features in the magnetic ﬁeld dependence of NMOR
much narrower.

Budker et al. (1998a) performed an investigation of the
wall-induced Ramsey eﬀect in NMOR using Rb atoms
contained in high quality paraﬃn-coated cells (Alexan-
drov et al., 1996). The apparatus employed in these
investigations is discussed in detail in Sec. XI.A. Bud-
ker et al. (1998a) observed
1-µG-width features in the
magnetic-ﬁeld dependence of NMOR.

∼

Budker et al. (2000b) investigated the dependence
on atomic density and light frequency and intensity of
NMOR due to the wall-induced Ramsey eﬀect. The
NMOR spectra for the wall-induced Ramsey eﬀect were
found to be quite diﬀerent from those for the transit eﬀect
(Fig. VIII.E.1). In the wall-induced Ramsey eﬀect, atoms
undergo many velocity-changing collisions between pump
and probe interactions. When Doppler-broadened hyper-
ﬁne transitions overlap, it is possible for the light to be
resonant with one transition during pumping and another
transition during probing. Both the ground-state polar-
ization produced by optical pumping and the eﬀect on the
light of the atomic polarization that has evolved in the
magnetic ﬁeld depend on the nature of the transition. For
F ′ = 2, 3 component of the 85Rb D1 line,
the F = 3
the contribution to optical rotation from atoms pumped
and probed on diﬀerent transitions has opposite sign as
that from atoms pumped and probed on the same tran-
sition. Thus the wall-induced Ramsey NMOR spectrum
consists of two peaks, since the contributions to optical
rotation nearly cancel at the center of the Doppler proﬁle.
In the transit eﬀect for buﬀer-gas-free cells, in contrast,
atoms remain in a particular velocity group during both
optical pumping and probing. The transit-eﬀect spec-
trum has a single peak because for each atom light is
resonant with the same transition during both pumping
and probing.

→

Budker et al. (2000b) also found that at the light in-
tensity and frequency at which highest magnetometric
sensitivity is achieved, the sign of optical rotation is op-

30 It is interesting to note that Ramsey himself (Kleppner, Ramsey,
and Fjelstadt, 1958), in order to decrease the resonance widths
in experiments with separated oscillatory ﬁelds, constructed a
“storage box” with Teﬂon-coated walls in which atoms would
bounce around for a period of time before emerging to pass
through the second oscillatory ﬁeld.

FIG. 17 Longitudinal magnetic ﬁeld dependence of optical
rotation in a paraﬃn-coated 85Rb-vapor cell (Budker et al.,
1998a). The background slope is due to the Bennett-structure
eﬀect. The dispersion-like structure is due to the transit ef-
fect. The inset shows the near-zero Bz-ﬁeld behavior at a
2 × 105 magniﬁcation of the magnetic ﬁeld scale. Light inten-
sity is ∼100 µW cm2. The laser is tuned ∼150 MHz to the
high frequency side of the F = 3 → F ′ absorption peak.

E. Antirelaxation-coated cells

long

provide

Antirelaxation-coated

spin-
cells
relaxation times due to the greatly reduced rate of
depolarization in wall collisions. Three nonlinear eﬀects
can be observed “nested” in the magnetic-ﬁeld depen-
dence of NMOR produced by such a cell (Fig. VIII.E).
The widest feature is due to Bennett-structure eﬀect
(Sec. V.A), followed by the feature due to the transit
eﬀect, which also occurs in uncoated cells (Sec. VIII.A).
The narrowest feature is due to the wall-induced Ramsey
eﬀect, a variant of the separated-ﬁeld transit eﬀect in
which atoms leave the light beam after being optically
pumped and are later probed after colliding with the
cell walls and returning to the beam.

1. Experiments

In their early work on optical pumping, Robinson et al.
(1958) showed that by coating the walls of a vapor cell
with a chemically inert substance such as paraﬃn (chem-
ical formula CnH2n+2), the relaxation of atomic polariza-
tion due to wall collisions could be signiﬁcantly reduced.
Recently, working with a paraﬃn-coated Cs vapor cell,
Kanorskii et al. (1995) discovered a narrow feature (of
width
1 mG) in the magnetic-ﬁeld dependence of Fara-
day rotation. Kanorskii et al. (1995) described the fea-
ture as a Ramsey resonance induced by multiple wall

∼

30

trix calculation of Sec. VII.B to describe both the illu-
minated and non-illuminated regions of the cell, and the
eﬀects of velocity-mixing and spin exchange. Expressions
for the eﬀect of alkali-alkali spin-exchange on the density
matrix have been obtained by Okunevich (1994, 1995);
Valles and Alvarez (1994, 1996), following work of Gros-
setete (1965). When atomic orientation is nonzero, the
expressions become nonlinear; thus, they are easily ap-
plied only for low-power linearly polarized pump light
far from the conditions of alignment-to-orientation con-
version (Sec. V.C). Taking velocity mixing and multiple
cell regions into account is straightforward but computa-
tionally intensive. A detailed description of such a calcu-
lation and comparison with experiment is in preparation
by D. Budker and coworkers.

F. Gas discharge

Gas discharge allows one to study ionized species,
refractory materials, and transitions originating from
metastable states, and has been extensively used in
atomic spectroscopy and polarization studies in partic-
ular (as in the work of, for example, Aleksandrov and
Kulyasov, 1972; Lombardi, 1969).

In optogalvanic spectroscopy one detects light-induced
transitions by measuring the changes in conductivity of
a discharge. The optogalvanic method has been applied
to the study of nonlinear level crossing and other NMOE
(Hannaford and Series, 1981; Stahlberg et al., 1989).

Other examples of NMOE work employing gas dis-
charge are the study of Lowe et al. (1987), who used Zee-
man quantum beats in transmission (i.e., time-dependent
NMOR; see Sec. VIII.B) in a pulsed-pump, cw-probe ex-
periment to determine polarization-relaxation properties
of a Sm vapor produced in a cathode sputtering dis-
charge, and that of Alipieva and Karabasheva (1999) who
studied the nonlinear Voigt eﬀect in the 2 3P
3 3D tran-
sition in neutral He.

→

G. Atoms trapped in solid and liquid helium

A recent(and experimentally demanding) technique for
reducing spin-relaxation is the trapping of the param-
agnetic species under investigation in condensed (su-
perﬂuid or solid) 4He. Solid-rare-gas-matrix isolation
spectroscopy (Coufal, 1984; Dunkin, 1998) has been
extensively used by chemists in the past half-century
for the investigation of reactive atoms, ions, molecules,
and radicals.
In all heavy-rare-gas matrices, however,
the anisotropy of the local ﬁelds at individual atomic-
trapping sites causes strong perturbation of guest atom
spin-polarization via spin-orbit interactions. As a conse-
quence, no high-resolution magneto-optical spectra have
been recorded in such matrices. However, the quan-
tum nature (large amplitude zero-point motion) of a con-
densed helium matrix makes it extremely compressible,

FIG. 18 (a) Wall-induced Ramsey rotation spectrum ob-
tained by Budker et al. (2000b) for light intensity 1.2
mW cm−2 and beam diameter ∼3 mm. (b) Transit eﬀect ro-
tation spectrum, for light intensity 0.6 mW cm−2. (c) Light
transmission spectrum for light intensity 1.2 mW cm2. Back-
ground slope in light transmission is due to change in incident
laser power during the frequency scan.

posite of that obtained for the low light-power transit
eﬀect. Budker et al. (2000a) explained this as the eﬀect
of alignment-to-orientation conversion (Sec. V.C) due to
the combined action of the optical electric ﬁeld and the
magnetic ﬁeld.

Skalla and Waeckerle (1997) studied the wall-induced
Ramsey eﬀect in cells with various geometries (cylindri-
cal, spherical, and toroidal), and used spatially separated
pump and probe ﬁelds to measure Berry’s topological
phase (Berry, 1984). Yashchuk et al. (1999b) investi-
gated the possibilities of applying the separated optical
ﬁeld method to improve the sensitivity of NMOR-based
magnetometers XII.A.

In addition to their application in precision magnetom-
etry (Sec. XII.A), NMOE in paraﬃn-coated cells were in-
vestigated in relation to tests of fundamental symmetries
(Sec. XII.B) and the study of light propagation dynamics
(Sec. XIII.B).

2. Theoretical analysis

In order to obtain a theoretical description of NMOE
in paraﬃn-coated cells, one must extend the density ma-

and a single-valence-electron guest atom can impose its
symmetry on the local environment via Pauli repulsion.
Alkali atoms thus form spherical nanometer-sized cavi-
ties (atomic bubbles), whose isotropy, together with the
diamagnetism of the surrounding He atoms, allows long-
lived spin polarization to be created in the guest atoms
via optical pumping. With Cs atoms in the cubic phase
of solid He, longitudinal spin relaxation times T1 of 1 s
were reported by Arndt et al. (1995), while transverse
relaxation times T2 are known to be larger than 100
ms (Kanorsky et al., 1996). The T1 times are presum-
ably limited by quadrupolar zero-point oscillations of the
atomic bubble, while the T2 times are limited by mag-
netic ﬁeld inhomogeneities. In superﬂuid He, the coher-
ence life times are limited by the ﬁnite observation time
due to convective motion of the paramagnetic atoms in
the He matrix (Kinoshita et al., 1994).

Nonlinear magneto-optical level-crossing signals (the
longitudinal and transverse ground-state Hanle eﬀects)
were observed by Arndt et al. (1995); Weis et al. (1995)
as rather broad lines due to strong magnetic-ﬁeld inho-
mogeneities.
In recent years, spin-physics experiments
in solid helium have used (radio-frequency/microwave–
optical) double resonance techniques.
Optical and
magneto-optical studies of defects in condensed helium
were reviewed by Kanorsky and Weis (1998).

Applications of spin-polarized atoms in condensed he-
lium include the study of the structure and dynamics of
local trapping sites in quantum liquids/solids, and possi-
ble use of such samples as a medium in which to search for
a permanent atomic electric-dipole moment (Weis et al.
(1997); Sec. XII.B).

H. Laser-cooled and trapped atoms

Recently, atomic samples with relatively long spin-
relaxation times were produced using laser-cooling and
trapping techniques. When studying NMOE in trapped
atoms, one must take into account the perturbation
of Zeeman sublevels by external ﬁelds (usually mag-
netic and/or optical) involved in the trapping technique.
Atoms can be released from the trapping potentials be-
fore measurements are made in order to eliminate such
perturbations.31

There have been several recent studies of the Faraday
and Voigt eﬀects using magneto-optical traps (MOTs).
108 85Rb atoms in a
Isayama et al. (1999) trapped
MOT and cooled them to about 10 µK. Then a pump
beam was used to spin-polarize the sample of cold atoms

∼

31 Another point to consider is that Doppler broadening due to the
residual thermal velocities of trapped atoms is smaller than the
natural line width of the atomic transition. Therefore, in the
low-power limit, optical pumping does not lead to formation of
Bennett structures (Sec. V.A) narrower than the width of the
transition.

31

∼

∼

orthogonally to an applied magnetic ﬁeld of
2 mG. Lar-
mor precession of the atoms was observed by monitor-
ing the time-dependent polarization rotation of a probe
beam. The limiting factor in the observation time (
11
ms) for this experiment was the loss of atoms from the re-
gion of interest due to free fall in the Earth’s gravitational
ﬁeld. Labeyrie et al. (2001) studied magneto-optical ro-
tation and induced ellipticity in 85Rb atoms trapped and
cooled in a MOT that was cycled on and oﬀ. The Faraday
rotation was measured during the brief time (
8 ms) that
the trap was oﬀ. The time that the MOT was oﬀ was suf-
ﬁciently short so that most of the atoms were recaptured
when the MOT was turned back on. Franke-Arnold et al.
(2001) performed measurements of both the Faraday and
Voigt eﬀects (Sec. I) in an ensemble of cold 7Li atoms.
Optical rotation of a weak far-detuned probe beam due
to interaction with polarized atoms was also used as a
technique for non-destructive imaging of Bose-Einstein
condensates (as in the work of, for example, Matthews,
1999).

∼

Narducci (2001) has recently begun to explore the pos-
sibility of measuring NMOE in cold atomic fountains.
The experimental geometry and technique of such an
experiment would be similar to the setup for Faraday-
Ramsey spectroscopy described in Sec. VIII.C, but the
time-of-ﬂight between the pump and probe regions could
be made quite long (a few seconds).

With far-oﬀ-resonant blue-detuned optical dipole
traps, one can produce alkali vapors with ground-state
0.1 Hz [for example, Davidson et al.
relaxation rates
(1995) observed such relaxation rates for ground-state
hyperﬁne coherences]. Correspondingly narrow features
in the magnetic-ﬁeld dependence of NMOE should be
observable. However, we know of no experiments inves-
tigating NMOE in far-oﬀ-resonant optical dipole traps.

∼

IX. MAGNETO-OPTICAL EFFECTS IN SELECTIVE
REFLECTION

1. Linear eﬀects

The standard detection techniques in atomic spec-
troscopy are the monitoring of the ﬂuorescence light and
of the light transmitted through the sample. A comple-
mentary, though less often used technique is monitoring
the light reﬂected from the sample or, more precisely,
from the window-sample interface. The reﬂected light in-
tensity shows resonant features when the light frequency
is tuned across an atomic absorption line (Cojan, 1954).
The technique was discovered by Wood (1909) and is
called selective reﬂection spectroscopy. A peculiar fea-
ture of selective reﬂection spectroscopy was discovered
after the advent of narrow-band tunable lasers: when the
light beam is near normal to the interface, the spectral
proﬁle of the reﬂection coeﬃcient shows a narrow ab-
sorptive feature of sub-Doppler width superimposed on a
Doppler-broadened dispersive pedestal (Woerdman and

Schuurmans, 1975). This peculiar line shape is due to
the quenching of the optical dipole by atom-window col-
lisions, which breaks the symmetry of the atomic velocity
distribution and results in a non-local optical response of
the medium.

A theoretical model of this eﬀect developed by Schuur-
mans (1976b) for low vapor pressure and low light inten-
sity yields for the resonant modiﬁcation of the reﬂection
coeﬃcient:

δR

y =

(cid:18)

∆
ΓD (cid:19)

Re

∝

∞

e−x2

0
Z

(x

y)

−

−

iγ0/(2ΓD)

dx,

(28)

where γ0 and ΓD are the homogeneous and Doppler
widths of the transition, respectively, and ∆ is the light
detuning. The expression diﬀers in the lower bound of the
integral from the usual Voigt integral of the index of re-
γ, the frequency derivative
fraction. In the limit of ΓD ≫
of Eq. (28) is a dispersive Lorentzian of width γ0, which
illustrates the Doppler-free linear nature of the eﬀect. As
only atoms in the close vicinity (λ/2π) of the interface
contribute signiﬁcantly to the reﬂection signal, selective
reﬂection spectroscopy is well suited for experiments in
optically thick media and for the study of atom-window
van der Waals interactions.

The ﬁrst theoretical discussion of magnetic ﬁeld-
induced eﬀects in selective reﬂection was given by Series
(1967). However, that treatment was incorrect, as it did
not take into account the above-mentioned sub-Doppler
features. The ﬁrst magneto-optical experiment using se-
lective reﬂection spectroscopy was performed by Stanzel
(1974b) on mercury vapor who studied magnetic-ﬁeld-
induced excited-state level crossings with broad-band ex-
citation. The theoretical description of that experiment
was given by Schuurmans (1976a) who considered cor-
rectly the modiﬁcations induced by window collisions.
The linear magneto-optical circular dichroism and rota-
tion in the selective reﬂection spectra from Cs vapor in
a weak longitudinal magnetic ﬁeld were studied by Weis
et al. (1993a), who recorded the spectral proﬁles of both
eﬀects at a ﬁxed magnetic ﬁeld and provided a theoreti-
cal analysis of the observed line shapes. In an experiment
of Papageorgiou et al. (1994), the narrow spectral lines
in selective reﬂection spectroscopy allowed resolution of
Zeeman components in the reﬂection spectra of σ+- and
σ−-polarized light in ﬁxed (120–280 G) longitudinal mag-
netic ﬁelds. In both experiments the use of wave-function
mixing (discussed in Sec. II.A) proved to be essential for
understanding the observed line shapes.

2. Nonlinear eﬀects

To our knowledge the only study of NMOE using selec-
tive reﬂection spectroscopy was the observation by Weis
et al. (1992) of ground-state Zeeman coherences in a
magneto-optical rotation experiment on Cs vapor. In this
experiment, the laser light was kept on resonance and the
magnetic ﬁeld was scanned, revealing the familiar narrow

32

dispersive resonance of NMOR. The dependence of the
width of this resonance on the light intensity and on the
atomic number density was studied under conditions of
high optical opacity.

X. LINEAR AND NONLINEAR ELECTRO-OPTICAL
EFFECTS

→

Although linear electro-optical eﬀects in resonant me-
dia have been studied since the 1920s (a comprehensive
review was written by Bonch-Bruevich and Khodovoi,
1967), there has been relatively little work on nonlin-
ear electro-optical eﬀects (NEOE). Davies et al. (1988)
experimentally and theoretically investigated linear and
nonlinear light polarization rotation in the vicinity of
F ′ = 1 transitions in atomic samarium, and
F = 0
Fomichev (1995) performed additional theoretical stud-
ies of NEOE for 0
0 transitions. There are
many similarities between NEOE and NMOE: the shift
of Zeeman sublevels due to the applied ﬁelds is the funda-
mental cause of both eﬀects, the nonlinear enhancement
in both cases can arise from the formation of Bennett
structures in the atomic velocity distribution (Budker
et al., 2002a) or the evolution of ground-state atomic
polarization, and these mechanisms change the optical
properties of the atomic vapor, thereby modifying the
polarization properties of the light ﬁeld.

1 and 1

→

→

Consider a Doppler-broadened atomic vapor subject
to a dc electric ﬁeld E and light near-resonant with an
atomic transition. The light is propagates in a direction
orthogonal to E and is linearly polarized along an axis
at 45◦ to E. Due to the Stark shifts ∆s, the component
of the light ﬁeld along E sees a diﬀerent refractive index
than the component of the light ﬁeld perpendicular to E.
The diﬀerence in the real parts of the refractive indices
leads to linear birefringence (causing the light to acquire
ellipticity) and the diﬀerence in the imaginary parts of
the refractive indices leads to linear dichroism (causing
optical rotation).

∼

If the light intensity is large enough to form Bennett
structures in the atomic velocity distribution, the nar-
row features (of width
γ0) in the indices of refraction
cause the maximum ellipticity to become proportional to
∆s/γ0, rather than ∆s/ ΓD as in the linear case. Optical
rotation is not enhanced by Bennett structures in this
case because it is proportional to the diﬀerence of bell-
shaped features in the imaginary part of the indices of
refraction, which is zero for the resonant velocity group
(and of opposite signs for velocity groups to either side
of the resonance).

There are also coherence eﬀects in NEOE for electric
γrel, which result from the evo-
ﬁelds such that ∆s ≪
lution of optically pumped ground-state atomic polar-
ization in the electric ﬁeld (Fig. B.2). The maximum
ellipticity induced in the light ﬁeld due to the coherence
eﬀect is proportional to ∆s/γrel.

While much of the recent work on coherence NMOE

has been done with alkali atoms, these are not necessarily
the best choice for NEOE because tensor polarizabilities
are suppressed for states with J = 1/2 as discussed in
Sec. XII.D.

Herrmann et al. (1986) studied a diﬀerent kind of
NEOE in which an electric ﬁeld is applied to a sample
of atoms, and normally forbidden two-photon transitions
become allowed due to Stark mixing. The large polariz-
abilities of Rydberg states make two-photon Stark spec-
troscopy of transitions involving Rydberg levels an ex-
tremely sensitive probe for small electric ﬁelds.

XI. EXPERIMENTAL TECHNIQUES

In this Section, we give details of some of the experi-
mental techniques that are employed for achieving long
ground-state relaxation times (atomic beams with sepa-
rated light-interaction regions, buﬀer-gas cells, and cells
with antirelaxation wall coating), as well as the tech-
niques used for sensitive detection of NMOE and NEOE,
especially spectropolarimetry (Sec. XI.B).

We begin the discussion by describing a representa-
tive experimental setup (Sec. XI.A). Using this example
we formulate some general requirements for experimental
apparatus of this sort, [for example, laser frequency tun-
ability and stability (Sec. XI.E), and magnetic shielding
(Sec. XI.D)], and outline how these requirements have
been met in practice.

A. A typical NMOE experiment

∼

×

2π

Here we give an overview of the Berkeley NMOE appa-
ratus, which has been used to investigate various aspects
of the physics and applications of narrow (
1-Hz,
Budker et al., 1998a) resonances, such as alignment-to-
orientation conversion (Budker et al., 2000a), self rota-
tion (Rochester et al., 2001), and reduced group velocity
of light (Budker et al., 1999a). The setup has also been
used to investigate NEOE and to conduct exploratory
experiments whose ultimate goal is testing fundamental
symmetries (Kimball et al., 2001; Yashchuk et al., 1999a).
Due to the large enhancement of small-ﬁeld optical ro-
tation produced by the narrow resonance, this setup is a
sensitive low-ﬁeld magnetometer (Budker et al., 2000b).
With a few modiﬁcations, this apparatus can also be ap-
plied to extremely high-sensitivity magnetometry in the
Earth-ﬁeld range (Budker et al., 2002b).

The Berkeley apparatus is shown in Fig. XI.A.
Rubidium and/or cesium atoms are contained in a va-
por cell with paraﬃn coating (Alexandrov et al., 1996),
used to suppress relaxation of atomic ground-state polar-
ization in wall collisions (Sec. VIII.E). The experiments
are performed on the D1 and D2 resonance lines. A
tunable extended-cavity diode laser is used as the light
source. The laser frequency is actively stabilized and can
be locked to an arbitrary point on the resonance line us-

33

FIG. 19 Schematic diagram of the modulation polarimetry-
based experimental setup used by Budker et al. (1998a) to
investigate NMOE in paraﬃn-coated alkali-metal-vapor cells.

ing the dichroic-atomic-vapor laser-lock technique (Sec.
XI.E). The laser line width, measured with a Fabry-
Perot spectrum analyzer, is
7 MHz. Optical rotation is
≤
detected with a conventional spectropolarimeter using a
polarization-modulation technique (Sec. XI.B). The po-
larimeter incorporates a crossed Glan prism polarizer and
polarizing beam splitter used as an analyzer. A Faraday
glass element modulates the direction of the linear polar-
ization of the light at a frequency ωm ≃
1 kHz with
10−3 rad. The ﬁrst harmonic of
5
an amplitude ϕm ≃
the signal from the photodiode in the darker channel of
the analyzer, is detected with a lock-in ampliﬁer. It is
proportional to the angle of the optical rotation caused
by the atoms in the cell, ϕs (Sec. XI.B). This signal,
normalized to the transmitted light power detected in
the brighter channel of the analyzer, is a measure of the
optical rotation in the vapor cell.

2π

×

×

A coated 10-cm-diameter cell containing the alkali va-
por is placed inside a four-layer magnetic shield and
surrounded with three mutually perpendicular magnetic
coils (Yashchuk et al., 2002a). The three outer layers
of the shield are nearly spherical in shape, while the in-
nermost shield is a cube (this facilitates application of
uniform ﬁelds to the cell). The shield provides nearly
isotropic shielding of external dc ﬁelds by a factor of
106 (Yashchuk et al., 2002a). Although a very prim-
∼
itive degaussing procedure is used (Sec. XI.D), the resid-
ual magnetic ﬁelds averaged over the volume of the vapor
cell are typically found to be at a level of several micro-
gauss (before compensation with the magnetic coils).

B. Polarimetry

Successful application of the NMOE-based experimen-
tal methods (Sec. XII) depends on one’s ability to per-
form precision polarimetry or, more speciﬁcally,
laser
spectropolarimetry.

In a “balanced polarimeter” (Huard, 1997), a sample is
placed between a polarizer and a polarizing beam split-
ter (analyzer) whose transmission axes are oriented at
45◦ to one another. The optical rotation ϕ due to the
optical activity of the sample can be found from a simple
expression valid for ϕ

1

≪

ϕ =

I2

I1 −
2(I1 + I2)

,

(29)

where I1 and I1 are the light intensities detected in the
two output channels of the analyzer. In order to measure
the ellipticity ǫ of the transmitted light, a λ/4-plate is
placed in front of the analyzer, oriented at 45◦ to its
axis, to form a circular analyzer (Huard, 1997, see also
Sec. XI.E).

Another method of polarimetry employs a crossed po-
larizer and analyzer (Fig. I and Sec. II.B) and polar-
ization modulation. A polarization modulator using a
Faraday-glass element is shown in Fig. XI.A. The signal
in the “dark” (crossed) channel of the analyzer is given
by

Is(t)

χI0

re +

α2
m+ ϕ2

≃

(cid:18)

1
2

+ 2χI0αmϕ sin ωmt

χI0α2

mcos 2ωmt.

(cid:19)

−

1
2

(30)

Here χ is the coeﬃcient deﬁned by absorption and scat-
tering of light by the atomic vapor cell, I0 is the inten-
sity of the linearly polarized light (in photons per unit
time) transmitted through the polarizer, re is polarizer
(analyzer) extinction ratio, and αm and ωm are polariza-
tion modulation amplitude and frequency, respectively.
The amplitude of the ﬁrst harmonic of the signal Eq.
(30) is a measure of the polarization rotation caused by
the sample. The ﬁrst-harmonic amplitude is also propor-
tional to the modulation amplitude αm. Typically, with
a Faraday modulator with a high-Verdet-constant glass
10−2 rad
(such as Hoya FR-5), the modulation αm is
(Wolfenden et al., 1990, 1991) at modulation frequencies
(High frequency modulation is often limited
∼
by the inductance of the Faraday modulator solenoid.)
Resonant photoelastic modulators can also be used for
polarimetry (as in the work of, for example, Oakberg,
1995; Wang and Oakberg, 1999), allowing for larger po-
larization modulation and higher modulation frequencies
(several tens of kilohertz).

1 kHz.

∼

From Eq. (30), one can obtain the sensitivity of the po-
larimeter with data accumulation time T for shot-noise-
limited detection of the ﬁrst-harmonic signal in the case
of an “ideal polarimeter” (α2

re + ϕ2):

m ≫
1
2√χI0T

.

δϕs ≃

(31)

34

0.5, this cor-
For a 1-mW visible-light beam and χ
10−8 rad Hz−1/2. Similar shot-noise-
responds to
limited sensitivity can be achieved with a balanced po-
larimeter (Birich et al., 1994).

≃

∼

×

2

Various modiﬁcations of the spectropolarimetry tech-
niques have been developed to meet speciﬁc experimental
requirements, with the common challenge of realizing the
shot-noise limit of Eq. (31). A review of magneto-optics
and polarimetry of condensed matter was given by Za-
passkii and Feoﬁlov (1975). Birich et al. (1994) consid-
ered in detail experimental approaches to measurement
of small optical rotation and their limiting factors.

C. Nonlinear magneto-optical rotation with
frequency-modulated light

Budker et al. (2000b) showed that NMOR can be used
for measurements of sub-microgauss magnetic ﬁelds with
sensitivity potentially exceeding 10−11 G Hz−1/2 (Sec.
VIII.E). However, for many applications (such as geo-
physics, magnetic prospecting, and navigation), it is nec-
essary to have a magnetometer with dynamic range
1
∼
G. Budker et al. (2002b) recently demonstrated that if
frequency-modulated light is used to induce and detect
nonlinear magneto-optical rotation (FM NMOR), the ul-
tranarrow features in the magnetic-ﬁeld dependence of
optical rotation normally centered at B = 0 can be trans-
lated to much larger magnetic ﬁelds. In this setup, light
polarization modulation (Fig. XI.A) is replaced by fre-
quency modulation of the laser, and the time-dependent
optical rotation is measured at a harmonic of the light
modulation frequency Ωm. The frequency modulation af-
fects both optical pumping and probing of atomic polar-
ization. This technique should enable the dynamic range
of an NMOR-based magnetometer to extend beyond the
Earth-ﬁeld range.

For suﬃciently low light intensities (so that the optical
pumping saturation parameter does not exceed unity),
FM NMOR can be understood as a three-stage (pump,
precession, probe) process (Sec. V.B). Due to the fre-
quency modulation of the laser light, the optical pumping
and probing acquire a periodic time dependence. When
the pumping rate is synchronized with the precession of
atomic polarization, a resonance occurs and the atomic
medium is pumped into an aligned state whose axis ro-
tates at the Larmor frequency ΩL. The optical proper-
ties of the medium are modulated at 2ΩL, due to the
symmetry of atomic alignment. This periodic change of
the optical properties of the atomic vapor modulates the
angle of the light polarization, leading to the high-ﬁeld
FM NMOR resonances.
If the time-dependent optical
rotation is measured at the ﬁrst harmonic of Ωm, a res-
onance occurs when Ωm coincides with 2ΩL. Additional
resonances can be observed at higher harmonics.

It should be noted that this technique is closely re-
lated to the work of Bell and Bloom (1961), in which the
intensity of pump light was modulated in order to op-

tically pump the atomic medium into a polarized state
which precessed with the Larmor frequency.

D. Magnetic shielding

Nonlinear magneto-optical eﬀects are generally very
sensitive to magnetic-ﬁeld magnitude, direction, and gra-
dients. For ground-state spin-relaxation times of <
1 s,
∼
NMOE are maximum at sub-microgauss magnetic ﬁelds
[Eq. (2)], necessitating their control at this level.32 This
control can be achieved with ferromagnetic shielding in
spite of the fact that residual ﬁelds due to imperfections
of the shield material are usually
10–50 µG (Kozlov
et al., 1982). With a carefully designed four-layer mag-
netic shield and three-dimensional coil system inside the
shield (see Fig. XI.A), it is possible to achieve long-term
magnetic-ﬁeld stability inside the innermost shield at the
level of 0.1 µG (Budker et al., 1998a; Yashchuk et al.,
1999a, 2002a).

∼

Closed ferromagnetic shells shield diﬀerent frequency
external ﬁelds via diﬀerent physical mechanisms. For
static and very low-frequency external ﬁelds, the most
important mechanism is ﬂux shunting due to the high
permeability of the material. At high frequencies, the
skin eﬀect becomes the most important mechanism. A
review of the early work on the shielding problem, a the-
oretical treatment, and a survey of practical realizations
was given by Sumner et al. (1987); see also books by
Khriplovich and Lamoreaux (1997); Rikitake (1987).

For static ﬁelds, the dependence of the shielding ratio
on the shape and size of n shielding layers is given by an
approximate formula:

Stot ≡

Bin
B0 ≃

Sn

n−1

Si

1

"

−

i=1
Y
where Si ≃

(cid:18)
Xi
µiti

Xi+1
Xi (cid:19)
.

−1

k

#

,

(32)

Here B0 is the magnetic ﬁeld applied to the shield, Bin
is the ﬁeld inside the shield, Si is the shielding factor
of the i-th layer, Xi is the layer’s radius or length (de-
pending on the relative orientation of the magnetic ﬁeld
and the layer), and ti and µi are the thickness and mag-
netic permeability of each layer, respectively. We assume
Xi/ti. The power k depends on
Xi > Xi+1 and µi ≫
3 for a spherical shield;
the geometry of the shield: k
k
1 for the axial shield-
ing factor of a cylindrical shield with ﬂat lids. Thus, for
shields of comparable dimensions, spherical shells pro-
vide the best shielding. In the design of the three outer

≃
2 for the transverse and k

≃

≃

35

∼

layers of the four-layer shield shown in Fig. XI.A, an ap-
proximation to a spherical shape, simpler to manufacture
than a true sphere, is used. The overall shielding ratio
10−6, roughly the same in all direc-
is measured to be
tions. The innermost shield is in the shape of a cube with
rounded edges. This allows compensation of the residual
magnetic ﬁeld and its gradients as well as application
of relatively homogeneous ﬁelds with a simple system of
nested 3-D coils of cubic shape (Yashchuk et al., 2002a).
The ﬁeld homogeneity is increased by image currents, due
to the boundary conditions at the interface of the high-
permeability material, which eﬀectively make the short
coils into essentially inﬁnite solenoidal windings.

An important characteristic of a magnetic shield, in
addition to the shielding factor and the residual ﬁelds
and gradients within the shielded volume, is the residual
magnetic noise. One source of such noise is the John-
son thermal currents (Lamoreaux, 1999; Nenonen et al.,
1996) in the shield itself. Allred et al. (2002) found that
10−10 G Hz−1/2 in
the noise related to this eﬀect was
the center of a multilayered cylindrical shield (of inner
diameter

40 cm).

∼

Superconducting shielding (Cabrera, 1988; Cabrera
and Halmilton, 1973, and references therein) yields the
highest ﬁeld stability. The shielding properties of super-
conductors originate in the Meissner eﬀect, i.e., the ex-
clusion, due to persistent currents, of magnetic ﬂux from
the bulk of a superconductor. Hamilton (1970); Taber
et al. (1993) developed a technique for reducing the mag-
netic ﬁeld inside a superconducting shield by expanding
the shield. When the dimensions of the superconducting
enclosure increase, the enclosed magnetic ﬁeld decreases
due to conservation of magnetic ﬂux “frozen” into the su-
perconductor. In one experiment, expansion of a folded
lead-foil (100 µm-thick) balloon was used; an ultra-low
residual magnetic ﬁeld (
0.06 µG) was achieved over a
liter-sized volume (Cabrera and Halmilton, 1973). With
expanded lead bags as superconducting shields and a sur-
rounding conventional ferromagnetic shield, a magnetic
ﬁeld of < 0.1 µG in the ﬂight dewar of the Gravity Probe
B Relativity Mission was maintained in a 1.3 m-by-0.25
m-diameter volume enclosing a gyroscope (Mester et al.,
2000), a shielding ratio of about 5

10−9.

∼

∼

An essential diﬀerence between superconducting and
ferromagnetic shields is their opposite boundary condi-
tions. Since a superconductor is an ideal diamagnetic
material, magnetic ﬁeld lines cannot penetrate into it,
and so image currents are of opposite sign as those in fer-
romagnetic material. This is important for determining
the shield geometry that provides the best ﬁeld homo-
geneity.

×

32 There are speciﬁc requirements to magnetic shielding for the
work with atoms in a cryogenic buﬀer gas environment discussed
in Sec. VIII.D.2, in which relaxation times of up to minutes are
expected.

E. Laser-frequency stabilization using magneto-optical
eﬀects

The development of frequency-stabilized diode laser
systems has led to recent progress in experimental atomic

and molecular physics in general, and the study of NMOE
in particular. Conversely, some of the simplest and
most eﬀective methods of laser-frequency stabilization
are based on linear and nonlinear magneto-optics.

A simple laser-locking system that uses no electronics
is based on the linear Macaluso-Corbino eﬀect, employ-
ing a cell in a longitudinal magnetic ﬁeld and a polarizer
placed inside the laser cavity and forming a frequency-
selective element (Lukomskii and Polishchuk, 1986; Wan-
ninger et al., 1992, and references therein). A similar
method based on narrow (Doppler-free) peaks in the
spectrum of the nonlinear magneto-optical activity for
laser-frequency stabilization was suggested by Cyr and
Tetu (1991) and adopted for laser stabilization by, for
example, Kitching et al. (1994, 1995); Lee and Campbell
(1992); Lee et al. (1993); Wasik et al. (2002).

A method based on magnetic-ﬁeld-induced circu-
lar dichroism of an atomic vapor was developed by
Cheron et al. (1994) for frequency stabilization of single-
frequency solid-state LaxNd1−xMgAl11O19 (LNA) lasers.
This technique was subsequently adapted to diode lasers
by Corwin et al. (1998), who coined the term dichroic-
atomic-vapor laser lock (DAVLL).

Figure XI.A shows an example of DAVLL application
(Budker et al., 1998a). The optical scheme incorporates a
polarizer (P), an uncoated Rb-vapor cell placed in a static
longitudinal magnetic ﬁeld, a λ/4-plate, and a polarizing
beam splitter (BS). With the fast axis of the λ/4-plate
oriented at 45◦ to the axis of the polarizing beam splitter,
as was originally suggested by Cheron et al. (1994), the
scheme realizes a circular analyzer sensitive to the outgo-
ing light ellipticity induced by the circular dichroism of
the atomic vapor. The output signal from the diﬀerential
ampliﬁer has dispersion-like frequency dependence cor-
responding to the diﬀerence between absorption spectra
for left and right circular components of the light. The
diﬀerential signal is used to frequency lock an external-
cavity diode laser to the center of the absorption line by
feeding back voltage to a piezoelectric transducer which
adjusts a diﬀraction grating in the laser cavity (Patrick
and Wieman, 1991; Wieman and Hollberg, 1991). This
setup is shown schematically in Fig. XI.A. Frequency
tuning in the vicinity of the line center can be achieved
by adjusting the angle of the λ/4-plate, or by applying
an appropriate bias in the electronic feedback circuit.

Various modiﬁcations of the DAVLL technique were
devised to meet speciﬁc experimental requirements.
Yashchuk et al. (2000) showed that a simple readjust-
ment of the respective angles of optical elements allows
one to extend the DAVLL frequency tuning range to
the wings of a resonance line. The DAVLL system of
Yashchuk et al. was developed for use in the vicinity of
equipment sensitive to magnetic ﬁelds. The cell-magnet
system, the core component of the device, was designed
200 G
to suppress the magnetic ﬁeld-spillage from the
magnetic ﬁeld that is applied over the Rb-cell volume.
Beverini et al. (2001) developed a DAVLL device with
fast response in which the laser cavity optical length is

∼

36

adjusted with an intra-cavity electro-optical modulator
instead of much slower mechanical motion of the grating.
Cliﬀord et al. (2000) showed that the zero crossing of the
DAVLL signal (and thus the laser locking frequency) is
dependent on the magnitude of the magnetic ﬁeld applied
to the Rb- or Cs-vapor cell and used this for tuning the
locked laser by varying the applied magnetic ﬁeld.

Zeeman shifts of resonances in linear (discussed by,
for example, Rikukawa et al., 1991) and nonlinear (Din-
neen et al., 1992; Ikegami et al., 1989; Lecomte et al.,
2000; Weis and Derler, 1988) spectroscopy can be used
for laser-frequency locking and tuning. Using nonlinear
saturation spectroscopy, laser output is locked to a satu-
rated absorption line whose frequency is modulated and
shifted by a combination of ac and dc magnetic ﬁelds.
With this method, a line width of 15 kHz and long-term
stability of 10 kHz can be achieved. By changing the dc
magnetic ﬁeld applied to the atomic cell, the frequency
of the laser can be tuned almost linearly in the range
of hundreds of megahertz without modulation of laser
intensity or frequency.

XII. APPLICATIONS

A. Magnetometry

∼

In Sec.

IV.A, we mentioned that Cohen-Tannoudji
et al. (1969); Dupont-Roc (1970); Dupont-Roc et al.
10−9 G Hz−1/2) mag-
(1969) performed ultra-sensitive (
netometry using the ground-state Hanle eﬀect. Since
then, the technology of optical-pumping magnetometers
has been further reﬁned (by, for example, Aleksandrov
et al., 1987), and such magnetometers, typically employ-
ing the rf–optical double-resonance method, are now used
in a variety of applications (by, for example, Alexandrov
and Bonch-Bruevich, 1992), particularly for measuring
geomagnetic ﬁelds.

The sensitivity of NMOR to small magnetic ﬁelds nat-
urally suggests it as a magnetometry technique (Barkov
et al., 1989a). In this Section, we discuss the limits of
the sensitivity and recent experimental work on NMOR
magnetometry.

1. Quantum noise limits

The shot-noise-limited sensitivity of a magnetic ﬁeld
measured for a time T with an ensemble of N particles
with spin-coherence time τ is

δB

∼

1
gµ

1
√N τ T

.

(33)

In this expression, we have neglected factors of order
unity that depend on particulars of the system (for ex-
ample, the value of F , and the relative contributions of
diﬀerent Zeeman sublevels). When light is used to inter-
rogate the state of the spins, as in NMOR, one also needs

to consider the photon shot-noise [Eq. (31)].33 Depend-
ing on the details of a particular measurement, either the
spin noise (33) or the photon noise (31) may dominate.
If a measurement is optimized for statistical sensitivity,
the two contributions to the noise are found to be com-
parable (Budker et al., 2000b).

Fleischhauer et al. (2000) considered an additional
source of noise in polarimetric spin measurements. When
the input light is oﬀ-resonant, independent quantum ﬂuc-
tuations in intensity of the two oppositely circularly po-
larized components of the light couple to the atomic Zee-
man sublevels via ac Stark shifts and cause excess noise
in the direction of the atomic spins. Fleischhauer et al.
(2000) concluded that this source of noise, while neg-
ligible at low light power, actually dominates over the
photon shot noise above a certain critical power. Es-
timates based on the formulae derived by Fleischhauer
et al. show that for the optimal conditions found by Bud-
ker et al. (2000b) this eﬀect could contribute to the over-
all noise at a level comparable to the photon shot noise.
However, the eﬀect of the ac Stark shifts can, in certain
cases, be minimized by tuning the light frequency so that
the shifts due to diﬀerent oﬀ-resonance levels compensate
each other (Novikova et al., 2001a). Some other possi-
bilities for minimizing the additional noise may include
compensation of the eﬀect by diﬀerent atomic isotopes
(Novikova et al., 2001a), or the use, instead of a polar-
ization rotation measurement, of another combination of
the Stokes parameters (Appendix A) chosen to maximize
the signal-to-noise ratio.

2. Experiments

∼

One approach to using NMOR for precision magnetom-
etry is to take advantage of the ultra-narrow (width
1
µG) resonance widths obtainable in paraﬃn-coated cells
(Sec. VIII.E). Using the experimental setup described in
Sec. XI.A, Budker et al. (2000b) optimized the sensitiv-
ity of an NMOR-based magnetometer to sub-microgauss
magnetic ﬁelds with respect to atomic density, light in-
tensity, and light frequency near the D1 and D2 lines
of 85Rb. They found that a shot-noise-limited magneto-
10−12 G Hz−1/2 was achievable
metric sensitivity of
in this system. This sensitivity was close to the shot-
noise limit for an ideal measurement [Eq. (33)] with the
1012 at 20◦
given number of atoms in the vapor cell (
C and rate of ground state relaxation (
1 Hz), indicat-
ing that, in principle, NMOR is a nearly optimal tech-
nique for measuring the precession of polarized atoms in
If limitations due to technical sources
external ﬁelds.

∼

∼

∼

×

3

37

of noise can be overcome, the sensitivity of an NMOR-
based magnetometer may surpass that of current optical
pumping (Alexandrov et al., 1996) and SQUID (super-
conducting quantum interference device) magnetometers
(Clarke, 1996), both of which operate near their shot-
noise-limit, by an order of magnitude. Even higher sen-
10−14 G Hz−1/2, may be achievable
sitivities, up to 2
with an ingenious magnetometric setup of Allred et al.
(2002) in which K vapor at a density of 1014 cm−3 is used
and the eﬀect of spin-exchange relaxation is reduced by
“locking” the precession of the two ground-state hyper-
ﬁne components together via the spin-exchange collisions
themselves (Happer and Tang, 1973).

×

The magnetic-ﬁeld dependence of NMOR is strongly
aﬀected by the magnitude and direction of transverse
magnetic ﬁelds (Budker et al., 1998a,b). At low light
powers, the transverse-ﬁeld dependence can be quanti-
tatively understood using a straightforward extension of
the Kanorsky-Weis model discussed in Sec. VII.A, which
opens the possibility of sensitive three-dimensional mag-
netic ﬁeld measurements.
As discussed in detail

frequency-
modulated light is used to induce and detect NMOR, the
dynamic range of an NMOR-based magnetometer may be
increased beyond the microgauss range to > 1 G without
appreciable loss of sensitivity.

in Sec. XI.C,

if

Novikova et al. (2001a); Novikova and Welch (2002),
using buﬀer-gas-free uncoated cells, investigated the ap-
plication of NMOR in optically thick media to magne-
tometry (Sec. VIII.A.3). Although the ultimate sensi-
tivity that may be obtained with this method appears to
be some two orders of magnitude inferior to that obtained
with paraﬃn-coated cells,34 this method does provide a
broad dynamic range, so that Earth-ﬁeld (
0.4 G) values
could be measured with a standard polarimeter.

∼

Rochester and Budker (2002) theoretically analyzed
magnetometric sensitivity of thick medium NMOR mea-
surements optimized with respect to light intensity in the
case of negligible Doppler broadening, and in the case of
large Doppler broadening. In the former case, the sen-
sitivity improves as the square root of optical density,
while in the latter, it improves linearly—a result which
can be obtained from standard-quantum-limit consider-
ations (Sec. XII.A.1).

Cold atoms prepared by laser trapping and cooling
were also recently used for NMOR-based magnetometry.
Isayama et al. (1999) employed a pump/probe geometry
108 cold 85Rb atoms that were trapped in a MOT
with
and then released (Sec. VIII.H) for measurement of an
2 mG. The observation time
applied magnetic ﬁeld of
for a single measurement was limited to about 10 ms due
to the free fall of the atoms in the Earth’s gravitational

∼

∼

33 We do not consider the use of the so-called spin-squeezed quan-
tum states (discussed by, for example, Ulam-Orgikh and Kita-
gawa, 2001, and references therein) or squeezed states of light
(Grangier et al., 1987), which can allow sensitivity beyond the
standard quantum limit.

34 The limitation in practical realizations of thick-medium magne-
tometry may come from the eﬀects of radiation trapping (Matsko
et al., 2001b, 2002a; Novikova and Welch, 2002).

ﬁeld; after 30 such measurements Isayama et al. (1999)
obtained a precision of 0.18 µG in the determination of
It is expected that by us-
the applied magnetic ﬁeld.
ing atomic fountains (Narducci, 2001) or far-oﬀ-resonant
optical dipole traps (Davidson et al., 1995), the observa-
tion time and overall sensitivity to magnetic ﬁelds can be
considerably improved.

B. Electric-dipole moment searches

The existence of a permanent electric-dipole moment
(EDM, reviewed by, for example, Khriplovich and Lam-
oreaux, 1997) of an elementary or composite particle such
as an atom would violate parity- (P ) and time-reversal
(T ) invariance. The nonrelativistic Hamiltonian HEDM
describing the interaction of an EDM d with an electric
ﬁeld E is given by

HEDM =

d

E

F

E.

(34)

·

−

∝

·
Under the parity operator ˆP (the space-inversion opera-
tor that transforms r
r), the axial vector F does not
change sign, whereas the polar vector E does. Therefore,
HEDM is P -odd, i.e., violates parity. Under the time-
reversal operator ˆT , E is invariant and F changes sign,
so HEDM is also T -odd.

→ −

Ever since the discovery in 1964 of CP -violation in the
neutral kaon system (C is charge-conjugation), there has
been considerable interest in the search for EDMs of el-
ementary particles. (CP -violation implies T -violation if
the combined CP T symmetry is valid, as is generally
believed). Many theoretical attempts to explain CP -
violation in the neutral kaon system, such as supersym-
metry, predict EDMs of the electron and neutron that
are near the current experimental sensitivities (see dis-
cussion by Khriplovich and Lamoreaux, 1997). Measure-
ments of the EDM of paramagnetic atoms and molecules
(that have unpaired electrons) are primarily sensitive to
the electron EDM de. It is important to note that due to
relativistic eﬀects in heavy atoms, the atomic EDM can
be several orders of magnitude larger than de.

If an atom has an EDM, its Zeeman sublevels will expe-
rience linear electric-ﬁeld-induced splitting much like the
usual Zeeman eﬀect. Most methods of searching for an
EDM have thus been based on detection (using magnetic-
resonance methods or light absorption) of changes in the
Larmor precession frequency of polarized atoms when a
strong electric ﬁeld is applied, for example, parallel or
anti-parallel to a magnetic ﬁeld.

Another (related) way of searching for EDMs is to use
induced optical activity. As was pointed out by Bara-
nova et al. (1977) and Sushkov and Flambaum (1978),
a vapor of EDM-possessing atoms subject to an electric
ﬁeld will cause rotation of the polarization plane of light
propagating along the direction of the electric ﬁeld—the
analog of Faraday rotation. Barkov et al. (1988a) demon-
strated that, just as in magneto-optics, nonlinear optical
rotation is signiﬁcantly more sensitive than linear optical

38

rotation to the EDM of an atom or molecule (see also dis-
cussion by Hunter, 1991; Schuh et al., 1993; Weis et al.,
1993b).

∼

∼

Kimball et al. (2001); Yashchuk et al. (1999a) recently
investigated the possibility of performing a search for the
electron EDM de using nonlinear optical rotation in a
paraﬃn-coated Cs-vapor cell subjected to a longitudinal
electric ﬁeld. In addition to Cs, which has an enhance-
ment factor for the electron EDM of
120, the cell would
also contain Rb, which has much smaller enhancement
factor and would be used as a “co-magnetometer.” The
estimated shot-noise-limited sensitivity to de for such
10−26e cm Hz−1/2 (for a 10 kV cm−1
an experiment is
electric ﬁeld). This statistical sensitivity should enable
a NMOR-based EDM search to compete with the best
present limits on de from measurements in Tl (Regan
et al., 2002), which has an enhancement factor of
600,
and Cs (Murthy et al., 1989). However, in order to reach
this projected sensitivity, there are several problems that
must be overcome. The ﬁrst is a signiﬁcant change in
the atomic density when electric ﬁelds are applied to the
cell. The second is a coupling of the atomic polariza-
tions of Cs and Rb via spin-exchange collisions, which
would prevent Rb from functioning as an independent
co-magnetometer. These issues are discussed in more de-
tail by Kimball et al. (2001).

∼

5

×

∼

There are also molecular beam experiments (Sauer
et al., 2001) searching for an electron EDM using a sepa-
rated light pump and probe technique that is a variant of
the Faraday-Ramsey spectroscopic method (Sec. VIII.C).
In another class of experiments, one searches for EDMs
of diamagnetic atoms and molecules. Such experiments
are less sensitive to the EDM of the electron than those
employing paramagnetic atoms and molecules. However,
they probe CP -violating interactions within nuclei, and
are sensitive to EDMs of the nucleons. Romalis et al.
(2001a,b) have conducted the most sensitive experiment
of this kind in 199Hg. A cylindrical quartz vapor cell at
1013 cm−3)
room temperature (vapor concentration
is subjected to an electric ﬁeld of up to 10 kV cm−1, ap-
plied via conductive SnO2 electrodes deposited on the
inner surfaces of the ﬂat top and bottom quartz plates.
The entire inner surface of the cell including the elec-
trodes is coated with paraﬃn. The cell is ﬁlled with a
N2/CO buﬀer-gas mixture at a total pressure of several
hundred Torr. The buﬀer gas is used to maintain high
breakdown voltage, and to quench metastable states of
mercury that are populated by the UV light employed.
The nuclear-spin-relaxation time (I = 1/2 for 199Hg) is
6 3P1
100–200 s. The experiment utilizes the 6 1S0 →
∼
transition at 253.7 nm, excited with light from a home-
made cw laser system. A magnetic ﬁeld of 17 mG and
the electric ﬁeld are applied to the cell, and circularly po-
larized resonant light, chopped at the Larmor frequency,
illuminates the cell in a direction perpendicular to that of
the ﬁelds. After the atoms are pumped for
30 s with 70
µW of light power to establish transverse circular polar-
ization, optical rotation of linearly polarized probe light,

∼

39

(Sec. VIII.C) is a convenient method for measuring the
Aharonov-Casher eﬀect with atoms. Gorlitz et al. (1995)
performed such an experiment with Rb atoms and found
agreement with the theoretical prediction at the level
of 1.4%. They veriﬁed the linear dependence of the
phase shift on the strength of the electric ﬁeld as well
as its nondispersive nature (independence of velocity).
An atomic Aharonov-Casher eﬀect was also measured by
Zeiske et al. (1995) using an atomic interferometer.

In Faraday-Ramsey geometry, the phase shift accu-
mulated in a homogeneous static electric ﬁeld between
∆M = 2 sublevels of an aligned atom is given by

φAC =

EdL,

(36)

2gµ
¯hc

Z

where the ﬁeld integral extends over the ﬂight region be-
tween the two optical interaction regions. This phase
shift enters directly in the Faraday-Ramsey line-shape
function given by Eq. (26). When using atoms with a
well known g-factor, the measurement of φAC can thus
be used to experimentally determine the electric ﬁeld in-
tegral (Rasbach et al., 2001).

D. Measurement of tensor electric polarizabilities

The quadratic Stark eﬀect in a Zeeman manifold
in a homogeneous static electric ﬁeld E can be

F, M
|
parameterized by

i

∆s(F, M ) =

1
2

−

αE2,

(37)

(38)

where the static electric polarizability α can be decom-
posed into scalar (α0) and tensor (α2) parts according to
(Angel and Sandars, 1968):

α = α0 +

3M 2

F (F + 1)
1)

−
F (2F

α2.

−

States with J = 1/2, such as the alkali ground states,
can only have tensor properties due to nonzero nuclear
spin. Tensor polarizabilities of such states are suppressed
compared to the scalar polarizabilities by the ratio of the
hyperﬁne splitting to the energy separation between the
state of interest and electric-dipole-coupled states of op-
posite parity. For the alkali ground states, the suppres-
sion is

106–107.

When combined with the magnetic shifts of Zeeman
sublevels, the tensor electric shifts lead to complex signals
II.D.1) when mag-
in level-crossing experiments (Sec.
netic ﬁeld is scanned. This technique has been used for
several decades to measure excited-state tensor polariz-
abilities. The combination of electric and magnetic shifts
is also responsible for the alignment-to-orientation con-
version processes (Sec. V.C).

∼

Measurements of ground-state tensor polarizabilities
in the alkalis were performed in the 1960s using con-
ventional atomic beam Ramsey resonance spectroscopy

FIG. 20 Experimental optical rotation signal obtained by Ro-
malis et al. (2001b) produced by Hg atomic polarization in a
magnetic ﬁeld of 17 mG. The inset shows a one-second seg-
ment of the data.

detuned from resonance by 20 GHz, is detected (Fig.
XII.B). The spin-precession frequency is measured in
two identical cells with opposite directions of the electric
ﬁeld with respect to the magnetic ﬁeld. This device has a
0.3 µHz/Hz1/2 over
sensitivity to energy level shifts of
a measurement time of a hundred seconds, better than
any other existing device (see Sec. XII.A). With several
months of data taking, it has set a limit on the atomic
10−28 e cm (95% conﬁdence).
EDM of

199Hg

< 2.1

∼

d

×

(cid:0)

(cid:12)
(cid:12)

(cid:1)(cid:12)
(cid:12)

C. The Aharonov-Casher phase shift

An atom moving in an electric ﬁeld E with velocity v
experiences a magnetic ﬁeld B = E
v/c. This “mo-
tional” magnetic ﬁeld induces phase shifts of the atomic
magnetic sublevels and thus aﬀects nonlinear magneto-
optical signals. The E
v eﬀect is a linear Stark ef-
fect that represents a severe systematic problem in many
EDM experiments. Gorlitz et al. (1995); Sangster et al.
(1993) showed that the induced phase shift is given by
the Aharonov-Casher (1984) phase

×

×

φAC =

1
¯hc

µ

E(s)ds

×

(35)

I(c)
acquired by a magnetic moment µ carried on a closed
trajectory (c) around a charged wire. The phase (35) is
independent of the shape of the trajectory (c) and is thus
referred to as a topological phase.

The Aharonov-Casher eﬀect was studied interfero-
metrically with neutrons Cimmino et al. (1989) and
with the ﬂuorine nucleus in the TlF molecule (Sangster
et al., 1993, 1995) using conventional Ramsey molecu-
lar beam spectroscopy. Faraday-Ramsey spectroscopy

(Carrico et al., 1968; Gould et al., 1969; Sandars and
Lipworth, 1964). A. Weis and co-workers are currently
using the eﬀect of the electric-ﬁeld-dependent energy
shifts on the nonlinear magneto-optical properties of the
atomic medium to remeasure these polarizabilities (Ras-
bach, 2001; Rasbach et al., 2001; Weis, 2001). The tech-
nique is an extension of Faraday-Ramsey spectroscopy
(Sec. VIII.C) to electric interactions in the precession re-
gion. The renewed interest in the tensor polarizabilities is
related to a discrepancy between previous experimental
and theoretical values and it is believed that increased
precision in both (at the sub-1% level) will provide a
valuable test of atomic structure calculations.

E. Electromagnetic ﬁeld tomography

Various techniques involving NMOE and NEOE can
be used to perform spatially-resolved measurements of
magnetic and electric ﬁelds (electromagnetic ﬁeld tomog-
raphy). Skalla et al. (1997b) used NMOR to measure the
precession of spin-polarized 85Rb atoms contained in a
cell ﬁlled with dense N2 buﬀer gas to ensure suﬃciently
long diﬀusion times for Rb atoms. The Rb atoms were
spin-polarized with a set of spatially separated, pulsed
pump beams, and subjected to a magnetic ﬁeld with a
gradient. Since the precession frequency of the Rb atoms
depended on the position of the atoms within the cell, the
spatial distribution of the magnetic ﬁeld within the cell
could be determined from the detected Larmor precession
frequencies. Skalla et al. (1997a) and Giel et al. (2000)
used similar techniques to measure the diﬀusion of spin-
polarized alkali atoms in buﬀer-gas-ﬁlled cells. Allred
et al. (2002) has investigated the possibility of biomag-
netic imaging applications of NMOE.

It is possible to localize regions of interest by inter-
secting pump and probe light beams at an angle. Anal-
ysis of the polarization properties of the probe beam
could, in principle, allow the reconstruction of the electric
and magnetic ﬁelds inside the volume where the pump
and probe beams overlap. This reconstruction would be
aided by the fact that NMOE enhance optical rotation
while NEOE enhance induced ellipticity. Scanning the
region of intersection would allow one to create a three-
dimensional map of the ﬁelds.

F. Parity violation in atoms

We have discussed applications of linear magneto-

optics to the study of parity violation in Sec. II.C.5.

In work related to a study of parity-violation, Bouchiat
et al. (1995) studied both theoretically and experimen-
tally magnetic-ﬁeld-induced modiﬁcation of polarization
of light propagating through Cs vapor whose frequency
was tuned near a resonance between two excited states.
The population of the upper state of the transition was
created by subjecting atoms to a pump laser pulse con-

40

necting this state to the ground state (in the work of
Bouchiat et al. (1995), this is a nominally forbidden M1-
transition which has a parity-violating E1-contribution,
and also an E1-contribution induced by an applied elec-
tric ﬁeld). A particular feature incorporated in the de-
sign of this experiment is that there is gain (rather than
absorption) on the probe transition.

Kozlov and Porsev (1990) considered theoretically the
possibility of applying an eﬀect directly analogous to
BSR NMOR (Sec. V.A) to the measurement of parity vi-
olation (of the P -odd, T -even rotational invariant k
B)
in the vicinity of atomic transitions with unsuppressed
M1 amplitude. They found that, while the maximum
eﬀect is not enhanced compared to the linear case, the
magnitude of the ﬁeld B at which the maximum occurs
is reduced in the nonlinear case by the ratio γ0/ΓD of
the homogenous width to the Doppler width of the tran-
sition.

·

Cronin et al. (1998) attempted to use electromagneti-
cally induced transparency (EIT; Sec. XIII.A) to address
the problems of the traditional optical-rotation parity-
violation experiments, namely, the problem of detailed
understanding of a complicated spectral lineshape, and
the absence of reversals that would help distinguish a true
P -violating rotation from systematics. In addition to a
probe beam tuned to an M1-transition, there is a second,
counter-propagating pump laser beam present whose fre-
quency is tuned to an adjacent fully allowed transition.
The presence of this pump beam modiﬁes the eﬀective
refractive index “seen” by the probe beam in a drastic
way. The main advantages of using this scheme for a par-
ity violation measurement are that the optical rotation
lineshapes are now Doppler-free and can be turned on
and oﬀ by modulating the pump beam intensity.

Other examples of application of nonlinear spectro-
scopic methods to the study of P -violation were reviewed
by Budker (1999).

XIII. CLOSELY-RELATED PHENOMENA AND
TECHNIQUES

A. Dark resonances

Zero-ﬁeld level-crossing phenomena involving linearly
polarized light such as those occurring in the nonlinear
Faraday eﬀect or the ground-state Hanle eﬀect (Sec. II.B)
can be interpreted in terms of dark resonances, or lambda
resonances. Such resonances occur when a light ﬁeld con-
sisting of two phase-coherent components of frequency
ω1 and ω2 is near resonance with a atomic Λ-system [a
three-level system having two close-lying lower levels35

35 In many dark-resonance experiments, the lower-state splitting
is the ground-state hyperﬁne splitting (for example, as with the
F = I±1/2 states in alkali atoms). As the coherent superposition
of hyperﬁne levels can be very long lived, the lambda resonances

41

be viewed as two phase-coherent ﬁelds which happen to
have the same frequency and intensity. A resonance oc-
curs when the atomic levels, tuned via the Zeeman ef-
fect, become degenerate. Even though here it is the level
splitting rather than the light frequency that is tuned,
the origin of the resonance is the same.37

Other closely-related topics discussed in the litera-
ture include “lasing without inversion” (see, for example,
discussion by Kocharovskaya, 1992) and phase-coherent
atomic ensembles, or “phaseonium” (Scully, 1992).

B. “Slow” and “fast” light

When a pulse of weak probe light propagates through
a nonlinear medium in the presence of a strong ﬁeld, var-
ious peculiar phenomena can be observed in the prop-
agation dynamics.
In particular, the strongly coupled
nonlinear system consisting of the medium and the drive
ﬁeld may be described (from the point of view of an ob-
server detecting the probe pulse shape and timing at the
input and the output of the system) as an eﬀectively
linear optical medium with group velocity that can be
1 m s−1 in some experiments), faster than c,
very slow (
or negative (see recent comprehensive reviews by Boyd
and Gauthier, 2002; Matsko et al., 2001a). When the
true nonlinear nature of the medium is considered, how-
ever, it is easily shown that all of these eﬀects are just
pulse-reshaping phenomena that certainly do not contra-
dict any fundamental laws of physics (see, for example,
discussion by Chiao, 1996).

∼

The connection between NMOE and “fast” and “slow”
light was established by Budker et al. (1999a) in an in-
vestigation of the dynamics of resonant light propagation
in Rb vapor in a cell with antirelaxation wall coating.
They modulated the direction of the input light polariza-
tion and measured the time dependence of the polariza-
tion after the cell. The light propagation dynamics that
they observed, including negative “group delays” asso-
ciated with electromagnetically induced opacity (Akul-
shin et al., 1998; Lezama et al., 1999), were analogous to
those in EIT experiments. The spectral dependence of
light pulse delays was measured to be similar to that of
NMOR, conﬁrming a theoretical prediction. In addition,
magnetic ﬁelds of a few microgauss were used to control
the apparent group velocity. Further studies of magnetic-
ﬁeld control of light propagation dynamics were carried
out by Mair et al. (2002); Novikova et al. (1999).

Recently, Shvets and Wurtele (2002) pointed out that
EIT and “slow” light phenomena can also occur in mag-
netized plasma.38 They observe that in such a medium,

37 Although the connection between various nonlinear eﬀects dis-
cussed here and NMOE is straightforward, it has not been widely
recognized until very recently.

38 Earlier studies of EIT phenomena in plasma were conducted by
Gordon et al. (2000a,b); Harris (1996); Matsko and Rostovtsev

FIG. 21 Illustration of the connection between lambda reso-
nances, electromagnetically-induced transparency (EIT), and
NMOE. (a) Lambda resonance in a three-level system. Two
phase-coherent optical ﬁelds at frequencies ω1 and ω2 pump
the system into a “dark” state in which absorption and ﬂuo-
rescence are suppressed. (b) EIT in the Λ-conﬁguration. In
this case, one component of the light ﬁeld is much stronger
than the other. In the absence of the coupling ﬁeld absorp-
tion on the probe transition is large. When the coupling ﬁeld
is applied, a dip, with width given by the relaxation rate of
the coherence between the two lower states, appears in the
absorption proﬁle. (c) NMOE in the Λ-conﬁguration. In this
case, the two light ﬁelds have the same intensity and frequency
and the two transitions have the same strength. Here the fre-
quency splitting of the transitions—rather than that of the
light components—is tuned, using a magnetic ﬁeld.

and one excited level, see Fig. XIII.A(a)]. When the
ω2 is equal to the
diﬀerence frequency ∆ωlight = ω1 −
frequency splitting ∆ωab of the two lower levels (the Ra-
man resonance condition), the system is pumped into a
coherent superposition of the two lower states which no
longer absorbs the bichromatic ﬁeld. Due to the decrease
of ﬂuorescence at the Raman resonance, this situation is
called a “dark resonance” (see, for example, the review
by Arimondo, 1996). The creation of a nonabsorbing co-
herent superposition of the lower states is also referred to
as “coherent population trapping”. When one frequency
component of the light ﬁeld is much stronger than the
other [Fig. XIII.A(b)], it is referred to as a “coupling” or
“drive” ﬁeld, and the reduction of the absorption of the
weaker probe ﬁeld is called “electromagnetically induced
transparency” (see, for example, the review36 by Harris,
1997).

An analogous situation occurs in nonlinear magneto-
optical experiments with linearly polarized light resonant
F ′ = 0 transition [Fig. XIII.A(c)]. The
with a F = 1
σ+ and σ− components of the linear polarization can

→

can have correspondingly small line widths. In Cs and Rb, line
widths below 50 Hz have been observed (Brandt et al., 1997; Er-
hard and Helm, 2001; Erhard et al., 2000). In a magnetic ﬁeld,
the dark resonance of an alkali atom splits into 4I+1 components;
the outermost components correspond to ∆M = ±2I coherences
which have a Zeeman shift of ∼±µBI/(2I + 1) (Wynands et al.,
1998). For cesium (I = 7/2) this yields a seven-fold enhanced
sensitivity to magnetic ﬁelds relative to experiments detecting
∆M = ±1 coherences. A magnetometer based on dark reso-
nances with a sensitivity of 120 nG Hz−1/2 has recently been
demonstrated by Stahler et al. (2001).

36 A list of earlier references dating back to the 1950s can be found

in a review by Matsko et al. (2001a).

EIT, commonly described as a quantum interference ef-
fect (Sec. XIII.A), can be completely described by clas-
sical physics.

C. Self-rotation

As mentioned in Sec. XI.B, if the light used to study
NMOR is elliptically polarized, additional optical rota-
tion (present in the absence of a magnetic ﬁeld) can
occur due to nonlinear self-rotation (SR). Self-rotation
arises when the elliptically polarized light ﬁeld causes
the atomic medium to acquire circular birefringence and
linear dichroism, causing optical rotation. There are sev-
eral physical mechanisms that can lead to SR in atomic
media,39 discussed in detail by Rochester et al. (2001).
Optical rotation can be caused by circular birefringence,
created by either a diﬀerence in the populations (due to
optical pumping, Davis et al., 1992) or the energies (due
M Zeeman sublevels. At high
to ac Stark shifts) of the
power, orientation-to-alignment conversion can generate
atomic alignment not along the axes of light polariza-
tion, leading to optical rotation due to linear dichroism.
In general, the spectra of SR and NMOR are diﬀerent,
and thus both the magnetic ﬁeld and light detuning de-
pendences can be used to distinguish NMOR and SR.

±

Self-rotation can play an important role in the out-
put polarization of gas lasers (Alekseev and Galitskii,
1969) and in high-resolution polarization spectroscopy
(Adonts et al., 1986; Agarwal, 1984; Alekseev, 1988;
Saikan, 1978). Self-rotation was theoretically considered
in relation to NMOR by Fomichev (1995); Giraud-Cotton
et al. (1985b) and as a systematic eﬀect in the study of
atomic parity nonconservation by Kosulin and Tumaikin
(1986). Self rotation in alkali vapors has been stud-
ied experimentally by Bakhramov et al. (1989); Bonch-
Bruevich et al. (1973); Davis et al. (1992); Rochester
et al. (2001)

Recently, it was found that if linearly polarized light
propagates through a medium in which elliptically po-
larized light would undergo SR, squeezed vacuum is pro-
duced in the orthogonal polarization (Boivin and Haus,
1996; Margalit et al., 1998; Matsko et al., 2002b; Tanas
and Kielich, 1983). It may be possible to use this eﬀect
to perform sub-shot-noise polarimetry (Grangier et al.,
1987) in the detection of NMOR.

XIV. CONCLUSION

In this Review, we have described the history and re-
cent developments in the study and application of res-

(1998).

39 Self-rotation was ﬁrst observed in molecular liquids (Maker et al.,
1964). The alignment of anisotropic molecules in the light ﬁeld
can lead to SR (Chiao and Godine, 1969).

42

onant nonlinear magneto-optical eﬀects. We have dis-
cussed the connections and parallels between this and
other subﬁelds of modern spectroscopy, and pointed out
open questions and directions for future work. Numerous
and diverse applications of NMOE include precision mag-
netometry, very high resolution measurements of atomic
parameters, and investigations of the fundamental sym-
metries of nature. We hope that this article has suc-
ceeded in conveying the authors’ excitement about work-
ing in this ﬁeld.

Acknowledgments

We are grateful to D. English and K. R. Kerner for
help with bibliography. The authors have greatly bene-
ﬁted from invaluable discussions with E. B. Alexandrov,
M. G. Kozlov, A. B. Matsko, A. I. Okunevich, M. Ro-
malis, J. E. Stalnaker, A. O. Sushkov, and M. Zolo-
torev.
This work has been supported by the Of-
ﬁce of Naval Research (grant N00014-97-1-0214), by
the U.S. Department of Energy through the LBNL
Nuclear Science Division (Contract No. DE-AC03-
76SF00098), by NSF CAREER grant PHY-9733479,
Schweizerischer Nationalfonds grant 21-59451.99, and by
the Polish Committee for Scientiﬁc Research KBN (grant
PBZ/KBN/043.PO3/2001) and the National Laboratory
of AMO Physics in Torun, Poland.

APPENDIX A: Description of light polarization in terms of
the Stokes parameters

In the formula (22) for the electric ﬁeld of light prop-
agating in the ˆz direction, the polarization state of the
E0, ϕ, ǫ, φ—
light is given in terms of the parameters
the light ﬁeld amplitude, polarization angle, ellipticity,
and phase, respectively. Another parametrization of the
polarization state is that given by the Stokes parameters
(see, for example, discussion by Huard, 1997), which are
useful because they are deﬁned in terms of directly mea-
surable intensities:

S0 = Ix + Iy = I0,
S1 = Ix −
Iy,
S2 = I+π/4 −
I−,
S3 = I+ −

I−π/4,

(A1)

where Ix and Iy are the intensities of the components
along the x- and y-axes, I±π/4 are the intensities of the
components at
π/4 to the x- and y-axes, and I+ and
I− are the intensities of the left- and right-circularly po-
larized components, respectively.

±

The Stokes parameters can also be written in a normal-
ized form that is easily related to the polarization angle

43

(B4)

and ellipticity:

Sz = S1/S0 = cos 2ǫ cos 2ϕ,
Sx = S2/S0 = cos 2ǫ sin 2ϕ,
Sy = S3/S0 = sin 2ǫ.

longitudinal polarization. When there are coherences be-
tween the sublevels, ρ(κ)
= 0, and the
medium is said to have transverse polarization.
If ρ is
represented in the basis
, longitudinal orientation
and longitudinal alignment are given by

= 0 for some q

F, M
|

i

q

(A2)

APPENDIX B: Description of atomic polarization

1. State multipoles

×

The density matrix of an ensemble of atoms in a state
with angular momentum F has (2F +1)
(2F +1) compo-
nents ρM,M ′. Since magneto-optical eﬀects involve spin
rotation (Larmor precession) and other more complex
forms of atomic polarization evolution, it is often use-
ful to work with the irreducible components of ρ, i.e, the
components ρ(κ)
κ . . . κ and κ = 0 . . . 2F ,
which transform among themselves under rotations (see,
for example, discussion by Omont, 1977; Varshalovich
et al., 1988). The ρ(κ)

are related to the ρM,M ′ by

q with q =

−

q

F

ρ(κ)
q =

′

1)F −M

(
−

F, M, F,
h

−

M ′

κ, q
|

ρM,M ′,
i

XM,M ′=−F
. . .
. . .

(B1)
where
indicate the Clebsch-Gordan coeﬃcients.
The density matrix for atoms in a state with angular mo-
mentum F can be decomposed into irreducible multipole
components according to

i

h

|

2F

κ

ρ =

q T (κ)
ρ(κ)
q

,

κ=0
X

q=−κ
X

(B2)

where the T (k)
T (κ) obtained from coupling F with F :

q

are components of the irreducible tensors

F

⊗

F = T (0)

T (1)

T (2F ).

(B3)

⊕

⊕ · · · ⊕

q

The components ρ(κ)
are called state multipoles. The fol-
lowing terminology is used for the diﬀerent multipoles:
ρ(0)–monopole moment or population, ρ(1)–vector mo-
ment or orientation, ρ(2)–quadrupole moment or align-
ment, ρ(3)–octupole moment, and ρ(4)–hexadecapole mo-
ment.40 Each of the moments ρ(κ) has 2κ+1 components.
The term polarization is used for the general case of an
ensemble that has any moment higher than population.
When the Zeeman sublevels are not equally populated,
ρ(κ)
= 0 for some κ > 0, and the medium is said to have
0

40 There are other deﬁnitions of the terms “orientation” and “align-
ment” in the literature. For example, in Zare (1988), alignment
designates even moments in atomic polarization (quadrupole,
hexadecapole, etc.), while orientation designates the odd mo-
ments (dipole, octupole, etc.).

Pz ∝
Azz ∝

ρ(1)
0 ∝ h
ρ(2)
0 ∝

Fzi
,
3F 2

z −

F2

,

(cid:11)

(cid:10)

respectively.

Note also that optical pumping with circularly polar-
ized light (in the absence of other external ﬁelds) creates
multipoles of all orders (κ
2F ), while pumping with
≤
linearly polarized light creates only even-ordered multi-
poles. This latter fact is a consequence of a symmetry
that is most clearly seen when the quantization axis is
along the light polarization direction.

2. Visualization of atomic polarization

In this section, we outline a technique for visualiz-
ing atomic polarization by drawing a surface in three
dimensions representing the probability distribution of
the angular momentum, as presented in more detail by
Rochester and Budker (2001a). A similar approach has
been used to describe molecular polarization and its evo-
lution (Auzinsh, 1997; Auzinsh and Ferber, 1995), and
more recently to analyze anisotropy induced in atoms
and molecules by elliptically polarized light (Milner et al.,
1999; Milner and Prior, 1999).

In order to visualize the angular momentum state of
atoms with total angular momentum F , we draw a sur-
face whose distance r from the origin is equal to the prob-
ability of ﬁnding the projection M = F along the radial
direction. To ﬁnd the radius in a direction given by polar
angles θ and ϕ, we rotate the density matrix ρ so that
the quantization axis is along this direction and then take
the ρF,F element:

r(θ, ϕ) =

M= F
h

R−1
ϕ,θ,0 ρ Rϕ,θ,0|
|

M= F

.
i

(B5)

Here Rα,β,γ is the quantum mechanical rotation matrix
(see, for example, discussion by Edmonds, 1996).

i

Consider, for example, atoms prepared at t = 0 in the
(“stretched”) state with the quantization
F = 1, M = 1
|
axis chosen along ˆy. An electric ﬁeld E is applied along
ˆz, causing evolution depicted in Fig. B.2. We see that
the state originally stretched along ˆy oscillates between
ˆy. In between,
this state and the one stretched along
the system evolves through states with no orientation,
but which are aligned along the ˆz
ˆx directions. Since
the stretched states have orientation, this evolution is
an example of orientation-to-alignment and alignment-
to-orientation conversion (see, for example, discussion by
Blum, 1996).

−

±

6
6
6
y

x

y

x

[Sov. Phys. JETP] 57(3), 1002.

z

t = 0

z

t =

3 ΤS
€€€€€€€€€€€€€€
8

z

z

t =

ΤS€€€€€€€€€
8

t =

ΤS€€€€€€€€€
2

x

x

x

z

t =

ΤS€€€€€€€€€
4

z

t =

5 ΤS
€€€€€€€€€€€€€€
8

y

y

y

y

x

y

x

z

t =

3 ΤS
€€€€€€€€€€€€€€
4

z

t =

7 ΤS
€€€€€€€€€€€€€€
8

z

t = ΤS

y

x

y

x

6(3), 291.

FIG. 22 A sequence of probability surfaces representing evo-
lution of a state with F = 1. The state is initially stretched
along ˆy at t = 0 and an electric ﬁeld is applied along ˆz, caus-
ing Stark beats with period τS.

APPENDIX C: Abbreviations

Alignment-to-orientation conversion
AOC
BSR
Bennett-structure-related
DAVLL Dichroic atomic vapor laser lock
EDM A permanent electric-dipole moment
EIT
FS
MOT Magneto-optical trap
NMOE Nonlinear magneto-optical eﬀects
NMOR Nonlinear magneto-optical rotation
SR

Self-rotation of light polarization

Electromagnetically induced transparency
Forward scattering

References

Adonts, G. G., D. G. Akopyan, and K. V. Arutunyan, 1986,

J. Phys. B 19(24), 4113.

Agarwal, G. P., 1984, Phys. Rev. A 29(2), 994996.
Agarwal, G. S., P. Anantha Lakshmi, J. P. Connerade, and

S. West, 1997, J. Phys. B 30(24), 5971.

Aharonov, Y. and A. Casher, 1984, Phys. Rev. Lett. 53(4),

319.

Ahmad, I., U. Griesmann, I. Martin, W. Dussa, M. A. Baig,

and J. Hormes, 1996, J. Phys. B 29(14), 2963.

Akulshin, A. M., S. Barreiro, and A. Lezama, 1998, Phys.

Rev. A 57(4), 2996.

Aleksandrov, E. B., 1965, Opt. Spectrosc. 19(3), 254.
Aleksandrov, E. B., M. V. Balabas, and V. A. Bonch-
Bruevich, 1987, Pis’ma Zh. Tekh. Fiz. [Sov. Tech. Phys.
Lett.] 13(11-12), 749.

44

Aleksandrov, E. B. and V. N. Kulyasov, 1972, Opt. Spectrosk.

[Opt. Spectrosc. (USSR)] 33(5), 1010.

Alekseev, A. I., 1988, ´Eksp. Teor. Fiz. [Sov. Phys. JETP]

94(7), 130.

Alekseev, A. I. and V. M. Galitskii, 1969, ´Eksp. Teor. Fiz.

Alexandrov, E. B., M. V. Balabas, D. Budker, D. S. English,
D. F. Kimball, C. H. Li, and V. Yashchuk, 2001, Light-
induced desorption of alkali atoms from paraﬃn coating,
unpublished.

Alexandrov, E. B., M. V. Balabas, A. S. Pasgalev, A. K.
Vershovskii, and N. N. Yakobson, 1996, in International
Symposium on Modern Problems on Laser Physics (MAIK
Nauka/Interperiodica Publishing, Novosibirsk, Russia),
volume 6 (no. 2) of Laser Physics, p. 244.

Alexandrov, E. B. and V. A. Bonch-Bruevich, 1992, Opt. Eng.

31(4), 711.

Alexandrov, E. B., M. Chaika, and G. Khvostenko, 1993, In-

terference of Atomic States (Springer, New York).

Alipieva, E. A. and S. I. Karabasheva, 1999, Eur. Phys. J. D

Allen, L. and J. H. Eberly, 1987, Optical resonance and two-

level atoms (Dover, New York).

Allred, J., R. Lyman, T. Kornack, and M. Romalis, 2002, A
high-sensitivity atomic magnetometer unaﬀected by spin-
exchange relaxation, unpublished.

Angel, J. R. P. and P. G. H. Sandars, 1968, Proc. R. Soc.

London, Ser. A 305, 125.

Arimondo, E., 1996, in Progess in Optics, edited by E. Wolf
(New York), volume XXXV of Elsevier Science B.V., p.
259.

Arndt, M., S. I. Kanorsky, A. Weis, and T. W. H¨ansch, 1995,

Phys. Rev. Lett. 74(8), 1359.

Attwood, D. T., 2000, Soft x-rays and extreme ultraviolet radi-
ation: principles and applications (Cambridge University,
Cambridge).

Atutov, S. N., V. Biancalana, P. Bicchi, C. Marinelli, E. Mar-
iotti, M. Meucci, A. Nagel, K. A. Nasyrov, S. Rachini, and
L. Moi, 1999, Phys. Rev. A 60(6), 4693.

Aubel, J. and C. Hause, 1966, J. Chem. Phys. 44, 2659.
Auzinsh, M., 1997, Can. J. Phys. 75(12), 853.
Auzinsh, M. and R. Ferber, 1995, Optical polarization of
molecules, volume 4 of Cambridge monographs on atomic,
molecular, and chemical physics (Cambridge University,
Cambridge).

Badalyan, A. M., V. I. Kovalevskii, M. K. Mararov, E. G.
Saprykin, G. I. Smirnov, and V. A. Sorokin, 1984, Kvant.
Elektron. (Moscow) [Sov. J. Quantum Electron.] 11(9),
1802.

Baird, P. E. G., M. Irie, and T. D. Wolfenden, 1989, J. Phys.

B 22(11), 1733.

Bakhramov, S. A., A. T. Berdikulov, A. M. Kokharov, and

V. V. Tikhonenko, 1989, Phys. Lett. A 141(1-2), 31.

Baranova, N. B., Y. V. Bogdanov, and B. Y. Zel’dovich, 1977,

Map. Fiz. Nauk [Sov. Phys. Usp.] 123(2), 349.

Baranova, N. B. and B. Y. Zel’dovich, 1979, Proc. R. Soc.

London, Ser. A 368(1735), 591.

Barkov, L. M., D. A. Melik-pashayev, and M. S. Zolotorev,

1989a, Opt. Commun. 70(6), 467.

Barkov, L. M., M. S. Zolotarev, and D. A. Melik-Pashaev,
1989b, Opt. Spectrosk. [Opt. Spectrosc. (USSR)] 66(3),
495.

Barkov, L. M., M. Zolotorev, and D. A. Melik-Pashaev, 1988a,

Pis’ma Zh. ´Eksp. Teor. Fiz. [JETP Lett.] 48(3), 144.

Barkov, L. M. and M. S. Zolotorev, 1980, ´Eksp. Teor. Fiz.

[Sov. Phys. JETP] 79(3), 713.

Barkov, L. M., M. S. Zolotorev, and D. A. Melik-Pashaev,
1987, Opt. Spectrosk. [Opt. Spectrosc. (USSR)] 62(2), 243.
Barkov, L. M., M. S. Zolotorev, and D. A. Melik-Pashaev,
1988b, Kvant. Elektron. (Moscow) [Sov. J. Quantum Elec-
tron.] 15(6), 1106.

Barrat, J., 1959, J. Phys. Radium 20(633), 657.
Barrat, J. P. and C. Cohen-Tannoudji, 1961, J. Phys. Radium

22, 329;443.

Bell, W. and A. Bloom, 1957, Phys. Rev. 107, 1559.
Bell, W. and A. Bloom, 1961, Phys. Rev. Lett. 6(6), 280.
Bennett, W., 1962, Phys. Rev. 126, 580.
Berry, M. V., 1984, Proc. R. Soc. London, Ser. A 392(1802),

Bertucceli, G., N. Beverini, M. Galli, M. Inguscio, and

F. Strumia, 1986, Opt. Lett. 11(6), 351.

Beverini, N., E. Maccioni, P. Marsili, A. Ruﬃni, and F. Sor-
rentino, 2001, Appl. Phys. B, Lasers Opt. B73(2), 133.
Birich, G. N., Y. V. Bogdanov, S. I. Kanorskii, I. I. Sobelman,
V. N. Sorokin, I. I. Struk, and E. A. Yukov, 1994, Journal
of Russian Laser Research 15(6), 455.

Blasberg, T. and D. Suter, 1992, Phys. Rev. Lett. 69(17),

45.

2507.

Blum, K., 1996, Density matrix theory and applications,
Physics of atoms and molecules (Plenum, New York), 2nd
edition.

Bogdanov, Y. V. and S. I. Kanorskii, 1987, Acta Phys. Hung.

61(1), 13.

Bogdanov, Y. V., S. I. Kanorskii, I. I. Sobelman, V. A.
Sorokin, I. I. Struk, and E. A. Yukov, 1988, in Spectral
Line Shapes, edited by J. Szudy (North-Holland, Torun,
Poland), volume 5, p. 459.

Bogdanov, Y. V., S. I. Kanorskii, I. I. Sobelman, V. N.
Sorokin, I. I. Struk, and E. A. Yukov, 1986, Opt. Spec-
trosk. [Opt. Spectrosc. (USSR)] 61(3), 446.

Bohr, N., 1924, Naturwiss. 12, 1115.
Boivin, L. and H. A. Haus, 1996, Opt. Lett. 21(2), 146.
Bonch-Bruevich, A. and V. Khodovoi, 1967, Map. Fiz. Nauk

[Sov. Phys. Usp.] 93, 71.

Bonch-Bruevich, A. M., V. A. Khodovoi, and V. V. Khromov,
1973, Opt. Spectrosk. [Opt. Spectrosc. (USSR)] 34(1), 195.
Borghs, G., P. De Bisschop, M. Van Hove, and R. E. Silverans,

1984, Phys. Rev. Lett. 52(23), 2030.

Bouchiat, M. A. and C. Bouchiat, 1997, Rep. Prog. Phys.

Bouchiat, M. A. and J. Brossel, 1966, Phys. Rev. 147(1), 41.
Bouchiat, M. A. and F. Grossetete, 1966, J. Phys. (Paris)

60(11), 1351.

27(5-6), 353.

Bouchiat, M. A., J. Guena, P. Jacquier, M. Lintz, and M. D.

Plimmer, 1995, Z. Phys. D 33(2), 89.

Boyd, R. W., 1992, Nonlinear optics (Academic, Boston).
Boyd, R. W. and D. J. Gauthier, 2002, “Slow” and “fast”

light, Progress in Optics (in press).

Brandt, S., A. Nagel, R. Wynands, and D. Meschede, 1997,

Phys. Rev. A 56(2), R1063.

Breit, G., 1932, Rev. Mod. Phys. 4, 504.
Breit, G., 1933, Rev. Mod. Phys. 5, 91.
Bretenaker, F., L. Dutriaux, J. C. Cotteverte, B. Lepine, and
A. Le Floch, 1995, p. 21, 3eme Colloque sur les Lasers et
l’Optique Quantique (3rd Colloquium on Lasers and Quan-
tum Optics. Horizons of Optics) Limoges, France 6-8 Sept.

45

1993 Ann. Phys. (France).

Bretenaker, F., B. Lepine, J. C. Cotteverte, and A. Le Floch,

1992, Phys. Rev. Lett. 69(6), 909.

Budker, D., 1999,

in Physics Beyond the Standard Model,
proceedings of the Fifth Intrnational WEIN Symposium,
edited by P. Herczeg, C. M. Hoﬀman, and H. V. Klapdor-
Kleingrothaus (World Scientiﬁc), p. 418.

Budker, D., D. F. Kimball, S. M. Rochester, and V. V.

Yashchuk, 1999a, Phys. Rev. Lett. 83(9), 1767.

Budker, D., D. F. Kimball, S. M. Rochester, and V. V.

Yashchuk, 2000a, Phys. Rev. Lett. 85(10), 2088.

Budker, D., D. F. Kimball, S. M. Rochester, and V. V.

Yashchuk, 2002a, Phys. Rev. A 65, 033401.

Budker, D., D. F. Kimball, S. M. Rochester, V. V. Yashchuk,
and M. Zolotorev, 2000b, Phys. Rev. A 62(4), 043403/1.
Budker, D., D. F. Kimball, V. V. Yashchuk, and M. Zolotorev,
2002b, Nonlinear magneto-optical rotation with frequency-
modulated light, Phys. Rev. A (in press).

Budker, D., D. J. Orlando, and V. Yashchuk, 1999b, Am. J.

Phys. 67(7), 584.

Budker, D., V. Yashchuk, and M. Zolotorev, 1998a, Phys.

Rev. Lett. 81(26, pt.1), 5788.

Budker, D., V. Yashchuk, and M. Zolotorev, 1998b, in ICAP
XVI (Windsor, Canada), volume Abstracts of contributed
papers, p. 356.

Buevich, O. E., I. S. Grigor’ev, A. F. Semerok, and V. A.
Firsov, 1987, Pis’ma Zh. ´Eksp. Teor. Fiz. [JETP Lett.]
45(7), 322.

Cabrera, B., 1988, in Near zero: new frontiers of physics,
edited by J. D. Fairbank, B. S. J. Deaver, C. W. F. Everitt,
and P. F. Michelson (W.H. Freeman, New York), p. 312.
Cabrera, B. and W. O. Halmilton, 1973, in The Science and
technology of superconductivity (Plenum, New York,), vol-
ume 2 v., p. 587.

Carrico, J. P., A. Adler, M. R. Baker, S. Legowski, E. Lip-
worth, P. G. H. Sandars, T. S. Stein, and M. C. Weisskopf,
1968, Phys. Rev. 170, 64.

Chen, X., 1989, Experimental and theoretical studies of the
linear and non-linear Faraday eﬀect at the resonance D2
line in Caesium vapour, Ph.d., ETH Zurich.

Chen, X., V. L. Telegdi, and A. Weis, 1987, J. Phys. B 20(21),

Chen, X., V. L. Telegdi, and A. Weis, 1990, Opt. Commun.

5653.

74(5), 301.

Cheron, B., H. Gilles, J. Hamel, O. Moreau, and H. Sorel,
1994, J. Phys. III, Appl. Phys. Mater. Sci. Fluids Plasma
Instrum. 4(2), 401.

Chiao, R. Y., 1996, in Amazing light: a volume dedicated to
Charles Hard Townes on his 80th birthday, edited by R. Y.
Chiao (Springer, New York).

Chiao, R. Y. and J. Godine, 1969, Phys. Rev. 185(2), 430.
Church, D. A. and T. Hadeishi, 1973, Phys. Rev. A 8(4),

Church, D. A. and T. Hadeishi, 1974, Appl. Phys. Lett. 24(4),

1864.

185.

Cimmino, A., G. I. Opat, A. G. Klein, H. Kaiser, S. A.
Werner, M. Arif, and R. Clothier, 1989, Phys. Rev. Lett.
63(4), 380.

Clarke, J., 1996, in SQUID Sensors: Fundamentals, Fabri-
cation, and Applications, edited by H. Weinstock (Kluwer
Academic, The Netherlands), p. 1.

Cliﬀord, M. A., G. P. T. Lancaster, R. S. Conroy, and K. Dho-
lakia, 2000, p. 1933, 14th National Quantum Electronics
Conference Manchester, UK Sept. 1999 Taylor and Francis

46

J. Mod. Opt. (UK).

Cohen-Tannoudji, C., 1968, in Cargese Lectures in Physics,
edited by M. L´evy (Gordon and Breach, New York), vol-
ume 2.

Cohen-Tannoudji, C., 1974, in Atomic Physics IV, edited by

A. W. G. zu Putlitz (Plenum), p. 589.

Cohen-Tannoudji, C. and J. Dupont-Roc, 1969, Opt. Com-

mun. 1(4), 184.

Ducloy, M., 1973, Phys. Rev. A 8(4), 1844.
Dumont, M., 1972, J. Phys. (Paris) 23(11-12), 971.
Dumont, M. and G. Durand, 1964, Phys. Lett. 8, 100.
Dunkin, I. R., 1998, Matrix-isolation techniques: a practical
approach, The practical approach in chemistry series (Ox-
ford University, Oxford).

Dupont-Roc, J., 1970, Rev. Phys. Appl. 5(6), 853.
Dupont-Roc, J., S. Haroche, and C. Cohen-Tannoudji, 1969,

Cohen-Tannoudji, C., J. DuPont-Roc, S. Haroche, and

Phys. Lett. A 28a(9), 638.

F. Lalo¨e, 1969, Phys. Rev. Lett. 22(15), 758.

Cojan, J. L., 1954, Ann. Phys. (Paris) 9, 385.
Colegrove, F., P. Franken, R. Lewis, and R. Sands, 1959,

Durrant, A. V., 1972, J. Phys. B 5(8), 1456.
Durrant, A. V. and B. Landheer, 1971, J. Phys. B 4(9), 1200.
Dyakonov, M. I. and V. Perel, 1966, Opt. Spectrosk. [Opt.

Phys. Rev. Lett. 3, 420.

Spectrosc. (USSR)] 20, 472.

Connerade, J. P., 1983, J. Phys. B 16(3), 399.
Connerade, J. P., W. A. Farooq, and M. Nawaz, 1992, J.

Phys. B 25(7), L175.

Connerade, J. P. and A. M. Lane, 1988, Rep. Prog. Phys.

Corney, A., 1988, Atomic and Laser Spectroscopy (Clarendon,

62(6), 061802/1.

51(11), 1439.

Oxford).

Corney, A., B. Kibble, and G. W. Series, 1966, Proc. R. Soc.

London, Ser. A 293, 70.

Edmonds, A. R., 1996, Angular momentum in quantum me-
chanics, Princeton landmarks in mathematics and physics
(Princeton University, Princeton, N.J.).

Erhard, M. and H. Helm, 2001, Phys. Rev. A 63(4), 043813/1.
Erhard, M., S. Nussmann, and H. Helm, 2000, Phys. Rev. A

Faraday, M., 1846a, Philos. Trans. R. Soc. London XIX, 1.
Faraday, M., 1846b, Philos. Mag. 28, 294.
Faraday, M., 1855, volume III of Experimental Researches in

Corwin, K. L., L. Zheng-Tian, C. F. Hand, R. J. Epstein, and

Electricity (London).

C. E. Wieman, 1998, Appl. Opt. 37(15), 3295.

Cotton, A. and H. Mouton, 1907, C. R. Acad. Sci. 145(229),

Fischer, A. and I. V. Hertel, 1982, Z. Phys. A 304(2), 103.
Fleischhauer, M., A. B. Matsko, and M. O. Scully, 2000, Phys.

870.

Cotton, A. and H. Mouton, 1911, J. Phys. (Paris) 1, 5.
Coufal, H., 1984, Rare gas solids, Springer tracts in modern

physics ; 103 (Springer, Berlin).

Cronin, A. D., R. B. Warrington, S. K. Lamoreaux, and E. N.

Fortson, 1998, Phys. Rev. Lett. 80(17), 3719.

Culshaw, W. and J. Kannelaud, 1964a, Phys. Rev. 133, A691.
Culshaw, W. and J. Kannelaud, 1964b, Phys. Rev. 135, A316.
Culshaw, W. and J. Kannelaud, 1964c, Phys. Rev. 136,

A1209.

Rev. A 62(1), 013808/1.

Fomichev, S. V., 1987, Technical Report IAE-4431/12, Kur-

chatov Institute of Atomic Energy.

Fomichev, S. V., 1991, J. Phys. B 24(22), 4695.
Fomichev, S. V., 1995, J. Phys. B 28(17), 3763.
Fork, R. and L. Bradley III, 1964, Appl. Opt. 3, 137.
Fork, R., L. Hargrove, and M. A. Pollack, 1964, Phys. Rev.

Franke-Arnold, S., M. Arndt, and A. Zeilinger, 2001, J. Phys.

Lett. 12, 705.

B 34(12), 2527.

Cyr, N. and M. Tetu, 1991, Opt. Lett. 16(12), 946.
Davidson, N., L. Heun Jin, C. S. Adams, M. Kasevich, and

Franken, P., 1961, Phys. Rev. 121, 508.
Garton, W. R. S., J. P. Connerade, M. A. Baig, J. Hormes,

S. Chu, 1995, Phys. Rev. Lett. 74(8), 1311.

and B. Alexa, 1983, J. Phys. B 16(3), 389.

Davies, I. O. G., P. E. G. Baird, and J. L. Nicol, 1987, J.

Phys. B 20(20), 5371.

Phys. B 21(23), 3857.

17(18), 1304.

Davis, W. V., A. L. Gaeta, and R. W. Boyd, 1992, Opt. Lett.

Decomps, B., M. Dumont, and M. Ducloy, 1976, in Laser
spectroscopy of atoms and molecules, edited by H. Walther
(Springer, Berlin), p. 283.

Dehmelt, H., 1957, Phys. Rev. 105, 1924.
DeMille, D., D. Budker, and E. D. Commins, 1994, Phys.

Gawlik, W., 1975, Ph.D. thesis, Jagiellonian Univ.
Gawlik, W., 1977, in IX Conference of the European Group

Gawlik, W., 1982, Phys. Lett. A 89A(6), 278.
Gawlik, W., 1994,

in Modern Nonlinear Optics, edited by
M. Evans and S. Kielich (Wiley, New York), volume
LXXXV of Advances in Chemical Physics, p. 733.

Gawlik, W., J. Kowalski, R. Neumann, and F. Tr¨ager, 1974a,

Gawlik, W., J. Kowalski, R. Neumann, and F. Tr¨ager, 1974b,

Opt. Commun. 12(4), 400.

Phys. Lett. A 48a(4), 283.

Davies, I. O. G., P. E. G. Baird, and J. L. Nicol, 1988, J.

for Atomic Spectroscopy (EGAS) (Krakw), p. 147.

Rev. A 50(6), 4657.

Gawlik, W., J. Kowalski, R. Neumann, H. B. Wiegemann,

Demtr¨oder, W., 1996, Laser spectroscopy : basic concepts and

and K. Winkler, 1979, J. Phys. B 12(23), 3873.

instrumentation (Springer, Berlin), 2nd enl. edition.

Gibbs, H. M., G. G. Churchill, and G. J. Salamo, 1974, Opt.

Dinneen, T. P., C. D. Wallace, and P. L. Gould, 1992, Opt.

Commun. 12(4), 396.

Commun. 92(4-6), 277.

Giel, D., G. Hinz, D. Nettels, and A. Wies, 2000, Opt. Express

Dodd, J. N. and G. W. Series, 1978, in Progress in Atomic
Spectroscopy, edited by W. Hanle and H. Kleinpoppen
(Plenum, New York).

6(13).

Phys. Lett. 32(2), 317.

Giraud-Cotton, S., M. Giraud, and L. Klein, 1975, Chem.

Dovator, N. A. and A. I. Okunevich, 2001, Opt. Spectrosk.

Giraud-Cotton, S., V. P. Kaftandjian, and L. Klein, 1982b,

[Opt. Spectrosc. (USSR)] 90(1), 23.

Phys. Lett. A 90A(8), 393.

Drake, K., 1986, Nichtlinearer Faraday-Eﬀekt und nichtlin-
earer Voigt-Eﬀekt am Beispiel eines (J=1-J=0)-bergangs
im Samarium, Ph.d. thesis, Universitt Hannover.

Drake, K. H., W. Lange, and J. Mlynek, 1988, Opt. Commun.

66(5-6), 315.

Giraud-Cotton, S., V. P. Kaftandjian, and L. Klein, 1982a,

Giraud-Cotton, S., V. P. Kaftandjian, and L. Klein, 1985a,

Phys. Lett. A 88A(9), 453.

Phys. Rev. A 32(4), 2223.

Giraud-Cotton, S., V. P. Kaftandjian, and L. Klein, 1985b,

Gorlitz, A., B. Schuh, and A. Weis, 1995, Phys. Rev. A 51(6),

Spectrochim. Acta B, At. Spectrosc. 32B(9-10), 327.

Gould, H., E. Lipworth, and M. C. Weisskopf, 1969, Phys.

Quantum Electron.] 15(3), 517.

Gozzini, A., 1962, C.R. Ac. Sci. (Paris) 255, 1905.
Grangier, P., R. E. Slusher, B. Yurke, and A. LaPorta, 1987,

423.

Jungner, P., T. Fellman, B. Stahlberg, and M. Lindberg, 1989,

Phys. Rev. Lett. 59(19), 2153.

Opt. Commun. 73(1), 38.

Giraud-Cotton, S., V. P. Kaftandjian, and B. Talin, 1980, J.

Phys. Rev. A 32(4), 2211.

Phys. (Paris) 41, 591.

Gordon, D. F., W. B. Mori, and C. Joshi, 2000a, Phys. Plas-

Gordon, D. F., W. B. Mori, and C. Joshi, 2000b, Phys. Plas-

mas 7(8), 3156.

mas 7(8), 3145.

R4305.

Rev. 188, 24.

Grossetete, F., 1965, J. Phys. (Paris) 26, 26.
Guichon, M. A., J. E. Blamont, and J. Brossel, 1957, J. Phys.

Radium 18, 99.

Guillaume, C. and L. Poincar´e, 1900,

in Congres Interna-
tional de Physique r´euni, edited by C.-E. Guillaume and
L. Poincar´e (Gauthier-Villars, Paris).

Hackett, R. Q. and G. W. Series, 1970, Opt. Commun. 2(3),

van Haeringen, W., 1967, Phys. Rev. 158, 256.
Hamilton, W. O., 1970, in International colloquium on weak
magnetic ﬁelds of geophysical and spatial interest (Paris,
France), Rev. Phys. Appl. (France), p. 41.

Hanle, W., 1924, Z. Phys. A 30, 93.
Hanle, W., 1926, Z. Phys. 35, 346.
Hannaford, P. and G. W. Series, 1981, J. Phys. B 14(21),

93.

L661.

Happer, W., 1971, in Prog. Quant. Electron., volume 1, p. 51.
Happer, W., 1972, Rev. Mod. Phys. 44(2), 169.
Happer, W. and H. Tang, 1973, Phys. Rev. Lett. 31(5), 273.
in High-resolution laser spectroscopy,
Haroche, S., 1976,

edited by K. Shimoda (Springer, Berlin), p. 256.
Harris, S. E., 1996, Phys. Rev. Lett. 77(27), 5357.
Harris, S. E., 1997, Phys. Today 50(7), 36.
Hatakeyama, A., K. Enomoto, N. Sugimoto, and T. Yabuzaki,

2002, Phys. Rev. A 65(2), 022904.

Hatakeyama, A., K. Oe, K. Ota, S. Hara, J. Arai,
T. Yabuzaki, and A. R. Young, 2000, Phys. Rev. Lett.
84(7), 1407.

Heisenberg, W., 1925, Z. Phys. 31, 617.
Hellwig, O., J. B. Kortright, K. Takano, and E. E. Fullerton,

2000, Phys. Rev. B 62(17), 11694.

Phys. A 282(3), 253.

Hermann, G. and A. Scharmann, 1967, Phys. Lett. 24A, 606.
Hermann, G. and A. Scharmann, 1968, Zeitschrift fur Physik

Hermann, G. and A. Scharmann, 1972, Z. Phys. A 254(1),

208, 367.

46.

47

Ikegami, T., S. Ohshima, and M. Ohtsu, 1989, Japanese Jour-
nal of Applied Physics, Part 1 (Regular Papers and Short
Notes) 28(10), L1839.

Isayama, T., Y. Takahashi, N. Tanaka, K. Toyoda,
K. Ishikawa, and T. Yabuzaki, 1999, Phys. Rev. A 59(6),
4836.

Ito, M., S. Murayama, K. Kayama, and M. Yamamoto, 1977,

Izmailov, A. C., 1988, Kvant. Elektron. (Moscow) [Sov. J.

Jones, R. V., 1976, Proc. R. Soc. London, Ser. A 349(1659),

Kanorskii, S. I., A. Weis, and J. Skalla, 1995, Applied Physics

B: Laser Optics 60(2-3), S165.

Kanorsky, S. I., S. Lang, S. Lucke, S. B. Ross, T. W. H¨ansch,

and A. Weis, 1996, Phys. Rev. A 54(2), R1010.

Kanorsky, S. I. and A. Weis, 1998, in Advances in Atomic,
Molecular, and Optical Physics vol. 38, edited by B. Bed-
erson and H. Walther (Academic, San Diego).

Kanorsky, S. I., A. Weis, J. Wurster, and T. W. H¨ansch, 1993,

Phys. Rev. A 47(2), 1220.

Kastler, A., 1950, J. Phys. Radium 11, 225.
Kazantsev, A., V. Smirnov, A. Tumaikin, and I. Yagofarov,
1984, Opt. Spectrosk. [Opt. Spectrosc. (USSR)] 57(2), 189.
Kazantsev, A. P., G. I. Surdutovich, and V. P. Yakovlev, 1986,

Pis’ma Zh. ´Eksp. Teor. Fiz. [JETP Lett.] 43(5), 222.

Khriplovich, I. B., 1991, Parity nonconservation in atomic

phenomena (Gordon and Breach, Philadelphia).

Khriplovich, I. B. and S. K. Lamoreaux, 1997, CP violation
without strangeness: electric dipole moments of particles,
atoms, and molecules, Texts and monographs in physics
(Springer, Berlin).

Kimball, D. F., D. Budker, D. S. English, C. H. Li, A.-T.
Nguyen, S. M. Rochester, A. O. Sushkov, V. V. Yashchuk,
and M. Zolotorev, 2001, in Art and Symmetry in Experi-
mental Physics: Festschrift for Eugene D. Commins, edited
by D. Budker, S. J. Freedman, and P. Bucksbaum (AIP,
Melville, New York), volume 596 of AIP Conference Pro-
ceedings, p. 84.

Kinoshita, T., Y. Takahashi, and T. Yabuzaki, 1994, Phys.

Kitching, J., R. Boyd, A. Yariv, and Y. Shevy, 1994, Opt.

Rev. B 49(5), 3648.

Lett. 19(17), 1331.

74(17), 3372.

Rev. Lett. 1, 232.

Kleppner, D., N. F. Ramsey, and P. Fjelstadt, 1958, Phys.

Kocharovskaya, O., 1992,

in XXth Solvay Conference on
Physics Phys. Rep. (Netherlands) (Brussels, Belgium), p.
175.

Korﬀ, S. A. and G. Breit, 1932, Rev. Mod. Phys. 4, 471.
Kortright, J. B. and S. K. Kim, 2000, Phys. Rev. B 62(18),

Herrmann, P. P., J. Hoﬀnagle, N. Schlumpf, V. L. Telegdi,

and A. Weis, 1986, J. Phys. B 19(9), 1271.

Herzberg, G., 1989, Spectra of Diatomic Molecules (Krieger,

12216.

Malabar, Florida).

Kortright, J. B., S. K. Kim, T. Warwick, and N. V. Smith,

Hilborn, R., L. Hunter, K. Johnson, S. Peck, A. Spencer, and

1997, Appl. Phys. Lett. 71(11), 1446.

J. Watson, 1994, Phys. Rev. 50(3), 2467.

Hinz, A., J. Pfeiﬀer, W. Bohle, and W. Urban, 1982, Mol.

Holmes, B. W. and J. A. R. Griﬃth, 1995, J. Phys. B 28(14),

Phys. 45(6), 1131.

2829.

Huard, S., 1997, Polarization of light (Wiley, New York).
Hunter, L., 1991, Science 252(5002), 73.

Kortright, J. B., M. Rice, S. K. Kim, C. C. Walton, and
T. Warwick, 1999, J. Magn. Magn. Mater. 191(1-2), 79.
Kortright, J. B., M. Rice, E. E. Marinero, B. Heinrich, J. Egel-
hoﬀ, W. F., A. Fert, H. Fujimori, G. Guntherodt, and R. L.
White, 1995, in Symposium Magnetic Ultrathin Films, Mul-
tilayers and Surfaces (San Francisco, CA, USA), Mater.
Res. Soc, p. 461.

Hermann, G., G. Lasnitschka, and A. Scharmann, 1977, Z.

Kitching, J., A. Yariv, and Y. Shevy, 1995, Phys. Rev. Lett.

Krupennikova, T. and M. Chaika, 1966, Opt. Spectrosk. [Opt.

Matthews, M. R., 1999, Two-Component Bose-Einstein Con-

Kosulin, N. L. and A. M. Tumaikin, 1986, Opt. Commun.

59(3), 188.

Kozlov, A. N., Y. V. Nikitenkio, and Y. V. Taran, 1982, Nucl.
Instrum. Methods Phys. Res. (Netherlands) 192(2-3), 379.
[Opt. Spectrosc.

Kozlov, M. G., 1989, Opt. Spectrosk.

Kozlov, M. G. and S. P. Porsev, 1990, ´Eksp. Teor. Fiz. [Sov.

Opt. 49, 367.

(USSR)] 67(6), 1342.

Phys. JETP] 97(1), 154.

Kristensen, M., F. Blok, M. v. Eijkelenborg, G. Nienhuis, and

J. Woerdman, 1994, Phys. Rev. A 51(2), 1085.

Krolas, I. and W. Winiarczyk, 1972, Acta Phys. Pol. A

A41(6), 785.

Spectrosc. (USSR)] 20, 1088.

Kuntz, M. C., R. Hilborn, and A. M. Spencer, 2002, Phys.

Labeyrie, G., C. Miniatura, and R. Kaiser, 2001, Phys. Rev.

Rev. A. 65(2), 023411.

A 64(3), 033402/1.

Lamoreaux, S. K., 1999, Phys. Rev. A 60(2), 1717.
Landau, L. D., E. M. Lifshits, and L. P. Pitaevskii, 1995,
Electrodynamics of continuous media, Teoreticheskaia ﬁzika
(Izd. 2-e). v. 8. (Butterworth-Heinemann, Oxford Eng-
land), 2nd rev. and enl. edition.

Lange, W., K. H. Drake, and J. Mlynek, 1986, in XIV Inter-
nation conference on Quantum Electronics (Digest of Tech-
nical Papers, San Francisco, California).

Le Floch, A. and R. Le Naour, 1971, Zh. Prikl. Spektrosk.

4(1), 290.

Le Floch, A. and G. Stephan, 1972, Phys. Rev. A 6(2), 845.
Lecomte, S., E. Fretel, G. Mileti, and P. Thomann, 2000,

Lee, W. D. and J. C. Campbell, 1992, Appl. Phys. Lett.

Appl. Opt. 39(9), 1426.

60(13), 1544.

Lee, W. D., J. J. Heuring, and J. C. Campbell, 1993,
in Frequency-Stabilized Lasers and their Applications
(Boston, MA, USA), Proc. SPIE - Int. Soc. Opt. Eng.
(USA), p. 34.

Lezama, A., S. Barreiro, and A. M. Akulshin, 1999, Phys.

Rev. A 59(6), 4732.

48

Matsko, A. B., O. A. Kocharovskaya, Y. Rostovtsev, G. R.
Welch, A. S. Zibrov, and M. O. Scully, 2001a, Advances in
Atomic, Molecular, and Optical Physics 46, 191.

Matsko, A. B., I. Novikova, M. O. Scully, and G. R. Welch,

2001b, Phys. Rev. Lett. 87(13), 133601/1.

Matsko, A. B., I. Novikova, and G. R. Welch, 2002a, J. Mod.

Matsko, A. B., I. Novikova, G. R. Welch, D. Budker, D. F.
Kimball, and S. M. Rochester, 2002b, Vacuum squeezing
in atomic media via self-rotation, unpublished.

Matsko, A. B. and Y. V. Rostovtsev, 1998, Phys. Rev. E

58(6), 7846.

densation, Ph.d., Universityof Colorado.

McCall, S. L. and E. L. Hahn, 1969, Phys. Rev. 183(2), 457.
Meekhof, D. M., P. A. Vetter, P. K. Majumder, S. K. Lam-
oreaux, and E. N. Fortson, 1995, Phys. Rev. A 52(3), 1895.

Menzies, R. T., 1973, Phys. Lett. A 43A(3), 209.
Mester, J. C., J. M. Lockhart, B. Muhlfelder, D. O. Mur-
ray, and M. A. Taber, 2000, in Fundamental Physics in
Space. H0.1 Symposium of COSPAR Scientiﬁc Commission
H held during the Thirty-Second COSPAR Scientiﬁc As-
sembly (Elsevier, Nagoya, Japan), Adv. Space Res. (UK),
p. 1185.

Milner, V., B. M. Chernobrod, and Y. Prior, 1999, Phys. Rev.

A 60(2), 1293.

Milner, V. and Y. Prior, 1999, Phys. Rev. A 59(3), R1738.
Mitchell, A. C. G. and M. W. Zemansky, 1971, Resonance
radiation and excited atoms (Cambridge University, Cam-
bridge).

Mlynek, J., R. Grimm, E. Buhr, and V. Jordan, 1987, in
Fundamentals of Quantum Optics II, edited by F. Ehlotzy
(Springer, Berlin), p. 249.

Mlynek, J., R. Grimm, E. Buhr, and V. Jordan, 1988, Appl.

Phys. B, Photophys. Laser Chem. B45(2), 77.

Moruzzi, G. and F. Strumia, 1991, The Hanle eﬀect and
level-crossing spectroscopy, Physics of atoms and molecules
(Plenum, New York).

Murthy, S. A., J. Krause, D., Z. L. Li, and L. R. Hunter, 1989,

Litﬁn, G., C. R. Pollock, J. Curl, R. F., and F. K. Tittel,

Phys. Rev. Lett. 63(9), 965.

1980, J. Chem. Phys. 72(12), 6602.

Nakayama, S., G. W. Series, and W. Gawlik, 1980, Opt. Com-

 Lobodzi´nski, B. and W. Gawlik, 1996, Phys. Rev. A 54(3),

mun. 34(3), 389.

Narducci, F., 2001, A proposal to use NMOR in atomic foun-

 Lobodzi´nski, B. and W. Gawlik, 1997, Phys. Scr. Vol. T T70,

tains for magnetometry, private communication.

Nenonen, J., J. Montonen, and T. Katila, 1996, Rev. Sci.

2238.

138.

Lombardi, M., 1969, J. Phys. (Paris) 30(8-9), 631.
Lowe, R. M., D. S. Gough, R. J. McLean, and P. Hannaford,

1987, Phys. Rev. A 36(11), 5490.

5051.

Instrum. 67(6), 2397.

Nienhuis, G. and S. Kryszewski, 1994, Phys. Rev. A 50(6),

Lukomskii, N. G. and V. A. Polishchuk, 1986, Zh. Prikl. Spek-

Nienhuis, G., J. P. Woerdman, and I. Kuscer, 1992, Phys.

trosk. 45(3), 382.

Macaluso, D. and O. Corbino, 1898a, Nuovo Cimento 8, 257.
Macaluso, D. and O. Corbino, 1899, Nuovo Cimento 9, 384.
Macaluso, D. and O. M. Corbino, 1898b, C.R.Ac.Sci. (Paris)

Mair, A., J. Hager, D. F. Phillips, R. L. Walsworth, and M. D.
Lukin, 2002, Phase coherence and control of stored pho-
tonic information, eprint quant-ph/0108046.

Majumder, P. K. and L. L. Tsai, 1999, Phys. Rev. A 60(1),

Maker, P., R. Terhune, and C. Savage, 1964, Phys. Rev. Lett.

Margalit, M., C. X. Yu, E. P. Ippen, and H. A. Haus, 1998,

Opt. Express 2(3).

127, 548.

267.

12, 507.

Rev. A 46(11), 7079.

Novikov, V. N., O. P. Sushkov, and I. B. Khriplovich, 1977,

Opt. Spectrosk. [Opt. Spectrosc. (USSR)] 43(4), 621.

Novikova, I., A. B. Matsko, V. L. Velichansky, M. O. Scully,
and G. R. Welch, 2001a, Phys. Rev. A 63(6), 063802/1.
Novikova, I., A. B. Matsko, and G. R. Welch, 2001b, Opt.

Lett. 26(13), 1016.

Novikova, I., V. A. Sautenkov, G. R. Welch, and M. O.
Scully, 1999, Reduction of the group velocity in nonlinear
magneto-optic experiment in dense coherent media, unpub-
lished.

Novikova, I. and G. R. Welch, 2002, J. Mod. Opt. 49, 349.
Oakberg, T. C., 1995, Opt. Eng. 34(6), 1545.
Okunevich, A. I., 1994, Opt. Spectrosk.

[Opt. Spectrosc.

(USSR)] 77(2), 178.

1636.

1327.

Okunevich, A. I., 1995, Opt. Spectrosk.

[Opt. Spectrosc.

(USSR)] 79(1), 12.
Okunevich, A. I., 2000.
Omont, A., 1977, Prog. Quantum Electron. 5(2), 70.
Oppenheimer, R., 1927, Z. Phys. 43, 27.
Pancharatnam, S., 1966, J. Opt. Soc. Am. B, Opt. Phys. 56,

Papageorgiou, N., A. Weis, V. A. Sautenkov, D. Bloch, and
M. Ducloy, 1994, Appl. Phys. B, Lasers Opt. B59(2), 123.
Patrick, H. and C. E. Wieman, 1991, Rev. Sci. Instrum.

62(11), 2593.

Pﬂeghaar, E., J. Wurster, S. I. Kanorsky, and A. Weis, 1993,

1242.

49

Hinds, 2001, in Art and Symmetry in Experimental Physics:
Festschrift for Eugene D. Commins, edited by D. Budker,
S. J. Freedman, and P. Bucksbaum (AIP, Melville, New
York), volume 596 of AIP Conference Proceedings, p. 62.
Sautenkov, V. A., M. D. Lukin, C. J. Bednar, I. Novikova,
E. Mikhailov, M. Fleischhauer, V. L. Velichansky, G. R.
Welch, and M. O. Scully, 2000, Phys. Rev. A 62(2),
023810/1.

Schieder, R. and H. Walther, 1974, Z. Phys. A 270(1), 55.
Schlesser, R. and A. Weis, 1992, Opt. Lett. 17(14), 1015.
Schlossberg, H. R. and A. Javan, 1966, Phys. Rev. Lett. 17,

Opt. Commun. 99(5-6), 303.

Schmieder, R. W., A. Lurio, W. Happer, and A. Khadjavi,

Pinard, M. and C. Aminoﬀ, 1982, J. Phys. (Paris) 43(9),

1970, Phys. Rev. A 2(4), 1216.

Ramsey, N. F., 1990, Rev. Mod. Phys. 62(3), 541.
Rasbach, U., 2001, Ph.d., University of Fribourg.
Rasbach, U., C. Ospelkaus, and A. Weis, 2001,

in Inter-
national Conference on Coherent and Nonlinear Optics
(SPIE, Minsk (Belarus)), to appear in the Proceedings.
Rautian, S. M. and A. M. Shalagin, 1991, Kinetic problems
of non-linear spectroscopy (North-Holland, Amsterdam).
Regan, B. C., E. D. Commins, C. J. Schmidt, and D. DeMille,

2002, Phys. Rev. Lett. 88(7), 071805.

Rikitake, T., 1987 .
Rikken, G. L. J. A. and B. A. van Tiggelen, 1996, Nature

Rikken, G. L. J. A. and B. A. van Tiggelen, 1997, Phys. Rev.

381(6577), 54.

Lett. 78(5), 847.

Schuh, B., S. I. Kanorsky, A. Weis, and T. W. H¨ansch, 1993,

Opt. Commun. 100(5-6), 451.

Schuller, F., M. J. D. Macpherson, and D. N. Stacey, 1987,

Physica B & C (Netherlands) 147C(2-3), 321.

Schuller, F., M. J. D. Macpherson, and D. N. Stacey, 1989,

Opt. Commun. 71(1-2), 61.

Schuller, F. and D. N. Stacey, 1999, Phys. Rev. A 60(2), 973.
Schuller, F., D. N. Stacey, R. B. Warrington, and K. P. Zetie,

1995, J. Phys. B 28(17), 3783.

Schuurmans, M. F. H., 1976a, Z. Phys. A 279(3), 243.
Schuurmans, M. F. H., 1976b, J. Phys. (Paris) 37(5), 469.
Scully, M. O., 1992, in XXth Solvay Conference on Physics
(Phys. Rep. (Netherlands), Brussels, Belgium), p. 191.

Series, G. W., 1967, Proc. Phys. Soc. London 91, 432.
Shen, Y. R., 1984, The principles of nonlinear optics (Wiley,

Rikukawa, H., T. Sato, M. Nakagawa, and M. Shimba, 1991,

New York).

Electron. Commun. Jpn. 2, Electron. 74(9), 41.

Roberts, G. J., P. E. G. Baird, M. W. S. M. Brimicombe,
P. G. H. Sandars, D. R. Selby, and D. N. Stacey, 1980, J.
Phys. B 13(7), 1389.

Shvets, G. and J. S. Wurtele, 2002, Electromagneti-
cally induced transparency of magnetized plasma, eprint
physics/0202051.

Siegmund, W. and A. Scharmann, 1976, Z. Phys. A 276(1),

Robinson, H., E. Ensberg, and H. Dehment, 1958, American

19.

Rochester, S. M. and D. Budker, 2001a, Am. J. Phys. 69(4),

mun. 143(4-6), 209.

Skalla, J., G. Wackerle, and M. Mehring, 1997a, Opt. Com-

Skalla, J. and G. Waeckerle, 1997, Appl. Phys. B, Lasers Opt.

Physics Society 3, 9.

450.

Rochester, S. M. and D. Budker, 2001b, Calculations of mag-

B64(4), 459.

netic deﬂection, unpublished.

Skalla, J., G. Waeckerle, M. Mehring, and A. Pines, 1997b,

Rochester,

S. M. and D. Budker,

2002, Nonlinear
magneto-optical rotation in optically thick media, eprint
physics/0202071.

Rochester, S. M., D. S. Hsiung, D. Budker, R. Y. Chiao, D. F.
Kimball, and V. V. Yashchuk, 2001, Phys. Rev. A 63(4),
043814/1.

Romalis, M. V., W. C. Griﬃth, J. P. Jacobs, and E. N. Fort-

son, 2001a, Phys. Rev. Lett. 86(12), 2505.

Romalis, M. V., W. C. Griﬃth, J. P. Jacobs, and E. N. Fort-
son, 2001b, in Art and Symmetry in Experimental Physics:
Festschrift for Eugene D. Commins, edited by D. Budker,
S. J. Freedman, and P. Bucksbaum (AIP, Melville, New
York), volume 596 of AIP Conference Proceedings, p. 47.

Rubinowicz, A., 1918, Phys. Z. 19, 441;465.
Saikan, S., 1978, J. Opt. Soc. Am. 68(9), 1184.
Sandars, P. G. H. and E. Lipworth, 1964, Phys. Rev. Lett.

13, 718.

Phys. Lett. A 226(1-2), 69.

Stahlberg, B., P. Jungner, and T. Fellman, 1989, Opt. Com-

mun. 70(4), 329.

Stahlberg, B., P. Jungner, T. Fellman, and A. Lindberg, 1990,
Appl. Phys. B, Photophys. Laser Chem. B50(6), 547.
Stahlberg, B., M. Lindberg, and P. Jungner, 1985, J. Phys. B

18(4), 627.

Stahler, M., S. Knappe, C. Aﬀolderbach, W. Kemp, and

R. Wynands, 2001, Europhys. Lett. 54(3), 323.

Stanzel, G., 1974a, Phys. Lett. A 47A(4), 283.
Stanzel, G., 1974b, Z. Phys. A 270(4), 361.
Stenholm, S., 1984, Foundations of laser spectroscopy, Wiley

series in pure and applied optics (Wiley, New York).

Stephens, P., 1989, Progress in Analytic Spectroscopy 12,

Sumner, T. J., J. M. Pendlebury, and K. F. Smith, 1987, J.

277.

Phys. D 20(9), 1095.

Sangster, K., E. A. Hinds, S. M. Barnett, and E. Riis, 1993,

Phys. Rev. Lett. 71(22), 3641.

Sushkov, A. O., 2001.
Sushkov, O. P. and V. V. Flambaum, 1978, ´Eksp. Teor. Fiz.

Sangster, K., E. A. Hinds, S. M. Barnett, E. Riis, and A. G.

[Sov. Phys. JETP] 75(4), 1208.

Sinclair, 1995, Phys. Rev. A 51(3), 1776.

Suter, D., 1997, The physics of laser-atom interactions (Cam-

Sargent, M. I., W. Lamb, and R. Fork, 1967, Phys. Rev. 164,

bridge University, Cambridge).

436 and 450.

Sauer, B. E., J. J. Hudson, M. R. Tarbutt, and E. A.

Taber, M. A., D. O. Murray, J. M. Lockhart, D. J. Frank, and
D. Donegan, 1993, in Cryogenic Engineering Conference,

edited by P. Kittel (Plenum, Albuquerque, New Mexico),
volume 39, part A, p. 161.

Tanas, R. and S. Kielich, 1983, Opt. Commun. 45(5), 351.
Theobald, G., V. Giordano, N. Dimarcq, and P. Cerez, 1991,

Atomic Physics Methods in Modern Research, edited by
K. Jungmann, J. Kowalski, I. Reinhard, and F. Tr¨ager
(Springer, Berlin), Lecture Notes in Physics 499.

Weis, A., V. A. Sautenkov, and T. W. H¨ansch, 1992, Phys.

50

Valles, J. A. and J. M. Alvarez, 1994, Phys. Rev. A 50(3),

Am. B, Opt. Phys. 10(4), 716.

J. Phys. B 24(13), 2957.

Tomlinson, W. and R. Fork, 1967, Phys. Rev. 164, 466.
Tregidgo, K. M. J., P. E. G. Baird, M. J. D. Macpherson,
C. W. P. Palmer, P. G. H. Sandars, D. N. Stacey, and
R. C. Thompson, 1986, J. Phys. B 19(8), 1143.

Ulam-Orgikh, D. and M. Kitagawa, 2001, Phys. Rev. A 64(5),

052106/1.

2490.

977.

Valles, J. A. and J. M. Alvarez, 1996, Phys. Rev. A 54(1),

Varshalovich, D. A., A. N. Moskalev, and V. K. Khersonskii,
irreducible
1988, Quantum theory of angular momentum:
tensors, spherical harmonics, vector coupling coeﬃcients,
3nj symbols (World Scientiﬁc, Singapore).

Vasilenko, L. S., L. N. Gus’kov, and A. V. Shishaev, 1978, in
Fifth Vavilov Conference on Nonlinear Optics (Novosibirsk,
USSR), Kvantovaya Elektron. Mosk., p. 1746.

Vedenin, V. D., V. N. Kulyasov, A. L. Kurbatov, N. V. Rodin,
and M. V. Shubin, 1986, Opt. Spectrosk. [Opt. Spectrosc.
(USSR)] 60(2), 239.

Vedenin, V. D., V. N. Kulyasov, A. L. Kurbatov, N. V. Rodin,
and M. V. Shubin, 1987, Opt. Spectrosk. [Opt. Spectrosc.
(USSR)] 62(4), 737.

Vetter, P. A., D. M. Meekhof, P. K. Majumder, S. K. Lam-
oreaux, and E. N. Fortson, 1995, Phys. Rev. Lett. 74(14),
2658.

Vliegen, E., S. Kadlecek, L. W. Anderson, T. G. Walker,
C. J. Erickson, and W. Happer, 2001, Nucl. Instrum. Meth-
ods Phys. Res. A, Accel. Spectrom. Detect. Assoc. Equip.
460(2-3), 444.

Voigt, W., 1898a, Nachr. v. d. Kgl. d. Wiss. z. G¨ottingen ,

349.

349.

Voigt, W., 1901, Ann. Der Phys. 4, 197.
Voytovich, A. P., 1984, Magneto-optics of gas lasers (Nauka

i Tekhnika, Minsk).

Walker, T. G., 1989, Phys. Rev. A 40(9), 4959.
Walker, T. G., J. H. Thywissen, and W. Happer, 1997, Phys.

Wang, B. and T. C. Oakberg, 1999, Rev. Sci. Instrum. 70(10),

Rev. A 56(3), 2090.

3847.

Wanninger, P., E. C. Valdez, and T. M. Shay, 1992, IEEE

Photonics Technol. Lett. 4(1), 94.

Warrington, D. M., 1986, J. Phys. B 19, 3477.
Warry, A. J., D. J. Heading, and J. P. Connerade, 1994, J.

Phys. B 27(11), 2229.

lished.

Weingeroﬀ, M., 1931, Z. Phys. 67, 679.
Weis, A., 2001,

in Laser Physics at the Limits, edited by
H. Figger, D. Meschede, C. Zimmermann, and J. F. Ro-
drigues (Springer).

Weis, A. and S. Derler, 1988, Appl. Opt. 27(13), 2662.
Weis, A., S. Kanorsky, M. Arndt, and T. W. H¨ansch, 1995,

Z. Phys. B , 359.

Weis, A., S. Kanorsky, S. Lang, and T. W. H¨ansch, 1997, in

Rev. A 45(11), 7991.

Weis, A., V. A. Sautenkov, and T. W. H¨ansch, 1993a, J. Phys.
II, At. Mol. Cluster Phys. Chem. Phys. Mech. Hydrodyn.
3(3), 263.

Weis, A., B. Schuh, S. I. Kanorsky, and T. H¨ansch, 1993b, in

EQEC’93 (EPS).

Weis, A., J. Wurster, and S. I. Kanorsky, 1993c, J. Opt. Soc.

Weisskopf, V., 1931, Ann. Der Phys. (Leipzig) 9, 23.
Wieman, C. E. and L. Hollberg, 1991, Rev. Sci. Instrum.

62(1), 1.

Winiarczyk, W., 1977, Acta Phys. Pol. A A52(1), 157.
Woerdman, J. P., G. Nienhuis, and I. Kuscer, 1992, Opt.

Woerdman, J. P. and M. F. H. Schuurmans, 1975, Opt. Com-

Commun. 93(1-2), 135.

mun. 14(2), 248.

Wolfenden, T. D., P. E. G. Baird, J. A. Deeny, and M. Irie,

1990, Meas. Sci. Technol. (UK) 1(10), 1060.

Wolfenden, T. D., P. E. G. Baird, and P. G. H. Sandars, 1991,

Europhys. Lett. 15(7), 731.

Wood, R. W., 1909, Philos. Mag. 18, 187.
Wood, R. W., 1922, Philos. Mag. 44, 1109.
Wood, R. W. and A. Ellett, 1923, Proc. R. Soc. London 103,

396.

Wood, R. W. and A. Ellett, 1924, Phys. Rev. 24, 243.
Wynands, R., A. Nagel, S. Brandt, D. Meschede, and A. Weis,

1998, Phys. Rev. A 58(1), 196.

Yamamoto, M., J. Hanari, and Y. Takubo, 1986, J. Opt. Soc.

Am. B, Opt. Phys. 3(10), 1245.

Yashchuk, V., D. Budker, and M. Zolotorev, 1999a, in Trapped
Charged Particles and Fundamental Physics (Asilomar,
CA, USA), AIP Conf. Proc., p. 177.

Yashchuk, V. V., D. Budker, and J. R. Davis, 2000, Rev. Sci.

Yashchuk, V. V., D. Budker, D. F. Kimball, and M. Zolotorev,

2002a, Magnetic shielding, unpublished.

Yashchuk, V. V., E. Mikhailov, I. Novikova, and D. Bud-
ker, 1999b, Nonlinear magneto-optical rotation with sepa-
rated light ﬁelds in 85Rb vapor contained in an antirelax-
ation coated cell, Technical Report LBNL-44762, Lawrence
Berekley National Laboratory.

Yashchuk, V. V., A. O. Sushkov, D. Budker, E. R. Lee, I. T.
Lee, and M. L. Perl, 2002b, Production of dry powder clots
using piezoelectric drop generator, unpublished.

Zapasskii, V. S. and P. P. Feoﬁlov, 1975, Map. Fiz. Nauk [Sov.

Phys. Usp.] 116(1), 41.

Zare, E., 1988, Angular Momentum: understanding sparial

aspects in chemistry and physics (Wiley, New York).

Phys. B, Lasers Opt. 60(2-3), 205.

Zetie, K. P., R. B. Warrington, M. J. D. Macpherson, D. N.
Stacey, and F. Schuller, 1992, Opt. Commun. 91(3-4), 210.
Zibrov, A. S. and A. B. Matsko, 2002, Phys. Rev. A. 65,

Zibrov, A. S., I. Novikova, and A. B. Matsko, 2001, Opt. Lett.

013814.

26(17), 1311.

Wasik, G., W. Gawlik, and J. Zachorowski, 2002, unpub-

Zeiske, K., G. Zinner, F. Riehle, and J. Helmcke, 1995, Appl.

Voigt, W., 1898b, Nachr. v. d. Kgl. d. Wiss. z. G¨ottingen ,

Instrum. 71(2, pt.1-2), 341.

