2
0
0
2
 
n
u
J
 
7
 
 
]
h
p
-
m
o
t
a
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
0
2
0
6
0
2
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Remarks on “Adiabatic stabilization: Observation of the
surviving population”
Sydney Geltman (JILA) and Mircea Fotino (MCDB)
University of Colorado, Boulder, CO 80309-0440, USA

Abstract

Questions are raised about certain experimental and theoretical
claims that atoms may be stabilized into their bound states, and pre-
vented from achieving full ionization, by the application of adiabatic,
ultraintense, high-frequency laser pulses. It is pointed out that those
authors have used the weak-ﬁeld concepts of cross section and ioniza-
tion rate in an ultra intense ﬁeld regime where they have no physical
signiﬁcance.

The purpose of this Comment is to raise several questions concerning
the theoretical interpretation of results obtained from recent experiments
by van Druten et al.
[1]. In those measurements Ne atoms in a cell were
prepared in the (2p)55g m = 4 Rydberg state by a pumping laser and
then ionized by a 90 fs pulse of 620 nm laser radiation having the range
of peak intensities .05 × 1014 to 2.3 × 1014 W/cm2. The relative yields
of ions thus produced and the surviving 5g atoms were measured. Figure
8 in Ref.
[1] contains the results of these relative yields, normalized so
they represent the absolute probabilities P(ion) and P(5g). Any appreciable
leakage into other channels was assumed negligible, so that the authors con-
verted their relative measurements to absolute ones with the normalization
P (ion) + P (5g) ∼= 1 at all intensities. Their P (ion) ∼= .25 and is virtually
ﬂat between I = .5 × 1014W/cm2 and 2.3 × 1014W/cm2, and the authors
point out that this behavior is well below the ionization probability ex-
pected on the basis of the Fermi Golden Rule. They also claimed that the
relative closeness of their extracted ionization cross sections to those of the
theory of Potvliege and Smith [2] constituted a veriﬁcation of the existence
of “adiabatic stabilization.”

We should like to point out to the reader that a dispute has been go-
ing on over the past decade on whether or not “adiabatic stabilization”
does indeed exist. Unfortunately, such controversy was not acknowledged in
Ref. [1]. Brieﬂy, the proponents of this phenomenon claim that when using
suﬃciently high-intensity, high-frequency ﬁelds, the ionization rate may de-
crease as the ﬁeld intensity increases. Since this is a clearly unexpected and
counter-intuitive behavior, it is not surprising that it is a matter of consid-
erable theoretical controversy. For a detailed presentation of the arguments,

1

we refer the reader to the general review articles by Eberly and Kulander
[3] in favor of stabilization, and by Geltman [4] in favor of full ionization.
These review articles contain extensive reference lists.

The overall situation as applied to the experiment [1] and theory [2] un-
der discussion is shown in Fig. 1, where the one-photon cross section for the
ionization of N e(5gm = 4) is plotted as a function of laser intensity. For the
purposes of the present discussion the atom N e(5gm = 4) may be regarded
as purely hydrogenic. The 16 points for P(ion) given in Fig. 8 of [1] are
represented here by the points labeled “exp.” The theoretical predictions
at high intensity in Fig. 1 are those of Potvliege and Smith [2] who use a
Sturmian-Floquet method to evaluate lifetimes of various hydrogenic states
subject to very intense ﬁelds at a number of wavelengths. In general they
ﬁnd this lifetime to decrease when the ﬁeld intensity increases, until a min-
imum in lifetime occurs, followed by an increase in lifetime when further
increasing the intensity. We believe that this unexpected behavior is most
likely the result of the use of a theoretical method beyond its range of valid-
ity. The Sturmian-Floquet method cannot account for the time dependence
contained in the full time-dependent Schr¨odinger equation under such ex-
treme conditions, where the atomic binding potential is eﬀectively destroyed
by the applied ﬁeld.

It is central to this discussion at this point to indicate the dilemma that
one faces when trying to understand how these results connect to the picture
of photoionization at much lower ﬁeld intensities, where there is general
agreement. At the lowest intensities the Fermi Golden Rule (FGR) allows
the evaluation of exact one-photon photoionization cross sections, and one
ﬁnds that σ (5gm = 4) = 2.15 × 10−20cm2 for λ = 620nm, using a method
of Burgess [5]. This value is indicated by FGR at the far left of Fig. 1.
At higher intensities one expects corrections over lowest-order perturbation
theory to enter the picture, and for tunneling (TI) to become the dominant
mechanism for ionization. At even higher intensities the “tunnel” disappears
as the eﬀective binding potential falls below the level of the bound state.
This occurs for a hydrogenic atom (m=0) when

Eo = Z

/16n

3

4

,

(1)

where Eo is the peak electric ﬁeld in the laser pulse (in a.u.), Z is the
eﬀective nuclear charge, and n is the principal quantum number. This ﬁeld
strength is the threshold for a very rapid and nonlinear rise in the probabil-
ity (to essentially unity) of the bound electron escaping into the continuum,

2

Figure 1: Eﬀective cross section of the photoionization of the hydrogenic 5g
m = 4 state by 620 nm laser radiation as a function of intensity. The FGR
calculated value is indicated at the lowest intensities (solid line), as are the
approximate regions for the FGR, TI, and OBI modes of ionization. The
dashed line in the TI region is a schematic representation of the cross section
below the OBI threshold (vertical dashed line). Experimental points of van
Druten et al.
[1] for N e 5g m = 4 (ﬁlled points) and the calculated values
of Potvliege and Smith [2] (open circles and approximate connecting curve).

3

over the lowered barrier along the ﬁeld direction, called over-the-barrier ion-
ization (OBI). For the present 5g state and Z=1, one ﬁnds that this condition
is reached at a laser intensity of 3.51 × 108W/cm2. Cooke and Gallagher
[6] have pointed out that when m 6= 0 there is a correction to the thresh-
old ﬁeld value given by (1) which is due to the preservation of the kinetic
energy associated with the angular momentum along the quantization axis.
The inaccessibility of that energy to the translational kinetic energy of the
ejected electron amounts to a raising of the eﬀective threshold ﬁeld of OBI.
Making that correction we ﬁnd that the OBI intensity for the 5g m = 4
state is raised to 1.18 × 109W/cm2. The above three regions are indicated
by FGR, TI, and OBI in Fig. 1. The eﬀective cross section in the TI region
has not been evaluated, but only schematically indicated as the dashed line
rising from the FGR limit to reﬂect the physically expected increasing cross
section with decreasing tunneling barrier size.

For all intensities above the OBI threshold an eﬀective cross section may
not be meaningfully deﬁned since the ionization probability is no longer a
linear function of the time. We must therefore regard as anomalous the ex-
perimental [1] and theoretical [2] points above the OBI threshold in Fig. 1.
In the TI and OBI regions the more precise quantity to describe the ioniza-
tion dynamics is the ionization probability, which results from a particular
laser pulse. The basic mechanisms for electron ejection in these regions are
tunneling and ﬁeld emission, which are qualitatively diﬀerent from that of
photon absorption, the mechanism that applies at the lowest intensities.
The proper description in the TI and OBI regions requires the solution of
the full time-dependent Schr¨odinger equation followed by its projection onto
ﬁeld-free continuum states, a task that has so far been intractable for real
atoms. Calculations on model atoms [7] have shown the rapid rise to full
ionization, as expected from the above qualitative arguments, and rigorous
deductions of the absence of stabilization have also been given [8]. The use
of an ionization rate or bound state lifetime, as done in [2], no matter how
sophisticated, can at best describe the true physics only through the TI
region. Above the OBI threshold the ionization probability is no longer a
linear function of the pulse duration, and so no ionization rate is any longer
physically meaningful.

It is very diﬃcult for a reader who is not actively engaged in similar
experiments to pinpoint exactly where erroneous results may have arisen in
this experiment [1]. An absolute measurement of ionization probability as
presented in Ref. [1] would require the perfect alignment of three lasers to
ensure that they all are acting on the identical interaction volume in the cell.

4

For example, it is not clear that the axial dimensions of all the focal regions
are identical, which would cast doubt on whether all the N e(5g m = 4)
atoms produced by the preparation pulse were exposed to the peak intensity
of the ionizing pulse. Furthermore, the measurements of relative yields of
surviving atoms and ionized atoms may not be reliably converted to absolute
probabilities by the simple normalization used in Fig. 8 of Ref.
[1]. One
must have individual absolute probability measurements for each of these
yields to ensure that no other channels are interfering. Ideally, an accurate
absolute measurement of ionization probability would require the use of
crossed atom and laser beams rather than a gas cell, as it is such crossed
beam geometries that have provided the most accurate measurements in the
past.

In conclusion, the purpose of this Comment is to show the gulf between
a phenomenological understanding of photoionization in ultra-intense ﬁelds
and the measurements reported in Ref. [1] and the theory in Ref. [2]. These
reported results on “adiabatic stabilization” use the concept of ionization
rates by photon absorption in an intensity region 3 to 5 orders of magnitude
larger than that at which one would expect the total break-up of the atom
by simple electrostatic arguments. To become acceptable, such claims for
stabilization must provide a physical answer to the counter argument that
the atom is being completely dissociated at much lower intensities. How can
there be any appreciable surviving population when the top of the binding
potential barrier lies far below the bound-state energy? There is no reason
that we can see to expect any appreciable survival population for a bound
atomic state that has been subject to many (∼50) cycles of a ﬁeld of such
extremely high intensity.

5

REFERENCES
[1] N. J. van Druten, R. C. Constantinescu, J. M. Schins, H. Nieuwen-

huize, and H. G. Muller, Phys. Rev. A 55, 622 (1997).

[2] R. M. Potvliege and P. H. G. Smith, Phys. Rev. A 48, R46 (1993).
[3] J. H. Eberly and K. C. Kulander, Science 262, 1229 (1993).
[4] S. Geltman, Chem. Phys. Lett. 237, 286 (1995).
[5] A. Burgess, Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 118, 477 (1958).
[6] W. E. Cooke and T. F. Gallagher, Phys. Rev. A 17, 1226 (1978).
[7] Q. Chen and I. B. Bernstein, Phys. Rev. A 47, 4099 (1993); S.

Geltman, J. Phys. B 27, 1497 (1994).

[8] A. Fring, V. Kostrykin, and R. Schrader, J. Phys. B 29, 5651 (1996).

6

