Photoionization of ultracold and Bose-Einstein condensed Rb atoms

D. Ciampini, M. Anderlini, J.H. M¨uller, F. Fuso, O. Morsch, J.W. Thomsen∗, and E. Arimondo.
INFM, Dipartimento di Fisica E. Fermi, Universit`a di Pisa, Via Buonarroti 2, I-56127 Pisa, Italy

2
0
0
2
 
n
u
J
 
7
 
 
]
h
p
-
m
o
t
a
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
9
1
0
6
0
2
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Photoionization of a cold atomic sample oﬀers intriguing
possibilities to observe collective eﬀects at extremely low tem-
peratures. Irradiation of a rubidium condensate and of cold
rubidium atoms within a magneto-optical trap with laser
pulses ionizing through 1-photon and 2-photon absorption
processes has been performed. Losses and modiﬁcations in
the density proﬁle of the remaining trapped cold cloud or the
remaining condensate sample have been examined as func-
tion of the ionizing laser parameters. Ionization cross-sections
were measured for atoms in a MOT, while in magnetic traps
losses larger than those expected for ionization process were
measured.

I. INTRODUCTION

The recent development of laser cooling and trapping
techniques has made possible the controlled realization of
dense and cold atomic samples, thus opening the way for
spectroscopic investigations in the low and ultra-low tem-
perature regimes not accessible with conventional tech-
niques. Cold atoms in magneto-optical traps (MOT)
have been used as excellent tools for the measurement of
ionization cross sections. In particular for alkaline atoms
[1–8] and for magnesium [9] valuable data have been ob-
tained using the trap population dynamics as a sensitive
monitor of the trap loss induced by the ionizing radiation,
extracting wavelength dependencies and absolute values
for the cross sections. More recently ultra-cold plasmas
have been created making use of laser cooled atomic sam-
ples and laser excitation to high Rydberg states [10]. To
understand the relaxation of such a system towards equi-
librium many phenomena such as recombination and su-
per elastic collisions in a completely new temperature
regime for plasmas have to be taken into account. More-
over a frozen Rydberg gas can be created with intrigu-
ing transport properties, like quasi-metallic behavior or
delayed electron emission [11]. In these systems the col-
lective character of the dynamics is due to the strong
interaction between charged and highly excited particles.

∗

Permanent address: Niels Bohr Institute, Oersted Lab-
oratory, University of Copenhagen, DK-2100 Copenhagen,
Denmark.

The realization of Bose-Einstein condensates (BEC) of
alkali atom vapors has attracted much interest to new
aspects of photon-matter interaction arising from the co-
herent nature of the atomic ensemble. Recently attention
has been paid to the analysis of photoionization of a BEC
by monochromatic laser light [12]. The products of the
photoionization process (electrons and ions) obey Fermi-
Dirac statistics. Owing to the coherent nature of the
initial atomic ensemble and the narrow spectral width of
the laser ionization source, the occupation number of the
electron/ion ﬁnal states can approach unity, especially
for excitation close to threshold. In this regime the ion-
ization rate should be reduced by the Pauli blockade and
determined by a balance between the laser light acting
on the atoms and the rate of escape of the ionization
products from the condensed system.

When photoionizing cold atoms, at decreasing tem-
perature and at increasing atomic density, the interac-
tion between the charged particles and the neutral ”di-
electric” background can become signiﬁcant. New in-
formation about the energy transfer from the charged
species to the neutral particles can be obtained using
non-dissipative traps, such as magnetic traps, and us-
ing the atom dynamics as a monitor. An ion localized
inside a condensate modiﬁes the density distribution of
the condensate dielectric background by attracting the
atoms towards itself. The classical interaction energy
between a single ion and a polarized ground state con-
densate at a distance typical for a condensate density of
1014 cm−3 is larger than typical chemical potentials in
Bose-Einstein condensates (h times 100 Hz). This means
that locally the polarization eﬀect is important for the
condensate dynamics and may even lead to a destruction
of the condensate phase. As a consequence, the observ-
able eﬀect depends on the interaction time between ions
and condensate: apart from the recoil picked up from the
ionizing photon, in real experiments stray electric ﬁelds
might limit this interaction time. Examining the con-
densate cloud remaining after the laser excitation, the
atom-ion/electron interaction for weakly ionized clouds
may show signiﬁcant changes of the density and momen-
tum distribution [13]. Furthermore the interaction of the
charged particles among themselves will play an impor-
tant role for higher fractions of ionized particles, with
plasma formation and collective eﬀects.

In this paper we report, and compare, the results
for the experimental investigation of the photoionization
process within a rubidium condensate and within the cold
rubidium sample of a MOT. The condensate photoioniza-
tion process originates from the ground state, while for

1

the MOT sample results from both the ground and the
ﬁrst excited electronic state have been obtained. We in-
vestigated ionization by means of 1-photon and 2-photon
single color processes using various pulsed and cw laser
sources, more precisely 296 nm for 1-photon ionization
and 580-600 nm for 2-photon ionization from the 5S1/2
ground state, 296 and 421 nm radiations for 1-photon
ionization from the 5P3/2 state. The ionization process
has been examined through the losses from the sample,
a cold cloud inside a MOT or a magnetic trap, or a con-
densate inside a magnetic trap. Our approach is based
on trap loss ionization spectroscopy with the photoion-
ization losses measured as an additional decay after the
trap loading.

Section II recalls brieﬂy the model for photoionization
induced trap loss, concentrating on the use of a pulsed
laser. Section III describes the experimental set-up and
the characteristics of the applied pulsed and cw laser ra-
diation. Section IV analyzes and discusses the experi-
mental results obtained on the thermal and condensate
cloud, separating the MOT and magnetic trap experi-
ments. Section V concludes the present investigation.

II. TRAP LOSS SPECTROSCOPY

A. Photoionization

The dynamics of the number N of trapped atoms in
a MOT in the constant density regime and with the
trap loading shut oﬀ, predicts an exponential decay, with
a time constant 1/γ, determined by collisions with the
background gas and intra-trap collisions. In the presence
of ionization by a cw laser, additional losses with rate
γph shorten the lifetime of the trap and the equation of
evolution for N becomes [1]

Hence, if N0 is the initial number of atoms,

dN
dt

= −γN − γphN.

N (t) = N0e

−(γ+γph)t.

(1)

(2)

When using photons above the ground state ionization
threshold on a MOT, the loss rate γph contains the con-
tributions from the 5S rubidium ground state ionization
rate R5S and from the 5P rubidium excited state ioniza-
tion rate R5P

γph = (1 − f )R5S + f R5P ,

(3)

with f the fraction of atoms in the excited state. That
fraction f , under standard MOT operating conditions,
can be calculated from the MOT laser parameters as in
refs. [2,4]. For a cold cloud in a magnetic trap or for a
In that case
condensate, Eq. (1) can be also applied.

the excited state fraction f is equal to zero, so that the
ionization loss depends on the ground state rate R5S only.
In the case of 1-photon ionization by a laser with a

photon ﬂux Fph, the ionization rate is

R5l = σ(1)

5l β(1)Fph,

with l = (S, P ), σ(1)
5l being the 1-photon ionization cross-
section and β(1) a geometrical correction coeﬃcient. For
a 2-photon ionization process with cross-section σ(2)
5l and
geometrical correction coeﬃcient β(2), the ionization rate
is

R5l = σ(2)

5l β(2)(Fph)2,

The geometrical coeﬃcients β(k) take into account the
spatial distribution of the laser beam and the atomic
sample. For a Gaussian laser beam with waists wx and
wy centered on a Gaussian atomic distribution with sizes
Lx and Ly, and assuming the density distribution of the
target atoms not depleted by the laser, the geometrical
corrections are

β(k) =

1

2

1 + k

Lx
wx

1 + k

Ly
wy

s(cid:18)

(cid:19) (cid:18)

(cid:16)

(cid:16)

(cid:17)

(cid:17)
with k = (1, 2). The correction approaches unity for
laser beam sizes larger than the atomic sample size. The
ionization photon ﬂux Fph is connected to the photon
number nph and area Aph = πwxwy/2, or to the intensity
Iph and wavelength λph by

,

2

(cid:19)

For the ionization by a pulsed laser with pulse duration

τph, the ionization probability is

Fph =

nph
Aph

=

Iphλph
hc

.

Pph = γphτph.

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

In analogy with Eq. (2), the atom number left in the
trap (either magneto-optical or magnetic) after the ap-
plication of a single laser pulse is

Nph = N0(1 − Pph) = N0(1 − γphτph).

(9)

For a sequence of laser pulses, we suppose that each ion-
ization process is not modiﬁed by the previous photoion-
ization history. Thus the application of a sequence of m
pulses leads to the following remaining number:

Nph = N0(1 − γphτph)m.

(10)

If we apply a pulse sequence with rate rph, at the time t
the atom number becomes

N (t) = N0e

−γt(1 − γphτph)rpht

(11)

2

In the case of a small ionization probability, the decrease
in the atom number is well approximated by an exponen-
tial decay, as in Eq. (2) for cw laser, with an eﬀective
ionization decay γeﬀ
ph

leading to additional trap losses. Rather than attempt-
ing to model the complicated cloud dynamics, in Section
IVb we will only estimate the kinetic energy imparted by
the laser pulse on a single atom.

ph = γphτphrph = [(1 − f )R5S + f R5P ] τphrph.
γeﬀ

(12)

We veriﬁed Eq. (11) to be valid by changing the repeti-
tion rate rph, and hence the time separation between suc-
cessive pulses, and obtaining consistent results for γeﬀ
ph .

B. Scattering and dipole force

Apart from changing the internal atomic state, the
ionizing laser radiation also acts on the center-of-mass
motion of the atoms through the scattering and dipole
forces (see e.g. [15] for an overview and [16] for the case
of pulsed radiation). For ionization above threshold the
excess energy of the photon is converted into kinetic en-
ergy of the fragments imparting large momentum on the
electron and ion. For trap loss spectroscopy only the
radiation forces xing on the atoms remaining in bound
states within the trap need to be considered for addi-
tional loss mechanisms. The dissipative environment of
a MOT with a typical eﬀective trap depth of 300 mK
safely recaptures and cools atoms with velocities of some
10 m/s, while in a conservative magnetic trap with typ-
ical depth of 50 µK atoms accelerated to 10 cm/s can
escape from the trap.

The relative role of the scattering and dipole forces act-
ing on the atoms depends mainly on the laser detuning
from the atomic transitions. For most of our investiga-
tions with pulsed lasers, the laser detuning was so large
that the scattering forces could be neglected. For the
case of a condensate there is a subtle diﬀerence between
the eﬀects of the scattering and dipole forces. In a spon-
taneous emission event the photon recoil is picked up
by this atom, as long as the condensate sound velocity
is smaller than the atomic recoil velocity. Instead, the
dipole force due to the coherent redistribution of laser
photons acts on the whole condensate cloud. For a con-
stant intensity gradient over the condensate, the center-
of-mass motion of the condensate will be driven by the
dipole force without internal excitation. By contrast, for
laser beam sizes comparable to the condensate size, the
gradient of dipole force produces also internal excitations
of the condensate. For the impulse approximation in the
case of pulsed radiation, a complicated phase pattern is
imprinted onto the condensate cloud, which subsequently
evolves into considerable modiﬁcations of the condensate
density distribution, catalyzing the formation of solitons,
as in ref. [17], or splitting the condensate cloud in pieces.
Part of these fragments may acquire a high enough ki-
netic energy to leave the magnetic trap potential, hence

C. Collisions

Additional trap losses may be caused by inelastic colli-
sions between the ionization products, electrons and ions,
and the thermal or condensed cloud remaining in the
trap. We have found very little information available for
those very low energy collisional processes. Using the
cross-section for collisions of 10 meV electrons with car-
bon dioxide molecules [18] or the scattering length for
the electron-Rb collisions reported in ref. [19], we esti-
mated the collisional processes to produce negligible ad-
ditional trap losses. We should also consider that, after
the ionization, a recombination process produces atoms
in highly excited Rydberg states, and those atoms will
thermalize within the condensate. During this process,
inelastic collisions can lead to additional losses, whose
contribution we cannot easily estimate.

III. EXPERIMENTAL SETUP

Our experimental apparatus, described in ref. [20], was
based on a double MOT system, divided into a high
vacuum region optimized for collecting Rb atoms in a
MOT and a second region of low background pressure,
into which the atoms were collected for transfer to the
high vacuum MOT. Photoionization investigations were
performed in the high vacuum MOT. For the experimen-
tal parameters of our MOT lasers (intensity I = 16.5
mW/cm2, detuning δ = −2.2Γ) we derived an excited
state fraction f = 0.14 ± 0.02.

The atoms from the high vacuum MOT can be trans-
ferred into a magnetic trap, in our case a triaxial time-
orbiting potential trap (TOP). Compressing the trapped
cloud and applying forced evaporative cooling with rf in-
duced spin ﬂips, the BEC phase transition was reached
with typically 5 · 104 atoms. ”Pure” | F = 2, mF = 2i
condensates contained up to 2 · 104 atoms in an ellipsoid
whose average dimension was in the 5 µm range. Instead
the dimension of the noncondensed cloud inside the TOP
was in the 40-100 µm range. Depending on the chosen
sequence of cooling and trapping steps, noncondensed or
condensed samples with temperatures ranging from a few
hundreds of µK down to tens of nK with atomic densities
of 1010-1014 atoms/cm3 were prepared.

The present experimental setup does not include a
charge detector to monitor directly the production of
positive and negative charges. Thus the action of the
photoionizing laser was monitored through the decrease
of the atoms remaining in the trap, applying a shadow

3

imaging detection using a 780 nm near-resonant probe
laser beam. The absorptive shadow cast by the cold
atoms was imaged onto a CCD camera. Measurements
on both condensates and very cold thermal clouds were
performed after a few milliseconds of free fall of the re-
leased atomic clouds, when their typical dimensions were
of the order of 30-300 µm. The atomic samples remain-
ing after the photoionization process contained a number
of atoms large enough to measure their temperature and
density distribution. Within the magnetic trap both a
sample of thermal atoms with about 106 rubidium atoms
cooled by evaporative cooling down to T=400 nK and a
condensate were photoionized.

The 4.177 eV energy threshold for ionization of rubid-
ium atoms from the 5S1/2 ground state can be reached by
a single photon of 296.815 nm wavelength. Alternatively
the ionization threshold can be crossed using two pho-
tons aroud 594 nm, with a substantially larger radiation
intensity needed since there is no resonant intermediate
level for the 2-photon process. We irradiated the cold
atom with pulsed lasers operating around 594 nm and
296 nm, and with a cw laser at 421 nm.

The 580-600 nm radiation was produced by an excimer-
pumped dye laser, with intensities in the hundreds of
MW/cm2 range and a laser pulse duration τph of 10
ns. Laser pulse repetition rates rph up to 12 Hz were
used. The excess energy Eex of the ionizing photons, and
therefore the kinetic energy of the released electrons, was
around 8.5 meV with an energy spread due to the laser
linewidth of around 0.1 meV. The 296 nm radiation was
generated from the yellow radiation by frequency dou-
bling within a BBO crystal, with 15% eﬃciency. The
wavelength used corresponded to an electron excess en-
ergy Eex of 10.4±0.1 meV. The 594 nm dye laser radia-
tion was focused down to 80 µm on the rubidium atoms,
while for the 296 nm radiation, owing to beam astigma-
tism, beam waists of respectively 0.36 × 1.6 mm for the
MOT and 0.16 × 0.78 mm for the TOP were achieved.

For the 421 nm radiation a grating stabilized diode
laser operating at 842 nm injected a tapered ampliﬁer
delivering power in excess of 500 mW. The IR radiation
was frequency doubled using an LBO crystal placed in-
side an external enhancement resonator [21]. Around 10
mW of narrowband cw radiation at 421 nm were avail-
able. The 421 nm wavelength was chosen in order to use
the 6P1/2 or 6P3/2 levels as near resonant intermediate
steps for a 2-photon process from the ground state lead-
ing to an electron excess energy of 1.7 eV. When applied
to atoms stored in a MOT, the 1-photon process out of
the populated 5P3/2 is dominant, releasing electrons with
an excess energy of 0.34 eV.

IV. PHOTOIONIZATION RESULTS

A. MOT

The frequency doubled radiation 296 nm pulsed laser
induced single-photon ionization of the ground state and
ﬁrst excited state. The MOT atoms were illuminated by
a photon ﬂux Fph = 2 × 1024 cm−2 s−1. Decay proﬁles of
the 780 nm wavelength MOT ﬂuorescence, proportional
to the trapped atom number, after shutting of the load-
ing are displayed in Fig.1. To separate in Eq. (12) the
contributions due to the ionization from the ground 5S1/2
and excited 5P3/2 state, we combined fast switching of
the MOT laser beams with the timing of the ionization
pulses. The solid line in Fig.1 shows the exponential de-
cay in absence of uv photoionization light, with a decay
time γ−1 =60 s. The dashed and dotted lines correspond
to the application of the pulsed uv light to a cw and a
synchronously switched MOT, respectively. In the syn-
chronous operation mode the MOT lasers were switched
oﬀ for 60µs leaving ample time for the atoms to decay
back to the ground state before interacting with the uv
pulse while keeping negligible the ballistic expansion of
cloud. Using the fraction of excited atoms f , we derived
from γph (around one ﬁfth of γ) the following values of
the photoionization cross-sections:

σ(1)
5S1/2

σ(1)
5P3/2

= (0.76 ± 0.15) × 10

−19cm2,

= (5.4 ± 1.2) × 10

−18cm2.

(13a)

(13b)

The ground state ionization cross-section value is in rea-
sonable agreement with the value measured in the late
sixties by Marr and Creek [22] using the absorption of
uv light emitted from a discharge lamp by hot Rb va-
pors, and later derived theoretically in refs. [23,24]. Since
we used interleaved scans for these measurements, our
largest systematic error source, the intensity determina-
tion of the ionizing laser, drops out for the ratio of the
two cross sections

σ5P3/2
σ5S1/2

= 71 ± 10,

(14)

the error being given only by the uncertainty in f .

 without UV
 UV + MOT lasers off
 UV + MOT lasers on

0

50

150

200

100
time (s)

)
s
t
i
n
u
.
b
r
a
(
 
)
t
(

N

2.0

1.5

1.0

0.5

0.0

4

FIG. 1. Time decay for the ﬂuorescence from the rubidium
atom MOT in absence (continuous line) and in the presence
of 296 nm uv light (dashed and dotted lines). For the case
of the dotted line the MOT lasers were switched oﬀ before
applying the uv light in order to populate the 5S1/2 ground
state only. A rph = 10 Hz pulse repetition rate was used, with
130 µJ pulse energy.

Also in the ground state 2-photon ionization by the
yellow 594 nm pulsed laser with photon ﬂux Fph ≃ 1027
cm−2s−1, we examined the decay of the MOT ﬂuores-
cence emission. Using the method of interleaved cw and
synchronously switched runs described above, we veri-
ﬁed that the 2-photon ionization contribution from the
excited 5P3/2 state could be neglected in this case. The
additional measured loss rate introduced by the pulsed
ph = 1.14 × 10−3 s−1.
dye laser with rate r = 11 Hz, was γeﬀ
Using Eq. (12) the ionization probability Pph by a single
pulse is 1 · 10−4, corresponding to a 2-photon ionization
cross section from the ground state

σ(2)
5S1/2

= (11 ± 6) × 10

−49cm4s.

(15)

This value agrees quite well with the theoretical predic-
tion 5 · 10−49cm4s, calculated by Bebb [25].

Using the 421 nm cw laser, we studied the decay of
the MOT population due to ionization from the ﬁrst ex-
cited state, whose cross section was estimated by Ay-
mar et al [23]. For the the 2-photon ionization from the
5S = 4 × 10−49 cm4s esti-
ground state the cross-section σ(2)
mated in [25] predicts a negligible ground-state ionization
with the available photon ﬂux. The measured additional
MOT loss rates γph are plotted in Fig.2 as a function of
the photoionizing laser intensity Iph. From these data
we obtained the following value for the photoionization
cross-section at λph = 421.66 nm:

σ(1)
5P3/2

= (1.34 ± 0.16) × 10

−17cm2

(16)

Figure 3 shows the measured data for the photoioniza-
tion cross-section from the rubidium excited state 5P3/2
for various wavelengths of the ionizing laser. Our experi-
mental points at 296 nm (pulsed) and 421 nm (cw) are in
good agreement with the values previously measured by
Dinneen et al [1], Gabbanini et al [2], and Klyucharev and
Sepman [26], the last one for an unresolved ﬁne structure
5P state, and the two theoretical estimates of Aymar et
al [23]. Within the explored range the cross-section de-
pendence on Eex is ﬁtted by a straight line, while at larger
excess energy a E

dependence is expected [23].

−9/2
ex

1
-

3
-

)
 

s
 
 

0
1
(
 

h
p

γ

20

80

60

40

0

)

2

m
c

8
1
-

0
1
(
 

2
/
3
p
5
 

)
1
(

σ

20

15

10

5

0

0

5

10
Iph (mW/cm
FIG. 2. Additional loss rate γph introduced in the MOT
evolution by the presence of the 421 nm cw laser, as a function
of the laser intensity Iph. From these data the photoionization
cross-section for the excited 5P3/2 state was derived.

20

15

2
)

s
s
o
l
 

m
o
t
a
 
l
a
n
o
i
t
c
a
r
F

0.5

0.4

0.3

0.2

0.1

 losses  

,
density

10

10

10

10

14

13

12

11

10

10
9
10
8
10

p
e
a
k
 
d
e
n
s
i
t
y
 
(
c
m

 
)
 

-
3

4

5

6

7

8

rfcut (MHz)

FIG. 4. Fractional

loss of atoms after exposure to 120
pulses of the 296 nm laser inside the magnetic trap (ﬁlled
circles) as a function of the ﬁnal frequency for rf evaporation
(for the open circle data point a longer time of ﬂight was
used). The decreasing rf cut produced an increasing atomic
peak density (open diamonds). The dashed line indicates the
condensation threshold position. The continuous line models
the eﬀect of the changing size of the cloud within the spatial
distribution of the uv beam.

B. Magnetically trapped atoms

0.0

0.5

1.0
Excess energy (eV)

1.5

2.0

FIG. 3. 1-photon ionization cross sections in the Rb MOT
from the excited state 5P3/2 as a function of the electron
excess energy. The ﬁlled squares are our experimental results
for λph = 296 nm and λph = 421 nm. Other data points are
extracted from the literature.

In the ionization experiment performed with uv light at
296 nm a lower peak intensity (70 µJ) and the large beam
size lead to a single pulse ionization probability of 0.002.
Because a single pulse produced a loss of atoms too small
to be directly detected, we illuminated the magnetically
trapped atoms (condensate and non-condensate) with a
sequence of 120 pulses, at a repetition rate of 11 Hz. We

 present work
 ref [1]
 ref [26]
 ref [2]
 ref[23]

5

performed the investigation of the ionization losses start-
ing with an initial cold cloud of 106 atoms and, varying
the ﬁnal rf frequency cut, we ionized clouds with decreas-
ing temperature and increasing atom density. Finally, for
radio-frequency cuts below the 3.95 MHz threshold, we
ionized a pure condensate. Data for the peak density and
the fractional atom loss are reported in Fig.4 as a function
of the ﬁnal rf value. The measured total fractional losses
between 15 and 20% were compared to the single pulse
loss extracted from the MOT measurements described
by the continuous curve in Fig.4 taking into account the
changing size of the atomic cloud into the geometric fac-
tor β(1) of Eq.(4) and an overall scale factor of 1.5, due
to an estimated misalignement of 100 µm between the
atomic cloud and the laser beam. We veriﬁed that the
temperatures of the thermal clouds were unaﬀected by
the laser pulses within the experimental uncertainty of
5%. However, when using a longer time of ﬂight before
imaging for a pure Bose condensed cloud (in order to de-
crease the optical density, thus getting more reliable data
for the number of atoms), we measured higher losses (the
open circle in Fig. 4). This result indicates the presence
of very low energy thermal atoms removed from the con-
densate but still trapped, albeit with a spatial density
below our detection noise. Thus the 296 nm laser acting
on a condensate produces additional loss of low energy
thermal atoms ejected from the condensate cloud. Since
for the large beam size and the moderate pulse energy
we did not expect a signiﬁcant contribution of scattering
and dipole forces, we have taken these additional losses
as ﬁrst evidence for the interaction of ionization products
with the condensate background.

2

1

0

1
-
 

3

)

J
 

0
1
(
 
y
g
r
e
n
e
 
e
s
l
u
p
/
s
s
o
l

-1 

585

595

580

590
λ
ph (nm)
FIG. 5. Loss rate for a single laser pulse, normalized by
the pulse energy, as a function of the dye-laser wavelength.
The vertical line indicates the threshold wavelength for the
2-photon ionization from the ground state.

600

Using the 594 nm pulsed radiation, we irradiated the
magnetically trapped atoms either with few pulses or by
applying a single laser pulse. The puzzling result of these
investigations was the measurement of a large loss rate,
larger by a factor ten than the value expected from the
previously measured 2-photon ionization cross-section.
Moreover, the measured trap losses depended strongly
on the alignment of the photoionizing laser with respect

6

to the magnetic trap. For perfect alignment and small
clouds we expected an ionized fraction of 2%, while losses
of 20% were observed. An example of the measured frac-
tional loss of atoms from the magnetic trap, normalized
to the laser pulse energy, is reported in Fig.5 as a function
of the wavelength of the ionizing laser. The data of Fig.5
do not exhibit a clear evidence of threshold behavior ex-
pected for a 2-photon ionization process. These results
suggest the presence of other loss mechanisms masking
the ionizing process.
In a magnetic trap, in fact, ev-
ery process changing the hyperﬁne or m-sublevel leads to
atom loss.

FIG. 6. Shadow image of a condensate after the application
a single dye laser pulse at 594 nm. The condensate is deformed
and a secondary condensate containing around 30% of the
original atoms is present (the periodic circular fringe patterns
are an artifact of the imaging technique). The size of the main
cloud at the ionization time was 7µm, the trapping frequency
23 Hz, the time of ﬂight 18 ms.

The presence of more complex trap loss processes is
indicated also by the spatial distribution of the atoms
inside the magnetic trap after the application of a sin-
gle laser pulse at 594 nm. For both the condensate and
the thermal cloud of magnetically trapped atoms, we no-
ticed that the laser pulse ejected a secondary cloud, a
”tail”, from the original one, as shown in Fig.6. The
shadow image of Fig.6, obtained after 11 ms of evolution
of the condensates within the magnetic trap, shows two
clouds, the upper cloud at the place of the original one
and the ejected secondary cloud separated spatially, at
a lower vertical position. The secondary cloud of Fig.
6 contained around 30% of the total number of atoms,
but in other conditions the secondary cloud contained
a fraction reaching 50%. Measuring the atomic density

and temperature for the two clouds separately we de-
rived that the phase space density of the ejected cloud
was comparable to the remaining fraction of the original
cloud. Below the condensation threshold both remain-
ing clouds had a phase space density far above 1. This
suggests that the laser pulse split the original condensate
into two condensed clouds. Both of the observed clouds
were strongly deformed with respect to the unperturbed
condensate showing a close to spherical density distri-
bution after the same time of ﬂight. The aspect ratio
and orientation of the deformed cloud depended on the
evolution time within the magnetic trap after the laser
excitation. Moreover a detailed analysis, outlined below,
showed for the main cloud a negligible center-of-mass mo-
tion, while the secondary cloud acquired a center-of-mass
motion during the interaction with the laser pulse.

In order to understand the nature of the secondary
cloud, we used the magnetic trap as a Stern-Gerlach an-
alyzer. We measured the position of the secondary con-
densate as a function of the evolution time τmagn within
the magnetic trap after the application of the laser pulse,
with results shown in Fig.7. From the oscillatory behav-
ior of the diﬀerence in position of the center-of-mass for
the two clouds we inferred that the secondary cloud con-
sisted of rubidium atoms in the | F = 2, mF = 1i Zeeman
state, excluding the | F = 1, mF = −1i state with simi-
lar magnetic moment, because our detection was sensitive
only to atoms in the F = 2 state [27]. Owing to the dif-
ferent magnetic moment of this state, both the frequency
of the harmonic sloshing motion and the equilibrium po-
sition diﬀer from those for atoms in the | F = 2, mF = 2i
state. A ﬁt to the measured position data, assuming that
the secondary cloud was created at the instant of the
laser pulse from the position of the mother condensate,
revealed that the secondary cloud started its oscillation
with an initial velocity vz(0)=(-0.5±0.2) cm/s, i.e., a ve-
locity pointing downwards along the vertical axis [28].
The laser pulse propagated at an angle of about 35o with
respect to the horizontal x-y place and pointed down-
wards in the z-y plane, while the laser light was polarized
along the x-direction of Fig.6. The atoms are polarized
along the direction of the bias ﬁeld, rotating in the hor-
izontal x-y plane with frequency 10 kHz. Changing the
timing of the laser pulse with respect to the bias ﬁeld
rotation we found no qualitative diﬀerence in the atomic
response for parallel and crossed electric and magnetic
ﬁelds.

To judge how the direct mechanical eﬀect of the laser
pulse could be responsible of the observed complex be-
havior of the clouds and of the anomalously high losses,
we estimated the role of the dipole forces in a single atom
picture. Placing a rubidium atom at the steepest slope
of the spatial laser beam proﬁle during the pulse, we es-
timated an atom to acquire a velocity of 0.8 cm/s under
application of the 594 nm pulse. Based on this estimate
the atomic kinetic energy of 40 µK would be well be-

low the trap depth, and direct losses due to the dipole
force would not be expected. An additional puzzle is as-
sociated with the transfer of the atoms from the initial
mF = 2 state to the mF = 1 ﬁnal one. Such a trans-
fer could be created by a Raman process associated to
the absorption and emission of the laser photons, with
a probability enhanced by the atomic stimulated emis-
sion as in the atom laser emission. However, the Raman
transfer between the Zeeman sublevels is forbidden by
the ∆mF = 0 selection rule for the interaction with a
linearly polarized laser ﬁeld. A violation of the selection
rule may arise because the trap magnetic ﬁeld is not con-
stant during the laser pulse or by ﬂuctuations of the laser
polarization on the time scale of a single pulse. Notice
that Raman scattering processes do not produce losses
in a MOT, where every Zeeman sublevel of the ground
state is trapped and the kinetic energy acquired is smaller
than the trap depth. As mentioned above, the shape of
the detected clouds was grossly diﬀerent from the shape
of unperturbed condensates. Such a shape deformation
could be associated with the asymmetry in the electron
emission produced by the photoionization process, excit-
ing complicated oscillations in the original and secondary
condensate clouds.

)

m
m

(
 
z
∆

0.5

0.0

-0.5

-1.0

-1.5

0

20

80

100

40
τ

60
mag (ms)
FIG. 7. Data for the relative displacement ∆z of the
| F = 2, mF = 1i secondary condensate, ejected from the
| F = 2, mF = 2i primary one after a single 594 nm laser
ionization pulse, versus the evolution time τmagn within the
magnetic trap. The oscillating ﬁt functions correspond to dif-
ferent initial velocities vz(0) of the secondary cloud, vz(0)=0
for the dashed line and vz(0) = −0.5 cm/s for the continu-
ous line, whose vertical shift for τmagn = 0 is due to free fall
evolution of the condensate during the time-of-ﬂight.

Finally we excited thermal clouds and condensates
with the 421 nm radiation detuned by 12 GHz above
the resonance and focused to 30µm × 3.3µm. At such a
detuning the scattering force still dominates the atomic
losses from the magnetic trap, and the trap losses due
to the 2-photon ionization from the ground state could
not be directly measured. We observed that the conden-
sate cloud falling under gravity through the 421 nm laser
beam was split into two condensate clouds, the reﬂected
and transmitted respectively, again without measurable
additional atomic losses. Note that in this case the inter-
action time with the laser radiation is orders of magni-
tude longer than for pulsed lasers, so that a complicated

7

dynamics may be produced.

V. CONCLUSIONS

illuminating discussion. This research was supported by
the Sezione A of INFM-Italy through a PAIS Project, by
the MIUR-Italy through a PRIN Project, and by the EU
through the contract HPRN-CT-2000-00125.

We applied trap loss spectroscopy to measure the pho-
toionization cross-sections of rubidium atoms conﬁned in
a MOT making use of cw and pulsed laser. We veriﬁed
that the use of pulsed lasers did not limit the accuracy
reached in the cross-section determination. We demon-
strated that the photoionization of magnetically trapped
thermal and condensed atoms instead does not represent
a precise tool for cross-section determination. In eﬀect
the magnetic trap depth is smaller than the MOT depth,
and the laser action on the cold atomic cloud may pro-
duce additional processes leading to atomic losses from
the trap, masking the ionization losses. We have observed
that both scattering and dipole forces associated with
strong pulsed lasers may impart a kinetic energy large
enough to overcome the trap depth. Moreover, dealing
with a condensate cloud, additional losses appear that are
probably due to the creation of a dilute thermal cloud.

We have discovered that the application of intense
pulsed radiation leads to huge excitation and macroscopic
splitting of a condensate without compromising its phase
space density. We identiﬁed the transfer of atoms to the
| F = 2, mF = 1i level as an important process, but the
detailed microscopic mechanism remains unclear and will
be subject of further studies.

On the basis of the photoionization cross-sections mea-
sured within a MOT we estimated to have created
charged clouds and condensates in magnetic traps con-
taining a fraction of 0.2% and 2% of ions at a time for
the 1-photon and 2-photon experiments respectively. We
have not observed any dramatic instability which could
be triggered by the strong polarization of those charged
condensates. However, we take the higher losses mea-
sured following the 1-photon ionization of a condensate as
a ﬁrst indication of the interaction between the ionization
products and the condensate background. Additional
processes such as collisions with cold electrons and ultra-
cold neutrals, recombination and collective processes in
the weak and cold plasma could modify the atomic cloud
evolution and in part be responsible for the more compli-
cated dynamics observed after the 2-photon excitation in
the condensate. In future experiments we plan to use cw
sources to ionize condensed clouds to disentangle scatter-
ing and dipole force eﬀects from the rich and interesting
physics of cold charged particles in quantum degenerate
clouds.

[1] T.P. Dinneen, C.D. Wallace, K.N. Tan, and P.L.Gould,

[2] C. Gabbanini, S. Gozzini, and A. Lucchesini, Opt. Com-

Opt. Lett.17, 1706 (1992).

mun. 141, 25 (1997).

[3] C. Gabbanini, F. Ceccherini, S. Gozzini, and A. Lucch-
esini, J. Phys. B: At. Mol. Opt. Phys. 31, 4143 (1998).
[4] O. Marag`o, D. Ciampini, F. Fuso, E. Arimondo, C. Gab-
banini, and S.T. Manson, Phys. Rev. A 57, R4110 (1998).
[5] B.M. Patterson, T. Takekoshi, R.J. Knize, Phys. Rev. A

59, 2508 (1999).

[6] F. Fuso, D. Ciampini, E. Arimondo, and C. Gabbanini,

Opt. Comm. 173, 223 (2000).

[7] V. Wippel, C. Binder, W. Huber, L. Windholz, M. Al-
legrini, F. Fuso, and E. Arimondo, Eur. J. Phys. D 17,
285 (2001).

[8] B.C. Duncan, V. Sanchez-Villican, P.L. Gould, and
H.R. Sadeghpour, Phys. Rev. A 63, 043411 (2001).
[9] F. Ruschewitz, J.L. Peng, R. Degner, H. Hinderthuer,
D. Scheller, D. Bettermann, W. Ertmer, in Proceedings
of the 1996 European Quantum Electronics Conference,
p. 112; J.W. Thomsen et al, to be published.

[10] T.C. Killian, et al Phys. Rev. Lett. 83, 4776 (1999);
S. Kulin, et al, ibidem 85, 318 (2000); M.P. Robinson,
et al, ibidem 85, 4466 (2000); T.C. Killian, et al, ibidem
86, 3759 (2001); S.K. Dutta, et al, ibidem 86, 3993
(2001).

[11] R. Cˆot´e, Phys. Rev. Lett. 85 5316 (2000).
[12] I.E. Mazets, Quant. Semiclass. Opt. 10, 675 (1999).
[13] In the He∗

condensates of [14] ions were present due to
Penning collisions, but the interaction time between ions
and neutrals was extremely short due to the high realesed
energy.

[14] A. Robert, et al, Science 292, 461 (2001); F. Pereira Dos

Santos, et al, Phys. Rev. Lett. 86, 3459 (2001).

[15] H.J. Metcalf and P. van der Straten, Laser Cooling and

Trapping, (Springer, New York ) 1999.

[16] M. M¨utzel, D. Haubrich, and D. Meschede, Appl. Phys.

B 70, 689 (2000).

[17] S. Burger,et al, Phys. Rev. Lett. 83, 5198 (1999); J. Den-

schlag, et al, Science 285, 571 (2000).

[18] D. Field, N.C. Jones, S.L. Lunt, and J.-P. Ziesel, Phys.

[19] C.H. Greene, A.S. Dickinson, H.R. Sadeghpour, Phys.

Rev. A 64, 022708 (2001).

Rev. Lett. 85, 2458 (2000).

[20] J.H. M¨uller, D. Ciampini, O. Morsch, G. Smirne,
M. Fazzi, P. Verkerk, F. Fuso, and E. Arimondo, J. Phys.
B: Atom. Mol. Opt. Phys. 33, 4095 (2000).

[21] Model TA-SHG-100 by Toptica.
[22] G.V. Marr and D.M. Creek, Proc. Roy. Soc. A. 304, 233

VI. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

The authors wish to thank G. Alber, W.M. Fairbank
Jr., C. Fort, P. Gould, M. Inguscio, and P. Zoller for

(1968).

8

[23] M. Aymar, O. Robaux, and S. Wane, J. Phys. B: At.

Mol. Opt. Phys 17, 993 (1984).

[24] M.G.J. Fink and W.R. Johnson, Phys. Rev. A 34, 3754

(1986), and references therein.

[25] H.B. Bebb, Phys. Rev. 149, 25 (1966).
[26] A.I. Klyucharev and V.Yu. Sepman, Optics Spectrosc.

38, 712 (1975).

[27] We conﬁrmed the absence of atoms in the |F = 1i hyper-
ﬁne states by applying a repumper laser before imaging
the primary and secondary clouds and verifying that the
atom numbers in the clouds were not modiﬁed.

[28] We allowed for a 2% accuracy in the magnetic ﬁeld cali-

bration.

9

