2
0
0
2
 
g
u
A
 
0
3
 
 
]
h
p
-
m
o
t
a
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
4
0
1
8
0
2
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

An accelerator mode based technique for studying quantum chaos

M.B. d’Arcy,1 R.M. Godun,1 D. Cassettari,1 and G.S. Summy1, 2
1Clarendon Laboratory, Department of Physics,University of Oxford,
Parks Road, Oxford, OX1 3PU, United Kingdom
2Department of Physics, Oklahoma State University, Stillwater, Oklahoma 74078-3072
(Dated: September 28, 2013)

We experimentally demonstrate a method for selecting small regions of phase space for kicked
rotor quantum chaos experiments with cold atoms. Our technique uses quantum accelerator modes
to selectively accelerate atomic wavepackets with localized spatial and momentum distributions.
The potential used to create the accelerator mode and subsequently realize the kicked rotor system
is formed by a set of oﬀ-resonant standing wave light pulses. We also propose a method for testing
whether a selected region of phase space exhibits chaotic or regular behavior using a Ramsey type
separated ﬁeld experiment.

PACS numbers: 05.45.Mt, 32.80.Lg, 42.50.Vk

Chaos in quantum mechanics is still a relatively poorly
deﬁned concept. Typically it is taken to refer to the be-
havior of a quantum system which in the classical limit
exhibits an exponential sensitivity to initial conditions.
A much studied example of such a system is the delta-
kicked rotor [1, 2]. A realization of its quantum ver-
sion, in the guise of cold atoms exposed to the ac-Stark
shift potential of an oﬀ-resonant standing wave of light
[3], has elucidated many of the concepts associated with
quantum chaos [4, 5, 6, 7]. However, one substantial
problem remains: there is no clear way of distinguishing
regular from chaotic dynamics. In the quantum regime
it is not possible to deﬁne a chaotic region of phase space
as being one in which two initially similar states have
an overlap which decreases exponentially with time. The
unitary nature of any interaction necessarily implies that
the overlap between such states remains unchanged. It
has been suggested by Peres [8] that an alternative def-
inition is needed for quantum systems. Peres’ proposal
involves examining the evolution of a state which can in-
teract with two potentials which diﬀer very slightly in
form. If the overlap between states produced by an evo-
lution under each potential decreases exponentially as a
function of time, then the region of phase space occupied
by the initial state can be said to be chaotic in the quan-
tum sense. The justiﬁcation for this deﬁnition is that
perturbation theory only converges when the region un-
der examination has regular properties. More recently
Gardiner et al. [9] have proposed an experiment with a
trapped ion which would implement the essential features
of Peres’ idea.

In this paper we address two problems related to the
experimental determination of a phase space stability
map for the atom optical version of the QDKR. Firstly,
we demonstrate a method for preparing cesium atoms in
a restricted region of phase space using the same stand-
ing wave light pulses which create the rotor. Secondly, we
show how by examining the overlap between the wave-
functions of the two hyperﬁne levels of the 62S1/2 cesium

ground state it should be possible to test the type of
dynamics exhibited by the prepared atoms.

The basis of our atom optical version of the QDKR is
exposure of laser cooled cesium atoms to pulses (dura-
tion tp and separation time T ) of a standing wave of oﬀ-
resonant light. The pulses are short enough to allow the
eﬀect of the atoms’s kinetic energy to be neglected during
a pulse. This places our experiment in the Raman-Nath
regime in which the spatially periodic ac-Stark shift po-
tential created by the light acts as a thin phase grating for
the atoms [10]. Thus an incident plane de Broglie wave is
diﬀracted into a series of “orders” separated in momen-
tum by ¯hG, where G = 2kL (kL is the light wavevector).
One of the striking features of this system is the existence
of quantum resonances [4, 11]. These resonances occur
when the pulse interval is a multiple of the half-Talbot
= 2πm/¯hG2. During these special times all of
time, T 1
2
the diﬀraction orders formed from incident plane waves
with certain momenta will freely evolve phases which are
multiples of 2π. For cesium, the ﬁrst quantum resonance
occurs at T = 67 µs.

In addition to being a paradigm of experimental quan-
tum chaos, this system can also produce quantum accel-
erator modes [10]. This is achieved by adding a potential
of the form UA(x) = max, where m is the atomic mass,
a is an applied acceleration and x is the position along
the standing wave. In our experiment the standing wave
is oriented in the vertical direction, so a is the acceler-
ation due to gravity. Quantum accelerator modes are
characterized by a ﬁxed momentum transfer of (on av-
erage) ξ¯hG during each standing wave pulse (see Fig. 1
of Ref. [10]). Typically the accelerator modes are formed
when the value of T is near to a quantum resonance.
For simplicity, we will henceforth conﬁne our attention
to pulse repetition times near to the ﬁrst quantum res-
onance. One way of modelling the accelerator modes is
to make the approximation that they consist of just a
few diﬀraction orders (say q − 1, q and q + 1, where q is
an integer) which in the time between two light pulses

accumulate a phase diﬀerence which is very close to an
integer multiple of 2π. At the next pulse this makes it
possible for interference to occur between the diﬀraction
orders in such a way that the population of the three or-
ders centered on q + ξ [12] is enhanced. By using this
rephasing condition, it can be shown [13] that after Np
pulses the central momentum of the accelerator mode is
α2
given by q = Np
1−α = Npξ, where γ = ¯h2G3/2πm2a
γ
. The same rephasing condition also leads
and α = T /T 1
to the conclusion that only incident plane waves with
momenta

2

pinit = (cid:0)α

−1l + const(cid:1) ¯hG

(1)

(where l is any integer) can ever participate in an accel-
erator mode. Thus in momentum space an accelerator
mode resembles a comb with a tooth spacing of α−1¯hG.
Furthermore, since plane waves separated by this mo-
mentum behave identically under the action of the kicks,
the accelerator mode eﬀectively contains only a single
momentum. Figure 1(a) shows the theoretical momen-
tum distribution of the accelerator mode after one set
of pulses, as calculated using a model based on diﬀrac-
tion [10]. To reﬂect the experimental situation the start-
ing distribution was gaussian with a width of 12 ¯hkL at
FWHM. Although there is good qualitative agreement
between Eq. (1) and the numerically derived momentum
distribution, an explanation for the ﬁnite widths of the
comb elements is needed. To understand this eﬀect recall
that each comb element must give rise to a set of diﬀrac-
tion orders which are always spaced by exact multiples
of ¯hG. To determine what the real momentum distribu-
tion looks like we must add together the diﬀraction from
all the diﬀerent comb elements. These have a spacing of
α−1¯hG, which for pulse interval times just less than the
Talbot time is slightly greater than ¯hG. The most obvi-
ous eﬀect of including the diﬀraction orders is that the
width of each comb element of the resultant distribution
becomes non-zero and increases with |α − 1|. Addition-
ally, when all the diﬀraction orders are weighted by the
intensity of the comb element from which they originated,
the nearest-neighbor spacing of the peaks in the momen-
tum distribution is reduced as one moves away from the
center of the distribution. The opposite eﬀect is pro-
duced when the pulse interval is slightly greater than the
Talbot time. Although the change in spacing is not im-
mediately obvious in Fig. 1(a), it has been conﬁrmed in
a detailed analysis of this data.

In Fig. 1(b) we show the spatial form of the accelera-
tor mode wavefunction as calculated with our numerical
model. Such a distribution is similar to that deduced
from the assumption that the mode consists of the sum
of three plane waves. Importantly, the wavefunction is
periodically localized in position with maxima occurring
every λspat = 2π/G. Since this is the wavelength of the
standing wave potential, points having this separation

2

FIG. 1: Numerically simulated momentum (a) and spatial (b)
distributions of the accelerated component of an ensemble of
cold cesium atoms after 20 pulses of an oﬀ-resonant standing
light wave. The pulses had a separation of 60 µs. The mo-
mentum distribution consists of a comb of peaks separated
by a little more than two photon recoils. The degree of spa-
tial localization is consistent with an accelerator mode which
contains approximately three diﬀraction orders. The dashed
line in (b) shows the position of the standing light wave.

behave equivalently and the wavefunction eﬀectively has
a spread in position which is less than λspat. From Fig. 1
we expect the width of one element of the moment comb
to be approximately 0.4 ¯hG and the extent of each region
of strong spatial localization to be λspat/3. For compari-
son, the extent in momentum of a unit cell of the classical
phase space is (T1/2/T )¯hG while that in position is λspat.
Hence the accelerator mode isolates a restricted region in
phase space which is about 10% of the overall area. Ad-
ditionally, since the eﬀect of the accelerator mode is to
produce a large momentum oﬀset, it should be straight-
forward to isolate these atoms.

We now discuss the experimental observation of the
distributions described above. Our atomic source was
a cesium magneto-optic trap containing approximately
107 atoms. After the trap was switched oﬀ the atoms
were cooled in an optical molasses to a temperature of 5
µK, corresponding to a momentum width of 12 ¯hkL at
FWHM. Following release, the atoms were exposed to a
series of pulses from a vertically oriented standing light
wave, detuned 30 GHz below the F = 4 → F ′ = 3 line in
the D1 transition at 894 nm. The pulses had a duration
of tp = 0.5 µs and a peak intensity of approximately
20 W/cm2. The atoms then fell freely until they passed
through a probe laser beam resonant with the D2 cycling
transition. By measuring the absorption of the probe
light as a function of time we were able to determine
the momentum distribution of the atoms in the F = 4
level. Additional details of our apparatus can be found

in Ref. [13].

The momentum resolution of our experiment was ap-
proximately 2 photon recoils, determined by the initial
spatial extent of the optical molasses and the thickness
of the probe laser beam. Hence direct observation of
the accelerator mode momentum comb was not possi-
Instead we used two sets of temporally separated
ble.
light pulses to infer its existence. The ﬁrst set contained
20 pulses and was used to create an accelerator mode.
The resultant atomic distribution was then translated in
momentum by allowing the atoms to fall for a variable
amount of time twait. Finally, a second set of pulses, iden-
tical to the ﬁrst, was applied. Figure 2 shows the resul-
tant momentum distributions as a function of twait. Both
panels contain a large fraction of unaccelerated atoms
near p = 0 (dotted line), a group of atoms that have
been accelerated by one set of pulses (dot-dashed line),
and atoms that have been accelerated by both pulse sets
(dashed line). In Fig. 2(a) the pulses had an interval of 60
µs and the accelerator mode imparted momentum in the
negative direction (with the convention gravity is nega-
tive), while in Fig. 2(b) the interval was 74 µs and the ac-
celerator mode imparted positive momentum. The eﬀect
of twait is to allow gravity to translate the distribution
in momentum space. If any of this distribution overlaps
with the momentum comb of Eq. (1) when the second set
of pulses occurs then a further acceleration takes place.
The periodic variation in the doubly accelerated popula-
tion with twait is just the length of time required for grav-
ity to accelerate the atoms by the momentum separation
of adjacent comb elements, α−1¯hG. In the T=60 µs case
this gives a value of 753 µs between accelerator mode re-
vivals. Along the dashed line of Fig. 2(a) we observe 763
± 4 µs, the discrepancy with the calculated value most
likely due to the slight variation in comb spacing across
the accelerator mode discussed previously. A similar level
of agreement is found for T=74 µs. As regards the width
of each momentum comb element, we note that numeri-
cal simulations have provided almost identical results to
those shown in Fig. 2 so it is reasonable to assume that
the actual extent of each momentum element is as shown
in Fig. 1(a).

Although we have accounted for the accelerator mode
revivals, we have said nothing about their sloping orienta-
tion (as seen in Fig. 2), nor about this slope’s dependence
on pulse interval. An explanation for this eﬀect can be
found by returning to the earlier observation that the mo-
mentum intervals between the peaks of Fig. 1(a) change
as one moves away from the center of the accelerator
mode. This implies that not all parts of the distribution
have to be translated by the same amount to regain the
accelerator mode condition of Eq. (1). At 60 µs, the outer
peaks bulge towards the center of the distribution. As-
suming that the whole distribution is accelerating under
gravity, the ﬁrst part to regain the accelerator mode con-
dition will be the component with the greatest positive

3

FIG. 2: Experimental momentum distributions of an ensem-
ble of cold cesium atoms after two sets of 20 pulses from an
oﬀ-resonant standing light wave. There was a variable amount
of time twait between the pulse sets. The dotted, dot-dashed
and dashed lines denote atoms accelerated by zero, one and
two sets of pulses respectively. The pulse spacing was T = 60
µs in (a) and T = 74 µs in (b). Each vertical slice is the
momentum distribution obtained for one value of twait where
the degree of shading indicates the population. Gravity is in
the negative direction.

momentum. For 74 µs the opposite will be the case and
the direction of the revival’s slope will ﬂip.

When twait is scanned in much smaller time steps the
previous experiment can also be used to demonstrate lo-
calization in position. These experiments are only mean-
ingful if they are performed when the wavefunction has
some degree of spatial localization, that is when twait is
close or equal to an integer multiple of the pulse sepa-
ration time. Furthermore, for these wait times all the
elements of the momentum comb described by Eq. (1)
translate by an integer number of standing wave peri-
ods (or equivalently acquire a phase of 2π × integer). As
we have seen, the momentum distribution produced by
the accelerator mode is not a comb of delta functions.
Thus we do not expect an exact rephasing of the dis-
tribution at the special wait times. Experimentally we
have found that for wait times greater than three pulse
separation times very little rephasing is observed. Fig-
ure 3 shows the momentum distributions observed when
the pulse separation time is 60 µs and the wait time is

4

under the action of a chaotic potential. Our proposal is
to take two atomic states which have been prepared by an
accelerator mode to have identical external components.
We would expose each state to chaotic potentials which
diﬀer slightly in strength and then measure the overlap
between the states in order to determine the dynamics.
The F = 3 and F = 4 ground state hyperﬁne levels of
cesium oﬀer a convenient means of realizing such a proce-
dure through a technique analogous to that of a Ramsey
separated ﬁeld experiment [15]. After selecting the de-
sired region of phase space and preparing atoms in the
F = 4, mF = 0 state, a 50:50 superposition of the two
hyperﬁne levels can be created by employing a π
2 pulse of
microwave radiation resonant with the 9.19 GHz F = 3,
mF = 0 −→ F = 4, mF = 0 magnetic dipole transition.
The QDKR light pulses can then be applied using the
same laser beam and pulse envelope as the accelerator
mode, but with the key change of moving the standing
wave to make a = 0 [4]. Importantly, each of the states
in the superposition would experience the standing wave
potential with a diﬀerent strength. For example, light
detuned 30 GHz below resonance for atoms in the F = 4
level is detuned approximately 40 GHz for F = 3 atoms.
Since the light shift scales inversely with detuning, the
component of the superposition in the F = 3 state sees a
kicking potential which is ∼ 0.75 the size experienced by
the component in F = 4. The ﬁnal step of our proposal
would be to expose the superposition to a second π
2 mi-
crowave pulse which diﬀers in phase by an amount ∆φ
from the ﬁrst pulse. If the overlap between the two ﬁnal
states is good then a sinusoidal variation in the popula-
tion of either state would be observed as ∆φ were system-
atically changed. The exact value of the overlap could be
determined by measuring the population at ∆φ = 0 and
∆φ = π
2 and then using a method similar to that outlined
in Ref. [9].

To summarize, we have demonstrated a new method of
preparing atoms in a narrow region of phase space from
an initially broad distribution. This was achieved using
quantum accelerator modes, a process in which atoms
are exposed to pulses of an oﬀ-resonant standing light
wave which is accelerating relative to the atoms’ frame
of reference. Since the experimental conﬁguration is very
similar to that used for experiments which have studied
the QDKR, it should be relatively straightforward to ap-
ply this technique to studies of quantum chaos. Previous
experiments have concentrated on the ensemble behav-
ior of the atoms. The work presented here paves the way
for a more detailed examination of the dynamics. We
have also suggested an experiment which would allow
the production of a quantum phase space stability map.
By using a method based on Ramsey separated ﬁelds we
can ﬁnd the amount of overlap between identical initial
states which have interacted with chaotic potentials of
slightly diﬀerent strengths. We hope that the combina-
tion of these two ideas will eventually lead to a fuller

FIG. 3: Experimental momentum distributions of an ensem-
ble of cold cesium atoms after two sets of 20 pulses from an
oﬀ-resonant standing light wave. Within each set the pulses
were separated by T = 60 µs and there was a variable amount
of time twait between the sets. The dotted, dot-dashed and
dashed lines denote atoms accelerated by zero, one and two
sets of pulses respectively. Each vertical slice is the momen-
tum distribution obtained for one value of twait where the
degree of shading indicates the population.

2 at2

scanned near to 120 µs. The accelerator mode reap-
pears at the dashed line whenever the atoms prepared
by the ﬁrst set of pulses have moved a whole number of
standing-wave wavelengths. We can quantify what the
period of the reappearance or revival should be by deter-
mining the distance which the atoms move during twait.
This distance is given by ∆x = v0twait + 1
wait, where
v0 is the velocity of the atoms after the end of the ﬁrst
set of pulses. We have calculated this velocity to be 177
mm/s [14], giving a revival period of 2.53 µs. This is
in good agreement with the value of 2.56 ± 0.03 µs that
is observed along the dashed line in Fig. 3. Another im-
portant feature of this ﬁgure is that except for the exact
multiple of the pulse separation time, not all parts of the
accelerator mode produced by the ﬁrst set of pulses are
able to simultaneously undergo acceleration by the sec-
ond set of pulses. This can be explained by noting that
the distance moved by an atom during the wait time
depends upon its initial velocity. Thus the revival pe-
riod for atoms that have been accelerated the most is the
smallest. This picture also provides an alternative way of
understanding why we only see clear signatures of spatial
localization near the multiples of T ; the revivals from the
diﬀerent comb elements in the accelerator mode all come
into phase at these times.

The preceding results demonstrate that by using a
pulsed periodic potential it is possible to select restricted
regions of phase space. We now suggest a technique for
investigating the dynamical properties of these regions

understanding of the concepts of quantum chaos.

I. Guarneri, M. K. Oberthaler

We thank A. Buchleitner, K. Burnett, S. Fishman,
and
S. A. Gardiner,
S. Wimberger for stimulating discussions. This work
was supported by the UK EPSRC, the Paul Instru-
ment Fund of The Royal Society, the EU as part of
the TMR ‘Cold Quantum Gases’ network, contract
no. HPRN-CT-2000-00125 and the ESF BEC2000+
program.

[1] A.L. Lichtenberg and M.A. Lieberman, Regular and

Chaotic Dynamics (Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 1992).

[2] G. Casati et al., in Stochastic Behavior in Classical and
Quantum Hamiltonian Systems, (Springer-Verlag, New
York, 1979).

[3] F.L. Moore et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 75, 4598 (1995).
[4] M.B. d’Arcy et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 87, 074102 (2001).

5

[5] D.A. Steck, W.H. Oskay, and M.G. Raizen, Science 293,

274 (2001).

[6] H. Ammann et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 80, 4111 (1998).
[7] J. Ringot et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 85, 2741 (2000).
[8] A. Peres, Quantum Theory: Concepts and Methods

(Kluwer Academic Publishers, Dordrecht, 1993).

[9] S.A. Gardiner,

J.I Cirac,

Phys. Rev. Lett. 79, 4790 (1997).

and

P. Zoller,

[10] M.K. Oberthaler et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 83, 4447 (1999).
L. Rebuzzini,
[11] S. Fishman,

I. Guarneri,

and

Phys. Rev. Lett. 89, 084101 (2002).

[12] The central diﬀraction order of the accelerator mode will

occur at the nearest integer to ξ.

[13] R.M. Godun et al., Phys. Rev. A 62, 013411 (2000).
[14] This velocity is acquired from a free fall under gravity for
5.2 ms before the beginning of the ﬁrst set of accelerator
mode pulses, the velocity imparted by the accelerator
mode, and the free fall during the accelerator mode.
[15] Molecular Beams, edited by N.F. Ramsey (Oxford Uni-

versity Press, Oxford, 1986).

