2
0
0
2
 
g
u
A
 
9
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
m
o
t
a
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
9
6
0
8
0
2
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Instability Heating of Sympathetically-Cooled Ions in a Linear Paul Trap

T. J. Harmon, N. Moazzan-Ahmadi, R. I. Thompson
Department of Physics and Astronomy, University of Calgary, 2500 University Drive NW, Calgary, AB, Canada, T2N 1N4
(December 16, 2013)

ions stored within a linear-geometry, radio frequency, electric-
Sympathetic laser cooling of
quadrupole trap has been investigated using computational and theoretical techniques. The simula-
tion, which allows 5 sample ions to interact with 35 laser-cooled atomic ions, revealed an instability
heating mechanism, which can prevent ions below a certain critical mass from being sympatheti-
cally cooled. This critical mass can however be varied by changing the trapping ﬁeld parameters
thus allowing ions with a very large range of masses to be sympathetically cooled using a single ion
species. A theoretical explanation of this instability heating mechanism is presented which predicts
that the cooling-heating boundary in trapping parameter space is a line of constant qu (ion trap
stability coeﬃcient), a result supported by the computational results. The threshold value of qu
depends on the masses of the interacting ions. A functional form of this dependence is given.

32.80.Pj, 34.10.+x, 34.20.Gj

I. INTRODUCTION

Laser cooling [1] has allowed atomic physicists to
study gas-phase atomic systems at ultra-low temper-
atures,
largely removing thermal eﬀects and allowing
many atomic systems to be studied at their most fun-
damental quantum level (e.g. atom interferometry [2]).
However, although a range of neutral and ionic atomic
systems has been cooled to sub-Kelvin temperatures with
direct laser cooling [1], there is a limitation of this ap-
proach. Conventional
laser cooling techniques, both
Doppler [3] and sub-Doppler [4], require isolated two- or
three-level systems. If a system has additional low-energy
meta-stable states or multiple nearly degenerate ground
states (e.g. rotational structure in molecular ions) then
the laser-cooling cycle terminates when the system falls
into a non-laser-cooled level. The solution to this prob-
lem generally requires one additional re-pumping laser
system for each meta-stable state (e.g. Ref. [5]). Cooling
of molecules is especially challenging due to their large
number of accessible rotational states. Understandably,
there only exist a small number of very complicated theo-
retical proposals (e.g. Ref. [6]) to directly cool molecular
ions. Therefore, many atomic systems such as those lack-
ing the necessary energy level structure and virtually all
molecular systems cannot be directly laser cooled. How-
ever, a much wider range of atomic and molecular sys-
tems can be taken to very low temperatures through a
process known as sympathetic cooling.

In this technique, a collection of two interacting
species, the sample species (which can not be directly
laser cooled) and the laser-cooled species, are conﬁned
to the same region of space and isolated from their sur-
roundings through the use of neutral particle or ion traps.
As the laser-cooled species interacts with the light ﬁeld
its temperature falls. When these cold atoms interact
or collide with the sample species, they extract energy
from the sample species thus sympathetically reducing
the sample species temperature. Recently, a variation

1

of this approach has been applied to neutrals whereby
evaporatively-cooled atoms sympathetically cool a sam-
ple species to produce Quantum Degenerate Gases from
species whose self-interaction (the interaction between
one atom with another identical atom) is too weak to
permit eﬃcient evaporative cooling on its own [7]. This
type of sympathetic cooling in neutrals depends funda-
mentally on the short range interactions (collisions) be-
tween the directly-cooled and sample species, and thus
the eﬀectiveness of sympathetic cooling depends funda-
mentally on the particular pair of species selected and
their associated inter-atomic or atom-molecule interac-
tion potentials. This makes it rather diﬃcult to produce
simple and broadly general rules regarding the eﬀective-
ness of sympathetic laser cooling that would apply to all
neutral atomic and molecular species. However, when
considering sympathetic cooling between ions, the domi-
nant interaction force is Coulomb interactions, which are
both long range and quite strong. This means that ions
do not tend to approach each other close enough that
the short-range interaction potentials, which diﬀer from
atom to atom and molecule to molecule, become impor-
tant. Therefore, the eﬀectiveness of sympathetic cooling
between charged particles tends to be a function of only
the mass and charge of each of the two ions, allowing for
rather generalised rules regarding sympathetic cooling of
charged particles to be deduced.

This work marks the beginning of a theoretical and
experimental program to study the processes associated
with the sympathetic cooling of ions. The longer term
goals are to develop the tools and expertise to produce
low-temperature, gas-phase samples in as wide a range
of atomic and molecular species as is physically possible
for use in such areas as molecular spectroscopy, spec-
troscopy of stable and unstable atomic isotopes, and the
physical implementation of Quantum Information Sci-
ence protocols. The following pages outline a compu-
tational/theoretical study of the apparently simple ques-
tion: What is the range of ion masses that a particular

laser cooled ionic species can sympathetically cool in a
quadrupole ion trap?

Sympathetic cooling of molecular ions by laser-cooled
atomic ions within a linear Paul trap has been exper-
imentally demonstrated [8] using ions of similar mass;
reaching translational temperatures below 100 mK. Fur-
ther experimental and molecular dynamics (MD) simu-
lations have shown axial translational temperatures as
low as 10 mK using a single ion species to sympatheti-
cally cool over a wider mass range [9], but no particular
or general limits on this range were determined. More
recently, work related to a novel ion trap in-situ mass
spectrometry technique under development by the Baba
and Waki group [10] has lead to an MD simulation study,
which illustrated that for particular trap conditions there
is a lower bound on the sample ion mass (ms) that can
be sympathetically cooled. This limit is 0.54 times the
mass of the laser cooled ion (mc) [11]. However, no up-
per bound on the masses that could be sympathetically
cooled was examined. This work investigates both the
cooling of higher mass ions, indicating a lack of a con-
crete upper bound, and examines the question of sym-
pathetic cooling of light sample ions in a more general
setting. The latter point lead to techniques to modify
the cooling threshold value, and provided a general the-
oretical framework for the heating processes in terms of
the concept of instability heating.

II. SYMPATHETIC COOLING OF TRAPPED
IONS: THE BASICS

As mentioned in the previous section, sympathetic
cooling of ions operates through Coulomb interactions
with laser cooled ions. Theoretically, such interactions
between ions that are completely isolated from their sur-
roundings, other than via the laser-cooling beam, will
eventually bring all of the ions into thermal equilibrium
at the laser-cooled ion temperature. However, trapped
ions are not completely isolated because the electric ﬁelds
(and magnetic ﬁelds for Penning Traps) used to suspend
the ions in space can themselves produce a number of
heating mechanisms (e.g. rf-heating [12]) and it is the
balance of laser cooling and trap heating that leads to an
equilibrium temperature. Therefore, depending on the
relative eﬃciency of energy extraction through collisions
with laser cooled ions and trap related heating eﬀects a
given ion can either increase or decrease its energy. It is
this balance that leads to the heating-cooling threshold
observed in Ref. [11]. In this work, we will concentrate
on ions stored in a linear-geometry, rf quadrupole-electric
ﬁeld trap (commonly referred to as a linear Paul trap). In
this type of trap, the ions are contained in the z-direction
by a DC trapping ﬁeld, while a rf-oscillating saddle-
shaped potential traps the ions in the xy-plane [13].

The stability of a single charged particle in an oscillat-
ing electric quadrupole ﬁeld is discussed in many refer-
ences [13–15]. Highlighting the relevant points, we start

(1)

(2)

with a single ion in a linear Paul Trap, where the conﬁn-
ing potential along the z-axis of the quadrupole is approx-
imated as harmonic. The ion is subject to the following
potential in x and y coordinates

Φ(x, y) =

Urf

y2
(cid:0)

x2
−
2r2
0

(cid:1)

cos(Ωt)

,

where Urf and Ω are the amplitude and angular fre-
quency of the applied rf-electric potential, respectively,
and r0 is the distance from trap centre to one of the elec-
trodes. Given that F =
Φ, the equations of motion
∇
for an ion of mass m and charge e in the x-y plane are
given by

−

e

¨x + (e/mr2
(e/mr2
¨y

0)Urf cos(Ωt)x = 0,
0)Urf cos(Ωt)y = 0.

−

Recasting these equations in unitless parameter form
(ξ = Ωt/2, qu = qx =

qy = 2eUrf /mΩ2r2

0) we get

−

∂2u
∂ξ2 −

[2qu cos(2ξ)]u = 0,

(3)

where u represents either x or y. Equation (3) is the
Mathieu equation in its canonical form [16], its general
solution being

′
u = α

eµξ

′′
C2ne2inξ + α

e

−µξ

C2ne

−2inξ (4)

∞

Xn=−∞

∞

Xn=−∞

where α′ and α′′ are integration constants determined by
˙u(ξ0), and ξ0), while
the initial conditions, (i.e. u(ξ0),
C2n and µ depend solely on the value of qu and not the
initial conditions [14]. If µ is purely imaginary then the
ion will have an oscillatory motion (trapped particle).
However, if µ is real or complex the motion will be un-
bound (unstable particle). The determination of µ from
qu in general is a diﬃcult problem and is best handled
< 0.908, then µ
numerically. It is well known that if
is purely imaginary and if
> 0.908 µ becomes com-
qu
|
plex, other than for some very localised values of qu [13].
For this reason qu is called the stability parameter.

qu
|

|

|

For stable trapping parameters, the motion of an ion
in x and y, as described by Eq. (4), can be broken down
into a superposition of the ion’s micromotion and its sec-
ular motion. The micromotion is an oscillatory motion at
the angular frequency of the trapping ﬁeld that increases
in amplitude the further the ion is from the trap centre.
It is the direct result of the oscillation of the trapping
ﬁeld driving the ion back and forth as the ﬁeld reverses.
The lower frequency secular motion is a simple harmonic
oscillation in the time-averaged pseudo-potential gener-
ated by the trapping ﬁeld. The secular frequency of this
motion, for small values of qu, is given by [14]

ωsec =

qu
√8

Ω,

(5)

2

while the amplitude can be expressed in terms of the
temperature based on the assumption of 1
2 kBT of energy
in the relevant mode:

u0 =

4
quΩ r

kBT
m

.

(6)

Sympathetic cooling requires that multiple interacting
ions are simultaneously stored in the trap. We cannot
deal with such a many-body system analytically, but
rather it is possible to calculate the motion of each ion
by integrating the equations of motion for each ion in the
trap. Additional terms have to be added to Eq. (2) to
account for the Coulomb repulsion between the ions, as
well as the laser cooling [17]. The equation of motion
for z is similar to the x and y equations, although it is
simpler because the electric ﬁeld in this direction is DC.

of sample ions, rf-heating balanced the laser cooling and
the laser-cooled ion temperature would remain the same.
In addition, the laser intensity was maintained at a low
enough level to prevent the formation of Wigner or ion
crystals. These conditions were chosen to be equivalent
to those used in Ref. [11]. The simulation output pro-
vided the average sample ion and laser-cooled ion tem-
peratures as a function of time. The temperature was
calculated by averaging the energy of each ion over 4 cy-
cles of secular motion and then calculating the average
ion energy for the 5 sample ions and the 35 laser cooled
ions, independently. The ion temperatures were deter-
mined from these average energies using [11]

=

E
h

i

5
2

kBT.

(7)

Integration was generally carried out for 30 ms, which
was usually suﬃcient to determine whether the temper-
ature of the sample ions was increasing or decreasing
with time. First, the laser-cooled ions were interacted
with a range of more massive sample ions (up to 8 times
the mass of the laser-cooled ions). This conﬁrmed that
sample ions heavier than the laser-cooled ions generally
cooled. However, as the mass diﬀerence increased, the
rate of cooling decreased.

FIG. 1. Temporal plots of the average temperature (see
text) of 8 amu sample ions and 24 amu laser-cooled ions stored
in a linear Paul trap calculated under three diﬀerent trap-
ping conditions. Line (a) is the sample ion temperatures for
Urf = 50 V, Ω = 2π(2.5 MHz), and qu = 0.71; line (b) is
the sample ion temperatures for Urf = 100 V, Ω = 2π(4.5
MHz), and qu = 0.53; line (c) is the sample ion temperatures
for Urf = 30 V, Ω = 2π(2.75 MHz), and qu = 0.35. Lines (d),
(e), and (f) are the laser-cooled ion temperatures correspond-
ing to the conditions for (a), (b), and (c), respectively.

Our simulation numerically integrated the motion of
35 laser cooled Mg+ ions interacting with 5 sample ions
using the Euler-Picard predictor-corrector method with
0.1 to 1 ns time-steps. The ions are conﬁned radially by
the potential given by Eq. (1) and axially by a harmonic
well with a force constant of 1 mV/mm. The initial con-
ditions for the simulations started the ions in random
positions with the sample ions at a temperature of 40
K and the laser cooled ions at a temperature of 15 K.
The laser intensity was selected so that in the absence

3

FIG. 2. Temporal plots of the average temperature (see
text) of 12 amu sample ions and 24 amu laser-cooled ions
stored in a linear Paul trap calculated under three diﬀerent
trapping conditions. Line (a) is the sample ion temperatures
for Urf = 40 V, Ω = 2π(2 MHz), and qu = 0.59; line (b) is the
sample ion temperatures for Urf = 70 V, Ω = 2π(2.6 MHz),
and qu = 0.61; line (c) is the sample ion temperatures for
Urf = 40 V, Ω = 2π(2.5 MHz), and qu = 0.35. Lines (d), (e),
and (f) are the laser-cooled ion temperatures corresponding
to the conditions for (a), (b), and (c), respectively.

Next the case in which the sample ions are less mas-
sive than the laser-cooled ions was examined. For a given
Urf and Ω, heating or cooling of the sample ion was ob-
served to depend on its mass. We conﬁrmed that for the
same trap conditions as in Ref. [11], there is the same
lower bound on the sample ion mass that can be sympa-
thetically cooled, i.e. ms = 0.54mc. At this point, tests
were made to determine if sample ions with ms < 0.54mc
could be cooled by changing the trap parameters. It was
found that there always exist values of qu for which this
is possible. A large number of simulations for a range of
sample ions with mass below 0.54mc were carried out. In
all cases the results were more or less the same as those
illustrated in Figs. 1 and 2. Figure 1 is for (ms = 8 amu,
mc = 24 amu) and Fig. 2 is for (ms = 12 amu, mc = 24
amu). Both of these ﬁgures show the typical result that if
the value of qu is reduced suﬃciently, the sample ions can
be cooled. To further test this hypothesis, maps of the
Urf -Ω space were made to determine the trapping ﬁeld
parameters for which the sample ions heated, cooled, or
remained basically unchanged in temperature. Figure 3
shows a pair of typical maps. The qu = 0.908 curve indi-
cates the single sample ion trapping stability threshold.
As can be seen, sympathetic cooling does not occur close
to this threshold and thus the ions are heated. As we
move away from this threshold we enter a region where
there appears to be a balance thus the ions neither heat
nor cool. Finally, for low enough values of qu sympa-
thetic cooling begins to occur. This begs the question of
why does cooling occur away from the single ion stability
threshold and can we predict the threshold for sympa-
thetic cooling? The answer to these questions are given
in the next two sections.

III. INSTABILITY HEATING THEORY

Although we have not yet discussed the precise heating
mechanism responsible, the results summarised in Fig. 3
clearly suggest the existence of a second mass thresh-
old for the behaviour of trapped ions. The ﬁrst mass
< 0.908 trap stability cri-
qu
threshold, dictated by the
|
terion, determines if the ion stays in the trap. The sec-
ond higher-mass threshold, which is also a function of the
trapping ﬁeld parameters, determines whether or not the
sample ion can be sympathetically cooled.

|

From the results of the previous section, it is reason-
able to conclude that the two mass thresholds have simi-
lar functional dependences on the trapping ﬁeld parame-
ters and ion mass, suggesting that the physical causes of
these two thresholds might be related. These considera-
tions prompted us to investigate if the heating process is
related to transient instabilities in the ion motion due to
interactions with the other ions in the trap, an eﬀect not
considered in the single ion treatment. We will refer to
this process as instability heating.

FIG. 3. Maps of the regions of heating and cooling in
Urf − Ω space for 5 sample ions and 35 laser-cooled ions in a
linear-geometry Paul trap. △ indicates simulations that pro-
duced ion heating, ▽ indicates ion cooling, and • indicates no
deﬁnitive change in temperature. Plot (a) is for 8 amu sam-
ple ions and 24 amu laser cooled ions while plot (b) is for 12
amu sample ions and 24 amu laser cooled ions. The solid line
indicates the qu = 0.908 stability threshold for single ion trap-
ping, while the second constant qu line in each ﬁgure is the
theoretical threshold between regions of sympathetic cooling
and heating of the sample ions (see text).

The basic physical mechanism for instability heating is
as follows. Equation (4) gives the general form for mo-
tion of an ion in an oscillating quadrupole ﬁeld. For a
single trapped ion, qu is a constant and for
< 0.908,
µ is purely imaginary thus the orbit is oscillatory. When
> 0.908, µ will contain a real part which will cause
qu
|
the trajectory of the ion to grow exponentially. However,
when the ion in question is in the presence of other ions,
qu can no longer be considered a constant but the addi-
tional randomly varying Coulomb forces require it to be

qu
|

|

|

4

qeﬀ,u
|

replaced with a time-varying eﬀective stability parameter
qeﬀ,u. Viewed as such,
can now exceed the thresh-
|
old value of 0.908 for short periods of times without the
ion escaping the trap. These time intervals in which the
ion trajectory grows exponentially are followed by inter-
vals for which
drops below 0.908 thus re-stabilizing
the ion at a larger maximum radius and a higher energy
orbit.

qeﬀ,u
|

|

To calculate qeﬀ,u, we will consider our physical system
at a particular point in time and replace the sample ion
of interest, which is exposed to the trap forces (FT,u)
and Coulomb force due to other ions (Fi,u) present in
the trap, with an equivalent ion. Furthermore, we will
assume that this equivalent ion is positioned at the same
point in the trap as the ion of interest, having the same
velocity and acceleration, and is subject to the same trap
force but is not exposed to the Coulomb force due to
the other ions, thus requiring it to have a time-varying
eﬀective mass. The eﬀective mass of the equivalent ion
in terms of the mass of the sample ion is given by

meﬀ,u =

m
1 + Fi,u

(cid:16)

FT ,u (cid:17)

.

Since the eﬀective mass is the mass for an equivalent
single ion in a trap, Eq. (3) can be used to obtain qeﬀ,u
given by

where

qeﬀ,u = qu (1 + εu) ,

εu =

Fi,u
FT,u

.

Note that qeﬀ,u is both time varying and can have diﬀer-
ent values for the x and y directions. We can now write
the instantaneous stability criterion as

(11)

qeﬀ,u
|
qeﬀ,u
|

=

qu (1 + εu)
|

0.908.

|

| ≤

When

|
> 0.908 (i.e. when the inter-ionic forces
suﬃciently exceed the trapping forces) we would expect
the possibility of exponential growth of ion trajectory,
leading to increased ion temperatures. Figures 4a and
4b illustrate that this is indeed the case. These simula-
tions show a short snapshot of the temporal evolution of
the x-coordinate of a sample ion in parallel with the com-
puted value of qeﬀ,x. They were obtained with a single
sample ion, a single laser-cooled ion, and with qu (= 0.9)
set very near the single ion instability threshold in order
to maximize the frequency of instability points. The evo-
lution of the particle motion shows a sequence of steps in
the amplitude of the ion’s motion, corresponding to steps
in the temperature of the ion. For each of these steps,
qeﬀ,x
we observe a corresponding spike in qeﬀ,x, where
|
|
exceeds 0.908. In some cases, the amplitude steps down,
which is expected since Eq. (4) contains both exponen-
tially growing and decaying terms. The energy drops only

(8)

(9)

(10)

when the decaying term is much larger than the growth
term, while it increases under all other conditions. On
the other hand, there are deﬁnitely many points where
qeﬀ,x exceeds 0.908, but no signiﬁcant change in the mo-
tional amplitude occurs. The explanation for this curious
behaviour is given below.

FIG. 4. Temporal plots of the computed evolution of (a)
qeﬀ,x (see text), (b) the x-position and (c) the time period that
qeﬀ,x remained above 0.908 for the sample ion in a simulation
involving a 6.6 amu sample ion and a 30 amu laser-cooled ion.
The trapping ﬁeld parameters were Urf = 70 V, Ω = 2π(2.9
MHz), and qu = 0.9.

What is perhaps more important than qeﬀ,u merely
exceeding 0.908 is the time interval over which qeﬀ,u has
an unstable value. As one can see from Eq. (10), even in
the presence of a distant laser cooled ion εu undergoes
a singularity each time the trapping force on the sample
ion becomes zero. This occurs at least twice per cycle
of the rf-trapping potential. However, when the time
period over which qeﬀ,u takes an unstable value is short
compared to the time interval for the rest of the cycle,
the ion trajectory does not signiﬁcantly grow, hence no
measureable heating occurs. Since the ion motion evolves

5

at the secular frequency, a singularity lasting for such
a short time interval should not signiﬁcantly eﬀect the
energy of the sample ion or its temperature.

ity threshold for a relatively long time (> 100 ns). On
the other hand, at point C there are several spikes all ex-
ceeding 1. However, none of the spikes last longer than
20 ns, and the ion motion shows no signiﬁcant change.

IV. CALCULATION OF HEATING-COOLING
THRESHOLD

To generate a predicted shape for the cooling-heating
threshold, we need to calculate a balance between the
heating and cooling rates. To calculate the heating rate,
we ﬁrst need the variation of the mean instability time
with the trapping ﬁeld parameters. From Eq. (10) and
11, the time interval for which
is larger than 0.908
is given by the time interval when

qeﬀ,u
|

|

FT,u
|

| ≤

Fi,u
| h
0.908

qu
qu

.

i |
±

(12)

is satisﬁed. The upper sign is used when FT,u and Fi,u
have opposite sign and the lower sign when they are
pointed in the same direction.
is the average inter-
ionic force during a collision. An estimate of this time
interval can be obtained as a function of trapping ﬁeld
parameters. The trapping force can be determined by
taking the gradient of Eq. (1). Using Eqs. 5 and 6, the
force on an ion near the trap centre can be approximated
by (see Fig. 5)

Fi,u
h

i

FT,x =

Urf sin Ωt

=

′

Urf sin Ωt

,

(13)

′

eu0 sin ωsect
r2
0

ex
r2
0

where t and t′ are used to indicate that the secular motion
and micromotion may be out of phase. We neglect the
small eﬀect of micromotion on the x-coordinate of the ion
near the trap axis. Given that the time scale of interest
is the secular period, much longer than the trapping ﬁeld
period, the trapping ﬁeld oscillation can be averaged out.
Strictly speaking this is zero, but stability is dependent
on
0.908. Thus it is really the absolute value of
the forces, not their signs which is of interest. Therefore,
it is reasonable to replace sin Ωt′ with its rms value. As-
suming that we are only interested in times close to the
point where the ion crosses the trap axis, the small angle
approximation ωsect

1 can be used. Thus

qeﬀ,u
|

| ≤

Using Eqs. 5 and 6 , we ﬁnd

≪

FT,x =

eu0ωsect
2r2
0

Urf .

FT,x =

eUrf
2r2

0 r

2kBT
ms

t.

Substituting Eq. (15) into Eq. (12), and solving for the
instability time τ , we ﬁnd:

τ =

0.908
Fi,u
|
0.9082

qu
|
q2
u

−

r2
0
eUrf r

ms
2kBT

.

6

(14)

(15)

(16)

FIG. 5. A temporal plot of the computed trap force on a
moving ion. Point A illustrates the short instability period
when the inter-ionic force exceeds the trapping force, while
period B illustrates the longer instability period occurring
when the secular motion of the ion passes through x = 0.

More signiﬁcantly, εx (or εy) also undergoes a singu-
larity as the ion crosses the y (or x) axis. This occurs
for each half cycle of secular motion. The important
diﬀerence between this and the trapping ﬁeld singular-
ities is that the instability periods can last over a much
longer time period as illustrated in Fig. 5. Here, the solid
curve represents the trap force on a moving ion as a func-
tion of time and the horizontal dotted lines represent the
magnitude of the slowly varying Coulomb force due to
another ion. For times less than 0.8 µs, the amplitude
of the trap force is large (i.e. the sample ion is not near
the y axis) and thus the inter-ionic force dominates only
for very short time-intervals as illustrated by A, which
is too short to signiﬁcantly eﬀect the trajectory. How-
ever, when the ion is close to the y axis (i.e. times near 1
µs), the trapping force is weaker and the inter-ionic force
dominates over a longer time period, possibly over sev-
eral cycles of the trapping ﬁeld if the ion spacing is small.
This is illustrated by event B. This results in a measure-
able heating of the sample ion. The importance of the
period over which the ion remains unstable is shown in
part (c) of Fig. 4. We see that the quantized steps in the
amplitude of the ion motion occur when qeﬀ,x exceeds
0.908 and does so for a period exceeding 30 to 40 ns.
To illustrate this point, three events are highlighted. At
point A, qeﬀ,x spikes to well above 1 for well over 100 ns,
resulting in a clear step in the motional amplitude. At
point B, there is also an amplitude step, but here qeﬀ,x
barely exceeds 1. However, qeﬀ,x stays above the stabil-

One can see immediately that the instability increases
in duration as qu approaches 0.908, and eventually be-
comes inﬁnity at the point that qu reaches the single ion
instability threshold.

Given Eq. (16), we can calculate the heating rate by
also considering the collision rate, the frequency at which
these axis-crossing instabilities happen, and the rate at
which the energy grows during the instability. The col-
lision rate is simply a function of the number of trapped
ions and trapping volume, while axis crossings occur
at twice the secular frequency. To determine the rate
of energy growth during the instability, we must calcu-
late how rapidly the radius of the ion trajectory grows.
The parameter µ in Eq. (4) governs this growth. Since
qu = 0.908 marks the transition from complex to real
values for µ, this coeﬃcient, at least near the transition
point, should take on the form

µ = η

qu

0.908,

(17)

p|

| −
where η is a constant of order unity. This cannot be
shown analytically for the Paul trap. However, for the
closely related rotating saddle trap that can be solved
analytically, µ takes the form of Eq. (17) [18]. Converting
back from unitless parameters, the rate of exponential
growth in the motion during the instability is given by

1
2

1
2

µΩ =

ηΩ

qeﬀ,u

0.908,

q|

| −

(18)

while the rate of energy increase is simply twice this
amount due to the harmonic nature of the potential.
Here, qu has been replaced with qeﬀ,u since it is the quan-
tity that reaches unstable values. We will approximate
Eq. (18) using a mean value for qeﬀ,u by assuming that
Fi,u is roughly constant over the instability period and
that FT,u can be replaced by the average of its maximum
magnitude during instability and its minimum value of
zero (see Eq. (12)). When qeﬀ,u for parallel and anti-
parallel forces are averaged, the result is independent of
qu leaving an average value for the exponential energy
growth rate of

= ηΩ√0.908.

µΩ
h

i

(19)

(20)

Finally, taking the heating rate to be proportional to the
the instability time, energy growth rate, the collision rate
(σcoll), and the axis crossing frequency (2σsec) yields

Rh =

Khσcoll0.908
0.9082

Fi,u
|
q2
u
−

qu
|

η
4π r

0.908
mskBT

.

To avoid overall heating of the ions, Rh must be bal-
anced by the cooling eﬀect, which occurs via elastic colli-
sions between slow and fast moving particles of diﬀerent
masses. Simple classical mechanics arguments show that
the eﬃciency of elastic collision energy transfer decreases
as the mass diﬀerence between the particles increases.
The energy transfer eﬃciency is given by 4ρ/(1 + ρ)2,

where ρ = ms/mc
[10]. Taking the cooling rate to be
proportional to the product of this eﬃciency and the col-
lision rate gives

Rc = Kcσcoll

(21)

2 .

ms/mc

1 + ms

mc (cid:17)

(cid:16)
When the two rates balance out, we should see a transi-
tion from heating to cooling of the sample ions. Equating
Eqs. 20 and 21, we obtain

qu
0.9082

4πK

=

q2
u

−

0.908

Fi,u
|

η r
|

m3

kBT
0.908 p

s/mc
(1 + ms/mc)2 , (22)

where the constant K, which is independent of the trap-
ping parameters, is deﬁned to be Kc/Kh. The collision
rates in Eqs. 20 and 21 have been taken to be the same.
This is valid if the number of laser-cooled ions signif-
icantly exceeds the number of sample ions. In general,
cooling occurs when sample ions collide with laser-cooled
ions, while instability heating is caused by interactions
between any two ions. However, if most of the ions in
the trap are laser-cooled ions, then most of the instabil-
ity heating is a result of interactions between sample ions
and laser-cooled ions. This means that both the heating
and cooling rates are proportional to the same collision
rate, and thus this rate cancels out. Therefore, the rate
of collisions determines the rate of heating or cooling and
not the sign of the temperature change.

Equation (22) provides the theoretical justiﬁcation
that lines of constant qu deﬁne the heating-cooling
boundaries in Urf -Ω space. Although we cannot calcu-
late threshold values for qu from ﬁrst principles, because
of the unknown scaling factors, it can be done numeri-
cally. This was done to produce the qu = 0.509 curve in
Fig. 3b, showing that this line eﬀectively separates the
regions of heating and cooling. Once the threshold value
of qu is determined for one mass combination, Eq. (22)
can be used to determine the value for other mass com-
binations. This is illustrated by the qu = 0.408 line in
Fig. 3a. This line was not ﬁt to the data, but rather it
It
was calculated from the constant value for Fig. 3b.
should be noted that this model has been applied only to
a limited mass range and that perhaps other mass eﬀects
have to be included if very large mass diﬀerences are to
be considered.

Up to this point, we have concentrated mainly on the
eﬀect of the mass of the sample ion. However, the laser-
cooled ion mass is also signiﬁcant. This is because the
eﬃciency of energy transfer between two colliding par-
ticles decreases as the ratio of the masses deviates from
unity, becoming eﬀectively zero when one mass is negli-
gible as compared to the other. However, the instability-
heating rate is expected to be relatively unchanged as it
results from the Coulomb interactions between the ions
and with the trapping ﬁeld. Thus for larger mass ratios,
the heating-cooling threshold should move further from
the single-ion instability threshold in order to reduce the

7

amount of instability heating that must be overcome.
This reduces the overall collision rate which decreases
the rate of heating or cooling of the sample ion. The
eﬀect of laser-cooled ion mass was examined by running
simulations with 18 amu sample ions interacting with ei-
ther 24 amu or 36 amu laser cooled ions for a range of qu.
The results are summarized in Table I which illustrates
the expected slight shift in the cooling-heating threshold
for diﬀerent laser-cooled ion masses. These results are in
good agreement with the heating-cooling transition val-
ues predicted by Eq. (23) based on the 12 amu/24 amu
threshold. The predicted heating-cooling threshold val-
ues are 0.585 for 18 amu/24 amu and 0.56 for 18 amu/36
amu.

V. DISCUSSION AND FUTURE DIRECTIONS

The results of the preceding sections provide us with a
physical insight into the competing processes that lead to
sympathetic heating or cooling of ion mixtures. Gener-
ally speaking, we can conclude that if sympathetic heat-
ing is occurring for light sample ions, the trap parameters
can be adjusted to move away from the single ion insta-
bility threshold, thereby allowing the sample ions to cool.
However, there is a limit to this eﬀect. As one moves far
away from the instability threshold, as would be needed
to cool very light ions, the trapping ﬁeld becomes weaker,
the trapping volume grows, and the collision rate be-
comes very small. Although an ion still cools, the rate of
cooling may be so small as to be of little practical use.

Instability heating is to be distinguished from rf-
This transient eﬀect is caused by
heating [13,19].
random interactions between ions, temporarily driving
them into unstable motion.
In contrast, rf-heating of
theions near the quadrupole axis is caused by continuous
Coulomb interactions with the ions which are constantly
driven by rf ﬁeld at the periphery. Rf-heating cannot
be suppressed solely by changing the trap parameters,
only by reducing the numbers of ions and cooling the
sample to the point where all the ions crystallize along
the central axis of the trap where micromotion is not
present. However, instability heating, which is a major
source of heating in the low-density gas phase regime,
can be quenched by choosing favourable trap parameters
so that the ions are less susceptible to heating. This is
achieved by minimising the duration of potentially un-
stable motion and the frequency at which these potential
instabilities occur, so that in the event of a collision the
ions is more likely to decrease its energy.

Further theoretical work is needed to study the eﬀect of
changing the relative numbers of sample and laser cooled
ions. When the number of sample ions increases, the in-
teractions between them can no longer be ignored. This
will ultimately cause more heating, since such interac-
tions cannot result in a decrease in the mean energy. Al-
though, Eq. (16) suggests that instability heating should

8

decrease in the higher energy regime this has yet to be
tested. Such collisions at high temperatures (∼300K)
require much more computational time and other tech-
niques may be developed to model them. At low energies
(∼1K) Eq. (16), which is applicable for ions in the gas
phase, becomes less valid since the ions are in the crys-
Instability heating is expected to be in-
talline phase.
signiﬁcant here since the axial separation is always large
enough to prevent the transverse forces, which cause in-
stabilities, from becoming too large. The dominant heat-
ing mechanism in this low energy crystalline phase would
be rf-heating when the number of ions is large.

In this work, we have ignored the internal degrees of
freedom of the sample ions, which is reasonable if the
ions are all atomic, but less so in the case of molecular
sample ions. The distinction between atomic sample ions
and molecular sample ions was deliberately overlooked,
since the focus of this work is the translational degrees
of freedom. In ignoring the molecular ions internal struc-
ture, we have a ﬁrst order approximation as to whether
or not the sample molecular ions will translationally heat
or cool. Translational cooling in this approximation is
seen as a signiﬁcant component of a complete model of
the sympathetic cooling. This is because a major energy
transfer process is expected to be intra-molecular trans-
fer of energy from rotational and vibrational modes to
translational degrees of freedom followed by inter-ionic
translational energy transfer to the laser-cooled atoms,
as modeled in this work.

VI. CONCLUSIONS

The mechanism through which sample ions are heated
in a linear Paul trap is a direct result of collisions, the
same collisions that would otherwise bring about thermal
equilibrium at a lower temperature. A collision can cause
an ion to become brieﬂy unstable and thus rather than
energy being transferred to the laser cooled ion for dis-
sipation in the radiation ﬁeld, kinetic energy is pumped
into the ion from the electric ﬁelds if its qeﬀ,u is greater
than 0.908. We have shown that instability heating is
minimised when qu is small. Since qu is a function of
mass, trap frequency, and trap depth, although a lower
mass limit exists below which sample ions will heat, this
threshold can be changed by modifying the trap param-
eters. This mass limit corresponds to a second charac-
teristic threshold value for qu, above which heating will
occur [11]. More generally, there exists a three dimen-
sional space spanned by mass, trap frequency, and trap
amplitude which is divided into regions of sympathetic
heating-cooling. Constraining any two of these variables
will result in an upper or lower limit in the third.

VII. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

The Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Coun-
cil of Canada supported this research. One of the authors
(TH) would like to acknowledge the ﬁnancial support of
the Faculty of Graduate Studies in the University of Cal-
gary. D. Hobill and H. Graumann provided very use-
ful assistance related to the challenges of computational
physics. The authors thank D. Feder for his helpful crit-
icism and assistance in preparation of this manuscript.

[17] H. J. Metcalf, P. Van der Staten, Laser Cooling and Trap-

ping, (Springer,New York,1999).

[18] R.I. Thompson, T.J. Harmon, M. Ball, Can. J. Phys.

(submitted).

[19] M. Drewsen, A. Broner, Phys. Rev. A 62, 045401 (2000).

Ω/2π [MHz] Urf [V] mc = 24 amu mc = 24 amu

qu
0.19
0.25
0.35
0.38
0.39
0.43
0.47
0.51
0.59
0.61
0.63
0.66
0.70
0.76

2
2.5
1.5
2.5
2
2.54
2.43
2.5
2
3
2.5
2.05
1.5
2.5

70
40
20
60
40
70
70
80
60
140
100
70
40
120

C
C
C
C
C
C
C
N
N
N
N
N
H
H

C
C
C
C
C
C
N
N
N
H
H
H
H
H

TABLE I. Computational observations of sympathetic
heating or cooling for diﬀerent trapping ﬁeld parameters for
5 sample ions (mc = 18 amu) interacting with 35 laser cooled
ions (either mc = 24 amu or mc = 36 amu). The sample ion
behavior was categorized, based on a 60 ms evolution, into
heating (H), cooling (C), or no observed temperature change
(N).

[1] See for example the many excellent papers in Coher-
ent and collective interactions of particles and radia-
tion beams, Proc. International School of Physics “Enrico
Fermi”, Course CXXXI, A. Aspect, W. Barletta and R.
Bonifacio (Eds.), IOC Press, Amsterdam, (1996); Fron-
tiers in laser spectroscopy, Proc. International School of
Physics “Enrico Fermi”, Course CXX, T.W. H¨ansch and
M. Inguscio (Eds.), North-Holland, Amsterdam, (1994);
Laser Manipulation of Atoms and Ions, Proc. Interna-
tional School of Physics “Enrico Fermi”, Course CXVIII,
E. Arimondo, W.D. Phillips, F. Stumia (Eds.), North-
Holland, Amsterdam, (1992).

[2] M. Kasevich, S. Chu, Appl. Phys. B 54, 321 (1992).
[3] S. Chu, L. Hollberg, J.E. Bjorkland, A. Cable, A. Ashkin,

Phys. Rev. Lett. 55, 48 (1985).

[4] P. Lett, R. Watts, C. Westbrook, W. Phillips, P. Gould,
H. Metcalf, Phys. Rev. Lett. 61, 169 (1988); J. Dalibert,
C. Cohen-Tannoudji, J. Opt. Soc. Am. B 6, 2023 (1989);
M. Kasevich, S. Chu, Phys. Rev. Lett. 69, 1741 (1992).
[5] B. Sheehy, S-Q. Shang, R. Watts, S. Hatamian, and H.

Metcalf, J. Opt. Soc. Am. B 11, 2165 (1989).

[6] J.T. Bahns, W.C. Stwalley, P.L. Gould, J. Chem. Phys.

104, 9689 (1996).

[7] A.C. Truscott; K.E. Strecker, W.I. McAlexander, G.B.

Partridge, R.G. Hulet, Science 291, 2570 (2001).

[8] K. Molhave, M. Drewsen, Phys. Rev. A 62,

011401(2000).

[9] P. Bowe, L. Hornekaer, Phys. Rev. Lett. 82, 2071(1999).
[10] T. Baba, I. Waki, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys. 35, L1134 (1996).
[11] T. Baba, I. Waki, J. Appl. Phys B 74, 375(2002).
[12] D. J. Wineland, J. C. Berguist, Phys. Rev. Lett. 59, 2935

(1987).
[13] W. Paul,

in E. Arimondo, W.D. Phillips, F. Stumia
(Eds.), Laser Manipulation of Atoms and Ions, Proc.
International School of Physics “Enrico Fermi”, Course
CXVIII, North-Holland, Amsterdam, 492 (1992).

[14] P. Dawson, Quadrupole Mass Spectrometry and its appli-

cations, (Elsevier, Amsterdam, 1976).

[15] R.E. March, R.J. Hughes, Quadrupole Storage Mass
Spectrometry, (Wiley and Sons, New York, 1989).
[16] F. M. Arscott, Periodic Diﬀerential Equations, (Perga-

mon Press, Oxford, 1964).

9

