2
0
0
2
 
g
u
A
 
6
 
 
]
h
p
-
m
o
t
a
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
4
2
0
8
0
2
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Laser gas-discharge absorption measurements of the ratio of two transition rates in
argon

I. M. Savukov∗ and H. G. Berry†
Department of Physics, 225 Nieuwland Science Hall
University of Notre Dame, Notre Dame, IN 46566
(Dated: February 2, 2008)

The ratio of two line strengths at 922.7 nm and 978.7 nm of argon is measured in an argon pulsed
discharge with the use of a single-mode Ti:Sapphire laser. The result 3.29(0.13) is in agreement with
our theoretical prediction 3.23 and with a less accurate ratio 2.89(0.43) from the NIST database.

PACS numbers: 39.30.+w, 32.70.Cs, 32.80.-t

I.

INTRODUCTION

We have recently developed a theory for particle-hole
states of closed-shell atoms that is potentially able to
predict energies and transition rates with high precision.
Initially, this theory has been tested in neon [1, 2]. For
transitions between neon excited states the accuracy of
experiments is very good and experiments agree well with
our theory. However, for heavier noble gas atoms, ex-
periments are often prone to systematic errors and the
precision is much lower. For example, many absolute
transition rates of argon were based on high-pressure arc
plasmas and depended on the assumption of local ther-
modynamic equilibrium of the upper state populations
which often was satisﬁed very approximately (see discus-
sion in Ref. [3]). Lifetime measurements using diﬀerent
techniques or even the same technique often yield quite
diﬀerent results. In Ref. [4], a uniﬁed set of atomic prob-
abilities for neutral argon is given. The data are obtained
from extensive analysis of existing experiments and from
new measurements of emission in the broad range 240-
18000 nm. The data are included in the NIST data base.
Errors of order 10% are quoted. Although our theory
is able to reproduce NIST data, the diﬀerence between
experiment and theory often exceeds quoted in Ref. [4]
error bars. There are two possibilities: (i) the theory is
less accurate and needs to be improved, (ii) experimental
error bars are larger and critical, more precise measure-
ments are needed. Therefore, the accurate measurements
presented in this paper are well motivated.

We describe a new experimental technique for precise
measurements of ratios of transition rates in gas dis-
charges and detail an apparatus realizing this technique.
We demonstrate our measurement of the ratio of two ar-
gon transitions and analyze systematic errors. Finally,
we present a comparison with our theory and other the-
ories and experiments.

∗Electronic address: isavukov@nd.edu; URL: http://www.nd.edu/
~isavukov
†Electronic address: Berry.20@nd.edu

II. AN EXPERIMENTAL TECHNIQUE FOR
ACCURATE MEASUREMENTS OF
TRANSITION RATE RATIOS

The essential goal of the experimental technique is to
measure the relative absorption rates for two diﬀerent
transitions that start from the same level.
In general,
the populations of the lower and upper states are needed
for ﬁnding the cross-section σif from the absorption co-
eﬃcient αif ,

αif = [Ni − (gi/gf )Nf ] σif

(1)

i1

i1

and

1/24s1/2

3/24s1/2

3p−1
h

(here Ni and Nf are densities of atoms in the initial
and ﬁnal states, gi/gf is the ratio statistical weights),
but in some cases the upper state population can be
neglected. This happens when the initial state is the
ground or long-lived metastable state, and the ﬁnal, up-
per states are short-lived and relatively unpopulated. In
gas discharges, at low current densities, metastable lev-
els are generally much more populated than any other
non-metastable excited levels. Experimentally, we also
observed states that have allowed decay modes. The
3p−1
states, surprisingly, were
h
populated almost as much as metastables at pressure of
a few Torr. The observed lifetimes of these states are
of the order of ten microseconds. The principal expla-
nation for such a slow decay is radiation capture: many
possibilities of emission and absorption of a photon oc-
cur before the photon can leave the discharge cell. The
observation of long-lived species in discharges gives the
possibility to use them as lower states for absorption mea-
surements. The other excited levels (not belonging to
the 4s group) quickly decay radiatively without radia-
tion capture and are eﬀectively depopulated in a pulsed
discharge as soon as the discharge current disappears.
Therefore, in upward transitions that start from the 4s
levels, the condition Ni >> Nf is satisﬁed, and the ab-
sorption becomes proportional just to the cross-section
and the initial density. Thus, by measuring the absorp-
tion for two transitions starting from the same level, in
, we can ﬁnd the ratio of
our experiment

3p−1

1/24s1/2

h

i1

cross-sections from the ratio of absorptions,

σif1
σif2

=

αif1
αif2

.

For a Doppler broadened proﬁle and for monochromatic
laser light tuned to the maximum of the proﬁle, the ratio
of cross-sections is equal to the ratio of line strengths

(2)

(3)

σif1
σif2

=

Sif1
Sif2

=

S1
S2

.

Therefore by measuring the ratio of absorptions for two
transitions, we can ﬁnd the ratio of line strengths S1/S2,
the important parameter that can be compared with
other experiments and with theory. The situation de-
scribed above is ideal for precise measurements of tran-
sition rate ratios: it has been very closely reproduced in
alkali vapor experiments, in which for Cs an accuracy
of better than 0.1% is claimed by Rafac and Tanner [5].
However, in the case of noble gases, especially when we
choose the starting level to be a non-metastable state, a
more complicated analysis is required.

In order to satisfy the condition Ni >> Nf for the
lowest excited states, we use a pulsed rather than a DC
discharge. In a DC discharge this condition is weaker,
because radiatively decaying levels are constantly repop-
ulated by collisions with hot electrons and by decay of
higher levels. It is especially true for radiation-capturing
levels. A further advantage of a pulsed discharge is the
possibility for enhancing the signal by utilizing its time
dependence. For example slow ﬂuctuations in laser in-
tensity can be excluded. In addition, the signal-to-noise
ratio can be improved using averaging (128-scan in our
experiment) on a digital oscilloscope. Without special ef-
forts an absorption of order 0.1% can be easily detected.
Such high sensitivity is useful for fast and precise tuning
of the laser to centers of Doppler proﬁles which is needed
if only one laser is available. The long-term stability of
the pulsed discharge is also better: the pulsed discharge
has substantially smaller sputtering and thermal eﬀects,
since the total charge from the discharge current is much
smaller for a pulsed discharge.

The principal disadvantage of the pulsed discharge is
the more complicated analysis of systematic errors, ba-
sically owing to the ﬁnite-time response of the detection
system. The various factors that can inﬂuence the mea-
surement of the ratio in pulsed discharges need careful
analysis: we will consider systematic errors that arise
from large absorption and inhomogeneity. When two
transitions diﬀer by a factor of at least three, a larger
absorption is recommended for better signal-to-noise ra-
tio. In such a case the linear relation between absorption
and line strength may no longer hold, and instead Beer’s
law must be used to derive the more general equation:

ln(I1/I10)
ln(I2/I20)

=

S1
S2

.

(4)

Here I1/I10 and I2/I20 are the reductions in the intensity
after passing the absorber for the ﬁrst and the second

2

(5)

transitions, respectively. This nonlinear equation can be
the cause of several systematic errors.

One eﬀect arises from a slow response of the detection
system. This results in a reduction of actual height of
the peak by an unknown coeﬃcient η:

ln(ηI1/I10)
ln(ηI2/I20)

=

S1
S2

.

If the equations were linear, this coeﬃcient would drop
out from the ratio, but for large and signiﬁcantly dif-
ferent absorptions for the two transitions, it will cause
a systematic error in the ratio. The other eﬀect arises
from inhomogeneity. So far we assumed that the absorp-
tion medium is homogeneous, but in gas discharges this is
far from being true. The discharge produces densities of
excited atoms with some transverse and longitudinal dis-
tributions. The longitudinal distribution does not cause
any problem, since for two transitions the ratio at each
small length of path stays the same, and eventually the
ratio of logarithms of intensities in Eq. (4) will remain the
same. The transverse distribution, however, will cause a
deviation from the simple Beer’s law and will require the
analysis of this distribution.

For a cylindrical discharge cell, which we use in our ex-
periment, if r is the distance from the axis, an integration
over r is needed,

Iout =

Z

Iin(r) exp [−α(r)] 2πrdr,

(6)

where Iin(r) is the input laser beam intensity, α(r) is
the absorption coeﬃcient, and Iout is integrated over a
detector area output intensity after an inhomogeneous
discharge medium. For simplicity in this equation the
change in absorption along the laser beam is ignored.
It is diﬃcult to ﬁnd the spatial distribution accurately,
although in some simple cases it can be predicted. In the
case of a diﬀusion controlled cylindrical discharge, the
distribution for the electron density ne and for excited
state densities, has approximately the form of a Bessel
function,

α(r) ∼ ne ≈ J0(2.4r/R) cos(πz/L).

(7)

[6], p.

The expression for the electron density ne is taken from
67. Using the series expansion of the
Ref.
Bessel function for small argument, J0(2.4r/R) ≈ 1 −
1
4 (2.4r/R)2 we can show that in our experiment with
R = 1.25 cm and r = 0.2 cm, the maximum change
in the absorption over the beam radius r is 3.7% and the
change in the integral for small α(r) is only 1.8%. There-
fore the eﬀect of the distribution is small. Moreover, if
the absorption is not very large, the exponential can be
expanded, and the linear dependence of the signal on the
absorption coeﬃcient can reduce further the eﬀect of the
distribution. If we examine NIST transition data [7] for
neutral argon, we ﬁnd many transitions in the range of
tunable lasers such as a Ti:Sapphire laser, which can be

Glass plate

Chopper

Discharge Cell

Photodiode

Aperture

Sync
Oscilloscope

Attenuator

Amplifier

.922700

Wavemeter

HV Pulse
Generator

RS232

Digital
Oscilloscope

Computer

Digital
Oscilloscope

Ti:Sapphire laser

FIG. 1: An experimental setup for conducting measurements
of absorption of laser radiation in pulsed discharges

used for the absorption experiments. However, in prac-
tice there are some restrictions: ﬁrst, the pair of tran-
sitions has to start from the same metastable levels or
radiation-capturing levels such as mentioned above. Sec-
ond, the range is greatly restricted by the tunability of
the laser: for example, our Ti:Sapphire laser has several
mirror sets for several ranges of wavelengths. Because the
change of mirrors takes many hours to complete, only one
mirror set can be used for measurements of ratios at one
time. As a result, for our currently installed mirror set,
only two pairs of transitions were appropriate. However,
our laser could not be tuned for one transition, and we
ended up able to make measurements for only one pair of
transitions: one transition at a wavelength 9227 ˚A and
the other at 9787 ˚A.

III. EXPERIMENTAL ARRANGEMENT

The optical and electrical diagrams of the experimen-
tal arrangement are shown in Fig. 1. The monochromatic
1W laser beam generated by the Ti:Sapphire laser is ex-
panded by traveling 8 meters between two optical tables
to the size of about 5 cm diameter. A variable aperture
reduces both the beam’s size and its power. To avoid
saturation of the transition, the beam intensity is fur-
ther reduced using a 2% reﬂection oﬀ a glass plate. A
chopper periodically interrupts the beam to give a 100%
reference absorption. The beam is then directed through
the discharge cell where it undergoes time-dependent ab-
sorption in the discharge initiated by HV pulses from the
HV pulse generator. The optical path of the laser beam
is terminated on the photodiode. The attenuator in front
of the screened photodiode compartment is used to avoid

3

any saturation eﬀects in the detection system. The sig-
nal from the photodetector is ampliﬁed and sent to the
digital oscilloscope for measurement of the absorption.

The laser is a commercial single frequency MBR-110
Ti:Sapphire laser, pumped with 7-15 W of CW Coherent
argon ion laser. The MBR-110 laser can be tuned in a
broad range, 700-1060 nm, but to cover all this range 6
diﬀerent mirror combinations have to be installed.

The discharge cell is a quartz tube of diameter 2.5 cm
and a length of 30 cm. Two standard electrodes were
fused symmetrically in side-tubes near each end. The
electrodes have large area to reduce unwanted sputter-
ing from the cathode which can reduce the lifetime of
metastables signiﬁcantly and aﬀect the population distri-
bution in the discharge as we observed in detail in helium.
Moreover, for the same purpose, an external ballast vol-
ume was added to the cell and a short-pulsed discharge
was used instead of a DC discharge.

A high voltage pulse generator produces high-voltage
(more than 10 kV to allow fast discharge breakdown)
pulses each of a few microseconds. The circuit is based
on a power transistor in the switching mode and high-
voltage transformer. A rotating chopper is inserted into
the optical path to produce a 100% normalization signal.
The detection system consists of a photodiode, an am-
pliﬁer, and a digital oscilloscope. There is no special
requirement on those elements except that the detection
system should provide a linear response and the distor-
tion of the waveform of the signal should be minimal.
The ﬁrst requirement is completely fulﬁlled if the laser
intensity does not exceed the saturation limit for a par-
ticular diode. The second requirement is approximately
satisﬁed: small distortion of the signal has been observed.
This eﬀect is analyzed in detail in the next section.

IV. MEASUREMENT AND ERROR ANALYSIS

To ﬁnd the ratio of line strengths, we measure the peak

absorption for two transitions and use the formula

ln(1 − V1/V10)
ln(1 − V2/V20)

=

S1
S2

.

Here V1 and V10 are the voltages proportional to the max-
imum of a pulsed discharge absorption and to the chopper
normalization absorption for the transition at λ = 922.7
nm shown in Fig.2. Similar voltages for the second tran-
sition at λ = 978.7 nm also shown in Fig.2. are V2 and
V20.

Repeating measurements of absorption several times,
we have obtained the ratio 3.29±0.04. A small error here
indicates the excellent statistics. However, the result can
still have systematic errors which need to be estimated
and if possible be excluded.

The ﬁrst type of systematic error can occur from a
slow drift in discharge conditions. Though our pulsed
discharge is very stable, to account for any slow drift, we

alternate measurements of the absorptions for the two
transitions.

The second possible systematic error can arise from the
uncertainty in the wavelength when the laser is manually
tuned to the resonances of the transitions by monitoring
absorption peaks similar to shown in Fig. 2. If ε1 and ε2
are relative average shifts owing to tuning uncertainty,
then the absolute systematic shift in the ratio σ (ε1, ε2)
is

σ (ε1, ε2) =

ln [(1 − (1 − ε1) V1/V10)]
ln [(1 − (1 − ε2) V2/V20)]

− S1
S2

≈ (ε2 − ε1),

(8)
where this equation was simpliﬁed for small absorption.
The tuning error is estimated to be about 1.5%.

The combined eﬀect of the nonlinearity of absorption
and ﬁnite-time response of the detection system leads to
another systematic error. Suppose ε is the reduction in
the peak height because of a slow time response. Then
we can write for the S-ratio

ln [1 − (1 − ε) V1/V10]
ln [1 − (1 − ε) V2/V20]

=

+ σ

S1
S2

Comparing measurements of ratios at diﬀerent discharge
currents and, hence absorption, we ﬁnd that the time
responce error is about 4%. This error gives a systematic
increase in the ratio by 4%, but the previous error due
to tuning decreases the ratio slightly by 1.5% so that
the overall systematic error is smaller. Finally, taking

0.15

0.10

0.05

0.00

-0.05

-0.10

-0.15

-0.20

0.08

0.04

0.00

-0.04

-0.08

V

 
,
l
a
n
g
S

i

V

 
,
l
a
n
g
S

i

TABLE I: The ratio of the two line strengths at 922.7 nm and
978.7 nm

4

Ratio

Source
Experiment
This work
Wiese et al. [4]
Theory
3.23
Savukov [2]
Lilly [8]
3.51
Garstang and Blerkom [9] 4.62

3.29±0.13
2.9±0.4

into account mentioned above statistical and systematic
errors, we obtain the accuracy of the measurement of the
ratio about 4%. The ﬁnal value of our ratio is 3.29±0.13.

V. COMPARISON WITH CI+MBPT THEORY
AND THE OTHER MEASUREMENTS AND
CALCULATIONS

The comparison of the ratio of line strengths is given in
Table I. Our measured ratio of line strengths 3.29±0.13 is
in excellent agreement with the value 3.23 obtained from
our mixed conﬁguration-interaction and perturbation-
theory calculations [2]. Both measured and theoretical
ratios agree also with the ratio 2.89±15% calculated from
the experimental transition rates of Ref. [4]. Our results
are close to semiempirical calculations by Lilly [8]. How-
ever, the ratio 4.62 from semiempirical calculations of
Ref. [9] based on a similar principle as calculations in
Ref. [8] disagree substantially with our result. One obvi-
ous problem with semiempirical approaches is that ener-
gies can not deﬁne completely the wave functions which
are very sensitive to the accuracy of calculations. In ad-
dition, transition amplitudes have additional corrections
which are not accounted by the eﬀective Hamiltonian.
For example, random-phase approximation (RPA) cor-
rections are due to shielding by the atom of an external
photon ﬁeld. Those corrections are substantial in Ar and
heavier noble-gas atoms and must be included to reach a
good precision.

-0.002

-0.001

0.000

0.001

0.002

0.003

0.004

Time, s

VI. CONCLUSION

FIG. 2: Absorption signals in a pulsed discharge with chopper
modulation for normalization. Absorption of two transitions
is measured. Negative voltages occur because the dc com-
ponent of the signal is removed. The insets show that after
rescaling the absorption peaks have the same shapes

We have measured an accurate ratio of line strengths
for two argon transitions. For this measurement we devel-
oped a new experimental technique based on a pulsed dis-
charge and a laser absorption measurement. This tech-
nique can be applied for measurements of other ratios
in noble gas atoms. The agreement of our measurement
and calculations is excellent.

5

[1] I. M. Savukov, W. R. Johnson, and H. G. Berry, Phys.

(1998).

Rev. A, submitted (2002), arXiv:physics/0207028.

[6] Y. P. Raizer, Gas Discharge Physics (Springer-Verlag,

[2] I. M. Savukov, Ph.D. thesis, University of Notre Dame

[3] Y. N. A. Hirabayashi, S. Okuda and T. Fujimoto, Phys.

bin/AtData/main asd.

(2002).

Rev. A 35, 639 (1987).

[4] W. L. Wiese, J. W. Brault, K. Danzmann, V. Helbig, and

M. Kock, Rev. Phys. A 39, 2461 (1989).

1054 (1965).

[5] R. J. Rafac and C. E. Tanner, Phys. Rev. A. 58, 1087

Berlin Heidelberg, 1991).
at

online

[7] Available

http://physics.nist.gov/cgi-

[8] R. A. Lilly, J. Opt. Soc. Am. 66, 245 (1976).
[9] R. H. Garstang and J. V. Blerkom, J. Opt. Soc. Am. 55,

