Precise measurement of hyperﬁne intervals using avoided
crossing of dressed states

Umakant D. Rapol and Vasant Natarajan∗
Department of Physics, Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore 560 012, INDIA

Abstract

We demonstrate a technique for precisely measuring hyperﬁne intervals in
alkali atoms. The atoms form a three-level Λ system in the presence of a strong
control laser and a weak probe laser. The dressed states created by the control
laser show signiﬁcant linewidth reduction. We have developed a technique for
Doppler-free spectroscopy that enables the separation between the dressed
states to be measured with high accuracy even in room-temperature atoms.
The states go through an avoided crossing as the detuning of the control laser
is changed from positive to negative. By studying the separation as a function
of detuning, the center of the level-crossing diagram is determined with high
precision, which yields the hyperﬁne interval. Using room-temperature Rb
vapor, we obtain a precision of 44 kHz. This is a signiﬁcant improvement
over the current precision of ∼1 MHz.

2
0
0
2
 
p
e
S
 
5
 
 
]
h
p
-
m
o
t
a
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
0
2
0
9
0
2
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Typeset using REVTEX

∗Electronic address: vasant@physics.iisc.ernet.in

1

There has been much excitement in recent times in the use of atomic coherences to mod-
ify the properties of light beams passing through an atomic vapor. For example, atomic
coherences have been used to slow light to low velocities and even to stop and “store” light
[1]. In electromagnetically induced transparency (EIT) experiments, an initially absorbing
medium becomes transparent to a probe beam when a control laser is applied to an aux-
iliary transition [2]. The control laser creates atomic coherences that shift the absorption
away from the line center. EIT techniques have several practical applications in probe am-
pliﬁcation [3], lasing without inversion [4] and suppression of spontaneous emission [5,6,7].
In many of these experiments, the atoms form a three-level system and the control laser
strongly drives two of these levels. As is well known, the strong driving creates dressed
It is the coherence between the dressed states that is the basis
states of the system [8].
for the phenomena mentioned above. Experimental observations of these phenomena have
been facilitated by the advent of low-cost tunable diode lasers which can be used to access
transitions in alkali atoms such as Rb and Cs. Alkali atoms have convenient energy levels
with strong oscillator strengths which form almost ideal three-level systems.

In this paper, we show that such “coherent control” techniques can be adapted to make
precise measurements of hyperﬁne intervals in alkali atoms. There are two properties of the
dressed states that are important for this measurement. First, the coherence between the
dressed states results in linewidth narrowing well below the natural linewidth [9]. Hence it
is possible to measure small shifts in the location of the dressed state. Second, the dressed
states have opposite symmetry. Therefore, as the detuning of the control laser is changed
from positive to negative, the dressed states go through a characteristic avoided crossing.
These two features can be combined to determine the exact center of the level-crossing
diagram, which yields the hyperﬁne interval. In our case, we work with room-temperature
Rb vapor. The linewidth of the hyperﬁne peaks is about 27 MHz, but the technique allows
us to extract the hyperﬁne interval with a precision of 44 kHz.

To understand our technique, let us ﬁrst consider the three-level Λ-type system in Rb in
some detail. The measurements are done on the D2 line in 87Rb (5S1/2 ↔ 5P3/2 transition).
As shown in Fig. 1, 87Rb has two hyperﬁne levels in the ground state with F = 1 and
2. The excited state splits into four hyperﬁne levels, of these the F ′ = 2 level couples to
both ground levels and can be used to form the Λ system. The control laser drives the
F = 1 ↔ F ′ = 2 transition with Rabi frequency of ΩR and detuning from resonance of ∆c.
The weak probe laser measures absorption on the F = 2 ↔ F ′ = 2 transition at a detuning
∆. The spontaneous decay rate from the excited level is Γ, which is 2π × 6.1 MHz in Rb.

The absorption of the weak probe in the presence of the control laser has been derived
previously [7,10]. As is well known, the strong control laser creates two dressed states due
to the ac Stark shift [8]. The probe absorption gets modiﬁed due to this and shows peaks
at the location of the two dressed states (Autler-Townes doublet), given by

1
2 q∆2
Here ∆+ and ∆− are the values of the probe detuning where the peaks occur. The corre-
sponding linewidths (Γ±) of these peaks are diﬀerent because of the coherence between the
two dressed states, and given by

c + Ω2
R.

∆c
2

∆± =

(1)

±

2

Γ± =

1 ∓

Γ
2





∆c
c + Ω2

R





.

q∆2

(2)

It is clear from the above expression that, if ∆c = 0, the two peaks are symmetric and have
identical linewidths of Γ/2. However, for any non-zero detuning, the peaks have asymmetric
linewidths. The ﬁrst peak has larger linewidth while the second peak has smaller linewidth
by precisely the same factor, in such a way that the sum of the two linewidths is equal to
the unperturbed linewidth, Γ.

The above analysis shows how the three-level system is useful in many applications. For
example, probe absorption at line center (∆ = 0) is strongly suppressed in the presence of a
resonant control laser because the dressed states created by the control laser are shifted by
the Rabi frequency. This is the basis for EIT experiments. Similarly, it is clear from Eq. 2
that the linewidth Γ+ of the second dressed state can be much below the natural linewidth
when the control-laser detuning is large. The basic idea for our experiment is also contained
c + Ω2
in the above analysis. From Eq. 1, the separation between the dressed states is q∆2
R.
As the detuning of the control laser is varied from negative to positive, the states exhibit an
avoided crossing, so that the separation at zero detuning is not zero but equal to the Rabi
frequency. Thus, by studying the variation of the separation with detuning, it is possible to
determine the location of the level crossing precisely.

However, observing the Autler-Townes doublet in room-temperature vapor is complicated
by eﬀects due to Doppler broadening. The above expressions are valid for a stationary atom;
in room-temperature vapor they have to be corrected for the thermal velocity distribution
of the atoms. One consequence of this is that the linewidth appearing in Eq. 2 is not the
natural linewidth but the Doppler width, which is 560 MHz for room-temperature Rb atoms.
We have solved the problem of Doppler broadening in the following manner. A part of the
probe laser is split oﬀ as a “pump” beam and sent through the vapor cell so that it is counter-
propagating with respect to the probe and control beams. The intensity of the pump beam
is chosen to be about 4 times higher than the probe. In this conﬁguration, the zero-velocity
group of atoms preferentially absorbs from the pump and the probe gets transmitted. This
is a standard technique used in Doppler-free saturated-absorption spectroscopy [11] which
we have adapted to the three-level case.

The experimental schematic for the hyperﬁne measurements in Rb is shown in Fig.
2. The probe and control beams are obtained from two frequency-stabilized diode laser
systems operating near the D2 line in 87Rb. The linewidth of the lasers after stabilization
has been measured to be below 1 MHz. The two beams co-propagate through a room-
temperature vapor cell containing Rb. The absorption through the cell is about 25%. The
counter-propagating pump beam discussed above is generated from the probe laser using a
beamsplitter. To set the frequency of the control laser, a part of the control beam is tapped
It can be potentially locked to
oﬀ for saturated-absorption spectroscopy in a vapor cell.
any of the hyperﬁne peaks or crossover resonances in the spectrum. We lock it to the
F = 1 ↔ F ′ = (1, 2) crossover resonance. The remaining frequency oﬀset (of about 78
MHz) to bring it close to the F = 1 ↔ F ′ = 2 is obtained using an acousto-optic modulator
(AOM). The frequency shift in the AOM is varied to get diﬀerent detunings and the value of
the AOM frequency at which the level-crossing occurs gives the hyperﬁne interval between
the F = (1, 2) crossover resonance and the F ′ = 2 level. Note that the only absolute

3

frequency entering the measurement is the frequency of the AOM, all other frequencies such
as the separation of the dressed states or the Rabi frequency of the control laser are only
important in their relative values.

The transmission of the probe laser as it is scanned across the F = 2 ↔ F ′ = 2 transition
is shown in Fig. 3.
In the ﬁrst trace, the control laser is turned oﬀ. The pump-probe
conﬁguration results in the appearance of a Doppler-free peak as for standard saturated-
absorption spectroscopy. Ideally, the linewidth of the peak should be the natural linewidth
of 6.1 MHz. The linewidth obtained in our case is about 27 MHz. There are many reasons for
this broadening, the main two being misalignment between the counter-propagating beams,
and power broadening due to the pump beam. However, as we will see below, the large
linewidth does not seriously aﬀect the measurement.

In the presence of the control laser, the F ′ = 2 peak splits into two peaks exactly as
predicted by the above analysis. This is shown in the middle trace of Fig. 3. The two peaks
have asymmetric linewidths because of the non-zero detuning of the control laser, with the
peak on the right having smaller linewidth. The detuning for this spectrum is +13.5 MHz.
In the lowest trace of Fig. 3, we show the same spectrum when the detuning has been
changed to −13.5 MHz. Notice that now it is the peak on the left that has the smaller
linewidth, showing that the symmetry of the dressed states changes as the detuning changes
from positive to negative. Furthermore, the sum of the linewidths of the two peaks in both
cases is equal to the unperturbed linewidth, as predicted by Eq. 2. However, as mentioned
before, the unperturbed linewidth is 27 MHz and not the natural linewidth of 6.1 MHz.

The variation of the separation of the Autler-Townes doublet as a function of AOM
frequency is shown in Fig. 4. Since the frequency of the control laser is ﬁrst shifted using
the AOM, and then locked to the F = 1 ↔ F ′ = (1, 2) crossover resonance, the AOM
frequency at which the separation reaches a minimum yields the hyperﬁne interval to the
F ′ = 2 level. The solid line in Fig. 4 is the expected variation in separation as a function
of control-laser detuning from Eq. 1. The best ﬁt yields a value of 78.433(44) MHz for
this hyperﬁne interval. Note that the absolute values of the control-laser Rabi frequency
and the separation of the peaks are not important. Any scaling error in obtaining these
numbers from the measured experimental parameters will not aﬀect the determination of
the minimum. The only absolute number of consequence is the AOM frequency and this is
measured very precisely using a frequency counter.

The accuracy of 44 kHz we obtain is signiﬁcantly better than the accuracy with which
hyperﬁne intervals in alkali atoms are currently known [12]. The values in Ref. [12] are
obtained by ﬁtting to all the available data on alkali atoms with measurements from a range
of techniques such as optical double resonance, cascade radiofrequency and level crossing.
The typical error in Ref. [12] for hyperﬁne intervals in the 5P3/2 state of Rb is about 1 MHz.
There is a more recent measurement in Rb [13] using stabilized diode lasers similar to the
lasers we have used in this work. Absolute frequencies of the diﬀerent hyperﬁne levels are
obtained using a Fabry-Perot interferometer and a stabilized HeNe laser as the frequency
reference. The accuracy quoted in Ref. [13] is 0.4 MHz. The frequency stability of the diode
lasers is a limitation in obtaining higher accuracy with such an interferometric technique.

The most precise measurements in 87Rb to date have been reported in Ref. [14] with a
quoted error of only 4–9 kHz. The extremely small error in this work has been achieved
using optical heterodyning of two ultra-stable tunable Ti-sapphire lasers locked to diﬀerent

4

hyperﬁne transitions. Several experimental advancements were used to bring down errors
to this level. The linewidth of the hyperﬁne transitions was reduced to 7 MHz in the
vapor cell using magnetic shielding and careful control of pump and probe intensities. The
cells themselves were specially constructed to ensure ultra-high purity. The lasers were
locked with 3 kHz precision to the line center using third-harmonic lock-in detection at
the modulation frequency. Ultra-stable frequency standards were used to achieve stability
of AOMs. By contrast, we have used standard locking of a low-cost diode laser to the
hyperﬁne transition. The transition is broadened to a linewidth of 27 MHz in the vapor
cell. We have therefore not really pushed the limits of precision for our technique.
It is
conceivable that, by using some of the advanced techniques mentioned in Ref. [14], we can
reduce our errors by a factor of 5 to 10. However, even at the level of 44 kHz, the technique
is useful since hyperﬁne intervals in the other isotope of Rb, 85Rb, or in other alkali atoms
are known only with ∼MHz precision.

In conclusion, we have demonstrated a new technique for measuring hyperﬁne intervals
in alkali atoms. The atoms form a three-level Λ system with an excited level coupled to a
ground level by a strong control laser, and the same excited level coupled to a diﬀerent ground
level by a weak probe laser. The control laser creates dressed states that show signiﬁcant
In addition, the
linewidth reduction when the control laser is detuned from resonance.
states go through an avoided crossing as the sign of the detuning is changed from positive to
negative. Even though we work with room-temperature vapor, we have adapted a technique
of using a counter-propagating pump beam that allows us to overcome the Doppler eﬀect and
measure the separation of the dressed states very accurately. By studying the separation as
a function of detuning, we determine the line center of the level-crossing diagram with high
precision. We work with room-temperature Rb atoms, where we obtain a precision of 44
kHz. This is already a useful level of precision since typical accuracy for hyperﬁne intervals
in alkali atoms is of order 1 MHz. However, we think that with foreseeable improvements,
the error can be brought down to the few kHz level. The technique is easily extended to
other alkali atoms such as Li, K, and Cs, where the transitions are accessible with low-cost
tunable diode lasers.

The authors thank Anusha Krishna for help with the experiments. This work was sup-
ported by a research grant from the Department of Science and Technology, Government of
India.

5

REFERENCES

[1] D. F. Phillips et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 83, 783 (2001); A. S. Zibrov et al., ibid. 88, 103601

(2002).

[2] K.-J. Boller, A. Imamo˘glu, and S. E. Harris, Phys. Rev. Lett. 66, 2593 (1991). See also,

S. E. Harris, Phys. Today 50, 36 (1997).

[3] S. Menon and G. S. Agarwal, Phys. Rev. A. 61, 013807 (2000).
[4] A. S. Zibrov et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 75, 1499 (1995).
[5] D. J. Gauthier, Y. Zhu, and T. W. Mossberg, Phys. Rev. Lett. 66, 2460 (1991).
[6] S.-Y. Zhu, L. M. Narducci, and M. O. Scully, Phys. Rev. A. 52, 4791 (1995).
[7] G. S. Agarwal, Phys. Rev. A. 54, R3734 (1996).
[8] C. Cohen-Tannoudji and S. Reynaud, J. Phys. B. 10, 365 (1977).
[9] U. D. Rapol, A. Wasan, and V. Natarajan, to be published.
[10] G. Vemuri, G. S. Agarwal, and B. D. Nageswara Rao, Phys. Rev. A. 53, 2842 (1996).
[11] W. Demtr¨oder, Laser Spectroscopy (Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 1982).
[12] E. Arimondo, M. Inguscio, and P. Violino, Rev. Mod. Phys. 49, 31 (1977).
[13] G. P. Barwood, P. Gill, and W. R. C. Rowley, Appl. Phys. B 53, 142 (1991).
[14] J. Ye, S. Swartz, P. Jungner, and J. L. Hall, Opt. Lett. 21, 1280 (1996).

6

FIGURES

FIG. 1. Three-level Λ system in 87Rb. The F ′ = 2 hyperﬁne level in the excited state is coupled
to two ground hyperﬁne levels: to F = 1 by the control laser and to F = 2 by the probe laser.
The control laser has detuning ∆c and Rabi frequency ΩR. The probe laser has detuning ∆. The
spontaneous decay rate from the excited level is Γ.

FIG. 2. Schematic of the experiment. The probe and control beams are derived from fre-
quency-stabilized, tunable diode laser systems. The power in each beam is set using a half-wave
plate (λ/2) and a polarizing beamsplitter (PBS). The two beams have orthogonal polarizations and
are mixed in a PBS, co-propagate through the Rb cell, and are separated again using a PBS. The
probe beam is detected on a silicon photodetector (PD). A part of the probe beam is split using
a beamsplitter (BS) and sent through the cell so that it counter-propagates with respect to the
probe and control beams. The angle between the counter-propagating beams has been exaggerated
for clarity; in reality it is close to 0 ensuring good overlap of the beams in the cell. The frequency
of the control laser is set by ﬁrst shifting it using an acousto-optic modulator (AOM) and then
locking to a hyperﬁne peak in the saturated-absorption spectrum. All unwanted beams terminate
on beam dumps (BD).

FIG. 3. Autler-Townes doublet. The ﬁgure shows probe transmission spectra as a function
laser oﬀ and shows a standard satu-
of probe detuning. The top trace is with the control
rated-absorption spectrum of the F ′ = 2 peak. The linewidth of the peak is 27 MHz.
In the
middle trace, the control laser is turned on at a detuning of +13.5 MHz. The peak splits into an
Autler-Townes doublet, with linewidths of 18 MHz and 9 MHz respectively. The bottom trace is for
a control-laser detuning of -13.5 MHz. The symmetry of the peaks has changed, and the linewidths
are now 9 MHz and 17 MHz respectively. Slow varying Doppler proﬁles have been removed from
all traces.

FIG. 4. Separation vs. AOM frequency. The ﬁgure shows the variation in the separation of the
Autler-Townes doublet peaks as a function of AOM frequency. The minimum separation occurs
when the control-laser detuning is zero. The solid line is a ﬁt to the expected variation from Eq. 1
in the text, which yields a value of 78.433(44) MHz for the interval between the F ′ = 2 level and
the F ′ = (1, 2) crossover resonance.

7

5P3/2
F'=2

5S1/2
F =2

Probe

c

Control

R

5S1/2
F =1

D
D
G
G
W
Probe
laser

Control
laser

Digital Storage
Oscilloscope

l /2

PBS

AOM

l /2

Saturated-
absorption
spectrometer

Rb Cell

PD

BD

BS

M

Pump
beam

(cid:12)
(cid:17)
X
(cid:17)
D
(cid:11)
(cid:3)
Q
R
L
V
V
L

P

V
Q
D
U
7
(cid:3)
H
E
R
U
3

&RQWURO(cid:3)RII

D = +13.5  0+]

D = -13.5  0+]

(cid:16)(cid:21)(cid:19)

(cid:16)(cid:20)(cid:19)

(cid:19)
3UREH(cid:3)GHWXQLQJ(cid:3)(cid:11)0+](cid:12)

(cid:20)(cid:19)

(cid:21)(cid:19)

(cid:12)
]
+
0

(cid:11)
(cid:3)
V
N
D
H
S
(cid:3)
I
R
(cid:3)
Q
R
L
W
D
U
D
S
H
6

(cid:20)(cid:24)

(cid:20)(cid:19)

(cid:24)

(cid:19)

(cid:25)(cid:19)

(cid:26)(cid:19)
$20(cid:3))UHTXHQF\(cid:3)(cid:11)0+](cid:12)

(cid:27)(cid:19)

(cid:28)(cid:19)

