2
0
0
2
 
p
e
S
 
3
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
m
o
t
a
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
7
8
0
9
0
2
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

To “stabilize” or not to “stabilize”?
S. Geltman (JILA) and M. Fotino (MCDB)
University of Colorado, Boulder, CO 80309-0440, USA

Abstract

The controversial question of whether or not an atom will be com-
pletely ionized by a laser pulse of arbitrarily increasing intensity is
discussed.

In recent years the world of physics has experienced at least two highly
publicized scientiﬁc controversies - “cold fusion” and “the ﬁfth force.” No
doubt there have been many more smaller-scale disputes that have remained
conﬁned to their own specialized areas. With this note we would like to bring
to the attention of the wider physics community one such debate that has
been going on for some time within a small subgroup of theoretical atomic
physicists who study the interaction of extremely intense laser radiation with
atoms.

The phenomenon at the center of this debate is referred to as “stabiliza-
tion,” by which is meant the freezing or even decrease in the photoionization
probability of an atom as the laser intensity is indeﬁnitely increased beyond
some ultraintense value. This of course is a highly counterintuitive expecta-
tion, but a number of theoretical studies using diverse approximations have
obtained results showing various forms of this unusual behavior [1].

We are on the skeptical side in this debate and feel that those theoreti-
cal studies that have found “stabilization” have used unjustiﬁed approxima-
tions [2]. The basic objection to the arguments supporting “stabilization” is
that the calculations are not suﬃciently rigorous treatments of the problem.
While perturbative treatments such as the Fermi Golden Rule are applicable
for weak light ﬁelds, when the laser intensity becomes extremely high a rig-
orous treatment would require a full dynamical solution. As is well known
from basic nonrelativistic quantum mechanics, a rigorous treatment of the
case of a ground state hydrogen atom being acted upon by a pulse of intense
laser radiation having electric ﬁeld E(t) would require

(1) a solution of the full time-dependent Schr¨odinger equation containing
the dipole interaction term r · E(t), subject to the initial condition
Ψ(r, 0) = φ1s(r),

(2) obtaining the probability amplitude for the bound electron being ejected

1

(1)

(2)

into the continuum state φk(r) as a result of the perturbation, i.e.,

ak(∞) =

Z

∗
k(r)Ψ(r, ∞),
drφ

where “∞” may be any time after the laser pulse is over, and ﬁnally

(3) getting the total ionization probability by integrating over all continuum

states, with the appropriate density-of-states factor,

Pion =

Z

2
dk(dn/dk)|ak(∞)|

.

While the above may appear to be a straightforward computational task,
the fact is that it has not yet been rigorously carried out in its entirety
for any real atom, not even hydrogen. Although the hydrogenic bound
and continuum stationary states are analytically well known, there is no
known analytic solution for the full time-dependent Schr¨odinger equation
for even the simplest external oscillatory ﬁelds, such as E(t) = Eosinωt.
Thus a numerical solution is needed, and indeed several numerically accurate
solutions for Ψ(r, t) have been obtained with the help of very large-scale
computers. However, steps (2) and (3) have never been carried out with
full accuracy. Instead, other approximations, which are questionable, have
been used to infer “evidence of stabilization” from the resulting Ψ(r, ∞).
However, for very much simpliﬁed atomic models, such as a delta function
potential in one dimension, it has been possible to accurately carry through
all the numerical steps above [3]. The increase in ionization probability as
a function of laser intensity was found to be not everywhere monotonic, as
might be expected in the region of tunneling arising from an alternating
electric ﬁeld. However, in the high-ﬁeld limit the ionization probability
always goes to 1 and stays there.

To be credible, “stabilization” must be based on a physical justiﬁca-
tion for the unexpected reversal of ionization probability at ever increasing
intensities, rather than on a number of disparate calculations using diﬀer-
ent approximation methods that are as yet untested in the ultrahigh in-
tensity regime. When an atom is subject to a static electric ﬁeld that is
allowed to increase indeﬁnitely in magnitude, the point is reached where the
top of the resultant binding potential is lowered to the level of the bound
state energy and the bound electron will spill out, giving rise to the well
known phenomenon of ﬁeld emission. A similar behavior should occur for

2

an alternating ﬁeld, even though the periodic changes in direction of the
ﬁeld will possibly reduce the probability of ionization from its static ﬁeld
value, and electrons will be ejected in all directions. However, in the case of
ﬁxed frequency, what possible physical mechanism could cause an atom to
become ionized with a decreasing probability as (1) the peak electric ﬁeld
strength is increasing, and (2) the top of the barrier is being continuously
lowered, so that the bound electron is classically being pulled out to larger
displacements from the nucleus, and is acquiring larger maximum kinetic
energies? Until a clear physical answer to this simple question is available,
doubts about the existence of “stabilization” are justiﬁed in spite of the
complex theoretical approximations and numerical simulations supporting
it that have appeared in the literature.

Some time ago we submitted to Physical Review A a Comment on a
paper that was published in that journal claiming to have observed a case
It appeared that there
of “stabilization” in a laboratory experiment [4].
were enough uncertainties in the spatial and temporal distributions of the
laser ﬁelds in the vapor cell (three separate lasers were needed to prepare
and ionize the atoms) to warrant bringing them to the attention of the
readers.
Included in the Comment were also some of the theoretical ar-
guments concerning uncertainties about “stabilization” as brieﬂy discussed
above. Unfortunately this Comment was rejected by Physical Review A
through a complex and protracted process that appeared to include biased
referees’ reports and unfair editorial handling. As a result the readership of
Physical Review A has been deprived of balanced views on this issue. This
unpublished Comment is now available from the physics archives [5].

Very recently Dondera et al.

[6] have claimed that the ground state
of atomic hydrogen would undergo “dynamic stabilization” by not reach-
ing ﬁnal full ionization with applied laser electric ﬁelds of up to 80 au.
They infer that they have achieved suﬃcient accuracy in the solution of the
time-dependent Schr¨odinger equation over times of up to 100 ﬁeld cycles to
allow them to evaluate the ionization probability by “computing the sur-
vival probabilities in the discrete states at the end of the pulse, and taking
the complement of their sum to 1.” However, they do not address the ob-
vious question – how can one in practice subtract out the contribution of
the inﬁnity of Rydberg states that are present? A more direct and accurate
procedure would be to project the continuum states directly onto the full
Ψ(r, t), as indicated in our above equations.

On the basis of our experience [7] in dealing with the time-dependent
Schr¨odinger equation as applied to the laser ionization of hydrogen atoms,

3

one cannot accept their procedure as being suﬃciently accurate. Their re-
sults of decreasing ionization probability as a function of increasing laser
electric ﬁeld strength in the high-ﬁeld limit for pulses of identical shape
and length thus appear to be an artifact of their numerical method. It is a
misdirection of scientiﬁc eﬀort for them to call upon experimentalists with
ultrahigh-power short-pulse lasers to undertake extremely diﬃcult measure-
ments to try to substantiate implausible calculational results.

References

[1] J. H. Eberly and K. C. Kulander, Science 262, 1229 (1993).

[2] S. Geltman, Chem. Phys. Lett. 237, 286 (1995).

[3] S. Geltman, J. Phys. B: At. Mol. Opt. Phys. 10, 831 (1977); 27, 1497
(1994); 32, 853 (1999); Q. Su, B. P. Irving, C. W. Johnson, and J. H.
Eberly, J. Phys. B: At. Mol. Opt. Phys. 29, 5755 (1996).

[4] N. J. van Druten, R. C. Constantinescu, J. M. Schins, H. Nieuwenhuize,

and H. G. Muller, Phys. Rev. A. 55, 622 (1997).

[5] S. Geltman and M. Fotino, arXiv:physics/0206020vl (7 June 2002).

[6] M. Dondera, H. G. Muller, and M. Gavrila, Phys. Rev. A 65, 031405

(2002).

[7] S. Geltman, Phys. Rev. A 45, 5293 (1992); J. Phys. B: At. Mol. Opt.

Phys. 27, 257 (1994); 33, 1967 (2000).

4

