2
0
0
2
 
t
c
O
 
7
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
m
o
t
a
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
9
6
0
0
1
2
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

A new Manifestation of Atomic Parity Violation in Cesium:
a Chiral Optical Gain induced by linearly polarized 6S-7S Excitation

J. Gu´ena, D. Chauvata, Ph. Jacquier, E. Jahier, M. Lintz, S. Sanguinettib, A. Wasan, M.A. Bouchiat
Laboratoire Kastler Brossel , 24 Rue Lhomond, F-75231 Paris Cedex 05, France
(January 9, 2014)

A.V. Papoyan, D. Sarkisyan
Institute for Physical Researches, Ashtarak-2, 378410, Armenia

We have detected, by using stimulated emission, an Atomic Parity Violation (APV) in the form of a chiral optical gain
of a cesium vapor on the 7S - 6P3/2 transition, consecutive to linearly polarized 6S-7S excitation. We demonstrate
the validity of this detection method of APV, by presenting a 9% accurate measurement of expected sign and
magnitude. We underline several advantages of this entirely new approach in which the cylindrical symmetry of the
set-up can be fully exploited. Future measurements at the percent level will provide an important cross-check of an
existing more precise result obtained by a diﬀerent method.

PACS numbers: 32.80.Ys, 11.30.Er, 33.55.b

APV experiments are important because they probe
the electron-hadron Z 0 exchange in conditions totally
diﬀerent from those encountered in high energy exper-
iments [1]. The Boulder group [2,3] has made quite an
achievement by performing a calibrated [4] measurement
of the parity violating 6S-7S transition amplitude Epv
1 ,
at a level of precision better than one per cent. The
importance of this work is illustrated by the abundant
literature triggered by the result. An atomic physics cal-
culation is required to arrive at a precise determination
of the weak nuclear charge QW [1], measuring the in-
teraction strength. Atomic theorists have met the real
challenge of reducing their calculation uncertainty below
the existing value of one per cent [5]. Subtle Breit [6] and
radiative [7] corrections, previously omitted, were found
to contribute at the few tenths of a percent level. Several
authors [3,8] have announced a deviation of 2.5 or 2.2σ
between the empirical determination of QW and the theo-
retical value expected in the Standard Model. Therefore,
particle physicists have searched for the possible implica-
tions of such a deviation when taken seriously. The best
way to account for it, without causing conﬂict with high
energy results, is to admit the existence of an additional
neutral vector boson Z ′
0, whose mass diﬀers according to
the models, but always falls around a fraction of TeV [9].
In view of such an important implication, an inde-
pendent measurement obtained by a totally diﬀerent
method, oﬀering a cross-check of the result, would be ex-
tremely valuable. Our experiment has been designed to
achieve this. Our approach diﬀers from the Boulder’s one
in two respects: a diﬀerent emphasis given to signal-to-
noise ratio (SNR) versus background level, and the choice
of a new APV physical observable. The idea arose after
our ﬁrst experiment [10] succeeded in illustrating the in-
terest of measurements in the forbidden 6S-7S Cs transi-
tion. It became clear that a novel detection scheme was
required to improve their sensitivity. The polarization
analysis of the ﬂuorescence light collected only one thou-
sandth of the photons emitted by the excited 7S atoms.
We proposed a more eﬃcient scheme based on stimulated

emission from 7S to 6P3/2 [11]. As shown in Fig.1, an
intense pulsed laser excites the 6S - 7S transition in a
time short compared to the 7S lifetime, in a longitudinal
electric ﬁeld ~El, giving rise to a large population inver-
sion and transient ampliﬁcation of a probe beam tuned at
resonance for the 7S - 6P3/2 transition. Thus, nearly all
atoms contribute to the signal. The dependence of the
ampliﬁcation on the relative orientation of the linear ex-
citation polarization ˆǫex and the linear probe one ˆǫpr, is
the eﬀect which demonstrates APV. In two mirror-image
conﬁgurations the excited vapor exhibits diﬀerent gains,
depending on whether the trihedron formed by ~El, ˆǫex and
ˆǫpr, is either right or left. In the present paper, we report
on the ﬁrst APV manifestation via such a chiral optical
gain which validates our approach.

The pseudo-scalar (ˆǫex · ˆǫpr)(ˆǫex ∧ ˆǫpr · ~El) appearing
in the gain leads to a tilt θpv of its optical axes with re-
spect to the symmetry planes of the experiment (Fig.1).
This tilt is given by the ratio of the PV E1 amplitude
to the vector part of the Stark induced amplitude [1],
θpv = −ImEpv
1 /βEl , about one µrd in current experimen-
tal conditions. We note that it is odd under ~El reversal.
In our experiment, two mirror-image conﬁgurations, as-
sociated with the beams coming out from the polariz-
ing beam splitter (PBS), are observed simultaneously, as
shown in Fig.1. At the cell input ˆǫpr is aligned along
one of the optical axes in absence of APV, either paral-
lel (k) or perpendicular (⊥) to ˆǫex. During propagation
through the vapor, APV induces a small tilt of ˆǫpr to-
wards the direction of largest gain. This linear dichroism
should not be confused with a true optical rotation! It
gives rise to an imbalance, odd under ~El reversal, in our
two channel polarization analyzer, operating in balanced
mode in absence of APV. In an ideal conﬁguration, the
imbalance between the optical signals in the two chan-
nels, S1 and S2, yields a measurement of the left-right
(L-R) asymmetry [12]:

ALR =

(S1 − S2)
(S1 + S2)

= −2θpv

exp (ηA) − 1

.

(1)

(cid:2)

(cid:3)

1

Here A is the optical density for the probe and η the
gain anisotropy, equal to (α⊥ − αk)/2αk, where αk (resp.
α⊥) is the probe gain per unit length for ˆǫex k ˆǫpr (resp.
ˆǫex ⊥ ˆǫpr).
In these APV measurements, we selected
the hyperﬁne component of the probe transition, the
7S1/2,F =4 − 6P3/2,F =4 line, leading to the largest value
of η, hence the largest L-R asymmetry. As Eq. 1 shows,
the greater the optical density, the larger the ampliﬁca-
tion of both the probe beam and the L-R asymmetry.
We took advantage of this by exploiting the high opti-
cal densities available in a vapor cell, and by increasing
the excitation energy and the ~El ﬁeld magnitude. The
exponential growth of the asymmetry with the applied
ﬁeld is the attribute of detection by stimulated emission,
contrasting with ﬂuorescence detection where the asym-
metry ∝ Im Epv
1 /βEl decreases when El is increased. It
should be stressed that a precise calibration procedure,
independent on line-shape, optical density and satura-
tion, has been devised and carefully tested [13]. This
consists in deliberately tilting the direction of ˆǫex with
respect to ˆǫpr by a small precisely calibrated angle θcal.
It can be shown that this causes the probe polarization
to rotate by an angle kθcal, with the same proportional-
ity factor k as the APV angle θpv. On the other hand,
due to the absence of magnetic ﬁelds, all atoms belong-
ing to a given hyperﬁne state contribute and line shape
problems coming from overlapping Zeeman components
are avoided. In addition, the suppression in the longitu-
dinal El-ﬁeld conﬁguration of the M1-Stark interference
eﬀect, which is a potential source of systematic eﬀect, is
welcome. A further attractive feature is the cylindrical
symmetry exhibited by the experiment: the signal is ex-
pected to remain invariant under simultaneous rotations
of the polarizations ˆǫex and ˆǫpr about the common beam
direction. This feature has enabled us to discriminate
against possible systematics arising from stray ﬁelds.

Despite the fact that our scheme combines several at-
tractive new features, the observation of the APV chiral
optical gain remains an experimental challenge. To make
the method work we have had to solve often unexplored
experimental problems. Besides a high precision diﬀer-
ential polarimeter operating in pulsed regime [13], our
experiment requires both the pulsed excitation laser and
the probe laser systems to satisfy uncommon speciﬁca-
tions described elsewhere [14]. For instance, it is crucial
to restrict the detection to the short time interval (∼ 20
ns) during which the vapor acts as an ampliﬁer, with the
help of a fast optical switch on the probe laser beam. An-
other major problem was actually to generate a pulsed
longitudinal uniform ~El-ﬁeld of ≃ 2 kV/cm inside a Cs
vapor cell at the useful atomic densities (≃ 1014/cm−3)
and over a length of 80 mm. Moreover, the initial glass
cells [14] had to be replaced by alumina ones consisting
of an alumina tube, closed by sapphire windows glued
at both ends [15]. The surface electrical conductivity of
alumina being much lower than that of glass [16], stray

magnetic ﬁelds induced by electric surface currents are
thereby suppressed. With alumina, one can use external
electrodes if need be [17]. The sapphire windows, unlike
glass ones, retain excellent transparency under intense
laser illumination in presence of the Cs vapor. Finally,
one can heat alumina cells to 250-300◦ C to thermodisso-
ciate troublesome Cs2 dimers. As a consequence, the ~E-
ﬁeld map distorsions coming from dimer photoionization
by the excitation laser beam [18] are strongly reduced.
One remaining problem, however, arises from the photo-
electrons emitted by the windows. We have shown that
these are considerably ampliﬁed by secondary electron
emission (SEE) from grazing collisions with the walls.
An eﬃcient solution has consisted in machining annu-
lar grooves with sharp tips in the alumina walls (1 mm
apart), making grazing incidence unlikely [19]. This mod-
iﬁcation of the internal surface has led to strong reduc-
tion of the ~E, ~B stray ﬁelds and enabled us to perform
the APV measurements reported here.

FIG. 1. Schematic of the experiment showing the two orthogo-
nal symmetry planes deﬁned by the electric ﬁeld ~El and the linear
excitation polarization ˆǫex. APV gives rise to a tilt θpv of the op-
tical axes of the excited vapor out of those planes. The incoming
probe polarization ˆǫpr provides a superposition of the right and
left-handed ˆǫex, ˆǫpr, ~El conﬁgurations analyzed. The probe ampli-
ﬁcation diﬀerence is directly extracted from the optical signals S1,
S2, recorded in each channel of the Polarizing Beam Splitter (PBS).
Inset: timing of the experiment repeated at 100 Hz.

The signature of the PV signal ﬁrst relies on a doubly
diﬀerential feature of the polarimeter output. The imbal-
ance at each ampliﬁed probe pulse, Damp = (S1−S2)
(S1+S2) is
compared to that of four consecutive probe pulses, Dref ,
measured when all 7S excited atoms have decayed. Thus
the doubly diﬀerential signal, Damp − Dref , selects at
the laser repetition rate (∼ 100 s−1) a true atomic ef-
fect, Dat, free from the probe polarization rotation (in-
dependent of the excited atoms) arising from polarization
defects present on the probe beam path. Our measure-
ment involves four diﬀerent physical parameter reversals,
listed in order of increasing period. 1) reversal of θcal, ev-
ery 0.25 s, providing for real time calibration; 2) reversal
of the ~El ﬁeld every 0.5 s (with 60 ms dead time); 3)
switching of the half-wave plate ( λ
2 )det in front of the po-

2

larimeter, which performs a symmetry of the outgoing
probe polarization with respect to the symmetry plane
of the experiment, every 2 s: it allows us to discriminate
between true polarization rotations and instrumental im-
balances [13]; 4) switching of another half-wave plate
( λ
2 )pr which acts on the input probe polarization, from
para (ˆǫex k ˆǫpr) to ortho (ˆǫex ⊥ ˆǫpr) conﬁguration for
discrimination between linear dichroism and optical ro-
tation [13]. Since performing twice a given reversal leaves
the system unchanged, for each reversal we introduce one
binary variable: σcal, σE , σdet, σpr = ±1. Thus the com-
plete signature of the APV signal involves an average over
all the 24 possible states. For a given f (σ), we deﬁne the
average, < f (σ) >σ= 1
2 (f (1) + f (−1)), i.e. the σ-even
part. This implies that < σf (σ) >σ= 1
2 (f (1) − f (−1))
yields the σ-odd part. The determination of the PV cal-
ibrated linear dichroism involves the construction of the
following quantity:

G = θcal (cid:28)

σE(cid:20)

< σdetDat({σj}) >σdetσcal
<σdetσcalDat({σj})>σdetσcal (cid:21)(cid:29)σE σpr

(2)

We stress that an imperfect ~El reversal leading to a ~El,odd
contribution to A does not aﬀect the RHS of Eq. 2.

Moreover, measurements with diﬀerent orientations of
ˆǫex provide important tests for systematic eﬀects asso-
ciated with stray transverse ~ET and ~BT ﬁelds (or beam
misalignment), since they are related to two preferred
directions in the transverse plane. In fact, four orienta-
tions suﬃce because of the structure of the Stark induced
dipole. A set of four supplementary λ/2 plates (two on
each beam) enables us to perform successive rotations of
ˆǫex (and ˆǫpr) by steps of 45◦, (directions ˆi = ˆx, ˆu, ˆy, ˆv),
while keeping the analyzer ﬁxed [14]. From the four mea-
surements, Gi, we extract two values of the isotropic part,
1
2 (Gx+Gy) = 1
2 (Gu+Gv), expected - and actually found -
to be equal to within the noise and to average to θpv. The
presence of an anisotropic part manifests itself through
the diﬀerences Dxy = 1
2 (Gu−Gv).
The isotropy test consists in plotting one point in the
cartesian coordinate system Dxy, Duv, for each cycle of
four orientations of ˆǫex and to look for a possible de-
viation of the center of gravity of the cloud of points
associated to all data. Clear anisotropies were some-
times observed. However, since their correlation with
the isotropic part is not signiﬁcant, the latter is negligi-
bly aﬀected. The two isotropic values obtained for each
PV cycle (every ∼ 8 mn) were averaged together over a
number N of cycles.

2 (Gx−Gy) and Duv = 1

Finally, for practical reasons, we are obliged to carry
out a further reversal. Although the ideal conﬁguration
requires perfect alignment of both laser beams along the
cell axis, we have to concede a small tilt angle of the
cell axis (ψ ∼ 3 mrd), in order to avoid an excess of
noise in the polarimeter. Since such a tilt breaks the
symmetry, we reverse its sign every few hours and we

P

take the average of the results obtained with both tilts,
aﬀected in practice by similar statistical noise: θpv
exp =
1
4 <

i Gi(σψ) >N,σψ .

As a consistency check, we have reconstructed the
APV signal in a diﬀerent way. Dat and A measured
for each pulse, yield the probe polarization tilt, θ =
for Dat. Replacing Dat by θ
−Dat/2(exp (ηA) − 1).
in Eq. 2 provides a second determination of the linear
dichroism G. Both methods lead to practically identical
ﬁnal results.

The validity of the entire acquisition procedure has
been tested by programming the reversal of an additional
tilt θ0 of the input polarization ˆǫex, willingly correlated
with ~El reversal. It is intended to mimic the APV eﬀect
by optical means. More precisely, the tilt and the ﬁeld
are switched in accordance with the following pattern,
(θ0 + θcal, ~El)(θ0 - θcal, ~El) (-θ0 + θcal, - ~El)(-θ0 -θcal, - ~El)
expected to mimic θpv = θ0. We expect the reconstructed
signal G (Eq. 2) to give θ0 + θpv. This test performed
with θ0/θcal = 10−1, has been successful within a preci-
sion of 2 %. When ˆǫex was rotated by increments of 450,
the same procedure enabled us to test the isotropy of the
polarimetry method, with SNR ∼ 100. The θ0 tilt cre-
ates a large linear dichroism γ1, with no optical rotation
α2. Thus, we also test successfully the discrimination be-
tween γ1 and α2, based on the para/ortho reversal. This
is a veriﬁcation of the reconstitution method (Eq. 2),
which deals correctly with the problem of a large gain
anisotropy.

This test also shows the importance of a continuous
search for a possible unwanted ~El,odd tilt of the input
excitation polarization during APV measurements. This
has been implemented using a visible polarimeter of the
same design as the probe polarimeter, with sensitivity
about 2.5 times better. Up to now, a stray eﬀect of this
kind, which might have arisen from electromagnetic in-
terferences associated with pulsed ~El ﬁeld monitoring,
remains buried in noise (≤ 3.5 × 10−8 rd).

There is one more harmful eﬀect which arises from a
longitudinal magnetic ﬁeld reversing with the ~El-ﬁeld,
Bz(El,odd). This causes a Hanle precession (El,odd) of
the axes of the atomic alignment responsible for the par-
ity conserving linear dichroism, around the beam axis.
In fact, such a Bz ﬁeld also gives rise to an optical ro-
tation by Faraday eﬀect. The Bz(El,odd) Faraday eﬀect
can thus be isolated and exploited to measure the ﬁeld
magnitude [21]. For this measurement, we select the
highly Bz-sensitive 7S1/2,F =4 − 6P3/2,F =5 line. Owing
to the progress which has resulted from grooving the in-
ternal surface of the alumina cell [19], the Bz(El,odd) ﬁeld
has remained either practically absent or small (< 50µG)
during the measurements reported here and more impor-
tantly it has exhibited only very slow drifts. Thus it is
possible to correct for its eﬀect, with only slight increase
of the statistical noise, by inserting ﬁeld measurements

3

between longer periods of APV data averaging. We have
veriﬁed the exactitude of the correction by performing
measurements on both transitions, while willingly apply-
ing a Bz(El,odd) ﬁeld of known magnitude.

We have calibrated the magnitude of the El ﬁeld inside
the alumina cell by exploiting the atomic signals [20]. Us-
ing this calibration leading to El = 1.619 kV/cm, with 2%
accuracy, and the result given by the Boulder group [2]
we expect to obtain for the 6S1/2,F =3 − 7S1/2,F =4 exci-
tation line: θpv = − ImEpv

= 0.962 ± 0.020 × 10−6 rd.

We have now accumulated 3200 experimental isotropic
values of the El,odd linear dichroism. Fig. 2 shows the
results of successive runs. The ﬁnal result is:

1
βEl

θpv
exp(µrd) = 1.082 ± 0.091 (stat),

(3)

which agrees with the expected value within statistical
error. The chiral optical gain which manifests APV is
thus clearly detected. This validates our method.

µrd

2.5

2.0

1.5

0.5

0.0

 

1.0

 

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

 

FIG. 2. Experimental values of θpv

exp(µrd) obtained in successive
runs with experimental conditions kept as constant as possible. The
solid (and dashed) lines represent the mean (and the statistical
error on this mean).

The experiment has not yet reached its ultimate sen-
sitivity. The noise is about 2.5 times the shot noise
limit. Its sensitivity to optical adjustments proves that
extra noise arises from interferences inside the inhomo-
geneously thick sapphire plates mounted as windows. In
our next Cs cell, their parallelism will be much improved.
By temperature tuning [17], an excellent reﬂexion mini-
mum ≤ 10−3 can be achieved and should be accompanied
by strong reduction of the interference noise. For further
improvement of the SNR, magniﬁcation of polarization
tilts using a dichroic optical component [23], is also a
promising technique we plan to implement soon. In par-
allel, we are constructing a new type of cell with internal
ring electrodes spaced by ceramic braces. This geometry
inhibits SEE while the electrodes connected at ﬁxed po-
tentials tend to evacuate the electrons circulating inside
the vapor. Hence, we expect a reduction of the transverse
ﬁelds [19], still present during the work reported here. All
in all combined with an increased acquisition time (now

4

210 h) by a factor of 3 or 4, these improvements should
bring us to within reach of our 1% precision objective.

We thank many colleagues, more particularly F. Lalo¨e,
D. Treille, C. Bouchiat, M. D. Plimmer, for their in-
terest in this work and encouragements, L. Pottier for
early contributions and A. Clouqueur for technical assis-
tance. A.W. acknowledges support from CNRS (IN2P3)
and S.S. from the European Commission. Laboratoire
Kastler Brossel is a Unit´e de Recherche de l’Ecole Nor-
male Sup´erieure et de l’Universit´e Pierre et Marie Curie,
associ´ee au CNRS (UMR 8552).

a Present address: Laboratoire de Physique des Lasers
Univ. Rennes 1, Campus de Beaulieu, 35700 Rennes, France.
b Also at E. Fermi Physics Department, Pisa Univ., Italy.

[1] M. A. Bouchiat and C. Bouchiat, J. Phys. France, 35,
899 (1974) and Rep. Prog. Phys. 60, 1351 (1997), for a
complete list of references.

[2] C. S. Wood et al, Science, 275, 1759 (1997).
[3] S. C. Bennett and C. E. Wieman, Phys. Rev. Lett. 82,

2484 (1999).

[4] M. A. Bouchiat and J. Gu´ena, J. Phys. France 49, 2037
(1988); C. Bouchiat and C. A. Piketty, J. Phys. France
49, 1851 (1988).

[5] V. A. Dzuba, V. V. Flambaum and O. P. Sushkov, Phys.
Lett. A 141, 147 (1989); S. A. Blundell, J. Sapirstein and
W. R. Johnson, Phys. Rev. D 45, 1602 (1992).
[6] A. Derevianko, Phys. Rev. Lett. 85, 1618 (2000).
[7] A.I. Milstein and O.P. Sushkov, e-print hep-ph/0109257.
[8] V. A. Dzuba et al., e-print hep-ph/0204134.
[9] R. Casalbuoni et al., Phys. Lett. B 460, 135 (1999); J.
Erler and P. Langacker Phys. Rev. Lett. 84, 212 (2000);
D.E. Groom, http://pdg.lbl.gov/ (ch.10).

[10] M. A. Bouchiat, J. Gu´ena, L. Hunter and L. Pottier,
Phys. Lett. B 117, 358 (1982); Phys. Lett. B 134, 463
(1984); J. Phys. (France) 47, 1709 (1986).

[11] M. A. Bouchiat, Ph. Jacquier, M. Lintz, L. Pottier, Opt.

Commun. 56, 100 (1985).

[12] D. Chauvat et al., Eur. Phys. J. D 1, 169 (1998); M. A.
Bouchiat and C. Bouchiat, Z. Phys. D 36, 105 (1996).
[13] J. Gu´ena et al., J. Opt. Soc. Am. B 14, 271 (1997) and

Opt. Commmun. 119, 403 (1995).

[14] J. Gu´ena et al., Quantum Semiclass. Opt. 10, 733 (1998).
[15] D. G. Sarkisyan, A. V. Melkonyan, Instr. and Exp. Techn.

32, 485 (1989)

[16] M. A. Bouchiat et al., Appl. Phys. B, 68, 1109 (1999).
[17] E. Jahier et al., Eur. Phys. J. D 13, 221 (2001).
[18] M. A. Bouchiat et al., Chem. Phys. Lett. 199, 85 (1992)

and Opt. Commun. 104, 157 (1993).

[19] J. Gu´ena et al., Appl. Phys. B, accepted for publication.
[20] This measurement is performed using a circularly polar-
ized excitation beam with the polarimeter operating as a
circular analyzer. Then, Damp ∝ ((M1 + M hf
l ),
is detected with El on and oﬀ. Since M1, M hf
and β are
1
precisely known [3], we thus deduce the magnitude of El.

1 )2 + β2E2

[21] M. A. Bouchiat et al., Z. Phys. D 33, 89 (1995).
[22] E. Jahier al., Appl. Phys. B 71 , 561 (2000).
[23] D. Chauvat et al., Opt. Commmun. 138, 249 (1997).

