3
0
0
2
 
b
e
F
 
6
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
m
o
t
a
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
4
9
0
2
0
3
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Multichannel cold collisions between metastable Sr atoms

Viatcheslav Kokoouline, Robin Santra, and Chris H. Greene
Department of Physics and JILA, University of Colorado, Boulder, Colorado 80309-0440, USA
(Dated: November 24, 2013)

We present a multichannel scattering calculation of elastic and inelastic cold collisions between
two low-ﬁeld seeking, metastable 88Sr [(5s5p)3P2] atoms in the presence of an external magnetic
ﬁeld. The scattering physics is governed by strong anisotropic long-range interactions, which lead
to pronounced coupling among the partial waves of relative motion. As a result, nonadiabatic
transitions are shown to trigger a high rate of inelastic losses. At relatively high energies, T > 100µK,
the total inelastic collision rate is comparable with the elastic rate. However, at lower collisional
energy, the elastic rate decreases, and at T ∼ 1µK, it becomes substantially smaller than the inelastic
rate. Our study suggests that magnetic trapping and evaporative cooling of 88Sr [(5s5p)3P2] atoms,
as well as 40Ca [(4s4p)3P2], in low-ﬁeld seeking states will prove diﬃcult to achieve experimentally.

PACS numbers: 34.50.-s,34.20.Cf, 34.20.Mq

In recent years, the trapping and cooling of alkaline-
earth atoms has been pursued with increased interest.
Trapping experiments with 88Sr [1, 2, 3, 4, 5] and 40Ca
[6, 7] atoms have been carried out, and experiments are
underway in a number of laboratories. One major thrust
of this research track is to extend the small class of
atomic species that have been Bose-Einstein condensed.
Also, the most prevalent isotopes have closed-shell nuclei,
which eliminates complications from hyperﬁne structure
and simpliﬁes the interpretation of cold collision data [8].
The usual route to quantum degeneracy utilizes mag-
netic trapping and evaporative cooling of precooled
atoms. Since ground-state alkaline-earth atoms possess
no magnetic dipole moment, some experimental groups
work with a system of alkaline-earth atoms in their lowest
(nsnp)3P2 metastable state [3, 4, 5, 7, 9]. The radiative
lifetime of this state is of the order of ten minutes [10].
However, as we show in this Letter, it is not spontaneous
emission that ultimately limits the magnetic-trap lifetime
of metastable alkaline-earth atoms. Their nonspherical
electronic structure gives rise to strong anisotropic in-
teratomic interactions not present in ground-state alkali
metals, hydrogen, or metastable helium. In the present
study, these interactions are predicted to generate severe
inelastic losses.

Derevianko et al. [11] were the ﬁrst to theoretically ap-
proach the intriguing problem of anisotropic long-range
interactions between metastable alkaline-earth atoms in
an external magnetic ﬁeld. Their study revealed impor-
tant insights, notably the existence of a long-range molec-
ular potential well. They also provided a ﬁrst estimate
of inelastic losses within a two-channel model, but at a
qualitative level only. Recently, Ref.
[12] performed a
detailed tensorial analysis of the anisotropic long-range
forces between two nonspherical atoms in a magnetic ﬁeld
and investigated the associated coupling between elec-
tronic structure and molecular rotational motion. A two-
body potential was derived that is ideal for multichannel-
scattering calculations. The present work has the goal
to carry the aforementioned theoretical studies to the

next level, and thus to provide guidance to experimen-
talists. Speciﬁcally, we develop a quantitative quantum
description of the two-body elastic and inelastic collisions
between alkaline-earth atoms in the (nsnp)3P2 excited
state. We focus on strontium atoms but brieﬂy address
implications of the present study to Ca and other similar
atoms.

Our treatment is based on the multichannel potential

derived in Ref. [12]:

ˆV =

ˆHI =

L2

2mredR2 + ˆHI −

(µ(1) + µ(2))

√2K + 1 [CK

TK

⊗ P

P

XK=0,2,4

B,

·
]0,0 ,

(1)

(2)

which is a function of internuclear distance R. L is the
operator of the angular momentum associated with the
rotation of the molecular frame, mred is the reduced mass
of the system, µ(1) and µ(2) are magnetic dipole opera-
tors of the two atoms, and B is the vector of the magnetic
ﬁeld. The term ˆHI is the eﬀective interatomic interac-
tion Hamiltonian acting in the electronic subspace of two
(nsnp)3P2 atoms, as indicated by the projection operator
. ˆHI is a totally invariant tensor, consisting of three dis-
P
tinct contributions, which derive from coupling of rank-
K tensor operators CK and TK. CK is associated with
molecular rotational motion, TK describes speciﬁc elec-
tronic couplings. Electric dipole-dipole dispersion forces
contribute to K = 0, 2, and 4, magnetic dipole-dipole in-
teraction enters T2, and electric quadrupole-quadrupole
interaction contributes to T4 [12]. For the incident chan-
nels of interest, and for magnetic ﬁelds of a few gauss
or stronger, all collision dynamics at cold temperatures
takes place at interatomic distances of about 100 Bohr
radii. Thus, using a pure long-range Hamiltonian is jus-
tiﬁed. In the present calculation the potential ˆV is rep-
resented by a matrix in the coupled angular momentum
basis and evaluated using Wigner-Racah algebra.

The potential matrix of Eq. 1 can be diagonalized at
diﬀerent R, giving a set of adiabatic potential curves.

−

At large internuclear distances, the potential curves con-
verge to nine diﬀerent dissociation limits, corresponding
4, . . . , 4) of the total
to nine diﬀerent values (Mel =
electronic angular momentum projection on the direction
of the magnetic ﬁeld. We assume that the initial relative
kinetic energy is low enough (< 100µK), so that we may
limit our treatment to the s-wave (L = 0) initial chan-
nel. However, other channels with L > 0 are present in
our model as possible escape channels. The technique of
magnetic trapping is limited to low-ﬁeld seeking atomic
states, i.e., the states with a negative projection of the
magnetic atomic moment µ on the direction of the ﬁeld.
We assume that initially, before a collision, the two atoms
have a speciﬁc Mtot projection of the total angular mo-
mentum including molecular frame rotation. The states
with diﬀerent Mtot projections are not coupled and can
be treated separately. Thus, Mtot, unlike Mel, is con-
served during the collision. In the initial channel L = 0,
thus Mel = Mtot for this channel.

0.2

0.1

0

-0.1

-0.2

100

200

300

0.23

0.22

0.21

0.2

)

K

(
 
y
g
r
e
n
e
 
l
a
i
t
n
e
t
o
P

16

18

L=22

20

80

100
140
120
Internuclear distance (a.u.)

160

FIG. 1: Adiabatic potential curves of Sr2[3P2] calculated for
a magnetic ﬁeld B = 500 G. The maximum Lmax partial
wave taken into account for these curves is 22 . The incident
channel (Mel = 4, L = 0) is marked by a big arrow. The
avoided crossing, marked by a circle, produces a large inelastic
rate. Numbers at the bottom of the plot specify the angular
momentum L of diﬀerent partial wave channels converging to
the Mel = 3 Zeeman level. Note, that at distances of about
100 a.u. diﬀerent partial waves are mixed. The inset shows
the same potential curves on a larger energy scale.
In the
inset one can see all nine dissociative limits corresponding to
nine Zeeman levels of the two separated strontium atoms.

Figure 1 gives an example of the adiabatic potential
curves for Mtot = 4 at the magnetic ﬁeld B = 500 gauss.
In the present calculation we have included partial waves
of rotating Sr2 molecular frame up to L = 22. The en-
trance s-wave channel is marked by a thick line. This
channel has a potential well situated around R = 90
a.u. The well is formed by the interplay of Zeeman,
quadrupole-quadrupole and dispersion interactions be-
tween the two atoms [11, 12]. The shape and depth of
the well changes with the magnetic ﬁeld. This fact allows

2

to change scattering properties of two-body collisions in
presence of the ﬁeld. References [11, 12] suggest that at
some magnetic ﬁeld the elastic scattering length can be
made very large, allowing fast evaporative cooling.

The key feature in Fig. 1 is a pronounced avoided
crossing at 80-90 a.u. This avoided crossing is mostly
formed between the entrance-channel curve and a curve
converging to a lower dissociation limit with (Mel =
3, L = 14) (see the encircled region in Fig. 1). Other
states are mixed as well in this region, but they play a
secondary role. According to the familiar Landau-Zener
model [13], such an avoided crossing produces a large
transition probability from the entrance channel into the
(Mtot = 3, L = 14) channel. This is because the en-
ergy of the avoided crossing is close to the total energy
of the system, and the two curves are almost parallel near
the avoided crossing. Thus, at low collision energies, one
would expect the inelastic cross-sections to be relatively
high.

In the previous theoretical study [11], Derevianko et
al. have calculated the elastic collisional rates and esti-
mated the inelastic rates as well. Their conclusion was
that inelastic collisions do not signiﬁcantly contribute to
the total rate. However, in that study, several simplifying
assumptions were made. The most important is that the
authors estimated the inelastic losses using a two-channel
model. The model includes an s-wave channel coupled
to a g-wave channel by the quadrupole-quadrupole in-
teraction. Our calculations show, however, that higher,
L > 6, partial waves are particularly important in the
loss process. We have found that L = 4 does not play
any important role in the losses, which is in agreement
[11]. This eﬀect of higher L is apparent in
with Ref.
1, where the channels (Mel = 4, L = 0) and
Fig.
(M ′
el = 3, L′ = 14) are strongly mixed around R = 85
a.u. At diﬀerent magnetic ﬁeld, diﬀerent partial waves
play a dominant role in the inelastic collisions. In other
words, the avoided crossing in Fig. 1 can be formed by
el = 3, L′) with L′
the states (Mel = 4, L = 0) and (M ′
depending on the ﬁeld. The inclusion of the higher partial
waves not only produces larger non-adiabatic dynamical
eﬀects, but it also modiﬁes the shape of adiabatic curves.
This would mean that Derevianko et al. [11] might un-
derestimate the inelastic rates by neglecting the channels
that 1) modify the entrance adiabatic channel and that
2) control the inelastic losses associated with the strong
nonadiabatic coupling. The strong multichannel coupling
not only causes the large inelastic losses; it signiﬁcantly
modiﬁes the elastic scattering. This makes the concept
of adiabaticity, adopted in Ref. [11], inapplicable to the
present case.

The above analysis of the adiabatic potential curves
develops a qualitative description of two-body collisions.
To obtain quantitative results, we solve the coupled ra-
dial Schr¨odinger equations for the potential operator of
Eq. 1:

1
2mred

d2
dR2

(cid:20)−

ˆI + ˆV

E ˆI
(cid:21)

−

~Ψ(R) = 0.

(3)

1e-10

1e-11

1e-12

1e-13

1e-10

1e-11

3

)
s
/

m
c
(
 
e
t
a
r
 
c
i
t
s
a
l
E

3

)
s
/

m
c
(
 
e
t
a
r
 
c
i
t
s
a
l
e
n
I

1 mK
100 µK
10 µK
1 µK

200

400

600

800

1000

B (G)

Elastic (upper panel) and total

FIG. 2:
inelastic (lower
panel) rates of the Sr[(3P2)]+Sr[(3P2)] collisions as a func-
tion of magnetic ﬁeld for several incident relative kinetic en-
ergies of the two strontium atoms. The entrance channel is
(Mel = 4, L = 0). At 1 mK, incoming partial waves with
L > 0 can penetrate their respective angular momentum bar-
riers. Their contribution is not included in this plot. (See
Fig. 3)

Here E is the total energy of the system, ~Ψ(R) is the mul-
ticomponent radial wavefunction, ˆI is the identity opera-
tor. When solving the equation, we work in the coupled
channel (diabatic) representation rather than in the adi-
abatic representation. This choice is justiﬁed by the fact
that in the diabatic representation, all diagonal and non-
diagonal couplings are smooth functions of R. Out of
the possible diabatic basis sets we adopt the atomic set,
which diagonalizes the two-body potential ˆV at R =
.
∞
For a given asymptotic collisional energy in the en-
trance channel, we obtain the total scattering matrix S
using the one-dimensional R-matrix approach [14, 15].
The R-matrix is obtained solving the Schr¨odinger equa-
tion within R < R0 = 1500 a.u. using ﬁnite elements
[15] as a representation basis. Having obtained the total
S-matrix, the elastic and inelastic rates αi as function of
E are given by familiar formulas (in atomic units):

αi =

σi,i′ =

ki′
mred

π
ki′ mred |

Si,i′

δi,i′

−

2 ,
|

(4)

i =

where k′
Ei′ ) is the incident de Broglie
wavenumber, Ei′ is the energy of the incident channel,
and σi,i′ is the corresponding cross-section. The entrance

2mred(E

p

−

3

channel is speciﬁed by index i′. In our discussion of colli-
sion rates, we do not utilize the scattering length, because
it is not energy-independent at energies E > 100µK for
this system.

In order to check the reliability of the present results,
we tested convergence with respect to diﬀerent numerical
and physical parameters of the problem. Two of these,
in particular, deserve mention here. The ﬁrst is a conver-
gence test of the calculated S-matrix with respect to the
position of the inner boundary in the numerical calcula-
tions. Since we have neglected the short-range molecular
interaction (we do not have the corresponding data), we
have to be sure that no ﬂux penetrates into the inner
region, i.e. the collisional dynamics is controlled only by
long-range potentials. As a result, we have found that
for the (Mel = 4) entrance channel, at low energies be-
low 1mK, no ﬂux penetrates into the short-range region.
However, the calculation for all the other low-ﬁeld seek-
ing magnetic states, (Mel = 1, 2, 3), shows that there is
a substantial probability of penetration, and therefore,
the inelastic rate is expected to be large. These entrance
channels cannot be treated unless one includes the short-
range molecular dynamics. Thus, the following treat-
ment is concentrated on the (Mel = 4, L = 0) entrance
channel solely. The second test is an assessment of con-
vergence with respect to the maximum number of par-
tial waves that are included in the calculations. As was
discussed above, most of the inelastic losses occur due
to the avoided crossing in the potential well of the inci-
dent channel. At the largest magnetic ﬁeld considered
here, B=1000 G, the avoided crossing is formed by an
interaction with the Mel = 3, L = 14 channel. Perform-
ing the full S-matrix calculation with maximum number
of partial waves, Lmax, up to 18, we have found that,
indeed, the inelastic and elastic rates are converged at
Lmax = 14. This test underlines the eﬀect of the molec-
ular frame rotation on the scattering process.

Figure 2 shows the inelastic and elastic rates as a func-
tion of the external magnetic ﬁeld for several incident ki-
netic energies. The resonant-like behavior of the curves
around 400 G is caused by the emergence of a quasi-
bound level in the entrance channel. Due to the strong
inelastic loss, the resonance is signiﬁcantly washed out.
Derevianko et al.
[11] have predicted a resonance at a
ﬁeld of about 1000 G. Since they neglected the inelastic
losses in their model, their elastic rate diverges to inﬁnity
at the resonant B-ﬁeld. In experiments aimed to obtain
a Bose-Einstein condensate, one is particularly interested
in the ratio between the elastic and inelastic rates. Fig-
ure 2 suggests that for strontium in the (5s5p)3P2 state,
evaporative cooling will not be eﬃcient at temperatures
below 10 µK. Figure 3 shows the rates as a function of
the relative incident kinetic energy. The rates of inelas-
tic scattering into individual magnetic sublevels are sep-
arated. The magnetic ﬁeld is ﬁxed at B = 100 G. As was
expected from the analysis of adiabatic curves shown in
Fig. 1, the sublevel Mel = 3 is responsible for most of
the inelastic losses.

Total inelastic
Mel=4, elastic
Mel=3
Mel=2
Mel=1
Mel=0
Mel=-1

-11

10

3

)
s
/

m
c
(
 
e
t
a
R

-12

10

-13

10

-9

10

-8

10

-7

10

-6

10

-5

10

-4

10

-3

10

Energy (K)

FIG. 3: The elastic and inelastic collision rates are shown
as functions of the relative incident kinetic energy. This plot
separates the contributions to the total inelastic rate from
diﬀerent Zeeman levels. The contribution from the lowest
Zeeman levels are not shown since they are very small. For
this plot, we have included contributions from all higher L > 0
partial waves in the entrance channel. The higher partial
waves are important at energies above 100 µK.

In view of experimental interest in other metastable
alkaline-earth atoms, we have carried out a similar cal-
culation for calcium atoms in the (4s4p)3P2 state and
obtained a comparable result for the elastic and inelas-
tic rates. The main diﬀerence is that the resonance for
Ca2 is shifted toward larger magnetic ﬁelds. To as-
sess whether any other species is likely to produce a
more favorable elastic/inelastic ratio, we have completed
a model calculation in which we artiﬁcially change the
quadrupole moment, the nuclear mass and the disper-
[11, 12] for deﬁnitions of the
sion coeﬃcients (see Refs.

4

quantities). Although such a variation of the atomic pa-
rameters modiﬁes the results, the main result remains
the same, namely an unfavorable elastic/inelastic ratio
at submillikelvin collisional energies. We point out that
a similar result was recently obtained in the analysis of
the collisions between two polar molecules [16] in an ex-
ternal electric ﬁeld. Thus, large inelastic rates apparently
rule out the possibility of cooling atoms or molecules with
large anisotropic multipole interactions down to submi-
crokelvin temperatures using magnetic traps.

A possible solution to this problem is to use an optical
trap [17] instead of a magnetic one. In this context, the
situation is similar to the case studied in atomic cesium.
Early experiments attempting Bose-Einstein condensate
of Cs (see, for example [18]) using magnetic trapping ap-
proaches had shown that the degenerate regime can not
be reached due to a rapid loss of atoms at short internu-
clear distances. In the case of Cs, the losses were caused
by a large spin-ﬂip cross-section. Recently, the group of
Grimm [17] utilized a purely optical trap of Cs atoms and
successfully achieved a Cs Bose-Einstein condensate.

Conclusion. We have calculated the elastic and in-
elastic two-body collisional rates of metastable strontium
atoms in the [(5s5p)3P2] state and metastable calcium
atoms in the [(4s4p)3P2] state. At low temperatures,
< 1µK, collisions in all low-ﬁeld seeking states are domi-
nated by inelastic processes. This appears to rule out the
possiblity of achieving a Bose-Einstein condensate with
these metastable atoms, using magnetic traps.

This work has been supported in part by the DOE Of-
ﬁce of Science and by an allocation of NERSC supercom-
puting resources. R.S. gratefully acknowledges ﬁnancial
support by the Emmy Noether program of the German
Research Foundation (DFG).

[1] T. P. Dinneen, K. R. Vogel, E. Arimondo, J. L. Hall, and

A. Gallagher, Phys. Rev. A 59, 1216 (1999).

[2] H. Katori, T. Ido, Y. Isoya, and M. Kuwata-Gonokami,

Phys. Rev. Lett. 82, 1116 (1999).

[3] H. Katori, T. Ido, Y. Isoya, and M. Kuwata-Gonokami, in
Atomic Physics 17, edited by E. Arimondo, P. DeNatale,
and M. Inguscio (AIP, Melville, NY, 2001).

[4] S. B. Nagel, C. E. Simien, S. Laha, P. Gupta,
V. S. Ashoka, and T. C. Killian, Phys. Rev. A 67,
011401(R) (2003).

[5] X.-Y. Xu, T. H. Loftus, J. L. Hall, A. Gallagher, and

J. Ye, J. Opt. Soc. Am. B, in press (2003).

[6] G. Zinner, T. Binnewies, F. Riehle, and E. Tiemann,

Phys. Rev. Lett. 85, 2292 (2000).

[8] M. Machholm, P. S. Julienne, and K.-A. Suominen, Phys.

A, in press (2003).

Rev. A 64, 033425 (2001).

[9] T. Loftus, J. R. Bochinski, and T. W. Mossberg, Phys.

Rev. A 63, 053401 (2001).

[10] A. Derevianko, Phys. Rev. Lett. 87, 023002 (2001).
[11] A. Derevianko, S.G. Porsev, S. Kotochigova, E. Tiesinga,

and P.S. Julienne, Phys. Rev. Lett. 90, 063002 (2003).

[12] R. Santra and C.H. Greene,

http://arxiv.org/abs/physics/0302060, submitted.
[13] E.E. Nikitin and S.Ya. Umanskii, Theory of Slow Atomic

Collisions, Springer Verlag, Berlin (1984).

[14] M. Aymar, C.H. Greene, and E. Luc-Koenig, Rev. Mod.

Phys. 68, 1015 (1996).

[15] J.P. Burke, Ph. D. Thesis “Theoretical investigation of
cold alkali atom collsions”, University of Colorado (1999).
[16] A.V. Avdeenkov and J.L. Bohn, Phys. Rev. A 66, 052718

(2002).

R. Grimm, Science 299, 232 (2002).

[18] J. Soding, D. Guery-Odelin, P. Desbiolles, G. Ferrari,
and J. Dalibard, Phys. Rev. Lett. 80, 1869 (1998).

[7] D. P. Hansen, J. R. Mohr, and A. Hemmerich, Phys. Rev.

[17] T. Weber, J. Herbig, M. Mark, H.-C. Nagerl, and

