3
0
0
2
 
b
e
F
 
5
 
 
]
h
p
-
m
o
t
a
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
4
1
0
2
0
3
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Transform-limited pulses are not optimal for resonant multiphoton transitions

Nirit Dudovich,∗ Barak Dayan,† S.M.G. Faeder, and Yaron Silberberg‡
Department of Physics of Complex Systems,
Weizmann Institute of Science,
Rehovot 76100, Israel

Maximizing nonlinear light-matter interactions is a primary motive for compressing laser pulses
to achieve ultrashort transform limited pulses. Here we show how, by appropriately shaping the
pulses, resonant multiphoton transitions can be enhanced signiﬁcantly beyond the level achieved by
maximizing the pulse’s peak intensity. We demonstrate the counterintuitive nature of this eﬀect
with an experiment in a resonant two-photon absorption, in which, by selectively removing certain
spectral bands, the peak intensity of the pulse is reduced by a factor of 40, yet the absorption rate
is doubled. Furthermore, by suitably designing the spectral phase of the pulse, we increase the
absorption rate by a factor of 7.

PACS numbers: numbers: 32.80.Qk, 32.80.Wr, 42.65.Re

The ability to steer quantum systems by coherently
manipulating the interacting light (coherent quantum
control), has been proposed [1, 2, 3, 4] and recently
demonstrated [5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10] for manipulating both
simple and complex systems such as atoms, molecules
and semiconductors. Weiner et al.
[11] demonstrated
selectivity among Raman transitions excited by shaped
pulses. They showed that by splitting an initially
transform limited pulse into a pulse sequence with
a speciﬁc repetition rate, a certain vibrational mode
of a molecular crystal was excited. Meshulach and
Silberberg [12, 13] demonstrated that by manipulating
the spectral phase of the exciting laser pulse, one could
reduce and even annihilate the two photon absorption
(TPA) rate. Nevertheless, it has been established [13]
that these processes are maximized by transform-limited
pulses, and cannot be enhanced beyond that level by
shaping the pulses. Here we show that for transitions
that involve an intermediate resonant state, this limit
is no longer valid. By shaping the pulses in a way
that exploits the spectral response of the interaction
around the resonance we enhanced the resonant TPA
rate in Rb vapor by a factor of 7, even though their
peak intensity was reduced. In another experiment we
enhanced the TPA rate by 100% simply by blocking all
the red-detuned frequencies of the pulse, although the
peak intensity of the pulse was reduced by a factor of
40.

Consider a TPA in an atomic system, induced by a
weak femtosecond laser pulse with an electric ﬁeld ε(t).
The amplitude of the excited state is predicted by the
second order time dependent perturbation theory:

af (t) = −

µf nµng

ε(t1)ε(t2)

1
~2

Xn

t

t1

Z

−∞ Z

−∞

× exp(iωf nt1) exp(iωngt2)dt2dt1 ,

(1)

where µf n and µng are the dipole moment matrix el-

ements, with |gi,|ni and |f i the ground, intermediate,
and ﬁnal levels, ωij ≡ (Ei − Ej)/~, and the summation is
performed over all possible intermediate states of the un-
perturbed atom. The pulse duration is assumed here to
be considerably shorter than all lifetimes involved. In a
nonresonant TPA, all the intermediate levels of the atom
are considerably far from the pulse frequency spectrum.
The nonresonant excited state amplitude can then be ap-
proximated by [13]:

anr
f ≈ −

µf nµng
ωng − ωf g/2

Xn

1
i~2
∞

Z

−∞

×

E(ω)E(ωf g − ω)dω .

(2)

where E(ω) is the Fourier transform of ε(t), and the
pulse spectrum is taken to be centered on ωf g/2. Equa-
tion (2) reﬂects the fact that two-photon transitions oc-
cur for all pairs of photons with frequencies that addi-
tively give the ﬁnal transition energy. As is evident from
Eq. (2), the nonresonant TPA rate is maximized by a
transform limited pulse, where all the spectral elements
of E(ω) have the same phase, and therefore add construc-
tively.

In the case of a resonant TPA, some intermediate (res-
onant) levels are within the spectral range of the pulse.
The contribution to the excited state amplitude due to
a transition through an intermediate resonant level |ii is
given by:

ar
f ≈ −

1
i~2 µf iµig

(cid:20)

iπE(ωig)E(ωf g − ωig)

+ ℘

∞

Z

−∞

E(ω)E(ωf g − ω)
ωig − ω

dω

.

(cid:21)

(3)

where ℘ is the principle value of Couchy, and
ωig, ωf g − ωig = ωf i are the resonance frequencies. As
(3), the resonant process exhibits
is evident from Eq.

a diﬀerent spectral behavior from that of the nonreso-
nant one.
In cases where a single resonant level exists
close to the two-photon frequency ωf g/2 (compared to
the spectral bandwidth of the pulse), the contribution of
the nonresonant process is negligible, therefore Eq. (3)
describes the total TPA rate.

The ﬁrst term in Eq. (3) depends only on the spectral
components of the pulse at the resonance frequencies,
whereas the second term integrates over the contribu-
tions of all other spectral components of the pulse. The
broad spectral dependence of the second term originates
from the short time (∼ 10−13 sec) the atom spends at
the intermediate level before absorbing the second pho-
ton, which according to the uncertainty principle allows
for some detuning between the exciting photons and the
resonance frequencies. Nevertheless, the larger the de-
tuning, the lower the probability the atom will stay at
the intermediate level long enough to absorb a second
ωig −ω factor. Due to the considerably
photon, hence the
longer time the atom remains at the ﬁnal level, the fre-
quencies of all the photon pairs must sum to ωf g, and
hence the dependence on E(ω)E(ωf g − ω) in Eqs. (2)
and (3). As expected for a harmonically driven system,
the ﬁrst term (the on-resonance contribution) is shifted
by π/2 compared with the second term(the oﬀ-resonance
contributions). Also, the spectral components below and
above the resonance excite the system in-phase and π
out-of-phase, respectively. We shall utilize these phase
relations to enhance the nonlinear response.

1

Using the above derivation, we can predict the TPA
rate for various pulses with diﬀerent spectra. When
the atom is subjected to a transform limited pulse, the
second term in Eq. (3) integrates over both negative and
positive contributions, and becomes negligible as the
spectral width of the exciting pulse grows larger than
|ωig − ωf g/2|. In other words, a transform limited pulse
induces a destructive quantum interference between
the events in which the ﬁrst exciting photon is red
detuned and those in which it is blue detuned. A simple,
although counterintuitive, way to enhance the transition
probability is to prevent this destructive interference
by blocking all red (or blue) detuned photons, despite
the fact that this will reduce the pulse’s peak intensity
(due to both attenuation of the power and broadening
of the pulse). Larger enhancement can be achieved
by applying a phase function that inverts the sign
of E(ω)E(ωf g − ω) about the resonance, so that all
photon pairs interfere constructively, and the transition
probability is maximized. Since the integrand in Eq.
(3) approaches its maximum absolute value around the
singular point at ωig, this enhancement depends on the
actual spectral resolution of the phase function, which
limits the sharpness of the sign inversion around ωig.

To demonstrate these enhancements experimentally,
we considered the resonant TPA in Rubidium gas be-

2

FIG. 1: (a) Energy levels diagram of a resonant TPA in Rb.
The frequencies of the 5S-5P (ωig) and 5P-5D (ωf i) resonant
transitions correspond to 780.2 nm and 776.0 nm, respec-
tively. The pulse spectrum is centered on the two-photon
transition frequency (ωf g/2) at 778.1 nm, with a bandwidth
of △ω =18 nm (FWHM). The excited atoms spontaneously
decay to the ground level through the 6P, emitting a ﬂuo-
rescence signal at ωf lr (≈ 420 nm). (b) The experimental
setup. Femtosecond laser pulses were modiﬁed in a computer-
controlled 4-f pulse shaper. The pulse shaper is composed of
a pair of diﬀraction gratings and a pair of achromat lenses.
A programmable SLM with 128 computer controlled discrete
elements is placed at the Fourier plane and is used to apply
phase masks to the spectrum of the pulse. The shaped pulses
were focused into the Rb cell, and the ﬂuorescence signal was
measured with a photomultiplier tube and a lock-in ampliﬁer.

tween the 5S and the 5D states, which is dominated by
resonant transitions through the 5P level (Fig. 1a). The
TPA was induced by pulses with a bandwidth of 18 nm
(corresponding to 50 fs transform limited pulses), pro-
duced by a mode-locked Ti:sapphire laser with an aver-
age power of 150 mW and repetition rate of 80 MHz.
The spectrum, centered on the two-photon transition
frequency ωf g/2 (778 nm), overlapped with the 5S-5P
and the 5P-5D resonant transitions at ωig and ωf i corre-
sponding to 780 nm and 776 nm, respectively. As excited
atoms decay spontaneously to the ground level through
the 6P level, the TPA intensity is evaluated by measuring
the ﬂuorescence at 420 nm. We adjusted the spectral
phase of the pulse with a programmable pulse shaper,
which includes a liquid crystal spatial light modulator
(SLM) at its Fourier plane [14, 15, 16]. The shaper en-
ables both cancellation of dispersion, as well as the appli-
cation of any desired additional spectral phase mask by
applying diﬀerent phase shifts to the spatially separated
spectral components of the pulse. Our setup (Fig. 1b)
was almost identical to the one in [12], except that the
input laser beam was expanded in order to improve the
spectral resolution to less than 0.3 nm.

In the ﬁrst experiment we demonstrate enhancement
of the TPA rate by blocking parts of the spectrum of the
exciting pulse. To achieve that, we placed an adjustable
slit at the shaper’s Fourier plane, and used it to block
spectral bands of the pulse symmetrically around ωf g/2
(Fig. 2a). The SLM was used here only for dispersion

3

FIG. 2: Experimental and calculated results for enhancement
of resonant TPA in Rb by selectively blocking parts of the
spectrum. (a) An adjustable slit was used to block spectral
bands of the exciting pulse symmetrically around ωf g/2. (b)
The average power transmitted through the slit (diamonds)
together with the experimental (circles) and calculated (line)
normalized ﬂuorescence intensity as a function of the higher
cutoﬀ wavelength. When the cutoﬀ wavelengths approached
the resonant transitions wavelengths (to within the spectral
resolution of our setup), the average power was reduced by
71%, whereas the TPA rate was doubled. (c) Calculated tem-
poral intensities of the optimal shaped pulse (solid) and the
initial 50 fs FWHM transform limited pulse (dashed). The op-
timal pulse is wider by almost a factor of 8 (390 fs FWHM),
and its peak intensity is reduced by a factor of 38.

FIG. 3: Experimental and calculated results for enhancement
of resonant TPA in Rb by scanning a 4 nm π/2 phase window
over the spectrum of the pulse. (a) The applied phase mask at
its optimal position, centered on ωf g/2, its leading and trail-
ing edges close to the resonance frequencies. (b) Experimental
(circles) and calculated (line) normalized ﬂuorescence inten-
sity as function of the spectral position of the phase window.
Maximum enhancement of 600% occurred when the window
was centered on ωf g/2 (778.1 nm, dashed line), as described
in (a), performing the desired sign inversion about ωig. (c)
Calculated temporal intensities of the optimal shaped pulse
(solid) and the initial transform-limited pulse (dashed), show-
ing a 26% reduction of the peak intensity due to the broad-
ening of the pulse.

cancellation in order
to produce transform-limited
pulses at the Rubidium gas cell. We measured both the
ﬂuorescence signal and the average power transmitted
through the slit as a function of the ”cutoﬀ wavelengths”
(i.e.
the shortest and longest wavelengths that passed
the slit; see Fig. 2a).

The experimental results are presented in Fig.

2b
together with the theoretical curve calculated by Eq.
(3). When the cutoﬀ frequencies approached the
frequencies of the resonant transitions, we observed a
steep enhancement of the ﬂuorescence signal, reaching a
factor of 2, while the power of the pulse at that point
was reduced by 71%. The maximum signal was achieved
when the cutoﬀ frequency was shifted from ωig by the
spectral resolution of the system. Closing the slit further
decreased the ﬂuorescence rapidly, which approached
zero when the slit closed completely.

Figure 2c illustrates the calculated temporal intensi-
ties of the optimal shaped pulse and the initial, unshaped
transform-limited pulse, showing both the drastic reduc-
tion of the intensity and the broadening of the pulse.
These results demonstrate the counterintuitive nature of
this enhancement. The 71% reduction in the average
power and the 8-fold broadening of the pulse (to 390 fs)

result in a reduction of the peak intensity by a factor of
38, yet the TPA rate was increased by 100%.

The goal of the next experiment was to achieve maxi-
mum enhancement of the TPA rate by inverting the sign
of E(ω)E(ωf g − ω) about the resonance. Therefore we
used the SLM as a phase ﬁlter to apply a phase shift of
π/2 to a 4 nm spectral window, and scanned that win-
dow over the pulse’s spectrum. The 4 nm width of the
phase window was chosen to ﬁt the diﬀerence between
resonant transitions at 780 nm and 776 nm, respectively.
Figure 3b shows the measured ﬂuorescence intensity vs.
the spectral position of the phase window, together with
a theoretical curve calculated by Eq. (3). Maximum en-
hancement by a factor of 7 was achieved when the phase
window was centered on ωf g/2, its leading and trailing
edges close to the frequencies of the resonant transitions
(Fig. 3a). Substituting the phase window at that posi-
tion in Eq. (3) will show that it performs the desired sign
inversion about the resonance for a spectral region of 8
nm around ωig, thus inducing a constructive instead of a
destructive interference in that region. Figure 3c shows
the calculated temporal intensities of the optimal shaped
pulse and the initial, unshaped transform-limited pulse.
The same enhancement factor (and a similar phase
window) was achieved when we performed an adaptive
optimization [17, 18, 19, 20] of the phase function, using
the ﬂuorescence intensity as a feedback signal.

In conclusion, we have shown that resonant multi-
photon transitions can be signiﬁcantly enhanced by ex-
ploiting the general spectral response of the interaction
around resonance. When the interaction involves an in-
termediate resonant state, maximizing the peak intensity
by obtaining a transform-limited pulse does not maxi-
mize the transition rate (as is the case with nonresonant
interactions), and pulses with signiﬁcantly lower inten-
sities can be more eﬀective. By properly designing the
spectral amplitude and phase of the exciting pulse, we
have demonstrated large enhancements of resonant TPA,
in excellent agreement with the theory. Unlike other ex-
periments in coherent quantum control, where selectivity
between a few processes is the primary goal, we achieved
an enhancement of the absolute rate of a single, simple
nonlinear process. Since this enhancement is based on
the general behavior of any system around resonance,
we believe this mechanism may have played a role in
enhancing more complex nonlinear interactions [18, 19],
and could be applied to enhance other resonant nonlinear
processes.

∗ Nirit.Dudovich@Weizmann.ac.il

4

† Barak.Dayan@Weizmann.ac.il
‡ www.weizmann.ac.il/home/feyaron/

[1] D. J. Tannor and S. A. Rice, J. Chem. Phys. 83, 5013

[2] M. Shapiro and P. Brumer, J. Chem. Phys. 84, 4103

(1985).

(1986).

85, 5805 (1986).

1581 (1993).

[3] D. J. Tannor, R. Kosloﬀ and S. A. Rice, J. Chem. Phys.

[4] W. S. Warren, H. Rabitz and M. Dahleh, Science 259,

[5] S. A. Rice, Science 258, 412 (1992).
[6] E. D. Potter et al., Nature 355, 66 (1992).
[7] B. Kohler et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 74, 3360 (1995).
[8] A. Hach´e et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 78, 306 (1997).
[9] R. N. Zare, Science 279, 1875 (1998).
[10] D. C. Clary, Science 279, 1879 (1998).
[11] A. M. Weiner et al., Science 247, 1317 (1990).
[12] D. Meshulach and Y. Silberberg, Nature 396, 239 (1998).
[13] D. Meshulach and Y. Silberberg, Phys. Rev. A 60, 1287

[14] A. M. Weiner and J. P. Heritage, Rev. Phys. Appl. 22,

(1999).

1619 (1987).

[15] A. M. Weiner et al., Opt. Lett. 15, 326 (1990).
[16] A. M. Weiner, Prog. Quantum Electron. 19, 161 (1995).
[17] R. S. Judson and H. Rabitz, Phys. Rev. Lett. 68, 1500

(1992).

[18] A. Assion et al., Science 282, 919 (1998).
[19] R. Bartels et al., Nature (to be published).
[20] H. Rabitz et al., Science 288, 824 (2000).

