3
0
0
2
 
r
p
A
 
6
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
m
o
t
a
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
7
5
0
4
0
3
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Dynamical ionization ignition of clusters in intense and short laser pulses

D. Bauer∗
Max-Born-Institut, Max-Born-Strasse 2a, 12489 Berlin, Germany

A. Macchi
Dipartimento di Fisica “Enrico Fermi”, Universit`a di Pisa & INFM, sezione A, Via Buonarroti 2, 56127 Pisa, Italy
(Dated: January 16, 2014)

The electron dynamics of rare gas clusters in laser ﬁelds is investigated quantum mechanically
by means of time-dependent density functional theory. The mechanism of early inner and outer
ionization is revealed. The formation of an electron wave packet inside the cluster shortly after
the ﬁrst removal of a small amount of electron density is observed. By collisions with the cluster
boundary the wave packet oscillation is driven into resonance with the laser ﬁeld, hence leading to
higher absorption and ionization. Although the mechanism is sensitive to the laser frequency, any
plasma resonances are found to be insigniﬁcant for the cluster sizes, the short pulse durations, and
the modest charge states under consideration.

PACS numbers: 36.40.-c, 42.50.Hz, 33.80.-b, 31.15.-p

I.

INTRODUCTION

Clusters bridge the gap between bulk material and
single atoms. When placed into a laser ﬁeld all atoms
inside (not too big) clusters experience the same laser
ﬁeld, contrary to the bulk where a rapidly created sur-
face plasma and the skin eﬀect prevents the laser from
penetrating deeper into the target. In rareﬁed gases, on
the other hand, the laser can propagate but the density
is too low to yield high absorption of laser energy and
high abundances of fast particles. Hence, the absorption
of laser energy is expected to be optimal in clusters. In
fact, highly energetic electrons [1], ions [2, 3, 4], photons
[5, 6, 7], and neutrons originating from nuclear fusion [8]
were observed in laser cluster interaction experiments.
A prerequisite for clusters as an eﬃcient source of en-
ergetic particles and photons is the generation of high
charge states inside the cluster. Several mechanisms for
the increased ionization (as compared to single atoms in
the same laser ﬁeld) have been proposed. Boyer et al.
[9] suggested that collective electron motion (CEM) in-
side the cluster is responsible for inner shell vacancies the
corresponding radiation of which was observed in exper-
iments [10]. Rose-Petruck et al. [11] introduced the so-
called “ionization ignition” (IONIG) where the combined
ﬁeld of the laser and the ions inside the cluster leads to
increased inner ionization, i.e., electrons are more easily
removed from their parent ion as if there was the laser
ﬁeld alone. The removal of electrons from the cluster as a
whole is called outer ionization. An “outer-ionized” clus-
ter will expand because of the Coulomb repulsion of the
ions while a heated, quasi-neutral cluster expands ow-
ing to the electron pressure. According to experiments
the latter viewpoint of a nanoplasma (NP) [2, 12] seems
to be appropriate for big clusters of about 104 atoms or

∗E-mail: bauer@mbi-berlin.de

more [13] while numerical simulations indicate that the
Coulomb explosion dynamics prevail for smaller clusters
[14, 15]. For recent reviews on the interaction of strong
laser light with rare gas clusters see [16, 17].

In this paper we are aiming at clarifying the early ion-
ization dynamics in laser cluster interaction. Because
the plasma has to be created ﬁrst the NP model is not
applicable. Although we shall ﬁnd CEM to be indeed
an important ingredient for the early ionization dynam-
ics of clusters, the origin of the CEM should be explained
rather than assumed beforehand. The IONIG model pre-
dicts that “as the ionization proceeds beyond the ﬁrst
ionization stage, strong electric ﬁelds build up within the
cluster that further enhance ionization” [11]. Here we are
interested in how these strong inner ﬁelds are generated.
Once the cluster is charged after the ﬁrst electrons are
removed, the remaining bound electrons experience the
attraction of neighboring ions. This attraction will be
largest for bound electrons of ions sitting near the clus-
ter boundary. The other ions will pull these electrons
into the cluster interior. This force might be supported
by the electric ﬁeld of the laser, thus leading to further
ionization. The IONIG model was successfully called on
for interpreting the experimental results in [18].

Although this IONIG mechanism is appealing, the de-
tails of the ionization dynamics remain unclear. If the
force exerted by the other ions is strong enough to ionize
further it should be also strong enough to keep the al-
ready freed electrons inside the cluster. Hence, it remains
to be explained how the electrons are removed from the
cluster as a whole (outer ionization). The electrons, af-
ter inner ionization, may as well shield the space charge
of the ions so that the IONIG mechanism would come
to an end, and the NP model would take over even in
small clusters. So, why does a strong electric ﬁeld build
up inside the cluster whose interplay with the electric
ﬁeld of the laser is constructive for inner as well as outer
ionization?

Classical particle methods are frequently applied to in-

vestigate the electron and ion dynamics of clusters in
laser ﬁelds [11, 14, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23] since a full three-
dimensional quantum treatment is out of reach with
nowadays computers.
In these classical accounts inner
ionization was either accounted for by sampling the quan-
tum mechanical electron distribution of the bound state
by a microcanonical, classical ensemble of electrons, or
by using ionization rates so that the electron dynamics
was simulated only after inner ionization. Semi-classical
Thomas-Fermi theory was employed in [15] to study the
explosion dynamics of clusters consisting of up to 55
atoms. In our work we use time-dependent density func-
tional theory [24, 25, 26] since we are mainly interested in
the early ionization dynamics of clusters were quantum
mechanics is important.

The article is organized as follows. In Section II the
numerical model is introduced. In Section III results are
presented concerning the groundstate properties of the
model cluster (III A), the electron dynamics (III B), the
formation of collective electron motion inside the cluster
and outer ionization (III C), the eﬀect of the collective
electron motion on inner ionization (III D), and the fre-
quency dependence of outer ionization (III E). Finally,
we conclude in Section IV.

2

Nion
k=1 Z[(x − Xk)2 + a2

model it may be chosen to yield satisfactory ground state
properties (we used α = 3/4). The ionic potential was
ei]−1/2 with constant
Vion(x) = − P
nearest-neighbor distances Xk+1 − Xk = d ≈ 2rWS where
rWS is the Wigner-Seitz radius . One may look at the 1D
ion chain as representing those Nion ions of a 3D spheri-
cal cluster which are situated along the diameter parallel
to the linearly polarized laser ﬁeld. The cluster radius
then is R ≈ (Nion − 1)d/2, and the number of ions in the
real 3D cluster N3D = R3/r3
WS would be of the order of
(Nion − 1)3.

The ions of bare charge Z were allowed to move ac-
cording to their classical equations of motion, again with
ii]−1/2 governing
a soft-core interaction Z 2[(Xj −Xk)2 +a2
their mutual repulsion. However, owing to the short laser
pulse durations and the moderate charge states created
the ionic motion did not play any role in all the results
presented in this paper.

III. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION

II. NUMERICAL MODEL

A. Groundstate properties

Time-dependent density functional theory (TDDFT) is
employed to study the ionization dynamics of small and
medium size rare gas clusters in intense and short laser
pulses. To that end the spin degenerate time-dependent
Kohn-Sham equation (TDKSE) is solved. However, solv-
ing the TDKSE in three spatial dimensions (3D) for
rare gas clusters in laser ﬁelds is too demanding for to-
days computers. One reason for this is that, contrary
to metal clusters [27] or fullerenes [28], the electrons in
the ground state of rare gas clusters are not delocal-
ized so that jellium models where the ionic background
is smeared out and assumed spherical are not applica-
ble. In order to make a numerical TDKS treatment fea-
sible two simpliﬁcations were made. First, as in pre-
vious studies of clusters in laser ﬁelds [29, 30, 31, 32],
the dimensionality of the problem was restricted to 1D,
namely to the direction of the linearly polarized laser
ﬁeld described by the vector potential A(t) = A(t)ex
in dipole approximation [33]. To that end the Coulomb
interactions were replaced by soft-core Coulomb inter-
ee]−1/2 and
actions,
ei]−1/2 for the electron-
|r − Rk|−1 → [(x − Xk)2 + a2
electron interaction and the electron-ion interaction, re-
spectively. The smoothing parameters aee and aei may
be chosen to yield ionization energies similar to real 3D
systems. The second simpliﬁcation was the use of the
exchange-only local density approximation (XLDA) so
that Vxc[n(x, t)] = VXLDA[n(x, t)] = −α(3n(x, t)/π)1/3
where n(x, t) is the electron density. The pre-factor α
would be unity in full 3D XLDA calculations. In the 1D

|r − r′|−1 → [(x − x′)2 + a2

i.e.,

Let us consider a chain of Nion = 9 ions with nearest-
neighbor distance d = 8 and nuclear charge per ion
Z = 4. Hence, the ground state of the neutral cluster
consists of N = 36 electrons. The smoothing parameters
for the soft-core Coulomb interaction were aee = aei = 1.
In Fig. 1 the ground state density and the various contri-
butions to the total potential are plotted: the ion poten-
tial Vion, the classical electron-electron repulsion U (x) =
R dx′ n(x′)[(x − x′)2 + a2
ee]−1/2 (Hartree potential), and
the exchange potential VXLDA. Although the ionic poten-
tial alone has its absolute minimum at the central ion the
total potential, including the classical Hartree-repulsion
and XLDA, consists of nine almost identical and equidis-
tantly separated potential wells, each locally similar to
that of the corresponding individual atom. Consequently,
the ground state density displays nine almost equal, well
localized peaks, and the energy levels of the cluster are
approximately at the same positions as those of the atom,
namely around −1.17 for the 2Nion = 18 inner electrons,
and around −0.23 for the 18 outer electrons (note, that
in the 1D model there are only 2 electrons per shell).
Since in XLDA Koopman’s theorem is usually not well
fulﬁlled the energy of the highest occupied orbital does
not equal the ionization energy for removing the outer-
most electron. Calculating the ionization energy from
the diﬀerence of the total energy of the neutral and the
singly ionized cluster ∆Ecluster = 0.26 was obtained. Do-
ing the same for the single atom led to ∆Eatom = 0.49
which is a reasonable value for rare gas atoms.

FIG. 1: Ground state electron density (orange, dashed-
dotted) and the various contributions to the total potential
ionic potential Vion (black, solid), Hartree po-
(red, solid):
tential U (blue, dotted), and XLDA potential VXLDA (green,
dashed).

FIG. 2: Logarithmic density log n(x, t) vs. space and time
for (a) the cluster with Nion = 9, Z = 4 (b) the single atom,
and (c) a cluster made of noninteracting atoms, all with an
electron dynamics as shown in (b). The laser parameters were
ω = 0.057, ˆE = 0.033, (3, 8, 3)-pulse.

B. Electron dynamics

Let us start by comparing the electron motion in the
cluster with that of a single atom. In Fig. 2 contour plots
of the logarithmic density are shown vs. space and time.
The results for the full cluster (a), the single atom (b),
and an artiﬁcial cluster made of noninteracting atoms (c)
in a laser pulse of frequency ω = 0.057 (λ = 800 nm) and
rather modest ﬁeld amplitude ˆE = 0.033, corresponding
to ≈ 3.9 × 1013 Wcm−2, are shown. The laser ﬁeld was
ramped up linearly over 3 cycles, held 8 cycles constant,
and ramped down again over 3 cycles (hereafter called a
(3, 8, 3)-pulse). The density in the contour plot (c) was
calculated by assuming that all of the Nion = 9 atoms
behave as the single atom in plot (b).

It is seen that the electron dynamics of the cluster
(a) and the noninteracting atoms (c) diﬀer signiﬁcantly
from each other already at t ≈ 150 because more electron
density leaves to the right at that time instant in (a) than
it does in (c). This behavior of stronger ionization of the
cluster than of the individual atoms continues during the
subsequent half laser cycles.

A qualitatively diﬀerent electron dynamics inside the
cluster emerges for t ≥ 400. While in the cluster (a)
an accumulation of electron density bounces from one
boundary of the cluster to the other such an electron
dynamics, of course, cannot build up in the ensemble
of independent atoms (c). The formation of an electron
wave packet which travels through the entire cluster in
step with the laser ﬁeld is remarkable in view of the fact
that the excursion of a free electron in the laser ﬁeld
ˆE = 0.033 amounts to ˆx = 10.2 only while the diameter
of the cluster is 2R ≈ 64. By varying the cluster size
(results for Nion = 17 will be presented in the following
subsection) it was found that the formation of the bounc-
ing wave packet at laser intensities where ˆE/ω2 < R/2
is a robust phenomenon, not sensitive to the cluster pa-
rameters. More advanced exchange potentials such as
the Slater potential with self-interaction corrected XLDA
and the Krieger-Li-Iafrate potential [34] were also tested
to ensure that the coherent electron motion is not an arti-
fact of plain XLDA. However, the wave packet formation
is sensitive to the laser frequency, as will be shown in
subsection III E.

3

C. Formation of collective electron motion inside
the cluster and outer ionization

It is useful to study the phase relation between the os-
cillating electron density inside the cluster and the laser
ﬁeld in order to understand the formation of the elec-
tron wave packet with unexpected large excursion ampli-
tude. Given a laser ﬁeld E(t) of optical (or lower) fre-
quency, the polarization of an atom is ∼ −E(t) because
the bound electrons are able to follow adiabatically the
force exerted by the ﬁeld. Hence, the phase lag of the po-
larization with respect to the laser ﬁeld is ∆φ = π. Free
electrons, on the other hand, oscillate perfectly in phase
∼ E(t) so that ∆φ = 0. Energy absorption from the laser
ﬁeld is low in both cases because R dt ˙x(t) · E(t) ≈ 0
(with x(t) the expectation value for the position of an
electron). During ionization there is necessarily a transi-
tion from ∆φ = π to 0 where energy absorption can take
place. During the ionization of atoms this transition oc-
curs rapidly while in clusters, after inner ionization, the
electrons may be still bound with respect to the cluster
as a whole. Hence, the free motion of electrons ∼ E(t)
comes to an end at latest when they arrive at the cluster
boundary. There, they either escape from the cluster,
contributing to outer ionization, or they are reﬂected so
that their phase relation with the driving laser is aﬀected,
leading on average to an enhanced absorption of laser
energy. Although collisions of the electrons with ions
are included in our TDDFT treatment the eﬀect of the
boundary on the electron dynamics clearly dominates.
The unimportance of electron ion collisions in medium
size and small clusters was pointed out in [14] while the
relevance of boundary eﬀects was recently aﬃrmed in [35]
within the NP model [36].

In Fig. 2a it is seen that some electrons enter about
ten atomic units into the vacuum before they are pulled
back by the cluster charge. This is reminiscent of what
in laser plasma physics is called Brunel eﬀect [38], “vac-
uum heating” [39], or, more expressively, “interface phase
mixing” [40]. Thanks to the fact that the fast electrons
leave the cluster (and slow electrons are accelerated) a ﬁl-
ter eﬀect comes into play so that a wave packet can form
that oscillates with the laser frequency and an excursion
amplitude of about the cluster radius R.

In order to underpin this scenario the dipole of
the electron density inside the cluster xinner(t) =
R+d/2
−(R+d/2)dx xn(x, t) was calculated for several laser and
R
cluster parameters. The results are shown in Fig. 3. In
panel (a) the laser and cluster parameters were the same
as in Fig. 2. One sees that during the ﬁrst few laser pe-
riods the electrons indeed move ∼ −E(t) (green, dotted
curve) as indicated by the ﬁrst, green bar at the top of the
xinner-plot. Then, the electrons inside the cluster get out
of phase with the laser for about nine cycles (red bar)
so that ∆φ ≈ π/2. During this period the dipole am-
plitude ˆxinner is particularly high [41]. Finally, towards
the end of the laser pulse the phase relation of the few
electrons which were removed from their parent ions but

FIG. 3: Dipole xinner and number of electrons inside the
cluster Ninner vs. time for diﬀerent laser and cluster param-
(a) ˆE = 0.583, ω = 0.057, Nion = 9, Z = 4; (b)
eters.
ˆE = 2.0, ω = 0.057, Nion = 9, Z = 4; (c) ˆE = 2.0, ω = 0.057,
Nion = 17, Z = 2; (d) ˆE = 0.099, ω = 0.18, Nion = 9,
Z = 4. The course of −E(t) (a (3, 8, 3)-pulse) is included in
the xinner-plots (dotted in green) for distinguishing motion in
phase with −E(t) (green bar at the top edge of the panel)
and motion approximately π/2 and π out of phase (red and
blue bar, respectively). For comparison, Nion times the result
for the single atoms are included in the Ninner-plots.

did not make it to leave the cluster becomes that of free
electrons (blue bar), i.e., xinner(t) ∼ E(t). In the lower
plot the number of electrons inside the cluster Ninner is
plotted and compared with Nion times the result for the
single atom. It is seen that during the ﬁrst phase (green
bar) ionization of the cluster proceeds similar to the sin-
gle atom case. However, when the phase lag is shifted to
∆φ = π/2 the cluster continues to ionize while the single
atom ionization comes to an end.

In Fig. 3b the same is shown for a higher laser intensity.
Essentially, the phase ∆φ behaves in the same way but
this time, due to the stronger laser ﬁeld, ionization of the
outer shell is almost completed during the ﬁrst few laser
cycles. Hence, the ﬁnal average charge state is almost
the same for the cluster and the single atom. In Fig. 3c
the result for a bigger cluster (Nion = 17, Z = 2) is
presented, revealing a qualitatively similar scenario as in
(a). Finally, in panel (d) a higher laser frequency was
used (ω = 0.18) while keeping the cluster parameters as
in (a) and (b). The Ninner-plot reveals that the single
atom ionizes more eﬃciently than the cluster for these
laser parameters. We will come back to the frequency
dependence of outer ionization in subsection III E.

D. Eﬀect of the collective electron motion on inner
ionization: dynamical ionization ignition

The formation of collective electron dynamics as ex-
posed in the previous subsection explains how the ab-
sorption of laser energy is increased due to a phase shift
into resonance with the driving ﬁeld, and how the elec-
trons, after inner ionization, are eﬃciently transported
out of the cluster (outer ionization). The increased in-
ner ionization still remains to be analyzed. IONIG states
that the presence of the other ions is responsible for the
more eﬃcient removal of bound electrons. This is because
two neighboring ions form a potential barrier (cf. the Vion
curve in Fig. 1) through which an electron may tunnel
when the whole cluster is submitted to an electric ﬁeld
so that the entire potential is tilted. However, we found
from our numerical studies that this energetic advantage
of a bound electron inside the cluster as compared with
an electron in the corresponding single ion is not very
pronounced for medium size and small clusters at mod-
erate charge states.
Instead, we propose a dynamical
version of IONIG where the previously introduced collec-

4

FIG. 4: Snapshots of the electron density and the total po-
tential (plus the laser electric ﬁeld potential alone) at time
(a) t = 662.5 and (c) t = 697.5. The bar at the bottom of
the density plot indicates xinner(t). Arrows, +, and − in the
potential plots illustrate the forces Flaser, Fint exerted by the
laser ﬁeld and the space charge, respectively. The contour
plots (b) and (c) show whether excess (light colors) or lack
(dark colors) of electron density (with respect to the average
density Ninner/Nion) prevails at the position of an ion. The
black horizontal lines indicate the times where the snapshots
were taken.

tive electron motion plays an important role. Coherent
electron motion was suggested to be responsible for inner
shell vacancies in Xe clusters, leading to x-ray emission
[5, 10]. In our numerical model there are only two shells
and we did not ﬁnd particularly high line emission from
the cluster as compared to the single atom. However, it
is possible that, owing to the lack of dynamical corre-
lation in XLDA, the interaction of the electrons in the
wave packet with the still bound electrons is underesti-
mated in our model. Thus, dynamical IONIG might be
the mechanism behind the experimental results reported
in [5].

Despite the fact that in our mean ﬁeld approach there
are no “hard” collisions of the electrons in the wave
packet with the still bound electrons, the electric ﬁeld
associated with the oscillating electron packet already
enhances inner ionization.
In Fig. 4 two snapshots of
the total eﬀective potential and the electron density are
presented for the same laser parameters as in Fig. 2. In
panel (a), electron density and total potential are shown
for a time where the electron wave packet is close to the
left cluster boundary (the red bar at the bottom of the
density plot indicates xinner(t)). The contour plot (b)
shows for each ion at position Xi the “diﬀerence density”
Xi+d/2
Xi−d/2dx n(x, t) − Ninner/Nion which indicates whether
R
there is a lack of electron density at that position inside
the cluster (black and dark colors) or whether there is
excess density (yellow and light colors) compared to the
average density Ninner/Nion.

In panel (a), at time t = 662.5 the wave packet is close
to the left boundary of the cluster while there is a lack
of electron density near the right boundary. This charge
distribution leads to a force Fint on the other electrons
(pointing to the right) and therefore increases the ion-
ization probability. The electric ﬁeld of the laser instead
is close to zero so that Flaser is small. The situation ap-
proximately a quarter of a laser cycle later is shown in
panel (c). The wave packet is at the center of the cluster,
moving with maximum velocity to the right and repelling
bound or slow electrons in front of it. The force Flaser is
close to its maximum value at that time, pointing into
the direction in which the wave packet moves. The ion-
ization probability is, again, greater than with the laser
ﬁeld alone. Thus, during the course of a laser cycle the
total force Flaser + Fint clearly leads to higher ionization

5

FIG. 5: Z = 4 minus the electron density, integrated ±d/2
around the central ion in the cluster to determine the number
of removed electrons as a function of time (solid curve, red).
The result for the single atom is also shown (dotted, black).

FIG. 7: Same as in Fig. 2 but for the higher frequency ωh =
0.18 and ˆE = 0.099. Logarithmic density log n(x, t) vs. space
and time for (a) the cluster, (b) the single atom, and (c) a
cluster made of noninteracting atoms.

FIG. 6: Average charge state vs. laser intensity of the clus-
ter (solid lines) and the individual atom (dotted) for the two
diﬀerent frequencies ωl = 0.057 (lf, drawn red) and ωh = 0.18
(hf, drawn blue). See text for discussion.

as if there was the laser ﬁeld only.

The fact that the electron wave packet dynamics in-
deed increases inner ionization is underpinned by Fig. 5
where the number of electrons in the region ±d/2 around
the central ion in the cluster was subtracted from the ini-
tial value Z = 4 and is compared with the corresponding
single atom result. The laser parameters were the same
as in Figs. 2 and 4. While for the single atom the ioniza-
tion is completed for t > 700 the average electron density
around the central ion in the cluster is still decreasing.
When the electron wave packet sweeps over the central
ion the density is temporarily increased, leading to local
minima in the curve of Fig. 5. When the wave packet
is closest to one of the two cluster boundaries the lack
of electrons around the central ion is maximal. The ab-
solute increase of this maximum each half cycle means
In contrast, the single atom,
ongoing inner ionization.
where only the laser ﬁeld is present but no wave packet
can form, does not ionize any further.

E. Dependence of outer ionization on the laser
frequency

The interaction of the model cluster with Nion = 9 was
investigated for the two diﬀerent laser frequencies ωl =
0.057 and ωh = 0.18 (corresponding to 800 and 254 nm,
respectively) and laser intensities between 4 × 1012 and
1016 Wcm−2. The pulses were of (3, 8, 3)-shape for both
frequencies, that is, the pulse durations were Tl ≈ 37 fs
and Th = 12 fs, respectively. After the laser pulse, the
average charge state in the cluster Zav = Z − Ninner/Nion
was calculated. Note that Zav only yields information
about outer ionization for it does not distinguish between
electrons that are still bound to their parent ions and
those which move inside the cluster.

In Fig. 6 the average charge state is plotted vs. the laser
intensity for the two frequencies ωh and ωl. The results
for the single atom are also shown. As discussed in the
previous subsections, it is seen that in the low frequency
case the atoms in the cluster are stronger ionized than
an individual atom in the same laser ﬁeld. Both charge
states come close only for Zav = 2, that is when the
two electrons of the ﬁrst shell are removed but the two
electrons of the next shell are still strongly bound. The
stepwise increase of the charge state due to the electronic

shell structure is very pronounced in the low-frequency
cluster case as well as for the single atoms at both, low
and high frequency. The cluster in the high-frequency
ﬁeld instead shows a very diﬀerent behavior: between
1014 Wcm−2 and the threshold to the inner shell at ≈
5 × 1015 Wcm−2, the charge state of the single atom is
higher than the average charge state in the cluster.

In Fig. 7 the dynamics of the cluster electrons is shown
for a (3, 8, 3)-pulse of frequency ωh = 0.18 and peak ﬁeld
amplitude ˆE = 0.099, corresponding to an intensity of
3.44 × 1014 Wcm−2. It is seen from Fig. 6 that for this
intensity the single atom ionizes more eﬃciently than the
cluster as a whole, contrary to what happens at the lower
frequency ωl = 0.057. Fig. 7 reveals that the electrons,
although removed from their parent ions, mostly remain
inside the cluster. From plot (c) one infers that if the
atoms inside the cluster were independent there would
be a strong electron emission for 100 < t < 350. The
emitted electrons have suﬃcient high kinetic energy to
escape from their parent ion (and, thus, from the “inde-
pendent atom”-cluster). Contour plot (a), instead, shows
that in the real cluster a signiﬁcant fraction of the elec-
trons near the cluster boundaries return due to the space
charge created by all the ions. A wave packet dynam-
ics that could enhance outer ionization, as in the low
frequency result of Fig. 2, does not form. We attribute
this to the fact that the initial inner ionization occurs
less adiabatic (multiphoton instead of tunneling ioniza-
tion). Moreover, the excursion ˆx = 3.06 < d/2 is too
small to trigger any collective motion. The dynamics
inside the cluster is rather “splash-like,” as can be in-
ferred from the strongly ﬂuctuating electron density be-
tween the ions in Fig. 7a. Hence, although at high laser
frequencies inner ionization is high, outer ionization re-
mains low since there is not the coherent electron dynam-
ics supporting outer ionization. Consequently, for creat-
ing quasi-neutral nanoplasmas and suppressing Coulomb
explosion the use of high frequency lasers is favorable.
Reduced ionization of clusters in laser ﬁelds of, however,
many times higher frequency (to be generated by x-ray
free electron lasers in the near future) was also found in
the numerical simulations of [21].

For laser intensities I > 3 × 1015 where, according to
Fig. 6, the average charge state in the cluster overtakes
the charge state of the single atom, we observe a wave
packet moving inside the cluster also for the high fre-
quency ωh. However, in contrast to the low frequency
case the phase lag ∆φ is rather small so that increased
absorption of laser energy and further ionization do not
occur.

6

IV. CONCLUSION

The ionization dynamics of a one-dimensional rare gas
cluster model in intense and short laser pulses was inves-
tigated by means of time-dependent density functional
theory. An electron wave packet dynamics was found
to build up inside the cluster when the excursion am-
plitude ˆE/ω2 exceeds the nearest neighbor distance of
the ions but is still signiﬁcantly smaller than the cluster
radius. The electron wave packet is driven into reso-
nance with the laser ﬁeld through the collisions of elec-
trons with the cluster boundary, leading to an excursion
amplitude of the wave packet of about the cluster ra-
dius. The fastest electrons in the wave packet escape
from the cluster (outer ionization). The electric ﬁeld of
the bouncing electron wave packet adds up constructively
to the laser ﬁeld, thus enhancing inner ionization. This
eﬀect was called dynamical ionization ignition. It is ro-

bust with respect to the cluster size but sensitive to the
laser frequency. Plasma resonances are insigniﬁcant for
the mechanism.

We expect the wave packet scenario being valid also
in real, three-dimensional rare gas clusters. Due to
the spherical cluster-vacuum boundary the wave packet
should assume a sickle-like shape in that case. However,
in order to verify this, studies with higher-dimensional
cluster models will be pursued in the future.

Acknowledgments

This work was supported by the Deutsche Forschungs-
gemeinschaft (D.B.) and through the INFM advanced
research project Clusters (A.M.). The permission to run
our codes on the Linux cluster at PC2 in Paderborn, Ger-
many, is gratefully acknowledged.

[1] Y. L. Shao, T. Ditmire, J. W. G. Tisch, E. Springate, J.
P. Marangos, and M. H. R. Hutchinson, Phys. Rev. Lett.
77, 3343 (1996).

[2] T. Ditmire, T. Donnelly, A. M. Rubenchik, R. W. Fal-
cone, and M. D. Perry, Phys. Rev. A 53, 3379 (1996).
[3] T. Ditmire, J. Tisch, E. Springate, M. Mason, N. Hay,
R. Smith, J. Marangos, and M. Hutchinson, Nature 386,
54 (1997).

[4] E. Springate, N. Hay, J. W. G. Tisch, M. B. Mason, T.
Ditmire, M. H. R. Hutchinson, and J. P. Marangos, Phys.
Rev. A 61, 063201 (2000).

[16] Jan Posthumus (ed.) Molecules and Clusters in Intense
Laser Fields (Cambridge University Press, Cambridge,
2001).

[17] V. P. Krainov and M. B. Smirnov, Phys. Rep. 370, 237

[18] E. M. Snyder, S. A. Buzza, and A. W. Castleman, Jr.,

Phys. Rev. Lett. 77, 3347 (1996).

[19] Isidore Last and Joshua Jortner, Phys. Rev. A 60, 2215

[20] Isidore Last and Joshua Jortner, Phys. Rev. A 62, 013201

(2002).

(1999).

(2000).

[5] A. McPherson, B. D. Thompson, A. B. Borisov, K. Boyer,

[21] Ulf Saalmann and Jan-Michael Rost, Phys. Rev. Lett.

and C. K. Rhodes, Nature 370, 631 (1994).

89, 143401 (2002).

[6] T. Ditmire, P. K. Patel, R. A. Smith, J. S. Wark, S. J.
Rose, D. Milathianaki, R. S. Marjoribanks, and M. H. R.
Hutchinson, J. Phys. B: At. Mol. Opt. Phys. 31, 2825
(1998).

[7] S. Ter Avetisyan, M. Schn¨urer, H. Stiel, U. Vogt, W.
Radloﬀ, W. Karpow, W. Sandner, and P. V. Nickles,
Phys. Rev. E 64, 036404 (2001).

[8] J. Zweiback, R. A. Smith, T. E. Cowan, G. Hays, K. B.
Wharton, V. P. Yanovsky, and T. Ditmire, Phys. Rev.
Lett. 84, 2634 (2000).

[9] K. Boyer, B. D. Thompson, A. McPherson, and C. K.
Rhodes, J. Phys. B: At. Mol. Opt. Phys. 27, 4373 (1994).
[10] W. Andreas Schroeder, T. R. Nelson, A. B. Borisov, J.
W. Longworth, K. Boyer, and C. K. Rhodes, J. Phys. B:
At. Mol. Opt. Phys. 34, 297 (2001).

[11] C. Rose-Petruck, K. J. Schafer, K. R. Wilson, and C. P.
J. Barty, Phys. Rev. A 55, 1182 (1997); C. Rose-Petruck,
K. J. Schafer, and C. P. J. Barty, Proc. SPIE Int. Soc.
Opt. Eng. 2523, 272 (1995).

[22] Christian Siedschlag and Jan M. Rost, Phys. Rev. Lett.

[23] Christian Siedschlag and Jan M. Rost, Phys. Rev. A 67,

[24] Erich Runge and E. K. U. Gross, Phys. Rev. Lett. 52,

89, 173401 (2002).

013404 (2003).

997 (1984).

[25] Kieron Burke and E. K. U. Gross, A Guided Tour of
Time-Dependent Density Functional Theory in Density
Functionals: Theory and Applications ed. by Daniel Jou-
bert (Springer, Berlin, 1998).

[26] E. K. U. Gross, J. F. Dobson, and M. Petersilka, in Topics
in Current Chemistry (Springer, Berlin, 1996) pp. 81.
[27] F. Calvayrac, P.-G. Reinhard, E. Suraud, and C. A. Ull-

rich, Phys. Rep. 337, 493 (2000).

[28] D. Bauer, F. Ceccherini, A. Macchi, and F. Cornolti,

Phys. Rev. A 64, 063203 (2001).

[29] Miroslav Brewczyk, Charles W. Clark, Maciej Lewen-
stein, and Kazimierz Rz¸a˙zewski, Phys. Rev. Lett. 80,
1857 (1998).

[12] H. M. Milchberg, S. J. McNaught, and E. Parra, Phys.

[30] Miroslav Brewczyk and Kazimierz Rz¸a˙zewski, Phys. Rev.

Rev. E 64, 056402 (2001).

A 60, 2285 (1999).

[13] K. Y. Kim, I. Alexeev, E. Parra, and H. M. Milchberg,

[31] Val´erie V´eniard, Richard Ta¨ieb, and Alfred Maquet,

Phys. Rev. Lett. 90, 023401 (2003).

Phys. Rev. A 65, 013202 (2001).

[14] Kenichi Ishikawa and Thomas Blenski, Phys. Rev. A 62,

[32] I. Grigorenko, K. H. Bennemann, and M. E. Garcia, Eu-

063204 (2000).

rophys. Lett. 57, 39 (2002).

[15] Marian Rusek, Herve Lagadec, and Thomas Blenski,

Phys. Rev. A 63, 013203 (2000).

[33] The dipole approximation can be applied because the
wavelengths of the laser light under consideration are

7

many times greater than the cluster diameters in our
study, and magnetic ﬁeld eﬀects do not play a role.
[34] J. B. Krieger, Yan Li, and G. J. Iafrate, Phys. Rev. A

[38] F. Brunel, Phys. Rev. Lett. 59, 52 (1987); F. Brunel,

Phys. Fluids 31, 2714 (1988).

[39] P. Gibbon and A. R. Bell, Phys. Rev. Lett. 68, 1535

45, 101 (1992).

[35] F. Megi, M. Belkacem, M. A. Bouchene, E. Suraud, and
G. Zwicknagel, J. Phys. B: At. Mol. Opt. Phys. 36, 273
(2003).

[36] On the other hand, experimental results could several
times successfully be interpreted by employing the NP
model where collisional absorption is supposed to be es-
sential [4, 37]. Whether the success of the NP model in
this context is just by coincidence or collisional absorp-
tion is really important is not yet clear.

[37] M. Lezius, S. Dobosz, D. Normand, and M. Schmidt, J.

Phys. B: At. Mol. Opt. Phys. 30, L251 (1997).

(1992).

19, 23 (2001).

[40] P. Mulser, H. Ruhl, and J. Steinmetz, Las. Part. Beams

[41] Note, however, that xinner(t) is the dipole and does
not describe the center of the oscillating wave packet.
The center of mass of all
inner electrons is xc.m. =
xinner/Ninner. However, to xinner, xc.m., and Ninner also
the electrons that are still bound to their parent ions con-
tribute so that xc.m. ≪ R holds despite the fact that the
oscillating wave packet has an excursion ≈ R.

This figure "fig1.png" is available in "png"(cid:10) format from:

http://arxiv.org/ps/physics/0304057v1

This figure "fig2.png" is available in "png"(cid:10) format from:

http://arxiv.org/ps/physics/0304057v1

This figure "fig3.png" is available in "png"(cid:10) format from:

http://arxiv.org/ps/physics/0304057v1

This figure "fig4.png" is available in "png"(cid:10) format from:

http://arxiv.org/ps/physics/0304057v1

This figure "fig5.png" is available in "png"(cid:10) format from:

http://arxiv.org/ps/physics/0304057v1

This figure "fig6.png" is available in "png"(cid:10) format from:

http://arxiv.org/ps/physics/0304057v1

This figure "fig7.png" is available in "png"(cid:10) format from:

http://arxiv.org/ps/physics/0304057v1

