3
0
0
2
 
n
u
J
 
0
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
m
o
t
a
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
5
5
1
6
0
3
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

An Optical Lattice of Ring Traps

Philippe Verkerk and Daniel Hennequin
Laboratoire de Physique des Lasers, Atomes et Mol´ecules, UMR
CNRS,
Centre d’Etudes et de Recherches Lasers et Applications, Universit´e des
Sciences et Technologies de Lille, F-59655 Villeneuve d’Ascq cedex - France
(January 6, 2014)

A new geometry of optical lattice is proposed, namely a lattice made of a 1D stack of ring traps.
It is obtained though the interference pattern of two counterpropagating beams: one of the beam is
a standard gaussian beam, while the other one is a hollow beam obtained through a setup with two
conical lenses. The resulting lattice is shown to have a high ﬁlling rate and a good conﬁnement, so
that it could be loaded directly from a MOT with applications in the domain of quantum computing,
or with a Bose-Einstein condensate, which would have in this case a 1D ring geometry.

32.80.Pj, 03.75.Lm, 03.67.Lx

Optical lattices are obtained by dropping atoms in the
interference pattern of coherent laser beams. Atoms un-
dergo a force whose potential is proportionnal to the light
intensity, so that cold atoms are located in conﬁned sites,
corresponding to the maximal (zero) intensity for bright
(dark) lattices. By varying the shape of the interference
pattern, atoms can be manipulated with an extreme pre-
cision and a relative ease: because of these possibilities,
optical lattices have recently attracted increasing inter-
est in various domains. Indeed, lattices may be loaded
with atoms cooled in a magneto-optical trap (MOT), or
with a Bose-Einstein condensate (BEC). Several spectac-
ular results have been obtained recently with the latter
the realization of a BEC coher-
conﬁguration, as e.g.
ent accelerator and multiphoton beam-splitter [1], and
the experimental demonstration of the quantum phase
transition from a superﬂuid to a Mott insulator [2]. It is
also possible to study more fundamental properties of the
BEC, as e.g. their free expansion in a low-dimensionnal
lattice [3], or their collective excitations [4]. Another
attractive research ﬁeld concerns low-dimensional BEC.
In particular, recent experiments have demonstrated the
formation of bright solitons in a 1D BEC with attractive
interactions [5]. These experiments have been realized
with simple waveguides, and thus a linear geometry of
the BEC. Optical lattices could enable the use of more
complex geometries, leading in particular to ring traps,
in which BECs should exhibit new properties [6].

Optical lattices are also a key system in the realiza-
tion of quantum computers with neutral atoms [7]. The
qubits are the two-level atoms trapped in the lattice sites,
and the interaction occurs through a cold collision be-
tween two atoms in neighboring sites. This requires to
produce a lattice with at least one atom by site, a good
conﬁnement of the atoms in each site and a decoherence
as low as possible. When the lattice is loaded from a
MOT, the ﬁrst condition is not fulﬁlled, simply because
of the relative weak atomic density in the MOT (typically

1011 atoms/cm3), as compared to the relative high den-
sity of sites in the lattice (typically 1013 sites/cm3 in a
3D square lattice). A possibility is to limit the number of
sites by using a 1D lattice, but in this case, the other con-
ditions are not fulﬁlled. Indeed, if a bright lattice is used,
the interactions of the trapped atoms with the light ﬁeld
is maximal, and the coupling between atoms and light
modiﬁes, through diﬀerent physical processes, the light
ﬁeld, and disturb the trapping and cooling mechanisms
[8]. Moreover, when such a lattice is near resonance,
it induces decoherence, whereas at large detuning, the
conﬁnement of atoms, linked to the wavelength of light,
decreases. In the same way, when a dark lattice is used,
the atoms are not trapped, except in the particular sit-
uation of a lattice of toroidal trap. But in the proposed
conﬁgurations, the radial conﬁnement is low, of the order
of the beam waist [9]. Until today, the only lattices able
to strongly conﬁne atoms with ﬂuorescence rates of the
order of 1 s, were the 3D dark lattices [10]. Therefore, a
solution for a high ﬁlling rate is to increase the density of
the atoms dropped in a 3D dark lattice, by using a BEC
[2]. However, note that in this case, the BEC is not use
for its particular coherent properties, but only because it
makes possible the access to higher atomic densities.

We propose here a new lattice geometry, where each
site is a ring trap, while the site density is typically 108
sites/cm3. Thanks to its properties, in particular the high
conﬁnement of the sites, and to its great adaptability,
many applications of such a lattice can be considered.
In particular, it can be loaded with a BEC, and thus
could produce a 1D ring BEC, but thanks to the low
density of sites, it can also be loaded directly with a
MOT. The paper is organized as follows: we ﬁrst discuss
the principle of the lattice of ring traps, then describe the
experimental realization, and ﬁnally show basic results
concerning atoms loaded in the lattice.

Each individual trap is a 3D dark ring, and the lattice
is a 1D stack of such rings. Thus, the global shape of the

1

potential is a bright full cylinder with a pile of ring wells
inside. Such potentials can easily be obtained by mak-
ing the interference of a standard gaussian beam with a
counterpropagating hollow beam, as illustrated schemat-
ically in ﬁg. 1a. Both beams have the same blue detuned
frequency, so that the trapping sites correspond to the
zero intensity sites. They propagate along the z vertical
axis with the same polarization, and the hollow beam
has an inverse gaussian distribution along the radial di-
rection r, with a zero intensity in its center. The interfer-
ence pattern is shown on ﬁg. 1b through the longitudinal
evolution of the transverse distribution. When the two
beams are out of phase (on the ﬁgure, in z = λ/4 + nλ/2
with n integer and λ the wavelength), two zeros of in-
tensity appear symmetrically on each side of the center.
Because of the cylindrical symmetry, these zeros corre-
spond to a unique ring along the azimutal direction. On
the contrary, when the two beams have the same phase
(in z = nλ/2), the intensity proﬁle reaches its maximum.
This interference pattern results in a potential U which
is, in the limit of weak saturation and large detuning,
proportional to the light intensity I:

U =

¯h
8

Γ2
∆

I
IS

(1)

where ∆ is the detuning, IS the saturation intensity and
Γ the width of the atomic transition. This potential is a
stack of rings separated by λ/2. Each ring has a radius r
of the order of the waist w0 of the gaussian beam, and a
thickness ∆r also of the order of w0. If z is chosen as the
vertical axis, the cylindrical symmetry of the potential is
not broken by gravity.

In the context described above, two main properties
of the lattice must be optimized: (i) the ﬁlling rate, and
(ii) the conﬁnement in the z and r directions. As the
number of sites is ﬁxed, the former is only linked to the
number of atoms loaded in the lattice.. This number is of
the order of the lattice volume, i.e. πr2L, where L is the
ﬁxed length of the lattice, corresponding to the diameter
of the atomic cloud used to load it. Thus in order to
increase the ﬁlling rate, r must be chosen as large as pos-
sible. On the other hand, the conﬁnement following the r
direction is linked to the radial thickness ∆r of the rings,
which accordingly must be chosen as small as possible.
Therefore, the simple example given in Fig. 1, appears
not to be optimal for our lattice, as both r and ∆r are
proportional to w0, while they should on the contrary be
independent, in order to be adjusted separately. More-
over, an inverse gaussian beam has the disadvantage to
concentrate most of the energy in the sides of the beam,
where it is not useful. To summarize, a good conﬁgura-
tion should concentrate most of the light intensity in the
vicinity of r, and make r and ∆r independent.

To obtain these properties, we use a hollow beam pro-
duced by a conical lens, as described in [11]. The conical
lens is an axicon, i.e. an optical system that produces a

2

FIG. 1. Principle of the ring potential. In (a), schematic
representation of the beam conﬁguration, through the propa-
gation of their intensity along the z axis: the full (1) and the
hollow (2) beams are counterpropagating. In (b), the result-
ing interference pattern. The transverse proﬁle of the inten-
sity I versus the radius r, is plotted versus the propagating
direction z.

line focus rather than a point focus from incident colli-
mated beam [12]. Axicons are extensively used to pro-
duce Bessel-Gauss beams [13] or annular beams [14,15].
The standard construction to generate an annular hol-
low beam is a doublet made by a converging lens and a
conical lens, as illustrated in ﬁg. 2a: the incident gaus-
sian beam is transformed in a ring, as each part of the
beam is deviated towards the optical axis z. In fact, be-
cause of the diﬀraction on the lens vertex, the resulting
beam exhibits, inside the main ring, secondary rings of
lower intensity [11]. However, these rings can be easily re-
moved with a mask, leading to a resulting annular beam
with typically 80% of the intensity of the initial gaussian
beam distributed in the unique ring (Fig. 3a). A second
conical lens is used to collimate the radius r of the ring,
so that after this second lens, r becomes constant with z
(Fig. 2b). Note that the beam is not really collimated, as
its waist, which is now the thickness of the ring, evolves
following the usual rules of propagation. In particular,
the lens L in Fig. 2b produces a beam with a minimum
thickness in M, where the mask used to suppress the sec-
ondary rings is located. The resulting hollow beam has
a radius r essentially dependent on the distance between
the two conical lenses, while its thickness ∆r depends
on the focal length of L. Thus r and ∆r are adjustable
independently.

The potential is obtained by focusing the gaussian
beam and the counterpropagating hollow beam at the
same point, so that the wave surfaces are planes perpen-
dicular to the propagation axis. The resulting potential

which varies with z. The minimum height UA = 650 Er,
in point A of Fig. 4, occurs at the same z as the zero
(Fig. 3b). The internal barrier has a channel structure,
with the lowest pass in point B (Fig. 4), at a height of
UB = 110 Er, between two successive longitudinal sites.
Atoms with low enough energy are conﬁned in a torus
with a half-ellipse cross-section with axes of the order of
0.1 µm and 10 µm. The diameter of the torus may be
chosen of several hundreds of µm, leading to a large cap-
ture volume. For example, with r = 100 µm (Fig. 4)
and an initial cloud of diameter 1 mm, 6 % of the initial
atoms are inside the external cylinder. Thus if the lattice
is loaded with a cloud of 107 atoms in 1 mm3, which are
the typical characteristics obtained from a MOT, 6 × 105
atoms are loaded in 2000 sites, leading to a ﬁlling rate
much larger than 1. Thus the potential appears to hold
the required properties, i.e. a 2D conﬁnement and a high
ﬁlling rate.

FIG. 2. Illustration of the beam propagation after one con-
ical lens in (a), and two conical lens in (b). In (a), the beam
crosses the lens L and the conical lens A. On the screen S,
located beyong the Bessel zone, the transverve proﬁle of the
beam is a series of concentric rings. In (b), the beam crosses
the lens L, then the two conical lenses A1 and A2. The mask
M eliminates the diﬀracting rings, and the telescope T reduces
the beam size. On the screen S, the transverve proﬁle of the
beam is a collimated ring.

)

2

200

n
0I

m
c
/
W

(
 
y
t
i
s
n
e

t

r

/

E
U

150

100

50

300

200

100

0

(a)

(b)

-300

-200

-100

100

200

300

0
r (µm)

FIG. 3. In (a), theoretical transverse proﬁle of the gaussian
(dashed) and hollow (full) beams used in the experiment. In
(b), the resulting transverse potential at the bottom of the
well. Parameters are those used in the experiments.

FIG. 4. 2D representation of the potential as a function of
the radius r and the longitudinal coordinate z. Parameters
are those of Fig. 3. Note that the two scales are diﬀerent.
Dark corresponds to a zero potential. Signiﬁcation of points
A and B is given in the text.

has a periodicity of λ/2, with a shape depending locally
on the phase φ between the two beams. It is illustrated
through the theoretical plots of Figs. 3b and 4 where, for
sake of simplicity, we used the parameters of experimen-
tal demonstration: the hollow and gaussian intensities
are respectively IA = 30 mW and IG = 15 mW (ﬁg.
3a), both beams are polarized σ+, with ∆/2π = 250
GHz. Fig. 3b shows the potential transverse proﬁle at
the bottom of the wells. The geometry of the ring ap-
pears clearly, with a conﬁnement of the order of r/10
for U < 150Er, and a height for the external barrier
of 650Er. Secondary minima originating in the residual
diﬀraction produced by the mask, appear inside the main
ring, but because of their weak depth, they should not be
annoying in most applications. A better understanding
of the potential distribution can be obtained from Fig. 4,
where U is plotted in gray scale versus r and z. The po-
tential is constituted by an external barrier, the height of

To test the feasibility of this lattice, we have imple-
mented an experiment with the characteristics described
above. Atoms of Cesium are initially cooled in a stan-
dard MOT with a detuning of −3Γ from resonance. At
time t = −40 ms, the magnetic ﬁeld is turned oﬀ, while
at time t = −30 ms, the detuning is increased to −5Γ
and the trap beam intensity is decreased: this sequence
allows us to obtain at time t = 0 a molasse with a tem-
perature of 15 µK, corresponding to an energy of 75Er,
and 107 atoms in typically 1 mm3.

The hollow and gaussian beams are produced by two
diode lasers injected by a single master diode laser in
an extended cavity, which ensure the same frequency
for both beams. For this demonstration, the beams are
tuned 250 GHz above the atomic transition, and are σ+
polarized, in order to increase the depth of the potential
wells. In these conditions, the power of the gaussian and
hollow beam, which are respectively 15 and 30 mW, are
suﬃcient to reach the needed potential depth of 100Er.
The gaussian beam has a minimum waist, at the level

3

of the MOT, of 140 µm. The axicon setup is mounted
on an optical rail, to guarantee a good stability of the
beam. The two conical lenses, with a vertex angle of
2◦, are separated by 146 mm. With an incident colli-
mated beam waist equal to 645 µm and a L focal length
of 500 mm, we obtain a hollow beam with r ≃ 1 mm
and ∆r ≃ 100 µm. A telescope located just before the
trap reduces these values to r ≃ 100 µm and ∆r ≃ 10
µm. We obtain in the MOT a transverse distribution of
the hollow beam which is in excellent agreement with the
theoretical one.

To load the cold atoms inside the lattice, the later is
turned on at a time t < 0, so that when the molasse is
switched oﬀ, the atoms are already distributed inside the
wells. At time t = 0, the atoms start to fall under the
eﬀect of gravity, except for those which are trapped in the
lattice. The free atoms needs typically 35 ms to quit the
lattice zone, so that for t > 35 ms, only trapped atoms
remain. To observe the atoms, we switch on during some
ms the trap laser beams near resonance, and we used a
low-noise cooled CCD camera to detect the ﬂuorescence
emitted by the atoms. A typical picture is shown in ﬁg. 5:
as the resolution of the imaging setup is larger than λ/2,
individual rings cannot be distinguished, and so atoms
appear to be distributed on a cylinder, with a diameter
widening at its ends, due to the defocusing of the beams.
The typical number of atoms obtained at t = 100 ms is
2 × 104, leading to a ﬁlling rate of several atoms by sites.

FIG. 5. Snapshot of the atoms in the lattice at time t = 50

ms.

In conclusion, we propose here a new lattice geometry,
namely a 1D stack of ring traps, enabling large ﬁlling
rates and high conﬁnement of atoms. A preliminary ex-
periment allows us to realize such a lattice, loading it
directly from a MOT, with a typical ﬁlling rate of 10
atoms per site. Several improvements are necessary be-
fore to make such a lattice useful to e.g. the realization of
a quantum gate. In particular, the detuning ∆ should be
increased, together with the intensities of lattice beams.
The method to load the cold atoms from a MOT in the

4

lattice should be optimized. To avoid too much losses
in the number of atoms, we plan to make this operation
in two steps: ﬁrst, the hollow beam is switched on just
after the trap beams are switched oﬀ, so that the atoms
inside the beam are trapped and remain in the cylinder.
Then, the gaussian beam is switched on progressively, so
that the atoms are adiabatically pushed in the ring traps.
This precaution prevents the atoms to be heated by a
sudden increasing of the potential. An interesting alter-
native would be to load the lattice with a Bose-Einstein
condensate, leading to 1D BEC with a ring geometry.

The Laboratoire de Physique des Lasers, Atomes et
Mol´ecules is “Unit´e Mixte de Recherche de l’Universit´e de
Lille 1 et du CNRS” (UMR 8523). The Centre d’Etudes
et de Recherches Lasers et Applications (CERLA) is sup-
ported by the Minist`ere charg´e de la Recherche, the
R´egion Nord-Pas de Calais and the Fonds Europ´een de
D´eveloppement Economique des R´egions.

[1] J. Hecker Denschlag, J. E. Simsarian, H. H¨aﬀner, C.
Mckenzie, A. Browaeys, D. Cho, K. Helmerson, S. L.
Rolston and W. D. Phillips, J. Phys. B: At. Mol. Opt.
Phys. 35, 3095 (2002)

[2] M. Greiner, O. Mandel, T. Esslinger, T. W. H¨ansch and

I. Bloch, Nature 415, 39 (2002)

[3] O. Morsch, M. Cristiani, J. H. M¨uller, D. Ciampini and

E. Arimondo, Phys. Rev. A 66, 021601(R) (2002)

[4] C. Fort, F. S. Cataliotti, L. Fallani, F. Ferlaino, P. Mad-
daloni and M. Inguscio, Phys. Rev. Lett. 90, 140405
(2003)

[5] K. E. Strecker, G. B. Partridge, A. G. Truscott and R.
G. Hulet, Nature 417, 150 (2002); L. Khaykovich, F.
Schreck, G. Ferrari, T. Bourdel, J. Cubizolles, L. D. Carr,
Y. Castin and C. Salomon, Science 296, 1290 (2002)
[6] G. M. Kavoulakis, Phys. Rec. A 67, 011601(R) (2003);
R. Kanamoto, H. Saito and M. Ueda, Phys. Rev. A 67,
013608 (2003)

[7] P. S. Jessen, D. L. Haycock, G. Klose, G. A. Smith, I. H.

Deutsch and G. K. Brennen, QIC 1, 20 (2001)

[8] J. Dalibard, Opt. Commun 68, 203 (1988); T. Walker et
al, Phys. Rev. Lett. 64, 408 (1990); A. Hemmerich et al,
Europhys. Lett. 21, 445 (1993)

[9] T. Freegarde and K. Dholakia, Opt. Commun. 201, 99

(2002)

[10] T. Esslinger, F. Sander, A. Hemmerich, T. W. H¨ansch,
H. Ritsch and M. Weidem¨uller, Opt. Lett. 21, 991 (1996)
[11] B. D´epret, Ph. Verkerk, D. Hennequin, Opt. Commun.

211, 31 (2002)

[12] J. H. McLeod, J. Opt. Soc. Am. 44, 592 (1954)
[13] R. M. Herman et al, J. Opt. Soc. Am. A 8,932 (1991); J.

Arlt et al, Opt. commun. 177, 297 (2000)

[14] P.-A. B´elanger, Appl. Opt. 17, 1080 (1978)
[15] I. Manek et al, Opt. Commun. 147, 67 (1998); L. Cac-

ciapuoti et al, Eur. Phys. J. D 14, 373 (2001)

