Applied Physics B manuscript No.
(will be inserted by the editor)

3
0
0
2
 
l
u
J
 
9
 
 
]
h
p
-
m
o
t
a
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
8
4
0
7
0
3
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Loss-free frequency switching of a locked laser

R.A. Cornelussen, T.N. Huussen, R.J.C. Spreeuw, and H.B. van Linden van den Heuvell

Van der Waals - Zeeman Instituut, Universiteit van Amsterdam, Valckenierstraat 65, 1018 XE Amsterdam, The Netherlands
e-mail: ronaldc@science.uva.nl

The date of receipt and acceptance will be inserted by the editor

Abstract We demonstrate a new and eﬃcient laser-
locking technique that enables making large frequency
jumps while keeping the laser in lock. A diode laser
is locked at a variable oﬀset from a Doppler-free spec-
tral feature of rubidium vapor, by frequency shifting the
laser before sending the light to a spectroscopy cell, us-
ing an acousto-optic modulator (AOM). The frequency
of the locked laser is switched quasi-instantaneously over
much more than the width of the spectral features, i.e.
the usual locking range. This is done by simultaneously
switching the AOM frequency and applying feed-forward
to the laser current. The advantage of our technique is
that power loss and beam walk caused by the AOM do
not aﬀect the main output beam, but only the small
fraction of light used for the spectroscopy. The transient
excursions of the laser frequency are only a few MHz and
last approximately 0.2 ms, limited by the bandwidth of
our locking electronics. We present equations that de-
scribe the transient behavior of the error signal and the
laser frequency quantitatively. They are in good agree-
ment with the measurements. The technique should be
applicable to other types of lasers.

1 Introduction

For the purpose of nowadays ubiquitous laser-cooling ex-
periments [1,2,3], lasers are routinely locked to a Doppler-
free absorption feature of an atomic transition. In a typ-
ical experimental time sequence one would ﬁrst accumu-
late atoms into a magneto-optical trap (MOT), followed
by a phase of e.g. polarization gradient cooling. Both
phases require diﬀerent detunings of the laser light. The
required switching of the frequency has been solved in
several ways. However the existing solutions have some
disadvantages, especially in terms of eﬃciency of laser
power.

An existing and straightforward method is to lock
the laser to a ﬁxed detuning away from resonance and
shift the laser frequency towards resonance by a vari-
able amount, using an acousto-optic modulator (AOM).

Usually, the AOM is used in double-pass conﬁguration to
cancel beam walk associated with frequency shifting, re-
sulting in a limited eﬃciency, typically lower than 65%.
Moreover the beam walk compensation is imperfect.

Both the loss of laser power and the residual beam
walk can be a problem when the light is used directly in
an experiment, or when high-power multi-mode ampli-
ﬁer lasers are used, such as a broad-area laser (BAL) [4,
5] or a semiconductor tapered-ampliﬁer laser (TA) [6].
With more seeding power, such ampliﬁers perform bet-
ter in terms of spectral purity and output power. More-
over they impose strict requirements on the beam point-
ing stability of the injection beam. The latter problem
could be solved by ﬁrst amplifying the light before fre-
quency shifting it, providing the ampliﬁer with suﬃcient
power and a stably aligned injection beam. However, the
power loss and beam walk now occur in the ampliﬁed
beam. Another solution is to injection-lock [7,8] a sec-
ond single-mode diode laser with the frequency shifted
light, since this puts less stringent requirements on injec-
tion power and beam pointing stability. A drawback is
that this solution requires a signiﬁcant amount of extra
equipment. Furthermore, is is not possible to implement
this solution in commercial BAL or TA systems, with a
master laser integrated in the system, without making
major adjustments to the system.

In this paper we demonstrate our method which is
both eﬃcient in its use of laser power and rigorously
eliminates the beam walk due to the AOM frequency
switching. As usual, we lock our laser using Doppler-free
saturation spectroscopy in a vapor cell of rubidium. The
laser is frequency-shifted by an AOM before sending it
through the spectroscopy cell. Thus, instead of shifting
a ﬁxed-frequency laser by a variable amount, we lock the
laser at a variable frequency. This is only possible if the
laser can follow the change in lock point associated with
a change in the AOM frequency. This is a problem if the
frequency jump is larger than the locking range, set by
the width of the Doppler-free features in the spectrum.
We solved this by providing the laser with a feed-forward

2

R.A. Cornelussen et al.

Fig. 1 Schematic representation of the spectroscopy setup.
The spectroscopy beam is sent through a double pass AOM
setup to a saturated absorption section. This allows lock-
ing of the laser to an arbitrary frequency in the vicinity of
an atomic transition. AL: aspheric lens, AOM: acousto-optic
modulator, APP: anamorphic prism pair, BAL: broad area
laser, BS: beam splitter, CL: cylinder lens, G: grating, L: lens,
LD: laserdiode, M: mirror, OI: optical isolator, P: periscope,
PBS: polarizing beam splitter, PD: photodiode, PZT: piezo
transducer, Rb: cell with rubidium vapor.

signal, causing the laser to jump to within the locking
range of the shifted lock point. We analyze the tran-
sient behavior of the laser frequency when making these
jumps.

2 Experimental implementation

In our experiment we work with 87Rb, which has a nat-
ural linewidth of Γ/2π = 6 MHz on the 5S1/2 → 5P3/2
resonance line (D2, 780 nm). The laser detunings needed
for the MOT and the molasses phase are -1.5Γ and -10Γ
with respect to the F = 2 → F ′ = 3 component of the
D2 line. In view of the frequency range of our AOM we
lock the spectroscopy beam to the F = 2 → F ′ = (1, 3)
crossover. The detunings with respect to this transition
are 203 MHz and 152 MHz respectively. The desired fre-
quency jump of ∼ 50 MHz is thus much larger than
Γ/2π, which deﬁnes the locking range.

We use a commercial laser system (Toptica, PDL100)
consisting of an extended cavity diode laser [9,10] in Lit-
trow conﬁguration [11], which injection locks a BAL. The
grating of the extended cavity is mounted on a piezo
stack (PZT) in order to scan the frequency. The setup
is shown in Fig. 1. Behind the optical isolator 35 mW of
power is left. The beam splitter reﬂects 10% to the spec-
troscopy setup. The spectroscopy beam ﬁrst passes an

Fig. 2 Schematic representation of the locking electronics.
We employ FM spectroscopy to obtain a dispersive signal.
This signal is used for integrational feedback to the PZT
for proportional feedback to the laser current. The AOM fre-
quency is generated by a VCO. The voltage driving the VCO
is ampliﬁed and used as feed-forward to the laser current in
order to compensate the spectroscopy frequency for the fre-
quency change of the AOM. On the left side of the dashed
line the locking electronics is shown, on the right side the
’optical’ components that can also be found in Fig. 1 are
visible.

anamorphic prism pair to circularize the elliptic beam
shape. It then goes to a double pass AOM setup and
ﬁnally to a Doppler-free spectroscopy section.

Fig. 2 shows a schematic representation of the elec-
tronics to lock the laser frequency. We employ FM spec-
troscopy [12,13] for locking the laser. A small modula-
tion with a radio-frequency (RF) of 33 MHz is added to
the laser current by means of a bias-T. The photodiode
signal of the Doppler-free spectroscopy is phase shifted
and mixed with the RF frequency resulting in a dis-
persive error signal, which is ampliﬁed with a measured
bandwidth ωerror/2π ≈ 20 kHz. This signal is integrated
and sent to the PZT in order to lock the laser to a spec-
tral feature. Proportional current feedback is also ap-
plied to suppress fast ﬂuctuations of the laser frequency.
The AOM frequency is generated by a voltage controlled
oscillator (VCO). The voltage driving the VCO is gener-
ated by a 12 bit digital to analog convertor (DAC), which
is subsequently converted to the correct voltage range.
This last step has a measured bandwidth ωV/2π = 2.6
kHz.

Fig. 3(a) shows FM spectra measured by scanning
the PZT for two AOM detunings δAOM, which are close
to the frequencies used in a typical lasercooling experi-
ment: δ0/2π = −186.2 MHz and (δ0 + δ1)/2π = −137.4
MHz. The jump in frequency is clearly larger than the
half-width of the dispersive features, so that the locking
electronics will not be able to keep the laser locked to the

Loss-free frequency switching of a locked laser

3

same line when this frequency jump is made. When this
shift is compensated by applying a feed-forward jump to
the laser current the spectroscopy beam will not change
frequency and the laser will stay locked. Experimentally
this is done by attenuating the voltage driving the VCO
(measured bandwidth of the attenuator ωﬀ /2π = 125
kHz) and feeding this as feed-forward to the modula-
tion input of the current controller, which has a speci-
ﬁed bandwidth ωmi/2π = 100 kHz. Ideally the frequency
change due to feed-forward δﬀ and the AOM detuning
δAOM should cancel. In reality the two frequencies are
only approximately equal:

δﬀ = −CδAOM,

(1)

with C ≈ 1. The parameter C is coarsely adjusted to 1 by
optimizing the overlap of the two spectra. The accuracy
is limited by the noise on the curves. Spectra with C
adjusted to 1 by this method are shown in Fig. 3(b).
When using the feed-forward on the laser current, we
observe that the laser remains locked while jumping. In
the next section the transient behavior of the error signal
will be discussed. A more accurate method to optimize
C will be demonstrated in section 4.

3 Analysis of transient behavior

In this section an equation will be derived describing the
transient behavior of the error signal. When the laser is
locked to a dispersive spectral feature and the frequency
excursions are small with respect to the width of this
feature, the error signal e(t) can be approximated by

e(t) = A(ωS(t) − ωR),

(2)

with A the slope of the dispersive signal of the reference
feature at frequency ωR, which is equal to the F = 2 →
F ′ = (1, 3) cross-over frequency in our experiment. The
frequency ωS(t) of the light in the spectroscopy section
is given by

ωS(t) = ωL(t) + δAOM(t),

(3)

where ωL(t) is the laser frequency and δAOM(t) is the
shift in the double-pass AOM section. In our experiment
this is a step function

Fig. 3 FM spectra, measured by scanning the PZT, for two
diﬀerent AOM detunings (a) without and (b) with current
feed-forward. It is clear that the frequency jump δ1 is larger
than the locking-range, the width of the dispersive features.
The laser will thus not stay locked to the F = 2 → F ′
=
(1, 3) cross-over when the AOM frequency is changed without
current feed-forward. Note that the curves in (b) have been
displaced vertically relative to each other.

term represents proportional current feedback. The third
term is the integrational feedback to the PZT controlled
grating. The last term is the feed-forward to the laser
current, which should instantaneously compensate the
detuning jump by the AOM, as deﬁned in Eq. (1).

When the laser is locked at t = 0 before the frequency

jump, several terms cancel:

ωL(0−) = ω0 + ϕe(0−) + α

e(τ )dτ − Cδ0 = ωR − δ0.

0

Z

−∞

δAOM(t) = δ0 + δ1u(t),

(4)

Combining Eqs. (1)-(6) yields:

with δ0/2π = −186.2 MHz, δ1/2π = 48.8 MHz and u(t)
the unit step function so that the laser changes frequency
at t = 0. Including all feedback and feed-forward terms,
the laser frequency ωL(t) is given by

ωL(t) = ω0 + ϕe(t) + α

e(τ )dτ + δﬀ (t).

(5)

t

Z

−∞

Here ω0 is the frequency of the laser when it is not locked
or any other electronic feedback is applied, the second

e(t) = A

ϕe(t) + α

e(τ )dτ + (1 − C)δ1u(t)

(7)

(cid:18)

t

Z
0

from which the error function e(t) after the frequency
jump can be solved. As discussed in the previous sec-
tion, several of the components have a limited band-
width, which can be easily incorporated in the Laplace
transform of Eq. (7), yielding

E(s) = τerror(s)A ×

τmi(s)ϕ +

E(s)+

h(cid:16)

α
s (cid:17)

(6)

(cid:19)

4

R.A. Cornelussen et al.

τV(s) (1 − τmi(s)τﬀ (s)C)

(8)

δ1
s (cid:21)

,

with E(s) the Laplace transform of e(t) and τx(s) =
1/(1 + s/ωx) for x ∈ {error, V, ﬀ, mi} a (dimensionless)
transfer function that describes the bandwidth of several
components of the setup as shown in Fig. 2. Only the
most limiting bandwidths are taken into account. The
closed loop transfer function can be derived by solving
E(s) from Eq. (8). Subsequently the error function e(t)
can be derived from E(s) by an inverse Laplace trans-
formation. Although the solution e(t) is analytical, it is
not printed here, because it is too lengthy.

The frequency of the laser ωL(t) can be derived from
the error function by combining the Laplace transforms
of Eqs. (2), (3) and (4) and incorporating the band-
width transfer functions τx(s) as discussed previously.
This yields for the laser frequency

ωL(t) = L

−1

E(s)
τerror(s)A

(cid:18)

δ1
s (cid:19)

− τV(s)

+ ωR − δ0,

(9)

where L−1(·) denotes an inverse Laplace transformation
and the solution of Eq. (8) for E(s) should be used for
E(s). Also Eq. (9) yields an analytical but lengthy so-
lution, and is therefore not printed here. In the next
section we will compare the calculated transients with
the measured ones.

4 Comparison with experimental data

Fig. 4(a) shows two error signals when the laser is locked
and the frequency of the laser is changed from MOT to
molasses frequencies at t = 0. The error signal is con-
verted to a frequency by dividing it by the slope A of
the dispersive signal. From this graph it is clear that
in steady state the excursions of the laser frequency are
approximately 1 MHz. One recognizes a fast increase of
detuning due to the frequency shift of the AOM, fol-
lowed by a decrease of frequency shift, because the cur-
rent feed-forward, slower due to the bandwidths ωﬀ and
ωmi, starts to compensate the AOM frequency shift. Fi-
nally a long tail due to the slow integrational feedback
which removes the last amounts of the error signal is
visible. The top curve is a typical error signal when C is
optimized by overlapping the spectra at the two AOM
detunings as shown in Fig. 3(b). The error signal has a
long tail due to the slow integrational feedback. By opti-
mizing the amplitude of the error signal while the laser
is locked, C can be optimized to a few permille. A curve
with C optimized using this method is shown in the bot-
tom graph of Fig. 4(a). The two solid curves are ﬁts to
the data using the error signal e(t) derived from Eq. (8).
The bandwidths ωx and the frequency δ1 are kept con-
stant to their measured or speciﬁed values. Only C, the
slope of the dispersive signal A, the integrational feed-
back parameter α and current feedback parameter ϕ are

Fig. 4 (a) Error signals versus time. At t = 0 the AOM
and diode laser are switched from MOT detuning to molasses
detuning. The top curve shows the error signal and a ﬁt when
the feed-forward compensates 98% of the applied AOM shift,
the bottom curve when the feed-forward is 100.3% of the
applied AOM shift. The solid line is the prediction of Eq.
(8). (b) Laser frequency versus time for the above mentioned
cases of current feed-forward (solid and dashed), calculated
using Eq. (9), and the frequency shift of the AOM (dash-
dot), which is limited by the bandwidth of the step function
ωV. The inset shows the development of the laser frequency
during the ﬁrst millisecond in more detail.

varied, where care is taken that A, α and ϕ stay within
the range of experimentally possible values. Values for
C are determined to be 0.98 and 1.003 respectively. For
both cases the amplitude of the frequency excursion is
smaller than Γ .

Fig. 4(b) shows the frequencies of the laser, which
are calculated using Eq. (9) for the same parameters as
the for the two curves in Fig. 4(a). The frequency shift
of only the AOM is also shown. From Fig. 4 it is clear
that the error caused by the extra feedback loop is not
severe for our application.

The main limiting parameters are the bandwidths
ωmi and ωﬀ in the current feed-forward path, which are
not present in the electrical path to the AOM. The am-
plitude of the frequency excursion can be decreased, the-
oretically to 0, by better matching the bandwidths of
the two paths, so that the detunings due the AOM and
the current feed-forward path always cancel. It would,

Loss-free frequency switching of a locked laser

5

8.

9.

10.

11.

12.
13.

P. Spano, S. Piazzolla, and M. Tamburrini, IEEE
J. Quantum Electr. QE-22, 427 (1986).
C.E. Wieman, and L. Hollberg, Rev. Sci. Instr. 62,
1 (1991).
K.B. MacAdam, A. Steinbach, and C. Wieman,
Am. J. Phys. 60, 1098 (1992).
L. Ricca, M. Weidem¨uller, T. Esslinger, A. Hem-
merich, C. Zimmermann, V. Vuletic, W. K¨onig,
and T.W. H¨ansch, Opt. Comm. 117, 541 (1995).
G.C. Bjorklund, Opt. Lett. 5, 15 (1980).
G.C. Bjorklund, M.D.Levenson, W. Lenth, and C.
Ortiz, Appl. Phys. B 32, 145 (1983).

of course, be more elegant if the bandwidth ωV is larger,
resulting in a shorter transient time. However one should
be careful with the bandwidths of the current feed-forward
path and the AOM path, since for constant, but un-
equal bandwidths of these paths, the amplitude of the
frequency excursions will increase for increasing ωV.

5 Conclusions and outlook

We have demonstrated a new technique for locking a
narrow linewidth laser to an arbitrary frequency in the
vicinity of a spectral feature not by frequency shifting
the output beam, but by frequency shifting the spec-
troscopy beam. By simultaneously switching the AOM
frequency and the laser current it is possible to change
the frequency of the laser by more than the locking
range, while keeping it locked. Whereas the frequency
shifting range of the present technique is limited by the
frequency range of the AOM, it should be possible to
make even larger jumps by jumping to a diﬀerent lock
point. The transient frequency excursion was smaller
than 5 MHz, less than the linewidth of the 87Rb D2 tran-
sition. The transient time was approximately 0.2 ms. The
amplitude of the excursions was limited by the matching
of the bandwidths of the electronics in the feed-forward
path and the AOM path. The duration of the transient
was limited by the small bandwidth ωV of the volt-
age driving the VCO and the current feed-forward. The
demonstrated technique is not restricted to diode lasers
but should be applicable also to other types of laser, e.g.
dye or Ti:Sapphire lasers.

Acknowledgements This work is part of the research pro-
gram of the “Stichting voor Fundamenteel Onderzoek van
de Materie” (Foundation for the Fundamental Research on
Matter) and was made possible by ﬁnancial support from
the “Nederlandse Organisatie voor Wetenschappelijk Onder-
zoek” (Netherlands Organization for the Advancement of Re-
search).

References

1.
2.

3.
4.

5.

6.

7.

S. Chu, Rev. Mod. Phys. 70, 685 (1998).
C.N. Cohen-Tannoudji, Rev. Mod. Phys. 70, 707
(1998).
W.D. Phillips, Rev. Mod. Phys. 70, 721 (1998).
E. Gehrig, B. Beier, K.-J. Boller, and R. Wallen-
stein, Appl. Phys. B 66, 287 (1998).
I. Shvarchuck, K. Dieckmann, M. Zielonkowski,
and J.T.M. Walraven, Appl. Phys. B 61, 475
(2000).
D. Voigt, E.C. Schilder, R.J.C. Spreeuw, and H.B.
van Linden van den Heuvell, Appl. Phys. B 72, 279
(2001).
G.R. Hadley, IEEE J. Quantum Electr. QE-22,
419 (1986).

