3
0
0
2
 
g
u
A
 
9
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
m
o
t
a
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
6
7
0
8
0
3
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Nanolithography with metastable helium atoms in a high-power
standing-wave light ﬁeld

S.J.H. Petra, L. Feenstra,∗ W. Hogervorst, and W. Vassen
Atomic and Laser Physics Group, Laser Centre Vrije Universiteit,
De Boelelaan 1081, 1081 HV Amsterdam, The Netherlands
(Fax: +31-20/44-47999, E-mail: stefan@nat.vu.nl)

We have created periodic nanoscale structures in a gold substrate with a lithography process using
metastable triplet helium atoms that damage a hydrofobic resist layer on top of the substrate. A
beam of metastable helium atoms is transversely cooled and guided through an intense standing-wave
light ﬁeld. Compared to commonly used low-power optical masks, a high-power light ﬁeld (saturation
parameter of 107) increases the conﬁnement of the atoms in the standing-wave considerably, and
makes the alignment of the experimental setup less critical. Due to the high internal energy of the
metastable helium atoms (20 eV), a dose of only one atom per resist molecule is required. With
an exposure time of only eight minutes, parallel lines with a separation of 542 nm and a width of
100 nm (1/11th of the wavelength used for the optical mask) are created.

PACS numbers: 32.80.Lg, 39.25.+k, 81.16.N

I.

INTRODUCTION

Since the beginning of the previous decade, atom-
optical manipulation of neutral atoms has been used to
create nanoscale structures (for a recent review of atom
nanofabrication, see Meschede and Metcalf [1]). Two
diﬀerent processes can be distinguished for the fabrica-
tion of such structures. In a deposition process nanoscale
structures are directly grown on a surface. Direct depo-
sition experiments have been performed with sodium [2],
chromium [3] and aluminum [4]. In a lithography proce-
dure, on the other hand, the atoms ﬁrst locally damage
an organic resist layer and next the pattern is transferred
to an underlying metal ﬁlm in a wet-etching process [5].
Although this last technique is a two-step process, it has
the advantage that in principle background-free struc-
tures can be created, and feature broadening caused by
the growth process is avoided. To create a pattern on
the sample, a mechanical mask (e.g. an electron micro-
scope grid) or an optical mask (standing light wave) can
be used. A mechanical mask partly blocks the atomic
beam, and the grid structure is imaged onto the sample.
Using grids in a lithography process, microscale struc-
tures have been created with metastable argon [6] and
metastable helium [7, 8], showing an edge resolution of
100 nm and 40 nm respectively. Atom lithography with
an optical mask has been demonstrated with cesium [9],
metastable argon [10], and metastable neon [11]. In the
cesium and argon experiments, structures with a feature
size of respectively 120 nm and 65 nm were realized. In
the latter experiment the atoms were optically quenched
by the light ﬁeld and an exposure time of eight hours
was required. In this paper we report lithography mea-
surements with a mechanical and an optical mask for

∗Current address: Physikalisches Institut, Universit¨at Heidelberg,
Philosophenweg 12, 69120 Heidelberg, Germany.

metastable helium atoms. Helium has the highest inter-
nal energy (20 eV) of all metastable atoms. Therefore,
the dose of atoms required to damage a resist molecule
can be small, compared to other metastable species. This
beneﬁts the exposure time of the sample to the atomic
beam.

An optical mask, formed by a standing-wave light ﬁeld,
acts as an array of cylindrical lenses, attracting the atoms
to the potential minima of the light ﬁeld. Two diﬀer-
ent regimes can be distinguished. A low-power regime,
where the atoms are focused at the center of the Gaussian
light beam, and a high-power regime, where the atoms
oscillate around the potential minima of the light ﬁeld.
The lithography experiments mentioned above were all
performed in the focusing regime using low-power opti-
cal masks. Theoretically, this regime can be described
straightforwardly, since an analytical expression for the
dipole force can be derived from the optical potential of
the light ﬁeld [12].

We have performed lithography experiments with a
high-power standing-wave light ﬁeld, where the simple
expression for the dipole force is not valid. This is due
to the fact that the dipole force becomes velocity de-
pendent, because the transverse velocity of the atoms,
channeling through the standing-wave light ﬁeld, can no
longer be neglected. In this high-power regime, the dipole
force can be described by a numerical model, ﬁrst pre-
sented by Minogin and Serimaa [13]. In a previous pa-
per we have compared this model with the model that
describes the conventional dipole force [14]. In the high-
power regime, the background due to non-focused atoms
is signiﬁcantly reduced compared to the focusing regime.
Also the alignment of the standing-wave laser beam with
respect to the sample is far less critical. The sample can
be placed behind the center of the laser beam, which re-
duces disturbances of the standing wave pattern due to
diﬀraction of the laser beam on the sample edge signiﬁ-
cantly [15]. Numerically calculated trajectories of atoms
channeling through a standing-wave light ﬁeld show an

2

DL

PD1

FL

BS

+

+

PBS1

DC

QP1

PBS2

FPI

PD2

PBS3

QP2

+

PM

S

CS

SW

FIG. 1: Schematic of the setup. Metastable helium atoms
are produced in DC discharge source S. Diode laser DL is
used for transverse cooling of the atomic beam in collimation
section CS. Part of the diode laser output (4%) is split by
beam splitter BS for spectroscopy. After reﬂection by polariz-
ing beam splitter PBS1 and double-passing discharge cell DC
and quarter-wave plate QP1, the light is detected by photo-
diode PD1. The light transmitted by PBS1 also passes PBS2
and is analyzed with Fabry-Perot interferometer FPI and pho-
todiode PD2. The beam from ﬁber laser FL is partly reﬂected
by PBS3 and also analyzed with FPI. The light transmitted
by PBS3 is retro-reﬂected by mirror SW, that is mounted on
the sample holder inside the vacuum chamber. After double-
passing QP2, the light of the standing wave is reﬂected by
PBS3 and monitored with power meter PM.

increased conﬁnement of the atoms in the optical well
along the atomic beam axis, due to a dissipative force
that reduces the transverse velocity of the atoms. The
Full Width at Half Maximum (FWHM) of the atom dis-
tribution on the sample is calculated to be 40 nm for
parameters as used in our experiment [14].

II. EXPERIMENTAL SETUP

The experimental setup is shown in ﬁgure 1. The met-
astable helium atoms are produced in a water-cooled DC
discharge [16]. In the discharge helium atoms are trans-
ferred from the 1 1S0 ground state to the 2 3S1 meta-
stable state, which has a lifetime of 8000 s. The atoms
have a mean longitudinal velocity of 2000 m/s, which
corresponds to an energy of 0.08 eV. The atomic beam
is transversely cooled in two dimensions using curved-
wavefront Doppler cooling [16, 17]. The collimation of
the atomic beam reduces the transverse velocity spread
of the atoms to about 3 m/s, corresponding to a beam
divergence of 9 mrad.
In the high-power regime, the
guiding of the atoms through the standing wave is not
very sensitive to the transverse velocity of the atoms,
and calculations have shown that the divergence is suf-
ﬁciently small [14]. The collimation of the beam en-
hances the ﬂux of the atomic beam by a factor of 6
to 1.1 × 1010 atoms s−1 mm−2. The light for transverse

cooling (20 mW) is provided by a DBR (Distributed
Bragg Reﬂector) diode laser. This laser is locked to
the 2 3S1 → 2 3P2 transition of the helium atom us-
ing Doppler-free saturation spectroscopy with a lock-in
technique. The wavelength of the light corresponding to
this transition is 1083 nm. The bandwidth of the laser is
experimentally determined to be 2 MHz, which is com-
parable to the 1.6 MHz linewidth of the 2 3P2 excited
state.

The standing-wave light ﬁeld is obtained by retro-re-
ﬂecting an 800 mW light beam, provided by a ﬁber laser
(IPG, model YLD-1BC). This laser also operates at a
wavelength of 1083 nm and is 375 MHz blue detuned from
the 2 3S1 → 2 3P2 transition to reduce spontaneous emis-
sion of the atoms in the standing-wave light ﬁeld. Higher
detunings are unfavorable, because the atoms can then
also interact with the light via the 2 3S1 → 2 3P1 tran-
sition. The frequency of this transition is only 2.3 GHz
higher than the frequency of the 2 3S1 → 2 3P2 transi-
tion.

The ﬁber laser is unlocked but its frequency with re-
spect to the locked diode laser is monitored with a Fabry-
Perot interferometer, whose cavity length is scanned with
a piezoelectric transducer. The ﬁber laser has a mea-
sured short-term linewidth of 1 MHz and a good long
term stability. Only drifts on the order of 10 MHz are
visible with respect to the locked diode laser during the
exposure times. The laser beam is focused onto a retro-
reﬂecting mirror to a size (1/e2 radius) of 0.33 mm, which
translates to a saturation parameter (deﬁned as the in-
tensity of the light divided by the saturation intensity of
the atomic transition) of 107. The retro-reﬂecting mir-
ror and the sample are mechanically ﬁxed in their rela-
tive position onto the sample holder, which is made of a
solid aluminum block. For each experiment a substrate
is mounted on the sample holder in free air. The sample
holder is then introduced into the vacuum chamber via
an air-lock. The exposure dose is determined by measur-
ing the current through a ﬁxed Faraday cup due to the
metastable atoms, before and after the exposure [16].

The laser beam is clipped by the sample,

located
100 µm from the center of the laser beam, downstream
the atomic beam. Numerical calculations that take into
account the longitudinal and transverse velocity spread
of the atomic beam have shown that this is the best po-
sition for the sample [14].

For proper alignment of the standing wave, the laser
beam is ﬁrst adjusted such that it is not clipped by the
sample and thus 100% of the light is back-reﬂected by
the standing-wave mirror onto the power meter (see ﬁg-
ure 1). Next, the beam is moved by a micrometer trans-
lation stage (not indicated in ﬁgure 1) and clipped by the
sample such that only 50% of the light is back-reﬂected,
which indicates that the sample position is at the center
of the laser beam. Finally, additional ﬁne tuning is done
with the translation stage to move the laser beam to the
desired position with respect to the sample.

The samples used in the experiment are silicon sub-

Å 

 200

 100

   0

0

Å 
200

100

 0

0

3

4

8 µm

100 nm

0.2

0.4 µm

FIG. 2: AFM image of a 10 µm × 10 µm scan. The dark
lines indicate the regions where the metastable helium atoms
have hit the sample. The separation between two successive
lines is 542 nm, which is half of the wavelength used for the
standing wave.

FIG. 3: Height proﬁles of the AFM image of ﬁgure 2. The
upper ﬁgure shows the average height proﬁle of the entire
image. The lower ﬁgure shows that the average FWHM of a
single line is 100 nm.

strates covered with a 1 nm chromium layer and a 30 nm
gold layer. These samples are cleaned with pure ethanol
and with a solution of concentrated sulfuric acid (98%
pure) and hydrogen peroxide (30% pure). In the exper-
iments two diﬀerent resist layers are used: nonanethiol
[CH3(CH2)8SH] and dodecanethiol [CH3(CH2)11SH]. A
Self-Assembled Monolayer (SAM) of either of these alka-
nethiols is deposited onto the substrates by leaving the
samples overnight in a 1 mM solution of the alkanethiol
in ethanol. The SAM forms a hydrofobic resist layer that
protects the gold layer in the wet etching process.

For nonanethiol and dodecanethiol the samples are ex-
posed to the atomic beam for eight minutes and ten min-
utes respectively. This corresponds to a dose of about
one metastable atom per resist molecule. During the ex-
posure, the SAM is locally damaged and loses its hydro-
fobic character. After being exposed, the samples are
wet etched in a cyanide etching solution [7]. The etching
times for nonanethiol and dodecanethiol are also eight
and ten minutes respectively. In the etching process, the
SAM molecules that are damaged due to the impact of a
metastable helium atom are removed, as well as the gold
ﬁlm underneath these damaged molecules. Longer etch-
ing times can aﬀect areas untouched by the metastable
helium atoms [5]. The samples are ﬁnally analyzed with
an Atomic Force Microscope (AFM).

III. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION

A typical result of a sample image produced with a
standing-wave light ﬁeld is shown in ﬁgure 2. The im-

age shows a 10 µm × 10 µm scan of the substrate, taken
with an AFM. The black lines indicate the positions
where the metastable helium atoms have hit the sample
and where the gold layer is removed in the etching pro-
cess. The average distance between two successive lines
is 542 nm, which is exactly half of the wavelength of the
standing-wave light ﬁeld (1083 nm). A more quantitative
analysis of the pattern is made in ﬁgure 3. This ﬁgure
shows that the average FWHM of the lines in ﬁgure 2
is about 100 nm. The results are the same for both the
nonanethiol and dodecanethiol SAM, although the latter
requires a 25% longer exposure and etching time. The
irregular structure of the black lines is probably caused
by the graininess of the gold layer, which is also visi-
ble on AFM images of untreated samples. For samples
that are under-exposed and/or under-etched, the black
lines are broken, while samples that are over-exposed
and/or over-etched show connections between two suc-
cessive lines. The chemistry involved in the experiments
makes the reproducibility of the measurements diﬃcult.
In some cases no line structures were found on the sam-
ple although all physical parameters of the experiment
were kept identical. When a sample is visibly inspected
by eye, diﬀracted light indicates that the sample contains
well written nanostructures.

To compare the measured structures with theory,
numerical simulations using the Minogin and Serimaa
model are shown in ﬁgure 4. The input parameters of
these calculations correspond to the values used in the
experiment. Based on these calculations, a FWHM of a
single line of 40 nm is expected, which is a factor of 2.5
smaller than observed experimentally.

The discrepancy between the measured and the cal-

4

a feature size of 1/11th of the optical-mask wavelength
is observed, which is hard to realize in the focusing (low-
power) regime, due to a large sensitivity to the longitudi-
nal and transversal velocity spread in the atomic beam in
this regime, and because the sample position with respect
to the standing wave is very critical.

FIG. 4: Results of numerically calculated trajectories of
atoms traveling through the standing-wave light ﬁeld [14].
The left-hand graph shows simulated trajectories of meta-
stable helium atoms with a mean longitudinal velocity of
2000 m/s and a transverse velocity spread of 3 m/s channeling
through a standing-wave light ﬁeld with a power of 800 mW
and a detuning of 375 MHz. The dashed line indicates the
sample position at 100 µm from the center of the laser beam,
downstream the atomic beam. The right-hand graph shows
a histogram of the atom distribution on the sample. The
FWHM of the distribution taken at the sample position is
40 nm.

culated width is attributed to both the graininess of
the gold layer and the wet-etching process, which is an
isotropic process that also removes the gold layer from
inside a line structure during etching. This conclusion
is in agreement with experiments performed with a me-
chanical mask, shown in ﬁgure 5. In these measurements
a grid of 1000 mesh (1000 lines per inch) is used instead
of an optical mask. From analysis with the AFM a 40◦
inclination in the gold layer is found, in agreement with
an earlier observation [7]. The AFM tip has a cone angle
of 10◦ and does therefore not limit the measured angle.
The 40◦ side wall inclination translates to a step-edge
of 40 nm and increases the expected FWHM linewidth
of a single line with 40 nm. Nanolithography with a wet-
etching technique incorporating a SAM as a resist layer
therefore seems to be limited to structure sizes larger
than 50 nm.

Comparing metastable helium nanolithography in the
high-power optical mask regime with results employing
other elements shows some clear advantages. First, the
high internal energy of metastable helium atoms allows a
relatively short exposure time of eight minutes. Second,
no pedestal due to non-focused atoms is visible. Third,
the high power available nowadays from ﬁber lasers al-
lows an extremely large saturation parameter (107) and
deep penetration in the channeling regime. In this regime

FIG. 5: Results of atom lithography with a 1000 lines/inch
mechanical mask. The upper ﬁgure shows an optical micro-
scope image (top view) of a sample and the AFM tip (pointing
into the paper). The lower image is an AFM scan of one bar
of the grid structure. Note the scale diﬀerence between the
horizontal and vertical axes. The side wall inclination turns
◦
, corresponding to a step-edge of 40 nm.
out to be about 40

Acknowledgments

The authors thank K.A.H. van Leeuwen for fruitful
discussions. Financial support from the Foundation for
Fundamental Research on Matter (FOM) is gratefully
acknowledged.

[1] D. Meschede and H. Metcalf, J. Phys. D 36, R17 (2003).
[2] G. Timp, R. E. Behringer, D. M. Tennant, J. E. Cun-
ningham, M. Prentiss, and K. K. Berggren, Phys. Rev.

Lett. 69, 1636 (1992).

[3] J. J. McClelland, R. E. Scholten, E. C. Palm, and R. J.

Celotta, Science 262, 877 (1993).

5

[4] R. W. McGowan, D. M. Giltner, and S. A. Lee, Opt.

ence 280, 1583 (1998).

Lett. 20, 2535 (1995).

[11] P. Engels, S. Salewski, H. Levsen, K. Sengstock, and

[5] Y. Xia, X.-M. Zhao, E. Kim, and G. M. Whitesides,

W. Ertmer, Appl. Phys. B 69, 407 (1999).

Chem. Mater. 7, 2332 (1995).

[6] K. K. Berggren, A. Bard, J. L. Wilbur, J. D. Gillaspy,
A. G. Helg, J. J. McClelland, S. L. Rolston, W. D.
Phillips, M. Prentiss, and G. M. Whitesides, Science 269,
1255 (1995).

[7] S. Nowak, T. Pfau, and J. Mlynek, Appl. Phys. B 63,

203 (1996).

[8] W. Lu, K. G. H. Baldwin, M. D. Hoogerland, S. J. Buck-
man, T. J. Senden, T. E. Sheridan, and R. W. Boswell,
J. Vac. Sci. & Tech. B 16, 3846 (1998).

[12] A. Ashkin, Phys. Rev. Lett. 40, 729 (1978).
[13] V. G. Minogin and O. T. Serimaa, Opt. Commun. 30,

373 (1979).

[14] S. J. H. Petra, K. A. H. van Leeuwen, L. Feenstra,
W. Hogervorst, and W. Vassen, Eur. Phys. J. D (2003),
online version 10.1140/epjd/e2003-00229-y.

[15] W. R. Anderson, C. C. Bradley, J. J. McClelland, and

R. J. Celotta, Phys. Rev. A 59, 2476 (1999).

[16] W. Rooijakkers, W. Hogervorst, and W. Vassen, Opt.

Commun. 123, 321 (1996).

[9] F. Lison, H.-J. Adams, D. Haubrich, M. Kreis, S. Nowak,

[17] A. Aspect, N. Vansteenkiste, R. Kaiser, H. Haberland,

and D. Meschede, Appl. Phys. B 65, 419 (1997).

and M. Karrais, Chem. Phys. 145, 307 (1990).

[10] K. S. Johnson, J. H. Thywissen, N. H. Dekker, K. K.
Berggren, A. P. Chu, R. Younkin, and M. Prentiss, Sci-

