Sub-Doppler spectroscopy of Rb atoms in a sub-micron vapor cell

in the presence of a magnetic ﬁeld

David Sarkisyan, Aram Papoyan, Tigran Varzhapetyan

Institute for Physical Research, NAS of Armenia, Ashtarak-2 378410 Armenia

Janis Alnis, Kaspars Blush, Marcis Auzinsh

Department of Physics, University of Latvia,

19 Rainis blvd, Riga, LV-1585, Latvia

(Dated: February 2, 2008)

Abstract

We report the ﬁrst use of an extremely thin vapor cell (thickness ∼ 400 nm) to study the

magnetic-ﬁeld dependence of laser-induced-ﬂuorescence excitation spectra of alkali atoms. This

thin cell allows for sub-Doppler resolution without the complexity of atomic beam or laser cooling

techniques. This technique is used to study the laser-induced-ﬂuorescence excitation spectra

of Rb in a 50 G magnetic ﬁeld. At this ﬁeld strength the electronic angular momentum J

and nuclear angular momentum I are only partially decoupled. As a result of the mixing of

wavefunctions of diﬀerent hyperﬁne states, we observe a nonlinear Zeeman eﬀect for each sublevel,

a substantial modiﬁcation of the transition probabilities between diﬀerent magnetic sublevels, and

the appearance of transitions that are strictly forbidden in the absence of the magnetic ﬁeld.

For the case of right- and left- handed circularly polarized laser excitation, the ﬂuorescence spectra

diﬀers qualitatively. Well pronounced magnetic ﬁeld induced circular dichroism is observed. These

observations are explained with a standard approach that describes the partial decoupling of I and

J states.

3
0
0
2
 
g
u
A
 
4
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
m
o
t
a
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
4
5
0
8
0
3
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

1

I.

INTRODUCTION

Sub-Doppler probes of atoms and molecules in a thermal gas cell is a well-established

subﬁeld of laser spectroscopy. In particular, velocity-selective techniques such as saturated

absorption spectroscopy, polarization spectroscopy, Doppler-free two photon spectroscopy

[1, 2], coherent dark state spectroscopy [3] and other techniques can provide linewidths

orders of magnitude smaller than the Doppler width.

During the past several years a fundamentally diﬀerent approach has been developed.

This new method is based on the spectroscopy of a diluted atomic vapor in an extremely

thin cell.

In most of these studies thermal Cs atoms are conﬁned to cells of thickness of

10 µm to 1000 µm. The Cs atoms that are moving parallel to the cell walls are laser

excited and ﬂuoresce in much the same way as atoms in a normal vapor cell. Atoms moving

perpendicularly to the closely-spaced cell walls are likely to suﬀer collisions with the wall

before they absorb and ﬂuoresce and therefore do not make a signiﬁcant contribution to the

laser-induced ﬂuorescence signal. Thus the spectra obtained is that of atoms that show

no ﬁrst-order Doppler shift. This approach allows for a relatively simple experimental

apparatus to provide sub-Doppler resolution [4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10].

It was demonstrated a long time ago in microwave spectroscopy [11], and recently in

the optical domain [12, 13, 14, 15], that the optimal cell thickness L for atomic line shape

narrowing is approximately λ/2 where λ is the wavelength of spectral features to be observed.

This fact stimulated us (D.S. and A.P.) to develop an extremely thin gas cell of thickness

of 100 − 300 nm. As far as we know this is an absolute record. The cell used in the

present investigation is at least one order of magnitude thinner than all other cells used

in this manner and has allowed for the ﬁrst optical measurement of atoms in a cell which

satisﬁes the condition L ≈ λ/2. These conditions allowed recently to resolve all hyperﬁne

transitions of the D2 line of Cs atoms. In addition to the Cs study, a naturally occurring

isotopic mixture of Rb atoms was introduced to the thin cell. For this case, 85Rb and 87Rb

hyperﬁne transitions were well resolved in the ﬁrst D1 line ﬂuorescence spectrum [16].

In

addition to removing Doppler broadening, thin cells provide a second advantage that is not

evident in other types of spectroscopy:

In an ordinary vapor cell it is extremely easy to

reach laser intensities that change the atomic ground state magnetic sublevel population

(optical pumping) and to saturate transitions. In ordinary cells optical pumping of atomic

2

states typically occurs at laser radiation intensities of 10 − 1000 nW/cm2 complicating the

experimental determination of relative absorption strengths and/or atomic populations.

In

a thin cell, however, the population of atoms that do not move parallel to the cell walls

constantly replenish depleted ground-state population, leading to linear laser absorption at

laser intensities up to at least, 50 mW/cm2 [16].

In the present paper we demonstrate that a sub-micron cell not only allows for sub-

Doppler atomic spectroscopy, but more sophisticated studies of linear magneto-optical eﬀects

as well. Speciﬁcally, we use sub-micron cells ﬁlled with 85Rb and 87Rb to explore circu-

lar dichroism induced by an external magnetic ﬁeld. The eﬀect of magnetic ﬁeld-induced

circular dichroism is important for a variety of reasons. For some time there have been

attempts to use polarization plane rotation of a laser beam by an atomic or molecular gas

to test of CP parity violation caused by interference between the neutral weak and electro-

magnetic interactions that couple a valence electron to the nucleus [17, 18, 19, 20]. Alkali

atoms including Cs are considered as a perspective objects for such CP parity violation mea-

surements. Simple linear magneto optical eﬀects caused by stray magnetic ﬁelds in general

and magnetic ﬁeld induced circular dichroism in particular can mimic the eﬀect of rotation

of the laser beam polarization plane by parity-violating neutral currents.

It is therefore

essential that the less exotic linear magneto-optical eﬀect be completely understood.

In

a more practical application, magnetic ﬁeld induced circular dichroism in alkali atoms has

been successfully applied for a diode laser frequency stabilization based on diﬀerence of the

absorption of right-hand and left-hand circular polarized radiation in atomic vapor placed

in the constant magnetic ﬁeld [21, 22]. This technique was applied to diode lasers in the

work of the Joint Institute for Laboratory Astrophysics (JILA) group [23] who coined for

this stabilization method the term dichroic atomic vapor laser lock (DAVLL).

In general circular dichroism studies in alkali metal vapors have a long history. The

ﬁrst detailed study of magneto optical rotational eﬀects for closely lying hyperﬁne levels

were performed in connection with the non-conservation of CP parity in bismuth [24, 25].

The work of G.J. Roberts et al is a combined theoretical and experimental investigation

of magneto-optical eﬀects on Doppler broadened transitions [25]. The primary focus of

this work is Faraday rotation but the closely related phenomenon of magnetic ﬁeld induced

circular dichroism is discussed as well. The shift of the energy of magnetic sublevels in

the magnetic ﬁeld is considered and hyperﬁne level mixing caused by the ﬁeld is taken into

3

account as well. Doppler broadened optical rotation spectra and, in one experiment, circular

dichroism spectra are observed. Typical features of the spectra have widths of the order of

GHz.

In a more recent paper [26], Doppler broadened magneto-optical rotation spectra

in a room-temperature Cs vapor in a magnetic ﬁeld of the order of 45 G, are presented,

along with a corresponding theoretical treatment. An interesting result of the theoretical

treatment is the fact that even at this relatively weak magnetic ﬁeld, the perturbation of

the wave function plays an essential role in the Zeeman energy level shift. In a study carried

out in Quebec [27] both isotopes of rubidium 85Rb and 87Rb as well as Cs atoms are used to

study absorption spectra of atoms in presence of a magnetic ﬁeld. In this study relatively

strong magnetic ﬁeld strengths of 790, 1440 and 2300 G are applied to the gas cell.

It

is shown that a magnetic ﬁeld strength exceeding 1000 G is required to observe magnetic

structure in the Doppler broadened absorption spectra. At this high ﬁeld values hyperﬁne

coupling is broken and nuclear and electronic moments in atom are decouple. Studies of

linear magneto-optical methods can be carried out also by non-direct methods like selective

reﬂection spectroscopy [28, 29] but will not be discussed in this work.

In present paper we demonstrate that extremely thin gas cells can be used successfully to

study with sub-Doppler resolution magnetic ﬁeld induced circular dichroism in atoms. We

are not aware of any previous experimental study of magnetic ﬁeld induced circular dichroism

that employes a sub-Doppler technique, although a theoretical study of magneto-optical

eﬀects on atoms in a thin cell has been carried out previously [13]. Here we observe magnetic

ﬁeld induced circular dichroism. We measure the total ﬂuorescence intensity as dependent on

the scanned diode laser frequency (leser-induced-ﬂuorescence excitation spectra) for both Rb

isotopes. Excitation with circularly polarized as well as linearly polarized radiation is used.

It is demonstrated that the laser-induced ﬂuorescence excitation spectra is qualitatively

very diﬀerent for left and right circularly polarized radiation. In contrast, the corresponding

Doppler broadened spectra changes only slightly as the light helicity changes and this change

may be explained with a simple model that ignores the rich physics observed in the sub-

Doppler spectra.

The paper is organized as follows. In Section II the experimental procedure and obtained

results are presented for the two naturally occurring Rb isotopes. Section III compares the

observed spectra with model calculations. In Section IV results are discussed, and in Section

V conclusions are drawn.

4

II. EXPERIMENTAL

The design of the ETC is presented in Fig. 1. It is a new modiﬁcation of sapphire cells

developed earlier (see [16] and references therein). The windows of 30 mm diameter and 3

mm thickness are made from very well-polished garnet (YAG) crystal, which is resistant to

highly corrosive alkaline vapors. The roughness of the inner surfaces of the YAG windows

is < λ/10. In order to realize a wedged gap between the YAG windows, a 1 mm-wide and

10-mm-long Al2O3 strip coating of ≈ 600 nm thickness has been deposited on the surface of

one of the YAG windows, near the lower edge. The sapphire side arm with a molybdenum

glass termination is used for ﬁlling the cell with Rb in the same way as for all-glass cells. To

attach the side arm, a hole is drilled at the bottom of the YAG windows. Before ﬁlling the

ETC with natural mixture of rubidium atoms (72.15% of 85Rb with nuclear spin I = 5/2

and 27.85% of 87Rb with nuclear spin I = 3/2), the cell was carefully out-gassed.

The wedged gap between the windows allows us to exploit a ∼ λ/2 thickness of a vapor

layer that is important for having the narrowest sub-Doppler line width [14]. An interfer-

ometric mapping of the gap thickness is performed using He-Ne laser. This measurement

shows that the thickness of the gap varies in the range of 100 nm - 600 nm. A ∼ 400 nm

thickness region of the cell aperture (≈ λ/2) has been explored in present experiment.

The upper temperature limit for the ETC is ∼ 400 ◦C. The ETC operated with a specially

designed oven, which has four openings; two for the laser beam transmission and two that

allow for ﬂuorescence to be detected simultaneously from two diﬀerent directions. The

density of the Rb atomic vapor is determined by the temperature of the boundary of Rb

metal column inside the side arm (Fig 1). The typical value of metal boundary (side arm)
temperature is kept at 120 ◦C throughout the measurements, while the window temperature
is set to somewhat higher value (140 ◦C) to prevent Rb condensation. The corresponding
number density of Rb atoms is NRb ≈ 2 × 1013 cm−3, and the collisional broadening is ∼ 3

MHz. The Doppler line width in an ordinary cell at this temperature regime is ≈ 600 MHz.

The ETC with Rb atoms is placed in 3 pairs of mutually perpendicular Helmholtz coils

which cancel the ambient magnetic ﬁeld and provide a homogeneous magnetic ﬁeld in an

arbitrary direction. The geometry of the experiment is depicted schematically in Fig. 5. The

collimated radiation beam of the cw laser diode (λ = 780.2 nm, 25 MHz line width, single

mode, ⊘ 3 mm.) is directed at normal incidence into the Rb-ﬁlled ∼ 400-nm-thick region of

5

the ETC. The maximum laser intensity is 50 mW/cm2. A Glan-Thomson prism is used to

purify the linear radiation polarization of the laser. To produce a circular polarization, a
λ/4 plate is utilized. A photodiode with an aperture of 1 cm2 is placed at 90◦ to the laser

propagation direction to detect the ﬂuorescence signal emerging through one of the two side

openings of the cell oven. The photodiode collects emission within ∼ 0.1 srad solid angle.

The signal of the photodiode is ampliﬁed and recorded with a storage oscilloscope. The

intensity of the ﬂuorescence emission (with no spectral and polarization resolution) from the

vapor layer excited by linearly and circularly polarized radiation is recorded versus the laser

radiation frequency. To obtain the laser-induced-ﬂuorescence excitation spectra, the laser

frequency is scanned linearly in a 9 GHz spectral region around the Rb D2 line by means of

injection current ramping.

As a result of hyperﬁne interactions, the ground state level of 85Rb is split into two

components with total angular momentum quantum numbers Fg = 2 and Fg = 3 and

the ground-state level of 87Rb is split into two components with total angular momentum

quantum numbers Fg = 1 and Fg = 2. The ground state level splitting for 85Rb and 87Rb

are approximately 3 and 7 GHz, respectively. In contrast, the four excited-state hyperﬁne

components are separated by only several hundred MHz (see Figs. 2 and 3). Since the

separation of the hyperﬁne sub-levels of the 5P3/2 state with Fe = 0−3 for 87Rb (72−157−267
MHz) and Fe = 1 − 4 for 85Rb (29 − 63 − 121 MHz) is less than the Doppler broadening (∼

600 MHz), the D2 spectrum for an ordinary Rb cell consists of only two resolved lines for

each Rb isotope: 5S1/2 (F = 1) → 5P3/2 (F = 0−2) and 5S1/2 (F = 2) → 5P3/2 (F = 1−3)
for 87Rb and 5S1/2 (F = 2) → 5P3/2 (F = 1 − 3) and 5S1/2 (F = 3) → 5P3/2 (F = 2 − 4)
for 85Rb. The total laser-induced-ﬂuorescence excitation spectra on a full D2 line scan in the

absence of the magnetic ﬁeld are presented in ﬁgure 4. The gray curve shows the Doppler

broadened spectrum in an ordinary room-temperature cm-long cell. The black curve shows

the same spectrum in an ETC. In the latter, features representing hyperﬁne levels of the

excited state can be seen clearly.

To explore magneto-optical eﬀects, we register the ﬂuorescence spectra for three diﬀerent

polarizations of laser radiation. Namely, left- and right- handed polarization for the case of
laser propagation parallel to the magnetic ﬁeld direction (σ+ and σ−) and linear polariza-

tion along the magnetic ﬁeld direction (π). Our choice of laser radiation polarization and

magnetic ﬁeld direction is determined by the fact that for each of these geometries, only one

6

well deﬁned transition type between magnetic sublevels of ground state mFg and magnetic

sublevels of excited state mFe can take place. Namely ∆m = mFe − mFg is equal to +1
for σ+ excitation, is equal to −1 for σ− excitation, and is equal to 0 for π excitation. We

record experimental laser-induced-ﬂuorescence excitation spectra of Rb atoms at a B-ﬁeld

strength of 50 G. This intermediate ﬁeld strength is chosen so that the Pashen - Back

eﬀect is important. At this interesting ﬁeld strength, the magnetic ﬁeld starts to decouple

the nuclear spin I from the electronic angular momentum J but these moments still remain

partially coupled. As a rule at this ﬁeld strength crossing take place in the magnetically

shifted hyperﬁne levels (see Figs. 2 and 3.)

In Figures 6, 7, 8, 9 scattered circles depict experimentally obtained signals for the

following transitions 85Rb, absorption Fg = 2 → Fe = 1, 2, 3, (4); 85Rb, absorption Fg =
3 → Fe = (1), 2, 3, 4; 87Rb, absorption Fg = 1 → Fe = 0, 1, 2, (3) and 87Rb, absorption

Fg = 2 → Fe = (0), 1, 2, 3. For reference in the same ﬁgures with lighter color are depicted

experimentally measured ﬂuorescence spectra in absence of the magnetic ﬁeld. We note

the observation of transitions that violate the ∆F = 0, ±1 selection rule for electric dipole

transitions. This selection rule is strictly true only for hyperﬁne levels in absence of the

magnetic ﬁeld. As the magnetic ﬁeld intensity increases from zero, the hyperﬁne levels mix

and transitions that are forbidden in absence of the ﬁeld start to be allowed. The excited-

state quantum number for transitions that are not allowed in the absence of a magnetic ﬁeld

are written in parenthesis.

From the ﬁgures presented it is clearly seen that laser-induced-ﬂuorescence excitation

spectrum for left and right-handed excitation are qualitatively diﬀerent. From simple sym-

metry considerations, these spectra must coincide in absence of the magnetic ﬁeld. In pres-

ence of the ﬁeld helicity of the laser polarization with respect to the ﬁeld direction starts to

play a very important role and these spectra are very diﬀerent for all transitions presented.

In agreement with nearly linear ﬂuorescence intensity dependence when the intensity of the

diode laser is increased, reported in [16], also in case of Rb the shape of ﬂuorescence spec-

trum does not noticeably depend on laser radiation intensity, at least in the range of IL =
1 − 50 mW/cm2. All the spectra presented in graphs were recorded with IL = 50 mW/cm2.

It is interesting to compare these spectra for case of ordinary cells when only Doppler

broadened spectra can be recorded. In ﬁgure 10 absorption spectra obtained at room tem-

perature in an ordinary call containing pure isotopes of Rb atoms. In one case 85Rb and

7

in other case 87Rb. Unfortunately, for technical reasons only the absorption and not the

laser-induced-ﬂuorescence excitation spectra were taken. Nevertheless, in these cells absorp-

tion and laser-induced-ﬂuorescence excitation spectra should be very similar. We see that

in these Doppler broadened spectra, both isotopes lead to spectra that are qualitatively

similar for both circularities of laser radiation. Each isotope leads to only one peak for

absorption from each of ground state hyperﬁne levels. This peak is shifted for two excita-

tion light polarizations on a frequency scale. This peak shifting is the phenomena that the

diode-laser-stabilization schemes [21, 22, 23] mentioned in the introduction exploit.

As we can see from Figs.6, 7, 8, 9, the transitions between individual magnetic sublevels

mF g → mF e of the same hyperﬁne transition Fg → Fe are not resolved in the conditions of

present experiment. Indeed, in the case of complete resolution, one would expect to up to

9 transitions between diﬀerent magnetic sublevels in case of circularly polarized excitation

for Fi = 1 → Fe = 0, 1, 2, (3) (cases (b) and (c) Fig. 8) and up to 22 magnetic transitions

for case of linearly polarized excitation for Fi = 3 → Fe = (1), 2, 3, 4 (case (a) Fig. 7). The

results of this experiment can be rather interpreted as B-ﬁeld dependent frequency shift

and variation of probabilities of the |Fg, mgi → |Fe, mei hyperﬁne transitions. In the present

experiment an essential limitation for the resolution comes from the width of excitation laser

line which was equal to 25 MHz. This allows to hope that in future resolution of sub-Doppler

spectroscopy in ETC can be increased and can be close to the homogeneous line width of

atomic transitions.

III. LASER-INDUCED-FLUORESCENCE EXCITATION SPECTRA IN A MAG-

NETIC FIELD. SIGNAL SIMULATION

As we see from the observed signals, there exists a well pronounced structure in laser-

induced-ﬂuorescence excitation spectra. This structure changes when the magnetic ﬁeld

is applied.

It can not be observed in Doppler broadened spectra. Similar structure was

observed earlier by [27] but only in an extremely strong magnetic ﬁeld with strength of

the order of 1000 G and stronger. At this ﬁeld strength electronic angular momentum J

of an alkali atom is decoupled from the nuclei spin angular momentum I and both angular

momenta interact with external ﬁeld practically independently. In present study, J and I

are only partially decoupled, and we can observe Pashen – Back eﬀect.

8

To simulate ﬂuorescence spectra of Rb atoms in a magnetic ﬁeld of intermediate strength

we will use the following model. We will assume that laser radiation is weak and absorption

rate Γp is small in comparison with the relaxation rates in ground and excited states, denoted

by γ and Γ respectively; Γp < γ, Γ. This assumption is well justiﬁed by the observation that

laser-induced-ﬂuorescence excitation spectrum is independent of the laser intensity.

The Hamilton operator of the atom in a magnetic ﬁeld can be written as

H =
b

H0 +
b

HHF S − µJ ·B − µI·B.
b

where

spin,

H0 is a Hamiltonian operator of unperturbed atom without taking into account nuclei
b

HHF S represents hyperﬁne interaction. The remaining two terms represent interaction
b

of the electronic magnetic moment µJ of atom and the nucleus magnetic moment µI with

the external magnetic ﬁeld B. These magnetic moments are connected with the respective

electronic and spin angular moments J and I of the atom

(1)

(2)

µJ = −

gJµB

~ J,

µI= −

gIµ0
~ I,

where µB and µ0 are the Bohr and nuclear magnetons respectively and gJ , gI are electrotonic

and nuclear Lande factors. The action of the magnetic ﬁeld on the atom has two closely

related eﬀects. First, magnetic sublevels of the hyperﬁne levels are mixed by the magnetic

ﬁeld:

Fe=Je+I

X
Fe=Je−I

|γkmi =

C (e)

kFe(B, m) |Fe, mi ,

|ηjµi =

C (g)

jFg(B, µ) |Fg, µi ,

(3)

Fg=Jg+I

X
Fg=Jg−I

where C (e)

kFe(B, m) and C (g)

jFg(B, µ) are mixing coeﬃcients that depend on the ﬁeld strength
and magnetic quantum number m or µ. The second eﬀect is deviation of the Zeeman

magnetic sublevel splitting in the magnetic ﬁeld for each hyperﬁne level from the linear one.

It means that the additional energy of the magnetic sublevel obtained in the magnetic ﬁeld

is not any more linearly proportional to the ﬁeld strength. New atomic states |γkmi and

|ηjµi in the magnetic ﬁeld in a general case are a linear combination of all initial hyperﬁne

levels (4 in case of Rb atoms in the 5P3/2 state and 2 in case of Rb atom in the 5S1/2 state).

As it is seen from Eq. (3), in the magnetic ﬁeld hyperﬁne angular momentum quantum

number F ceases to be a good quantum number, but magnetic quantum numbers m and µ

are still good quantum numbers. This reﬂects the symmetry of the perturbation imposed by

9

the magnetic ﬁeld and means that only hyperﬁne sublevels with the same magnetic quantum

numbers are mixed by the magnetic ﬁeld.

The mixing coeﬃcients C (e)

jFg(B, µ) of the hyperﬁne states in the magnetic
ﬁeld and energies of these levels in the ﬁeld γk Em, ηj Eµ can be found as eigenvectors and

kFe(B, m) and C (g)

eigenvalues of the Hamilton matrix (1). In Figures 2 and 3 the energy levels obtained by

the Hamilton matrix diagonalization for two Rb atom isotopes in the excited 5P3/2 state in

the magnetic ﬁeld are presented.

For Rb atoms in the ground state hyperﬁne level splitting is larger than in an excited

state.

It is around 3 or 7 GHz for two 85Rb and 87Rb isotopes respectively, see Fig. 4,

which in both cases is large in comparison to the magnetic sublevel energies obtained in the

magnetic ﬁeld of 50 G. As a result ground state energy levels in the magnetic ﬁeld can, to

a very good level of approximation, be represented by the linear Zeeman eﬀect. Namely,
ηj Eµ = gηj µBBµ/~, where gηj is the Lande factor of the respective hyperﬁne level. For very
weakly mixed levels it still can be represented with the hyperﬁne quantum number Fg. For
85Rb atoms in 5S1/2 state we have gηj = −1/3 for Fg = 2 and gηj = 1/3 for Fg = 3, and
for 87Rb in 5S1/2 state we have gηj = −1/2 for Fg = 1 and gηj = 1/2 for Fg = 2. In case of

mixing of only two hyperﬁne levels the Breit-Rabi formula can be used to ﬁnd both mixing

coeﬃcients and level energies (see for example [35, 36].)

In the magnetic ﬁeld excited state density matrix created by the laser light can be written

as (see for example [37].)

klfmm′ =

Γp
e

Γ + ikl∆ωmm′ X

jµ

hγkm|

exc·

E∗
b

D |ηjµi hγlm′|
b

E∗
b

exc·

∗
D |ηjµi
b

.

(4)

and kl∆ωmm′ = (γkEm −γl Em′)/~ is the energy splitting of the magnetic sublevels m and
m′ belonging to the excited state levels k and l. Magnetic quantum numbers of the ground

state level ηj are denoted by µ and magnetic quantum numbers of the excited state level γk,l
by m and m′. In this last expression it is assumed that two magnetic sublevels of the excited

state, that initially belonged to two diﬀerent hyperﬁne levels at some speciﬁc magnetic ﬁeld

strength, can have the same energy and can be excited simultaneously and coherently. It

means nonzero ﬁeld level crossing signals [37] in general can be included in this model. At

the same time for practical calculations performed in this work this is not important, as

far as laser radiation used to excite atoms in this work is chosen in such a way that it can

10

be represented only by one component in a cyclic system of coordinates and is not able to

create coherence between magnetic sublevels of the atom.

In our particular simulation we assume that when we scan laser frequency only those

transitions that are in an exact resonance with the laser ﬁeld are excited. So at each laser

frequency a speciﬁc density matrix is calculated. This density matrix is of course dependent

on the magnetic ﬁeld strength that determines magnetic sublevel splitting and wave function

mixing. The intensity of the ﬂuorescence with a speciﬁc polarization Eobs in a transition

between excited γk and ﬁnal ηj state in the magnetic ﬁeld can be calculated according to

[37]

I (Ef ) = I0 X
mm′µ

X
klj

hγkm|

obs·

E∗
b

D |ηjµi hγlm′|
b

E∗
b

obs·

D |ηjµi
b

∗kl fmm′.

(5)

The ﬁnal state of the transition may or may not coincide with the atomic hyperﬁne ground

state level from which the absorption started. When in expressions for excited state density

matrix elements (Eq (4)) and ﬂuorescence intensity (Eq (5)) ground |γkmi and excited state

|ηjµi wave function expansion over the atomic wave functions in absence of magnetic ﬁeld is

used, see Eq. (3) matrix elements of the type hFem|

exc·

E∗
b

d |Fgµi appear. Standard methods
b

of angular momentum theory can be used to calculate these matrix elements, see for example

[31, 32, 33, 34].

IV. ANALYSIS

For laser-induced-ﬂuorescence excitation spectra simulation in a magnetic ﬁeld we use the

following procedure. From the magnetic sublevel energy spectra obtained from the Hamilton

matrix diagonalization we calculate absorption line positions in a magnetic ﬁeld. Then we

calculate absorption line strengths for these transitions taking into account level mixing,

the speciﬁc laser radiation polarization, and the magnetic ﬁeld value. Then we assume

that the predominant factor in the formation of the absorption line shape is homogeneous

broadening.

In the general case the proﬁle is a Voigt contour which is a convolution of

homogeneous (Lorentzian) and inhomogeneous (Gaussian) line shapes [38]. Our assumption

that inhomogeneous broadening is substantially reduced in a sum-micron cell allows us to

employ a Lorentzian absorption proﬁle. From the energy levels, intensities, and line proﬁles,

we are able to create spectra of expected ﬂuorescence intensity in the absence of spectral

11

and polarization discrimination, but with speciﬁc emission directions.

It means that in

this way we are simulating laser-induced-ﬂuorescence excitation spectra for our excitation –

observation conditions.

In Figures 6, 7, 8, 9 calculated intensities of ﬂuorescence are shown as vertical bars of

heights that represent the intensity of ﬂuorescence at a speciﬁc laser excitation frequency.

Solid lines in ﬁgures show laser-induced-ﬂuorescence excitation spectra that takes into ac-

count the linewidth of each absorption line as described above. To get the best coincidence

between measured and calculated spectra the homogeneous linewidth of each absorption

component was assumed to be equal to 45 MHz. This is several times the natural linewidth

of the resonant transition of unperturbed Rb atom. The radiation width of the absorption

components in D2 line are expected to be approximately ∆νD2 = 1/(2πτ ) ≈ 6 MHz [30],

where τ ≈ 26 ns is lifetime of Rb in 5P3/2 state. Partially this absorption line broadening

is due to the fact that we have a broad laser line – 25 MHz. The rest of the broadening of

the absorption line most probably can be attributed to the atomic collisions within the cell

walls.

V. CONCLUSIONS

For the ﬁrst time it was demonstrated that ETC can be successfully used to study spectra

with sub-Doppler resolution of alkali atoms in a magnetic ﬁeld. In particular, for rather weak

magnetic ﬁeld of 50 G when nucleus spin angular momentum I and electronic angular mo-

mentum J are only partially decoupled, we registered changes in laser-induced-ﬂuorescence

excitation spectrum with sub-Doppler resolution of Rb atoms when diﬀerent polarizations

of excitation laser are used. It was demonstrated that spectra when right- and left-hand

circularly polarized excitation is used diﬀer very strongly and these diﬀerences are not only

quantitative, but also qualitative. A strong magnetic ﬁeld induced circular dichroism in

this experiment is clearly observed. Appearance of this circular dichroism may be explained

in a standard approach which describes how partial decoupling of I and J mixes together

magnetic sublevels of diﬀerent hyperﬁne states of alkali atoms. As a result we have a non-

linear Zeeman eﬀect for each magnetic sublevel. A second consequence of this mixing of

wave functions of diﬀerent hyperﬁne states is a substantial modiﬁcation of transition prob-

abilities between diﬀerent magnetic sublevels, including the fact that transitions that are

12

strictly forbidden in absence of the magnetic ﬁeld start to be allowed. The importance

of these changes of transition probabilities even for the case of a rather weak magnetic

ﬁeld illustrates that thin cells can show a sensitivity to physical processes not accessible to

conventional spectroscopy.

VI. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

The authors are very thankful to Prof. Neil Shafer-Ray for fruitful discussions. The

authors are grateful to A. Sarkisyan for his valuable participation in fabrication of the ETC.

This work was supported, in part, by ANSEF Grant # PS 18-01 and Armenian Republic

Grants # 1351, 1323.

[1] A.L. Schawlow, Rev. Mod. Phys. 54(3) (1982) 697

[2] V. S. Letokhov, V.P. Chebotayev, Nonlinear Laser Spectroscopy, Springer Series in Optical

Sciences, Vol. 4, Springer, Berlin, 1977

[3] R. Wynands, A. Nagel, Appl. Phys. B 68 (1999) 1

[4] D.S. Glassner, B. Ai, R.J. Knize, Opt. Lett. 19 (1994) 2071

[5] B. Ai, D.S. Glassner, R.J. Knize, J.P. Partanen, Appl. Phys. Lett. 64(8) (1994) 951

[6] S. Briaudeau, D. Bloch, M. Ducloy, Europhys. Lett. 35(5) (1996) 337

[7] S. Briaudeau, S. Saltiel, G. Nienhuis, D. Bloch, M. Ducloy, Phys. Rev. A 57 (1998) R3169

[8] S. Briaudeau, D. Bloch, M. Ducloy, Phys. Rev. A 59 (1999) 3723

[9] S. Briaudeau, S. Saltiel, J.R.R. Leite, M. Oria, A. Bramati, A. Weis, D. Bloch, M. Ducloy, J.

Phys. IV France 10 (2000) Pr8-145

[10] A. Izmailov, Laser Phys. 3 (1993) 507

[11] R.H. Romer, R.H. Dicke, Phys. Rev. 99 (1955) 532

[12] T.A. Vartanyan, D.L. Lin, Phys. Rev. A 38 (1995) 5197

[13] B. Zambon, G. Nienhuis, Opt. Commun. 143 (1997) 308

Digest, p. 333, Moscow, Russia, 2002

[15] G. Dutier, S. Saltiel, D. Bloch, M. Ducloy, to be published

13

[14] A. Yarovitski, G. Dutier, S. Saltiel et al. , Int. Quant. Electr. Conf. IQEC/2002, Technical

[16] D. Sarkisyan, D. Bloch, A. Papoyan, M. Ducloy, Opt. Commun. 200 (2001), 201

[17] I.B. Khriplovich, S.K. Lamoreaux, CP Violation Withour Strangeness, Electric Dipole Mo-

ments of Particles, Atoms, and Molecules, Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, Barcelona,

Budapest, Hong Kong, London, Milan, Paris, Santa Clara, Singapore, Tokyo (1997) 230

[18] E.D. Commins, Physica Scripta 46 (1993) 92

[19] M.A. Bouchiat, C. Bouchiat, Rep. Progr. Phys. 60 (1997) 1351

[20] J. Guena, D. Chauvat, Ph. Jacquier, E. Jahier, M. Lintz, S. Sanguinetti, A. Wasan, M.A.

Bouchiat, A.V. Papoyan, D. Sarkisyan, Phys. Rev. Lett., 90 (2003), 143001

[21] V.V. Yashchuk, D. Budker, J.R. Davis, Rev. Sci. Instrum. 71(2) (2000) 341

[22] M.A. Cliﬀord, G.P.T. Lancaster, R.S. Conroy, K. Dholakia, J. Mod. Opt. 47(11) (2000) 1933

[23] K.L. Corwin, Z.T. Lu, C.F. Hand, R.J. Epstein, C.E. Wieman, Appl. Opt. 37(15) (1998) 3295

[24] V.N. Novikov, O.P. Sushkov, I.B. Khriplovich, Opt. Spectrosc. 42 (1977) 370; Opt. Spectrosc.

45 (1978) 236

[25] G.J. Roberts, P.E.G. Baird, M.W.S. Brimicombe, P.G.H. Sandars, D.R. Selby, D.N. Stacey,

J. Phys. B: Atom. Molec. Phys. 13 (1980) 1389

[26] X. Chen, V.L. Telegdi, A. Weis, J. Phys. B: Atom. Molec. Phys. 20 (1987) 5653

[27] P. Tremblay, A. Michaud, M. Levesque, S. Theriault, M. Breton, J. Beaubien, N. Cyr, Phys.

Rev. A 42(5) (1990) 2766

[28] A. Weis, V.A. Sautenkov, T.W. Hansch, J. Phys. II France 3 (1993) 263

[29] N. Papageorgiou, A. Weis, V.A. Sautenkov, D. Bloch, M. Ducloy, Appl. Phys. B 59 (1994)

123

bridge (1995)

[30] C.E. Theodosiou, Phys. Rev. A 30 (1984) 2881

[31] M. Auzinsh, R. Ferber, Optical Polarization of Molecules, Cambridge University Press, Cam-

[32] R.N. Zare, Angular Momentum, J. Wiley and Sons, New York (1988)

[33] D.A. Varshalovich, A.N. Moskalev, V.K. Khersonskii, Quantum Theory of Angular Momen-

tum, World Scientiﬁc, Singapore (1988)

[34] I.I. Sobelman, Atomic Spectra and Radiative Transitions, Springer Verlag, Berlin (1979)

[35] E.B. Aleksandrov, M.P. Chaika, G.I. Khvostenko, Interference of Atomic States, Springer

Verlag, New York, (1993)

[36] S. Svanberg, Atomic and Molecular Spectroscopy: Basic Aspects and Prectical Applications,

14

Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg (1992)

[37] J. Alnis, M. Auzinsh, Phys. Rev. A 63 (2001) 023407

[38] W. Demtroder, Laser spectroscopy: Basic Concepts and Instrumentation, Springer, Berlin,

Heidelberg, New York, Hong Kong, London, Milan, Paris, Tokyo (2002)

VII. CAPTIONS TO THE FIGURES

FIG. 1: The design of the ETC. 1 – the windows of the ETC, made from a garnet (YAG) crystal,

the thickness is 3 mm, diameter is 30 mm. The ﬂatness of the both inner surfaces of the YAG

windows is less than λ/10; 2 – ∼ 600 nm-thick Al2O3 coating in the shape of a 1 mm-wide and 10

mm-long strip; 3 – the glue; 4 – the sapphire side arm with a ”molybdenum glass” termination; 5

– column of Rb metal.

FIG. 2: Excited-state hyperﬁne magnetic sublevel splitting for intermediate strength of a magnetic

ﬁeld for 85Rb isotope

FIG. 3: Excited-state hyperﬁne magnetic sublevel splitting for intermediate strength of a magnetic

ﬁeld for 87Rb isotope.

15

FIG. 4: Doppler broadened ﬂuorescence spectra (light line) obtained in an ordinary cell and sub-

Doppler spectra obtained in ETC on D2 line of both Rb isotopes in absence of the magnetic ﬁeld.

FIG. 5: Geometrical conﬁguration of the experiment. Magnetic ﬁeld is applied along z or x axis.

FIG. 6: Experimental (scatter circle) and simulated (dark line) ﬂuorescence spectra of 85Rb isotope

on transitions Fg = 2 → Fe = 1, 2, 3, (4). (a) linearly polarized π excitation, (b) circularly polarized
σ− excitation, (c) circularly polarized σ+ excitation. With light line respective ﬂuorescence spectra

in absence of the magnetic ﬁeld is shown.

FIG. 7: Experimental (scatter circle) and simulated (dark line) ﬂuorescence spectra of 85Rb isotope

on transitions Fg = 3 → Fe = (1), 2, 3, 4. (a) linearly polarized π excitation, (b) circularly polarized
σ− excitation, (c) circularly polarized σ+ excitation. With light line respective ﬂuorescence spectra

in absence of the magnetic ﬁeld is shown.

16

FIG. 8: Experimental (scatter circle) and simulated (dark line) ﬂuorescence spectra of 87Rb isotope

on transitions Fg = 1 → Fe = 0, 1, 2, (3). (a) linearly polarized π excitation, (b) circularly polarized
σ− excitation, (c) circularly polarized σ+ excitation. With light line respective ﬂuorescence spectra

in absence of the magnetic ﬁeld is shown.

FIG. 9: Experimental (scatter circle) and simulated (dark line) ﬂuorescence spectra of 87Rb isotope

on transitions Fg = 2 → Fe = 1, 2, 3, (4). (a) linearly polarized π excitation, (b) circularly polarized
σ− excitation, (c) circularly polarized σ+ excitation. With light line respective ﬂuorescence spectra

in absence of the magnetic ﬁeld is shown.

FIG. 10: Absorption spectra in an ordinary optical cell for (a) 85Rb and (b) 87Rb. Peak 1 is
absorption for σ− or σ+ radiation in absence of the magnetic ﬁeld. Peak 2 corresponds to the
absorption of σ− radiation in a magnetic ﬁeld and peak 3 to the absorption of σ+ radiation.

17

L=100 -600 nm

1

4

3

2

3

5

Fig. 1

