Reply to Comment by Holas and March

R. K. Nesbet
IBM Almaden Research Center, 650 Harry Road, San Jose, CA 95120-6099, USA
(July 18, 2011)

3
0
0
2
 
p
e
S
 
9
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
m
o
t
a
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
0
2
1
9
0
3
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

For Phys.Rev.A

The accompanying Comment by A. Holas and N. H. March
[Phys. Rev. A 66, 066501 (2002)] is concerned with the issue
of whether or not kinetic energy can be represented by an ef-
fective local potential, as required for an exact Thomas-Fermi
theory equivalent to Kohn-Sham density-functional theory.
They dispute [R.K. Nesbet, Phys. Rev. A 65, 010502(R)
(2001)], which concludes that for more than two electrons
the use by Kohn and Sham of the Schr¨odinger kinetic energy
operator is variationally correct, while the equivalent local
potential required for a valid Thomas-Fermi theory, a Fr´echet
functional derivative of the Kohn-Sham ground-state kinetic
energy functional, does not exist. The argument of Holas and
March is clearly invalid for the simple example of the low-
est triplet state of a two-electron atom with noninteracting
electrons. Why this fails, as do earlier arguments in the liter-
ature, has been explained in recent publications, summarized
here.

The principal issue in dispute is the question whether
an exact ab initio Thomas-Fermi theory (TFT) exists
for ground states, equivalent to Kohn-Sham density-
functional theory (DFT). This depends on the deﬁnition
of a ground-state kinetic energy functional of the elec-
tron density and on the deﬁnition and computability of
its density-functional derivative. Holas and March claim
that a local (Fr´echet) functional derivative of the Kohn-
Sham ground-state kinetic energy functional exists, as
a rigorous consequence of variational theory. This can-
not be true, because it would imply the equivalence of
ground-state TFT and DFT, which result in clearly in-
consistent variational equations for systems with more
than two electrons [1].

The conclusions of the cited paper [2] are misstated
by Holas and March [3]. In contrast to their allusion to
”... Nesbet’s worrisome claims...”, which they hold to be
contrary to the accepted opinion that ”...DFT is funda-
mentally correct and internally consistent...”, the anal-
ysis summarized in [2] concludes that Kohn-Sham the-
ory correctly uses the kinetic energy operator ˆt = − 1
2 ∇2
of Schr¨odinger, and is variationally correct in the local-
density approximation(LDA). However, there is no for-
mal proof that a local (Fr´echet) functional derivative ex-
ists in general for the exchange-correlation density func-
tional, nor for the Kohn-Sham kinetic energy functional.
In fact, the latter Fr´echet derivative cannot exist in a
valid quantum theory for more than two electrons. This
precludes an exact TFT for ground states. Because Holas
and March cite standard arguments which lead to simi-
lar inconsistencies, it is important to trace the point of

failure of these arguments. This will be done here.

The fundamental

incompatibility of Thomas-Fermi
theory (TFT) and Kohn-Sham theory (DFT) for more
than two electrons has not been widely recognized. If the
argument of Holas and March and earlier conclusions in
accepted literature were sound, TFT would be correct. If
the two theories are incompatible, then DFT must fail,
in sharp contrast to the history of applications of these
theories. To illustrate this incompatibility, consider the
lowest 3S state of an atom with two noninteracting elec-
trons. Kohn-Sham theory solves the pair of Schr¨odinger
equations

ˆtφ1s = {ǫ1s − v(r)}φ1s
ˆtφ2s = {ǫ2s − v(r)}φ2s.

(1)

The orbital wave functions are orthogonal because the
energy eigenvalues are unequal. They are independently
normalized to unity and are equally occupied. An equiv-
alent TFT would use a single Lagrange multiplier µ for
ρd3r = 2. If a local
the global normalization constraint
density functional derivative of the kinetic energy func-
δρ(r) = vT (r), this implies the
tional T exists in the form δT
Thomas-Fermi equation

R

vT (r) = µ − v(r),

(2)

Eqs.(1) cannot be deduced from Eq.(2), because two in-
dependent Lagrange multipliers cannot be derived from
one. Unconstrained by the exclusion principle, this
Thomas-Fermi equation has a ground-state solution in
which the partial density ρ1s is normalized to 2, while ρ2s
is normalized to zero. The total energy, 2ǫ1s, is below the
correct ground state. The theory fails because a single
global Lagrange multiplier µ does not suﬃce to normalize
ρ1s and ρ2s separately. It cannot replace the set of inde-
pendent Lagrange multipliers ǫi required for Fermi-Dirac
electrons. Any theory that produces a Fr´echet derivative
of a kinetic energy functional implies incorrect physics
unless all ǫi are equal.

Holas and March present an argument which, if cor-
rect, would support the conclusion that solution of a
Thomas-Fermi equation and of Kohn-Sham equations for
the same variational model must lead to the same results.
This is obviously false for the simple model cited above.
Eqs.(9) of Holas and March give the functional diﬀer-
ential δT of the deﬁning Schr¨odinger orbital functional
i ni(i|ˆt|i). Because ρ =
i φi in
T =
DFT, a sum of orbital densities,

i niρi =

i niφ∗

P

P

P

δT =

ni Z

Xi

d3r{ǫi − v(r)}δρi(r)

1

δT
niδρi(r)

=

φ∗
i (r)ˆtφi(r)
ρi(r)

.

For independently normalized partial densities ρi, this
determines modiﬁed Thomas-Fermi equations equivalent
to the usual Kohn-Sham or Schr¨odinger equations for
noninteracting electrons [6]. This restores Fermi-Dirac
statistics and orbital shell structure to Thomas-Fermi
theory.

Holas and March cite the work of Englisch and En-
glisch [8,9] as supporting their argument. This is incor-
rect, because the rigorous discussion of [8,9] cannot dis-
tinguish between Fr´echet and Gˆateaux functional deriva-
tives. Only normalized density functions are considered,
and constants in the Euler-Lagrange equations are not
determined. Englisch and Englisch [8] prove the exis-
tence in general of a Gˆateaux derivative. They do not
consider the subshell structure of the DFT density func-
tion, but arbitrarily insert a non-indexed single parame-
ter λ into their Eq.(4.1), which if correct would imply an
exact TFT. As shown above for the simple example of the
lowest 1s2s3S state of an atom with two noninteracting
electrons, this result is physically incorrect. Construction
of a Gˆateaux derivative consistent with the operator ˆt in
noninteracting Schr¨odinger equations and in Kohn-Sham
equations uses only the mathematics of variational the-
ory in the orbital Hilbert space, following a long tradition
of textbook derivations [7].

[1] R. K. Nesbet, Phys. Rev. A 58, R12 (1998).
[2] R. K. Nesbet, Phys. Rev. A 65, 010502(R) (2001).
[3] A. Holas and N. H. March, Phys. Rev. A 66, 066501 (2002)
[4] R. K. Nesbet, Int. J. Quantum Chem. 81, 384 (2001).
[5] P. Blanchard and E. Br¨uning, Variational Methods in
Mathematical Physics: A Uniﬁed Approach (Springer-
Verlag, Berlin, 1992).

[6] R. K. Nesbet, Int. J. Quantum Chem. 90, 262 (2002).
[7] R. K. Nesbet, Variational Principles and Methods in The-
oretical Physics and Chemistry (Cambridge University
Press, New York, 2002).

[8] H. Englisch and R. Englisch, phys.stat.sol.(b) 123, 711

[9] H. Englisch and R. Englisch, phys.stat.sol.(b) 124, 373

(1984).

(1984).

for variations about solutions of the noninteracting
Schr¨odinger equations. This is valid for all density varia-
tions induced by orbital variations, whether or not the
orbitals are normalized [2]. These equations demon-
strate that partial variations δiT of the orbital func-
tional T about stationary states are unique functionals
of the partial density variations δρi [4]. This implies that
the Kohn-Sham ground-state functional Ts[ρ] can be ex-
tended to include such inﬁnitesimal variations and deﬁnes
a density functional derivative for each orbital subshell
[2,4],

δT
niδρi(r)

= ǫi − v(r).

This is a Gˆateaux functional derivative, the generaliza-
tion to functional analysis of a partial derivative [5]. A
Fr´echet derivative, equivalent to a local potential func-
tion vT , exists only if all ǫi are equal [4].

R

The Kohn-Sham density functional Ts is obtained by
evaluating T for ground-state orbital functions, restrict-
ing functional Ts to normalized ground states of other-
wise arbitrary external local potential functions. The
fallacy in the argument of Holas and March is that they
cannot deduce the functional derivative from this func-
tional, limited to normalized orbitals and densities. They
modify Eqs.(9) by replacing the parameters ǫi, implied
by the Schr¨odinger equation, by the single parameter µ,
appropriate to TFT. This leads to their Eq.(11), which
δρi
is not consistent with Eqs.(9) unless all integrals
vanish, as they do if all ρi are separately normalized.
Since this requires independent Lagrange multipliers ǫi,
replacing them by the single parameter µ is not justiﬁed
unless all ǫi are equal. For ﬁxed orbital normalization, all
integrals of constants drop out, so that Eqs.(9) and (11)
cannot be distinguished. No conclusion can be drawn
about functional derivatives unless the deﬁnition of Ts
is extended to density variations driven by orbital varia-
tions that are unconstrained in the orbital Hilbert space.
Lagrange multiplier formalism requires the relevant
functional to be deﬁned for variations unconstrained by
normalization [7]. Otherwise Euler-Lagrange variational
equations cannot be derived. This motivates the exten-
sion of Ts as deﬁned by Kohn and Sham to inﬁnitesi-
mal function-neighborhoods of ground-state densities ρ,
generated by inﬁnitesimal variations of the orbital func-
tions φi [4]. For noninteracting electrons, Fermi-Dirac
statistics requires separate normalization of each elec-
tronic subshell density, which implies independent La-
grange multipliers ǫi indexed by orbital subshells. Un-
less all these orbital energies are equal, they cannot be
replaced by a single parameter µ. TFT uses such a global
parameter to normalize the total density, with no refer-
ence to shell structure. This is the reason for the historic
failure of TFT to describe electronic shell structure [2].
For stationary states, the Gˆateaux derivative implied
by Eqs.(9) is operationally equivalent to the linear oper-
ator ˆt, because (ǫi − v)φi = ˆtφi [2]. It can be expressed
as a local mean orbital kinetic energy,

2

