Primary population of antiprotonic helium states

J. R´evai∗

Research Institute for Particle and Nuclear Physics,

H-1525 Budapest, P.O.B. 49, Hungary

Joint Institute for Nuclear Research, Dubna, 141980, Russia

N. V. Shevchenko†

(Dated: February 17, 2014)

Abstract

A full quantum mechanical calculation of partial cross-sections leading to diﬀerent ﬁnal states

of antiprotonic helium atom was performed. Calculations were carried out for a wide range of

antiprotonic helium states and incident (lab) energies of the antiproton.

PACS numbers: 36.10.-k, 25.43.+t, 34.90.+q

3
0
0
2
 
t
c
O
 
0
3
 
 
]
h
p
-
m
o
t
a
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
3
5
1
0
1
3
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

∗Electronic address: revai@rmki.kfki.hu
†Electronic address: shev@thsun1.jinr.ru

1

I.

INTRODUCTION

One of the most impressive success stories of the last decade in few-body physics is the

high precision experimental and theoretical studies of long lived states in antiprotonic helium

(for an overview see [1]). While the energy levels have been both measured and calculated

to an extreme precision, allowing even for improvement of numerical values of fundamental

physical constants, some other relevant properties of these states were studied with consid-

erably less accuracy. Among these is the formation probability of diﬀerent metastable states

(J, v) in the capture reaction

¯p + 4He −→ (4He+ ¯p)Jv + e−.

(1)

The existing calculations of the capture rates of slow antiprotons in He [2, 3, 4] are based

on classical or semiclassical approaches and they mainly address the reproduction of the

overall fraction (3%) of delayed annihilation events. Recent experimental results from the

ASACUSA project [5], however, yield some information on individual populations of diﬀerent

metastable states, and our aim is to perform a fully quantum mechanical calculation of the

formation probability of diﬀerent states in the capture reaction.

II. CALCULATION METHOD

The exact solution of the quantum mechanical four-body problem, underlying the re-

action (1) is far beyond the scope of this work, and probably also of presently available

calculational possibilities. Still, we want to make a full quantum mechanical, though ap-

proximate, calculation of the above process. Full is meant in the sense that all degrees of

freedom are taken explicitly into account, all the wave functions we use, are true four-body

states.

The simplest way to realize this idea is to use the plane wave Born approximation which

amounts to replacing in the transition matrix element the exact scattering wave function
Ψ+

i by its initial state Φi which preceded the collision.

Tf i = hΦf |Vf |Ψ+

i i ≈ hΦf |Vf |Φii.

(2)

2

In our case the initial and ﬁnal wave functions were taken in the form:

Φi

He, Ki(r1, r2, R) = ΦHe(r1, r2)

Φf

Jv, Kf (ρ1, ρ2, R) = ΦJv(ρ1, R)

1

(2π)3/2 eiKiR
(2π)3/2 eiKfρ2

1

where ri are the vectors pointing from helium to the i-th electron, R is the vector between

He and ¯p, while ρi are the Jacobian vectors connecting the electrons with the center of
mass of the He − ¯p system. For the He the ground state wave function we used the simplest

eﬀective charge hydrogen-like ansatz [6]

For the antiprotonic helium wave function we used the Born-Oppenheimer form [7, 8],

which correctly reﬂects the main features of the ﬁnal state:

ΦHe(r1, r2) = N exp (−σ(r1 + r2)).

ΦJv(ρ, R) =

YJM ( ˆR)φ1σ(ρ; R)

χJv(R)
R

where φ1σ(ρ; R) is a ground state two-center wave function, describing the electron motion

in the ﬁeld of He and ¯p separated by a ﬁxed distance R, while χJv(R) is the heavy-particle
relative motion wave function corresponding to (4He ¯p e−) angular momentum J and ”vi-

brational” quantum number v. The transition potential Vf is obviously

Vf = −

+

2
r2

1
|r1 − R|

+

1
|r1 − r2| .

The partial cross-section leading to a certain antiprotonic helium state (Jv) can be written

σJv = (2π)4 Kf
Ki

µi µf

dΩKf

Z

Jv,Kf |Vf | Φi

He,Kii

hΦf
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)

2

.

(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)

The angular integrations occurring in the evaluation of Eq. (5) were carried out exactly,

using angular moment algebra, while the 3-fold radial integrals were calculated numerically.

The general expression (5) for the cross-section leading to a speciﬁc state (Jv) can be

rewritten in terms of matrix element between angular momentum eigenstates as

as

with

σJv = (2π)4 Kf
Ki

µi µf

(2Λ + 1) |M Λ

J,l|2

XΛ,l

M Λ

J,l = h [ΦJv φKf ,l(ρ2)]Λ

M | Vf | [ΦHe φKi,Λ(R)]Λ

M i,

3

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

where φK,l(r) denotes free states which deﬁnite angular momentum

φK,l(r) =

jl(Kr)Ylm(ˆr)

2
π

r

and [ ]J

M stands for vector coupling. Since the angular momentum of the He ground state is
zero, the total angular momentum Λ of the incident side is carried by the antiproton. A given

antiprotonic helium ﬁnal state Jv can be formed with diﬀerent total angular momenta Λ

depending on the orbital momentum l carried away by the emitted electron. Our calculations

show, that only the values l = 0 and l = 1 give a non-negligible contribution to the sum in

Eq. (6).

III. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION

We have calculated the partial population cross-sections σJv for states with angular mo-

mentum J and energy EJv in the interval J = 25 − 51, EJv = −(4.9 − 2.3) a.u. For

these states all the energetically allowed transitions were calculated for incident antiproton

energies in the range 5 − 30 eV.

Our overall results are presented on the contour plots of Fig. 1. The black line separates

the regions of short-lived and long-lived states. The latter (on the right side of the line) are

selected according to the usual criterium of Auger-electron orbital momentum lAuger ≥ 4.

In Figs. 2–4 we tried to illustrate the dependence of certain selected cross-sections σJv(E)

on their parameters. In Fig. 2 we displayed certain cross-sections for various incident en-

ergies as a function of antiprotonic helium angular momentum J, connecting points, which

correspond to a certain vibrational quantum number v, while in Fig. 3 the connected points

belong to the same principal quantum number N = J + v + 1.

Fig. 4 shows the dependence of a few cross-sections on the incident energy of antiproton.

A table, containing all our results, would not ﬁt the size of this paper, how-

ever,

it can be obtained from the authors upon request, or seen/downloaded at

http://www.rmki.kfki.hu/~revai/table.pdf.

It is not easy to draw general conclusions about the relevant physics of antiproton capture

from this bulk of data. There is, however, a conspicuous feature of our data, which deserve

some consideration. In a certain region of antiprotonic helium states the dependence of the

cross-sections on quantum numbers show a smooth, regular pattern, while with increasing

4

FIG. 1: Overall distribution of calculated cross-sections over the quantum numbers J and v for

diﬀerent incident antiproton energies. The black line separates the short lived (on the left) and long

lived states (on the right side of the line) of antiprotonic helium. All cross-sections are measured

in units of a2

0, a0 being the atomic length unit.

excitation energy this behavior becomes irregular. On Fig. 1 this is seen as a transition from

almost parallel stripes to an ”archipelago” type structure, while on Figs. 2–3 the smooth

lines become oscillatory.

In order to reveal the origin of this phenomenon we looked into the structure of the matrix

5

FIG. 2: Cross-sections for the lowest few vibrational quantum numbers v and diﬀerent incident

antiproton energies.

over R. We can rewrite (7) as

element in Eq (7) and found that its actual value is basically determined by the integration

M Λ

J,l ∼

∞

Z

0

χJv(R) F (R) jΛ(KiR) R dR,

(8)

where χJv(R) is the He− ¯p relative motion wave function in the BO state Jv, jΛ(KiR) is the

spherical Bessel function of the incident ¯p, and F (R) contains all rest: the potentials, the

6

FIG. 3: Examples of cross-sections with ﬁxed N in the ”smooth” and ”oscillatory” regime (see

text).

FIG. 4: Dependence of selected cross-sections on incident antiproton energy.

angular integrals, and the integrals over the electron coordinates. The expression (8) can be

considered as a kind of ”radial, one-dimensional” Born approximation for the transition of

the antiproton from the initial state jΛ(KiR) to the ﬁnal state χJv(R) and F (R) plays the

role of the potential.

Fig. 5 shows a few characteristic plots of jΛ(KiR), χJv(R), and F (R). It can be seen, that

F (R) depends very weakly on the quantum numbers of the transition, thus its interpretation

as ”transition potential” is not meaningless. The other essential conclusion from Fig. 5 is,

that the value of the integral is basically determined by the overlap of two rapidly varying

functions, jΛ(KiR) and χJv(R). While χJv(R) is strongly localized with rapid decay in both

directions R → ∞ and R → 0, jΛ(KiR) is rapidly oscillating for large R and — due to the

high angular momentum Λ — strongly decreasing in the direction R → 0. For increasing

J, χJv slightly moves outwards, while increasing v (the number of its nodes) makes it more

and more oscillating.

Increasing incident energy moves jΛ(KiR) inwards. According to

7

FIG. 5: Parts of the integrand of Eq (8): jΛ(KiR) (solid line), χJv(R) (dashed line, scaled by a

factor of 1/100) and F (R) (dotted line). For details see text.

these general observations, the ”smooth regime” of the dependence of partial cross-sections

on the energy and quantum numbers, corresponds to the situation, when only the ”outer”

tail of χJv(R) and the ”inner” tail of jΛ(KiR) overlap. For increasing energy (incident

or excitation) the oscillating parts of χJv and jΛ might overlap leading to an irregular

”unpredictable” dependence on quantum numbers and incident energy.

8

This idea can be traced on the last two plots of Fig. 2. The χJv(R) functions for a given

v are essentially of the same form, only with increasing J they are pushed outwards into the

region of oscillations of jΛ(KiR). For the nodeless v = 0 function this leads to a decrease of

the integral in Eq. (8), while each node of the v 6= 0 functions produces a minimum in the

cross-section when it penetrates into the region of non-vanishing jΛ(KiR).

The three graphs on the right side of Fig. 5. demonstrate this phenomenon on the case

of the 20 eV v = 1 curve of Fig. 2. It can be seen, how the position of the node of χJv(R)

relative to the ﬁrst peak of the jΛ(KiR) Bessel-function brings about the minimum of the

cross-section.

IV. CONCLUSIONS

To our knowledge, this is the ﬁrst calculation of the process (1) in which realistic ﬁnal

state wave functions were used. Due to this fact we think, that our results concerning the

relative population of diﬀerent ﬁnal states might be reliable in spite of the poor treatment

of the dynamics of the capture process. As for the absolute values of cross-sections, a more

realistic dynamical treatment of the reaction (1) is probably inevitable.

The transition matrix elements are basically determined by the overlap of the BO function

χJv(R) and the incident Bessel function jΛ(KiR) of the antiproton. All the rest can be

incorporated into a potential-like function F (R), which weakly depends on the quantum

numbers of the transition. This feature will be probably preserved if a more realistic initial

state wave function (both for the electrons and the antiproton) will be used.

The ”smooth” regime of the quantum number dependence of the partial cross-section al-

lows to check the existing two ”thumb rules” [1, 7] for the most likely populated antiprotonic

helium states. One of them states, that the mostly populated levels will have

N ∼

∼ 37 − 38

M
m

r

(9)

while according to the other assumption, the maximum of the capture cross-section occurs

for zero (or smallest possible) energy of the emitted electron and correspondingly for highest

excitation energy. From our contour plots of Fig. 1 we can conclude, that the maximum

cross-sections occur along a line, which can be approximated by

v(σmax) = a − b ∗ J

(10)

9

with a ∼ 15 − 20 and b ∼ 0.4 − 0.45, depending on incident energy. This observation does

not seem to conﬁrm any of the ”thumb rules”.

As for comparison of our results with the recently obtained experimental data [5], we

would like to make two remarks. First, our calculations show, that the cross-sections strongly

depend on incident antiproton energy. Since the energy distribution of the antiprotons be-

fore the capture is unknown, the direct comparison with the observed data is impossible.

Secondly, any observed population data inevitably involve a certain time delay after forma-

tion and thus the eﬀect of ”depopulation” due to collisional quenching. Since this eﬀect is

absent from our calculation, again, the comparison with experimental data is not obvious.

Acknowledgments

One of the authors (JR) acknowledges the support from OTKA grants T037991 and

T042671, while (NVS) is grateful for the hospitality extended to her in the Research Institute

for Particle and Nuclear Physics, where most of the work has been done. The authors wish

to thank A.T. Kruppa for providing them with one of the necessary computer codes.

[1] T. Yamazaki et al., Phys. Rep. 366, 183 (2002).

[2] G. Y. Korenman, Hyperﬁne Interact. 101-102, 81 (1996).

[3] G. Y. Korenman, Nucl. Phys. A 692, 145c (2001).

[4] J. S. Cohen, Phys. Rev. A 62, 022512 (2000).

[5] M. Hori et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 89, 093401 (2002).

Verlag, Berlin-G¨ottingen-Heidelberg, 1957).

[7] I. Shimamura, Phys. Rev. A 46, 3776 (1992).

[8] J. R´evai and A. T. Kruppa, Phys. Rev. A 57, 174 (1998).

[6] H. A. Bethe and E. E. Salpeter, Quantum mechanics of one- and two-electron atoms (Springer

10

