3
0
0
2
 
t
c
O
 
5
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
m
o
t
a
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
6
6
0
0
1
3
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

A relation between electromagnetically induced absorption resonances and nonlinear
magneto-optics in Λ-systems

D. Budker1, 2, ∗ and S. M. Rochester1, †
1Department of Physics, University of California at Berkeley, Berkeley, California 94720-7300
2Nuclear Science Division, Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, Berkeley, California 94720
(Dated: February 20, 2014)

Recent work on Λ-resonances in alkali metal vapors (E. Mikhailov, I. Novikova, Yu. V. Ros-
tovtsev, and G. R. Welch, quant-ph/0309171, and references therein) has revealed a novel type of
electromagnetically induced absorption resonance that occurs in three-level systems under speciﬁc
conditions normally associated with electromagnetically induced transparency. In this note, we show
that these resonances have a direct analog in nonlinear magneto-optics, and support this conclusion
with a calculation for a J = 1 → J ′ = 0 system interacting with a single nearly circularly polarized
light ﬁeld in the presence of a weak longitudinal magnetic ﬁeld.

PACS numbers: 42.50.Gy

Electromagnetically induced transparency (EIT, see,
for example, Ref. [1] and references therein) is a phe-
nomenon in which absorption of a near-resonant light
ﬁeld is inhibited by the presence of an additional elec-
tromagnetic ﬁeld. There exists an intimate connection,
discussed in detail in Ref. [2], between EIT and resonant
nonlinear magneto- and electro-optical eﬀects, for exam-
ple, nonlinear Faraday rotation.

Recently, a counterpart to EIT, electromagnetically in-
duced absorption (EIA), has also garnered signiﬁcant ex-
perimental and theoretical attention (see, for example,
Refs. [3, 4] and references therein). Once again, close
connections can be found to nonlinear magneto-optical
eﬀects. For example, consider one possible situation
in which EIA may arise, that of optical pumping on a
F → F ′ = F + 1 transition [5], as occurs in the D2 lines
of the alkalis. In the early days of quantitative studies of
nonlinear magneto-optical rotation (NMOR) near the al-
kali D-lines (see, for example, Ref. [6]), a sign inversion of
the optical rotation was observed at the F = I+1/2 → F ′
(I is the nuclear spin) transition group near the cycling
transition [see also, for example, Fig. 15(a) in the review
paper [2], or Fig. 10(b) in Ref. [7]]. The origin of the in-
version is precisely EIA related to optical pumping on a
F → F +1 transition (see the discussion in Refs. [2, 6, 7]).
A novel type of EIA resonance exhibited by a three-
level Λ-system interacting with a bichromatic light ﬁeld
has been recently investigated both experimentally and
theoretically [8, 9]. Experiments were carried out with
87Rb atoms contained in vapor cells with and without
buﬀer gas. Two phase-coherent copropagating laser ﬁelds
tuned near the D1 transition were used as the drive and
the probe ﬁelds [Fig. 1(a)], where the two lower states are
the two ground-state hyperﬁne components of 87Rb. The
intensity of the probe ﬁeld was analyzed at the output of
the cell as a function of the two-photon (Raman) detun-

∗Electronic address: budker@socrates.berkeley.edu
†Electronic address: simonkeys@yahoo.com

δ

∆

|a

γ0

∆

γ0

|c

γ

(a)

M= -1             0            +1

|b

(b)

γ

hΩL

FIG. 1: (a) A nondegenerate Λ-system subject to a bichro-
matic phase-coherent light ﬁeld. (b) A J = 1 → J ′ = 0 atomic
transition subject to a monochromatic elliptically-polarized
light ﬁeld and a longitudinal magnetic ﬁeld. ∆ is the one-
photon detuning, γ0 is the homogeneous width of the optical
transition, γ is the ground-state relaxation rate, ΩL is the
Larmor frequency corresponding to the magnetic ﬁeld in case
(b).

ing δ. For a buﬀer-gas-free cell, EIT, manifesting itself
as a peak in the output probe-ﬁeld intensity at near-zero
two-photon detuning, was observed at all one-photon de-
tunings ∆. However, for cells with buﬀer gas (for exam-
ple, 30 torr of Ne), very diﬀerent behavior was discov-
ered. While EIT was observed as in the buﬀer-gas-free
case for small one-photon detuning ∆, the resonance in
two-photon detuning became asymmetric at larger values
of ∆, eventually turning into an EIA resonance. A rather
striking feature of the EIA resonance is that it leads to a
signiﬁcant reduction of the transmitted probe-ﬁeld inten-
sity on the two-photon resonance under conditions where
there is very little absorption of the probe ﬁeld in the ab-
sence of the drive. The authors of Refs. [8, 9] found that
an essential condition for the EIA eﬀect to occur is that
the buﬀer-gas collisions broaden the optical transition to
the point that the homogeneous width is comparable or
exceeds the Doppler width (hence, they call the new res-
onances “buﬀer-gas-induced absorption resonances”).

In this note, we point out the connection between the
new EIA resonances and a nonlinear magneto-optical ef-
fect arising when a single elliptically polarized light ﬁeld
interacts with atoms in the presence of a weak magnetic
ﬁeld applied along the light-propagation direction. We
consider a J = 1 → J ′ = 0 transition [Fig. 1(b)] and
associate the states |bi and |ci with the M = −1 and
M = 1 Zeeman sublevels of the J = 1 ground state,
and the two components of the light ﬁeld with the left-
and right-circular polarizations of a monochromatic light
ﬁeld. The resultant light ﬁeld corresponds to elliptically
polarized light. The relative phase of the two circular
components, which deﬁnes the spatial orientation of the
principal axes of the polarization ellipse, can have any
ﬁxed value. In order to complete the analogy between
the two problems, we need to introduce the analog of the
two-photon detuning δ. This is done by applying a lon-
gitudinal magnetic ﬁeld that splits the two Zeeman sub-
levels [Fig. 1(b)]. It is straightforward to show that for an
optically thin sample, the absorption of the weak probe
ﬁeld is proportional to the change of ellipticity per unit
length. The original problem is thus analogous to the de-
termination of the nonlinear magneto-optical dichroism
for nearly circularly polarized input light.

We performed a calculation of the nonlinear magneto-
optical eﬀect using the density-matrix method that was
applied earlier to the analysis of nonlinear self-rotation
(i.e., magnetic-ﬁeld-free rotation) of nearly linear ellipti-
cally polarized light [10] and NMOR [11, 12]. In order to
reproduce the basic phenomenon—the change from EIT
to EIA with the increase of the one-photon detuning—it
is suﬃcient to consider the Doppler-free case. In fact, as
pointed out in Ref. [9], Doppler averaging leads to a sup-
pression of the eﬀect of interest. This is the reason that
buﬀer gas is required to observe the eﬀect in the Doppler-
broadened case: by increasing the homogenous width of
the optical transition so it becomes comparable to the
Doppler width, it eﬀectively “turns oﬀ” the suppression.
The calculation ﬁnds the steady-state density-matrix as-
suming radiative decay of the upper state to the ground
state, and much slower isotropic relaxation and incoher-
ent repopulation of the ground state (for example, due
to atoms entering and leaving the interaction volume).
Qualitatively similar results are obtained for an “open”
system in which the upper state decays to an unobserved
level.

Figure 2 shows plots of the change in ellipticity upon
propagation through an optically thin sample as a func-
tion of the applied magnetic ﬁeld (the analog of the two-
photon detuning δ) for diﬀerent values of the one-photon
detuning ∆ (other parameters used in the calculation are
listed in the ﬁgure caption). This ﬁgure shows the change
in the sign of the two-photon resonance as the one-photon
detuning is increased (analogous to the transition from
EIT to EIA), and is similar to the results presented in
Fig. 3 of Ref. [9] for the Λ-resonances with a bichromatic
light ﬁeld, where a decrease in ellipticity here corresponds
to absorption of probe light in the case of Ref. [9]. All

2

0

0

0

0

0

0

D(cid:144)Γ0=1.5

D(cid:144)Γ0=1.2

D(cid:144)Γ0=0.9

D(cid:144)Γ0=0.6

D(cid:144)Γ0=0.3

D(cid:144)Γ0=0

L
s
t
i
n
u

.
b
r
a
H

Ε
D

-0.04

-0.02

0.02

0.04

0
WL(cid:144)Γ0

FIG. 2: Change in ellipticity of almost completely circularly
polarized light as a function of normalized Larmor frequency
ΩL/γ0 at various normalized light detunings ∆/γ0, where γ0
is the radiative width of the upper state. The Rabi frequency
is ΩR = 0.5γ0, and the ground state relaxation rate is γ =
0.001γ0.

of the details of the discussion presented in that refer-
ence can similarly be mapped onto the magneto-optical
case considered here. For example, the fact that the EIA
resonance peak appears shifted with respect to the EIT
peak when the one-photon detuning is non-zero is be-
cause of the ac-Stark shift of the lower state produced
under this condition. Similarly, the EIT peak is broader
due to larger power broadening in the case of one-photon
resonance. Note that in Fig. 2 the change in ellipticity is
always zero at zero magnetic ﬁeld. This is because of the
somewhat counter-intuitive fact that for a 1 → 0 transi-
tion and isotropic ground-state relaxation, the medium
produces no change in light polarization in the absence
of a magnetic ﬁeld. This was ﬁrst discovered in Ref. [13];
for a discussion, see also Ref. [10] and references therein.
The analogy presented here can help explain the re-
markable feature of the EIA resonances observed in Refs.
[8, 9], which is that there is signiﬁcant reduction of the
transmitted probe-ﬁeld intensity on the two-photon reso-
nance under conditions where there is very little absorp-
tion of the probe ﬁeld in the absence of the drive. One
may say that rather than the probe ﬁeld being absorbed,
the interaction of the light ﬁeld with atoms causes the
stronger ﬁeld to be partially converted into the probe-
ﬁeld mode. Thus, at the EIA resonance, the contribution

to the probe ﬁeld due to this conversion is π out of phase
with the initial probe ﬁeld, causing the overall resultant
probe-ﬁeld amplitude to decrease. A similar interaction
between a strong and a weak (actually, vacuum) polar-
ization modes has been discussed in Ref. [14].

We hope that the analogy between the Λ-resonances
with a bichromatic light ﬁeld and the nonlinear magneto-
optical eﬀects will prove to be fruitful for qualitative un-
derstanding of both phenomena and serve as a guide to
further experimental and theoretical work. This has al-
ready been the case with the study of light-propagation

dynamics, in which a similar analogy [15] has led to light-
propagation experiments with monochromatic light and
Zeeman sublevels that were more straightforward than
their counterparts involving bichromatic light ﬁelds and
hyperﬁne sublevels (see Refs. [16, 17] for comprehensive
reviews).

The authors acknowledge useful discussions with Mar-
cis Auzinsh, Derek Kimball, Irina Novikova, Szymon
Pustelny, Jason Stalnaker, and Valeriy Yashchuk. This
work has been supported by the Oﬃce of Naval Research
(grant N00014-97-1-0214).

3

[1] S. E. Harris, Phys. Today 50, 36 (1997).
[2] D. Budker, W. Gawlik, D. F. Kimball, S. M. Rochester,
V. V. Yashchuk, and A. Weis, Rev. Mod. Phys. 74, 1153
(2002).

[3] J. Alnis, K. Blushs, M. Auzinsh, S. Kennedy, N. Shafer-
Ray, and E. R. I. Abraham, J. Phys. B 36, 1161 (2003).
[4] H. Failache, P. Valente, G. Ban, V. Lorent, and

A. Lezama, Phys. Rev. A 67, 43810 (2003).

[5] A. Kazantsev, V. Smirnov, A. Tumaikin, and I. Yago-

farov, Opt. Spectrosk. 57, 189 (1984).

[6] S. I. Kanorsky, A. Weis, J. Wurster, and T. W. H¨ansch,

Phys. Rev. A 47, 1220 (1993).

[7] D. Budker, D. J. Orlando, and V. Yashchuk, Am. J. Phys.

67, 584 (1999).

[8] E. Mikhailov, Y. Rostovtsev, and G. R. Welch, Absorp-
tion resonance and large negative delay in rb vapor with
buﬀer gas (2003), quant-ph/0309151.

[9] E. Mikhailov, I. Novikova, Y. V. Rostovtsev, and G. R.
Welch, Buﬀer-gas induced absorption resonances in rb
vapor (2003), quant-ph/0309171.

[10] S. M. Rochester, D. S. Hsiung, D. Budker, R. Y. Chiao,
D. F. Kimball, and V. V. Yashchuk, Phys. Rev. A 63,

043814/1 (2001).

[11] D. Budker, D. F. Kimball, S. M. Rochester, V. V.
Yashchuk, and M. Zolotorev, Phys. Rev. A 62, 043403
(2000).

[12] D. Budker, D. F. Kimball, S. M. Rochester, and V. V.

Yashchuk, Phys. Rev. A 65, 033401 (2002).

[13] A. I. Alekseev and V. M. Galitskii, Zh. Eksp. Teor. Fiz.

57, 1002 (1969).

[14] A. B. Matsko, I. Novikova, G. R. Welch, D. Budker, D. F.
Kimball, and S. M. Rochester, Phys. Rev. A 66, 043815
(2002).

[15] D. Budker, D. F. Kimball, S. M. Rochester, and V. V.

Yashchuk, Phys. Rev. Lett. 83, 1767 (1999).

[16] R. W. Boyd and D. J. Gauthier, in Progress in Optics,
edited by E. Wolf (Elsevier, Amsterdam, 2002), vol. 43,
pp. 497–530, ch. 6.

[17] A. B. Matsko, O. A. Kocharovskaya, Y. Rostovtsev, G. R.
in Advances
Welch, A. S. Zibrov, and M. O. Scully,
in Atomic, Molecular, and Optical Physics, edited by
B. Bederson (Academic Press, New York, 2001), vol. 46,
pp. 191–242.

