3
0
0
2
 
v
o
N
 
7
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
m
o
t
a
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
0
8
0
1
1
3
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

SEARCH FOR POSSIBLE VARIATION OF
THE FINE STRUCTURE CONSTANT

Savely G. Karshenboim∗

D. I. Mendeleev Institute for Metrology (VNIIM),
St. Petersburg 198005, Russia
Max-Planck-Institut f¨ur Quantenoptik,
85748 Garching, Germany

February 2, 2008

Abstract

Determination of the ﬁne structure constant α and search for
its possible variation are considered. We focus on a role of the ﬁne
structure constant in modern physics and discuss precision tests of
quantum electrodynamics. Diﬀerent methods of a search for possible
variations of fundamental constants are compared and those related
to optical measurements are considered in detail.

1

Introduction

Fundamental constants play important role in modern physics. Some of
them are really universal and enter equations from diﬀerent subﬁelds. An
example is the ﬁne structure constant α and other quantities related to
properties of electron and nucleon. Electron is a carrier of the electric
charge and it is the orbiting particle in any atom. Thus, its character-
istics enter a great number of basic equations of atomic physics as well
as various eﬀects of electrodynamics, which are related to quantum na-
ture of physics or discrete (atomic) nature of matter. The latter is a back
door through which quantum physics enters nearly classical experiments
involving the Avogadro number, Faraday constant and various properties
of single species. The “hidden” quantum mechanics is in the fact of the

∗E–mail: sek@mpq.mpg.de

1

very existence of identical objects. Thus, the electron charge e is a mark
of an open or hidden quantum nature of a phenomenon.

Most quantities related to properties of electron are dimensional and
thus depend on our deﬁnitions of units. The ﬁne structure constant, which
in fact is the squared electric charge of electron in natural units

α =

e2
4πǫ0¯hc

,

(1)

is dimensionless and thus its value is a “true” fundamental constant which
does not depend on any convensions (like, e.g., deﬁnitions of units in Inter-
national System SI) and it is one of very few fundamental constants which
can be measured in actual physical experiments and originate from physics
of very short distances related to Grand Uniﬁcation Theories.

Proton and nuclei formed by protons and neutrons also transport elec-
tric charge in some phenomena and they are chieﬂy responsible for mass
of classical massive objects. As attractors for orbiting electrons, nuclei are
responsible for recoil and hyperﬁne eﬀects. They also oﬀer some dimen-
sionless parameters such as mass ratio of electron and proton me/mp and
g factors of free proton and neutron. However, such parameters are less
fundamental than the ﬁne structure constant.

A variety of completely diﬀerent approaches to an accurate determina-
tion of the ﬁne structure constant α shows how fundamental and universal
this constant is. The value of α can be determined from quantum electrody-
namics (QED) of a free electron, from spectroscopy of simple atoms, from
quantum nonrelativistic physics of atoms and particles, from measurement
of macroscopic quantum eﬀects with help of electrical standards. A com-
parison of diﬀerent approaches to the determination of the ﬁne structure
constant allows us to check consistency of data from all these ﬁelds, where
the determination of α involves the most advanced methods and technolo-
gies. The further output of this activity is precision QED tests and the
new generation of electrical standards.

A possibility of time and space variations of some fundamental con-
stants is very likely for a number of reasons. For example, we accept a
so-called inﬂatory model of the evolution of our Universe and thus have to
acknowledge a dramatic variation of the electron mass and electron charge
at a very early moment of the evolution of the Universe. Therefore we could
expect some much slower variations of these and some other quantities at
the present time. A possible variation of fundamental constants is searched
for in two kinds of experiments:

• measurements of the quantities easily accessible and/or potentially
highly sensitive to the variations (such as experiments at the Oklo
reactor);

2

• studies of the quantities that allow a clear interpretation, particularly

in terms of fundamental physical constants.

Indeed, the only fact of a cosmological variation detected today and
determination of its magnitude would be a great discovery and one could
think that its clear interpretation is not so important at the initial stage
of a search.

However, everybody experienced in high precision studies knows that
while achieving a new level of accuracy, one very often encounters new
systematic eﬀects and sometimes it takes quite a while to eliminate them.
We can expect receiving a number of diﬀerent positive and negative results
and without a proper interpretation we will hardly be able to compare
them and check their consistency. Actually, such results have already been
obtained:

• Studies of samarium abundance in uranium deposits in Oklo showed
no signiﬁcant shift of the 97.3 meV resonance while comparing the
current situation with the operation of the Fossil natural fusion reac-
tor about 2 billion years ago [1]. Since the typical nuclear energy is
a few MeV per nucleon, that is a strong statement. We remind that
meV stands for 10−3 while MeV for 106 eV.

• Studies of the quasar absorption spectrum imply a relative shift of
atomic lines at the ppm level. That is a line-dependent shift (addi-
tional to the common Doppler red shift) related to the period of up
to ten billion years [2]. It may be interpreted as an evidence that a
value of the ﬁne structure constant was in the far past not the saem
as now.

• Laboratory comparison of hyperﬁne splitting in cesium and rubidium
ﬁnds no variation at the level of a few parts in 1015 per year [3].

With two negative and one positive results we still cannot make a state-
ment because they are not comparable. We need some set of data obtained
in a really independent way but with results clearly correlated in the case
of the variation of constants.

Since quantum electrodynamics is the best advanced quantum theory
and the ﬁne structure constant is a basic electrodynamical quantity, it is
attractive to use it as an interface for a search for a possible variation of
constants. Such an interface allows clear interpretation and a reasonable
comparison of diﬀerent laboratory experiments, which will hopefully deliver
their results in one or two years.

The need to interpret the results in terms of some fundamental param-

eters comes basically from two reasons:

3

• It is of crucial importance to be able to compare results on the vari-
ation of various quantities coming from diﬀerent experiments. To be
compared, they have to be expressed in terms of the same universal
parameters.

• Theory of Grand Uniﬁcation and quantum gravity can be helpful to
establish links between the variation of diﬀerent fundamental con-
stants, such as α and me/mp etc. The possible links can also extend
to experiments on a search for other exotic eﬀects such as a violation
of the equivalence principle.

The paper is substantially based on a talk at the HYPER symposium
(Paris, 2002). Since a number of important results such as [4, 5, 6, 7,
8, 9, 10, 11] were published just after the meeting, the paper has been
considerably enlarged and updated for this publication.

2 Quantum electrodynamics and the ﬁne struc-

ture constant

Quantum electrodynamics (QED) of free particles and bound atomic sys-
tems allows a number of accurate tests. Most comparisons of theory versus
experiment mainly conﬁrm theory, while some of experiments show either
data scatter or slight disagreement within a few standard deviations which
in principle can be expected due to a big number of diﬀerent experimental
QED tests.

• Free QED can be tested via a study of the anomalous magnetic mo-
ment of electron and muon. The former is limited by our knowledge
of the ﬁne structure constant α while for the latter the dominant
sources of the uncertainty are the experimental uncertainty and inac-
curacy of our understanding of hadronic eﬀects, i.e. eﬀects of strong
interactions.

• Bound state QED can be tested for weakly bound atoms (when the
binding energy in low-Z atoms that is proportional to (Zα)2mc2,
is signiﬁcantly smaller than mc2) or for the strong coupling regime
realized in high-Z few-electron atoms. Advanced QED calculations
allow to reach such a high accuracy that for any values of the nu-
clear charge Z the theoretical uncertainty for conventional atoms is
due to the nuclear-structure eﬀects. The experimental uncertainty
and the uncertainty of the determination of fundamental constants
are sometimes not so small and for any QED tests performed with
hydrogen-like atoms, the uncertainty of the pure QED calculations is
not a limiting factor today [12, 13].

4

helium fs (ν

21)

muonium hfs

Cs recoil

(g - 2)e

CODATA, 1998

137.035980

137.036000
QED values of the inverse fine structure constant α-1

137.036020

Figure 1: Determination of the ﬁne structure constant α by means of QED
and atomic physics. The presented values are from the anomalous magnetic
moment of electron [14] (recently corrected in [4]), the muonium hyperﬁne
structure [15], the helium ﬁne structure [20, 21] and the recoil-photon ex-
periment with cesium [17] (the proton-to-electron mass ratio is taken from
[18, 19]). The CODATA result is related to the adjustment performed in
1998 [16].

To perform a successful QED calculation, one needs to know proper val-
ues of several fundamental constants related to atomic physics and quantum
electrodynamics. One of the most important is the ﬁne structure constant.
Its determination by means of atomic physics and QED is summarized in
Fig. 1.

We have not included into Fig. 1 any results for which the uncertainty
is mainly due to electrical and material standards since the basic strategy
is to determine α without involving those standards and apply its value to
calibrate the standards. An accurate value of the ﬁne structure constant is
of great practical importance for electrical standards, mainly due to repro-
duction of ohm [22] and, perhaps in future, of kilogram [23]. The same value
of electrical resistance in any measurement performed at diﬀerent labora-
tories can be maintained with the help of the quantum Hall eﬀect without
any knowledge of the ﬁne structure constant. However, an accurate value
of α is still needed for a proper reproduction of the basic electrical units of

5

SI in order to avoid any inconsistency between the units of diﬀerent physi-
cal quantities. For example, the mentioned above quantum Hall resistance
(so called von Klitzing constant) is

RK =

µ0c
2α

h
e2 =
If the electrical standards accomodate an incorrect value of the quantum
Hall resistanse RK, it will lead to either a breakdown of the Ohm law (if
ohm, volt and ampere are treated in an inconsistent way) or to a discrep-
ancy (via the Ampere law) between watt determined from electrical and
mechanical units.

(2)

.

3 Are fundamental constant really fundamen-

tal?

Theory is not in position to produce any quantitative prediction, giving
instead some expressions for the quantities that can be measured. To obtain
any numerical results for those theoretical expressions, one needs some
values of the fundamental constants for the input data. This need for proper
input data limits accuracy even in a perfect theory. Those fundamental
constants originate from the Hamiltonian that describes free particles and
their interactions.

However, one needs to distinguish clearly between the unperturbed and

perturbed parameters of Hamiltonian.

• The former are real fundamental constants, which in some scenario
may be even ﬁxed and in principle can be calculated. However, the
unperturbed “bare” parameters, such as a bare electron charge e0,
have no direct relation to any actual measurements.

• In contrast, the latter are the constants we only see in our experi-
ments as a measured electric charge, mass etc. They are a result of
perturbations and renormalizations and from the fundamental point
of view they are only eﬀective parameters, like, e.g., eﬀective mass of
an electron in some medium. A diﬀerence between condensed matter
physics and particle physics is that an electron can be extracted from
any medium and studied as free, while in the case of particle physics
we cannot study an electron free of QED interactions.

The details of the renormalizazion δe = e − e0 depend on physics at
extremely short distances for which we have neither a proper theory nor
experimental data. The theory we deal with is not appropriate there. How-
ever, for conventional problems we used not to care about bare parameters

6

targeting to bridge diﬀerent measurements and thus expressing measured
cross sections, lifetimes and energy shifts in terms of measured masses and
charges. This idea was a breakthrough at the early time of QED and it
opens a way to a selfconsistent description of physics of our “low-energy”
world. To work for QED one needs to deal only with measurable quantities
and not to care about their “real” origin. However, a situation becomes
quite diﬀerent when we turn to the consideration of the variation of funda-
mental constants. In such a case we have to care about the origin of both
the bare charge e0 and the renormalization correction δe and in particular
about its dependence on details of physics at the Uniﬁcation and Planck
scale (MPl = (c¯h/G)1/2 ≃ 1.2 · 1019 Gev/c2 ≃ 2.2 · 10−8 g).

Thus, we arrive to a strange situation when there are some undetectable
truly fundamental constants and some universal experimental values re-
lated to perturbed eﬀective parameters.

Discussing a status of diﬀerent fundamental constants, we have to note

that there is some hierarchy among them.

• The most fundamental constants are constants related to properties
of space-time, namely, ¯h, c and G, which determine the Planck units.

• Another important set of fundamental constants is formed by those

which are responsible for properties of basic particles:

– electromagnetic, weak and strong coupling constants (and, in

particular, the electric charge e0);

– ΛQDC, a dimensional parameter of quantum chromodynamics,
which mainly determines observed mass of proton and neutron;
– Yukawa coupling constants of interaction of “normal” parti-
cles with the Higgs particles which determine the lepton, quark
masses and masses of intermediate bosons;

– parameters of the Higgs Lagrangian;
– parameters of the Cabibbo-Kobayashi-Maskawa matrix.

One can see that most of them cannot be measured precisely while some
cannot be measured at all. However, it may be useful to remember about
them when discussing a scenario of hierarchy of α, me and mp variation.
Other constants such as proton mass or magnetic moment are less funda-
mental.

7

4 Are the fundamental constant really con-

stants?

4.1 Expressing results in terms of basic constants

Since we distinguish between perturbed and unperturbed parameters of
Hamiltonian, the most obvious scenario is when variations are related to
eﬀective perturbed constants, while the truly fundamental constants do not
vary. However, a direct variation of parameters of the basic Hamiltonian
may be also possible.

In the introduction we made a statement that it is crucially important
to be able to compare diﬀerent results. Some measurable quantities can be
easily related to the fundamental constants.

• Optical transitions can be in principle expressed in terms of the Ry-

dberg constant and the ﬁne structure constant.

• A calculation of the hyperﬁne intervals requires some knowledge of
the magnetic moment of nuclei. A model that presents all nuclear
magnetic moments in terms of a few basic constants is necessary. An
only model, which can express the nuclear moments in simple terms
ab initio, is the Schmidt model (see Sect. 7). Unfortunately, it is
not accurate enough and introduces an uncertainty that is sometimes
large and probably cannot be reduced.

There are a number of values which cannot be expressed in simple terms
mainly because nuclear eﬀects dominate are strongly involved there. One
example is a low-lying resonance in samarium, similar situation arises with
a study of radioactive nuclear decay in samples from early time of either
Earth or meteorites, investigations of pulsar periods etc.

4.2 Basic constants

We do not discuss here any limits for a possible variation of the gravitational
constant G because they are much weaker than limits from spectroscopy.
We focus our consideration on atomic and in part molecular spectra, since
they can be studied with high accuracy and can be expressed in terms of
some basic constants.

From the experimental point of view the basic constants for interpreta-

tion of spectroscopic data are

• the ﬁne structure constant α;

• proton-to-electron mass ratio me/mp;

8

• g factor of proton;

• g factor of neutron.

The Rydberg constant Ry is not included because its variation cannot
be detected. Any results can be obtained only for dimensionless quanti-
ties which are mainly related to the frequency/energy ratio. Rigorously
speaking, a search for a variation of a dimensional value is also possible
but another kind of experiment is needed. All experiments for a search
of space and time variation of fundamental constants suggest two spec-
troscopic measurements separated in time and space. In the case of the
astrophysical spectroscopic data evaluation, the drift of the Rydberg con-
stant, if it happens, cannot be separated from the red shift due to expansion
of the Universe or a peculiar motion of the spectroscopic and is to be in-
terpreted as its part. To detect a drift of dimensional values in laboratory
experiments, we should check that the units are the same.
In practice
this involves another measurement and thus the signal for variation will be
related to some ratio of their data, i.e. it should be a relative measurement.
However, a measurement of time and/or space variation of a dimen-
sional quantity is still possible if an experiment is designed to deal directly
with gradients. Doing spectroscopy we can look for a variation of the ﬁne
structure constant which is dimensionless. However, looking at the propa-
gation of light we could judge on variability of the speed of light c which is
dimensional. It seems that a search for gradients is much more complicated.
In the case of the Rydberg constant it would be of interest to compare
radiation from the same sources separated in time. However, in a labo-
ratory experiment there is no reasonable way to delay the radiation for a
long enough period and thus to compare a frequency of light sent from
the same sources at diﬀerent times.
If a proper scheme is suggested, it
should be applied ﬁrst to detect the red shift due to the expansion of the
Universe which is at a level of a part in 1010 per year, while the variation
of constants should be at least a few orders of magnitude lower as we can
see from various experiments [1, 2, 3, 5] (see also Sect. 10).

One can see that the above mentioned set of “practical” fundamental
constants is really diﬀerent from the “truly” fundamental one discussed
above. This diﬀerence is really important from the theoretical point of
view.
In particular, looking for really fundamental constants instead of
the proton-to-electron mass ratio, one has to deal with the electron and
the proton mass. They are to be expressed in natural units of Grand
Uniﬁcation Theories (GUTs) which are related to either the Planck mass
or the Uniﬁcation mass. Since the origin of the electron mass (via the Higgs
sector) and the proton mass (via QCD conﬁnement) is diﬀerent, they have
to enter any theoretical scenario separately.

9

Expressing masses in units of the Planck mass we arrive to an experi-
mental problem. The Planck mass enters experimental data only via gravi-
tation eﬀects. However, there is no data for that (see, e.g., the review [24])
with spectroscopic accuracy. An exception might be a study of pulsar pe-
riods. Potentially they can provide us with more accurate data. However,
there is a number of reasons for the red shift of their period and the pulsar
data can be rather of use if the variation of constants leads to a blue shift of
the pulsar period. However, even in this case there are at least two sources
of the blue shift:

• an increase of the mass of the pulsar because of picking up some

amount of dust particles;

• a decrease of the Hubble red shift if the pulsar is going towards the

Earth.

The red shift is proportional to the distance between the emitter (the pul-
sar) and the absorber (the Earth) and it has to decrease when they move
towards each other. The value of the decrease is

∆z = −Hv∆t ,

(3)

where H is the Hubble constant and v is the relative velocity. For v =
200 km/s the decrease of frequency is 3 × 10−14 per year.
In order to
interpret the blue shift of the pulsar period at a level of a part per 1015
per year, one has to determine the radial component of the pulsar velocity
with the uncertainty below 10 km/s. Meanwhile, the radial component of
velocity cannot be determined so accurately. It is unlikely that an accuracy
with which a period of any puslar can be determined is good enough to
compete with spectroscopic data, however, they can deliver accurate lim-
its on a variation of the gravitational constant G, compatible with other
limitations.

4.3 Correlations between variations of diﬀerent con-

stants

There are two main problems related to the correlation of diﬀerent basic
constants. One is due to relations between truly fundamental constants
and observable basic parameters and the other is due to relations between
diﬀerent fundamental constants. Let us start with the ﬁrst one.

From the theory of strong interactions we know that the proton and
neutron mass in the so-called chiral limit as well as any other dimensional
quantities related to strong interactions are completely determined by a
single parameter ΛQCD. The dimensionless quantities are just constants.

10

However, quarks possess masses. Another violation of the chiral limit oc-
curs due to electromagnetic interactions which involve leptonic loops. In
other words, the renormalized electric charge of quarks and nucleons de-
pends on electron mass. Let us discuss dependence on quark masses in
more detail. It is well known that a parameter mq/ΛQCD is small for u and
d quarks only, while it is not small for heavier quarks such as s and c. We
remind that light quark masses are below 10 Mev/c2, while ΛQCD =216(25)
Mev/c2 and a mass of the s quark is between 80 and 155 Mev/c2 [30].

A fraction of heavier quarks is nearly vanishing in proton and neu-
tron and does not contribute to some of their properties, such as mag-
netic moment. Eﬀects of the light quark masses can be taken into account
via chiral perturbation theory (see [60] and references therein). However,
heavy quarks contribute to the proton and neutron mass at the level of
10-20% because their contributions are enhanced by their masses and such
contributions cannot be systematically taken into account. Note that the
dependence of their contribution on the masses is not simple because the
fraction of ss and cc pairs inside a proton depends on their masses.

Due to that, a practical question arises about ﬁxing a set of basic “prac-
tical” constants in the form as above. In particular, one can suggest to com-
bine g factors of nucleons and the mass ratio me/mp. A reason for that is
their sensitivity separately to the contents of the strange quark, while their
combination such as µp/µB does not depend on that. However, the nuclear
magnetic moment has the orbital component (proportional to the nuclear
magneton) and spin component (proportional to the proton/neutron mag-
netic moment). The magnetic moment of a nucleon (proton or neutron)
does not depend on eﬀects due to s and c quarks, while the nuclear mag-
neton determined via the proton mass does

µN =

e¯h
2mp

.

(4)

Thus, magnetic moments and g factors actually enter equations in diﬀerent
combinations some of which depend on the s quark mass, while some not.
A choice of a basic set is rather a matter of taste, however, variation of
mass, magnetic moments and g factors are correlated.

Variations of all fundamental constants are correlated and caused by the
same reasons and in principle the rate should be approximately the same.
However, some hierarchy is still in place and it depends on a scenario. Let
us present some examples.

• The phase transition in the inﬂatory model happened because of gen-
eral cooling, caused by the expansion, and temperature dependence
of the vacuum expectation of the Higgs ﬁeld. In that case the biggest
rate corresponds to the electron mass. QED with massless charged

11

leptons and in particular charge renormalization eﬀects in such a the-
ory diﬀer very much from “conventional” QED with massive charged
particles. In the massless case the electric charge does not exist in
“conventional” sense since it is deﬁned as a coupling constant for the
interaction at the asymptotically large distance. The result of such a
deﬁnition is divergent. However, that does not matter indeed in the
hot and dense Universe where there is some characteristic distance
between particles. After the phase transition which provides leptons
and quarks with their masses, the Universe is still expanding and
cooling and the electric charge varies now with time and temperature
via the vacuum polarization contributions to renormalization but at
a negligible and undetectable level. The variation of the electron
mass dominates. The variation of the electric charge of the electron
is slower than that of the electron mass. The variation of the pro-
ton mass is mainly caused by the contents of the strange quarks; the
same is with g factors of the proton and neutron. The variation of
the proton and neutron magnetic moments is even smaller and of the
order of gp/gn.

• In the case of some oscillations (within the cosmological time scale)
of the compactiﬁcation radius, which enters as an eﬀective cut-oﬀ
of ultraviolet logarithmic divergences for the renormalization of the
mass and charge of particles and likely determines parameters of the
interaction with the Higgs sector and ΛQCD, one should expect rel-
atively fast variations of the electron and proton masses separately
while the variation of their ratio strongly depends on details of the
model and in principle can vanish at all. The variation of the ﬁne
structure constant is to be slower than the variation of the proton
mass [25, 26]. The variation of the proton g factor is to be pro-
portional to the strange part of the proton mass and a rate for the
proton-to-electron mass ratio. The same is true for the neutron g
factor.

• One more scenario can be related to a kind of a domain structure
for some parameters which are not directly coupled to the vacuum
energy, like, e.g., the parameters of the Cabibbo-Kobayashi-Maskawa
(CKM) matrix and in particular the Cabibbo angle. In such a case the
biggest variation related to spectroscopy is to be for the g factor of the
proton and neutron. A domain structure may imply some relaxation
on the way to the homogenous equilibrium, which has to produce a
time variation to follow space variations. Another similar possibility
is due to a variation of some mass ratio such as me/mµ when the
vacuum energy is not changed. However, the most important eﬀect
is not directly related to spectroscopy. A shift of parameters of the

12

CKM matrix or mass ratios will strongly aﬀect the nuclear synthesis
chain and it may happen that the same isotopes as on the Earth exist
but with a diﬀerent abundance, or even some isotopes stable here are
unstable with shifted constants and vice versa. The spectroscopic
study of transitions in the gross and ﬁne structure from astrophysical
sources cannot resolve diﬀerent isotopes of the same element and
with diﬀerent isotopes presented the spectroscopic data will be indeed
aﬀected. Since relatively few elements are involved in analysis, the
α variations may be emulated by a proper correction of fundamental
constants which determine the nuclear synthesis. Lack of an accurate
theory does not allow to eliminate the competition between possible
α variation and diﬀerent nuclear systhesis. This question requires
further studies.

5 Hierarchy and scenario: two examples

A possibility that values of the fundamental constants vary with time at a
cosmological scale was ﬁrst suggested quite long ago [27], but no natural
idea about a reason for such a variation has been suggested since. There
are a number of simple reasons related to the evolution of Universe (cool-
ing, expansion etc) which imply some small slow variation but not at a
detectable level. Instead, there is a number of diﬀerent models and ideas
about what can cause the some bigger variations (see, e.g., [24]) which can
in principle be detected present days, but the truth is that we do not really
understand quantitively the origin of a number of basic quantities (funda-
mental constants) of our world and in particular cannot understand details
of their possible variation in time and space.

Let us consider some of the examples above in more detail. We as-
sume that most parameters may be in principle calculated and derived
within some Grand Uniﬁcation Theory. One may note that α ∼ 10−2 and
me/MPl ∼ 4 · 10−23, so that these quantities are of such a diﬀerent order of
magnitude that it is hard to expect that both are calculated on the same
ground. However, they can indeed become of the same order if we compare
α and ln(MPl/me) ≃ 51.5. If they could be derived from ﬁrst principles,
the result must be something like 1/π4 or π−2/4π and corrected due to
renormalization. How can the variations appear in such a scheme? We
have two basic suggestions.

• The values derived ab initio are related to some equilibrum state.
However, in a given moment t we observe a compactiﬁcation ra-
dius R(t) oscillating at a cosmological scale around an equilibrium
value R0, which is completely determined by the Planck length LPl =
¯h/MPlc. The observable fundamental constants depend on R(t) via

13

their remormalization and thus vary. Most of the consequences were
considered above in the previous section.

• Some parameters are chosen due to a spontaneous violation of sym-
metry. They may have space variation (especially if this breakdown
happened at the late period of the inﬂation) and their scatter will
cause the space variation while their relaxation may be responsible
for the time variation.

The inﬂatory model assumes some phase transition with a breakdown
of symmetry and fast expansion at the same time. This phase transition
was suggested (see, e.g., [28]) because we have to explain why essential
properties of diﬀerent parts of our Universe are the same with those parts
in an earlier period although they are separated by horizon and cannot
interfere with each other. The problem was solved by suggesting the in-
ﬂation phase: a phase transition with so fast expansion that two points
which were close to each other after the transition become separated by
a horizon for a long cosmological time period. As we discussed in [29], it
may produce some space non-homogenous distribution for some parameters
just after the inﬂation and their independent time evolution in the remote
horizon-separated area with a cosmological scale.

One can note that we have a number of parameters, the origin of which

we do not undestand (see, e.g., [30]):

• parameters of the Cabibbo-Kobayashi-Maskawa (CKM) matrix, which
are responsible for diﬀerent eﬀects of the weak interactions with
quarks and hadrons;

• the ratio mµ/me and other mass ratios for leptons and quarks from
diﬀerent generations. Actually, even within the same generation we
cannot explain values of me/mu and md/mu.

Let us assume that they are a result of the same spontaneous breakdown
of symmetry, which caused the inﬂation, and their values are determined
worldwide during the inﬂation phase. We also suggest that they are not
directly coupled to the vacuum energy1 so that their space ﬂuctuations
cannot have the same value independently. There is no reason for them to
be exactly the same everywhere and thus they can slightly vary in space
and time and a pattern of their current values should be “frozen out” with
an increase of the horizon separating diﬀerent areas of the Universe. The
space dependence will lead to time variations on a way to the equalibrium.
1There is a number of parameters due to the CKM matrix and mass ratios and we
can consider the vacuum energy as their function. The energy deﬁnitely depends on
some parameters, however, it may happen that there is a valley in some direction of
the multiparameter space. In other words, we suggest that it is possible to coherently
change some parameters in such a way that the vacuum energy is not changed.

14

Let us brieﬂy discuss the consequences.

• In the leading approximation, a weak-interaction eﬀects related to the
CKM matrix will lead to some correction to the magnetic moment
of proton and neutron only at a level of a part in 105 and thence
the variation of the magnetic moments should be 105 weaker than
a variation of the CKM parameters. The proton and electron mass
will not be shifted as well as the ﬁne structure constant. In a cosmo-
logical scale they will also contribute to parameters of eﬀective weak
interactions and in particular to neutron lifetime.

• The variation of mass parameters related to diﬀerent generations like,
e.g., mµ/me has unclear consequences for the ﬁne structure constant
because we do not really know the origin of the ratio mµ/me and do
not know which combination of me and mµ is coupled to the vacuum
energy. Thus we cannot guess what a variation by, e.g., a factor of two
means for either of two masses (in natural units of the Planck mass).
It may happen that the electron and muon masses will be changed by
two orders separately, or on the contrary, one mass can go up and the
other down. In the ﬁrst case a contribution to renormalization will be
strongly aﬀected. If masses themselves vary much faster than their
ratio, a variation of the ﬁne structure constant will be compatible with
the variation of the mass ratio. In the second case the renormalization
is weaker because the variation of the contributions of electron and
muon loops will in part compensate each other and because they will
be also suppressed by logarithmic nature of renormalization. The
magnetic moments of the proton and neutron will be not changed.
The proton mass will vary slightly because of the contribution of the
current quark masses (particularly of that of the s quark), while the
electron mass can vary with any rate. We see that any clariﬁcation
of details is only possible after a model is speciﬁed.
It is most likely that the lepton and quark masses should be somehow
coupled to the vacuum energy. But some their speciﬁc combinations
could still be uncoupled (see the footnote above). It is more natural
to expect that vacuum energy should depend on some “averadge”
mass of all leptons and quarks and thus the second scenario is more
probable.

The hierarchy is very diﬀerent from, e.g., the one suggested in [26, 31] with
a much faster variation of mp/me than that of the ﬁne structure constant α
and the g factors. We discuss these two examples in order to demonstrate
that hierarchy depends on a scenario and there is a great number of very
diﬀerent options for them. Further discussion of the hierarhy and scenaria
is presented in [29].

15

Table 1: Scaling behavior of energy intervals as functions of the funda-
mental constants. Ry stands for the Rydberg constant, µ is the nuclear
magnetic moment. The references are related to papers where use of this
scaling behavior in a search for the variations was pointed out. Importance
of the relativistic corrections for the hyperﬁne structure was ﬁrst empha-
sized in [34], while for other atomic transitions it was discussed in [35].

Transition

Ato
mic

Gross structure
Fine structure
Hyperﬁne structure
Mole Electronic structure
cular Vibration structure
Rotational structure

Relativistic corrections

Energy scaling
Ry
α2Ry
α2(µ/µB)Ry
Ry
(me/mp)1/2Ry
(me/mp)Ry
Extra factor of α2

Refs.
[32]
[32]
[32]
[33]
[33]
[33]
[34, 35]

6 Atomic spectroscopy and variation of fun-

damental constants

High-resolution spectroscopy oﬀers a possibility to study variations of fun-
damental constants based on a simple non-relativistic estimation of energy
intervals for atomic and molecular transitions [32, 33] (see Table 1). Impor-
tance of the relativistic corrections was ﬁrst emphasized in [34] (studying
the hyperﬁne intervals in diﬀerent atoms) and later was explored in [35]
for applications to other transitions realized in most accurate microwave
and optical measurements. Recently relativistic atomic calculations were
intensively used for a study of astrophysical data in [2, 35].

We have to emphasize that a study of atomic and molecular transitions
in contrast to nuclear energy levels allows a reliable interpretation of the
results in terms of the fundamental constants. Most of laboratory tran-
sitions and an essential part of astrophysical ones involve s levels, which
have a wave function non-vanishing in the vicinity of the nucleus. The
operators related to relativistic corrections are singular at short distances
and the relativistic corrections involve (Zα)2 rather than α2, even for neu-
tral atoms and singly charged ions [36, 35]. For heavy nuclei with a large
value of the nuclear charge Z such relativistic eﬀects signiﬁcantly shift the
non-relativistic result [35].

As an example of the application of atomic and molecular transitions,
we collect in Table 2 most recent astrophysical results on the variation

16

Table 2: Most recent astrophysical limits for the variation of fundamental
constants. Comments: a – based on relativistic corrections; b – related to
H2 molecular spectroscopy; c – originates from a comparison of hydrogen
HFS interval with hydrogen molecular spectroscopy.

Value
∂ ln α/∂t
∂ ln(mp/me)/∂t
∂ ln(α2gp)/∂t

Variation
(−0.5 ± 0.1) × 10−15 yr−1
(5 ± 3) × 10−15 yr−1
(−0.3 ± 0.6) × 10−15 yr−1

[2]
[5]
[37]

a
b
c

Reference Comment

of fundamental constants. The astrophysical results used to be originally
presented in terms of a variation of a constant at a given value of the red
shift z. We present them in terms of a variation rate assuming a linear
time dependence in order to be able to compare the astrophysical data
with laboratory results which are discussed in the following sections. Since
the linear drift is an open question, one should consider the data in Table 2
not as a rigorous result, but rather as an illustration.

7 Hyperﬁne structure and variation of nu-

clear magnetic moments

Successes of high resolution spectroscopy (except last few years) were mostly
related to precision measurements of hyperﬁne structure in neutral atoms
(cesium, rubidium, hydrogen etc.) or single charged ions (mecrury, ytter-
bium etc.). Even today, despite a dramatic progress with optical transitions
which presents a revolution in frequency metrology, the most accurate com-
parison of two frequencies is related to a comparison of hyperﬁne intervals
in neutral cesium and rubidium [3]. It is this experiment that can poten-
tially provide us with the most strong laboratory limit on a variation of
one of fundamental constants.

However, one question remains to be solved: how to express all nuclear
magnetic moments in terms of a few basic constants. At least for an odd
nucleus this problem can be solved with the help of so called Schmidt model
(see for detail [38].

The model explains a value of the magnetic moment of a nucleus with
an odd number of nucleons as a result of the spin and orbit motion of a
single nucleon, while the others are coupled and do not contribute. This ap-
proximation is reasonable when the coupled nucleons form closed shells. If
the shells are not closed, the corrections could be quite large and the model

17

Table 3: Hyperﬁne splitting and magnetic moment of some alkali atoms.
Here: uS is the Schmidt value of the nuclear magnetic moment µ while
µN is the nuclear magneton. The uncertainty of the calculation in [34,
36] is estimated by comparing less accurate general results on cesium and
mercury in [34, 36] with a more accurate calculation in [35]. The actual
values of the nuclear magnetic moments are taken from [39]. A sensitivity
to α variation is deﬁned as κ = ∂ ln

/∂ ln α.

Z

Atom Schmidt value Actual value

κ

for µ
(µS/µN )
gp/2
gn/2
5/14(8 − gp)
gp/2 + 1
7/18(10 − gp)
−gn/6
−gn/6

1
4
37

55
70
80

H
9Be+
85Rb
87Rb
133Cs
171Yb+
199Hg+

Frel(α)
(cid:1)

(cid:0)

for µ
(µ/µS)
1.00
0.62
1.57
0.74
1.50
0.77
0.80

Relativistic
factor
Frel(α)
1.00
1.00
1.15, [34, 36]
1.15, [34, 36]
1.39, [35]
1.78, [34, 36]
2.26, [35]

0.00
0.00
0.30(6)
0.30(6)
0.83
1.42(15)
2.30

is far from perfect as it is clear from Table 3 where we present some data
related to atoms of interest and obtained from microwave spectroscopy.

The most accurate up-to-now frequency comparison is related to the
hyperﬁne intervals of cesium-133 and rubidium-87 in their ground states
[3], however, there is a problem of a proper interpretation of the result in
terms of the fundamental constants due to signiﬁcant corrections to the
Schmidt values.

We have to note that in general the corrections to the Schmidt model
are comparable to relativistic corrections caused by atomic eﬀects. The
relativistic corrections expressed in terms of a correcting factor to the non-
relativistic result

∆E = ∆E(non−rel) × Frel(α)

(5)

are also summarized in Table 3.

However, it is not very clear which nucleus is good for a search, the
one with small corrections to the Schmidt model or the one with the large
corrections. Indeed, in the case of small corrections the interpretation is
easier. However, as one can see from Sect. 4.3, in some models the g factor
of the nucleon should vary relatively slow. In the case of chiral QCD (a
limit of zero masses for the current quarks) the nucleon g factors are in
principle completely determined. When one takes into account the current
masses of the u and d quarks, the corrections to the nucleon magnetic

18

moment and the nucleon mass are negligible. However, that is not the case
for the current mass of the s quark, which signiﬁcantly aﬀects the nucleon
mass, but not the magnetic moment. In other words, the nuclear magneton
(e¯h/2mp) is shifted with the correction to mp, while the magnetic moments
of proton and neutron are not. Since the g factor is a ratio of the nucleon
magnetic moment and the nuclear magneton, the g factors of the proton
and the neutron are to be shifted coherently with their ratio not aﬀected.
The main property of QCD is that in the chiral limit the dimensional value
depends on a parameter ΛQCD, while dimensionless ones are independent
and ﬁxed. If we accept ideas of [26] that the variations are somehow caused
by variations of ΛQCD, a variation of the g factors has to be relatively slow
and in principle it may happen that nuclear corrections vary faster than g
factors.

We also need to mention a correlation between a relative value of the
correction to the Schmidt model and importance of the orbital contribution
to the nuclear magnetic moment. As one can see from Table 3 the biggest
corrections to the Schmidt model (87Rb and 133Cs) related to a distructive
interference between the spin and orbit contributions. The partial cance-
lation between these two terms which diﬀerently depend on fundamental
constants oﬀers hyperﬁne intervals which are potentially the most sensitive
to the variations of the constants. In all other atoms important for fre-
quency standards in Table 3 the orbital contribution either small or vanish
at all and since the gp and gn can vary coherently this intervals could be
not quite sensitive to a variation of the QCD parameter ΛQCD. In such a
situation it is important to study both the magnetic moments with small
corrections to the Schmidt model and those with the large corrections.

The most accurate microwave measurements are related to hyperﬁne
intervals in hydrogen [40], ytterbium ion [41], rubidium [3] and cesium.
A value of the latter is accepted by deﬁnition but one has to provide a
realization of this deﬁnition which involves experimental uncertainties. The
experiment with four mentioned hyperﬁne intervals were performed several
times and provide us with some limits on the variation of their frequency.
Most of experiments were carried out as absolute measurements, i.e. as a
comparison of a frequency under study with the cesium hyperﬁne interval.
A few more measurements were performed as relative measurements with a
direct comparison of two diﬀerent frequencies. Work on some experiments
is not yet completed and we can hope that their results will be repeated
with higher accuracy. There are also some experiments (see [38] for detail)
which were done with high accuracy only once and unfortunately there are
no plans to repeat them in close future: on beryllium [42] and mercury
[43].

The Schmidt model also predicts that some nuclear magnetic moments
have to be quite small because of a signiﬁcant cancellation between the

19

proton spin and orbit contributions, in particular for nuclei of 1/2− and
3/2+ (see [38] for detail). Those magnetic moments as well as small mag-
netic moments of even nuclei can be used to look for a variation of the
fundamental constants since an enhancement may arise in them because of
a substantial cancellation between contributions with diﬀerent dependence
on fundamental constants. Extending our interest to even and radioactive
nuclei, we can note that a cancellation between diﬀerent contributions (pro-
ton and neutron spins, proton orbit) can lead to a dramatically small value.
For instance, the nuclear magnetic moment of 198Tl (T1/2 = 5.3(5) h) is
below than a part in 103 of the nuclear magneton.

We have to note that often two additional neutrons do not change the
nuclear magnetic moment very much and the magnetic moments for diﬀer-
ent odd isotopes of the same element are about the same. For rubidium-85
(I = 5/2) and for rubidium-87 (I = 3/2) that is not a case and their com-
parison will be free of a variation of the ﬁne structure constant, so that by
comparing them one can study a variation of gp only.

8 Optical transitions and variation of the ﬁne

structure constant

Optical transitions are free of the problem of nuclear eﬀects. There are two
kinds of optical experiments:

• One can compare an optical frequency with another optical one.

• One can measure an absolute optical frequency, i.e. compare an op-

tical frequency with a hyperﬁne interval in cesium.

The latter suggests a mixed optical–microwave experiment, however, the ce-
sium frequency may be excluded from the ﬁnal interpretation. The optical–
optical and optical–microwave high precision relative measurements are
now possible due to the recently developed frequency comb [44].

The most accurate measurements were performed with the hydrogen
[45] and calcium [47] atoms and with the ytterbium [46] and mercury [47, 8]
ions. All these results can contribute in accurate limits on the variation
of the constants if they are repeated with high accuracy, since previous
measurements were not as accurate as the most recent ones. As far as I
know, all experiments are in progress and new results have to be expected
soon. Somewhat less accurate results were achieved some time ago for the
indium [48] and strontium [11] ions and further progress is still possible.

The claimed accuracy of experiments [45, 47, 46] (see Table 4) was at
the level of a part per 1014 and one may doubt their high precision as
well as in that in the case of microwave experiments [3, 40, 42, 41, 43]. In

20

Table 4: The most accurate optical measurements: results and sensitivity
of the optical transitions to a time variation of α. The sensitivity to α
variation is deﬁned as κ = ∂ ln
/∂ ln α and presented according to
[35], except for the strontium result (⋆) which is our rough estimate based
on [35].

Frel(α)
(cid:1)
(cid:0)

Z Atom

1
H
20
Ca
Sr+
38
In+
49
70 Yb+
80 Hg+

Frequency
[Hz]
2 466 061 413 187 103(46), [45]
455 986 240 494 158(26), [47]
444 779 044 095 520(100), [11]
1 267 402 452 899 920(230), [48]
688 358 979 309 312(6), [46]
1 064 721 609 899 143(10), [47]
1 064 721 609 899 144(14), [8]

Fractional
uncertainty
2 × 10−14
6 × 10−14
22 × 10−14
18 × 10−14
0.9 × 10−14
0.9 × 10−14
1.0 × 10−14

κ
[35]
0.00
0.03
0.25⋆
0.21
0.9
- 3.18

most laboratories the results were reproduced for a number of times with
a diﬀerent setup, e.g., with diﬀerent ion traps. A few experiments were
independently performed in several laboratories:

• the hydrogen hyperﬁne splitting was numerously measured in 1970-

1980 [40] (see also [38] for detail);

• cesium standards from diﬀerent laboratories were numerously com-

pared one to another (see e.g. [49]);

• the ytterbium microwave interval was measured a few times at PTB

[50] and NML [41];

and NIST [47].

• the calcium optical transition was measured a few times at PTB [51]

Only one of the four mentioned above quantities is related to optical tran-
sitions. However, good understanding of a cesium standard is crucially
important if we like to interpret two absolute measurements of diﬀerent
optical transitions realized in diﬀerent laboratories as an indirect measure-
ment of their ratio. There are also other possibilities to verify accuracy of
spectroscopic experiments.

A test for the 1s − 2s transition was recently performed at MPQ [9]. A
study of transitions for diﬀerent hyperﬁne components and determination
of their diﬀerence oﬀer a possibility to ﬁnd the hyperﬁne interval for the
metastable 2s state. The uncertainty of the 2s hyperﬁne interval is 6×10−15

21

2s1/2

2s hfs (rf)

two-photon 

uv transitions 

1s1/2

1s hfs (rf) 

F = 1 (triplet)

F = 0 (singlet)

Figure 2: The level scheme for an optical measurement of the 2s hyperﬁne
structure in the hydrogen atom [9].

of the big 1s − 2s interval (see Fig. 2). The optical result [9] for this
microwave quantity has an accuracy higher than the recent radio frequency
result [52] and it is in good agreement with theory [53].

Several transitions for hydrogen, calcium, ytterbium and mercury have
been accurately measured a few times or monitored for some period. How-
ever, the monitoring was performed for a relative short period (a few
months rather than a few years) and in the case of a comparison of two
measurements separated by years, the second wave of the measurements
(see Table 4) was more accurate than the ﬁrst wave. An exception is a
recent measurement on mercury [8]. After experiments [45, 47, 46] are re-
produced with higher accuracy, we will obtain four values for a variation
of the optical frequencies with respect to the cesium microwave frequency.
The frequency f of an optical transition can be presented in the form

f = const × Ry × Frel(α) .

(6)

A possible variation of the value of the Rydberg constant in SI units is re-
lated to a variation of the cesium hyperﬁne interval in natural atomic units
and cannot have simple interpretation (see Sect. 7). However, we can com-
pare a relative drift of optical frequencies as a function of ∂Frel(α)/∂ ln(α).
The expected signature of the variation of the ﬁne structure constant is
presented in Fig. 3. The dashed line

∂ ln(f )
∂t

= a + b ×

∂Frel(α)
∂ ln(α)

,

(7)

22

 

+

In

H

+

Yb

Ca

+

Sr

 

1
-

5
1
-

]

r
y
 

0
1

[
 
 
t

d
/
)
f
(
n

l
 

d

+

Hg

-4

-2

0

2

d ln(f) /d ln 

α

Figure 3: The expected structure of the optical data for a possible vari-
ation of the fundamental constants. A value of ∂Frel(α)/∂ ln(α) for each
transition has been taken from [35] (see Table 4 for detail).

is related to the time variation:

of the Rydberg constant in the SI units and

a =

∂ ln(Ry)
∂t

b = ∂ ln α/∂t

of the ﬁne structure constant α.

(8)

(9)

9 Application of frequency measurements to
a search for the violation of the Lorentz
invariance

A search for a time variation of a ratio of two frequencies can also be
applied to test the Lorentz invariance. A breakdown of this invariance
assumes existence of a favorite frame, but we actually have one. That is
the frame where the microwave background radiation is isotropic. An only

23

question is whether there are any eﬀects depending on the velocity v with
respect to this frame or not. A violation of the Lorentz invariance can, for
example, lead to diﬀerent summation of two velocities. A transition energy
has to be of the form:

∆E = c1 · α2mc2 ×

1 + c2 ·

+ c3 · α4mc2 ×

1 + c4 ·

(cid:18)

v2
c2 (cid:19)

v2
c2 (cid:19)

.

= ∆Ev=0 ×

1 + ceﬀ ·

(cid:18)

v2
c2 (cid:19)

+

(cid:18)

(10)

The coeﬃcients c2 and c4 are rather of kinematic origin and it can
happen that they depend on an atom only slightly. However, if relativistic
corrections are big enough, an anomalous coeﬃcient ceﬀ deﬁnitely has to
be diﬀerent. The velocity of the Sun with respect to the frame where the
microwave background is isotropic is well known [55]. Because of the Earth
motion with respect to the Sun, the value of v2/c2 is changing periodically
with the amplitude of 2.5 × 10−7.

The expected amplitude of the annual variation of the value of v2/c2 in
Eq. (10) actually does not depend strongly on the assumption what frame
is the favorite. However, the assumption that the favorite frame is the
one where the microwave background radiation is isotropic, can essentially
simplify analysis because of a known phase of the annual oscillations.

By now, a number of systems with great relativistic corrections have
been studied (atomic transitions, nuclear magnetic moments etc). The
highest accuracy is slightly better than a part per 1014. However, the
biggest uncertainty is rather systematic than statistical and can be dis-
missed when looking for a periodic oscillation with a period of a sidereal
year with a known phase. We expect that the limit for ceﬀ at the level of
a few ppb is feasible.

10 Summary

10.1 Actual laboratory limits for variation of funda-

mental constants

There are two kinds of comparisons of diﬀerent frequencies. One is related
to so-called clock comparisons. In other words, the idea of the experiment
is to compare two clocks, based on diﬀerent transitions. The other kind of
comparison is a direct comparison of two measured frequencies. When a
relation of a transition frequency and clock frequency is well understood, a
clock comparison is the same as a comparison of the transition frequencies.
However, it is often not the case, because there is a number of systematic
eﬀects responsible for a diﬀerence between an unperturbed value of some

24

5:

Current

laboratory limits

Table
frequency
(1/f ) |(∂f )/(∂t)| in SI units (i.e. with respect to a hyperﬁne interval in
cesium. Limits marked with an asterix (∗) are obtained by comparing two
or more separately published measurements, while the ones marked with
a star (⋆) are taken from direct monitoring of two frequencies within the
same long-term experiment.

on variation of

Atoms
H
Rb
Yb+
H
Ca
Hg+
Mg

Limit
2 × 10−13 yr−1
7 × 10−16
5 × 10−14
1 × 10−13
8 × 10−14
7 × 10−15
3 × 10−13

Ref(s).
[40, 38]∗
[6]⋆
[56, 41]∗
[57, 45]∗
[58, 51, 47]∗
[47, 8]∗
[59]⋆

Comment
Hyperﬁne
structure

Gross
structure

Fine structure

transition and a reference frequency produced by the clock. A well known
example when they are essentially not the same is a hydrogen mazer. The
eﬀects due to the wall shift, which are actually time dependent (and that
is clearly seen from long-term measurements), are essentially bigger than
a short-term unstability.
In contrast to a number of papers (see, e.g.,
[24]) we follow [38] and completely exclude any clock comparisons from
our consideration paying attention to comparisons of transition frequencies
only. We collect current laboratory limits for the variation of frequencies
of atomic transitions of gross, ﬁne and hyperﬁne structure in Table 5.

Dependence of the frequencies on the fundamental constants is discussed
above and one can interpret the data from Table 5 in terms of the funda-
mental constants. There are various ways to achieve a pure optical result
for the variation. One can combine two gross structure transitions and take
advantage of diﬀerent values of relativistic corrections. Another possibil-
ity is to combine a gross structure transition and a ﬁne structure one and
to use their diﬀerent non-relativitic behavior as a function of fundamental
constants. In both cases the hyperﬁne interval of cesium can be used as a
reference line and its eﬀects will be canceled in the ﬁnal result assuming a
variation with a cosmological scale. We note, however, that a variation of
atomic frequencies can in principle be caused by a violation of the Lorentz
invariance (see, e.g., the previous section). In such a case a variation of the
frequency ratio should have a fast component and a combination of results
from a few separate experiments requires an additional analysis.

The actual limits for the variation of the fundamental constants are
summarized in Table 6. To estimate the variation of gp we use the result

25

Table 6: Actual laboratory limits for a variation of the fundamental con-
stants (see [38, 54, 29] for detail). All results but a limit for gp are model
independent. The gp result is based on the Schmidt model.

Fundamental
constant
α
α2µp/µe
α−3µp/µe
α2µn/µe
µp/µe
µn/µe
gn/gp
me/mp
gp

Limit for
variation rate
1 × 10−14 yr−1
6 × 10−14 yr−1
7 × 10−15 yr−1
8 × 10−14 yr−1
2 × 10−14 yr−1
6 × 10−14 yr−1
5 × 10−14 yr−1
2 × 10−13 yr−1
4 × 10−16 yr−1

[3]. However, for all other limits we combine a comparison of some probe
frequency with the cesium hyperﬁne interval and the result [3]. Thus, we
exclude cesium from consideration and eﬀectively deal with the variation of
the probe frequency with respect to the rubidium hyperﬁne interval. The
latter is understood better than cesium within the Schmidt model and thus
provides us with more reliable data.

We note that recently a number of optical transitions were measured
only once and data coming in 2003 and 2004 are expected to improve
essentially a limit for a variation of the ﬁne structure constant and thus of
µp/µe and mp/me.

10.2 Comparison of laboratory searches to others

Advantages and disadvantages of diﬀerent searches for the variation of the
fundamental constants are summarized in Table 7 (see [38, 54, 29] for de-
tail). We note that the sensitivity of various methods to the separation
of space and time variations is diﬀerent. Also diﬀerent is a possibility to
distinguish between an oscillation and a linear drift within a cosmologi-
cal scale. The level of limits retaled to diﬀerent epochs is quite diﬀerent,
however, it is absolutely unclear how the variations should behave with
time. For instance it may happen that they slow down. Access to diﬀerent
constants and reliability of results also diﬀer from one approach to another.
A crucial problem for a reliable interpretation is the involvement of
strong interactions. In principle, it may be possible to avoid the nuclear

26

Table 7: Comparison of diﬀerent kinds of a search for the variation of the
fundamental constants (see [38, 54, 29] for detail).

Geochemistry
∆t ∼ 109 yr
∆l ≃ 109 c×yr ∆l ≃

Drift or oscillation
Space variations
Level of limits
Present results
Variation of α

10−17 yr−1
Negative
Not reliable
Variation of me/mp Not accessible
Not accessible
Not accessible
Not sensitive
Laboratory

Variation of gp
Variation of gn
Strong interactions

Drift or oscillation ∆t ∼ 1 − 30 yr
Space variations
Level of limits
Present results
Variation of α
Variation of me/mp
Variation of gp
Variation of gn
Strong interactions

0
10−15 yr−1
Negative
Accessible
Accessible
Accessible
Accessible
Sensitive

c×yr

Astrophysics
∆t ∼ 109 − 1010 yr
109 − 1010
10−15 yr−1
(cid:0)
(cid:1)
Positive (α)
Accessible
Accessible
Accessible
Not accessible
Not sensitive
Laboratory
(optics)
∆t ∼ 1 − 10 yr
0
10−14 yr−1
Negative
Accessible
Not accessible
Not accessible
Not accessible
Not sensitive

corrections to the Schmidt model in a study of microwave transitions. For
example, a limit of a possible variation of the ﬁne structure constant could
be achieved from a comparison of the hyperﬁne interval in the ground state
of single charged ions of ytterbium-171 and mercury-199. We note that the
Schmidt values for these nuclei are the same. The actual values are some-
what below the Schmidt values (by approximately 20%), but they are also
approximately the same (within 4%) for both elements (see Table 3). If that
is a systematic eﬀect, the corrections to the Schmidt model for ytterbium
and mercury can cancel each other and a variation of the frequency is to be
completely determined by a possible variation of α. Unfortunately, there
is no satisfactory understanding if the correction is a systematic eﬀect, or
it accidentally has about the same value for two elements.

A clear advantage of the optical measurements is their reliable interpre-
tation for each particular measurement and a possibility to compare results

27

of diﬀerent experiments.

Because of diﬀerent sensitivity to various eﬀects and diﬀerent possible
hierarchy which can take place because of diﬀerent scenaria, we believe that
it is worth trying to search for possible variations using diﬀerent methods
and a wide variety of studied quantities. A study of optical transitions
is one of those, which have clear advantages and disadvantages discussed
above, and we hope that progress in frequency metrology in the optical and
ultraviolet domain will soon deliver us new accurate results.

Recent progress in optical spectroscopy allows us to hope that new data
on optical frequency measurements will appear within one or two years and
the optical limits on a possible variation of the ﬁne structure constant will
be improved.

Acknowledgments

The author is grateful to Z. Berezhiani, V. Flambaum, H. Fritzsch, T. W.
H¨ansch, J. L. Hall, L. Hollberg, M. Kramer, W. Marciano, M. Murphy, A.
Nevsky, L. B. Okun, E. Peik, T. Udem, D. A. Varshalovich, M. J. Wouters
and J. Ye for useful and stimulating discussions. The consideration in
Sect. 9 was stimulated in part by a discussion with W. Phillips at HYPER
symposium who pointed out that for the energy of the s states only eﬀects
quadratic in velocity could be important. The work was supported in part
by RFBR under grants ## 00-02-16718, 02-02-07027, 03-02-16843.

References

[1] A. I. Shlyakhter, Nature (London) 264, 340 (1976);

T. Damour and F. Dyson, Nucl. Phys. B480, 596 (1994);
Y. Fujii, A. Iwamoto, T. Fukahori, T. Ohnuki, M. Nakagawa, H. Hi-
daka, Y. Oura, and P. Moller, Nucl.Phys. B573, 377 (2000).

[2] J. K. Webb, M. T. Murphy, V. V. Flambaum, S. J. Curran, Astrophys.

Space Sci. 283, 565 (2003).

[3] C. Salomon, Y. Sortais, S. Bize, M. Abgrall, S. Zhang, C. Nicolas,
C. Mandache, P. Lemonde, P. Laurent, G. Santarelli, A. Clairon, N.
Dimarcq, P. Petit, A. Mann, A. Luiten, and S. Chang, in Atomic
Physics 17 (AIP conference proceedings 551). Ed. by E. Arimondo et
al. AIP, 2001, p. 23.

[4] T. Kinoshita and M. Nio, Phys. Rev. Lett. 90, 021803 (2003).

28

[5] A. Ivanchik, E. Rodriguez, P. Petitjean, and D. Varshalovich, Astron.
Lett. 28, 423 (2002); A. Ivanchik, P. Petitjean, E. Rodriguez, and D.
Varshalovich, Astrophys. Space Sci. 283, 583 (2003).

[6] H. Marion, F. Pereira Dos Santos, M. Abgrall, S. Zhang, Y. Sortais,
S. Bize, I. Maksimovic, D. Calonico, J. Gruenert, C. Mandache, P.
Lemonde, G. Santarelli, Ph. Laurent, A. Clairon, and C. Salomon,
Phys. Rev. Lett. 90, 150801 (2003).

[7] G. Wilpers, T. Binnewies, C. Degenhardt, U. Sterr, J. Helmcke, and

F. Riehle, Phys. Rev. Lett. 89, 230801 (2002)

[8] S. Bize, S. A. Diddams, U. Tanaka, C. E. Tanner, W. H. Oskay, R. E.
Drullinger, T. E. Parker, T. P. Heavner, S. R. Jeﬀerts, L. Hollberg,
W. M. Itano, D. J. Wineland, and J. C. Bergquist, Phys. Rev. Lett.
90, 150802 (2003).

[9] N. Kolachevsky, M. Fischer, S. G. Karshenboim and T.W. H¨ansch,
Can. J. Phys. 80, 1225 (2002); Eprint physics/0305073; Phys. Rev.
Lett. to be published.

[10] E. Peik and Chr. Tamm, Europhys. Lett. 61, 181 (2003).

[11] H. S. Margolis, G. Huang, G. P. Barwood, S. N. Lea, H. A. Klein, W.
R. C. Rowley, P. Gill, and R. S. Windeler, Phys. Rev. A 67, 032501
(2003)

[12] S. G. Karshenboim, In Atomic Physics 17 (AIP conference proceed-

ings 551). Ed. by E. Arimondo et al. (AIP, 2001), p. 238.

[13] S. G. Karshenboim, In Precision physics of simple atomic systems,
ed. by S. G. Karshenboim and V. B. Smirnov, (Springer, Berlin, Hei-
delberg, 2003), p. 141.

[14] R.S. Van Dyck Jr., P. B. Schwinberg, and H. G. Dehmelt, Phys. Rev.
Lett. 59, 26 (1987); V. W. Hughes and T. Kinoshita, Rev. Mod. Phys.
71, S133(1999).

[15] W. Liu, M. G. Boshier, S. Dhawan, O. van Dyck, P. Egan, X. Fei,
M. G. Perdekamp, V. W. Hughes, M. Janousch, K. Jungmann, D.
Kawall, F. G. Mariam, C. Pillai, R. Prigl, G. zu Putlitz, I. Reinhard,
W. Schwarz, P. A. Thompson, and K. A. Woodle, Phys. Rev. Lett.
82, 711 (1999); A. Czarnecki, S. I. Eidelman and S. G. Karshenboim,
Phys. Rev. D65, 053004 (2002).

[16] P. J. Mohr and B. N. Taylor, Rev. Mod. Phys. 72, 351 (2000).

29

[17] A. Wicht, J. M. Hensley, E. Sarajlic, and S. Chu, In Proceedings of
the 6th Symposium Frequency Standards and Metrology, ed. by P. Gill
(World Sci., 2002), p.193.

[18] T. Beier, H. Haﬀner, N. Hermanspahn, S. G. Karshenboim, H.-J.
Kluge, W. Quint, S. Stahl, J. Verdu, and G. Werth, Phys. Rev. Lett.
88, 011603 (2002).

[19] S. G. Karshenboim and A. I. Milstein, Phys. Lett. B 549, 321 (2002).

[20] G. W. F. Drake, Can. J. Phys. 80, 1195 (2002).

[21] M. C. George, L. D. Lombardi, and E. A. Hessels, Phys. Rev. Lett.

87, 173002 (2001).

[22] B. N. Taylor and T. J. Witt, Metrologia 26, 47 (1989).

[23] B. N. Taylor and P. J. Mohr, Metrologia 36, 63 (1999).

[24] J.-P. Uzan, Rev. Mod. Phys. 75, 403 (2003).

[25] W. J. Marciano, Phys. Rev. Lett. 52, 489 (1984).

[26] X. Calmet and H. Fritzsch, Eur. Phys. J. C24, 639 (2002); H. Fritzsch,

E-print hep-ph/0212186.

[27] P. A. M. Dirac, Nature 139 (1937) 323;

F. J. Dyson, In Aspects of Quantum Theory (Cambridge Univ. Press,
Cambridge, 1972) p. 213; In Current Trends in the Theory of Fields
(AIP, New York, 1983), p. 163.

[28] A. Linde, In Three Hundred Years of Gravitaion (Ed. by S. W. Hawk-
ing and W. Israel, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 1987), p.
604;
S. K. Blau and A. H. Guth, ibid., p. 524;
G. B¨orner, The Early Universe (Springer-Verlag, 1993).

[29] S. G. Karshenboim, Eprint physics/0306180, to be published.

[30] K. Hagiwara et al., The Review of Particle Physics, Phys. Rev. D66,

[31] P. Langacker, G. Segre, and M. J. Strassler, Phys. Lett. B528, 121

010001 (2002).

(2002).

[32] M. P. Savedoﬀ, Nature 178, 688 (1956).

[33] R. I. Thompson, Astrophys. Lett. 16, 3 (1975).

30

[34] J. D. Prestage, R. L. Tjoelker, and L. Maleki, Phys. Rev. Lett. 74,

3511 (1995).

[35] V. A. Dzuba, V. V. Flambaum, and J. K. Webb, Phys. Rev. A59, 230

(1999);
V. A. Dzuba and V. V. Flambaum, Phys. Rev. A61, 034502 (2000);
V. A. Dzuba, V. V. Flambaum, M. V. Marchenko, eprint
physics/0305066.

[36] H. B. G. Casimir, On the Interaction Between Atomic Nuclei and

Electrons (Freeman, San Francisco, 1963);
C. Schwarz, Phys. Rev. 97, 380 (1955).

[37] M. T. Murphy, J. K. Webb, V. V. Flambaum, M. J. Drinkwater, F.
Combes, and T. Wiklind, Mon. Not. Roy. Astron. Soc. 327, 1244
(2001).

[38] S. G. Karshenboim, Can. J. Phys. 78, 639 (2000).

[39] R. B. Firestone, Table of Isotopes (John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 1996).

[40] H. Hellwig, R.F.C. Vessot, M. W. Levine, P. W. Zitzewitz, D. W. Al-

lan, and D. J. Glaze, IEEE Trans. IM 19, 200 (1970);
P. W. Zitzewitz, E. E. Uzgiris, and N. F. Ramsey, Rev. Sci. Instr. 41,
81 (1970);
D. Morris, Metrologia 7, 162 (1971);
L. Essen, R. W. Donaldson, E. G. Hope and M. J. Bangham, Metrolo-
gia 9, 128 (1973);
J. Vanier and R. Larouche, Metrologia 14, 31 (1976);
Y. M. Cheng, Y. L. Hua, C. B. Chen, J. H. Gao and W. Shen, IEEE
Trans. IM 29, 316 (1980);
P. Petit, M. Desaintfuscien and C. Audoin, Metrologia 16, 7 (1980).

[41] R. B. Warrington, P. T. H. Fisk, M. J. Wouters, and M. A. Lawn, In
Proceedings of the 6th Symposium Frequency Standards and Metrol-
ogy, ed. by P. Gill (World Sci., 2002), p. 297.

[42] J. J. Bollinger, J. D. Prestage, W. M. Itano, and D. J. Wineland,

Phys. Rev. Lett. 54, 1000 (1985).

[43] D. J. Berkland, J. D. Miller, J. C. Bergquist, W. M. Itano, and D. J.

Wineland, Phys. Rev. Lett. 80, 2089 (1998).

[44] T. Udem, J. Reichert, R. Holzwarth, S. Diddams, D. Jones, J. Ye, S.
Cundiﬀ, T. H¨ansch, and J. Hall, In Hydrogen atom, Precision physics
of simple atomic systems, ed by S. G. Karshenboim et al., (Springer,

31

Berlin, Heidelberg, 2001) p. 125;
J. Reichert, M. Niering, R. Holzwarth, M. Weitz, Th. Udem, and T.
W. H¨ansch, Phys. Rev. Lett. 84, 3232 (2000);
R. Holzwarth, Th. Udem, T. W. H¨ansch, J. C. Knight, W. J.
Wadsworth, and P. St. J. Russell, Phys. Rev. Lett. 85, 2264 (2000);
S. A. Diddams, D. J. Jones, J. Ye, S. T. Cundiﬀ, J. L. Hall, J. K.
Ranka, R. S. Windeler, R. Holzwarth, Th. Udem, and T. W. H¨ansch,
Phys. Rev. Lett. 84, 5102 (2000).

[45] M. Niering, R. Holzwarth, J. Reichert, P. Pokasov, Th. Udem, M.
Weitz, T. W. H¨ansch, P. Lemonde, G. Santarelli, M. Abgrall, P. Lau-
rent, C. Salomon, and A. Clairon, Phys. Rev. Lett. 84, 5496 (2000).

[46] J. Stenger, C. Tamm, N. Haverkamp, S. Weyers, and H. R. Telle, Opt.

Lett. 26, 1589 (2001).

[47] T. Udem, S. A. Diddams, K. R. Vogel, C. W. Oates, E. A. Curtis,
W. D. Lee, W. M. Itano, R. E. Drullinger, J. C. Bergquist, and L.
Hollberg, Phys. Rev. Lett. 86, 4996 (2001).

[48] J. von Zanthier; Th. Becker, M. Eichenseer, A. Yu. Nevsky, Ch.
Schwedes, E. Peik, H. Walther, R. Holzwarth, J. Reichert, Th. Udem,
T. W. H¨ansch, P. V. Pokasov, M. N. Skvortsov, and S. N. Bagayev,
Opt. Lett. 25, 1729 (2000).

[49] See e.g.: T. Parker, In Proceedings of the 6th Symposium Frequency
Standards and Metrology, ed. by P. Gill (World Sci., 2002), p. 89.

[50] Chr. Tamm, D Schnier and A Bauch, Appl. Phys. B60, 19 (1995).

[51] F. Riehle, H. Schantz, B. Lipphardt, G. Zinner, T. Trebst, and J.

Helmcke, IEEE Trans. IM-48, 613 (1999);
J. Stenger, T. Binnewies, G. Wilpers, F. Riehle, H. R. Telle, J. K.
Ranka, R. S. Windeler, and A. J. Stentz, Phys. Rev. A63, 021802
(2001).

[52] N. E. Rothery and E. A. Hessels, Phys. Rev. A61, 044501 (2000).

[53] S. G. Karshenboim and V. G. Ivanov, Phys. Lett. B524, 259 (2002);

Euro. Phys. J. D19, 13 (2002).

[54] S. G. Karshenboim. In, Laser Physics at the Limits, ed. by H. Figger,
D. Meschede and C. Zimmermann (Springer-Verlag, Berlin, Heidel-
berg, 2001), p. 165.

[55] D. J. Fixsen, E. S. Cheng, J. M. Gales, J. C. Mather, R. A. Shafer,

E. L. Wright, Astrophys. J. 473, 576 (1996).

32

[56] P. T. Fisk et al., IEEE Trans UFFC–44 (1997) 344;

P. T. Fisk, Rep. Prog. Phys. 60 (1997) 761.

[57] Th. Udem, A. Huber, B. Gross, J. Reichert, M. Prevedelli, M. Weitz

and T. W. H¨ansch, Phys. Rev. Lett. 79, 2646 (1997)

[58] H. Schnatz, B. Lipphardt, J. Helmcke, F. Riehle, and G. Zinner, Phys.

Rev. Lett. 76, 18 (1996).

[59] A. Godone, C. Novero, P. Tavella, and K. Rahimullah, Phys. Rev.
Lett. 71, 2364 (1993); A. Godone, C. Novero, P. Tavella, G. Brida, F.
Levi, IEEE Trans. IM–45, 261 (1996).

[60] V.V. Flambaum, E-print Archive: physics/0302105.

33

