3
0
0
2
 
c
e
D
 
3
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
m
o
t
a
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
8
3
1
2
1
3
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Observation of light dragging in rubidium vapor cell

Dmitry Strekalov, Andrey B. Matsko, Nan Yu, and Lute Maleki

Jet Propulsion Laboratory, California Institute of Technology,
4800 Oak Grove Drive, Pasadena, California 91109-8099
(Dated: January 8, 2014)

We report on the experimental demonstration of light dragging eﬀect due to atomic motion in a
rubidium vapor cell. We found that the minimum group velocity is achieved for light red-shifted
from the center of the atomic resonance, and that the value of this shift increases with decreasing
group velocity, in agreement with the theoretical predictions by Kocharovskaya, Rostovtsev, and
Scully [Phys. Rev. Lett. 86, 628 (2001)].

PACS numbers: 42.50.Gy, 03.30.+p

The phenomenon of

light dragging by a moving
medium has a two century long history [1, 2]. Starting
with Fresnel’s ether theory [3] and Fizeau’s observation
of light dragging [4], several investigations of this eﬀect
were performed before the advent of relativity. Later, the
special theory of relativity greatly advanced the under-
standing of this eﬀect through the relativistic addition
of velocities [1]. At the same time when the theory of
relativity was being developed, Lorentz [5] predicted the
inﬂuence of dispersion in a moving medium on the speed
of light. This eﬀect was ﬁrst veriﬁed by Zeeman who
used glass rods for high dispersion placed on a moving
platform [6].

The experimental approach to the study of light drag-
ging by a moving medium has recently received a new
opportunity, since it was found that coherent media can
have a huge dispersion that can result in ultraslow group
velocities of light (for review see [7, 8]). The value of this
dispersion is many orders of magnitude greater than the
dispersion of glass used by Zeeman, for example. Ultra-
slow group velocities have been observed in atomic vapors
[9, 10, 11] as well as in doped solids [12, 13]. These re-
sults have revealed new and exciting opportunities for the
study of fundamental phenomena involving light drag-
ging, for instance, by suggesting dielectric analogies of
astronomical eﬀects [14].

The frequency dispersion responsible for the ultraslow
light propagation occurs in the vicinity of a narrow trans-
parency window resulting from Electromagnetically In-
duced Transparency (EIT) [15, 16, 17]. The speciﬁc
structure of the EIT medium has raised questions about
the minimum group velocity of light that can be realized.
The ponderomotive eﬀects [18] as well as light reﬂection
from the medium boundary and absorption in the dielec-
tric have been identiﬁed as possible sources of inﬂuence
on the achievable minimum group velocity [19].

It was also shown that it is possible to slow down a
light pulse or even bring it to a full stop using the eﬀect
of light dragging [20]. The light pulse can be at rest with
respect to an observer if the medium moves uniformly
with a velocity equal and opposite to the group velocity
of light propagating in the stationary medium. More-
over, light dragging was predicted [20] in an atomic cell

containing hot atomic vapor. In this case the eﬀect was
predicted to be achieved by selecting a proper velocity
subgroup in the inhomogeneously (Doppler) broadened
medium. The selection can be realized by tuning the
frequency of a drive laser and is nothing more than spec-
tral hole-burning, a phenomenon well known in nonlinear
spectroscopy [21].

The experimental realization of “light freezing” and
the observation of light dragging in a Doppler-broadened
medium nevertheless encountered diﬃculties [22]. This
is because the use of either optically thick collimated
atomic beams, or vacuum atomic cells is required. The
small group velocities of light, on the other hand, was
realized in hot atomic cells containing a buﬀer gas, or
in coated atomic cells. The presence of a buﬀer gas or
coating results in velocity mixing of the atoms via veloc-
ity changing collisions. It becomes impossible to select a
proper velocity subgroup as discussed in [20].

We report on an experiment for the observation of light
dragging in a hot vacuum atomic rubidium cell without
any butter gas or coherence preserving coating. We real-
ized the experiment by a proper tuning of the experimen-
tal parameters which allowed us to reach Vg ≈ 1.7 km/s
average group velocity in a L = 5 cm long cell. We found
that the group velocity decreases with red tuning of the
drive laser radiation (which corresponds to selecting of
an eﬀective “atomic beam” moving in the opposite direc-
tion with respect to the light), and increases with blue
tuning. As a result, the maximum of average group delay
for light propagating in the cell shifts as much as 40 MHz
to the red. The following theoretical analysis expands on
our results.

An understanding of light dragging can be gained from
Lorentz transformation of the wave vector and frequency
of electromagnetic waves. Using this transformation and
the deﬁnition of group velocity, we come to the conclusion
[2] that if light propagates in the direction of the medium
ﬂow, its group velocity in laboratory frame,
Vg, changes
as

e

V 2
g
c2

!

−

vnω0
c

dVg
dω0

,

(1)

Vg = Vg + v

1 −

 

e

where Vg is the group velocity in the frame of reference
moving with the medium, v is the velocity of the medium
relative to the laboratory frame of reference, c is the
speed of light in the vacuum, n is the index of refraction
of the medium, ω0 is the frequency of the electromagnetic
wave.

Eq.(1) is general; it does not depend on the speciﬁc
properties of a medium. Hence, it is valid for a hot atomic
vapor where small group velocities could be realized. The
goal of the present paper is to detect light dragging based
on Doppler eﬀect in an atomic cell.

The velocity of an atomic subgroup (that can be se-
lected by standard techniques of nonlinear spectroscopy
[21]) should be compared to the average thermal speed
vT = (2kT /M )1/2 of atoms in the cell, where k is Boltz-
mann constant, T is the temperature, and M is the
atomic mass. For 87Rb, this speed is equal to approx-
imately 230 m/s for T = 65oC. The minimum group
velocity observed in our experiment is much larger than
this value. To detect the light dragging eﬀect we mea-
sure the shift of the minimum group delay with respect
to the laser tuning that determines the atomic velocity
subgroup.

Let us estimate this shift. We consider a three level
Λ conﬁguration shown in Fig.1. Such a scheme is very
convenient for understanding of EIT based on coherence
population trapping [15], though it is not applicable for
quantitative description of the eﬀect in real atoms [23].
Drive and probe lights interact with transitions |ai → |ci
and |ai → |bi, respectively. The dipole-forbidden transi-
−1
tion |ci → |bi has a long life time γ
bc determined primary
by the interaction time of atoms and light.

∆ D

a

∆

(t)E

probe

b

E

drive

c

FIG. 1: Simpliﬁed energy levels scheme. The drive and probe
ﬁelds interact with a velocity subgroup of atoms moving at
vT ∆/∆D. The velocity width of this eﬀective “atomic beam”
γac
γcb ≪ vT [20], where |Ωdrive| is the Rabi
is ∆v ≈
frequency of the drive, γac is the homogeneous decay rate of
the drive transition, γcb is the coherence decay rate, kdrive is
the drive wave vector.

2|Ωdrive|
kdrive

p

The dependence of the group velocity on the drive fre-
quency in the motionless medium may be estimated from

2

(3)

(4)

where ∆ = ω0 − ωac (Fig.(1)), ∆D = 215 MHz is the half
width at half maximum of the Doppler proﬁle, β(T ) is a
function of temperature that is used to take into account
propagation and optical pumping eﬀects. For optically
thin medium consisting of Λ atoms β(T ) = 1 [20]. This
function can be determined by comparing measured dis-
tribution widths to ∆D.

The drive laser detuned from one-photon resonance by
∆ makes the probe interact with the atomic “beam”.
This “beam” has an average speed v = vT ∆/∆D while
moving in the direction of the probe wave. According
to (1) the group velocity with respect to the laboratory
frame of reference is approximately equal to

Vg ≈ Vg(0)

1 + β(T )

"

∆
∆D (cid:19)

(cid:18)

2

#

+ vT

∆
∆D

.

The group velocity reaches a minimum at detuning ∆opt

e

∆opt
∆D

= −

vT
2β(T )Vg(0)

.

This minimum corresponds to the maximum of group
delay L/
Vg. The frequency shift of the maximum group
delay could be detected and measured.

e

The basic elements of our experimental setup include
a rubidium atomic vapor cell with an enriched amount of
87Rb isotope; a frequency stabilized diode laser produc-
ing the drive and probe beams; and a reference laser sta-
bilized with a reference rubidium cell allowing us to mea-
sure the exact frequency of the radiation passing through
the atomic cell by observing a beat signal. The ampli-
tude of the probe laser is modulated at 3 kHz with an
acousto-optical modulator. We measure the delay of the
beat-note of the probe radiation to detect the light drag-
ging phenomenon. Let us now describe the setup in more
detail (see Fig.2).

1 MHz
reference

RF1

λ/2

PBS

PLL

RF2

FM

AM

AOM
+101MHz

3 kHz
driver

trigger to
oscilloscope

Computer

Spectrum analyzer

Digital oscilloscope

φ

beat
signal

Drive and
probe
laser

AOM
+100MHz

PBS

Beam
expander

λ/4

B

λ/4 PBS

Detector

Bandpass
filter

Reference
laser

beat
signal

87

Rb cell

x3 µ-shield

Detector

FIG. 2: A simpliﬁed diagram of the experimental setup. RF1
and RF2 are the drivers for the acousto-optical modulators
(AOM) that are locked to an external 1 MHz reference by a
phase-lock loop (PLL); PBS are the polarizing beam splitters.

Vg = Vg(0)

1 + β(T )

"

∆
∆D (cid:19)

(cid:18)

2

,

#

(2)

The two-inch-long atomic cell contains 75% of 87Rb
and 25% 85Rb. The cell can be kept at a constant tem-
perature ranging from 45oC to 75oC, stabilized to 0.1oC

with a feedback loop. The cell is placed inside a solenoid,
which is used to create a bias magnetic ﬁeld along the
propagation direction of the optical beam. This ﬁeld in-
troduces a 1 MHz Zeeman detuning for the ground state
sublevels with ∆m = 2. The solenoid and the cell are
enclosed in a three-layer µ-metal shield to cancel stray
magnetic ﬁelds.

We use a Vortex laser system tuned to the 5S1/2, F=2
→ 5P1/2, F=1 transition of 87Rb. The laser radiation is
split into two parts: drive and probe, whose powers can
be varied, and their beam radius is set at R = 5 mm by
the beam expander.

The short term stability of our laser is better than
1 MHz/Hz1/2. However, the long term stability is rather
unsatisfactory, so for the accurate frequency measure-
ments we had to use a reference laser locked at the
crossover resonance at 85Rb D1 line in an additional
cell (not shown in Fig.2). Measuring the beat frequency
of these two lasers with a spectrum analyzer allowed us
to track the detuning of the ﬁrst laser from the transi-
tion with better than 3 MHz resolution during up to ﬁve
hours, when the ﬁrst laser was stepped through 2 GHz
range several times.

To split the laser beam into the drive and probe we
use a polarizing beam splitter (PBS) preceded by a half-
wave plate; then, each beam passes through an acousto-
optical modulator (AOM) up-converting one frequency
by 100 MHz, and the other by 101 MHz. The 1 MHz fre-
quency diﬀerence between the two beams is enforced by
phase-locking the AOM drivers’ beat signal to a 1 MHz
reference signal in the master-slave phase lock loop (PLL)
conﬁguration, and corresponds to ωbc in Fig. (1). The
AOM in the probe (the slave) channel also performs the
function of modulation of the probe amplitude at 3 kHz.
The phase of this modulation is later used to determine
the group delay of the probe light.

As a result, we obtain the CW drive and amplitude
modulated probe beams with orthogonal linear polariza-
tions, and with the frequency detuning exactly matching
the ground state splitting for ∆m = 2 imposed by the
solenoid ﬁeld. To couple these ground states, the lin-
early polarized drive and probe ﬁelds are transformed to
opposite circular polarizations by a quarter wave plate.
This step occurs after they have been combined by the
second PBS and passed through the beam expander to
maintain a good quality Gaussian beam of the prescribed
radius.

Light that passes through the cell is converted back to
linear basis with the second quarter wave plate, and then
the drive light is rejected by a polarizer. The extinction
ratio is approximately 0.5%. Probe radiation is detected
by a photodiode whose output is coupled into a digital
oscilloscope, to monitor the signal. We use the phase
measurement function of the oscilloscope to determine
the group delay of the 3 kHz beat-note, and the ampli-
tude measurement function to measure its transmission.
Note that this type of measurement completely rejects
the drive leaking into the probe polarization (e.g. due

3

to polarization rotation) and provides us with very clean
probe absorption data.

Let us turn now to the measurement results. The min-
imum full width at half maximum of the EIT resonance
that we detected is 20 KHz, which is slightly narrower
than the inverse average transit time of atoms through
the laser beam vT /(2R), for the beam diameter used in
our setup. The additional narrowing of the resonance
could orginate from the density narrowing eﬀect of the
EIT resonance [24].

The maximum group delay of the 3 KHz beat note was
approximately 30 µs. This group delay was detected for a
72oC cell temperature, 2.4 mW drive and 0.15 mW probe
ﬁeld powers. Drive and probe ﬁelds had approximately
30% and 10% relative transmission respectively.

We ﬁrst detected the group delay for the beat-note
of the probe at a couple of dozens of cell temperatures.
The data were taken with a ﬁxed two-photon detuning,
drive and probe powers, and varying one-photon detun-
ing. Four typical data curves are shown in Fig.3 (maxi-
mum delay increases with temperature). It is easy to see
that the curve shapes are non-Lorentzian for any temper-
ature. Moreover, the width of the dependencies increases
almost twice as fast with the temperature increase from
45oC to 72oC. Such a shape is determined by the multi-
level structure of the system as well by the fact that we
study an open transition.

 

27

24

21

18

15

12

9

6

3

0

s

l

 
,
y
a
e
d
p
u
o
r
G

 

-400 -300 -200 -100

0

100 200 300

Detuning 

, MHz

FIG. 3: Typical dependence of the group delay on the single
photon detuning ∆. The curves correspond to (top to bottom)
o
T = 72, 68, 62 and 49

C.

It is easy to see that the center of curves in Fig.3 are
shifted each with respect to the other. At low tempera-
tures the center coincides with the resonant frequency of
atomic transition, while for large temperatures it shifts
to the red. We found the maximum delay and shift of the
point of maximum delay for each curve. To ensure con-
sistency of the results we repeated the experiment with a
diﬀerent drive power (2.8 mW). The combined measure-
ment results are shown in Fig.4 by dots and crosses for
diﬀerent drive powers. We also performed measurements

of the group delay versus power of the drive radiation at
a ﬁxed temperature T = 69oC and placed the data on the
same plot as empty circles. The dependencies perfectly
agree with each other, conﬁrming the theoretical predic-
tion of Eq.(4), i.e. the frequency shift of the maximum
group delay only depends on the maximum delay itself
and not on how it is achieved.

To compare the theoretical predictions and experimen-
tal data we plot the function given by Eq.(4) as a solid
line in Fig.4. In this function, the width parameter β(T )
is determined from the widths of experimental curves
such as shown in Fig.3 and varies from unity for the
low temperature curves to approximately one half for the
high temperature curves.

 

4

0.00

-0.05

D

/

-0.10

-0.15

 

In conclusion, we have demonstrated the eﬀect of light
dragging occurring in a hot atomic vapor due to thermal
motion of atoms. Our experiment conﬁrms the inﬂuence
of spatial dispersion of the refractive index of a medium
on light propagation. Moreover, we have measured the
group velocity dragging for a beat-note of monochromatic
waves, which is equivalent to a measurement of diﬀeren-
tial phase velocity dragging, and is an indirect veriﬁca-
tion of Lorentz theory for phase velocity of light in mov-
ing media. Our results also show that coherent atomic
media really possess large light dragging abilities so the
ideas to “freeze light” with such a motion are reasonable.

5

10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 50 55

v

/v

gr

t

FIG. 4: Combined results showing the dependency of the de-
tuning ∆ corresponding to minimum group velocity vgr on
vgr. The data are obtained by: ﬁxing the drive power at 2.4
mW (solid dots) and 2.8 mW (crosses) and varying temper-
ature from 45oC to 72oC; and by ﬁxing temperature at 69oC
and varying the drive power (empty circles). The solid line is
the theory curve obtained from Eq.(4).

The research described in this paper was carried out
under sponsorship of DARPA by the Jet Propulsion Lab-
oratory, California Institute of Technology, under a con-
tract with the National Aeronautics and Space Adminis-
tration.

[1] W. Pauli, ”Theory of relativity”, (Pergamon, New York,

1958).

[2] L. D. Landau and E. M. Lifshitz, ”Electrodynamics of

continuous media”, (Pergamon, New York, 1984).

[3] A. J. Fresnel, Ann. Chim. Phys. 9, 57 (1818).
[4] H. Fizeau, C. R. Acad. Sci. (Paris) 33, 349 (1851); Ann.

de Chimie et de Phys. 57, 385 (1859).

[5] H. A. Lorentz, ”Versuch einer Theorie der elek-
trischen und optischen Erscheinungen in bewegten Kor-
pern”,(Leiden, 1895); Proc R. Acad. (Amsterdam) 6, 809
(1904).

[6] P. Zeeman, Proc R. Acad. (Amsterdam) 17, 445 (1914);

18, 398 (1915).

[7] A. B. Matsko, O. Kocharovskaya, Y. Rostovtsev,
G. R. Welch, A. S. Zibrov, and M. O. Scully, Adv. At.
Mol. Opt. Phys. 46, 191 (2001).

[8] R. W. Boyd and D. J. Gauther, Prog. Optics 43, 497

[10] M. M. Kash, V. A. Sautenkov, A. S. Zibrov, L. Hollberg,
G. R. Welch, M. D. Lukin, Y. Rostovtsev, E. S. Fry, and
M. O. Scully, Phys. Rev. Lett. 82, 5229 (1999).

[11] D. Budker, D. Kimball, S. Rochester, and V. Yashchuk,

Phys. Rev. Lett. 83, 1767 (1999).

[12] A. V. Turukhin, V. S. Sudarshanam, M. S. Shahriar, J.

A. Musser, B. S. Ham, and P. R. Hemmer, Phys. Rev.
Lett. 88, 023602 (2002).

[13] M. S. Bigelow, N. N. Lepeshkin, and R. W. Boyd, Phys.

Rev. Lett. 90, 113903 (2003).

[14] U. Leonhardt and P. Piwnicki, Phys. Rev. Lett. 84, 822

(2000).

[15] E. Arimondo, Progress in Optics 35, 257 (1996).
[16] S. E. Harris, Phys. Today 50, 36 (1997).
[17] J. P. Marangos, J. Mod. Opt. 45, 471 (1998).
[18] I. Carusotto, M. Artoni, and G. C. La Rocca, JETP Lett.

[19] V. V. Kozlov, S. Wallentowitz, and S. Raghavan, Phys.

72, 289 (2000).

Lett. A 296, 210 (2002).

[20] O. Kocharovskaya, Y. Rostovtsev, and M. O. Scully,

Phys. Rev. Lett. 86, 628 (2001).

[21] V. S. Letokhov and V. P. Chebotaev, ”Nonlinear laser
spectroscopy”, (Springer-Verlag, New York, 1977).
[22] E. E. Mikhailov, Y. V. Rostovtsev, and G. R. Welch, J.

[23] A. D. Greentree, D. Richards, J. A. Vaccaro, A. V. Dur-
rant, S. R. de Echaniz, D. M. Segal, and J. P. Marangos,
Phys. Rev. A 67 , 023818 (2003).

[24] M. D. Lukin, M. Fleischhauer, A. S. Zibrov, H. G. Robin-
son, V. L. Velichansky, L. Hollberg, and M. O. Scully,
Phys. Rev. Lett. 79, 2959 (1997).

[9] L. V. Hau, S. E. Harris, Z. Dutton, and C. H. Behroozi,

Mod. Opt. 50, 2645 (2003).

(2002).

Nature 397, 594 (1999).

