Phasor analysis of atom diﬀraction from a rotated material grating

Alexander D. Cronin, John D. Perreault
University of Arizona, Tucson, Arizona 05721
(Dated: February 21, 2014)

The strength of an atom-surface interaction is determined by studying atom diﬀraction from a
rotated material grating. A phasor diagram is developed to interpret why diﬀraction orders are never
completely suppressed when a complex transmission function due to the van der Waals interaction is
present. We also show that atom-surface interactions can produce asymmetric diﬀraction patterns.
Our conceptual discussion is supported by experimental observations with a sodium atom beam.

PACS numbers: 03.75.Dg, 07.60.Ly, 34.20.Cf, 34.20.Gj
Keywords: atom diﬀraction, van der Waals, blazed grating, vibration curve

3
0
0
2
 
c
e
D
 
2
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
m
o
t
a
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
4
8
0
2
1
3
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Atom diﬀraction from a material grating has recently
been used to measure the strength of van der Waals inter-
actions between atoms and the grating. This was possible
in [1, 2, 3] because atom-surface interactions modify the
intensity in each diﬀraction order as a function of atomic
velocity. In this paper we measure van der Waals inter-
actions by studying diﬀraction as a function of incidence
angle. We also demonstrate an asymmetric atom diﬀrac-
tion pattern from a fabricated material grating.

Historically, a graphical analysis in the complex plane
has been useful to understand optical diﬀraction. This
is especially true for the Fresnel integrals for which no
closed form analytical solutions have been found, yet the
Cornu spiral permits a physical interpretation [4]. We
have adapted this approach to our current problem in
atom optics. Even the far-ﬁeld limit, van der Waals in-
teractions modify atom diﬀraction such that no closed
form analytical solution has been found. Hence we de-
veloped a phasor diagram similar to the Cornu spiral to
interpret our atom diﬀraction data.

In particular, we prove that no combination of grat-
ing geometry and van der Waals interaction strength can
cause diﬀraction orders to disappear. This is proved us-
ing a phasor diagram, and conﬁrmed experimentally by
rotating a diﬀraction grating about an axis parallel to the
grating bars while measuring the ﬂux in each diﬀraction
order.

In the standard optical theory of diﬀraction from a
Ronchi-ruling, i.e. a square-wave absorbing grating, a
missing order is obtained when

(a) Phasor diagrams for diﬀraction into orders
FIG. 1:
n = 0, 1, 2, 3 from a grating with open fraction η = 0.48. Re-
sultant vectors are drawn with dashed lines from tip to tail of
each curve. (b) Van der Waals interactions modify the pha-
sor diagram, and considerably increase the magnitude of the
second order.

diﬀraction order. Speciﬁcally, we consider the ﬁeld Ψn
associated with the nth diﬀraction order in the Fraun-
hauﬀer approximation due to a periodic array of aper-
tures illuminated by a plane wave Ψinc. The slit width w
and grating period d determine the diﬀraction envelope
so the amplitude and phase of each order is given by:

n = ±

m
η

(1)

Ψn =

Ψinc

w/2

d Z

−w/2

dξeiφn(ξ)

(2)

where n is the diﬀraction order, m is an integer greater
than zero, and η is the open fraction deﬁned as window
size divided by grating period. For example, a 50% open
fraction suppresses all the even orders.

The origin of missing orders in the optical theory can
be explained with a phasor plot often referred to as a
vibration curve [5] and shown in Figure 1a. In this ap-
proach a complex amplitude-phase diagram is used to
visualize the amplitude and phase of the ﬁeld in each

where Ψinc is the incident wave amplitude, ξ is the spatial
coordinate inside an aperture, and φn(ξ) = nκξ with
κ = 2π

d being the grating wavenumber.

This integral can be visualized by adding phasors of
length dξ and phase φn(ξ) in the complex plane. Curves
generated this way are the real vs imaginary parts of
the cumulative integral of Ψn given by Equation 2. The
magnitude and phase of a resultant vector (from start to
end of such a curve) correspond to the complex amplitude

Ψn as shown in Figure 1. A resultant of zero magnitude
represents a missing order.

Before including phase shifts due to atom-surface in-

teractions, this integral can be computed analytically:

Ψn = Ψinc η sinc(nη)

(3)

For comparison with experiment, intensity is given by
In = |Ψn|2.

In the WKB approximation, to leading order in V (ξ),
van der Waals interactions cause a phase shift φvdW (ξ)
given by

φvdW (ξ) =

−V (ξ)l
v~

where V (ξ) is the van der Waals potential for atoms in-
teracting with a surface, l is the distance the atom prop-
agates in the potential, v is the atomic velocity, and ~
is Planck’s constant divided by 2π. Near a surface the
potential is known to be

V (r) =

−C3
(r)3

where r is the atom-surface distance [6]. For simplicity,
as in [1, 2, 3] V (r) is approximated by equation 5 inside a
grating window with ﬁnite thickness l, and approximated
by zero outside the grating window.

Van der Waals interactions with the bars on either side
of the slot thus modify the phase of each point on the
phasor diagram. This phase is described by:

˜φn(ξ) = φn(ξ) + φvdW (ξ) + φof f set

(6)

where φn(ξ) is due to the diﬀraction angle, φvdW (ξ) is
due to van der Waals interactions with surfaces located
at ξ = ± w
2 , and φof f set is a constant added for reasons
that will be discussed:

φvdW (ξ) =

φn(ξ) = nκξ
C3l
v~ [(ξ − w/2)
16C3l
v~w3 .

φof f set =

−3 − (ξ + w/2)

−3]

Examples of phasor diagrams modiﬁed by atom-surface
interactions are shown in Figure 1b, and for a range of
van der Waals interaction strengths are shown again in
Figure 2.

The constant φof f set is not physical but is chosen to
be φof f set = −φvdW (0) as a convenience to compare the
shape of the phasor curves for arbitrary van der Waals
constant C3. This phase oﬀset does not change the norm
of the resultant amplitudes, hence it will not aﬀect the
proof regarding missing orders. It simply rotates the spi-
ral such that ˜φn(0) = 0 independent of C3.

For C3 = 0 the phasor curves are simple circles because
dξ φn(ξ) = nκ is constant. The phase φn(ξ)

the curvature d

(4)

(5)

(7)

(8)

(9)

2

FIG. 2:
Phasor diagrams for diﬀraction from a grating
with open fraction η = 0.48 shown for diﬀraction order
n = 2 given diﬀerent values of the van der Waals coeﬃcient
C3 = 0, 1, 10, 100 eV˚A3. The resultant vectors from tip to tail
are drawn with dashed lines.

spans an angle κnw, and the arc length of the curve is
given by the window size w. Thus the radius of the circle
is ρ = (nκ)−1 and it is centered at the location iρ. When
the curve is an integral number of full circles, the end-
points overlap and the resultant ﬁeld has zero magnitude.
This corresponds to a missing order.

The additional phase due to van der Waals interactions
makes the phasor curve deviate from a circle. One end
of the spiral will always be inside the circle deﬁned by ρ
and the other end must be outside. This is true because
the curvature d
dξ (φn +φvdW ) increases monotonically as ξ
goes from 0 to w/2 and decreases monotonically as ξ goes
from 0 to -w/2 (and the curvature equals nκ at ξ = 0).
Hence, the two ends of the spiral will never coincide and
the resultant ﬁeld will never have zero magnitude.

We have now proved regardless of the physical open
fraction, there are never missing orders in atom diﬀrac-
tion from a material structure unless C3 = 0. In addition,
the diﬀraction envelope is no longer described by a sinc2
function as would be the case if the diﬀraction were de-
scribed by a real-valued eﬀective open fraction.

Our phasor diagram analysis also provides a method
to bound the error on numerically computed amplitudes.
If the limits of integration in Equation 2 are replaced by
±(w/2 − ǫ), the maximum error in resultant amplitude is
given by the radius of a circle with the curvature of the
phasor diagram at ξ = (w/2 − ǫ), i.e. error in Ψn is less
than (Ψinc/d)R where R−1 ≡ d ˜φn/dξ |ξ=(w/2−ǫ).

To conﬁrm this theoretical description, we present
atom diﬀraction data using a sodium atom beam and
a silicon nitride grating with a period of 100 nm. We call
rotation about a grating bar twist as shown in Figure
3. Normal incidence deﬁnes zero twist. Diﬀraction pat-
terns shown in Figure ?? were obtained with the grating
held at a twist of 0, 12, and then 22 degrees, by scanning
the position of the hot wire detector. Twist foreshortens
the grating period and therefore slightly increases the
diﬀraction angle. However, the +n and −n diﬀraction

3

FIG. 3: Experimental geometry.

orders are nearly equally deﬂected because the atomic
de Broglie wavelength is small compared to the grating
spatial period.

The feature explored in this study is the relative in-
tensity in each order, which changes considerably as the
grating is twisted. Atom ﬂux diﬀracted into the zeroth
order decreases when the grating is twisted, but ﬂux
into the second and third orders ﬁrst increases. Fig-
ure 4 shows that the second order intensity is largest
for an intermediate twist. Variation in the relative in-
tensity among diﬀraction orders is expected because the
projection of the grating viewed from the incident atom
beam changes with twist. However, a model based on ab-
sorptive atom optics is not suﬃcient to explain our data.
Phase shifts due to van der Waals interactions must be
included, as discussed earlier.

FIG. 5: Data (circles) and models (dashed and solid lines)
of the intensity in each diﬀraction order as a function of grat-
ing twist. The model parameters are: d=100nm, w=67nm,
◦
l=116nm, and α = 3.5
. For dashed lines C3=0 (using equa-
tion 11), and for solid lines C3=5 eV˚A3 (using equation 13).
Statistical error bars for each data point are smaller than the
circles.

in Fig ??, twist does in fact modify the projected open
fraction. Furthermore, due to trapezoidal grating bars,
van der Waals phase shifts must be carefully analyzed.
With reference to Figure ??, twisting the grating by angle
β causes slots to appear narrower so the resulting open
fraction is:

w
d
w−l(tan β−tan α)
d

; |β| < α
; α < |β| < βmax
; βmax < |β|

(10)

η(β) = 

0


where w is the slot width viewed at normal incidence,
l is the thickness of the grating, α is the wedge angle of
the bars, β is the twist, βmax is the maximum twist at
which any ﬂux is transmitted, and d is the grating period
viewed at normal incidence. The intensity in diﬀerent
diﬀraction orders then depends on twist as:

In(β) = η(β)2sinc2(η(β)n)

(11)

FIG. 4: Diﬀraction scans with diﬀerent grating twist. Diﬀrac-
tion of both sodium atoms and sodium dimers is visible. First
th
order atom diﬀraction, I1 is located at ±0.3 mm from the 0
order.

We also present data obtained while scanning the grat-
ing twist and leaving the detector at one position (Figure
5). In the latter experiment we have measured In = |Ψn|2
for each n=[0,4] while continuously changing the pro-
jected open fraction. This technique is well suited to
the task of searching for missing orders, because the pro-
jected open fraction can be scanned through 1
4 , i.e.
values that would make missing orders according to the
optical theory.

3 , 1

2 , 1

For a perfectly thin grating, twist would not aﬀect the
open fraction. For our gratings, with a geometry shown

This model without an allowance for atom-surface in-
teractions was used to predict intensity in the ﬁrst ﬁve
orders as a function of twist shown in Figure 5 (dashed
lines), and compares poorly with the data.

FIG. 6: Top view of the atom beam passing through the
grating slots. The grating twist is denoted by β, the wedge
angle of each bar is α, the grating period is d, the thickness
is l, and physical open width is w.

Two features of this model are familiar from standard
diﬀraction theory. First, in the limit of small open frac-
tion the intensity of each order becomes equal. This hap-
pens at large twist. Second, the orders are completely
suppressed at certain angles for which n = mη(β)−1, i.e.
missing orders are predicted. However, the atom beam
ﬂux is never entirely suppressed until the projected open
fraction is zero, i.e. there are no missing orders in the
data.

Several of the grating geometry parameters are known
from the manufacturing process and SEM images [7].
The period is d = 100 nm and the window size is w =
67±5 nm, so at normal incidence the open fraction is ap-
proximately 67%. The only physical grating parameters
left in the optical model are the thickness, l, and wedge
angle, α. These are constrained by measuring the max-
imum twist at which any ﬂux is transmitted, and must
satisfy the condition w = l(tan βmax − tan α). The data
show βmax = 31 ± 2o. With this constraint, there is only
one free parameter in the optical model, i.e. α.

The relative intensity for each order is determined in
the optical model by Eq 11, and can be compared to the
data that were recorded without changing the detector
gain or incident beam ﬂux. However, the velocity distri-
bution of the beam broadens the higher order diﬀraction
peaks. Each diﬀraction order has a HWHM in the detec-
v )2
tor plane given approximately by σ2
where σ0 is the HWHM of the zeroth order, L is the
distance between the grating and the detector, σv
v is the
ratio of the HWHM spread in velocity to the average ve-
locity, and Θn is the diﬀraction angle [2]. The velocity
ratio is 1/15 and the average velocity is 1000 m/s. To al-

0 + (ΘnL σv

n = σ2

4

low for the velocity distribution, the relative intensity of
each diﬀraction order is multiplied by σ−1
n in the model.
We have not accounted for the change in Θn with twist,
that has the eﬀect of further reducing the recorded in-
tensity of the higher orders at large twist.

To include the van der Waals interactions with the
twisted grating, the model must take account for the
varying distance to the surface as atoms pass through
the slots as shown in Figure 6, i.e.
the transverse co-
ordinate in the grating now depends on the longitudinal
position ξ → ξ0 +ξ(z). The potential due to each interior
wall is approximated by the van der Waals potential for
an inﬁnite surface when the atoms are inside the grating
slots, and zero elsewhere. Then the phase shift due to
one wall of a twisted grating is:

φvdW (ξ) =

−2C3[(x tan(θ) − w/2 + ξ0)−2]|x=l/2
v~ tan(θ) cos(β)

x=−l/2

(12)
where θ = β ± α with the sign depending on whether
the classical paths get closer or farther from the grating
wall as a function of z. Changing the sign of w describes
the phase shift from the other wall. As before, the ﬁeld
amplitude in nth order diﬀraction is given by an integral,
but now the limits of integration depend on grating twist
as shown in Equation 10 as does φvdW given by Equation
12:

Ψn =

η(β) d
2

Z

η(β) d
2

ei(φn(ξ)+φvdW (ξ))dξ.

(13)

Equation 13 can now be used to describe intensity in
each order as a function of van der Waals coeﬃcient, atom
velocity, and grating twist: In(C3, v, β) = |Ψn|2. When
C3 is zero, the expression for the intensities reduces to
In comparison, when C3 is not zero the
Equation 11.
model predicts no missing orders and agrees qualitatively
with the data in Figure 5 (this model is shown with solid
lines). We note the van der Waals interaction diverts ﬂux
from the zeroth order into the higher orders, and tends
to smooth the features given by Equation 11. Even the
slight asymmetry in intensity as a function of twist is
reproduced. To our knowledge this is the ﬁrst hint of a
fabricated structure acting as a blazed grating for atom
waves.

When used to measure the strength of C3 for sodium
atoms and a grating made of silicon nitride, we determine
a value for C3 = 5+5
−2eV˚A3. Further work on the precise
shape of the grating, and the van der Waals potential in
all space due to the structure is needed to reduce this
uncertainty.

The maximum asymmetry we observe in the ﬁrst or-
o
−5
der occurs at a twist of ±5o and is I +5
1 = 1.1. In
simulations with a larger wedge angle and larger C3, the
asymmetry can be as large as 1.5. An asymmetric dis-
tribution of intensity between the +1st and −1st orders,

/I

1

o

as this implies, would be useful for atom interferometers
that only employ the 0th and +1st diﬀraction orders.

manuscript and both H. Uys and P. Hoerner for technical
assistance.

5

Even at normal incidence the van der Waals interac-
tion has reduced the intensity of the zeroth order diﬀrac-
tion by a factor of 0.65 compared to the zeroth order
ﬂux predicted with C3 = 0. As an extrapolation, if we
could obtain similar gratings with a 20 nm period, the
ﬂux transmitted into the zeroth order will be reduced to
0.06 of the ﬂux predicted with C3 = 0. Hence, van der
Waals interactions pose a signiﬁcant problem for sub-100-
nanometer scale atom optics.

In conclusion, a novel way to measure the atom-surface
interaction potential was presented. By twisting a 100
nm period diﬀraction grating, we show that atom-surface
interactions prevent missing orders, and cause asymmet-
ric diﬀraction patterns. Both observations are explained
by a complex transmission function and a phasor analysis
similar to the Cornu spiral.

We are indebted to T. Savas and H.I. Smith for fabri-
cation of the 100 nanometer period material gratings [7].
We also thank B. Anderson for a critical reading of this

[1] R. E. Grisenti, W. Schollkopf, J. P. Toennies, G. C.
Hegerfeldt, and T. Kohler, Phys. Rev. Lett. 83, 1755
(1999).

[2] R. E. Grisenti, W. Schollkopf, J. P. Toennies, J. R. Man-
son, T. A. Savas, and H. I. Smith, Phys. Rev. A 61, 033608
(2000).

[3] R. Bruhl, P. Fouquet, R. E. Grisenti, J. P. Toennies, G. C.
Hegerfeldt, T. Kohler, M. Stoll, and D. Walter, Europhys.
Lett. 59, 357 (2002).

[4] E. Hecht, Optics (Addison Wesley, 1990).
[5] Halliday, Resnick, and Krane, Physics (Wiley, 2002).
[6] P. W. Milonni, The Quantum Vacuum (Academic Press,

1994).

[7] T. A. Savas, M. L. Schattenburg, J. M. Carter, and H. I.

Smith, J. Vac. Sci. Tech. B 14, 4167 (1996).

