Magnetically induced anions

Victor G. Bezchastnov,∗ Peter Schmelcher,† and Lorenz S. Cederbaum‡

Theoretische Chemie, Physikalisch-Chemisches Institut,

Universit¨at Heidelberg, INF 229, D-69120 Heidelberg, Germany

(Dated: January 19, 2014)

Abstract

The main focus of this review is on magnetically induced anions. Before discussing these new an-

ionic states which exclusively exist in the presence of magnetic ﬁelds, we review in some detail the

anionic physics without external ﬁeld. For completeness, we also outline the properties of ﬁeld-free

existing anions when exposed to magnetic ﬁelds. The magnetically induced states constitute an

inﬁnite manifold assuming that the nucleus of the anion is inﬁnitely heavy. At laboratory ﬁeld

strengths the corresponding binding energies show two diﬀerent scaling properties belonging to

the ground (∝ B2) and the excited (∝ B3) magnetically induced states. We provide a detailed

discussion of the physics of the moving anion taking into account the coupling between the anionic

centre of mass and its electronic degrees of freedom. A number of ﬁeld-adapted techniques exploit-

ing exact constants of motion and the adiabatic separation of motions are applied to simplify the

Hamiltonian that describes the eﬀective interaction between the centre of mass and the electronic

degrees of freedom. Employing classical simulations the autodetachment process of the anions in

the ﬁeld is observed and a rich variety of spectral properties of moving anions is predicted: de-

pending on the parameters, such as the mass and polarizability of the neutral system as well as the

ﬁeld strength, induced bound states, resonances and detaching states of the corresponding anions

are to be expected. An outline of an ab initio quantum approach is provided that allows quantum

dynamical investigations of the moving anion.

3
0
0
2
 
c
e
D
 
1
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
m
o
t
a
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
6
7
0
2
1
3
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

∗E-mail: Victor.Bezchastnov@tc.pci.uni-heidelberg.de; Permanent address: Department of Theoretical As-

trophysics, Ioﬀe Physical-Technical Institute, 194021 St.-Petersburg, Russia
†E-mail: Peter.Schmelcher@tc.pci.uni-heidelberg.de
‡E-mail: Lorenz.Cederbaum@urz.uni-heidelberg.de

1

I.

INTRODUCTION

The behavior and properties of negative ions have been the subject of intense research

for many decades. There exists a vivid interest in the electronic structure and dynamics of

negative ions, both from the theoretical and experimental points of view (see, e.g., [1, 2],

and the references therein). Negative ions play an important role in stellar and terrestrial

atmospheres as well as in laboratory and cosmic plasmas [3, 4]. The main processes respon-

sible for the radiative properties of the solar photosphere are the bound-free transitions of

the anion H−, which have been investigated theoretically in Refs. [5, 6]. The same ion could

play a crucial role in the production of the interstellar H2 molecules. Beyond this negative

ions are of major relevance to chemical reaction dynamics in general and frequently occur

either as intermediates or ﬁnal products of chemical reactions.

The formation and binding mechanisms of negative ions are of delicate nature. There-

fore, sophisticated theoretical as well as spectroscopic tools have to be invented in order

to prove their existence and probe their properties. Although research on negative ions is

both theoretically and experimentally a well-established area, the past ten years have seen

enormous progress and added a lot to our knowledge on anions, see, e.g., Ref. [7] for a recent

review and the references therein for other reviews. As an example of a new experimental

method we mention the threshold photodetachment to excited states of the neutral atom

in conjunction with resonance ionization detection that allows the precise determination of

binding energies in weakly bound atomic negative ions (electron aﬃnity less than 0.2eV)

[8, 9]. From a theoretical point of view the ab initio description of anions employing e.g.

multiconﬁguration Hartree-Fock with relativistic corrections, multiconﬁguration Dirac-Fock,

relativistic coupled cluster or multireference conﬁguration interaction has advanced substan-

tially. In Section II we will provide an outline of the binding mechanisms of various types

of anions including atoms, molecules and to some extent also clusters thereby discussing

the subtleties of their existence and spectral properties. Most neutral atomic and small

molecular species lead to anions with a few bound states. In some cases even no anionic

counterpart exists.

External ﬁelds add signiﬁcantly to the variety of anions as well as to the richness of their

properties. Focusing on magnetic ﬁelds a key work on anions exposed to homogeneous ﬁelds

was done by Avron, Herbst and Simon in 1981 [10]. Applying tools from functional analysis

2

they arrived at the surprising statement that any anion possesses an inﬁnite number of

bound states for arbitrary magnetic ﬁeld strength. Motivated by this spectacular discovery

the authors of this review performed recently a number of investigations on the physical

properties of these newly formed anions. In particular, they went beyond the assumption

of an inﬁnitely heavy nucleus that was applied in Ref. [10]. The main concern of the

present review is to summarize and elucidate the state-of-the-art concerning anions exposed

to external magnetic ﬁelds with particular emphasis on the so-called magnetically induced

anions. The latter states and/or species exist exclusively due to the presence of the external

magnetic ﬁeld. In Section III we discuss anions in the presence of a magnetic ﬁeld dealing

with the response of well-known anionic states to the ﬁeld. Section IV is dedicated to the

discussion of magnetically induced anions. First we will review the case of a static anion

assuming inﬁnite anionic mass. Thereafter we proceed to include eﬀects due to the collective

motion of the anions that possess severe impact on their spectral and dynamical properties.

In particular we draw attention to classical simulations which show that, depending on the

relevant parameters, the motion-induced dynamics can lead to a decay of the magnetically

induced states. An outline of a possible quantum approach to the moving magnetically

induced anions is given. In section V we provide some brief conclusions.

II. ANIONS IN FIELD-FREE SPACE.

The major part of the theoretical and experimental studies on anions concerns their

properties in ﬁeld-free space. A variety of anionic states, e.g., ground, excited and resonance

states of diﬀerent atomic, molecular and cluster species is known.

In order to classify

these states they can be sorted with respect to the underlying mechanisms that support

the attachment of an extra electron to a neutral species. Basically, one can divide these

mechanisms into

A) valence binding,

B) non-valence binding,

C) combined or mixed binding

mechanisms. In this classiﬁcation the anionic valence-bound states are formed by accommo-

dating an extra electron in an outer electronic shell of the neutral counterpart. The electron

3

then becomes bound exclusively due to short-range attractive valence forces. In contrast,

for the non-valence-bound states the extra electron is loosely bound in an orbital whose

spatial extension exceeds signiﬁcantly the extensions of the electronic orbitals of the neu-

tral species. For such states, long-range attractive forces inﬂuence the motion of the extra

electron and are the key ingredients of its binding. Finally, the combined or mixed binding

happens if, e.g., a few outer electrons of the neutral species extend their spatial orbitals to

accommodate the extra electron, or the external electron attaches to an excited Rydberg

orbital of a molecule. For these states, the short-range valence forces support binding of the

excess electron in the extended orbital, while the latter orbital is additionally stabilized by

the long-range attraction to the inner part of the anion. Among the binding mechanisms

introduced above only the valence binding is of pure character. The corresponding states can

be referred to as conventional anionic states. For the non-valence binding, the short-range

valence forces usually remain important as well. As a result, the long-range forces, although

playing a dominant role, are in many cases not exclusively responsible for the stability and

binding properties of the anion. A similar statement holds for the “long-range part” of the

combined binding mechanisms. Rigorously speaking, the non-valence binding and the com-

bined binding can be speciﬁed as the mechanisms where the short-range valence forces are

not the only or primary source of supporting the anionic states, see, e.g., Ref. [11]. Another

commonly used terminology is referring to the corresponding states as to non-conventional

anionic states, see Ref. [12].

In the following we present a brief overview of the anions in relation to the basic classes

of the binding mechanisms speciﬁed above. We discuss some characteristic examples of the

valence-bound, non-valence-bound and combined-bound anionic states. For each class, when

appropriate, we address ﬁrst atomic and then molecular or more complicated anions and

consider examples of the ground, excited and resonance anionic states.

A. Valence-bound anions

It is well-known that certain atoms are unable to form bound anions. Examples are He,

Be, N, Ne, Mg, Ar, Mn, Zn, Kr, Cd, Xe, Hg, Rn. All other atoms can accommodate an

extra electron in a ground anionic state, and the corresponding experimental and theoretical

aﬃnities are well documented, see, e.g., Refs. [7, 13, 14]. For example, the hydrogen atom can

4

attach an electron to form the H− ion within the electronic state 1s2 1S0. The corresponding

binding energy was theoretically calculated in Ref. [15] as 0.754209(3) eV, and accurate

measurements [16] yielded the experimental value 0.75420(2) eV. A search for excited bound

electronic conﬁgurations has particularly been carried out in Ref. [15] and led to a negative

result. Later, a rigorous proof that the H− ion possesses only one bound state was given

in Ref. [17]. It is important to note that this state is stable exclusively due to correlation

eﬀects between the motions of the two electrons.

It is only a few atoms, such as C and Si, that support excited bound anionic states. These

states usually belong to the same symmetries, and therefore, exhibit in particular the same

parities as the corresponding ground states. Also, a number of heavy atoms have been found

to support bound stable excited anionic states. The corresponding theoretical calculations

have to account for relativistic eﬀects. Examples are the anions La−, Lu−, Bi− and Lr− [18].

Experimentally, excited states have been observed for La− [19] and Lu− [20]. The measured

binding energies, 0.17 eV and 0.16 eV, respectively, turn out to be in good agreement with

the theoretically predicted values.

Many atomic anions possess resonance states. Often it is rather diﬃcult to draw a deﬁ-

nite conclusion if a state is an excited bound state or a resonance one. This is because the

corresponding experimental observations can be of quite delicate nature, and the required

let us consider the states 6s 6p 3P o

theoretical calculations are usually rather involved, see, e.g. Ref. [12]. To provide an example
J of the Cs− ion that have been studied extensively. They
form a manifold corresponding to the values J = 0, 1, 2 of the total electronic momentum.

On theoretical grounds, these states were identiﬁed in Ref. [21] as resonances. The photode-

tachment studies presented in Ref. [22] enabled an estimate of the position and width for

the 3P o

1 state as 8 and 5 meV, respectively. The same studies however were not conclusive
for the other states. Later, the positions of the resonances above the Cs threshold were

computed [23, 24] as 9.11, 21.84 and 32.16 meV with the respective widths of 5.78, 19.33

and 47.46 meV. The fact that the energy bands corresponding to these resonance states

strongly overlap elucidates the diﬃculty in resolving the individual states experimentally.

The valence-bound molecular anions are formed by attaching an extra electron to a

molecule with a vacant or semi-ﬁlled valence orbital. From the corresponding experiments,

we know that bound anionic ground states are supported by almost all diatomic molecules.

For example, in the anion CN− an extra electron occupies a non-bonding σ orbital, while

5

in the anion O−

2 the added electron shares an anti-bonding π∗ orbital. Only a few diatomic
molecules, in particular closed-shell ones such as H2, N2 and CO, do not support stable

valence-bound anionic states. The latter two molecules, however can form combined-bound

metastable anions, as described in section C. Examples of more complex valence-bound an-

ions can be found in Ref. [11]. They include, e.g., the anion H3C-COO− with the extra

electron occupying a delocalized π orbital of the carboxylate group.

B. Non-valence-bound anions

The anions which one can call non-valence-bound are mainly molecular anions. From

a theoretical point of view, following the methodology of the review [11], some general

remarks are appropriate. The latter concern the possible types of the long-range potentials

experienced by an excess electron. Since the extra electron attaches to a neutral molecule,

the latter cannot exert a Coulomb-like potential. A sort of “exception” are very large

molecules, e.g., biomolecules comprising distinguishable cationic sites. Of course, they also

cannot exert a Coulomb-like potential at large distances. However, if an excess electron

approaches a certain spatial area around a cationic site it can become bound due to Coulomb

attraction to this site. Such binding occurs in anions formed by attaching an extra electron

to zwitterion tautomers H3N+−CHR−COO− with a well-deﬁned cationic site H3N+ that

are parts of fundamental biomolecules such as the amino acids. The binding energy of

the zwitterion-derived anions is basically determined by a combination of attraction of the

excess electron to the cationic site and repulsion exerted on this electron by the negatively

charged end of the zwitterion. As pointed out in Ref. [11], the longer the chain separating

the two charged sites in the zwitterion, the stronger the net binding of an extra electron to

the cationic site.

For molecules that are not extraordinary large, the longest-range potential appears if the

molecule possesses a permanent dipole moment d. It is the charge-dipole potential

Vdip = −dr/r3,

(1)

which scales with the distance r between the electron and the neutral species as Vdip ∝ r−2. A

neutral species can also possess a permanent quadrupole moment, which is a tensor quantity

Qik (i, k = 1, 2, 3 enumerate the Cartesian coordinate axes). Then an extra electron can

6

experience the charge-quadrupole potential of the form

Vquad = Qikxixk/(2r5),

(2)

where xi deﬁne the position vector, r = (x1, x2, x3), of the attached electron with respect

to the molecule, and the conventional tensor notations assume summations over the same

indices. The latter potential scales with r as Vquad ∝ r−3. Other kinds of long-range

potentials can appear due to the fact that the electric ﬁeld of the external electron polarizes

the neutral species thereby inducing dipole, quadrupole, and higher order momenta. This

provides a contribution to the interaction energy of the electron and neutral species in form

of charge-induced-dipole, charge-induced-quadrupole and higher-multipole induced potentials.

The main term of the resulting polarization potential is

Vpol = −κikxixk/(2r6),

(3)

where κik is the tensor of the (dipole) polarizability of the neutral species. The potential (3)
scales with r as Vpol ∝ r−4.

Since the charge-dipole potential is the longest-range potential which can be exerted

by a neutral species, it is of major relevance in a variety of anions formed by attaching

an electron to polar molecules. Some molecular anions are known to be formed due to the

charge-quadrupole potential. The corresponding classes of anions are called the dipole-bound

anions and quadrupole-bound anions, respectively. Below we brieﬂy review some theoretical

aspects related to these classes.

a. Dipole-bound anions. The charge-dipole potential (1) has been rigorously examined

regarding its ability to bind an electron. This potential is often called the point dipole

potential. In Refs. [25, 26] it was shown that if the magnitude of the dipole moment exceeds

1.625 Debyes, the point dipole supports bound states of σ symmetry. A dipole moment

larger than 9.6375 D is required to bind an electron in states of π symmetry, while the

bound states of δ symmetry can be supported if the dipole moment exceeds 24.218 D. The

binding energies are, however, inﬁnite indicating that the electron “falls into the attractive

centre”. This feature, associated with a strong divergency of the potential (1) at r → 0,

was a reason to consider the binding properties of the ﬁxed ﬁnite dipole. The latter is a

system of two static charges q and −q separated by a distance R and providing the dipole

moment of the magnitude d = qR. Being far away from the static ﬁnite dipole (r ≫ R),

7

an extra electron experiences the charge-dipole potential (1). At smaller distances, the

potential deviates from (1) and has a form of the Coulomb attractive/repulsion potential

in the vicinity of the positive/negative static charge. In contrast to the point dipole, the

binding energies of the ﬁnite dipole are ﬁnite for non-zero value of R. The ﬁrst rigorous

calculations of the energy levels, as functions of R, of an electron moving in the ﬁeld of a

ﬁnite dipole were presented in Ref. [27]. Later, the binding properties the ﬁnite dipole were

analyzed in Refs. [28, 29, 30]. The conditions for critical binding were shown to depend

not on q and R separately, but on their product, i.e., on the value of the dipole moment d.

Moreover, as discussed in Ref. [31], the minimum magnitude of the dipole moment necessary

to bind the electron in a σ state is the same, 1.625 D, as required for binding by the point

dipole potential (1). Both the potentials of a point dipole and of a ﬁxed ﬁnite dipole were

shown to support an inﬁnite number of bound states of an electron. If the dipole is not ﬁxed

in space, i.e., is rotating, its binding properties weaken and the number of bound states is, at

most, ﬁnite. In particular, a larger value of the dipole moment is needed to bind an electron.

The critical dipole moment was found in Ref. [32] to increase with decreasing moment of

inertia I of the dipole and/or increasing total angular momentum J of the system of the

dipole and excess electron.

Theoretical studies of electronic binding to polar molecules, which go beyond the simple

point dipole and ﬁxed ﬁnite dipole models, are well reviewed in Refs. [33, 34]. In particular,

investigations of the binding of an electron to the diatomic molecule LiCl in Ref. [35] revealed

the ﬁnite dipole model predictions to be in poor agreement with the results of the ab initio

calculations. In Ref. [11] a conclusion is drawn that there is a good reason to believe that in

real situations the binding is due primarily to the dipole potential but, in no case can it be

shown that the resultant anions are purely dipole-bound. The binding energy is determined

not only by the dipole moment of the molecule but also by the nature of the molecule’s other

occupied orbitals as reﬂected in their Coulomb and exchange potentials. In some rigorous

studies it was even possible to evaluate a percentage of binding resulting from other sources

than the pure dipole attraction. For example, according to Ref. [36], for the H3C-CN−

anion, which is assumed to be dipole-bound, in fact 53 % of the binding arises from the

dispersion interaction between the excess electron and the other electrons. For those states

where the charge-induced-dipole interaction plays an essential role in binding the electron,

the average distance between this loosely bound electron and the polar molecule is typically

8

10 − 100 ˚A, see, e.g., Ref. [37]. Studying the binding of an electron to realistic polar

molecules demonstrates the following fact:

if a species forms a valence-bound anion, this

does not preclude it from also forming a dipole-bound state. Advancing with respect to the

theoretical description of these states, one has to exploit and justify various approximations.

For instance, when electron binding energies exceed the spacings between rotational levels of

the molecule, it is safe to neglect the corresponding non-Born-Oppenheimer couplings that

can induce electron ejection, see Ref. [39]. Likewise, when the binding energies exceed the

vibrational level spacing, it is usually safe to neglect the analogous couplings that can lead

to electron loss.

b. Quadrupole-bound anions. The simplest model of a quadrupole-bound molecular

anion considers the motion of an electron governed by the potential of a point quadrupole,

Vquad(r) = −(4π/5)(Q/r3)Y20(θ, φ), where Q is the magnitude of the point quadrupole and

Y20 is a spherical harmonics. This potential can support bound states for any Q > 0,

i.e., unlike the case of a dipole, there is no critical value for the quadrupole moment to

bind an electron. Similar to the binding by a point dipole, the electron is bound by a

point quadrupole with an inﬁnite energy due to the strong singularity of the potential at

r = 0. Therefore, additional assumptions about the interaction between the quadrupole

molecule and the excess electron at small r are invoked when the point quadrupole potential

is considered as a source of binding. Such an approach was applied, for example in Ref. [38]

to investigate the anionic state of the rotationally symmetric linear CS2 molecule which does

not possess a permanent dipole moment but has a sizable quadrupole moment Q = 3.3 a.u.

In order to model the Pauli repulsion between the attached electron and the core electrons of

the molecule the point quadrupole potential was replaced by a positive inﬁnite potential for

values of r smaller than some critical cut-oﬀ radius Rc. It has been found that for binding
to occur, the cut-oﬀ radius must be small, Rc ≈ 0.3 ˚A, which is even much smaller than the
C−S bond length (≈ 1.56 ˚A) of the molecule. It is pointed out that this small value of Rc

does not imply that the overlap of the orbital of the attached electron with the orbitals of the

core electrons of the molecule is large. Indeed, an analysis of the radial probability density

of the attached electron presented in Ref. [38] shows that a sphere which contains 80% of the
probability to ﬁnd the electron has the radius ≈ 100 ˚A. This indicates a signiﬁcant spatial

extension of the state of the attached electron.

Another example of a molecular anion which has been suggested to be quadrupole bound

9

is the (BeO)−

2 anion, see Refs. [40, 41]. In Ref. [11] it is mentioned that indeed for the latter

anion the d-symmetry of the charge distribution of the excess electron is consistent with the

angular part of the charge-quadrupole potential according to the spherical harmonics Y20.

However, it is pointed out that there are other interactions that contribute to the binding for

this anion, e.g., valence short-range attractions in the regions of the two Be+2 centres. The

conclusion emerges that, even more than in the case of dipole-bound anions, it is impossible

to ﬁnd a species which can exclusively be called quadrupole-bound.

According to accumulated experience, describing the dipole-bound and quadrupole-bound

anions in terms of only long-range binding is nothing but a rather crude approximation.

As counted in Ref. [11], under this approximation relevant issues are ignored such as: (a)

Coulomb and exchange interactions between the excess and inner-shell electrons, (b) orthog-

onality of the extra electron’s orbital to those of the other electrons in the molecule, and (c)

indistinguishability of the electrons and thus the antisymmetry of the many-electron wave

function within which the extra electron resides. Indeed, a picture where a single electro-

static potential guides an external electron becomes essentially inaccurate when this electron

“penetrates a neutral species”. In order to still consider the electronic attachment in the

framework of a one-electron approach, some model modiﬁcations are usually introduced for

the potentials (1)-(3) at small distances. In addition, short-range terms are often applied

to account for a valence-binding contribution. Examples of correspondingly modiﬁed po-

tentials can be found, e.g., in Ref. [42]. These potentials have been extensively applied to

investigating the ground states of various molecular anions.

C. Combined-bound anions

Combined binding mechanisms support certain atomic anions. These anions are expected

to possess resonance states which correspond to high-spin conﬁgurations of the outer elec-

tronic shells. According to Refs. [43, 44], the maximum spin polarized conﬁgurations are

able to provide a strong unscreening of the nuclear charge, which is a necessary prerequi-

site to accommodate a further electron. Examples of such metastable states are the states

3P e (2p2) of the H− anion, 4So (2p3) of the He− anion and 4So (1s 2p3) of the Li− anion.

A combination of the short-range valence binding and binding due to long-range attractive

forces can also be a mechanism providing long-lived resonance states of various molecular

10

anions. Particularly interesting examples are the diatomic molecules N2 and CO which are

known as being unable to attach an extra electron in a conventional valence-bound stationary

state.

Experimentally, the anion N−

2 has been observed in mass spectrometric investigations
[45, 46] suggesting a lifetime in excess of 10−5 s. The concept of high-spin states with
several equivalent electrons has been applied in Ref. [47, 48] to study the N−
three equivalent electrons are attached to an N 2+

In particular, in Ref. [48], the

2 anion where

core.

2

state 6Σ+

u has been found to be stable against electronic autodetachment. In addition, its

radiative decay to lower-lying electronic states can only occur via a spin-ﬂip process, caused

by e.g. spin-orbit interaction which is very weak. Hence this 6Σ+
should have a long lifetime providing the stability of the anion N−

u Feshbach resonance state

2 on the time scale of an

experiment in a mass spectrometer.

The molecules CO and N2 are isoelectronic and consequently the anion CO− exhibits

many similarities with the anion N−

2 . Subsequent theoretical investigations on excited states

of this anion have been performed in Ref. [49]. The same idea with respect to the construction

of the anionic state has been exploited. An extra electron is valence-bound by a carbon

atom occupying, together with the two outer electrons, the 2p shell. The resulting carbon

anion, at reasonably large distances from the oxygen atom, can be considered as a point

charge which polarizes the atom. This provides a long-range interaction between these

species contributed by the charge-quadrupole, charge-induced dipole and charge-induced

quadrupole attractions. Such an asymptotic behavior of the corresponding potential curve

has been successfully conﬁrmed by detailed ab initio calculations of the 6Π high-spin sextet

state of the anion CO− reported in Ref. [49]. This state, similar to the 6Σ+
anion N−

2 , has been found to be a long-lived resonance state.

u state of the

Other examples of long lived resonance states of similar nature as the above ones are the

high-spin states of the diatomic anion BF− [50] and the triatomic anion CO−
He−

2 , which has been discovered experimentally [52], can also be considered as supported

2 [51]. The anion

by a combination of valence and long-range binding forces. A long-lived state of this anion

has been identiﬁed theoretically in Refs. [53, 54] as a (1σ2

g σu 2σg 1πu) 4Πg state, where two

electrons are attached to a He+

2 core.

An interesting feature of diatomics which can form the high-spin anions has been discussed

in Ref. [12]. These species can be expected to bind an extra electron in diﬀerent states by

11

either valence binding or non-valence binding mechanisms. For ground states of various

diatomic molecules (e.g., CMg, SiMg and others) the electric dipole moment exceeds the

critical value of 1.625 D which makes them candidates that possess dipole-bound negative

ion states. One can also infer that all excited neutral states are accompanied by their

respective dipole-bound anionic states. Therefore these species might not only support

various valence-bound states, but additionally a number of dipole-bound anionic states, see

Ref. [55].

The combined binding mechanism can also be revealed in some more complex species,

for which it can support even stable ground state anions. These anions are formed by at-

taching an extra electron to molecules in a Rydberg orbital. A well-known example of a

neutral Rydberg molecule is the NH4 radical with an excited electron residing in a diﬀuse
s-orbital of the core cation NH+

4 . Another example is the H3C−NH3 molecule in which an

excited electron occupies the orbital centered on the closed-shell cationic site NH+

3 . For

both examples the Rydberg orbitals have most of theirs densities outside the region where

the cation’s valence orbitals reside and can accommodate another electron. In this way the

corresponding double Rydberg anions are formed. The attached electron becomes valence

bound in the Rydberg orbital, while this orbital is linked to the cationic core or site of the

anion by the long-range Coulomb attraction. The valence character of binding the extra

electron in the Rydberg orbital is stressed in Ref. [11], where it is pointed out that a suc-

cessful treatment of such anions must allow for a correlated multiconﬁgurational treatment

of at least the two electrons in the Rydberg orbital. The spatial properties of the Rydberg

orbitals were investigated in Ref. [56], where the radial probability density of the highest

occupied molecular orbitals (HOMOs) were presented for the tetrahedral structures of NH4
and NH−

4 . Interestingly, the position of the maximum in the radial probability density is

not substantially diﬀerent for these species. In the direction of the NH bond this position
is 2.19 ˚A for NH4 and 2.26 ˚A for NH−
4 , while in the opposite direction it is 2.47 ˚A and
2.61 ˚A, respectively. However, the HOMO of the anion is much more diﬀuse than that of

the radical, which is a consequence of the repulsion between the two Rydberg electrons of

the anion. This is illustrated by an increase of the radius of the sphere containing 90%
of the probability of ﬁnding the electron: 4.52 ˚A for NH4 and 5.64 ˚A for NH−
bond direction, 4.73 ˚A for NH4 and 5.93 ˚A for NH−

4 in the opposite direction. The spatial

4 in the NH

extension of the Rydberg orbitals exceeds essentially the equilibrium distance between the

12

atoms N and H in the radical (1.050 ˚A) and in the anion (1.0525 ˚A).

III. ANIONS IN THE PRESENCE OF A MAGNETIC FIELD

The eﬀects of an external magnetic ﬁeld on the electronic structure of atomic and molecu-

lar systems have been the focus of theoretical investigations in recent decades. It is however

remarkable that the corresponding investigations on anions basically concern the valence-

bound states of a single anion, the negative hydrogen ion H−. To our best knowledge, with

the exception of Ref. [57] where strong magnetic ﬁeld eﬀects on the helium negative ion are

investigated, there exist no detailed studies of other than H− anions in magnetic ﬁelds. Also,

the impact of the magnetic ﬁeld on the above-discussed non-valence-bound anionic states

has not been discussed in the literature.

The inﬂuence of the external magnetic ﬁeld on the binding properties of the anion H− has

been investigated for a broad range of ﬁeld strengths, from zero up to astrophysically relevant

values. The corresponding works can be presented by Refs. [58, 59, 60, 61, 62, 63, 64], and

the recent Ref. [65]. Already in early theoretical investigations, see, e.g., Refs. [58, 59],

it has been demonstrated that exposing the anion H− to a magnetic ﬁeld yields several

interesting eﬀects. The most striking is the appearance of excited valence-bound states. We

remind the reader, that in ﬁeld-free space, the negative hydrogen ion possesses a single

bound state. Another interesting outcome is the fact that, with increasing ﬁeld strength,

the energetically lowest state of H− changes from the singlet, even-parity state, to the triplet,

odd-parity state. A crossover of the corresponding energy levels has been found in Ref. [59]

to occur at B ≈ 1.3 × 104 T. The situation is demonstrated in Figure 1, where we present

the anionic total energies calculated in Ref. [65], as functions of the ﬁeld strength. The

energy levels represent the lowest singlet and triplet states corresponding to the projections

of the total electronic spin onto the direction of the ﬁeld Sz = 0 and Sz = −1, respectively.

Also shown are the anionic detachment thresholds for these states. These thresholds are the

total energies of the neutral atom and a free electron, both in the magnetic ﬁeld, with the

longitudinal component of the total electronic spin being preserved. The diﬀerence between

the singlet and triplet threshold energies is gust given by the value of the magnetic ﬁeld

strength B in atomic units (1 a.u. of the ﬁeld strength corresponds to 2.3554 × 105 T). It

features the well-known coupling of the energy of a system of “bare” electronic spins to the

13

magnetic ﬁeld strength, Espin = BSz, see, e.g., Ref. [66].

Figure 2 shows the one-electron binding energies of the singlet and triplet states of the

anion H− for a broad range of the magnetic ﬁeld strengths. Dots, connected by smooth solid

lines for convenience, represent the results of benchmark calculations from Ref. [65]. Both

binding energies are determined with respect to the corresponding thresholds, i.e., they are

the energies required to remove one electron from the anion without changing the value of

Sz.

The true physical detachment edge of the anion is given by the lowest of the detachment

threshold energies which is the triplet detachment threshold energy shown in Figure 1. A

relevant quantity is therefore the diﬀerence I between this edge and the ground-state anionic

energy. This energy changes, however, from the energy of the singlet state to the energy

of the triplet state as the ﬁeld strength is increased (see Figure 1). Such a quantity I

characterizes the true binding properties of the anion, regardless of the spin orientations

of the electrons before and after detachment. Notice that in reality the spin conﬁguration

of the anionic electrons is weakly perturbed by spin-orbit interaction. The value of I can

also be referred to as the true electron aﬃnity of the hydrogen atom in the presence of a

magnetic ﬁeld. Remarkably, the earlier analysis of this aﬃnity in Refs. [58, 59] resulted

in the striking conclusion that it takes negative values for 1.2 × 103 < B < 3.3 × 103 T

which means that the H− anion is unbound for that intermediate range of ﬁeld strengths.

In contrast, the recent results obtained in Ref. [65] and presented in Figure 1 demonstrate

that the lowest anionic energy level is below the triplet detachment threshold energy for

any value of the ﬁeld strength. In order to present in this review a plot of the true electron

aﬃnity as a function of B we have used the reference data from Ref. [65] for interpolating the

singlet and triplet binding energies, Is(B) and It(B), respectively, by spline functions. The

latter functions have been used to obtain a smooth curve I(B) accordingly to the following

expression:

I(B) = max{Is(B) − B, It(B)} .

(4)

This curve is given in Figure 3 by the solid line. For comparison, we also show by dashed lines

the positive values of the electron aﬃnity previously obtained in Ref. [59]. A gap between

the two branches of the latter indicates the range of the ﬁeld strengths where the anion

H− was predicted to be not stable. The results from Ref. [65], however, can be assumed

to be more reliable. They clearly demonstrate that I(B) > 0 at any B, i.e., the anion is

14

always bound. With increasing B the electronic aﬃnity ﬁrst decreases reaching a minimum

value I ≈ 0.307 × 10−3 a.u., and then increases again. The local minimum corresponds

to a crossover of the singlet and triplet energy levels seen in Figure 1. The branch of the

curve I(B) with decreasing slope shows the energy required to remove one electron from the

singlet bound state accompanied by the spin ﬂip of the detaching electron at a magnetic

ﬁeld B. The slope of this curve is in rather good agreement with the results from Ref. [59].

The branch of the curve I(B) with increasing slope represents the energy required to remove

one electron, preserving its spin orientation, from the triplet state of the anion. Here, the

previously obtained results from Ref. [59] deviate signiﬁcantly from the correct dependence

of I(B). It is to be concluded that earlier variational calculations presented in Refs. [58, 59]

were not accurate enough for the triplet bound state of the anion H− leading to the wrong

conclusion that the anion is unbound in the intermediate ﬁeld regime.

IV. MAGNETICALLY INDUCED ANIONS

This section, which is the main part of the present review, concerns the anionic states

which exist exclusively due to the presence of an external magnetic ﬁeld. In the preceding

section, it was mentioned that the theoretical investigations of the binding properties of the

negative hydrogen ion revealed the appearance of its excited valence-bound states when the

anion is exposed to the magnetic ﬁeld. Such a response of this speciﬁc anion to external

magnetic ﬁeld is already an interesting phenomenon. However, this is only one of many

intriguing properties that one can expect when studying any anion in a magnetic ﬁeld. The

latter expectation is based on the formal mathematical proof provided in Ref. [10] that any

singly charged negative ion possesses an inﬁnite number of bound states in a magnetic ﬁeld

of arbitrary strength. Before, the role of the magnetic ﬁeld in supporting the inﬁnite manifold

of anionic bound states was discussed in Ref. [67].

The property of the negative ions established in Ref. [10] means that they exhibit an

unusual, essentially non-perturbative, response to external magnetic ﬁelds. Indeed, while in

ﬁeld-free space atomic and small molecular anions typically possess only one bound state

and some even none, the number of bound states is inﬁnite in a magnetic ﬁeld of arbitrary

strength. The fact that any neutral system can bind an electron in a magnetic ﬁeld of arbi-

trary strength is very surprising and has far reaching experimental implications. However,

15

the statement about the inﬁnite manifold of the anionic bound states was formulated in

Ref. [10] as the conclusion of a formal mathematical consideration of the properties of the

underlying quantum operators. This investigation did not provide a transparent physical

picture of the appearance of the inﬁnite sequence of bound states. It also did not explicitly

evaluate the corresponding anionic binding energies. Although a wide set of works focused

on the inﬂuence of the magnetic ﬁeld on low-lying anionic states (see the preceding section),

surprisingly, for almost two decades there was no systematic treatment of the highly excited

anions predicted in Refs. [10, 67]. A physics based approach describing the inﬁnite sequence

of bound anionic states has been developed in Ref. [68]. The underlying binding mecha-

nism can be regarded as a non-valence binding mechanism. The corresponding bound states

are formed by the combined action of a polarization potential and the external magnetic

ﬁeld on the excess electron. In order to stress the exclusive role of the magnetic ﬁeld for

the binding of the electron these states were called in Ref. [68] magnetically induced states.

Their binding energies have been explicitly evaluated. In Section IV.A below we discuss the

appearance of the inﬁnite manifold of these states in more detail and present estimates of

the corresponding binding energies.

Magnetically induced states of negative ions exposed to external magnetic ﬁelds turn out

to be of even more delicate nature than the theoretical considerations in Refs. [10, 67, 68]

implied. These considerations assumed, as it is often done when calculating the electronic

structure of atomic and molecular systems, that the anion is inﬁnitely heavy, i.e. spatially

ﬁxed. However, this neglects, in the presence of the magnetic ﬁeld, a coupling between

the collective and internal degrees of freedom of the anions. A closer look at the problem,

see, e.g., Ref. [69], revealed, that the latter coupling is of major relevance for the binding

mechanism supporting the magnetically induced anions. In Ref. [68] it has been already

mentioned that one should expect the eﬀects due to the ﬁnite anionic mass to be important

for the properties of the magnetically induced states. This expectation is based on the

theoretical experience accumulated within several decades separating the publications [10,

67] and [68]. The important issue has been demonstrated that, in a magnetic ﬁeld, the

centre of mass (CM) motion does not decouple from the electronic motion and particular

care must be taken when neglecting the coupling, see, e.g., Refs. [70, 71, 72, 73, 74]. An

intricate interaction between the CM and the internal degrees of freedom has been shown

to lead to a variety of dynamical phenomena. For the neutral hydrogen atom, in Ref. [75] it

16

has been found that the transition from regularity to chaos in the classical internal motion

is accompanied by a transition from quasi-periodic oscillations to a diﬀusional motion in the

CM. For the He+ ion, a permanent exchange of energy between the CM and electronic degrees

of freedom can result in a dynamical self-ionization eﬀect [76, 77]. Rigorous quantum studies

revealed essential inﬂuence of the CM motion in magnetic ﬁelds on the internal structure of

the neutral hydrogen atom [78, 79, 80, 81, 82, 83] as well as of the positive hydrogen-like ions

[84, 85]. The above cited results indicate that the properties of the magnetically induced

anionic states could be strongly inﬂuenced by the coupling between the CM and internal

motions. In view of this coupling the very statement that there is an inﬁnite manifold of

anionic bound states in the presence of a magnetic ﬁeld becomes questionable.

Accounting for CM eﬀects requires the development of new theoretical approaches to

describe moving magnetically induced anions. A meaningful approach has been worked out

in Ref. [86]. It resulted in deriving a reduced-dimensionality Hamiltonian which describes

the magnetically induced states of the anions of ﬁnite mass. The latter Hamiltonian accounts

for the relevant coupling of the motion of the external electron to the motion of the neutral

anionic counterpart (an atom or a small molecule). The basic ideas of the underlying

approach as well as its connection to the previously investigated model of an inﬁnitely

heavy anion are discussed in Section IV.B below.

The Hamiltonian obtained in Ref. [86] has been applied in Refs. [69, 87] to investigate the

classical dynamics of excited anions in magnetic ﬁelds. These investigations demonstrate

that the motion of the excess electron can change from a bound motion to an unbound one

when the eﬀects due to the CM motion are included. This proved that the coupling between

the CM and internal motions is crucial for the stability of the magnetically induced states.

The relevant classical dynamics is discussed in more details in Section IV.C below.

Let us summarize up to this point. Following the formal proof given in Ref. [10] the

theoretical investigations [68] illuminate in physical terms the reasons why the number of

bound states of anions in the presence of a magnetic ﬁeld is inﬁnite assuming the anions to

be inﬁnitely heavy. The corresponding binding energies have been explicitly evaluated. On

the other hand, the approximation of inﬁnite anionic mass was shown in Refs. [69, 87] to be

inadequate. Investigating the underlying classical dynamics of the moving anions in magnetic

ﬁelds it was demonstrated that motional eﬀects are indispensable for a complete and correct

description of the dynamical processes as well as the structure of the anions. The latter

17

investigations also mean that the coupling between the motions of the external electron and

the neutral anionic counterpart can be expected to lead to a variety of interesting phenomena.

For example, a quantized motion of the anion as a whole across the magnetic ﬁeld can

manifest itself in a discrete spectrum of the anionic bound states. Also, some magnetically

induced states can become resonances when allowing the anion to move. Calculating the

binding energies, positions and widths of resonances is, therefore, of major relevance when

studying the properties of anions in magnetic ﬁelds. Finally, the number of magnetically

induced bound states is by itself a quantity to be investigated taking account of the motional

eﬀects. To address the above questions, the quantum treatment of magnetically induced

states for moving anions had to be further developed. Recently [88], possibilities to quantise

the Hamiltonian derived in Ref. [86] have been suggested. They are discussed in Section IV.D

below.

A. Static anions: inﬁnite manifold of magnetically induced bound states

The assumption that the anion is static (inﬁnitely heavy) reduces the problem of its

binding to the investigation of the electronic motion only. Such an approach has been

exploited in Refs. [10, 67, 68]. As discussed above, Ref. [10] provides a very formal pure

mathematical consideration employing advanced techniques from fundamental analysis. In

Ref. [68], several transparent physical approximations have been applied and justiﬁed in the

course of the estimation of the anionic binding energies. To begin with, one can expect the

magnetically induced states to be loosely bound and spatially very extended states. The

excess electron diﬀers essentially in properties and behavior from the electrons of the neutral

species which we will refer to as core electrons. One can therefore neglect the short-range

quantum interactions (exchange etc.) of the excess electron with the core electrons. As a

next step, the extra electron can be assumed to move much slower than the core ones. Then,

one can exploit a quasistatic approximation neglecting non-adiabatic couplings between the

states of the core electrons due to the motion of the external electron. Under the latter

approximation, the binding mechanism can be treated as a one-particle problem where the

motion of the excess electron is guided by an attractive potential V (r) exerted by the neutral

species. Those anions have been addressed whose neutral counterparts do not possess a

permanent dipole moment. For them, the main source of the electrostatic attraction of the

18

excess electron is a potential, polarization-like at large distances from the neutral species.

In ﬁeld-free space, the latter long-range attraction is not suﬃcient to bind the electron since

it cannot support a conﬁned electronic motion in three dimensions. The situation changes

drastically if an external magnetic ﬁeld is present. It conﬁnes the electronic motion in the

plane perpendicular to the ﬁeld, i.e., in two dimensions. In order to support a bound state,

therefore, it is suﬃcient if the polarization potential can prevent the electronic escape along

the ﬁeld. As a consequence, the problem of the electronic binding can be considered as

a one-dimensional problem. A further relevant approximation allows a description of the

transverse motion of the excess electron in terms of the Landau orbitals indicating that this

motion is dominated by the ﬁeld. More explicitly, the part of the electronic wave function

depending on the transverse coordinates r⊥ = (x, y) can be supposed to coincide with that

for a free electron in a magnetic ﬁeld, hr⊥|n, si.

The above discussed steps are the essence of the procedure exploited in Ref. [68] to arrive

at a one-dimensional Schr¨odinger equation describing the motion of the attached electron

along the magnetic ﬁeld. Within such an approach, the kinetic energy associated with the

transverse motion of the attaching electron can take the discrete values

εLan
n = B

n +

(cid:18)

1
2 (cid:19)

, n = 0, 1, 2, . . . ,

(5)

which are nothing but the Landau energies of a free electron. The quantum number n

enumerates the electronic Landau levels. The electronic longitudinal angular momentum

can equal lz = −s where s = −n, −n + 1, −n + 2, . . .. The quantity εLan

0 = B/2 determines

the continuum threshold for the states of the external electron. Typically, the states that

are truly bound relate to the ground Landau manifold, n = 0. The electron can therefore

be attached to the neutral species with the values of lz corresponding to s = 0, 1, 2, . . ..

It is important that for the static anion lz represents an integral of motion. Hence the

quantum number s can be conveniently used to label the states of the attaching electron.

For each s, one can speak of a speciﬁc one-dimensional potential, Vs(z) = h0, s|V (r)|0, si,

which enters the corresponding Schr¨odinger equation describing the electronic motion along

the magnetic ﬁeld. The latter potential can bind the electron in at least one quantum state.

Subsequently, a negative ion can be formed in an inﬁnite manifold of the magnetically

induced states. Assuming the polarization character (3) for the potential V (r), the corre-

sponding binding energies have been explicitly evaluated in Ref. [68] using the weak-coupling

19

one-dimensional theory:

ε0 = 0.31κ2B2 ,

s = 0 ,

εs = 0.12κ2B3δ2

s ,

s = 1, 2, . . . ,

δ1 = 1 ,

δs = [1 − (1.5/s)]δs−1 ,

(6)

(7)

where κ is the scalar polarizability of the neutral species and B is the magnetic ﬁeld strength,

both in atomic units. By specifying the polarizability κ, the above estimates can be applied

to any atomic or small molecular negative ion assuming a vanishing permanent electric dipole

moment. These estimates establish the dependence of the binding energies on the magnetic

ﬁeld strength and on the quantum number s: for s = 0 the binding energy scales according

to B2, while for s = 1, 2, . . . they scales according to B3; for large s the binding energies

behave as −εs ∝ s−3. In Ref. [68] it has also been veriﬁed that the estimates (6) and (7) are

in complete agreement with results from a numerical solution of the Schr¨odinger equation

for the motion of the external electron along the magnetic ﬁeld.

Let us point out a few relevant aspects. The estimates (7) for the binding energies of

the “excited”, i.e. corresponding to s = 1, 2, 3 . . ., magnetically induced states are obtained

assuming that there is no deviation of the attractive potential V (r) from the polarization

one (3) at small r. In the transverse plane, the electronic density distributions corresponding

to the Landau orbitals with s > 0 are progressively shifted from the origin with increasing

s. As a result, the short-range behavior of the potential V (r) plays no role in aﬀecting the

motion of the excess electron. In other words, the magnetically induced states with s > 0

are supported exclusively by the long-range polarization attraction of the electron to the

neutral species. For the “ground”, i.e. corresponding to s = 0, magnetically induced state,

the short-range behavior of the potential V (r) is important. One has to model this potential

at small r diﬀering it from the polarization one. This can be achieved, e.g., by introducing a

cut-oﬀ of the polarization potential (3) at distances smaller than a typical size of the neutral

species. For the anion H−, a model potential has been used in Ref. [68] related to the known

energy [27] of an electron moving in the Coulomb ﬁelds of the two static charges: of the

nucleus (proton) and of the external electron. The numerical coeﬃcient in the estimate (6)

is therefore model-dependent. The related feature is also the scaling behavior of this binding

energy with respect to the magnetic ﬁeld strength diﬀerent from that of the binding energies

for s > 0. However, as discussed in Refs. [68, 86], there are signiﬁcant reasons to believe

20

that the scaling behavior of ε0 with respect to both the polarizability and the magnetic ﬁeld

strength has a universal character, while the dependence of the numerical coeﬃcient on the

short-range behavior of the potential V (r) is rather weak.

Another remark is appropriate. The estimate (6) should be applied with particular care

to those anions which possess ground bound states in ﬁeld-free space.

Indeed, the wave

function describing the motion of the excess electron for the anions in ﬁeld-free space exhibits

normally the same nodal structure and parities as the wave function of the magnetically

induced s = 0 state. The magnetically induced s = 0 state should therefore strongly mix

with the conventional anionic state in case the latter exists. Such a mixture can be expected

to change the properties and in particular to shift the energies of the corresponding states.

The above comments on a character of binding of the excess electron in the s = 0 mag-

netically induced state provide an analogy of this state with the non-valence bound states

of the anions in ﬁeld-free space. As pointed out in Section II.B, for the latter states the

short-range valence forces play also a signiﬁcant role. However, if in ﬁeld-free space one can

hardly ﬁnd an example of anionic state supported exclusively by a long-range interaction,

such states appear in the presence of a magnetic ﬁeld. A detailed physics-guided investi-

gation [68] demonstrates that the magnetically induced states s = 1, 2, . . . are exclusively

non-valence bound. This investigation conﬁrms the general conclusion previously obtained

in the mathematical study [10]: for static anions, the number of the bound states is inﬁ-

nite in the presence of a magnetic ﬁeld. For those neutral species which cannot bind an

extra electron in ﬁeld-free space, the inﬁnite sequence of the magnetically induced states

also includes the s = 0 state, while for the anions possessing a bound (ground) state in

ﬁeld free-space an accurate description of the “ground” magnetically induced state might

go beyond the approach developed in Ref. [68].

Table 1 presents the binding energies of the magnetically induced states exclusively for

the group of atomic anions which do not exist in ﬁeld-free space (see Section II.A). For

the latter anions, one can conﬁdentially apply the estimate (6) for the lowest magneti-

cally induced states corresponding to s = 0. Two values of the magnetic ﬁeld strengths,

B = 10 T and B = 30 T, respectively, are chosen which can be achieved at laboratories.

For each value, the binding energies for the states s = 0 and s = 1 are indicated. Also

indicated are the corresponding atomic polarizabilities according to Ref. [89]. Among them

the smallest polarizability is that of the He atom, while the biggest one is that of the Cd

21

atom. Correspondingly, at B = 30 T, the He− anion has the smallest binding energies,

ε0 ≈ 2.63 × 10−4 meV and ε1 ≈ 1.3 × 10−8 meV of the ground and ﬁrst excited magnetically
induced states, respectively. In contrast, the anion Cd−, at the same magnetic ﬁeld strength,

exhibits signiﬁcantly larger binding energies of the corresponding states, ε0 ≈ 0.32 meV and
ε1 ≈ 1.6 × 10−5 meV, respectively.

Among all atoms, the atom Cs possess the largest polarizability, κ ≈ 403. Small molecules

Rb2 and Cs2 possess however even bigger polarizabilities [89], κ ≈ 533 and κ ≈ 702,

respectively. At a magnetic ﬁeld of 10 T, the estimates (7) provide for the correspond-

ing magnetically induced excited anionic states the binding energies ε1 ≈ 4 × 10−5 meV,
ε1 ≈ 7 × 10−5 meV and ε1 ≈ 1.2 × 10−4 meV, respectively.

The approach developed in Ref. [68] can also describe magnetically induced states of

exotic “muonic” anions formed by attaching a muon to a neutral species. For such anions,

there is no exchange interaction between the attaching muon and the electrons of the neutral

anionic counterpart, so there is even no need to invoke the approximation which neglects this

interaction. The ﬁnal estimates of the binding energies exceed these given by Eqs. (6)-(7)

by the ratio of the muonic mass to the electronic mass, me/mµ ≈ 207.

B. Beyond the approximation of spatially ﬁxed (static) anions

In order to describe the magnetically induced anionic states taking into account the

coupling between the CM and the excess electron, a corresponding approach was developed

in Ref. [86] that allows a reduction of the dimensionality of the problem. In the following

we sketch the main steps of derivation of the corresponding Hamiltonian.

The same idea as for the case of the static anion has been exploited that the extra electron

is loosely bound and possesses a low velocity compared to that of the tightly bound electrons

of the neutral species. Suppose for simplicity that the anion is formed by attaching the extra

electron to an atom. In a ﬁrst step, the Hamiltonian of the system is expressed in terms of

the CM coordinate R of the neutral atom and a relative coordinate r of the extra electron

with respect to the atomic CM. The relative coordinates of the core electrons are, however,

speciﬁed with respect to the nucleus. Then a unitary gauge-like transformation allows one

to eliminate coupling terms of the motion of the core electrons to both the motions of the

atomic CM and of the excess electron which involve the canonical momenta of the core

22

electrons. After that the Hamiltonian can be averaged over the motion of the core electrons

using the procedure exploited in Ref. [68]. One obtains

π2
2mat

1
2

H =

+ He + V (r) ,

π = P +

B×R − p +

B×r ,

1
2

He =

p +

B×r

1
2 (cid:18)

1
2

2

.

(cid:19)

(8)

(9)

(10)

The Hamiltonian (8) allows a description of the moving negative ion as a neutral atom

interacting with an external electron, i.e., it involves six degrees of freedom. The ﬁrst term

in (8) represents the kinetic energy of the atom and the coupling of the atomic CM to the

electron, mat is the mass of the atom. P and p are the momenta conjugated to R and

r, respectively. He describes a free electron in a magnetic ﬁeld and V (r) is an attractive

potential which links the electron to the atom. When r exceeds the atomic size, this potential

takes on the appearance of a polarization potential: V = −κ/(2r4). It should be emphasized

that the Hamiltonian (8) involves the parameters which characterise the atom as a whole

i.e. the atomic mass mat and polarizability κ. Therefore, it can be likewise applied to study

magnetically induced bound states of any anion, by specifying these parameters for the

underlying neutral system (atom or small molecule). For a non-spherical molecule κ may

depend on the orientation of this molecule with respect to the magnetic ﬁeld axis. This can

be included in Eq. (8) by deﬁning V = V (r) appropriately.

For further treatment of the Hamiltonian (8) it is appealing to introduce new canonical

variables diﬀerent from the Cartesian ones.

In a magnetic ﬁeld, a free charged particle

performs a Larmor rotation around its guiding centre in the plane perpendicular to the

ﬁeld, see, e.g., Ref. [70]. A bound anion as an entity is expected to exhibit a Larmor-like

rotation. Having this in mind, the motion of the neutral counterpart can also be conveniently

described in terms of the variables related to the Larmor rotation. Instead of the atomic

transverse coordinates and momenta one can introduce two sets of coordinates: Xc and

Yc which determine the location of the guiding centre, and XL and YL which provide the

location of the atom with respect to this centre. Similar coordinates can be introduced for

the excess electron: xc and yc describe the location of the electronic guiding centre with

respect to the atom and xL and yL provide the position of the electron with respect to

(xc, yc). From the quantum point of view for free charged particles, the cylindrical radii

23

corresponding to the above pairs can only take on the following discrete values,

R2

c = X 2

c + Y 2

c = (2N0 + 1)/B , R2

L = X 2

L + Y 2

L = (2N + 1)/B ,

c = x2
r2

c + y2

c = (2n0 + 1)/B ,

L = x2
r2

L + y2

L = (2n + 1)/B ,

(11)

where N0, N, n0 and n are non-negative integer numbers. It is worthy of notice that the

kinetic energy of the electronic Larmor rotation is determined by the radius of the Larmor

orbit and equals 0.5Br2

L. The last relation of Eqs. (11) naturally provides the latter energies

to be the Landau energies (5).

Although the reader might have an impression that the above quantities are introduced

formally, they do relate to physically meaningful types of motion in magnetically induced

anions. For an illustration of these quantities, Figure 4 shows the mutual arrangement of

the origin and the guiding centres as well as the Larmor orbits for the atom and the external

electron. To provide an idea of the separation between the atom and the electron, the

displacements are chosen in Figure 4 according to Eqs. (11) for N0 = 2, N = 0, n0 = 1 and

n = 0 for the magnetic ﬁeld strength B = 10 T. The choice of N = n = 0 simulates the

atom and the external electron moving on the ground Landau orbits.

Having introduced the new sets of coordinates, it is possible to utilise the conservation of

the total pseudo-momentum parallel and perpendicular to the magnetic ﬁeld and to eliminate

two atomic CM degrees of freedom from the Hamiltonian. Then the motion of the ion can

be described in terms of four degrees of freedom. Three degrees of freedom are associated

with the motion of the extra electron with respect to the atomic CM and relate to the pairs

{xc, yc}, {xL, yL} and {z, pz}. One more degree of freedom corresponds to the atomic motion

in terms of the pair {XL, YL}.

Basic features of the anionic motion in diﬀerent degrees of freedom are demonstrated

in Figures 5-7. They show the classical trajectories for the anion Cs− in a magnetic ﬁeld

B = 40 T. The initial conditions simulate a bound anion, occupying as an entity the ground

Landau level, while the excess electron is attached to the atom in a state corresponding to

the magnetically induced state s = 3 of a static anion. We refer the reader to Ref. [86] for

the details. Figure 5 shows the anionic motion in terms of the motions of the atom and the

external electron. The slowest motion is exhibited by the atom and shown in Figure 5a.

The motion of the external electron along the magnetic ﬁeld exhibits faster oscillations (see

Figure 5c). The electronic motion transverse to the magnetic ﬁeld is a combination of a

24

slow drift of its guiding centre (xc, yc) and an extremely fast Larmor rotation around it (see

Figure 5b). This demonstrates that indeed the pairs {xc, yc} and {xL, yL} naturally identify

slow and fast degrees of freedom, respectively, for the motion of the external electron.

Figure 6 shows the electronic drift motion across the ﬁeld in terms of the slow variables

{xc, yc}. The electronic guiding centre follows a circular-like trajectory around the atom.

The radius of this trajectory however varies, and the variation corresponds essentially to the

modulation of the atomic trajectory (see Figure 5a). The separate Larmor motion of the

electron is shown in Figure 7a. The number of rotations of the electron around its guiding

centre corresponds to the number of the fast oscillations of the electronic Larmor radius

involved in the ﬁgure. It is huge compared to the oscillations of all other slow degrees of

freedom on this time scale. To be speciﬁc, for a time interval of 8 ns the radius of the

electronic guiding centre exhibits 1 oscillation. For the same time interval, the number of

the longitudinal oscillations of the electron is 84 while the number of the Larmor rotations

is 17906.

An important feature of the fast electronic motion is explicitly seen in Figure 5b: the

time evolution of the electronic Larmor radius does not exhibit a slow modulation as the

time evolution of the guiding centre does. This indicates that the atomic motion to a good

approximation does not interact with the electronic Larmor rotation. In other words, being

initially placed on a Landau orbit, the external electron always follows it with its Larmor

radius showing only tiny ﬂuctuations around a constant mean value. The Larmor radius

can therefore be considered as an approximate integral of motion.

The character of the anionic motion discussed above allows one to draw several important

conclusions. The main eﬀect of the interaction between the neutral species and the external

electron for a moving anion is due to the coupling between the CM of the neutral species

and the guiding centre of the external electron i.e. between the slow degrees of freedom

for the anion. Similar to the case of the inﬁnitely heavy anion, when describing the mag-

netically induced states of moving anions, a physically meaningful approximation may still

assume a conservation, at the level of the zero-point Landau energy, of the kinetic energy

of the electronic motion transverse to the ﬁeld. However, in contrast to the static case, the

electronic longitudinal angular momentum lz is no longer an integral of motion for a moving

anion due to the drift motion of the guiding centre (xc, yc).

In order to average the Hamiltonian (8) over the fast electronic Larmor rotation, a suc-

25

cessful quantum procedure has been developed in Ref. [86]. When studying the electronic

motion in terms of the variables discussed above (we refer also to Figure 4), one can intro-

duce one dimensional states, hxL|ni or hyL|ni, equivalently describing pure Larmor rotations.

The latter states provide the electronic Landau energies (5) but they do not specify the elec-

tronic guiding centre or the angular momentum lz. Applying the ground (n = 0) states for

the desirable averaging involves a series of non-trivial transformations. They result in the

following eﬀective three-dimensional Hamiltonian that applies to the magnetically induced

states of moving anions:

Heﬀ = H1 + H2 ,

H1 =

(XL + xc)2 + (YL + yc)2

,

(cid:3)

H2 =

+ Veﬀ(r2

c , z2) .

B2
2mat (cid:2)
p2
z
2µ

(12)

(13)

(14)

The term H1 represents the kinetic energy associated with the motion of the neutral species

across the magnetic ﬁeld.

It also involves the coupling between the transverse degrees

of freedom of this species and the extra electron. H2 describes the motion of the extra

electron relative to the neutral species, µ = memat/(me + mat) is the reduced mass of this
c , z2) =
electron. The main ingredient of the latter Hamiltonian is an eﬀective potential Veﬀ(r2

h0|V (r)|0i. It has been worked out in Ref. [86] in an explicit form,

The Hamiltonian (12) possesses an integral of motion determined by the operator

Veﬀ(r2

c , z2) = −

v = 0.5Bz2 ,

κB2

∞

8 Z
0
f = 0.5

dξ

ξ exp(−vξ)
(1 + ξ)f
.

c + 1

,

Br2
(cid:0)

(cid:1)

L =

B
2

R2
(cid:0)

L − r2
c

.

(cid:1)

In this context, i.e. having eliminated irrelevant degrees of freedom, it can be regarded as the

total longitudinal angular momentum of the anion. As typical for many-body systems, the

latter integral of motion can hardly be implemented to additionally reduce the dimensionality

of the Hamiltonian (12) in the framework of further studies of the quantum properties.

To make contact with the bound states of the inﬁnitely heavy anion, we notice that in the

limit mat → ∞ the electronic guiding centre displacement becomes an integral of motion. It

can take the discrete values r2

c = (2s + 1)/B, s = 0, 1, 2, . . . (cf. Eqs. 11), which correspond

26

to the electronic longitudinal angular momentum lz = −s. For these ﬁxed values of r2

c , the
eﬀective potential (13) has been shown in Ref. [86] to coincide with the one-dimensional

potential Vs(z) that determines the properties of the magnetically induced states for static

anions (see Section IV.A). This means that, at the selected values r2

c = (2s + 1)/B, the
Hamiltonian H2 has the bound eigenstates with the energies −(µ/me)εs, where εs can be

estimated according to Eqs. (6)-(7). The latter states, however, are no longer the eigenstates

of the Hamiltonian (12) for ﬁnite mass mat of the neutral species. Considering the complete

problem they mix with the eigenstates of the Hamiltonian H1 when the anion is allowed to

move.

Possibilities of a further quantum treatment of the Hamiltonian (12) will be considered at

the end of this review. At this point we emphasize that, with the fastest degrees of freedom

being removed in the course of the above sketched derivation, the numerical propagation of

the classical motion for long times with very high stability is possible. Relevant investigations

including statistical studies of the motion-induced detachment of anions are discussed in the

following section.

C. Motion-induced dynamics and decay of the magnetically induced states

In Ref. [87] the classical motion with respect to the degrees of freedom involved in the

Hamiltonian (12) has been investigated. The classical trajectories have been calculated for

ﬁxed integer values of the total longitudinal angular momentum (14) i.e. according to the

quantised system.

For classical simulations of the moving magnetically induced anions one has to establish

relevant energy shells for which the trajectories propagate. Without having obtained the

energy spectrum of the Hamiltonian (12) from quantum considerations, some assumptions

about relevant energy values are required. It is legitimate to assume as initial conditions

such conditions which simulate the bound anion in the absence of the coupling between the

motions of the neutral species and the extra electron. Starting from such conditions, the

classical trajectories can be propagated taking into account the motional coupling thereby

elucidating its role for the dynamics of the anion. Such an approach has been exploited in

Ref. [87]. By the choice of initial conditions the anion was placed, as an entity, on a Landau

orbit, with the extra electron bound to the neutral species corresponding to that for a static

27

anion. The trajectories have then been propagated for the energies deﬁned by two quantum

numbers,

EN s =

B
M (cid:18)

N +

1
2 (cid:19)

−

µ
me

εs , N = 0, 1, 2, . . . ,

s = 0, 1, 2, . . . .

(15)

The ﬁrst term in Eq. (15) is the Landau energy of the anion (cf. Eq. (5) for the electronic

Landau energies), M = mat + me is the total mass of the anion, while εs is the binding

energy of the extra electron in a static anion given in Eqs. (6)-(7).

Evidently, when the energy value Heﬀ = EN s is negative, the classical motion is conﬁned

to a ﬁnite portion of phase space. If the energy is positive, one might expect to observe

detaching trajectories corresponding to an inﬁnite motion and phase space of the system.

These features of the classical dynamics are demonstrated in Figures 8, 9 and 10 which

show the motion of the Cs− ion in a magnetic ﬁeld B = 10 T. All the examples correspond

to initial conditions according to the magnetically induced bound state s = 1 of the static

ion. In order to deﬁne the spatial location of the atom it was chosen to coincide with that

presented in Figure 4.

Figure 8 shows the motion of the ion initially placed on the ground Landau level N = 0,

for the value L = 0. The corresponding anion energy is negative and the available phase

space is ﬁnite providing a bound motion of the anion. This motion is comprised of the

atomic rotation around the ﬁxed guiding centre (Figure 8a), the rotation of the electronic

guiding centre around the atom (Figure 8b) and the oscillations of the electronic longitudinal

coordinate (Figure 8c). Figure 9 shows the atomic trajectories for a positive value of the

Hamiltonian (12) which corresponds to an initial excitation of the anion according to the

Landau level N = 10. The propagated trajectories relate to the diﬀerent integer values

of the integral of motion L which vary from 3 to 18. The smaller values of L correspond

to larger initial curvature the atomic trajectory resulting in a more eﬃcient dynamical

energy exchange between the atomic and the electronic degrees of freedom. As a result,

for L = 3, 4, 5, 6 and 7 the latter ﬂuctuating energy exchange triggers the autodetachment

process and the atomic motion becomes unbound. For L = 8, 9, . . . , 18 these ﬂuctuations

are insuﬃcient to cause the autodetachment and the anion moves as a bound system with

the atom rotating on circular-like orbits.

In Figure 10, the electronic motion corresponding to the atomic trajectories shown in

Figure 9 is presented. The time variations of the electronic longitudinal coordinate z and the

28

transverse displacement of the guiding centre rc from the atom are given. The illustrations

for L = 5 and 7 (Figures 10a,b) correspond to the detaching atomic trajectories, and the

trajectories for L = 8 and 10 (Figures 10c,d) relate to the ﬁnite circular-like atomic motion.

One immediately realises that for the detaching motion both the longitudinal and transverse

separation between the atom and the electron increase unlimited with time. For the bound

anion, both displacements oscillate with time, and the amplitude as well as the frequency of

the fast oscillations of z are modulated by the slower oscillations of rc. The latter modulation

decreases for increasing L indicating that the eﬃciency of the energy exchange between the

atom and the electron reduces with the increase of the radii of the atomic orbit.

It is

also seen that the frequency of the longitudinal electronic oscillations is maximal while the

corresponding amplitude is minimal for minimal transverse separation between the electronic

guiding centre and atom.

In order to investigate the stability of the anions it is suﬃcient to consider only the

relative motion of the external electron with respect to the atom. The corresponding classical

equations of motion have been derived in Ref. [86] exploiting the conservation of the anionic

angular momentum (14). They couple two degrees of freedom associated with the pairs

{rc, ϕ} and {z, pz} of conjugated variables. The angle ϕ is the angle between the vectors

RL = (XL, YL, 0) and rc = (xc, yc, 0).

The reduction of the problem of anionic stability to a two-dimensional one is physically

meaningful. The diﬀerence in the number of the relevant dimensions, i.e. between one and

two, is the essence of the diﬀerence between electronic attachment for a static and moving

i.e. realistic anion in a magnetic ﬁeld. Indeed, the magnetic ﬁeld conﬁnes the extra electron

in two dimensions. Its binding to a static neutral species then becomes a subject of a one-

dimensional motion. However, a neutral species of a ﬁnite mass is no longer a static centre.

The motion of this species, since it is a neutral particle, is not conﬁned by the magnetic

ﬁeld. Therefore, transverse separation between the neutral species and excess electron is an

additional degree of freedom which plays a relevant role in the attachment and detachment

processes.

The two-dimensional analysis of the anionic stability has been exploited in Ref. [87] to

study the decay of the initially bound anionic states via the motional-induced coupling.

Classical trajectories have been propagated corresponding to diﬀerent initial conditions as-

sociated with certain energy shell (15). For each trajectory of such an ensemble the de-

29

tachment time have been calculated being a measure of the time required to change the

character of motion from initially bound to an unbound one. In this way the autodetach-

ment curves have been obtained which show the fraction of detached trajectories depending

on the propagation time.

As a relevant example we show in Fig. 11 the detachment curve for the ion H− moving

in a typical laboratory magnetic ﬁeld of strength B = 1 T. The lowest energy shell (15)

for N = s = 0 has been selected which is positive, EN s = 1.046 × 10−9 a.u., and therefore

relates to autodetachment. The classical simulations show that the autodetachment process

is essentially completed for the complete ensemble of trajectories within 12 ns. This time

scale is a measure for the lifetime of the anion H− prepared initially in the N = s = 0 state.

Also shown in Figure 11 are the typical detaching trajectories associated with the diﬀerent

parts of the autodetachment curve. They feature two essentially diﬀerent scenarios of the

electronic motion, associated with the two possible signs for the derivative ˙rc at the initial

time. For positive signs, the transverse separation of the electronic guiding centre from the

atom starts to increase from the very beginning of the propagation of the trajectory. As

a result, the eﬀective potential weakens and already after one longitudinal oscillation the

electron is no longer suﬃciently attracted by the atom to support a bound motion (see the

bottom insert in Figure 11). For negative signs, the transverse displacement rc initially

decreases making the interaction Veﬀ stronger. Consequently, the longitudinal electronic

motion undergoes a series of oscillations which become increasingly denser with the decrease

of rc as the upper insert in Figure 11 demonstrates. This part of the motion is associated on

average with energy transfer from the electronic to the atomic degrees of freedom. At later

times the opposite tendency is observed and the electron acquires energy from the atomic

motion. Then rc starts to increase and the following motion ﬁnally becomes a detaching

one.

Another example is presented in Figure 12. It illustrates the autodetachment decay of

the magnetically induced Cs− anion. This anion is much heavier than H− and therefore

expected to be more stable with respect to the motion-induced coupling. Besides, for ﬁxed

nucleus, its magnetically induced states are more strongly bound, due to the large polariz-

ability of the Cs atom. For the same magnetic ﬁeld strength, B = 1 T, the energy shell (15)

for the anion Cs− corresponding to N = s = 0 is negative providing a stable bound motion.

For N = 0 and higher s the energy shells are positive. The corresponding states undergo the

30

autodetachment process, and the related curves are shown in Figure 12. They demonstrate

an interesting feature that for higher internal excitations of the anion its motion-induced

decay is much slower than for low excitations. For example, the typical time for the com-

plete autodetachment decay of all anionic conﬁgurations N = 0, s = 2 is 3000 ns. It is by

a factor of two larger than the corresponding time of 1400 ns for the decay of the anions

initially prepared for N = 0, s = 1. The reason for the longer lifetimes of the higher internal

excitations relates to the fact that the higher excitations correspond to larger initial trans-

verse separations between the atom and the excess electron. This reduces the interaction

and consequently the energy exchange between the particles. Extrapolating this classical

feature to properties of quantum states of the magnetically induced anions one may expect

that the energetically higher resonance states have longer lifetimes.

The character of the autodetaching motion for the anion Cs− is illustrated in Figure 13

by three typical examples of the trajectories contributing to the three distinct parts of the

anionic autodetachment curve for s = 3 shown in Figure 12. The trajectories (a) and (b)

correspond to a relatively fast autodetachment, when the transverse separation between the

electronic guiding centre and the atom increases staring from the initial time. Interestingly

the evolution rc = rc(t) is the same for the trajectories (a) and (b) which diﬀer signiﬁcantly

with respect to the variation of the electronic coordinate z = z(t). This indicates that the

transverse electronic degrees of freedom are inﬂuenced predominantly by the atomic motion

and less by the electronic motion along the ﬁeld. The trajectory (c) ﬁrst experiences a

reduction of the separation between the electronic guiding centre and the atom. The fastest

longitudinal oscillations occur close to the minimal value for rc. In total 189 oscillations

occur with respect to z(t) before the trajectory becomes detaching.

An analysis of the dynamics of the magnetically induced anions reveals that the energy

exchange between the neutral species and the excess electron mostly involves the transverse

electronic degrees of freedom associated with the variation of the guiding centre displacement

rc. The magnetically induced states which are bound under the approximation of a static

neutral species can decay when the latter is allowed to move. The channel of decay relates

to increasing rc i.e. transverse separation between the particles. This weakens the eﬀective
c , z2) which, above some critical value of rc, looses the
two-dimensional potential Veﬀ = Veﬀ(r2

ability to support bound electronic motion along the magnetic ﬁeld.

On the one hand, the classical simulations provide the reasons to assume that the inclusion

31

of the collective motion terminates the inﬁnite series of the magnetically induced bound

states predicted in [10]. On the other hand, they reveal the times of autodetachment to be

long enough to speak of the corresponding states as of anionic resonances. Further quantum

investigations are therefore of great relevance in order to quantitatively describe properties

of bound and resonance states for moving magnetically induced anions.

It is naturally desirable to determine the number of bound states for an anion in a

magnetic ﬁeld. Some qualitative estimates can be drawn from the studying the classical

dynamics. A general ﬁnding is that whenever the classical motion for positive energies,

EN s > 0, and low collective excitations N have been analysed in Ref. [87], the autode-

tachment process has been detected. Assuming then that the condition E0s < 0 provides

the number of magnetically induced bound states one ﬁnds this number to depend on two

parameters: the product of the atomic mass and the polarizability squared i.e. matκ2, and

the ﬁeld strength B.

In Figure 14 we present the domains associated with diﬀerent val-

ues for the number of magnetically induced bound states in the “matκ2 − B” plane. The

lines separating the domains corresponding to one and more bound states are parallel to

each other due to the same scaling behavior of the quantity εs with B for s = 1, 2, . . . :

εs ∝ B3. The boundary between the domains of unbound and bound states is determined

by the condition E0s = 0 at s = 0 and corresponds to the diﬀerent scaling law, ε0 ∝ B2 (see

Eq. (6)). It is essential to note that for every atom (or molecule) there exists a non-zero

critical value of the ﬁeld strength Bcrit below which the anion is not magnetically bound.
The larger matκ2 is the smaller is the critical ﬁeld. For a given neutral system we can

determine from Figure 14 the expected number of magnetically bound states of the anion

for a given ﬁeld strength. For convenience, we indicate in the ﬁgure the values of matκ2

for some speciﬁc atoms and molecules taken from Ref. [89]. Particularly note worthy is the

fact that some of the atoms indicated cannot bind an electron in the absence of a magnetic

ﬁeld [7], but are shown here to form stable negative ions in relatively weak magnetic ﬁelds.

For instance, matκ2 ≈ 9 × 105 a.u.
above a critical ﬁeld Bcrit ≈ 3 × 10−2 T. For completeness we mention that for the lightest
atom (H atom; matκ2 ≈ 4 × 104 a.u.) to magnetically bind an electron, a ﬁeld larger than

for the noble gas atom Ar implies that Ar− is stable

Bcrit ≈ 10 T is needed while for the heavy Cs atom which possesses the largest polarisability
(matκ2 ≈ 4 × 1010 a.u.) the critical ﬁeld is as small as Bcrit ≈ 10−6 T.

32

D. Towards a quantum description of the moving magnetically induced anions

A quantum treatment of the Hamiltonian (12) turns out to be a diﬃcult problem. This is

in particular due to the fact that the variables xc and yc, although being related to physically

meaningful degree of freedom, correspond to a canonical pair of coordinate and momentum.

The potential Veﬀ given in Eq. (13) is therefore non-local in a quantum description of the

motion of the excess electron. To proceed, basis functions have been introduced in Ref. [88]

such that the action of the eﬀective potential on them can be described analytically. These

functions also involve other degree of freedom related to the motion of the neutral species

in terms of the pair {XL, YL}. In addition, they respect the integral of motion L given by

Eq. (14). Two suitable sets of quantum basis states have been suggested in Ref. [88]. We

draw here attention to one of them, which describes the eigenstates of the Hamiltonian (12)

for vanishing eﬀective potential. It has been called the set of basis states of detached anion

and is of particular convenience for treating loosely bound magnetically induced anionic

states. The basis states are |u, Ji speciﬁed by two quantum numbers: the number u takes

non-negative continuous values and determines the kinetic energy of an isolated neutral

species moving across the magnetic ﬁeld, Eat

u = Bu/mat, while the number J takes integer

values which are the eigenvalues of the total longitudinal angular momentum L. Expanding

an eigenfunction of the Hamiltonian (12) in terms of the basis states |u, Ji yields an integro-

diﬀerential equation,

p2
z
2µ

(cid:20)

+ Eat

u − EJ (cid:21)

g(J)
u (z) = −

∞

Z
0

du′ V (J)

u′,u(z) g(J)

u′ (z) .

(16)

Solutions of the latter equation are the “expansion coeﬃcients” g(J)

u (z) and the anionic ener-

gies EJ attributed to a given value J of the longitudinal angular momentum L. The kernel
V (J)
u′,u(z) = hu′, J|Veﬀ|u, Ji, which can be referred to as the potential functions, describes the
coupling between the states of free motion of the neutral species across the ﬁeld owing to

the interaction between the species and the external electron via the potential Veﬀ.

Neglecting the couplings between diﬀerent states of the motion of the neutral species one

can introduce an approximation of Eq. (16) by a one-dimensional Schr¨odinger equation with

a potential

W (J)

u (z) =

du′ V (J)

u′,u(z) .

(17)

Such an approximation describes the attachment of an external electron to the neutral species

∞

Z

0

33

moving across a magnetic ﬁeld with a speciﬁc kinetic energy Eat

u . The binding energies of

the corresponding magnetically induced states of the anion depend on the quantum numbers

u and J. As discussed in Ref. [88], applying this approximation can be relevant for large

values of u. For u ≫ max(1, |J|) it allows one to obtain the analytical estimate for the

binding energies in form of the asymptotical expansion in a series,

εu,J =

2

π
2 (cid:17)

(cid:16)

µ

κ2B3

u3 (cid:20)

1 +

|J| +

3
u (cid:18)

3
2 (cid:19)

+

6
u2 (cid:18)

J 2 +

|J| +

+ . . .

.

(18)

15
4

75
16(cid:19)

2

(cid:21)

The parameter u in Eq. (18) can be associated with a mean kinetic energy of the neutral

species, hEati = Bu/mat. At ﬁxed hEati the states of moving anions are expected to possess

binding energies which scale with respect to the polarizability and magnetic ﬁeld strength

according to κ2B3. This scaling property of the binding energies is essentially associated

with the polarization-like behavior of the potential which links the external electron to the

neutral species. We remind the reader that the same property holds for the states with s > 0

for inﬁnitely heavy anions, cf. Eq. (7). With increase of the mean kinetic energy of neutral

species, the magnetically induced moving anions can be naturally expected to become less

bound. This is consistent with the reduction of the binding energies with increasing u shown

in Eq. (18). On the other hand, the estimates (18) hint that the magnetically induced moving

anions are expected to be more bound for larger absolute values of the total longitudinal

angular momentum |J|. This ﬁnding can be particular important for selecting the conditions

under which magnetically induced bound states or long-living resonances are well manifested.

Derivation of the integro-diﬀerential equation (16) and the detailed studies of the prop-

erties of potential functions V (J)

u′,u(z) provided in Ref. [88] open new possibilities for further
rigorous quantum investigations of moving magnetically induced anions. Future eﬀorts con-

cerning numerical approaches to solve Eq. (16) are expected to bring new physical results.

For example, according to the asymptotic estimates (18) moving anions possess a sequence

of magnetically induced bound states corresponding to diﬀerent values of the total longitu-

dinal angular momentum. Answering the question whether the number of these states is

ﬁnite or inﬁnite requires an accounting of the coupling described by the integral operator in

Eq. (16). On the other hand, the classical studies discussed in the previous section lead to

the expectation that many magnetically induced states are resonance states. Eq. (16) can

be applied to study them by ab initio quantum methods.

34

V. CONCLUSIONS AND OUTLOOK

After a classiﬁcation and discussion of the binding mechanisms and properties of anions

in ﬁeld-free space this review mainly focused on the anionic states which were predicted by

Avron, Herbst and Simon [10]: In the presence of an external magnetic ﬁeld of arbitrary

strength there exists an inﬁnite manifold of bound states for any anion. This surprising

prediction stimulated a series of investigations [68, 69, 86, 87, 88] of the underlying binding

mechanism and the properties of the unusual states of anions exposed to the magnetic

ﬁeld. A ﬁrst analysis of the underlying physics [68] conﬁrmed that, assuming the anions are

inﬁnitely heavy i.e. spatially ﬁxed, the number of the bound states induced by the magnetic

ﬁeld is inﬁnite. These states are supported by the long-range polarization-like attraction of

the excess electron to a static neutral species along the magnetic ﬁeld. Explicit expressions

for the binding energies of the inﬁnite series of bound states were derived thereby obtaining

two categories of scaling with respect to the ﬁeld strengths: The binding energy of the

energetically lowest magnetically induced bound state scales as ∝ B2 whereas the series of

excited states scales as ∝ B3.

A complete description of anions in magnetic ﬁelds has to include the motion of the

collective (CM) degrees of freedom: In the presence of a magnetic ﬁeld the CM motion

couples to the electronic motion and the corresponding interaction plays a crucial role for

the stability of the excess electron [69]. The theoretical description of moving excited anions

in magnetic ﬁelds requires several conceptually new methods and techniques. These include

among others canonical transformations, exploitation of the constants of motion as well as

adiabatic separations of fast and slow degrees of freedom in the ﬁeld [86]. Following this route

allows an identiﬁcation of the prevailing eﬀective potential which links the excess electron

to the underlying neutral system in a moving anion. We have reviewed the dynamics and

stability of anions governed by the latter potential thereby elucidating the signiﬁcance of

the the coupling between the neutral species and the electron due to the anion’s motion in a

magnetic ﬁeld. This coupling triggers the process of autodetachment thereby pushing some

of the bound states for ﬁxed nucleus into the continuum. Their number, their properties

and whether they induce resonances in the continuum depends on the parameters of the

speciﬁc anion (atomic mass and polarizability and, of course, also on the magnetic ﬁeld

strength). The latter allow for a strong variety of anionic structures being additionally

35

enriched by the tuning of the external parameters such as the magnetic ﬁeld strength [87].

We have suggested a concrete approach [88] for the ab initio quantum description of the

moving anions that should be capable of addressing all above-indicated regimes including in

particular the process of motional decay. Here, much work is still to be done.

Expectations in this young ﬁeld of research are manifold. A rich spectrum of bound and

resonance states of the anions moving in magnetic ﬁelds is obvious by present. One should

emphasize that this includes anionic species that do not exist in the absence of the ﬁeld

(examples are Ar− and Xe−). From an experimental point of view these might be the most

interesting ones to discover ! Beyond the magnetically induced polarization binding a variety

of other binding mechanisms created by the combination of magnetic and e.g. permanent

dipole or quadrupole forces could lead to other interesting anionic species with unexpected

properties.

Acknowledgements

Financial support by the Deutsche Forschungemeinschaft is gratefully acknowledged.

36

[1] H. Massey, Negative Ions, Cambridge University Press 1976.

[2] M.K. Scheller, R.N. Compton and L.S. Cederbaum, Science, 1995, 270, 1160.

[3] D. Gray, Observation and analysis of stellar spectra, Cambridge 1992.

[4] A. Chutjian, A. Garscadden and J.M. Wadehra, Phys. Rep., 1996, 6, 264.

[5] R. Wildt, Asptrophys. J, 1939, 190, 611.

[6] S. Chandrasekhar, Astrophys. J., 1958, 128, 114.

[7] T. Andersen, H.K. Haugen and H. Hotop, J. Phys. Chem. Ref. Data, 1999, 28(6), 1511.

[8] V.V. Petrunin, J.D. Voldstad, P. Balling, P. Kristensen, T. Andersen and H.K. Haugen,

Phys. Rev. Lett., 1995, 75, 1911.

[9] T. Andersen, H.H. Andersen, P.Balling, P. Kristensen and V.V. Petrunin,

J. Phys. B: At. Mol. Opt. Phys., 1997, 30, 3317.

[10] J.E. Avron, I.W. Herbst and B. Simon, Commun. Math. Phys., 1981, 79, 529.

[11] J. Simons and P. Sikorski, The Roles of Electrostatics in forming Molecular Anions and Di-

anions, in Theoretical Prospect of Negative Ions, ed. J. Kalcher, Research Signpost 2002.

[12] J. Kalcher, Paradigms of Unconventional Negative Ion States, in Theoretical Prospect of Neg-

ative Ions, ed. J. Kalcher, Research Signpost 2002.

[13] H. Hotop and W.C. Lineberger, Phys. Chem. Ref. Data, 1985, 14, 731.

[14] T. Andersen, K.A. Bertelsen, M.K. Raarup, N. Rud, J. Olsen and L. Veseth, Phys. Rev. A,

1999, 60, 3627.

[15] C.L. Pekkeris, Phys. Rev., 1962, 126(4), 1470.

[16] K.R. Lykke, K.K. Murray and W.C. Lineberger, Phys. Rev. A, 1991, 43, 6104.

[17] R.N. Hill, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1977, 38(12), 643.

[18] E. Eliav, A. Landau and U. Kaldor, Relativistic Coupled-Cluster Studies of Negative Ions, in

Theoretical Prospect of Negative Ions, ed. J. Kalcher, Research Signpost 2002.

[19] V.T. Davis and J.S. Thompson, J. Phys. B: At. Mol. Opt. Phys., 2001, 34, L433.

[20] A.M. Covington, D. Calabrese, J.S. Thompson and T.J. Kvale,

J. Phys. B: At. Mol. Opt. Phys., 1998, 31, L855.

[21] U. Thumm and D.W. Norcross, Phys. Rev. A, 1993, 47, 305.

[22] M. Scheer, R.C. Bilodeau, C.A. Brodie and H.K. Haugen, Phys. Rev. A, 1998, 58, 2844.

37

[23] C. Bahrim and U. Thumm, Phys. Rev. A, 2000, 022722.

[24] C. Bahrim, U. Thumm and I.I. Fabrikant, J. Phys. B: At. Mol. Opt. Phys., 2001, 34, L195.

[25] E. Fermi and E. Teller, Phys. Rev., 1947, 72, 399.

[26] A.S. Wightman, Phys. Rev., 1950, 77, 521.

[27] R.F. Wallis, R. Herman and H.W. Milnes, J. Mol. Spectroscopy, 1960, 4, 51.

[28] O.H. Crawford, Proc. Roy. Soc. (London), 1967, 91, 279.

[29] O.H. Crawford and A. Dalgarno, Chem. Phys. Lett., 1967, 1, 23.

[30] W.B. Brown and R.E. Roberts, J. Chem. Phys., 1967, 46, 2006.

[31] J.E. Turner, Am. J. Phys., 1977, 45, 758.

[32] W.R. Garret, Phys. Rev. A, 1971, 3, 961.

[33] C. Desfran¸cois, Phy. Rev. A, 1995, 51, 3667.

[34] M. Gutowski, K.D. Jordan and P. Skurski, J. Phys. Chem., 1998, 102, 2624.

[35] K.D. Jordan, W. Luken, J. Chem. Phys., 1976, 64, 2760.

[36] M. Gutowski, P. Skurski, A.I. Boldyrev, J. Simons and K.D. Jordan, Phys. Rev. A, 1996, 54,

[37] D.M.Smith, J.Smets, Y. Elkadi and L. Adamowicz, J. Phys. Chem. A, 1997, 101, 8123.

[38] R.N. Compton, F.B. Dunning and P. Nordlander, Chem. Phys. Lett., 1996, 253, 8.

[39] O.H. Crawford and W.R. Garret, J. Chem. Phys., 1977, 66, 4968.

[40] K.D. Jordan and J.F. Leibman, Chem. Phys. Lett., 1979, 62, 143.

[41] M. Gutowski and P. Skurski, Chem. Phys. Lett., 1999, 303, 65.

[42] C. Desfran¸cois, H. Abdoul-Carime and Jean-Pierre Schermann, Int. J. Mod. Phys. B, 1996,

1906.

10, 1339.

[43] C.F. Bunge, M. Galan, R. Jauregui and A.V. Bunge, Nucl. Instrum. Methods, 1982, 202, 909.

[44] C.A. Nicolaides, G. Aspromallis and D.R. Beck, J. Mol. Struct., 1989, 199, 283.

[45] H. Gnaser, Phys. Rev. A, 1997, 56, R2518.

[46] R. Middleton and J. Klein, Phys. Rev. A, 1999, 60, 3786.

[47] T. Sommerfeld and L.S. Cederbaum, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1998, 80, 3723.

[48] A. Dreuw and L.S. Cederbaum, Int. J. Mass Spectrom., 1999, 188, 199.

[49] A. Dreuw and L.S. Cederbaum, Phys. Rev. A, 1999, 59(4), 2702.

[50] A. Dreuw, T. Sommerfeld and L.S. Cederbaum, J. Chem. Phys., 2002, 116(14), 6039.

[51] A. Dreuw and L.S. Cederbaum, J. Phys. B: At. Mol. Opt. Phys., 1999, 32, L665.

38

[52] Y.K. Bae, M.J. Coggiola and J.R. Peterson, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1984, 52, 747.

[53] L. Adamowicz and T. Pluta, Phys. Rev. A, 1991, 44, 2860.

[54] L. Adamowicz and T. Pluta, Chem. Phys. Lett., 1991, 179, 517.

[55] J. Kalcher and A.F. Sax, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2000, 326, 80.

[56] H. Cardy, C. Larrieu and A. Dargelos, Chem. Phys. Lett., 1986, 131, 507.

[57] X. Guan, B. Li and L. Wu. Phys. Rev. A, 2001, 64, 043402.

[58] Ronald J.W. Henry, R.F. O’Connell, Ed. R. Smith, G. Chanmugam and A.K. Rajagopal,

Phys. Rev. D, 1974, 8, 329.

[59] G.L. Surmelian, R.J.W. Henry and R.F. O’Connell, Phys. Lett., 1974, 49A, 431.

[60] D.M. Larsen, Phys. Rev. B, 1979, 20, 5217; Phys. Rev. Lett., 1979, 42, 742; Phys. Rev. B,

[61] C.-H. Park and A.F. Starace, Phys. Rev. A, 1984, 29, 442.

[62] M. Vincke and D. Baye, J. Phys. B: At. Mol. Opt. Phys., 1989, 22, 2089.

[63] D.M. Larsen and S.Y. McCann, Phys. Rev. B, 1992, 46, 3966; 1993, 47, 13175.

[64] M. Bylicki, S.I. Themelis and C.A. Nicolaides, J. Phys. B: At. Mol. Opt. Phys., 1994, 27,

1981, 23, 4076.

2741.

[65] O.-A. Al-Hujaj and P. Schmelcher, Phys. Rev. A, 2000, 61, 063413.

[66] L.D. Landau and E.M. Lifshitz, Quantum Mechanics, 1965, Pergamon Press, Oxford, England.

[67] J.E. Avron, I.W. Herbst and B. Simon, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1977, 39(17), 1068.

[68] V.G. Bezchastnov, P. Schmelcher and L.S. Cederbaum, Phys. Rev. A, 2000, 61 052512.

[69] V.G. Bezchastnov, L.S. Cederbaum and P. Schmelcher, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2001, 86, 5450.

[70] B.R. Johnson, J.O. Hirschfelder and K.H. Yang, Rev. Mod. Phys., 1983, 55, 109.

[71] P. Schmelcher and L.S. Cederbaum, Phys. Rev. A, 1991, 43, 287.

[72] P. Schmelcher and L.S. Cederbaum, in Computational Trends in Quantum Chemistry, Kluwer

Academic Publ. 1994.

[73] P. Schmelcher and L.S. Cederbaum, in Atoms and Molecules in Intense Fields, Springer 1997.

[74] P. Schmelcher and L.S. Cederbaum, Comm. on Mod. Phys., 2000, 2, 123.

[75] P. Schmelcher and L.S. Cederbaum, Phys. Lett. A, 1992, 164, 305.

[76] P. Schmelcher and L.S. Cederbaum, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1995, 74, 662.

[77] V.S. Melezhik and P. Schmelcher, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2000, 84, 1870.

[78] V.B. Pavlov-Verevkin and B. Zhilinskii, Phys. Lett. A, 1980, 78, 244.

39

[79] G. Wunner, H. Ruder and H. Herold, Astrophys. J., 1981, 241, 374.

[80] M. Vincke and D. Baye, J. Phys. B: At. Mol. Opt. Phys., 1988, 21, 2407.

[81] G.G. Pavlov and P. Meszaros, Astrophys. J., 1993, 416, 752.

[82] M. Vincke, M. Le Dournef and D. Baye, J. Phys. B: At. Mol. Opt. Phys., 1992, 25, 2787.

[83] A.Y. Potekhin, J. Phys. B: At. Mol. Opt. Phys., 1994, 27, 1073.

[84] D. Baye and M. Vincke, J. Phys. B: At. Mol. Opt. Phys., 1986, 19, 4051.

[85] V.G. Bezchastnov, G.G. Pavlov and J. Ventura, Phys. Rev. A, 1988, 58, 180.

[86] V.G. Bezchastnov, L.S. Cederbaum and P. Schmelcher, Phys. Rev. A., 2002, 65, 032501.

[87] V.G. Bezchastnov, P. Schmelcher and L.S. Cederbaum, Phys. Rev. A., 2002, 65, 042512.

[88] V.G. Bezchastnov and L.S. Cederbaum, Phys. Rev. A., 2003, 68, 012501.

[89] T.M. Miller, Atomic and Molecular Polarizabilities,

in CRC Handbook of Chemistry and

Physics, 76th Edition, CRC Press, 1996.

40

TABLE I: Binding energies of the ground and ﬁrst excited magnetically induced states of those

atomic anions which do not exist in ﬁeld-free space. κ is the polarizability of the neutral atom.

B = 10 T

B = 30 T

Atom κ, a.u. ε0, meV

ε1, meV

ε0, meV

ε1, meV

He

Be

N

Ne

Mg

Ar

Mn

Zn

Si

Cd

Xe

Hg

Rn

1.38

2.92 × 10−5 4.81 × 10−10 2.629 × 10−4 1.29 × 10−8

37.79 2.18 × 10−2 3.59 × 10−7 0.196

9.70 × 10−6

7.42

2.67

8.41 × 10−4 1.38 × 10−8 7.574 × 10−3 3.74 × 10−7

1.08 × 10−4 1.79 × 10−9 9.797 × 10−4 4.84 × 10−8

71.53 7.81 × 10−2 1.28 × 10−6 0.703

3.47 × 10−5

11.07 1.87 × 10−3 3.08 × 10−8 1.686 × 10−2 8.33 × 10−7

63.43 6.14 × 10−2 1.01 × 10−6 0.553

47.9

3.50 × 10−2 5.77 × 10−7 0.315

2.73 × 10−5

1.55 × 10−5

16.76 4.29 × 10−3 7.07 × 10−8 3.864 × 10−2 1.91 × 10−6

48.59 3.60 × 10−2 5.93 × 10−7 0.324

27.29 1.13 × 10−2 1.87 × 10−7 0.102

38.46 2.25 × 10−2 3.72 × 10−7 0.203

35.76 1.95 × 10−2 3.21 × 10−7 0.175

1.60 × 10−5

5.06 × 10−6

1.01 × 10−5

8.69 × 10−6

41

Figure 1. The total energies and detachment thresholds for the two lowest states of the

anion H− in a magnetic ﬁeld. The dots represent the results from Ref. [65]

and are connected with lines for convenience: the solid lines represent the total

energies of the singlet and triplet levels while the dot-dashed lines indicate the

corresponding detachment thresholds. 1 a.u. of the ﬁeld strength corresponds to

2.3554 × 105 T.

Figure 2. The binding energies for the singlet and triplet states of the anion H− in a

magnetic ﬁeld, according to the results from Ref. [65]. Both quantities are the

spin-preserving binding energies, i.e., energies required to remove one electron

from the anion without changing the longitudinal component of the total elec-

tronic spin (see text).

Figure 3. The true electron aﬃnity of the hydrogen atom in a magnetic ﬁeld. The solid

curve is obtained from the results presented in Ref. [65]. Dashed lines show the

results obtained earlier in Ref. [59].

Figure 4. The coordinates used to describe a moving anion as a system of a neutral atom

and an external electron. The spatial extension corresponding to 10 T magnetic

ﬁeld strength is indicated by the bold horizontal bar.

Figure 5. Motion of the Cs− ion in terms of the four interacting degrees of freedom in

the magnetic ﬁeld B = 40 T. (a) The trajectory of the atomic motion across

the magnetic ﬁeld for the propagation time 285 ns. (b) The solid line area is

the trajectory of the fast electronic motion relative to the atom in the plane per-

pendicular to the magnetic ﬁeld. This trajectory is shown for the propagation

time 0.5 ns. The dashed line indicates the corresponding trajectory of the elec-

tronic guiding centre for a bigger propagation time of 7 ns. (c) The electronic

oscillations along the magnetic ﬁeld.

Figure 6. Motion of the electronic guiding centre for the trajectory shown in Figure 5:

(a) in the plane perpendicular to the magnetic ﬁeld, (b) the time dependence of

the displacement rc =

c + y2
x2

c of the electronic guiding centre from the atom.

Figure 7. The electronic Larmor motion corresponding to the trajectory shown in Fig-

p

42

ure 5: (a) in the plane perpendicular to the magnetic ﬁeld (involving 1118 cycles

over the time scale of 0.5 ns), (b) demonstrates the adiabatic conservation of the

corresponding Larmor orbit radius rL =

L + y2
x2
L.

Figure 8.

p
Stable regular motion of the Cs− ion in terms of the three interacting degrees of

freedom (averaged over the fast electron Larmor rotations) in the magnetic ﬁeld

B = 10 T. The energy of the anion is −1.262 × 10−9 a.u. given by Eq. (15) for

N = 0, s = 1. The value of the anionic longitudinal angular momentum (14) is

L = 0. The top panel shows the atomic trajectory for one nearly complete cycle of

the atomic rotation around the guiding centre corresponding to the propagation

time 1000 ns. The indicated displacement of the atomic guiding centre from the

origin (the integral of motion) and the initial displacement of the atom from it

correspond to those given in Figure 4. The bottom panel shows the rotation of

the electronic guiding centre around the atom, and the electronic longitudinal

oscillations for the propagation time 25 ns.

Figure 9. The atomic trajectories for the motion of the Cs− ion corresponding to the

positive energy EN s = 4.820 × 10−10 a.u.

for N = 10, s = 1 for the magnetic

ﬁeld strength B = 10 T. The diﬀerent trajectories relate to the diﬀerent values

of the longitudinal angular momentum (14) indicated at the arrows which point

to the initial locations of the atom. The propagation times are about 370 ns for

the detaching trajectories and 1000 ns for the non-detaching (circular-like) ones.

Figure 10. The electronic motion for the selected atomic trajectories shown in Figure 9.

The time variations of rc and z are demonstrated. Subﬁgures (a), (b), (c) and

(d) correspond to L = 5, 7, 8 and 10, respectively.

Figure 11. The fraction of the trajectories which describe the autodetachment of the ex-

tra electron from the anion H− due to motion-induced eﬀects as a function of

time for the magnetic ﬁeld B = 1 T. The initial conditions for the trajectories

belong to the energy shell (15) at N = s = 0, and to the value L = 0 such that at

time t = 0 the ensemble of anions corresponds to the energetically lowest magnet-

ically induced bound state of the inﬁnitely heavy anion. The inserts show typical

trajectories corresponding to the diﬀerent parts of the anionic autodetachment

43

curve.

Figure 12. The fractions of the detached trajectories for the Cs− anions moving in a

magnetic ﬁeld B = 1 T with the longitudinal angular momentum L = −1. The

initial ensembles of the anions simulate the entire anion on the ground Landau

orbit, N = 0, but with diﬀerent aﬃnities of the external electron to the atom

corresponding to the magnetically induced bound states s = 1, 2, 3, 4 and 5,

respectively, of the inﬁnitely heavy ion.

Figure 13. The three typical trajectories corresponding to the three diﬀerent slopes of

the autodetachment curve for s = 3 shown in Figure 7. The top plot shows

variations of the electronic longitudinal coordinate with time, while the bottom

plot demonstrates evolutions of the transverse separation of the electronic guid-

ing centre from the atom. The trajectories (a), (b) and (c) contribute to the

correspondingly labelled parts of the autodetachment curve in Figure 12. Notice

that the trajectories (a) and (b) for rc = rc(t) coincide.

Figure 14. The domains of diﬀerent numbers of bound magnetically induced states in

the “matκ2 − B” plane. In this plot we also indicate the values of matκ2 for some

speciﬁc atoms and small molecules. The encircled elements are the elements

which do not form a stable negative ion in ﬁeld-free space. This ﬁgure is based

on simple energetic arguments (see text). Quantitative corrections are expected

on the ground of full quantum calculations.

44

.

.

.
.

.

.
.

.

... . . .
... .
... .

.
.

... . . .

.

.

.
.

FIG. 1: The total energies and detachment thresholds for the two lowest states of the anion H−

in a magnetic ﬁeld. The dots represent the results from Ref. [65] and are connected with lines for

convenience: the solid lines represent the total energies of the singlet and triplet levels while the

dot-dashed lines indicate the corresponding detachment thresholds. 1 a.u. of the ﬁeld strength

corresponds to 2.3554 × 105 T.

45

. .. . . ..
. .. . . ..

. .. .
. .. .

. .. .
. .. .

.. .

. .. .

. .. .
. .. .

. .. .
.

.
.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

FIG. 2: The binding energies for the singlet and triplet states of the anion H− in a magnetic ﬁeld,

according to the results from Ref. [65]. Both quantities are the spin-preserving binding energies,

i.e., energies required to remove one electron from the anion without changing the longitudinal

component of the total electronic spin (see text).

46

FIG. 3: The true electron aﬃnity of the hydrogen atom in a magnetic ﬁeld. The solid curve is

obtained from the results presented in Ref. [65]. Dashed lines show the results obtained earlier in

Ref. [59].

47

e

e

e

e

e

e

e

e

48

FIG. 4: The coordinates used to describe a moving anion as a system of a neutral atom and an

external electron. The spatial extension corresponding to 10 T magnetic ﬁeld strength is indicated

by the bold horizontal bar.

49
FIG. 5: Motion of the Cs− ion in terms of the four interacting degrees of freedom in the magnetic

ﬁeld B = 40 T. (a) The trajectory of the atomic motion across the magnetic ﬁeld for the propagation

FIG. 6: Motion of the electronic guiding centre for the trajectory shown in Figure 5: (a) in the plane

perpendicular to the magnetic ﬁeld, (b) the time dependence of the displacement rc =

x2
c + y2
c

p

of the electronic guiding centre from the atom.

50

51
FIG. 7: The electronic Larmor motion corresponding to the trajectory shown in Figure 5: (a) in the

FIG. 8: Stable regular motion of the Cs− ion in terms of the three interacting degrees of freedom

(averaged over the fast electron Larmor rotations) in the magnetic ﬁeld B = 10 T. The energy of

the anion is −1.262 × 10−9 a.u. given by Eq. (15) for N = 0, s = 1. The value of the anionic

longitudinal angular momentum (14) is L = 0. The top panel shows the atomic trajectory for

one nearly complete cycle of the atomic rotation around the guiding centre corresponding to the

propagation time 1000 ns. The indicated displacement of the atomic guiding centre from the origin

(the integral of motion) and the initial displacement of the atom from it correspond to those given

in Figure 4. The bottom panel shows the rotation of the electronic guiding centre around the atom,

and the electronic longitudinal oscillations for the propagation time 25 ns.

52

FIG. 9: The atomic trajectories for the motion of the Cs− ion corresponding to the positive energy

EN s = 4.820 × 10−10 a.u. for N = 10, s = 1 for the magnetic ﬁeld strength B = 10 T. The diﬀerent

trajectories relate to the diﬀerent values of the longitudinal angular momentum (14) indicated at

the arrows which point to the initial locations of the atom. The propagation times are about 370 ns

for the detaching trajectories and 1000 ns for the non-detaching (circular-like) ones.

53

54
FIG. 10: The electronic motion for the selected atomic trajectories shown in Figure 9. The time

variations of rc and z are demonstrated. Subﬁgures (a), (b), (c) and (d) correspond to L = 5, 7, 8

FIG. 11: The fraction of the trajectories which describe the autodetachment of the extra electron

from the anion H− due to motion-induced eﬀects as a function of time for the magnetic ﬁeld

B = 1 T. The initial conditions for the trajectories belong to the energy shell (15) at N = s = 0,

and to the value L = 0 such that at time t = 0 the ensemble of anions corresponds to the

energetically lowest magnetically induced bound state of the inﬁnitely heavy anion. The inserts

show typical trajectories corresponding to the diﬀerent parts of the anionic autodetachment curve.

55

FIG. 12: The fractions of the detached trajectories for the Cs− anions moving in a magnetic ﬁeld

B = 1 T with the longitudinal angular momentum L = −1. The initial ensembles of the anions

simulate the entire anion on the ground Landau orbit, N = 0, but with diﬀerent aﬃnities of the

external electron to the atom corresponding to the magnetically induced bound states s = 1, 2, 3, 4

and 5, respectively, of the inﬁnitely heavy ion.

56

FIG. 13: The three typical trajectories corresponding to the three diﬀerent slopes of the autode-

tachment curve for s = 3 shown in Figure 7. The top plot shows variations of the electronic

longitudinal coordinate with time, while the bottom plot demonstrates evolutions of the transverse

separation of the electronic guiding centre from the atom. The trajectories (a), (b) and (c) con-

tribute to the correspondingly labelled parts of the autodetachment curve in Figure 12. Notice

that the trajectories (a) and (b) for rc = rc(t) coincide.

57

FIG. 14: The domains of diﬀerent numbers of bound magnetically induced states in the “matκ2−B”

plane. In this plot we also indicate the values of matκ2 for some speciﬁc atoms and small molecules.

The encircled elements are the elements which do not form a stable negative ion in ﬁeld-free space.

This ﬁgure is based on simple energetic arguments (see text). Quantitative corrections are expected

on the ground of full quantum calculations.

58

