3
0
0
2
 
c
e
D
 
4
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
m
o
t
a
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
0
9
0
2
1
3
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Low-energy X-ray standards from hydrogenlike pionic atoms

D.F. Anagnostopoulos,1 D. Gotta,2 P. Indelicato,3, ∗ and L.M. Simons4
1Department of Materials Science and Engineering,
University of Ioannina, GR-45110 Ioannina, Greece
2Institut f¨ur Kernphysik, Forschungszentrum J¨ulich, D-52425 J¨ulich, Germany
3Laboratoire Kastler Brossel, ´Ecole Normale Sup´erieure et Universit´e
Pierre et Marie Curie, Case 74, 4 place Jussieu, 75005 Paris, France
4Paul-Scherrer-Institut (PSI), CH 5232-Villigen, Switzerland
(Dated: September 2, 2003)

We demonstrate the ﬁrst step of a complete program, which consists in establishing an X-ray
energy standard scale with the use of few-body atoms, in the few keV range. Light pionic and
muonic atoms as well as one and two-electron ions from Electron-Cyclotron Ion sources are used.
The transition energies are calculable from quantum electrodynamics, meaning that only a very
limited subset need be measured and compared with theory, while providing a large number of
standard lines. Here we show that circular transitions in pionic neon atoms, completely stripped
from their electrons, reveal spectral lines which are narrow, symmetric and well reproducible. We
use these lines for the energy determination of transition energies in complex electronic systems,
like the Kα1,2 transitions in metallic Ti, which may serve as secondary standard.

PACS numbers: 06.20.Fn, 32.30.Rj, 36.10.-k, 07.85.Nc

Accurate (below 1 ppm) and reproducible X-ray wave-
length standards with reasonably dense set of lines would
be very valuable for the most widespread application
of X-rays: the determination of crystal lattice param-
eters with diﬀractometric methods (see e.g., Ref.
[1]
and references therein.) Other practical applications are
found, like the energy calibration of synchrotron radia-
tion beams, monochromators and spectrometers and the
determination of the response function of X-ray spec-
trometers and diﬀractometers. X-ray standards can thus
be useful in many areas of modern science like crystallog-
raphy, solid state, molecular, atomic and particle physics,
chemistry, and biochemistry.

A recent experiment used the 57Fe M¨ossbauer radi-
ation, excited by synchrotron radiation, improved the
energy (wavelength) standard for the energy region of
14 keV by two orders of magnitude in accuracy from
10 ppm to 0.2 ppm [2]. This attempt, while very promis-
ing, is very diﬃcult to extend to lower energies, where
electron conversion would dramatically reduce the nu-
clear ﬂuorescence. In the absence of an appropriate ex-
citation source, such as synchroton radiation, this would
require unrealistically high source activities with the ad-
ditional requirement of a suﬃciently long life time of the
parent isotope. In addition self-absorption of low energy
X-rays in the source is very strong. The X-rays can thus
only originate from the surface layer, which leads to an
upper bound to the maximum eﬀective activity that can
be reached by increasing the amount radioactive mate-
rial. Finally, all these transitions are orders of magnitude
narrower than crystal spectrometers resolution. For some
applications the extreme narrowness of γ lines is of no use
while limiting severely their intensity.

The most widely used X-ray energy standards, at
present time, are made by exciting inner-shell transi-

tions in atoms with either electrons or photons.
In a
number of cases their energies are given with precision
close to 1 ppm [3], which does not necessarily mean that
these standards can be used to such an accuracy. For
X-rays originating from inner-shell transitions in multi-
electron systems, the center of gravity of the line cannot
be attributed unambiguously to a physical transition.
Shake-oﬀ processes (which create additional vacancies)
and open outer shells lead to numerous satellite tran-
sitions very close in energy to the diagram line, which
cannot be resolved and produce asymmetric line shapes.
Moreover, the line shape of transitions in multielectronic
systems depends also on the excitation mechanism used
to create the inner-shell vacancies. For example the evo-
lution of the K (1s−1) Argon spectrum has been stud-
ied as function of excitation energy [4, 5], and dramatic
qualitative changes were observed. The chemical envi-
ronment of the atom also plays a strong role as can be
seen from the comparison between solids, metallic vapors
and theoretical X-ray absorption edges energies [3, 6, 7].
This problem also aﬀects transition energies, particularly
when they involve M2,3 and N2,3 shells.

An inherent problem with current standard X-ray lines
is their natural width, which is typically more than 10
times larger than the resolution of the best X-ray spec-
trometers. Hence, ﬂuorescence radiation is unsuitable to
determine the response function of the apparatus.

As an alternative and more general approach to both γ-
rays or natural X-rays, we thus propose to proﬁt from re-
cent developments in exotic-atoms research and in heavy-
ions sources, and to use two- and three-body systems as
photon emitters in the few keV range. In contrast to γ-
rays, electronic, muonic and pionic atoms would provide
a dense set of lines, that can be supplemented by an even
denser set if one can use antiprotonic atoms with beam

intensities comparable to LEAR at CERN [8]. Our pro-
gram consists ﬁrst in doing relative energy measurements
of transitions in one and two-electron ions, emitted by the
plasma of Electron-Cyclotron Ion Sources (ECRIS), of
circular transitions in fully stripped pionic atoms and of
X-rays from solid ﬂuorescence targets. Modern, commer-
cial, permanent-magnet ECRIS are small and relatively
economical to operate, and could be available in a large
number of places to provide reference lines.

This relative energy scale will then be tied to a few,
very bright lines, the energy of which will be measured
absolutely, with either a double-ﬂat crystal instrument,
or a backscattering spectrometer as in [2] obtained from
a Electron-Cyclotron Ion Trap (ECRIT), a device de-
rived from the ECRIS, and optimized for increasing the
trapping time of the ions [9], and thus the production
of X-rays from highly-charged ions.
Intense M1 radia-
tion from the 1s2s 1S0 → 1s2 transition in helium-like
Argon has been observed both in conventional ECRIS
[10] and in the ﬁrst run of the PSI ECRIT in 2002 [11].
The ions energy in such a device ranges from ≈ 0.5 eV
to 6 eV depending on the injected RF power[12], giv-
ing rise to a Doppler broadening in the 5 to 18 ppm,
i.e., 0.07 to 0.28 eV for Ar. This allows for measure-
ments well below 1 ppm, and corresponds also to the
expected accuracy (typically 1 meV) of theory for one
electron ions in this range of Z. Diﬀerent energy ranges
and diﬀraction orders can be connected by exploiting
the Yrast structure of the exotic-atom cascade, which
leads to a strong population of circular states, thus fa-
voring transitions with a change of the principal quan-
tum number n by 1. Hence, successive transitions in
the same atom connect diﬀerent energy scales in ratios
≈ (cid:0)1/(n + 1)2 − 1/n2(cid:1) / (cid:0)1/n2 − 1/(n − 1)2(cid:1), which are
roughly of the order of 0.5 for n around 5. For instance,
πNe provides the photon energies of 2.7, 4.5 and 8.3 keV
corresponding respectively to the 7 → 6, 6 → 5 and
5 → 4 transitions. With such a comparison method one
can transfer energy standards between orders without
problems due to changes in index of refraction.

The present program has several advantages. First,
once a set of lines has been measured and compared
to a given accuracy to quantum-electrodynamics (QED)
calculations, other lines from the same source or from
neighboring elements can be used as standards without
the need of a direct measurement. Transition energies
of these simple system can probably be calculated nowa-
days from ﬁrst principle to better than 1 meV, beneﬁt-
ing from high-accuracy tests of QED in hydrogen [13].
This is even true for hadronic atoms, if one uses circular
transitions, which are not aﬀected by strong interaction.
Only particle masses (very well known except for pion),
the ﬁne structure constant and the Rydberg constant are
needed. Over time the precision of the calculation can be
improved by systematically including contributions from
higher-order Feynman diagrams. The quality of the cal-

2

culation can be checked by comparing to the directly
measured lines energies as well as to all the relatively
measured ones which are directly connected to the direct
measurements.

Second, the natural line widths of these transitions,
while not as small as γ-ray line, are three orders of mag-
nitude narrower than the ones of multielectronic systems.
Finally, the combination of the exotic-atom and elec-
tronic X-ray sources can provide a powerful tool for es-
tablishing high-quality X-ray energy standards. As an
example, the 5g → 4f transition in πC, the Lyman-α in
hydrogenlike Cl and the Kα ﬂuorescence line in singly
ionized Ar, degenerate in energy by few eV, can be easily
related by the method presented here.

In the present letter, we present the measurement, with
a crystal spectrometer of the characteristic X-radiation
from hydrogenlike pionic atoms. We use these transitions
as energy standards for the energy determination of the
transition energies in a complex electronic systems, the
Kα1,2 transitions in Ti. In this way we intend to show
that the pionic transition is in good agreement with a rea-
sonably well measured Kα1,2 transition. Copper would
have made a better case, but the present world average
for the pion mass involve the Cu Kα doublet. This issue
will however be solved when the ﬁnal value for the pion
to muon mass ratio is released [14].

For this experiment we used the cyclotron trap II [15]
attached to the πE5 pion line at the Paul Scherrer Insti-
tute (PSI, Switzerland). In this device a 112 MeV/c pion
beam is decelerated in a magnetic ﬁeld using a suitable
set of degrader foils. Such a set-up allows the use of dilute
targets like gases. Typically 4 × 108 π−/s are injected in
the trap for 1 mA proton current. The target consists
of a cylinder of 60 mm diameter and 26 cm length, with
50 µm-thick kapton walls. The pressure in the target was
around 1 bar, leading to typically 1.7 × 106 π−/s stops
in the gas.

For light elements (Z ≤ 10) the cascade that follows
leads quickly to the formation of an hydrogenlike exotic
atom in a circular state. All the electrons are ejected by
Auger eﬀect in the early stage of the cascade, in a pro-
cess similar to internal conversion in nuclei, because of
the large mass of the pion (≈ 273 × me− ). Accordingly
transition energies are 273 times larger than electronic
ones between states of identical quantum numbers. Be-
cause the atoms are formed in a low-pressure gas the time
it takes to recapture electrons from molecules in the gas
is much longer than the pionic atom lifetime, hence, the
exotic atoms stay in an hydrogenlike state for the rest
of the atomic cascade. It has been shown that less than
2 % of the X-ray observed are aﬀected by the presence
of an extra electron [16]. When using solid targets the
undeﬁned status of the electron shell is the principal lim-
itation in high-precision experiments using exotic-atom
X-rays [17].

X-rays emitted by the exotic atoms at the center of the

3

ing electrons. These energies can be calculated with high
precision since the strong interaction plays no role for
such high-lying circular states. We obtain 4509.894 eV
and 4512.948 eV for the 6h → 5g transition in π22Ne and
π20Ne, respectively. There is an uncertainty of 11 meV
on these energy values which originates exclusively from
the pion mass.

The natural width of the πNe 6h → 5g transition is
12 meV. The fact that the calibration line is almost a
δ function allows for precise determination of the spec-
trometer response function. The measured instrumental
response function width of 440±20 meV is close to the
theoretical limit of 330 meV as predicted from the Monte-
Carlo simulations for the chosen geometry. The πNe line
shape is ﬁtted suﬃciently well by using Gaussian line
proﬁles.

To deduce the Ti Kα line shape we ﬁtted a sum of
six Voigt proﬁles, following [18] using the Gaussian re-
sponse function obtained from the πNe spectrum. The
peak positions, Kα0
1, 2, are obtained from the zeros of the
derivative of the ﬁtted function. The spectrometer dis-
persion, necessary to transform the position information
of the detector to energy, is obtained in a self-consistent
1). For the
way from the πNe spectrum itself (Fig.
very small energy diﬀerence, for the case of πNe 6 → 5
and Ti Kα, the energy-dependent corrections originating
from the imaging properties of crystal spectrometer (re-
fraction index, crystal bending and size, rocking curve )
are almost invariable and cancel out.

The results are displayed in Table I, together with
presently known values. The experimental error in the
energy of the Kα1 line is practically given by the statis-
tical uncertainty on the Kα1 and π20Ne 6h → 5g lines.
In the case of the Kα2 line the error is dominated by the
uncertainty on the dispersion value, which is due to the
limited statistics of the π22Ne 6h → 5g transition. Both
contributions could be drastically reduced by increasing
the statistics of the measurement.

Narrow transitions from exotic atoms allow to char-
acterize very precisely the response function of a curved
crystal set-up. For the described experiment the accu-
racy of the extracted natural widths of the electronic
systems (Table I) reaches the one obtained with ultimate
resolution devices like double-ﬂat crystal spectrometers
[7, 23].

In the present letter we have demonstrated that narrow
lines from hydrogenlike pionic atoms are able to serve as
energy standards in the few keV range. By using this
method the energy uncertainty is limited primarily by
the knowledge of the charged pion mass, whenever tran-
sitions close in energy can be found. We have proven that
an hydrogenic pionic line, the energy of which has been
calculated from QED can be used to establish the en-
ergy of a previously well measured line with comparable
accuracy. A research program is underway to improve
on the precision of the pion mass to the order of about

FIG. 1: Upper : Ti Ka doublet ﬁtted by a sum of six Voigt
functions. Lower : πNe 6 → 5 transitions showing ﬁne-
structure and isotopic eﬀects. Comparison of the two spectra
demonstrates the energy coincidence of the Ti Kα1 and of the
π20Ne 6h → 5g lines.

trap are analyzed using a Johann-type Bragg spectrom-
eter that was developed for applications requiring very
high luminosity and excellent resolution in noisy envi-
ronments, in the 1.7 to 10 keV range. It was equipped
with a spherically bent Si(220) crystal having a radius
of curvature of 2.9854 m. A detailed description of the
apparatus is given in [8, 16, 18] .

For this proof-of-principle measurement we relate the
energy of the 6h → 5g transition in pionic neon to energy
of the Kα1,2 transitions of Ti. The Ti Kα1 diﬀers only by
a fraction of an eV from the strong 6h → 5g transition
in π20Ne. Hence, the measurement could be performed
by exchanging only the neon-ﬁlled target cell with a 30 ×
20 mm2 plate of metallic Ti, without any other change
of the experimental set-up. The ﬂuorescence X-rays were
excited by means of an X-ray tube with a Cr-anode. The
consecutively recorded πNe and Ti spectra are shown in
Fig. 1.

The pionic transition energies are calculated from the
world average pion mass mπ = 139.57018 ± 0.00035 MeV
as given by the particle data group [19] and fundamen-
tal constants [20] with the Klein-Gordon equation for a
spherical nuclear charge distribution (to improve numer-
ical stability although direct eﬀect on energy is small).
They include the Uehling potential for vacuum polariza-
tion to all order, the K¨all`en and Sabry as well as the
Wichman and Kroll correction, and include nuclear re-
coil and relativistic recoil. The nuclear masses for 20Ne
and 22 Ne are deduced from atomic masses in [21] and
[22] respectively, by subtracting the mass of the 10 miss-

TABLE I: Peak position energies and natural widths of the Kα1,2 transitions in metallic Ti in comparison with previous
measurements (in eV). For this work the errors on the energies from the experiment (ﬁrst parenthesis) and from the calibration
standard, i. e., the uncertainty of the pion mass (second parenthesis), are given separately.

Line
Kα0
1
Kα0
2

Energy (this work)

4510.903(19)(11)
4504.942(40)(11)

Energy (Refs. [3])
4510.869(49)
4504.887(49)

Width (this work)

1.6(1)
2.1(1)

Width

1.5(3)a
2.1(4)a

Element
Ti

aRef. [23]

4

1 ppm [14]. An alternative is to use muonic transitions
as the muon mass is known to 0.05 ppm [19]. However,
intensities achievable are about two orders of magnitude
smaller than in the case of pionic atoms. Much higher
intensity will be available from X-ray sources like the
super-conducting Electron-Cyclotron Ion Trap (ECRIT)
developed at the Paul Scherrer Institute, in which few-
electron atoms up to hydrogenlike systems are produced
[9]. Such electronic two-body systems will be used as
calculable energy standards in the same way as exotic
atoms.

In a separate experiment we have recently used the
technique presented here to measure the energy of the Sc
Kα lines, which are known only from interpolation [24],
with an accuracy improved by a factor of 12 [25].

By using X-ray lines, both from hydrogenlike exotic
and electronic atoms a relative energy scale is established
that can easily range up to 30 keV. Around 60 lines will
be available if electronic, pionic and muonic atoms are
used, hundred more if antiprotonic atoms are available.
The energy of these lines will depend only on the ﬁne
structure constant α, and on the pion, muon and electron
mass, and they can also be connected to low-energy γ-ray
standards.

Laboratoire Kastler Brossel

is Unit´e Mixte de
Recherche du CNRS n◦ 8552, of the Physics Depart-
ment of ´Ecole Normale Sup´erieure and Universit´e Pierre
et Marie Curie.

∗

Electronic address:
URL: http://dirac.spectro.jussieu.fr/

paul.indelicato@spectro.jussieu.fr;

[1] J. H¨artwig, S. Grosswig, P. Becker, and D. Windisch,

Physica Status Solidi (a) 125, 79 (1991).

[2] Y. V. Shvyd’ko, M. Lerche, J. J¨aschke, M. Lucht, E. Ger-
dau, M. Gerken, H. D. R¨uter, H.-C. Wille, P. Becker,
E. E. Alp, et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 85, 495 (2000).

[3] R. Deslattes,

E. Kessler,

Jr,
L. de Billy, E. Lindroth,
35

cato,
ton, Rev. Mod. Phys.
http://www.physics.nist.gov/PhysRefData/XrayTrans/index.html.

Indeli-
and J. An-
(2003), URL

75,

P.

233 (1976).

[4] R. D. Deslattes, P. L. Cowan, and R. E. LaVilla, AIP

Conference Proceedings. no. 94, 100 (1982).

[5] R. D. Deslattes, R. E. LaVilla, P. L. Cowan, and

A. Henins, Phys. Rev. A 27, 923 (1983).

[6] P. Indelicato, S. Boucard, and E. Lindroth, Eur. Phys. J.

D 3, 29 (1998).

[7] J. Kawai, E. Nakamura, Y. Nihei, K. Fujisawa, and

Y. Ghoshi, Spectrochim. Acta B 45, 463 (1990).

[8] D. Gotta, D. F. Anagnostopoulos, M. Augsburger,
G. Borchert, C. Castelli, D. Chatellard, J. P. Egger, P. El-
Khoury, H. Gorke, P. Hauser, et al., Nucl. Phys. A 660,
283 (1999).

[9] S. Biri, L. Simons, and D. Hitz, Rev. Sci. Instrum. 71,

1116 (2000).

[10] G. Douysset, H. Khodja, A. Girard, and J. P. Briand,

Phys. Rev. E 61, 3015 (2000).

[11] D. F. Anagnostopoulos, S. Biri, V. Boisbourdain,
M. Demeter, G. Borchert, J. Egger, H. Fuhrmann,
D. Gotta, A. Gruber, M. Hennebach, et al., Nucl. In-
strum. Methods B 205, 9 (2003).

[12] C. Bernard, Ph.D. thesis, Universit Claude Bernard

(1996).

[13] B. de Beauvoir, C. Schwob, O. Acef, L. Jozefowski,
L. Hilico, F. Nez, L. Julien, A. Clairon, and F. Biraben,
Eur. Phys. J. D 12, 61 (2000).

[14] N. Nelms, D. F. Anagnostopoulos, M. Augsburger,
G. Borchert, D. Chatellard, M. Daum, J. P. Egger,
D. Gotta, P. Hauser, P. Indelicato, et al., Nucl. Inst. &
Meth. in Phys. Res. A 477, 461 (2002).

[15] L. Simons, Hyp. Int. 81, 253 (1993).
[16] S. Lenz, G. Borchert, H. Gorke, D. Gotta, T. Siems,
D. Anagnostopoulos, M. Augsburger, D. Chatellard,
J. Egger, D. Belmiloud, et al., Phys. Lett. B 416, 50
(1998).

[17] B. Jeckelmann, P. Goudsmit, and H. Leisi, Phys. Lett. B

335, 326 (1994).

[18] D. F. Anagnostopoulos, R. Sharon, D. Gotta, and

M. Deutsch, Phys. Rev. A 60, 2018 (1999).

[19] D. Groom, M. Aguilar-Benitez, C. Amsler, R. Barnett,
P. Burchat, C. Carone, C. Caso, G. Conforto, O. Dahl,
M. Doser, et al., Eur. Phys. J C15, 1+ (2000), URL
http://pdg.lbl.gov.

[20] P. J. Mohr and B. N. Taylor, Rev. Mod. Phys. 72, 351

(2000).

[21] F. DiFilippo, V. Natarajan, K. R. Boyce,
D.E. Pritchard, Phys. Rev. Lett. 73, 1481 (1994).
[22] G. Audi and A. Wapstra, Nucl. Phys. A 595, 409 (1995).
[23] S. I. Salem and P. L. Lee, At. Data Nucl. Data Tab. 18,

and

[24] J. Bearden, Rev. Mod. Phys. 39, 78 (1967).
[25] D. Anagnostopoulos, D. Gotta, P. Indelicato, and L. Si-

mons, to be published.

