4
0
0
2
 
n
a
J
 
5
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
m
o
t
a
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
4
7
0
1
0
4
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Light-Pressure-Induced Shifts of 23SJ=1 − 23PJ=0,1,2 Helium Lines in a Vapor Cell and
Implications for the Fine Structure Constant Measurement

T. Zelevinsky1 and G. Gabrielse1
1Department of Physics, Harvard University, Cambridge, MA 02138
(Dated: February 16, 2014)
In the process of 4He 2P ﬁne structure measurement in a vapor cell, highly nonlinear dependences
of 2S1 − 2PJ intervals on helium density are observed and attributed to light pressure.
If total
angular momentum of the excited state is not greater than that of the ground state, there are
large polarization dependences and variations of shifts with helium pressure that exhibit apparent
singularities. A pressure-variable cell may be a better system for control of this eﬀect than an atomic
beam. A method of avoiding the shifts for the ﬁne structure measurement is suggested.

Doppler-free saturation spectroscopy has become a
standard tool for measurements of optical atomic tran-
sition frequencies. The technique is based on excitation
of the atoms by a laser beam that selectively saturates a
sinlge velocity group, and on the subsequent probing by
the second laser beam. Detection can involve either ﬂu-
orescence of the atoms in the interaction region or trans-
mission of the probe through the sample. Saturation
spectroscopy is extensively used for precision measure-
ments and has numerous applications in the ﬁeld of time
standards [1, 2, 3].

We use saturation spectroscopy to probe 2S1 − 2P0,1,2
triplet transitions in 4He. The purpose of the experiment
is to carry out a precision measurement of the 2P ﬁne
structure splittings (f12 ≈ 2.3 GHz, f01 ≈ 29.6 GHz)
and to compare them with theoretical values in order
to test three-body QED, as well as to extract a value
for the ﬁne structure constant α and compare it with
other determinations of α. Much theoretical [4, 5] and
experimental [6, 7, 8, 9] progress on the 2P intervals has
been reported recently.

The role of the pump beam in saturation spectroscopy
is usually viewed in terms of exciting the atoms and mak-
ing them invisible to the probe. In reality, the pump also
perturbs external atomic degrees of freedom, imparting
a momentum kick each time a photon is absorbed. This
modiﬁes the velocity distribution of the sample and leads
to line shifts. Light pressure eﬀects have been observed
previously. Grimm and Mlynek studied shifts of probe
absorption proﬁles for closed transitions in ytterbium
vapor [10, 11, 12, 13] due to the light scattering force.
Minardi and coworkers encountered light-pressure shifts
for closed and open transitions while working on the
helium ﬁne structure measurement in an atomic beam,
and have explained them [14, 15] through scattering and
dipole forces. They used ﬂuorescence detection rather
than probe transmission which led to an additional de-
pendence of the shifts on light intensity. In both cases,
atoms were described as two-level systems, and line shifts
of up to ∼ 20% of the natural width Γ were reported.

We have observed light-pressure-induced shifts of 2S −
2P helium lines in a vapor cell. In particular, we stud-

ied situations with linklin and lin⊥lin pump and probe
polarization conﬁgurations. The ﬁrst case can generally
be described as a two-level system with or without loss.
The second case must be viewed as a multilevel system,
and the associated line shifts are as large as Γ/2. The
sign of the shift in a multilevel atom is positive if Je ≥ Jg
and negative otherwise (Je, Jg are total angular momenta
of 2PJ , 2S1). Moreover, if Je ≤ Jg, the dependence of
the shift on parameter τ that sets the duration of coher-
ent pumping has a discontinuity and changes sign when
1/τ ≈ Γ/2.

Previous studies of light pressure relied on beam diam-
eter as a measure of the duration τ of the pump beam’s
interaction with the atoms. Line shifts depend directly
on τ , since it determines the degree of deformation of
the Doppler proﬁle. We do spectroscopy in a pressure-
variable vapor cell, and we have found that varying pres-
sure allows a very clean observation of this systematic
eﬀect. There is no uncertainty associated with having
to model the intensity proﬁle of the pump; instead, τ is
inversely proportional to pressure p, and the proportion-
ality constant can be determined from pressure broaden-
ing of the spectral line. In fact, a case can be made for
using vapor cells instead of atomic beams for this preci-
sion measurement. Since τ ∝ 1/p, light-pressure-induced
shifts disappear at higher pressures. Collisions in the cell
lead to other shifts, but if pressure is low enough for these
shifts to be linear, line centers can simply be extrapolated
to zero pressure.

Our results for the lin⊥lin case are surprising since
they show that when a continuous parameter such as
pressure is varied smoothly, a highly discontinuous be-
havior of the line center can result. Moreover, they
demonstrate that extreme dependences of line centers on
polarization can occur even when no dependences are ex-
pected in the saturation spectroscopy model. The ﬁnd-
ings presented here also suggest a way to do helium 2P
ﬁne structure fJJ ′ measurements while avoiding the light
pressure systematic eﬀect. It consists of lifting the degen-
eracies of 2S and 2P with a magnetic ﬁeld, and choos-
ing optical transitions only between those Zeeman sub-
levels of 2S and 2PJ , or 2S and 2PJ ′ , that have the same

FM

Clock
Laser

Frequency
Lock

Scan
Laser

Frequency Stabilization

Lock-In Detection

 He3

 He4

Pressure
Regulation

 He4

5-300 mTorr

Data
Analysis

FIG. 1: Experimental setup. The scan laser (SDL diode, 1083
nm) is used to perform saturation spectroscopy on 4He, while
an identical clock laser is locked to a 3He line using frequency
modulation spectroscopy and serves as a frequency reference.

spontaneous-decay branching ratios for 2PJ as for 2PJ ′.
Then light-pressure-induced shifts are the same for both
optical transitions and cancel when ﬁne structure inter-
vals are calculated. Additional systematic eﬀects arise
from magnetic shifts, but for moderate ﬁelds they are
very well understood.

The physical basis of the line shifts is as follows. In
the presence of laser light, the thermal atomic velocity
distribution picks up a small deformation that can be
detected by the probe. When Je ≤ Jg and optically dark
states are present, frequency shifts depend not only on
the degree of velocity proﬁle distortion which is propor-
tional to τ , but also on the size of the saturation peak,
which is the dominant feature of the signal. The size of
this peak depends on the optical pumping time constant.
When it equals the collisional time constant at a pressure
p0, the saturation signal changes sign (and therefore van-
ishes), while the light-pressure-induced signal dominates
and pulls the line center in the direction determined by
the sign relationship of the two signal components. This
leads to a discontinuity at p0.

Fig. 1 illustrates the experimental setup. Spectroscopy
is done with a 1083 nm diode laser, placed in an ex-
tended cavity to narrow its line width and to allow fre-
quency tuning. The light is split into pump and probe
beams that counter-propagate through the vapor cell,
and probe transmission is detected synchronously with
the pump chopping frequency. Pump and probe frequen-
cies are oﬀset by ∼ Γ, so the beams interact with mov-
ing atoms. Laser frequency can be scanned through the
resonance for all three optical transitions 2S1 − 2P0,1,2
(they are denoted simply by P0,1,2). The frequency is
counted relative to a 3He clock constructed with an iden-
tical diode laser. Metastable 23S1 He atoms are created
with a high power RF discharge. The pressure of (mostly

2

ground state) helium in the cell is varied between 5 and
300 mTorr.

Light pressure contributions to saturation signals have
been worked out by Grimm [10]. The model consists
of a gas of two-level atoms with resonance frequency
ω0 and Doppler width much greater than Γ. The light
ﬁeld is a plane wave, which is a reasonable approxi-
mation for spatially expanded laser beams. Each cycle
of the pump excitation followed by spontaneous emis-
sion is accompanied by an average momentum transfer
It corresponds
of ¯hk from the laser ﬁeld to the atom.
to the recoil frequency ǫr = ¯hk2/2m. For 2S − 2P in
4He, ǫr = 2π × 42 kHz, whereas Γ = 2π × 1.6 MHz.
If ǫr ≪ Γ, light pressure is described by the scatter-
ing force Fs(v) = ¯hkΓPe (Pe is the excitation prob-
ability). Evolution of the atomic velocity distribution
N (v) obeys the Fokker-Planck equation ∂N (v, t)/∂t =
−(1/m)∂[Fs(v)N (v, t)]/∂v. For small perturbations, the
solution is N (v, t) = N0(v) − N0(v2)(t/m)∂Fs(v)/∂v. In
the case of a continuous laser excitation, velocity distri-
bution reaches steady state N (v, t) = N (v), and t be-
comes τ which is limited by collisions in the cell in our
case. The velocity proﬁle distortion is then

δN (v) = ǫrτ

sk(v − v2)(Γ3/2)N0(v2)
[k2(v − v2)2 + (1 + s)(Γ/2)2]2

(1)

if s is the saturation parameter and v2 is velocity res-
onant with the pump. Since the strength of velocity
modiﬁcation is set by dimensionless parameters ǫrτ and
s, the perturbative approach is justiﬁed if ǫrτ · s ≪ 1.
To ﬁrst order in s, the absorption coeﬃcient is A =
A0 +s(ASAT +ALP ). A0 is the response in the absence of
the pump, whereas ASAT and ALP describe eﬀects due
to saturation and light pressure. Using the detuning pa-
rameter δ = 2(ω − ω0)/Γ and taking s ≪ 1, the total
normalized Doppler-free absorption coeﬃcient is

ASAT + ALP
AN

=

1
2(δ2 + 1)

+ ǫrτ

δ
(δ2 + 1)2 ,

(2)

where AN ≡ −2π2nL|d|2N0(v2)/¯h in terms of the dipole
matrix element ~d, sample length L, and number density
n. The ﬁrst term in eq. (2) is the symmetric Lorentzian
caused by saturation. The second term is antisymmetric
in δ and has the form of a Lorentzian derivative, and is
due to light pressure. The strength of the light pressure
eﬀect relative to the saturation eﬀect is independent of
If ǫrτ is small, as is the case here, the
laser intensity.
absorption in eq. (2) is proportional to an expansion of

F (δ) =

1
2

1
(δ − ǫrτ )2 + 1

.

(3)

Light pressure shifts the line by δω = ǫrτ Γ/2. The ob-
served line shape remains symmetrical and Lorentzian,
within experimental resolution. Since τ ∝ 1/p, the line

3

FIG. 2: Level structures and coupling coeﬃcients for 2S1 −
2PJ .

center appears blue-shifted by an amount inversely pro-
portional to pressure. True line shapes also include linear
pressure shifts and broadening predicted by collision the-
ory [1, 16] (−1.41(2) MHz/Torr and 25.0(2)MHz/Torr,
respectively, from our measurements).

Eq. (2) describes the eﬀect of light pressure on line
shape only for a two-level atom. The actual energy lev-
els of 4He contain 2J + 1 degenerate sublevels among
which optical pumping can occur since the laser is polar-
ized. Level structures and coupling strengths are shown
in Fig. 2. The quantization axis is the direction of probe
polarization which is kept constant. Above we assumed
that light pressure is due entirely to the pump. Velocity
redistribution caused by the probe does not contribute
when integrated over all velocities because of the inher-
ent experimental asymmetry between pump and probe.
Below, the eﬀect of the probe is included, but only adds
a minor correction to the results.

We deﬁne velocity- and frequency-dependent unsatu-

rated transition rates

Ri(ω, kv) =

siγ3/8
(ω − ω0 ∓ kv)2 + (γ/2)2 .

(4)

The subscript i = 1, 2 refers to the probe and counter-
propagating pump, respectively, γ = Γ + γc is the line
width that includes natural width and collisional broad-
ening, and ω0 includes the linear pressure shift. Time
evolution of sublevel populations is adequately described
by rate equations. The light-pressure-induced modiﬁca-
tion of steady-state populations, as in eq. (1), is propor-
tional to

Di(ω, kv) =

siǫr(ω − ω0 ∓ kv)γ3/2
[(ω − ω0 ∓ kv)2 + (1 + si)(γ/2)2]2 .

(5)

∆N is

coeﬃcient

is A1(ω, p)

=
Probe
absorption
a0 R ∆N (ω, kv, p)σ1(ω, kv)dv.
the popula-
tion diﬀerence between ground and excited sublevels
coupled by the probe, pressure p appears because of
its eﬀect on τ , and σ1 is the Lorentzian cross sec-
tion of the probe’s interaction with the atoms. The
transmission signal observed in the experiment
is
S(ω, p) = A1(ω, p, s1, 0) − A1(ω, p, s1, s2), since our syn-
chronous detection method has the eﬀect of subtracting
the signal obtained with the pump beam turned oﬀ. The
eﬀect of light pressure is contained in Di, which are used

FIG. 3: (a, b, c) Frequency shifts of P0,1,2 for lin⊥lin po-
larizations. Points are experimental values and include error
bars, solid curves are calculated shifts, and dashed curves
are 1/(p − p0) ﬁts to the data as explained in the text. (d)
Calculated ratios of P0 signal amplitudes (lin⊥lin) to signal
amplitudes of an ideal two-level atom vs. pressure. They are
proportional to 1 − p0/p (solid line).

to

order

velocity

collisional

to modify the ground-excited state population diﬀerence
∆N .
In

re-
simulate
equilibration, we add the following terms
to the
rate equations of the ground state sublevel populations:
+1
˙gcoll
n=−1 gn/3 − gm), where 3 is the ground
m = γe(P
state degeneracy factor and the projection m refers to
the total angular momentum J = 1. The mean elastic
collision rate γe ≈ γc but varies by ∼20% for the three
If the relative angle of pump and
optical transitions.
probe polarizations is θ, the stationary rate equations
for populations gm, em are

m+1

Γ

X
n=m−1

Cn

men + Cm

m (R1 + cos2 θR2)(em − gm)

+ X

n=m±1

m = 0,

m sin2 θR2(en − gm) + ˙gcoll
Cn

1
2
Γem′ + Cm′
m′ (R1 + cos2 θR2)(em′ − gm′)
1
Cm′
n sin2 θR2(em′ − gn) = 0.
2

+ X

n=m′±1

(6)

R1, R2, e, g depend on ω, kv, s1, and s2. Cn
m are coupling
coeﬃcients between gm and en from Fig. 2. Population
diﬀerences for P1,2 are computed analogously to the P0
expression ∆NP0 = g0[1−(1/3)τ (D1 +cos2 θD2)]−e0[1−
(1/3)τ (D1 + D2)] using solutions to eq. (6). Finally, the
absorption coeﬃcient A1 is found.

Including light pressure into the calculation of absorp-
tion signals yields excellent agreement with experiment.
Fig. 3 (a, b, c) shows data (points) and predictions (solid
curves) for all three optical transitions and lin⊥lin polar-
izations. At higher pressures the most prominent feature
is the linear pressure shift. At lower densities velocity-

4

For instance, P1 is much more sensitive to polarization
than P2, and we found that if θ ≃ 30◦, P1 and P2 shifts
closely mirror each other and cancel after calculation of
the f12 interval. A more reliable method is to resolve
Zeeman sublevels with an external ﬁeld and choose tran-
sitions for which light-pressure shifts exactly match for
2S −2PJ and 2S −2PJ ′. This can be done for f12 by mea-
suring m = ±1 → m′ = ±1 for both P1 and P2 (Fig. 4).
If one also measures f12 while using the m = 0 → m′ = 0
line for P2, light-pressure-induced shifts do not cancel,
and by comparison with the ﬁrst case serve as a calibra-
tion used for correcting f01 and f02 shifts.

In conclusion, a new manifestation of light-pressure-
induced line shifts is observed and explained. We found
a pressure-variable vapor cell to be a convenient setup
for studying these shifts. We also suggest an approach to
measuring 2P ﬁne structure splittings in 4He that yields
results unaﬀected by light pressure for f12 and provides
a correction mechanism for f01 and f02.

We would like to thank C. Levy, T. Roach, N. Her-
manspahn, and D. Farkas for valuable contributions to
the ﬁne structure experiment, as well as S. Ezekiel and
D. Phillips for helpful discussions. This work was sup-
ported by NSF.

[1] W. Demtr¨oder, Laser Spectroscopy, 3rd edition (Springer,

[2] T. W. H¨ansch and H. Walter, Rev. Mod. Phys. 71, S242

[3] J. Ye, L. S. Ma, and J. L. Hall, Phys. Rev. Lett. 87,

270801 (2001).

[4] G. W. F. Drake, Can. J. Phys. 80, 1195 (2002).
[5] K. Pachucki and J. Sapirstein, J. Phys. B 35, 1783

2003).

(1999).

(2002).

[6] M. C. George, L. D. Lombardi, and E. A. Hessels, Phys.

Rev. Lett. 87, 173002 (2001).

[7] C. H. Storry, M. C. George, and E. A. Hessels, Phys.

Rev. Lett. 84, 3274 (2000).

[8] J. Castillega, D. Livingston, A. Sanders, and D. Shiner,

Phys. Rev. Lett. 84, 4321 (2000).

[9] F. Minardi, G. Bianchini, P. C. Pastor, G. Giusfredi,
F. S. Pavone, and M. Inguscio, Phys. Rev. Lett. 84, 3274
(2000).

[10] R. Grimm, Ph.D. thesis, Swiss Federal Institute of Tech-

nology (1989).

[11] R. Grimm and J. Mlynek, Appl. Phys.B 49, 179 (1989).
[12] R. Grimm and J. Mlynek, Phys. Rev. Lett. 63, 232

(1989).

[13] R. Grimm and J. Mlynek, Phys. Rev. A 42, 2890 (1990).
[14] F. Minardi, M. Artoni, P. Cancio, M. Inguscio, G. Gius-
fredi, and I. Carusotto, Phys. Rev. A 60, 4164 (1999).
[15] M. Artoni, I. Carusotto, and F. Minardi, Phys. Rev. A

[16] D. Vrinceanu, S. Kotochigova, and H. R. Sadeghpour

62, 023402 (2000).

(2003).

FIG. 4: f12 measurement unaﬀected by light-pressure shifts
(in a magnetic ﬁeld). Shifts cancel for m = ±1 → m
= ±1. If
instead m = 0 → m
= 0 is taken for P2, shifts do not cancel
since the mean numbers of scattered photons, hni, are not the
same. The diﬀerence between these two f12 measurements
serves as a calibration for f01 and f02 shifts.

′

′

equilibrating collisions become rare and light pressure
dominates.

P2 is the simplest case, since all ground state sublevels
interact with the probe (Fig. 2) and the situation is qual-
itatively similar to the two-level case. The shift is ∝ ǫrτ
as in eq. (3), and τ ∝ 1/p. The P1 line centers have an
eﬀective singularity at p0 = 32 mTorr. Here the m = 0
ground sublevel is a dark state into which the atom’s
population can be optically pumped by the probe. If the
pump is introduced in a lin⊥lin conﬁguration, it can re-
store some of the population to the m = ±1 sublevels.
Optical pumping is signiﬁcant only at lower pressures,
when the optical time 1/Γ is close to the collisional time
1/γc. As the pressure is lowered, the saturation signal
goes from increased to decreased probe transmission in
the presence of the pump. The saturation signal ampli-
tude vanishes at p0. Since the eﬀect of the scattering
force is always of the same sign, the resulting line shift
changes sign at p0. The P1 line shift can still be described
by a function of the form (3) if τ ∝ 1/(p−p0). This mod-
iﬁed form of τ follows from the fact that for a multilevel
system with Je ≤ Jg the ﬁrst (saturation) term of eq.
(2) is multiplied by 1 − p0/p in the vicinity of p0. Fig.
3 (d) shows the calculated dependence of P0 signal am-
plitude on pressure, ﬁtted to 1 − p0/p. The 1/(p − p0)
description of the shifts is valid as long as the shift does
not exceed the line half-width; otherwise, signal-to-noise
ratio diminishes and the shift grows so large that the per-
turbative approximation breaks down. The dark states of
P0 are m = ±1, and the P0 line center has a discontinuity
at 47 mTorr. Overall sign of the shift here is reversed.
This is due to the fact that in the lin⊥lin conﬁguration,
probe interacts with m = 0 sublevels, but pump cannot
exert pressure on the m = 0 ground state sublevel. Thus
probe only picks up deformation of the excited state ve-
locity distribution, whereas for P1 and P2 deformations
of the ground state distributions play a dominant role.

Understanding the light-pressure shifts allows us to
avoid them in the ﬁne structure measurement. One way
is to correctly choose the pump polarization direction.

