Observation of Large Atomic-Recoil Induced Asymmetries in Cold Atom Spectroscopy

C. W. Oates, G. Wilpers, and L. Hollberg
Time and Frequency Division, National Institute of Standards and Technology, 325 Broadway, Boulder, CO 80305
(Dated: February 2, 2008)

The atomic recoil eﬀect leads to large (25 %) asymmetries in simple spectroscopic investigations
of Ca atoms that have been laser-cooled to 10 µK. Starting with spectra from the more familiar
Doppler-broadened domain, we show how the fundamental asymmetry between absorption and
stimulated emission of light manifests itself when shorter spectroscopic pulses lead to the Fourier
transform regime. These eﬀects occur on frequency scales much larger than the size of the recoil
shift itself, and have not been observed before in saturation spectroscopy. These results are relevant
to state-of-the-art optical atomic clocks based on freely expanding neutral atoms.

4
0
0
2
 
n
a
J
 
5
 
 
]
h
p
-
m
o
t
a
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
1
1
0
1
0
4
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

PACS numbers: 32.80.-t, 42.62.Fi

When we recently started using much colder Ca atoms
for our ultra-high resolution optical clock spectroscopy,
we discovered unexpectedly large asymmetries in the re-
sulting spectra, which we found to be the direct result
of atomic recoil.[1] Most surprising was that these eﬀects
appeared on a frequency scale more than ten times larger
than the size of the recoil eﬀect itself. In this letter we use
a simple saturation spectroscopic conﬁguration to show
how the small eﬀect of atomic recoil can cause these large
asymmetries in the spectra of samples of freely expand-
ing cold atoms. Not only are these eﬀects of interest
from the point of view of basic physics, they also have
important implications for future optical clocks based on
laser-cooled neutral atoms.[1, 2]

The eﬀects of atomic recoil have been of consid-
erable interest to laser spectroscopists for more than
30 years [3] and are the foundation of laser cooling of
atoms. The ﬁrst experimental evidence that saturation
absorption spectroscopy produced a recoil splitting in the
Doppler-free spectra of atomic and molecular lines was
demonstrated by Hall, Bord´e, and Uehara using a high-
resolution laser spectrometer.[4] Since then there have
been several beautiful demonstrations of recoil splitting
via various forms of saturation spectroscopy (see for ex-
In all of these studies the
ample refs. [5, 6, 7, 8]).
closely spaced recoil components were superimposed on a
broad Doppler background, thereby obscuring the recoil-
induced asymmetries inherent in light-atom interactions.
In the work presented here, the width of the Doppler
background is only seven times that of the recoil splitting,
thereby clearly exposing the asymmetric aspect of the
recoil components in the Doppler-broadened regime (see
Fig 1). Moreover, by gradually changing the resolution,
we show how this leads to large spectral asymmetries
in the Fourier-transform limit. These eﬀects diﬀer from
asymmetries described in earlier papers, which resulted
from spontaneous emission or collisional quenching.[3, 4]

As described elsewhere, the recoil doublet can be
readily understood from conservation of momentum and
energy.[3, 4] When an atom initially at rest absorbs a
photon of frequency ν, it recoils with a velocity, vr =

FIG. 1: Two-pulse saturated absorption spectrum as a func-
tion of laser detuning from the Bohr frequency with a probe
pulse duration of 40 µs (circles) along with a lineshape simu-
lation (solid line) based upon the model described in the text.
Clearly seen are the saturation dips separated by the recoil
splitting superimposed on the Doppler background, with the
stimulated emission component (‘SE’) red-shifted and the ab-
sorption component (‘A’) centered. Shown for comparison is
a simulated “doubled” Doppler curve (dashed line). Note that
the much smaller dips on the outside wings of the dips result
from the ( sin x
x )

spectrum of the excitation pulses.

2

hν/mc, where m is the atomic mass. For a two-level
atom with an energy level spacing of E0 = hν0, this ab-
sorption resonance occurs at a frequency,

νA = ν0 +

hν2
0
mc2 = ν0 +

1
2

1
2

νr.

(1)

Eq. 1 shows that the incident photon needs to supply
energy for both the atomic excitation and recoil. For an
atom at rest but starting in the excited state, a similar
analysis shows that the resonance for stimulated emission
occurs at a frequency νSE = ν0
1/2νr. This resonance
is red-shifted relative to that for absorption by νr, the
splitting of the recoil doublet, which is typically tens of
kilohertz for optical transitions. This frequency splitting
ensures that the alternating absorption and stimulated

−

emission cycles in Rabi ﬂopping are simultaneously res-
onant even when the Doppler shift associated with the
atomic recoil is included. Thus, one cannot observe the
recoil splitting with a singly-passed laser beam. Instead,
one must use two counter-propagating laser beams, the
usual conﬁguration for saturation spectroscopy. Then the
atomic recoil due to photon absorption from one beam
pushes an atom toward the counter-propagating beam,
eﬀectively reversing the sign of the recoil shift. In this
way it is possible to see two distinct sub-Doppler fea-
tures split by νr, although this small splitting can only
be resolved in ultra-high-resolution experiments.

In this investigation, we take advantage of the capa-
bilities of our optical clock apparatus [1] to perform the
simplest form of saturation spectroscopy. We excite a
laser-cooled (T = 10 µK) sample of neutral Ca atoms us-
ing the closed 657 nm transition between the 1S0 ground
state and the meta-stable 3P1 excited state, which has
a lifetime of 340 µs. With transit-time broadening and
spontaneous emission negligible, we can change the spec-
troscopic resolution just by changing the duration of the
square probe pulses. Finally, we can excite the atoms
sequentially with laser pulses of equal intensity and fre-
quency detuning. Sequential excitation greatly simpliﬁes
the analysis, since it removes the possibility of events con-
taining more than two photons from diﬀerent directions
that can distort the lineshapes [4, 5, 9].

∼

→

We realize these experimental conditions with the fol-
lowing measurement cycle.[1] We ﬁrst load Ca into a
magneto-optic trap using the strongly-allowed 423 nm
cooling transition. We then turn oﬀ the 423 nm light
and use a 3-dimensional quenched narrow-line cooling
scheme based on the clock transition to reduce the tem-
106 atoms) to less than
perature of the atomic sample (
10 µK.[1, 10] When the atoms are cold, we switch oﬀ the
trap and turn on a greater than 2 G magnetic bias ﬁeld
to perform the spectroscopy on the narrow m = 0
m = 0
clock transition. We then probe the 657 nm clock tran-
sition with pulses derived from a cw diode laser, which
is locked tightly to a narrow Fabry-Perot cavity fringe
(producing a laser linewidth less than 70 Hz). Some light
from this stabilized master laser is used to injection-lock
a slave laser whose output is sent through two acousto-
optic modulators to generate the pulses for the oppos-
ing directions. The deﬂected light is steered into optical
ﬁbers to spatially ﬁlter the beams. The beams coupled
out of the ﬁbers expand and are collimated to about
6 mm, so that the atoms see ﬂat wavefronts (radius of
curvature greater than 50 m). As much as 13 mW can be
coupled into these beams, although we adjust the power
to yield unit excitation on resonance (commonly called a
π-pulse in Rabi ﬂopping parlance). For these measure-
ments we illuminate the atoms with a pulse from one
direction, wait 6 µs (to make sure the ﬁrst beam is com-
pletely turned oﬀ), and then illuminate the atoms with
a pulse from the opposite direction. Finally, the fraction

2

−

of atoms in the excited state is measured using a normal-
ized shelving ﬂuorescence detection technique.[1] We scan
the probe frequency (νL) slowly (4 s sweep time) while
continuously repeating the measurement cycle (duration
35 ms) to generate our spectra as a function of the laser
detuning (νL

ν0).

To make a connection with previous experiments, we
ﬁrst consider the Doppler-broadened regime, for which
we choose a pulse duration (40 µs) such that the spec-
troscopic resolution is about 21 kHz. This is less than
the 150 kHz (FWHM) Doppler width of the 10 µK atoms
and slightly less than the 23.1 kHz recoil splitting of the
657 nm clock transition. In Fig. 1 we show the resulting
excitation spectrum, whose envelope is primarily deter-
mined by the Doppler background. In fact this envelope
is simply twice the height of the curve seen with a single
probe pulse, because for most laser frequencies the two
counter-propagating laser beams excite non-overlapping
velocity classes. However, at the absorption resonance
frequency, νL = νA (‘A’ in Fig. 1), there is not this
doubling of the Doppler background, since the ﬁrst laser
pulse has already excited the majority of these atoms to
the long-lived excited state. Note that the second pulse
cannot de-excite many of these atoms either, since due
to atomic recoil they have been shifted out of resonance.
The second resonance (‘SE’ in Fig. 1), at νL = νSE, re-
sults from atoms that started with a velocity v =
vr,
and were thus excited by the ﬁrst pulse (in the atoms’
rest frame, νL = νA); now at rest in the lab frame due to
atomic recoil, they are resonant with the second pulse for
stimulated emission, thereby reducing the net fraction of
atoms excited.

−

The two dips resulting from these resonances are anal-
ogous to those seen in earlier experiments but with one
important distinction: due to the small width of the
Doppler background, we can readily see that the dips are
asymmetrically located about the center of the Doppler
background. Since the Doppler background results from
absorption, it is naturally centered around the resonance
at νL = νA, coincident with the absorption recoil dip.
The dip associated with stimulated emission is located
one recoil frequency (νr) below the absorption resonance,
on the red side of the Doppler curve. It is important to
emphasize that this asymmetry is not a result of the or-
der of the laser pulses. If we reverse the temporal order,
so that the pulse directions are reversed, we observe the
identical lineshape, not its mirror image. Rather, this
asymmetry is a fundamental feature of saturation spec-
troscopy, though one that is easily overlooked in exper-
iments with broad Doppler backgrounds. As has been
noted by other observers,[9, 11] this asymmetry can lead
to undesired oﬀsets in realizing optical frequency stan-
dards based on saturation absorption since the unper-
turbed line center of the transition (midway between the
recoil components) is not centered on the background.

We now consider what happens to this spectrum as we

3

the two sides. Thus, the size of the asymmetry is related
to the slope of the envelope multiplied by the size of the
recoil eﬀect.

Alternatively, we can think of this spectrum as result-
ing from two contributions: one symmetric (due solely
to absorption) and one asymmetric (due to stimulated
emission by the second pulse). This framework allows a
simple model to describe our spectra well (an exact theo-
retical treatment of coherent saturation spectroscopy in-
cluding multi-photon eﬀects has been developed by Bord´e
and co-workers[9, 12]. We start by considering the exci-
tation spectrum resulting from the ﬁrst (idealized) square
π-pulse of duration T and Rabi frequency Ω illuminat-
ing a sample of ground-state atoms initially at rest. This
yields the well-known Rabi spectrum [13] for the excita-
tion probability:

P (∆) =

Ω2T 2

sin

√Ω2 + ∆2 T /2

4  

√Ω2 + ∆2 T /2
(cid:2)

!

(cid:3)

2

,

(2)

(cid:3)

(cid:2)

−

−

where ∆ = νL
νA is the laser detuning from the absorp-
tion resonance. Illuminating the atoms with a square π-
pulse from the opposite direction gives two sets of atoms
to consider. First, there are atoms that remained in
the ground state after the ﬁrst pulse (a fraction equal
to 1
P (∆)); they will be resonant with a second pulse
at frequency νL = νA, so the above equation applies to
these atoms as well. Second, the atoms that were ex-
cited by the ﬁrst pulse (a fraction equal to P (∆)) now
have a velocity vr toward the second counter-propagating
laser beam. The associated Doppler eﬀect will shift
the stimulated emission resonance down by one recoil,
so these atoms will be resonant with light at frequency
ν′
2 νr, or ν′
SE = νSE
2νr. The frac-
tion of these atoms transferred back to the ground state
can then be derived from the same probability function
P , but with the argument ∆′ = νL

ν′
SE = ∆ + 2νr.

SE = νA

νr = ν0

−

−

−

3

To ﬁnd the total fraction in the excited state after two

−

pulses, we simply add the two contributions:

Pﬁnal = P (∆) [1

P (∆)] + [1

P (∆ + 2νr)] P (∆). (3)

−

−

The ﬁrst product in this expression gives the ground-
state contribution and is symmetric (both pulses are res-
onant at the same frequency). The second term gives
the excited-state contribution, but it is asymmetric due
to the oﬀset of 2νr between arguments of the multipli-
cands, thus yielding a net asymmetry for Pﬁnal. We can
easily connect this model with experiment by including
the initial velocity distribution (via the detuning) and the
unequal laser intensities seen by the atoms due to the spa-
tial distribution of the atoms in the laser mode (via the
Rabi frequency). The free parameters in our simulation
were overall signal amplitude (imperfect normalization
required a 10 - 15 % reduction in signal size) and atomic
cloud size (which we ﬁxed at the same value for all simu-
lations). We measured the velocity distributions and the

FIG. 2: Two-pulse spectra taken for probe pulse durations of
40, 20, 10, 6, and 2.6 µs (bottom to top). Curves are vertically
oﬀset for clarity.

broaden the Fourier spectrum of the probe pulse, not just
beyond the recoil splitting but well beyond the width of
the Doppler distribution itself. This regime has not pre-
viously been investigated experimentally, but is becom-
ing important in state-of-the-art optical atomic clocks
based on neutral atoms.[1, 2] We access this regime by
reducing the duration of the probe pulses (while main-
taining the pulse area to keep the excitation probability
constant). In Fig. 2, we show a set of spectroscopic line-
shapes taken over probe durations ranging from 40 µs
down to 2.6 µs. Note that the fraction of atoms excited
grows with decreasing resolution as our probe spectrum
covers a larger fraction of the velocity distribution. For
the shortest pulse length, the Fourier transform of the
probe pulse has a spectral width approximately 2.5 times
that of the Doppler distribution. As we see, changing the
resolution from 21 kHz to 42 kHz (20 µs pulse duration)
begins to obscure the recoil splitting, but the large asym-
metry persists. As we move to 85 kHz resolution (10 µs
pulse duration), the recoil splitting is no longer visible
as the two dips merge into a single dip centered at ν0,
but the spectrum now appears to consist of two peaks
whose separation is determined by the spectroscopic res-
olution and whose amplitudes diﬀer by more than 25 % !
The asymmetry persists for even the lowest resolution,
where the maxima are separated by 280 kHz, more than
10 times that of the recoil splitting itself.

Examination of Fig. 2 provides an intuitive picture of
how such a small eﬀect can cause such large asymmetries.
In the Fourier-transform regime we ﬁnd the unusual spec-
troscopic condition where the widths of both the envelope
and the dip are determined almost solely by the probe
time, but are slightly oﬀset from one another. This small
oﬀset leads to the envelope asymmetry by causing the dip
to intersect the Doppler envelope at diﬀerent heights on

4

the location of recoil components on the Doppler back-
ground. In addition we have shown how this asymmetry
in the recoil frequencies leads to large amplitude asymme-
tries in the Fourier transform limit, a regime that has not
previously been investigated but is important for state-of-
the-art precision metrology. Extending these studies to a
regime with Ca atoms laser cooled to sub-recoil temper-
atures, as demonstrated by Curtis et al. [1], would allow
us to individually address the recoil components via laser
detuning. This could enhance the sensitivity of precision
measurements such as that of the photon recoil or other
atom interferometry experiments [14, 15, 16].

We thank J. Bergquist and J. Kitching for their insight-
ful comments and J. Hall for illuminating discussions.
This work was supported in part by NASA and ONR-
MURI. G. W. acknowledges support from the Alexander
von Humboldt Foundation.

Work of a US government agency; not subject to copy-

FIG. 3: Two-pulse spectrum (circles) resulting from probe
pulses of 2.6 µs duration along with the corresponding sim-
ulation (solid line). Also shown are the spectrum (squares)
and simulation (dashed line) resulting when a blue heating
pulse is inserted between red probe pulses to suppress the
absorption-based recoil component (see text).

right.

laser mode size separately and used the resulting values
for the simulations. We see good agreement over a variety
of probe resolutions (simulations are shown as solid lines
in Figs. 1 and 3), although we see small diﬀerences in
the wings at the lowest resolutions, most likely resulting
from the non-ideal square pulses used in the experiment.
Interestingly, we can isolate the second product in
the expression for Pﬁnal experimentally by using recoil
suppression.[7, 11] In this case we suppress the ground-
state (absorption) contribution by illuminating the atoms
with a resonant 423 nm pulse (duration 20 µs) after the
ﬁrst red probe pulse but before the second red pulse. This
heats the atoms in the ground state to the point where
excitation by the second pulse produces a nearly ﬂat
Doppler background, upon which sits the contribution
from the atoms shelved in the excited state. Fig. 3 shows
that the feature associated with stimulated emission is
fully responsible for the lineshape asymmetry, as the ab-
solute peak height diﬀerences are virtually identical. We
emphasize that this asymmetric envelope persists in four-
pulse Bord´e-Ramsey saturation spectroscopy [12] in the
Fourier-transform regime, which is used in ultra-high res-
olution studies and for cold atom optical clocks.[1, 2]
However, the good agreement between theory and ex-
periments give us good conﬁdence that these eﬀects will
not limit the accuracy of these clocks.

In summary, we have used ultra-cold two-level atoms
and ultra-high resolution spectroscopy to probe the
atomic recoil structure unique to saturated absorption
spectroscopy at an unprecedented level. The result-
ing spectra clearly reveal the fundamental asymmetry in

[1] E. A. Curtis, C. W. Oates, and L. Hollberg, J. Opt. Soc.

Am. B 20, 977 (2003).

[2] G. Wilpers, T. Binnewies, C. Degenhardt, U. Sterr,
J. Helmcke, and F. Riehle, Phys. Rev. Lett. 89, 230801
(2002).

[3] A. P. Kol’chenko, S. G. Rautian, and R. I. Sokolovski˘ı,

Soviet Physics JETP 28, 986 (1969).

[4] J. L. Hall, C. J. Bord´e, and K. Uehara, Phys. Rev. Lett.

37, 1339 (1976).

[5] R. L. Barger, J. C. Bergquist, T. C. English, and D. J.

Glaze, Appl. Phys. Lett. 34, 850 (1979).

[6] U. Sterr, K. Sengstock, J. H. M¨uller, D. Bettermann, and

W. Ertmer, Appl. Phys. B 54, 341 (1992).

[7] F. Riehle, J. Ishikawa, and J. Helmcke, Phys. Rev. Lett.

61, 2092 (1988).

[8] S. N. Bagayev, A. E. Baklanov, V. P. Chebotayev, and

A. S. Dychkov, Appl. Phys. B 48, 31 (1989).

[9] J. Ishikawa, F. Riehle, J. Helmcke, and C. J. Bord´e, Phys.

Rev. A 49, 4794 (1994).

[10] T. Binnewies, G. Wilpers, U. Sterr, F. Riehle, J. Helm-
cke, T. E. Mehlst¨aubler, E. M. Rasel, and W. Ertmer,
Phys. Rev. Lett. 87, 123002 (2001).

[11] F. E. Dingler, V. Rieger, K. Sengstock, U. Sterr, and

W. Ertmer, Opt. Commun. 110, 99 (1994).

[12] C. J. Bord´e, C. Salomon, S. Avrillier, A. Van Lerberghe,
C. Br´eant, D. Bassi, and G. Scoles, Phys. Rev. A 30,
1836 (1984).

[13] I. I. Rabi, S. Millman, P. Kusch, and J. R. Zacharias,

Phys. Rev. 55, 526 (1939).

[14] D. S. Weiss, B. C. Young, and S. Chu, Phys. Rev. Lett.

70, 2706 (1993).

[15] M. J. Snadden, J. M. McGuirk, P. Bouyer, K. G. Haritos,
and M. A. Kasevich, Phys. Rev. Lett. 81, 971 (1998).
[16] S. Gupta, K. Dieckmann, Z. Hadzibabic, and D. E.

Pritchard, Phys. Rev. Lett. 89, 140401 (2002).

