4
0
0
2
 
n
a
J
 
5
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
m
o
t
a
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
5
7
0
1
0
4
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Nonlinear Variation of Light-Pressure-Induced Multilevel Atomic Line Shifts with
Vapor Pressure in Helium Spectroscopy

T. Zelevinsky1 and G. Gabrielse1
1Department of Physics, Harvard University, Cambridge, MA 02138
(Dated: February 20, 2014)
Highly nonlinear dependences of 4He 23S − 23P lines on pressure were observed in vapor cell
saturation spectroscopy. Line shifts agree with those expected from light-pressure-induced pertur-
bation of atomic velocity distribution. In the lin⊥lin pump and probe polarization conﬁguration,
multilevel atomic structure must be taken into account. For a two-level atom, the shift magnitude
is determined by the collisional time constant, but when the system has dark states there is an
additional time constant due to optical pumping. The collisional and optical time constants com-
pete, and become equal at a certain pressure p0. Saturation signal vanishes at p0 whereas signal
due to light pressure remains. This leads to a dependence of line centers on pressure that exhibits
apparently singular behavior at p0. The 2S − 2PJ =1 line shift reaches the natural half width. Vapor
cells may be more suitable for investigation of this eﬀect than atomic beams since the shifts vanish
at suﬃciently high pressures. Two ways of controlling the shifts for the helium 2P ﬁne structure
measurement are discussed.

I.

INTRODUCTION

Laser spectroscopy is an indispensable method for
measuring optical and near-infrared transition frequen-
In particular, saturation spectroscopy
cies in atoms.
[1, 2] is a two-photon technique that allows suppression
of ﬁrst-order Doppler shifts. It involves excitation of a
single atomic velocity group by the pump laser beam and
probing by the second laser beam. Monitoring the ﬂuo-
rescence or probe transmission signal yields line shapes
limited by the natural width rather than by Doppler
broadening.

We use saturation spectroscopy to carry out a precision
measurement of 23P0,1,2 ﬁne structure in 4He. Compar-
ison of the small ∼ 2 GHz f12 interval to the theoretical
prediction [3, 4] is a test of three-body QED, while the
large ∼ 30 GHz f01 interval combined with its theoreti-
cal expansion in α, the ﬁne structure constant, allows to
extract a value for α and compare it with other exper-
imental determinations [5]. Recent progress on He 2P
ﬁne structure measurements has been reported by sev-
eral groups [6, 7, 8, 9]. Hessels et al. [6, 7] utilized direct
microwave spectroscopy of the intervals, while the ex-
periments of Shiner and Inguscio were based on optical
spectroscopy of 2S−2P . All three groups performed mea-
surements on metastable helium beams. Our approach
of measuring the 2S − 2PJ and 2S − 2PJ ′ transitions
and subtracting them to ﬁnd the fJJ ′ intervals relies on
the inherent precision of laser spectroscopy. We chose to
use a vapor cell rather than an atomic beam because the
cell yields a high signal-to-noise ratio, and because our
results can be compared to the results of other helium ex-
periments performed on atomic beams in order to make
a judgment regarding the use of vapor cells in precision
measurements.

The main function of the pump beam in saturation
spectroscopy is to populate the atoms’ excited state and
make the sample partially transparent to the probe.

However, the pump also alters the momentum state of
the atoms by transferring a momentum of ¯hk each time
a photon is absorbed and spontaneously emitted. Ther-
mal atomic velocity distribution attains a small defor-
mation that can be picked up by the probe beam. This
leads to frequency shifts and is critical for precision mea-
surements. Light pressure eﬀects have been previously
predicted [10] and observed. Prentiss and Ezekiel re-
ported ﬂuorescence line shape asymmetries for a two-
level sodium atomic beam in an intense standing-wave
ﬁeld [11]. Grimm and Mlynek studied shifts of probe ab-
sorption proﬁles for closed transitions in ytterbium va-
por [12, 13, 14] due to dissipative light scattering force.
Minardi and coworkers encountered light-pressure shifts
for closed and open helium 2S − 2P transitions in an
atomic beam [15, 16], and explained them through scat-
tering and dipole forces, depending on kinetic energy of
the probed atoms. Their detection method used ﬂuores-
cence detection rather than probe transmission which led
to an additional light-intensity dependence of frequency
shifts. In both cases, atoms were described as two-level
systems, and line shifts reached ∼ 20% of the natural
width Γ.

We have observed light-pressure-induced shifts of 2S −
2P helium lines in a vapor cell and studied their manifes-
tations with linklin and lin⊥lin pump and probe polar-
izations. Atoms interacting with beams in linklin conﬁg-
uration can generally be described as two-level systems
with or without loss, depending on angular momentum
of 2PJ . The lin⊥lin case requires the atom to be repre-
sented as a multilevel system, and leads to line shifts of
up to Γ/2. The sign of the shift in a multilevel system is
opposite if angular momentum of the excited state, Je,
is smaller than that of the ground state, Jg. In addition,
if Je ≤ Jg, optically dark states are present, and shift
magnitude depends not only on the degree of velocity
proﬁle distortion, but also on the size of the saturation
peak, which is the main feature of the signal. The size of
this peak depends on the optical pumping time constant,

since, along with laser polarization, optical pumping de-
termines the ground-excited state population diﬀerence
that in turn controls probe transmission. When optical
and collisional time constants are equal at pressure p0,
saturation signal changes sign (and therefore vanishes),
while light-pressure-induced signal dominates and pulls
the line center in the direction determined by the sign of
the saturation peak. As a result, singularities of the type
1/(p − p0) occur at p0. These are true singularities only
in the sense that the 1/(p − p0) dependence holds while
the splitting between the positive and negative branches
of the curve is less than the half width of the line, or ∼ 1
MHz for helium 2S−2P . For larger shifts, line centers are
not deﬁned, since signal tends to vanish in the pressure
region near p0; moreover, the small-shift approximation
breaks down as shifts exceed Γ/2. The discontinuity at
p0 results from competition between collisional and opti-
cal time constants and corresponds to 1/τ ∼ Γ/2 where τ
is the duration of coherent pumping limited by collisions.
Previous studies of light pressure relied on beam di-
ameter as a measure of duration τ of the pump beam’s
interaction with the atoms. Line shifts are proportional
to τ since it is a measure of deformation of the Doppler
proﬁle by light pressure. We found that varying pressure
in a vapor cell gives us a very large degree of control over
this systematic eﬀect. As opposed to varying laser beam
diameter, there is no uncertainty associated with the in-
tensity proﬁle of the pump. Instead, τ is inversely pro-
portional to pressure p, and the proportionality constant
can be found from pressure broadening of the spectral
line. In fact, if an appropriate vapor pressure range is
chosen, a case can be made for using vapor cells instead
of atomic beams for this precision measurement. Since
τ ∝ 1/p, light-pressure-induced shifts are negligible at
higher pressures. Of course, collisions in the cell lead to
line shifts [1], but if pressure is low enough for these shifts
to be linear, true values of the intervals can be recovered
by extrapolating line centers to zero pressure.

Our results for the lin⊥lin polarization arrangement
are quite surprising, since they show that a highly discon-
tinuous behavior of the absorption line center can result
from a smooth variation of a continuous experimental pa-
rameter such as vapor pressure. They also illustrate the
fact that extreme dependences of line centers on polariza-
tion can occur even when no dependences are expected
in standard saturation spectroscopy theory.

We suggest two ways to do helium ﬁne structure fJJ ′
measurements while reducing or eliminating the light-
pressure systematic eﬀect. The ﬁrst method exploits dif-
ferent sensitivities to light polarization of 2S − 2PJ and
2S − 2PJ ′ optical transitions. A polarization arrange-
ment can be found that makes line shifts nearly identical
and subsequently they cancel upon calculation of the ﬁne
structure interval. The second method consists of resolv-
ing Zeeman sublevels of 2S and 2P , and inducing opti-
cal transitions between those sublevels of 2S and 2PJ ,
and 2S and 2PJ ′ , that have the same spontaneous-decay
branching ratios from 2PJ as from 2PJ ′. Light-pressure-

2

induced shifts are then the same for both optical tran-
sitions, which leads to cancellation when ﬁne structure
intervals are computed. This method introduces addi-
tional systematic eﬀects from magnetic shifts, but for
moderate ﬁelds they are well understood and can be eas-
ily corrected for.

II. DESCRIPTION OF THE EXPERIMENT

The 23S1 − 2P0,1,2 Doppler-free saturation spec-
troscopy of 4He is performed in a pressure-variable glass
cell. Spectroscopy is done with a 1083 nm diode laser,
placed in an extended cavity to narrow its line width
down to 0.025Γ and to allow frequency tuning. The laser
beam is split into pump and probe beams that counter-
propagate through the vapor cell. Pump and probe are
oﬀset by 2MHz, so they interact with atoms that are mov-
ing in the laboratory frame but with a small enough ve-
locity that the saturation dip sits on a ﬂat Doppler back-
ground. Pump intensity is modulated and probe trans-
mission through the cell is detected synchronously with
the pump modulation frequency. Diode laser frequency
can be scanned through the resonance for all three op-
tical transitions (the transitions are denoted simply as
P0, P1, and P2). Laser frequency is counted relative to
the reference which is an identical diode laser locked to
a transition of 3He. In order to create metastable 23S
He atoms, a coil of thick wire is wound around the vapor
cell and together with a capacitor forms a circuit tuned
to about 60 MHz, into which a high power resonant sig-
nal is coupled. The number of metastables created by the
discharge is estimated to be roughly 1 ppm. The pres-
sure of ground state helium in the cell is varied between
5 and 300 mTorr.

III. SUMMARY OF LIGHT-PRESSURE
THEORY FOR TWO-LEVEL ATOMS

Light-pressure contribution to the probe absorption
proﬁle for two-level atoms has been worked out by Grimm
and Mlynek [12, 13, 14]. The model consists of a gas of
atoms with resonance frequency ω0, line width (FWHM)
Γ, and Doppler width much larger than Γ. The light ﬁeld
is a traveling plane wave, which is a reasonable approxi-
mation for spatially expanded laser beams.

Saturation spectroscopy is usually described in terms
of the pump partly saturating the transition and thus
increasing probe transmission [1]. In this case, the ab-
sorption signal is a symmetric Lorentzian with natural
line width. In reality, action of the pump is not limited
to saturation but also aﬀects the momentum of the atom.
Pump photons lead to cooling or heating processes that
cause atomic velocities to redistribute so that they are
no longer correctly described by a thermal proﬁle. Probe
transmission is sensitive to this velocity proﬁle deforma-
tion.

3

Each cycle of excitation and spontaneous emission is
characterized by an average momentum transfer of ¯hk
from the pump beam to the atom. It corresponds to the
recoil frequency of ǫr = ¯hk2/2m. For 2S − 2P of 4He,
ǫr = 2π × 42 kHz, whereas Γ = 2π × 1.6 MHz. If ǫr ≪ Γ,
light pressure can be described by the classical scattering
force

Inside the integral, a(v) describes the internal and N (v)
the external degrees of freedom of the atoms within the
medium. The pump modiﬁes not only the internal, but
also the external degrees of freedom, and thus aﬀects
both a(v) and N (v).

For weak pump intensities, only terms of O(s1) need to
be kept in N (v) and a(v). Written as linear expansions
in s,

Fs(v) = ¯hkΓPe(v),

where the excitation probability is

Pe(v) =

s
2

(Γ/2)2
k2(v − v2)2 + (1 + s)(Γ/2)2

if s is the saturation parameter and v2 is the atomic veloc-
ity resonant with the pump. Initial velocity distribution
has a Doppler proﬁle N0(v) and evolution of N (v) is de-
scribed by the continuity equation [17] (y is the spatial
coordinate along the laser beams)

∂
∂t

N (v, t) +

∂
∂v (cid:18)

∂v
∂t

N (v, t)

+

(cid:19)

∂
∂y (cid:18)

∂y
∂t

N (v, t)

= 0.

(cid:19)

Since the atomic ensemble is uniform in space, ∂/∂y van-
ishes, and

∂
∂t

1
m

∂
∂v

N (v, t) = −

[Fs(v)N (v, t)].

If modiﬁcation of N (v) is small, we can ﬁnd the ﬁrst-
order perturbative solution to this equation,

N (v, t) = N0(v) − N0(v2)

Fs(v).

(1)

t
m

∂
∂v

Eq. (1) assumes that Fs(v) is non-zero only for velocities
in the vicinity of v2, and that N0(v) is nearly constant
in the region of non-vanishing Fs(v). For a continuous
laser excitation, velocity distribution reaches steady state
N (v, t) = N (v), and t in eq. (1) becomes τ . In our case,
τ is limited by collisions of the metastable atoms with
ground state helium in the cell. Making this substitution,
we obtain the new velocity proﬁle

is

N (v) = N0(v) + ǫrτ

sk(v − v2)(Γ3/2)N0(v2)

[k2(v − v2)2 + (1 + s)(Γ/2)2]2 . (2)

where

a(v) = a0(v) + sa1(v),
N (v) = N0(v) + sN1(v).

Then

+∞

Z
−∞
+∞

+s

Z

−∞

A =

N0(v)a0(v)dv + s

N0(v)a1(v)dv

+∞

Z

−∞

N1(v)a0(v)dv ≡ A0 + s(ASAT + ALP ).

(3)

A0 denotes response in the absence of the pump, whereas
ASAT and ALP describe eﬀects due to saturation and
light pressure by the pump, respectively. Optical re-
sponse functions a0(v) and a1(v) can be found in Refs.
[12, 13, 18].

From eq. (3), saturation component of the probe ab-

sorption coeﬃcient is calculated to be

ASAT = −

κN0(v2)
2

1
k2(v1 − v2)2/Γ2 + 1

,

where κ ≡ 2π2nL|d|2/¯h in terms of dipole matrix element
~d, sample length L, and atomic number density n, and
v2 and v1 are velocities resonant with pump and probe,
respectively. The light-pressure component of A can also
be found from eq. (3):

ALP = −κN0(v2)ǫrτ

k(v2 − v1)/Γ
[k2(v1 − v2)2/Γ2 + 1]2 .

The total Doppler-free absorption, to ﬁrst order in s,

ASAT + ALP = −κN0(v2)X(δ),

(4)

The strength of velocity proﬁle modiﬁcation is set by
dimensionless parameters ǫrτ and s. The perturbative
approach is justiﬁed if ǫrτ · s ≪ 1. Eq. (2) describes the
dispersive kink that appears on the Doppler proﬁle as a
result of light pressure.

Absorption and dispersion of light by a medium is
equivalent to multiplication of the light ﬁeld by e−C,
where Re (C) = A is the absorption coeﬃcient. In terms
of optical response of individual velocity groups of the
atoms comprising the medium,

A =

N (v)a(v)dv.

+∞

Z

−∞

X(δ) =

1
2(δ2 + 1)

+ ǫrτ

δ
(δ2 + 1)2

(5)

in terms of the detuning parameter δ = 2(ω − ω0)/Γ, if ω
is the pump and probe frequency. This result is derived
by Grimm and Mlynek [12, 13, 14] and is presented here
to facilitate further discussion.

The ﬁrst term of X(δ) is the symmetric Lorentzian
caused by saturation of the transition by the pump. The
second term is antisymmetric in δ and has the form of a
Lorentzian derivative, and is due to light pressure. Note
that the strength of the light pressure eﬀect relative to
the saturation eﬀect is independent of laser intensity at
low values of s.

4

FIG. 1: Optical pressure by the pump beam eﬀectively super-
imposes a dispersive component (dotted line) onto the sym-
metric line shape (dashed line). Here, ǫrτ = 0.05, and the re-
sulting line shape (solid line) closely resembles a blue-shifted
Lorentzian.

If ǫrτ is a small parameter (in our experiment, ǫrτ <

0.3), X(δ) can be viewed as an expansion of

F (δ) =

1
2

1
(δ − ǫrτ )2 + 1

.

(6)

The eﬀect of light pressure, therefore, is to shift the line
center by δω = ǫrτ Γ/2. The observed line shape remains
symmetrical and Lorentzian, within experimental reso-
lution. Fig. 1 shows the shifted line for ǫrτ = 0.05.
Interaction time τ is proportional to 1/p, hence the line
center of the measured transition appears blue-shifted by
an amount inversely proportional to pressure.

Fig. 2 helps to visualize the reason for the shift. At
negative detunings the probe interacts with an increased
number of atoms due to the light-pressure-induced kink
in the Doppler proﬁle. Its transmission is reduced, yield-
ing a smaller signal on the red side of the saturation peak.
At positive detunings, on the other hand, the probe en-
counters a decreased number of atoms and its transmis-
sion is higher, leading to a larger signal on the blue side
of the saturation peak. The result is the line shape in
Fig. 1 (solid line).

When calculating line shapes, one must include linear
pressure shifts and broadening predicted by collision the-
ory [1, 19]. For 2S − 2P , we measured the linear pressure
shift to be -1.41(2) MHz/Torr and the pressure broaden-
ing to be 25.0(2)MHz/Torr.

IV. CALCULATION OF
LIGHT-PRESSURE-INDUCED SHIFTS IN
HELIUM

The function X(δ) of eq. (5) precisely describes the ef-
fect of light pressure on the saturation line shape only for
two-level atoms. The actual energy levels of 4He contain
2J + 1 degenerate Zeeman sublevels. They are impor-
tant for optical pumping since the laser is polarized. In
all three transitions we work with, 23S1 is the eﬀective

FIG. 2: Explanation of blue shift of the saturation peak. At
negative detunings, the probe beam, which is resonant with
atoms moving with velocity v1, samples a larger number of
atoms, yielding a lower transmission signal. At positive de-
tunings, the probe samples fewer atoms, and its transmission
is higher. The result is a blue-shifted line shape.

FIG. 3: Level structures and coupling coeﬃcients for P0, P1,
and P2 transitions.

ground state; its sublevels are m = ±1 and m = 0, and
it has a degeneracy of 3. Excited states 23P0, 23P1, and
23P2 have degeneracies of 1, 3, and 5, respectively. Pro-
jections m correspond to total angular momenta J. Level
structures and coupling strengths are shown in Fig. 3. In
the following discussion, we take the quantization ˆz-axis
to point in the direction of probe polarization, which is
kept constant.

In the presence of degenerate energy levels and opti-
cal pumping, relative magnitudes of ASAT and ALP in
eq. (4) are not constant, and therefore line shift of eq.
(6) does not have a simple linear dependence on τ . For
instance, if all atoms are pumped into a sublevel that
does not interact with either pump or probe, increasing
τ will have no further eﬀect on line shape. In this case,
a more careful investigation of time-dependent dynamics
of pump-probe interaction with the atoms is necessary in
order to determine the relative magnitude of the light-
pressure eﬀect.

Note that in the theoretical discussion we assumed that
light pressure is due entirely to the pump. Any additional
term in eq. (3) of O(s1) describing velocity redistribution
caused by the probe would vanish when integrated over

all velocities. This is due to the inherent experimental
asymmetry between pump and probe. In the more con-
crete discussion of light pressure in helium below, the
eﬀect of probe on atomic velocities is included, but it
only adds a minor correction to the results.

Rate equations for individual Zeeman sublevels are
written in terms of velocity- and frequency-dependent
unsaturated transition rates

Ri(ω, kv) =

siγ3/8
(ω − ω0 ∓ kv)2 + (γ/2)2 .

The subscript i = 1, 2 refers to probe and pump, re-
spectively, γ = Γ + γc is the line width that includes
natural width and collisional broadening, and transition
frequency ω0 includes linear pressure shift. Doppler shift
kv appears with a negative sign for the probe and a posi-
tive sign for the pump because the two beams propagate
in opposite directions. Transition probability between
2S(Jg = 1; m) and 2P (Je = 0, 1, 2; n) is proportional to
Ri and to the coupling coeﬃcient Cn
m corresponding to
the appropriate Je (Fig. 3). Time scale of population
dynamics is set by the inverse of the natural line width
Γ. Cross section of the probe beam’s interaction with the
atoms is

σ1(ω, kv) = σ0

(γ/2)2
(ω − ω0 − kv)2 + (γ/2)2 .

Time evolution of sublevel populations is adequately
described by rate equations, taking into account pump
and probe absorption and stimulated emission, as well as
spontaneous decay. In order to accurately describe popu-
lation dynamics of an atom undergoing elastic collisions,
one needs to include re-equilibration of velocities caused
by such collisions.
It can be accomplished by adding
terms to the rate equations that allow exchange of pop-
ulations between diﬀerent velocity groups. These terms
can signiﬁcantly complicate the problem by making rate
equations nonlinear. However, a simple approximation
of velocity-exchange collisions can be used instead.
In
order to simulate collisional velocity re-equilibration, we
add the following terms to the rate equations of ground
state sublevel populations:

˙gcoll
m = γe(

− gm),

+1

Xn=−1

gn
3

where 3 is the ground state degeneracy factor. This ex-
pression would have been exact if population exchange
took place between the same velocity groups of diﬀerent
sublevels, rather than between diﬀerent velocity groups
of the same sublevel. The factor γe is the mean elastic
collision rate, proportional to the total measured collision
rate γc. It diﬀers slightly between the three optical tran-
sitions, since the excited state is not the same for P0, P1,
and P2, and although we do not explicitly include colli-
sional eﬀects in the excited state equations (most atoms
are in the ground state), they cause eﬀective γe to vary.

5

Ground and excited state populations of sublevels with
total angular momentum projection m are denoted by
gm and em. The quantities em, gm, R1, R2 depend on
ω, kv, s1, and s2. The angle of pump polarization with
respect to probe polarization is θ. We exploit the sym-
metry gm = g−m and em = e−m. The stationary rate
equations are

m+1

Γ

Xn=m−1

Cn

men + Cm

m (R1 + cos2 θR2)(em − gm)

+

Xn=m±1

m = 0,

m sin2 θR2(en − gm) + ˙gcoll
Cn

1
2
Γem′ + Cm′
m′ (R1 + cos2 θR2)(em′ − gm′)
1
Cm′
n sin2 θR2(em′ − gn) = 0.
2

+

Xn=m′±1

Once the steady-state velocity-dependent sublevel
populations are obtained, they are modiﬁed by light pres-
sure as in eq. (2). This modiﬁcation is proportional to τ
and to dispersive functions which are deﬁned as follows
for the probe and pump:

Di(ω, kv) =

siǫr(ω − ω0 ∓ kv)γ3/2
[(ω − ω0 ∓ kv)2 + (1 + si)(γ/2)2]2 .

Power broadening has been included in the denominators
of Di.

The probe absorption coeﬃcient is

A1(ω, p, s1,2) = a0

∆N (ω, kv, p, s1,2)σ1(ω, kv)dv,

Z

(7)
where a0 is an overall pressure-dependent multiplica-
tive factor, ∆N is the population diﬀerence between the
ground and excited state sublevels coupled by the probe,
and pressure p appears because of its eﬀect on τ .

Finally, Doppler-free transmission signal observed in

the experiment is

S(ω, p) = A1(ω, p, s1, 0) − A1(ω, p, s1, s2),

(8)

since our synchronous detection method has the eﬀect
of subtracting the signal obtained with the pump turned
oﬀ.

If the functions Di(ω, kv) are neglected, this descrip-
(8) give ordinary Lorentzian
tion and speciﬁcally eq.
saturation line shapes. Eﬀect of light pressure as de-
scribed in Sec. III is entirely included in Di, which are
used to modify the ground-excited state population dif-
ference ∆N . The resulting ∆N is inserted into eq. (7),
and ﬁnally the signal line shape is computed using eq.
(8). Signal proﬁle S(ω, p) then includes the eﬀect of light
pressure as well as the ordinary saturation contribution.
For a two-level atom interacting with ˆz-polarized pump
and probe, population diﬀerence which determines A1 of
eq. (7) is

∆N2L = (g0 − e0)[1 − τ (D1 + D2)].

6

FIG. 4: Computed frequency shifts of a two-level atom due
to light pressure. The approaches of Secs.
III and IV give
equivalent results.

Using eqs. (7) and (8), it is straightforward to compute
line shapes of expected probe transmission signals and
to ﬁnd their frequency shifts. We use linear pressure
broadening and shift values that were measured for 4He.
The results are shown in Fig. 4. At higher pressures,
only linear pressure shift is apparent. At lower pressures,
there is a shift inversely proportional to pressure.
In
fact, if τ = 1/γc, where γc = 0.0138 Γ p /mTorr from
experiment, the shift of ω0 due to light pressure is exactly
δω = ǫrτ Γ/2, as predicted by analytical description of
Sec. III and eq. (6).

For P0, P1, and P2 transitions, population diﬀerences
that enter the absorption coeﬃcient (7) are found analo-
gously to ∆N2L:

∆NP0 = g0[1 −

τ
3

(D1 + cos2 θD2)] − e[1 −

τ
3
1
∆NP1 = (g1 − e1)[2 − τ (D1 − cos2 θD2 −
2
7
∆NP2 = g1[2 − τ (D1 − cos2 θD2 −
6
1
2
1
2
1
6

−e1[2 − τ (D1 − cos2 θD2 −

cos2 θD2 −

cos2 θD2 −

+g0[1 − τ (

−e0[1 − τ (

D1 −

D1 −

2
3

2
3

2
3

2
3

(D1 + D2)],

sin2 θD2)],

sin2 θD2)]

sin2 θD2)]

sin2 θD2)]

sin2 θD2)].

V. RESULTS AND COMPARISON WITH
EXPERIMENT

Including light pressure into the calculation of satura-
tion signals yields excellent agreement with experiment.
Fig. 5 (a) shows data (points) and predictions (solid
curves) for all three optical transitions and the lin⊥lin
pump and probe polarization conﬁguration. At higher
pressures the most prominent feature is linear pressure
shift. At lower densities, velocity-equilibrating collisions
become rare, and light-pressure eﬀect is the dominant
feature. All three curves exhibit signiﬁcant qualitative

FIG. 5: (a) Line shifts for P0, P1, and P2, in the lin⊥lin polar-
ization conﬁguration. Points are experimental values and in-
clude error bars, solid curves are calculated shifts, and dashed
curves are 1/(p − p0) ﬁts to data as explained in the text. (b)
Line shifts for P0, P1, and P2, in the linklin polarization con-
ﬁguration. Points are experimental values and include error
bars and solid curves are calculated shifts. (c) f12 ﬁne struc-
ture interval measured in the lin⊥lin conﬁguration.

diﬀerences, and, in addition, P0 and P1 curves have dis-
continuity points. Fig. 5 (c) shows the f12 ﬁne structure
interval vs. pressure measured at θ = 90◦.

Although the curves in Fig. 5 (a) emerge from the com-
bination of equations that describe population dynamics
and velocity proﬁle deformation by light pressure, they
are not diﬃcult to understand on an intuitive basis. The
P2 transition happens to be the simplest (refer to Fig.
3). In this case, all ground state sublevels interact with
the probe, and the situation turns out to be similar to
the two-level case (Fig. 4). The shift is ǫrτ as in eq. (6),
and τ ∝ 1/p.

The P1 transition is more complicated, and pressure
dependence of the line center has an eﬀective singularity
at p0 = 32 mTorr. Fig. 3 shows that in this case the
coupling coeﬃcient between m = 0 sublevels vanishes.
Therefore, if probe is ˆz-polarized, the m = 0 ground sub-
level is a dark state into which the atom’s population
can be optically pumped. If the pump beam is then in-
troduced such that polarization arrangement is lin⊥lin,
the pump can restore some of the population to m = ±1
sublevels. Optical pumping is only signiﬁcant at lower
pressures when the optical time constant 1/Γ is close to
the collisional time constant 1/γc. As pressure is reduced,
probe transmission goes from increased to decreased in

7

FIG. 6: Calculated ratios of P0 signal amplitudes (lin⊥lin)
to signal amplitudes of a two-level atom vs. pressure. The
dependence is proportional to 1 − p0/p (ﬁtted curve).

the presence of the pump. At a special value of pressure,
p0, saturation signal amplitude vanishes, and becomes
negative at lower pressures. Since the eﬀect of scattering
force is always of the same sign, the resulting line cen-
ter shift changes sign at p0. This situation is equivalent
to ﬂipping the sign of the symmetric component of the
signal (dashed line in Fig. 1), while keeping the sign of
the dispersive component (dotted line) unchanged. The
result is a red shift of the line instead of a blue shift.

In the case of P1, line shift can still be described by
a function of the form (6), if τ is made proportional to
1/(p − p0) rather than 1/p. This can be seen from eq. (5)
that describes a two-level atom. If the ﬁrst term of X(δ)
is multiplied by 1 − p0/p, line shift of eq. (6) is propor-
tional to 1/(p − p0), as long as the shift does not exceed
the half width of the line (otherwise, signal-to-noise ratio
becomes small and the shift so large that perturbative
approximations break down). When Je ≤ Jg, saturation
signal amplitude in the lin⊥lin conﬁguration is indeed
proportional to 1 − p0/p. Fig. 6 shows the calculated
dependence of P0 signal amplitude on pressure ﬁtted to
a 1 − p0/p curve. The P0 amplitude dependence on p is
similar to the P1 case, except zero crossing occurs at a
slightly diﬀerent pressure. Discontinuity point p0 is the
pressure at which γc ∼ Γ/2. In other words, at p0 the
collisional time constant becomes approximately equal to
one cycle of optical pumping which leads to the change
from probe transmission to probe absorption and to dis-
continuous behavior of light-pressure-induced line shift.
P0 also has dark states (m = ±1 for a ˆz-polarized
probe beam), and its line center in Fig. 5 (a) shows a
singularity at a pressure of 47 mTorr. The overall sign of
the light-pressure-induced shift here is reversed. This is
due to the fact that in the lin⊥lin conﬁguration, probe
interacts with the m = 0 sublevels, but pump cannot ex-
ert pressure on the m = 0 ground state sublevel. There-
fore, probe picks up only deformation of the excited state
velocity distribution, whereas in the P1 and P2 cases de-
formation of ground state distributions plays a dominant
role.

In addition to theoretical predictions, Fig. 5 (a) shows

FIG. 7: Direct manifestation of light pressure creating a dis-
persive kink in the helium velocity distribution. The data are
taken for P1 in lin⊥lin conﬁguration. Dashed curves are line
shapes predicted by light-pressure theory.

ﬁts to the data (dashed lines). The ﬁtting function is

f (p) =

− 0.00141p,

a
p − p0

where p0 = 0 for P2, the coeﬃcient of the second term
is the previously measured linear pressure shift, p is in
mTorr, f is in MHz, and a ∝ ǫrτ .

The theory of light-pressure shifts in a vapor cell is
based on just two parameters, γe and τ . The velocity-
equilibrating collision rate γe diﬀers by ∼ 20% for P0, P1,
and P2, since it is a phenomenological constant and is af-
fected by diﬀerences in level structure. γe is uniquely
determined by discontinuity points, and equals 0.39 γc
and 0.52 γc for P0 and P1, respectively. P2 pressure de-
pendence is relatively insensitive to the exact value of
γe, and it was chosen to be 0.5 γc for computational pur-
poses. The second parameter, τ , also depends on tran-
sition, since it is the mean duration of coherent action
of the pump that couples diﬀerent sublevels in the three
transitions.
τ was found from the lin⊥lin data to be
1.8/γc, 2.5/γc, and 1.2/γc for P0, P1, and P2, respec-
tively.

The constants γe and τ are also expected to have a mild
dependence on θ. However, they were kept unchanged
for a prediction of light-pressure-induced shifts for linklin
polarization conﬁguration. Qualitative agreement is very
good and is shown in Fig. 5 (b). In this arrangement, P2
line center is aﬀected the most, since P2 is a closed sys-
tem and resembles a two-level system in both lin⊥lin and
linklin situations. P1 and especially P0 are aﬀected less,
since they are open systems in this case, optical pumping
severely limits τ , and light-pressure-induced shifts cannot
grow too large.

The lin⊥lin P0 and P1 signal quality is poor near p0
since saturation signal amplitude vanishes at that point

8

′

= ±1 for P1, m = 0 → m

◦
FIG. 8: (a) f12 ﬁne structure interval vs. pressure at θ = 0
and θ = 30◦. (b) f12 vs. pressure measured in a magnetic
ﬁeld. White circles: average of m = ±1 → m′ = ±1 tran-
sitions. Linear slope is the pressure shift of f12. Black cir-
cles: m = ±1 → m
= 0 for
P2. Aside from the pressure shift, there is a residual light-
pressure-induced shift since the mean numbers of scattered
photons, hni, diﬀer for P1 and P2. Dotted line corresponds
to theoretical pressure dependence of line shifts ﬁtted to data
with one free parameter. If this parameter is appropriately
scaled, it can be used for light-pressure-induced shift correc-
tion for f01 and f02. The scaling is determined from the dif-
ference in hni for the optical transitions.

′

(Fig. 6). Therefore, line center values cannot be ob-
tained for p0 and the nearby pressure values. When the
Lorentzian component of eq. (5) vanishes, however, the
dispersive component can still be observed. When P1
data were collected near p0 ≃ 31.5 mTorr, the eﬀect of
light pressure was seen directly, as illustrated in Fig. 7.
The ﬁrst line shape was taken at p < p0 and demon-
strates a signiﬁcant red shift, while the second line shape
corresponds to p > p0 and shows an equivalently large
blue shift. The distance between the peaks is almost 2
MHz, or a full line width.

VI. CONTROLLING
LIGHT-PRESSURE-INDUCED LINE SHIFTS

From Figs. 5 (a) and (b) it is evident that P2 is much
less sensitive to θ than P0 and P1. We found that at θ ≃
30◦, the pressure curve for the P1 shift looks qualitatively
similar to the P2 curve. The f12 ﬁne structure interval
is plotted vs. pressure for θ = 30◦ in Fig. 8 (a), and at
this angle the dependence of the interval on pressure is
signiﬁcantly minimized.

The method of choosing the optimal θ is generally
not adequate for a high precision ﬁne structure measure-
ment, since residual light-pressure-induced shifts remain
at low pressures due to intrinsic diﬀerences between sub-
level structure of the two optical transitions which leads
to diﬀerent degrees of velocity proﬁle distortion. The
f12 interval can be measured in a way that allows light-
pressure-induced shifts to cancel entirely. Such a mea-
surement is achieved by resolving Zeeman sublevels with
a ˆz-directed magnetic ﬁeld and measuring optical tran-
sition frequencies only between sublevels with those m-
values that have the same coupling strengths for both

FIG. 9: f12 measurement unaﬀected by light-pressure shifts
(in a magnetic ﬁeld). Shifts cancel for m = ±1 → m′ = ±1.
If instead m = 0 → m
= 0 is used for P2, shifts do not cancel
since mean numbers of scattered photons, hni, are not the
same. The diﬀerence between these two f12 measurements
serves as a calibration for f01 and f02 shifts.

′

P1 and P2. This implies that the scattering force aﬀects
velocity distributions in equivalent ways, and the diﬀer-
ence P1 − P2 is free of shifts. The unique choice of optical
transitions follows from considerations of coupling coef-
ﬁcients (Fig. 3): m = ±1 sublevels are coupled with
ˆz-polarized pump and probe, as shown in Fig. 9.

f01 and f02 intervals do not allow such cancellation of
light-pressure-induced shifts. However, if f12 is measured
using the m = 0 → m′ = 0 transition for P2 (Fig. 9),
along with the ’clean’ m = ±1 → m′ = ±1 result it
can be used as a calibration of shifts for f01 and f02. A
comparison of the two f12 measurements vs. pressure is
shown in Fig. 8 (b).

VII. CONCLUSION

We observed and explained a new manifestation of
light-pressure-induced line shifts in 4He vapor cell satu-
ration spectroscopy. The shifts for 2S − 2P2 are qualita-
tively similar to those for two-level atoms, but 2S − 2P0
and 2S − 2P1 shifts must be explained using multiple
Zeeman sublevels, and in the lin⊥lin pump-probe po-
larization conﬁguration exhibit singularities of the form
1/(p − p0) as a function of vapor pressure, as long as the
shifts do not exceed ∼ Γ/2. These discontinuities result
from a competition of the collisional and optical pump-
ing time constants. When the time constants are equal
at p0, the saturation contribution to the Doppler-free sig-
nal vanishes and changes sign, while the dispersive light-
pressure contribution remains ﬁnite. When dark states
are present, either blue shifts or red shifts are possible
above p0, depending on whether populations of ground or
excited states coupled by the probe are absorbing most
of the recoil. We found that vapor cells allow an easy
control of this systematic eﬀect, and demonstrated two
ways to carry out precise ﬁne structure measurements
with light-pressure-induced shifts strongly suppressed.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

We thank C. Levy, T. Roach, N. Hermanspahn, and D.
Farkas for valuable contributions to the experiment. We

are also grateful to S. Ezekiel and D. Phillips for discus-
sions and helpful suggestions. This work was supported
by NSF.

9

2003).

(1999).

(2002).

[1] W. Demtr¨oder, Laser Spectroscopy, 3rd edition (Springer,

[11] M. G. Prentiss and S. Ezekiel, Phys. Rev. Lett. 56, 46

[2] T. W. H¨ansch and H. Walter, Rev. Mod. Phys. 71, S242

[12] R. Grimm, Ph.D. thesis, Swiss Federal Institute of Tech-

(1986).

nology (1989).

[3] G. W. F. Drake, Can. J. Phys. 80, 1195 (2002).
[4] K. Pachucki and J. Sapirstein, J. Phys. B 35, 1783

[5] T. Kinoshita, Rep. Prog. Phys. 59, 1459 (1996).
[6] M. C. George, L. D. Lombardi, and E. A. Hessels, Phys.

Rev. Lett. 87, 173002 (2001).

[13] R. Grimm and J. Mlynek, Appl. Phys.B 49, 179 (1989).
[14] R. Grimm and J. Mlynek, Phys. Rev. A 42, 2890 (1990).
[15] F. Minardi, M. Artoni, P. Cancio, M. Inguscio, G. Gius-
fredi, and I. Carusotto, Phys. Rev. A 60, 4164 (1999).
[16] M. Artoni, I. Carusotto, and F. Minardi, Phys. Rev. A

62, 023402 (2000).

[7] C. H. Storry, M. C. George, and E. A. Hessels, Phys.

[17] V. G. Minogin and V. S. Letokhov, Laser Light Pressure

Rev. Lett. 84, 3274 (2000).

[8] J. Castillega, D. Livingston, A. Sanders, and D. Shiner,

Phys. Rev. Lett. 84, 4321 (2000).

[9] F. Minardi, G. Bianchini, P. C. Pastor, G. Giusfredi,
F. S. Pavone, and M. Inguscio, Phys. Rev. Lett. 84, 3274
(2000).

[10] A. P. Kazantsev, G. I. Surdutovich, and V. P. Yakovlev,

JETP Lett. 43, 281 (1986).

on Atoms (Gordon and Breach, London, 1987).

[18] V. S. Letokhov and V. P. Chebotayev, Nonlinear Laser
Spectroscopy, Springer Ser. Opt. Sci. 4 (Springer, Lon-
don, 1977).

[19] D. Vrinceanu, S. Kotochigova, and H. R. Sadeghpour

(2003).

This figure "EnergyLevelsHe4.jpg" is available in "jpg"(cid:10) format from:

http://arxiv.org/ps/physics/0401075v1

This figure "ExptSetup.jpg" is available in "jpg"(cid:10) format from:

http://arxiv.org/ps/physics/0401075v1

