4
0
0
2
 
b
e
F
 
0
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
m
o
t
a
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
6
0
1
2
0
4
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Creating a self-induced dark
spontaneous-force optical trap for neutral
atoms

S. R. Muniz, K. M. F. Magalh˜aes, E. A. L. Henn, L. G.
Marcassa and V. S. Bagnato.

Instituto de F´ısica de S˜ao Carlos, Universidade de S˜ao Paulo, Caixa Postal 369,
S˜ao Carlos, SP - CEP 13560-970 - Brazil

Abstract

This communication describes the observation of a new type of dark spontaneous-
force optical trap (dark SPOT) obtained without the use of a mask blocking the
central part of the repumper laser beam. We observe that loading a magneto-optical
trap (MOT) from a continuous and intense ﬂux of slowed atoms and by appropri-
ately tuning the frequency of the repumper laser is possible to achieve basically the
same eﬀect of the dark SPOT, using a simpler apparatus. This work characterizes
the new system through measurements of absorption and ﬂuorescence imaging of
the atomic cloud and presents a very simple model to explain the main features
of our observations. We believe that this new approach may simplify the current
experiments to produce quantum degenerated gases

Key words: high-density MOT, optical pumping, dark SPOT.

Introduction

Laser cooling and trapping techniques have been very useful in the studies of
atomic physics. Particularly the magneto-optical trap (MOT) has shown to
be a versatile method to produce cold and relatively dense atomic samples. Its
development is certainly one of the main responsible for the wide spreading of
the cold and ultracold matter studies and applications [1]. In many of these
studies is important to have a very dense sample of ultracold atoms populating
the lower hyperﬁne ground state. However, in practice, there is a limit to the
highest density attainable in a MOT, which is typically on the order of 1010
atoms/cm3.

Preprint submitted to Elsevier Science

9 February 2008

As it is well known, the limit to the density in a MOT is consequence of two
major processes: cold-collision induced losses and secondary light scattering.
The ﬁrst impediment involves the cold collision of ground and excited state
atoms within the trap, which allows transforming part of the excitation energy
of the photon into kinetic energy of the colliding pair. This process eventu-
ally provides enough energy to the atoms to leave the trap [2]. In this case,
higher densities imply in a larger collisions rate and leads to higher losses.
Since the trap loss rate is usually on the order of 10−11cm3/s, one has in prac-
tice samples with atomic densities on the order of 1010cm−3. Secondary light
scattering imposes another limitation to these systems. The reabsorption of
emitted photons causes an outward radiation pressure [3] that prevents further
increase of the density. Due to this second mechanism the loading normally
occurs at constant density, where an increase in the number of atoms results
in a increase of the volume [4].

In order to overcome both limitations Ketterle et al [5] developed the so
called dark spontaneous-force optical trap, or simply ‘dark SPOT’, where
the trapped atoms were spatially conﬁned in a hyperﬁne ground state which
does not interact with the trapping laser frequencies, staying therefore in the
dark. This scheme provides an eﬀective way to supplant the light scattering
that causes the limitations mentioned before. This was accomplished by plac-
ing a physical obstacle to block the central region of the repumper laser beams.
Atoms in the dark region are rapidly pumped to the lower energy ground state
and do not interact with the lasers. The absence of light scattering in inner
and most dense portion of the cloud causes a tremendous decrease in the
repulsive force induced by photon secondary scattering as well as the ground-
1010cm−3
excited collisions rates and allowed them to obtain approximately 5
sodium atoms in this type of ”dark MOT”. One of the main feature of the
dark SPOT is to produce a very dense and compact distribution of ground
state atoms, located in the center of the atomic trapped cloud. This achieve-
ment was an important step towards magnetic trapping of these atoms and
the further realization of Bose Einstein Condensation [6].

×

In this paper we demonstrate a similar trap without the use of any obstacle
in the repumper beam. The dark region, in our case, is created by the own
atoms absorption. Using a continuous and intense ﬂux of slowed sodium atoms
in their 3S1/2(F = 1) ground state and adjusting the intensity and frequency
of the repumper laser, we were able to capture about 109 atoms in a conﬁgu-
ration where the repumper beam is severally absorbed by the outer part of the
atomic cloud, in this way the atoms in the center of the trap stay in a ”dark
ground state”. We named this situation a self-induced dark MOT (SDMOT).
It represents an improvement in the achievement of high density because it
can be done even when a single electro-optically modulated laser beam is used
for trapping the atoms. In the next sections we present a description of our
experimental apparatus, followed by the results obtained by absorption of a

2

probe laser beam. Finally we also present a simple model in order to explain
some of the main features of our system.

1 Experimental Setup

A schematic diagram of our experimental setup is showed in ﬁgure 1. An
eﬀusive sodium beam is decelerated in a tapered solenoid by the Zeeman-
tuned technique [7]. After the solenoid there is an extra coil that allows to
extract an intense ﬂux of slowed atoms [8]. These atoms are already in the
lower hyperﬁne ground state, as discussed in the next section of this paper
and explained in more details in reference [9] . In this conﬁguration, to avoid
any zero crossing in the value of the magnetic ﬁeld, the current circulation in
the extra coil is such that its ﬁeld lines smoothly match the ﬁeld lines of the
MOT coils.

Fig. 1. Schematic diagram of the experimental system. Atoms emerging from an
eﬀusive oven are decelerated and trapped in a MOT aligned with slowing tube. The
magnetic ﬁeld proﬁle is presented in the ﬁgure detail, where z in given in centimeters
and B in tesla.

Three ring-cavity dye lasers provide the light for the slowing, trapping and
repumping transitions. In order to do that, all the lasers are frequency stabi-
lized and peak-locked to the appropriate optical transition, using a vapor cell
and the saturated absorption signal. The laser frequencies are easily tuned to
3P3/2(F ′ = 3) and
the red of the sodium atomic transitions 3S1/2(F = 2)
3P3/2(F ′ = 2), at the speciﬁed ∆slower, ∆trap and ∆repump
3S1/2(F = 1)
detunings, through the use of acousto-optical modulators (AOM). Although
in the measurements described here we have used two independent lasers to
produce the SDMOT, we veriﬁed that similar results could be observed when
a single laser was used for trapping. In that case an electro-optical modu-
lator (EOM) tuned around 1.7 GHz is necessary to provide the repumping

−→

−→

3

light. The main reason for choosing the extra dye laser was to easily change
the repumper frequency, allowing for large repumping detunings. Once our
home-built EOM has a resonance cavity, to enhance the electric ﬁeld applied
to the non-linear crystal [10], it would be somewhat trickier to do the same
large frequency variation using only the EOM. In fact, the possibility of easily
changing the frequency of the repumper light might be one of the reasons that
allowed us to observe the above-mentioned eﬀect.

The MOT is located in an ultra-high vacuum (UHV) glass cell, positioned
at the end of the deceleration tube and in-line with the slowing process, as
shown in ﬁgure 1. This conﬁguration provides a very eﬃcient coupling of the
slowed atoms into the MOT. To avoid the undesirable mechanical eﬀect of the
F ′ = 3 transition, we use
strong slowing laser, tuned close to the F = 2
a variation of the Zeeman-tuned technique, which is discussed in details in
reference [11]. The trap is created by six independent laser beam tuned to the
red of the trapping and repumping transitions, respectively by the values ∆trap
and ∆repump. The repumper laser comes in four independent beams, aligned
collinearly with the trapping beam in the horizontal plane.

−→

Once the MOT laser beams and the quadrupole coils are activated we capture
about 109 atoms in the trap after the optimization of the MOT and slowing
process parameters. In our system, the atomic cloud can be characterized
either by ﬂuorescence or absorption imaging using a triggerable digital CCD
camera.

2 Emerging slowed atomic beam characteristics

In order to characterize the outgoing ﬂux of slow atoms we have used a probe
laser beam crossing the atomic beam at small angle. During this characteriza-
tion the MOT lasers and the quadrupole magnetic coils were turned oﬀ. The
ﬂuorescence at the crossing position was imaged in a photomultiplier tube and
the analysis of the ﬂuorescence, as function of the probe frequency, allowed
us to measure the velocity distribution of the output ﬂux after deceleration.
This measurement also allowed us to discriminate the population in each of
the two ground states sub-levels.

−→

Tuning the slower laser frequency close to the cycling transition 3S1/2(F =
3P3/2(F ′ = 3) and with the slowing magnet carrying a curent of about
2)
45A, which produces a ﬁeld approximately given by B(z) = 1000√1
z + 100,
for B given in gauss and z in meters, one obtains a ﬂux of slow atoms emerging
in the 3S1/2 (F = 2) ground state level with a peak velocity of about 200 m/s.
To obtain lower velocities at this condition the slowing laser frequency has to
be tuned to the blue of the transition. This type of behavior has been already

−

4

investigated by our group in the past [9] and it is mainly due to the adiabatic
following of the atoms in the magnetic ﬁeld during the slowing process. The
measured velocity distribution is presented in ﬁgure 2. Decreasing the current
of the slowing magnet to about 36A the situation is completely diﬀerent and
a large ﬂux of very slow atoms emerges from the process in the 3S1/2(F = 1)
ground state level. The output velocity of these atoms obey the relation vout
∆slower/k, where ∆slower is the slower laser detuning and k is the wave

≈ −
vector.

Fig. 2. Fluorescence measurement of the outgoing distribution of slowed atoms as
function of a probe laser frequency. The measurements were done at two diﬀerent
solenoid currents. At 45A the atomic ﬂux is predominantly at 3 S 1/2(F = 2) state,
while at 36 A it is predominantly 3 S 1/2(F = 1) atoms. Dashed lines show the
position of the atomic transitions.

Although the atoms are decelerated in the cycling transition 3S1/2(F = 2)
−→
3P3/2(F ′ = 3), as they approach the end of the slowing solenoid, the lower
amplitude of the ﬁeld as well as the conﬁguration of the ﬁeld lines create
adequate conditions to optically pump the atoms to the 3S1/2(F = 1) state.
At this point the deceleration process stops abruptly and the slowed atoms
migrate out of the solenoid without interacting with the slowing laser. We
measured about 1010 atoms/sec emerging from the slowing process near zero
velocity and already in the 3S1/2(F = 1) state. The ﬁgure 2 also shows the
velocity distribution for the 3S1/2(F = 1) atoms when the second operating
condition is used. The peak velocity is nearly zero when ∆slower ∼ 0 and the
distribution width is approximately 50 m/s. Recalling a previous measurement
of the capture velocity of a MOT [12], one sees that a considerable portion of
this ﬂux can be captured by the trap.

5

3 Trapping the decelerated atoms

To be able to eﬃciently capture atoms in the MOT, the average atomic velocity
has to be on the order of the capture velocity of the trap. We use a variant
of the Zeeman-tuned technique [11] to provide the slow atoms for the MOT,
which is kept in UHV conditions. Then, after activating the MOT coils and
lasers, as the slowed atoms emerging in 3S1/2(F = 1) get into the capture
region, they start to accumulate in the trap. The slowing laser frequency and
Zeeman magnet current are optimized for capturing the maximum number
10MHz, with respect to the
atoms. In our experiment we used ∆trap =
transition 3S1/2(F = 2)
30MHz with
−→
3P3/2(F ′ = 0) transition. This situation is
respect to the 3S1/2(F = 1)
represented in ﬁgure 3. The loading time was about 0.6 seconds and the total
number of trapped atoms was around 109atoms. Each of the six beams of the
trapping laser had about 30 mW , and 8 mW on each of the four repumping
beams. The beams had a gaussian proﬁle with waist of approximately 1 cm
FWHM.

−
3P3/2(F ′ = 3), and ∆repump =

−→

−

Fig. 3. Diagram of sodium levels indicating the optical transitions and the laser
detunings involved.

To understand how the process actually works, we can consider the capture
happening in the following way: atoms emerge from the slowing solenoid in
the 3S1/2(F = 1) ground state, interacting with the repumping and trap-
ping lasers they are pumped to 3S1/2(F = 2) state and initiate cycling in the
3P3/2(F ′ = 3) strong transition, where the spatially selec-
3S1/2(F = 2)
tive light pressure capture them in the MOT . However, because of the high
loading ﬂux of atoms, there is a strong absorption of the repumper laser across
the trapped cloud. As consequence of this fact, the repumper laser is attenu-
ated and therefore atoms are no longer eﬃciently repumped to 3S1/2(F = 2)
state. The result is an atomic cloud composed of two parts: an outside shell

−→

6

predominantly with 3S1/2(F = 2) atoms, interacting with both lasers, and an
inner atomic cloud mainly pumped to the 3S1/2(F = 1) ground state. The in-
ner part does not interact with the lasers and therefore is not subjected to the
limitations of density discussed before. A schematic diagram of the physical
situation is presented in ﬁgure 4, where the relative dimensions for both parts
observed are represented.

Fig. 4. Schematic representation of the relative atomic distribution of S1/2(F = 1)
atoms (dark part in the center) embedded in a larger trapped cloud.

Using a weak probe beam, which could be tuned resonant with the F = 1
and F = 2 atomic transition, we have characterized the cloud with respect
to both hyperﬁne ground state. In order to do that we imaged the probe
beam on a CCD and observed the integrated absorption distribution along
the probe beam path. A sequence of these images can be observed in ﬁgures 5
and 6. The maximum absorption observed of F = 2 atoms was less than 50%,
while for the F = 1 atoms was higher than 95%. The outer diameter of the
3S1/2(F = 2) atoms was about 4 mm when observe through the absorption
image, the absorption for the 3S1/2(F = 1) shows a spatial distribution within
2 mm of diameter. With the value of absorption and optical path we can
calculate densities which are ∼ 1010 cm−3 for F = 2 atoms and ∼ 1011 cm−3
for F = 1 atoms. This situation characterizes what we have called a ’self dark
SPOT’, where the inner part of the cloud is in the dark and the outside works
as a regular MOT. These numbers are in agreement with the conventional
dark SPOT reported in ref. [5].

We have observed that to obtain the self-induced dark SPOT the conditions on
the repumper detuning and the eﬃciency of deceleration process are crucial.
The ﬁgure 5 shows a sequence of absorption images for the 3S1/2(F = 1)
atoms in diﬀerent conditions of deceleration. As the magnetic ﬁeld of the
slower magnet is lowered, more atoms emerge in the S1/2(F = 1) state and
the establishment of the SDMOT is remarkable. Usually, when the SDMOT
is operating, one can see a strong absorption in a weak F = 1 probe beam
with bare eyes.

However, if the ﬂux of 3S1/2(F = 1) atoms is not high enough to create the

7

Fig. 5. Sequence of images showing the variation in the absorption of a weak probe
beam for diﬀerent currents of the slowing solenoid. As the magnetic ﬁeld decreases
a larger ﬂux of atoms is obtained in the F=1 state, increasing the absorption signal.
The darkest parts in ﬁgure (c) represent absorption of approximately 100% in the
probe beam.

initial density proﬁle, the subsequent pumping of the atoms to 3S1/2(F = 1)
is not reached. It is interesting to note that is not only the absorption of the
repumper that plays a role in the creation of a population diﬀerence across
the cloud, but also the decrease in the absorption of the trap laser, which due
to the higher intensity rapidly pumps the atoms to the lower hyperﬁne and
accelerates the establishment of the diﬀerential population proﬁle.

Figure 6 shows two images of the trap, where the ﬁrst one (a) was obtained
by ﬂuorescence and the second (b) by absorption imaging. The absorption
F ′ = 2.
image was obtained with a weak probe laser, tuned to the F = 1
Both images have the same scale and where taken while the SDMOT was
turned on. It is clearly observed that the absorption image of the F = 1

−→

8

Fig. 6. Comparison between a ﬂuorescence (a) and absorption (b) images from the
same SDMOT. The ﬁgure shows the relative size of the ”dark cloud” ( S1/2(F = 1)
atoms) embebed within the whole trapped cloud.

atoms is concentrated in the inner part of the trap and its spatial distribution
is smaller than the whole trap, which is represented in the ﬂuorescence image.
Irregularities on the trap image are mainly due to laser beam inhomogeneity
and certain trap instabilities due to the high number of atoms.

4 A simple model for the SDMOT

In order to understand our observations we present here a very simple ana-
lytical model to show the attenuation of the laser intensity along the cloud
and the accumulation of the F = 1 state atoms at the central part of the
trap. The idea of the model is simply to point out the main features presented
by the system. Our model considers the four-level system shown in ﬁgure 7.
The levels (1) and (2) are respectively the ground states 3S1/2(F = 1) and
3S1/2(F = 2) while the levels (2′) and (3′) are the respective 3P3/2. We consider
this four-level system in the presence of the two laser beams, the trapping and
repumper laser, both represented in the ﬁgure 7 respectively by the frequencies
ω1 and ω2.

Using the rate equations for the transitions involved one can determine the
local population ratio as a function of light intensity. In the equations below,
N2 is the number of atoms in state 2, while N1 is the number in state 1. The
local population ratio on steady state is given by:

N2
N1

=

2P12′

P22′

−
P23′

9

(1)

Fig. 7. A four-level diagram used to construct the one-dimensional model presented.
The two lasers are also represented in the diagram.

where

P12′(ω2) =

Ω2
repump + (Γ/2)2 + Ω2

12′ (x)/2

∆2

1
2

12′ (x)/2

P22′(ω1) =

Ω2
(58 + ∆trap)2 + (Γ/2)2 + Ω2

22′ (x)/2

1
2

22′ (x)/2

P23′(ω1) =

Ω2
trap + (Γ/2)2 + Ω2

23′ (x)/2

∆2

1
2

23′ (x)/2

(2)

(3)

(4)

−

The terms Ω12′ (x) = 5qIR(x), Ω22′ (x) = 13qIT (x) and Ω23′ = 28qIT (x) are
the local Rabi frequencies along a given x -direction, while IT (x) represents the
intensity of trap laser and IR(x) the repumper laser intensity along the same
line. In all the equations the frequencies are expressed in MHz and the intensi-
ties in mW/mm2, as given by the reference [13]. In our case ∆trap =
10 MHz
80 MHz (as represented by the ﬁgures 3 and 7). The calcu-
and ∆repump =
lation, which is a simpliﬁed one-dimensional version of the actual trap, starts
considering an atomic cloud with homogenous distribution of 3S1/2(F = 1)
atoms. As the lasers are turned on, the strong absorption of the repumper laser
produces a population imbalance as predicted by equation (1). At each posi-
tion, as the intensities IR(x) and IT (x) varies, higher concentration of atoms
in F = 1 appears. The ﬁnal result, predicted by the rate equation model, is
the establishment of a population and laser intensity proﬁles across the atomic
cloud. At steady state the one-dimensional proﬁle for atomic population and
laser intensity are represented in ﬁgure 8.

−

10

Representation of

Fig. 8.
the numerical results from the one-dimensional
model. The ﬁgure shows the intensity proﬁle of both lasers (a), population in the
S1/2(F = 1) state (b), and the population in 3S1/2(F = 2) (c), after reaching the
steady state conditions. In the ﬁgure (a) the dash line indicates the trap laser in-
tensity while the continuous line indicates the repumper laser.

According to the ﬁgure 8(a) we see that the intensity of the trapping laser
decreases only modestly, while the repumper is fully attenuated as it pene-
trates in atomic cloud. We also see that eventhough the population in F = 1
is initially small at the outer part of the trapped cloud; it increases rapidly as
the repumper laser is absorbed. The population in F = 2 is complementary
because in our model the local number obeys N1 +N2 = N. The importance of
this model resides in showing the establishment of a population proﬁle, which
is qualitatively in concordance with our observations.

11

5 Conclusions

We have observed a new kind of dark SPOT, which is naturally produced by
loading a standard MOT from an intense ﬂux of slowed atoms in the 3S1/2(F =
1) state, and by adjusting the intensity and frequency of the repumper laser.
Using the system described here it was possible to create a ”dark MOT ”,
without spatially separating the F = 1 and F = 2 laser beams. The shadow
in the F = 1 light was created by the own absorption of the atoms, due to an
accumulation of
”dark state ” atoms in the center of the trap. Because the
resemblance of this process with the work of Ketterle et al [5], we named this
new trap as self-induced dark MOT (SDMOT).

”Dark MOTs ” of this kind, where atoms stay predominantly in a ”dark” hy-
perﬁne level, not interacting with the trapping light, are an important to over-
come density limitations of the standard MOT. We veriﬁed that the SDMOT
works as good as the usual dark SPOT conﬁguration, with the advantage that
since it does not require spatially separated beams for trap and repumper, it
can be simply operated with a single electro-optical modulator (EOM) to pro-
duce the repumping light. This simpliﬁes the experimental setup also because
it does not require special alignments to image the blocking disk, used as a
physical obstacle in the repumper beam. However, the situation we have pre-
sented here depends upon a dense ﬂux of atoms in conditions to be trapped,
as well as some special tuning conditions for the repumping light. Some pre-
liminary results also show that the temperature of those sample might be
lower than the usual dark SPOT, but to understand such eﬀect a more com-
prehensive theoretical model will be required, as well as other experimental
investigations.

6 Acknowledgments

This work was developed at Center for Research in Optics and Photonics,
CePOF, and it was supported by FAPESP, though the program CEPID. It
also had support from the Brazilian national funding agency, CNPq.

References

[1] See, for instance, the collection of selected papers on ultracold matter, in Nature

416 (2002) 6877.

12

[2] J. Weiner, V. S. Bagnato, S. C. Zilio and P. Julienne, Rev. Mod. Phys. 71 (1999)

1.

[3] T. Walker, D. Sesko, and C. Wieman, Phys. Rev. Lett. 64 (1990) 408.

[4] T. Walker, P. Feng, D. Hoﬀman and R. Williamson, Phys. Rev. Lett. 69 (1992)
2168; L. Marcassa, V. Bagnato, Y. Wang, C. Tsao, and J. Weiner, O. Dulieu,
Y. B. Band, P. S. Julienne, Phys. Rev. A 47 (1993) R4563.

[5] W. Ketterle, K. B. Davis, M. A. Joﬀe, A. Martin, and D. Pritchard, Phys. Rev.

Lett. 70 (1993) 2253.

[6] M. H. Anderson, J. R. Ensher, M. R. Matthews, C. E. Wieman and E. A.
Cornell - Science 269 (1995) 198; C. Bradley, C. Sackett and R. Hulet, Phys.
Rev. Lett. 75 (1995) 1687;

K. B. Davis, M.-O. Mewes, M. R. Andrews, N. J. van Druten, D. S. Durfee, D.
M. Kurn and W. Ketterle, Phys. Rev. Lett. 75 (1995) 3969.

[7] V. S. Bagnato, C. Salomon, E. Marega and S. C. Zilio, J. Opt. Soc. B 8 (1991)

497.

4070.

4240.

[8] M. Firmino, C. A. Faria, S. C. Zilio and V. S. Bagnato, Phys. Rev. A 41 (1990)

[9] R. Napolitano, S. C. Zilio and V. S. Bagnato, Opt. Comm. 80 (1990) 110.

[10] J. F Kelly, A. Gallagher, Rev Sci. Instrum. 58 (1987) 563.

[11] S. G. Miranda, S. R. Muniz, G. D. Telles, L. G. Marcassa, K. Helmerson and

V. S. Bagnato, Phys. Rev. A 59 (1999) 882.

[12] S. R. Muniz, K. M. F. Magalh˜aes, Ph. W. Courteille, M. A. Perez, L. G.
Marcassa, and V. S. Bagnato, Phys. Rev. A 65 (2001) 015402; V. S. Bagnato,
L. G. Marcassa, S. G. Miranda, S. R. Muniz, and A. L. de Oliveiraz, Phys. Rev.
A 62 (2000) 013404.

[13] P. M. Farrel, W. R. MacGillivray, and M. C. Standage, Phys. Rev. A 37 (1998)

13

