Atom lithography with two-dimensional optical masks

S.J.H. Petra, K.A.H. van Leeuwen, L. Feenstra,∗ W. Hogervorst, and W. Vassen
Atomic and Laser Physics Group, Laser Centre Vrije Universiteit,
De Boelelaan 1081, 1081 HV Amsterdam, The Netherlands

With a two-dimensional (2D) optical mask at λ = 1083 nm, nanoscale patterns are created
for the ﬁrst time in an atom lithography process using metastable helium atoms. The internal
energy of the atoms is used to locally damage a hydrofobic resist layer, which is removed in a wet
etching process. Experiments have been performed with several polarizations for the optical mask,
resulting in diﬀerent intensity patterns, and corresponding nanoscale structures. The results for a
linear polarized light ﬁeld show an array of holes with a diameter of 260 nm, in agreement with a
computed pattern. With a circularly polarized light ﬁeld a line pattern is observed with a spacing
of λ/√2 = 766 nm. Simulations taking into account many possible experimental imperfections can
not explain this pattern.

4
0
0
2
 
b
e
F
 
6
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
m
o
t
a
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
7
2
1
2
0
4
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

PACS numbers: 32.80.Lg, 39.25.+k, 81.16.Nd

I.

INTRODUCTION

Over the last ten years atomic nanofabrication with op-
tical masks has been demonstrated in numerous experi-
ments. With a direct deposition technique, 1D structures
have been grown with sodium [1], chromium [2, 3, 4, 5],
aluminum [6], ytterbium [7] and iron [8]. Similarly, in a
two-step lithography process, experiments have been per-
formed with cesium [9], metastable argon [10], metastable
neon [11], and metastable helium [12]. In a lithography
process, a metal ﬁlm is covered with an organic resist
layer, which is selectively damaged by the studied atoms.
Next, the damaged molecules and their underlying metal
layer are removed with a cyanide etching solution. Al-
though the lithography procedure requires an additional
step, it has the advantage that the pattern formation
does not suﬀer from atomic diﬀusion in the growth pro-
cess [13], and the structures have no pedestal.

So far, experiments with a 2D optical mask have been
performed by deposition of chromium atoms [14, 15].
Chromium is advantageous because a short wavelength
can be used (λ = 426 nm) implying small structure sizes
of 70 – 80 nm. Disadvantage is the long exposure time
and the inevitable pedestal in the structures. Also, atom
lithography with cesium atoms and a holographic light
mask has been reported, resulting in a line pattern with
a periodicity of 426 nm and a perpendicularly superposed
line pattern with a 23.4 µm spacing [16]. We report on
experiments with a 2D optical mask using metastable he-
lium atoms in a lithography procedure. The metastable
helium atom has a very high internal energy (20 eV),
and the dose of atoms required to aﬀect a single resist
molecule is therefore low [17]. This shortens the expo-
sure time of the samples to about eight minutes [12].

The optical mask is generated by interference of laser
beams that propagate perpendicularly to an atomic beam

∗Present address: Physikalisches Institut, Universit¨at Heidelberg,
Philosophenweg 12, 69120 Heidelberg, Germany

FIG. 1: Schematic view of the 2D intensity proﬁles for lin-
early polarized light, perpendicular to the plane of incidence
(left-hand image) and circularly polarized light (right-hand
image). The mirrors are indicated by the gray rectangles.
The ratio of the wavelength of the light and the waist of the
laser beam is not to scale.

which is directing towards the sample. A force is exerted
on the atom by the interaction of the induced atomic
dipole moment with the electric ﬁeld of the standing light
wave. For a two-level atom, the optical potential of the
standing-wave light ﬁeld can be written as [18]:

U (~r) =

¯h∆
2

ln

1 +

(cid:18)

I(~r)
Isat

Γ2
Γ2 + 4∆2 (cid:19)

,

(1)

where ∆ is the detuning of the light from atomic reso-
nance, I(~r) is the intensity of the light as a function of
the position ~r = (x, y, z), Isat is the saturation intensity
of the optical transition, and Γ is the natural linewidth
of the atomic transition. The dipole force experienced
by the atom, corresponding to this optical potential, is
given by:

U (~r).

~F (~r) =

~
∇
−
The formation of a 2D optical mask is shown schemati-
cally in Figure 1. The incident light beam, traveling from
right to left in the x-direction, is reﬂected at 45◦ down-
ward in the minus y-direction and retro-reﬂected by the

(2)

2

→

atomic beam, deﬁned as the full width at 1/e2 height,
is decreased to 3 m/s and the centerline beam intensity
1010 s−1 mm−2 on the sam-
is increased sixfold to 1.1
ple. The laser light for the collimation beams is provided
by a 20 mW distributed Bragg reﬂector diode laser that
operates at a wavelength of 1083 nm. With Doppler-free
saturation spectroscopy this laser is actively stabilized to
the 2 3S1

2 3P2 transition of the helium atom.

×

→

The light for the 2D optical mask is obtained from a
ﬁber laser also operating at a wavelength of 1083 nm
and delivering a power of 800 mW. The frequency of
this light is 375 MHz blue detuned with respect to the
2 3S1
2 3P2 transition. The atoms are therefore re-
pelled to the intensity nodes of the standing-wave light
ﬁeld. The frequency stability of the ﬁber laser is moni-
tored with respect to the locked diode laser with a Fabry-
Perot interferometer (see Figure 2). The laser beam is
focused at the sample holder with a waist (deﬁned as ra-
dius at 1/e2 of the intensity height) of 0.33 mm. The
corresponding Rayleigh length of 32 cm renders the ac-
tual focal point uncritical. The maximum saturation
parameter is Imax/Isat = 107, where Imax is the max-
imum intensity at the nodes of the standing wave and
Isat = 0.17 mW/cm2. The retro-reﬂected laser beam
overlaps the incident beam path over a distance of 3.3 m,
and is then reﬂected by polarizing beam splitter cube
PBS3 and monitored with a power meter. The standing-
wave is aligned with respect to the sample position by
ﬁrst adjusting it such that it is not clipped by the sam-
ple and thus 100% of the light is back-reﬂected by the
standing-wave mirror onto the power meter. Next, the
beam is displaced by adjusting a micrometer translation
stage (not indicated in ﬁgure 2) and clipped by the sam-
ple until only 50% of the light is back-reﬂected, which
indicates that the sample position is at the center of the
laser beam. Final ﬁne tuning is done with the translation
stage in order to move the laser beam to the desired posi-
tion with respect to the sample. The large distance over
which both the incident and retro-reﬂected beam overlap
reduces the misalignment angle of the laser beam to less
than 0.3 mrad.
In the case where a linearly polarized
optical mask is used, quarter-wave plate QP2 is removed
after alignment of the laser beam.

The samples are silicon substrates covered with a 1 nm
chromium layer and a 30 nm gold layer. A hydrofobic re-
sist layer of nonanethiol [CH3(CH2)8SH] molecules allows
to develop the samples in a simple wet-etching process
[12, 17, 21]. After depositing a Self-Assembled Mono-
layer (SAM) of nonanethiol, the samples are exposed to
the atomic beam for eight minutes, corresponding to a
dose of about one metastable atom per SAM molecule.
In a Penning ionization process, the SAM is locally dam-
aged by the metastable atoms [22]. After exposure, the
samples are etched in a cyanide solution that dissolves
the damaged molecules, and the underlying gold ﬁlm
[12, 17, 21]. The etching time is also typically eight min-
utes. After etching, the sample topography is analyzed
with an Atomic Force Microscope (AFM).

FIG. 2: Schematic of the setup. Metastable helium atoms
are produced in DC discharge source S and travel in the z-
direction toward the sample. In the collimation section CS,
laser beams of diode laser DL allow for collimation of the
atomic beam in both x- and y-direction. Part of the diode
laser output (4%) is split of by beam splitter BS for spec-
troscopy. After reﬂection by polarizing beam splitter PBS1
and double-passing discharge cell DC and quarter-wave plate
QP1, the light is detected by photodiode PD1. The light
transmitted by PBS1 also passes PBS2 and is analyzed with
Fabry-Perot interferometer FPI and photodiode PD2. The
optical standing-wave mask is made by the ﬁber laser FL. A
small part of its beam reﬂected by PBS3 and also analyzed
by FPI. For the standing wave the beam is ﬁrst reﬂected
downward in the y-direction and retro-reﬂected by the mirror
set SW, which is incorporated in the sample holder inside the
vacuum chamber. After double-passing QP2, the light of the
standing wave is reﬂected by PBS3 and monitored with power
meter PM.

lower mirror. In this mirror conﬁguration a 2D interfer-
ence pattern appears just in front of the upper mirror.
The atomic beam propagates in the z-direction through
the light ﬁeld. The samples are placed in the light ﬁeld
in front of this upper mirror. The two images of Figure 1
show the intensity proﬁle of the optical mask for the two
diﬀerent polarizations used in the experiments. The left-
hand image presents the pattern formed by a linearly po-
larized light beam, polarized perpendicular to the plane
of incidence, i.e. in the z-direction. The right-hand im-
age shows the intensity proﬁle of a circularly polarized
light beam.

II. EXPERIMENTAL SETUP

The experimental setup is shown in Figure 2 and is
similar to the setup we described in a previous paper
[12]. The helium atoms are transferred to the metastable
2 3S1 state in a DC helium discharge. The atomic beam
is collimated in two dimensions using a curved wavefront
technique with converging laser beams [19, 20]. After
the 2D-collimation the transverse velocity spread of the

3

FIG. 3: AFM surface scans of the samples. The images
cover an area of 10 µm
10 µm. The left-hand and right-
hand images show the results of the linearly polarized and the
circularly polarized optical mask respectively. The separation
between both the lines and the dots is λ/√2 = 766 nm.

×

III. RESULTS

Figure 3 shows two 10 µm

10 µm surface scans of the
×
samples taken with the AFM. The structure shown in
the left-hand image was created with a linearly polarized
optical mask. The dark regions indicate the positions
where the metastable helium atoms have hit the sam-
ple surface and where the gold layer has been removed
in the etching process. The average structure height is
about 20 nm. The image shows a lattice of dots with
a λ/√2 = 766 nm separation. The holes have an av-
erage Full Width at Half Maximum (FWHM) diameter
of 260 nm. The right-hand image pattern was produced
with a circularly polarized optical mask. The orienta-
tion of the lines is perpendicular to the mirror surface,
and the line separation is also λ/√2, with an average di-
ameter of 360 nm. A close look at the structures shows
a graininess typical for all lithography experiments with
gold layers [9, 12, 17]. Zooming in on a part of the ﬁgure
shows that the gold typically consists of approximately
20 nm diameter grains.

IV. DISCUSSION

For a better understanding of the created structures,
calculations of both the optical potential of the light ﬁeld
and the expected atomic distributions on the samples
have been performed. Due to the magnetic degeneracy
of the lower and upper states of the optical transition, the
potential of Equation 1 is not strictly valid. In a more
accurate approach, the actual (adiabatic) potentials have
been calculated by diagonalizing the interaction with the
light ﬁeld. However, the resulting potentials for the J =
1
J = 2 transition used here correspond closely to the
two-level potential of Equation 1. Hence, for convenience
this potential has been used for the calculations.

→

The potentials of the optical masks corresponding to
the intensity proﬁles of Figure 1 are shown in Figure 4a

FIG. 4: Calculations of the potential (a), the atomic distribu-
tions on the sample (b) and the experimental results (c) for a
circularly polarized light ﬁeld (left-hand images) and linearly
polarized light ﬁeld (right-hand images). All images cover an
area of 2λ

2λ, with λ the wavelength of the light.

×

×

for linearly polarized light (left-hand image) and circu-
larly polarized light (right-hand image). The images
2λ, where λ = 1083 nm is the wave-
cover an area of 2λ
length of the optical transition. The gray-scale indicates
the height of the potential, where the lightest regions
correspond to the areas where the potential is the high-
est. For both polarizations, numerical simulations have
been performed on the atoms that travel through the 2D
standing-wave light ﬁeld. These calculations were done
using the dipole force ~F (~r) from Equation 2 in a three-
dimensional model that calculates the atomic trajecto-
ries numerically. In a previous paper we have described
this model in detail [23]. The atomic distributions corre-
sponding to the potential plots are shown in Figure 4b,
where every black dot represents the position where an
atom has hit the sample. As an initial distribution, a
201 atoms is used, distributed homoge-
lattice of 201
×
neously on a 4λ
4λ grid. Both the longitudinal and
transverse velocity of every atom is picked randomly from

×

a Gaussian velocity distribution that corresponds to the
experimental values. The calculations, simulations and
measurements in Figure 4 were taken at a sample posi-
tion of 100 µm behind the center of the laser beam, in
the downstream direction of the atomic beam. From Fig-
ure 4a and Figure 4b it is clear that the atoms are guided
to the regions of the lowest potential, i.e., the dark re-
gions of the potential plots. The calculated structure
for linearly polarized light (along the z-direction) shows
a grid structure of the atoms, with a line separation of
λ/√2. For the circularly polarized light ﬁeld, a dotted
pattern is formed, where the separation of two successive
dots is λ/√2 at an angle of 45◦ with the x-axis.

For comparison, the experimental results for both po-
larizations are shown in Figure 4c as well. These images
2λ) of the images shown in
are close-ups of a part (2λ
×
Figure 3. The images with a linearly polarized light ﬁeld
are in agreement with the simulated atomic distribution
shown in Figure 4b. The qualitative visual agreement be-
tween the patterns are conﬁrmed by a 2D Fourier analysis
of the distribution. The calculated diameter (FWHM) of
the dots (along the x- and y-axis) is 170 nm, which is
in agreement with the measured width of 260 nm. The
broadened feature size seen in the experimental results
can be attributed to the isotropic etch process, that re-
moves the unprotected gold from all directions. The lack
of visibility of the lines connecting the dots is probably
because the dose of metastable atoms was too small to
damage the resist layer enough in those speciﬁc areas.
A longer exposure time, however, will broaden the dots,
similar to the 1D case [12].

The pattern formed with a circularly polarized light
ﬁeld deviates strongly from the calculated structure. In-
stead of a lattice of dots, the experimental results show a
line pattern orientated perpendicular to the upper stand-
ing-wave mirror surface. Despite calculations that take
into account a possible misalignment of the laser beam,
an imperfect polarization state and/or intensity gradi-
ents of the beams due to imperfect mirrors, we can not
explain the observed pattern. Both mirrors for the 2D
optical masks have been veriﬁed experimentally to have
a conservation of polarization better than 97%. Thor-
ough examination of the samples with the AFM have

4

×

shown that the line pattern seen in Figure 3 is clearly
visible in a large area of 300 µm
300 µm. Outside this
area the 1D standing wave dominates the interference
pattern, resulting in line structures with a separation of
λ/2, and indicating that the 2D structure is produced at
the center of the 2D light ﬁeld. This is conﬁrmed by the
structure direction and spacing (λ/√2), that can only
be explained from the atom having experienced the force
of a 2D optical mask. Therefore the observed structures
with a circularly polarized light ﬁeld remain unexplained.
V. CONCLUSION

We have demonstrated atom lithography with
metastable helium using 2D optical masks. Calculations
can only partly explain the observed structures. With
a linearly polarized light ﬁeld a lattice of holes with a
diameter (FWHM) of 260 nm is created. The structures
obtained with a circularly polarized optical mask show
lines in a direction perpendicular to the mirror surface
with a FWHM of 360 nm. The separation between both
the lines and the holes is λ/√2 = 766 nm. The struc-
ture size that may be written with 1083 nm light in a
2D mask is determined by the wavelength of the light.
Structures with a smaller periodicity and size are feasi-
ble when shorter wavelength light is used. In this respect
the 2 3S1
3 3P2 transition is promising. Light at the
λ = 389 nm wavelength can be generated eﬃciently by
frequency doubling of a Ti:Sapphire laser [24]. The recent
advent of diode lasers at this wavelength is promising as
well. However, the problem with the 20 nm graininess of
the structures remains, and has to be solved when struc-
tures smaller then 20 nm are aimed for.

→

Acknowledgments

We are grateful to E.W.J.M. van der Drift (DIMES
Nanofacility, The Netherlands) for providing the silicon
wafers. Financial support from the Foundation for Fun-
damental Research on Matter (FOM) is gratefully ac-
knowledged.

[1] G. Timp, R. E. Behringer, D. M. Tennant, J. E. Cun-
ningham, M. Prentiss, and K. K. Berggren, Phys. Rev.
Lett. 69, 1636 (1992).

[2] J. J. McClelland, R. E. Scholten, E. C. Palm, and R. J.

Celotta, Science 262, 877 (1993).

[3] U. Drodofsky, J. Stuhler, B. Brezger, Th. Schulze,
M. Drewsen, T. Pfau, and J. Mlynek, Microelectron. Eng.
35, 285 (1997).

[4] H.-B. Sun, H. Inouye, Y. Inouye, K. Okamoto, and
S. Kawata, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys. Part 2 40, L711 (2001).
[5] E. Jurdik, J. Holfeld, H. van Kempen, and Th. Rasing,

Appl. Phys. Lett. 80, 4443 (2002).

[6] R. W. McGowan, D. M. Giltner, and S. A. Lee, Opt.

[7] R. Ohmukai, S. Urabe, and M. Watanabe, Appl. Phys. B

Lett. 20, 2535 (1995).

77, 415 (2003).

[8] K. A. H. van Leeuwen, private communication.
[9] F. Lison, H.-J. Adams, D. Haubrich, M. Kreis, S. Nowak,

and D. Meschede, Appl. Phys. B 65, 419 (1997).

[10] K. S. Johnson, J. H. Thywissen, N. H. Dekker, K. K.
Berggren, A. P. Chu, R. Younkin, and M. Prentiss, Sci-
ence 280, 1583 (1998).

[11] P. Engels, S. Salewski, H. Levsen, K. Sengstock, and

W. Ertmer, Appl. Phys. B 69, 407 (1999).

5

[12] S. J. H. Petra, L. Feenstra, W. Hogervorst, and

[19] A. Aspect, N. Vansteenkiste, R. Kaiser, H. Haberland,

W. Vassen, Appl. Phys. B 78, 133 (2004).

and M. Karrais, Chem. Phys. 145, 307 (1990).

[13] E. te Sligte, K. M. R. van der Stam, B. Smeets, P. van der
Straten, R. E. Scholten, H. C. W. Beijerinck, and
K. A. H. van Leeuwen, J. Appl. Phys. 95, 1749 (2004).

[14] C. C. Bradley, W. R. Anderson, J. J. McClelland, and

[20] W. Rooijakkers, W. Hogervorst, and W. Vassen, Opt.

Commun. 123, 321 (1996).

[21] Y. Xia, X.-M. Zhao, E. Kim, and G. M. Whitesides,

Chem. Mater. 7, 2332 (1995).

R. J. Celotta, Appl. Surf. Sci. 141, 210 (1999).

[22] H. Ozaki and Y. Harada, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 112, 5735

[15] Th. Schultze, B. Brezger, R. Mertens, M. Pivk, T. Pfau,

(1990).

and J. Mlynek, Appl. Phys. B 70, 671 (2000).

[16] M. M¨utzel, S. Tandler, D. Haubrich, D. Meschede,
K. Peithmann, M. Flasp¨ohler, and K. Buse, Phys. Rev.
Lett. 88, 083601 (2002).

[17] S. Nowak, T. Pfau, and J. Mlynek, Appl. Phys. B 63,

[23] S. J. H. Petra, K. A. H. van Leeuwen, L. Feenstra,
W. Hogervorst, and W. Vassen, Eur. Phys. J. D 27, 83
(2003).

[24] J. C. J. Koelemeij, R. J. W. Stas, W. Hogervorst, and

W. Vassen, Phys. Rev. A 67, 053406 (2003).

203 (1996).

[18] A. Ashkin, Phys. Rev. Lett. 40, 729 (1978).

