4
0
0
2
 
r
a

M
 
0
3
 
 
]
h
p
-
m
o
t
a
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
1
4
1
3
0
4
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Proposal for high-precision Atomic Parity Violation measurements
using ampliﬁcation of the asymmetry by stimulated emission
in a transverse ~E and ~B ﬁeld pump-probe experiment

J. Gu´ena, M. Lintz and M. A. Bouchiat ∗
Laboratoire Kastler Brossel a et F´ed´eration de Recherche b
D´epartement de Physique de l’Ecole Normale Sup´erieure,
24 Rue Lhomond, F-75231 Paris Cedex 05, France
(August 13, 2013)

Ampliﬁcation by stimulated emission of radiation provides an intriguing means for increasing the sensitivity of Atomic
Parity Violation (APV) measurements in a pump-probe conﬁguration well adapted to the 6S − 7S cesium transition.
It takes advantage of the large number of atoms excited along the path of the pump beam. In the longitudinal E- ﬁeld
conﬁguration currently exploited in an ongoing APV measurement, this number is limited only by the total voltage
sustainable by the Cs vapor. In order to overcome this limit, we consider, both theoretically and experimentally, the
possibility of performing the measurements in a transverse E-ﬁeld conﬁguration requiring a much lower voltage. We
discuss the necessarily diﬀerent nature of the observable and the magnetoelectric optical eﬀects entering into play.
They condition modiﬁcations of the experimental conﬁguration with, in particular, the application of a transverse
magnetic ﬁeld. We suggest the possibility of rotating the transverse direction of the ﬁelds so as to suppress systematic
eﬀects. With a long interaction length, a precision reaching 0.1% in a quantum noise limited measurement can be
expected, now limited only by the necessity of operating below the threshold of spontaneous superradiant emission
of the excited medium. If we approached this limit, however, we could greatly amplify the asymmetry using triggered
superradiance. PACS numbers: 32.80.Ys, 11.30.Er, 33.55.b

I. INTRODUCTION

of non-linear eﬀects which complicate interpretation of
the data.

A. Motivation for new independent measurements

The main goal of Atomic Parity Violation (APV) ex-
periments is a precise determination of QW , the so-called
weak charge of the nucleus which, as far as the electron-
nucleus weak interaction is concerned, plays the same
role as the electric charge for the Coulomb interaction [1].
The value of QW (Cs) is quoted as a signiﬁcant constraint
on “New Physics” in the Particle Data Book [2]. Atomic
calculations in cesium have reduced their uncertainty be-
low 1% [3] and many cross checks have reinforced con-
ﬁdence in the results at this level [4–6]. On the exper-
imental side a single group [7,8] has met the challenge
which consists in achieving a calibrated [9] measurement
of the APV 6S
1 at a level
of precision better than 1%. However, the measurement
of any fundamental quantity has to pass the test of the
veriﬁcation by a completely independent method. More-
over, it has been reemphasized recently [10,11] that their
reported value for the small nuclear spin-dependent con-
tribution is diﬃcult to explain theoretically.

7S transition amplitude Epv

−

APV experiments are notoriously diﬃcult from the
standpoints of both low statistics and the possibility of
numerous systematic eﬀects. Solutions which increase
the Signal to Noise Ratio (SNR) often give rise to un-
desirable spurious eﬀects.
In our ﬁrst Cs APV Stark
interference experiment [12], the detection method was
selective but ineﬃcient. The same was true for APV
measurements in thallium [13]. Conversely, in the atomic
beam experiments on Cs [7], the SNR is huge by com-
parison, thanks to the high light intensity obtained in
the power build-up cavity. However, this is at the price

1

B. Interesting features of a pump-probe experiment

→

More recently, another method [14] has provided its
ﬁrst APV measurements [15], and highlighted a mecha-
nism looking attractive as regards its potential gain of
sensitivity, namely ampliﬁcation by stimulated emission
of radiation [16].
It relies on a pump-probe scheme in
which the excited 7S state is populated by an intense,
pulsed excitation beam, with a linear polarization ˆǫex
and a wave vector ˆk parallel to the applied electric ﬁeld
~E. The atoms are then probed by a second, collinear
pulsed laser beam which is tuned to resonance for the
7S
6P3/2 transition. The probe beam is ampliﬁed by
stimulated emission. At the same time its linear polariza-
tion ˆǫpr, undergoes a small change of direction or pseudo-
rotation, due to a linear dichroism arising from the pres-
~E)
ence of the pseudoscalar term (ˆǫex ·
in the gain and leading to a tilt θpv of its eigen-axes
with respect to the planes of symmetry of the experi-
ment [15,20]. This tilt is given by the ratio of the PV E1
amplitude to the vector part of the Stark induced am-
plitude [1] θpv =
1 /βE , about 1 µrad in current
experimental conditions. This is the important param-
eter to be measured. We note that the pseudo-rotation
of ˆǫpr is, as θpv, odd under ~E reversal, which provides
a powerful tool for discriminating against systematic ef-
fects. We measure the rotation with a high sensitivity,
two-channel polarimeter operating in balanced mode [21],
in which it gives rise to an imbalance Damp = S1−S2
S1+S2 be-
tween the signals, S1, S2 recorded in the two channels

ˆǫpr)(ˆǫex ∧

ImEpv

ˆǫpr ·

−

detecting the ampliﬁed probe beam. To reject the con-
tribution due to imperfections of the probe polarization,
the imbalance is also measured with a subsequent ref-
erence probe pulse and subtracted [17] to yield, at each
excitation pulse, the imbalance of atomic origin, that is
Dref .
the left-right asymmetry: ALR ≡
Using real-time calibration by a known tilt of the optical
axes of parity-conserving origin, we deduce the value of
θpv.

Dat = Damp −

We have already demonstrated that this method has a
good detection eﬃciency (all photons arising from stimu-
lated emission by the probe beam reach the polarimeter)
while preserving the selectivity of the ﬂuorescence de-
tection approach. In addition, this scheme allows us to
exploit rotational symmetry about the pump probe com-
mon beam axis to reduce systematic eﬀects [22]. The
limit of sensitivity achievable by our present technique is
the important issue at stake, discussed in this paper. The
SNR is deﬁnitely better than that obtained using polar-
ized ﬂuorescence detection and it is expected to bring us
to within reach of our 1% precision objective. However,
one should not conclude that this represents the ultimate
sensitivity limit obtainable with the stimulated-emission
method of detection. Indeed the key point here is that
we use an enhancement mechanism which considerably
increases both the probe intensity and its left-right asym-
metry with the optical density at the probe wavelength.
Since we ﬁrst validated the method [15], we have checked
that this mechanism does really increase the SNR. It has
indeed contributed signiﬁcantly to the increase by a fac-
tor of 3.3 that we have recently obtained. This raises
the question of just how much more one might expect to
increase the sensitivity in this way.

C. Practical limit to the ampliﬁcation with a
longitudinal ~E ﬁeld

A

The optical density of the Cs vapor at the probe wave-
= ln (nout/nin), deduced from the number of
length
incoming (nin) and outgoing (nout) probe photons, is
proportional to the number of 7S excited atoms in the
interaction region N , itself proportional to the excitation
beam energy, to the square of the electric ﬁeld strength
E2 and to the length of the cell. At the quantum limit,
the inverse of the noise equivalent angle N EQA per
pulse, hence the measurement sensitivity, involves the
square root of the number of probe photons per pulse
), times the asymmetry
reaching the detector, nin exp (
ampliﬁcation factor [16], dALR/dθ. This result [18] re-
lies on two reasonable assumptions that we wish to make
explicit here. First, the polarimeter operates in balanced
mode. Second, the number of collected photons sponta-
neously emitted in the mode of the probe beam is very
small as compared to the number of stimulated photons
10−6 in typical conditions), and remains small at
(
≃

A

2

moderate ampliﬁcations, so that the associated noise can
be neglected [19].
In the limit

1, the asymmetry ampliﬁcation can be
expressed in an identical way for both the “para” (ˆǫex k
ˆǫpr), and “ortho” (ˆǫex ⊥

ˆǫpr), conﬁgurations:

A ≤

dALR/dθ = 2ηavAav ,
Aav = (

Ak +

A⊥)/2 and ηav =

α⊥
αk −
αk + α⊥

,

(1)

with

Ak and

A⊥ denote the optical densities and αk
where
and α⊥ the ampliﬁcation coeﬃcients for the ﬁeld per unit
length, in the two conﬁgurations [16]. For the favorable
6P3/2,F =4 transition 2ηav = 22/23,
6SF =3 →
which henceforth we approximate by 1. Thus we can
write:

7SF =4 →

(N EQA)−1 = √nin exp (

Aav/2)

× Aav ,

(2)

A

.
A

which obviously corresponds to a rapid increase of the
quantum noise limited SNR = θpv(N EQA)−1/pulse as a
function of

In the longitudinal ﬁeld conﬁguration, where ~Ek lies
along the common beam direction ˆk, the only parame-
ter left in our experiment for increasing
is the exci-
tation beam intensity. To increase the applied electric
ﬁeld we need to increase the applied potentials but at
the large Cs vapor densities at which we operate (a few
times 1014/cm3), too large a voltage would present the
ˆk, increas-
risk of a discharge inside the vapor. With ~E
ing the length also requires a prohibitive increase of the
applied voltage. By contrast, this kind of limitation is
obviously absent if the experiment is performed not in
the longitudinal but in the transverse ﬁeld conﬁguration.
We also note that in a transverse ﬁeld ~E⊥, the left-right
PV asymmetry receives a contribution not only from the
vector Stark induced amplitude iβ ~E⊥ ∧
ˆǫex (where
~σ denotes the electron spin operator) but also from the
scalar one α ~E⊥ ·
7S Cs transition [1],
→
. Therefore, at smaller ﬁeld magnitudes E⊥,
β
10
α
|
|
| ≃
|
typically close to Ek/10, and with a longer interaction
length, we can expect an overall left-right asymmetry
signiﬁcantly larger than in the longitudinal ﬁeld conﬁg-
uration. However, the physical quantity which bears the
PV signature in a transverse E-ﬁeld is diﬀerent. We ex-
amine it in detail in the next section.

ˆǫex. For the 6S

~σ

k

·

II. A PUMP-PROBE APV EXPERIMENT
IN A TRANSVERSE ELECTRIC FIELD

A. The need for a magnetic ﬁeld

While in a longitudinal ~E ﬁeld the observables are the
diﬀerent contributions to the 7S-excited alignment [22],
detected through the linear dichroism or birefringence to

which they give rise, in the transverse ~E ﬁeld geometry
the observables are the contributions to the 7S orienta-
tion giving rise to circular dichroism or optical rotation.
ˆk collinear
However, only the orientation component ~P
to the beam contributes to the probe polarization signal.
We show below that it is possible to realize conditions
such that, at least in principle, only the orientation of
parity violating origin participates to the signal.

·

There are several contributions to the orientation cre-
ated in the 7S state. The interference between the Stark-
induced electric-dipole transition amplitudes of scalar
and vector origins gives rise to a longitudinal compo-
α ξexˆk, where ξex denotes the photon
nent ~P (2) =
helicity. In addition, the interference of the scalar Stark-
induced amplitude with the magnetic-dipole amplitude
M1 on the one hand and the parity violating electric-
dipole amplitude ImEpv
1 on the other, gives rise to the
transverse component:

−

5
6

β

~P⊥ =

5
6

M1 + ξexIm Epv
1
αE⊥

(ˆk

ˆE⊥)

∧

≡

~P (1) + ~P pv,

(3)

after excitation of the 6SF =4 →
7SF =4 line. We have
split ~P⊥ into the PV contribution ~P pv and the M1 con-
tribution ~P (1) which is 2
104 larger, but which cancels
out if the atoms are excited by two counterpropagating
beams of equal intensity [23] (see Fig.1).

×

probe

M2

cell

M1

probe

l -plate

shutter

beam 
splitter

shutter

l -plate

l /4

l /2

Glan pol

on/off

exc. 
beam

expect the simple time-dependences sin(ωLt) for ~P pv and
cos(ωLt) for ~P (1). By numerically averaging over realistic
time distributions we ﬁnd the predicted time-dependence
is still described by a sine and a cosine law to within a
good approximation, if one replaces the Larmor angular
precession frequency ωL of one atom in the applied ~B
ﬁeld by an eﬀective angular frequency ωef f whose nu-
merical value depends on experimental parameters such
as excitation pulse duration and probe intensity.

B. Dark-ﬁeld detection

·

·

·

During an exploratory stage of the experiment [25],
ˆk and
we have observed the B-ﬁeld dependence of ~P (1)
ˆk (Fig.2). We have found that the ﬁeld magnitude
~P (2)
ˆk Stark-induced longitu-
required to suppress the ~P (2)
dinal contribution is 28 G for an excitation-probe pulse
delay of 20 ns, i.e. suﬃciently short to avoid signiﬁcant
loss of excited atoms by spontaneous decay. Another
important feature is that, for that delay, the magnitude
of ~P (1) observed with a single excitation beam is very
close to its maximum value. Therefore, adjustment of
both the delay and the ﬁeld magnitude combined with
the use of two counter-propagating beams enables us to
ensure dark-ﬁeld detection of ~P pv. We have veriﬁed that,
over durations as short as 20 ns, the damping of the 7S
polarization due to collisional relaxation is completely
negligible.

100

P(2)

P(1)

FIG. 1. Schematic of the optical arrangement allowing for the
cancellation of ~P (1):
two counterpropagating excitation beams
are made colinear to the probe beam by using dichroic mirrors
(M1, M2); their extinction is monitored by two independent shut-
ters. The birefringences on the two paths are corrected by adjusting
the axis orientation and the tilt of two λ-plates.

Bx (Gauss)

5

10

15

20

25

Since the Im Epv
1

contribution we want to observe is
perpendicular to ˆk and to ~E⊥, we apply a magnetic ﬁeld
~B in the direction parallel to ~E⊥. We also delay the
probe pulse with respect to the excitation pulse to give
the transverse orientation created suﬃcient time to pre-
cess around ~B towards the direction of the beam ˆk. Si-
multaneously, the component ~P (2) precesses by the same
angle and becomes orthogonal to ˆk. If the instants of ex-
citation and detection for all atoms coincided, we would

FIG. 2. Larmor precession of ~P (1) and ~P (2) in a magnetic ﬁeld
~B parallel to ~E⊥, observed in real time with a single excitation
beam: the pump-probe delay is kept ﬁxed at 20 ns and the mag-
nitude of the ﬁeld is varied. ~P (1) · ˆk (diamonds, right scale) and
~P (2) · ˆk (dots, left scale) are deduced from the contributions to
Dat/A (for deﬁnitions see the text) respectively ξex-even, E⊥-odd,
B-odd and ξex-odd, E⊥-even, B-even. (E⊥= 185 V/cm; exc. pulse
0.9 mJ; resonant for 6SF =4 → 7SF =4; beam diameter 1.8 mm;
probe pulse, 4 × 107 linearly polarized (k ~B) photons, resonant for
7SF =4 → 6P3/2,F =5) [25].

3

)
 

3
-
0
1
(
 
 

A

/
 

t
a

D

80

60

40

20

0

0

16

14

12

10

8

6

4

2

0

 

·

The linearly polarized resonant probe beam passing
through the oriented vapor acquires a small helicity. For
sensitive detection of this helicity we have converted our
two-channel polarimeter [21] from a linear to a circular
analyzer by inserting a quarter wave plate in front of the
polarizing beam splitter cube. The imbalance of atomic
origin is still deﬁned as Dat = Damp−
Dref . The tiny con-
tribution to Dat which is odd under the reversals of ξex,
ˆk. An
~E and ~B provides us with the PV observable, ~P pv
important step is to normalize it by another imbalance
of well known atomic origin serving as a calibration. For
this purpose, we can use the imbalances occuring when
one or the other of the two counterpropagating excita-
tion beams is blocked. They provide us with the observ-
able ~P (1)
1 /M1
from the ratio of the E-odd atomic imbalance measured
with both excitation beams present, Dat(ˆkex,
ˆkex), to
the diﬀerence of the E-odd imbalances obtained with a
single excitation beam present, Dat(ˆkex)
ˆkex). It
is interesting to note that this normalization procedure
has the advantage of eliminating the magnitude of the
electric ﬁeld. However, because of the asymmetry ampli-
ﬁcation process, for precise measurements it is important
to measure all the imbalances to be compared at equal
optical densities. One simple way to fulﬁll this condi-
tion for measurements made alternatively with a single
beam or two beams, might consist in increasing the ap-
plied potential for a single beam so as to double E2
⊥, the
extracted quantity then being √2 (Im Epv

ˆk. Thereby we can extract directly Im Epv

Dat(

−

−

−

·

1 /M1).

It can be recalled that a PV asymmetry of the same
origin has already been observed in our group, though in
very diﬀerent experimental conditions, using polarized
ﬂuorescence detection [12]. This earlier work provides
valuable information: our detailed analysis of the main
systematic eﬀects [26], transposed to the present situa-
tion, allows us to evaluate the risks of systematic eﬀects
in this new detection scheme. As conﬁrmed by other
transverse ﬁeld PV experiments, the most troublesome
source of systematics arises from interference between
the Stark-induced electric-dipole and the magnetic-dipole
amplitudes. Thanks to the use of two counterpropagat-
ing beams, there are two criteria to discriminate the Epv
1
against the M1 contribution, based on their diﬀerent be-
haviour under ξex and ˆkex reversals. However this is not
enough to guarantee the absence of systematic eﬀects at
the level needed for reaching a high accuracy. Indeed, if
the cell input window has a birefringence α(1)
ex with its
axes at 45◦ to ~E⊥, then the 6S
7S excitation rate is af-
fected by a ξex-dependent contribution, the vapor acting
like a linear analyzer oriented along the direction of ˆE⊥,
α(1)
2 = ( 1
which detects
ex ξex ). To ﬁrst ap-
proximation this contribution is the same for the 7S pop-
ulation and the 7S polarization signals, respectively pro-
portional to
and Dat, so that it cancels in their ratio.
However, as soon as the contributions to the transition

ˆE⊥ ·
|

ˆǫex|

2 −

A

−

rate proportional to αβ and β2 are taken into account this
compensation is no longer exact and in the ratio Dat/
,
A
the birefringence problem is not eliminated, but reduced
at the level of 2α(1)
10−2).
With 2α(1)
ex = 10−3 rad, the systematic eﬀect would be
P (1), or 60% of the PV signal itself. Clearly
10−5
3
other means of discrimination are necessary.

ex κ (where κ =

2
4α + 5β
6α2

≃

−

×

×

×

3

β

C. Recovering the axial symmetry

A further eﬃcient way to suppress this source of sys-
tematics would be to exchange the direction of the fast
and slow axes of birefringence with respect to the direc-
tion of ~E⊥. Since this looks unfeasible with a cesium
vapor cell, we have considered instead the possibility of
rotating the ﬁeld by 90◦, which is of course equivalent.
We propose a new design of the electrodes (Fig. 3) such
that by simply switching voltages and currents the mea-
surement can be repeated with both ~Et and ~B ﬁelds ro-
tated by 90◦. This is equivalent to switching the sign of
α(1)
ex , so that the ξex-dependent contribution to P (1) due
to α(1)
ex also changes sign. Owing to this additional re-
versal we expect to improve the discrimination between
P pv and P (1) by more than two orders of magnitude. As
shown in Fig. 3, it is even possible to perform rotations of
~E⊥ by successive increments of 45◦. First, this provides
a sensitivity to the birefringence α(3)
ex having its axes par-
allel and orthogonal to ~E⊥ via the observation of the ξex
once ~Et is rotated by 45◦. Second, since
dependence of
α(3)
ex can combine with a small misalignment of ~E⊥ and
~B to generate a systematic eﬀect, the possibility of alter-
nating measurements in two orthogonal directions of ~E⊥
are here again very helpful.

A

-V1

-V0

0

V1

V0

0

-V1

V1

FIG. 3. Electrode arrangement inside a cylindrical cell al-
lowing one to rotate the transverse electric ﬁeld by increments
◦
of 45
. We have shown by numerical simulation that, by ad-
justing the potential ratio V1/V0, we could make the ﬁeld
very homogeneous close to the axis. The side arm is to be
connected to the Cs reservoir (not shown).

4

The cell should be made from an insulating material,
for instance high purity alumina to which sapphire win-
In our preliminary measure-
dows can be glued [27].
ments, following ideas similar to those exploited for real-
izing the longitudinal ﬁeld conﬁguration [28], we used an
alumina cell with external electrodes. The design of Fig.3
with internal electrodes would provide the possibility to
eliminate the electric charges induced by photoionization
of the sapphire windows under the impact of the intense
excitation pulse [22]. However, it should be noted that,
as conﬁrmed by observation, the transverse ﬁeld conﬁgu-
ration favours a reduction of space charge eﬀects. Indeed,
due to its direction the ﬁeld tends to drag all the free elec-
trons out of the interaction region. In addition if the cell
length is increased, for a given excitation energy the rel-
ative importance of the space charge eﬀects located close
to the windows will be reduced.

At a ﬁrst glance, the transverse ﬁeld pump-probe ex-
periment appears to lack cylindrical symmetry, one of
the main advantages inherent to the longitudinal E-ﬁeld
geometry. In actual fact, we can recover this symmetry
by using the electrode conﬁguration proposed in Fig.3
which makes it possible to alternate measurements with
directions of the transverse E-ﬁeld rotated by angular
increments of 45◦ and directions of ~B simultaneously ro-
tated by adjusting the currents in two pairs of coils. We
mention that signals of atomic origin permit to test the
defect of parallelism between ~E and ~B in each conﬁgura-
tion [29].

III. EXPECTED GAIN OF SENSITIVITY WITH
~E TRANSVERSE

A. Estimated gain

Now we have deﬁned the operating conditions neces-
sary for obtaining dark-ﬁeld detection of a calibrated PV
asymmetry having a very speciﬁc signature in the trans-
verse ﬁeld conﬁguration, we can discuss at last the cru-
cial objective at stake: how to increase the experimental
sensitivity by making use of the asymmetry ampliﬁca-
tion given by a longer interaction length. To estimate
the SNR ratio for the polarimeter operating as a circu-
lar polarization analyzer we use the simpliﬁed model al-
ready employed to discuss asymmetry ampliﬁcation in
the ~Ek conﬁguration [16]. It provides clear analytical re-
sults for dALR/dθ and although we used it somewhat be-
yond its range of validity (rather large saturation levels,
short probe pulse durations), we have found that its pre-
dictions reproduce our observations well, not only their
general trend but even semi-quantitatively [18].
(Note
that numerical methods to arrive at quantitative predic-
tions in speciﬁc conditions, if need be, have also been
given in [16], but they lead to less transparent results).

Transposing to the transverse ﬁeld experiment the rea-
soning leading to Eq. 1, we derive the expression of the
Noise Equivalent Polarization, N EQP , at the limit of
quantum noise:

(N EQP )−1 = √nin exp (

(E⊥)/2)

dALR/dP.

(4)

−

×

exp (

2 (exp (

Dat = 1

A
Since P pv is in the range of 10−6, the left-right asym-
ζP )
ζP )) can
metry ALR ≡
−A
A
ζP , which exhibits the
be written simply as ALR ≃ A
sensitivity of ALR to measuring the 7S orientation. ζ
is an angular coeﬃcient depending on the probe transi-
6P3/2,F =5
tion, 6/5 in the favorable case of the 7SF =4 →
transition.
Writing explicitly the dependence of

(E⊥) on the
A
(E⊥) = kα2E2
⊥L⊥, such as
adjustable parameters,
the ﬁeld magnitude and the cell length, we obtain the
SNR/pulse in a transverse ﬁeld experiment:

A

SN R( ~E⊥) =

P pv
|

(N EQP )−1 ,

| ×
= kImEpv
1 αE⊥L⊥ exp (

k
2

α2E2

⊥L⊥)

√nin , (5)

×

to be compared to the SNR/pulse in a longitudinal ﬁeld
case (where

kβ2E2

(Ek)

k Lk, [30]):

SN R( ~Ek) =

≃
(N EQA)−1 ,

A
θpv
|

| ×
= kImEpv

1 βEkLk exp (

β2E2

kLk)

√nin . (6)

×

k
2

The role of the interaction length is made clear from both
Eqs. 5 and 6. Presently Lk = 8 cm, let us suppose that
we can operate with L⊥ = 40 cm and E⊥ = β
α Ek, we can
then reasonably expect:

SN R(E⊥) =

exp

40
8

A

(E⊥)
2

(cid:18)

−

A

(Ek)
2 (cid:19) ×

SN R(Ek).

(7)

A

A

≃
5

(Ek)

(E⊥)

0.4 and

2.0, Eq.7 predicts a
With
≃
exp 0.8 = 10 which,
sensitivity gain by a factor of
if real, would literally transform the experimental situa-
tion. One might wonder about using still larger values
of
(E⊥) by making L longer or E⊥ larger? In fact, at
higher optical density, a new physical process comes into
play, namely superradiance.

A

≃

×

B. Towards larger optical densities: spontaneous
versus triggerred superradiance

At high optical densities

, the excited vapor can su-
A
perradiate spontaneously within some time delay, which
is increased. This process has been
becomes shorter as
the subject to both theoretical and experimental investi-
gations in the past [31–33], and more recently for condi-
tions corresponding to those encountered here [34].

A

5

The present situation is particularly well suited for
studying superradiance: by smoothly increasing the op-
tical density, for instance with a knob driving the E-ﬁeld
magnitude, it is possible to study the atomic emission as
it gradually goes through three diﬀerent regimes: i) lin-
ear ampliﬁcation of a resonant saturating probe pulse, ii)
triggered superradiance, when superradiance emission is
triggered by the injection of a weak resonant probe pulse
and iii) spontaneous superradiance occuring without any
probe beam, within a delay τD . In a ﬁrst approxima-
tion, the delay of the onset of spontaneous superradiance
is inversely proportional to the number of excited atoms
in the interaction region N and hence to

:
A

(8)

τD =

8π
3

log N .

a2
N λ2Γ
Here a is the diameter of the excitation beam, λ the wave-
length of the probe transition and Γ is the spontaneous
emission rate for the most probable hyperﬁne compo-
nent. Because of the near-absence of Doppler dephasing
between the dipoles, due to the narrow spectral width
of the excitation laser, the threshold is nearly as low as
Eq.8 predicts which is not the case in many other practi-
cal circumstances. However, we must bear in mind that
the measurements reported in [34] were performed with-
out any applied magnetic ﬁeld. We expect such a ﬁeld to
cause dephasing and hence delay the superradiant emis-
sion. Consequently, the values of τD recorded versus the
number of excited atoms, presented in [34] only serve as
a lower limit to estimate the delay as a function of
in
the conditions of this proposal.

A

FIG. 4. Example of a triggered superradiant pulse. Dashed
curve:
the probe pulse (unampliﬁed) in the absence of ex-
cited atoms. Dotted curve: due to the presence of excited
atoms the probe pulse is ampliﬁed. The experimental conditions
(nCs = 1.8 × 1014 at/cm3, E⊥ = 400 V/cm, L⊥ =25 mm) are such
that the optical density is large. Note that a non-zero intensity is
observable even before the probe gate is opened. This is due to
the photon leakage (a few 10−3) through the “closed” probe gate,
which prepares the build-up of the coherence of the atomic dipoles.
When the probe gate is opened (80 µW, 20 ns), full triggering of
the superradiance occurs without any delay [34].

Actually, for PV measurements τD should not be too

6

A

short (hence
should not be too large) for two major
reasons. First, to observe ~P pv, this vector must undergo
a Larmor precession and τD must be long enough for the
precession to have time to occur. Second, the random
character of spontaneous superradiance deprives the de-
tection of the stability required to make high precision
measurements. Reliable measurements are possible only
if the probe pulse can be applied before any superradi-
ance spontaneously occurs.

By contrast, the triggered superradiance regime oﬀers
very attractive possibilities: a very weak radiation ﬁeld
is enough to suppress ﬂuctuations in direction, frequency
and polarization of the spontaneous emission and to give
rise to complete, sudden emission of the whole 7S atom
population leading to a very large ampliﬁcation of the
probe pulse (see Fig.4). It is still more important to notice
that this is accompanied by an ampliﬁcation of the left-
right asymmetry resulting from the angular anisotropy
(orientation) of the radiating atomic medium [34]. For
instance, in a situation close to that of Fig.4 we have
observed an asymmetry ampliﬁcation by a factor of 4.
As underlined by Eq.5, such an increase in sensitivity of
dALR/dP would be of invaluable help.

After examination of our data giving τD versus

, we
arrive at the conclusion that the gain of sensitivity by a
factor of 10 predicted from Eq.7 with
(E⊥) = 2.0, looks
realistic, so that the future of high precision APV experi-
ments based on ampliﬁcation by stimulated emission ap-
pear very promising. Using this technique measurements
at the precision level of 0.1% look feasible.

A

A

IV. AN ALTERNATIVE EXPERIMENTAL
APPROACH

ImEpv

Finally, we would like to mention that the experimen-
tal conﬁguration depicted in this paper presents an in-
teresting alternative. It can be veriﬁed that with an ex-
citation beam linearly polarized, and with two transverse
electric and magnetic ﬁelds, which are orthogonal, then
the excited atoms acquire an orientation in the direc-
tion ~E
~B, hence along the direction of the excitation
∧
beam. For ∆F = 0 lines, this new observable can be
written as ~P pv(B)
~B. Contrary to the
situation of section II, where we considered an orienta-
tion ~P pv present in absence of B, but requiring the B-
ﬁeld to be detectable by the probe, here we have a new
orientation component directly created in the observa-
tion direction, but which cancels out when B = 0. To
observe it one requires partial resolution of the Zeeman
structure of the 6S
7S transition which is not diﬃ-
cult in view of the Doppler width reduction obtained in
the pump-probe conﬁguration (in a zero magnetic ﬁeld
the linewidth, partly due to the ﬁnite excitation dura-
tion, is about 80 MHz). This has several advantages: the

1 α ~E

−

∝

∧

PV signal can be observed via dark-ﬁeld detection, us-
ing the diﬀerential two-channel polarimeter, without any
pump-probe delay; thus the risk of spontaneous superra-
diance is pushed towards higher optical densities. On
the ∆F = 0 transitions, with linear polarization ˆǫex cho-
sen parallel to ~E, there is no contribution arising from
the M1 amplitude. However to calibrate the P pv(B)
signal, a good solution might consist in switching the
excitation polarization from linear to circular. With a
single excitation beam, the lifting of degeneracy gives
rise to a longitudinal polarization of the excited state
~B due to the Stark-M1 inter-
~P (1)(B)
ference, which is detectable in the same conditions as
~P pv(B). The advantage is that, as in the ﬁrst approach,
this calibration gives access directly to ImEpv
1 /M1 inde-
pendently of the E-ﬁeld magnitude and independently of
the line shape. Note that, experimentally, there can be no
confusion with the transverse orientations ~P (1) and ~P pv
discussed in sect. II, Eq.3, since their Larmor precession
is blocked by the ~B-ﬁeld now parallel to the direction
along which they are created.

αEM1ξex ~E

∝

∧

Moreover, let us point out that all that has been said
in the preceding discussion about the risks of system-
atic eﬀects connected with window birefringence and the
ways to eliminate them, can be transposed to this conﬁg-
uration. In particular a rotation of the transverse ﬁelds
around the common beam direction is well adapted to
overcoming the window birefringence.

Due to its physical origin linked to partial resolution of
the Zeeman structure, this orientation signal exhibits a
line shape which is an odd function of the frequency de-
tuning of the excitation beam with respect to the probe
beam frequency, and passes through zero close to reso-
nance. The same result also holds if the signal observed is
the circular dichroism of the probe. In these conditions,
one might prefer to observe the optical rotation signal
which is an even function of the frequency detuning [35].

V. CONNECTIONS WITH PREVIOUS WORK

In this section we would like to point out that the study
of E-ﬁeld assisted forbidden transitions and the search for
atomic parity violation based on probe-beam detection,
has opened up a wide class of magnetoelectric optical ef-
fects. Up to now, several groups have been interested
in the circular or linear dichroism which aﬀect the beam
exciting a forbidden transition due to the contribution to
the transition rate of an interference between the Stark-
induced electric dipole amplitude and either the Epv
1 or
the M1 amplitudes. However, the forbidden transition is
so weak that the dichroism is not directly detectable on
the transmitted excitation beam itself. In fact, the pop-
ulation of the excited state has been the quantity mon-
itored using ﬂuorescence detection. Thus, the circular

7

·

·

∧

∝

∝

~E

( ~E

ξexˆk

ˆǫex ∧

ˆk)(ˆǫex ·

~B observed in the APV Cs experi-
dichroism
ment at Boulder [7] was detected by looking for a change
of the ﬂuorescence rate correlated with that of ξex. The
~B) characteristic of a
linear dichroism
Stark-M1 interference in the transition rate of a similar
highly forbidden Yb transition has also been detected at
Berkeley [36] via a change of the ﬂuorescence rate cor-
related with the direction of the linear polarization of
the excitation beam with respect to the ﬁelds. The sit-
uation is diﬀerent in pump-probe experiments, i.e. our
recent APV experiment and those suggested here. The
excited state presents some kind of angular anisotropy
(alignment [16,22] or orientation, see sect.
II and IV)
and the magnetoelectric eﬀect is revealed under the form
of a linear or circular dichroism on the forward scattered
probe beam. Probe-beam monitoring is well known in the
context of optical pumping [37], but here in the context
of highly forbidden transitions it is new to detect the
rotational invariants which characterize the Stark inter-
ference terms appearing in the forbidden transition prob-
abilities under the form of magnetoelectric optical eﬀects
on the probe beam. The advantage is the ampliﬁcation of
these eﬀects occuring while the probe beam propagates
through the excited medium with special enhancement
when collective eﬀects take place.

VI. CONCLUSION

We have described a new strategy for performing APV
measurements in a pump-probe experiment, using detec-
tion by stimulated emission following excitation in trans-
verse electric and magnetic ﬁelds. This method takes ad-
vantage of experience gained from our present experiment
using a longitudinal E-ﬁeld, also based on stimulated-
emission detection. We have shown that one can cir-
cumvent the apparent breaking of rotational symmetry
about the propagation axis by rotating the direction of
the applied E ﬁeld.

By using a transverse E ﬁeld, one could increase both
interaction length and ﬁeld strength without the risk of
discharge in a Cs vapour.
In this way, optical densi-
ties larger than those accessible in the longitudinal ﬁeld
geometry, can provide stronger beneﬁt from the mecha-
nism of asymmetry ampliﬁcation during propagation of
the probe beam in the excited medium.
In the limit
of quantum noise, one can expect to gain in sensitiv-
ity by a factor of 10. Even more favorable conditions
can be achieved: by choosing the pump-probe delay to
trigger superradiance of the anisotropic excited medium,
the left-right asymmetry can be greatly ampliﬁed. With
these intriguing possiblities, one could look forward to
APV measurements at the 0.1% level.

(0 to 15%) and with temperature stabilization stable op-
erating conditions can be achieved.

[24] E. Jahier et al., Appl. Phys. B 71 , 561 (2000).
[25] E. Jahier et al., J. Phys. IV France 12 (2002) Pr5-159;

E. Jahier, Th`ese de l’Universit´e Paris VI, 2001, (http:
//theses-en-ligne.in2p3.fr/view-thes-phys-atom fr.html)
[26] M. A. Bouchiat, J. Gu´ena and L. Pottier, J. Phys.

(France) 46, 1897 (1985) and 47, 1175 (1986).

[27] D. G. Sarkisyan, A. V. Melkonyan, Instr. and Exp. Techn.

32, 485 (1989).

[28] E. Jahier al., Eur. Phys. J. D, 13, 221 (2001).
[29] For the misalignment of ~E and ~B the measurement prin-
ciple is based on the detection of the orientation induced
by interference between the M1 and the scalar Stark am-
plitudes with a single excitation beam and a linear exci-
∗
ex ∧ ˆk)} oriented at
tation polarization ∝ Re{( ˆE · ˆǫex)(ˆǫ
◦
of ~B. After precession in the ~B ﬁeld, it gives rise to a
45
longitudinal orientation, that, choosing coordinate axes x
∗
y}δEyBxˆk. It
and z along ~B and ˆk, we can write as Re{ǫxǫ
is odd under the insertion of a λ/2 plate which reverses
the sign of Re{ǫxǫ∗
y}. Thus, it can easily be compared
with the component |ǫex|2ExBxˆk which is even under
this reversal. The ratio between both signals yields di-
rectly < δEy > /Ex, i.e. the misalignment defect.
[30] The transverse and longitudinal ﬁeld experiments that
we consider here diﬀer not only by the ﬁeld direction,
but also by the polarization of the excitation beam, cir-
cular versus linear and the hyperﬁne transitions involved,
6SF =4 → 7SF =4 → 6P3/2,F =5 versus 6SF =3 → 7SF =4 →
6P3/2,F =4. But it turns out that the overall change in the
k coeﬃcient is small and can be neglected.

[31] R. H. Dicke, Phys. Rev. 43, 99 (1954).
[32] L. Mandel and E. Wolf in Optical Coherence and Quan-
tum Optics, (Cambridge Univ. Press, 1995) ch.16.
[33] M. Gross and S. Haroche, Phys. Report 93, 302 (1982).
[34] M. A. Bouchiat, J. Gu´ena, Ph. Jacquier, M. Lintz and L.
Pottier, J. Phys. II France, 2, 727 (1992); Ph. Jacquier,
Th`ese d’´Etat, Universit´e de Paris VI (1991).

[35] Hyperﬁne mixing of the wave functions also contributes
to this eﬀect but to a smaller extent, leading to a distor-
tion of the line near the centre (circular dichroism) or in
the wings (optical rotation).

[36] J.E. Stalnaker, et al., Phys. Rev. A, 66, 031403(R)
52002); D. Budker and J. E. Stalnaker, Phys. Rev.
Lett.91, 263901 (2003).

[37] D. Budker, W. Gawlik, D.F. Kimball, S.M. Rochester,
V.V. Yashchuk, A. Weis, Rev. Mod. Phys. 74, 1153
(2002).

REFERENCES AND NOTES

∗ e-mail: Marie-Anne.Bouchiat@lkb.ens.fr
aLaboratoire Kastler Brossel is a Unit´e de Recherche de
l’Ecole Normale Sup´erieure et de l’Universit´e Pierre et Marie
Curie, associ´ee au CNRS (UMR 8552).

bF´ed´eration de Recherche du D´epartement de Physique de

l’Ecole Normale Sup´erieure associ´ee au CNRS (FR684)

[1] M. A. Bouchiat and C. Bouchiat, J. Phys. France, 35,
899 (1974) and Rep. Prog. Phys. 60, 1351 (1997), for a
complete list of references.

[2] Particle Data Book 2002 (URL: http://pdg.lbl.gov/) 10.
Electroweak Model and Constraints on New Physics
[3] V. A. Dzuba, V. V. Flambaum and J. S. M. Ginges 66,

076013 (2002).

[4] V. A. Dzuba, V. V. Flambaum and O. P. Sushkov, Phys.
Lett. A 141, 147 (1989); S. A. Blundell, J. Sapirstein and
W. R. Johnson, Phys. Rev. D 45, 1602 (1992).
[5] A. Derevianko, Phys. Rev. Lett. 85, 1618 (2000).
[6] A.I. Milstein and O.P. Sushkov, e-print hep-ph/0109257.
[7] C. S. Wood et al., Science, 275, 1759 (1997).
[8] S. C. Bennett and C. E. Wieman, Phys. Rev. Lett. 82,

2484 (1999).

[9] M. A. Bouchiat and J. Gu´ena, J. Phys. France 49, 2037
(1988); C. Bouchiat and C. A. Piketty, J. Phys. France
49, 1851 (1988).

[10] W. R. Johnson, M. S. Safronova and U. I. Safronova,

Phys. Rev. A 67, 062106 (2003);

[11] C. Bouchiat and C.A. Piketty, Z. Phys. C 49, 91 (1991).
[12] M. A. Bouchiat, J. Gu´ena, L. Hunter and L. Pottier,
Phys. Lett. B 117, 358 (1982); Phys. Lett. B 134, 463
(1984); J. Phys. (France) 47, 1709 (1986).

[13] R. Conti, P. Bucksbaum, S. Chu, E.D. Commins and L.R.

Hunter, Phys. Rev. Lett. 42, 343 (1979).

[14] M. A. Bouchiat, Ph. Jacquier, M. Lintz, L. Pottier, Opt.

Commun. 56, 100 (1985).

[15] J. Gu´ena et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 90, 143001 (2003).
[16] M. A. Bouchiat and C. Bouchiat, Z. Phys. D 36, 105

(1996).

[17] By triggering several times the probe beam after each
excitation pulse, the photon shot noise on the reference
measurements can be made negligible and will be ignored.

[18] D. Chauvat et al., Eur. Phys. J. D 1, 169 (1998).
[19] This, of course, does not hold any longer when the ex-
cited medium approaches the conditions of spontaneous
superradiance, a situation where spontaneous emission
causes additional noise, as discussed in sect. III C.
[20] J. Gu´ena et al., Quantum Semiclass. Opt. 10, 733 (1998).
[21] J. Gu´ena et al., J. Opt. Soc. Am. B 14, 271 (1997) and

Opt. Commmun. 119, 403 (1995).

[22] M. A. Bouchiat, J. Gu´ena and M. Lintz, Eur. Phys. J.

D, 28, 331 (2004); e-print arXiv:physics/0311101

[23] For matching the two beam intensities, a simple proce-
dure might rely on a highly parallel glass plate usable as
a temperature-tunable Fabry-Perot [24], close to normal
incidence on the path of a single beam. The range over
which the transmission variation can be adjusted is wide

8

