4
0
0
2
 
b
e
F
 
9
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
m
o
t
a
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
6
0
0
3
0
4
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Experimental study of nonlinear focusing in a magneto-optical trap using a Z-scan
technique

Yingxue Wang∗ and M. Saﬀman
Department of Physics, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, Wisconsin, 53706
(Dated: December 15, 2013)

We present an experimental study of Z-scan measurements of the nonlinear response of cold Cs
atoms in a magneto-optical trap. Numerical simulations of the Z-scan signal accounting for the
nonuniform atomic density agree with experimental results at large probe beam detunings. At
small probe detunings a spatially varying radiation force modiﬁes the Z-scan signal. We also show
that the measured scan is sensitive to the atomic polarization distribution.

PACS numbers: 42.65.Jx,32.80.Pj

I.

INTRODUCTION

Clouds of cold atomic vapors produced by laser cool-
ing and trapping techniques provide strongly nonlinear
eﬀects when probed with near resonant light beams.
Soon after the ﬁrst demonstration of a magneto optical
trap(MOT)[1] it was recognized that the cold and dense
clouds were useful for studies of nonlinear spectroscopy[2,
3], generation of non-classical light[4] and other nonlinear
eﬀects[5, 6]. In this work we study nonlinear focusing of
a near resonant probe beam taking into account the spa-
tial dependence of the atomic density and the eﬀect of the
probe induced radiative forces on the MOT distribution.

From the perspective of nonlinear optics a cold vapor
in a MOT is an interesting alternative to the nonlinear-
ity of a hot vapor in a cell. A typical MOT provides a
peak density of order 109 − 1011 cm−3, and an interac-
tion length of a few mm. On the other hand a heated
vapor cell can easily have atomic densities of 1014 cm−3
and interaction lengths of 10 cm, or more, so that much
stronger nonlinearities can be achieved in a vapor cell
than in a MOT. Nonetheless there are a number of rea-
sons for looking more closely at the optical nonlinearity
provided by a cold vapor. To begin with the relative
strength of the MOT nonlinearity compared with a hot
cell is larger than the above estimates would indicate be-
cause of Doppler broadening eﬀects. In the presence of
the large inhomogeneous Doppler width in a hot cell it is
typical to detune the probe beam by a GHz or more to
avoid strong absorption. Conversely the Doppler limited
linewidth of cold atoms in a MOT is of order the homoge-
neous linewidth or less so that much smaller detunings of
order tens of MHz can be used. The full saturated non-
linearity can therefore be achieved with a much weaker
probe beam in a MOT than in a vapor cell. Addition-
ally, the large detunings used in vapor cells imply that
detailed modeling of nonlinear eﬀects in Alkali vapors
must account for the plethora of hyperﬁne and Zeeman
levels. Such modeling, as has been done by several groups

∗Electronic address: yingxuewang@wisc.edu

[7, 8], involves numerical integration of hundreds of cou-
pled equations for the density matrix elements. Only in
special cases, using e.g. a buﬀer gas to create large pres-
sure broadening, can a simpliﬁed two-level type model
provide an accurate description of nonlinear propagation
eﬀects[9]. Working in a MOT with a small probe beam
detuning the probe interacts strongly with only a single
atomic transition so that the main eﬀects of nonlinear
propagation can be achieved using a compact two-level
atomic model. As we show below this is only partially
true since radiative forces and population distribution
among Zeeman sublevels lead to observable features in
the measured probe transmission.

In addition a cold atomic vapor potentially provides
a qualitatively diﬀerent nonlinearity than a hot vapor
does because the mechanical eﬀects of light can result
in strong modiﬁcation of the atomic density distribu-
tion, which in turn feeds back on the nonlinearity seen
by the optical beam. Indeed some experiments already
observed reshaping of the MOT cloud due to radiation
trapping eﬀects[5, 10, 11]. While such density redis-
tribution eﬀects in both position and momentum space
may also occur in hot vapors, as in the collective atomic
recoil laser[12, 13, 14], and radiation pressure induced
dispersion[15], such eﬀects are potentially much more
pronounced in cold vapors where momentum transfer
from the light beams is signiﬁcant. In particular we ex-
pect that complex spatial structures can be formed due
to coupled instabilities of the light and density distri-
butions in a fashion analogous to the eﬀects that have
been predicted for light interacting with coherent mat-
ter waves[16, 17]. Some recent related work has shown
evidence of nonlinear focusing in a MOT[18], and possi-
bly structure formation in experiments that include the
eﬀects of cavity feedback[19]. In Sec. IV we discuss the
relevance of the present measurements in the context of
observation of coupled light and matter instabilities.

Our primary interest in the present work is a detailed
study of nonlinear focusing and defocusing of a tightly fo-
cused probe beam that propagates through a MOT. The
Z-scan technique was originally developed[20] for charac-
terization of thin samples of nonlinear materials. Since
the MOT cloud is localized to a region of a few mm in

thickness we can easily apply this technique for character-
ization of the MOT nonlinearity. The theoretical frame-
work based on a two-level model is described in Sec. II.
Z-scan measurements were taken with a Cs MOT using
the procedures discussed in Sec. III. The experimental
and theoretical results are compared in Sec. IV where we
also compare additional measurements and calculations
of reshaping of the transverse proﬁle of the probe beam
after propagation through the MOT.

II. NUMERICAL MODEL

In Z-scan measurements, the transverse proﬁle of a
laser beam passing through a nonlinear sample is investi-
gated. In the presence of self-focusing or self-defocusing
the transmittance through a small aperture placed after
the medium exhibits a S-shaped dependence on the po-
sition of the beam waist with respect to the nonlinear
sample. Following the original demonstration of the Z-
scan technique[20, 21] there have been a large number of
theoretical studies of the Z-scan method that take into
account diﬀerent types of nonlinear response and con-
sider diﬀerent characteristic ratios between the Rayleigh
length of the probe beam and the thickness of the non-
linear sample[21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26]. The interaction of
a probe beam with a cloud of cold two-level atoms is de-
scribed by a saturable mixed absorptive and dispersive
nonlinearity with a susceptibility of the form[27]

χ(r) = na(r)W0

3λ3
4π2

2∆/γ − i
1 + 4∆2/γ2 + I/Is

.

(1)

Here na(r) is the density of atoms at position r, W0 is
the population diﬀerence in thermal equilibrium, γ is the
homogeneous linewidth, ∆ = ω − ωa is the diﬀerence be-
tween the probe frequency ω = 2πc/λ and the atomic
transition frequency ωa, λ is the wavelength of the laser
beam in vacuum, Is is the on resonance saturation inten-
sity, and I is the optical intensity.

None of the existing theoretical treatments can be di-
rectly used for our situation. Although the work of
Bian, et al.[23] studied the Z-scan behavior for a sat-
urable nonlinearity, it was restricted to no absorption
and weak saturation. In work to be published elsewhere
we derive analytical expressions for the Z-scan curve for
(1). How-
a susceptibility of the type given in Eq.
ever, we ﬁnd that in order to obtain good agreement
with experimental measurements it is necessary to take
account of the spatial variation of the density in the
MOT cloud. We have therefore relied on direct numer-
ical simulations to compare with experimental results.
To do so we assume a scalar probe beam of the form
E = [A(r)/2]eı(kz−ωt) + [A∗(r)/2]e−ı(kz−ωt) and invoke
the paraxial and slowly varying envelope approximations
to arrive at the wave equation

∂A(r)
∂z

−

i
2k

k
2

∇2

⊥A(r) = i

χ(r)A(r)

(2)

2

FIG. 1: (color on-line) Z-scan experimental setup (a) and
timing sequence (b). D and Dref are signal and reference de-
tectors respectively and Df l is the ﬂuorescence detector used
to monitor the number of cold atoms.

where ∇2
coordinates and k = 2π/λ.

⊥ = ∂2/∂x2 + ∂2/∂y2 with x, y the transverse

Equation (2) was solved numerically on a 128 × 128 or
256 × 256 point transverse grid using a split-step spectral
code. Propagation from the atomic cloud to the pinhole
plane was calculated by solving (2) with the right hand
side equal to zero. As the experimental free propaga-
tion distance of 15 cm resulted in the beam spilling over
the edges of the computational window, calculations were
done with a distance of 3 cm, and a pinhole diameter of
1/5 the actual size. The numerical solutions obtained
in this way describe the interaction of the probe beam
with an unperturbed MOT. Since there is no integration
over the Doppler proﬁle of the atoms we are implicitly
assuming they are at rest. In reality the atoms are accel-
erated due to the absorption of photons from the beam,
so the laser frequency seen by the atoms is shifted to
the red. A model including this Doppler eﬀect should be
used when the probe beam interacts with the cloud for a
time corresponding to many absorption/emission cycles.
We discuss the implications of the radiative force for the
Z-scan curves in Sec. IV.

III. EXPERIMENTAL SETUP

The experimental setup is shown in Fig. 1(a). A stan-
dard MOT was loaded directly from a background Cs va-
por. The trapping and repumping beams were obtained
from two external cavity diode laser systems. The trap-

ping beams were detuned from the F = 4 → F ′ = 5 cy-
cling transition by ∆ ∼ −2γ, where γ/(2π) = 5.2 MHz.
The Gaussian diameter of each trapping beam was 2.5
cm with a peak intensity of 2.4 mW/cm2, and the beams
were retroreﬂected after passage through the MOT. The
peak saturation parameter for all six beams was 13.1.
The repumping beam was tuned to the F = 3 → F ′ = 4
transition. The magnetic ﬁeld gradient was 9 G/cm along
the vertical y direction while the probe beam propagated
horizontally along z. Time of ﬂight measurements gave a
typical MOT temperature of 60 µK.

In order to model the Z-scan data accurately some care
was taken to characterize in detail the spatial distribu-
tion of trapped atoms. Fluorescence measurements of
the MOT cloud taken with a camera placed on the x
axis revealed a ﬂattened density proﬁle indicative of ra-
diation trapping eﬀects[5, 10, 28]. This type of proﬁle
has previously been modeled with a Fermi-Dirac type
distribution[29]. We chose to use an expansion with more
ﬁtting parameters of the form

na(y, z) = na0

2
− 2z
2
w

4
− 2z
4
w

az e

z + bz e

z + cz e

6
− 2z
6
w
z

az + bz + cz
4
− 2y
4
w

2
− 2y
2
w

ay e

y + by e

y + cy e

6
− 2y
6
w
y

×

ay + by + cy

(3)

where na0 is the peak density, wz, wy are the Gaussian
radii along z and y and the a, b, c are ﬁt parameters along
the two axes. The trapped Cs atoms formed an ellipsoidal
cloud, which was modeled as a density distribution Eq.
(3) with typical Gaussian diameters of 2wz = 7.3 mm
and 2wy = 6.0 mm as shown in Fig. 2. The ﬁt residuals,
as seen in the lower plots in Fig. 2, were small in the
center of the MOT and reached 20% at the very edges of
the cloud. Since the axis of the B ﬁeld coils was along y
we assumed that the x and z density proﬁles were equal.
As the size of the probe beam was small compared to the
width of the cloud we approximated na(r) by na(z) given
by the ﬁrst line of Eq. (3) in our numerical simulations.
The total number of trapped atoms was 2.5 × 108 as
measured by an optical pumping method [30, 31]. This
number was also measured and monitored from day to
day by recording the ﬂuorescence signal using a lens and
calibrated photodetector [28]. The result from the ﬂu-
orescence signal, taking into account the corrections for
the atomic polarizability distribution discussed in Ref.
[28] was about 2.5 times lower than that from the opti-
cal pumping measurement. The number of cold atoms
measured by the ﬂuorescence method varied by up to
15% from day to day. The peak atomic density deter-
mined from the number measurement using the optical
pumping method, and the size of the cloud using the
data shown in Fig. 2, was typically 5.5 × 1010 cm−3, and
2.2 × 1010 cm−3 using the ﬂuorescence measurement of
the number of atoms. We believe the optical pumping
method to be more accurate since it does not rely on any
assumptions about the polarization of the MOT cloud.

3

(color on line) Intensity proﬁles (dots) of the Cs
FIG. 2:
atomic cloud along z (a) and y (b) directions, with curve
ﬁtting results (solid lines). Frames (c) and (d) show the cor-
responding ﬁtting errors.

The Z-scan probe beam was derived from the trapping
laser and frequency shifted to the desired detuning with
an acousto-optic modulator. The beam was then spa-
tially ﬁltered with an optical ﬁber before focusing into
the MOT with a lens fscan = 400 mm mounted on a
translation stage. The Gaussian radius of the beam at
the focus was w0 = 24.5 µm. A 1.0 mm diameter pin-
hole was placed 15 cm away from the center of the MOT
(outside the vacuum chamber). The transmitted ﬁeld
through the pinhole was measured by photodetector D.
To measure the transmittance of the probe beam, the
trapping beams and the probe beam were turned on se-
quentially, as shown in Fig. 1(b). During the measure-
ment, the trapping beams were turned oﬀ ﬁrst and the
repumping beam was left on to pump the atoms into
the F = 4 state. The transmittance of the pinhole at
diﬀerent times after the probe beam was turned on was
measured as D(t)/Dref .

In the experiment, the lens was scanned instead of the
nonlinear sample as shown in Fig. 1(a). Compared with
traditional Z-scan measurements, there are two points to
consider. First, note that a movement of the lens in the
+z direction is equivalent to a movement of the cloud in
the −z direction. Therefore, Z-scan curves obtained in
this experiment have the opposite conﬁguration to the
traditional ones, e.g. a peak followed by a valley shows
a self-focusing nonlinearity. Second, since the lens was
scanned, the position of the beam waist changed, which
aﬀected the linear (without cold atoms) transmittance.
To take this eﬀect into account, we recorded D(on/oﬀ)
with the MOT on and oﬀ (by turning the magnetic ﬁeld
on and oﬀ) so that the normalized Z-scan curve was given
by D(on)/D(oﬀ) as a function of z.

Before discussing the Z-scan measurements we note
that transmission scans with the pinhole removed can be
used for calibration of the peak atomic density. Figure
3 shows the measured transmittance curve with the pin-
hole removed and the probe beam tuned on resonance
with the transition F = 4 → F ′ = 5. The peak inten-
sity was 1.07 W/cm2 giving a peak saturation parameter
of 975. Measurements were taken for both circular (σ+

and σ−) and linear polarized beams. The measurements
show that the probe beam was strongly absorbed when
the beam waist was far from the center of the atomic
cloud. As the beam waist was moved closer to the cloud
center the intensity of the beam increased and the ab-
sorption saturated, so that the transmittance increased.
The results using right and left hand circular polarization
were very similar to each other, while the curve for the
linear beam is broader than those with circular beams
and its peak transmittance is a little lower. The solid
line is the numerical calculation under the experimental
conditions using a two-level atom model with Is = 1.1
mW/cm2, and the dashed line is the calculation with Is
= 1.6 mW/cm2. Thus the solid line corresponds to a cir-
cularly polarized probe with the assumption of complete
optical pumping of the atoms into the mF = ±4 levels
(Is = 1.1 mW/cm2), while the dashed line corresponds to
linear polarization with the assumption of uniform distri-
bution among the Zeeman sublevels (Is = 1.6 mW/cm2).
The best ﬁt to the data implies a peak atomic density
of na0 = 2.3×1010 cm−3. This is lower than the measure-
ment based on the optical pumping method, and slightly
higher than the measurement using the ﬂuorescence sig-
nal. As can be seen from the ﬁgure, the numerical result
for a circularly polarized beam agrees reasonably with the
data, although the width of the calculated scan is about
15% narrower than the data. The agreement between
calculation and experiment for linear probe polarization
is slightly worse.

IV. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS

A. Z-Scan measurements

Figures 4 and 5 show Z-scans measured for self-
defocusing and self-focusing nonlinearities. Measure-

FIG. 3: (color on-line) Measured on resonance transmission
curve of a Cs cloud at λ = 852 nm 6µs after the probe beam
was turned on with diﬀerent polarizations. The solid line is
the calculated result for a circularly polarized beam and the
dashed line is for a linearly polarized beam. The Gaussian
diameter of the atomic cloud was 2wz = 6.2 mm and az =
0.85, bz = 0.03, cz = 0.07.

4

ments were taken with right hand circular (RHC) and left
hand circular (LHC) probe beam polarizations at each
detuning. In all the experiments, the peak intensity of
the probe beam was 1.07 W/cm2. The solid lines show
the numerically calculated curves which assumed com-
plete optical pumping of the atoms into the mF = ±4 lev-
els as in the transmission measurements described above.
Concentrating ﬁrst on the self-defocusing case with
RHC polarization shown in Fig. 4 a,c we see that at
short times after turning oﬀ the MOT the shape of the
curves is similar to that calculated numerically, while the
peak density which was used as a ﬁtting parameter was
about half as large as that measured using the methods
described in Sec. III. We believe that the discrepancy
is due to partial atomic polarization as discussed below.
The curves have a pronounced peak when the probe waist
is positioned past the center of the cloud at z ∼ 7 mm and
only a small dip, which almost disappears as the detun-
ing is decreased from −4γ to −3γ. The departure from
the traditional S shaped form that is obtained for a pure
Kerr nonlinearity[20], is due to the nonlinear absorption.
The measurements were taken in a regime of strong sat-
uration at the probe beam waist, s∆ = 26.4 at ∆ = −3γ
and s∆ = 15.0 at ∆ = −4γ where the saturation param-
eter is s∆(r) = I(r)/Is∆ and Is∆ = Is(1 + 4∆2/γ2) is the
saturation intensity at ﬁnite detuning[27]. As we move
to larger detuning the saturation parameter decreases,
so the eﬀects of nonlinear absorption are diminished and
the Z-scan curves tend towards the normal symmetric S
shape.

At long times of t = 2.6 ms the MOT cloud has
partially dispersed and the Z-scan curve is ﬂatter and
broader with an almost complete disappearance of the
valley at negative z. In the intermediate regime of t =
112 µs the peak at z = 7 mm increases by 5-10% com-
pared to the value at t = 16 µs. This increase is consistent
with focusing, and a local increase in density, due to the
radiation force

Fsp(r) = ¯h k γ
2

s(r)
1 + 4(∆ − k · v(r))2/γ2 + s(r)

,

(4)

where s(r) = I(r)/Is and v(r) is the atomic velocity.
As shown in Ref.
[32] a radiation force that decreases
with distance into the MOT due to absorption of the
pushing beam results in focusing of the atoms after a
ﬁnite time. Near the focal plane of the probe beam where
the saturation parameter is large the peak light induced
acceleration is amax = ¯hkγ/(2m), with m the atomic
mass. The time to be pushed a distance δz is thus δt =
p2δz/amax. which for 133Cs evaluates to δt ≃ 130 µs
for δz = 0.5 mm. This is consistent with the observation
of a larger Z-scan signal at a probe interaction time of
t = 112 µs.

Turning now to the self-focusing case with LHC polar-
ization shown in Fig. 5 a,c we see similar results as in the
self-defocusing case at t = 16 µs except that the trans-
mittance peak now appears for z negative as expected.
The valley in the transmittance is also more pronounced

5

FIG. 4: Measured Z-scan of a Cs cloud at λ = 852 nm at diﬀerent time delays with detunings ∆ = −4γ (a,b) and ∆ = −3γ (c,d)
with respect to the F = 4 → F
= 5 transition. The data marked by open circles, triangles and crosses show the transmittance
at t = 16 µs, 112 µs and 2.6 ms after the probe beam was turned on respectively. The MOT parameters used in the calculation
−3(ﬁtting
were 2wz = 7.2 mm, az = 0.32, bz = 0.27, cz = 0.26 (measured from camera images), and na0 = 1.0 × 1010 cm
parameter).

′

FIG. 5: Measured Z-scan of a Cs cloud at diﬀerent time delays with detunings ∆ = +4γ (a,b) and ∆ = +3γ (c,d) with
respect to the F = 4 → F ′ = 5 transition. The data marked by open circles, triangles and crosses show the transmittance at
t = 16 µs, 112 µs and 2.6 ms after the probe beam was turned on respectively. The MOT parameters used in the calculation
−3 (ﬁtting parameter).
2wz = 7.4 mm, az = −0.38, bz = 2.2, cz = −1.1 (measured from camera images), and na0 = 0.9×1010 cm

than for self-defocusing particularly at the larger detun-
ing of ∆ = +4γ. At the intermediate time of t = 112 µs
we see an enhanced peak which again is consistent with
focusing due to the radiation pressure force.

However at the longest time of t = 2.6 ms we see the
overall ﬂattening of the Z-scan curve together with an
unexpected secondary peak in the transmission that ap-
pears for z positive. This secondary peak can be quali-

tatively explained using Eq. (4). The radiation pressure
force accelerates the atoms and Doppler shifts them to
the red. Although the initial detuning is positive for self-
focusing, after some time a fraction of the atoms will
be Doppler shifted to an eﬀective negative detuning and
will act to defocus the light which gives a transmission
peak at positive z. We can estimate the time for this to
occur by noting that the peak time dependent Doppler
shift is kv(t) = kamaxt. A Doppler shift of γ is reached at
tγ = 2m/(¯hk2) which evaluates to tγ = 78 µs for 133Cs.
Thus for ∆ = 3γ and t > tγ we expect to see some
evidence of self-defocusing, which is consistent with the
experimental data in Fig. 5 a,c at t = 2.6 ms. The eﬀect
is smaller when we go to ∆ = +4γ since the scatter-
ing force is weaker and the Doppler shift must be larger
in order to change the sign of the detuning. Note that
no secondary features appear in Fig. 4 where we start
with red detuning since the Doppler shifts only move the
atoms even further out of resonance.

The measurements discussed above were repeated with
opposite helicity of the probe beam as shown in the
right hand columns of Figs. 4 and 5. The strength of
the Z-scan signal was substantially diﬀerent for the two
probe beam helicities. For example for red detuning at
∆ = −4γ the peak to valley Z-scan signal at t = 16 µs
from Fig. 4 a,b was 0.57 for RHC polarization but only
0.39 for LHC polarization. For blue detuning at ∆ = 4γ
the peak to valley Z-scan signal at t = 16 µs from Fig.
5 a,b was 0.57 for LHC polarization but only 0.37 for
RHC polarization. Thus for red detuning the strongest
eﬀect was obtained with RHC polarization which was
the opposite polarization as the copropagating σ+ trap-
ping beams shown in Fig. 1, while for blue detuning
the strongest eﬀect was obtained with LHC polarization
which was the same polarization as the copropagating
σ+ trapping beams shown in Fig. 1. We considered sev-
eral possible reasons for this unexpected dependence on
probe beam helicity. All measurements were taken with
the MOT magnetic ﬁeld still on. However, the Zeeman
shift of the cycling transition at the edge of the MOT
cloud in the x − z plane was less than 3 MHz which is
not large enough to explain any polarization or Zeeman
dependence.

The numerical simulations were done with a two-level
model which implicitly assumes complete pumping of the
atomic population to the lower level of the cycling transi-
tion. Before application of the probe beam the atomic po-
larization will be distributed across Zeeman levels. The
spatial localization provided by a MOT is due to the
fact that σ+ and σ− polarizations interact more strongly
with the atoms on diﬀerent sides of the cloud. This nat-
urally leads to a spatial variation of the atomic polariza-
tion. Indeed a rate equation model[33] predicts a polar-
ization of 20% or more at the edges of a Rb MOT. At
very short times after the probe beam is turned on, or
if the optical pumping due to the probe beam were only
partially successful, we would expect a polarization de-
pendent interaction that depended on the helicity of the

6

probe. However, Figs. 4 and 5 show that the helicity
of the probe that interacts most strongly with the MOT
switches when we change the sign of the detuning.

This eﬀect can be explained qualitatively in the fol-
lowing way. Looking at Fig. 6 we see that the eﬀective
oﬀ-resonance saturation parameter of the probe beam
varies by many orders of magnitude across the atomic
cloud. The volume that determines the nonlinear diﬀrac-
tion of the probe beam can reasonably be taken to extend
out to oﬀ-axis distances of a beam waist where the oﬀ-
resonance saturation parameter is as small as 0.001 at
the edges of the cloud for a centered probe beam. Let
us assume the atomic population before application of
the probe beam is distributed across the Zeeman lev-
els. Then the longest optical pumping time, that for
transferring an atom in mF = −4 to mF = 4, will be,
neglecting the excited state branching ratios, tpump ∼
mF =4
mF =−4 1/|CmF ,mF +1|2 where the
(2/γ)[(1 + s∆)/s∆] P
Clebsch-Gordan coeﬃcients are normalized such that
CmF =4,mF ′ =5 = 1. We ﬁnd tpump ∼ 20 µs at s∆ = 1
and tpump ∼ 1 ms at s∆ = 0.01. The implication of this
estimate is that the probe beam does not completely po-
larize the volume of the MOT that it interacts with, even
at times as long as several hundred µs. At the latest time
shown in Figs. 4 and 5, t = 2.6 ms, the optical pumping
is substantially complete, and there is only a very small
diﬀerence between the data taken with opposite probe
beam helicities, except for the eﬀects of the radiation
force as discussed above.

The Z-scan signal is intrinsically due to the nonlinear
eﬀects of self-focusing and self-defocusing. These eﬀects
are strongest when a circularly polarized probe interacts
with a fully polarized atomic sample. However, the radi-
ation forces that shift the detuning to the red, are also
maximized for a fully polarized atomic sample. When
the probe is blue detuned the radiation forces will ini-
tially increase the strength of the interaction so that a
probe polarization that couples strongly to the atomic
polarization will give a larger eﬀect. In the opposite case
of red detuning of the probe the pushing forces only serve
to decrease the strength of the interaction so that the Z-
scan signal will be strongest when the pushing is reduced.
Although the MOT has opposite atomic polarization for
positive and negative z and is not expected to have any
net polarization imbalance averaged over the cloud, the
probe beam is attenuated as it propagates so that the
front edge of the cloud has a stronger impact on the Z-
scan signal. We thus expect a larger signal when a red de-
tuned probe has a polarization that gives a weaker atomic
coupling, and less pushing forces, on the front side of the
cloud, and a larger signal when a blue detuned probe
has a polarization that gives a stronger atomic coupling
on the front side of the cloud. These arguments suggest
that a red-detuned probe will give a larger signal when
it has the opposite helicity of the trapping beam that
has the same momentum projection along ˆz, and that a
blue-detuned probe will give a larger signal when it has
the same helicity as the trapping beam. This is indeed

what is observed in Figs. 4 and 5.

As a further check on this explanation we changed the
sign of the magnetic ﬁeld and reversed the helicities of all
the trapping laser beams. We then found that the data
were the same as that measured previously provided we
also ﬂipped the helicity of the probe beam. This sup-
ports the conclusion that the dependence on probe beam
polarization is due to the spatial distribution of atomic
polarization inside the MOT in the presence of imperfect
optical pumping and radiative forces.
It is interesting
to note that the number density deduced from transmis-
sion scans shown in Fig. 3 would be higher, and thus
in closer agreement with the other density measurements
discussed in Sec. III, if we took into account a partial po-
larization of the atoms. However the transmission scans,
which were taken without a pinhole, and therefore de-
pend only on the total transmission, and not the shape
of the wavefront, show no helicity dependence. We con-
clude that Z-scan measurements provide a signal that is
comparatively sensitive to the atomic polarization distri-
bution. The extent to which a Z-scan could be used to
measure the polarization distribution quantitatively re-
mains an open question.

FIG. 6: Saturation parameter of the probe beam in the atomic
cloud at diﬀerent radial positions ρ = px2 + y2. w(z) =
w0p1 + λ2z2/(π2w4
0) is the z-dependent probe beam waist.

B. Spatial redistribution of intensity

In addition to the Z-scan transmittance measurements,
the transmitted probe beam far ﬁeld distribution was
observed directly using a CCD camera. To do so, the
pinhole and photodetector D in Fig. 1 were removed,
and a lens (f = 100 mm) was used to image a plane
at z = 72 mm after the cloud center onto the camera.
Pictures were recorded with the beam waist at diﬀer-
ent positions relative to the center of the cloud for self-
defocusing and self-focusing cases as shown in Figs. 7
and 8. To illustrate the self-defocusing or self-focusing
of the beam, the diﬀerence between the intensity distri-
butions with and without cold atoms is shown. In Fig.
7 we see the result with the beam waist near the center
of the cloud (z = −1 mm) and at the edge of the cloud

7

close to the detector (z = +6 mm). At z = −1 mm, the
beam gets focused faster due to the nonlinearity, so the
far ﬁeld transmitted beam has an additional divergence
compared to the linear case. Thus the central part of the
picture is dark. At z = +6 mm, the beam becomes less
focused due to the same eﬀect, so that in the far ﬁeld the
beam is more converged relative to the linear case, which
gives a bright region in the center of the picture. For the
two pictures in Fig. 8 we have similar results with the
roles of positive and negative z interchanged due to the
opposite sign of the nonlinearity.

The lower parts of Figs. 7 and 8 show that numeri-
cal calculations predict the transverse beam proﬁles with
an accuracy similar to that seen for the Z-scan trans-
mittance curves. We see that the agreement is best for a
self-defocusing nonlinearity while in the self-focusing case
there is a tendency towards localized maxima and min-
ima in the transverse proﬁles. Similar phenomena were
reported in Ref. [18]. Additional numerical calculations
at 5-10 times higher densities reveal strong ﬁlamentation
of the transmitted beam. Future work will investigate
propagation eﬀects in this regime experimentally.

V. DISCUSSION

We have used Z-scan measurements to characterize
the nonlinear optical response of a cold atomic cloud.
We show that the measured data agree with a two-level
atomic model at short times provided the probe helicity
is chosen to match the helicity of the trapping beams on
the front side of the cloud. At longer times modiﬁcations
to the Z-scan occur because of radiation pressure forces.

FIG. 7: Transmitted probe beam intensity for ∆ = −3γ.
The pictures show the intensity minus the intensity without
a MOT for z = −1 mm and +6 mm. The bottom ﬁgures
show the line proﬁles across the center of the beam, which are
normalized to the center intensity of the beam without cold
atoms. The dashed line is the result of numerical calculations.
−3 while
The peak MOT density was na0 = 0.7 × 1010 cm
wz, az, bz, cz were the same as in Fig. 5.

8

This results in some additional focusing of the cloud and
the appearance of a secondary Z-scan peak when a blue
detuned probe accelerates the atoms past resonance, to
give a partially red detuned response. Transverse proﬁles
of the probe beam show focusing and defocusing features
consistent with the Z-scan transmittance measurements.
Future work will study clouds with larger optical thick-
ness where we expect modulational instabilities of the
probe beam to lead to small scale modiﬁcations of the
atomic distribution.

Acknowledgments

FIG. 8: Transmitted probe beam intensity for ∆ = +3γ at
z = −3 mm and +2 mm. All other parameters are the same
as in Fig. 7.

We thank Thad Walker for helpful discussions. Sup-
port was provided by The University of Wisconsin Grad-
uate School, the Alfred P. Sloan foundation, and NSF
grant PHY-0210357.

[1] E. L. Raab, M. Prentiss, A. Cable, S. Chu, and D. E.

[19] A. T. Black, H. W. Chan, and V. Vuletic, Phys. Rev.

Pritchard, Phys. Rev. Lett. 59, 2631 (1987).

Lett. 91, 203001 (2003).

[2] J. W. R. Tabosa, G. Chen, Z. Hu, R. B. Lee, and H. J.

[20] M. Sheik-Bahae, A. A. Said, and E. W. V. Stryland, Opt.

Kimble, Phys. Rev. Lett. 66, 3245 (1991).

Lett. 14, 955 (1989).

[3] D. Grison, B. Lounis, C. Salomon, J. Y. Courtois, and

G. Grynberg, Europhys. Lett. 15, 149 (1991).

[4] A. Lambrecht, T. Coudreau, A. M. Steinberg, and E. Gi-

acobino, Europhys. Lett. 36, 93 (1996).

[21] M. Sheik-Bahae, A. A. Said, T.-H. Wei, D. J. Hagan, and
E. W. V. Stryland, IEEE J. Quantum Electron. 26, 760
(1990).

[22] J. A. Hermann and R. G. McDuﬀ, J. Opt. Soc. Am. B

[5] T. G. Walker, D. Sesko, and C. E. Wieman, Phys. Rev.

10, 2056 (1993).

[6] S. Barreiro and J. W. R. Tabosa, Phys. Rev. Lett. 90,

mun. 172, 347 (1999).

Lett. 64, 408 (1990).

133001 (2003).

[7] D. Dangel and R. Holzner, Phys. Rev. A 56, 3937 (1997).
[8] J. A. Andersen, M. E. J. Friese, A. G. Truscott, Z. Ficek,
P. D. Drummond, N. R. Heckenberg, and H. Rubinsztein-
Dunlop, Phys. Rev. A 63, 023820 (2001).

[9] W. Lange, Y. A. Logvin, and T. Ackemann, Physica D

96, 230 (1996).

[23] S. Bian, M. Martinelli, and R. J. Horowicz, Opt. Com-

[24] B. Yao, L. Ren, and X. Hou, J. Opt. Soc. Am. B 20, 1290

(2003).

[25] G. Tsigaridas, M. Fakis,

I. Polyzos, M. Tsibouri,
P. Persephonis, and V. Giannetas, J. Opt. Soc. Am. B
20, 670 (2003).

[26] W.-P. Zang, J.-G. Tian, Z.-B. Liu, W.-Y. Zhou, C.-P.
Zhang, and G.-Y. Zhang, Appl. Opt. 42, 2219 (2003).
[27] R. W. Boyd, Nonlinear Optics (Academic Press, San

[10] D. W. Sesko, T. G. Walker, and C. E. Wieman, J. Opt.

Soc. Am. B 8, 946 (1991).

Diego, 1992).

[11] M. T. de Araujo, L. G. Marcassa, S. C. Zilio, , and V. S.

Bagnato, Phys. Rev. A 51, 4286 (1995).

[12] R. Bonifacio, L. D. Salvo, L. M. Narducci, and E. J.

D’Angelo, Phys. Rev. A 50, 1716 (1994).

[28] C. G. Townsend, N. H. Edwards, C. J. Cooper, K. P.
Zetie, C. J. Foot, A. M. Steane, P. Szriftgiser, H. Perrin,
and J. Dalibard, Phys. Rev. A 52, 1423 (1995).

[29] D. Hoﬀmann, P. Feng, and T. Walker, J. Opt. Soc. Am.

[13] G. L. Lippi, G. P. Barozzi, S. Barbay, and J. R. Tredicce,

B 11, 712 (1994).

Phys. Rev. Lett. 76, 2452 (1996).

[30] K. E. Gibble, S. Kasapi, and S. Chu, Opt. Lett. 17, 526

[14] P. R. Hemmer, N. P. Bigelow, D. P. Katz, M. S. Shahriar,
L. DeSalvo, and R. Bonifacio, Phys. Rev. Lett. 77, 1468
(1996).

[15] R. Grimm and J. Mlynek, Phys. Rev. A 42, 2890 (1990).
[16] M. Saﬀman, Phys. Rev. Lett. 81, 65 (1998).
[17] M. Saﬀman and D. V. Skryabin,

in Spatial Solitons,
edited by S. Trillo and W. Torruellas (Springer, Berlin,
2001).

[18] G. Labeyrie, T. Ackemann, B. Klappauf, M. Pesch, G. L.
Lippi, and R. Kaiser, Eur. Phys. J. D 22, 473 (2003).

[31] Y.-C. Chen, Y.-A. Liao, L. Hsu, and I. A. Yu, Phys. Rev.

[32] L. Khaykovich and N. Davidson, J. Opt. Soc. Am. B 16,

(1992).

A 64, 031401 (2001).

702 (1999).

[33] R. S. Schappe, M. L. Keeler, T. A. Zimmerman,
M. Larsen, P. Feng, R. C. Nesnidal, J. B. Boﬀard, T. G.
Walker, L. W. Anderson, and C. C. Lin, Adv. At. Mol.
Opt. Phys. 48, 357 (2002).

