Manipulating the scattering length of a Bose-Einstein condensate

in an amplitude - modulated optical lattice.

Department of Physics and Astronomy, Northwestern University , Evanston , Illinois , 60208 .

G.M.Genkin∗.

Abstract

The scattering length in a BEC conﬁned in an amplitude - modulated

optical lattice can be manipulated by the modulation strength. Two standing

laser waves of main and sideband frequencies of an optical lattice induce a

Raman transition; due to resonant Raman driving the eﬀective scattering

length depends on the modulation strength and the detuning from resonance

and can be tuned to a given value.

* Electronic address: gena@pluto.phys.nwu.edu.

03.75.Lm, 05.30.Jp.

4
0
0
2
 
r
p
A
 
5
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
m
o
t
a
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
7
7
0
4
0
4
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Typeset using REVTEX

1

The recent experimental observation of Bose-Einstein condensation in a dilute gas of

ultracold trapped atoms [ 1-3 ] has generated much interest in studying the properties of

a Bose-Einstein condensate ( BEC ) and manipulating such coherent matter by external

electromagnetic ﬁelds. The experimental observation of Bose-Einstein condensation in a

dilute gas of ultracold trapped atoms [ 1-3 ] has generated much interest in manipulating

such coherent matter by external electromagnetic ﬁelds. Recently atoms have been conﬁned

in optical potentials created by standing light waves [ 4, 5 ], with the wavelength of the

optical potential much smaller than the dimensions of the trap. The unique prospects of

this new class of system (the correlated bosons on a lattice ) became evident. The possibility

of creating optical lattice in trapped Bose - condensed gases has provided an opportunity

to study superﬂuids in novel situations. The presence of the lattice leads to a variety of

solid - state eﬀects. For example, a transition to a Mott insulator becomes possible when a

superﬂuid like a BEC is placed in a periodic potential [4]; the oscillation frequency of the

center - of - mass motion of the condensate is reduced [6] as a result of the enhanced eﬀective

mass of the atoms tunneling between potential wells. By accelerating the optical lattice [7]

Bloch oscillations of the condensate have been observed, and reducing the amplitude of the

lattice optical potential leads to a breakdown of these oscillations as a result of Landau -

Zener tunneling between bands.

Many physical properties of a dilute gas are determined by the atom - atom interaction.

In a dilute and cold gas only binary collisions at low energy are relevant and these collisions

are characterized by a single parameter, the s - wave scattering length. The conﬁnement of

a gas in one or more spatial dimensions can strongly modify the collisional properties (two

- body scattering in an optical lattice ) of atoms [8 - 12]. In Ref.[12] was shown that in an

3D optical lattice a dilute gas is described by the eﬀective atomic scattering length aef f ,

modiﬁed and tunable by the lattice parameters,

aef f =

πln2
4

a

d
a + l∗

¯h
mωl2
0

,

l∗ =

l0qD0,

ln2
4

2

(1)

where a is the free - space scattering length, the optical lattice potential is determined by a

V0 and lattice spacing d, and l0 is the size of the ground state wave function in an individual

well of an optical lattice. The wave functions of the relative motion of two particles of

mass m are characterized by the quasimomentum q, the band index s, and the energy

εsq = εs

ts cos(qd), where ts = √Ds¯hω/π, Ds

1 is WKB tunneling exponent between

−

≪

the neighboring wells, ω2 = V0/(md2), εs are the energies of states s in isolated wells. The

eﬀective scattering length aef f is modiﬁed by the optical lattice if the tunneling between

the neighboring lattice sites is suﬃciently small and the new length scale l∗ contains the

tunneling amplitude ( for the band index s = 0 the amplitude D0 ) and describes the

inﬂuence of particle states extending over several lattice sites on the two - body scattering

in an optical lattice. In Ref.

[12] was shown that in the case of attractive interaction, for

the free - space length a < 0, the eﬀective scattering length exhibits resonant behavior and

leads to a geometric resonance at l∗ =

, and for l∗ >

the eﬀective scattering becomes

a
|

|

a
|

|

repulsive aef f > 0.

The goal of this paper is manipulating of the eﬀective scattering length by a time -

dependent action of the lattice parameters. We consider a manipulation of the scattering

length in a BEC in an amplitude - modulated optical lattice. The such optical lattice can

be created by interfering pair of amplitude - modulated beams. In general, there are the

two generic types ( a resonant and a nonresonant cases ) of the manipulation. The eﬀect

of the modulation is to modulate the optical lattice potential so that it becomes a time -

dependent optical lattice potential which the depth of the optical potential is

V0(t) = V0(1 + ν cos ωM t), ν < 1,

(2)

where ν is the modulation strength, ωM is the modulation frequency. If the period of

modulation 2π/ωM is larger the nonequilibrium dynamic time τnoneq, then the time behavior

of a BEC in an amplitude - modulated optical lattice is quasistatic. The nonequilibrium

dynamic time τnoneq for trapped bosonic atoms in an optical lattice potential was considered

in Ref.[11] and was shown that the characteristic time of the dynamical restoration of the

3

phase coherence is a Josephson time h/J.

A resonant case.

One is a resonant mechanism which operates when the modulation frequency ωM is close

to the excited internal state of a BEC. A resonant mechanism is determined by change in the

population of the ground state due to a resonant driving. In a BEC in a periodic potential

the characteristic energetic scale of the band structure [14,15] is the recoil energy ER. And,

usually, ER exceeds J, and the quasistatic behavior is not valid. However, in this case is

more convenient to use a picture that an amplitude - modulated ﬁeld can be presented as

a set of monochromatic ﬁelds (main on frequency ω and sideband on frequencies ω

ωM ).

±

These ﬁelds can induce a Raman transition between the two Bloch bands of a BEC s = 0

and s

= 0. A resonant ﬁeld via a two - photon ( Raman ) transition changes the population

of the lowest Bloch band s = 0 of a BEC. In resonant case the system is excited by an oﬀ

- resonant Raman ( two - photon ) driving with the Rabi frequency ΩR. In an amplitude -

modulated optical lattice two standing laser waves of frequencies ω and ω

ωM (ωM

ω)

−

≪

drive an atom in a Raman scheme. The eﬀective two - photon Rabi frequency is given in

terms of the single - photon Rabi frequencies Ω and Ω′ of the ﬁelds on the main ω and

sideband ω′ = ω
with the modulation strength ν we have for standing waves ΩR(x) = νΩ2(x)

ωM frequencies as ΩR = Ω·Ω′

2∆ . For the amplitude - modulated laser beams

, here ∆

−

2∆ = νV0(x)

h

is the far - detuning of the laser beams from the atomic resonance (the closest neighboring

optical dipole transition), and V0(x) =

3
j=1 Vjo cos2 kxj is the optical lattice potential with

P

wave vectors k = 2π

λ and λ the wavelength of the laser beams on the main frequency,

and we are omitted the terms proportional to the small parameter ∆k

x = ωM

c x

·

1,

≪

where ∆k

k, for x < λ

10−4cm, ωM

107s−1, this parameter is about 10−7.

∼

(cid:22)

k′

≡

−

The eigenstates of a BEC are Bloch waves, and an appropriate superposition of Bloch

states yields a set of Wannier functions which are localized on the individual lattice sites.

Without a resonant driving the wave functions in a tight binding model can be represented

[12] as ws(x) = ZsΨs(x), where Ψs(x) is the wave function of the oscillator in a state s,

and Zs is a normalization factor. However, for a resonant driving the wave functions are

4

6
wres

s (x) = ϕ(x)ws(x), where the function ϕ(x) is the solution of the Bloch equation of the

standard Rabi problem. We consider a steady state driving regime, in which the function

ϕ(x) is determined on the parameters of the ﬁeld ( the Rabi frequency and the detuning

from resonance δ = ωM

(ωb

ωa) ). In order to avoid a suﬃcient population of the excited

−

−

Bloch band s

= 0, we are assume ΩR < δ, then ϕ2(x)

)2. Using the wave

1

≃

−

1

2 ( ΩR(x)

δ

functions wres

s

, in which the size of the ground state oscillator wave function l0 in a lattice

is much less than the lattice period d = λ/2, and following Ref.

[12] we ﬁnd the eﬀective

scattering length ares

ef f modiﬁed by the resonantly amplitude modulation

aef f

ares
ef f −
aef f

(
≃ −

νV0
hδ

)2.

(3)

As a result, we can manipulate the eﬀective scattering length in a BEC in an resonantly

amplitude - modulated optical lattice. This tuning is determined by the modulation strength

ν and the detuning δ. By varying the parameter ν/δ, we can tune ares

ef f to a given value.

A nonresonant case.

Second is a nonresonant mechanism for which we will use a direct time - dependent

description. Note that such potential is created by interfering pair of amplitude - modulated

laser beams with the modulation strength ν/2 of the electric ﬁeld amplitude, and was omitted

the quadratic term for the small parameter ν2/4. A nonresonant low - frequency mechanism

of manipulation is in operation for a quasistatic regime ωM < 2πτ −1

noneq, therefore, if V0

corresponds to a geometric resonance at l∗ =

for attractive interaction then as the time

|
runs, the system goes from an attractive interaction to a repulsive interaction and back

a
|

again with frequency ωM . Therefore, it is allow to investigate the nonequilibrium dynamics

in a BEC. In a nonresonant case ΩR/δ

1 then ϕ(x) = 1 and we have a time - dependent

→

WKB tunneling exponent D0(t). The WKB tunneling exponent is a nonlinear function

on the strength of the periodic potential V0 which is proportional to the laser intensity .

If we have a time - dependent lattice laser intensity, then, although V0(t) = V0, due to

the nonlinearity of a WKB tunneling exponent a time - averaged D0(t) will be diﬀerent

from a WKB tunneling exponent D0 without a modulation. For a small ν we have the

5

6
time - averaged D0(t) = D0 + ∆D0, where the bar stands for a time average and ∆D0

is proportional to the time - averaged ν2cos2 ωM t ( the time - averaged of the modulation

harmonic oscillation to the lowest even order power ). For a low - frequency nonresonant

manipulation we will use a time - dependent potential ( Eq.(2)), and there could be a

modulation frequency ωM low enough for quasistatic behavior. Using the WKB tunneling

exponent D0 ≃
scale lnon

∗

exp(

−

πd
¯h √2mV0) and using V0(t) (Eq.(2)), we have a time - dependent length

(t) and, correspondingly, a time - dependent eﬀective scattering length anon

ef f (t).

Calculating the time - average D0(t) by expanding in a series about the small parameter

2mV0π2d2/¯h2 < 1, we ﬁnd the time - average length scale lnon

∗

, which is modiﬁed by the

nonresonant amplitude modulation

l∗

lnon
∗
−
l∗

ν2
4

2mV0π2d2
¯h2

.

≃

(4)

If ν2

4

2mV0π2d2
¯h2

is not small, then we may expand the expression for the time - dependent D0(t)

using Bessel functions In(x) and the functions cosn ωM t. In this case instead the parameter

ν2
4

2mV0π2d2
¯h2

we have I2(ν πd

¯h √2mV0), because, usually πd

¯h √2mV0 ≫

1 and for ν < 0.4 among

In(x < 2) the largest is I2(x).

In summary, the eﬀective scattering length in a BEC in an optical lattice can be manip-

ulated by an amplitude - modulated manner. The eﬀect of the modulation is to modulate

the optical lattice potential so that it becomes a time - dependent optical lattice potential

depth and, correspondingly, the eﬀective scattering length becomes time - dependent. There

are two mechanisms of the manipulation. One, a resonant mechanism is in operation for the

modulation frequency closed to the excited internal state of a BEC, and two standing laser

waves of main and sideband frequencies of an amplitude - modulated optical lattice induce

a Raman transition. Due to resonant Raman driving the population of the lowest Bloch

band s = 0 of a BEC changes, therefore, the eﬀective scattering length is also changed.

As a result, the eﬀective scattering length is other than without a modulation, this tuning

is determined by the square of the modulation strength and the square of the detuning.

Second, a nonresonant low - frequency mechanism, for which we use a direct time - depen-

6

dent description. Due to the nonlinear dependence of the WKB tunneling amplitude on

the optical lattice depth for the harmonic modulation of the optical lattice depth the time

- averaged tunneling exponent D0(t) is diﬀerent from D0 without a modulation. The pro-

posed mechanism of manipulating the eﬀective scattering length makes it possible to tune

it to a given value. As a result, although a time - averaged optical lattice potential with

a harmonic modulation is equal to an optical lattice potential without a modulation, the

eﬀective scattering length in a BEC conﬁned in an amplitude - modulated optical lattice can

be manipulated by the modulation strength. In conclusion, the nonequilibrium dynamics of

a BEC can be investigated by manipulating the eﬀective scattering length of a BEC in an

amplitude - modulated optical lattice.

I thank A.J.Freeman for encouragement.

7

REFERENCES

[1] M. H. Anderson et al., Science 269, 198 (1995).

[2] C. C. Bradley et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 75, 1687 (1995).

[3] K. B. Davis et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 75, 3969 (1995).

[4] C. Orzel et al., Science 291, 2386 (2001).

[5] M. Greiner et al., Nature (London) 415, 39 (2002).

[6] F. S. Cataliotti et al., Science 293, 843 ( 2001).

[7] O. Morsch et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 87, 140402 (2001).

[8] M. Olshanii, Phys. Rev. Lett. 81, 938 (1998).

[9] D. S. Petrov, G. V. Shlyapnikov, and J. T. M. Walraven, Phys. Rev. Lett. 85, 3745

(2000).

[10] D. S. Petrov, M. Holzmann, and G. V. Shlyapnikov, Phys. Rev. Lett. 84, 2551 (2000).

[11] D. S. Petrov and G. V. Shlyapnikov, Phys. Rev. A 64, 012706 (2001).

[12] P. O. Fedichev, M. J. Bijlsma, and P. Zoller, Phys. Rev. Lett. 92, 080401 (2004).

[13] A. Polkovnikov, S. Sachdev, and S. M. Girvin, Phys. Rev. A 66, 053607 ( 2001).

[14] K. Berg - Sørensen and K. Mølmer, Phys. Rev. A 58, 1480 (1998).

[15] D. Diakonov et al., Phys. Rev. A 66, 013604 (2002).

8

