4
0
0
2
 
y
a
M
 
6
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
m
o
t
a
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
1
8
0
5
0
4
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Is a multiple excitation of a single atom equivalent to a single excitation of an
ensemble of atoms?

Ido Kanter, Aviad Frydman and Assaf Ater
Minerva center and the Department of Physics, Bar Ilan University, Ramat-Gan 52900, Israel

Recent technological advances have enabled to isolate, control and measure the properties of
a single atom, leading to the possibility to perform statistics on the behavior of single quantum
systems. These experiments have enabled to check a question which was out of reach previously: Is
the statistics of a repeatedly excitation of an atom N times equivalent to a single excitation of an
ensemble of N atoms? We present a new method to analyze quantum measurements which leads to
the postulation that the answer is most probably no. We discuss the merits of the analysis and its
conclusion.

PACS numbers: 03.65.Ta, 42.50.Lc, 02.50.Ga

The development of laser cooling techniques have en-
abled to study the properties of single atoms. This re-
search is motivated both by the quest for better under-
standing of basic quantum mechanics concepts as well as
by potential applications in the ﬁelds of quantum com-
puters, quantum clocks and random number generators.
[1, 2, 3]. Though the accuracy of quantum mechanical
experiments is increasing rapidly, the analysis of the data
is still in its primary stage and a method for detecting
correlations is far from being established.

An example for the above eﬀort is the advanced study
of quantum jumps in a single atom. Figure 1 shows the
results of a typical quantum jump experiment performed
on a 189Hg+ ion (data provided by W.M Itano). The
atomic system contains two excited states (as seen in ﬁg-
ure 2). State 1 has a strong coupling to the ground state
while state 2 is weakly coupled and has a long lifetime.
If the system is excited to state 1 it will emit a photon
as the system decays to the ground state (“light” level)
unless it is transferred to state 2 in which case the ﬂuo-
rescence will stop for a period of the lifetime of this state
(“dark” level). The data is viewed as a set of switches
between two levels. The higher one representing detec-
tion of emitted photons as the sample decays from state
1 to the ground state and the lower one (basically 0)
represents the situation where the sample is at state 2.

This type of experiments opens the opportunity to ex-
amine new questions related to quantum mechanics. It is
well established that the decay of an ensemble of quan-
tum particles is governed by a Poissonian process. The
number of decay events as a function of time is propor-
tional to exp(−t/τ ), where τ is the relevant life time.
This behavior indicates that the process is random with
no correlations among successive events. Such statistics
were conﬁrmed in many quantum experiments such as
Alpha and Beta radiation and decay of excited atoms to
the ground state [4]. The question we raise in this work
is whether the excitation of a single atom many times

 

 

100

50

s
t
n
u
o
c

0

47000

48000

49000

time (ms)

M

0

1

0

1

0.9838

0.0168

0.0189

0.981

0

1

N

0

1

1

0

0.0005

0.9995

FIG. 1: A section of a typical quantum jump measurement
performed on a Mercury ion. The red line shows the clip-
ping threshold for the analysis process (results are insensitive
to the precise threshold value). The ﬁgure also depicts the
Markov matrix (M) and the noise matrix (N) obtained from
the analysis of the entire experimental data set using by the
BW algorithm.

would exhibit the same behavior and statistics. For in-
stance, in the quantum jumps experiments, the question
is whether the level lifetimes are random and temporally
uncorrelated. This question is of major importance both
for the foundation of quantum mechanics as well as for
setting guidelines for future applications.

In order to check this question we develop a method to
analyze the data of quantum jumps experiments. This
method is based on the theory of the hidden Markov
model[5, 6, 7]. A Markov model is a ﬁnite state machine
that changes state once every time unit. The manner in
which the state transitions occur is probabilistic and is
governed by a state-transition matrix, M. For applying
this model to quantum jumps we focus on the simplest
case of a Markov model, i.e. only two levels “light” and

1

2

2

 

 

1

A

a
t
a
d
 
c

i
l

o
b
m
y
s

0

B

49200

49300

49400

time (ms)

FIG. 2: A schematic energy diagram of the ionic system.

FIG. 3: Part of the symbolic data sequence after clipping
the data of ﬁgure 1. The dashed line shows the result of the
Viterbi algorithm.

“dark”. Quantum jumps are expected to be described by
a Markovian process, since events are assumed to depend
only on the current state and not on the history. If on
the other hand, a system does not follow pure Marko-
vian statistics, the process is named a Hidden Markov
Process. For example, if the atom experiences external
ﬁelds or interactions, one may expect to observe a devi-
ation from Markovian behavior. In this case the process
has to be described by two 2X2 transition matrices. The
ﬁrst one, M, stands for the transitions due to the Marko-
vian process (M(i,j) stands for the transition from i to
j) while the second one, N, represents unexpected tran-
sitions that can not be ascribed to the usual statistics
of the system. The oﬀ-diagonal elements of matrix N,
known also as the noise, measure the amount of devia-
tion from pure Markovian behavior. For pure Markovian
processes the oﬀ-diagonal elements are zero and as these
elements increase the noise increases. A practical way to
determine the two matrices, M and N, that character-
ize the most likely underlying processes, is known as the
Baum-Welch (BW) algorithm [5].

The actual analysis of the quantum jumps data is per-
formed using the following procedure. A data set, such
as that of ﬁgure 1, is clipped to produce a symbolic data
sequence containing two levels, 0 and 1 (0 representing
a ”dark” level and 1 representing the “light” level). The
transitions between these levels are analyzed by running
the Baum-Welch procedure [5] to produce two matrices,
M, and, N. A typical result is shown in ﬁgure 1. Here we
analyze the data of a sequence of 105 data points where
each point represents the number of photon counts in a
time interval of 1ms.

note that though the eﬀect is rather small, it can not be
attributed to a ﬁnite size artifact. We have generated
artiﬁcial sequences (using matrix M only) having sizes
similar to the experimental one which produced pure
Markov matrices with negligible oﬀ-diagonal elements of
matrix N. Similar non-Markovian results were obtained
on a longer sequence (7.5 ∗ 105 data points) taken from a
Sr quantum jumps experiment [2].

The BW procedure indicates that a single ion produces
unexpected transitions. One may ask whether it is possi-
ble to go one step further and to identify the location
(in the time sequence) of the noise. Such a question
arises, for instance, in the case of digital communica-
tion, where a Markovian message is transmitted through
a noisy channel. The receiver’s goal is to identify the lo-
cations of the noisy bits in order to recover the original
signal [8]. An established way to do this is by using the
Viterbi algorithm [9] to compute the most likely under-
lying Markov sequence, or, in other words, the expected
physical outcome without the detected noise [10].

The outcome of running the Viterbi algorithm on the
data of ﬁgure 1 is presented in ﬁgure 3. The clipped data
contains sub-sequences like ...000010000... (type A) or
...111101111.... (type B). The Viterbi procedure identi-
ﬁes most of events of type B as noise, but non of type
A. A similar eﬀect was obtained in all studied quantum
jump experimental sequences (over 10 data sets).

The oﬀ-diagonal elements of matrix N show that while
there are no unexpected transitions from 0 → 1, there are
non-trivial transitions from 1 → 0 that are not consistent
with a simple Markovian framework. It is important to

The above result reveals the fact that sawtooth-like
features of type B (a few dozens in a sequence of 105 data
points), can not be explained as part of the usual statis-
tics of the ion, i.e. Markovian statistics. We demonstrate

that these sawteeth are the cause for non-Markovian
noise by ﬂipping these particular data points from 0 to 1
and running the BW procedure on the revised sequence.
This procedure yields practically pure Markov matrices
even for ﬂipping only ∼40% of the features detected by
the Viterbi process as problematic.

It is important to note that deviations from pure expo-
nential behavior of the plateau statistics were observed in
quantum jumps experiments [2]. These were attributed
to experimental diﬃculties in controlling the laser am-
plitude and frequency over relatively large time periods.
This experimental artifact gives rise to non-Poissonian
statistics due to long plateaus (with times larger than
130 ms). Our analysis (the BW and the Viterbi algo-
rithms) implies that it is the short plateaus, rather then
the long ones, which are responsible for the unexpected
behavior. Further support is obtained by running the
BW algorithm on quantum jump data once while eras-
ing long plateaus (having time scales above 100ms) and
again while erasing plateaus shorter than 2ms. In the for-
mer case we found that the oﬀ-diagonal noise remained
non-zero. On the other hand the latter case revealed that
the noise was entirely suppressed when the short plateau
were removed from the sequence. Our analysis therefore
strongly implies that the sources of non-Markovian be-
havior in a single atom experiment are the short plateaus
where the system spends a relatively short time at the
excited state.

In an attempt to understand the results of the anal-
ysis we note that though an atom is a single quantum
particle it is a many body system containing many de-
grees of freedom. Therefore, the decay of the atom to the
ground state may have some characteristic timescales.
This might be a source for our observations. If the ion is
repeatedly excited with very short time intervals it may
not be able to fully relax. This may give rise to a de-
viation from the expected Markovian statistics. In this

3

respect the excitation of a single atom many times may
diﬀer from a single excitation of many atoms. A natural
way to further check this hypothesis experimentally is to
enhance the eﬀect by taking measurement with a shorter
characteristic timescale (counting photons in time inter-
vals shorter than a ms). We suspect that such measure-
ments would result in a larger deviation from Markovian
behavior.

We gratefully acknowledge W.M Itano and D. J Berke-
land for providing the quantum jump experimental data
and P.W. Anderson and L. Khaikovich for useful discus-
sions.

[1] C.E. Wieman, D.E. Pritchard and D.J. Wineland, Rev.

Mod. Phys., 71, S253 (1999).

[2] D.J. Berkeland, D.A. Raymonson and V.M. Tassin,

arXiv : physics0304013 .

[3] S.A. Diddmas et. al., Science 293, 825 (2001).
[4] For example see A.G. Calamai and C.E. Johnson, Phys.

Rev. A 42, 5425 (1990).

[5] G.J. McLachen and T. Krishnan, ”The EM Algorithm

and Extensions”, John Wiley and Sons (1997).

[6] L.B. Rabiner, B.H. Juang, ”An Introduction to Hidden
Markov Models”, IEEE ASSP Magazine, vol 3, February
1986.

[7] I.

Kanter,

A.

Frydman

and

A.

Ater,

Cond − mat/0402246 .

[8] T.M. Cover and J.A. Cover, ”Elements of Information

Theory”, John Wiley and Sons (1991).

[9] J.G. Proakis, “Digital communication”, McGraw-Hill

(2001).

[10] Note that the separation of the received message to signal
and noise is not always possible due to either theoretical
bounds of information theory or limitations of the used
algorithm and the examined sequence. However, in many
cases the Viterbi algorithm proves very usuful.

