Pure spin–angular momentum coeﬃcients for non–scalar
one–particle operators in jj–coupling∗

G. Gaigalas a and S. Fritzsche b †

a Institute of Theoretical Physics and Astronomy,
A. Goˇstauto 12, Vilnius 2600, Lithuania.
b Fachbereich Physik, Universit¨at Kassel,
Heinrich–Plett–Str. 40, D – 34132 Kassel, Germany.

February 17, 2014

Abstract

A revised program for generating the spin–angular coeﬃcients in relativistic atomic
structure calculations is presented. When compared with our previous version [G. Gai-
galas, S. Fritzsche and I. P. Grant, CPC 139 (2001) 263], the new version of the Anco
program now provides these coeﬃcients for both, scalar as well as non–scalar one–particle
operators as they arise frequently in the study of transition probabilities, photoionization
and electron capture processes, the alignment transfer through excited atomic states,
collision strengths, and in many other investigations.

The program is based on a recently developed formalism [G. Gaigalas, Z. Rudzikas,
and C. F. Fischer, J. Phys. B 30 (1997) 3747], which combines techniques from second
quantization in coupled tensorial form, the theory of quasispin, and the use of reduced
coeﬃcients of fractional parentage, in order to derive the spin–angular coeﬃcients for
complex atomic shell structures more eﬃciently. By making this approach now available
also for non–scalar interactions, therefore, studies on a whole ﬁeld of new properties and
processes are likely to become possible even for atoms and ions with a complex structure.

4
0
0
2
 
y
a
M
 
6
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
m
o
t
a
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
6
3
1
5
0
4
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

∗Submitted as: New Version Announcement
†Email: s.fritzsche@physik.uni-kassel.de

NEW VERSION SUMMARY

Title of program: ANCO(2)

Catalogue number: ADQO

Program Summary URL: http://cpc.cs.qub.ac.uk/summaries/ADQO

Program obtainable from: CPC Program Library, Queen’s University of Belfast, N. Ireland.

Catalogue identiﬁer of previous version: ADOO [1]; title: Anco.

Authors of the original program: G. Gaigalas, S. Fritzsche and I. P. Grant

Does the new version supersede the previous one:
Yes, apart from scalar one– and two–particle tensor operators, the program now supports
also non–scalar one–particle operators ˆAk for any rank k > 0.

Licensing provisions: None.

Computer for which the new version has been tested: IBM RS 6000, PC Pentium II, AMD
Athlon K7.
Installations: University of Kassel (Germany).
Institute of Theoretical Physics and Astronomy (Lithuania).
Operating systems: IBM AIX 6.2.2+, Linux 7.1

Program language used in the new version: Ansi standard Fortran 90/95.

Memory required to execute with typical data: 200 kB.

No. of bits in a word: All real variables are parameterized by a selected kind parameter.
Currently this parameter is set to double precision (two 32–bit words) for consistency with
other components of the Ratip package [2].

Distribution format: Compressed tar ﬁle.

Keywords: Atomic many–body perturbation theory, complex atom, conﬁguration interac-
tion, eﬀective Hamiltonian, multiconﬁguration Dirac–Fock, photoionization, Racah algebra,
reduced matrix element, relativistic, second quantization, spin–angular coeﬃcients, tensor
operators, transition probabilities, 9/2–subshell.

Nature of the physical problem:
The matrix elements of a one–electron tensor operator ˆAk of (any) rank k with respect to
ij(ab) (a| ˆAk|b)
a set of conﬁguration state functions (CSF) |γiJiPii can be written as Pij tk
ij(ab) are independent of the operator ˆAk, i, j are CSF
where the spin–angular coeﬃcients tk
labels and a, b specify the interacting orbitals. A combination of second–quantization and

2

quasispin methods has been utilized in order to derive and to obtain these angular coeﬃcients
for one–electron tensor operator of any rank [3]. Operators of non–scalar rank, k > 0, occur
frequently, for instance, in the study of transition probabilities, photoionization and electron
capture processes, alignment transfer, collision strengths, and elsewhere.

Reasons for the new version:
The Ratip package [2] has been found an eﬃcient tool during recent years, in order to exploit
the (relativistic atomic) wave functions from the Grasp92 program [4] for the computation of
atomic properties and processes. Apart from a more eﬃcient set–up of the (Dirac–Coulomb–
Breit) Hamiltonian matrix [5], the Ratip program now supports large–scale computations of
transition probabilities within a relaxed orbital basis [6], Auger rates and angular–anisotropy
parameters [7], and of several other quantities. For these properties, the spin–angular co-
eﬃcients for scalar one– and two–particle operators are suﬃcient, as be obtained from the
previous version of Anco [1]. However, in order to extent the range of (possible) applica-
tions also to other processes such as the atomic photoionization, (radiative) electron capture,
or photoexcitation and alignment studies, non–scalar one–particle operators will occur and
need to be treated eﬃciently. With the presently revised version of Anco, we provide the
spin–angular coeﬃcients for such operators, making use of the modern design of the Ratip
package in Fortran 90/95 [8]. Similarly as for all previously implemented components of this
package, the revised Anco program facilitates the use of large wave function expansions of
several ten thousand CSF or even more in the future.

Summary of revisions:
When compared with the previous CPC version of the Anco program [1], the following
modiﬁcations and (new) capabilities have been added:

1. The module rabs recoupling has been enlarged to include further expressions from
Ref. [9], i.e. Eq. (14) and (19). These expressions are incorporated into the routines
recoupling matrix 1p shell for calculating the recoupling matrix for the case of CSF
with one open shell and into recoupling matrix 2p shells for CSF with two open
shells, respectively. Moreover, the subroutine recoupling C 3 has been added to derive
the C3 coeﬃcients, cf. [9, Eq. (17)].

2. Several procedures have been added also to the module rabs anco to enable the user
with a simple and direct access to the spin–angular coeﬃcients. For example, the
two routines anco calculate csf pair 1p and anco calculate csf matrix 1p pro-
vide these coeﬃcients for any one–particle operator with speciﬁed rank, either for a
single pair of CSF or for a whole array of such functions, respectively. Both procedures
make use of the subroutines anco one particle diag for the diagonal matrix elements
and anco one particle off otherwise. In anco calculate csf matrix 1p, the spin–
angular coeﬃcients are calculated for any rank k ≥ 0 either for the whole matrix or
for a sub–matrix with rows from (given) row low ... row up and columns from col low
... col up. While the procedure anco calculate csf pair 1p returns no T coeff co-
eﬃcients directly in the array anco T list, the coeﬃcients of a whole CSF array are

3

returned in the derived data structure anco pair list; see the header of the module
rabs anco for further details.

3. The deﬁnition and set–up of properly derived data types in [1] has deﬁnitly helped
facilitate the data exchange between diﬀerent components of the Ratip package. These
data structures have been used also for extenting the Anco program. For the one–
particle coeﬃcients, for example, the derived type

type :: anco_T_coeff

integer
type(nkappa)
real(kind=dp)

:: nu
:: a, b
:: T

end type anco_T_coeff

were introduced already in our previous version, where we used nu = 0 to designate the
scalar interaction. The integer nu now indicates simply the rank of the (one–particle)
In further applications of Ratip, therefore, these coeﬃcients can be easily
tensor.
accessed if the module rabs anco is properly used by the additional code.

4. A few minor changes are made also in the (interactive) dialog which controls the pro-
gram as well as for the printout of the spin–angular coeﬃcients. One additional question
in the dialog:

Generate one-electron angular coefficients for non-scalar interactions ?

can ﬁrst be answered with n or N — if non–scalar coeﬃcients are not requested. If an-
swered by y or Y, the additional question:

Generate GRASP92-like d coefficients for non-scalar interactions ?

arise and help the user to select Grasp92–like d k
ab(rs) coeﬃcients, such as previously
obtained from the Mct component of Grasp, or ’pure’ angular coeﬃcients (as utilized
within Ratip). Finally, the prompt

Enter the rank of the tensor:

requests the user to specify the rank of the one–particle operator.

5. As previously, the Anco program generates two output ﬁles; while the .sum Anco
summary ﬁle provides a short summary of the computations, the spin–angular coeﬃ-
cients and all necessary quantum numbers for their classiﬁcation are stored in the .vnu
ﬁle. The format for printing the d k
rs(ab) is very similar to each other, apart
from the sorting process which is used in Grasp92 [4] and which is not done by Anco.

rs(ab) and t k

As before, the source code of the Anco component is distributed together with the source
of all other components of Ratip in order to facilitate the installation and to save the user
from additional adaptions to be made. The whole package is provided as a compressed
Ratip anco.tar.Z archive ﬁle. On a Unix (or any compatible) system, the two commands

4

uncompress Ratip anco.tar.Z and tar xvf Ratip anco.tar will reconstruct the ﬁle struc-
ture. The obtained ratip root directory then obtains the source code, the ﬁle make-anco
for generating the executable xanco and the subdirectory test-anco for the test example.
Details of the installation are explained also in the Read.me ﬁle in the ratip root directory

Restrictions onto the complexity of the problem:
For all subshells with j ≥ 11/2 (i.e. h11/2−, i−, ... electrons), the maximal number of equiv-
alent electrons is restricted to two.

Typical running time:
This strongly depends on the system and the size of the wave function expansion to be
considered. Our test case, which is distributed with the code in the subdirectory test-anco,
required 32 seconds on a 1400 MHz AMD Athlon K7/1400T. Typically, Anco calculates
about 10,000 angular coeﬃcients per second.

Unusual features of the program:
Anco has been designed as component of the Ratip package [2] for calculating a vari-
ety of relativistic atomic transition and ionization properties. Owing to the careful use of
allocatable and pointer arrays, there is (almost) no restriction on the size or any dimen-
sion of the ”physical problem” apart from the computer ressources themselves.

References

[1] G. Gaigalas, S. Fritzsche and I. P. Grant, Comput. Phys. Commun. 139 (2001) 263.

[2] S. Fritzsche, J. Elec. Spec. Rel. Phen. 114–116 (2001) 1155.

[3] G. Gaigalas, Lithuanian Physics Journal 39 (1999) 63.

[4] F. A. Parpia, C. F. Fischer, and I. P. Grant, Comput. Phys. Commun. 94 (1996) 249.

[5] S. Fritzsche, C. F. Fischer, and G. Gaigalas, Comput. Phys. Commun., in print (2002).

[6] S. Fritzsche, C. F. Fischer, and C. Z. Dong, Commput. Phys. Commun., 124 (2000) 343.

[7] K. Ueda, Y. Shimizu, H. Chiba, M. Kitajima, H. Tanaka, S. Fritzsche and N. M. Kabach-

nik, J. Phys. B 34 (2001) 107.

[8] M. Metcalf and J. Reid, Fortran 90/95 Explained (Oxford University Press, 1996).

[9] G. Gaigalas, Z. Rudzikas, and C. F. Fischer J. Pys. B 30 (1997) 3747.

5

