4
0
0
2
 
y
a
M
 
1
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
m
o
t
a
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
9
4
0
5
0
4
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Dynamic eﬀects in nonlinear magneto-optics of atoms and molecules

E. B. Alexandrov∗
A. F. Ioﬀe Physico-Technical Institute, 26 Polytekhnicheskaya, St Petersburg 194021, Russian Federation

M. Auzinsh†
Department of Physics, University of Latvia, 19 Rainis blvd, Riga, LV-1586, Latvia

D. Budker‡
Department of Physics, University of California, Berkeley, CA 94720-7300 and
Nuclear Science Division, Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, Berkeley CA 94720

D. F. Kimball and S. M. Rochester
Department of Physics, University of California, Berkeley, CA 94720-7300

V. V. Yashchuk
Advanced Light Source Division, Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, Berkeley CA 94720
(Dated: February 2, 2008)

A brief review is given of topics relating to dynamical processes arising in
nonlinear interactions between light and resonant systems (atoms or molecules)
in the presence of a magnetic ﬁeld.

2008 Optical Society of America

c
(cid:13)
OCIS codes: 020.0020, 270.1670.

Contents

1. Introduction

2. Quantum beats

3. Transient dynamics

4. Beat resonances

A. Amplitude resonances
B. Frequency resonances
C. Polarization resonances
D. Parametric resonances
E. Parametric relaxation resonances
F. Relation to coherent population trapping

5. Applications

A. High-order polarization moments
B. Magnetometry

6. Related topics

A. Fluorescence detection
B. Polarization-noise spectroscopy

7. Conclusions and outlook

∗Electronic address: ealex@online.ru
†Electronic address: mauzins@latnet.lv
‡Electronic address: budker@socrates.berkeley.edu

A. Polarization moments and the angular momentum probabilit

1

2

4

5
5
5
6
7
7
8

8
8
9

10
10
10

11

References

1.

Introduction

13

The study of resonant nonlinear magneto-optical eﬀects
(NMOE) is an active area of research with a rich history
going back to the early work on optical pumping. These
eﬀects result from the resonant interaction of light with
an atomic or molecular system in the presence of addi-
tional external electromagnetic ﬁelds (most commonly a
uniform magnetic ﬁeld, but we will also consider electric
ﬁelds). A recent review by Budker et al.1 deals primarily
with the eﬀects in atoms; the molecular case is detailed in
a monograph by Auzinsh and Ferber.2 In this paper, we
focus on the dynamical aspects of such interactions, at-
tempting to oﬀer the reader a uniﬁed view on various di-
verse phenomena and techniques while avoiding excessive
repetition of material already discussed in the previous
reviews. Interest in the application of dynamic NMOE
to experimental techniques has been increasing in recent
years. The use of dynamic eﬀects allows one to do things
diﬃcult with steady-state NMOE, for example, high-
sensitivity Earth-ﬁeld-range magnetometry. Dynamic ef-
fects can also allow information (such as the value of
energy-level splittings) that would normally be obtained
from high-resolution spectroscopy to be extracted from
direct measurements of frequency, a more robust tech-
nique.

Nonlinear magneto-optical eﬀects (speciﬁcally those
related to coherence phenomena1) are observed when

a optically polarized medium undergoes quantum beats
(Sec. 2) under the inﬂuence of an external ﬁeld, and so
inﬂuences the polarization and/or intensity of a trans-
mitted probe light beam. While this is inherently a dy-
namical process on the microscopic level, a macroscopic
ensemble of particles3 reaches a steady state in about
the polarization relaxation time if the external parame-
ters are held constant. Thus, in order to observe quan-
tum beat dynamics, these parameters must be varied at
a rate signiﬁcant compared to the polarization relaxation
rate. One approach, discussed in Sec. 3, is to produce po-
larization with a pulse of pump light, and then observe
the eﬀect of the subsequent quantum beat dynamics on
the optical properties of the medium. Alternatively, the
method of beat resonances (Sec. 4) can be used, in which
an experimental parameter [the amplitude (Sec. 4 A), fre-
quency (Sec. 4 B), or polarization (Sec. 4 C) of the light,
the external ﬁeld strength (Sec. 4 D), or the rate of po-
larization relaxation (Sec. 4 E)] is modulated, and the
component of the signal at a harmonic of the modula-
tion frequency is observed. Resonances are seen when
the modulation frequency is a subharmonic of one of the
quantum-beat frequencies present in the system.

2. Quantum beats

Quantum beats 2,4,5,6,7 is the general term for the time-
evolution of a coherent superposition of nondegenerate
energy eigenstates at a frequency determined by the en-
ergy splittings. In this paper, we are primarily concerned
with the evolution of a polarized ensemble of particles
with a given angular momentum that have their Zeeman
components split by an external ﬁeld. For linear Zee-
man splitting—the lowest-order eﬀect due to a uniform
magnetic ﬁeld—the evolution is Larmor precession, i.e.,
rotation of the polarization about the magnetic ﬁeld di-
rection. For nonlinear splittings, such as quadratic Stark
shifts, the polarization evolution is more complex. The
state of the ensemble is described by the density ma-
trix, which evolves according to the Liouville equation.
While this all that is necessary for a theoretical descrip-
tion of the system, physical insight can often be gained
by decomposing the density matrix into polarization mo-
ments having the symmetries of the spherical harmon-
ics.
In quantum beats due to nonlinear energy split-
tings the relative magnitudes of the various polarization
moments change with time, a process sometimes known
as alignment-to-orientation conversion (see Refs. 1,2 and
references therein). A pictorial illustration of the polar-
ization state can be obtained by plotting its angular mo-
mentum probability distribution. The polarization mo-
ment decomposition and angular momentum probability
distribution not only aid physical intuition, but they are
themselves complete descriptions of the ensemble state,
and can be used in some cases to simplify calculations.
For a more detailed discussion, see Appendix A.

As an example, we consider the nonlinear Zeeman
shifts that occur when atoms with hyperﬁne structure

2

are subjected to a suﬃciently large magnetic ﬁeld. For
states with total electron angular momentum J = 1/2,
such as in the alkali atoms, the shifted frequency ωm
of each Zeeman sublevel with spin projection m along
the magnetic ﬁeld direction is given by the Breit-Rabi
formula7

ωm
2π

=

∆
2 (2I + 1) −

−

gI µmB

∆
2 (cid:18)

±

1 +

4mξ
2I + 1

+ ξ2

(cid:19)

1/2

,

±

(1)
where ξ = (gJ + gI )µB/∆, gJ and gI are the electronic
and nuclear Land´e factors, respectively, B is the mag-
netic ﬁeld strength, µ is the Bohr magneton, ∆ is the
hyperﬁne-structure interval, I is the nuclear spin, and
the
sign refers to the upper and the lower hyperﬁne
level, respectively. We set ¯h = 1 throughout this paper.
Consider an atomic sample of cesium (I = 7/2), ini-
tially in a stretched state (mz = F = 4) with respect
to the z-axis. In the presence of an ˆx-directed magnetic
eigenstates
ﬁeld, the energy eigenstates are the
of the Fx operator. The stretched state along ˆz is a su-
perposition of these nondegenerate eigenstates, and so
quantum beats are seen in the evolution of the system.

F mxi
|

i

−

iωmt)

F m
|

(For B = 0.5 G, τ1 ≃

The time evolution of each eigenstate is given by
cm exp (
where cm is the initial amplitude.
For moderate ﬁeld strengths such that the parameter ξ
is small, the shifts deviate only slightly from linearity.
Thus, expanding Eq. (1) in powers of ξ, we see that over
time scales comparable to the Larmor period, the evo-
lution (to ﬁrst order) is just Larmor precession with pe-
8(gJ µB)−1 (neglecting here gI compared to
riod τ1 ≃
gJ ). The evolution due to the second-order quadratic
shifts is also periodic, but with a much longer period
32∆(gJµB)−2.
τ2 ≃
6 µs and
0.3 s.) One way to illustrate these quantum beats
τ2 ≃
is to produce graphs of the spatial distribution of an-
gular momentum at a given time. To do this, we plot
three-dimensional closed surfaces for which the distance
from the origin in a given direction is proportional to
the probability of ﬁnding the maximum projection of an-
gular momentum along that direction.8,9 This plot illus-
trates the symmetries of the polarization state, indicating
which polarization moments are present. (For a discus-
sion of the angular momentum probability distribution
and the polarization moments, see Appendix A.) A col-
lection of surfaces showing the time-evolution of the po-
larization over half of a period τ2 of the second-order
evolution is shown in Fig. 1. The ﬁrst plot represents the
initial stretched state—the surface is literally stretched
in the ˆz direction. This state undergoes rapid preces-
sion around ˆx with period τ1. At the same time, the
slower second-order evolution results in changes in the
shape of the probability surface. By “stroboscopically”
drawing successive surfaces each at the same phase of the
fast Larmor precession (i.e., at integer multiples of τ1),
the polarization can be seen to evolve into states with
higher-order symmetry before becoming stretched along
ˆz at t = τ2/2. In particular, at t = τ2/4 the state is

−

3

Fig. 2. Angular momentum spatial distribution for states
composed only of population (ρ0
0) and the maximum pos-
sible values of the components ρκ
±κ for a particular κ.
κ = 0: monopole moment (isotropic state with pop-
ulation only); κ = 1: dipole moment (oriented state);
κ = 2: quadrupole moment (aligned state); κ = 3: oc-
tupole moment; κ = 4: hexadecapole moment; κ = 5:
triakontadipole moment.

Fig. 1. Quantum beats in Cs illustrated with surfaces
representing the probability of ﬁnding the system in
the state with maximal projection m = F in a given
direction.8,9 This sequence is “stroboscopic” in the sense
that the surfaces correspond to times chosen to have the
same phase of the fast Larmor precession around the di-
rection of the magnetic ﬁeld (ˆx). From the symmetry of
the plots one clearly sees that orientation present in the
initial state collapses and revives in the process of the
temporal evolution. Temporal variation of higher polar-
ization moments give rise to higher-order-symmetry con-
tributions to the probability surface (see also Fig. 3).

symmetric with respect to the x-y plane, a characteristic
of the even orders in the decomposition of the polariza-
tion state into irreducible tensor moments ρκ (Appendix
A). In general, for a multipole moment of rank κ with po-
larization transverse to the quantization axis (such that
only the components ρκ
κ are nonzero) this
q with q =
moment has rotational symmetry of order κ about that
axis2,10 (Fig. 2).

±

In order to explore the decomposition into polarization
moments further, it is useful to plot the norms9 of the
polarization moments as a function of time (Fig. 3). The

Fig. 3. Temporal evolution of the norms of various po-
larization moments of ranks κ of the F = 4 ground state
of Cs corresponding to the case of Figs. 1 and 4. The
initial stretched state is dominated by the lowest-order
moments; at t = τ2/4 the state is composed only of even-
order moments.

4

behavior exhibited by the higher-order moments in Fig.
3. While it is true in general that weak probe light is not
coupled to atomic polarization moments of rank greater
than two,11 the fact that the absorption is insensitive
to the κ = 2 moment (alignment) is a consequence of
our assumption that the upper-state hyperﬁne structure
is unresolved. In Fig. 4(c) one can see the eﬀect of the
third-order terms in the expansion of (1), reducing the
contrast of the envelope function.

Collapse and revival phenomena similar to the ef-
fect described here have been observed in nuclear
precession.12 In that work, spin precession of an I = 3/2
system, 201Hg, was studied and the slight deviations from
linearity in the Zeeman shifts responsible for the collapse
and revival beats were due to quadrupole-interaction
shifts arising from the interaction of the atoms with the
walls of a rectangular vapor cell. Collapse and revival
phenomena in molecules with large angular momenta
were considered in a tutorial paper.13

3. Transient dynamics

In order
in the
to observe macroscopic dynamics
magneto-optical eﬀects, some experimental parameter
must be varied in time. Perhaps the most conceptually
straightforward technique is to induce atomic or molecu-
lar polarization with a pulse of pump light and then ob-
serve the transient response. Quantum beats were origi-
nally observed in this way by detecting ﬂuorescence.14,15
We are primarily concerned here with techniques involv-
ing probe light detection (a brief discussion of ﬂuores-
cence experiments is given in Sec. 6 A). An early applica-
tion of this method in conjunction with probe-light polar-
ization spectroscopy was an experiment16 with ytterbium
vapor. A 5 ns pulse of linearly polarized dye-laser light
produced a coherently excited population in the 6 3P1
state, whose Zeeman sublevels were split by a magnetic
ﬁeld. The transmission of a subsequent linearly polar-
ized probe-light pulse was observed through a crossed
polarizer. Optical anisotropy in stimulated emission was
observed as polarization rotation of the probe beam. The
time dependence of the signal, due to the quantum-beat
evolution (Larmor precession) of the excited-state polar-
ization, was investigated indirectly by holding the probe-
pulse delay time τ ﬁxed, and sweeping the magnetic ﬁeld.
Oscillations corresponding to cos 2ΩLτ , where ΩL is the
Larmor frequency, were seen in the signal. The factor
of two appears because linearly polarized light induces
alignment (the κ = 2 tensor moment), which has two-fold
symmetry about any axis perpendicular to the alignment
axis (Sec. 2). Thus the quantum-beat frequency for this
moment is 2ΩL; in general, a rank κ moment polarized as
shown in Fig. 2 will have quantum-beat frequency κΩL
in a ˆz-directed magnetic ﬁeld.

Recently, nonlinear magneto-optical rotation with
pulsed pump light was used to study the sensitivity lim-
its of atomic magnetometry at very short time scales.17,18
Observation of the time-dependence of optical rotation of

Fig. 4. Collapse and revival beats arising in optically
pumped Cs atoms due to nonlinearity of Zeeman shifts.
(a) Time-dependent absorption of the probe light (see
text) observed on a short time scale reveals an oscillation
at the Larmor frequency. (b) Observation on a longer
time scale reveals the characteristic collapse and revival
(beating) behavior. Note period of essentially complete
(c) At even longer
collapse of the oscillation pattern.
time scales, the beat pattern is modiﬁed due to third-
order nonlinearity.

−

I, m

mJ i

J, mJ i|
|

ﬁgure shows that initially the lowest-order moments pre-
dominate. At t = τ2/4 the odd-order moments are zero
and the state is comprised of even-order moments only.
We can now connect these pictures of the atomic po-
larization state to an experimentally observable signal,
e.g., the absorption of weak, circularly polarized light
propagating along ˆz. To ﬁnd the absorption coeﬃcient,
assuming that the upper-state hyperﬁne structure is not
basis
resolved, we transform to the
with quantization axis along ˆz and sum over the transi-
tion rates for the Zeeman sublevels. At short time scales
[Fig. 4(a)] we see absorption modulated at the Larmor
frequency, due to the precession of the atomic polariza-
tion about the x-axis. The absorption is minimal when
the state is oriented along ˆz, and maximal when it is ori-
ˆz. Looking at the envelope of this modula-
ented along
tion at longer time scales, we see “collapse and revival”
with period τ2/2 of the absorption oscillation amplitude
[Fig. 4(b)]. The maxima of the envelope are associated
with the stretched states shown in Fig. 1 and the min-
ima with the states that are symmetric with respect to
the x-y plane. This can also be seen by comparison to
Fig. 3; the envelope of the signal plotted in Fig. 4(b)
is proportional to the norm of the κ = 1 moment (ori-
entation), and does not have any of the time-dependent

−

≪

≪

a weak probe beam allows the measurement of the mag-
netic ﬁeld to be corrected for the initial spin-projection
uncertainty. For measurement times T short enough that
non-light-induced polarization relaxation processes can
(γ√N )−1, where γ is the
be neglected (in this case, T
relaxation rate and N is the number of polarized atoms),
a “quantum nondemolition measurement”19 can be per-
formed by using far-detuned probe light. Over this time,
a sub-shotnoise measurement with uncertainty scaling
as N −3/4 is then possible.20 If squeezed light19 is used,
Heisenberg-limited scaling of N −1 can be obtained, lim-
(γN )−1.
ited to an even shorter measurement time T
In the experiments discussed so far in this section, the
measurement times were much shorter than the polar-
ization relaxation time. When longer measurements are
made, the amplitude of the quantum beats will be seen to
decay during the measurement, due to mechanisms such
as collisional relaxation and, for excited states, sponta-
neous emission.21 An often important mechanism that
has the eﬀect of polarization relaxation is ﬂy-through or
transit relaxation. This results from polarized particles
travelling out of the probe light beam while unpolarized
particles enter the beam, resulting in a decrease in aver-
age polarization in the probe region. The eﬀective rate
of this relaxation γt can be estimated from the average
thermal velocity over the size of the relevant region. How-
ever, this relaxation is, in general, not described by an
exponential decay with time constant γt, but in many
cases can be substantially more complicated. For exam-
ple, consider a situation in which, immediately after the
pump pulse, particles are polarized in a spatial region
that is larger than the probe region. This can occur even
if the pump and probe beams have identical and overlap-
ping proﬁles under conditions of nonlinear absorption: a
strong Gaussian-proﬁled pump beam can perform eﬃ-
cient optical pumping even far away from the beam cen-
ter. The weak probe, on the other hand, acts at the
intensity range of linear absorption; it takes some time
for particles in thermal motion to reach the beam center
where they undergo the probe interaction. As a result, at
the initial moments following the pump pulse, one does
not observe signiﬁcant eﬀective relaxation. Only after a
certain amount of time does ﬂy-through relaxation set in.
This eﬀect was predicted and measured for relaxation of
ground state K2 molecules.22 This nonexponential relax-
ation kinetics can be signiﬁcant for quantitative analysis
of quantum-beat signals.

In addition to the observation of transients, another
way to study quantum beat dynamics is to use resonance
techniques involving modulation of the external experi-
mental conditions. Such techniques are discussed in the
next section.

4. Beat resonances

A. Amplitude resonances

In a pulsed experiment such as described in Sec. 3, the
quantum beats will tend to wash out as the pulse rate

5

is increased relative to the polarization relaxation rate.
Particles polarized during successive pulses will, in gen-
eral, beat out of phase with each other, cancelling out the
overall medium polarization.
If the quantum-beat fre-
quency is slower than the relaxation rate, each polarized
particle will not be able to undergo an entire quantum-
beat cycle before relaxing. Thus the quantum beats will
not cancel completely, and there will be some residual
steady-state polarization. This is the eﬀect studied in
the limiting case of steady-state NMOE experiments with
cw pump light. If the quantum-beat frequency is faster
than the relaxation rate, each particle will contribute to
the average polarization over its entire quantum beat cy-
cle, and the macroscopic polarization of the medium will
be destroyed entirely. This is the reason that magne-
tometers based on steady-state NMOE lose sensitivity
for Larmor frequencies greater than the relaxation rate.
However, time-dependent macroscopic polarization can
be regained—even for high quantum beat frequencies—if
the pump light is pulsed or amplitude modulated at a
subharmonic of the quantum-beat frequency.23 Polariza-
tion is produced in phase with that of particles pumped
on previous cycles. The light pulses contribute coher-
ently to the medium polarization, and the ensemble beats
in unison. This eﬀect is known as synchronous opti-
cal pumping or “optically driven spin precession”.24,25
This is a particular case of a general class of phenomena
known as beat resonances,2,7,14,26 exhibited when a pa-
rameter of the pump light or external ﬁeld is modulated,
as discussed below.
In NMOE experiments, such reso-
nances are generally observed using lock-in detection of
the transmission or polarization signal of the probe light,
at a harmonic of the modulation frequency. However, in
some cases, such as when total transmission (or ﬂuores-
cence) is observed, the resonances can also be detected
in the time-averaged signal27.

In 1961, Bell and Bloom24 were the ﬁrst to observe beat
resonances, due to quantum beats in the ground states
of Rb and Cs and in metastable He. The ﬁrst ground-
state quantum-beat resonance experiments in molecules
28 and were followed by exper-
were performed with Te2
iments with K2.29,30 Synchronous optical pumping has
been used over the years in many applications. To give
just one example, this method was employed in sensitive
searches31,32,33 for a possible permanent electric-dipole
moment (whose existence is only possible due to a vi-
olation of both parity and time-reversal invariance) of
199Hg.

B. Frequency resonances

Frequency (rather than amplitude) modulation of the
pump light can be used to produce an eﬀect similar
to that discussed in Sec. 4 A. Here, the optical pump-
ing rate is modulated as a result of its frequency de-
pendence. One example of this is nonlinear magneto-
optical (Faraday) rotation with frequency-modulated
light (FM NMOR).34,35,36 In this technique, linearly po-
larized light near-resonant with an atomic transition is

directed parallel to the magnetic ﬁeld. The frequency
of the light is modulated, causing the rates of optical
pumping and probing to acquire a periodic time depen-
dence. As described in Sec. 4 A, a resonance occurs when
the quantum-beat frequency κΩL for a rank-κ polariza-
tion moment equals the modulation frequency Ωm (the
lowest-order polarization moment here has κ = 2). The
atomic sample is pumped into a macroscopic rotating
polarized state that causes a periodic modulation of the
plane of light polarization at the output of the medium.
The amplitude of time-dependent optical rotation at var-
ious harmonics of Ωm can be measured with a phase-
sensitive lock-in detector (Fig. 5). Additional resonances
can be observed when the quantum-beat frequency is
equal to higher harmonics of the modulation frequency
(equivalently, Ωm is equal to subharmonics of the beat
frequency 2ΩL/n, where n is the harmonic order).

As discussed in Sec. 4 A, in a steady-state nonlinear
magneto-optical rotation experiment, the equilibrium po-
larization of the ensemble depends on the balance of Lar-
mor precession with various mechanisms causing the po-
larization to relax (e.g., spin-exchange collisions or wall
collisions). When the Larmor frequency is much less than
the relaxation rate, the magnitude of the optical rotation
increases linearly with the Larmor frequency. When the
Larmor frequency increases, polarization is washed out
and optical rotation falls oﬀ. Such zero-ﬁeld resonances
are also observed in the magnetic ﬁeld dependence of the
in-phase FM NMOR signals (Fig. 5). For the zero-ﬁeld
resonances, Ωm is much faster than both ΩL and the opti-
cal pumping rate for the cell, so the frequency modulation
does not signiﬁcantly aﬀect the pumping process. On the
other hand, as the laser frequency is scanned through res-
onance, there arises a time-dependent optical rotation, so
the signal contains various harmonics of Ωm.

The FM NMOR technique is useful for increasing the
dynamic range of NMOR-based magnetometers (Sec.
5 B). The beat resonances have width comparable to
that of the zero-ﬁeld resonance (since the dominant re-
laxation mechanisms are the same), but in principle can
be centered at any desired magnetic ﬁeld.

C. Polarization resonances

In addition to beat resonances obtained by modulation
of the light amplitude and frequency, resonances due to
modulation of light polarization have also been studied
(for a review of earlier work, see Ref. 37). These po-
larization resonances (also called phase resonances) are
much like the other light modulation eﬀects discussed
above. Polarization modulation can be thought of as out-
of-phase amplitude modulation of the light polarization
components, providing a conceptual link to amplitude
resonances (Sec. 4 A).

For Zeeman beats, the light polarization, when ro-
tated at the Larmor frequency, is always parallel to the
alignment of the ensemble. In this case, optical pump-
ing contributes continuously and coherently to a rotating
aligned polarization state of the ensemble. This eﬀect

6

×

laser power was 15 µW, beam diameter

Fig. 5. Signals detected at the ﬁrst harmonic (a,b) and
second harmonic (c,d) of Ωm as a function of longitu-
dinal magnetic ﬁeld. This experiment employed buﬀer-
gas-free, paraﬃn-coated vapor cells containing isotopi-
cally enriched 87Rb. The laser was tuned near the
D1 line,
2
1 kHz, and the modulation amplitude
mm, Ωm = 2π
×
∆ωm = 2π
220 MHz. Traces (a,c) and (b,d) corre-
spond to the in-phase and the quadrature outputs of the
signals from the lock-in detector, respectively. The zero-
ﬁeld resonances observed in traces (a,c) are similar in na-
ture to the resonances observed in static NMOE studies
(see text). The quadrature components arise because of
a phase diﬀerence between the “probe” modulation and
the modulation of the optical properties of the atomic
medium. (Aligned atoms produce maximum optical ro-
tation when the alignment axis is at an angle of π/4 to
the light polarization direction.) Figure from Ref. 34.

∼

was studied in an experiment38 with Rb. A λ/2 plate
on a motor-driven rotating optical mount was used to
continuously rotate the light polarization direction at a
ﬁxed frequency; transmission was observed with lock-in
detection at this frequency while the longitudinal mag-
netic ﬁeld strength was swept (Fig. 6). The “dark res-
onance”, a drop in transmission, is normally centered
at zero ﬁeld when light polarization is ﬁxed [Fig. 7(b)].

Fig. 6. Experimental arrangement for the polarization
resonance study.

D. Parametric resonances

7

Fig. 8. A schematic of an experimental arrangement for
parametric resonance spectroscopy with magnetic-ﬁeld
modulation.

As mentioned in Sec. 4 A, one way to obtain beat reso-
nances is to modulate the external ﬁeld (e.g., the mag-
netic ﬁeld), and consequently the Larmor precession fre-
quency. This method has been used for sensitive atomic
magnetometry,39 and is presently employed as a use-
ful general nonlinear-spectroscopic technique40 known as
parametric resonance.

In a typical setup (Fig. 8), linearly polarized resonant
laser light traverses the medium, to which a magnetic
ﬁeld parallel to the light-propagation direction is applied.
The magnetic ﬁeld has two components—a nearly dc
component (that can be slowly scanned) and an ac com-
ponent with frequency much faster than the ground-state
polarization-relaxation rate. Transmitted light intensity
is monitored with a photodetector, the signal from which
is analyzed with a lock-in ampliﬁer referenced to the ac
modulation of the magnetic ﬁeld.

As in FM NMOR (Sec. 4 B, Fig. 5), there are two types
of resonances that are seen when the dc magnetic ﬁeld is
scanned: the zero-ﬁeld resonance (independent of the ac-
modulation frequency) that only appears in the in-phase
component of the signal, and the frequency-dependent
resonances in both the in-phase and quadrature compo-
nents. The former arise because for resonant light the
transmission is a quadratic function of the magnetic ﬁeld,
while the latter are due to an eﬀective modulation of the
rate of polarization production. As the ac ﬁeld adds to
or subtracts from the static ﬁeld, it leads to acceleration
or deceleration of the Larmor precession, respectively.
Since, as discussed in Sec. 4 A, Larmor precession acts to
average out the macroscopic polarization induced by cw
pump light, more overall polarization is generated when
the Larmor precession rate is the slowest. As a result, the
rate of polarization production is modulated at the ac fre-
quency, and so, as for amplitude or frequency resonances,
a beat resonance occurs when the modulation frequency
is a subharmonic of the quantum beat frequency.

E. Parametric relaxation resonances

Beat resonances can also arise when the parameter that
is modulated is the relaxation rate of the atomic polariza-

Fig. 7. Faraday rotation angle (a) and transmission (b)
dependences on magnetic ﬁeld recorded with stationary
linear polarization of light. Trace (c) shows light trans-
mission as a function of magnetic ﬁeld when the linear
polarization is rotated at Ωm = 2π
14 Hz. Coil current
of one µA corresponds to a magnetic ﬁeld of approxi-
mately one µG.

×

This resonance was shifted by the polarization rotation
frequency [Fig. 7(c)]. Polarization resonances occurring
in molecules have been analyzed theoretically.27 In that
work, the time-averaged ﬂuorescence intensity was con-
sidered as the method of detection.

8

−

sulting in an observed resonance24 when the diﬀerence
becomes equal to 2ΩL, the splitting between the M = 1
and M =

1 energy levels.

CPT resonances can also occur when the light is fre-
quency modulated. In this case, the light spectrum con-
sists of an inﬁnite number of sidebands with amplitudes
of the nth sideband given by a Bessel function Jn(m)
corresponding to the modulation index m = ∆ωm/Ωm,
where ∆ωm is the modulation depth. For example, an
experiment46 with cesium atoms studied the applica-
tion of the CPT eﬀect with frequency-modulated light
to atomic magnetometry. The value of the modulation
index was m
1.5, so only a few sidebands were promi-
nent. Both vacuum and buﬀer-gas cells were used, and
the minimum observed width of the CPT resonance was
1.4 kHz in the latter case. The width of the resonance sets
the lower bound on the magnetic ﬁelds (and, correspond-
ingly, the resonance frequency) for which the resonances
can be resolved.

≃

The situation changes somewhat if the modulation
index becomes large. For example,
in the nonlinear
magneto-optical rotation with frequency-modulated light
experiments described in Sec. 4 B the modulation depth
30 MHz and the modulation rate is Ωm ≃
is ∆ωm ≃
105 and the pairs of
100–1000 Hz.34,35,36 Thus m
≃
∆M = 2 sublevels are coupled by a very large num-
ber of frequency-sideband pairs with comparable am-
plitude [Fig. 9(c)]. For this reason, the description in
terms of the CPT-resonances is less intuitive here than
the synchronous-pumping picture presented in Sec. 4 B.

5. Applications

A. High-order polarization moments

The use of Zeeman beat resonances allows one to di-
rectly create and detect higher-order polarization mo-
ments. Because a polarization moment with rank κ has
symmetry of order κ about some axis (Sec. 2), a reso-
nance in both pumping and probing due to interaction
with this moment occur when the light-particle interac-
tion is modulated at the frequency Ωm = κΩL. A dipole
transition can connect polarization moments with ranks
diﬀering by at most two. Consequently, multiple pho-
ton interactions are required to generate high-rank po-
larization moments. For example, two interactions are
required to produce a rank κ = 4 hexadecapole moment
from an initially unpolarized (κ = 0) state. There must
be an equal number of photon interactions in order to
detect a signal due to the high-order multipole moment,
which will be modulated at κΩL. Thus the amplitude
of the signal due to the hexadecapole resonance scales as
the fourth power of the light intensity, as experimentally
observed35 in FM NMOR (Sec. 4 B).

Figure 10 shows the magnetic-ﬁeld dependence of FM
NMOR signals from a paraﬃn-coated cell containing
87Rb in which the atoms are pumped and probed with
a single light beam tuned to the D1 transition. At rela-
tively low light power [Fig. 10(a)], there are three promi-

Fig. 9. (a) Light frequency spectrum for light-intensity
modulation with 50% depth. (b) A CPT resonance at
double modulation frequency in the case of a F = 1
→
F ′ = 0 transition. The lower-state Zeeman sublevels are
split in a magnetic ﬁeld applied along the quantization
axis. (c) The CPT resonances in the case of frequency
modulation with a large modulation index.

tion. Once again, resonances occur when the frequency
of the modulation coincides with the spin-precession
frequency or its subharmonic. This eﬀect was pre-
dicted theoretically41,42 and observed experimentally43
in metastable helium, where relaxation rate was modu-
lated by modulating the discharge current in a helium
cell. Note that since relaxation is independent of the
direction of the atomic spins (isotropic relaxation), this
method, in contrast to the ones discussed above, cannot
produce large overall polarizations of the sample when
the Larmor precession rate signiﬁcantly exceeds the re-
laxation rate (see Sec. 4 A).

We also brieﬂy mention here another related dynamic
magneto-optical eﬀect: a sudden change in the relax-
ation or optical pumping rate for a driven spin system
can cause transient spin-nutations44 while the system re-
laxes towards its new equilibrium state.

F. Relation to coherent population trapping

An equivalent description of the beat resonance phenom-
ena can be given in terms of coherent population trap-
ping (CPT), an eﬀect that is also closely related to Λ-
resonances and mode crossing (see Ref. 45 for a review).
Indeed, harmonic modulation of the light intensity leads
to the appearance of two sidebands at frequencies shifted
from the unperturbed light frequency ω0 by the value of
Ωm. With mod-
the modulation frequency: ω1,2 = ω0 ±
ulation depth less than 100%, the spectral component
with frequency ω0 also survives [Fig. 9(a)]. A CPT res-
onance occurs when the frequency diﬀerence between a
pair of spectral components of the modulated light coin-
cides with the frequency splitting of the lower-state Zee-
man sublevels, so that light is resonant with a pair of
F ′ = 0 transition [Fig.
transitions.45 For a F = 1
9(b)], a CPT resonance leads to transfer of population
from the “bright” state to the “dark” states that are
uncoupled to the light, and light transmission increases.
For harmonic modulation of the light intensity, there are
two spectral diﬀerence frequencies (Ωm, 2Ωm), each re-

→

9

ﬁeld magnetometry in alkali atoms (Sec. 5 B), the use of
the highest-order polarization moment supported by a
given state may be advantageous, because its evolution
is free of complications due to nonlinear dependence of
the Zeeman shifts on the magnetic ﬁeld.35

B. Magnetometry

∼

The steady-state NMOE are a valuable tool for magne-
tometry; it has been shown52 that the sensitivity of a
magnetometer based on nonlinear Faraday rotation can
10−11 G Hz−1/2. Dynamic techniques can pro-
reach
vide useful extensions to the steady-state methods—in
particular, they can be used to increase the magnetome-
ter’s dynamic range by translating the narrow zero-ﬁeld
resonances to higher magnetic ﬁelds. As discussed in
Sec. 4 B, steady-state NMOE lose sensitivity to magnetic
ﬁelds when the Larmor frequency is greater than the po-
larization relaxation rate.
If beat resonances are used
for magnetic ﬁeld detection, however, the dependence of
the resonance condition on the modulation frequency can
be used to tune the response of the system to a desired
magnetic ﬁeld range.

While the earliest examples of beat resonance magne-
tometry used amplitude24 or parametric39,53 resonances,
in recent years the use of light-frequency modulation
has become more common.34,54,55,56 This is a result of
the development and broad use of single-mode diode-
laser systems. For such lasers, frequency modulation
via the diode current and/or the cavity length controlled
with a piezoelectric transducer voltage can be simpler
and more robust than either light amplitude modula-
tion or modulation of the applied magnetic ﬁeld. How-
ever, such frequency modulation is usually accompanied
15%.56
with inevitable intensity modulation of up to
The deleterious eﬀects of parasitic modulation and of
laser-intensity noise can be avoided by detecting optical
rotation34 rather than transmission.

∼

The use of beat resonances to selectively address high-
rank polarization moments (Sec. 5 A) can also be an ad-
vantage in magnetometry. Detection of such polarization
moments may result in increased statistical sensitivity by
allowing the use of higher light power without signiﬁcant
increase in the polarization relaxation rate due to power
broadening.35

One possible application of beat resonance mag-
netometers is to low-ﬁeld and remote-detection nu-
clear magnetic resonance and magnetic-resonance imag-
ing. Both parametric resonance53 and FM NMOR
magnetometers57 have been used to measure the nuclear
magnetization of a gaseous sample placed near a “probe”
Rb-vapor cell.
In the latter work, the ﬁelds—due to
xenon that was polarized by spin-exchange collisions with
laser-polarized Rb–were in the nanogauss range.

±

±

Fig. 10. An example of the magnetic-ﬁeld dependence of
the FM NMOR signals showing quadrupole resonances
at B =
143.0 µG, and the hexadecapole resonances
at
71.5 µG. Laser modulation frequency is 200 Hz,
modulation amplitude is 40 MHz peak-to-peak; the cen-
tral frequency is tuned to the low-frequency slope of the
F ′ = 1 absorption line. Plots (a,b) show the
F = 2
in-phase component of the signal at two diﬀerent light
powers; plot (c) shows the quadrature component. Note
the increase in the relative size of the hexadecapole sig-
nals at the higher power. The insets show zooms on
hexadecapole resonances. Figure from Ref. 35.

→

nent resonances: one at B = 0, and two corresponding
to 2ΩL = Ωm (see Sec. 4 B, Fig. 5). Much smaller sig-
nals, whose relative amplitudes rapidly grow with light
power, are seen at 4ΩL = Ωm, the expected positions of
the hexadecapole resonances.

Various experimental signatures of high-rank polar-
ization moments were previously detected with other
techniques,47,48,49,50,51 but by taking advantage of the
unique periodicity of the dynamic optical signals using
beat resonances, such high-rank moments can be di-
rectly created, controlled, and studied. Because of the
enhanced optical nonlinearities and diﬀerent relaxation
properties, higher-order polarization moments are of par-
ticular interest for application in many areas of quantum
and nonlinear optics. In addition, when performing high-

10

capole in K2 molecules were also observed using pulsed
pump light and ﬂuorescence detection.

So far, we have discussed quantum beats arising due
to the temporal evolution of the ground state. Obvi-
ously, one can also detect quantum beats in excited-state
dynamics by observing ﬂuorescence after pulsed excita-
tion. This technique was used for the ﬁrst observations of
quantum beats in atoms, in experiments with the 63P2
state14 of Hg and the 53P1 state15 of Cd. In diatomic
molecules, quantum beats from an excited state were ﬁrst
observed62 with iodine dimers in the B3Π0+

u state.

3Σ+

Quantum-beat studies measuring ﬂuorescence from
metastable states have been done as part of eﬀorts to
improve the present-day limit63 on the parity- and time-
reversal-invariance-violating permanent electric-dipole
moment (EDM) of the electron.64 Close-lying states of
opposite parity that can be mixed by a static electric ﬁeld
are advantageous for EDM measurements. The J = 1
level of the ﬁrst electronic excited state of lead oxide
is split into two opposite-parity states
(PbO), a(1)
(the Ω-doublet65) separated by only about 11 MHz. A re-
cent experiment66 studied quantum beats in ﬂuorescence
from molecules excited by a dye-laser pulse to the J = 1
states of a(1)(v′ = 5). For an EDM measurement it is
necessary to measure small shifts with great accuracy;
a sensitivity of about 50 Hz/√Hz was demonstrated,66
consistent with shot noise in the experiment. Precision
measurements of the Land´e factors of the two compo-
nents of the Ω-doublet were also made, laying the ground-
work for a future EDM measurement. Quantum-beat
measurements have also been done in atoms to evaluate
metastable states for use in an EDM measurement: preci-
sion tensor polarizability measurements were done with
Stark-induced quantum beats in Sm.67 Also, a pair of
long-lived opposite-parity states in Dy that are separated
by only 3 MHz were studied.68 These states, components
of which can be brought to crossing by applying a weak
static magnetic ﬁeld, were used in a quantum-beat tech-
nique to search for eﬀects due to parity violation.69

(cid:2)

(cid:3)

B. Polarization-noise spectroscopy

An unpolarized medium clearly can not produce a net
quantum beat signal. However, even in an unpolarized
sample the randomizing processes that relax polarization
at a rate γ cause the medium polarization to ﬂuctuate
around its average value of zero. Since polarization cre-
ated at a given time persists for an average time 1/γ, the
polarization noise spectrum contains only components at
frequencies less than
γ in the absence of an external
ﬁeld. When a magnetic ﬁeld is applied, the polarization
produced at a given time undergoes quantum beats, and
so the detected signal in probe light propagating along
the magnetic ﬁeld direction is modulated at the quantum-
beat frequency. Thus the peak in the noise spectrum orig-
inally centered at zero frequency with width γ is shifted
to the quantum-beat frequency. This eﬀect has been ob-
served for Zeeman beats in an experiment on the 589 nm
resonance line of Na contained in a vapor cell with buﬀer

∼

Fig. 11. Ground-state beat-resonance signal measured as
a change of the degree of polarization of laser induced
ﬂuorescence as a function of modulation frequency Ωm
of excitation light. The experiment was done with K2
molecules. Two resonances, at twice (alignment) and
four times (hexadecapole moment) the Larmor frequency
ΩL, were observed. Figure from Ref. 61.

6. Related topics

A. Fluorescence detection

Another standard technique for the observation of quan-
tum beats is the detection, not of polarization or trans-
mission of a probe beam, but of spontaneous emis-
sion from an excited state. Quantum beats in ﬂuores-
cence induced by weak probe light after pulsed excita-
tion were experimentally observed for the ﬁrst time in
an experiment58,59 measuring the magnetic moment of
the (v′′ = 1, J ′′ = 73) rovibronic level of the ground elec-
tronic state X 1Σ+
g of K2 molecules. Many molecules have
1Σ ground states. The magnetic moment of these states
is nominally zero—nonzero corrections appear only be-
cause of mixing with other states due to perturbation
by molecular rotation.60 This makes calculations of mag-
netic moments in 1Σ states rather complicated and ex-
perimental measurements of these moments become im-
portant.

≤

As noted in Sec. 5 A, a single-photon dipole interac-
tion couples polarization moments with a diﬀerence in
rank ∆κ
2. Since the absorption and re-emission of
probe light is a two-photon process, moments up to rank
four can be observed in ﬂuorescence induced by single-
photon excitation. Indeed, excited-state alignment will
be directly connected by a dipole transition to all ex-
isting ground-state moments from population (κ = 0)
to the hexadecapole moment (κ = 4). This technique
was used in the study of the K2 ground state for the
ﬁrst observation29,30,61 of a beat resonance due to the
hexadecapole moment (Fig. 11). Relaxation dynamics22
and Zeeman beats59 of multipole moments up to hexade-

gas.70

While the eﬀect described above is classical in the sense
that it is not related to the inherent uncertainty in the
polarization of each individual particle, quantum eﬀects
can also be relevant. In particular, the uncertainty rela-
tion between Cartesian components of the angular mo-
mentum implies that a similar polarization noise eﬀect
can be present not only for unpolarized samples, but
also even when there is full polarization. For example,
the noise would still be present in the same experimental
geometry if the particles were fully polarized along the
magnetic ﬁeld and had no longitudinal relaxation. The
width of the noise resonance would then be given by the
transverse relaxation rate.

An interesting blend of noise spectroscopy and the FM
NMOR method (Section 4 B) was recently studied us-
ing nonlinear Faraday rotation on the Rb D lines.71 A
balanced polarimeter could be conﬁgured to either de-
tect optical rotation or ellipticity of the light transmitted
through atomic vapor. Instead of the deliberate applica-
tion of laser-frequency modulation at a given rate, the
frequency noise inherent to diode lasers was relied on.
The noise power at the output of the balanced polarime-
ter at a ﬁxed frequency was observed as a function of the
magnetic ﬁeld. Resonant features were seen at B = 0
and at the values of B for which twice the Larmor fre-
quency coincided with the observation frequency, i.e., the
counterparts of the usual FM NMOR resonances.

7. Conclusions and outlook

We have discussed the various dynamic nonlinear
magneto-optical eﬀects, including transient eﬀects occur-
ring when the experimental conditions are changed sud-
denly, and beat resonance eﬀects that result from modu-
lation of an experimental parameter. We have attempted
to bring together diverse experimental techniques—
the
which can involve various modulation schemes,
“quantum” low-J limit or the “classical” high-J limit,
and related phenomena such as coherent population
trapping—and describe them from a common viewpoint.

The dynamic eﬀects have many applications in atomic
and molecular physics, allowing experimental methods
that would be diﬃcult to implement using the steady-
state eﬀects. For example, polarization moments can be
separately inﬂuenced and measured, allowing determina-
tion and exploitation of their various properties, such as
diﬀering relaxation rates. High-sensitivity magnetome-
try based on optical rotation can be performed with ar-
bitrarily large magnetic ﬁelds. Also, the dynamic eﬀects
provide a robust technique for precise measurements of
energy-level splittings, which makes them an invaluable
tool for fundamental symmetry tests relating to atomic
and molecular structure and interactions.

11

Appendix A: Polarization moments and the an-
gular momentum probability distribution

Here we describe in more detail the complementary de-
scriptions of the polarization state discussed in Sec. 2.
Most of the formulas given here can be found in the litera-
ture (for example, in Ref. 72), but they can be diﬃcult to
piece together, and, in particular, a discussion of the con-
nection between the quantum and classical limits is not
readily available. Thus it seems useful to gather together
this information.
In this section, equation numbers of
formulas found in Ref. 72 are referred to in brackets.

In order to describe the polarization state of a particle,
it can be helpful to write the state as a sum of tensor op-
erators having the symmetries of the spherical harmonics
Yκq(θ, φ). This multipole expansion is useful not only for
understanding the polarization symmetry (Fig. 2), but
also for reducing the complexity of the density matrix
evolution equations, especially for states with large an-
gular momentum. In molecular spectroscopy, one typi-
cally deals with states of much larger angular momenta
(J
In this case, the standard
Liouville equations of motion73 form a large coupled sys-
tem that can be diﬃcult to solve. However, the equations
of motion for the multipole expansion coeﬃcients can be
much simpler.10 This idea was introduced by Ducloy 74
and later applied to the analysis of a large variety of
nonlinear magneto-optical eﬀects in diatomic molecules
(see Ref. 2 and references therein).75

100) than for atoms.

≃

We employ the polarization operators

κ
q , deﬁned to
T
be irreducible tensors of rank κ that satisfy the normal-
ization condition [Eq. 2.4(2)]

and the phase relation [Eq. 2.4(3)]

′

Tr

†

κ
q
T

κ
q′ = δκκ′δqq′
T

κ
q
T

† = (

1)q

−

κ
−q.
T

Matrix elements of
given by [Eq. 2.4.2(8)]

κ
q resulting from this deﬁnition are
T

Jm′

κ
q |

|T

h

Jm

=

i

2κ + 1
2J + 1 h

r

Jmκq

Jm′
|

,
i

(A3)

|

h

. . .

. . .
i

where
are the Clebsch-Gordan coeﬃcients. The
density matrix is deﬁned as ρ = ΨΨ†, where Ψ is the
wavefunction of one particle and the overbar denotes the
average over the ensemble. It [or any arbitrary (2J + 1)
×
(2J + 1) Hermitian matrix] can be expanded in terms of
the polarization operators as [Eq. 6.1(47)]

2J

κ

ρ =

Xκ=0

Xq=−κ

†,

κ
ρκ
q
q T

where the expansion coeﬃcients ρκ
values of

[Eq. 6.1(48)]:

κ
q
T

q are the expectation

ρκ
q = Tr ρ

κ
q .
T

(A1)

(A2)

(A4)

(A5)

In terms of the density matrix elements ρmm′ this gives
[Eq. 6.1.5.(49)]

it can be seen from the expansion (A4) that the angular
momentum probability distribution

12

ρκ
q =

2κ + 1
2J + 1

r

J

Xm,m′=−J

Jmκq
h

Jm′
|

i

ρmm′,

(A6)

with the inverse transformation [Eq. 6.1(50)]

ρmm′ =

2J

κ

Xκ=0

Xq=−κ

2κ + 1
2J + 1 h

r

Jmκq

Jm′
|

ρκ
q .
i

(A7)

These relations are also commonly written in an equiva-
lent form using the identity

Jmκq
h

Jm′
|

i

= (

1)J−m

−

2J + 1
2κ + 1 h

r

Jm′J

κq
m
|

. (A8)
i

−

To produce a visual representation of the polarization
state, we plot the probability of the maximum projec-
tion of angular momentum along the unit vector ˆn(θ,φ),
i.e., the matrix element ρJJ (θ, φ) =
,
where [Eq. 6.1(20)]
(cid:11)

JJ(θ,φ)

JJ(θ,φ)

(cid:10)

ρ
(cid:12)
(cid:12)

(cid:12)
(cid:12)

Jm(θ,φ)

(φ, θ, 0)
|

D

Jm

i

=

=

(cid:11)

(cid:12)
(cid:12)

DJ

m′m(φ, θ, 0)
|

Jm

i

Xm′

(A9)

ˆn(θ,φ) operator; the
are the eigenfunctions of the J
Wigner D-functions DJ
m′m(α, β, γ) are the matrix ele-
ments of the rotation operator
(α, β, γ). Since the di-
agonal matrix elements of the polarization operators are
found from Eqs. (A3) and (A9) and the properties of the
D-functions to be [Eq. 6.1(27)]

D

·

ρJJ (θ, φ) =

4π
2J + 1

r

2J

κ

Xκ=0

Xq=−κ

JJκ0

h

JJ
|

q Y ∗
ρκ
i

κq(θ, φ)

(A11)
is a linear combination of spherical harmonics Y ∗
κq(θ, φ)
with coeﬃcients determined by the amplitude of the
corresponding polarization moment in the polarization
state of the ensemble. Given a probability distribution
ρJJ (θ, φ), the polarization moments ρκ
q and thus the den-
sity matrix elements ρmm′ can be recovered using the
orthonormality of the spherical harmonics, so all three
are complete and equivalent descriptions of the ensemble-
averaged polarization. All three descriptions can be use-
ful in calculations, especially in the large-J limit, for
which ρJJ (θ, φ) corresponds (apart from a normalization
factor2) to the classical probability distribution of the
angular momentum direction.

For large angular momentum,

the expression for
ρJJ (θ, φ) in terms of the density matrix elements ρmm′
simpliﬁes considerably.76,77 From Eq. (A9) we have

ρJJ (θ, φ) =

JJ(θ,φ)
(cid:10)

JJ(θ,φ)
ρ
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
DJ∗
m1J DJ
(cid:12)
(cid:12)

(cid:11)
m2J ρm1m2

=

=

Xm1m2

Xmµ

DJ∗

m+µ/2,J DJ

m−µ/2,J ρm+µ/2,m−µ/2,

(A12)

Jm(θ,φ)

(cid:10)

κ
q
T
(cid:12)
(cid:12)

Jm(θ,φ)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)

(cid:11)

=

r

4π
2J + 1 h

Jmκ0

Jm
|

Yκq(θ, φ),
i

where we have used the substitution m1,2 = m
µ/2.
The D-functions can be evaluated for the special case of
interest here [Eq. 4.17(8)], giving

±

(A10)

ρJJ (θ, φ) = (2J)!

eiµφ [cos (θ/2)]2(J+m) [sin (θ/2)]2(J−m) ρm+µ/2,m−µ/2
µ/2)! (J
m

µ/2)! (J + m

m + µ/2)! (J + m + µ/2)!

.

−

−

Xmµ

(J

p

−

−

(A13)

The factor depending on θ can be written

[cos (θ/2)]2(J+m) [sin (θ/2)]2(J−m) =

cos θ)1−m/J (1 + cos θ)1+m/J

(A14)

1
4

(cid:20)

(1

−

J

,

(cid:21)

and, for large J, has a sharp peak centered at cos θ = m/J. Thus as J
contributes to the sum, and we can write

→ ∞

, for a given θ only the term m = J cos θ

ρJJ (θ, φ)

(2J)!
4J

≃

(1

m

−

−

Xµ

(J

−

p

m/J)J−m (1 + m/J)J+m eiµφρm+µ/2,m−µ/2
µ/2)! (J + m

µ/2)! (J

m + µ/2)! (J + m + µ/2)!

.

−

−

(A15)

For physical situations of interest, we can assume that only a limited number of polarization moments are present
J are nonzero. For these terms
(κ

2J), which implies that only density matrix elements ρm+µ/2,m−µ/2 with µ/2

≪

≪

in the sum the factor with explicit dependence on J can be simpliﬁed using Stirling’s approximation, n!

(2J)!
4J

m/J)J−m (1 + m/J)J+m

(1

−

(J

m

µ/2)! (J + m

µ/2)! (J

m + µ/2)! (J + m + µ/2)! ≃

−

−

p

−

−

(2J)!
4J

(1

−

m/J)J−m (1 + m/J)J+m
m)! (J + m)!
(J

−

1.

≃
(A16)

13

nne−n:

≃

Thus, in this limit, we have

ρJJ (θ, φ)

eiµφρm+µ/2,m−µ/2.

(A17)

≃ Xµ

For example, if one uses linearly polarized light to excite
a molecular transition between states with the same J in
the ground and excited state (Q-type transition) in the
absence of a magnetic ﬁeld, only diagonal density-matrix
elements will be nonzero. We can calculate these matrix
elements according to a simple formula,8

ρmm =

3m2
J(J + 1)(2J + 1)

.

Only one summand is left in Eq. (A17). Using m =
J cos θ we immediately get

(A18)

(A19)

ρ (θ, φ)

3 cos2 θ
2J + 1

.

≃

References

1. D. Budker, W. Gawlik, D. F. Kimball, S. M.
Rochester, V. V. Yashchuk, and A. Weis, “Reso-
nant nonlinear magneto-optical eﬀects in atoms,”
Rev. Mod. Phys. 74(4), 1153–1201 (2002).

2. M. Auzinsh and R. Ferber, Optical Polarization
of Molecules (Cambridge University, Cambridge,
1995).

3. We will use the word “particle” to refer to either

atoms or molecules.

4. S. Haroche, in High-resolution laser spectroscopy,
edited by K. Shimoda (Springer, Berlin, 1976), pp.
256–313.

5. J. N. Dodd and G. W. Series, in Progress in atomic
spectroscopy, edited by W. Hanle and H. Kleinpop-
pen (Plenum, New York, 1978), vol. 1, pp. 639–677.
6. E. Hack and J. Huber, “Quantum beat spectroscopy
of molecules,” International Reviews in Physical
Chemistry 10, 287–317 (1991).

7. E. B. Aleksandrov, M. P. Chaika, and G.
Interference

Khvostenko,
(Springer-Verlag, New York, 1993).

of Atomic

I.
States

8. M. Auzinsh, “Angular momenta dynamics in mag-
netic and electric ﬁeld: Classical and quantum ap-
proach,” Can. J. Phys. 75(12), 853–872 (1997).
9. S. M. Rochester and D. Budker, “Atomic polar-
ization visualized,” Am. J. Phys. 69(4), 450–454
(2001).

10. M. P. Auzinsh and R. S. Ferber, “Optical pumping
of diatomic molecules in the electronic ground state:
classical and quantum approaches,” Phys. Rev. A
43(5), 2374–2386 (1991).

11. M. Dyakonov, “Theory of resonance scattering of
light by a gas in the presence of a magnetic ﬁeld,”
Zhurnal Eksperimental’noi i Teoreticheskoi Fiziki,
47, 2213-2221 20, 1484–1489 (1964).

12. P. K. Majumder, B. J. Venema, S. K. Lamoreaux,
B. R. Heckel, and E. N. Fortson, “Test of the lin-
earity of quantum mechanics in optically pumped
201Hg,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 65(24), 2931–2934 (1990).
13. M. Auzinsh, “The evolution and revival structure of
angular momentum quantum wave packets,” Can. J.
Phys. 77(7), 491–503 (1999).

14. E. Aleksandrov, “Luminiscence beats induced by
pulsed excitation of coherent states,” Opt. Spec-
trosc. (USSR) 17, 522–523 (1964).

15. J. N. Dodd, R. Kaul, and D. Warington, “The mod-
ulation of resonance ﬂuorescence excited by pulsed
light,” Proc. Phys. Soc. London, Sect. A 84, 176–
178 (1964).

16. W. Lange and J. Mlynek, “Quantum beats in trans-
mission by time-resolved polarization spectroscopy,”
Phys. Rev. Lett. 40(21), 1373–1375 (1978).

17. J. M. Geremia, J. K. Stockton, A. C. Doherty, and
H. Mabuchi, “Quantum Kalman ﬁltering and the
Heisenberg limit in atomic magnetometry,” Phys.
Rev. Lett. 9125(25), 801 (2003).

18. J. M. Geremia, J. K. Stockton, and H. Mabuchi,
(2004),

atomic magnetometry”

“Sub-shotnoise
quant-ph/0401107.

19. M. O. Scully and M. S. Zubairy, Quantum Optics
(Cambridge University, Cambridge, England, 1997).
20. M. P. Auzinsh, D. Budker, D. F. Kimball, J. E. Stal-
naker, A. O. Sushkov, and V. V. Yashchuk, “Can a
quantum nondemolition measurement improve the
sensitivity of an atomic magnetometer?” (2004),
physics/0403097.

21. The quantum-beat frequency must be higher than
the relaxation rate for quantum-beat dynamics to
be clearly observed. In molecules, for example, the
excited-state relaxation rate is often dominated by
108 s−1, greater
radiative decay and is typically
106
than the typical ground-state relaxation rate (
s−1). Thus, larger magnetic ﬁelds are required to
observe excited-state Zeeman beats than for the ob-
servation of ground-state quantum beats.

∼

∼

22. M. P. Auzinsh, R. S. Ferber, and I. Pirags, “K2
ground-state relaxation studies from transient pro-
cess kinetics,” J. Phys. B 16(15), 2759–2771 (1983).
23. The idea of stroboscopic matching in order to in-
crease coupling between systems (light and precess-
ing spins in this context) is also omnipresent in
the ﬁeld of nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR). For

example, Hahn and co-workers introduced various
methods of coupling spin systems with diﬀerent gy-
romagnetic ratios together by matching the Larmor
frequency of one system to the Rabi frequency of the
other (the Kaplan-Hahn matching), or by match-
ing the Rabi frequencies of the two systems (the
Hartmann-Hahn matching).78 A general review79 of
the connection between concepts in quantum optics
and NMR was given by Hahn.

24. W. Bell and A. Bloom, “Optically driven spin pre-

cession,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 6(6), 280 (1961).

25. W. Bell and A. Bloom, “Observation of forbidden
resonances in optically driven spin systems,” Phys.
Rev. Lett. 6(11), 623 (1961).

26. E. B. Aleksandrov, “Quantum beats of luminescence
under modulated light excitation,” Opt. Spectrosc.
14, 233–234 (1963).

27. M. Auzinsh, “Nonlinear phase resonance of quan-
tum beats in the dimer ground state,” Opt. Spec-
trosc. (USSR) 68(6), 750–752 (1990).

28. R. S. Ferber, A. I. Okunevich, O. A. Shmit, and
M. Y. Tamanis, “Lande factor measurements for the
130Te2 electronic ground state,” Chem. Phys. Lett.
90, 476–480 (1982).

29. M. Auzinsh, K. Nasyrov, M. Tamanis, R. Ferber,
and A. Shalagin, “Resonance of quantum beats in
a system of magnetic sublevels of the electronic
ground state of molecules,” Sov. Phys. JETP 65(5),
891–897 (1987).

30. M. P. Auzinsh, K. A. Nasyrov, M. Y. Tamanis, R. S.
Ferber, and A. M. Shalagin, “Determination of the
ground-state Lande factor for diatomic molecules
by a beat-resonance method,” Chem. Phys. Lett.
167(1-2), 129–136 (1990).

31. J. P. Jacobs, W. M. Klipstein, S. K. Lamoreaux,
B. R. Heckel, and E. N. Fortson, “Limit on the
electric-dipole moment of 199Hg using synchronous
optical pumping,” Phys. Rev. A 52(5), 3521–3540
(1995).

32. M. V. Romalis, W. C. Griﬃth, J. P. Jacobs, and
E. N. Fortson, “New limit on the permanent electric
dipole moment of 199Hg,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 86(12),
2505–2508 (2001).

33. M. V. Romalis, W. C. Griﬃth, J. P. Jacobs, and
E. N. Fortson, in Art and Symmetry in Experimental
Physics: Festschrift for Eugene D. Commins, edited
by D. Budker, S. J. Freedman, and P. Bucksbaum
(AIP, Melville, New York, 2001), vol. 596 of AIP
Conference Proceedings, pp. 47–61.

34. D. Budker, D. F. Kimball, V. V. Yashchuk, and
M. Zolotorev, “Nonlinear magneto-optical rotation
with frequency-modulated light,” Phys. Rev. A
6505(5 Part B), 5403 (2002).

35. V. V. Yashchuk, D. Budker, W. Gawlik, D. F. Kim-
ball, Y. P. Malakyan, and S. M. Rochester, “Se-
lective addressing of high-rank atomic polarization
moments,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 9025(25), 3001 (2003).
36. Y. P. Malakyan, S. M. Rochester, D. Budker, D. F.

14

Kimball, and V. V. Yashchuk, “Nonlinear magneto-
optical rotation of frequency-modulated light reso-
nant with a low-J transition,” Phys. Rev. A 69,
013817 (2004).

37. E. B. Aleksandrov, “Optical manifestation of inter-
ference of non-degenerate atomic states,” Sov. Phys.
- Usp. 15, 436–451 (1972).

38. D. Budker, D. F. Kimball, and V. V. Yashchuk,
Nonlinear magneto-optic atomic magnetometry for
the earth ﬁeld range, Tech. Rep. LBNL PUB-5449,
Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory (1999).
39. J. Dupont-Roc, “Determination of the three compo-
nents of a weak magnetic ﬁeld by optical methods,”
Rev. Phys. Appl. 5(6), 853–864 (1970).

40. H. Failache, P. Valente, G. Ban, V. Lorent, and
A. Lezama, “Inhibition of electromagnetically in-
duced absorption due to excited-state decoherence
in Rb vapor,” Phys. Rev. A 67(4), 043810 (2003).
41. A. I. Okunevich, “Parametric relaxation resonance
of optically oriented atoms in a transverse magnetic
ﬁeld,” Zhurnal Eksperimentalnoi Teor. Fiz. 66(5),
1578–1580 (1974).

42. L. Novikov, “Optically excited parametric res-
onance,” Comptes Rendus Hebdomadaires des
Seances de L’Academie des Sciences, Serie B (Sci-
ences Physiques) 278(25), 1063–1065 (1974).
43. A. I. Okunevich, “Parametric relaxation resonance
of optically oriented metastable 4He atoms in an
eﬀective magnetic ﬁeld,” Zhurnal Eksperimentalnoi
Teor. Fiz. 67(3), 881–889 (1974).

44. E. B. Aleksandrov, M. V. Balabas, and V. A. Bonch-
Bruevich, “Nutation caused by a change in relax-
ation rate,” Pis’ma Zh. ´Eksp. Teor. Fiz. 45(6), 309–
310 (1987).
45. E. Arimondo,

in Progess in Optics, edited by
E. Wolf (New York, 1996), vol. XXXV of Elsevier
Science B.V., pp. 259–354.

46. C. Andreeva, G. Bevilacqua, V. Biancalana, S. Car-
taleva, Y. Dancheva, T. Karaulanov, C. Marinelli,
E. Mariotti, and L. Moi, “Two-color coherent pop-
ulation trapping in a single Cs hyperﬁne transition,
with application in magnetometry,” Appl. Phys. B,
Lasers Opt. 76(6), 667–675 (2003).

47. D. Suter, T. Marty, and H. Klepel, “Rotation prop-
erties of multipole moments in atomic sublevel spec-
troscopy,” Opt. Lett. 18(7), 531–533 (1993).
48. D. Suter and T. Marty, “Experimental observation
of the rotation properties of atomic multipoles,” J.
Opt. Soc. Am. B 11(1), 242–252 (1994).

49. J. D. Xu, G. W¨ackerle, and M. Mehring, “Multiple-
quantum spin coherence in the ground state of al-
kali atomic vapors,” Phys. Rev. A 55(1), 206–213
(1997).

50. J. D. Xu, G. W¨ackerle, and M. Mehring, “Optical
detection of spin multipole order in the ground state
of alkali atoms,” Z. Phys. D 42(1), 5–13 (1997).
51. A. B. Matsko, I. Novikova, G. R. Welch, and M. S.
Zubairy, “Enhancement of Kerr nonlinearity by

multiphoton coherence,” Opt. Lett. 28(2), 96–98
(2003).

52. D. Budker, D. F. Kimball, S. M. Rochester, V. V.
Yashchuk, and M. Zolotorev, “Sensitive magnetom-
etry based on nonlinear magneto-optical rotation,”
Phys. Rev. A 62(4), 043403 (2000).

53. C. Cohen-Tannoudji, J. DuPont-Roc, S. Haroche,
and F. Lalo¨e, “Detection of the static magnetic ﬁeld
produced by the oriented nuclei of optically pumped
3He gas,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 22(15), 758–760 (1969).
54. B. Cheron, H. Gilles, J. Hamel, O. Moreau, and
E. Noel, “A new optical pumping scheme using a
frequency modulated semi-conductor laser for 4He
magnetometers,” Opt. Commun. 115(1-2), 71–74
(1995).

55. B. Cheron, H. Gilles, J. Hamel, O. Moreau, and
E. Noel, “4He optical pumping with frequency mod-
ulated light,” J. Phys. II 6(2), 175–185 (1996).
56. H. Gilles, J. Hamel, and B. Cheron, “Laser pumped
Instrum. 72(5),

4He magnetometer,” Rev. Sci.
2253–2260 (2001).

57. V. V. Yashchuk, J. Granwehr, D. F. Kimball, S. M.
Rochester, A. Trabesinger, J. T. Urban, D. Budker,
and A. Pines, “Hyperpolarized xenon nuclear spins
detected by optical atomic magnetometry” (2004),
physics/0404090.

58. M. P. Auzinsh, M. Y. Tamanis, and R. S. Fer-
ber, “Observation of quantum beats in the kinetics
of the thermalization of diatomic molecules in the
electronic ground state,” Jetp Lett. 42(4), 160–163
(1985).

59. M. Auzinsh, M. Tamanis, and R. Ferber, “Zeeman
quantum beats after optical depopulation of the
ground electronic state of diatomic molecules,” Sov.
Phys. JETP 63(4), 688–693 (1986).

61. M. Auzinsh and R. Ferber,

60. H. Lefebvre-Brion and R. W. Field, The Spectra and
Dynamics of Diatomic Molecules (Elsevier, 2004).
“Observation of
quantum-beat resonance between magnetic sub-
levels with ∆M = 4,” Jetp Lett. 39(8), 452–455
(1984).

62. R. Wallenstein, J. A. Paisner, and A. L. Schawlow,
“Observation of Zeeman quantum beats in molecu-
lar iodine,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 32, 1333–1336 (1974).
63. B. C. Regan, D. Commins, C. J. Schmidt, and
D. DeMille, “New limit on the electron electric
dipole moment,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 88(7), 071805
(2002).

64. D. DeMille, F. Bay, S. Bickman, B. Kawall,
L. Hunter, J. Krause, D., S. Maxwell, and K. Ulmer,
in AIP. American Institute of Physics Conference
Proceedings, no.596, 2001, pp.72-83. USA., edited
by D. Budker, P. Bucksbaum, and S. J. Freedman
(2001).

65. G. Herzberg,

Spectra of Diatomic Molecules

(Krieger, Malabar, Florida, 1989).

66. D. Kawall, F. Bay, S. Bickman, Y. Jiang, and D. De-
Mille, “Precision Zeeman-Stark spectroscopy of the

15

metastable a(1)[3Σ+] state of PbO,” Phys. Rev.
Lett. 92(13), 133007 (2004).

67. S. Rochester, C. J. Bowers, D. Budker, D. DeMille,
and M. Zolotorev, “Measurement of lifetimes and
tensor polarizabilities of odd-parity states of atomic
samarium,” Phys. Rev. A 59(5), 3480–3494 (1999).
68. D. Budker, D. Demille, E. D. Commins, and M. S.
Zolotorev, “Experimental investigation of excited
states in atomic dysprosium,” Phys. Rev. A 50(1),
132–143 (1994).

69. A. T. Nguyen, D. Budker, D. DeMille, and
M. Zolotorev, “Search for parity nonconservation
in atomic dysprosium,” Phys. Rev. A 56(5), 3453–
3463 (1997).

70. E. B. Aleksandrov and V. S. Zapasskii, “Magnetic
resonance in the Faraday rotation noise spectrum,”
Zhurnal Eksperimentalnoi Teor. Fiz. 81(1), 132–138
(1981).

71. M. Martinelli, P. Valente, H. Failache, D. Felinto,
L. S. Cruz, P. Nussenzweig, and A. Lezama, “Noise
spectroscopy of non-linear magneto optical reso-
nances in Rb vapor,” Phys. Rev. A (2004).

72. D. A. Varshalovich, A. N. Moskalev, and V. K.
Khersonskii, Quantum theory of angular momen-
tum: irreducible tensors, spherical harmonics, vec-
tor coupling coeﬃcients, 3nj symbols (World Scien-
tiﬁc, Singapore, 1988).

73. L. Allen and J. H. Eberly, Optical resonance and

two-level atoms (Dover, New York, 1987).

74. M. Ducloy, “Non-linear eﬀects in optical pumping
with lasers. I. General theory of the classical limit
for levels of large angular momenta,” J. Phys. B
9(3), 357–381 (1976).

75. When the excitation light has a spectral proﬁle
broader than the homogeneous absorption line-
width, calculations can also be simpliﬁed by using
rate equations for the Zeeman coherences.80,81 It
has been demonstrated that in many cases these
rate equations give very good agreement between
the model and experimental results. Recently, a de-
tailed analysis82 of the application limits for the rate
equations for Zeeman coherences for nonlinear mag-
neto optical eﬀects was carried out.

76. K. A. Nasyrov and A. M. Shalagin, “Inter-
action between intense radiation and atoms or
molecules experiencing classical rotary motion,”
Zhurnal Eksperimentalnoi Teor. Fiz. 81(5), 6649–
6663 (1981).

77. K. A. Nasyrov, “Wigner representation of rotational
motion,” J. Phys. A: Math. Gen. 32, 66636678
(1999).

78. C. P. Slichter, Principles of Magnetic Resonance,
Springer Series in Solid-State Sciences (Springer,
1996).

79. E. L. Hahn, “Concepts of NMR in quantum op-
tics,” Concepts in Magnetic Resonance 9(2), 69–81
(1997).

80. C. Cohen-Tannoudji, “Theorie quantique du cycle

de pompage optique. Veriﬁcation experimentale des
noveaux eﬀets prevus (1-re partie),” Ann. de Phys.
(Paris) 7, 423–461 (1962).

81. C. Cohen-Tannoudji, “Theorie quantique du cycle
de pompage optique. Veriﬁcation experimentale des
noveaux eﬀets prevus (2-e partie),” Ann. de Phys.

(Paris) 7, 469–504 (1962).

82. K. Blush and M. P. Auzin’sh, “Validity of rate equa-
tions for zeeman coherences for analysis of nonlinear
interaction of atoms with laser radiation” (2003),
physics/0312124.

16

