4
0
0
2
 
l
u
J
 
8
 
 
]
h
p
-
m
o
t
a
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
0
4
0
7
0
4
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

A High Flux Source of Cold Rubidium

Christopher Slowe,1, ∗ Laurent Vernac,1, 2 and Lene Vestergaard Hau1
1Department of Physics and Division of Engineering and Applied Sciences,
Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts 02138
2Laboratoire de Physique des Laser, Institut Galil´ee, Universit´e Paris 13,
Avenue Jean Baptiste Cl´ement 93430 Villetaneuse France
(Dated: February 2, 2008)
We report the production of a continuous, slow, and cold beam of 87Rb atoms with an unprece-
dented ﬂux of 3.2 × 1012 atoms/s and a temperature of a few milliKelvin. Hot atoms are emitted
from a Rb candlestick atomic beam source and transversely cooled and collimated by a 20 cm long
atomic collimator section, augmenting overall beam ﬂux by a factor of 50. The atomic beam is then
decelerated and longitudinally cooled by Zeeman slowing.

PACS numbers: 39.10.+j,32.80.Pj

Cold and slow, high-ﬂux atomic beams are essential
for high signal to noise measurements in atom interfer-
ometry experiments [1], for rapid loading of magneto-
optical traps (MOTs) for production of Bose-Einstein
condensates, and for the potential creation of a CW atom
laser. A variety of methods have been employed over the
years to create cold, intense atomic beams. Low velocity
intense sources (LVIS) [2], Axicons [3], and 2D MOTs
[4, 5, 6] employ background vapor loading into a MOT.
They are typically limited in total ﬂux by the loading
rate of the MOT to a few times 109 atoms/s, though
1010 atoms/s, as
they may be pushed as high as to 6
in [7] (but with higher longitudinal temperature).

×

×

An alternative approach involves the use of a hot eﬀu-
sive source of atoms, with a much higher vapor pressure
and followed by a deceleration and cooling stage. White
light slowing has been used to produce a beam with up
1010 Cs atoms/s [8]. The Zeeman slower [9] re-
to 2
quires less laser power. Using this technique, the authors
in [10] have been able to produce a beam of Rb with
1011 atoms/s. However, both
an integrated ﬂux of 2
are limited by the transverse velocity distribution of the
original atomic source and can thus be made signiﬁcantly
more eﬃcient by adding some form of transverse beam
collimation and cooling.

×

×

In this Letter, we report the production of a slow and
cold (both transversely and longitudinally) atomic beam
1012) atoms/s at 116
1012 (1.7
with a total ﬂux of 3.2
1011)
(45) m/s and a peak intensity of 7.5
atoms/s/cm2. A schematic representation of the appara-
tus used for production of the atomic beam is shown in
Fig. 1. The set-up consists of a two-stage vacuum cham-
ber, with the source chamber separated from the detec-
tion chamber by a one-meter Zeeman slower tube.

1011 (3

×

×

×

Our source of thermal atoms originates from a Rb can-
dlestick atomic beam source (Fig. 1(a)) [11, 12], which
provides an intense, well collimated beam. This source
has a low temperature shield around a localized hot emis-
sion point kept at 160◦C, corresponding to a 7 mtorr va-
por pressure. The 2 mm emission hole lies 2 cm behind

×

a 2 mm collimation hole, resulting in an emitted beam
with a total divergence of π/100 sr. At this temperature,
the resulting atomic beam has a mean velocity of 400
1014 atoms/s; 25%
m/s, and a total emitted ﬂux of 1.2
of these emitted atoms are 87Rb of which 36% are within
the designed capture velocity of the Zeeman slower (320
1013 atoms/s. Ru-
m/s), for a total available ﬂux of 1.1
bidium at the emission hole is replenished by capillary
action via a gold-coated stainless steel mesh wick which
draws from a reservoir of liquid rubidium (kept at 50◦C
just above the Rb melting point of 40◦C). The pressure
of the source vacuum chamber can be kept below 10−8
45◦C cold ﬁnger. Moreover, by
torr, with the aid of a
lining the inside of the reservoir with the same wicking
mesh, uncollimated Rb is recycled, minimizing the need
for reloading and source maintenance.

×

−

To optimize coupling of atoms from the source into the
Zeeman slower region, we employ an atomic collimator,
with a large transverse capture velocity which acts to
uniformly decelerate the transverse velocity of the atoms
over its entire length [13]. As shown schematically in
Fig. 1(b), the ﬁrst 15 cm of the transverse collimation is
1”
accomplished by two pairs of nearly plane parallel 6
1
mirrors (one pair for each transverse axis), with a 2
cm laser beam for each axis coupled in at one end of the
structure at a small angle, β0, relative to the mirror’s
normal [13, 14]. By an optimal choice of laser beam and
mirror geometry, we greatly increase the capture velocity
of the collimator relative to a comparable length of 2D
molasses. Here, the mirrors in each pair are at a small
angle α relative to each other. Thus, upon the nth re-
ﬂection, the laser beam angle βn will be

×
×

βn = β0

nα.

−

(1)

By design, as the atomic beam propagates down the col-
limator, it becomes more and more collimated due to the
radiation pressure from the laser beams which become
more and more normal to the mirrors according to (1).
In this way, it is possible for the laser beams to remain
orthogonal to the trajectory of the atoms, which are then

2

FIG. 1: Experimental set-up. An atomic beam is produced via a candlestick atomic beam source (a) with a divergence
angle of 1/10 radian. The atoms in the beam then pass through a 20 cm long transverse collimation (b) and cooling (c) stage
and are subsequently longitudinally decelerated and cooled by means of a 1 m long Zeeman slower (d), which is designed in
the zero-crossing conﬁguration shown. Measurement of the atomic beam is performed via an absorption measurement 10 cm
beyond the end of the Zeeman slower (e).

uniformly accelerated radially with the maximum sponta-
neous force, F max
spont, and follow an approximately circular
arc.

One can readily show that with ﬂat mirrors it is impos-
sible to make the wavefronts follow a perfectly circular
arc (as shown by the dashed line in Fig. 1(b)). We solve
for β as a function of distance to arrive at

β(z) =

α +

(β0

1
2 "

r

α)2

−

−

4α
D

z

,

#

(2)

where D is the mirror spacing. If we want the ﬁnal angle
to approach zero, as it should for a perfectly collimated
atomic beam, β should decrease linearly rather than as
√z as given by (2). Although the laser rays will not
follow the ideal trajectory as a function of z, the increas-
ingly steep angle will cause the density of the rays to
increase at the end, compensating for the intensity loss
from repeated reﬂections.

As a ﬁnal consideration, note that we still require the
laser beam to exit the collimator; if the ﬁnal angle were
normal to the mirror, the beam would simply couple back
down the collimator and undo the collimation. To avoid
this, we couple the laser beam non-orthogonally to the
atomic velocity and correct for the resulting longitudinal
Doppler shift by blue detuning the laser by +3MHz (0.5Γ,
where Γ is the natural linewidth).

Since the collimation laser is tuned to near resonance,
we sacriﬁce ﬁnal transverse temperature for maximum
collimation. Next, the 5 cm region of 2D molasses
(Fig. 1(c)) rectiﬁes this by transversely cooling the atomic
beam, as well as serving as a tool for the overall alignment
of the collimation structure with respect to the Zeeman
slower tube (which deﬁnes an aperture of 10−3 sr).

With the atomic beam collimated, transversely cooled,
and eﬃciently coupled out of the source chamber, the

longitudinal beam slowing and cooling are accomplished
with a one meter long Zeeman slower (Fig. 1(d)). The
slower design is of the zero-ﬁeld-crossing type with a ﬁnal
compensating coil intended to leave very little fringe ﬁeld
in the experimental chamber. By design, the last six
coils (which set the “negative” part of the magnetic ﬁeld
proﬁle) can be driven independently of the ﬁrst thirteen
coils to allow for adjustment of the ﬁnal velocity.

We ﬁrst directly demonstrate the eﬀectiveness of the
atomic beam collimation stage by an absorption mea-
surement at the end of the Zeeman slower, but without
the magnetic ﬁeld or Zeeman slowing beam present. By
measuring the transmission coeﬃcient of a probe laser
through the atomic beam, we may extract the optical
density (OD) of the atomic beam. Further, by sweep-
ing the detuning, ∆, of the probe laser, we extract the
atomic beam’s velocity distribution projected onto the
probe’s axis (see Fig. 1(e)).

Data resulting from the above method are shown in
Fig. 2(a). In this case, the probe is normal (φ = 0◦) to
the axis of the Zeeman slower, so that we may discern
the transverse velocity spread. By ﬁtting the frequency
proﬁle of the optical density to a Voigt distribution,

OD(∆)

n(v⊥)σ(∆

kv⊥)dv⊥,

(3)

∝

Z

−

we may extract the velocity spread of the density n(v⊥),
knowing the Lorentzian form of the cross-section σ(∆)
(where v⊥ is the transverse velocity, and k the wavenum-
ber). We ﬁnd that the uncollimated emission from our
source has an RMS spread of 4 m/s, which is simply a
consequence of geometry (an atomic beam with a mean
longitudinal velocity of around 400 m/s apertured to a
half angle of 1/100th of a radian). Addition of the 2D
molasses decreases this spread to 1.7 m/s, while the ap-

3

FIG. 2: Measurement of the atomic beam’s transverse
velocity and spatial distributions. (a) OD of the bare
atomic beam (light grey) with molasses (dark grey) and with
the full 20 cm of transverse collimation and cooling (black).
(b)-(d) Transverse mode structure of the atomic beam ob-
tained by scanning the position of the probe beam along the
direction normal to the Zeeman slower axis and the probe
beam direction. This is done for the (b) uncollimated atomic
beam, (c) with molasses, and (d) with the full 20 cm of trans-
verse cooling and collimation.

plication of the full transverse collimation and cooling
leads to a spread of 1 m/s.

As an extension of this method, in Fig. 2(b-d) we trans-
late the probe laser along y and measure the peak OD at
each point to extract the transverse mode structure of the
atomic beam. To account for the structure, we assume
that the normalized transverse density proﬁle, g(x, y), of
the atomic beam takes the form:

g(x, y) =

N1 + N2e− x2+y2
(cid:18)

2σ2

(cid:19)

Θ(r2

x2

y2),

0 −

−

(4)

where the Gaussian is a consequence of the collimation,
and the unit step function Θ comes from the aperturing
eﬀect of the Zeeman tube which has radius r0, and N1,2
are normalization constants. Measurement of the OD is
equivalent to projecting (4) along x, meaning we will be
sensitive to the y mode function,

G(y)

OD(y)/

OD(y′)dy′

≡

=

Z

Z

g(x, y)dx.

(5)

(6)

Figs 2(b-d) show the data and corresponding ﬁts using
(4,6) for the atomic beam without collimation (which has
N2 = 0), with 2D molasses, and with full transverse col-
limation and cooling, respectively. Note that in all three
situations, the radius, r0, of the disk is left as a ﬁt pa-
rameter, and yields a value near the actual 1.9 cm radius
of the Zeeman slower tube.

FIG. 3: Flux enhancement through transverse colli-
mation and cooling. Flux measured as a function of longi-
tudinal velocity based on measurement of the OD as a func-
tion of probe frequency (inset). The color scheme here is as
in Fig. 2(a) The dashed curve is a calculation of the distribu-
◦
tion solely from eﬀusion from the source at T = 160
C (no
adjustable parameters).

To measure the longitudinal velocity spread, we switch
to a geometry where the probe is at an angle φ = 9◦
relative to the normal of the atomic beam (Fig. 3 in-
set). The bottom curve shows the un-collimated eﬀu-
sive distribution from the source. The middle and top
curves represent the addition of the 2D molasses and full
transverse cooling and collimation, respectively. As an-
ticipated, both of these transverse cooling conﬁgurations
work best at lower longitudinal velocities, but still give
signiﬁcant enhancement up to 300 m/s.

From this measurement, we may extract the ﬂux by
deconvolving the Voigt distribution (3) which may be
written in terms of the ﬂux density, Φ(v) = n(v)/v, at
arbitrary probe angle φ as

Φ(vk)

f σ0G(y)
cos φ

∞

dvk
vk

−

0
Z

Γ2 (∆

1 + 4

OD(∆, y) =

kvk sin φ)2 .
(7)
Here, vk is the longitudinal velocity, ∆ is the detuning of
the probe from resonance, Γ the natural linewidth, and
σ0 the resonant cross section of the transition which is
weighted by the average oscillator strength f . (The probe
is chosen to be linearly polarized, and averaging over the
0.46.)
available F = 2 to F = 3 transitions leads to f
Without the Zeeman slower, in the limit where the
width of the longitudinal velocity distribution, contained
in Φ(vk), is much larger than Γ, we may pull the ﬂux out
of the vk integral and rearrange to obtain

≈

Φ(vk) =

2kvk sin φ cos φ
f σ0Γπ

OD(kvk sin φ, y = 0)
G(y = 0)

.

(8)

Thus, by measuring the OD at ﬁxed y = 0, having al-
ready mapped out the beam’s transverse mode to ex-
tract G(y = 0), we may readily extract the atomic
beam’s ﬂux density (Fig. 3) from the OD measurement
(inset). The overall eﬃciency of the transverse collima-
tion and cooling process can be summarized as follows:

4

total ﬂux

Φ(vk)dvk =

Z

2v0 cos φ
f σ0ΓπG(y)

Z

OD(∆, y)d∆.

(9)

So, by measuring the spatial mode, G(y) of the atomic
beam in each of the cases in Fig. 4 (as we did in Figs 2(b-
d)), we may readily compute the total ﬂux of the atomic
beam.

Note that in these ﬁgures, the stated ﬂux results from
integrating the measured OD over the peak. As we pro-
ceed to lower ﬁnal velocities, the ﬂux in this peak gradu-
ally drops and the distribution begins to form a tail in the
high velocity region. In fact, integrating over the total
1012
distribution (up to 150 m/s) yields a total ﬂux of 3
atoms/s in all cases, and the presence of the high tail has
been traced to minor ripples in the magnetic ﬁeld at the
end of the Zeeman slower.

×

Importantly, the signal enhancement for the Zeeman
slowed distribution due to the transverse collimation and
cooling exceeds the factor of 25 observed for the unslowed
1012) atoms/s at 116
1012 (1.7
beam. We measure 3.2
1010) atoms/s
(45) m/s, to be compared to 6
without any transverse collimation and cooling, for factor
of 50 in overall increase.

×
1010 (3

×

×

×

This work was supported by the Air Force Oﬃce of Sci-
entiﬁc Research, ARO-MURI, and NASA. CS was sup-
ported by a National Defense Science and Engineering
Grant sponsored by the U.S. Department of Defense.
The authors would like to acknowledge D. Rogers, J.
MacArthur and A. Sliski for invaluable technical exper-
tise and thank W. H¨ansel for useful discussions and valu-
able support.

∗

Electronic address: slowe@physics.harvard.edu

[1] P. R. Berman, Atom Interferometry (Academic Press,

London, 1997), 1st ed.

[2] Z. T. Lu et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 77, 3331 (1996).
[3] K. I. Lee et al., J. Korean. Phys. Soc. 33, 365 (1998).
[4] E. Riis, D. S. Weiss, K. A. Moler, and S. Chu, Phys. Rev.

Lett. 64, 1658 (1990).

[5] K. Dieckmann, R. J. C. Spreeuw, M. Weidem¨uller, and

J. T. M. Walraven, Phys. Rev. A 58, 3891 (1998).

[6] W. Wohlleben, F. Chevy, K. Madison, and J. Dalibard,

Eur. Phys. J. D. 15, 237 (2001).

[7] J. Schoser et al., Phys. Rev. A 66, 023410 (2002).
[8] S. E. Park et al., J. Opt. Soc. Am. B 19, 2595 (2002).
[9] J. V. Prodan, W. D. Phillips, and H. Metcalf, Phys. Rev.

Lett. 49, 1149 (1982).

[10] T. Lahay et al., cond-mat/0405013.
[11] L. V. Hau, J. A. Golovchenko, and M. M. Burns, Rev.

[12] M. R. Walkiewicz, P. J. Fox, and R. E. Scholten, Rev.

Sci. Instr. 65, 3746 (1994).

Sci. Instr. 71, 3342 (2000).

[13] A. Aspect et al., Chemical Physics 145, 307 (1990).
[14] M. D. Hoogerland et al., Appl. Phys. B 62, 232 (1996).

FIG. 4: Optical density measurement of Zeeman
slowed atomic beam taken at a probe angle of 45◦ rela-
tive to the atomic beam axis for varying ﬁnal velocities. In
all cases, the top thirteen coils of the slower are maintained
at I = 5 A (corresponding to a capture velocity of 320 m/s).
The current in each plot is that of the ﬁnal set of Zeeman
slower coils, which adjust the ﬁnal velocity by 16 (m/s)/A.
The grey curve represents the same situation as the black
curve in Fig. 3.

×

×

1013/s which are “capturable” by the Zee-
of the 1.1
1011/s arrive in the main chamber
man slower, only 2
due to the solid angle of the Zeeman tube. Transverse
collimation and cooling increases this capturable ﬂux to
1012/s. This is a factor of 25 enhancement and
5.3
means that we can couple a full 50% of the atoms which
are usable from our source through the Zeeman slower
structure.

×

The measured eﬀect of the Zeeman slower on the
atomic beam with various magnetic ﬁeld conﬁgurations is
shown in Fig. 4. In this series, we choose our probe beam
to be at 45◦ to the axis of the atomic beam, to allow
for maximum velocity sensitivity. In Fig. 4(a) we show
the eﬀect of turning on the positive ﬁeld of the Zeeman
slower (as deﬁned by the ﬁrst thirteen coils in Fig. 1(d)).
As we increase the ﬁeld in the negative region as shown
in Figs 4(b-d), we can continuously tune the ﬁnal veloc-
ity of our atomic beam, while always maintaining a high
overall ﬂux (for the cases shown, tuning the velocity from
116 to 45 m/s).

With the slower activated, the width of the longitudi-
nal velocity distribution is narrow, and we may substitute
1/v0 for 1/vk in (7), where v0 is the average velocity of
the atomic beam. We integrate and rearrange to get the

