EPJ manuscript No.
(will be inserted by the editor)

4
0
0
2
 
l
u
J
 
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
m
o
t
a
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
3
1
0
7
0
4
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Eﬃcient Stark deceleration of cold polar molecules

Eric R. Hudson, J. R. Bochinski, H. J. Lewandowski, Brian C. Sawyer, and Jun Ye

JILA, National Institute of Standards and Technology and
University of Colorado and Department of Physics, University of Colorado,
Boulder, Colorado 80309-0440

Received: date / Revised version: date

Abstract. Stark deceleration has been utilized for slowing and trapping several species of neutral, ground-
state polar molecules generated in a supersonic beam expansion. Due to the ﬁnite physical dimension
of the electrode array and practical limitations of the applicable electric ﬁelds, only molecules within a
speciﬁc range of velocities and positions can be eﬃciently slowed and trapped. These constraints result
in a restricted phase space acceptance of the decelerator in directions both transverse and parallel to the
molecular beam axis; hence, careful modeling is required for understanding and achieving eﬃcient Stark
decelerator operation. We present work on slowing of the hydroxyl radical (OH) elucidating the physics
controlling the evolution of the molecular phase space packets both with experimental results and model
calculations. From these results we deduce experimental conditions necessary for eﬃcient operation of a
Stark decelerator.

PACS. 32.60.+i Zeeman and Stark eﬀects – 39.10+j Atomic and molecular beam sources and techniques

1 Introduction

The study of ultra-cold polar molecules is a rapidly emerg-
ing ﬁeld as evidenced by this special journal edition, and
the large number of new experiments being undertaken
[1,2,3,4,5,6]. The permanent electric dipole moment, µ,
possessed by polar molecules allows for a new type of inter-
action in the ultra-cold environment. This electric dipole-
dipole interaction (and control over it) should give rise to
unique physics and chemistry including novel cold collision
dynamics [7], quantum information processing [8], and a
second order phase transition analogous to spontaneous
magnetization of a ferromagnet. When the translational
energy of colliding polar molecules becomes comparable
to their dipole-dipole interaction energy, the molecules
can dramatically inﬂuence each other’s trajectory. Lack
of spherical symmetry in the interaction causes collid-
ing molecules to be attracted or repelled depending on
their relative orientation. Thus, an external electric ﬁeld,
which orients the molecules, may have a profound eﬀect
on the molecular interactions leading to large changes in
observed scattering rates [7]. Another interesting possibil-
ity is the observation of criticality in a two or three (3D)
dimensional lattice of dipolar molecules. For a typical po-
lar molecule (
2 Debye) in a 3D optical lattice with 1
m spacing, the critical temperature for the second order
phase transition (spontaneous polarization) is estimated
3µ2/(2πǫ0kBR3) = 200 nK,
by a 3D Ising model as Tc ∼
where R is the dipole-dipole separation, ǫ0 is the permit-

∼

Correspondence to: Eric.Hudson@colorado.edu

∼

tivity of free space, and kB is Boltzmann’s constant [9]. By
using extremely polar molecules such as those predicted
to occur from photo-association of free radicals with Ru-
bidium ( µ
10 Debye) [10], or by decreasing the dipole-
dipole separation through simply trapping polar molecules
at a suﬃcient density, the critical temperature may be
raised by at least one order of magnitude. It is interesting
to note that at temperatures signiﬁcantly higher than this
regime an analog to adiabatic demagnetization refrigera-
tion [11] may become possible, leading to a new method
for further cooling polar molecules, so-called “paraelectric
cooling” [12].

The technique of Stark deceleration is especially well-
suited for production of cold polar molecules since it uti-
lizes the Stark shift associated with polar molecules to
remove the mean translational energy from a supersonic
beam of molecules. Supersonic molecular beams, utilized
extensively in physical chemistry, are capable of producing
intense pulses of molecules with mean velocities of a few
hundred meters per second and a small velocity spread
about this mean. Therefore, in the moving frame of the
molecular pulse the associated velocity spread corresponds
to a low temperature distribution (
1 K). Stark decelera-
tion conservatively removes this mean velocity, leaving be-
hind a cold molecule distribution in the laboratory frame.
To date this technique has been employed to produce slow,
cold beams of CO [2], OH [3], ND3 [13], resulting in a
trapped sample of 104 molecules at 25 mK in the case
of ND3. Slowing of YbF in an alternate-gradient deceler-

∼

2

Eric R. Hudson et. al: Eﬃcient Stark deceleration of cold polar molecules

ator has also been demonstrated in a proof of principle
experiment [6].

Due to practical limitations of both the physical di-
mensions of a Stark decelerator and the applicable electric
ﬁelds, only molecules within a speciﬁc range of velocities
and positions can be eﬃciently slowed and trapped. These
constraints result in a restricted phase space acceptance of
the decelerator in directions both transverse and parallel
to the molecular beam axis. Thus, for eﬃcient operation
care must be taken to match the phase space distribution
of the supersonic beam source (emittance) to the phase
space acceptance of the Stark decelerator. This article de-
tails work from both experiment and model, describing the
process of phase space matching between the supersonic
beam source and the molecular decelerator. The focus of
the current article is to present a clear understanding of
the decelerator eﬃciency and describe explicitly the exper-
imental requirements of maximizing it. For experimenter
new to this ﬁeld, this article will serve as a useful and
practical guide for design of future Stark deceleration ex-
periments.

∼

∼

Our experiment centers on the deceleration of the neu-
tral hydroxyl radical, OH. For low rotational levels the 2Π
electronic ground state of OH is suﬃciently described by
Hund’s case (a). Spin-orbit coupling results in the 2Π3/2
139 cm−1 below the 2Π1/2 state. Because of
state lying
the non-zero orbital angular momentum of the unpaired
electron in OH each total angular momentum, J, state
is λ-type doubled, resulting in two closely spaced (
1.5
GHz), opposite parity levels in the ro-vibrational ground
state. The application of an electric ﬁeld readily mixes
these states and for the symmetric f state results in an
increase in energy with electric ﬁeld [14]. The most polar-
2Π3/2, J = 3/2,
ized sub-level of this state, denoted as
|
mJ = 3/2, f
, is decelerated by our Stark decelerator. We
i
detect the presence of OH molecules through the tech-
nique of laser induced ﬂuorescence. A pulsed excitation
laser tuned to 282 nm promotes the molecules along the
X2Π3/2(v = 0, J = 3/2) elec-
A2Σ1/2(v = 1, J = 3/2)
tronic transition, excited molecules subsequently decay
primarily (73%) back to the ground electronic state along
the A2Σ1/2(v = 1)
X2Π3/2(v = 1) pathway at 313 nm.
This ﬂuorescence is collected and imaged onto a photo-
multiplier tube. By varying the time of the laser pulse, we
sample the OH molecules at a single location at diﬀerent
times to extract time-of-ﬂight (ToF) information. Care-
ful measurements of the total molecule numbers before
and after the Stark decelerator, and thus determination
of the overall decelerator eﬃciency as a function of de-
celerator/supersonic beam operation parameters, enables
information pertaining to the phase space matching of the
source to the decelerator to be obtained. We have devel-
oped a simple model along with results of Monte Carlo
simulations that provide excellent agreement with the ob-
served behavior. The remainder of the article is organized
as follows. Section 2 brieﬂy describes the operation of a
Stark decelerator (for a more complete review of Stark
deceleration see [15,16]) as well as develops the simple
intuitive model for phase space matching. Section 3 de-

→

←

Fig. 1. Schematic of the Stark decelerator, displaying the
pulsed valve and discharge plates, the molecular beam skim-
mer, the electric hexapole, and the electrode stages. The elec-
trode stages alternate orientation (vertical - horizontal) as
shown in the ﬁgure. The spatial locations indicated by arrows
correspond to the locations where molecule number is mea-
sured to determine decelerator eﬃciency.

tails our experimental results and compares them to the
model of Section 2 to provide conﬁdence in using it for op-
timization, while Section 4 is reserved for conclusions and
suggestions for optimal operation of a Stark decelerator.

2 Stark Deceleration

∼

∼

∼

Figure 1 shows a schematic of our Stark decelerator, which
has been described elsewhere[16]. Hydroxyl radical molecules
1:99 mix-
produced by the discharge of H2O in Xenon (
ture) undergo a supersonic expansion and are subsequently
10−4
skimmed to separate the low vacuum source region (
10−7 torr), which
torr) from the high vacuum region (
contains the decelerator electrodes and the applied high-
voltage electric ﬁelds. After skimming, the molecules are
focused by an electrostatic hexapole ﬁeld to provide trans-
verse coupling into the Stark decelerator. Once the molecules
are coupled into the Stark decelerator, the slowing process
begins. The Stark decelerator is constructed of 69 slowing
stages spaced 5.475 mm apart with each stage comprised
of two cylindrical electrodes of diameter 3.175mm sepa-
rated axially by a 5.175 mm and oppositely biased at high
voltage (
12.5 kV). Successive stages are oriented orthog-
onally to each other to provide transverse guiding of the
molecular beam. The geometry of the slowing stages pro-
vides an electric ﬁeld maximum between the electrodes
with the ﬁeld decreasing away from the electrode cen-
ter as seen in Figure 2(a). Therefore, a weak-ﬁeld seek-
ing molecule travelling longitudinally down the decelera-
tor will be decelerated as it moves into the region between
the electrodes and will remain decelerated if the high volt-
age is removed before the molecule passes through the
electrode’s ﬁeld. In order to minimize the number of high
voltage switches used, all the like-oriented electrodes of
the same polarity are connected to one switch (4 switches
total for the entire decelerator).

±

As a consequence of this switch minimization, when
the voltage at each slowing stage is grounded and the next
stage is turned on, the electric ﬁeld is not completely re-
moved, but rather becomes the ﬁeld generated by the al-
ternate set of electrodes (i.e. the solid versus dashed curves
in Figure 2(a)). Thus, the decrease in the molecular kinetic
energy, ∆KE, is given as the diﬀerence in potential en-
ergy generated by the two sets of electrodes and is shown

Eric R. Hudson et. al: Eﬃcient Stark deceleration of cold polar molecules

3

useful to deﬁne the excursion of a molecule from the syn-
chronous molecule position as ∆φ = φ
φ0. Then with
the use of Newton’s second law and the sine function ﬁt
to the change of kinetic energy as function of φ0 (Figure
2(b)) it is trivial to write [17,15]:

−

d2∆φ
dt2 +

πCMax
mL2 (sin(∆φ + φ0)

−

sin(φ0)) = 0,

(2)

where CMax is the maximum kinetic energy change per
slowing stage, t is the time coordinate, and m is the molec-
ular mass. This equation is that of a harmonic oscillator
with its equilibrium position oﬀset (represented by φ0).
Thus one expects non-synchronous molecules to oscillate
around the synchronous molecule position inside an asym-
metric oscillator potential. From numerical integrations of
Eq. (2) and the ﬁrst time derivative of Eq. (1) one can
solve for the stable and unstable regions of phase space,
shown as a function of the synchronous molecule phase
angle in Figure 3 for OH under typical decelerator opera-
tion. The most important feature of Figure 3 is the rapidly
decreasing area of stable evolution (i.e. region bounded by
the separatrix). This decrease in stable area is easily un-
derstood by analogy to the pendulum driven by a constant
torque. As the torque is increased (i.e. the synchronous
phase angle is increased) the equilibrium position of the
pendulum is pushed toward the apex, therefore the ampli-
tude of oscillations that result in stable oscillatory motion
is reduced. This behavior is responsible for the separatrix
possessing only one cusp for non-zero φ0. It is clear that
the number of molecules accepted by a decelerator operat-
ing at a speciﬁc synchronous molecule phase angle is then
given as an area integral inside the separatrix weighted
by the supersonic beam distribution at the decelerator’s
entrance.

This phase space “bucket” loading is illustrated graph-
ically in Figure 4. In the ﬁrst panel of this ﬁgure, ToF data
taken at the decelerator entrance (location “a” indicated
in Figure 1) are shown along with a hypothetical ideal
supersonic beam of OH molecules (vz,center = 300 m/s,
vz = 30 m/s, where vz,center is the pulse mean speed and
∆vz is the full width at half maximum of the distribu-
tion (FWHM)). For this graph the supersonic molecular
beam parameters were varied by tuning the discharge ini-
tiation time as described previously [18] resulting in the
ability to input two vastly diﬀerent molecular beams into
the decelerator. The ﬁrst distribution utilized has vz,center
= 415 m/s with ∆vz of
90 m/s, while the second dis-
tribution is centered about 350 m/s with a spread of
∼
80 m/s. For these two experimental distributions and the
idealized case, Monte Carlo simulation results are used to
construct graphs of the longitudinal phase space occupied
by the molecules in the remaining panels of the ﬁgure.
Each gray point in these graphs represents the location in
phase space of a sample molecule as predicted by our simu-
lations at the time of loading into the decelerator. The two
dashed curves on each graph are projections of the phase
space distribution onto the respective axes. Overlaid on
these graphs are the separatrix curves for operation at φ0
=0◦, the so-called bunching condition, and for slowing the

∼

Fig. 2. Phase stable operation of the decelerator. (a) Longi-
tudinal Stark energy potentials generated by the two sets of
electrodes, where the solid line represents the potential from
one set of electrodes and the dotted line from the other set. (b)
Kinetic energy loss per stage (∆KE) experienced by molecules
from switching between the two potentials given above. Dashed
line corresponds to a sine function approximation of the poten-
tial energy loss. The shaded region corresponds to the phase
◦
stable area when decelerating at 45

.

as a function of synchronous molecule phase angle, φ0, in
Figure 2(b). The synchronous molecule phase angle, φ0is
deﬁned as:

φ0 =

180◦
L

z,

(1)

where L is the distance between two adjacent stages and
the zero position of z is deﬁned to be exactly between
two adjacent stages. Thus, switching at φ0 = 0◦ corre-
sponds to no net change in molecular kinetic energy, while
maximum deceleration (acceleration) occurs at φ0 = 90◦
(-90◦). Though synchronous molecule phases between φ0
= 0◦ and 180◦ lead to deceleration, only 0◦ < φ0 < 90◦
results in stable slowing because it is only on the positive
sloping ∆KE curve that molecules ahead (behind) of the
center of the bunch are decelerated more (less) than the
average deceleration. To further investigate the dynam-
ics of the molecules within this stable packet about the
synchronous molecule (i.e. the center of the bunch) it is

4

Eric R. Hudson et. al: Eﬃcient Stark deceleration of cold polar molecules

◦
, 30

◦
, and 60

Fig. 3. Phase stable area (separatrix area) versus phase angle
◦
for φ0 = 0
. As the phase angle is increased,
the stable area is reduced; equivalently, the stable longitudinal
velocity width narrows, and assuming the source completely
populates the phase stable region, decreases the number of
molecules in the stable packet.

molecules to rest at the exit of the decelerator. From these
graphs, the importance of creating a cold (i.e. small ∆v)
source of molecules as an input for a Stark decelerator is
clear; with a smaller ∆v the molecular pulse spreads less
in route from generation at the source to the decelera-
tor entrance, and thus is more eﬃciently coupled into the
decelerator in both the spatial and velocity dimensions.
The beneﬁcial eﬀect of lowering the pulse mean speed is
also made evident; as the mean speed drops, the required
phase angle for slowing is reduced and thus the separatrix
area increases.

As aforementioned, the eﬀects of supersonic beam and
Stark decelerator parameters on overall eﬃciency can be
estimated from knowledge of the separatrix overlap with
the supersonic beam phase space. Approximating the area
enclosed by the separatrix as that of the corresponding
rectangle whose height (width) correspond to the separa-
trix velocity (spatial) bounds and ignoring the minimal
convolution due to the short free ﬂight of the molecules
after creation, the overall longitudinal slower eﬃciency is
given as:

ηLongitudinal = N [νz, ∆νz, νz,Bounds(φ0)]
N [z, ∆z, zBounds(φ0)],

(3)

×

with

N (x, ∆x, xBounds) =

XUpperbound(φ0)
XLowerbound(φ0) f (x, ∆x)dx
∞
−∞ f (x, ∆x)dx
R

,

(4)

R

where z refers to the dimension along the decelerator’s
axis (longitudinal axis) and f (x, ∆x) is the molecular dis-
tribution in the appropriate dimension. The integration
bounds correspond to the separatrix maxima along their
appropriate dimension and are an explicit function of the
synchronous molecule phase angle. From Figure 2(b) we
see that for φ0 = 45◦, non-synchronous molecules with

Fig. 4. Longitudinal bucket loading. Panel (a) represents
time-of-ﬂight measurements taken at the decelerator input (po-
sition “a” in ﬁgure 1) for diﬀerent molecular beam operating
conditions. Filled circles (ﬁlled squares) represent operating
with a distribution with a mean speed of 415 m/s (350 m/s)
and a full width at half maximum spread of 95 m/s (85 m/s),
while the solid line is an idealized molecular beam of 300 m/s
mean speed with 10% velocity spread. Panels (b), (c), and (d)
represent the longitudinal phase space at the beginning of the
Stark deceleration as derived from our Monte Carlo simula-
tions. In panel (b) the dashed separatrix represents bunching
for 415 m/s, while the larger solid line is the separatrix for
bunching at 370 m/s. Inside the 370 m/s bunching separatrix
is shown the separatrix for slowing a packet of molecules to
25 m/s. In panel (c) the separatrix are shown for bunching at
325 m/s and slowing to 25 m/s molecules from the 350 m/s
distribution, while panel (d) shows bunching at 300 m/s and
slowing to 25 m/s for the hypothetical molecular beam.

phase angles between 45◦ and 135◦ will be slowed more
than the synchronous molecule (shaded region). In gen-
eral, we see the maximum stable forward excursion is then
given as:

∆φMax,+(φ0) = 180

2φ0

(5)

◦

−

Unfortunately, a closed form solution for the maximum
backwards excursion, ∆φMax,−(φ0), does not exist, how-
ever, it can easily be found numerically or estimated by
the negative of Eq. (5) since both the maximum stable
forward and backward excursions have the same average
derivative as a function of φ0. From Eq. (2) we ﬁnd the
work done in bringing a molecule starting at ∆φMax,+(φ0)
with the same speed as the synchronous molecule (i.e.at
the separatrix cusp) back to the synchronous molecule po-
sition (i.e. ∆φ = 0), W, as:

W = −

CMax
π

0

∆φM ax,+(φ0)

Z

(sin(∆φ + φ0)

sin(φ0))d∆φ

−

(6)

Eric R. Hudson et. al: Eﬃcient Stark deceleration of cold polar molecules

5

Clearly, this molecule will possess the maximum stable
velocity and we thus have the separatrix velocity bound
as:

∆νMax(φ0) = 2

(cos(φ0)

φ0) sin(φ0)).

CMax
mπ

r

(

π
2 −

−

(7)
Now, assuming the molecular distributions are ade-

quately described by the form:

f (x, ∆x) = exp 

x

xcenter
−
∆x
2√ln(2)





(8)


where ∆x refers to FWHM and xcenter to the value at
which the distribution is centered we see Eq. (3) becomes:






2






ηLongitudinal =

1
4

[Erf

 

(vz,design −

∆νz
2

vz,center) + ∆νz,Max(φ0)

(vz,design −

(zdesign −

 
(zdesign −

Erf

−

 

[Erf

×

Erf

−

 

−

vz,center)
∆νz
2
zcenter) + L

∆νz,Max(φ0)

π ∆φMax,+(φ0)

zcenter)

L
π ∆φMax,+(φ0)

∆z
2

−
∆z
2

ln(2)

p

!
(9)

ln(2)

]

!

ln(2)

!

ln(2)

]

!

p

p

p

Where Erf refers to the Error function, and vz,design
and zdesign have been introduced to account for the possi-
bility of designing the decelerator pulse sequence to select
molecules which are not at the peak of the molecular dis-
tribution. If molecules are loaded at the peak of the dis-
tribution (i.e. vz,design = vz,center and zdesign = zcenter)
and we approximate ∆φMax,−(φ0) =
∆φMax,+(φ0), we
recover the simple result of our earlier work [15]:

−

ηLongitudninal = Erf

∆νz,Max(φ0)
∆νs
2
φ0
π/2 )

 

L(1

p

!

ln(2)

,

p

Erf

×

 

−
∆x
2

ln(2)

(10)

!

which is useful for estimating expected decelerator ef-
ﬁciency. Plots of Eq. (8) with loading at the peaks of the
distributions are shown in Figure 5 versus both ∆vz (Fig-
ure 5(a)) and vz,center (Figure 5(b)), where the value of
∆φMax,−(φ0) has been found numerically. In these graphs
the slowing phase angle was chosen to bring the molecules
to rest at the decelerator’s exit. Again the importance of
a low central velocity and small spread about this mean is
evident. The most striking feature of these graphs is the
ﬂattening of the longitudinal slower eﬃciency for small

velocity spreads. In fact for a suﬃciently narrow velocity
spread the mean speed of the pulse becomes to some de-
gree “unimportant” as the supersonic beam emittance ﬁts
entirely inside the decelerator acceptance for most oper-
ating conditions. It is important to note that similar ef-
fects can be achieved by changing the characteristics of the
Stark decelerator. By increasing the stage-to-stage spacing
one enlarges the spatial bounds of the separatrix resulting
in more decelerated molecules; however, increasing the dis-
tance without increasing the applied electric ﬁeld will re-
sult in worse transverse guiding and a smaller stable phase
space area transverse to the molecular beam axis. Increas-
ing only the applied electric ﬁeld results in the ability to
decelerate molecules with larger velocity spreads relative
to the synchronous molecule speed, and thus increases the
overall slower eﬃciency. However, the technical challenges
associated with going to voltages higher than the present
operating conditions are large. Therefore a more practi-
cal alternative maybe to increase the number of slowing
stages to reduce the required phase angle.

Eﬃcient operation of a given decelerator/supersonic
beam combination occurs when Eq. (8) is maximized at
the desired ﬁnal speed. Since the molecular distribution
and the desired ﬁnal speed are assumed ﬁxed the only pa-
rameter which can be varied is vz,design, the initial speed
for which the decelerator pulse sequence is designed. By
decreasing vz,design the required slowing phase angle is
decreased and the separatrix area increased. However, if
vz,design is lowered too far below vz,center the molecular
beam phase space overlaps poorly with the decelerator in-
put separatrix and slower eﬃciency suﬀers. Thus, the most
eﬃcient slower operation will occur for a vz,design below
vz,center by an amount that depends on the ∆vz of the
pulse and the desired ﬁnal speed (typically 1 to 10 per-
cent of vz,center for slowing to rest). Figure 6 shows the
results of maximizing Eq. (8) for the given experimental
distributions as well as the idealized source. In this graph
the amount of velocity detuning from vz,center for most
eﬃcient operation is shown as a function of desired ﬁnal
speed. For ﬁnal packet speeds close to the initial pulse
speed (right part of graph) it is most eﬃcient to utilize a
phase angle of zero (bunching) because of its large accep-
tance and vary vz,design. However, as the ﬁnal velocity is
decreased, this procedure eventually leads to a mismatch
between the supersonic beam emittance and the decelera-
tor acceptance, and it becomes more eﬃcient to decelerate
molecules nearer the center of the supersonic beam distri-
bution, leading to the sharp “transition” peaks. The posi-
tion of this transition for our decelerator is at a detuning
equal to approximately 15% of the pulse spread and is evi-
dent in the ﬁgure by the sudden drop in velocity detuning.
As slower molecules are desired, the eﬀect of the decreas-
ing acceptance of the decelerator (with increasing φ0) is
combated by selecting slower initial molecules, which re-
quire less slowing. This eﬀect is evident by the increase of
detuning with slower ﬁnal speeds. The gain in eﬃciency
by optimizing decelerator operation according to Eq. (8)
depends sensitively on both the molecular beam and de-
celerator parameters, but in the case of our experimental

6

Eric R. Hudson et. al: Eﬃcient Stark deceleration of cold polar molecules

 

415 m/s

350 m/s

-15

]
s
/
m

[
 
 
 
)

V

 
-
 

V

(

c

n
g
i
s
e
d

0

-5

-10

-20

-25

-30

-35

-40

 

Ideal source, 300 m/s

0

100

200

300

400

Desired Final Speed [m/s]

Fig. 6. Decelerator optimization condition. The optimum de-
tuning of the design speed from the pulse’s mean speed as a
function of desired ﬁnal speed shown for three diﬀerent super-
sonic beam distributions.

ηT ransverse = Erf

∆νx,Max(φ0)
∆νx
2

 

ln(2)

!

p

Erf

×

∆x(φ0)
∆x
2

 

ln(2)

Erf

!

∆νy,Max(φ0)
∆νy
2

 

p

Erf

×

∆y(φ0)
∆y
2

 

ln(2)

!

p

ln(2)

!

p

(12)

∼

The spatial acceptance of the decelerator is set by the
decelerator rod spacing, thus ∆x and ∆y
1 mm. Be-
cause the transverse evolution of molecules through the
Stark decelerator is a complicated dynamical process that
depends sensitively on the operating conditions it is not
possible to give a simple expression for ∆vx,Max(φ0) and
∆vx,Max(φ0), however, for most deceleration experiments
to date it can be estimated as
3 m/s for most slower
conditions with minimal error [16,20]. The behavior of Eq.
(11) is analogous to that of Eq. (8), as the velocity (spa-
tial) spread of the source is lowered or the maximum sta-
ble velocity (position) is increased by a decelerator change,
the eﬃciency of the slower grows. It is the aim of proper
hexapole focusing to ”mode-match” the supersonic beam
into this transverse acceptance set by the decelerator.

∼

Fig. 5. Simple model for longitudinal bucket loading. Panel
(a) shows the eﬀect of varying the supersonic beam’s velocity
spread on longitudinal eﬃciency for several initial speeds, while
panel (b) shows the longitudinal eﬃciency as a function of
initial pulse speed for several velocity spreads.

conditions ranges from only a few percent to well over a
factor of 100 improvement [19].

While Eq. (8) describes the eﬃciency of decelerator
operation in the longitudinal dimension, it says nothing
about evolution transverse to the decelerator axis. In this
dimension the molecular distribution is centered about
zero in both space and velocity thus Eq. (3) becomes:

ηT ransverse = N [0, ∆νx, νx,Bounds(φ0)]N [0, ∆x, xBounds(φ0)]

N [0, ∆νy, νy,Bounds(φ0)]N [0, ∆y, yBounds(φ0)],

(11)

3 Experiment

where x and y refer to the dimensions perpendicular to
the decelerator’s axis. Assuming distributions of the form
of Eq. (7) we have:

Time of ﬂight measurements of OH molecules taken at
the exit of the decelerator (position “b” in Figure 1) are
shown in Figure 7 for various decelerator operating condi-
tions. Open circles represent operation in transverse guid-
ance mode, where the decelerator array is biased at high
voltage, but un-switched resulting in a potential minimum

Eric R. Hudson et. al: Eﬃcient Stark deceleration of cold polar molecules

7

Fig. 7. Molecular packets at the decelerator exit (position “b”
in Figure 1) for varying phase angles. Peaks arriving later in
time are the result of slowed molecules. From comparison of
the number of molecules in these packets to the total inputted
molecular number, decelerator eﬃciency can be determined.

along the decelerator axis. This mode of operation does
not aﬀect the molecules longitudinal speed, but provides
transverse guidance through the length of the decelerator.
The remaining traces show the stable packet of molecules
produced when switching the decelerator with non-zero
phase angle. As the slowing angle is increased the packets
arrive later in time signifying their smaller mean speed.
The spreading of the ToF pulse due to free ﬂight and
convolution with the detection window is also evident.
Integration of the deconvolved ToF pulse reveals the to-
tal molecular number in each phase stable packet, and is
shown in Figure 8, where the data points have been nor-
malized to the bunching condition. In this graph the total
molecular number is plotted versus the ﬁnal speed of the
molecular bunch for the three diﬀerent operating condi-
tions represented in Figure 4. The ﬁlled circles represent
data taken for slowing sequences designed for an initial
speed of 415 m/s. For this data the supersonic beam was
operated to yield a distribution centered at 415 m/s with
a 90 m/s FWHM. The ﬁlled squares in Figure 8 represent
loading molecules from the same distribution into a phase
bucket designed for 370 m/s initial speed. For the data
represented by the ﬁlled triangles, the supersonic beam
was operated to yield a pulse centered at 350 m/s with an
80 m/s spread. In this data, the decelerator was operated
for a 325 m/s initial speed. The solid lines in this graph
represent the simple theory of Section 2, while the open
data points correspond to the results of our Monte Carlo
simulations. Despite the assumptions made in deriving Eq.
(8) we see the simple theory of Section 2 is quite accurate.
The only noticeable discrepancy occurs for the 415 m/s
curve, where it appears that deviation in the experimen-
tal bunching point (which is used to normalize the graph)
is responsible for the oﬀset. From this graph we see that
operation at 325 m/s is clearly more eﬃcient at produc-

Fig. 8. The stable molecule number normalized to φ0= 0◦
for three cases of operation. Circles represent operation with a
supersonic beam centered at 415 m/s with a 90 m/s FWHM
and the deceleration sequence designed for molecules at 415
m/s. Squares represent a deceleration sequence designed for
370 m/s molecules from the same beam distribution. Triangles
are for deceleration designed for 325 m/s molecules from a
distribution centered at 350 m/s with an 80 m/s spread. Filled
points represent data, while open points represent results from
the Monte Carlo simulation. The solid lines are the results of
the simple model of Section 2.

ing slow molecules. Again, the importance of developing
a slow cold source as the input for eﬃcient Stark deceler-
ation is clear.

By comparing the total molecule number observed in
each packet to the total number of molecules inputted into
the decelerator (Figure 4 (a)) the overall eﬃciency of the
Stark decelerator can be determined and is shown in Fig-
ure 9 for the 370 m/s case as ﬁlled squares. Overlaid on
this graph is the simple model of Section 2. For this the-
ory the transverse parameters ∆x and ∆y = 1.5 mm and
∆vx and ∆vy = 12 m/s were used in Eq. (11) [21]. It is
remarkable to note that this simple theory predicts the
overall slowing eﬃciency quite accurately with no free pa-
rameters. Clearly, this level of agreement with our simple
model gives conﬁdence in using it as an optimization tool.

4 Conclusions

We have developed a simple model of the process of phase
space matching between the supersonic beam emittance
and the decelerator acceptance. The ability of this model
to predict with accuracy the eﬃciency of the Stark de-
celeration process gives conﬁdence in its use as an opti-
mization tool. While optimization according to this model
gives small gain for supersonic sources with low mean ki-
netic energy and small velocity spreads, it can lead to dra-
matic improvement for molecular beams that have either
a high kinetic energy, a large velocity spread, or both. As

8

Eric R. Hudson et. al: Eﬃcient Stark deceleration of cold polar molecules

and initial pulse design speed, vz,center , for slowing can
be found from Eq. (8).

This research work is supported by the Keck Founda-
tion, NSF, and NIST. H. J. L. acknowledges support from
the N.R.C.

References

1. Jonathan D. Weinstein, Robert deCarvalho, Thierry Guil-
let, Bretislav Friedrich, and John M. Doyle. Nature 395,
(1998) 148.

2. H.L. Bethlem, G. Berden, and G. Meijer, Phys. Rev. Lett.

83, (1999) 1558.

3. J.R. Bochinski, Eric R. Hudson, H. J. Lewandowski, and

Jun Ye, Phys. Rev. Lett. 91, (2003) 243001.

4. A. J. Kerman, J.M. Sage, S. Sainis, T. Bergeman, and D.

DeMille, Phys. Rev. Lett. 92, (2004) 033004.

5. T. Junglen, T. Rieger, S.A. Rangwala, P.W.H. Pinkse, and

G. Rempe Phys. Rev. Lett. 92, (2004) 223001.

6. M. R. Tarbutt, H. L. Bethlem, J. J. Hudson, V. L. Ryabov,
V. A. Ryzhov, B. E. Sauer, G. Meijer, and E. A. Hinds, Phys.
Rev. Lett. 92, (2004) 173002.

7. A. V. Avdeenkov and J. L. Bohn, Phys. Rev. A 66, (2002)

052718.

8. D. DeMille, Phys. Rev. Lett. 88, (2002) 067901.
9. R. K. Pathria,

Statistical Mechanics,

2nd

edn.,

(Butterworth-Heinemann, Oxford 1996).

10. Pavel Soldn and Jeremy M. Hutson, Phys. Rev. Lett. 92,

(2004) 163202.

11. Frank Pobell, Matter and Methods at Low Temperatures,

2nd edn. (Springer, Berlin 1996.

12. W. Kanzig, H.R. Hart, Jr., and S. Roberts, Phys. Rev.

Lett. 13, (1964) 543.

13. H.L. Bethlem, G. Berden, F.M.H. Crompvoets, R.T.
Jongma, A.J.A. van Roij, and G. Meijer, Nature 406, (2000)
491.

14. Gerhard Herzberg, Molecular Spectra and Molecular Struc-
ture, 2nd edn. (Krieger Publishing Company, Malabar,
Florida 1989)

15. H.L. Bethlem, F.M.H. Crompvoets, R.T. Jongma, S.Y.T.
van de Meerakker, and G. Meijer, Phys. Rev. A 65, (2002)
053416.

16. J.R. Bochinksi, Eric R. Hudson, H.J. Lewandowski, and

Jun Ye, physics/ 0403126.

17. H. Wiedemann, Particle Accelerator Physics I: Basic Prin-
ciples and Linear Beam Dynamics, 2nd edn. (Springer, Berlin
1999).

18. H.J. Lewandowski, Eric R. Hudson, J.R. Bochinski, and

Jun Ye, physics/0406151

19. Since 415 m/s molecules cannot be slowed to rest in our
decelerator, detuning the pulse design speed to decelerate
molecules with 405 m/s (the maximum speed which can be
brought to rest in our machine) or less initial speed would by
deﬁnition be an inﬁnite gain in eﬃciency. Thus the usefulness
of this technique for hot sources is evident.

20. Floris M. H. Crompvoets, Hendrick L. Bethlem, Jochen
Kpper, Andr J. A. van Roij, and Gerard Meijer, Phys. Rev.
A 69, (2004) 063406.

21. The parameters used for the beam’s transverse character-
istics are for the gaussian of best ﬁt to the transverse beam
proﬁle generated from the Monte Carlo simulations.

Fig. 9. Stark deceleration eﬃciency. Eﬃciency of the Stark
decelerator as a function of ﬁnal speed for slowing designed
for an initial speed of 370 m/s taken from the distribution
centered at 415 m/s with a 90 m/s FWHM. Filled squares are
data points obtained from the results of Figure 8 normalized
by the results of trace (a) in Figure 4. The solid line is the
model of Section 2 including both longitudinal and transverse
eﬃciencies.

the technique of Stark deceleration is extended to more ex-
otic molecular species, which because of their large mass,
internal modes or process of creation result in non-ideal
supersonic beams for input into a Stark decelerator, max-
imization of the decelerator operation eﬃciency will be
essential.

Clearly, it is the aim of the experimenter to maximize
the product of Eqs. (8) and (11) for the most eﬃcient de-
celerator operation. The eﬃciency of the decelerator de-
pends sensitively on both the supersonic beam and Stark
decelerator parameters. The importance of developing a
cold source as the input for any Stark deceleration ex-
periment cannot be overstated since this is the only real
cooling in a slowing experiment and, for a given deceler-
ator, sets the attainable eﬃciency. While increasing the
dimensions of slowing stages and their separations to al-
low deceleration of more molecules is a viable way to in-
crease the deceleration eﬃciency, it is met with increas-
ing technical challenge as the electrode voltage must also
be scaled. Perhaps a more reasonable alternative is to in-
crease the number of slowing stages, thus dropping the
amount of energy required to be removed at each stage,
resulting in a larger phase space acceptance. A reasonable
design goal is to include enough stages in the decelerator
so that molecules can be decelerated to the desired ﬁnal
45◦. Also, positioning
speed with a phase angle of φ0 ≤
the source as close as possible to the input of the decelera-
tor is of importance to provide eﬃcient spatial coupling in
the longitudinal dimension. Finally, for a given molecular
beam/decelerator combination the optimum phase angle

