4
0
0
2
 
g
u
A
 
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
m
o
t
a
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
9
0
0
8
0
4
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Investigation of microwave transitions and nonlinear magneto-optical rotation in
anti-relaxation-coated cells∗

D. Budker,1, 2, † L. Hollberg,3 D. F. Kimball,1 J. Kitching,3, ‡ S. Pustelny,4 and V. V. Yashchuk5
1Department of Physics, University of California at Berkeley, Berkeley, California 94720-7300
2Nuclear Science Division, Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, Berkeley, California 94720
3National Institute of Standards and Technology, 325 S. Broadway, Boulder, CO 80305-3322
4Instytut Fizyki im. M. Smoluchowskiego, Uniwersytet Jagiello´nski, Reymonta 4, 30-059 Krakow, Poland
5Advanced Light Source Division, Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, Berkeley CA 94720
(Dated: February 10, 2013)

Using laser optical pumping, widths and frequency shifts are determined for microwave transi-
tions between ground-state hyperﬁne components of 85Rb and 87Rb atoms contained in vapor cells
with alkane anti-relaxation coatings. The results are compared with data on Zeeman relaxation
obtained in nonlinear magneto-optical rotation (NMOR) experiments, a comparison important for
quantitative understanding of spin-relaxation mechanisms in coated cells. By comparing cells manu-
factured over a forty-year period we demonstrate the long-term stability of coated cells, an important
property for atomic clocks and magnetometers.

PACS numbers: 32.30.Bv,32.70.Jz,32.80.Bx,95.55.Sh

I.

INTRODUCTION

Alkali metal vapor cells with paraﬃn anti-relaxation
coatings, ﬁrst introduced by H. G. Robinson et al.
in
the 1950’s [1] and subsequently studied in great detail by
M.-A. Bouchiat et. al. [2, 3] and other authors (see, for
example, Ref. [4] and references therein), are presently at
the heart of some of the most sensitive optical-pumping
magnetometers [5]. Recently, paraﬃn-coated cells have
also been used in investigations of nonlinear-optics such
as nonlinear magneto- and electro-optical eﬀects (see
[6, 7] for detailed reviews). Although the use of
Refs.
paraﬃn-coated cells in atomic clocks has also been ex-
tensively investigated (see, for example, Refs. [8, 9, 10]),
up until now such cells have not been commonly used
in commercial clocks. Wall-coated cells have microwave
clock-resonance linewidths comparable to those observed
in cells containing buﬀer gases, which results in compa-
rable short-term instability for cm-scale frequency refer-
ences. In addition, the sensitivity of the resonance fre-
quency to temperature variations is comparable for the
two types of cells (when the gas composition in the case of
buﬀer-gas cells is chosen to minimize the temperature de-
pendence). However, wall coated cells are somewhat less
robust than buﬀer-gas cells in that they must be kept at
a temperature below that at which the wax melts. In ad-
dition, solid or liquid alkali metal that migrates onto the
walls of the cell after it has been made can reduce the ef-
fectiveness of the wall coating, so care must be exercised
to keep the coating temperature above or equal to that
of the stem containing the condensed alkali metal. Thus

∗This work is a partial contribution of NIST, an agency of the US
Government, and is not subject to copyright.
†Electronic address: budker@socrates.berkeley.edu
‡Electronic address: kitching@boulder.nist.gov

it appears that for cm-scale frequency references, have
no distinct advantage over buﬀer gases in containing the
atoms.

The ongoing work aimed at developing highly minia-
turized atomic frequency references [11, 12] and mag-
netometers has created renewed interest in wall coat-
ings. These devices will likely take advantage of minia-
ture atomic vapor cells with physical dimensions on the
order of 1 mm or smaller [13]. Because of the larger
surface-to-volume ratio, atoms conﬁned in such a small
cell spend a larger fraction of their time interacting with
the cell wall than they would in a larger cell. There-
fore, linewidth broadening and frequency shifts associ-
ated with the cell walls can signiﬁcantly aﬀect the perfor-
mance of the frequency reference even when a buﬀer gas
of moderate pressure is used. Therefore, the quality and
eﬃciency of coatings applied to the walls of such small
cells is an important factor in determining the feasibility
of highly miniaturized frequency references, particularly
those with cell volumes signiﬁcantly below 1 mm3.

Collisions of alkali atoms with cell walls can aﬀect the
atomic state in a number of ways. In addition to opti-
cal resonance broadening, the atomic ground states can
undergo Zeeman and hyperﬁne decoherence and popula-
tion transfer. Typically, the hyperﬁne decoherence rate
is found to be about one order of magnitude larger than
the Zeeman decoherence rate [9, 14]. For atomic fre-
quency references, the properties of the atomic transi-
tion between hyperﬁne levels determine the short-term
stability, while for most magnetometers, transitions be-
tween Zeeman levels within a single hyperﬁne level are
important. Thus, investigation of a comparison between
diﬀerent wall-relaxation eﬀects, particularly a compar-
ison of Zeeman and hyperﬁne decoherence, is of inter-
est both from the viewpoint of understanding the basic
physics and also with regard to practical applications.

In this paper, we present measurements of intrin-
sic linewidths and shifts performed with several alkane-

coated alkali-vapor cells manufactured in diﬀerent labo-
ratories over a period of about 40 years. We compare the
results to those of the nonlinear magneto-optical rotation
(NMOR [6]) experiments, and draw conclusions pertain-
ing to the clock applications of the coated cells. Speciﬁ-
cally, we ﬁnd that wall coatings can remain eﬀective for at
least several decades after the cell is fabricated, and that
for high quality alkane coatings, neither the molecular
weight distribution of the alkane chains nor the method
by which the wall coating is deposited has much bear-
ing on the eﬀectiveness of the coating. In addition, the
NMOR linewidth is found to be up to ten times smaller
than the hyperﬁne coherence linewidth when the two
are measured in the same cell at similar temperatures.
This can be explained by the way in which electron-spin
randomization contributes to the decoherence in each of
these cases.

II. THE CELLS

The anti-relaxation-coated buﬀer-gas-free cells used in
the present work are listed in Table I. The inner-wall
coating of each of the cells was an alkane ﬁlm (general
chemical formula CnH2n+2). None of these cells were “re-
cured” or heat treated before testing (a procedure that
may be used, if necessary, to reduce the relaxation due
to alkali metal that has collected on the coated walls).

The cell identiﬁed in Table I as Gib, containing a natu-
ral mixture of Rb isotopes, was manufactured at Berkeley
around 1964 for the Ph.D. thesis work of H. M. Gibbs [19]
(Ref. [19] gives a detailed description of the cell manufac-
turing process). The coating material is Paraﬂint, which
consists of alkane chains with a wide range of molecular
weights. The coating was applied by melting Paraﬂint
wax and running it over the cell surface. This cell has
obvious Rb crystalline deposits on the wall and there are
several glass tubulations on the spherical surface (i.e.,
imperfections that originate from glass tubes that were
attached to the cell during the manufacturing process).
Regions of the cell have heavy pooling of wax and the
coating thickness is very non-uniform.

The cell referred to as Ale-10 was made by E. B.
Alexandrov and M. V. Balabas according to the proce-
dure described, for example, in Ref.
[20]. The material
of the coating is a mixture of alkane chains of diﬀerent
length (n∼50) fractionated from polyethylene at 220◦C.
The coating was applied by vapor deposition, where a
piece of the paraﬃn was placed in a side-arm and the
whole cell was heated to ﬁll it with the paraﬃn vapor,
and then cooled. The resulting coating has estimated
thickness of ∼ 10 µm, and can be barely seen by eye.

The cells referred to as TT11 and H2 were made by
H. G. Robinson. The material of the coating is tetra-
contane (n=40) distilled at about 200◦C. The puriﬁed
tetracontane wax was evaporatively coated onto the cell
surface from a hot needle. The resulting coating is thin
(and so not visible by eye) and has melting temperature

of ∼ 80◦C.

2

III. MICROWAVE-TRANSITION
MEASUREMENTS

A schematic of the apparatus is shown in Fig.1. We
used a distributed-Bragg-reﬂector (DBR) diode laser [16]
with a measured linewidth of ≈ 2 MHz, whose frequency
was tuned near the Rb D1 resonance (795 nm). The light
beam passes through a variable attenuator, an optical iso-
lator used to avoid optical feedback into the laser, and
then a linear polarizer. It is then directed through a va-
por cell (at room temperature) enclosed in a single-layer
cylindrical magnetic shield. The laser beam diameter at
the location of the cell is ∼ 7 mm. The intensity of the
transmitted light is detected with a photodiode. A dc
magnetic ﬁeld is applied to the cell parallel to the light
propagation direction by passing current through a coil
wound on the surface of a cylindrical acrylic insert (not
shown) that ﬁts into the magnetic shield. A microwave
ﬁeld is applied with a single-wire loop terminating a coax-
ial cable. The microwave synthesizer is referenced to a
hydrogen maser (δν/ν ∼ 10−13).

For one cell (TT11 [38], see Table I), a slightly diﬀer-
ent apparatus was used. The magnetic shield consisted
of two layers, and a low-Q (of several thousand) cylindri-
cal microwave cavity operating in the TE011 mode was
employed instead of the wire loop. In this apparatus, it
was possible to heat the cell while keeping the stem at
a lower temperature. This was useful for evaluating the
eﬀect of the temperature on the widths and shifts of the
microwave transition.

In the experiment, the laser frequency was tuned to a
particular location on the optical absorption proﬁle, and
the microwave frequency was swept around the nominal
frequency of the ﬁeld-free separation of the ground-state
hyperﬁne components of 85Rb: 3, 035, 732, 440 Hz [17]
or 87Rb: 6, 834, 682, 610.9 Hz [18], while the transmitted
light intensity was recorded. An applied dc magnetic
ﬁeld gave rise to the splittings as shown in the microwave
spectra of Figs. 2 and 3.

IV. NONLINEAR MAGNETO-OPTICAL
MEASUREMENTS OF ZEEMAN RELAXATION

For all cells except TT11, in addition to studying mi-
crowave transitions, we also measured Zeeman relaxation
rates using nonlinear magneto-optical rotation. The gen-
eral idea of the method is the following (see the review [6]
for a detailed discussion). The interaction of the atoms
with a near-resonant laser ﬁeld results in polarization of
the atomic medium. The induced polarization evolves in
the presence of a magnetic ﬁeld; the resulting change of
the medium’s polarization is detected by measuring opti-
cal rotation of the linearly polarized light (which, in this
case, plays the part of both the pump and the probe). In

3

TABLE I: Vapor cells used for the measurements and the experimentally determined values for microwave linewidths and shifts.
T - the temperature of the cell (which was higher than that for the stem for some of the measurements). n - the total number
density of Rb vapor. The quantity φ is the estimated average phase shift per wall collision. The uncertainty in φ includes an
estimate of the eﬀect of non-ideal cell shape. For 87Rb, the phase shift φ′ scaled to 85Rb (see text) is also given. The last
two columns list the deduced contributions to the microwave linewidths from the spin-exchange collisions and the adiabatic
collisions, respectively (see text).

Ale-10
Gib

1997
1964

Cell Year made Ref. Diam. (cm) T (◦C) n (cm−3) Isotope
85Rb
85Rb
87Rb
87Rb
87Rb

8 · 109
8 · 109

1985
1985

[21]
[21]

[20]
[19]

3.5
3.4

H2
TT11

25
25

10
10

21
22
42
43

7 · 109
6.5 · 109
1.4 · 1010
3.4 · 1010

se

2π (Hz) γµ

γµ

exp

2π (Hz) Shift (Hz) |φ| (rad) |φ′| (rad) γµ
8.7(5)
11(2)
16(4)
22(3)
23(2)
17.5(10)
21.5(10)

0.037(7)
0.022(6)
0.065(6) 0.029(3)
0.050(5) 0.022(2)
0.043(4) 0.019(2)

-24(4)
-14(4)
-42(2)
-93(1)
-80(1)

0.036(4) 0.016(2)

-70.5(3)

1.3
1.3
1.2
1.2
1.0
2.2
5.2

a

2π (Hz)
2
0.6
5
9
7

5

TABLE II: Experimentally determined values for FM NMOR linewidths. T - the temperature of the cell (the stem and
the cell body are at the same temperature). n - the total number density of Rb vapor. γNM OR
- calculated spin-exchange
contribution to the NMOR linewidth. The last column lists the deduced contributions to the microwave linewidths from
electron-spin-randomization collisions (see text).

se

/(2π) (Hz) γNM OR

se

/(2π) (Hz) γµ

er/(2π) (Hz)

Ale-10

Cell T (◦C) n (cm−3) Isotope γNM OR
4 · 109
6 · 109
4 · 109

19
25
21

85Rb

Gib

exp

0.7(1)
1.2(1)
2.9(1)
2.9(1)
3.5(1)

85Rb
87Rb
87Rb

H2

21

4 · 109

0.15
0.24
0.15
0.24
0.24

3
5
13
9
11

DBR
diode
laser

hydrogen maser
reference

data
acquisition

attenuator

microwave
synthesizer

preamplifier

optical
isolator

polarizer

iris

microwave-
field loop

dc magnetic-
field coil

photodiode

coated vapor cell

magnetic shield

FIG. 1: Experimental setup for measuring microwave transi-
tions.

cell. The time-dependent optical rotation was detected
with a balanced polarimeter after the vapor cell. In this
work, the laser was tuned to the Rb D1 line; laser beam
diameter was ∼ 2 mm, and the light power was <
∼ 15 µW.
A static magnetic ﬁeld is applied along the light propa-
gation direction. Narrow resonances in modulation fre-
quency appear in the synchronously detected optical-
rotation signal when the frequency is equal to twice the
Larmor frequency (Fig. 5). The factor of two is related
to the two-fold spatial symmetry of the induced atomic
alignment. The widths of the resonances are determined
by the ground-state Zeeman relaxation rate.

An advantage of the FM NMOR technique for mea-
suring the Zeeman relaxation rate is that when a bias
ﬁeld is applied (as in the present case), the resonance
curves are, to ﬁrst order, insensitive to small transverse
magnetic ﬁelds; this eliminates a possible source of sys-
tematic error.

this work, we used a version of the NMOR technique in
which the frequency of the laser is modulated and optical
rotation varying at the modulation frequency is detected
(FM NMOR [22, 23, 24]; Fig. 4).

The vapor cell under study was placed inside a multi-
layer magnetic shielding system (not shown) equipped
with coils for compensating residual magnetic ﬁelds and
gradients and for applying well-controlled ﬁelds to the

V. PROCEDURE, RESULTS AND DISCUSSION

The total electronic angular momentum in the ground
electronic state of rubidium is J = 1/2. For 85Rb, the
nuclear spin is I = 5/2. In a low dc magnetic ﬁeld where
nonlinear Zeeman shifts resulting from decoupling of hy-
perﬁne structure can be neglected, one generally expects

-150 -100 -50

0
Frequency Increment HkHzL

50

100

150

-10

-5
0
Frequency Increment HkHzL

5

10

L
s
t
i
n
u
.
b
r
a
H

l
a
n
g
i
S

L
s
t
i
n
u
.
b
r
a
H

l
a
n
g
i
S

L
s
t
i
n
u
.
b
r
a
H

l
a
n
g
i
S

-15 -10

-5

0
Frequency Increment HkHzL

5

10

15

-60

-40

-20
Frequency Increment HHzL

0

20

FIG. 2: Examples of the microwave spectra recorded with the
Ale-10 85Rb cell (see Table I). The common parameters for
the three scans are: dc magnetic ﬁeld = 29 mG, linear light
polarization, laser tuned to the center of the F = 3 → F ′
transition, total scan rate (saw-tooth sweep) = 0.02 Hz. Each
plot represents an average of approximately ﬁve scans. Upper
and middle plots: input light power 0.25 µW; lower plot: in-
put light power 13 µW, microwave power reduced by a factor
≈ 63. The lower plot also shows a ﬁt by a Lorentzian superim-
posed on a linear background. The ﬁt Lorentzian linewidth
(FWHM) is 10.9(3) Hz, slightly larger than the “intrinsic”
width of about 8.7 Hz (Table I) due to residual light broad-
ening (see text).

to see 11 distinct resonance hyperﬁne transition frequen-
cies between various linear-Zeeman-split sublevels of the
upper and lower ground state hyperﬁne levels. (For 87Rb,
an atom with I = 3/2, there are 7 transition frequencies.)
The experimental observation of this is shown in the up-

4

L
s
t
i
n
u
.
b
r
a
H

l
a
n
g
i
S

FIG. 3: An example of a microwave spectrum recorded with
the TT11 87Rb cell (see Table I). The parameters for the scan
are: dc magnetic ﬁeld = 2.7 mG, linear light polarization,
laser tuned to the center of the F = 2 → F ′ transition, total
scan rate (saw-tooth sweep) = 0.2 Hz. The plot represents a
single scan. Input light power = 6 µW. The comparison of this
plot with the middle plot in Fig. 2 illustrates the advantages
of using a TE011 microwave cavity as opposed to a current
loop: almost complete suppression of the broad pedestal and
the ∆MF 6= 0 microwave transitions.

per plot of Fig. 2). The relative intensities of various
components depend on the power, polarization, and tun-
ing of the pump light, the geometry and orientation of
the microwave loop, and the microwave power. Under
typical conditions in this experiment, the peaks of the
resonances correspond to an increase in absorption by
several percent (the optical depth on resonance of the
room-temperature cells is of order unity).

The width of the peaks on the upper plot in Fig. 2 is
about 4 kHz (FWHM) and is dominated by the Doppler
width of the microwave transition. There is also a sig-
niﬁcant contribution due to the phase variation of the
microwave ﬁeld over the cell volume resulting from the
use of a simple loop for generation of the microwave ﬁeld.
A zoom with higher frequency resolution (the middle plot
in Fig. 2) reveals additional sharp features superimposed
on top of the Doppler-broadened lines. These are the
Dicke-narrowed lines [9, 25] of primary interest in the
present work.

While all the sharp features are of comparable widths,
in the following we concentrate on the central resonance
corresponding to the “clock transition” between the M =
0 Zeeman components (the 0-0 transition), which is to
ﬁrst order insensitive to dc magnetic ﬁelds and gradients.
An example of a high-resolution recording of the narrow
feature is shown in the lower plot in Fig. 2. The line
shape is well described by a Lorentzian as seen from the
ﬁtting curve also shown in the plot.

We have measured the widths and shifts of the cen-
tral narrow resonance for each of the cells. In order to
eliminate the eﬀects of power broadening and shifts, we
performed double extrapolation of the widths and cen-
tral frequencies of the resonances to zero optical and mi-

frequency modulation

reference

Ωm

Polarizer

B 

Analyzer

PD1

−
+

Σ

PD2

Diode
laser

Atomic
vapor cell

Data aquisition

absorption

rotation

Lock-in

FIG. 4: Simpliﬁed schematic of the experimental setup for
measuring Zeeman relaxation rate with the FM NMOR tech-
nique [22, 23, 24].

L
s
t
i
n
u
.
b
r
a
H

l
a
n
g
i
S

130 135 140 145 150 155 160 165
Modulation Frequency HHzL

FIG. 5: An example of the FM NMOR data taken with the
Ale-10 cell. The central frequency of the laser is tuned ≈
400 MHz lower than the center of the F = 3 → F ′ absorption
peak of the D1 line (this point corresponds to a maximum
of the FM NMOR signal). The laser frequency is modulated
with an amplitude of 20 MHz. A bias magnetic ﬁeld of 156 µG
is applied along the light-propagation direction. The data is
shown along with a ﬁt by a dispersive Lorentzian (see Ref.
[24]). The width of the resonance corresponds to γNM OR
=
2π · 0.7 Hz, the narrowest magneto-optical resonance width
observed with alkali atoms to date.

exp

crowave power, using their observed linear dependence
on power at low powers. (The eﬀects of light broadening
can also be minimized by judicious choice of light tun-
ing; for example, the high-frequency slope of the 85Rb
F = 3 → F ′ optical transition provides relatively large
signals with greatly reduced light broadening. The signal
deteriorates on the low-frequency slope, presumably be-
cause Zeeman optical pumping dominates over hyperﬁne
pumping. Similar “tricks” are also used in optical pump-
ing magnetometry [27] and in NMOR [28, 29].) The re-
sults, which were found to be independent of laser tuning
and polarization, are summarized in Table I. For 85Rb,
uncertainties in the shifts include both the errors of the
present measurement and 3 Hz uncertainty in the knowl-

5

edge of the absolute transition frequency for free atoms
[26]; for 87Rb, the latter uncertainty is negligible [18].

An example of the data taken with the microwave cav-
ity is shown in Fig. 3. The TE011 cavity has important
advantages over a simple loop, as can be seen from the
comparison of Fig. 3 with the middle plot in Fig. 2. In
particular, strong suppression of the broad pedestal and
the ∆MF 6= 0 microwave transitions is apparent.
(In
Ref. [10], microwave transition lineshapes obtained using
TE011 and TE111 cavities were compared to each other.
Narrow lines appeared only when the TE011 cavity was
used. Ref. [10] also contains references to calculations of
the lineshape in the regime in which the dimensions of
the cell are comparable with the wavelength, and, corre-
spondingly, with the microwave cavity mode size.)

As an additional cross-check of the results given in Ta-
ble I, a set of room temperature data for the H2 cell
was also taken using the 780 nm D2 resonance (a diﬀer-
ent diode laser system was used for this measurement).
The results, the intrinsic width of 20.3(9) Hz and shift
of −89.5(11) Hz, are consistent with the data obtained
with D1 resonance (see Table I), as expected.

The data taken at diﬀerent temperatures in the TT11
cell provide some insight into the adsorption process of
the alkali atoms onto the walls. The adsorption time of
the atom on the wall, under simplifying assumptions such
as a uniform adsorption energy on all sites on the surface,
is usually assumed to be [30]

¯ta = τ0eEa/kT ,

(1)

where τ0 is the period of vibration of the adsorbed atom
in the wall potential, Ea is the adsorption energy, k is
the Boltzmann constant and T is the absolute tempera-
ture. At higher temperatures, therefore, an atom spends
less time on the wall and should experience a smaller fre-
quency shift and broadening. The frequency shift (dis-
cussed in the following section) in particular should be
reduced by a factor equal to the fractional change in ad-
sorption time due to the change in cell temperature:

d∆ν
∆ν

= −

Ea
kT

·

dT
T

.

(2)

For the TT11 cell, the frequency shift measured at two
temperatures allows one to calculate [under the assump-
(1)] the absorption energy, giving Ea =
tions of Eq.
0.06 eV. This is consistent with previous values found
in similar cells but smaller than the 0.1 eV reported by
some researchers (see Ref. [31] and references therein).

In interpreting the observed microwave frequency
shifts we have assumed that these shifts originate in col-
lisions of rubidium atoms with the cell walls because
the cells studied here are nominally free from buﬀer gas.
However, due to high mobility of helium atoms in glass,
it is possible that atmospheric helium has diﬀused into
the cells through the glass (particularly in the case of the
oldest Gib cell). Assuming that the helium inside the
cells is in equilibrium with that in the atmosphere (for

which the partial He concentration is 5.2 · 10−6) and us-
ing the literature data (e.g., Ref. [15]) for the frequency
shifts of the rubidium 0-0 microwave transitions, we ﬁnd
that the microwave resonance is shifted by +1.3 Hz and
+2.9 Hz for 85Rb and 87Rb, respectively. Since these
shifts are relatively small, and since we do not know the
actual pressure of helium in the cells, we ignore these
shifts in the rest of the paper, noting them as a possible
source of a small systematic error. Broadening due to
collisions with helium is negligibly small.

The procedure for obtaining the Zeeman relaxation
data is described in Refs. [22, 24]. Great care was exer-
cised to minimize the possible contributions to resonance
linewidths due to magnetic-ﬁeld gradients. The contribu-
tion of gradient broadening to the FM NMOR linewidth
(upon compensation of the gradients) is found to be neg-
ligible at the level of present uncertainties [32]. Similar
to the procedure used for the microwave transitions, the
observed resonance widths (see Fig. 5) were extrapolated
to zero light power.

Atomic number densities listed in Tables I and II were
determined by ﬁtting linear absorption spectra taken at
low light power (∼ 1 µW).

VI.

INTERPRETATION

There are several known relaxation mechanisms at
including spin-
work in the vapor cells studied here,
exchange relaxation, loss of polarized atoms due to col-
lisions with uncoated surfaces (primarily in the cell’s
stem), and relaxation due to collisions with the wall coat-
ing.

The contribution of spin-exchange relaxation to the mi-
crowave width can be estimated using the formulae given
in Refs.
[33, 34]. When only one isotope with nuclear
spin I is present in the cell, the spin-exchange contribu-
tion to the linewidth of the 0-0 microwave transition is
given by

where σse is the spin-exchange-collision cross-section
(σse = 2 · 10−14 cm2 for all cases relevant here [34]),
n is the atomic number density,

γµ
se
2π

=

R(I)nvrelσse
π

,

vrel =

8kT /πµred

p

R(I) =

6I + 1
8I + 4

(3)

(4)

(5)

is the nuclear slow-down factor for the 0 − 0 transition.
For the Gib cell, where two isotopes are present, the con-
siderations are similar. The values of the contribution of
the spin-exchange collisions to the microwave linewidths
deduced from the measured number density are listed

in the next-to-last column of Table I. In all cases, this
contribution is less than 25% of the overall observed
linewidth γµ

exp.

The relaxation due to the stem can be estimated from
the geometry (except for the Gib cell which does not have
a stem, whose deposits of solid rubidium are apparently
covered with paraﬃn), and is found to contribute to the
microwave linewidth less than a fraction of a Hz in the
case of the Ale-10 cell and less than one Hz in the case of
the TT11 and H1 cells. Eﬀects related to the cell stems
therefore contribute to the hyperﬁne decoherence at a
level somewhat less than the measurement errors given
in Table I. We ignore this contribution in the following
discussion.

Collisions of alkali atoms with the wall coating can
be separated into three categories. The most “gentle”
or adiabatic collisions, while causing hyperﬁne transition
frequency shift and decoherence (as discussed below),
generally do not result in population transfer or Zeeman
decoherence. The stronger collisions, for example, colli-
sions with paramagnetic impurities or “dangling bonds,”
randomize the electron spin. However, they do not aﬀect
the nuclear spin, so a polarized atom retains a certain de-
gree of polarization after the collision. Finally, an atom
can be absorbed into the coating for a suﬃciently long
time that all polarization is destroyed. First, we analyze
the contribution of the adiabatic collisions.

While the adiabatic collisions do not cause atoms to
jump between quantum states, the interaction with the
wall during a collision causes a phase shift φ between
hyperﬁne states [30]. The hyperﬁne transition frequency
shift due to this phase shift can be estimated as follows.
Consider an atom in the cell that we will track for a time
τ much longer than the typical time interval between its
wall collisions. The distance travelled by the atom (along
some complicated reticulated trajectory) is vτ , where

v =

8kT /πM

p

is the mean speed and M is the mass of the atom. The
next question is: how many times did this atom collide
with the wall? The answer for a spherical cell (for which
the mean distance between wall collisions assuming the
usual cosine angular distribution of atoms bouncing oﬀ
the wall is 4R/3) is

6

(6)

(7)

(8)

(9)

is the average relative speed and µred is the reduced mass
of the colliding atoms, and

where tc is the characteristic time between wall collisions.
If the phase shift per collision is φ, the overall phase
increment in time τ is:

On the other hand, the phase increment is also equal to

vτ
4R/3

=

τ
tc

,

φ

vτ
4R/3

.

2π∆ντ,

TABLE III: Linewidth budget for the microwave transitions. γµ
er/(2π) are the deduced contributions to the
microwave linewidth from adiabatic and electron-randomization collisions (from Tables I and II), respectively. The last two
columns list the total expected width based on the sum of these deduced contributions and the experimentally observed
microwave linewidths (from Table I).

a /(2π) and γµ

7

Isotope γµ

a /(2π) (Hz) γµ

er/(2π) (Hz) Total (Hz) γµ

exp/(2π) (Hz)

Cell
Ale-10 85Rb
85Rb
Gib
87Rb
87Rb

H2

2
0.6
5
9

5
13
9
11

7
14
14
20

8.7(5)
11(2)
16(4)
22(3)

where ∆ν is the sought-for frequency shift. Equating (8)
and (9), and cancelling τ , we get:

.

(10)

∆ν =

3v
4R

φ
2π
The values of the phase shift φ for various cells, experi-
mental conditions, and Rb isotopes deduced from the ex-
perimental values of the microwave transition frequency
shifts using Eq. (10) are listed in Table I. The results are
consistent with the available earlier data for Rb in alkane-
coated cells (Ref.
[9] and references therein) within the
spread between diﬀerent cells under similar conditions
and with the same Rb isotope.

In order to compare the coating properties for cells
containing diﬀerent isotopes (particularly, the Ale-10 cell
with the other cells used in this work), one can scale the
phase shift to one and the same isotope (e.g., 85Rb) us-
ing the expected proportionality of the phase shift and
the hyperﬁne transition frequency [39]. The scaled values
(φ′) for the 87Rb data are listed in Table I. The results in-
dicate that all the diﬀerent coatings studied in this work
produce roughly the same phase shifts in wall collisions.
We also note that the phase shifts per collision measured
here in Rb are roughly consistent with those measured
for Cs on paraﬃn coatings (φ = 0.09(1) rad [30]), when
scaled to the corresponding hyperﬁne frequency.

Because of the statistical character of the collisions,
there is a spread in the amount of phase shift acquired
by the atoms, which contributes to the resonance width
[30, 35] (a derivation of the broadening and shift due to
this mechanism is given in the Appendix):

γµ
a
2π

=

φ2
πtc

.

(11)

For the parameters of the present experiment, these con-
tributions to the width comprise from γµ
a /(2π) ≈ 0.6 Hz
to ∼ 10 Hz. As seen from Table I, the sums of γµ
a and
γµ
se are insuﬃcient to explain the observed overall intrin-
sic widths γµ

exp in any of the cases.

A possible contribution to the linewidth that may ex-
plain this is from electron-spin randomizing collisions
with the wall or, possibly, gaseous impurities other than
helium [2]. The magnitude of this contribution to the
width of the microwave transitions can be estimated from
the assumption that the NMOR linewidths are also domi-
nated by electron-spin randomization collisions [36]. The

measured NMOR linewidths are broader than what is
expected given the known spin-exchange cross-sections
(see Table II). The relaxation rate of the 0-0 microwave
coherence due to spin randomization should be 3/4 of
the electron randomization rate [34], while the intrinsic
NMOR linewidth due to electron-spin randomization is
smaller due to the nuclear slow-down eﬀect (see, for ex-
[34]) and is calculated to be ≈ 1/3 of the
ample, Ref.
spin-randomization rate for 85Rb and ≈ 1/2 for 87Rb
[36].

Using this

information,

the contribution of

the
electron-spin randomization collisions to the microwave
linewidth can be estimated (γµ
er, Table II). For example,
for the Ale-10 cell at 25◦C, assuming that the Zeeman
relaxation is dominated by spin-randomization collisions,
we have

γµ
er
2π

≈ 2 × (1.2 Hz) × 3 ×

≈ 5 Hz.

(12)

3
4

(Under the conditions of our experiments, in which lin-
early polarized low-intensity light is used, the eﬀect of
spin-exchange collisions is nearly identical to that of
electron-randomization collisions [34], and we do not
separate spin exchange from the additional electron-
randomization processes in this estimate and those pre-
sented in Tables II and III.) In expression (12), the factor
of two accounts for the relation between the relaxation
rate for the 0-0 coherence and the Lorentzian width of the
microwave transition. Adding up all the contributions
and estimating the associated uncertainties, we ﬁnd that
for the Ale-10 cell we can account for about 7(1) Hz out
of the observed 8.7(5) Hz, which is satisfactory, particu-
larly, in view of a number of simplifying assumptions in
our model (for example, the assumption that the disper-
sion of φ is equal to φ2 in the adiabatic collisions, see Ap-
pendix). The microwave linewidth budgets for the cells
where both the microwave and NMOR data are available
are summarized in Table III.

The fact that both Rb isotopes are simultaneously
present in the Gib cell allows a check of our model for
consistency, and provides further evidence that the dis-
persion of phase shifts in adiabatic collisions is not the
dominant source of the microwave linewidth. For the val-
ues of φ (Table I) for the two isotopes extracted from the
measured frequency shifts using Eq. (10), Eq. (11) pre-
dicts about an order of magnitude larger contribution to

the width from phase-shift dispersion in adiabatic colli-
sions for 87Rb compared to that for 85Rb. This is clearly
inconsistent with a relatively small diﬀerence in the width
observed experimentally but does correspond to the pre-
diction of our model.

So far, we have considered adiabatic and electron-spin
randomization collisions. Collisions that completely de-
polarize atoms would also contribute to both the hyper-
ﬁne and Zeeman relaxation. However, if one assumes
that relaxation is dominated by collisions of this type
rather than electron-randomization collisions, carrying
out an analysis similar to the one above, one does not
achieve satisfactory agreement between the microwave
and NMOR linewidths.

The present experimental data for the widths and
shifts of the microwave transitions appears inconsistent
with a hypothesis that the linewidth is dominated by
dispersion of the phase shifts in adiabatic wall colli-
sions. On the other hand, comparing the microwave
data and the Zeeman relaxation data measured with
nonlinear magneto-optical rotation, we have proposed
that the dominant source of the linewidth is electron-
spin randomizing collisions. This hypothesis consistently
accounts for the linewidth-budget deﬁcits for both mi-
crowave transitions and NMOR resonances. The rate of
the electron-randomization collisions necessary to explain
the observed microwave and NMOR linewidths are too
large to be accounted for by spin-exchange collisions (Ta-
bles I and II). Thus, it is necessary to assume electron
randomization processes occurring either in collisions of
the alkali atoms with cell walls or, possibly, in collisions
with gaseous impurities. These two scenarios may be dis-
tinguished by comparing relaxation rates for otherwise
similar cells having vastly diﬀerent diameters.

[15].

It is interesting to compare the present results with
those of Ref.
In that work, the rates of the
hyperﬁne-coherence and population relaxation in wall
collisions in a Paraﬂint-coated cell were measured, and
the latter was found to be an order of magnitude lower
than the former.
In the present experiment, since we
have found that electron-randomization collisions domi-
nate relaxation at room temperature, one would expect
that the two rates should be similar. This apparent con-
tradiction may be attributable to an important diﬀerence
of the experimental procedure of Ref.
[15] compared to
this work: namely that the data was obtained in the
limit of zero rubidium density in the cell (which was
achieved by maintaining the stem at a lower temperature
than the cell walls). This may suggest that the electron-
randomization in our case is due to a modiﬁcation of the
coating surface due to the presence of rubidium atoms.
These issues will be addressed in future work.

VII. CONCLUSION

It appears that the vapor-cell coatings studied in this
work, manufactured using three rather diﬀerent technolo-

8

gies, all show comparable performance in terms of the
parameters (linewidth and shift) relevant to their use in
magnetometers and atomic clocks. Moreover, the fact
that a cell (Gib) manufactured 40 years ago shows com-
parable performance to that of more recently manufac-
tured cells is evidence of the stability of the coating prop-
erties [40] and suitability of such cells for extremely long
term measurements, for example, as frequency reference
and magnetic sensor elements for deep-space missions.

The durability of the wall coatings and the lack
of dependence of the coating properties on the exact
molecular-weight composition and the method of coat-
ing deposition are encouraging with regard to the ap-
plication of such coatings to miniature atomic frequency
references. Wall coatings might play an important role
in improving the performance of compact atomic clocks
if a way of integrating the application of the coating with
the cell fabrication process is found. This integration will
likely be an important future step in the development of
atomic clocks based on sub-mm alkali atom vapor cells.
This work was initiated and inspired by H. G. Robin-
son who has contributed greatly to its realization. The
authors are grateful to D. English, S. M. Rochester, and
J. E. Stalnaker for useful discussions and help with data
analysis, to S. N. Evans for his help in understanding
the statistics underlying collisional broadening and shift,
and to H. Shugart, E. B. Alexandrov, and M. V. Balabas
for providing the anti-relaxation-coated cells. This work
was supported by the Oﬃce of Naval Research, NSF, by a
CalSpace Minigrant, and by the Microsystems Technol-
ogy Oﬃce of the Defence Advanced Research Projects
Agency (DARPA). D.B. also acknowledges the support
of the Miller Institute for Basic Research in Science.

VIII. APPENDIX

Here we give a derivation of

line broadening and
shift arising from the collisional phase shifts acquired by
atoms.

Suppose a collection of atomic oscillators are all in
phase initially, and in the absence of collisions, they all
oscillate at a frequency ω0. Let φ be the average phase
shift per collision, and 1/tc the average collision rate.
There are two factors that lead to a dispersion in dif-
ferent atoms’ phase shifts acquired after a time t ≫ tc.
First, there is a statistical distribution of the number of
collisions n experienced by atoms over a time t which we
will assume to be Poissonian:

p(n, t) =

e−t/tc(t/tc)n
n!

,

(13)

where p(n, t) is the probability that an atom experiences
n collisions in time t [the mean number of collisions corre-
sponding to the distribution (13) is hni = t/tc]. Second,
the phase shifts per collision are not the same. We will as-
sume a normal distribution with a mean value φ (|φ| ≪ 1)
and a dispersion φ2. (The latter property follows from a

distribution of wall-sticking times with a universal bind-
ing energy exceeding kT ; see, for example, Ref. [30].)

Let us consider atoms that have experienced some ﬁxed
number of collisions n ≫ 1. Let φn be the overall phase
accumulated by an atom over n collisions. Because of
the normal distribution of phase shifts in individual col-
lisions (resulting in a random walk in phase), we have a
Gaussian distribution of accumulated phases:

p(φn, n) =

1
2πnφ2

e

− (φn−nφ)2
2nφ2

,

p

where nφ is the average phase accumulated in n colli-
sions, and nφ2 is the dispersion.

Taking into account the distributions (13) and (14), the
oscillation amplitude averaged over the atomic ensemble
is found as a weighted sum of the contributions from
individual atoms (∝ ei(ω0t+φj ), where φj is the phase
accumulated by this individual atom):

A(t) ∝

∞

e−t/tc(t/tc)n
n!

∞

Z

−∞

ei(ω0t+φn)
2πnφ2

Xn=0
= eiω0t−t/tc

(cid:16)

−iφ−φ2/2

1−e

p
(cid:17) ,

e− (φn−nφ)2

2nφ2

dφn

(15)

(16)

9

where in the last step we have explicitly evaluated the
integral and the sum. Next, we use the fact that |φ| ≪ 1,
and, expanding the exponential factor to second order in
φ, we obtain:

(14)

A(t) ∝ ei(ω0−φ/tc)t−φ2t/tc ,

(17)

which says that the frequency of the oscillation is shifted
by φ/tc, and the amplitude decays at a rate φ2/tc lead-
ing to line broadening.
(It is interesting to note that
neglecting either one of the random factors – the number
of collisions experienced by an atom or the dispersion in
phase shift per collision – leads to a two times slower de-
cay rate in either case.) In order to obtain the line width
of the absorption resonance, the decay rate of the ampli-
tude has to be multiplied by a factor of two. Therefore,
Eq. (17) gives the formulae (10) and (11).

[1] H. Robinson, E. Ensberg, and H. Dehmelt, Bull. Am.

[14] H. G. Robinson and C. E. Johnson, IEEE Trans. Instrum.

[2] M. A. Bouchiat, Ph.D. thesis, L’Universite de Paris

[15] J. Vanier, J. F. Simard, and J. S. Boulanger, Phys. Rev.

[3] M. A. Bouchiat and J. Brossel, Phys. Rev. 147(1), 41

[16] T. Hirata, M. Maeda, M. Suehiro, and H. Hosomatsu,

Meas. IM-32, 198 (1983).

A 9(3), 1031 (1974).

[4] V. Liberman and R. J. Knize, Phys. Rev. A 34(6), 5115

[17] M. Tetu, R. Fortin, and J. Y. Savard, IEEE Trans. In-

Phys. Soc. 3, 9 (1958).

(1964).

(1966).

(1986).

[5] E. B. Alexandrov and V. A. Bonch-Bruevich, Opt. Eng.

31(4), 711 (1992).

[6] D. Budker, W. Gawlik, D. F. Kimball, S. M. Rochester,
V. V. Yashchuk, and A. Weis, Rev. Mod. Phys. 74(4),
1153 (2002).

[7] E. B. Aleksandrov, M. Auzinsh, D. Budker, D. F. Kim-
ball, S. M. Rochester, and V. V. Yashchuk, Dynamic ef-
fects in nonlinear magneto-optics of atoms and molecules
(2004), physics/0405049.

[8] A. Risley, J. Jarvis, S., and J. Vanier, J. Appl. Phys.

(USA) 51(9), 4571 (1980).

[9] H. G. Robinson and C. E. Johnson, Appl. Phys. Lett.

40(9), 771 (1982).

[10] R. P. Frueholz, C. H. Volk, and J. C. Camparo, J. Appl.

Phys. (USA) 54(10), 5613 (1983).

[11] J. Kitching, S. Knappe, and L. Hollberg, Appl. Phys.

Lett. 81, 553 (2002).

[12] Y. Y. Jau, A. B. Post, N. N. Kuzma, A. M. Braun,
M. V. Romalis, and W. Happer, Phys. Rev. Lett. 92(11),
110801/1 (2004).

[13] L. Liew, S. Knappe, J. Moreland, H. G. Robinson,
L. Hollberg, and J. Kitching, Appl. Phys. Lett. 84(14),
2694 (2004).

IEEE J. Quantum Electron. 27(6), 1609 (1991).

strum. Meas. 25, 477 (1976).

[18] S. Bize, Y. Sortais, M. S. Santos, C. Mandache, A. Cla-
iron, and C. Salomon, Europhys. Lett. 45(5), 558 (1999).
[19] H. M. Gibbs, Ph.D. thesis, University of California,

Berkeley (1965).

[20] E. B. Alexandrov, M. V. Balabas, D. Budker, D. English,
D. F. Kimball, C. H. Li, and V. V. Yashchuk, Phys. Rev.
A 66(4), 042903/1 (2002).

[21] H. G. Robinson (1985), unpublished.
[22] D. Budker, D. F. Kimball, V. V. Yashchuk, and M. Zolo-

torev, Phys. Rev. A 65, 055403 (2002).

[23] V. V. Yashchuk, D. Budker, W. Gawlik, D. F. Kimball,
Y. P. Malakyan, and S. M. Rochester, Phys. Rev. Lett.
90, 253001 (2003).

[24] Y. P. Malakyan, S. M. Rochester, D. Budker, D. F. Kim-
ball, and V. V. Yashchuk, Phys. Rev. A 69(1), 013817
(2004).

[25] R. Dicke, Phys. Rev. 89, 472 (1953).
[26] J. Vanier and C. Audoin, The quantum physics of atomic
frequency standards (A. Hilger, Bristol ; Philadelphia,
1989).

[27] E. B. Aleksandrov, M. V. Balabas, and V. A. Bonch-

Bruevich, Pis’ma Zh. Tekh. Fiz. 13(11-12), 749 (1987).

[28] D. Budker, V. Yashchuk, and M. Zolotorev, Phys. Rev.

Lett. 81(26), 5788 (1998).

[29] D. Budker, D. F. Kimball, S. M. Rochester, V. V.
Yashchuk, and M. Zolotorev, Phys. Rev. A 62(4), 043403
(2000).

[30] H. M. Goldenberg, D. Kleppner, and N. F. Ramsey, Phys.

[31] C. Rahman and H. G. Robinson, IEEE J. Quantum Elec-

Rev. 123(2), 530 (1961).

tron. QE-23(4), 452 (1987).

ker (2004), to be published.

[32] S. Pustelny, D. F. Kimball, V. V. Yashchuk, and D. Bud-

[33] F. Grossetete, J. Phys. (Paris) 29(5-6), 456 (1968).
[34] W. Happer, Rev. Mod. Phys. 44(2), 169 (1972).
[35] R. Jochemsen, M. Morrow, A. J. Berlinsky, and W. N.

Hardy, Phys. Rev. Lett. 47(12), 852 (1981).

[36] A. I. Okunevich, S. M. Rochester, D. Budker, and
V. V. Yashchuk (2003), unpublished. Indirect evidence
that electron-spin-randomization collisions are signiﬁcant
comes also from an experimental comparison of relax-
ation rates for the quadrupole and hexadecapole mo-
ments for the case of 87Rb in a paraﬃn-coated cell sim-
ilar to the Ale-10 cell, see V.V. Yashchuk, D. Budker,
W. Gawlik, D.F. Kimball, Yu. P. Malakyan, and S.M.

10

Rochester, Phys. Rev. Lett. 90, 253001 (2003).

[37] R. Herman and H. Margenau, Phys. Rev. 122, 1204

(1961).

[38] This cell was kindly loaned to us by Symmetricom, TRC.
This does not imply an endorsement by NIST; cells from
other companies may work equally well.

[39] This neglects possible eﬀects of the diﬀerent mass of the
two isotopes. The proportionality of the phase shift and
the hyperﬁne frequency arises from the fact that the
mechanism through which the phase shift occurs is the
change of the valence-electron density near the nucleus
during a collision [30, 37]. This scaling is conﬁrmed, at
least approximately, by the present work (see the data
for the two Rb isotopes simultaneously present in the
Gib cell listed in Table I), and the earlier work of Ref.
[15].

[40] For example, assuming that the intrinsic coating proper-
ties at a certain time after manufacturing were identical
for the Ale-10 and the Gib cell, we can roughly estimate
the temporal drift of the microwave frequency shift as
being ≤ 10 Hz/30 years.

