Strong light ﬁelds coax intramolecular reactions on femtosecond
time scales

M. Krishnamurthy, F. A. Rajgara, and D. Mathur
Tata Institute of Fundamental Research, 1 Homi Bhabha Road, Mumbai 400 005, India.
(October 31, 2013)

Abstract

Energetic H+
2 ions are formed as a result of intra-molecular rearrangement
during fragmentation of linear alcohols (methanol, ethanol, propanol, hex-
anol, and dodecanol) induced by intense optical ﬁelds produced by 100 fs
long, infrared, laser pulses of peak intensity 8×1015 W cm−2. Polarization
dependent measurements show, counterintuitively, that rearrangement is in-
duced by the strong optical ﬁeld within a single laser pulse, and that it occurs
before Coulomb explosion of the ﬁeld-ionized multiply charged alcohols.

4
0
0
2
 
g
u
A
 
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
m
o
t
a
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
7
0
0
8
0
4
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Typeset using REVTEX

1

Molecular rearrangements are a very important facet of chemical dynamics and play a
key role in understanding reaction pathways [1]. Molecular rearrangements are basically
unimolecular reactions in which the energy absorbed by the molecule is channeled to certain
vibrational modes that leads to reorientation or realignment of the molecular structure.
The molecule with the altered morphology is then able to evolve along reaction pathways
that were otherwise not available, and this results in a particular set of reaction products.
Unimolecular reactions, of which isomeric transformation are a subset, play a vital role in
many important reactions in nature, like photoabsorption in rhodopsin that is responsible for
vision [2]. Many rearrangements, like the McLaﬀerty rearrangement [3], often play a pivotal
role in analytical chemistry in that they provide deeper insights into molecular fragmentation
and reaction mechanisms. The advent of femtochemistry [4] has enabled molecular motion
to be deciphered in very direct fashion, and has provided new insights into intramolecular
motion and reaction pathways that has enabled the subject to make qualitative progress on
a number of fronts.

A priori, it might be considered perfectly legitimate to postulate that rearrangement
reactions are of little or no concern in situations where molecules are irradiated by ultrashort
laser light whose intensity is large enough so that the associated electric ﬁelds start to match
intramolecular Coulombic ﬁelds. Light intensities of 1016 W cm−2 achieve this situation and
make optical ﬁeld-induced multiple ionization inevitable in most polyatomic molecules. The
rapid deposition (on femtosecond timescales) of laser energy that gives rise to ejection of
more than one molecular electron also leads to eﬃcient, and fast fragmentation of molecules
via a Coulomb explosion. Most often, the molecular ion peak that is measured in a mass
spectrum in such instances is negligibly small compared to the yield of fragments ions [5].
This is even more so in measurements that are made in “intensity-selected” mode [6] wherein
only the central (most intense) part of the laser focal volume is sampled and contribution
to the mass spectrum from the lower intensity regions of the focal volume is avoided. In
such intense ﬁeld situations, conventional wisdom would dictate that it is very improbable
that the multiply charged molecular ion that is formed will undergo re-orientation so as to
lead to rearrangement products. Multiple ionization in the Franck-Condon region leads to
fragment ions that are driven by the Coulomb repulsion between the charged fragments,
releasing potential energy in the form of translational energy of the fragment ions. To the
best of our knowledge no report has been published of fast intramolecular reactions in such
intense ﬁelds.

We report here results of intense ﬁeld experiments that we have conducted to probe
intramolecular reactions involving proton migration in a series of linear alcohols, methanol,
ethanol, propanol, hexanol, and dodecanol. The peak laser intensities employed in our stud-
ies were as high as 8×1015 W cm−2. Quite unexpectedly, we ﬁnd that proton migration
leading to bond formation occurs within the multiply charged parent molecular ion that is
formed by optical ﬁeld induced tunnel ionization. Moreover, such proton migration occurs
much before the Coulomb repulsion makes the fragment ions ﬂy apart. The fast rearrange-
ment leads to formation of unusual products of dissociative ionization of alcohols, namely
H+
2 ions that are formed with substantial kinetic energy in the center-of-frame (cm) of the
molecule. This ultrafast re-arrangement reaction is seen to be a feature that is common to
the fragmentation dynamics of all the linear chain alcohols under similar ﬁelds. Results of
experiments that we conducted by changing the laser polarization direction indicate that the

2

rearrangement occurs within the 100 fs pulse duration that we used. The short intense light
ﬁeld coaxes molecular rearrangement in addition to causing molecules to undergo fragmen-
tation into ions. Analysis of the fragmentation pathways of the multiple charged alcohols
has been carried out using ab initio quantum computational techniques, and results indicate
that H+
2 formation is a preferred pathway. Unlike rearragements that occur in weak-ﬁelds,
the intense optical ﬁeld in our experiments coaxes the system to follow the minimum-energy
pathway such that hydrogen molecule ions are formed on a time scale that is shorter than
that required for the fragment ions from the Coulomb explosion of the multiply charged
alcohols to ﬂy apart.

Our experiments were carried out using a linear, two-ﬁeld time-of-ﬂight spectrometer
(TOF) that has been described elsewhere [7]. Brieﬂy, we used a Ti:sapphire laser system
employing chirped pulse ampliﬁcation that produces 806 nm wavelength pulses of energy up
to 55 mJ/pulse, of 100 fs duration at 10 Hz repetition rate. In the measurements we report
here, pulses with energies upto 4 mJ/pulse were focused using a biconvex lens, of 15 cm
focal length, in an ultra-high vacuum chamber that is pumped down to a base pressure of
2×10−10 Torr. Typical peak intensities in the focal spot were in the range 1015-1016 W cm−2.
Use of a 3 mm aperture in front of the TOF spectrometer ensured that our measurements
were conducted in the intensity selective mode. The Rayleigh range in these measurements
was 6 mm. Linear chain alcohol molecules of interest were eﬀused into the chamber (after
degassing by means of several freeze-pump-thaw cycles in a clean, greaseless vacuum line)
such that typical operating pressures were in the range of 1-8×10−8 Torr. Ions formed in the
interaction region were electrostatically extracted, with nearly unit eﬃciency, into our TOF
spectrometer. A fast photodiode signal was used for the start pulses of our TOF spectrum,
while the stop signals were from the channeltron ion detector used in the pulse counting
mode. TOF spectra were measured with a 1 GHz-bandwidth digital oscilloscope along with
the waveform for each laser pulse, and data were recorded on the computer using a fast
programmable bus. We also measured the laser pulse intensity along with the arrival time
information, such that pulse-to-pulse intensity variations were accounted for, and data could
be appropriately selected so as to eliminate intensity ﬂuctuations larger than ±5%.

Figure 1 a) shows part of a typical TOF spectrum obtained when ethanol molecules
were irradiated with pulses of peak intensity 8×1015 W cm−2. We have recently presented a
study of the polarization dependence of the ﬁeld-induced fragmentation dynamics of linear
chain alcohols [8]. Here we focus only on the proton migration reaction. Along with the
multiply charged molecular ion peaks the TOF spectrum oﬀers evidence for multiply charged
atomic fragments, like C2+. In such cases, the large kinetic energy release (KER) in the
fragmentation event manifests itself in TOF spectra in the form of clear splitting in the
arrival times of ions as the fragments that are initially scattered in a direction towards the
detector reach early, and are labeled as forward scattered ions (marked f in the ﬁgure), while
those that are initially formed in the opposite direction reach the detector later, and are
denoted backward scattered ions (marked b in the ﬁgure). The time diﬀerence between the
forward and backward ions provides a measure of the kinetic energy release that accompanies
a particular ion formation channel.

We draw attention to the not-insubstantial signal that is observed in Fig. 1 a) at ﬂight
2 molecular ions; Fig. 1 b) depicts this somewhat
2 peak shows clear features on either side of the central peak due to

times of 0.75 µs, corresponding to H+
more clearly. The H+

3

H+

the forward and backward scattered ions, which indicates that the ions corresponding to
this feature are formed with substantial kinetic energy release in the cm frame. This is an
unexpected feature since in TOF spectra one does not expect to ﬁnd molecular ions with
large energy in the cm frame. Fig. 1 a) also shows a typical spectrum of ion signals obtained
at base pressure, when the alcohols are not introduced. At the lower end of the 10−9 Torr
range, trace H+ ions that are desorbed from stainless steel are observed but we note that
there is no evidence for H+
2 ions in the background after our vacuum chamber has been
thoroughly degassed by baking for prolonged periods of time.

2 ions are only observed once alcohols are introduced in the chamber. An impor-
tant question that obviously needs to be addressed is whether these H+
2 ions result from
an intermolecular reaction, where H+ formed from one alcohol molecule interacts with an
hydrogen-atom fragment from another molecule within the laser focal volume, or is their
formation due to intramolecular reactions? To decipher this we measured the H+
2 signal
as a function of alcohol pressure. At pressures below 6×10−8 Torr the ion signal that was
obtained showed, very clearly, a linear dependence. The H+
2 yield deviated from linear
dependence at higher pressures, indicating the onset of bimolecular collisions.
In all our
measurements care was taken to use very large extraction ﬁelds so as to ensure that ion
collection eﬃciency was close to unity, even for energetic ions.

Although the measurements that we have described so far indicate that H+

2 ions are
formed in our experiments by a unimolecular process following an intramolecular rearrange-
ment, unambiguous conﬁrmation of this was obtained from polarization dependent studies
that we conducted. Figure 1 b) shows the spectrum that we measured when the plane
polarized laser light was perpendicular to the TOF axis as compared to when the plane of
polarization was made parallel to the TOF axis. As can be seen, the forward and back-
scattered peaks are suppressed with the use of perpendicularly polarized light. Firstly, this
enables us to deduce that the energetic H+
2 ions are formed by an intramolecular rearrange-
ment. If they were formed from a bimolecular reaction involving the interaction of a proton
with another alcohol molecule, the process would certainly not be expected to show a depen-
dence on the polarization of the ionizing laser pulse. Moreover, it would exhibit a quadratic
dependence on gas pressure, contrary to observations. Secondly, the data shown in Fig. 1 b)
indicate that the rearrangement reaction occurs within the duration of a single laser pulse,
and is driven by the strong optical ﬁeld.

We also note that if the formation of H+

2 were a consequence of molecular reorientation,
possibly in an excited ionic state that evolved from the Franck-Condon region of the neutral
ground state, the H+
2 yield would, again, not be expected to show a dependence on laser
polarization.

As mentioned above, H+

2 ions that are formed also possess substantial kinetic energy in
the center-of-mass frame. Figure 2 shows the kinetic energy spectrum that is deduced from
the forward and backward scattered peaks in TOF spectra that we measured for methanol
precursors. The TOF spectra were used to obtain the energy released in the cm frame using
the following equation derived from simple kinematics [9]

2(2mUo)1/2
qEs
where δT is the time separation between the forward and backward scattered peaks, Uo is the
energy release in the center-of-mass frame, m is the mass of the ion, q is the ionic charge,

δT =

(1)

,

4

and Es is the ion extraction ﬁeld used in our TOF spectrometer. There is a low-energy
component that essentially arises from those fraction of molecules that are not perfectly
aligned along the laser polarization vector and do not undergo fast rearrangements. In such
cases H+
2 can be formed from the plethora of avoided crossings between ﬁeld-dressed potential
energy surfaces on timescales that are not necessarily less than 100 fs. Most unexpectedly,
energetic hydrogen molecule ions are also produced, with energies that extend up to ∼12
eV. The H+
2 kinetic energy arises from the Coulomb repulsion from the charge on the rest
of the multiply-charged alcohol molecule. Since a most probable value as high as 5 eV is
observed in our measurements (and such values are typical of those expected upon Coulomb
explosion of multiply charged molecules [10]), the clear implication is that the molecular
reorientation occurs well before the Coulomb explosion happens.

In order to gain further insight, we have made minimum energy path calculations on
multiply charged methanol using an ab initio quantum chemical method [11] to determine
the fragmentation path for the linear chain alcohols under consideration here. Self-consistent
ﬁeld Hartree-Fock computations were carried out using a 3-21G basis. Though these cal-
culations are not rigorous enough for deriving the detailed energetics of the fragmentation
reaction, they do provide adequately-reliable qualitative insight into the main features of
the reaction pathway. Using the steepest-descent method we ﬁnd that the multiply charged
(doubly and triply charged) methanol molecule reorients to form the H2 moiety that sep-
arates from the rest of the charged molecule. In Fig. 3 we show snap-shot pictures of the
minimum energy path that illustrate this. This feature was found to be apparent in all the
linear chain alcohols used in our experiments. Note how the two hydrogen atoms that are
denoted HA and HB take part in the rearrangement so as to give rise to formation of a HA-HB
bond in panel f. The novel feature of this reorientation reaction is that it involves an alcohol
ion that is multiply charged by the action of a laser ﬁeld whose intensity is large enough
to lead one to intuitively postulate that Coulomb explosion is the only possible pathway
that is open. The rearrangement reaction that is depicted in Fig. 3 is coaxed by the strong
optical ﬁeld. The sequence of events that occur are the following: i) at the rising edge of
the laser pulse, the C-H axis of the alcohol molecule becomes aligned with respect to the
laser light’s electric ﬁeld vector, ii) the aligned molecule undergoes multiple ionization, and
iii) also undergoes reorientation so as to form the H+
2 moiety that Coulomb explodes from
the remaining part of the charged molecule.

In summary, we have observed ultrafast intramolecular rearrangement leading to bond
formation upon intense ﬁeld irradiation of a series of linear alcohol molecules in the gas
phase. The rearrangement process gives rise to an unusual ionic fragment, H+
2 , that is
formed with substantial amount of kinetic energy (a most probable value of about 5 eV
in the center-of-mass frame). We have established that H+
2 is formed by a unimolecular
reaction. The results of polarization dependence measurements that we have made indicate
that the rearrangement occurs within the duration of the laser pulse and is coaxed by the
strong light ﬁeld.

We gratefully acknowledge partial ﬁnancial support for our Terawatt laser from the

Department of Science and Technology.

5

REFERENCES

[1] P. Jensen and P. R. Bunker, Computational Molecular Spectroscopy, (Wiley, Chichester,

[2] K. C. Hasson, F. Gai, and P. A. Anﬁnrud, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 93, 1512 (1996).
[3] F.W. McLaﬀerty, Anal. Chem. 31, 82 (1959).
[4] A. H. Zewail, Femtochemistry - Ultrafast Dynamics of The Chemical Bond, Vols. I and

II, (World Scientiﬁc, Singapore, 1994).

[5] A. D. Bandrauk, ⁀Molecules in Laser Fields, (Marcel Dekker, New York, 1994).
[6] S. Banerjee, G. R. Kumar, and D. Mathur, J. Phys. B 32, L305 (1999); 32 4277 (1999).
[7] F. A. Rajgara, M. Krishnamurthy, and D. Mathur, Phys. Rev. A , 68, 023407 (2003).
[8] F. A. Rajgara, M. Krishnamurthy, and D. Mathur, J. Chem. Phys., 119, 12224 (2003).
[9] W.C. Wiley and I.H. McLaren, Rev. Sci. Instrum., 26 1150 (1955).
[10] D. Mathur, Phys. Reports, 225, 193 (1993); ibid 391, 1 (2004).
[11] HyperChem, Molecule modeling system, Release 5.11 for Windows, Hypercube Inc.,

2000).

(1999).

6

FIGURES

FIG. 1. a) Typical TOF spectra observed when a linear chain alcohol, ethanol in this case,
is subjected to linearly-polarized optical ﬁelds of intensity 8×1015 W cm−2. The polarization
vector kept was parallel to the spectrometer axis. Similar spectra were also observed for methanol,
propanol, hexanol, and dodecanol. Only the fastest arrival times are shown, where ions with low
mass to charge ratio ions appear, in order to focus attention only on the H+
2 ion. f and b denote
forward and backward scattered ions (see text). The spectrum obtained with same laser intensity
and number of laser shots at background pressure (≤1×10−9 Torr) is also shown. b) Spectra
observed with the plane of polarization parallel and perpendicular to the spectrometer axis. Note
the disappearance of forward and backward components in the latter case. The extraction voltages
used to measure spectra shown in a) and b) were slightly diﬀerent, hence the small diﬀerence in
the ﬂight time corresponding to H+

2 ions.

FIG. 2. Distribution of kinetic energies released (KER) upon formation of H+

2 ions. The energy

values are in the center-of-mass frame.

FIG. 3. Snapshots of

the reaction pathway followed by a doubly-charged methanol
ion, CH3OH2+ computed by the steepest descent method using an ab initio Hartree-Fock,
self-consistent-ﬁeld method (see text). Note the rearrangement that leads to formation of a molec-
ular bond between atoms denoted HA and HB.

7

a)

b)

H+

+

H2

b

f

2+

Cb

2+

Cf

Background

0

0.4

0.6

0.8

1.0

1.2

1.4

f

+

H2

b

Parallel polarization

Perpendicular polarization

)
s
t
i
n
u
.
b
r
a
(
 
d
e
y
 
n
o
I

l

i

30

15

6

4

2

0.8

0.9

1.0

1.1

Flight time (m s)

500

250

)
s
t
i
n
u
 
.
b
r
a
(
 
d
e
y
 
n
o
I

l

i

0

0

5

10

15

+ KER (eV)

H2

