4
0
0
2
 
p
e
S
 
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
m
o
t
a
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
9
0
0
9
0
4
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Pump-probe spetrosopy in an operating magneto-optial trap:

the role of Raman transitions between disrete and ontinuum atomi states

Tomasz M. Brzozowski,

Maria Brzozowska, Jerzy Zahorowski, Mihaª Zawada, and Wo jieh Gawlik

∗

Marian Smoluhowski Institute of Physis, Jagiel lonian University, Reymonta 4, PL 30-059 Craow

(Dated: 17th Otober 2012)

†

85

We report on pump-probe measurements of absorption and four-wave-mixing spetra in a

Rb

magneto-optial trap taken while the trap is in operation. The trapping beams are used as pump

light. We onentrate on the entral feature of the spetra at small pump-probe detuning and

attribute its narrow resonant strutures to the superposition of Raman transitions between light-

shifted sublevels of the ground atomi state and to atomi reoil proesses. These two ontributions

have di(cid:27)erent dependenies on trap parameters and, in ontrast to earlier interpretations, are in-

homogeneously broadened. The strong dependene of the spetra on the probe-beam polarization

indiates the existene of large optial anisotropy of the old-atom sample, whih is attributed to

the reoil e(cid:27)ets. We point out that the reoil-indued resonanes an be isolated from other ontri-

butions, making pump-probe spetrosopy a highly sensitive diagnosti tool for atoms in a working

MOT.

PACS numbers: 32.80.Pj, 42.50.Vk, 42.65.-k

I.

INTRODUCTION

out by Tabosa et al. [9℄ and Grison et al. [2℄. Also, there

exists spetrosopi evidene of optial latties in a MOT

with a speial, phase-shift-insensitive, trapping beam ge-

The magneto-optial trap (MOT) is now a standard

ometry [10℄. These experiments indiated the potential

tool for obtaining old atomi samples. Due to signif-

of pump-probe spetrosopy for old-atom diagnostis.

iantly redued Doppler broadening, low ollision rate

However, the omplexity of suh spetra from a work-

and long interation time, suh samples o(cid:27)er a unique

ing MOT resulted in their possible appliation for MOT

possibility of ultra-preise spetrosopi measurements.

diagnostis being negleted. In this paper we revisit the

They are espeially useful for pump-probe experiments,

problem and desribe our systemati studies of suh spe-

whih investigate Raman transitions between nearly de-

tra.

generate energy levels. The resonant strutures in probe

spetra observed in old media for pump-probe detun-

The aim of this paper is to examine the Raman pro-

ing muh smaller than the natural linewidth are due to

esses whih our in a MOT. Their interplay makes

numerous e(cid:27)ets: stimulated Rayleigh sattering [1℄ and

the MOT spetra far more omplex than those obtained

Raman transitions between either light shifted sublevels

under simpler experimental onditions. The systemati

of a ground atomi state [2℄, vibrational energy levels

study of the MOT spetra is neessary for their possible

of atoms loalized in an optial lattie [3℄, or kineti mo-

appliation for MOT diagnostis whih, as we show be-

mentum states of unbound atoms [4℄. However, the MOT

low, an be suessfully performed by pump-probe spe-

is not an ideal tool for systemati investigation of these

trosopy. Working MOT spetrosopy an onstitute a

e(cid:27)ets. Beause of the (cid:28)xed three-dimensional geometry

powerful, non-destrutive diagnosti tool.

It an pro-

of the trapping beams, the presene of inhomogeneous

vide information on the atomi loud density [11℄ and

trapping magneti (cid:28)eld, and limited (cid:29)exibility in varying

average Rabi frequeny [12℄. Below, we onentrate on

the trap parameters, it is di(cid:30)ult to seletively address

the additional possibility of spetrosopi veloimetry of

the phenomena mentioned above. This is why the MOT

atoms in a working MOT, based on the reoil-indued

usually serves only as an initial stage of preparation of a

resonanes (RIR). This method has been already suess-

old sample whih, after swithing o(cid:27) the MOT's opti-

fully used to determine the temperature of the old sam-

al and magneti (cid:28)elds, is sub jet to more preisely on-

ple [4℄,[13℄,[14℄,[15℄ but under onditions in whih RIR

trolled experimental onditions, suh as dediated pump

onstituted the only relevant ontribution to the spetra.

beam geometry and polarization [1℄,[4℄,[5℄,[6℄,[7℄, phase-

In a working MOT, however, reoil-indued resonanes

stabilized pump beams [8℄, et.

appear aompanied by the other Raman proesses whih

neessitates lear identi(cid:28)ation and more thorough anal-

Despite these di(cid:30)ulties, pump-probe spetrosopy of

ysis of their individual ontributions.

trapped atoms performed while the MOT is working, us-

ing the trapping beams as pump light, has been studied

Below, in Se. II we brie(cid:29)y haraterize our setup and

by several authors. Suh experiments were (cid:28)rst arried

in Se. III present in more detail our experiment and re-

sults. We perform spetrosopi measurements of

Rb

85

∗

†

Eletroni address: tmbeti.pl

reord two signals: a probe absorption and a four-wave

URL: http://www.if.uj.edu.pl/ZF/qnog/

mixing signal. The latter is generated by atoms as a

atoms in a standard MOT [16℄. With the MOT's opti-

al and magneti (cid:28)elds still turned on, we simultaneously

2

result of their nonlinear interation with the probe and

trapping beams and in suh a geometry propagates oppo-

sitely to the probe beam diretion [17℄. The spetrosopi

signals were aquired for various trap parameters, e.g.,

the trapping beams' intensity and detuning from atomi

resonane and the gradient of the MOT's magneti (cid:28)eld.

This allowed us to arry out a systemati investigation of

the phenomena that a(cid:27)et the shapes of the absorption

and four-wave mixing spetra.

In Se. IV, we show that the theoretial explanation

of the observed spetra has to inlude two ontributions:

the Raman resonanes between light-shifted Zeeman sub-

levels of the

Rb

85

2

S1/2 (F = 3) ground state, or for

the reoil-indued resonanes (RIR) [4℄, [19℄, [20℄. Ad-

ditionally,

in order to reah good agreement between

the theory and the experimental data, one has to on-

sider realisti physial onditions in the MOT, namely,

the light intensity and polarization gradients, the three-

dimensional geometry of the trapping beams, and the

short, the Raman-Zeeman resonanes (RZR) [2℄, [18℄ and

Figure 1: The geometry of the experimental setup.

range was ±3 MHz. Sine both trapping and probe lasers

are seeded with the same beam, they are phase loked.

inhomogeneity of the quadrupole MOT's magneti (cid:28)eld.

Thus, when these two lasers work in the pump-probe on-

In Se. IV we present interpretation of the main indi-

(cid:28)guration they provide a spetrosopi resolution whih

vidual mehanisms that an be reognized in the MOT.

We also note that the di(cid:27)erene between the σ+
σ−

absorption spetra is the signature of the optial

and

anisotropy of the old atomi sample in a MOT and is

allows one to distinguish resonant strutures with widths

of few kHz, limited by residual phase (cid:29)utuations. The

repumping beam is derived from an independent, free

running laser diode, and is overlapped with one of the

due to reoil resonanes indued by the probe and dif-

trapping beams. The quadrupole magneti (cid:28)eld is gen-

ferent trapping beams. Finally, we suggest a method to

erated by a pair of anti-Helmholtz oils, whih produe

eliminate the RZR ontribution, thus opening the pos-

an axial gradient of 16 G/m. Stray d magneti (cid:28)elds

sibility of real-time, nondestrutive MOT temperature

are zeroed by three orthogonal pairs of Helmholtz oils.

measurement based on observation of the width of RIR

ontribution [4℄ and onlude our work in Se. V.

atoms in the loud with a Gaussian

0.9 mm. The temperature of our sam-

ple, measured by the time-of-(cid:29)ight method [23℄, is about

We trap about 107
radius of σ

≈

100 µK.

II. EXPERIMENTAL SETUP

The geometry of our experiment is depited in Fig. 1.

We use a standard magneto-optial trap [21℄

in

a stainless-steel vauum hamber with anti-re(cid:29)etion

The probe beam enters the loud of old atoms at a small

angle θ = 3.5◦
polarization of the probe beam is set by the λ/4 wave-

with one of the trapping beams. The

oated windows. Our laser setup onsists of four home-

plate plaed after a polarizer (P). We de(cid:28)ne the polar-

built diode lasers. One of them, equipped with an ex-

ization of the probe beam with respet to the nearly o-

ternal avity, is frequeny stabilized using saturated ab-

-polarized. We

sorption in a rubidium vapor ell, or alternatively the

) when it is the same as

propagating trapping beam, whih is σ−
all the probe polarization σ−

(σ+

Doppler-free dihroism method [22℄. This laser serves as

that of the nearly o-propagating (ounter-propagating)

the master for injetion seeding into the trapping and

trapping beam. After traversing the loud, the probe

probe lasers. The 780 nm light from a 70-mW trap-

beam is direted onto a photodiode whih reords the

ping diode laser is divided into three beams, whih have

absorption spetrum (ABS phd). The four-wave mixing

Gaussian radius σ
120 µW/mm

2

≈

0.4 m and peak intensity Imax =

. They are retro-re(cid:29)eted after passing the

to the probe beam, is re(cid:29)eted by a 50/50 beamsplit-

beam, generated in the loud and propagating oppositely

trap ell. The frequeny shift of the trapping and probe

ter (BS) onto another photodiode (FWM phd). Both

beams is ontrolled by several aousto-opti modulators

signals are aquired simultaneously and thus an be di-

(AOMs). The typial detuning, ∆ = ω
ω0 , of the trap-
ping beams of frequeny ω from the trapping transition
5.98 MHz
resonane frequeny ω0 is −

3Γ, where Γ = 2π

×

−

is the transition's natural linewidth. Before injetion into

retly ompared. The probe beam is shaped to have the

diameter smaller than the loud size in order to avoid an

undesired bakground of non-absorbed light. Typially,

the probe-laser power is about 1 µW, and its frequeny

the probe laser diode, the master beam double passes the

is swept at a rate of 5 MHz/s. The spetra presented in

AOM, whih allows us to tune the frequeny ωpr

probe laser in the range of ±40 MHz around the mas-

ter laser frequeny. In our experiment the probe sweep

sweeps.

of the

this paper are reorded as a funtion of the pump-probe

detuning, δ = ωpr −

ω , and are averaged over 20 probe

3

Figure 2: Probe absorption spetra (a) and four-wave mixing

signal (b), reorded when almost all trapping beam power is

Figure 3: Probe absorption spetra (a) and four-wave mixing

-polarized probe beam. The

sent to the pair of trapping beams nearly ollinear with the

signals (b) for the σ+

and σ−

spetra are reorded as a funtion of the pump-probe detuning

δ .

Imax

stands for the peak intensity of a single trapping

beam. The trapping beam detuning from atomi resonane

is ∆ = −3Γ, the magneti (cid:28)eld gradient along oil axis is
∂B/∂z = 13 G/m.

III. MEASUREMENTS AND RESULTS

probe, as shematially shown in (). The intensity of these

2
beams is Iz = 300 µW/mm
2
sal to the probe beam is 30 µW/mm
trapping beams is ∆ = −3Γ and the magneti (cid:28)eld gradient
is ∂B/∂z = 13 G/m. The dispersive shape of the reoil-
indued resonane shows up in the enter of the σ−

. The detuning of the

, intensity of beams transver-

-polarized

probe absorption spetrum (marked by grey arrow).

We have performed systemati studies of absorption

nant strutures better resolved. This fat an be quali-

85

and four-wave mixing spetra of

Rb atoms in a MOT.

tatively explained by the inrease of the splitting of the

We have varied the trapping beams' intensity, their de-

ground-state Zeeman sublevels due to the a Stark shift

tuning and the magneti (cid:28)eld gradient. Examples of

absorption and four-wave-mixing spetra simultaneously

(light shift). For Ω > Γ, this shift is proportional to the
pump beam intensity (Ω is the Rabi frequeny assoi-

reorded for three various trapping beam intensities are

ated with the pump (cid:28)eld). The quantitative desription

depited in Fig. 2. The shapes of the spetra are sim-

of the shape of the spetra, however, should inorporate

ilar to those previously observed and assigned to RZR

all possible Raman transitions between the pairs of adja-

(see, for example, [2℄, [9℄). However, in ontrast to the

ent Zeeman sublevels in the

pure RZR ase, they di(cid:27)er signi(cid:28)antly for σ+
umn) and σ−
umn). In partiular, in absorption, the σ+

and σ−

85

polarization of the probe beam (right ol-

ontribution. This will be disussed in the next setion.

spe-

In the ase of the absorption spetra for the σ−

-

(left ol-

Rb (see Fig. 4a below) and also inlude a possible RIR

2

S1/2 (F =3) ground state of

tra have di(cid:27)erent amplitudes and positions of individual

polarized probe, a weak, ultra-narrow struture appears

resonanes. In four-wave mixing, the spetra onsist of

In the four-

near the pump-probe detuning δ

0.

≈

two very distint ontributions, one broad and seond

wave mixing signal this ultra-narrow resonane is even

ultra-narrow. The broad ontribution to the wave-mixing

more pronouned and ours for both polarizations of

spetra reorded with the σ+
that assoiated with the σ−

probe appears broader that

the probe beam. This feature in a MOT spetra has

probe.

not yet been thoroughly examined. We attribute it

>From Fig. 2 it is learly seen that with the inrease

to reoil-indued resonanes [4℄. To verify this hy-

of the trapping beam intensity, both the absorption and

pothesis we have performed an additional measurement.

four-wave-mixing spetra beome wider and their reso-

The trapping beam intensities were set in suh a way

4

that almost all trapping laser power was sent to the

sub jet to three pairs of ounter-propagating laser beams

pair of trapping beams nearly ollinear with the probe.

of frequeny ω with pairwise orthogonal irular polar-

In suh a situation, trapping beams transverse to the

izations. Their interferene in the intersetion region re-

probe are muh attenuated and serve only to sustain the

sults in a omplex spatial modulation of light intensity

loud stability. Thus, we approah the well known one-

and polarization [25℄. For the sake of simpliity, we on-

dimensional pump-probe spetrosopy setup with two

sider here only the ase where the net light (cid:28)eld is lin-

ounter-propagating strong pump beams nearly ollinear

early polarized and hoose quantization axis parallel to

with the probe [5℄, while still having old atomi loud in

the loal diretion of the net (cid:28)eld E. In this referene

a stable MOT. Spetra registered under suh onditions,

frame, the resulting pump light is π-polarized and shifts

presented in Fig. 3, reveal resonant strutures around

the Zeeman sublevels of both the ground and the ex-

δ

0 even better resolved than those of Fig. 2. In parti-

ited atomi state. The 5

2

S1/2 (Fg = 3) ground state

ular, a distint dispersion-like resonane develops in the

multilevel struture is presented in Fig. 4a. The opti-

≈

enter of the absorption spetrum for the σ−
probe, while for the σ+

visible. The shape of this resonane agrees well with the

the mg = 0 sublevel of the ground state, with this sub-

probe polarization it is barely

a symmetri distribution of populations with respet to

theory of reoil-indued resonanes [4℄ and its width or-

level being mostly populated. The atoms interating with

-polarized

al pumping in suh a sheme leads to alignment, i.e.

responds to the atual temperature of the atomi sample,

the pump light are probed by irularly polarized weak

ous magneti-(cid:28)eld gradients. Sine the size of the loud

suh proesses are possible, depending on the sign of the

whih has been measured independently [23℄.

In order to understand how the measured spetra de-

pend on realisti MOT onditions we have measured

the absorption and four-wave mixing spetra for vari-

is proportional to (∂B/∂z)−1/2

[16℄, the value of the

magneti (cid:28)eld in the peripheries of the loud sales as

(∂B/∂z)1/2
B = 0 in the trap enter, we observed that for smaller

. For a well-aligned MOT with the value

gradients the resonanes our at the same frequenies

as for larger gradients but are better resolved. Thus, due

probe laser [26℄. The Raman proesses involving a π-
polarized pump and a σ±
1. For a given population
to transitions with ∆mg =
±
distribution among the mg sublevels, two diretions of

-polarized probe photon lead

probe-pump detuning δ . In the onsidered ase of dom-
inant population in the mg = 0 sublevel, the Raman
1 take plae for δ < 0 and lead
transitions with ∆m =
to gain of the probe; those with ∆m = +1 take plae for
δ > 0 and result in its attenuation. These proesses are

−

δ
resonant whenever |

| oinides with the energy separa-

to the (cid:28)nite size of the atomi loud, when modelling

tion of the adjaent sublevels. The amplitude of the or-

the experimental urves one has to take into aount the

responding resonane is proportional to the population

inhomogeneous broadening due to the MOT quadrupole

di(cid:27)erene of the sublevels involved in the transition and

magneti (cid:28)eld.

depends on the Clebsh-Gordan oe(cid:30)ients assoiated

with the spei(cid:28) transition path. The simplest model of

the probe absorption spetrum is obtained by summing

IV.

INTERPRETATION

the Lorentzian pro(cid:28)les entered at the appropriate reso-

nane frequenies and weighted by produts of the rele-

The shape of the absorption and four-wave mixing

vant population di(cid:27)erenes and squares of the Clebsh-

spetra that we simultaneously measure in our experi-

Gordan oe(cid:30)ients

ment an be explained on the basis of two proesses: Ra-

man transitions between light-shifted Zeeman sublevels

(RZR) of the ground state [2℄, [24℄ and reoil-indued

resonanes (RIR) [4℄. The theoretial outline of both

proesses is presented below. However, in order to per-

form the omplete modelling of the spetra, we extended

the present theories by inlusion of two types of inho-

mogeneous broadening: one due to modulation of the

net E-(cid:28)eld in the trap and the other onneted with the

presene of the quadrupole trapping magneti (cid:28)eld B.

Moreover, the standard three-dimensional geometry of

3

i=1
X
−3

−

i=−1
X

sRZR(δ) =

wi−1,i∆Πi−1,iL (δ, δi−1,i, γi−1,i)

wi+1,i∆Πi+1,iL (δ, δi+1,i, γi+1,i) .

(1)

In the above equation, wk,j is the weight assoiated with
j =
the Clebsh-Gordan oe(cid:30)ient along the k = mg ↔
mg Raman transition path, ∆Πk,j is the population dif-
ferene of the k = mg and j = mg sublevels, and the

L (δ, δk,j, γk,j) =

(2)

γk,j

γ2
k,j + (δ

−

δk,j)2 ,

where δk,j and γk,j are, respetively, the resonane fre-
j = mg transitions.
quenies and widths of the k = mg ↔

These widths are due to the optial pumping, the (cid:28)nite

the MOT beams has to be taken into aount when on-

Lorentzian pro(cid:28)le is given by

sidering reoil proesses in a working trap.

A. Raman transitions between light-shifted

Zeeman sublevels (RZR)

(Fe = 4) transition in

85

2

S1/2 (Fg = 3) − 5

2

P3/2

Let us onsider the yling 5

interation time and atomi ollisions in a trap. The

Rb atom in a MOT. The atom is

spetrum generated using formula (1) with assumption

5

of full optial pumping in the losed system shown in

Fig. 4a is presented in Fig. 4b ompared to the relevant

experimental data. The omparison shows that the lat-

ter onstitutes an envelope for the theoretial urve un-

der whih individual resonanes are unrealistially well

resolved. This suggests a broadening mehanism, whih

is indeed provided by the spatial inhomogeneity of the

light intensity in the trap. To aount for this e(cid:27)et,

we averaged the alulated spetra over Rabi frequeny

Ω. This an be done as desribed in the Ref. [27℄, but

in our ase it was su(cid:30)ient to sum the absorption spe-

tra generated aording to (1) for the appropriate range

of Rabi frequenies. By numerial simulations of var-

ious (cid:28)eld ontributions, similar to that of Ref. [25℄, we

have found that the relevant range that produes the best

agreement between the theory and the experiment is 5Γ
to 7.5Γ. This orresponds to the average Rabi frequeny
of 6.25Γ determined as in Ref. [12℄. The inlusion of the

E-(cid:28)eld inhomogeneity yields a better agreement of theo-

retial results with the experimental data, as presented in

Fig. 5. However, there is still a disrepany between the

theoretial predition and the experimental signal near

0. Moreover, the model disussed above does not

δ

≈

explain the profound di(cid:27)erene between the spetra reg-

istered for σ+

and σ−

- polarized probe. The explanation

of this e(cid:27)et is presented in the next subsetion.

predited by Guo et al. [20℄ and observed by Grynberg

et al. [4℄, [5℄. A simple momentum-spae analysis of RIR

an be found in Refs. [4℄, [15℄, [19℄. Here we brie(cid:29)y reall

its results.

Let us onsider atoms of mass m interating with a

weak probe beam (with wave vetor

and frequeny

ω +δ), whih makes an angle θ with the diretion of prop-

agation of a strong pump beam (wave vetor

, frequeny

ω ), as depited in Fig. 6a. The proess of pump photon

k

pr

k

absorption followed by the probe photon emission results

in the momentum hange ∆p of an atom, where

∆p =

2~k sin

−

θ
2

.

The preeding equation is derived assuming small probe-

k

k

= k . The resonane ours

pump detuning |

| ≈ |

pr|

whenever the probe-pump detuning oinides with the

kineti energy di(cid:27)erene, namely at detuning

δres =

2k
m

−

(cid:18)

~k sin

θ
2 −

θ
2

.

p

sin

(cid:19)

(3)

(4)

B. Reoil-indued resonanes (RIR)

Figure 4: (a) Multilevel struture of the 5

S1/2 (F = 3)
Rb ground state. Zeeman sublevels are perturbed with a π -

85

2

polarized pump (thik grey arrows), whih results in their

The momentum exhange between non-loalized atoms

energy shift and symmetri population distribution (align-

and the laser (cid:28)eld is assoiated with the phenomenon of

ment), marked by grey irles. The struture is then probed

the so-alled reoil-indued resonanes (RIR). They were

-polarized beam. (b) Theoretial absorption signal

by a σ+

ompared with the experimental spetrum. The theoretial

urve was generated for the Rabi frequeny Ω = 6Γ, detuning
∆ = −3Γ and γi,k = 0.13Γ for all i, k. Experimental ondi-
2
tions: Imax = 102 µW/mm

, ∆ = −3Γ, ∂B/∂z = 13 G/m.

An analogous onsideration performed for the ase of

trum (aquired under the same experimental onditions as in

Figure 5: The omparison of experimental absorption spe-

probe-photon absorption followed by emission of a pho-

ton into the pump beam leads to the nearly idential for-

mula for δres

as (4), but with the opposite sign. Similarly

Fig. 4b) with the theoretial urve generated aording to (1)

and averaged over the Rabi frequeny range Ω ∈ [5Γ; 7.5Γ].

6

to the RZR ase, the resonane amplitude is proportional

to the population di(cid:27)erene between the relevant atomi

states, but now we onsider the ontinuum, kineti mo-

mentum states rather than disrete, magneti sublevels

(Fig. 6b),

∆Π (p(cid:28)nal, pinitial) = Π (p + ∆p)

Π (p) .

(5)

−

Integration over all possible momentum values leads to

the formula for the RIR signal given as

∞

−

Z

−∞

≪

sRIR(δ, θ) =

dp∆Π (p(cid:28)nal, pinitial) L(δ).

(6)

Assuming that Π(p) is a Gaussian distribution, ∆p
pT = √mkBT and γ

≪
kpT /m [4℄ (all these onditions

are ful(cid:28)lled in our ase), one arrives at an analyti for-

mula for the absorption spetrum signal

sRIR(δ, θ) =

m
2π

~δ
3/2
T k sin (θ/2)

2u

−

r

exp

×

−

2u2

δ2
T (2k sin(θ/2))2

,

(7)

(cid:20)
where uT = pT /m is the most probable atomi speed.

(cid:21)

The signal (7) is the derivative of a Gaussian funtion.

It has its minimum/maximum for δ =
2uT k sin(θ/2)
and the width of the spetrum ∆RIR , de(cid:28)ned as the dis-

±

tane between minimum and maximum, is proportional

assoiated with atomi interation with two beams: the pump

to √T . The RIR spetrum an thus serve as a spetro-

sopi tool for the temperature measurement of a old

(thik grey arrow) and probe (thin arrow) beams interseting

in an atomi sample at a small angle θ. (b) Raman transitions

atomi sample [4℄,[13℄,[14℄, aording to the formula

between the kineti momentum states for an atom in a state

Figure 6: (a) Basi geometry for the reoil indued resonane,

T =

m
16kBk2 sin(θ/2)

∆2

RIR.

(8)

with spei(cid:28) mg .

the polarization of the probe selets the pump of the ap-

The results presented above refer to a two-level atom and

propriate polarization among all six available beams.

a simple pump-probe beam on(cid:28)guration. Nevertheless,

For example, onsider the ase in whih the probe

this simple approah an be also suessfully used in our

-polarized and the quantization axis is par-

ase in whih multilevel atoms are sub jet to a three di-

allel to its diretion of propagation. Obviously, one on-

beam is σ−

mensional set of trapping beams. Sine a distint RIR

ontribution appears only near δ

0 (see Figs. 2, 3),

≈

it must result from Raman transitions between the mo-

mentum states of the same magneti sublevel, ∆mg = 0.

tribution to the reoil proess is due to the probe beam

ombined with the nearly o-propagating trapping beam.

Analogously, the σ+

-polarized probe interats with the

nearly ounter-propagating trapping beam. The seond

In priniple, RIRs an also our between momentum

ontribution is due to the trapping beams transverse to

states assoiated with various Zeeman sublevels, i.e. with

= 0, in whih ase some σ+

/σ−

asymmetry might

∆mg 6

be visible, but this ontribution to the overall signal is

the probe. In the hosen referene frame, these beams ap-

pear as linearly σ and π-polarized. Depending on their
relative phases, they represent σ+

or σ−

-polarized pump

negligible. First, the amplitudes of suh ontributions

have been shown to be about order of magnitude weaker

than of the ∆mg = 0 prinipal ones [28℄. Seond, they

photons with the same probability, so they equally on-

tribute to the reoil proesses both for the σ+

and σ−

-

polarized probe. This onsideration yields the total RIR

would result only in a small frequeny shift of the broader

signal in the probe beam absorption in the MOT with all

RZR ontribution. Third, as shown below in IV C, the

six trap beams as equal to

Raman transitions with ∆mg 6

= 0 in a working MOT

are sub jet to inhomogeneous broadening whih further

redues their importane for RIR. Thus, the reoil on-

tribution is due to the probe and pump beams of the

same polarization. This implies that our atoms an be

sRIR(δ, θ) + 2sRIR(δ, 90◦)

-polarized probe;

θ) + 2sRIR(δ, 90◦)

(9)

for σ−
sRIR(δ, 180◦
for σ+

−

sRIR, MOT(δ) = 



e(cid:27)etively treated as two level systems [11℄, [29℄ and that

-polarized probe.

7

The above disussion allows one to assoiate the observed

distint di(cid:27)erene between the MOT spetra taken for σ−
and σ+

-polarized probe exlusively with the reoil pro-

esses, sine, as it was pointed out in Se. IV A, the RZR

ontributions are insensitive to the probe beam polariza-

tion.

C.

In(cid:29)uene of the MOT magneti (cid:28)eld

The onsiderations presented above lead to the onlu-

sion that both RZR and RIR ontribute to the observed

spetra, so the omplete formula for the absorption signal

beomes

s(δ) = ¯sRZR(δ) + sRIR,MOT(δ),

(10)

where ¯sRZR(δ) is the RZR ontribution averaged over

Rabi frequenies available in a MOT, as disussed in

Se. IV A. The results of theoretial simulations aord-

ing to formula (10) are depited in Fig. 7 ((cid:28)t 1◦

) and

siderably after onsidering both ontributions to s(δ),

the theoretial spetrum still exhibits resonanes that are

too narrow. Simplisti attempts to redue resolution of

the theoretial spetra by extending the Ω inhomogene-
ity range in the ¯sRZR(δ) ontribution does not improve
the (cid:28)t. Whereas the net spetrum s(δ) beomes broader,

ompared with experimental data. While the agreement

inludes only inhomogeneity of the

of the modelled and experimental spetra improved on-

+ inhomogeneity of the

-

Figure 7: Experimental and theoretial absorption spetra for

-polarized probe beam. The experimental ondi-

and σ−

σ+
2
tions: Imax = 102 µW/mm
Fit 0◦
(cid:28)t 0◦

+ RIR, (cid:28)t 2◦

- as (cid:28)t 1◦

, ∆ = −3Γ, ∂B/∂z = 13 G/m.
E

-(cid:28)eld, (cid:28)t 1◦

- as

B

(cid:28)eld. Parameters of theoretial simulations: Rabi frequeny

averaging range Ω ∈ [5Γ; 7.5Γ]; Gaussian width of a single,
inhomogeneously broadened resonane σB = 0.088Γ, whih
orresponds to the atual trap size σz = 0.9 mm; the tem-
perature of atomi loud T = 155 µK was (cid:28)tted to ahieve

the best agreement of the simulation with experimental data

and is onsistent with the results of Ref. [23℄. For better om-

its individual peaks and dips are shifted out of oini-

parison, the experimental spetra are added in grey to eah

dene with the experimental ones. This indiates that

(cid:28)t.

some other kind of inhomogeneous broadening meha-

nism must a(cid:27)et the spetra. This mehanism is due to

B

the quadrupole MOT magneti (cid:28)eld

and (cid:28)nite size of

far, old atoms in a MOT have been onsidered to be

the atomi loud. As the spatial distribution of atomi

free of any inhomogeneous broadening. Our experiment

density in the trap is Gaussian, modelling of the indi-

shows that this is not the ase. While the spetra are

vidual RZR resonanes, suh as in Eq. (1), should be

indeed free of Doppler broadening, the magneti (cid:28)eld in-

performed with the Gaussian pro(cid:28)les G(δ, δk,j , B), rather

homogeneities ause substantial broadening of the pump-

than with the Lorentz funtions (2). We thus take

probe Raman spetra and orresponding hange of their

lineshapes from Lorentzian to Gaussian.

G(δ, δk,j, B) = C exp

(11)

(δ

2
δk,j )

−
2σ2
B

,

#

"−

with

σB =

gF µB
~

∂B
∂z

σz ≫

γk,j .

fator of the

2

In the above formulas, C is a onstant, gF is the Lande
S1/2 (F = 3) hyper(cid:28)ne state, µB is the Bohr
magneton and σz is the Gaussian radius of the atomi
loud along z axis. The results of the theoretial sim-

MOT magneti (cid:28)eld are presented in Fig. 7 as (cid:28)t 2◦

averaging exlusively over |

E

| ((cid:28)ts 0◦

and 1◦

D. Four-wave mixing signals

The four-wave mixing signals reorded in our exper-

(12)

iment (Figs. 2b, 3b) learly exhibit two ontributions:

the broad pedestal and pronouned, ultra-narrow fea-

tures for δ

0. The former an be attributed to the

≈

superposition of the RZRs and RIRs and the latter is

due to the transitions between kineti momentum states,

RIR and possibly to the Rayleigh sattering [1℄. Ultra-

ulation of the absorption spetra with inlusion of the

narrow resonanes are here far better resolved than in

are ompared with the experimental data. In ontrast to

four-wave mixing spetrosopy appears to be more sen-

and

the ase of orresponding absorption signals. Hene, the

ment of the theoretial and experimental absorption sig-

of this onjeture is hampered by the level of omplex-

), the agree-

sitive to the reoil e(cid:27)ets. However, preise veri(cid:28)ation

nals is now very good. This indiates the importane of

ity of the theory of four-wave mixing for reoil indued

the inhomogeneous broadening of the MOT spetra. So

resonanes (see, e.g. [20℄). Also, the nature of the four-

8

wave mixing proess di(cid:27)ers substantially from the probe

absorption: the four wave mixing signal is, in general, al-

element of a momentum-dependent density matrix. Sine

, where ρeg(p, p ′) is an o(cid:27)-diagonal

ρeg(p, p ′)
2
ulated as |
|
ρeg(p, p ′) = ρeg(p, p ′)RZR + ρeg(p, p ′)RIR
ene terms ρeg(p, p ′)RZR ×

ρge(p ′, p)RIR

, the interfer-

play an impor-

tant role in the four-wave mixing signal. These terms are

likely to be responsible for signi(cid:28)ant di(cid:27)erenes between

four-wave mixing signals for the two irular probe polar-

izations. The theoretial work by Guo et al. [20℄ presents

a derivation of the four-wave mixing resonanes due to

atomi reoil in a two-level system. However, for this

theory to be appliable to our ase, it should be om-

plemented with the RZR ontribution for systems with

nonzero angular momenta.

E. Optial anisotropy of old atoms

In Se. IV A we disussed the RZR ontribution to

the MOT absorption spetra.

It does not depend on

predition (b).

Figure 8: The di(cid:27)erene σ−−σ+

for the experimental absorp-

tion spetra presented in Fig. 7 (a) ompared with theoretial

the probe beam polarization, due to the fat that in the

onsidered ase of π-polarized pump (cid:28)eld, neither popu-

lations of individual Zeeman sublevels, nor the Raman-

resonane frequenies, depend on the sign of mg . On

the other hand, in the ase of RIR, the polarization of

the probe beam plays a ruial role. As was mentioned

in the onlusions of Se. IV B, reoil proesses for two

opposite irular polarizations of the probe result in dra-

and the optial pumping by pump beams reates atomi

alignment, rather than polarization. Thus the optial

anisotropy of our old sample an be assoiated exlu-

sively with the reoil proesses. Consequently, when two

absorption spetra for the σ−

and σ+

probe beams are

subtrated, the RZR ontribution is ompletely elimi-

matially di(cid:27)erent momentum and energy transfers. The

nated and one is left only with the ontribution from

momentum transfer from trapping beams perpendiular

RIRs for the pump beams o- and ounter-propagating

to the probe is the same for both probe beam polariza-

tions and, aording to Eq. (3), equals ∆p =

with the probe.

~k√2/2.

±

However, the probe beam polarization selets whih of

The optial anisotropy assoiated with RIR and shown

the two pump beams, the o-propagating or the ounter-

above (Fig. 8) onstitutes experimental evidene of the

propagating with the probe, is involved in the RIR. The

quantity of the momentum transfer is ∆p
σ−

2~k for the σ+

- and ∆p

≈ ±

-polarized probe. Hene,

~kθ for the

≈ ±

the RIR ontribution is the ause of the obvious di(cid:27)er-

ene between the absorption spetra for the two probe

beam polarizations around δ

0. Fig. 8a exempli(cid:28)es

≈

suh a di(cid:27)erene, obtained by subtration of two inde-

e(cid:27)et reently predited by Dubetsky and Berman [30℄.

The authors of this paper onentrated on the some-

what di(cid:27)erent experimental situation in whih the opti-

al anisotropy is deteted via rotation of the polarization

plane of a weak, linearly polarized probe beam propa-

gating perpendiularly to the pump beam [31℄. Still, the

anisotropy desribed here has the same physial origin,

pendently measured absorption signals, ompared with

the RIR.

the alulated one (Fig. 8b). While not all details of

the two urves are the same, the overall orrelation with

the theoretial predition is quite visible. We attribute

V. CONCLUSIONS

the remaining disrepanies to residual phase instabilities

of our lasers that ause distortions of the entral, ultra-

We have suessfully explained absorption spetra

narrow (some kHz wide) parts of the spetra of Fig. 8a.

reorded simultaneously with four-wave mixing signals

A possible variation of the MOT parameters during the

in a working MOT. We have shown that full agreement

time interval between aquisition of the suessive spe-

between the theory and experimental data is attainable

tra ould additionally ontribute to these disrepanies.

only when realisti MOT onditions, the light modula-

The asymmetry between absorption spetra, i.e. be-

are taken into aount. Our theoretial analysis empha-

tion in a trap and the quadrupole MOT magneti (cid:28)eld

tween optial properties of the sample as seen by probe

sizes the importane of the atomi reoil proesses in a

beams of di(cid:27)erent polarizations, is known as dihroism,

MOT. Reoil-indued resonanes have already been used

or generally as optial anisotropy. In our ase, the atomi

in atomi veloimetry [13℄,[14℄.

In order to apply this

sample is plaed in a enter of a MOT, where B = 0,

method to atoms in a working MOT, one has to eliminate

9

other proesses in(cid:29)uening the spetra, namely the Ra-

spetrosopy. Sine the four-wave mixing signals are gen-

man transitions between light-shifted Zeeman sublevels

erated in a more omplex proess, espeially when the

of the ground atomi state, RZR. For the MOT veloime-

multilevel struture and reoil e(cid:27)ets have to be taken

try based on RIRs, the RZR ontribution appears as an

into aount, their theoretial analysis is ompliated and

undesired bakground whih hinders preise determina-

requires further investigation. At the same time they ap-

tion of the RIR width. Unlike the RIR ontribution,

pear to be far more sensitive to reoil proesses than ab-

that due to the RZR is sub jet to signi(cid:28)ant inhomoge-

sorption, as the ultra-narrow strutures are here highly

neous broadening by trap magneti and light (cid:28)elds, so it

pronouned. This interesting feature motivates one to

is worthwhile to eliminate this bakground, e.g. suh as

work out the method of MOT diagnostis based on four-

suggested above by reording the optial anisotropy or

wave mixing.

the di(cid:27)erential σ+

/σ−

absorption.

Let us note that in ontrast to the experiment by

Shadwinkel et al. [10℄ with arefully phase-stabilized

trap beams, we see no ontribution from the Raman tran-

Aknowledgments

sitions between vibrational levels assoiated with a pos-

sible optial lattie, whose frequenies ould be in the

This work was

supported by the KBN (grant

similar range of the order of 100 kHz. We have found

no. 2P03B 088 26) and is part of a general program on

that under regular onditions in a standard MOT with

old-atom physis of the National Laboratory of AMO

nonstabilized trap beams, the short-term, random (cid:29)utu-

Physis in Torun, Poland. We are grateful to T. Paªasz

ations of the trapping beam phases aused by mehanial

for his ontribution to the early stage of the experiment,

instabilities of the setup, wash out the interferene pat-

A. Gabris for his help in numerial alulations, M. Trip-

tern, thus preventing stationary modulation of optial

penbah and D. Budker for stimulating disussions and

potential and atomi loalization.

to D. Kimball, Sz. Pustelny , and S. Rohester for their

Another aspet of our results is the four-wave mixing

omments on the manusript.

[1℄ B. Lounis, J. Courtois, P. Verkerk, C. Salomon, and G.

[17℄ R. W. Boyd, Nonlinear Optis, Aademi Press, In.

Grynberg, Phys. Rev. Lett. 69, 3029 (1992).

1992.

[2℄ D. Grison, B. Lounis, C. Salomon, J. Y. Courtois, and

[18℄ J.-Y.Courtois and G. Grynberg, Phys. Rev. A 48, 1378

G. Grynberg, Europhys. Lett. 15, 149 (1991).

(1993).

[3℄ see, for example, G. Grynberg and C. Robilliard, Phys.

[19℄ P. Verkerk, Proeedings Of The International Shool Of

Rep. 355, 335 (2001) and referenes therein.

Physis, Course CXXXI, 325 (1996).

[4℄ G. Grynberg. J.-Y. Courtois, B. Lounis, and P. Verkerk,

[20℄ J. Guo, P. R. Berman, B. Dubetsky, and G. Grynberg,

Phys. Rev. Lett. 72, 3017 (1994).

Phys. Rev. A 46, 1426 (1992).

[5℄ P. Verkerk, B. Lounis, C. Salomon, C. Cohen-Tannoudji,

[21℄ J. Zahorowski, T. Paªasz, and W. Gawlik, Optia Ap-

and J. Courtois, Phys. Rev. Lett. 68, 3861 (1992).

pliata 28, 239 (1998).

[6℄ Y.-C. Chen, Y.-W. Chen, J.-J. Su, J.-Y. Huang, and I.

[22℄ G. W¡sik, W. Gawlik, J. Zahorowski, W. Zawadzki,

A. Yu, Phys. Rev. A 63, 043808 (2001).

Appl. Phys. B 75, 613 (2002).

[7℄ G. C. Cardoso, J. W. R. Tabosa, Opt. Comm. 185, 353,

[23℄ T. M. Brzozowski, M. M¡zy«ska, M. Zawada, J. Za-

(2000).

horowski, and W. Gawlik, J. Opt. B: Quantum Semi-

[8℄ A. Hemmerih, M. Weidemüller, T. Esslinger and T. W.

lass. Opt. 4, 62 (2002).

Hänsh, Europhys. Lett. 21, 445 (1993).

[24℄ J.-Y. Courtois and G. Grynberg, Phys. Rev. A 46, 7060

[9℄ J.W.R. Tabosa, G. Chen, Z. Hu, R. B. Lee, and H. J.

(1992).

Kimble, Phys. Rev. Lett. 66, 3245 (1991).

[25℄ S. A. Hopkins and A. V. Durrant, Phys. Rev. A 56, 4012

[10℄ H. Shadwinkel, U. Reiter, V. Gomer and D. Meshede,

(1997).

Phys. Rev. A 61, 013409, (1999).

pump-

[26℄ In our model, we onsider the harateristi π−σ±

[11℄ A. Lezama, G. C. Cardoso, and J. W. R. Tabosa, Phys.

probe polarization on(cid:28)guration, whih is the simplest

Rev. A 63, 013805 (2001).

one that an reprodue the shape of the observed spetra.

[12℄ J. Zahorowski, T. Brzozowski, T. Paªasz, M. Zawada,

[27℄ J. H. Marquardt, H. G. Robinson, and L. Hollberg, J.

and W. Gawlik, Ata Phys. Polon. A 101, 61 (2002).

Opt. So. Am. B 13, 1384 (1996).

[13℄ D. R. Meaher, D. Boiron, H. Metalf, C. Salomon, and

[28℄ J. Guo and P. R. Berman, Phys. Rev. A 47, 4128 (1993).

G. Grynberg, Phys. Rev. A 50, R1992 (1994).

[29℄ A. Lipsih, S. Barreiro, A. M. Akulshin, and A. Lezama,

[14℄ G. Di Domenio, G. Mileti and P. Thomann, Phys. Rev.

Phys. Rev. A 61, 053803 (2000).

A 64, 043408-1 (2001).

[30℄ B. Dubetsky and P. R. Berman, Phys. Rev. A 52, R2519

[15℄ M. C. Fisher, A. M. Dudarev, B. Gutiérrez-Medina, and

(1995).

M. G. Raizen, J. Opt. B: Quantum Semilass. Opt. 3, 279

[31℄ In Ref. [30℄, the term Faraday rotation is used for the

(2001).

predited rotation assoiated with RIR, though it is not

[16℄ E. L. Raab, M. Prentiss, A. Cable, S. Chu, and D. E.

due to any magneti (cid:28)eld. Some authors distinguish the

Prithard, Phys. Rev. Lett. 59, 2631 (1987).

magneti-(cid:28)eld from otherwise indued rotations by using

the notions of "paramagneti" and "diamagneti" Fara-

disussed in this paper.

day e(cid:27)ets [32℄. Similarly as in the reent review [33℄,

[32℄ C. Cohen-Tannoudji, F. Laloë, J. Physique (Paris) 28,

we reserve the notion of the Faraday e(cid:27)et for a spei(cid:28)

505, 722 (1967).

narrow lass of e(cid:27)ets exlusively related to the presene

[33℄ D. Budker, W. Gawlik, D. F. Kimball, S. M. Rohester,

of the magneti (cid:28)eld and prefer to use the term optial

A. Weis, and V.V. Yashhuk, Rev. Mod. Phys. 74, 1153

anisotropy for the broad lass of ases where the rota-

(2002).

tion is not related to the magneti (cid:28)eld, as in the ase

10

