4
0
0
2
 
p
e
S
 
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
m
o
t
a
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
1
1
0
9
0
4
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Collimated, single-pass atom source from a pulsed alkali metal dispenser for
laser-cooling experiments

Kevin L. Moore,∗ Thomas P. Purdy, Kater W. Murch, Sabrina Leslie, Subhadeep Gupta, and Dan M. Stamper-Kurn
University of California
366 LeConte Hall, Berkeley, CA 94720
(Dated: March 3, 2008)

We have developed an improved scheme for loading atoms into a magneto-optical trap (MOT)
from a directed alkali metal dispenser in <10-10 torr ultra-high vacuum conditions. A current-
driven dispenser was surrounded with a cold absorbing “shroud” held at ≤ 0 oC, pumping rubidium
atoms not directed into the MOT. This nearly eliminates background alkali atoms and reduces
the detrimental rise in pressure normally associated with these devices. The system can be well-
described as a current-controlled, rapidly-switched, two-temperature thermal beam, and was used
to load a MOT with 3×108 atoms.

PACS numbers: 32.80.Pj, 39.10.+j, 42.50.Vk

I.

INTRODUCTION

The ﬁrst step in the construction of an atomic physics
experiment is obtaining an appropriate source of atoms.
Directed sources of atoms have a long and storied his-
tory [1]. A thermal beam of atoms is easily obtained
from an oven or other gas source, though this inevitably
involves a diﬀerential pumping scheme, a 1/r2 decrease
in atom ﬂux with distance between the oven and the col-
lection region, a mechanical shutter to quench the beam,
and direct handling of a puriﬁed sample of the atom of
interest. A Zeeman slower [2] can improve the ﬂux of
laser-cooled atoms from an oven, but suﬀers from the
same drawbacks as an oven as well as the added compli-
cations of the magnetic design and the slowing beams.
A multiply loaded magneto-optical trap (MOT) [3] ini-
tially loaded from a vapor cell is a widely-used source
for cold atom experiments, but has the drawback of in-
creased optical, electronic, and vacuum infrastructure.
Light-induced atomic desorption (LIAD) [4], while not
a collimated beam source, is an elegant technique which
has recently been improved to yield very fast MOT load-
ing rates [5]. However, the infrastructure necessary for
fast LIAD is not always appropriate for other experimen-
tal requirements [6].

Alkali metal dispensers [7], or “getters,” have emerged
as a useful alternative to these sources [8, 9], requir-
ing only a modest electric current (<10 A) for their
operation. The driving current rapidly heats the dis-
penser causing a reduction reaction, inducing the cm-
scale devices to release an atomic vapor (rubidium, in
our case) with a rapid turn-oﬀ time. The emitted atoms
are quite hot, as the dispensers reach temperatures of
800 oC or more for typical current pulses [8, 9]. The
fraction of atoms capable of being captured by a typical
MOT is quite small (≈10-5) due to the large tempera-
tures reached, but the eﬃcacy of the dispensers for direct

∗Electronic address: klmoore@socrates.berkeley.edu

loading is salvaged both by the large atom ﬂux and their
ability to be placed close to the MOT. Alkali metal dis-
pensers are already used as sources for vapor cell MOTs
(Refs [10, 11, 12] for example), but in these cases the 800
oC atoms are cooled by the walls of the vapor cell so the
loading rate into the MOT is increased.

Many ultracold atomic physics experiments demand
base pressures of less than 10-10 torr, particularly in the
case of magnetic trapping of atoms for long periods of
time. Getters have been used directly in an ultra-high
vacuum (UHV) ultracold atom experiment [13] and the
atomic ﬂux from a dispenser has been collimated to make
an atom beam [14], but to the best of the authors’ knowl-
edge no published work describes a system which at-
tempts to control the output ﬂux of the getter entirely in
the UHV chamber.

The desire for a fast, simple, and eﬃcient source of ru-
bidium atoms with a minimal impact on UHV conditions
led us to the development of a cold shroud for the rubid-
ium dispenser and MOT system. The shroud acts as a
pump for rubidium atoms released by the dispenser that
are either (a) not directed towards the MOT, (b) of the
wrong isotope, or (c) moving too quickly to be captured
by the MOT. The dispenser-shroud system thus acts as
a fast, compact, collimated atomic beam source with a
minimized impact on UHV conditions.

This letter discusses the performance of the getter-
shroud system as well as the eﬃciency of loading atoms
into a MOT from the direct ﬂux of a dispenser.
Im-
portantly, our measurements characterizing the loading
rate and equilibrium populations of a MOT indicate that
direct loading of atoms from a getter is strikingly inef-
fective.
In contrast, our measurements indicated that
a secondary, lower temperature atomic source was also
formed, contingent on operation of the getter, which was
much more eﬀective at loading a MOT at UHV condi-
tions. Future getter-loaded, UHV experiments can be
designed to make use of this tempered source in a more
controlled manner.

2

FIG. 1: Essential elements of the getter and cold shroud
system. The getter is brought within 1.2 inches of the MOT
center, and with a driving current greater than 2.7 A it re-
leases a hot rubidium vapor. When cold, the copper nozzle
that surrounds the getter absorbs nearly all of the emitted
rubidium atoms that are not directed through the open aper-
ture towards the MOT. The MOT is loaded from the resultant
atomic beam exiting the nozzle. The vast majority of emitted
atoms are moving too quickly to be captured by the MOT,
but are absorbed by the cold copper plate on the right.

II. EXPERIMENT

Our experiments are carried out in a stainless steel
UHV chamber pumped to below 10-10 torr. This chamber
was divided between a main chamber and a secondary
“getter chamber”, designed so as to allow defective or
depleted getters to be replaced without exposure of the
main UHV chamber to atmosphere. The getter is spot-
welded to nickel rods and mounted on a hollow linear
feedthrough [15] which provides six inches of travel. The
current feedthrough also has a hollow interior (0.4” ID
tube) and a 1.33 inch mini-ﬂange port which accepts an
electrical feedthrough to control the current through the
getter. A single-rod current feedthrough is suﬃcient, as
the return current path can be grounded to the chamber
on the interior bellows of the linear motion feedthrough.
Figure 1 shows a schematic of the experiment. The
mounted getter on a retracted translation stage rests just
behind a gate valve to the main chamber. The vacuum
region that surrounds the dispenser and translation stage
is evacuated by a turbomolecular and an ion pump. Once
this region is opened, it takes less than 30 minutes to
spot weld a new getter and reseal the vacuum system.
The “getter chamber” is then evacuated and undergoes
a modest bakeout (≈2 days), during which the dispenser
is degassed as discussed by the authors of Ref.
[8]. We
typically follow their procedure, although the alternate
method advocated by Ref. [9] also provides a usable ru-
bidium source.

When the gate valve is opened, pressures in the 10−10
torr range are established in both the getter chamber and
the main chamber. With the entry path though the gate
valve clear, the dispenser can be translated to within 1.25
inches of the MOT center.

FIG. 2: Extinction of a background vapor and production of
a single-pass atomic beam by low temperature shroud. The
top image shows the ﬂuorescence of the background rubidium
atoms for a getter pulse of 10 A for 15 seconds at a shroud
temperature of 21.5oC. The bottom image is the ﬂuorescence
for an identical getter pulse and incident MOT beams, but
instead the shroud is held at -30oC. Note the sharp edges of
the atom beam, as well as the disappearance of background
ﬂuorescence. In both images, the atom beam ﬂows from left
to right, consistent with the orientation of Fig. 1.

To ensure that rubidium atoms not captured by the
MOT are pumped away, all line of sight from the dis-
penser to the room temperature UHV chamber is blocked
by a nickel-plated cold copper shroud. As the shroud is
cooled, the sticking probability for a rubidium atom (or
any alkali metal) impacting the surface approaches unity.
In theory this would protect all sensitive surfaces from
the direct ﬂux of atoms as well as preventing a room tem-
perature background vapor of rubidium from permeating
the chamber during an experiment. Figure 2 highlights
the suppression of the background rubidium vapor with
the cooling of the cold shroud; operating the getter while
the shroud is at room temperature produces visible ﬂu-
orescence throughout the chamber due to a thermal ru-
bidium vapor, while similar operation with a cold (-30
oC) shroud yields ﬂuorescence only from a beam with
line-of-sight access to the getter. The pressure spike as-
sociated with the dispenser heating, observable at 10-10
torr with an ion gauge, is also reduced by nearly a factor
of two with the cooling of the shroud, although not en-
tirely eliminated because the dispenser and current leads
outgas more than just rubidium at such high tempera-
tures.

Atoms are collected in a MOT centered within the
getter-emitted beam. The MOT is formed from 13 mW
of input laser power to each of six 0.75 inch diameter
beams. The quadrupole coils are placed outside the vac-

3

formed through operating the getter are much higher
than those collected from the background atomic ﬂux,
indicating that the getter-shroud system is indeed oper-
ating as a pulsed atomic beam source, as desired. Longer
getter pulses make use of this high loading rate to reach
equilibrium MOT numbers up to 3 × 108. Second, con-
ﬁrming the visual ﬁndings of Fig. 2, the cold shroud
extinguishes the background rubidium vapor if it is op-
erated at suﬃciently low temperatures; below 0 ◦C, the
MOTs formed from the background vapor were only
barely detected by our absorption measurements. Fur-
ther, the inset of Fig. 3 shows the rapid termination of
the MOT loading rate upon extinguishing the getter cur-
rent, satisfying the second stated criterion for the system.
While the getter-shroud system satisﬁes the stated cri-
teria as an eﬃcient, rapidly-switched atom source, this
data clearly exhibits some surprising features. The rea-
son that the getter-loaded MOT depends so strongly on
the shroud temperature, including an almost complete
elimination of trapped atoms for the coldest tempera-
tures, is not immediately obvious. The dispenser assem-
bly has no mechanical contact with the shroud, mean-
ing that the getter itself arrives at the same tempera-
tures regardless of the temperature of the shroud. The
small MOT populations for low shroud temperatures sug-
gest that the direct atom ﬂux from the getter is actu-
ally a rather poor source for a MOT. Our original intent
was to utilize this shroud at or below -20 oC, but the
reduced MOT population at lower temperatures forces
a choice between rubidium background elimination and
larger MOT populations. The optimum shroud temper-
ature will likely vary for diﬀerent experimental require-
ments.

In order to diagnose the thermal character of atoms
emitted by the dispenser, a laser 45o to the atomic beam
was scanned in frequency while ﬂuorescence at the cen-
ter of the MOT region was detected on a photodiode.
This yields information about the velocity distribution
of the emitted atoms, though the resultant spectrum is
expected to be a convolution of many competing factors
due to the large probe beam size (≈ 0.75 inch diameter),
divergence of emitted atoms, optical pumping rates, and
background ﬂuorescence.

The ﬂuorescence data (Figure 4) shows the eﬀect of
the cold shroud on the velocity distribution of the emit-
ted atoms from a strong getter pulse (10 A, 30 sec). For a
shroud at room temperature the overall rubidium density
in the MOT region is approximately twice that of a -11
oC shroud. At 21 oC the background rubidium vapor and
the rubidium ﬂux from the nozzle can be clearly distin-
guished, and the Doppler-shifted atoms show peak ﬂuo-
rescence at 550 MHz from the background vapor. At -11
oC, the background atoms are barely resolvable, and the
Doppler-shifted atoms are now peaked at 630 MHz. Also
plotted in Fig. 4 is the ﬂuorescence curve for a room tem-
perature (21 oC) shroud and no getter ﬂux. In this case,
the peak ﬂuorescence in the MOT region is shifted by
300 MHz from the line center of the Doppler-broadened

FIG. 3: MOT population as a function of shroud temper-
ature. Crosses (+) denote a MOT loaded by a 10 A, 6 sec
pulse, circles (o) a MOT loaded from background atoms for 6
sec with no getter pulse. Inset shows MOT loading rate as a
function of time overlayed upon the current proﬁle of a 3 sec,
◦
10 A getter pulse (the shroud temperature was 19
C). The
rapid quenching of the MOT loading rate upon cessation of
the getter current has a decay time of 0.6 sec.

uum system, three inches from the center of the MOT,
and are typically operated with axial ﬁeld gradients of
20 G/cm. The MOT population was limited by the rel-
atively small amount of light power per beam. Ref. [13]
observed getter-loaded MOT populations of 5×108 atoms
with more intense MOT beams. The trends reported in
this paper should scale directly with improvements in
MOT loading.

III. RESULTS

Our pulsed atomic source should be evaluated un-
der two criteria: ﬁrst, that operating the source yields
an atomic ﬂux which is eﬃciently loaded into sizeable
MOTs, and, second, that the source can be quickly
switched oﬀ to yield UHV conditions for subsequent ex-
perimentation (e.g. magnetic trapping and evaporation)
of the laser-cooled atoms. We assessed the performance
of our getter-shroud system under both criteria by mea-
suring the loading rate and equilibrium population in
MOTs formed either during or after the atomic source
was pulsed: large MOTs formed during the getter pulse
indicate eﬃcient loading, while small MOTs formed sec-
onds after the getter pulse indicate the desired suppres-
sion of the atomic ﬂux when the source is turned oﬀ.
Measurements of MOT populations under both condi-
tions (getter on/getter oﬀ) are shown in Figure 3 as a
function of the temperature of the shroud.

Several conclusions can be drawn from this data. First,
at all temperatures of the shroud, the MOT populations

of normal operation of the getter the desorbing ﬂux would
then persist for several days.

4

IV. DISCUSSION

While the dispenser-shroud system has proven itself to
be potentially useful for ultracold atomic experiments,
there are some drawbacks. We tried many diﬀerent dif-
ferent avenues for continuous operation in an attempt to
maximize MOT population and minimize the experiment
repetition time.
If the getter is pulsed too frequently
(<20 seconds separation between 3 sec, 10 A pulses) the
pressure in the chamber rises to a steady state above the
minimum base pressure. While we believe this to be an
improvement over bare operation of a dispenser in UHV,
we had hoped to reduce this repetition time further, but
even with the coldest shrouds we were unable to execute
an experimental cycle of less than 20 seconds.

Second, rubidium adsorbed on the shroud will be re-
leased into the UHV if the shroud is allowed to warm up.
If one is to prevent this substantial gas load from inter-
fering with in-vacuum equipment (such as ion pumps or
high-ﬁnesse mirrors), the cooling of the shroud must be
made fail safe. Furthermore, one would not be able to
bake the shroud in UHV. Thus contamination of the UHV
chamber would be correctable only by selective baking or
by thoroughly cleaning the chamber. This disadvantage
belies the purpose of the getter as an easily-exchanged
UHV atom source.

Drawbacks aside, several improvements to our design
could be made which would make the system a useful
tool in many instances. First, the aperture on the nozzle
could be widened to allow a larger ﬂux into the MOT.
The aperture is currently 0.25” in diameter and appears
to “choke” the MOT at lower temperatures because the
beam is only shining into a fraction of the MOT cross-
section. A larger aperture would increase the ﬂux as the
square of the aperture diameter, allowing the maximum
getter-loaded population number to be reached in less
time with a reduced impact on the pressure.

Another improvement would be the addition of a
“shadow” for the getter. This would likely take the form
of a metal piece which would obscure the getter slit from
direct line of sight to the center of the MOT. This should
drastically reduce the losses due to MOT atoms collid-
ing with fast Rb atoms, allowing for a larger ﬁnal MOT
population.

Finally, given the ﬂuorescence spectrum in Fig. 4,
one could construct a system which would utilize the
secondary room temperature beam generated by the
rubidium-coated surfaces of the shroud. A miniature
“oven,” operated in the main UHV chamber, could sur-
round a dispenser that purposefully directs its atomic
ﬂux towards the inner walls of the oven. Atoms emitted
from the getter would be tempered by the inner surface
of the oven, and these thermalized atoms would then be
allowed to escape through a collimated aperture to eﬃ-

FIG. 4: Fluorescence spectra of atom ﬂux in the MOT region.
o
The probe laser beam was incident upon the atom ﬂux at 45
to the center line of the the shroud nozzle. Dotted lines show
absorption spectrum, inferred from a saturation absorption
signal generated in a reference rubidium vapor cell. Plotted
are ﬂuorescence curves when the shroud is at room tempera-
ture and at -12
C, given a 30 second, 10 A current pulse to
the getter. Also plotted is the background ﬂuorescence in the
MOT region with no getter pulse, clearly showing the sizeable
room temperature ﬂux emitted from the room temperature
shroud surface after a large layer of atoms have desorbed on
the inner surface of the nozzle.

o

background rubidium spectrum. This is caused by the
ﬂux of desorbing atoms from the shroud nozzle surface
which acts as a directed, room-temperature background
ﬂux into the MOT region; we were only able to discern
this ﬂuorescence spectrum after an atypically large layer
of rubidium had been deposited on the inner surface of
the shroud nozzle.

This data explicitly demonstrates that the velocity dis-
tribution of the atomic ﬂux through the nozzle and into
the MOT region is signiﬁcantly aﬀected by the thermal
state of the shroud. The strong dependence of the getter-
loaded MOT population on shroud temperature in Fig.
3 is better understood in this context, especially given
the fact that a room temperature beam loads ≈10 times
more atoms into a MOT than a 1000 K oven of the same
number ﬂux. The most likely explanation for the mod-
iﬁcation of the atom ﬂux is that a large fraction of the
atomic ﬂux from the getter is impingent upon the cold
nozzle used to collimate the remaining ﬂux. If the surface
has a substantial probability of reﬂecting and thermaliz-
ing these atoms, then a ﬂux seemingly colder than the
getter-only ﬂux seen at -11 oC will be emitted because
the emitted atoms will be a mixture of hot getter-emitted
atoms and cooler reﬂected atoms. The thermalization of
getter-emitted atoms with surrounding walls has been
previously observed [14]. The sum of these two ﬂuxes
yields the reduced Doppler shift seen in the room tem-
perature data in Fig. 4. We found that after a few weeks

5

ciently load a closely situated MOT. Cold baﬄes would
then be placed behind the MOT to pump away the atoms
which are not captured by the MOT. During experi-
mental operation the oven could be held at or slightly
above room temperature to increase atom yield and pre-
vent a surface layer of atoms from forming. When the
experimental system is not in operation the miniature
oven could be heated further to release any remaining
adsorbed atoms onto the cold baﬄes.

V. CONCLUSION

We have found that combining alkali metal dispensers
with a cold absorbing shroud can improve the perfor-
mance of the getters in a UHV environment suitable for
ultracold atom experiments. Strong suppression of the
background rubidium vapor is evident, and a MOT can

be eﬃciently loaded from the resultant atomic beam ex-
iting the cold shroud nozzle with minimized vacuum im-
pact from the dispenser.

Acknowledgments

We thank Stefan Schmid, Mike Grobis, and Dave Mu-
rai for their technical assistance and advice. The authors
eﬀort was sponsored by the Defense Advanced Research
Projects Agency (DARPA) and Air Force Laboratory,
Air Force Materiel Command, USAF, under Contract
No. F30602-01-2-0524, the National Science Foundation
under Grant No. 0130414, the Sloan Foundation, the
David and Lucile Packard Foundation, and the Univer-
sity of California. KLM acknowledges support from the
National Science Foundation. SG acknowledges support
from the Miller Institute for Basic Research in Science.

[1] N. F. Ramsey, Molecular Beams. Oxford University

mermann, J. App. Phys 84, 6499 (1998).

Press, Reprint Ed. (1997).

[9] U. D. Rapol, A. Wasan, and V. Natarajan, Phys. Rev. A

[2] W. D. Phillips and H. Metcalf, Phys. Rev. Lett. 48, 596

64, 023402 (2001).

[3] C. J. Myatt et al., Optics Letters 21, 290 (1996).
[4] B. P. Anderson and M. A. Kasevich, Phys. Rev. A 64,

(2002).

(1982).

023404 (2001).

[5] S. N. Atutov et al., Phys. Rev. A 67, 053401 (2003).
[6] As outlined in Atutov et al., fast LIAD requires a pyrex
cell which is coated with polydimethylsilosane. Our ex-
periments in cavity QED preclude the possibility of a
glass cell functioning as the main chamber.

[7] Manufactured by SAES Getters USA Inc.
[8] J. Fortagh, A. Grossman, T. W. Hansch, and C. Zim-

[10] H. J. Lewandowski, Ph.D. thesis, University of Colorado

[11] M. R. M. et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 81, 243 (1998).
[12] C. Wieman, G. Flowers, and S. Gilbert, Am. J. Phys. 63,

317 (1995).

[13] H. Ott et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 87, 230401 (2001).
[14] T. M. Roach and D. Henclewood, to be published.
[15] Manufactured by Thermionics Vacuum Products, part
number FLMH-275-50-6. Inclusion of this item is not an
endorsement; we expect that devices from other manu-
facturers would behave in a similar fashion.

