Is Non-Sequential Double Ionization a Completely Classical Photoelectric Effect ?

Phay J. Ho,1 R. Panﬁli,1,2 S.L. Haan,3 and J.H. Eberly1
1Department of Physics and Astronomy, University of Rochester, Rochester, NY 14627,
2Spectral Sciences, Inc., Burlington MA 01803, 3Department of Physics and Astronomy, Calvin College, Grand Rapids MI 49546

We demonstrate a substantial advance in achieving a uniﬁed picture of atomic double ionization. A simpliﬁed
non-quantum analysis of electron-pair dynamics gives surprisingly good agreement with experiments at laser
intensities above 1014 watts/cm2. This is the regime where driven electrons are being proposed to enable attosec-
ond timing of atomic processes, control of intramolecular electron currents, and short-wavelength generation,
and in the same regime our results show that two-electron behavior is dominated by classical correlation.

4
0
0
2
 
p
e
S
 
0
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
m
o
t
a
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
9
9
0
9
0
4
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

PACS numbers: 32.80.Rm, 32.60.+i

The photoelectric effect (photo-ionization) provided a ma-
jor challenge to classical physics. It was explained only by
means of Einstein’s invention of a quantum mechanical the-
ory for particles [1] via his famous Nobel Prize formula,
~ω = BE + KE. Here BE and KE are an electron’s bind-
ing and kinetic energies and ~ω is the energy of the absorbed
photon. After 100 years (next year) Einstein’s formula is still
fully accepted. Very intense short-pulse lasers have recently
permitted observation of the two-electron photoelectric effect.
Surprisingly, we have found that this photo-effect is under-
standable without any quantum mechanics at all. This is a
dramatic reversal of theoretical form and is of more than aca-
demic interest. Important current initiatives in atomic, molec-
ular and optical physics will be inﬂuenced by the mechanism
responsible for strong-ﬁeld ionization, including attosecond
timing of atomic and molecular processes [2], the availabil-
ity of controlled intramolecular single-electron beam currents
[3], the generation of short-wavelength coherent radiation [4],
and the use of strong short-pulse laser ﬁelds to control elec-
tron motion in general [5].

To summarize brieﬂy, the experimental data show that two
atomic (or molecular) outer-shell electrons are photo-ejected
together, 1-million times more frequently than the standard
uncorrelated sequential theory [6] allows, so the process is
called non-sequential double ionization (NSDI). The mecha-
nism that makes NSDI correlation so effective is far from set-
tled, and theorists have been engaged in trying to understand
it [7, 8, 9, 10] since the ﬁrst laboratory results were reported
in 1992 and 1993 [11, 12]. The anomalously high double ion-
ization yield, which may be the greatest differential degree
of electron pair correlation ever recorded, remains the princi-
pal signature of NSDI, but additional data is currently being
reported from cold-target recoil-ion momentum spectroscopy
(COLTRIMS) experiments [13, 14, 15, 16]. These momen-
tum distribution data, along with the ion-yield data, serve as
the benchmarks for various theoretical models.

It is well known that advances in atomic, molecular and
optical theory in the NSDI regime are severely hindered by
the simultaneous action of three equally important and com-
peting forces on the two electrons: Coulombic binding to the
nucleus, Coulombic repulsion from each other, and the oscil-
lating force of the intense laser ﬁeld. The potential energies
providing all of these forces are sketched in Fig. 1. However,

FIG. 1: Potential energies of two atomic electrons are sketched in the
vicinity of the nuclear potential well at x = 0. The blue and black
dots locate the two electrons, while the lines are the potential energy
curves for each. Note that each curve has a peak at the other-colored
dot, showing the effect of e-e repulsion. The overall slant is due to
the laser force directed to the right, as shown by the arrow at top.

as a guide, NSDI theory has for 10 years used the elementary
few-step rescattering model [17, 18]. This is based on an em-
pirical picture in which Coulomb forces are largely ignored in
favor of a patchwork scenario in which one electron escapes
the atom by quantum tunnelling, and then is classically forced
back by the laser to the core where a quantum mechanical col-
lision liberates both electrons at once.

We report here a new approach to understanding the double
photoelectric mechanism that differs in spirit and in results
from what we will now call the old rescattering model and its
several extensions [19, 20]. The ﬁrst difference is very im-
portant but still more or less natural - our new approach is
able to include all Coulomb forces at all times, taking full ac-
count of the rapidly changing locations of both electrons, and
and not locking one electron near to the nucleus. The second
difference is unnatural and radical by comparison - our ap-
proach makes no use at all of quantum theory. Two desirable
results appear at once in calculations based on this completely
classical approach: two-electron escape occurs without ever
invoking the quantum effect of tunneling, and the prediction
of an unwanted intensity threshold, below which a rescatter-
ing electron is not energetic enough to knock out the second
electron in one collision, disappears. These results might be
considered accidental, except that the same calculations also
lead to the anomalously high double-ion yield that is the prin-
In fact,
cipal signature of NSDI. This is shown in Fig. 2.

2

FIG. 2: The “knee” signature of NSDI data, here calculated classi-
cally, is shown clearly. The dashed curve (red) is inserted by hand
to indicate the prediction made by sequential quantum tunneling the-
ory and make clear the huge difference with the knee curve. The
arrows indicate the two representative knee-region NSDI intensities
analysed in the text, and the dashed vertical line shows where the
(experimentally unobserved) intensity threshold predicted by the old
rescattering theory would be.

with this theoretically radical non-quantized extension of the
old rescattering model, calculations based on it reproduce the
most prominent features of NSDI, including the recoil mo-
mentum distributions observed in COLTRIMS experiments.

Before we present the results of our calculations, we will
brieﬂy describe our completely classical method [21, 22, 23,
24]. There are several ways to proceed. It would make lit-
tle sense to derive a sequence ofpredictions using calculations
that are tied to only one atomic target species. The greatest
interest lies in calculations that are the most general, so long
as they add clarity to experimental ﬁndings and yield speciﬁc
predictions. Thus we will depend on as few input parame-
ters as possible, and start our calculations as generally as pos-
sible with a large microcanonical ensemble of initial condi-
tions (see [21, 23]). In adhering to the mandates of simplicity
and generality, we adopt the familiar one-dimensional AEA
(aligned-electron approximation) [25], and go so far as to use
1/√x2 + a2
its standard quasi-Coulomb potential V (x) =
with the soft-core parameter taken the same, a = 1, for all the
electron-electron and electron-nucleus interactions.

−

We point out that our distributions of initial positions and
momenta of the two electrons shown in Fig. 3 are notably
different from one-electron distributions, where most of the
time is spent away from the origin and near the turning points.
Here both distributions fall off going away from the origin,
and the coordinate distribution is actually closely similar to
the quantum probability distribution of the ground state for the
same model [21]. These distributions are easy to understand
classically. For instance, by ﬁxing the position of electron 1 at
the nucleus, the dynamical constraint of electron 2 is governed

FIG. 3: The upper and lower panels show the position and momen-
tum distributions of the initial ensemble with energy equal to -2.24
a.u.

by

p2
1
2

+

p2
2
2 −

1
px2

2 + 1

= Eg + 2 =

0.24,

(1)

−

where Eg is the energy of this 2-e system. Eqn. (1) resembles
the corresponding one-electron equation except for the pres-
ence of the kinetic energy of electron 1. Finite kinetic energy
of electron 1 pushes the turning point of electron 2 closer to
the center. We see here a small example of the effect of e-e
classical correlation.

The energy of the ensemble is -2.24 a.u., chosen to equal
the energy of the corresponding two-electron quantum ground
state. We numerically follow a swarm of 104 - 106 two-
electron trajectories under an 8-cycle sinusoidal laser pulse
with the experimental wavelength 780 nm (frequency ω =
0.0584 a.u.) and a trapezoidal envelope. At the end of the
laser pulse, the trajectories can be sorted for those that were
doubly ionized. A statistical analysis can be compared with
experimental results and the results of other theoretical mod-
els.

Now we will demonstrate how far one can go and what in-
sights and predictions are available with a completely classical
(CC for short) model [22, 23]. The ﬁrst results were already
shown in Fig. 2 where we see the probability of double ion-
ization as a function of the peak intensity of the laser pulse. It
shows the NSDI knee, which is the generic signature of high
correlation. For the same intensities as explored in strong-
ﬁeld experiments the double ionization curve can be separated
into two regimes: a “normal” sequential ionization regime at
intensities higher than the knee, and the “anomalous” high-
count NSDI regime at intensities that include the knee and go
below it. The separation of the regimes shown by this model

3

FIG. 4: Energy vs.
time plots showing 4 distinct stages of NSDI
for two knee-region trajectories. The fainter orange line tracks the
energy of an electron that is ﬁrst tightly bound. It becomes quasi-
free without tunneling and returns for a number of recollisions. The
darker blue line tracks the energy of an inner electron, which be-
comes less and less tightly bound during the multiple recollisions
before the double ionization event. Note that the many e-e interac-
tions are indicated by the randomly timed spikes.

falls in the neighborhood of I = 1015W/cm2, just as in most
experiments.

×

To exploit the CC approach we show in Fig. 4 a type of en-
ergy analysis of the time histories of NSDI trajectories. The
1014 W/cm2,
four histories shown were obtained for I = 1.0
one of the intensities in the high correlation region marked in
Fig. 2. Each plot in Fig. 4 covers many cycles of the laser
pulse and the vertical scales indicate the energies of the elec-
trons. The energies plotted are, for each electron, the sum of
all types: kinetic energy, electron-nucleus binding energy, e-e
correlation energy and laser ﬁeld interaction energy. A quick
glance at the energetics shows that we can divide the evolu-
tion of CC trajectories into four distinct stages, which we now
believe can be taken as universal to NSDI: initiation, recol-
lision, ionization and jitter. This characterization is not far
from that conjectured by Yudin and Ivanov [20] on the basis
of selected Newtonian trajectories for a single electron. Our
pictures show details in a time domain not seen before (2e
dynamics prior to single ionization), and they also reveal a
previously unremarked electron-pair phasing. Below we cor-
relate this phasing with momentum properties of the electron-
ion products in an intuitively appealing way. One can easily
interpret each of the four NSDI stages.

Initiation stage: Both electrons are conﬁned in bound orbits
in the nuclear potential. In contrast to the old rescattering pic-
ture, neither electron is quiescent. Many rapid e-e interactions
occur as the laser pulse is turning on (i.e., in the ﬁrst two laser
cycles). This is already suggested by Fig. 1, which shows the
e-e repulsion of each electron for the other, with neither elec-
tron located at the nuclear core, two features absent from the

FIG. 5: Final ion momentum distributions calculated classically us-
ing the ensemble method. The letters Z and NZ label the peaks of
the broad but distinct groups of trajectories with small or Zero ion
momentum and substantially Non-Zero ion momentum respectively.

old model. As the laser ﬁeld grows in strength it tips the bind-
ing potential further down and one electron can gather energy
from the other electron, and escape without tunneling.

Recollision stage: The semi-liberated electron returns to the
core. It is possible to have more than one return, and with
each return the efﬁciency of energy transfer rests on the rel-
ative motional phase between the two electrons. The many-
return element explains the absence of the old model’s unde-
sired threshold intensity.

Ionization stage: A single collision leads to very rapid and
highly correlated double ionization. Except that it occurs after
several recollisions, not the ﬁrst, this abrupt ionization is part
of the old rescattering picture too.

Jitter stage: At the time they are ionized the two electrons
exhibit jitter oscillations that are nearly exactly in phase or out
of phase with each other. The in-phase electrons escape the
suppressed binding potential in the same half laser cycle after
the ﬁnal e-2e collision, and are located on the same side of the
nucleus. The out of phase events ﬁnd the second electron to
be ﬁeld-ionized (rather than directly collision-ionized) in an
odd half-cycle after the ﬁrst one departs, and are located on
the opposite side of the nucleus.

The four stages of NSDI illustrated in Fig. 4 are the nec-
essary steps in a classical correlation mechanism and valid
in the intensity range where the enhancement of ion yield is
observed. Support for this comes from the jitter phasing men-
tioned above.
It provides an intuitively natural explanation
for a prominent feature of the recoil ion momentum (the sum
of individual electron momenta) distributions obtained for he-
lium, neon and argon. This feature is the tendency for the
momentum distributions to exhibit three symmetric and broad
but reasonably well separated peaks rather than one. We have
previously denoted these as the non-zero (NZ) and zero (Z)
recoil momentum peaks [24]. Fig. 5 shows a CC calculation
of such momentum distributions with peaks labelled either Z
or NZ. Jitter trajectories that are out of phase naturally have a
practically zero sum of electron momentum, corresponding to

the Z recoil peaks, and the opposite is expected for in-phase
jitter motion, which corresponds to fully additive electron mo-
menta, as in the NZ peaks. Furthermore, the CC approach
predicts that as the laser intensity decreases the NZ fraction
also decreases, as has been reported for helium [13], and as
the laser intensity decreases, the width of the momentum dis-
tribution decreases, as has also been observed experimentally
[13, 14].

In summary, we have made an entirely classical study
of the response of two-electron atoms to intense short-pulse
laser radiation in the non-sequential double ionization (NSDI)
regime. Our purpose is not to ﬁnd agreement with NSDI data
speciﬁc to any real atom, but to determine whether it is rea-
sonable to assign the strong electron correlation associated
with NSDI to classical orgins. This is clearly the case and
the consequences are important because a straightforward and
numerically easy route is now opened up for undertaking sys-
tematic and wide-ranging exploration of time-dependent and
phase-coherent atomic multi-electron effects in a strong radi-
ation ﬁeld. It is beginning to be widely accepted that multi-
electron effects will play an observable role in forthcoming
work at the ultra-short high-intensity frontier [2, 3, 4, 5]. It is
intriguing to guess that experimenters have already been reg-
istering some three-electron effects with NSDI observations
without knowing it.

Finally, as support for our positive conclusion we have
shown that the CC model can reproduce all the major elements
of experimental NSDI. It is important, we believe, that this
can be done within a completely classical framework, with-
out recourse to tunneling or other quantum mechanisms. In
particular, we have shown how central is the role of e-e dy-
namical interaction in the ionizing dynamics, and in deter-
mining the position and momentum distributions of the initial
ensemble. The strongly dynamical character of the e-e inter-
action has previously been undervalued, but in the CC model it
clearly facilitates the required energy exchange between elec-
trons. Different multiple-recollision channels produce trajec-
tories with different ﬁnal momenta, producing similar or op-
posite jitter phasings, which underlie the NZ and Z trajecto-
ries, respectively. Most importantly, we have shown that the
major signatures of NSDI, at least those that are observed ex-
perimentally, can be understood using classical physics, leav-
ing only a minor (or possibly future) role for quantum effects
to play.

4

Acknowledgements: This work was supported by NSF
grant PHY-0072359. We have beneﬁtted from discussions on
this topic with W. Becker, P.B. Corkum, L.M. DiMauro, M.
Yu. Ivanov, W. Sandner and D. Zeidler.

[1] A. Einstein, Ann. Phys. 17, 132 (1905).
[2] For example, “Strong ﬁeld path control using attosecond pulse
trains,” K.J. Schafer, et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 92, 023003 (2004)
[3] For example, “Sub-laser-cycle electron pulses for probing
molecular dynamics”, H. Niikura, et al., Nature 417, 917
(2002).

[4] For example, “Coherent Soft X-ray Generation in the Water
Window with Quasi-Phase Matching”, E. A. Gibson, et al., Sci-
ence 302, 95 (2003).

[5] For example, “Attosecond control of electronic processes by in-
tense light ﬁelds”, A. Balt˘uska, et al., Nature 421, 611 (2003).
[6] M. V. Ammosov, N. B. Delone and V. P. Kra˘inov, Sov. Phys.

JETP 64, 1191 (1986).

[7] A. Becker and F. H. M. Faisal, Phys. Rev. A 59, R1742 (1999).
[8] S.P. Goreslavskii, S.V. Popruzhenko, R. Kopold, and W. Becker,

Phys. Rev. A 64, 053402 (2001).

[9] L.-B. Fu, J. Liu and S.-G. Chen, Phys. Rev. A 65, RC021406

(2002).

[10] J. S. Parker et al., J. Phys. B 36, L393 (2003).
[11] D. N. Fittinghoff et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 69, 2642 (1992).
[12] B. Walker et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 73, 1227 (1994).
[13] Th. Weber et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 84, 443 (2000).
[14] Th. Weber et al., J. Phys. B 33, L127 (2000).
[15] B. Feuerstein et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 87, 043003 (2001).
[16] M. Weckenbrock et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 92, 213002 (2004).
[17] K.C. Kulander, K. J. Schafer and J.L. Krause, in Super In-
tense Laser-Atom Physics, B. Piraux, A. L’Huillier and K.
Rzazewski, Eds. (Plenum, New York), 95 (1993).

[18] P. B. Corkum, Phys. Rev. Lett. 71, 1994 (1993).
[19] T. Brabec, M. Yu. Ivanov and P. B. Corkum, Phys. Rev. A 54,

[20] G.L. Yudin and M. Yu. Ivanov, Phys. Rev. A 63, 033404 (2001).
[21] R. Panﬁli, J. H. Eberly and S. L. Haan, Opt. Express 8, 431

[22] S. L. Haan, et al., Phys. Rev. A 66, 061042(R) (2002).
[23] R. Panﬁli, S. L. Haan, and J. H. Eberly, Phys. Rev. Lett. 89,

[24] P.J. Ho and J.H. Eberly, Opt. Express 11, 2826 (2003).
[25] J. Javanainen, J.H. Eberly and Q. Su, Phys. Rev. A 34, 3430

R2551 (1996).

113001 (2002).

(2001).

(1987).

