Applied Physics B manuscript No.
(will be inserted by the editor)

4
0
0
2
 
t
c
O
 
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
m
o
t
a
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
5
0
0
0
1
4
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Photoassociation inside an optical dipole trap: absolute rate coefﬁcients and
Franck-Condon factors

R. Wester1, S. D. Kraft1, M. Mudrich1 ⋆, M. U. Staudt1, J. Lange1, N. Vanhaecke2 ⋆⋆, O. Dulieu2, M. Weidem ¨uller1

1 Physikalisches Institut, Universit¨at Freiburg, Hermann-Herder-Straße 3, 79104 Freiburg, Germany
2 Laboratoire Aim´e Cotton, CNRS, Bˆatiment 505, Campus d’Orsay, 91405 Orsay, France

February 2, 2008

Abstract We present quantitative measurements of the pho-
toassociation of cesium molecules inside a far-detuned op-
tical dipole trap. A model of the trap depletion dynamics
is derived which allows to extract absolute photoassociation
rate coefﬁcients for the initial single-photon photoassociation
step from measured trap-loss spectra. The sensitivity of this
approach is demonstrated by measuring the Franck-Condon
modulation of the weak photoassociation transitions into the
low vibrational levels of the outer well of the 0−
g state that
correlates to the 6s + 6p3/2 asymptote. The measurements
are compared to theoretical predictions. In a magneto-optical
trap these transitions have previously only been observed in-
directly through ionization of ground state molecules.

1 Introduction

Formation, manipulation and interactions of ultracold molecules
today forms one of the major topics in ultracold atomic and
molecular physics. Photoassociation of a cold atom pair fol-
lowed by spontaneous emission to the ground state, which
has started the ﬁeld of ultracold molecules [?,?], and coherent
magnetic ﬁeld sweeps across Feshbach resonances represent
the most prominent techniques to form ultracold molecules;
the latter has ﬁnally lead to the successful creation of molecu-
lar Bose Einstein condensates [?,?,?]. To populate low-lying
molecular states that are not accessible by the Feshbach reso-
nance method, two-color photoassociation schemes have been
investigated [?,?]. Coherent photoassociation of a Mott in-
sulator phase with exactly two atoms per lattice site into a
molecular phase has combined the two approaches employ-
ing the scheme of a laser-driven Feshbach resonance [?]. The
formation of heteronuclear cold molecules composed of two

⋆ Present address: Laboratoire Aim´e Cotton, CNRS, Bˆatiment

505, Campus d’Orsay, 91405 Orsay, France
⋆⋆ Present address: Fritz-Haber Institut, Faradayweg 4-6, 14195
Berlin, Germany

different alkali atoms has only recently been successfully achieved
by photoassociation in a double magneto-optical trap [?,?].

We have investigated photoassociation inside a far-detuned
optical dipole trap, because this type of trap offers the pos-
sibility to catch associated molecules that decay into bound
levels of the ground electronic state inside the same opti-
cal dipole trap and store or manipulate them for long pe-
riods of time. This approach will therefore facilitate colli-
sion and chemical reaction experiments with state-selected
ultracold molecules and may culminate in coherent ultracold
chemistry [?]. While most photoassociation experiments so
far have employed magneto-optical traps, the ﬁrst demonstra-
tion of the photoassociation of ultracold atoms employed an
optical dipole trap [?]. The higher densities and the suppres-
sion of near resonant light scattering in optical dipole traps
allow for high photoassociation rates and long photoassocia-
tion times. As a consequence, a strong loss of trapped atoms
due to photoassociation is achieved. Furthermore, the initial
atomic quantum state is not determined by the trap, in con-
trast to magneto-optical or magnetic traps, but can be con-
trolled independently.

In this work we present photoassociation trap loss spec-
tra of ultracold cesium inside a quasi-static optical dipole trap
formed by a CO2 laser. We focus on the 0−
g (6s+6p3/2(2P3/2))
double-well state of Cs2 (hereafter referred to as 0−
g (P3/2))
which is extensively described in Ref. [?]. Fig. 1 schemati-
cally shows this molecular potential curve together with the
curves of other relevant electronic states that correlate to the
6s + 6p3/2 asymptote. The 0−
g (P3/2) state is particularly in-
teresting, because single-photon photoassociation allows to
populate vibrational levels in its outer well that have a high
probability to decay into bound levels of the electronic ground
states. This is due to the barrier between the inner and outer
well of this potential which leads to large Franck-Condon fac-
tors for the radiative decay [?]. Also tunneling into the inner
part of the potential has been observed [?]. The highly sensi-
tive detection of ground state molecules by multiphoton ion-
ization was used in a sequence of experiments by P. Pillet et
al. to study the photoassociation of Cs2 [?,?,?].

2

R. Wester et al.

Modeling the trap depletion dynamics as a function of
photoassociation time allowed us to extract precise absolute
photoassociation rate coefﬁcients, i. e. with an accuracy of
better than a factor of 2 [?]. We have observed photoasso-
ciation resonances down to the lowest vibrational levels of
the 0−
g (P3/2) outer well. These resonances have very small
rate coefﬁcients and could only be detected in previous mea-
surements, because they decay into bound molecules and are
therefore observed by multiphoton ionization. Our measure-
ment yield the same quality as the ion spectra of Ref. [?] with-
out introducing the radiative transition to bound molecules
and the ionization efﬁciency into the signal strength. This al-
lows us to extract the Franck-Condon modulation of the ini-
tial photoassociation step for all vibrational levels down to
the v = 0 level of the 0−

g (P3/2) external well.

2 Experimental setup

The photoassociation experiments have been performed with
an ensemble of cesium atoms trapped in an optical dipole trap
that is formed by the focus of a CO2 laser. As described in
detail in Refs. [?,?], the optical dipole trap is loaded from
a cesium magneto-optical trap which is superimposed in the
focus of the CO2 laser (see Fig. 2). The MOT is operated
in ﬁve-beam conﬁguration and loads from a Zeeman slowed
beam up to 108 particles at a density of 109 cm−3 as inferred
from absorption imaging.

×

×

After turning off the magnetic ﬁeld of the MOT a brief
105 atoms at a
molasses cooling phase transfers about 5
1011 cm−3 and a temperature of 40 µK into
density of 5
the optical dipole trap [?,?]. The repumping beam is extin-
guished several milliseconds before the main MOT beam,
which pumps all Cs atoms into the F = 3 ground state. For
the cold cesium atoms the CO2 laser focus with its potential
depth of 0.8 mK represents a harmonic trap with axial and ra-
dial trap frequencies of ωax = 12.8 Hz and ωrad = 625 Hz
respectively. In thermal equilibrium the density distribution
of the atoms in the trap is given by a cylindrically symmet-
ric Gaussian distribution with standard deviations of 600 µm
and 13 µm in the axial and radial directions, respectively. The
lifetime of the atoms in the dipole trap is of the order of 100 s,
due to collisions with residual gas atoms.

The photoassociation light is provided by a widely tun-
able Titanium:Sapphire laser (Coherent MBR 110) system,
which delivers a typical output power of 200 mW with a line
width of about 100 kHz, after passing through an optical iso-
lator and a single-mode optical ﬁbre. Relative frequency changes
are monitored by measuring the transmission signal of a frac-
tion of the Ti:Sapphire laser beam through a confocal cavity
with a free spectral range of 1000 MHz. In order to decrease
the frequency spacing of the transmission peaks, two side-
bands are modulated onto the cavity path of the Ti:Sapphire
beam at
200 MHz using a double-pass AOM setup. The
length of the cavity is stabilized by locking one of the cav-
ity mirrors with a piezo actuator to the fringe of the trans-
mission signal of a superimposed cesium-spectroscopy stabi-
lized diode laser. This provides a relative frequency accuracy

±

of about 5 MHz. The absolute laser frequency is measured
with a commercial wavemeter (Burleigh WA 1000) with an
accuracy of 500 MHz. The photoassociation laser is passed
through the trapped cesium cloud in the focus of the CO2
laser at an angle of θ = 22.5◦ with respect to the CO2 laser
beam. The width of the Ti:Sapphire beam at the trap cen-
ter amounts to 150 µm. The intensity of the photoassociation
beam amounted to typically 50 W/cm2 and was increased for
the weakest vibrational transitions up to 300 W/cm2.

Once the cesium atoms are loaded into the dipole trap, the
shutter of the photoassociation laser is opened and the atom
cloud is illuminated for up to 1000 ms. For some data sets a
short molasses cooling pulse is applied after half of the pho-
toassociation time to lower the temperature and thereby in-
crease the photoassociation rate. Finally the CO2 laser light is
extinguished and all remaining cesium atoms are recaptured
into the magneto-optical trap. The number of recaptured ce-
sium atoms is obtained from the ﬂuorescence signal of the
MOT with a relative accuracy of better than 5 %. The ﬂuores-
cence signal is calibrated to the absolute atom number using
absorption images, which leads to an absolute accuracy of the
atom number of 30 %. Due to the very long storage time, the
photoassociation-laser induced atom loss signal is a precise
measure for the formation of cold molecules through pho-
toassociation. To measure photoassociation spectra the fre-
quency of the Ti:Sapphire laser is scanned and the loading,
photoassociation and recapture cycle is repeated. The fre-
quency range scanned during one cycle is 3 MHz.

A wide photoassociation spectrum, composed of several
individual scans, is shown in the lower trace of Fig. 3. It is
compared to a photoassociation scan obtained directly in the
magneto-optical trap using a lock-in scheme to measure the
ﬂuorescence reduction that occurs when a photoassociation
resonance adds a loss channel to the MOT (upper trace). The
spectra show vibrational progressions in the 0−
u and 1g
molecular states that correlate to the 6s + 6p3/2 asymptote.
Note the exquisite stability of trap loading (overall ﬂuctua-
tions in particle number < 5%). This comparison shows a
signiﬁcant improvement of the signal-to-noise ratio for the
optical dipole trap measurement. Furthermore, the Cs hyper-
ﬁne state in the MOT is F = 4, whereas in the dipole trap it
was chosen to be the absolute ground state, F = 3. This is
reﬂected in the different amplitudes of the resonances in the
MOT compared to the dipole trap.

g , 0+

3 Photoassociation results

3.1 Photoassociation into the 0−

g (P3/2) outer well

By measuring photoassociation induced trap loss from the
optical dipole trap, the vibrational progression of the 0−
g (P3/2)
outer well of Cs2 (see Fig. 1) has been observed. Selected
photoassociation (PA) spectra are shown in Fig. 4 for the vi-
brational levels v = 2, 6 and 10. It can be seen that the num-
ber of recaptured atoms drops signiﬁcantly when the PA laser
is tuned to a resonance with a rovibrational state, leading to

Photoassociation inside an optical dipole trap: absolute rate coefﬁcients and Franck-Condon factors

3

a strong spectroscopic signature. Outside of a resonance es-
sentially 100 % of the atoms transferred to the dipole trap are
recaptured. The noise on the baseline corresponds to the shot-
to-shot ﬂuctuations in the number of atoms transferred to the
dipole trap.

In the 0−

g state narrow resonances are observed, showing
a rotational progression for each vibrational level. Vibrational
quantum numbers are assigned to each spectrum based on the
accurate spectroscopic investigation of Ref. [?]. From the ro-
tational progression for each vibrational level rotational con-
stants are extracted, which are found to be in good agreement
with previous studies (see table 1).

It is interesting to note that we observe rigid rotor states
of the cesium molecule up to J = 4. For pure s-wave scat-
tering angular momentum conservation predicts a maximum
rotational excitation of J = 2 for optical dipole excitation
from the triplet ground state. This is indeed the strongest ro-
tational line in all the photoassociation spectra. Larger rota-
tional states can be rationalized due to additional angular mo-
mentum contributions, such as from orbital angular momen-
tum due to p-wave or d-wave scattering or from the total nu-
clear spin of the atom pair. Actually, the height of the p-wave
centrifugal barrier is estimated to be 35 µK, assuming that
the initial collisional channel proceeds via the a3Σ+
u (6s +
6s) state only. Given the initial temperature of the cesium
atoms of 40 µK, this leads us to attribute the J = 3 res-
onances to p-wave collisions. During the photoassociation
time in the trap the temperature increases to about 60 µK,
as described in detail below. The origin of the weak J =
4 component may therefore be a d-wave collision (barrier
height about 200 µK) of two fast atoms in the thermal dis-
tributions that either tunnel through or surmount the barrier,
even though both the p- and d-wave barriers are found too
weak to support a shape resonance that could increase the
tunneling probability. Light-induced mechanisms such as “ﬂux
enhancement” which are important in magneto-optical traps
[?] do not play a role in a far-detuned optical dipole trap.

3.2 Model of the trap loss dynamics

Owing to the controlled conditions that prevail inside the op-
tical dipole trap it is feasible to convert the trap loss signal
into an absolute photoassociation rate coefﬁcient. For high
photoassociation laser intensities or long interaction times the
photoassociation process can easily deplete more than 50 %
of the trapped atoms. Therefore a model is needed to describe
the depletion of the trapped atoms. This model assumes pho-
toassociation from an atomic cloud at thermal equilibrium
and takes into account the time dependence of both the atomic
density and the temperature inside the optical dipole trap. The
basis of the depletion model is the rate equation for trap loss

dN
dt

=

2

−

Z

G(x, T ) n2(x, T ) d3x

(1)

which describes the loss of two atoms per collision event and
depends on the photoassociation rate coefﬁcient G(x, T ) and

the pair density n2(x, T ). The latter is given by the square of
the cylindrically symmetric Gaussian density distribution of
the thermal trapped atom cloud. The rate coefﬁcient G(x, T )
needs special attention, because it depends on the photoas-
sociation laser intensity and therefore becomes position de-
pendent if the PA laser intensity varies spatially. In the ex-
periment the width of the PA laser of w = 150 µm is much
larger than the radial extension of the atomic cloud (13 µm),
but smaller than the axial extension (800 µm). The intensity
therefore changes only along the axial direction, denoted z,
and has a Gaussian proﬁle. In the low-intensity limit (G
intensity) one obtains

∝

G(x, T ) = G0(T )e

−2 sin2

2

θ z

/w

2

.

(2)

Note that the width of the distribution is given by the PA laser
width and the intersection angle of the PA laser with the trap
axis θ. The peak rate coefﬁcient G0(T ) corresponds to the
peak intensity 2P/(πw2) of the photoassociation laser with
power P .

Integration of Eq. (1) yields a differential equation for the

particle number N ,

dN
dt

=

2G0(T )

−

N 2
V (T )

,

(3)

where the effective volume V (T ) depends on the PA laser
and CO2 trap parameters and is given by

V (T ) =

2πkBT
mCsωradωax (cid:19)

(cid:18)

2 √8 sin θ
√πw

= V0T 2.

(4)

The connection between particle number and temperature
is taken from a thermodynamic model of the trap depletion
which was also successfully employed to study hyperﬁne-
changing Cs-Cs and Li-Cs collisions [?]. This model assumes
that each colliding atom pair upon leaving the trap removes
a total energy of q6kBT where the parameter q is obtained
0.05. As a
from a ﬁt to the experimental data yielding 0.5
consequence of this relation, temperature and particle number
are linked by the scaling law

±

T
T0

=

N
N0

q−1

.

(5)

T − 1

Given the temperature dependence of the rate coefﬁcient
2 , Eq. (3) is integrated
at low temperatures G0(T )
∝
analytically yielding the number of trapped atoms and the
temperature as a function of the storage time and the pho-
toassociation rate coefﬁcient. This is inverted to give the rate
coefﬁcient for the initial temperature T0 as a function of the
remaining atoms N (tP A) after a photoassociation time tP A,

G0(T0) =

V0T 2
0
(9/2)N0tP A (cid:16)

(N (tP A)/N0)

−9/4

1

.

(cid:17)

−

(6)

The cooling pulse that has been applied for some data sets
after tP A/2 was observed to reduce temperature and parti-
cle number of the trapped atoms by a factor of α
0.75.
It is accounted for by a piece-wise solution of the differential

∼

4

R. Wester et al.

∼

equation (3) and leads for these data sets to a correction factor
of 1/(1 + α3/2)

0.4 to the rate coefﬁcient G0.

The trap depletion model was veriﬁed experimentally for
a single photoassociation resonance by measuring the atom
number, the atomic density and the temperature as a function
of photoassociation time using absorption imaging. The re-
sult in Fig. 5 shows the measured decrease of the number of
cesium atoms. As can be seen, the temperature of the atoms is
increasing from 40 to about 80 µK during 10 s of interaction
time with the photoassociation laser, which is due to the cold-
est atoms associating most favorably. Within the photoassoci-
ation time of 1 s that is employed to measure photoassociation
spectra, the temperature increases to about 60 µK. This effect
is included in the model through Eq. (5). One can see that the
agreement to our trap depletion model is satisfactory, despite
its simplicity.

Using this model, speciﬁcally Eq. 6, absolute photoas-
sociation rate coefﬁcients are calculated for the resonances
of the v = 2 spectrum in Fig. 4 and values between 5
·
10−11 cm3/s for J = 2 are
10−12 cm3/s for J = 0 and 3
·
obtained. The PA laser intensity amounted to 90 W/cm2. The
accuracy of the obtained rate coefﬁcients is estimated to be
about 40 %, which is mainly due to the accuracy of the ab-
solute particle number as obtained from absorption imaging
(estimated to be 30 %) and the accuracy of the cesium tem-
perature (estimated to be 10 %).

·

·

In Ref. [?] absolute photoassociation rate coefﬁcients were
measured in a magneto-optical trap and compared to theo-
retical calculations. The measurements were carried out for
u and 0−
several PA resonances in the 0+
g states at small de-
10−11 cm3/s and
tunings and rate coefﬁcients of between 1
10−11 cm3/s were measured. In the same paper theoretical
5
rate coefﬁcients are calculated using a perturbative model in
good agreement with the measured rates. For photoassocia-
tion into the 0−
g state at large detunings, corresponding to the
low vibrational levels that are studied here, the model in Ref.
[?] predicts rate coefﬁcients of a few times 10−12 cm3/s for
a laser intensity of 55 W/cm2. Our measured rate coefﬁcients
are somewhat larger than this range. This is partly accounted
for by the higher laser intensity by a factor of 1.5 and the
lower temperature in our experiment of almost a factor of
4 which together predicts higher rate coefﬁcient by about a
factor of three or values of around 10−11 cm3/s [?]. This is
in reasonable agreement with the measured values. An even
better test of the quality of the absolute rate coefﬁcient mea-
surements in the dipole trap has been carried out in our group
by studying saturation of the photoassociation rate coefﬁcient
at the unitarity limit [?]. These measurements agree within
the estimated 40 % accuracy with theoretical prediction for
the unitarity limited photoassociation rate coefﬁcient.

3.3 Franck-Condon modulation in the 0−

g (P3/2) outer well

The photoassociation efﬁciency depends crucially on the Franck-
Condon (FC) factor
function
φ
i
|

involving the continuum wave-
of the initial collisional state and the molecular

φ
ψ(v)
i
|
h

ψ(v)
i
|

wavefunction
of the PA level in the excited molecu-
lar state. The brackets hold for the integration over the in-
teratomic coordinate R. In this approach the generally R-
dependent dipole transition moment is approximated to be
constant for the interatomic distances at which photoassoci-
ation occurs. The FC factor is known to exhibit strong vari-
ations with the vibrational quantum number v of the excited
state [?,?,?]. Indeed, the PA process involves an excited po-
tential curve and an initial potential curve varying as R−3
and R−6 respectively at large distances. For small detunings
of the PA laser, the overlap integral is mainly determined by
the value of the initial continuum wavefunction at the external
turning point of the excited potential. The intensity pattern of
the PA spectrum then reﬂects the oscillations of the contin-
uum wavefuntion. At larger detunings, radial wave functions
in both channels may locally oscillate with similar frequency,
inducing abrupt changes in the overlap integral.

In this work we present measurements of the Franck-Condon

modulation directly through the analysis of trap loss spec-
tra for the lowest vibrational levels in the 0−
g (P3/2) exter-
nal well, in contrast to previous measurements [?] which de-
tected ground state molecules by photoionization and there-
fore measured the FC modulation multiplied by the radiative
decay probability and the ionization efﬁciency. Furthermore,
in the present experiment the F = 3 initial state is chosen
for the cesium atoms, in contrast to the measurements with
F = 4 atoms in a magneto-optical trap.

To connect the photoassociation rate coefﬁcient with the
Franck-Condon factor we employ the theoretical description
by Bohn and Julienne [?], which is, for low photoassociation
intensities, equivalent to the treatment proposed in several pa-
pers [?,?,?]. It yields a scattering probability

psc =

G
Gunitarity

=

Γ
γ/4

.

(7)

This relation holds if the PA rate coefﬁcient G is small com-
pared to the unitarity limited maximum rate PA coefﬁcient
T −1/2. The scattering probability psc thus de-
Gunitarity ∝
pends on the coupling constant Γ and the natural line width γ
of the electronic transition. The coupling constant Γ is given
by

Γ = 2π(Veg)2

(8)
ψ(v)
φ(Ekin
|
where (Veq)2 is the Rabi frequency squared of the electronic
transition, which is proportional to the laser intensity.

→

2,

0)

|h

i|

For each J = 2 rotational state of the vibrational levels
v = 0 to 23 we have measured the photoassociation rate coef-
ﬁcient using the trap depletion model described above. In the
course of this work we investigated if more vibrational levels
could be found below the v = 0 level, which would cause an
incorrect assignment of the vibrational progression. However,
no additional vibrational levels were found for larger detun-
ings than the v = 0 level. For each observed vibrational level
the Franck-Condon (FC) factor is calculated using Eqs. (7)
and (8). The measurements for v
10 were carried out with
an intermediate cooling pulse and were corrected accordingly
(see section 3.2). The accuracy of the individual FC factors is

≤

Photoassociation inside an optical dipole trap: absolute rate coefﬁcients and Franck-Condon factors

5

estimated to be 60 %, mainly given by the accuracy of the rate
coefﬁcient (see above) and the PA laser intensity. To remove
the energy-normalization of the continuum wavefunction φ
all FC factors have been normalized to the maximum FC fac-
tor, v = 4, which now amounts to 1. The result is shown
in the upper panel of Fig. 6. The measured FC factors show
a clear step modulation starting with a very small value for
v = 0 and 1 and increasing by a factor of 100 from v = 1
to 2. For higher vibrational levels a much weaker modulation
is observed with a local maximum near v = 4 and a local
minimum around v = 18.

Theoretical modeling of the Franck-Condon factor mod-
ulation has been carried out for comparison with the exper-
imental results. This requires the computation of the
ψ(v)
i
|
radial wave functions. The vibrational wavefunctions
and
φ
i
|
of the 0−
g (P3/2) external well are easily obtained from a stan-
dard Numerov integration using the Rydberg-Klein-Rees (RKR)
potential of Ref. [?]. In principle, the main task is the integra-
tion of the continuum wave function. Only when the atoms
are prepared in the fully stretched states F = 4, MF = 4,
the collisional entrance channel is fully correlated to a sin-
gle state, i.e. the lowest a3Σ+
u state: it is described accurately
enough by an available theoretical potential curve, connected
Cn/Rn asymptotic expan-
at large distances to an accurate
sion (see for instance Refs. [?,?]), and adapted to reproduce
the measured cesium triplet scattering length [?]. This type of
calculations has been performed in Ref. [?] and is referred to
in the following as the single-component calculation.

P

In the present experiment the atoms are not polarized, so
that many channels with different internal hyperﬁne quan-
tum numbers contribute to the process. Moreover, each col-
lisional channel is described by a radial wavefunction which
results from the coupling between components of both a3Σ+
u
and X 1Σ+
g electronic states, interacting through the hyper-
ﬁne hamiltonian. Indeed the vibrational motion of the excited
levels presented here proceeds over the 15-30a0 range, which
is the recoupling range for the hyperﬁne interactions in ce-
sium. The complexity of this coupled channel problem has
lead us to perform the calculation for two colliding atoms
occupying the F = 3, MF = 3 state. The total continuum
wavefunction is then a three-component molecular wavefunc-
tion characterized by the projection M = 6 of the total angu-
lar momentum. With this multi-component wavefunction the
Franck-Condon modulation is calculated.

In the lower panel of Fig. 6 the Franck-Condon factors are
shown that are calculated using the multi-component wave
function (full squares) together with the result for the single-
component wave function (open squares). Again all values
are normalized to the maximum FC factor. Both calculations
clearly show a strong increase for small vibrational levels
similar to the observation in the experiment. For the multi-
component calculation the steepest increase is observed be-
tween v = 2 and 3 in contrast to the experimentally found
step between v = 1 and 2, which is also found in the single-
component calculation. For larger vibrational levels the FC
factors of the multi-component calculation exhibit a some-
what larger amplitude variation than the measured data, but

the overall FC factors are fairly constant. Even thought the
atoms in the experiment are not polarized in contrast to the
calculation, a similar trend is observed in the experimental
data. A local minimum near v = 18 is found in the multi-
component calculation, similar to the measurement, but other
local minima near v = 7 and 11 are not found in the measure-
ment. The single-component calculation shows much deeper
minima for v = 14 and 21, which are not present in the more
accurate multi-component calculation. Thus one may specu-
late that also the minima in the multi-component FC calcula-
tion may become ﬁlled in by angular momentum components
that are not included in the calculation but certainly present
in the experiment. To resolve this a full FC calculation or a
measurement with polarized atoms would be necessary.

4 Conclusions

As it was shown in Ref. [?], photoassociation experiments
beneﬁt signiﬁcantly from the utilization of a conservative op-
tical trap, due to the high pair density and the long interaction
times. Furthermore the internal hyperﬁne state of the trapped
atoms is well deﬁned. In this work we present a thorough
quantitative analysis of the photoassociation in a far-detuned
optical dipole trap. Using a thermodynamic trap depletion
model absolute photoassociation rate coefﬁcients were ob-
tained with an accuracy of about 40 %.

The high sensitivity of photoassociation in a dipole trap
was demonstrated by studying photoassociation resonances
into the lowest vibrational levels of the outer well of the 0−
state through trap loss. From these measurements the Franck-
Condon factors for the initial single-photon excitation step of
the photoassociation process were extracted for the lowest 24
vibrational levels of the 0−
g (P3/2) outer well and compared to
a theoretical calculation. Previously, these transitions could
only be observed by multiphoton ionization of ground state
molecules. No further photoassociation resonances at larger
detuning than v = 0 were found, conﬁrming the assignment
in Ref. [?].

In the current experiment ground state Cs2 molecules are
presumably already produced and trapped, but not observed
due to the lack of an appropriate detection system. In future
experiments multiphoton ionization will be used to detect and
study these trapped molecules.

g (P3/2)

5 Acknowledgments

The experiments were performed while the group was still
at the Max-Planck-Institut f¨ur Kernphysik in Heidelberg and
we wish to thank the institute, in particular D. Schwalm, for
generous support. This work is supported by the Deutsche
Forschungsgemeinschaft in the Schwerpunktprogramm 1116
,,Interactions in Ultracold Atomic and Molecular Gases” un-
der WE-2661/1-2. We also acknowledge support by the EU
research training network ,,Cold molecules” (COMOL), un-
der the contract number HPRN-2002-00290.

R. Wester et al.

v
2
6
10

δ [GHz] a
-2207.6
-2008.2
-1821.6

δ [GHz] b
-2207.6(0.5)
-2008.1(0.5)
-1821.6(0.5)

B [MHz] a B [MHz] b
49.3(1.0)
45.6(1.0)
44.6(1.0)

48.9
46.8
45.0

Table 1 Detuning δ of the J = 0 level relative to the 6s 2S1/2(F =
4)→ 6p 2P3/2(F ′
= 5) asymptote and rotational constants B for
−
g (P3/2) (a: Ref. [?]; b: this work,
selected vibrational states of the 0
estimated accuracies are denoted in brackets).

Fig. 4 Photoassociation trap loss spectra as a function of the pho-
toassociation laser detuning relative to the 6s 2S1/2(F = 4)→ 6p
2P3/2(F ′ = 5) asymptote for v=2, 6 and 10 in the 0−
g outer well.
Rotational progressions are observed for each vibrational level up
to J=3. For v = 10 also a weak J=4 transition is observed. The res-
onance at -2208 GHz detuning in the upper panel is attributed to
another electronic state.

6

y
g
r
e
n
E

−
0 g

−
0 g

+
0 u

1u

1g

2
Cs  6p  P   (F’) +
2
Cs  6s  S   (F=3)

3/2
1/2

Photoassociation
laser

2

Cs  6s  S   (F=3) +
1/2
2
Cs  6s  S   (F=3)

1/2

Σ3a

+
u

Cs−Cs distance

gX +
Σ1

Fig. 1 Schematic overview of the relevant molecular potential
curves for Cs2 photoassociation into the 0−

g outer well.

Fig. 2 Experimental setup consisting of a cesium magneto-optical
trap overlapped with a CO2 optical dipole trap and a photoassocia-
tion laser.

Fig. 3 Comparison of a wide-scan photoassociation spectrum mea-
sured in the far-detuned optical dipole trap (lower trace) with the
same spectrum obtained in the magneto-optical trap (MOT) shown
in the upper trace.

Photoassociation inside an optical dipole trap: absolute rate coefﬁcients and Franck-Condon factors

7

Fig. 5 Upper panel: number of atoms remaining in the trap as a
function of the photoassociation laser interaction time; the solid line
is a ﬁt to the trap depletion model from which the absolute pho-
toassociation rate coefﬁcient is obtained. Lower panel: translational
temperature of the remaining atoms as a function of photoassocia-
tion time, measured by absorption imaging of the radial expansion
after release of the atoms from the CO2 trap; the solid line is the ﬁt
of the trap depletion model with the initial temperature as the only
free parameter. Data are shown for the v = 20, J = 2 photoassoci-
ation resonance in the 0−

g outer well.

Fig. 6 Experimental data (upper panel) and theoretical results
(lower panel) for the square of the Franck-Condon factor as a func-
tion of the vibrational level for photoassociation resonances into
J = 2 states in the 0−
g outer well. Each curve is normalized to
the maximum Franck-Condon factor.

