4
0
0
2
 
t
c
O
 
2
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
m
o
t
a
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
4
7
0
0
1
4
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Atomic Clocks and Constraints on Variations of Fundamental Constants

Savely G. Karshenboim
D. I. Mendeleev Institute for Metrology (VNIIM), St. Petersburg 198005, Russia
Max-Planck-Institut f¨ur Quantenoptik, 85748 Garching, Germany

Victor Flambaum
School of Physics, University of New South Wales, Sydney 2052, Australia

Ekkehard Peik
Physikalisch-Technische Bundesanstalt, 38116 Braunschweig, Germany
(Dated:)

I.

INTRODUCTION

Fundamental constants play an important role in mod-
ern physics, being landmarks that designate diﬀerent
areas. We call them constants, however, as long as
we only consider minor variations with the cosmological
time/space scale, their constancy is an experimental fact
rather than a basic theoretical principle. Modern theories
unifying gravity with electromagnetic, weak, and strong
interactions, or even the developing quantum gravity it-
self often suggest such variations.

Many parameters that we call fundamental constants,
such as the electron charge and mass (see, e.g., Ref.
[1, 2]), are actually not truly fundamental constants but
eﬀective parameters which are aﬀected by renormaliza-
tion or the presence of matter [3]. Living in a changing
universe we cannot expect that matter will aﬀect these
parameters the same way during any given cosmologi-
cal epoch. An example is the inﬂationary model of the
universe which states that in a very early epoch the uni-
verse experienced a phase transition which, in particular,
changed a vacuum average of the so-called Higgs ﬁeld
which determines the electron mass. The latter was zero
before this transition and reached a value close or equal
to the present value after the transition.

The problem of variations of constants has many facets
and here we discuss aspects related to atomic clocks and
precision frequency measurements. Other related topics
may be found in, e.g., Ref. [4].

Laboratory searches for a possible time variation of
fundamental physical constants currently consist of two
important parts: (i) one has to measure a certain phys-
ical quantity at two diﬀerent moments of time that are
separated by at least a few years; (ii) one has to be able
to interpret the result in terms of fundamental constants.
The latter is a strong requirement for a cross comparison
of diﬀerent results.

The measurements which may be performed most ac-
curately are frequency measurements; and thus,
fre-
quency standards or atomic clocks will be involved in
most of the laboratory searches. Frequency metrology
has shown great progress in the last decade and will con-
tinue to do so for some time. The constraints on the vari-
ations of the fundamental constants obtained in this man-

ner are, so far, somewhat weaker than those from other
methods (astrophysics, geochemistry), but still competi-
tive with them. In contrast to other methods, however,
frequency measurements allow a very clear interpretation
of the ﬁnal results and a transparent evaluation proce-
dure, making them less vulnerable to systematic errors.
While there is still potential for improvement, the basic
details of the method have been recently ﬁxed.

The most advanced atomic clocks are discussed in
Sect. II. They are realized with many-electron atoms
and their frequency cannot be interpreted in terms of
fundamental constants. However, a much simpler prob-
lem needs to be solved: to interpret their variation in
terms of fundamental constants. This idea is discussed
in Sect. III. The current laboratory constraints on the
variations of the fundamental constants are summarized
in Sect. IV.

II. ATOMIC CLOCKS AND FREQUENCY
STANDARDS

Frequency standards are important tools for precision
measurements and serve various purposes which, in turn,
have diﬀerent requirements that must be satisﬁed.
In
particular, it is not necessary for a frequency standard to
reproduce a frequency which is related to a certain atomic
transition although it may be expressed in its terms. A
well known example is the hydrogen maser, where the
frequency is aﬀected by the wall shift which may vary
with time [5]. For the study of time variations of funda-
mental constants it is necessary to use standards similar
to a primary caesium clock. In this case, any deviation
of its frequency from the unperturbed atomic transition
frequency should be known (within a known uncertainty)
because this is a necessary requirement for being a ‘pri-
mary’ standard.

From the point of view of fundamental physics, the
hydrogen maser is an artefact quite similar, in a sense,
to the prototype of the kilogram held at the Bureau In-
ternational des Poids et Mesures (BIPM) in Paris. Both
artefacts are somehow related to fundamental constants
(e.g., the mass of the prototype can be expressed in terms
of the nucleon masses and their number) but they also

have a kind of residual classical-physics ﬂexibility which
allows their properties to change. In contrast, standards
similar to the caesium clock have a frequency (or other
property) that is determined by a certain natural con-
stant which is not ﬂexible, being of pure quantum ori-
gin. It may change only if the fundamental constants are
changing.

In Sect. IV, results obtained with caesium and ru-
bidium fountains, a hydrogen beam, ultracold calcium
clouds, and trapped ions of ytterbium and mercury are
discussed. While caesium and rubidium clocks operate in
the radio frequency domain, most of the other standards
listed above rely on optical transitions.

A. Caesium Atomic Fountain

FIG. 1: Schematic of an atomic fountain clock.

Caesium clocks are the most accurate primary stan-
dards for time and frequency [6]. The hyperﬁne split-
ting frequency between the F = 3 and F = 4 levels of
the 2S1/2 ground state of the 133Cs atom at 9.192 GHz
has been used for the deﬁnition of the SI second since
1967. In a so-called caesium fountain (see Fig. 1), a di-
lute cloud of laser cooled caesium atoms at a temper-
ature of about 1 µK is launched upwards to initiate a
free parabolic ﬂight with an apogee at about 1 m above
the cooling zone. A microwave cavity is mounted near
the lower endpoints of the parabola and is traversed by
the atoms twice – once during ascent, once during de-
scent – so that Ramsey’s method of interrogation with
separated oscillatory ﬁelds [5] can be realized. The total
interrogation time being on the order of 0.5 s, a reso-

2

nance linewidth of 1 Hz is achieved, about a factor of
100 narrower than in traditional devices using a ther-
mal atomic beam from an oven. Selection and detection
of the hyperﬁne state is performed via optical pumping
and laser induced resonance ﬂuorescence. In a carefully
controlled setup, a relative uncertainty slightly below
1·10−15 can be reached in the realization of the resonance
frequency of the unperturbed Cs atom. The averaging
time that is required to reach this level of uncertainty is
on the order of 104 s. One limiting eﬀect that contributes
signiﬁcantly to the systematic uncertainty of the caesium
fountain is the frequency shift due to cold collisions be-
tween the atoms. In this respect, a fountain frequency
standard based on the ground state hyperﬁne frequency
of the 87Rb atom at about 6.835 GHz is more favorable,
since its collisional shift is lower by more than a factor
of 50 for the same atomic density. With the caesium fre-
quency being ﬁxed by deﬁnition in the SI system, the
87Rb frequency is therefore presently the most precisely
measured atomic transition frequency [7].

B. Single-Ion Trap

An alternative to interrogating atoms in free ﬂight, and
a possibility to obtain practically unlimited interaction
time, is to store them in a trap. Ions are well suited be-
cause they carry electric charge and can be trapped in
radio frequency ion traps (Paul traps [8]) that provide
conﬁnement around a ﬁeld-free saddle point of an elec-
tric quadrupole potential. This ensures that the internal
level structure is only minimally perturbed by the trap.
Combined with laser cooling it is possible to reach the
so-called Lamb–Dicke regime where the linear Doppler
shift is eliminated. A single ion, trapped in an ultrahigh
vacuum is conceptually a very simple system that allows
good control of systematic frequency shifts [9]. The use
of the much higher, optical reference frequency allows
one to obtain a stability that is superior to microwave
frequency standards, although only a single ion is used
to obtain a correction signal for the reference oscillator.
A number of possible reference optical transitions with
a natural linewidth of the order of 1 Hz and below are
available in diﬀerent ions, such as Yb+ [10] and Hg+ [11].
These ions possess a useful level system, where both a
dipole-allowed transition and a forbidden reference tran-
sition of the optical clock can be driven with two diﬀer-
ent lasers from the ground state. The dipole transition
is used for laser cooling and for the optical detection of
the ion via its resonance ﬂuorescence. If a second laser
excites the ion to the metastable upper level of the ref-
erence transition, the ﬂuorescence disappears and every
single excitation can thus be detected with practically
hundred percent eﬃciency as a dark period in the ﬂuo-
rescence signal.

Using these techniques and a femtosecond laser fre-
quency comb generator (see Sect. 99.2.5) for the link to
primary caesium clocks, the absolute frequencies of the

cooling
transition
(dipole
allowed)

metastable
level

“forbidden"
reference
transition

FIG. 2: Double resonance scheme applied in single-ion-trap
frequency standards.

transitions 2S1/2 → 2D5/2 in 199Hg+ at 1065 THz and
2S1/2 → 2D3/2 in 171Yb+ at 688 THz have been mea-
sured with relative uncertainties of only 9 · 10−15. It is
believed that single-ion optical frequency standards of-
fer the potential to ultimately reach the 10−18 level of
relative accuracy.

A similar double resonance technique can be employed
if the reference transition is in the microwave domain and
a number of accurate measurements of hyperﬁne struc-
ture intervals in trapped ions has been performed. In par-
ticular, the HFS interval in 171Yb+ has been measured
several times [12] and can be used to obtain constraints
on temporal variations.

C. Laser-Cooled Neutral Atoms

Optical frequency standards have been developed with
free laser-cooled neutral atoms, most notably of the
alkaline-earth elements that possess narrow intercombi-
nation transitions. The atoms are collected in a magneto-
optical trap, are then released and interogated by a se-
quence of laser pulses to realize a frequency-sensitive
Ramsey-Bord´e atom interferometer [13]. Of these sys-
tems, the one based on the 1S0 → 3P1 intercombination
line of 40Ca at 657 nm has reached the lowest relative un-
certainty so far (about 2·10−14) [11, 14]. Limiting factors
in the uncertainty of these standards are the residual lin-
ear Doppler eﬀect and phase front curvature of the laser
beams that excite the ballistically expanding atom cloud.
It has therefore been proposed to conﬁne the atoms in
an optical lattice, i.e., in the array of interference max-
ima produced by several intersecting, red-detuned laser
beams [15]. The detuning of the trapping laser could be
chosen such that the light shift it produces in the ground
and excited state of the reference transition are equal,
and therefore it would produce no shift of the reference
frequency. This approach is presently being investigated
and may be applied to the very narrow (mHz natural
linewidth) 1S0 → 3P0 transitions in neutral strontium,

3

ytterbium, or mercury.

D. Two-Photon Transitions and Doppler-Free
Spectroscopy

The linear Doppler shift of an absorption resonance can
also be avoided if a two-photon excitation is induced by
two counterpropagating laser beams. A prominent exam-
ple that has been studied with high precision is the two-
photon excitation of the 1S → 2S transition in atomic
hydrogen. The precise measurement of this frequency is
of importance for the determination of the Rydberg con-
stant and as a test of quantum electrodynamics (QED).
Hydrogen atoms are cooled by collisions in a cryogenic
nozzle and interact with a standing laser-wave of 243 nm
wavelength inside a resonator. Since the atoms are not
as cold as in laser cooled samples, a correction for the
second order Doppler eﬀect is performed. The laser exci-
tation is interrupted periodically and the excited atoms
are detected in a time resolved manner so that their ve-
locity can be examined. An accuracy of about 2 · 10−14
has been obtained in absolute frequency measurements
with a transportable caesium fountain [16].

E. Optical Frequency Measurements

In recent years, the progress in stability and accuracy
of optical frequency standards has been impressive; and
there is belief that in the future an optical clock may
supersede the microwave clocks because the optical oscil-
lators oﬀer a much higher number of periods in a given
time. In addition, some systematic eﬀects, such as the
Zeeman eﬀect, have an absolute order of magnitude that
does not scale with the transition frequency, and con-
sequently is relatively less important at higher transi-
tion frequencies. A long-standing problem, however, was
the precise conversion of an optical frequency to the mi-
crowave domain, where frequencies can be counted elec-
tronically in order to establish a time scale or can easily
be compared in a phase coherent way.

This problem has recently been solved by the so-called
femtosecond laser frequency comb generator [17]. Brieﬂy,
a mode-locked femtosecond laser produces, in the fre-
quency domain, a comb of equally spaced optical fre-
quencies fn that can be written as fn = nfr + fceo (with
fceo < fr), where fr is the pulse repetition rate of the
laser, the mode number n is a large integer (of order
105), and fceo (carrier-envelope-oﬀset) is a shift of the
whole comb that is produced by group velocity disper-
sion in the laser. The repetition rate fr can easily be
measured with a fast photodiode. In order to determine
fceo, the comb is broadened in a nonlinear medium so
that it covers at least one octave. Now the second har-
monic of mode n from the “red” wing of the spectrum,
at frequency 2(nfr + fceo), can be mixed with mode 2n
from the “blue” wing, at frequency 2nfr + fceo, and fceo

4

TABLE I: Limits on possible time variation of frequencies
of diﬀerent transitions in SI units. Here δf /f is the frac-
tional uncertainty of the most accurate measurement of the
frequency f .

Atom,

f

transition [GHz]

H, Opt 2 466 061
Ca, Opt 455 986
Rb, HFS
6.835
Yb+, Opt 688 359
Yb+, HFS 12.642
Hg+, Opt 1 064 721

δf /f
−15]
[10
14
13
1
9
73
9

∆f /∆t
[Hz/yr]
−8 ± 16
−4 ± 5
(0 ± 5) · 10
−1 ± 3
(4 ± 4) · 10

0 ± 7

−6

−4

Refs.

[16]
[14]
[7]
[18]
[12]
[11]

III. ATOMIC SPECTRA AND THE
FUNDAMENTAL CONSTANTS

A. The Spectrum of Hydrogen and Nonrelativistic
Atoms

The hydrogen atom is the simplest atom and one can
easily calculate the leading contribution to diﬀerent kinds
of transitions in its spectrum (cf., for example, Ref. [19]),
such as the gross, ﬁne, and hyperﬁne structure. The scal-
ing behavior of these contributions with the values of the
Rydberg constant R∞, the ﬁne structure constant α, and
the magnetic moments of proton and Bohr magneton is
clear. The results for some typical hydrogenic transitions
are

f (2p → 1s) ≃

· cR∞ ,

f (2p3/2 − 2p1/2) ≃

· α2 · cR∞ ,

fHFS(1s) ≃

· α2 ·

· cR∞ .

(2)

µp
µB

3
4
1
16
4
3

In the nonrelativistic approximation, the basic frequen-
cies and the ﬁne and hyperﬁne structure intervals of all
atomic spectra have a similar dependence on the funda-
mental constants. The presence of a few electrons and
a nuclear charge of Z 6= 1 makes theory more compli-
cated and introduces certain multiplicative numbers but
involves no new parameters. The importance of this scal-
ing for a search for the variations was ﬁrst pointed out in
Ref. [20] and was applied to astrophysical data. Similar
results may be presented for molecular transitions (elec-
tronic, vibrational, rotational and hyperﬁne) [21], how-
ever, up to now no measurement with molecules has been
performed at a level of accuracy that is competitive with
atomic transitions. They have been used only in a search
for variations of constants in astrophysical observations
(see e.g. [22]).

FIG. 3: Frequency comb generated from femtosecond laser
pulses.

In this way, the
is obtained as a diﬀerence frequency.
precise relation between the two microwave frequencies
fr and fceo and the numerous optical frequencies fn is
known. The setup can now be used for an absolute op-
tical frequency measurement by referencing fr and fceo
to a microwave standard and recording the beat note be-
tween the optical frequency fo to be measured and the
closest comb frequency fn. Vice versa, the setup may
work as an optical clockwork, for example, by adjusting
fceo to zero and by stabilizing one comb line fn to fo
so that fr is now an exact subharmonic to order n of
fo. The precision of these transfer schemes has been in-
vestigated and was found to be so high that it will not
limit the performance of optical clocks for the foreseeable
future.

F. Limitations on Frequency Variations

The frequency standards described above have been
succesfully developed and their accuracy has been im-
proved in the last decade. This progress, as a conse-
quence, has led to certain constraints on the possible
variations of the fundamental constants. Considering fre-
quency variations, one has to have in mind that not only
the numerical value but also the units may vary. For this
reason, one needs to deal with dimensionless quantities
which are unit-independent. During the last decade, a
number of transition frequencies were measured in the
corresponding SI unit, the hertz. These dimensional re-
sults are actually related to dimensionless quantities since
a frequency measurement in SI is a measurement with re-
spect to the caesium hyperﬁne interval[31]

f
fHFS(Cs)

(cid:9)

= 9 192 631 770 ·

f
(cid:8)
where
stands for the numerical value of the frequency
f . In Sect. IV, in order to simplify notation, this symbol
for the numerical value is dropped.

f
(cid:8)

(1)

(cid:9)

,

TABLE II: Magnetic moments and relativistic corrections for
atoms involved in microwave standards. The relativistic sen-
sitivity κ is deﬁned in Sect. III C. Here µ is an actual value
of the nuclear magnetic moment, µN is the nuclear magne-
ton, and µS stands for the Schmidt value of the nuclear mag-
netic moment; the nucleon g factors are gp/2 ≃ 2.79 and
gn/2 ≃ −1.91.

µ/µS κ
Z Atom µ/µN
37 87Rb
2.75
0.74 0.34
55 133Cs
2.58 7/18 · (10 − gp) 1.50 0.83
70 171Yb+ 0.49
0.77 1.5

µS/µN
gp/2 + 1

−gn/6

B. Hyperﬁne Structure and the Schmidt Model

The atomic hyperﬁne structure

fNR(HFS) = const · α2 ·

· cR∞

(3)

µ
µB

involves nuclear magnetic moments µ which are diﬀer-
ent for diﬀerent nuclei; thus, a comparison of the con-
straints on the variations of nuclear magnetic moments
has a reduced value. To compare them, one may apply
the Schmidt model (see, e.g., Ref. [3, 23]), which predicts
all the magnetic moments of nuclei with an odd number
of nucleons (odd value of atomic number A) in terms of
the proton and neutron g-factors, gp and gn, respectively,
and the nuclear magneton only. Unfortunately, the un-
certainty of the calculation within the Schmidt model
is quite high (usually from 10% to 50%). The Schmidt
model, being a kind of ab initio model, only allows for im-
provements which, unfortunately, involve some eﬀective
phenomenological parameters. This would not really im-
prove the situation, but return us to the case where there
are too many possibly varying independent parameters.
A comparison of the Schmidt values to the actual data
is presented for caesium, rubidium, and ytterbium in Ta-
ble II.

C. Atomic Spectra: Relativistic Corrections

A theory based on the leading nonrelativistic approx-
imation may not be accurate enough. Any atomic fre-
quency can be presented as

f = fNR · Frel(α) ,

(4)

where the ﬁrst (nonrelativistic) factor is determined by a
scaling similar to the hydrogenic transitions (2). The sec-
ond factor stands for relativistic corrections which vanish
at α = 0; and thus, Frel(0) = 1.

The importance of relativistic corrections for the hy-
perﬁne structure was ﬁrst emphasized in Ref. [25]. Rel-
ativistic many-body calculations for various transitions
have been performed in Refs. [24, 26, 27, 28]. A typical

5

TABLE III: Limits on possible time variation of the frequen-
cies of diﬀerent transitions and their sensitivity to variations
in α due to relativistic corrections.

Atom, transition

∂f /f ∂t
−3.2(63) × 10
−8(11) × 10

H, 1s − 2s
−1
40Ca, 1S0 −3 P1
171Yb+, 2S1/2 − 2D3/2 −1.2(44) × 10−15 yr−1
199Hg+, 2S1/2 − 2D5/2 −0.2(70) × 10

−15 yr

−15 yr
−15 yr

−1

κ
0.00
0.03
0.9
−1 −3.2

accuracy is about 10%. Some results are summarized in
Tables II and III, where we list the relative sensitivity of
the relativitic factors Frel to changes in α,

κ =

∂ ln Frel
∂ ln α

.

(5)

Note that the relativistic corrections in heavy atoms are
proportional to (Zα)2 because of the singularity of rel-
ativistic operators. Due to this, the corrections rapidly
increase with the nuclear charge Z.

The signs and magnitudes of κ are explained by a sim-
ple estimate of the relativistic correction. For example,
an approximate expression for the relativistic correction
factor for the hyperﬁne structure of an s-wave electron
in an alkali-like atom is (see, e.g., Ref. [25])

Frel(α) =

1
1 − (Zα)2

1

·

1 − (4/3)(Zα)2 ≃ 1 +

11
6

(Zα)2 .

p

A similar rough estimation for the energy levels may be
performed for the gross structure:

E = −

Z 2

amc2α2
2n2
∗

·

1 +

(cid:18)

(Zα)2
n∗

1
j + 1/2 (cid:19)

.

(6)

Here j is the electron angular momentum, n∗ is the eﬀec-
tive value of the principle quantum number (which de-
termines the nonrelativistic energy of the electron), and
Za is the charge “seen” by the valence electron – it is 1
for neutral atoms, 2 for singly charged ions, etc. This
equation tells us that κ, for the excitation of the electron
from the orbital j to the orbital j′, has a diﬀerent sign
for j > j′ and j < j′. The diﬀerence of sign between the
sensitivities of the ytterbium and mercury transitions in
Table III reﬂects the fact that in Yb+ a 6s-electron is
excited to the empty 5d-shell, while in Hg+ a hole is cre-
ated in the ﬁlled 5d-shell if the electron is excited to the
6s-shell.

IV. LABORATORY CONSTRAINTS ON THE
VARIATIONS OF THE FUNDAMENTAL
CONSTANTS

Logarithmic derivatives [see, e.g., Eq. (5)] appear since
we are looking for a variation of the constants in relative

units. In other words, we are interested in a determina-
tion of, e.g., ∆α/α∆t while the input data of interest are
related to ∆f /f ∆t. Their relation takes the form

as

∂ ln f
∂t

=

∂ ln fNR
∂t

+ κ ·

∂ ln α
∂t

.

(7)

If one compares transitions of the same type – gross struc-
ture, ﬁne structure – the ﬁrst term cancels.

1
u2
i (cid:18)

∂ ln fi
∂t

−

∂ ln Ry
∂t

− κi

∂ ln α

2

∂t (cid:19)

Xi

= 1 + χ2

min ,

is presented in Fig. 5. Here we sum over all available
data: ∂ ln fi/∂t is the central value of the observed drift
min the minimized χ2 of
rate, ui its 1σ uncertainty, and χ2
the ﬁt.

6

A. Constraints from Absolute Optical
Measurements

Absolute frequency measurements oﬀer the possibility
to compare a number of optical transitions with frequen-
cies fNR, which scale as cR∞, with the caesium hyperﬁne
structure. One can rewrite Eq. (7) as

∂ ln fopt
∂t

=

∂ ln cR∞
∂t

+ κ ·

∂ ln α
∂t

,

(8)

where dimensional quantities, such as frequency and the
Rydberg constant, are stated in SI units [cf. Eq. (1)].
This equation may be used in diﬀerent ways. For exam-
ple, in Fig. 4 we plot experimental data for ∂ ln fopt/∂t
as a function of the sensitivity κ and derive a model-
independent constraint on the variation of the ﬁne struc-
ture constant

∂ ln α
∂t

= (−0.3 ± 2.0) · 10

−15 yr

−1

(9)

and the numerical value of the Rydberg frequency cR∞
(see Table IV) in the SI unit of hertz. The latter is of
great metrological importance, being related to a com-
mon drift of optical clocks with respect to a caesium
clock, i.e., to the deﬁnition of the SI second. The SI deﬁ-
nition of the metre is unpractical and so, in practice, the
optical wavelengths of reference lines calibrated against
the caesium standard are used to determine the SI metre
[29].

FIG. 4: Frequency variations versus their sensitivity κ.

The constraints on the variations of α and cR∞ are
correlated and the standard uncertainty ellipse, deﬁned

FIG. 5: Constraints on the time variations of the ﬁne struc-
ture constant α and the numerical value of the Rydberg con-
stant. The preliminary data on Ca are not included.

The numerical value of the Rydberg constant, from the
point of view of fundamental physics, can be expressed
in terms of the caesium hyperﬁne interval in atomic units
and its variation may be expressed in terms of the vari-
ations of α and µCs/µB. A constraint for the latter is
presented in Table IV.

B. Constraints from Microwave Clocks

A model-independent comparison of diﬀerent HFS
transitions is not simple because their nonrelativistic con-
tributions fNR are not the same, but involve diﬀerent
magnetic moments. Applying Eq. (9) to experimental
data, one can obtain constraints on the relative varia-
tions of the magnetic moments of Rb, Cs, and Yb (see
Table IV).

C. Model-Dependent Constraints

In order to gain information on constants more fun-
damental than the nuclear magnetic moments, any fur-
ther evaluation of the experimental data should involve
the Schmidt model, which is far from perfect. Model-
dependent constraints are summarized in Table V.

The nucleon g factors, in their turn, depend on a di-
mensionless fundamental constant mq/ΛQCD, where mq
is the quark mass and ΛQCD is the quantum chromo-
dynamic (QCD) scale. A study of this dependence may

TABLE IV: Model-independent laboratory constraints on the
possible time variations of natural constants.

X
α
{cR∞}
µCs/µB
µRb/µCs
µYb/µCs

−1

−1

∂ ln X/∂t
(−0.3 ± 2.0) · 10
(−2.1 ± 3.1) · 10
(3.0 ± 6.8) · 10

−15 yr
−15 yr
−15 yr

−1
(−0.2 ± 1.2) · 10−15 yr−1
−1
(3 ± 3) · 10

−14 yr

TABLE V: Model-dependent laboratory constraints on possi-
ble time variations of fundamental constants. The uncertain-
ties here do not include uncertainties from the application of
the Schmidt model.

X
me/mp
µp/µe
gp
gn

∂ ln X/∂t
(2.9 ± 6.2) · 10
(2.9 ± 5.8) · 10
(−0.1 ± 0.5) · 10

−15 yr
−15 yr
−15 yr

−1
(3 ± 3) · 10−14 yr−1

−1

−1

supply us with deep insight into the possible variations of
the more fundamental properties of Nature (see Ref. [24]
for details). This approach is promising, but its accuracy
needs to be better understood.

V. SUMMARY

The results collected in Tables IV and V are compet-
itive with data from other searches and have a more
reliable interpretation. The results from astrophysical
searches and the study of the samarium resonance from
Oklo data claim higher sensitivity (see, e.g., Ref. [4]),
however, they are more diﬃcult to interpret. We have,

7

for example, not assumed any hierarchy in variation rates
or that some constants stay ﬁxed while others vary, as it is
done in the study of the position of the Oklo resonance.
The evaluation presented here is transparent, and any
particular calculation or measurement can be checked.
In contrast, the astrophysical data show signiﬁcant re-
sults only after an intensive statistical evaluation.

The laboratory searches involving atomic clocks have
deﬁnitely shown progress and in a few years we expect
an increase in the accuracy of these clocks, an increase
in the number of diﬀerent kinds of frequency standards
(e.g., optical Sr, Sr+, In+ standards and a microwave
Hg+ standard are being tried now), and indeed an in-
crease in the time separation between accurate experi-
ments, since it is now typically only 2–3 years. An optical
clock based on a nuclear transition in Th-229 is also un-
der consideration [30]. Such a clock would oﬀer diﬀerent
sensitivity to systematic eﬀects, as well as to variations
of diﬀerent fundamental constants.

Laboratory searches are not necessarily limited by ex-
periments with metrological accuracy. An example of a
high-sensitivity search with a relatively low accuracy is
the study of the dysprosium atom for a determination of
the splitting between the 4f 105d6s and 4f 95d26s states,
which oﬀers a great sensitivity value of κ ≃ 5.7 · 108 [28].
Variations of constants on the cosmological time scale
can be expected but the magnitude, as well as other de-
tails, is unclear. Because of a broad range of options
there is a need for the development of as many diﬀerent
searches as possible, and the laboratory search for varia-
tions is an attractive opportunity to open up a way that
could lead to new physics.

Acknowledgments

We are very grateful to our colleagues and to partic-
ipants of the ACFC-2003 meeting for useful and stimu-
lating discussions.

[1] W. E. Baylis and G. W. F. Drake, Chap. 1 in this Hand-

[8] W. Paul, Rev. Mod. Phys. 62, 531 (1990). See also: J.

[2] P. J. Mohr and B. N. Taylor, Rev. Mod. Phys. (2004), to

book.

be published.

Javanainen, Chap. 73 in this Handbook.

[9] H. Dehmelt, IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas. 31, 83 (1982).
[10] J. Stenger, C. Tamm, N. Haverkamp, S. Weyers, and H.

[3] S. G. Karshenboim, Eprints physics/0306180 and

R. Telle, Opt. Lett. 26, 1589 (2001).

physics/0311080, to be published.

[4] Astrophysics, Clocks and Fundamental Constants, Lec-
ture Notes in Physics, edited by S. G. Karshenboim and
E. Peik (Springer, Berlin, 2004), Vol. 648.

[5] N. F. Ramsey, Rev. Mod. Phys. 62, 541 (1990).
[6] A. Bauch, H. R. Telle, Rep. Prog. Phys. 65, 789 (2002).
[7] H. Marion, F. Pereira Dos Santos, M. Abgrall, S. Zhang,
Y. Sortais, S. Bize, I. Maksimovic, D. Calonico, J. Gruen-
ert, C. Mandache, P. Lemonde, G. Santarelli, Ph. Lau-
rent, A. Clairon, and C. Salomon, Phys. Rev. Lett. 90,
150801 (2003).

[11] T. Udem, S. A. Diddams, K. R. Vogel, C. W. Oates, E.
A. Curtis, W. D. Lee, W. M. Itano, R. E. Drullinger,
J. C. Bergquist, and L. Hollberg, Phys. Rev. Lett. 86,
4996 (2001); S. Bize, S. A. Diddams, U. Tanaka, C. E.
Tanner, W. H. Oskay, R. E. Drullinger, T. E. Parker, T.
P. Heavner, S. R. Jeﬀerts, L. Hollberg, W. M. Itano, D.
J. Wineland, and J. C. Bergquist, Phys. Rev. Lett. 90,
150802 (2003).

[12] P. T. Fisk et al., IEEE Trans. UFFC 44, 344 (1997); P.
T. Fisk, Rep. Prog. Phys. 60, 761 (1997); R. B. Warring-
ton, P. T. H. Fisk, M. J. Wouters, and M. A. Lawn, in

Proceedings of the 6th Symposium Frequency Standards
and Metrology, edited by P. Gill (World Scientiﬁc, 2002),
p. 297.

[13] C. J. Bord´e, Phys. Lett. A 140, 10 (1989).
[14] G. Wilpers et al. , Phys. Rev. Lett. 89, 230801 (2002);

F. Riehle et al. in Ref. [4], p. 229.

[15] H. Katori, M. Takamoto, V. G. Pal’chikov, and V. D.
Ovsiannikov, Phys. Rev. Lett. 91, 173005 (2003).
[16] M. Niering, R. Holzwarth, J. Reichert, P. Pokasov,
Th. Udem, M. Weitz, T. W. H¨ansch, P. Lemonde, G.
Santarelli, M. Abgrall, P. Laurent, C. Salomon, and A.
Clairon, Phys. Rev. Lett. 84, 5496 (2000); M. Fischer et
al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 92, 230802 (2004).

[17] T. Udem, J. Reichert, R. Holzwarth, S. Diddams, D.
Jones, J. Ye, S. Cundiﬀ, T. W. H¨ansch, and J. Hall, in
The hydrogen atom: Precision physics of simple atomic
systems, Lecture Notes in Physics, edited by S. G.
Karshenboim et al. (Springer, Berlin, 2001), Vol. 570,
p. 125.

[18] E. Peik, B. Lipphardt, H. Schnatz, T. Schneider, Chr.
Tamm, and S. G. Karshenboim, physics/04021132.
[19] J. Sapirstein, Chap. 28 in this Handbook; P. Mohr, Chap.

29 in this Handbook.

[20] M. P. Savedoﬀ, Nature 178, 688 (1956).

8

[21] R. I. Thompson, Astrophys. Lett. 16, 3 (1975).
[22] D. A. Varshalovich, A. V. Ivanchik, A. V. Orlov, A. Y.
Potekhin, and P. Petitjean, in Precision Physics of Sim-
ple Atomic Systems. Lecture Notes in Physics, edited by
S. G. Karshenboim and V. B. Smirnov (Springer-Verlag,
Berlin, 2003), Vol. 627, p. 199.

[23] S. G. Karshenboim, Can. J. Phys. 78, 639 (2000).
[24] V. V. Flambaum, physics/0309107; V. V. Flambaum,
L.B. Leinweber, A.W. Thomas, and R.D. Young, Phys.
Rev. D 69, 115006 (2004).

[25] J. D. Prestage, R. L. Tjoelker, and L. Maleki, Phys. Rev.

Lett. 74, 3511 (1995).

[26] V. A. Dzuba, V. V. Flambaum, and J. K. Webb, Phys.
Rev. Lett. 82, 888 (1999); Phys. Rev. A 59, 230 (1999).
[27] V. A. Dzuba, V. V. Flambaum, Phys. Rev. A 61, 034502

(2001).

[28] V. A. Dzuba, V. V. Flambaum, M.V. Marchenko, Phys.

Rev. A 68, 022506 (2003).

[29] T. J. Quinn, Metrologia 40, 103 (2003).
[30] E. Peik and Chr. Tamm, Europhys. Lett. 61, 181 (2003).
[31] Most absolute frequency measurements have been real-
ized as a direct comparison with a primary caesium stan-
dard.

