4
0
0
2
 
v
o
N
 
9
 
 
]
h
p
-
m
o
t
a
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
7
9
0
1
1
4
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Atom Interferometry in a Vertical Optical
Lattice

G. Modugno, E. de Mirandes, F. Ferlaino, H. Ott, G. Roati, M. Inguscio
LENS and Dipartimento di Fisica, Universit`a di Firenze, and INFM, Via Nello
Carrara 1, 50019 Sesto Fiorentino, Italy

Abstract

We have studied the interference of degenerate quantum gases in a
vertical optical lattice. The coherence of the atoms leads to an interference
pattern when the atoms are released from the lattice. This has been shown
for a Bose-Einstein condensate in early experiments. Here we demonstrate
that also for fermions an interference pattern can be observed provided
that the momentum distribution smaller then the recoil momentum of
the lattice. Special attention is given to the role of interactions which
wash out the interference pattern for a condensate but do not aﬀect a
spin polarized Fermi gas, where collisions at ultra cold temperatures are
forbidden. Comparing the interference of the two quantum gases we ﬁnd
a clear superiority of fermions for trapped atom interferometry.

1 Introduction

Atom interferometry [1] lies at the heart of quantum mechanics because it di-
rectly reveals the wave nature of massive particles. It is also important with
respect to technical applications because it can be used for precision measure-
ments of forces and rotations [2, 3, 4]. To observe the interference, an atomic
beam or a trapped atomic sample is subjected to a periodic scatterer — often
realized with an optical lattice. The lattice probes the coherence of the atoms
between neighboring lattice sites, thus leading to constructive or destructive
interference, depending on the relative phase between the diﬀerent paths. On a
distant screen, an interference pattern is observed if the width of the initial mo-
mentum spread of the atoms in the direction of the lattice δq is smaller than the
recoil momentum of the lattice π/d, where d is the lattice spacing. For a thermal
beam this condition can be achieved by using apertures which ﬁlter out a co-
herent part of the beam. For a trapped sample however, the temperature of the
atoms must be reduced below the recoil temperature. An optical lattice created
by two counter propagating laser beams has a lattice spacing of d = λ/2, where
λ is the wavelength of the laser. The recoil temperature which is associated
with the recoil momentum is in general below 1 µK. Consequently, the experi-
mental conditions for observing interference with trapped atoms are similar to
the requirements for achieving Bose-Einstein condensation. It is for this reason,
that the ﬁrst experimental observation of the interference of trapped atoms was
made with a Bose-Einstein condensate [5]. Being a completely coherent sample
a condensate shows high contrast and good visibility. However the required
momentum condition can also be achieved with other atomic samples such as

1

y
g
r
e
n
e

Er

0

5

Egap

Ebw

4

2

+qB

3

-qB

Bragg reflection

1

quasimomentum q

Figure 1: Dispersion relation: energy of the quasi momentum states of a peri-
odic potential, presented in an extended-zone scheme. The bandgap Egap and
the band width Ebw are indicated on the right. A particle that is initially pre-
pared at rest (position 1, q = 0) changes its quasi momentum under a constant
external force F :
˙q = F/¯h. The quasi momentum increases linearly until it
reaches the Bragg momentum qB = π/d = 2π/λ (position 2). For a suﬃciently
high lattice it is Bragg reﬂected and reappears at the opposite side of the Bril-
louin zone (position 3, −qB). It then scans anew the ﬁrst Brillouin zone, thus
performing a periodic motion in quasi momentum and in real space. In case
of a shallow lattice there is a ﬁnite probability to undergo a Zener tunnelling
transition from position 3 to position 4 corresponding to a band transition from
the ﬁrst to the second band. The particle is not reﬂected at the band edge and
gains more quasi momentum (position 5). Subsequent tunnelling into higher
bands is more and more likely and the particles motion can follow the external
force ﬁnally being released from the lattice.

thermal clouds [6] or degenerate Fermi gases. Indeed our experimental results
presented in this work prove that the observation of atomic interference within a
trapped sample is not restricted to Bose-Einstein condensates. On the contrary
atomic Fermi gases exhibit an even superior performance because the initially
good visibility of the interference pattern of a condensate is counterbalanced by
a washing out of the fringes for longer holding times.

The work is organized as follows: in the ﬁrst part we introduce the theoret-
ical concepts to describe particles in a periodic potential which is subjected to
an external force. In the second part we introduce our experimental setup, the
loading procedure of the atoms in the lattice and show how the interference pat-
tern can be detected. In the last part we present our results and discuss possible
extensions of our work for future applications in precision interferometry.

2

2 Theoretical Concepts

Particles in a homogeneous periodic potential are described with Bloch states.
They extend over the whole lattice and are characterized by the quasi mo-
mentum q and the band index n. The dispersion relation of the Bloch states
for a sinusoidally potential is shown in Fig. 1 in an extended-zone-scheme:
it
shows the typical band structure with the band gap Egap at the recoil energy
Er = ¯h2(2π/λ)2/2m, where m is the mass of the particle. For simplicity we
only consider one dimension. Without an external force, a particle which is pre-
pared in a quasi momentum state q and a band n will remain in this state and
propagate with a velocity which is given by the ﬁrst derivative of the dispersion
relation

v =

1
¯h

∂E(q)
∂q

.

˙q =

Fext
¯h

.

In the presence of a constant external force Fext, the dynamics of the particle can
be described within a semiclassical approximation [7] and the quasi momentum
evolves according to

When the quasi momentum of a particle which is prepared in the lowest band
equals the Bragg momentum qB = π/d = 2π/λ there are two options:
if the
band gap is large it stays conﬁned within its band and is Bragg reﬂected from
the lattice (Fig. 1). It reappears on the opposite site of the ﬁrst Brillouin zone
(±qB) and scans anew the Brillouin zone. The temporal evolution of the quasi
momentum is hence a periodic sawtooth function. These dynamics are known
as Bloch oscillations [6]. The angular frequency ωBO and the amplitude a are
given by

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

ωBO =

a =

Fextλ
2¯h
Ebw
2Fext

=

=

mgλ
2¯h
Ebw
2mg

,

where Ebw is the band width. The second identity gives the explicit expression
for the gravitational force Fext = mg. The second option is a Zener tunnelling
process into the second band, whose probability depends strongly on the chosen
parameters of the potential and can be tuned by changing the lattice depth.

3 Experimental Setup

In the experiment we employ a mixture of bosonic 87Rb and fermionic 40K
atoms. Both species are prepared in a magneto-optical trap and subsequently
transferred in a magnetic trapping potential with trapping frequencies of ωa =
2π × 16 Hz and ωr = 2π × 200 Hz in the axial and radial direction (for 87Rb).
During the forced evaporation of 87Rb the fermions are sympathetically cooled
and we can bring both species simultaneously to quantum degeneracy [9]. By

3

mirror

vacuum glass cell

CCD camera

retroreflected laser beam

 

}(cid:13)

 

ultra cold atoms

optical lattice

imaging laser

Figure 2: Sketch of the experimental setup. The atoms are loaded in a vertical
optical lattice which is created by a retroreﬂected, oﬀ-resonant laser beam. After
a given evolution time, the atoms are released from the potential and fall freely
in the gravitational potential. After an expansion of 8-20 ms the atoms are
imaged with a resonant imaging laser.

removing all bosons at the end of the evaporation ramp we can produce a pure
Fermi gas of about 3 × 104 atoms spin polarized in the F = 9/2, mF = 9/2
state. The typical temperature is T = 0.3TF, where TF = 330 nK is the Fermi
temperature. A pure Bose-Einstein condensate can be produced with about 105
atoms in the F = 2, mF = 2 state. We then switch on adiabatically a lattice
created by a retroreﬂected laser beam aligned along the vertical direction.

The wavelength of the lattice laser is far detuned to the red of the optical
atomic transitions (λ = 873 nm) to avoid photon scattering. The depth of the
potential can be adjusted in the range of UK = 1 − 4Er for the fermions and
URb = 1 − 10Er for the bosons. Note, that the recoil energy Er = ¯h2k2/2m
diﬀers by factor of 2 for the two species due to the diﬀerent mass. Because both,
the Fermi temperature and the critical temperature for Bose-Einstein conden-
sation are comparable to the recoil energy divided by the Boltzmann constant,
the atoms are loaded mostly in the ﬁrst band of the lattice potential. The
Gaussian proﬁle of the lattice beams provides the conﬁnement in the horizontal
plane. Using diﬀerent intensities for the two beams we obtain a radial depth of

4

the optical potential of about 10 Er, with a typical trap frequency of 2π × 30
s−1. Due to the harmonic radial conﬁnement every quasi momentum state has
an additional harmonic oscillator ladder for each of the two radial dimensions.
However, the Hamiltonian of the 3D system can be separated in its three coor-
dinates [11] and the motion in the direction of the lattice is decoupled from the
motion in the radial direction. Therefore the three dimensional nature of our
setup does not change the equation of motion (2). A sketch of the experimental
setup is shown in Fig. 2.

−λE2

To study the interference we suddenly switch oﬀ the magnetic trap and let
the atoms evolve in the combined lattice and gravitational potential.
In our
range of lattice depths only the atoms in the ﬁrst band are trapped against
gravity, while the small fraction in excited bands falls down freely. After a
given evolution time we release the atoms from the trap and probe the cloud
by absorption imaging after 8 ms (20 ms) of free expansion for the fermions
(bosons). The interference of the atomic cloud can be made visible in diﬀerent
ways. The ﬁrst method, where the potential height is lowered to a small value
until the atoms drop out of the potential via Zener Tunnelling processes leads
to a continuous output. For our setup the probability for such a process is
gap/8¯h2g, where g is the earth acceleration, and the band gap
given by P = e
Egap can be derived from the lattice depth U = sEr. Here the lattice depth is
measured in units of the recoil energy (parameter s). Due to the exponential
dependence on the square of the band gap, we can completely suppress Zener
tunnelling (s > 3) or precisely tune it in order to realize a continuous output
coupler (0 < s < 2).
If the momentum spread of the atoms is smaller than
the width of the ﬁrst Brillouin zone a constant fraction of the atoms is released
from the lattice and falls along gravity, every time the ensemble reaches the
Bragg momentum. The output is expected to be pulsed. In the second method
the lattice is switched oﬀ instantaneously (non-adiabatically) thus projecting
the quasi momentum distribution on the momentum distribution. After a free
expansion of the atoms, the spatial distribution of the atoms reveals the mo-
mentum distribution of the atoms inside the optical lattice. A similar result is
achieved in a slightly modiﬁed method, where the optical lattice is switched oﬀ
adiabatically. For these purposes the lattice depth is lowered to zero in about
50 µs, a time scale longer than the oscillation period of the atoms in each lattice
site. Thereby, the quasi momentum distribution is exactly mapped (and not
projected) to the momentum distribution. From the absorption image we can
extract the momentum distribution of the atomic cloud. For interferometric
applications one is interested in the time evolution of the quasi momentum. To
these purposes we have to repeat the procedure for various trapping times and
perform a frequency analysis of the data.

The interpretation of the atomic distribution after release from the trap
as an interference pattern might not be obvious, especially when only a single
peak in the momentum distribution is observed. The reason for this is that
the wave nature of the atoms is only apparent in the structure of the Bloch
states whereas the equations of motion (Eqns. 1 and 2) are classical. However,

5

100

75

)

m
µ
(
 
n
o
i
t
i
s
o
p

50

25

0

(a) Bose-Einstein condensate(cid:13)

   (b) Fermi gas

)

m
µ
(
 
n
o
i
t
i
s
o
p

50

25

0

6

optical density (arb. units)

optical density (arb. units)

Figure 3: Absorption images after continuous release from the lattice.
(a)
Bose-Einstein condensate: each pulse corresponds to a Bloch oscillation. The
ﬁrst pulse has a total expansion time of 20 ms. (b) Degenerate Fermi gas: due
to the smaller atom number and the shorter time of ﬂight only three pulses are
visible. The expansion time of the ﬁrst pulse was 8 ms. Both clouds have been
released immediately after being loaded in the vertical lattice (zero evolution
time). The scans on the right of both graphs indicated the integrated optical
density along the vertical direction.

in an pure quantum-mechanical description based on Wannier-Stark states the
interpretation is straightforward [8]: the atoms occupy the stationary states of
the Wannier-Stark ladder and after release, the outcoupled atoms of all states
interfere during the expansion.

4 Results and Discussion

In Fig. 3a we show the interference pattern of a Bose-Einstein condensate which
is released continuously from the lattice directly after being loaded. It shows
the pulsed output that is known for a coherent ensemble [5]. The distance be-
tween the pulses is deﬁned by the Bloch oscillation period which amounts to
Tb = 1.1 ms for the bosons and Tf = 2.3 ms for the fermions. The visibility
of the interference pattern for the condensate is large. Note, that the vertical
width of the pulses is much larger than the quasi momentum spread of the con-
densate in the lattice. This is due to the inter atomic repulsion that broadens

(cid:13)
(cid:9)
(a)  Bose-Einstein condensate

(b)  Fermi gas

0 ms

7 ms

0 ms

2 ms

Figure 4: Absorption images after continuous release from the lattice for diﬀer-
ent holding times. (a) Bose-Einstein condensate after 0 ms and 2 ms of holding
time, corresponding to about 1 Bloch oscillations. (b) Degenerate Fermi gas
after 0 ms and 7 ms, corresponding to about 3 Bloch oscillations.

the distribution during the expansion. In Fig. 3b we repeat the experiment with
a degenerate Fermi gas. It shows the same structure however, because of the
longer Bloch oscillation period we observe only three pulses. It is important to
compare the visibility of the pattern with that of the condensate: initially, the
fermions have a much broader quasi momentum distribution in the lattice. Its
half-width δq is determined by the Fermi momentum [12] and for our param-
eters we ﬁnd δq = 0.75qB. This fulﬁlls the requirement of a quasi momentum
distribution which is narrower than the recoil momentum of the lattice. In con-
trast to the condensate, the momentum of the fermions does not change during
the expansion because the Pauli principle forbids collisions between identical
fermions at ultra low temperatures. As a result the interference patterns for
both, the condensate and the Fermi gas show a similar contrast after the ex-
pansion (Fig. 3).

In a second experiment we have studied the evolution of the interference
pattern for longer holding times. After loading we keep the atoms in the ver-
tical lattice for several ms and repeat the continuous release as described in
the previous paragraph. The results are shown in Fig. 4. While the distribu-
tion of the fermions is unchanged with respect to the previous measurement the
interference pattern of the condensate has been washed out completely. This
striking diﬀerence is due to the interaction of the atoms inside the condensate.
A possible heating of the atoms in the lattice can be excluded because the radial
momentum distribution does not change. We can give a qualitative explana-

7

)

B

q
(
 

t

m
u
n
e
m
o
M

1,0

0,5

0,0

-0,5

-1,0

0

 

5

10

15

250

255

Time (ms)

Figure 5: Time resolved Bloch oscillations. The graph shows the evolution
of the quasi momentum for 250 ms, corresponding to 110 periods. The data
are ﬁtted with a sawtooth function. Absorption images are shown for t = 0,
corresponding to the initial preparation of the cloud at rest and at t = TBloch/2,
where half of the cloud is Bragg reﬂected. The third image shows the cloud
after 252 ms where the contrast has substantially decreased.

tion of this eﬀect by looking at the total energy diﬀerence between atoms in
neighboring lattice sites. In addition to the gravitational potential the bosons
experience a phase shift due to the mean ﬁeld energy. As the density proﬁle
of the condensate along the lattice is inhomogeneous the contribution from the
mean ﬁeld energy varies between neighboring lattice sites. This leads to a de-
phasing of the wave function in diﬀerent lattice sites [13] and to a loss of phase
coherence. In a spin polarized Fermi gas this eﬀect is absent because collisions
between the atoms are forbidden. Hence, the phase diﬀerence between atoms in
neighboring lattice site is solely determined by the external force. An important
conclusion can be drawn from this experiment: in interferometric applications
of trapped atomic gases it is more favorable to employ a degenerate Fermi gas
than a Bose condensed gas because the disadvantage of having a relatively broad
momentum distribution is overcompensated by the absence of collisions.

After having shown the superity of fermions for trapped atom interferometry
we now present an experiment where we have tested the limits of an interfer-
ometry with trapped Fermi gases. Using the same experimental sequence as

 

8

described above we load a pure Fermi gas in the optical lattice and follow the
evolution of the quasi momentum for many periods. At the end of each exper-
imental run we now adiabatically switch oﬀ the optical lattice and image the
cloud after 8 ms time of ﬂight. From the absorption images which show the quasi
momentum distribution we can extract the position of the main peak (Fig. 5).
Indeed if we follow its motion we ﬁnd the peculiar sawtooth shape expected for
Bloch oscillations (see section 2). We can follow the oscillations for more than
250 ms corresponding to about 110 Bloch periods, and only at later times the
contrast is degraded by a broadening of the momentum distribution. This is
to our knowledge the longest lived Bloch oscillator observed so far in all kind
of physical systems. The reduction of contrast can be seen from Fig. 5 where
we show the absorption image of a data point at 252 ms. The atoms ﬁll nearly
homogeneously the ﬁrst Brillouin zone and we cannot any longer determine the
center of the quasi momentum distribution with high precision. From a ﬁt to
the present data we obtain a Bloch oscillation period of TB = 2.32789(22) ms.
Assuming that the only uniform force acting on the atomic sample is gravity we
determine a local gravitational acceleration from Eqn. 3 as g = 9.7372(9) m/s2.
The precision at the level of 10−4 obtained in this proof-of-principle experi-
ment is promising for future application of this technique to accurate determina-
tion of forces. Note that the extension of the Fermi gas in the vertical direction
is very small, ∆z = 55µm, and in principle can be reduced down to the size
of a few lattice sites without loosing the interference pattern. Such a sensor
based on trapped fermions is therefore promising to extend the measurement of
forces to length scales in the micrometer range, with applications to the study
of forces close to surfaces, or to gravity at small scales [14].

5 Summary

In conclusion we have studied the interference of trapped bosons and fermions
in an optical lattice aligned along gravity. For a condensate interference can be
seen with high contrast. However the interference pattern is rapidly washed out
for even short evolution times in the vertical lattice. The absence of interactions
in a spin polarized fermionic sample prevents a reduction of the contrast for
longer evolution times and proves the superiorness of fermions for trapped atom
interferometry. We have also demonstrated that interferometry with trapped
fermions allows for a high precision measurement of forces on a micrometer
length scale, with possible application to the study of fundamental phenomena.
Acknowledgement This work was supported by MIUR, by EU under Con-
tract No. HPRICT1999-00111, and by INFM, PRA ”Photonmatter”. H.O. was
supported by EU with a Marie Curie Individual Fellowship under Contract No.
HPMF-CT-2002-01958.

9

References

MA (1997). (1997).

[1] Atom Interferometry, P. Berman (Ed.), Academic Press, Chestnut Hill,

[2] A. Peters, K. Y. Chung, and S. Chu, Nature 400, 849 (1999).

[3] J. M. McGuirk, G. T. Foster, J. B. Fixler, M. J. Snadden, and M. A.

Kasevich, Phys. Rev. A 65, 033608 (2002).

[4] S. Gupta, K. Dieckmann, Z. Hadzibabic, and D. E. Pritchard, Phys. Rev.

Lett. 89, 140401 (2002).

[5] B. P. Anderson and M. A. Kasevich, Science 282, 1686 (1998).

[6] M. Ben Dahan, E. Peik, J. Reichel, Y. Castin, and C. Salomon, Phys. rev.

Lett. 76, 4508 (1996).

Phi (1976).

[7] Solid State Physics, N. W. Ashcroft and N. D. Mermin, Saunders College,

[8] G. Roati, E. de Mirandes, F. Ferlaino, H. Ott, G. Modugno, and M. Ingus-

cio, Phys. Rev. Lett. 92, 230402 (2004).

[9] G. Roati, F. Riboli, G. Modugno, and M. Inguscio, Phys. Rev. Lett. 89,

150403 (2002).

[10] In an inﬁnite system these states are not square-integrable and are therefore

often labeled as quasi stationary states or resonances.

[11] This is not strictly true because the lattice height varies across the beam
diameter, thus coupling the motion along the lattice with the radial motion.

[12] Care has to be taken by calculating the momentum spread of a Fermi gas in
the direction of the lattice. Because of the θ-function shaped Fermi distri-
bution the integration over the two radial directions leads to a momentum
spread which is eﬀectively smaller than the Fermi momentum.

[13] Because a tilted periodic potential does not posses an abolute potential
minimum one cannot deﬁne a ground state of the system. Consequently a
condensate which is loaded into such kind of potential is never in equilib-
rium and cannot be described with a single stationary wave function. In
fact the experimental observation directly proves this non-stationarity.

[14] S. Dimopoulos and A. A. Geraci, Phys. Rev. D 68, 124021 (2003).

10

