4
0
0
2
 
v
o
N
 
0
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
m
o
t
a
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
3
1
1
1
1
4
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Using microwave techniques to manipulate atomic mixtures at µK temperatures

D. Ciampini, E. Courtade, C. Sias, G. Carelli, F. Mango, O. Morsch and E. Arimondo
INFM, Dipartimento di Fisica E.Fermi, Universit`a di Pisa, Largo Pontecorvo 3, I-56127 Pisa,Italy
(Dated: February 17, 2014)
We report on the use of microwave radiation to cool a mixture of of 133Cs and 87Rb atoms in a

magnetic trap and to selectively evaporate atoms in diﬀerent Zeeman states.

PACS numbers: PACS number(s): 32.80.Pj, 32.10.Fn, 84.40.Ba

I.

INTRODUCTION

Laser cooling techniques, combined with evaporative
cooling in magnetic traps, allowed the observation of
Bose-Einstein condensation (BEC) in a dilute gas of 87Rb
atoms in 1995 [1]. Since then all stable bosonic alkali
isotopes have been condensed [2, 5], as well as atomic
hydrogen [3] and metastable helium [4]. Typically atoms
are trapped in conservative potentials and evaporation
is either performed by applying radio-frequency or mi-
crowave radiation [5]. These two evaporation methods
have diﬀerent applicability and eﬃciency, which is more
evident when dealing with combinations of ultra-cold
atoms. Atomic mixtures have been experimentally inves-
tigated in magneto-optical traps (MOTs) [7, 8, 9], and a
few combinations of ultra-cold atoms have been experi-
mentally investigated in conservative traps, among them
K-Rb [10] Li-Cs [11] and, in our group, Rb-Cs [12].

In this work we study the application of microwave
techniques to a mixture of ultra-cold 87Rb and 133Cs
atoms in a magnetic trap. The motivations are the inves-
tigation of the low-temperature regime and the control of
the atomic state of the mixture, in the framework of the
study of the collisional properties of Cs and Rb atoms at
µK temperatures (reported in detail elsewhere [12]).

The standard approaches for evaporative cooling are
based on radio-frequency transitions between Zeeman
sublevels of a given hyperﬁne level [1] and on the use
of circle-of-death evaporative cooling [13]. The second
approach can be used only for a TOP magnetic trap, as
in our experiment, whereas the ﬁrst can be applied to
evaporate atoms trapped in any magnetic potential. The
sequence of circle-of-death followed by radio-frequency
evaporation is routinely applied to achieve BEC in TOP
traps. To a good approximation, circle-of -death evap-
oration is equally eﬃcient on Cs and Rb atoms, where
the evaporation eﬃciency is deﬁned as the ratio of the
decrease in temperature to the loss in atom number.

When dealing with a mixture of Cs and Rb atoms in
a magnetic trap, radiative evaporation based on radio-
frequency induced transitions cannot be applied to evap-
orate both species. Using microwaves it is possible to
cool the Cs atoms by direct evaporation, in addition to
sympathetic cooling through collisional energy exchange
with Rb atoms. Moreover, the microwave radiation can
be used to selectively evaporate atoms in speciﬁc Zee-
man sublevels. By applying microwave techniques we

are able to prepare a mixture of 4 × 104 Rb atoms in
the |F = 2, mF = 2i state and 104 Cs atoms in the
|F = 4, mF = 4i state at about 6 µK (mean trapping
frequency 70 Hz). This temperature is of the same or-
der of magnitude as that reported by the ENS group [14]
for Cs in the same atomic state in their early search for
condensation of Cs.

This paper is arranged as follows. Section II describes
the experimental setup used for the preparation of the
cold Rb-Cs mixture. Section III is devoted to the descrip-
tion of the microwave radiation generation and transfer
to the atomic sample. The experiments performed using
microwave radiation to cool the atomic mixture are de-
scribed in Section IV, while the state-selective removal
of atoms from the trap is discussed in Section V. Section
VI presents some conclusions.

II. EXPERIMENTAL SETUP

The experimental apparatus used for this work is de-
scribed in [12] and is similar to our Rb-BEC setup de-
scribed in detail elsewhere [15]. We use a double-chamber
vacuum system with a 2D collection MOT in the up-
per chamber and a six-beam MOT in the lower cham-
ber. The beams for the two MOTs are created by su-
perimposing the trapping and repumping beams for the
two species and sending them through the same optics
(mirrors, lenses and waveplates). Once the two species
MOT is ﬁlled, after brief compressed MOT and molasses
phases, the trapping beams are switched oﬀ and the
atoms are optically pumped into the |F = 2, mF = 2i
and |F = 4, mF = 4i magnetically trappable states of
Rb and Cs, respectively.
Immediately after that, the
time-averaged orbiting potential (TOP) magnetic trap is
switched on. A schematic of the coils for the TOP trap
is presented in Fig. 1. The temperature of the atomic
mixture is then lowered ﬁrst by circle-of-death evapora-
tion and after by radiative evaporation (radio-frequency
and/or microwave radiation). Microwave radiation is de-
livered to the atoms by a dielectric rod antenna, de-
scribed in detail below.

The atom number and temperature are measured by
ﬂashing on a beam resonant with one of the atomic
species and recording the shadow on a CCD camera.
Using a diﬀerent beam frequency, the other species is
imaged. For a given atom, diﬀerent Zeeman sublevels

2

In a preliminary experiment we veriﬁed the behavior
of our microwave antennas by monitoring the reﬂection
coeﬃcient with a network analyzer over a band of fre-
quencies around the desired frequency. For both anten-
nas, the reﬂected power fraction never exceeded −10 dB,
with a modulation structure related to the presence of
objects adjacent to the antenna. The eﬀect of the dielec-
tric rod is to concentrate the microwave ﬁeld in a lobe in
the direction of the cone termination [17], and the direc-
tivity gain is determined primarily by the antenna length.
We experimentally found that for the same on-axis dis-
tance from the conductor waveguide, the ﬁeld intensity
was ampliﬁed by a factor 2.4 when the dielectric rod was
inserted (see ﬁg. 2).

)
.
u
.
a
(
 
y
t
i
s
n
e
t
n
I

1.0

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

0.0

0

5

10

15

Distance (cm)

FIG. 2: Intensity of the e.m. ﬁeld in arbitrary units measured
at various distances from the end of the metal waveguide, in
presence (solid squares) and in absence (open squares) of the
dielectric rod extension. The dashed line marks the distance
from the antenna where the cold atoms are located during the
experiment.

IV. EXPERIMENTAL PROCEDURE

Atoms in high ﬁeld seeking states are trapped around
the minimum of the TOP potential, with the least en-
ergetic atoms closer to the bottom of the potential well.
Cs and Rb atoms have diﬀerent equilibrium positions in
the magnetic trap due to gravitational sag, thus the over-
lap of the two clouds depends on the trap strength and
cloud sizes. For our experimental conditions, however,
the overlap can be considered complete, as discussed in
[12]. All techniques of forced evaporation select the most
energetic particles spatially; i.e. it is a selection based on
potential energy. In a TOP trap the temperature of the
atomic mixture is lowered through circle-of-death evap-
orative cooling, deﬁned by the rotating zero of ﬁeld cre-
ated by the (static) quadrupole and the (rotating) bias
ﬁeld. By continuously reducing the strength of the rotat-
ing bias ﬁeld the circle-of-death shrinks and atoms from
the high energy tail of the distribution are progressively
removed from the sample [19].

At low temperatures and high atomic density circle-of-
death evaporation becomes ineﬃcient, because it leads

FIG. 1: Schematic of the coils for the magnetic trap. The
quadrupole axis is along the horizontal direction while the
bias ﬁeld, produced by the TOP coils, rotates in the horizon-
tal plane. The radio-frequency coils and the antenna for the
microwave evaporation are visible.

can be magnetically trapped and all of them are imaged
by the same resonant laser ﬂash.
In order to observe
their relative populations we maximized the separation
between the equilibrium position of the sublevels, given
by the trap parameters and magnetic moments of the
atoms. In a very shallow potential, in fact, the various
Zeeman states appear as clouds spatially separated along
the vertical direction owing to the gravitational sag [15].

III. THE MICROWAVE SOURCE AND
ANTENNA

The microwave radiation was produced by a frequency
locked oscillator system composed of a Sweep Oscillator
(HP 8350B), a Frequency Counter (HP 5343A) and a
Source Synchronizer (HP 5344A). The frequency sweep
and the microwave switch were computer-controlled and
synchronized to the experimental cycle. The microwave
radiation was ampliﬁed up to 100 mW by a preampliﬁer
(HP 8349A) and up to 5 W by a second power ampliﬁer
(Kuhne, model KU702 for the C-band and model KU922
for the X-band).

The microwave radiation was delivered to the atoms
by a dielectric rod antenna. In our experiment we used
two diﬀerent antennas, one made of teﬂon, optimized to
deliver radiation at 9.2 GHz and one made of plexiglass,
used in the region around 6.8 GHz. The antennas con-
sist of a circular-section dielectric rod directly inserted in
the circular end of a metal waveguide. The rod is coni-
cally shaped at both ends, with the cone lengths equal to
6 cm and 8 cm for the Cs and Rb antennas, respectively.
Such linearly tapered-rod antennas have been extensively
studied, since the presence of dielectrics close to the con-
ductor structure profoundly modiﬁes the performance of
the antenna [16].

to a continuous increase of the trapping frequencies (due
to the dependence of the trapping frequency on the in-
verse of the square root of the bias ﬁeld in a TOP trap)
and hence of the atomic densities, leading to three-body
losses. At the end of the circle-of-death evaporation
phase, Rb and Cs atoms are in thermal equilibrium at
∼ 15 µK. In order to cool the atomic mixture further, we
have explored diﬀerent possibilities.

Radiative evaporation is a very general technique that
uses a radiation ﬁeld to transfer atoms from a trapped to
an untrapped state in an energy-selective way and it com-
monly used for evaporation cooling of a single species.
The advantages of radiative evaporation (radio-frequency
and microwave) are that the magnetic potential does not
have to be modiﬁed to sustain the evaporation since the
escape rate is controlled independently by the amplitude
and the frequency of the applied radiation.

Radio-frequency

between
|F, mF = F i and |F, mF = F − 1i states exploits
spin-ﬂips of atoms on a resonant shell deﬁned by [20]

evaporation

induced

gF mF µBB(~x) = ¯hωrf

(1)

where B(~x) is the modulus of the instantaneous local
magnetic ﬁeld, µB is the Bohr magneton and gF is the
Land´e factor. By ramping down the frequency ωrf of
the ﬁeld, the radius of the surface volume where the reso-
nance condition is fulﬁlled shrinks, leading to an eﬀective
forced evaporation [1]. Radio-frequency evaporation de-
pends on the Zeeman-sublevel spacing, as stated in Eq. 1.
When the same radio-frequency radiation is applied to a
mixture of atoms, generally the energy of the atoms that
are selectively cut (cut energy) is diﬀerent for diﬀerent
species. For a mixture of Rb and Cs atoms the resonance
condition expressed by Eq. 1 leads to a cut energy for the
Cs atoms which is half that for Rb atoms. Thus, when
the most energetic Cs atoms are removed by the rf ra-
diation, cold Rb atoms at the bottom of the potential
are also removed from the trap. As a consequence, it is
impossible to use radio-frequency radiation to cool the
Cs atoms without removing all the Rb atoms from the
trap. On the contrary, cooling the Rb atoms with the
rf has no eﬀect on the Cs temperature. Thus, in our bi-
nary mixture only Rb atoms can be evaporatively cooled
using radio-frequency radiation. Nevertheless, we veri-
ﬁed that when performing evaporation on the Rb atoms,
the measured temperature of the Cs atoms exactly fol-
lowed the Rb temperature down to a few µK, indicat-
ing that sympathetic cooling was taking place, as long
as the remaining number of Rb atoms, compared to the
Cs atom number, was suﬃcient to sustain the thermal-
ization.
In summary, when dealing with a mixture of
Cs and Rb atoms in the low temperature regime for both
species, radio-frequency radiation can be used to cool the
Rb atoms only, while the Cs atoms cooling is indirect.

Microwave techniques for evaporative cooling can be
an eﬃcient alternative to radio-frequency induced evap-
orative cooling, and its advantages are particularly evi-
dent when applied to mixtures of atomic species, as in

3

 

N

 
 
(
1
0

6

)

2.0

1.5

1.0

0.5

0.0

9.28

9.30

9.34

9.32
fin (GHz)

ν

FIG. 3: Mean temperature (open diamonds) and number of
atoms (open circles) of the Cs cloud as a function of the ﬁ-
nal value of the microwave frequency. The initial value is
9.40 GHz. The duration of the evaporation ramp is 5 s and
the power of the microwave ﬁeld is 35 dBm. The data re-
ported in this graph are from single experimental runs and
the uncertainties due to the ﬁt of the single images is below
the size of the data points.

 T   
 N

)

K
µ
(
 
T

 

120

100

80

60

40

)

K
µ
(
 
T

60

50

40

30

20

10

0

2

4

6
Power (dBm)

8

10

12

FIG. 4: Mean temperature of the Cs cloud as a function of
the power of the microwave radiation for a given ramp (from
9.3 GHz to 9.22 GHz). The duration of the evaporation ramp
is 5 s. The data uncertainty reported in the graph is due to
statistical averaging over several experimental runs.

our experiment. Microwave evaporation uses transitions
between Zeeman sublevels belonging to diﬀerent hyper-
ﬁne levels of the ground states. For a transition between
the hyperﬁne states |F, mF = F i and |F −1, mF = F −1i
of an alkali atom, the resonance condition is

¯hω0 + gF (2mF − 1)µBB(~x) = ¯hωµw

(2)

where ω0
2π is the hyperﬁne splitting (∼ 9.2 GHz for Cs,
∼ 6.8 GHz for Rb). The consequence of the previous
equation is that the resonance conditions for Cs and Rb
are always very diﬀerent and the two evaporation pro-
cesses are completely independent. With this technique
it is thus possible to selectively remove from the trap Rb
or Cs atoms with, in both cases, no eﬀect on the other
species. For a mixture of Cs and Rb atoms, therefore,
microwave techniques oﬀer the possibility to directly cool
the Cs atoms.

Figure 3 shows some parameters of the Cs cloud after
the microwave evaporation. Rb atoms had been elimi-
nated through a resonant ﬂash before starting the evap-
oration process for the Cs atoms. The mean tempera-
ture of the Cs cloud decreases in the same way as the
number of atoms. The cloud was irradiated by a mi-
crowave frequency ramp with a ﬁxed starting frequency
and varying ﬁnal frequency. The evaporation takes place
after the compression phase following the loading of the
atoms into the magnetic trap. The data points at the
far right describe the initial condition before application
of the microwave radiation. The dependence of the ﬁnal
temperature of the Cs cloud on the microwave intensity
is shown in ﬁgure 4. For these data the microwave radi-
ation was applied after an initial phase of circle-of-death
cooling.

For a given atomic species we generally observed a
lower eﬃciency for the microwave evaporation compared
to radio-frequency evaporation. In fact, due to imperfect
optical pumping (and, possibly, other depolarizing pro-
cesses during the evaporation cycle), both the Rb and
Cs cold clouds had admixtures of atoms in other Zeeman
sublevels. The radio-frequency radiation induces a chain
of transitions from the trapped states to the untrapped
states, thus evaporating atoms from every trapped Zee-
man sublevel. The microwave ﬁeld, on the other hand, is
resonant with one Zeeman state only, leaving the resid-
ual population of the other sublevels uncooled by the
microwave radiation. This residual population is eventu-
ally cooled through collisions with the atoms in the other
Zeeman state (sympathetic cooling).

V. STATE SELECTIVE EVAPORATION

we now illustrate another application of the state selec-
tivity the microwave evaporation technique. Since at the
end of the circle-of-death evaporation phase we measured
a percentage of around 80 percent of Rb atoms in the de-
sired fully stretched state |F = 2, mF = 2i, with around
20 percent in the |F = 2, mF = 1i sublevel, we used
the microwave radiation to eliminate the populations in
the sublevels other than the desired fully stretched state.
This is not achievable using radio-frequency radiation,
since the resonance condition of Eq. 1 is equally fulﬁlled
for atoms in all trapped Zeeman states. The results of
the state selective evaporation in a Rb atomic sample is
shown in Fig. 5. The two peaks correspond to Rb atoms
in the diﬀerent Zeeman states, spatially separated along
the vertical direction because of the diﬀerential sag. The
fraction of atoms in the |F = 2, mF = 1i state has been
reduced from 20 percent to 10 percent, with no loss of
atoms from the |F = 2, mF = 2i state. The microwave
radiation was applied for 10 s at 5W and the frequency
was scanned over a range of 8 MHz in order to cover the
entire range of position-dependent resonance conditions
for all the |F = 2, mF = 1i atoms in the sample.

For Cs atoms it was not possible to spatially distin-

4

1400

1300

1200

1100

1000

900

)
.
a
.
u
(
 
y
t
i
s
n
e
d
 
l
a
c
i
t
p
O

a)

b)

0

1

2

Position (mm)

FIG. 5: Integrated proﬁle of a Rb cloud (a) before and (b)
after the state selective microwave evaporation. The two
peaks correspond to the atoms in the |F = 2, mF = 2i and
|F = 2, mF = 1i states experiencing a diﬀerent gravitational
sag for a mean magnetic trap frequency of 18 Hz. The posi-
tion of the atoms is measured downwards from the symmetry
center of the quadrupole ﬁeld. The temperature of the atoms
in the main peak is ≃ 16 µK. An arbitrary vertical oﬀset has
been added to separate the two proﬁles.

guish the atoms in the |F = 4, mF = 4i Zeeman sublevel
from those in the |F = 4, mF = 3i state using the dif-
ferential sag in the magnetic trap. In fact for Cs atoms
the ratio of the magnetic moments of the two trapped
states is only 4
3 , while for Rb atoms, considering the two
trapped states, this ratio is 2. Thus in the Cs atoms
case, we performed a Stern-Gerlach type experiment to
separate the Zeeman levels in time-of-ﬂight. This sepa-
ration is only necessary to observe the atoms in diﬀerent
sublevels as separate clouds, but is not necessary for the
selectivity of the evaporation using the microwaves. At
the end of the circle-of-death evaporation phase the rela-
tive populations of Cs atoms in the |F = 4, mF = 4i Zee-
man sublevel and in |F = 4, mF = 3i are 60 percent and
40 percent, respectively. The percentage of atoms in the
unwanted Zeeman sublevel is higher for Cs atoms than
for Rb atoms. This could be due to density-dependent
inelastic collisions in the magnetic trap in which the mF
state of the atoms is changed, as reported by [18]. By
applying a microwave evaporation phase, we were able
to reduce the fraction of atoms in the |F = 4, mF = 3i
state to about 20-30 percent.

VI. CONCLUSIONS

In a two-species experiment, microwave techniques are
a very feasible method to perform radiative evaporation.
We showed that both Rb and Cs atoms can be eﬃciently
evaporated using microwave radiation. Notice that the
microwave evaporation is very ﬂexible with respect to the
choice of the magnetic trap conﬁning the atoms. Even
for a large change of the local ﬁeld B(~x) appearing in

Eq. 1, the shift of the microwave resonance frequency is
always within the bandwidth of the source and ampli-
ﬁer. Microwave techniques can be combined with radio-
frequency radiation in order to simultaneously cool, for
example, one species by radio-frequency waves and the
other by microwaves.

Moreover, we used microwave radiation to selectively
remove atoms from speciﬁc Zeeman sublevels, manipulat-
ing the atomic state composition of our Rb-Cs mixture.

This application is fundamental when preparing the Rb-
Cs mixture for studying interpecies interactions.

We thank J. Reichel for preliminary discussions on the
microwave equipment, A. Piombini for the network an-
alyzer measurements, M. Giordano for the loan of mi-
crowave equipment, and A. Alberti and G. Tumino for
help in the early stages of the experiment. This research
was supported by the INFM (PRA Photonmatter), and
by the EU Network Cold Quantum Gases.

5

[1] For a review of early experiments on Bose-Einstein
condensation, see W. Ketterle, D.S. Durfee and D.M.
Stamper-Kurn, in ”Bose-Einstein condensation in atomic
gases, Proceedings of the International School of Physics
‘Enrico Fermi’, Course CXL”, (ed. M. Inguscio, S.
Stringari and C.E. Wieman), IOS Press (Amsterdam),
67 (1999).

[2] M.H. Anderson, J.R. Ensher, M.R. Matthews, C.E. Wie-
mann, and E.A. Cornell, Science 269, 198 (1995); T.
Weber, J. Herbig, M. Mark, H.C. Nagerl, and R. Grimm,
ibid. 299, 232 (2003); K. B. Davis, M.-O. Mewes, M.R.
Andrews, N.J. van Druten, D.S. Durfee, D.M. Kurn, and
W. Ketterle, Phys. Rev. Lett. 75, 3969 (1995); C. C.
Bradley, C. A. Sackett, and R. G. Hulet, ibid. 78, 985
(1997); S. L. Cornish, N. R. Claussen, J. L. Roberts, E.
A. Cornell, and C. E. Wieman, ibid. 85, 1795 (2000).
[3] D. G. Fried, T. C. Killian, L. Willmann, D. Landhuis,
S. C. Moss, D. Kleppner, and T. J. Greytak, Phys. Rev.
Lett. 81, 3811 (1998).

[4] D.G. Fried, T.C. Killian, L. Willmann, D. Landhuis, S.C.
Moss, D. Kleppner, and T.J. Greytak, Phys. Rev. Lett.
81, 3811 (1998);F. Pereira Dos Santos, J. Lonard, J.
Wang, C. J. Barrelet, F. Perales, E. Rasel, C. S. Un-
nikrishnan, M. Leduc, and C. Cohen-Tannoudji, ibid. 86,
3459 (2001).

[5] G. Modugno, G. Ferrari, G. Roati, R.J. Brecha, A. Si-
moni, M. Inguscio, Science 294, 1320 (2001); C. Chin has
communicated that the experiment of ref. [6] investigated
microwave evaporation for Cs atoms.

[6] C. Chin, V. Vuleti´c, A.J. Kerman, and S. Chu, Phys.

Rev. Lett. 85, 2717 (2000).

[7] G. D. Telles, W. Garcia, L. G. Marcassa, V. S. Bagnato,
D. Ciampini, M. Fazzi, J. H. Mller, D. Wilkowski, and
E. Arimondo, Phys. Rev. A 63, 033406 (2001).

[9] M. W. Mancini, G. D. Telles, A. R. L. Caires, V. S. Bag-
nato, and L. G. Marcassa, Phys. Rev. Lett. 92, 133203
(2004).

[10] G. Ferrari, M. Inguscio, W. Jastrzbeski, G. Modugno,
G. Roati, and A. Simoni, Phys. Rev. Lett. 89, 053202
(2002).

[11] A. Mosk, S. Kraft, M. Mudrich, K. Singer, W. Wohlleben,
R. Grimm, and M. Weidem¨uller, Appl. Phys. B 73, 791
(2001).

[12] M. Anderlini, E. Courtade, M. Cristiani, D. Cossart,
D. Ciampini, C. Sias, O. Morsch, and E. Arimondo,
cond-mat/0410565.

[13] E.W. Hagley, L. Deng, M. Kozuma, J. Wen, K. Helmer-
son, S.L. Rolston, W.D. Phillips, Science 283, 1706
(1999).

[14] M. Arndt, M. Ben Dahan, D. Gu´ery-Odelin, M.W.
lett. 79, 625

Reynolds, and J. Dalibard, Phys. Rev.
(1997).

[15] J.H. M¨uller, D. Ciampini, O. Morsch, G. Smirne, M.
Fazzi, P. Verkerk, F. Fuso, and E. Arimondo, J. Phys.
B: Atom. Mol. Opt. Phys. 33, 4095 (2000).

[16] On surface-wave antennas see Antenna Handbook, edited
by Y.T. Loo and S.W. Lee, Van Nostrand Reinhold Com-
pany New York (1988).

[17] R. B. Watson and C. W. Horton, J. App. Phys. 19, 661
(1948); R. B. Watson and C. W. Horton, ibid. 19, 836
(1948).

[18] J. Arlt, P. Bance, S. Hopkins, J. Martin, S. Webster, A.
Wilson, K. Zetie and C.J. Foot, J. Phys. B: At. Mol. Opt.
Phys. 31, L321 (1998).

[19] Cs and Rb atoms at the same temperature have the
same spatial extension in a magnetic trap. Circle-of-death
evaporation can thus be simultaneously applied to atoms
of both species.

[8] L. G. Marcassa, G. D. Telles, S. R. Muniz, and V. S.

[20] Eq. 1 and Eq. 2 are derived in the limit of weak magnetic

Bagnato, Phys. Rev. A 63, 013413 (2001).

ﬁeld.

