4
0
0
2
 
c
e
D
 
2
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
m
o
t
a
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
4
4
1
2
1
4
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Dissociative recombination and low-energy inelastic electron collisions
of the helium dimer ion

H. B. Pedersen,1, ∗ H. Buhr,1 S. Altevogt,1 V. Andrianarijaona,1 H. Kreckel,1 L. Lammich,1 N. de
Ruette,2 E. M. Staicu-Casagrande,2 D. Schwalm,1 D. Strasser,3 X. Urbain,2 D. Zajfman,1, 3 and A. Wolf1
1Max-Planck-Institut f¨ur Kernphysik, D-69117 Heidelberg, Germany
2D´epartement de Physique, Universit´e Catholique de Louvain, B-1348, Louvain-la-Neuve, Belgium
3Department of Particle Physics, Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot, 76100, Israel
(Dated: December 6, 2013)

−9 cm3 s

The dissociative recombination (DR) of 3He4He+ has been investigated at the heavy-ion Test
Storage Ring (TSR) in Heidelberg by observing neutral products from electron-ion collisions in a
merged beams conﬁguration at relative energies from near-zero (thermal electron energy about 10
meV) up to 40 eV. After storage and electron cooling for 35 s, an eﬀective DR rate coeﬃcient at near-
−1 is found. The temporal evolution of the neutral product rates and
zero energy of 3 × 10
fragment imaging spectra reveals that the populations of vibrational levels in the stored ion beam
are non-thermal with fractions of ∼0.1–1% in excited levels up to at least v = 4, having a signiﬁcant
eﬀect on the observed DR signals. With a pump-probe-type technique using DR fragment imaging
while switching the properties of the electron beam, the vibrational excitation of the ions is found
to originate mostly from ion collisions with the residual gas. Also, the temporal evolution of the DR
signals suggests that a strong electron induced rotational cooling occurs in the vibrational ground
state, reaching a rotational temperature near or below 300 K. From the absolute rate coeﬃcient
and the shape of the fragment imaging spectrum observed under stationary conditions, the DR
rate coeﬃcient from the vibrational ground state is determined; converted to a thermal electron
−1. The corresponding branching ratios from
−10 cm3 s
gas at 300 K it amounts to (3.3 ± 0.9) × 10
v = 0 to the atomic ﬁnal states are found to be (3.7 ± 1.2)% for 1s2s 3S, (37.4 ± 4.0)% for 1s2s 1S,
(58.6 ± 5.2)% for 1s2p 3P , and (2.9 ± 3.0)% for 1s2p 1P . A DR rate coeﬃcient in the range of
−1 or above is inferred for vibrational levels v = 3 and higher. As a function of the
2 × 10
collision energy, the measured DR rate coeﬃcient displays a structure around 0.2 eV. At higher
energies, it has one smooth peak around 7.3 eV and a highly structured appearance at 15–40 eV.
The small size of the observed eﬀective DR rate coeﬃcient at near-zero energy indicates that the
electron induced rotational cooling is due to inelastic electron-ion collisions and not due to selective
depletion of rotational levels by DR.

−7 cm3 s

PACS numbers:

I.

INTRODUCTION

with charged products exist, which are represented by

Low-energy collisions of diatomic, positive molecular
ions with free electrons are important processes in cold
dilute media, such as the interstellar medium, planetary
atmospheres, and laboratory discharges where they are
among the reactions controlling the degree of ionization
and the chemical composition. Usually the dominant
neutralization process is the dissociative recombination
(DR) [1] between an incident molecular ion AB+ and a
free electron e−

AB+(v, J) + e−(E) → A(n) + B(n′).

(1)

where v and J denote the rovibrational quantum num-
bers of the molecular ion, while E and n, n′ are the elec-
tron energy and the atomic ﬁnal-state quantum numbers,
respectively. Beside recombination, dissociative reactions

∗To
henrik.pedersen@mpi-hd.mpg.de

correspondence

whom

should

be

addressed;

AB+(v, J)+e−(E) →

+e−(E′) (2)

A+(n) + B(n′)
A(n) + B+(n′)

(cid:26)

(cid:27)

and termed dissociative excitation (DE). Finally, non-
dissociative inelastic interactions occur,
in particular
through collisions of the type

AB+(v, J) + e−(E) → AB+(v′, J ′) + e−(E′),

(3)

which describe the electron-impact excitation or de-
excitation of nuclear motion in the molecular ion.

Beyond the relevance of these collision processes in cold
dilute media, the understanding of their underlying quan-
tum dynamical mechanisms is of fundamental interest.
In particular, non-adiabatic dynamics manifestly violat-
ing the Born-Oppenheimer approximation often plays an
important role, which makes low-energy electron colli-
sions of small molecular ions a benchmark case for under-
standing non-adiabatic molecular interactions involving
electronic continuum states.

For DR, the attractive interaction in the initial state
and the exothermic, non-radiative nature of the process
mostly lead to large cross sections at low collision ener-
gies, often reaching the order of 10−14 cm2 for an incident

energy of E ∼ 0.03 eV. For many systems, including the
experimentally and theoretically well studied cases of H+
2
and its isotopomers [2] as well as heavier systems such as
O+
2 [3, 4], NO+ [5, 6], and others, a slow incident electron
can be resonantly captured by purely electronic interac-
tions into doubly excited repulsive states of the neutral
system, which enables the ‘direct’ mechanism [1, 7] as
an eﬃcient pathway for DR. Some systems exist where
suitable electronic potentials for the ‘direct’ process are
absent for the low-lying ro-vibrational states; however, in
many such cases, including the astrophysically important
molecular ions HeH+ and H+
3 [2], non-adiabatic mecha-
nisms are nevertheless considered to cause DR with sim-
ilar cross sections as in the ‘direct’ process [1, 8].

A system falling outside this picture is the helium
dimer ion, He+
2 . From early theoretical work [9] up to
the most recent calculation [10], extremely low cross sec-
tions (of order 10−18 cm2 for E ∼ 0.03 eV) have been
predicted for the DR of He+
2 in low-lying initial vibra-
tional states. Electronic potential curves driving the ‘di-
rect’ DR process at low electron energies are not acces-
sible from the lower vibrational states, as shown in Fig.
1. The inclusion of rovibrational interactions in theoret-
ical calculations [10] causes a rich structure of narrow
electron capture resonances, but still yields a small eﬀect
in the energy-averaged rate coeﬃcient; these calculations
did not include non-adiabatic coupling to neutral states
below the ion curve as a signiﬁcant increase of the cross
section due to such coupling was not expected. For ex-
cited vibrational states (v >
∼ 3), much larger DR cross
sections (∼10−14 cm2 at E ∼ 0.03 eV as typical for other
species) are predicted [10]. The low-energy DR of helium
dimer ions should therefore be characterized by extreme
variations of the cross sections among the low vibrational
states.

The helium dimer ion is of importance in models of the
early universe [11] and in laboratory plasmas. Particu-
larly, He+
2 is the dominant ion in the fundamental helium
plasmas and in the helium afterglow at pressures above
∼5 mbar [12] and at room temperature (while atomic
ions dominate the low-pressure He afterglows or at higher
temperature). In the helium plasma, He+
2 is created in
either three-body [13] or binary collisions [12, 14] giving
ions with a signiﬁcant rovibrational excitation [12, 15].
The helium afterglow is characterized by a strong recom-
bination of electrons and molecular ions and the simulta-
neous occurrence of excited (triplet) helium atoms [16].
The DR of He+
2 ions was suggested early on [7] to ex-
plain the observed recombination [17]. However, later
experiments and modeling suggested collisional-radiative
recombination (He+
∗ + e−) as the domi-
2 + 2e− → He2
nent process, with the DR rate coeﬃcient being negli-
gible at an upper limit of <5 × 10−10 cm3/s [12]. DR
from higher vibrational states (certainly present in the
studied high-pressure afterglows) was also argued to be
negligible, while other studies of the He afterglow and
plasma [18, 19] showed a signiﬁcant role of DR for vibra-
tionally excited ions in producing excited He atoms with

2

n = 3, 4. Thus, the actual role of DR in high-pressure
He afterglows remains unclear.
The structure of the He+

2 ion is well studied theoreti-
cally [20, 21] and several experimental studies were pe-
formed [22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27]. In particular, the precise
data from vibrational spectroscopy [24] and the high-level
calculations on the electronic potential energy surface
for He+
2 make it possible to calculate accurate nuclear
wavefunctions, reliable vibrational and rotational radia-
tive lifetimes, and accurate kinetic energy releases for the
DR process, all of which are essential to interpret the ex-
perimental results presented in this paper.

Regarding the low-energy DR process, already Mul-
liken [9], on the basis of qualitative arguments on the
electronic structure of He2, suggested that the rate from
the vibrational ground states of He+
should be very
2
small, while still signiﬁcant for higher vibrational lev-
els. Calculated diabatic potential energy curves for dis-
sociative states by Cohen [28] and Guberman [29] con-
ﬁrmed this hypothesis, since no curve crossing exists
close to the ground vibrational state of the ion and the
dissociative curves of the neutral, thus suppressing the
‘direct’ route of DR. In a recent paper Carata et al.
[10] presented new Multichannel Quantum Defect Theory
(MQDT) calculations on the low energy DR of He+
2 ad-
dressing several aspects of importance for an experimen-
tal study. For the three isotopomers, the DR from the
vibrational states v = 0–4 was calculated (including also
rotational excitation) considering the lowest three neu-
tral dissociative curves of the symmetries 3Σ+
g , and
3Πu with the diabatic asymptotic limits of He(1s2 1S) +
He(1s2s 3S), He(1s2 1S) + He(1s2s 1S), and He(1s2 1S)
+ He(1s2p 3P ), respectively (see Fig. 1). At low relative
energies (0–0.1 eV) and for v = 0–2, the 3Σ+
g curve was
found to provide the dominant dissociation route, with a
very small cross section ranging from ∼10−18–10−16 cm2
for v = 0, leading to a rate coeﬃcient of only 6.1 × 10−11
cm3/s at 300 K. Oppositely, for v = 3 and 4 the preferred
dissociation route was found to be 3Πu with an average
cross section about four orders of magnitude larger than
for v = 0. Also the rotational excitation was found to
inﬂuence the DR cross section, the result increasing by
about a factor of 2 in going from J = 0 to J = 9 for
3He4He+(v = 0). In the work of Carata et al. [10] curve
crossing in the asymptotic region was not explicitly con-
sidered and therefore the branching ratios into the ﬁnal
channels were not predicted, however, it was argued that
dissociation should preferentially proceed on the domi-
nant dissociative curve for a given vibrational level (3Σ+
g
for v = 0–2).

g , 1Σ+

Regarding DR at higher electron energies, the avail-
able detailed calculations for excited electronic states of
He+
2 [21] indicate at which energies and internuclear dis-
tances doubly excited neutral states, suitable for reso-
nant electron capture and subsequent dissociation, could
be expected. An overview of the predicted higher-lying
potential curves of He+
2 are given in Fig. 2. Rydberg-like
doubly excited neutral states can occur in energy regions

extending down by ∼3 eV from the calculated excited
ionic potential curves. Considering the Franck-Condon
zone of He+
2 (v = 0), peaks in the DR rate due to reso-
nant electron capture are expected and in fact observed
in the data presented here at electron energies of ∼6–10
eV and further up at >

∼20 eV.

In the present experiment, DR and other related
electron-induced reactions are studied for the asymmet-
ric isotopomer 3He4He+ of the helium dimer ion, using a
stored ion beam and a merged cold electron beam at the
heavy-ion Test Storage Ring (TSR) in Heidelberg [30].
The extreme variation of the DR cross section with the
vibrational quantum number imposes large demands on
the understanding of the ion beam evolution during the
experiment. In particular, the predicted diﬀerence in the
average DR cross section of four orders of magnitude [10]
in going from v = 0 to v = 3 makes the experimental
DR techniques sensitive to a population of vibrationally
excited states of <
∼10−4 in the ion beam.
This sensitivity was already noted in the only earlier
merged beams experiment on the DR of He+
2 , performed
by Urbain et al. [31] at the ASTRID storage ring using
3He4He+ and 4He4He+. The results for the two species
diﬀered strongly from each other, as expected from their
diﬀerent infrared emission properties in case of a strong
initial vibrational excitation. For 4He4He+, a DR cross
section monotonously decreasing with the collision en-
ergy was observed between 0 and 15 eV with no time de-
pendence over ∼14 s of storage time, while the 3He4He+
DR cross section showed a peak at around 6 eV and a
strong decrease with time in the low energy region. Thus,
a high sensitivity of the reaction rate to the internal ex-
citation, with a small cross section for lower vibrational
states, was demonstrated.

In order to extract quantitative information on the DR
process and related low-energy electron collisions of He+
2 ,
a major part of the present experimental work is devoted
to clarifying the internal excitation dynamics of an elec-
tron cooled 3He4He+ ion beam in a storage ring. On
the one hand, the Coulomb explosion imaging technique
(Sec. III) is used to monitor the vibrational population
of the stored ion beam while, on the other hand, time de-
pendent measurements of DR rate coeﬃcients (Sec. IV A)
and DR fragment imaging distributions (Sec. IV B) are
employed as diagnostic tools to understand the evolution
of the distribution of rovibrational states in the stored
ion beam.

Measurements over long ion storage times (up to 70
s) reveal a dependence of the low-energy DR rate on the
rotational excitation of the 3He4He+ beam and indicate
internal cooling of the stored ion beam by rotationally
inelastic electron collisions (Sec. V A).

Time dependent observations of structures in the DR
fragment imaging distributions (Sec. V B) and pump-
probe-type experiments (Sec. V C) serve to identify the
vibrational levels contributing to the measured signal;
in addition, they are used to measure the variation of
electron-impact vibrational excitation rates of 3He4He+

3

in an electron energy range of 2–9 eV.

After identifying these contributions, the branching ra-
tios for the ﬁnal atomic states (Sec. VI A) and the abso-
lute low-energy DR rate coeﬃcient (Sec. VI B) are ex-
tracted for 3He4He+(v = 0) ions. Energy dependent ab-
solute cross sections are obtained for low-energy DR (Sec.
VI C) and for high-energy DR and DE (Sec. VI D, VI E).
Finally, the results on DR are considered in the light of
previous experimental and theoretical data (Sec. VII A)
and the cross sections of vibrationally and rotationally
inelastic collisions, as implied by the present data, are
discussed (Sec. VII B).

Using the same arrangement and similar procedures,
measurements have also been performed on 4He4He+;
these results will be presented in a forthcoming publi-
cation.

II. EXPERIMENTAL BACKGROUND

A.

Ion beam and detector setup

The experiment was conducted at the Test Storage
Ring (TSR) [30] at the Max-Planck-Institut f¨ur Kern-
physik in Heidelberg. A schematic drawing of the exper-
imental setup is displayed in Fig. 3. The basic experi-
mental procedures have been described in detail earlier
regarding merged electron and ion beam experiments in
general [32], DR of molecular ions [33, 34], and Coulomb
explosion imaging [35, 36].

For the present experiment, helium dimer ions were
produced in a standard duoplasmatron ion source [37].
Ion source geometries both with and without an expan-
sion cup following the anode were tested. Without an ex-
pansion cup the source delivered 300–500 nA of 3He4He+
for total pressures of 0.4–1.1 mbar in the ﬁlament cham-
ber and an arc current of 0.33 down to 0.08 mA. The
currents of atomic 3He+ and 4He+ were kept about equal
at 20–30 µA. With an expansion cup in the ion source,
the absolute yields of 3He4He+ were considerably lower
and the source showed less stable operation. During the
measurements reported here we used the source geome-
try without expansion cup, keeping the pressure in the
cathode chamber at 0.6 mbar and the arc current close
to 0.10 mA. Weak amounts of N2+ were observed in the
beam with the Coulomb explosion technique (Sec. III).
In all the experiments performed in this work small traces
of N2+ in the beam have no inﬂuence on the results.

The ions were accelerated to kinetic energies Ei of
either 7.28 MeV or 3.36 MeV using an rf accelerator
[38, 39], transported to the storage ring by means of
several magnetic steering and focusing elements, injected
into the storage ring and stored in the ﬁeld of its bending
and focusing magnets. Pulses of a few nA were injected
for about 150 µs and the ions were stored for times up
to 70 s with a mean lifetime (1/e) of 9.8 s. The beam
loss is mainly determined by ion collisions with species
of the residual gas which is composed mostly (≥ 90%)

of H2. The average pressure in the storage ring was 5–
10 × 10−11 mbar during the present measurements.

The TSR electron cooler [40, 41] was used to apply
phase space cooling to the stored He+
2 ion beam [42] and
to perform the electron-ion recombination experiments
[32, 33]. The electron beam is guided by a longitudinal
magnetic ﬁeld (∼0.04 T) and has a diameter of 29.5 mm
in the region where the electron and ion beam overlap
collinearly, surrounded by a 1.5 m long solenoid magnet.
In two toroid magnets adjacent to the “central” region
of the electron cooler, the electron beam is bent in and
out of the overlap region. Neutral products created by
interactions of the He+
2 ions in the straight section of the
storage ring containing the electron cooler are separated
from the circulating ion beam at the downstream storage-
ring magnet (see Fig. 3) and detected behind this magnet
as described in detail below.

The relative velocity of electrons and ions in the central
part of the electron cooler is controlled by the electron
acceleration voltage [32]. The diﬀerence between the av-
erage longitudinal ion and electron velocities deﬁnes the
detuning velocity vd and the corresponding detuning en-
2 (where m denotes the electron mass,
ergy Ed = (m/2)vd
which here in good approximation can be used to re-
place the reduced mass). The collision velocities v are
distributed according to an anisotropic Maxwellian [32]
characterized by the electron temperatures T⊥ and Tk
perpendicular and parallel to the beam direction, respec-
tively. For the present experiment kT⊥ = 10 meV and
kTk = 0.5 meV.

The average beam velocities can be exactly matched
(Ed = 0) chosing a laboratory electron energy Ec
e =
(m/M )Ei (M denoting the ion mass). At this setting
called the “cooling” energy, eﬃcient translational (phase-
space) cooling of the stored ion beam takes place through
Coulomb scattering [42] between the ions and the colder
and continuously renewed electrons. The time needed
for completion of the phase space cooling depends on the
initial ion temperature, the electron intensity and the de-
tailed injection conditions; for the present measurements
the phase space cooling was completed after 6 s, at the
latest. For energy dependent studies of electron-ion in-
teractions, the laboratory electron energy Ee can be de-
tuned from Ec
e, yielding ﬁnite detuning energies Ed for
the relative motion between electrons and ions as further
discussed in Sec. IV A.

At velocity matching (Ed = 0), electrons and ions in-
teract with typical collision energies E in the 10-meV
range, corresponding to the transverse electron temper-
ature (kT⊥). At an ion energy of Ei = 7.28 MeV, the
cooling energy of the electron beam was Ec
e = 571 eV
and electron densities ne of 1.2 × 107 cm−3 and 5.5 × 106
cm−3 were used, as speciﬁed below. At Ei = 3.36 MeV,
the cooling energy was Ec
e = 263 eV and the electron
density was 5.5 × 106 cm−3.

Applying electron energies Ee > Ec

e, relative energies
Ed up to ∼50 eV were adjusted, resulting in electron col-
lision energies with a FWHM spread [32] of, e.g., ∼0.2 eV

4

at Ed = 10 eV. Variations of Ed are connected with slight
but signiﬁcant variations of electron density ne(Ed).

Two types of detectors are used behind the storage-
ring dipole magnet (Fig. 3) to count and analyze the
neutral products created by interactions of the 3He4He+
ions with the merged electron beam or with residual
gas molecules. An energy-sensitive surface barrier de-
tector with a size of 40 × 60 mm2, centered to the beam
axis, served to count and discriminate events with neu-
tral products. With essentially unit eﬃciency, each event
creates an output pulse of this detector whose height is
proportional to the total kinetic energy of all neutral
products. As all neutral products propagate with the
ion beam velocity, the pulse height thus represents the
total mass of neutral fragments, corresponding to 3, 4,
or 7 atomic mass units (amu) if a single 3He atom, a sin-
gle 4He atom, or two (3He + 4He) atoms arrive in the
neutral product channel. The interpretation of the cor-
responding, mass-discriminated neutral count rates R(3),
R(4), and R(7) in terms of rate coeﬃcients for electron
and residual gas induced processes will be discussed be-
low.

Instead of the surface barrier detector, also a multi-
particle imaging detector [33] could be used in the de-
tector chamber. From an 80-mm diameter multichannel
plate, equipped with a phosphor screen, the transverse
coordinates of all fragments arriving within a coincidence
time window of a few microseconds, is read out with an
event-triggered camera system. This system is used for
DR fragment imaging as described in Sec. IV B.

B. Event rates for electron-induced processes

The elementary rate coeﬃcient αX (Ed) of any
electron-induced process X, as represented by Eqs. (1)–
(3), is related to the cross section σX (E) of this process
for a given collision energy E = (m/2)v2 through the
average over the electron velocity distribution according
to

αX (Ed) =

|v|σX (E)f (vd, v)d3v,

(4)

Z

where f (vd, v) is the electron velocity distribution [32]
at a given detuning velocity vd = (2Ed/m)1/2.
In the
present work it will be important for some of the electron-
induced processes to consider the dependence of their
rate on the rovibrational state v, J of the stored molec-
ular ions.
In this context, the ensemble of Ni stored
ions will be described by normalized populations pvJ (t)
in the various ro-vibrational levels, which in general can
depend on the storage time (time since injection) t. In-
troducing state dependent elementary rate coeﬃcients
αX (Ed) ≡ αvJ
X (Ed) the observed rate coeﬃcients will be
the ro-vibrationally averaged quantities

˜αX (Ed) =

pvJ (t)αvJ

X (Ed).

(5)

XvJ

Using these rate coeﬃcients, the rate RX of an electron-
induced process X occuring in the central overlap region
of the electron cooler can be written as

RX = ηNine(Ed)˜αX (Ed).

(6)

Here, η = L/C, where L is the length of the central over-
lap region (1.5 m in the present experiment) and C the
storage ring circumference (55.4 m, yielding η = 0.027).
The expression given in Eq. (6) is not complete, as ad-
ditional electron-induced reactions occur in the toroid
regions where the electron beam, over a part of its bent
section, still overlaps the ion beam. In contrast to the
central region, where a single controlled value of Ed oc-
curs, the detuning energy in the toroid regions rises fast
as a consequence of the rapidly increasing angle between
the two beams [33, 43].
In the present measurements,
the beams still overlap on a length of ∼16 cm in each
of the bends adjacent to the central section, and the ex-
cess detuning energy in these regions rises by up to ∼10
eV. The rate RX will hence include an additional toroid
contribution ˜αtor
X (Ed), so that Eq. (6) should be replaced
by

RX = ηNine(Ed)

˜αX (Ed) + ˜αtor

X (Ed)

.

(7)

with [34, 43]

(cid:3)

˜αtor

X (Ed) =

˜αX

˜Ed(x; Ed)

dx.

(8)

(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)

(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)

Here, ˜Ed(x; Ed) denotes the shifted detuning energy as a
function of the longitudinal position x in the toroid re-
gion, obtained from the known beam geometry. From an
energy dependent rate measurement RX (Ed) covering a
suitably wide range of detuning energies Ed it is possi-
ble to obtain the toroid contribution ˜αtor
X (Ed) and hence
the corrected rate coeﬃcient ˜αX(Ed) through a robust
iterative procedure [34, 43].

(cid:2)

xmax

2
L

xmin

Z

C. Stored ion beam evolution

Understanding the temporal evolution of the rovibra-
tional level distribution in the stored and electron cooled
ion beam is essential for the interpretation of the ex-
perimental results presented. Hence, in this section we
outline and model the main processes that lead to beam
loss and inﬂuence the rovibrational populations. In par-
ticular, the rovibrational states are coupled to the ∼300
K blackbody radiation ﬁeld in the storage ring. More-
over, the stored ions experience collisions with electrons
in the electron cooler and with species in the residual gas
leading to loss, excitation and de-excitation of vibrational
and rotational motion. To serve in the discussion of ex-
perimental data, expressions for the time dependence of
the stored ion number, the neutral fragment count rates,
and the rovibrational populations will be derived.

5

1. Beam loss and neutral fragment count rates

The relevant processes leading to ion loss from the cir-
culating beam are inelastic collisions with residual gas
molecules and with electrons in the electron cooler. Beam
loss through elastic scattering processes can be neglected.
In collisions with a residual gas particle (R), the domi-
nant loss arises through the DE-type reactions

3He4He+ + R →

3He+ + 4He
3He + 4He+

+ R′.

(9)

(cid:27)

(cid:26)
For each of these processes we deﬁne a rate constant kg
DE,
which describes the reaction rate per stored ion and de-
pends on the reaction cross section and the gas density.
Residual gas collsions can also lead to dissociative charge
exchange (DC)

3He4He+ + R → 3He + 4He + R′

(10)

DC ≪ kg

DE and kg

described by the rate constant kg
DC. At the MeV ion
beam energies used here, it is expected that kg
DE;
also, we assume for simplicity that at these collision en-
ergies both kg
DC are independent of the initial
rovibrational state of the molecular ion. The rate con-
stant kg
X for any rest-gas induced process X is related to
the collision cross section σg

X by
X = ngviσg
kg
X ,
where ng (∼106 cm−3 in the present experiments) is the
residual gas density.

(11)

The

ro-vibrationally averaged rate
electron-induced reactions follow from Eq. (7) as

constants of

˜kX (Ed; t) = ηne

˜αX (Ed) + ˜αtor

X (Ed)

.

(12)

(cid:2)

Rate constants kvJ
X (Ed) for electron-induced reactions on
ions in a speciﬁc ro-vibrational level are deﬁned in a sim-
ilar manner. The loss of ions from the circulating beam
is then described by the following rate equation for the
ion number Ni:

(cid:3)

˙Ni = −

DE + kg

2kg
h

Ni,
(13)
where rate constants for the electron-induced DR and DE
reactions were introduced.

DC + ˜kDR(Ed; t) + 2˜kDE(Ed; t)
i

Similarly, the count rates representing the arrival of
one or the correlated arrival of two neutral particles at the
surface barrier detector (see Sec. II A) can be described;
the properties of this detector allow unit counting eﬃ-
ciency to be assumed. For events yielding two neutrals
(3He + 4He) the rate is given by

R(7) =

fgkg

DC + ˜kDR(Ed; t)
i

h

Ni,

(14)

while the rates for the observation of a single neutral
fragment (3He or 4He) are given by

R(3) = R(4) =

fgkg
h

DE + ˜kDE(Ed; t)
i

Ni.

(15)

Here fg is a geometrical factor expressing the fraction
of all residual gas events (which occur over all the ring
circumference) that leads to a neutral particle detection
on the surface barrier detector.

2. Radiative thermalization

f ), and absorption (Bi

Since the 3He4He+ molecular ions have a permanent
electrical dipole moment, their rovibrational motion is
coupled to the 300-K radiation ﬁeld of the storage ring.
Based on the potential energy curve [20] for the X 2Σ+
u
electronic ground state of He+
2 we have calculated the
Einstein coeﬃcients for spontaneous emission (Ai
f ), stim-
ulated emission (Si
f ) for rovibra-
tional transitions connecting initial (i) and ﬁnal (f ) rovi-
brational levels; the same approach and approximations
as in Ref. [44] were used [45]. Since the spin-rotational
interaction is negligible, the rotational quantum numbers
are J = 0, 1, 2, . . . and the linestrengths for 1Σ -1Σ tran-
sitions have been used instead of those for 2Σ -2Σ tran-
sitions [46], with the selection rule ∆J = ±1. Figure 4
shows the results of these calculations for the total ra-
v′J ′ , as a function
diative lifetime τvJ = 1/
of rotational quantum number J for the ﬁrst six vibra-
tional states of the 2Σ+
u ground state of 3He4He+. [The
notations (v′J ′) < (vJ) and (v′J ′) > (vJ) are used to la-
bel the levels lying energetically below and above a given
level vJ, respectively.]

(v′J ′)<(vJ) AvJ

P

The master equations for the numbers NvJ of stored
ions in states vJ under the inﬂuence of blackbody-
induced radiative transitions are given by

˙NvJ =

′

′

′

′

J

Av

vJ + Sv

vJ ρT (Ev

J

Nv′J ′ −

′

′

J
vJ )
i

v′J ′ ρT (EvJ

v′J ′ )NvJ

+

′

′

J

Bv

vJ ρT (Ev

(cid:27)
vJ )Nv′J ′ −

J

′

′

X(v′J ′)>(vJ) (cid:26) h
− BvJ

X(v′J ′)<(vJ) (cid:26)

(cid:2)

−

AvJ

v′J ′ + SvJ

v′J ′ ρT (EvJ

v′J ′ )

NvJ

,

(cid:27)

(cid:3)

(16)

where ρT (hν) is the Planck distribution for radiation at
temperature T at photon energy hν = Ei
f = |Ef − Ei|.
Master equations of this type, possibly including fur-
ther, v and J dependent interactions of the stored ions,
are used to model the time evolution of level popula-
tions pvJ (t) in the stored ion beam, deﬁned by pvJ (t) =
NvJ (t)/

v′J ′ Nv′J ′ (t).

P

To illustrate the signiﬁcance of radiative transitions
on the evolution of the rovibrational population of the
stored ion beam, and to predict the associated relaxation
times, the coupled set of Eqs. (16) was solved for a Planck
radiation ﬁeld at 300 K for diﬀerent initial populations

6

(Fig. 5) using a fourth order Runge-Kutta method for
numerical integration.

Thermalization among the six lowest vibrational lev-
els [Fig. 5(a)] occurs after ∼12 s; however, already at
∼5 s the populations of higher vibrational levels (v ≥ 2)
are well below 10−4, and the characteristic time scale
for changes in the vibrational populations amounts to
only ∼3 s. The rotational populations within the v = 0
level [Fig. 5(b)] evolve over several tens of seconds, and
thermalization is only reached after hundreds of seconds.
If only radiative transitions were decisive for the evolu-
tion of the rovibrational population in the present mea-
surements, higher vibrational states (v ≥ 3) would be
essentially unpopulated after ∼3 s of storage and no con-
tribution to the DR signal [Eqs. (5),(14)] should occur
from these states despite a DR cross section four orders
of magnitude larger than for the ground state (v = 0).

3. Collisional eﬀects on rovibrational populations

Collisions with both residual gas molecules and elec-
trons are known to aﬀect the rovibrational populations
in stored beams of molecular ions [47, 48, 49, 50]. The rel-
evant elementary reactions between the stored He+
2 ions
and residual gas molecules in the present case would be
collisions at MeV energies leaving the interacting He+
2
intact, but changing its rovibrational excitation.
In a
photodissociation study of the stronger radiatively ac-
tive molecular ion CH+ [51] it was found that the ions
do equilibrate with the 300 K radiation ﬁeld, and eﬀects
of collisional induced rotational heating (expressed as an
increase of the rotational temperature) were determined
to be ≤10 K/s at similar residual gas densities as in the
In a study of HD+ under similar
present experiment.
conditions, evidence for a weak but measurable eﬀect of
vibrational excitation in the residual gas was reported
[47, 52].

The interaction with the electron beam can aﬀect the
rovibrational populations in two ways. Firstly, diﬀerent
rate coeﬃcients αvJ
X (Ed) for electron-induced reactions X
(in particular DR, possibly DE) can lead to diﬀerent ion
loss rate constants kvJ
X (Ed) [Eq. (12)] for the various rovi-
brational levels, leading to preferential depletion of levels
with higher reaction rates. Indeed, in a recent study of
the DR of D2H+ [48] this was considered as a mecha-
nism likely to produce rotational populations in the ion
beam with temperatures below the ambient blackbody
radiation ﬁeld. Secondly, (ro-)vibrational transitions can
be directly induced in electron collisions, as described by
Eq. (3). In particular, vibrational excitation is likely to
occur at collision energies in the eV range, as found for
HD+ [47, 52]. Even if the interaction energy is tuned to
small Ed in the central part of the electron cooler, higher
electron collision energies occur over smaller portions in
the toroid region (see Sec. II A) and can cause vibrational
excitation.

On the other hand, at vanishing detuning energy Ed,

where many of the present studies are performed, colli-
sions in the central region of the electron cooler are char-
acterized by very small interaction energies, as given by
the electron temperature kT⊥ = 10 meV. Under these
conditions, the rate coeﬃcients for superelastic collisions
(SEC) [53] with vibrationally excited ions often exceed
the DR rate coeﬃcient, and the related vibrational de-
excitation [cf. Eq. (3)] was indeed experimentally ob-
served for H+

2 [49, 50] and D+

2 [47].

Also in the present experiment on 3He4He+ the elec-
tron temperature kT⊥ is well below the vibrational spac-
ings, and of the order of the rotational spacings for
low-lying J levels in the v = 0 state. As purely rota-
tional radiative transitions are relatively slow [see Figs. 4,
5(b)], rotationally inelastic electron collisions may com-
pete with them. With a rotational constant of Be = 8.4
cm−1 ≈ 1 meV [24] for 3He4He+, both excitation and
de-excitation of rotational levels can be caused by elec-
tron collisions. The rates of rotationally inelastic low-
energy electron-ion collisions have been considered the-
oretically for several molecular systems (see for instance
Refs. [54, 55, 56] and references therein), however, to the
best of our knowledge no calculations exist for 3He4He+.
The typical cross sections for these reactions are in the
range of 10−14–10−12 cm2 near their thresholds, and their
eﬀect on the present measurement can indeed be signiﬁ-
cant.

Collisional eﬀects on the rovibrational populations in
the stored ion beam will be further discussed below in
Sec. VII B 2, considering both residual gas and electron
collisions. The radiative rates of Eq. (16) will be comple-
mented by approximate rate constants for inelastic col-
lisions in order to obtain a rough model description of
the rovibrational evolution under such eﬀects. It should
be emphasized that the evolution of the populations can-
not generally be slowed down, but only accelerated by
the occurrence of additional processes. Hence the maxi-
mum timescales over which the vibrational and rotational
level populations evolve will still be given by the radiative
timescales determined above.

III. COULOMB EXPLOSION DIAGNOSTICS

The relative vibrational level populations of the stored
3He4He+ ions were monitored with Coulomb explosion
imaging (CEI) of ions slowly extracted from the beam
during storage. Details about the CEI method and the
setup at the TSR with the slow ion extraction can be
found in Refs. [35, 57, 58]. The extracted ions with ki-
netic energy Ei = (M/2)v2
i = 7.28 MeV were collimated
by two 1-mm apertures 3 m apart, and then sent through
a 80 ˚A thick diamond like carbon foil; the thickness cor-
responds to a dwell time of the ions in the foil of only
5.6 × 10−16 s. In the foil the binding electrons are rapidly
(within ∼10−16 s) stripped from the molecule, leaving
the bare nuclei to separate (explode) due to their mutual
Coulomb repulsion and thus to convert their Coulomb

7

energy into kinetic energy. The stripping time is much
faster than both the vibrational (τvib = 2/cωe = 4×10−14
s [24]) and rotational periods (τrot = 1/2cBe = 2 × 10−12
s [24]) of 3He4He+; so the nuclear motion is essentially
unchanged prior to the explosion, and to a ﬁrst approx-
imation the kinetic energy release therefore reﬂects di-
rectly the incident molecule’s nuclear coordinates. How-
ever, despite the short dwell time in the foil, the recoiling
nuclei also interact with the target atoms [59, 60] which
causes an alteration of the kinetic energy release from the
value expected for a pure Coulomb explosion.

The actual kinetic energy release ˜Ek was determined at
a distance ˜s = 2.965 m from the foil with a three dimen-
sional imaging technique [35], where the relative distance
˜D on the plane of the detector and the relative time of ar-
rival ∆t of the two fragments from an exploding molecule
were recorded. The position resolution was σ ˜D = 0.1 mm
and the time resolution was measured to be σ∆t = 100 ps
(1σ Gaussian widths). From the time and position data,
the kinetic energy release is determined as

˜Ek =

Ei
˜s2

M (3He)M (4He)

[M (3He) + M (4He)]2 [(vi∆t)2 + ˜D2].

(17)

The kinetic energy distribution after Coulomb explosion
for an ensemble of ions in a given vibrational state v has
a characteristic form Pv( ˜Ek) [36] that reﬂects the distri-
bution of nuclear positions and momenta in this state as
well as the fragment scattering in the foil, broadening
the distribution by ∼20%. For an ensemble of ions in
several vibrational states the normalized kinetic energy
distribution after Coulomb explosion

P ( ˜Ek, t) =

pv(t)Pv( ˜Ek)

(18)

v
X
is a superposition of the normalized distributions for
the individual vibrational states, where the coeﬃcients
pv(t) represent the relative populations of the vibrational
states v in the beam, and

v pv(t) = 1.

The resolution of the CEI technique does not allow us
P
to distinguish small contributions to the kinetic energy
from rotational excitation, and the coeﬃcients are to be
considered summed over the rotational degrees of free-
dom

pv(t) =

pvJ (t).

(19)

XJ
With an accurate modeling of the distributions Pv( ˜Ek)
the relative distribution of vibrational states in the beam
can be determined by ﬁtting Eq. (18) to the experimental
distribution with the relative populations pv(t) as free
parameters.

To model the distributions Pv( ˜Ek) we followed closely
the procedure described in Ref. [36], where a quantum
mechanical description of the Coulomb explosion pro-
cess was combined with semi-classical ion propagation
through the foil. Brieﬂy, the nuclear wave functions were

ﬁrst calculated by numerically solving the radial nuclear
Schr¨odinger equation for 3He4He+ in the electronic po-
tential given in Ref. [20]. Each nuclear wavefunction
was projected on the Coulombic continuum of 3He2+ and
4He2+ using Coulomb wave functions calculated with the
WCLBES subroutine [61, 62] available from the CERN
Fortran Library, to obtain the kinetic energy distribution
corresponding to Coulomb explosion without scattering
eﬀects in the foil. This kinetic energy distribution was
inverted to an artiﬁcial distribution of internuclear dis-
tances (R) by the transformation ˜Ek = 4e2/R.

For classical trajectories in the Coulomb explosion, this
artiﬁcial radial distribution yields the distribution of ki-
netic energy releases that corresponds to the quantum
mechanical Coulomb explosion. The artiﬁcial distribu-
tion of initial radial distances R was then used as input
to a semi-classical propagation of ions through the car-
bon foil, which modeled multiple scattering and charge
exchange of the molecular fragments in the foil [59] as
well as the eﬀects of wake ﬁelds and electronic stopping
[60, 63]. After leaving the foil the ions were propagated
on classical trajectories to the detector, where also the
calculated position and times were folded with the ﬁ-
nite resolutions (σ ˜D and σ∆t) of the detector. The semi-
classical propagation as well as the folding of the simu-
lations with the detector characteristics were done using
existing codes [59, 63].

Figure 6(a) displays normalized kinetic energy distri-
butions P ( ˜Ek, t) as measured with the CEI technique
for three time intervals after ion injection into the TSR
when no electron cooling was applied. The kinetic en-
ergy distribution is seen to become narrower with time,
and the distribution seems to converge after 3 s, i.e., no
change of the distribution could be observed when com-
paring distributions at diﬀerent time intervals for ≥3 s
after injection. When no electron cooling is applied the
rovibrational population of the ion beam is determined
by radiative thermalization in competition with excita-
tion through ion collisions with the residual gas (see Sec.
II C 3). The relaxed kinetic energy distribution (t ≥ 3
s) without electron cooling compares very well with the
Monte Carlo simulation for Pv=0( ˜Ek), obtained from the
procedure described above. Performing a least-squares
ﬁt to the same distribution, using the superposition of
simulated functions Pv( ˜Ek) according to Eq. (18), yields
pv=0(t ≥ 3 s) = (98.9 ± 1.3)%. For the kinetic energy dis-
tribution in an early phase of the vibrational relaxation
(t = 0–1 s) the level populations are found from a similar
ﬁt to be (56 ± 3)% in v = 0, (13 ± 4)% in v = 1, (16 ± 5)%
in v = 2, and 15% distributed over the levels with v ≥ 3.
Figure 6(b) displays the normalized kinetic energy dis-
tributions P ( ˜Ek, t) for the same time intervals as in
Fig. 6(a) with electron cooling applied continuously at
all storage times, in parallel with the slow extraction.
The combined action of the electron beam and the slow
extraction strongly reduces the beam lifetime and the
amount of data is rather low. However, also in this case
the kinetic energy distribution is seen to narrow with

8

time, and after 3 s the experimental distribution com-
pares well with the simulated one for the ground state.
A least-squares ﬁt to the converged distribution, using
the superposition of simulated functions Pv( ˜Ek) as given
in Eq. (18), yields pv=0 = 91 ± 14 %.

Summarizing, from the CEI measurements it is evident
that the ion beam is dominated by the vibrational ground
state v = 0 after 3 s both with and without the presence
of the electron beam during storage. This is consistent
with the time scale of radiative thermalization, but both
thermal or non-thermal vibrational distributions with a
few percent of the ions in higher vibrational states are
consistent with the data.

IV. ELECTRON-INDUCED REACTIONS

A. DR and DE rate measurements

Details of the experimental procedure for measuring
rates of fragments from DE and DR reactions at the TSR
have been described previously [32, 33]. In the present
measurement, the rates of neutral fragment events with
total masses of 3, 4 and 7 atomic mass units were ob-
served with the surface barrier detector (Sec. II A) as a
function of the electron detuning energy Ed and the time
t after the injection, yielding the quantities R(7)(Ed; t),
R(3)(Ed; t), and R(4)(Ed; t), respectively. The electron
detuning energy could be cycled between the cooling en-
ergy (Ed = Ec
d = 0), a variable “measurement” energy
Em
d ap-
propriately as described below, the full-mass count rate
at the reference energy, R(7)(Er
d; t), served for normaliza-
tion with respect to the stored 3He4He+ ion current.

d , and a “reference” energy Er

d. After choosing Er

d ; t), R(3)(Em

The energy dependences of the count rates R were usu-
ally obtained by cycling (“wobbling”) between the three
given levels of Ed at a dwell time of 50 ms on each of
the levels. Following an injection of ions into the ring,
Ed was ﬁrst kept constant at Ec
d = 0 for 5 s to allow
for phase space cooling and vibrational relaxation of the
stored ion beam whereafter the electron energies Ed were
wobbled as described. The value Em
d was varied from
one injection to the next. Energy and time dependent
rates R(7)(Em
d ; t) were ob-
tained from the detector counts accumulated over nu-
merous injections, performing several scans of Em
d over
the desired range, where the counts for individual val-
ues of Em
d and for individual bins of the ion storage time
(i.e., the time after the injection into the storage ring)
were added. With normalization and background sub-
traction as described below, rate coeﬃcients ˜αDR(Ed; t)
and ˜αDE(Ed; t) for the electron induced reactions were
obtained. Time variations in these rate coeﬃcients can
arise from variations of the 3He4He+ level populations
pvJ (t) in the stored beam [see Eq. (5)].

d ; t), and R(4)(Em

Apart from the wobble scheme, also much longer dwell
times for Ed, ranging up to many seconds, were used in
order to study the temporal behavior of the absolute and

9

the normalized count rates, aiming at the determination
of absolute rate coeﬃcients and at the study of the level
populations pvJ (t) of the stored ions. Measurements with
both types of timing schemes will be discussed in the
following.

the electron beam is switched oﬀ indicates the presence
of an electron-induced DE rate even at Ed = 0, repre-
senting the toroid contribution discussed above; this rate
is represented by the term ˜kDE(0; t) in Eq. (15). From
the observed step in R(3) at t = 10 s, we ﬁnd the size of
this contribution relative to the rest-gas rate constant as

1. Relative, energy dependent count rates

c1 = ˜kDE(0)/fgkg

DE = 0.18(2).

(20)

d ; t)/R(7)(Er

d ; t)/R(7)(Er

Typical raw data for the DR and the DE channel, av-
eraged over time intervals of 5-10 s and 35-68 s and rep-
resenting the relative rates R(7)(Em
d; t) and
R(3)(Em
d ; t), respectively, are shown in Fig. 7.
In these data, as in the remainder of this paper, the ref-
erence energy was chosen as that of the prominent peak
in the DR signal R(7), setting Er
d = 7.3 eV. The relative
DR rate coeﬃcient shown in Fig. 7(a) shows a consider-
able storage time dependence at Ed <
∼ 0.1 eV, while the
high-energy structure does not vary signiﬁcantly with the
storage time. The absolute DR rate coeﬃcient at Er
d and
the rate variations with the storage time will be consid-
ered further in the following. The DE rate in Fig. 7(b)
shows a threshold at ∼2.5 eV, corresponding to the dis-
sociation energy of He+
2 . The non-zero rate R(3) below
the threshold arises partly from DE events in the residual
gas and partly from the toroid contribution discussed in
Sec. II B.

2. Beam lifetime, reaction rate constants, and absolute rate
coeﬃcients

A series of measurements with long dwell times on dif-
ferent levels of Ed was performed in order to study the in-
ﬂuence of electron and rest-gas induced reactions on the
ion beam lifetime, to clarify the relative signiﬁcance of
the various reaction rates considered in Sec. II C 1, and to
obtain ﬁrst information about the eﬀects of time-varying
internal excitations, as represented by pvJ (t). Moreover,
these measurements yield an absolute calibration of our
rate coeﬃcients.

Figure 8 shows the time evolution of the absolute rates
R(7) and R(3) for a situation where the electron beam
was continuously on at Ed = 0 for 10 s, whereafter it was
switched oﬀ. The transient behavior observed in R(3) at
< 5 s can be attributed to changes in the ion beam orbit
and hence its pointing towards the detector during the
initial electron cooling of the ion beam.

The full-mass rate R(7) shows a clearly non-exponential
decrease up to the time when the electron beam is turned
oﬀ, when it drops sharply, by more than two orders of
magnitude. We conclude that this rate is dominated by
DR and that the related rate constant ˜kDR(0; t) shows a
signiﬁcant time dependence, representing that of pvJ (t),
which will be further investigated below. On the other
hand, at times later than 5 s the decrease of R(3) is well
described by a single exponential, both with and with-
out the electrons. The jump in R(3) at the time when

No signiﬁcant time dependence of ˜kDE(0) is observed,
as R(3) decreases as a single exponential even with the
electrons present.

The time dependence of R(3) at t > 10 s reveals the
beam loss due to rest-gas induced processes, described by
˙Ni(t) = −koﬀ Ni(t) with koﬀ = 2kg
DC [cf. Eq. (13)].
Dissociative charge exchange (DC) in the rest gas is much
less likely than DE, as revealed by the ratio R(7)/R(3)
without electron beam, which yields with the help of Eqs.
(14) and (15)

DE + kg

c2 = kg

DC/kg

DE = 1.6(2) × 10−3.

(21)

From the experimental result koﬀ = 0.1014(13) s−1 one
can then deduce

kg
DE = koﬀ /(2 + c2) = 0.0506(7) s−1.

(22)

together with kg

DC = 8(1) × 10−5 s−1.

The measurement of Fig. 8 was repeated immediately,
under the same vacuum conditions, now changing the
electron energy Ed from 0 to Er
d = 7.3 eV at t = 10 s
(see Fig. 9). The full-mass rate R(7), showing the same
non-exponential behavior as before for Ed = 0, increases
strongly as Ed is stepped up to Er
d and turns over to a
single-exponential decay. The decay rate of R(7) for t >
10 s is the same as that of R(3) within the experimental
accuracy and amounts to kref = 0.1177(15) s−1.

The single-exponential decays of R(7) and R(3) at Er
d
indicate that ˜kDR(Er
d) and ˜kDE(Er
d) are time indepen-
dent, i.e., they reveal no inﬂuence due to possible time
variations of the level populations pvJ (t). Using Eqs.
(14), (15), (20), and (21) to express the measured ratio
c3 = R(7)(Er

d)/R(3)(0) = 2.56(7) from Fig. 9, one ﬁnds

˜kDR(Er
d )
fgkg

DE

= c3(1 + c1) − c2

(23)

Using this result and expressing in a similar way the mea-
sured ratio c4 = R(3)(Er
d)/R(7)(Er
d) = 1.02(1) from Fig.
9, one ﬁnds that the ratio of the DE and DR rate con-
stants at the reference energy can be expressed as

ρDE =

˜kDE(Er
d)
˜kDR(Er
d)

=

c3c4(1 + c1) − 1
c3(1 + c1) − c2

(24)

Evaluation of this expression yields ρDE = 0.690(14).
The decays of both R(7) and R(3) ﬁnally reﬂect the de-
crease of the ion number according to ˙Ni(t) = −krefNi(t)
with kref = koﬀ + ˜kDR(Er
d) [cf. Eq. (13)].

d) + 2˜kDE(Er

With the help of Eq. (24) it is then possible to obtain
the absolute DR rate coeﬃcient at Er

d as

relation

˜αc+tor
DR (Er

d) =

˜kDR(Er
d)
ηne

=

kref − koﬀ
ηne[1 + 2ρDE]

.

(25)

DR (Er

Here, ˜αc+tor
d) is used to denote the sum of the con-
tributions from the central and the toroid sections, oc-
curing in Eq. (7); a toroid correction (which is small at
Ed = Er
d) will be applied in Sec. IV A 3. With the known
d) = 7.9 × 106 cm−3 and η = 0.027 we ob-
values of ne(Er
tain ˜αc+tor
d) = 3.2(4)×10−8 cm3 s−1, in the particular
DR (Er
example described above.

d) and the absolute rate constant kg

One also obtains, with the known DR rate constant
˜kDR(Er
DE for DE on
rest-gas from Eq. (22), the eﬃciency fg for detecting rest-
gas events, which results in 0.044(7) and hence in an
“observed” eﬀective ion beam length of ∼2.4 m, in rea-
sonable agreement with the geometrical conditions of the
experiment.

DC and kg

The above described procedure to obtain an absolute
DR rate coeﬃcient relies on the assumption that the pres-
ence of the electron beam does not aﬀect the vaccuum
signiﬁcantly in the region of the electron cooler, i.e., that
the values of kg
DE are unaﬀected by the presence
of the electron beam. To investigate the validity of this
assumption we made measurements similar to the ones
in Figs. 8 and 9, but now changing the detuning energy
from zero to 0.5 eV at 10 s. As can be derived from Fig.
7 the electron induced reactions at 0.5 eV are relatively
small, and the decay of the stored ion beam is determined
mainly by DE in the residual gas (kg
DE). With Ed = 0.5
eV, an ion beam decay rate of k0.5 eV = 0.0994(15) s−1
was obtained, in consistency with the value koﬀ obtained
without the electron beam. Hence, the electron beam
does not aﬀect the beam decay signiﬁcantly through an
increase of vacuum pressure, and the assumptions under-
lying the above derivation are indeed justiﬁed.

d) = 2.8(4) × 10−8 cm3 s−1.

Repeated measurements of the rate coeﬃcient at Er
d
as described above yielded values that scattered around
those obtained in the example discussed. As the ﬁnal
normalization of the measured rate coeﬃcient we use
the weigthed average of the diﬀerent measurements and
give their standard deviation as the uncertainty, yielding
˜αc+tor
DR (Er
Altogether, the time dependences of the absolute count
rates show a markedly non-exponential decay for the full-
mass events near zero energy, indicating an inﬂuence of
internal relaxation of the stored ions on their DR rate.
For high-energy DR, no such inﬂuence is observed, and a
comparison of the decay rates with and without electrons
can be used to obtain the DR rate coeﬃcient on the peak
at 7.3 eV, providing a useful absolute normalization.

3. Energy dependent rate coeﬃcients

From the relative rate shown in Fig. 7, the absolute
DR rate coeﬃcients can now be determined using the

10

DR (Ed; t) = ˜αc+tor
˜αc+tor

DR (Er
d)

R(7)(Ed; t)
R(7)(Er
d; t)

ne(Er
d)
ne(Ed)

.

(26)

Here, the very small background from DC in the residual
gas contained in the rate R(7) can be safely neglected.
Since the DR rate coeﬃcient for energies outside the
scanned energy region can be assumed to vanish, the
standard iterative procedure [34, 43] can be used to ob-
tain the toroid-corrected DR rate ˜αDR(Ed; t), shown for
the relaxed beam (t = 35–68 s) in Fig. 10(a). The toroid
contribution to the low energy part of the DR rate co-
eﬃcient measurement is illustrated by Fig. 11. Its size
relative to the corrected rate coeﬃcient at Ed = 0 is
found to be ˜αtor

DR(0)/ ˜αDR(0) = 0.34(6).

For DE, the rate coeﬃcient is obtained as

DE (Ed; t) = ˜αc+tor
˜αc+tor

DR (Er
d)

ne(Er
d)
ne(Ed)

×

R(3)(Ed; t) − R(3)(0; t)(1 − εtor)

×

R(7)(Er

d; t)

(27)

,

where the background contribution to DE from the resid-
ual gas only is subtracted, i.e. εtor = ˜kDE(0)/[fgkg
DE +
˜kDE(0)]. During the experimental runs, small tempo-
ral variations of the vacuum conditions produce changes
in the residual gas rate constant kg
DE. For the partic-
ular residual gas pressure present when the data used
to derive c1 in Eq. (20) was taken, we obtain ε′
tor =
c1/(1 + c1) = 0.15(2). Since ˜kDE(0) is vacuum indepen-
dent, the value of εtor can directly be obtained as εtor =
ε′
(3)(0; t)/R′
tor [R′
d; t)]/[R(3)(0; t)/R(7)(Er
d; t)], where
R′
(3)(0; t) and R′
d; t) are the observed rates of Figs.
8 and 9.

(7)(Er
(7)(Er

The toroid correction of the DE rate is expected to be
reliable up to Ed ∼ 25 eV. Above this value an assump-
tion about the further energy dependence of the DE rate
coeﬃcient from 40 eV up to ∼ 55 eV is required. We
assume as a resonable approximation that the rate coef-
ﬁcient stays constant in this range at the value measured
at 40 eV. The DE rate coeﬃcient corrected under this as-
sumption, ˜αDE(Ed; t), is shown in Fig. 10(b) for t = 35–
68 s. It should be noted that the toroid correction brings
the DE rate at low energy to zero. Indeed, this veriﬁes
in a sensitive manner that the identiﬁcation of the step
in the rate R(3) of Fig. 8 is correct.

B. DR fragment imaging

The event-triggered fragment imaging detection sys-
tem mentioned in Sec. II A yields the transverse posi-
tions of correlated pairs of neutral 3He and 4He frag-
ments released in single DR reactions. Distributions of
the transverse distance between such correlated product
atoms reveal the kinetic energy release (KER) of the DR

events. The KER in turn can provide a signature of the
internal excitation present in the reacting 3He4He+ ions.
Fragment imaging measurements were performed only
at Ed = 0 and served particularly to clarify the eﬀect of
internal excitations on the low-energy DR rate coeﬃcient
˜αDR(0; t), found to display a signiﬁcant time depencence
in the measurements of Sec. IV A. Here, we will ﬁrst
consider the experimental framework, analysis, and ba-
sic observation related to fragment imaging of 3He4He+
DR reactions. Similar to the rate coeﬃcient ˜αDR(0; t),
also the fragment imaging distributions show a time de-
pendence, whose basic phenomenology will be presented
in this section. In a next step (Sec. V) we will describe
series of dedicated experiments where both rate coeﬃ-
cient and fragment imaging measurements are used as
tools for understanding the nature and the origin of the
rovibrational excitation in the stored 3He4He+ ion beam.

1. Fragment imaging experimental conditions

Following a reaction of 3He4He+ with the residual gas
or with electrons, either one or two neutral fragments ar-
rive at the detector, which for unit detection eﬃciency
and a perfect single-event trigger scheme would yield
corresponding one-body (single) or two-body (double)
events. The observed numbers ˜Ns and ˜Nd are reduced
with respect to the true event numbers Ns and Nd due
to the ﬁnite detection eﬃciency of the MCP detector.

As the fragments are identiﬁed by the light spots they
generate on the detector screen, a two-body event with a
small transverse distance can in addition be falsely identi-
ﬁed as a one-body event, in case the light spots overlap.
This results in a limited detection for DR events with
small KER.

The measured fragment rates were kept below 103 s−1
in all runs. The ratio of detected double to single events
was found to vary between 0.15 and 0.03. With an eﬀec-
tive coincidence time window of the event trigger scheme
of ∼10 µs, the false coincidence contribution is expected
to stay below 1%. Accordingly, the ratio of (false) triple
events to the doubles was found to be well below 1%. We
hence consider that false coincidences can be neglected.
Assuming that the fragment masses are identiﬁed, the
coordinates of the center of mass (c.m.) can be deter-
mined for correlated two-body events. The c.m. coor-
dinates represent the transverse motion of the interact-
ing 3He4He+ ions, propagated on a straight line from
the location of the DR event to the detector. Although
the present fragment imaging system does not allow the
masses to be identiﬁed, the c.m. coordinates can be re-
constructed for, on the average, 50% of all events by as-
signing the masses of 3 and 4 amu, respectively, arbi-
trarily to the individual fragments in each observed cor-
related pair. The observed pattern of c.m. positions in
the transverse plane, shown in Fig. 12(a) for an electron
energy Ed = 0, reveals diﬀerent contributions to the low-
energy DR rate. One contribution has circular symmetry

11

and is located near the nominal beam axis of the straight
storage ring section to which the detector is aligned (zero
point of the x-y plane). Two additional, horizontally
elongated structures appear at −7 mm < xc.m. < −3
mm and −0.5 mm < yc.m. < 1.5 mm. While all con-
tributions must arise from electron interaction (see Sec.
IV A 2), the circular part can be assigned to the straight
(central) overlap section of the electron cooler, while the
two elongated structures clearly originate from the two
toroid regions, where the electron beam is guided in and
out of the ion orbit. In fact, the ion beam is horizontally
deﬂected by the magnetic ﬁeld of the toroids [43], whose
bending plane is oriented vertically. As expected, the
main contribution from the toroids does not arise close to
the beam merging region, where the electron interaction
energy is still close to Ed = 0, but further up or down
the bends, where the interaction energy reaches values
close to 7 eV, i.e., around the peak in the DR rate coef-
ﬁcient (see Fig. 7(a)); here, the ion beam is already bent
substantially from its aligned direction in the overlap re-
gion. Note that in Fig. 12(a) the narrow circular peak
near the zero point of the x-y plane is surrounded by a
more diﬀuse distribution of events which represents those
events for which the arbitary assignment of the individ-
ual fragment masses was incorrect. Yet, by suitable cuts
on the c.m. positions as indicated in Fig. 12(a), the frag-
ment imaging data for Ed = 0 can be decomposed into
separate contributions from the linear overlap region of
the electron cooler and from the toroid regions.

d and ˜N t

The described assignment of the c.m. position ranges
is further supported by the time depencence of the rates
˜N c
d for the central and the toroid region, respec-
tively. These rates are shown with a normalization to
the observed rate of single events, ˜Ns, in Fig. 12(b). The
d/ ˜Ns shows a signiﬁcant time variation
relative rate ˜N c
over up to 20 s, similar to the variation of the DR rate
constant at Ed = 0 discussed in Sec. IV A 2. In contrast,
d/ ˜Ns settles to a constant value much faster, in consis-
˜N t
tency with the observation of a ﬁxed DR rate constant
for Ed = 7.3 eV in Sec. IV A 2.

2. Fragment imaging distributions

The analytical description of transverse (projected) in-
terparticle distance distributions for DR fragment imag-
ing of diatomic molecular ions has been discussed in de-
tail earlier [36]. At vanishing electron collision energy
(Ed = 0; thermal electron energy neglected) the kinetic
energy release Ek for well deﬁned initial state v, J and
ﬁnal atomic states n, n′ can be written as

′

EvJnn
k

= EvJ − Enn′ ,

(28)

where EvJ denotes the initial molecular energy level and
Enn′ the asymptotic energy level of the atomic fragments.
Each contribution with a given kinetic energy release is
associated with a characteristic distribution PvJnn′ (D)

[36] of projected distances, displaying an endpoint at the
maximal transverse distance

Dmax = smax

M (3He) + M (4He)

M (3He)M (4He) s

EvJnn′
k
Ei

,

(29)

p

where smax denotes the maximum possible distance from
a DR interaction point to the detector (in the present
setup smax = 7.17 m, corresponding to the far end of
the central electron interaction region as seen from the
fragment imaging detector). With given molecular level
populations pvJ (t) and with the DR rate coeﬃcients
αvJnn
DR (0) for speciﬁc initial and ﬁnal states, the total
spectrum of measured projected distances can be writ-
ten as the superposition

′

P (D, t) = K(t)

pvJ (t)αvJnn

DR (0)PvJnn′ (D),

(30)

′

XvJnn′

where K(t) is a normalization factor. As contributions
from various rotational levels cannot be resolved, the dis-
tinct features in the projected distance distribution are
associated with individual vibrational levels and individ-
ual atomic quantum numbers n, n′. Using J-averaged
DR rate coeﬃcients ˜αvnn
DR (0) and distance distributions
˜P (Trot)
vnn′ (D), taking into account the rotational energy and
thermal rotational level populations for a suitable tem-
perature Trot [36], the superposition of Eq. (30) is then
represented as

′

P (D, t) = K(t)

pv(t)˜αvnn

DR (0) ˜P (Trot)

vnn′ (D).

′

(31)

Xvnn′

The distributions of relative distances between fragments
from DR reactions as obtained with the fragment imaging
technique reveal information on the relative contributions
to the overall DR rate from diﬀerent reaction channels
vnn′, as characterized by pv(t)˜αvnn
DR (0). For assigned
vibrational levels v, these data also yield the branching
ratios to the possible atomic ﬁnal states.

′

The DR fragment imaging measurements discussed be-
low were performed at an ion energy of Ei = 3.36 MeV
using a detuning energy Ed = 0 (where the electron den-
sity amounted to ne = 5.5 × 106 cm−3). Figure 13(a)
shows as an example the analytical shape of the pro-
jected distance distribution for v = 0, J = 0 and for the
ﬁnal channel He(1s2) + He(1s2s3S) (Ek = 2.41 eV), to-
gether with the end points for other possible ﬁnal states
with n = 2 and 3, as reached from the vibrational lev-
els v = 0–6. As seen in Fig. 1, the zero-energy DR of
3He4He+ ions in the vibrational states v ≥ 3 can also lead
to the n = 3 ﬁnal atomic states, associated with much
smaller kinetic energy release. In the observed projected
distance distributions, contributions with end points at
small D therefore indicate the presence of vibrationally
excited ions in levels v ≥ 3, and can only arise from such
levels.

The projected distance distributions observed with a
stored 3He4He+ beam for diﬀerent time intervals after

12

the injection are shown in Fig. 13(b)–(d). A prominent
contribution at low distances D, clearly arising from vi-
brationally excited ions in v ≥ 3, can be seen at all times,
although its relative size decreases substantially during
the ﬁrst ∼10 s of storage time. The peak at large dis-
tances becomes narrower at later storage times. Two
regions showing diﬀerent types of temporal behavior can
be identiﬁed, with a border at D ∼ 7 mm. Limited detec-
tion of fragment pairs, as discussed in Sec. IV B 1, occurs
at D < 2.5 mm.

The fragment distributions of Fig. 13 include data
only from the central part of the electron–ion interaction
region, corresponding to the “central region” c.m. cut
shown in Fig. 12(a). For the toroid regions, much dif-
ferent projected distance distributions are observed. As
seen in Fig. 14 they are characterized by much higher en-
ergy release, dominated by the dissociation dynamics on
the high-energy peak of the DR rate coeﬃcient between
5 and 9 eV.

It is interesting to note that the projected distance dis-
tribution from the toroid regions in Fig. 14 appears to be
only slighty aﬀected by the limited detection of fragment
pairs with small D. This opens up the opportunity of
ﬁnding the fraction of events suppressed by limited de-
tection at small D in the fragment distributions from the
central part of the interaction region. Using the solid
state detector, oﬀering unit detection eﬃciency, the size
of the toroid contribution relative to the DR rate from
the central region of the electron cooler was determined
in Sec. IV A 3 to amount to ˜αtor
DR(0)/ ˜αDR(0) = 0.34(6).
On the other hand, Fig. 12(b) shows a ratio between the
double-hit events from the toroid and the central region
of ˜N t
d = 0.67(10) for t > 15 s. Assuming that the
toroid contribution on the imaging detector, ˜N t
d, is not
inﬂuenced by limited detection, while the central contri-
bution is reduced through this eﬀect by a factor of 1− ˜fd,
the missing fraction ˜fd can be determined to

d/ ˜N c

˜fd = 1 −

˜αtor

DR(0)/ ˜αDR(0)
d/ ˜N c

˜N t

d

= 0.49(11)

(32)

for times larger than 15 s after injection. In Sec. VI B
this number will be used to evaluate the absolute DR
rate coeﬃcient for the v = 0 level.

V. ROVIBRATIONAL EXCITATION AND
COOLING OF THE STORED ION BEAM

As illustrated in Sec. II C 2, radiative thermalization
with the blackbody radiation at 300 K would make the
ion beam dominated by the vibrational ground state with
pv=0 > 99.9% after 10 s of storage, leaving <0.1% in all
higher vibrational states [see Fig. 5(a)]. However, the
rotational radiative relaxation is expected to be much
slower [Fig. 5(b)]. Moreover, a number of processes be-
yond radiative transitions were discussed in Sec. II C 3
that may modify the rovibrational populations. Hence,

internal excitations in the stored molecular ion beam de-
serve careful consideration.

The Coulomb explosion measurements described in
Sec. III conﬁrm the vibrational relaxation of the ions
with a possible remaining excited-state population at the
percent level for the case that no electrons are present.
In the presence of electrons a similar vibrational relax-
ation is seen, but the observational uncertainties would
allow the excited-state populations to exceed the 10%
level. Based on these measurements and considering the
expected large increase of the He+
2 DR rate coeﬃcient
for increasing vibrational excitation, the excited state
populations in the stored ion beam can still be suﬃ-
ciently large to cause signiﬁcant contributions to the ob-
served neutral fragment rates. Regarding rotations, the
Coulomb explosion imaging method is unfortunately not
suited to characterize the excited level populations.

In this section, a series of arguments and dedicated
measurements is described which attempts to clarify
in detail the inﬂuence of internal molecular excitations
on the present data and to identify processes beyond
blackbody-driven radiative interactions that determine
the evolution of rovibrational populations in the stored
ion beam. From the evidence obtained, it then becomes
possible to extract quantitative, initial- and ﬁnal-state
speciﬁc information on the DR of 3He4He+ (Sec. VI).
A further discussion using a model description of ro-
vibrational excitation and de-excitation (Sec. VII B) will
ﬁnally allow the cross sections of the underlying inelastic
processes to be quantitatively characterized.

A. Time dependence of zero energy DR rate

Figure 15 shows the ratio R(7)/R(3) at Ed = 0 for con-
ditions where the electron beam was either continuously
on or switched oﬀ for diﬀerent segments of time after the
end of the phase-space cooling. Following Eqs. (14) and
(15) and noting the time independence of ˜kDE(0) (Sec.
IV A), this ratio is proportional to the rovibrationally av-
eraged DR rate constant ˜kDR(0; t) and hence probes the
evolution of the rovibrational population in the ion beam
if the DR rate coeﬃcients of the rovibrational levels diﬀer
from each other [see Eq. (5)].

As seen in Fig. 15, when the electron beam is continu-
ously on, ˜kDR(0; t) decreases strongly until an apparently
constant level is reached after about 30 s. The shape of
the curve cannot be well-described by a simple function
such as a single exponential plus a constant or the sum of
two exponentials. When the electron beam has been oﬀ
for one of the various segments of time, a larger value of
R(7)/R(3) is observed when switching it back on as com-
pared to the situation where the electron beam is contin-
uously on. However, after switching the electron beam
on again, R(7)/R(3) decreases on a time scale of ∼10 s
to the level reached with the electron beam continuously
on. The eﬀect of the electron beam on the rovibrational
population is further emphasized by the data shown in

13

Fig. 16, which displays the value of R(7)/R(3) for two dif-
ferent electron densities. A higher electron density leads
to a faster approach to the asymptotic DR rate, while the
ﬁnal asymptotes are similar. The electron-beam depen-
dent behaviors illustrated in Fig. 15 and 16 clearly show
that the DR reaction rate depends upon the rovibrational
state and that the electron beam indeed inﬂuences the
rovibrational population in the beam.

Moreover, as seen in Fig. 15, the value of R(7)/R(3)
at the moment when the electron beam is switched back
on decreases with longer periods without electron cool-
ing. This proves unambiguously that the rovibrational
population in the ion beam evolves over tens of seconds
even if only radiative transitions and residual gas colli-
sions can occur. The electron beam was also switched oﬀ
for a similar period as in Fig. 15 at later times after injec-
tion (35–50 s), i.e., after R(7)/R(3) had already reached
its asymptotic value. In this test (not shown in Fig. 15)
no signiﬁcant change of the ratio R(7)/R(3) could be seen
when switching the electron beam back on. Hence, on
a time scale of 15 s the asymptotic rovibrational pop-
ulation reached after continuous electron interaction is
not altered under the combined inﬂuence of blackbody
radiation and residual gas collisions.

Using the estimates on the rovibrational evolution
given in Sec. II C 2 it is possible to understand more pre-
cisely the origin of the signal evolutions shown in Fig. 15
and Fig. 16. Radiative transitions drive the vibrational
population of the stored ions to stabilize within a few
seconds after injection, and the fast decay of the DR rate
up to ∼10 s could well represent the vibrational stabi-
lization. That the vibrational stabilization is observed
for longer times than seen with the CEI technique is ex-
pected since the DR measurements are much more sensi-
tive to higher vibrational states, given the larger DR cross
sections for these as compared to the vibrational ground
state v = 0 [10]. The ﬁnal vibrational populations in the
beam cannot be estimated based on the results in Fig.
15 and Fig. 16, but will be discussed in Sec. V B.

Based on its timescale, the following evolution of the
DR signal over tens of seconds, i.e., beyond 10 s in Fig.
15 and Fig. 16, must originate from changes in the rota-
tional populations. As a ﬁrst consequence, this demon-
strates that the DR cross section depends on the initial
rotational state of the interacting ion. In Sec. II C 3 two
possible eﬀects of the electron beam on the rotational
populations were discussed: preferential depletion of spe-
ciﬁc J levels by the DR reaction, or their electron-impact
excitation and de-excitation [Eq. (3)].

Preferential depletion by the DR reaction would pro-
duce a signiﬁcant eﬀect on the beam decay, which was not
observed in the measurements of Sec. IV A (see Fig. 8).
Moreover, the electron induced rate variation seen in Fig.
15 when switching the electron beam back on occurs over
a time scale of ∼10 s. With the applied electron density
of ne = 1.2 × 107 cm−3, the rate coeﬃcients involved in
the underlying changes of the rotational level populations
should have a size of ∼(10 s ·ηne)−1 = 3 × 10−7 cm3/s.

On the other hand, the observed absolute DR rate coef-
ﬁcient at Ed = 0 (including contributions from excited
states with v ≥ 3) amounts to only ∼3 × 10−9 cm3/s [see
Fig. 10(a)], much smaller than required to depopulate a
signiﬁcant part of the ion beam.

These arguments leave electron-induced cooling [Eq.
(3)] as the mechanism driving the evolution of the rota-
tional states in the stored ion beam. It should be noted
that the time scale for variations of the DR rate coef-
ﬁcient through the radiation ﬁeld alone, as revealed by
the starting points of the various cooling curves in Fig.
15, approaches several tens of seconds at later times af-
ter injection and probably reaches >
∼100 s as revealed by
the additional test described above, when electrons were
switched oﬀ at times of 35–50 s. In connection with the
radiative lifetimes shown in Fig. 4, this indicates a ro-
tational distribution dominantly composed of levels with
J <

∼ 6, i.e., rotational temperatures of <

∼300 K.

B. Assignment and time dependence of DR
fragment imaging spectra

The DR fragment imaging spectra shown in Fig. 13
were taken under similar cooling conditions as the curve
shown by open symbols in Fig. 16, using the same elec-
tron density (5.5 × 106 cm−3) although the ion beam
energy was reduced in order to enhance the fragment
separation in the detector plane. The time slices of the
three imaging spectra are marked by arrows in Fig. 16.
In the following, we will ﬁrst give a preliminary assign-
ment of the structures in the imaging distribution from
the latest time slice, enlarged in Fig. 17; then we will
consider the time evolution of the individual signals in
two regions of this distribution with a subdivision at the
interparticle distance D = 7 mm.

As stated earlier, the broad structure at D < 7 mm
in the projected distance distribution, marked as Region
1 in Fig. 17, can only arise from the DR of ions ini-
tially in vibrational states with v ≥ 3, proceeding to
products where one He atom emerges in an excited state
with a principal quantum number n ≥ 3. Vertical lines,
grouped according to the initial levels with v ≥ 3 in this
region, indicate the end points of the expected shapes
Pv0nn′ (D) [cf. Eq. (30)] for transitions from a given vi-
brational level to the diﬀerent ﬁne structure terms of the
He(1s2 1S) + He(1s3l) ﬁnal channel. The assignment of
the signal in Region 2 (7 mm < D < 16 mm) is at this
point ambiguous. The peak at 7–12 mm can be well de-
scribed by reactions from the ion’s vibrational ground
state (v = 0) to ﬁnal states with an excited He atom
in 1s2s 3S, 1s2s 1S, 1s2p 3P and 1s2p 1P . However, the
peak structure can also be described by including sub-
stantial contributions from v = 1. Moreover, to fully
describe the tail to higher distances, some contributions
from vibrational states v ≥ 3 are certainly needed, as in-
dicated in the ﬁgure. In Sec. V C below it will be argued
that the major part of the signal in Region 2 indeed must

14

arise from transitions from v = 0.

d and ˜N R2

Figure 18(a) shows the time evolution of the integrated
signals in Region 1 and Region 2, ˜N R1
d after nor-
malization to the detected number of one-body events,
˜Ns. The signals from the two regions have very diﬀerent
time dependencies in the ﬁrst ∼6.5 s. While the signal
from Region 1 decreases strongly, the signal from Region
2 shows a slight increase. From 6.5 s onwards both sig-
nals decrease, the signal from Region 1 essentially reach-
ing a constant level after ∼12 s, while that from Region
2 continues to decrease slowly over the full observation
period up to 22 s. This tendency is emphasized in Fig.
18(b) where the ratio of the two signals, ˜N R1
d , is
displayed as a function of time. Thus, the increase in the
ratio at the late times demonstrates the diﬀerent time
evolution at times beyond >10 s.

d / ˜N R2

The fact that the signals in Region 1 and 2 have very
diﬀerent time structures for the ﬁrst 6.5 s proves that
they originate from diﬀerent parts of the rovibrational
population in the ion beam at these times and indicates
that the signal in Region 2 arises from the lower vibra-
tional levels, possibly up to v = 2. This is also consistent
with the fast vibrational stabilization, taking at most 12
s, imposed by the radiative decay of excited vibrational
states as discussed in Sec. II C 2. The time evolution
on the longer time scale (≥10 s) can be unambiguously
assigned to rotational states with diﬀerent DR cross sec-
tions. Since the signal from Region 2 shows a time de-
pendence after 10 s, while an apparent stabilization is
seen for the signal in Region 1 (v ≥ 3), the rotational
dependence of the DR cross section seems to be more
important for the vibrational ground state (possibly in-
cluding v = 1 and 2 which have not yet been excluded at
this point) than for the higher vibrational states.

The distribution of interparticle distances in Fig. 17
shows that vibrational levels with v ≥ 3 (Region 1) con-
tribute signiﬁcantly to the DR signal even after >10 s of
storage time, in contrast to the expected eﬀect of radia-
tive relaxation (Sec. II C 2), which would yield insignif-
icant excited state populations not contributing to the
DR signal despite their predicted large cross sections. In
consequence, since the populations cannot be determined
by radiative interactions alone, the stored ions must ex-
perience vibrational excitation by some further mecha-
nism(s).

C. Fragment imaging pump-probe experiments

The observations that the signal in Region 1 arises
from higher vibrational states (v ≥ 3) and that the major
part of Region 2 originates from DR of the lower vibra-
tional states makes it possible to use a pump-probe type
experiment to investigate the eﬀect of the electron beam
and of residual-gas collisions on the vibrational popula-
tion. The operation of the electron cooler during these
measurements is schematically shown in Fig. 19(a). Fol-
lowing each injection, the energy of the electron beam is

altered in a regular time pattern, spending several time
intervals of 1 s each at an excitation energy [Ed = 4.0
eV in Fig. 19(a)] and interrupting these excitation pe-
riods by probing intervals of 1 s each, where projected
fragment distance distributions are recorded at Ed = 0
(probing energy). The eﬀect of electron excitation at dif-
ferent energies is illustrated in Fig. 19(b) by showing the
distribution of projected distances accumulated in the
last four probing intervals [t = 9–16 s, see Fig. 19(a)]
at two diﬀerent excitation energies. The ratio of events
in the Regions 1 and 2 is clearly diﬀerent for the two
excitation energies, Region 1 (originating from v ≥ 3)
dominating the spectrum much more for 4.0 eV excita-
tion than for 7.3 eV excitation.

In the following, we will quantify the DR rates asso-
ciated with Regions 1 and 2 by the integrated counts of
d and ˜N R2
two-body events in the respective regions, ˜N R1
d ,
each normalized to the number ˜Ns of single-hit events
during the same counting period. Obviously, the sig-
nals in Regions 1 and 2 are not completely independent
since the reactions contributing to the signal in Region
2 partly give intensity to Region 1. However, it is ev-
ident from Fig. 18 that the signal in Region 2 evolves
slowly with time, and to a ﬁrst approximation its con-
tribution to Region 1 can be considered constant. With
this observation, the relative intensity ˜N R1
d / ˜Ns for Re-
gion 1 yields a useful probe signal for the vibrational
population in v ≥ 3, provided one keeps in mind that it
contains an oﬀset contribution proportional to the corre-
sponding signal for Region 2. It should also be stressed
that, compared to the continuous operation used in Secs.
V A and V B, the switching operation in the pump-probe
measurements leads to somewhat diﬀerent average eﬀects
of the electron beam on the rovibrational populations in
the ion beam, so that the rates ˜N R1,R2
/ ˜Ns cannot be
directly compared to the corresponding quantities of the
previous measurements at the same storage times.

d

The association of Region 1 with vibrationally excited
ions is supported by observing the time dependence of
the signal ˜N R1
d / ˜Ns following the end of an excitation pe-
riod. For this purpose, the data collected in the probing
intervals are subdivided into time bins counting from the
start of the probing period. The temporal variation of
the signals from both Regions after the end of excitation
is shown for an excitation energy of 4 eV in Fig. 20(a).
The DR signal from Region 1 is enhanced right after the
electron excitation period and then shows a signiﬁcant,
rapid decrease. The time constant for the decay of this
signal (containing a constant oﬀset due to the contribu-
tions from Region 2, as discussed above) is consistent
with the expected radiative lifetime of the levels v = 3–
5, lying in the range of 0.4–0.25 s as shown in Fig. 4.
Remarkably, no signiﬁcant time variation (above a 10%
level) is seen on the DR signal from Region 2. This pro-
vides a strong experimental evidence that the major part
of this signal originates from the vibrational ground state
(v = 0). In fact, the radiative lifetimes of all excited v lev-
els (populated either directly or by the radiative cascade

15

from v ≥ 3) are short enough that signiﬁcant contribu-
tions to the Region-2 DR signal from such levels should
reveal themselves by a decaying component in the time-
dependent pump-probe measurement of Fig. 20(a).
It
should also be noted that the constant value of ˜N R2
d / ˜Ns
[marked by a dashed line in Fig. 20(a)] is slightly higher
than obtained at the same storage times when the elec-
tron beam at zero energy was applied continuously [Fig.
18(a)]. This is consistent with the interpretation of a
strong electron induced rotational de-excitation at zero
energy, as discussed in Sec. V A.

The variation of the vibrational excitation with the
electron energy is displayed in Fig. 20(b). The sig-
nal from Region 1 is clearly energy dependent with a
peak at ∼5 eV. The mechanism underlying this observed
electron-induced vibrational excitation will be discussed
in Sec. VI E. The signal originating from Region 2 has no
energy dependence, conﬁrming again that this part of the
DR signal originates predominantly from 3He4He+(v =
0) ions. Note that the energy range scanned in this mea-
surement covers an essential part of the electron energies
present in the toroid regions of the electron cooler when
the detuning energy in the central part of the electron
cooler is close to zero.

Fragment imaging measurements with a similar tim-
ing cycle were performed to probe the eﬀect of leaving
the 3He4He+ ions under the inﬂuence of residual gas col-
lisions only. To this end, following each injection, the
probing periods were again arranged as in Fig. 19(a),
but instead of stepping up the electron energy the elec-
tron beam was switched oﬀ for 1 s between the probing
periods. Figure 21 shows that under these conditions the
probe signal from Region 1 is essentially constant, pos-
sibly with a slight temporal increase showing the eﬀect
of vibrational excitation from the toroid regions after the
electrons have been switched back on. The signal ratio
between Regions 1 and 2 during the probing period con-
tinuously stays at ∼2, a value close to that found when
the electron beam was continuously on [t > 9 s in Fig.
18(b)]. Altogether, the dominant part of the observed vi-
brational excitation persists in the stored 3He4He+ beam
even during the absence of the electron beam (over times
that exceed the radiative lifetime of the excited vibra-
tional levels). We conclude that the dominant role in
maintaining a small non-thermal vibrational population
in the stored beam is played by ion collisions with the
residual gas.

VI. RESULTS

A. Low-energy DR: initial-to-ﬁnal state dynamics

The absence of a time dependence of the rate ˜N R2
in
the pump-probe experiments of Sec. V C shows that at
most ∼10% of the signal in Region 2 (D > 7 mm) of the
DR fragment imaging distributions at Ed = 0 can arise
from 3He4He+ ions in the vibrationally excited states.

d

Hence, the shoulders on the right-hand side of the frag-
ments imaging distribution of Fig. 17 can be overwhelm-
ingly assigned to diﬀerent ﬁnal states of 3He4He+(v = 0)
DR. Consequently, the distribution was ﬁtted with the
individual initial-to-ﬁnal-state contributions listed in Ta-
ble I, yielding the full line in Fig. 17. In particular, the
dominant contributions peaking at ∼7.2 mm and ∼8.0
mm (cf. Fig. 17) must come from the 3P and 1S states,
respectively. Contributions to the imaging signal whose
shape cannot be attributed to v = 0 ions are on the few-
percent level; within the remaining arbitrariness caused
by the similarity of the energy release for the diﬀerent
channels with v 6= 0, they were attributed to certain ﬁnal
states reached from ions with v = 3 and 4, as indicated
in Table I.

The ﬁtted signal contributions of Table I now yield the
branching ratios for DR of 3He4He+(v = 0) ions into the
various ﬁne structure terms of the n = 2 ﬁnal atomic
states. Table II lists these ratios, which show a domi-
nance of the 1s2p 3P and 1s2s 1S ﬁne structure levels;
this result will be further discussed in Sec. VII A 2.

In addition, it is possible to extract from Table I the
fraction of all detected two-body events that originates
from 3He4He+ in the vibrational ground state, which
amounts to ˜I(v = 0) = 0.54(5). This result will be used
in the next section to derive the low-energy DR rate co-
eﬃcient for v = 0 3He4He+ ions.

Finally, two conclusions can be drawn from the low
fraction (at most ∼10%) of signal contributions from vi-
brationally excited ions in Region 2. Firstly, this indi-
cates that the levels v = 1 and 2, for which the DR can
contribute to Region 2 only (n = 2 ﬁnal atomic states),
In fact,
are weakly populated in the stored ion beam.
the DR rate coeﬃcient should grow signiﬁcantly with in-
creasing v through the improving Franck-Condon overlap
(an increase by at least a factor of 10 for each quantum
of vibrational excitation between 0 and 2 was predicted
in Ref. [10]), so that the populations of excited v levels
are likely to be <1%. Secondly, the levels v ≥ 3 (likely
to have similar populations) do yield a substantial DR
signal in Region 1 (n ≥ 3 ﬁnal atomic states) but, re-
markably, still seem to contribute very little to Region
2. Hence, ions in these levels show a strong preference
for DR into the higher-lying atomic states, avoiding the
n = 2 ﬁnal levels.

B. Absolute low-energy DR rate coeﬃcient

From the comparison of the ion beam decay rate with
and without the presence of the electron beam, an abso-
lute rate coeﬃcient of ˜αDR(Er) = 2.8(4) × 10−8 cm3 s−1
was deduced in Sec. IV A 2 for the DR on the high-energy
peak at a relative energy of Er
d = 7.3 eV. The energy-
dependent rate measurements were normalized using this
absolute rate and, after the toroid correction (see Sec.
IV A 3), yield for t > 35 s a zero-energy, rovibrationally
averaged DR rate coeﬃcient of ˜αDR(0) = 2.7(4) × 10−9

16

cm3 s−1. Following the assignment and the ﬁt of the DR
fragment imaging distribution as discussed in the previ-
ous section, it becomes possible to determine the fraction
of the observed DR rate at Ed = 0 that originates from
v = 0 3He4He+ ions.

The total intensity in the fragment imaging spectrum,
corresponding to the toroid-corrected averaged rate co-
eﬃcient ˜αDR(0), is reduced by the limited detection, as
discussed in Sec. IV B 2, by a factor of 1 − ˜fd, where
˜fd was obtained in Eq. (32). The integrated intensity
˜I(v = 0) of the ﬁtted v = 0 contributions in the normal-
ized fragment imaging spectrum can therefore be written
as

˜I(v = 0) =

p0 ˜αv=0

DR (0)

(1 − ˜fd)˜αDR(0)

,

(33)

using the eﬀective contribution p0 ˜αv=0
DR (0) from v = 0
ions contained in ˜αDR(0) as deﬁned by Eq. (5). Within
the error of the absolute rate coeﬃcient scale of ∼20%
we can here neglect the deviation of p0 from unity.

Using the values of ˜I(v = 0) and ˜αDR(0) determined

above, we then obtain

DR (0) = (7.3 ± 2.1) × 10−10 cm3 s−1.
˜αv=0

(34)

This rate coeﬃcient is still averaged over the relaxed ro-
tational distribution resulting after storage and electron
cooling of 35 s (cf. Sec. V A). The inﬂuence of the rota-
tional relaxation is illustrated by the open symbols in Fig.
16, keeping in mind that the given result was obtained
with an electron density of 5.5 × 106 cm−3.

Assuming a DR cross section varying as ∝ E−1 up
to ∼0.1 eV, the merged-beams rate coeﬃcient ˜αv=0
DR (0)
can be converted to a rate coeﬃcient for a thermal,
isotropic electron velocity distribution at 300 K through
the division by a factor of (300 K/T⊥)1/2 arctan(T⊥/Tk −
1)1/2/(1 − Tk/T⊥)1/2 = 2.2 that follows from the respec-
tive averages over isotropic and anisotropic Maxwellians.
This yields ˜αv=0

300 K, DR = (3.3 ± 0.9) × 10−10 cm3 s−1.

After subtraction of αv=0

DR (0) from the total observed
rate coeﬃcient ˜αDR(0), a diﬀerence of ∆˜αDR(0) =
1.9(5) × 10−9 cm3 s−1 remains, that represents the frac-
tion due to vibrationally excited ions in states v ≥ 3. The
value of ∆˜αDR(0) can be used to estimate the zero-energy
DR rate coeﬃcient for excited vibrational states v ≥ 3.
J pvJ < 0.01 for
Assuming relative populations pv =
these levels, we obtain ˜αv≥3

DR (0) >
On the other hand, if a value of ∼10−6 cm3 s−1 is re-
garded as an upper limit for the DR rate coeﬃcient of
He+
2 ions in any vibrational excited level, the relative
population of levels with v ≥ 3 must be ≥0.19 %. Hence,
it is reasonable to assume excited vibrational states to
occur in the stored ion beam at fractions between ∼0.1
and 1%.

∼ 2 × 10−7 cm3 s−1.

P

C. Low energy structure of the DR cross section

∼19 eV, may indicate the importance of individual core
excited resonances as in the case of CD+ [64].

17

In the low-energy range the measured rate coeﬃcient
˜αDR(Ed) shows a strong variation with time as illustrated
for Ed = 0 in Fig. 15. The measured energy dependence
in two characteristic time windows is shown in Fig. 22.
As discussed, contributions from higher vibrational states
are signiﬁcant even at long storage time, as illustrated
by the indicated size of αv=0
DR (0). The observed low-
energy DR rate coeﬃcient displays a peak-like structure
at ∼0.025 eV which persists over all accessible times after
injection, but sharpens at the later times. The present
measurement shows no indication of further structure in
the DR cross section in the energy range below 1 eV.

D. High energy structure of the DR cross section

At high collision energies, the variation of the rate coef-
ﬁcient ˜αDR(Ed) directly reﬂects the energy dependence of
the DR cross section. The electron energy spread (∼0.23
eV at 10 eV and ∼0.34 eV at 20 eV) is small compared
to the observed structures, so that the DR cross section
˜σDR(E) can be obtained directly from the rate coeﬃ-
cient using the relation ˜αDR(Ed) ∼ (2Ed/m)1/2˜σDR(Ed).
The high-energy structure of the measured rate coeﬃ-
cient (Fig. 23) shows much less variation with the storage
time, indicating that the sizes of the state-speciﬁc cross
sections are similar to each other. Between 3 and 12 eV,
a broad peak structure is observed that, as shown in Fig.
23(a), slightly shifts and narrows with time, again reﬂect-
ing the evolution of rovibrational states in the beam dur-
ing storage. The position and the width of this structure
match well the energies of vertical transitions from the
ionic vibrational ground state to dissociating neutral Ry-
dberg states which converge to the repulsive A2Σ+
u ionic
state shown Fig. 1. The DR cross section arising from
this reaction channel is found to be (1.7 ± 0.2) × 10−16
cm2 at the peak near 7.3 eV.

At higher energies (>15 eV) the measured rate coeﬃ-
cient displays a rich structure with a small narrow peak
(FWHM ∼2 eV) at ∼19 eV, a larger and broader peak
at ∼22.5 eV, a plateau-like behavior at 25–27 eV, and
a small modulation at 31 eV before the rate declines.
In the energy region of these observed structures, ver-
tical transitions from the ionic vibrational ground state
can reach dissociating neutral Rydberg states attached
to highly excited states of the He+
2 ion; the ionic curves
correlated to the He+(1s) + He(1s2l) atomic limits are
shown in Fig. 2. For instance, the energetic limit for dis-
sociation into He(1s2s) + He(1snl) (n ≥ 2) is 17.4 eV,
and the peak at ∼ 19 eV could well represent dissociation
to these ﬁnal states following an initial vertical electron
capture process. Similarily, the energetic limit for disso-
ciation into He(1s3l) + He(1snl) (n ≥ 3) is 23.6 eV, for
He(1s4l) + He(1snl) (n ≥ 4) 25.0 eV, while the energetic
limit for He+(1s) + He+(1s) is found at 26.9 eV. The
very detailed structure, in particular the narrow peak at

E. Energetic structure of DE and electron-impact
vibrational excitation

In the present experiment, all three types of electron-
induced reactions discussed in Sec. I were studied as a
function of the collision energy. For the energy range of
vertical transitions from the ionic ground state to neu-
tral dissociating Rydberg states attached to the lowest
excited state of He+
2 (∼3–10 eV) the measured reaction
rate coeﬃcients for DE and DR are compared in Fig.
24(a). The energy dependence of the signal for electron-
impact vibrational excitation to states v ≥ 3, as obtained
from the pump-probe measurements, is also included in
Fig. 24(a). The absolute scale of the excitation proﬁle is
arbitrarily chosen in order to compare its shape to the
rate coeﬃcients for DR and DE.

Considering only the “direct” DE caused by simple
electron impact excitation to the repulsive curve of He+
2 ,
the DE cross section should rise only at >
∼5 eV (cf. Fig.
1). Here, we observe that the DE rate coeﬃcient rises
already at much lower energies, close to the dissociation
threshold of ∼2.4 eV, and indeed follows the energy de-
pendence of the DR rate coeﬃcient up to ∼5 eV. Above
this energy, the DE rate ceases to rise until the onset of
the “direct” DE at ∼7 eV, which leads to a strong in-
crease towards higher energies, while the DR rate drops.
The DE signal below ∼7 eV clearly shows the inﬂuence
of intermediate neutral Rydberg states on this process.
The vibrational excitation signal also occurs below the
dissociation threshold and it extends far above the dis-
sociation energy with a peak at ∼5 eV. The peak posi-
tion matches the vertical transition energy from the ionic
ground state to the ﬁrst neutral dissociative curve 3Σ+
g
[see Fig. 24(b)], but also the higher lying neutral states
below the A2Σ+
u ionic state appear to contribute. A sim-
ilar excitation proﬁle was previously reported for HD+
[47, 52]. The results underline the importance of the
electronically doubly excited states in all, DR, DE, and
electron-impact excitation of He+

2 [53].

2 involving the ﬁrst 3Σ+

A mechanism of resonance enhanced DE and vibra-
tional excitation was described by Orel and Kulander
[65] for HeH+. A similar mechanism is illustrated in
Fig. 24(b) for He+
g Ryberg state
reached vertically at 5 eV above the vibrational ground
state. Following resonant capture of the incident elec-
tron, the resonance state autoionizes with a considerable
fraction of the excitation energy being given to the nu-
clear motion, leading either into the vibrational contin-
uum (DE) or into a bound vibrational state (EX) of the
He+
2 ion in its electronic ground state. DR results if the
resonance evolves without autoionization.

VII. DISCUSSION

A.

3He4He+ DR

1. DR rate coeﬃcient

Our general observations regarding the DR rate coef-
ﬁcient of 3He4He+ and its dependence on the ion stor-
age time are in overall agreement with those of the only
earlier storage ring experiment at ASTRID [31], which
also showed a strong variation of the low-energy DR rate
during the vibrational relaxation and indicated a small
rate coeﬃcient for the vibrational ground state. Very
recently, absolute rates from this experiment were pre-
sented [66]. For low-energy DR, a thermal rate coeﬃ-
cient of (6 ± 3) × 10−10 cm3 s−1 for 300 K was extracted
from the data at >
∼12 s of storage time, including all pos-
sible contributions from excited ro-vibrational states of
the stored ions. Within the statistical errors, the frag-
ment imaging distributions from this experiment, also re-
ported recently [66], do not show any contribution of the
n = 2 ﬁnal atomic states, unlike the present data (cf. Sec.
VI A). Hence, the extraction of a rate coeﬃcient for v = 0
ions is not possible there; moreover, this may indicate a
higher internal excitation of the stored ions than in our
case. Converting our zero-energy, rovibrationally aver-
aged DR rate coeﬃcient ˜αDR(0) = 2.7(4) × 10−9 cm3 s−1
to a 300-K thermal value through the division by 2.2
(see Sec. VI B), we obtain—as a quantity equivalent to
the rovibrationally averaged ASTRID result—a value of
1.2 × 10−9 cm3 s−1, signiﬁcantly higher in spite of prob-
ably a lower internal excitation of the ions. Regarding
high-energy DR, we ﬁnd a signiﬁcantly larger cross sec-
tion than ASTRID on the peak near 7 eV [1.7(2) × 10−16
cm2 (see Sec. VI D) vs. 0.6(3) × 10−16 cm2 at ASTRID];
in addition, diﬀerent values are found for the position
of the maximum (7.3 eV vs. 6.6 eV at ASTRID). While
some of these discrepancies may be explained by the dif-
ferent ion source and storage conditions in the two ex-
periments, the reasons for the apparent disagreement in
the absolute cross section, particularly obvious for the
high-energy peak, are presently unknown.

For the vibrational ground state, our thermal DR rate
coeﬃcient of ˜αv=0
300 K, DR = (3.3 ± 0.9) × 10−10 cm3 s−1 is
consistent with the limit of <5 × 10−10 cm3 s−1 obtained
by Deloche et al.
[12]. For excited vibrational states,
the result of ˜αv≥3
∼ 2 × 10−7 cm3 s−1 (Sec. VI B),
corresponding to thermal rate coeﬃcients of >
∼ 1 × 10−7
cm3 s−1, clearly exceeds the limit of Ref. [12]. However,
the observed strong increase of the DR rate coeﬃcient
for excited vibrational states is in accord with the mea-
surement by Ivanov et al. [19] and with the calculations
by Carata et al. [10].

DR (0) >

Our low-energy thermal rate coeﬃcient for the vibra-
tional ground state is about a factor of 6 larger than the
theoretical result (6.1 × 10−11 cm3 s−1) of Carata et al.
[10] which, although given for J = 0, diﬀers only lit-

18

tle from that for a rotational temperature of 300 K (see
Fig. 14 of Ref. [10]) which should describe the present
experimental conditions more adequately. Carata et al.
emphasize [10] that non-adiabatic couplings to singly ex-
cited neutral states are not included in their calculation,
so that the larger rate coeﬃcient observed here may in-
dicate the presence of such couplings (however, possible
branching to ground-state He atoms [10] can be excluded
experimentally as discussed in the following Section).

Very recently, Royal and Orel [67] have obtained re-
sults for the high-energy DR of 3He4He+ (∼2–13 eV) us-
ing time dependent wave packet calculations. Their peak
cross section of 0.75 × 10−17 cm2 is signiﬁcantly smaller
than our result; the peak position is in good agreement,
while the calculated peak shape does not reproduce the
asymmetry found in our data for t > 35 s (see Fig. 23,
and Fig. 3 of Ref. [67]). The latter observation may in-
dicate the presence of mechanisms or dissociating curves
not included in the calculation.

2. DR branching ratios

To the best of our knowledge, previous experimental
results regarding the ﬁnal-state branching ratios for the
low-energy DR of v = 0 He+
2 ions suitable for a com-
parison with our results are not available. Carata et al.
[10] in their calculations found the 3Σ+
g curve to be the
dominant dissociation route for the vibrational ground
state. Although this curve diabatically correlates to the
1s2s 3S ﬁnal atomic state, we ﬁnd only ∼3.7% of the DR
events from the vibrational ground state in this channel
(see Table II). The experimentally strongest channels
(3P and 1S) correspond to dissociating curves yielding
only minor contributions to the calculated DR rate [10].
In the context of these calculations this would indicate
the presence of substantial population exchange between
molecular states in the dissociation process. Such eﬀects,
which clearly need further study, could be caused by the
interference of the three dissociation routes (3Σg, 3Πu,
and 1Σg) through Σ-Π coupling [28] or by non-adiabatic
couplings [68, 69]. An example of a similar population
exchange can be found in the DR of O+

2 [3, 4].

The inclusion of non-adiabatic couplings, suggested by
the diﬀerence between the experiment and the MQDT
result for the v = 0 DR rate, as well as by the possi-
ble re-population eﬀects considered just above, was sus-
pected [10] to give more ﬂux of dissociation to energeti-
cally lower asymptotic channels, notably the ground state
product channel He(1s2) + He(1s2). From our DR frag-
ment imaging results, we can with high sensitivity ex-
clude the presence of this channel, which for our experi-
mental parameters would have a maximum interparticle
separation of 37.2 mm and thus be easily recognizable on
the 80-mm diameter fragment imaging detector. In fact,
also in the case of HeH+ DR, characterized by strong
non-adiabatic coupling, ground state products could be
excluded with high experimental sensitivity [70].

The small contribution from higher vibrational states
in Region 2 of the fragment imaging distributions (see
Sec. VI A) is remarkable. Consequently, the strong DR
from excited vibrational levels (v ≥ 3) proceeds mostly
to ﬁnal states with an excited He(nl) atom with n ≥ 3.
Similar strong preferences for DR into the highest ener-
getically open ﬁnal channels were observed previously for
the DR of HeH+ [70] and LiH+ [71].

B. Rovibrational excitation and de-excitation
mechanisms and rates

1. Vibrational excitation of stored 3He4He+ ions

Using the coupled set of Eqs. (16) for the rovibrational
populations in the stored ion beam, we have modeled the
eﬀect of inelastic collisions of the stored ions with resid-
ual gas molecules acting in addition to the blackbody-
induced radiative transitions already discussed in Sec.
II C. Lacking measurements or calculations suitable for
a realisic modeling of MeV collisions between molecular
ions and H2 (the main component of the residual gas),
we strongly simplify the case, using a single ﬁxed cross
section to describe the probability that the state v, J of
a molecular ion is changed in a residual gas collision to
a diﬀerent state v′, J with a certain v′ 6= v. The same
partial cross section σg
inel is used for all possible ﬁnal v′
within a model containing six vibrational levels (v = 0–5)
and thirty rotational levels (J = 0–29). Since the rele-
vant collisions, leaving the molecular ion intact in spite
of the high collision energy, are likely to proceed at large
distance with a small exchange of momentum, we as-
sume that the rotational quantum number is preserved.
We then obtain rate constants kg
inel according to Eq. (11)
with ng = 1.3 × 106 cm−3 and include the term

+

(kg

inelNv′J − kg

inelNvJ )

(35)

Xv′

on each of the right-hand sides of Eqs. (16), thus describ-
ing the collisional excitation and de-excitation of vibra-
tional levels in residual gas collisions. As expected (see
Sec. II C) the equilibrium under the inﬂuence of residual
gas collisions was always reached faster than under the
action of radiative transitions alone (Fig. 5). The equilib-
rium populations obtained in competition with radiative
relaxation for four diﬀerent values of σg
inel are shown in
Fig. 25. The excited-state equilibrium populations on
the order of 1% indicated by the experimental results are
found to correspond to partial inelastic collision cross sec-
tions of the order of a few 10−18 cm2.
From the ion beam decay rate kg

DE (see Sec. IV A 2)
the partial cross section for each of the two DE reac-
tion channels in a residual gas collision [Eq. (9)] is de-
termined to be 2.7 × 10−17 cm2. On the other hand, the
cross section for dissociative charge exchange [Eq. (10)]
is found to be 4 × 10−20 cm2. The estimated vibrational

19

excitation cross sections lie between both values. The
reaction mechanism(s) that can lead to vibrational exci-
tation of the stored ions after collisions with a residual
gas molecule (H2) at MeV energies is not obvious.
It
may proceed as a direct vibrational excitation reaction
or it may proceed as a relaxation process after an initial
charge exchange collision. Clearly, to understand better
the importance of the vibrational excitation in storage
ring measurements, there is a need for theoretical work
on such processes both in view of obtaining absolute cross
sections and understanding the underlying mechanisms.
The result shows that for molecular ions that are not or
only weakly radiatively active (unlike 3He4He+), an ion
beam stored in a storage ring may stabilize with a signif-
icant vibrational excitation, even though the molecules
may have been produced vibrationally cold in the ion
source. However, in the well studied case of stored H+
2
ions, electron induced vibrational de-excitation turned
out to be a strong process [50] and found to dominate
the stabilized level of vibrational excitation.

2. Rotational excitation and cooling

The interaction with electrons at zero detuning energy
(Ed = 0) was shown in Sec. V A to have a strong eﬀect
on the DR rate coeﬃcient ˜αDR(0), as represented by the
time dependence of the normalized DR rate R(7)/R(3).
While the evolution <
∼ 10 s was attributed mainly to
vibrational stabilization, the time scale of the observed
variations beyond 10 s was assigned to changes in the rel-
ative rotational level populations within the vibrational
ground state. Here we address the time dependence of the
normalized DR rate R(7)/R(3) beyond 10 s by exploring
possible mechanisms changing the rotational populations
in the stored ion beam in a similar way as in the previous
subsection, extending the set of Eqs. (16) and following
the resulting time evolution in a model calculation. A
complete modeling of the normalized DR rate R(7)/R(3)
is excluded considering that the detailed rate coeﬃcients
αvJ
DR (possibly with strong resonances for certain J’s) are
unknown. With the aim of illustration, we focus mainly
on the time dependence of the rotational temperature for
an ensemble of ions, since the time scale of changes in the
normalized DR rate R(7)/R(3) still qualitatively reﬂects
the time scale of changes in the rotational temperature,
despite a complicated J-dependence of αvJ

DR.

As discussed in Sec. V A, a rotational dependence of
the DR rate coeﬃcient might lead to selective depletion
of excited rotational levels, provided the involved rate co-
eﬃcients are large enough. To schematically investigate
this eﬀect, we parameterize the DR rate coeﬃcient as

αvJ

DR(0) = av(1 + bJ),
where the parameter av represents the vibrational and b
the rotational dependence. The v- and J-dependent DR
rates are included by adding the terms

(36)

− kvJ

DR(0)NvJ

(37)

to the right-hand sides of Eqs. (16). The increase of the
DR rate with the vibrational level was included by chos-
ing a0 = 5 × 10−10 cm3 s−1 and letting av increase by
a factor of 10 for each consecutive excited state up to
v = 3, and then setting av = 5 × 10−7 cm3 s−1 for v ≥ 3.
A strong J-dependent increase of αvJ
DR(0) was assumed
with b = 1. As before, a model with six vibrational lev-
els (v = 0–5) was considered. In comparison to radiative
relaxation alone [Fig. 26(a), curve α], the inclusion of DR
depletion (curve β) has a small eﬀect as long as the vi-
brational excitation in residual gas collision is neglected
(depletion is only eﬃcient at short times, when excited
vibrational levels are still signiﬁcantly populated). If the
population of excited vibrational levels by residual gas
collisions is included, adding the terms of Eq. (35), the
depletion eﬀect tends to become stronger; however, a
time scale of the cooling eﬀect comparable to that ob-
served in Fig. 15 is reached only for very large values of
σg
inel, for which excited vibrational states would be about
as strongly populated as the v = 0 ground state. This
situation is not found in the experiment and hence, as al-
ready stated in Sec. V A, depletion [even with the strong
eﬀect implied by choosing b = 1 in Eq. (36)] cannot lead
to signiﬁcant changes of the rotational temperature on
the time scales of the electron-induced cooling eﬀect of
Fig. 15.

To estimate the eﬀect of rotationally inelastic electron
collisions [Eq. (3) with v = v′] we parameterize the rota-
tional excitation cross section, inspired by the formula-
tion given by Rabadan et al. [54], as

′

σJ→J
EX (E) = σ0

E − EJ
J ′
E

EJ
J ′
E

,

r
where the overall size of the cross section is determined
by the parameter σ0. The corresponding de-excitation
cross section is derived from the principle of microscopic
reversibility, and written as

(38)

′

→J

DEX (E′) = σJ→J
σJ

EX (E′ +EJ

J ′ )

′

E′ + EJ
J ′
E′

2J + 1
2J ′ + 1

. (39)

r

The rotationally inelastic electron collisions are then in-
cluded in the coupled set of Eqs. (16) by adding the fol-
lowing terms to its right hand side

→J

DEX (0)NvJ ′ − kJ→J
kJ

EX (0)NvJ

→J

EX (0)NvJ ′ − kJ→J
kJ

DEX (0)NvJ

, (40)

′

′

(cid:17)

(cid:17)

X(vJ ′)>(vJ) (cid:16)

′

′

+

+

X(vJ ′)<(vJ) (cid:16)
EX (Ed) and kJ→J

′

′

where kJ→J
DEX (Ed) are deﬁned according
to Eq. (12). Figure 26(b) illustrates the eﬀect of the
electron induced rotational transitions for two diﬀerent
values of σ0 in comparison to the case where only ra-
diative transitions aﬀect the rotational population. For
simplicity, the electron induced transitions included in
the model were restricted to ∆J = ±1.

20

This calculation indicates that signiﬁcant changes of
the rotational temperature on the time scales of the ob-
served cooling eﬀect in Fig. 15 can be obtained by elec-
tron induced rotational transitions for σ0 of the order
of 10−12 cm2; the collisional cooling in fact leads down
to the electron temperature (kT⊥ = 10 meV, T⊥ = 116
K) which is included through the averaging of the exci-
tation and de-excitation cross sections according to Eq.
(12). The required value of the cross section constant
σ0 (amounting to ∼104 ˚A2) is not unrealistic [55] and
slightly smaller values may in fact be suﬃcient if transi-
tions other than ∆J = ±1 [54] are considered in addition.
Fig. 27 displays calculated ratios R(7)/R(3) as a function
of time both when the rotational de-excitations are neg-
ligible (soild line) and when they have a strong eﬀect
on the rotational temperature (dashed lines). Even with
the simplifying assumptions made here, the model cal-
culation in Fig. 27 reproduces almost quantitatively the
experimental data of Fig. 15 when a strong rotational
de-excitation is included.

Summarizing, the model calculations—in combination
with the ﬁnding of only small populations on the per-cent
level in excited vibrational states—suggest that the ob-
served temporal evolution of the low-energy DR signal of
stored 3He4He+ ions is due to rotational cooling through
inelastic electron collisions, and not due to the combined
action of DR depletion and vibrational excitation.

Rotational excitation and de-excitation in electron col-
lisions have already been considered theoretically for sev-
eral molecular ions (see, e.g., Ref. [54]). It must be ex-
pected that such reactions play a signiﬁcant role for other
storage ring measurements on DR too.
In a study of
D2H+ [48] a similar time dependence of the low-energy
DR rate was observed, in that case with a considerably
large DR rate coeﬃcient, so that the observed changes of
rotational populations were attributed mainly to selec-
tive ion depletion by DR from the ion beam, implying a
linear dependence of the rate coeﬃcient on the rotational
temperature with slope 0.94 × 10−9 cm3 s−1K−1. How-
ever, additional de-excitation of D2H+ ions by rotation-
ally inelastic electron collisions could not be excluded, as
also in this case the actual dependence of the DR rate
coeﬃcient on the rotational level is still unknown.

VIII. CONCLUSION

The present merged-beams DR measurements with
3He4He+ ions clearly conﬁrm the predicted strong de-
pendence of the DR cross section for He+
2 on the initial
vibrational level. DR observations at low collision ener-
gies (<
∼100 meV) have turned out to be highly sensitive
to small populations in vibrationally excited states. Al-
though 3He4He+ is radiatively active, which should result
in negligible populations in vibrationally excited states
after already a few seconds of storage, evidence for sta-
tionary, non-thermal populations on vibrational excited
levels with fractions of 0.1 to 1% was found by analyzing

the DR fragment imaging distributions. Pump-probe-
type measurements involving switching or variations of
the energy of the electron beam allowed the vibrational
excitation by energetic electron-ion collisions to be dis-
tinguished from that by ion collisions with the residual
gas, ﬁnding the latter to dominate in the normal storage
conditions.

level populations,

On the longer time scales typical for the evolution
of rotational
the presence of the
velocity-matched electron beam is seen to cause signiﬁ-
cant changes of the observed (state-averaged) zero-energy
DR rate coeﬃcient, which are attributed to rotational
cooling of the 3He4He+ ions in connection with a de-
pendendence of the DR cross section on their initial ro-
tational state. The cooling eﬀect could be unambigu-
ously attributed to rotational de-excitation in inelastic
low-energy electron-ion collisions. Selective depletion by
a rotationally sensitive loss process can be excluded since
the only process which could provide for such a sensitivity
is low-energy DR, and the corresponding rate coeﬃcient
is observed to be two orders of magnitude too low to
account for suﬃcient rotational population changes.

With the developed understanding of the beam dynam-
ics and the contributions of diﬀerent reaction channels to
the DR fragment imaging distribution, an absolute DR
rate coeﬃcient of (7.3 ± 2.1) × 10−10 cm3 s−1 could be
determined for v = 0 3He4He+ ions, referring to an elec-
tron thermal energy near 10 meV and to a rotational
temperature likely to be near 300 K or below. The result
is somewhat larger than predicted in recent theoretical
calculations [10] and consistent with earlier experimental
limits [12]. Also branching ratios for the four accessible
ﬁnal atomic states could be determined (Table II); they
signiﬁcantly diﬀer from those expected [10] on the ba-
sis of the relative importance of the various dissociative
potential curves and their diabatic correlations to ﬁnal
atomic levels.

In an energy range up to 40 eV, the energy dependences

21

of the cross sections for DR, DE and electron-impact vi-
brational excitation were measured. The DR cross sec-
tion shows the expected broad peak at ∼7.3 eV and inter-
esting structures, one of them narrow, at higher energies,
which appear to carry detailed information about higher
lying doubly excited states of He2 and call for further in-
vestigations. The measurements also reveal the compe-
tition between diﬀerent stabilization pathways after the
resonant capture of an electron on He+
2 at energies of
several eV.

In a broader view, the results presented in this paper
illustrate some of the challenges faced by storage ring
experiments setting out to measure very small DR cross
sections or to obtain sensitivity on initial rotational states
in such measurements. At the present stage, in partic-
ular the rotational excitation can only be extracted by
indirect conclusions bringing together several experimen-
tal ﬁndings. In the future, more direct diagnostic tech-
niques to study the rotational population of the stored
and electron cooled ion beams, similar to the laser tech-
nique demonstrated earlier for a speciﬁc case [51], are
highly desirable. With such diagnostic techniques estab-
lished, the strong rotational excitation and de-excitation
that appears to be possible by low-energy collisions in the
merged electron beam could also be used to actively ma-
nipulate the rotational populations in a stored ion beam.

Acknowledgments

This work has been funded by the German Israel Foun-
dation for Scientiﬁc Research (GIF) under Contract No.
I-707-55.7/2001 and by the European Community within
the Research Training Network “Electron Transfer Reac-
tions”. HBP acknowledges support from the European
Community program IHP through a Marie Curie fellow-
ship under contract No. HPMF-CT-2002-01833.

[1] D. R. Bates, Adv. At. Mol. Opt. Phys. 34, 427 (1994).
[2] M. Larsson, Annu. Rev. Phys. Chem. 48, 151 (1997).
[3] D. Kella, L. Vejby-Christensen, P. J. Johnson, H. B. Ped-
ersen, and L. H. Andersen, Science 276, 1530 (1997).

[4] S. L. Guberman, Science 278, 1276 (1997)
[5] L. Vejby-Christensen, D. Kella, H. B. Pedersen, and L.

H. Andersen, Phys. Rev. A 57, 3627 (1998).

[6] H. Sun and H. Nakamura, J. Chem. Phys. 93, 6491

[7] D. R. Bates, Phys. Rev. 77, 718 (1950).
[8] V. Kokoouline and C. H. Greene, Phys. Rev. A 68,

[9] R. S. Mulliken, Phys. Rev. 136, A962 (1964).
[10] L. Carata, A. E. Orel, and A. Suzor-Weiner, Phys. Rev.

(1990).

012703 (2003).

A 59, 2804 (1999).

509 1, (1998).

Phys. Rev. A 13, 1140 (1976).

[13] A. V. Phelps and S. C. Brown, Phys. Rev. 86, 102 (1952).
[14] J. A. Hornbeck and J. P. Molnar, Phys. Rev. 84, 621

(1951).

[15] X. Urbain, in Proceedings of the 1999 Conference on Dis-
sociative Recombination, Theory, Experiment and Appli-
cations IV, edited by M. Larsson, L. B. A. Mitchell, and
I. F. Schneider (World Scientiﬁc, Singapore, 1999), p.
160.

[16] M. Cheret and F. Lampert, C. R. Acad. Sci. (Paris) 275,

[17] M. A. Biondi and S. C. Brown, Phys. Rev. 75, 1697

[18] V. A. Ivanov, N. P. Penkin, and Y. E. Skoblo, Opt. Spec-

trosc. 54, 552 (1983).

77 (1972).

(1949).

(1989).

[11] P. C. Stancil, S. Lepp, and A. Dalgarno, Astrophys. J,

[19] V. A. Ivanov and Y. E. Skoblo, Opt. Spectrosc. 65, 445

[12] R. Deloche, P. Monchicourt, M. Cheret, and F. Lampert,

[20] W. Cencek and J. Rychlewski, J. Chem. Phys. 102, 2533

(1995).

(1991).

[21] J. Ackermann and H. Hogreve, Chem. Phys. 157, 75

[22] J. G. Maas, N. P. F. B. van Asselt, P. J. C. M. Nowak, J.
Los, S. D. Peyerimhoﬀ, and R. J. Buenker, Chem. Phys.
17, 217 (1976).

[23] J. P. Flamme, T. Mark, and J. Los, Chem. Phys. Lett.

75, 419 (1980).

[24] N. Yu and W. H. Wing, Phys. Rev. Lett. 59, 2055 (1987).
[25] L. Coman, M. Guna, L. Simons, and K. A. Hardy, Phys.

Rev. Lett. 83, 2715 (1999).

[26] W. J. van der Zande and W. Ubachs, Phys. Rev. Lett.

[27] K. A. Hardy and X. W. Wang , Phys. Rev. Lett. 84, 3213

84, 3212 (2000).

(2000).

[28] J. S. Cohen, Phys. Rev. A 13, 86 (1976).
[29] S. L. Guberman, in Physics of Ion-Ion and Electron-Ion
Collisions, Vol. 83 of NATO Advanced Study Institute
Series B: Physics, edited by F. Brouillard and J. W. Mc-
Gowan (Plenum, New York, 1983), p. 167.

[30] D. Habs et al., Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res. B 43,

390 (1989).

[31] X. Urbain, C. P. Safvan, M. J. Jensen, and L. H. An-
dersen, in Proceedings of the 1999 Conference on Disso-
ciative Recombination, Theory, Experiment and Applica-
tions IV, edited by M. Larson, L. B. A. Mitchell, and I.
F. Schneider (World Scientiﬁc, Singapore, 1999), p. 261.
[32] G. Kilgus, D. Habs, D. Schwalm, A. Wolf, N. R. Badnell,

and A. M¨uller, Phys. Rev. A. 46, 5730 (1992).

[33] Z. Amitay, D. Zajfman, P. Forck, U. Hechtﬁscher, B.
Seidel, M. Grieser, D. Habs, R. Repnow, D. Schwalm,
and A. Wolf, Phys. Rev. A 54, 4032 (1996).

[34] A. Al-Khalili, S. Ros´en, H. Danared, A. M. Derkatch,
A. K¨allberg, M. Larsson, A. Le Padellec, A. Neau, J.
Semaniak, R. Thomas, M. af Ugglas, L. Vikor, W. Zong,
W. J. van der Zande, X. Urbain, M. J. Jensen, R. C.
Bilodeau, O. Heber, H. B. Pedersen, C. P. Safvan, L.
H. Andersen, M. Lange, J. Levin, G. Gwinner, L. Knoll,
M. Scheﬀel, D. Schwalm, R. Wester, D. Zajfman, and A.
Wolf, Phys. Rev. A 68, 042702 (2003).

[35] R. Wester et al., Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res. A

413, 379 (1998).

[36] Z. Amitay, A. Baer, M. Dahan, J. Levin, Z. Vager, D.
Zajfman, L. Knoll, M. Lange, D. Schwalm, R. Wester,
A. Wolf, I. F. Schneider, and A. Suzor-Weiner, Phys.
Rev. A 60, 3769 (1999).

[37] T. S. Green, Rep. Prog. Phys. 37, 1257 (1974).
[38] M. Grieser, H. Deitinghoﬀ, D. Habs, R. von Hahn, E.
Jaeschke, C.-M. Kleﬀner, V. K¨ossler, S. Papureanu, R.
Repnow, M.-H. Rhee, D. Schwalm, and A. Schempp,
Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res. A. 328, 160 (1993).
[39] R. von Hahn, M. Grieser, D. Habs, E. Jaeschke, C.-
M. Kleﬀner, J. Liebmann, S. Papureanu, R. Repnow,
D. Schwalm, and M. Stampfer, Nucl. Instrum. Methods
Phys. Res. A 328, 270 (1993).

[40] M. Steck, G. Bisoﬃ, M. Blum, A. Friedrich, C. Geyer, M.
Grieser, B. Holzer, E. Jaeschke, M. Jung, D. Kr¨amer, K.
Matl, W. Ott and R. Repnow, Nucl. Instrum. Methods
Phys. Res. A. 287, 324 (1990).

[41] S. Pastuszka, U. Schramm, M. Grieser, C. Broude,
R. Grimm, D. Habs, J. Kenntner, H.-J. Miesner, T.
Sch¨ussler, D. Schwalm, and A. Wolf, Nucl. Instrum.
Methods Phys. Res. A. 369, 11 (1996).

[42] H. Poth, Phys. Rep. 196, 135 (1990).

22

[43] A. Lampert, A. Wolf, D. Habs, J. Kenntner, G. Kilgus,
D. Schwalm, M. S. Pinzola, and N. R. Badnell, Phys.
Rev. A. 53, 1413 (1996).

[44] Z. Amitay, D. Zajfman, and P. Forck, Phys. Rev. A 50,

2304 (1994).

[45] The dipole moment function in Eq. (5) of Ref. [44] was
divided by 2, consistent with the derivation in F. O. El-
lison, J. Chem. Phys. 36, 478 (1962).

[46] G. Herzberg, Spectra of Diatomic Molecules (Van Nos-
trand, New York, 1950), Chap. V,3, pp. 208 and 250.
[47] D. Zajfman, S. Krohn, M. Lange, H. Kreckel, L. Lam-
mich, D. Strasser, D. Schwalm, X. Urbain, and A. Wolf,
Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res. B 205, 360 (2003).

[48] L. Lammich, D. Strasser, H. Kreckel, M. Lange, H. B.
Pedersen, S. Altevogt, V. Andrianarijaona, H. Buhr, O.
Heber, P. Witte, D. Schwalm, A. Wolf, and D. Zajfman,
Phys. Rev. Lett. 91, 143201 (2003).

[49] T. Tanabe, H. Takagi, I. Katayama, K. Chida, T. Watan-
abe, Y. Arakaki, Y.Haruyama, M. Saito, I. Nomura, T.
Honna, N. Noda, and K. Hosono, Phys. Rev. Lett. 83,
2163 (1999).

[50] S. Krohn, Z. Amitay, A. Baer, D. Zajfman, M. Lange,
L. Knoll, J. Levin, D. Schwalm, R. Wester, and A. Wolf,
Phys. Rev. A 62, 032713 (2000).

[51] U. Hechtﬁscher, Z. Amitay, P. Forck, M. Lange, J. Linke-
mann, M. Schmitt, U. Schramm, D. Schwalm, R. Wester,
D. Zajfman, and A. Wolf., Phys. Rev. Lett. 80, 2809
(1998).
[52] M. Lange

to be published; M. Lange,
PhD thesis,
2001
of Heidelberg,
(http://www.ub.uni-heidelberg.de/archiv/1774).

University

et al.,

[53] K. Nakashima, H. Takagi, and H. Nakamura, J. Chem.

Phys. 86, 726 (1986).

[54] I. Rabadan, S. K. Sarpal, and J. Tennyson, Mon. Not. R.

Astron. Soc. 299, 171 (1998).

[55] I. Rabadan, S. K. Sarpal, and J. Tennyson, J. Phys. B,

31, 2077 (1998).

325, 443 (2001).

426 (1989).

[56] A. Faure and J. Tennyson, Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc.

[57] Z. Vager, R. Naaman, and E. P. Kanter, Science 244,

[58] D. Zajfman, Comments At. Mol. Phys. 29, 369 (1994).
[59] D. Zajfman, T. Graber, E. P. Kanter, and Z. Vager, Phys.

Rev. A 46, 194 (1992).

[60] R. Garcia-Molina, C. D. Denton, I. Abril, and N. R.

Arista, Phys. Rev. A 62, 012901 (2000).

[61] I. J. Thompson and A. R. Barnett, Comput. Phys.

[62] I. J. Thompson and A. R. Barnett, J. Comput. Phys. 64,

Comm. 36, 363 (1985).

490 (1986).

[63] L. Lammich, H. Buhr, H. Kreckel, S. Krohn, M. Lange,
D. Schwalm, R. Wester, A. Wolf, D. Strasser, D. Zajf-
man, Z. Vager, I. Abril, S. Heredia-Avalos, R. Garcia-
Molina, Phys. Rev. A 69 062904 (2004).

[64] P. Forck, C. Broude, M. Grieser, D. Habs, J. Kenntner, J.
Liebmann, R. Repnow, D. Schwalm, A. Wolf, Z. Amitay,
and D. Zajfman, Phys. Rev. Lett. 72 2002 (1994).
[65] A. E. Orel and K. C. Kulander, Phys. Rev. A 54 4992

(1996).

[66] X. Urbain, N. Djuri´c, C. P. Safvan, M. J. Jensen, H. B.
Pedersen, L. Vejby Søgaard, and L. H. Andersen, sub-
mitted to J. Phys. B.

[67] J. Royal and A. E. Orel, in Proc. 6th Int. Conf. on Dis-
sociative Recombination, Theory, Experiments and Ap-

23

plications, Mosbach, Germany, 2004, to be published in
J. Phys. Conf. Series.

[68] S. L. Guberman, Phys. Rev. A 49, R4277 (1994).
[69] B. K. Sarpal, J. Tennyson, and T. A. Morgan, J. Phys.

B 27, 5943 (1994).

[70] J. Semaniak, S. Ros´en, G. Sundstr¨om, C. Str¨omholm, S.
Datz, H. Danared, M. af Ugglas, M. Larsson, W. J. van
der Zande, Z. Amitay, U. Hechtﬁscher, M. Grieser, R.
Repnow, M. Schmidt, D. Schwalm, R. Wester, A. Wolf,
and D. Zajfman, Phys. Rev. A 54, R4617 (1996).
[71] S. Krohn, M. Lange, M. Grieser, L. Knoll, H. Kreckel, J.
Levin, R. Repnow, D. Schwalm, R. Wester, P. Witte, A.
Wolf, and D. Zajfman, Phys. Rev. Lett. 86, 4005 (2001).

24

TABLE I: Signal contributions (normalized to the integral
of the observed distribution) obtained from a least-squares ﬁt
to the DR fragment imaging distribution at Ed = 0, listed in
the sequence of increasing kinetic energy release.

Initial state

Final channel

Contribution

3He4He+(v = 0) He(1s2 1S) + He(1s2p 1P )
3He4He+(v = 0) He(1s2 1S) + He(1s2p 3P )
3He4He+(v = 0) He(1s2 1S) + He(1s2s 1S)
3He4He+(v = 3) He(1s2 1S) + He(1s2p 3P )
3He4He+(v = 0) He(1s2 1S) + He(1s2s 3S)
3He4He+(v = 4) He(1s2 1S) + He(1s2s 3S)

0.0154(16)
0.311(28)
0.198(21)
0.041(14)
0.0196(6)
0.025(3)

TABLE II: Measured ﬁnal state branching ratios following
low-energy DR from the v = 0 level of 3He4He+

Final channel
He(1s2 1S) + He(1s2s 3S)
He(1s2 1S) + He(1s2s 1S)
He(1s2 1S) + He(1s2p 3P )
He(1s2 1S) + He(1s2p 1P )

Branching ratio (%)

3.7 ± 1.2
37.4 ± 4.0
58.6 ± 5.2
2.9 ± 3.0

25

FIG. 1: Potential energy curves for the X 2Σ+
u electronic
ground state of He+
2 [20] and its ﬁrst dissociative state (A2Σ+
g )
[21] together with the three lowest dissociating curves of He2
[10, 28]. The energetic positions of the ﬁrst seven vibra-
tional levels of 3He4He+ are shown as horizontal lines in the
X 2Σ+
g state correlates
to He(1s2 1S) + He(1s2s 3S), the 1Σ+
g state to He(1s2 1S) +
He(1s2s 1S), and the 3Πu state to He(1s2 1S) + He(1s2p 3P ).

u potential. Asymptotically, the 3Σ+

FIG. 2: The lowest doublet potential energy curves of the
He+
2 system as calculated by Ackermann and Hogreve [21].
The vertical arrows indicate the energetic positions above the
vibrational ground state of 3He4He+ where major structures
in the DR rate coeﬃcient have been observed in the present
measurement.

26

D

D

Injection
+
4
3
He  He
3.36 / 7.28 MeV

0

2

4m

TSR

Extracted beam

Carbon target

CEI detector

D

D

Phosphor
screen

MCP
detector

Photo−
mulitiplier

CCD 
camera

Surface Barrier 
Detector

D

D

Molecular ion beam

Electron cooler

D

D

Electron temperature 

kT  =  0.5  meV 

|| 

kT  =  10 meV 

__
| 

Electron−Ion collisions

Ion Beam Chopper

Collimators

Dipole magnet

FIG. 3:

(1.5 columns wide) Schematic drawing of the experimental setup around the TSR.

27

FIG. 4: Calculated total radiative lifetimes as a function
of the rotational quantum number J for the ﬁrst six vibra-
tional levels (v = 0–5) in the X 2Σ+
u electronic ground state
of 3He4He+.

FIG. 5: Radiative thermalization of rovibrational levels in the
u electronic ground state of 3He4He+. (a) Vibrational
X 2Σ+
thermalization among v = 0–5. Initially, the six vibrational
levels were populated equally, with a rotational temperature
of 1500 K imposed on each level. (b) Rotational thermaliza-
tion in the v = 0 level for initial rotational temperatures of
500 K (solid), 1500 K (dashed), and 3000 K (dotted). The
lowest line marks the 300 K equilibrium temperature.

28

FIG. 7: Measured rates (raw data) of (a) DR and (b) DE
events with normalization to the rate of DR events at the
reference detuning energy (Er
d=7.3 eV). Ion energy Ei = 7.28
MeV; electron density ne = 5.5 × 106 cm−3.

FIG. 6: Normalized distributions of the kinetic energy re-
leases ( ˜Ek) after foil induced Coulomb explosion of 3He4He+
ions extracted from the stored beam. (a) Electron beam oﬀ;
(b) electron beam on (Ed = 0). Distributions are shown for
times after injection of 0–1 s (open circles), 2–3 s (triangles),
and ≥3 s (ﬁlled circles). The solid lines show the simulated
distribution for the ground state, and the dashed line shows
the result of a least-squares ﬁt with Eq. (18) to the distribu-
tion without the electron beam obtained at 0–1 s. Ion energy
Ei = 7.28 MeV; electron density ne = 5.5 × 106 cm

−3.

FIG. 8: Measured fragment rates R(7) (ﬁlled circles) and R(3)
(open circles) averaged over 76 injections when the electron
beam is switched oﬀ after 10 s of storage. For times >10 s the
values R(7) (solid circles) have been multiplied by a factor of
50. The solid line shows a single exponential ﬁt to the rate
R(3) at 10–23 s with the electron beam oﬀ, while the dashed
lines compares the slope of the ﬁtted curve to the rate R(3) at
ealier times and to the rate R(7). Ion energy Ei = 7.28 MeV;
electron density ne = 5.5 × 106 cm

−3.

29

FIG. 9: Measured rates R(7) (ﬁlled circles) and R(3) (open
circles) average over 33 injections as a function of time t after
injection where the detuning energy Ed was changed from 0
to 7.3 eV at t = 10 s. The upper solid line shows a single
exponential ﬁt to the rate R(3) at 10–23 s, while the lower
dashed and soild lines are repeated from Fig. 8.

FIG. 11: Eﬀect of the toroid correction on the DR rate coef-
ﬁcient displayed in Fig. 10(a) in the low energy region. The
upper curve (open circles) shows the directly obtained rate co-
eﬃcient ˜αc+tor
DR (Ed) while the lower curve (ﬁlled circles) shows
the rate coeﬃcient ˜αDR(Ed) after toroid correction.

FIG. 10: Rate coeﬃcients as a function of the detuning en-
ergy Ed measured in a time interval of 35–68 s after ion in-
jection. (a) Toroid corrected DR rate coeﬃcient over the full
energy range studied. The dashed line marks the zero on the
vertical scale. (b) Toroid corrected DE rate coeﬃcient. Ion
−3.
energy Ei = 7.28 MeV; electron density ne = 5.5 × 106 cm

FIG. 12: DR (two-body) events recorded with the frag-
ment imaging technique.
(a) Two-dimensional distribution
of events according to their c.m. positions xc.m., yc.m.. (b)
Time evolution of the signal from the central part (ﬁlled cir-
cles) and the toroid part (open circles) of the electron cooler
with normalization to the apparent one-body events ( ˜Ns).

30

FIG. 13: Distributions of projected interparticle distances
(D) from DR (two-body) events in the central part of the
(a) Analytical
electron cooler at zero detuning energy Ed.
form of the distribution for a special case (see text) and end
points (marked by vertical ticks on arrows) for various pos-
sible initial-to-ﬁnal-state channels. The lower frames show
experimental results for time intervals of (b) 3–6.5 s (c) 6.5–
10 s, and (d) 10–22 s. The hatched area at low distance marks
the region of limited detection due to overlapping light spots
on the phosphor screen. Ion energy Ei = 3.36 MeV; electron
density ne = 5.5 × 106 cm

−3.

31

FIG. 15: Measured DR rate R(7)(0) normalized to R(3)(0)
for situations where the electron beam was continuously on
(ﬁlled circles), and switched oﬀ at 5–10.5 s (open circles), 5–
20.5 s (open squares), 5–35 s (open diamonds), and 5–45 s
(open triangles). Ion energy Ei = 7.28 MeV; electron density
ne = 1.2 × 107 cm

−3.

FIG. 14: Fragment imaging spectrum for DR from the toroid
regions of the electron cooler for the same conditions as in Fig.
13 and for storage times of 10–22 s.

32

FIG. 16: Measured DR rates R(7)(0) normalized to R(3)(0)
measured with the electron beam continuously on for electron
−3 (open circles) and ne =
densities of ne = n1 = 5.5 × 106 cm
−3 (ﬁlled circles). To compare the relative
n2 = 1.2 × 107 cm
rate R(7)(0)/R(3)(0) at the two diﬀerent electron densities the
data measured for n1 have been scaled with the help of Eq.
(14), (15), and (20) by the factor n2(1 + 1/c1)/(n2 + n1/c1) =
1.77. Ion energy Ei = 7.28 MeV. The time intervals marked
a, b, and c are those for which fragment imaging spectra are
presented in Fig. 13.

33

FIG. 17: Assignment of DR reaction channels to the data of
Fig. 13(d), taken at 10–22 s after injection. The vertical lines
grouped for diﬀerent intitial vibrational levels v show the end-
points of the distributions for various DR reaction channels as
explained in the text. The black curve shows a least-squares
ﬁt to the data, explained in Sec. VI A; the gray lines show
the contributions of the individual DR channels from v = 0
included in this ﬁt. The hatched area at low distance marks
the region of limited detection due to overlapping light spots
on the phosphor screen. Ion energy Ei = 3.36 MeV; electron
density ne = 5.5 × 106 cm

−3.

34

FIG. 18: Time evolution of the dissociative recombination
signal at Ed = 0 as observed with the fragment imaging tech-
nique (contribution from the central part of the electron cooler
only). (a) Intensities of the signals from the Regions 1 and
2 of the fragment imaging distribution (cf. Fig. 17) relative
to the observed number ˜Ns of one-body imaging events. (b)
Ratio of the signal intensities from Regions 1 and 2.

35

FIG. 19: Pump-probe experiments using the fragment imag-
ing method. (a) Schematic illustration of the operation of the
electron cooler. (b) Projected distance spectrum obtained in
the 4 probing periods within the time interval 9–16 s, each
time following excitation with electrons at 4.0 eV (ﬁlled cir-
cles) and 7.3 eV (open circles). The shapes of the two distri-
butions are emphasized (to guide the eye) by the solid and the
dotted curves. Ion energy Ei = 3.36 MeV; electron density
ne = 5.5 × 106 cm

−3.

36

FIG. 20: Electron induced vibrational excitation as studied
with the DR fragment imaging pump-probe experiments. The
DR signals occurring in Region 1 (ﬁlled circles) and Region 2
(open circles) (cf. Fig. 17) are shown (a) as a function of time
after excitation with electrons at 4 eV, and (b) as a function
of the excitation energy. The counts were collected from the 4
probing periods for ≥ 9 s after injection; the counts in Regions
1 and 2 have been normalized to the observed number ˜Ns of
one-body imaging events.

37

FIG. 21: Residual-gas induced vibrational excitation as stud-
ied with the fragment imaging pump-probe experiments. The
DR signals occurring in Region 1 (ﬁlled circles) and Region
2 (open circles) (cf. Fig. 17) are shown as a function of time
after turning on the electron beam again, following an oﬀ-
period of 1 s. The counts were collected and normalized as in
Fig. 20.

FIG. 22: Detailed view of the measured toroid corrected
rate coeﬃcients ˜αDR(Ed) at low relative energies obtained for
storage time intervals of 5–10 s (open circles) and 35–68 s
(ﬁlled circles); see Fig. 10(a) for a full view.

38

FIG. 23: Detailed view of the measured toroid corrected rate
coeﬃcients ˜αDR(Ed) obtained for storage time intervals of 5–
10 s (open circles) and 35–68 s (ﬁlled circles) in the detuning
energy ranges of (a) Ed = 1–15 eV and (b) Ed = 15–40 eV.

39

FIG. 24:
(a) Measured rate coeﬃcients for DR (black ﬁlled
circles) and DE (open circles) at t = 35–68 s together with
the vibrational excitation proﬁle as obtained from the pump-
probe experiments (light ﬁlled circles). The absolute scale of
the excitation proﬁle is arbitrarily chosen to compare its shape
to the rate coeﬃcients for DR and DE. (b) Schematic illus-
tration (inspired by Ref. [65]) of the DR, DE and vibrational
excitation (EX) processes following an initial electron capture
(EC) at 5 eV from the vibrational ground state (v = 0) into
the 3Σ+
g dissociative Ryberg state. Immediately after electron
capture a nuclear wave packet (marked 0 fs) is formed in the
3Σ+
g potential, where it is repelled towards larger internuclear
distances as illustrated by the wave packets at 2 fs and 4 fs; a
process that ﬁnally leads to DR. During repulsion, the wave
packet looses intensity since the molecule can autoionize (AI)
to the ionic ground state, leading to either DE or EX. The
gray shaded areas show the Frank-Condon region for electron
reemission for the wave packet at 2 fs.

40

FIG. 25: Calculated vibrational equilbrium populations pv,
relative to the population p0 in v = 0, obtained when vibra-
tional excitation through collisions with the residual gas [Eq.
(35)] is included in the model of Eqs. (16) for four values of
the excitation cross section σg
inel as indicated. Six vibrational
levels (v = 0-5) and thirty rotational levels (J = 0–29) on
each vibrational level are modeled; the residual gas density
is set to ng = 1.3 × 106 cm−3 and the temperature of the
radiation ﬁeld to 300 K.

41

FIG. 26: Calculated eﬀects of electron-ion collisions and
ion-residual gas collisions on the rotational thermalization in
u electronic ground state of 3He4He+ from an initial
the X 2Σ+
temperature of 1500 K. (a) Inﬂuence of (α) radiative transi-
tions (solid), (β) radiation and DR depletion [Eqs. (36), (37);
dashed] and (γ1−3) radiation, DR depletion, and vibrational
excitation in the residual gas [Eq. (35)] with diﬀerent exci-
tation cross sections σg
Initially, the six lowest
inel (dotted).
vibrational levels were populated equally, with a rotational
temperature of 1500 K imposed on each level. The electron
−3 and the residual gas
density was set to ne = 1.2 × 107 cm
density to ng = 1.3 × 106 cm−3. (b) Inﬂuence of radiative
transitions (solid) and of radiation plus rotationally inelastic
collisions in the velocity-matched electron beam [Eqs. (38)–
−13
(40)]. The cross section constant was set to σ0 = 5 × 10
−12 cm2 (dashed). Initially, only the
cm2 (dash-dotted) and 10
vibrational ground state was assumed to be populated with a
rotational temperature of 1500 K. The experimental electron
temperatures were used to derive the rate coeﬃcients of the
inelastic electron collisions; ne as in (a).

42

FIG. 27: Model calculation of the observable ratio R(7)/R(3)
including the eﬀect of radiation, DR depletion, and rotation-
ally inelastic collisions. Only the vibrational ground state
v = 0 was populated and it was assumed that a rotational
temperature of 1500 K was reached after 5 s of ion storage.
−3. R(7) was
The electron density was ne = 1.2 × 107 cm
obtained using the model rate coeﬃcient of Eq.
(36) with
a0 = 5 × 10−10 cm2s−1 and b = 1. R(3) rate was calculated
as (fgkg
DE = 0.0506
−1. The solid curve shows
−4 s
−1, and ˜kDE(0) = 8.73 × 10
s
the ratio R(7)/R(3) when the rotationally inelastic collisions
are neglected (σ0 = 0). The dashed curves show the ratio
R(7)/R(3) computed with a strong electron induced rotational
−12 cm2) with the electron beam being
de-excitation (σ0 = 10
either continously on or switched oﬀ for time intervals of 5-20
s and 5-40 s as marked.

DE + ˜kDE(0)) × Ni, with fg = 0.044, kg

