4
0
0
2
 
c
e
D
 
3
 
 
]
h
p
-
m
o
t
a
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
2
2
0
2
1
4
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Stability of the hydrogen atom of classical electrodynamics

Jayme De Luca∗
Universidade Federal de S˜ao Carlos,
Departamento de F´ısica
Rodovia Washington Luis, km 235
Caixa Postal 676, S˜ao Carlos, S˜ao Paulo 13565-905
(Dated: August 30, 2013)

We study the stability of the circular orbits of the electromagnetic two-body problem of classical
electrodynamics. We introduce the concept of resonant dissipation, i.e. a motion that radiates
the center-of-mass energy while the interparticle distance performs bounded oscillations about a
metastable orbit. The stability mechanism is established by the existence of a quartic resonant
constant generated by the stiﬀ eigenvalues of the linear stability problem. This constant bounds the
particles together during the radiative recoil. The condition of resonant dissipation predicts angular
momenta for the metastable orbits in reasonable agreement with the Bohr atom. The principal
result is that the emission lines agree with the predictions of quantum electrodynamics (QED) with
1 percent average error even up to the 40
line. Our angular momenta depend logarithmically
on the mass of the heavy body, such that the deuterium and the muonium atoms have essentially
the same angular momenta, in agreement with QED. Analogously to QED, our stability analysis
naturally uses the eigenvalues of an inﬁnite-dimensional linear operator; the inﬁnite-dimensionality
is brought in by the delay of the electromagnetic interaction.

th

According to classical electrodynamics, a quasi-
circular orbit of the hydrogen atom radiates energy. We
show that this complex Poincar´e-invariant two-body mo-
tion can damp the center-of-mass energy only, while
the interparticle distance performs bounded oscillations
about some circular orbits, a phenomenon henceforth
called resonant dissipation. This dynamics emits radia-
tion of a sharp frequency while the center-of-mass energy
decreases to compensate for the energy damping, during
the life-time of the emission process, i.e. a collective ra-
diative recoil. The stability mechanism is established by
the existence of a resonant constant that keeps the inter-
particle distance bounded during the radiative recoil and
deformation. This resonant normal form exists because
of a resonance involving the stiﬀ modes of the linearized
delay equations of motion, i.e., the linear normal modes
with eigenvalues of a very large imaginary magnitude [1].
The results of this simple stability analysis contain no ad-
justable parameter, satisfy Maxwell’s equations and pre-
dict the magnitudes of atomic physics with accuracy and
qualitative detail. We calculate every circular emission
line of hydrogen with a 1 percent error.

To understand how our dynamics is a solution of the
equations of motion of classical electrodynamics, one
needs to go beyond the simpliﬁcations suggested by the
Galilei-invariant Coulomb problem. In quantum electro-
dynamics (QED) the circular Bohr orbits of hydrogen
correspond to excited states that decay to the ground
state in a life-time of about 106 turns[2]. Disregarding
the singular coupling to the center-of-mass coordinate is
a naive use of the equations of classical electrodynamics
which predicts that the radiated energy comes out of the
electrostatic potential energy. In this process the inter-
particle distance decreases while the rotation frequency
increases by a factor of two during the life-time, making

the emission of a sharp line impossible.
It is very in-
structive to estimate this energy dissipation along circu-
lar orbits directly from the Lorentz-Dirac dissipative self-
interaction force[3]. The complexity disregarded by this
simpliﬁcation stems from three main sources:
(i) The
group theoretical complexity of Poincar´e-invariant two-
body dynamics; the two no-interaction theorems[4] limit
Hamiltonian and local Lagrangian descriptions of two-
body dynamics to straight-line free motions only. These
negative theorems are sound warning that the Galilei-
invariant Coulombian dynamics, with trivial and sepa-
rable center-of-mass motion, is a bad approximation to
relativistic two-body dynamics. (ii) The delay equations
of motion bring in an inﬁnite-dimensional dynamical sys-
tem and needs an initial function as the initial condition;
addition of the non-runaway condition leads to a well-
posed mathematical problem [5]. The stability analysis
of such dynamics reveals stiﬀ eigenvalues with an arbi-
trarily large imaginary part, as long as integer multiples
of π (an arbitrary integer number appears naturally) [1].
(iii) The generic solution to a stiﬀ diﬀerential equation is
not slowly varying everywhere and typically it has jumps;
see for example the equations of Lienard type in Ref.[6].
Another example is the small parameter multiplying the
highest derivative of the Lorentz-Dirac self-interaction
force[3]. After Dirac’s derivation of a ﬁnite force of self-
interaction within classical electrodynamics[3], Eliezer
considered a model two-body motion with Coulomb in-
teraction plus self-interaction[7]. A simple physical con-
sequence transpired, that with self-interaction the elec-
tron cannot fall into the proton even along unidimen-
sional collision orbits. This surprising result is a warning
that self-interaction is a singular perturbation over the
Coulombian dynamics and also suggests that colinear or-
bits are the natural attractors of the dissipative dynamics

(a ground state with zero angular momentum). Along
such orbits the heavy particle (the proton) moves in a
non-Coulombian way and the self-interaction provides a
repulsive mechanism that avoids a collision. Disregard of
the stiﬀ nature of the equations of classical electrodynam-
ics has produced several conundrums, and the present
work is an attempt to recognize the correct qualitative
behavior of the solutions of classical electrodynamics.

It is important to distinguish a metastable orbit from
a ground state; a metastable orbit can display resonant
dissipation, while the ground state does not radiate en-
ergy. Hydrogen orbits with a vanishing dipole that do
not radiate energy are not studied here; they must be
attractors of the dissipative dynamics and are certainly
far from circular orbits. In Ref. [8] we studied the circu-
lar orbits of the classical helium atom with retarded po-
tentials and self-interaction, an electromagnetic setting
henceforth called the dissipative-retarded setting (DR).
Because these very special circular orbits of helium do
not radiate in dipole, the physics of the emission of a
sharp line is easy to understand even in the DR setting[8].
There is already an interesting resonant structure for
these circular obits of helium within the Darwin approxi-
mation. [8, 9] (a low-velocity approximation to Fokker’s
Lagrangian). The predictions of the Darwin approxima-
tion were tested numerically in Ref.
[10], ﬁnding non-
ionizing states in the atomic magnitude, as predicted in
Ref. [8]. The generalization to the circular orbits of the
hydrogen atom in the DR setting is troublesome; circular
orbits of hydrogen are stable within the Darwin approxi-
mation and radiate in dipole, such that a sharp emission
line seems like a conundrum for classical electrodynamics
in the DR setting. In this work we come to grips with the
physics of the hydrogen atom by showing that the correct
description comes only after the inclusion of the nuclear
motion (i.e. a two-body system with delay and dissi-
pation). The resonant dissipation radiates mostly the
center-of-mass energy while a slow deformation of circu-
larity and a collective recoil take place. After a possibly
long life-time, this resonant dissipation produces enough
deformation to destabilize the orbit, i.e. only metastabil-
ity is possible (this is also what QED says about circular
orbits).

Here we study the electromagnetic two-body problem
in a electromagnetic setting slightly diﬀerent from DR;
we take the equations of motion derived from Fokker’s
Lagrangian of the action-at-a-distance electrodynamics
[1, 11, 12], with advanced and retarded interactions, and
we add the Lorentz-Dirac self-interaction force[3] on each
particle. This electromagnetic setting is henceforth called
the dissipative-Fokker model (DF), as opposed to the
DR model used by us in Ref.
[8]. Both the DR and
the DF settings satisfy Maxwell’s equations everywhere
and deﬁne covariant dynamical systems for the electro-
dynamics of classical point charge. For example, the
energy dissipated along a hypothetical circular orbit is

2

still proportional to the acceleration squared in the DF
electrodynamics as well (Larmor’s radiation formula), a
consequence of the Lorentz-Dirac self-interaction. We
experimented with the stability analysis of the several
possibilities within classical electrodynamics, and DF is
the most transparent setting for the resonant dissipation
phenomenon introduced here. Our results advocate for
the interest of this electromagnetic model (DF); we pre-
dict the Bohr atom with great precision and qualitative
detail.

Our perturbation theory starts from the unperturbed
circular orbit of the isolated electromagnetic two-body
problem derived from Fokker’s Lagrangian, as explained
in Refs.[1, 11, 12]. A motion of the particles in concen-
tric circles with a constant angular speed and along a
diameter is a solution of these equations of motion. This
is because the symmetric contributions from future and
past generate a resulting force that is normal to the ve-
locity of each particle. We henceforth call this orbit the
circular orbit[1, 11, 12]. The quantities for this uniform
circular motion are given in [11]. Our electron has mass
m1 and travels a circle of radius r1 while the proton has
mass m2 and travels a circle of radius r2. We henceforth
1
use a unit system where the electronic charge is e =
−
and the speed of light is c = 1. The circular orbit is de-
ﬁned by the retardation angle θ that one particle turns
while the light emanating from the other particle reaches
it (one light-cone distance away). The frequency Ω of an-
gular rotation is given, to lowest order in θ, by Kepler’s
law

Ω = µθ3 + ...

(1)

≡

where µ
m1m2/(m1 + m2) is the reduced mass. For
shallow-energy atomic orbits, the angular momentum lz
−1 [11], which is of the
is given to ﬁrst order by lz = θ
order of the inverse of the ﬁne structure constant, α−1 =
137.036. To simplify the stability analysis, we transform
the particle coordinates from Cartesian to gyroscopic co-
ordinates

xk + iyk ≡
iyk ≡
xk −

exp(iΩt)[dk + ηk],
exp(

iΩt)[dk + ξk],

−

(2)

where ηk and ξk are complex numbers deﬁning the per-
turbation of the circularity. The coordinates of the elec-
tron are deﬁned by Eq. (2) with k = 1 and d1 = r1 while
the coordinates of the proton are deﬁned by Eq. (2) with
k = 2 and d2 =
r2 (at the same time in the inertial
frame the particles are in diametrically opposed positions
along the unperturbed orbit [11]). We also need here
the stability along the perpendicular z direction, a lin-
ear problem that is uncoupled from the xy stability and
easier to work out. The linear stability analysis proceeds
like in Ref. [1], by substituting the circular orbit plus a

−

perturbation, Eq. (2), into Fokker’s Lagrangian, expand-
ing this Lagrangian to quadratic order and taking the
Euler-Lagrange equations to linear order[16]. Because
we have a delay system at hand, the normal mode con-
dition (the characteristic equation) has inﬁnitely many
roots. This characteristic equation involves hyperbolic
functions that can become arbitrarily large and are in-
sensitive to an arbitrarily large imaginary part of the
eigenvalue [1]. A standard technique of delay analysis is
to keep only the largest powers of the eigenvalue plus the
hyperbolic terms in the characteristic equation[14]. This
large-imaginary-part limit is performed in Ref. [1] for the
equal-mass two-body system (see Eq. (15) of Ref.
[1]).
Here we generalize this large-imaginary-part-limit to the
arbitrary-mass case and we computed the characteristic
equation with a symbolic algebra software (Maple 9). We
deﬁne the normal mode eigenvalue by λΩ/θ, i.e. every
coordinate perturbation oscillates in time as exp(λΩt/θ).
The limiting form of the characteristic equation for the
isolated diﬀerent-mass case is

µθ4
M

(

) cosh2(λ) = 1,

(3)

≡

where µ is the reduced mass and M
m1 +m2. Both the
planar and the perpendicular linearized equations have
the same limiting characteristic Eq. (3) along circular
orbits. For hydrogen (µ/M ) is a small factor of about
(1/1824). It is important to understand the structure of
the roots of Eq. (3) in the complex λ plane, specially
It is
for θ of the order of the ﬁne structure constant.
10−13
easy to see that the very small parameter µθ
multiplying the hyperbolic cosine on the left-hand side
4M
of Eq.(3) determines that Re(λ)
µθ4 ). For
the ﬁrst 13 excited states of hydrogen this σ is in the
< 18.2. The imaginary part of λ can
interval 14.2 <
be an arbitrarily large multiple of π, such that the general
solution to Eq. (3) is

4M ∼

σ
|

≡ |

| ≃

ln(

q

σ

|

4

λ =

(σ + iπq),

±

(4)

where q is an arbitrary integer. The plus or minus sign
of Eq. (4) is related to the time-reversibility of the iso-
lated two-body system, a symmetry that is broken by
radiation.

Next we include the dissipation of the DF electrody-
namics, i.e. the Lorentz-Dirac self-interaction, a calcula-
tion performed by adding the self-interaction force to the
Lagrangian equations of motion of the isolated system.
Here we give only the limiting form of the characteristic
equation

g
λ2 )(

µθ4
M

(1

−

) cosh2(λ) = 1

θ2λ+

) sinh(2λ)+...

2
3

−

1
λ

(

µθ4
M

(5)
where g =
7 for the planar stability and g = 1 for
the perpendicular stability. We give the terms up to

−

3

O(1/λ2) because these are essential for the mathematical
phenomenon presented. The coeﬃcient g of the term of
order 1/λ2 is the only diﬀerence between the planar and
the perpendicular characteristic equations up to O(1/λ2).
Further terms of size 1/λ3 and θ4λ2 produce only small
quantitative changes for σ in the atomic range and will
be given elsewhere. The linear term on the right-hand
side of Eq.
(5) with the 2/3 coeﬃcient is due to the
self-interaction force. This dissipative term breaks the
time-reversal symmetry of Eq. (3) and the roots of Eq.
(5) no longer come in plus or minus pairs. In the follow-
ing we implement the necessary condition for a convex
analytic function of the interparticle distance to exist.

In the same way already used in Ref.[8], this condition
should involve the perpendicular direction z as well. This
is because if the atom is to recoil like a rigid body while
it radiates, one expects the orbital plane to nutate and
precess, typical gyroscopic motions of a rigid body. To
introduce the main idea simply, we assume that the non-
runaway condition restricts the physics to a ﬁnite number
of linear modes. We take a perpendicular normal mode
and a planar normal mode of Eq. (5), of eigenvalues λz
and λxy respectively. Suppose we can ﬁnd these modes
∗
∗
such that λz + λxy + λ
z + λ
xy = 0, which is the necessary
condition for a quartic normal form. i.e.

Re(λz + λxy) = 0.

(6)

The coordinate of the planar normal mode is a linear
combination of the four ηξ gyroscopic coordinates: u
≡
a1kηk + b1kξk ,while the coordinate of the perpendicular
b1z1 + b2z2. Because Fokker’s
z normal mode is Z
≡
∗
∗
Lagrangian is real, λ
z and λ
xy are also solutions to Eq.
(5) with complex conjugate normal mode coordinates.
Using these normal mode coordinates and Eq. (6), one
can show that the following quartic form is a constant of
motion up to higher order terms[9]:

u

C

2
|

(7)

2 + ...
Z
|
|
≡ |
2is a quadratic function of
u
Notice from Eq. (2) that
|
|
the planar coordinates, such that this constant limits the
excursion along the z direction times the planar distance
to the circular orbit. This necessary condition and the
continuation of the leading term (7) to an asymptotic
series is discussed in Ref.
[9]. The lesson of the above
construction is that if the interparticle distance is to be
bound by a resonant constant while the dissipation goes
on, then we must be able to ﬁnd a pair of roots to Eq.
(5) such that Eq. (6) holds. This implies that Eq. (5)
has a pair of almost-symmetric roots of the form

λxy ≡
λz ≡ −

(σ + πqi + iǫ1),

(σ + πqi + iǫ2),

(8)

where ǫ1 and ǫ2 can be assumed real if λz + λxy is purely
imaginary by absorbing the real part of the perturbation

in the deﬁnition of σ. The above-deﬁned root-searching
problem is well posed and for each integer q conditions
(5) and (8) determine θ as a function of q , i.e., θ must
be quantized! An asymptotic solution to condition (8)
can be obtained by expanding Eqs. (5) up to quadratic
order in ǫ1 and ǫ2 while treating σ as an approximate
constant. This approximation determines the following
discrete values for θ

and

θ2 =

6(π2q2
σ2)
σ(π2q2 + σ2)2 ,
−

(ǫ1 −

ǫ2) =

π2q2)
4πq(3σ2
σ(σ2 + π2q2)2 .
−

(9)

(10)

According to QED, circular Bohr orbits have maximal
angular momentum and a radiative selection rule ( ∆l =
~) restricts the decay from level n + 1 to level n only,
±
i.e. circular orbits emit the ﬁrst line of each spectro-
scopic series (Lyman, Balmer, Ritz-Paschen, Brackett,
etc...), henceforth called the QED circular line. We have
solved Eqs. (8) and (5) with a Newton method in the
−1
complex λ plane. Every angular momentum lz = θ
determined by Eq. (6) has a value in the correct atomic
magnitude, but the subset of Table 1 has frequencies
wDF surprisingly close to the QED lines. These lines
are when the integer q is approximately equal to an in-
teger multiple of the integer part of 2σ. The reason for
such selection rule is that from the resonances satisfy-
2 depend-
ing the necessary condition, only some have
|
ing on the translation-invariant quantities (ξ1 −
ξ2) and
η2) to allow a recoiling translation[16]. In our de-
(η1 −
scription the emission mechanism is at a frequency equal
to the orbital frequency Ω corrected by the frequency
(7),
of the complex amplitude uZ deﬁned above Eq.
as we explain below. The numerically calculated angu-
−1 for this select subset are given
lar momenta lz = θ
in Table 1, along with the orbital frequency in atomic
units (1373Ω)/µ = (137θ)3, the QED ﬁrst frequency of
the series in atomic units wQED ≡
(n+1)2 ), and
the frequency predicted by the dissipative Fokker model
(137θ)3 + 1373θ2(ǫ1 −
ǫ2). We list only the ﬁrst
wDF ≡
13 lines, which are the experimentally observable, but
we tested the agreement of the numerical calculations of
the Newton method with up to the 40th circular line pre-
dicted by QED. Beyond that, the asymptotic formula (9)
shows that the agreement is essentially for any integer n
because substitution of q = [2σ]n into Eq. (9) yields

2 ( 1
n2

u
|

−

1

1

θ

−1 = r

2π2
3

σ3/2n

137.9n,

∼

(11)

to be compared with the 137.036 of QED. The agreement
for any integer n suggests that Eq. (5) is equivalent to
Schroedinger’s equation (both are eigenvalue problems

for an inﬁnite-dimensional linear operator, and linear op-
erators with the same spectrum are equivalent).

4

−1 (137θ)3
lz = θ
6.137
161.21
1.136
282.88
4.097
397.40
1.833
519.59
9.911
637.79
6.059
751.48
3.880
871.84
987.25
2.672
1109.18 1.188
1225.92 1.139
1343.20 1.061
1466.89 8.146
1585.51 6.455

×
×
×
×
×
×
×
×
×
×
×
×
×

wQED
10−1 3.750
10−1 6.944
10−2 2.430
10−2 1.125
10−3 6.111
10−3 3.685
10−3 2.391
10−3 1.640
10−3 1.173
10−3 8.678
10−3 6.600
10−4 5.136
10−4 4.076

×
×
×
×
×
×
×
×
×
×
×
×
×

wDF
10−1 3.688
10−2 6.806
10−2 2.470
10−2 1.113
10−3 6.054
10−3 3.719
10−3 2.392
10−3 1.654
10−3 1.170
10−4 8.694
10−4 6.628
10−4 5.102
10−4 4.052

10−1
10−1
10−2
10−2
10−3
10−3
10−3
10−3
10−3
10−4
10−4
10−4
10−4

×
×
×
×
×
×
×
×
×
×
×
×
×

1

1

2 ( 1
n2

Table 1: Numerically calculated angular momenta
−1 in units of e2/c, orbital frequency in atomic
lz = θ
units (137θ)3, circular line of QED in atomic units
wQED ≡
(n+1)2 ) and the emission frequency of the
−
(137θ)3 + 1373θ2(ǫ1 −
DF model in atomic units wDF ≡
ǫ2) .
Last we calculate the frequency of the emission line.
The treatment is a consequence of the above deﬁned
DF version of electrodynamics and diﬀers from the
usual electromagnetic model (DR) in non-trivial ways.
We have consistently used the relativistic action-at-a-
distance electrodynamics as a many-body electromag-
netic theory, as ﬁrst suggested in Ref. [13]. This no-ﬁeld
theory is based on a parametrization-invariant action in-
volving two-body interactions only, without the media-
tion by ﬁelds. The isolated electromagnetic two-body
problem, away from the other charges of the universe, is
a time-reversible dynamical system deﬁned by Fokker’s
action

SF =

m1ds1 − Z

m2ds2

(12)

− Z

+

δ(

x1 −
||

x2||

2) ˙x1 ·

Z Z

˙x2ds1ds2,

2

x2||

where xi(si) represents the four-position of particle i =
1, 2 parametrized by its arc-length si , double bars stand
for the four-vector modulus
x1 −
·
||
x2), and the dot indicates the Minkowski scalar
(x1 −
product of four-vectors with the metric tensor gµν (g00 =
1, g11 = g22 = g33 =
1). The Euler-Lagrange equations
of Lagrangian (12) were already used to derive our Eq.
(3). Surprisingly, the solution to the unusual equations
of motion of Lagrangian (12) are still determined by ini-
tial position and velocity, as proved in Ref.([5]) for the
non-runaway solutions. Therefore we are dealing with a

(x1 −

x2)

≡

−

perfectly well-posed and causal system dressed in an un-
familiar form, and we invite the reader to consult Ref. [5].
In the many-body action-at-a-distance electrodynamics
one needs a prescription to describe the incoherent in-
teraction with the universe, because including every sin-
gle particle of the universe in a pairwise many-body La-
grangian like Eq. (12) is impractical (even though it is
precisely what we want to describe physically). This pre-
scription for the dissipative interaction with the universe
must be a covariant prescription that satisﬁes Maxwell’s
equations. For example, the Wheeler-Feynman prescrip-
tion of Ref.
[13] leads to the usual electromagnetic DR
model. The prescription of the DF model is to add
the Lorentz-Dirac self-interaction directly to the Euler-
Lagrange equations of action (12). The main diﬀerence
from the DF to the DR prescription is that we do not
consider the other correlated particle of the two-body
system as part of the incoherent universe, as we shall
discuss elsewhere.

In the DF model the interaction with a distant par-
ticle involves half/retarded plus half/advanced Li´enard-
Wierchert interactions, as derived from a pairwise La-
grangian of type (12). We shall show that this does not
preclude radiation of energy. Once DF satisﬁes Maxwell’s
equations everywhere, Poynting’s theorem is valid for
any true orbit that solves the stiﬀ equations of motion.
Thinking of Poynting’s theorem as detached from the
complexity of the equations of motion might suggest a use
of this theorem to calculate the radiation of hypothetical
orbits that are not even solution to the equations of mo-
tion. For example, one can show that with half/retarded
plus half/advanced ﬁelds a perfectly circular orbit does
not radiate energy. But again, it is just as easy to show
that a perfectly circular orbit is not a solution of the
equations of motion with the self-interaction terms. Stiﬀ-
ness can prevent the dynamics from staying even for a sin-
gle turn in the neighborhood of an orbit that would be a
solution to the equation without the stiﬀ terms [6]. A fa-
miliar use of the retarded-only radiation ﬁelds of DR is to
calculate the incoherent dissipation of a circular current
by applying Poynting’s theorem to the radiation ﬁelds
of a hypothetical circular orbit.
It is a trivial exercise
to show that this produces the same result of integrat-
ing the Lorentz-Dirac self-interaction times the velocity
along that hypothetical circular orbit. Even though this
approximation is ﬁne for macroscopic currents restricted
by a wire and forced by a battery, the stiﬀ delay equa-
tions of electrodynamics can jump wildly given unstable
conditions. Therefore, one should see ﬁrst if the solu-
tion exists and if it is stable in the model and only then
calculate the radiation for that precise stable orbit. The
perturbations to circularity deﬁned by Eq. (2) are nec-
essary to stabilize the orbit, and as we show below, are
essential as well to determine the radiated energy. The
self-interaction force is a very small singular dissipative
term along the unperturbed circular orbit, and the dissi-

5

pation calculated over the perturbed orbit is completely
changed by the gyroscopic perturbations, even if the ﬁnal
orbit stays near the circular orbit. After proper account
of these perturbations, our metastable orbit radiates even
with the half-retarded plus half-advanced ﬁelds.

The half/retarded plus half/advanced radiation mag-
netic ﬁeld of the electron in the DF model (the far-
magnetic ﬁeld) is[15]

Brad =

(a−

n−)
v−)2r −

×
n−

2(1

−

·

(a+ ×
n+ ·
−

n+)
v+)2r

,

2(1

(13)

·

n

±

(r

where v and a are the electronic velocity and accelera-
tion, n is a unit vector from the electron to the observa-
tion point, underscore minus indicates evaluation on the
retarded light-cone and underscore plus indicates evalu-
ation on the advanced light-cone. These two light-cones
are deﬁned by t± = t
x) where x is the vec-
−
tor position of the electron measured from the center of
2r, whenever 2r is
the circular orbit. Once (t+ −
an integer multiple of the distance travelled by light in
a circular period (one light-period), the ﬁrst term of ex-
pansion (13) along the precise circular orbit vanishes and
the next term is the important one; a quadratic function
of the orbital quantities. The same cancellation happens
for the far-electric ﬁeld whenever 2r is an odd-integer
multiple of half the light-period, but for us here the far-
magnetic ﬁeld is enough. The next term of the magnetic
expansion about the circular orbit is

t−)

≃

B(1)

rad =

2(n

v)(a

·

×

n) + (n
r

·

x)( ˙a

n)

.

×

(14)

We can estimate (14) by noticing that along the n = ˆx
direction of the unperturbed plane this quadratic term
contains a product of the z perturbed coordinate times
the x perturbed coordinate. Those perturbations are de-
scribed by the u and Z nonrunaway normal modes al-
ready used and explained above Eq. (7). Using the nor-
mal mode conditions θ ˙u = Ωλxyu and θ ˚Z = ΩλzZ to-
gether with Eq.(8) one can show that the quadratic form
uZ is a complex amplitude that oscillates harmonically
ǫ2)Ω/θ.
with the beat frequency (λxy + λz)Ω/θ = (ǫ1 −
This complex amplitude is precisely the square-root of
our resonant-normal form (7), which is a constant be-
cause it is the modulus of the complex number uZ =
√C exp[i(ǫ1 −
ǫ2)Ωt/θ]. Translating the u mode to Carte-
sian coordinates with Eq. (2), we obtain the following
approximation to B(1)
rad

B(1)

rad ∝

2uZ
r

exp(iΩt),

(15)

and therefore the frequency of the emission line is equal
to Ω plus the frequency of uZ

wDF (n) = Ω + (ǫ1 −

ǫ2)Ω/θ,

(16)

with Ω given by Eq. (1). Notice that the emitted fre-
quency of the DF model is naturally diﬀerent from the
orbital frequency. Among all possible settings of electro-
dynamics, only DF has this possibility. The fact that
the emission frequency of hydrogen is diﬀerent from the
orbital frequency is another famous conundrum for the
usual DR electromagnetic setting. The emission fre-
quency of Eq. (16 ) contains diﬀerences of eigenvalues of
the linear inﬁnite-dimensional operator (5) and is strik-
ingly similar to the Rydberg-Ritz combinatorial principle
of quantum mechanics for the emission lines.

To discuss the width of the emission lines, we notice
that for small amplitudes the resonant normal form con-
strains the deformation while allowing a radiative recoil.
Even though the ﬁrst term of the resonant normal form is
a function of the relative separation only, a higher-order
term might not be so, and at some point the recoil breaks
the metastable orbit down, ionizing the atom. The con-
struction of this next term shall be left for future work. In
the dynamical process of resonant dissipation, the sharp
line is emitted while the dynamics is in the neighbor-
hood of the original orbit. We conjecture that when the
metastable orbit breaks down, it can fall into the next
metastable attractor; another circular orbit, or into the
ground state.

1

−

≃

2 ( 1
n2

1
(n+2)2 ).

To discuss the light of elliptical orbits is beyond our
stability analysis of circular orbits. We just notice here
that a quartic term of expansion (13), B(2)
rad, will naturally
have frequencies that are sums of two wDF of Eq. (16 ),
w(4)

DF = wDF (n) + wDF (n + 1)
The present simple approximation does not yet com-
pete with the precision of QED, but it is surprising that
recognizing the correct qualitative dynamical behavior of
the equations of motion of classical electrodynamics can
take us so far (the small corrections to Eq. (5) will be
given elsewhere). The results are also beyond the Dar-
win approximation to Fokker’s Lagrangian because the
logarithm is not analytic at θ = 0. We see then that the
physics of resonant dissipation is qualitatively beyond the
non-ionization criterion previously used by us[10], even
though it contains it ( the particles must stay bound dur-
ing dissipation). In the DF electrodynamics, the results
of Ref. [8] can be recovered by giving a ﬁnite mass to the
nucleus and letting the atom dissipate the center-of-mass
energy[8]. If the non-analyticity in θ is not present, the
Darwin approximation might even be good qualitatively,
as used in Ref.
[8]. The linear stability of the equa-
tions of classical electrodynamics naturally involved an
inﬁnite-dimensional linear eigenvalue problem, Eq. (5),
which is essentially a PDE, like Schroedinger’s equation.
We conjecture here that it should be possible to construct
an average linear operator from Eq. (5) with g = 1 and
ǫ2)Ω/θ is a diﬀer-
7 such that Ω+(ǫ1 −
Eq. (5) with g =

−

6

ence between its consecutive eigenvalues. That would be
the Schroedinger’s eigenvalue problem. Last, the angu-
lar momenta of Eq. (11) depend only logarithmically on
the mass ratio times θ4, such that the deuterium and the
muonium atoms have essentially the same values for θ
(i.e., the same ﬁne structure constant, in agreement with
QED). Notice that if the proton mass is set inﬁnite, the
quantized angular momenta become inﬁnite as well, such
that this logarithmic σ is a genuine two-body eﬀect.

Recognizing the correct qualitative dynamical behav-
ior is an intuition that goes a long way here; it suggested
we should explore the inﬁnite dimensionality of the delay
with stability analysis and make use of the stiﬀ modes.
These stiﬀ modes provide a natural integer number to
label the metastable orbits. The natural appearance of
the inﬁnite-dimensional operator (Eq. (5)), and the large
body of qualitative and quantitative agreement suggests
that simple stability analysis inside the DF electrody-
namics is a consistent new version of QED; one with an
~ given by Eq. (11). More work should be done to un-
derstand the relation between those two theories.

We thank Savio B. Rodrigues for discussions and for
checking the numerical work in the complex λ plane with
MATLAB.

∗ author’s email address: deluca@df.ufscar.br
[1] A. Staruszkiewicz, Acta Physica Polonica XXXIII,

1007(1968), see eq. (15).

[2] N. Bohr, Philos. Mag., 26, 1 (1913); 26, 476 (1913).
[3] P.A.M.Dirac, Proc. R. Soc. London, Ser. A 167, 148

(1938).

[4] D. G. Currie, T.F. Jordan and E. C. G. Sudarshan, Rev.
Mod. Phys. 35, 350 (1963); G. Marmo, N Mukunda and
E.C.G. Sudarshan, Phys. Rev. D 30, 2110 (1984).

[5] R. D. Driver, Phys. Rev. D 19, 1098 (1979).
[6] J. Grasman, Asymptotic Methods for Relaxation Oscilla-
tions and Applications , Applied Mathematical Sciences,
63, Springer-Verlag, New York (1987).

[7] C.J. Eliezer, Proc. Cambridge Philos. Soc. 39, 173

(1943).

[8] J. De Luca, Phys. Rev. Lett. 80, 680 (1998) .
[9] J. De Luca, Phys. Rev. E 58, 5727 (1998).
[10] J. De Luca, Phys. Rev. E 62, 2060 (2000).
[11] A. Schild, Phys. Rev. 131, 2762 (1963).
[12] C. M. Andersen and H. C. Von Baeyer, Phys. Rev. D 5,

802 (1972).

[13] J. A. Wheeler and R. P. Feynman, Rev. of Mod. Physics,

17, 157 (1945) and Rev. of Mod. Phys. 21, 425 (1949).

[14] R. E. Bellman and K.L.Cooke, Diﬀerential-Diﬀerence
Equations, Academic Press, New York (1963) . page 393.
[15] F. Rohrlich, Classical Charged Particles, Addison-

Wesley, New York (1965).
[16] J. De Luca, to be published.

