5
0
0
2
 
n
a
J
 
8
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
m
o
t
a
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
2
9
0
1
0
5
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

An AC electric trap for ground-state molecules

Jacqueline van Veldhoven1,2, Hendrick L. Bethlem1,2, and Gerard Meijer1
1Fritz-Haber-Institut der Max-Planck-Gesellschaft
Faradayweg 4-6, D-14195 Berlin, Germany
2FOM-Institute for Plasmaphysics Rijnhuizen, P.O. Box 1207,
NL-3430 BE Nieuwegein, The Netherlands
(Dated: July 24, 2013)

We here report on the realization of an electrodynamic trap, capable of trapping neutral atoms
and molecules in both low-ﬁeld and high-ﬁeld seeking states. Conﬁnement in three dimensions is
achieved by switching between two electric ﬁeld conﬁgurations that have a saddle-point at the center
of the trap, i.e., by alternating a focusing and a defocusing force in each direction. AC trapping
of 15ND3 molecules is experimentally demonstrated, and the stability of the trap is studied as a
function of the switching frequency. A 1 mK sample of 15ND3 molecules in the high-ﬁeld seeking
component of the |J, Ki = |1, 1i level, the ground-state of para-ammonia, is trapped in a volume of
about 1 mm3.

PACS numbers: 33.80.Ps,39.10.+j,33.55.Be

During the last years, trapping of molecules using op-
tical ﬁelds [1], magnetic ﬁelds [2], and electric ﬁelds [3]
has been experimentally demonstrated.
In the largest
and deepest traps thus far realized, made of static in-
homogeneous magnetic and/or electric ﬁelds, paramag-
netic or polar molecules in low-ﬁeld seeking quantum
states can be conﬁned [4]. There is a special interest
in polar molecules, as they are promising for a variety
of fundamental physics studies and applications [5, 6].
For most of these investigations, however, trapping of
molecules in high-ﬁeld seeking states is required. For in-
stance, only when polar molecules are trapped in their
absolute ground-state, which is high-ﬁeld seeking for any
molecule, increasing the phase-space density via evapora-
tive cooling is expected to be possible; the strong dipole-
dipole interaction between polar molecules is predicted
to lead to high trap loss rates due to inelastic collisions
for molecules in low-ﬁeld seeking states [7], thereby ham-
pering the evaporative cooling process. Furthermore,
when biomolecules or heavy diatomic molecules, e.g.,
those that are important for measurements on the electric
dipole moment of the electron [8, 9], are to be trapped,
a trap for molecules in high-ﬁeld seeking states is the
only viable option. Due to their small rotational energy
level spacings, these molecules are purely high-ﬁeld seek-
ing already in relatively small electric or magnetic ﬁelds.
In principle, optical trapping can be used for molecules in
high-ﬁeld seeking states [1, 10]. In this Letter we experi-
mentally demonstrate an AC electric trap, a new trap for
molecules in high-ﬁeld seeking states with a depth and a
volume that is considerably larger than obtainable with
an optical trap.

Creating a maximum of the static electric ﬁeld in free
space in three dimensions, which would allow trapping of
molecules in high-ﬁeld seeking states, is fundamentally
impossible [11]. In two dimensions such a ﬁeld maximum
can be created. In a cylindrically symmetric geometry,
for instance, a static electric ﬁeld can be made with a
maximum in the radial direction and a minimum in the

axial direction, or vice versa. Switching between these
two saddle-point conﬁgurations results in a ﬁeld that is
alternatingly exerting a focusing and a defocusing force in
each direction for molecules in high-ﬁeld (and low-ﬁeld)
seeking states. Conﬁnement in three dimensions can thus
be obtained.

In our experiment we create the two required saddle-
point electric ﬁeld conﬁgurations either by adding a
hexapole ﬁeld to, or by subtracting a hexapole ﬁeld from,
a dipole ﬁeld, as suggested by Peik [12]. As switch-
ing between the two conﬁgurations involves changing the
hexapole ﬁeld only, the electric ﬁeld in the center of the
trap doesn’t change, which has, for instance, the advan-
tage that Majorana transitions are prevented. The mag-
nitude of the force on a molecule, which is proportional
to the distance from the center of the trap, is the same in
the two electric ﬁeld conﬁgurations, but the direction of
the force is opposite. At any ﬁxed position, the force on a
molecule will average out over time. However, a molecule
does not stay at a ﬁxed position but will move towards
the center of the trap under the inﬂuence of a focusing
force. It will then be closer to the center, where the force
is smaller, when the defocusing force is applied. This de-
focusing force will move the molecule further away from
the center again, bringing it in a region of a larger force
when the focusing force is applied. On average, molecules
will thus be further away from the center of the trap when
the focusing force is applied than they are while being de-
focused, resulting in a net focusing force. This is shown
in Fig. 1, where three trajectories of molecules along the
z-direction are displayed during several switching peri-
ods. The molecules perform a fast micromotion at the
switching frequency superimposed on a slower ’secular’
motion. The grey area encompasses all stable trajecto-
ries, and shows the size of the package of molecules along
the z-direction in the trap as a function of time. This
size is indeed seen to be largest (smallest) when focusing
(defocusing).

Whether the trap is stable or not depends on the (ra-

2

other and the net force on the molecules averages out
more. The trap will thus be deepest for frequencies just
above the cut-oﬀ frequency and will become less deep for
higher frequencies, whereas no trapping at all is possible
for frequencies below the cut-oﬀ frequency. The same ar-
guments and equations apply for the x- and y-direction,
with qx = qy = −qz/2.

The operation principle of this AC electric trap for neu-
tral polar molecules is similar to that of a Paul trap for
charged particles [14]. Using magnetic ﬁelds, AC trap-
ping has already been demonstrated for cesium atoms
[15] and several proposals for an AC electric trap for
atoms have been put forward [12, 16, 17].
In two di-
mensions the same principle has been used to focus neu-
tral molecules in high-ﬁeld seeking states in an alternate
gradient (AG) decelerator [19, 20] and in an AC electric
guide [18].
It is noted that in an AG focuser constant
voltages can be applied; the molecules will experience an
alternating ﬁeld due to their forward velocity.

In the experimental setup shown in Fig. 2 a mixture of
5% 15ND3 seeded in xenon expands from a pulsed valve
at a 10 Hz repetition rate. In the expansion region, about
60% of the ammonia molecules cool to the |J, Ki = |1, 1i
level, the ground-state of para-ammonia. After passing
through a skimmer, the beam is coupled into a Stark
decelerator by a hexapole. This part of the set-up and
the operation principle of the decelerator have been de-
scribed in detail elsewhere [21, 22]. Upon exiting the
decelerator with a forward velocity of around 15 m/s,
15ND3 molecules in the low-ﬁeld seeking component of
the |J, Ki = |1, 1i level are transversally and longitudi-
nally focused into the AC trap by a second hexapole and
a buncher [23], respectively. A cross-section of the AC
electric trap together with the voltages applied to the
electrodes for the two diﬀerent electric ﬁeld conﬁgura-
tions is shown in Fig. 2 [25]. The trap has a hexapole
geometry consisting of two ring electrodes with an inner
diameter of 10 mm and two end caps, with a closest sep-
aration of 9.1 mm. Between the two ring electrodes there
is a 2.9 mm gap through which the UV detection laser is
coupled in. There is a 2 mm diameter hole in the entrance
end cap for coupling the 15ND3 molecules into the trap
and a 2 mm diameter hole in the exit end cap for extract-
ing the laser-produced molecular ions. When the pack-
age of slow ammonia molecules enters the trap, voltages
are applied to the trap electrodes such that molecules
are brought to a standstill near the center of the trap.
At that time a 20 µs duration pulse of 1.43 GHz radia-
tion can be coupled in to induce the transition from the
low-ﬁeld seeking to the high-ﬁeld seeking hyperﬁne levels
in the |J, Ki = |1, 1i state of 15ND3 [22]. Under opti-
mum conditions, about 20% of the ammonia molecules
are pumped to high-ﬁeld seeking levels.

When the AC electric trap is switched on, the voltages
on the trap are alternated at a frequency Ω between the
two conﬁgurations shown in Fig. 2. The conﬁgurations on
the left-hand side and on the right-hand side in the ﬁgure
focus high-ﬁeld (low-ﬁeld) seeking molecules in the axial

FIG. 1: Trajectories of molecules along the z-direction of the
AC trap as a function of trapping time, for a switching fre-
quency of 1100 Hz. The block-wave above the graph indicates
whether the electric ﬁeld conﬁguration is focusing or defocus-
ing along ˆz. The grey area shows the size of a package of
molecules, which is seen to be largest when the electric ﬁeld
conﬁguration is focusing. The two dotted lines are at 79 and
79.5 periods of switching, when the measurements on the size
of the trapped sample shown in Fig. 4 are performed.

dial) frequency Ω with which the two electric ﬁeld con-
ﬁgurations are switched. This is most conveniently dis-
cussed when it is assumed that the electric hexapole ﬁeld
is modulated with a sinusoidal function, rather than with
a square wave. The qualitative behavior of the trap as
a function of Ω will be the same, but for a sinusoidally
varying ﬁeld the trajectories of the molecules are solu-
tions of the well-known Mathieu equation [12, 13]:

(1)

(2)

d2z
dτ 2 + (a − 2qz cos 2τ )z = 0,

with

a = 0;

qz =

12µef f U3
mΩ2z3
0

;

τ =

Ωt
2

,

where µef f is the eﬀective dipole moment of the molecule,
U3 is the amplitude of the oscillating hexapole term, m
is the mass of the molecule, and z0 is the characteris-
tic radius of the trap. When a = 0, solutions of the
Mathieu equation are stable along the z-direction when
|qz| < 0.907. If the voltages on the trap are kept con-
stant, the value of |qz| can be changed by changing Ω.
At low frequencies, solutions to the Mathieu equation
are unstable and the amplitude of the molecular motion
will increase exponentially in time. Above some cut-oﬀ
frequency, the trap will abruptly become stable. When
the frequency is increased further, the molecules have
less time to move in between switching times. Their am-
plitudes during focusing and defocusing approach each

3

FIG. 3: Density of 15ND3 molecules in low-ﬁeld seeking (lfs)
and high-ﬁeld seeking (hfs) levels of the |J, Ki = |1, 1i state at
the center of the trap as a function of the switching frequency,
after the trap has been on for 72 ms. The signal of the high-
ﬁeld seekers is scaled up by a factor of 5.

ization followed by mass-selective detection of the parent
ions. The (2+1) Resonance Enhanced Multi Photon Ion-
ization (REMPI) scheme that is used selectively ionizes
the 15ND3 molecules in the upper or lower component
of the |J, Ki = |1, 1i inversion doublet, containing the
low-ﬁeld seeking or high-ﬁeld seeking levels, respectively.
In Fig. 3 the density of 15ND3 molecules at the center
of the trap is shown as a function of the switching fre-
quency for molecules in low-ﬁeld seeking and high-ﬁeld
seeking states. The signal for the high-ﬁeld seekers is
scaled up by a factor of ﬁve, to correct for the 20% con-
version eﬃciency in the microwave pumping process. To
arrive at the relative densities, a correction has also been
made for the quantum-state speciﬁc ionization eﬃciency.
The measurements are made after the AC trap has been
on for 72 ms, enabling data-acquisition at the 10 Hz rep-
etition rate of the experiment. The trapping lifetime is
actually expected to be several tenths of seconds, lim-
ited by the residual background pressure. The measure-
ments agree with the qualitative description of the de-
pendence of the stability of the trap on Ω as described
above. If the cut-oﬀ frequency is calculated using Eq. 2
with µef f = 0.75 Debye, z0 ≈ 4.5 mm, and U3 = 3 kV,
a frequency of around 890 Hz is found. The numeri-
cally calculated cut-oﬀ frequency for 15ND3 in this trap
is around 980 Hz, in good agreement with the measure-
ments. Note that the cut-oﬀ frequency for the high-ﬁeld
seekers is slightly higher than for the low-ﬁeld seekers
due to an about 4% diﬀerence in µef f in the electric
ﬁeld at the center of the trap. With the present settings,
the highest density of trapped molecules is observed at a
switching frequency of 1100 Hz. Due to the anharmonic-
ity of the trap it is expected that the trap works better

FIG. 2: Experimental setup. A molecular beam of 15ND3
molecules in the low-ﬁeld seeking component of the |J, Ki =
|1, 1i level is decelerated and brought to a standstill in the
AC electric trap. Before turning on the trap a transition
from low-ﬁeld seeking to high-ﬁeld seeking levels can be made
by applying a microwave pulse. Cross-sections of the trap
are shown with lines of equal electric ﬁeld strength (contours
are shown at 5, 10, 12.5, 15, 17.5, 20, 25 and 30 kV/cm,
increasing from blue to red (on-line only)) for both electric
ﬁeld conﬁgurations, together with plots of the electric ﬁeld
strength along the r- and the z-direction.

(radial) and the radial (axial) direction, respectively. The
resulting trapping potential is about twice as deep in the
axial direction as it is in the radial direction. Therefore,
increasing the trap depth in the r-direction at the cost of
decreasing the trap depth in the z-direction will improve
the overall trap performance. This can experimentally
be done by adjusting the duty cycle, i.e., the fraction
of each switching period during which the electric ﬁeld
conﬁguration is applied that is denoted as the z-focusing
conﬁguration in Fig. 2. In the measurements the duty
cycle is 45% when trapping high-ﬁeld seekers and 55%
when trapping low-ﬁeld seekers. The trap is switched on
with the r-focusing (z-focusing) conﬁguration when trap-
ping high-ﬁeld (low-ﬁeld) seekers, and the ﬁrst switching
to the other conﬁguration is performed after a quarter
period.

After a certain trapping time, the trap is switched oﬀ,
and the molecules are detected using pulsed UV-laser ion-

4

direction is indeed smaller during r-focusing (denoted as
defocusing in Fig. 1) than it is during z-focusing (denoted
as focusing in Fig. 1). From the observed spatial distri-
butions, a temperature of the trapped sample of around
1 mK is deduced.

In the AC electric trap demonstrated here, neutral
atoms and molecules, both in low-ﬁeld and in high-ﬁeld
seeking states, can be trapped. For molecules in high-
ﬁeld seeking states only optical traps, which have a typ-
ical trap depth below 1 mK and a typical volume of
10−5 cm3 [10], had been demonstrated thus far; a con-
siderably deeper and larger microwave trap has recently
been proposed [24]. We have demonstrated here, using
15ND3 as a prototypical polar molecule, an AC electric
trap with a trap depth of about 5 mK and a trapping
volume of about 20 mm3. This relatively deep and large
trap for ground-state molecules holds great promise for
future applications.

FIG. 4: Spatial distribution along ˆz of 15ND3 molecules in
high-ﬁeld seeking states after trapping at 1100 Hz for 79 (left)
and 79.5 (right) switching periods. A Gaussian distribution
is ﬁtted to the measurements and the width (FWHM) of this
distribution is given.

for molecules in low-ﬁeld than in high-ﬁeld seeking states,
in agreement with the observations.

In Fig. 4 measurements of the spatial distribution along
the z-direction are shown for 15ND3 molecules in high-
ﬁeld seeking states. The measurements are performed
after trapping for about 72 ms at a switching frequency
of 1100 Hz. The data shown on the left are taken after
79 periods of switching, i.e., in the middle of r-focusing.
The data shown on the right are taken half a period later,
i.e., in the middle of z-focusing.
It is clear from these
measurements that the package of molecules in the z-

Acknowledgments

This work is part of the research program of the
‘Stichting voor Fundamenteel Onderzoek der Materie
(FOM)’, which is ﬁnancially supported by the ‘Ned-
erlandse Organisatie voor Wetenschappelijk Onderzoek
(NWO)’. The technical support by A.J.A. van Roij, the
design and construction of the electronics by G. Heyne
and P. Zilske, and discussions with J. K¨upper and B.
Friedrich are gratefully acknowledged.

[1] T. Takekoshi, B.M. Patterson and R.J. Knize, Phys. Rev.

[16] F. Shimizu and M. Morinaga, Jpn.J.Appl.Phys 31, L1721

Lett. 81, 5105 (1998).

(1992).

[2] J.D. Weinstein, R. deCarvalho, T. Guillet, B. Friedrich

and J.M. Doyle, Nature 395, 148 (1998).

[3] H.L. Bethlem, G. Berden, F.M.H. Crompvoets,
R.T. Jongma, A.J.A. van Roij and G. Meijer, Nature
406, 491 (2000).

[4] W.H. Wing, Prog. Quant. Electr. 8, 181 (1984).
[5] H.L. Bethlem and G. Meijer, Int. Rev. Phys. Chem. 22,

[6] Special Issue on Ultracold Polar Molecules, Eur. Phys. J.

73 (2003).

D 31 (2) (2004).

[7] J.L. Bohn, Phys. Rev. A 63, 052714 (2001).
[8] J.J. Hudson, B.E. Sauer, M.R. Tarbutt and E.A. Hinds,

Phys. Rev. Lett. 89, 023003 (2002).

[9] D. Kawall, F. Bay, S. Bickman, Y. Jiang and D. DeMille,

Phys. Rev. Lett. 92, 133007 (2004).

[10] R. Grimm, M. Weidem¨uller and Y. Ovchinnikov, Adv.

Atom. Mol. Opt. Phys. 42, 95 (1999).

[11] S. Earnshaw, Trans. Camb. Phil. Soc. 7, 97 (1842).
[12] E. Peik, Eur. Phys. J. D 6, 179 (1999).
[13] M. Abramowitz and I.A. Stegun: Handbook of Mathe-
matical Functions. 9. edition. Dover Publications, New
York, 1970.

[14] W. Paul, Rev. Mod. Phys. 62, 531 (1990).
[15] E.A. Cornell, C. Monroe and C.E. Wieman, Phys. Rev.

Lett. 67, 2439 (1991).

[17] M. Morinaga and F. Shimizu, Laser Phys. 4, 412 (1994).
[18] T. Junglen, T. Rieger, S.A. Rangwala, P.W.H. Pinkse
and G. Rempe, Phys. Rev. Lett. 92, 223001 (2004).
[19] H.L. Bethlem, A.J.A. van Roij, R.T. Jongma and G. Mei-

jer, Phys. Rev. Lett. 88, 133003 (2002).

[20] M.R. Tarbutt, H.L. Bethlem, J.J. Hudson, V.L. Ryabov,
V.A. Ryzhov, B.E. Sauer, G. Meijer and E.A. Hinds,
Phys. Rev. Lett. 92, 173002 (2004).

[21] H.L. Bethlem, F.M.H. Crompvoets, R.T. Jongma,
S.Y.T. van de Meerakker and G. Meijer, Phys. Rev. A
65, 053416 (2002).

[22] J. van Veldhoven, J. K¨upper, H.L. Bethlem, B. Sartakov,
A.J. van Roij and G. Meijer, Eur. Phys. J. D 31, 337
(2004).

[23] F.M.H. Crompvoets, R.T. Jongma, H.L. Bethlem,
A.J.A. van Roij and G. Meijer, Phys. Rev. Lett. 89,
093004 (2002).

[24] D. DeMille, D.R. Glenn and J. Petricka, Eur. Phys. J. D

31, 375 (2004).

[25] In the experiments reported here, the applied voltages
generate a dipole ﬁeld with an alternating hexapole ﬁeld.
We have also used this trap with a constant hexapole
ﬁeld to conﬁne molecules in low-ﬁeld seeking states.

