5
0
0
2
 
n
a
J
 
7
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
m
o
t
a
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
6
4
1
1
0
5
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Quantum Accelerator Modes from the Farey Tree

A. Buchleitner,1 M.B. d’Arcy,2 S. Fishman,3 S.A. Gardiner,4
I. Guarneri,5,6,7 Z.-Y. Ma,8 L. Rebuzzini,5 G.S. Summy9

∗

1Max-Planck-Institut f¨ur Physik komplexer Systeme,
N¨othnitzer Str. 38, D-01187 Dresden, Germany
2Atomic Physics Division, National Institute of Standards and Technology,
Gaithersburg, MD 20899-8424, USA
3Physics Department, Technion, Haifa IL-32000, Israel
4JILA, University of Colorado and National Institute of Standards and Technology,
Boulder, CO 80309-0440, USA
5Dipartimento di Fisica e Matematica, Universit`a degli Studi dell’Insubria,
Via Valleggio 11, I-22100 Como, Italy
6Instituto Nazionale per la Fisica della Materia, Unit`a di Milano,
Via Celoria, I-20133 Milano, Italy
7Instituto Nazionale di Fisica Nucleare, Sezione di Pavia,
Via Bassi 6, I-27100 Pavia, Italy
8Clarendon Laboratory, Department of Physics, University of Oxford,
Parks Road, Oxford, OX1 3PU, United Kingdom
9Department of Physics, Oklahoma State University,
Stillwater, OK 74078-3072, USA
∗To whom correspondence should be addressed; E-mail: gil.summy@okstate.edu

The Farey Tree is an arithmetical construction which establishes a hierarchical
structure for the rational numbers. It provides a natural ordering of Arnol’d
tongues, parameter regions where driven nonlinear classical systems exhibit
mode-locking – the synchronization of the system dynamics with the drive.
Here we show that mode-locking ﬁnds its purely quantum counterpart in atom
optical quantum accelerator modes. These modes are formed by exposing cold
atoms to periodic kicks in the direction of the gravitational ﬁeld. They are an-
chored to the Arnol’d tongues of a “pseudoclassical” dynamics formally con-

1

structed from the quantum mechanical time evolution. We show that due to
the extended stability region covered by the Arnol’d tongues, the modes are
robust spectral features of the driven system, and can be classiﬁed according
to the Farey rule. By “climbing up” the Farey Tree, the modes can provide an
improving rational approximant to the Earth’s gravitational acceleration.

Precise control of the state and of the time evolution of quantum systems is one of the
central targets of current research in experimental and theoretical atomic physics, quantum op-
tics, mesoscopics, and quantum information. Tailoring wave packets in Rydberg systems (1),
producing single photons on demand (2), creating coherent superpositions of macroscopic
persistent-current states (3), and, most recently, the controlled production of multiparticle en-
tanglement (4), are prominent examples of what is often coined as “quantum state engineering”.
In other words for many systems almost perfect control has been achieved over matter on the
microscopic level. However, many of these schemes still rely on an understanding of the quan-
tum dynamics in terms of some unperturbed basis of the quantum system under control, and are
fragile, i.e. rapidly lose their eﬃciency under the inﬂuence of decoherence, or simple technical
noise. Meanwhile, it has become clear that generic features of strongly coupled quantum sys-
tems allow for novel and often extremely robust strategies of quantum control. In such systems,
studied in much detail in the area of quantum chaos, peculiar eigenstates emerge which ex-
hibit unexpected localization properties and dynamics, and are remarkably inert with respect to
uncontrolled perturbations. Prominent examples thereof are nondispersive wave packets in peri-
odically driven quantum systems (5), quantum resonances (6,7), and stochastic web states (8,9).
Hitherto all these “strong coupling” quantum control schemes have relied on some under-
lying classical dynamics, which in general is mixed regular-chaotic. It is precisely the rich
structure of a mixed classical phase space that is key (10). For such a classical picture to have
any bearing on the actually observed quantum dynamics, it is in general necessary to approach
the semiclassical limit, i.e., to steer the quantum system into the spectral range of high spectral
densities, where the classical actions accumulated along typical eigenmodes of the system are
large as compared to Planck’s quantum ~. Under these conditions, the quantum system can
“resolve” the intricate phase space structure of classically mixed regular-chaotic dynamics, and
classical nonlinear stabilization phenomena emerge on microscopic scales.

Arguably one of the most prominent and ubiquitous of such stabilization phenomena in
nonlinear classical dynamics is mode-locking. Here eigenmodes of a periodically driven system
are locked in their temporal evolution onto the phase of the external drive through a nonlinear
resonance phenomenon. This mechanism was ﬁrst described by Huygens (11) when he realized
the apparently spontaneous synchronization of the pendula of two nearby clocks on a wall. It
is operational in many technical applications from frequency stabilized lasers (12) to plasma
conﬁnement (13) in fusion reactors, and has recently been imported to the quantum realm, so
as to create nondispersive electronic wave packets in the anharmonic Coulomb potential (5) of
highly excited Rydberg states. An important question is: is this necessarily strictly a classical
or semiclassical eﬀect?

2

Figure 1: Colour density plot of experimental atomic momentum distributions (measured rel-
ative to the momentum attained due to gravitational free-fall) showing the development of a
quantum accelerator mode created by applying a sequence of pulses from a standing wave of
laser light to a sample of 107 laser-cooled caesium atoms, with a pulsing period T = 60.5µs.
The colourbar at the right indicates the population scale, in arbitrary units. The transfer of
momentum in the negative direction, linearly with the number of pulses, to about 20% of the
atoms (that fraction of the initial atomic wave packet which is trapped by the pseudoclassical
resonance island depicted in Fig. 3) is clear.

Here we report that, indeed, mode-locking can be implemented on the quantum level even
far from the semiclassical limit. The quantum accelerator modes (QAMs) of cold atoms kicked
along the Earth’s gravitational ﬁeld are mode-locked quantum eigenstates of cold matter. These
modes are formed at certain kicking intervals and have the characteristic that atoms within a
mode receive the same amount of momentum each time a kick occurs. Figure 1 shows how this
leads to a linear increase of momentum for these atoms. Due to underlying number theoretical
properties which are deeply rooted in an arithmetical construction known as the Farey Tree
(14,15),QAMs hold the potential for accurately determining the local gravitational acceleration.
Mode-locking
Mode-locking enters the theory of QAMs via the following map:

2πΩ
Jn+1 =Jn −
θn+1 =θn + Jn+1 mod(2π),

K sin(θn),

−

(1a)
(1b)

which describes the perfectly deterministic motion of a periodically kicked classical particle
on a circle, and whose connection to our atom optics experiments will become apparent shortly.
In this map, θn and Jn are the angle and angular momentum just before the nth kick, K is the

3

kicking strength and Ω the unperturbed winding number. If the particle is additionally subject
to dissipative forces, the accessible phase space shrinks, and Eq. (1) reduces (in the long-time
limit) to the sine-circle map (16):

θn+1 = θn −

K sin(θn)

2πΩ,

−

(2)

a much-studied paradigm for the phenomenon of mode-locking. If K = 0 and Ω is a rational
number equal to m/p (m and p integer), then any trajectory of the sine-circle map will return
to its initial value (modulo 2π) after p iterations. For 0 < K < 1, the eﬀect of mode-locking
is observed: that is over a range of Ω values around m/p, the mode-locking interval, a peri-
odic trajectory with rational winding number m/p persists. This orbit attracts all other orbits
asymptotically in time, such that they all end up with this winding number. The widths of the
mode-locking intervals are exponentially small in p, and increase with increasing K up until
1, thus forming regions in (Ω, K) parameter space that terminate at K = 0, Ω = m/p.
K
These regions are the Arnol’d tongues (17).

≥

Figure 2: Schematic of experimental setup used to study quantum accelerator modes in Oxford,
as described in Refs. (25, 26).

Experimental set-up and phenomenology
107 caesium atoms is
In our experimental setup, shown schematically in Fig. 2, a cloud of
trapped and cooled in a magneto-optic trap (MOT) to a temperature of 5 µK. The atoms are then
released and exposed to a sequence of pulses, equally spaced in time, from a standing wave
created by a retroreﬂected beam of light with wavelength λ = 895 nm, 15 GHz red-detuned

∼

4

5

×

∼

104 mW/cm2, and
from the D1 transition. The peak intensity in the standing wave is
the pulse duration is tp = 500 ns. These values of detuning, intensity, and pulse duration are
such that excitation to the upper atomic level can be neglected. Furthermore, the motion of
the atoms during a pulse is negligible and this allows us to treat each pulse as a δ-function.
The atoms experience the standing wave as a potential that varies sinusoidally in space, with
period λ/2. The potential is due to the light-induced energy shift caused by the ac-Stark eﬀect
in which there is a coupling between the electric ﬁeld of the light and an induced dipole in
the atom. This shift is proportional to the light intensity, and results in a force experienced by
the centre-of-mass of the neutral atom. After the pulsing sequence, the atoms fall through a
sheet of laser light located below the MOT, from which they resonantly scatter photons. By
monitoring the scattering signal as a function of time, the atoms’ momentum distribution is
h/λ, where h/λ is the ‘photon recoil’, the momentum
determined with a resolution of
imparted by a standing wave photon to an atom upon absorption. A QAM is characterized by
momentum transfer, linear with time, to a substantial fraction of the initial cloud of atoms. In
the QAM shown in Fig. 1, momentum is transferred linearly with pulse number to
20% of
the atoms. Remarkably, the shape of the accelerated peak remains basically unchanged as light
pulses continue to be applied, and the probability that an atom remains in the QAM between
consecutive kicks can be over 98%.
Theoretical model and pseudoclassical dynamics
The dynamics of the atoms in the light and gravitational ﬁelds are well modelled by the one-
dimensional δ-kicked accelerator Hamiltonian (18):

×

∼

∼

2

ˆP2
2M

ˆH =

+ Mgˆz

~φd[1 + cos(Gˆz)]

−

δ(t

nT ).

−

Xn

(3)

Here ˆz is the vertical position, ˆP the momentum, M the atomic mass, g the gravitational accel-
eration, t the time, T the pulse period, G = 4π/λ (~G is therefore equal to two photon recoils),
and φd = U0tp/2~, where U0 is the maximum ac Stark shift in the standing wave. The mean
value of φd experienced by the atoms in the experiment is 0.8π.

ǫ

×

1). Furthermore we deﬁne K = φd|

Experimentally the QAMs are found to occur when T is close, but not exactly equal to,
special resonant values given by Tl = 2πlM/(~G2) = l
66.7µs, with l any integer. Being
interested in the dynamics for T close to a resonant value, we introduce the small parameter
and Ω = gGT 2/(2π), and then proceed
ǫ = 2πl(T/Tl −
as follows (19, 20): First we perform a gauge transformation, which amounts to measuring the
momentum relative to that of freely-falling atoms. In this gauge, the Hamiltonian is spatially
periodic with period 2π/G. Consequently, as shown by Bloch theory (21), the momentum
can only change by integer multiples of ~G, the extent of the Brillouin zone. Therefore the
quasimomentum β~G, which is the momentum modulo ~G (so that β
[0, 1) is the non-integer
part of P/~G), is conserved and separate ‘ladders’ of momentum states, each having a particular
value of β, evolve independently. Any wavefunction obtained by superposing momentum states
in such a ladder is a Bloch state, a 2π/G-periodic function multiplied by a phase factor eiβGz,
which can equivalently be represented by a rotor wavefunction. We therefore introduce the

∈

|

5

angle ˆθ = Gˆz mod(2π), and ﬁnd that the Schr¨odinger equation which governs the time evolution
of the rotor wavefunction ψβ(θ) is written, in the θ-representation, as (20)

∂ψβ
∂t

i

ǫ

|

|

=

Hβ( ˆI, t)ψβ −

K cos(ˆθ)

δ(t

n)ψβ ,

−

Xn

(4)

where ˆI, the conjugate of ˆθ, is given by

ǫ

∂/∂θ, and the Hamiltonian

i
−

|

|

ǫ

|

|

If we attribute to

the role of a scaled Planck’s constant, Eq. (4) may be considered as the
exact quantization of the classical rotor dynamics, with a classical momentum I related to the
physical momentum by P/~G = I/
+ β. The pseudoclassical dynamics are therefore obtained
from the quantum dynamics of Eq. (4) in the limit ǫ = T ~G2/M
0, whilst ~ maintains its
2πl
the quantum dynamics are governed by
natural ﬁnite value. Consequently, at small values of
the trajectories of the pseudoclassical kicked system, and yet remain within the deep quantum
limit.1 Thus, the kick-to-kick evolution is exactly described by the map of Eq. (1), with

→

−

ǫ

ǫ

|

|

|

|

Hβ depends on Ω.

Jn = In + πl + βτ

2πΩ(n + 1/2) ,

(5)

−

→

→

→

0+. When ǫ

, the evolution is described by a map which,

−
where τ = 2πlT/Tl and ǫ
0
though formally diﬀerent, is immediately reduced to Eq. (1) by a simple change of variables.
Pseudoclassical phase space
To analyze the dynamics in the ǫ
0 limit, it is convenient to take Jn mod(2π) in Eq. (1),
since the phase space is 2π-periodic in J, and ﬁnd the stable ﬁxed points and periodic orbits
of the toroidal map thus obtained. First let us assume that (J0, θ0) is a stable ﬁxed point of the
map of Eq. (1), surrounded by a nonlinear resonance island where the motion is predominantly
regular, while outside it the motion is chaotic, as shown in Fig. 3. For this island, Jn is ﬁxed
in time (Jn = J0), so In grows linearly with time, as can be seen from Eq. (5). Since In is
linearly related to the momentum P, the island travels in momentum, resulting in acceleration.
This is precisely the characteristic property of the QAM observed in Fig. 1. Hence, by virtue
of the identiﬁcation of Eqs. (4) and (5) in the pseudoclassical limit we can identify QAMs
with nonlinear resonance islands in pseudoclassical phase space. These are robust structures, as
guaranteed by the Kolmogorov-Arnol’d-Moser (KAM) theorem (22), one of the fundamental
results of nonlinear dynamics. A quantum wavepacket initially prepared in the island travels
with it, and decays slowly by tunneling to the chaotic surroundings. For suﬃciently small ǫ,
this tunneling is exponentially weak, resulting in a relatively stable QAM even for rather large
values, e.g. ǫ =
0.58, as depicted in Fig. 1. More importantly, due to the KAM theorem
the island itself is rather inert with respect to perturbations of the Hamiltonian generating the
map (1), and this robustness is inherited by the QAMs themselves, thus shielding them against
technical noise (5) which is unavoidable in real laboratory experiments.

−

Periodic orbits of the map are characterized by the period p and the winding number around
the J-direction on the torus, m/p. If a wavepacket is launched within an island surrounding a

1Only for l = 0 does the pseudoclassical limit ǫ

0 coincide with the genuine semiclassical limit ~

However, for timing reasons, l = 0 is in a regime that is inaccessible to our current experimental setup.

0.

→

→

6

stable periodic orbit, the acceleration of the corresponding QAM obeys

Pn ≃

P0 + n

2π
ǫ

Ω
 

−

m
p !

~G.

(6)

|
QAMs are thus characterized by the numbers (p, m) – the QAM shown in Figs. 1 and 3 is the
(1, 0) mode.

|

Figure 3: Phase portrait for the map of Eq. (1) in the vicinity of the ﬁxed point J0 = 0, θ0 =
2.791, with K = 1.468 and Ω = 0.080. This corresponds to the experimental quantum acceler-
ator mode shown in Fig. 1.

Arnol’d tongues of quantum accelerator modes
One may draw a ‘phase diagram’, as shown in Fig. 4, that represents, in the plane of the param-
eters Ω and K, the regions (tongues) wherein stable periodic orbits that have diﬀerent values
of (p, m) are observed numerically. The range of Ω in Fig. 4 contains the region of the (Ω, K)
plane explored experimentally, using values of T in the vicinity of T2 = 133.3µs. Close to the
K = 0 axis, each of the stable periodic orbit regions has the shape of a wedge, with its vertex
at Ω = m/p, K = 0. As one moves to higher K inside a tongue, the periodic orbit eventually
turns unstable. A sequence of bifurcations follows, which breaks the tongue into fragments.
Fragments of diﬀerent tongues intertwine and overlap in complicated ways. A tongue may be
overlapped by others even before breaking, and such overlaps persist even at quite small values
of K. This is at variance with the standard Arnol’d tongues (such as, e.g., those associated with
the sine-circle map of Eq. (2) in which dissipation is present), which are exponentially narrow

7

Figure 4: Arnol’d tongues structure. The dotted line indicates the locus of the experimentally
T2; the dashed lines bound the regions for which the (21, 8) and (5, 2)
explored points when T
∼
stable periodic orbits exist, as speciﬁed by Eq. (7).

in p and repel each other, at least until a threshold for the onset of chaotic motion is reached
(K = 1 for Eq. (2)) (23, 17).

A canonical perturbation theory closely related to that used in Chirikov’s classic analysis
of the standard map (22, 24), essentially assuming K to be small and Ω to be close to a chosen
rational value, determines a condition for the existence of a stable periodic orbit for Eq. (1) with
given (p, m):

(7)

Turning this expression into an equality produces a function which accurately bounds the ob-
served wedge-shaped tongue near its vertex. This bound is shown for the (21, 8) and (5, 2) pe-
riodic orbits by the dashed lines in Fig. 4; it clearly marks the border of the respective tongues.
Numerical computation and scaling considerations reveal the ‘critical region’ where a tongue
3/2. Thus, the higher the period of an orbit, the nar-
breaks to be roughly located at K
rower the corresponding tongue, and the lower the ‘critical value’ of K at which the tongue
begins to break.

2πp−

∼

The set of parameters which corresponds to any given experimental realization determines
a point in the phase diagram, and if this point is inside a tongue then a QAM corresponding
to the stable periodic orbit (p, m) may be observed. At ﬁxed pulse number n, Eq. (6) deﬁnes a
curve of enhanced population in the (T, P) plot, where the enhancement is due to the presence of

K

> 2π √p

Ω

|

|

−

.

m

p (cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)

(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)

8

the (p, m) QAM. Hence the phase diagram of Fig. 4 may be explored by systematically varying
experimental parameters. Speciﬁcally, this is done by keeping both φd and n constant, while
varying T . The results of such an experiment are shown in Fig. 5. This procedure varies ǫ (and
hence K and Ω), and the locus of the experimentally explored points in the phase diagram is a
curve shown by the dotted line in Figs. 4 and 6, which hits the K = 0 axis at Ω′ = gGT 2
l /2π, the
value of Ω that corresponds to the exactly-resonant value of the kicking period. This is equal to
0.3902 when l = 2.

Figure 5: Colour density plot of experimental atomic momentum distributions (measured rela-
tive to the momentum attained due to gravitational free-fall) after 30 pulses as T is varied in the
vicinity of T2(133.3µs), from 124.5µs to 142.5µs in steps of 0.128µs. The labels (a), (b), and
(c) indicate the (2, 1), (3, 1), and (5, 2) quantum accelerator modes, respectively, resulting from
the corresponding Arnol’d tongues, as discussed in the text and depicted in Fig. 6. Labels (d)
and (e) indicate the (7, 3) and (8, 3) modes. In each case, the overlaid white line indicates the
momenta predicted for the mode by Eq. (6). The colourbar at the right indicates the population
scale, in arbitrary units.

Quantum accelerator modes and the Farey tree
Perhaps most remarkably, the values of m and p which are experimentally observable are de-
termined by the Farey hierarchy of rational numbers (15). This is a representation of rational
numbers that is a generic feature of mode-locking phenomena. In this hierarchy all rational
numbers in [0, 1] are constructed as follows: Start from the pair
. At the second level
(cid:17)
the fraction 1
0
. On the next level the
and r2 = m2
(cid:17)
fractions 1
p2
are adjacent irreducible fractions at some level, the ﬁrst rational to be added between them at
the next level is their Farey mediant r = m1+m2
. At no level can a rational with a denominator
p1+p2
smaller than p1 + p2 be found between r1 and r2. At each level the interval [0, 1] is thus divided

2+1 are added. This process is continued so that if r1 = m1
p1

1+1 is introduced so that the series consists of

2 = 0+1
1+2 and 2

1, 1
(cid:16)
2, 1
1, 1

3 = 1+1

3 = 0+1

(cid:16)

1

1

0

9

by the Farey fractions into Farey subintervals. As the experimental curve approaches Ω′ in Fig.
6, it successively intersects tongues speciﬁed by values of (p, m); these values determine the
QAM that are observed. The ratios m/p are increasingly close approximations to Ω′.

Figure 6: Operation of the Farey recursion, moving from frames A to D, for determining the
experimentally observed (2, 1), (3, 1), and (5, 2) quantum accelerator modes (a), (b) and (c),
shown in Fig. 5. The dotted line indicates the locus of the experimentally explored points.

In order to determine the tongues (and hence QAMs) that will appear in the experiment, we
start from orbits with small p. In Fig. 6A two p = 1 tongues, namely the (1, 0) and (1, 1) tongues,
are presented (their vertices, at K = 0, are outside the boundaries of Fig. 4). These correspond
to the ﬁrst numbers in the Farey hierarchy. The dotted line that marks the experimental values is
found to intersect (within the boundaries of the ﬁgure) the (1, 0) tongue. At these intersections
the stable orbit (1, 0) is found. The corresponding QAMs exhibit rapid acceleration and at the
observation time, after 30 pulses, they have moved beyond the experimental window shown in
Fig. 5. To ﬁnd higher QAMs, higher orders of the Farey hierarchy must be introduced. At the

10

3 to 1

3 is further from Ω′ than is 1

second level the (2, 1) tongue, shown in Fig. 6B, is introduced and Ω′ is now in the interval
1 , 1
[ 0
2]. The experimental (dotted) line intersects the (2, 1) tongue so a (2, 1) orbit is found,
leading to a QAM. The corresponding points are marked by (a) in Figs. 5 and 6B. The third level
introduces the (3, 1) and (3, 2) tongues, as shown in Fig. 6C. The experimental line intersects
both these tongues, yet only the (3, 1) QAM is observed (intersection position marked by (b) in
Figs. 5 and 6C). The reason for this is that the rational 2
3, and so the
3/2. Hence there are
intersection with the (3, 2) tongue takes place in a region where K > 2πp−
only narrow remnants of the tongue and the corresponding stable island is too small for a QAM
to be observable. The relevant Farey subinterval is now, therefore, 1
2. The construction
can be continued in similar fashion. In Fig. 6D the (5, 2) and (5, 3) tongues are introduced and
the QAM corresponding to (5, 2) is marked by (c) in Figs. 5 and 6D. Proceeding thus would
ideally produce all the Farey subintervals in which Ω′ belongs. Faint traces of QAMs that lie
outside this recursion may also be detected, e.g., the white line (d) in Fig. 5 corresponds to a
(7, 3) mode. Note the extent to which it is disfavored in comparison with the (8, 3) mode (line
(e)), because 3
Future directions
The above construction demonstrates how the Farey tree enables the classiﬁcation of the com-
plex structure of overlapping tongues according to those that are most important for the de-
scription of the QAMs observed for a speciﬁc value of Ω′. Furthermore, as K
0, the value
of m
p for the QAMs seen in the experiment will converge towards Ω′. Thus since Ω′ is itself
determined by the local value of gravity, we will obtain systematically improving rational ap-
proximants of g. The use of this eﬀect in precision gravity measurements is a striking potential
application. Other lines of future research will include quantum accelerator mode dynamics in
a Bose-Einstein condensate, accelerator mode spectroscopy, atom interferometry and the appli-
cation of accelerator mode dynamics to the experimental implementation of a quantum search
algorithm. In all these issues, the underlying pseudoclassical mode-locking mechanism ren-
ders quantum accelerator modes a robust tool for eﬃcient quantum state control, deeply in the
quantum realm.

8 is closer to Ω′ than is 3
7.

→

References

1. T. Weinacht, J. Ahn, P. Bucksbaum, Phys. Rev. Lett. 80, 5508 (1998).

2. S. Brattke, B. Varcoe, H. Walther, Phys. Rev. Lett. 86, 3534 (2000).

3. C. van der Wal, et al., Science 290, 773 (2000).

4. C. Roos, et al., Science 304, 1478 (2004).

5. H. Maeda, T. F. Gallagher, Phys. Rev. Lett. 92, 133004 (2004).

11

6. W. H. Oskay, D. A. Steck, V. Milner, B. G. Klappauf, M. G. Raizen, Opt. Commun. 179,

7. M. B. d’Arcy, R. M. Godun, M. K. Oberthaler, D. Cassettari, G. S. Summy, Phys. Rev. Lett.

137 (2000).

87, 074102 (2001).

8. T. M. Fromhold, et al., Nature 428, 726 (2004).

9. A. R. R. Carvalho, A. Buchleitner, Phys. Rev. Lett. 93, 204101 (2004).

10. A. Buchleitner, D. Delande, J. Zakrzewski, Phys. Rep. 368, 409 (2002).

11. M. Nijhoﬀ, ed., Oeuvres Compl`etes de Christiaan Huygens, vol. 5 (Soci´et´e Hollandaise des

Sciences, La Haye, 1893).

1974).

12. M. Sargent, M. O. Scully, W. E. Lamb, Laser Physics (Addison Wesley, Reading, Ma,

13. J. B. Taylor, B. V. Chirikov, Phys. Rev. Lett. 33, 1139 (1974).

14. J. Farey, Phil. Mag. 47, 385 (1816). See, however, a historical note in Ref. (15).

15. G. H. Hardy, E. M. Wright, An introduction to the theory of numbers (Clarendon Press,

Oxford, 1979).

16. H. G. Schuster, Deterministic Chaos, an Introduction (VCH, Weinheim, 1995).

17. M. H. Jensen, P. Bak, T. Bohr, Phys. Rev. A 30, 1960 (1984).

18. M. B. d’Arcy et al., Phys. Rev. E 64, 056233 (2001).

19. S. Fishman, I. Guarneri, L. Rebuzzini, Phys. Rev. Lett. 89, 084101 (2002).

20. S. Fishman, I. Guarneri, L. Rebuzzini, J. Stat. Phys. 110, 911 (2003).

21. N. W. Ashcroft, N. D. Mermin, Solid State Physics (Holt, Rinehart and Winston, New York,

22. A. J. Lichtenberg, M. A. Lieberman, Regular and Chaotic Dynamics (Springer Verlag, New

1976).

York, 1992).

23. P. Cvitanovi´c, et al., Classical and Quantum Chaos, Part I: Deterministic Chaos

(www.nbi.dk/ChaosBook, Copenhagen, 2003).

24. B. V. Chirikov, Phys. Rep. 52, 263 (1979).

25. M. K. Oberthaler, R. M. Godun, M. B. d’Arcy, G. S. Summy, K. Burnett, Phys. Rev. Lett.

83, 4447 (1999).

12

26. S. Schlunk, M. B. d’Arcy, S. A. Gardiner, G. S. Summy, Phys. Rev. Lett. 90, 124102 (2003).

27. We acknowledge support from the Royal Society, the Wolfson Foundation, the Lindemann
Trust, the US-Israel BSF, the Minerva Centre of Nonlinear Physics of Complex Systems,
NASA, the Clarendon Bursary, the UK EPSRC, and the EU TMR ‘Cold Quantum Gases’
Network.

13

