5
0
0
2
 
b
e
F
 
5
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
m
o
t
a
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
3
7
0
2
0
5
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Cold atoms in videotape micro-traps

C. D. J. Sinclair, J. A. Retter,∗ E. A. Curtis,† B. V. Hall,‡ I. Llorente Garcia, S. Eriksson, B. E. Sauer, and E. A. Hinds
Blackett Laboratory, Imperial College,
London, SW7 2BW, UK

(Dated: January 10, 2014)

We describe an array of microscopic atom traps formed by a pattern of magnetisation on a piece
of videotape. We describe the way in which cold atoms are loaded into one of these micro-traps and
how the trapped atom cloud is used to explore the properties of the trap. Evaporative cooling in the
micro-trap down to a temperature of 1 µK allows us to probe the smoothness of the trapping potential
and reveals some inhomogeneity produced by the magnetic ﬁlm. We discuss future prospects for
atom chips based on microscopic permanent-magnet structures.

PACS numbers: 39.25.+k, 03.75Be, 75.50.Ss

I.

INTRODUCTION

Magnetic storage media provide a convenient way to
prepare small magnetic structures that can be used to
manipulate cold atoms. These include audiotape [1],
ﬂoppy disks [2, 3, 4], videotape [5, 6], magneto-optical
ﬁlms [7, 8, 9], and hard disks [10]. Using standard
lithographic techniques, it is also possible to make small
patterns of current carrying wires for the same pur-
pose [11, 12]. This has led to the concept of the
atom chip, in which small structures are integrated on
a substrate and used to control the motion and inter-
actions of microscopic cold atom clouds. The atom
chip presents opportunities for quantum coherent ma-
nipulation of atoms for quantum information processing
It also cre-
or fundamental studies of quantum gases.
ates a versatile miniaturised system ideal for manipulat-
ing cold atom clouds in a variety of applications such
as magnetometry [13], interferometry [14] and miniature
clocks [15, 16]. For a number of years it has been clear
that permanent-magnet microstructures have a signiﬁ-
cant contribution to make to atom chips [17], since they
have the possibility of making very tight atom traps with
cloud sizes approaching 10 nm. So far, however, magnetic
microstructures have only been used to control much
larger macroscopic clouds.

In this paper we describe a permanent-magnet atom
chip, an adaptation of the magnetic mirror described in
reference [17], in which we prepare and manipulate small
atom clouds with radial sizes down to 50 nm. The next
section introduces the videotape and shows how periodic
magnetisation can be used to trap atoms. Section III de-
scribes the design and structure of the videotape atom
chip. The loading, cooling and trapping of atoms in a

∗Now at Laboratoire Charles Fabry de l’Institut d’Optique,
UMR8501 du CNRS, 91403 Orsay Cedex, France.
†Electronic address: a.curtis@imperial.ac.uk
‡Now at Centre for Atom Optics and Ultrafast Spectroscopy, Swin-
burne University of Technology, Melbourne, Australia.

videotape micro-trap are described in Section IV. In Sec-
tion V we describe experiments to test our understanding
of these micro-traps and to study the quality of the video-
tape. In the ﬁnal section we discuss some of the future
directions of permanent-magnet atom-chip experiments.

II. MAGNETIC MEDIA AND ATOM TRAPS

The basis of our micro-traps is a magnetic pattern writ-
ten on videotape as illustrated in Fig. 1. As in the mag-
netic mirror we use a sinusoidal pattern, however, in this
work we add a bias ﬁeld to form an array of micro-traps.
With magnetisation M0 cos kx along the x direction, the
magnetic ﬁeld outside the ﬁlm is

(Bx, By) = Bsure−ky(− cos(kx), sin(kx)).

(1)

For a ﬁlm of thickness b, the ﬁeld at the surface is

Bsur =

µ0M0(1 − e−kb).

(2)

1
2

Thus the potential energy of a weak-ﬁeld-seeking atom
increases exponentially as it approaches the mirror sur-
face. This is how the atom is reﬂected.

The micro-traps appear when a bias ﬁeld Bbias is su-
perimposed in the x-y plane, as shown in Fig. 1. Near
each trap the magnetic ﬁeld has a quadrupole structure
with a zero in the centre and a gradient of ﬁeld strength
given by

B′ = kBbias.

In order to suppress Majorana spin ﬂips of the trapped
atoms, we also apply an axial bias ﬁeld Bz, which pre-
vents the total ﬁeld from going exactly to zero at the
centre. For small-amplitude transverse oscillations this
makes a harmonic trap with frequency

(3)

(4)

2πfr = kBbias

µBgF mF
mBz

,

r

where µBgF mF is the usual factor in the Zeeman energy
and m is the mass of the atom. The trap centres are

2

FIG. 3: Magnetic ﬁeld strength plotted versus x and y going
through the centre of a trap. Here we take bias ﬁelds of 40 G
along x and 1 G along z. The videotape ﬁeld has a strength
of 110 G at the surface and the trap forms 17 µm away from
the surface.

FIG. 1: (a) Magnetic ﬁeld lines produced by the magnetised
videotape. A uniform bias ﬁeld is added to this to make an
array of atom guides. (b) Contours of constant magnetic ﬁeld
strength. Circular contours enclose the lines of minimum ﬁeld
strength, where atoms are trapped.

FIG. 2: Optical microscope image showing reversals of the
magnetic ﬁeld direction. These are revealed by a thin garnet
ﬁlm placed on the surface, viewed with polarised light through
a crossed analyser.

formed at a distance ytrap from the surface, given by

ytrap =

ln(Bsur/Bbias).

(5)

1
k

Ref. [17] provides further detail about permanent mag-
netic patterns and their corresponding ﬁelds.

III. VIDEOTAPE ATOM CHIP DESIGN

We have chosen to use videotape because it can store
patterns with feature sizes down to a few micrometers
using simple commercial recording equipment adapted
in the laboratory. Videotape is designed to hold data
reliably for long periods of time and has a high coerciv-
ity, making the magnetisation insensitive to the presence
of the bias ﬁelds. The particular tape we use, Ampex
398 Betacam SP, has a 3.5 µm-thick magnetic layer con-
taining iron-composite needles, 100 nm long with 10 nm
radius, which are set in a glue and aligned parallel to
the x direction. This ﬁlm is supported by a polymer rib-
bon 11 µm thick. Since atom-trap experiments are con-

FIG. 4: The videotape atom chip assembly. The reﬂective
surface of the chip is one inch square.

ducted in ultra-high vacuum conditions at a few times
10−11 Torr, the vacuum properties of the materials we
use are important. Remarkably, this videotape has a very
low outgassing rate at room temperature and is able to
withstand baking at 120◦C [18].

For the experiments described in this paper, the mag-
netic sine wave has a period of 106 ± 2 µm. We are able to
observe this directly by placing a thin Faraday-rotating
garnet ﬁlm (Nd:Lu:Bi) on the surface and viewing it un-
der a microscope with polarised light, as shown in Fig. 2.
The accurate measurement of the period is achieved by
counting a large number of these fringes.

We have measured that the ﬁeld at the surface of the
tape is 110 ± 10 G, as we discuss further in Section V.
Taking this value together with typical bias ﬁelds Bbias =
40 G and Bz = 1 G, we calculate the expected trapping
ﬁeld strength shown in Fig. 3. For trapped 87Rb atoms
in the |F = 2, mF = 2i sublevel of the ground state, the
small-amplitude radial oscillation frequency is 30 kHz.

After recording, a piece of the videotape is glued to
a glass coverslip 150 µm thick using a UHV-compatible
epoxy (BYLAPOX 7285), as described in references [19,
20]. This is coated with a ∼ 5 nm adhesion layer of
chromium and ∼ 400 nm of gold in order to make the

surface of the chip reﬂect 780 nm laser light. The pur-
pose here is to allow the formation of a magneto-optical
trap (MOT) by reﬂection [21] in order to collect and cool
the atoms close to the videotape. The coverslip is then
glued to a 1 inch square stainless-steel base to form the
chip assembly shown in Fig. 4. Five wires insulated by
a ceramic coating run underneath the coverslip through
channels cut into the steel, ending on Macor terminal
blocks. The three wires parallel to the z direction lie
immediately below the coverslip and have 500 µm diam-
eters. The central one of these, the “centre wire”, is used
to transport cold atoms from the MOT into one video-
tape micro-trap, whilst the outer two form an rf antenna
used subsequently for evaporative cooling of the atoms.
Two larger, 1 mm-diameter wires run along x and pass
below the centre wire. These are separated by 8.5 mm.
Currents in these allow the trap to be closed oﬀ at its ends
by making a ﬁeld that rises to a maximum in the z direc-
tion above each wire. The whole assembly is mounted in
the high-vacuum chamber on a ﬂange that allows trans-
lation under vacuum in any direction.

IV. LOADING A MICRO-TRAP

A double MOT system delivers cold 87Rb atoms to
the atom chip assembly. The ﬁrst MOT, in an auxil-
iary chamber, is a low-velocity intense source (LVIS)[22]
with three retro-reﬂected laser beams. The Rb atoms
are provided by a resistively-heated dispenser that in-
creases the pressure to ∼ 1 × 10−9 Torr. The LVIS deliv-
ers a ∼ 15 m/s beam of cold atoms into the main vacuum
chamber through a 6 mm-long, 1 mm-diameter aperture
30 cm away from the atom chip. The second MOT, in
the main chamber, is formed by four independent laser
beams, two of which we reﬂect from the surface of the
chip. The magnetic quadrupole ﬁeld is provided by coils
located outside the chamber. When this MOT is loaded
by the LVIS source for 20 s, ∼ 3 × 108 atoms are collected
at a temperature of ∼ 150 µK and at a distance of 4 mm
from the chip. The pressure in this chamber is too low
to register on the ionisation gauge, which cuts out below
3 × 10−11 Torr. The MOT lifetime exceeds 50 s.

Once the MOT has been ﬁlled, the dispenser and laser
beams of the LVIS are turned oﬀ and the cloud is moved
to 1.5 mm from the chip by ramping up an external bias
ﬁeld of ∼ 4 G. At this point, the red-detuning of the
laser from the D2(F = 2 → 3) cooling transition is in-
creased over 14 ms from -15 MHz to -45 MHz. This cools
the cloud to ∼ 50 µK. Next, the MOT is switched oﬀ
(both the light and the ﬁeld) and a uniform ﬁeld is ap-
plied in order to optically pump using σ+ light on the
D2(F = 2 → 2) transition for 400 µs. This transfers the
atoms into the |F = 2, mF = 2i weak-ﬁeld-seeking state.
Approximately 3 × 107 of these atoms are then recap-
tured in a purely magnetic trap, formed by passing 15 A
through the centre wire and imposing a 14 G ﬁeld along
x. The eﬃciency of transfer from the MOT to the mag-

3

FIG. 5: Double image of atoms in a single videotape micro-
trap. Dark areas correspond to regions of maximum absorp-
tion. Image area is 3.4 mm×1.5 mm.

netic trap is particularly sensitive to the way in which
the laser frequency is swept to larger detuning.

The bias ﬁeld is immediately ramped up to 44 G over
100 ms, which increases the trap depth, compresses the
cloud and moves it to 160 µm from the surface (where
the ﬁeld of the videotape is still negligible). This trans-
fer heats the cloud adiabatically, increasing the elastic
collision rate to ∼ 20 s−1, which is suﬃcient to start
evaporative cooling. The ﬁeld at the centre of this
trap is ∼ 500 mG, giving a radial oscillation frequency
of 1.1 kHz, while the axial frequency is 15 Hz.
In or-
der to drive the evaporation, the rf ﬁeld is now applied
and its frequency is swept for 6 seconds according to
f = (30 e−t + 3.9) MHz, where t is in seconds. This cools
the cloud to 10 µK. Leaving the rf ﬁeld on at 3.9 MHz,
we continue to evaporate by reducing the centre-wire cur-
rent and the bias ﬁeld over 4 s. This gradually brings the
cloud close to the surface, into a region where the ﬁeld
of the videotape becomes comparable with the bias ﬁeld.
Finally, the wire current is ramped down to zero, leaving
atoms conﬁned solely by the videotape micro-trap. After
this phase of compression and additional cooling there
are a few times 105 atoms in the micro-trap at a tem-
perature of ∼ 10 µK. When lower temperatures than this
are required, we make a second stage of rf evaporation
that takes place entirely in the micro-trap.

The atoms are imaged by optical absorption, using a
single pulse of light (typically 40 µs long), tuned to the
D2(F = 2 → 3) transition. A CCD camera records the
image of the cloud, formed at unit magniﬁcation by a
high-quality achromatic doublet lens. The imaging beam
makes an angle of ∼ 10◦ to the gold surface in order to
give two images: the cloud and its reﬂection in the mirror.
This provides a simple measure of the distance between
the atoms and the surface. Figure 5 shows the image of
2 × 105 atoms at 20 µK, held in a 15 Hz×4.7 kHz trap,
55 µm from the surface of the videotape.

V. EXPERIMENTS

Having now trapped the atoms, our ﬁrst experiment
is to check the exponential law for the strength of the
videotape ﬁeld given in Eq.(1) and to measure the sur-

4

FIG. 6: Logarithmic dependence of atom-surface distance on
the applied bias ﬁeld. The intercept at zero height measures
the ﬁeld at the surface of the chip.

FIG. 7: Oscillations of the atom cloud in the axial direction.
Each point involves a new realization of the experiment with
a suitably chosen time delay before measuring the position of
the cloud. The line is a damped sine wave intended to guide
the eye.

face ﬁeld Bsur. According to Eq.(5), the distance be-
tween the trap and the surface, ytrap, should be linearly
proportional to ln(Bbias), with a slope of 1/k and an in-
tercept on ytrap = 0 of Bbias = Bsur. Figure 6 shows
measurements of ytrap for a variety of bias ﬁelds. These
distances, to which we assign an uncertainty of ± 4 µm
are derived from the separation measured between the
centres of the two cloud images. The uncertainty in Bbias
is a 7% calibration error. Our measurements conﬁrm the
exponential ﬁeld decay of Eq.(1) and yield a value of
110 ± 10 G for Bsur. This is approximately half the max-
imum possible value given by Eq.(2) with µ0M0 equal
to the saturated magnetisation, 2.3 kG. The result is not
surprising since our method of recording was to monitor
the playback signal and to set the current in the record
head just below the level where any distortion was evi-
dent.

The second experiment is to investigate the frequen-
cies of the micro-trap. In the axial direction, the restor-
ing force is small enough that we can see oscillations of
the cloud directly on the CCD camera. Typical axial
frequencies are in the range 5 − 20 Hz. Figure 7 shows
the centre-of-mass oscillation of a 1 µK cloud with an
initial displacement of 100 µm. The damping of this os-
cillation is due primarily to the collisional coupling into
other degrees of freedom, with relatively little eﬀect from
the slight anharmonicity of the trap.

Radial oscillation cannot be observed in the same di-
rect way because the frequency is too high. Moreover,
the radial size of the cloud is far smaller than one pixel
of the camera: a 30 kHz trap at 1 µK, gives a cloud radius
of 52 nm. Instead, we add a modulation δBbias cos(2πf t)
to the bias ﬁeld, which shakes the trap in the radial di-
rection. When the frequency f coincides with the ra-
dial oscillation frequency fr, the cloud is heated. Once
again, the collisions within the gas couple the motional
degrees of freedom, allowing us to detect the radial heat-
ing through the corresponding increase in the length of
the cloud. The inset in Fig. 8 shows the cloud temper-

FIG. 8: Radial trap frequency versus applied bias ﬁeld. Solid
line: harmonic approximation given in Eq. 4. Data points:
Measured radial trap frequencies. Inset: Typical radial exci-
tation spectrum.

ature versus f , as measured by its length after applying
the modulation for 5 s. The radial resonance is seen as a
dramatic increase in the temperature. The main graph
in Fig. 8 shows these resonance frequencies versus bias
ﬁeld. The solid line is the harmonic frequency given by
Eq. 4 with Bz = 2 G, corresponding to the axial ﬁeld
used in these experiments. At low bias ﬁeld, we see good
agreement between this formula and the measured radial
frequency. With a stronger bias, the radial frequency
lies below the prediction of Eq. 4 (and the resonances
are broader). We believe this is due to the compression
of the cloud, which occurs when Bbias is increased after
loading the micro-trap. This increases the initial tem-
perature and expands the cloud out of the central region
where the harmonic approximation is valid. Here the po-
tential is more linear, as one can see in Fig. 3 (indeed,
the harmonic region is almost invisible on the scale of
Fig. 3), giving rise to a lower oscillation frequency and a
broadening of the resonance feature.

Our ﬁnal experiment uses the cold atoms to probe the
magnetic smoothness of the videotape. Figure 9 shows

5

FIG. 9: Density distribution of trapped atom clouds at three
diﬀerent heights above the videotape.

the density distribution of a 1 µK cloud at three diﬀerent
distances from the surface. The cloud has a smooth pro-
ﬁle at a distance of 100 µm, but develops structure as it
approaches the surface. This is reminiscent of the struc-
ture observed near a wire (see [23], [24], and references
therein), which is caused by an alternating magnetic ﬁeld
in the z direction due to a transverse component of the
current density in the wire. The structure we see here is
also caused by an alternating magnetic ﬁeld along the z
direction, although of course there are no currents ﬂow-
In this case, it is an alternating
ing in the videotape.
component of magnetization along z that causes the un-
wanted magnetic ﬁeld through an eﬀective current den-
sity jx = ∂Mz/∂y.

In order to discover how this ﬂuctuating z component
of magnetisation comes about, we have studied a piece
of tape taken from the same cassette as the tape. Fig-
ure 10 shows the surface topography of this sample as
measured by an atomic force microscope. The greyscale
indicates the height of the tape measured over an area
of 100 µm× 50 µm. Below that is a graph showing the
typical height proﬁle along a line. These images reveal
some small height variations over transverse lengths of
tens of micrometers, which are only due to the failure of
the tape to lie ﬂat. In addition, however, we see some
small, deep holes in the surface that only appear on the
magnetically coated side of the tape. The typical spac-
ing of these defects is ∼ 10 µm, with the more prominent
ones being 50 − 100 µm apart. It seems most likely that
these are formed during manufacture, perhaps by small
bubbles emerging from the glue. Whatever their cause,
such defects in the magnetic ﬁlm would be expected to
lead to precisely the kind of structure that we observe in
our cold atom clouds.

FIG. 10: Atomic force microscope scan showing topography
of a piece of videotape. (a) Survey of a 100 µm× 50 µm region.
(b) Height versus position along the line indicated in (a).

VI. CONCLUSION AND PROSPECTS

We have shown how to load cold atoms into micro-
traps formed by patterns of magnetisation on videotape
and we have used these clouds to demonstrate a basic
understanding of the magnetic ﬁeld and the traps above
the tape. The videotape is well suited to making very
anisotropic traps, which are of interest in the study of
one-dimensional quantum gases. Indeed, we have made
traps with an aspect ratio as large as 40 kHz× 4 Hz. With
this in mind, we have cooled the atom clouds down to
1 µK and have studied the smoothness of the trapping po-
tentials formed by the videotape. This experiment shows
no undesirable structure within the trap at a distance
of 100 µm (where fr ≤ 1 kHz), but reveals microscopic
wells of order 1 µK deep at a distance of 50 µm (where
fr ≤ 10 kHz). We have identiﬁed that this is due to
physical defects in the magnetic ﬁlm itself, which proba-
bly render the videotape unsuitable for the study of 1D
gas in smooth traps with the highest radial frequencies.
However, the method of writing magnetic patterns on
videotape remains a versatile and promising technique
for manipulating the atoms 100 µm away from the sur-
face. At present we are installing optical ﬁbres on the
chip, which will operate at that height and will be used
to investigate the interaction of light with trapped Bose-
Einstein condensates [26]. Further information about the
development of micro-optical components can be found
in [25].

Recent research on Pt/Co multilayer thin ﬁlms [8] ap-
pears to oﬀer a solution to the problem of homogeneity of
the magnetic layer. A pattern of lines with 2 µm period
has been written on this material and the result indicates
that the ﬁeld should be exceedingly smooth at heights

above a few micrometers. With these ﬁlms we anticipate
using the techniques developed in this paper to prepare
one-dimensional gases in extremely elongated traps.

In conclusion, we have shown that cold atoms can
be loaded into micro-traps formed above a videotape,
thereby demonstrating a ﬁrst rudimentary permanent-
magnet atom chip.

Acknowledgments

We are indebted to Alan Butler, Jon Dyne and Bandu
Ratnasekara for technical assistance. This work is sup-

[1] T. M. Roach, H. Able, M. G. Boshier, H. L. Grossman,
K. P. Zetie, and E. A. Hinds, Phys. Rev. Lett. 75, 629
(1995).

[2] I. G. Hughes, P. A. Barton, T. M. Roach, M. G. Boshier,
and E. A. Hinds, J. Phys. B: At. Mol. Opt. Phys. 30, 647
(1997).

[3] I. G. Hughes, P. A. Barton, T. M. Roach, and E. A.
Hinds, J. Phys. B: At. Mol. Opt. Phys. 30, 2119 (1997).
[4] C. V. Saba, P. A. Barton, M. G. Boshier, I. G. Hughes,
P. Rosenbusch, B. E. Sauer, and E. A. Hinds, Phys. Rev.
Lett. 82, 468 (1999).

[5] P. Rosenbusch, B. V. Hall, I. G. Hughes, C. V. Saba, and

E. A. Hinds, Phys. Rev. A 61, 031404(R) (2000).

[6] P. Rosenbusch, B. V. Hall, I. G. Hughes, C. V. Saba, and

E. A. Hinds, Appl. Phys. B 70, 709 (2000).

[7] D. C. Lau, R. J. McLean, A. I. Sidorov, D. S. Gough,
J. Koperski, W. J. Rowlands, B. A. Sexton, G. I. Opat,
and P. Hannaford, Journal of Optics B: Quantum and
Semiclassical Optics 1, 371 (1999).

[8] S. Eriksson, F. Ramirez-Martinez, E. A. Curtis, B. E.
Sauer, P. W. Nutter, E. W. Hill, and E. A. Hinds, Appl.
Phys. B 79, 811 (2004).

[9] I. Barb, R. Gerritsma, Y. T. Xing, J. B. Goedkoop, and

R. J. C. Spreeuw, arXiv:physics/0501109 (2005).

[10] B. Lev, Y. Lassailly, C. Lee, A. Scherer, and H. Mabuchi,

Appl. Phys. Lett. 83, 395 (2003).

[11] R. Folman, P. Krueger, J. Schmiedmayer, J. Denschlag,
and C. Henkel, Advances in Atomic, Molecular, and Op-
tical Physics 48, 236 (2002).

[12] J. Reichel, Appl. Phys. B 75, 469 (2002).
[13] P. D. D. Schwindt, S. Knappe, V. Shah, L. Hollberg, and

J. Kitching, Appl. Phys. Lett 85, 6409 (2004).

[14] E. A. Hinds, C. J. Vale, and M. G. Boshier, Phys. Rev.

ported by the UK Engineering and Physical Sciences Re-
search Council, the Royal Society, and the FASTnet and
QGates networks of the European Union.

6

Lett. 86, 1462 (2001).

[15] P. Treutlein, P. Hommelhoﬀ, T. Steinmetz, T. W.
H¨ansch, and J. Reichel, Phys. Rev. Lett 92, 203005
(2004).

[16] S. Knappe, V. Shah, P. D. D. Schwindt, L. Hollberg,
J. Kitching, L.-A. Liew, and J. Moreland, Appl. Phys.
Lett 85, 1460 (2004).

[17] E. A. Hinds and I. G. Hughes, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys.

[18] S. A. Hopkins, E. A. Hinds, and M. G. Boshier, Appl.

32, R119 (1999).

Phys. B 73, 51 (2001).

[19] R. P. Bertram, H. Merimeche, M. M¨utzel, H. Metcalf,
D. Haubrich, D. Meschede, P. Rosenbusch, and E. A.
Hinds, Phys. Rev. A 63, 053405 (2001).

[20] J. A. Retter, Ph.D. thesis, University of Sussex (2002).
[21] J. Reichel, W. H¨ansel, and T. W. H¨ansch, Phys. Rev.

Lett. 83, 3398 (1999).

[22] Z. T. Lu, K. L. Corwin, M. J. Renn, M. H. Anderson,
E. A. Cornell, and C. E. Weiman, PRL 77, 3331 (1996).
[23] J. Fortagh, H. Ott, S. Kraft, A. Guenter, and C. Zim-

mermann, PRA 66, 041604 (2002).

[24] M. P. A. Jones, C. J. Vale, D. Sahagun, B. V. Hall, C. C.
Eberlein, B. E. Sauer, K. Furusawa, D. Richardson, and
E. A. Hinds, J. Phys. B: At. Mol. Opt. Phys. 37, L15
(2004).

[25] S. Eriksson, M. Trupke, H. F. Powell, D. Sahagun,
C. D. J. Sinclair, E. A. Curtis, B. E. Sauer, E. A.
Hinds, Z. Maktadir, C. O. Gollasch, and M. Kraft,
arXiv:physics/0502031 (2005).

[26] A paper reporting Bose-Einstein condensation on this

atom chip is in preparation.

