5
0
0
2
 
b
e
F
 
7
 
 
]
h
p
-
m
o
t
a
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
1
3
0
2
0
5
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Integrated optical components on atom chips

S. Eriksson, M. Trupke, H. F. Powell, D. Sahagun, C. D. J. Sinclair, E. A. Curtis, B. E. Sauer, and E. A. Hinds
Blackett Laboratory, Imperial College, London SW7 2BW, UK

Z. Moktadir, C. O. Gollasch, and M. Kraft
School of Electronics and Computer Science, University of Southampton, Southampton SO17 1BJ, UK

We report on the integration of small-scale optical components into silicon wafers for use in atom
chips. We present an on-chip ﬁbre-optic atom detection scheme that can probe clouds with small
atom numbers. The ﬁbres can also be used to generate microscopic dipole traps. We describe our
most recent results with optical microcavities and show that single-atom detection can be realised
on an atom chip. The key components have been fabricated by etching directly into the atom chip
silicon substrate.

PACS numbers: 39.25.+k, 32.80.-t, 42.82.-m, 42.50.Pq

I.

INTRODUCTION

Atom chips oﬀer a convenient way to miniaturise ex-
periments in atomic physics [1, 2]. Microstructures on
the surface of the chip produce magnetic and/or elec-
tric ﬁelds, which can be used to conﬁne and manip-
ulate cold alkali atoms near the surface of the chip.
Several research groups can now prepare Bose-Einstein
condensates (BECs) in microscopic magnetic traps on
atom chips. The large ﬁeld gradients that can be gen-
erated near a microstructured surface permit the con-
trolled tunnelling of atoms over micron or sub-micron
lengths. This makes the atom chip a natural platform
for applications in coherent matter-wave control such as
miniaturised atom interferometry [3, 4], quantum infor-
mation processing [5], and the study of low-dimensional
quantum gases [6]. Interaction between the cold atoms
and the room temperature surface of the atom chip can
be detrimental to applications that require the most sen-
sitive control of the atom. For example, thermal ﬂuctu-
ations of the charges in the conducting chip surface pro-
duce magnetic ﬁeld noise. This can relax atomic spin co-
herences and populations, thereby destroying the quan-
tum coherence of the atoms [7, 8, 9, 10, 11]. Further-
more, microscopic imperfections in the materials of the
atom chip can cause roughness in the trapping potential,
leading in extreme cases to fragmentation of the atom
clouds [12, 13, 14, 15]. These phenomena are now well
understood, and their consequences can be minimised by
careful consideration of the chip design. As an exam-
ple, very recent results from experiments with atom chips
based on permanently magnetised patterns on videotape
show that the spin-ﬂip-induced loss rate is substantially
decreased due to the reduced thickness of conducting ma-
terial on the chip [16, 17]. Further improvement is ex-
pected by using even thinner multilayered ﬁlms [18]. Re-
ﬁnement of fabrication techniques for current carrying
wires is also in progress.

With this new understanding and control over atom-
surface interactions it is becoming possible to manipulate
the quantum states of a few atoms in very tight traps only

a few micrometres from the surface of an atom chip. This
raises the crucial question of how to detect a few atoms
close to the chip. Hitherto, the standard method for
probing clouds of trapped atoms has been by absorption
imaging or ﬂuorescence detection. The laser light is typi-
cally delivered to the chip by external mirrors and lenses.
This technique becomes increasingly diﬃcult to utilise as
the atom-surface distance becomes small and when the
cloud contains very few atoms. Moreover, it is diﬃcult
to address individual atoms in this way. Any attempt at
constructing a large-scale quantum information proces-
sor based on trapped neutral atoms would greatly bene-
ﬁt from a simple detection scheme able to sense a single
atom and having high spatial resolution. It is therefore
desirable to devise new on-chip detection schemes.

In this paper, we report on our recent eﬀorts towards
integrating micro-optical mirrors and ﬁbres into atom
chips based on silicon. These components enable us to
tailor light ﬁelds on the micrometre size-scale, which is
commensurate with the relevant trap sizes. Such light
ﬁelds are well suited for probing a small part of a large
atom cloud, or alternatively, for sensing small groups of
atoms or single atoms. Some of these components are
manufactured as an integral part of the silicon wafer sur-
face and can be used to detect atoms within a few mi-
crons from the surface. Control of light ﬁelds on this scale
also opens up entirely new possibilities for manipulating
atoms in microscopic traps.

We have chosen to work with atom chips fabricated
on silicon wafers because this material is well understood
and many fabrication techniques are already well estab-
lished. We have been working on a number of devices
that use patterns etched into the silicon wafer. Here, we
introduce two of them. (i) An atom detector based on
a pair of optical ﬁbres mounted in a v-groove etched on
the chip wafer. Each ﬁbre can be used to shine light
into the other across a small gap where atoms may be
placed. A few (5 - 10) atoms in the gap can then be de-
tected, either through the phase shift of the light if it is
oﬀ-resonant, or through the absorption of near-resonant
light [19]. The ﬁbres can also be used to generate a one-
dimensional standing wave pattern, making an optical

lattice of ∼ 100 anti-nodes in which the atoms can be
manipulated by the optical dipole force. (ii) We describe
a plano-concave optical microcavity where the concave
mirror is formed on an etched spherical indentation in
the silicon wafer itself. The other mirror is attached to
the end of an optical ﬁbre, which acts as the input/output
port for light. This permits on-chip single atom detec-
tion.

In the next section we describe a typical silicon atom
chip into which these structures are being integrated.
Section III deals with incorporating optical ﬁbres for on-
In section IV we
chip detection of small atom clouds.
describe optical microcavities that are suitable for single
atom detection. We conclude with a summary in sec-
tion V.

II. THE MAGNETIC TRAP ATOM CHIP

The silicon chip that we are currently using manipu-
lates the atoms with magnetic ﬁelds generated by current
carrying wires. The silicon substrate is covered with a
0.6 µm thick insulating layer of SiO2. This in turn is cov-
ered by a thin Cr adhesion layer and a 5.5 µm layer of Au,
both deposited by sputtering. This provides a reﬂective
surface for laser light that is used to collect and cool 87Rb
atoms in a magneto-optical trap (MOT) in a standard
mirror-MOT arrangement. The current-carrying wires
are deﬁned lithographically by etching narrow trenches
in the Au and Cr layers, a fabrication process that has
been described in detail elsewhere [20].

An image of the chip taken before it was mounted
in the vacuum chamber can be seen in Fig. 1. On the
chip, four independent wires trace out a Z-shaped pat-
ter. When current ﬂows through the wire in the presence
of a uniform bias ﬁeld a Ioﬀe-Pritchard trap for weak ﬁeld
seeking atoms is formed in the middle of the 7 mm long
central section of the Z [21]. A microscope image of the
central section is shown in the inset of Fig. 1. In this part
of the chip, there are four parallel wires. The two inner
wires are 33 µm wide, while the outer pair have a width
of 85 µm. The centre-to-centre distances are 83 µm and
300 µm for the thin and thick wire pairs respectively. The
chip has two additional ‘end-wires’ which run orthogonal
to the centre section. These wires can be used to pro-
vide additional trap depth, or alternatively to shift the
magnetic trap along the Z-wires.

The chip is mounted on a stainless steel base plate,
which is in good thermal contact with the vacuum ﬂange.
The high thermal conductivity of silicon is a useful fea-
ture of this particular chip (for a review of the properties
of common materials that are used to manufacture atom
chips, the reader should consult Ref. [22]). In ultra-high
vacuum, the two inner wires can each carry currents up
to 1.7 A for one second with only a few degrees increase
in temperature. The corresponding current limit for the
outer Z-wires is 2.5 A, whilst for the end-wires it is 8.0 A.
With all wires at these currents, a magnetic trap 1 mm

2

FIG. 1: The magnetic trap atom chip with dimensions
26.4 mm (length) by 22.5 mm (width). The inset shows a high
resolution microscope image of the central region of the chip
where the atom cloud is conﬁned.

from the chip surface has a trap depth of approximately
1 mK which is suﬃcient to hold a laser cooled cloud pro-
duced in the MOT.

All six wires on the chip can be independently con-
trolled. With the appropriate choice of wire currents and
bias ﬁelds, the atom cloud can be moved around on the
chip and split in various ways. This kind of control over
the cloud is essential for many of the experiments that
will be performed with the optical components described
in the next sections of this paper.

III. FIBRE-OPTIC DETECTION OF ATOMS

In principle, ﬂuorescence could be used to detect small
numbers of atoms, but it is diﬃcult to achieve a high
collection eﬃciency and each scattering event heats the
atom, whether or not the scattered photon is detected.
The alternative is to use a directed light beam, which can
be eﬃciently collected and used to measure the absorp-
tion or phase shift due to the atoms. Signal-to-noise ar-
guments show that the latter method is typically prefer-
able, provided the cross-sectional area of the light beam
is made small enough [19]. A suitably tight waist can
be achieved using a tapered optical ﬁbre, as illustrated
in Fig. 2 (a), which has a focal spot at a working dis-
tance f from the tip of the ﬁbre. Over most of its length,
the ﬁbre we use is a standard 780 nm single-mode ﬁbre
with a protective acrylate coating and an outside diame-
ter of 250 µm. A few millimeters from the end, the pro-
tective coating is removed to reveal the 125 µm diameter
cladding. A few hundred micrometers from the end, both
the core and the cladding begin to taper, and the ﬁbre
terminates in a curved surface. This leads to a focal spot
with an intensity distribution whose full width at half
maximum is w at the working distance f from the ﬁbre
tip. We have been working with ﬁbres where f ≃ 25µm
and w ≃ 2.8 µm.

A single tapered ﬁbre may be used to sense atoms by
ﬂuorescence, provided that they are held suﬃciently near

3

limit of detection sensitivity, as discussed in Ref. [19].

In order to establish good mechanical stability and
alignment of the ﬁbres on the atom chip, we etch v-
grooves into the silicon substrate. Fig. 2 (c) shows a
scanning electron microscope (SEM) micrograph looking
down on them. The length of each groove can be several
centimetres and its width is chosen to ﬁt the optical ﬁbre
stripped down to its cladding. Fig. 2 (c) shows the cen-
tral 2 mm, which on this particular chip includes a trench
for an atom guide wire (the dark vertical rectangular fea-
ture). Near the centre, where the ﬁbres come to within
a few tens of micrometers of one another, the groove be-
comes narrower to support the tapered ﬁbre ends. The
grooves are manufactured by depositing masking layers
of 40 nm of SiO2 and 160 nm of SiN on a clean silicon
wafer. The surface is photolithographically patterned to
make openings that have a rectangular shape with con-
stant width for most of the length. Near the ﬁbre tips,
the width of the opening in the mask is stepped down
to match the narrower tapered ends of the ﬁbers. The
masking layer is removed in these areas by dry etching,
leaving windows through which the silicon is then wet
etched, using 30 % KOH by volume at 70 ◦C. The etch-
ing time is optimised to create a groove of the desired
depth.

This structure of two ﬁbres in a v-groove can also be
used to generate optical lattices in one dimension by guid-
ing light through both ﬁbres. We propose to use this ge-
ometry to create a Mott-insulator transition [23] on an
atom chip. The basic idea is to increase the optical lat-
tice intensity adiabatically from zero in the presence of a
BEC between the ﬁbre ends. A key point here is that the
small transverse dimension of the light beam allows the
volume of each well in the lattice to be small. This en-
sures an atom-atom repulsion energy in the kHz domain,
allowing the transition to be achieved adiabatically on
the millisecond timescale. Once the cloud has made the
transition into a Mott state, the ﬁbres can be used for
detection of the atom ordering by coherent Bragg scat-
tering from the lattice.

IV. OPTICAL MICROCAVITIES

In order to bring the optical detection sensitivity down
to one atom, the light beam needs to pass several times
back and forth through the region where the atom is lo-
cated. In other words, we require an optical cavity. For
the purpose of detecting one atom it is not necessary
to have a cavity with particularly high ﬁnesse provided
the waist size is small. In that case, the main challenge
lies in constructing cavities that can be integrated on the
atom chip. To this end, we have been working on plano-
concave microcavities with the curved mirror etched into
the silicon wafer. The plane mirror is a ﬂat, cleaved ﬁ-
bre tip with a high reﬂectivity coating applied to it. The
general scheme of the cavity is illustrated in Fig. 3 (a).
The concave mirror of the cavity is fabricated by means

FIG. 2: Tapered optical ﬁbres.
(a) Diagram of the ﬁbre
end, (b) Microscope image of two opposing ﬁbres with light
propagating between them.
(c) SEM micrograph of silicon
v-grooves for mounting ﬁbres in an atom chip. The scale is
the same in (b) and (c).

the ﬁbre tip. This could be achieved, for example, by
sending 795 nm light through the ﬁbre to form an optical
dipole force trap, tuned to the red side of the 87Rb D1
(52S1/2 - 52P1/2) transition. 87Rb atoms held by a mag-
netic trap elsewhere on the chip are moved into the detec-
tion zone near the focal spot of a ﬁbre and are captured
in this trap. Resonant light tuned to the D2 transition
at 780 nm is then passed through the same ﬁbre in or-
der to induce ﬂuorescence, some of which is collected by
the ﬁbre and appears as reﬂected light. Unfortunately,
even in the absence of atoms there is a background of
reﬂected light which is diﬃcult to reduce below the level
of ∼ 0.1% of the input. With careful ﬁltering of the re-
ﬂected trapping light this method has the capability to
detect several tens of atoms.

A much better scheme is to use two ﬁbres, mounted
face-to-face. Fig. 2 (b) shows a microscope image of
the arrangement, with light propagating between two ta-
pered ﬁbres. After adjusting the focal spots to coincide
we are able to obtain ﬁbre to ﬁbre coupling eﬃciencies
of up to 87 %, more than enough for detection by ab-
sorption to become feasible. The situation is now very
similar to standard absorption imaging, except that de-
tection takes place in a small, well-localised part of the
atom chip. A second important diﬀerence is that every
photon in the light beam passes through a waist of small
area πw2/4 ≃ 6 µm2. The resonant absorption cross sec-
tion 3λ2/2π is roughly 20 times smaller than this, result-
ing in a ∼ 5% absorption for each atom in the waist of
the light beam. This method is suitable for detecting 5-
10 atoms. An alternative version of this detector is to use
non-resonant light and to measure the optical phase shift
due to the non-resonant interaction. This has a similar

4

In order to investigate the optical properties of the
cavity, 780 nm light from a diode laser is coupled into the
ﬁbre, which is aimed at a gold-coated mirror. The silicon
wafer is translated longitudinally by a piezoelectric stack
to produce a sweep that can cover several cavity fringes
and the reﬂected intensity is monitored. Fig. 4 shows
the reﬂected light signal as a cavity of length L = 120 µm
is scanned over one free spectral range (FSR). In this
experiment the curved mirror had a 180 µm radius of
curvature and the ﬁnesse (FSR/∆ν) was 102.

FIG. 3: The optical microcavity. (a) Plano-concave optical
microcavity with length L and cavity waist w. The plane mir-
ror with reﬂectivity R1 is formed on the ﬁbre tip by applying
a pull-oﬀ coating. The concave mirror with reﬂectivity R2 is
formed by sputtering Au onto the etched silicon wafer (see
main text for details). (b) SEM micrograph of an array of
isotropically etched spherical mirrors on a silicon wafer.

of isotropic etching, a widely used technique in microma-
chining in which the silicon wafer is etched at approxi-
mately the same rate in all directions. The etching solu-
tion is continuously stirred during the etching process, re-
sulting in a surface that is approximately spherical. The
etchant is a mixture of hydroﬂuoric acid (H) and nitric
acid (N), diluted in acetic (A) acid. The surface morphol-
ogy and etch rate produced by these chemicals are highly
dependent on the concentration of each component, and
on the agitation. The relative amounts we prefer to use
are H:N:A = 9:75:30 by volume. Further details of the
fabrication process can be found elsewhere [24]. An SEM
micrograph of a typical array of spherical mirror tem-
plates is shown in Fig. 3 (b).
In order to investigate
cavities of various lengths, we have adjusted the etching
parameters to produce wafers with a range of mirror radii
between 50 and 250 µm. The etched surface typically has
an RMS roughness of 5 nm, as measured by atomic force
microscopy, often with some areas noticeably better than
others. For our ﬁrst measurements, we sputtered an ad-
hesion layer of Cr onto these substrates, followed by 100
nm of Au. After sputtering, the roughness increased to
∼ 10 nm.

The plane mirror of the cavity, which acts as the input
coupler, is made by gluing a dielectric multilayer trans-
fer coating onto the plane cleaved end of a single-mode
780 nm optical ﬁbre (mode size 2.7 µm). We have chosen
a coating with a reﬂectivity of R1 = 98-99% for light in
the near infrared range of the spectrum in order to match
the reﬂectivity of gold in this wavelength range. The
coating layer is transferred from a glass plate (to which
it is loosely attached by adhesion with a dense saline so-
lution) by applying an index-matched optical epoxy to
the ﬁbre tip. After the epoxy has set, the tip is pulled
away from the glass plate, breaking the coating around
the tip edges.

FIG. 4: Reﬂected intensity from an optical microcavity with
gold-coated spherical mirror. The cavity length is scanned
over one FSR.

Taking the fringe visibility together with the value of
the ﬁnesse, we calculate that the (intensity) reﬂectivities
of the mirrors are R1 = 0.989 and R2 = 0.950. The value
of R1 corresponds closely to the value speciﬁed by the
manufacturer of the transfer coating. We attribute the
low value of R2 to the surface roughness of the convex
mirror. Even so, this cavity is already good enough to
detect single atoms. When weakly illuminated with light,
we calculate that the amplitude of the reﬂection dips de-
creases by a factor of 5 if an atom is introduced into the
cavity [25].

For future applications in quantum information pro-
cessing, it would be useful to achieve strong coupling be-
tween the atom and the optical microcavity. With this
in mind we have started to investigate how high the ﬁ-
nesse of these cavities can be made. As a ﬁrst step in this
direction we have put a dielectric coating on one of the
silicon wafers and have used a higher-reﬂectivity transfer
coating on the ﬁbre. First results show a ﬁnesse in ex-
cess of 3,000 on selected mirrors, opening the way to new
cavity QED experiments on a chip.

Further work is necessary to incorporate the cavity into
an operating atom chip so that it can be loaded with
atoms. In order to ﬁne tune the cavity on the chip we
have been developing a micro-actuator, which allows the
translation of the concave mirror in all three directions
of space [26]. The translation range of the cavity mirror
in the chip plane is large enough to compensate for any
mismatch of the optical axes of the cavity mirrors. The

cavity length can be tuned to sweep over several cavity
fringes.

V. SUMMARY

We have presented optical micro-components that can
be integrated into atom chips. We have investigated the
properties of a ﬁbre-optic detection scheme and shown
that clouds with small atom numbers can be probed. We
have also developed a high-ﬁnesse optical micro-resonator
and have shown that it is suitable for single atom detec-
tion on a chip, coupled to the external world by a ﬁbre.
Silicon is the substrate material that we have used to de-
velop these new optical components because that is the
basis of some working atom chips. However, our tech-
niques are probably applicable to any substrate that can
be etched or micro-machined. The challenge from the

5

micro-fabrication side of the work lies in the assembly of
the various micromachined components of the atom chip,
such as the three-axis actuator, the gold wires, the detec-
tion cavities and the v-grooves for the optical ﬁbres. This
will require bonding of several silicon wafers with good
alignment (of the order of a few micrometres). Work is
in progress to produce an atom chip that incorporates
these various components.

Acknowledgments

The authors would like to thank Jon Dyne for expert
technical assistance. This work is supported by the UK
Engineering and Physical Sciences Research Council, the
Royal Society, and by the FASTNET and QGATES net-
works of the European Union.

[1] E. A. Hinds and I. G. Hughes, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys.

32, R199 (1999).

[2] R. Folman, P. Kr¨uger, J. Schmiedmayer, J. Denschlag,
and C. Henkel, Adv. At. Mol. Opt. Phys. 48, 263 (2002).
[3] E. A. Hinds, C. J. Vale, and M. G. Boshier, Phys. Rev.

Lett. 86, 1462 (2001).

[4] W. H¨ansel, J. Reichel, P. Hommelhoﬀ, and T. W. H¨ansch,

Phys. Rev. A 64, 063607 (2001).

[5] T. Calarco, E. A. Hinds, D. Jaksch, J. Schmiedmayer,
J. I. Cirac, and P. Zoller, Phys. Rev. A 61, 022304 (2000).
[6] J. Phys. IV France 116, ‘Quantum Gases in Low Dimen-
sions’ (L. Pricoupenko, H. Perrin and M. Olshanii, Eds.)
(2004).

[7] C. Henkel, S. P¨otting, and M. Wilkens, Appl. Phys. B

69, 379 (1999).

I. Bouchoule, C. I. Westbrook, and A. Aspect, Phys. Rev.
A 70, 043629 (2004).

[16] E. A. Curtis, et. al., Manuscript in preparation (2005).
[17] E. A. Curtis, et. al., Submitted to the topical issue on

atom chips of the European Phys. J. D (2005).

[18] S. Eriksson, F. Ramirez-Martinez, E. A. Curtis, B. E.
Sauer, P. W. Nutter, E. W. Hill, and E. A. Hinds, Appl.
Phys. B 79, 811 (2004).

[19] P. Horak, B. G. Klappauf, A. Haase, R. Folman,
J. Schmiedmayer, P. Domokos, and E. A. Hinds, Phys.
Rev. A 67, 043806 (2003).

[20] E. Koukharenko, Z. Moktadir, M. Kraft, M. E. Abdel-
salam, D. M. Bagnall, C. Vale, M. P. A. Jones, and E. A.
Hinds, Sensor. Actuat. A-Phys. 115, 600 (2004).

[21] J. Reichel, W. H¨ansel, and T. W. H¨ansch, Phys. Rev.

[8] M. P. A. Jones, C. J. Vale, D. Sahagun, B. V. Hall, and

Lett. 83, 3398 (1999).

E. A. Hinds, Phys. Rev. Lett. 91, 080401 (2003).

[9] D. M. Harber, J. M. McGuirk, J. M. Obrecht, and E. A.

[22] J. Reichel, Appl. Phys. B 75, 469 (2002).
[23] M. Greiner, O. Mandel, T. Esslinger, T. W. H¨ansch, and

Cornell, J. Low Temp. Phys. 133, 229 (2003).

I. Bloch, Nature 415, 39 (2002).

[10] P. K. Rekdal, S. Scheel, P. L. Knight, and E. A. Hinds,

Phys. Rev. A 70, 013811 (2004).

[11] Y. Lin, I. Teper, C. Chin, and V. Vuleti´c, Phys. Rev.

Lett. 92, 050404 (2004).

[12] J. Fort´agh, H. Ott, S. Kraft, A. G¨unther, and C. Zim-

mermann, Phys. Rev. A 66, 041604(R) (2002).

[13] A. E. Leanhardt, Y. Shin, A. P. Chikkatur, D. Kielpinski,
W. Ketterle, and D. E. Pritchard, Phys. Rev. Lett. 90,
100404 (2003).

[14] M. P. A. Jones, C. J. Vale, D. Sahagun, B. V. Hall, C. C.
Eberlein, B. E. Sauer, K. Furusawa, and D. Richardson,
J. Phys. B: At. Mol. Opt. Phys. 37, L15 (2004).

[15] J. Est`eve, C. Aussibal, T. Schumm, C. Figl, D. Mailly,

[24] Z. Moktadir, E. Koukharenka, M. Kraft, D. M. Bagnall,
M. Jones, H. Powell, and E. Hinds, J. Micromech. Micro-
eng. 14, 1 (2004).

[25] A. Kuhn and G. Rempe, in Experimental Quantum Com-
putation and Information, edited by F. de Martini and
C. Monroe (IOS Press, Amsterdam, 2002), Proc. Int.
School of Physics Enrico Fermi, course CXLVIII, pp. 37–
66.

[26] C. O. Gollasch, Z. Moktadir, M. Kraft, D. M. Bagnall,
M. Trupke, S. Eriksson, and E. A. Hinds, To appear in
J. Micromech. Microeng. (2005).

