5
0
0
2
 
r
a

M
 
4
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
m
o
t
a
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
1
1
1
3
0
5
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Accuracy of an Atomic Microwave Power Standard

David C. Paulusse, Nelson L. Rowell, and Alain Michaud∗

July 2, 2004, revised October 10, 2004

Abstract– We have built an atomic microwave power standard based on
the electromagnetic interaction with laser-cooled atoms. The atoms tra-
versed a waveguide transmission line, and under the eﬀect of the radiation,
the internal state populations underwent a Rabi ﬂopping oscillation. Mea-
surement of the oscillation frequency allowed the determination of the in-
cident microwave power. As many of 60 oscillations were observed over a
dynamic range of 20 dB and the standard deviation of the measurements
was about 0.02%. The measured frequency was compared to a calculated
one and an agreement of 1.3% with an uncertainty of 5% (rectangular) was
found.

Index Terms– Microwave measurements, Laser Cooling, Cooling, Atomic
Measurements.

Introduction

Although the standard calorimetric technique is a proved and practical
way to measure microwave power it is still worthwhile to develop alternate
techniques, e.g. ones based on the probing of atomic transitions. Similar and
diﬀerent approaches have been investigated in the past and are described
in [1]. The advent of laser cooling brings more interesting potentialities for
future developments. Two experiments have already demonstrated that the
measurement of the Rabi ﬂopping frequency of laser cooled atoms can be
related to the microwave power. Our previous prototype had a resolution
of 0.3% over a dynamic range of 20dB [2], [3]. As the radiation was applied
∗The authors are with the Institute for National Measurement Standards, National Re-
search Council, Ottawa, ON., Canada, K1A 0R6. email: Alain.Michaud@nrc-cnrc.gc.ca.
This paper was submitted for publication in IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas.

1

to the atoms through a glass cell, it was not possible to evaluate the ﬁeld
distribution nor to accurately measure the power. The National Institute
of Standards and Technology experiment consisted of a launched cloud of
atoms through a resonant cavity [4]. Although the high quality factor of
the cavity made it diﬃcult to accurately evaluate the incident power, they
reported agreement between the measured power using the Cs atoms and a
power meter within about 4%.

In this paper, the atoms crossed an actual waveguide transmission line
that allowed a more accurate description of the electromagnetic ﬁeld and its
relation with the transmitted power. We give a description of the apparatus,
show a typical measurement, and discuss its accuracy.

II. Principle of Operation

The model that describes the evolution of the atomic states when they
are submitted to electromagnetic ﬁeld was developed for the study of the
atomic clocks. However if the frequency of the ﬁeld is kept in resonance
with the transition, then the atomic populations will undergo a Rabi ﬂop-
ping oscillation whose frequency is proportional to the amplitude of the
electromagnetic ﬁeld (see [5] chapter 5).
In order to achieve an accurate
measurement, one should evaluate the ﬁeld amplitude on the path of the
atoms and should also should know the ratio between the power measured
by the atoms in vacuum to the incident power in air.

This experiment used laser cooled-Rubidium atoms, which were dropped
through a waveguide transmission line operating in the fundamental mode
(See Fig. 1). The advantages of this scheme are that the microwave ﬁeld
distribution is very well known and the transmitted power can be calculated
using an analytical expression. The waveguide section was kept under vac-
uum using two reﬂectionless windows and the transmitted power could be
measured simultaneously via the cold atoms and a monitor power sensor.
The device was operated in CW mode and is fully compatible with common
waveguide standards.

A. Lasers and Optics

The laser system was based on single frequency, stabilized laser diodes. The
cooling laser delivered about 35 mW and was kept in resonance with 5s1/2
F= 2 to 5p3/2 F’=3 transition of Rb87. The probe and repumping lasers,
were tuned to the same transition as the cooling laser and to the F=1 to
the F’=(1 or 2) transition respectively.

2

Figure 1: Schematic of the experimental system. The atoms are trapped at
the intersection of the laser beams, then they cross the waveguide and are
detected below.

3

First, approximately 108 atoms were captured in a standard magneto-
optical trap [6]. Next, the atoms were optically pumped simply by turning
oﬀ the repumping light earlier than the cooling laser at the end of the cooling
sequence. At this point all the atoms were in the F=1 state.

Before they entered the waveguide, a static magnetic ﬁeld of 160 milli-
gauss parallel to the magnetic part of the RF ﬁeld was ramped up in about
30 ms. The atoms crossed the guide in 14 ms and then they were probed
using a laser beam. The ﬂuorescence signal from the photodetector mea-
sured the population of the F=2 level, so any signal results from the mF =0
to mF ′=0 transition only.

B. Microwave System

The atomic power standard is compared to a power transfer standard which
was operated in the calibrated source mode. The power transfer standard
was a 3 dB waveguide directional coupler and a NBS-IV type power meter.
Its output was attached to one end of the transmission line vacuum chamber.
The other end of the line was attached to a reﬂection-less termination.

In this experiment the microwave power was kept constant (CW mode)
and the ﬁeld intensity time proﬁle was set by the time of ﬂight of the atoms
through the waveguide. We repeated the experiment varying the power level
each time and we evaluated the number of oscillations. Knowing the ana-
lytical expression for the magnetic ﬁeld [7], we could deduce the calibration
factor K2, the ratio of incident power to the monitored power on the side
arm of the transfer standard [1].

The reference frequency input of the synthesizer was obtained from an
atomic clock and the output frequency was set to the atomic transition fre-
quency. Since the Rabi frequency is also a function of the detuning from
the resonance, it was necessary to set the signal frequency with care. The
microwave signal was generated by the synthesizer was also leveled using a
10 dB coupler and thermistor mount-power meter (coaxial).

C. Evacuated Transmission Line

The vacuum chamber consisted of an evacuated R-70 type waveguide trans-
mission line in which the fundamental mode propagates to the interaction
region without reﬂection or leakage. We prevented any reﬂection by using
tuned windows on each end of the line (Fig. 2). Each window consisted of

4

Figure 2: Diagram of the evacuated transmission line. The device is re-
versible.

two 1 mm thick quartz plates spaced a quarter wavelength apart. The re-
ﬂection from the ﬁrst plate canceled exactly the reﬂection of the second one
and the insertion loss of the window was therefore small at the frequency of
operation. Furthermore, as an additional precaution, against any possible
standing waves between the windows, the distance between them was cho-
sen so that the frequency of operation is centered between the two closest
modes. The overall length of the line is about 50 cm, and it is symmetrical
around the access holes.

Fig 3 shows the overall insertion loss of the line. The vertical line on the
graph marks the operating frequency. The baseline of 1.05% corresponds
to the normal attenuation of the copper waveguide. The oscillations on
both sides of the operating frequency are interference between the ¨input¨and
¨output ¨windows. They disappear in the center as the windows are tuned not
to have any reﬂection at that frequency. The access holes are located so that
the atoms will cross the guide in the center of the broad walls. This position
was chosen to obtain linear magnetic ﬁeld polarization and constant ﬁeld
intensity in the path of the atoms. The holes are 5.7 mm in diameter and
12 mm long with negligible measured leakage. A more accurate evaluation of
the interaction proﬁle would include a numerical simulation of this area but
this was not done in the present study. Finally, using laser beam geometry,
which would not use a vertical laser beam could further reduce the diameter
of the holes.

At approximately 14 cm from the center of the line, there was also a grid
on the narrow wall of the waveguide (not shown in the ﬁgure). The purpose
of that grid was to allow the high vacuum pumping for the waveguide itself.
The insertion loss measurement were done using a vector network ana-
lyzer. We also measured a line of the same guide having the same length.
The measured insertion loss of this line was found to be 0.8% (
0.1%).
The 0.25% diﬀerence between this and the chamber is the sum of all the
contributions: the tuned windows, the access holes where the atoms crosses
the chamber and the grid for the vacuum pumping.

±

5

Figure 3: Frequency response of the transmission line. The vertical line
marks the operating frequency.

III. Experimental results and Discussion

A. Measurement Results

The normalized amplitude of the photodetector signal is plotted in Fig. 4,
as a function of the square root of the incident power. The solid line is a ﬁt
of a cosine function. The number of samples was chosen to unambiguously
resolve the number of fringes in a short amount of time. The measurements
were done as follow: Three ¨dry¨launches were done as a check of the trap
quality. Then one launch was done with the optical pumping applied. Typ-
ically the signal fell to 10 percent of the previous amplitude. Finally the
microwave power was turned on, the amplitude stabilization loop left to set-
tle and three launches were done with the optical pumping and microwave
present in the waveguide. The plotted value is normalized with respect to
the diﬀerence between the no-microwave and no-pumping amplitudes. Then
the DC power applied on the monitor thermistor mount was measured both
with and without RF applied. The normalization of the vertical axis was
done in order to reduce the noise and the eﬀect of long term drifts such as

6

Figure 4: Normalized amplitude of the photodetector signal as a function of
the square root of transmitted power.

trap size for example.

Fig 4 shows as many as 60 Rabi oscillations over a power range up to
3.9 mW. This range includes the usual measurement conditions commonly
employed, i.e. 1 mW. Higher ranges are possible simply by launching from a
higher distance. The loss of contrast at the high range of the curve was from
three sources: 1) The atoms travel at diﬀerent velocity due to the fact that
the temperature is not zero. The phase diﬀerence between the slow and the
fast atoms increases as the average frequency increases thus resulting in a
loss of contrast. 2) The ﬁeld intensity was maximum but not constant along
the large wall direction at the center of the guide. 3) The sinusoidal behavior
is given under the rotating ﬁeld approximation. Since the only important
parameter in this ﬁgure is the frequency of the oscillations, no attempt was
done to characterize the amplitude of the oscillations or the contrast decay.
This is usually achieved using a small scale (classical) ballistic monte-carlo
analysis. All the atom’s contribution are summed, assuming an initial po-
sition and velocity distribution (see the references in [6] section 7.4). This

7

Figure 5: Relative deviation of the Rabi frequency versus a linear depen-
dance.

was not done in the present study. Nevertheless, measurements over the
whole range are not necessary if an estimate of the power is known. Then
a certain number of selected fringes could be used only, possibly the last ones.

B. Linearity and Noise

In order to evaluate the linearity of the system, we compared a short section
of the data plotted in Fig. 4 to the full sequence. Each relative deviation
Ri plotted in Fig. 5 is obtained by ﬁtting three cycles of data (about 30
points) to the function:

S(P )

cos(Ω√P (1 + Ri))

≃

(1)

We observed a dip at around 2 mW where the deviations were as large as
0.14%. It is not clear at this stage whether this was due to a non-linear eﬀect
or it was merely noise. If we restricted the measurement range to less than

8

1 mW then the deviation was typically around 0.02% or less, corresponding
to an averaging time of 10 to 30 minutes per point (3 cycles of data).

C. Accuracy

We calibrated the transfer standard by comparison with an existing PC-7
mm standard. A waveguide to coaxial adapter was used to attach a waveg-
uide thermistor mount to the calibrated source. The S-parameters of the
adapter were measured on a vector network analyzer and used in the ex-
pression of the correction factor. This resulted in accuracy for the power
measurements of 2% with a rectangular distribution.

In order to evaluate the interaction time, we measured the distance from
the trap to the waveguide and to the probe beam and compared them to
the observed values. We also compared our estimation to the time of ﬂight
signal. Finally, we estimated the relative uncertainty on the interaction
time to be 4% (rectangular). This represents the most important source of
uncertainty of our experiment.

Now we compare the measured Rabi frequency from the ﬁgure 4 to the

one deduced from the measurement of the incident power we ﬁnd:

ΩM
ΩC

= 0.987

0.05

±

(2)

When measuring power, both techniques were in agreement by 2.6%.
The total uncertainty in power was less than 10% (rectangular distribution)
and was mainly due to the transit time (4%) and the reference power sensor
(2%). This suggests that more tests should be made in order to further re-
duce the uncertainties. However, although we can not say at this time that
the accuracy of the present method has reached that of an actual standard,
we have shown that the system allows one to perform measurements with
a resolution of 0.02% over a range of 20 dB with no obvious fundamental
limitation, to the accuracy.

IV. Conclusion and Outlook

We have measured the Rabi frequency of the hyperﬁne interaction of a
laser cooled sample of Rb87 atoms as they fall through a microwave trans-
mission line. It was possible to observe as many as 60 ﬂopping oscillations
up to a power of 3.9 mW, corresponding to a dynamic range of 26 dB. The

9

frequency of the oscillations was measured with a resolution of 0.02%. It was
compared to the calculated frequency and an agreement of 1.3% was found
between both, with an accuracy of 5% (rectangular distribution). This cor-
responds to an agreement of 2.6% when considering power measurement.
The accuracy of our system could signiﬁcantly be improved by reducing the
uncertainty of the transit time through the waveguide. As there are many
ways by which this objective can be reached, it therefore does not constitute
a major limitation to realizing this type of standard.

References

[1] A. Fantom. Radio Frequency and Microwave Power Measurement, ´Ed.
Peter Peregrinius Ltd., London, 278 pp., 1990, IEE press, Available:
http://www.iee.org

[2] D.C. Paulusse, N.L. Rowell and A. Michaud, Realization of an
Atomic Power Standard, 2002 Conference on Precision Electromagnetic
Measurements. Ottawa, June 16-21, 2002, pp. 194-5.

[3] D.C. Paulusse, N.L. Rowell, A. Michaud, Microwave Power
Standard using cold Atoms, Eighteenth International Conference
(ICAP 2002) Poster Presentation Abstracts.
on Atomic Physics
2002, p. 329[Online]. Available:
Cambridge, July 28-August 2,
http://www.wspc.com.sg/icap2002/article/2423055.pdf

[4] E.A.

T.P.

Donley,

Heavner,
B.F. Riddle,Quantum-Based Microwave Power Measurement Per-
formed with a Miniature Atomic Fountain, Proceedings: 2003 IEEE
International
frequency Control Symposium. Tampa Bay, May 4-8,
2003, pp. 135137.

Crowley,

T.P.

[5] J. Vanier, C. Audoin, The Quantum Physics of Atomic Frequency

Standards. Adam Hilger, Bristol, 1988, Vol. 1,2. 1567 pp.

[6] H.J. Metcalf, P. van der Straten, Laser Cooling and Trapping

New York, Springer-Verlag, 1999, pp. 156162.

[7] S.R. Seshadri, Fundamentals of Transmission Lines and Electromag-

netic Fields Addison-Wesley, Massachusetts, 1971, 598 pp.

10

