Coherent coupling in a cold Rydberg dipole gas

Marcel Mudrich,∗ Nassim Zahzam, Thibault Vogt, Daniel Comparat, and Pierre Pillet
Laboratoire Aim´e Cotton, Campus d’Orsay Bˆat. 505, 91405 Orsay, France
(Dated:)

Coupling by the resonant dipole-dipole energy transfer between cold cesium Rydberg atoms is
investigated using time-resolved narrow-band de-excitation spectroscopy. This technique combines
the advantage of eﬃcient Rydberg excitation with high-resolution spectroscopy at variable inter-
action times. The coherent character of the process is studied by back and forth transfer in the
np + np ←→ ns + (n + 1)s reaction. The evolution of coherence is mostly due to the motion
between the atoms induced by the dipole-dipole interaction. Dipole-dipole interaction is observed
spectroscopically as avoided level crossing.

5
0
0
2
 
r
p
A
 
4
 
 
]
h
p
-
m
o
t
a
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
2
2
0
4
0
5
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Cold ensembles of Rydberg atoms are particularly in-
teresting quantum systems because of the strong but con-
trollable interactions between the atoms. Thermal mo-
tion of the atoms is mostly negligible on the timescale
of Rydberg excitation (”frozen Rydberg gas”). However,
many-body interactions are no longer negligible as it has
been demonstrated for Rydberg atoms interacting via
resonant dipole-dipole interaction associated with energy
transfer resonances [1, 2, 3]. Thus, a cold Rydberg en-
semble resembles an amorphous solid rather than a gas.
This makes cold Rydberg gases promising candidate
systems for fast quantum information schemes as was
suggested using tunable resonant dipole-dipole interac-
tion associated with energy transfer resonances
[4, 5].
In particular, the Rydberg-Rydberg interaction may be
exploited to induce a phase in a conditional phase-gate
operation and to inhibit excitation of pairs of Rydberg
atoms within a mesoscopic volume. The signature of local
blockade of Rydberg excitation due to long-range interac-
tion has been observed in experiments with narrow-band
laser excitation [6, 7] and line broadening due to reso-
nant dipole-dipole interactions has been observed using
microwave spectroscopy [8]. It has recently been realized
that dipole-dipole interactions between Rydberg atoms
may also feature dynamics with dramatic eﬀects such as
state redistribution phenomena, Penning ionization, and
subsequent plasma formation [9, 10, 11, 12].

The aim of this Letter is to study reacting pairs of close
Rydberg atoms in the environment of a dense Rydberg
sample. The complete dynamics of the system should
take into account the many-body evolution of the ensem-
ble [2, 3, 13] as well as the relative motion of the atoms of
the interacting pairs [12, 14]. The presented observations
are interpreted as a decoherence eﬀect in the evolution
of the pairs of atoms. We consider the process

(1)

np3/2 + np3/2

ns + (n + 1)s

←→
with n = 24 and n = 25, which is resonant at elec-
tric ﬁelds E0 = 44.1 V/cm and E0 = 59.1 V/cm, re-
spectivelly. Unless stated otherwise the magnetic com-
In contrast
ponent of the np3/2-atoms is
to experiments employing narrow-band Rydberg exci-
tation as a means of probing interactions between the

mJ |
|

= 1/2.

FIG. 1: (Color online) (a) Schematic representation of the
scheme of pulsed excitation of 25p3/2 Rydberg states and cw
de-excitation to the short-lived 7s state. (b) Combined pulsed
and cw excitation scheme for narrow-band excitation of 24p3/2
and subsequent de-excitation.

atoms [6, 7] we use broad-band pulsed laser excitation
and time-delayed probing by narrow-band de-excitation.
This technique combines the advantage of high Rydberg
densities and high-resolution spectroscopy at variable in-
teraction times.

The Rydberg atoms are excited in a cloud of up to 107
Cs atoms produced in a standard vapor-loaded MOT at
10−10 mbar [2, 14]. At the
residual gas pressure of 3
×
trap position, a static electric ﬁeld and a pulsed high
voltage ﬁeld can be applied by means of a pair of electric
ﬁeld grids spaced by 15.7 mm. The magnetic quadrupole
ﬁeld of the MOT is switched oﬀ during the Rydberg ex-
citation phase. For Rydberg excitation we use a pulsed
(7 ns,
10 GHz spectral width
running at 10 Hz repetition rate. The Rydberg atoms are
subsequently probed by a single-mode tunable Ti:Sa laser
of up to 400 mW output power. The beams of the pulsed
dye and Ti:Sa lasers are coaxially aligned and weakly
focused into the atomic cloud.

100 µJ) dye laser with

∼

∼

The excitation scheme used in the ﬁrst experiment pre-
sented in this Letter is schematically depicted in Fig. 1
105 atoms are excited by the pulsed dye
(a). Up to 6

×

pp
|

laser from the 6p3/2 upper MOT state to the 25p3/2 Ry-
dberg state. This normally forbidden transition becomes
partially allowed when the excitation takes place in the
presence of a static electric ﬁeld. To fulﬁl the energy
transfer resonance condition the electric ﬁeld is tuned to
a value such that the energy of a pair of np-atoms de-
matches the energy of a pair of ns- and
noted by
i
ss′
by the Stark eﬀect. In the two-atom
(n + 1)s-atoms
|
picture resonant dipole-dipole interaction lifts degener-
acy of the unperturbed states which linearly combine to
the coherent repulsive and attractive interaction states,
) /√2,
+
i
|
respectivelly. The corresponding energy curves V+(E)
and V−(E) are the eigenvalues of the perturbed two-level
Hamiltonian as a function of electric ﬁeld E

pp
= (
|

) /√2 and

ss′
|

pp
|

i − |

= (

ss′

|−i

+

i

i

i

i

Vpp(E) ∆V

(cid:18)

∆V

Vss′ (E) (cid:19)

,

(2)

i

i

pp
|

ss′
|

where Vpp(E) and Vss′ (E) stand for the energies of the
unperturbed states
and ∆V denotes the
and
dipole-dipole interaction energy. In the experiment, up
to 50 % of the population of p-atoms which are in the
interacting magnetic sublevel are transformed into pairs
of s and s′-atoms within 300 ns interaction time. Sub-
sequently, the 25p-Rydberg atoms are coupled to the 7s
state by the Ti:Sa laser. The Ti:Sa laser is applied contin-
uously during 1 µs before selectivelly detecting the num-
ber of 25p and 26s atoms by applying a ﬁeld ionizing high
1 µs rise time and recording the ion
voltage pulse with
signal with gated integrators. Since the lifetime of the
7s state is short (56.5 ns) compared with the Rydberg
lifetime (
10 µs), tuning the Ti:Sa laser into resonance
leads to a drop of the number of detected Rydberg atoms.
The Ti:Sa laser frequency is recorded using a commercial
wavemeter with 3 MHz resolution (Angstr¨om WS-8).

∼

∼

×

×

105 and 1.5

Typical depumping spectra of the 25p3/2 state at two
diﬀerent values of the electric ﬁeld are displayed in Fig. 2.
The number of 25p and 26s Rydberg atoms is normal-
ized to the number of excited atoms without depumping
105, respectively. The dis-
laser, which is 6
played spectra are the results of averaging over 4 individ-
ual scans and low-pass ﬁltering to eliminate shot-to-shot
ﬂuctuations which are in the range of 30 %. On reso-
nance, the number of 25p-atoms drops to about 40 %,
which is mainly due to the fact that both
= 1/2
= 3/2 components are excited by the broad-
and
band pulsed laser but only
= 1/2 is coupled by the
mj|
|
narrow-band depumping laser. Remarkably, we are also
able to observe the reduction of 26s atoms by as much as
40 %, as depicted in Fig. 2. This observation implies that
resonant coupling of s-atoms back to p-atoms is also eﬃ-
cient. However, the position of the depumping resonance
of the s-signal is shifted to higher frequencies when the
electric ﬁeld is tuned to values slightly higher than trans-
fer resonance (Fig. 2 (b)). Apparently, resonant coupling
of s-atoms back to p-atoms is eﬃcient only when exciting

mj|
|

mj|
|

2

 

 

 

 

 

e
d
u

t
i
l

p
m
a

 

i

g
n
p
m
u
p
e
d

 

e
v
i
t

l

a
e
R

1.2

1.0

0.8

 

0.6

0.4

0.0

0.2

                     

(a)

 

25p atoms

                      

(b)

 

25p atoms

F=43.93 V/cm

 26s atoms

F=44.13 V/cm

 26s atoms

-150 -100 -50

0

50 100 150

-150 -100 -50

0

50 100 150

 

Depumping laser frequency (MHz)

FIG. 2: (Color online) Typical depumping spectra of 25p3/2-
atoms at two diﬀerent values of the electric ﬁeld E =
43.93 V/cm (a) and E = 44.13 V/cm (b). The p and s-ﬁeld
ionization signals are normalized to signals without depump-
ing laser.

+
|

the symmetric repulsive state
, which in turn remains
i
nearly perfectly coherent during the depumping period.
These results can be interpreted as a consequence of rela-
tive motion of the pairs of atoms leading for the attractive
case (
) to l-mixing of states in the manifold. However,
in our experiment we cannot directly observe such state
mixing. This assumption is supported by recent work
demonstrating the motion of atoms induced by dipole
forces [11].

|−i

In Fig. 3 the positions of p and s-lines obtained from
ﬁtting Lorentzian functions to the experimental spectra
are plotted versus electric ﬁeld. The linear ﬁt curve illus-
trates the Stark shift of the p-state Vpp. The dashed lines
result from ﬁtting to the s-line positions the eigenvalue
curve V+(E) of expression (2). Free ﬁt parameters are
Vss′ , which is assumed to be independent of the electric
ﬁeld, and ∆V . The resulting value ∆V /h = 15(3) MHz
has to be compared with the expected value, which can
(µ25s25pµ26s25p)/R3 in atomic
be estimated by ∆Vtheo ≈
units (a. u.), where µ25s25p = 241 a. u. and µ26s25p =
237 a. u. denote the transition dipole moments, and R
stands for the mean distance between interacting Ryd-
berg atoms. The resulting value ∆Vtheo/h
0.5 MHz
is much smaller than the experimental one which is at-
tributed to many-body eﬀects inducing a wide energy
band as in a disordered solid rather than a splitting of de-
generate levels in the simple two-atom picture [2, 3, 13].
We have carefully checked that the eﬀect was not an arte-
fact due to the shape of the ﬁeld ionization pulse which
could lead to (a-)diabatic following of the Stark manifold.
Coherence of the dipole coupled interaction state
+
i
|
is interrogated by measuring the coupling eﬃciency for
variable evolution times of the Rydberg sample. For this,
the narrow-band depumping pulse is time-delayed with
respect to the excitation pulse. The ﬁeld ionizing high-
voltage ramp is applied at constant time of 10 µs after the
excitation pulse. The open diamonds in Fig. 4 represent
the depletion amplitudes of 26s-atoms which are obtained
from Lorenzian ﬁts of the 26s-lines. The plotted ampli-

≈

3

mj|
|

emission, and cw-excitation of the Rydberg levels as illus-
trated in Fig. 1 (b). The branching ratio for transitions
from 7p3/2 to 7s intermediate state is 44 % [15]. Atoms
= 1/2 Rydberg
are excited selectively to the 24p3/2,
state by switching on the Ti:Sa laser during t1 = 0.3 µs
after the dye laser pulse by means of an acousto-optic
modulator. This pump pulse transfers the maximum
number of atoms into the Rydberg state. After an oﬀ-
period of ∆t = 0.1-10 µs a second pulse of t2 = 1 µs dura-
tion is applied for down-stimulating the Rydberg atoms
to the short-lived 7s-state as in the previous experiment.
The ﬁeld ionizing high-voltage pulse is applied at a ﬁxed
time of 5 µs after the dye laser pulse for the measurements
with ∆t = 0-3 µs and 15 µs after the dye laser pulse for
the measurements with ∆t = 4-10 µs.

The observed 24p-resonance is depicted as a dashed
line in Fig. 4 for an electric ﬁeld E = 59.1 V/cm which
corresponds to maximum excitation transfer. Depump-
ing of the p-atoms takes place at the center of the excita-
tion line for two reasons. On the one hand, the Rabi fre-
quency is largest on resonance which leads to maximum
depletion of the Rydberg. Qualitatively, the line shape
is well reproduced by a two-level rate equation model
for the evolution of the populations of Rydberg and 7s-
atoms at various laser detunings. On the other hand,
a small number of photo-ions (. 100) is created by the
Ti:Sa laser, presumably by photo-ionization of the 7p3/2-
state. The space charge from these ions induces inho-
mogeneous Stark broadening during Rydberg excitation,
which we have studied in detail and which will be pub-
lished elsewhere. Therefore we do not draw any detailed
conclusions from the positions of 24p and 25s-excitation
lines. Since the ions are accelerated out of the Rydberg
sample within 300 ns at 59.2 V/cm, the depumping line
is unaﬀected by photo-ions. The depumping minimum
nearly reaches zero in this scheme since all excited Ryd-
berg atoms are subject to subsequent de-excitation.

−

signal amplitude relative to the maximum p

The s-lines for three diﬀerent oﬀ-periods of the Ti:Sa
laser are plotted vertically shifted from each other for the
sake of distinctiveness. The vertical scale indicates the
s
signal.
−
Up to 50 % of p-atoms are converted into s-atoms, which
requires many-body interactions to govern the excitation
transfer process [2, 3, 13]. When comparing the depump-
ing minima of p and s-lines one notices that again deple-
tion of the s-atoms is eﬃcient only on the high-frequency
side of the spectral line. In fact, the p and s-depumping
line positions qualitatively reproduce a similar E-ﬁeld de-
pendence as the one shown in Fig. 3. However, the ﬁtted
1 MHz which can
interaction energy amounts to ∆E
be explained by a factor 6 lower Rydberg density than in
the ﬁrst experiment using pulsed Rydberg excitation.

≈

For an increasing oﬀ-period ∆t of the Ti:Sa laser the
depumping eﬃciency clearly deminishes. In fact we ob-
serve a hole in the spectrum only up to ∆t
1.5 µs, and
a reduced signal amplitude for longer times. In order to

∼

FIG. 3: (Color online) (a) Positions of the minima in the p and
s spectra (open and ﬁlled diamonds, respectivelly) for various
values of the electric ﬁeld as shown in Fig. 2. The straight line
is a linear ﬁt of the positions of p-lines, the dashed lines indi-
cate the interaction potential curves V+(E) and V−(E) from
Eq. 2 obtained from a least-squares ﬁt of V+(E) to the s-line
positions. (b) The ﬁlled circles and the Lorentzian ﬁt curve
represent the number of 26s atoms relative to the number of
25p atoms without depumping laser.

+
|

tudes are normalized to the 26s-signal recorded without
depumping pulse. The initial depumping amplitude of
up to 60 % continuously decreases down to roughly 30 %
at 5 µs interaction time. The loss of coherence with in-
teraction time is attributed to the relative motion of the
interacting atoms induced by dipole forces. For the re-
pulsive case,
, dipole coupling asymptotically vanishes
i
thereby leaving the ensemble in an incoherent sum of p
and s, s′-populations. Then, only p-atoms are depumped
but s and s′-atoms remain unaﬀected. The contribution
to decoherence from the thermal motion of the Rydberg
atoms is expected to be negligible since the average dis-
placement of an atom in 1 µs is only
0.1 µm, which is
small compared to the average distance between Rydberg
atoms R
10 µm. Coherence loss may also be related
to the dynamics of migration of excitation [2]. In order
to clarify this issue further experimental and theoretical
eﬀorts are required.

∼

∼

In a complementary experiment, the dynamics of res-
onant excitation transfer is investigated on the timescale
of several microseconds. Rydberg atoms are now excited
by a combined scheme of pulsed excitation, spontaneous

4

the data are better modelled by a power-law decay which
is plotted as smooth line to guide the eye. When compar-
ing the data for broad-band and narrow-band Rydberg
excitation one notices diﬀerent initial depumping ampli-
tudes, which has already been discussed. Time evolution,
however, qualitatively agrees for the two experiments.

In conclusion, we have reported on narrow-band time-
resolved spectroscopy of a gas of interaction Rydberg
atoms. Resonant dipole-dipole interaction in a dense gas
of Rydberg atoms, in which many-body eﬀects are in-
volved, is resolved spectroscopically. Excitation transfer
at the attractive potential branch is suppressed, presum-
ably due to state-mixing dipole-induced collisions. Co-
herent coupling between the interacting atoms is probed
by measuring the eﬃciency of back and forth excitation
transfer for variable interaction times. Decoherence of
the repulsive interaction state takes place on a time scale
of
2 µs which can be attributed to the mechanical mo-
tion induced by repulsive dipole forces [12, 14]. These
results seem to indicate the frontier between a frozen
Rydberg gas where the thermal motion of atoms is negli-
gible and a dipolar gas where the motion between atoms
induced by the dipole forces dominates the dynamics.

∼

This work is in the frame of the European Research
and Training Network COLMOL (contract HPRN-CT-
2002-00309) and QUACS. One of the authors (M. M.) is
supported by COLMOL. The autors acknowledge fruitful
discussions with T. Gallagher, V. Akulin and E. Brion.

∗

Electronic address: mudrich@physik.uni-bielefeld.de
[1] T. F. Gallagher, Rydberg Atoms (Cambridge University

Press, New York, 1994).

[2] I. Mourachko et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 80, 253 (1998).
[3] W. R. Anderson et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 80, 249 (1998).
[4] M. D. Lukin et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 87, 037901 (2001).
[5] D. Jaksch et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 85, 2208 (2000).
[6] D. Tong et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 93, 063001 (2004).
[7] K. Singer et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 93, 163001 (2004).
[8] K. Afrousheh et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 93, 233001 (2004).
[9] A. Walz-Flannigan et al., Phys. Rev. A 69, 063405

(2004).

(2004).

[10] M. P. Robinson et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 85, 4466 (2000).
[11] W. Li et al., Phys. Rev. A 70, 042713 (2004).
[12] W. Li, P. J. Tanner, and T. F. Gallagher, submitted

[13] I. Mourachko et al., Phys. Rev. A 70, 031401(R) (2004).
[14] A. Fioretti et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 82, 1839 (1999).
[15] R. L. Kurucz and B. Bell, Atomic line data (1995), cam-

bridge, Mass.: Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory.

FIG. 4: (Color online) (a) Typical 24p and 25s-spectra ob-
tained after excitation and time-delayed de-excitation of 24p
Rydberg atoms for various delay times ∆t. The smooth lines
result from ﬁtting the spectra with a heuristic model func-
tion (see text). (b) Temporal evolution of the amplitude of
depletion of the 25s-population.

quantify the depumping dynamics the s-lines are ﬁtted by
G(ν)),
the heuristic model function Ns(ν) = L(ν)
where L and G stand for Lorentzian and Gaussian func-
tions. During the ﬁtting procedure the peak positions
are held ﬁxed as well as the Lorentzian peak amplitude
which is obtained from ﬁtting the s line without depump-
ing laser as indicated by the smooth curve of Lorentzian
shape.

(1

−

×

The resulting Gaussian amplitude factor which may
vary between zero (no depumping) and unity (depump-
ing down to zero) is plotted versus ∆t as ﬁlled diamonds
in Fig. 4 (b). Depumping eﬃciency drops fastest during
the ﬁrst microsecond with an exponential time constant
τ = 2.6 µs. In the entire time range up to 10 µs, however,

