5
0
0
2
 
y
a
M
 
0
3
 
 
]
h
p
-
m
o
t
a
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
1
0
2
5
0
5
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

EPJ manuscript No.
(will be inserted by the editor)

Editorial: Quo vadis, cold molecules?

John Doyle1, Bretislav Friedrich1,2, Roman Krems3 and Fran¸coise Masnou-Seeuws4

1 Department of Physics, Harvard University, Cambridge, MA 02138, USA

2 Fritz Haber Institute of the Max Planck Society, D-14135 Berlin, Germany

3 ITAMP, Harvard-Smithsonian Center for Astrophysics, Cambridge, MA 02138, USA

4 Laboratoire Aim´e Cotton, CNRS, Bˆat. 505 Campus d’Orsay, 91405 Orsay Cedex, France

Received: date / Revised version: date

Abstract. The present issue gives a snapshot of the rapidly developing ﬁeld of ultracold polar molecules.

PACS. 33.80.Ps Cold atoms and molecules

1 Introduction

ent techniques used to produce cold molecules, a number

that increased from zero over the past eight years.

The idea to produce this Topical Issue came to us during

As cold, we designate molecules with translational tem-

a meeting in Cambridge last January, the ITAMP-CUA

peratures between 1 and 1000 mK. Such molecules can be

Workshop on Ultracold Polar Molecules1. The ultracold

easily manipulated with electromagnetic ﬁelds and trapped.

polar weather that beset Cambridge at that time con-

As ultracold, we designate molecules whose translational

tributed to a congenial and, indeed, warm atmosphere

temperatures are typically less than 1 mK; such molecules

in the halls and hallways of the workshop’s venue, the

are distinguished by a single partial-wave scattering.

Harvard-Smithsonian Center for Astrophysics.

Place picture

1.1 Why cold polar molecules?

The present collection of papers is a snapshot of a very

Currently, the goal of many researchers is to produce dense

rapidly developing ﬁeld. There are now at least nine diﬀer-

samples of ultracold polar molecules. This goal is shared

1 ITAMP is the Institute for Theoretical, Atomic, Molecu-

by colleagues with diverse backgrounds, mainly in physical

lar and Optical Physics; CUA is the Harvard/MIT Center for

chemistry, chemical physics and in atomic and molecular

Ultracold Atoms.

physics. Why such an intense interdisciplinary interest?

2

Doyle, Friedrich, Krems, and Masnou: Quo vadis?

Molecules are diﬀerent from atoms - certainly more com-

lar molecular gases. Cooling molecules is more diﬃcult

plicated - and one might say “more interesting:” they oﬀer

than cooling atoms. The complex molecular internal level

intriguing properties which are not available with atoms,

structure precludes a simple extension of laser cooling to

such as body-ﬁxed electric dipole moments. Hence the em-

molecules (although work is continuing in this area and the

phasis on polar.

proposals to laser-cool metal hydrides look promising [1,

As atomic physics has moved beyond the trapping and

2]). Despite hurdles, considerable progress has been made

study of dilute gases of simple atoms, a new many-body

and we are in a period of very rapid world-wide growth in

physics has emerged. Similarly, fundamental physical chem-

this new ﬁeld. In 1998, the ﬁrst trapping of neutral polar

istry is moving in new directions, becoming increasingly

molecules, CaH, in a magnetic ﬁeld was reported [3]. Since

preoccupied with controlling chemical reactions and colli-

then, several groups have made advances in the produc-

sions in general. In both research areas dense samples of

tion of cold polar molecules by a variety of methods. The

cold molecules are called for - and wanting. Once these be-

creation of homonuclear (bosonic) alkali dimers via pho-

come available, much is expected to happen: there is the

toassociation or Feshbach resonances is now being followed

promise of the discovery of new phases of matter, ultracold

up with application of the same techniques to produce po-

chemistry, and even a robust quantum computer made out

lar bi-alkali dimers; recently Feshbach resonances in dual-

of molecules suspended in free space. These far-reaching

species traps have been found [4,5]. Ground-state (or at

research goals and the thrill of the challenge drew a group

least triplet ground state) bi-alkalis have been produced

of about seventy researchers through the ultracold weather

by photoassociation [6,7,8,9]. The methods of photoas-

to talk about polar molecules. This volume is not a sum-

sociation and Feshbach-resonance linking can be termed

mary of that meeting (please see the Workshop’s web page

“indirect” as the molecules are formed from pre-cooled

for that, http://itamp.harvard.edu/polar/polar.html) but

atoms (see Section 2 of this Editorial). There are more

a series of peer-reviewed articles fostered by that meeting.

than twenty groups pursuing the indirect methods and

We hope that you will ﬁnd this collections of papers useful

some are turning their attention from homonuclear to po-

and inspiring.

lar molecules. The advantages and drawbacks of the indi-

rect methods are described in Section 2.

1.2 How to create cold polar molecules?

“Direct” methods are based on cooling preexisting molecules.

The discovery of methods for cooling, trapping, and ma-

By current count there are at least ﬁfteen groups pursu-

nipulating atoms has generated a revolution in atomic

ing either buﬀer-gas cooling [3,10,11,12,13], electric-ﬁeld

physics. In the past few years many researchers have cho-

pulsed beam slowing [14,15,16,17,18], light-ﬁeld slowing

sen to pursue the creation and study of ultracold po-

[19], laser cooling [1], counter-rotating-nozzle slowing [20],

Doyle, Friedrich, Krems, and Masnou: Quo vadis?

3

single collision scattering [21], or beam skimming with a

dous promise for reaching physics beyond the Standard

guide [22,23]. All of these direct methods start with rel-

Model. Producing larger numbers of colder molecules will

atively hot molecules, typically from a molecular beam

naturally lead to improvements in these eﬀorts. Beyond

source, and employ some combination of slowing, cooling

these anticipated phenomena, there awaits a terra incog-

and trapping as an initial step toward creation of ultra-

nita. What are the possibilities for chemistry at low tem-

cold polar molecular gases (see Section 3 of this Editorial).

perature? Will there be applications to clocks? Are there

The advantages of (many of) the direct approaches in-

new collisional phenomena? These are some of the ques-

clude wide applicability and large yield (CaH, OH, and

tions that are on the table. Just as we are now seeing

NH3 have been already trapped and a wide variety of

phenomena in the ultracold atom ﬁeld not dreamt about

molecules, including benzene, have been slowed). A dis-

twenty years ago when BEC research was launched, we ex-

advantage is that many of these methods generally do

pect that new and exciting molecular phenomena we can’t

not immediately yield the very low translational temper-

now imagine will emerge ten to twenty years hence.

atures, typically in the microkelvin range, which are at-

tainable with the indirect methods. It will be necessary

2 Making ultracold polar molecules from cold

to bridge the “temperature gap” between the initial load-

ing temperatures of the direct methods (1-1000 mK) and

atoms

the desirable ultracold regime < 1 mK. There are a wide

2.1 Photoassociation and radiative stabilization

variety of proposals on how to do this, including direct

evaporative cooling, sympathetic cooling with laser- or

evaporatively cooled atoms, or direct laser cooling. The

application of these techniques will generally require start-

ing with a large number of molecules. It will also require

learning a great deal of new physics.

Laser cooling techniques cannot be easily applied to molecules

[2,30], which are complex multi-level systems. One can

circumvent this diﬃculty by ﬁrst cooling the constituent

atoms, then making excited state molecules by photoasso-

ciation of atom pairs with laser light, following the scheme

proposed in 1987 by Thorsheim et al. [31] and discussed

The payoﬀ should be worth the eﬀort. Most promi-

in multiple reviews [32,33,34,35]. However, molecules thus

nently, the large electric dipole moments of polar molecules

obtained are short-lived and decay by spontaneous emis-

produce a strong interparticle interaction that can be ex-

sion, most often dissociating back into atoms. In order

ploited for quantum computing or as a source for direct

to produce stable molecules, population transfer from a

BCS pairing [24,25,26,27,28,29]. Also, precision spectroscopy

bound level v′ of the excited electronic state to bound lev-

of heavy dipolar molecules in searches for an elementary-

els v of the ground (or lower triplet) electronic state must

particle electric dipole moment (EDM) [16,17] holds tremen-

occur. This stabilization process involves either sponta-

4

Doyle, Friedrich, Krems, and Masnou: Quo vadis?

neous emission, or induced emission with a second laser.

for homonuclear molecules the potentials correlating with

The advantage of the photassociation method is that one

the ﬁrst excited asymptotic limit have a long range R−3

makes ultracold molecules at the same translational tem-

behaviour due to the resonant exchange interaction. Since

peratures as the precursor atoms (below 1 mK). A draw-

the photoassociation of ultracold atoms occurs at large

back is that the molecules are often formed in excited vi-

distances, the R−3 potentials, which support bound lev-

brational levels of the electronic ground state, so that they

els with larger extension, are more favourable. However,

are not vibrationally cold. Also, in many cases, the stable

the stabilization step is quite eﬃcient for hetereonuclear

molecules are formed in the lower triplet state rather than

dimers, due to the similar R−6 asymptotic behaviour of

the ground state and they can be captured due to their

both the ground and excited potential curves. This makes

low temperature either in a magnetic trap [33,34] or in a

bound-bound transitions more probable in heteronuclear

dipole trap at the focus of a CO2 laser beam [36].

molecules than in homonuclear dimers. KRb, RbCs and

The ﬁrst stable ultracold molecules that were formed,

KCs were predicted to be promising candidates [44]. Af-

detected by photoionization and time-of-ﬂight selection of

ter successful detection of a signature of stable molecules,

the molecular ions, were homonuclear alkali dimers [37,

molecular ion production [45,46], it took six years to make

38,39,40,41,42,43]. Several mechanisms were identiﬁed as

ultracold heteronuclear dimers with clear identiﬁcation of

the stabilization step, all associated with speciﬁc proper-

the production mechanisms. The following molecules were

ties of the potential curves in the excited electronic state.

The progress and development of new schemes appear to

ﬁrst formed and state-identiﬁed in 2004: RbCs by the Yale

group [47,48] and KRb by the UConn2 group [6] and by

be strongly dependent on accurate spectroscopic informa-

the Sao Paulo group [49]. Contributions from the ﬁrst two

tion about the molecules and on vigorous symbiosis be-

groups are presented in this issue, which contains more

tween theory and experiment (see the reviews [33,34] and

than ten papers on the subject of photoassociation.

references therein).

The UConn group’s paper by Wang et al. (pp xx-yy)

As for the formation of heteronuclear dimers, there is

an added complication of using a double MOT. This is-

sue is “merely” technical and has been solved by many

groups. Regarding the photoassociation itself, it was pre-

dicted [44] that the photoassociation step would be less

eﬃcient for heteronuclear dimers than for homonuclear

molecules. The heteronuclear molecular potentials in the

presents a detailed photoassociation spectroscopy of KRb,

formation of molecules in the ground triplet state a3Σ+,

and detection of stable molecules using a two-photon ion-

ization scheme. A wealth of information is thus available

on the molecular levels in the range of 95 cm−1 below the

K(4s) and Rb(5p1/2) asymptotic limit, elucidating the in-

teractions and perturbations between various vibrational

excited electronic state vary asymptotically as R−6, while

2 UConn is the University of Connecticut.

Doyle, Friedrich, Krems, and Masnou: Quo vadis?

5

series. Such a resonant structure was known to be im-

that populating the v = 0 and v = 1 levels is a realis-

portant for the eﬃciency of the stabilization step (reso-

tic goal, and that making translationally and rotationally

nant coupling mechanism [42]). The paper shows that it

cold molecules that are also in the ground vibronic state

can also be a loss path, through predissociation, since a

should be feasible.

photoassociated molecule could rapidly dissociate before

emitting a photon that would stabilize it. Information on

potential curves and transition moments can be obtained

from the spectra, yielding useful data to design new forma-

tion schemes. The stable KRb molecules can be trapped

in a magnetic ﬁeld, as expected for triplet state molecules,

which was already demonstrated for Cs2 [50] and Rb2 [51].

The same problem is addressed theoretically in the

paper by Kotochigova, Tiesinga, and Julienne (pp

xx-yy) for the KRb molecule. The potential curves and

transition dipole matrix elements are determined by ab

initio calculations. A wide range of transition moments

is thus available. The starting point is a pair of K(4s)

and Rb(5s) atoms, spin-polarized and therefore interact-

The paper of Bergeman, Kerman, Sage, Sainis,

ing within the a3Σ+ state. The photoassociation laser cre-

and DeMille (pp xx-yy) investigates the possibility of

ates a resonance with a level v′ in the excited state (2 0+).

transferring RbCs stable molecules from the lower triplet

The latter is such that the transition dipole moment to a

state a3Σ+ to the ground state X1Σ+. Stable molecules

vibrational level of the ground X 1Σ+ is also large. This

are created as in previous experiments [47,48]. We should

is due to the ﬁne structure coupling in the excited state,

note the large value of the densities (close to 1012 cm−3)

where the singlet and triplet states are mixed, so that ra-

for both species, the temperature of 75 µK, and the very

diative transitions to both ground and lower triplet states

large number of Cs atoms attained in these experiments.

are allowed. The authors note that this is not possible for

Stable molecules are formed in a bound level of the lower

homonuclear molecules, where the u − g symmetry would

triplet state and they are re-excited by a photon into a

forbid one of the transitions. Thus, it is a big advantage

bound level of an excited electronic state correlating with

of the heteronuclear systems. The authors propose a two-

the Rb (5s) + Cs (6p) asymptotic limit. From an analysis

color Raman photoassociation experiment in which the

of the bound-bound spectrum, data are extracted on the

ﬁrst photon is slightly detuned from a photoassociation

excited potential curves and on the coupling between var-

resonance, while the second photon drives the transition

ious channels. Using this information, the best schemes to

from the (2 0+) level to a vibrational level of the ground

transfer population from a bound level in an excited elec-

state: the numerical calculations show that the latter can

tronic state (or in a mixture of such excited states, due to

be rather low (v < 30) and propose optimal paths. Using

coupling) to a bound level of the ground X1Σ+ state are

the computed values for the permanent dipole moments

discussed. From the Franck-Condon factors, it is shown

in the ground state, the authors discuss the stability of

6

Doyle, Friedrich, Krems, and Masnou: Quo vadis?

heteronuclear molecules relative to thermal blackbody ra-

As for NaCs, detailed information, necessary to design

diation, which would cause cascading from one vibrational

new schemes, is now available from the extensive spectro-

level to another in the same electronic state. However, the

scopic work of Docenko, Tamanis, Ferber, Pashov,

lifetimes are found to be much longer than the typical

Kn¨ockel, and Tiemann (pp xx-yy), from Riga and Han-

duration of an experiment, in agreement with earlier cal-

nover. In the paper published here, the molecular spec-

culations [52].

troscopy experiment is described and a very accurate de-

Is it possible to go beyond the favorite molecules RbCs

and KRb? The theoretical paper by Azizi, Aymar, and

Dulieu (pp xx-yy) assesses photoassociation and cold molecule

formation rates, which are computed for all the heteronu-

clear dimers composed of either Rb or Cs atoms. As in

the previous paper, the rates are computed from numer-

ical vibrational wavefunctions and the integral over the

termination of the X1Σ potential curve is presented, by

ﬁtting an analytical function to the measured energies of

more than 2000 rovibrational levels. The long range coef-

ﬁcients such as C6 can thus be determined very precisely.

The spectrum provides information on the shallow a3Σ+

potential and the authors estimate the scattering lengths

for both potentials.

dipole transition moment rather than estimates of the

Another candidate appears to be the LiH molecule,

probability for vertical transitions. The results are com-

as discussed in the paper of Taylor-Juarros, Cˆot´e, and

pared to the homonuclear Cs2 rates, using a rescaling fac-

Kirby (pp xx-yy). The dipole moment of the alkali hy-

tor for the diﬀerences in reduced mass and atomic Rabi

dride molecules can be larger than that of heteronuclear

frequency. It is shown that the photoassociation rates are

alkali dimers. As in the two theoretical papers described

reduced by a factor ≈ 30 for a pair of identical atoms

above, the authors compute the photoassociation rates

compared to a pair of diﬀerent atoms. However, since for

from a continuum level to a bound level v′ of the A1Σ+

heteronuclear dimer molecules the excited potential curves

excited state, followed by stimulated emission rates to a

have the same R−6 asymptotic behavior as the ground or

bound level v of the ground X1Σ+ state, looking for the

lower triplet curves, the radiative decay to bound levels

best v, v′ combination for a stimulated Raman photoasso-

is faster than in homonuclear molecules, making the sta-

ciation experiment. Important formation rates are found

ble molecule formation rates only one order of magnitude

for stable molecules. An advantage of the alkali hydrides

smaller than for Cs2. Another conclusion is that the lighter

is that due to the large dipole moment in the X1Σ+ state

species (LiRb, NaRb, LiCs, NaCs) should be much better

(typically one order of magnitude larger than in the KRb

candidates than previously thought, therefore encouraging

molecule discussed above) the stable molecules formed in

experiments in that direction.

an excited v level decay by spontaneous emission to the

Doyle, Friedrich, Krems, and Masnou: Quo vadis?

7

ground vibrational level v = 0 with relatively short life-

of long range wells constrains the relative motion to very

times.

large interatomic separation, with the inner turning point

The Raman scheme is also discussed by Stwalley (pp

around 150 a0 (while the outer turning point can be as far

xx-yy) with the aim of converting molecules formed by

as 1100 a0). Penning ionization is therefore inhibited, as

Feshbach resonances into ground state molecules. The ini-

photoionization was inhibited in Ref. [53]. The novelty of

tial state is considered to be a loosely bound level of 3Σ+

the experiment is in the calorimetric detection of the pho-

symmetry rather than the continuum, corresponding to re-

toassociation resonance: when the laser frequency is tuned

cent experiments in condensates with magnetically tuned

to a molecular transition, creating a bound photoassoci-

Feshbach resonances. It could also be populated by pho-

ated molecule, the latter decays by spontaneous emission,

toassociation followed by spontaneous emission. Besides

yielding a pair of atoms that heat the cloud of metastable

KRb, the molecules discussed from a general perspective

atoms. This increase of temperature can be detected by

are LiNa, NaK, NaRb, and RbCs. The region of the spec-

optical methods. Very accurate photoassociation spectra

trum where detailed studies should be performed is indi-

are thus produced, with line widths of a few MHz. Excel-

cated.

lent agreement is obtained between the observed spectrum

Up to now, photoassociation has been used to popu-

and calculations based on long-range potentials. Future

late bound levels in the electronic states correlating with

work will explore the magnitude of the scattering length

the ﬁrst excited atomic limit. It was often suggested that

by accurate photoassociation spectroscopy.

highly excited molecules at intermediate and long range

All the papers described so far have treated the laser

were also good candidates [53,54,55]. Alternatively, the

coupling in the photoassociation reaction in a perturba-

initial state can also be a continuum state of an excited

tive way. In fact, laser light can also be used to manipulate

potential curve: a very interesting experiment was recently

molecules, control the photoassociation reaction or tune

performed by the ENS3 group in Paris [56]. Starting from

the scattering length. The concept of an optically induced

spin-polarized metastable helium (4He) atoms at very low

Feshbach resonance is very useful for understanding such

temperatures (2 to 30 µK), bound levels of electronic states

physical processes. We will discuss optically induced Fes-

correlating with the 23S1 + 23P0 asymptotic limit are pop-

hbach resonances in this section and magnetically induced

ulated by photoassociation. Details are presented here by

Feshbach resonances in Sec. 2.1.

Kim, Rapol, Moal, L´eonard, Walhout, and Leduc

(pp xx-yy). Such molecules should decay by Penning ion-

ization, but for some symmetries (0+

u , 1u) the existence

The theoretical paper by the Orsay group of Luc-

Koenig, Vatasescu, and Masnou-Seeuws (pp xx-yy)

discusses the possibility of replacing cw lasers by a series

3 ENS is Ecole Normale Superieure.

of chirped laser pulses which optimize both the photoas-

8

Doyle, Friedrich, Krems, and Masnou: Quo vadis?

sociation rate and the formation of stable molecules in

times, shorter than collisional relaxation or characteristic

low vibrational levels. A time-dependent non-perturbative

dissociation times [58].

treatment of the photoassociation reaction in a cold ce-

Manipulating the scattering length with a photoasso-

sium sample has been proposed earlier in 2004 [57]. In the

ciation laser has been proposed in several theoretical pa-

present paper the authors discuss the choice of the pa-

pers [59,60,61], and achieved in the experiments of Refs.

rameters of the chirped pulses (intensity, duration, linear

[62,63]. The paper by Koelemeij and Leduc analyzes

chirp rate). The variation of the laser frequency allows one

the possibility of using photoassociation to determine the

to sweep through several optical Feshbach resonances, de-

scattering length of metastable helium (through accurate

termining a photoassociation window within which com-

measurement of the binding energy of the last bound level

plete adiabatic population transfer from the ground elec-

of the ground state) and to manipulate it in order to con-

tronic state to bound levels of the excited state is taking

trol the dynamics of metastable helium condensates.

place. A large number of vibrational levels can be pop-

ulated coherently, so that with a reasonable repetition

rate of the laser pulses, the number of molecules formed

per unit time is expected to be much larger than with

a cw laser of equivalent power. Besides, due to scaling

laws on the vibrational periods of long-range molecules,

revival phenomena can occur for the vibrational motion

in the excited state. It is therefore possible to compute

the linear chirp parameter in order to create, within the

excited state, a wavepacket focused at the inner turning

point of a long range well. This wavepacket has a large

Franck-Condon overlap with low vibrational levels of the

ground state, so that a second laser pulse could create

vibrationally cold stable molecules. The method is sim-

ilar to the Raman scheme discussed in many papers of

this issue but uses pulsed lasers. The advantage of short

pulses is that molecules in highly excited vibrational lev-

els can be transferred to the ground level in very short

A generalized theory of photoassociation in quantum

degenerate gases is presented in this issue by Mackie,

Dannenberg, Piilo, Suominen, and Javanainen (pp

xx-yy). In particular, the authors discuss photoassociation

(together with magnetic Feshbach resonances, see below

Section 2.2) in mixed Fermi-Bose gases. They report a

numerical observation of large-amplitude atom-molecule

oscillations similar to those occurring in pure Bose gases.

The authors also discuss the prospects for fermion atom -

fermion molecule pairing and explore the transition from

triatomic molecules to correlated atom-molecule pairs.

We have already mentioned that photoassociation leads

to long-range molecules. The vibrational motion of long-

range molecules is determined by long-range interatomic

forces which can be eﬀectively described by theoretical

models such as generalized quantum defect theory. The

cold molecule research ﬁeld is therefore linked to the ﬁeld

of Rydberg atoms, and many concepts are similar (we

have mentioned earlier scaling laws and revival phenom-

Doyle, Friedrich, Krems, and Masnou: Quo vadis?

9

ena) with diﬀerences arising from the R−n, n = 3, 6, rather

atoms is required. Fortunately, technology has advanced

than R−1 asymptotic behaviour. This very fertile topic is

enough so that ultracold alkali metal atom gases are now

represented here by the paper of Gao (pp xx-yy), which

routinely produced by more than 30 groups worldwide.

reports systematics of rotational energy levels of diatomic

molecules in the vicinity of a dissociation threshold. A

new classiﬁcation scheme of long-range states of diatomic

molecules is proposed. The study should be helpful for the

analysis and identiﬁcation of molecular spectra required

for the photoassociation experiments, and for discussion

of the determination of the scattering length from spec-

troscopy of the last vibrational levels (see the two papers

on metastable helium quoted above, Ref. [32] and refer-

ences therein).

Another aspect of the theoretical developments in the

cold-molecule ﬁeld, where the relative motion of two atoms

has to be accurately described from a distance of around

one to thousands of atomic units, is the implementation of

numerical grid methods to represent the continuum wave

function in the ground state and the vibrational wavefunc-

tion in the excited state, with grid steps adapted to the

local de Broglie wavelength: such methods are routinely

used in at least six papers in this volume.

2.2 Making cold molecules from cold atoms via

magnetic Feshbach Resonances

In order to stitch ultracold atoms together and cre-

ate molecules, a Feshbach resonance can be used. The

reader is directed to other publications ([29] and references

therein) for a more detailed picture. In brief, in the ultra-

cold regime the collision of two atoms is described by the

scattering length. This scattering length is very sensitive

to the potential of the interacting atomic pair (molecular

potential). If the atoms or the molecule or both are para-

magnetic, the potential can be tuned by an external mag-

netic ﬁeld. A Feshbach resonance occurs when the energy

of the unbound state (the atomic pair) and of the bound

state (the diatomic molecule) become equal. The scatter-

ing length changes at a Feshbach resonance. It can be

made positive (corresponding to a repulsive interaction)

or negative (attractive interaction) and its magnitude ar-

bitrarily large (within the limits of unitarity). By tuning

through the resonance the atom pair can be driven into the

bound molecular state. The binding energy of the molecule

is tiny, typically in the mK range. Molecules created from

bosonic atoms are quickly destroyed by collisions, while

molecules produced from fermionic atoms may exist for a

long time [68,69,70]. It is believed that it might be pos-

The possibility of creating ultracold molecular Bose-Einstein

sible to transfer them to more tightly bound states using,

condensates via resonant collisions [64,65,66,67,68,69,70,

for example, pulsed Raman laser ﬁelds [58] (see also the

71,72,73,74,75,76] became a reality in 2003 [77,78,79,80].

discussion in Sec. 2.1). At the workshop, this approach to

The idea is simple but its realization is not, as a very dense

producing heteronuclear molecules was discussed but no

gas of quantum-degenerate (or near-degenerate) precursor

experimental results were then available. Now there are

10

Doyle, Friedrich, Krems, and Masnou: Quo vadis?

at least two groups that have found Feshbach resonances

of molecules that can be brought into the buﬀer gas [3].

in heteronuclear systems [4,5]. This greatly raised the ex-

The techniques that have been applied so far, laser abla-

pectation that polar molecules will be produced in this

tion [82] and capillary ﬁlling [83], suﬀer from serious draw-

way.

backs. Capillary ﬁlling is suitable only for stable molecules

The rich resonant structure of molecular spectra ob-

that remain gaseous at low temperatures. Laser ablation

served in ultracold collision experiments cannot be ex-

oﬀers more versatility (including in situ production of un-

plained without a rigorous theoretical analysis. Bhattacharya,

stable species), but the yield and variety of molecules pro-

Baksmaty, Weiss, and Bigelow (pp xx-yy) present an

duced from a solid precursor and, indeed, the precursor’s

article in this issue with a clear discussion of methods

very chemical identity are hard to predict.

for calculating Feshbach resonances in heteronuclear al-

kali dimers. The presentation is both simple enough to be

understood by a general reader and comprehensive enough

to be of interest to an experimentalist.

The paper by Egorov, Campbell, Friedrich, Maxwell,

Tsikata, van Buuren, and Doyle (pp. xx-yy) describes

a new technique of injecting molecules into the buﬀer gas,

one which oﬀers signiﬁcant advantages over the existing

techniques. The reported technique makes use of a molec-

3 Methods for cooling, slowing, and trapping

ular beam made up of the species of interest and employs

polar molecules

the beam to deliver this species into the cryogenic cell. The

work demonstrates that a subtle balance can be struck

(a) Buﬀer-gas cooling is a versatile technique which pro-

between the molecular beam ﬂux into the cell and the

vides the means to cool any molecules (or atoms) to tem-

ﬂux of the He buﬀer gas out of the cell such that the in-

peratures of a few hundred millikelvin. This temperature

jection and thermalization occur on time scales shorter

is determined by the equilibrium vapor pressure of the

than the diﬀusion loss time. The beam-loaded buﬀer gas

He buﬀer gas that is used to thermalize the molecules via

cooling technique is demonstrated with a pulsed beam

elastic collisions. The technique, pioneered by the Doyle

of NH radicals produced from NH3 in a glow discharge.

group in 1997 [81], has been used in a number of studies

The maximum number of ground-state (i.e., thermalized)

since to cool paramagnetic atoms or molecules and to load

NH(3Σ−,v= 0, N = 0) molecules loaded into the cell of

them into a magnetic trap [82]. A recalcitrant problem has

volume of 150 cm3 was measured to be 1012. The radicals

been the introduction of the molecules to be cooled into

were detected via laser-induced ﬂuorescence. In addition,

the cryogenic buﬀer gas. Solving this problem has been of

the authors make the point that the molecular beam can

primary importance, since the number of molecules that

be rid of unwanted species by applying standard electro-

can be cooled and trapped is limited mainly by the number

static or magnetic ﬁlters.

Doyle, Friedrich, Krems, and Masnou: Quo vadis?

11

(b) Stark acceleration or deceleration provides the means

able ﬁeld arrays [95]. This is used as a basis for developing

to alter the velocity of polar molecules at will and to simul-

a quasi-analytic model of a Stark accelerator/decelerator.

taneously select the molecules’ internal states. Although

This model depends on just a small number of parameters;

conceived almost half a century ago, the technique was im-

the lowest-order version (referred to as the ﬁrst-harmonic

plemented only recently, in 1999, by the group of Meijer

accelerator/decelerator model) depends on a single Fourier

[84]. The technique relies on time-dependent inhomoge-

coeﬃcient, one which accounts for the spatial dependence

neous ﬁelds generated by an array of ﬁeld stages, to repet-

of the inhomogeneous electric ﬁeld. Yet, the simplest ver-

itively alter the Stark potential energy of the molecules

sion of the model is shown to explain the key features of

and, by energy conservation, also their kinetic energy. In

the accelerator/decelerator (such as phase stability and

a Stark decelerator, the potential energy is increased at

longitudinal acceptance), and to capture the dynamics of

each decelerator stage and thus the kinetic energy is cor-

the acceleration/deceleration process semi-quantitatively.

respondingly reduced (and vice versa in an accelerator). In

An extensive discussion of the dynamics exploits the iso-

order to accelerate/decelerate a bunch of molecules with

morphism of the ﬁrst-harmonic accelerator/decelerator with

a ﬁnite distribution of positions and velocities, the ac-

a biased pendulum. Also, the general properties of the ve-

celeration/deceleration process must take place under the

locity of molecules in a phase-stable accelerator/decelerator

condition of phase stability, much appreciated in charged-

are examined, and found to reveal a similarity between a

particle accelerator physics [85,86]. Stark deceleration was

Stark accelerator/decelerator and a ﬂying accordion.

ﬁrst demonstrated with an array of 63 pulsed electric ﬁeld

stages. This was shown to decelerate metastable CO molecules

from 225 m/s to 98 m/s [84].

The paper by van Veldhoven, K¨upper, Bethlem,

Sartakov, van Roij, and Meijer (pp. xx-yy), demon-

strates the beneﬁts of using slow molecules in microwave-

Since 1999, the Stark decelerator underwent many re-

UV double-resonance spectroscopy. The resolution of the

ﬁnements and was combined with other devices [87], most

inversion tunneling spectrum of 15ND3 is shown to be

notably a trap [88], a buncher, and a storage ring [89] (see

boosted by Stark-decelerating the molecules to a velocity

below). Also other laboratories have since implemented

of 52 m/s. The transit-time broadening is thereby reduced

Stark deceleration [17,90,91,92,93,94].

by a factor of 10 compared with undecelerated molecules

Friedrich’s paper (pp. xx-yy) provides a rigorous de-

moving at 280 m/s. This results in a fully resolved hy-

scription of the dynamics of molecules in a Stark acceler-

perﬁne spectrum with a 1 kHz linewidth (the spectrum

ator/decelerator. The paper opens with a Fourier analysis

was taken for the J = 1, K = 1 state over 1.43 GHz).

of the time-dependent inhomogeneous Stark ﬁeld, of the

A simulation of the measured spectrum, based on a gen-

kind generated in current experiments by linear switch-

eralized tensor coupling scheme, is also described. As the

12

Doyle, Friedrich, Krems, and Masnou: Quo vadis?

authors point out, the inversion frequency in ammonia de-

since the ring radius scales with the square of the velocity,

pends sensitively on the electron/proton mass ratio, and

table-top storage rings require samples of molecules slowed

could be used to monitor the ratio’s possible time depen-

down to velocities on the order of 10 m/s. A prototype

dence. In order for the techniques to become competitive

storage ring for low-ﬁeld seeking states of polar molecules

[96], the present accuracy needs to be further improved,

was implemented by Crompvoets et al. [89] and used to

by a factor of 106. This should become possible once an

store about 106 ND3 molecules for up to 430 ms corre-

ammonia molecular fountain is implemented, allowing for

sponding to 50 round trips (the storage time was limited

an interaction time of as much as a second. We note that

by background gas scattering). The storage ring of a 25

deuterated ammonia molecules, due to their small inver-

cm diameter was made up of a hexapole lens bent onto it-

sion splitting, exhibit a ﬁrst-order Stark eﬀect at ‘all’ ﬁeld

self. Before loading, the molecules were Stark-decelerated

strengths (including the low ones). This makes them a

to a velocity of 92 m/s. In addition, a buncher was imple-

favorite choice for studies on molecular manipulation.

mented, to narrow the longitudinal velocity spread of the

The paper by Hudson, Bochinski, Lewandowski,

decelerated molecules to about 300 µK.

Sawyer, and Ye (pp. xx-yy) analyzes the experimental

Nishimura, Lambertson, Kalnins, and Gould (pp.

conditions needed for an eﬃcient Stark deceleration of

xx-yy) propose a storage ring for high-ﬁeld seekers. The

a beam of OH radicals. Calculations are presented that

authors envision a storage ring 3 m in diameter, consist-

show the fraction of molecules decelerated, given a cer-

ing of eight octants. Each octant contains a buncher and a

tain emittance of the molecular beam and acceptance of

pair of alternating-gradient focusing triplet lenses. In or-

the decelerator. The calculated fraction is compared with

der to obtain net focusing in both transverse directions,

experimental data, and a good agreement is found. The

the lenses are arranged in a sequence with gradients alter-

fraction decreases with the decreasing goal velocity and

nating in sign (the so called alternating-gradient focusing

drops to about 0.1% for a goal velocity of about 30 m/s,

[97]). Simulations indicate that such a ring would store,

for molecules moving initially at 370 m/s, and originating

e.g., ground-state CH3F molecules with a longitudinal ki-

from a hot beam (whose mean velocity and velocity width

netic energy of 2 K for several minutes. The molecules

are, respectively, 415 m/s and 90 m/s). The paper makes

would be produced in a pulsed supersonic expansion and

the point that the fraction of molecules decelerated could

Stark decelerated before injection into the ring. For a

be substantially increased if a cold source were used.

peak beam intensity of 1019 sr−1 s−1 and a nearly per-

(c) A storage ring oﬀers an alternative to trapping.

fect phase-space matching between the beam, decelerator

Unlike a trap, a storage ring can accommodate molecules

and ring, each bunch in the ring would consist of about

whose longitudinal velocities are not all that low. However,

108 molecules and would have a density on the order of

Doyle, Friedrich, Krems, and Masnou: Quo vadis?

13

109 cm−3 in the straight sections throughout the storage

This of course precludes cooling of the internal degrees

time. Such a high density may foster evaporative cool-

of freedom of the molecules. Although the Stark eﬀect is

ing. Apart from storing singular bunches, the ring may be

somewhat greater for low rotational states, these are not

able to hold up to 200 bunches simultaneously. This would

selected eﬃciently. As a result, the internal temperature of

provide a large ﬂux desirable, for instance, for collisional

the translationally cold molecules picked up by the Stark

or spectroscopic experiments. These could be carried out

ﬁeld remains close to that of the source.

without ﬁeld perturbations, in the ﬁeld-free regions of the

(e) The Earnshaw theorem precludes trapping of atoms

storage ring.

or molecules via their high-ﬁeld seeking states in static

(d) The paper by Junglen, Rieger, Rangwala, Pinkse,

electric or magnetic ﬁelds [97]. Since ground states of atoms

and Rempe (pp. xx-yy) describes an electrostatic guide

and molecules are always high-ﬁeld seeking, there has been

for slow polar molecules in low-ﬁeld seeking states, which

a considerable eﬀort to ﬁnd ways of circumventing Earn-

shares some of its key features with the storage ring of

shaw’s curse, by devising traps for high-ﬁeld seekers made

Crompvoets et al. [89]. A guide for molecules may ﬁnd

up of time-dependent electromagnetic ﬁelds. These com-

use in molecular interferometry and in the study of slow

prise switched static ﬁelds [98] (ac traps) or radiative ﬁelds,

collisions.

both resonant (MOT’s) and nonresonant (optical dipole

The technique selects the low-velocity tail of a Maxwell-

traps) [78,99]. A common drawback of these traps is their

Boltzmann velocity distribution present in a thermal eﬀu-

small volume and depth; these signiﬁcantly limit the abil-

sive molecular beam. Transverse velocity selection is achieved

ity to apply evaporative cooling which could otherwise

by injecting the molecular beam into a quadrupole elec-

be used to drive the trapped molecules into the ultracold

trostatic ﬁeld generated by rod electrodes aligned along

regime (≤ 1 mK).

the beam axis. By bending the rod electrodes, also lon-

DeMille, Glenn, and Petricka (pp. xx-yy) propose

gitudinal velocity ﬁltering is achieved. The technique was

a deep, large-volume microwave trap for high-ﬁeld seek-

demonstrated with ND3 molecules. A ﬂux of 1010 transla-

ing states of cold/slow polar molecules. A maximum of

tionally cold ND3 molecules per second could be achieved.

free-space electric ﬁeld strength is produced in a confocal

The longitudinal temperature of the molecules was mea-

cavity, pumped by 2 kW of resonantly coupled microwave

sured, via time-of-ﬂight mass spectrometry, to be about

power. Field strengths on the order of 10 kV/cm in the

4 K. The eﬃciency of the technique beneﬁts from cooling

TEM00 mode spread over a volume of 1 cm3 seem fea-

the beam source. However, the eﬀusive ﬂow regime needs

sible. The trapping is based on a near-resonant electric-

to be maintained, in order for the hydrodynamic veloc-

dipole interaction of the microwave ﬁeld with the rota-

ity to remain negligible and the low-velocity tail in place.

tional ground state of a polar molecule. The interaction

14

Doyle, Friedrich, Krems, and Masnou: Quo vadis?

couples the ground state to higher rotational states and

crowave trap. Among these, the possibility of loading mul-

modiﬁes its eigenenergy. For a red detuning of the mi-

tiple pulses of molecules in a low-ﬁeld seeking state and

crowave ﬁeld, the interaction is attractive and so the eigenen-

pumping them into the trappable ground state seems par-

ergy drops with respect to the ﬁeld-free value. For a linear

ticularly appealing (a similar scheme has been proposed

polarization of the microwave ﬁeld, multiphoton transi-

earlier by van der Meerakker et al. [100]). Another cooling

tions complicate the resulting energy-level pattern. How-

scheme envisioned is evaporative cooling driven by elastic

ever, for a circular polarization (and red detuning), mul-

collisions. The elastic collision cross sections are shown to

tiphoton transitions can no longer occur, and the energy

be dramatically enhanced by the alignment of the molec-

level pattern greatly simpliﬁes. In particular, the ground-

ular dipoles by the trapping ﬁeld and the ensuing strong

state level becomes free of avoided crossings with other

dipolar interaction. Elastic cross sections for collisions be-

levels and its dependence on the strength of the microwave

tween ground state SrO molecules are estimated to come

ﬁeld becomes similar to that of a ground state polar molecule

close to 107 ˚A2. This would suﬃce for a thermalization of

in a DC ﬁeld. Thus, the ground-state eigenenergy of a

the trapped molecules at number densities as low as 108

polar molecule in a red-detuned circularly polarized mi-

cm−3.

crowave ﬁeld can be used for stable trapping. Because

of the long radiative lifetimes of the excited rotational

states, the red detuning can be minimized, without the

danger of heating the trapped molecules by photon scat-

tering (which bedevils trapping at optical frequencies).

This maximizes the drop of the eigenenergy with ﬁeld

strength and thus the trap depth. Indeed, according to

the dressed-state analysis presented in the paper, the trap

depth for the molecular ground state scales roughly as

1
2 µε0, where µ is the body-ﬁxed electric dipole moment

of the molecule and ε0 the eﬀective ﬁeld strength at the

center of the trap. Hence for µ ≈ 1 Debye and ε0 ≈ 10

kV/cm, the expected trap depth is on the order of 100

mK.

(f) Single-collision slowing in crossed molecular beams.

The paper by Elioﬀ, Valentini, and Chandler (pp. xx-

yy) describes an experiment that demonstrates a rather

general technique of producing slow molecules, by billiard-

like collisions in crossed molecular beams. Signiﬁcant num-

bers of slow NO molecules (≈ 15 m/s, corresponding to

a translational temperature of about 0.5 K) in a single

internal state (2∆1/2, v= 0, J = 15/2) are generated by

scattering of a pulsed molecular beam of NO by a beam

of Ar. The number of slow molecules produced (≈ 105 per

pulse) corresponds to a fraction of about 10−5 of the over-

all number of molecules that are colliding during a beam

pulse. The technique relies on the cancellation of the lab-

oratory velocity of the scattered molecules. This occurs

The paper by DeMille et al. also discusses various op-

when the laboratory velocity of the center of mass of the

tions of accumulating and cooling the molecules in the mi-

colliding partners (NO + Ar) becomes equal in magni-

Doyle, Friedrich, Krems, and Masnou: Quo vadis?

15

tude but opposite in direction to the center-of-mass re-

magnetic, whether they can be trapped in a magneto-

coil velocity of the scattered molecule (NO). The velocity

optical trap (MOT). The paper identiﬁes the criteria that

spread of the molecules that satisfy this cancellation con-

molecules must meet in order to be amenable to Doppler

dition depends on the velocity spread of the NO beam.

cooling and provides a list of such molecules. The crite-

For the scattering of partners with the same mass, the

ria include a strong vibronic transition, with a near-unit

condition is fulﬁlled for elastic collisions, in which case,

Franck-Condon factor, and no intervening electronic tran-

interestingly, the energy spread of the slow molecules is

sitions that could divert photons from a closed cooling

found to decrease to zero. The technique has been demon-

absorption/emission cycle. Out of a list of ten diatomic

strated using a state-of-the-art detection scheme based on

molecular candidates (six of which are paramagnetic), Di

state-speciﬁc REMPI ionization and micro-channel plate

Rosa chose CaH(A2Π1/2-X2Σ+) as a representative ex-

imaging of the NO+ ions produced.

ample.

(g) A class of atoms, best represented by the alkalis,

The number of absorption/emission cycles needed to

can be eﬃciently cooled by repetitive absorption of pho-

decelerate a molecule of mass m from an initial veloc-

tons that counter-propagate with respect to the atoms

ity v to a standstill with radiation of wavelength λ is

(Doppler cooling). Since, in the visible range, the mo-

N = mvλ/h, which comes close to 4500 for CaH(A,v′ = 0-

mentum transferred by a single photon is small, typically

X,v′′ = 0) moving initially at v≈ 100 m/s. For a cy-

thousands of such photons need to be absorbed before a

cling transition with a Franck-Condon factor of 0.9995, the

thermal alkali atom can be brought to a halt. In order for

probability, p, of spontaneous emission to levels outside of

the absorption to be repetitive, the re-emission of the ab-

the absorption/emission cycle is then p = 0.0005. Hence

sorbed photon must send the atom into the same initial

the probability that a molecule will remain in the absorp-

state where it started. Hence we speak of a closed absorp-

tion/emission cycle is (1 − p)N ≈ 0.1 and so about 10% of

tion/emission cycle. Finding molecules with a closed ab-

the molecules will be cooled. Although a Franck-Condon

sorption/emission cycle is diﬃcult, if not impossible. As a

factor of about 0.9995 is quite rare, in some molecules,

way out, Bahns et al. have proposed a sequential scheme

such as CaH(A-X), the Franck-Condon factors for two

which uses an array of stimulated Raman sidebands to

neighboring levels, v′ = 0, 1 → v′′ = 0, add up to a value

repump molecules that have fallen out from the cooling

close to 0.9995. This would then require a single repump-

cycle [2].

ing laser, to drive the v′ = 1 → v′′ = 0 transition.

Di Rosa’s paper (pp. xx-yy) examines whether a cer-

The experimental work reported by Di Rosa is a ﬁrst

tain class of molecules can be laser-cooled without ex-

step towards a CaH MOT. It examines experimentally a

tensive repumping and, provided the molecules are para-

laser-cooling cycle for CaH, in particular the underlying

16

Doyle, Friedrich, Krems, and Masnou: Quo vadis?

hyperﬁne structure of the A-X band. He estimates that the

atures (5-25 K). The nanodroplets cool down by evapo-

lifetime in a CaH MOT will be about 1 ms. At a thermal

ration to a temperature of 380 mK or 150 mK if 4He or

loading rate of the CaH vapor, the MOT could hold about

3He are used, respectively; the uniform temperature of

105 molecules.

the nanodroplets is determined essentially by their sur-

(h) The work of Bertelsen, Vogelius, Jorgensen,

face tension. The resulting size distribution is log-normal,

Kosloﬀ, and Drewsen (pp. xx-yy) takes advantage of the

peaking typically at thousands of He atoms.

low temperatures (≈ 10 mK) available in Coulomb crys-

The nanodroplets can be doped by atoms or molecules,

tals to control the photodissociation dynamics of MgH+

by passing the nanodroplets beam through a vapor pick-up

ions embedded in the crystal. The molecular ions are sym-

cell. The atoms or molecules quickly thermalize, in all their

pathetically cooled into the crystal by laser-cooled atomic

degrees of freedom, with the cold He nano-environment.

ions. The authors foresee that the cold crystal environ-

They can recombine with other dopant atoms or molecules,

ment along with the tight spatial localization (≈ 1 µm)

if these are picked up by the same nanodroplet (the pick-

will make it possible to control the branching ratio be-

up statistics is Poissonian); the binding energy is released

tween the Mg+(3p)+H and Mg(3s2)+H+ dissociation chan-

into the He nano-bath. The ensuing species can then be

nels, by radiative coupling of MgH+(A) to its B and C

sensitively probed via high-resolution spectroscopy. Atoms

electronic states. This will be eﬀected by two indepen-

in He nanodroplets can thus form dimers (or larger oligomers).

dent laser ﬁelds. The paper presents calculations which

indicate that the branching ratio could be varied at will,

either by varying the intensity of the lasers involved or the

frequency of one of the lasers.

The formation of cold heteronuclear alkali dimers NaK

in helium droplets was previously observed by Higgins et

al. [107,108]. In the present issue, the experimental pa-

per by Mudrich, B¨unerman, Stienkemeier, Dulieu

(i) Another technique for producing cold molecules re-

and Weidem¨uller (pp xx-yy) reports the observation of

lies on thermalization in the cryogenic environment pro-

the eﬃcient formation of LiCs and NaCs in helium nan-

vided by helium nanodroplets. This technique, pioneered

odroplets. The molecules are excited by a laser and then

in 1992 [101], has been implemented by several groups and

photo-ionized. The paper reports the excitation spectra

used to improve the resolution of molecular spectroscopy

recorded from mass selective photo-ionization. The po-

[102,103], study nanoscopic superﬂuidity [104,105] and to

tential curves correlating with the Li(2s) + Cs(5d) and

foster self-assembly of non-equilibrium structures [106], to

Na(3s) + Cs(5d) asymptotic limits are obtained based on

name just a few.

the measurement and compared with theoretical results

He nanodroplets are produced by a supersonic expan-

from ab initio calculations with perturbative treatment

sion of He at high pressures (5-45 bar) and low temper-

of the ﬁne structure. The discussion shows the need for a

17

(2)

Doyle, Friedrich, Krems, and Masnou: Quo vadis?

global frequency shift of the computed potentials. We note

that little was known about the spectroscopy of LiCs and

βn = knσin

n /4π,

NaCs in the triplet state before this study was undertaken.

where σin

n = Pn′6=n σn→n′ , kn = µvn/¯h, vn is the collision

The authors point to the intriguing possibility of decel-

velocity and µ is the reduced mass of the collision system.

erating and trapping nanodroplets - along with the dopant

Eq. (2) can be used to evaluate the zero temperature rate

molecules. This, they envision, could be achieved by ﬁrst

coeﬃcient for inelastic energy transfer or chemical reaction

ionizing the nanodroplets (by electron impact or capture)

and then applying a stopping potential. The cold and slow

Rn(T = 0 K) = 4πβn¯h/µ,

(3)

molecules could then be photo-desorbed and conﬁned in

an electrostatic trap. The ﬂux of the molecule-doped He

nanodroplets is estimated to be about 1010 s−1.

Because σin

n ∼ 1/kn according to the Wigner law, βn is

constant in the limit kn → 0 and the rate coeﬃcient (3)

is ﬁnite at zero temperature.

The elastic cross section is given by

4 Theory of cold collisions involving molecules

σn→n = 4π(α2

n + β2

n).

(4)

The production of ultracold molecules has led chemists to

The positions and lifetimes of the bound levels of the

ask the questions: What is the eﬃciency of chemical reac-

collision complex lying just below dissociation threshold

tions and inelastic energy transfer in molecular collisions

can be estimated from the real and imaginary parts of the

at low temperatures? Are chemical reactions possible at

scattering length as follows [110]:

temperatures near absolute zero?

Based on the analysis of Landau and Lifshitz [109],

Balakrishnan, Kharchenko, Forrey and Dalgarno showed

that elastic and inelastic molecular scattering can be char-

acterized in the limit of ultralow collision velocity by a

complex scattering length [110]

E = −

(cos 2γn + i sin 2γn) = En − iΓn/2,

(5)

¯h2
2µ|an|

where γn = arctan (βn/αn). The energy E is real for single

channel scattering because βn = 0 and γn = 0. When

there is more than one open channel, the bound levels can

decay through transitions into lower levels with a lifetime

an = αn − iβn.

(1)

τn = ¯h/Γn = µ|an|4/(2¯hαnβn)

(6)

The imaginary part of the scattering length βn is directly

that can be rewritten in terms of the zero energy elastic

proportional to the total cross section for inelastic scat-

cross section and zero temperature rate coeﬃcient (3) as

tering in the state n

follows:

18

Doyle, Friedrich, Krems, and Masnou: Quo vadis?

≥ 10−4 K in molecular systems. More recent calculations

τn =

σn→n(kn → 0)|an|2
2Rn(T = 0)αn

(7)

demonstrate that often this is not so.

The studies of the He + H2 and other collision sys-

Forrey et al. [111] showed that the expression (7) can be

tems [116,117,118,119,120,121,122,123,124,125,126,127,

used to estimate the positions and lifetimes of Feshbach

128] showed that zero temperature rate coeﬃcients for

resonances occurring in the incident channel in s-wave col-

vibrational, rotational and electronic energy transfer in

lisions. The derivation of Eq. (7) is based on multichan-

atom - atom and atom - molecule collisions may have

nel eﬀective-range theory and it can be applied only to

substantial magnitudes. It was demonstrated by several

the states that lie close to thresholds. More details on

authors that the attractive part of the interaction poten-

threshold phenomena in atom-atom, atom-molecule and

tial in the entrance collision channel is critical for the dy-

electron-atom collisions can be found in a comprehensive

namics of ultracold scattering. Dashevskaya and Nikitin

review by Sadeghpour et al. [112], the review by Krems

presented a simple explanation of this phenomenon us-

[113] and the paper of Mies and Raoult [114].

ing a generalized Landau-Lifshitz treatment of a collision

The Wigner law establishes that rate coeﬃcients for

problem [129].

inelastic collisions and chemical reactions at zero tem-

The stability of rotationally hot molecules in a cold

perature are ﬁnite. The magnitudes of the zero temper-

buﬀer gas has been explored in rigorous calculations of

ature rates for inelastic scattering of atoms and molecules

atom - molecule collisions at ultracold temperatures pre-

were, however, not known until recently. The ﬁrst calcula-

sented in this issue (Forrey pp. xx-yy). Interesting im-

tions of rate constants for vibrational relaxation in atom -

plications for observation of ultracold super-rotors and

molecule collisions at ultralow temperatures were carried

quasiresonant energy transfer at very low collision energy

out by Schwenke and Truhlar [115]. They demonstrated

should be appealing to experimental investigators.

that conventional quantum theory of vibrational relax-

Chemical reactions can be of two types: insertion re-

ation is adequate for interpretation of low energy atom

actions and abstraction reactions. The insertion reactions

- molecule collisions and showed that low energy cross

are often barrierless. Quantum mechanical calculations of

sections follow the trends predicted by Wigner. The rate

chemical reactions are usually carried out in hyperspheri-

constants for the He - I2 system studied by Schwenke and

cal coordinates. Probabilities of chemical reactions are ob-

Truhlar were, however, extremely small in the zero tem-

tained from the solution of coupled diﬀerential equations

perature limit and it was concluded that the zero energy

on a grid of a single coordinate - the hyperradius. The total

divergence of inelastic cross sections may not aﬀect the

wave function of the reactive complex may be expanded in

rate coeﬃcients for inelastic scattering at temperatures

terms of products of asymptotic functions corresponding

Doyle, Friedrich, Krems, and Masnou: Quo vadis?

19

to diﬀerent reaction arrangements or in a basis of functions

at ultralow energies. The rate coeﬃcient for the reaction

that vary with the hyperradius. The former procedure is

at zero temperature was calculated to be 1.25×10−12 cm3

suitable for the description of abstraction reactions, while

s−1. It was suggested that the large rate of the reaction

the latter should be used for insertion reactions.

at ultracold temperatures is due to tunneling of the light

An example of an insertion reaction is the reaction of

H atom under the reaction barrier. Several later studies

an alkali atom with an alkali diatomic molecule, like Na

of F + D2 collisions [134,135,136] indicated that tunnel-

+ Na2. Sold´an and coworkers used a hyperspherical co-

ing plays an important role in the reaction. A very recent

ordinate quantum mechanical method of Launay and Le

article by Bodo, Gianturco, Balakrishnan and Dalgarno

Dourneuf [130] to investigate the Na + Na2 reaction at

demonstrated that the chemical reaction of F with H2 at

ultracold temperatures [131]. They showed that the cross

ultracold temperatures is assisted by a virtual resonance

sections for the reaction removing the vibrationally ex-

state near collision threshold [137]. A slight variation of

cited Na2(v = 1) molecules follow the Wigner law and

the mass of H2 shifts the virtual level in and out of res-

the rate coeﬃcient for the reaction is large in the limit

onance with the collision energy, leading to dramatic en-

of zero temperature. Recently, the same authors have ex-

hancement or suppression of the reaction rate.

tended their calculation to study the Li + Li2 reaction at

Two articles in this issue (Weck and Balakrishnan

zero temperature [132]. It was shown that for low-lying

pp. xx-yy and Bodo and Gianturco pp. xx-yy) report

bound states of Li2 there is no systematic diﬀerence be-

calculations of chemical reactions with large activation

tween the inelastic collision rates for molecules formed

barriers in the limit of zero temperature. It is demon-

from fermionic and bosonic Li.

strated that abstraction chemical reactions may be very

The abstraction reactions have a potential barrier which

fast at ultracold temperatures and the reactivity is en-

separates the reactants from products. An example of an

hanced to a great extent by internal excitation of the re-

abstraction reaction is the chemical reaction of F with

actants. In particular, it is shown that the rate of the F

H2. Because the reaction barrier always has a large mag-

+ H2 reaction is larger than the rate of collisional relax-

nitude on the ultracold energy scale, it might be expected

ation of the reactants when the H2 molecule is excited to

that the abstraction reactions would not occur at ultracold

an energy level above the activation barrier. These stud-

temperatures. Balakrishnan and Dalgarno presented the

ies will potentially lead to the development of the ﬁeld of

ﬁrst investigation of an abstraction reaction at ultracold

ultracold chemistry as they show that chemical reactions

temperatures [133]. It was found that the cross sections

do occur at zero absolute temperature. Studies of ultra-

for the chemical reaction F + H2 → FH + H follow the s-

cold chemistry in external ﬁelds will open up the ﬁeld of

wave Wigner law and have surprisingly large magnitudes

controlled chemistry.

20

Doyle, Friedrich, Krems, and Masnou: Quo vadis?

The possibility of the creation of ultracold molecules is

Together with the computational study of Volpi and Bohn

determined by their lifetime in an external ﬁeld trap. The

[141], this analysis indicates that the Zeeman relaxation

stability of cold and ultracold molecules in magnetic traps

rate in ultracold collisions of atoms or molecules should

was studied in a series of papers by Bohn and cowork-

increase dramatically with increasing ﬁeld strength.

ers [138,139,140,141] and Krems and coworkers [142,143,

An important discovery is reported in the article of this

144]. Krems and Dalgarno proposed a theory for quan-

issue (K los, Rode, Rode, Cha lasi´nski, and Szcz¸e´sniak

tum mechanical calculations of molecular collisions in a

pp. xx-yy) describing interactions of non-S-state transi-

magnetic trap and showed that trap loss of magnetically

tion metal atoms with He. Non-S-state atoms interact

trapped diatomic molecules in electronic 2Σ or 3Σ states

upon collisions with He eﬀectively like diatomic molecules

and in the rotational ground state is determined by the

[148,149] and collisional cooling of non-S-state atoms in

coupling to rotationally excited states [142]. The rotation-

a magnetic trap has been predicted to be impossible [150,

ally excited states are not energetically allowed at low col-

151]. The study of K los and coworkers, however, demon-

lision energies so collision-induced spin relaxation occurs

strates that the angular dependence of the interaction

through virtual excitations in the reactive complex and it

potential between transition metal atoms and He is dra-

is slow. This study identiﬁed the range of molecules that

matically suppressed. This indicates that transition metal

may be amenable to magnetic trapping and evaporative

atoms should be amenable to buﬀer-gas loading in a mag-

cooling to ultracold temperatures. Novel states in dimers

netic trap and, possibly, evaporative cooling to ultracold

of ultracold molecules linked by an electric ﬁeld were found

temperatures. Trapping of non-S-state atoms will greatly

by Bohn and coworkers [145].

expand the scope of ultracold molecular physics. Photoas-

To explore the prospects for sympathetic cooling of

sociation of ultracold non-S-state atoms will produce ul-

molecules by collisions with ultracold atoms, Sold´an and

tracold non-Σ-state molecules.

Hutson computed highly accurate interaction potentials

of the Rb–NH complex in various spin states [146]. They

5 Conclusions and future directions

showed that collision dynamics of ultracold Rb atoms with

We hope that the readers of this issue will be convinced

NH molecules may be complicated by the coupling to ion-

of the rapid expansion of the ﬁeld of ultracold molecules.

pair states leading to dramatic enhancement of the inter-

We should note the combination of traditional physics (ac-

action strength.

curate molecular spectroscopy) and very recent research

Krems and Dalgarno derived threshold laws for reori-

advances (molecular quantum gases). We should also note

entation of electronic angular momentum in atomic and

the strong interplay between theory and experiment, which

molecular collisions in the absence of external ﬁelds [147].

appears in many papers of this issue. We expect the next

Doyle, Friedrich, Krems, and Masnou: Quo vadis?

21

few years will be marked by the development of improved

sity conducive to evaporation may be achieved by bunch-

techniques for the production of ultracold molecules, and

ing. Evaporative cooling is also likely to be attained in

by more fundamental studies with cold and ultracold molecules

magnetic traps, which can be loaded with large numbers

as model systems and as a tool for very precise measure-

of molecules using the beam-loaded buﬀer gas technique.

ments.

Another possibility is to use a hydride molecule plus laser

It is clear from the present series of papers that there

cooling to directly load the molecules into a magnetic,

are many roads to cold molecules. The groups working

electrostatic or ac trap. Sympathetic cooling of molecules

with indirect methods like photoassociation of ultracold

(or molecular ions) with laser cooled atoms (or atomic

atoms will develop eﬃcient ways of creating molecules in

ions) is also being pursued in a number of laboratories.

the vibrational ground level, making use of various tech-

Cooling Rydberg molecules is an interesting challenge

nologies (e.g., Raman schemes, chirped pulses) that have

to explore [92,93,94].

yet to be fully studied. The groups working with direct

During the next few years, new experiments are likely

methods will develop techniques to reach lower temper-

to be carried out that will make use of cold molecules.

atures. In either case, trapping molecules and detecting

Scattering of slow molecules by atoms conﬁned in a MOT,

them is an important issue.

or of successive bunches in a decelerator, storage ring or

The development of new types of traps for molecules in

trap by one another are among the pursuits likely to be

high-ﬁeld seeking states will likely be pursued as a prior-

taken up in several laboratories. The implementation of a

ity by several groups. Apart from the microwave trap pro-

molecular fountain is a prominent goal.

posed in this issue, it is the ac trap for polar - and perhaps

Chemical reactions have been shown to occur rapidly

even paramagnetic - molecules that raises great expecta-

at temperatures near zero Kelvin and further studies, both

tions. Such traps could conﬁne ground state molecules,

experimental and theoretical, will demonstrate the unique-

which are immune to dipolar relaxation and other loss pro-

ness of ultracold chemistry. It may be expected that se-

cesses. This would greatly improve the chances for achiev-

lection rules are more pronounced and branching ratios

ing evaporative cooling - and reaching the ultracold regime.

of chemical reactions enhanced at ultralow temperatures

Such traps oﬀer a large volume and might be loaded by op-

[152]. The study of ultracold chemistry will take us into

tical pumping of slow molecules in suitable excited states.

a strange new world. Even the smallest activation energy

The presence of the trapping ﬁeld is expected to greatly

will surely exceed the available thermal energy. However,

enhance the scattering cross section by aligning the molec-

the large de Broglie wavelength pertaining to the ultra-

ular dipoles, and thus reduce the requisite number density

cold regime entirely changes the nature of reaction dy-

of the trapped molecules. Alternatively, the critical den-

namics. At such low temperatures, even the collisions of

22

Doyle, Friedrich, Krems, and Masnou: Quo vadis?

large molecules exhibit signiﬁcant quantum eﬀects. En-

study and applications of collective quantum phenomena

ergy barriers on the potential energy surface play a diﬀer-

in this new form of matter. Of primary interest are the

ent role because, in the hyperquantum regime, tunneling

eﬀects of rotational and vibrational excitation and their

becomes the dominant reaction pathway. Since tunneling

manifestation in collisional properties. In particular, a BEC

and resonances are characteristic of this regime, they can

of polar molecules would represent a system of relatively

serve as ultra-sensitive probes of particular features of the

strongly interacting particles. This could be used in eluci-

potential energy surface.

dating the link between BECs in gases and in liquids. The

Interactions of molecules at low temperatures can be

study of ultracold fermionic molecules is also of great in-

manipulated by external electromagnetic ﬁelds and the

terest: the electric dipole-dipole interaction, which is pre-

creation of cold and ultracold molecules may lead to the

dicted to be energy independent, may give rise to a molec-

development of the ﬁeld of controlled chemistry. External-

ular superﬂuid via BCS pairing. This may take place at

ﬁeld control of chemical reactions can be based on sev-

phase space parameters achievable by evaporative cool-

eral principles. The Zeeman and Stark eﬀects may remove

ing. Ultracold molecules could be also used in quantum

some of the energetically allowed reaction paths or they

computation. The scheme invokes ultracold ground-state

may open closed reaction channels [153], leading to sup-

molecules trapped in a one-dimensional optical lattice com-

pression or enhancement of the reaction eﬃciency. Exter-

bined with an inhomogeneous electrostatic ﬁeld [24].

nal ﬁelds couple the states of diﬀerent total angular mo-

There is also a class of experiments with cold molecules

menta, so that forbidden electronic transitions may be-

that could answer questions reaching beyond molecular

come allowed in an external ﬁeld and the transition rate

physics and chemistry: these experiments test fundamen-

may be controlled by the ﬁeld strength [150]. As the F +

tal symmetries in nature, such as the time-reversal symme-

H2 reaction shows, the rate of low temperature abstraction

try and the symmetrization postulate. A possible violation

reactions may be dramatically enhanced by the presence

of time reversal symmetry may be revealed by measuring

of a resonance state near threshold. By shifting molecular

the electric dipole moment (EDM) of the electron in heavy

energy levels with external ﬁelds, it should be possible to

diatomic molecules. It is particularly thrilling that the cur-

bring an excited bound level of the reactive complex in

rent experimental upper bound on EDM is close to several

resonance with the collision energy [137]. External ﬁelds

predictions made by theories that go beyond the Standard

may inﬂuence statistical properties of ultracold molecular

Model [154,155,156,157,158,159,160]. An increase in ac-

gases such as diﬀusion.

curacy by even one order of magnitude would therefore

Achieving quantum degeneracy in an ultracold ensem-

have a dramatic impact on theory. Also rapid progress in

ble of polar molecules will greatly expand the scope for

testing the Pauli principle for bosons with cold molecules

Doyle, Friedrich, Krems, and Masnou: Quo vadis?

23

(with zero-spin nuclei) is expected. Another fundamen-

tal experiment tests parity violation, via high-resolution

spectroscopy of enantiomers of chiral molecules [161]. The

accuracy of this experiment is expected to be signiﬁcantly

enhanced by using cold molecules.

Acknowledgments

We acknowledge the Institute for Theoretical Atomic, Molec-

ular and Optical Physics (ITAMP) at Harvard University

and the Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory and the

Center for Ultracold Atoms (CUA) at Harvard Univer-

sity and Massachusetts Institute of Technology for sup-

porting the 2004 Workshop on ultracold polar molecules.

We thank John Bohn for his help on the Feshbach reso-

nance section and Kate Kirby for useful comments on the

manuscript. We thank Franco Gianturco for encouraging

the idea to organize this issue and the European Physi-

cal Journal D for the opportunity to publish this sizable

collection of papers.

24

Doyle, Friedrich, Krems, and Masnou: Quo vadis?

References

10. C. L. Cesar, D. M. Silveira, M. G. Veloso, F. Zappa and C.

1. M. Di Rosa, ITAMP-CUA Workshop on Ultracold Polar

Molecules, Cambridge, 2004.

2. J. T. Bahns, W. C. Stwalley, and P. L. Gould, Laser cooling

C. Rodegheri, Buﬀer gas trap for hydrogen spectroscopy, in

Hydrogen Atom III, The international conference on Pre-

cision Physics of Simple Atomic Systems, ed. C. L. Cesar,

of molecules: a sequential scheme for rotation, translation,

S. G. Karshenboim and V. A. Shelyuto (2004).

and vibration, J. Chem. Phys. 104, 9689 (1996).

11. A. Peters, A cryogenic magnetic trap for ultracold atoms

3. J. Weinstein, R. deCarvalho, T. Guillet, B. Friedrich, and

and molecules, in Quantum Gases International Workshop

J. M. Doyle, Magnetic trapping of calcium monohydride

p. 19 (2003)

molecules at millikelvin temperatures, Nature (London)

12. D. DeMille, Private Communication (2004).

395, 148 (1998).

13. R. deCarvalho, N. Brahms, B. Newman, C. Johnson, L.

4. C. A. Stan, M. W. Zwierlein, C. H. Schunck, S. M. F. Rau-

Willman, J. M. Doyle, T. J. Greytak, and D. Kleppner, A

pach, and W. Ketterle, Interspecies Feshbach Resonances,

New Path to Ultracold Hydrogen, in Hydrogen Atom III,

Preprint at www.arXiv.org/cond-mat/0406129 (2004).

The international conference on Precision Physics of Sim-

5. S. Inouye, J. Goldwin, M. L. Olsen, C. Ticknor, J. L.

ple Atomic Systems, ed. C. L. Cesar, S. G. Karshenboim

Bohn, and D. S. Jin, Observation of Heteronuclear Fes-

and V. A. Shelyuto (2004).

hbach Resonances in a Bose-Fermi Mixture, Preprint at

14. H. L. Bethlem and G. Meijer, Production and application

www.arXiv.org/cond-mat/0406208 (2004).

of translationally cold molecules, Int. Rev. Phys. Chem.,

6. D. Wang, J. Qi, M. F. Stone, O. Nikolayeva, H. Wang, B.

22, 73 (2003).

Hattaway, S. D. Gensemer, P. L. Gould, E. E. Eyler, and

15. J. R. Bochinski, E. R. Hudson, H. J. Lewandowski, and

W. C. Stwalley, Photoassociative production and trapping

J. Ye, Cold free radical molecules in the laboratory frame,

of ultracold KRb molecules, Phys. Rev. Lett., in press.

Phys. Rev. A, submitted.

7. A. J. Kerman, J. M. Sage, S. Sainis, T. Bergeman,

16. E.A. Hinds, Testing

time reversal

symmetry using

and D. DeMille, Production and state-selective detection

molecules, Physica Scripta T70, 34 (1997).

of ultracold, ground state RbCs molecules, Preprint at

17. M. R. Tarbutt, H. L. Bethlem, J. J. Hudson, V. L. Ryabov,

www.arXiv.org/physics/0402116m (2004).

V. A. Ryzhov, B. E. Sauer, G. Meijer, and E. A. Hinds,

8. M. W. Mancini, G. D. Telles, A. R. L. Caires, V. S. Bag-

Slowing heavy, ground-state molecules using an alternating

nato and L. G. Marcassa, Observation of ultracold ground-

gradient decelerator, Phys. Rev. Lett. 92, 173002 (2004).

State heteronuclear molecules, Phys. Rev. Lett. 92, 133203

18. H. Gould, Department of Energy, Basic Energy Science

(2004).

Contractor’s Meeting, 2003.

9. C. Haimberger, J. Kleinert, M. Bhattacharya, and N. P.

19. P. F. Barker, A. I. Bishop, R. Fulton, and M. N. Shneider,

Bigelow, Formation and detection of ultracold ground-state

Slowing molecules with pulsed optical lattices, in ACS 2004

polar molecules, Phys. Rev. A 70, 21402 (2004).

National Meeting Technical Program (2004).

Doyle, Friedrich, Krems, and Masnou: Quo vadis?

25

20. M. Gupta and D. Herschbach, A mechanical means to pro-

30. N. Djeu and W. T. Whitney, Laser cooling by spontaneous

duce intense beams of slow molecules, J. Phys. Chem. A

anti-Stokes scattering, Phys. Rev. Lett. 46, 238 (1981).

103, 10670 (1999).

31. H. R. Thorsheim, J. Weiner, and P. S. Julienne, Laser-

21. M. S. Elioﬀ, J.J. Valentini, and D. W. Chandler, Subkelvin

induced photoassociation of ultracold sodium atoms, Phys.

cooling NO molecules via billiard-like collisions with argon,

Rev. Lett. 58, 2420 (1987).

Science 302, 1940 (2003).

32. J. Weiner, V. S. Bagnato, S. C. Zilio and P. S. Julienne,

22. S. A. Rangwala, T. Junglen, T. Rieger, P. W. H. Pinkse,

Experiments and theory in cold and ultracold collisions,

and G. Rempe, Continuous source of translationally cold

Rev. Mod Phys. 71, 1-86 (1999).

dipolar molecules, Phys. Rev. A 67, 043406 (2003).

33. J. T. Bahns, W. C. Stwalley, and P. L. Gould, Formation

23. E. Nikitin, E. Dashevskaya, J. Alnis, M Auzinsh, E.

R. I. Abraham, B. R. Furneaux, M. Keil, C. McRaven,

N. Shafer-Ray, and R. Waskowsky, Measurement and

prediction of the speed-dependent throughput of a mag-

netic octupole velocity ﬁlter including nonadiabatic eﬀects,

of cold (T ≤ 1K) molecules, Adv. Atomic. Mol. Opt. Phys.

42, 171–224 (2000).

34. F. Masnou-Seeuws and P. Pillet, Formation of ultracold

molecules (T< 200 µK) via photoassociation in a gas of

laser-cooled atoms, Adv. Atomic. Mol. Opt. Phys. 47, 53-

Phys. Rev. A 68, 023403 (2003).

127 (2001).

24. D. Demille, Quantum computation with trapped polar

molecules, Phys. Rev. Lett. 88, 067901 (2002).

25. L. Santos, G. V. Shlyapnikov, P. Zoller, and M. Lewen-

stein, Bose-Einstein Condensation in Trapped Dipolar

Gases, Phys. Rev. Lett. 85, 1791 (2000).

26. M. Baranov, L. Dobrek, K. Goral, L. Santos, and M.

Lewenstein, Ultracold dipolar gases - a challenge for ex-

periments and theory, Phys. Scripta T102, 74 (2002).

35. W. C. Stwalley and H. Wang H, Special review lecture -

Photoassociation of ultracold atoms: A new spectroscopic

technique, J. Mol. Spectrosc. 195, 194 (1999).

36. T. Takekoshi, B. M. Patterson and R. J. Knize, Observa-

tion of Optically Trapped Cold Cesium Molecules, Phys.

Rev. Lett. 81 5105 (1998)

37. A. Fioretti, D. Comparat, A. Crubellier, O. Dulieu,

F. Masnou-Seeuws, and P. Pillet, Formation of cold Cs2

molecules through photoassociation, Phys. Rev. Lett. 80,

27. L. D. Carr, G. V. Shlyapnikov, and Y. Castin, Achiev-

4402–4405 (1998).

ing a BCS Transition in an Atomic Fermi Gas,

38. T. Takekoshi, B. M. Patterson, and R. J. Knize, Ob-

Phys. Rev. Lett. 92, 150404 (2004).

servation of optically trapped cold cesium molecules,

28. M. A. Baranov,  L. Dobrek, and M. Lewenstein, Superﬂu-

Phys. Rev. Lett. 81, 5105 (1999).

idity of trapped dipolar Fermi Gases, Phys. Rev. Lett. 92,

39. N. Nikolov, E. E. Eyler, X.T. Wang, J. Li, H. Wang,

250403 (2004).

W. C. Stwalley, and P. Gould, Observation of trans-

29. D. Kleppner, Professor Feshbach and his resonance,

lationally ultracold ground state potassium molecules,

Physics Today 57, 12 (2004).

Phys. Rev. Lett. 82, 703 (1999).

26

Doyle, Friedrich, Krems, and Masnou: Quo vadis?

40. A. N. Nikolov, J. R. Ensher, E. E. Eyler, H. Wang,

of Ultracold RbCs Molecules, Phys. Rev. Lett., 92, 153001

W. C. Stwalley, and P. Gould, Eﬃcient Production of

(2004).

Ground-State Potassium Molecules at Sub-mK Tempera-

49. M.W. Mancini, G. D. Telles, A. R. L. Caires, V. S. Bag-

tures by Two-Step Photoassociation, Phys. Rev. Lett. 84,

nato, and L. G. Marcassa, Observation of ultracold ground-

246 (2000).

state heteronuclear molecules, Phys. Rev. Lett. 92, 133203

41. C. Gabbanini, A. Fioretti, A. Lucchesini, S. Gozzini, and

(2004).

M. Mazzoni, Observation of translationally cold ground

50. N. Vanhaecke, W. DeSouza Melo, B. Laburthe Tolra,

state rubidium molecules, Phys. Rev. Lett. 84, 2814 (2000).

D. Comparat, and P. Pillet, Accumulation of cold ce-

42. C. M. Dion, C. Drag, O. Dulieu, B. Laburthe Tolra, F.

sium molecules via photoassociation in a mixed atomic and

Masnou-Seeuws, and P. Pillet, Resonant coupling in the

molecular trap, Phys. Rev. Lett. 89, 063001 (2002).

formation of ultracold ground state molecules via photoas-

51. D. J. Heinzen unpublished; R. S. Freeland, Ph. D thesis,

sociation, Phys. Rev. Lett. 86, 2253 (2001).

University of Texas, pp112-122.

43. F. Fatemi, K. Jones, P. Lett, and E. Tiesinga, Ul-

52. W. T. Zemke and W. C. Stwalley, Radiative transition

tracold ground-state molecule production in sodium,

probabilities,

lifetimes and dipole moments for the vi-

Phys. Rev. A 66, 053401 (2002).

brational

levels of the X 1Σ+ ground state of 39K 85Rb,

44. H. Wang and W. C. Stwalley, Ultracold photoassocia-

J. Chem. Phys. 120, 88 (2004).

tive spectroscopy of heteronuclear alkali-metal diatomic

53. H. Wang, X. T. Wang, P. L. Gould, and W. C. Stwal-

molecules, J. Chem. Phys. 108, 5767 (1998).

ley, Optical-optical double resonance photoassociative spec-

45. J. P. Shaﬀer, W. Chalupezak, and N. P. Bigelow, Photoas-

troscopy of ultracold 39K atoms near highly excited asymp-

sociative ionization of heteronuclear molecules in a novel

totes, Phys. Rev. Lett. 78, 4173 (1997).

two-species magneto-optical trap, Phys. Rev. Lett. 82, 1124

54. M.L. Almazor, O. Dulieu, M. Elbs, E. Tiemann and F.

(1999).

Masnou-Seeuws, How to get access to long range states of

46. U. Schloder, H. Engler, U. Schunemann, R. Grimm, and M.

highly excited molecules, Eur. Phys. J. D 5, 237-242 (1999).

Weidemuller, Cold inelastic collisions between lithium and

55. T. Laue, P. Pellegrini, O.Dulieu, C. Samuelis, H. Knoeckel,

cesium in a two species magneto-optical trap, Eur. Phys.

F. Masnou-Seeuws and E. Tiemann, Observation of the

J. D 7, 331 (1999).

long-range potential well of the (6)1Σ+

g state of Na2, Eur.

47. A. J. Kerman, J. M. Sage, S. Sainis, T. Bergeman, and D.

Phys. J. D 26, 173 (2003).

∗
DeMille, Production of Ultracold, Polar RbCs

Molecules

56. J. L´eonard, M. Walhout, A. Mosk, T. M¨uller, M. Leduc,

via Photoassociation, Phys. Rev. Lett. 92, 033004 (2004).

and C. Cohen-Tannoudji, Giant helium dimers pro-

48. A. J. Kerman, J. M. Sage, S. Sainis, T. Bergeman, and D.

duced by photoassociation of ultracold metastable atoms,

DeMille, Photoassociation and State-Selective Detection

Phys. Rev. Lett. 91, 073203 (2003).

Doyle, Friedrich, Krems, and Masnou: Quo vadis?

27

57. E. Luc-Koenig, R. Kosloﬀ, F. Masnou-Seeuws, and

66. E. Tiesinga, B. J. Verhaar, and H. T. C. Stoof, Threshold

M. Vatasescu, Time-dependent analysis of photoassocia-

and resonance phenomena in ultracold ground-state colli-

tion of cold cesium atoms using chirped laser pulses, Phys.

sions, Phys. Rev. A 47, 4114 (1993).

Rev. A 70 (2004).

67. P. S. Julienne and E. Tiesinga, Making cold molecules by

58. C. Koch, J. Palao, R. Kosloﬀ, and F. Masnou-Seeuws, How

time-dependent Feshbach resonances, J. Mod. Optics 51,

to obtain ultracold v=0 molecules using optimal control

1787 (2004).

theory., Phys. Rev. A 70, 013402 (2004).

68. D. S. Petrov, C. Salomon, and G. V. Shlyapnikov, Weakly

59. P. Fedichev, Y. Kagan, G. V. Shlyapnikov, and J. Wal-

bound dimers of Fermionic atoms, Phys. Rev. Lett. 93,

raven, Inﬂuence of nearly resonant light on the scattering

090404 (2004).

length in low-temperature atomic gases, Phys. Rev. Lett.

69. D. S. Petrov, Three-body problem in Fermi gases with

77, 2913 (1996).

short-range interparticle interaction, Phys. Rev. A 67,

60. J. L. Bohn and P. S. Julienne, Prospects for inﬂuencing

010703(R) (2003).

scattering lengths with far-oﬀ resonant light, Phys. Rev. A

70. D. S. Petrov, C. Salomon, and G. V. Shlyapnikov, Scatter-

56, 1486 (1997).

ing properties of weakly bound dimers of fermionic atoms,

61. V. Kokoouline, J. Vala, and R. Kosloﬀ, Tuning the scat-

Phys. Rev. A, in press.

tering length on the ground triplet state of Cs2, J. Chem.

71. S. Inouye, M. R. Andrews, J. Stenger, H. J. Miesner, D.

Phys. 114, 3046 (2001).

M. Stamper-Kurn, and W. Ketterle, Observation of Fes-

62. F. K. Fatemi, K. M. Jones, and P. D. Lett, Observation of

hbach resonances in a Bose-Einstein condensate, Nature

optically induced Feshbach resonances in collisions of cold

392, 151 (1998).

atoms, Phys. Rev. Lett. 85, 4462 (2000).

72. Ph. Courteille, R. S. Freeland, D. J. Heinzen, A. van Abee-

63. M. Theis, G. Thalhammer, K. Winkler, M. Hellwig,

len, and B. J. Verhaar, Observation of a Feshbach res-

G. Ruﬀ, R. Grimm, and J. H. Denschlag, Tuning the scat-

onance in cold atom scattering, Phys. Rev. Lett. 81, 69

tering length with an optically induced Feshbach resonance,

(1998).

Phys. Rev. Lett. 93, 123001 (2004).

73. J. L. Roberts, N. R. Claussen, James P. Burke, Jr., Chris

64. W. C. Stwalley, Stability of spin-aligned hydrogen at

H. Greene, E. A. Cornell, and C. E. Wieman, Resonant

low temperatures and high magnetic ﬁelds: new ﬁeld-

magnetic ﬁeld control of elastic scattering in cold 85Rb,

dependent

scattering resonances and predissociations,

Phys. Rev. Lett. 81, 5109 (1998).

Phys. Rev. Lett. 37, 1628 (1976).

74. C. Chin, V. Vuletic, A. J. Kerman, and Steven

65. E. Tiesinga, A. J. Moerdijk, B. J. Verhaar, and H. T. C.

Chu, High resolution Feshbach spectroscopy of cesium,

Stoof, Conditions for Bose-Einstein condensation in mag-

Phys. Rev. Lett. 85, 2717 (2000).

netically trapped atomic cesium, Phys. Rev. A 46, R1167

75. A. Marte, T. Volz, J. Schuster, S. D¨urr, G. Rempe, E.

(1992).

G. M. van Kempen, and B. J. Verhaar, Feshbach reso-

28

Doyle, Friedrich, Krems, and Masnou: Quo vadis?

nances in rubidium 87: precision measurement and analy-

ing cross -sections between 4.3 and 1.8 K, Mol. Phys. 67,

sis, Phys. Rev. Lett. 89, 283202 (2002).

455 (1989).

76. E. A. Donley, N. R. Claussen, S. T. Thompson, and C.

84. H. L. Bethlem, G. Berden, and G. Meijer, Decelerating

E. Wieman, Atom-molecule coherence in a Bose-Einstein

neutral dipolar molecules, Phys. Rev. Lett. 83, 1558 (1999).

condensate, Nature 417, 529 (2002).

85. V. Veksler, J. Phys. (USSR) 9, 153 (1944).

77. M. Greiner, C. A. Regal, and D. S. Jin, Emergence of a

86. E. M. McMillan, The SynchrotronA Proposed High Energy

molecular Bose-Einstein condensate from a Fermi gas, Na-

Particle Accelerator, Phys. Rev. 68, 143 (1945).

ture (London) 426, 537 (2003)

87. H. L. Bethlem, F. M. H. Crompvoets, G. Berden, R. T.

78. S. Jochim, M. Bartenstein, A. Altmeyer, G. Hendl, S.

Jongma, S. Y. T. Meerakker, and G. Meijer, Deceleration

Riedl, C. Chin, J. Hecker Denschlag, and R. Grimm, Bose-

and trapping of ammonia using time-varying electric ﬁelds,

Einstein condensation of molecules, Science 302, 2101

Phys. Rev. A 65, 053416 (2002).

(2003).

88. H. L. Bethlem, G. Berden, F. M. H. Crompvoets, R. T.

79. M. W. Zwierlein, C. A. Stan, C. H. Schunck, S. M. F. Rau-

Jongma, A. J. A. van Roij, and G. Meijer, Electrostatic

pach, S. Gupta, Z. Hadzibabic, and W. Ketterle, Obser-

trapping of ammonia molecules, Nature (London) 406, 491

vation of Bose-Einstein condensation of molecules, Phys.

(2000).

Rev. Lett. 91, 250400 (2003).

89. F. M. H. Crompvoets, H. L. Bethlem, R. T. Jongma, and

80. T. Bourdel, L. Khaykovich, J. Cubizolles, J. Zhang, F.

G. Meijer, A prototype storage ring for neutral molecules,

Chevy, M. Teichmann, L. Tarruell, S.J.J.M.F. Kokkel-

Nature (London) 411, 174 (2001).

mans, and C. Salomon, Experimental study of the BEC-

90. J. A. Maddi, T. P. Dinneen, and H. Gould, Slowing

BCS crossover region in lithium 6, Phys. Rev. Lett. 93,

and cooling molecules and neutral atoms by time-varying

050401 (2004).

electric-ﬁeld gradients, Phys. Rev. A 60, 3882 (1999).

81. J. Kim, B. Friedrich, D. P. Katz, D. Patterson, J. D. We-

91. J. R. Bochinski, E. R. Hudson, H. J. Lewandowski, G.

instein, R. deCarvalho, and J. M. Doyle, Buﬀer-gas load-

Meijer, and J. Ye, Phase space manipulation of cold free

ing and magnetic trapping of atomic europium, Phys. Rev.

radical OH molecules, Phys. Rev. Lett. 91, 243001 (2003).

Lett. 78, 3665 (1997).

92. S. R. Procter, Y. Yamakita, and T. P. Softley, Controlling

82. R. deCarvalho, J. M. Doyle, B. Friedrich, T. Guillet, J.

the motion of hydrogen molecules, Chem. Phys. Lett. 374,

Kim, D. Patterson, and J. Weinstein, Buﬀer-gas loaded

667 (2003).

magnetic traps for atoms and molecules: A primer, Eur.

93. E. Vliegen, H. J. Woerner, T. P. Softley and F. Merkt,

Phys. J. D 7 , 289 (1999).

Nonhydrogenic eﬀects in the deceleration of Rydberg atoms

83. D. R. Willey, D. N. Bittner, and F. C. Delucia, Colli-

in inhomogeneous electric ﬁelds, Phys. Rev. Lett. 92,

sional cooling of the NO-He system - the pressure broaden-

033005 (2004).

Doyle, Friedrich, Krems, and Masnou: Quo vadis?

29

94. N. Vanhaecke, D. Comparat, and P. Pillet, Rydberg decel-

Andronikashvili experiment, Science 279, 2083 (1998).

eration using a travelling electric-ﬁeld gradient J. Phys. B:

105. J. P. Toennies, A. F. Vilesov, and K. B. Whaley, Super-

At. Mol. Opt. Phys. 37, 1 (2004).

ﬂuid helium droplets: an ultracold nanolaboratory, Physics

95. H. L. Bethlem, G. Berden, A. J. A. van Roij, F. M. H.

Today 54, 31 (2001).

Crompvoets, and G. Meijer, Trapping neutral molecules in

106. C. J. Burnham, S. S. Xantheas, M. A. Miller, B. E. Ap-

a traveling potential well, Phys. Rev. Lett. 84, 5744 (2000).

plegate, and R. E. Miller, The Formation of Cyclic Water

96. W. Ubachs and E. Reinhold, Highly accurate H2 Lyman

Complexes by Sequential Ring Insertion: Experiment and

and Werner band laboratory measurements and an im-

Theory, J. Chem. Phys. 117, 1109 (2002).

proved constraint on a cosmological variation of the proton-

to-electron mass ratio, Phys. Rev. Lett. 92, 101302 (2004).

97. D. Auerbach, E. E. A. Bromberg, and L. Wharton,

107. J. Higgins, C. Callegari, J. Reho, F. Stienkemeier, W. E.

Ernst, M. Gutowski, and G. Scoles, Helium cluster isola-

tion spectroscopy of alkali dimers in the triplet manifold,

Alternate-Gradient focusing of molecular beams, J. Chem.

J. Phys. Chem. A 102, 4952 (1998).

Phys. 45, 2160 (1966).

98. E. Peik, Alternate-gradient focusing of molecular beams,

Eur. Phys. J. D 6, 179 (1999)

99. J. D. Miller, R. A. Cline, and D. J. Heinzen, Far-oﬀ-

resonance optical trapping of atoms, Phys. Rev. A 47,

R4567 (1993).

108. J. Higgins, J. Reho, F. Stienkemeier, W. E. Ernst, K.

K. Lehmann, and G. Scoles, Spectroscopy in, on and oﬀ a

beam of superﬂuid helium nanodroplets, Atomic and Molec-

ular Beams: The State of the Art 2000, R. Campargue Ed.,

Springer-Verlag (2000).

109. L. D. Landau and E. M. Lifshitz, Quantum mechanics

100. S. Y. T. van de Meerakker, R. T. Jongma, H. L. Bethlem

and G. Meijer, Accumulating NH radicals in a magnetic

(1965).

trap, Phys. Rev. A 64, 041401 (2001).

101. S. Goyal, D. L. Schutt, and G. Scoles, Vibrational spec-

troscopy of sulfur hexaﬂuoride attached to helium clusters,

110. N. Balakrishnan, V. Kharchenko, R. C. Forrey and A.

Dalgarno, Complex scattering lengths in multi-channel

atom-molecule collisions, Chem. Phys. Lett. 280, 5 (1997).

Phys. Rev. Lett. 69, 933 (1992).

111. R. C. Forrey, N. Balakrishnan, V. Kharchenko and A.

102. F. Dong and R. E. Miller, Vibrational Transition Mo-

Dalgarno, Feshbach resonances in ultracold atom-diatom

ment Directions for Determining the Structure of Isolated

scattering, Phys. Rev. A 58, R2645 (1998).

Biomolecules, Science 298 1227 (2002);

112. H. R. Sadeghpour, J. L. Bohn, M. J. Cavagnero, B. D.

103. R. Lehnig and A. Slenczka, Emission Spectra of Free Base

Esry, I. I. Fabrikant, J. H. Macek, and A. R. P. Rau, Col-

Phthalocyanine in Superﬂuid Helium Droplets, J. Chem.

lisions near threshold in atomic and molecular physics, J.

Phys. 118, (2003)

Phys. B: At. Mol. Opt. Phys. 33, R93 (2000).

104. S. Grebenev, J. P. Toennies and A. F. Vilesov, Super-

113. R. V. Krems, ”Chemical reactions and inelastic collisions

ﬂuidity within a small helium-4 cluster: The microscopic

of atoms and molecules at cold and ultracold temperatures”

30

Doyle, Friedrich, Krems, and Masnou: Quo vadis?

in Recent Research Developments in Chemical Physics,

123. R. V. Krems and A. A. Buchachenko, Ultracold inelastic

Vol. 3 part II, pp. 485-500 (2002). ISBN: 81-7895-066-9.

atomic collisions: Threshold relaxation of O(3P0) by He,

114. F. H. Mies and M. Raoult, Analysis of threshold eﬀects

Phys. Rev. A 64, 024704 (2001).

in ultracold atomic collisions, Phys. Rev. A 62, 012708

124. R. V. Krems and A. Dalgarno, Shape resonances and

(2000).

nonadiabatic dynamics in O(3Pj ) + He collisions at cold

115. D. W. Schwenke and D. G. Truhlar, The eﬀect of

and ultracold temperatures, Phys. Rev. A 66, 012702

Wigner singularities on low-temperature vibrational relax-

(2002).

ation rates, J. Chem. Phys. 83, 3454 (1985).

125. P. E. Siska, Cold and ultracold ion-neutral

inelas-

116. N. Balakrishnan, R. C. Forrey and A. Dalgarno, Quench-

tic collisions: Spin-orbit

relaxation in He + Ne+,

ing of H2 vibrations in ultracold 3He and 4He collisions,

J. Chem. Phys. 115, 4527 (2001).

Phys. Rev. Lett. 80, 3224 (1998).

126. R. Krems and A. Dalgarno, Electronic and rotational en-

117. N. Balakrishnan, A. Dalgarno and R.C. Forrey, Vibra-

ergy transfer in F(2P1/2) + H2 collisions at ultracold tem-

tional relaxation of CO by collisions with 4He at ultracold

peratures, J. Chem. Phys. 117, 118 (2002).

temperatures, J. Chem. Phys. 113, 621 (2000).

127. P. Florian, M. Hoster, and R. C. Forrey, Rotational re-

118. C. Zhu, N. Balakrishnan, A. Dalgarno, Vibra-

laxation in ultracold CO+He collisions, Phys. Rev. A 70,

tional relaxation of CO in ultracold 3He collisions,

032709 (2004).

J. Chem. Phys. 115, 1335 (2001).

128. K. Tilford, M. Hoster, P. M. Florian, and R. C. Forrey,

119. N. Balakrishnan and A. Dalgarno, On the quenching of

Cold collisions involving rotationally hot oxygen molecules,

rovibrationally excited molecular oxygen at ultracold tem-

Phys. Rev. A 69, 052705 (2004).

peratures, J. Phys. Chem. A 105, 2348 (2001).

129. E. I. Dashevskaya and E. E. Nikitin, Quantum sup-

120. R. C. Forrey, N. Balakrishnan, A. Dalgarno, M. R. Hag-

pression and enhancement of the quasiclassical Landau-

gerty, and E. J. Heller, Quasiresonant energy transfer in

Lifshitz matrix elements: Application to the inelastic H2-

ultracold atom-diatom collisions, Phys. Rev. Lett. 82, 2657

He scattering at ultralow energies, Phys. Rev. A 63, 012711

(1999).

(2000).

121. J. C. Flasher and R. C. Forrey, Cold collisions between

130. J.-M. Launay and M. Le Dourneuf, Hyperspherical close-

argon atoms and hydrogen molecules, Phys. Rev. A 65,

coupling calculation of integral cross-sections for the re-

032710 (2002).

action H + H2 → H2 + H, Chem. Phys. Lett. 163, 178

122. E. Bodo, F. A. Gianturco, and A. Dalgarno, Quenching

(1989).

of vibrationally excited CO(nu=2) molecules by ultra-cold

131. P. Sold´an, M. T. Cvitaˇs, J. M. Hutson, P. Honvault and

collisions with He-4 atoms, Chem. Phys. Lett. 353, 127

J.-M. Launay, Quantum dynamics of ultracold Na + Na2

(2002).

collisions, Phys. Rev. Lett. 89, 153201 (2002).

Doyle, Friedrich, Krems, and Masnou: Quo vadis?

31

132. M. T. Cvitaˇs, P. Sold´a, J. M. Hutson, P. Honvault, J.-

NH(X 3Σ−) molecules with He atoms in a magnetic ﬁeld:

M. Launay, Ultracold Li + Li2 collisions: bosonic and

An ab initio study, Phys. Rev. A 68, 051401(R) (2003).

fermionic cases, cond-mat/0409709.

144. R. V. Krems, A. Dalgarno, N. Balakrishnan and

133. N. Balakrishnan and A. Dalgarno, Chemistry at ultracold

G. C. Groenenboom, Spin-ﬂipping transitions in 2Σ

temperatures, Chem. Phys. Lett. 341, 652 (2001).

molecules induced by collisions with structureless atoms,

134. E. Bodo, F.A. Gianturco, and A. Dalgarno, The reaction

Phys. Rev. A 67, 060703 (2003).

of F+D2 at ultra-low temperatures: the eﬀect of rotational

145. A. V. Avdeenkov, D. C. E. Bortolotti, and J. L.

excitation, J. Phys. B: At. Mol. Opt. Phys. 35, 2391 (2002).

Bohn, Field-linked states of ultracold polar molecules,

135. E. Bodo, F.A. Gianturco, and A. Dalgarno, F+D2 reac-

Phys. Rev. A 69, 012710 (2004).

tion at ultracold temperatures, J. Chem. Phys. 116, 9222

146. P. Sold´an and J. H. Hutson, Interaction of NH(X3Σ)

136. N. Balakrishnan and A. Dalgarno, J. Phys. Chem. A 107,

pathetic Cooling and the Formation of Extremely Polar

Molecules with Rubidium Atoms: Implications for Sym-

Molecules, Phys. Rev. Lett. 92, 163202 (2004).

(2002).

7101 (2003).

137. E. Bodo, F. A. Gianturco, N. Balakrishnan, and A. Dal-

147. R. V. Krems and A. Dalgarno, Threshold laws for col-

garno, Chemical reaction in the limit of zero kinetic energy:

lisional reorientation of electronic angular momentum,

virtual states and Ramsauer minima in F + H2 → HF +

Phys. Rev. A 67, 050704 (2003).

H, J. Phys. B: At. Mol. Opt. Phys. 37 3641 (2004).

148. V. Aquilanti and G. Grossi, Angular momentum coupling

138. J. L. Bohn, Molecular spin relaxation in cold atom-

schemes in the quantum mechanical treatment of P-state

molecule scattering, Phys. Rev. A 61, 040702(R) (2000).

atom collisions, J. Chem. Phys. 73, 1165 (1983).

139. J. L. Bohn, Cold collisions of O2 with helium,

149. R. V. Krems, G. C. Groenenboom and A. Dalgarno, Elec-

Phys. Rev. A 62, 032701 (2000).

tronic interaction anisotropy between atoms in arbitrary

140. A. V. Avdeenkov and J. L. Bohn, Ultracold collisions of

angular momentum states, J. Phys. Chem. A 108, 8941

oxygen molecules, Phys. Rev. A 64, 052703 (2001).

(2004).

141. A. Volpi and J. L. Bohn, Molecular vibration in cold-

150. R. V. Krems and A. Dalgarno, Disalignment transitions

collision theory, Phys. Rev. A 65, 064702 (2002).

in cold collisions of 3P atoms with structureless targets in

142. R. V. Krems and A. Dalgarno, Quantum-mechanical the-

a magnetic ﬁeld, Phys. Rev. A 68, 013406 (2003).

ory of atom-molecule and molecular collisions in a mag-

151. V. Kokoouline, R. Santra and C. H. Greene, Mul-

netic ﬁeld: Spin depolarization, J. Chem. Phys. 120, 2296

tichannel cold collisions between metastable Sr atoms,

(2004).

Phys. Rev. Lett. 90, 253201 (2003).

143. R. V. Krems, H. R. Sadeghpour, A. Dalgarno, D. Zgid,

152. R. V. Krems, D. Zgid, G. Chalasinski, J. Klos, and

J. Klos, and G. Chalasinski, Low-temperature collisions of

A. Dalgarno, On the Possibility of Buﬀer Gas Cool-

32

Doyle, Friedrich, Krems, and Masnou: Quo vadis?

ing of Paramagnetic Carbon to Ultracold Temperatures,

Phys. Rev. A 66, 030702 (2002).

153. R. V. Krems, Breaking van der Waals molecules with

magnetic ﬁelds, Phys. Rev. Lett. 93, 013201 (2004).

154. E. A. Hinds and P. G. H. Sandars, Experiment to search

for P- and T-violating interactions in the hyperﬁne struc-

ture of thallium ﬂuoride, Phys. Rev. A 21, 480 (1980).

155. E. A. Hinds and K. Sangster, Testing time-reversal sym-

metry with molecules, AIP Conference Proceedings 270,

77 (1993).

156. E. D. Commins, Adv. At. Mol. Opt. Phys. 40, 1 (1999).

157. D. DeMille, F. Bay, S. Bickman, D. Kawall, D. Krause,

Jr., S. E. Maxwell, and L. R. Hunter, Investigation of PbO

as a system for measuring the electric dipole moment of

the electron, Phys. Rev. A 61, 052507 (2000).

158. B. C. Regan, E. D. Commins, C. J. Schmidt, and D. De-

Mille, New limit on the electron electric dipole moment,

Phys. Rev. Lett. 88, 071805 (2002).

159. J. J. Hudson, B. E. Sauer, M. R. Tarbutt, and E. A.

Hinds, Measurement of the electron electric dipole moment

using YbF molecules, Phys. Rev. Lett. 89, 023003 (2002).

160. N. Fortson, P. Sandars, S. Barr, The search for a perma-

nent electric dipole moment, Physics Today 56, 33 (2003)

161. Ch. Daussy, T. Marrel, A. Amy-Klein, C. T. Nguyen, Ch.

J. Bord, and Ch. Chardonnet, Limit on the parity non-

conserving energy diﬀerence between the enantiomers of a

chiral molecule by laser spectroscopy, Phys. Rev. Lett. 83,

1554 (1999).

