5
0
0
2
 
y
a
M
 
6
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
m
o
t
a
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
4
8
1
5
0
5
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

A simple method for obtaining electron scattering phase shifts from energies of an
atom in a cavity

I.M. Savukov
Department of Physics, Princeton University, Princeton, New Jersey 08544
(Dated: January 30, 2014)

We present a simple method for obtaining elastic scattering phase shifts and cross sections from
energies of atoms or ions in cavities. This method does not require calculations of wavefunctions
of continuum states, is very general, and is extremely convenient from practical point of view:
some conventional computer codes designed for the energies of bound states can be used without
modiﬁcations. The application of the method is illustrated on an example of electron scattering from
Kr and Ar. From Brueckner orbital energies in variable cavities, we have obtained ab initio cross
sections that are in close agreement with experiment. The relativistic eﬀects are also considered
and found to be small below 10 eV.

PACS numbers: 34.80.Bm, 31.15.Ar, 31.25.-v, 31.30.Jv

Conventional methods of calculations of scattering
cross sections are cumbersome, inconvenient, and very
often inaccurate. This is only because they all are based
on computing continuum, or sometimes quasicontinuum,
wavefunctions and asymptotic ﬁttings to extract phase
shifts. Such an approach requires modiﬁcations of con-
ventional atomic structure codes, developed for bound
states, or just writing new programs altogether. For a
known potential it is not a diﬃcult task – this is why
numerous semi-empirical calculations can be found in
the literature – but the level of accuracy and theoreti-
cal uncertainty of calculations based on ad hoc poten-
tials can not be totally satisfactory. For ab initio cal-
culations already complicated codes have to be rewrit-
ten, which takes considerable amount of time. For multi-
conﬁguration Hartree-Fock (MCHF) method this was un-
dertaken by Saha [1, 2] to obtain ab initio results in agree-
ment with experiment. However, many-body perturba-
tion theory (MBPT) methods, which were developed for
fundamental symmetry tests, have not been used for cal-
culations of electron scattering cross sections.

The method we propose in this letter is very simple and
general: instead of ﬁnding continuum wavefunctions and
ﬁtting them to asymptotical solutions to obtain phase
shifts for given electron energies, we impose a boundary
condition on an atom, an ion, or a molecule to make
the spectrum discreet and then from discreet energies
extract phase shifts which are uniquely related to these
energies. Thus the problem of phase shifts is converted
into a conventional problem of ﬁnding energies of bound
states. Especially simple relation exists, as we will show,
in the case of an atom in a spherical cavity.

It can be shown that continuum and quasicontinuum
wavefunctions are equivalent. For example, in Ref. [3] it
was stated that B-spline solutions obtained in a cavity
can be interpreted as a representation of true continuum
states with a diﬀerent normalization, and the energy of
the quasicontinuum states can be set to an arbitrary pos-
itive value by adjusting the size of the cavity. There are
also other methods that give B-spline continuum wave-
functions at any energy: the Galerkin method [4], least-

squares approach [5, 6], and free boundary condition ap-
proach [7]. The emphasis in these works is placed on ap-
plications of B-splines which are very often bundled with
the cavity boundary conditions: for the method proposed
here, however, the boundary conditions are more essen-
tial than B-splines, which are still convenient for evalua-
tion of radial integrals in high-precision MBPT calcula-
tions [8].

While our method can be justiﬁed mathematically in
quite general assumptions, it is not yet obvious that the
method will be accurate in practical calculations, so we
will illustrate the usefulness and accuracy of the method
on speciﬁc examples such as the MBPT calculations of
electron elastic scattering phase shifts and cross sections
from Ar and Kr. The MBPT is chosen because it can pro-
vide the best accuracy for a negative mono-valent ion, e.g.
Ar+e−, uses cavity-bound basis functions, so the code
does not need modiﬁcation, and allows systematic consid-
eration of correlations. To obtain correct electron-noble
gas scattering cross sections it is necessary to include the
direct and exchange potentials from a frozen noble-gas
atom as well as core polarization eﬀects. The direct part
of the unperturbed atomic potential produces a phase
shift opposite to that of the exchange part. The combined
phase shift from the frozen atom is opposite in sign to
that of the core-polarization. We will show that so-called
Brueckner-orbital (BO) approximation treats accurately
these eﬀects and results in good precision. The accuracy
can be further improved by using all-order couple-cluster
method, or other accurate methods developed for mono-
valent atoms. The calculations of phase shifts from en-
ergies for other systems should be also possible and will
be undertaken in future.

Apart from illustration purpose, the calculations will
serve to provide accurate ab initio cross sections for com-
parison with other theories and experiments and to im-
prove understanding of this particular system. Despite
longer than a century history [9] that experiments on
electron interaction with gases have, many questions re-
main open and this area of research is still very active.
Elastic scattering of electrons on noble-gas atoms is of

particular interest since many precise measurements are
available providing tests for theories which all with a few
exceptions are not of ab initio type and are based on pseu-
dopotentials to take into account exchange interaction
and signiﬁcant polarizability of noble-gas atoms by an
electron. Although elaborate complicated semi-empirical
eﬀective potentials have been developed to achieve good
accuracy of calculations, many diﬀerent calculations and
measurements are still
in disagreement, and there is
clearly signiﬁcant uncertainty in theoretical understand-
ing. This situation exist in almost all noble-gas atoms.

For example, motivated by uncertainty in cross sec-
tions at low energies, which are important for extraction
of scattering lengths, ﬁrst ab initio calculations of low-
energy electron scattering from neon [1] and argon [2]
based on MCHF method to account for polarization
eﬀects have been reported, and good agreement with
experiment has been demonstrated. Although MCHF
method is very eﬀective in general for the considera-
tion of complicated open-shell ions, in monovalent atoms
and low-charge ions this method has lower accuracy than
MBPT methods, which were not applied to calculations
of electron scattering from noble-gas atoms, probably due
to complications associated with continuum states.

With the aid of partial wave expansion,

a total elastic cross section σt can be found from phase
shifts δl

Ψ(r) =

Y m
l (θ, φ)

Xlm

Pl(r)
r

σt =

4π
k2

X

(2l + 1) sin2 δl

(1)

(2)

which are normally extracted from asymptotic behavior
of radial wavefunctions Pl(r) obtained by numerical so-
lution of radial Schr¨odinger equation

d2Pl(r)

dr2 +

(cid:20)

k2 − U (r) −

l(l + 1)
r2

(cid:21)

Pl(r) = 0

(3)

for a given energy E = k2/2 as a parameter.
In this
equation U (r) is some eﬀective potential which describes
approximately direct and exchange interaction as well as
the attraction due to core polarizability. (Atomic units
are used in all equations.) The radial wavefunctions can
be also obtained by using ab intio atomic structure meth-
ods such as MCHF [1, 2] or MBPT. Because wavefunc-
tions are not always available in precision MBPT calcu-
lations and most codes output either energies or matrix
elements, the extraction of phase shifts from wavefunc-
tions is not very convenient. However, it is not necessary:
phase shifts can be obtained from energies of an atom
bound to a cavity, which is a natural setting in MBPT
calculations. The extraction is possible because the cav-
ity uniquely encodes phase shift information into energies
of quasicontinuum states and quasicontinuum wavefunc-
tions are proportional to true continuum wavefunctions

2

if their energies are the same. The last statement can be
easily proved since the continuum and quasicontinuum
wavefunctions are both unique solutions of the radial dif-
ferential equation with the same boundary condition at
r → 0, the same energies, although with diﬀerent nor-
malization conditions and maybe sign convention. The
equivalence of quasicontinuum and continuum states was
also stated in Ref. [3]. At large r continuum and quasi-
continuum solutions approach asymptotically the solu-
tion in empty cavity proportional to rjl(r), where jl(r)
are spherical Bessel functions, and the eﬀect of the atomic
potential is only in phase shifts which can be determined
from the asymptotic form of the wavefunctions or from
energies for a known cavity radius R, which is our pro-
posed method:

δl(En) = xln −

2EnR

(4)

p

where xln is the nth zero of the spherical Bessel function
jl(x). Accurate values of xln can be found in mathemat-
ical reference books, for example on page 467 of Ref.[10],
column jν,s where ν = l + 1/2 and s = n. For l = 0,
x0n = nπ. The lowest quasicontinuum state of a given
symmetry has to be used with the ﬁrst zero of the cor-
responding spherical Bessel function, the next state with
the second zero, etc.

Energies of quasicontinuum states are calculated in
Brueckner-orbital approximation, which accounts for
core-polarization eﬀects with relatively high precision.
First, the Dirack-Hartree-Fock (DHF) equation is solved
for a closed-shell atom (Ar or Kr). Then in the obtained
DHF potential, B-spline ﬁnite basis is generated. In this
basis, the Hamiltonian matrix hij = δijǫi + Σij (ε0),

Σij(ε0) =

(−1)jm+jn−ji−jc
(2ji + 1)(2k + 1)
(−1)ji+jn−jb−jc
(2ji + 1)(2k + 1)

Xkcmn

Xkbcn

Xk(icmn)Zk(mnjc)
ε0 + εc − εm − εn

+

Xk(icmn)Zk(mnjc)
ε0 + εn − εb − εc

(5)

is calculated and diagonalized to obtain BO energies.
The summation runs over core states c, excited states
n, m, and angular momenta k; the matrix elements are
calculated between all possible states i and j. The cou-
pled radial integrals Xk(abcd) and Zk(abcd) are deﬁned
for example in [11]. The self-energy matrix elements
Σij(ε0), which take into account dominant part of core-
polarization eﬀects, depend on electron energy ε0 and
contains non-local interaction, so that they can not be
approximated accurately with a single eﬀective poten-
tial unless the energy range is small, ε ≤ ε0, and the
distance between electron and an atom is large com-
pared to the size of the atom so that exchange interaction
can be neglected. The diagonalization is important be-
cause energy diﬀerences between quasi-continuum states
are small. Essentially, all-order methods are necessary,
at least to include chained self-energy corrections. Pure
2nd- or 3rd-order expansions will be inaccurate due to
this reason, and we will illustrate this numerically for

TABLE I: “Bag” model artifact. An extra phase shift δ due to
the “bag” boundary condition for an empty cavity of R=15
E/2 in the Pauli ap-
a.u.
proximation; l is the angular momentum of the state, n is the
radial quantum number.

is compared with prediction α

p

α

l n Ecav
E/2
δ
1 1 4.48[-2] 1.10[-3] 1.09[-3]
1 3 2.64[-1] 2.69[-3] 2.65[-3]
1 4 4.39[-1] 3.80[-3] 3.42[-3]
2 1 7.38[-2] 1.41[-3] 1.40[-3]

p

)

2

m

 

0
2
-
0
1
(
 
n
o
i
t
c
e
s
 
s
s
o
r
C

10

1

0.1

0.01

2nd-order MBPT in the next section, but couple-cluster
methods, which treat some diagrams in all orders, are
expected to give good accuracy. The simplest future
improvement for the current BO theory is to take into
account screening, which is more signiﬁcant in heavier
noble-gas atoms.

Relativistic eﬀects can be also carefully considered, if
necessary. One eﬀect is the diﬀerence in energies be-
tween for example p1/2 and p3/2 states, which for low-
energy scattering is small, but becomes more pronounced
at higher energies. The self-energy correction is also
slightly diﬀerent in non-relativistic and relativistic cases
because intermediate states in the summation are diﬀer-
ent. One interesting consequence of the use of relativis-
tic basis in calculations is that the boundary condition
is not P (R) = 0, but rather P (R) = Q(R), where P (r)
and Q(r) are large and small components of the radial
Dirac wavefunction. This is so-call “bag” boundary con-
dition which is required to avoid Klein paradox [12] and
spurious solutions observed in Ref. [13]. Using the Pauli
expansion, it can be shown that the diﬀerence in bound-
ary conditions produces additional phase shift equal to
α
E/2, where α is the ﬁne-structure constant and E is
the energy of the electron. This shift can be obtained if
we compare energies generated in the empty cavity with
energies expected from the zeros of the spherical Bessel
functions as illustrated in Table I. Apparently, the Pauli
approximation explains well and predicts accurately the
E/2 ≪ 1. When the shift is
“bag” shift as long as α
large, it is necessary to subtract it or even to reanalyze
this method more carefully. In the calculations presented
below the energies were small enough to neglect this ef-
fect as well as some other relativistic eﬀects.

p

p

The results of our calculations for elastic cross section
on argon is shown in Fig.1. Close agreement with ex-
perimental data is achieved in the range below 10 eV if
the self-energy chain corrections are included (BO ener-
gies are used) and the cross sections from partial waves
with l = 0 − 2 are added. To emphasize the importance
of l > 0 contributions in Fig.1 we also plot s-wave cross
section separately and in Fig.2 we compare phase shifts
from s-, p-, and d-waves. To check that our predictions
for phase shifts are correct, we compare them with ex-
perimental phase shifts. Contributions from higher order
partial waves are much smaller, but can be in principle
included. At low energies, the dominant contribution

3

DHF

BO, s-, p-, d-waves

 Expt. 1
 Expt. 2

2nd MBPT, s-wave

BO, s-wave

0.01

0.1

1
Electron energy (eV)

10

FIG. 1: Low energy argon cross section. Comparison of var-
ious theoretical approximations and of the ﬁnal accurate BO
values with experiment. The solid line (partial waves l=0-2)
and the dashed line (l=0) show our BO cross sections obtained
after diagonalization of the Hamiltonian matrix that contains
self-energy deﬁned by Eq.(5). The dotted line is cross section
obtained from 2nd order MBPT energies without diagonaliza-
tion. The dash-dotted line shows cross section obtained from
DHF energies. Experimental results are taken from Refs. [14]
(Expt. 1) and [15] (Expt.2).

3.0

2.5

2.0

1.5

1.0

0.5

0.0

-0.5

-1.0

-1.5

-2.0

)
d
a
r
(
 
s
t
f
i

h
s
 
e
s
a
h
P

d-wave

p-wave

s-wave

0

5

10

15

20

Energy (eV)

FIG. 2: Comparison of our BO calculations (the solid line)
with experiment [16] (the points with error bars) for phase
shifts of electron scattering from argon.

comes from s-waves, which is expected; however, at en-
ergy about 0.36 eV, s-wave sin δ crosses zero, resulting in
a minimum of the cross section. In this region the p-wave
and d-wave contributions become particularly important
and aﬀect the shape of the Ramsauer-Townsend mini-
mum.

Although the diagonalization does not change much
energies of the quasi-continuum states, the phase shifts
and cross sections obtained from energies before (dotted
line) and after (solid line) diagonalization are quite dif-
ferent, see Fig.1. The agreement is achieved only in the
last case.
In the case when argon cross section is cal-
culated from DHF energies and thus polarization eﬀects
are ignored, the cross section is completely inaccurate.

)

2

m

 

0
2
-
0
1
(
 
n
o
i
t
c
e
s
-
s
s
o
r
C

10

1

0.1

0.01

0.1
Energy (eV)

1

10

FIG. 3: Low-energy krypton cross section. The solid line
shows our theory and dashed line shows pseudopotential cal-
culations by Plenkiewicz et al. [19]. Experiment: open circles
with larger error bars show the cross sections of Gus’kov et al.
[14], solid circles with smaller error bars show cross sections
of Buckman and Lohmann [20], and solid circles without error
bars show results of Subramanian and Kumar [21].

At low energy DHF scattering length is exactly opposite
to correct value. DHF potential cross section does not
depend much on energy and this potential in the range
below 3 eV can be approximated by an inﬁnite poten-
tial at R < R0, where R0 =1.42-1.53 a.u. approximately
equal to the size of the argon electron cloud about 1.56
a.u. Simple interpretation of this is the repulsion due to
Pauli exclusion principle.

Because the experiments at very low energy are dif-
ﬁcult, we also ﬁnd scattering length by extrapolating

4

our results to zero energy, Rscatt = −1.47 ± 0.03 a.u.
There are several other calculations of the argon scatter-
ing length: -1.63 a.u. by Asaf et al. [17] from studies of
perturbed optical absorption in gases , -1.492 by Buck-
man and B.Lohmann [15] and -1.449 by Ferch et al. [18]
from TSC studies, and -1.486 by Saha [2] from low en-
ergy calculations. Our value disagrees only with the value
from Ref.[17].

Our theoretical cross section for krypton is shown in
Fig.3. The agreement with the cross section obtained
by Plenkiewicz et al. [19] from a pseudopotetial is very
close. The agreement with experiment is also relatively
good in all range of energies shown, although some dis-
agreement can be seen near the cross-section minimum,
which can be due to the inaccuracy of both theory and
experiment.

In this paper, we proposed a simple method for cal-
culations of phase shifts from energies of quasicontin-
uum states and illustrated its high precision with MBPT
calculations. The method in general can be applied to
many scattering problems: electron scattering on various
atoms and ions, positron scattering, atom-atom scatter-
ing; however, in each case some speciﬁc atomic structure
method has to be developed to achieve practical preci-
sion. Discussed BO approximation can be used only for
electron scattering on closed-shell atoms and ions.

The author is grateful to Dr. Kuzma for ﬁnding rel-
evant references and to Prof. Happer for discussion of
physics of electron scattering, for reading the manuscript,
and for suggestions for its improvement.

[1] H. P. Saha, Phys. Rev. A 39, 5048 (1989).
[2] H. P. Saha, Phys. Rev. A 47, 273 (1993).
[3] H. Bachau, E. Cormier, P. Decleva, J. E. Hansen, and

F. Mart´in, Rep. Prog. Phys. 64, 1815 (2001).

[4] C. F. Fischer and M. Idress, Comput. Phys. 3, 53 (1989).
[5] M. Brosolo, P. Decleva, and A. Lisini, Comput. Phys.

Comm. 71, 207 (1992).

[6] M. Brosolo and P. Decleva, Chem. Phys. 159, 185 (1992).
[7] L. A. A. Nikolopoulos and P. Lambropoulos, J. Phys.

B:At. Mol.Opt. Phys. 34, 545 (2001).

[8] W. R. Johnson and J. Sapirstein, Phys. Rev. Lett. 57,

1126 (1986).

[9] A. Zecca, G. P. Karwasz, and R. S. Brusa, RIVISTA DEL

NUOVO CIMENTO 19, 1 (1996).

[10] M. Abramowitz and I. A. Stegun, eds., Handbook of
Mathematical Functions With Formulas, Graphs, and
Mathematical Tables (U.S. Government Printing Oﬃce,
Washington, D.C. 20402, 1972), 10th ed.

[11] M. S. Safronova, W. R. Johnson, and U. Safronova, Phys.

Rev. A 53, 4036 (1996).

[12] W. R. Johnson, S. A. Blundell, and J. Sapirstein, Phys.

[13] G. W. F. Drake and S. P. Goldman, Phys. Rev. A 23,

Rev. A 37, 307 (1988).

2093 (1981).

[14] Y. K. Gus’kov, R. V. Savvov, and V. A. Slobodyanyuk,

Zh. Tekh. Fiz 48, 277 (1978).

[15] S. J. Buckman and B.Lohmann, J. Phys. B 19, 2547

(1986).

[16] J. F. Williams, J. Phys. B: At. Mol. Phys. 12, 265 (1979).
[17] U. Asaf, W. S. Felps, and S. P. McGlynn, Phys. Rev. A

40, 5458 (1989).

B 18, 967 (1985).

[18] J. Ferch, B. Granitza, C. Masche, and W. Raith, J. Phys.

[19] B. Plenkiewicz, P. Plenkiewicz, C. Hou´ee-Levin, and J.-

P. Jay-Gerin, Phys. Rev. A 38, 6120 (1988).

[20] S. J. Buckman and B. Lohmann, J. Phys. B: At. Mol.

Phys. 20, 5807 (1987).

[21] K. P. Subramanian and V. Kumar, J. Phys. B 20, 5505

(1987).

