5
0
0
2
 
n
u
J
 
9
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
m
o
t
a
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
0
2
2
6
0
5
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Non-destrutive study of non-equilibrium states of old, trapped atoms

Maria Brzozowska, Tomasz M. Brzozowski, Jerzy Zahorowski, and Wo jieh Gawlik

Marian Smoluhowski Institute of Physis, Jagiel lonian University, Reymonta 4, PL 30-059 Craow

∗

†

(Dated: 20th February 2014)

We report on the non-destrutive, real-time spetrosopi determination of the 2D kineti mo-

mentum distribution of a old-atom sample. The method is based on the three-beam measurement

of the reoil-indued resonanes. It an be applied for atoms in a working trap, i.e. onstantly per-

turbed by the trap (cid:28)elds, and yields the real-time, in-situ diagnostis of the 2D atomi momentum

distribution. The method is versatile, aurate and works in a wide range of trapping parameters.

We used it to demonstrate various non-equilibrium states of atoms in an operating magneto-optial

trap. In partiular, we demonstrated anisotropy of the momentum distribution of atomi sample in

the trap with unequal intensities of the trapping beams.

PACS numbers: 32.80.Pj, 42.50.Vk, 42.65.-k

In experiments with old, dilute atomi gases, the (cid:28)rst

ooling stage usually employs a magneto-optial trap

(MOT), whih yields temperatures in a range of hundreds

to a few µK. Further traps and ooling stages an be ap-

plied for reahing the quantum degeneray regime. This

requires mathing of the momentum distributions of var-

ious traps. Knowledge of suh distributions is also essen-

tial for quantum state diagnostis of the trapped sample.

Below, we present reliable 2D diagnostis method based

on the so alled reoil-indued resonanes (RIRs) and ap-

ply it to study non-standard momentum distributions in

Figure 1: Reoil-indued resonanes: (a) Geometry of the

a MOT.

laser beams, (b) the atomi kineti energy and momentum

The RIRs result from a stimulated Raman proess,

hanges due to the Raman proess oupling two kineti states.

whih ouples two kineti states of free moving atoms

Cirles symbolize populations Π(p) of these states.

(Fig. 1). The oupling is aomplished by interation

with two laser beams, the pump and the probe, of fre-

quenies ω and ω + δ , respetively. As a result of

the Raman transition, the atoms gain kineti energy

∆Ekin = ~δ and hange momentum p by ∆p = ~∆k =
±2~kˆei sin θ/2, where k is the modulus of the light wave
vetor, θ is the angle between the beams, and ˆei is the
unit vetor perpendiular to the bisetor of θ. The sign
in ∆p depends on the diretion of the Raman proess.

of the reoil e(cid:27)et in a ontinuously working MOT and its

in(cid:29)uene on the probe absorption and four wave mixing

spetra has been reently demonstrated in Ref. [3℄.

The big advantage of the RIR method is its dire-

tional seletivity. Π(p) is probed in a given diretion,

spei(cid:28)ed by the angle between the probe and the pump

beams (Fig.1a). Hene, apart from appliations to stan-

The non-zero amplitude of the onsidered Raman reso-

dard 1D veloimetry [7, 9℄, RIRs an also be used for

nane arises from di(cid:27)erent populations of the given ki-

studies of a possible momentum distribution anisotropy

neti states. When reorded in absorbtion, the RIR

in non-equilibrium states of a old atomi sample. For

shape is proportional to a derivative of the momentum

example, atoms in a MOT an be driven away from ther-

distribution ∂Π(pi)/∂pi , where pi = p·ˆei [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6℄.
This diret relation of the RIR signal to Π(p) allows on-

mal equilibrium by introduing appropriate asymmetry

in the trapping parameters. In partiular, as predited

venient and aurate measurement of the kineti momen-

in Ref. [11℄ and demonstrated below, when the trap-

tum distribution in a old atomi sample, provided that

ping light intensity in a MOT is unevenly distributed

the distribution is su(cid:30)iently narrow.

between the trapping beams, the width of Π(p) beomes

The (cid:28)rst unambiguous observation of RIRs was made

diretion-dependent.

in a 1D optial lattie [1℄ (cid:28)lled with atoms muh older

In this Letter we present evidene of three di(cid:27)erent

than in a standard MOT. RIR signals were also seen in

kinds of anisotropy of the momentum distribution in a

optial molasses [7, 8℄, in a old atomi beam [9℄ and

onstantly operating MOT, i.e. with all light and mag-

with atoms released from a MOT [10℄. The signi(cid:28)ane

neti (cid:28)elds on. The measurement was onduted us-

∗

†

Eletroni address: gawlikuj.edu.pl

thermometry as suggested by Meaher et al. [7℄. Impor-

URL: http://www.if.uj.edu.pl/ZF/qnog/

tant feature of our extension is that 2D information is

ing our three-beam, RIR-based method for simultaneous

probing of the momentum distribution in two perpendi-

ular diretions. The method extends the priniple of 1D

2

Π(p) is the Maxwell-Boltzmann distribution, the RIR
signal s(δ) [2, 3℄ reorded with the retrore(cid:29)eted probe

is given by two ontributions. The (cid:28)rst one results from

the Raman proess involving the pump and the probe

beam making small angle θ and the wide one is for angle
180◦ − θ. The signal is

s(δ) ∝ −A⊥δ exp

−

− A||δ exp

−

δ2
ξ2
⊥ (cid:19)

(cid:18)

(δ − δ0)2
ξ2
||

,

!

 

(1)

where, for small θ, ξ2

⊥ ≈ 2kBk2m−1θ2τ⊥ and ξ2

|| ≈
8kBk2m−1τ|| . τ⊥ and τ|| are the distribution widths in
the ⊥ and || diretions in the temperature units, A|| and
A⊥ are the amplitudes of the orresponding ontribu-
tions, m is the atomi mass and kB is the Boltzmann
onstant, and δ0 is the possible frequeny shift between
the ⊥ and || ontributions, to be disussed later.

Figure 2: The layout of the experiment. The pump and probe

beams interset in a loud of old atoms in the working MOT.

With the optional mirror we realize a three-beam on(cid:28)gura-

tion in whih the momentum exhange is allowed in two di-

retions: ⊥ and ||. Third pair of the MOT beams along x and

the MOT oils are not shown in this (cid:28)gure.

aquired simultaneously in one measurement.

85

In our experiment (Fig. 2) the

Rb atoms are trapped

and ooled in a standard vapor-loaded MOT [12℄. Ad-

ditionally, two beams interseting in the trap enter are

introdued: the pump and the probe. The probe beam

is direted at a small angle α = 3◦
(propagating along z ), and the pump is at θ = 5◦

to the MOT beams

to

the probe. The probe beam an be deteted either di-

retly or after retrore(cid:29)etion. The setup with retrore-

(cid:29)eted probe enables the measurement of Π(p) simulta-
neously along two perpendiular diretions: ⊥, for an-
gle θ between the pump and the nearly o-propagating
probe, and ||, for angle 180◦ − θ between the pump and
the nearly ounter-propagating probe. When α and θ are
su(cid:30)iently small, ⊥ and || almost oinide with the y and
z diretions, respetively. Both pump and probe beams

are derived from diode lasers synhronized by injetion-

loking and are blue-detuned from the trapping transi-

2

tion

S1/2(F = 3)(cid:21)

P3/2(F ′ = 4) by ∆ = 2π·140 MHz
≈ 23.3 Γ, where Γ denotes the natural linewidth. De-

2

tuning of this size redues the atomi perturbation to a

very low level (sattering rate ∝ 1/∆2
for non-destrutive measurements. Despite large ∆, the

) whih is essential

pump and probe beams drive the Raman signal with a

Figure 3: Transmission spetrum of a retrore(cid:29)eted probe

(gray) and the theoretial predition (dashed) of eq.(1). The

beam setup is shown in the inset. The MOT beams have

2

per beam and are detuned

intensity IMOT = 13.8 mW/cm
from the trapping transition by ∆MOT = −3 Γ, the repumper
beam intensity IREP = 15 mW/cm
gradient ∂xB = 12 Gauss/cm, the pump beam intensity I =
, the probe beam total power P ≈ 2 µW and
33 mW/cm
diameter σ = 1 mm.

2

2

, the axial magneti (cid:28)eld

su(cid:30)iently large amplitude and signal-to-noise ratio for

Typial example of the retrore(cid:29)eted-probe transmis-

2

the pump beam intensities 5-35 mW/m

. In priniple,

sion spetrum is shown in Fig. 3. It exhibits two distint

one ould retrore(cid:29)et the pump- rather than probe-beam.

resonant ontributions, as predited by eq. (1). The wide

Suh solution, however, would introdue extra omplia-

ontribution is shifted with respet to the narrow one by

tions due to the standing-wave pattern of a strong pump.

72.4 kHz, whih indiates a non-zero average momentum

The probe beam is sanned by δ ≈ ±1 MHz around
frequeny ω of the pump beam. The probe and pump

omponent in the || diretion [19℄. This is evidene of a

slow (2.8 m/s) atomi drift resulting from a small imbal-

photons indue Raman transitions between the atomi

ane of the radiation pressures intrinsi to a MOT with

kineti states separated by ±~δ . Sine the polarization

retrore(cid:29)eted trapping beams. It has been heked that

of the pump and probe beams is hosen to be the same,

this shift inreases when the imbalane is purposely in-

the atoms undergo Raman transitions with ∆mF = 0.

reased. As the veloity distributions derived from the

Hene, the internal atomi state does not hange and

signal in Fig. 3 are Gaussian, one an determine the val-

the only states that have to be onsidered are the ex-

ternal states assoiated with the kineti energy of the

atomi enter-of-mass. The multi-level struture of

Rb

ues τ⊥ = 171.7 ± 6.2 µK and τ|| = 170.1 ± 3.2 µK. The
equality of these τ s implies thermodynamial equilibrium
and allows their interpretation as temperature T . The

85

an thus be redued to a set of independent two-level

equilibrium is due to the fat that total intensities of

transitions whih allows straightforward appliation of

eah pair of the beams remain the same and persists for

the basi RIR theory [1, 2℄. With the assumption that

various MOT-beams intensities (Fig. 4). The quasi-linear

inrease of T with the total MOT-beams intensity agrees

of τ⊥ with growing κ), but the theory fails to repro-

well with previous observations [15, 16, 17℄.

due the exat shape of the experimental dependene.

3

We attribute this disrepany to additional mehanism

of sub-Doppler ooling involving multilevel struture of

85

Rb atoms, whih is not inluded in the alulations of

Ref. [11℄. The inrease of Iz aompanied by attenuation
of Ix and Iy results in a very e(cid:30)ient quasi-1D ooling
sheme in the σ+ − σ−
of this ooling is provided by the values of τ|| falling to
70 µK, well below the Doppler ooling limit of 140 µK.

optial molasses [14℄. Evidene

Figure 4: Trapped atoms in a thermal equilibrium: the de-

pendene of widths τ⊥ and τ|| on the intensity of the MOT

beams (the intensity is given per one MOT beam). Other

parameters are the same as in the ase of Fig. 3.

The thermodynamis of the system beomes di(cid:27)erent

when the trapping light is unevenly distributed between

the MOT beam pairs.

For suh onditions, Ga jda and Mostowski predited in

Ref. [11℄ that the width of kineti momentum distribution

beomes diretion-dependent. Suh anisotropy is a signa-

ture of the non-equilibrium state of the old atom loud.

Exploiting the simultaneous measurement of the momen-

tum width in two perpendiular diretions, we veri(cid:28)ed

whether suh an anisotropy in a MOT an be observed.

For this reason, we hanged intensity balane between

the longitudinal (Iz ) and transverse (Ix , Iy ) MOT beam
pairs, while keeping the total intensity I0 = Ix + Iy + Iz
onstant. We de(cid:28)ne parameter κ as the relative intensity
of Iz , Iz = κI0 , Ix = Iy = (1 − κ)I0/2. The results of
the measurement of τ|| and τ⊥ for di(cid:27)erent values of κ

are depited in Fig 5. For equal partition of the trapping

intensity (κ = 1/3), the widths of kineti momentum

Figure 5: The measured widths of the kineti momentum

distributions in the two perpendiular diretions, τ⊥ (hollow
irles)and τ|| ((cid:28)lled irles), as a funtion of relative intensity
2
κ. For the equilibrium (κ = 1/3), IMOT = 6.8 mW/cm
τ⊥ = 100±3 µK and τ|| = 103±2 µK. Other parameters as in

,

Fig. 3. Theoretial urves are plotted aording to Refs. [11,

13℄.

In the situation disussed above, the MOT beams were

arefully aligned whih resulted in high stability of the

trapped-atom loud, even for the largest departures from

the equal partition of the trapping light intensity, and al-

lowed (cid:28)tting of the RIR signals by expression (1). The

distributions are the same as expeted. However, when

sole manifestation of the non-equilibrium state of the

κ inreases, τ|| and τ⊥ follow opposite trends, whih is

sample was the anisotropy of Π(p).

evidene of kineti momentum anisotropy in a working

The thermodynamis equilibrium an be altered yet in

MOT and thereby its non-equilibrium state. We notie

that τk +2τ⊥ whih is the measure of v2
⊥ is onstant
within ±2% over the whole measured range of κ shown in
Fig. 5. The derease of τ|| with the growing κ is due to the

k +2v2

a di(cid:27)erent way, namely by enhaning imbalane between

the ounter-propagating MOT-beam radiation pressures.

Fig. 6a depits the RIR reorded with a standard 1D,

two-beam arrangement applied to the ase when the

fat that the heating assoiated with spontaneous emis-

MOT beams were slightly misaligned and detuned loser

sion is isotropi, whereas the ooling rate is higher for

to resonane. The 1D thermometry was aomplished

the diretion with the inreased intensity. The momen-

by replaing the optional mirror in (Fig. 2) by a pho-

tum anisotropy beomes manifest beause the density of

todiode. In this on(cid:28)guration, the pump and the probe

the atoms is too small to provide e(cid:30)ient thermalization.

Simple estimation for typial onditions and Rb-Rb ol-

lision ross-setion σRb−Rb = 3 · 10−13

2

beams form the angle 180◦ − θ and the reorded signal
is proportional only to ∂Π(p||)/∂p|| . Its shape deviates

m

yields the

from a derivative of a Gaussian urve. It is straightfor-

atomi ollision rate below 1 Hz in our trap, while the

ward to obtain the atual distribution of veloity om-

frition oe(cid:30)ient, in frequeny units, is in the kHz range.

The theoretial behavior of τ|| and τ⊥ aording to the

formulas from Refs. [11, 13℄ is plotted in Fig. 5 along

ponent in the || diretion, v|| , by integrating the probe

transmission signal and saling to the veloity units: for

small θ, v|| ≈ δ/2k . To emphasize the departure of the

with the experimental data. They exhibit similar qual-

atual veloity distribution from the ase of the thermal

itative behavior (the derease of τ|| and the inrease

equilibrium, the distribution obtained from experimen-

4

butions of old, trapped atoms, based on reoil-indued

resonanes. Its potential has been demonstrated by study

of three di(cid:27)erent momentum distributions of atoms in the

operating magneto-optial trap: (i) thermodynami equi-

librium with well de(cid:28)ned temperature and Gaussian mo-

mentum distribution with a slow veloity drift; (ii) non-

equilibrium state haraterized by Gaussian distributions

with drastially di(cid:27)erent widths in the longitudinal and

transverse diretions; (iii) non-equilibrium state of asym-

metri momentum distribution along one diretion. The

result (ii) qualitatively on(cid:28)rms theoretial preditions of

Ref. [11℄ and indiate need for more detailed theory. Our

method allows aurate determination of the momentum

distributions simultaneously in two perpendiular dire-

tions and an be straightforwardly applied to 3D ase. It

an be used for the non-destrutive, on-line diagnostis

of the atom dynamis in a trap and arried out indepen-

dently and simultaneously with the other spetrosopi

measurements. The method should also be appliable

to quantum-degenerate gases. In fat, the widely used

Bragg spetrosopy is based on the same priniple of mo-

mentum and energy transfer: it measures the momentum

gained by atoms whereas RIR measures the omplemen-

tary photoni loss. Measuring the Bragg-beam transmis-

sion in our three-beam geometry, rather than imaging

Figure 6:

(a) The probe transmission spetrum in a mis-

aligned MOT for IMOT = 3.1 mW/cm

, ∆MOT = −2.25Γ

2

and other experimental parameters as in Fig 3. As shown

in inset, the probe-beam is not retrore(cid:29)eted, hene only the

wide RIR ontribution is present.

(b) The atual veloity

distribution Π(v||) (grey thik line) obtained by integrating

the probe transmission spetrum and the Gaussian referene

the BEC shape an beome a valuable, non-destrutive

(dotted line), de(cid:28)ned in text.

alternative to standard diagnostis of ultra-lod, trapped

atoms.

This work was supported by the Polish Ministry of Si-

tal signal is shown in Fig. 6b together with the idealized

ene and Information Soiety Tehnologies and is part of

Gaussian urve of the same area and of the width derived

a general program on old-atom physis of the National

from the positions of the minimum and maximum of the

Laboratory of AMO Physis in Toru«, Poland. Authors

RIR signal in Fig. 6a.

would like to thank Mariusz Ga jda for his illuminating

In onlusion, we have worked out three-beam spe-

disussion [13℄ and Krzysztof Saha for his valuable om-

trosopi method of determining the momentum distri-

ments.

[1℄ G. Grynberg. J.-Y. Courtois, B. Lounis, and P. Verkerk,

(1994).

Phys. Rev. Lett. 72, 3017 (1994).

[12℄ E. L. Raab, M. Prentiss, A. Cable, S. Chu, and D. E.

[2℄ P. Verkerk, Proeedings of The International Shool of

Prithard, Phys. Rev. Lett. 59, 2631 (1987).

Physis, Varenna, Course CXXXI, 325 (1996).

[13℄ M. Ga jda, private ommuniation.

[3℄ T. M. Brzozowski, M. Brzozowska, J. Zahorowski, M.

[14℄ J. Dalibard and C. Cohen-Tannoudji, J. Opt. So. Am.

Zawada, and W. Gawlik, Phys. Rev. A 71, 013401 (2005).

B 6, 2023 (1998).

[4℄ J. Guo, P. R. Berman, B. Dubetsky, and G. Grynberg,

[15℄ P. D. Lett, W. D. Phillips, S. L. Rolston, C. E. Tanner,

Phys. Rev. A 46, 1426 (1992).

R. N. Watts, C. I. Westbrook, J. Opt. So. Am. B 6,

[5℄ J. Guo and P. R. Berman, Phys. Rev. A 47, 4128 (1993).

2085 (1989)

[6℄ B. Dubetsky and P. R. Berman, Phys. Rev. A 52, R2519

[16℄ C. D. Wallae, T. P. Dinneen, K. Y. N. Tan, A. Ku-

(1995).

marakrishan, P. L. Gould and J. Javanainen, J. Opt. So.

[7℄ D. R. Meaher, D. Boiron, H. Metalf, C. Salomon, and

Am. B, 11, 703 (1994).

G. Grynberg, Phys. Rev. A 50, R1992 (1994).

[17℄ X. Xu, T. H. Loftus, M. J. Smith, J. L. Hall and A.

[8℄ M. C. Fisher, A. M. Dudarev, B. Gutiérrez-Medina, and

Gallagher and J. Ye, Phys. Rev. A 66, 011401(R) (2002)

M. G. Raizen, J. Opt. B: Quantum Semilass. Opt.3, 279

[18℄ U. D. Rapol and A. Wasan and V. Natara jan, Phys. Rev.

(2001).

A, 46, 023402 (2001).

[9℄ G. Di Domenio, G. Mileti and P. Thomann, Phys. Rev.

[19℄ The possible drift in the perpendiular diretion annot

A 64, 043408-1 (2001).

be deteted in this setup as the shifts of the two reso-

[10℄ Y.-C. Chen, Y.-W. Chen, J.-J. Su, J.-Y. Huang, and I.

nanes are proportional to their widths.

A. Yu, Phys. Rev. A 63, 043808 (2001).

[11℄ M. Ga jda and J. Mostowski, Phys. Rev. A 49, 4864

