5
0
0
2
 
n
u
J
 
4
 
 
]
h
p
-
m
o
t
a
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
8
3
0
6
0
5
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Study of P,T-Parity Violation Eﬀects in Polar
Heavy-Atom Molecules

A.V. Titov1, N.S. Mosyagin1, A.N. Petrov1, T.A. Isaev1, and D. DeMille2

1 Petersburg Nuclear Physics Institute, Gatchina, St.-Petersburg district 188300,

Russia; titov@pnpi.spb.ru; http://www.qchem.pnpi.spb.ru

2 Physics Department, Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut 06520, USA

Summary. Investigation of P,T-parity nonconservation (PNC) phenomena is of
fundamental importance for physics. Experiments to search for PNC eﬀects have
been performed on TlF and YbF molecules and are in progress for PbO and PbF
molecules. For interpretation of molecular PNC experiments it is necessary to cal-
culate those needed molecular properties which cannot be measured. In particular,
electronic densities in heavy-atom cores are required for interpretation of the mea-
sured data in terms of the P,T-odd properties of elementary particles or P,T-odd
interactions between them. Reliable calculations of the core properties (PNC eﬀect,
hyperﬁne structure etc., which are described by the operators heavily concentrated
in atomic cores or on nuclei) usually require accurate accounting for both relativistic
and correlation eﬀects in heavy-atom systems. In this paper, some basic aspects of
the experimental search for PNC eﬀects in heavy-atom molecules and the compu-
tational methods used in their electronic structure calculations are discussed. The
latter include the generalized relativistic eﬀective core potential (GRECP) approach
and the methods of nonvariational and variational one-center restoration of correct
shapes of four-component spinors in atomic cores after a two-component GRECP
calculation of a molecule. Their eﬃciency is illustrated with calculations of param-
eters of the eﬀective P,T-odd spin-rotational Hamiltonians in the molecules PbF,
HgF, YbF, BaF, TlF, and PbO.

Key words: electronic structure, heavy-atom molecules, ab initio method,
relativistic eﬀective core potential, hyperﬁne structure, parity violation.

Introduction

It is well recognized that polar diatomics containing heavy elements are
very promising objects for the experimental search for the break of inver-
sion symmetry (P) and time-reversal invariance (T). Though the search for
the P,T-parity nonconservation (PNC) eﬀects in heavy atoms and heavy-atom
molecules has produced null results up to now, there are serious reasons to
search for them with the presently accessible (expected) level of experimental

2

A.V. Titov, N.S. Mosyagin, A.N. Petrov, T.A. Isaev, and D. DeMille

sensitivity. The observation of non-zero P,T-odd eﬀects at this level would in-
dicate the presence of so-called “new physics” [1] beyond the Standard Model
(SM) of electroweak and strong interactions [2–5] that is certainly of funda-
mental importance. Despite well known drawbacks and unresolved problems of
the Standard Model (radiative corrections to the Higgs mass are quadratically
divergent; rather artiﬁial Higgs mechanism of symmetry breaking is not yet
veriﬁed in experiment; the problem of CP-violation is not well understood,
where “C” is charge conjugation symmetry etc.) there are no experimental
data available which would be in direct contradiction with this theory (see
section 2 and papers [1, 6] for more details and references). In turn, some
popular extensions of the Standard Model, which allow one to overcome its
disadvantages, are not conﬁrmed experimentally.

A crucial feature of PNC experiments in atoms, molecules, liquids or solids
is that for interpretation of measured data in terms of fundamental constants
of the P,T-odd interactions, one must calculate those properties of the sys-
tems, which establish a connection between the measured data and studied
fundamental constants (see section 3). These properties are described by oper-
ators heavily concentrated near or on heavy nuclei; they cannot be measured
and their theoretical study is not a trivial task. During the last several years
the signiﬁcance of (and requirement for) ab initio calculation of electronic
structure providing a high level of reliability and accuracy in accounting for
both relativistic and correlation eﬀects has only increased (see sections 2 and
9).

The main goal of the paper is to discuss the present status of relativis-
tic calculations of P,T-odd properties in heavy-atom molecules, the two-step
methodology used in these calculations, and the accuracy of this method. The
historical background of the PNC study in atoms and molecules, its current
status and some general remarks on the PNC experiments are presented in
sections 1, 2 and 3, correspondingly. The ab initio relativistic methods and
the two-step techniques of calculation designed for studying PNC properties
in heavy-atom molecules are discussed in sections 4 and 5. The calculations of
PNC properties and hyperﬁne structure in molecules PbF, HgF, YbF, BaF,
TlF and PbO are presented in sections 6–9. Concluding remarks are outlined
in section 10.

1 Study of P- and T-parity nonconservation eﬀects in
heavy-atom molecules: Historical background

After discovery of the combined charge and space parity violation, or CP-
violation, in K 0
L-meson decay [7], the search for the electric dipole moments
(EDMs) of elementary particles has become one of the most fundamental
problems in physics [1, 6, 8–10]. A permanent EDM is induced by the weak
interaction that breaks both the space symmetry inversion and time-reversal
invariance [11]. Considerable experimental eﬀort has been invested in probing

Study of P,T-Parity Violation Eﬀects in Polar Heavy-Atom Molecules

3

for atomic EDMs induced by EDMs of the proton, neutron and electron,
and by P,T-odd interactions between them. The best available restriction for
the electron EDM, de, was obtained in the atomic Tl experiment [12], which
established an upper limit of
cm, where e is the charge
de|
·
|
of the electron. The benchmark upper limit on a nuclear EDM is obtained in
atomic experiment on 199Hg [13],
cm, from which the
dHg
·
|
|
cm, was also recently
dp|
best restriction on the proton EDM,
·
|
obtained by Dmitriev & Sen’kov [14] (the previous upper limit on the proton
EDM was obtained in the TlF experiment, see below).

10−28 e
10−24 e

< 2.1
< 5.4

10−27 e

< 1.6

×
×

×

≈

≥

Since 1967, when Sandars suggested the use of polar heavy-atom molecules
in the experimental search for the proton EDM [15], molecules have been
considered the most promising objects for such experiments. Sandars also
noticed earlier [16] that the P- and P,T-parity nonconservation eﬀects are
strongly enhanced in heavy atoms due to relativistic and other eﬀects. For
example, in paramagnetic atoms the enhancement factor for an electron EDM,
datom/de, is roughly proportional to α2Z 3αD, where α
1/137 is the ﬁne
structure constant, Z is the nuclear charge and αD is the atomic polarisability.
It can be of order 100 or greater for highly polarizable heavy atoms (Z
50).
Furthermore, the eﬀective intramolecular electric ﬁeld acting on electrons in
polar molecules can be ﬁve or more orders of magnitude higher than the
maximal ﬁeld accessible in a laboratory. The ﬁrst molecular EDM experiment
was performed on TlF by Sandars et al. [17] (Oxford, UK); it was interpreted
as a search for the proton EDM and other nuclear P,T-odd eﬀects. In 1991,
in the last series of the 205TlF experiments by Hinds et al. [18] (Yale, USA),
10−23 e
the restriction dp = (
cm was obtained (this was recalculated
·
in 2002 by Petrov et al. [19] as dp = (
1.7
−
In 1978 the experimental investigation of the electron EDM and other
PNC eﬀects was further stimulated by Labzowsky et al. [20, 21] and Sushkov
& Flambaum [22] who clariﬁed the possibilities of additional enhancement of
these eﬀects in diatomic radicals like BiS and PbF due to the closeness of
levels of opposite parity in Ω-doublets having a 2Π1/2 ground state. Then
Sushkov et al. [23] and Flambaum & Khriplovich [24] suggested the use of Ω-
doubling in diatomic radicals with a 2Σ1/2 ground state for such experiments
and the HgF, HgH and BaF molecules were ﬁrst studied semiempirically by
Kozlov [25]. At the same time, the ﬁrst two-step ab initio calculation of PNC
eﬀects in PbF initiated by Labzowsky was ﬁnished by Titov et al. [26, 27]. A
few years later, Hinds started an experimental search for the electron EDM
in the YbF molecule, on which the ﬁrst result was obtained by his group in
2002 (Sussex, UK) [28], de=(
cm. Though that restriction
3.2)
·
is worse than the best current de datum (from the Tl experiment, see above),
nevertheless, it is limited by only counting statistics, as Hinds et al. pointed
out in [28].

10−23 e

cm).
·

10−26e

2.8)

0.2

6)

×

×

±

−

±

×

±

−

4

A new series of electron EDM experiments on YbF by Hinds’ group (Im-
perial College, UK) are in progress and a new generation of electron EDM
experiments using a vapor cell, on the metastable a(1) state of PbO, is being

4

A.V. Titov, N.S. Mosyagin, A.N. Petrov, T.A. Isaev, and D. DeMille

prepared by the group of DeMille (Yale, USA). The unique suitability of PbO
for searching for the elusive de is demonstrated by the very high projected sta-
tistical sensitivity of the Yale experiment to the electron EDM. In prospect, it
allows one to detect de of order of 10−29
cm [29], two–four orders of
·
magnitude lower than the current limit quoted above. Some other candidates
for the EDM experiments, in particular, HgH, HgF, TeO∗, and HI+ are being
discussed and an experiment on PbF is planned (Oklahoma Univ., USA).

10−31 e

÷

2 Present status of the electron EDM search

As is mentioned in the introduction, the observation of a non-zero EDM would
point out the presence of so called “new physics” (see [1, 30] and references)
beyond the Standard Model [2–5,31] or CP violation in the QCD sector of SM,
SU (3)C. The discovery of a lepton EDM (electron EDM in our case) would
have an advantage as compared to the cases of neutron or proton EDMs
because the latter are not considered as elementary particles within the SM
and its extensions.

In Table 1 some estimates for the electron EDM predicted by diﬀerent the-
oretical models are given (e.g., see [6] for more details). One can see from the
table that the most conservative estimate is given by the Standard Model.
This is explained by severe cancellations and suppressions of the contribu-
tions producing the electron EDM within the SM. In turn, the “new physics”
(extensions of the Standard Model: supersymmetry (SUSY) [1, 32, 33] multi-
Higgs [34–36], left-right symmetry [33, 35, 37], lepton ﬂavor-changing [38, 39]
etc.) is very sensitive to the EDMs of elementary particles. This is especially
true for the minimal (“naive”) SUSY model, which predicts an electron EDM
already at the level of 10−25e
cm. However, the best experimental estimate
·
on the electron EDM, 1.6
cm, obtained in the experiment on the
·
Tl atom [12], is almost two orders of magnitude smaller. More sophisticated
SUSY models (which are extremely popular among theorists because they al-
low one to overcome serious theoretical drawbacks of SM, explain the “gauge
hierarchy problem”, solve the problem of dark matter in astrophysics etc.)
still predict the electron EDM at the level of 10−27e
cm or somewhat smaller.
·
Since the Tl experiment is ﬁnished now, an intriguing expectation is connected
with the ongoing experiment on the a(1) state of the PbO molecule, which is
expected to be sensitive to the electron EDM at least two orders of magnitude
smaller. Thus, the most popular extensions of SM can be severely examined
by this experiment, i.e. even the result compatible with zero will dramatically
inﬂuence their status.

10−27e

×

Study of P,T-Parity Violation Eﬀects in Polar Heavy-Atom Molecules

5

Table 1. Prediction for the electron EDM, |de|, in popular theoretical models

Model

Standard Model

Left-right symmetric

Lepton ﬂavor-changing

Multi-Higgs

Supersymmetric

|de| (in e·cm)

< 10−38
10−28 − 10−26
10−29 − 10−26
10−28 − 10−27
≤ 10−25

Experimental limit [12]

< 1.6×10−27

3 General remarks on experimental search for EDMs in
atoms and molecules

The experiments to search for EDMs in atoms and molecules are carried out
using diﬀerent approaches [6,40]. The experimental technique depends on the
properties of the atoms and molecules used in such an experiment. These
properties inﬂuence the atomic and molecular sources, resonance region and
detector. For example, for diatomic radicals like YbF or PbF the experiments
on molecular beams are most reasonable, while for molecules with closed elec-
tronic shells in the ground state like PbO the EDM measurements can be
carried out in optical cells.

Nevertheless, the statistical sensitivity of the experiments to the electron
or proton EDM usually depends on some parameters common for all such
EDM experiments. The easiest way to see this is to apply the Heisenberg
uncertainty principle to evaluate the sensitivity of the EDM measurement.
Suppose that the EDM of a molecule is measured in some electric ﬁeld, E. (Do
not confuse the EDM of a polar molecule with the large conventional dipole
moment of the molecule, which averages to zero in the absence of external
electric ﬁeld in the laboratory coordinate system. In contrast to the latter, the
(vanishingly small) molecular EDM can exist only due to P,T-odd interactions;
it is permanent and its direction depends on the sign of the projection of the
total electronic momentum on the molecular axis. See [6] for more details.)
Thus the energy of interaction of the molecular EDM, d = d σ (where σ is
a unit vector along the total angular momentum of the molecule), with the
electric ﬁeld is d
E (linear Stark eﬀect) and the energy diﬀerence between
the levels with opposite directions of the total angular momentum (leading
to the contributions of diﬀerent signs) is 2d
E. If a measurement is carried
out by detecting the energy shift during a time T , the uncertainty in the d
determination is δd = ¯h/(2T E
σ). For such measurement on N uncorrelated
molecules one, obviously, has

·

·

·

6

A.V. Titov, N.S. Mosyagin, A.N. Petrov, T.A. Isaev, and D. DeMille

δd = ¯h/(2T √N E

σ) = ¯h/(2T Eσ

τ dN/dt) ,

·

p

where dN/dt is the counting rate, Eσ = E
σ, and τ is the total measurement
T and T is limited by the coherence time of the considered
time (usually τ
system). Up to now we deal with the molecular EDM d. Let us write d = Gde,
where de is the value of the electron EDM (the same is valid, of course, for
the proton EDM) and G is the proportionality coeﬃcient (usually called the
enhancement factor). Thus, the ﬁnal expression for δde is

≫

·

δde =

=

,

(1)

2T GEσ

τ dN/dt

2T W

τ dN/dt

¯h

p

¯h

p

where the value W = GEσ is the eﬀective electric ﬁeld in the molecule, which
can be interpreted as the ﬁeld that should be applied along the EDM of a free
electron to give the energy shift 2W de ≡
prospective EDM experiment can be derived:

From expression (1), the basic conditions which should be met in any

2Eσd .

1. The counting rate (dN/dt) should be made as high as possible. From
this point of view the experiments on vapor cells, like that planned for
PbO, have a clear advantage as compared to beam experiments because
molecular vapor density can be usually made much higher than molecular
beam density. Thus, in the experiment on the PbO cell the counting rate
is estimated to be of order 1011–1015 Hz [29], while in the experiment on
the YbF molecular beam the counting rate was of order 103—104 Hz [28].
2. It is crucial to attain high coherence time T . In the beam experiments that
time is just the time of ﬂight through the region with the electric ﬁeld.
For a gas-dynamic molecular source the typical time of ﬂight is 1
10 ms.
On the other hand, for the PbO experiment in vapor cell T is close to the
0.1 ms. So, the beam
lifetime of the excited (metastable) state a(1), T
≈
experiments have advantage in the coherence time.

−

3. It is also critical to have a high value of the eﬀective electric ﬁeld W ,
acting on the electron. The only way to know that parameter is to per-
form relativistic calculations. It is notable that the ﬁrst semiempirical
estimates of this kind were performed by Sandars in [15, 16] for Cs and
TlF, correspondingly. In these papers the importance of accounting for
relativistic eﬀects and using heavy atoms and heavy-atom molecules in
EDM experiments was ﬁrst understood.

The expected energy diﬀerence, 2d

E is extremely small even for com-
pletely polarized heavy-atom molecules. Thus, in practice, the EDM experi-
ment is usually carried out in parallel and antiparallel electric and magnetic
(B) ﬁelds. Interaction energy of the molecular magnetic moment, µ, with the
magnetic ﬁeld is much higher than that of the EDM with the electric ﬁeld
and the energy diﬀerences are

·

2µ

B + 2d

E

·

·

Study of P,T-Parity Violation Eﬀects in Polar Heavy-Atom Molecules

7

and

2µ

B

2d

E

·

·

−
for parallel and antiparallel ﬁelds, respectively (in practice, the atomic or
molecular spin precession is usually studied instead of direct measurement of
the energy shift, see [40]). When the electric ﬁeld is reversed, the energy shift,
4d
E = 4deW , points to the existence of the permanent molecular EDM.
The same measurement technique is applicable to studying other P,T-odd
interactions in atoms and molecules.

·

The electronic structure parameters describing the P,T-odd interactions
of electrons (sections 6, 7, and 9) and nucleons (section 8) including the in-
teractions with their EDMs should be reliably calculated for interpretation
of the experimental data. Moreover, ab initio calculations of some molecu-
lar properties are usually required even for the stage of preparation of the
experimental setup. Thus, electronic structure calculations suppose a high
level of accounting for both correlations and relativistic eﬀects (see below).
Modern methods of relativistic ab initio calculations (including very recently
developed approaches) allow one to achieve the required high accuracy. These
approaches will be outlined and discussed in the following sections.

4 Heavy-atom molecules: Computational strategies.

The most straightforward method for electronic structure calculation of heavy-
atom molecules is solution of the eigenvalue problem using the Dirac-Coulomb
(DC) or Dirac-Coulomb-Breit (DCB) Hamiltonians [41–43] when some ap-
proximation for the four-component wave function is chosen.

However, even applying the four-component single conﬁguration (SCF)
approximation, Dirac-Fock (DF) or Dirac-Fock-Breit (DFB), to calculation
of heavy-atom molecules (followed by transformation of two-electron inte-
grals to the basis of molecular spinors is not always an easy task) because
a very large set of primitive atomic basis functions can be required for such
all-electron four-component SCF calculations (see [44]). Starting from the
Pauli approximation and Foldy–Wouthuysen transformation, many diﬀerent
two-component approaches were developed in which only large components
are treated explicitly (e.g., see [45–48] and references). In addition, the ap-
proaches with perturbative treatment of relativistic eﬀects [49] have been de-
veloped in which a nonrelativistic wavefunction is used as reference. Dur-
ing the last few years, good progress was also attained in four-component
techniques [41, 50–52] which allowed one to reduce eﬀorts in calculation and
transformation of two-electron matrix elements with small components of four-
component molecular spinors. These developments are applied, in particular,
in the dirac [53] and bertha [54, 55] molecular programs. Thus, accurate
DC(B) calculations of relatively simple heavy-atom molecules can be per-
formed on modern computers now.

8

A.V. Titov, N.S. Mosyagin, A.N. Petrov, T.A. Isaev, and D. DeMille

The greatest computational savings are achieved when the two-component
relativistic eﬀective core potential (RECP) approximation suggested originally
by Lee et al. [56] is used (e.g., see reviews [57–59]). There are several reasons
for using RECPs (including model potentials and pseudopotentials) in calcu-
lations of complicated heavy-atom molecules, clusters and solids. The RECP
approaches allow one to exclude the large number of chemically inactive elec-
trons from molecular calculations and to treat explicitly only valence and out-
ermost core electrons from the beginning. Then, the oscillations of the valence
spinors are usually smoothed in heavy-atom cores simultaneously with exclud-
ing small components from the explicit treatment. As a result the number of
primitive basis functions can be reduced dramatically; this is especially impor-
tant for calculation and transformation of two-electron integrals when study-
ing many-atomic systems and compounds of very heavy elements including
actinides and superheavies. The RECP method is based on a well-developed
nonrelativistic technique of calculations; however, an eﬀective spin-orbit in-
teraction and other scalar-relativistic eﬀects are taken into account usually
by means of radially-local [57–60], separable [61–63] or Huzinaga-type [64–66]
operators.

Correlation molecular calculations with RECPs are naturally performed
in the basis of spin-orbitals (and not of spinors as is in all-electron four-
component calculations) even for the cases when quantum electrodynamics
(two-electron Breit etc.) eﬀects are taken into account [44, 67]. Note, how-
ever, that the DCB technique with the separated spin-free and spin-dependent
terms also has been developed [68], but it can be eﬃciently applied only in
the cases when spin-dependent eﬀects can be neglected both for valence and
for core shells. In the RECP method, the interactions with the excluded inner
core shells (spinors!) are described by spin-dependent potentials whereas the
explicitly treated valence and outer core shells are usually described by spin-
orbitals in molecular calculations. It means that some “soft” way of accounting
for the core-valence orthogonality constraints is applied in the latter case [69]
(note, meantime, that the strict core-valence orthogonality can be retrieved
after the RECP calculation by using the restoration procedures described be-
low). Another merit of the RECP method is in its natural ability to account
for correlations with the explicitly excluded inner core electrons [70] (this
direction is actively developed during last years). The use of the molecular
spin-orbitals and the “correlated” RECPs allows one to reduce dramatically
the expenses at the stage of correlation calculation of heavy-atom molecules.
These are important advantages when a very high level of accounting for cor-
relations is required even in studying diatomics (e.g., see calculations of PbO
described in section 9). Thus, many complications of the DC(B) molecular
calculations are avoided when employing RECPs.

The “shape-consistent” (or “norm-conserving”) RECP approaches are
most widely employed in calculations of heavy-atom molecules though “energy-
adjusted/consistent” pseudopotentials [58] by Stuttgart team are also ac-
tively used as well as the Huzinaga-type “ab initio model potentials” [66]. In

Study of P,T-Parity Violation Eﬀects in Polar Heavy-Atom Molecules

9

plane wave calculations of many-atom systems and in molecular dynamics, the
separable pseudopotentials [61–63] are more popular now because they pro-
vide linear scaling of computational eﬀort with the basis set size in contrast to
the radially-local RECPs. The nonrelativistic shape-consistent eﬀective core
potential was ﬁrst proposed by Durand & Barthelat [71] and then a modi-
ﬁed scheme of the pseudoorbital construction was suggested by Christiansen
et al. [72] and by Hamann et al. [73].

In a series of papers (see [67, 69, 70, 74, 75] and references) a generalized
RECP approach was developed that involves both radially-local, separable
and Huzinaga-type potentials as its components in particular cases. It allows
one to attain very high accuracy of calculation of valence properties and elec-
tronic densities in the valence region when treating outermost core shells in
calculations explicitly (see section 5 for more details).

Nevertheless, calculation of such properties as spin-dependent electronic
densities near nuclei, hyperﬁne constants, P,T-parity nonconservation ef-
fects, chemical shifts etc. with the help of the two-component pseudospinors
smoothed in cores is impossible. We should notice, however, that the above
core properties (and the majority of other properties of practical interest which
are described by the operators heavily concentrated within inner cores or on
nuclei) are mainly determined by electronic densities of the valence and outer
core shells near to, or on, nuclei. The valence shells can be open or easily
perturbed by external ﬁelds, chemical bonding etc., whereas outer core shells
are noticeably polarized (relaxed) in contrast to the inner core shells. There-
fore, accurate calculation of electronic structure in the valence and outer core
region is of primary interest for such properties.

For evaluation of the matrix elements of the operators concentrated on
(or close to) nuclei, proper shapes of the valence molecular four-component
spinors must be restored in atomic core regions after performing the RECP
calculation of that molecule. In 1959, a nonrelativistic procedure of restora-
tion of the orbitals from smoothed Phillips–Kleinman pseudoorbitals was pro-
posed [76] based on the orthogonalization of the latter to the original atomic
core orbitals. In 1985, Pacios & Christiansen [77] suggested a modiﬁed orthog-
onalization scheme in the case of shape-consistent pseudospinors. At the same
time, a simple procedure of “nonvariational” one-center restoration (NOCR,
see below) employing the idea of generation of equivalent basis sets in four-
component Dirac-Fock and two-component RECP/SCF calculations was pro-
posed and ﬁrst applied in [26] to evaluation of the P,T-odd spin-rotational
Hamiltonian parameters in the PbF molecule. In 1994, a similar procedure
was used by Bl¨ochl inside the augmentation regions [78] in solids to construct
the transformation operator between pseudoorbitals (“PS”) and original or-
bitals (“AE”) in his projector augmented-wave method.

All the above restoration schemes are called “nonvariational” as com-
pared to the “variational” one-center restoration (VOCR, see below) pro-
cedure proposed in [79, 80]. Proper behavior of the molecular orbitals (four-
component spinors) in atomic cores of molecules can be restored in the scope

10

A.V. Titov, N.S. Mosyagin, A.N. Petrov, T.A. Isaev, and D. DeMille

of a variational procedure if the molecular pseudoorbitals (two-component
pseudospinors) match correctly the original orbitals (large components of
bispinors) in the valence region after the molecular RECP calculation. As
is demonstrated in [44, 69], this condition is rather correct when the shape-
consistent RECP is involved to the molecular calculation with explicitly
treated outermost core orbitals and, especially, when the generalized RECP
operator is used since the above matching condition is implemented at their
generation.

At the restoration stage, a one-center expansion in the spherical harmonics
with numerical radial parts is most appropriate both for orbitals (spinors) and
for the description of “external” interactions with respect to the core regions
of a considered molecule. In the scope of the discussed two-step methods for
the electronic structure calculation of a molecule, ﬁnite nucleus models and
quantum electrodynamic terms including, in particular, two-electron Breit
interaction may be taken into account without problems [67].

One-center expansion was ﬁrst applied to whole molecules by Desclaux
& Pyykk¨o in relativistic and nonrelativistic Hartree-Fock calculations for the
series CH4 to PbH4 [81] and then in the Dirac-Fock calculations of CuH,
AgH and AuH [82] and other molecules [83]. A large bond length contraction
due to the relativistic eﬀects was estimated. However, the accuracy of such
calculations is limited in practice because the orbitals of the hydrogen atom
are reexpanded on a heavy nucleus in the entire coordinate space. It is notable
that the RECP and one-center expansion approaches were considered earlier
as alternatives to each other [84, 85].

The applicability of the discussed two-step algorithms for calculation of
wavefunctions of molecules with heavy atoms is a consequence of the fact
that the valence and core electrons may be considered as two subsystems,
interaction between which is described mainly by some integrated properties
of these subsystems. The methods for consequent calculation of the valence
and core parts of electronic structure of molecules give us a way to combine
the relative simplicity and accessibility both of molecular RECP calculations
in gaussian basis set, and of relativistic ﬁnite-diﬀerence one-center calculations
inside a sphere with the atomic core radius.

The ﬁrst two-step calculations of the P,T-odd spin-rotational Hamiltonian
parameters were performed for the PbF radical about 20 years ago [26, 27],
with a semiempirical accounting for the spin-orbit interaction. Before, only
nonrelativistic SCF calculation of the TlF molecule using the relativistic scal-
ing was carried out [86, 87]; here the P,T-odd values were underestimated by
almost a factor of three as compared to the later relativistic Dirac-Fock calcu-
lations. The latter were ﬁrst performed only in 1997 by Laerdahl et al. [88] and
by Parpia [89]. The next two-step calculation, for PbF and HgF molecules [90],
was carried out with the spin-orbit RECP part taken into account using the
method suggested in [91].

Later we performed correlation GRECP/NOCR calculations of the core
properties in YbF [92], BaF [93], again in YbF [94] and in TlF [19]. In 1998,

Study of P,T-Parity Violation Eﬀects in Polar Heavy-Atom Molecules

11

ﬁrst all-electron Dirac-Fock calculations of the YbF molecule were also per-
formed by Quiney et al. [95] and by Parpia [96]. Recently we ﬁnished extensive
two-step calculations of the P,T-odd properties and hyperﬁne structure of the
excited states of the PbO molecule [97, 98]. One more two-step calculation
of the electron EDM enhancement eﬀect was performed very recently for the
molecular ion HI+ [99].

We would like to emphasize here that the all-electron Dirac-Fock calcula-
tions on TlF and YbF are, in particular, important for checking the quality of
the approximations made in the two-step method. The comparison of appro-
priate results, Dirac-Fock vs. RECP/SCF/NOCR, is, therefore, performed in
papers [19, 94] and discussed in the present paper.

In this paper, the main features of the two-step method are presented and
PNC calculations are discussed, both those without accounting for correlation
eﬀects (PbF and HgF) and those in which electron correlations are taken into
account by a combined method of the second-order perturbation theory (PT2)
and conﬁguration interaction (CI), or “PT2/CI” [100] (for BaF and YbF), by
the relativistic coupled cluster (RCC) method [101, 102] (for TlF, PbO, and
HI+), and by the spin-orbit direct-CI method [103–105] (for PbO). In the ab
initio calculations discussed here, the best accuracy of any current method has
been attained for the hyperﬁne constants and P,T-odd parameters regarding
the molecules containing heavy atoms.

5 Two-step method of calculation of core properties

The two-step method consists of a two-component molecular RECP calcula-
tion at the ﬁrst step, followed by restoration of the proper four-component
wave function in atomic cores at the second step. Though the method was
developed originally for studying core properties in heavy-atom molecules, it
can be eﬃciently applied to studying the properties described by the operators
heavily concentrated in cores or on nuclei of light atoms in other computa-
tionally diﬃcult cases, e.g., in many-atom molecules and solids. The details
of these steps are described below.

Generalized RECP

When core electrons of a heavy-atom molecule do not play an active role, the
eﬀective Hamiltonian with RECP can be presented in the form

HEf =

[hSchr(iv) + UEf (iv)] +

(2)

1
riv jv

.

Xiv >jv

Xiv

This Hamiltonian is written only for a valence subspace of electrons which are
treated explicitly and denoted by indices iv and jv. In practice, this subspace is
often extended by inclusion of some outermost core shells for better accuracy
but we will consider them as the valence shells below if these outermost core

12

A.V. Titov, N.S. Mosyagin, A.N. Petrov, T.A. Isaev, and D. DeMille

and valence shells are not treated using diﬀerent approximations. In Eq. (2),
hSchr is the one-electron Schr¨odinger Hamiltonian

hSchr =

∇2

1
2

−

Zic
r

,

−

(3)

where Zic is the charge of the nucleus decreased by the number of inner
core electrons. UEf in (2) is an RECP (relativistic pseudopotential) opera-
tor that is usually written in the radially-local (semi-local) [57] or separable
(e.g., see [63] and references) approximations when the valence pseudospinors
are smoothed in the heavy-atom cores. Contrary to the four-component wave
function used in Dirac-Coulomb(-Breit) calculations, the pseudo-wave func-
tion in the RECP case can be both two- and one-component. The use of the
eﬀective Hamiltonian (2) instead of all-electron four-component Hamiltonians
leads to the question about its accuracy. It was shown both theoretically and
in many calculations (see [69, 75] and references) that the typical accuracy
of the radially-local RECPs is within 1000–3000 cm−1 for transition energies
between low-lying states though otherwise is sometime stated (see [106,107]).
In our two-step calculations the generalized RECP operator [69,74] is used
that includes the operators of radially-local shape-consistent RECP, separa-
ble pseudopotential and Huzinaga-type model potential as its components.
Additionally, the GRECP operator can include terms of other types, known
as “self-consistent” and two-electron “term-splitting” corrections [69, 74, 108],
which are important particularly for economical (but precise!) treatment of
transition metals, lanthanides and actinides. With these terms, the accuracy
provided by GRECPs can be even higher than the accuracy of the frozen
core approximation (employing the same number of explicitly treated elec-
trons) because they can account for relaxation of explicitly excluded (inner
core) electrons [69, 75]. The theoretical background of the GRECP concept
is developed in a series of papers [44, 67, 69, 70, 74, 75]. In contrast to other
RECP methods, GRECP employs the idea of separating the space around
a heavy atom into three regions: inner core, outer core and valence, which
are ﬁrst treated employing diﬀerent approximations for each. It allows one to
attain practically any desired accuracy, while requiring moderate computa-
tional eﬀorts since the overall accuracy is limited in practice by possibilities
of correlation methods.

When innermost core shells must be treated explicitly, the four-component
versions of the GRECP operator can be used, in principle, together with the
all-electron relativistic Hamiltonians. The GRECP can describe here some
quantum electrodynamics eﬀects (self-energy, vacuum polarization etc.) thus
avoiding their direct treatment. One more remark is that the two-component
GRECP operator can be applied even to very light atoms when smoothing
the large components of the four-component spinors only in the vicinity of
the nucleus just to account for relativistic eﬀects (the GRECP for hydrogen
provides accuracy of treatment of very small relativistic contributions within
5%).

Study of P,T-Parity Violation Eﬀects in Polar Heavy-Atom Molecules

13

Nonvariational One-Center Restoration

1/26p1

The electronic densities evaluated from the two-component pseudo-wave func-
tion very accurately reproduce the corresponding all-electron four-component
densities in the valence and outer core regions not only for the state used in
the GRECP generation but also for other states which diﬀer by excitations of
valence electrons. This is illustrated in ﬁgure 1 (see also tables 8 and 9 in [44]),
where the radial parts of the large components of the thallium bispinor and
the corresponding pseudospinor are compared for the state averaged over the
relativistic 6s2
1/2 conﬁguration, whereas the 21-electron GRECP is gen-
erated for the state averaged over the nonrelativistic 6s16p16d1 conﬁguration.
That is true also for the electronic densities obtained in the corresponding
Dirac-Coulomb(-Breit) and GRECP calculations accounting for correlation.
In the inner core region, the pseudospinors are smoothed, so that the elec-
tronic density with the pseudo-wave function is not correct. When operators
describing properties of interest are heavily concentrated near or on nuclei,
their mean values are strongly aﬀected by the wave function in the inner re-
gion. The four-component molecular spinors must, therefore, be restored in
the heavy-atom cores.

All molecular spinors φp can be restored as one-center expansions in the
cores using the nonvariational one-center restoration (NOCR) scheme [19, 26,
27, 90, 92–94, 97, 98] that consists of the following steps:

•

•

Generation of equivalent basis sets of one-center four-component spinors

fnlj(r)χljm
gnlj(r)χ2j−l,jm (cid:19)

and

smoothed

two-component

pseudospinors

all-electron Dirac-Fock(-Breit)

(cid:18)
˜fnlj(r)χljm in ﬁnite-diﬀerence
and
GRECP/SCF calculations of the same conﬁgurations of a considered atom
and its ions. The nucleus is usually modeled by a uniform charge distri-
bution within a sphere. The all-electron four-component hfdb [109–111]
and two-component grecp/hfj [112, 113] codes are employed to generate
two equivalent numerical basis sets used at the restoration. These sets,
describing mainly the atomic core region, are generated independently of
the basis set used for the molecular GRECP calculations.
The molecular pseudospinorbitals are then expanded in the basis set of one-
center two-component atomic pseudospinors (for r
Rnocr, where Rnocr is
the radius of restoration that should be suﬃciently large for calculating
core properties with required accuracy),

≤

˜φp(x)

≈

Lmax

j=|l+1/2|

Xl=0

Xj=|l−1/2| Xn,m

cp
nljm

˜fnlj(r)χljm ,

(4)

where x denotes spatial and spin variables. Note that for linear molecules
only one value of m survives in the sum for each φp.

14

A.V. Titov, N.S. Mosyagin, A.N. Petrov, T.A. Isaev, and D. DeMille

•

Finally, the atomic two-component pseudospinors in the molecular basis
are replaced by equivalent four-component spinors and the expansion co-
eﬃcients from Eq. (4) are preserved:

Lmax

j=|l+1/2|

φp(x)

≈

Xl=0

Xj=|l−1/2| Xn,m

cp
nljm (cid:18)

fnlj(r)χljm
gnlj(r)χ2j−l,jm (cid:19)

.

(5)

The molecular four-component spinors constructed this way are orthogonal
to the inner core spinors of the atom, because the atomic basis functions used
in Eq. (5) are generated with the inner core shells treated as frozen.

spinor
pseudospinor
difference*1000

)
.
u
.
a
(
 
)
r
(

j
l

n

f
*
r

 0.6

 0.5

 0.4

 0.3

 0.2

 0.1

 0

-0.1

-0.2

-0.3

 0.01

 0.06

 2.19

 13.24

 0.36
r (a.u.)

Fig. 1. The radial parts of the large component of the 6p1/2 bispinor and
the corresponding pseudospinor obtained in equivalent Dirac-Fock and 21-electron
GRECP/SCF calculations for the state averaged over the relativistic 6s2
1/2
conﬁguration of thallium. Their diﬀerence is multiplied by 1000. The GRECP is
generated for the state averaged over the nonrelativistic 6s16p16d1 conﬁguration.

1/26p1

Variational one-center restoration

In the variational technique of one-center restoration (VOCR) [79, 80], the
proper behavior of the four-component molecular spinors in the core regions
of heavy atoms can be restored as an expansion in spherical harmonics in-
side the sphere with a restoration radius, Rvocr, that should not be smaller
than the matching radius, Rc, used at the RECP generation. The outer parts

Study of P,T-Parity Violation Eﬀects in Polar Heavy-Atom Molecules

15

of spinors are treated as frozen after the RECP calculation of a considered
molecule. This method enables one to combine the advantages of two well-
developed approaches, molecular RECP calculation in a gaussian basis set
and atomic-type one-center calculation in numerical basis functions, in the
most optimal way. This technique is considered theoretically in [80] and some
results concerning the eﬃciency of the one-center reexpansion of orbitals on
another atom can be found in [75].

The VOCR scheme can be used for constructing the core parts of the
molecular spinors (orbitals) instead of using equivalent basis sets as in the
NOCR technique. A disadvantage of the NOCR scheme is that molecular
pseudoorbitals are usually computed in a spin-averaged GRECP/SCF molec-
ular calculation (i.e. without accounting for the eﬀective spin-orbit inter-
action) and the reexpansion of molecular pseudospinorbitals on one-center
atomic pseudospinors can be restricted in accuracy, as was noticed in the
GRECP/RCC/NOCR calculations [19] of the TlF molecule (see below). With
the restored molecular bispinors, the two-electron integrals on them can be
easily calculated. Thus, the four-component transfomation from the atomic
basis that is a time-consuming stage of four-component calculations of heavy-
atom molecules can be avoided. Besides, the VOCR technique developed
in [92] for molecular pseudospinors can be reformulated for the case of molec-
ular pseudospinorbitals to reduce the complexity of the molecular GRECP
calculation as is discussed in section 4.

However, the most interesting direction in the development of the two-
step method is the possibility to “split” the correlation structure calculation
of a molecule into two sequential correlation calculations: ﬁrst, in the valence
region, where the outer core and valence electrons are explicitly involved in the
GRECP calculation; and then, in the core region, when the outer and inner
core space regions are only treated at the restoration stage. Correlation eﬀects
in the valence and outer core regions (not only valence parts of molecular
orbitals but also conﬁguration coeﬃcients) can be calculated, for example, by
a combination of RCC and CI methods (see section 9) with very high accuracy.
Then correlation eﬀects in the inner and outer core regions (including the
dipole-type relaxation of atomic inner core shells in a molecule) can be taken
into account using the Dirac-Coulomb(-Breit) Hamiltonian and the one-center
expansion. By increasing the one-center restoration radius Rvocr , one can take
into account correlation eﬀects in the intermediate region (outer core in our
case) with the required accuracy. Roughly speaking, the computational eﬀorts
for the correlation structure calculations in the core and valence regions are
added when using the two-step approach, whereas in the conventional one-step
scheme, they have multiplicative nature.

Two-step calculation of molecular properties

To evaluate one-electron core properties (hyperﬁne structure, P,T-odd eﬀects
etc.) employing the above restoraton schemes it is suﬃcient to obtain the one-
, after the molecular RECP calculation in the
particle density matrix,

{

Dpq}
g

16

A.V. Titov, N.S. Mosyagin, A.N. Petrov, T.A. Isaev, and D. DeMille

φp}
e
φp}
{
W
h

basis of pseudospinors
Wpq}
of a property operator W (x) should be calculated in the basis of equivalent
. The mean value for this operator can be then
four-component spinors
evaluated as

. At the same time, the matrix elements

{

{

=

i

DpqWpq .

Xpq

g

(6)

{

W Ef
pq }

. Then, in expression (6) one should only replace

Only the explicitly treated valence shells are used for evaluating a core prop-
erty when applying Eq. (6) since the atomic frozen core (closed) shells do not
usually contibute to the properties of practical interest. However, correlations
with the core electrons explicitly excluded from the RECP calculation can be
also taken into account if the eﬀective operator technique [114] is applied to
in the basis set of bispinors
calculate the property matrix elements
. Al-
by
φp}
{
ternatively, the correlations with the inner core electrons can be, in principle,
considered within the variational restoration scheme for electronic structure
in the heavy atom cores. Strictly speaking, the use of the eﬀective operators
is correct when the molecular calculation is carried out with the “correlated”
GRECP (see [70]), in which the same correlations with the excluded core
electrons are taken into account at the GRECP generation as they are in con-
. Nevertheless, the use of the (G)RECP that does not account
structing
for the core correlations at the molecular calculation stage can be justiﬁed if
these correlations do not inﬂuence dramatically the electronic structure in the
valence region. The latter approximation was applied in the calculations of
YbF and BaF molecules described in the following section.

W Ef
pq }

W Ef
pq }

Wpq}

{

{

{

When contributions to

are important both in the core and valence
regions, the scheme for evaluating the mean value of W (x) can be as follows:

W
h

i

calculation of matrix elements with the molecular pseudospinorbitals
(which are usually linear combinations of atomic gaussians) over the entire
space region using conventional codes for molecular RECP calculations (al-
though the operator W can be presented in diﬀerent forms in calculations
with the RECP and Dirac-Coulomb(-Breit) Hamiltonians),

=

W
i
h
g

Xpq

Dpq

g

Z
r<∞ e

φp(x) W (x)

φq(x) dx ;

(7)

calculation of the inner part of the matrix element of the operator with
the same molecular pseudospinorbitals using the one-center expansion for
φp}
e

(Rocr stands for Rnocr or Rvocr below, Rocr

Rc):

≥

{

<

φp(x) W (x)

φq(x) dx ;

(8)

W
i
h
g

=

Xpq

Dpq

g

Z
r<Rocr e

•

calculation of the inner part of the matrix element of the operator with the
restored molecular four-component spinors using the one-center expansion

e

e

•

•

Study of P,T-Parity Violation Eﬀects in Polar Heavy-Atom Molecules

17

for

:

φp}

{

W
h

< =
i

Xpq

Dpq

g

Z
r<Rocr

φ<
p (x) W(x) φ<

q (x) dx .

(9)

The matrix element

of the W (x) operator is evaluated as

W
h

i

<

W
i
h
g
Obviously, the one-center basis functions can be numerical (ﬁnite-diﬀerence)
for better ﬂexibility.

W
h
g

W
h

W
h

(10)

i −

+

=

i

i

< .

The mean values of the majority of operators for the valence properties can
be calculated with good accuracy without accounting for the inner parts of
the matrix elements (8) and (9). As discussed above, for calculating the mean
values of the operators heavily concentrated on or near nuclei it is suﬃcient
to account only for the inner parts (9) of the matrix elements of W (x) on the
restored functions φ<
p (x), whereas the other contributions, (7) and (8), can
be neglected.

Calculation of properties using the ﬁnite-ﬁeld method [115,116] and Eq. (6)

within the coupled-cluster approach is described in section 8.

6 Calculations of PbF and HgF

The ground states of the diatomic radicals PbF and HgF are 2Π1/2 and 2Σ1/2,
respectively. Here the superscript denotes spin multiplicity, Π and Σ are the
projections of the electron orbital angular momentum on the molecular axis
and the subscript is the projection of the total electron angular momentum on
the molecular axis directed from the heavy atom to ﬂuorine. It is convenient to
describe the spin-rotational spectrum of the ground electronic state in terms
of the eﬀective spin-rotational Hamiltonian Hsr

eﬀ , following [90, 117]:

Hsr

′

eﬀ = BJ 2 + ∆S
·
B
·
S
×

G
+ µ0S
+ WAkAλ

·

′

′

′

J + S
Dλ

A

I

·

·
E

·

−
I + (Wdde + WSkS)S
·

′

λ
·

(11)

′

The ﬁrst line in this expression describes the rotational structure with ω-
or spin-doubling and the hyperﬁne interaction of the eﬀective electron spin
S
with the nuclear spin I. B is the rotational constant, J is the electron-
rotational angular momentum, ∆ is the ω-doubling constant. The second line
describes the interaction of the molecule with the external ﬁelds B and E,
(λ is the unit vector directed from the heavy nucleus to the light one). The
last line corresponds to the P-odd electromagnetic interaction of the electrons
with the anapole moment of the nucleus described by the constant kA [40],
P,T-odd interaction of the electron EDM de with the interamolecular ﬁeld,
and P,T-odd scalar interactions of the electrons with the heavy nucleus [90].

18

A.V. Titov, N.S. Mosyagin, A.N. Petrov, T.A. Isaev, and D. DeMille

The parameter ∆, tensors A and G, molecular dipole moment D and the
constants Wi are expressed in terms of one-electron matrix elements; concrete
expressions for the above parameters can be found in [90], and for Wd and
Ak they are also given in the next sections. The results of the calculations are
presented in Table 2.

Table 2. Parameters of the spin-rotational Hamiltonian for the ground states of
199HgF and 207PbF (I=1/2); (a) experimental data [118]; (b) semiempirical re-
sults from [25]; (c) ab initio calculations [90]; (d),(e) ab initio calculations [27] with
semiempirical accounting for the “minimal” and “maximal” spin-orbit mixing mod-
els, respectively, and ∆/2B from [119] (the Wi values in [27] have wrong sign).

Ak

A⊥ Gk

G⊥ WS Wd

(MHz) (MHz)

(kHz) (1025 Hz

e cm )

HgF (a) 22621 21880 1.993

1.961

(b)
(c) 24150 23310 1.996

8690 -7460 0.034 −0.269
PbF (d)
9550 -8240 0.114 −0.438
(e)
(c) 10990 -8990 0.040 −0.326

−191
1.960 −185
51
99
55

−4.8
−4.8
1.0
1.8
1.4

In [90] the conclusion was made, that the accuracy in calculations of the
parameters of the eﬀective spin-rotational Hamiltonian is close to 20%. How-
ever, further ab initio calculations showed the situation is more complicated.
As was understood in calculations of YbF [92], a fortuitous cancellation
of eﬀects of diﬀerent types took place in the above calculations. Accounting
for the polarization of the 5s, 5p-shells leads to an enhancement of the contri-
butions of the valence shells to the Ak, A⊥ and PNC constants on the level
of 50% of magnitude. A contribution of comparable magnitude but of oppo-
site sign takes place when the relaxation-correlation eﬀects of the 5d-shell are
taken into account. This was conﬁrmed in [120] when accounting for electron
correlation both in the valence and core regions of HgF as compared to the
YbF case.

7 Calculations of YbF and BaF

The results of two-step calculations for the YbF molecule (1996,1998) [92, 94]
and for the BaF molecule (1997) [93] are presented in Table 3 Table 3, where
they are compared with other semiempirical and four-component results. For
the isotropic hyperﬁne constant A = (Ak + 2A⊥)/3, the accuracy of our calcu-
lation is about 3%, as determined by comparison to the experimental datum.
A⊥)/3 (which is much smaller in magnitude),
The dipole constant Ad = (Ak −

Study of P,T-Parity Violation Eﬀects in Polar Heavy-Atom Molecules

19

though better than in all previous calculations known from the literature, is
still underestimated by almost 23%. After a semiemprical correction for a
perturbation of 4f -shell in the core of Yb due to the bond making, this error
is reduced to 8%. Our value for the eﬀective electric ﬁeld on the unpaired
1010 V cm−1 (see section 3 and
S
electron is W = Wd|
Eq. (11)).

= 4.9 a.u.= 2.5

λ
·

×

|

′

In Table 3 the values of the Wd constant

Wdde = 2W de = 2

2Σ1/2| Xi

h

2Σ1/2i
,
Hd(i)
|

(12)

where Hd describes interaction of the electron EDM de with the internal
molecular electric ﬁeld Emol:

Hd = 2de (cid:18)

0 0
0 σ (cid:19) ·

Emol,

from various calculations are tabulated. These include the unrestricted Dirac-
Fock calculation of Parpia (1998) [96], four-component calculations of Quiney
et al. (1998) [95] accounting for correlation, the most recent semiempirical
calculation of Kozlov (1997) [121] and our latest GRECP/RASSCF/EO cal-
culation (EO stands for the eﬀective operator technique in the framework of
the second-order perturbation theory; see section 5 and paper [100] for more
details). All results are in very close agreement now. It should be noted that
the valence electron contribution to Wd in [96] diﬀers by only 7.4% from the
corresponding RECP-based calculation of Titov et al. (1996) [92].

A similar increase in the values for the hyperﬁne constants and parameters
of the P,T-odd interactions when the correlations with the core shells (primar-
ily, 5s, 5p) are taken into account is also observed for the BaF molecule [93],
as one can see in Table 3. Of course, the corrections from the 4f -electron
excitations are not required for this molecule. The enhancement factor for the
P,T-odd eﬀects in BaF is three times smaller than in YbF mainly because of
the smaller nuclear charge of Ba.

8 Calculation of 205TlF molecule.

Eﬀective Hamiltonian.

Here we consider the P,T-odd interaction of the 205Tl nucleus (which has one
unpaired proton) with the electromagnetic ﬁeld of the electrons in the 205TlF
molecule [19]. This molecule is one of the best objects for measurements of
the proton EDM. The eﬀective interaction with the EDM of the Tl nucleus
in TlF is written in the form

H eﬀ = (dV + dM )I/I

λ ,

·

(13)

20

A.V. Titov, N.S. Mosyagin, A.N. Petrov, T.A. Isaev, and D. DeMille

Table 3. The hyperﬁne structure constants A = (Ak + 2A⊥)/3 (isotropic) and Ad =
(Ak − A⊥)/3 (dipole) and PNC parameters Wi (i.e. Wd, WA, and WS) described in
Eqs. (11) and (12) for the 171YbF and 137BaF molecules.

A

Ad

Wd

(MHz) (MHz) (1025 Hz

WA WS

e cm ) (Hz) (kHz)

The 171YbF molecule

7617

102

Experiment [122]
Semiempirical [121]
Semiempirical [123] (with 4f -correction)
GRECP/SCF/NOCR [92]
GRECP/RASSCF/NOCR [92]
Restricted DF (Quiney, 1998) [95]1
Rescaled1 ,2 restricted DF
Restricted DF + core polarization1
Unrestricted DF (Parpia, 1998) [96]

(unpaired valence electron)

Unrestricted DF [96]
GRECP/RASSCF/NOCR/EO [94]
GRECP/RASSCF/NOCR/EO [94]

Experiment [124]3
Semiempirical [25]
Experiment [125]4
Semiempirical [25]
GRECP/SCF/NOCR [93]
GRECP/RASSCF/NOCR [93]
GRECP/SCF/NOCR/EO [93]
GRECP/RASSCF/NOCR/EO [93]

−1.5
−1.26
59 −0.91
60 −0.91
35 −0.62
−1.24
60 −1.20

−0.962
−1.203
79 −1.206

25

17

−0.35

11 −0.230
11 −0.224
26 −0.375
24 −0.364

4932
4854
5918

7865

7842

2326

2418

1457
1466
2212
2224

730 −48
−43
484 −33
486 −33
326 −22
652 −44
620 −42

−441

634

634

210 −11
111 −6.1
107 −5.9
181
175

−0.41

240 −13

(with 4f -correction)

7839

94 −1.206

The 137BaF molecule

1 The results of Quiney et al. and Parpia have been adjusted by a factor of two to be

consistent with the deﬁnition of Wi used here, see Eqs. (11) and (12).

2 The Wi values are rescaled from the “restricted DF” results employing the calculated
), which

)/(Acalc·Acalc
and experimental A and Ad values by the factor
are in good agreement with the “restricted DF + core polarization” values.

(Aexpt·Aexpt

q

d

d

3 The hyperﬁne constants are measured in an inert gas matrix [124] and the semiem-

pirical Wi values [25] are based on these data.
4 The hyperﬁne constants are measured in a molecular beam [125].

(14)

(15)

(16)

(17)

Study of P,T-Parity Violation Eﬀects in Polar Heavy-Atom Molecules

21

where I is the Tl nuclear spin operator; λ is the unit vector along z (from Tl
to F); dV and dM are the volume and magnetic constants [126]:

dV = 6SX = (

dpR + Q)X ,

−
where S is the nuclear Schiﬀ moment; dp is the proton EDM; R and Q are
the factors determined by the nuclear structure of 205Tl (see [19]);

ρψ(r) is the electronic density calculated from the electronic wavefunction ψ,

X =

2π
3 (cid:20)

∂
∂z

ρψ(r)

;

(cid:21)x,y,z=0

dM = 2√2(dp + dN )

µ
Z

(cid:18)

+

1
2mc (cid:19)

M ,

where dN is the nuclear EDM arising due to P,T-odd forces between the
nucleons; µ, m and Z are the magnetic moment, mass and charge of the Tl
nucleus; c is the velocity of light;

M =

1
√2 h

ψ

li
αi ×
r3
i (cid:19)z |

ψ

;

i

| Xi

(cid:18)

li is the orbital momentum of i-th electron; αi are its Dirac matrices. Ac-
counting for Heﬀ leads to a diﬀerence in the hyperﬁne splitting of TlF in
parallel and antiparallel electric and magnetic ﬁelds. The level shift hν =
4(dV + dM )
λ
I
/I is measured experimentally (for the latest results see [18]).
i
·
h
The parameters X of Eq. (15) and M of Eq. (17) are determined by the
electronic structure of the molecule. They were calculated in 1997 for the
ground 0+ state of TlF by Parpia [89] and by Laerdahl, Saue, Faegri Jr., and
Quiney [88] using the Dirac–Fock method with gaussian basis sets of large sizes
(see Table 4). Below we refer to paper [127] with the calculations presented
in details and not to the brief communication [88] of the same authors. There
was also a preliminary calculation of electronic structure in TlF performed
by Wilson et al. in [128]. In paper [19] the ﬁrst calculation of 205TlF that
accounts for correlation eﬀects was performed (see also [129] where the limit
on the Schiﬀ moment of 205Tl was recalculated).

Results.

Calculations were carried out at two internuclear separations, the equilibrium
Re = 2.0844 ˚A as in Ref. [89], and 2.1 ˚A, for comparison with Ref. [127]. The
relativistic coupled cluster (RCC) method [130,131] with only single (RCC-S)
or with single and double (RCC-SD) cluster amplitudes is used (for review of
diﬀerent coupled cluster approaches see also [132, 133] and references). The
RCC-S calculations with the spin-dependent GRECP operator take into ac-
count eﬀects of the spin-orbit interaction at the level of the one-conﬁgurational

22

A.V. Titov, N.S. Mosyagin, A.N. Petrov, T.A. Isaev, and D. DeMille

SCF-type method. The RCC-SD calculations include, in addition, the most
important electron correlation eﬀects.

The results obtained with the one-center expansion of the molecular
spinors in the Tl core in either s; p, s; p; d or s; p; d; f partial waves are collected
in Table 4. The ﬁrst point to notice is the diﬀerence between spin-averaged
SCF values and RCC-S values; the latter include spin-orbit interaction ef-
fects. These eﬀects increase X by 9% and decrease M by 21%. The RCC-S
function can be written as a single determinant, and results may therefore
be compared with DF values, even though the RCC-S function is not varia-
tional. The GRECP/RCC-S values of M indeed diﬀer only by 1–3% from the
corresponding DF values [89, 127] (see Table 4).

Much larger diﬀerences occur for the X parameter. There are also large dif-
ferences between the two DF calculations for X, which cannot be explained by
the small change in internuclear separation. The value of X may be expected
to be less stable than M [127]. The conclusion in [19] is that the RCC-S value
for X, which is higher than that of [89, 127], is more correct. The electron
correlation eﬀects are calculated by the RCC-SD method at the molecular
equilibrium internuclear distance Re. A major correlation contribution is ob-
served, decreasing M by 17% and X by 22%.

The hyperﬁne structure constants of Tl 6p1

1/2 and Tl2+ 6s1, which (like
X and M ) depend on operators concentrated near the Tl nucleus, were also
calculated. The errors in the DF values are 10–15% with respect to experiment
and the RCC-SD results are within 1–4% of experiment. The improvement in
X and M upon inclusion of correlation is expected to be similar.

Table 4. Calculated X (15) and M (17) parameters (in a.u.) for the 205TlF ground
state, compared with DF values [89,127]. GRECP/RCC-S results include spin-orbit
interaction, and GRECP/RCC-SD values also account for electron correlation.

R = 2.1 ˚A
s, p s, p s, p, d, f

Re = 2.0844 ˚A
s, p s, p, d s, p, d, f
M

Expansion

s, p
X
SCF(spin-averaged) 19.67 17.56 17.51 8967 19.52 17.43 8897
GRECP/RCC-S
13.84 9813 16.02 13.82 9726
DF [89]
DF [127]
GRECP/RCC-SD

13.641 8747

11.50 7635

16.12
15.61

7743

M

X

1 M is calculated in Ref. [127] using two-center molecular spinors, corresponding to
inﬁnite Lmax in Eq. (5).

Study of P,T-Parity Violation Eﬀects in Polar Heavy-Atom Molecules

23

9 Calculations of 207PbO molecule.

As is noted in section 1, experiments on the excited a(1) [29] or B(1) [134]
states of PbO having nonzero projection of total electronic momentum on the
internuclear axis can be, in principle, sensitive enough to detect de two or
even four orders of magnitude lower than the current limit. Knowledge of the
eﬀective electric ﬁeld, W , is required for extracting de from the measurements
(see section 3). In papers [97,98], W for the a(1) (3Σ+ σ2
2) and B(1)
(3Π1 σ2
2) states of the PbO molecule was calculated by the RCC-
SD [101, 102] and conﬁguration interaction (CI) [103–105, 135] methods. To
provide an accuracy check for the calculation of the electronic structure near
the Pb nucleus the hyperﬁne constant, Ak, was also calculated.

1π1

1σ2

3π4

2σ1

1π1

2σ2

1σ2

3π3

Results.

CI calculations [98] were performed at two internuclear distances: R = 3.8 a.u.
(as in RCC calculations), and R = 4.0 a.u. (which is close to the equilibrium
distances of the a(1) and B(1) states). In the RCC calculations [97] the inter-
nuclear distance R = 3.8 a.u. was used because of problems with convergence
at larger distances. The calculated values with the one-center expansion of
the molecular spinors in the Pb core in either s; p or s; p; d partial waves are
collected in Table 5.

Let us consider the 5s, 5p, 5d orbitals of lead and 1s orbital of oxygen as
the outercore and the σ1, σ2, σ3, π1, π2 orbitals of PbO (consisting mainly of
6s, 6p orbitals of Pb and 2s, 2p orbitals of O) as valence. Although in the CI
calculations we take into account only the correlation between valence elec-
trons, the accuracy attained in the CI calculation of Ak is much better than
in the RCC-SD calculation. The main problem with the RCC calculation was
that the Fock-space RCC-SD version used there was not optimal in accounting
for nondynamic correlations (see [136] for details of RCC-SD and CI calcula-
tions of the Pb atom). Nevertheless, the potential of the RCC approach for
electronic structure calculations is very high, especially in the framework of
the intermediate Hamiltonian formulation [102, 131].

Next we estimate the contribution from correlations of valence electrons
with outercore ones (which also account for correlations between outercore
electrons) as the diﬀerence between the results of the corresponding 10- and
30-electron GRECP/RCC calculations (see also [136] where this correction
is applied to the Pb atom). We designate such correlations in Table 5 as
“outercore correlations”. When taking into account outercore contributions
at the point R = 4.0 a.u. we used the results of the RCC calculation at
the point R = 3.8 a.u. Since these contributions are relatively small and
because the correlations with the outercore electrons are more stable than
correlations in the valence region when the internuclear distance is changed,
this approximation seems reasonable. Finally, we have linearly extrapolated
the results of the calculations to the experimental equilibrium distances, Re =

24

A.V. Titov, N.S. Mosyagin, A.N. Petrov, T.A. Isaev, and D. DeMille

4.06 a.u. for a(1) [137] and Re = 3.91 a.u. for B(1) [119]. The ﬁnal results are:
Ak =
cm) for a(1) and Ak = 4887 MHz,
cm) for B(1). The estimated error for the ﬁnal W value
W =
is 20% for the B(1) state. For a(1) the estimated error bounds put the actual
W value between 90% and 130% of our ﬁnal value (for details see [98]).

3826 MHz, W =
1024Hz/(e
8.0
·

1024Hz/(e
·

−
−

6.1

−

·

·

Table 5. Calculated parameters Ak (in MHz) and W (in 1024Hz/(e·cm), see section
3 and Eq. (12)) for the a(1) and B(1) states of 207PbO at the internuclear distances
3.8 and 4.0 a.u. The experimental value of Ak in a(1) is −4113 MHz [138]. The
preliminary experimental value of Ak for B(1) is 5000 ± 200 MHz [139].

State
Parameters
Expansion

a(1) σ2
Ak
s,p,d

1σ2

2 σ2

3π3

1π1
2
W

3Σ1 B(1) σ2
Ak

1σ2

2σ1

3π4
1 π1
2
W

3Π1

s,p

s,p,d s,p,d

s,p

s,p,d

Internuclear distance R = 3.8 a.u.

10e-RCC-SD [97]
30e-RCC-SD [97]
outercore: (30e-10e)-RCC-SD
10e-CI [98]
FINAL [98]
(10e-CI + outercore)

-2635 -2.93
-2698
-63
-3446

-3.05 3878 -11.10
-4.10 4081
-9.10
-1.05
203
-4.13 4582

-10.10
-9.70
0.40
-10.64

-3509

-5.18 4785

-10.24

Internuclear distance R = 4.0 a.u.

10e-CI [98]
FINAL [98]
(10e-CI + outercore)1

-3689

-3752

-4.81 4762

-5.86 4965

-7.18

-6.78

1 It is assumed that the outercore contribution at the internuclear distance R=4.0
a.u. is approximately the same as is at R=3.8 a.u.

10 Conclusions

The P,T-parity nonconservation parameters and hyperﬁne constants have
been calculated for the particular heavy-atom molecules which are of primary
interest for modern experiments to search for PNC eﬀects. It is found that a
high level of accounting for electron correlations is necessary for reliable cal-
culation of these properties with the required accuracy. The applied two-step
(GRECP/NOCR) scheme of calculation of the properties described by the op-
erators heavily concentrated in atomic cores and on nuclei has proved to be a
very eﬃcient way to take account of these correlations with moderate eﬀorts.
The results of the two-step calculations for hyperﬁne constants diﬀer by less
than 10% from the corresponding experimental data. A comparable level of

Study of P,T-Parity Violation Eﬀects in Polar Heavy-Atom Molecules

25

accuracy is expected for the P,T-odd spin-rotational Hamiltonian parameters,
which can not be obtained experimentally.

The precision of the discussed calculations is limited by the current pos-
sibilities of the correlation methods and codes and not by the GRECP and
NOCR approximations, despite the fact that the GRECP/NOCR method al-
lows one to reduce seriously the computational expenses of the correlation
treatment as compared to conventional Dirac-Coulomb(-Breit) approaches
when (1) using molecular spin-orbitals instead of spinors in (G)RECP calcula-
tion; (2) employing “correlated” GRECP versions [70] to account for correla-
tions with the core electrons explicitly excluded from (G)RECP calculations;
(3) combining gaussian basis functions at the molecular (G)RECP calculation
with numerical functions at the one-center restoration; and (4) splitting the
correlation treatment of a molecule into two sequential steps, ﬁrst in valence
and then in core regions.

In turn, the accuracy attained in the calculations presented above is suf-
ﬁcient for a reliable interpretation of the measurements in PNC experiments
on these molecules.

Acknowledgments.

We are very grateful to L.N.Labzowsky for initiating and supporting our
activity in studying PNC properties in heavy-atom molecules over many
years. We would like to thank our colleagues I.V.Abarenkov, A.B.Alekseyev,
R.J.Buenker, E.Eliav, U.Kaldor, M.G.Kozlov, A.I.Panin, A.B.Tulub, and
I.I.Tupitsyn for many stimulating discussions and fruitful collaboration on
the relevant research.

The present work is supported by the U.S. CRDF grant RP2–2339–GA–
02 and RFBR grant 03–03–32335. A.P. is grateful to Ministry of education of
Russian Federation (grant PD 02–1.3–236) and to St.-Petersburg Committee
of Science (grant PD 03-1.3-60). N.M. is also supported by the grants of Rus-
sian Science Support Foundation and the governor of Leningrad district. D.D.
acknowledges additional support from NSF Grant No. PHY-0244927 and the
David and Lucile Packard Foundation. A part of calculations of PbO was per-
formed on computers of Boston University in the framework of the MARINER
project.

References

1. Erler, J. and Ramsey-Musolf, M. J. Low energy tests of the weak interaction

(2004). Eprint http:// arXiv.org/ hep-ph/0404291.

2. Glashow, S. L. Partial-symmetries of weak interactions. Nuclear Physics 22,

579–588 (1961).

3. Weinberg, S. A model of leptons. Phys. Rev. Lett. 19, 1264–1266 (1967).

26

A.V. Titov, N.S. Mosyagin, A.N. Petrov, T.A. Isaev, and D. DeMille

4. Salam, A. Weak and electromagnetic interactions.

In: N. Svartholm (ed.)
Elementary particle theory, relativistic groups, and analyticity, pp. 367–377
(Almqvist and Wiksells, Stockholm, Sweden, 1968).

5. Weinberg, S. Eﬀects of a neutral intermediate boson in semileptonic processes.

Phys. Rev. D 5, 1412–1417 (1972).

6. Commins, E. D. Electric dipole moments of leptons. Adv. At. Mol. Opt. Phys.

40, 1–55 (1999).

7. Christenson, J. H., Cronin, J. W., Fitch, V. L., and Turlay, R. Evidence for

the 2π decay of the K 0

2 meson. Phys. Rev. Lett. 13, 138–140 (1964).

8. Sapirstein, J. Parity violation. In: Schwerdtfeger [41], pp. 468–522.
9. Berger, R. Parity-violation eﬀects in molecules.

In: Schwerdtfeger [42], pp.

188–288.

10. Ginges, J. S. M. and Flambaum, V. V. Violations of fundamental symmetries
in atoms and tests of uniﬁcation theories of elementary particles. Phys. Rep.
397, 63–154 (2004).

11. Landau, L. D. Conservation laws in weak interactions. Sov. Phys.–JETP 5,

336–337 (1957).

12. Regan, B. C., Commins, E. D., Schmidt, C. J., and DeMille, D. New limit on
the electron electric dipole moment. Phys. Rev. Lett. 88, 071805/1–4 (2002).
13. Romalis, M. V., Griﬃth, W. C., and Fortson, E. N. New limit on the permanent

electric dipole moment of 199Hg. Phys. Rev. Lett. 86, 2505 (2001).

14. Dmitriev, V. F. and Sen’kov, R. A. Schiﬀ moment of the Mercury nucleus and

the proton dipole moment. Phys. Rev. Lett. 91, 212303/1–4 (2003).

15. Sandars, P. G. H. Measurability of the proton electric dipole moment. Phys.

16. Sandars, P. G. H. The electric dipole moment of an atom. Phys. Lett. 14,

Rev. Lett. 19, 1396–1398 (1967).

194–196 (1965).

17. Hinds, E. A., Loving, C. E., and Sandars, P. G. H. Limits on P and T violating

neutral current week interactions. Phys. Lett. B 62, 97–99 (1976).

18. Cho, D., Sangster, K., and Hinds, E. A. Search for time-reversal-symmetry
violation in thallium ﬂuoride using a jet source. Phys. Rev. A 44, 2783–2799
(1991).

19. Petrov, A. N., Mosyagin, N. S., Isaev, T. A., Titov, A. V., Ezhov, V. F., Eliav,
E., and Kaldor, U. Calculation of the P,T-odd eﬀects in 205TlF including
electron correlation. Phys. Rev. Lett. 88, 073001/1–4 (2002).

20. Labzowsky, L. N. Λ doubling and parity nonconservation eﬀects in the spectra

of diatomic molecules. Sov. Phys.–JETP 48, 434–445 (1978).

21. Gorshkow, V. G., Labzovsky, L. N., and Moskalyov, A. N. Space and time
parity nonconservation eﬀects in the spectra of diatomic molecules. Sov. Phys.–
JETP 49, 209–216 (1979).

22. Sushkov, O. P. and Flambaum, V. V. Parity violation eﬀects in diatomic

molecules. Sov. Phys.–JETP 48, 608–613 (1978).

23. Sushkov, O. P., Flambaum, V. V., and Khriplovich, I. B. To a possibility of
investigation of P- and T-odd nuclear forces in atomic and molecular experi-
ments. Sov. Phys.–JETP 87, 1521–1540 (1984).

24. Flambaum, V. V. and Khriplovich, I. B. On the enhancement of parity non-
conserving eﬀects in diatomic molecules. Phys. Lett. A 110, 121–125 (1985).
25. Kozlov, M. G. Semiempirical calculation of P- and P,T-odd eﬀects in diatomic

molecules. Sov. Phys.–JETP 62, 1114 (1985).

Study of P,T-Parity Violation Eﬀects in Polar Heavy-Atom Molecules

27

26. Titov, A. V. PhD Thesis, (St.-Petersburg (former Leningrad) State University,

Russia, 1985).

27. Kozlov, M. G., Fomichev, V. I., Dmitriev, Y. Y., Labzovsky, L. N., and Titov,
A. V. Calculation of the P- and T-odd spin-rotational Hamiltonian of the PbF
molecule. J. Phys. B 20, 4939–4948 (1987).

28. Hudson, J. J., Sauer, B. E., Tarbutt, M. R., and Hinds, E. A. Measurement of
the electron electic dipole moment using YbF molecules. Phys. Rev. Lett. 89,
023003/1–4 (2002).

29. DeMille, D., Bay, F., Bickman, S., Kawall, D., Krause, Jr., D., Maxwell, S. E.,
and Hunter, L. R. Investigation of PbO as a system for measuring the electric
dipole moment of the electron. Phys. Rev. A 61, 052507/1–8 (2000).
30. Okun’, L. B. Leptons and quarks (North Holland, Amsterdam, 1982).
31. Kobayashi, M. and Maskawa, T. CP-violation in the renormalizable theory of

weak interaction. Progr. Theor. Phys. 49, 652–657 (1973).

32. Kazakov, D. I. Beyond the standard model (In search of supersymmetry)

(2000). ArXiv: hep-ph/0012288.

33. Mohapatra, R. N. Uniﬁcation and Supersymmetry. The Frontiers of Quark-

Lepton Physics (Springer, New-York, U.S.A., 2003). 421 pp.

34. Barr, S. M. Measurable T - and P -odd e−N interactions from Higgs boson

exchange. Phys. Rev. Lett. 68, 1822–1825 (1992).

35. Barr, S. M. A review of CP violation in atoms. Int. J. Mod. Phys. A 8, 209–236

(1993).

36. Ginzburg, I. F. and Krawczyk, M. Symmetries of two Higgs doublet model

and CP violation (2004). ArXiv: hep-ph/0408011.

37. Pati, J. C. and Salam, A. Lepton number as the fourth “color”. Phys. Rev. D

10, 275–279 (1974).

38. Liu, J. T. and Ng, D. Lepton ﬂavor changing processes and CP violation in

the 331 model (1994). ArXiv: hep-ph/9401228.

39. Masina, I. and Savoy, C. A. Changed lepton ﬂavour and CP violation: Theoret-
ical impact of present and future experiments (2004). ArXiv: hep-ph/0410382.
40. Khriplovich, I. B. and Lamoraux, S. K. CP Violation without Strangeness. The
Electric Dipole Moments of Particles, Atoms, and Molecules (Springer-Verlag,
Berlin, 1997).

41. Schwerdtfeger, P. (ed.). Relativistic Electronic Structure Theory. Part I. Fun-
damentals, vol. 11 of Theoretical and Computational Chemistry (Elsevier, Am-
sterdam, 2002). xx + 926 pp.

42. Schwerdtfeger, P. (ed.). Relativistic Electronic Structure Theory. Part 2. Ap-
plications, vol. 14 of Theoretical and Computational Chemistry (Elsevier, Am-
sterdam, 2004). xv + 787 pp.

43. Hirao, K. and Ishikawa, Y. (eds.). Recent Advances in Relativistic Molecular

Theory (World Scientiﬁc, Singapore, 2004). 328 pp.

44. Mosyagin, N. S., Petrov, A. N., Titov, A. V., and Tupitsyn, I. I. GRECPs
accounting for Breit eﬀects in uranium, plutonium and superheavy ele-
ments 112, 113, 114.
In press;
http://arXiv.org/physics/0505207.

Progr. Theor. Chem. Phys. (2005).

45. Wood, J. H. and Boring, A. M. Improved Pauli Hamiltonian for local-potential

problems. Phys. Rev. B 18, 2701–2711 (1978).

46. Barthelat, J. C., Pelissier, M., and Durand, P. Analytical relativistic self-
consistent-ﬁeld calculations for atoms. Phys. Rev. A 21, 1773–1785 (1980).

28

A.V. Titov, N.S. Mosyagin, A.N. Petrov, T.A. Isaev, and D. DeMille

47. van Lenthe, E., Baerends, E. J., and Snijders, J. G. Relativistic regular two-

component Hamiltonians. J. Chem. Phys. 99, 4597–4610 (1993).

48. Wolf, A., Reiher, M., and Hess, B. A. Two-component methods and the gen-
eralized Douglas-Kroll transformation. In: Schwerdtfeger [41], pp. 622–663.
49. Kutzelnigg, W. Perturbation theory of relativistic corrections. 2. Analysis and
classiﬁcation of known and other possible methods. Z. Phys. D 15, 27–50
(1990).

50. Dyall, K. G. A systematic sequence of relativistic approximations. J. Comput.

Chem. 23, 786–793 (2002).

51. Visscher, L. The Dirac equation in quantum chemistry: Strategies to overcome
the current computational problems. J. Comput. Chem. 23, 759–766 (2002).
52. Grant, I. P. and Quiney, H. BERTHA – relativistic atomic/molecular structure
(Les Houches, France, 2004). Conference “Quantum Systems in Chemistry and
Physics: QSCP-IX”, oral and poster reports.

53. Saue, T., Jensen, H. J. A., Visscher, L., et al . “dirac04” (2004). A relativistic

ab initio electronic structure program.

54. Quiney, H. M., Skaane, H., and Grant, I. P. Ab initio relativistic quantum
chemistry: four-components good, two-components bad! Adv. Quantum Chem.
32, 1–49 (1999).

55. Grant, I. P., Quiney, H. M., and Skaane, H. “bertha” (1998). An ab initio

relativistic molecular electronic structure program [54].

56. Lee, Y. S., Ermler, W. C., and Pitzer, K. S. Ab initio eﬀective core potentials
including relativistic eﬀects. I. Formalism and applications to the Xe and Au
atoms. J. Chem. Phys. 67, 5861–5876 (1977).

57. Ermler, W. C., Ross, R. B., and Christiansen, P. A. Spin-orbit coupling and
other relativistic eﬀects in atoms and molecules. Adv. Quantum Chem. 19,
139–182 (1988).

58. Schwerdtfeger, P. Relativistic pseudopotentials. In: U. Kaldor and S. Wilson
(eds.) Theoretical chemistry and physics of heavy and superheavy elements, pp.
399–438 (Kluwer academic publishers, Dordrecht, The Netherlands, 2003).
59. Lee, Y. S. Two-component relativistic eﬀective core potential calculations for

molecules. In: Schwerdtfeger [42], pp. 352–416.

60. Teichteil, C., Maron, L., and Vallet, V. Relativistic pseudopotential calcula-

tions for electronic excited states. In: Schwerdtfeger [42], pp. 476–551.

61. Bl¨ochl, P. E. Generalized separable potentials for electronic-structure calcula-

tions. Phys. Rev. B 41, 5414–5416 (1990).

62. Vanderbilt, D. Soft self-consistent pseudopotentials in a generalized eigenvalue

formalism. Phys. Rev. B 41, 7892–7895 (1990).

63. Theurich, G. and Hill, N. A. Self-consistent treatment of spin-orbit coupling in
solids using relativistic fully separable ab initio pseudopotentials. Phys. Rev.
B 64, 073106, 1–4 (2001).

64. Bonifacic, V. and Huzinaga, S. Atomic and molecular calculations with the

model potential method. I. J. Chem. Phys. 60, 2779–2786 (1974).

65. Katsuki, S. and Huzinaga, S. An eﬀective Hamiltonian method for valence-
electron molecular calculations. Chem. Phys. Lett. 152, 203–206 (1988).
66. Seijo, L. and Barandiar´an, Z. Relativistic ab-initio model potential calculations
for molecules and embedded clusters. In: Schwerdtfeger [42], pp. 417–475.
67. Petrov, A. N., Mosyagin, N. S., Titov, A. V., and Tupitsyn, I. I. Accounting
for the Breit interaction in relativistic eﬀective core potential calculations of
actinides. J. Phys. B 37, 4621–4637 (2004).

Study of P,T-Parity Violation Eﬀects in Polar Heavy-Atom Molecules

29

68. Dyall, K. G. An exact separation of the spin-free and spin-dependent terms of
the Dirac-Coulomb-Breit Hamiltonian. J. Chem. Phys. 100, 2118–2127 (1994).
69. Titov, A. V. and Mosyagin, N. S. Generalized relativistic eﬀective core poten-

tial: Theoretical grounds. Int. J. Quantum Chem. 71, 359–401 (1999).

70. Mosyagin, N. S. and Titov, A. V. Accounting for correlations with core elec-
trons by means of the generalized RECP: Atoms Hg and Pb and their com-
pounds. ArXiv.org/ physics/0406143; J. Chem. Phys., v.122 (2005).

71. Durand, P. and Barthelat, J.-C. A theoretical method to determine atomic
pseudopotentials for electronic structure calculations of molecules and solids.
Theor. Chim. Acta 38, 283–302 (1975).

72. Christiansen, P. A., Lee, Y. S., and Pitzer, K. S.

Improved ab initio eﬀec-
tive core potentials for molecular calculations. J. Chem. Phys. 71, 4445–4450
(1979).

73. Hamann, D. R., Schl¨uter, M., and Chiang, C. Norm-conserving pseudopoten-

tials. Phys. Rev. Lett. 43, 1494–1497 (1979).

74. Titov, A. V. and Mosyagin, N. S. The generalized relativistic eﬀective core
potential method: Theory and calculations. Russ. J. Phys. Chem. 74, Suppl. 2,
S376–387 (2000). [arXiv: physics/0008160].

75. Titov, A. V. Doctorate Thesis, (Petersburg Nuclear Physics Institute, RAS,

Russia, 2002).

76. Phillips, J. C. and Kleinman, L. New method for calculating wave functions

in crystals and molecules. Phys. Rev. 116, 287–294 (1959).

77. Pacios, L. F. and Christiansen, P. A. Ab initio relativistic eﬀective potentials
with spin-orbit operators. I. Li through Ag. J. Chem. Phys. 82, 2664–2671
(1985).

78. Bl¨ochl, P. E. Projector augmented-wave method. Phys. Rev. B 50, 17953–

17979 (1994).

79. Titov, A. V. A restoration of wave function in core region of a molecule. In:
Theses of reports of the 4th European Conf. on Atomic and Mol. Physics, p.
299 (Riga, Latvia, 1992).

80. Titov, A. V. A two-step method of calculation of the electronic structure of
molecules with heavy atoms: Theoretical aspect. Int. J. Quantum Chem. 57,
453–463 (1996).

81. Desclaux, J. P. and Pyykk¨o, P. Relativistic and non-relativistic Hartree-Fock
one-centre expansion calculations for the series CH4 to PbH4 within the spher-
ical approximation. Chem. Phys. Lett. 29, 534 (1974).

82. Desclaux, J. P. and Pyykk¨o, P. Dirac-Fock one-centre calculations. The
molecules CuH, AgH and AuH including p-type symmetry functions. Chem.
Phys. Lett. 39, 300–303 (1976).

83. Desclaux, J.-P. Tour historique. In: Schwerdtfeger [41], pp. 1–22.
84. Pitzer, K. S. Relativistic eﬀects on chemical properties. Acc. Chem. Res. 12,

85. Pyykk¨o, P. and Desclaux, J.-P. Relativity and the periodic system of elements.

271–276 (1979).

Acc. Chem. Res. 12, 276–281 (1979).

Phys. Rev. A 21, 471–479 (1980).

86. Hinds, E. A. and Sandars, P. G. H. Electric dipole hyperﬁne structure of TlF.

87. Coveney, P. V. and Sandars, P. G. H. Parity- and time-violating interactions

in thallium ﬂuoride. J. Phys. B 16, 3727–3740 (1983).

30

A.V. Titov, N.S. Mosyagin, A.N. Petrov, T.A. Isaev, and D. DeMille

88. Laerdahl, J. K., Saue, T., Faegri, Jr, K., and Quiney, H. M. Ab initio study
of PT-odd interactions in Thallium Fluoride. Phys. Rev. Lett. 79, 1642–1645
(1997).

89. Parpia, F. A. Electric-dipole hyperﬁne matrix elements of the ground state of
the TlF molecule in the Dirac-Fock approximation. J. Phys. B 30, 3983–4001
(1997).

90. Dmitriev, Y. Y., Khait, Y. G., Kozlov, M. G., Labzovsky, L. N., Mitrushenkov,
A. O., Shtoﬀ, A. V., and Titov, A. V. Calculation of the spin-rotational hamil-
tonian including P- and P,T-odd weak interaction terms for the HgF and PbF
molecules. Phys. Lett. A 167, 280–286 (1992).

91. Titov, A. V. Matrix elements of the U (2n) generators in the spin-orbit basis.

Int. J. Quantum Chem. 42, 1711–1716 (1992).

92. Titov, A. V., Mosyagin, N. S., and Ezhov, V. F. P, T -odd spin-rotational
Hamiltonian for the YbF molecule. Phys. Rev. Lett. 77, 5346–5349 (1996).
93. Kozlov, M. G., Titov, A. V., Mosyagin, N. S., and Souchko, P. V. Enhancement
of the electric dipole moment of the electron in the BaF molecule. Phys. Rev.
A 56, R3326–3329 (1997).

94. Mosyagin, N. S., Kozlov, M. G., and Titov, A. V. Electric dipole moment of

the electron in the YbF molecule. J. Phys. B 31, L763–767 (1998).

95. Quiney, H. M., Skaane, H., and Grant, I. P. Hyperﬁne and P,T-odd eﬀects in

YbF 2Σ. J. Phys. B 31, L85–95 (1998).

96. Parpia, F. Ab initio calculation of the enhancement of the EDM of an electron

in the YbF. J. Phys. B 31, 1409–1430 (1998).

97. Isaev, T. A., Petrov, A. N., Mosyagin, N. S., Titov, A. V., Eliav, E., and Kaldor,
U. In search of the electron dipole moment: Ab initio calculations on 207PbO
excited states. Phys. Rev. A 69, 030501(R)/1–4 (2004).

98. Petrov, A. N., Titov, A. V., Isaev, T. A., Mosyagin, N. S., and DeMille, D. P.
Conﬁguration interaction calculation of hyperﬁne and P,T-odd constants on
207PbO excited states for the electron EDM. Phys. Rev. A (2005). In press;
http://arXiv.org/physics/0409045.

99. Isaev, T. A., Mosyagin, N. S., Petrov, A. N., and Titov, A. V. On the electron

EDM enhancement in HI+ (2004). ArXiv: physics/0412177, 3 p.

100. Dzuba, V. A., Flambaum, V. V., and Kozlov, M. G. Calculation of energy levels
for atoms with several valence electrons. JETP Lett. 63, 882–887 (1996).

101. Kaldor, U. Relativistic coupled cluster: Method and applications.

In: R. J.
Bartlett (ed.) Recent Advances in Coupled-Cluster Methods, pp. 125–153
(World Scientiﬁc, Singapore, 1997).

102. Landau, A., Eliav, E., and Kaldor, U. Intermediate Hamiltonian Fock-space

coupled-cluster method. Adv. Quantum Chem. 39, 171–188 (2001).

103. Buenker, R. J. and Krebs, S. The conﬁguration-driven approach for multirefer-
ence conﬁguration interaction calculations. In: K. Hirao (ed.) Recent Advances
in Multireference Methods, pp. 1–29 (World Scientiﬁc, Singapore, 1999).
104. Alekseyev, A. B., Liebermann, H.-P., and Buenker, R. J. Spin-orbit multirefer-
ence conﬁguration interaction method and applications to systems containing
heavy atoms. In: Hirao and Ishikawa [43], pp. 65–105.

105. Titov, A. V., Mosyagin, N. S., Alekseyev, A. B., and Buenker, R. J.
GRECP/MRD-CI calculations of spin-orbit splitting in ground state of Tl
and of spectroscopic properties of TlH. Int. J. Quantum Chem. 81, 409–421
(2001).

Study of P,T-Parity Violation Eﬀects in Polar Heavy-Atom Molecules

31

106. Dolg, M. Eﬀective core potentials. In: J. Grotendorst (ed.) Modern Methods
and Algorithms of Quantum Chemistry, vol. 1 of NIC Series, pp. 479–508
(J¨ulich, 2000). [http://www.fz-juelich.de].

107. Titov, A. V. and Mosyagin, N. S. Comments on “Eﬀective Core Potentials”

by M.Dolg [106]. ArXiv.org/ physics/0008239 (2000).

108. Titov, A. V. and Mosyagin, N. S. Self-consistent relativistic eﬀective core
potentials for transition metal atoms: Cu, Ag, and Au. Structural Chem. 6,
317–321 (1995).

109. Tupitsyn, I. I. “hfdb” (2003). Program for atomic ﬁnite-diﬀerence four-
component Dirac-Hartree-Fock-Breit calculations written on the base of the
hfd code [110].

110. Bratzev, V. F., Deyneka, G. B., and Tupitsyn, I. I. Application of the Hartree-
Fock method to calculation of relativistic atomic wave functions. Bull. Acad.
Sci. USSR, Phys. Ser. 41, 173–182 (1977).

111. Tupitsyn, I. I. and Petrov, A. N. Self–consistent ﬁeld calculations of heavy
atoms including the breit interaction. In: 5–th Session of the V.A. Fock School
on Quantum and Computational Chemistry, p. 62 (Novgorod the Great, 2002).
112. Tupitsyn, I. I. and Mosyagin, N. S. “grecp/hfj” (1995). Program for atomic
ﬁnite-diﬀerence two-component Hartree-Fock calculations with the generalized
RECP in the jj-coupling scheme.

113. Tupitsyn, I. I., Mosyagin, N. S., and Titov, A. V. Generalized relativistic
eﬀective core potential. I. Numerical calculations for atoms Hg through Bi. J.
Chem. Phys. 103, 6548–6555 (1995).

114. Lindgren, I. Eﬀective operators in the atomic hyperﬁne interaction. Rep. Prog.

115. Kunik, D. and Kaldor, U. Hyperﬁne pressure shift of hydrogen in helium. J.

Phys. 47, 345–398 (1984).

Chem. Phys. 55, 4127–4131 (1971).

116. Monkhorst, H. J. Calculation of properties with the coupled-cluster method.

Int. J. Quantum Chem.: Quantum Chem. Symp. 11, 421–432 (1977).

117. Kozlov, M. and Labzowsky, L. Parity violation eﬀects in diatomics. J. Phys.

B 28, 1931–1961 (1995).

118. Knight, Jr., L. B., Fisher, T. A., and Wise, M. B. Photolytic codeposition
generation of the HgF radical in an argon matrix at 12 K: An ESR investigation.
J. Chem. Phys. 74, 6009–6013 (1981).

119. Huber, K. P. and Herzberg, G. Constants of Diatomic Molecules (Van

Nostrand-Reinhold, New York, 1979).

120. Mosyagin, N. S. et al . GRECP/NOCR calculations of hyperﬁne structure and

parity violation eﬀects in YbF, HgF and HgH (2002). Unpublished.

121. Kozlov, M. G. and Ezhov, V. F. Enhancement of the electric dipole moment
of the electron in the YbF molecule. Phys. Rev. A 49, 4502–4506 (1994).
122. Knight, Jr., L. B. and Weltner, Jr., W. On the spin-doubling constant, γ, and

g tensor in 2Σ molecules. J. Chem. Phys. 53, L4111–4112 (1970).

123. Kozlov, M. G. Enhancement of the electric dipole moment of the electron in

the YbF molecule. J. Phys. B 30, L607–612 (1997).

124. Knight, L. B., Easley, W. C., and Weltner, W. Hyperﬁne interaction and
chemical bonding in MgF, CaF, SrF, and BaF molecules. J. Chem. Phys. 54,
322–329 (1971).

125. Ryzlewicz, C., Sch¨utze-Pahlmann, H. U., Hoeft, J., and T¨orring, T. Rotational
spectrum and hyperﬁne structure of the 2Σ radicals BaF and BaCl. Chem.
Phys. 71, 389–399 (1982).

32

A.V. Titov, N.S. Mosyagin, A.N. Petrov, T.A. Isaev, and D. DeMille

126. Schiﬀ, L. I. Measurability of nuclear electric dipole moments. Phys. Rev. 132,

2194–2200 (1963).

127. Quiney, H. M., Laerdahl, J. K., Faegri, Jr, K., and Saue, T. Ab initio Dirac-
Hartree-Fock calculations of chemical properties and PT-odd eﬀects in thallium
ﬂuoride. Phys. Rev. A 57, 920–944 (1998).

128. Wilson, S., Moncrieﬀ, D., and Kobus, J. TlF (1Σ+): Some preliminary elec-

tronic structure calculations (1994). RAL-94-082 Report.

129. Dzuba, V. A., Flambaum, V. V., Ginges, J. S. M., and Kozlov, M. G. Electric
dipole moments of Hg, Xe, Rn, Ra, Pu, and TlF induced by the nuclear schiﬀ
moment and limits on time-reversal violating interactions. Phys. Rev. A 66,
012111 (2002).

130. Kaldor, U. and Eliav, E. High-accuracy calculations for heavy and super-heavy

elements. Adv. Quantum Chem. 31, 313–336 (1999).

131. Kaldor, U., Eliav, E., and Landau, A. Four-component relativistic coupled

cluster – method and applications. In: Hirao and Ishikawa [43], pp. 283–327.

132. Paldus, J. and Li, X. A critical assessment of coupled cluster method in quan-

tum chemistry. Adv. Chem. Phys. 110, 1–175 (1999).

133. Paldus, J. Coupled cluster methods. In: S. Wilson (ed.) Handbook of Molecular
Physics and Quantum Chemistry, vol. 2, pp. 272–313 (John Wiley & Sons, Ltd,
Chichester, 2003).

134. Egorov, D., Weinstein, J. D., Patterson, D., Friedrich, B., and Doyle, J. M.
Spectroscopy of laser-ablated buﬀer-gas-cooled PbO at 4 K and the prospects
for measuring the electric dipole moment of the electron. Phys. Rev. A 63,
030501(R)/1–4 (2001).

135. Buenker, R. J. and Peyerimhoﬀ, S. D. Individualized conﬁguration selection
in CI calculations with subsequent energy extrapolation. Theor. Chim. Acta
35, 33–58 (1974).

136. Isaev, T. A., Mosyagin, N. S., Kozlov, M. G., Titov, A. V., Eliav, E., and
Kaldor, U. Accuracy of RCC-SD and PT2/CI methods in all-electron and
RECP calculations on Pb and Pb2+. J. Phys. B 33, 5139–5149 (2000).
137. Martin, F., Bacis, R., Verges, J., Bachar, J., and Rosenwaks, S. High resolu-
tion fourier transform spectroscopy of PbO molecule from investigation of the
O2(1Dg)−Pb reaction. Spectrochim. Acta 44A, 889 (1988).

138. Hunter, L. R., Maxwell, S. E., Ulmer, K. A., Charney, N. D., Peck, S. K.,
Krause, D., Ter-Avetisyan, S., and DeMille, D. Precise spectroscopy of the
a(1) [3Σ+] state of PbO. Phys. Rev. A 65, 030501(R) (2002).

139. Kawall, D., Gurevich, Y., and DeMille, D. To be published.

