Two-dimensional atomic lithography by sub-micron focusing of atomic beams

Will Williams∗ and M. Saﬀman
Department of Physics, 1150 University Avenue,
University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, WI, 53706
(Dated: January 16, 2014)

We analyze a method for serial writing of arbitrary two-dimensional patterns using optical focusing
of a collimated atomic beam. A spatial light modulator is used in a side illumination geometry to
create a localized optical spot with secondary maxima that are well separated from the central peak.
Numerical simulation of a lithography experiment using a magneto-optical trap as a source of cold
Cs atoms, collimation and cooling in a magnetic guide, and optical focusing predicts full width at
half maximum pixel sizes of 110 x 110 nm and writing times of about 20 ms per pixel.

5
0
0
2
 
n
u
J
 
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
m
o
t
a
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
2
2
0
6
0
5
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

PACS numbers:

I.

INTRODUCTION

Controlling the motion of neutral atoms using light
ﬁelds has been an important topic in atomic physics for
several decades. Focusing of atoms from a source onto a
planar substrate can be used for lithography where the
writing is done by an atomic beam instead of a light
ﬁeld. This technique is potentially useful for fabrication
of structures with sub-micron resolution. Atomic focus-
ing can be achieved with magnetic or optical ﬁelds. In
atomic lithography with light ﬁelds, an optical proﬁle
creates a spatially dependent dipole force that alters the
trajectories of neutral atoms. One and two dimensional
standing wave light patterns have been used to create pe-
riodic atomic patterns[1, 2, 3, 4, 5]. Imaging of an atomic
beam is also possible using a magnetic lens as was demon-
strated by Kaenders et al. [6], and a wide range of atomic
guiding and imaging tasks have been demonstrated using
magnetic ﬁelds[7].

While there has been a great deal of work in atomic
lithography (recent reviews can be found in Refs. 8, 9,
10), only spatially periodic or quasiperiodic[3, 11] pat-
terns have been demonstrated. As this limits the range of
applications and usefulness of the technique there is con-
siderable interest in devising approaches that will allow
spatially complex structures to be created. One approach
to creating non-periodic patterns is to use a more com-
plex optical ﬁeld, as in Refs. 12, 13. An alternative serial
writing approach is to focus the atomic beam to a very
small spot and then move the spot to draw an arbitrary
two-dimensional structure. Spot motion can be achieved
either by scanning the spot over a stationary substrate,
or by moving the substrate. An example of an optically
scanned atomic beam focused to a size of about 200 µm
can be found in Ref. 14. To obtain higher resolution
tightly focused atomic beams are necessary which can be
created by propagation in hollow core ﬁbers[15] which
have the drawback of low atomic ﬂux, or using Bessel
beams[16, 17, 18, 19]. A drawback of the Bessel beam

∗Electronic address: wdwilliams@wisc.edu

FIG. 1: Proposed schematic for focusing neutral atoms to a
small isolated dot.

approach is the existence of secondary maxima that can
lead to atom localization in rings surrounding the central
peak.

In this paper we analyze a new approach to focusing
an atomic beam to a spot with a characteristic size of
about 100 nm. The optical proﬁle used for the atomic
focusing is created with a spatial light modulator (SLM)
that allows the spot to be scanned with no mechanical
motion. By controlling both the phase and intensity pro-
ﬁle of the incident beam we create an optical “funnel”
that focuses a high percentage of the atomic ﬂux into a
single spot. The proposed approach, as shown in Fig.
1, uses a magneto-optical trap (MOT) as a source of
cold atoms. A continuous ﬂow of atoms is pushed out

2

FIG. 3: Example of translating a J0 Bessel proﬁle composed
of 32 laser beams by adding appropriate phase shifts to the
interfering plane waves.

where Is is the saturation intensity, γ is the natural
linewidth, ∆ = ω − ωa is the detuning from resonance,
ω is the optical frequency, and ωa is the atomic transi-
tion frequency. We write the intensity as I = I(x, y)g(z)
where I(x, y) gives the dependence in the x, y plane and
g(z) is an envelope function which describes the inten-
sity proﬁle along the z axis, which we will take to be
the propagation direction of the atomic beam. Atoms
propagating through a region of spatially varying inten-
sity experience a dipole force F = −∇U which alters
their trajectories, and can be used to focus the atoms
into a desired pattern. When ∆ < 0 (red detuning) we
get an attractive potential that concentrates the atoms
where the intensity is highest, while for ∆ > 0 (blue de-
tuning) the potential is repulsive. For potentials of inter-
est we calculate the atomic trajectories numerically using
the classical equations of motion for the atomic center of
mass. It is also assumed that the atoms do not collide
and only interact with the given potential. Therefore,
each atom trajectory can be treated individually and a
large number of single atom trajectories resulting from a
statistical distribution of initial conditions can be com-
bined to determine an output distribution.

The optical potential can be constructed by combin-
ing several laser beams. When only a few beams are
used the potential has a periodic structure, e.g. a one-
dimensional standing wave created by two counter propa-
gating beams, or a checkerboard pattern created by four
beams. To focus all of the atoms to a single spot, the
periodic structure must be removed. This can be done
by adding more laser ﬁelds. Consider a two-dimensional
ﬁeld formed using N laser beams all propagating in the
same plane and arranged to cross at a common point.
The shape of the resulting intensity proﬁle is determined
by the angles between the beams as well as the magni-
tude and phase of the ﬁelds. The simplest possibility is
to cross laser beams, which all have equal electric ﬁeld
phases and magnitudes, with equal angular spacing. As
the number of beams goes to inﬁnity the intensity proﬁle
tends to J 2
x2 + y2), the square of the zeroth order
Bessel function which has a ring structure whose scale
is dependent only on the wavelength of the light through
k = 2π/λ. An axicon can be used to create a Bessel beam
for this purpose[18], and it is possible to create higher
order Bessel proﬁles such as a J1 proﬁle as proposed by

0 (k

p

FIG. 2: Atomic Lithography with a Spatial Light Modulator

of the MOT[9, 20, 21] and collimated using a magnetic
guide followed by an optical focusing region. The mag-
netic waveguide creates a micron sized atomic beam, with
the ﬁnal focusing down to a full width at half maximum
atomic spot size of wa,FWHM = 110 nm provided by a
far detuned optical proﬁle together with near resonant
It is then possible to move the optical
cooling beams.
proﬁle and write a two-dimensional pattern by changing
the phases of the laser beams with the SLM. We study the
feasibility of this approach using numerical simulations of
the atomic trajectories including propagation and cooling
in the magnetic guide and the optical proﬁle.

In Sec.

II we summarize the main features of opti-
cal focusing of atoms, and describe the creation of a
Bessel proﬁle using side illumination with a SLM. The
optical funnel for reduction of atomic trapping in sec-
ondary maxima is described in Sec. III. The design of
a cold atom setup coupled to a magnetic waveguide and
then followed by the optical funnel is described in Sec.
IV. Numerical results showing the feasibility of writing
a two-dimensional structure are given in Sec. V.

II. OPTICAL POTENTIAL

The goal of optically mediated atomic lithography is
to control the trajectories of atoms by means of light
ﬁelds. A collimated atomic beam is passed through a re-
gion of spatially varying optical intensity that modiﬁes
the atomic trajectories such that a desired atomic pat-
tern is deposited on a substrate. The conservative optical
potential for a two-level atom including the eﬀects of sat-
uration is[22]

U =

¯h∆
2

ln

1 +

(cid:20)

I
Is

1
(1 + 4∆2/γ2) (cid:21)

,

(1)

3

0 (k

FIG. 4: Atom focusing in two dimensions using a standing
wave I ∼ J 2
x2 + y2) light mask. On the right is a numer-
ical example of atom focusing in the light mask. The atomic
beam had an axial velocity of 14 m/s, a transverse distribu-
tion with wa,FWHM = 1.6 µm, and a transverse temperature
of Ta = 22.5 µK. The peak potential depth is U/kB = 21 mK
and the optical mask is created with light of λ = .852 µm.

p

Okamoto et al [19], by altering the phase proﬁle of the
beam.

An alternative approach to creating a Bessel beam,
as well as higher order beams, is to use a SLM. There
has been substantial recent interest in using SLM tech-
nology in atom optics [23] as well as an experimental
demonstration of manipulation of atoms in microscopic
optical traps[24]. Superpositions of Bessel functions may
also be useful for addressing individual atoms in opti-
cal lattices[25]. Referring to the geometry of Fig. 2,
when the number of laser beams N > 32 the pattern
is periodic on scales much longer than the size of the
central Bessel peak, so we obtain a well isolated Bessel
proﬁle. After the optical proﬁle is constructed, serial
writing of a pattern can be accomplished by translat-
ing the central spot where atoms are focused. The pro-
posed method to accomplish this is to change the phase
of each of the individual beams to construct the pro-
ﬁle at a new point on the plane. Each beam with in-
dex j = (1, N ) can be represented as an electric ﬁeld
Ej = E0 exp{ik[cos(θj) x + sin(θj) y] − i φj} where E0 is
the amplitude, k is the wavenumber, φj is a phase, and
θj is the angle of the beam propagation direction with
respect to the x axis. We assume all beams are polarized
along ˆz so we can neglect vectorial eﬀects. To create a
Bessel proﬁle centered at x = y = 0 we choose all φj = 0.
To move the proﬁle to be centered at coordinates (x0, y0)
we put

φj = k[cos(θj)x0 + sin(θj)y0].

(2)

This enables translation of the pattern as shown in Fig.
3. A spatial light modulator can readily be used to create
these phase shifts in a side illumination geometry which is
compatible with deposition of an atomic beam, as shown
in Fig. 2.

The results of a numerical simulation of atom focusing
using a J 2
0 Bessel proﬁle can be seen in Fig. 4. In or-
der to reduce heating that occurs when the atoms enter

FIG. 5: The Optical Funnel proﬁle has wave amplitudes that
subtend an angular range of π (left), resulting in a localized
potential well without secondary rings (right).

the focusing region two-dimensional near resonant mo-
lasses beams with the same axial proﬁle as the focusing
potential are included. Details of the numerical method,
including parameters of the cooling beams, are given in
Sec. V. A serious problem with this approach is that the
atoms are not focused to a single spot. It is diﬃcult to ob-
tain a large atomic ﬂux in a beam that is narrow enough
to prevent focusing into the surrounding ring structure.
To correct this, the rings of the Bessel function need to
be removed. One possibility is to superimpose a red de-
tuned J0 proﬁle with a blue detuned and repulsive J1 (or
higher order) proﬁle. The wavelengths and amplitudes of
the two Bessel beams can be chosen to suppress the ring
structure. While the ﬁrst ring can be suppressed, higher
order rings are still present and the blue detuned Bessel
proﬁle needs to have a very large detuning. This is be-
cause the ﬁrst maximum of higher order Bessel proﬁles
is not at the same radius as the ﬁrst ring of the zeroth
order Bessel. For example, the third order Bessel has its
ﬁrst maximum at 0.668λ while the ﬁrst ring of the ze-
roth order Bessel is at 0.61λ. Therefore to get the ﬁrst
maximum to line up with the ﬁrst ring, we must change
the wavelength to 776 nm, as compared to the 852 nm
used for J0 focusing with Cs atoms. Since the potential
is proportional to 1/∆ for large detuning, the power re-
quired to obtain the correct well depth to cancel the ﬁrst
order ring is extremely large.

III. OPTICAL FUNNEL

In this section we discuss an alternative proﬁle that
uses traveling waves to avoid the ring structure that mars
the applicability of the Bessel proﬁle. We call this struc-
ture an optical funnel. The central spot of the Bessel
squared proﬁle has a FWHM diameter wFWHM = 0.359λ.
This small width may be relaxed in exchange for a proﬁle
that has a less troublesome ring structure. One possible
optical proﬁle is the funnel shown in Fig. 5. The funnel
is a traveling wave ﬁeld that subtends an angular range
of π and has amplitudes that decrease linearly on either
side of the maximum. The radius of the rim of the funnel
depends on how many beams are used to create the pro-
ﬁle, as shown in Fig. 6. All atoms that enter the proﬁle
inside the rim will be funneled towards the point of low-

4

FIG. 8: Numerical results for atomic deposition in a Bessel
proﬁle (left) and funnel proﬁle (right). Each panel shows a
region of 2 µm × 2 µm and the optical wavelength is 852
nm. The atomic beam for both ﬁgures had a axial velocity
of 14 m/s, a transverse distribution with wa,FWHM = 1.6 µm,
and a transverse temperature of Ta = 22.5 µK.

optical potential is preferred since it is possible to focus
a large percentage of the atomic ﬂux in a single spot with
no rings. Figure 8 shows focusing to a single spot using
the same atomic beam parameters as in Fig. 4. For the
simulation two noninteracting funnel proﬁles are placed
on top of each other to create a symmetric potential,
as described above. The atomic spot in the funnel has
wa,FWHM = 110 nm. Note that the ring structure which
is very pronounced when using a Bessel beam has been
essentially eliminated. Both optical proﬁles have depths
of approximately 21 mK. For both proﬁles cooling beams
were used together with the optical focusing as discussed
in Sec. V. The results of the simulation show that the
funnel captures 94% of the atoms into the 2 µm × 2 µm
square, the size of the ﬁgure, compared to only 45.3% for
the Bessel proﬁle with only 6% captured in the central
spot.

It is interesting to compare the localized potential cre-
ated with the funnel to simply using tightly focused
Gaussian beams. The use of Gaussian beams would
completely eliminate the background ring problem, but
comes at the expense of larger spot size. Experiments
with a high numerical aperture lens system[26] have
demonstrated focusing of a single Gaussian beam to a
spot diameter of wFWHM = 0.86λ. A Gaussian beam
is highly elongated so we can superpose two incoherent
Gaussians to create a symmetric optical potential. Be-
cause there is a large degree of elongation, even for such
a tightly focused Gaussian, the resulting symmetrized in-
tensity proﬁle has wFWHM = 1.4λ which is almost twice
as big as we obtain for the funnel. Comparing Bessel
beams, the optical funnel, and Gaussian beams, we see
that the funnel combines a relatively small spot size with
large radius rings. In Sec. V we demonstrate that two
dimensional structures can be written by translating the
funnel proﬁle.

FIG. 6: The optical funnel intensity with lighter regions rep-
resenting higher intensity. The rim of the funnel has a larger
radius as the number of laser beams is increased. The pan-
els show 8 beams (top left),16 beams (top right), 24 beams
(bottom left), and 32 beams (bottom right).

est energy at the center. The result is a high percentage
of the atomic ﬂux being directed into the central spot.
The width of the atomic spot that is written then scales
as wa,FWHM ∼ wFWHM
kBTa/U0, where U0 is the max-
imum well depth of the funnel, and Ta is the temperature
of the transverse atomic motion. The FWHM of the fun-
nel intensity proﬁle is 0.48λ in x and 1.38λ in y. We can
create an approximately circular potential by combining
two noninteracting funnels (they have a relative detuning
that is large compared to γ, yet small compared to ∆),
to get wFWHM = 0.72λ in both the x and y directions, as
shown in Fig. 7.

p

Even though the width of the symmetrized funnel pro-
ﬁle is approximately twice that of the Bessel proﬁle, this

FIG. 7: The funnel potential(left) and contour plots(right).
Contours for 10%, 50%, and 90% of the peak intensity are
shown. The optical proﬁle is composed of two noninteracting
optical funnels (with diﬀerent detunings) each composed of
16 laser beams.

IV. ATOMIC SOURCE AND MAGNETIC
PRECOLLIMATION

Most experimental demonstrations of atomic lithogra-
phy have used an oven as a source of thermal atoms. The
atomic beam is then collimated using mechanical aper-
tures and/or transverse laser cooling to create a beam
suitable for lithography experiments. At least two ex-
periments [27, 28] have also used cold or axially cooled
atom sources for lithography experiments. A detailed dis-
cussion of the relative merits and requirements of diﬀer-
ent types of atomic sources for lithography experiments
can be found in Ref. 9. Generally speaking oven based
sources provide higher ﬂux and therefore faster writing
speeds than cold atom sources. One advantage of cold
sources is the low longitudinal velocity which minimizes
surface damage and sputtering from atom impact on the
deposition substrate. We are interested here in a tech-
nique that is suitable for writing feature sizes as small as
100 nm. The requirement for high ﬂux, and fast writing
over a large area may therefore be less important than
minimization of surface eﬀects.

The above considerations motivate us to consider the
suitability of a cold atom source using the geometry
In order to match a
shown schematically in Fig. 1.
MOT source with a transverse size of 0.1 − 1.0 mm to
the micron sized funnel proﬁle so that secondary rings
are eliminated it is necessary to precollimate the atomic
beam. We note that this would also be necessary with an
oven based source. We propose to do so using a magnetic
guide and transverse laser cooling.

The potential U (x, y) due to a magnetic ﬁeld B(x, y)

in a quadrupole magnetic wave guide is

U (x, y) = µBgmB(x, y)

B(x, y) = b′

x2 + y2

p

where b′ = 2µ0J/(πa2), m is the magnetic quantum num-
ber, g is the Land´e factor, µB is the Bohr magneton, µ0
is the magnetic permeability, J is the current, and a is
the distance from the center of the guide to each wire.
As indicated in Fig. 1 two-dimensional molasses beams
are used to cool the atoms in the magnetic guide. The
resulting size of the atomic beam after cooling is given
by the virial theorem to be

(3)

(4)

(5)

< r >=

kBTa
gmµBb′

.

Using Ta = 22.5 µK, J = 500 A and a = 4 mm, the
average radial distance of the atoms from the center of
the guide is 1.34 µm.

The magnetic potential is attractive for atoms that are
prepared in states with positive m. Since the atoms pass
close to the trap axis, we must add a bias ﬁeld along
the longitudinal axis of the guide to minimize Majorana
spin ﬂips. The result of this bias ﬁeld will be a slightly
larger atomic beam. The simulations in the next section

5

FIG. 9: The RMS width of the atomic beam (left) and trans-
verse temperature (right) of the atoms as they travel through
the optical funnel. The initial temperature before entering
the funnel is 22.5 µK. The dashed line shows the axial proﬁle
of the funnel potential.

were done with a bias ﬁeld B0 to give a total magnetic
2(x2 + y2). Simulations show
ﬁeld B(x, y) =
that adding a bias ﬁeld of B0 = 0.1 G in the axial direc-
tion results in a slightly larger average radial distance of
1.42 µm for the above parameters.

0 + b′

B2

p

V. NUMERICAL RESULTS

Atomic focusing was simulated using a 4th order
Runge-Kutta code to trace the trajectories of individual
atoms from the injection into the magnetic wave guide
through the optical guide. The atomic parameters were
chosen to correspond to the Cs D2 line (62S1/2 − 62P3/2)
transition with decay rate γ = 2π × 5.22 MHz. Param-
eter values consistent with magnetic waveguide experi-
ments were chosen [21]: a = 4 mm and J = 500 A. A
small bias ﬁeld of B0 = 0.1 G was included in the sim-
ulation as discussed above. The atomic beam from the
MOT at the entrance to the 20 cm long magnetic guide
was taken to be a Gaussian distribution with 1/e2 ra-
dius of 100 µm, transverse temperature of 20 µK, and
mean longitudinal velocity of 14 m/s. Since compression
in the magnetic guide heats the atoms we added two di-
mensional molasses beams to the simulation. The in-
tensity of the cooling beams was set to 2.9 W/m2, or
I/Is = .26, and ∆m = −γ/2. The cooling was simulated
by randomly changing the momenta of each atom by ei-
ther 2¯hkm/ma,−2¯hkm/ma, or 0 once per scattering time
with probabilities of 25%, 25%, and 50% respectively
while constantly damping the atoms with a force[29] −βv
. Here, km is the wavenumber of the molasses beams, ma
is the mass of the atom, and β is the damping coeﬃcient.
The velocity kick was added in both transverse directions
to independently cool along each axis. The linewidth γ,
was decreased by a factor of 8 and the recoil velocity was
decreased to 0.23 cm/s to simulate sub-Doppler cooling
to approximately 22.5 µK in the transverse plane. The
resulting FWHM of the atomic beam after cooling but
still in the magnetic wave guide is wa,FWHM ≃ 1.68 µm.
At the end of the magnetic wave guide we feed the
atoms into the optical funnel. The funnel was comprised
of two noninteracting funnel proﬁles, each consisting of
32 laser beams. The two funnels are overlapped to form

6

was 40 % of the saturation intensity. Two pairs of orthog-
onal cooling beams were used with the same axial spatial
mode as the beams used to create the funnel. The cooling
beams help to limit the temperature, but do not inter-
act strongly enough with the atoms to cool them to the
Doppler temperature before the atoms hit the substrate.
The substrate is placed at the center of the Gaussian pro-
ﬁle as has been done in some experiments[30]. The trans-
verse temperature of the atoms just before the substrate
is approximately 2.5 mK. Since the atoms are heated to
well above the Doppler temperature when entering the
optical proﬁle, cooling was simulated solely by a damp-
ing force, ignoring photon kicks. The resulting number
density in the optical proﬁle has wa,FWHM = 110 nm
with 82% of the atoms falling within a radius of 500 nm
and 20% falling within the FWHM of the beam. The
trajectories of 100 atoms are shown in the inset of Fig.
10.

Due to the large intensity of the funnel beams addi-
tional heating due to photon scattering may also be of
concern. The peak scattering rate at the center of the
many beam optical funnel is [29]

r ∼

γ
2

I0
Is
1 + 4∆2

γ2 + I0

Is

(6)

For the funnel parameters given above this results in a
maximum scattering rate of r = 1.3 × 106 s−
1. The atom-
light interaction time is approximately 0.1 ms and results
in scattering of about 150 photons. The scattering of
)2 = 30 µK to the atomic
these photons adds ma
ma
temperature which can be neglected since the tempera-
ture of the atoms at the center of the proﬁle is approxi-
mately 2.5 mK.

kB ( √150¯hk

To simulate writing of a two-dimensional pattern the
optical funnel is reconstructed at varying distances from
the atomic beam axis using the phases given by Eq. (2).
A simulation of a W is shown in Fig. 11. The W is
made by positioning the funnel at 101 diﬀerent spots and
depositing a total of 24240 atoms. The FWHM of the
atomic beam at the substrate increases the further the
optical funnel is from the center of the magnetic guide.
This results in a small spreading of the ends of the W,
visible in Fig. 11. Figure 12 shows that the FWHM of the
atomic beam on the substrate increases by about a factor
of two when the funnel is moved by a distance of 3 µm.
This is because the atoms that enter the potential near
the rim obtain a larger radial velocity while traveling to
the potential minimum. As a result, the atoms are hotter
when they arrive at the substrate and thus have a larger
wa,FWHM.

In order for this type of lithography to be practical
the writing speed must not be too slow. Coverage of
a surface with one monolayer of Cs corresponds to a
surface density of about [30] 4 × 1015 atoms/cm2.
It
has been shown[31] that between 3 and 7 monolayers
of Cs are needed to create enough damage for expo-
sure of organic self-assembled monolayer (SAM) coat-

FIG. 10: Number density of the optically focused atomic
beam with wa,FWHM = 110 nm. The insert shows the trajec-
tories of 100 randomly chosen atoms as they travel through
the optical proﬁle. The compression of the beam is clearly
seen. The substrate, shown on the right, is in the center of
the Gaussian proﬁle.

a symmetric potential, as in Fig 7. The axial proﬁle of
the beams was g(z) = exp(−2z2/w2
z), with wz = 0.6 mm
and their cross section was assumed to be circular in
the focusing region. A peak intensity of 7 × 106 W/m2
and ∆/2π = −10 GHz was chosen for one funnel and
6.3 × 106 W/m2 and ∆/2π = −9 GHz for the other.
This choice of parameters gives the same well depth for
both funnels, but detuned such that they do not interact.
This results in a total well depth of U0/kB = 21 mK with
a laser power requirement of approximately 124 and 111
mW respectively.

Since the atoms are heated as they travel into the opti-
cal funnel as shown in Fig. 9, we add cooling beams to the
optical proﬁle. For the cooling beams, the detuning was
set to half the line width and the intensity of each beam

FIG. 11: Distribution of atoms deposited to write the letter
W written by changing the phases of the beams creating the
optical proﬁle. The magnetic guide is stationary and aligned
with the center of the picture which shows a region of size
4 µm × 4 µm.

7

scanned that far since when the funnel position moves
a distance comparable to the width of the beam leav-
ing the magnetic guide the spot size created by the fun-
nel starts to increase. We can therefore say that for
the parameters investigated it appears possible to write
no more than several hundred independent pixels with
wa,FWHM ∼ 110 nm. Alternatively the system could be
optimized to write a single small, but stationary spot,
and the substrate scanned mechanically. This would in
principle allow an arbitrarily large number of pixels to
be written.

A long term goal of atomic lithography is to produce
a large scale lithographic process. To do so a number of
challenges will have to be overcome. The optical fun-
nel will only capture atoms into a small spot if they
enter the funnel close enough to the center. Theoreti-
cally, we could increase the axial thickness of the funnel,
or increase the laser intensity to increase the range at
which the funnel will capture atoms. Experimentally,
this is limited by available laser power. Another exper-
imental diﬃculty will be the sub-Doppler cooling that
is required in the magnetic wave guide. Others have
shown theoretically that sub-Doppler cooling is possible
with small spot sizes[32], but experiments have not yet
demonstrated this level of cooling of a traveling beam in
a quadrupole wave guide. Requirements on cooling eﬃ-
ciency could be traded oﬀ against stronger compression
due to larger magnetic ﬁelds. This is limited by the abil-
ity to run large currents through small wires. Approaches
based on lithographically patterned wires[7] which will
enable waveguides with smaller dimensions may enable
even tighter conﬁnement.

In conclusion we expect that solutions to these issues,
as well as further optimization of performance by reﬁne-
ment of parameters will be possible. Full evaluation of
the suitability of the atom-optical approach for writing
complex structures described here will ultimately rely on
experimental tests.

The authors thank Deniz Yavuz for helpful discussions.
This work was supported by NSF grant PHY-0210357,
and an Advanced Opportunity Fellowship from the Uni-
versity of Wisconsin graduate school.

FIG. 12: FWHM of the atomic beam at the substrate as a
function of the distance d between the magnetic waveguide
and the funnel.

ings. Given a spot of wa,FWHM = 110 nm, which deﬁnes
a pixel with area π552 = 9500 nm2, the exposure per
pixel for one monolayer of Cs is 3.8 × 105 atoms/pixel.
Given a ﬂux of 5 × 108 atoms/s and 20% of the atoms
falling within an area of diameter wa,FWHM, it will take
about 3.8 ms to deposit one monolayer of Cs. The time
needed to successfully write 3 to 7 monolayers of cesium
to a pixel is then between 11 and 27 ms. The W has
lengths which total 4.8 µm which corresponds to at least
4.8 µm/110 nm ≈ 44 spots. Therefore, the writing time
for the W would be approximately 1 second.

VI. DISCUSSION

We have described an atomic lithography system that
uses magnetic and optical ﬁelds to focus atoms from a
MOT onto a sub-micron spot. Doing so requires combin-
ing conﬁning potentials with optical molasses to main-
tain low atomic temperatures. Using numerical simula-
tions of experimentally realistic parameters we produce
pixels with wa,FWHM = 110 nm, and a writing speed of
order 20 ms per pixel. The position of the pixel can be
scanned to write arbitrary planar structures using phase
shifts created by a SLM. The optical funnel that pro-
duces the ﬁnal focusing has an acceptance region with
diameter of about 8 µm. However, the funnel cannot be

[1] G. Timp, R. E. Behringer, D. M. Tennant, J. E. Cun-
ningham, M. Prentiss, and K. K. Berggren, Phys. Rev.
Lett. 69, 1636 (1992).

[2] J. J. McClelland, R. E. Scholten, E. C. Palm, and R. J.

Celotta, Science 262, 877 (1993).

[3] T. Schulze, B. Brezger, R. Mertens, M. Pivk, T. Pfau,

and J. Mlynek, Appl. Phys. B 70, 671 (2000).

[6] W. G. Kaenders, F. Lison, A. Richter, R. Wynands, and

D. Meschede, Nature 375, 214 (1995).

[7] E. A. Hinds and I. G. Hughes, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys.

32, R119 (1999).

15, R233 (2003).

[8] M. K. Oberthaler and T. Pfau, J. Phys. Condens. Matter

[9] D. Meschede and H. Metcalf, J Phys D: Appl Phys 36,

[4] C. C. Bradley, W. R. Anderson, J. J. McClelland, and

R17 (2003).

R. J. Celotta, Appl. Surf. Sci. 141, 210 (1999).

[5] S. J. H. Petra, K. A. H. van Leeuwen, L. Feenstra,
W. Hogervorst, and W. Vassen, Appl. Phys. B 79, 279
(2004).

[10] J. J. McClelland, S. B. Hill, M. Pichler, and R. J. Celotta,
Science and Technology of Adv. Mater. 5, 575 (2004).
[11] E. Jurdik, G. Myszkiewicz, J. Hohlfeld, A. Tsukamoto,
A. J. Toonen, A. F. van Etteger, J. Gerritsen,

J. Hermsen, S. Goldbach-Aschemann, W. L. Meerts,
et al., Phys. Rev. B 69, 201102(R) (2004).

[12] M. M¨utzel, S. Tandler, D. Haubrich, D. Meschede,
K. Peithmann, M. Flasp¨ohler, and K. Buse, Phys. Rev.
Lett. 88, 083601 (2002).

[13] M. M¨utzel, U. Rasbach, D. Meschede, C. Burstedde,
J. Braun, A. Kunoth, K. Peithmann, and K. Buse, Appl.
Phys. B 77, 1 (2003).

[14] H. Oberst, S. Kasashima, V. I. Balykin, and F. Shimizu,

Phys. Rev. A 68, 013606 (2003).

[15] M. J. Renn, D. Montgomery, O. Vdovin, D. Z. Anderson,
C. E. Wieman, and E. A. Cornell, Phys. Rev. Lett. 75,
3253 (1995).

[16] J. E. Bjorkholm, R. R. Freeman, A. Ashkin, and D. B.

Pearson, Phys. Rev. Lett. 41, 1361 (1978).

[17] V. I. Balykin and V. S. Letokhov, Opt. Commun. 64, 151

[18] B. Dubetsky and P. R. Berman, Phys. Rev. A 58, 2413

(1987).

(1998).

[19] K. Okamoto, Y. Inouye, and S. Kawata, Jpn. J. Appl.

Phys. Part 1 40, 4544 (2001).

[20] Z. T. Lu, K. L. Corwin, M. J. Renn, M. H. Anderson,
E. A. Cornell, and C. E. Wieman, Phys. Rev. Lett. 77,
3331 (1996).

[21] E. Mandonnet, A. Minguzzi, R. Dum, I. Carusotto,

8

Y. Castin, and J. Dalibard, Eur. Phys. J. D 10, 9 (2000).

[22] J. J. McClelland, J. Opt. Soc. Am. B 12, 1761 (1995).
[23] D. McGloin, G. C. Spalding, H. Melville, W. Sibbett, and

K. Dholakia, Opt. Express 11, 158 (2003).

[24] S. Bergamini, B. Darqui´e, M. Jones, L. Jacubowiez,
A. Browaeys, and P. Grangier, J. Opt. Soc. Am. B 21,
1889 (2004).

[25] M. Saﬀman, Opt. Lett. 29, 1016 (2004).
[26] N. Schlosser, G. Reymond, I. Protsenko, and P. Grangier,

Nature 411, 1024 (2001).

[27] J. Fujita, M. Morinaga, T. Kishimoto, M. Yasuda,
S. Matsui, and F. Shimizu, Nature 380, 691 (1996).
[28] P. Engels, S. Salewski, H. Levsen, K. Sengstock, and

W. Ertmer, Appl. Phys. B 69, 407 (1999).

[29] H. J. Metcalf and P. van der Straten, Laser Cooling and

Trapping (Springer-Verlag, New York, 1999).

[30] F. Lison, H.-J. Adams, D. Haubrich, M. Kreis, S. Nowak,

and D. Meschede, Appl. Phys. B 65, 419 (1997).

[31] K. K. Berggren, R. Younkin, E. Cheung, M. Prentiss,
A. J. Black, G. M. Whitesides, D. C. Ralph, C. T. Black,
and M. Tinkham, Adv. Mater. 9, 52 (1997).

[32] V. I. Balykin and V. G. Minogin, J. Exp. Theor. Phys.
96, 8 (2003), translated from Zh. ´Eksp. Teor. Fiz. 123,
13 (2003).

