5
0
0
2
 
n
u
J
 
8
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
m
o
t
a
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
9
9
1
6
0
5
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Storage and retrieval of light pulses in atomic media with “slow” and “fast” light

A. Lezama1,2, A.M. Akulshin1, A.I. Sidorov1 and P. Hannaford1
1ARC Centre of Excellence for Quantum Atom Optics and Centre for Atom Optics and Ultrafast Spectroscopy,
Swinburne University of Technology, Hawthorn, 3122, Australia
2Instituto de F´isica, Facultad de Ingenier´ia, C. Postal 30, 11000 Montevideo, Uruguay
(Dated: February 2, 2008)

We present experimental evidence that light storage, i.e. the controlled release of a light pulse by
an atomic sample dependent on the past presence of a writing pulse, is not restricted to small group
velocity media but can also occur in a negative group velocity medium. A simple physical picture
applicable to both cases and previous light storage experiments is discussed.

PACS numbers: 42.50.Gy, 32.80.Bx, 32.80.Qk

All-optical information processing requires the use of
photons as fast and reliable carriers of information. Pho-
tons are quantum objects and the search for media where
the quantum state of photons can be preserved and pro-
cessed is of great signiﬁcance. Recently, broad attention
has been focussed on the possibility of “light storage”
(LS) which is the preservation of the information car-
ried by a light pulse for controllable later release. Such
a possibility was suggested in theory [1] and subsequent
experimental results were presented in support of this
suggestion [2, 3, 4, 5]. In all of these experiments, a weak
light pulse was “written” into an atomic medium driven
by a stronger ﬁeld and, after a dark interval, retrieved
from the medium by turning on the strong (drive) ﬁeld.
All observations of LS were achieved under conditions
of electromagnetically induced transparency (EIT) since,
according to [1], EIT and “slow light” (small group veloc-
ity associated with EIT) play a key role. The storage ef-
fect is seen as a consequence of the slowing and compres-
sion of the light pulse in the atomic medium, the propa-
gation of a mixed light-matter excitation (dark-state po-
lariton), the transformation of the dark-state polariton
in the absence of light into a pure atomic spin excitation
and ﬁnally the release of a light pulse once the drive ﬁeld
is turned on [6].

The purpose of this letter is to present experimental
results and theoretical considerations which broaden the
scope of the subject by demonstrating that a LS eﬀect,
analogous to that previously reported [2, 3, 4, 5], can
take place in media where EIT does not occur and where
the probe pulse group velocity is negative (“fast light”)
as a result of large anomalous dispersion.

Steep anomalous dispersion exists in driven atomic me-
dia in connection with electromagnetically induced ab-
sorption (EIA) [7]. EIA occurs when resonant light in-
teracts with a two-level atomic transition in which the
Zeeman degeneracy of the excited level is higher than
that of the lower level; namely Fe > Fg > 0 where Fe
and Fg are the total angular momenta of the excited level
and ground level, respectively. A resonant increase in
the probe absorption occurs under the condition of a Ra-
man resonance with ground state Zeeman sublevels [8].

In particular, at zero magnetic ﬁeld the EIA resonance
condition is achieved for the two orthogonal polarization
components of a single monochromatic optical ﬁeld. Su-
perluminar pulse propagation in an atomic vapor under
the conditions of EIA has been demonstrated in [9].

The experimental scheme used is very similar to the
one presented in Ref. [2]. LS was studied in a 5 cm long
vapor cell containing a natural isotopic mixture of rubid-
ium. The cell was placed at the center of a cylindrical µ-
metal shield. A solenoid inside the magnetic shield allows
tuning of the longitudinal magnetic ﬁeld B. The cell was
heated (∼ 70 ◦C) to produce almost 100% linear absorp-
tion and 50 − 80% absorption at maximum light inten-
sity. Two extended cavity diode lasers were used for the
D1 and D2 transitions. Fast switching on and oﬀ of the
laser light was achieved with an acousto-optic modulator
(AOM). After the AOM, a polarizer ﬁxes the polarization
of the drive ﬁeld. A Pockels cell along the light beam was
used as an electro-optic modulator (EOM) to generate a
probe pulse with orthogonal polarization relative to the
drive ﬁeld. The probe pulse was 5 times weaker than the
drive ﬁeld. Care was taken to use the EOM in the λ/2
conﬁguration in order to produce in-phase probe pulses
relative to the drive ﬁeld. The light beam was expanded
to a 1 cm diameter before the cell. The maximum laser
power available at the cell was 0.6 mW and 2 mW for
the D1 and D2 lines, respectively. After traversing the
atomic vapor, the drive and probe polarization compo-
nents of the light were separated by a polarizing beam
splitter and collected by fast photodiodes. The electronic
control and detection response times were shorter than 1
µs.

Our setup allows the use of linear perpendicular or
opposite circular drive and probe ﬁeld polarization com-
binations. Qualitatively similar LS eﬀects were observed
for both choices. We describe in the following the sig-
nals obtained with perpendicular linear drive and probe
ﬁelds polarizations. LS under conditions of EIT was ob-
served on both the transitions 5S1/2 (F = 1) → 5P3/2
(D2 line) and 5S1/2 (F = 2) → 5P1/2 (F ′ = 1) (D1 line)
of 87Rb. We present results obtained for the latter transi-
tion which was also used in previous experiments [2, 4, 5].

a

b

c

                  Dark interval

0

10

Time (m s)

20

a) Transition: 5S1/2 (F = 2) → 5P1/2 (F

FIG. 1: Observed signals for the probe ﬁeld intensity trans-
mission.
= 1)
of 87Rb with Gaussian probe pulse; dashed: Gaussian en-
velope of transmitted probe pulse without dark interval.
c) Transition:
b) Same transition;
5S1/2 (F = 2) → 5P3/2 (F ′ = 3) of 87Rb; square probe pulse.

square probe pulse.

′

The width of the EIT resonance, measured at maximum
light power by varying the magnetic ﬁeld, was 65 kHz.
Trace a of Fig. 1, obtained with a Gaussian shape probe
pulse, reproduces the essential features of the previous
LS experiments [2, 3, 4, 5]. Since the inverse of the
pulse duration is small compared to the EIT resonance
width, the Gaussian pulse shape is well preserved during
propagation. A pulse delay (relative to vacuum propaga-
tion) of approximately 1 µs is observed corresponding to
a group velocity vg ∼ 5 × 104 m/s. We subsequently used
square probe pulses to simplify further comparison with
numerical modelling. Trace b was obtained for the same
transition as for a with a square probe pulse. The trans-
mitted probe pulse presents a characteristic distortion,
indicative of a slow light medium [9]. In both traces the
retrieved pulse has an exponential decay with approxi-
mately the same decay time (∼ 2 µs). An exponential
decay time of 8±2 µs was measured for the retrieved pulse
amplitude as a function of the dark interval, in agreement
with the transverse atomic time-of-ﬂight estimate.

We now turn our attention to the D2 line where EIA
leads to fast light propagation. Trace c of Fig. 1 was
obtained with the laser tuned to the 5S1/2 (F = 2) →
5P3/2 (F ′ = 3) transition of the D2 line. We notice a
characteristic probe pulse distortion with a leading edge
less absorbed than the rest of the pulse. Such distor-
tion is indicative of the pulse advancement expected in a
fast light medium [9]. We observe that in the fast light
medium the retrieved pulse has similar characteristics to
the pulse retrieved from the slow light medium. In either
case, in the absence of a magnetic ﬁeld, the retrieved
pulse has an exponentially decaying slope with a time
constant dependent on the drive ﬁeld intensity. In the
presence of a nonzero magnetic ﬁeld similar damped os-

2

cillations are seen on the retrieved pulse envelope for the
two types of transitions. The same dependence of the
retrieved pulse amplitude on the dark interval duration
is observed in the two cases.

To model the observed results, we have solved the
Bloch equations for an homogeneous ensemble of atoms
with two energy levels with Zeeman degeneracy [10]. The
excited state decays spontaneously to the ground state
at a rate Γ and, in order to mimic time-of-ﬂight relax-
ation, all states in the system decay at rate γ while “fresh
atoms” are isotropically injected in the ground levels
at the same rate. The atoms interact with an optical
ﬁeld whose polarization is decomposed into two orthog-
onal (linear or circular) components with arbitrary am-
plitude and phase. The light propagation in the atomic
sample is considered to the lowest order in the sample
optical length [11]. Consequently, it is assumed that
all atoms in the sample see the same (undepleted) in-
cident ﬁeld. Under such an assumption, the transmitted
ﬁeld is ~ET ≃ ~E0 + iα ~P where ~E0 is the total incident
ﬁeld, ~P = T r (cid:16)ρ ~D(cid:17)is the atomic optical polarization
per atom, ~D is the electric dipole operator and α is a
real constant proportional to the atomic density and the
sample length that is adjusted to the observed absorp-
tion. The transmitted signal can be computed for either
polarization component. The pulse sequence used for
the calculation is shown in the upper traces of Fig. 2.
Trace a corresponds to the calculated transmission (at
the probe ﬁeld polarization) for parameters correspond-
ing to the transition 5S1/2 (F = 2) → 5P1/2 (F ′ = 1)
of 87Rb. Trace b was calculated for the transition
5S1/2 (F = 2) → 5P3/2 (F ′ = 3) of 87Rb. The pulse dis-
tortions observed in the experiment are well reproduced
and a retrieved pulse is obtained for both transitions after
the dark interval. The amplitude of the retrieved pulse
depends on the probe pulse amplitude and duration and
decays exponentially with a decay time depending on the
drive ﬁeld intensity alone. Similar results to those pre-
sented in Fig. 2 are obtained if orthogonal circular po-
larization are considered for both ﬁelds.

The above results can be explained on the basis of a
unique physical picture. Consider the basic light-atom
interaction process presented in Fig. 3a where an optical
ﬁeld couples the atomic ground-state C (coupled state)
to the excited state e while the second ground-state D
(dark state) is unaﬀected by the ﬁeld. After excitation
in state e the atom can decay spontaneously to both
lower states. This is an optical pumping process [12].
If the atoms interact with the light for a suﬃciently long
time and if states C and D are stationary, the atoms will
eventually end in state D and the medium will become
transparent. During this process, transitions from state
e to state D occur spontaneously but may also take place
through stimulated Raman emission. The condition for
stimulated Raman emission is the existence of nonzero

On

Off

 

On

Off

Drive

Probe

a

b

0

200

400

600

800

1000

1200

t

FIG. 2: Dotted (dashed): drive (probe) time sequence. a)
Calculated transmitted probe ﬁeld intensity for the transition
= 1) of 87Rb. b) Same for the
5S1/2 (F = 2) → 5P1/2 (F
transition 5S1/2 (F = 2) → 5P3/2 (F
= 3). Parameters (see
[10]): ΩD/Γ = 0.3 (a), ΩD/Γ = 0.6 (b), ΩD/ΩP = 2, γ/Γ =
10−3, α = 8, B = 0 (ΩD and ΩP are the drive and probe ﬁeld
Rabi frequencies).

′

′

coherence between states C and D, i.e. ρDC 6= 0 where
ρDC is the element of the density matrix between states
D and C. Under such a condition the interaction with the
applied ﬁeld results in optical coherence between states
e and D (ρeD 6= 0) which in turn radiates a ﬁeld for
this transition which is coherent with the initial ﬁeld. As
a general rule, a light ﬁeld interacting with a coherently
prepared atom in the ground state will induce coherent
emission of light in all allowed optical transitions as long
as the (ground state) atomic coherence is preserved (Fig.
3b).

Direct generalization of the situation represented in
Fig 3a to the more complex case of a two-level system
with arbitrary Zeeman degeneracy interacting with an
optical ﬁeld is possible.
In general, given the ﬁeld po-
larization, after a suitable basis transformation, one can
identify several (C) states in the ground level, each cou-
pled to a corresponding excited state sublevel, and two,
one or zero dark (D) states (Fig. 3c). The last case oc-
curs when the Zeeman degeneracy of the excited level is
higher than that of the ground level [13, 14]. In all cases
the general rule stated above applies.

Two types of systems have commonly been considered
for the experimental study of coherent light-atom inter-
action dynamics.
In the ﬁrst class one has the Hanle
type experiments [15, 16, 17, 18, 19] where a single op-
tical ﬁeld with well deﬁned polarization interacts with
two atomic levels with Zeeman sublevels whose energy is
tuned with a static magnetic ﬁeld. If the light polariza-
tion is linear it is straightforward that a scheme similar
to that of Fig. 3c results by choosing the quantization
axis along the direction of the light polarization. Even
in the general case of arbitrary elliptical light polariza-

 
                                   

e 

a) 

e 

b) 

C 

D 
 

C 

r CD „

D 
 0 
 

3

c) 

D 
 

e 

C 

FIG. 3: Basic level-schemes for the light atom interaction.
White arrow: applied ﬁeld; dashed arrow: spontaneous emis-
sion; solid arrow: stimulated Raman emission; curved arrow:
ground state coherence. a) Incoherent optical pumping, b)
optical pumping with coherence, c) generalization of a) for
two levels with Zeeman degeneracy.

tion the scheme of Fig. 3c can be applied after a suitable
transformation of the state basis that depends on the in-
cident light polarization [14]. An immediate consequence
of this description is that in the presence of ground state
coherence the system will respond by the coherent emis-
sion of light with a polarization orthogonal to that of the
incident ﬁeld. Such a process was recently discussed in
terms of the polarization change that the light experi-
ences while propagating in an atomic medium with light
induced anisotropy and an alternative explanation of the
LS eﬀect in such terms was proposed [20].

A second class of experiments for which the picture
presented in Fig. 3a-b can be conveniently applied, con-
cerns a system of an excited level and two ground levels
with energy separation ∆ driven by two optical ﬁelds of
frequency ω1 and ω2. This system (hereafter designated
as the Λ system), has been extensively studied theoret-
ically and experimentally in connection with EIT. Since
in a Λ system each ﬁeld interacts with a diﬀerent transi-
tion, it is possible after a time dependent unitary trans-
formation to describe the atomic dynamics by a time-
independent Hamiltonian and to identify a dark state D
and a coupled state C [21]. This “coupled-uncoupled”
description exactly corresponds to the situation of Fig.
3a-b. Both levels C and D are linear combinations of the
two lower levels that explicitly depend on the amplitudes
and phases of the applied ﬁelds. Here again, if coherence
is present between levels C and D, the atomic medium
will react to the optical excitation by the coherent emis-
sion of ﬁelds at frequencies ω1 and ω2. These ﬁelds are
“orthogonal” to the applied ﬁelds in the sense that they
together only couple to state D (while the incident ﬁelds
only couple to C). As an example we consider the sit-
uation corresponding to the retrieval process in the LS
experiment reported in [3]. After the dark interval, the
drive ﬁeld (ω1) alone excites the Λ system. Since (previ-
ously created) coherence is present between the ground
levels (that coincide with C and D in this case), a ﬁeld

G
of frequency ω2 = ω1 − ∆ is emitted by the medium. In
the general case, in the presence of coherence between C
and D, two ﬁelds will be emitted with frequencies ω1 and
ω2 that will interfere with the incident ﬁelds.

The previous discussion leads to a very general qualita-
tive understanding of the transient behavior of coherently
driven atomic systems. For given excitation conditions,
after a long enough time, the system will reach a steady
state. If one or more dark states exists the steady state
of the system will be the dark state(s) D. If no dark state
exists the steady state will generally be a statistical mix-
ture (diagonal density matrix) of states C. A rapid mod-
iﬁcation of the excitation conditions, for instance a light
polarization change in a Hanle experiment or a change in
the amplitude or phase of the ﬁelds in a Λ scheme, will
determine a new set (C′, D′) of coupled and dark states.
The change in the excitation conditions needs to be rapid
with respect to the optical pumping time but may oth-
erwise be slow with respect to other characteristic times.
Since the previous state of the system is generally a linear
combination of the new C′, D′ states, coherence among
the latter states exists and results in the transient emis-
sion of an “orthogonal” ﬁeld. Such emission will last as
long as the coherence between C′ and D′ survives. The
decay of the transient emission will be purely exponen-
tial with a time constant given by the optical pumping
time between states C′ and D′ if those states are station-
ary. If they are not stationary (nonzero magnetic ﬁeld for
a Hanle experiment or nonzero Raman detuning in a Λ
system), the decay will show damped oscillations [10]. If
the two diﬀerent excitation conditions are separated in
time by a dark interval then the transient emission of
an “orthogonal” ﬁeld will occur after the dark interval
provided that this interval is not long compared to the
ground state coherence lifetime. This mechanism applies
to the LS experiments previously reported [2, 3, 4, 5].

The experimental results and the discussion above
demonstrate that EIT and propagation in a “slow light”
medium is not an essential requirement for the storage
and retrieval of a light pulse in an atomic medium. One
point in the simple description presented here, which de-
parts from previous theoretical treatments [1], is the sim-
ple consideration of the ﬁeld propagation in the atomic
medium where the spatial variation of the incident ﬁeld
along the sample is essentially neglected. This crude ap-
proximation is nevertheless appropriate under conditions
where the duration of the probe pulse is comparable or
longer than the light propagation time. Such a situa-
tion occurred in most LS experiments reported so far
(including ours) with the exception of [3]. In the picture
presented here, the light retrieval transient appears as
a consequence of the irreversible relaxation of the sys-
In this context, only
tem towards a new steady state.
exponential decaying pulses can be obtained preventing

4

the retrieval of information about the state of the initial
probe pulse other than its presence (one bit information).
The storage and recovery of information on the state of
the incoming probe pulse are beyond the scope of this
simple picture and possibly of most experimental condi-
tions achieved to date.

In conclusion, we have achieved storage and retrieval of
light pulses in slow-light and fast-light media and given
a uniﬁed description of both cases. The results presented
in this letter suggest that further theoretical and exper-
imental work is needed for the understanding and prac-
tical realization of information preserving storage in an
atomic medium. A necessary ﬁrst step in this direction
would be the realization of an atomic medium in which
more than one probe pulse (more than one bit of in-
formation) can be contained in the atomic sample and
propagate without signiﬁcant distortion [22, 23].

This work was supported by a Swinburne University

RDGS grant and Fondo Clemente Estable (Uruguay).

[1] M. Fleischhauer and M. D. Lukin, Phys. Rev. Lett. 84,

5094 (2000).

[2] D. F. Phillips et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 86, 783 (2001).
[3] C. Liu et al., Nature 409, 490 (2001).
[4] A. S. Zibrov et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 88, 103601 (2002).
[5] A. Mair et al., Phys. Rev. A 65, 031802 (2002).
[6] M. D. Lukin, Rev. Mod. Phys. 75, 457 (2003).
[7] A. M. Akulshin, S. Barreiro, and A. Lezama, Phys. Rev.

[8] A. M. Akulshin, S. Barreiro, and A. Lezama, Phys. Rev.

[9] A. M. Akulshin et al., Phys. Rev. A 67, 011801(R)

Lett. 83, 4277 (1999).

A 57, 2996 (1998).

(2003).

65, 023814 (2002).

[10] P. Valente, H. Failache, and A. Lezama, Phys. Rev. A

[11] R. Walser and P. Zoller, Phys. Rev. A 49, 5067 (1994).
[12] W. Happer, Rev. Mod. Phys. 44, 169 (1972).
[13] V. S. Smirnov, A. M. Tumaikin, and V. I. Yudin, Zh.

Eksp. Teor. Phys. 96, 1613 (1989).

[14] A. V. Taichenachev et al., Phys. Rev. A 69, 033410

(2004).

[15] A. Kastler, Nuc. Inst. and Meth. 110, 259 (1973).
[16] P. Hannaford, Physica Scripta T70, 117 (1997).
[17] Y. Dancheva et al., Opt. Commun. 178, 103 (2000).
[18] F. Renzoni et al., J. Opt. B: Quantum Semiclass. Opt.

3, 7 (2001).

[19] H. Failache et al., Phys. Rev. A 67, 043810 (2003).
[20] G. G. Kozlov, E. B. Aleksandrov, and V. S. Zapasskii,

Optics and Spectroscopy 97, 909 (2004).

[21] M. O. Scully and M. S. Zubairy, Quantum optics (Cam-

bridge University Press, Cambridge, 1997).

[22] R. W. Boyd et al., Phys. Rev. A 71, 023801 (2005).
[23] A. B. Matsko, D. V. Strekalov, and L. Maleki, Optics

Express 13, 2210 (2005).

