Europhysics Letters

PREPRINT

5
0
0
2
 
n
u
J
 
0
3
 
 
]
h
p
-
m
o
t
a
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
5
2
2
6
0
5
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

A promising method for the measurement of the local ac-
celeration of gravity using Bloch oscillations of ultracold
atoms in a vertical standing wave

Pierre Clad´e 1, Sa¨ıda Guellati-Kh´elifa 2, Catherine Schwob 1, Franc¸ois Nez 1,
Lucile Julien 1 and Franc¸ois Biraben 1
1 Laboratoire Kastler Brossel, ´Ecole Normale Sup´erieure, CNRS, UPMC, 4 place Jussieu,
75252 Paris Cedex 05, France
2 CNAM-INM, Conservatoire National des Arts et M´etiers, 292 rue Saint Martin,
75141 Paris Cedex 03, France

PACS. 32.80.Pj – Optical cooling of atoms; trapping.
PACS. 42.50.Vk – Mechanical eﬀects of light on atoms, molecules, electrons, and ions.
PACS. 04.80.-y – Experimental studies of gravity.

Abstract. – An obvious determination of the acceleration of gravity g can be deduced from
the measurement of the velocity of falling atoms using a π − π pulses sequence of stimulated
Raman transitions. By using a vertical standing wave to hold atoms against gravity, we expect
to improve the relative accuracy by increasing the upholding time in the gravity ﬁeld and to
minimize the systematic errors induced by inhomogeneous ﬁelds, owing to the very small spatial
amplitude of the atomic center-of-mass wavepacket periodic motion. We also propose to use
such an experimental setup nearby a Watt balance. By exploiting the g/h (h is the Planck
constant) dependence of the Bloch frequency, this should provide a way to link a macroscopic
mass to an atomic mass.

Introduction. – The dynamic of an atomic wave packet in a periodic potential under the
inﬂuence of a static force has been extensively analyzed using diﬀerent physical approaches :
in terms of Wannier-Stark resonance states [1], Bloch oscillations [2] or macroscopic quantum
interferences induced by tunnelling due to the external acceleration [3](for review see [4]).
When the external constant force F is suﬃciently weak to prevent the non adiabatic inter-
band transitions, all these physical pictures give a periodic evolution with a Bloch frequency
νB = λ|F |
2h , where λ is the wavelength of the light used to create the periodic potential.
An interesting conﬁguration occurs when the external force is induced by the acceleration of
gravity. In this case the Bloch frequency is equal to νB = mgλ
2h and depends only on the local
acceleration of the gravity g, the wavelength of the light λ and some fundamental constants.
This frequency is typically in the range 100 Hz − 2000 Hz, and its measurement allows the
determination of g. Previous experiments have already been realized using the dynamic of
BEC [3, 5] or degenerated Fermi gaz [5] in vertical 1-D optical lattice. Kasevich’s group has
observed the interference between macroscopic quantum states of BEC atoms conﬁned in a
c(cid:13) EDP Sciences

2

EUROPHYSICS LETTERS

vertical array of optical traps. This interference arises from the tunneling induced by the
acceleration of gravity and appears as a train of falling atomic pulses. The acceleration of the
gravity g was determined by measuring the spatial period of the pulses train. In Ingusio’s
group [5] the Bloch period is straightforwardly deduced from the evolution of the momentum
in the trap by adiabatically releasing the cloud from the lattice. In both experiments the de-
tection is performed by imaging the falling atomic cloud using absorption imaging techniques
and the uncertainty on the g determination did not exceed 10−4 dominated by the imaging
system.

Our experimental approach is based on the precise determination of the velocity distribu-
tion of atoms along the vertical axis using Doppler-sensitive Raman transitions. An obvious
determination of the acceleration of the gravity will be possible by measuring the atomic ve-
locity variation after a given falling time T . This is performed by applying a π − π pulses
sequence with a spacing time T : the ﬁrst pulse deﬁnes an initial velocity by selecting a narrow
velocity class from an ultracold atomic sample. Atoms are then in a well deﬁned internal state.
The second pulse measures the ﬁnal velocity distribution of the atoms after the fall by trans-
ferring a resonant velocity slice to another internal state. This so-called velocity sensor allows
us to locate the center of the velocity distribution with a high accuracy and is now limited by
the experimental setup platform’s vibrations [6]. We could substantially improve the relative
uncertainty on the measurement of g by increasing the falling time T , but this parameter is
swiftly limited by the dimension of the vacuum chamber. In our experiment we suggest to hold
the atoms against gravity by applying between the two Raman pulses a far resonant standing
wave, during an interrogation time TBloch (ﬁg. 1.a). In the nondissipative case, atoms fall so
far as to absorb a photon from upward wave and emit a stimulated photon in the downward
wave. Atoms make a succession of Λ transitions (ﬁg. 1.b) inducing a momentum exchange of
2¯hk (k is a wave vector of the standing wave) with the cycling frequency νB = mgλ
2h . This
evolution is equivalent to the dynamic of the Bloch oscillations [7]. In a previous work [8] we
have measured a transfer eﬃciency of 99.5% per cycle, this result promises a large number of
Bloch oscillations. Another particular interest of our method is the small spatial amplitude
of the atomic center-of-mass wavepacket motion during the oscillations (1) [9]. The selec-
tion (ﬁrst Raman pulse) and measurement (second Raman pulse) are done in a small volume
allowing a better control of systematic eﬀects arising from inhomogeneous ﬁelds. In this let-
ter we investigate the possibility to make a high precise measurement of the acceleration of
gravity g using Bloch oscillations of cold atoms in a vertical standing wave. Such accurate
measurements have important repercussions on geophysical applications including earthquake
predictions, locating oil and studies of the global warming. We ﬁrst describe our measurement
method, then we present a preliminary measurement of g, and ﬁnally we discuss the signal
losses observed when we increase the number of Bloch oscillations.

Experimental Set-up. – The main experimental apparatus has been already described
in reference [8]. Brieﬂy, 87Rb atoms are captured, from a background vapor, in a σ+ − σ−
conﬁguration magneto-optical trap (MOT). The trapping magnetic ﬁeld is switched oﬀ and
the atoms are cooled to about 3 µK in an optical molasses. After the cooling process, we
apply a bias ﬁeld of ∼ 100 mG. The atoms are then optically pumped into F = 2, mF = 0
ground state. The determination of the velocity distribution is performed using a π − π pulses
sequence of two vertical counter-propagating laser beams (Raman beams): the ﬁrst pulse with
frequency initially ﬁxed at νsel, transfers atoms from 5S1/2, |F = 2, mF = 0i state to 5S1/2,
|F = 1, mF = 0i state, into a velocity class of about vr/15 centered around (λνselect/2) − vr

(1)For typical values of the light potential parameters, the atomic center-of-mass wavepacket oscillates in
space with a spatial amplitude of the order of few lattice periods.

P. Clad´e et al.: Measurement of the local acceleration of gravity using Bloch oscillations3

a)

b)

hw, k

hw, k

p - Pulse

Vertical standing wave

p - Pulse

mg

Tbloch
T

t

h- k          0

hk        p

Fig. 1 – a). Experimental pulses sequence. b) A narrow velocity class is selected by the ﬁrst Raman
pulse. When the vertical standing wave is switched on, atoms fall so far as to be resonant with
the Λ transition: they absorb a photon from the upward wave and emit a stimulated photon in the
downward wave. This induces a momentum exchange of 2¯hk.

where λ is the laser wavelength and vr is the recoil velocity. To push away the atoms remaining
in the ground state F=2, we apply after the ﬁrst π-pulse, a laser beam resonant with the
5S1/2 (F = 2) to 5P1/2 (F = 3) cycling transition. Atoms in internal state F=1 fall under
the acceleration of gravity during T . We then perform the ﬁnal velocity measurement using
the second Raman π-pulse, whose frequency is νmeas. Population transfer from the hyperﬁne
state F = 1 to the hyperﬁne state F = 2 due to the second Raman pulse is maximal when
2π(νsel − νmeas) = g × T × k (k1 − k2) k, where k1, k2 are the wave vectors of the Raman
beams. The populations (F = 1 and F = 2) are measured separately by using the one-
dimensional time of ﬂight technique developed for atomic clocks and depicted in [10]. To
plot the ﬁnal velocity distribution we repeat this procedure by scanning the Raman beam
frequency νmeas of the second pulse.

The two Raman beams are generated using two laser diodes injected by two extended-
cavity diode lasers (ECLs). To drive the velocity-sensitive Raman transition, the frequency
diﬀerence of the master lasers must be precisely resonant with 87Rb ground-state hyperﬁne
transition (∼ 6.8 GHz). The frequency of one ECL is stabilized on a high stable Zerodur
Fabry-Perot (ZFP) cavity. The second ECL is then phase-locked on to the other using the
beat note technique (see ﬁg. 2.b). The very stable RF source is performed by mixing the 62th
harmonic of a 100 MHZ quartz oscillator with diﬀerent digital synthesizers (SRS DS345).
They are used to tune ﬁnely the frequency of the RF source. A YIG oscillator is phase-locked
on to the central line of the source in order to reject completely the residual sidebands of the
diﬀerent mixings. A multiplexer switches between two synthesizers to generate the frequency
oﬀset for the velocity selection or measurement. The frequency of a third synthesizer is
linearly swept during the selection and the measurement pulses to compensate the Doppler
shift during the fall of the atoms (ﬁg. 2.a). The time interval between the two Raman pulses
is precisely deﬁned by the delay between the triggering signal of the two frequency sweeps.
Each laser beam passes through an acousto-optic modulator (∼ 80 MHz) for timing (switch
on and oﬀ) and intensity control. The two beams have linear orthogonal polarizations and
are coupled into the same polarization maintaining optical ﬁber. The pair of Raman beams
is sent through the vacuum cell. The counter propagating conﬁguration is achieved using a
polarizing beam-splitter cube and an horizontal retroreﬂection mirror placed above the exit
window of the cell. The standing wave used to create the 1-D optical lattice is generated by
a Ti:Sapphire laser, whose frequency is stabilized on the same highly stable ZFP cavity. This
laser beam is split in two parts. To perform the timing sequence, each one passes through
an acousto-optic modulator to control its intensity and frequency. The beams are detuned by

EUROPHYSICS LETTERS

4

n

n2
1-

a )

t

b )

Sweep

Selection

Sweep

Measure

Detector

ECL Phase-lock

Synthe3

Phase-lock loop

Synthe1

Synthe2

ν
ν
ν
ν

center = 753800.4 ± 3.2 Hz
center = 753800.4 ± 3.2 Hz
center = 753800.4 ± 3.2 Hz
center = 753800.4 ± 3.2 Hz
Tdelay = 30 ms
Tdelay = 30 ms
Tdelay = 30 ms
Tdelay = 30 ms

)

2
N
+
1
N

(
/

2
N

 0.5

 0.4

 0.3

 0.2

 0.1

 0

YIG

x62

100MHz
Quartz

 753000

 754000

 754500

 753500
sel-ν
ν

meas (Hz)

Fig. 2

Fig. 3

Fig. 2 – a). Temporal variation of the frequency diﬀerence of the two Raman beams. b). The synthe1
and the synthe2 allow us to switch between the selection and a measurement steps. To compensate
the Doppler shift during the falling of the atoms the frequency of the synthes3 is swept linearly during
the Raman pulses.

Fig. 3 – The ﬁnal distribution velocity of atoms after a free fall of 30 ms. The center of the velocity
distribution is located with an uncertainty of 3.2 Hz, corresponding to a relative uncertainty of
4 × 10

−6 on the measurement of the acceleration of the gravity .

260 GHz from the 5S1/2 − 5P3/2 resonance line to avoid spontaneous emission. With this laser
parameters the optical potential depth U0 equals to 2.7 ER (ER = ¯h
k
2m is the recoil energy).
For this value, when the external acceleration is due to gravity, the transfer of atoms to the
higher bands remains insigniﬁcant for several periods of Bloch oscillations.

2

2

Results. – In a ﬁrst experiment, we determine g by measuring the atomic velocity varia-
tion after the free fall of atoms during 30 ms, using the π −π Raman pulses sequence described
previously. The typical ﬁnal velocity distribution is shown in (ﬁg. 3). The center of this dis-
tribution is located with an uncertainty of 3.2 Hz (corresponding to vr/5000) in an average
time of 20 mn, allowing a measurement of g with a relative uncertainty of 4 × 10−6. This
uncertainty, is limited by many systematic errors. These errors may occur due to the vibration
noise of the retroreﬂecting mirror [6], the ﬂuctuation of the number of detected atoms and the
atomic motion between the two pulses (eﬀect of inhomogeneous ﬁelds).

In a second experiment, we apply between the two π-pulses a standing wave during an
interrogation time TBloch. We then study the evolution of the ﬁnal momentum distribution by
changing TBloch. Before analyzing the experimental results, we brieﬂy recall the relevant re-
sults of Bloch’s theory. The energy spectrum of the particle presents a band structure (indexed
by n) arising from the periodicity of the potential (optical lattice with period d = λ/2). The
corresponding eigenergies En(q) and the eigenstates |n, qi (Bloch states) are periodic functions
of the continuous quasi-momentum q, with a period 2 × k = 2π/d. The quasi-momentum q
is conventionally restricted to the ﬁrst Brillouin zone ] − π/d, π/d]. If we apply a constant
force F , suﬃciently weak in order to avoid interband transitions, a given Bloch state |n, q(0)i
evolves (up to a phase factor) into the state |n, q(t)i according to

P. Clad´e et al.: Measurement of the local acceleration of gravity using Bloch oscillations5

(mod 2π/d)

q(t) = q(0) + 2 × k

t
τB
When the atoms are only submitted to the gravity force, the Bloch period τB is given
by 2h
mgλ . This period corresponds to the time required for the quasi-momentum to scan a
full Brillouin zone. In our experiment, ﬁrst we prepare Bloch states around quasi-momentum
q = 0 (in lattice frame) at the bottom of the fundamental energy band (n = 0) by turning
on adiabatically the standing wave (rise time of 300 µs): this avoids a transfer of population
into the higher energy band. After time TB we suddenly switch oﬀ the optical potential
and we measure the ﬁnal momentum distribution. This quantity Ψ0,q(P ) corresponds to the
projection of the Bloch state |0, qi onto a plane-wave components |pi (measurement basis).
Using analytic properties of the Bloch waves we obtain

(1)

Ψ0,q(P ) =

2π
d

r

˜Φ0(p) ×

Xl

δ(p − q − 2πl/d),

l ∈ Z

(2)

where ˜Φ0(p) is the Fourier transform of the Wannier function of the fundamental energy
band [11]. The momentum spectrum is composed of peaks separated by the momentum
corresponding to reciprocal-lattice vector, 2k = 2π/d. In our experiment we measure only
the momentum component in the ﬁrst Brillouin zone. In (ﬁg. 4.a) we report the center of
the measured peak as a function of the holding time TB. The observed sawtooth shape is the
signature of Bloch oscillations (eq. 1). We point out that just before turning on the Bloch
potential, selected atoms reach a mean velocity of about 10 vr. In order to compensate this
velocity drift, the upward beam’s frequency is shifted by ∼ 150 kHz (in the laboratory frame
the standing wave is then moving with a constant velocity of about 10 vr). To use a pure
standing wave, we should launch atoms in ballistic atomic-fountain trajectories either from a
moving molasses [12] or with Bloch oscillations [8], and turn on the Bloch potential when they
reach their summit. We observe more than 60 Bloch periods corresponding to the longest lived
Bloch oscillator observed in bosonic systems. To determine the Bloch period τB, we measure
the time interval between the centers of the two extreme slopes of sawtooth. We extract the
value of τB by dividing this time interval by the suitable integer number. This measurement
leads to a determination of the local acceleration of gravity with a relative uncertainty of
1.1 10−6 as h
m ratio [13] and the wavelength λ are known with a better accuracy. The linear
ﬁt of the experimental data in (ﬁg. 4.a) is performed by ﬁxing the value of the recoil velocity.
The envelop function ˜Φ0(p) (eq. (2)) is symmetric and localized in the Brillouin zone [9].
Outside the center of the Brillouin zone this function shifts the center momentum peak to
the quasi-momentum q(t). This eﬀect explains the fact that around each period the residuals
increase when we move away from the center of the Brillouin zone (ﬁg. 4.b). The data analysis
allowing the determination of the Bloch period are performed in order to reduce substantially
the systematic error induced by this eﬀect.

When we increase the interrogation time of the standing wave up to 100 ms, the signal is
signiﬁcantly degraded (loss rate becomes larger than 50%). In order to understand the origin
of this losses, we have measured, for a given laser intensity, the losses per oscillation versus
the detuning ∆, relative to F = 2 → F = 3 transition (ﬁg. 5). These losses are obtained
by comparing the number of atoms measured after N oscillations to those measured after
N = 10 oscillations. The choice of the parameter ∆ allows us to estimate the eﬀects of the
spontaneous photon scattering and the interband transitions which depend both on ∆ (for
interband transition see [7]). We observe that the losses exceed 3%, they are more important
than the 0.5% rate losses measured using an accelerated standing wave [8]. This results from

EUROPHYSICS LETTERS

6

r

v
2
/
v

-4.0

-4.2

-4.4

-4.6

-4.8

-5.0

r

v
2

/
v
∆

1.5 10-3
1.0 10-3
0.5 10-3
0.0 10-3
-0.5 10-3
-1.0 10-3
-1.5 10-3

Fig. 4

a /

TBloch (ms)

b /

 9 10 11 12

65 66 67 68 69

 
n
o
i
t
a

l
l
i

c
s
o
 
r
e
p
 
s
e
s
s
o
L

 0.08

 0.07

 0.06

 0.05

 0.04

 0.03

 0.02

 0.01

 0

Fig. 5

 9 10 11 12

65 66 67 68 69

TBloch (ms)

 0  50  100  150  200  250  300  350  400  450  500
∆(GHz)

Fig. 4 – a. The center of the ﬁnal velocity distribution versus the duration of the standing wave. The
dot represent the experimental data and the line the least-square ﬁt performed by ﬁxing the recoil
velocity. b) The residuals of the ﬁt.

Fig. 5 – The losses per oscillation versus detuning ∆. These losses are obtained by comparing the
number of atoms measured after N oscillations to those measured after N = 10 oscillations. The
relevant advantage of this presentation is to take into account only the losses during the Bloch
oscillations process. Dot: the experimental data. The theory: (Dotted line). Solid line: theory
including the interparticle collisions.

the slowness of the Bloch oscillations, since in a vertical standing wave the Bloch period is
∼ 1.2 ms, when in reference [8] the period was only ∼ 0.1 ms.

For the experimental values of the standing wave parameters, the losses induced by the
spontaneous emission and the interband transitions in the weak binding limit do not match
with the experimental data (dotted line in (ﬁg. 5)). Performing a least-square ﬁt based on
this model and including collisions with the residual Rb vapor, we extract a characteristic
time constant of the damping due to the collisions of about 70 ms. This value corresponds
to the lifetime of the molasses for the residual vapor pressure in the cell. Therefore we think,
that the number of Bloch oscillations, in our experiment could be increased by reducing the
pressure in the vacuum chamber.

Conclusion and prospects. – We have described an experimental method to measure the
vertical velocity distribution of atoms by using a π − π pulses sequence of Doppler-sensitive
Raman transitions. We have performed a preliminary determination of the local acceleration
of gravity with a relative accuracy of 10−6 by measuring the Bloch period. We have also
demonstrated that the number of Bloch oscillations is not yet limited by either the interband
transitions or the spontaneous emission, but only by collisions with the background atomic
vapor. To overcome this limit, we are now building a new ultrahigh vacuum chamber where
the magneto-optical trap will be loaded by an atomic slow beam. In order to improve the
accuracy of the velocity measurement a vibration-isolation system is also in implementation.
These improvements should allow us to take a better beneﬁt of the Bloch oscillations.

An attractive possibility consists to replace the π − π velocity measurement by a two

P. Clad´e et al.: Measurement of the local acceleration of gravity using Bloch oscillations7

π/2 Ramsey-Bord´e sequence. We obtain then a π/2 − π/2-Bloch oscillation-π/2 − π/2 atom-
interferometer. Comparing this scheme to the π/2 − π − π/2 atom-interferometer used in
gravimetry [14, 15], where the pulses spacing time is limited by the eﬀects related to the
spatial position, the advantage would be to increase the measurement time thanks to Bloch
oscillations for a similar phase diﬀerence between the two paths. This way, we could reduce
signiﬁcantly the uncertainty of the gravity interferometric measurement. Finally, we suggest
to use such experiment nearby a Watt balance site [16,17]. In the dynamic mode of the balance
the relation which equates the mechanical power and the electric power is given by [17]:

where M is the standard mass, v is the velocity of the vertical moving coil, h the Planck
constant, C represents a dimensionless constant and FJ , F ′
J denote the frequencies applied to
a Josephson device. Using the g/h dependence of the Bloch period we obtain

(3)

(4)

In conclusion, associating our Bloch oscillations experiment to a Watt Balance could be used
to link a macroscopic mass to an atomic mass.

M gv = CFJ F ′

J h

M
m

=

CFJ F ′
J
2

λ
νB

1
v

∗ ∗ ∗

We thank A. Clairon and C. Salomon for valuable discussions. This experiment is sup-
ported in part by the Bureau National de M´etrologie (Contrats 993009 and 033006) and by
the R´egion Ile de France (Contrat SESAME E1220).

REFERENCES

76 (1996) 4512.

4508.

[1] Wilkinson S.R, Bharucha C.F, Madison K.W, Qian Niu and Raizen M.G, Phys.Rev.lett,

[2] Ben Dahan M., Peik E, Reichel J., Castin Y. and Salomon C., Phys. Rev. Lett., 76 (1996)

[3] Anderson B.P. and Kasevich M.A., Science, 282 (1998) 1686.
[4] Raizen M.G., Salomon C. and Niu .Q, Phys. Today, 50 (1997) 30.
[5] Roati G.,De Mirandes E., Ferlaino F., Ott H., Modungno G. and Inguscio M.,

Phys.Rev.lett, 92 (2004) 230402-1.

[6] Clad´e P.,Guellati-kh´elifa S., Schwob C., Nez F., Julien F. and Biraben F., Eur. Phys.

[7] Peik E., Ben Dahan M., Bouchoule I., Castin Y. and Salomon C.,Phys. Rev. A, 55 (1997)

J. D, 33 (2005) 173.

2989.

[8] Battesti. R, Clad´e P., Guellati-Kh´elifa S., Schwob C., Gr´emaud B., Nez F., Julien L.

and Biraben F.,Phys. Rev. Lett., 92 (2004) 253001-1.

[9] Hartmann T., Keck F., Korsch H.J. and Mossmann S., Journal of physics., 6 (2004) 2.
[10] Clairon A., Laurent P., Santarelli G., Ghezali S., Lea N. and Bahoura M., IEEE

Trans. Instrum. Meas., 44 (1995) 128.
[11] Kohn. W, Phys. Rev., 115 (1959) 809.
[12] Clairon A., Salomon C., Guellati S. and Phillips W.D., Europhys.Lett, 16 (1991) 165.
[13] Mohr P. and Taylor B., Rev. Mod. Phys., 72 (2000) 351.
[14] Peters A., Chung K.Y. and Chu S., Metrologia, 38 (2001) 25.
[15] McGuirk J.M., Foster G.T., Fixler J.B., Snadden M.J. and Kasevich M.,Phys. Rev. A,

65 (2002) 033608.

8

EUROPHYSICS LETTERS

[16] Kibble. B.P, Atomic Mass and Fundamental Constants, edited by J.H. Sanders and A.H.

Wapstra (Plenum, New York,1976), 5 (545) .

[17] Eichenberger. A, Jeckelmann. B, and Richard. P., Metrologia, 40 (2003) 356-365.

