EPJ manuscript No.
(will be inserted by the editor)

5
0
0
2
 
l
u
J
 
7
 
 
]
h
p
-
m
o
t
a
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
0
6
0
7
0
5
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Inﬂuence of optical aberrations in an atomic gyroscope

J´erˆome Fils1, Florence Leduc1, Philippe Bouyer2, David Holleville1, No¨el Dimarcq1, Andr´e Clairon1 and Arnaud
Landragin1
1 BNM-SYRTE, UMR 8630, Observatoire de Paris, 61 avenue de l’Observatoire, 75014 Paris, France
2 Laboratoire Charles Fabry, UMR 8501, Centre Scientiﬁque d’Orsay, bˆat. 503, BP 147, 91403 Orsay, France

Received: date / Revised version: date

Abstract. In atom interferometry based on light-induced diﬀraction, the optical aberrations of the laser
beam splitters are a dominant source of noise and systematic eﬀect. In an atomic gyroscope, this eﬀect is
dramatically reduced by the use of two atomic sources. But it remains critical while coupled to ﬂuctuations
of atomic trajectories, and appears as a main source of noise to the long term stability. Therefore we measure
these contributions in our setup, using cold Cesium atoms and stimulated Raman transitions.

PACS. PACS-03.75.Dg Atom and neutron interferometry – PACS-42.15.Fr Aberrations – PACS-32.80.Pj
Optical cooling of atoms; trapping

1 Introduction

Since the pioneering demonstrations of interferometry with
de Broglie atomic waves using resonant light [1,2] and
nanofabricated structures [3] as atomic beam splitters, a
number of new applications have been explored, including
measurements of atomic and molecular properties, funda-
mental tests of quantum mechanics, and studies of various
inertial eﬀects [4]. Using atom interferometers as inertial
sensors is also of interest for geophysics, tests of general
relativity [5], and inertial guidance systems.

Atom interferometers based on light-induced beam split-

ters have already demonstrated considerable sensitivity to
inertial forces. Sequences of optical pulses generate the
atom optical elements (e.g., mirrors and beam splitters)
for the coherent manipulation of the atomic wave pack-
ets [6]. The sensitivity and accuracy of light-pulse atom
interferometer gyroscopes [7], gravimeters [8] and gravity
gradiometers [9] compare favorably with the performances
of state-of-the-art instruments. Furthermore, this type of
interferometer is likely to lead to a more precise direct
determination of the fundamental constant α from the
measurement of ¯h/M [10]. In the case of rotation mea-
surements, the sensitivity reaches that of the best labo-
ratory ring laser gyroscope [11]. Indeed the Sagnac phase
shift, proportional to the total energy of the interfering
particle, is much larger for atoms than for photons. This
compensates for the smaller interferometer area and the
lower ﬂux.

In this paper we focus on the eﬀect of the ﬂuctuations
of the atomic trajectory, which might aﬀect the long term
stability of atomic gyroscopes when coupled with local
phase variations induced by optical aberrations. We will

introduce this problem in paragraph 2 and illustrate it
quantitatively in the case of our setup in paragraph 3.

Our experiment consists in an almost complete iner-
tial measurement unit [12], using cold Cesium atoms that
enable for a drastic reduction of the apparatus dimen-
sions while reaching a sensitivity of 30 nrad.s−1.Hz−1/2 to
rotation and 4x10−8 m.s−2.Hz−1/2 to acceleration. Its op-
eration is based on recently developed atom interference
and laser manipulation techniques. Two interferometers
with counter-propagating atomic beams discriminate be-
tween rotation and acceleration [13]. Thanks to the use of
a single pair of counter-propagating Raman laser beams,
our design is intrinsically immune to uncorrelated vibra-
tions between the three beam splitters, usually limiting
such devices. This conﬁguration is made possible by the
use of a reduced launch velocity, inducing a reasonable in-
teraction time between the pulses. However, as any atomic
gyroscope, our sensor’s scheme remains sensitive to local
phase variations, a limitation that has already been en-
countered in optical atomic clocks [14].

2 Principle

We ﬁrst brieﬂy review the basic light-pulse method in the
case of a symmetric Ramsey-Bord´e interferometer scheme
[15], where three travelling-wave pulses of light resonantly
couple two long-lived electronic states.The two-photon stim-
ulated Raman transitions between ground state hyperﬁne
levels are driven by two lasers with opposite propaga-
kg). First, at t = t1 a
tion vectors ke and kg (ke ≃ −
beam splitting pulse puts the atom into a coherent super-
position of its two internal states. Because of conserva-
tion of momentum during the atom-light interaction, this

2

Please give a shorter version with: \authorrunning and \titlerunning prior to \maketitle

·

·

−

−

φe (ui, ti) = keﬀ

the phase imparted to the atoms by the initial beam split-
ting pulse, the mirror pulse, and the recombining pulse
xi + Φ(ui).
where φi = φg (ui, ti)
The sensitivity to rotation and acceleration arises from
xi and simpliﬁes to ∆φacc = axkeﬀ T 2
the ﬁrst term keﬀ
2keﬀvyΩzT 2 for the present setup. The
and ∆φrot =
phase Φ(ui) for the pulse at time ti corresponds to the lo-
cal phase in the (y, z) plane due to wavefront distortions of
both laser beams1. It induces a residual phase error at the
2Φ(u2) + Φ(u3).
exit of the interferometer δΦ = Φ(u1)
Acceleration cannot be discriminated from rotation in
a single atomic beam sensor, as stated above. This limita-
tion can be circumvented by installing a second, counter-
propagating, cold atomic beam (ﬁg. 1) [13]. When both
atomic beams perfectly overlap, the area vectors for the re-
sulting interferometer loops have opposite directions. The
corresponding rotational phase shifts ∆φrot have opposite
signs while the acceleration phase shifts ∆φacc are identi-
cal. Consequently, acceleration is calculated by summing
the two interferometer’s phase shifts: ∆φ+
2∆φacc;
while taking the diﬀerence rejects the contribution of uni-
2∆φrot. In addition, the
form accelerations so that ∆φ−
residual phase error δΦ vanishes in ∆φ−, but remains in
∆φ+ as an absolute phase bias 2

δΦ.

−

∼

∼

However, an imperfect overlapping of the two counter-
propagating wavepackets trajectories might lead to an im-
perfect common mode rejection of the residual phase error
in ∆φ−. Thus, a phase bias δΦ− = δΦL
δΦR will appear,
where the notations L and R concern the left and right
atom interferometers. While the phase bias δΦ+
δΦ
depends on the local value of the phase at the average
position ri =
, the phase bias δΦ− depends on the
local phase gradient at the average position ri with the
uR
position oﬀset δri = uL
i :

i +uR
i
2

uL

−

≃

×

2

×

i −
Φ(r1)

δΦ− =

∇

δr1

2
−
Φ(r3)

·
+

Φ(r2)
δr3.

·

δr2

∇
·

(1)

∇
Equation 1 shows that uncorrelated ﬂuctuations of the
wavepackets trajectories from shot to shot causes ﬂuctu-
ations of the phase bias, which amplitude depends on the
local wavefront slope of the phase. If we consider a per-
fect control of the launch velocity2, ﬂuctuations of tra-
jectories are only due to ﬂuctuations of the initial posi-
tions of the atomic clouds. Consequently, we can consider
δr1 = δr2 = δr3. The phase ﬂuctuation is then simply pro-
portional to the product of the ﬂuctuations of the cloud
initial position (y0, z0) with the phase gradients ∆Φi. As
the phase gradients are time-independent, the Allan vari-
ance of the phase σ2

δΦ− is simply:

σ2
δΦ− = σ2
+σ2

y0 . [∂y (Φ (r1)

z0 . [∂z (Φ (r1)

−

2
2Φ (r2) + Φ (r3))]

−

2
2Φ (r2) + Φ (r3))]

(2)

1 The interferometer is also sensitive to time ﬂuctuations of
the Raman laser phases [12]. These ﬂuctuations are identical
for the two interferometers and disappear from the rotation
signal. They will be neglected in this paper.

2 We can reach a stability of 10

−4m.s

−1 or better from shot

to shot thanks to the moving molasses technique [17].

Fig. 1. Time-pulsed Ramsey-Bord´e atom interferometer us-
ing stimulated Raman transitions induced by two counter-
propagating laser beams of wave vectors ke and kg. Cesium
atoms are launched on the same trajectory but in opposite di-
rections with velocities vL,R = {0, ±vy, vz}, from right to left
(R) and left to right (L). The interactions with light pulses
occur at times ti=1,2,3 at three diﬀerent locations. The detec-
tion consists in measuring the probability of presence in each
output port after the last pulse.

¯hke
pulse introduces a relative momentum ¯hkeﬀ = ¯hkg −
between the atomic wave packets corresponding to each
state. These wave packets drift apart for a time T , after
which a mirror pulse is applied at t2 = t1 + T to redirect
the two wave packets. After another interval of duration
T , the wave packets physically overlap, and a ﬁnal beam
splitting pulse recombines them at t3 = t1 + 2T . The mea-
surement of the probabilities of presence in both internal
states at the interferometer output leads to the determi-
nation of the diﬀerence of accumulated phases along the
two paths. In general, atoms are launched with a velocity
v so that each stimulated Raman transition occurs at a
xi, yi, zi}i=1,2,3 that can be evaluated
particular position
from the classical trajectories associated with the atomic
wave packets [16], as shown ﬁg. 1. In our setup, Raman
laser beams propagate in the (Ox) direction and atoms
are launched in the (y, z) plane. We deﬁne ui=
the
yi, zi}
{
atomic cloud positions in this plane at time ti.

{

In the absence of any external forces, atoms initially
prepared in a particular state (6S1/2, F = 3, mF = 0 in the
present setup) will return to this state with unit proba-
bility. A uniform external acceleration or rotation induces
a relative phase shift between the interfering paths. This
phase shift modiﬁes the transition probability between the
two Cesium internal states 6S1/2, F = 3, mF = 0 and
6S1/2, F = 4, mF = 0 (noted
in the following).
3
|
Hence the transition probability measurement leads to the
determination of the phase shift and ﬁnally the evaluation
of the perturbing forces.

and

4
|

i

i

It can be shown that the only contribution to the
phase shift results from the interaction with the laser light
ﬁelds [16]. In the limit of short, intense pulses, the atomic
phase shift associated with a transition
(resp.
) is +φi (resp. -φi), where φi is the phase dif-
4
|
i
ference between the two Raman laser beams. We then
at the
4
3
ﬁnd that the transition probability from
|
i
|
exit of the interferometer is simply 1
cos(∆φ)] where
−
2φ2 + φ3. The three quantities correspond to
∆φ = φ1

3
i → |

4
i → |

2 [1

3
|

to

i

i

−

Please give a shorter version with: \authorrunning and \titlerunning prior to \maketitle

3

Fig. 2. Front view of our gyroscope; the interaction zone is
located near the top of the atomic trajectories. Atoms are
−1, mak-
launched symmetrically at initial velocity v0 = 2.4 m.s
ing an angle of 82o with the horizontal axis. The enclosed ori-
ented areas are equivalent to their projections on the (Oxy)
plane.

y0 and σ2

where σ2
z0 are the Allan variances of the initial
horizontal and vertical positions. Eq. 2 shows that the
ﬂuctuations of the clouds initial positions, as well as the
wavefront quality of the Raman beams, have to be sys-
tematically investigated in atomic gyroscopes in order to
estimate how it aﬀects its performances.

3 Experimental results

In our setup, the atomic sources are clouds of Cesium
atoms, cooled in magneto-optical traps and launched with
a parabolic ﬂight (ﬁg. 2). As the initial angle reaches 82o,
and the launch velocity 2.4 m.s−1, the horizontal veloc-
ity vy is 0.3 m.s−1. The single pair of Raman laser beams
propagates along the x-axis and is switched on three times
at the top of the atomic trajectories. If the three pulses are
symmetric with respect to the trajectory apogees, the in-
terferometer oriented enclosed areas are equivalent to their
ﬂat horizontal projections: the oriented vertical projection
is naught. The time delay between pulses is typically 45
ms. The positions of the atoms during the three Raman
pulses are given in ﬁg. 2.

In order to investigate the ﬂuctuations of the atomic
initial positions from shot to shot, we image one of the two
clouds. The cycling sequence takes about 1.3 s and consists
on a trap phase of 500 ms, a molasses phase of 20 ms, a
launching phase of 2 ms and a waiting time phase of 800
ms needed to process the image: download of the image,
subtraction of a background image and determination of
the cloud barycenter position in y- and z-axes. The image
is taken just after turning oﬀ the trap magnetic ﬁeld, at
the end of the molasses phase. We calculate the Allan
standard deviations [18] of the barycenter horizontal and
vertical positions (ﬁg. 3) from a one hour acquisition. Two

Fig. 3. Allan standard deviations of the horizontal (black
squares) and vertical (grey triangles) MOT positions as a func-
tion of the integration time τ , plotted in log-log scale. On the
right axis the Allan standard deviation of the intensity ratio
of MOT cooling lasers is plotted in dashed line as a function
of the integration time τ .

peaks, appearing after 10 s and 150 s of integration time,
are characteristic of ﬂuctuations of periods equal to 20 s
and 300 s. After about 10 min integration (630 s), the
position standard deviations reach 10 µm and 5 µm in
the horizontal and vertical directions respectively. This
dissymmetry is consistent with the magnetic ﬁeld gradient
conﬁguration, which is twice higher on the Z-direction.
The long-term variations are due to ﬂuctuations of the
MOT cooling lasers intensity ratio, which Allan standard
deviation is plotted in ﬁg. 3. We see again the oscillation
of period 300 s, appearing for 150 s integration time. We
analyze this as the period of the air conditioning, creating
temperature variations on the ﬁbre splitters delivering the
cooling lasers.

This result has to be coupled to the optical aberra-
tions of the Raman lasers. The main contribution to these
aberrations comes from the vacuum windows used for the
Raman laser beams, which clear diameter is 46 mm. They
have been measured with a Zygo wavefront analyzer, which
gives the laser phase distortion created by the windows.
This distortion is projected on the Zernike polynomial
base [19]. As our atomic clouds are about 2 mm wide, the
decomposition is pertinent only up to the 36th polynomial.
Indeed, the upper numbers correspond to high spatial fre-
quencies, so that their eﬀect will be smoothed by averag-
ing on the atomic cloud dimensions. To reduce the stress
on the vacuum windows, essentially due to the mount-
ing, they were glued in place. Thanks to this method, the
wavefront quality reaches λ/50 rms over the whole clear
diameter of 42 mm.

The wavefront measurement allows for evaluation of
the atomic phase shift ﬂuctuations due to the coupling
between aberrations and position ﬂuctuations using eq.2
assuming that the two sources are uncorrelated. Their rel-
ative position ﬂuctuations are √2 times greater than these
observed for one source. The contribution of this phase
ﬂuctuations to the Allan standard deviation of the rota-
tion rate measurement is shown in ﬁg. 4. We compare it
with the ultimate stability of our gyroscope, given by the

4

Please give a shorter version with: \authorrunning and \titlerunning prior to \maketitle

Such techniques open large improvement possibilities,
which will be conﬁrmed directly on the long-term stability
measurement of the atomic signal in our interferometer
setup.

5 Acknowledgements

The authors would like to thank DGA, SAGEM and CNES
for supporting this work, Pierre Petit for the early stage
of the experiment and Christian Bord´e for helpful dis-
cussions. They also thank Thierry Avignon and Lionel
Jacubowiez from SupOptique for their help in the wave-
front measurement.

Fig. 4. Allan standard deviation of the rotation measurement,
taking into account the optical aberrations when coupled with
position ﬂuctuations. The dashed curve shows the quantum
projection noise limit, indicating that the optical aberrations
may aﬀect the gyroscope performances at long term.

References

quantum projection noise. It is estimated to 30/√τ nrad.s−1
(τ is the integration time) from the ultimate signal-to-
noise ratio obtainable with 106 atoms.

The rotation noise induced by position ﬂuctuations has
a signiﬁcant contribution for integration times larger than
100 s. At the present stage of the experiment, this lim-
itation is due to the high temperature sensitivity of the
ﬁbre splitters. This could be the main limitation of the
gyroscope performances.

4 Conclusion

In the present paper we studied the stability of a cold atom
gyroscope based on two symmetrical Ramsey-Bord´e inter-
ferometers, with respect to optical phase inhomogeneity.
Instability due to aberrations is not a speciﬁc problem in-
duced by Raman transitions, but concerns every type of
atom interferometer using light beam splitters. We showed
that the coupling between wavefront distortions of these
lasers and ﬂuctuations of the atomic trajectory becomes
predominant at long term, despite a wavefront quality of
λ/50 rms obtained thanks to glued windows. In our setup,
atomic trajectory ﬂuctuations are mainly due to ﬂuctua-
tions of the intensity ratio of the MOT cooling lasers, in-
duced by the ﬁbre splitters used for their generation.
However several improvements may render their contribu-
tion negligible:
- reduce the atomic trajectory ﬂuctuations, by using dis-
crete optical couplers for the MOT instead of the present
ﬁbre splitters,
- minimize the number of optics which contribute to the
interferometer instability. This can be done by including
the Raman laser beam imposition optics in the vacuum
chamber, in order to remove the aberrations due to the
vacuum windows, or by minimizing the number of non-
common optics for the two Raman lasers, since only the
phase diﬀerence between the lasers is imprinted on the
atomic phase shift.

1. F. Riehle, T. Kisters, A. Witte, J. Helmcke and Ch. J.
Bord´e, Phys. Rev. Lett. 67 (1991) 177 ; M. Kasevich, S.
Chu, Phys. Rev. Lett. 67 (1991) 181.

2. E. M. Rasel, M. Oberthaler, H. Batelaan, J. Schmiedmayer
and A. Zeilinger, Phys. Rev. Lett. 75 (1995) 2633 ; D. M.
Giltner, R. W. McGowan and S. A. Lee, Phys. Rev. Lett. 75
(1995) 2638.

3. D. W. Keith, C. Ekstrom, Q. A. Turchette and D. E.

Pritchard, Phys. Rev. Lett. 66 (1991) 2693.

4. Atom Interferometry (ed. Paul R. Berman, London: Aca-

5. R. Bingham et al., Assessment Study Report, ESA-SCI

demic Press, 1997).

(2000) 10.

6. Ch. J. Bord´e, Laser Spectroscopy X (ed. M. ducloy, E. Gi-

acobino, G. Camy, World Scientiﬁc, 1991) 239.

7. T. L. Gustavson, A. Landragin, M. A. Kasevich, Class.

Quantum Grav. 17 (2000) 1-14.

8. A. Peters, K. Y. Chung and S. Chu, Nature 400 (1999) 849.
9. J. M. McGuirk , M. J. Snadden and M.A. Kasevich, Phys.

Rev. Lett. 85 (2000) 4498-4501-974.

10. A. Wicht, J. M. Hensley, E. Sarajlic and S. Chu, in Pro-
ceedings of the 6th Symposium on Frequency standards and
metrology (ed. Patrick Gill, World Scientiﬁc, 2001) 193.

11. K. U. Schreiber, A. Velikoseltsev, and M. Rothacher,
T. Kl¨ugel, G. E. Stedman and D. L. Wiltshire 60
615. J. Geophis Res., 109 (2004), B06405,
(1997)
doi:10.1029/2003JB002803.

12. F. Yver-Leduc, P. Cheinet, J. Fils, A. Clairon, N. Dimarcq,
D. Holleville, P. Bouyer, A. Landragin., J. Opt. B: Quantum
Semiclass. Opt. 5 (2003) S136-S142.

13. T. L. Gustavson, P. Bouyer, M. A. Kasevich, Proc. SPIE

3270 (1998) 62.

14. T. Trebst, T. Binnewies, J. Helmcke, and F. Riehle,
I.E.E.E. Trans. on Inst. and Meas. 50 (2001) 2165-2170.
15. Ch. J. Bord´e, in Advances in the Interplay between Quan-
tum and Gravity Physics (ed. V. de Sabbada, Kluwer, Aca-
demic Publisher, 2001)

16. C. Antoine, Ch. J. Bord´e, Phys. Lett. A 306 (2003) 277.
17. A. Clairon, C. Salomon, S. Guellati and W. Phillips, Eu-

rophys. Lett. 16 (1991) 165.

18. D. W. Allan, Proc. IEEE 54 (1966) 221.
19. M. Born and E. Wolf, Principles of Optics (Pergamon

Press, ﬁfth edition, 1975).

