5
0
0
2
 
l
u
J
 
9
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
m
o
t
a
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
8
0
2
7
0
5
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Long-term stabilization of the length of an optical reference cavity

Ga¨etan Hagel, Marie Houssin, Martina Knoop,∗ Caroline Champenois, Michel Vedel, and Fernande Vedel
Physique des Interactions Ioniques et Mol´eculaires (CNRS UMR 6633), Universit´e de Provence,
Centre de Saint J´erˆome, Case C21, 13397 Marseille Cedex 20, France†
(Dated: February 20, 2014)

To obtain a high degree of length stabilisation of an optical reference cavity, its free-spectral range
is locked by means of an accurate and stable frequency synthesizer. The locking scheme is twofold: a
laser is locked on the N
mode of a reference Fabry-Perot cavity and part of the laser light is shifted
in frequency by an acousto-optical modulator (AOM) mounted in double-pass, matching half of the
free spectral range of the reference cavity to be in resonance with the (N+1)
mode of the cavity.
The resulting absolute stabilization of the length of the cavity reaches the 10−11
level per second
limited by the lock transfer properties and the frequency stability of the AOM control synthesizer.

th

th

PACS numbers: 42.60.Lh Eﬃciency, stability, gain, and other operational parameters , 07.05.Dz Control
systems

I.

INTRODUCTION

Today, the precision and stability of laser frequen-
cies reaches beyond the 10−14-level, removing the last
obstacles for an ultimate investigation of possible new
frequency standards outpassing the performances of the
actual cesium atomic clock by orders of magnitude [1].
Nevertheless, many experimental applications require
lasers with less stringent performances, like a sub-MHz
linewidth and an absolute frequency stability better than
this spectral width for time scales up to a minute.
In
our experiment [2], probing of an atomic transition re-
quires a narrow interrogation laser linewidth, which can
be obtained in a straightforward way by stabilizing a laser
on a Fabry-Perot cavity of high ﬁnesse. The use of the
Pound-Drever-Hall (PDH) locking technique [3] permits
to counteract rapid frequency ﬂuctuations and allows to
obtain laser linewidths largely inferior to 100 kHz.

To suppress frequency drifts, stabilisation of the length
of the reference cavity of the interrogation laser is re-
quired. This can be realized by a maximum isolation
from mechanical, acoustic and thermal perturbations, or
by an absolute stabilisation on an atomic transition, gen-
erally by making use of an additional (diode) laser set-
up. Stabilisation on an atomic transition is often made
by the saturated absorption technique to avoid Doppler
broadening eﬀects in a gas at room temperature. The em-
ployed crossover transitions have spectral widths of about
10 MHz (for example Rb: 5.9 MHz, Cs: 14 MHz), lim-
iting the attainable frequency stabilities to almost three
orders of magnitude below these values.

Very few diﬀerent techniques have been used to as-
sure an absolute-length stabilisation of a reference cav-
ity. They all compare the frequency diﬀerence between
two eigenmodes of a reference cavity with an external rf
frequency applied to a phase or frequency modulation de-

∗Electronic address: Martina.Knoop@up.univ-mrs.fr
†URL: http://www.up.univ-mrs.fr/ciml/

vice. The Dual-Frequency Modulation (DFM) technique
with two phase modulators (EOM) in a row has been used
in [4]. It has been applied in a slightly modiﬁed set-up
to measure the frequency of molecular transitions with
a uncertainty of 2 ×10−8 [5], where the change in free-
spectral range (FSR) of an optical cavity is tracked by a
servo on an EOM. Another implementation is reduced to
the use of a single EOM [6]. Long-baseline interferometry
uses double modulation techniques to assure length de-
termination of the interferometer arms which can reach
a relative uncertainty of 10−11 [7].

In this manuscript we describe a new scheme for the
use of a DFM method for the absolute-length stabilisa-
tion of an optical cavity. In order to avoid a mean-term
drift of the laser we have chosen to stabilize the length of
the cavity by locking the frequency diﬀerence between its
Nth and its (N+1)th longitudinal mode. The frequency
diﬀerence is generated by an acousto-optical modulator
at a ﬁxed value matching half of the FSR of the reference
cavity. The high accuracy and stability of a frequency
synthesizer are thus transferred to the FSR. The use of
acousto-optic modulators at frequencies largely beyond
100 MHz allows to stabilize short optical cavities. Fur-
thermore, the described method is independent from the
existence of nearby atomic transitions. We have demon-
strated excellent frequency stability for periods up to a
couple of hours.

II. EXPERIMENTAL REALIZATION

The complete experimental set-up is pictured in ﬁgure
1. The 729-nm-laser is a broad-area diode laser mounted
in an external cavity to assure single-mode lasing and
to reduce its linewidth [8]. The diode is then stabilized
onto a reference cavity by using the Pound-Drever-Hall
lock [3]. Our present goal is to enhance the stability of
this optical reference cavity. The cavity has a ﬁnesse of
about 1000 and the spacer between the two mirrors is
made out of Invar. This home-made cavity spacer has an
outer diameter of 50 mm, an inner diameter of 10 mm,

2

 DL@729 - locked on cavity

 DL@729 - free running

)

m
B
d
(
 
e
d
u

t
i
l

p
m
a

-60

-65

-70

-75

-80

136450 136500 136550 136600 136650

frequency [kHz]

FIG. 1: Experimental setup of the described locking scheme.
The lock signal for the PDH signal of the diode laser enters
the cavity from the right, while the length stabilisation of the
cavity is injected into the reference cavity from the left side,
after a double-pass through the 250-MHz AOM. L designs
the lenses used for eﬃcient mode-matching, while mirrors are
noted M, and polarization beam-splitters PBS. See text for
detailed description.

FIG. 2: Beat signal of one part of the 729 nm diode laser
with another part of the same laser having passed through
a 10 km optical ﬁber. The upper curve has been recorded
for the diode laser being locked to the reference cavity, and
results in a spectral linewidth lower than 25 kHz, while the
lower curve has been measured with no lock at all resulting
in a linewidth of several hundred kHz.

and a length of about 300 mm. The cavity is formed by
commercial broad-band mirrors (700-900 nm), a plane
and a curved one (radius of curvature 2m). The plane
mirror is mounted on a piezo-electric transducer (PZT)
allowing to adjust the length of the cavity by application
of a DC-voltage up to 150 V corresponding to a length
variation of about 2 µm.
In the course of a day, the
reference cavity undergoes a slow frequency drift mainly
due to temperature variations, in a lab where the ambient
temperature is stabilized to approximately one degree.

The instantaneous linewidth of the diode laser locked
onto the reference cavity has been measured by an auto-
correlation technique [9]. The beat signal of a part of the
laser beam with a second part of the same beam which
has passed through 10 km of optical ﬁber is shown in ﬁg-
ure 2. This beat signal has been acquired with a HP ESA
1500A spectrum analyzer at a 3 kHz bandwidth. While
the free-running laser (lower curve, open circles) has a
linewidth of the order of several hundred kHz, which is
a typical result for a broad-area diode laser in an exter-
nal cavity, the linewidth of the locked laser is inferior to
25 kHz. This is achieved by feeding the frequency cor-
rections of the PDH-signal to diﬀerent elements in the
diode laser cavity setup. While slow ﬂuctuations (up to
200 Hz) are corrected by the piezo-electric element sup-
porting the cavity grating, intermediate corrections (up

to 10 kHz) are applied via the diode laser current source,
and rapid frequency corrections are made directly on the
anode of the diode laser making use of an FET mounted
as a passive voltage-current transductor [10].

To increase the stability of the reference cavity in order
to avoid a mean-term drift of the laser we have chosen to
stabilize the length of the cavity by locking the frequency
diﬀerence between its Nth and its (N+1)th longitudinal
mode. The frequency diﬀerence is ﬁxed by a highly stable
frequency synthesizer driving the acousto-optical modu-
lator at a frequency corresponding to the half of the FSR
of the cavity.

In the described locking scheme, the frequency of the
diode laser corresponds to the Nth multiple of the cavity’s
free spectral range

νDL = (N + ϕ + Φ) · νF SR

(1)

where N is the mode number, ϕ the Fresnel phase shift
due to the curvature of the cavity mirrors, and Φ the
phase shift which occurs upon reﬂection due to the ﬁnite
conductivity of the mirrors. In the following, we are only
interested in the frequency diﬀerence of two neighboring
modes, we may thus assume that these phase shifts are
almost identical and can therefore be neglected.

In addition to the PDH lock of the diode onto the
reference cavity, one part of the laser output which has
double-passed an acousto-optic modulator is injected into

the cavity. Note that in our set-up this second beam
enters the cavity from the opposite side of the PDH lock.
This beam has been oﬀset in frequency by two times
νAOM = 249.82 MHz ﬁxing the FSR of the reference cav-
ity.

νDL + 2 × νAOM = (N + 1) · νF SR

(2)

The PDH lock relies on circular polarization of the
laser light entering the cavity and prevents us from us-
ing separate polarizations for the two beams incident on
the cavity. Therefore the two photodiodes generating
the error signals are sensitive to both parts of the beam.
It is thus imperative to separate the reactions of the two
lock loops. In practice, this has been realized with a pure
integrator in the length-stabilisation of the reference cav-
ity and a resistor bias stabilization integrator [11] in the
PDH lock (with a limited gain at zero frequency). As a
consequence, at frequencies below the hertz, the correc-
tions applied to the diode laser are negligible compared
to those sent to the FSR lock.

One of the major points for a stable conﬁguration of
the locking scheme is to choose a frequency modulation
fm of the FSR lock larger than the second cut-oﬀ of the
diode-lock (≈ 10 kHz). At small frequency modulation
values (e.g. 1 kHz) the gain of the PDH servo is too high
(55dB) producing a strong reaction. As a consequence
the lock of the laser on the reference cavity becomes un-
stable. For best results, we have chosen to modulate the
driving frequency of the AOM at 22 kHz with an ampli-
tude of 100 kHz. At this frequency the PDH gain is about
35 dB, which is at least an order of magnitude below the
gain of the FSR stabilization.

To produce the counter-reaction, a photodiode detects
the signal reﬂected by the cavity, which is then demod-
ulated by a lock-in ampliﬁer. The output of this lock-in
is integrated (time constant of 1 s) before being sent to
to the PZT transducer controlling the length of the ref-
erence cavity.

The overall response of the lock is given by the res-
olution of the employed frequency synthesizer. In fact,

∆νDL
νDL

=

∆νF SR
νF SR

=

∆νsynth
νsynth

(3)

and the ratio of the FSR to diode frequency is, in our
case,

νDL ≈ 0.8 × 106νF SR = 1.6 × 106νsynth

(4)

We use an Aeroﬂex 2030-series frequency synthesizer
with an internal frequency standard at 10 MHz (OCXO)
having a 0.1 Hz accuracy and a fractional frequency sta-
bility at 1 minute of about 5 ×10−10 [12] to control the
AOM output.

To test the stability of the cavity, the evolution of the
diode laser frequency has been measured by a waveme-
ter, where the employed reference wavelength is a tem-
perature stabilized HeNe transition at 632.8 nm. The

3

200

0

-200

-400

-600

m
n

 

9
2
7
@

 

 
]
z
H
M

[
 

-800

 diode without lock

 PDH lock on reference cavity

 PDH and FSR lock

0

2000

4000

6000

8000

 t [ s ]

FIG. 3: Temporal evolution of the laser frequency for a free-
running laser (⋆), the laser locked by PDH on the optical
cavity (◦), and with the FSR of the cavity locked on the fre-
quency synthesizer (•).

precision of the wavemeter is better than 40 MHz, which
has been veriﬁed by the frequency resolution obtained on
the atomic transition of a single calcium ion during pe-
riods of a couple of hours [13]. The temporal evolution
of the diode laser frequency is reported in ﬁgure 3, the
straight lines in this graph are linear ﬁts to the acquired
data, reﬂecting the long-term frequency drifts. On the
considered time scales (10 minutes to three hours) the
observed frequency variations have all presented a linear
evolution.

The lower curve in ﬁgure 3 reﬂects the frequency of the
diode laser in external cavity without any additional sta-
bilisation. The frequency drift is almost 800 MHz per
hour, mainly due to thermal drifts of the high-power
diode-laser component and a very typical value for a non-
stabilized laser. The upper curve shows the ﬂuctuations
of the diode frequency as it is stabilized onto the de-
scribed Invar cavity. A reduction of the frequency drift
to values below 100 MHz per hour can be observed. The
center graph monitors the frequency of the diode locked
to the reference cavity with the cavity’s FSR stabilized
by the synthesizer frequency. The apparent drift of the
frequency has been reduced to less than 3 kHz per sec-
ond, corresponding to a frequency variation per hour of
less than 9 MHz limited by the frequency stability of the
employed frequency synthesizer.

III. CONCLUSION

We have presented a method to stabilize the length of
an optical reference cavity implementing the lock of its
FSR by an AOM. The corner stone of this method is a
thorough frequency separation of the interaction of the
two lock loops, the result is dependant of the quality of
the locking schemes adopted. The stability reached by
this method is only limited by the technical performance
of the employed frequency synthesizer. The implemented

technique is a pure frequency lock, no phase condition
has to be fulﬁlled. Compared to existing DFM meth-
ods which have been designed using phase modulators,
the use of an acousto-optical modulator in our scheme
allows application of the technique to cavities which are
shorter than some tens of centimeters. Furthermore, the

presented method can be used in a wavelength regime
where no atomic transitions are accessible. The stabil-
ity performances described could be easily improved by
using an external frequency standard with higher preci-
sion and stability for the frequency synthesizer ﬁxing the
length of the optical cavity.

4

[1] S. Diddams, T. Udem, J. Bergquist, E. Curtis,
R. Drullinger, L. Hollberg, W. Itano, W. Lee, C. Oates,
K. Vogel, and D. J. Wineland, Science 293, 825 (2001).
[2] C. Lisowski, M. Knoop, C. Champenois, G. Hagel,
M. Vedel, and F. Vedel, Appl. Phys. B 81, 5 (2005).
[3] R. Drever, J. Hall, F. Kowalski, J. Hough, G. Ford,
A. Munley, and H. Ward, Appl. Phys. B 31, 97 (1983).
[4] R. G. DeVoe and R. G. Brewer, Phys. Rev. A 30, 2827

(1984).

Am. B 16, 2255 (1999).

Phys. B. 59, 187 (1994).

[6] P. Courteille, L. Ma, W. Neuhauser, and R. Blatt, Appl.

[7] A. Araya, S. Telada, K. Tochikubo, S. Taniguchi,
R. Takahashi, K. Kawabe, D. Tatsumi, T. Yamazaki,

S. Kawamura, S. Miyoki, et al., Applied Optics 38, 2848
(1999).

[8] M. Houssin, P. Courteille, C. Champenois, M. Herbane,
M. Knoop, M. Vedel, and F. Vedel, Appl. Optics 42, 4871
(2003).

[9] T. Okoschi, K. Kikuchi, and A. Nakayama, Electron.

Lett. 16, 630 (1980).

[10] F. Schmidt-Kaler, private communication, 2003.
[11] P. Horowitz and W. Hill, The art of electronics (Cam-

[12] Aeroﬂex Test Solutions, private communication, 2005.
[13] M. Knoop, C. Champenois, G. Hagel, M. Houssin,
C. Lisowski, M. Vedel, and F. Vedel, Eur. Phys. J. D
29, 163 (2004).

[5] L.-S. Ma, J. Ye, P. Dub´e, and J. L. Hall, J. Opt. Soc.

bridge University Press, Cambridge, 1989).

