5
0
0
2
 
g
u
A
 
7
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
m
o
t
a
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
7
9
1
8
0
5
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Matter-Wave Decoherence due to a Gas Environment in an Atom Interferometer

Hermann Uys, John D. Perreault, and Alexander D. Cronin
Department of Physics, University of Arizona, Tucson, AZ 85721
(Dated: January 13, 2014)

Decoherence due to scattering from background gas particles is observed for the ﬁrst time in a
Mach-Zehnder atom interferometer, and compared with decoherence due to scattering photons. A
single theory is shown to describe decoherence due to scattering either atoms or photons. Predictions
from this theory are tested by experiments with diﬀerent species of background gas, and also by
experiments with diﬀerent collimation restrictions on an atom beam interferometer.

When a quantum system in a superposition of states
interacts with an environment, the coherence of the su-
perposition can be lost. Modern decoherence theory ex-
plains this is a result of entanglement between the system
and unobserved degrees of freedom in the environment
[1]. Understanding how diﬀerent environments cause de-
coherence is important for applications such as atom in-
terferometry or quantum computation, where coherent
superpositions are required.

In this Letter we compare two diﬀerent mechanisms
for decoherence: scattering atoms and scattering light.
A dilute gas of massive particles and a beam of radia-
tion are quite diﬀerent environments, yet they both cause
contrast loss in our atom interferometer. The data and
analysis presented here shows that gas decoherence (atom
scattering) and photon decoherence (light scattering) can
be understood with a single universal theory described by
Tan and Waals [2] and also Tegmark [3]. Motivated by
this theory, we show that the distribution of momentum
transfer from the environment to the detected atoms de-
termines the amount of contrast loss regardless of the
kind of objects being scattered in the environment.

To study gas decoherence we vary the background pres-
sure in the entire interferometer chamber whilst monitor-
ing the transmitted ﬂux, as well as the interference con-
trast which we deﬁne as C = (Imax−Imin)/(Imax+Imin),
where Imax(min) is the maximum (minimum) count rate
in the interference fringes. The presence of contrast re-
ﬂects the fact that the atoms are in a coherent super-
position of states. A related issue is the attenuation of
atom beam intensity by the environments. The atten-
uation is the same on both paths of the interferometer
and is therefore the equal to the attenuation of the av-
erage detected intensity, hIi = (Imax + Imin)/2. In what
follows we will denote the contrast and intensity in the
absence of scattering by C0 and I0. Because the room
temperature background gas atoms have more momen-
tum than photons by a factor of ≃ 105, they can deﬂect
beam atoms by large enough angles that they often miss
our detector. As a result, the gas environment reduces
the average atom beam intensity to 10% before the con-
trast is halved. By comparison photon scattering does
not reduce the detected ﬂux (see Fig. 1).

One can compare the two environments as two

Photon Decoherence

Gas Decoherence

0

C
C

/

0

>
I
<
>
I
<

/

1.0

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

0.0
1.0

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

0.0

0

C
C

/

 

0

>
I
<
>
I
<

/

1.0

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

0.0
1.0

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

0.0

0.0

0.2

0.4

0.6

laser power (mW)

0

4

2
6
pressure  (µTorr)

8

10

FIG. 1: Comparison of photon decoherence (left) to gas de-
coherence (right). Contrast and Intensity in an atom beam
interferometer are reported as a function of resonant laser
beam power or background gas pressure. The curves come
from a general theory of decoherence given by Equations (2)
and (3).

gedanken microscopes that use either light waves or de
Broglie waves of background gas to detect which path
atoms took in the interferometer. According to Feyn-
mann’s Heisenberg microscope idea [4], a quantum sys-
tem can be localized with a spatial resolution δx of

δx ≥

λ
2 NA

=

h
2p NA

,

(1)

where λ is the wavelength of the light or the wavelength
of the gas particles used to make the microscope, p is the
momentum of the photons (or gas particles), and NA is
the numerical aperture of the microscope. The inequality
in Eq. (1) becomes an equals sign if the microscope is
limited only by diﬀraction. Heuristically, by detecting an
atom’s position the microscope can observe the particle
nature of an atom, which is complementary to the wave
nature. Hence, if such a microscope can even in principle
resolve which path each atom took in the interferometer,
the
then evidence for the wave nature of atoms (i.e.

2

interferometer experiments with an absorbing structure
in one arm [6]. Those cases lead to attenuation in one arm
only. In our case both arms are exposed to the same gas
environment and experience the same attenuation. (We
will discuss gas decoherence in relation to [5, 6] more in
the conclusion).

Our apparatus was previously used to study photon
decoherence [7, 8, 9, 10]. That experiment used a laser
beam tuned to the λ = 590 nm transition of the Na beam
atoms that was positioned as indicated in Fig. 2, so as to
scatter oﬀ of both arms of the interferometer. The con-
trast was monitored as a function of laser intensity and
as a function of the separation vector, d, between the
two arms of the interferometer at the location of scatter-
ing. This Letter is the ﬁrst report of gas decoherence in
a Mach-Zehnder interferometer. A Talbot Lau interfer-
ometer was used recently to study gas decoherence [11],
but our observations are in a diﬀerent regime since the
momentum spread of our detected beam is 10,000 times
smaller than in the Talbot Lau interferometer [12]. Un-
like [11] we do not get an exponential decay of contrast
with gas pressure (see Fig. 1). It was also suggested in
[11] that gas decoherence could not be observed in our
Mach-Zehnder interferometer because all the scattered
atoms would miss the detector. Indeed, in the limit of
an inﬁnitely narrow beam and detector, only atoms with
zero recoil could be detected. In that case the momen-
tum transfer, (p NA) = 0, so by Eq. (1) a Heisenberg mi-
croscope would have poor resolution and fringe contrast
could therefore be preserved. We attribute the possibil-
ity of gas decoherence in our apparatus to the non-zero
size of the atom beam and the detector. To conﬁrm this
we present data showing that gas decoherence depends
on the beam collimation in Fig. 3.

Figure 3(a) compares the contrast loss, C/C0, observed
as a function of the average beam intensity, hIi/hI0i,
when diﬀerent species of background gas (Xe, Ar, He,
and N2) are introduced to the interferometer chamber.
These data form a universal curve even though quite dif-
ferent amounts of pressure are needed for each gas to
cause a 50% reduction in atom beam intensity. Fig. 3(b)
shows similar data obtained with wider collimating slits.
The solid and dashed lines come from our decoherence
theory described next.

The results of Fig.

3 can be understood within a
widely accepted picture of decoherence that views every
system as a subset of a larger environment that is also
governed by quantum mechanics, but is not monitored
by the observer [1]. The result of coupling to this envi-
ronment is that the oﬀ-diagonal elements of the density
matrix describing the system are damped. This picture
was successfully used to explain the photon decoherence
experiment [7, 8, 9, 10] in which case the damping of oﬀ-
diagonal elements of the density matrix causes a reduc-
tion in contrast to C = βC0. The decoherence function,

FIG. 2: Schematic of the atom interferometer and scattering
scenarios. For gas decoherence the entire interferometer is
exposed to background gas, allowing scattering to take place
anywhere along both arms of the interferometer. Previous
experiments [7, 8, 9] studied photon scattering from the two
arms at a location where the separation vector d is deﬁned.

interference fringe contrast) should be unobservable.

Since the gedanken gas microscope has a smaller wave-
length probe than the light microscope, it is natural to
expect that gas scattering should cause more contrast loss
than photon scattering. In apparent contradiction to this
simple picture, the contrast is not destroyed even when
there is a suﬃcient gas pressure to attenuate the atom
beam. As we shall explain, the analysis of the gedanken
microscope resolution must be adjusted to include the
probability distribution of momentum kicks from the en-
vironment to each detected atom, and in the case of the
gas environment this lead to poorer gedanken microscope
resolution than predicted by the ideal limit.

Our experiment employs a Mach-Zehnder atom inter-
ferometer, shown in Fig. 2, with two arms formed by
the zeroth and ﬁrst diﬀraction orders of a supersonic Na
atom beam (mean velocity 3000 m/s and ∆v/hvi ≈ 1/10)
that passes through a 100-nm period grating. A second
grating redirects the beams so they overlap and make
ﬂux density interference fringes at the position of a third
grating. Atoms transmitted through the third grating
are detected with a hot wire, and oscillations in the ﬂux
due to the interference contrast are observed when the
third grating is translated. At a background gas pres-
sure of 2 × 10−7 Torr, the contrast is C0 ≃ 25% and the
average detected atom ﬂux is I0 ≃ 100, 000 counts per
second. The beam is collimated to 2×10−5 radians by
two 10 µm slits separated by 1 m, and the detector is
50 µm in diameter. The gratings are each separated by
1 m. To study gas decoherence we vary the background
pressure by controlling a gas leak into the interferometer
chamber whilst monitoring the beam intensity and in-
terference contrast. Note that the entire interferometer
chamber is ﬁlled with gas so scattering can take place
anywhere along either arm of the interferometer. This
setup is diﬀerent from atom interferometer experiments
in which a gas cell was placed on one arm [5], or neutron

 Xe
 Ar
 He
 N2

0.0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

1.0

     <I>/<I0>

(a)

(b)

0
C
C

/

 

0
C
C

/

1.0

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

0.0

1.0

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

0.0

 1000 µm slits
  100 µm slits
  10 µm slits

0.0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

1.0

     <I>/<I0>

FIG. 3: Contrast and intensity shown in parametric plots as
a function of the pressure of the background gas. (a) Vari-
ous background gas species provide similar results. (b) Large
atom beams cause more rapid loss of contrast. Theory curves
are from Equations (4) and (5).

β, is

β(d) = R

∆kmax
∆kmin

P (∆k)e−i(∆k)·d d∆k
P (∆k) d∆k

,

∆kmax
∆kmin

(2)

R

In Eq. (2), P (∆k) is the
as predicted by [2] and [3].
probability distribution to undergo a momentum change
¯h∆k due to scattering. The limits of integration are de-
termined by ∆kmax(min) that still permit the atom beam
to be detected. The denominator simply expresses the to-
tal probability, Pdet, for a beam atom to be detected. We
emphasize that ∆kmax(min) depends not only on the size
of the detector, but also on the initial position and mo-
mentum of the beam atoms. To ﬁnd β one must therefore
average over the beam width and height.

To describe P (∆k) one must take into account the
probability, Pn, that an atom undergoes exactly n scat-
tering events on its trajectory to the detector plane. Pn
is determined by the background gas pressure or radia-
tion intensity. P (∆k) also depends on the probability
that the atom gets a total momentum kick ∆k as a re-
sult of these n scattering events. This is given by the
convolution (which we indicate with ∗) of the absolute
value squared of the scattering amplitude f ≡ f (∆k)

3

with itself n times, because the probability distribution
function of two random variables is the convolution of
the constituent distribution functions. We write

P (∆k) = P0δ(∆k) +

|f |2
σt

P1

(cid:18)

+ P2

|f |2 ∗ |f |2
σ2
t

+ ...

,

(cid:19)

(3)
where δ() is the Dirac delta function, and f is explicitly
normalized by the total scattering cross-section σt.

In practice we account for the averaging over beam
proﬁle in Eq. (2) in an approximate way by multipying
the term in brackets on the right in Eq. (3) (i.e. terms
accounting for multiple scattering) by (1 + Abeam
), where
Adet
Abeam is the cross-sectional area of the beam and Adet the
cross-sectional area of the detector. The weight factor
Abeam
then allows for the possibility that beam atoms
Adet
that would have missed the detector in the absence of
scattering, might now be scattered onto the detector.

Up to this point, the theory used in Eqs. (2) and (3) is
still general enough to describe both photon decoherence
and gas decoherence. Indeed, this universal model of de-
coherence from scattering serves as the basis for all the
theoretical curves presented in Figs. (1) and (3). For the
photon environment, Pn and |f (∆k)|2 are determined by
atom-photon interactions, e.g., dipole radiation scatter-
ing as discussed in [7, 8, 9, 10]. For the gas environment
it can be shown that the probability to scatter n times
after travelling a distance z through the background gas
obeys the Poisson distribution Pn = zn
λ , where λ is
the mean free path. Furthermore f (∆k) is the complex
amplitude of an outgoing spherical wave in the Lippman-
Schwinger equation, which in the Born approximation is
simply the Fourier transform of the inter-atomic poten-
tial [13].

n!λn e− z

mg +mb

A thorough calculation of the decoherence function
for the gas environment should also include an aver-
age over initial momentum states of the background gas.
The main eﬀect of the averaging procedure described by
Russek [14] is to scale the scattering angle in the lab,
θ, with respect to that in the center of mass frame, Θ,
according to θ ≈ mg
Θ where mg is the mass of the
background gas atom and mb the mass of the beam atom.
This approximation is valid when the atom beam speed
is large compared the average speed of the background
gas atoms, and it was used in this analysis to ﬁnd f (∆k).
Since scattering from the background gas can take
place anywhere along the interferometer the decoherence
function should also be averaged over d. However, in-
stead of explicitly averaging over d we note that terms
in the numerator of the decoherence function, Eq. (2),
are small if they oscillate rapidly over the range of inte-
gration, i.e. when d · ∆k > 2. For gas scattering this
rapid oscillation of the integrand occurs for values of d
corresponding to scattering a distance of z ≥ 1 mm from
the third (or ﬁrst) grating. Therefore only scattering
that takes place close to the third (or ﬁrst) grating gives

signiﬁcant contributions to β. The consequence of aver-
aging over d, which we indicate with angle brackets, is
therefore that to a good approximation only atoms that
do not scatter contribute coherently to the interference
pattern. With this consideration the predicted contrast
based on Eqns. (2) and (3) reduces to

and the detected ﬂux is

hCid ≈ C0 (cid:28)

P0
Pdet (cid:29)d

,

hIid ≈ I0hPdetid .

(4)

(5)

These predictions show good agreement with experimen-
tal data as seen in Figs. 1 and 3. Note in particular
that data taken with the Na atom beam and all back-
ground gasses tested (He, Ar, Xe, N2), collapse on the
same curve in this plot. This is due to the fact that the
spatial extent of the interatomic potential is very similar
for Na and all the gasses used (the minimum in V (r) is lo-
cated near 5 Angstroms for each of these gasses [15]). As
a consequence, the widths of the scattering probability
distributions, |f (∆k)|2, are similar for these gasses.

Eqns. (2), (3) and the Born approximation for f (∆k),
taken together allow us to predict that faster beams
or scattering centers with larger spatial extent to their
potential will cause more contrast loss per attenuation,
since both of these scenarios lead to narrower P (∆k) and
hence a larger Pdet. Furthermore, a larger detector or
larger atom beam (hence larger ∆kmax) will also cause
more contrast loss, since this would increase the incoher-
ent contribution to the denominator in Eq. (2) due to
scattering.

We have tested one of these predictions by using a
beam with larger cross-sectional area. A wide beam is
beneﬁcial for applications such as gyroscopes [16] where
high ﬂux is desired, but separated beams are not needed.
Fig. 3(b) compares the contrast, C/C0, as a function of
atom ﬂux, hIi/hI0i, for for three beam sizes. Note that
contrast is diminished more rapidly for the wider beam as
predicted by Eqs. (4) and (5). Optimizing interferometer
performance for practical applications therefore relies on
a tradeoﬀ between desired intensity and contrast at the
achievable vacuum levels.

In the vocabulary of related work [6], the gas envi-
ronment is a stochastic absorber in the quantum limit.
Furthermore, as predicted by [6] for an environment such
as the gas that interacts with both arms of the interfer-
ometer, if only non-scattered atoms were detected then
Pdet = P0 and C/C0 would remain 1 even as hIi/hI0i is
reduced to P0.

As a ﬁnal point we discuss the impact of gas deco-
herence on experiments in which the atom wave index
of refraction due to a dilute gas was measured [5]. Ad-
ditional incoherent ﬂux that hits the detector does not

4

aﬀect the fringe phase, nor does it change the product
hIiC. Thus the gas decoherence described here should
not inﬂuence results reported in [5].

In conclusion, we have observed loss of interference
contrast in a Mach-Zehnder atom interferometer as a re-
sult of increased background gas pressure. Momentum
transfer from the gaseous environment causes decoher-
ence of scattered atoms so that only atoms that undergo
no scattering contribute coherently to the interference
pattern. These results are explained by a general the-
ory of decoherence that treats gas scattering and pho-
ton scattering equally. This theory allows us to predict
that higher velocity beams, atoms with longer range po-
tentials, a wider detector or a wider beam will increase
the contrast loss from gas decoherence. This provides
quantitative predictions for interferometer performance
in imperfect vacuum.

This research was supported by an Award from Re-
search Corporation and the National Science Foundation
Grant No PHY-0354947.

[1] W. H. Zurek, Physics Today 44, 36 (1991); J. A. Wheeler
and W. Zurek, eds., Quantum Theory and Measurement
(Princeton University Press, Princeton, 1983); W. H.
Zurek, Rev. Mod. Phys. 75, 712 (2003); D. Giulini E.
Joos C. Kiefer J. Kupsch I. -0. Stamatescu H. D. Zeh,
Decoherence and the Appearance of a Classical World
in Quantum Theory (Springer-Verlag, Heidelberg, 1996);
M. Namiki S. Pascazio, Phys. Rev. A 44, 39 (1991).
[2] S. Tan and D. Walls, Phys. Rev. A 47, 4663 (1993).
[3] M. Tegmark, Found. Phys. Lett. 6, 571 (1993).
[4] R. Feynman, R. Leighton, and M. Sands, The Feynman
Lectures on Physics, vol. Vol. 3 (Addison-Wesley, Read-
ing, MA, 1965).
[5] J. Schmiedmayer

et. al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 74, 1043
(1995); T. D. Roberts, A. D. Cronin, D. A. Kokorowski,
and D. E. Pritchard, Phys. Rev. Lett. 89 200406 (2002).
[6] J. Summhammer, H. Rauch, and D. Tuppinger, Phys.
Rev. A 36 4447 (1987); J. Summhammer, and H. Rauch,
Phys. Rev. A 46 7284 (1992).

[7] M. Chapman et. al., Phys. Rev. Lett 75, 3783 (1995).
[8] P. Berman, ed., Atom Interferometry, Advances in
Atomic, Molecular, and Optical Physics (Academic
Press, San Diego, 1997).

[9] D. Kokorowski et. al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 86, 2191 (2001).
[10] D. Pritchard et. al., Ann. Phys. 10, 35 (2001).
[11] K. Hornberger et. al., 160401 (2003).
[12] B. Brezger et. al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 88 100404 (2002).
[13] J. Sakurai, Modern Quantum Mechanics

(Addison-

Wesley, US, 1994).

[14] A. Russek, Phys. Rev. 120 1536 (1960).
[15] J. Tellinghuisen, J. Chem. Phys. 71 1283 (1979);

W. Baylis, J. Chem. Phys. 51 2665 (1969).

[16] T. L. Gustavson, A. Landragin, and M. A. Kasevich,

Classical and Quantum Gravity 17, 2385 (2000).

