5
0
0
2
 
g
u
A
 
5
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
m
o
t
a
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
0
0
1
8
0
5
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

High-ﬂux beam source for cold, slow atoms or molecules

S. E. Maxwell, N. Brahms, R. deCarvalho, J. Helton, S. V. Nguyen, D. Patterson, and J. M. Doyle
Department of Physics, Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts 02138, USA

D. R. Glenn, J. Petricka, and D. DeMille
Department of Physics, Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut 06520, USA
(Dated: February 20, 2014)

We demonstrate and characterize a high-ﬂux beam source for cold, slow atoms or molecules. The
desired species is vaporized using laser ablation, then cooled by thermalization in a cryogenic cell
of buﬀer gas. The beam is formed by particles exiting a hole in the buﬀer gas cell. We characterize
the properties of the beam (ﬂux, forward velocity, temperature) for both an atom (Na) and a
molecule (PbO) under varying buﬀer gas density, and discuss conditions for optimizing these beam
parameters. Our source compares favorably to existing techniques of beam formation, for a variety
of applications.

PACS numbers: 39.10.+j

Cold, slow beams of atoms or molecules are of wide
utility. A common use of such beams is as a source
for loading into traps, where the particles can be fur-
ther cooled and manipulated, e.g. to create Bose con-
densates or Fermi degenerate gases. Because the number
of trapped particles is typically limited by the character-
istics of the initial beam (ﬂux, forward velocity, tempera-
ture, etc.), signiﬁcant eﬀort has been put into developing
improved atomic beam sources [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7]. Work
on developing cold molecular sources has recently been a
particularly active ﬁeld of research [8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13].
As with atoms, one of the aims is to produce quantum
degenerate gases, including those comprising strongly in-
teracting electric dipoles [14, 15, 16].

For the purposes of loading traps, an ideal source would
produce a large ﬂux of any atom or molecule at temper-
atures less than the depth of the trap, Tt. For most
currently used trap technologies, Tt . 1 K. For species
amenable to laser cooling, this temperature is within the
capture range of a MOT [17]. For paramagnetic atoms
and molecules, strong magnetic traps can have depths ex-
ceeding 1K [18]. For polar molecules, electric ﬁeld-based
traps can reach similar depths [19, 20].

We describe here a simple, robust source that can op-
erate with nearly any atomic or molecular species, and
which produces a beam at high ﬂux with translational
and rotational temperatures near 1 K. We demonstrate
this source for both an atom (Na) and a polar molecule
(PbO), and discuss the diﬀerent regimes of beam for-
mation. Our analysis makes it possible to estimate and
optimize various characteristics of the beam source for
general use. We believe this provides an attractive alter-
native to many beam techniques now in use.

A simple outline of the operation of our source is
as follows. Atoms or molecules of the desired species,
A, are ﬁrst vaporized by laser ablation. This produces
N particles of A per pulse, at a high temperature Ti.
The ablation takes place inside a cryogenic cell ﬁlled

with He buﬀer gas at low temperature Tb and density
nHe. After a characteristic number of collisions N ,
the translational temperature T of A comes arbitrar-
ily close to equilibrium with the buﬀer gas, such that
T ≈ (1 + ǫ)Tb when N = −κln(ǫTb/Ti) [21].
[Here
κ ≡ (mA + mHe)2/(2mAmHe), and mHe (mA) is the
mass of He (A)]. Rotational degrees of freedom are also
cooled during these collisions. By allowing both He and
A particles to exit the cell via a small hole, a beam of
A is formed. The beam persists for a duration given by
the diﬀusion lifetime of A in the cell, which is limited by
sticking of A particles upon contact with the cell walls.
The number of cold particles of A in the beam is de-
termined by both nHe and the cell geometry. During
thermalization, a particle of A typically travels a dis-
tance R ≈ N /(nHeσt), where σt is a thermally-averaged
cross section for elastic collisions. Hence, for a cell with
distance Rh from the ablation point to the hole, the par-
ticles of A will be eﬃciently thermalized before exiting
the hole only if R < Rh. In addition, the purely geomet-
ric probability for a particle of A to escape in the beam
is governed by the ratio d/Rh, where d is the diameter of
the exit hole.

The forward velocity, vf , of the thermalized beam of
A particles also depends on both nHe and d. Speciﬁcally,
vf is determined by the ratio d/λ, where λ = 1/(nHeσc)
is the mean free path of A particles in the cell; here σc is
the elastic cross-section for cold A-He collisions. In the
eﬀusive limit (λ ≫ d), vf will be given approximately by
the thermal velocity of cold A particles, i.e. vf ≈ vA ≡
p2kBTb/mA. By contrast, when λ ≪ d the A particles
will become entrained in the outward ﬂow of He, so that
vf ≈ vHe ≡ p2kBTb/mHe. Since mA ≫ mHe for most
species of interest, vf is much smaller in the eﬀusive limit
than for an entrained beam.

Note that the conditions for eﬃcient thermalization
and for a slow beam are in conﬂict. Thermalization is
most eﬃcient for nHe above a threshold value, but ef-

2

the crossover between eﬀusive and entrained ﬂow of
A—i.e., the condition d = λ—occurs for nHe = nc ≈
1015 cm−3. This should be compared to the density
nHe = nt required for full thermalization of A parti-
cles—i.e., such that R ≈ N /(nHeσt) = Rh. Assum-
ing σt ≈ σc, we ﬁnd that for Na in our cell, nt ≈ nc.
Thus it should be anticipated that our cell is near the
optimal geometry for producing a maximal ﬂux of slow,
cold Na. By contrast, the larger mass of PbO makes
N much larger than for Na, implying that our cell ge-
ometry is not optimal for PbO. We characterize the the
beam source for both species within a range of densities
around the anticipated optimal condition for Na, namely
nHe ≈ 0.2 − 5 × 1015 cm−3.

The beam source is monitored using laser spectroscopy.
Doppler shifts and widths of the spectra are used to de-
termine beam velocity proﬁles. Signal size and timing
yield the column density and particle dynamics. To mea-
sure the longitudinal (transverse) velocity proﬁle, a probe
laser beam is sent collinear with (perpendicular to) the
molecular beam. For Na, a third probe beam monitors
atoms inside the cell.

We monitor Na atoms via absorption of a probe laser
tuned to the 3s1/2 → 3p3/2 transition at wavelength
λN a = 589 nm. The probe laser frequency is continu-
ously scanned over the entire absorption proﬁle (a range
of ∼ 1 GHz), at a rate of 1 kHz, resulting in several com-
plete spectral proﬁles of the Na atomic beam for each
ablation pulse. The relatively slow scan of the laser en-
sures that we are sensitive only to nearly-thermalized Na
atoms; hot atoms traverse the detection region before a
scan is complete.

PbO is monitored via laser-induced ﬂuorescence. This
probe laser is tuned to the X(v′′ = 0) →B(v′ = 5) transi-
tion at λP bO,e = 406 nm. Fluorescence is detected using
a photomultiplier tube (PMT), with interference and col-
ored glass ﬁlters to selectively observe the B(v′ = 5) →
X(v′′ = 4) transition at λP bO,f = 460 nm. A shutter with
an opening time of ∼ 7 ms is used to shield the PMT from
the initial glow following each ablation pulse. Again,
this technique ensures that only slow-moving molecules
are detected. The signal is averaged over several (typi-
cally 10) shots of the ablation laser with the probe laser
frequency ﬁxed. A single spectral scan consists of fre-
quency points separated by 10-30 MHz across a span of
up to several GHz. Our quantitative determination of
molecule number from ﬂuorescence counts includes esti-
mates of the detection eﬃciency and branching fraction
for the detected transition [22]. We estimate the error
in our absolute number measurement of PbO to be less
than a factor of 2.

For Na, the in-cell probe beam was used to determine
both N and σc. We ﬁnd NN a ≈ 1014/pulse for both
the Na and NaCl targets. We measure diﬀusion lifetimes
of τ [ms] ≈ 4 × 10−15 × nHe (cid:2)cm−3(cid:3). From this we in-
fer σc ≈ 3 × 10−15 cm2. For PbO, previous work has

FIG. 1: A schematic of the beam apparatus. When detecting
ﬂuorescence, a lens (not shown) collimates a fraction of the
ﬂuorescence light and directs it out a window to a PMT.

fusive ﬂow demands that nHe be less than a typically
diﬀerent threshold. The highest ﬂux of cold, slow A par-
ticles is obtained when Rh and d are chosen so that these
thresholds in buﬀer-gas density coincide (namely, when
Rh/d ≈ N σc/σt), and nHe is set at this common thresh-
old value (n

−1
He = dσc = Rhσt).

A schematic of the beam setup is given in Fig. 1.
The buﬀer gas cell is a brass box ∼10 cm on edge. The
cell is mounted in vacuum, with the top face attached
to the cold plate of a liquid He cryostat. An 0.8 mm
long exit hole with d = 3 mm is centered on one side
face. The bottom and other side faces are covered with
windows for optical access. Several ablation targets are
mounted on the top face at Rh ≈ 6 cm. The ablation
light consists of laser pulses of ∼ 5 ns duration, with
energy ∼ 15 mJ, focused to a spot size . 1 mm, at a
wavelength of 532 nm. The ablation laser is typically
ﬁred at 10 Hz repetition rate. We produce Na atoms with
sodium metal or NaCl targets, and PbO molecules with
a vacuum hot-pressed PbO target. With our ablation
conditions, typically Ti ≈ 1000 K for both species.

Buﬀer gas continuously ﬂows into the cell through a
narrow tube which is thermally anchored to the cold
plate. This ensures that the buﬀer gas is at the tem-
perature of the cold plate upon entry to the cell. The
cell walls, and thus the He gas, are typically at Tb = 5 K.
Helium in the cell must be replenished as it ﬂows con-
tinuously through the exit hole. A calibrated metering
valve at room temperature is used to control the ﬂow
into the cell, and hence the density, of the buﬀer gas.
We determine nHe to within a factor of 2. Good vac-
uum is maintained in the beam region by means of a
coconut charcoal sorption pump with a pumping speed
of ∼1000 l s−1.

For a typical elastic cross-section σc ≈ 3 × 1015 cm−3,

3

FIG. 2: The number of cold A particles, Nh, that emerge in
the beam as a function of nHe. Curves with speciﬁc functional
forms have been inserted to show the diﬀerent scaling regimes.
The intersection of the curves corresponds to the condition
R = Rh, where a typical A particle is thermalized just as it
reaches the hole.

measured an ablation yield of ≈ 1012/pulse [23], and our
measurements with an in-cell probe indicate a compara-
ble yield.

In Fig. 2 we plot the number, Nh, of thermalized par-
ticles of species A exiting the hole as a function of nHe.
We also show the results of a Monte Carlo simulation of
the beam formation process. The condition for full ther-
malization is apparent in both the experimental and sim-
ulated data for Na, while as expected we do not appear
to reach the condition of full thermalization for PbO.

In the Na data and simulations, we ﬁnd that Nh in-
creases rapidly (approximately ∝ n3
He) up to a critical
value of nHe, above which Nh is roughly constant at
its maximum value Nh,max. The low-density scaling is
consistent with a simple picture in which A particles
are distributed uniformly over a volume of characteris-
tic length Lt ≈ N λ, when they have thermalized to near
(This broad distribution arises, in our simulations
Tb.
of the thermalization process, from the spreads both in
the number of collisions required to thermalize and in
the free path between collisions.) At high density, the
condition Nh ≃ Nh,max arises in our simulations when
R < Rh for essentially all A particles. In this regime,
the fraction of A particles escaping, fmax = Nh,max/N ,
is given roughly by the area of the hole to the area of a
hemisphere at radius Rh, i.e., fmax ≈ d2
h). In our
geometry, fmax ≈ 3 × 10−4.

h/(8R2

The simulated beam data in Fig. 2 is scaled to match
the experimental Na data by adjusting the values of NN a
and σt. The resulting value, NN a ≈ 5 × 1013,
is in
reasonable agreement with the determination from the
in-cell probe. The ﬁtted thermalization cross-section,
σt ∼ 1 × 10−15 cm2, is somewhat smaller than σc. This
is reasonable, since elastic cross sections are typically

FIG. 3: PbO and Na beam mean forward velocities, vf , as a
function of nHe. Extrapolation of the data to zero buﬀer gas
density is illustrated by best-ﬁt lines (dashed).

smaller at higher collision energies[24].

Fig. 3 shows the average forward velocity, vf , of the
beams of A particles as nHe is varied. For both Na and
PbO, the data show a nearly linear increase of vf with
nHe, with the velocity of the lighter species always larger.
This behavior is consistent with the following simple pic-
ture. A slowly-moving particle of A takes a time Te to
exit the hole, where Te ∼ d/vA. During this time, it un-
dergoes Ne collisions with fast, primarily forward-moving
He atoms, where Ne ∼ nHeσcvHeTe. Each collision im-
parts a momentum transfer ∆pA ∼ mHevHe. This results
in a net velocity boost ∆vA, given by ∆vA ∼ vAd/λ ∝
nHe. This picture should be roughly valid for densities
below the regime of full entrainment, where vf ∼ vHe.
The velocities we measure for Na are approximately re-
produced by modeling of the beam formation process
with our measured value of σc.

This picture also predicts that the behavior of vf , when
extrapolated to nHe = 0, should yield the velocity of an
eﬀusive beam of A particles at temperature Tb. To make
this comparison, it is critical to note that our detection
technique is sensitive to molecules within a roughly cylin-
drical volume, of diameter Dd and with length L extend-
ing from the exit hole. Under our conditions, where Dd ∼
d < L, it can be shown that an eﬀusive beam will exhibit
a velocity distribution close to f (v) ∝ v2e−mAv
/(2kB Tb)
and a mean velocity ¯vef f ≈ 1.13vA. Our extrapolated
data is within ∼ 25% of this prediction for both species.
Fig. 4 shows the temperature of the beams vs. nHe,
as measured by the velocity spreads in the longitudi-
nal and transverse directions, as well as the rotational
population distribution (for PbO). For transverse tem-
perature we ﬁt to a distribution of the form ft(v) ∝
e−mAv
/(2kB T ). For longitudinal temperature we use
fl(v) ∝ e−mA(v−vl)
/(2kB T ). Fits of the longitudinal data
to the eﬀusive distribution fl,ef f (v) ∝ v2e−msv
/(2kB T )
were poor, consistent with the partial entrainment of A

2

2

2

2

4

of the A beam into a region of ultra-high vacuum. Under
the conditions described here, this beam source could be
used to load a peak ﬂux of up to 2 × 1011 s−1 Na atoms
into a simple permanent magnet guide such as the type
described in Ref. [7]. An electrostatic guide such as that
described in Ref. [12] could be loaded with a peak ﬂux of
∼ 109 s−1 PbO molecules in the J=1 rotational state, ad-
equate for loading into a microwave [19] or electrostatic
[29] trap. The high ﬂuxes from our source could result in
substantial improvements in atomic and molecular trap-
ping experiments that depend on large initial numbers.

We acknowledge support from the National Science
Foundation under Grant Nos. DMR-0325580 and PHY-
0071311, the Army Research Oﬃce, the W.M. Keck
Foundation, and the David and Lucile Packard Founda-
tion.

[1] Z. T. Lu et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 77, 3331 (1996).
[2] C. Slowe, L. Vernac,

and L. V. Hau (2004),

physics/0407040.

[3] J. Schoser et al., Phys. Rev. A 66, 023410 (2002).
[4] K. Dieckmann, R. J. C. Spreeuw, M. Weidemuller, and
J. T. M. Walraven, Phys. Rev. A 58, 3891 (1998).

[5] P. Cren et al., Eur. Phys. J. D 20, 107 (2002).
[6] R. S. Conroy et al., Opt. Commun. 226 (2003).
[7] E. Nikitin et al., Phys. Rev. A 68, 023403 (2003).
[8] M. Gupta and D. Herschbach, J. Phys. Chem. A 105,

1626 (2001).

[9] H. L. Bethlem, G. Berden,
Phys. Rev. Lett. 83, 1558 (1999).

and G. Meijer,

[10] M. R. Tarbutt et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 92, 173002 (2004).
[11] M. S. Elioﬀ, J. J. Valentini, and D. W. Chandler, Science

302, 1940 (2003).

[12] S. A. Rangwala et al., Phys. Rev. A 67, 043406 (2003).
and P. F. Barker,
I. Bishop,
[13] R. Fulton, A.

Phys. Rev. Lett. 93, 243004 (2004).

[14] L. Santos, G. V. Shlyapnikov, P. Zoller, and M. Lewen-

stein, Phys. Rev. Lett. 85, 1791 (2000).

[15] M. A. Baranov, M. S. Mar’enko, Val. S. Rychkov, and
G. V. Shlyapnikov, Phys. Rev. A 66, 013606 (2002).

[16] M. Baranov et al., Phys. Scr. 102, 74 (2002).
[17] E. L. Raab et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 59, 2631 (1987).
[18] J. G. E. Harris et al., Review of Scientiﬁc Instruments

[19] D. DeMille, D. Glenn, and J. Petricka, Eur. Phys. J. B

[20] H. Bethlem et al., Nature 406, 491 (2000).
[21] R. deCarvalho et al., European Physical Journal D 7, 289

75, 17 (2004).

31, 375 (2004).

(1999).

[22] E. A. Dorko et al., Chem. Phys. 102, 349 (1986).
[23] D. Egorov et al., Phys. Rev. A 63, 030501(R) (2001).
[24] L. Landau and E. Lifshitz, Quantum Mechanics (Non-
relativistic Theory), vol. 3 of Course of Theoretical
Physics (Pergamon Press, 1977), third revised ed.

[25] J. Kim et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 78, 3665 (1997).
[26] B. Friedrich, J. Weinstein, R. deCarvalho, and J. Doyle,

J. Chem. Phys. 110, 2376 (1999).

[27] B. S. Zhao et al., Rev. Sci. Instrum. 75, 146 (2004).

FIG. 4: PbO and Na temperatures as a function of nHe as
determined by ﬁts to spectral proﬁles. “Transverse”, “longi-
tudinal”, and “in cell” refer to the location of the probe laser
(see Fig. 1). Typical errors for the transverse and in cell Na
temperatures are comparable to the marker size.

in the helium ﬂow. For the rotational temperature, we
use Clebsch-Gordan and H¨onl-London factors to deter-
mine the relationship between ﬂuorescence intensity and
initial state population for various rotational lines. The
ratio of initial state populations for 2-3 rotational lines
determine the temperature corresponding to a Boltz-
mann distribution. Our data indicates complete ther-
malization of all detected particles. Note that we observe
no additional cooling below Tb, as would be expected for
entrainment in a fully supersonic He ﬂow.

The beam source described here can be readily adapted
to the needs of a wide range of experiments. For exam-
ple, it can be used for a wide variety of species with
performance similar to that described here. The total
ﬂux depends linearly on the ablation yield N , which for
any given target is diﬃcult to predict a priori. How-
ever, for nearly every species we have tried (here and
in many related experiments), it has been possible to
achieve large values of N by a suitable choice of precursor
material. For example, under operating conditions simi-
lar to those used here, we have obtained N = 1012−1014
for a variety of metal atoms and N = 1011 − 1013 for
many species of diatomic molecules (including radicals)
[25, 26, 27, 28]. In addition–subject to limitations of cool-
ing power or gas load–the source could be run at lower
temperatures, higher repetition rates, or with higher ex-
traction eﬃciency (e.g., by using several separated exit
holes). Our discussion of the beam formation mechanism
makes it straightforward to determine the eﬀects of such
changes.

A key possible improvement to the source would be
the addition of a guide, either magnetic (for paramag-
netic species) or electric (for polar molecules). In both
cases, He is unaﬀected by the guide potential and will
exit through the sides of the guide, allowing extraction

[28] C. I. Hancox et al., Nature 431, 281 (2004).
[29] H. L. Bethlem et al., Phys. Rev. A 65, 053416 (2002).

5

