5
0
0
2
 
p
e
S
 
3
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
m
o
t
a
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
5
0
1
9
0
5
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Pyramidal micro-mirrors for microsystems and atom chips

M. Trupke,∗ F. Ramirez-Martinez, E.A. Curtis, J.P. Ashmore, S. Eriksson, and E.A. Hinds
Blackett Laboratory, Imperial College, Prince Consort Road, London SW7 2BW, United Kingdom

Z. Moktadir, C. Gollasch, and M. Kraft
School of Electronics and Computer Science, Southampton University, Southampton, SO17 1BJ, United Kingdom

G. Vijaya Prakash and J.J. Baumberg
School of Physics and Astronomy, Southampton University, Southampton, SO17 1BJ, United Kingdom

Concave pyramids are created in the (100) surface of a silicon wafer by anisotropic etching in
potassium hydroxide. High quality micro-mirrors are then formed by sputtering gold onto the
smooth silicon (111) faces of the pyramids. These mirrors show great promise as high quality optical
devices suitable for integration into MOEMS and atom chips. We have shown that structures of
this shape can be used to laser-cool and hold atoms in a magneto-optical trap.

PACS numbers: 32.80.Pj Optical cooling of atoms; trapping, 39.25.+k Atom manipulation (scanning probe
microscopy, laser cooling, etc.), 07.10.Cm Micromechanical devices and systems, 81.65.Cf Surface cleaning
and etching

The miniaturization of optical components leads to
higher packaging density and increased speed of devices
that manipulate light. This is part of the vast ﬁeld
of Microsystems technology, designated by Micro-Opto-
Electro-Mechanical Systems (MOEMS), in which elec-
tronic, mechanical, and optical devices are integrated on
the micron scale. As mirrors are fundamental compo-
nents of most optical systems, techniques for the inte-
gration of high-quality mirrors are relevant for the ad-
vancement of this ﬁeld. In the context of atomic physics,
there has been a recent drive to integrate optical elements
with atom chips[1–3] for the purposes of detection and
quantum-coherent manipulation of cold atoms[4, 5]. Just
as pyramidal mirrors have been used[6] to form macro-
scopic magneto-optical traps (MOTs), so these micro-
scopic pyramids may be used to cool and trap an array
of small atom clouds on a chip.

We have fabricated 2-dimensional arrays of micro-
mirrors in silicon using a method that is simple, eco-
nomical, and compatible with MOEMS. We start with a
(100)-oriented silicon wafer, coated with a thin layer of
oxide. Optical lithography is then used to make square
openings in the oxide, through which the silicon can be
etched. We use the anisotropic etchant potassium hy-
droxide (KOH) at a concentration of 25% by volume
and a temperature of 80 ◦C. This attacks the Si(100)
plane more rapidly than the Si(111) plane, resulting in a
pyramidal pit [7] bounded by the four surfaces (1, 1, 1),
(¯1, 1, 1), (1, ¯1, 1) and (¯1, ¯1, 1). Typical resulting pyra-
mids are shown in Fig. 1. The Si(111)- faces of the pyra-
mids are expected to be extremely smooth because of the
layer-by-layer etching mechanism involved[8, 9]. Atomic
force microscope measurements conﬁrm this, giving an
rms surface roughness value of less than 0.5 nm for the
uncoated pyramid faces. This makes them ideal as sub-
strates for high-quality optical mirrors. After stripping

the oxide mask away, a layer of gold of 100 nanometers
thickness is applied to the silicon. Gold was chosen as
it is a good reﬂector for infrared light, but other metals
or dielectric coatings can also be applied. After sputter-
ing gold, the surface roughness increases to 3 nm (rms).
With this amount of roughness one can calculate that the
scattering loss of the specularly reﬂected intensity should
be less than 0.5% in the near-infrared range [10].

FIG. 1: SEM micrographs of the etched and gold-coated pyra-
mids. (a) top view showing pyramids in a rectangular array
with a pitch of 100 µm. (b) Cross-sectional view of a single
pyramid. This was obtained by cleaving the pyramid paral-
lel to one of its edges. The base of the pyramid has a side
of length 30 µm, corresponding to a perpendicular depth of
21.3 µm

Fig. 1 (a) shows a small section of the array viewed un-
der a scanning electron microscope after completion of
the gold coating. In this particular sample, the square
pyramids have 30 µm sides and are arranged in a square
lattice with a pitch of 100 µm. Both the etching and the
sputtering are standard processes that can be accurately
controlled to give reproducible results and to make large
numbers of mirors in a single batch. In the rest of this
paper we analyse and measure directly how the pyramids
respond to polarised and unpolarised light. We also test

2

FIG. 3: (a) Cross section in the x−z plane through a pyramid,
showing type (1) and type (2) trajectories. These involve
reﬂections from mirrors on opposite sides of the pyramid. (b)
View of the entrance aperture of the pyramid, showing the
regions that produce type(1), type (2) and type (3) rays.

rounded edges on the entrance aperture of the pyramid,
which can be seen in Fig. 1 (b).

FIG. 4: Views of the vertex pyramidal mirror under an opti-
cal microscope at 100× magniﬁcation. Top row: Raytracing
simulation. Bottom Row: Photographs. (a) and (d): without
polarisers; (b) and (e): parallel polariser and analyser; (c)
and (f): crossed polariser and analyser.

If a ray is incident near one of the corners of the pyra-
mid, the ﬁrst reﬂection sends it oﬀ towards the opposite
mirror, but it is intercepted and deﬂected by the adja-
cent mirror before the opposite mirror sends it out of the
pyramid as a type (3) ray. These rays make an angle of
31.5◦ with the z axis and form double spots at azimuthal
angles of 36.9◦, 53.1◦, etc. as shown in Fig. 2 (a). These
spots are less distinct than those of type (1) because the
corners of the pyramid are rounded, a feature that does
not aﬀect the type (1) rays. Fig. 2 (b) shows the same
photographed reﬂection pattern, but here the superim-
posed circles indicate the expected position and magni-
tude of spots reﬂected from a pyramid with rounded cor-

FIG. 2: Measured intensity distribution of reﬂected light, at
a distance of 7 cm from the array of pyramids, when it is illu-
minated at normal incidence. A central bright spot, which is
caused by reﬂection from the region between pyramids, was
blocked to improve the visibility of light reﬂected from the
pyramids. The circles in (a) show the reﬂection pattern ex-
pected for a perfect pyramid, while the circles in (b) indicate
the calculated reﬂection pattern for a pyramid with rounded
corners. Size indicates expected relative intensity.

a macroscopic model to show that this silicon pyramid
mirror geometry is suitable for making a MOT.

The sides of the pyramids deﬁne x and y axes, as shown
in Fig. 1. Our ﬁrst test of the mirrors is to illuminate
them with a collimated 1 mm-diameter laser beam (wave-
length 633 nm) propagating along the z axis, i.e. normal
to the silicon surface and along the symmetry axis of
the pyramids. Fig. 2 (a) shows the reﬂected pattern of
light observed on a screen 7 cm away from the mirrors.
On this image we have drawn circles indicating the po-
sition of spots as expected from a perfect pyramid. The
three prominent spots at the corners of the square are
due to doubly reﬂected rays, which we classify as type
(1). These reﬂect from opposite faces of the pyramid, as
illustrated by the solid line in Fig. 3 (a). There should be
a fourth spot at the bottom of the photographs, but this
is blocked by a mount holding the beamsplitter through
which the array is illuminated.

If the angle between opposite mirrors is α, the type (1)
beams make an angle of (π − 2α) with the z axis. From
the angles measured, we ﬁnd that α = (70.6 ± 0.7)◦,
in agreement with the expected angle between opposing
faces of arccos(1/3) = 70.5◦.

When the incident ray is close to the apex of the pyra-
mid (within 1.6 µm for a pyramid of 30 µm base length),
it is reﬂected twice by the ﬁrst mirror, as illustrated by
the dashed line in Fig. 3 (a). These rays, which we call
type (2), should produce secondary spots just inside the
type (1) spots. However, the power in the type (2) re-
ﬂected beams is expected to be 100 times smaller because
of the small area from which they originate, as shown in
Fig. 3 (b). Consequently it is not possible to identify the
type (2) beams clearly against the diﬀracted wings of the
type (1) beams. Furthermore, there is a background of
light along the x- and y-axes caused by reﬂection from

3

reﬂections of the type-1 beams. In the present pyramid
the beams are not orthogonal and there are additional
rays, which could also disturb the balance of forces in the
trap. To test whether it is nonetheless possible to trap
atoms in such a pyramid, we constructed a macroscopic
glass model with a base length of 16.3 mm, coated with
aluminium and a protective layer of Si02. Fig. 5 shows
the ﬂuorescence image from a cloud of atoms trapped in
this pyramid MOT, together with two reﬂections of the
cloud. There are also reﬂections from the top face of the
pyramid and from the edges. In order to assist the eye,
we superimpose the entrance aperture of the pyramid as
a solid line and we show the edges dashed. We have also
built and tested a 90◦ pyramid MOT of similar volume
and with the same coating, and ﬁnd that there is no
signiﬁcant diﬀerence in the number of trapped atoms or
in the stability of the MOT.

In the microscopic version, we anticipate using pyra-
mids with a 200 µm base and will supply the required
magnetic quadrupole ﬁeld using existing microfabrication
methods[1, 11] to produce small current loops around
each pyramid. We estimate that such a MOT can col-
lect as many as 1000 atoms or as few as 1, according
to the choice of operating parameters. Compared with
other methods of creating arrays of microscopic traps on
a chip[12, 13], this relies on a simple fabrication method
and requires only a single input laser beam to give all the
necessary trapping beams. It has been shown that Bose-
Einstein condensation can be achieved on atom chips,
both with current-carrying wire traps[14] and with per-
manent magnet traps [15]. Consequently it may be pos-
sible to create an array of condensates loaded from these
MOTs. Alternatively, if there is just one atom per site,
the array would have possible applications in quantum
information processing[4].

Further potential applications for the pyramids are in
the areas of photonics and telecommunications. For ex-
ample, by ﬁlling the pits with ferroelectric material or
liquid crystals and applying an electric ﬁeld, it may be
possible to use the pyramids as fast optical switches.

In summary, we have designed, fabricated and char-
acterized a new type of micro-mirror, produced by
anisotropic etching through square apertures on a silicon
single crystal. As an elementary component for optics,
the micro-mirror has a variety of possible applications
in MOEMS devices. We have demonstrated that it is
possible to form a magneto-optical trap with this mirror
geometry, making these pyramids very promising for
creating arrays of microscopic traps on atom chips.
Detailed experiments and further theoretical analysis
are currently under way to develop these applications.

We acknowledge support from the UK EPSRC Basic
Technology, QIPIRC, and Physics programmes and from
the FASTNET and Atom Chips networks of the Euro-
pean Commission.

FIG. 5: Fluorescence image of 1.6 × 108 atoms magneto-
◦
optically trapped in a 70.5
pyramid. Two reﬂections are
also visible. The 16.3 mm aperture of the pyramid (solid line)
and its sloping edges (dashed lines) have been added to guide
the eye of the reader. The outline of the incident laser beam
is shown dotted. Some light is scattered from the edges of the
pyramid and from the plane outside.

ners. The roundness is included in the ray-tracing model
by four additional surfaces at each corner. These are
shaped to form approximate cone sections with radii of
2.5 µm at the base and 0.825 µm at the apex of the pyra-
mid. The resulting reﬂection pattern closely matches the
photographed intensity distribution.

The three types of ray described above also present
diﬀerent characteristics when observed using polarised
light. Type (1) reﬂections leave the linear polarisation of
the light unchanged, whereas the type (3) reﬂections pro-
duce rotations of ±53◦ or ±78◦. This is investigated in
our second test of the mirrors, in which we examine them
with white light under an optical microscope, illuminat-
ing them once again along the z axis. Fig. 4 (a) shows
the image calculated by ray-tracing for unpolarised light
with the microscope focussed in the plane of the apex
of a perfect pyramid. In this ﬁgure most of the area is
bright. In ﬁg. 4 (b) we show the expected image for lin-
early polarised light, viewed through a parallel analyser,
which suppresses the type (3) contribution. This leads
to a reduction in the intensity of reﬂections from the cor-
ner region. In Fig. 4 (c), the analyser is crossed with the
polariser and only type (3) rays contribute, making the
corner region bright. The intensity patterns observed in
the laboratory are shown in ﬁgures 4 (d), 4 (e), and 4 (f).
They correspond closely to the calculated distributions,
indicating that the pyramid reﬂects light as expected.

Our immediate application for these structures is to
build an array of small magneto-optical traps, integrated
into an atom chip in a single additional etching step. As
in a 90◦ pyramid MOT[6], lateral conﬁnement is given by
the ﬁrst reﬂections of the type-1 beams, while the vertical
trapping forces arise from the input beam and the second

∗

Electronic address: michael.trupke@imperial.ac.uk\\
[1] R. Folman, P. Krueger, J. Schmiedmayer, J. Denschlag,
and C. Henkel, Adv. At. Mol. Opt. Phys. 48 (2002).
[2] S. Eriksson, M. Trupke, H. F. Powell, D. Sahagun,
C. D. J. Sinclair, E. A. Curtis, B. E. Sauer, E. A. Hinds,
Z. Moktadir, C. O. Gollasch, et al., Eur. Phys J.D 35,
135 (2005).

[3] M. Trupke, E. A. Hinds, S. Eriksson, E. A. Cur-
and M. Kraft,

tis, Z. Moktadir, E. Kukarenka,
arXiv:physics/0506234 (2005).

[4] S. Scheel, J. Pachos, E. A. Hinds, and P. L. Knight,

arXiv:quant-ph/0403152 (2004).

[5] P. Horak, B. Klappauf, A. Haase, R. Folman, J. Schmied-
mayer, P. Domokos, , and E. A. Hinds, Phys. Rev. A 67,
043806 (2003).

[6] K. I. Lee, J. A. Kim, H. R. Noh, and W. Jhe, Opt. Lett.

21, 1177 (1996).

[7] R. Brendel, in Proc. 14th European Photovoltaic Solar
Energy Conference, edited by H. A. Ossenbrink, P. Helm,
and H. Ehmann (Stephens, Bedford, 1997), p. 1354.

4

[8] Z. Moktadir and H. Camon, Modell. Simul. Mater. Sci.

Eng. 5, 481 (1997).

[9] K. Sato, M. Shikida, T. Yamashiro, M. Tsunekawa, and

S. Ito, Sens. and Actuat. A 73, 122 (1999).

[10] P. Beckmann and A. Spizzichino, The Scattering of
Electromagnetic Waves from Rough Surfaces (Pergamon
Press, 1963).

[11] S. Eriksson, F. Ramirez-Martinez, E. A. Curtis, B. E.
Sauer, P. W. Nutter, E. W. Hill, and E. A. Hinds, Appl.
Phys. B 79, 811 (2004).

[12] A. Grabowski and T. Pfau, Eur. Phys. J. D 22, 347

(2003).

[13] E. A. Hinds, in Atomic Physics 17, edited by E. Ari-
mondo, P. D. Natale, and M. Inguscio (AIP, New York,
2001), vol. 551 of AIP Conference Proceedings, pp. 405–
413.

[14] H. Ott, J. Fortagh, G. Schlotterbeck, A. Grossmann, and
C. Zimmermann, Phys. Rev. Lett. 87, 230401 (2001).
[15] C. D. J. Sinclair, E. A. Curtis, I. Llorente-Garcia, J. A.
Retter, B. V. Hall, S. Eriksson, B. E. Sauer, and E. A.
Hinds, arXiv:physics/0503619 (2005), to appear Phys.
Rev. A.

