5
0
0
2
 
p
e
S
 
8
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
m
o
t
a
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
9
3
2
9
0
5
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

A High Temperature Calium Vapor Cell for Spetrosopy on the

Interombination Line

4s2 1

S0 to

4s4p 3

P1

Christopher J. Erikson, Brian Neyenhuis, Dallin S. Durfee

Department of Physis and Astronomy and

∗

Brigham Young University, Provo, UT 84602

We have demonstrated a high temperature vapor ell for absorption spetrosopy on the Ca inter-

ombination line. The ell uses a dual hamber design to ahieve the high temperatures neessary

for an optially dense vapor while avoiding the neessity of high temperature vauum valves and

glass-to-metal seals. We have observed over 50 perent absorption in a single pass through the

ell. Although pressure broadening in the ell prevented us from performing saturated-absorption

spetrosopy, the broadening resulted in higher signal-to-noise ratios by allowing us to probe the

2
atoms with intensities muh greater than the 0.2µW/m

transition.

saturation intensity of the unbroadened

INTRODUCTION

a simple vapor ell. Even with these tehniques it an

still be di(cid:30)ult to produe the needed densities for spe-

Vapor ells are often a very onvenient soure of atoms

trosopy on the interombination line. Before deiding to

for various spetrosopi measurements. Although they

onstrut a high-temperature alium vapor ell we tried

su(cid:27)er from relatively large Doppler shifts ompared to

to measure absorption on the interombination line in a

laser-ooled or beam soures, they are typially very

speially designed high-density disharge ell but did not

simple and inexpensive devies and an often produe

detet any signi(cid:28)ant absorption. From measurements on

muh larger optial densities than other more ompli-

ated shemes. Vapor ells are widely used, and have

been for some time. Most alkali-atom based laser ool-

the 423 nm resonane line we determined that this ell

produed a ground state density of 9 × 1011

atoms/m

3

.

In a single pass through the 10 m disharge this should

result in less than 1% absorption on the interombination

ing experiments utilize vapor ells to lok the ooling

and probing lasers to the atomi transition. These vapor

line.

ells typially onsist of a glass vessel ontaining a small

amount of alkali metal whih is heated with a low power

VAPOR CELL DESIGN

heater or simply by ontat with the room-temperature

environment to produe an optially thik vapor.

Alkaline-earth spetrosopy has gained onsiderable

tors to onsider. The (cid:28)rst is the length of the vapor ell.

When designing a vapor ell there are several key fa-

interest in the past years, in part due to the use of the

alium 4s2 1

S0 to 4s4p 3

P1 interombination transition

to realize optial frequeny standards. As suh there has

A longer ell will result in higher absorption at a given

temperature. We deided that we wanted a relatively

ompat ell and deided to (cid:28)x the length of the olumn

been interest in reating simple soures of alkaline-earth

of vapor to be about 10 m. As disussed below, the total

vapors to use as referenes for these experiments. In our

length of the vauum hamber is a longer length of 51 m

ase we wanted to have a relatively simply alium soure

to limit heat (cid:29)ow away from the vapor and to allow the

for use in a laser lok for an exited state laser ooling

ends of the hamber to be ool enough to mount to our

sheme and in order to (cid:28)nd the frequenies of the modes

optial table. To simplify the use of the ell we deided

of a high-stability optial avity relative to the alium

to design the ell to ahieve our target of 50% absorption

interombination line.

in a single pass through the ell, although the windows in

Unfortunately the vapor pressures of the alkaline-earth

the ell are large enough to aommodate multiple passes

elements are onsiderably lower than those of the alkali

through the ell.

atoms. Furthermore, the narrowness of the interom-

Given a ell length of t =10 m and a target of 50% ab-

bination line ompared to the Doppler broadening of a

sorption we an alulate the required density of atoms in

near-room temperature vapor results in a very small ef-

the ell using Beer's law. Beer's law states that the fra-

fetive absorption ross setion, requiring high atomi

densities in order to ahieve appreiable absorption. As

suh, produing an optially dense vapor in a thermal ell

requires vapors at temperatures whih are inompatible

with standard vauum tehnology.

tion of light transmitted through the ell when our laser

is on resonane should be equal to exp(−nσ
t) where
n is the density of atoms and t is the length of the ell.
The e(cid:27)etive ross setion, σ
ral absorption ross setion σ0 = 3λ2/2π beause, due to

, is lower than the natu-

e(cid:27)

e(cid:27)

There are many ways to ahieve higher optial densi-

Doppler broadening, only a small fration of the atoms

ties, suh as the use of an eletri disharge [1, 2℄. But

will be in resonane with the laser light at any given

these shemes tend to be muh more ompliated than

time. When the laser is on resonane, only those atoms

2

whih have a Doppler shift less than about one natural

be used on the outer hamber. And beause the outer

line width will satter signi(cid:28)ant amounts of light, and

hamber is evauated, the seals between the inner ham-

you would expet that the e(cid:27)etive ross setion should

ber and outer hamber don't have to be vauum tight

be lower than the natural ross setion by a fator of the

in order to maintain vauum in the inner hamber. The

order of the ratio of the natural line width to the Doppler

only requirement on the seals between the inner and outer

broadened line width.

hambers is that they leak alium vapor at a su(cid:30)iently

Beause the Doppler broadening in our ell is muh

low rate to allow the ell to operate for a long time with-

larger than both the natural line width Γ and the laser
line width, the e(cid:27)etive on-resonane ross setion σ
approximately equal to σ0Γλ(m/32πkBT )1/2
where λ is
the resonant wavelength of the transition, m is the mass
of an atom, kB is Boltzmann's onstant, and T is the
temperature of the vapor. In this limit σ

does not de-

e(cid:27)

is

e(cid:27)

out maintenane.

A sheme similar to our two-hamber design is dis-

ussed in [3℄. In this design there was no seal between

the inner and outer hambers, but long narrow tubes are

used to limit alium di(cid:27)usion out of the hot inner ham-

ber. Beause the inner hamber is evauated through

pend on the laser line width. Although the e(cid:27)etive ross

these tubes no high temperature valve was required. Op-

setion is temperature dependent, it is only mildly so (cid:22)

tial aess to the vapor was also done through these

it varies by only 18% as the vapor goes from 500◦
800◦

C. As suh, to estimate the required temperature we

fusion rate of alium out of the inner hamber results in

an alulate the e(cid:27)etive ross setion at some reason-

rapid fogging of the outer hamber windows. This was

C to

tubes, making window seals unneessary. The large dif-

able temperature and then treat it as a onstant. For a

alium vapor at 500◦
setion for the interombination line is 8.8 × 10−20

2

m

.

C, the e(cid:27)etive on-resonane ross

With this ross setion, to get 10% absorption in a ol-

umn of vapor 10 m long requires a density of 1.2 × 1013

overome in [3℄ using mirrors inside the outer vauum to

de(cid:29)et the light to windows whih were away from the di-

ret line-of-sight of the inner ell. These mirrors quikly

oated with alium, whih re(cid:29)eted the light reasonably

well. We hose not to implement this design for two rea-

atoms per ubi m. This is aomplished by a alium

sons. First, we expet that alium oated mirrors would

vapor in equilibrium with solid alium at 522◦
50% absorption, a density of 7.9 × 1013
m is needed, requiring a temperature of 587◦

C.

C. For

have a tendeny to oxidize when the hamber is vented

atoms per ubi

to reload it with alium. Seond, and more ritial, the

di(cid:27)usion rate of alium through these tubes is rather

The onstrution of a vapor ell for spetrosopy on the

large (cid:22) in the tests reported in [3℄ the ell ran for only

◦

alium interombination transition is non-trivial due to

3 days running at 460

C using an unspei(cid:28)ed amount of

the relatively high temperature required and the sarity

alium. To avoid the trouble of ontinually reloading

of vauum omponents whih an operate at these tem-

the ell we designed a ell whih uses windows to seal

peratures. Beause the alium will tend to aumulate

the alium into the inner hamber.

at the oldest point in the ell, the oldest point will

Our goal for the ell was to maintain a vapor dense

eventually determine the vapor pressure in the ell. In

enough to ahieve 10% absorption for over 1000 hours

order to prevent fogging of the windows, the ell's win-

with an initial load of 5 grams of alium. This implies a

dows should be kept onsiderably hotter than the tem-

maximum allowable leak rate whih is equivalent that of

perature of the vapor. As suh, produing a 587◦

2
a hole with a ross setion of about 1 mm

C va-

. While this is a

por requires portions of the ell to be onsiderably hotter

very large hole by vauum standards, it does require some

than 587◦

C. A blown glass ell would beome soft and

are to be taken. For example, the two 20-mm diameter

ollapse at the required temperatures. The most om-

windows in our design have a ombined irumferene of

monly used metal to metal or glass to metal seals an

13 m. If the average distane between the edge of the

only be baked up to about 450◦

C. The only inexpensive

windows and the mating surfae is greater than 8 µm,

and highly reliable way to make metal to metal vauum

the alium leak rate will be too large. Looser require-

seals at these temperatures are to weld or braze ompo-

ments ould be ahieved simply by loading the ell with

nents together. In order to evauate the hamber, a high

more alium. But this would inrease the ost of oper-

temperature valve is also required. Commerially avail-

ating the ell and inrease the risk that over time enough

able high-temperature valves are relatively expensive and

of the alium leaking out of the inner hamber would

typially annot be baked above 450◦

C.

ondense on the outer hamber windows to signi(cid:28)antly

To get around the expense and limitations of avail-

redue their transpareny.

able high-temperature vauum omponents, we deided

Our design is shown in Fig. 1. In this design the in-

to use a two-hamber design. In this design the hot al-

ner hamber is sandwihed between the two halves of the

ium vapor is ontained within an inner hamber whih

outer hamber. The inner hamber is 10 m in length,

is surrounded by an outer hamber. Beause the vapor

and 5.1 m in diameter. This diameter was hosen to

is ontained in the inner hamber, the entire outer ham-

aommodate the mounting of 20-mm diameter windows

ber does not have to be held at high temperatures. This

on the ends of the inner hamber. Eah half of the outer

allows simple ommerially available seals and valves to

hamber is 20 m long to allow the far ends of the ell

3

between the windows and a (cid:29)at steel mating surfae. The

window is then ompressed by a metal ring held down

with three bolts. The opper gaskets have beveled edges

to reate a knife-edge ontat on eah side of the gas-

ket, similar to the gaskets used in the Kasevih seal [4℄

but with no attempt to obtain a vauum-tight juntion.

Sapphire windows were (cid:28)rst used, but even when held at

◦

a temperature over 100

C hotter than the alium va-

por they quikly fogged over (possibly due to a hemial

reation). We eventually swithed to alium (cid:29)uoride

windows, whih have not shown any signi(cid:28)ant fogging

and whih have a thermal expansion oe(cid:30)ient whih is

a muh better math to stainless steel and opper.

The ell is heated by two band heaters at the loation

of the windows and by a high temperature heat tape

wrapped around a ylindrial aluminum sleeve whih is

slid over the opper tube. The maximum temperatures

that the ell an maintain are set by the maximum rated

temperatures of the heaters. The band heaters an be

heated as high as 800◦
to 740◦

C. The heat tape is rated to go up

C, su(cid:30)ient to produe atomi vapors with nearly

100% absorption. If not wrapped properly, however, heat

tape an generate (cid:16)hot spots(cid:17) and fail. As suh we ran

the heat tape onservatively, well below the maximum

rated temperature.

FIG. 1: Diagram of the high temperature vapor ell. Diagram

The inner hamber is wrapped in several layers of high-

is to sale.

temperature (cid:28)berglass insulation and aluminum foil. The

to be relatively ool ompared to the temperature of the

C during operation of the

inner hamber. The outer ell uses standard o(cid:27)-the-shelf

ell. This allows us to seal the ends of the ell with stan-

outer hamber is not insulated, resulting in large temper-

ature gradients suh that the far ends of the ell are at a

temperature of less than 100◦

metal-to-metal (cid:29)anges with opper gaskets, and the win-

dard vauum viewports and makes it possible to mount

dows on the outer ell are standard ommerial vauum

the ell to our optis table without generating a signif-

windows.

iant heat load. Sine standard vauum seals are used,

To evauate the ell, one half of the outer hamber

we were able to easily add a vauum (cid:16)T(cid:17) to one side of

is onneted to a vauum pump through a valve. The

the outer hamber in order to aommodate a vauum

two halves of the outer hamber are onneted by a 5/16

gauge.

inh steel tube, allowing them to both be evauated at

After loading alium into the ell the ell

is (cid:28)rst

the same time. The inner hamber was onneted to

heated using just the two band heaters, ensuring that the

the outer hamber through a long (cid:29)exible steel tube on-

windows are the hottest parts of the inner hamber and

neted to a short piee of opper tubing whih is brazed

thus preventing alium build-up on the windows. Even-

into a plate at the top of the inner hamber (see Fig. 1).

tually the alium migrates to the older opper tube and

After evauating the inner ell through this opper tube,

the vapor density drops. After this migration ours we

we pinh the tube o(cid:27) using a pinh-o(cid:27) tool ommonly

typially operate the ell with the band heaters (cid:28)xed at

used by plumbers to rapidly seal water leaks in opper

C and use the heat tape to ontrol the alium vapor

750◦

tubing. We found that on a lean piee of opper this tool

pressure.

reates a vauum-tight seal as long as the tool remains on

the tube. To reate a permanent seal, before removing

the tool we ut the tube o(cid:27) just above the pinh and (cid:28)ll

RESULTS

the stub with silver solder. The opper tube was made

long enough to allow us to do the pinh-o(cid:27) proedure

A typial absorption spetrum from our ell is shown in

several times before we have to braze a new tube into

Fig. 2. All of our absorption data was taken using a grat-

the ell.

ing stabilized diode laser of the design desribed in [5℄. A

Two windows separate the inner hamber from the two

portion of the laser light was sent to a referene etalon to

halves of the outer hamber. To reate a tight enough seal

measure how far the laser was sanned when taking ab-

to ontain the alium vapor, a opper gasket is plaed

sorption spetra. To verify the alibration of the etalon's

i

i

n
o
s
s
m
s
n
a
r
T

 
t
n
e
c
r
e
P

100

80

60

40

20

4

sured on the referene etalon and used this (cid:28)t to onvert

the time axis for eah of our sans into a alibrated fre-

queny axis orreted for the nonlinear san of the laser's

frequeny in time (See Fig. 2). Finally, we orreted for

etaloning e(cid:27)ets due to the windows in the ell by (cid:28)tting

the very edges of the absorption signal, where essentially

no absorption ourred, to a seond order polynomial.

We subtrated the polynomial from the absorption san

and then normalized the san so that the leftmost edge

was equal to 1.

To test the longevity of the ell we loaded the ell with

only 0.5 grams of alium and ran the ell for over 60

hours at high enough temperatures to produe between

30 and 50 perent absorption. Beause the rate at whih

alium leaks out of the inner ell is proportional to the

density of the vapor, we an onlude that the amount of

alium whih leaked out of the inner hamber while we

ran the ell is equivalent to the leakage that would our

−3

−2

−1

0
1
frequency (GHz)

2

3

FIG. 2: Absorption spetra. The blak line at the top of

while operating the ell for over 200 hours at a lower

the (cid:28)gure is the measured transmission through the avity

temperature to produe 10% peak absorption, suggesting

as a funtion of the detuning of the laser from the enter of

that we have surpassed our design goal of 1000 hours with

the interombination line.

It is drawn over a thiker grey

line whih shows the alulated absorption for a 10 m long

5 grams of alium.

olumn of Ca vapor at a temperature of 750

C (the tempera-

We have ompared our absorption data to a model of

ture of the hottest parts of the inner ell) but with a density

the expeted absorption pro(cid:28)le. We (cid:28)rst started with

onsistent with a solid soure of alium whih is at 580

C.

a model whih had just one free parameter, the tem-

Superposed on this graph is the transmission through the ref-

perature of the vapor. Assuming that the temperature

erene etalon (the blak line with three sharp peaks at the

of the solid alium (whih ats as the soure for the

bottom of the graph) whih we used to measure how far our

laser had sanned. Above the referene etalon trae in grey

alium vapor) was similar to the temperature of the

is the transmission through the ultra-stable high-(cid:28)nesse av-

vapor, we expeted that this one parameter would de-

ity who's modes we measured relative to the absorption line

sribe both the Doppler width of the absorption urve

using our vapor ell.

as well as the density of the vapor (whih, along with

◦

◦

the Doppler width, determines the on-resonane absorp-

tion). Although this simplest model produed reasonably

free-spetral range, we sanned the laser frequeny over

good results on our earliest data, after running the ell

a large range suh that we ould ompare the etalon to a

for several hours the measured absorption urves beame

ommerial wavelength meter. This measurement agreed

notieably wider than the urves predited by our model.

with the manufaturer's spei(cid:28)ed free-spetral range of 2

The fat that our single-parameter model does not (cid:28)t

GHz to within 0.5%.

most of our data well is not surprising. One would ex-

A beam splitter positioned just before the light entered

pet that one all of the solid alium had migrated into

the ell direted a portion of the beam to a photo-diode so

the opper tube, whih is at a signi(cid:28)antly lower tem-

that we ould reord a laser intensity referene to normal-

perature than the rest of the inner hamber, a somewhat

ize away hanges in the laser intensity during the san.

more ompliated two-parameter model would be needed.

Upon exiting the ell the light passed through a pair of

In this model the temperature of the solid alium, whih

interferene (cid:28)lters to blok the blakbody radiation from

ats as the soure of the vapor, and the e(cid:27)etive temper-

the ell. The light level was then deteted on a photo-

ature of the vapor were entered as separate free param-

diode. During eah san a digital osillosope reorded

eters. We also tried (cid:28)tting our data to a Voigt pro(cid:28)le

the light power before the ell, the light power after the

model whih inluded a third free parameter to inlude

ell, and the amount of light passing through the refer-

possible e(cid:27)ets of pressure broadening.

ene etalon. To remove stray-light bakground levels, a

Our two-parameter model (cid:28)ts the data reasonably well

seond set of traes were reorded with the light bloked

when we assume that the temperature of the vapor is

near the laser.

lose to the temperature of the windows (see Fig. 2). Al-

To proess the data we (cid:28)rst subtrated the bakground

though we don't know the preise temperature at the lo-

from the sans of the laser power before and after the ell.

ation of the solid alium, from measurements at the top

We then divided the absorption signal at eah point in

and bottom of the opper tube we have a range of possible

time by the intensity referene. Next we alulated a

temperatures. From the urve (cid:28)ts to our data it is appar-

paraboli (cid:28)t to the loation in time of eah peak mea-

ent that the density of the vapor is onsistent with this

5

range of temperatures. When we add pressure broaden-

light through the ell and make huge improvements in

ing to our model it was very obvious that the Voigt pro(cid:28)le

the signal-to-noise ratio. At these intensities our prini-

did not have the same shape as the data unless the pres-

ple noise soure was the digitization noise of the digital

sure broadening was assumed to be less than 100 MHz.

osillosope whih we used to aquire data, and with little

This implies that most of the disagreement between our

e(cid:27)ort we aquired lean enough data to (cid:28)nd the enter of

simple one-parameter model and the measured urves is

the Doppler-broadened line within the required 10 MHz.

due to the higher temperature of the vapor rather than

With our high-stability optial avity we determined that

pressure broadening. Beause 100 MHz is muh smaller

the enter of the line did not shift measurably over the

than the Doppler width we an only asertain an upper

range of temperatures used in the ell. For us the only

limit on pressure broadening through urve (cid:28)tting. We

disadvantage of pressure broadening was the fat that we

have determined a lower limit on pressure broadening by

were unable to reah the inreased saturation intensity

observing an inrease in the saturation intensity; at the

with our ~1 mW laser beam and were therefore unable

ell temperatures used to take the data in Fig. 2 we

to perform saturated-absorption spetrosopy.

found that using all of the power from our laser we ould

inrease the intensity of our light to over 10,000 times the

saturation intensity for a ollision-free gas without seeing

CONCLUSIONS

any signi(cid:28)ant redution in absorption, implying a lower

limit on the pressure broadening of several MHz.

We have demonstrated a high-temperature two-

Beause the pressure-broadened width is signi(cid:28)antly

smaller the Doppler width, a simpler absorption model

hambered vapor ell for absorption spetrosopy on the

alium 4s2 1

S0 to 4s4p 3

P1 interombination transition.

whih does not inlude pressure broadening is still quite

We have ahieved high absorption and a long lifetime

aurate. This makes data analysis muh faster, avoiding

using a fairly simple and very robust design, without

repetitive alulations of the integral in the Voigt pro(cid:28)le

needing to use expensive or ompliated high tempera-

to optimise a urve (cid:28)t. The simple model works beause

ture seals or valves. Although the seals between the two

the area under the absorption urve of a pressure broad-

hambers do not need to be vauum tight, we have found

ened gas is independent of the amount of broadening.

that are must be taken in order to a keep the alium

This an be shown without any knowledge of what the

loss rate reasonably small. Signi(cid:28)ant pressure broaden-

atoms are olliding with, what the ollision frequeny is,

ing in the ell has been used to our advantage, allowing

or even whether the line shape is Lorentzian or if the

higher light intensities to be used, thereby improving the

impat approximation applies. We only need to assume

quality of our data.

that ollisions only result in phase shifts with no diret

exitation or de-exitation. From the atom's frame it is

Sott Bergeson, Wes Li(cid:27)erth, and Rebea Tang. This

equivalent to think of the laser (cid:28)eld's phase, rather than

work was supported by a grant from the Researh Cor-

We would like to aknowledge the ontributions of

the atom's phase, as hanging during the ollision, result-

poration.

ing in a light (cid:28)eld whih is e(cid:27)etively frequeny broad-

ened. As suh, pressure broadening an be thought of as

the redistribution of optial power to di(cid:27)erent frequen-

ies (from the perspetive of the atom) with the total

∗

power in the light (cid:28)eld remaining onstant.

Eletroni address: dallin_durfeebyu.edu

Pressure broadening in our ell is a disadvantage if

[1℄ R. L. Cavasso-Filho, A. Mirage, A. Salabrin, D. Pereira,

preise loation of the atomi transition frequeny is re-

and F. C. Cruz, J. Opt. So. Am. B, 18, 1922-1927 (2001).

quired. But for our purpose of (cid:28)nding the frequenies

[2℄ D. Hansen and A. Hemmerih, Phys. Rev. A, 72, 022502

of the modes of an ultra-stable high-(cid:28)nesse avity rela-

(2005).

[3℄ M.-S. Huanga, M.-H. Lu, and J.-T. Shy, Rev. Si. In-

tive to the absorption line we only needed to (cid:28)nd the top

strum., 73, 3747-3749 (2002).

of the absorption line to an auray of about 10 MHz.

[4℄ A. Noble and M. Kasevih, Rev. Si. Intrum., 65, 3042-3-

And beause the saturation intensity of ollisionless al-

42 (1994).

ium vapor is just 0.2µW/m

2

, the inreased saturation

[5℄ R. Merrill, R. Olson, S. Bergeson, and D.S. Durfee, Appl.

intensity due to ollisions allows us to send muh more

Opt., 43, 3910-3914 (2004).

