5
0
0
2
 
p
e
S
 
7
 
 
]
h
p
-
m
o
t
a
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
6
5
0
9
0
5
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

,

Coherent control with shaped femtosecond laser pulses applied to ultracold molecules

Wenzel Salzmann, Ulrich Poschinger, Roland Wester, and Matthias Weidem¨uller∗
Physikalisches Institut, Universit¨at Freiburg, Hermann Herder Str. 3, D-79104 Freiburg i. Br.

Andrea Merli, Stefan M. Weber, Franziska Sauer, Mateusz Plewicki, Fabian
Weise, Aldo Mirabal Esparza, Ludger W¨oste, and Albrecht Lindinger†
Institut f¨ur Experimentalphysik, Freie Universit¨at Berlin, Arnimallee 14, D-14195 Berlin, Germany

We report on coherent control of excitation processes of translationally ultracold rubidium dimers
in a magneto-optical trap by using shaped femtosecond laser pulses. Evolution strategies are applied
in a feedback loop in order to optimize the photoexcitation of the Rb2 molecules, which subsequently
undergo ionization or fragmentation. A superior performance of the resulting pulses compared to
unshaped pulses of the same pulse energy is obtained by distributing the energy among speciﬁc
spectral components. The demonstration of coherent control to ultracold ensembles opens a path
to actively inﬂuence fundamental photo-induced processes in molecular quantum gases.

PACS numbers: 32.80.Qk, 33.80.-b, 82.53.-k

The goal to study interactions in ultracold molecular
gases [1], with its perspectives for quantum computa-
tion [2], quantum scattering [3], ultrahigh precision spec-
troscopy [4], and coherent ultracold chemistry [5], is pro-
pelling various research programs to produce and trap
dense ultracold molecular ensembles [6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11].
The manipulation of molecular wavepacket dynamics
with shaped femtosecond pulses may open exciting possi-
bilities to this ﬁeld. In recent years, the control of molec-
ular processes by shaped fs-laser pulses through appli-
cation of evolution strategies in a feedback loop has at-
tained considerable success. Since it was proposed [12],
it has been applied to a large variety of experiments,
i.e. selective fragmentation [13], population transfer [14],
ionization [15], and high harmonic generation [16]. By
using an iterative process, the method enables the dis-
covery of an optimal laser pulse shape which drives the
system towards a desired target state. It even became
possible to gain information about the laser-molecule in-
teraction itself [15], as the optimal pulse shape carries,
upon combination with the system Hamiltonian, all the
information about the underlying molecular dynamics.

Theoretical work on photoassociation with pulsed
lasers has started several years ago [17] and ﬁrst experi-
ments with thermal mercury atoms in a gas cell [18] and
with sodium atoms in a magneto-optical trap [19] have
been performed. More recently, optimal control calcu-
lations were done proposing eﬃcient ultracold molecule
formation [20] and vibrational cooling [21] by appropri-
ately shaped laser pulses. However, up to now there are
no experimental results on the application of feedback-
controlled optimization to photoassociation or manipula-
tion of ultracold molecules. We address this question in
this letter and present an investigation of the interaction
of femtosecond laser pulses with ultracold ground state
molecules in view of a pulsed photoassociation experi-

ment. In particular, we demonstrate the enhancement of
the electronic excitation and subsequent fragmentation
of ultracold molecules from a magneto-optical trap using
shaped femtosecond laser pulses, which were adaptively
optimized by an evolutionary algorithm.

In our experimental setup (Fig. 1), about 107 85Rb
atoms are captured in a magneto-optical trap (MOT) at a
density of 1010 atoms/cm3. Diatomic rubidium molecules
are continuously produced predominantly in the triplet
electronic ground state in the MOT [22, 23]. The Rb2
molecules are detected via resonant two photon ioniza-
tion and time-of-ﬂight mass analysis. The ionization
laser is a 15 Hz Nd:YAG pumped dye laser that has a
spectral width of 0.5 cm−1 and a pulse energy of 20 mJ.
Rb+
2 molecules are observed at dye laser wavelengths be-
tween 600 and 610 nm with a maximum count rate of 0.5
molecules per pulse at 602.5 nm.

The femtosecond (fs) laser pulses are generated in a
Ti:Sapphire oscillator (Tsunami; Spectra Physics) that
provides pulses of 120 fs duration (FWHM) at a rate of
80 MHz, a spectral width of ∆λ = 10 nm and an energy
up to 18 nJ per pulse. Low pulse energies ensure that
the laser-molecule interaction is well described in a per-
turbative picture and no high intensity eﬀects have to
be considered. To modify the spectral components of
the pulses we use a pulse shaper that allows indepen-
dent phase and amplitude modulation [24].
It consists
of a liquid crystal modulator (CRI; SLM-256) [25] with
2x128 pixels, placed in the Fourier plane of a double grat-
ing zero dispersion compressor. A lens focuses the beam
to a spot of 150 µm diameter at the center of the trap,
illuminating about 10% of the cloud volume. For the ex-
periments the fs-laser is tuned in the range between 780
and 820 nm.

Transform-limited fs-pulses with wavelengths near the
Rb resonance lines and focused into the MOT are found

2

0.6 nJ. As only molecules in the electronic ground state
are detected, the signal reduction has to be attributed
either to excitation or redistribution in the ground state
by Raman processes.
In the latter case, the molecules
can end up outside the detection laser bandwidth which
would lead to a signal reduction. Scans of the detection
laser with and without fs-beam show reduced but quali-
tatively similar spectra which should not be the case for a
vibrational redistribution. The linear behavior at low en-
ergies indicates a one-photon excitation of the molecules
by the laser pulses [26].

According to [22], the molecules in the MOT initially
populate the highest levels in the a3Σ+
u state. Due to se-
lection rules and Franck-Condon factors, they are prefer-
ably excited to the 0−
g and 1g 5s5p1/2 states (see Fig. 3).
It can be expected that excited molecules absorb further
photons, so the whole process of molecular loss can be
regarded as a resonance enhanced multi-photon excita-
tion, followed by dissociation, predissociation or ioniza-
tion. This happens either within one pulse, or, as the
laser repetition rate is comparable to the lifetime of the
ﬁrst excited state, it occurs in the subsequent pulse. At
high energies all molecules in the laser focus are excited
or dissociated and the residual signal in Fig. 2 is due to
molecules which did not interact with the femtosecond
laser. This shows that most of the molecules are pro-
duced within a small volume inside the MOT which is
consistent with the picture that they form at the MOT
center where the atom number density is at its maximum
[27].

In order to demonstrate the practical applicability of
coherent control concepts to ultracold molecules, the
Rb+
2 signal acts as an input for the self-learning optimiza-
tion algorithm which autonomously programs the pulse

FIG. 2: Reduction of the Rb+
2 molecular ion signal as function
of transform limited femtosecond pulse energy. The pulses
have a central wavelength of 800 nm and 10 nm FWHM. The
D1 atomic resonance at 795 nm is ﬁltered out of the pulse.
The ionization laser for REMPI is set to 602.6 nm.

FIG. 1: Experimental setup for iterative closed-loop maxi-
mization of ultracold Rb2 excitation from the ground elec-
tronic singlet or triplet states by shaped femtosecond laser
pulses. The ultracold molecules are formed in a magneto-
optically trapped gas of rubidium atoms. The laser pulse
shapes represent individuals of an evolutionary algorithm.
Their ﬁtness is evaluated by the reduction of the Rb+
2 sig-
nal resulting from resonantly enhanced photoionization of the
Rb2 molecules.

to strongly interact with the trapped atoms, as observed
through a signiﬁcant decrease of MOT ﬂuorescence. At
small pulse energies, the trap loading rate outside the
femtosecond beam can partly compensate for the losses
in the focus, resulting in an area of reduced ﬂuorescence
predominantly where the beam is passing, whereas for
high energies the trap is completely depleted. We at-
tribute this to photon scattering from the femtosecond
pulses, which causes an outward directed light force on
the atoms, leading to trap loss. The eﬀect is signiﬁcantly
stronger when the D2 atomic resonance at 780 nm was
part of the pulse spectrum than for the D1 resonance at
795 nm, reﬂecting the higher transition dipole moment
of the D2 line. A narrow slit, representing a bandpass
of 0.3 nm width, is scanned through the Fourier plane
of the pulse shaper, which showed that only components
resonant with the D1 and D2 atomic transitions are re-
sponsible for this eﬀect. Singly-charged rubidium ions
have been detected when the central pulse frequency was
resonant with one of the atomic transitions, indicating
that resonant three-photon ionization contributes to the
loss of atoms from the MOT. To study the laser pulse in-
teraction with rubidium molecules, the atomic resonance
components were removed from the pulse spectrum by a
notch ﬁlter, realized by a physical block in the shaper’s
Fourier plane. In this way atomic losses from the MOT
could be reduced below the detection threshold.

The rubidium dimers interact with the fs-laser pulses
over the entire accessible range of central wavelengths
from 780 nm to 820 nm. As shown in Fig. 2, the molec-
ular signal decreases linearly with the pulse energy for
weak pulses and levels oﬀ to 25% at a pulse energy of

3

resonances found by the evolutionary algorithm. Starting
from a narrow band in the a3Σ+
u state [22, 23], molecules
are excited into bound states below the D1 resonance.
By shifting the peak positions, the algorithm ﬁnds tran-
sition frequencies from this band to certain vibrational
states, thereby sharing the pulse energy more eﬃciently
than a broad Gaussian pulse. The algorithm therefore
has a large number of possible solutions to choose from
and so the ﬁnal pulse shapes after an optimization are
not identical. In the spectral region between 12000 and
12500 cm−1, the vibrational level separation is about 10
cm−1 in the 0−
g and 1g 5s5p1/2 states, respectively. The
high density of states also explains the limited poten-
tial of the optimization because the optimization factor
depends on the chosen peakwidth which is limited by
the shaper resolution. The Franck-Condon factors may
also be relevant for the excitation process since they dif-
fer for diﬀerent vibronic transitions and favor particular
frequencies which are enhanced in the experimentally ac-
quired spectra. Yet, as the initial ground state popula-

FIG. 4: (a) Molecular ion signal resulting from the best, the
worst and the mean individual of the population for each gen-
eration during a closed loop experiment.
(b) Femtosecond
laser pulse spectrum of the ﬁnal best individuals of two suc-
cessive optimization runs under equal conditions with similar
ﬁnal optimization result.

FIG. 3: Potential curves of the rubidium dimer including spin-
orbit interaction. Initially, the molecules are expected to pop-
ulate the highest levels in the a3Σ+
u [22, 23]. The molecular
excitation by the femtosecond pulses is indicated by the ar-
row. The shaded areas show the initial and ﬁnal distribution
of molecular vibrational states.

shaper in a closed loop experiment. The algorithm is
based on evolution strategies and is described in detail
in [28]. Because of the small molecular ion count rate
and hence the low signal-to-noise ratio the signal is aver-
aged over 128 dye laser pulses for each individual of the
algorithm. To reduce the search space for the learning al-
gorithm we chose a scheme of parametric amplitude and
free phase optimization where the algorithm tries to ﬁnd
the optimal pulse shape under the restriction that only a
few sharp spectral peaks contribute to the pulse shape.
The algorithm administrates 31 individuals, each consist-
ing of the parameters for eleven narrow Gaussian peaks
of 7 cm−1 FWHM. During an optimization, the spectral
peak positions and amplitudes are altered to ﬁnd the best
ﬁtting combination of frequencies.

The adaptive algorithm was applied to manipulate the
excitation pulses with the aim to minimize the molecu-
lar signal from the MOT. For each iteration the ion sig-
nals corresponding to the best and worst individuals are
protocoled together with the mean ﬁtness of the whole
generation. As depicted in Fig. 4(a), all three signals de-
crease during the particulate optimization to about 70%
of the initial value after 20 iterations. The spectra of
the ﬁnal best individuals of two successive runs shown in
Fig. 4(b) display several peaks which coincide in some
but not all spectral positions. The frequency span of the
fs-pulse supports our assignment of excitation to the 0−
g
and 1g 5s5p1/2 states (see Fig. 3). By comparing the
excitation yield of the best individuals with transform-
limited pulses of the same energy it is observed that the
optimized pulse excites the molecules on average 25%
more eﬃciently, which demonstrates the feasibility and
potential of adaptive control.

We attribute the observed excitation enhancement to
an increased spectral intensity at particular molecular

tion distribution in the vibrational states is not known
accurately, no quantitative treatment or assignment can
be made.

To conclude, in this letter we show the application of
iterative adaptive control techniques to the manipulation
of ultracold molecules. The minimization of molecular
signal from a rubidium magneto-optical trap results in
pulse shapes that signiﬁcantly excite more Rb2 molecules
than transform-limited pulses of the same energy. The
resulting pulse spectra are not unambiguous because of
the large number of possible optimal solutions within the
experimental accuracy. For future applications of shaped
fs-pulses in photoassociation experiments, the dissocia-
tive eﬀect of the pulses has to be suppressed. On the one
hand, photoassociated cold molecules may be dissociated
by subsequent femtosecond pulses due to the high repe-
tition rate of the femtosecond laser system. Therefore,
photoassociated molecules have to be detected directly
after their formation by increasing the repetition rate of
the detection system, ideally matching the rate of the
photoassociating beam. On the other hand, the excita-
tion of ground state molecules may be coherently sup-
pressed while enhancing the molecule formation through
actively shaping the pulses. For this purpose, we cur-
rently theoretically investigate realistic scenarios for fem-
tosecond photoassociation of cold molecules by numeri-
cally simulating the dynamical behavior of an atom pair
interacting with an arbitrarily shaped electromagnetic
ﬁeld. It is also envisioned to use speciﬁcally shaped fem-
tosecond laser pulses for the cooling of vibrational molec-
ular excitations by pump-dump processes via an inter-
mediate excited state. This approach could be applied
to produce quantum-degenerate molecular gases in arbi-
trary vibrational states or superpositions of states.

We thank C. Koch, R. Kosloﬀ, B. Sch¨afer-Bung and
V. Bonaˇci´c-Kouteck´y for theoretical support and many
stimulating discussions. This work was supported by
the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft in the frame of the
Sonderforschungsbereich 450 and the Schwerpunktpro-
gramm 1116. F. Sauer acknowledges the Studienstiftung
des deutschen Volkes, A. Merli thanks the Cusanuswerk.

4

Hinds, Phys. Rev. Lett. 89, 023003 (2002).

[5] D. J. Heinzen, R. Wynar, P. D. Drummond, and K. V.

Kheruntsyan, Phys. Rev. Lett. 84, 5029 (2000).

[6] A. Fioretti, D. Comparat, A. Crubellier, O. Dulieu,
F. Masnou-Seeuws, and P. Pillet, Phys. Rev. Lett. 80,
4402 (1998).

[7] J. D. Weinstein, R. deCarvalho, T. Guillet, B. Friedrich,

and J. M. Doyle, Nature 395, 148 (1998).

[8] H. L. Bethlem, G. Berden, and G. Meijer, Phys. Rev.

Lett. 83, 1558 (1999).

[9] S. Jochim, M. Bartenstein, A. Altmeyer, G. Hendl,
S. Riedl, C. Chin, J. Hecker-Denschlag, and R. Grimm,
Science 302, 2101 (2003).

[10] M. Greiner, C. A. Regal, and D. S. Jin, Nature 426, 537

[11] M. W. Zwierlein, C. A. Stan, C. H. Schunck, S. M. F.
Raupach, S. Gupta, Z. Hadzibabic, and W. Ketterle,
Phys. Rev. Lett. 91, 250401 (2003).

[12] R. S. Judson and H. Rabitz, Phys. Rev. Lett. 68, 1500

(2003).

(1992).

[13] A. Assion, T. Baumert, M. Bergt, T. Brixner, B. Kiefer,
V. Seyfried, M. Strehle, and G. Gerber, Science 282, 919
(1998).

[14] C. J. Bardeen, V. V. Yakovlev, K. R. Wilson, S. D. Car-
penter, P. M. Weber, and W. S. Warren, Chem. Phys.
Lett. 280, 151 (1997).

[15] S. Vajda, A. Bartelt, E.-C. Kaposta, T. Leisner,
C. Lupulescu, S. Minemoto, P. Rosendo-Francisco, and
L. W¨oste, Chem. Phys. 267, 231 (2001).

[16] R. Bartels, S. Backus, E. Zeek, L. Misoguti, G. Vdovin,
I. P. Christov, M. M. Murnane, and H. C. Kapteyn, Na-
ture 406, 164 (2000).

[17] M. Machholm, A. Giusti-Suzor, and F. H. Mies, Phys.

Rev. A 50, 5025 (1994).

[18] U. Marvet and M. Dantos, Chem. Phys. Lett. 245, 393

(1995).

[19] F. Fatemi, K. M. Jones, H. Wang, I. Walmsley, and P. D.

Lett, Phys. Rev. A 64, 033421 (2001).

[20] J. Vala, O. Dulieu, F. Masnou-Seeuws, P. Pillet, and

R. Kosloﬀ, Phys. Rev. A 63, 013412 (2000).

[21] C. P. Koch, J. P. Palao, R. Kosloﬀ, and F. Masnou-

Seeuws, Phys. Rev. A 70, 013402 (2004).

[22] C. Gabbanini, A. Fioretti, A. Lucchesini, S. Gozzini, and

M. Mazzoni, Phys. Rev. Lett. 84, 2814 (2000).

[23] M. Kemmann, I. Mistrik, S. Nussmann, H. Helm, C. J.
Williams, and P. S. Julienne, Phys. Rev. A 69, 022715
(2004).

[24] M. M. Wefers and K. A. Nelson, J. Opt. Soc. Am. B 12,

1343 (1995).

[25] A. M. Weiner, D. E. Leaird, J. S. Patel, and J. R. Wullert,

IEEE J. Quant. Elect. 28, 908 (1992).

[26] T. Ban, D. Aumiler, and G. Pichler, Phys. Rev. A 71,

[27] C. G. Townsend, N. H. Edwards, C. J. Cooper, K. P.
Zetie, C. J. Foot, A. M. Steane, P. Szriftgiser, H. Perrin,
and J. Dalibard, Phys. Rev. A 52, 1423 (1995).

[28] A. Bartelt, S. Minemoto, C. Lupulescu, S. Vajda, and

L. W¨oste, Eur. Phys. J. D 16, 127 (2001).

∗ Corresponding˙author: m.weidemueller@physik.uni-freiburg.de
† Corresponding˙author: lindin@physik.fu-berlin.de

022711 (2005).

[1] J. Doyle, B. Friedrich, R. V. Krems, and F. Masnou-

Seeuws, Eur. Phys. J. D 31, 149 (2004).

[2] D. DeMille, Phys. Rev. Lett. 88, 067901 (2002).
[3] C. Chin, T. Kraemer, M. Mark, J. Herbig, P. Waldburger,
H.-C. N¨agerl, and R. Grimm, Phys. Rev. Lett. 94, 123201
(2005).

[4] J. J. Hudson, B. E. Sauer, M. R. Tarbutt, and E. A.

