5
0
0
2
 
p
e
S
 
3
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
m
o
t
a
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
4
0
2
9
0
5
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Reconstruction of Atomic Ionization Probabilities in
Intense Laser Fields

T R J Goodworth1, W A Bryan1, I D Williams2
and W R Newell1
1) Department of Physics and Astronomy, University College London, Gower
Street, London WC1E 6BT, UK
2) Department of Physics, Queen’s University Belfast, Belfast BT7 1NN, UK

Abstract. Application of a parallel-projection inversion technique to z-scan
spectra of multiply charged xenon and krypton ions, obtained by non-resonant
ﬁeld ionization of neutral targets, has for the ﬁrst time permitted the direct
observation of intensity-dependent ionization probabilities. These ionization
eﬃciency curves have highlighted the presence of structure in the tunnelling
regime, previously unobserved under full-volume techniques.

1. Introduction

Multiple atomic ionization within intense (> 1014 Wcm−2) non-resonant laser ﬁelds
is an area of considerable interest [1] involving non-linear phenomena such as above-
threshold ionization, non-sequential ionization [2], and high harmonic generation [3].
Early investigations collected ion signal from the full confocal volume, see for example
[4]. As such, detected ion yields represented a convolution of all active intensity-
dependent ionization processes. The use of a full confocal volume also meant that the
ion yield curves as a function of peak laser intensity followed the characteristic I3/2
behaviour within the saturated ﬁeld ionization regime. The ﬁrst attempt to limit this
gross spatial integration used a pinhole aperture to image the centre of a shallow laser
focus [5]. Under this conﬁguration intensity variation was achieved by conventional
half-wave plate energy attenuation techniques. The generalised dependence of total
ionization has also been studied by soft focusing the laser beam into an approximately
cylindrical conﬁguration as viewed by the ion detector [6]. More recently, intensity
selective scanning has been successfully implemented through z-scanning [7, 8]. This
technique uses a slit of width ∆z to limit the detected intensity range along the laser
propagation (z) axis, in this case the intensity variation is accessed by translating the
laser focus along the laser propagation (z) axis with respect to the masking aperture
using the natural, on-axis (Lorentzian) intensity variation Iz = I0/(1 + (z/zo)2), where
2/λ is the Rayleigh range. This technique also has the advantage that lower
zo = πω0
intensity processes are accessed with increased interaction volumes due to the shape
of the confocal volume, see for example [9]. Despite the quantisation of the intensity
variation along the z-axis with this technique, the radial intensity variation remains
unbound. As such, the powerful z-scan technique is restricted to the determination of
threshold (Ith) and saturation (Isat) intensities by Gaussian volume ﬁtting [8]. Clearly,
if the radial intensity variation were quantised in a similar way to the z-axial variation,

Reconstruction of Atomic Ionization Probabilities in Intense Laser Fields

2

Figure 1. Z-scan time-of-ﬂight matrices for Xe and Kr targets. Centrally located
on each ﬁgure, the z = 0 axis corresponds to the position of the peak laser intensity
Io. Ion yield proﬁles are generated by temporal integration of these plots.

the z-scan technique would yield complete intensity-dependent ionization curves for
all observed charge states, and also allow a range of laser intensities to be investigated
simultaneously. In light of this, we present a technique for the quantisation of the
confocal volume to the order (∆z)2 using a parallel-projection inversion algorithm in
conjunction with the z-scan technique.

2. Inversion Methodology

Inversion techniques allow determination of an object’s internal properties through
the deconvolution of a set of line integrals intersecting the object, perhaps the most
familiar example of which is computer-assisted tomography (CAT) [10]. Generally,
where the structure of the object is unknown, line integrals from a number of locations
around the object are necessary to obtain the reconstructed image via an inversion
technique such as the Radon transform [11]. However, if the structure of the object
is known, or has rotational symmetry about an axis normal to the line integrals, the
object may be reconstructed from observations at a single orbital location. In this
instance, the object is the laser confocal volume, with the line integrals determined
by integration of the rare gas target experimental z-scans which are shown in ﬁgure 1.
In this case, each of the n z-axial measurements (ηn) represents the total
integrated ion yield from all ionization processes within the discrete intensity range I(z)
to I(z+ ∆z) along the z-axis, and an unbound range of intensities in the radial plane.

Reconstruction of Atomic Ionization Probabilities in Intense Laser Fields

3

Figure 2. Quantisation of the confocal volume by z-scanning. The isointensity
contours are given by equation 1, and the double indices throughout the ﬁgure
refer to the volume elements Vn,s, where n denotes the slit position along the
z-axis, and s denotes the isointensity contour.

By constructing a basis set of n Gaussian isointensity contours Is, each separated by the
imaging slit width ∆z along the z-axis, the entire confocal volume can be quantised to
the order (∆z)2 by known volume elements Vn,s, where n denotes the z-axial position
and s refers to the isointensity contour. These quantised volume elements are aligned
such that the boundary of each contour coincides with the edge of the imaging slit as
shown in ﬁgure 2. Importantly, volume elements common to a particular isointensity
shell will possess the same intensity Is irrespective of the z-axial position (n). The
functional form of Is is given in equation 1 where r is radial coordinate orthogonal to
z, and ωo is the focused laser beam radius at the position z = 0.
Io

Is(z, r) =

1 + (z/zo)2 exp

(cid:18)

−2r2
(1 + (z/zo)2)ω2

o (cid:19)

(1)

Having fully quantised the confocal volume, the integrated ion yield proﬁles can be
expressed through the simple matrix product ηn = Vn,s ξs, where ξs is the volume
normalised, intensity-dependent ion yield. As the basis sets for n and s are coincident
along the z-axis (see ﬁgure 2), the volume matrix is necessarily well-conditioned, and
the system can be solved immediately for ξs by an inversion of the form: ξs = V−1
n,s
ηn.

The ion signal proﬁles used in the inversion algorithm were obtained from the
experimental z-scans depicted in ﬁgure 1 by temporal (vertical axis) integration of
the time-of-ﬂight spectra for each z. This gave an ion signal intensity proﬁle as
a function of z for each observed ion species which in turn acted as the basis for

Reconstruction of Atomic Ionization Probabilities in Intense Laser Fields

4

the inversion process. Diﬀraction eﬀects present at very small z values, well above
saturation intensities, act to form additional signal-producing volume over and above
that expected through Gaussian volume calculations [8]. These additional volume
elements were isolated and excluded from the reconstruction process. In any case the
location of this eﬀect, well above the saturation intensity, places it well out of the
region of interest for the present study.

3. Experimental Conﬁguration

The Wiley-McLaren type time-of-ﬂight mass spectrometer used to collect the z-scan
spectra has been described in detail elsewhere [12], hence only salient points will be
discussed here. The confocal mask which enables z-scanning consists of a 0.5 mm
diameter on-axis aperture situated at the top of a 300 Vcm−1 extraction region. For
the current optical conﬁguration, this can be approximated to a semi-inﬁnite slit as the
aperture diameter is much greater than the confocal waist for the full focal detuning
range employed. The target gas is injected directly into the interaction region at
a ﬁll pressure of 10−7 mbar on a background of 10−10 mbar, well below the onset
of any observable space-charge eﬀects. At pressures greater than 10−6 mbar space
charge eﬀects were observed as a widening of the ion peaks in the TOF spectra and as
distortions in the z-scans. At pressures of 10−7 mbar, these eﬀects have disappeared.
The gas is multiply ionized by 65 fs linearly polarised Ti:Sapphire laser pulses at 10
Hz repetition rate with a central wavelength of 790 nm, focused using f /34 optics to a
peak laser intensity of 7 × 1015 Wcm−2. The laser energy E (= 4 mJ) was measured
using a calibrated power meter and the waist radius ωo (= 17 µm) was calculated from
ωo = 2fλ/π where f is the f-number (f = 34) of the optical system. The peak intensity
was calculated using I = E/τ πω2
o, where τ is the laser pulse duration. The combination
of errors associated with meter calibration and pulse duration measurement give an
absolute error on the intensity of 30%, although the relative intensities are accurate to
within 10%. The cylindrical symmetry of the focused beam is essential preserved
in the present optical conﬁguration since the maximum angle of incidence of the
laser beam is less than 0.5 degrees from the optical axis. This means transmission
through the shallow focusing lens is essentially independent of the orientation of the
polarisation vector with respect to the plane of incidence [13]. Ions produced during
the laser interaction are detected by a microchannel plate detector outputting to a fast
digital storage oscilloscope, where spectra are averaged over 500 shots. Shot to shot
energy ﬂuctuations were minimised by a discriminating photodiode. The focal lens
was mounted on a computer controlled precision translation stage, allowing the focal
detuning to be driven with a 0.25 mm step size with respect to the z-axis, permitting
the production of 50-element z-scans. Figure 1 shows the raw z-scan spectra for xenon
and krypton targets. Ions up to Xe5+ and Kr5+ were observed, and have been found
to be in good agreement with other experiments employing rare gas targets at these
intensities [4, 14].

4. Results and Discussion

It should be noted that the reconstruction method employed will yield ionization
probability (P) multiplied by the inherent quantum eﬃciency (q) of the detector.
Following application of
the derived Ionization
the reconstruction algorithm,
Probability x Quantum Eﬃciency (q) is mapped onto an intensity axis as shown in

Reconstruction of Atomic Ionization Probabilities in Intense Laser Fields

5

Figure 3. Reconstructed intensity-dependent, volume-normalised, Pq curves as
a function of the discrete on-axis local peak intensity Is for all observed charge
states. The arrows indicate the saturation intensity expected under an ADK
approximation.

ﬁgure 3. In doing so it is clear that the intensity-dependant Pq curves for each observed
ion species are similar. Each curve is initiated at a threshold intensity Ith, followed
by a rapid rise in the Pq characteristic of Stark-shifted multiphoton ionization. In
turn, this is followed by a slow rate of increase, characteristic of tunnelling ionization
until the Pq curve saturates. Considering the ﬁrst ionization stage (Xe → Xe+) as
an example, it should be noted that the probability of observing Xe+ would actually
decrease at intensities above saturation as multiple ionization becomes signiﬁcant.
However the probability of Xe+ being generated during the pulse is still Pq = 1, and
since it provides a more informative insight into the ﬁeld ionization dynamics, we have
plotted this probability of production, as opposed to the probability of observation, in
ﬁgure 3. The higher ionization stages display correspondingly higher values of Pq at
which they saturate as a consequence of the varying quantum eﬃciency of the detector
as a function of charge state. Indeed, measurement of the Pq values at saturation for
multiply charged ions (ﬁgure 3) relative to the singularly charged ion Pq curve provides
a direct experimental measure of the detector quantum eﬃciency. All Pq curves in
ﬁgure 3 can therefore be normalized to a unit probability (P = 1) at saturation. The
Pq curves for the Xe4+ and Kr5+ are not saturated.

The Coulomb potential plus the laser electric ﬁeld (ε) gives rise to a total potential
of V(r) = Zr−1 - ε.r, where Z is the residual charge on the ion, and r is the radial
distance from the charge centre. A saddle point in V(r) occurs for ε = εsat = Z3/(4n*)2

Reconstruction of Atomic Ionization Probabilities in Intense Laser Fields

6

[15], where n* (= n - δl) is the eﬀective principal quantum number, and δl denotes the
quantum defect [16]. The calculated εsat values, which are both charge and species
speciﬁc, (shown by arrows in ﬁgure 3) are in excellent agreement with the present
experimental saturation intensities. The tunnelling regions in ﬁgure 3, in particular
for Kr+ and Xe+, display detail previously unseen in full confocal volume experiments.
Indeed, this technique has, for the ﬁrst time, allowed accurate determination of the
gradient in this transitory regime to be made, which perhaps surprisingly displays an
unexpected level of structure, including a species-speciﬁc gradient with Kr+ having
a slope three times that of Xe+. The explanation for this structure requires further
investigation, but we may hypothesize as to the cause. This is the intensity region
where rescattering of the ionised electron from the singly charged core has been shown
to contribute to non-sequential double ionisation, probably via excitation followed by
ﬁeld ionisation [17].
It is quite likely that as well as ionisation, recombination, or
indeed ﬁeld-stimulated recombination is also occurring in the electron-ion interaction.
This would have the eﬀect of depleting the yield of singly charged ions, and hence
could account for the observed structure.

Using perturbation theory, the low intensity Stark-shifted multiphoton region can
be quantiﬁed by IN σ where N is the number of photons and σ is the ionization cross-
section. A χ2 minimisation in this region yielded N = 6(8) for Xe, and N = 7(10)
for Kr, less than the expected values shown in brackets, suggesting that the atomic
potential is strongly inﬂuenced by dynamic Stark shifts of 3-5 eV or alternatively by
transient population trapping [18].

The Xe2+ and Kr2+ Pq curves both display a characteristic knee structure
separating the regions of non-sequential (NS) and sequential (S) ionization. The
transition from NS to S ionization is completed by laser intensities of 6 × 1013 and 8
× 1013 Wcm−2 in Xe2+ and Kr2+ respectively. The source of the NS signal below the
knee has previously been attributed to a recollision mechanism [19]. At 6 × 1013 and
8 × 1013 Wcm−2, the corresponding maximum recollision energies are 12.9 and 16.6
eV, leaving a deﬁcit of 8.3 and 7.8 eV against the ionization potentials of Xe+ and Kr+
respectively, indicative of excited states undergoing ﬁeld or electron impact ionization.
Recently, Becker and Faisal [20] have completed S-matrix calculations in which the
primary ionized electron is dressed by the radiation ﬁeld [21], which demonstrates
the role of the laser ﬁeld in electron impact ionization process. A more quantitative
interpretation of the intensity-dependent Pq curves can be obtained by recasting the
reconstructed curves in terms of the Keyldsh adiabaticity parameter γ [22], given in
a convenient form by γ = (Ei/2UP )1/2, where Ei is the ionization potential of the
target, λ is the wavelength in microns of the incident radiation ﬁeld, and UP is the
ponderomotive or quiver energy of the electron in the ﬁeld, calculated using UP =
9.33 × 10−14 λ2 I (Wcm−2). As shown in ﬁgure 4, the curves for both Xe+ and Kr+
overlap well in γ-space, with saturated ﬁeld ionization occurring for γ < 0.8, and the
quantum mechanical tunnelling region straddling γ = 1, in excellent agreement with
the theoretically predicted range of 0.5 < γ < 1 [15].

5. Conclusion

In conclusion,
it has been shown that the use of a parallel-projection inversion
algorithm has realised the full potential of the experimental z-scan technique by, for
the ﬁrst time, fully quantising the confocal interaction region, allowing production of
volume normalised, intensity-dependent ion yield curves for a range of charge states

Reconstruction of Atomic Ionization Probabilities in Intense Laser Fields

7

Figure 4. Intensity-dependent ionization probabilities for Xe+ (▽) and Kr+ (
) as a function of the Keyldsh parameter. The dashed lines divide the three key
regions of atomic ionization.

in xenon and krypton.

The reported experiment is the ﬁrst direct observation of intense-ﬁeld atomic
ionization eﬃciencies, independent of both radial intensity blurring and interaction
volume eﬀects, which would usually mask the subtle features detected in ﬁgure 3.
With application to molecular targets, this novel technique will permit an insight
into a wide range of intensity-dependent dissociation and ionization mechanisms with
greater clarity.

Acknowledgments

We wish to thank the staﬀ of the ASTRA laser facility at the Rutherford Appleton
Laboratory, A J Langley, C J Hooker and E J Divall for their expert assistance in
the collection of experimental data. This work was supported by the Engineering and
Physical Sciences Research Council. TRJG and WAB gratefully acknowledge EPSRC
awards.

Reconstruction of Atomic Ionization Probabilities in Intense Laser Fields

8

References

[1] Agostini P et al, Phys. Rev. Lett. 42 (1979) 1127, Yamakawa K et al, Phys. Rev.
Lett. 92 (2004) 123001, Rudenko A et al, Phys. Rev. Lett. 93 (2005) 253001
[2] Larochelle S, Talebpour A and Chin S L, J. Phys. B: At. Mol. Opt Phys. 31
(1998) 1201, and references therein.
[3] L’Huillier et al, Atoms in Intense Laser Fields Ed. M Gavrila (Academic, New
York) 1992
[4] Augst S, Meyerhofer D D, Strickland D and Chin S L, J. Opt. Soc. Am. B 8
(1991) 858
[5] Jones R R, Phys. Rev. Lett. 74 (1995) 1091
[6] Hankin S M, Villeneuve D M, Corkum P B and Rayner D M, Phys. Rev. A. 64
(2001) 013405
[7] Hansch P, Walker M A and Van Woerkom LD, Phys. Rev. A. 54 (1996) 2559
[8] El-Zein A et al. Phys. Scripta T92 (2001) 119
[9] Greenwood, J et al. Phys. Rev. Lett. 88 (2002) 233001
[10] Herman G T, Image Reconstruction from Projections, Academic Press (1980)
[11] Radon J, Math. Phys. 69 (1917) 262
[12] Sanderson J H et al, Phys. Rev. A. 65 (2002) 043403
[13] Ditchburn R W, Light, Blackie (1963)
[14] Talebpour A et al, J. Phys. B: At. Mol. Opt. Phys. 30 (1997) 1721
[15] Ilkov F A, Decker J E and Chin S L, J. Phys B: At. Mol. Opt. Phys. 25 (1992)
4005
[16] Bethe H A and Salpeter E E, Quantum Mechanics of One and Two Electron
Atoms, Springer (1957)
[17] Feuerstein B et al, Phys. Rev. Lett. 87 (2001) 043003
[18] Talebpour A, Chien C Y and Chin S L, J. Phys. B: At. Mol. Opt. Phys. 29
(1996) 5725
[19] Corkum P B, Phys. Rev. Lett. 71 (1993) 1994
[20] Becker A and Faisal F H M, J. Phys. B: At. Mol. Opt. Phys. 32 (1999) L335
[21] Van der Hart H W, J. Phys. B: At. Mol. Opt. Phys. 34 (2001) L147
[22] Keyldsh L V, J. Exp. Theor. Phys. 47 (1964) 1945

