5
0
0
2
 
p
e
S
 
4
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
m
o
t
a
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
1
2
1
9
0
5
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Geometry- and diﬀraction-independent ionization probabilities in intense laser ﬁelds:
probing atomic ionization mechanisms with eﬀective intensity matching

W. A. Bryan,∗ S. L. Stebbings, E. M. L. English, T. R. J. Goodworth, and W. R. Newell†
Department of Physics and Astronomy, University College London, Gower Street, London WC1E 6BT, UK

J. McKenna, M. Suresh, B. Srigengan, and I. D. Williams
Department of Pure and Applied Physics, Queen’s University Belfast, Belfast BT7 1NN, UK

I. C. E. Turcu, J. M. Smith, E. J. Divall, C. J. Hooker, and A. J. Langley
Central Laser Facility, Rutherford Appleton Laboratory, Chilton, Didcot, Oxon OX11 0QX, UK
(Dated: January 11, 2014)

We report a novel experimental technique for the comparison of ionization processes in ultrafast
laser pulses irrespective of pulse ellipticity. Multiple ionization of xenon by 50 fs 790 nm, linearly
and circularly polarized laser pulses is observed over the intensity range 10 TW/cm2 to 10 PW/cm2
using Eﬀective Intensity Matching (EIM), which is coupled with Intensity Selective Scanning (ISS)
to recover the geometry-independent probability of ionization. Such measurements, made possible
by quantifying diﬀraction eﬀects in the laser focus, are compared directly to theoretical predictions of
multiphoton, tunnel and ﬁeld ionization, and a remarkable agreement demonstrated. EIM-ISS allows
the straightforward quantiﬁcation of the probability of recollision ionization in a linearly polarized
laser pulse. Furthermore, probability of ionization is discussed in terms of the Keldysh adiabaticity
parameter γ, and the inﬂuence of the precursor ionic states present in recollision ionization is
observed for the ﬁrst time.

PACS numbers: 32.80.Rm, 42.50.Hz, 42.65.Sf

I.

INTRODUCTION

Over the last decade and a half, the advent of modern
laser technology has resulted in a fruition of signiﬁcant
experimental studies on the interaction of intense ultra-
fast laser pulses with dilute matter. The success of these
works has naturally precipitated a reaction from the the-
oretical community, which has lead to a highly productive
dialogue. Particular highlights are the observation [1] of
high harmonic generation (HHG), the use of HHG to gen-
erate attosecond-timescale bursts of XUV radiation [2],
nonsequential ionization of atoms [3] and molecules [4]
through electron rescattering and the enhanced ioniza-
tion of molecules leading to Coulomb explosion [5]. Ex-
perimental advances by the authors and co-workers have
allowed the investigation of the interaction of ultrafast
laser pulses with ionic targets, where the ionization of
ground and metastable Ar+ [6], C+ [7] and Xe+ [8] has
been observed for the ﬁrst time. Central to all of these
studies is the observation of process which are depen-
dent on focused laser intensity, traditionally facilitated
by variation of the pulse energy. While being straight-
forward to carry out experimentally, this technique suf-
fers the drawback that, as the pulse energy is varied,
the size of the laser focus is altered. Such geometry-
dependent measurements are of course still of great im-
portance, and have allowed major advances in the under-

∗Electronic address: w.bryan@ucl.ac.uk
†Electronic address: w.r.newell@ucl.ac.uk

standing of laser-matter interactions: the drawback is in
making comparisons with theory. A diﬀerent approach
has been facilitated by the ongoing development of laser
ampliﬁcation techniques [9], permitting macroscopic con-
trol of laser focal conditions through intensity selective
scanning (ISS) [10, 11]. Here the laser focal geometry
is constant, and a spatially selective detector is used to
image diﬀerent regions of the focus. Such measurements
are of particular interest to the atomic physics commu-
nity, with regards, for example, to the response of noble
gas atoms to focused femtosecond laser pulses.

While a number of experimental studies have com-
pared atomic ionization using circular and linear polar-
ized laser pulses, for recent examples see [4, 12], to the
authors’ knowledge, all have employed the traditional
geometry-dependent technique. For a particular pulse
energy, there is a change in electric ﬁeld amplitude when
the polarization is switched from linear to circular, mak-
ing a comparison problematic. We propose a new method
to circumvent this problem, as a development of ISS. A
constant pulse energy ratio between linear and circular
polarizations is deﬁned such that the relative ionization
yield is constant as the laser focus is translated past the
spatially selective detector, irrespective of laser polar-
ization. This technique of eﬀective intensity matching
(EIM) coupled with ISS is employed to examine ultra-
fast strong ﬁeld ionization of xenon: EIM-ISS results are
presented.

Before quantitative analysis of the EIM-ISS results is
possible, it is necessary to remove the geometry depen-
dence inherent in the ionization yields. A method to per-
form such a deconvolution has been proposed in [10]. An

analogous technique has been presented by the authors
[13], where a numerical inversion is employed to remove
the geometry dependence from the ISS results. However
both techniques only allow the removal of Gaussian fo-
cusing. Modern laser systems typically generate pulses
with a Gaussian proﬁle in the far-ﬁeld. However, optical
transport systems impose geometrical constraints such
that it is practically impossible to propagate this per-
fect proﬁle into the experimental chamber. Such beam
propagation has been addressed recently by L¨u and co-
workers [14] through the application of an aperture func-
tion approximation [15] to a multi-apertured optical sys-
tem. Unfortunately, this approximation, even with little
or no beam truncation, will introduce oscillatory distor-
tions to the laser intensity. Zhang and co-workers [16]
have presented an elegant analysis of the diﬀraction of
a focused beam, with particular application to tradi-
tional geometry-dependent intensity variation measure-
ments.
In the present work, beam diﬀraction is quan-
tiﬁed before focusing takes place: this treatment better
representing typical experimental systems.

The spatial insensitivity of most instruments employed
in intensity variation measurements [12, 17, 18, 19, 20,
21, 22] average over such diﬀraction eﬀects, as all of the
confocal volume lies within the volume that the instru-
ment images. In the case of EIM-ISS, the very spatial
sensitivity that makes the technique so powerful also
makes it susceptible to optical distortions. Given that
the EIM-ISS technique naturally discriminates between
low-intensity large volume and high-intensity small vol-
ume processes, then before the laser - atom system under
investigation can be fully understood, it is vital to quan-
tify the spatial distribution of laser intensity. Herein, we
present the results of an analytical treatment of the fo-
cusing of a truncated Gaussian laser pulse through an
arbitrary ABCD (where A to D are elements of the Sys-
tem Matrix) optical system, the derivation of which is
given in Appendix A.

By matching the optical conditions in our ABCD
model to those in our experimental focus, we then re-
move the geometry dependence from the EIM-ISS data,
revealing for the ﬁrst time geometry-free and diﬀraction-
free probabilities of ionization for both linear and circular
polarizations, and compare them directly to theoretical
predictions.

II. APPLICATION TO LASER - DILUTE
MATTER INTERACTIONS

In the following section, the optical system employed is
deﬁned, then the xenon EIM-ISS data is presented. The
apertured solution for an arbitrary ABCD optical sys-
tem is then employed to remove the geometrical inﬂuence
of the volume of the laser focus, resulting in geometry-
independent atomic ionization probabilities. Ionization
mechanisms are then discussed in detail. Finally, the
variation of geometry-independent ionization probability

2

FIG. 1: Illustration of the cylindrically symmetric optical sys-
tem employed in recent laser - dilute matter interactions. The
aperture, radius a, lies in the input plane at z = 0, with radial
co-ordinate r1. The resulting focus lies in the output plane at
z = z 1 + z 2, with radial co-ordinate r2. The focal length of
the lens is f, and zf = z2 - f is position with respect to the
focus.

with the Keldysh parameter [23] is presented, allowing
ionization mechanisms to be discussed in terms of the rel-
ative frequencies of the tunneling electron and the laser
ﬁeld.

A. Optical system

In recent experimental studies published by the au-
thors and co-workers [6, 7, 8, 13] the optical system is as
illustrated in Fig. 1, with a corresponding system matrix

A B
C D

=

1 − (z2/f )
−1/f

z1 + (1 − z1/f )z2
1 − (z1/f )

(cid:18)

(cid:19)

(cid:18)

(1)

(cid:19)

where z1 and z2 correspond to the distance between the
aperture and lens, and lens and focus, and f is the fo-
cal length of the lens. We also deﬁne zf = z2 - f as the
position parallel to the beam propagation direction with
respect to the focus. The system matrix is derived using
straightforward matrix optics, and is the transformation
from the input plane (containing the aperture) to the
output plane, through a translation, a refraction and a
second translation to the focus. In the present work, the
following values apply: z1 = 300 mm, z2 = 250 mm, f
= 250 mm and the aperture radius a = 11 mm. Given
the wavelength, λ = 790 nm, the only quantity which is
unknown is the beam radius ωg before the aperture at
which diﬀraction occurs. The ﬁxed aperture, located at
z = 0, deﬁnes the reference plane for the System Matrix.
As presented in Appendix A, we derive a solution for
the laser intensity distribution in the vicinity of the fo-
cus, which accounts for diﬀraction of the incoming laser
beam at an aperture of ﬁnite diameter. Such a solution is
particularly applicable to ultrafast (Ti: sapphire based)

physics, where the intensity distribution in the laser fo-
cus is rarely Gaussian. Fig. 2(a)-(j) shows the result of
simulating the focus of the current optical system for the
ﬁxed radius aperture and a range of beam radii. Initially,
the beam radius ωg = 5 mm, and the focus created is al-
most identical to the unapertured form described by Eq.
(A6) in Appendix A. However, as the beam radius is in-
creased, the focus is disturbed by the diﬀraction of the
incoming beam at the aperture. As the beam radius be-
comes comparable to the aperture radius, the focus shows
pronounced lines of maximum and minimum intensity in
both zf and r2. The isointensity contours in Fig. 2(a)-
(j), separated by an order of magnitude, illustrate that as
the beam radius is increased, the focal spot size increases
along r2 contrary to the behaviour expected in the case
of an unapertured Gaussian beam.

B. Eﬀective intensity matching (EIM)
as applied to ISS

The experimental apparatus employed in the present
work has been described in detail [6, 7, 8, 13, 24], so
only a brief outline is given here. The 20 mJ, 790 nm
50 fs output of the ASTRA Ti:sapphire laser is trans-
mission focused on to the target gas in the source region
of the time-of-ﬂight mass spectrometer. Given the high
power of the laser used in our recent work, intensities in
excess of 1017 Wcm−2 are routinely generated in a long
focus. Indeed, the intensity range required for ultrafast
ionization rate studies, typically > 1013 Wcm−2 is pro-
duced ≈ 10 mm from the centre of the focus. The 250
µm entrance aperture located in the time-of-ﬂight mass
spectrometer places a tight spatial limitation on the vol-
ume of the focused laser beam which produces ion signal
from the target gas, and by translating the focusing lens
parallel to the z-axis, the spectrometer is exposed to dif-
ferent regions of the focus. Typically, such ISS or z-scan
experiments are performed by averaging the ion signal
measured at each lens position, zf .

To explore the ionization mechanism in xenon we have
developed a novel experimental technique, namely eﬀec-
tive intensity matching, combined with intensity selective
scanning (EIM-ISS). The essence of EIM-ISS is to deﬁne
a constant ratio, REIM between the laser intensities of
the linearly (I lin) and circularly (I circ) polarized laser
beams such that the spatial distribution of the ions de-
tected for each polarization are the same for all zf values
assuming that nonsequential ionization processes are neg-
ligible. Before recording the xenon data presented, the
ionization of neon was observed with circularly and lin-
early polarized radiation to deﬁne the ratio REIM. Neon
is a good test gas as, of all the noble gases, it is least
susceptible to nonsequential (recollision) ionization [25].
Our studies, not presented here [8], reveal that REIM =
I lin / I circ = 0.65 ± 0.02 gives a remarkable match in
the Ne+ ionization signal over a large (≈ 10 mm) range
of zf , equivalent to an intensity range 1013 Wcm−2 to

3

FIG. 2: (a) to (j) Simulated intensity distributions in loga-
rithmic grayscale with isointensity contours, separated by an
order of magnitude, for the optical system in Fig. 1. The
aperture radius a = 11 mm is kept constant, while the beam
radius ωg is varied from 5 to 20 mm. Diﬀraction is clearly
apparent even when the aperture is considerably larger than
the beam radius.

1016 Wcm−2. A similar approach was reported in [26]
to explain threshold ionization intensities observed with
linearly and circularly polarized light in a long-pulse (1
ps) traditional intensity variation measurement. How-
ever, the present study and that of [8] are of a higher
precision, being the culmination of a systematic inves-
tigation, and are unique in the area of ultrafast intense
ﬁeld interactions.

The exact value of REIM is determined by the inﬂu-
ence of the diﬀerent laser polarizations and electric ﬁeld
amplitudes on the ionization process. In the linearly po-
larized case, the sinusoidal laser electric ﬁeld is modu-
lated by the pulse envelope: the ﬁeld amplitude oscillates
under a typically sech2 temporal proﬁle. With circular

4

eﬀects. All ions generated were averaged over 500 laser
shots for each position along zf . The observed z-scan is
presented in Fig. 3, showing Xen+ (n = 1, 2, 3) product
ion yields, with the Xe2+ and Xe+ yields displaced verti-
cally by 0.5 and 1.0 respectively for clarity. By limiting
the ﬁeld of view of the spectrometer, the ion signal from
a particular charge state at each z-position is an integral
over all r2 and a narrow range of zf . This selectivity is
apparent in the data in Fig. 3. Starting at the focus, each
ion yield presented is observed to increase from near zero
to a maximum, the position of the maximum moving to
lower zf with increasing charge state, n. Each successive
charge state requires an increase in intensity to maximize
its ionization yield, a common result of traditional inten-
sity measurements [12, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22]. Subtle rip-
ples present in the data presented in Fig. 3 are the result
of diﬀraction in the ultrafast laser focus.
Importantly,
linear and circular time-of-ﬂight spectra are recorded at
each zf position as the focusing optic is translated, rather
than recording a linear scan followed by a circular scan.
This ensures that conditions within both the spectrome-
ter and laser focus undergo minimal variation.

Xenon has a far greater propensity for ionization
through recollision in a linear laser ﬁeld than neon, giv-
ing rise to the major diﬀerences between linearly and
circularly polarized light observed in the EIM-ISS data
in Fig. 3. The data recorded with circular polarization is
recollision-free, as the probability of the ﬁrst-ionized elec-
tron returning to the ion in a circularly polarized ﬁeld is
negligible [29]. The ‘signature’ of recollision is clearly ap-
parent in the Xe2+ and Xe3+ data as an enhancement of
the integrated ion yield with linear polarization at po-
sitions of z at larger distances from the focus than the
maxima (for example, in Xe2+ 4.5 mm < zf < 8 mm).
This enhancement is due to recollision ionization in the
linear ﬁeld being more eﬃcient than sequential multiple
large
ionization by the laser ﬁeld at low intensities (i.e.
zf with respect to the centre of the focus).

The enhancement of ion yield by recollision ionization
in Xe2+ and Xe3+ is directly responsible for the signiﬁ-
cant diﬀerences in the Xe+ yield curves. This is a con-
sequence of the conservation of confocal volume, necessi-
tated by the following important points. The core result
of EIM-ISS is that the eﬀective laser intensity is identi-
cal for linear and circular polarizations. Given that the
number density is constant, the ionization yield from se-
quential ionization of the atoms in the confocal volume is
made to match for both polarizations over all zf . How-
ever, the volume of the laser focus must be conserved,
therefore, we observe for the ﬁrst time the true interplay
between the volumes generating a charge state Xen+ (n =
1, 2, 3...), which totally contains and often overlaps with
the volume generating all higher charge states. Therefore
the suppression of integrated ion yield in the case of Xe+
in the range 3 mm < zf < 8 mm is due to the depopula-
tion of the Xe+ volume in the laser focus (when the laser
is linearly polarized) through the observed mechanism of
recollision ionization to higher charge states. An analo-

FIG. 3: Raw EIM-ISS data for the ionization of xenon to
Xen+ (n = 1, 2, 3). The integrated xenon ion yield is recorded
as function of focusing optic position with respect to the axis
of the spectrometer, in Fig. 1 equivilant to zf . Linear (solid
symbols) and circular (open symbols) polarized laser pulses
are employed, where EIM is used to deﬁne the distribution
of ion signal with varying zf . The presence of nonsequential
(recollision) ionization is apparent in the Xe2+ and Xe3+ sig-
nal as signal enhancement at low intensity (large zf ) in the
case of linear polarization. Ripples in the ion yield indicate
the presence of diﬀraction.

polarization the electric ﬁeld is continually present, and
the electric ﬁeld direction rotates through 2π during the
laser period, and the ﬁeld amplitude typically takes a
sech2 proﬁle. In the circularly polarized ﬁeld, the projec-
tion of the angular momentum imparted to the electron
is conserved along the direction of beam propagation.
However, in the linearly polarized ﬁeld, momentum is
imparted to the electron in the direction of electric ﬁeld
oscillation, i.e. perpendicular to the propagation axis.
This has an important inﬂuence on tunnel ionization, as
recently noted by Tulenko and Zon [27] in which the rate
of tunnelling depends on the magnetic quantum number
of the tunnelling electron: in [28] it was concluded that
the ionization rate should be identical, irrespective of po-
larization type.

With REIM deﬁned, the spectrometer source region was
ﬁlled with xenon to a pressure of 1 × 10−8 mbar: a low
pressure is used to avoid the inﬂuence of space-charge

gous depletion is observed around the maximum of the
Xe2+ yield, caused by depopulation of the Xe2+ volume
by recollision ionization to Xe3+ in linearly polarized ra-
diation. This sequence is repeated for the higher charge
states. By comparing the sum of ion yields over all charge
states at each z for the two polarizations, a near exact
match is observed, conﬁrming conservation of focal vol-
ume. This then is the major beneﬁt of EIM-ISS, allowing
direct comparisons to be made between atomic ionization
mechanisms for the ﬁrst time.

C. Deconvolution of EIM-ISS results:
volume-independent ionization probabilities

To further develop our understanding of the interplay
of ionization mechanisms as observed using EIM-ISS us-
ing both linear and circular polarizations, we turn now
to removing the geometry dependence of the ionization
signal from the EIM-ISS data in Fig. 3. The aim of such
analysis is the recovery of geometry-independent ioniza-
tion probabilities.

Van Woerkom and co-workers have previously estab-
lished a technique for the removal of the dependence of
ionization probability on focal volume [10, 11], where the
ionization probability Ω(I ), may be calculated from the
zf dependent ion signal S(zf ) via the on-axis intensity
distribution Iax(zf ) according to:

Ω(Iax(zf )) ∝

[Iax(zf )S(zf )]

(2)

Iax(zf )
dIax(zf )/dzf (cid:19)

d
dzf

(cid:18)

In the present work, we have reﬁned this treatment,
ﬁrstly to allow for the non-Gaussian nature of the fo-
cussed beam and secondly removing the dependence of
ionization probability on the intensity distribution within
the laser focus, despite the presence of diﬀraction. The
latter is achieved by applying Eq. (A9) in Appendix A
to Eq. (2) where Iax = |U (r2 = 0, zf )2|.

Although the 1/e2 beam radius is diﬃcult to deﬁne
accurately, it is of a comparable size to the ﬁnal aper-
ture radius. Furthermore, the ionization signal of the
ﬁrst three charge states is expected to saturate within
the range of zf (i.e. intensity) in the current experiment
[21], thus the gradient of the ionization probability should
tend to zero at high intensity for all change states, n. At
intensities above saturation, it is reasonable to expect
ionization probability to decrease, as ionization to higher
charge states becomes increasingly more likely. However,
if we deﬁne some saturation intensity I SAT, which oc-
curs at a corresponding on-axis distance z SAT from the
focus, at zf < z SAT (i.e. on-axis I > I SAT), I SAT is
still present oﬀ-axis thus occupying a larger proportion
of the volume than the on-axis contribution. The result
of applying Eq. (2) is only valid at intensities < I SAT: at
intensities > I SAT, we deﬁne the probability of ionization
as unity. This volume- and diﬀraction-free intensity de-
pendent quantity is referred to as the partial probability

5

FIG. 4: EIM geometry-independent partial probability of ion-
n+ (n = 1, 2, 3) as function of intensity,
ization (PPI) for Xe
measured for both linear (solid symbols) and circular (open
symbols) polarizations. Increasing charge states are normal-
ized to descending orders of magnitude for clarity. Three
types of sequential ionization are identiﬁed: multiphoton (low
intensity, constant gradient, long dashed line), tunnelling (in-
termediate intensity, decreasing gradient, solid line) and ﬁeld
ionization (high intensity, vertical arrow). Recollision ioniza-
tion (short dashed line) is also observed with linear polariza-
tion. See text for discussion.

of ionization (PPI). If the conserved probability of ion-
ization (CPI) is required, this may be readily calculated
according to CPI (n) = PPI (n) - PPI (n + 1), where n
is charge state, as before. This technique will be applied
in future publications.

The geometry- and diﬀraction-independent PPIs are
now recovered from the EIM-ISS data in Fig. 3, and are
presented in Fig. 4, where the saturated (unity) ioniza-
tion probabilities of the increasing charge states are nor-
malized to descending orders of magnitude to aid visual
presentation. The beam radius ωg is estimated from a
measurement of the unfocused beam proﬁle, and small
adjustments (of the order of 0.1 mm) made to ωg until
the PPI curves recovered do not exhibit rapid changes of
gradient with intensity. The beam radius ωg = 10.25 mm
used to recover these ionization probabilities is found to
be not only consistent over all charge states observed in
xenon (n = 1, 2, 3), but also for a wide range of atomic

(the other Noble gases) and molecular (H2, D2, N2, CO2)
targets covered in our studies.

To quantify the results presented in Fig.

4, the
intensity-dependent probability of ionization to Xen+ (n
= 1, 2, 3) by four ionization mechanisms is now discussed.
Starting with the lowest intensity, the following mecha-
nisms are apparent in Fig. 4:

(i) Multiphoton ionization (MPI) is predicted by
lowest-order perturbation theory (LOPT) to vary accord-
ing to I N [30], where N is the number of 790 nm (1.56
eV) photons absorbed, thus on a log-log plot of proba-
bility vs. intensity a constant gradient of N should exist.
Increasing charge state n requires an increasing number
of photons. For example, Xe2+ production requires an
energy of 21.21 eV, therefore the absorption of at least
fourteen 790 nm photons is required. The expected gra-
dients for MPI of Xen+ are 7.8 (n = 1), 13.6 (n = 2)
and 20.6 (n = 3). For n = 1 and 2, the expected gradi-
ents are shown in Fig. 4 as long dashed lines. For n =
3, there is no MPI observed within the sensitivity of the
experiment, determined by the low target gas density.

(ii) Tunnel ionization (TI), as described initially by
Keldysh [23] and later reﬁned by Popov and co-workers
[28], is the result of a bound electron tunnelling out of
the atom through the laser-modiﬁed Coulomb potential.
With increasing intensity, TI becomes more eﬃcient, as
the laser + Coulomb barrier width decreases. Repre-
sented in Fig. 4 as solid lines, Keldysh theory predicts
a tunnel rate, which we have converted to probability.
Note that the amount of TI observed is not always well-
predicted by tunnelling theory, as observed recently by
Yamakawa and co-workers [31] who introduced scaling
factors in order to match theory and experiment. In the
present work, when the TI theory is shifted to improve
the ﬁt with the PPI, the factors used are made clear.

(iii) At the highest intensities, classical ﬁeld ionization
(FI) dominates, as the electric ﬁeld of the laser pulse is
suﬃcient to rapidly suppress the Coulomb potential, al-
lowing direct liberation of the electron. The intensity at
which FI is predicted to occur is indicated by the verti-
cal arrows in Fig. 4, calculated using the over-the-barrier
model. The intensity at which FI dominates should co-
incide with the saturation of TI.

Ionization mechanisms (i) to (iii) are sequential in na-
ture, and due to the EIM technique should occur at the
same eﬀective laser intensity for linear and circular po-
larizations (evident from the overlap of the Xe+ PPIs
in Fig. 4). As the ionization potential increases with
charge state, we expect a systematic increase in the in-
tensity required to produce a certain ionization mecha-
nism. Furthermore, as discussed with reference to Fig. 3,
there is an enhancement of signal in a linearly polarized
laser pulse at low intensities, thus we must also consider
nonsequential ionization processes:

(iv) Recollision ionization (RI) [29], also referred to
as nonsequential double or multiple ionization (NSDI or
NSMI), predominantly occurs due to the linear laser ﬁeld
driving a correlated liberated electron back to the par-

6

ent ion, thus initiating secondary ionization [32]. This
process has been the subject of a number of COLTRIMS
In Fig. 4, the enhancement of Xe2+ and
studies [33].
Xe3+ by RI is clearly seen in the diﬀerence of PPI curves
for linear and circularly polarized radiation. In Fig. 4,
the presence of RI is indicated by the short dashed lines,
generated by transferring the theoretical prediction of se-
quential ionization of previous charge state(s) onto the
linearly polarized data. For Xe2+ RI, the combined MPI
and TI to Xe+ PPI is ﬁtted, whereas for Xe3+ RI, the
MPI and TI to Xe+ and the TI to Xe2+ is ﬁtted as there
is more than one recollision mechanism possible resulting
in triple ionization.

By comparing the quality of ﬁt of MPI, TI, FI and RI
to the data in Fig. 4, we can directly determine how suc-
cessfully the geometry- and diﬀraction-independent PPIs
are predicted by theory. As the PPI measured with circu-
lar polarization is not inﬂuenced by RI, the circular data
is therefore a more direct comparison to the predicted
MPI and TI response.

For ionization to Xe+, MPI with the absorption of
eight photons occurs at the lowest intensities (< 2.5 ×
1013 Wcm−2) present in Fig. 4, indicating that LOPT
is applicable. As the laser intensity increases, the PPI
response tends away from MPI: the TI prediction ﬁts
the data excellently (i.e. directly predicted by Keldysh
theory), even at intensities greater than that where FI
is predicted to be the dominant mechanism. The Xe+
data clearly illustrates the intensity ranges over which
the diﬀerent ionization mechanisms apply.

When the laser ﬁeld generates Xe2+, the absorption of
fourteen photons is required for MPI to proceed. As is
apparent from the long dashed line, only the very low-
est intensities are predicted by MPI. TI theory is even
more successful in this, accurately predicting a three or-
der of magnitude increase in the PPI to better than 10
%. However, it is necessary to translate the data by a
factor of 0.91 in intensity to achieve this ﬁt (cf 0.85 from
[31], albeit during a shorter duration laser pulse, and
geometry-dependent ion yield was measured). As with n
= 1, FI is only reasonably accurate. In the case of the
linearly polarized laser pulse, at low intensity, there is
considerable RI present, as indicated by the short dashed
line. The RI contribution follows clearly the shape of the
theoretical prediction of sequential MPI and TI produc-
tion (short dashed line) visually ﬁtted to the Xe2+ data.
This is consistent with Xe+ being the source atom for
RI to Xe2+. Such a method has been used by a number
of groups (for example, see [21]) ﬁtting RI in geometry-
dependent ion yield measurements, and it appears to be
successful here.

LOPT does not apply at all in the case of Xe3+ as the
expected gradient of 20.6 is far too high to be supported
by the data. However, TI theory is able to accurately pre-
dict the PPI from low intensity right up to saturation,
with the data translated by a factor of 0.85 in inten-
sity, (cf 0.70 from [31]), here well-deﬁned by FI (vertical
arrow). There are now three possible nonsequential RI

routes possible: (a) 0 → 1 ⇒ 3, (b) 0 ⇒ 2 → 3 and
(c) 0 ⇛ 3, where → indicates sequential ionization, ⇒
indicates double ionization through RI, and ⇛ indicates
triple ionization through RI. While there is strong evi-
dence for mechanisms (a) and (b) as is clear from the
two short dashed lines on Fig. 4, there is little evidence
for the presence of mechanism (c). If it does occur, it is
with a greatly suppressed PPI as compared to (a) and
(b). The shape of the RI PPI for n = 3 is well described
by a combination of the theoretical prediction of sequen-
tial ionization to Xe+ and Xe2+ as denoted by the short
dashed lines (a) and (b) in Fig. 4 respectively.

The ease with which ionization mechanism may be de-
termined from Fig. 4 is illustrated by considering what
happens to a group of atoms in a circularly polarized laser
ﬁeld at an intensity of 2 × 1014 Wcm−2. Such an inten-
sity will at least triply ionize the atom: all atoms will
be ionized to Xe+ by FI, between 40% and 50% of these
ions will be further ionized to Xe2+ by TI, and of these
ions, 1% will undergo MPI to Xe3+. The situation with
linear polarization is complicated by NSMI, however the
contribution is readily calculable from Fig. 4. Through a
combination of multiphoton, tunnel and ﬁeld ionization
theory, the response of xenon to the ultrafast laser ﬁeld
may be accurately quantiﬁed.

D.
Ionization mechanism
and the Keldysh parameter

The pioneering theoretical work of Keldysh [23] estab-
lished a rule for distinguishing between ionization mech-
anisms in a laser ﬁeld using the fact that the ionization is
governed by the relative frequency of the laser ﬁeld and
the tunnel frequency of the electron. The ratio of these
frequencies is deﬁned as the adiabaticity, or Keldysh pa-
rameter, γ [23, 28], and allows the ionization mechanism
to be broadly determined:

ωlaser
ωtunnel

Ei
2Up

=

s

γ =

γ ≫ 1
γ ≃ 1
γ ≪ 1

where

MPI
TI
FI

(3)

In Eq. (3), Up = 9.33 × 10−14 I λ2 is the pondermotive
potential of the laser ﬁeld, with intensity I in Wcm−2
and laser wavelength λ in µm, and Ei is the ionization
potential of the atom in eV. The accepted deﬁnition is
that when γ ≫ 1, the frequency of the laser is greater
than the tunnelling frequency, hence MPI results. When
γ ≃ 1, the frequency of the laser ﬁeld is comparable to
the tunnel frequency of the electron, hence tunnel ion-
ization is the most prominent mechanism. Conversely,
when γ ≪ 1, the laser ﬁeld comparable to the Coulomb
ﬁeld between the nucleus and the electron, therefore clas-
sical FI dominates. To determine how well the Keldysh

7

FIG. 5: PPI as a function of Keldysh parameter for Xen+ (n
= 1, 2, 3) for (a) circular and (b) linear polarization. The
presence of multiphoton ionization (MPI) dominates at high
γ, whereas tunnel ionization (TI) is more prominent at γ < 2.
A ﬁve point running average (solid line) through the points
in (a) is duplicated onto (b) (dashed line) to illustrate the
sequential ionization PPI as a function of γ.
Interestingly,
the contribution from recollision ionization in the linear pulse
tends to MPI/TI response of Xe+.

adiabaticity parameter quantiﬁes ultrafast ionization of
xenon, our quantiﬁcation of the ionization mechanism as
presented in Fig. 4 is converted to adiabaticity in Fig. 5,
and the data normalized to unity at γ = 0.1.

In Fig. 5(a), the PPI to Xen+ (n = 1, 2, 3) in a circu-
larly polarized laser pulse as a function of γ is presented.
Interestingly, the transition between MPI and TI for n =
1 and n = 2 occurs at the same γ = 2, thus the identiﬁca-
tion of the presence of MPI at low intensities in Xe2+ is
realistic. The vertical dashed line indicates the transition
between MPI and TI occurring at γ = 2, which is consis-
tent with the intensities at which the transition between
MPI and TI is observed for Xe+ and Xe2+ (see Fig. 4).
The position of this transition is consistent with the pre-
diction of Keldysh. Furthermore, the PPI of Xen+ (n =
1, 2, 3) all tend to unity at γ = 0.5. For γ < 0.5, FI dom-
inates for (n = 1, 2, 3). Fig. 5(a) also contains a 5-point
running average through the experimental points (solid
lines), to indicate the trend of the data. These trends are
duplicated onto Fig. 5(b) as dashed lines, allowing the
comparison of PPI in circular and linear polarized laser
pulses.

As is apparent from Fig. 5(b), the PPI of Xen+ (n = 1,
2, 3) in a linearly polarized laser pulse as a function of γ is
rather diﬀerent from the circular case, as expected from
Fig. 3 and 4 due to the presence of RI. When n = 1, there
is little deviation between linear and circular over the full
range of γ recorded. However, for n = 2, around γ = 1.2,
the PPI breaks away from the response observed in the
circular case (long dashed line), and tends to follow the
PPI response for n = 1. This transition, due to RI, has
not been observed in this manner before. Importantly,

the n = 1 PPI is the upper limit of PPI enhancement by
RI for n = 2. As is apparent from Fig. 5(b), the PPI
as a function of γ for n = 3 exhibits a similar behaviour,
however as there are now two RI processes present, as γ
is decreased, the PPI for n = 3 tends ﬁrst to the PPI for
n = 2 around γ = 1.3, then around γ = 2.3, tends to the
n = 1 response.

III. SUMMARY

A new investigation into atomic ionization dynam-
ics has been presented, employing a novel experimental
technique allowing a direct comparison between linear
and circular polarizations. The key to eﬀective inten-
sity matching (EIM) is deﬁning the spatial dependence
of ionization yield as independent of polarization type.
Intensity selective scanning (ISS) is used to measure the
ionization of xenon as a function of laser intensity by
translating the focusing optic with respect to a spatially
limited time-of-ﬂight spectrometer.

By deriving a solution for the diﬀraction of a Gaus-
sian laser pulse through an arbitrary ABCD optical sys-
tem, geometric eﬀects have been removed from the EIM-
ISS results, producing partial probabilities of ionization
(PPI) for Xen+ (n = 1, 2, 3) for both linear and circular
polarizations. This technique has allowed clear measure-
ment of the PPI due to recollision ionization, which con-
tributes signiﬁcantly to double and triple PPI in a linear
polarized laser ﬁeld. Multiphoton, tunnel and ﬁeld ion-
ization contributions are clearly identiﬁed for the charge
states presented for both linear and circular polariza-
tions. We ﬁnd that for the lowest intensities, multipho-
ton ionization successfully predicts ionization to Xe+ and
Xe2+. As the laser intensity is increased, tunnel ioniza-
tion theory is extremely successful, up to the intensity at
which classical ﬁeld ionization dominates.

The volume-independent PPIs have also been pre-
sented as a function of the Keldysh adiabaticity parame-
ter for linear and circular polarizations. The applicability
of multiphoton and tunnel ionization theory allows a pre-
cise deﬁnition of the transition between ionization mech-
anisms, which occurs when the Keldysh adiabaticity pa-
rameter, γ = 2. Furthermore, an interesting dependence
on the lower ionization states is observed for recollision
ionization in a linearly polarized laser pulse. This due to
the necessity to generate the source ion before recollision
can proceed.

Acknowledgments

This research was supported by the Engineering and
Physical Sciences Research Council (EPSRC), UK: both
EMLE and SLW acknowledge studentships from the EP-
SRC, JMK would also like to acknowledge funding from
DEL, MS from IRCEP at QUB.

8

APPENDIX A: DIFFRACTION
QUANTIFICATION

The conventional approach for treating the propaga-
tion of light beams is through the solution of the gen-
eralized Huygens-Fresnel integral (see for example [34]).
Speciﬁcally, the Collins form [35] of this integral is often
used, as it allows the ABCD system matrix to be directly
incorporated into the calculation. When the propagation
of the beam is limited by some form of aperture, solving
the Huygens-Fresnel integral analytically becomes more
diﬃcult, and it often requires a numerical solution. The
diﬃculty then becomes one of generating a suﬃciently ac-
curate, computationally eﬃcient solution. This has been
addressed recently by L¨u and Ji [14], who deftly adapted
an approximation of the aperture function of Wen and
Breazeale [15] to allow the analytical treatment of multi-
apertured ABCD optical systems for the ﬁrst time. How-
ever, the approximate aperture function employed intro-
duces oscillations into the light amplitude even before any
diﬀraction eﬀects are present, thus it is felt that a more
accurate solution to the problem of propagating Gaus-
sian beams through apertured ABCD optical systems is
warranted.

1. General solution

In considering the Huygens-Fresnel integral [34] for an
arbitrary ABCD system matrix in polar co-ordinates, the
beam intensity on the output plane U (r2, φ, z) is deﬁned
as

∞

2π

1
λB
0 Z
0
Z

U (r2, φ, z) =

U0(r1, θ, z = 0) exp(ikS) r1 dr1 dθ

(A1)
also referred to as the Collins diﬀraction integral [35],
where

S = z +

(Ar2

1 − 2r1r2 cos[θ − φ] + Dr2
2)

(A2)

1
2B

is the path between point (r1, θ) on the input plane and
point (r2, φ) on the output plane, and z is the distance
between the input and output planes. Variables A, B and
D are the elements of the system matrix. For a Gaussian
input beam, in the plane deﬁned by r1 and z = 0, we
deﬁne

U0(r1, θ, z = 0) = exp(−r2

1/ω2
g)

(A3)

where ωg deﬁnes the beam radius in the input plane. By
substituting Eq. (A3) and Eq. (A2) into Eq. (A1), and
employing the following expression from laser resonator
calculations [36]

2π

0
Z

kr1r2
X

exp

i

cos(θ − φ) − lθ

dθ

(cid:20)

(cid:18)
= 2πil exp(−i lφ)Jl

(cid:19)(cid:21)
kr1r2
X

(cid:18)

(cid:19)

(A4)

where Jl is a Bessel function of the ﬁrst kind and l th
order, we arrive at the following general expression for l
= 0:

U (r2, φ, z) =

exp

exp(ikz)

ikDr2
2
2B

(cid:18)
exp(P r2

(cid:19)
1) J0(Qr1) r1 dr1

2π
λB
∞

×

0
Z

where

P = −

+

i kA
2B

1
ω2
g
kr2
B

Q =

and k = 2π/λ. The analytical solution of this integral is
now examined for the unapertured and apertured cases.
It is assumed that the ABCD optical system generates
a focus in the vicinity of the output plane, however the
solutions presented apply for any system matrix.

2. Unapertured solutions

Many contemporary laser-dilute matter experiments
assume an unapertured Gaussian pulse proﬁle, which
when focused generates the following well-known distri-
bution of intensity, I (r 2, z)

(A6)

I(r2, z) =

1 + (z/z0)2 exp

I0

−2r2
2
ω2
0 [I0/[1 + (z/z0)2]

(cid:19)

(cid:18)
where r 2 and z deﬁne the co-ordinate frame in the vicin-
ity of the focus, and the the beam waist, ω0 = 2f λ/πωg
and Rayleigh range, z0 = π ω2
0/λ characterize the inten-
sity distribution. In these expressions, f is focal length
of the lens generating the focus, λ the wavelength and ωg
the 1/e2 unfocussed beam diameter. The on axis distri-
bution can be trivially found by setting r2 = 0. Solving
Eq. (A5) for r2 = 0, the on-axis unapertured solution for
the current treatment is found by evaluating the integral
∞
0 dr1, giving

R

U (r2 = 0, z) = −

exp(ikz)

(A7)

π
λBP

This expression may be expanded to generate the oﬀ-
axis unapertured solution, by performing the integration
∞
0 dr1, but with r2 6= 0, with
in Eq. (A5) as before for
a solution

U (r2, z) = −

exp

π
λBP

R
ikDr2
2
2B

(cid:18)

(cid:19)

exp(ikz) exp(Q2/4P )

(A8)
This solution requires the real part of P to be negative,
and the imaginary part of Q to be zero. As this is sat-
isﬁed for all cases by the deﬁnitions in Eq. (5), this is a
universal solution.

3. Apertured solutions

9

To allow for the action of a ﬁnite aperture before the
ABCD optical system, the integral in Eq. (A5) is evalu-
a
0 dr1 where a is the aperture radius. The on-axis
ated
solution is found by setting r2 = 0, producing the follow-
ing expression

R

U (r2 = 0, z) =

exp(ikz)(exp(a2P ) − 1)

(A9)

π
λBP

(A5)

where the conditions applied to Eq. (A5) are applicable
here.

To ﬁnd a solution to the oﬀ-axis apertured system, the
a
0 dr1 where a is the
integral in Eq. (A5) is evaluated
aperture radius. This equation cannot be solved analyti-
cally, so two methods of calculating the spatial intensity
distribution are employed. Firstly, we perform a Taylor
Series expansion around r2 = 0, of the integral term in
Eq. (A5), so the general form is thus

R

U (r2, z) =

exp

ik

+ z

Dr2
2
2B

2π
λB
∞

y

×

y=0
X

x=0 (cid:18)
X

(cid:20)

(cid:18)
−1y
(y − x)!

(cid:19)(cid:21)
P y−x Q2x
22x(x!)2

(A10)

(cid:19)

where x and y are the indices of the expansion terms.
This solution can be used to calculate the distribution
of intensity for certain optical systems depending on P,
Q and a. For a relatively sharp focus (f of the order of
ωg) with little diﬀraction (a ≫ ωg), the number of terms
required in the Taylor Series is small. However, when the
system exceeds these limits, particularly when there is
signiﬁcant diﬀraction of the incoming beam, the number
of terms required becomes untenable, and the (x !)2 term
requires impracticable computational power to evaluate.
In this case, the intensity distribution may be evaluated
by converting to a ﬁnite element problem through

U (r2, z) =

exp

ik

+ z

Dr2
2
2B

(cid:19)(cid:21)

(cid:18)

(cid:20)
r1 exp(P r2

2π
λB
a

r1=0
X

×

1)J0(Qr1)∆r1

(A11)

This solution requires accurate and rapid evaluation of
the Bessel Function, which becomes processor-intensive
as Qr1 becomes large. By approximating Jn(Qr1) ≃
(2/πQr1)1/2 cos[Qr1 - (nπ/2) - (π/4)] when Qr1 > 8,
evaluation of this sum becomes very eﬃcient while re-
taining a deviation from the expected value of < 1 in
104. The oﬀ-axis solution is therefore

10

U (r2, z) =

exp

ik

+ z

2π
λB

Dr2
2
2B

(cid:20)

(cid:18)

a

r1 exp(P r2
1)

1/2

2
πr1Q

(cid:18)

(cid:19)

(cid:16)

(cid:19)(cid:21)

r1=0
X

π
4

(cid:17)

cos

Qr1 −

∆r1

(A12)

By making ∆r1 small, Eq. (A11) and (A12) will produce
an extremely accurate quantiﬁcation of the output plane.
The selection of which form to employ depends on the ge-
ometry of the ABCD system and the size of the incoming
beam relative to the aperture diameter. Computational
eﬃciency may be further improved through the applica-
tion of Adaptive Mesh Reﬁnement [37], where the grid
spacing depends on the rate of variation in U resolved
along both the r2 and z axes.

An important test for the oﬀ-axis apertured solution,
Eq. (A10) to Eq. (A12) is to check for convergence to the
oﬀ-axis unapertured solution, Eq. (A8) and the accepted
deﬁnition, Eq. (A6) when a ≫ ωg. Through rigorous
two-dimensional comparisons for a variety of ABCD sys-
tems, beam radius ωg and aperture radius a have shown
that all solutions presented are self-consistent, and, when
applicable, consistent with the accepted solution.

[1] M Ferray, A. L’Huillier, X. F. Li, L. A. Lompr´e, G. Main-

35 79 (1995)

fray and C. Manus, J. Phys. B 21 L31 (1988)

[2] M. Hentschel et al, Nature (London) 414 509 (2001), R.
Kienberger et al, Nature (London) 427 817 (2004).
[3] K. J. Schafer, B. Yang, L. F. DiMauro and K. C. Ku-
lander, Phys. Rev. Lett. 70 1599 (1993), P. B. Corkum,
Phys. Rev. Lett. 71 1994 (1993)

[4] C. Cornaggia and Ph. Hering, Phys. Rev. A 62 023403

(2000)

[5] J. H. Posthumus, Rep. Prog. Phys. 67 623 (2004).
[6] J. B. Greenwood, I. M. G. Johnston, P. McKenna, I. .
Williams, T. R. J. Goodworth, J. H. Sanderson, W. A.
Bryan, A. El-Zein, W. R. Newell, A. J. Langley and E.
J. Divall, Phys. Rev. Lett. 88 233001 (2002).
[7] S. L. Stebbings et al, submitted to J. Phys. B.
[8] M. Suresh, J. McKenna, B. Srigengan, I. D. Williams,
E. M. L. English, S. L. Stebbings, W. A. Bryan, W. R.
Newell, E. J. Divall, C. J. Hooker and A. J. Langley, Nucl.
Instrum. and Meth. in Phys. Res. B 235 216 (2005)
[9] S. Backus, C. G. Durfee III, M. M. Murnane and H. C.

Kapteyn, Rev. Sci. Instrum. 69 1207 (1998)

[10] M. A. Walker, P. Hansch and L. D. Van Woerkom, Phys.

[11] P. Hansch, M. A. Walker and L. D. Van Woerkom, Phys.

[12] C. Guo, M. Li, J. P. Nibarger and G. N. Gibson, Phys.

Rev. A 57 R701 (1998).

Rev. A (54 R2559 (1996).

Rev. A 58 R4271 (1998)

[13] T. R. J. Goodworth, W. A. Bryan, I. D. Williams and
W. R. Newell, J. Phys. B: At. Mol. Opt. Phys. 38 3083
(2005).

[14] B. L¨u and X. Ji, J. Opt. A: Pure Appl. Opt. 6 161 (2004).
[15] J. J. Wen and M. A. Breazeale, J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 83

[20] A. Talebpour, C. Y. Chein, Y. Liang, S. Larochelle and S.
L. Chin, J. Phys. B: At. Mol. Opt. Phys. 30 1721 (1997)
[21] S. Larochelle, A. Talebpour and S. L. Chin, J. Phys. B:

At. Mol. Opt. Phys. 31 1201 (1998)

[22] B. Sheehy, R. Lafon, M. Widmer, B. Walker, L. F. Di-
Mauro, P. Agostini and K. C. Kulander, Phys. Rev. A
58 3942 (1998)

[23] L. V. Keldysh, Sov. Phys. JEPT 20 1307 (1965).
[24] W. A. Bryan, J. H. Sanderson, A. El-Zein, W. R. Newell,
P. F. Taday and A. J. Langley, J. Phys. B: At. Mol. Opt.
Phys. 33 745 (2000)

[25] V. L. B. de Jesus, B. Feuerstein, K. Zorst, D. Fischer,
A. Rudenko, F. Afanch, C. D. Schr¨oter, R. Moshammer
and J. Ullrich, J. Phys. B: At. Mol. Opt. Phys. 37 L161
(2004)

[26] T. Auguste, P. Monot, L. A. Lompr´e, G. Mainfray and C.
Manus, J. Phys. B: At. Mol. Opt. Phys. 25 4181 (1992)
[27] E. B. Tulenko and B. A. Zon, Laser Phys. 13 450 (2003).
[28] A. M. Perelomov, V. S. Popov and M. V. Terent’ev, Sov.
Phys. JETP 23 924 (1966), 24 207 (1967), A. M. Perelo-
mov and V. S. Popov, Sov. Phys. JETP 25 42 (1967).

[29] P. B. Corkum, Phys. Rev. Lett. 71 1994 (1993).
[30] H. G. Muller, P. Agostini and G. Petite, in Atoms in
intense laser ﬁelds, edited by M. Gavrila, Adv. At. Mol.
Opt. Phys., Academic Press (1992).

[31] K. Yamakawa, Y. Akahane, Y. Fukuda, M. Aoyama, N.
Inoue, H. Ueda and T. Utsumi, Phys. Rev. Lett. 92
123001 (2004).

[32] A. Becker, R. D¨orner and R. Moshammer, J. Phys. B:

At. Mol. Opt. Phys. 38 S753 (2005)

[33] See, for example, R. Moshammer et al, Phys. Rev. Lett.

1752 (1988).

84, 447 (2000).

[16] L. Zhang, L. J. Frasinski and K. Codling, J. Phys. B: At.

[34] M. Born and E. Wolf, Principles of Optics, 5th ed. New

Mol. Opt. Phys. 27 3427 (1994).

York: Pergamon Press (1975).

[17] K. Kondo, A. Sagisaka, A. Tamida, Y. Nabekawa and S.

Watanabe, Phys. Rev. A 48 R2531 (1993)

[18] B. Walker, B. Sheehy, L. F. DiMauro, P. A. Agostini, K.
J. Schafer and K. C. Kulander, Phys. Rev. Lett. 73 1227
(1994)

[19] L. F. DiMauro and P. Agostini, Adv. At. Mol. Opt. Phys.

[35] S. A. Collins, J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 60 1168 (1970).
[36] J. P. Tach´e, Appl. Opt. 26 2698 (1987).
[37] M. Berger and J. Oliger, J. Comput. Phys. 53 484 (1984),
M. Berger and P. Colella, J. Comput. Phys. 82 62 (1989).

