5
0
0
2
 
t
c
O
 
1
3
 
 
]
h
p
-
m
o
t
a
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
4
7
2
0
1
5
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

1D optial lattie in a working MOT: o-existene of bound and free atoms diagnosed

by the reoil-indued resonanes

Maria Brzozowska, Tomasz M. Brzozowski, Jerzy Zahorowski, and Wo jieh Gawlik

Marian Smoluhowski Institute of Physis, Jagiel lonian University, Reymonta 4, PL 30-059 Craow

∗

†

(Dated: 17th February 2014)

85

We report on studies of simultaneous trapping of

Rb atoms in a magneto-optial trap (MOT)

and 1D optial lattie. Using Raman pump-probe spetrosopy, we observe the o-existene of

two atomi frations: the (cid:28)rst, whih onsists of free, unbound atoms trapped in a MOT and the

seond, loalized in the miropotentials of the optial lattie. We examine how the ratio of these

two frations and the shape of the lattie miropotentials hange with the intensity of the MOT

trapping beams.

PACS numbers: 32.80.Pj, 42.50.Vk, 42.65.-k

Optial latties [1℄ onstitute a onvenient tool for

lasers injetion-loked to a ommon master osillator.

studying phenomena related to periodially ordered sys-

tems. They are formed by the light-interferene pattern,

The probe beam is sanned by δ
1 MHz around
frequeny ω of the lattie beam and its transmission is

≈ ±

haraterized by spatial, periodi light intensity and/or

monitored by the photodiode.

light polarization modulation. This modulation leads to

periodially varying dipole fore whih, ating on the suf-

(cid:28)iently old atoms, an result in their loalization in the

minima or maxima of the light intensity map. Optial

latties with spatially modulated light polarization pro-

vide energy dissipation mehanisms resulting from yli

optial pumping of the traveling atoms between their

ground state sublevels [3℄. This leads to atom temper-

atures below the Doppler ooling limit [4℄. Usually, the

optial latties are (cid:28)lled with atoms either prepared in

a MOT and further ooled in optial molasses or from

the Bose-Einstein ondensate [2℄. In priniple, stable lat-

tie trapping an our also in a MOT but this requires

Figure 1: Layout of the experiment. The probe and retrore-

speial beam on(cid:28)guration [5, 6℄.

(cid:29)eted lattie beams interset in a loud of old atoms in the

We report on a 1D, blue-detuned optial lattie reated

working MOT. The momentum exhange due to Raman tran-

diretly in a regular working MOT, i.e. with (cid:29)utuating

trapping (cid:28)elds onstantly on. By means of the Raman

pump-probe spetrosopy we study the o-existene of

sitions involving the probe and the lattie photons is allowed

in two diretions: ⊥ and ||. The 1D lattie onstrains atomi
motion along the z′
diretion, whih, for small θ, nearly oin-
ides with the || diretion. The third pair of the MOT beams

two atomi frations: one, whih is aptured by the lat-

and the MOT oils are not shown.

tie, and the other, whih is too hot to be loalized in the

lattie miropotentials. We also show that the depth of

The probe and lattie beams drive Raman transitions

the lattie potential wells an be ontrolled by the MOT

with absorption of a photon from one beam followed

beams.

In our experiment (see Fig. 1) we use the

Rb atoms

85

trapped and ooled in a standard six-beam, vapor-loaded

MOT [7℄. Two additional beams interset at a small an-

gle in the trap enter: the lattie standing wave and the

running probe beam. Both have the same, linear po-

by a stimulated emission to the seond beam. The re-

sulting hange of atomi momentum ∆p = ~∆k =
2~kˆei sin θ/2, where k is the modulus of the light wave
±
vetor, θ is the angle between the beams, and ˆei is the
unit vetor in the (y, z) plane, perpendiular to the bi-
setor of θ (Fig 2a). The sign in ∆p depends on the

larization and are blue-detuned from the trapping tran-

diretion of the Raman proess. Sine the photons in-

sition

volved in the transition have the same polarization, the

2

S1/2(F = 3)(cid:21)
·140
23.3 Γ, where Γ denotes the natural linewidth.

P3/2(F ′ = 4) by ∆latt = 2π

2

MHz ≈

−

atoms to a negligible level: the sattering rate does not

exeed 44 kHz for the lattie beam intensities Ilatt =
5

35 mW/m

2

. We have measured that suh lattie

intensities do not ause any visible heating. The trap-

atom remains in the same ground state. Thus, the hange

kineti energy by ∆Ekin = ~δ (Fig. 2b). The net vari-
ation of the probe beam intensity, s(δ), depends on the

population di(cid:27)erene of the momentum states and shows

a resonant behavior around δ = 0 [8, 9℄. This, so alled,

Suh a detuning redues resonant interation with the

of its momentum is aompanied only by the hange of

ping, probe and lattie beams are derived from diode

reoil-indued resonane, has a shape of the derivative of

2

Figure 2:

(a) Geometry of the light beams and momentum

transfer ~∆k

in the Raman transition. (b) Raman transitions

between kineti states of free, unbound atoms. () Raman

transitions between vibrational levels in the optial lattie

potential. The vibrational levels spaing dereases due to

anharmoniity. In (b) and () irles symbolize populations

of the relevant levels.

the atomi kineti momentum distribution along the mo-

mentum exhange diretion, s(δ)
pi = p

ˆei .

∝

·

∂Π(pi)/∂pi , where

The above mehanism works for atoms whih move

Figure 3: (a) Single, wide RIR spetrum aquired in the two-

freely and their kineti energy an hange in a ontinu-

beam on(cid:28)guration shown in the inset. Solid line represents

ous way but not for atoms trapped in optial latties. In

the (cid:28)t by the (cid:28)rst term of eq.(1). Suh spetra are used

our ase the motion of atoms on(cid:28)ned in the 1D lattie

to determine temperature of the atomi loud. (b) Experi-

wells beomes quantized in one diretion. This results

mental spetrum (grey) reorded in the presene of the 1D

optial lattie (inset) and the (cid:28)t by eq.(1) (solid line). ()

in vibrational struture of energy levels, unevenly spaed

by ~ω(1)

v , ~ω(2)

v , . . . due to anharmoniity of the potential

(Fig. 2). Positions of the most distint Raman vibra-

RIR omponents of the (cid:28)t: wide RIR assoiated with mo-

mentum exhange in the || diretion (dotted line) and narrow
RIR assoiated with the exhange in the ⊥ diretion (solid

tional resonanes [10, 11℄, the (cid:28)rst harmoni and over-

line). (d) Vibrational omponents: (cid:28)rst harmoni (solid line)

and overtone (dotted line), extrated from the (cid:28)t.

tone, δ =

¯ω I
v ,

±

±

¯ω II

v , assoiated with the hange of vi-

brational quantum numbers by 1 and 2, an be found by

averaging of vibrational level spaing over anharmoni-

ity of the trapping potential with weights re(cid:29)eting the

and probe beams. This is a signi(cid:28)ant simpli(cid:28)ation with

temperature-dependent populations of given vibrational

respet to the previous work [12℄, allowing sensitive study

levels.

of oexistene of the two frations. By dereasing the

By hanging intensities of the MOT and lattie beams,

intensity of the trapping beams, when the temperature

the atomi temperature and lattie depth an be varied

of the magneto-optial trap was appropriately low, we

so that a signi(cid:28)ant fration of atoms may be loalized

studied modi(cid:28)ations of the spetra indiating partition

in lattie wells. In our geometry of the probe and lattie

of our atomi sample into two frations. The measured

beams three ontributions are then expeted in the probe

spetra were (cid:28)tted with the equation

transmission spetrum. Two of them are reoil-indued

resonanes: the narrow one, involving the probe and the

nearly o-propagating lattie beam with ∆p along the

⊥ diretion, and the wide one, for the probe and lattie
beams nearly ounter-propagating, with ∆p along the ||

diretion (Fig. 1). The third possible ontribution is the

vibrational spetrum resulting from Raman transitions

between quantized energy levels of the atoms trapped

and osillating in the 1D lattie miropotentials [10℄. The

spetra aquired in our experiment indeed exhibit all the

expeted ontributions, as shown in Figs. 3b-d. It proves

oexistene of two atomi frations in a MOT: the un-

s(δ) =

∂

∂

G

A||

−
+ LI (cid:2)
L
+ LII (cid:2)

(δ, ξ||)
∂δ
(δ,

−

(δ,

L

−

A⊥

G

−
v , γ I )
¯ω I
v , γ II )
¯ω II

− L

(δ, ξ⊥)
∂δ
(δ, ¯ω I

− L

v , γ I )(cid:3)
(δ, ¯ω II

v , γ II )(cid:3) ,

(1)

(δ, ξ) is the normalized Gaussian desribing ki-
where G
neti momentum distribution with standard deviation ξ ,
(δ, ω, γ) is the Lorentzian used for modeling the Ra-
and L
man vibrational resonane entered at ω and with width
γ ; A|| and A⊥ represent amplitudes of the wide (||) and
narrow (⊥) RIR ontributions, and LI and LII are am-

bound fration of free moving atoms and the loalized

plitudes of the vibrational resonanes assoiated with the

fration of atoms aptured by the 1D lattie. Thanks

(cid:28)rst harmoni and overtone [13℄. Figs. 3, d show sep-

to large detuning ∆latt , transitions involving the MOT-

arated reoil and vibrational ontributions of expression

beams do not overlap with those indued by the lattie

(1) to the spetrum of Figs. 3b.

3

We also observed systemati variation of the relative am-

plitudes of the two RIR ontributions. As it an be seen

in Fig. 4, for lower temperatures the amplitude of the

wide RIR assoiated with the momentum exhange in the

|| diretion in notieably smaller than for the ⊥ diretion.

This behavior an be explained by onstraints imposed

by 1D optial lattie on the atomi movement and on-

sequent suppression of reoil in the || diretion. Hene,

loalized atoms do not ontribute to the wide RIR. Sine

the fration of atoms trapped in the lattie grows with

the derease of temperature at the expense of unbound

atoms, the amplitude of the wide RIR beomes smaller.

Inversely, sine there is no lattie trapping in the ⊥ di-

retion, the loalization does not a(cid:27)et the narrow RIR.

Figure 4: Probe transmission spetra with 1D optial lattie

reorded for various MOT-beam intensities and related tem-

peratures. Left olumn, measured spetra (grey) and RIR

ontributions (solid blak) determined from two-beam ther-

mometry (see text). Right olumn, vibrational ontributions

extrated by substration of RIS omponents from full spetra

and theoretial (cid:28)ts (dotted).

In the spetra measured with three-beam on(cid:28)guration

the (cid:28)rst vibrational omponent is very distint but the

overtone overlaps with the wide RIR. To improve the (cid:28)t

auray, we redued the number of free parameters by

determining the temperature of the old atomi loud for

eah measurement. For that purpose, the mirror retrore-

(cid:29)eting the lattie beam (Fig. 1) was bloked and the

two-beam RIR veloimetry [14, 15℄ with the ounter-

propagating Raman beams was performed.

In suh a

on(cid:28)guration, the only ontribution to the spetrum is

the wide RIR assoiated with the momentum transfer

along the || diretion (Fig. 3a). Sine our 1D optial lat-

tie does not exhibit spatial polarization modulation, no

additional ooling mehanism is present. Hene, we as-

Figure 5: Trap-beam intensity and temperature dependene

of the atomi frations estimated by alulating areas S
under relevant spetra ontributions: (a) Slattice/Swide RIR ,

the ratio of the loalized and unbound atomi fration and

Snarrow RIR/Swide RIR re-saled as desribed in text, the ratio
of number of atoms moving free in the ⊥ and || diretions, (b)
Sovertone/S1st harmonic , the ratio of atoms undergoing Raman

st

sume that the temperature of atoms in a MOT with and

transitions responsible for the 1

harmoni and overtone.

without the lattie is the same. Having determined the

temperature T , we alulate the widths ξ|| and ξ⊥ [12, 14℄

and use them as onstants in the (cid:28)ts with two (cid:28)rst terms

To estimate the relative ontributions of the disussed

atomi frations, we numerially evaluated areas S under

of eq. (1). The (cid:28)tted RIR ontributions are then sub-

relevant terms of eq. (1). Fig. 5a presents the alulated

trated from the spetra reorded with the lattie beams,

ratio Slattice/Swide RIR , whih represents the temperature

i.e. with unbloked retrore(cid:29)eting mirror of Fig. 1. The

dependene of the relative number of atoms in the lattie

resulting di(cid:27)erene onstitutes pure lattie ontribution

whih is very well reprodued by the last terms of eq. (1),

as seen in Fig. 4.

to the atoms that move free in the || diretion. Fig. 5a
depits also the ratio Snarrow RIR/Swide RIR re-saled by
θ)/2] [12, 14℄.
a geometrial fator sin(θ/2)/ sin [(180

−

For dereasing temperature of the atomi loud we ob-

As the transition amplitudes for both RIRs are the

served inrease of the amplitude of the vibrational ontri-

same, the ratio an be straightforwardly treated as the

bution relative to the RIR ontribution. This indiates a

growth of the fration loalized in the 1D optial lattie.

relative number of the atoms unbound in the ⊥ and
|| diretions. The two plots in Fig. 5a exhibit sim-

4

ilar harater resulting from inrease of the unbound

In onlusion, we have realized a stable 1D optial lat-

atomi fration with growing temperature. As expeted,

tie reated diretly within a working MOT. The lattie

Snarrow RIR/Swide RIR asymptotially tends to unity. For

an apture relatively hot atoms (∼100 µK).

higher temperatures and trapping-beam intensities we

By performing Raman pump-probe spetrosopy we

observed the systemati inrease of the overtone ontri-

bution relative to the 1st

harmoni (Sovertone/S1st harmonic

investigated the o-existene of the two atomi frations:

one trapped in a lattie and the other moving freely in the

ratio, depited in Fig. 5b). We attribute it to the rising

magneto-optial trap. We demonstrated that the sup-

probability of the overtone transitions due to higher an-

pression of reoil along lattie-trapping diretions makes

harmoniity of the lattie potential for higher trapping-

it possible to use the reoil-indued resonanes as a tool

beam intensity [16℄.

for studying the dynamis of the lattie loading. In this

We have also studied a hange of the position of the

way we extended the sope of the RIR, usually applied for

average (cid:28)rst harmoni frequeny, ¯ω I

v , with the inrease of

diretion-seletive veloimetry [8, 12, 14, 15℄. Moreover,

temperature at higher trapping-beam intensity (Fig. 6).

we found that the trapping beams signi(cid:28)antly a(cid:27)et the

As the higher vibrational levels beome more populated

lattie potential. This opens a possibility of ontrolling

with the inreasing temperature, one might expet a shift

the optial lattie properties by independent light (cid:28)elds.

of the vibrational resonanes towards lower frequenies.

However, ¯ω I

v inreases when the trapping light beomes

This work is supported by the Polish Ministry of Si-

ene and Information Soiety Tehnologies and is part of

more intense. We interpret this e(cid:27)et as follows. The

a general program on old-atom physis of the National

levels of the atoms in a MOT with the lattie beams

Laboratory of AMO Physis in Toru«, Poland. We would

swithed on are light-shifted by two (cid:28)elds:

the red-

like to thank Julien Saby for his assistane in analysis of

detuned MOT (cid:28)eld and the blue-detuned lattie (cid:28)eld.

the experimental data and to Dmitry Budker for his re-

When the intensity of the trapping light is inreased,

marks on the manusript.

the light-shifts of the ground atomi sublevels also in-

rease. This leads to smaller detuning of the atomi

resonane frequeny relative to the blue-detuned lattie

beam. Sine the depth of the lattie potential Ulatt is pro-
portional to Ilatt/∆latt , we observe the inrease of Ulatt
followed by inrease of ¯ω I
√Ulatt . The alulations
v ∝

based on suh simplisti explanation, despite the quali-

∗

†

Eletroni address: gawlikuj.edu.pl

URL: http://www.if.uj.edu.pl/ZF/qnog/

tative agreement, fail to reprodue the observed depen-

dene of ¯ω I
v .

It indiates that in our ase bihromati

Hänsh and T. Esslinger, Appl. Phys. B 73, 769-772

[1℄ for review see, for example, G. Grynberg and C. Robil-

liard, Phys. Rep. 355, 335 (2001) and referenes therein.

[2℄ see, for example, M. Greiner, I. Bloh, O. Mandel, T.W.

dressing [17℄ annot be redued to independent light

(2001) and referenes therein.

shifts. The observed phenomenon suggests a pratial

[3℄ J. Dalibard and C. Cohen-Tannoudji, J. Opt. So. Am.

way of adjusting the lattie potential by an additional

B 6, 2023 (1998).

light (cid:28)eld that is not diretly assoiated with reation of

[4℄ P.D. Lett, R.N. Watts, C.I. Westbrook, W.D. Phillips,

the lattie.

P.L. Gould and H.J. Metalf, Phys. Rev. Lett. 61, 169

[5℄ K.I. Petsas, A.B. Coates and G. Grynberg, Phys. Rev.

(1988).

A, 50, 5173 (1994).

[6℄ H. Shadwinkel, U. Reiter, V. Gomer and D. Meshede,

Phys. Rev. A, 61 013409 (1999).

[7℄ E. L. Raab, M. Prentiss, A. Cable, S. Chu, and D. E.

Prithard, Phys. Rev. Lett. 59, 2631 (1987).

[8℄ G. Grynberg. J.-Y. Courtois, B. Lounis, and P. Verkerk,

Phys. Rev. Lett. 72, 3017 (1994).

[9℄ P. Verkerk, Proeedings of The International Shool of

Physis, Varenna, Course CXXXI, 325 (1996).

[10℄ P. Verkerk, B. Lounis, C. Salomon, and C. Co-

hen(cid:21)Tannoudji, J.(cid:21)Y. Courtois and G. Grynberg, Phys.

Rev. Lett. 68, 3861, (1992).

[11℄ P.S. Jessen, C. Gerz, P.D. Lett, W.D. Phillips, S.L. Rol-

ston, R.J.C. Spreeuw, and C.I. Westbrook, Phys. Rev.

Figure 6: Frequeny

¯ω

I
v of the vibrational resonane (marked

Lett., 69 49 (1992).

[12℄ T. M. Brzozowski, M. Brzozowska, J. Zahorowski, M.

by arrows on the lattie spetrum in the inset) as a funtion

Zawada, and W. Gawlik, Phys. Rev. A 71, 013401 (2005).

of the MOT trapping beams intensity. Solid line presents

[13℄ Our alulations based on Ref. [18℄ proved that higher

the independent light-shift predition. Although it shows the

overtones an be negleted.

orret rising slope, it does not reprodue the magnitude of

[14℄ M. Brzozowska, T.M. Brzozowski, J. Zahorowski and

experimental shifts.

W. Gawlik, submitted.

[15℄ D. R. Meaher, D. Boiron, H. Metalf, C. Salomon, and

(1993).

G. Grynberg, Phys. Rev. A 50, R1992 (1994).

[18℄ C. Cohen-Tannoudji, J. Dupont-Ro and G. Grynberg,

[16℄ G. Herzberg, Moleular Spetra and Moleular Struture,

Atom-Photon Interations: Basi Proesses and Appli-

Krieger Publishing Company 1992, pp.85-88

ations, John Wiley & Sons, 1992, pp. 86-87; 519-523.

[17℄ e.g. Z. Fiek and H.S. Freedho(cid:27), Phys. Rev. A, 48 3092

5

