5
0
0
2
 
t
c
O
 
2
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
m
o
t
a
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
2
0
2
0
1
5
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Atomic spirograph : Quantum state measurement using coherent transients

Antoine Monmayrant, B´eatrice Chatel, and Bertrand Girard
Laboratoire Collisions, Agr´egats, R´eactivit´e (UMR 5589 CNRS-UPS), IRSAMC,
Universit´e Paul Sabatier Toulouse 3, 31062 Toulouse cedex 9, France
(Dated: February 20, 2014)

We present the principle and experimental demonstration of Time Resolved Quantum State Holog-
raphy. The quantum state of an excited state interacting with an ultrashort chirped laser pulse is
measured during this interaction. This has been obtained by manipulating coherent transients
created by the interaction of femtosecond shaped pulses and rubidium atoms.

PACS numbers: 32.80.Qk, 42.50Md, 82.53.Kp

Quantum state measurement is a central issue of fun-
damental importance to quantum mechanics [1, 2]. Since
only probabilities can be predicted by quantum mechan-
ics, the phases of the wave function seem at ﬁrst sight
meaningless. However, relative phases between quantum
states are crucial in many circumstances such as predic-
tion of the free or driven evolution of the system, or the
measurements of quantities (observables) related to the
superposition of quantum states with diﬀerent energies.
Several examples of quantum phase measurements of
states created by ultrashort pulses are based on interfer-
ences between an unknown wave function and a ”refer-
ence” wave function. These wave functions are created
by a sequence of two ultrashort pulses (an unknown pulse
and a reference pulse). In quantum state holography, the
quantum state created by the unknown pulse is deduced
either by time- and frequency- integrated ﬂuorescence
measured as a function of the delay [3, 4], or by measuring
the population of each eigenstate for diﬀerent values of
the relative phases [5], or the amplitude of ﬂuctuations
when the delay is randomly ﬂuctuating [6, 7]. In ﬂuo-
rescence tomography, position probability distributions
are measured as a function of time [8, 9]. For instance,
the dispersed ﬂuorescence emitted by an oscillating nu-
clear wave packet in a diatomic molecule provides the
position distribution through the Franck-Condon princi-
ple [8]. Alternatively the induced dipole can be obtained
from heterodyne measurement [10]. More recently the in-
ternuclear quantum state of dissociating molecules have
been elegantly measured by tomography using velocity
map imaging [11].

In all these examples, the quantum state is ﬁrst pre-
pared and then measured in a second step. In the work
reported here, the quantum state is measured during the
interaction with the unknown laser pulse. Its evolution
is thus recorded in real time.

When the matter - light interaction is in the linear
regime, the ﬁnal state populations can be entirely de-
duced from the power spectrum. This is for instance the
case for a one-photon transition in the weak ﬁeld regime.
However, the phase of the wave function is sensitive to
the various phases of the electric ﬁeld. This can have im-
portant consequences for applications where a subsequent
excitation is performed, in particular when coherent su-
perpositions are involved.

The transient evolution of excited state population is
also strongly dependent on the detailed laser shape. In
particular, non-resonant contributions are as important
as resonant ones. As an intuitive illustration of this state-
ment, the transient response to a non-resonant excita-
tion follows the electric ﬁeld temporal envelope, indepen-
dently of its spectrum. For instance, simply changing the
pulse duration changes this transient response.

A resonant interaction leads to radically diﬀerent be-
haviors. Fourier Transform (FT) limited pulses produce
a step-wise excitation in the weak-ﬁeld regime, and Rabi
oscillations in the intermediate and strong ﬁeld regime.
Chirped pulses produce a total population inversion in
the strong ﬁeld with a ﬁnal state robust with respect
to small variations of laser parameters [12]. Chirped
pulses in the weak ﬁeld regime lead to Coherent Tran-
sients (CTs) [13, 14], a less intuitive behavior which il-
lustrates the relative importance of the various stages of
the interaction. The laser frequency sweeps linearly with
time and crosses the resonance. Most of the population
transfer occurs at resonance. The small fraction of ex-
cited state amplitude transferred after resonance leads
to strong oscillations due to interferences between the
oscillating atomic dipole and the exciting ﬁeld (see Fig.
1, dotted line). Otherwise, interaction before resonance
results in negligible eﬀects. Similarly, in propagation ex-
periments, interferences between the ﬁeld radiated by the
atom and the incoming ﬁeld leads to interferences which
can be used as a partial analysis of the ﬁeld such as chirp
[15] or dispersion [16] measurements.

The shape of these CTs can be radically changed by
using a pulse shaper [17, 18]. This high sensitivity of
Coherent Transients to slight modiﬁcations of the laser
pulse provides possibilities to use CT measurements as
a characterization of the laser pulse itself [19] or of the
quantum state which is generated. In a simple approach,
if the general shape of the laser pulse is known and only
few parameters need to be determined, one can use a
simple adjustment of these parameters to ﬁt the experi-
mental CTs with the predicted ones [18]. However, one
would like to establish a general method providing a di-
rect inversion from the data to the quantum state. One
limitation of CTs is that only the part of the pulse af-
ter resonance leads to oscillations which can be used to
determine the shape. Another diﬃculty is that the mea-

sured quantity is related to the excited state probability
whereas one aims to measure probability amplitudes. In
this contribution we show how it is possible to overcome
these diﬃculties. Several CT measurements are com-
bined, each with a sequence of two pulses. This sequence
consists of a reference pulse which creates an initial pop-
ulation in the excited state, and an ”unknown” pulse
whose eﬀect on the quantum state is to be measured in
real time. The ﬁrst pulse creates an initial population in
the excited state so that the corresponding dipole beats
with the whole of the second (unknown) pulse. A sec-
ond measurement is performed after adding a π/2 phase
shift to the second pulse. This provides in-phase and in-
quadrature measurements from which the real-time evo-
lution (during the laser interaction) of the quantum state
can be deduced. In common with quantum state hologra-
phy [3], the quantum state created by the unknown pulse
is determined by direct interferometric comparison with
a reference quantum state. However, in our method, the
unknown quantum state is measured at any time during
and after its creation. Moreover, the properties of the
ﬁrst pulse need not be fully characterized in our method.
Consider the resonant interaction between an atomic
system and a sequence of two weak nonoverlapping fem-
tosecond laser pulses E1 (t) and E2 (t). First order time
dependent perturbation theory predicts the probability
of ﬁnding the atom in the excited state at any time τ
after the interaction with the ﬁrst pulse to be

S θ(τ ) =

ae1(∞) + e iθae2(τ )
(cid:12)
2
+ |ae2(τ )|
(cid:12)

2

= |ae1(∞)|

(cid:12)
(cid:12)

2

(1)

+ 2 Re

e iθae

(cid:2)

∗
1(∞)ae2(τ )
(cid:3)

Here θ is an arbitrary phase which can be added to the
second pulse with respect to the ﬁrst one. The probabil-
ity amplitude produced by the pulse Ek (t) is

2

is applied to modify the electric ﬁeld. Here ∆ω = ω −
ωL, where ωL is the laser carrier frequency. The ﬁrst
pulse is short (FT limited) and the second one is delayed
and strongly chirped in order to produce the CTs. The
ﬁrst pulse creates the required initial excited population
to produce oscillations during the whole second pulse as
shown on Fig. 1.

Time (ps)

FIG. 1: Simulation of Coherent Transients resulting from the
excitation of the atom by a FT limited pulse (at time t=0)
followed by a chirped pulse (centered at t=10ps). For θ =
0 (black) and θ = π/2 (gray). Dotted line: ”Simple” CTs
obtained for a single pulse at t=10ps.

To illustrate this scheme, an experiment has been per-
formed in atomic rubidium. The experimental set-up
is displayed in Fig. 2. The 5s-5p(P1/2) transition (at

CPA

NOPA

795 nm

1 (cid:181)J, 20 ps

1 kHz

Pulse

1 mJ

130 fs

Shaper

Delay line

607 nm, 1 kHz

1 (cid:181)J, 30 fs

795 nm, 1 kHz

Rb

Cell

Photo

Multiplier

aek(t) = −

t

µeg
2i~ Z

−∞

Ek(t

′

)e iωeg t

′

′

dt

(2)

FIG. 2: Experimental set-up. NOPA : non collinear optical
parametric ampliﬁer; CPA: Chirped Pulse Ampliﬁer

where ωeg is the transition frequency and µeg the dipole
moment matrix element. The excited state probability
S θ(τ ) can be measured in a pump-probe scheme with an
ultrashort probe pulse tuned on a transition towards an-
other excited state |f i [14]. The probability amplitude
produced by the second pulse ae2(t) can be obtained by
resolving the nonlinear equation array resulting from a
set of two experiments performed with diﬀerent values
of θ. For instance, θ0 and θ0 + π/2 can be chosen.
If
the second pulse is much weaker than the ﬁrst one, the
quadratic term in ae2(τ ) can be neglected to obtain a
simple linear equation array. Alternatively, a third mea-
surement can be performed with only the second pulse
in order to measure |ae2(τ )|2 directly.

The two pulse sequence with a well deﬁned phase rela-
tionship can be generated at once by a pulse shaper [20].
For this purpose, the complex spectral mask

′
Hθ(ω) = {1 + exp[i(θ + φ

′′
∆ω + φ

(∆ω)2/2)]}/2

(3)

795 nm) is resonantly excited with a pulse sequence.
The transient excited state population is probed ”in real
time” on the 5p-(8s, 6d) transitions with an ultrashort
pulse (at 607 nm). The laser system is based on a con-
ventional Ti:Sapphire laser with chirped pulse ampliﬁ-
cation (Spitﬁre, Spectra Physics) which supplies 1 mJ
-130 fs -795 nm pulses. Half of the beam is used for the
pump pulse. The remaining half seeds a home made Non-
collinear Optical Parametric Ampliﬁer (NOPA) com-
pressed using double pass silica prisms, which delivers
pulses of a few microJoule, 30 fs -FWHM pulse inten-
sity, centered around 607 nm. The pump pulse is shaped
with a programmable pulse-shaping device[20], recom-
bined with the probe pulse and sent into a sealed rubid-
ium cell. The pump-probe signal is detected by moni-
toring the ﬂuorescence at 420 nm due to the radiative
cascade (8s, 6d) - 6p - 5s collected by a photomultiplier
tube as a function of the pump-probe delay. The pulse

3

shaping device is a 4f set-up composed of one pair each of
reﬂective gratings and cylindrical mirrors. Its active ele-
ments -two 640 pixels liquid crystal masks- are installed
in the common focal plane of both mirrors. This provides
high resolution pulse shaping in both phase and ampli-
tude [20]. This is used to generate the shaped pump pulse
by applying the function Hθ deﬁned above. The laser is
centered at resonance (ωL = ωeg). The delay between
the two pulses is equal to φ′ = 6 ps. The second pulse
is strongly chirped (φ” = −2.105 fs2) to around 10 ps
duration.

 

 

)
.
u

 
.

b
r
a
(
 
e
c
n
e
c
s
e
r
o
u
F

l

 

 

FIG. 4: Experimental probability amplitude reconstructed
from the CTs of Fig. 3. Real part and Imaginary parts are
shown as a function of time.

-1

0

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

Delay (ps)

FIG. 3: Coherent Transients resulting from the excitation of
the atom by a FT limited pulse (at time t=0) followed by
a chirped pulse (centered at t=6ps). Lower panel: relative
phase between pulses θ = θ0 ≃ −0.7 rad and upper panel :
θ = θ0 + π/2. Solid line : theory; squares : experiment.

Figure 3 displays the Coherent Transients obtained
with the two experiments performed with θ = θ0 ≃
−0.7 rad and θ = θ0 + π/2. The squares represent the
experimental results which ﬁt perfectly with the resolu-
tion of the Schr¨odinger equation (solid line). The ﬁrst
plateau (for positive times) is due to the population in-
2
duced by the ﬁrst FT limited pulse. It allows |ae1(∞)|
to be determined.

The eﬀects of the second pulse can be divided into
three parts. The strong increase taking place at reso-
nance (around t = 6 ps) is preceded and followed by
oscillations resulting from interferences of oﬀ -resonance
contributions with the resonant population. The height
of the asymptotic value depends strongly on the relative
phase θ.

The excited state probability amplitude produced by
the second pulse is extracted from the two measurements
displayed in Fig. 3. The good stability of the laser allows
the raw data to be used without any renormalization be-
tween the two pairs of measurements. The reconstructed
probability amplitude is displayed on Fig. 4 in a 3D plot
(complex plane as a function of time). The projections on

the various 2D planes are also displayed. The expected
Cornu spiral is clearly seen in the complex plane.

The ﬁrst part of the spiral winds around the population
induced by the ﬁrst pulse (which has been substracted
on the graph). After passage through resonance corre-
sponding to an almost ”straight” direction as expected
(stationary phase in Eq. 2), the second part of the spi-
ral winds around the asymptotic value resulting from the
combined eﬀects of both pulses. The reconstruction pro-
cedure requires resolving a set of nonlinear equations.
Two solutions are in general mathematically obtained,
but only one is physically acceptable. It is obtained by
continuity from the solution corresponding to the begin-
ning of the second pulse for which ae2(−∞) = 0. This
procedure works eﬃciently as long as these two solutions
are not degenerated. This may occur for particular val-
ues of θ if the second pulse is larger than the ﬁrst one.
This situation should therefore be avoided. However, a
scheme with three measurements as depicted above (see
Fig. 1) could instead be used in this situation. Figure 5
gives examples of Cornu spirals reconstructed for θ values
of θ0 = 3.3 rad and θ0 + 2π/3. for similar pulse ampli-
tudes. The quality of the reconstruction is excellent in
the two cases.

The present experiment beneﬁts from the wide capabil-
ity of our high resolution pulse shaper [20]. In particular
it delivers a sequence of two shaped pulses with excellent
(interferometric) stability. The lack of stability was a se-
rious limitation (partly bypassed by measuring the noise
induced by delay ﬂuctuations [6, 21]) in previous experi-
ments [22]. This was overcome only recently in Michelson
type experiments [23, 24].

4

phase and amplitude pulse shaper allows speciﬁc phases
to be applied to the second pulse at the transition fre-
quencies associated with each independent excited state.
A simple scheme with (2p + 1) measurements for p ex-
cited states can be derived. This provides with a system
of 2p linear equations with 2p unknowns (real and imag-
inary part of each probability amplitude). The set of
speciﬁc phases can be easily chosen to ensure that the
corresponding system can be inverted. Such a scheme
would present an extension of quantum state hologra-
phy [3, 4] to the time evolution holography of a complex
quantum wave packet.

Weak-ﬁeld interaction is not an intrinsic limitation of
this technique which can be extended to wave packets
created in the strong ﬁeld. In this regime, iterative algo-
rithms have been proposed to reconstruct the quantum
state in wave packet interferences [25] and could be im-
plemented in our scheme.

We have demonstrated how the instantaneous excited
state can be reconstructed during its interaction with a
laser pulse. This scheme is very general and can be used
even without chirping the pulse.
It can have wide ap-
plications in situations where careful control of the wave
function during ultrashort pulses interaction is searched.
This is in particular the case of quantum information ap-
plications. It can of course be also used to characterize
complex pulse shapes [19].

FIG. 5: Reconstructed experimental probability amplitude
obtained for diﬀerent values of the relative phase : θ0 = 3.3
rad and θ0 + 2π/3.

The present scheme achieves time resolved measure-
ment of a single quantum state. Extension to a superpo-
sition of quantum states is rather straightforward. The

We sincerely acknowledge Julien Courteaud for his
help during a part of the experiment and Chris Meier
for fruitful discussions.

[1] M. G. Raymer, Contemp. Phys. 38, 343 (1997).
[2] W. P. Schleich, Quantum Optics in Phase Space (Wiley-

Lett. 87, 033001 (2001).

[15] J. E. Rothenberg, IEEE J. Quant. Electronics QE-22,

VCH, Berlin, 2001).

174 (1986).

[3] C. Leichtle, W. P. Schleich,

I. S. Averbukh, and

M. Shapiro, Phys. Rev. Lett. 80, 1418 (1998).

[4] I. S. Averbukh, M. Shapiro, C. Leichtle, and W. P. Schle-

ich, Phys. Rev. A 59, 2163 (1999).

[5] X. Chen and J. A. Yeazell, Phys. Rev. A 56, 2316 (1997).
[6] T. C. Weinacht, J. Ahn, and P. H. Bucksbaum, Phys.

Rev. Lett. 80, 5508 (1998).

[7] T. C. Weinacht, J. Ahn, and P. H. Bucksbaum, Nature

[16] J. Delagnes, A. Monmayrant, P. Zahariev, B. Chatel,
B. Girard, and M. A. Bouchene, Appl. Phys. B submit-
ted (2005).

[17] J. Degert, W. Wohlleben, B. Chatel, M. Motzkus, and

B. Girard, Phys. Rev. Lett. 89, 203003 (2002).

[18] W. Wohlleben, J. Degert, A. Monmayrant, B. Chatel,
M. Motzkus, and B. Girard, App. Phys. B 79, 435 (2004).
[19] A. Monmayrant, B. Chatel, and B. Girard, Opt. Lett.

[8] T. J. Dunn, I. A. Walmsley, and S. Mukamel, Phys. Rev.

[20] A. Monmayrant and B. Chatel, Rev. Sci. Inst. 75, 2668

[9] U. Leonhardt and M. G. Raymer, Phys. Rev. Lett. 76,

[21] O. Kinrot, I. Averbukh, and Y. Prior, Phys. Rev. Lett.

397, 233 (1999).

Lett. 74, 884 (1995).

1985 (1996).

accepted (2005).

(2004).

75, 3822 (1995).

[10] A. Zucchetti, W. Vogel, D. G. Welsch, and I. A. Walms-

[22] V. Blanchet, C. Nicole, M. A. Bouchene, and B. Girard,

ley, Phys. Rev. A 60, 2716 (1999), article.

Phys. Rev. Lett. 78, 2716 (1997).

[11] E. Skovsen, H. Stapelfeldt, S. Juhl, and K. Molmer, Phys.

[23] K. Ohmori, Y. Sato, E. E. Nikitin, and S. A. Rice, Phys.

Rev. Lett. 91 (2003), article 090406.

Rev. Lett. 91, 243003 (2003).

[12] B. Broers, H. B. van Linden van den Heuvell, and L. D.

[24] H. Katsuki, H. Chiba, B. Girard, C. Meier, and

Noordam, Phys. Rev. Lett. 69, 2062 (1992).
[13] N. V. Vitanov, Phys. Rev. A 59, 988 (1999).
[14] S. Zamith, J. Degert, S. Stock, B. de Beauvoir,
V. Blanchet, M. A. Bouchene, and B. Girard, Phys. Rev.

K. Ohmori, Phys. Rev. Lett. submitted (2005).

[25] X. Chen and J. A. Yeazell, Phys. Rev. A 60, 4253 (1999),

article.

