Transportable laser system for atom interferometry

P. Cheinet, F. Pereira Dos Santos, T. Petelski, J. Le Gou¨et, K. T. Therkildsen,
A. Clairon and A. Landragin

LNE-SYRTE, CNRS UMR8630, Observatoire de Paris, 61 avenue de l’observatoire, 75014 Paris, France

Compiled July 30, 2013

We describe an optical bench in which we lock the relative frequencies or phases of a set of three lasers in
order to use them in a cold atoms interferometry experiment. As a new feature, the same two lasers serve
alternately to cool atoms and to realize the atomic interferometer. This requires a fast change of the optical
frequencies over a few GHz. The number of required independent laser sources is then only 3, which enables
the construction of the whole laser system on a single transportable optical bench. Recent results obtained
with this optical setup are also presented.

c(cid:13) 2013 Optical Society of America

OCIS codes: 140.3320, 120.3180, 140.3550, 120.3930.

5
0
0
2
 
t
c
O
 
8
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
m
o
t
a
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
1
6
2
0
1
5
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Within the last decades, atom interferometers have de-
veloped into a highly competitive tool
for precision
measurements.1 Atomic fountains used as atomic clocks
are the best realization of the time unit.2 Atom inter-
ferometry also promises sensors to be highly sensitive to
inertial forces.3–6 The use of stimulated Raman transi-
tions to manipulate the atomic wave packet has proven
to be an eﬃcient way to obtain high accuracy devices.5, 6
In this letter, we describe a robust, compact and ver-
satile laser system for atom interferometers using al-
kali atoms. Such experiments basically need two diﬀer-
ent optical frequencies, whose diﬀerence remains close to
the hyperﬁne transition frequency. When they are tuned
close to the D2 transitions, they are used to cool and
repump the atoms in a magneto-optical trap (MOT).
When far detuned, and phase locked, they are used to
induce stimulated Raman transitions for the interferom-
eter.7 Since lasers are not used simultaneously for trap-
ping and Raman transitions, we have implemented a
technique to use the same two lasers for both functions
on our gravimeter.8 It allowed us to build the whole laser
setup on a 60 × 90 cm2 optical bench.

Our laser setup is shown in ﬁgure 1. A ﬁrst laser L1 is
locked on an atomic transition, using FM-spectroscopy9
on a saturated absorption signal. This laser constitutes
an optical frequency reference and is used in our exper-
iment to detect or push the atoms. A second laser L2 is
alternately used as repumper or as master Raman laser.
Part of the outputs of L1 and L2 are superimposed on
a fast photodetector (PD12) (Hamamatsu G4176) and
the frequency of the beat note is servo locked by using a
frequency to voltage converter. A third laser L3 is used
alternately as cooling or as slave Raman laser. The fre-
quency diﬀerence between L2 and L3 is measured with
a second optical beat note on PD23. Finally, both L2
and L3 beams are superimposed and directed through
an acousto-optical modulator either to a magneto-optical
trap or to an atomic interferometer.

Both frequency locks of L2 and L3 use the same
scheme which is shown in ﬁgure 2. The optical beat note
issued from the photodetector is mixed with a reference

Fig. 1. Laser setup. The detection laser is locked on a
spectroscopy signal. The repumper (resp. cooling) laser
frequency is compared to the detection (resp. repumper)
laser frequency with an optical beat note and servo
locked. Two tapered ampliﬁers (TA) are used on the re-
pumper and cooling lasers before they are combined on
a polarizing beam splitter cube and sent alternately to
the trap or to the interferometer using an acousto-optical
modulator (AOM).

oscillator, down to an intermediate frequency (IF). For
the L2 lock this reference is a tunable oscillator (YIG).
Whereas for L3 we use a ﬁxed 7 GHz frequency ob-
tained by the multiplication of a low phase noise 100
MHz quartz oscillator. The IF signal is then sent into a
digital frequency divider in order to ﬁt into the work-
ing frequency range (0-1 MHz) of a frequency to voltage
converter (FVC) (AD650). A computer controlled oﬀset
voltage VSet is subtracted from the output voltage of the
FVC. The obtained error signal is integrated once and
added to the laser diode current. This correction signal
is integrated again and added to the piezoelectric (PZT)
voltage which controls the cavity length. To change the
laser frequency, one can change VSet for ﬁne tuning or
the YIG frequency for larger frequency changes. In ad-
dition, a computer controlled correction current IC and
a correction voltage VC , are added to the current and
PZT drivers to help the lock while changing the laser
frequency.

For the phase lock of L3 a second path is imple-

1

ramp induces a detuning ∆ of up to 2 GHz on both L2
and L3 to get the Raman laser frequencies. We also add a
ramp on the PZT voltages VC to induce a 2 GHz sweep so
that the laser frequencies stay inside the locking range.
Since the PZT mode-hop free tuning range is close to
± 0.6 GHz, it is necessary to change the current setting
point of the laser during the sweep. Thus we apply ramps
on the currents IC so that the laser frequencies remain
in the middle of the free tuning range. When the servo
loop is closed, the lasers stay locked during the whole
sequence.

In ﬁgure 3 is shown the response of the servo system to
a frequency ramp of 2 GHz in 2 ms, in open and closed
loop conﬁgurations. The black curve corresponds to the
error signal of L2 in open loop operation. The laser fre-
quency remains within 100 MHz from the locking point
during the whole 2 GHz ramp. The voltage ramp does
not compensate exactly the sweep because of thermal ef-
fects due to the change in the laser current. When the
servo loop is closed, the remaining frequency deviation is
compensated for. The gray curve shows the residual fre-
quency error of L2 during the sweep, and reveals residual
damped oscillations of the PZT.

Fig. 3. L2 frequency error during a 2 GHz sweep imposed
in 2 ms. (Black) Servo loop opened (laser unlocked).
(Gray) servo loop closed (laser locked).

We then switch L3 to the phase-locked loop (PLL)
after the end of the frequency ramp. We aim at obtaining
an accuracy of 10−9 g which implies that the phase error
has to remain below 0.3 mrad.8 It takes a few hundreds
of µs for the lock to come perfectly to the right frequency
and to start phase locking. We display the residual phase
error as a function of the delay after enabling the PLL in
ﬁgure 4. 0.5 ms after the loop is closed, the phase reaches
a steady state with a 2 ms time constant exponential
decay. The 0.3 mrad criterion is then reached in about 2
ms. We have measured its spectral phase noise density in
steady state8 and calculated a total contribution of 0.56
mrad rms of phase noise in the atomic interferometer
corresponding to 10−9 g rms.

Fig. 2. Locking electronics. (Solid line) Frequency lock
scheme. The optical beat note is mixed with a reference
oscillator to an intermediate frequency (IF). The IF is
converted to a voltage signal and another voltage VSet
is subtracted to obtain the error signal of the lock. It
is integrated and then sent to the current driver. It is
integrated once more and sent to the PZT driver. Prede-
termined corrections IC and VC are added to the diode
current and to the PZT voltage during the sweep. (Dot-
ted line) Phase lock scheme added to L3. The IF is com-
pared to a Local Oscillator (LO) in a digital phase and
frequency detector (DPFD) delivering the phase error
signal. Two switches select which loop is closed.

mented. The IF frequency is divided by 2 and compared,
in a digital phase and frequency detector (DPFD)10
(MCH12140), to the signal of a local oscillator at 82.6
MHz which is generated by a Direct Digital Synthesiser
(DDS) (AD9852) clocked at 300 MHz. The DPFD
delivers an error signal which is added through a high
bandwidth servo system (∼ 4 MHz) to the laser current.
It is also added to the PZT error signal before its last
integration. Moreover some switches can be activated
so that either the frequency lock loop or the phase lock
loop is closed.

Our interferometer is an atomic gravimeter which
measures the acceleration of freely falling 87Rb atoms.
Its sensitivity is given by: ∆Φ = kef f gT 2, where ∆Φ
is the interferometric phase, kef f is the eﬀective wave
vector of the Raman transition, g is the Earth’s gravity
and T is the time between the interferometer’s Raman
pulses.

This frequency locking system is versatile and enables
to control dynamically the frequency of the two lasers,
over the whole experimental sequence. It is ﬁrst possible
to frequency lock the lasers to the frequencies required to
cool 87Rb atoms in a MOT. Dividing the total available
laser power between a 2D-MOT11 and a 3D-MOT, load-
ing rates of 3 × 109 atoms.s−1 are obtained. Then we
turn the magnetic ﬁeld oﬀ and further cool the atoms
with σ+ − σ− molasses down to a temperature of 2.5
µK.

Once the atoms have been released from the molasses,
a frequency ramp is applied on the YIG oscillator. This

We want to emphasize that the Raman detuning ∆
can be changed at will and other sweeps can be added in

2

Fig. 4. L3 phase error. The PLL is closed at t = 0 af-
ter the 2 GHz sweep. After 0.5 ms, the phase error is
exponentially decreasing with a time constant of 2 ms.

References

the cycle. This enables to realize ﬁrst a velocity selective
Raman pulse (∼ 35 µs), with a detuning of 2 GHz which
reduces the spontaneous emission. Then the detuning
is swept back to 1 GHz for the interferometer itself, to
achieve a better transfer eﬃciency.

Finally, the phased-locked Raman lasers are used to
realize the interferometer. Due to the Doppler eﬀect, the
Raman detuning has to be chirped to compensate for
the increasing vertical velocity of the atomic cloud. This
chirp a, obtained by sweeping the DDS frequency, in-
duces an additional phase shift. The total interferomet-
ric phase is then given by: ∆Φ = (kef f g − a)T 2. Figure 5
displays the interferometric fringes obtained by scanning
the chirp rate. In this experiment, T is 40 ms and the
sensitivity is already of 4 × 10−8 g Hz−1/2, limited by
residual vibrations of the apparatus.

quired frequencies to cool 87RB atoms in a 3D-MOT
and to realize an atomic interferometer with far detuned
Raman lasers. Our laser setup is robust and versatile
since the lasers routinely stay locked for days and we
can change the detuning of the Raman transitions at will.
Our goal for the gravimeter experiment is to reach an ac-
curacy of 10−9 g and a sensitivity of a few 10−9 g Hz−1/2.
Thanks to its compactness, the gravimeter will be trans-
portable to compare it with other absolute gravimeters.
It will also be moved close to the LNE watt balance ex-
periment, which aims at measuring the Planck’s constant
and redeﬁning the kilogram.12

The authors P. C. and J. L. G. thank DGA for sup-
porting this work. The author K. T. T. thanks also the
”Fondation Danoise” for its support.

1. Ch. J. Bord´e, Metrologia 39, 435 (2002).
2. A. Clairon, Ph. Laurent, G. Santarelli, S. Ghezali, S. N.
Lea and M. Bahoura, IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas. 44,
128 (1995).

3. F. Riehle, Th. Kisters, A. Witte, J. Helmcke, Ch. J.

Bord´e, Phys. Rev. Lett. 67, 177 (1991).

4. A. Lenef, T. D. Hammond, E. T. Smith, M. S. Chapman,
R. A. Rubenstein, and D. E. Pritchard, Phys. Rev. Lett.
78, 760 (1997).

5. T. L. Gustavson, A. Landragin, M. Kasevich, Class.

Quantum. Grav. 17, 1 (2000).

6. A. Peters, K. Y. Chung, S. Chu, Metrologia 38, 25

7. M. Kasevich and S. Chu, Phys. Rev. Lett. 67, 181

(2001).

(1991).

8. P. Cheinet, B. Canuel, F. Pereira Dos Santos, A.
submitted for
IEEE Trans. on Instrum. Meas.,

Gauguet, F. Leduc, A. Landragin,
publication to:
http://fr.arxiv.org/abs/physics/0510197

9. J. L. Hall, L. Hollberg, T. Baer, and H. G. Robinson,

Appl. Phys. Lett. 39, 680 (1981).

10. G. Santarelli, A. Clairon, S. N. Lea, and G. M. Tino,

Opt. Commun. 104, 339 (1994).

11. K. Dieckmann, R. J. C. Spreeuw, M. Weidem¨uller and
J. T. M. Walraven, Phys. Rev. A 58, 3891 (1998).
12. G. Genev`es, P. Gournay, A. Gosset, M. Lecollinet, F.
Villar, P. Pinot, P. Juncar, A. Clairon, A. Landragin, D.
Holleville, F. Pereira Dos Santos, J. David, M. Besbes,
F. Alves, L. Chassagne, S. Top¸cu, IEEE Trans. Instrum.
Meas. 54, 850 (2005).

Fig. 5. Atomic interferometer fringes obtained by scan-
ning the Raman detuning chirp rate during the interfer-
ometer. The time between the Raman pulses is T = 40
ms. The solid line is a sinuso¨idal ﬁt of the experimental
points displayed in black squares.

To conclude, this locking technique allowed us to build
with only three lasers an optical bench providing the re-

3

