5
0
0
2
 
c
e
D
 
1
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
m
o
t
a
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
9
9
1
2
1
5
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

JETP Letters, 82, 529(2005)
Induced Absorption Resonance on the Open Fg = 1 → Fe = 2 Transition
of the D1 Line of the 87Rb Atom

A.S.Zibrova,b and A.B.M atskoc
a Lebedev Physical Institute, Russian Academy of Sciences, Leninsky pr. 53, Moscow, 117924, Russia,
b Department of Physics, Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts, 02138, USA,
e-mail: azibrov@cfa.harvard.edu
c Jet Propulsion Laboratory, California Institute of Technology, 4800 Oak Grove Drive, Pasadena, California, 91109-8099, USA

Submitted 1 August 2005

Induced absorption resonance on the open Fg = 1 → Fe = 2 transition of the D1 line of the 87 Rb atom
has been observed. The eﬀect of atomic motion on the formation of the resonance has been revealed. The
numerical calculations are in good agreement with experiment.

PACS: 42.50.Gy, 42.65.k

Narrow atomic resonances are always important in
spectroscopy, particularly in metrology. A new type of
resonances was recently discovered in a degenerate two-
level system and was called induced absorption reso-
nance [1]. Rautian [2] pointed out that spontaneous co-
herence transfer plays an important and universal role
in the formation of spectra. If transitions with approx-
imately equal frequencies νm1−n1 and νm−n, where mi
and ni are the upper and lower levels, respectively, are
coupled through spontaneous relaxation, it transfers co-
herence between the states |mii and |nii. Rautian con-
siders that the importance of this process is comparable
with the importance of the spontaneous and stimulated
emission processes introduced by Einstein. In the spec-
troscopy of a coherently prepared medium, coherence
spontaneous transfer is clearly manifested when induced
absorption resonance is observed.
Its name appeared
In
by analogy with induced transparency resonance.
the case of induced absorption resonance, absorption
increases due to constructive interference between the
quantum states of the system. Coherence is transferred
between Zeeman sublevels due to a spontaneous process
[3, 4]. As was recently predicted in [5], spontaneous co-
herence transfer could be eﬃciently used in the γ radi-
ation range to control Mossbauer spectra. Analysis of
spontaneous coherence transfer seems to be important,
because this eﬀect is the same in microwave and optical
ranges, as well as in γ optics. This motivation stimu-
lated us to study induced absorption resonance in the
rubidium vapor and to present the results in this paper.

Induced absorption resonance was ﬁrst detected on
the closed transition of the D2 line of the Rb atom that
absorbs two in-phase copropagating light waves [1]. It
was pointed out that induced absorption resonance was

5P

1/2

F=2
F=1

Rb cell

d

λ/2

B

Rb cell

λ/4

d1

PBS

d2

(a)

5S

1/2

5P

5P

3/2

1/2

F=2
F=1

(c)

F=0,1,2,3

F=1,2

5S

1/2

(b)

F=1,2

(d)

λ/4

λ/4

Fig.1: Layouts of the experiments and the scheme of
levels for observing induced absorption resonance. (a)
The Hanle conﬁguration experiment, where the trans-
mittance of the linearly polarized coherent light is de-
tected as a function of the magnetic ﬁeld B. (b) The
experiment that involves a pump laser inducing atomic
coherence and the probe laser. The transmission of a
weak circularly polarized probe ﬁeld is measured as a
function of the frequency. The frequency of the pump
laser is ﬁxed. The rotation of the polarization of the
pump ﬁeld is opposite to the rotation of the polariza-
tion of the probe ﬁeld. (c) The scheme of the levels of
the D1 line of the 87Rb atom. (d) The scheme of the
levels of the D1 and D2 lines of the 87Rb atom.

observed when the degeneracy factor of the excited state
exceeded the degeneracy factor of the ground state, i.e.,
0 < Fg ≤ Fe = Fg + 1 [6]. This eﬀect was theoretically
described in [7] for various intensities of the pump ﬁeld,
magnetic moments, and polarizations.

Signals associated with induced absorption reso-
nance were also observed in experiment [8], where the
Hanle conﬁguration was used (laser light propagated
along the magnetic-ﬁeld direction). In that experiment,

1

2

A. S. Zibrov, A. B. Matsko

Fig.2: Transmission of laser radiation vs. the longitu-
dinal ﬁeld magnitude (see the layout in Fig. 1a). The
laser frequency is tuned to the D1 line of the 87Rb atom.
Transmission increases at zero magnetic ﬁeld for all the
transitions except for the F = 1 → F
= 2 transition
(see Fig. 1c). The relative amplitudes of the resonances
are not changed. The magnitude of the induced absorp-
tion resonance on the F = 1 → F
= 2 transition is very
small and is equal to 0.2% of the total 60% absorption.
The shape of the resonance is shown in Fig. 3.

′

′

the atomic Rb vapor was pumped by a single linearly
In the case of the degeneracy of the
polarized wave.
lower level of the ground state, bright resonances were
detected in ﬂuorescence with a concomitant increase in
absorption. Those experimental results were theoreti-
cally analyzed in [9]. In the more recent work [10], it
was shown that an increase in absorption in the Hanle
conﬁguration should also be expected when a laser beam
is perpendicular to the magnetic ﬁeld.

As was mentioned above, induced absorption reso-
nance was observed on the closed transition of the de-
generate ground state. The weak induced absorption
resonance was also observed on the open Fg = 2 →
Fe = 2, 3 transition in the 85Rb atom [8]. However,
on the other open transition Fg = 1 → Fe = 2 of the
D1 line of the 87Rb atom, the eﬀect was not detected
[11, 12].
It was assumed that this was due to optical
pumping and the low degeneracy factor of the corre-
sponding atomic states.

In this paper, we present the results of the exper-
imental investigation of induced absorption resonance
on the open Fg = 1 → Fe = 2 transition of the D1
line scheme [1] and in the Hanle conﬁguration [8]. The

Fig.3: Transmission of laser radiation vs. the magnetic
ﬁeld B in the experiment whose layout is shown in Fig.
1a. The laser is tuned to the open F = 1 → F
= 2
transition (of the D1 line). Transmission increases at
zero magnetic ﬁeld. Lines 1 and 2 correspond to the
laser-ﬁeld intensities 1.5 and 3 mW/cm2, respectively.
A decrease in absorption on line 1 is equal to 3% of the
total 60% absorption. The inset shows the ﬁne struc-
tures of induced absorption resonance.

′

observed eﬀect appeared to be weak (0.2% of the total
absorption due to the optical-pumping-induced deple-
tion of the population). Optical pumping does not com-
pletely destroy spontaneous coherence transfer, which is
responsible for the formation of induced absorption res-
onance, because the atoms interact with light for a ﬁnite
time. Thus, this experiment corroborates that induced
absorption resonance occurs on all Fg → Fe = Fg + 1
transitions both closed and open. The numerical cal-
culation conﬁrms the conclusions drawn using those ex-
perimental results.

We describe both experiments. The ﬁrst experiment
is the same as in [11]. Figure 1a shows the layout of the
setup. An external-cavity laser was tuned to the D1
or D2 line of the 87Rb atom (see Figs. 1c,1d). A laser
beam passed through a half-wave plate and a cell 3.0 cm
in length that contained isotopically pure 87Rb. The va-
por density was controlled by the cell temperature. The
transmission was detected by a photodiode d. The cell
was placed in a three-layer magnetic screen. The longi-
tudinal magnetic ﬁeld is produced by a solenoid placed
inside the screen. The static magnetic ﬁeld gives rise
to the appearance of Zeeman sublevels. The splitting
was equal to the splitting µBB/~ between the neighbor-
ing Zeeman sublevels, where µB is the Bohr magneton.
In the case of the 87Rb atom, the splitting is equal to
B × 0.7M Hz/G.

Induced absorption resonance on the open . . .

3

′

Fig.4: Transmission of laser radiation vs. the mag-
netic ﬁeld B in the experiment whose layout is shown
in Fig. 1a (Hanle conﬁguration). The laser is tuned
near the transition 5S1/2, F = 1 → 5P3/2, F
= 0, 1, 2
of the D2 line of the rubidium atom: (1) the laser fre-
quency is shifted by 250 MHz from the center of the
Doppler proﬁle toward the blue end, (2) the laser fre-
quency is turned to the center of the Doppler proﬁle,
and (3) the laser frequency is shifted by 250 MHz from
the center of the Doppler proﬁle toward the red end. A
decrease of absorption at the center of line 1 is equal
to 2%, whereas the total absorption is equal to about
60%.

In the second experiment, two external-cavity lasers
were used. The frequency of the laser creating coher-
ence remained unchanged, whereas the frequency of the
probe laser was scanned. The radiation of the strong
laser after the passage through a quarter-wave plate be-
came circularly polarized in the direction σ+ , whereas
the radiation of the probe laser was polarized in the
opposite direction σ−. Downstream of the cell, beams
were split by a quarter-wave plate and polarization cube
(PBS) and were detected by photodetectors d1 and d2.
The magnetic-ﬁeld dependence of the light trans-
mission at four frequencies in the Hanle experiment is
shown in Fig.2. The cell temperature was equal to 50
C, the light power was 0.1 mW, and the beam diameter
was equal to 1.5 mm. The transmission increases near
the region where the magnetic ﬁeld is zero for all tran-
sitions except for the F = 1 → F ′ = 2 transition. The
absorption resonance with the subnatural width of the
optical transition is almost unseen in the curve. This
behavior was observed in [11].

After an increase in sensitivity, we detected this in-
crease in absorption (see Fig. 3). The induced absorp-
tion resonance is broadened as the intensity of light in-
creases and disappears at intensities above 20mW/cm2

Fig.5: Transmission Iout/Iin of the probe beam in the
experiment whose layout is shown in Fig. 1b. The fre-
quency of the laser inducing coherence is tuned to the
open transition 5S1/2, F = 1 → 5P1/2, F
= 2 (see Fig.
1d). The inset shows the resonance peak at an increased
scale.

′

. The total increase in absorption is a consequence of
the depopulation of levels due to optical pumping.

An increase in absorption was also observed on the
transition 5S1/2; F = 1 → 5P3/2; F ′ = 0, 1, 2 of the D2
line of rubidium. Unfortunately, the Doppler broaden-
ing prevents the resolution of all the transitions inter-
acting with light in this transition. We measured the
transmission for three diﬀerent tunings of the laser fre-
quency (see Fig. 4). An increase in absorption is eas-
ily seen with tuning to the high-frequency part of the
Doppler proﬁle. We emphasize that interaction with the
F = 1 → F ′ = 2 transition is stronger at these frequen-
cies, whereas interaction with the F = 1 → F ′ = 0
transition is stronger in the low-frequency range.

Transmission of laser radiation vs. the magnetic ﬁeld
B in the experiment whose layout is shown in Fig. 1a
(Hanle conﬁguration). The laser is tuned near the tran-
sition 5S1/2, F = 1 → 5P3/2, F ′ = 0, 1, 2 of the D2 line
of the rubidium atom: (1) the laser frequency is shifted
by 250 MHz from the center of the Doppler proﬁle to-
ward the blue end, (2) the laser frequency is tuned to
the center of the Doppler proﬁle, and (3) the laser fre-
quency is shifted by 250 MHz from the center of the
Doppler proﬁle toward the red end. A decrease of ab-
sorption at the center of line 1 is equal to 2%, whereas
the total absorption is equal to about 60%.

We studied induced absorption resonance in the
standard scheme of experiments with induced absorp-
tion, where two lasers were used. The frequency depen-
dence of the transmission of the radiation of the probe
laser is shown in Fig. 5. The frequency of the laser cre-

4

A. S. Zibrov, A. B. Matsko

ating coherence was tuned to the center of the Doppler
proﬁle of the Fg = 1 → F ′ = 2 transition. The power of
this laser was equal to 3 mW, whereas the power of the
probe laser was equal to 0.1 mW. The beams of both
lasers had a diameter of 1.5 mm. Induced absorption
resonance was located at the peak of the bell-shaped
transparency resonance associated with optical pump-
ing.

In order to explain the experimental results, nu-
merical calculations based on the Maxwell-Bloch equa-
tions describing the propagation of the electromagnetic
ﬁeld in the cell are performed with the inclusion of all
the Zeeman sublevels of the D1 line of the 87Rb atom.
We studied the interaction with linearly polarized light
tuned to the frequency of the Fg = 1 → Fe = 2 tran-
sition of the D1 line. Light in the model propagates in
the direction coinciding with the direction of the exter-
nal magnetic ﬁeld. The model also takes into account
that atoms are continuously refreshed in the region of
interaction with light due to inﬂux from other regions
of the cell. The rate γ0 of this process is determined by
the time of ﬂight of atoms through the laser beam. The
Bloch equations are the same as in [9]. The calculations
were performed with γ0 = 0.0004γ, where γ is the rate
of the natural decay of the excited state, and the Rabi
frequency Ω = 0.04γ, which corresponds to the ﬁeld in-
tensity Iin = 0.025mW/cm2. The normalized magnetic
ﬁeld dependence of the transmission of the incident radi-
ation is shown in Fig. 6. Induced absorption resonance
is seen near zero magnetic ﬁeld. We emphasize that in-
duced absorption resonance on this transition was not
observed in the theoretical work [9].

As the intensity of the laser ﬁeld increases, the con-
trast of induced absorption resonance decreases. More-
over, we observe in experiments that induced absorption
resonance completely disappears at intensities of several
milliwatts per centimeter squared. To understand this
observation, we performed numerical simulation along
the Doppler proﬁle with γ0 = 0.003γ and Ω = 0.34γ,
which corresponds to an intensity of Iin = 1.5mW/cm2.
The width of the velocity distribution was taken to be
100γ. The result of the numerical simulation is shown
by the right line in Fig. 6, where it is seen that the
behavior of the calculated line coincides with the exper-
imentally observed dependence given by line 1 in Fig.
3.

The resulting diﬀerences shown in Figs. 6a and 6b
are obviously caused by the motion of atoms. In order to
ensure this conclusion, we calculated the population of
the Fe = 2 excited state for the inhomogeneously broad-
ened transition with various detunings ∆ of the laser
frequency (in other words, for groups of atoms with var-

Fig.6: Transmission Iout/Iin on the open F = 1 →
′
F
= 2 transition vs. the magnetic ﬁeld as obtained in
the numerical calculation for (a) homogeneously broad-
ened and (b) Doppler broadened rubidium vapor. The
calculation was performed for the case shown in Fig.
1a.

ious velocities). The calculations were performed with
the same Rabi frequencies and coherence decay rates as
in the calculations presented in Fig. 6b and in the ex-
periment (see Fig. 3). As is seen in Fig. 7, induced
absorption resonance on the homogeneously broadened
transition is not observed at zero detuning and only
atoms with nonzero velocity contribute to the forma-
tion of the resonance. Such a behavior is due to the
fact that atoms with lower velocities more rapidly leave
the process of the formation of induced absorption res-
onance on the inhomogeneously broadened transition.
Under the action of optical pumping, atoms eﬃciently
decay into another level of the ground state and thereby
the eﬀect of spontaneous coherence transfer, which de-
termines the formation of induced absorption resonance,
is small.

Spontaneous coherence transfer is substantial for the
Fg → Fe = Fg + 1 transition, because the popula-
tion of the magnetic sublevels of the excited state ex-
ceeds the population of the sublevels of the states of the
Fg → Fe = Fg or Fg → Fe = Fg − 1 transitions under
the same conditions. Atoms in these states are trapped
in dark states due to coherent population trapping [13],

Induced absorption resonance on the open . . .

5

cell enter the region of atom-light interaction. This pro-
cess maintains a nonzero population of the state. The
shorter the interaction time, the larger the number of
atoms in the excited state. However, when the interac-
tion time is too short, coherence degrades. It is neces-
sary to search for the optimum interaction time. The
interaction time is determined by the laser-beam radius.
An increase in the radius increases the interaction time.
In our experiment, we chose the beam radius according
to the available intensities. We think that optimization
determined the success in the observation of the induced
absorption resonance in this experiment.

We are grateful to V.L. Velichansky and V.P.
Yakovlev for interest in this work and stimulating dis-
cussions.

1. A. M. Akulshin, S. Barreiro, and A. Lezama, Phys. Rev.

A 57, 2996 (1998).

2. S. G. Rautian, Zh. Eksp. Teor. Fiz. 108, 1186 (1995)
[JETP 81, 651 (1995)]; Zh. Eksp. Teor. Fiz. 115, 12
(1999) [JETP 88, 6 (1999)].

3. 3. A. V. Taichenachev, A. M. Tumaikin, and V. I. Yudin,
JETP Lett. 69, 819 (1999); Phys. Rev. A 61, 011802
(2000).

4. Among other mechanisms of the formation of the in-
duced absorption resonance, Goren et al. analyzed pop-
ulation transfer between Zeeman sublevels. (C. Goren,
A. D. Wilson-Gordon, M. Rosenbluh, and H. Fried-
mann, Phys. Rev. A 70, 043814 (2004)).

5. R. Coussement, Y. Rostovtsev, J. Odeurs, et al., Phys.

Rev. Lett. 89, 107601 (2002).

6. A. Lezama, S. Barreiro, and A. M. Akulshin, Phys. Rev.

A 59, 4732 (1999).

7. A. Lipsich, S. Barreiro, A. M. Akulshin, and A. Lezama,
Phys. Rev. A 61, 053803 (2000); A. Lipsich, S. Bareiro,
P. Valente, and A. Lezama, Opt. Commun. 190, 185
(2001).

8. Y. Dancheva, G. Alzetta, S. Cartaleva, et al., Opt. Com-

mun. 178, 103 (2000).

9. F. Renzoni, C. Zimmermann, P. Verkerk, and E. Ari-
mondo, J. Opt. B: Quantum Semiclassic. Opt. 3, S7
(2001).

10. F. Renzoni, S. Cartaleva, G. Alzetta, and E. Arimondo,

Phys. Rev. A 63, 065401 (2001).

11. F. Renzoni, W. Maichen, L. Windholz, and E. Ari-

mondo, Phys. Rev. A 55, 3710 (1997).

12. G. Alzetta, S. Cartaleva, Y. Dancheva, et al., J. Opt. B:

Quantum Semiclassic. Opt. 3, 181 (2001).

13. E. Arimondo, in Fundamentals of Quantum Optics III,
Ed. by F. Ehlotz (Springer, Berlin, 1993); Lect. Notes
Phys. 420, 170 (1994); in Progress in Optics, Ed. by E.
Wolf (Elsevier, Amsterdam, 1996), p. 257.

′

Fig.7: Magnetic-ﬁeld dependence of the population
of the excited state for various detunings ∆ for the ho-
mogeneously broadened F = 1 → F
= 2 transition.
As the detuning ∆ increases, the population decreases.
The maximum population at B = ∆ = 0 is equal
to 0.002. The maximum population for the detuning
∆ = γ, 2γ, 3γ, 7γ, and 20γ is equal to 0.98, 0.95,
0.89, 0.59, and 0.15, respectively. The intensity of the
laser ﬁeld and ﬁeldatom interaction are the same as in
Fig. 6b. No subnatural width of resonance is observed
for atoms with zero velocity.

whereas this is not the case for the Fg → Fe = Fg + 1
transition.

It is also easy to explain why absorption on the in-
duced absorption resonance near the open transition
is small in our experiment. Near the open transition,
atoms eﬃciently decay into another level of the ground
state and thereby the eﬀect of spontaneous coherence
transfer, which determines the formation of induced ab-
sorption resonance, is small.

induced absorption resonance on the open
Thus,
Fg = 1 → F ′
e = 2 transition of the D1 line of rubidium
has been observed in the experiment. Experiments show
that induced absorption resonance is observed even in
the presence of strong optical pumping on the transi-
tion. Therefore, the previous statement made in [1] that
a closed transition is necessary for observing induced ab-
sorption resonance should be revised. This study also
shows that the intensity range for observing induced ab-
sorption resonance in a Doppler broadened medium is
wider than that in a homogeneously broadened medium.
In conclusion, we try to explain why the induced ab-
sorption resonance on the open transition under investi-
gation was not observed in the previous theoretical and
experimental works cited above. The population of the
open transition is equal to zero in the steady state. In
a real experiment, fresh atoms from other regions of the

