5
0
0
2
 
c
e
D
 
6
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
m
o
t
a
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
2
5
1
2
1
5
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

On the recollision-free excitation of krypton during
ultrafast multi-electron tunnel ionization

W A Bryan1, S L Stebbings1†, J McKenna2,
E M L English1, M Suresh2‡, J Wood1, B Srigengan2,
I C E Turcu3, I D Williams2 and W R Newell1
1) Department of Physics and Astronomy, University College London, Gower
Street, London WC1E 6BT, UK
2) Department of Pure and Applied Physics, Queen’s University Belfast, Belfast
BT7 1NN, UK
3) Central Laser Facility, CCLRC Rutherford Appleton Laboratory, Chilton,
Didcot, Oxon. OX11 0QX, UK
†Present address: Department of Physics and Astronomy, University of
Southampton, Southampton, SO17 1BJ, UK
‡Present address: Cavendish Laboratory, University of Cambridge, Madingley
Road, Cambridge CB3 0HE, UK

E-mail: w.bryan@ucl.ac.uk

Abstract. The probability of multiple ionization of krypton by 50 femtosecond
circularly polarized laser pulses, independent of the optical focal geometry, has
been obtained for the ﬁrst time. The excellent agreement over the intensity
range 10 TWcm−2 to 10 PWcm−2 with the recent predictions of A. S. Kornev
[Phys. Rev. A 68, 043414 (2003)] provides the ﬁrst experimental
et al
conﬁrmation that non-recollisional electronic excitation can occur in strong ﬁeld
ionization. This is particularly true for higher stages of ionization, when the laser
intensity exceeds 1 PWcm−2 as the energetic departure of the ionized electron(s)
diabatically distorts the wavefunctions of the bound electrons. By scaling the
probability of ionization by the focal volume, we discusses why this mechanism
was not apparent in previous studies.

1. Introduction

Modern intense ultrafast pulsed lasers generate an electric ﬁeld of suﬃcient strength
to tunnel ionize one or more valence electrons from an atom. Such processes are
generally treated as a rapid succession of isolated events, in which the states of the
remaining bound electrons are unrelated to the preceding ionization events. While
such a description has been shown to be more than adequate at predicting single,
and in certain cases double ionization, a number of recent experimental studies have
indicated the necessity to consider more than one active electron [1]. In the current
study, we present evidence for the existence of indirect non-recollisional excitation of
the bound valence electrons during tunnel ionization (TI).

The foundation of the modern theoretical description of intense AC-ﬁeld nonlinear
photoionization was laid by Keldysh [2], who derived the dependence of the rate of
TI on the frequency and strength of the optical ﬁeld and the binding energy and
quantum state of the ion and electron: for a detailed review see [3]. In the ultrafast

Atomic excitation during multi-electron tunnel ionization

2

regime (optical pulse duration of the order of femtoseconds, 1 femtosecond = 10−15
s), the ionization of an atom is either a perturbative process (peak intensity less
that approximately 10 TWcm−2 where 1 TW = 1012 W), or a strong-ﬁeld process,
described by tunnel theory. In the present work, we concern ourselves purely with the
strong ﬁeld regime.

Immediately following ionization, the liberated electron is in a modiﬁed Volkov
state [4], and is initially fully correlated with the parent ion. The electron is driven
on a trajectory deﬁned by the ellipticity of the laser radiation and the optical phase
at which ionization occurred. An intriguing phenomenon in the strong ﬁeld regime is
that of recollision [5] whereby electron impact excitation [6] or further ionization
[7] can arise in a linearly polarized laser pulse, which drives electron(s) back to
the parent ion. The COLTRIMS technique [8] has recently been employed to great
eﬀect to investigate these mechanisms. Recollision is the key mechanism for coherent
attosecond XUV pulse generation [9], whereby energy absorbed by the electron from
the ﬁeld is dissipated photonically upon recombination with the parent ion.

Tunnel theory, often the popular ADK form [10], is unable to quantify recollision,
however by treating recollision ionization (RI) as TI from the previous charge state,
albeit with a suppressed eﬃciency, an adequately accurate numerical solution may be
found [11, 12]. RI can be treated in a more physically robust manner either through
intense-ﬁeld many-body S -matrix theory [13] or time-dependent density functional
theory [14]. The time-dependent solution of the Schrodinger equation [15] provides
the most accurate description of the process at the expense of only being applicable
to two-electron systems and then with a massive computational overhead.

In the present work however, we have made RI events extremely unlikely by
employing circularly polarized light. In undergoing tunnel ionization, an atom must
absorb a large number of photons [2] which, when absorbed from a circularly polarized
laser pulse, transfer considerable angular momentum to the liberated electron,
dramatically reducing the probability of returning to the ionic core, i.e. the impact
parameter will be very large. In terms of the laser-induced electric ﬁeld, following TI,
the ﬁeld drives the free electron on a spiral path: the pitch of the spiral is deﬁned by
the temporal envelope of the pulse. As the pulse intensity increases, the electron is
rapidly removed from the vicinity of the ion. By negating recollision processes, the
masking eﬀects of electron-impact excitation and ionization are removed, revealing
the existence of a new laser-induced excitation mechanism.

laser pulses

While ionization in ultrafast

is well documented, minimal
theoretical and essentially no experimental studies have investigated the possibility
of simultaneous excitation of the parent ion during TI. The contemporary work of
Zon [16] introduced the idea of ‘inelastic tunnelling’ whereby the parent ion can be
left in an excited state following the ionization of one of N identical valence electrons.
The excitation process is through ‘shake-up’, ﬁrst employed by Carlson [17] to explain
single UV photon absorption leading to the ionization of a ﬁrst electron with the
excitation of a second electron. The ionization event diabatically distorts the bound
electron wavefunctions, resulting in the excitation of a bound electron.

Zon [16] and Kornev et al

[18] have derived a general expression for the rate
of TI of an atom with simultaneous excitation of the lowest lying ionic states. This
derivation relies on the sudden approximation, valid in the case of ultrafast TI as the
ionization potential is far greater than the excitation energy of the ion. The range of
excited states of Krm+ (m = 2 to 6) considered is consistent with this approximation,
modifying the probability of ionization signiﬁcantly. Furthermore, it is also necessary

Atomic excitation during multi-electron tunnel ionization

3

to allow for all combinations of excitation + ionization to some ﬁnal charge state after
the laser pulse has ﬁnished, irrespective of whether it is a ground or excited state. To
distinguish such processes from standard sequential TI, we refer to such processes as
multi-electron tunnel ionization (METI). This distinction is necessary, as Eichmann
et al [12] have previously proposed a mechanism of collective tunnel ionization (CTI),
whereby two electrons can simultaneously tunnel away from the atom. This process
was predicted to only arise if the tunnelling electrons have highly correlated momenta,
otherwise recapture of one of the electrons would occur; this requirement results in a
very low probability.

2. Experimental Procedure

In general, previous experimental measurements of ion yield as a function of laser
intensity are unavoidably a convolution of the probability of ionization with the focal
volume producing the signal [19, 20]. By simply changing the energy of the laser pulse,
the spatial distribution of laser intensity also changes, resulting in the characteristic
I 3/2 response at intensities above saturation, the so-called ‘volume variation’ problem.
While most apparent above saturation, there is also an intrinsic volume dependence
below saturation, which subtly modiﬁes the gradient of the ion yield. Frequently, the
complexity of this situation is compounded by diﬀraction associated with the spatial
proﬁle of the laser; a direct comparison with theory being made impossible without
introducing the speciﬁc experimental geometry. Through a contemporary method by
Bryan et al [21], developed from the pioneering work of Walker et al [22] and analogous
to the tomographic technique of Goodworth et al [23], we circumvent this hinderance.
A novel solution to the volume variation problem was proposed by Van Woerkom
and co-workers [20]: by softly focusing a high-energy ultrafast laser pulse into a tightly
apertured photoion detector, only those ionization states generated within a narrow
spatial (and therefore intensity) window are detected. By translating the focusing
optic, this restricted range of observed laser intensities may be accurately manipulated.
Up to six-fold ionization of krypton saturates at intensities less than 10 PWcm−2,
and the 30 mJ 790 nm 50 fs laser pulses generated by the ASTRA Laser Facility (UK)
need only be softly focussed (f /11 optics) to generate a peak intensity in excess of
100 PWcm−2.
Indeed the active range of the focused ASTRA beam extends over
tens of millimetres. By limiting the spatial acceptance of our ion time-of-ﬂight mass
spectrometer to 250 microns, the ion yield is strongly dependent on the position of
the optical focus with respect to the spectrometer. By recording the relative ion yield
of Krn+ (n = 1 to 6) while translating the focusing optic in 125 micron steps, the
intensity selective scan presented in ﬁgure 1 is measured [21, 22, 23]. Throughout
this measurement, the krypton gas pressure is low enough so as to avoid space-
charge eﬀects, tested by repeating the intensity selective scan (ISS) measurements as
a function of pressure. At higher number densities, space-charge eﬀects are apparent
as a loss of ion yield deﬁnition both in time-of-ﬂight and focal position.

At this point, we wish to stress the importance of identifying background
contaminants in the ISS data. In previous studies on argon [24], such an incumbrance
is not present, as argon has three naturally occurring isotopes 36Ar, 38Ar and 40Ar
with abundances of 0.33%, 0.06% and 99.60% respectively, which do not suﬀer from
signiﬁcant charge-to-mass degeneracy with any possible atmospheric contaminants
(greater than 0.1% yield). Krypton however has six main isotopes 78Kr, 80Kr,
82Kr, 83Kr, 84Kr and 86Kr, with natural abundances 0.35%, 2.28%, 11.58%, 11.49%,

Atomic excitation during multi-electron tunnel ionization

4

Intensity selective scan ion yield matrix for Krn+ (n = 1 to 6)
Figure 1.
generated at the focus of a 50fs 790nm circularly polarized laser pulse. The
2000-laser shot average ion yield is recorded with an apertured time-of-ﬂight
mass spectrometer as the focusing optic is translated parallel to the direction
of propagation. The six most abundant isotopes are clearly resolved.

57.00% and 17.30% respectively. The high charge-to-mass ratio resolution of our
spectrometer allows selective ion yield integration over those isotopes not degenerate
with background contaminants. An example is the Kr3+ peak in ﬁgure 1: 84Kr3+
is degenerate with N+
2 requires a far lower intensity than 84Kr3+,
apparent in ﬁgure 1 as the faint ion yield extending to large distances from the focus.
To recover the probability of ionization, the non-degenerate isotopes (78, 80, 82 and
86) are integrated with respect to ﬂight time, thus the spatially dependence of the ion
yield is measured.

2 . Ionization to N+

To make the ISS measurements directly comparable with theoretical predictions,
we remove the spatial integration through a deconvolution [21, 22] or inversion [23]
technique, requiring the measured ion yield and theoretical on-axis intensity as a
function of focal position as inputs. The resulting partial probability of ionization
(PPI) [21] is independent of the eﬀects of varying signal-producing volume. The
unavoidable diﬀraction of the laser pulse is also accounted for by solving the Collins
form [25] of the Huygens-Fresnel diﬀraction integral [26]. The enhancement of detector
gain with charge state (quantum eﬃciency) is also quantiﬁed. The PPI is therefore
equivalent to the response of a single atom to a spatially inﬁnite laser focus, as we have
removed all instrumental dependence. The PPI results are valid up to saturation,
however at higher intensities the deconvolution breaks down, thus the PPI is then
deﬁned as unity.

The raw PPI(n) for Krn+ (n = 1 to 6) results are presented in ﬁgure 2. The
inﬂuence of the variation of quantum eﬃciency of our detector is apparent from the
increasing PPI(n) at which saturation occurs with increasing ion charge state.
In
ﬁgure 2, the values in parenthesis in the legend are the quantum eﬃciencies relative to
the PPI of Kr+. If the PPI(n) for Krn+ (n = 1 to 6) presented in ﬁgure 2 is divided
by the quantum eﬃciency, all PPI(n) saturate to unity at high intensity.

If the quantum eﬃciency of the detector is removed, such that the PPI(n) are now
normalized, the break down of the deconvolution routine at intensities greater than
saturation can be addressed by conserving the probability of ionization. Consider the
PPI(n) for n = 1, 2 as shown in ﬁgure 2. At low intensity, PPI(1) is small, and

Atomic excitation during multi-electron tunnel ionization

5

Figure 2. Partial probability of ionization (PPI) to Krn+ (n = 1 to 6) as a
function of laser intensity recovered from the ISS data presented in ﬁgure 1. The
deconvolution of a non-Gaussian focal volume as detailed in Bryan et al
[21]
results in a PPI which is independent of the spatial distribution of laser intensity
across the laser focus. The PPI at which saturation occurs relative to the PPI
of Kr+ is proportional to the quantum eﬃciency of the detector. The values in
parenthesis in the legend indicate the relative eﬃciency for each charge state.

increases with intensity up to saturation at an intensity of 200 TWcm−2. However,
as is often the case in atomic ionization, PPI(2) is nonzero at this intensity. The
condition for conserving probability is that the sum of probabilities is less than unity
below the saturation of PPI(1) or equal to unity at higher intensities, thus at an
intensity greater than 200 TWcm−2, the conserved probability of ionization to Kr+,
CPI(1) must be less than unity as PPI(2) is nonzero. This deﬁnition is extended to
an N electron system in the present work and is only valid following the removal of
the quantum eﬃciency.

3. Results

A direct comparison between the theoretical predictions of Kornev et al
[18] and
the present volume-independent CPI is presented in ﬁgure 3. All theoretical curves
presented are universally normalized in intensity to the experimental data.
In all
frames of ﬁgure 3, the sequential ADK prediction is the thin line, and the multi-
electron tunnel
In ﬁgure 3(a),
ionization (METI) predication is the thick line.
neither the ADK or METI predictions represent the Kr+ CPI: this is due to a
contribution from multiphoton ionization (MPI) at suﬃciently low intensities to access
the perturbative regime. At intensities close to the saturation of Kr+, it can be seen
that both ADK and METI describe the CPI adequately. A similar low intensity
response is observed in ﬁgure 3(b) (Kr2+), where again around 100 TWcm−2 MPI
contributes. However, as the intensity increases, the METI prediction is in much
better accord with the experimental data, reproducing the CPI far more closely than
ADK. The superiority of agreement with METI over ADK is dramatically illustrated
for ionization to Kr3+, Kr4+ and Kr5+, ﬁgure 3(c) to (e), particularly high intensity

Atomic excitation during multi-electron tunnel ionization

6

Figure 3. Conserved probability of ionization (CPI) to Krn+ (n = 1 to 6) by
a 50fs 790nm circularly polarized laser pulse. All inﬂuence of both the optical
or detector geometry has been removed, allowing a direct comparison with the
predictions of Kornev et al [18]. In all frames (a) to (f), the thin line is traditional
sequential TI (ADK [10]) prediction, while the thick line is the CPI for multi-
electron tunnel ionization (METI) including an allowance for excitation to low
lying states. The remarkable agreement illustrates the breakdown of tunnel
theory, particularly for triple (c) or higher order ionization, where the agreement
between the measured CPI and the METI prediction indicates the presence of
excitation.

Kr3+ and Kr4+ at all intensities. Indeed, at an intensity of around 1 PWcm−2, ADK
theory underestimates the CPI of Kr4+ by more than an order of magnitude. At
the highest intensities discussed in the present work, ionization to Kr6+, ﬁgure 3(f)
is well described by both ADK and METI, however the latter is still observed to
give the better agreement. Throughout ﬁgure 3, it is apparent that METI generates
an excellent quantiﬁcation of the CPI of krypton by circularly polarized 50 fs laser
pulses. This is a direct consequence of the excitation of the bound valence electrons
in the atomic ion. The shake-up mechanism invoked in both the present work and
[18] is the subject of ongoing interest, see for example the recent review by Becker
et al
[13]: shaking can only cause excitation at high intensities, as the energy of
the departing electron must be suﬃcient to excite other residual electrons. This
is supported by the present work: there is no signiﬁcant excitation until around 1
PWcm−2. Becker et al [13] predict many orders of magnitude diﬀerence between the
recollision yield and shake up contribution. However, here the recollision contribution
is negligible. In qualitative terms the high degree of agreement between the measured
CPI and the METI prediction is a result of (i) the high intensity laser-induced
population of low-lying excited states through diabatic shake-up excitation, (ii) the
removal of recollision excitation or ionization through the use of circular polarization.
Furthermore, this observation would not be possible without the measurement of the
geometry-independent PPI and the realization of conservation of probability. The
pertinent question raised by the present work is why has this mechanism not been

Atomic excitation during multi-electron tunnel ionization

7

Figure 4. Volume-scaled partial probability of ionization to Krn+ for n = 1 to 6
as compared to the volume-scaled predictions of Kornev et al [18], illustrating how
ionization-induced excitation could be more diﬃcult to identify from traditional
intensity variation measurements. As in ﬁgure 3, the thin line is traditional
sequential ADK prediction, while the thick line is multi-electron tunnel ionization
(METI) prediction, allowing the generation of excited states by ionization.

observed before?

4. The presence of excitation in previous experiments

In ﬁgure 4, we present the PPI(n) to Krn+ for n = 1 to 6, however in contrast to
ﬁgure 2, the PPI for each ionization state is scaled by the volume of the laser focus
generating the signal. This is easily quantiﬁed, as the deconvolution route requires
the precise computation of the spatial distribution of intensity, as described in [21].
Figure 4 also contains the volume-scaled METI predictions [18]. As is expected, the
observations of the previous section are still applicable, however it is now far more
diﬃcult to isolate which model applies above saturation.

Comparing ﬁgures 3 and 4, we illustrate how subtle diﬀerences between the
volume-scaled PPI and either theoretical prediction could be missed in a traditional
intensity-variation measurement (equivalent to ﬁgure 4, for example see [11]). If the
detector eﬃciency is unknown, the measurement of which is by no means trivial, the
eﬀect of excitation could conceivably be overlooked as a manifestation of detector
eﬃciency or could be ignored if the ADK curves are normalized independently. As
apparent from ﬁgure 4, excitation is manifest as a major vertical shift in apparent yield,
and a minor variation in intensity response. Furthermore, a number of experimental
studies have commented on the inadequacy of tunnel theory (speciﬁcally the ADK
treatment [10]), without concrete discussion of why, nor the suggestion of a mechanism
by which tunnel theory might be breaking down. It is hoped that the present work
allows previous experimental data to be re-examined in terms of the ionization-induced
excitation mechanism.

5. Conclusion

We present for the ﬁrst time strong evidence for the presence of considerable atomic
excitation during tunnel ionization of krypton by a 790nm 50fs circularly polarized
laser pulse focused to intensities in excess of 10 TWcm−2. The polarization of the

Atomic excitation during multi-electron tunnel ionization

8

radiation is such that recollision excitation and ionization are essentially negated.
The impressive agreement between the measured conserved probability of ionization
and recent theoretical predictions indicate that excitation during ionization need be
considered irrespective of recollision processes. Excitation is due to the intense laser
ﬁeld energetically removing valence electrons: during these tunnel ionization events,
the wavefunctions of the remaining electrons is impulsively distorted. Such excitation
is also expected to occur in a linearly polarized laser ﬁeld, and, as the results of Kornev
et al [18] suggest, is expected to be even more important in a 5fs laser pulse. This has
a major bearing on the emerging ﬁeld of optical attosecond physics. The inﬂuence of
initial and transitionary electronic states accessed through intra-pulse excitation must
be quantiﬁed to accurately predict the energy of the emitted photons.

Acknowledgments

This work is supported by the EPSRC, UK. Research studentships are acknowledged
by SLS, EMLE and JW (EPSRC), JMcK (DEL) and MS (IRCEP at QUB).
The authors would like to thank the following staﬀ of the ASTRA Laser Facility
(Rutherford Appleton Laboratory, UK): J M Smith, E J Divall, C J Hooker and A J
Langley. The authors would also like to acknowledge A S Kornev and B A Zon from
Voronezh State University, Russia for electronically communicating their theoretical
data and for highly fruitful discussions.

References

[1] Yamakawa K et al 2004 Phys. Rev. Lett. 92 123001
[2] Keldysh L V 1964 J. Exp. Theor. Phys. 47 1945
[3] Popov V S 2004 Physics - Uspekhi 47 855
[4] Volkov D M 1935 Z. Phys. 94 250
[5] Corkum P B 1993 Phys. Rev. Lett. 71 1994
[6] Feuerstein B et al. 2001 Phys. Rev. Lett. 87 043003
[7] Moshammer R et al 2002 Phys. Rev. A 65 035401
[8] D¨orner R et al 2000 Phys. Rep. 330 95
[9] Reider G A 2004 J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys. 37 R37

[10] Ammosov M V, Delone N B and Krainov V P 1986 Zh. Eskp. Teor. Fiz. 91 2008, Sov. Phys.

[11] Larochelle S, Talebpor A and Chin S L 1998 J. Phys. B: At. Mol. Opt. Phys. 31 1201
[12] Eichmann U, D¨orr M, Maeda H, Becker W and Sandner W 2000 Phys. Rev. Lett. 84 3550
[13] Becker A and Faisal F H M 2005 J. Phys. B: At. Mol. Opt. Phys. 38 R1
[14] Bauer D and Ceccherini F 2001 Opt. Express 8 377
[15] Parker J S, Doherty B J S, Meharg K J and Taylor K T 2003 J. Phys. B: At. Mol. Opt. Phys.

JETP 64 1191

36 L393

[16] Zon B A 1999 Sov. Phys. JETP 89 219
[17] Carlson T A 1967 Phys. Rev. 156 142
[18] Kornev A S, Tulenko E B and Zon B A 2003 Phys. Rev. A 68 043414
[19] Pegarkov A I, Charron E and Suzor-Weiner A 1999 J. Phys. B: At. Mol. Opt. Phys. 32 L363
[20] Hansch P, Walker M A and Van Woerkom L D 1996 Phys. Rev. A 54 R2559
[21] Bryan W A et al 2006 Phys. Rev. A (accepted for publication)
[22] Walker M A, Hansch P and Van Woerkom L D 1998 Phys. Rev. A 57 R701
[23] Goodworth T R J, Bryan W A, Williams I D and Newell W R 2005 J. Phys. B: At. Mol. Opt.

Phys. 38 3083

[24] Bryan W A et al (submitted for publication)
[25] Collins S A 1970 J. Opt. Soc. Am. 60 1168
[26] Born M and Wolf E Principles of Optics: Electromagnetic Theory of Propagation, Interference

and Diﬀraction of Light 5th Edition (Cambridge University Press, UK)

