5
0
0
2
 
c
e
D
 
6
 
 
]
h
p
-
m
o
t
a
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
1
4
0
2
1
5
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Self-sustained oscillations in a Large Magneto-Optical Trap

G. Labeyrie, F. Michaud and R. Kaiser1
1Institut Non Lin´eaire de Nice, UMR 6618, 1361 route des Lucioles,
F-06560 Valbonne.
(Dated: December 22, 2013)

We have observed self-sustained radial oscillations in a large magneto-optical trap (MOT), con-
taining up to 1010 Rb85 atoms. This instability is due to the competition between the conﬁning
force of the MOT and the repulsive interaction associated with multiple scattering of light inside
the cold atomic cloud. A simple analytical model allows us to formulate a criterion for the instabil-
ity threshold, in fair agreement with our observations. This criterion shows that large numbers of
trapped atoms N > 109 are required to observe this unstable behavior.

PACS numbers: 32.80.Pj, 42.50.Vk, 52.35.-g

A large fraction of the stars in the upper Hertzsprung-
Russell diagram present pulsations based on an inter-
play between modulated radiation pressure eﬀects, which
tends to increase the size of the star, and a collapse
based on gravitational forces [1]. Instabilities also occur
in other similar systems such as conﬁned plasmas where
a long range Coulomb interaction has to be countered
by a conﬁning force to avoid an explosion of the plasma
[2]. These systems are of fundamental importance for as-
trophysics and for controlled fusion and have thus been
extensively studied in the past. However it is either im-
possible (in the case of stars) or extremely diﬃcult (in
the case of conﬁned plasmas) to perform experiments
to study the full dynamics of such systems where col-
lective eﬀects play a dominant role. On the other side,
allowing for adequate rescaling, alternative systems can
present similar dynamics. A variety of interesting collec-
tive eﬀects have thus been identiﬁed in charged colloidal
systems [3]. Recently ultra-cold plasmas created by ion-
izing a cloud of laser cooled atoms became subject to in-
creased attention [4]. Beyond the possibility of studying
analogous eﬀects as in astro- and plasma physics, sys-
tems with long range interactions are known to lead to
non-extensive behavior and appropriate scaling laws are
needed to predict macroscopic properties. Here we show
that a large cloud of laser cooled atoms is an adequate
system to study such collective eﬀects. The radiation
pressure of the multiply scattered photons in such clouds
can indeed be related to a long range Coulomb type in-
teraction [5]. We thus suggest an analogy between the
dynamics of a large cloud of cold atoms, astrophysical
systems and plasma physics.

The eﬀect of multiple scattering on the dynamics of
the atoms is well known in the community of laser cool-
ing of atoms, as multiple scattering has been a major
limitation to obtain large phase space densities in cold
atomic traps. Bose-Einstein condensation (BEC) in di-
lute atomic vapors has only been achieved after switching
oﬀ all laser ﬁelds and using evaporation techniques [6].
More recently, multiple scattering of light in cold atoms
has been used to study coherent light transport in ran-

dom media [7]. This has led to an investigation of yet
unexplored regimes, namely the limit of very large num-
ber of cold atoms in the presence of quasi-resonant light.
Here we do not focus on the properties of the scattered
light but on the mechanical eﬀects of this light on the
atoms. We have observed collective instabilities triggered
by the repulsive interatomic force arising from multiple
scattering, and identiﬁed a supercritical Hopf bifurcation
separating the standard stable MOT operation from a yet
undescribed unstable regime.

2

In order to estimate the relevance of plasma physics
considerations to study multiple scattering of light by
cold atoms it is worth deriving the equivalent of sev-
eral plasma parameters for our system. The analogy
with an 1/r2 repulsive Coulomb-type force [5] is obtained
from evaluating the power scattered by one atom (Pscatt)
and deriving the intensity incident I2 on a second atom
via I2 ∝ Pscatt/(4πr2). The resulting radiation pressure
force scales as 1/r2 and one can thus deﬁne an eﬀective
charge ˜q which depends on the absorption cross sections
and laser intensity and is typically ˜q ≈ 10−4e[5]. A to-
tal interaction energy ˜qV = N ˜q
4πǫ0R larger than the ki-
netic energy kBT of the particles leads to an increased
diameter L = 2R of the magneto-optical trap when the
number N of atoms exceeds ≈ 105. Alternatively the
Debye length λD = pǫ0kBT /n˜q2 above which collec-
tive eﬀects become important is of the order of 100µm,
well below the typical size of a large MOT (several mm).
Also, in our experiments the corresponding plasma fre-
quency ωD = pn˜q2/mǫ0 is slightly larger (≈ 200Hz)
than relaxation rate of the atomic positions (≈ 50Hz).
We thus expect our cloud to behave as a weakly damped
plasma. Another interesting quantity is the ratio be-
tween the nearest neighbor Coulomb interaction and the
4πǫ0a /kBT with a ≃ n−1/3 [8]. We
kinetic energy ΓCb = ˜q
estimate this quantity to be smaller than unity in our
system, excluding thus any crystallization. An impor-
tant aspect of these light induced collective interactions
is that the eﬀective charge ˜q depends on experimental
control parameters, allowing for a engineering of the ef-

2

2

e
c
n
e
c
s
e
r
o
u
l
f
 
T
O
M

 
l
a
i
t
r
a
p

0(cid:13)

0(cid:13)

(b)(cid:13)

(a)(cid:13)

0(cid:13)

50(cid:13)

100(cid:13)

150(cid:13)

 (cid:13) (Hz)(cid:13)

0(cid:13)

50(cid:13)

100(cid:13)

150(cid:13)

 (cid:13) (Hz)(cid:13)

2(cid:13)

4(cid:13)
6(cid:13)
MOT loading time (s)(cid:13)

8(cid:13)

)
.
u
.
a
(
 
r
e
t
n
e
c
 
T
O
M

 
f
o
 
e
c
n
e
r
o
u
l
f

6(cid:13)

4(cid:13)

2(cid:13)

0.00(cid:13)

0.05(cid:13)
time (s)(cid:13)

0.10(cid:13)

FIG. 1: Fluorescence of part of the MOT during a loading
sequence. Below a critical number of atoms Nth, the size
of the atom cloud increases without speciﬁc dynamical be-
havior. Above the threshold Nth the cloud switches to an
unstable mode characterized by periodic oscillations in the
partial ﬂuorescence signal. Inserts : Fourier transform of sig-
nal, with (a) a ﬂat noise in the stable regime and (b) distinct
oscillations in the unstable regime.

fective charge which can be modiﬁed by orders of magni-
tude. Finally it might be possible to use the high phase
space densities of a BEC and thus study strongly cou-
pled plasma in the degenerate regime [9] as expected in
neutron stars and white dwarfs [10].

Our cloud of cold atoms is conﬁned in a MOT using
laser-induced forces [11]. We collect Rb85 atoms from
a dilute vapor using six large independent laser beams
(beam waist 4cm, power per beam P = 30mW ) thus
avoiding the intensity imbalance and feedback mecha-
nism responsible for the instability of ref[12]. Under
standard operating conditions, the trapping lasers are
detuned from the F = 3 → F ′ = 4 transition of the D2
line by δ = −3Γ (Γ/2π = 6M Hz). A magnetic ﬁeld gra-
dient (∇B ≈ 10G/cm) is applied to generate a spatially
dependent Zeeman shift yielding the restoring force of
the trap. A repumping laser on the F = 2 → F ′ = 3 of
the D2 line is used to control the total number of atoms.
We thus obtain a MOT with up to N = 1010 atoms (di-
ameter L = 5mm, T = 80µK)[13]. The size and shape
of the cloud is monitored by imaging the MOTs ﬂuores-
cence on a cooled CCD. The optical thickness b of the
cloud at the trapping laser frequency is measured by a
photodiode. To obtain a time-resolved information on
the local density of the MOT, we also image a portion of
the cloud on another photodiode.

Fig.1 illustrates the onset of spontaneous self-sustained
oscillation for a suﬃciently large number of atoms. We
switched on the MOT at t = 0 and monitored the time
evolution of the ﬂuorescence from a portion of the MOT.

FIG. 2: Fluorescence of the MOT center. In the unstable
regime, periodic oscillations appear in the absence of external
modulations.

This partial ﬂuorescence signal is roughly describing the
number of atoms in the observed region. Starting from
N = 0 at t = 0, the trap ﬁlls with a time constant
τ = 1.45s determined by the ambient Rb pressure. Be-
low a critical number of atoms Nth, the size of the atom
cloud increases with number of trapped atoms[14] but
no speciﬁc dynamical behavior is observed. Above the
threshold Nth the cloud switches to an unstable behavior
characterized by periodic oscillations in the partial ﬂuo-
rescence signal. These radial oscillations of the cloud are
self-sustained in the sense that no external modulation
of any control parameter is present.

In the inserts of Fig.1 are shown Fourier transforms of
the partial ﬂuorescence. Below the instability threshold
(insert a) a ﬂat noise background is obtained.
In con-
trast, in an unstable MOT, obtained for a larger number
of atoms, distinct oscillation frequencies (insert b) ap-
pear, with higher harmonic components indicating the
non harmonic oscillation of the signal.

Indeed, the dynamics in the unstable regime can be
more complex than a harmonic oscillation, as further il-
lustrated in Fig.2 where we detect the ﬂuorescence from
the center of the MOT. A high contrast modulation of
the center ﬂuorescence is observed in this experiment.
We can speculate that to the fast phase of decrease of the
signal corresponds a MOT expansion (decreased density
at the center), whereas we associate the increasing part
of the ﬂuorescence to a slower compression phase. We ob-
served that the precise shape of this oscillation depends
on the laser beam alignment and on the monitored region
of the MOT. However, the threshold separating the sta-
ble from the unstable regime was found to be very robust
with respect to trap parameters.

Investigating the MOT at the instability threshold by

(cid:13)
(cid:13)
1(cid:13)

0(cid:13)

-1(cid:13)

-2(cid:13)

-3(cid:13)

.(cid:13)

i

g
n
n
u
t
e
d

UNSTABLE(cid:13)

STABLE(cid:13)

5(cid:13)

10(cid:13)

B [G/cm](cid:13) (cid:13)

15(cid:13)

∇

Phase diagram of self-sustained oscillation : a
FIG. 3:
(δ,
B) cut in parameter space shows the separation between
the stable (for larger detuning δ) and the unstable regime: ex-
perimental threshold values (squares) and 1-zone model pre-
diction (solid line).

varying 2 of the control parameters of the experiment (de-
tuning, magnetic ﬁeld gradient), we can map the phase
diagram shown in Fig.3 (full squares). The solid line cor-
responds to the theoretical prediction presented at the
end of this paper. As can be seen, the overall behavior
is unstable when the trapping laser frequency is brought
within roughly one natural width from resonance. This
critical detuning depends here rather weakly on the mag-
netic ﬁeld gradient. Note however that the measured
cloud size and number of atoms at threshold do vary quite
a bit during this experiment (a factor 5 for N and a factor
2 for L). In addition, we systematically found an optical
thickness b ≈ 1 at the instability threshold. However,
this is clearly not a suﬃcient condition for the onset of
instabilities, since b = 1 is also observed in the stable
region of Fig.3.

We also carefully monitored the ﬂuctuations of the to-
tal number of atoms when the MOT operates in the un-
stable regime, as e.g.
for the data in Fig.2. We found
these to be below 2%, as in the stable regime. This in-
dicates that, for a given set of MOT parameters, the
unstable cloud oscillates at ﬁxed N .

To further characterize the transition to instability, we
have checked that the amplitude of the oscillation contin-
uously grows from zero as the control parameter (detun-
ing or number of atoms in the experiments performed)
crosses the threshold value. A Fourier analysis of the
signal across the threshold showed that the instability
start at a non zero frequency, which is closely related to
the natural oscillation frequency of the harmonic trap.
Furthermore, no hysteresis was observed despite explicit
investigation. All these ﬁndings are consistent with a
supercritical Hopf bifurcation.

3

Already in the stable regime, we observed some
clear indications that strongly increasing the number of
trapped atoms aﬀects the way the MOT operates. As it
is well-known, the MOT inﬂates when atoms are added
as a consequence of multiple scattering of light [5].
In
addition to the standard L ∝ N 1/3 law[5], we found
for large number of atoms N > 109 a diﬀerent scaling
L ∝ N 1/2[14, 15]. By monitoring the relaxation of the
MOT after displacing it from its equilibrium position, we
observed a cross-over from an over-damped behavior at
small N (typical for usual MOTs) to an under-damped
behavior at large N . We interpret this ﬁnding as a con-
sequence of the attenuation of the trapping beams inside
the cloud, which reduces the friction at the center of the
cloud. This could be envisioned as a precursor to the in-
stability. Indeed, we found that just below the threshold
(i.e.
in stable operation), the MOT is systematically in
the underdamped regime.

To explain the apparition of this new instability, we
developed a simple model where the screened compres-
sion force of the MOT is competing against the repul-
sive interaction due to multiple scattering of light inside
the cloud. We stress that this instability is thus qualita-
tively diﬀerent from that studied in ref[12], where the use
of retro-reﬂected beams introduces the feedback neces-
sary for the instability. The instability process of ref[12],
which manifests as oscillations of the center-of-mass of
the MOT, does not involve the long-range interatomic
interactions which drives the behavior of our large MOT.
We propose in the following a very simple 1-zone model
which exhibits an instability threshold. This model
amounts to an extremely simpliﬁed mean ﬁeld theory,
based however on microscopic expressions for the light
forces acting on the atoms. A more reﬁned approach,
beyond the scope of this paper, could e.g. involve hydro-
dynamical approximations[16].

We assume an homogeneous density and the size of the
cloud L is related to the density n via the total number of
atoms N : n = N/L3. The dynamics along one symmetry
axis (Ox) of a probe particle located outside of the cloud
(at position x > R from the trap center, with a velocity
v) is then governed by the force :

F (x, v) =

e−b
1 + 4(δ−µx−kv)2

Γ2
1
1 + 4(δ+µx+kv)2

Γ2

sinc

sinc

~kΓ
2
~kΓ
2
~kΓ
2

+η

−

sinc

1
1 + 4δ2
Γ2

(1 − e

−b)(

R
x

)2

(1)

This expression relies on the low intensity Doppler
model
force (incident on-
resonance saturation parameter sinc). The ﬁrst term in

the magneto-optical

for

(cid:13)
this expression is the attenuated force of the laser passed
through the cloud (with the corresponding Zeeman shift
µx and Doppler shift kv), the second term corresponds
to the non attenuated force of the laser propagating in
the opposite direction. In absence of the e−b attenuation,
these two terms give rise to the standard cooling (via the
opposite Doppler terms kv) and trapping (via the oppo-
site Zeeman terms µx) of cold atoms. The last terms is
the sum of all binary repulsive interactions which, using
Gauss theorem, yields an 1/r2 repulsion for a probe parti-
cle outside the cloud. This term can be understood as the
radiation pressure originating from the MOT with a to-
tal radiated power corresponding to attenuation of the 6
laser beams. Here η corresponds to the ratio between the
absorption cross section of the incident laser frequency
and the inelastically rescattered photons [5]. We now
apply this model at the edge of the cloud (x = R). A
linear stability analysis, using x = R + δx eiωt around
the ﬁxed point F (R, v = 0) = 0 , yields the threshold
condition for an instability (Im(ω) = 0) :

C (δ, µ, b, R) = e

−b

δ − µR
1 + 4(δ−µR)2

Γ2

+

δ + µR
1 + 4(δ+µR)2

Γ2

= 0 (2)

We ﬁnd that for our experimental parameters the

threshold is given with a good approximation by :

δ + µR ≈ 0

(3)

It should be stressed that in standard MOTs one usu-
ally has µR ≪ |δ| :
for |δ| = Γ and a magnetic ﬁeld
gradient ∇B = 10 G/cm, condition (3) implies a MOT
diameter of 8 mm ! It is only with N in the 1010 range
that such MOT sizes can be obtained.
In this regime,
the edge of the cloud is now exploring the nonlinear part
of the magneto-optical force. It can be shown from the
expression of the force that the threshold condition (3)
corresponds to the passage from a positive to a negative
friction at the edge of the cloud. Thus, a small velocity
ﬂuctuation is ampliﬁed instead of damped and the atoms
at the edge are kicked away from the center of the cloud.
The cloud thus expands until its optical thickness drops
below a certain level, where the MOT is back to its stan-
dard mode of operation (weak repulsion) and the atoms
are pushed back toward the center.

In order to further confront our simple model to the ex-
periment, we computed the threshold value of the detun-
ing δ using the control parameter ∇B and the measured
values of the size of the cloud R and its optical thickness
b at threshold. The result corresponds to the solid line in
Fig.3 and gives the correct order of magnitude and be-
havior for the instability threshold. This gives us further
conﬁdence about the qualitative validity of our model, as
the size of the cloud varies by more than a factor 2 along
the threshold boundary. Furthermore, both the thresh-
old criterion (3) and the simple picture of the unstable

4

dynamics near threshold are conﬁrmed by recent results
from a more involved model[17], which includes the inho-
mogeneous density distribution inside the cloud (N-zone
model).

We have described in this paper the observation of
self-sustained oscillation in a large cloud of laser cooled
atoms, arising from the competition between the MOT’s
conﬁning force and the long range multiple scattering re-
pulsive interaction. This new instability process aﬀects
the behavior of large MOTs containing more than 109
in experimen-
atoms, a regime increasingly found e.g.
tal setups producing BECs. This observation shows that
large clouds of cold atoms still present a rich dynamics
with a variety of yet unexplored regimes. A simple 1-
zone model has been presented which allows to predict
the instability threshold and to understand the underly-
ing physical mechanism. Future possible investigations
include the forced oscillation regime, the spectroscopy of
excitation modes in this system, gas-liquid-crystal phase
transitions in the degenerate regime and feedback mech-
anisms allowing for stabilization of a large cloud of in-
teracting particles. Progress on the theoretical aspects
of the systems described in this paper include exploit-
ing mean ﬁeld theory and molecular dynamic simula-
tions. This should allow for a better understanding of
the bifurcation observed in our experiment and lead to
study statistical (thermodynamic) properties across the
threshold. If the degenerate regime could be reached (or
inducing similar interactions in a Bose Einstein Conden-
sate) a mean ﬁeld theory based on binary collisions as
in usual Gross Pitaevskii equation will not be valid due
to the long range interaction, connecting this system to
strongly correlated quantum systems.

We thank L. Gil, Ph. Mathias, D. Wilkowksi, S. Balle,
F. Bouchet, B. Cessac and Y. Elskens for insightful con-
versations and E. Vaujour and M. Renaudat for help at
various stages of the experiment. We acknowledge ﬁnan-
cial support by CNRS and PACA region.

[1] J. P. Cox, Theory of Stellar pulsation (Princeton Univer-

sity Press, Princeton,New Jersey, 1980).

[2] M. P. Evrard et al., Plasma Phys. 21, 999 (1979).
[3] J. -P. Hansen, I. R. McDonald and E. L. Pollock, Phys.

Rev. A. 11, 1025 (1975).

[4] C. E. Simien et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 92, 143001 (2004).
[5] T. Walker, D. Sesko and C. Wieman, Phys. Rev. Lett.

64, 408 (1990).

[6] M. H. Anderson et al., Science 269, 198 (1995); K. B.
Davis et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 75, 3969 (1995); C. C.
Bradley, C. A. Sackett, J. J. Tollett and R. G. Hulet,
Phys. Rev. Lett. 75, 1687 (1995).

[7] G. Labeyrie et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 83, 5266 (1999).
[8] E. L. Pollock and J. P. Hansen, Phys. Rev. A 8, 3110

(1973).

[9] L. Foldy, Phys. Rev. 124, 649 (1961).

[10] P. Jetzer Phys. Rep. 220, 163 (1992).
[11] S. Chu, Rev. Mod. Phys. 70, 685 (1998); C. Cohen-
Tannoudji, Rev. Mod. Phys. 70, 707 (1998); W. D.
Phillips, Rev. Mod. Phys. 70, 721 (1998).

[12] D. Wilkowski, J. Ringot, D. Hennequin and J.-C. Gar-
reau, Phys. Rev. Lett. 85, 1839 (2000); A. di Stephano,
P. Verkerk, and D. Hennequin, Eur. Phys. J. D 30, 243
(2004).

[13] G. Labeyrie et al. Opt. Comm. 243, 157 (2004).
[14] K. Lindquist, M. Stephens, and C. Wieman, Phys. Rev.

A 46, 4082 (1992).

[15] The observed √N size dependence of large MOTs is not
yet fully understood. Several physical ingredients could
possibly yield such a variation : multiple scattering (be-
yond double scattering), non linear spatial dependence of
the forces or non uniform atomic density.

[16] T. Pohl, T. Pattard and J. M. Rost, Phys. Rev. A 70,

033416 (2004).

[17] T. Pohl et al., in preparation.

5

