5
0
0
2
 
c
e
D
 
4
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
m
o
t
a
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
6
2
1
2
1
5
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Sagnac Interferometry in a Slow-Light Medium

Graham T. Purves,∗ Charles S. Adams, and Ifan G. Hughes
Department of Physics, Durham University, South Road, Durham, DH1 3LE, UK.
(Dated: July 28, 2013)

We use a Sagnac interferometer to measure the dispersive and absorptive properties of room
temperature Rubidium vapor on the D2 line at 780.2 nm. We apply a pump beam such that the
resulting Λ system exhibits Electromagnetically Induced Transparency. Using a “biased alignment”
technique we demonstrate a direct and robust method of measuring the rapid variation in the
refractive index. Such a “slow-light” Sagnac interferometer is ideally suited to precision measurement
applications such as magnetometry and inertial sensing.

PACS numbers: 42.50.Gy, 39.30.+w, 07.60.Ly, 32.30.-r

Slow light is the propagation of light with a group ve-
locity signiﬁcantly below the speed of light in a vacuum.
Slow light propagation is observed in media whose re-
fractive index varies rapidly with respect to frequency.
The rapid variation in the refractive index has a con-
comitant narrow transparent window in the spectrum of
the slow-light medium. Such narrow transmission win-
dows can be produced using Electromagnetically Induced
Transparency (EIT) in an atomic vapor [1, 2, 3]. Slow
light propagation has also been observed in solid-state
media such as ruby [4] and optical ﬁbers [5].
In gen-
eral EIT is an eﬀect seen in three-level systems interact-
ing with two light ﬁelds [6, 7]. For slow light in atomic
systems, the three levels form a Λ system with the two
lower states being coupled to the common upper state
by optical transitions.
In the Λ system the width of
the EIT resonance is ultimately limited by the coherence
time between the two lower energy states, which can be
very long, consequently resonances as narrow as tens of
Hz have been observed [8, 9]. Narrow resonances lend
themselves to being used as the basis for sensitive mea-
surements. For example, utilising the narrow linewidth of
EIT resonances, it is possible to construct extremely com-
pact atomic clocks [10]. Magnetically sensitive Λ systems
enable the construction of compact and sensitive magne-
tometers [11, 12, 13, 14, 15]. It has also been proposed
that slow light could enhance the rotational sensitivity of
a Sagnac interferometer [16], to produce a hybrid optical
matter-wave Sagnac interferometer [17] — this scheme
would require laser cooled atoms to achieve the proposed
matter-wave sensitivity gain. The sensitivity of atomic
systems to inertial sensing is also highlighted in recent
work where an atomic magnetometer has been used to
provide precision measurements of rotations [18].

In this paper, we present measurements on a slow-light
medium in a Sagnac interferometer. We show that an ap-
propriately conﬁgured slow-light Sagnac interferometer
provides a direct and robust readout of the dispersion.
The experimental set-up is shown in Fig. 1(i). We study

∗Electronic
URL: http://massey.dur.ac.uk/gtp

address:

g.t.purves@dur.ac.uk;

F ′) using or-
the 87Rb D2 line (5s 2S 1
thogonal circular polarized pump and probe beams. For
a room temperature vapor, the pump and probe couple
to three excited states, as depicted in Fig. 1(ii).

F = 1 → 5p 2P 3

2

2

The degeneracy of the two Zeeman sub-levels within
the ground hyperﬁne state is lifted by applying a mag-
netic ﬁeld of ≃ 1 G co-axial to the pump and probe
beams. This ensures that the two-photon resonance
(δ = 0) does not coincide with the beat signal arising
when the pump and probe have the same frequency.

Both pump and probe beams are derived from the same
Extended Cavity Diode Laser (ECDL) and double-pass
through separate Acousto-Optic Modulators (AOMs).
The ECDL is detuned by ∆ from the F = 1 → F ′ = 2
resonance. The pump beam is shifted by a ﬁxed fre-
quency oﬀset, whereas the probe has a variable oﬀset
which is scanned about δ = 0, see Fig.
1(ii). The
frequency-shifted beams are recombined on a polariz-
ing beam splitter (PBS) and coupled through a sin-
gle mode, polarization-preserving optical ﬁber ensur-
ing that the pump and probe beams are perfectly co-
propagating. The output from the ﬁber is collimated
and passes through two 50:50 beam splitters. The ﬁrst
beam splitter is used to pick oﬀ one of the Sagnac out-
puts. The loss associated with the ﬁrst 50:50 beam split-
ter could be avoided by using polarization to pick oﬀ the
output beam [19], however this would prevent the use
of orthogonally polarized pump and probe beams. The
second beam splitter divides both pump and probe into
the two counter-propagating arms of the Sagnac inter-
ferometer, see Fig. 1(i). The beams within the Sagnac
interferometer all have circular Gaussian proﬁles, with
a full-width at half-maximum (FWHM) in the center of
the Rb vapor cell of around 2 mm. Either side of the
Rb cell, the orthogonal linear polarized beams are con-
verted into circular polarizations by quarter-wave plates.
The beams pass through an 8 cm long Rb vapor cell,
which is positioned centrally within a solenoid, inside a
cylindrical µ-metal shield. In the anticlockwise direction,
the pump beam is coupled out of the interferometer by
a PBS, before reaching the Rb cell. The two counter-
propagating probe beams interfere on the second beam
splitter. Output arm A includes a neutral-density ﬁlter
which transmits 50% of the light onto photodiode A. Arm

B propagates back towards the ﬁrst beam splitter, where
50% is reﬂected onto photodiode B.

are given by

2

(1)

(2)

PA + PB
P0

PA − PB
P0

∝ (cid:0)e

−αcL

−αaL

+ e

(cid:1) ,

−αL

∝ e

sin (kL∆n) ,

where PA, PB and P0 quantify the power in arms A, B
and the total power into the interferometer, respectively;
αc and αa are the absorption coeﬃcients for the clockwise
and anticlockwise beams, respectively; α = (αc + αa) /2;
L is the length of the Rb vapor cell; and ∆n is the dif-
ference in refractive index between the clockwise and an-
ticlockwise beams. It should be noted that |kL∆n| ≪ 1,
hence sin(kL∆n) ≃ kL∆n, i.e. the diﬀerence signal can
be taken to be directly proportional to ∆n. Finally, as
only the clockwise probe beam co-propagates with the
pump beam within the vapor cell, only the clockwise
probe beam experiences a narrow EIT feature, hence ∆n
is equal to the refractive index of the EIT feature alone.
Thus the diﬀerence between the two output arms of the
Sagnac interferometer is directly proportional to the dis-
persion associated with the EIT feature.

Compared to a Mach-Zehnder interferometer [21, 22],
the Sagnac interferometer provides a more robust tool for
measuring EIT dispersion features. In both interferome-
ters it is necessary that the beam paths of the two arms
should be close to equal. This is trivial in the Sagnac,
as both arms of the interferometer follow the same path
but in opposite directions, whereas in the Mach-Zehnder
the path length of the two independent arms must be
matched (requiring a piezoelectric transducer to control
of the length of one of the two arms [22]). In addition
the Sagnac interferometer provides a degree of common-
mode rejection against translational mirror vibrations.

To ascertain at which value of laser detuning, ∆, the
features are strongest, a double-scanning technique was
used [23, 24]. ∆ is scanned over the full Doppler broad-
ened transition once, whilst at the same time, the two-
photon detuning δ/2π, is scanned m times over a range
of several hundreds of kHz with the AOM [23, 24]. This
leads to m EIT features occurring within the range of
the Doppler broadened transition Fig. 2. The frequency
scale of such a plot is not straight forward, the centers of
the diﬀerent EIT features are separated by a frequency
given by the ECDL scan ∆/2π whilst the width of the
features is determined by the AOM scan δ/2π. The am-
plitude of the EIT signals are determined by a Gaussian
envelope. This is expected, as the number of atoms that
contribute to the EIT signal across the Doppler broad-
ened resonance can be closely approximated by a Gaus-
sian function. Scanning two counter-propagating beams
at the same frequency across the Doppler broadened res-
onance leads to the occurrence of saturation spectroscopy
resonances [25, 26]. The features most prominent in Fig.
2 occur at frequencies of approximately 0 MHz, −80 MHz
and −160 MHz, consistent with the known hyperﬁne
structure.

FIG. 1:
(Color online) (i) Sagnac interferometer experimen-
tal set-up. The probe beam (red/dark-grey) passes around
the Sagnac interferometer in both clockwise and anticlockwise
directions, however the orthogonally polarized pump beam
(orange/light-grey) only passes through the Rubidium vapor
cell in the clockwise direction. BS — 50:50 beam splitter; ND
— neutral-density ﬁlter; PD — photodiode; PBS — polar-
ization beam spitting cube; BD — beam dump; and λ/4 —
quarter-wave plate. (ii) The Λ system investigated in this pa-
per: ∆ is the single-photon detuning of the pump ﬁeld from
the atomic resonance; and δ is the detuning of the probe from
(iii) Output beam pro-
the two-photon Raman resonance.
ﬁles for “perfect” alignment (upper) and “biased” alignment
(lower), see text. The shaded rectangles show the positions
of two mechanical slits.

In the case that the probe beams perfectly counter-
propagate, (“Perfect” alignment, Fig. 1(iii)(upper)); arm
A is dark (light grey/light red), whilst arm B is bright
(dark grey/red). A change in the refractive index of the
medium for one direction of propagation shifts the fringe
pattern. However the sensitivity is minimal, as the shift
is about a maxima or minima of the interference pattern,
where the rate of change of intensity with displacement is
lowest. To enhance the sensitivity we “bias” the interfer-
ometer by introducing a small angle between the counter-
propagating beams [19, 20], such that both light and dark
fringes appear in the interference pattern at both out-
puts, Fig. 1(iii)(lower). Two mechanical slits aperture
the fringe pattern, such that only the region between the
light and dark fringe is focussed onto the photodiode.
This biasing technique enables one to obtain maximal
sensitivity to changes in the refractive index and a sig-
nal that is directly proportional to the refractive index
diﬀerence between the two counter-propagating probes.
The sum and diﬀerence signal between the two outputs

3

FIG. 2:
(Color online) Sum (i) and diﬀerence (ii) of the
output arms of the Sagnac interferometer. The red (light-
grey) trace shows unsmoothed data, the blue (dark-grey)
trace shows the data with a nineteen point running average.
The probe beam power is 4 µW, the pump beam power is
26 µW. The piezo is used to scan both pump and probe ﬁelds
over a range of 1.3 GHz whilst the AOM scans the probe
ﬁeld twelve times, over a range of 1.8 MHz, about the two-
photon Raman resonance. The frequency scale applies only
to the piezo scan. When the Raman resonance condition is
met, there is a sharp increase in transmission and a concomi-
tant rapid change in the refractive index. The signals in both
plots are normalised such that the sum of the signals in the
two arms, away from the Doppler resonance, is equal to one.
The Doppler broadened background has been subtracted from
both signals.

In order to characterize both the transmission and
dispersion of the EIT feature, the ECDL was tuned to
the center of the Doppler broadened transition, between
−100 and −200 MHz in Fig. 2. The probe alone was
then scanned across the two-photon Raman resonance.
The signals from the two output arms, A and B, were
recorded, both with and without the pump ﬁeld. The
probe-only signal was subtracted from the probe-and-
pump signal, this removed varying background due to the
scanning of the AOM. Plots of the two individual arms of
a typical signal can be seen in Fig. 3(i). The signal is nor-
malised to the oﬀ-resonance sum of the two output arms,
and then the background is subtracted. The diﬀerence
signal, PA − PB (Eq. (2)), giving the refractive index of
the EIT feature, is shown in Fig. 3(ii). The sum Eq. (1),
which is proportional to the transmission of the EIT reso-

FIG. 3:
(Color online) The EIT feature as measured in the
Sagnac interferometer. The probe power is 3 µW and the
pump power is 28 µW. The signal size is normalised to the
sum of the oﬀ resonance signal in both arms. The background
signal has been subtracted from each arm after normalisa-
tion.
(i) shows the individual signals from the two output
arms of the Sagnac interferometer: A — red (light-grey) and
(ii) shows the diﬀerence signal be-
B — blue (dark-grey).
tween the two arms A − B. (iii) shows the sum signal of the
two arms (orange/light-grey line), with least-square ﬁts of a
Lorentzian function (blue/dark-grey dashed line) and a cusp
function (red/mid-grey solid line).

nance, is shown in Fig. 3(iii). Along with the sum signal
data are two least-square ﬁts, a Lorentzian and a cusp
function (two back-to-back exponentials). Both functions
are ﬁtted to the data across the frequency range shown
in the ﬁgure.
If the signals are power broadened, the
beam proﬁle aﬀects the line shape and width of the reso-
nance [27]: a step-like beam proﬁle leads to a Lorentzian
line shape and a Gaussian beam proﬁle to an arctan line
shape. In this case the FWHM varies linearly with the
intensity of the beam, Fig. 4. The cusp function gives the
expected line shape for transit-time dominated broaden-
ing [28], and is virtually indistinguishable from the arctan
ﬁt [27].

For the parameters used in this work, the EIT reso-

4

of 170 kHz, where the probe power is 4 µW. Whilst this
is more than forty times narrower than the excited state
linewidth, even narrower resonances could be obtained
using a buﬀer gas to extend the interaction time [8, 9].
For example by increasing the beam size by a factor of
two we obtain resonance widths of 70 kHz. A larger beam
size has a two-fold beneﬁt: the intensity is reduced and
the transit time of atoms through the pump beam is in-
creased — leading to reduced transit time broadening.

In summary, a Sagnac interferometer has been realised
incorporating a slow-light medium. We show that one
can “bias” the interferometer to provide a direct and ro-
bust readout of the dispersion associated with narrow
EIT resonances. Using this technique Sagnac interfer-
ometry provides a modulation-free method of producing
a signal with potential applications in magnetometry and
inertial sensing.

Acknowledgments

Graham Purves’s PhD studentship was provided by
EPSRC. the authors would like to thank M. Pritchard,
Dr. S. Cornish and Dr. S. Gardiner for useful comments
on the text.

FIG. 4: Plot of the FWHM of a Lorentzian dispersion ﬁt to
the diﬀerence signal for a range of pump powers. Experimen-
tal data (circles) with a linear ﬁt (solid line).

nance is power broadened. The amplitude of the features
increases with pump power until it starts to saturate
at around 50 µW. Reducing the intensity of the pump
reduces the width of the resonances, as can be seen in
Fig. 4. Extrapolating the linear ﬁt of Fig. 4, shows that
reducing the pump power to zero will lead to a FWHM

[1] L. V. Hau, S. E. Harris, Z. Dutton, and C. H. Behroozi,

[14] M. St¨ahler, S. Knappe, C. Aﬀolderbach, W. Kemp, and

Nature 397, 594 (1996).

[2] M. M. Kash, V. A. Sautenkov, A. S. Zibrov, L. Hollberg,
G. R. Welch, M. D. Lukin, Y. Rostovtsev, E. S. Fry, and
M. O. Scully, Phys. Rev. Lett. 82, 5229 (1999).

[3] D. Budker, D. F. Kimball, S. M. Rochester, and V. V.

R. Wynands, Europhys. Lett. 4, 323 (2001).

[15] C. Aﬀolderbach, M. St¨ahler, S. Knappe, and R.

Wynands, Appl. Phys. B 75, 605 (2002).

[16] M. R. Sagnac, C. R. Acad. Sci. 157, 708 (1913).
[17] F. Zimmer and M Fleischhauer, Phys. Rev. Lett. 92,

Yashchuk, Phys. Rev. Lett. 83, 1767 (1999).

253201 (2004).

[4] M. S. Bigelow, N. N. Lepeshkin, and R. W. Boyd, Phys.

[18] T. W. Kornack, R. K. Ghosh, and M. V. Romalis, Phys.

Rev. Lett. 90, 113903 (2003).

Rev. Lett. 95, 230801 (2005).

[7] K.-J. Boller, A. Imamo˘glu, and S. E. Harris, Phys. Rev.

Phys. Rev. Lett. 74, 666 (1995).

[5] Y. Okawachi, M. S. Bigelow, J. E. Sharping, Z. Zhu, A.
Schweinsberg, D. J. Gauthier, R. W. Boyd and A. L.
Gaeta, Phys. Rev. Lett. 94, 153902 (2005).

[6] S. E. Harris, J. E. Field, and A. Imamo˘glu, Phys. Rev.

Lett. 64, 1107 (1990).

Lett. 66, 2593 (1991).

[8] S. Brandt, A. Nagel, R. Wynands, and D. Meschede,

Phys. Rev. A 56, R1063 (1997).

[9] M. Erhard and H. Helm, Phys. Rev. A 63, 043813 (2001).
[10] S. Knappe, V. Shah, P. D. D. Schwindt, L. Hollberg, J.
Kitching, L.-A. Liew, and J. Moreland, Appl. Phys. Lett.
85, 1460 (2004).

[11] P. D. D. Schwindt, S. Knappe, V. Shah, L. Hollberg, J.
Kitching, L.-A. Liew, and J. Moreland, Appl. Phys. Lett.
85, 6409 (2004).

[19] G. Jundt, G. T. Purves, C. S. Adams, and I. G. Hughes,

Eurro. Phys. J. D 27, 273 (2003).

[20] N. P. Robins, B. J. J. Slagmolen. D. A. Shaddock. J. D.
Close, and M. B. Gray, Opt. Lett. 27, 1905 (2002).
[21] M. Xiao, Y.-Q. Li, S.-Z. Jin, and J. Gea-Banacloche,

[22] A. S. Zibrov, M. D. Lukin, L. Hollberg, D. E. Nikonov,
M. O. Scully, H. G. Robinson, and V. L. Velichansky,
Phys. Rev. Lett. 76, 3935 (1996).

[23] A. M. Akulshin, A. Cimmino, A. I. Sidorov, R. McLean,

and P. Hannaford, J. Opt. B 5, S479 (2003).

[24] A. M. Akulshin, A. Cimmino, A. I. Sidorov, P. Han-
naford, and G. I. Opat, Phys. Rev. A 67, 011801(R)
(2003).

[25] K. B. MacAdam, A. Steinbach, and C. E. Wieman, Am.

J. Phys. 60, 1098 (1992).

[12] M. O. Scully and M. Fleischhauer Phys. Rev. Lett. 69,

[26] D. A. Smith and I. G. Hughes, Am. J. Phys. 72, 631

1360 (1992).

(2004).

[13] A. Nagel, L. Graf, A. Naumov, E. Mariotti, V. Bian-
calana, D. Meschede, and R. Wynands, Europhys. Lett.
44, 31 (1998).

[27] A. V. Ta˘ıchenachev, A. M. Tumaikin, V. I. Yudin, M.
St¨ahler, R. Wynands, J. Kitching, and L. Hollberg, Phys.
Rev. A 69, 024501 (2004).

[28] J. E. Thomas and W. W. Quivers Jr., Phys. Rev. A 22,

2115 (1980).

5

