5
0
0
2
 
c
e
D
 
5
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
m
o
t
a
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
5
4
1
2
1
5
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Demonstration of a Controllable Three-Dimensional Brownian Motor
in Symmetric Potentials

P. Sj¨olund1, S. J. H. Petra1, C. M. Dion1, S. Jonsell1, M. Nyl´en1, L. Sanchez-Palencia2, and A. Kastberg1∗
1Department of Physics, Ume˚a University, SE-90187 Ume˚a, Sweden
2Laboratoire Charles Fabry, Institut d’Optique Th´eorique et Appliqu´ee,
Universit´e Paris-Sud XI, F-91403 Orsay cedex, France
(Dated: February 21, 2014)

We demonstrate a Brownian motor, based on cold atoms in optical lattices, where isotropic random
ﬂuctuations are rectiﬁed in order to induce controlled atomic motion in arbitrary directions.
In
contrast to earlier demonstrations of ratchet eﬀects, our Brownian motor operates in a potential that
is spatially and temporally symmetric, in apparent contradiction to the Curie principle. Studies of
Brownian motors, and in particular ones with unique control properties, are of fundamental interest
because of the role they play in protein motors and their potential applications in nanotechnology.

PACS numbers: 05.40.-a, 32.80.Pj, 87.80.Fe

Understanding how to extract useful work out of the
energy of random ﬂuctuations in mesoscopic or quantum
mechanical systems is a formidable challenge for nan-
otechnological applications and for physiology. Protein
motors[1] that realize vital living cell functions are ex-
amples of such Brownian motor systems, involving noise
rectiﬁcation and possibly quantum dynamics[2, 3, 4].
This is also of fundamental interest, since such a sys-
tem is in apparent contradiction with the second law
of thermodynamics. However, in his lectures of physics,
Richard Feynman describes a schematic ratchet mecha-
nism able to rectify noise[5], based on an original idea by
von Smoluchowski[6]. This requires the necessary con-
ditions that the system must be (i) asymmetric and (ii)
brought out of thermodynamic equilibrium. Up to now,
essentially all suggestions and tentative demonstrations
of Brownian motors rely on that archetype principle.
Brownian motors have been theoretically investigated
and also demonstrated for a variety of systems: much
of this is referenced in recent review articles[2, 3, 7, 8].
One impressive recent example is the demonstration of
Brownian ratchets in arrays of asymmetric pores[9, 10].
However, most of the realizations of ratchets and Brown-
ian motors typically inherently lack the possibility of in-
ducing motion in any direction in three dimensions and
are diﬃcult to control.

In this letter, we demonstrate a Brownian motor, based
on an ultra-cold atomic gas, where the atoms are trapped
in stationary optical lattices. Optical lattices have proved
to be highly controllable systems[11, 12], and they are
routinely used for example in studies of Bose-Einstein
condensation and of quantum state manipulation[13, 14].
Our Brownian motor operates with a mechanism where
the potential is both temporally and spatially symmetric.
Moreover, in contrast to other rectiﬁcation mechanisms
reported, the motion can be induced in any direction in
three dimensions with a controlled speed. This new type
of a Brownian motor opens up possibilities for funda-
mental studies of noise-induced directed motion. The

underlying principle is very general and is potentially
transferable to molecular motors and to applications in
nano-electronics and chemistry.

The need for asymmetry to extract directed motion out
of random ﬂuctuations is intuitive and is underpinned by
the Curie principle, which implies that asymmetric dy-
namics cannot emerge in a system possessing spatial and
temporal symmetry[15]. So far, most scientiﬁc work on
ratchets and Brownian motors have relied on the applica-
tion of a force asymmetric either in space or in time, al-
beit one that averages to zero. These kinds of ratchet ef-
fects have been investigated in optical lattices[16, 17, 18].
However, it has been suggested recently that a ratchet ef-
fect may appear in a spatially and temporally symmetric
potential provided that there are asymmetric jumps be-
tween potentials that are shifted in phase[19]. This has
been shown using a simple theoretical model and it is a
challenging task to realize it experimentally.

We obtain controlled motion in three dimensions
despite the absence of spatial as well as of tempo-
ral asymmetry, in apparent contradiction to the Curie
principle[15]. Instead, the combined dynamics, made up
of phases of Hamiltonian motion interrupted by stochas-
tic dissipative processes provide the asymmetry[19]. Di-
rected motion is induced for atoms switching between
two state-dependent periodic potentials that are coupled
via optical pumping. The rectiﬁcation process emanates
from the fact that the couplings between the two poten-
tials, via the vacuum ﬁeld reservoir, are strongly asym-
metric. For this experiment, the coupling between the
potentials is driven by quantum jumps as resulting from
spontaneous emission, which essentially is a quantum me-
chanical feature. Moreover, atoms in optical lattices can-
not be fully described in a classical picture. Therefore,
our system may also be relevant in the context of quan-
tum Brownian motors[2, 20, 21].

The basic idea for the rectiﬁcation mechanism demon-
strated in this work is depicted in Fig. 1. Depending on
their internal state, the atoms are subjected to one of

2

[25, 26]. The presence of dissipation, albeit small, will
result in a slow normal diﬀusion of the atoms in the
lattice[12, 26, 27]. Our setup consists of two optical
lattices produced by two diﬀerent laser ﬁelds of slightly
diﬀerent frequencies, close to distinct atomic resonances.
This is realized using cesium, which has a hyperﬁne struc-
ture in the ground state that is great enough to enable
spectrally selective optical lattices, but also small enough
to ensure that the two distinct lattices have essentially
the same spatial periodicity (given by the wavelengths of
the light and the interference pattern) within the sam-
ple volume. In these double optical lattices, spontaneous
emission also induces asymmetric couplings between the
potentials and it is possible to accurately control the rela-
tive spatial phase between the potentials as demonstrated
in[28, 29].

The physical system that emanates from this set-up
is not an exact replica of the simple model depicted in
Fig. 1. Instead of the two potentials, UA(z) and UB(z),
the atoms now shift between two manifolds of poten-
tials, corresponding to two diﬀerent hyperﬁne levels in
the ground state of Cs. Optical pumping will preferen-
tially transfer atoms to the magnetic substates with the
deepest optical potentials, yielding a system that shares
the basic features shown in Fig. 1. Apart from transi-
tion between the manifolds, there will also be transitions
within the respective manifolds, in particular for moving
atoms. In fact, transitions like these are responsible for
the dissipation[12, 30]. This dissipation is state and posi-
tion dependent, but can, by spatial averaging, be likened
to a friction force[31].

The experimental apparatus has been described in de-
tail elsewhere[28, 29].
In brief, we start with a cloud
of laser-cooled Cs atoms with a temperature of a few
microkelvin. The two spatially overlapped lattices are
formed by four laser beams each (overlapped in pairs),
yielding tetragonal lattice structures.
In the resulting
double optical lattice, we typically trap some 108 atoms,
with a ﬁlling fraction of about 0.05 atoms per site. The
atomic states trapped are the Fg = 3 and Fg = 4 hy-
perﬁne structure levels of the ground state in Cs (6s
2S1/2). The light ﬁelds are close to the D2 resonance at
852 nm (reaching 6p 2P3/2). Among the hyperﬁne struc-
ture manifolds in the ground and excited states, lattice
B is close to the (Fg = 4 → Fe = 5) resonance. This
is a closed transition and the optical pumping out of
lattice B will be very slow.
In contrast, lattice A op-
erates on the open transition (Fg = 3 → Fe = 4), where
the probability for optical pumping to lattice B is large.
The spatial phases along the three coordinate axes of
the lattices are controlled by individually adjusting the
optical path lengths of the four branches that build up
the lattices[28, 29]. By varying the irradiances and the
detunings from the two atomic resonances the optical
pumping rates can be controlled individually.

Experimental veriﬁcation of induced drift, when a spa-

FIG. 1: Illustration of the rectiﬁcation mechanism. Atoms
move in two symmetric potentials UA(z) and UB(z). These
potentials are coupled via the asymmetric optical pumping
rates γA→B and γB→A (γA→B ≫ γB→A). a) The potentials
are in phase. The transfer from the long lived state B, to
the transient state A, and back, will not lead to biased mo-
tion. b) A phase shift ϕ is introduced. Spatial diﬀusion will
be strongly facilitated in one direction, whereas it essentially
vanishes in the opposite direction, leading to a drift velocity
vd.

two three-dimensional periodic potentials (UA and UB)
with identical periods. The atoms undergo a Brownian
motion in each potential. Ever so often, an atom will be
pumped from one internal state to the other, resulting in
random jumps between UA and UB. The asymmetry that
eventually gives rise to controlled rectiﬁcation is caused
by a pronounced diﬀerence in the transfer rates between
the potentials (γA→B 6= γB→A). If the two potentials are
in phase (Fig. 1a), an atom will spend most of the time in
the long lived state (B), where its dynamics can be well
described by a quantum-mechanical harmonic oscillator
with dissipation. Every now and then, it is pumped to
the transient state (A), from where it returns very quickly
to state B. This excursion will cause a slight heating and
will increase the probability for escape to a neighbor-
ing lattice site. This diﬀusion is symmetric. If the rela-
tive phase between the potentials is shifted (Fig. 1b), the
situation changes drastically. During the time spent in
lattice A, the atom experiences a potential with an in-
cline that depends on the phase shift. Thus, the diﬀusion
will be strongly enhanced in one speciﬁc direction, and
correspondingly reduced in the opposite direction. Even
though the potentials are symmetric and stationary, the
atoms are propelled in a controllable direction.

This Brownian motor can be realized, in a completely
controllable fashion, using cold atoms in a double opti-
cal lattice. Optical lattices are spatially periodic poten-
tials formed in the interference pattern from a number
of laser beams due to a second-order interaction between
an atomic dipole and the light ﬁeld [11, 12]. Tuning the
light frequency of an optical lattice to the proximity of an
atomic resonance provides a dissipative channel resulting
from spontaneous emission. The potential is then accom-
panied by an eﬃcient cooling mechanism[12, 22, 23, 24],
providing friction in our system, and by momentum
diﬀusion leading to a Brownian motion of the atoms

3

FIG. 2: a) Induced drift in the vertical (z) direction, measured
as arrival time t at a probe beam as a function of the relative
t0 is
spatial phase ϕ for an interaction time τ of 350 ms.
the arrival time for zero drift velocity. b) Conﬁrmation of a
constant drift velocity obtained by plotting t2 as a function
of t + τ for diﬀerent τ . The line is a linear ﬁt.

tial phase diﬀerence is imposed between the lattices, is
displayed in Fig. 2a. The data is acquired with a bal-
listic time-of-ﬂight technique[24], where the atoms are
dropped, when the lattices are abruptly switched oﬀ, af-
ter a selectable interaction time and detected 5 cm lower.
The arrival time will depend on the combination of the
vertical (z) position and velocity of the atoms at the time
of release. The graph shows arrival time (t) as a function
of relative phase (ϕ). An independent measurement of
the phase shift is provided by a simultaneous measure-
ment of the temperature (or, to be precise, of the width of
the velocity distribution) as described in [28, 29]. There
is no induced drift when the relative spatial phase, ϕ,
is 0, π or 2π: these are positions where no biased mo-
tion is expected (see Fig. 1A). For all other phase shifts,
there is clear evidence of induced drift. It has extrema
around π/2 and 3π/2, with opposite signs. By control-
ling the lattice parameters, such as the optical pumping
rates between the potentials, the potential depths, and
also the dissipation in the system, we are able to inﬂu-
ence the magnitude of the directed transport. We can
induce drifts of the order of velocities corresponding to
one atomic recoil, which is about 3 mm/s for a Cs atom
scattering a lattice photon.

A crucial feature of the rectiﬁcation mechanism de-
scribed above is that it induces a constant drift velocity
of the cloud of atoms[19]. To conﬁrm that the drift veloc-
ity is constant in the z direction, we have used a relative
spatial phase of 3π/2 and we have varied the interaction
time τ in the lattices from 10 ms to 350 ms. Using a sim-
ple dynamical law, it is straightforward to show that for
an atom having a constant velocity, vd, in a controllable
time interval, τ , before ballistic release, the arrival time,
t, at the probe should have the functional form

gt2 + 2vd(t + τ ) − 2z0 = 0,

(1)

where g is the gravitational acceleration and z0 is the dis-
tance from the interaction region to the probe. In Fig. 2b,
we show that the experiments yield a linear relationship

FIG. 3: False color images of the atomic cloud. The central
image, labeled ‘0’, shows the initial atomic distribution. The
series labeled ‘a1-a2’ are images taken at two diﬀerent inter-
action times following a phase shift along z. The ﬁnal image
is acquired after an interaction time of 0.9 s. For images ‘b1-
b2’, the phase shift is still along z, but diﬀerent by π. The
series ‘c1-c2’ is obtained when the phase shift is along x. Fi-
nally, a diagonal drift is displayed in ‘d1-d2’, where the phase
is shifted both along z and along x.

between t2 and (t+τ ), conﬁrming the assumption of con-
stant velocity.

Our lattice structures are periodic in three dimensions,
and we can adjust the relative spatial phases along x, y
or z at will. Thus, the Brownian motor works also hori-
zontally (x and y directions), and indeed in an arbitrary
direction. We conﬁrm this by measuring directly the po-
sition of the center of the atomic cloud, as a function
of interaction time τ . This is done for horizontal direc-
tion x, as well as along z, by imaging the shadow of
the atoms, transiently illuminated with a weak resonant
probe beam, on a CCD-detector. The results are shown
in Fig. 3 for the relative spatial phases that induces max-
imum drift in the respective directions. To determine
the center-of-mass position, we performed Gaussian ﬁts
of the atomic distribution. This method of detection is
more direct than the time-of-ﬂight method, but it has
substantially lower resolution. Along z, the direct spa-
tial data do, however, reproduce the results displayed in
Fig. 2a. Also, the data in Fig. 3 prove that the Brown-
ian motor is three-dimensional. In Fig. 4, we show the
center-of-mass position measured as a function of inter-

4

FIG. 4: The center-of-mass positions, for Brownian motors
along x and z, measured as a function of the interaction time
τ in the lattice. The data is obtained from images like those
displayed in Fig. 3.

FIG. 5: Results from numerical simulations of the Brownian
motor mechanism for the vertical (z) and horizontal (x) di-
rections. The drift velocity vd is plotted as a function of the
relative spatial phase ϕ.

action time, yet again conﬁrming a constant drift velocity
in both the x and z directions.

The actual potentials in our system have diﬀerent
shapes in diﬀerent directions. Along z, the potential is
simply sinusoidal; however, in the two transversal direc-
tions, the minima are separated by regions where the
potential is essentially ﬂat. This alters the phase de-
pendence of the Brownian motor. We have performed
a numerical simulation for a classical atom based on
the Fokker-Planck equation[19, 32], using a realistic two-
dimensional potential. The result is shown in Fig. 5,
where we see a marked diﬀerence in the phase depen-
dence of the drift velocity for the x and z directions. Note
that this simulation is made with the simpliﬁed model de-
picted in Fig. 1. To make a quantitative comparison with
experiment, a much more elaborate method is needed,
where the quantum features of the atomic evolution are
included.

In our current set-up, we control the transition rates
between the two potentials by varying the irradiance and
the detuning of the light that builds up the potentials.
The control is complicated by the fact that these mod-
ulations will also change the dissipation and the height
of the potential barriers. This could be circumvented
by adding homogeneous laser ﬁelds that increase one or
both of the inter-potential couplings in a controlled way.
This would greatly facilitate fundamental studies of the
quantum transport properties in the system. Separating
the control of potential depth, dissipation and coupling
could then be carried further by detuning so far that the
inherent dissipation becomes a small perturbation. Even
dissipation could be added to the system independently
by using standard laser-cooling techniques[22, 23, 24].

The system that we describe in this letter provides a
new platform for general studies of dynamics in Brownian
rectiﬁers driven by quantum jumps[21]. It is more versa-
tile than other realizations of Brownian motors since it
works with symmetric potentials and its parameters can
be accurately controlled. This, in turn, facilitates three-
dimensional control, which we have demonstrated. Such
investigations may have useful applications in the under-

standing of biological or chemical systems. Indeed, this
mechanism[19] is not restricted to optical lattices, but is
quite general. The two states could in principle be two
diﬀerent chemical compounds and the transitions could
be corresponding chemical reactions[4].

This work has been supported by Knut och Alice
Wallenbergs stiftelse, Carl Tryggers stiftelse, Kempes-
tiftelserna, Magnus Bergwalls stiftelse and the Swedish
Research Council. Part of this research was conducted
using the resources of the High Performance Computing
Center North (HPC2N).

∗
Electronic address: anders.kastberg@physics.umu.se
[1] G. Oster and H. Wang, Trends Cell Biol. 13, 114 (2003).
[2] P. H¨anggi, F. Marchesoni, and F. Nori, Ann. Phys.

(Leipzig) 14, 51 (2005).

[3] R. D. Astumian and P. H¨anggi, Physics Today 55, 33

(2002), no. 11.

[4] R. D. Astumian, Science 276, 917 (1997).
[5] R. P. Feynman, R. B. Leighton, and M. Sands, The
Feynman Lectures on Physics (Addison-Wesley, Reading,
MA, 1963), vol. 1, chap. 46, pp. 46–1–46–9.

[6] M. von Smoluchowski, Physik. Z. 13, 1069 (1912).
[7] P. Reimann and P. H¨anggi, Appl. Phys. A 75, 169 (2002).
[8] P. Reimann, Phys. Rep. 361, 57 (2002).
[9] S. Matthias and F. M¨uller, Nature 424, 53 (2003).
[10] C. Kettner, P. Reimann, P. H¨anggi, and F. M¨uller, Phys.

Rev. E 61, 312 (2000).

[11] P. S. Jessen and I. D. Deutsch, Adv. At. Mol. Opt. Phys.

[12] G. Grynberg and C. Robilliard, Phys. Rep. 355, 335

37, 95 (1996).

(2001).

[13] M. Greiner, O. Mandel, T. Esslinger, T. H¨ansch, and

I. Bloch, Nature 415, 39 (2002).
[14] C. Monroe, Nature 416, 238 (2002).
[15] P. Curie, J. Phys. III (Paris) 3, 393 (1894).
[16] C. Mennerat-Robilliard, D. Lucas, S. Guibal, J. Tabosa,
C. Jurczak, J.-Y. Courtois, and G. Grynberg, Phys. Rev.
Lett. 82, 851 (1999).

[17] M. Schiavoni, L. Sanchez-Palencia, F. Renzoni, and
G. Grynberg, Phys. Rev. Lett. 90, 094101 (2003).

5

[18] P. H. Jones, M. Goonasekera, and F. Renzoni, Phys. Rev.

(1995).

Lett. 93, 073904 (2004).

[19] L. Sanchez-Palencia, Phys. Rev. E 70, 011102 (2004).
[20] P. Reimann, M. Grifoni, and P. H¨anggi, Phys. Rev. Lett.

79, 10 (1997).

[21] P. H¨anggi and G.-L. Ingold, Chaos 15, 026105 (2005).
[22] S. Chu, Rev. Mod. Phys. 70, 685 (1998).
[23] C. Cohen-Tannoudji, Rev. Mod. Phys. 70, 707 (1998).
[24] W. D. Phillips, Rev. Mod. Phys. 70, 721 (1998).
[25] J. Dalibard and C. Cohen-Tannoudji, J. Opt. Soc. Am.

B 6, 2023 (1989).

[26] L. Sanchez-Palencia, P. Horak, and G. Grynberg, Eur.

Phys. J. D 18, 353 (2002).

[27] T. W. Hodapp, C. Gerz, C. Furthlehner, C. I. Westbrook,
W. D. Phillips, and J. Dalibard, Appl. Phys. B 60, 135

[28] H. Ellmann, J. Jersblad, and A. Kastberg, Phys. Rev.

[29] H. Ellmann, J. Jersblad, and A. Kastberg, Eur. Phys. J.

Lett. 90, 053001 (2003).

D 22, 355 (2003).

[30] C. M. Dion, P. Sj¨olund, S. J. H. Petra, S. Jonsell, and

A. Kastberg, Europhys. Lett. 72, 369 (2005).

[31] Y. Castin, J. Dalibard, and C. Cohen-Tannoudji, in Light
Induced Kinetic Eﬀects on Atoms, Ions, and Molecules,
edited by L. Moi, S. Gozzini, C. Gabbanini, E. Arimondo,
and F. Strumia (ETS Editrice, Pisa, 1991), pp. 5–24.
[32] H. Risken, The Fokker-Planck equation (Springer, Berlin,

1989), 2nd ed.

