5
0
0
2
 
c
e
D
 
2
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
m
o
t
a
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
7
0
1
2
1
5
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Dynamic Manipulation of Bose-Einstein Condensates With a Spatial Light Modulator

V. Boyer,1 R. M. Godun,1 G. Smirne,1 D. Cassettari,1 C. M.
Chandrashekar,1 A. B. Deb,1 Z. J. Laczik,2 and C. J. Foot1
1Clarendon Laboratory, University of Oxford, Parks Road, Oxford, OX1 3PU, UK
2Department of Engineering Science, University of Oxford, Parks Road, Oxford, OX1 3PJ, UK
(Dated: February 2, 2008)

We manipulate a Bose-Einstein condensate using the optical trap created by the diﬀraction of a
laser beam on a fast ferro-electric liquid crystal spatial light modulator. The modulator acts as a
phase grating which can generate arbitrary diﬀraction patterns and be rapidly reconﬁgured at rates
up to 1 kHz to create smooth, time-varying optical potentials. The ﬂexibility of the device is demon-
strated with our experimental results for splitting a Bose-Einstein condensate and independently
transporting the separate parts of the atomic cloud.

PACS numbers: 32.80.Pj, 42.40.My, 03.75.Kk

The miniaturization of atomic traps is key to the use
of ultracold atoms in applications requiring full quan-
tum control of the external degrees of freedom, such as
quantum information processing or matter wave interfer-
ometry. As pointed out in Ref. [1], quantum eﬀects on
the propagation of the spatial wavefunction arise when
the trapping potential features details on a length scale
smaller than the atomic wavelength, typically 1 µm for
ultracold atoms.

One of the two main technologies to realize microtraps
is the atom chip [2, 3], which consists of microfabricated
conducting wires able to generate highly conﬁgurable
magnetic traps. A common drawback is that the very
proximity of the wires or the surface holding the wires
(10 − 500 µm) results in undesired perturbations [1, 4, 5].
Another limitation is that magnetic trapping only works
for a subset of all the Zeeman sublevels.

The alternative technology to magnetic atom chips
is optical trapping. Atoms in light ﬁelds far-detuned
from atomic resonances can be tightly conﬁned in a
non-dissipative trap,
in any Zeeman sub-level of the
ground state [6] and far away from any physical struc-
ture. Regular arrangements of microtraps, called optical
lattices [7], are obtained by interfering intersecting laser
beams. More complex trapping structures have been im-
plemented on cold atoms using micro-lenses and other
micro-optic elements [8, 9]. However, compared to the
magnetic atom chips, those techniques do not have much
ﬂexibility built in, because the shape of the potential is
contained in a static optical setup, and only a small num-
ber of manipulations can be performed [8].

Programmable diﬀractive optics can eﬃciently extend
the capabilities of micro-optic components by generating
arbitrary light patterns. In colloidal physics experiments
using optical tweezers, it is common to generate multiple
traps by diﬀracting the light from spatial light modula-
tors (SLMs) [10]. These programmable diﬀractive opti-
cal elements allow great ﬂexibility and dynamic control
of the optical potentials, and dynamic manipulation of
plastic beads has been demonstrated [11]. However, be-

fore the work reported here, the application of spatial
light modulation to move cold atoms had been consid-
ered diﬃcult because the motion of atoms is not subject
to damping (unlike samples in water), and variation of
the potential must be carried out extremely smoothly.
Previously, static intensity patterns have been proposed
to create hollow guides for cold atoms [12], and have been
used to trap atoms in multiple wells [13].

We report the manipulation of Bose-Einstein conden-
sates with moving optical tweezers generated by diﬀrac-
tion of a laser beam on the programmable phase grating
created by a ferro-electric liquid crystal SLM. We were
able to split the BEC into two or three pieces, and to
move those pieces in a plane perpendicular to the tweez-
ers. This demonstrates the ﬂexibility of this technique
and its ability to create a variety of dynamic optical traps
for sub-microKelvin atoms.

An SLM is an array of pixels acting as individually tun-
able absorbers or retardation waveplates which can im-
print on a light beam a spatial amplitude modulation or
a spatial phase modulation respectively. Common SLMs
are made of nematic liquid crystal pixels whose birefrin-
gence is controlled by polarizing them with an external
electric ﬁeld. They exhibit a continuous phase retarda-
tion eﬀect and a good diﬀraction eﬃciency, and were suc-
cessfully used to create static patterns [13, 14]. However,
their refresh rate, which is the rate at which the retarda-
tion of a pixel can be changed from one value to another,
is of the order of 50 Hz, which is too low for most cold
atom applications. In order to generate a useful dynamic
potential, the device should be able to generate hundreds
or thousands of diﬀerent patterns on the time scale of the
experiment, typically a few seconds. For this reason, we
used a ferro-electric liquid crystal SLM, which is much
faster but is limited to binary values of the retardation,
resulting in an imprinted phase of 0 or π [15].

Our device is a 256×256 square-pixel array of total
size 4 × 4 mm from Displaytech, used in reﬂection. Let
x and y be the main axes of the chip. Ferro-electric liq-
uid crystal materials are birefringent, with two bi-stable

y

Ein

Eout
−

−22.5◦

22.5◦

Eout
+

Eout
π

π

Eout
0

x

FIG. 1: Polarization eﬀects in a ferro-electric liquid crystal.
The electric ﬁeld Ein of the incident light is polarized along
the y axis. Depending on the two possible positions of the fast
axis (dashed lines), the output polarization Eout
± is rotated by
±45◦. The corresponding possible components along the x
axis Eout
are dephased with respect to each other
by π. The component of the output polarization along the
y axis is not dephased and goes into the zeroth order of the
diﬀraction pattern.

and Eout

π

0

orientations for the liquid crystal director. By applying
an appropriate electric ﬁeld, the director can be switched
between these two orientations, and the fast axis can be
rotated in the xy plane between ±22.5◦ with respect to
the y axis (Fig. 1). The retardation, which is a func-
tion of the thickness of the material, is set to be λ/2 at
λ ≃ 700 nm. As a result, the eﬀect on light linearly po-
larized along y is a rotation of the polarization through
±45◦, depending on the sign of the electric ﬁeld, and the
two possible values of the x-component of the polariza-
tion of the rotated light are dephased by π. Thus the
x-component of the light reﬂected from the SLM has a
binary phase modulation and contributes to the diﬀrac-
tion pattern, whereas the y-component of the light is not
phase modulated and is reﬂected into the zeroth order of
the diﬀraction pattern.

We chose to use the diﬀraction pattern in the far ﬁeld.
Note that the near ﬁeld can also generate useful trap-
ping potentials, as shown in Refs. [16, 17]. In our case,
in the scalar approximation, the diﬀracted electric ﬁeld is
the Fourier transform of the phase pattern on the SLM.
There is the same amount of light in the plus and mi-
nus ﬁrst orders, but in practice we only use the plus ﬁrst
order. This, together with the fact that the designed ro-
tation of the incident polarization is 45◦ instead of 90◦,
that we use a wavelength for which the retardation eﬀect
is less than λ/2, and that the pixels do not join com-
pletely, leads to a diﬀraction eﬃciency into the plus ﬁrst
order of only 3%. However, this low eﬃciency is not of
practical importance because only 100 µW are required
to trap a BEC in our experimental conditions.

The operation of a ferro-electric SLM presents two
kinds of problem. First, in continuous operation, charge

(a) ϕ = 0

(b) ϕ = π/3

(c) ϕ = 2π/3 (d) ϕ = π

2

FIG. 2: Four diﬀerent phase ﬁlters realizing the same diﬀrac-
tion pattern consisting of a single spot. The pixels with a 0
phase are shown in white and the pixels with a π phase are in
black. Each ﬁlter has the phase pattern in a diﬀerent position,
corresponding to diﬀerent phases of the electric ﬁeld, ϕ, at the
spot position. The ﬁlters (a) and (d) are complementary.

migration in the liquid crystal reduces the retardation ef-
fect and the light power in the diﬀraction pattern fades to
zero with a time constant of 0.5 s. Charge migration can
be prevented by DC balancing the electric ﬁeld in such a
way that the temporal average is close to zero. Thus the
problem is averted when the phase of each pixel is ﬂipped
regularly in time. However, the second problem is that
the switching of the state of a pixel takes about 250 µs,
during which the birefringence is not well deﬁned. Thus,
ﬂipping the phase of a large number of pixels at the same
time will produce a substantial ﬂicker of the diﬀraction
pattern. Solving simultaneously the DC balancing and
the ﬂicker problems requires a compromise between op-
posite constraints on the level of pixel changes between
consecutive ﬁlters (phase modulation patterns) of a se-
quence.

Calculating the ﬁlter corresponding to a desired inten-
sity diﬀraction pattern (target) is a diﬃcult problem in
general. The phase of the diﬀracted ﬁeld, which is ir-
relevant to the atoms, is unknown, and assuming a ﬂat
phase across the diﬀraction pattern and taking the re-
verse Fourier transform of the electric ﬁeld would give a
phase and amplitude modulation diﬀraction grating. In
order to obtain a pure phase modulation grating, one has
to use algorithms such as iterative Fourier transform [18],
genetic algorithm [19], or direct binary search (DBS) [20].
We use a modiﬁed version of DBS [25] which takes care of
the ﬂicker and DC balancing issues mentioned above. As
shown in Ref. [21], the ﬂicker can be reduced by including
a term in the DBS error function which keeps account of
the pixel changes between consecutive ﬁlters. DC balanc-
ing requires that all the pixels are changed periodically
in the sequence, at least a few times per second. We
enforce such a change by imposing a time-varying value
of the phase of the ﬁeld at one of the target points with
an extra term in the error function. As shown in Fig. 2,
modifying the overall phase of the ﬁeld results in chang-
ing the position of the phase pattern on the chip. A
small variation of the phase corresponds to the change of
a small number of pixels. By carefully setting the weight
of the three terms in the error function, we could gen-

erate sequences of ﬁlters which smoothly moved a set of
spots in the Fourier plane, while keeping the ﬂicker below
a few percent of the total intensity, and preventing the
diﬀraction pattern from fading away.

To trap cold atoms in the optical potential created by
the diﬀraction pattern of the SLM, we initially create a
BEC in a magnetic trap. The BEC apparatus is similar to
the one described in Ref. [22], and consists of a pyramidal
magneto-optical trap (MOT) feeding a second MOT in
a high vacuum glass cell. The atoms are then transfered
into a time-averaged orbiting potential [23] and are evap-
oratively cooled until a BEC containing 2 × 105 atoms is
formed. In the ﬁnal step, the magnetic trap is turned oﬀ
while the laser beam diﬀracted by the SLM (2 mm waist
on the SLM) is turned on, transfering the atoms into the
optical potential. The diﬀraction pattern is imaged on
the trapping zone using the same optics as the absorption
imaging system. We thus have access to the atomic distri-
bution in the Fourier plane of the SLM. The smallest spot
size waist we can create is w = 3.8 µm, slighly larger than
the diﬀraction limit of the optical system. At a wave-
length λ = 850 nm and a power P = 0.12 mW, it creates
an optical trap with oscillation frequencies 1.2 kHz ra-
dially and 60 Hz in the direction of propagation, and a
depth ǫ = 2 µK [26].

A BEC of 2 × 105 atoms trapped in such a spot has
dimensions of 1.5 µm×1.5 µm×30 µm and a chemical po-
tential of 0.7 µK, only one third of the trap depth. This
means that very few thermal atoms can be trapped, and
the BEC in equilibrium is almost pure. When heating is
applied to the cloud, fast evaporation and rethermaliza-
tion bring the system back to an equilibrium consisting
of a quasi-pure BEC with fewer atoms. Because we oper-
ate at high peak density, around 1015 cm−3, the collision
rate is very high and this rethermalisation happens on a
timescale of a few milliseconds. Unless the heating rate
is very high, the cloud stays condensed and the heating
translates into atom losses, on top of the other sources of
loss. These are dominated by the 3-body recombination,
which leads to a measured loss rate per atom of ∼ 2 s−1
for a BEC of 2 × 105 atoms.

The ﬁrst of the two experiments that we report here
splits the BEC into two parts, as shown in Fig. 3. Dur-
ing 250 ms, the BEC is transfered into a light pattern
consisting of two spots in the Fourier plane separated by
6.4 µm [27]. After the magnetic ﬁeld is switched oﬀ, the
two spots are moved away from each other until they
reach a separation of 55 µm after 200 ms. The refresh
rate of the SLM is 500 Hz and the displacement of the
spots between each ﬁlter is 1/18 of the spot waist. Fig-
ure 3 shows the atomic spatial distribution measured by
absorption imaging, at various times during the splitting.
Each picture represents a diﬀerent realization of the se-
quence for which the separation process is interrupted at
a given point by turning oﬀ the trapping light. The atoms
are allowed to free fall for 3 ms before the picture is taken.

3

0 ms

100 ms

200 ms

55 µm

FIG. 3: (color online). Splitting and transport of a BEC with
two optical tweezers. Each frame is an absorption image of
the atomic cloud, taken at the time shown on the left.

During the imaging process, the atoms are heated up by
exchanging photons with a near resonant probe beam,
resulting in atomic clouds much more expanded than the
original size in the trap. However the distance between
the clouds accurately reﬂects the separation between the
two traps.

In an independent series of experiments, we accurately
measure the atom number by allowing the cloud to ex-
pand for 15 ms before taking images, and we compare the
atom loss of the moving sequence with that of a static
double well, which reﬂects the contribution of 3-body re-
combination only. At the end of the separation sequence
shown in Fig. 3, the total atom loss is 50%, half of which
is due to the non-adiabatic motion of the potential. The
important result is that the non-adiabatic loss reduces
to a few percent when using smaller displacements of the
spots between consecutive frames of only 1/36 of the spot
waist. We ﬁnd that the splitting generally works well for
values of the refresh rate of the SLM ranging from 200 Hz
to 1 kHz, but some discrete values have to be avoided in
order to prevent strong heating of the BEC; such reso-
nances occur because the refresh rate can have harmonics
resonant with the radial oscillation frequency, resulting
in a non-adiabatic linear motion which can excite radial
oscillations.

To demonstrate further the ﬂexibility of our setup, we
load the BEC into a set of three spots in an arrangement
that would not be easily achievable using many other
techniques. As shown in Fig. 4(a), we start by load-
ing the BEC directly into a double-well and, initially, we
move the two wells apart vertically until they are sepa-
rated by 20 µm. We then split the lower spot into two
spots which separate horizontally to up to 25 µm. The
splitting required careful control of the height and the
shape of the potential barrier separating the newly cre-
ated pair of wells. A picture of the BEC in the ﬁnal
3-spot arrangement is shown in Fig. 4(b). The length of

(a)

(b)

25 µm

A 47, R4567 (1993).

4

[2] J. Reichel, W. H¨ansel, and T. W. H¨ansch, Phys. Rev.

Lett. 83, 3398 (1999).

[3] R. Folman, P. Kr¨uger, J. Schmiedmayer, J. Denschlag,
and C. Henkel, Adv. At. Mol. Phys. 48, 263 (2002).

[4] J. Est`eve et al., Phys. Rev. A 70, 043629 (2004).
[5] M. P. A. Jones, C. J. Vale, D. Sahagun, B. V. Hall, and

E. A. Hinds, Phys. Rev. Lett. 91, 080401 (2003).

[6] J. D. Miller, R. A. Cline, and D. J. Heinzen, Phys. Rev.

[7] J. V. Porto et al., Phil. Trans. R. Soc. A 361, 1417 (2003).
[8] R. Dumke et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 89, 097903 (2002).
[9] R. Dumke, T. M¨uther, M. Volk, W. Ertmer, and G. Birkl,

Phys. Rev. Lett. 89, 220402 (2002).
[10] D. G. Grier, Nature 424, 810 (2003).
[11] G. Sinclair et al., Opt. Express 12, 5475 (2004).
[12] D. McGloin, G. C. Spalding, H. Melville, W. Sibbett, and

K. Dholakia, Opt. Express 11, 158 (2003).

[13] S. Bergamini et al., J. Opt. Soc. Am. B 21, 1889 (2004).
[14] H. Melville et al., Opt. Express 11, 3562 (2003).
[15] W. J. Hossack, E. Theofanidou, J. Crain, K. Heggarty,

and M. Birch, Opt. Express 11, 2053 (2003).

[16] R. Newell, J. Sebby, and T. G. Walker, Opt. Lett. 28,

[17] E. Schonbrun et al., Opt. Express 13, 3777 (2005).
[18] R. W. Gerchberg and W. O. Saxton, Optik 35, 237

1266 (2003).

(1972).

[19] D. Goldberg, Genetic algorithms in search, optimization
and machine learning (Addison-Wesley, Reading, 1989).
[20] M. A. Seldowitz, J. P. Allebach, and D. W. Sweeney,

Appl. Opt. 26, 2788 (1987).

[21] V. Boyer, C. M. Chandrashekar, C. J. Foot, and Z. J.
Laczik, Journal Of Modern Optics 51, 2235 (2004).

[22] J. Arlt et al., J. Phys. B 32, 5861 (1999).
[23] W. Petrich, M. H. Anderson, J. R. Ensher, and E. A.

Cornell, Phys. Rev. Lett. 74, 3352 (1995).

[24] Y. Shin et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 92, 050405 (2004).
[25] DBS is an iterative algorithm in which the target is spec-
iﬁed by providing the desired intensity level on a ﬁnite
number of points. The ﬁlter is randomly initialized, and
the corresponding diﬀracted intensity (current pattern)
is calculated at the target points. An error function pro-
vides a measurement of the distance between the current
pattern and the target. At each iteration, the phase of a
randomly chosen pixel of the ﬁlter is ﬂipped if the result-
ing variation in the error is negative

[26] The beam propagates horizontally; gravity will reduce

the trap depth by about 25%.

[27] Although this distance of 6.4 µm is close to the spot size,
the two spots are fully separated. Unlike schemes relying
on the incoherent addition of the potentials created by
two laser beams, for instance using an acousto-optic mod-
ulator with multiple driving frequencies [24], the ability
to control the light phase at the target allows increased
versatility when generating a double well potential. For
example, it becomes possible to create two very closely
spaced spots which destructively interfere at the mid-
point, allowing the spots to be separated by a narrower
potential barrier.

FIG. 4: (color online). Splitting of a BEC into 3 pieces. (a):
Schematic of the dynamics of the potential, starting from a
double-well (dashed lines) to 3 separate traps (solid lines).
(b): Absorption imaging of the BEC in the ﬁnal trap.

the sequence after the initial loading is 540 ms, and the
refresh rate of the SLM is set to 200 Hz. Because we are
currently limited to only 128 diﬀerent ﬁlters for technical
reasons, we cannot generate a motion of the potential as
smooth as the one in the 2-spot experiment. As a result,
a more severe heating leads to a ﬁnal number of atoms
which is half the number expected when taking into ac-
count the 3-body recombination only. However, using a
larger number of ﬁlters would reduce that heating.

In conclusion, we have shown that dynamic optical po-
tentials created with SLMs can be used to manipulate
the external degrees of freedom of cold atoms in a con-
trolled manner and with little heating. We believe that
combined with high numerical aperture optics, resulting
in tightly conﬁning optical tweezers, this versatile tech-
nique can play a very important role for applications such
as quantum information processing with neutral atoms,
where one of the crucial steps is the building of a bus
able to carry individual qubits between memory and pro-
cessing units. Proposals using on-chip magnetic trapping
to create quantum processors with mobile qubits can be
readily adapted to diﬀractive optical trapping without
having the drawbacks of magnetic trapping. It should be
emphasized that the optical traps created by diﬀraction
are not limited to two dimensions and can extend in all
directions.

So far, we have focused on dynamic and non trivial ar-
rangements of spots, but generating other patterns, such
as so-called doughnut modes, should be possible, for in-
stance to study persistent currents and superﬂuid prop-
erties.

We acknowledge support from EPSRC, EC (Marie-
Curie fellowship, Cold Quantum Gases network), the
Royal Society, and DARPA.

[1] Y. J. Lin, I. Teper, C. Chin, and V. Vuleti´c, Phys. Rev.

Lett. 92, 050404 (2004).

