6
0
0
2
 
n
a
J
 
6
 
 
]
h
p
-
m
o
t
a
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
6
3
0
1
0
6
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Coherent manipulation of atoms by co-propagating laser beams

Yuri B. Ovchinnikov
National Physical Laboratory, Hampton Road, Teddington, Middlesex, TW11 0LW, UK∗
(Dated: December 23, 2013)

Optical dipole traps and fractional Talbot optical lattices based on the interference between
multiple co-propagating laser beams are proposed. The variation of relative amplitudes and phases
of the interfering light beams of these traps makes it possible to manipulate the spatial position
of trapped atoms. Examples of spatial translation and splitting of atoms between a set of the
interference traps are considered. The prospect of constructing all-light atom chips based on the
proposed technique is presented.

PACS numbers: 32.80.Pj, 32.80.Qk

I.

INTRODUCTION

There are three general types of conservative atom
traps: magnetic, electrostatic and optical dipole traps.
This paper concentrates on a special kind of all-light
atom chip traps. First we review the progress in mag-
netic surface traps, which have been the basis for atom
chips to date.

Magnetic atom chips [1] are becoming more and more
popular experimental technique to produce and manipu-
late Bose-Einstein condensed (BEC) coherent ensembles
of ultra-cold atoms [2] . The main advantage of mag-
netic chips is their compactness, relatively low energy
consumption and low cost, which is related to the prox-
imity of atoms to the sources of magnetic ﬁeld. Most of
the chips use current caring wires to create strong non-
uniform magnetic ﬁelds.
Initially magnetic chips were
used only to trap [3] and guide [4] cold thermal atoms,
now the more complicated versions of them are used to
get BEC [5] and even to implement integrated atom in-
terferometers [6]. In spite the fact that the current con-
sumed by each of the elements of the magnetic chip is es-
sentially smaller compared to the macroscopic magnetic
traps, it is far above the currents used in traditional inte-
grated electronic elements. Further complication of mag-
netic atom chips will sooner or later have to face up to the
problem of removing dissipated heat. The further minia-
turization of the magnetic chip elements is restricted by
the ﬂuctuations of the magnetic ﬁeld caused by thermally
excited currents in the metal wires and some other eﬀects
[8], which rapidly increase with decreasing distance be-
tween the trapped atoms and the surface of the chip.

All-light atom chips involve manipulation of atomic
motion with light forces only. To provide coherent manip-
ulation of atoms in these chips far-detuned dipole traps
[8] have to be used. There are multiple advantages of
these chips over the magnetic chips. The all-light chips
are free of the problems of heat dissipation and the ab-
sorption of light in their substrates is rather small. The
Van-der-Waals interaction of atoms with a surface of a di-

∗Electronic address: yuri.ovchinnikov@npl.co.uk

electric substrate becomes important only at sub-micron
distances [7]. Another advantage of the light traps is
that they can conﬁne atoms in all magnetic energy states
including the magnetically in-sensitive ones. This last
property of the all-light chips makes them very advanta-
geous for precise measurements. Finally, the cold ensem-
bles of molecules can be formed and stored in these traps
[9].

The development of all-light atom chips lags behind
that of magnetic chips. One approach to the manipula-
tion of atoms near the surface of a dielectric substrate is
based on evanescent light waves [10]. In fact the earliest
proposal of a surface trap for neutral atoms was a light
dipole trap based on a superposition of two evanescent
light waves of diﬀerent frequencies [11]. The ﬁrst obser-
vation of atoms cooled in an evanescent light trap was
made in 1997 [12] after the cooling mechanism of atoms
in evanescent waves became available [13]. The evanes-
cent light wave traps are still under development and a
recent result is that BEC Cs atoms have been produced
in such a trap [14], this was not possible in magnetic
traps due to speciﬁc properties of collisions between cold
Cs atoms. Recently also the surface waveguides [15] and
two-dimensional surface optical lattices [16] based on the
bichromatic evanescent waves have been proposed.

Another approach to the surface light traps, which was
developed in parallel to evanescent wave traps, is based
on standing light waves [17]. Recently an integrated
atom-optical circuit, which combines cooling of atoms
in a surface magneto-optical trap and their subsequent
transportation along the waveguide formed by a stand-
ing light wave, has been demonstrated [18]. Finally, in
[19, 20] a microscopic array of independent dipole light
traps formed by an array of microlenses was realized.

These light and magnetic chips technologies comple-
ment each other nicely, as demonstrated by the new gen-
eration of combined atom chips [21, 22].

This paper introduces another approach to the con-
struction of near-surface all-light atom optics ele-
ments based on the interference between multiple co-
It also demonstrates how to
propagating laser beams.
coherently transfer and split atoms between arrays of
such traps, which opens the prospects of building new
interferometers, quantum registers and other missing el-

ements of all-light chips.

Following this introduction the second section consid-
ers basic multi-beam traps, and concentrates on a two-
beam trap, because it is the simplest conﬁguration in-
terference trap. In the third section the basic manipu-
lations of the spatial position of the trapped atoms are
considered. The fourth section considers optical lattices
based on a fractional Talbot eﬀect. In the outlook section
the prospects of building all-light atom chips are brieﬂy
discussed. Finally, in the conclusion the results of this
investigation are summarized.

II. MULTI-BEAM INTERFERENCE DIPOLE
TRAPS

The simplest trap based on the interference of co-
propagating laser beams is a two-beam dipole trap. Al-
though the two-beam trap is not the most ideal trap of
this kind, it is the best to explain the general principle.
The trap is formed by the two Gaussian laser beams,
which are co-propagating in z direction (see Fig. 1). The
waists of the beams locate in the X0Y plane. Our in-
terest is the region A, where the interference of the two
beams forms the fringes, which can be used for three-
dimensional conservative trapping of atoms by dipole
light forces [8]. The amplitude of the light ﬁeld can be
written as

E(x, y, z) =

exp

i

kz

−

(cid:20)

(cid:18)

−

n

j=1 r
X

2
π

1
w2(z)

exp

tan

−1(z/zR) +

−

(cid:20)
k((x

(x

−

xj )2 + (y
w2(z)
xj )2 + (y
−
2(z + z2

−
R/z)

yj)2

−

yj)2)

×

(cid:21)

,

(cid:19)(cid:21)

(1)

−

where for a two-beam trap n = 2, x1 =

d/2,
x2 = d/2, y1,2 = 0, d is the distance between the beams,
1 + (z/zR)2 is the radius of each of the two
w(z) = w0
beams, w0 is their waist radiuses, k = 2π/λ is the wave
p
vector and zR = πw2
0/λ is the Rayleigh range. The am-
plitude of each of the two beams is normalized to unit
power. We suppose here that both beams are of the
same linear polarization directed along the y-axis. The
spatial distribution of the light intensity resulted from
the interference between the two beams is described by
the formula

I(x, y, z) =

exp

(cid:20)

−

(cid:18)

2dx
w2(z)

(cid:19)

2
πw2(z) ×
2dx
w2(z)

(cid:18)

+ exp

d2 + 4(x2 + y2)
2w2(z)

exp

−

(cid:18)

+ 2 cos

(cid:19)

(cid:18)

2πdxz
λ(z2 + z2
R)

×

(cid:19)

,

(cid:19)(cid:21)
(2)

The interference between the two beams forms inten-
sity fringes along the x-axis, which are described by the

2

cosine term inside the square brackets. These fringes are
very well known from the Young’s double slit interferome-
ter. The ﬁrst exponential term of equation (2) shows that
the intensity of the central interference fringes reaches
maximum at z
= 0. For the central fringe, when x = 0
and y = 0, the maximum of intensity is reached at

z = zmax = zR

(3)

d2
2w2

0 −

1.

s

When the waist radii, w0 of the beams and the dis-
tance, d between them are comparable to each other, the
interference pattern consists mostly of a single central
fringe. Fig. 2 shows the intensity distribution of the two-
beam interference pattern in the X0Z plane for z > 0,
w0 = λ and d = 3λ. One can see that the central in-
terference fringe is partially separated from the waist re-
gions of the two source beams. The cross sections of the
spatial intensity distribution of the central interference
fringe along the x, y and z coordinate axis are shown on
Fig. 3 a, b, c. The maximum of the light intensity in this
fringe is reached at z = 5.66 λ in a full agreement with
the formula (3). Fig. 3 d shows the intensity distribution
2xzmax/d, which connects the
along the line z = zmax ±
centre of the fringe to the centres of the waists of the
source beams. These two directions deﬁne the poten-
tial depth of the corresponding red-detuned dipole trap
formed by the central interference fringe. It is expected
that the escape of atoms from the trap due to their heat-
ing or tunnelling will happen mostly along these direc-
tions.

According to the formula (2) the interference trap is
scalable. If the sizes of the interfering beams w0 and the
distance between them d are increased proportionally by
the same factor a, the transverse size of the trap along
the x and y axes also increases by factor a, while the lon-
gitudinal size along the z-axis increases by factor a2. This
scalability law is exactly the same as for a single Gaus-
sian light beam. The situation when the sizes of the light
beams stays ﬁxed and only the distance between them is
increased is very diﬀerent. In that case there additional
intensity fringes along the x-axis of the interference trap
become visible.

To increase the degree of localization of the central in-
terference fringe, a larger number of the interfering light
beams must be used. Let us skip the three-beam case and
consider the trap, which consists of four equidistant co-
propagating light beams with waist radiuses of w0 = λ,
which are located at the corners of a square with side
length d = 3 λ, as it is shown in Fig. 4. The amplitude
of the interference ﬁeld produced by the interference be-
tween the four beams is described by the formula (1),
where the coordinates of the centres of the four Gaussian
beams (xj , yj) are (-d/2, d/2), (-d/2, -d/2), (d/2, d/2)
and (d/2, -d/2). The spatial distribution of the light in-
tensity in the r0Z plane, which is crossing the square
trap along its diagonal r (see Fig. 4), is shown in Fig. 5.

6
The maximum of the intensity in the central interference
fringe is localized at z = 8.885λ. Fig. 6 a, b, c, d shows the
spatial intensity distribution along four diﬀerent direc-
tions around the maximum of the fringe. The last graph
shows the intensity distribution along the line which joins
the waist centre of one of the source beams and the centre
of the interference fringe. One can see that the separation
of the fringe is nearly complete.

To estimate the potential depth of the red-detuned
trap formed by the interference of
the four co-
propagating laser beams we will take an example of Rb87
atom trapped by the coherent light of a Nd:YAG laser
with wavelength of λ = 1.064 µm. We will use a two-
level model of the atom, the wavelength of which λ0 =
0.780 µm corresponds to the strongest 5S1/2
5P 3/2
transition of Rb87. Such a frequency of the trapping light
is chosen to minimize the probability of the spontaneous
scattering of photons by an atom and therefore to pre-
serve the coherence of the light-atom interaction. The
dipole potential formed by the light can be estimated
from the formula [8]

→

Udip(x, y, z) =

3πc2
2ω3

−

Γ

+

Γ
ω0 + ω

(cid:19)

0 (cid:18)

ω0

ω

−

I(x, y, z),

(4)
where ω0 = 2πc/λ0 is the frequency of the atomic
transition, ω is the frequency of the light ﬁeld, Γ is the
linewidth of the transition and I(x, y, z) is the spatial dis-
tribution of the light intensity. We neglect here the ﬁne
structure of the transition between the ground 5S state
of Rb87 and its ﬁrst 5P excited state, which causes just a
small correction to the magnitude of the potential (4) for
the chosen frequency of the trapping light. For the laser
power 1.6 mW in each beam of the four-beam trap this
formula gives the total depth of the central interference
fringe of 82 µK. The corresponding oscillation frequen-
cies of the Rb atoms around the minimum of the trap
are equal to fx = fy = 18.7 kHz and fz = 2.6 kHz, which
gives the mean frequency of the trap of f0 = 16.6 kHz.
The rate of spontaneous scattering of the trapped atoms
can be estimated from the formula [8]

3

3π2c2
2~ω3
2

0 (cid:18)

ω
ω0

−

(cid:19)

I(x, y, z).

Γscat(x, y, z) =

Γ

ω0

ω

−

(cid:18)

+

Γ
ω0 + ω

(cid:19)

(5)

For the parameters of the light ﬁeld given above
the minimum time between the spontaneous scattering
events 1/Γscat near the bottom of the trap is about 1
second. To get longer coherence times without scarify-
ing the potential depth, CO2 lasers with a wavelength of
10 µm can be used [23].

Additional heating of the trapped atoms can be caused
by technical noise of the laser beams. Periodic change
of the depth of the dipole trap causes transition of the

3

atoms to the higher vibrational states of the trap poten-
tial. Such parametric heating of the atoms in the multi-
beam interference trap due to ﬂuctuations of the light
intensity is expected to be the same as in other dipole
traps and is relatively small [24, 25] even for free-running
industrial lasers.

The other source of parametric heating is a motion of
the trapping dipole potential caused by ﬂuctuations of
the relative phases of the interfering laser beams. The
corresponding transition rate of trapped atoms from the
ground to the ﬁrst vibration state of the trap is

R0→1 =

2π3M f 3
x
~

Sx(fx),

(6)

≈

×

p

Sφ(fx) = 5

where fx is the transverse frequency of the trap, M
is the mass of atom and Sx(fx) is the spectral den-
sity of the position ﬂuctuations in the trap centre along
the x axis [26]. According to this equation,
if an
atom is conﬁned in a trap with an oscillation frequency
fx = 18.7 kHz, achievement of the transition rate of
R0→1 = 1 s−1 requires a position stability of
Sx(fx) =
10−6 µm/√Hz. The change of the position of the
2.4
interference trap along the x axis ǫ = α∆φ is a linear
function of the phase diﬀerence between the interfering
laser beams ∆φ, where the proportionality coeﬃcient
α = D/2π is determined by the period of the interfer-
ence fringes D
zmaxλ/d along the x axis at z = zmax.
For the given above example of a four beam interference
trap the period of the interference fringes along x axis at
z = zmax = 9.45 µm is D
3 µm. Therefore, to achieve
≈
R0→1 = 1 s−1, the required relative phase stability of the
10−6 rad/√Hz. Accord-
laser beams is
ing to [27] the phase spectral density of a phase locked
p
Nd:YAG laser at frequency f = 1 kHz is better than
10−6 rad/√Hz. It means that even inde-
pendent lasers can provide the phase stability required.
p
If all the trapping beams are generated from the same
laser, their relative phase ﬂuctuations should be essen-
tially smaller than the absolute phase noise of the laser
light. In fact in standard optical lattices the demands on
the phase stability of the laser beams are stricter than in
the multibeam copropagating interference dipole traps
for two reasons. First, the typical vibration frequency of
the optical lattice potential is higher (
100 kHz) and ac-
cording to the equation (6) the parametric heating rate
of atoms grows rapidly with the frequency. Second, all
the beams of the copropagating interference trap can be
formed from diﬀerent parts of a single laser beam.
It
means the relative phases of these beams will be as stable
as the phase across a single laser beam, which is not the
case of standard optical lattices, where the laser beams
have to propagate along diﬀerent passes before they in-
terfere with each other.

Sφ(f ) = 3

×

×

≥

III. MANIPULATION OF ATOMS

A coherent dipole light trap is a very useful element
of atom optics. However many important applications
such as atom interferometry [28] or quantum computing
[29] require the ability to manipulate atoms between or
within these traps. In this paper only the manipulation
of a spatial position of atoms between the interference
traps will be described. There are two basic types of such
manipulation, the translation of atoms and their splitting
between two or more dipole traps. Let us consider a
spatial translation of atoms ﬁrst. Certainly the simplest
way to translate trapped atoms in space is by adiabatic
change of the spatial position of the trapping light beams,
but that is not possible for all-light atom chips, in which
the position of the light beams emitted from the surface
of the chip is ﬁxed and determined by the design of the
chip. The only parameters, which can be changed are
the intensities, phases, polarizations or frequencies of the
individual light beams. Multi-beam interference traps
oﬀer the possibility of translating atoms in all directions,
but only the translation of atoms across the light beams
is considered here.

One way to move atoms across the interfering light
beams is to change their relative phases. For a two-beam
interference trap the change of the phase of one of the
beams will lead to the transverse displacement of the in-
terference fringes. The problem of the two-beam trap is
that the shifted central interference fringe eventually be-
comes merged with one of the source beams, which leads
to transfer of the trapped atoms into the waist region of
this beam. For an atom chip, where the waists of the
source beams are located in the plane of the surface of
the chip, that means atom reaching the surface of the
chip, thermalize, and escape from the trap.

As shown in the previous section the four-beam trap
allows atoms to be conﬁned and well separated from the
source light beams. The translation of the trapped atoms
along the x- and y-axis of this trap preserves that sepa-
ration of the central interference fringe from the source
beams. Fig. 7 shows the intensity distribution of the light
ﬁeld in the X0Z plane while the phases of the beams 3 and
4 of the four-beam trap are changed by the same amount
relative to the beams 1 and 2 (see Fig. 4). The parame-
ters of this four-beam trap are the same as ones used in
the previous section. One can see that the centre of the
trap is smoothly moving along the x-axis while the phase
of the beams 3 and 4 is changed. During the shift of the
central fringe the second interference fringe from the side
opposite to the direction of motion of the central fringe is
developed. Nevertheless these two fringes stay well sep-
arated from each other by a distance of about 3 µm. By
choosing the proper intensities of the laser beams and
the rate of the spatial translation of the fringe it is pos-
sible to keep the tunnelling probability of the translated
atoms to the other interference fringe negligibly small.
The procedure described provides a unidirectional shift
of the trapped atoms along the x-axis. Fig. 8 shows the

4

evolution of the intensity distribution of the trap along
the x-axis taken at z=8.885 λ, where the maximum of the
fringe is located, as a function of the phase diﬀerence be-
tween the two pairs of the light beams. The dashed lines
show the borders of the trap, which correspond to the
x-coordinates of the centres of the four trapping light
beams. From the last graph of Fig. 8 it follows that
at φ = π the position of the shifted interference fringe
reaches the border of the trap. Let us suppose now that
there are two four-beam traps are set up next to each
other in such a way that they have a common border
with two pairs of their light beams are superimposed as
shown in ﬁg. 9. The adiabatic transfer of atoms between
these two traps can be organized as follows. First the
second trap is completely oﬀ. By variation of the phase
diﬀerence between the light beams of the ﬁrst trap form 0
to π atoms are moved towards the common border. Then
the intensity of the ﬁrst trap is switched oﬀ while the in-
tensity of the second trap is simultaneously switched on.
The phases of the beams in the second trap are set in
such a way to pick up the atoms at the common border
of the traps. Finally the adiabatic change of the phases
of the light beams of the second trap moves atoms to its
centre and the process of transfer of atoms between the
two traps is completed. This elementary process can be
expanded to a large number of neighboring traps so that
an all-light conveyor belt similar to the magnetic one [30]
can be realized.

The next important type of atomic manipulation is
the coherent splitting of the atomic ensemble into two
identical parts. Such a coherent beam splitter is a key
element of any interferometer. In the last few years the
interferometers based on conservative traps, which can
be adiabatically transformed into double-well traps, were
actively investigated [6, 31, 32, 33]. In [31] it is proposed
to split the atomic ensemble by adiabatic transportation
of a single well potential into a double well trap and then
to recombine the two wells back into a single well trap.
Some possible phase diﬀerence between the atoms in two
”arms” of the interferometer would lead to variation of
the population of the excited oscillation states of that
ﬁnal single well trap. A simpler approach is used in
[6, 32, 33], where it is proposed to split atoms coherently
in a double well trap and then to release atoms by switch-
ing oﬀ the trap potential. As a result interference fringes
like a classical Young’s double slit interferometer were
observed. The experiments [6, 33] relied on magnetic mi-
crotraps. A very diﬀerent approach was demonstrated in
[32] where an optical double well trap was used. This
optical trap consists of two Gaussian beam traps of dif-
ferent frequencies, which do not interfere with each other
in a sense that they do not produce a stationary interfer-
ence pattern. A smooth spatial translation of these traps
with respect to each other allows both merger into one
trap and separation to form a double well potential.

The splitter based on the interference dipole traps can
also be made by placing two non-interfering traps next
to each other. The diﬀerence is that the transformation

of the dipole potential is achieved now, not by moving
of the trapping light beams, but by changing their rela-
tive phases. The corresponding conﬁguration of the trap,
which consists of six co-propagating laser beams is shown
in Fig. 9. This ﬁgure shows the intensity distribution of
light in the X0Y plane, where the waists of all the beams
are located. The distance between the adjacent beams
along the x- and y-axes is d=3 λ and their waist radii are
w0 = λ. The amplitude of the light ﬁeld in the beams
3 and 4 is by factor √2 larger compared to the beams
1, 2, 5 and 6. The arrows shows the direction of the
polarization of light in each of the beams. This con-
ﬁguration corresponds to the two four-beam traps with
crossed polarizations, which have a common side located
at x=0. We suppose that initially the phases of the outer
beams 1, 2, 5 and 6 φ1 = φ2 = φ5 = φ6 = π are in
anti-phase with the phases of the central beams 3 and 4
φ3 = φ4 = 0. In these conditions the interference of the
beams forms a fringe, the maximum of which is located
at x=y=0, z=8.43 λ. The intensity distribution of light
in that fringe along the x-axis taken at z=8.43 λ is shown
by the highest curve in ﬁg. 10. The other curves in this
ﬁgure shows the stages of the transformation of this sin-
gle well potential into a double well trap while the phases
of the outer beams are changed gradually from π to 0.
Finally at φ1 = φ2 = φ5 = φ6 = 0 the two maximums of
the double well trap are located exactly at the centres of
the two adjacent four-beam traps at x=

1.5 λ.

It is possible to perform a coherent splitting of atoms
between the two four-beam traps formed by six beams of
the same polarization by changing their relative phases.
In that case an additional interference between the outer
most beams of the traps leads to more complicated evo-
lution of the trap potential.

±

IV. TALBOT OPTICAL LATTICES

The idea of trapping atoms in the dipole potential of
a standing light wave has been put forward in 1968 [34]
long before the laser cooling of atoms was achieved. The
potential formed by a standing light wave is unique, be-
cause it has an ideally sinusoidal form of periodicity, de-
termined by the wavelength of light. Standing light waves
were used in a huge number of experiments on diﬀraction
and interference of thermal atomic beams [28, 35]. A
new interest to the standing light waves appeared after
Bose-Einstein condensates of cold atoms became avail-
able. The BEC loaded into three-dimensional lattices
has allowed one for the ﬁrst time to get ﬁlling factor
more than 1 and to observe such an eﬀect as a super-
ﬂuid - Mott insulator transition [36]. The interest of the
standing light waves might be explained also by the fact
that an essential part of proposals for quantum comput-
ing rely on optical lattices [29]. The advantage of the
optical lattices in the quantum computing applications
is the the possibility of performing the same quantum
logic operations in parallel over a large number of iden-

5

tical sites of the lattice. However there are still some
unsolved problems with addressing and selective manip-
ulation of atoms between several distinct sites of optical
lattices based on standing light waves.

In [19, 20] a two-dimensional lattice of about 80 dipole
traps, separated from each other by a macroscopic dis-
tance of 125 µm has been demonstrated. The lattice was
made by focussing a laser beam with a microfabricated
array of microlenses. Addressing of a single site of the
lattice and modiﬁcation of the trapping potential with
an additional inclined laser beam was demonstrated ex-
perimentally.

An alternative approach is to trap of atoms using frac-
tional Talbot optical lattices, which are based on the in-
terference of an array of multiple co-propagating equidis-
tant laser beams. Compared to a case of an array of in-
dependent dipole traps [19, 20], the Talbot optical lattice
permits a much smaller period of the lattice and control
of the form of all or part of the interference potential
by changing the phases and amplitudes of the individual
source beams.

The Talbot eﬀect [37] consists of reproducing the trans-
verse spatial distribution of light coming through a trans-
mission diﬀraction grating at the distances from the grat-
ing, which are multiples of a Talbot period T = 2d2/λ,
where d is a period of the diﬀraction grating. For a grat-
ing with inﬁnite number of slits, the transverse spatial
distribution of light intensity at Talbot distances is ex-
actly the same as the intensity distribution of light in
the plane of the grating. This is valid for both a one-
dimension and two-dimension gratings of a deﬁnite pe-
riod.

×

At fractional distances T

M/N , where M and N
are coprime integers, the fractional Talbot images are
observed [38]. The transverse period of the intensity dis-
tribution of light at fractional Talbot distances is 2d/N
for even N and d/N for odd values of N . The fractional
Talbot optical images of diﬀerent orders are separated
from each other in space, because they are located at dif-
ferent distances from the grating and also shifted with
respect to each other transversally.

These periodic spatial distributions of light formed at
fractional Talbot distances by the interference of a peri-
odic array of light beams can be used as atom traps.

×

We will skip the case of a one-dimensional Talbot grat-
ing and describe the most interesting case of the square
two-dimension grating, which is formed by 5
5 square
array of 25 co-propagating Gaussian laser beams. The
waists of the beams are located in the X0Y plane with
coordinates of their centres xj = nd and yj = md, where
n, m =
1, 0, 1, 2 and d = 10 λ is the period of
the array. The waist radiuses of each of the beams are
w0 = λ. The corresponding Talbot period of the lattice
is T = 200 λ. Fig. 11 a shows the spatial intensity distri-
bution of the corresponding interference pattern in the
XZ plane at y=d/2. That speciﬁc plane was taken to see
the intensity maximums of the fractional Talbot lattice
at z = T /2 = 100 λ, where the interference fringes are

2,

−

−

shifted by half of a period with respect to the position of
the source beams in the X0Y plane. In full accordance
with theory the transverse period of the T /2-lattice is
equal to d. The other fractional Talbot lattice of nearly
same intensity and of twice smaller period d/2 is located
at z = T /4 = 50 λ. Fig 11 b and 11 c show the transverse
distributions of the light intensity in the XY plane, taken
at z = T /2 and z = T /4 correspondingly. To get a better
idea on the intensities of the diﬀerent fractional Talbot
lattices, the distribution of the light intensity along the
z-axis at x = y = d/2 is presented in ﬁg. 12 a. One can
see that the intensity of the T /4-lattice is comparable to
the intensity of the T /2-lattice. Calculations show that
the intensity of the interference fringes at the full Talbot
distance z = T = 200 λ, the locations of which in the XY
plane are the same as the positions of the source beams,
is about four times smaller compared to the fringes of the
T /2-lattice. Finally, ﬁg. 12 b shows the transverse distri-
bution of the light intensity in the T /2-lattice taken along
the x-axis at z = T /2 and y = d/2.

To estimate the potential depth of the Talbot lat-
tices we use again an example of Rb87 atoms and the
wavelength of light of a Nd:YAG laser. For the laser
power of 4 mW in each of the 25 source beams of the
lattice the potential depth of the central sites of the
T /2-lattice is about 91 µK. The oscillation frequencies
of the atoms near the centres of the sites of the lattice
are fz = 1.74 kHz and fx = fy = 16.25 kHz.

Due to the large number of the source beams involved
in the Talbot lattices, they oﬀer a huge variety of ways
to manipulate the trapped atoms by changing the phases
and amplitudes of diﬀerent groups of the source beams.
The methods described in the previous section for the
four-beam interference traps can be easily extended to
the Talbot lattices. For example, a change of the rela-
tive phases and amplitudes of diﬀerent rows of the source
beams can provide a unidirectional transfer of atoms be-
tween the rows of the Talbot lattice. The shift of the
phases of the even source beams with respect to the odd
ones can change the period of the Talbot lattice potential
by factor of two [39].

Another important diﬀerence of the Talbot lattice com-
pared to the standing light wave lattices is that the form
of its potential can essentially diﬀer from a sinusoidal
form. The general rule is that the intensity distribution
of light in the Talbot lattice reproduces the correspond-
ing distribution of the light beams in the source plane
X0Y. Therefore, the diﬀerent sites of the Talbot lattice
can be well isolated from each other, which is important
for applications where the tunnelling of atoms between
diﬀerent sites of the lattice is undesirable.

V. OUTLOOK

In this paper the interference traps formed by co-
propagating Gaussian laser beams have been consid-
ered. The same principles are also valid for the light

6

beams formed by diﬀraction of light at round holes. The
construction of an all-light atom chip might be as fol-
lows. The desired matrix of holes is made in a non-
transparent screen, which is mounted on top of some
optical substrate. Micro-electro-optical elements are po-
sitioned right above or below each of the holes to control
the amplitudes and phases of the individual source light
beams. This construction would allow one to address
each of the beams with electrical signals. It was demon-
strated that interference traps are scalable, which means
all sizes of the traps and their distance from the waists
of the source beams depend on the sizes of the beams
and the distances between them. Therefore using holes
of diﬀerent diameter in the chip would allow manipula-
tion of the spatial position of atoms not only along but
also across the surface of the chip.

An alternative chip construction might use an array of
single mode polarization mantaining ﬁbres, which could
each be addressed individually.

The negative sign of the frequency detuning of the
trapping light of the interference traps and Talbot lat-
tices provides an opportunity to use these traps for trap-
ping such atoms as Sr, Yb, Ca and some other atoms in
a regime when the optical Stark shift of the intercombi-
nation transition of these atoms is cancelled [40]. Thus
fractional Talbot lattices may provide an alternative op-
tion for the construction of portable optical frequency
standards.

VI. CONCLUSION

The dipole traps based on the interference between
multiple co-propagating laser beams can be conﬁgured
to enable atom manipulation by changing the phases, po-
larizations and intensities of the individual light beams.
Such basic manipulation of cold atoms in these traps as
their spatial displacement and coherent splitting in two
identical parts have been outlined. A Talbot optical lat-
tice dipole trap based on the interference of arrays of
co-propagating laser beams is proposed. It is shown that
single sites of the Talbot lattice can be well isolated from
each other. In addition the Talbot lattice provides a num-
ber of ways to transfer atoms between lattice sites. The
variable period of the considered Talbot optical lattices
enables one to choose the right compromise between the
addressability of the individual sites of the lattice and
the interaction of the sites with each other.

It is shown that with rather moderate power (1-4 mW)
laser beams with wavelength 1 µm, the depth of interfer-
ence traps for Rb87 atoms can be
100 µK, while the
coherence time is of the order of 1 second.

∼

This technique oﬀers the opportunity of building a new
generation of all-light atom chips based on interference
traps, which might ﬁnd applications in the design of inte-
grated elements of quantum logic, atom interferometers
and other atom optics components.

The examples of the interference traps and their ma-

tional Measurement System Directorate of the Depart-
ment of Trade and Industry via the Strategic Research
Programme of NPL.

7

nipulation presented in this paper do not pretend to be
the most optimal ones, but are intended only to demon-
strate the main principles. The most optimal and eﬃ-
cient schemes for interference traps and methods of atom
manipulation still have to be developed.

VII. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

Many thanks to Hugh Klein for his valuable comments
to the paper. This work was funded by the UK Na-

[8] R. Grimm, M. Weidemuller, Yu. B. Ovchinnikov, Adv.

[25] W. Alt, D. Schrader, S. Kuhr, M. M¨uller, V. Gomer, D.

[1] R. Folman, P. Kr¨uger, J. Schmiedmayer, J. Denschlag,
and C. Henkel, Adv. At. Mol. Opt. Phys. 48, 263 (2002).
[2] L. P. Pitaevskii, S. Stringari, Bose-Einstein Condensa-

tion, (Oxford University Press, Oxford, 2003).

[3] J. Fortagh, A. Grossmann, C. Zimmermann, T. W.

H¨ansch, Phys. Rev. Lett. 81, 5310 (1998).

[4] N.H. Dekker, C.S. Lee, V. Lorent, J.H. Thywissen, S.P.
Smith, M. Drndic, R.M. Westervelt, M. Prentiss, Phys.
Rev. Lett. 84, 1124 (2000).

[5] W.Hansel, P. Hommelhoﬀ, T.W. H¨ansch, J. Reichel, Na-

ture 413, 498 (2001).

[6] T. Schumm, S. Hoﬀerberth, L. M. Andersson, S. Wil-
dermuth, S. Groth, I. Bar-Joseph, J. Schmiedmayer, P.
Kruger, Nature Physics 1, 57 (2005).

[7] A. Landragin,

J.-Y. Courtois, G. Labeyrie, N.
Vansteenkiste, C. I. Westbrook, A. Aspect, Phys. Rev.
Lett. 77, 1464 (1996).

At. Mol. Opt. Phys. 42, 95-170 (2000).

[9] S. Jochim, M. Barenstein, A. Altmeyer, G. Hendl, S.
Riedl, C. Chin, J. Hecker Denschlag, R. Grimm, Sci-
ence 302 2101 (2003); published online November 13
(10.1126/science.1093280); M. Greiner, C. A. Regal, D.
S. Jin, Nature 426 537 (2003); M. W. Zwierlein, C. A.
Stan, C. H. Schunck, S. M. F. Raupach, S. Gupta, Z.
Hadzibabic, and W. Ketterle, Phys. Rev. Lett. 91 250401
(2003).

[10] J. P. Dowling, J. Gea-Banacloche, Adv. At. Mol. Opt.

Phys. 37, 1 (1996).

[11] Yu. B. Ovchinnikov, S. V. Shul’ga, V. I. Balykin, J. Phys.

B: At. Mol. Opt. Phys. 24, 3172 (1991).

[12] Yu. B. Ovchinnikov, I. Manek, R. Grimm, Phys. Rev.

[13] J. S¨oding, R. Grimm Yu. B. Ovchinnikov, Opt. Comm.

Lett. 79, 2225 (1997).

119, 652 (1995).

[14] D. Rychtarik, B. Engeser, H.-C. Nagerl, R. Grimm, Phys.

Rev. Lett. 92, 173003 (2004).

[15] A. H. Barnett, S. P. Smith, M. Olshanii, K. S. Johnson,
A. W. Adams, M. Prentiss, Phys. Rev. A 61, 023608
(2000).

[16] K. Christandl, G. P. Lafyatis, S.-C. Lee, J.-F. Lee, Phys.

Rev. A 70, 032302 (2004).

[17] H. Gauck, M. Hartl, D. Schneble, H. Schnitzler, T. Pfau,

J. Mlynek, Phys. Rev. Lett. 81, 5298 (1998).

[18] D. Schneble, M. Hasuo, T. Anker, T. Pfau, J. Mlynek, J.

Opt. Soc. Am. B 20, 648 (2003).

[19] R. Dumke, M. Volk, T. M¨uther, F. B. J. Buchkremer, G.

Birkl, W. Ertmer, Phys. Rev. Lett. 89, 97903, 2002.
[20] F.B.J. Buchkremer, R. Dumke, M. Volk, T. M¨uther, G.

Birkl, W. Ertmer, Laser Phys. 12, 736, (2002).

[21] Y.-J. Wang, D. Z. Anderson, V. M. Bright, E. A. Cornell,
Q. Diot, T. Kishimoto, M. Prentiss, R. A. Saravanan, S.
R. Segal, S. Wu, Phys. Rev. Lett. 94, 090405 (2005).
[22] S. Eriksson, M. Trupke, H. F. Powell, D. Sahagun,
C. D. J. Sinclair, E. A. Curtis, B. E. Sauer, E.
A. Hinds, Z. Moktadir, C. O. Gollasch, M. Kraft,
arXiv:physics/0502031 (2005).

[23] T. Takekoshi, R. J. Knize, Opt. Lett. 21, 77 (1996); S.
Friebel, C. D’Andrea, J. Walz, M. Weitz, T. W. H¨ansch,
Phys. Rev. A 57, R20 (1998); T. Weber, J. Herbig,
M. Mark, H.-C. N¨agerl, R. Grimm, Science 10.1126/sci-
ence.1079699.

[24] T. A. Savard, K. M. O’Hara, J. E. Thomas, Phys. Rev.

A 56, R1095 (1997).

Meschede, Phys. Rev. A 67, 033403 (2003).

[26] M. E. Gehm, K. M. O’Hara, T. A. Savard, J. E. Thomas,

Phys. Rev. A 58, 3914 (1998).

[27] J. Ye, J. L. Hall, Opt. Lett. 24, 1838 (1999).
[28] Atom Interferometry, Edited by P. R. Berman, Academic

Press, San Diego, New York (1997).

[29] Quantum Information Processing, Edited by G. Leuchs

and T. Beth, WILEY-VCH, Weinheim (2003).

[30] W. H¨ansel, J. Reichel, P. Hommelhoﬀ, T. W. H¨ansch,

Phys. Rev. Lett. 86, 608 (2001).

[31] W. H¨ansel, J. Reichel, P. Hommelhoﬀ, T. W. H¨ansch,

Phys. Rev. A 64, 063607 (2001).

[32] Y. Shin, M. Saba, T. A. Pasquini, W. Ketterle, D.E.
Pritchard, and A.E. Leanhardt, Phys. Rev. Lett. 92,
050405 (2004).

[33] Y. Shin, C. Sanner, G.-B. Jo, T. A. Pasquini, M. Saba,
W. Ketterle, D. E. Pritchard, M. Vengalattore, M. Pren-
tiss, ArXiv preprint, cond-mat 0506464.

[34] V. S. Letokhov, Pis’ma v Zh. Exp. Teor. Fiz. 7 348 (1968)

[JETP Lett. 7, 272 (1968)].

[35] Harold J. Metcalf and Peter van der Straten, Laser cool-

ing and trapping (Springer, New York, 1999).

[36] I. Bloch, Nature Physics 1, 23 (2005).
[37] H. Talbot, Phil. Mag. 9, 401 (1836).
[38] J. T. Winthrop, C. R. Worhthington, J. Opt. Soc. Am.

55, 371 (1965).

[39] Yu. B. Ovchinnikov, Opt. Comm. 216, 33 (2003).
[40] H. Katori, M. Takamoto, V. G. Palchikov, V. D. Ovsian-

nikov, Phys. Rev. Lett. 91, 173005 (2003).

8

Fig.1 Schematics of the two-beam interference trap.
Fig.2 Spatial intensity distribution of light in the XOZ-

at z = 8.885 λ for several diﬀerent values of the phase
shift between the two pairs of source light beams.

plane of a two-beam interference trap.

Fig.3 Cross sections of the intensity distribution of
light in the central interference fringe of the two-beam
interference trap, which are taken along four diﬀerent di-
rections.

Fig.4 Intensity distribution in the four-beam trap in
the XOY-plane, where the waists of the beams are lo-
cated.

Fig.5 Spatial intensity distribution of light in the XOZ-

plane of the four-beam interference trap.

Fig.6 Cross sections of the intensity distribution of
light in the central interference fringe of the four-beam
interference trap, which are taken along four diﬀerent di-
rections.

Fig.7 Intensity distribution in the four-beam trap in
the XOZ-plane as a function of the phase diﬀerence be-
tween the two pairs of source laser beams.

Fig.8 Cross sections of the intensity distribution of
light in the moving central interference fringe of the four-
beam interference trap, which are taken along the x-axis

Fig.9 Intensity distribution in the two superimposed
four-beam traps in the XOY-plane, where the waists of
the beams are located. The arrows shows the polariza-
tions of the six light beams.

Fig.10 Evolution of the intensity distribution of light
along the x-axis in a superposition of two four-beam in-
terference traps, which is taken at z = 8.43 λ for ﬁve
diﬀerent values of the phases of the outer laser beams 1,
2, 5 and 6.

Fig.11 a) Intensity distribution of light in the XZ-plane
at y=d/2 produced by 5 x 5 two-dimensional array of
Gaussian light beams. b) Intensity distribution across
the fractional Talbot optical lattice taken at z = T /2 =
100 λ. c) Intensity distribution in a higher order lattice
at z = T /4 = 50 λ.

Fig.12 a) Cross section of the intensity distribution
in the fractional Talbot lattices along the z-axis at
x=y=d/2. b) Cross section of the transverse intensity
distribution along the x-axis at z = T /2 = 100 λ and
y=d/2.

9

FIG. 1: Yuri B. Ovchinnikov ”Coherent manipulation of
atoms...”

10

FIG. 2: Yuri B. Ovchinnikov ”Coherent manipulation of
atoms...”

11

FIG. 3: Yuri B. Ovchinnikov ”Coherent manipulation of
atoms...”

12

FIG. 4: Yuri B. Ovchinnikov ”Coherent manipulation of
atoms...”

13

FIG. 5: Yuri B. Ovchinnikov ”Coherent manipulation of
atoms...”

14

FIG. 6: Yuri B. Ovchinnikov ”Coherent manipulation of
atoms...”

15

FIG. 7: Yuri B. Ovchinnikov ”Coherent manipulation of
atoms...”

16

FIG. 8: Yuri B. Ovchinnikov ”Coherent manipulation of
atoms...”

17

FIG. 9: Yuri B. Ovchinnikov ”Coherent manipulation of
atoms...”

FIG. 10: Yuri B. Ovchinnikov ”Coherent manipulation of
atoms...”

18

FIG. 11: Yuri B. Ovchinnikov ”Coherent manipulation of
atoms...”

19

FIG. 12: Yuri B. Ovchinnikov ”Coherent manipulation of
atoms...”

