All-optical generation and photoassociative probing of sodium Bose-Einstein
condensates

R. Dumke, M. Johanning, E. Gomez, J. D. Weinstein, K. M. Jones and P. D. Lett
Atomic Physics Division, National Institute of Standards and Technology, Gaithersburg, MD 20899-8424
(Dated: February 20, 2014)

We demonsatrate an all optical technique to evaporatively produce sodium Bose-Einstein conden-
sates (BEC). We use a crossed-dipole trap formed from light near 1 µm, and a simple ramp of the
intensity to force evaporation. In addition, we introduce photoassociation as diagnostic of the trap
loading process, and show that it can be used to detect the onset of Bose-Einstein condensation.
Finally, we demonstrate the straightforward production of multiple traps with condensates using
this technique, and that some control over the spinor state of the BEC is achieved by positioning
the trap as well.

6
0
0
2
 
b
e
F
 
5
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
m
o
t
a
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
8
0
1
2
0
6
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

PACS numbers: 03.75.Hh, 03.75.Be, 32.80.Pj, 39.20.+q

I.

INTRODUCTION

All-optical approaches to attaining Bose-Einstein con-
densation (BEC) allow the trapping of spin-zero species
(which cannot be held in a magnetic trap), and multiple,
arbitrary spin states at once. In addition, the technique
is convenient, avoiding large magnetic ﬁeld coils that re-
strict optical access and allowing rapid evaporative cool-
ing and condensation. A number of variations on this
technique have been used successfully to condense a vari-
ety of atomic species. Here we present the ﬁrst all-optical
approach to evaporatively obtain BEC in sodium. Ad-
ditionally, we extend the technique to multiple traps in
a conﬁguration useful for atom optics experiments. Our
stainless steel vacuum chamber incorporates an ion de-
tector which we use to sensitively detect photoassociation
transitions. This signal is sensitive to the atomic density
and provides a convenient way to optimize the loading of
our dipole trap and BEC formation within the trap.

The ﬁrst demonstration of evaporative cooling of a
sodium gas held in a crossed dipole trap [1] was per-
formed in 1995. The trap was formed by a pair of beams
from a Nd:YAG laser operating at 1.06 µm, detuned
well red of the atomic resonance.
In these studies the
phase space density of the gas was increased by a fac-
tor of 28, but did not reach the conditions required to
Bose-condense the rather small sample used. Later that
year BEC in sodium was ﬁrst observed [2] in a trap that
employed magnetic conﬁnement along with an optical
“plug” to keep atoms away from a region of zero magnetic
ﬁeld. While magnetic traps of many forms have since
dominated BEC studies, interest in all-optical methods
has continued as well.

In this paper we return to investigate evaporative cool-
ing of sodium in a crossed-beam dipole trap. With suf-
ﬁcient initial loading of the dipole trap, we ﬁnd that it
is relatively straightforward to achieve BEC with up to
2.5 × 105 23Na atoms by simply ramping down the trap
laser intensity. The dipole trapping beams give us ﬂex-
ibility in arranging the location of the condensate and
allows us to create traps with diﬀerent spin-component

FIG. 1:
a) Absorption image of four crossed dipole traps
taken just after loading from a magneto-optical trap. This
array was generated by recycling the trapping beams. The
traps have a separation of ≈ 250 µm. Atoms loaded into
the arms of the trap make them visible before evaproation.
b) Absorption image of the traps taken after evaporation, as
described in the text, showing four BEC’s.

populations. By recycling the beams, we construct multi-
ple crossing regions with variable spacings. For instance,
we can easily arrange a square array of four optical traps,
spaced by ≈ 250 µm, and produce a condensate in each
trap, as shown in Fig. 1. Such arrays of condensates can
be useful in a number of atom optics and fundamental
physics experiments.

II. BACKGROUND

Producing BEC without the use of a magnetic trap was
ﬁrst demonstrated with 87Rb in 2001 [3]. In this exper-
iment the trap was formed by crossed, tightly-focussed
beams from a CO2 laser operating at a wavelength near
10 µm. Since that time BEC in optical traps has been
observed with several other species as well, using traps
and procedures of varying complexity. 133Cs [4] was con-
densed in a combined CO2/ﬁber laser dipole trap. Cs is
heavy and diﬃcult to condense, requiring magnetic ﬁeld
gradients to cancel the force of gravity and bias ﬁelds
to tune the scattering length by using a magnetic Fesh-

bach resonance. In this case weakly-focussed beams from
the CO2-laser trap the Cs atoms, and a tightly-focussed
beam at 1064 nm is introduced to create a “dimple” in
the trap, where atoms can evaporate to higher density.
Cr was recently condensed [5] by an evaporative cooling
sequence which begins in a magnetic trap, and is com-
pleted after transferring the atoms to a crossed-dipole op-
tical trap. Such traps are not restricted to the infrared:
174Yb, with its strongest transition near 400 nm, was
condensed in a crossed-dipole trap [6] formed from a 532
nm laser. The technique is also applicable to fermions,
and evaporative cooling in a single beam CO2-laser op-
tical trap has also been used to produce a degenerate
Fermi gas of 6Li atoms [7].

Many variations of the loading sequence, including the
ramping of laser intensity and magnetic ﬁeld, as well as
dynamic changes in the optical system, have proven suc-
cessful. Many of these complexities are dictated by the
speciﬁcs of the atomic species that are used, especially
In comparison with many of
their collision properties.
these previous experiments, sodium BEC can be achieved
in a relatively simple sequence. No magnetic ﬁeld gra-
dient is required to compensate for gravity, and we use
1.07 µm light from a ﬁber laser, which does not require
the special window materials that are needed in the far
infrared. Furthermore, we use a simple intensity ramp
with no moving optics, resulting in a relatively uncom-
plicated and robust procedure.

We begin our experiment with atoms accumulated in
a magneto-optical trap (MOT) fed with a zero-crossing
Zeeman slower. Our MOT is of order 2 mm in diameter,
while the optical trap has a 1/e2 waist of 61 ± 3 µm,
resulting in a poor geometric overlap for loading. As dis-
cussed in Ref. [8] the loading process is somewhat com-
plex and various schemes have been developed for im-
proving it. To attain BEC in our experiments we have
maintained a ﬁxed trap size and concentrated on optimiz-
ing the loading by adjusting the way in which we ramp
down the MOT light and magnetic ﬁeld.

To monitor the buildup of the atomic density in the
optical trap we introduce a photoassociation technique.
Photoassociation (PA) is the process where two colliding
atoms absorb a photon and form an electronically excited
diatomic molecule [9, 10] (see Fig. 2). Photoassociation
has been used to produce high-resolution spectra of the
molecular states that are accessible in this way. The pho-
toassociation transition can be detected in a number of
ways, the two most common are trap loss and ionization.
When a molecule is formed two atoms are removed from
the trap, and a simple detection of atom number (by ab-
sorption or ﬂuorescence), as a function of frequency, can
be used to locate a PA transition. If the excited molecule
can be further excited to an autoionizing state, or to an
ionization continuum, the presence of an ion signal will
indicate the PA transition. On the other hand, the tech-
nique can also be used as a probe for a number of eﬀects,
such as wavefunction distortion by magnetic [11] or opti-
cal Feshbach [12] resonances, or, as in this case, as a sen-

2

FIG. 2: Sketch of the relevant Na2 molecular potentials and
coupling lasers. The photoassociation laser LP A couples col-
liding atoms with energy E to form an excited-state molecule.
The excited state is resonantly excited to an autoionizing state
by Lion, resulting in an ion signal proportional to the excited
state population.

sitive probe of the atomic density. Many of the low-lying
states of Na2 have been studied using photoassociation
techniques, and in the current experiments we take ad-
vantage of a photoassociation-ionization transition that
we have used in previous spectroscopy experiments [13].
We demonstrate that we can monitor the evolution of
the trap density in our experiment using a PA ioniza-
tion signal produced by two auxiliary lasers. One laser
is tuned to a known molecular transition and the second
is tuned to promote the excited molecule to a high-lying
autoionizing state. The result is the production of Na+
2
ions, which we detect with a microchannel plate. For
the present purposes the important feature of the PA
signal is that it depends on the square of the atomic den-
sity, and thus the signal is most sensitive to atoms in the
dipole trap rather than those in the diﬀuse cloud of atoms
around it, even though there are many more atoms in this
cloud. Within the trap it is most sensitive to atoms in the
lowest vibrational states of the trap, where the density is
highest.

III. SUMMARY OF TRAP LOADING AND
EVAPORATION PROCEDURE

The experimental setup and timing sequence are shown
in Fig. 3a and Fig. 3b, respectively. Our approach to
attaining BEC proceeds as follows: The dipole trap is
loaded from a standard Zeeman-slower-fed, six-beam,
dark-spot, magneto-optical trap (MOT). This produces,
after a loading time of about 8 s, a sample of 7×109 23Na
atoms at about 300 µK, in a volume of ≈(2 mm)3. A
single, traveling-wave, annular repumping beam, tuned
to the 3S F=1 → 3P3/2 F=2 transition, is used along
with the cooling light, tuned to the red of the 3S F=2

→ 3P3/2 F=3 cycling transition, to form the dark-spot
MOT. Nearly all of the atoms are thus in the F=1 hy-
perﬁne state. This reduces hyperﬁne-changing collisions
in the dipole trap and is required for the application of
further cooling techniques. The dipole trap is formed
by crossing two focussed beams in the MOT volume, as
described below, and is turned on during the ﬁnal 2.5 sec-
onds of the MOT phase. At this time the intensity of the
cooling light is reduced from 6 mW/cm2 to 3 mW/cm2
in each beam, producing a weak MOT to further cool the
atomic sample. Loading the dipole trap directly from the
MOT at this point, gives a trapped atom number of only
3×104 (measured by absorption imaging 100 ms after the
MOT phase).

To increase the number of atoms loaded into the dipole
trap a 60 ms transitional “molasses” phase is applied as
the MOT is gradually turned oﬀ. During this time the
magnetic ﬁeld gradient from the MOT coils is lowered
from 0.5 mT/cm to 0 mT/cm and the detuning of the
cooling light is increased from 24 MHz to 32 MHz (mea-
sured red from the 3S1/2 F=2 → 3P3/2 F=3 cooling tran-
sition at 16973 cm−1). The repumping beam during this
period continues to be a single, annular, traveling-wave
beam. The ramp starts from a detuned strong MOT con-
dition that at ﬁrst compresses the atomic cloud. As the
ramp continues the temperature of the cloud is decreased.
The ﬁnal temperature of the cloud after this phase is
50 µK. The currents in a set of magnetic-ﬁeld-nulling coils
are adjusted in order to achieve the lowest temperature
at this phase. After this 60 ms molasses phase all near-
resonant laser beams are extinguished by acousto-optical
modulators (AOMs), followed by mechanical shutters.
This loading process determines the initial phase space
density, and thus, whether or not it is ﬁnally possible to
reach quantum degeneracy.

The molasses phase is followed by a 300 ms period of
free evaporation, during which the dipole trapping beams
are held at constant power. Finally, we have a period
of forced evaporation during which both dipole trapping
beams are ramped down in power, simultaneously, over
a time of 12.5 s. The timing sequence of the diﬀerent
experimental steps is shown in Fig. 3b. The details of
the experiment, and the diagnostics applied to optimize
this sequence are discussed in the next section.

IV. EXPERIMENTAL PROCEDURE AND
PHOTOASSOCIATION DIAGNOSTICS

The trapping beams are produced by a commercial Yb-
doped ﬁber laser which can generate up to 100 W of
1.07 µm light. The line width of this laser is ≈ 3 nm and
the polarization is random.
(The polarization changes
quickly on the time scale of the typical oscillation periods
of the atoms in the dipole trap.) In practice we operate
the laser at . 40 W, since it shows excess intensity noise
at higher powers. The trapping light passes through one
AOM. The ﬁrst diﬀracted order from the AOM goes to

3

the experiment and the intensity of this beam is con-
trolled by the rf-drive power. The beams are divided by
a non-polarizing beam-splitter cube and focussed into the
vacuum chamber with 300 mm focal length lenses. Note
that we do not need to polarize the beams or introduce
frequency shifts to wash out interference eﬀects. The an-
gle between the beams inside the chamber is ≈ 90◦ and
the beam waist in the crossing region is ≈ 61 µm (1/e2
radius). The beam size is obtained from the trap oscil-
lation frequency, laser power, and calculated Stark shift.
The plane of the crossed beams is perpendicular to grav-
ity. Each beam has a maximum power of 14 W at the
trap location, corresponding to an initial potential depth
of U/kB = 510 µK (where kB is the Boltzman constant).
To analyze the properties of the atoms in the dipole
trap, we can use absorption imaging. The atoms are re-
leased from the trap by turning oﬀ the trapping laser in
order to minimize eﬀects due to ac-Stark shifts caused
by the dipole trap. The number and temperature of
the atoms are extracted using time-of-ﬂight (TOF) tech-
niques. For short times after the end of the molasses
phase, the absorption signal is dominated by the expand-
ing MOT cloud and it is necessary to allow the non-
trapped fraction of the atoms to fall away before we can
cleanly observe the atoms in the dipole trap. 500 ms af-
ter switching oﬀ all resonant light we trap ≈ 107 atoms
in the whole dipole potential, and 2 × 106 atoms in the
crossed region, with a temperature of 50 µK. This results
in an initial peak atom density of 9 × 1013 cm−3. The
density is derived from the measured temperature, atom
number, and trap oscillation frequency, and by assum-
ing that the Gaussian potential can be described by a
harmonic approximation at the bottom of the trap.

To measure the trap oscillation frequency we paramet-
rically excite the breathing mode of the trap. First we
evaporatively cool the atoms, proceeding 3 s into the
usual intensity ramp of the dipole trap (discussed below).
We then modulate the power of the dipole trap potential
sinusoidally and measure trap loss as a function of modu-
lation frequency using time-of-ﬂight imaging. The mean
oscillation frequency of the trap during the free evapora-
tion stage is 1.7 ± 0.2 kHz. Trap oscillation frequencies
for other laser powers are derived from this by scaling to
the square root of the measured power in the trap beams.
We obtain the trap depth and the waist size from the os-
cillation frequency and the power in the trapping beams,
again making a harmonic approximation [14].

To probe the evolution of the atom cloud during the
molasses and evaporation stages, we employ a new tech-
nique which allows us to directly monitor the density of
the atoms inside the trap. The density is probed by a
PA laser which resonantly produces bound excited state
molecules (in the J = 0 rotational level of the 0−
g com-
ponent of a vibrational level in the (1)3Σ+
(S+P3/2)
g
potential [15]). The laser frequency for this transition
is 16845.16 cm−1. The molecules which are formed are
then excited by an additional laser (at 17099.95 cm−1)
to an autoionizing level (see Fig. 2). The ions that are

4

a)

MOT coils

MOT / molasses

zero crossing 
Zeeman slower

oven

f300

PA 

f300

non-PBS

f40

f200

telescope

shutter

telescope

AOM f-30

f150

b)
B-field gradient
(mT/cm)

cooling laser 
2
intensity (mW/cm  )

0.5

0

6

0

-1.6

-3.2

30

0.2

fiber 
laser 

cooling laser 
detuning (G )

beam dump

dipole trap 
power (W)

T
O
M
 
k
a
e
w

s
 
5
.
2

s
e
s
s
a
o
m

l

s
m
 
0
6

.
p
a
v
e
 
e
e
r
f

s
m
 
0
0
2

i

g
n
d
a
o

l

s
 
0
2
 
>

n
o
i
t
a
r
o
p
a
v
e

s
 
5
.
2
1

FIG. 3:
a) Sketch of the experimental setup. b) Timing sequence of the experiment indicating the MOT magnetic ﬁeld
gradient, MOT/cooling laser detuning and intensity, and the total power in the dipole trap beams. There are four stages to the
loading of the trap. A strong MOT period is used for rapid loading. The weak MOT period then reduces the temperature of
the MOT. These are followed by an optimized ramped-molasses phase, and a free evaporation phase, where the intensity of the
dipole laser is held constant. Finally, there is a forced evaporation phase where the intensity of the dipole laser is successively
reduced.

produced are then eﬃciently detected by a microchannel
plate. This ion signal is proportional to the volume in-
tegral over n2, where n indicates the atom density. At
the temperatures under consideration here, this s-wave
PA transition is in the Wigner Law regime and the PA
signal is not directly dependent on the temperature (av-
erage collision energy) of the atoms, but simply depends
on the density (as discussed in [10]).

In sodium the molecular energy levels are such that in
a MOT a steady ion signal is produced by the trapping
beams themselves, so it is necessary to turn them oﬀ
to see the PA signal. The PA and ionizing lasers are
then turned on (4 mW and 5 mW, respectively, in an
approximately 100 µm spot size). The ion signal that
is produced can be used to optimize the cooling process
and the loading into the trap. Figure 4 shows the ion
signal, measured in this way (integrated over a 10 ms
period), during our optimized 60 ms molasses ramp. The
density increases continuously until the end of the 60 ms,
at which point the magnetic ﬁeld is zero. During the last
few milliseconds of this stage the magnetic ﬁeld at the
location of the dipole trap is so small that the conditions
are characteristic of a true optical molasses, and the ﬁnal
temperature is not improved by extending the molasses
period beyond the end of the magnetic ﬁeld ramp.

After the molasses phase we turn oﬀ all of the cooling
light beams and wait before starting the forced evapora-
tion ramp. The evolution of the density during this ﬁrst
300 ms free evaporation period helps to reach the ex-
tremely high phase space density needed for a successful
forced evaporation.

During the free evaporation phase (where the dipole
laser power is held constant), we can again probe the
time evolution of the density of the atoms in the trap by

FIG. 4: The Na+
2 ion signal due to photoassociation (PA),
as explained in the text, which is used to optimize the trap
loading sequence. The MOT laser tuning is shifted and the
magnetic ﬁeld ramped down over 60 ms. This scan shows the
resulting ion signal when the ramping has been optimized.

using our PA technique. We are continuously producing
and ionizing molecules during this time, however, a 1 s
duration PA pulse (at a power of 340 µW) reduces the
atom number by only 5% and represents a small pertur-
bation on the trapped atom density dynamics. In Fig. 5

5

given by the elastic collisions slows down as the trap po-
tential (and therefore the oscillation frequency) is low-
ered. At the end of our evaporation ramp we calculate
a factor of 25 lower collision rate than at the beginning.
Our ramp is divided into 7 segments during each of which
the intensity is dropped, approximately linearly, by a fac-
tor of two (see Fig. 6b). (The ramp function fed to the
electronics is linear, however, nonlinearities in the rf drive
electronics and the AOM response lead to some curvature
in the actual ramp segments, which are not corrected
for.) The duration of each segment is optimized exper-
imentally to give the largest phase space density. The
temperature at the end of each segment is determined by
the trap depth at the end of that segment. Our ramp is
12.5 s long and approximately follows the theoretically
optimized curve U (t) ∝ 1/(1 + t/τ )β with τ =3.5s β=3.5,
as derived in Ref. [17].

Figure 6 shows the decrease of the atom number and
temperature with the lowering of the trap oscillation
frequency. The temperature decreases monotonically,
roughly as a constant fraction η ≈ 0.1 of the potential
depth [17]. Figure 7 shows the evolution of the peak
density, derived from the data in Fig. 6 and assuming a
harmonic potential. (Once BEC begins we ﬁt the atom
distribution to a sum of two components: a broad ther-
mal distribution and a narrow distribution representing
the condensate fraction. The temperature is extracted
from the ﬁt to the thermal fraction and the peak den-
sity from a sum of the densities of the thermal and the
condensed components.) The density decreases at ﬁrst,
due to the loss of atoms and the decreasing conﬁnement
as the trap is weakened. The density then rises as the
condensate starts to form. As the intensity, and thus
the trap frequency, is lowered, the temperature also de-
creases, as shown in Fig. 6. Taking all the parameters
into account one sees that the resulting phase space den-
sity increases as the evaporation proceeds, as seen in
Fig. 7. The speed of this increase is sensitive to the ini-
tial conditions. At the lowest trap frequencies most of the
atoms are already condensed and the density and phase
space densities begin to go down as the trap potential
is further expanded. At the end of the 12.5 s intensity
ramp we observe a condensate with a typical number of
1.5 × 105 atoms, or about 80% of the atoms. The ﬁ-
nal trap depth is 2.9 µK and the oscillation frequency is
120 Hz with 80 mW of power in each trapping beam. The
peak density is 9 × 1013 cm−3, and the observed conden-
sate lifetime is 18 s. Most likely this lifetime is limited
by noise on the trapping potential. The background gas
pressure is 4 × 10−9 Pa (3 × 10−11 torr), measured by
an ionization gauge.

A straightforward investigation of the onset of BEC
can be made by probing the atoms on a photoassociation
transition and measuring the PA rate by either the ion
signal, as discussed above, or the loss of the atoms out of
the trap, as shown in Fig. 8. Here the PA laser intensity is
much higher than in Fig. 5. We can observe the onset of
BEC using the PA technique as it detects the steep rise in

FIG. 5:
Ion signal during the ﬁrst one second of evaporation
with constant trap intensity. During this stage all additional
cooling light is turned oﬀ and the PA and ionizing laser pow-
ers are lower than in Fig. 4. The ion signal (integrated for
10 ms periods) indicates the density evolution during this free
evaporation stage. The density increases during this phase
while atoms are lost, which indicates that during this time
the atomic cloud is rapidly cooling.

the ion signal shows that the density begins to increase
during this trap holding phase. The evaporation process
causes atom loss and is not compensated by any loading
during this time. The remaining atoms rethermalize at
higher density. The increase in density slows down with
time and, ﬁnally, if held too long, the loss out of the trap
becomes the dominant process and the density starts to
decrease. This can be seen for times later than about
300 ms in Fig. 5. The trap lifetime under these condi-
tions, as seen in the ﬁgure, is fairly short and is possibly
limited by beam-pointing instabilities induced by thermal
eﬀects (due to the high RF power in the AOM which con-
trols the power into the trapping beams). Under other
conditions longer lifetimes are obtained, as discussed be-
low.

The initial phase space density in the trap, just 500 ms
after the molasses phase (or 200 ms after the free evapora-
tion phase), is 1 × 10−2. Using the corresponding value
for the density and the three-body rate constant from
[16] (K3 = 1.1 × 10−30 cm6s−1, measured for the F=1,
mF =-1 state, with a density of 1014 cm−3), we can infer
the three-body loss rate in our trap to be ≈ 0.01 s−1.
It is thus possible that the three-body losses contribute
to limiting the density achievable by free evaporation.
The estimated elastic collision rate is initially ≈ 2 kHz.
During the optimized loading ramp and after free evap-
oration the density increases by about a factor of 300,
from 3 × 1011 in the MOT, to 9 × 1013 cm−3 in the
dipole trap.

At the time when free evaporation gives the maximum
density we start a period of forced evaporation by simply
lowering the power simultaneously in both dipole trap
beams. The most energetic atoms escape and the re-
maining atoms rethermalize at a lower temperature with
a higher phase space density. The rethermalization rate

6

FIG. 6: (Color online) a) The evolution of the temperature of
the thermal fraction (squares) and the trapped atom number
(diamonds) during the evaporation ramp. The temperature of
the thermal fraction changes linearly with the potential depth
until approximately the point where a condensate starts to
form. The zero of time is the beginning of the forced evap-
oration ramp, after 300 ms of free evaporation with a static
trap depth. b) The evaporation ramp (on a log scale) of the
trap frequency versus time. The dashed vertical line indicates
the time of the onset of BEC.

FIG. 7:
(Color online) Density evolution in the trap during
the forced evaporation ramp (squares, right vertical axis) as a
function of trap oscillation frequency. The peak phase space
density as a function of the trap oscillation frequency (dia-
monds, left vertical axis). The dashed vertical line indicates
the onset of BEC and to the right of this line the condensate
fraction is less than 1 %.

FIG. 8:
(Color online) Condensate fraction of the trapped
atoms (diamonds) and fractional trap loss due to a 10 ms,
on-resonance photoassociation pulse, as explained in the text
(squares), as functions of the trap oscillation frequency. The
dashed vertical line indicates the onset of BEC.

density that accompanies the phase transition. PA trap
loss measurements sometimes result in higher signal-to-
noise than the ion signal discussed above, and can also
be used for such measurements, albeit destructively.

Measurements of the fractional trap loss are shown in
Fig. 8 and are produced by illuminating the trap with
a laser resonant with the PA transition discussed above.
The cloud is illuminated for a time of 10 ms and con-
tains 4 mW in a ≈ 100 µm spot. The remaining atom
number is compared with the atom number when the PA
beam is tuned oﬀ resonance to give the fractional trap
loss measurements plotted in the ﬁgure. Near the end of
the evaporation ramp the trap depth is only ≈ 2.9 µK and
the probe beam, which is detuned red from the atomic
resonance, signiﬁcantly distorts the trap potential by in-
ducing an additional dipole force on the atoms. To pre-
vent this eﬀect a laser, blue detuned from the resonance
(≈ 5 mW), is added to counteract this dipole force. Fig. 8
shows that when the condensate emerges the fractional
trap loss increases rapidly and can serve as an indicator
of the presence of the condensate.

To understand Fig. 8 in more detail it is essential to
know which parts of the atomic distribution are con-
tributing to the PA signal. Figure 9 shows line pro-
ﬁles of time-of-ﬂight pictures of the atom distribution,
taken with and without the PA beam applied (with the
same intensity and duration as above). Figure 9a was
taken when there was only a thermal cloud present, and
Fig. 9b was taken after the appearance of a condensed
fraction within the thermal cloud. The upper proﬁle in
both of the plots show the proﬁle when the PA beam was
applied but tuned oﬀ-resonance, while the lower proﬁles
show which atoms remain after the PA beam tuned to
resonance was applied. In both cases one sees that after
the PA pulse a large fraction of the coldest atoms are

7

FIG. 9: Line proﬁles taken from time-of-ﬂight pictures of an
atomic ensemble. The upper traces are taken with the pho-
toassociation (PA) beam tuned oﬀ resonance and the lower
proﬁles after applying the PA beam on resonance. These pro-
ﬁles are produced by ﬁnding the center of a time-of-ﬂight pic-
◦
ture of an atom cloud and azimuthally averaging over 180
.
The two independent half-circles of data, one used for nega-
tive r, allow for better signal-to-noise, while the asymmetry in
r permits some judgment of the noise level. a) Time-of-ﬂight
proﬁles with a thermal kinetic energy distribution and ﬁt. b)
Time-of-ﬂight proﬁles of an atomic ensemble with an initial
condensed fraction of 41%. The lines through the data are
two-component (thermal/BEC) ﬁts to the data. The dashed
lines show the thermal contribution.

missing. This is because the coldest atoms are mostly
held near the trap center, where the density is highest.
When a fraction of the atoms are condensed, as in Fig. 9b,
the condensed part contributes the most to the PA sig-
nal because this part of the atomic distribution has the
highest density - even though the PA rate coeﬃcient for
a condensate is lower by a factor of two than that of a
thermal ensemble [10, 18].

V. DISCUSSION

As shown in Fig. 1 we can quite easily create a num-
ber of condensates by recycling the trap beams, as long
as the crossing regions stay within the volume of the
MOT. The trapping beams are brought into the cham-
ber through 300 mm lenses and are diverging as they exit
the vacuum chamber. Each exiting beam is then recolli-
mated by another 300 mm lens, and retroreﬂected back
through the same lens on a small angle, to intersect the
orthogonally-propagating beams. This simple construc-
tion can produce an array of four traps. Such an array
of condensates immediately suggests that one might use
them in a variety of atom-optics experiments. One can,
for instance, imagine launching one condensate into an-
other by scanning the retro-reﬂecting mirror. With more
sophisticated optics one can think of creating a regular
lattice array of condensates in three dimensions, with
spacings on a scale of about 100 µm.

Optical traps can produce spinor condensates, as
demonstrated in Ref. [3]. By applying a magnetic ﬁeld

FIG. 10: a) Absorption images after a time-of-ﬂight of two
condensates generated by retro-reﬂecting one trapping beam
as described in the text. During the time-of-ﬂight a magnetic
ﬁeld gradient is applied, separating the mF levels. Line trace
of the distribution of atoms between the mF = 0, ±1 states for
the upper (b), and lower (c) cloud. The distribution depends
on the position of the trap in the MOT. The dotted lines
represent a ﬁt to the sum of three displaced Gaussians, from
which the relative populations are extracted.

gradient during time-of-ﬂight imaging one can separate
and observe the diﬀerent magnetic spin components. We
can also create a mixture between the three available spin
states, mF = 0, ± 1. In Fig. 10 we have recycled and re-
focused only one of the trapping beams to generated two
traps. By applying the same evaporation ramp to all of
the beams we generate two condensates at the same time.
We then apply a magnetic ﬁeld gradient with our MOT
coils and, in this case, we ﬁnd that the population of the
magnetic spin components is diﬀerent for the two traps.
In fact, the spin distributions map to the diﬀerent trap
positions and allows for almost pure spin states under
some conditions. By successively changing the crossing
position and having a little bit luck, one is able to ob-
tain most of the population in a single magnetic sublevel
without having to apply any additional optical pumping.
The polarization of the sample is apparently due to the
local magnetic ﬁeld and laser imbalances in the MOT and
molasses phases, which produce varying mF distributions
in diﬀerent spatial locations, which are then preserved in
the trap.

The technique that we describe here represents our
ﬁrst eﬀort and could be improved upon by, amongst
other things, stabilizing the laser intensity at higher pow-
ers with an AOM. Problems due to pointing instabil-
ities could also be improved by better heat-sinking of
the AOM to reduce temperature ﬂuctuations caused by
changes in rf powers to the AOM. The beam spot size
has not been optimized in these experiments, and it is
still to be determined if we can trap more atoms and
produce larger condensates by using a larger spot size
(taking advantage of the factor of 2-3 more power that

8

we have available). Eventually, at large trap sizes the
evaporation to BEC will be stalled by the lack of density
or limited by background gas scattering as we require
longer evaporation times.

In this paper we have demonstrated a straightforward,
all-optical method of production of sodium Bose-Einstein
condensates. With some variation in parameters, this ap-
proach could be used for other species as well. In addi-
tion, we have introduced a new technique for probing the
density evolution in the dipole trap during the evapora-
tion process using photoassociation. This tool enables us
to optimize the production of a Bose-Einstein condensate

in a simple manner. Under some conditions it also allows
for non-destructive monitoring of the condensate evolu-
tion. The ﬁxed-focus crossed-dipole trap technique is ca-
pable of generating multiple condensates simultaneously,
which can be connected with each other via the dipole
trap beams. The simple optical system allows for a great
deal of ﬂexibility in constructing experiments, and also
provides good optical access to the system. The ability
to produce multiple independent condensates suggests a
number of interesting atom optics experiments where, for
instance, one could collide or channel condensates in the
waveguides provided by the trapping beams.

[1] C. Adams, H. J. Lee, N. Davidson, M. Kasevich, and

S. Chu, Phys. Rev. Lett. 74, 3577 (1995).

[2] K. Davis, M. O. Mewes, M. R. Andrews, N. J. van
Druten, D. S. Durfee, D. M. Kurn, and W. Ketterle,
Phys. Rev. Lett. 75, 3969 (1995).

[3] M. D. Barrett, J. A. Sauer, and M. Chapman, Phys. Rev.

Lett. 87, 010404 (2001).

[4] T. Weber, J. Herbig, M. Mark, H.-C. Nagerel, and

R. Grimm, Science 299, 232 (2003).

[5] A. Griesmaier, W. J., H. S., J. Stuhler, and T. Pfau,

Phys. Rev. Lett. 94, 160401 (2005).

[6] Y. Takasu, K. Maki, K. Komori, T. Takano, K. Honda,
M. Kumakura, T. Yabuzaki, and Y. Takahashi, Phys.
Rev. Lett. 91, 040404 (2003).

[7] S. R. Granade, M. E. Gehm, K. M. O’Hara, and J. E.

Thomas, Phys. Rev. Lett. 88, 120405 (2002).

[8] S. J. M. Kuppens, K. L. Corwin, K. W. Miller, T. Chupp,
and C. E. Wieman, Phys. Rev. A 62, 013406 (2000).
[9] J. Weiner, V. S. Bagnato, S. Zilio, and P. S. Julienne,

Reviews of Modern Physics 71, 1 (1999).

[10] K. Jones, E. Tiesinga, P. D. Lett, and P. S. Julienne,

Reviews of Modern Physics under review (2006).
[11] P. Courteille, R. S. Freeland, H. D. J., F. A. van Abeelen,
and B. J. Verhaar, Phys. Rev. Lett. 81, 69 (1998).
[12] F. K. Fatemi, K. M. Jones, and P. D. Lett, Phys. Rev.

Lett. 85, 4462 (2000).

[13] L. E. E. de Araujo, J. D. Weinstein, S. D. Gensemer,
F. K. Fatemi, K. M. Jones, P. D. Lett, and E. Tiesinga,
J. Chem. Phys. 119, 2062 (2003).

[14] S. Friebel, R. Scheunemann, J. Walz, T. H¨ansch, and

M. Weitz, Appl. Phys. B 67, 699 (1998).

[15] K. Xu, Y. Liu, J. Abo-Shaeer, T. Mukaiyama, J. Chin,
D. Miller, W. Ketterle, K. M. Jones, and E. Tiesinga,
Phys. Rev. A p. accepted for publication (2005).

[16] D. M. Stamper-Kurn, M. Andrews, A. P. Chikkatur,
S. Inouye, H.-J. Miesner, J. Stenger, and W. Ketterle,
Phys. Rev. Lett. 80, 2027 (1998).

[17] K. M. O’Hara, M. E. Gehm, S. R. Granade, and J. E.

Thomas, Phys. Rev. A 64, 051403(R) (2001).

[18] D. Harber, H. Lewandowski, J. McGuirk, and E. Cornell,

Phys. Rev. A 66, 053616 (2002).

