Europhysics Letters

PREPRINT

6
0
0
2
 
r
a

M
 
3
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
m
o
t
a
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
7
0
1
3
0
6
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Ultracold Atoms Driven by a Kicked Rotor in a Finite
Box

K. Henderson 1,2, H. Kelkar 1,2, T.C. Li 1,2, B. Guti´errez-Medina 1,2(∗) and
M.G. Raizen 1,2
1 Center for Nonlinear Dynamics - The University of Texas at Austin, Austin TX
78712-1081, USA
2 Department of Physics -The University of Texas at Austin, Austin TX 78712-1081,
USA
∗ Present Address: Stanford University, Stanford, California.

PACS. 05.20.Dd – Kinetic theory.
PACS. 03.75.Hh – Static properties of condensates; thermodynamical, statistical, and struc-

PACS. 05.70.Ln – Nonequilibrium and irreversible thermodynamics.

tural properties.

Abstract. – We study the eﬀect of diﬀerent heating rates of a dilute Bose gas conﬁned in a
quasi-1D ﬁnite, leaky box. An optical kicked-rotor is used to transfer energy to the atoms while
two repulsive optical beams are used to conﬁne the atoms. The average energy of the atoms is
localized after a large number of kicks and the system reaches a nonequilibrium steady state. A
numerical simulation of the experimental data suggests that the localization is due to energetic
atoms leaking over the barrier. Our data also indicates a correlation between collisions and the
destruction of the Bose-Einstein condensate fraction.

Introduction. – A quantum system in direct contact with its immediate environment is of
considerable practical interest to current and future eﬀorts in quantum engineering. It is well
understood that environment induced decoherence is a direct cause of the transition between
quantum coherence and classical dissipation and diﬀusion [1, 2]. The particular details of this
transition, however, cannot always be measured or explored in a manner as to reveal its direct
genesis. But in some cases the most obvious danger to quantum coherence can be identiﬁed by
a straightforward competition, for example, between noise and localization [3]. In a sample of
dilute bosons, for example, dissipation, macroscopic loss of atoms, and thermal contamination
can singly or simultaneously destroy the stability and coherence of the condensate and its
wavefunction.

The question of whether dynamically or spatially extended macroscopic quantum behavior
can be realized has been deeply explored for over a decade with ultracold atoms. The most nat-
ural and ideal experimental testing ground has been that of periodically kicked systems which
can be used to distinguish classical diﬀusion from the purely quantum mechanical behavior
of dynamical localization [4]. Analogously, recent experiments have have also explored the
c(cid:13) EDP Sciences

2

EUROPHYSICS LETTERS

possibility of seeing Anderson-like localization in spatially random (disordered) media [5–7].
These results have been relegated to a classical description but their work optimistically sug-
gests that such systems can also reveal, in a complimentary manner to dynamical localization,
a distinction between classically induced-disorder localization and a quantum suppression of
spatial diﬀusion.

In this work, we report a study of a driven dilute Bose gas conﬁned in a quasi-1D ﬁnite
optical billiard. We observe a classical saturation of the energy of the atoms due to a competi-
tion between additional energy from a kicked rotor and ﬁnite boundaries that allow energetic
atoms to leave. From a phase space density representation, we characterize the heating rates
of this system for both Bose-Einstein condensate (BEC) and thermal atoms. We also measure
the BEC fraction as a function of number of kicks and identify a correlation between collisions
and a rapid loss in phase space density.

Experimental-Setup. – In this experiment, a Zeeman-slower loaded magneto-optical trap
of 2 × 109 sodium atoms is used to produce 3 × 106 Bose-Einstein condensate atoms in the
F = 1, mF = −1 state in a ’cloverleaf’ Ioﬀe-Pritchard type magnetic trap [8] with trapping
frequencies of ωρ = 2π × 324 Hz and ωz = 2π × 20 Hz in the radial and axial directions
respectively. We then create a magnetic waveguide [9] by lowering only the axial trapping
frequency to 2π × 0.82 Hz in 700 ms. The atoms are now conﬁned axially using two billiard
beams, which are described below. This procedure has negligible heating eﬀect and can
eﬃciently transfer over 2 × 106 atoms with condensate fractions of up to 0.6(2). Lifetimes in
this hybrid trap have been measured to be nearly 10 seconds. Similarly, there is no measurable
increase in the thermal fraction or temperature for over 1 second.

The ﬁnite potential barriers of the billiard are created by two far-oﬀ-resonant (λ = 532 nm)
optical billiard beams. The location and power of each of the billiard beams are controlled in
real time by an acousto-optic deﬂector (AOD). Each of the beams forms a repulsive barrier
in the axial direction and together they form the end caps for the atoms in the waveguide.
They are separated by L = 123 µm along the waveguide axis and have an asymmetric spot
size (1/e2) at the location of the atoms of wz = 10.4 µm by wρ = 160 µm in the axial and
radial directions respectively. Each beam creates a potential barrier height of Vb/(2π¯h) =
180(20) kHz (18(2) µK), which can hold atoms with a velocity of up to 8.0 cm/s [10].

Fig. 1 – (color online). (a) Layout of the hybrid optical and magnetic trap with kicked rotor beams.
(b) Axial intensity proﬁle taken from a CCD image of the optical billiard and kicked rotor beams.
The intensity variation of the kicked rotor spots is measured to be less than 5%. Here, the intensity
of the billiard beams has been lowered by a factor of 5 so that the intensity proﬁles are not saturated.

K. Henderson, H. Kelkar, T.C. Li, B. Guti´errez-Medina and M.G. Raizen: Ultracold Atoms Driven by a Kicked Rotor in

Two independent techniques were used to determine the axial spot size, wz. The ﬁrst
technique was to measure the transmission probability through a single barrier with a known
amount of laser power. The second technique was to measure the evolution of the aspect ratio
of a BEC released from the billiard when the beams are very close to each other. The two
techniques give a consistent value for wz. Additionally, the Rayleigh length, zR = πω2
0/λ, for
the axial spot size is ∼ 600 µm which is much larger than 2σρ, the radial extent of the atoms in
the waveguide. In the radial direction, each beam is 4 times larger than the measured spatial
extent of the atoms (σρ ≤ 20 µm), thereby causing deviations in the potential uniformity by
less than 12%.

The experimental sequence is as follows: BEC atoms are held in the billiard while being
kicked, N times, by the kicked rotor beams, which are described below. Between consecutive
kicks, the atoms undergo free evolution inside the quasi-1D billiard. We then measure the
momentum distribution of the atoms after 10 ms of free expansion. The rms width of the
distribution is used to calculate the energy along axial and radial directions.

Kicked Rotor Details. – In order to create the kicked rotor beams with the same spatial
proﬁles as the billiard beams but diﬀerent deﬂection angles, an arbitrary waveform generator
is also used to control the same AOD. By applying the billiard and kicked rotor signals
simultaneously, the desired spatial pattern of light can be drawn at the location of the atoms.
As shown in Fig. 1(a), the kicked rotor is made up of ﬁve equally spaced beams contained
within the billiard beams. The distance between adjacent beams is d = 20.5 µm.

As a benchmark for our experiment, we characterize the parameter space of our kicked
rotor by the standard kicked rotor model. Since the standard theory for a kicked rotor
assumes a sinusoidal potential for the kicks, the inner spacing for our kicked rotor is chosen
to enhance the sinusoidal characteristic of the intensity proﬁle, which determines, in a linear
fashion, the amplitude of the potential V0. In our case, the power of each kicked rotor beam,
after subtracting the light-oﬀset due to overlapping gaussian beams, is 39(4) mW, which
corresponds to a potential height of V0/(2π¯h) = 35(3) kHz. The nearly sinusoidal potential,
as shown in Fig. 1(b), corresponds to a characteristic momentum of 2¯hkL/m = 0.39 mm/s,
where kL = 2π/λ and λ = 2d = 41 µm.

2 +K cos φ PN

The scaled kicked rotor Hamiltonian is H = ρ

n=1 f (τ −n). Here, momentum
is ρ = 2¯hkL/¯k, where ¯k is a dimensionless parameter equal to 8ωrT . T is the kick period,
N is the total number of kicks, and ωr = ¯hkL/2m. The displacement of each atom in the
axial direction is given by φ = 2kLz and τ = t/T measures time in units of the kick period.
The stochasticity parameter, K, determines the classical evolution of the system and can be
written in dimensionless form as K = 8V0T tpωr/¯h, where tp is the ﬁnite pulse of the kicked
rotor. When K > 4 widespread chaos appears in a classical system leading to unbounded
motion in phase space [11]. For our experimental parameters, K ranges from 44 to 660 and
¯k ranges from 2.5 to 37 for T = 10 to 150 ms, respectively. We can also estimate the initial
energy per kick to be ∼ 310 nK, which can be dervied from the classical momentum diﬀusion
rate h((ρ/¯k)2/2)i = K 2/4¯k2 [12].

2

Since the optical pulses are restricted to have a ﬁnite width in time there is a classical
momentum boundary for a particular pulse time which is given by pb = πm/kLtp. For the
data presented in this paper, tp = 200 µs, and therefore pb/m becomes ﬁxed at 10 cm/s
(26.6 µK), which is signiﬁcantly higher than the barrier height and consequently higher than
any energy measured. In contrast, the theory of the quantum kicked rotor predicts two non-
classical results: the quantum break time or localization time, N ∗ = K 2/4¯k2, and the quantum
break energy, E∗ = 2(N ∗(2¯hkL))2/m. For our experimental parameters, N ∗ is calculated to
occur when N = 105 and E∗ is found to be 27 µK, corresponding to a velocity of 10.0 cm/s.

4

EUROPHYSICS LETTERS

Fig. 2 – (color online) Energy growth and atom number loss as a function of number of kicks. (a) Ez
(solid square) and (b) Eρ (solid circle) are the energies measured in the axial and radial directions,
respectively. For this data the kick pulse width (tp = 200 µs), kicks strength (V0/2π¯h = 35(3) kHz),
and billiard height (Vb/2π¯h = 180(20) kHz) are unchanged. For the atom number data (solid trian-
gles), there is a systematic uncertainty of ± 10% which is not shown. The solid lines are a numerical
simulation for thermal atoms driven by a kicked rotor in a quasi-1D ﬁnite box given our experimental
parameters.

These conditions are also never realized for this system since the barrier height is lower than
E∗.

Results and Discussion. – The dependance of energy and atom number on the number of
kicks is presented in Figs. 2. After a large number of kicks, typically N ≥ 35, the energy of the
system reaches a saturation value. The origin of this saturation in energy is purely classical
and can be explained by considering the loss of high energy atoms over the barriers. The ﬁnite
size of the barriers puts an inherent cutoﬀ on the maximum energy that the atoms can possess
in thermodynamic equilibrium. This results in the system reaching a nonequilibrium steady
state where the input of energy from each additional kick is exactly balanced with the energy
lost due to the subsequent removal of the hottest atoms over the ﬁnite potential barrier.

Figs. 2(a) and (b) present contrasting examples of energy growth along the axial and radial
directions. For short time between kicks, the axial and radial energies evolve very diﬀerentely
in their ﬁnal values. If suﬃcient time passes between kicks (T > 15 ms), then collisions play a
major role in thermalizing the axial and radial components. The energy in the two directions
is then almost identical as shown in Fig. 2(b).

In Fig. 3, energy measurements are made for both the axial and radial directions after
N = 40 kicks. For short kick periods, T < 15 ms, mixing increases between the axial and
radial directions but remains stably separate up to N = 40 kicks. For T > 15 ms, the system
becomes completely ergodic at N = 40 kicks. It can also be seen that the atom loss rate is
relatively constant for N = 40 kicks for all kick periods. The fact that the atom number after
40 kicks is nearly the same for all kick periods suggests that the atom loss rate is mostly due
to the same amount of energy being added from each kick.

In both Figs. (2) and (3), the result from a quantum numerical simulation is added for
comparison with our data. The numerical simulation utilizes a discrete variable representation
in order to approximate the Hamiltonian of our system [13, 14]. The simulation assumes an
initial sample of non-interacting thermal atoms with a constant collision rate of 5 Hz. This
assumption is consistent with the calculated initial value for the collision rate between atoms,
namely, γ = nσchvi ∼ 5 Hz, where n = 6.5 × 1012 cm−3 is the mean density, σc = 8πa2
s =

K. Henderson, H. Kelkar, T.C. Li, B. Guti´errez-Medina and M.G. Raizen: Ultracold Atoms Driven by a Kicked Rotor in

Fig. 3 – (color online) Energy as a function of the kick period for N = 40 kicks. Ez (solid square)
and Eρ (solid circle) are the energies measured in the axial and radial directions, respectively. The
solid line is a numerical simulation for our experimental parameters. The dotted line is a numerical
simulation for the same parameters but for no collisions between atoms.

1.9 × 10−12 cm2 is the collision cross section for sodium atoms, and hvi is the rms velocity of
atoms, which is initially measured to be 10(1) mm/s. Most importantly, the simulation uses
the exact optically-constructed potential used in the experiment as depicted in Fig. 1(b).

Employing our experimental parameters [15], the simulation agrees very well for large kick
periods where there is complete thermalization between axial and radial directions. When
the model assumes there are no collisions between atoms, as shown in Fig. (3), the energy in
the axial direction, Ez, after N = 40 kicks is independent of the kick period. This theoretical
result conﬁrms that collisions are necessary for mixing the two degrees of freedom. It also
implies that any energy imparted radially must come from collisions and not directly from the
kicks.

To build a more coherent picture incorporating both the change in energy and the loss
of atom number, we plot the dependence of phase space density (PSD) versus the number
of kicks, as shown in Fig. 4(a). Here, a three dimensional phase space density is calculated
ρ, where λi = (2π¯h2/(mkBTi))1/2 is the thermal de Broglie wavelength and n
using ̟ = nλzλ2
is the density. Two signiﬁcant features warrant discussion. First, there is a marked diﬀerence
between the initial PSD decay rates for BEC and thermal atoms. This diﬀerence is due largely
to the comparable energy scale of the initial energy of the BEC, ∼ 250 nK, and the energy
added by a single kick, roughly 310 nK. Consequently, only a few kicks are required to cause
the BEC atoms to be heated above their critical temperature, TC ∼ ¯h(ω2
ρωzN )1/3/kB [16],
which for our system is ∼ 500 nK . The atoms then follow the same PSD trajectory as thermal
atoms. On the other hand, in the case of thermal atoms, the energy from a single kick is only
a fraction of the initial energy, ∼ 1 µK.

The second, more remarkable feature of the PSD plot applies to the time dependent be-
havior of both BEC and thermal atoms. For both BEC and thermal atom initial conditions,
experimentally ﬁtted exponential decay rates in PSD are identical for large N , i.e., for times
after a nonequilibrium steady state has been achieved. In both cases, BEC and thermal atoms
achieve a nonequilibrium steady state that is independent of the kick period.

For small number of kicks, N ≤ 10, the measured exponential decay rate in PSD for BEC
atoms is nearly seven times as fast as for thermal atoms. This exponential decay rate is
coincident with a rapid decay in the condensate fraction, as shown in Fig. 4(b). Data for the
condensate fraction decay rate indicates that there are two distinct time scales, one for short

6

EUROPHYSICS LETTERS

Fig. 4 – (color online) Phase space density and BEC fraction as a function of number of kicks. (a) Solid
shape data represent BEC starting conditions. Open shape data represent thermal (non-condensed)
starting conditions. The solid line is a numerical simulation for thermal atoms driven by a kicked
rotor in a quasi-1D ﬁnite box given our experimental parameters. (b) Experimental data is sorted
into short kick periods, T = 2 − 28 ms (solid squares), and long kick periods, T = 40 − 150 ms (solid
circles). The insets are time of ﬂight (10 ms) axial proﬁles for N = 0 kicks and N = 10 kicks for
T = 28 ms.

kick periods T ≤ 30 ms and one for the long kick periods T ≥ 40 ms. For the short kick
periods, the number of collisions is approximately 44% that of a longer kick periods. This
implies that, for small N and small T , the condensate atoms remain unaﬀected by the thermal
atoms in between kicks.

Conclusion. – The system we report on is a classic driven system with loss [17, 18]. It is
a system that, for a suﬃcient number of kicks, can be characterized by a simple decay rate of
energetic atoms escaping from the billiard. In this system, collisions play a dominant role in
irreversibly mixing the axial and radial energies. Collisions, however, do not cause the onset
of a nonequilibrium steady state. We showed that the monotonic addition of energy from an
initial kick (N < 8) causes the sharp rise in energy and hence, the sharp decrease in PSD in a
sample that is initially BEC. Since thermal atoms begin with an energy which is higher than
the single kick energy, the additional energy from an initial kick is not as high. In the case of
a BEC, we have seen that there seems to be a one to one correspondence between the loss of
BEC fraction with a rapid drop in the phase space density

This study is relevant to most conservative atom traps with ﬁnite trap depth and mea-
surable heating rate. In the future, very careful calorimetry measurements can be done to
elucidate the nature in which small excitation aﬀect and ultimately destroy condensate atoms.
These types of measurements would be of signiﬁcant interest to those studying the fundamen-
tal thermodynamic and coherence properties of condensate atoms.

∗ ∗ ∗

The authors would like to acknowledge support from the Sid W. Richardson Foundation,
the National Science Foundation, and the R. A. Welch Foundation. The authors would also
like to thank Dr. E. Narevicius and Dr. M. Marder for helpful discussions.

K. Henderson, H. Kelkar, T.C. Li, B. Guti´errez-Medina and M.G. Raizen: Ultracold Atoms Driven by a Kicked Rotor in

REFERENCES

[1] W. H. Zurek, Rev. Mod. Phys., 75 (2003) 715.
[2] K. Shiokawa and B.L. Hu, Phys. Rev. E, 52 (1995) 2497.
[3] B. G. Klappauf, W. H. Oskay, D. A. Steck, and M. G. Raizen, Phys. Rev. Lett., 81 (1998)

1203.

Rev. Lett., 73 (1994) 2974.

[4] F. L. Moore, J. C. Robinson, C. Bharucha, P. E. Williams, and M. G. Raizen, Phys.

[5] D. Cl´ement, A. F. Var´on, M. Hugbart, J. A. Retter, P. Bouyer, L. Sanchez-Palencia,
D. M. Gangardt, G.V. Shlyapnikov and A. Aspect, Phys. Rev. Lett., 95 (2005) 170409.
[6] C. Fort, L. Fallani, V. Guarrera, J. E. Lye, M. Modugno, D. S. Wiersma and M.

Inguscio, Phys. Rev. Lett., 95 (2005) 170410.

[7] T. Schulte, S. Drenkelforth, J. Kruse, W. Ertmer, J. Arlt, K. Sacha, J. Zakrzewski

and M. Lewenstein, Phys. Rev. Lett., 95 (2005) 170411.

[8] M.-O. Mewes, M.R. Andrews, N.J.van Druten, D.M. Kurn, D.S. Durfee and W. Ket-

terle, Phys. Rev. Lett., 77 (1996) 416.

[9] Speciﬁc details of the creation, ﬂatness, and isotropy of the magnetic waveguide are provided

[10]

In the case of our experimental parameters, quantum mechanical tunneling through an optical

[11] A.L. Lichtenberg and M.A. Lieberman, Regular and Chaotic Dynamics (Springer-Verlag,

[12] D.A. Steck, Quantum Chaos, Transport, and Decoherence in Atom Optics, PhD. Thesis,

[13] D. T. Colbert and W. H. Miller, J. Chem. Phys., 96 (1992) 1982.
[14] R.L. Liboff, Kinetic Theory: Classical, Quantum, and Relativisitic Descriptions (John Wiley

in [19].

billiard is negligible.

New York) 1991.

University of Texas, 2001.

& Sons, New York) 1998.

[15] Systematic uncertainties in atom number, optical spot sizes and beam intensity account for up
to ± 20% of the total uncertainty in our experimental parameters. The numerical model used to
ﬁt these data falls within this uncertainty.

[16] F. Dalfovo, S. Giorgini, L.P. Pitaevskii and S. Stringari, Rev. Mod. Phys., 71 (1999)

463.

[17] H.A. Kramers, Physica, 7 (1940) 284.
[18] P. H¨anggi, P. Talkner, and M. Borkovec, Rev. Mod. Phys., 62 (1990) 251.
[19] K. Henderson, H. Kelkar, B. Guti´errez-Medina, T. C. Li and M.G. Raizen,

quant-opt/0509025, preprint 2005.

