6
0
0
2
 
r
a

M
 
0
3
 
 
]
h
p
-
m
o
t
a
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
5
5
2
3
0
6
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Spin-Polarizing Cold Sodium Atoms in a Strong Magnetic Field

K.M.R. van der Stam, A. Kuijk, R. Meppelink, J.M. Vogels, and P. van der Straten
Atom Optics and Ultrafast Dynamics, Utrecht University,
P.O. Box 80,000, 3508 TA Utrecht, The Netherlands
(Dated: August 13, 2013)

The eﬃciency of evaporative cooling, which is used for the creation of a Bose Einstein condensate,
depends strongly on the number of particles at the start of the evaporation. A high eﬃciency can
be reached by ﬁlling the magneto-optical trap with a large number of atoms and subsequently
transferring these atoms to the magnetic trap as eﬃciently as possible. In our case (for sodium) this
eﬃciency is limited to 1/3, because the magnetic substates of the F = 1 state, which is used in the
trapping process, are equally populated. This limit can be overcome by spin-polarizing the sample
before the transfer. For sodium atoms, however, the improvement is very small when it is done in
a small magnetic ﬁeld due to the large number of optical transitions in combination with the high
optical density. In this article we describe spin-polarizing sodium atoms in a high magnetic ﬁeld.
The transfer eﬃciency is increased by a factor of 2. The high magnetic ﬁeld makes the process also
more robust against variations in the magnetic ﬁeld, the laser frequency and the polarization of the
laser beam.

PACS numbers: 32.80.Bx, 32.80.Pj

I.

INTRODUCTION

The ﬁrst realization of a Bose Einstein condensate
(BEC) in 1995 opened up a completely new ﬁeld of re-
search [1, 2, 3]. Currently a BEC is often used as a
starting point for further research. Therefore it is of
great importance to have a reliable process of creating a
BEC. Creating a BEC can be divided into two main steps.
First, atoms are cooled and trapped in a magneto-optical
trap (MOT) using laser cooling. Second, the sample is
transferred to a magnetic trap (MT), in which evapora-
tive cooling is applied. The latter cooling technique is
based on selectively removing the most energetic atoms,
followed by rethermalization of the remaining atoms due
to elastic collisions. The eﬃciency of the evaporative
cooling depends strongly on the rethermalization rate.
Therefore, at the start of the evaporation the density of
atoms in the magnetic trap should be as large as pos-
sible. This can be achieved by creating a MOT with
a large number of atoms, and subsequently transferring
those atoms to the MT as eﬃciently as possible. In our
case, we trap sodium atoms in the F = 1 M = −1 state,
because only the atoms which have a decreasing potential
energy with decreasing magnetic ﬁeld will be trapped in
the minimum of the MT (low ﬁeld seekers). The transfer
eﬃciency is limited to 1/3, because the magnetic sub-
states of the F = 1 state are equally occupied in the
MOT. The transfer eﬃciency can be increased by spin-
polarizing the sample before loading it into the MT. This
can be done by applying a short laser pulse with the
proper polarization in combination with a small mag-
netic ﬁeld to deﬁne the diﬀerent spin states with respect
to the magnetic trap, after the MOT is turned oﬀ and
before the MT is turned on, Fig. 1. Spin-polarization
is a commonly used technique in BEC experiments, for
example in the experiments with Rb [1], He [4], and Ne
[5]. In these experiments transfer eﬃciencies up to 0.70

are reached. To our knowledge in sodium BEC experi-
ments the eﬃciency has never exceeded 0.35 [6], due to
the large number of transitions lying very close to each
other in frequency in combination with the high optical
density. The ﬁnal degree of polarization is determined by
the balance between the optical pumping to the polar-
ized state and the depolarization. The depolarization is
caused by oﬀ-resonant scattering of the spin-polarization
beam by atoms, which are already polarized, and the re-
absoption of spontaneous emitted photons.
In sodium
MOTs used in BEC experiments the optical density is so
high, that these are strong depolarization mechanisms.
For sodium it is not possible to circumvent this problem
using a larger detuning due to the large number of optical
transitions, which are close to each other in frequency.
In this article we describe a method of spin-polarizing a
high density sample of cold sodium atoms at a high mag-
netic ﬁeld. The method suppresses the depolarization
due to the previous mentioned processes strongly and
makes the process also more robust against instabilities
in magnetic ﬁeld and laser frequency.

II. EXPERIMENTAL SETUP

In our BEC experiment a thermal atomic beam pro-
duced by an oven operating at 570 K is slowed longi-
tudinally by means of Zeeman slowing. In our Zeeman
slower the magnetic ﬁeld decreases from approximately
1000 G at the beginning to approximately -200 G at the
end of the slower. The large negative magnetic ﬁeld at
the end of the slower makes the extraction of the atoms
from the slower less critical compared to a slower with
a small positive end-ﬁeld. The slowing process is driven
by a laser beam with a detuning of 356 MHz below the
Fg = 2 to Fe = 3 transition. During the passage of the
zero crossing of the magnetic ﬁeld atoms can be excited
to the Fe = 2 state, since the detuning becomes small

2

the transfer to the MT resulting in a maximum trans-
fer eﬃciency of 1/3. The eﬃciency can be increased by
transferring the atoms to the magnetically trapped state,
Fg = 1, Mg = −1 in our case, before loading them into
the MT. This spin-polarizing process can increase the
number of atoms at the start of the evaporative cooling
with a factor of three. Since the evaporative cooling is a
non linear process, the increase of atoms in the BEC can
be much larger, depending on the loss mechanism during
the evaporation.

The number of atoms in our experiment can be de-
termined either by ﬂuorescence or absorption imaging.
In this experiment we mainly use ﬂuorescence imaging,
where 20 ms after the atoms are released from the trap
(MOT or MT), a 1 ms laser pulse with repump and MOT
frequency is applied. The density of the cloud after an
expansion time of 20 ms is small enough to neglect opti-
cal density eﬀects. Therefore the number of atoms that
are illuminated scales linearly with the measured ﬂuores-
cence. We determine the transfer eﬃciency by taking the
ratio of the number of atoms in the MOT and the MT.
A possible complication of the measurement is that not
only the Fg = 1, Mg = −1 state can be trapped in the
MT, but also the Fg = 2, Mg = 1, 2 states. These states
are not distinguishable from the Fg = 1, Mg = −1 state
with our imaging technique. However, since we use σ−
light and apply after spin-polarizing an extra laser pulse
at the MOT (Fg = 2 → Fe = 3) frequency to pump the
atoms to the Fg = 1 state, it is highly unlikely for the
atoms to end in the Fg = 2, Mg = 1, 2 states.

III. OPTICAL TRANSITIONS OF NA IN A
MAGNETIC FIELD

To determine the magnetic ﬁeld and laser frequency
required for the spin-polarization we have calculated the
frequencies of the transitions from the 32S1/2 ground
state to the 32P3/2 excited state as a function of the mag-
netic ﬁeld for the diﬀerent hyperﬁne levels. The results
are shown in Fig. 2 for transitions from the Fg = 1 →
Fe = 0, 1, 2, 3 driven by σ− and σ+ light. Note that F is
no longer a good quantum number in a magnetic ﬁeld and
therefore the selection rule ∆F = 0, ± 1 no longer applies.
The detuning is given with respect to the 32S1/2(Fg = 2)
to 32P3/2(Fe = 0) transition.

From Fig.2 we can determine which combinations of
magnetic ﬁeld and frequency result in a transfer to the
sublevel, where atoms can be trapped. The ﬁrst cri-
terium is that the atoms need to be transferred to the
Fg = 1, Mg = −1 state. Therefore the transfer from
Mg = 1 to Mg = 0, −1 state and from Mg = 0 to
Mg = −1 state are important. The transition from
the Mg = −1 to Me = −2 state should be suppressed
because this transition is not necessary for polarizing
the atoms, but can cause depolarization and heating of
the cloud. The second criterium is that the situation is
robust against ﬂuctuations in magnetic ﬁeld, laser fre-

FIG. 1: The principle of spin-polarizing. The atoms in the
Fg = 1 ground state are optically pumped by a laser beam
with σ− polarization (black arrows). Atoms in the Fe = 1 ex-
cited state can decay back to the Fg = 1, 2 ground states. This
is shown as an example for the Fe = 1, Mg = −1 state (dashed
arrows). Atoms in the Fg = 2 ground state are pumped to
the excited state by an extra laser beam with a combination
of σ− and σ+ polarization (not shown).

in a small magnetic ﬁeld. Atoms in this state can be
lost from the slowing process due to decay to the Fg = 1
ground state. Therefore, we have a second frequency
(the so called repumper) which excites the atoms from
the Fg = 1 ground state to the Fe = 2 excited state. In
the case of the Zeeman slower this repump frequency is
generated by adding sidebands to the laser beam with
a frequency diﬀerence of 1720 MHz by using an electro-
optical modulator (EOM). After the atoms have been
slowed down to 30 m/s a dark-spot MOT is loaded for
6 sec. The dark-spot MOT is operated with three retro-
reﬂected laser beams (MOT beams) with a detuning of
-12 MHz with respect to the Fg = 2 to Fe = 3 transi-
tion, and one retro reﬂected beam (repump beam) with
a detuning of +2.5 MHz with respect to the Fg = 1 to
Fe = 1 transition. For the MOT the repump beam is
generated with a separated laser instead of an EOM. In
the dark-spot MOT conﬁguration the repump beam has
a black spot in the center of the beam. The atoms in the
center of the dark-spot MOT are optically pumped in the
Fg = 1 ground state due to the absence of repump light
[7]. This avoids the density limitation which is present
in a bright MOT due to intra-MOT collisions [8, 9]. A
typical dark-spot MOT in our experiments contains 1010
atoms at a temperature of 320 µK at a peak density of
about 3.0 · 1011 cm−3[10]. After the loading the magnetic
ﬁeld and the repump beam are ﬁrst shut oﬀ and the MOT
beams are shut down 1 ms later to make sure that all the
atoms end up in the Fg = 1 ground state. Subsequently
the atoms are transferred to the magnetic trap. We use
a cloverleaf trap for full 360 degree optical access with
a magnetic ﬁeld gradient of 100 Gauss/cm which leads
to trap frequencies in the axial and radial direction of
νz = 14.8 Hz and νρ = 120.2 Hz, respectively. Because
the atoms in the MOT are equally distributed over the
three magnetic sublevels of the trapped state (Fg = 1),
only atoms in one of the three states can be trapped after

3

This detuning is, however, problematic to reach in our
setup. In case (2) another suitable situation is reached
at 1790 MHz, which is achievable in our setup. Case (3)
is reached by decreasing the magnetic ﬁeld to 20 G, while
the detuning is set slightly higher at 1810 MHz. This re-
sults in a situation which also gives the two transitions we
want, but it is more sensitive to ﬂuctuations in both pa-
rameters. The last possibility (case (4)) is at a detuning
of 1880 MHz, combined with 25 G magnetic ﬁeld. This
means that only considering the pumping process, the
second and the fourth combinations are useful. Looking
at the transition that can be made with σ+ light, (see Fig.
2(b)), we observe that the (25 G, 1880 MHz) combination
is resonant with two transitions, while the high magnetic
ﬁeld (100 G) situation is not close to resonance. This
means that combination 2 is much more stable against
polarization ﬂuctuations. The large energy splitting of
the transitions at high magnetic ﬁeld reduces also the
optical density, and will for that reason be used in our
work.

In the spin-polarizing process atoms are optically
pumped from the Fg = 1 state, because this is the oc-
cupied state in the dark-spot MOT. To prevent atoms
from being lost from the spin-polarizing process due to
decay to the Fg = 2 we apply an extra depump frequency.
This depump frequency excites the atoms from Fg = 2
ground state. We use the MOT laser beams for depump-
ing. With respect to the quantization axis of the atoms
the polarization of the MOT laser beams is a combination
of σ−, π and σ+ polarization. In Fig. 3 the transition
frequencies from the Fg = 2 ground state to the diﬀer-
ent excited states as a function of the magnetic ﬁeld are
shown for σ−, π and σ+ light, respectively.

Figure 3 shows that at the chosen combination (100
G and 1790 MHz) the depump frequency is nearly res-
onant with the Fg = 2, Mg = 1 to Fe = 2, Me = 0, 1, 2
transition. However, the other magnetic sublevels of the
ground state are much further detuned. When atoms
pass another Fg = 2 states during the optical pump-
ing process it takes more time to complete the spin-
polarization. The scatter rate for an oﬀ-resonant transi-
tion is given by

γs =

s0γ/2
1 + s0 + (2δ/γ)2 ,

(1)

where s0 is the saturation parameter, δ is the detuning
from resonance and γ is the line width of the used tran-
sition. For example, the Fg = 2, Mg = 0 has a detuning
of 113 MHz with respect to the depump frequency. The
scatter rate (γs) from this state decreases by more than a
factor of 500 with respect to the on-resonant scattering.
To simulate the optical pumping process, we have to
solve the Optical Bloch equations (OBE) for the den-
sity matrix of a multi-level atom in a magnetic ﬁeld. In
case the optical pumping process is long compared to the
lifetime for spontaneous decay, we can adiabatically elim-
inate the optical coherences and obtain generalized equa-
tions for the evolution of the density matrices σg of the

FIG. 2: The transition frequencies from the 32S1/2(Fg = 1)
ground state to the 32P3/2(Fe = 0, 1, 2, 3) excited states as a
function of the magnetic ﬁeld for σ− light (a) and σ+ light (b).
On the right side of the ﬁgure the magnetic quantum num-
bers of the transitions are given, Mg →Me. The detuning is
given with respect to the 32S1/2Fg = 2 to 32P3/2Fe = 0 tran-
sition. The dashed line indicates the spin-polarization laser
frequency. The numbers 1 to 4 in (a) indicate the possible
combination of magnetic ﬁeld and frequency that drive the
atoms to the Fg = 1, Mg = −1 state. In (b) the numbers 2
and 4 are the situations which are stable against ﬂuctuations
in magnetic ﬁeld and frequency and can be reached in our
setup (see text).

quency and polarization. The last requirement is a fre-
quency between 1620 MHz and 1860 MHz, because de-
tunings larger than 1860 MHz and smaller than 1620
MHz are diﬃcult to reach in our setup.

The ﬁrst requirement is met at four combinations of
magnetic ﬁeld and detuning shown in Fig. 2(a), which
will be discussed in this paragraph. At these combina-
tions both transitions from Mg = 1 to Mg = 0, and
from Mg = 0 to Mg = −1 state are close to resonance,
while the Mg = −1 to Me = −2 transition is as far de-
tuned as possible. In case (1) a magnetic ﬁeld of 100 G
with a frequency of 1570 MHz is in principle possible.

4

role. The evolution equations of the density matrix thus
reduce to rate equations for the populations of the ground
and excited state. The eﬀect of the depumping process
is taken into account by assuming that the depumper
beam induces all (σ+, π and σ−) possible transitions in
the atom with equal strength. Finally, we eliminate the
population of excited states. This is valid, since the du-
ration of optical pumping process is much longer than
the excited state lifetime. This way the largest rate in
the rate equations is reduced from the spontaneous decay
rate to the optical pump rate, which in case of large de-
tuning can be much smaller. This allows us to increase
the time step in the numerical integration of the rate
equation considerably and thus decrease the computa-
tion time.
The optical pumping process can now be described as the
transfer of the atom from the ground to the excited state
by the absorption of a photon, followed by a branching
of the atom from one excited state to diﬀerent ground
states by spontaneous emission. The transfer of an atom
from one ground state i to another ground state j is than
determined by an optical pump rate γp, which in zero
magnetic ﬁeld is proportional to the Clebsch-Gordan co-
eg of the polarization q = 0, ±1 of the pump
eﬃcient Cq
beam, the detuning δ of the transition and the branching
ratio Bje of the spontaneous emission process:

γp,ij = X
e

s0BjeCq
ei

2Γ/2
2 + (2δ/Γ)2 ,

1 + s0Cq
ei

(2)

where the summation runs of all possible excited states
e. Here s0 = I/Isat is the saturation parameter for the
strongest transition and δ = ω −ω0. In case of a non-zero
magnetic ﬁeld, all these three parameters are modiﬁed.
First, the magnetic ﬁeld changes the energies of ground
and excited states and therefore the transition frequen-
cies ω0. Second, since the states at non-zero ﬁeld become
a linear combination of the states at zero ﬁeld, the cou-
pling between ground and excited states for a given po-
larization is modiﬁed and this eﬀects both the coupling
coeﬃcient Cq
ei and the branching ratio Bje. All these
eﬀects are taken into account in our simulation.

IV. SPIN-POLARIZING IN A HIGH
MAGNETIC FIELD

The process of spin-polarizing in a high magnetic ﬁeld
as indicated in the previous section is done at a ﬁeld
of 100 G combined with a detuning which equals 1790
MHz. The magnetic ﬁeld is created by a combination of
the ﬁeld produced by the pinch and the bias coils of our
cloverleaf magnetic trap. This ﬁeld can be tuned from 0
G to 125 G with an accuracy of 1 G. The frequency of
the spin-polarizing laser can be tuned by changing the
RF frequency that drives the AOM and can be changed
from 1790 MHz to 1850 MHz with an accuracy of 3 MHz.
To determine the eﬃciency of the spin-polarizing pro-
cess we measure the transfer from the MOT to the MT.

FIG. 3: The transition frequencies from the 32S1/2(Fg = 2)
ground state to the 32P3/2(Fe = 0, 1, 2, 3) excited states as
a function of the magnetic ﬁeld for σ−(a), π(b), and σ+(c)
light. To the right side of the ﬁgure the magnetic quantum
numbers Mg →Me of the transition are given. The detuning
is given with respect to the 32S1/2(Fg = 2) to 32P3/2(Fe = 0)
transition. The dashed line indicates the used laser frequency.
Number 2 gives the combination of magnetic ﬁeld and laser
frequency we use for the depumping during spin-polarizing.

ground state and σe of the excited state [11]. To simplify
the treatment we choose the quantization axis along the
propagation direction of the pump laser, in which case
only the diagonal elements of the density matrix play a

This is done by loading the atoms in the dark-spot MOT
for 6 seconds. After the loading the MOT laser beams
and the MOT magnetic ﬁeld are turned oﬀ and sub-
sequently the sample is spin-polarized by switching on
the magnetic ﬁeld, the spin-polarizing laser beam and
the MOT laser beams (for depumping) for a certain pe-
riod τ . After switching the magnetic ﬁeld and the spin-
polarizing beams oﬀ, we apply an extra depump period
(τdepump) to make sure all the atoms end up in the Fg = 1
ground state. After 6 seconds of trapping the atoms in
the MT, the MT is turned oﬀ and subsequently ﬂuo-
rescence imaging is applied, as described in section 2.
The transfer eﬃciency is determined by taking the ra-
tio between the ﬂuorescence images of the MOT and the
MT. The eﬃciency depends on the polarization and the
pulse length (τ ) of the spin-polarizing beam, the extra re-
pump time (τdepump), the magnetic ﬁeld, the frequency
of the spin-polarizing beam (ω) and the frequency of the
depump beam (ωdepump). All data is taken, unless oth-
erwise stated, with a polarization beam intensity of 5
mW/cm2, a repump beam intensity of 20 mW/cm2, τ =
1 ms, τrepump = 1 ms and a magnetic ﬁeld of 100 G.

In Fig. 4 the eﬃciency of the transfer is shown as a
function of the polarization of the spin-polarizing beam.
The maximum measured transfer fraction is 0.75, which

FIG. 4: The transfer eﬃciency from the MOT to the MT
as a function of the angle between the linear polarization of
the laser beam and the slow axis of a quarter wave plate.
Here 0, 45 and 90 degrees correspond with σ−, π and σ+,
respectively. The dots are the measurements and the solid
line is the simulation.

implies an increase with a factor of 2.7, compared to 0.28
without spin-polarizing. That the fraction of 0.28 is lower
than 1/3 is due to imperfections in the geometrical over-
lap between the two traps. In day to day measurements
we obtain an increase with a factor of 2. Furthermore, we
can see that the simulation agrees with the measurements
satisfactory and we will use the results of the simulation
to explain other data.

The used pulse length of 1 ms is long compared to the

5

natural lifetime of sodium of 16 ns. In 1 ms an atom can
scatter on resonance more than 6 · 104 photons, which
is much more than the number of photons it takes to
spin-polarize the atom, which is of the order of 10. We
have measured the transfer eﬃciency of the atoms from
the MOT to the MT as a function of the pulse length
(Fig. 5). We observe an increase of the transfer eﬃ-

FIG. 5: The transfer eﬃciency of atoms from the MOT to the
MT as a function of the pulse length of the spin-polarizing
pulse.

ciency until a pulse duration of 1 ms and a decrease of
the transfer towards longer pulses. To understand this
behavior qualitatively we have to take the decrease of
the scatter rate by a factor of 500 due to the detuning
of the depump transitions and a decrease by a factor of
15 due to the detuning of the spin-polarization transition
into account. We ﬁnd that on average only 8.4 photons
per atom are scattered during the pumping process. It
becomes problematic that the Fg = 1, Mg = −1 state is
not completely dark. Although we set the frequency such
that the Fg = 1, Mg = −1 to Fe = 3, Mg = −2 transition
is oﬀ resonance, the scatter rate is still more than 8000
s−1. Those emitted photons will be reabsorped by the
optically thick sample and can cause a depolarisation of
the sample. Our simulation fails to predict this, because
we do not take the reabsorption into account. Why at
longer pulse durations (>1 ms) the transfer fraction de-
creases is not clear to us, but we have not investigated
this in more detail.

In Fig. 6 the results of the measurement are shown, in
which the transfer of the atoms is determined as function
of the magnetic ﬁeld. These results show that the transfer
is large and nearly constant at magnetic ﬁelds in excess of
40 G. Therefore the process is insensitive for ﬂuctuations
in the ﬁeld strength in this range. The minima at 10
G and 35 G can be understood by looking at Fig. 2a.
The dotted line (the used laser frequency) crosses the
F = 1, Mg = −1 to F = 2, Mg = −2 transition at 10 G
and the F = 1, Mg = −1 to F = 3, Mg = −2 transition
at 35 G. At these magnetic ﬁelds the atoms in the F =

6

FIG. 6: The transfer eﬃciency of atoms from the MOT to
the MT as a function of the magnetic ﬁeld applied during
spin-polarization.

FIG. 7: The transfer eﬃciency of atoms from the MOT to the
MT as a function of the spin-polarization frequency.

tons by the optically thick sample is studied by measur-
ing the transfer eﬃciency as a function of the number of
atoms in the MOT. In Fig. 8 we see a small increase
in the transfer eﬃciency when the number of particles
is decreased. As the density scales with the number of
particles [7], spin-polarizing works only slightly less when
the optical density is increased by more than one order
of magnitude. This shows that reabsorption is strongly
suppressed in our experiment by using a high magnetic
ﬁeld. This agrees qualitatively with the theoretical work
of Tupa and Anderson [12], where they study the eﬀect of
radiation trapping on the polarization of a cloud of ther-
mal atoms. However, their results can not be applied to
our work, since in their case the reabsorption takes place
in a Doppler-broadened sample.

1, Mg = −1 state scatter more than 104 photons in 1 ms,
which results in complete depolarization of the sample.
At ﬁelds below 5 Gauss, which are in generally used
for spin-polarization, the measurements show a small
transfer eﬃciency. This is due to the large detuning of
the depump frequency (30 MHz), causing most of the
atoms to end up in the Fg = 2 state. This can be
circumvented by using an extra depump laser beam at
the resonance frequency instead of using the MOT laser
beams. However, even with an extra depump beam the
spin-polarizing at ﬁelds below 5 Gauss is problematic ac-
cording to our simulation because the detuning of the
Fg = 1, Mg = −1 → Fe = 2, Me = −2 transition is too
small to suppress this transition signiﬁcantly. Further-
more, since the sample is optically thick the absorption
of the spontaneously emitted photons leads to depolar-
ization of the sample [6].

The results of the measurement of the frequency de-
pendence of the spin-polarization are shown in Fig. 7.
This measurement is done at a magnetic ﬁeld strength
of 60 G instead of 100 G. The results can be explained
using Fig. 2. When we increase the detuning at a con-
stant magnetic ﬁeld of 60 G, the essential transitions
Fg = 1, Mg = 0 → Fe = 2, Me = −1 and Fg = 1Mg = 1
→ Fe = 2, Me = 0 are reached at 1800 MHz. Both
the measurements and the simulation show indeed an in-
creases at 1800 MHz.

The dependence on the depump time has also been
measured. It turns out that a τdepump of 1 ms is optimal.
This long period (1 ms) is due to the large detuning of the
depump beam. This means that during spin-polarizing
a signiﬁcant fraction of the atoms occupies the Fg = 2
state. A frequency change of ± 10 MHz with respect
to ωdepump does not inﬂuence the transfer eﬃciency sig-
niﬁcantly, but due to the detuning the necessary pulse
length changes.

The inﬂuence of the reabsorption of the emitted pho-

Finally, we studied the eﬀect of the gain of a factor of

FIG. 8: The transfer eﬃciency of atoms from the MOT to
the MT as a function of the number of particles in the MOT.
Under normal conditions the number of atoms in the MOT
equals 1·1010.

2 in transfer eﬃciency on the evaporative cooling of the
trapped atoms in order to reach Bose Einstein conden-
sation. In Fig. 9 an image of a BEC without and with
the use of spin-polarization is shown. Since evaporative
cooling is a non-linear process this gain factor of 2 in the
number of particles at the beginning of the cooling leads
in Fig. 9 to an increase of a factor of 9 in the number of
particles in the BEC. The latter gain depends strongly on

of atoms due to three-body collisions during the evapo-
ration limits the increase in the BEC. Furthermore, the
increase in eﬃciency of the evaporation process is less, if
the initial number of particles increases. In the situation,
that without spin-polarizing the sample results in a BEC
containing 6·106 atoms, the gain becomes a factor of 3.
This results in a BEC of 1.8·107 atoms.

7

V. CONCLUSION

In this article we have described spin-polarizing of a
sample of cold sodium atoms in a high magnetic ﬁeld.
This way of spin-polarizing circumvents the problem at
low magnetic ﬁelds with the large number of optical tran-
sitions in combination with the high optical density. Fur-
thermore, this method is more robust against variations
in the applied magnetic ﬁeld as well as the used fre-
quency. We have increased the transfer eﬃciency of the
atoms from the MOT to the MT by a factor of maximum
2.7. The day to day gain is a factor of 2. This increase
leads to a gain of a factor of 3–9 in the condensate.

VI. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

FIG. 9: A three-dimensional presentation of the eﬀect of spin-
polarization after evaporative cooling using absorption imag-
ing after an expansion time of the cloud of 40 ms. The left
picture shows the optical density of a BEC produced with-
out using spin-polarization, the right picture shows the same
measurement with spin-polarization. The left condensate con-
tains 1 ·10 6 atoms. spin-polarizing the sample enhances the
number of atoms to 9 ·10 6(right picture), which implies a
gain of a factor of 9 in the condensate.

the number of particles at the start of the evaporation.
After we improved our initial conditions, we start with a
higher number of particles in the MT. In this case the loss

We acknowlegde stimulating discussions with E.D. van
Ooijen. We thank H.G.M. Heideman for helpful discus-
sions during the preparation of this manuscript.

[1] M.H. Anderson, J.R. Ensher, M.R. Matthews, C.E. Wie-

man, and E.A. Cornell, Science 269, 198 (1995)

[2] K.B. Davis, M.-O. Mewes, M.R. Andrews, N.J. van
Druten, D.S. Durfee, D.M. Kurn, and W. Ketterle, Phys.
Rev. Lett. 75, 3969 (1995)

[3] C.C. Bradley, C.A. Sackett, J.J. Tollett, and R.G. Hulet,
Phys. Rev. Lett. 75, 1687 (1995); C.C. Bradley, C.A.
Sackett, and R.G. Hulet, Phys. Rev. Lett. 78, 985 (1997)
[4] F. Pereira Dos Santos, J. Leonard, J. Wang, C.J. Bar-
relet, F. Perales, E. Rasel, C.S. Unnikrishnan, M. Leduc,
and C. Cohen-Tannoudji, Phys. Rev. Lett. 86, 3459
(2001)

[5] S.J.M. Kuppens, J.G.C. Tempelaars, V.P. Mogendorﬀ,
B.J. Claessens, H.C.W. Beijerinck, and E.J.D. Vreden-
bregt, Phys. Rev. A 65, 023410 (2002)

[6] Z. Hadzibabic, S. Gupta, C.A. Stan, C.H. Schunck, M.W.

Zwierlein, K. Dieckmann, and W. Ketterle, Phys. Rev.
Lett 91, 160401 (2003)

[7] W. Ketterle, K.B. Davis, M.A. Joﬀe, A. Martin, and D.E.

Pritchard, Phys. Rev. Lett. 70, 2253 (1993)

[8] M. Prentiss, A. Cable, J.E. Bjorkholm, S. Chu, E.L.
Raab, and D.E. Pritchard, Opt. Lett. 13, 452 (1988)
[9] T. Walker, D. Sesko, and C. Wieman, Phys. Rev. Lett.

64, 408 (1990)

[10] E.D. van Ooijen, Realization and Illumination of Bose-
condensed Sodium Atoms, Ph. D. thesis (Utrecht Univer-
sity 2005)

[11] G. Nienhuis, J. de Phys. C1, 97 (1985).
[12] D. Tupa, and L.W. Anderson, Phys. Rev. A36, 2142

(1987)

