A deﬁnitive number of atoms on demand: controlling the number of atoms in
a-few-atom magneto-optical trap

Seokchan Yoon, Youngwoon Choi, Sangbum Park, Jaisoon Kim, Jai-Hyung Lee and Kyungwon An∗
School of Physics, Seoul National University, Seoul 151-742, Korea
(Dated: July 29, 2013)
A few 85Rb atoms were trapped in a micron-size magneto-optical trap with a high quadrupole
magnetic-ﬁeld gradient and the number of atoms was precisely controlled by suppressing stochastic
loading and loss events via real-time feedback on the magnetic ﬁeld gradient. The measured occu-
pation probability of single atom was as high as 99 %. Atoms up to ﬁve were also trapped with
high occupation probabilities. The present technique could be used to make a deterministic atom
source.

6
0
0
2
 
r
p
A
 
1
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
m
o
t
a
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
7
8
0
4
0
6
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

PACS numbers: Valid PACS appear here

In recent years there has been a strong interest in trap-
ping and manipulating single neutral atoms localized spa-
tially with a small kinetic energy. In addition, a deter-
ministic atom source for single or an exactly known num-
ber of atoms is necessary for various experiments in quan-
tum optics, cold collision, precision measurements and
quantum information [1]. Several groups have demon-
strated trapping single atoms and controlling position of
atoms by means of magneto-optical trap (MOT) [2, 3, 4]
or optical dipole trap [5]. Reduction of the probability
of trapping more than one atom as a result of intra-trap
two-body collision eﬀects was also observed in a tight-
focused dipole trap superimposed on a MOT [6].

Because of the stochastic nature of loading and loss
events in MOTs, all of the above works rely on ultrahigh
vacuum for a relatively long trap lifetime and a low load-
ing rate for suppression of random multi-atom loading
events. As a result, one-atom trap events are rare, and
thus very long waiting times are needed in order to cap-
ture single atoms. Furthermore, trapping more than one
atom deterministically for an extended period of time was
not possible in those experiments. Recently, determinis-
tic production of single chromium atoms in a MOT with
a controlled feedback on loading and loss rates has been
reported [7]. In that report, a chromium atomic beam
from an evaporator was manipulated for controlling the
loading rate of the trap.

In the present work, we have realized a determinis-
tic source of rubidium atoms based on a micron-sized
MOT in a vapor cell with high occupation probabili-
ties of single or any desired number atoms, up to ﬁve
atoms, controlled by a magnetic-ﬁeld-gradient feedback
technique. In a MOT with a high magnetic ﬁeld gradient,
as the ﬁeld gradient is increased, both the capture veloc-
ity vcap and the trapping area Atr of the trap decrease,
and thus the loading rate RL, proportional to Atrv4
cap
in one-dimensional model [8], decreases rapidly, enabling
great reduction of the average number of trapped atoms.
Strong magnetic ﬁeld gradient also plays an important

roles in making a well localized atomic source since the
trap size is inversely proportional to the square root of
magnetic ﬁeld gradient. The high magnetic ﬁeld gradi-
ent is, however, not the only requirement for trapping a
well-deﬁned small number of atoms in a MOT since the
number of atoms in the trap still ﬂuctuates randomly
by stochastic loading and loss processes even under the
high magnetic-ﬁeld gradient. We have reduced the ran-
dom ﬂuctuations in the number of atoms by controlling
the loading rate with real-time feedback on the magnetic
ﬁeld gradient.

A schematic of our experiment is shown in Fig. 1. Our
MOT follows a standard MOT conﬁguration with six
cooling laser beams and a repump laser. The total power
of cooling laser beams was set to 1.2 mW with a beam size
of 3 mm in diameter and the frequency of cooling laser
was tuned to -6 MHz from the D2 transition of 85Rb. The
base pressure of a ultrahigh vacuum chamber containing
the trap was maintained in the range of 10−11 Torr. A
current-driven Rb getter dispenser was used to produce
background Rb atoms to be trapped. Two water-cooled
electromagnets in anti-Helmholtz conﬁguration were em-
ployed in order to produce a high magnetic-ﬁeld gradient
up to 600 G/cm.

The exact number of atoms in the trap was measured
from the ﬂuorescence light emitted by the MOT. The ﬂu-

∗Electronic address: kwan@phya.snu.ac.kr

FIG. 1: Schematic of the magnetic-ﬁeld gradient feedback for
a few-atom MOT.

2

FIG. 2: Typical time traces of ﬂuorescence signal from a few-
atom MOT. The magnetic-ﬁeld gradient is 210 G/cm in (a)
and 420 G/cm in (b) whereas the average number of atoms
is 1.2 in (a) and 0.18 in (b). The current applied to the Rb
dispenser was ﬁxed at 1.9 Amps during the measurements.

orescence light was collected with an objective lens with
a numerical aperture of 0.23, mounted inside the vacuum
chamber. After passing through a focusing lens and an
optical bandpass ﬁlter centered at 780 nm with a 10-nm
bandwidth, the collected ﬂuorescence was detected by
an avalanche photodiode operating in photon-counting
mode with a time bin of 100 ms. The overall photon col-
lection eﬃciency including optical losses at various stages
in our detection system was about 0.9%. Fluorescence
images of trapped atoms were also taken by a digital
charge-coupled-device camera. When the magnetic ﬁeld-
gradient is higher than 400 G/cm, the measured trap size
was 5 µm (FWHM), which is mostly determined by the
optical resolution of our imaging optics.

Figures 2 (a) and (b) show partial time traces of typical
step-wise ﬂuorescence signals from the MOT, obtained by
the avalanche photo diode for two diﬀerent loading rates
set by diﬀerent magnetic-ﬁeld gradients for the same Rb
background pressure. Such step-wise signals are charac-
teristics of a few-atom MOT with the ﬂuorescence lev-
els quantized according to the instantaneous number of
atoms in the trap. We can measure both the loading rate
RL and the one atom loss rate Γ1 with background gas
by counting the number of one-step-upward or one-step-
downward transitions in the ﬂuorescence signal since such
transitions correspond to addition or subtraction of one
atom in the trap, respectively. The loading rates mea-
sured in this way for complete time traces corresponding
to Figs. 2(a) and (b) are 1.1×10−2s−1 and 1.6×10−3s−1,
respectively. The one atom loss rate is 0.9 × 10−2s−1.

A lifetime T1 of single-atom trap is deﬁned as the aver-
age time during which a single atom remains in the trap.
Because both loading and loss events change the number
of trapped atoms, T1 = [RL + Γ1]−1. Although it is de-
sirable for a given Γ1 to increase T1 as much as possible
by decreasing RL, RL cannot be made too small since it
then takes too long to reload the empty trap. The waiting
−1
L . The
time for loading single atom T is given by T = R
measured trap lifetime and waiting time for one atom in
Fig. 2(b) were 110 s and 590 s, respectively.

FIG. 3: Feedback in action. (a) Time trace of the magnetic
ﬁeld gradient and (b) the ﬂuorescence signal from trapped
atoms. The ﬁeld gradient can be changed with a rise/fall time
τ of 100 ms. The waiting time T for one atom was about 600
ms.

For the purpose of active controlling the number of
atoms, the loading rate is controlled by changing the
magnetic-ﬁeld gradient. The sequence of ﬁeld-gradient
feedback is depicted in Fig. 3. At ﬁrst, atoms are loaded
into the trap at a low magnetic-ﬁeld gradient of 60 G/cm
with a short waiting time i.e., with a relatively high load-
ing rate. The number of atoms measured via the ﬂuores-
cence signal is used as a trigger signal for changing the
ﬁeld gradient. After a given number of atoms are loaded
in the trap, the ﬁeld gradient is rapidly increased to a
high value of 420 G/cm in order to reduce the loading
rate almost to zero. At this high ﬁeld gradient, practi-
cally no atoms can be loaded into the trap and only loss
events occur. As soon as any atom escapes from the trap
and thus the ﬂuorescence falls below a preset level corre-
sponding to the given number of atoms, the ﬁeld gradient
is rapidly decreased to a low value at which atoms can
be loaded into the trap quickly. After waiting for the
desired number of atoms to be captured in the trap, the
ﬁeld gradient is set back to the high value again in order
to shut oﬀ the loading rate. If the number of trapped
atoms are more than the preset number, the magnetic
ﬁeld is completely turned oﬀ for a short time (∼100 ms)
in order to ﬂush out all of the trapped atoms and then
turned on again for reloading atoms again.

At a ﬁxed Rb background vapor pressure with a con-
stant current of 2.1 A applied to the Rb dispenser, the
loading rate rapidly decreases to 0.001 s−1 as the ﬁeld
gradient increases to 420 G/cm, resulting in a waiting
In contrast, when the ﬁeld
time of about 17 minutes.
gradient is 60 G/cm, one atom can be loaded in a wait-
ing time of only 600 ms.

The time traces of ﬂuorescence signal when the feed-
back is employed are shown in Fig. 4 with their level his-
tograms for various preset feedback atom numbers. The
observed occupation probabilities for a single atom was
as high as 99 %. The trap lifetime for single atom was
about 99 s, limited only by the collisions with background

3

FIG. 4: Results of the magnetic ﬁeld gradient feedback. The atom number is ﬁxed to one in (a), two in (b) and three in (c).
Each histogram shows the occupation probability for the preset feedback atom number. Photon count rate corresponding to
one atom is about 17,000 cps.

gas molecules, and thus Γ1 = 1.0 × 10−2s−1. However,
the occupation probabilities (and trap lifetimes) of two
and three atoms were measured to be 86 % (29 s) and 85
% (14 s), respectively. In addition, the maximum occu-
pation probabilities achieved by the feedback for four and
ﬁve atoms were reduced to 77 % and 76 %, respectively.
These trap lifetimes are much shorter than (Γ1N )−1 with
N ≥ 2 due to light-induced intra-trap two-atom colli-
sional losses [9].
If we denote the two-atom collision
rate as Γ2, the total loss rate for N atoms is given by
Γ1N + Γ2N (N − 1)/2. From the above trap lifetimes for
N = 2, 3, we then obtain Γ2 ≃ 1.4 × 10−2s−1. The intra-
trap two-atom collision rate Γ2 depends on the intensities
and detunings of cooling and repumping lasers [10]. The
Γ2 could be minimized by an order of magnitude by sim-
ply adjusting the laser intensities.

Under the present experimental conditions, we could

control the atom number up to ﬁve atoms with high oc-
cupation probabilities. However, our ﬁeld gradient feed-
back itself is not limited to ﬁve atoms. More than ﬁve
atoms can be prepared with high eﬃciencies by enhanc-
ing the imaging accuracy at the low ﬁeld gradient and by
improving the unloading algorithm for the case of over-
loaded atoms [11].

Our trap can be used as a deterministic atom source
for many applications such as quantum information and
nanotechnology. Other applications include studying co-
herent collective eﬀects of precisely known small number
of atoms and quantitative analysis of two-body cold col-
lision dynamics in a micron size trap [12].

This work was supported by Korea Research Foun-
dation Grant (KRF-2005-070-C00058), KOSEF Grant
(NRL-2005-01371) and grant from the Ministry of Sci-
ence and Technology of Korea.

[1] M. A. Nielsen and I. L. Chuang, Quantum Computation
and Quantum Information (Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge, 2002).

[2] Z. Hu and H. J. Kimble, Opt. Lett. , 16, 1888 (1994).
[3] D. Haubrich, H. Schadwinkel, F. Strauch, B. Ueberholz,
R. Wynands, and D. Meschede, Europhys. Lett. , 34, 663
(1996).

[8] D. Haubrich, A. H¨ope, and D. Meschede, Opt. Comm. ,

102, 225 (1993).

[9] D. Sesko, T. Walker, C. Monroe, A. Gallagher, and C.

Wieman, Phys. Rev. Lett. , 63, 961 (1989).

[10] S. D. Gensemer, V. Sanches-Villicana, K. Y. N. Tan, T.
T. Grove, and P. L. Gould, Phys. Rev. A , 56, 4055
(1997).

[4] F. Ruschewitz, D. Bettermann, J. L. Peng, and W. Ert-

[11] S. Yoon, Y. Choi, S. Kang, W. Kim, J.H. Lee, and K.

mer Europhys. Lett. , 34, 651 (1996).

[5] S. Kuhr, W. Alt, D. Schrader, M. M¨uller, V. Gomer, and

D. Meschede, Science , 293, 278 (2001).

[6] N. Schlosser, G. Reymond, I. Protsenko, and P. Grangier,

Nature, 411, 1024 (2001).

[7] S. B. Hill and J. J. McClelland, Appl. Phys. Lett. , 82,

3128 (2003).

An, to be published.

[12] B. Ueberholz, S. Kuhr, D. Frese, V. Gomer, and D.
Meschede, J. Phys. B: At. Mol. Opt. Phys. 33, L135
(2000), and J. Phys. B. At. Mol. Opt. Phys. 35, 4899
(2002).

