6
0
0
2
 
r
p
A
 
4
 
 
]
h
p
-
m
o
t
a
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
0
2
0
4
0
6
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Alternating Gradient Focusing and Deceleration of Polar Molecules

Hendrick L. Bethlem1,2,∗ M.R. Tarbutt3, Jochen K¨upper1, David
Carty1†, Kirstin Wohlfart1, E.A. Hinds3, and Gerard Meijer1
1Fritz-Haber-Institut der Max-Planck-Gesellschaft,
Faradayweg 4-6, D-14195 Berlin, Germany
2Laser Centre Vrije Universiteit, De Boelelaan 1081,
NL-1081HV Amsterdam, The Netherlands
3Centre for Cold Matter, Blackett Laboratory,
Imperial College London, SW7 2BW, United Kingdom

(Dated: January 5, 2013)

Beams of polar molecules can be focused using an array of electrostatic lenses in alternating
gradient (AG) conﬁguration. They can also be accelerated or decelerated by applying an appropriate
high voltage switching sequence to the lenses. AG focusing is applicable to molecules in both low-
ﬁeld and high-ﬁeld-seeking states and is particularly well suited to the problem of decelerating heavy
molecules and those in their ground rotational state. We describe the principles of AG deceleration
and set out criteria to be followed in decelerator design, construction and operation. We calculate the
longitudinal and transverse focusing properties of a decelerator, and exemplify this by 2D-imaging
studies of a decelerated beam of metastable CO molecules.

PACS numbers: 33.80.Ps,33.55.Be,39.10.+j

I.

INTRODUCTION

During the last few years, a variety of techniques have
been demonstrated to produce samples of trapped neu-
tral molecules [1]. One of these exploits the force that a
polar molecule experiences in an inhomogeneous electric
ﬁeld to change its motion. This force attracts molecules
to regions of high or low electric ﬁeld depending on the
sign of the Stark shift. Some small polar molecules in
low-ﬁeld seeking states have been decelerated using a se-
ries of pulsed electric ﬁelds. These include CO [2], NH3
and ND3 [3], OH [4, 5], NH [6], H2CO [7] and SO2 [8]. In
the case of ND3 [3] and OH [5] packets of Stark deceler-
ated molecules have subsequently been electrostatically
trapped. We aim to extend this deceleration method to
heavy polar molecules including bio-molecules. Of par-
ticular interest are molecules such as YbF which are be-
ing used in experiments aimed at detecting time-reversal
symmetry violating interactions leading to a permanent
electric dipole moment (EDM) of the electron, which is
a sensitive probe for physics beyond the Standard Model
[9, 10]. Decelerated molecules oﬀer an increased sensi-
tivity for these experiments. Stark deceleration of bio-
molecules allows one to prepare samples of selected con-
formers for further studies.

Deceleration of heavy polar molecules is diﬃcult for
two reasons: (i) For a given velocity of the beam, the
kinetic energy of the molecules, and thus the number of
electric ﬁeld stages required to bring the molecules to
(ii) At the
a standstill, is proportional to their mass.

†Present adress: Physical and Theoretical Chemistry Laboratory,
South Parks Road, Oxford OX1 3QZ, United Kingdom
∗Electronic address: rick@fhi-berlin.mpg.de

electric ﬁeld strengths required for deceleration, all low-
lying rotational levels of heavy molecules have a negative
Stark shift. In these states the molecules are attracted to
a maximum of the electric ﬁeld, i.e. to the electrodes. In
order to guide high-ﬁeld-seeking molecules through the
decelerator dynamic focusing schemes need to be used
which, typically, have an order of magnitude smaller ac-
ceptance than the schemes used to guide low-ﬁeld-seeking
molecules. We have recently demonstrated a decelerator
for high-ﬁeld seeking molecules [11, 12] using the alter-
nating gradient principle. Those experiments showed the
feasibility of the AG deceleration technique, which we
discuss in detail here.

Our paper is organized as follows. In Sec. II we out-
line the method of alternating gradient Stark decelera-
tion, and set out some general principles that will guide
us through the rest of the paper. In Sec. III the Stark
shift of polar molecules is discussed in more detail, draw-
ing on the particular cases of metastable CO, YbF and
benzonitrile.
In Sec. IV we present three simple elec-
trode geometries that may be used to make a single lens
of the alternating gradient array and discuss the mer-
its of these geometries. In Sec. V we consider the motion
of the molecules through the decelerator, present the tra-
jectories and phase-space distributions, and calculate the
transmission of both idealised and real decelerators. In
Sec. VI we present an experimental study of the trans-
verse focusing properties of an AG decelerator, by mea-
suring the two-dimensional distributions of a decelerated
beam of metastable CO molecules. Our results are com-
pared to calculations. A summary of our main conclu-
sions and a discussion of future prospects are given in
Sec. VII.

2

ing one of these capacitors. Again, by switching the elec-
tric ﬁelds at the appropriate times the molecule will be
decelerated. A series of switched electric ﬁelds can thus
be used to decelerate a pulsed molecular beam. The ini-
tial velocity of a seeded supersonic beam of molecules is
in the range 250–2000 m/s, depending on the mass and
temperature of the carrier gas. Typically, more than 100
stages are required to decelerate these beams to zero ve-
locity. In order to have useful transmission, it is therefore
of utmost importance that the trajectories through the
decelerator are stable.

For a force ﬁeld, ~F (~r), to keep a particle in static equi-
librium around ~r = 0, two conditions must be met. The
applied force must vanish at ~r = 0, and, for small dis-
placements, the force ﬁeld should tend to restore the
particle towards ~r = 0 [53]. To achieve the latter it is
necessary that the divergence of the force be negative,
~
~F < 0 [54]. The force acting on the molecules in an
∇ ·
inhomogeneous electric ﬁeld is given by:

(1)

~F (~r) =

W (E),

~
∇

−
with W (E) being the Stark shift of a polar molecule in
. The properties
an electric ﬁeld of magnitude E =
|
of this force ﬁeld were analyzed in a seminal paper by
Auerbach, Bromberg and Wharton [13]. For molecules
that experience a linear Stark shift in the applied ﬁeld,
W =

µeﬀ E, it was shown that:

~E
|

−

~F =

~
∇ ·

µeﬀ
E3

3

2

2

(cid:18)

∂Φ
∂xk (cid:19)
∂Φ
∂xk (cid:19) (cid:18)

∂2Φ
∂xi∂xj (cid:19)
∂2Φ
∂xi∂xj (cid:19) (cid:18)

Xi,j,k=1 "(cid:18)
∂Φ
∂xi (cid:19) (cid:18)

−

(cid:18)

∂2Φ
∂xk∂xj (cid:19)(cid:21)
(2)

,

where Φ is the electrostatic potential and µeﬀ is an ef-
fective dipole moment which depends on the particular
molecular state. Using Schwartz’s inequality, it can be
seen that the sum is always positive. Therefore, for
molecules having a linear Stark shift the sign of ~
~F
is determined solely by the sign of µeﬀ [55]. Thus, for
molecules that have a negative µeﬀ (low-ﬁeld seekers),
~
0, and focusing is straightforward. For molecules
∇ ·
that have a positive µeﬀ (high-ﬁeld seekers), ~
0,
and focusing is more problematic.

∇ ·

∇ ·

~F

~F

≤

≥

The diﬃculty of focusing high-ﬁeld-seeking molecules
~F =
is analogous to the situation for ions, for which ~
q ~
~E = 0 in free space, where q is the charge of the
∇ ·
ion. Therefore, techniques routinely applied to ions can
be translated to polar molecules. Three schemes are gen-
erally employed. (i) Circular motion; In a cyclotron the
curvature of the trajectory adds a force which, in an ap-
propriately shaped magnetic or electric ﬁeld, stabilizes
the motion of the ions [14]. A similar stabilization can
be achieved for polar molecules. For example, molecules

∇ ·

FIG. 1:
(a) Layout of an alternating gradient decelerator
for polar molecules showing the ﬁrst four deceleration stages.
Each electrode pair acts both to focus and decelerate the
molecules. (b) Cross-section of a single lens formed from two
20 mm long rods with hemispherical ends, 6 mm in diameter
and spaced 2 mm apart. Potential energy along the z-axis for
metastable CO molecules in the a3Π, J=1, Ω=1, M Ω=+1
level, when the potential diﬀerence between the electrodes is
20 kV. The high-voltage switching procedure is indicated: the
voltages are turned on when the bunch of molecules reaches
the ‘HV on’ position, and are turned oﬀ once they reach the
‘HV oﬀ’ position.

II. GENERAL PRINCIPLES

A Stark decelerator consists of a series of capacitor
plates. A polar molecule that has its dipole oriented anti-
parallel to the electric ﬁeld (a low-ﬁeld seeker) will gain
potential energy when entering one of these capacitors
and will therefore be decelerated. When leaving the ﬁeld
of the capacitor it will lose potential energy and so be ac-
celerated back to its initial velocity. If we switch the ﬁeld
oﬀ before the molecule has left the capacitor, it will keep
its lower velocity. Similarly, a molecule that has its dipole
oriented parallel to the electric ﬁeld (a high-ﬁeld seeker)
will accelerate when entering, and decelerate when leav-

that have a linear Stark shift in an applied ﬁeld ﬂying at
a distance r from the axis of a capacitor formed by two
coaxial cylinders, experience a force proportional to 1/r2.
They therefore move in stable Kepler-type orbits around
the central electrode. This technique has been used to fo-
cus molecules in high-ﬁeld seeking states [15, 16, 17]. (ii)
Alternating gradient (AG) focusing; Alternating gradient
focusing of charged particles was pioneered by Courant,
Livingstone and Snyder [18, 19] and is now applied in vir-
tually all particle accelerators. An AG array consists of a
series of magnetic or electric quadrupole lenses that focus
ions in one direction while defocusing them in the other
direction. By alternating the orientation of these ﬁelds
it is possible to obtain net focusing in both directions.
As this stabilization is due to the motion of the ion it-
self, it is referred to as ‘dynamic’ stability. Application of
the technique to focus polar molecules was demonstrated
experimentally by Kakati and Lain´e [20], by G¨unther et
al. [21, 22, 23] and by Bromberg [24]. More recently,
the AG technique was used to focus metastable argon
atoms released from a magneto-optical trap [25] and ce-
sium atoms in an atomic fountain [26]. Furthermore, the
transmission of methylﬂuoride molecules through a 15 m
long AG beamline was modelled and optimized [27]. (iii)
Einzel lens; In an Einzel or uni-potential lens an ion is
subjected to an acceleration along the axial direction fol-
lowed by an equal deceleration. In the radial direction
ions are focused on entering the fringe ﬁeld and defocused
on leaving it. This results in a net (dynamic) focusing
eﬀect. The focusing is only eﬀective when the change in
kinetic energy of the ions is a substantial fraction of their
initial energy and so Einzel lenses are only useful for low
energy ion beams. A similar eﬀect is obtained for polar
molecules entering and leaving a ﬁeld region, but again
its usefulness is restricted to very low energy beams, e.g.
for loading slow molecules into a trap.

For a decelerator (or accelerator) for polar molecules
alternating gradient focusing seems the obvious choice.
Fig. 1(a) shows the general form of the experimental
setup. The AG lenses are formed from a pair of cylin-
drical electrodes to which a voltage diﬀerence is applied.
Molecules will be defocused in the plane containing the
electrodes while being focused in the orthogonal plane.
As the molecules move down the beamline the focus-
ing and defocusing directions alternate. The defocusing
lenses have a smaller eﬀect on the molecules than the
focusing lenses, not because their power is smaller (it
is not), but because the molecules tend to be close to
the axis when they are inside the defocusing lenses and
further away from the axis when they encounter the fo-
cusing lenses. Molecules in high-ﬁeld seeking states are
accelerated while entering the ﬁeld of an AG lens and are
decelerated while leaving the ﬁeld. By simply switching
the lenses on and oﬀ at the appropriate times, AG focus-
ing and deceleration of polar molecules can be achieved
simultaneously. Fig. 1(b) shows the potential energy (the
Stark shift) along the z-axis of a single lens for a represen-
tative high-ﬁeld seeking molecule. The molecules enter

3

each lens with the electric ﬁelds turned oﬀ so that their
speed is unchanged as they enter. The ﬁelds are then
suddenly turned on, and the high-ﬁeld seeking molecules
are decelerated as they leave the lens and move from a
region of high ﬁeld to one of low ﬁeld. This process is
repeated until the molecules reach the desired speed. As
indicated in the ﬁgure, the amount of deceleration can
be controlled by choosing how far up the potential hill
the bunch of molecules has climbed before the ﬁelds are
turned oﬀ (i.e. by moving the ‘HV oﬀ’ point in Fig. 1(b)).
Similarly, the eﬀective length of each lens, Leﬀ , can be
controlled by varying the amount of time that the ﬁelds
are on (i.e. by moving the ‘HV on’ point in Fig. 1(b)).

A prototype machine of this type has been used to
decelerate high-ﬁeld seeking metastable CO molecules
from 275 m/s to 260 m/s [11]. More recently, an im-
proved device decelerated ground state YbF molecules
from 287 m/s to 277 m/s, corresponding to a 7% reduc-
tion of the kinetic energy [12]. Since then, YbF and
CaF molecules have been decelerated using an array of
21 lenses at Imperial College London, while at the Fritz-
Haber-Institut in Berlin, CO and benzonitrile molecules
have been decelerated using an array of 27 lenses. These
results will be presented elsewhere.

III. THE STARK SHIFT IN POLAR
MOLECULES

~E
|

We now discuss the Stark shift in more detail for
some representative polar molecules. The Stark shift of
a molecule is a function of the electric ﬁeld magnitude
E =
. It is useful to deﬁne a dimensionless parame-
|
ter, λ, that describes the strength of the electric ﬁeld. In
the context of an idealized rigid-rotor molecule [28] with
dipole moment µ and rotational constant B (in energy
units), the appropriate dimensionless ratio is λ = µE/B.
When the electric ﬁeld is ‘weak’, λ
1, the Stark shift is
quadratic in λ and can be calculated using second order
perturbation theory. The states are best labelled by the
rotational angular momentum quantum number J, and
its projection, M , onto the ﬁeld axis. If λ is increased,
states of diﬀerent J are increasingly strongly mixed un-
til, in the strong-ﬁeld limit (λ
1), the states are called
‘pendular’ [29, 30, 31]. In that case they are labelled by
the quantum numbers vp and M , with vp = 2J
,
|
and states of the same vp but diﬀerent M are degener-
ate. In this strong-ﬁeld limit, all the low-lying states are
high-ﬁeld seekers. This limit is of most interest for our
present discussion. Within this high-ﬁeld, pendular state
model, the Stark shift, W , is given by

− |

≪

≫

M

W (vp, λ)/B =

λ + (vp + 1)(2λ)1/2,

(3)

−

showing that the Stark shift becomes asymptotically lin-
ear in the electric ﬁeld.

4

(4)

(5)

We ﬁnd it useful to deﬁne the eﬀective dipole moment,

µeﬀ , more generally as

µeﬀ (E) =

∂W
∂E

,

−

which converges with increasing electric ﬁeld to its maxi-
mum value µ, reached when the body-ﬁxed dipole mo-
ment is parallel to the external electric ﬁeld. From
Eq. (3) and (4) the eﬀective dipole moment is given, in
the strong-ﬁeld limit, by

µeﬀ = µ

1
(cid:18)

−

vp + 1
√2λ (cid:19)

.

≫

Note that the eﬀective dipole moments of states hav-
ing the same values of vp converge once the strong-ﬁeld
criterion (λ
1) is met. By contrast, the convergence of
all the µeﬀ to a single value is a much slower one, scaling
as λ−1/2 and so requiring λ1/2
1 for low values of vp.
In strong ﬁelds the eﬀective dipole moment varies little
with applied ﬁeld, and for small changes of the ﬁeld it
can be approximated as a constant. This is a very useful
approximation in the context of an alternating gradient
lens where the ﬁeld is high and does not vary greatly
across the aperture of the lens.

≫

Figure 2(a) shows the Stark splitting and the eﬀective
dipole moments for the J=1, Ω= 1 level of the a3Π ex-
cited state of CO. The electronic ground state of CO has
a small dipole moment (0.1 Debye) and rotational levels
in this state only experience a second order Stark eﬀect in
realizable ﬁelds. By contrast, the metastable a3Π state of
CO (lifetime 3.7 ms) has a dipole moment of 1.37 Debye
(1 Debye is equivalent to 0.0168 cm−1/kV/cm). Being a
Π-state, all the rotational levels are doubly degenerate.
As the separation of the nuclear motion and the elec-
tronic motion is not exact, this degeneracy is lifted and
each rotational level is split in zero electric ﬁeld into two
levels with opposite parity. For the J=1, Ω= 1 level this
Λ-doublet splitting is Λ=394 MHz. The two Λ-doublet
levels are coupled by an electric ﬁeld, leading to levels
with a mixed parity that have non-zero space-ﬁxed elec-
tric dipole moment. The Stark shift of the two Λ-doublet
levels in a small static electric ﬁeld of magnitude E is
found by diagonalizing the energy within a single rota-
tional manifold:

W (E) =

2

Λ
2

+

µE

±s(cid:18)

(cid:19)

(cid:18)

M Ω
J (J + 1)

2

Λ
2

,

∓

(cid:19)

(6)

where J denotes the total angular momentum, while Ω
and M are the projections of J onto the body ﬁxed and
space ﬁxed axes, respectively. At higher electric ﬁelds,
the Stark eﬀect includes coupling to states of the same M
but diﬀerent J. Since low-lying states have many states
of higher J above them, this coupling ultimately turns

FIG. 2: Stark shifts and eﬀective dipole moments for (a) the
J=1, Ω= 1 levels of the a3Π state of CO, (b) the lowest four
rotational levels in the ground state of YbF and (c) the lowest
eight rotational levels of benzonitrile. In (a) and (b) the basis
set includes all levels up to J=10, while in (c) all levels up to
J=30 were included.

them all into high-ﬁeld seekers. For example, the upper-
most level in Fig. 2(a) is weak-ﬁeld seeking, but at ﬁelds
400 kV/cm it becomes high-ﬁeld seeking. The ef-
above
fective dipole moments for the lowest rotational levels of
CO are shown below the Stark-curves in Fig. 2(a). Cal-
culation of the Stark shift in metastable CO is discussed
in detail by Jongma et al. [32].

∼

Figure 2(b) shows the energy and eﬀective dipole mo-
ments of YbF in the X 2Σ+ electronic ground state as
a function of the electric ﬁeld strength [33]. The states
are labelled by the rotational quantum number N and its
projection onto the electric ﬁeld axis, MN . This Stark
eﬀect is caused by the mixing of rotational levels. The
ground rotational state is high-ﬁeld seeking at all ﬁelds.
Other states, such as the N = 1, MN = 0 state are low-
ﬁeld seeking at small electric ﬁelds but become high-ﬁeld
seeking at larger ﬁeld values. For the N = 1, MN = 0
state, the turning point occurs at an electric ﬁeld of
18 kV/cm for the heavy
∼
YbF molecule. For the ﬁelds in Fig. 2(b), the high-ﬁeld
1 is satisﬁed, and one sees that the µeﬀ
condition λ
values converge for states of the same vp = 2J
, but
|
diﬀerent M . It is also evident in the ﬁgure that conver-
gence of the eﬀective dipole moments to the single value,
µ, is very slow, as discussed earlier.

5B/µ, corresponding to only

− |

≫

M

∼

In Fig. 2(c) we show the Stark eﬀect and eﬀective
dipole moments in the lowest rotational states of benzoni-
trile, calculated using experimentally determined con-
stants [34]. Benzonitrile is an asymmetric top, and there-
fore levels with the same J are mixed by the electric ﬁeld
as well as those having ∆J =
1. As a molecule of this
size has rather small rotational constants, all rotational
levels become high-ﬁeld seeking in relatively weak elec-
tric ﬁelds. The jumps between dipole moment curves in
Fig. 2(c) are caused by avoided crossings. Details on the
calculation of the Stark shifted energy levels in an asym-
metric top molecule can be found elsewhere [35].

±

Table I gives the relevant properties for Stark decel-
eration for a selection of polar molecules. These prop-
erties are the Stark shift, eﬀective dipole moment, rota-
tional constants and mass. Values are given at a ﬁeld
of 100 kV/cm and are for molecules in the electronic and
rovibronic ground state (with the exception of metastable
CO). The number of electric ﬁeld stages required to bring
molecules with a certain initial velocity to rest depends
on the ratio of their Stark shift to their mass. The focus-
ing properties of molecules ﬂying at a certain velocity de-
pend on the ratio of their eﬀective dipole moment to their
mass. One can see from the table that these molecules,
though widely diﬀerent in mass, have similar ratios of
eﬀective dipole moment to mass, and of Stark shift to
mass, and so will be focussed and decelerated similarly.
The Stark shifts and eﬀective dipole moments are gen-
erally dependent on the speciﬁc quantum state that the
molecule is in. For many experiments one would like to
decelerate molecules in a variety of quantum states simul-
taneously. This can be done when all the rotational states
have the same dependence on electric ﬁeld, as is more or

5

less the case for the polyatomic aromatic molecules with
small rotational constants listed in the table. For com-
plex molecules such as tryptophan, the decelerator oﬀers
the intriguing possibility of selecting a speciﬁc confor-
mational isomer out of the various conformers known to
co-exist in a supersonic beam [41], as the individual con-
formers have distinctly diﬀerent values of µeﬀ .

IV.

ELECTRODE GEOMETRY

A. The ﬁeld of an inﬁnitely long lens

Although the electrodes of a decelerator are in short
segments along the beam direction, the basic focusing
properties are best elucidated by ﬁrst considering the
case of long electrodes. In this section we discuss how
to design a set of electrodes that minimizes the aberra-
tions of an AG lens. In an aberration-free lens, molecules
experience a harmonic interaction potential in the trans-
verse plane. As discussed in Sec. II, the potential will fo-
cus along one direction and defocus along the other. For
molecules that experience a linear Stark shift the ideal
form for the ﬁeld strength is also harmonic; E(x, y) =
E0 + η(x2
y2). As we shall see, this ﬁeld cannot be re-
alized but it is possible to produce a ﬁeld that is a good
approximation to this ideal one. We follow a similar ap-
proach to that given in [27].

−

In a region devoid of charges the electric ﬁeld can be
Φ,
2Φ = 0. In 2D, Φ may be represented by a multi-

derived from the electrostatic potential Φ as ~E =
with
pole expansion as:

~
∇

∇

−

Φ(x, y) = Φ0

cos(nθ)

∞

n

"
n=1
X
∞

bn
n

+

an
n

r
r0 (cid:19)

n

(cid:18)
r
r0 (cid:19)

sin(nθ)

.

#

(7)

n=1
X
(x2 + y2) and θ = tan−1

(cid:18)

y
x

(cid:1)

(cid:0)

p

are the usual
Here r =
cylindrical coordinates. an and bn are dimensionless con-
stants. r0 and Φ0 are scaling factors that characterize the
size of the electrode structure and the applied voltages,
respectively. The electric ﬁeld magnitude at the centre
1 + b2
a2
is given by E0 = (Φ0/r0)
1. The n = 1 terms in
Eq. (7) represent a constant electric ﬁeld, while the n = 2
and n = 3 terms represent the familiar quadrupole and
hexapole ﬁelds that have been used extensively to focus
molecules in low-ﬁeld seeking states [42].

p

Equation (7) represents the most general form of the
electrostatic potential consistent with Laplace’s equation.
Now we choose the coeﬃcients to be suitable for mak-
ing a good lens. We require the magnitude of the elec-
tric ﬁeld to be non-zero at the origin, and symmetric
under reﬂection in the x- and y-axes. To achieve this,
we make Φ symmetric under reﬂection in the x-axis and
anti-symmetric under reﬂection in the y-axis by setting

6

Molecule

Rotational state

Stark shift
(cm−1)

Eﬀective dipole Rotational constants Mass
(cm−1/kV/cm)
(amu)

at 100 kV/cm at 100 kV/cm

CO

a 3Π1

[32]

|J = 1, M Ω = −1i

−1.25

(cid:1)
CaF [36, 37]

(cid:0)

|J = 1/2, M Ω = +1/4i

−3.43

YbF [33]

ND3 [38]

|J = 1/2, M Ω = +1/4i

−4.91

|J = 1, M K = −1i

pyridazine [39]

|JKaKc |M |i = |0000i

benzonitrile [34]

|JKaKc |M |i = |0000i

|JKaKc |M |i = |0000i

tryptophan [40] I
II
III
IV
V
VI

−1.27

−5.59

−6.71

−6.25
−4.72
−1.71
−11.68
−12.28
−11.37

(cm−1)
A / B / C

- / 1.68 / -

- / 0.34 / -

- / 0.24 / -

- / 5.14 / 3.12

0.21 / 0.20 / 0.10

0.19 / 0.051 / 0.040

0.041 / 0.013 / 0.012
0.039 / 0.014 / 0.012
0.033 / 0.017 / 0.013
0.032 / 0.016 / 0.013
0.043 / 0.011 / 0.0096
0.045 / 0.011 / 0.0095

28

59

193

20

80

103

216

0.0135

0.0420

0.0569

0.0134

0.0624

0.0711

0.0646
0.0494
0.0183
0.120
0.126
0.116

TABLE I: A selection of polar molecules with their relevant properties for AG focusing and deceleration.

all bn = 0 and retaining only the terms of odd n. Antic-
ipating the result that high-order terms only introduce
undesirable non-linearities into the force we choose to re-
tain only a1, a3 and a5. Hence:

Φ(x, y) = Φ0

a1

+ a3

x
r0

x3

3xy2

−
3r3
0

(cid:0)
10x3y2 + 5xy4

(cid:1)

.

!

(cid:1)

 
x5

(cid:0)

+a5

−

5r5
0

(8)

From this potential, we obtain the electric ﬁeld magni-

∂Φ
∂x

2

+

∂Φ
∂y

2

tude, E(x, y) =

. Throughout the re-

(cid:17)
(cid:16)
gion r < r0 this can be expanded as a power series in a3
a1 we obtain
a3 ≪
and a5. For the case a5 ≪

(cid:1)

r
(cid:0)

E(x, y) = E0

1 +

x2

y2

a3
a1 (cid:0)
x4 + y4
r4
0

(cid:1)

 

a5
a1 (cid:0)

−
r2
0

+

.

· · · !

+

(cid:1)

(9)

2

a3
a1 (cid:19)

2

 (cid:18)

3

a5
a1 !

x2y2
r4
0

−

+

The ﬁrst two terms have the desired form and domi-
nate the expansion. The other terms produce focus-
ing aberrations.
It might appear advantageous to set
a5/a1 = (a3/a1)2/3 so as to cancel the cross term. How-
ever, the best policy is to minimize a5/a1 [27] because
the x4 + y4 term is also a damaging aberration.

To produce these ﬁelds we need to choose electrodes
whose surfaces map onto the equipotentials. We are free
to choose a3/a1 either positive or negative and will dis-
cuss both cases in turn. For example, Fig. 3(a) shows

FIG. 3: Electrostatic equipotentials of equation (8) for the
cases (a) a3/a1 = +1/7, a5 = 0 and (b) a3/a1 =
1/7,
a5 = 0. Red and blue colourings correspond to positive and
negative potentials respectively. The white lines show elec-
trode surfaces designed to follow these contours.

−

equipotentials for a3/a1 = +1/7 and a5 = 0. The choice
a1 while re-
of a3 is constrained by the condition a3 ≪
maining large enough to provide signiﬁcant focusing. The
solid white lines show electrodes, chosen to be circular
for ease of construction, that match the equipotentials
closely. They have radii of R = 3r0 and are centred at
4r0, leaving a gap of 2r0. Because these elec-
x =
trodes do not match the equipotential exactly, higher
order terms appear in the ﬁeld. From a ﬁt to the nu-
merically calculated electrostatic potential we ﬁnd for
this geometry a3/a1 = 0.143 and a5/a3 = 0.143. It is
noted that this two-rod ﬁeld can be solved analytically
and that a3/a1 = (r0/R) / (2 + r0/R) and a5/a3 = a3/a1,
in agreement with our ﬁt.

±

The two charged rods are schematically depicted in

7

Fig. 4(a), while Fig. 4(b) shows the magnitude of the
electric ﬁeld they produce as a function of distance along
the x-axis (solid line) and y-axis (dashed line). A high-
ﬁeld seeker will be defocussed along x and focussed along
y. Fig. 4(c) shows the corresponding forces exerted on
CO molecules in the high ﬁeld seeking component of the
a3Π, J=1, Ω=1 level. The dashed line is the restoring
force generated by a displacement along y, and is seen to
be roughly linear. The solid line indicates the defocusing
force along x. The sign of this force has been reversed
so that the two can be compared directly. The two have
equal gradients near the origin. Further away from the
origin, the non-linearity due to a5 acts to strengthen the
defocusing power whereas the focusing is weakened. We
will see later that this diﬀerence reduces the acceptance
of an alternating gradient decelerator.

±

The rather large value of a5/a3 in this two-rod case can
be reduced by adding two grounded electrodes tangential
to the Φ = 0 equipotentials at y =
2.65r0. These are
shown dashed in Fig. 3(a), where for simplicity we have
given the new rods the same radius R. In this case the
coeﬃcients become a3/a1 = 0.157 and a5/a3 = 0.070. At
the expense of a slightly less ideal ﬁeld one can position
the four identical electrodes at the corners of a square.
This has the advantage that one is free to choose in which
plane the ﬁeld focuses or defocuses by simply switching
the voltages [43]. Using electrodes of radius r0 with their
centers placed on the corner of a square of side 3r0 yields
a3/a1 = 0.59 and a5/a3 = 0.056. The rather large value
of a3/a1 introduces higher order terms in the ﬁeld, even
though a5/a3 is quite small. A disadvantage of this ﬁeld
geometry is that the electric ﬁeld strength on the beam
axis is only half that on the electrodes. This makes the
conﬁguration less suited for use in a decelerator as the
energy removed per stage is proportional to the central
ﬁeld. The geometry is useful for guiding molecules, as
was recently demonstrated by Junglen et al. [44].

−

We turn now to the case of negative a3/a1 illustrated
in Fig. 3(b) where we have chosen a3/a1 =
1/7 and
a5 = 0. This is well approximated by electrodes of radius
R = 2.3r0, with a minimum gap of 2r0 as shown by the
solid white lines of Fig. 3(b). The precise ﬁeld produced
0.139 and a5/a3 =
by these electrodes has a3/a1 =
0.014. This geometry compares very favourably to the
−
cases considered in Fig. 3(a) with regard to minimizing
a5 and hence the lens aberrations. As this geometry is
symmetric, we can again reverse the focus and defocus
directions very easily by interchanging the potentials on
the top-right and bottom-left electrodes of Fig. 3(b). The
ﬁeld at the centre is 41% of the maximum, which is dis-
advantageous for a decelerator. This geometry was dis-
cussed by L¨ubbert et al.
[23] in the context of focusing
ICl molecules.

−

(a) Schematic view
FIG. 4: The case of a two-rod lens.
of the lens formed by two 6 mm diameter rods spaced 2 mm
apart with a potential diﬀerence of 20 kV. (b) The electric
ﬁeld strength versus displacement along the x-axis (solid line)
and the y-axis (dashed line). (c) Forces on a CO molecule in
the high-ﬁeld-seeking component of the a3Π, J=1, Ω=1 level.
Dashed line: focusing force, Fy(0, y). Solid line: defocusing
force Fx(x, 0). The sign of this force has been reversed for ease
of comparison. The gradient of both lines near the origin is
k=0.37 cm−1/mm2.

8

−

Due to the inhomogeneity of the electric ﬁeld along z, the
defocusing force becomes larger than the focusing force
near the exit of the lens, whereas the focusing force is
larger than the defocusing force further away from the
lens. This is illustrated in Fig. 5, that shows the three
force constants kx, ky and kz for the high-ﬁeld seeking
CO molecules as they approach the end of a lens formed
by two rods with hemispherical ends. In this ﬁgure, the
origin of z is at the point of inﬂection (∂2E/∂z2=0) and
the region of the hemispherical ends is indicated by the
grey shaded area. We begin with the left hand side of the
ﬁgure where the end-eﬀects are negligible. Here, kz = 0
ky = 0.37 cm−1/mm2 the same as
and therefore kx =
in Fig. 4. As the molecules approach the exit of the lens,
they experience a decelerating force which can be seen
in the ﬁgure as a positive kz. According to Eq. (10),
this is accompanied by a corresponding decrease in the
sum kx + ky. We see this as a strengthening of the defo-
cusing constant kx near the exit, which becomes nearly
twice as strong as the focusing constant. As we will see
in Sec. V A, this is another mechanism, in addition to
the aberrations discussed in Sec. IV A, that signiﬁcantly
reduces the transmission of an AG decelerator. A more
gradual termination of the rods, e.g. a prolate spheroid
replacing the hemisphere, reduces both the ﬁrst and sec-
ond derivatives of E with respect to z and so reduces
end-eﬀects in accordance with Eq. (11). In comparison
with the two-rod conﬁguration, the four-rod arrangement
of Fig. 3(b) is also found to have a more favourable ﬁeld
at the exit of the lens.

V. MOTION OF THE MOLECULES THROUGH
THE DECELERATOR

In this section we investigate the motion of molecules
through the decelerator and discuss criteria for optimiz-
ing the transmission. The ﬁrst part of this section deals
with transverse stability, and the second part with longi-
tudinal stability. This division is based on the assump-
tion that the transverse and longitudinal motions can be
treated independently. This is an approximation whose
validity we discuss at the end of the section.

A. Transverse motion

In describing the transverse motion, we start by assum-
ing that the molecules experience a linear force that fo-
cuses them along one direction and defocuses them along
the other. The orientation of successive lenses alternates.
The lenses have lengths L and are separated by drift re-
gions of length S where the molecules experience no force.
For molecules moving with a constant velocity, vz, along
the molecular beam axis, the equation of motion in a lens
can be written as ∂2x/∂z2
κ2x = 0, where the plus sign
±
applies in a focusing lens, and the minus sign applies in
a defocusing lens. The number of oscillations per unit

FIG. 5: The ‘force constants’ for CO (a3Π, J=1, Ω=1,
M Ω=+1) along the molecular beam axis and near the exit
of the lens shown in Fig. 1(b) and Fig. 4(a). Solid line: de-
focussing constant kx =
focussing
∂Fx/∂x. Dashed line:
constant ky =
∂Fy/∂y. Dash-dotted line: axial gradient
∂Fz/∂z. The three are linked by Eq. (10). The gray
kz =
shaded area indicates the region of the lens’s hemispherical
end.

−

−

−

B. End eﬀects

Until now we have assumed the electrodes to be in-
ﬁnitely long. We now discuss the inﬂuence of end eﬀects.
Eq. (2) gives the divergence of the force on a molecule
with linear Stark shift. If we restrict our attention to the
axis of our beamline, this equation is greatly simpliﬁed.
Consider, for example, the pair of electrodes shown in
Fig. 4. The electrostatic potential is symmetric about
the x-z-plane and the y-z-plane is one of antisymmetry
with Φ = 0 everywhere on this plane. All the electrode
geometries considered here have this property. On the
beamline, the intersection of these two planes, it follows
that all the derivatives in equation (2) are zero apart
from ∂Φ/∂x and ∂2Φ/∂z∂x. Since
∂Φ/∂x is the only
non-zero electric ﬁeld component, its magnitude is the
total electric ﬁeld strength E. Thus, on axis,

−

~F =

~
∇ ·

µeﬀ
E

2

.

∂E
∂z

(cid:18)

(cid:19)

(10)

−

∂Fx/∂x, ky =

Inside the lens ∂E/∂z = 0 and ∂Fz/∂z = 0 and it follows
that the spring constants in the two transverse directions
∂Fy/∂y are equal and opposite,
kx =
ky means
as shown in Fig. 4(c). The equality kx =
In
that the focusing and defocusing powers are equal.
= 0
= 0 and ∂Fz/∂z
the fringe ﬁeld of the lens ∂E/∂z
and we ﬁnd that

−

−

kx + ky =

µeﬀ

−

1
E

∂E
∂z

2

−

(cid:19)

∂2E
∂z2

!

 
∂
∂z

(cid:18)
1
E

(cid:18)

∂E
∂z

.

(cid:19)

= µeﬀ E

(11)

6
6
length inside a focusing lens is κ/2π and is related to
z. We also deﬁne
the force constant k by κ =
the angular oscillation frequency Ω which, for the linear
Stark eﬀect reads

k
|
p

/mv2
|

Ω =

k
|
|
m

=

µeﬀ
m

2E0a3
r2
0

.

s

r

(12)

For a molecule with initial position x(z0) and velocity
v(z0), the equation of motion can be written as

(cid:18)
The transfer matrix M (z

(cid:19)

x(z)
vx(z)

= M (z

z0)
|

x(z0)
vx(z0)

(cid:19)
(cid:18)
z0) is then given by
|

.

(13)

are expressed in seconds and 1/seconds, respectively,
rather then in meters and 1/meters as is customary in
the charged particle accelerator literature. This follows
from our use of (x, vx) as state variables, rather than
(x, vx/vz).

The Courant-Snyder parameters and the phase ad-

vance are related to one another:

α(z) =

vz
2

dβ(z)
dz

,

−

γ(z) =

1 + α2(z)
β(z)

,

Φ =

1
vz Z

z

z+lcell

1
β(z′)

dz′.

9

(17a)

(17b)

(17c)

(cid:18)

(cid:18)

cos κl
Ω sin κl

−
1 l/vz
0
1
cosh κl
Ω sinh κl

(cid:19)

1
Ω sin κl
cos κl

(cid:19)

1
Ω sinh κl
cosh κl

F :

focusing lens

O: drift space

(14)

D: defocusing lens

M (z

z0) =
|






(cid:18)
where l = z
z0. The transfer matrix is written as F in
a focusing lens, as D in a defocusing lens and as O in a
drift region.

−

(cid:19)

The transfer matrix for any interval made up of subin-
tervals is just the product of the transfer matrices of the
subintervals:

M (z2|

z0) = M (z2|

z1)M (z1|

z0).

(15)

A single repeating unit of the alternating gradient ar-
ray has the transfer matrix F (L).O(S).D(L).O(S). We
have written the lengths L and S explicitly here, but will
usually drop them. The transfer matrix for an array of
N such units is M = (F ODO)N . Alternatively, it can
be useful to introduce frequent deceleration sections into
longer lenses using a conﬁguration M = (F O)n(DO)n.
This structure with n = 3 is used in the decelerator that
we present in Sec. VI.
In order for molecules to have
stable trajectories through any such array it is neces-
sary that all the elements of the transfer matrix remain
bounded when N increases indeﬁnitely. This is the case
when

2 T r(M ) < +1 (see, for example, [45]).

1 < 1

It is useful to parameterize the transfer matrix of one

−

repetitive unit with length lcell as [19]

M (z + lcell

z) =
|

cos Φ + α sin Φ
γ sin Φ

(cid:18)

−

β sin Φ

cos Φ

α sin Φ

−

,(16)

(cid:19)

where α(z), β(z) and γ(z) are z-dependent parameters
with periodicity equal to that of the lattice and are
known as the Courant-Snyder parameters. Φ is known
as the phase-advance per cell. Note that β(z) and γ(z)

Equation (17b) ensures that the matrix has unity deter-
minant. When expressed in this form, the transfer ma-
trix acquires an extremely useful property, namely that
the matrix describing N lattice units is identical to the
matrix for a single unit, but with Φ replaced by N Φ.
Equation (17c) shows that Φ is independent of z, since
the integral is taken over one complete period of the peri-
odic function β. Note that the stability criterion becomes

1 < cos Φ < +1 and so is satisﬁed if Φ is real.
The trajectory of a molecule moving through the ideal

−

lattice is given by

x(z) =

β(z)ǫi cos(φ(z) + δi),

(18)

p

z

where ǫi and δi deﬁne the initial conditions of this partic-
ular molecule, and φ(z) is a z-dependent phase given by
0 1/β(z′) dz′. Equation (18) shows that the
φ(z) = 1/vz
motion is a product of two periodic functions, the ﬁrst of
R
wavelength lcell and the second of wavelength 2πlcell /Φ.
When Φ
2π, the ﬁrst motion has a short wavelength
and is known as the micromotion, while the second has a
much longer wavelength and is called the macromotion.
This motion is identical to that of an ion in an rf trap
[46]. From x(z) and the relationships that hold between
the Courant-Snyder parameters, it can be shown that

≪

γ(z)x2 + 2α(z)xvx + β(z)v2

x = ǫi.

(19)

This equation deﬁnes an ellipse in the phase-space
whose coordinates are x and vx. The shape of the ellipse
evolves periodically with z, but always has the same area
πǫi. A set of molecules having many diﬀerent values of
δi but the same value of ǫi will all lie on the same ellipse.
Furthermore, a distribution of molecules with all possible
values of δi and all values of ǫi in the range 0 < ǫi < ǫ,
will all lie inside the ellipse characterized by ǫ. Again, the
shape of this ellipse evolves periodically, but its area is a

p

±

constant, πǫ. The value of ǫ deﬁnes the size of the beam
in phase-space, and is called the emittance of the beam.
Equation (18) tells us that the transverse displacements
of a set of molecules lie within a beam envelope given by
β(z)ǫ. The velocity spread lies
the periodic function
within a beam envelope given by
γ(z)ǫ.

±

p

In Fig. 6(a),

some trajectories are plotted for
metastable CO molecules travelling at 315 m/s through
an alternating gradient array of type (F O)3(DO)3. The
parameters of the array are κ = 38.7 m−1, L = 2 mm
and S = 28 mm. Here, the phase-advance is π/6, and
the micromotion of wavelength lcell is superimposed on
a macromotion whose wavelength is 12 lcell. The shaded
area of the ﬁgure shows the envelope of the transmit-
ted molecular beam as it passes through the array. For
such small values of the phase-advance, there is only a
small diﬀerence between the maximum and minimum
sizes of the beam envelope. As the phase-advance in-
creases, the modulation of the beam envelope increases.
This is demonstrated in Fig. 6(b) which shows trajecto-
ries and beam envelope for the same value of κ but with L
increased to 6 mm and S decreased to 24 mm. The phase
advance is now π/2, meaning that molecules return to
their starting point after 4 lcell . Figure 6(c) shows the
phase-space distribution of the beam at four positions
within the unit cell. In graph (i), the molecules are at
the centre of the defocusing triplet. Here, the transverse
size of the beam is at its minimum. The beam is diverging
as it enters the focusing lenses (ii), and reaches its maxi-
mum size at the centre of the focusing triplet (iii). Graph
(iv) shows that the beam is converging when it enters the
defocusing lenses. The fact that the transverse size of the
beam is larger in the focusing lenses than in the defocus-
ing lenses, and that the forces are proportional to the
oﬀ-axis displacements, accounts for the stability of the
array. Since the stability relies upon the motion itself, it
is commonly referred to as ‘dynamic’ stability.

p

We now calculate the transverse acceptance of the AG
array. If we suppose that the array of lenses has a uniform
aperture d throughout its length, then the beam whose
emittance is ǫ will be transmitted without loss provided
that the envelope ﬁts inside the aperture, i.e. provided
that
β(z)ǫ < d/2 everywhere in the array. The trans-
verse acceptance is the phase-space area occupied by the
beam of largest emittance consistent with this criterion.
This area is πd2/(4βmax). From Fig. 6 we see that β is
always a maximum at the centre of a focusing lens. To
calculate the transverse acceptance of a lattice, we sim-
ply ﬁnd the value of β at this position using Eq. (16)
F (L/2). From
with M = F (L/2)
this we ﬁnd that β is a dimensionless number divided by
Ω and so the acceptance is a multiple of d2Ω. d and Ω
are the natural scaling parameters of the problem, and
trajectories are invariant when plotted in (x/d, vx/(dΩ))
space.

D(L)

O(S)

O(S)

·

·

·

·

In Fig. 7(a) and Fig. 7(b) we show the transverse accep-
tance calculated for lattices of F ODO and (F O)3(DO)3
cells, respectively. The acceptance is plotted as a func-

10

FIG. 6:
(a) Trajectories of metastable CO molecules ﬂying
with a forward speed of 315 m/s through a (F O)3(DO)3 array.
The parameters are κ=38.7 m−1, L=2 mm and S=28 mm,
corresponding to Φ = π/6. The shaded area shows the
√βǫ, for a constant aperture
beam envelope bounded by
±
of d=2 mm. (b) As (a), but with L=6 mm and S=24 mm cor-
responding to Φ = π/2.
(c) Phase-space area occupied by
the beam at four positions in the unit cell with the position
spread in mm and the velocity in m/s. (i) Centre of the defo-
cusing set, (ii) between the defocusing and focusing sets, (iii)
centre of the focusing set and (iv) between the focusing and
defocusing sets.

11

tions for the experiments where metastable CO was used
at forward speeds of 630 m/s and 315 m/s. The cross
and triangle placed on Fig. 7(b) correspond to the set-
tings used to calculate the trajectories in Fig. 6(a) and
Fig. 6(b), with small and large phase advance respec-
tively.

It is worth considering the scaling behaviour of the
transverse acceptance with aperture, d. The accep-
tance along each direction scales as d2Ω, and Ω scales
as E1/2
0 d−1 (Eq. (12)). It is natural to operate the decel-
erator at the maximum ﬁeld that can be achieved, which
is determined by the breakdown ﬁeld. If the transverse
scale of the lenses is increased, with E0 held constant by
corresponding increases in the applied voltages, the ac-
ceptance along each direction is linear in d, implying that
one should make the aperture as large as possible. There
is, however, a practical upper bound Vmax on the applied
voltages. Once this value of Vmax is reached, E0 scales
as d−1 and the acceptance in each transverse direction
is proportional to d1/2. Although the acceptance contin-
ues to increase with d, the decreasing value of E0 results
in an undesirable decrease in the energy loss per decel-
eration stage. Furthermore, increases in the acceptance
cease to be useful once the transverse emittance of the
beam is fully contained within the transverse acceptance
of the decelerator.

We have seen that transverse stability depends on
maintaining coherence between the oscillation of the
molecules and the structure of the array. This makes
the alternating gradient focussing particularly sensitive
to deviations from the ideal, such as nonlinear terms in
the force, end eﬀects, and misalignments of the lens ar-
ray. We now discuss the impact of each of these on the
transverse acceptance. Fig. 8 shows the two-dimensional
transverse acceptance of an (F O)3(DO)3 array calcu-
lated for the various lens geometries discussed in Sec. IV.
The lens-lens spacing, L + S, is ﬁxed at 30 mm, and the
operating conditions correspond, for metastable CO, to
the two straight, solid lines drawn on Fig. 7(b). Figure
8(a) is calculated for CO molecules with a forward speed
of 315 m/s, while Fig. 8(b) is for a speed of 630 m/s.
The calculation uses the known Stark shift of metastable
CO [32] and the electric ﬁelds obtained from SIMION
[47]. The trajectories of, typically, 5 105 molecules with
random initial positions and velocities are traced through
a 96-lens array by numerical integration. Line (i) shows
the acceptance obtained for a set of perfect linear lenses
with E0 = 95 kV/cm, a3/a1 = 1/7 and r0 = 1 mm. The
lens aperture, d, is taken to be 2.1 mm for reasons that
will become clear shortly. Since this line is for perfect
lenses, it sets the scale for the forthcoming cases. Line (ii)
shows the acceptance obtained when the force has a small
non-linearity, corresponding to the real ﬁeld of the four
lens geometry of Fig. 3(a), with the two high voltage elec-
10 kV and the other two grounded. Once
trodes held at
again, r0 is 1 mm and this gives E0=95 kV/cm. End-
eﬀects are not considered. The curve displays structure
that is absent in the ideal case, and the region of high

±

FIG. 7: Acceptance in one transverse direction of an inﬁnitely
long alternating gradient array, as a function of κL and κS.
The acceptance is in units of d2Ω. Also shown are some con-
tours of Φ which deﬁne the stability region. (a) A F ODO
array. (b) A (F O)3(DO)3 array. Straight solid and dashed
lines, cross, triangle and dot are all referred to in the text.

tion of the two dimensionless parameters that deﬁne the
lattice, κL and κS. The acceptance (in either transverse
direction) is given in units of d2Ω. One sees that the
highest transverse acceptance is 0.186d2Ω and is obtained
when κL
L. By contrast, a single, inﬁnitely
long focusing lens has an acceptance of (π/4)d2Ω, which
is over four times larger. The ﬁgure also shows some con-
tours of Φ, ﬁlling the region of stability bounded by the
1 contours. The cos Φ = +1 contour corre-
cos Φ =
sponds to the vertical line κL = 0.

1 and S

≪

±

∼

In the experiments discussed in Sec. VI, the physical
structure is ﬁxed at L + S = 30 mm, but the eﬀective
length of the lenses can be varied by adjusting the high-
voltage switch-on time (see Fig. 1(b)). Thus, the possible
operating conditions lie on a straight line. Two such lines
are shown in Fig. 7(b), indicating the operating condi-

12

FIG. 9: The calculated acceptance for an array of 96 ideal
lenses, as a function of the degree of misalignment (deﬁned
in the text). Random (i) and constant (ii) misalignments of
a F ODO array with κ=50 m−1, L=S=15 mm. Random (iii)
and constant (iv) misalignments of a (F O)3(DO)3 array with
κ=38.7 m−1, L=6 mm and S=24 mm.

±

linearities to be very detrimental indeed. The eﬀective
aperture is reduced to 1.6 mm. As shown by line (iv),
a further reduction in acceptance occurs when we intro-
duce the fringe-ﬁeld aberrations at the entrance and exit
of each lens. Here, the electrodes of the two-rod lens
have hemispherical ends of radius 3 mm as outlined in
Sec. IV B. The eﬀective aperture for this case is 1.3 mm.
We have also considered the four-electrode geometry of
Fig. 3(b), with the electrodes at
10 kV and r0 = 1 mm,
giving E0 = 47 kV/cm. As discussed in Sec. IV, this
geometry results in very small non-linearities, the ratio
a5/a3 being a factor of 10 smaller than in the two-rod
case. The calculated acceptance is shown by line (v) and
is divided by a factor 4 for ease of comparison. As E0,
and hence Ω is smaller in this case, the maximum accep-
tance is shifted to higher values of L. The eﬀective aper-
ture for this conﬁguration is 2.9 mm making it by far the
most eﬀective conﬁguration considered. Note that this
eﬀectiveness is due to the small value of a5/a3 and not
due to the sign of a5/a3; indeed, calculations show that if
we reverse the sign the acceptance is the same. As men-
tioned in Sec. IV, a disadvantage of this geometry is that
the ﬁeld on axis is only half that of the two-rod geome-
try, for the same maximum electric ﬁeld. A decelerator
composed of these 4-rod lenses would therefore require
twice as many deceleration stages as one composed of 2-
rod lenses. The much improved acceptance comes at the
cost of increased decelerator length.

Finally in this section, we discuss how the inevitable
misalignments of a real machine aﬀect the transverse ac-
ceptance. We consider two types of misalignment.
In
the ﬁrst type, referred to as ‘random’, the centre of each
lens is displaced horizontally and vertically from the axis
by amounts chosen at random from normal distributions
with full-width at half-maximum ∆r. In the second type,
referred to as ‘constant’, lenses that focus in the hori-

FIG. 8: The acceptance along the solid lines indicated in
Fig. 7 for (a) CO seeded in Xenon (vz=315 m/s) and (b)
CO seeded in Argon (vz=630 m/s). Lenses with four diﬀer-
ent electrode geometries have been used, as indicated in the
legend. For comparison, the transmission of perfectly linear
lenses with a minimum aperture of 2.1 mm is also shown.

acceptance is seen to be narrower. We chose the value of
d in the ideal case (curve (i)) so as to give the same maxi-
mum acceptance. This suggests the deﬁnition of an eﬀec-
tive aperture, deﬀ , 2.1 mm in this case. It is interesting to
note that this eﬀective aperture is slightly larger than the
real 2 mm gap between the two electrodes at high volt-
age. This occurs because the beam envelope is smaller in
the defocusing direction than in the focusing direction,
and the smaller gap is in the defocusing direction. The
2D transverse acceptance scales as d4
eﬀ . We next increase
the size of the non-linear contributions to the force, by
removing the two grounded electrodes of Fig. 3(a). As
discussed in Sec. IV, this approximately doubles the ra-
tio a5/a3. All other parameters are kept constant, and
end-eﬀects are not yet considered. The acceptance in this
case is given by line (iii). We ﬁnd the impact of the non-

zontal direction are perfectly aligned to one another and
deﬁne the axis, while the lenses that focus in the vertical
direction are all displaced from the axis by an amount
∆r in both transverse directions. These types of mis-
alignment tend to occur naturally in the construction of
the decelerator. For example, in our decelerators, each
electrode is mounted into one of four common bars to
which the high voltages are applied. The degree of ran-
dom misalignment is determined by the machining pre-
cision and the construction technique. Misalignment of
the four bars relative to each other results in a constant
displacement of the horizontal lenses from the vertical
lenses.

We have calculated how the transverse acceptance of
the decelerator diminishes as the degree of misalignment
increases. Sensitivity to misalignments is found to de-
pend somewhat on the values of κ, L and S. Some rep-
resentative cases are shown in Fig. 9. This ﬁgure gives
the 2D transverse acceptance for an alternating gradi-
ent array of 96 ideal lenses (linear force, no end eﬀects)
as a function of the degree of misalignment, ∆r/ra, ra
being the radius of the circular aperture deﬁned by the
lenses. Each line in the ﬁgure has been normalized to
the acceptance obtained for perfect alignment. Line (i)
gives the result in the case of random misalignments in a
F ODO array with κ=50 m−1, L=15 mm and S=15 mm.
One sees that random misalignments of ∆r
0.03ra are
suﬃcient to reduce the acceptance by 50%. Line (ii) plots
the eﬀect of a constant misalignment for the same param-
eters, showing this to be a less severe misalignment in this
case. A 50% drop in acceptance is reached when this mis-
alignment reaches ∆r
0.05ra. Lines (iii) and (iv) plot
the random and constant cases for a (F O)3(DO)3 array
with κ=38.7 m−1, L=6 mm and S=24 mm. Here, the ac-
ceptance is not so sensitive to the random misalignments,
while the sensitivity to the constant misalignment is the
same as for the F ODO case. These curves give some typ-
ical scenarios. In general, we ﬁnd that the transmission
is less sensitive to misalignments for smaller values of κL,
and that misalignments are most severe when the array
is operated close to the stability boundary at Φ = π.

∼

∼

In our decelerators with ra=1 mm, we have achieved
values of approximately 20 µm for the size of the ran-
dom misalignment by specifying tight machining toler-
ances where appropriate. An alignment jig was used to
50 µm.
reduce the constant type of misalignment below

∼

B. Longitudinal motion

In order to decelerate or accelerate the molecules, time-
varying electric ﬁelds are applied. A molecule in a high-
ﬁeld seeking state will gain kinetic energy as it enters the
ﬁeld of a lens, while it loses kinetic energy as it leaves the
lens, as shown schematically in Fig. 1(b). If the electric
ﬁeld is switched on while the molecule is inside a lens
there is no change to its kinetic energy but the molecule
will decelerate as it leaves the lens. The moment when

13

the ﬁeld is switched on determines the eﬀective length
Lef f of the lens and hence the focusing properties. The
moment when the ﬁeld is switched oﬀ determines the
deceleration properties of the lens. We switch oﬀ the
electric ﬁelds when the molecules have not yet left the
ﬁeld of a lens completely, as shown in Fig. 1(b). This
ensures that molecules at the head of the pulse lose more
kinetic energy, while those at the tail lose less. In this
way, molecules with a suitably narrow spread of longitu-
dinal position and velocity can be be conﬁned to a small
area of phase-space throughout the decelerator. This be-
haviour, known as phase stability, has been discussed ex-
tensively in the context of decelerating weak-ﬁeld seeking
molecules [48].

To analyze the longitudinal motion, we begin by Taylor
expanding the on-axis potential energy of a single decel-
eration stage (see Fig. 10) around the point of inﬂection
at z = 0:

W (z) = W (0) + W ′(0)z + W ′′′(0)z3 +

,

· · ·

(20)

3
W
∂z3

(cid:12)
(cid:12)

z=0
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)

z=0, W ′′′(0) = ∂

where W ′(0) = ∂W
and we have
∂z
used the fact that ∂2W/∂z2
|z=0 = 0. Close to z = 0 the
potential energy can be approximated using the ﬁrst two
terms only. The switching sequence is constructed such
that a hypothetical molecule, the so-called ‘synchronous
molecule’, always reaches the same position zs of the rel-
evant lens at the moment when the ﬁelds are turned oﬀ.
The change in kinetic energy of the synchronous molecule
W (zs), Wlens being the
is the same in every lens, Wlens −
Stark shift of the molecule inside the lens.

When the energy taken out per stage is small com-
pared to the total kinetic energy of the molecules [48],
i.e., when ∆v
v, one can describe this change in en-
ergy as originating from a constant force

≪

Fs =

Wlens −

W (zs)

,

(L + S)

(21)

where (L + S) is the distance that the synchronous
molecules travels between two subsequent switching
times. The diﬀerence of the force on a non-synchronous
molecule at position z and the force on the synchronous
molecule at position zs is now given by

F

Fs = −

−

W (z) + W (zs)
(L + S)

W ′
(L + S)

≈ −

(z

zs).

(22)

−

Consequently, the non-synchronous molecules oscillates
around the synchronous molecule with an angular fre-
quency given by

ωz =

W ′
m(L + S)

,

s

(23)

with m being the mass of the molecules.

14

lens, and turned oﬀ again when it is half way up the po-
tential hill. This ensures that non-synchronous molecules
oscillate around the synchronous one as before. Once the
molecules are well inside the lens, the ﬁelds are turned
on again to focus the molecules, and must be turned oﬀ
before they approach the exit to ensure that they are not
accelerated out of the lens. The ﬁrst high voltage pulse
determines the amount of deceleration whilst the second
determines the eﬀective length of the lens.

C. Coupling between the longitudinal and
transverse motion

The transverse stability depends on the longitudinal
velocity because κ is inversely proportional to vz. Sup-
pose the experimental settings at the start of the de-
celerator correspond to the point (κL, κS) indicated by
the dot in the transverse acceptance plot of Fig. 7. As
the molecules are decelerated, their position on this plot
moves away from the origin along the dashed line. Even-
tually, this point will move out of the region of stabil-
ity, and the beam will be lost. To avoid this, either Ω
or L and S must be altered along the array in sympa-
thy with the decreasing speed. A decrease in Ω could
be achieved by decreasing the curvature of the electric
ﬁeld. This could be done without altering the on-axis
ﬁeld, which governs the energy loss per stage. However,
the transverse acceptance is proportional to Ω, and un-
less the decrease in Ω is compensated by an increase in d,
this will lead to beam loss. A more satisfactory approach
is to decrease L and S so that L/vz and S/vz remain
constant. With this approach the lenses will be long at
the beginning of the decelerator and since deceleration
occurs only at the end of each lens the overall length
may then become undesirably large. That problem can
be circumvented by splitting each lens into several parts,
i.e., by replacing the F ODO array with the more general
(F O)n(DO)n array. As the velocity is decreased, n is
also decreased until, at the end of the decelerator, n = 1.
In this way the beam can be decelerated stably to a small
fraction of its initial speed.

In the longitudinal direction, molecules oscillate
around the position of the synchronous molecule, caus-
ing the eﬀective lens length experienced by a molecule
to vary according to the phase of its longitudinal oscil-
lation. This also couples the longitudinal and transverse
motions, possibly leading to parametric ampliﬁcation of
the transverse oscillation [49]. The coupling can be sup-
pressed by designing the lenses to be long compared to
the longitudinal spread of the decelerated beam.

VI.

2D IMAGING OF AN AG DECELERATED

BEAM OF CO MOLECULES

In order to demonstrate the performance of the alter-
nating gradient decelerator, we have carried out exper-

FIG. 10: The Stark shift of metastable CO (a3Π1, v′=0,
J ′=1, M Ω=1) molecules as a function of their position along
the molecular beam axis. The dotted lines indicate the posi-
tion of the synchronous molecule when the electric ﬁelds are
switched on and oﬀ for two diﬀerent settings of the decelerator
(expressed as the energy change per stage, ∆W , compared to
the maximum possible energy change, ∆Wmax ). In the lower
part of the ﬁgure some (closed) trajectories in phase-space are
shown for non-synchronous molecules, relative to the position
and velocity of the synchronous molecule.

In our experiment with metastable CO molecules,
and
longitudinal

L + S=30 mm,
in a

described
W ′(0)=0.29 cm−1/mm resulting
frequency ωz/2π=320 Hz.

Sec. VI,

in

Figure 10 shows the trajectories of a few non-
synchronous molecules, plotted in phase space relative to
the position and velocity of the synchronous molecule.
From these numerical simulations, non synchronous
molecules are found to oscillate around the synchronous
molecule with a frequency of ωz/2π=330 Hz, close to the
frequency given by Eq. (23). The thick curves in Fig. 10
show the outermost trajectories of molecules that are still
phase stably decelerated. The longitudinal acceptance is
m/s, when ∆W = 0.7∆Wmax , and three
about 50 mm
·
times larger when ∆W = 0.25∆Wmax .

Alternating gradient deceleration can also be applied
to low-ﬁeld seeking molecules.
In this case, a slightly
more complicated switching pattern must be used to
achieve both longitudinal and transverse stability. Sup-
pose we want the synchronous molecule to lose an en-
ergy 0.5 ∆Wmax per stage. The ﬁelds should be turned
on well before the synchronous molecule approaches the

15

FIG. 11: Scheme of the experimental setup. CO molecules are prepared by UV laser excitation to a high-ﬁeld seeking level
of the metastable a3Π state and pass through an array of 12 lenses arranged in the (F O)3(DO)3 conﬁguration, with the last
group of electrodes oriented vertically. The transverse distribution of high-ﬁeld seeking metastable CO molecules is recorded
20 cm after the decelerator using a micro channel plate, phosphor screen and CCD camera.

iments on CO molecules in the a3Π state. The main
reason for choosing metastable CO molecules for these
experiments is that (i) they can be prepared in a single
quantum state at a well-deﬁned position and time, and
(ii) their velocity distribution as well as their transverse
distribution can be readily recorded. A scheme of the
experimental setup is shown in Fig. 11. A pulsed beam
of CO is produced by expanding a mixture of CO with
either Xe or Ar into vacuum, using a modiﬁed solenoid
valve. When seeded in Argon the mean velocity of the
beam is vi=630 m/s, corresponding to an initial CO ki-
netic energy of Ekin = 480 cm−1. When Xenon is used
and when the valve housing is cooled to 180 K (just above
the boiling point of Xe at the pressure used) the mean
velocity of the CO molecules in the beam is reduced to
315 m/s (mixture of 20% CO in Xe) or to 275 m/s (mix-
ture of 5% CO in Xe) corresponding to initial kinetic en-
ergies of 120 cm−1 and 89 cm−1, respectively. In all cases,
the velocity spread is approximately 10%, corresponding
to a translational temperature of about 1 K.

←

The metastable CO molecules are prepared in a sin-
gle quantum state by direct laser excitation on the spin-
X 1Σ+ (v′′=0) transition, using
forbidden a3Π (v′=0)
narrow-band pulsed 206 nm (6.0 eV) radiation. In the ex-
periments reported here, the laser is tuned to excite the
lower Λ-doublet component of the J ′=1 a3Π1 level via
the R2(0) transition. By setting the polarization of the
laser perpendicular to the stray electric ﬁelds present in
the excitation region only the M Ω = 1 high-ﬁeld seeking
level is prepared.

The CO molecules pass through a 1.0 mm diame-
ter skimmer into a second, diﬀerentially pumped, vac-
uum chamber housing the 35 cm long AG decelerator.
The decelerator consists of 12 equidistant 20 mm long
lenses, separated by 10 mm long drift regions. The

lenses are arranged in four groups of three, with the
ﬁrst group of electrodes oriented horizontally and the
last group of electrodes oriented vertically. The lenses
are formed from two circular electrodes (bold white lines
of Fig. 3(a)), with r0=1 mm and R=3 mm, and have
hemispherical ends. The two opposing rods are simul-
taneously switched between 0 kV and
10 kV by two in-
dependent high voltage switches. The electric ﬁeld on
the axis is 95 kV/cm, corresponding to a Stark shift of
-1.2 cm−1 for the metastable CO molecules. The Stark
shift on the molecular beam axis is shown as a function
of z in Fig. 1(b).

±

The molecules land on a micro-channel plate (MCP)
detector placed on the beam axis. The 6 eV energy of
the excited state is suﬃcient to release Auger electrons
from the surface. These are ampliﬁed and detected on a
phosphor screen using a CCD camera (LaVision GmbH).
Thus, the 2D distribution of the metastable CO beam is
recorded. The detection eﬃciency of the MCP detector
is estimated to be about 10−3 [50]. Detection eﬃciencies
> 10% can be obtained by letting the molecules impinge
on a ﬂat gold surface kept at 500 K and redirecting the
Auger electrons towards an MCP mounted oﬀ-axis. Un-
fortunately, our attempts to build suﬃciently distortion-
free optics to image the electrons from the gold surface
onto the MCP detector failed. Therefore, the longitudi-
nal characteristics of the decelerator are recorded using
the gold plate detector, but the 2D distribution of the
decelerated CO is measured with the MCP directly inter-
cepting the beam. The initial intensity of the metastable
CO beam is monitored simultaneously by detecting the
X 1Σ+ ﬂuorescence near the entrance of the AG
a3Π
decelerator with a photomultiplier tube (PMT).

←

Figure 12 shows the measured time-of-ﬂight (TOF)
distributions for several values of the energy change per

16

when vi=630 m/s and 40 µs when vi=315 m/s) so that
only the decelerated molecules are detected. The images
104 detected molecules accumulated
are formed from
over many shots (2000 when vi=630 m/s and 104 when
vi=315 m/s). The false colour is a measure of the number
of molecules detected in each pixel. A calculated spatial
distribution is shown beside each experimental image.

∼

We discuss ﬁrst the data with vi = 630 m/s, Fig. 13(a).
The top image shows the 2D distribution obtained
when there are no voltages on the decelerator. As
expected, this measurement simply shows equally dis-
tributed molecules within the aperture formed by the
electrodes. The detected distribution has a width-to-
height ratio of about 1.3 because the last 3 electrode pairs
are oriented vertically and end 9 cm closer to the detec-
tor than the last horizontal electrode pairs. By looking
at the outline of the electrodes, one can also see that the
lens array was not perfectly aligned. Indeed, the centre
of the horizontal lens set is displaced by 250 µm from the
center of the vertical set (we have since reduced this mis-
alignment to less than 50 µm). This misalignment has
been included in the simulations.

The remaining images in Fig. 13(a) show how the pro-
ﬁle of the beam changes as the eﬀective length of the
lenses is increased. We consider the vertical direction
ﬁrst.
In this direction, the last set of lenses are defo-
cussing, and the beam is diverging when it exits the de-
celerator. One might expect this divergence to increase
with increasing lens length. However, the smaller size
of the beam inside the defocussing lenses (compare (a)
and (b) in Fig. 6) tends to compensate for the increased
power of those lenses. As a result, the vertical divergence
changes very little in our experiments and the height of
the distribution is approximately constant in all the im-
ages. In the horizontal direction, the last set of lenses
are focusing lenses, and so the beam is converging when
it exits the decelerator. In contrast to the defocussing
lenses, the size of the beam inside the focussing lenses
is ﬁxed, being determined by the lens aperture. As the
lens length increases the exiting beam converges more
strongly and so the width of the detected distribution
decreases. When the lens length is about 8 mm, a focus
is formed in the plane of the detector. Here, the settings
correspond to the dot placed on the transverse accep-
tance plot of Fig. 7(b), where the phase-advance is π/6.
The focus that is formed is rather aberrant, resembling
a cross rather than a vertical line. As we will see shortly,
the aberration is caused by non-linearities in the trans-
verse forces. When the length is increased beyond 8 mm
the focus lies in frontupstream of the detector and the
horizontal width begins to increase again. In all cases,
the experimental images agree very well indeed with the
simulations.

Turning now to the data with vi=315 m/s (Fig. 13(b)),
we see that the lower forward speed results in the focus
being formed in the plane of the detector for a smaller
value of Leﬀ . Using a thin lens approximation, the fo-
cal length is 1/κ2L. Since halving vi, doubles κ we ex-

FIG. 12: Observed time-of-ﬂight (TOF) distributions of
metastable CO molecules over the 54 cm path length through
the apparatus, for 4 diﬀerent settings of the decelerator (ex-
pressed as the energy change per stage, ∆W ). The lowest
curve shows the TOF-distribution when the electric ﬁelds are
oﬀ. The measurements (thick curves) have been given an
oﬀset for clarity. The thin curves show the results of 3D tra-
jectory calculations. The vertical dashed line indicates the
expected arrival time of a molecule ﬂying with a constant
velocity of 275 m/s.

stage, ∆W . The timing sequences were chosen so that
the decelerator would always act on a group of molecules
with initial speeds centred on vi = 275 m/s. The lowest
curve is the TOF distribution obtained with no voltages
applied to the decelerator. Molecules with a speed of
275 m/s arrive at the time indicated by the dashed line in
the ﬁgure. Using the 12 stages, the speed can be reduced
to 263 m/s, or increased to 286 m/s, depending on the
timing of the switched ﬁelds. In these experiments the de-
8 kV. The thin curves showing
celerator was operated at
the results of the trajectory calculations discussed earlier
describe the TOF distributions for the decelerated bunch
rather well. Similarly good agreement is obtained in the
simulation of the accelerated beam (not shown). The ra-
tio of the time-integrated signal with decelerator on and
oﬀ is
1.5 as also predicted by our simualtions. This ra-
tio is about 10 times larger than measured in a previous
experiment on metastable CO [11].

∼

±

Figure 13 shows

transverse distributions of

the
molecules, measured 20 cm downstream from the decel-
erator exit for a variety of eﬀective lens lengths. The
imaging detector is switched on for a short period (20 µs

17

FIG. 13: Observed and calculated 2D distributions of a decelerated beam of CO molecules with an initial speed of (a) 630 m/s
and (b) 315 m/s, for various values of the eﬀective lens length (in mm).

18

VII.

SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS

In this paper we have presented the principles of al-
ternating gradient deceleration of polar molecules along
with the criteria that govern decelerator design and op-
eration. We began by showing that heavy molecules in
low-lying rotational states seek strong ﬁeld, and so can-
not be conﬁned by static electric ﬁelds. Alternating gra-
dient focusing can be used to stabilize the trajectories of
such molecules in a Stark decelerator. We showed how
the electric ﬁelds required to achieve alternating gradi-
ent focusing can be produced using simple electrode ge-
ometries. The simplest of these, the two-rod geometry
shown in Fig. 3(a), has already been used to decelerate
metastable CO and YbF molecules [11, 12], and was used
in the imaging experiments presented here. This elec-
trode geometry gives rise to signiﬁcant non-linear terms
in the force. These can be reduced, without reducing
the on-axis ﬁeld, by the addition of a pair of grounded
electrodes. The non-linearities are further reduced when
four high voltage electrodes are arranged as in Fig. 3(b),
but at the cost of reducing the ﬁeld on the axis. The
fringe-ﬁelds of the lenses, essential for deceleration, tend
to increase the defocusing power relative to the focus-
ing power near the entrance and exit of the lens. This
detrimental eﬀect can be reduced by terminating the rods
more gradually. The four-rod geometries are also more
favourable than the two-rod geometry in this respect.

We discussed the motion of the molecules through the
decelerator in detail. When the transverse forces are
perfectly linear, the transverse motion is best described
using the formalism ﬁrst set out in the context of the
alternating gradient synchrotron [19], and outlined in
Sec. V A. The trajectories are described in terms of the
phase-advance and the envelope function. The transverse
phase-space distribution is an ellipse whose shape evolves
periodically through the lattice, but whose area is a con-
stant. Figure 6 illustrates the evolution of the beam enve-
lope and the phase-space ellipse. We calculated the trans-
verse acceptance of an array of ideal lenses as a function
of κL and κS (Fig. 7) and found the maximum accep-
tance to be 0.186d2Ω, where d is the transverse aperture
and Ω given in terms of the mass, the eﬀective dipole mo-
ment and the electric ﬁeld curvature by Eq. (12). Non-
linearities in the transverse forces, and the fringe-ﬁelds
of the lenses, severely reduce the transverse acceptance
(Fig. 8). Furthermore the degree of lens-to-lens align-
ment required to achieve a high transmission was found
to be demanding but attainable with high-precision ma-
chining.

The longitudinal motion was discussed in terms of a
simple model of phase-stability. The most signiﬁcant
coupling between transverse and longitudinal motion is
that the transverse motion depends on the forward speed.
As the speed is reduced the molecules spend more time
in each lens. A good way to handle this is to use an
(F O)n(DO)n structure with n larger at the entrance
than at the exit of the decelerator.

FIG. 14: Simulated 2D distributions 20 cm downstream from
the decelerator exit, for CO molecules with vi = 630 m/s. (a)
Linear force, (b) true force, excluding end eﬀects, and (c) true
force.

pect the focus to be formed for Leﬀ =2 mm, exactly as
observed in the data. These settings correspond to the
cross placed on Fig. 7(b), where again, the phase advance
is π/6. As Leﬀ is increased beyond 2 mm, the horizon-
tal focus lies progressively further in front of the detec-
tor and so the detected distribution grows progressively
wider. When Leﬀ > 10 mm, the trajectories become un-
stable and there is a very sudden drop in the intensity
of the simulated data. The experimental images show a
less rapid drop in intensity, CO molecules being observed
near the molecular beam axis, even when Leﬀ = 14 mm.
In addition, a diagonal cross shape is observed in the
experimental data. This we attribute to molecules so
strongly focused in the ﬁrst three lenses that they es-
cape and subsequently ﬂy outside the decelerator. Our
simulation could not follow such trajectories because the
ﬁeld used was bounded 4 mm from the beam axis and
molecules outside this area were considered lost. We sur-
mise that these molecules also give rise to the intensity
observed at the centre of the images.

By integrating the intensity of the measured distribu-
tions one obtains the acceptance as a function of the ef-
fective length of the lenses, analogous to the calculations
shown in Fig. 8. However, a frequency drift of the UV
excitation laser during the measurements compounded
by the rather low counting rates, resulted in integrated
beam ﬂuctuations of more than 50%, preventing a clear
comparison of measured and calculated acceptances.

Figure 14 reveals the origin of the aberrations present
at the focus. We repeated the calculation for the case of
vi = 630 m/s, Leﬀ = 8 mm. In (a), the calculation was
performed assuming a perfectly linear force, and we ﬁnd
the focus to be a vertical line without aberration. The
aberrations appear when we include the non-linearities
in the force (Fig. 14(b)), showing this to be the primary
factor in degrading the image quality. The addition of the
end-eﬀects degrades the image quality a little further, as
shown in (c).

We studied the focusing properties of an alternating
gradient decelerator experimentally using an array of 12
lenses, by measuring 2D images of a decelerated beam of
metastable CO molecules. Trajectory simulations of this
experiment reproduce the experimental ﬁndings. Non-
linearities in the force and eﬀects due to rounded ends of
the electrodes need to be included to obtain close agree-
ment. These experimentally veriﬁed simulations predict
a transverse acceptance of 2 (mm.m/s)2, see Fig. 8, and
a longitudinal acceptance of 50 mm.m/s, see Fig. 10.
These numbers can be compared to those that have been
presented earlier for light molecules in low-ﬁeld seeking
states.
In the Stark deceleration of ammonia, for in-
stance, a transverse acceptance of 160 (mm.m/s)2 and a
longitudinal acceptance of 10 mm.m/s has been obtained
[3]. As discussed above, the transverse acceptance is very
much smaller than for ideal lenses and we can expect
a more sophisticated lens design to yield a tenfold im-
provement. A further increase of the acceptance could be
achieved by increasing the transverse aperture, although
a corresponding increase in the applied voltages would
be needed in order to maintain the same on-axis electric
ﬁeld.

In discussing the alternating gradient decelerator, we
have also laid out the principles of a guide for high-ﬁeld-
seeking molecules. Unlike a decelerator, a guide does
not need to be divided into segments along the beamline,
and so can be free of end-eﬀects. The symmetric four
electrode geometry of Fig. 3(b) makes an ideal guide be-
cause its aberrations are small, its acceptance is high, and
the focus and defocus directions are very easily switched.
Another interesting application is to use this geometry
as an m/µeﬀ ﬁlter, the equivalent of an m/q ﬁlter for

19

∼

ions [46]. The resolution of such a ﬁlter can be increased,
at the expense of the acceptance, by tuning the focus-
defocus duty-cycle away from 50%. In one plane, the de-
focusing lenses are then longer than the focusing lenses
making the stability region narrower and so increasing
the resolution. Calculations indicate that a resolution
0.1 can be obtained at the cost
∆(m/µeﬀ )/(m/µeﬀ )
of a factor of 4 in acceptance relative to the maximum.
The decrease in velocity achieved in an AG decelerator
so far has been rather small, but since the trajectories of
the molecules through the decelerator are inherently sta-
ble, no additional losses are expected when the number
of stages is further increased. For the molecules listed in
Table I, and for many others, approximately 100 electric
ﬁeld stages are suﬃcient to bring them to rest. These
molecules could subsequently be stored in a storage ring
[51] or in an AC-trap [52].

VIII. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

We acknowledge the expert technical assistance of H.
Haak and J. Dyne. We thank B. Friedrich and J. van
Veldhoven for helpful discussions and S.Y.T. van de
Meerakker and F. Filsinger for help with performing the
calculations of the Stark eﬀect. This work was supported
by the ‘Cold Molecules’ network of the European Com-
mission and, in the UK, by EPSRC and PPARC. H.L.B
acknowledges ﬁnancial support from the Netherlands Or-
ganisation for Scientiﬁc Research (NWO) via a VENI-
grant. M.R.T and E.A.H acknowledge the support of
the Royal Society.

[1] J. Doyle, B. Friedrich, R.V. Krems, and F. Masnou-
Seeuws, Eur. Phys. J. D 31, 1 (2004), and references
therein.

[2] H.L. Bethlem, G. Berden, and G. Meijer, Phys. Rev.

Lett. 83, 1558 (1999).

[3] H.L. Bethlem, F.M.H. Crompvoets, R.T. Jongma, S.Y.T.
van de Meerakker, and G. Meijer, Phys. Rev. A 65,
053416 (2002).

[4] J.R. Bochinski, E.R. Hudson, H.J. Lewandowski, G. Mei-
jer, and J. Ye, Phys. Rev. Lett. 91, 243001 (2003).
[5] S.Y.T van de Meerakker, P.H.M. Smeets, N. Vanhaecke,
R.T. Jongma, and G. Meijer, Phys. Rev. Lett. 94, 023004
(2005).

[6] S.Y.T van de Meerakker, I. Labazan, S. Hoekstra, J.
K¨upper, and G. Meijer, arXiv:physics/0512194 (2005).
[7] E.R. Hudson, C.T. Ticknor, B.C. Sawyer, C.A. Taatjes,
H.J. Lewandowski, J.R. Bochinski, J.L. Bohn, and J. Ye,
arXiv:physics/0508120 (2005).

[8] S Jung, E. Tiemann, and C. Lisdat, submitted.
[9] J.J. Hudson, B.E. Sauer, M.R. Tarbutt and E.A. Hinds,

Phys. Rev. Lett. 89, 023003 (2002).

[10] J.J. Hudson, P.C. Condylis, H.T. Ashworth, M.R. Tar-
butt, B.E. Sauer and E.A. Hinds, in Laser Spectroscopy

17, Edited by E.A. Hinds, A. Ferguson and E. Riis, p.
219 (World Scientiﬁc, Singapore, 2005).

[11] H.L. Bethlem, A.J.A. van Roij, R.T. Jongma, and G.

Meijer, Phys. Rev. Lett. 88, 133003 (2002).

[12] M.R. Tarbutt, H.L. Bethlem, J.J. Hudson, V.L. Ryabov,
V.A. Ryzhov, B.E. Sauer, G. Meijer, and E.A. Hinds,
Phys. Rev. Lett. 92, 173002 (2004).

[13] D. Auerbach, E.E.A. Bromberg, and L. Wharton, J.

Chem. Phys. 45, 2160 (1966).

[14] J.J. Livingood, Principles of cyclic particle accelerators.

D. van Nostrand, Inc., New Jersey (1961).

[15] J.C. Helmer, F.B. Jacobus, and P.A. Sturrock, J. Appl.

Phys. 31, 458 (1960).

[16] K.-R. Chien, P.B. Foreman, K.H. Castleton, and S.G.

Kukolich, Chem. Phys. 7, 161 (1974).

[17] H.-J. Loesch and B. Scheel, Phys. Rev. Lett. 85, 2709

[18] E.D. Courant, M.S. Livingstone, and H.S. Snyder, Phys.

(2000).

Rev. 88, 1190 (1952).

[19] E.D. Courant and H.S. Snyder, Ann. Phys. 3, 1 (1958).
[20] D. Kakati and D.C. Lain´e, Phys. Lett. 24A, 676 (1967);

28A, 786 (1969); J. Phys. E 4, 269 (1971).

[21] F. G¨unther and K. Sch¨ugerl, Z. Phys. Chemie NF80, 155

[22] A. L¨ubbert, F. G¨unther, and K. Sch¨ugerl, Chem. Phys.

[41] T.R. Rizzo, Y.D. Park, L.A. Peteanu, and D.H. Levy, J.

(1972).

Lett. 35, 210 (1975).

69, 5174 (1978).

1972.

041601(R) (2000).

72, 043406 (2005).

73, 2557 (2002).

1657 (1957).

(1990).

(1991).

[23] A. L¨ubbert, G. Rotzoll, and F. G¨unther, J. Chem. Phys.

[24] E.E.A. Bromberg, Ph.D. thesis, University of Chicago

[25] H-R. Noh, K. Shimizu, and F. Shimizu Phys. Rev. A 61,

[26] J.G. Kalnins, J.M Amini, and H. Gould, Phys. Rev. A

[27] J. Kalnins, G. Lambertson, and H. Gould, Rev. Sci. Instr.

[29] H.-J. Loesch and A. Remscheid, J. Chem. Phys. 93, 4779

[30] B. Friedrich and D.R. Herschbach, Z. Phys. D 18, 153

[31] J.M. Rost, J. C. Griﬃn, B. Friedrich and D. R. Her-

schbach, Phys. Rev. Lett. 68, 1299 (1992).

[28] M. Peter and M.W.P. Strandberg, J. Chem. Phys. 26,

pore), (1999).

20

J. Am. Chem. Soc. 123, 8440 (2001).

Chem. Phys. 84, 2534 (1986).

[42] J. Reuss, in Atomic and Molecular Beam Methods, Vol.
I, ed. G. Scoles, (Oxford University Press, New York,
1988).

[43] This ﬁeld was also considered by Anderson; R.W. An-
derson, Book of abstracts of the International Conference
on ’Stereodynamics in Chemical Reactions’, Schoorl, The
Netherlands 2002.

[44] T. Junglen, T. Rieger, S.A. Rangwala, P.W.H. Pinkse
and G. Rempe, Phys. Rev. Lett. 92, 223001 (2004).
[45] S.Y. Lee, Accelerator Physics (World Scientiﬁc, Singa-

[46] W. Paul, Rev. Mod. Phys. 62, 531 (1990).
[47] D.A. Dahl, Simion 3D Version 6.0, Idaho National Engi-

neering Laboratory, Idaho Falls (USA), (1995).

[48] H.L. Bethlem, G. Berden, A.J.A. van Roij, F.M.H.
Crompvoets, and G. Meijer, Phys. Rev. Lett. 84, 5744
(2000).

[49] S.Y.T van de Meerakker, N. Vanhaecke, H.L. Bethlem,

[51] H. Nishimura, G. Lambertson, J. G. Kalnins, and H.

[52] J. van Veldhoven, H.L. Bethlem, and G. Meijer, Phys.

[53] We consider focusing in three directions here. It is pos-
sible to create ﬁelds that focus molecules in high-ﬁeld-
seeking states in the transverse direction while defocusing
them in the longitudinal direction. These ﬁelds cannot be
used for phase-stable deceleration.

[54] The condition ~

~F < 0, is necessary but not suﬃcient
for stability. For instance, the force may vary in such a
way that parametric ampliﬁcation of the amplitude of
the trajectories occurs (see, for instance, [49]).

∇ ·

[55] A similar expression can be derived for a quadratic Stark

[32] R.T. Jongma, G. von Helden, G. Berden, G. Meijer,

and G. Meijer, Phys. Rev. A 73, 023401 (2006).

Chem. Phys. Lett. 270, 304 (1997).

[50] R.T. Jongma, Th. Rasing, and G. Meijer, J. Chem. Phys.

[33] B.E. Sauer, J. Wang, and E.A. Hinds, J. Chem. Phys.

102, 1925 (1995).

[34] D.R. Borst, T.M. Korter and D.M. Pratt, Chem. Phys.

Gould, Eur. J. Phys. D 31, 359 (2004).

[35] W. Kong and J. Bulthuis, J. Phys. Chem. A 104, 1055

Rev. Lett. 94, 083001 (2005).

105, 7412 (1996).

Lett. 350, 485 (2001).

(2000).

[36] L.A. Kaledin, J.C. Bloch, M.C. McCarthy and R.W.

Field, J. Mol. Spectroscopy 197, 289 (1999).

[37] W.J. Childs, L.S. Goodman, U. Nielsen and V. Pfeufer,

J. Chem. Phys. 80, 2283 (1984).

[38] D.A. Baugh, D. Young Kim and V.A. Cho, L.C. Pipes,
J.C. Petteway and C.D. Fuglesang, Chem. Phys. Lett.
219, 207 (1994).

[39] H. Li, K.J. Franks, R.J. Hanson, and W. Kong, J. Phys.

Chem. A 102, 8084 (1998).

[40] I. Compagnon, F.C. Hagemeister, R. Antoine, D. Rayane,
M. Broyer, P. Dugourd, R.R. Hudgins and M.F. Jarrold,

shift [13].

