6-axis inertial sensor using cold-atom interferometry

B. Canuel, F. Leduc, D. Holleville, A. Gauguet, J. Fils, A. Virdis∗,
A. Clairon, N. Dimarcq, Ch. J. Bord´e, and A. Landragin†
LNE-SYRTE, CNRS UMR 8630, Observatoire de Paris,
61 avenue de l’Observatoire, 75014 Paris, France

P. Bouyer
Laboratoire Charles Fabry, CNRS UMR 8501, Centre Scientiﬁque d’Orsay, bˆat. 503, BP 147, 91403 Orsay, France
(Dated: February 20, 2014)

We have developed an atom interferometer providing a full inertial base. This device uses two
counter-propagating cold-atom clouds that are launched in strongly curved parabolic trajectories.
Three single Raman beam pairs, pulsed in time, are successively applied in three orthogonal direc-
tions leading to the measurement of the three axis of rotation and acceleration. In this purpose, we
introduce a new atom gyroscope using a butterﬂy geometry. We discuss the present sensitivity and
the possible improvements.

suring all inertial axis has not yet been achieved. This
represents a real challenge for inertial measurement such
as the possibility of monitoring gravity and the 3 com-
ponents of the earth rotation at the same position.

6
0
0
2
 
r
p
A
 
7
 
 
]
h
p
-
m
o
t
a
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
1
6
0
4
0
6
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

PACS numbers: 03.75.Dg, 39.20.+q, 06.30.Gv

Since its proof of principle in 1991 [1, 2], atom interfer-
ometry has demonstrated in particular great sensitivity
to accelerations [3, 4] and rotations [5]. Among beau-
tiful applications [6], these experiments oﬀer attractive
perspectives for application in inertial navigation, geo-
physics or tests of fundamental physics [7], where the
ability of cold-atom interferometry to give stable and ac-
curate measurements can bring a real improvement com-
pared to standard technologies, as is already the case
for atomic clocks [8]. Nowadays, best performances are
achieved by Chu-Bord´e interferometers [2, 9] using three
Raman pulses (π/2−π −π/2). The pulses couple the two
hyperﬁne ground states (|6S1/2, F = 3, mF = 0 > and
|6S1/2, F = 4, mF = 0 > in the case of Cesium atoms),
which split apart when using counter-propagating Raman
lasers [10]. The π/2 and π pulses realize respectively the
beam-splitters and mirrors of the interferometer. This
conﬁguration allows measurement of acceleration along
the direction of propagation of the Raman lasers. When
the geometrical area included in the interferometer is non
zero, it also gives access to the rotation around the axes
perpendicular to the oriented area. Up to now, atom
interferometer have only been proven to be sensitive to
a single inertial quantity (e.g. Acceleration or rotation
along one single axis), although intrinsically sensitive to
at least both acceleration and rotation. In order to get
full inertial monitoring, all six axes (3 rotations and 3 ac-
celerations) must be measured, as needed for inertial nav-
igation, geophysics measurements or some tests of funda-
mental physics [7]. In the past, this was achieved by im-
plementing multiple inertial sensors, as proposed in [7],
and the ability of using a single ”proof mass” for mea-

∗Address: SAGEM D´efense et s´ecurit´e, Groupe SAFRAN, URD11,
72-74 rue de la Tour Billy, BP 72 - 95101 Argenteuil Cedex, France
†Contact: arnaud.landragin@obspm.fr

FIG. 1: 6-axis inertial sensor principle. The atomic clouds
are launched on a parabolic trajectory, and interact with the
Raman lasers at the top. The four conﬁgurations (a)-(d) give
access to the 3 rotations and the 3 accelerations. In the Chu-
Bord´e conﬁguration, the Raman beams direction can be hor-
izontal or vertical, creating the interferometer in a horizontal
(a) or vertical (b)(c) plane. With a butterﬂy 4-pulse sequence
of horizontal beams (d), the rotation Ωx can be measured.

In this letter we describe a new setup which is sensi-
tive along six axis of inertia. The two key features of our
setup are the use of a single Raman beam pair pulsed in
time and the choice of a strongly curved parabolic trajec-
tory. This allows successive use of three conﬁgurations of
Raman lasers that interact with two counter-propagating
atomic clouds, giving access to all components of rota-
tion and acceleration. For one of theses components, we
use a new butterﬂy conﬁguration based on a four-pulse

sequence (π/2 − π − π − π/2). In addition, we introduce
an original Raman conﬁguration to reduce the systematic
eﬀect introduced by wavefront distortions.

In our experiment, about 107 Cesium atoms are
trapped from a vapour in magneto-optical traps during
125 ms, and cooled down to 3 µK. The Cesium clouds
are launched along parabolic trajectories using moving
molasses at 2.4 m.s−1, with an angle of 8 degrees with
respect to the vertical direction. Then the atoms are pre-
pared in the state |6S1/2, F = 3, mF = 0 > before enter-
ing the interferometer zone at the top of their trajectory,
where they interact with the Raman lasers. In the fol-
lowing k denotes the eﬀective wave vector of the Raman
transition, and ϕl the diﬀerence of phase between the
two lasers. The interrogation sequence is achieved with
a single pair of Raman beams covering the entire inter-
rogation zone. The beams are switched on during 20 µs
to realize the Raman pulses, which provides an easy way
to change the pulse sequence. The atomic velocity and
the Raman beam size, 30 mm diameter (1/e2), set the
maximum interrogation time to 80 ms. At the exit of the
interferometer, the transition probability depends on the
inertial forces through the phase diﬀerence accumulated
between the two arms of the interferometer [11]. Raman
transitions enable detection of the internal states of the
atoms by ﬂuorescence imaging.

We now present the description of the 6 axis inertial
sensor principle. The direction of sensitivity of the setup
is deﬁned by the direction of the Raman interrogation
laser with respect to the atomic trajectory. As illustrated
in Fig. 1, with a classical Chu-Bord´e sequence of three
pulses (π/2 − π − π/2), a sensitivity to vertical rotation
Ωz and to horizontal acceleration ay is achieved by plac-
ing the Raman lasers horizontal and perpendicular to the
atomic trajectory [5](Fig. 1(a)). The same sequence, us-
ing vertical lasers, leads to the measurement of horizon-
tal rotation Ωy and vertical acceleration az (Fig. 1(b)).
Thanks to our speciﬁc setup, we also have access to the
other components of acceleration and rotation which lie
along the horizontal direction of propagation of the atoms
(x axis). The use of cold atoms in strongly curved tra-
jectories allows to point the Raman lasers along the x
direction, oﬀering a sensitivity to acceleration ax and no
sensitivity to rotation (Fig. 1(c)). We also have an easy
access to the horizontal rotation Ωx by changing the pulse
sequence to 4 pulses: π/2 − π − π − π/2 (Fig. 1(d)). We
detail in the following the two conﬁgurations: the Chu-
Bord´e sequence of three pulses (a) and our new butterﬂy
four-pulse sequence (d).

The ﬁrst pulse sequence that we study here is a stan-
dard three pulses: (π/2 − π − π/2). In the Chu-Bord´e
interferometer, the phase shift depends on the accelera-
tion a and on the rotation rate Ω through [9]:

∆Φ = k(a − 2(Ω × v))T2.

(1)

2

The scale factor depends only on k, 2T the total inter-
rogation time and v the mean velocity in the laboratory
frame, which are well controlled. In the following k is
horizontal and along the y axis, as we see in Fig. 1(a).
The surface delimited by the two arms of the interferom-
eter is curved and the projection of the oriented area on
the two vertical planes cancels out. Therefore it gives ac-
cess to accelerations along this direction and to rotations
around the vertical axis. To discriminate between ac-
celeration and rotation, we use two counter-propagating
Cesium atomic clouds leading to an opposite velocity in
eq. 1 [12].

In our setup, we have developed a new method to re-
duce the variations of the local-wave vector k, which in-
duce perturbations that can be read as inertial phase
shifts [13]. In this method the Raman beams propagate
in the same optical system with orthogonal circular po-
larizations, pass through the atomic trajectories and are
retroreﬂected through a quarter-wave plate[14]. In this
case, the aberrations are common and compensated most
of the time: until the lasers cross the atoms. With circu-
lar polarizations, the atoms can experience two diﬀrac-
tion processes with opposite k vectors. In order to select
a single diﬀraction process, we tilt the laser beams by
6o in the horizontal plane (Fig.2), and compensate the
Doppler eﬀect by an additional frequency diﬀerence be-
tween the Raman lasers [15]. Since the two atom clouds
are counterpropagating, their Doppler detunings are op-
posite, which means that each atomic cloud is resonant
with a diﬀerent Raman pair, and this results in an op-
posite eﬀective wave-vector for the two interferometers.
Therefore, the rotation and the acceleration parts are re-
spectively obtained by the sum and the diﬀerence of the
phases measured by the two interferometers (A and B).

FIG. 2: The orthogonally polarized copropagating Raman
beams are tilted with respect to the atom trajectories. They
are retroreﬂected by a mirror through a quater waveplate so
that the atoms interact with counterpropagating beams at
frequency ω1 and ω2 + δω with ω1 − ω2 ≈ 9.2 GHz. The
detuning δω compensates for the Doppler shift so that each
of the two counterpropagating atom clouds can interact with
only one pair of beams. Interferometer areas are shown in the
case of a three-pulse Chu-Bord´e interferometer.

We show in Fig. 3 the scan of the fringes of both in-
terferometers by changing the phase ϕl between the ﬁrst
and the second Raman pulse. With our interrogation
time of 2T=60 ms, the fringe contrasts are respectively
14.4% and 10.6% for A and B. The low contrast values
can be explained by the sizes of the clouds after ballistic
expansion (3.3 mm rms radius) and by the Gaussian in-
tensity proﬁle of the laser beams. In addition, mismatch
between the trajectories A and B requires a compromise
for the diﬀraction eﬃciency that leads to a reduction of
the contrast by a factor of about two.

FIG. 3: Fringes obtained with the two interferometers A and
B, for an interrogation time of 2T=60 ms.

To reach the maximum sensitivity to inertial forces, we
operate the interferometer on the side of a fringe. To real-
ize this condition for the two interferometers together, we
align the Raman laser in the horizontal plane and com-
pensate the rotational phase with an appropriate change
of ϕl. In addition, by using two diﬀerent values of ϕl, the
interferometers can sit alternately on each side of a fringe
[8], which allows rejection of long-term drifts of the con-
trast and of the oﬀset of the fringe patterns. Fig. 4 shows
the time recordings of vertical rotation Ωz and horizon-
tal acceleration ay extracted from the half sum and half
diﬀerence of the two interferometers’ phase shifts.

FIG. 4: Acceleration and rotation signals extracted from the
half sum and half diﬀerence of the phase shifts of interferom-
eters A and B. DC oﬀset on the acceleration signal is due to
the residual contribution of gravitational acceleration. The
acceleration dispersion on the acceleration signal comes from
oscillations of the isolation platform.

3

These results were obtained using an isolation platform
(nano-K 350BM-1) to reduce the level of vibration in or-
der to reach the maximum sensitivity [16]. However, this
system introduces long term tilt ﬂuctuations which yields
some acceleration ﬂuctuations through the projection of
g on the direction of k. To limit this eﬀect, we have
developed a servo-lock of the platform tilt. The resid-
ual oscillation of this system at 0.03 Hz can be identiﬁed
on the acceleration signal. Since this oscillation com-
pletely disappears on the rotation signal, it gives a clear
validation of the discrimination concept. We estimate
the performances of our setup from the Allan standard
deviation of these measurements. The signal-to-noise ra-
tio from shot to shot (0.56 s) is 12 for the acceleration
and 39 for the rotation leading to a respective sensitiv-
ity of 4.7 × 10−6 m.s−2 and 2.2 × 10−6 rad.s−1 for one
second averaging time. For both measurements, the Al-
lan standard deviation (Fig. 5) approaches the typical
white noise behaviour for long integration times. The
sensitivity reaches 6.4 × 10−7 m.s−2 for acceleration and
1.4 × 10−7 rad.s−1 for rotation after 10 min of averaging
time.

We have performed the measurement of the Earth’s
rotation rate with our cold atom interferometer: 5.50 ±
0.05 × 10−5 rad.s−1, in which the error bar corresponds
to statistical uncertainty. This measured value for the
projection along the vertical axis was found in good
agreement with the expected value at Paris latitude
(λ = 48o50′08”): 5.49 × 10−5 rad.s−1.

FIG. 5: Allan standard deviations of acceleration (triangles)
and rotation (circles) measurements. Dashed lines corre-
sponds to the -1/2 slope expected for a white noise. The
peak near 10 s averaging time on the acceleration signal is
due to the residual oscillations of the isolation platform tilt.

We now turn to the butterﬂy conﬁguration (Fig. 1(d)),
which was ﬁrst proposed to measure the gravity gradient
[17]. It can be used to measure rotations with the same
Raman beams as in the previous conﬁguration (y axis)
but in a direction (x axis) that cannot be achieved with a
standard 3 pulses sequence. Four pulses, π/2−π−π−π/2,
are used, separated by times T/2-T-T/2 respectively.
The atomic paths cross each other leading to a twisted
interferometer. The horizontal projection of the oriented
area cancels out so that the interferometer is insensitive
to rotation around the z axis. In contrast, the vertical

projection now leads to a sensitivity to rotation around
the x axis:

∆Φ =

(k × (g + a)).ΩT3.

(2)

1
2

This sensitivity to rotation appears from a crossed
term with acceleration and is no longer dependent on
the launching velocity. This conﬁguration is not sensi-
tive to DC accelerations along the direction of the Raman
laser, but remains sensitive to ﬂuctuations of horizontal
and vertical acceleration. With our isolation platform,
the remaining ﬂuctuations are negligible compared to g,
which does not compromise the stability of the scaling
factor. The sensitivity to rotation is comparable with
that of conﬁgurations (a) and (b). With 2T=60 ms, this
conﬁguration leads to a interferometer area reduced by a
factor 4.5, but it scales with T3 and thus would present
a higher sensitivity for longer interrogation times.

The atomic fringe patterns are presented in Fig. 6 and
show contrasts of 4.9% and 4.2% for interferometer A
and B respectively. By operating the interferometer on
the fringe side, as explained before, we obtain a signal-to-
noise ratio from shot to shot of 18 limited by the residual
vibrations. The sensitivity to rotation is equal to 2.2 ×
10−5 rad.s−1 in 1 s, decreasing to 1.8×10−6 rad.s−1 after
280 s of averaging time.

FIG. 6: Fringes obtained with both interferometers A and B
in the 4-pulses butterﬂy conﬁguration for a total interrogation
time of 2T=60 ms.

To summarize, we have presented the ability to mea-
sure the 6 inertial axis with the same setup. This shows
the advantage of using cold atoms combined with a single
laser beam pulse in the time domain. A ﬁrst measure-
ment, in a Chu-Bord´e interferometer, has demonstrated a
sensitivity of 1.4×10−7 rad.s−1 to rotation and 6.4×10−7
m.s−2 to acceleration in 10 min averaging time. We have
measured the Earth’s rotation rate with an accuracy of
1%. Many improvements, such as the cold atom sources,
will allow to increase the sensitivity by a factor 50 on
rotation and 10 on acceleration [18].

In addition, we have demonstrated the butterﬂy con-
ﬁguration which uses four pulses and which is sensitive

4

to rotation around the axis parallel to the direction of
propagation of the atoms at the top of their trajectory.
This conﬁguration is especially well adapted to trajec-
tories close to those of an atomic fountain, in which a
single source of atom is launched vertically. Since the
interferometer area scales with T3, this opens the possi-
bility of a cold atom gyroscope reaching a sensitivity of
10−9 rad.s−1 in one second.

The authors would like to thank the D´el´eguation
G´en´erale pour l’Armement, the Centre National d’Etudes
Spaciales, the SAGEM, the European Union (FINAQS)
and the Ile de France region (IFRAF) for their ﬁnancial
supports, Pierre Petit and Christophe Salomon for their
contributions to the early stage of the experiment and
Robert Nyman for careful reading of the manuscript.

[1] O. Carnal and J. Mlynek, Phys. Rev. Lett. 66 2689
(1991). D. W. Keith, C. R. Ekstrom, Q. A. Turchette
and D. E. Pritchard Phys. Rev. Lett. 66 2693 (1991). F.
Riehle, Th. Kister, A. Witte, J. Helmcke and Ch. Bord´e,
Phys. Rev. Lett. 67 177 (1991). F. Shimizu, K. Shimizu
and H. Takuma, Phys. Rev. A 46 R17 (1992).

[2] M. Kasevich and S. Chu, Phys. Rev. Lett. 67 181 (1991).
[3] A. Peters, K. Y. Chung, S. Chu, Metrologia 38 25 (2001).
[4] J. M. McGuirk, G. T. Foster, J. B. Fixler, M. J. Snadden,

M. A. Kasevich, Phys.Rev. A 65 033608 (2001).

[5] T. L. Gustavson, P. Bouyer, M. A. Kasevich, Phys. Rev.

Lett. 78 2046 (1997).

[6] Atom Interferometry (ed. Paul R. Berman, London: Aca-

demic Press) (1997) and references therein.

[7] R. Bingham et al., Assessment Study Report, ESA-SCI

(2000) 10 and references therein.

[8] A. Clairon, Ph. Laurent, G. Santarelli, S. Ghezali, S. N.
Lea and M. Bahoura, IEEE Trans Instrum. Meas. IM44
128 (1995).

[9] Ch. J. Bord´e, Laser Spectroscopy X (ed. M. ducloy, E.

Giacobino, G. Camy, World Scientiﬁc) 239 (1991).
[10] M. Kasevich, D.S. Weiss, E.Riis, K. Moler, S. Kasapi and

S. Chu, Phys. Rev. Lett. 66 2297 (1991).

[11] Ch. J. Bord´e, General Relativity and Gravitation 36,475-

502 (2004).

[12] T. L. Gustavson, A. Landragin, M. A. Kasevich, Class.

Quantum Grav. 17 1-14 (2000).

[13] J. Fils, F. Leduc, P. Bouyer, D. Holleville, N. Dimarcq,
A. Clairon and A. Landragin, Eur.Phys. J. D 36,257-260
(2005).

[14] A.Landragin, P.Featonby, french patent n◦FR 02-15454.
[15] With cold atoms, the Doppler width is small enough so
that atoms can only feel the eﬀect of a single Raman pair.
[16] Without the platform, the ﬂuctuations could induce
phase shifts higher than 2π [3], which would compromises
the discrimination process.

[17] T. Gustavson, PhD. Thesis, Stanford University (2000).
[18] P. Cheinet, F. Pereira Dos Santos, T. Petelski, J. Le
Gou¨et, K. T. Therkildsen, A. Clairon, A. Landragin, sub-
mitted for publication arxiv: physics/0510261.

