6
0
0
2
 
y
a
M
 
2
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
m
o
t
a
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
1
8
1
5
0
6
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Rb∗Hen exciplexes in solid 4He

A. Hofer,∗ P. Moroshkin, D. Nettels, S. Ulzega, and A. Weis
D´epartement de Physique, Universit´e de Fribourg,
Chemin du Mus´ee 3, 1700 Fribourg, Switzerland†
(Dated: July 26, 2013)
We report the observation of emission spectra from Rb∗Hen exciplexes in solid 4He. Two diﬀerent
excitation channels were experimentally identiﬁed, viz., exciplex formation via laser excitation to the
atomic 5P3/2 and to the 5P1/2 levels. While the former channel was observed before in liquid helium,
on helium nanodroplets and in helium gas by diﬀerent groups, the latter creation mechanism occurs
only in solid helium or in gaseous helium above 10 Kelvin. The experimental results are compared
to theoretical predictions based on the extension of a model, used earlier by us for the description
of Cs∗Hen exciplexes. We also report the ﬁrst observation of ﬂuorescence from atomic rubidium in
solid helium, and discuss striking diﬀerences between the spectroscopic feature of Rb-He and Cs-He
systems.

PACS numbers: 32.30.-r, 33.20.-t, 33.20.Ea, 67.40.Yv, 67.80.-s

200

0

-200

-400

-600

-800

L
1
-
m
c
H

y
g
r
e
n
e

I.

INTRODUCTION

The formation process of alkali-Hen exciplexes, i.e.,
of bound states of an excited alkali atom with one or
more ground state helium atoms, was studied in recent
years in superﬂuid [1, 2] and in solid [3] helium. These
studies have given support to earlier proposals [4, 5],
which tentatively explained the quenching of atomic ﬂu-
orescence from light alkali atoms (Li, Na, K) in con-
densed helium by the formation of alkali-helium exci-
plexes, whose emission spectra are strongly red-shifted
with respect to the atomic resonance lines. Exciplex for-
mation was also studied on the surface of helium nan-
odroplets [6, 7, 8, 9, 10] and in cold helium gas [1, 2, 11].
Recently we have performed an experimental and theo-
retical study of the Cs∗Hen exciplex formation process in
the hcp and bcc phases of solid 4He [12]. A comparison
with the results of [1, 2] has revealed that the exciplex for-
mation mechanism in solid helium diﬀers from the one in
superﬂuid helium and in cold helium gas. We concluded
that exciplexes in solid helium result from the collective
motion of several nearby helium atoms which approach
the Rb atom simultaneously, while in liquid and gaseous
helium the binding of the helium atoms proceeds in a
time sequential way.

The motivation for the present study of the Rb-He sys-
tem arose from the question whether the collective mech-
anism is speciﬁc for Cs in solid helium, or whether it also
holds for other alkali atoms. While the light alkali atoms
(Li, Na, K) do not emit resonance ﬂuorescence when ex-
cited in condensed helium, atomic cesium ﬂuoresces both
in superﬂuid and in solid helium, when excited on the D1
transition. Rubidium represents an intermediate case, as
it was reported [13] to ﬂuoresce in liquid helium when ex-
cited on the D1 transition with a yield which is strongly

∗adrian.hofer@unifr.ch
†www.unifr.ch/physics/frap/

quenched with increasing He pressure. No ﬂuorescence
from Rb in solid helium was observed in the past, al-
though it was shown that optically detected magnetic
resonance can be used to detect light absorption on its
D1 transition [14].

ΕmaxHRbL

ΕbHCsL

ΕbHRbL

ΕminHRbL

1

2

3

4

6

7

8

9

5
n

FIG. 1: Calculated energies of Rb(A2Π1/2)Hen exciplexes
as a function of the number n of attached helium atoms.
All energies (deﬁned in Fig. 2(b)) are given with respect to
the dissociation limit, i.e., the energy of the 5P1/2 state of
free Rb . Shown here are the depths of the potential wells
ǫmin(Rb) (open circles), the barrier heights ǫmax(Rb) (open
squares) and the binding energies ǫb(Rb) (solid dots). The
binding energies ǫb(Cs) (open triangles) of Cs exciplexes from
[12] are shown for comparison.

A major diﬀerence between cesium and rubidium
exciplexes Rb/Cs(A2Π1/2)Hen becomes apparent from
Fig. 1 which shows the calculated binding energies ǫb(Rb)
(ǫb(Cs)) of the exciplexes as a function of the number n of
bound helium atoms for Rb (Cs). For Cs only exciplexes
with 5, 6 and 7 helium atoms have their energy below

the dissociation limit and are therefore stable, while for
Rb all exciplexes with n = 1 . . . 8 are stable.

For cesium the binding energy has a local minimum
for n = 2 (quasi-bound complex) and there is a poten-
tial barrier that hinders the formation of exciplexes with
more than 2 helium atoms in a sequential manner. As
evidenced by the measurements of [1] the Cs∗Hen=2 exci-
plex is therefore the largest complex that can be formed
by a sequential attachment of He atoms. Larger com-
plexes can only be formed in a collective way, which
becomes possible in pressurized solid helium [3]. The
largest stable complex will be the one with the lowest
binding energy. For Rb all the exciplexes with n = 1 . . . 8
are stable, so once the Rb∗Hen=1 exciplex is created
all larger complexes can be formed with high proba-
bility by the sequential ﬁlling of the helium ring until
the state with the lowest binding energy is reached. In
helium environments with lower densities than pressur-
ized solid helium the time intervals between successive
attachments is long enough to permit the exciplex to ﬂu-
oresce, so that ﬂuorescence from all intermediate exci-
plexes Rb∗Hen=1...6 can be observed in gaseous helium
[2]. The results presented below indicate that in solid He
the Rb(A2Π1/2)Hen formation process is so rapid that
any intermediate conﬁgurations have no time to emit ﬂu-
orescence. For Rb in solid helium one therefore expects
that only the most strongly bound Rb∗He6 exciplex is
formed.

In Sec. II we review the theoretical model for the de-
scription of exciplex spectra developed in [12] and extend
it to the Rb-He system.
In Sec. III we introduce the
experimental setup and present experimental emission
and excitation spectra of rubidium-helium exciplexes. In
Sect. IV we compare the experimental results with the
theoretical model calculations as well as other experi-
ments and discuss the diﬀerent decay channels of excited
Rb in solid helium.

II. THEORY

We brieﬂy describe the theoretical approach of our
calculation of the Rb∗Hen exciplex emission spectra for
n = 1 − 9. The model used is an extension of the cal-
culations performed earlier for cesium-helium exciplexes
[3, 12] and we shall review only the basic principles and
assumptions. We consider only the interaction of the ex-
cited Rb atom with the n helium atoms that form the
exciplex and neglect the inﬂuence of the helium bulk.
The largest perturbation comes from the close helium
atoms that form the exciplex and it is therefore a good
approximation to neglect the helium bulk. The interac-
tion between the Rb atom and one ground state helium
atom is described as a sum over semi-empirical pair po-
tentials [15]

V Rb-He
n

(r) =

V 5P (ri) ,

(1)

n

X
i=1

2

n

n

(r) + (2/3)∆L · S, (2)

where ri is the position of the i-the helium atom with
respect to the position of the Rb atom. After including
the spin-orbit interaction of the Rb valence electron and
the helium-helium interaction, V He-He
(r), modeled as the
sum over interaction potentials [16] between neighboring
helium atoms the total interaction Hamiltonian is given
by
VRb∗Hen (r) = V Rb-He

(r) + V He-He
n
where ∆ = 237.6 cm−1 is the ﬁne structure splitting
of the rubidium 5P state in the free atom. L is the
orbital angular momentum operator and S the electronic
spin operator. Next, the total
interaction operator
VRb∗Hen (r) is represented in the basis |n, L, Si and
diagonalized algebraically. Exciplexes of two diﬀerent
structures are formed as in the case of cesium-helium
exciplexes. When one or two helium atoms are bound
the electronic wavefunction has an apple shape with the
helium atoms attached in its dimples, whereas for n > 2
the electronic wavefunction has a dumbbell shape, with
the bound helium atoms distributed along a ring around
the dumbbell’s waist. The potential curves leading to
the formation of these two classes of structures are
represented in Fig. 2 using the examples of Rb∗He2
and Rb∗He6. The potential curves shown represent the
r-dependent eigenvalues of the operator VRb∗Hen (r) of
Eq. (2).
In the same ﬁgures we also show the ground
state potentials nV 5S

σ (r) + V He-He

(r).

n

As can be seen from Fig. 2(a) the energetically most
favorable formation channel for Rb∗He2 proceeds via D2
excitation; when two helium atoms approach along the
nodal line of the apple-shaped electron distribution of the
B2Π3/2 state, they are attracted into the potential min-
imum. When the system is excited on the D1 transition
the approaching helium atoms see a repulsive spherical
electronic distribution of the Rb atom at large distances
with a potential barrier of 29 cm−1. We recall that the
corresponding barrier height in cesium is 79 cm−1 [12]
due to the larger spin-orbit interaction energy in that
atom [4]. The approaching helium atoms deform the
electronic conﬁguration of the 5P state from spherical
to apple shaped.

The exciplexes with n > 2 [Fig. 2(b)] have no potential
well in the B2Π3/2 state, which is purely repulsive and
which correlates to the 5P3/2 atomic state. However,
the A2Π1/2 state possesses a potential well and a poten-
tial barrier. The barrier is associated with the transfor-
mation of the electronic wavefunction from spherical to
dumbbell-shaped when several helium atoms approach
the Rb atom. Exciplexes with n > 2 can only be formed
in the A2Π3/2 state.

The electronic distributions of the rubidium-helium
system for the diﬀerent states at various interatomic sep-
arations are illustrated by pictographs in Fig. 2. The solid
lines represent the quantization axis, which is the inter-
nuclear axis for Rb∗Hen≤2 and the symmetry axis of the
helium ring for the Rb∗Hen>2 complexes, while helium

Rb(A2Π1/2)Hen=6,7 are shown in Fig. 3.

3

FIG. 3: Calculated emission spectra of Rb(B2Π3/2)Hen=1,2
(dashed lines) and Rb(A2Π1/2)Hen=6,7 (solid lines). The dot-
ted lines indicate the positions of the resonance lines of the
free Rb atom.

III. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS

A. Experimental setup

The experimental setup is similar to the one de-
scribed in our previous publication [3]. A helium crys-
tal is grown at pressures around 30 bar in a pressure
cell immersed in superﬂuid helium at 1.5 Kelvin. The
matrix is doped with rubidium atoms by laser abla-
tion using a frequency-doubled Nd:YAG laser. The
cell has ﬁve windows for admitting the ablation beam
and the beam of the spectroscopy laser (a tunable cw
Ti:Al2O3 laser) and for collecting ﬂuorescence from the
sample volume. The ﬂuorescence is dispersed by a
grating spectrometer and recorded, depending on the
spectral range under investigation, either by a CCD
camera (9500. . .13500 cm−1) or by an InGaAs photo-
diode (5500. . .9500 cm−1). We shall refer to these
as CCD-spectrometer and InGaAs-spectrometer respec-
tively. With the InGaAs-spectrometer spectra were
recorded by a stepwise tuning of the grating, while
integral spectra could be recorded with the CCD-
spectrometer.

B. Atomic Bubbles

Defect atoms in solid helium reside in atomic bubbles,
whose size and structure can be described by the equilib-
rium between a repulsive alkali-helium interaction due to
the Pauli principle on one hand and surface tension and
pressure volume work on the other hand [5, 17, 18]. The
interaction with the helium bulk shifts the 5S1/2 →5P1/2

FIG. 2: Adiabatic potentials of the Rb∗Hen system:
(a)
Rb∗He2 , (b) Rb∗He6. The equilibrium bubble radius of the
ground state Rb atom is indicated with Rb(5S). The energies
shown in Fig. 1 as a function of the number of bound helium
atoms are visualized in (b).

atoms are drawn as ﬁlled disks with a radius of 3.5 ˚A.

In a next step we have calculated the vibrational zero-
point energies for all Rb∗Hen for n = 1 . . . 9. Details
of this calculation were discussed in [12] for the case of
cesium. Only the lowest vibrational state is considered
as higher vibrational states are not populated at the
temperature (T=1.5 K) of the experiment. The bind-
ing energies ǫb(Rb), ǫb(Cs), the well depths ǫmin(Rb)
and the barrier heights ǫmax(Rb) are shown in Fig. 1 for
Rb(A2Π1/2)Hen=1...9.

As a last step we calculate the emission spectra
I(ν) of all Rb∗Hen=1...9 exciplexes under the Franck-
Condon approximation as discussed in [12]. The theo-
retical emission spectra for Rb(B2Π3/2)Hen=1,2 and for

(D1) and 5S1/2 →5P3/2 (D2) transitions of Rb by ap-
proximately 35 nm to the blue with respect to their val-
ues (794 nm and 780 nm respectively) in the free atom.
This shift of the excitation lines as well as a smaller blue
shift of the corresponding emission lines is well described
by the bubble model [5, 19]. We have calculated the equi-
librium radius of the atomic bubble formed by the 5S1/2
ground state of the Rb atom to be Rb = 6 ˚A (Fig. 2)
following the model described in [17, 18]. For the inter-
action potential between groundstate Rb and He atoms
we have used the same semi-empirical potentials [15] as
for the exciplex model.

It is the close vicinity of the helium atoms in the ﬁrst
solvation shell, together with their large zero point oscil-
lation amplitudes, which form the basis of the eﬃcient
exciplex formation in solid helium.

C. Emission spectra following D1 excitation

Fig. 4 shows the emission spectrum recorded with the
CCD-spectrometer following excitation at the D1 wave-
length 13140 cm−1 (758 nm). The peak at 12780 cm−1
represents ﬂuorescence from the atomic 5P1/2 state.
While D1 atomic ﬂuorescence from Cs in solid helium
has been studied and used extensively in the past it was
believed that rubidium would not ﬂuoresce on the D1
transition when embedded in solid helium. This belief
was based on the reported quenching of that ﬂuorescence
at high pressures in superﬂuid helium [13]. It should be
noted that the observed Rb-D1 ﬂuorescence is orders of
magnitude weaker than the corresponding line in Cs and
could only be detected with long integration times (4 sec-
onds) of the CCD camera, which probably explains why
this spectrum was not observed in previous experiments
[14].

The apple-shaped exciplexes with one or two bound
helium atoms are expected to ﬂuoresce within the spec-
tral range of Fig. 4 and the absence of any prominent
spectral feature indicates that these complexes are not
formed upon D1 excitation. The sloped background vis-
ible in Figs. 4 and 6 is a strong wing of scattered laser
light. The inset in Fig. 4 shows a spectrum which was
recorded using a grating with a higher resolution. The
excitation laser was shifted by 65 cm−1 (still in the D1
absorption band (Fig. 7) to the blue with respect to the
spectrum of Fig. 4 to make clear that no D2 emission can
be observed after D1 excitation. The arrow in the inset
indicates the position of the D2 emission measured after
D2 exciation (peak a in Fig. 6).

When exploring the longer wavelength range with the
InGaAs-spectrometer we found a very strong ﬂuorescence
band (Fig. 5) centered at 7420 cm−1, which we assign to
Rb∗Hen>2 exciplexes in the A2Π1/2 state. This is the
ﬁrst recording of such exciplexes after D1 excitation and
the proof that the quenching of atomic D1 ﬂuorescence is
due to exciplex formation. The dashed and the solid lines
in Fig. 5 are theoretical emission spectra from Rb∗He6

4

and Rb∗He7 respectively. Figure 5(b) shows the theoret-
ical curves, shifted such as to make their blue wings coin-
cide with the experimental points. The line shape of the
experimental curve is well reproduced by the two theoret-
ical curves. The theoretical curve of the Rb∗He7 ﬁts the
experimental points better on the low energy side, while
on the high energy range both curves are in very good
agreement with the experimental spectrum. A small dis-
crepancy is visible on the low energy wing, which can be
due to imprecisions of the strongly sloped ground state
potential (Fig. 2) or to changes of the latter due to the
helium bulk. It is a remarkable fact that the ﬂuorescence
yield of this exciplex after D1 excitation in solid helium
is larger than after D2 excitation, while it was not ob-
served at all in superﬂuid helium. We will come back to
this point in Sect. III.

A similar emission at around 7200 cm−1 has been seen
in liquid helium by the Kyoto group [2] after D2 excita-
tion and was assigned to the emission by the Rb∗He6
exciplex.

FIG. 4: Measured emission spectrum (dots) recorded with
the CCD-spectrometer following D1 excitation. The dashed
vertical lines indicate the D1 and D2 lines of the free Rb atom.
The peak b’ is the ﬂuorescence from the D1 transition. The
inset shows the spectral range around the D-lines recorded
with a higher resolution grating and an excitation frequency
slightly (65 cm−1) shifted to the blue. The rise on the right
side is from scattered laser light. The arrow gives the position
at which D2 emission is detected after D2 excitation (peak a
in Fig. 6).

D. Emission spectra following D2 excitation

Fig. 6 shows the emission spectrum, measured with the
CCD-spectrometer, when the laser is tuned to the atomic
D2 transition at 13420 cm−1 (745 nm).

Four prominent spectral features can be seen in the
emission spectrum. The two rightmost peaks (labelled
a and b) represent atomic D2 and D1 ﬂuorescence re-
spectively. Together with the peak of Fig. 4 they con-

5

(Fig. 5). This suggests that the emission stems from the
same state (A2Π1/2) as the emission after D1 excitation.
The population of that state following D2 excitation is
another proof of the existence of a ﬁne structure relax-
ation mechanism. No other exciplex emission was ob-
served in the spectral range between the Rb∗Hen>2 and
the Rb∗He2 exciplexe emission (peak e’ in Fig. 5(a) and
peak d in Fig. 6 respectively).

FIG. 5: Fluorescence spectrum (dots) following D1 excitation
measured with the InGaAs-spectrometer. The emission band
stems from a Rb∗Hen>2 exciplex (e’). An identical emission
spectrum was observed after D2 excitation. (a) The dashed
line is a calculated emission spectrum from Rb∗He6 and the
solid line from Rb∗He7. (b) The two theoretical spectra are
shifted in order to match the experimental curve.

stitute the ﬁrst observation of atomic ﬂuorescence from
rubidium in solid helium. The presence of D1 emission
after D2 excitation is evidence for the existence of a ﬁne
structure relaxation channel. We assign the two broader
features c and d peaked at 12400 cm−1 and 11800 cm−1
respectively to the emission from Rb(B2Π3/2)He1 and
Rb(B2Π3/2)He2 exciplexes. The solid lines in Fig. 6 are
the calculated n = 1 and n = 2 emission spectra of Fig. 3
shifted to the blue by ∆1 and ∆2 respectively, so that
their line centers coincide with the positions of the mea-
sured curves. The shifts are probably due to the inter-
action with the surrounding helium bubble. Note that
the two theoretical curves have to be shifted by diﬀerent
amounts in order to match the experimental lines. We
have found previously in the Cs-He system [12] that the
rate and sign of the pressure shift of exciplex emission
lines depend on the number of bound helium atoms.

As with the spectra of Sect. III C we have recorded
the emission in the region of longer wavelengths with
the InGaAs-spectrometer. As a result we ﬁnd a spec-
trum, which is identical (same central wavelength and
same width) with the one observed with D1 excitation

FIG. 6: Fluorescence spectrum (dots) recorded with the
CCD-spectrometer following D2 excitation. The dashed verti-
cal lines indicate the position of the D1 and D2 line of the free
Rb atom. The following assignments are made to the emis-
sion peaks: atomic D2 ﬂuorescence (a), atomic D1 ﬂuores-
cence (b), emission from Rb(B2Π3/2)He1 exciplexes (c), and
emission from Rb(B2Π3/2)He2 exciplexes (d). The solid lines
are calculated emission spectra from Rb(A2Π3/2)He1 and
Rb(A2Π3/2)He2 exciplexes. The lines are shifted in order to
match the peaks of the experimental curves. ∆1 = 350 cm−1
and ∆2 = 440 cm−1 are the shifts with respect to the calcu-
lated positions shown in Fig. 3.

E. Atomic excitation spectra

The experimental emission spectra presented above
were recorded with two ﬁxed excitation wavelengths,
chosen such as to maximize the signals of interest.
It
is of course interesting to investigate how the diﬀer-
ent spectral features depend on the excitation wave-
length. For this we have varied the wavelength of the
Ti:Al2O3 laser in discrete steps over the spectral range
of 13000. . .13700 cm−1 (∼770. . .730 nm). For every exci-
tation wavelength we have measured the amplitudes of
the emission peaks of Figs. 4, 5 and 6.

The top part of Fig. 7 shows the excitation spectrum
of D2 ﬂuorescence, which is centered at 13460 cm−1 (743
nm). One sees clearly that this ﬂuorescence can only
be produced by D2 excitation. The lower part of Fig. 7
shows the excitation spectrum of D1 ﬂuorescence. It con-
sists of two absorption bands centered at 13180 cm−1
and 13460 cm−1 respectively, which corresponds to ex-

cited states correlating with the atomic 5P1/2 and 5P3/2
levels respectively. D1 ﬂuorescence can thus be produced
directly via D1 excitation or via D2 excitation combined
with a J-mixing interaction due to the alkali-helium in-
teraction. The D1 absorption band is slightly asymmetric

6

FIG. 7: Excitation spectra of the ﬂuorescence from atomic
rubidium: Top: ﬂuorescence analyzing spectrometer set to
the D2 emission line (peak a of Fig. 6); bottom: spectrometer
set to the D1 emission line (peaks b’ and b of Figs. 4 and 6).
The dashed lines are Gaussians whose sum (solid line) was
ﬁtted to the data.

with a longer wing on the low energy side. This feature
has been observed before in Cs [5]. The D2 absorption
band measured for both D1 and D2 ﬂuorescence, has
a double peaked-structure. The scarce number of data
points is well ﬁtted by a superposition of two Gaussians
separated by about 125 cm−1. This splitting of the D2
excitation lines of cesium and rubidium in superﬂuid he-
lium has been explained before in terms of a dynamic
Jahn-Teller eﬀect due to quadrupolar bubble-shape os-
cillations which lift the degeneracy of the P3/2 state [20].

F. Exciplex excitation spectra

Fig. 8 shows the excitation spectra of the exciplex lines
c, d, and e’ of Figs. 5 and 6. As the Rb∗He1,2 exciplexes
can only be observed after D2 excitation (Fig. 8 c, d) we
conclude that these apple-shaped complexes are formed
in the B2Π3/2 state. The D1, D2 and Rb(B2Π3/2)He1,2
emission lines are very weak and of similar amplitude.
The bottom spectrum (e’) represents by far the strongest
signal that comes from the Rb(A2Π1/2)Hen>2 exciplex
which can be excited by either D1 or D2 radiation. Its
emission line is about 100 times stronger than the other

FIG. 8: Excitation spectra of the ﬂuorescence from Rb∗Hen
exciplexes (dots) with the ﬂuorescence spectrometer tuned to
emission from Rb∗He1 c, Rb∗He2 d, and Rb∗Henmax e’. The
solid lines are Gaussian ﬁts. The signals in the spectrum e’ is
approximately two orders of magnitude larger than the ones
of c and d and than the atomic signals from Fig. 7.

lines. This result is in strong contrast with the emission
of the corresponding cesium exciplex, Cs(A2Π1/2)Hen>2,
in solid helium, for which the emission after D1 excitation
is very weak [12]. The double-peaked structure of the D2
excitation spectrum is not well resolved for the Rb∗He1,2
exciplexes. It was observed before for Cs∗He and Rb∗He
exciplexes on superﬂuid helium nanodroplets [6, 8].

IV. DISCUSSION

A. Atomic lines

The assignment of the atomic D1 and D2 excitation
and emission lines is unambiguous. The excitation lines
are blue-shifted by approximately 600 cm−1, while the
emission lines are shifted by only 65 cm−1 with respect
to the free atomic transitions. These shifts have been
studied in superﬂuid helium [18] and are well described

by the bubble model. The blue shift results from the in-
teraction with the bulk helium, which is less pronounced
in the emission process as the latter occurs in a bubble
of larger size [5]. As already mentioned, excitation at the
D1 transition leads to emission on the D1 line only, while
excitation at the D2 line leads to emission on both the
D1 and the D2 lines.

B. Apple-shaped Rb(B2Π3/2)He1,2 exciplexes

One or two helium atoms approaching the apple-
shaped atomic 5P3/2, mJ = ±3/2 state do not experience
a potential barrier on their way to the potential well of
the B2Π3/2 state. The formation process of Rb∗He1 and
Rb∗He2 exciplexes is therefore straightforward after D2
excitation. Note that the potential diagram for Rb∗He1
is similar to the one for Rb∗He2, shown in Fig. 2, and that
it has a reduced potential well depth. The Rb∗He1,2 exci-
plex emission line following D1 excitation is not observed
because only the largest exciplex is formed as discussed
in paragraph IV D.

Cs∗He2 is the only apple-shaped exciplex that was ob-
served in related experiments with cesium in superﬂuid
[1] and in solid [3, 12] helium, while in cold helium gas
both Cs∗He1 and Cs∗He2 structures were detected [1]. It
remains an open question why the Cs∗He1 exiplex does
not ﬂuoresce in condensed helium, while the correspond-
ing rubidium exciplex does.

C. Dumbbell-shaped Rb(A2Π1/2)Hen>2 exciplexes

The emission line shown in Fig. 5 has the longest wave-
length of all observed spectral lines and originates thus
from the lowest-lying bound state, i.e., the A2Π1/2 state
of Fig. 2(b). Note that all Rb∗Hen>2 exciplexes have
similar potential curves with potential wells/barriers in-
creasing with n. All of these structures have the shape
of dumbbells, with the helium atoms bound around their
waists [12]. Fig. 5 also shows the calculated line shapes
of the emission from Rb∗He6 and Rb∗He7. Disregard-
ing shifts of the line centers the theoretical line shapes
match the experimental spectrum quite well. The good
matching of the line width in particular indicates that
this emission is from a single exciplex species with a spe-
ciﬁc number of bound helium atoms and that it does not
come from a superposition of diﬀerent exciplexes. The
shift of the lines is most likely due to the interaction with
the helium bulk, which was not taken into account in our
calculation. It is diﬃcult to estimate whether the bulk
shifts the line to the blue or to the red. One can there-
fore not assign the observed emission band to Rb∗He6 or
Rb∗He7 in an unambiguous way. The calculated binding
energies ǫb(Rb) (Fig. 1) show that the complex with 6 he-
lium atoms has the lowest binding energy and is therefore
the most stable exciplex. Observations in liquid He [2]
conﬁrm this prediction. However, the exact calculation

7

of the energy of the lowest lying bound state involves a
precise quantitative treatment of its oscillatory degrees of
freedom. In [12] we have described in detail how we cal-
culate these oscillation energies. There is an uncertainty
in the calculated binding energies due to the simpliﬁed
assumptions we made. An additional uncertainty comes
from the semi-empirical pair potentials [15]. For big exci-
plexes like the Rb∗He6 every uncertainty in the potential
will be ampliﬁed because of the additive contribution of
the n helium atoms discussed in Sect. II. This can change
the position and the depth of the well in the excited state.
To all of this adds the eﬀect of the helium bulk, which
was not treated so far. The following arguments sup-
port the Rb∗He6 to be the structure observed. It has the
minimal binding energy and the corresponding Cs exci-
plex line is shifted to lower wavenumbers with increasing
pressure [12]. Assuming the same tendency for the Rb
exciplex brings the spectral position of Rb∗He6 into bet-
ter agreement with the experimental curve (Fig. 5). On
the other hand the line shape of the calculated Rb∗He7
ﬁts better to the data. Therefore we can not conclude
which exciplex is the one observed in the experiment.

D. Formation of dumbbell-shaped
Rb(A2Π1/2)Hen>2 exciplexes

The radius of the bubble formed by the rubidium
ground state has an equilibrium radius Rb of 6 ˚A, which
is smaller than the corresponding radius for cesium. The
excitation process is a Franck-Condon transition to the
5P state during which the radius does not change.

The D1 excitation starting at Rb(5S)= 6 ˚A ends at the
left of the potential barrier of the A2Π1/2 state so that
the exciplex is easily formed by helium atoms dropping
into the well. Note that for cesium in solid helium the
corresponding transition ends on the right side of the
potential barrier in the excited state [12]. In that case
the helium atoms have to tunnel through the potential
barrier in order to form the exciplex. This explains why
exciplex emission of Cs in solid helium after D1 excita-
tion is much weaker than after D2 excitation, while for
Rb the opposite holds. It also explains why no emission
from Rb exciplexes after D1 excitation could be observed
in gaseous (below 10 Kelvin) and in liquid helium envi-
ronments [2] in which the helium atoms are, on average,
further away from the Rb atom and where the excitation
thus ends at the right of the potential barrier. Under
those conditions the exciplex formation is strongly sup-
pressed as the helium atoms have to tunnel one after an-
other through the potential barrier to form the exciplex.
This tunneling occurs at a rate which is smaller than the
exciplex lifetime. The same is true for Rb on He droplets,
where no exciplex was observed after D1 excitation [10].
The authors of [10] estimated the tunneling time to be
about 500 ns, much longer than the lifetime.

When exciting the system at Rb(5S)= 6 ˚A on the
D2 transition the corresponding ﬁne-structure relaxation

8

channel allows the system to form the terminal exciplex
in the potential well of the A2Π1/2 state.

In solid helium only the largest exciplex Rb∗Henmax is
observed after D1 excitation. This means that the po-
tential well is ﬁlled up to the maximal value of helium
atoms that it can hold on a time scale which is shorter
than the radiative lifetimes of the intermediate products.
It is therefore likely to assume, as we have previously
done for the formation of the corresponding cesium exci-
plexes that the exciplex results from a collective motion
of the helium atoms.

E. Summary and conclusion

We have presented several new spectral features ob-
served in the laser-induced ﬂuorescence from a helium
crystal doped by laser ablation from a solid rubidium
target. We detected for the ﬁrst time weak, but unam-
biguously identiﬁed D1 and D2 ﬂuorescence lines from
atomic rubidium, which were previously believed to be
completely quenched in solid helium. We have shown
that Rb∗Hen exciplex formation is possible after D1 ex-
citation, in contrast to cesium doped He, in which ex-
ciplex formation proceeds only via absorption on the D2
transition. We have explained this in terms of the smaller
bubble diameter of rubidium, which allows the excitation

to proceed directly to a binding state without tunnelling
processes as they are needed with cesium. We have fur-
ther reported the observation of Rb∗He1,2 exciplex emis-
sion after D2 excitation, a process which could not be
observed in liquid helium, as well as the observation of a
larger exciplex. The main decay channel of laser excited
Rb in solid helium is via the formation of this largest
exciplex, assigned to be either Rb∗He6 or Rb∗He7 with
subsequent emission of strongly red shifted ﬂuorescence.
It remains an open question why one observes the two
exciplexes Rb∗He1 and Rb∗He2, while in equivalent ex-
periment with cesium there is only ﬂuorescence form the
Cs∗He2 complex. This feature could be related to a
recently discovered absorption band of the Rb2 dimer
which overlaps with the D2 atomic absorption line [21].
It may also be related to unexplained details of the diﬀer-
ent steps in the formation process. Femtosecond pump-
probe experiments would clearly be the tool of choice for
further investigations of this question.

Acknowledgments

We thank J. Pascale for sending us his numerical Rb-
He pair potentials. This work was supported by the grant
number 200020-103864 of the Schweizerischer National-
fonds.

[1] K. E. K. Hirano, M. Kumakura, Y. Takahashi, and

T. Yabuzaki, Phys. Rev. A 66, 012722 (2002).

[2] K. Hirano, K. Enomoto, M. Kumakura, Y. Takahashi,
and T. Yabuzaki, Phys. Rev. A 68, 012722 (2003).
[3] D. Nettels, A. Hofer, P. Moroshkin, R. M¨uller-Siebert,
S.Ulzega, and A. Weis, Phys. Rev. Lett. 94, 063001
(2005).

and T. Yabuzaki, Phys. Rev. A 69, 012501 (2004).
[12] P. Moroshkin, A. Hofer, D. Nettels, S. Ulzega, and

A. Weis, J. Chem. Phys. 124, 024511 (2006).

[13] T. Kinoshita, K. Fukuda, T. Matsuura, and T. Yabuzaki,

Phys. Rev. A 53, 4054 (1996).

[14] T. Eichler, R. M¨uller-Siebert, D. Nettels, S. Kanorsky,

and A. Weis, Phys. Rev. Lett. 88, 123002 (2002).

[4] J. Dupont-Roc, Z. Phys. B 98, 383 (1995).
[5] S. Kanorsky, A. Weis, M. Arndt, R. Dziewior, and

[15] J. Pascale, Phys. Rev. A 28, 632 (1983).
[16] R. A. Aziz and A. R. Janzen, Phys. Rev. Lett. 74, 1586

T. H¨ansch, Z. Phys. B 98, 371 (1995).

(1995).

[6] O. B¨unermann, M. Mudrich, M. Weidem¨uller, and
F. Stienkemeier, J. Chem. Phys. 121, 8880 (2004).
[7] C. P. Schulz, P. Claas, and F. Stienkemeier, Phys. Rev.

[17] S. I. Kanorsky, M. Arndt, R. Dziewior, A. Weis, and

T. W. H¨ansch, Phys. Rev. B 50, 6296 (1994).

[18] T. Kinoshita, K. Fukuda, Y. Takahashi, and T. Yabuzaki,

[8] F. R. Br¨uhl, R. A. Trasca, and W. E. Ernst, J. Chem.

Lett. 87, 153401 (2001).

Phys. 115, 10220 (2001).

Phys. Rev. A 52, 2707 (1995).

[19] H. Bauer, M. Beau, B. Friedl, C. Marchand, K. Miltner,
and H. J. Reyher, Physics Letters A 146, 134 (1990).
[20] T. Kinoshita, K. Fukuda, and T. Yabuzaki, Phys. Rev.

[9] J. Reho, J. Higgins, C. Callegari, K. K. Lehmann, and

G. Scoles, J. Chem. Phys. 113, 9686 (2000).

B 54, 6600 (1996).

[10] J. Reho, J. Higgins, K. K. Lehmann, and G. Scoles, J.

[21] P. Moroshkin, A. Hofer, S. Ulzega, and A. Weis, to be

Chem. Phys. 113, 9694 (2000).

published (2006).

[11] K. Enomoto, K. Hirano, M.Kumakura, Y. Takahashi,

