6
0
0
2
 
y
a
M
 
6
 
 
]
h
p
-
m
o
t
a
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
9
4
0
5
0
6
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Tunnel ionization of open-shell atoms

Z. X. Zhao and T. Brabec
Physics Department & Center for Research in Photonics,
University of Ottawa, 150 Louis Pasteur, Ottawa, ON K1N 6N5, Canada

A generalized ADK (Ammosov-Delone-Krainov) theory for ionization of open shell atoms is com-
pared to ionization experiments performed on the transition metal atoms V, Ni, Pd, Ta, and Nb.
Our theory is found to be in good agreement for V, Ni, Pd, and Ta, whereas conventional ADK
theory overestimates ionization by orders of magnitude. The key to understanding the observed
ionization reduction is the angular momentum barrier. Our analysis shows that the determination
of the angular momentum barrier in open shell atoms is nontrivial. The Stark shift is identiﬁed
as the second dominant eﬀect responsible for ionization suppression. Finally, these two eﬀects can-
not explain the Nb data. An analysis of the electron spins suggests that Pauli blocking might be
responsible for the suppression of tunneling in Nb.

PACS numbers:

Tunnel ionization theory was developed in several semi-
nal works [1, 2]. All of these theories are based on the
single active electron (SAE) approximation, where only
the weakest bound electron interacts with the laser ﬁeld.
The most commonly used tunneling theories are ADK
(Ammosov-Delone-Krainov) and MO-ADK (molecular-
ADK) theory [2], which are in excellent agreement with
experiments in noble gases and small molecules [3].

The situation is diﬀerent for more complex systems.
Theoretical predictions from ADK theory often overesti-
mate experimentally measured ionization yields by orders
of magnitude [4, 5]. Recently, a quasi-analytical multi-
electron theory of tunnel ionization was developed [6], re-
vealing that the SAE approximation loses its validity in
complex materials. A comparison with ionization exper-
iments in C60 showed reasonable agreement. This theory
opens the door to explore the new multi-electron physics
associated with tunnel ionization in complex systems.

In this paper we develop the theory of Ref.

[6] fur-
ther to analyze tunnel ionization of the transition metal
atoms Vanadium (V), Nickel (Ni), Palladium (Pd), Tan-
talum (Ta), and Niobium (Nb). They are signiﬁcantly
more complex than noble gas atoms due to an open d
shell and large angular and spin momenta. ADK theory
overestimates [5] ionization in transition metal atoms by
orders of magnitude. Our work reveals the following new
ﬁndings:
(i) We ﬁnd good agreement with V, Ni, Pd, and Ta ex-
periments. This further corroborates the applicability of
the theoretical framework, developed here and in Ref.
[6], to general complex systems.
(ii) The ﬁrst major eﬀect responsible for the suppression
of ionization is found to be the angular momentum bar-
rier. Due to the complexity of open shell atoms, determi-
nation of l is not as straightforward as in noble gases, but
requires a careful analysis. This reveals unprecedented
insight into the structure and complexity of transition
metal atoms. The second dominant contribution to the
suppression of tunneling comes from an increase of the

ionization potential caused by the Stark shift. Our anal-
ysis demonstrates the importance of the Stark shift for
tunnel ionization.
(iii) The two eﬀects discussed in (ii) cannot explain the
strong ionization reduction found in Nb. An analysis of
the spins of s- and d-orbital electrons suggests that the
reduction of tunnel ionization in Nb might be caused by
Pauli blocking, an eﬀect central to many-body physics.
(iv) Starting from the quasi-analytical multi-electron the-
ory of of Ref. [6], a generalized multi-electron ADK/MO-
ADK theory is derived, which includes correction factors
accounting for multi-electron eﬀects and angular momen-
tum barrier.

Our analysis begins with the tunnel ionization rate in

atomic units, as given in Ref. [6],

wm =

∆2(m+1)
(2κ)2|m|+1|m|!  

Xl

Blme−t

(1)

2

,

!

where l and m refer to the angular momentum and mag-
netic quantum numbers of the ﬁeld-free asymptotic wave-
function of the weakest bound valence electron that is
matched with the wavefunction of the tunneling electron.
In the case that m is a non-degenerate, good quantum
number, e.g. homonuclear diatomic molecules, w = wm,
with w the ionization rate. When m is not a good
quantum number, several m contribute to the tunnel-
ing wavefunction and w =
m wm. For m degenerate,
e.g. noble gas atoms, the ionization rate is determined by
P
m wm. Note that Eq. (1) corrects a mis-
w = 1/(2l +1)
print in Eq. (8) of Ref. [6] with respect to the position of
m′m(R)Qlm′Clm′ , and Qlm
m′ Dl
is the normalization constant of the spherical harmonics
P
[2, 6]. The rotation matrix Dl
m′m rotates the coordi-
nate system by the Euler angle R, and allows calcula-
tion of ionization along an arbitrary direction, once the
matching coeﬃcients Clm have been determined along
z1
z1
one direction. Finally, t =
z0 1/pzdz,
R

z0 pzdz, 1/∆2 =
R

l. Further, Blm =

P

P

pz =

κ2 − 2zE + 2V (z), and

p

V (z) = −

+

Z
z

β+E
z2 −

β+
2z4 +

l(l + 1)
2z2

.

(2)

The electric ﬁeld E is assumed to point along the z-
direction, Z is the charge of the residual ion after ion-
ization, and β = βn and β+ = βn−1 refer to the polariz-
ability of the n-electron system before and after ioniza-
tion [6]. The Stark shifted [7] and the ﬁeld free ioniza-
tion potential of the weakest bound electron are given
by κ2/2 = Ip − (β − β+)E2/2, and Ip, respectively. The
four terms in Eq. (2) represent the barrier coming from
the Coulomb potential, the laser polarization, the image
charge, and the angular momentum, respectively. The
last three terms are not accounted for in ADK/MO-ADK
theory.
Integration is performed between the limits z0
and z1, where z1 is the outer turning point.

The lower integration limit z0 is the point at which the
laser dressed, tunneling wavefunction is matched to the
ﬁeld free, asymptotic ground state, see Ref. [6]. Match-
ing has to be done at a ﬁeld free point. As complex sys-
tems are highly polarizable, the polarization ﬁeld cancels
the laser ﬁeld at a point a, where β+E/a2 − aE ≈ 0.
Solution of this equation gives z0 = a = β1/3
+ . Due to
shielding the inner part of the system, z ≤ a, is approxi-
mately ﬁeld free. In a metallic sphere, the matching point
lies on the surface.

When V (z) ≪ κ2/2 for z0 < z < z1 is fulﬁlled, the
square root in pz0 can be Taylor expanded. In this limit,
all the integrals can be solved analytically and contact
can be made between Eq. (1) and ADK/MO-ADK the-
ory. The calculation is fairly involved; details will be
given in a longer paper. The generalized ADK/MO-ADK
ionization rate is given by

wm = wo

α =

α

E
2κ2
(cid:18)
l(l + 1)E
κ3

(cid:19)

+

2β+E2

κ3 −

5β+E3
2κ7

(3)

where wo refers to the conventional ADK/MO-ADK ion-
ization rate,

wo =

| ˆClmQlm|2
2|m||m|!κ2Z/κ−1

2κ3
E

2Z/κ−|m|−1

exp

−2κ3
3E

.

0

(cid:18)

(cid:18)

(cid:19)

(cid:19)
(4)
The ADK/MO-ADK matching coeﬃcient in Eq. (4) is
related to the matching coeﬃcient in Eq. (1) by ˆClm =
Clmeκz0z−Z/κ
m wm. The
. We use here w = 1/(2l + 1)
three correction terms in α come from the angular mo-
mentum barrier, the laser polarization barrier, and the
image charge term, respectively. The l-barrier is not con-
tained in the ADK/MO-ADK theory. The l-dependence
in ADK/MO-ADK theory comes from the spherical har-
monics and the matching coeﬃcient. In the limit of l = 0

P

2

Ni

Pd

0.01

0.1

Intensity (10

1
 W cm

-2
)

14

t
d
w

∫

V

Nb

Ta

3

2

1

0

3

2

1

0

3

2

1

0
0.01

0.1

1
 W cm

-2
)

14

Intensity (10

wdt in V, Ni, Nb, Pd, and
FIG. 1: Tunnel ionization yield
Ta versus laser peak intensity. The open circles denote the
experimental results from Ref. [5]. The dashed and full lines
refer to the theoretical results obtained from ADK theory, and
from our theory, Eq. (3), respectively. Gaussian laser pulse
parameters: wavelength 1.5µm and FWHM width 50f s.

R

and small polarizability, Eq. (3) reduces to the conven-
tional ADK/MO-ADK ionization rate, wm = wo. A com-
parison of Eq. (3) with Eq. (1) shows excellent agree-
ment for the transition metal atoms investigated here.
Therefore, we use Eqs. (3) - (4) throughout the paper.
The applicability of (3) for complex molecules will be
investigated in a future work.

Key to understanding tunnel ionization in transition
metal atoms is knowledge of the angular momentum l
of the asymptotic wavefunction of the weakest bound va-
lence electron. Quantum chemistry codes have been used
to determine l for small molecules and noble gas atoms
[2, 8]. As Hartree-Fock (HF) is suﬃcient to model these
systems, the asymptotic wavefunction can be obtained
from the highest occupied molecular orbital. We ﬁnd
that this method is also applicable to Pd and gives l = 2,
see the discussion below. This allows us also to extract
ˆClm for Pd from the numerical analysis and to compare
it with the ADK matching coeﬃcient [2], as determined
by quantum defect theory. The ADK matching coeﬃ-
cient is commonly used to calculate tunnel ionization of
atoms. The numerical result is found to be by a factor of
1.2 smaller. This diﬀerence is insigniﬁcant and corrobo-
rates the validity of quantum defect theory. Hence, the
ADK matching coeﬃcient is used for all the other tran-
sition metal atoms, where a numerical determination is
not possible.

In all other transition metals the wavefunction under-
goes a complex conﬁguration mixing, when the valence
electron is pulled away from the nucleus to the asymp-
totic region. Quantum chemistry codes are not sensitive
to the asymptotic part of the wavefunction, as they op-

timize the binding energy, which mainly depends on the
wavefunction close to the nucleus. Although an accurate
description of the asymptotic wavefunction is in principle
possible within a conﬁguration interaction (CI) analysis,
in practice it requires an unreasonably large number of
conﬁgurations. Therefore, due to the lack of proper nu-
merical methods l is inferred from the conﬁguration data
given in table I.

Our analysis of the transition metal atoms starts with
Vanadium. Whereas in noble gases l is determined by the
highest occupied orbital, this is no longer possible here.
Although the highest occupied orbital of V is a 4s orbital,
the following more careful analysis of the total angular
momentum L shows that l = 0 is forbidden. The total
angular momentum of the atom and ion ground state is
L = 3 and L+ = 2, respectively, see table I. The plus
subscript refers to ions and ion-parameters throughout
the paper. From the angular momenta L and L+ a range
of possible values of l can be derived. This is done by us-
ing the ﬁeld free, asymptotic, atomic ground state, which
can be approximated as the tensor product of the ionic
ground state and of the valence electron far away from the
nucleus. As a result, the total angular momentum of the
ion plus valence electron, as determined by the angular
momentum addition theorem, has to be equal to the to-
tal angular momentum of the neutral atom. This is only
possible when l fulﬁlls the condition L+ − l ≤ L ≤ L+ + l,
yielding 1 ≤ l ≤ 5. The possible range of l can be fur-
ther narrowed down by utilizing the fact that parity also
has to be conserved. As V and V+ have even parity, the
parity of the asymptotic valence electron wavefunction
must be even, too. This requires l to be even and thus,
l = 2, 4. As the 3d orbitals are energetically close to
the highest occupied 4s orbitals, the dominant tunneling
channel comes from a 3d-orbital with l = 2.

We would like to note three points associated with the
above analysis. First, the conservation laws were applied
to the ﬁeld free, asymptotic ground state, which is the
initial state for tunneling. Angular momentum and par-
ity are of course not conserved during tunnel ionization.
Second, the atomic ground state close to the nucleus and
in the asymptotic limit is described by diﬀerent conﬁg-
urations. This mixing of conﬁgurations in the time in-
dependent ground state should not be confused with a
time-dependent reconﬁguration. Third, we assume that
the atom relaxes adiabatically during ionization into its
ionic ground state. When an excited state is populated
after ionization, which is termed shake-up [9], the ioniza-
tion potential increases by the energy diﬀerence between
ion excited and ground state, ∆I.
In transition metal
atoms ∆I ≈ 0.3 − 1eV is small, so that the shake-up
channel might be important. Whereas it would be sur-
prising when tunnel ionization leaves ions dominantly in
an excited state, due to the complexity of the problem
it also cannot be rigorously ruled out. Our angular mo-
mentum analysis gives l = 0, 2 for the shake-up channel.

3

In case l = 2, the shake up channel gives a small correc-
tion to the fundamental channel and our results remain
unchanged. In case l = 0, our theory would predict a too
large ionization yield, close to ADK theory. The l = 0
shake-up channel is excluded based on the fact that l = 2
explains the experimentally observed ionization suppres-
sion very well. We suggest an experiment to corroborate
our conclusion. The ﬁrst excited state in transition metal
atoms is non-dipole allowed and therewith metastable.
Therefore, the population of the ion states after ioniza-
tion can be probed by exciting dipole allowed transitions
and measuring ﬂuorescence or the loss experienced by
the probing laser. For example, in V+ the lowest dipole
allowed transitions from the 3d4 ground state and the
ﬁrst excited (metastable) 3d34s state can be probed, with
transition energies of ≈ 4.5eV and 4eV, respectively. In
dependence on whether the shake-up channel has l = 0 or
2, one would ﬁnd a predominant population of the 3d34s
state or of the 3d4 ground state, respectively.

R

[5].

Given the simple approach used here and experimen-
tal uncertainties, our theory is in good agreement with
the experimental data of Ref.
In Fig. 1 the ion-
ization yield
w[E(t)]dt is plotted versus the laser peak
intensity. For pulse parameters and shape of the laser
electric ﬁeld E(t) see the ﬁgure caption. Our theory (full
line) explains the diﬀerence between experiment (empty
circles) and ADK theory (dashed line). Half of the diﬀer-
ence is due to the l-barrier which is not accounted for in
ADK/MO-ADK theory. As β+ is small, the role of the
laser polarization induced barrier is insigniﬁcant. The
other half of the diﬀerence is accounted for by the Stark
shift, which reduces ionization by increasing the ioniza-
tion potential. The large Stark eﬀect arises from the big
diﬀerence in polarizabilities β and β+, see table I. As
the Stark eﬀect increases with laser intensity, its eﬀect
is most pronounced at high intensities. Therefore, the
ionization yield rises gradually and reproduces the shape
of the experimental curve, in contrast to the abrupt rise
predicted by ADK/MO-ADK theory. Switching oﬀ the
l-barrier shows that the Stark eﬀect requires the l-barrier
to suppress ionization eﬀectively. Without the l-barrier
ionization would be shifted to lower intensities, where the
role of the Stark eﬀect is insigniﬁcant.

Part of the large discrepancy between ADK/MO-ADK
theory and experiment might arise from the fact that
ADK/MO-ADK overestimates tunnel ionization in the
above barrier limit. The Coulomb barrier is suppressed
at an electric ﬁeld Ebs = I 2
p /4, which corresponds to a
laser intensity of 7 × 1012W/cm2 in V. Hence, barrier
suppression in V occurs before ADK/MO-ADK theory
shows that signiﬁcant ionization takes place. In H and
He, ADK/MO-ADK theory overestimates above the bar-
rier ionization rates by a factor of 2-4 [10], which is by far
not enough to explain the diﬀerence in Fig. 1. In tran-
sition metals the magnitude of the overestimation is un-
known. Nevertheless, we believe that barrier suppression

is not the dominant factor responsible for the diﬀerence
between ADK/MO-ADK theory and experiment. Signif-
icant ionization usually takes place around the intensity
at which the barrier is suppressed. In V ionization be-
comes dominant in the range between 4×1013W/cm2 and
7 × 1013W/cm2, which is by a factor of 5-10 larger than
the barrier suppression intensity. It appears to be coun-
terintuitive that ionization should only start at intensities
so much higher than the barrier suppression intensity. In
our opinion the large diﬀerence points to the fact that
ADK/MO-ADK theory, which is exclusively based on the
Coulomb barrier, underestimates the true tunneling bar-
rier. This is corroborated by our theory, Eq. (2). Due
to l-barrier and Stark shift, the tunneling barrier is not
suppressed over the laser intensity range used in Fig. 1.
For Ni and Pd we get similarly good agreements as
for V, see Fig. 1. For Ni our analysis yields l = 2.
In Pd determination of l is straightforward. The total
angular momentum changes from L = 0 to L+ = 2. The
conﬁguration changes from 4d10 to 4d9, showing that the
tunneling electron comes from a d-orbital and that l = 2,
in agreement with the HF analysis discussed above.

In Ta it was not possible to unambiguously identify
l. From table I we ﬁnd two relevant ionization channels.
The possible angular momentum values are l = 0, 2, 4, 6.
Hence, ionization from an s-orbital and from a d-orbital
are possible. In V tunneling from a d-orbital is preferred,
probably because breaking of the closed subshell 4s2 con-
ﬁguration is energetically unfavorable. We suspect that
tunneling from a d-orbital in Ta might be favored for
similar reasons. This is supported by comparing theory
and experiment for l = 2, which yields good agreement.
For l = 0 the experimental data cannot be explained.

Finally, for Nb we could not get agreement with ex-
perimental data. The possible values of l are l = 0, 2, 4.
Niobium does not have a closed s-subshell like V, Ni, and
Ta, which might favor tunneling of a d-electron. There-
fore, we use l = 0 in Fig. 1. We have also performed test
calculations for l = 2 and 4. These also do not give sat-
isfactory agreement, corroborating our conclusion that
the l-barrier is not responsible for the observed ioniza-
tion suppression. Further, ionization due to dimers and
higher clusters was excluded experimentally [12].

A spin analysis of the s- and d-electrons shows that the
spins of the tunneling and bound electrons are all parallel
in Nb. In all other transition metal atoms the spins of
the bound electrons are parallel, however the tunneling
spin points in the opposite direction. Therefore, in V, Ni,
Pa, and Ta, the exchange eﬀect between tunneling and
bound electrons is zero. In contrast to that, the tunneling
electron in Nb feels the exchange eﬀect with the bound
electrons. The exchange eﬀect makes it harder for the
tunneling electron to pass the other open shell electrons
and to escape.
In the language of many-body physics
this is termed Pauli blocking.

4

Based on the fact that none of the other mechanisms
can explain the Nb experiments, we speculate that Pauli
blocking is responsible for the observed ionization sup-
pression. A quantitative proof will require a generaliza-
tion of the current ionization theory to account for the
exchange eﬀect, which will be subject to future work.

Z

Neutral

Ip (eV) l

Conf.
V 23 3d34s2
Ni 28 3d84s2
Pd 46 4d10
Ta 73 5d36s2
Nb 41 4d45s

2

2S+1LJ β
4F 3
3F4
1S0
4F 3
6D 1

Ion
Conf. 2S+1LJ β+
5D0
3.1
2D 5
2D 5
5F1
5D0

12.4 3d4
6.8 3d9
4.8 4d9
13.1 5d36s
15.7 4d4

7.7

4.7

1.4

1.8

2

2

2

2

6.75

7.64

8.34

7.89

6.76

2

2

2

2

0

TABLE I: Table for the transition metal elements V, Ni,
Pd, Ta and Nb, containing the total charge of the nucleus,
conﬁguration, total spin and angular momentum, polariz-
ability (˚A3) of neutral and singly charged ion,
ionization
potential Ip and the angular momentum l of the tunneling
electron. The plus subscript refers to singly charged ions and
their properties throughout the paper. The polarizability
is calculated by using density functional theory in the
local density approximation [11]; β agrees with published
data, see http:// webbook.nist.gov; for β+ no data is avail-
able for comparison. The conﬁguration data is taken from
http://physics.nist.gov/PhysRefData/Handbook/index.html.

[1] B. M. Smirnov and M. I. Chibisov, Sov. Phys. JETP 22,
585 (1966); A. M. Perelomov, V. S. Popov, and M. V.
Terent’ev, Sov. Phys. JETP 23, 924 (1966).

[2] M. V. Ammosov, N. B. Delone, and V. P. Krainov, Sov.
Phys. JETP 64, 1191 (1986); X. M. Tong, Z. X. Zhao,
and C. D. Lin, Phys. Rev. A 66, 033402 (2002).
[3] B. Walker et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 73, 1227 (1994).
[4] A. Talebpour, S. Larochelle, , and S. L. Chin, J. Phys.
B 31, 2769 (1998); V. R. Bhardwaj, D. M. Rayner,
D. M. Villeneuve, and P. B. Corkum, Phys. Rev. Lett.
87, 253003 (2001); A. N. Markevitch et al., Phys. Rev.
A 68, 011402(R) (2003).

[5] M. Smits, C. A. de Lange, A. Stolow, and D. M. Rayner,

Phys. Rev. Lett. 93, 213003 (2004).

[6] T. Brabec, M. Cˆot´e, P. Boulanger, and L. Ramunno,

Phys. Rev. Lett. 95, 073001 (2005).

[7] A. Saenz, Phys. Rev. A 66, 063408 (2002).
[8] T. K. Kjeldsen, C. Z. Bisgaard, L. B. Madsen, and

H. Stapelfeldt, Phys. Rev. A 71, 013418 (2005).

[9] I. V. Litvinyuk et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 94, 033003 (2005).
[10] X. M. Tong and C. D. Lin, J. Phys. B 38, 2593 (2005).
[11] A. Zangwill and D. A. Liberman, Comp. Phys. Comm.

32, 63 (1984).

[12] David Rayner, private communication.

