6
0
0
2
 
y
a
M
 
9
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
m
o
t
a
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
5
4
2
5
0
6
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Collisions of Slow Highly Charged Ions with Surfaces

J. Burgd¨orfer,1 C. Lemell,1 K. Schiessl,1 B. Solleder,1 C. Reinhold,2 K. T ˝OK´ESI,3 and L. Wirtz4
1Institute for Theoretical Physics, Vienna University of Technology, A-1040 Vienna, Austria, EU
2Oak Ridge National Laboratory, Oak Ridge, TN 37831, USA
3Institute for Theoretical Physics, Vienna University of Technology, A-1040 Vienna, Austria, EU
Institute of Nuclear Research of the Hungarian Academy of Sciences (ATOMKI), H-4001 Debrecen, P.O.Box 51, Hungary, EU
4Institute for Electronics, Microelectronics and Nanotechnology,
B.P. 60069, 59692 Villeneuve d’Ascq Cedex, France, EU

Progress in the study of collisions of multiply charged ions with surfaces is reviewed with the
help of a few recent examples. They range from fundamental quasi-one electron processes to highly
complex ablation and material modiﬁcation processes. Open questions and possible future directions
will be discussed.

I.

INTRODUCTION

≫

With the advent of highly charged (Q

1), low energy
ion sources, the interaction of slow multiply charged ions
with surfaces has developed into one of the most active
areas in the ﬁeld of particle-solid interactions. On the
most fundamental level, its interest is derived from the
complex many-body response of metal electrons to the
strong Coulomb perturbation characterized by a large
1. The neutraliza-
Sommerfeld parameter η = Q/υp ≫
tion is a true multi-electron capture (and loss) process
involving up to the order of
100 electrons and posing a
≈
considerable challenge to theory. Furthermore, resonant
transfer processes involve highly excited levels in the ions
and are expected to set in at large distances from the sur-
faces when the Rydberg wavefunction begins to “touch”
the surface. The study of multiply and highly charged
ion-surface interaction is also of considerable importance
for the understanding of surface damage and plasma-wall
interactions.

As experimental techniques have become more sophis-
ticated, the motivation for these studies has broadened to
elucidate the dynamical response of the many-body sys-
tem of the surface to a very strong Coulomb perturbation
on one side and to material science, surface diagnostics,
characterization and modiﬁcation on the other. Given
the diversity of the subject and its rapid growth, no at-
tempt of completeness of this overview will be made.

We will brieﬂy review the neutralization scenario now
widely accepted and discuss new experimental and the-
oretical results which have expanded our understanding
of highly charged ion (HCI) surface interactions. The
key element will be the “classical over barrier” (COB)
model for electron transfer into Rydberg states [1, 2, 3].
This model has been remarkably successful in a qualita-
tive and, sometimes, quantitative description of charge
transfer between surfaces and HCI. Originally developed
for metals, it has been extended to insulators. Despite its
success, its conceptual foundation and range of validity
is far from being well established.

Only for simple, eﬀective one-electron processes, fully
quantum mechanical models for electronic processes have
been developed, a few of which will be brieﬂy discussed.

First attempts to develop a many-body theory have been
taken within the framework of time-dependent density
functional theory (TDDFT). Both the potential as well
as major limitations of such methods will be summarized.
Driven by both conceptual interest and by technical
applications, nano-scale surfaces have taken center stage.
Interactions with internal walls of both metallic and insu-
lating nano-capillaries will be considered. We will focus
on material science applications of collisions with sur-
faces. Here, the use of ion scattering as a tool to study
surface magnetism and for active manipulation and mod-
iﬁcation of surfaces by charged particle impact are cur-
rently hot topics of investigation. The latter holds the
promise of self-organized and, possibly functionally con-
trolled, nanostructures. This paper is not meant as a
comprehensive review but as an introduction into cur-
rent developments and unsolved problems in the ﬁeld of
ion-surface scattering. More detailed informations can
be found in the list of references and in recent reviews
[4, 5, 6, 7].

II. THE COLLISION SCENARIO

Interaction of slow highly charged ions (HCI) with sur-
faces is a true many-body problem involving a complex
array of processes on diﬀerent time and energy scales,
schematically depicted in Fig. 1. They are driven by the
large amount of potential energy (PE) given by the sum
over all successive ionization potential (Ip)i of the HCI,

P E =

(Ip)i ,

(1)

Q

Xi=1

brought into the collision. PE can easily reach tens keV ′s
and, for slow ions, considerably exceed the kinetic energy
1
2 M v2
p of the projectile. For grazing incidence where the
normal component v
is small compared to the parallel
v
component, v
k

⊥
, we have

⊥ ≪

1
2

M v

P E

⊥ ≪
such that penetration of the projectile into deeper layers
of the solid can be ruled out.

(2)

2

of the topmost layers and, by way of electron-phonon
coupling, of atoms and ions near the surface. The ﬁnal
stage is then the creation of defects, heating of the lattice,
and ablation of surface material (“potential sputtering”
[12, 13]).
Developing a quantitative description with predictive
power for such a complex array of processes has remained
a challenge. Nevertheless, some progress made to date
will be highlighted in the following.

III. THEORETICAL METHODS

A. Classical Over Barrier Model

Classical models for the electronic dynamics have a
long-standing tradition in atomic collision physics going
back to Bohr’s account of energy loss of charged par-
ticles [14]. This tradition was continued with Thomas’
genius analysis of electron capture in 1927 [15] and later
with the binary encounter model for ionization [16]. For
problems with one active electron, the “classical trajec-
tory Monte Carlo (CTMC) Method” [17] was developed
as an eﬃcient algorithm with, quite often, quantitative
predictive power. Classical methods are appealing in
view of their simplicity compared to quantum calcula-
tions, even for simple systems. While for fundamental
atomic collision process, such as one-electron ionization
and capture, quantum ab initio calculations are possible
[18, 19], resorting to a classical descriptions is almost in
inevitable for complex many-body systems such as colli-
sions with surfaces. Among classical models, the classical
over-barrier (COB) model has proven to be versatile and
remarkably successful.

The COB model was originally developed for one-
electron capture into highly charged ions in ion-atom col-
lisions by Ryufuku et al.
[20] based on earlier work by
Bohr and Lindhard [21] and later extended by Barany et
al.
[22] and Niehaus [23] to incorporate multi-electron
transfer. Its extension to ion-surface collisions [1, 2, 3]
provides a simple framework for the description of ion-
surface interactions. The physical signiﬁcance of the
COB model is derived from the fact that only classically
allowed over-the-barrier processes as opposed to tunnel-
ing are suﬃciently fast to be eﬀective within the charac-
teristic interaction time of the ion with the surface.
An ’active’ electron crossing the barrier is subject to the
potential V (~r, ~R),

V (~r, ~R) = Ve(~r) + V I

pe(~r, ~R) + Vpe(~r, ~R)

(4)

where ~r = (x, y, z) is the position of the electron, with
x and y parallel to the surface and z perpendicular to
the surface, and ~R = (Rx, Ry, Rz) is the position of the
projectile (an HCI). The direct interaction between the
electron and the HCI, Vpe, is given for hydrogenic pro-

FIG. 1: Scenario for the interaction of a slow HCI of charge Q
with surfaces (left to right): attraction by image force, multi-
ple electron capture into high Rydberg states and formation of
hollow atoms, dissipation of potential energy by Auger deex-
citation, autoionization, and photoemission, relaxation near
point of impact with ablation of surface particles, electrons,
and heating, ﬁnally reﬂexion or penetration of projectile (Fig.
from [8]).

The ensuing interaction scenario is dominated by com-
peting mechanisms for dynamical screening, conversion
and dissipation of the incident energy into electronic and
nuclear degrees of freedom, particle emission and, ulti-
mately structural deformations of the solid surface. In
the ﬁrst stage of this scenario, the ion polarizes the sur-
face and creates a (self) image potential, V SI

V SI (R) =

Q2
4R

(ε(ω)
1)
(ε(ω) + 1)

−

,

−

(3)

−

≪

≫

→

1 for ω

1)/(ε + 1) represent the optical limit Q

where ε(ω) is the bulk dielectric function of the target
while (ε
0 of
the surface dielectric function ε(ω, Q) [4]. Ideal conduc-
tors and thus metallic surfaces correspond to the limit
ε(ω)
1. The attractive image force leads to
an acceleration, and thus to a bending of the trajectory
towards the surface. At a critical distance R = Rc the
electronic response is no longer conﬁned to a polarization
within the surface but results in transfer of electrons into
high lying states of the projectile. The formation of “hol-
low atoms” [9] (more precisely, hollow ions) marks this
second stage. As the projectile approaches the surface,
part of the potential energy is released by electron emis-
sion in Auger processes involving both electrons localized
around the ion as well as near the surface. The relaxation
during this stage is, however, too slow to render the pro-
jectile in its ground state.
In vicinity to the surface,
quasi-resonant capture from inner shells (“side feeding”
[10]) as well as two-center Auger capture [11] begin to
ﬁll inner shells marking the fourth stage of this process.
The key feature of the slow deexcitation is that a sig-
niﬁcant fraction of the incident potential energy remains
to be relaxed as the ion hits the surface. Consequently,
dissipation will involve the electronic degrees of freedom

3

FIG. 2:
Scaled energy gain ∆E/W due to image ac-
celeration for diﬀerent targets. Experimental data: O :
A1; ∆, (cid:3),Au(110),•, Au. Also shown are the COB model (see
Eq. 9) and the classical lower bound, from Ref. 28 and refs.
therein.

jectiles by

Vpe(~r, ~R) =

Q

.

−

~r
|

−

~R
|

Corresponding single-particle core potentials for non-
hydrogenic ions are available in the literature [24]. The
interaction potential between the electron and the sur-
face in absence of the HCI is denoted by Ve. The “image
potential” due to the presence of the HCI is denoted by
V I
pe. The latter two potentials are markedly diﬀerent for
metals and for insulators [3, 25, 26]. Choosing for sim-
plicity pure Coulomb potentials the electronic self-image
potential (Eq. (3 )) as the large-z limit of Ve for metals,
the position of the saddle point zs, dV (zs)dz = 0 and the
barrier height V (zs, R) can be determined analytically.
The critical distance follows from [1, 2, 3, 4],

V (zs, Rc) = ET =

W ,

−

where W is the work function of the surface, as

Rc(Q)

√2Q
W

.

≃

The COB model predicts, furthermore, the critical quan-
tum number nc into which the ﬁrst resonant capture
event takes place,

nc =

Q
√2W

1
1 + Q
−
√8Q

1/2









1/2

.

These predictions pertain to the ﬁrst stages of the neu-
tralization scenario and were initially diﬃcult to verify
since the subsequent violent relaxation processes tend to

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

FIG. 3: Sketch of nanocapillary and typical ion trajectories
(aspect ratio not to scale), trajectories leaving the capillary
in its initial charge state (type 1); trajectories undergoing
grazing incidence scattering (type 2), and trajectories leaving
capillary before touching down probing early stages of hollow-
atom formation (type 3).

erase the memory on earlier stages. Eq.
(7) was ﬁrst
indirectly tested (Fig. 2) by measurements [27, 28] of
the energy gain due to the image acceleration (Eq. (3)).
Since the charge of the projectiles is reduced by one unit
(Q′ = Q, Q
1...) at each successive critical distance,
Rc(Q′) (Eq. (7)), the energy gain along the neutraliza-
tion sequence (“staircase”) follows as [2]

−

∆E =

W
3√2

Q3/2

(9)

in agreement with experimental data [27, 28, 29]. Similar
estimates can be derived for insulators [3].
Direct test became available with the help of novel tar-
gets, metallic nanocapillaries, pioneered by the group of
Yamazaki et al. [30]. Interaction with the internal walls
of capillaries allows to select trajectories that avoid a
close encounter with the surface (trajectories of type 3
(Fig. 3)) thus allowing spectroscopic as well as charge-
state analysis of the early stages of the neutralization
scenario. Application of the COB allows the determi-
nation of the charge state fractions proportional to the
areas of concentric rings whose thicknesses are deter-
mined by Eq. (7). Good agreement of the COB simula-
tions [31], even when relaxation processes are neglected
clearly supports the validity of Eq. (7) (Fig. 4). Very re-
cently, much more detailed evidence on the early stages
of hollow atom formation became available through spec-
troscopy of optical emission from high Rydberg states in
ArQ(Q = 8
12). From the line intensity along the tran-
−
sitions n
1, the population of n shells could be
n
determined [32] (Fig. 5). The peak in the initial state
occupation follows the prediction (Eq. 8).

→

−

4

left: Final state charge fraction of N 6+ penetrating
FIG. 4:
N i nanocapillary. Open circles: exp.
(ref. 29), triangle:
prediction by geometric cross sections (right), full circle: COB
simulation (ref. 30), right: Decomposition of cross section
into rings corresponding to sequential capture of electrons at
the critical distance for each charge state.

B. Quantum Mechanical Foundations

The COB model hinges on several approximations.
The most drastic ones include: tunneling (i.e. below bar-
rier) transitions are neglected since they have small rates
compared to over-barrier processes so that they give only
a minor contribution to the reaction rate. Atomic states
are assumed to exist as resonances near and above the
barrier when the electron is classically allowed to escape.
Optical dipole transitions within the projectile driven by
dynamical polarization ﬁelds in the target (e.g. plasmon
excitations) are negligible since these processes are in-
trinsically non-classical [33]. Furthermore, despite the
slow velocities involved (v
1), quantum-mechanical
⊥ ≪
spreading of the wavepacket representing the active elec-
tron can be neglected on the time scale during which
charge transfer takes place.
To explore the approximate validity of some of these as-
sumptions, quantum calculations have been performed,
mostly for singly charged ions, where the reduction to an
eﬀective one-electron description is justiﬁed and where
the density of states to be subtended in the calculations
is limited. For simple metals, e.g. the collision of pro-
tons with an aluminum surface, perturbed atomic states
of hydrogen can be calculated very accurately [26, 34]
using the potentials derived from ground-state density
functional theory. Both the position of the resonance
and its width, i.e. the lifetime and transition rate can
be extracted from, for example, complex scaling [34] or
stabilization calculations [26].
Despite the strong distortion of the atomic ground state,
the bound state portion of the resonant wavefunction
remains well-localized around the ion core and trace-
able down to very small distances from the surface.
Resonance positions remain well deﬁned in the region
where over-barrier transitions become possible (Fig. 6a).
For large distances, the width of the resonance Γ (Fig.
6b) decays approximately exponentially as expected for

FIG. 5: Optical emission spectra for 2 keV/amu incident
Arq+ ions. Lines connected by the solid lines are attributed
to ∆n = 1 transitions of Ar(q−1)+ (from ref. 31). Predictions
for nc (Eq. (8)) marked by arrows.

3.6
“thick-barrier” tunneling. At a critical distance Rc ≈
a.u., the resonance crosses the top of the barrier separat-
ing the atomic well from the jellium. As the 1s state
becomes a broad “over-barrier” resonance, the width be-
gins to saturate. This observation of well-deﬁned, yet
broadened over-barrier resonances supports the picture
of over-barrier capture into broadened projectile states
invoked in the COB model. For insulator surfaces, e.g.
LiF as a prototype ionic alkali-halide surface, calcula-
tions of atomic energy levels in an environment of lo-
calized charges and low symmetry requires methods of
quantum chemistry for large molecules at the level of self-
consistent ﬁeld [35, 36] and beyond [37]. As contributions

5

lems, either employing coupled-channel methods [39, 40]
or wavefunction propagation or a grid [41, 42]. The latter
was primarily used for the simulation of H − detachment,
which can be reduced to an eﬀective one-electron prob-
lem. The electronic ground state of the surface, e.g. of
LiF, provides an adequate representation of the channel
potential. Quantum calculations for this problems have
yielded valuable insights into the role of the Madelung
potential for the detachment near LiF [41] and the inﬂu-
ence of the projected bandgap of Cu [42]. Extensions to
HCI have not yet been attempted.
A potentially promising avenue for treating the time-
dependent multi-electron dynamics is time-dependent
density functional theory (TDDFT). As a matter of
principle, time-dependent density functional theory [43]
provides a highly eﬃcient method to solve the time-
dependent quantum many-body problem.
It yields di-
rectly the time-dependent one-particle density n(~r, t) of
the many-body system.
Within TDDFT, the time-dependent density is repre-
sented through the time-dependent Kohn-Sham spin-
orbitals Φσ,j(~r, t) as

n(~r, t) =

nσ(~r, t) =

Xσ=
↑↓

Xσ=
,
↓
↑

Xj=1

Nσ

2 ,
Φσ,j(~r, t)
|
|

(10)

where Nσ denotes the number of electrons of spin σ.
The one-particle spin-orbitals Φσ,j(~r, t) evolve according
to the time-dependent Kohn-Sham equation governed by
the one-particle Kohn-Sham Hamiltonian

H KS

σ [n

, n

] =

↑

↓

1
2

~
∇

2 + Vext(~r) + V (~r, t)

(11)

−
+VH [n](~r, t) + Vxc[n

, n

](x, t) ,

↑

↓

=

Φσ,ji
|

Φσ,j(t
|

)
i
→ −∞

which includes the external one-particle potential, the
Hartree potential and the exchange-correlation potential.
The initial states
are the oc-
cupied Kohn-Sham orbitals of stationary ground state
density functional theory (DFT).
In practice, however, applications are hampered by the
lack of knowledge about the exact exchange-correlation
potential Vxc[n].
Its form is a priori not known and a
convergent algorithm for its calculation to increasingly
higher degree of accuracy has not yet been proposed.
Moreover, the number of occupied orbitals needed to ad-
equately represent the density of states of a surface of a
simple metal is large (Nσ >
103), thus represent a major
∼
numerical challenge. This is most likely the reason why
only few applications of TDDFT to ion-surface scattering
[44, 45] have been reported to date. A recent example
for the time-dependent density ﬂuctuation induced by a
triply charged ion (Q = 3) in front of a jellium surface is
shown in Fig. 7. At the surface the polarization charge
density giving rise to the image potential can be observed.
Simultaneously, the onset of charge transfer to the pro-
jectile becomes visible. At this large distance, R = 25,
capture still proceeds by tunneling which is reﬂected in

FIG. 6:
a) Position of the H(1s) resonance [Er =Re(E)]
near an A1 as function of R : −, ∆ and ♦ diﬀerent complex-
rotation calculations (ref. 25 and refs. therein), image shift
formula E1s(∞) + [1/4(R − z0)]. Also shown is the energy of
the top of the barrier as a function of R (...). b) As in a) but
for width of the H(1s) resonance [Γ = 2 Im(E)] as a function
of R.

due to electron-electron correlations play an important
role for the proper ordering of the covalent relative to
the ionic levels, relevant for charge transfer, sophisticated
methods such as the multi-reference conﬁguration inter-
action (MR-CI) approach [37] are required. The position
and width of avoided crossings (or more generally, coni-
cal intersections) near the LiF surface drastically change,
when correlation eﬀects are included. The relevant levels
undergoing conical intersections have, so far, only de-
termined for protons on LiF [37] and could provide a
semiquantitative explanation for the ionization potential
dependence of sputtering [38]. For highly charged ions,
a high density of accessible quasi-covalent levels with a
multitude of conical intersections makes such calculations
a formidable task. In fact, the very same reasons favor
the applicability of the COB model. However, direct ver-
iﬁcation of the underpinning of the COB is still missing.
Solution of the time-dependent Schr¨odinger equations
has, so far, only be attempted for one-electron prob-

6

ture and deexcitation rates [48], and c) the embedding of
these processes within the framework of a classical phase
space transport simulation for the ion. The equation of
motion of ρ is of the form of a Liouville master equation

∂
∂t

(cid:18)

+

˙~R~
∇R −

1
M

∂Vp
∂R

~
∇

˙~R(cid:19)

ρ =

ρ ,

R

(12)

,

}

}

{

{

}

{

(cid:16)

~R,

p(p)

p(T )

P (P )

P (P )

where the “relaxation” (collision) operator includes single
and double particle-hole (de) excitation processes which
represent resonant capture, resonant loss, hole hopping,
ionization by promotion through the continuum, Auger
capture, Auger deexcitation and autoionization which de-
pend on both the local position of the ion, ~R, and the
population strings
. A detailed discus-
and
sion of the rates entering Eq. (12) is given in Ref. [47, 48].
The eﬀective projectile potential Vp that governs the ionic
motion will depend, in general, on the strings as well, i.e.
. Direct integration of the Liou-
VP
ville master equation (Eq. (12)) appears to be extremely
diﬃcult in view of the large number of degrees of freedom
involved. Here, the fourth ingredient, d) solution by test
particle discretization and a Monte Carlo sampling for
ensembles of stochastic realizations of trajectories comes
into play. We follow a large number of ionic trajecto-
ries with identical initial conditions for the phase space
variables (R, vp) along an event - by - event sequence of
stochastic electronic processes whose probability laws are
governed by the rates of the underlying Liouville master
equation. The probability for any process with transition
rate Γα within a time interval ∆t to occur is determined
by

}(cid:17)

{

W α(∆t) = 1

exp(

∆tΓα) .

−

−

(13)

{

}µ

P (P )
n (t)

resulting population strings

In order to decide which electronic transition (if any)
takes place during the time period ∆t, we use the
rejection method for each of the distributions. At the
same time the coordinate and velocity of the HCI are
propagated in time according to a Langevin equation of
motion.
The
and
P (T )(t)
}µ for a single stochastic trajectory µ are
{
discontinuous functions of time. After sampling a large
number of trajectories, one obtains smooth ensemble
averages representing solutions of Eq. (12). Earlier and
less complete simulations of the neutralization scenario
were given in Refs.
[49, 50]. Variants of the present
approach have been previously employed for energetic
ion transport
electron transport through solids [51],
through nanocapillaries to be discussed below, and very
recently for the interaction of strong laser ﬁelds with
large clusters [52].
For illustration, we present an application of Eq. (12)
to the interaction of Ne10+ with a LiF surface in
vertical incidence. We focus on the existence of the
“trampoline eﬀect”. A microscopic trampoline eﬀect
was proposed by Briand et al. [53] for insulators. As the

FIG. 7: Potential energy surface (top picture) and induced
TDDFT density change (bottom picture) for a triply charged
ion approaching a jellium surface with rs = 3 and W = 0.33
a.u. for HCI-surface distance of R = 25 a.u..

V nd3r
R

1 when inte-
the low electron density, Ne =
≪
grating over a volume enclosing the projectile. Only near
Rc for over barrier processes reaches Ne ≈
A major conceptually diﬃculty is that, even if n(~r, t)
would be exactly known, a read-out functional to ex-
tract occupation numbers of excited projectile and target
states is still missing. Only very recently, some progress
in the construction of a functional that allow to extract
the S-matrix from the density, S[n], has been made [46].

1.

C. Hybrid Classical-Quantum Simulations:
Classical Transport Theory

Going beyond simple one-electron (or mean ﬁeld) de-
scriptions requires novel concepts. We have recently
introduced a classical transport theory (CTT) which
is based on a multi-particle Liouville master equation
[47].
It invokes four major ingredients: a) the ex-
plicit treatment of multi-electron processes by follow-
ing the time evolution of the joint phase space den-
that depends on population
sity ρ

P (P )

P (T )

,

~, ~R,
(cid:16)

{

}

{

}(cid:17)

}

strings of N -electron states in the projectile
and
P (T )
target, b) the usage of transition rates in the
{
relaxation (or transport) kernel, that are derived from
quantum calculations (mostly, ﬁrst-order perturbation
theory) wherever available, e.g. two-center Auger cap-

{

}

P (P )

Ne10+ → LiF

prominent role remains an open question to be explored
in the near future [54].

7

0.000

-0.002

-0.004

)
.
u
a
(

.

v

-0.006

-0.008

-0.010

0

without hole
hopping

with hole
hopping

5

10

15

20

R (a.u.)

FIG. 8: Evolution of the average vertical velocity vz of a
Ne10+ ion with an initial energy Ekin = 1 a.u. starting at a
distance of 20 a.u. as a function of the distance from the sur-
face. Solid line: with hole hopping; dashed line: hole hopping
switched oﬀ.

.

⊥

}

The average velocity v

HCI approaches the surface, the formation of a hollow
atom is accompanied by the microscopic charge up of
the surface in the vicinity of the impact region. As
surface charges (i.e.holes) feature only a slow mobility,
the ion may be repelled by the charge patch without
actually touching down. The simulation of the average
ion velocity (Fig. 8) requires a simultaneous simulation
of the random walk of the electronic holes on the F −
sublattice which represent in this case the target strings
P (T )
of the projectile
{
remains always negative, meaning movement towards
the surface. At distances larger than the critical distance
for ﬁrst electron capture, the projectile is accelerated by
the self-image interaction. As electron capture begins to
contribute, the acceleration still continues but is reduced
because the charge state of the projectile and its image
has decreased and because the repulsion due to holes
generated by capture increases. At around 11 a.u., the
hole repulsion starts to dominate over the image accel-
eration and the projectile slows down. The repulsive
force can oﬀset the image acceleration. However, it is,
on the average, not strong enough to lead to a complete
stop and to a reversal of the projectile above the surface.
Only 2 % of all trajectories are reﬂected at distances
larger than 3 a.u. from the topmost layer and no turning
point was observed at a distance larger than 3.5 a.u.
Such small distances of closest approach correspond
already to the fringes of the binary collision regime and
imply an (almost) complete neutralization of the highly
charged ion.
While we conclude that for a Ne10+ vertically incident
on an LiF surface, the trampoline eﬀect, i.e., the above
surface reﬂection leaving the ion in a multiply charged
state,
its occurrence for very high charge
states where repulsion by slow holes should play a more

is absent,

IV.

ION TRANSPORT THROUGH

NANOCAPILLARIES

Nanocapillaries play currently a very prominent role
in HCI-surface interaction well beyond the original goal
to study the early stages of the hollow atom forma-
tion. The focus has shifted towards transport through
capillaries, particularly of ions in their original charge
states. For metallic capillaries trajectories of type 1
(see Fig. 3) transport promises new information on the
stopping power (or friction force) at unprecedentedly
large distances from the surface [55]. For insulating
capillaries a recently discovered ion guiding eﬀect [56]
due to self-organized charge up suggests the opportunity
to build ion-optical devices for forming and guiding
nano-sized beams.

A. Energy Loss in Metallic Nanocapillaries

4

3

∝

Calculation of the friction force for ions propagating
parallel to the surface at large distances has remained
a puzzle. Linear response (LR) theory for an electron
gas within the framework of TDDFT yields an R−
z dis-
tance dependence from the surface caused by particle-
hole excitations [57]. The apparently much simpler ap-
proach of the socalled specular reﬂection model pioneered
[58] predicts a much stronger friction
by Ritchie et al.
z . This diﬀerence is of crucial
force S decaying as R−
importance for transport of highly charged ions through
nanocapillaries because of the high charge state Q
≫
Q2 and the long interaction time during the prop-
1, S
agation over mesoscopic distances (
10 µm). This
puzzle was recently solved [55] by noting that TDDFT-
LR lacks the contribution of plasmon excitation of a jel-
lium at large distances. In distant collisions, the long-
wavelength or optical limit (Q
0) is probed. Because
of the lack of electron-phonon coupling in a jellium, the
0. Con-
width γ of the plasmon peak vanishes as Q
sequently, plasmons can neither decay nor be excited.
By correcting for the ﬁnite width at γ(Q
0) within a
modiﬁed TDDFT calculation, the proper large distance
behavior could be restored. Fig. 9 displays the correlated
energy loss scattering angle (∆Eθ) distribution of slow
Kr30+ ions penetrating a metallic Ni nanocapillary. The
predicted energy loss is found to be suﬃciently large as
to be accessible by future experiments.

→

→

→

≈

−

1

^
8

D

q

in

ZQ+

a

q

out

FIG. 10:
Illustration of transmission through insulating
nanocapillaries, schematically. Array of nanocapillaries ori-
ented along the surface normal, inset: close-up of an indi-
vidual capillary. An insulating foil (PET) with dielectric con-
stant ε is covered on both sides with gold layers (dark shaded)
preventing charge up of the target during experiment. Cap-
illaries with radius a = 50 nm and L = 10µm are typically
D = 500 nm apart. Projectiles enter and exit the capillary
under angles θin and θout with respect to the capillary axis
respectively. The capillary axis is either normal to the surface
or Gaussian distributed with ∆θα <∼ 2o (FWHM).

≈

103 s and can even reach days.

mission (or impact) events in the same capillary are, for
present experimental current densities of nA/mm2 of the
order of ∆t
0.1 s, and ﬁnally, characteristic (bulk) dis-
charge times τb for these highly insulating materials, can
be estimated from conductivity data to typically exceed
τb >
∼
This multi-scale problem spans a remarkable 18 orders
of magnitude. A fully microscopic ab initio simulation
covering all relevant scales is undoubtedly out of reach.
The method of choice is therefore a simulation based on
the classical transport theory discussed above, modiﬁed
such that the discharge characteristics deduced from data
for macroscopic material properties of the nanocapillary
material can be incorporated. Speciﬁcally, the bulk dis-
charge time τb or bulk diﬀusion constant Db as well sur-
face charge diﬀusion constant Ds will be estimated from
surface and bulk conductivity data for mylar [62].

The present approach represents a mean-ﬁeld classical
transport theory [63] based on a microscopic classical-
trajectory Monte Carlo (CTMC) simulation for the ion
transported, self-consistently coupled to the charge-up of
and charge diﬀusion near the internal capillary walls. Ini-
tially, each ion impact at the surface deposits Q charges.
The charged-up micro-patch will undergo surface diﬀu-
sion with diﬀusion constant Ds as well diﬀusion into the
bulk with diﬀusion constant Db. Bulk diﬀusion is ex-
tremely slow for highly insulating materials while the sur-
face diﬀusion towards the grounded metallic layers (Fig.
10) will be a factor ∼= 100 faster, thus governing the over-
all discharge process. Self-organized guiding sets in when
a dynamical equilibrium between charge-up by a series of

FIG. 9: 2D correlation pattern between the energy loss and
the scattering angle of Kr30+ ions passing through an Ni
nanocapillary at 2.5 eV/amu energy. The distance-dependent
stopping power is calculated by the SRM (see text).

B. Guiding through Insulating Capillaries

≈

Capillaries through insulating foils (PET or “Mylar”,
[56] and SiO2 [59]) have been studied in several labora-
tories [60, 61]. Unexpectedly, considerable transmission
probabilities for projectiles in their initial charge state
20o. Ap-
were measured for incidence angles as large as
parently, ions are guided along the capillary axis with a
spread (FWHM) of ∆θout of several degrees for mylar [56]
but close to geometric opening θ0 for SiO2 [59]. Keeping
the initial charge state, contrary to the expected neutral-
ization upon approach of the internal capillary surface,
suggests that the ions bounce oﬀ the walls at distances
larger than the critical distance Rc ≈
2Q/W (Eq. (7)).
We refer to this eﬀect as a mesoscopic trampoline. Key
to this process is the charging up of the internal insulator
walls due to preceding ion impacts. Ion guiding through
the capillary ensues as soon as a dynamical equilibrium
of self-organized charge up by the ion beam, charge re-
laxation, and reﬂection is established.
A theoretical description and simulation of this process
poses a considerable challenge in view of the widely dis-
parate time scales simultaneously present in this prob-
lem:
The microscopic charge-up and hole transport due to the
impact of individual ion impact takes place on a time
scale of sub-f s to f s with a typical hole hopping time
15s. The transmission time τt of a projectile
τh < 10−
ion through the capillary for typical ion energies of
≈
10s. Typical av-
200 eV/u is of the order of τt ≈
erage time intervals ∆t between two subsequent trans-

10−

p

e
9

7 keV Ne7+ (CTT)
Exp.

0.4

0.35

0.3

0.25

0.2

0.15

0.1

0.05

e
t
a
r
 
n
o
i
s
s
i
m
s
n
a
r
t

FIG. 11: Scatter plot of deposited charges in the interior of
an individual capillary and resulting trajectories for θin = 3o.
a) zig-zag distribution leading to blocking for an unrealistic
choice (Ds = Db); b) patch distribution leading to transmis-
sion for realistic values (Ds = 100Db).

ion impacts at internal walls is established such that the
electrostatic repulsion prevents further impacts and the
ion is reﬂected at distances from the wall larger than the
critical distance (Eq. 7) from the surface. The wall forms
then an eﬀective mesoscopic “trampoline” for subsequent
ions and guides the projectile towards the exit, as shown
for a few sample trajectories in Fig. 11.
A ﬁrst quantitative comparison of the CTT simulation
with experimental data can be made for the transmis-
sion probability as a function of the incident tilt angle
θin relative to the capillary axis (Fig. 12). Transmission
occurs for θin well outside the geometric opening angle
0.50 of the capillary. Theoretically predicted [63]
θ0 ≈
eﬃciency in ion guiding agrees reasonably well with ex-
perimental data of Vikor et al. [59]. Unlike the transmis-
sion function, the angular distribution of guided ions in
the initial charge state is still not completely understood.
The angular spread is, in part, determined by the spread
in capillary axis distribution which is poorly known as
well as by collective eﬀects due to the charge-up of the
ensemble of capillaries which can be viewed as a charged
condenser [63]. The width of the angular distribution ob-
served in some of the experiments exceeds the predicted
width even if these additional sources of spreading are
included.

V. APPLICATIONS TO MATERIAL SCIENCE

The interaction of HCI with surfaces depends on the
electronic structure and morphology of the surface. In
turn, deposition of a large amount of potential energy
onto an nanometer-sized impact zone leads to modiﬁca-
tions of the surface. HCI surface collisions are therefore
promising candidates for both localized surface diagnos-
tics as well as surface modiﬁcation and nanostructuring.

0

0

1

2
q

in

3
(deg)

4

5

FIG. 12: Transmission function (transmission probability)
as a function of angle of incidence θin relative to the mean
capillary axis. Full symbols: present CTT, open symbols: ex-
perimental data: 7 keV Ne7+ (Vikor et al. 58). Experimental
transmission rates have been normalized to CTT results at
θin = 0o.

A. Two-Dimensional Surface Magnetism

(Anti) ferromagnetic ordering is a cooperative phe-
nomenon and, thus, strongly dependent on the local en-
vironment to which atoms with a large magnetic moment
are exposed to. One key parameter is the coordination
number, the number of nearest neighbors. Surface and
bulk atoms are subject to diﬀerent environments, in par-
ticular, diﬀerent coordination numbers. Magnetic order-
ing in the bulk (3D magnetism) may therefore be dras-
tically diﬀerent from surface (or 2D) magnetic ordering.
Grazing incidence ion-surface scattering was very early
recognized as an excellent tool to selectively probe the
magnetic ordering of the topmost layer. Rau and col-
laborators [64] pioneered electron capture spectroscopy
(ECS) which detects magnetization via spin polarization
of captured electrons and the subsequent measurement
of the polarization transferred to the nucleus via hyper-
ﬁne interaction. Optical polarization measurements of
excited states provide a complementary route [65].
Very recently, the investigation of 2D magnetism has
been extended to multiply charged ions [66, 67]. Spin-
polarized electron emission by N 6+ scattered at a Fe
(001) surface has been used as a “label” for the electrons
involved in the hollow atom formation. Electrons from
the conduction band are, in general, spin polarized while
core states giving rise to “side feeding” [9] show little
to no polarization. Comparison of a recent COB simula-
tion [68] with the polarization data [66] shows reasonably
good agreement for energetic electrons originating from
KLL Auger transitions in N 6+ (Fig. 13). The participat-
ing electrons originate primarily from the early stages
of the hollow-atom formation and thus from the con-
duction band. A minor contribution comes from Auger
capture into lower-lying states. The emitted electrons

(c)

electron energy (eV)

exp. data

simulation

)
s
t
i
n
u

 
.

b
r
a
(
 
s
t
n
u
o
c

(b)

(a)

electron energy (eV)

FIG. 13: Grazing incidence scattering (θin = 1.5o) of N6+
at magnetized Fe(001) surface. a) Exp. electron spectrum
(Ref. 65) b) Exp. (65) and simulated (66) spin polarization
of energetic electrons c) Exp. spin polarization for diﬀerent
incident charge states at low energies.

at lower energies have a multitude of sources, including
slowed-down KLL electrons, lower-energy autoionization
electrons, kinetic electron emission as well as secondary
electron emission. While above E
50 eV transport and
slowing down can account for the polarization observed,
the remarkably high degree of polarization (up to
70%)
at very low energies is, so far, unaccounted for and awaits
a convincing explanation. A spin-ﬁlter eﬀect [69] is a
promising candidate but quantitative details remain to
be worked out.

≈

≈

B. Sputtering and Nanostructuring

Conventional sputtering is driven by the kinetic en-
ergy deposited by, typically, singly charged ions (“kinet-
ing sputtering”).
Increasing the energy deposition re-
quires, thus, higher kinetic energies which, in turn, leads
to deeper penetration and bulk modiﬁcation. It was very
early realized [12] that slow HCI’s promise an interesting
alternative scenario for sputtering. The energy deposited
is potential energy (“potential sputtering”). The pene-
tration depth can be kept to a minimum of about one
monolyer resulting in “soft” sputtering. The latter no-
tion does not imply that the electronic or lattice structure
to remain intact. Quite to the contrary, the ﬁrst scenario
suggested, the “Coulomb explosion” [12] of insulator sur-
faces, suggested a violent distortion and restructuring of
the surface, without, however, signiﬁcant penetration of
the projectile into the bulk. This original proposal for
potential sputtering was plagued by several conceptual
diﬃculties: Even in well-insulating materials, the mobil-
ity of holes, i.e. electronic charge carries, is too fast such
that an extended region of high-density charge depletion
cannot be maintained for a time interval of an electronic
500f s necessary to convert poten-
sputtering time ts ≈

10

FIG. 14: Mass removal due to sputtering of (a) LiF and
(b) of MgOx by highly charged ions as a function of ion im-
pact energy. Left ordinate: in atomic mass units per incident
projectile (as measured by the quartz crystal microbalance).
Right ordinate: corresponding sputter yield (in molecules per
incident ion). Solid lines for guidance only; dashed lines: ex-
trapolation to zero kinetic energy (from refs. 12 and 71).

tial energy into kinetic energy of target ions [70]. If one
neglects hole mobility, sputtering via Coulomb explosion
would predominantly emit ionized target atoms with high
kinetic energies (>
100 eV ). Both of these predictions
∼
[71] are at odds with several experiments. A variant to
this scenario, Coulomb explosion of hydrogenated adsor-
bates has, however, been veriﬁed: the adsorption of hy-
drocarbons at surfaces results in the emission of protons
which rapidly increases with the charge of the incident
Q4. This has been explained [72] in terms
HCI as
≈
of C
H bond breaking by the HCI and subsequent
Coulomb explosion of the molecule. Here, the low mass
of the proton and the orientation the hydrocarbon bond
sticking out of the surface plays a crucial role in emitting
protons suﬃciently fast so that re-neutralization on the
way out or reconstruction of a bond becomes unlikely.

−

The simple Coulomb explosion picture has therefore
be amended to yield a more complex scenario:
cen-
tral to a realistic sputtering mechanism is the trap-
ping of the initially generated electronic defects, either
by strong electron-phonon coupling to so-called “self-
trapped holes” or “self-trapped excitons” or trapping by

lattice defects generated by the incident projectile or al-
ready present. In either situation, the holes or, more gen-
erally, the electronic defects become transiently trapped
so that potential energy can be converted within time
τs into kinetic energy of target atoms. This conversion
does not necessarily require ionic Coulomb interaction
and thus allows for the emission of neutrals. A prominent
example are color centers in alkali halides leading to copi-
ous emission of neutral Li and F atoms (Fig. 14a). Even
at neglegible kinetic energy, a signiﬁcant mass removal is
achieved that is proportional to the potential energy, i.e.
grows approximately with the charge Q2. The primary
production process of self-trapped holes and excitons has
been understood, at least for singly charged ions, in terms
of curve crossings (see Sect. III B and refs. [37]). A more
complex situation arises in materials where the electron-
phonon coupling is weak, i.e. the trapping of primary
electronic defects is insuﬃcient to prevent rapid diﬀusion
of holes. In these materials a diﬀerent and more generally
applicable mechanism has been identiﬁed, “kinetically as-
sisted potential sputtering (KAPS)” [73]. The essence of
this process, examples of which are shown in Fig. 14b,
is the simultaneous presence of both kinetic energy and
potential energy as prerequisite for large-scale ablation
to take place. The eﬃciency of this process rapidly di-
minishes when either the kinetic energy or the charge
state becomes small. This observation suggests that it is
the kinetic energy of the incident projectile that causes
lattice dislocations) along its track which
defects (e.g.
then serve as transient trapping centers for electronic de-
fects caused by the accompanying potential energy. This
interplay, which can be operative in a broad range of
materials, makes potential energy induced sputtering a
much more wide-spread phenomena.

C. Towards Nanostructuring

The impact of a highly charged ion creates a strong
dislocation in the surface (Fig. 15) which, contrary to
naive expectation, is not necessarily a crater but can take
on the shape of a “blister”or “hillock” [74, 75], as seen
in AFM pictures. Clearly, the appearance on an AFM
image may not accurately mirror the morphology of the
defect as a clear-cut separation between microscopy and
spectroscopy is diﬃcult to achieve. In other words, an
electronic defect may appear as a topographic defect [76].
Moreover, the size of the tip may be insuﬃcient to distin-
guish the crater from its rim. Fig. 15 also illustrates size
dependence of the nanodefect on the charge. HCI are
therefore excellent tools to inscribe nano-sized structures
into the surface with the charge as control parameter of
its size.
Future applications hinge on the availability of additional
elements of control for nanostructuring. This is a largely
unexplored area of research for potential sputtering. For
kinetic sputtering, self-organization of defect structures
have been analyzed [77] and, in part, experimentally ver-

11

FIG. 15:
(a) UHV AFM contact mode image of sapphire
(A12O3, c-plane 0001) bombarded with 500 eV Ar+ions. The
defects are topographic features; all dimensions in nanome-
ters, (b) as in (a) but bombarded with 500 eV Ar7+ ions. Nan-
odefects induced by these ions with same kinetic but higher
potential energy as compared to Ar+, from ref. (74).

iﬁed [78]. Bradley and Harper (BH) have introduced a
phenomenological diﬀusion equation for the height vari-
y plane, [77]
ation h(x, y) the x

−

∂
∂t

,

−

−

D

∇

i.e.

∇
(cid:0)

2
∇

v0 + ν

h(x, y, t) =

2h(x, y, t)

2h(x, y, t)
(cid:1)
(14)
where v0 is the constant ablation rate, ν is the (neg-
ative) surface tension while D is the diﬀusion rate
for the surface curvature. Eq.
(14) applies to normal
incidence. Additional terms with odd powers of the
derivate would appear for oblique incidence. Key to
nanostructuring is the negative surface tension which
describes, on a phenomenological level, the tendency
towards spontaneous roughening of the surface under
ion impact,
randomly appearing depressions are
deepened as they become more susceptible to further
ablations than nearby hills. The microscopic justiﬁca-
tion for negative surface tension relies on the spike-like
energy deposition pattern for kinetic sputtering. The
balance of curvature diﬀusion which tends to smooth the
surface and kinetic roughening results in self-organized
nanostructuring. Ordered wavelike patterns have been
predicted for oblique incidence. For normal incidence,
a near-ordered hexagonal spatial correlation pattern
in h(x, y) has been recently observed [78], clearly
pointing towards self-organized ordered nanostructuring
(Fig. 16). However, such a pattern formation has not
been theoretically accounted for in detail. Moreover,
translating these observations to potential sputtering
is not straight-forward.
Its primary energy deposition
is expected to be markedly diﬀerent from spikes along
tracks. The challenge for the future is thus to develop
a theory in analogy to the BH approach Eq.
(14)
for potential sputtering,
in particular to explore the
existence (or absence) of the negative surface tension
and to improve the BH equation such as to account
for “crystallization” of defects in ordered hexagonal
patterns.

12

Work supported by the Austrian Fonds zur F¨orderung
der wissenschaftlichen Forschung under proj. nos. FWF-
SFB016 “ADLIS” and P17449-N02, by the EU under
contract No. HPRI-CT-2001-50036, by the Hungar-
ian Scientiﬁc Research Found: OTKA Nos. T038016,
T046454,
the grant “Bolya” from the Hungarian
Academy of Sciences, and the TeT Grant No. A-15/04.

FIG. 16: SEM image of highly ordered cone-shaped dots on
a (100) GaSb surface formed by ion impact. (a) The extract
of a SEM image and (b) the corresponding two-dimensional
autocorrelation reveal the regularity and hexagonal ordering
of the dots (from ref. 77).

[1] J. Burgd¨orfer, P. Lerner, and F. W. Meyer, Phys. Rev.

A44, 5674 (1991).

Huldt, P. Hvelplund, A. Johnson, H. Knudsen, L. Liljeby,
and K.G. Rensfelt, Nucl. Instr. & Meth. B9, 397 (1985).

[2] J. Burgd¨orfer and F. Meyer, Phys. Rev. A47, R20 (1993).
[3] J. H¨agg, C. Reinhold, and J. Burgd¨orfer, Phys. Rev. A55

[23] A. Niehaus, J. Phys. B19, 2925 (1986).
[24] R.H. Garvey, C.H. Jackman, and A.E.S. Green, Phys.

(1997).

[4] J. Burgd¨orfer in Review of Fundamental Processes and
Applications of Atoms and Ions, ed. C. Lin (World Sci-
entiﬁc, Singapore 1993) p. 517-614.
[5] H. Winter, Phys. Rep. 367, 387 (2002).
[6] HP. Winter and F. Aumayr, J. Phys. B 32, R39 (1999).
[7] A. Arnau et al., Surf. Sci. Rep. 27, 113 (1997).
[8] F. Aumayr and HP. Winter, Nucl. Instr. & Meth. B 233,

111 (2005).

(1990).

[9] J.P. Briand, et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 65, 159 (1990).

[10] L. Folkerts and R. Morgenstern, Europhys. Lett. 13, 377

[11] H.D. Hagstrum, Phys. Rev. 96 (1954) 336; Electron
and Ion Spectroscopy of Solids, eds. L. Fiermans at al.
(Plenum, NY, 1978) p. 273.

[12] E. Parilis, Proc.

Int. Conf. Phenomena in Ionized
Gases, Editura Akademiei Repulicii Socialistic Romania,
Buckarest, 1969, p. 24; I. Bitensky and E. Parilis, J. de
Physicle C2, 227 (1989).

[13] T. Neidhart, F. Pichler, F. Aumayr, HP. Winter, M.
Schmid, and P. Varga, Phys. Rev. Lett. 74 5280 (1995).
T. Neidhart, F. Pichler, F. Aumayr, HP. Winter, M.
Schmid, and P. Varga, Nucl. Instr. & Meth. B 98, 465
(1995).

[14] N. Bohr, Kgl. Danske Videnskab. Selska B. Mat-fys.

Medd. XVIII, No. 8 (1948).

[15] L.H. Thomas, Proc. Roy. Soc. A114, 5611 (1927).
[16] T. Bonsen and L. Vriens, Physica 47, 307 (1970).
[17] R. Abrines and I.C. Percival, Proc. Phys. Soc. 88, 861,

873 (1966).

[18] see e.g. T. Winter, Phys. Rev. A 25, 697 (1982); N.

Toshima, Phys. Rev. A 50, 3940 (1994).

[19] see e.g. T. Minami et al. J. Phys. B 37, 4025 (2004).
[20] H. Ryufuku, K. Sasaki, and T. Watanabe, Phs. Rev. A21

(1998).

[21] N. Bohr and J. Lindhard, Dan. Vid. Sel. Mat. Phys.

745 (1980).

Medd. 78. No. 7 (1954).

[22] A. B´ar´any, G. Astner, H. Cederquist, H. Danared, S.

Rev. A12, 1144 (1975), and references therein.

[25] P.J. Jennings, R.O. Jones, and M. Weinert, Phys. Rev.
B37, 6113 (1988); P.J. Jennings and R.O. Jones, Ad-
vances in Physics 37, 341 (1988).

[26] S. Deutscher, X. Yang, and J. Burgd¨orfer, Phys. Rev.

[27] H. Winter, C. Auth, R. Schuch and E. Beebe, Phys. Rev.

A55, 466 (1997).

Lett. 71, 1939 (1993).

[28] F. Aumayr, H. Kurz, D. Schneider, M.A. Briere, J.W.
McDonald, C.E. Cunningham and HP Winter, Phys.
Rev. Lett. 71, 1943 (1993).

[29] C. Lemell, HP. Winter, F. Aumayr, J. Burgd¨orfer, and

F. Meyer, Phys. Rev. A53, 880 (1996).

[30] S. Ninomya, Y. Yamazaki, F. Koike, H. Masuda, T.
Azuma, K. Komaki, K. Kuroki, and M. Sekiguchi, Phys.
Rev. Lett. 78, 4557 (1997).

[31] K. T˝ok´esi, L. Wirtz, C. Lemell, and J. Burgd¨orfer, Phys.
Rev. A 61, 020901 (R) (2000); Phys. Rev. A 62, 042902
(2001).

[32] Y. Morishita, R. Hutton, H.A. Torii, K. Tomaki, T.
Brage, K. Ando, K. Ishii, and Y. Yamazaki, Phys. Rev.
A 70, 012902 (2004).

[33] C. Reinhold and J. Burgd¨orfer, J. Phys. B 26, 3101

(1993).

[34] P. Nordlander and J.C. Tully, Phys. Rev. Lett. 61, 990
(1988); Surf. Sci. 211/212, 207 (1989); Phys. Rev. B 42,
5564 (1990).

[35] A.B. Borisov and V. Sidis, Phys. Rev. B56, 10628 (1997).
[36] E.A. Garcia et al., Phys. Rev. B59, 13370 (1999).
[37] L. Wirtz et al., Phys. Rev. A68, 032902 (2003).
[38] G. Hayderer et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 83, 3948 (1999).
[39] S. Deutscher, Ph.D. Thesis, FU Berlin, Shaker-Verlag

[40] A. Borisov et al., Phys. Rev. B63, 045407 (2001).
[41] A. Borisov and J. Gauyacq, Phys. Rev. B62, 4265 (2000).
[42] H. Chakraborty et al., Phys. Rev. A 70, 052903 (2004).
[43] E. Runge, E.K.U. Gross, Phys. Rev. Lett. 52, 997 (1984).
E.K.U. Gross, W. Kohn, Phys. Rev. Lett. 55, 2850

(1985).

(1988).

[44] K. Shafer, N. Kwong, and J. Garcia, Surf. Sci 199, 132

[45] C. Lemell et al., Nucl. Instr. Meth. B235, 425 (2005).
[46] N. Rohringer, S. Peter, and J. Burgd¨orfer, submitted to

Phys. Rev. Lett. (2005).

[47] L. Wirtz, C. Reinhold, C. Lemell, and J. Burgd¨orfer,

Phys. Rev. A67, 012903 (2003).

[48] J. Burgd¨orfer, C. Reinhold, and F. Meyer, Nucl. Instr.

[49] S. Winecki, M. St¨ockli, and C. Cocke, Phys. Rev. A55,

[50] J. Burgd¨orfer, C. Reinhold, and F. Meyer, Nucl. Instr.

Meth. B205, 690 (2003).

4310 (1997).

Meth. B98, 415 (1995).

[51] J. Burgd¨orfer and J. Gibbons, Phys. Rev. A 42, 1206
(1990), J. Burgd¨orfer in Proceedings of 16th ICPEAC
(eds. A. Dalgarno et al.) AIP Conf. Proc. 205, 476
(1990).

Lett. (2005, in press).

[53] J.-P. Briand, S. Thuriez, G. Giardino, G. Borsoni, M.
Froment, M. Eddrief, and C. S´ebenne, Phys. Rev. Lett.
77, 1452 (1996).

[54] F. Aumayr, private communication (2005).
[55] K. T˝ok´esi, X.-M. Tong, C. Lemell and J. Burgd¨orfer,
in Quantum

Phys. Rev. A 72, 022901 (2005); Adv.
Chemistry 46, 29 (2004).

[56] N. Stolterfoht, J. Bremer, V. Hoﬀmann, R. Hellhammer,
D. Fink, A. Petrov, and B. Sulik, Phys. Rev. Lett. 88,
133201 (2002).

[58] R. Ritchie and A. Marusak, Surf. Sci. 4, 234 (1966).
[59] Gy. Vikor, R.T. Rajendra Kumar, Z.D. Pes´ic, N. Stolter-

13

foht, and R. Schuch, Nucl. Instr. and Meth. Phys. Res.
B233, 218 (2005).

[60] Y.Kanai, private communication (2005).
[61] F. Aumayr, private communication (f2005).
[62] Data sheets of Mylar (http://www.dupontteijinﬁlms.com).
[63] K. Schiessl, W. Palﬁnger, C. Lemell, and J. Burgd¨orfer,
Nucl. Instr. Meth. B232, 228 (2005), and Phys. Rev. A
(2006, in press).

[64] C. Rau and R. Sitzmann, Phys. Lett. 43A, 317 (1973);
C. Rau, J. Magn. Magn. Mater. 31-34, 874 (1983).
[65] R. Zimny, H. Hagedorn, H. Winter, and J. Kirschner,

Appl. Phys. Lett. A47, 77 (1988).

[66] R. Pfandzelter et al. Phys. Rev. Lett. 86, 4152 (2001).
[67] M. Unipan et al. Nucl. Instr. Meth. B232, 1 (2005).
[68] B. Solleder et al., to be published (2005).
[69] M. Kaminski, Phys. Rev. Lett. 23, 819 (1969).
[70] F. Aumayr, J. Burgd¨orfer, P. Varga, and HP. Winter,

Comments At. Mol. Phys. 34, 201 (1999).

[72] J. Burgd¨orfer and Y. Yamazaki, Phys. Rev. A54, 4140

[73] G. Hayderer et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 86, 3530 (2001).
[74] D. Schneider et al., Surf. Sci. 204, 403 (1993).
[75] I. Gebeshuber et al., Int. J. Mass. Spec. 229, 27 (2005).
[76] T. Meguro, Y. Yamaguchi, H. Fukagawa, H. Tanai, N
Hanano, Y. Yamamoto, and T. Ishii, Nucl. Instr. Meth.
B235, 431 (2005).

[77] R. Bradley and J. Harper, J. Vac. Sci. Technol. A6, 2390

(1996).

(1996).

(1988).

[57] see e.g., A. Liebsch, Electronic Excitations at Metal Sur-

[78] T. Bobek et al., Phys. Rev. B68, 085324 (2003), S. Facsko

faces (Plenum, NY, 1997).

et al. Science 285, 1551 (1999).

[52] C. Deiss, N. Rohringer, and J. Burgd¨orfer, Phys. Rev.

[71] H.P. Cheng and J.D. Gillaspy, Phys. Rev. B55, 2628

