6
0
0
2
 
y
a
M
 
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
m
o
t
a
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
8
1
0
5
0
6
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Long-lived Bloch oscillations with bosonic Sr atoms and application to gravity
measurement at micrometer scale

G. Ferrari, N. Poli, F. Sorrentino, and G. M. Tino∗
Dipartimento di Fisica and LENS, Istituto Nazionale Fisica Nucleare,
Istituto Nazionale Fisica della Materia, Polo Scientiﬁco-Universit di Firenze, 50019 Sesto Fiorentino, Italy

We report on the observation of Bloch oscillations on the unprecedented time scale of several
seconds. The experiment is carried out with ultra-cold bosonic strontium-88 loaded into a vertical
optical standing wave. The negligible atom-atom elastic cross section and the absence of spin makes
88Sr an almost ideal Bose gas insensitive to typical mechanisms of decoherence due to thermalization
and to external stray ﬁelds. The small size enables precision measurements of forces at micrometer
scale. This is a challenge in physics for studies of surfaces, Casimir eﬀects, and searches for deviations
from Newtonian gravity predicted by theories beyond the standard model.

PACS numbers: 03.75.-b, 04.80.-y, 32.80.-t

Quantum devices using ultracold atoms show extraor-
dinary features. Atom interferometry is used for preci-
sion inertial sensors [1, 2], to measure fundamental con-
stants [3, 4, 5], and testing relativity [6]. The small size
enables precision measurements of forces at micrometer
scale. This is a challenge in physics for studies of surfaces,
Casimir eﬀects [7], and searches for deviations from New-
tonian gravity predicted by theories beyond the standard
model [8, 9]. Here we show that using laser-cooled stron-
tium atoms in optical lattices, persistent Bloch oscilla-
tions are observed for t ≃ 10 s, and gravity is determined
with ppm sensitivity on micrometer scale. The insensi-
tivity to stray ﬁelds and collisions makes Sr in optical
lattices, a candidate also for future clocks [10], a unique
sensor for small-scale forces with better performances and
reduced complexity compared to proposed schemes using
degenerate Bose [11] or Fermi [12] gases. This improves
the feasibility of new experiments on gravity in unex-
plored regions.

The conﬁnement of ultracold atoms in optical lattices,
regular structures created by interfering laser beams
where the atoms are trapped by the dipole force, pro-
vides clean model systems to study condensed-matter
physics problems [13].
In particular, Bloch oscillations
were predicted for electrons in a periodic crystal poten-
tial in presence of a static electric ﬁeld [14] but could not
be observed in natural crystals because of the scattering
of electrons by the lattice defects. They were directly
observed using atoms in an optical lattice [15].

In our experiment, laser-cooled 88Sr atoms are trapped
in a 1-dimensional vertical optical lattice. The combi-
nation of the periodic optical potential and the linear
gravitational potential gives rise to Bloch oscillations at
frequency νB given by

νB =

mgλL
2h

∗Electronic address: Guglielmo.Tino@ﬁ.infn.it

where m is the atomic mass, g is the acceleration of
gravity, λL is the wavelength of the light producing the
lattice, and h is Plancks constant. Since both λL and
m are well known, the overall force along the lattice axis
can be determined by measuring the Bloch frequency νB.
In order to do a force measurement with given interro-
gation time, the atomic wavefunction has to undergo a
coherent evolution on the same time timescale. The most
common eﬀects limiting the coherence time for ultracold
atoms are perturbations due to electromagnetic ﬁelds and
atom-atom interactions. 88Sr is in this respect a good
choice because in the ground state it has zero orbital, spin
and nuclear angular momentum that makes it insensitive
to stray electric and magnetic ﬁelds that otherwise need
to be shielded. In addition, 88Sr has remarkably small
atom-atom interactions [16]; this prevented so far the
achievement of Bose-Einstein condensation for this atom
[16, 17] but becomes an important feature in experiments
where collisions lead to a loss of coherence limiting the
measurement time and the potential sensitivity.

The experimental setup used in this work is schemat-
ically shown in Fig. 1. The method used to produce
ultracold Sr atoms was already described in [18]. The ex-
periment starts with trapping and cooling ∼ 5 × 107 88Sr
atoms at 3 mK in a magneto-optical trap (MOT) oper-
ating on the 1S0-1P1blue resonance line at 461 nm. The
temperature is then further reduced by a second cool-
ing stage in a red MOT operating on the 1S0-3P1narrow
transition at 689 nm and ﬁnally we obtain ∼ 5 × 105
atoms at 400 nK. After this preparation phase, that takes
about 500 ms, the red MOT is switched oﬀ and a one-
dimensional optical lattice is switched on adiabatically in
50 µs. The lattice potential is originated by a single-mode
frequency-doubled Nd:YVO4 laser (λL = 532 nm) deliv-
ering up to 350 mW on the atoms with a beam waist
of 200 µm. The beam is vertically aligned and retro-
reﬂected by a mirror producing a standing wave with a
period λL/2 = 266 nm. The corresponding photon re-
coil energy is ER = h2/2mλ2
L = kB × 381 nK. As ex-
pected from band theory [19], the amplitude of the oscil-
lation in momentum space decreases as the lattice depth

2

ones shown in Fig. 2, are integrated along the horizontal
direction and ﬁtted with the sum of two Gaussian func-
tions. From each image, two quantities are extracted
that are reported in Fig. 3 as a function of the evolution
time in the lattice: the ﬁrst is the vertical momentum
distribution of the lower peak, that is shown in Fig. 3a.
The second is the width of the atomic momentum distri-
bution (i.e. the second momentum of the distribution)
which is shown in Fig. 3b. We ﬁnd that the latter is less
sensitive against noise-induced perturbations to the ver-
tical momentum. We observed ∼ 4000 Bloch oscillations
in a time t = 7 s. During this time, about 8000 pho-
ton momenta are coherently transferred to the atoms.
Oscillations continue for several seconds and the mea-
sured damping time of the amplitude is τ ∼ 12 s. To
our knowledge, the present results for number of Bloch
oscillations, duration, and the corresponding number of
coherently transferred photon momenta, are by far the
highest ever achieved experimentally in any physical sys-
tem.
From the measured Bloch frequency νB = 574.568(3) Hz
we determine the gravity acceleration along the optical
lattice g = 9.80012(5) ms−2. The overall estimated sensi-
tivity is 5×10−6 g and, neglecting the 500 ms preparation
of the atomic sample, we have a sensitivity of 4 × 10−5 g
at 1 second. We expect that a sensitivity of 10−7 g can
be achieved using a larger number of atoms, and reduc-
ing the initial temperature of the sample. Apart from
collisional relaxation, which should contribute to deco-
herence on a minute timescale, the main perturbation
to quantum evolution is represented by vibrations of the
retro-reﬂecting mirror [20]. Minor contributions to deco-
herence may come from the axial momentum dispersion
of the lattice at 10−6 due to its radial extension.

Fig.

4 illustrates the loss of visibility of the two-
component momentum distribution at the Bragg reﬂec-
tion. The persistent visibility of the bimodal distribu-
tion on more than 104 atoms directly reﬂects the single
atom coherent evolution on seconds timescale, while the
reduction in the signal-to-noise ratio is due to the 5 s
e−1 lifetime of the sample limited essentially by residual
background vapor pressure in the MOT chamber. It is
worth noting that the 5 s lifetime is not inconsistent with
the observed 12 s coherence time: the atoms that collide
with the room temperature background vapor are ejected
from the µK deep lattice potential and do not contribute
to the measured signal.

The micrometric spatial extension of the atomic cloud
in the vertical direction, and the possibility to load it
into the optical potential at micrometric distance from
a surface, makes the scheme we demonstrated particu-
larly suitable for the investigation of forces at small spa-
tial scales. The possibility of investigating the gravita-
tional force at small distances by atomic sensors was pro-
posed in [21], discussed in detail in [22], and preliminarly
demonstrated in [23]. Deviations from the Newtonian law
are usually described assuming a Yukawa-type potential

FIG. 1:
Simpliﬁed scheme of the apparatus used to ob-
serve Bloch oscillations and to measure g: Sr atoms are laser
cooled and trapped at a temperature of about 400 nK in a
red magneto-optical-trap (MOT). The MOT laser beams are
then switched-oﬀ and the atoms are transferred in a verti-
cal 1-dimensional optical lattice generated by a laser beam
retroreﬂected by a mirror; atoms are conﬁned in series of lay-
ers at the maxima of the standing wave by the dipole force.
We measure the momentum distribution of the atoms, after
the coherent evolution in the potential given by the periodic
potential plus gravity, by a time-of-ﬂight measurement, after
a free fall of 12 ms, using a resonant probe laser beam and
absorption imaging on a CCD camera.

is increased. This suggests that in order to measure the
Bloch frequency with maximum contrast the intensity of
the lattice laser should be reduced. On the other hand,
reducing the intensity results in a loss in the number of
trapped atoms because of the smaller radial conﬁnement.
For this reason, we used a lattice depth of 10 ER. For a
lattice potential depth corresponding to 10 ER, the trap
frequencies are 50 kHz and 30 Hz in the longitudinal and
and radial direction, respectively. Before being trans-
ferred in the optical lattice, the atom cloud in the red
MOT has a disk shape with a vertical size of 12 µm rms.
In the transfer, the vertical extension is preserved and
we populate about 100 lattice sites with 2 × 105 atoms
with an average spatial density of ∼ 1011 cm−3. After
letting the atoms evolve in the optical lattice, the lattice
is switched oﬀ adiabatically and we measure the momen-
tum distribution of the sample by a time-of-ﬂight mea-
surement, after a free fall of 12 ms, using a resonant probe
laser beam and absorption imaging on a CCD camera.

Fig.

2 shows time-of-ﬂight images of the atoms
recorded for diﬀerent times of evolution in the optical
lattice potential after switching-oﬀ the MOT. In the up-
per part of the frames, the atoms conﬁned in the optical
lattice can be seen performing Bloch oscillations due to
the combined eﬀect of the periodic and gravitational po-
tential. The average force arising from the photon recoils
transferred to the atoms compensates gravity.

The images obtained by absorption imaging, as the

3

FIG. 2: Time-of-ﬂight images of the atoms recorded for diﬀerent times of evolution in the optical lattice potential after
switching-oﬀ the MOT. In the upper part of each frame, the atoms conﬁned in the optical lattice perform Bloch oscillations for
the combined eﬀect of the periodic and gravitational potential. The average force arising from the photon recoils transferred
to the atoms compensates gravity. In the lower part, untrapped atoms fall down freely under the eﬀect of gravity.

FIG. 3: Bloch oscillation of 88Sr atoms in the vertical 1-
dimensional optical lattice under the eﬀect of gravity. Two
quantities are extracted from the analysis of the data: The
average vertical momentum of the lower peak (a) and the
width of the atomic momentum distribution (b). From the
ﬁt of the data in b, a Bloch frequency νB = 574.568(3) Hz is
obtained with a damping time τ ∼ 12 s for the oscillations.

FIG. 4: Vertical momentum distribution of the atoms at the
Bragg reﬂection recorded after an evolution time in the lattice
of 4 ms, 3 s, and 7 s. Bloch oscillations can be detected with
a good contrast for times as long as 7 s with more than 104
atoms. At longer times the signal-to-noise ratio is degraded
due to loss of atoms induced by collisions with the background
vapor pressure. For a better visibility the vertical scale was
rescaled among the three graphs.

V (r) = −G

(1 + αe

−r/λ)

m1m2
r

where G is Newtons gravitational constant, m1 and m2
are the masses, r is the distance between them. The pa-
rameter α gives the relative strength of departures from
Newtonian gravity and λ is its spatial range. Experi-
ments searching for possible deviations have set bounds
for the parameters α and λ. Recent results using micro-
cantilever detectors lead to extrapolated limits α ∼ 104
for λ ∼ 10 µm and for distances ∼ 1 µm it was not
possible to perform direct experiments so far [8, 9].

The small size and high sensitivity of the atomic probe
allows a direct, model-independent measurement at dis-
tances of a few µm from the source mass with no need for
modeling and extrapolation as in the case of macroscopic
probes. This allows to directly access unexplored regions
in the α − λ plane. Also, in this case quantum objects
are used to investigate gravitational interaction.

Our results indicate that our Sr atoms when brought
close to a thin layer can be used as probe for the grav-
itational ﬁeld generated by the massive layer[24]. If we
consider, in fact, a material of density ρ and thickness
d, the added acceleration of gravity in proximity of the
source mass is a = 2πGρd so that when d ∼ 10 µm and
ρ ≃ 10 g/cm3) as for tungsten crystals the resulting ac-
celeration is a ∼ 4 × 10−11 ms−2. Measuring νB at a
distance ∼ 4 µm away from the surface [25] would allow
to improve the constraint on α by two orders of magni-
tude at the corresponding range λ ∼ 4 µm. Spurious non-
gravitational eﬀects (Van der Waals, Casimir forces), also
present in other experiments, can be reduced by using an
electrically conductive screen and performing diﬀerential
measurements with diﬀerent source masses placed behind
it. Moreover, by repeating the same measure with the 4
stable isotopes (3 bosons, 1 fermion, with atomic mass
ranging from 84 to 88), hence modulating the gravity

4

potential through the probe mass instead of the source
mass, we can further discern among gravitational and
QED forces.

In conclusion, we observed persistent Bloch oscillations
of weak-interacting bosonic Sr atoms in a vertical optical
lattice for a time longer than 7 s, with more than 8000
photon momenta coherently transferred to the atoms.
In addition to the intrinsic interest of the observed ef-
fect, these results can be important for diﬀerent experi-
ments as, for example, in the measurement of fundamen-
tal constants. The small size and high sensitivity of the
new atomic sensor are important for the investigation
of small spatial-scale forces as in atom-surface interac-
tions, surface-induced decoherence, Casimir-Polder inter-
action, and for the search of recently predicted deviations
from the Newtonian gravitational law at the micrometer
scale. Crucially enough, when compared with other pro-
posals using Bose-Einstein condensates and degenerate

Fermi gases as probe, our scheme is not aﬀected by colli-
sional and mean-ﬁeld degrading eﬀects. This enables us
to reach much longer observation times and higher sen-
sitivities. In addition, our atoms are insensitive to stray
electric and magnetic ﬁelds and an all-optical procedure
is used for the cooling and the conﬁnement. The prepa-
ration of the ultracold atom sample takes less than 0.5
s, which is negligible with respect to measurement dura-
tion, and much faster the typical tens of seconds needed
for a cycle of evaporative and sympathetic cooling when
using degenerated gases.

We thank M. Artoni and G. Oppo for a critical read-
ing of the manuscript, G. Saccorotti for the seismic noise
measurements, and R. Ballerini, M. De Pas, M. Giuntini,
A. Hajeb for technical assistance. G. M. Tino acknowl-
edges stimulating discussions with E. A. Cornell. This
work was supported by Istituto Nazionale di Fisica Nu-
cleare, LENS, Ente Cassa di Risparmio di Firenze.

[1] A. Peters, K. Y. Chung, and S. Chu, Nature 400, 849

(1999).

[14] F. Bloch, Z. Phys. 52, 555 (1929).
[15] M. Raizen, C. Salomon, and Q. Niu, Physics Today 50

[2] T. L. Gustavson, A. Landragin, and M. A. Kasevich,

(1997, and references therein).

Class. Quantum Grav. 17, 2385 (2000).

[3] A. Wicht, J. M. Hensley, E. Sarajlic, and S. Chu, Physica

Scripta 102, 82 (2002).

[4] P. Clad´e, E. de Mirandes, M. Cadoret, S. Guellati-
Kh´elifa, C. Schwob, F. Nez, L. Julien, and F. Biraben,
Phys. Rev. Lett. 96, 033001 (2006).

[5] J. Stuhler, M. Fattori, T. Petelski, and G. M. Tino, J.

Opt. B: Quantum Semiclass. Opt. 5, S75 (2003).

[16] G. Ferrari, R. E. Drullinger, N. Poli, F. Sorrentino, and

G.M. Tino, Phys. Rev. A 73, 23408 (2006).

[17] T. Ido, Y. Isoya, and H. Katori, Phys. Rev. A 61,

061403(R) (2000).

[18] N. Poli, R. E. Drullinger, G. Ferrari, J. L´eonard, F. Sor-
rentino, and G. M. Tino, Phys. Rev. A 71, 061403(R)
(2005).

[19] N. Ashcroft and N. Mermin, Solid State Physics (Saun-

[6] S. Fray, C. A. Diez, T. W. Haensch, and M. Weitz, Phys.

ders, 1976).

[7] M. Antezza, L. P. Pitaevskii, and S. Stringari, Phys. Rev.

Rev. Lett. 93, 240404 (2004).

Lett. 95, 113202 (2005).

[8] J. C. Long, H. W. Chan, A. B. Churnside, E. A. Gul-
bis, M. C. M. Varney, and J. C. Price, Nature 421, 922
(2005).

[9] S. J. Smullin, A. A. Geraci, D. M. Weld, J. Chiaverini,
S. Holmes, and A. Kapitulnik, Phys. Rev D 72, 122001
(2005).

[20] Independent measurements with an accelerometer at the
level of the retro-reﬂecting mirror indicate a seismic noise
consistent with the observed damping time.

[21] G.M. Tino, High precision gravity measurements by atom
interferometry. In I. Ciufolini, D. Dominici, L. Lusanna
eds.: A Relativistic Spacetime Odyssey - Proceedings of
JH Workshop, Firenze, 2001 (World Scientiﬁc, 2003).
Also, Tino G. M., Nucl. Phys. B 113, 289 (2003).
[22] S. Dimopoulos and A. A. Geraci, Phys. Rev. D 68,

[10] M. Takamoto, F.-L. Hong, R. Higashi, and H. Katori,

124021 (2003).

Nature 435, 321 (2005).

[23] D. M. Harber, J. M. Obrecht, J. M. McGuirk, and E. A.

[11] B. P. Anderson and M. A. Kasevich, Science 282, 1686

Cornell, Phys. Rev. A 72, 033610 (2005).

[12] G. Roati, E. de Mirandes, F. Ferlaino, H. Ott, G. Mod-
ugno, and M. Inguscio, Phys. Rev. Lett. 92, 230402
(2004).

[13] I. Bloch, Nat. Phys. 1, 253001 (2005, and references

(1998).

therein).

[24] S. Kuhr, W. Alt, D. Schrader, M. Mueller, V. Gomer,

and D. Meschede, Science 293, 278 (2001).

[25] I. Carusotto, L. Pitaevskii, S. Stringari, G. Modugno,
and M. Inguscio, Phys. Rev. Lett. 95, 093202 (2005).

