6
0
0
2
 
n
u
J
 
6
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
m
o
t
a
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
0
5
1
6
0
6
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Diﬀuse light scattering dynamics under conditions of
electromagnetically induced transparency

V.M. Datsyuk, I.M. Sokolov, D.V. Kupriyanov
Department of Theoretical Physics, State Polytechnic University, 195251, St.-Petersburg, Russia∗

M.D. Havey
Department of Physics, Old Dominion University, Norfolk, VA 23529†
(Dated: February 2, 2008)

We show that, under conditions of electromagnetically induced transparency (EIT), a signiﬁcant
portion of the incident probe pulse can be transferred into Rayleigh and Raman scattering channels.
The light scattered into the Rayleigh channel emerges from the sample with an EIT time delay. We
show that a proper description of the probe light propagation in the sample should include, in the
diﬀusion dynamics, a spin polariton generated by the two-photon EIT process. The results have
important implications for studies of weak light localization, and for manipulation of single and few
photon states in ultracold atomic gases.

PACS numbers: 34.50.Rk, 34.80.Qb, 42.50.Ct, 03.67.Mn

I.

INTRODUCTION

∼

External control of the electrodynamic response of
atomic systems has been revolutionized by the merger of
the ideas of coherent population trapping [1, 2, 3, 4] with
the techniques and concepts of ultracold atom physics
[5]. The potential aﬀorded by the combination was ﬁrst
demonstrated in the remarkable experiments of Hau, et
al. [6], in which a coherent light pulse was compressed in
an ultracold gas of sodium atoms, the excitation having
a very small group velocity
17 m/s. Subsequent ex-
tensive theoretical and experimental research has shown
that a combined atomic-photonic quasiparticle excitation
is created in the ultracold medium, and that the prop-
erties of the polariton can be dynamically manipulated
through the external qualities of the light ﬁelds used to
prepare and probe the medium [2, 3, 4, 7]. Since then,
studies have shown a broad range of physics associated
with coherent manipulation of propagation of electro-
magnetic waves [8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15]. For example,
Chaneli`ere and co researchers have recently shown, in a
series of beautiful experiments [16], that it is possible to
generate single photon wave packets, and to map them
into polaritons in an ultracold sample of 85Rb atoms.
The single photon wave packets could be regenerated af-
ter a controllable delay by judicious application of a con-
trol electromagnetic ﬁeld. The physical processes associ-
ated with manipulation and storage of individual photon
wave packets, and entanglement of the quantum states
of the packets with a propagating one, are critical ele-
ments for quantum information protocols and quantum
memory applications.

Among the essential elements needed for practical ap-
plications is quantitative understanding of coherence loss

∗Electronic address: Kupr@DK11578.spb.edu
†Electronic address: mhavey@odu.edu

mechanisms in each stage of a quantum information pro-
tocol. In many studies of storage and retrieval of single
and multiple quantum wave packets in ultracold gases,
the initially created excitation undergoes decay as the
length of the storage time is increased. In this paper, we
focus quantitatively on one mechanism which can lead
to such a potential loss of ﬁdelity, and some of the sur-
prising physics that results from these considerations. In
particular, we consider the diﬀusely (multiply) scattered
light that is necessarily generated as a result of optical
excitation with temporally ﬁnite light pulses. In a gen-
eral case, the associated ﬁnite spectral band width pro-
duces diﬀusely scattered Rayleigh and Raman modes in
the sample. These modes show quite diﬀerent temporal
behavior, in comparison with the coherent forward scat-
tered probe light. In addition, because the Rayleigh scat-
tered component maintains coherence with the incident
probe beam, a new type of quasiparticle, a diﬀuse po-
lariton, is created. Finally, we point out that the physics
of light diﬀusion in a coherent medium consisting of a
thermal (not ultracold) gas of Rb atoms has been inves-
tigated by Matsko, et al. [14]. We point out that there
have been a large number of studies of the fascinating
physics of coherent population trapping; some represen-
tative papers are cited here [8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14]. A
number of reviews have also appeared on the subjects of
EIT and coherent population trapping, and contempo-
rary applications [1, 3, 4, 17, 18].

In the remainder of this paper, we ﬁrst consider in
more detail why, in the context of the previous discus-
sion, the diﬀuse scattering channels are important. This
is followed by a description and discussion of the complex
susceptibility for the case of a typical lambda conﬁgura-
tion attainable on hyperﬁne resonance transitions in an
ultracold gas of 87Rb atoms [19]. The scattering channels
are then considered, with particular attention paid to the
Green’s function for propagation in the inhomogeneous
and optically anisotropic medium. We then present our
results describing the temporal behavior of the forward

scattered light and the diﬀusely scattered ﬂuorescence.
We ﬁnally show that the coherence of the multiply scat-
tered Rayleigh mode can be detected through the appear-
ance of the coherent backscattering eﬀect for the weak
probe beam.

II. BASIC ASSUMPTIONS AND
CALCULATION APPROACH

A. Why the scattering channels are important

As an example of a system where EIT resonance can
be clearly observed, we consider the Λ-type conﬁgura-
tion in the hyperﬁne manifold of the D1-line of 87Rb, see
Fig. 1 A strong coupling ﬁeld with right-handed circu-
lar polarization is applied between the F = 2 hyperﬁne
sublevel of the ground state and F ′ = 1 hyperﬁne com-
ponent of the excited level. The atoms equally populate
the relevant Zeeman states of the lower hyperﬁne sublevel
F = 1. In the ﬁgure, the detuning of the coupling (probe)
laser from atomic resonance is deﬁned as ∆1 (∆2). Such
an atomic conﬁguration is typical for EIT observation
and can be fashioned in ultracold systems using for ex-
ample, magneto-optic or quasistatic dipole traps. Such
conﬁgurations have also been widely studied in more tra-
ditional heated atomic gas cells; see for examples, Ref.
[12, 13, 14].

In the present paper, we assume that atoms are so
deeply slowed by an atomic cooling process that we can
neglect all eﬀects associated with atomic motion. These
are ideal conditions for EIT and the probe mode, applied
F ′ = 1 hyperﬁne
with any polarization to the F = 1
transition, would ﬁnd respective Λ-type excitation chan-
nels, thus generating, as a result of the coherent Raman
process, hyperﬁne coherence in the ground levels. To set
our terminology, we refer in brief to Rayleigh and elastic
Raman scattering processes as Rayleigh scattering. The
terminology Raman scattering refers only to hyperﬁne
inelastic Raman scattering. All time scales are measured
relative to the inverse lifetime Γ−1 of the 87Rb resonance
transition.

→

To reliably observe the conversion of the probe pulse
into a polariton-type quasiparticle state, which, as ex-
pected, would forwardly propagate through the sample,
some temporal and spectral requirements should be ful-
ﬁlled. There are two important temporal parameters for
the process: the pulse duration τp and the delay time τd
between the entrance and emergence of the probe light
pulse. Apparently, for high-ﬁdelity conversion of the full
incident light pulse into the polariton pulse, it is desir-
able that τd > τp. For the simplest Λ-type conﬁguration
the delay time can be estimated as

τd =

L
¯v ∼

n0λ2L

Γ
Ω2
R

(2.1)

where L is the sample length, ¯v is a group velocity for the
probe mode at the resonance, n0 is the density of atoms,

2

FIG. 1: An example of an excitation scheme for observation
of the EIT eﬀect in the system of hyperﬁne and Zeeman sub-
levels of the D1-line of 87Rb. The coupling ﬁeld is applied with
right-handed circular polarization to the F = 2 → F ′ = 1
transition and the probe mode in the orthogonal left-handed
polarization excites the atoms on the F = 1 → F ′ = 1 tran-
sition. The EIT eﬀect appears for equal detunings of the
coupling and probe modes from atomic resonances: ∆1 = ∆2

λ is the wavelength divided by 2π for the probe radiation,
Γ is the natural decay rate for the upper state and ΩR
is the Rabi frequency for the coupling mode. The time
τp can be estimated via the time-frequency uncertainty
principle, i.e. as τp ∼
1/∆p, where ∆p is the spectral
width of the pulse. The spectral width ∆p is restricted
by the condition that, at the relevant detuning from the
EIT resonance, the optical thickness of the sample b(∆2)
at ∆2 = ∆p would be small enough and the medium
would be transparent. Then in order of magnitude the
pulse duration τp is limited by the inequality

τp >

n0λ2L

q

Γ
Ω2
R

(2.2)

1
For an optically extended medium with
the pulse duration can be made shorter than the delay
time. But in reality such an optically dense sample is
rather diﬃcult to prepare in an experiment with ultracold
atoms, where the parameter n0λ2L is typically close to
ten or even less in order of magnitude.

p

≫

n0λ2L

The problem is more subtle if the EIT channel is ad-
justed for transport of a portion of ”non-classical” light.
As a particular example, one can imagine a pulse of for-
wardly propagating squeezed light. Such states of light
can be created with an intra-cavity optical parametric
light source and its spectral properties can be controlled
with the quality factor of the cavity. For such a light
source the outgoing radiation can be properly described
by the model proposed by Collett and Gardiner in Ref.
[20] when the squeezed (X1) and anti-squeezed (X2)

quadrature components are described by the correlation
functions with diﬀerent relaxation times, which we re-
spectively denote as τ1 and τ2. In principle, there exists
an inequality between these correlation times τ2 > τ1,
which can be a strong constraint for high degrees of
squeezing. For reliable transport of the squeezed light
with preservation of its unique statistical properties it
would be necessary that τp > τ2 > τ1. The variation
of all these temporal parameters should be limited both
by the longer estimation (2.1) and the shorter estima-
tion (2.2). Apparently it would be more diﬃcult to fulﬁll
the EIT criteria for the squeezed light than for a pure
coherent light source.

However, the atomic sample can be probed with a light
pulse with shorter duration than is given by (2.2) and the
EIT-mechanism will work even if a portion of the light
pulse is transported via a non-forward scattering channel.
For such an experimental situation the pulse duration
τp can be limited by the time scale Γ/Ω2
R, given by the
inverse spectral width of the transparency window in the
local susceptibility of the medium. Then the input pulse
of the probe light should be transformed into a polariton-
type pulse in the diﬀuse mode, which now will ﬁll the
sample via a coherent diﬀusion (non-forward scattering)
process.

B. The macroscopic susceptibility and scattering
tensors

The dynamics of the macroscopic polarization, induced
by a probe radiation pulse, is driven by the dynamical
susceptibility of the medium. Referring to the excita-
tion scheme shown in Fig. 1, under conditions of EIT-
resonance, the susceptibility of the medium for the probe
mode entering the sample in a particular polarization is
generated by two coherently interacting Λ-type channels.
In the laboratory frame, with the z-axis directed along
the coupling beam, the susceptibility tensor has a diago-
nal form in the basis of circular polarizations and can be
written as the following sum

2

(de∗
q )nm|
|
∆2 + iΓ/2

1
¯h

ρmm(r)

′

q (r, ∆2) =
χq

′

δq
q

−

Vnm′
|
∆2 + iΓ/2

2
|

×

1
(cid:26)

−

Xn(m),m′(m),m
1

∆1 −

∆2 + Σnm′ (∆2)

(cid:27)

(2.3)

∓

iey)/√2 [22].

We use standard co/contravariant notation for the basis
vectors of circular polarizations, see [21], which can be
expressed by Cartesian basis vectors as e0 = ez, e±1 =
(ex ±
The ﬁrst line in (2.3) has an isotropic form and de-
scribes the local macroscopic susceptibility in the normal
approach of linear electrodynamics. Here the squared
transition dipole moments (de∗
q)nm between the lower
Zeeman sub-
n
m
|
|
levels are weighted with the population components of
the atomic density matrix ρmm(r) = n0(r)/(2F + 1),

and upper

i ≡ |

i ≡ |

F ′, n

F, m

i

i

3

where n0(r) is the local density of atoms at a spatial
point r. In a environment characteristic of ultracold and
trapped atoms, the density distribution is typically in-
homogeneous and the density matrix as well as the sus-
ceptibility tensor are spatially dependent. The frequency
detuning ∆2 is the oﬀset of the probe mode ω2 from the
resonance ∆2 = ω2 −

ωF ′F with F = 1, F ′ = 1.

The second line in (2.3) reveals the contribution of
the EIT-eﬀect. Here Vnm′ are the transition matrix el-
ements for the coupling mode between those quantum
F, m′
which are subse-
states
i
quently chained with an initial state
via the respec-
tive Λ-type excitation channel. This is indicated in the
sum by the dependence of the subscript indices on m:
m′ = m′(m) and n = n(m). The frequency detuning ∆1
is the oﬀset of the coupling mode ω1 from the resonance
ωF ′F with F = 2, F ′ = 1. The pole in the de-
∆1 = ω1 −
nominator of Eq.(2.3) is shifted due to the Autler-Townes
eﬀect and the self-energy correction is given by

m′
|

i
m
|

F ′, n

i ≡ |

i ≡ |

and

n
|

i

Σnm′(∆2)

∆nm′ (∆2)

Γnm′(∆2)

i
2

−

≡

= |

Vnm′
∆2 + iΓ/2

2
|

(2.4)

The susceptibility tensor (2.3) describes an anisotropic
and optically active medium despite the homogeneous
population of the Zeeman sublevels. This is a direct con-
sequence of the EIT-eﬀect. Anisotropy comes from the
diﬀerent Λ-type transitions activated by diﬀerently polar-
ized probe modes. This eﬀect has a similar physical na-
ture as various optical anisotropy eﬀects associated with
the presence of the strong coupling ﬁeld, see [23, 24, 25].

The scattering process in a medium is conveniently de-
scribed by the scattering tensor formalism. This tensor
is responsible for frequency- and polarization-dependent
transformation of an incident electromagnetic plane wave
as a result of its scattering on an isolated atom. Under
conditions of EIT control for the mode incident on atom
at frequency ω2, the scattering tensor is given by

′′

m)

ˆα(m
pq

(∆2)

′′

m)

α(m
pq

≡

m′′
(∆2)
|

ih

m

|

1
¯h

(dp)m′′n(dq)nm
∆2 + iΓ/2

m′′
|

ih

m

|

=

−

Xm′(n),n
Vnm′
1
|
∆2 + iΓ/2
(cid:26)

2
|

−

×

1

∆1 −

∆2 + Σnm′ (∆2)

(2.5)

(cid:27)

which determines the amplitude of the outgoing wave for
either the elastic or inelastic scattering channel accompa-
F m
m
nied by transition of the atom from the state
i ≡ |
|
i
F m′′
m′′
with F = 1 to the state
with F=1
i
|
(Rayleigh channel) or F = 2 (Inelastic Raman channel).
The scattering tensor should obey the following impor-

i ≡ |

tant identity

dΩ

Z

Xm′′ε′
=

4πω2
c

ω2(ω2 + ωmm′′)3
c4

′′

m)

(∆2)(ε′∗)pεq

α(m
pq
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)

Im

α(mm)
pq

(∆2)(ε∗)pεq

h

i

2

(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)

(2.6)

which is an optical theorem reﬂecting the unitary prop-
erty of the scattering process. Here εq and (ε′∗)p are re-
spectively the contravariant circular components of the
polarization vectors for the incident photon and of the
complex conjugated polarization vector for the scattered
photon. The sum is extended over all possible scattering
channels and all possible output polarizations. After in-
tegration over the full scattering angle the left hand side
reproduces the total scattering cross section.

i

i

n

n
|

m
|

i → |

m′
|

Because of their similar physical nature, the expres-
sions for the susceptibility tensor (2.3), and for the scat-
tering tensor (2.5) are visualized in similar form. The
important diﬀerence is that, in the expression (2.5), an
arbitrary reference frame can be assumed and any dipole-
can be initiated. At the same
type transitions
is coupled by the strong
time, each of the upper states
that is indi-
ﬁeld with a certain selected ground state
cated in the sum as m′ = m′(n). This prohibits the light
scattering for the resonance mode when ∆2 = ∆1 but
opens the scattering channel for any non-vanishing de-
tuning. Moreover, under the EIT eﬀect it becomes quite
important which scattering channel (elastic Rayleigh or
inelastic Raman) the probe photon occupies as it is scat-
tered away from its original forward propagation. An
elastically scattered photon still undergoes coherent cou-
pling and should emerge from the sample with a rela-
tively long delay. In contrast, in the Raman channel the
photon freely propagates through the sample with nearly
the (vacuum) speed of light because the medium is ideally
transparent in this case.

i

C. The Green’s function

Since the probe or scattered beam can propagate in
any direction, its free-path transformation can be prop-
erly described by the Green’s function formalism. For
the transmitted or elastically scattered light the Green’s
function can be expressed in the form of phase integrals

Dq1

q2 (r1, r2, ω2) =

×

cos(φ(r1, r2)) δq1
h

¯h
r1 −
|

eiφ0(r1,r2)+ik2|r1−r2|

r2|

−
q2 + i sin(φ(r1, r2)) (~nˆ~σ)q1

q2

(2.7)

i

Here k2 = ω2/c and ~n = ~n(∆2) is the ”unit” symbolic
vector, the components of which are deﬁned below.

The parameters of the phase integrals can be expressed
by the major components of the susceptibility tensor,
which are deﬁned by Eq.(2.3) and related to the probe
beam either co-propagating in the forward direction or

4

perpendicular to the coupling beam. In this sense, ex-
pression (2.7) gives a radiation zone asymptote for the
retarded-type Green’s function and the polarization in-
dices q1, q2 are deﬁned in the reference frame naturally
r2.
linked with the ray direction, such that z
In this frame the Green’s function has a non-diagonal
form in a natural basis of local circular polarizations with
q1,2 =

1 (left-hand/right-hand).

r1 −

k

±

The phase integrals are given by

φ0(r1, r2) =

χ0(r, ∆2) ds

φ(r1, r2) =

χ(r, ∆2) ds

(2.8)

2πω2
c
2πω2
c

r1

r2

Z

r1

r2

Z

and evaluated along a ray from point r2 to point r1. The
integrand χ0(r, ∆2) is expressed in terms of major-axes
components of the susceptibility tensor as

χ0(r, ∆2) =

−1(r, ∆2) + χ+1
χ−1

1 + cos2 β
4
sin2 β
2

+

(cid:2)
0(r, ∆2)
χ0

+1(r, ∆2)
(cid:3)
(2.9)

where β is the polar angle between the ray and the cou-
pling beam directions. The function χ(r, ∆2) is given by

χ(r, ∆2) =

1/2

3

"

Xi=1

i (r, ∆2)
χ2
#

(2.10)

where

χ1(r, ∆2) =

sin2 β
2

cos γ

1
2

(cid:26)

χ2(r, ∆2) =

sin2 β
2

sin γ

1
2

(cid:26)

−1(r, ∆2) + χ+1
χ−1

+1(r, ∆2)
(cid:3)

0(r, ∆2)
χ0

(cid:27)
−1(r, ∆2) + χ+1
χ−1

+1(r, ∆2)
(cid:3)

(cid:2)

−

(cid:2)

−

0(r, ∆2)
χ0

(cid:27)
−1(r, ∆2)
χ−1
(cid:3)

−

cos β
2

(cid:2)

χ3(r, ∆2) =

+1(r, ∆2)
χ+1

(2.11)

Here γ is an azimuthal angle indicating the uncertainty in
directions of a pair of orthogonal axes ﬁxing the reference
frame in the plane transverse to the ray. The ”unit”
symbolic vector ~n is deﬁned by its components as

ni = ni(∆2) =

(2.12)

χi(r, ∆2)
χ(r, ∆2)

and is independent of r.
case by the set of complex components (n1, n2, n3).

It is described in the general

III. RESULTS

A. The forward transmitted pulse

→

↔

The graphs in Figs. 2 and 3 show how the original
pulse proﬁle is modiﬁed after propagation through the
sample in an EIT channel. The calculations were done
for two diﬀerent pulse shapes, these being Gaussian-type
(Fig. 2) and rectangular-type (Fig. 3), with pulse widths
of τp = 100 Γ−1. In our numerical simulations we consid-
ered as an example 87Rb atoms, when the coupling ﬁeld
and the probe light excitations were respectively applied
F ′ = 1
F ′ = 1 (empty) and F = 1
at F = 2
(equally populated) hyperﬁne transitions, as shown in
Fig. 1. The coupling ﬁeld is always right-hand circularly
polarized and the probe ﬁeld can have varying polariza-
tion, being either left- or right-hand circularly polarized.
The calculations were based on attainable parameters of
an ultracold atomic cloud conﬁned in a magneto optic
trap. For a Gaussian atom distribution in the trap, the
weak-ﬁeld optical depth, on resonance and through the
center of the trap is given by b0 = √2πn0σ0r0, where
n0 is the peak density and σ0 is the normal (not mod-
iﬁed by the EIT eﬀect) resonance cross section, r0 is
the radius of the cloud. The dependencies shown in
Figs. 2 and 3 reproduce the pulse transformation af-
ter its passing through such an atomic sample with the
size r0 = 0.25 cm and peak optical depth b0 = 50. All the
parameters are in accordance with the condition that the
delay time τd is longer than the duration τp of the orig-
inal pulse. The inequality τd > τp can be controlled by
appropriate choice of the Rabi frequency for the coupling
, which we deﬁned with respect to the
Vnm′
ﬁeld Ωc = 2
|
|
m′ =
hyper-
n =
F = 2, M =
ﬁne Zeeman transition. For the dependencies shown in
Figs. 2 and 3, the Rabi frequency is given by Ωc = 0.4Γ.
For the case of a Gaussian proﬁle the output pulse
preserves the original shape but becomes more extended
in time. The highest ﬁdelity channel for reproduction
of the original pulse is obtained when the coupling and
probe ﬁelds are in orthogonal polarization states (blue
curve in Fig.2). The loss of the pulse energy is only 10%
for this case. But for the pulse transmitted through the
sample in the right-handed polarization channel there is
up to 40% energy loss. This is a clear manifestation of
the scattering process, which cannot be ignored, as we
argued by simple estimations in Section II A.

F ′ = 1, M ′ = 0

} ↔

−

{

{

1

}

The modiﬁcation of the pulse proﬁle manifests itself
even more dramatically if the probe pulse has a rectan-
gular shape. Due to dispersion the original pulse shape
is completely transformed in the extended medium to a
Gaussian form and the losses of energy are more signif-
icant for this case. That eﬀect is shown by the calcu-
lations of the outgoing pulse proﬁle presented in Fig. 3
for two diﬀerent polarization channels. The calculations
were done for the initial parameters similar to those used
in the calculation of the dependencies for Fig. 2. For the
outgoing pulses shown in Fig. 3 the losses are up to 60%

5

FIG. 2: Intensity proﬁles for light pulses transmitted through
a sample of 87Rb atoms via the EIT channels. The coupling
ﬁeld is applied on the empty F = 2 ↔ F ′ = 1 transition
with right-handed circular polarization and the probe ﬁeld,
exciting the atoms on the F = 1 → F ′ = 1 transition, is
either left-handed polarized (blue, short-dash curve) or right-
handed polarized (green, longer-dash curve). The black curve
indicates the original Gaussian-type pulse with a duration of
τp = 100 Γ−1.

FIG. 3: Same as in Fig. 2 but for a rectangular input pulse
proﬁle.

for the left-handed and up to 80% for the right-handed
polarization channels.

B. The scattered pulse

The plots in Fig. 4 reproduce the time dependence
of instantaneous intensity for the fractions of the light

Rm 

Rl   

Rm 

Rl   

s_ -> 

s_ -> 

s   -> 

+

s   -> 

+

h_

h_

h_

h_

 

 

FIG. 4: The intensity proﬁles for the portion of the light
pulse scattered at 900 to the direction of the incident pulse.
The curves represent the Rayleigh (Rl) channel (F = 1 →
F ′ = 1 → F = 1) and the Raman (Rm) channel (F = 1 →
F ′ = 1 → F = 2), with the input polarization state, and
polarization channel of the emerging light as indicated in the
caption. In all cases, the observation channel corresponds to
detection of light with left-hand helicity (h−).

→

F ′ = 1

→
F ′ = 1

pulse, originally incoming with Gaussian proﬁle shown
in Fig. 2, and scattered by the sample in a direction
orthogonal to the incident probe beam. Note that we
designate the polarization of the scattered light in terms
of its helicity, which is a natural choice when considering
the radiation propagating towards a detector. In Fig. 4,
the curves indicate our results for the Rayleigh scatter-
ing channel (F = 1
F = 1) and the Raman
→
channel (F = 1
F = 2). Let us recall here
→
that for the sake of brevity we do not distinguish between
elastic Raman and Rayleigh channels. The calculational
parameters were chosen the same as for the dependencies
of Figs. 2 and 3. The solid and dotted blue curves illus-
trate the portion of the scattered light pulse incoming
with left-handed circular polarization (σ−) and emerging
the sample in the left-hand helicity polarization (h−). In
turn, the short-dashed and long-dashed green curves il-
lustrate the portion of the scattered light pulse incoming
with right-handed polarization (σ+) and emerging the
sample again in the left-hand helicity polarization (h−).
Thus, for the intensity proﬁles shown in Fig. 4, the out-
going light is always considered in the left-hand helicity
polarization channel.

As follows from these dependencies, the scattered light
emerges the sample with a rather long delay in units of
Γ−1. This is an indication of the slow light phenomenon
typically associated with the EIT eﬀect, but for the scat-
tered light. The portion of the input pulse, distorted
in the scattering process, propagates through the sample
faster and is more extended in time than the transmitted
pulse. This can be explained by the spectral structure
of the scattered pulse, which has a deﬁcit of near reso-

6

nance photons for which the EIT mechanism works ide-
ally. For the scattered light pulse leaving the sample via
a Rayleigh channel, the group velocity is greater than for
the transmitted incident pulse. The photons created in
the Raman channel leave the sample with the speed of
light in vacuo because the medium is fully transparent
for them. The spectral notch in the distribution of the
scattered photons leads to the beating eﬀect in the time
behavior of the output light intensity, which is clearly
seen for all the scattering channels presented in Fig. 4.

To show the diﬀerence between the usual incoherent
scattering and scattering in the environment supporting
the EIT-eﬀect, let us turn to the physical background
of the process. If the medium is illuminated by a single
mode probe ﬁeld, which is precisely in the resonance with
the coupling ﬁeld such that ω1 = ω2 + ω21, where ω21 is
the hyperﬁne splitting in the diagram of Fig. 1, the entire
atom-ﬁeld system is described by the following density
matrix

ˆρ =

1
3

Xj=1,2

Ψjih
|

Ψj|

+ . . .

(3.1)

where dots denote the contribution of non-coupled state
and the sum j = 1, 2 is extended over two Λ schemes
shown in ﬁgure 1. The wave functions contributing to
the expansion (3.1) are given by

Ψji
|

=



Ω(j)
p
p + Ω(j)2

c

Ω(j)2

1
|

ij −

Ω(j)
c
p + Ω(j)2

c

Ω(j)2

2
|

ij



q

q

Field

i

× |



(3.2)

2
|

1
|

where
ij are respectively the left and right
ij and
atomic spin states coupled with the j-th Λ-type excita-
tion channel and Ω(j)
c and Ω(j)
p are the Rabi frequencies
respectively for the coupling and for the probe ﬁelds. For
the sake of simplicity we presume both the Rabi frequen-
cies to be real parameters. It is a crucial point of the EIT
eﬀect that despite the fact that even though the atomic
substate given in the square-brackets of (3.2) is not an
eigenstate of the atomic Hamiltonian, the full wavefunc-
tion
is an eigenstate of the entire atom-ﬁeld system
if the ﬁeld is in coherent state. Thus under conditions of
perfect Λ-resonance the system is not able to scatter the
light.

Ψji
|

However if the probe mode is not in exact two-photon
In
resonance the situation becomes more complicated.
the single atom case and as a ﬁrst approximation there
will be coherent beats with exchange of a photon between
coupling and probe modes of the ﬁeld, which are initiated
by low frequency phase oscillation of the atomic spin co-
herence. In a macroscopic system these beats are collec-
tivized and transformed to a polariton wave packet cre-
ated in the sample by a pulse of the probe ﬁeld enveloped
by a set of near resonance spectral modes. For a short

distance the polariton wave propagates in the forward
direction but it will be scattered at long distances if the
medium is optically extended. However the probe ﬁeld,
even being scattered via Rayleigh channels, remains in a
coherent state and can be also enveloped by the modes
inside the EIT spectral window. Thus the polariton wave
does not disappear as a result of Rayleigh scattering but
transforms to a diﬀuse coherent mode. The quantum na-
ture of such a diﬀuse polariton can be veriﬁed if the con-
trol ﬁeld is switched oﬀ and switched on again with delay.
Then the propagation of the polariton wave in the for-
ward direction and via Rayleigh scattering channel will
be stopped and be regenerated again with a time delay.
Thus the scattered light, as well as the transmitted light,
can be stored in the medium and recovered on demand.
That is a unique property of the light propagation under
EIT conditions.

C. The coherent backscattering process

A clear indicator of the coherence in the Rayleigh scat-
tering channel is the appearance of the coherent backscat-
tering (CBS) process. This eﬀect is a typical example
of a ”which path” interference fashioned by a disordered
medium. For a portion of a light wave emerging the sam-
ple in the backward direction there is constructive or,
for some special cases, destructive interference [26] be-
tween the scattering amplitudes along any multiple scat-
tering chain. The various manifestations of the CBS phe-
nomenon in ultracold atomic systems [27, 28, 29], and un-
der diﬀerent physical conditions, has been the subject of
many discussions during the last decade, see Kupriyanov,
et al. for a review [30]. Some future prospects in this ﬁeld
have been summarized by Havey and Kupriyanov [31]. In
the context of light scattering in an atomic environment
supporting the EIT eﬀect, the CBS process can be inter-
preted as interference between two unknown reciprocal
paths for the diﬀuse polaritonic wave propagating inside
the sample via Rayleigh scattering as shown schemati-
cally in Fig. 5. The speciﬁc nature of the EIT-resonance
essentially modiﬁes the time behavior of the interference
component of the outgoing wave packet in comparison
with how it is usually observed for a pulse-type excita-
tion of an opaque atomic medium.

For the scattering process developing in the standard
conditions of elastic scattering and for a rather long ex-
citation probe pulse the ”ladder” (non-interference) and
the ”crossed” (interference) components have an approx-
imately similar dependence on time. The important dif-
ference in their time behavior is mainly observable in the
transient stages of the excitation process, see Ref.
[30].
Inside the pulse the relation between the instantaneous
magnitudes of these components, usually expressed in
terms of the enhancement factor for the CBS output in-
tensity, has typically no time dependence. The enhance-
ment factor approaches a stable and constant value inside
the pulse. This value reproduces the enhancement factor

7

FIG. 5: A schematic diagram explaining the coherent
backscattering phenomenon. The polaritonic waves scattered
in the medium follow pairs of reciprocal scattering paths indi-
cated by the solid and dashed traces. The emergent electro-
magnetic ﬁeld in the backwards direction can show interfer-
ence between the propagating modes following the two paths.

for the steady state regime in conditions of a single mode
excitation of the atomic sample with a resonant probe
light. A crucial contrast for the CBS process observable
in an environment of the EIT eﬀect is that the resonant
carrier mode of the light pulse cannot be scattered and
the spectral proﬁle for the pulse fraction, deﬂected by
the medium from its original forward propagation, al-
ways has a narrow gap near this mode. That results in
a quite unusual time behavior for the interference over-
lap of two reciprocal fragments of the backscattered wave
packet.

h− and σ+ →

The dependencies of Figs. 6 and 7 illustrate the tempo-
ral behavior of the instantaneous intensity for the fraction
of the probe pulse scattered in the backward direction
h−. The
via the Rayleigh channels σ− →
outgoing intensity is mainly contributed by the ”ladder”-
type terms such that the interference contribution, shown
in the magniﬁed bottom parts of the graphs, gives actu-
ally only a few percent of the total intensity. For conve-
nience in these ﬁgures the gray curves indicate the time
proﬁles for the incoming and transmitted pulses. Let
us point out that these proﬁles slightly diﬀer from those
which are shown in Figs. 2 and 4 because the aperture
of the probe beams are selected diﬀerently for the two
calculations. In Fig. 2 the cross section of the beam was
less than the cross sectional area of the atomic cloud,
which is a natural requirement for measurements in slow
or stopped light experiments. Alternatively, for observ-
ing the CBS eﬀect from all atoms of the ensemble it is
more natural to make the cross-section of the probe beam
bigger than the cross sectional area of the atomic cloud.
The important feature of the dependencies displayed in
Figs. 6 and 7 is that the ”crossed”-type terms lead to an
oscillating interference enhancement near the midpoint

8

FIG. 8: The enhancement factor for σ+ → h− (green dashed
curve) and σ− → h− (blue solid curve) scattering channels.

It is an intriguing consequence of the calculation results
that the behavior of the enhancement factor is generally
quite complicated because of the nontrivial manifesta-
tion of diﬀerent spectral components of the input pulse
in formation of the backscattered fraction of the outgoing
pulse in diﬀerent scattering orders. The most important
seems an oscillating enhancement near the midpoint of
the scattered pulse, which corresponds with the polari-
tonic wave packet overlap inside the medium.

IV. CONCLUSIONS

In summary, we have made a theoretical and calcula-
tional investigation of the Rayleigh and Raman scattered
light modes in a medium conﬁgured to demonstrate elec-
tromagnetically induced transparency in the coherently
forward scattered light. In particular, for an anisotropic
and inhomogeneous sample of ultracold atoms we have
examined the time evolution of the forward scattered
light, the diﬀusely (multiply) scattered light in a char-
acteristic right-angle ﬂuorescence geometry, and in the
backscattering conﬁguration used to study weak local-
ization of light in ultracold atomic gases. The inten-
sity of the forward scattered light is modiﬁed by both
Rayleigh and Raman scattering of Fourier components
of the incident pulse which lie outside the EIT trans-
mission window.
In particular, the intensity of a light
pulse regenerated in a typical ’stopped-light’ experiment
is signiﬁcantly modiﬁed by the loss of these components,
which in part maintain their coherence with respect to
the incident light.
In addition, these components pro-
duce complex time dependence in both the ﬂuorescence
and in the coherent backscattering geometries. The in-
terferences responsible for the coherent backscattering
enhancement are a clear indicator of the coherence of
the scattering processes. We emphasize the fundamental
conclusion that light scattered into the Rayleigh modes
maintains its coherence with respect to the original in-

FIG. 6: The temporal proﬁles for the fraction of the light
pulse scattered in the backward direction for the σ− → h−
Rayleigh scattering channel. The blue solid curve is the total
intensity proﬁle and the dotted blue curve is the interference
contribution. The short- and long-dashed gray curves respec-
tively indicate the input and the transmitted pulses. For these
graphs the ordinate only qualitatively reproduces the relative
magnitudes of the pulse intensities.

FIG. 7: Same as in Fig. 6 but for the σ+ → h− Rayleigh
scattering channel.

of the backscattered pulse proﬁle.

The time behavior of the interference eﬀect can be
properly described in terms of the enhancement factor

η(t) =

IS(t) + IL(t) + IC (t)
IS(t) + IL(t)

(3.3)

where IS(t)+IL(t) is the contribution of single scattering
and of the ladder terms in multiple scattering and IC (t)
is the contribution of the crossed terms. The dependence
of η(t) on time is illustrated in the graphs of Fig. 8.

cident pulse. This is manifested by interferometric en-
hancement of the backwards scattered intensity from the
sample. This in turn implies that, along with the polari-
ton associated with the forward scattered light, a diﬀuse
and coherently related polariton coexists within the vol-
ume of the ultracold atomic sample. We close by noting
that a deeper understanding of the mesoscopic proper-
ties of the diﬀusive excitation is clearly required, and
this report represents a ﬁrst step in this direction. Fur-
ther theoretical and experimental research into this area
is underway.

Acknowledgments

9

We appreciate the ﬁnancial support of the National
Science Foundation (NSF-PHY-0355024), the Russian
Foundation for Basic Research (RFBR-05-02-16172-a),
INTAS (Project ID: 7904) and the North Atlantic Treaty
Organization (PST-CLG-978468). D.V.K. would like to
acknowledge ﬁnancial support from the Delzell Founda-
tion, Inc.

[1] Stephen E. Harris, Phys. Today 50, No. 7, 36 (1997).
[2] M.D. Lukin and A. Imamoglu, Nature 413, 273 (2001).
[3] M.D. Lukin, Rev. Mod. Phys. 75, 457 (2003).
[4] Michael Fleischhauer, Atac Imamoglu, and Jonathan P.

Marangos, Rev. Mod. Phys. 77, 633 (2005).

[5] Harold J. Metcalf and Peter van der Straten, Laser Cool-

ing and Trapping (Springer, New York, 1999).

[6] L.V. Hau, S.E. Harris, Z. Dutton, C.H. Behroozi, Nature

[7] M. Fleischhauer and M.D. Lukin, Phys. Rev. A 65,

397, 594 (1999).

022314 (2002).

[8] Danielle A. Braje, Vlatko Balic, Sunil Goda, G.Y. Yin,
and S.E. Harris, Phys. Rev. Lett. 93, 183601 (2004).
[9] Danielle A. Braje, Vlatko Balic, G.Y. Yin, and S.E. Har-

ris, Phys. Rev. A 68, 041801(R) (2003).

[10] Chien Liu, Zachary Dutton, Cyrus H. Behroozi, and Lene

Vestergaard Hau, Nature 409, 490 (2001).

[20] M.J. Collett and C.W. Gardiner, Phys. Rev. A 30, 1386

(1984).

[21] D.A. Varshalovich, A.N. Maskalev, V.K. Khersonskii,
Quantum Theory of Angular Momentum (World Scien-
tiﬁc Singapore, 1988).

[22] It is important to recognize that in this complex basis
set the contravariant basis-vectors are given by eq = e∗
q
and the metric tensor has non-diagonal form: (eq)p =
(−)qδq −p such that a right hand polarization vector with
q = +1 has negative covariant projection with p = −1.

[23] D. McGloin, M.H. Dunn and D.J. Fulton, Phys. Rev. A

[24] D. Cho, J.M. Choi, J.M. Kim, Q.H an, Park, Phys. Rev.

62, 053802 (2000).

A 72, 023821 (2005).

[25] V.A. Sautenkov, Y.V. Rostovtsev, H. Chen, P. Hsu,
G.S. Agarwal, M.O. Scully, Phys. Rev. Lett. 94, 233601
(2005).

[11] Min Yan, Edward G. Rickey, and Yifu Zhu, Phys. Rev.

[26] D.V. Kupriyanov, I.M. Sokolov, and M.D. Havey, Optics

A 64, 041801(R) (2001).

Comm. 243, 165 (2004).

[12] D. Budker, D.F. Kimball, S.M. Rochester, and V.V.

Yashchuk, Phys. Rev. Lett. 83, 1767 (1999).

[13] M.M. Kash, V.A. Sautenkov, A.S. Zibrov, L. Holberg,
G.R. Welch, M.D. Lukin, Yu. Rostovtsev, E.S. Fry, and
M.O. Scully, Phys. Rev. Lett. 82, 5229 (1999).

[14] A.B. Matsko, I. Novikova, M.O. Scully, and G.R. Welch,

Phys. Rev. Lett. 87, 133601 (2001).

[15] Yanhong Xiao, Irina Novikova, David F. Phillips, and
Ronald L. Walsworth, Phys. Rev. Lett. 96, 043601
(2006).

[16] T. Chaneli`ere, D.N. Matsukevich, S.D. Jenkins, S.-Y.
Lan, T.A.B. Kennedy, and A. Kuzmich, Nature 438, 833
(2005).

[17] J. P. Marangos, J. Mod. Opt. 45, 471 (1998).
[18] E. Arimondo, in Progress in Optics edited by E. Wolf,
Vol. XXXV, p.257 (Elsevier Science, Amsterdam, 1996).
[19] Marlan O. Scully and M Suhail Zubairy, Quantum Optics

(Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 1997).

[27] G. Labeyrie, F. deTomasi, J-C. Bernard, C.A. M¨uller,
C. Miniatura, and R. Kaiser, Phys. Rev. Lett. 83,
5266 (1999). See also, G. Labeyrie, C.A. M¨uller, D.S.
Wiersma, Ch. Miniatura, and R. Kaiser, J. Opt. B: Quan-
tum Semiclass. Opt. 2, 672 (2000).

[28] Y. Bidel, B. Klappauf, J.C. Bernard, D. Delande, G.
Labeyrie, C. Miniatura, D. Wilkowski, and R. Kaiser,
Phys. Rev. Lett. 88, 203902-1 (2002).

[29] D.V. Kupriyanov,

I.M. Sokolov, P.Kulatunga, C.I.
Sukenik, and M.D. Havey, Phys. Rev. A 67, 013814
(2003); D.V. Kupriyanov, I.M. Sokolov, N.V. Larionov,
P. Kulatunga, C.I. Sukenik, S. Balik, and M.D. Havey,
Phys. Rev. A 69, 033801 (2004).

[30] D.V. Kupriyanov, I.M. Sokolov, C.I. Sukenik, M.D.

Havey, Laser Phys. Lett. 3, 223 (2006).

[31] Mark D. Havey and Dmitriy V. Kupriyanov, Physica

Scripta 72, C30 (2005).

