6
0
0
2
 
n
u
J
 
2
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
m
o
t
a
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
4
9
0
6
0
6
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Controlling high-harmonic generation and above-threshold ionization with an
attosecond-pulse train

C. Figueira de Morisson Faria1, P. Sali`eres2, P. Villain2, and M. Lewenstein3,4
1Centre for Mathematical Science, City University,
Northampton Square, London EC1V 0HB, United Kingdom
2CEA-SPAM, Bˆat. 522, Centre d’Etudes de Saclay, F-91191 Gif-Sur-Yvette, France
3ICREA, Instituci´o Catalana di Recerca i Estudis Avan¸cats, and ICFO,
Institut de Ci`encies Fot`oniques, E-08860 Castelldefels (Barcelona), Spain
4Institut f¨ur theoretische Physik, Universit¨at Hannover, Appelstr. 2, D-30167 Hannover, Germany
(Dated: December 11, 2013)

We perform a detailed analysis of how high-order harmonic generation (HHG) and above-threshold
ionization (ATI) can be controlled by a time-delayed attosecond-pulse train superposed to a strong,
near-infrared laser ﬁeld. In particular we show that the high-harmonic and photoelectron intensities,
the high-harmonic plateau structure and cutoﬀ energies, and the ATI angular distributions can be
manipulated by changing this delay. This is a direct consequence of the fact that the attosecond pulse
train can be employed as a tool for constraining the instant an electronic wave packet is ejected in
the continuum. A change in such initial conditions strongly aﬀects its subsequent motion in the laser
ﬁeld, and thus HHG and ATI. In our studies, we employ the Strong-Field Approximation and explain
the features observed in terms of interference eﬀects between various electron quantum orbits. Our
results are in agreement with recent experimental ﬁndings and theoretical studies employing purely
numerical methods.

I.

INTRODUCTION

and order-dependent phase of the atomic dipole [14].

High-frequency light pulses of attosecond (10−18s) du-
ration have caused a breakthrough in metrology, allowing
one to resolve and control dynamical processes occurring
in the subfemtosecond and subangstr¨om scale [1]. This is
in particular possible due to the fact that one attosecond
is roughly the time it takes for light to travel through
atomic distances. Attosecond pulses may be used, for
instance, for tracing the motion of bound electrons [2],
exciting inner shell electrons [3], controlling molecular
motion [4], electron emission [5], high-harmonic genera-
tion [6, 7] or above-threshold ionization [8].

Such pulses owe their existence to the fact that high-
order harmonics, which are generated by rare gases in-
teracting with intense (I ∼ 1014W/cm2), near-infrared
(IR) laser ﬁelds of femtosecond duration, are nearly phase
locked. Hence, by superposing a large number of har-
monics one may obtain attosecond pulses in the extreme
ultraviolet range [1]. There exist two approaches to
attosecond-pulse production. One may generate isolated
attosecond pulses from few-cycle laser pulses [2, 9, 10],
or attosecond-pulse trains from laser pulses comprising
several cycles [11]. Such attosecond pulse trains have
been predicted in the late 1990’s [12], and experimen-
tally realized a few years later [11]. Since then, there has
been considerable improvement in their contrast, dura-
tion and peak intensity. In particular, an intrinsic chirp
of the attosecond emission was evidenced, setting a lower
limit on the duration of the attosecond pulses obtained by
grouping an increasing number of harmonic orders [13].
Thereby, important issues are an adequate choice of the
group of harmonics, and optimal propagation conditions
in the gaseous media. In this context, it is of interest to
control the atto-chirp and more generally the intensity-

Recently, it has been shown that an attosecond-pulse
train superposed to an intense laser ﬁeld can be used
for manipulating high-order harmonic generation (HHG)
[6, 7] and above-threshold ionization (ATI) [8]. In par-
ticular, the resolution, intensity and maximal energies of
both ATI and HHG spectra turned out to be strongly
dependent on the time delay between the laser ﬁeld and
the attosecond pulse train. This behavior has been pre-
dicted theoretically [6, 8] and observed experimentally in
both cases [7, 8]. It has been interpreted in the light of
the physical mechanisms governing both phenomena.

In HHG, an electron reaches the continuum by tun-
neling or multiphoton ionization at a time t′, propagates
in the continuum and, subsequently, at a time t, recom-
bines with its parent ion [15]. In this process, the kinetic
energy acquired by this electron is released in form of
high-frequency radiation. Similarly, for ATI, an electron
leaves an atom, either reaching the detector, or elastically
recolliding with it. This leads to the low- or high-order
ATI peaks, respectively. The attosecond pulse train can
be used for controlling the ejection of such an electron
in the continuum. Speciﬁcally, the time t′ can be ﬁxed
by changing the time delay between the attosecond pulse
train and the IR ﬁeld. This constraint upon the ioniza-
tion time can be used as a tool for selecting a particular
orbit of an electron reaching the continuum [6, 7], or a
particular momentum transfer from the IR ﬁeld to the
electron [8]. As a direct consequence, the ATI and HHG
spectra can be manipulated.

In this paper, we investigate the eﬀects reported in
[6, 7, 8] for HHG and ATI in detail, using a quantum-
mechanical formulation of the above-stated processes
[16, 17, 18], within the Strong-Field Approximation
(SFA) [19]. This approach has some advantages over

that employed in [6, 8], i.e., the numerical solution of
the time-dependent Schr¨odinger equation (TDSE). In-
deed, even though the SFA involves a higher degree of
modeling and physical approximations, it is much less
demanding, from the computational viewpoint. This is
particularly important for a realistic description of the
macroscopic response of the gaseous system, in which
the single-atom response serves as input for propagation
codes. Furthermore, it provides a transparent and clear
physical interpretation, in terms of the orbits of an elec-
tron leaving or recombining with its parent ion. This is
a further advantage over the TDSE, for which it may be
diﬃcult to extract the physical mechanisms involved.

In this work, we put a particularly strong emphasis on
the quantum interference between the diﬀerent possible
paths of an electron ejected by the attosecond-pulse train.
Speciﬁcally, we investigate how the initial conditions with
which the electron reaches the continuum inﬂuence such
an interference, and which consequences this has on the
ATI or HHG spectra. We show that the attosecond pulses
can be used for controlling this interference, and explain
the features observed in [6, 7, 8] in terms of electron
orbits.

This paper is organized as follows: In Sec. II, we brieﬂy
discuss the SFA for ATI and HHG, with emphasis on the
changes introduced by the attosecond-pulse train. Subse-
quently (Sec. III), we show how several features of both
phenomena are aﬀected by it, and provide physical ex-
planations. Finally, in Sec. IV, we give a summary of
such results and state the main conclusions of this work.

II. TRANSITION AMPLITUDES

A. Above-threshold ionization

For ATI, we will concentrate on the direct electrons,
which reach the detector without rescattering with their
parent ion.
In this case, the ATI transition amplitude
reads

bp(t) = i

E(t′)dt′dz(p + A(t′))eiS(p,t,t

′

),

(1)

t

0
Z

with the action

S(p, t, t

) = −

′

t

2

[p + A(t′′)]
2

t′  

Z

+ Ip

′′

.

dt

(2)

!

Eq. (1) can be understood as follows: At an instant
t′, an electron is ejected by the external laser ﬁeld from
the atomic state in which it is initially bound, reaching a
continuum state. It then remains in the continuum until
a time t, when it reaches the detector with ﬁnal momen-
tum p. In Eq. (1), A(t), Ip, and E(t′) = −dA(t′)/dt′
denote the vector potential, the atomic ionization poten-
tial, and the electric ﬁeld at the time of its release, respec-
tively. We take the dipole matrix element dz(p+ A(t)) =

2

(3)

hp + A(t)| r.ǫz |ψ0i for an initial 1s state, where the vec-
tor ǫz denotes the polarization axis. Speciﬁcally, this
yields

dz(p) = i

219/4I 5/4
π

p

 

!

p.ǫz
[p2 + 2Ip]3

We will now write the transition amplitudes for the
speciﬁc case in which an attosecond-pulse train is present.
We assume that this train is composed of an inﬁnite num-
ber of odd harmonics. This yields

Eatto(t) = Ehπ

δ(t −

)ǫz,

(4)

(−1)n
σ(t)

∞

n=0
X

nπ
ω

where ω, Eh, and σ(t) denote the laser ﬁeld frequency,
the attosecond-pulse strength and the train temporal en-
velope, respectively. In this paper, we assume that the
envelope is either given by

σ(t) ∼ exp[ζ|t|],

(5)

where ζ ≪ 1, or by σ = const. Physically, the latter case
corresponds to an inﬁnitely long attosecond-pulse train.
We approximate the laser ﬁeld by a monochromatic wave
El(t) = −dAl(t)/dt, with the vector potential Al(t) =
2
Up cos(ωt − φ)ǫz of frequency ω dephased of φ with
respect to the attosecond-pulse train.

p
We now assume that the attosecond pulse train re-
leases the electron in the continuum and that its subse-
quent propagation is determined only by the monochro-
matic ﬁeld. This implies that E(t′) ≃ Eatto(t′) and
A(t) ≃ Al(t) in Eq. (1). For the direct ATI electrons,
such assumptions lead to the transition amplitude

bp ∼ [d+ cos α − id− sin α]χ(a(o), ζπ/ω)

+[d− cos α − id+ sin α]χ(a(e), ζπ/ω),

(6)

where d± = dz(p+A(t′))±dz(p−A(t′)), θ gives the angle
between the laser ﬁeld and the ﬁnal electron momentum,
and the argument α = 2p
Up/ω cos θ sin φ comes from
the non-trivial part of the action. Furthermore, in Eq.
p
(6),

χ(a, ζπ/ω) =

sinh(ζπ/ω)
− cos(a) + cosh(ζπ/ω)

,

(7)

a(o) = (Ip + Up + p2/2 − ω)π/ω and a(e) = (Ip + Up +
p2/2)π/ω, respectively. Eq. (7) exhibits sharp peaks at
cos a = 1 (i.e., for a = 2nπ). Speciﬁcally, a(o) and a(e)
lead to expressions with steep maxima around the odd
and even ATI peaks, respectively.

In the limit of inﬁnitely long attosecond-pulse trains,

bp = b(e)

p + b(o)

p , where

[d− cos α − id+ sin α] δ(

+Up+Ip−2nω) (8)

p2
2

b(e)
p ∼

n
X

and

b(o)
p ∼

n
X

[d+ cos α − id− sin α] δ(

+Up+Ip−(2n+1)ω),

p2
2

(9)
gives the contributions from the even and odd ATI peaks,
respectively [20]. In Eq. (8) and (9), one can explicitly
notice that the electron leaves with vanishing momen-
tum if 2nω = (Ip + Up). Physically, this means that the
ionization potential Ip is eﬀectively shifted by the pon-
deromotive potential Up. Such an eﬀect is noticeable for
relatively high driving-ﬁeld intensities.

In some of the subsequent results, in order to perform
a more direct comparison with the results existing in the
literature, we will integrate the photoelectron yield over
the solid angle. In this case, the yield will be given by

η(p) = 2π

|bp|2d(cos θ),

(10)

1

−1

Z

where bp is given by Eq. (6).

Furthermore, apart from initial 1s states, we will con-
sider the so-called broad gaussian (GBR) approximation,
for which dz(p + A(t)) = const. Physically, this ap-
proximation means that the electron is initially in an ex-
tremely localized bound state (for details see, e.g., [16]).
In this particular case, and in the limit of inﬁnitely long
attosecond-pulse trains, the integral (10) can be solved
analytically and gives

η(p) ∼ 1 ±

sin(2α0)
2α0

,

and

(11)

Up/ω sin φ, and the positive and neg-
where α0 = 2p
ative signs correspond to the odd and even ATI peaks,
respectively.

p

B. High-harmonic generation

3

We will, however, adopt a slightly diﬀerent convention:
instead of considering the time delay in the infra-red ﬁeld,
we will take Al(t) = 2
Up cos(ωt)ez and insert the delay
td = φ/ω in the attosecond pulses. Such a convention will
facilitate the discussions in Sec. III.B, in terms of electron
orbits. Under such assumptions, Eq. (12) reads

p

bΩ =

∞

(−1)n

iπEh
σ
∗
z(k + Al(t))dz(k + Al(t
d

n=0
X

+∞
dt
−∞

Z

Z

′
n)).

d3k exp [iS(t, t

′
n, Ω, k)]

(14)

In this case, the ionization time is being ﬁxed at t′
n =
td + nπ/ω, with n an integer, because the electron is
being released into the continuum at such an instant by
the attosecond pulses.

The transition amplitude is further simpliﬁed in the
sense that only the integrals in k and t must be solved.
We evaluate this equation employing saddle-point meth-
ods. For that purpose, we consider k and t so that
S(t, t′, Ω, k) is stationary,
i.e., that ∂S/∂k = 0 and
∂S/∂t = 0. This yields the saddle-point equations

t

t′
n

Z

dτ [k + Al(τ )] = 0,

(15)

2(Ω − Ip) = [k + Al(t)]2 ,

(16)

whose solutions can be directly associated to the classical
orbits of an electron returning to [Eq. (15)] and recom-
bining with [Eq. (16)] its parent ion [18]. In the presence
of the attosecond-pulse train the saddle-point equations
for t and k can be combined, so that the electron return
time is given by

The HHG transition amplitude is given by an expres-

sion which is slightly diﬀerent from Eq. (1), namely

sin ωt − (−1)n sin ωtd

bΩ = i

∞
dt
−∞
Z

′

t
dt
−∞

Z
Z
E(t′) exp[iS(t, t′, Ω, k)],

∗
d3kd
z(k + A(t))dz(k + A(t

′

))

= [ω(t − td) − nπ)]

cos ωt ∓

(Ω − Ip)/(2Up)

.

(cid:18)

q

(12)

For details on the approximation employed we refer to
Ref. [21].

(17)

(cid:19)

with the action

1
2

t

t′

Z

S(t, t′, Ω, k) = −

[k+A(τ )]2dτ −Ip(t−t′)+Ωt. (13)

Eq. 12 describes a physical process in which an electron
is freed at a time t′, propagates in the continuum with
momentum k from t′ to t, and, at this time, recombines
with its parent ion, generating a harmonic of frequency
Ω.

We will now apply the same physical assumptions as
in the previous sections to the transition amplitude (12).

Alternatively, one may follow the procedure in
Ref. [16], and compute the Fast Fourier transform for the
time-dependent dipole moment in the Strong-Field Ap-
proximation. Such an approach involves a single saddle
point approximation in the intermediate electron momen-
tum, and two numerical integrations. Hence, it possesses
the advantage of taking into account all sets of orbits,
and not only the above-mentioned pairs. The procedure
adopted in this paper, however, allows a more detailed
assessment of quantum-interference eﬀects. For compar-
ison, we provide the time-dependent equations employed
in [16], together with a brief discussion, in the appendix.

III. RESULTS

A. Above-threshold ionization

As a starting point, we will investigate the eﬀect re-
ported in [8], in which the yield extends to much higher
energies for vanishing delay. In [8], this is justiﬁed by the
following argument: if the electron leaves the atom at the
zero of the IR ﬁeld (i.e., at φ = nπ), its vector potential
is at is maximum, i.e., A(t′) = ±2
Up. Hence, when the
electron reaches the continuum, under these conditions it
acquires maximum possible drift momentum. Therefore,
it reaches the detector with higher energies. Since this
eﬀect only inﬂuences how the electron is ejected in the
continuum, this should aﬀect both direct and rescattered
electrons equally. Therefore, we expect that Eq. (8) and
(9), for the direct electrons, exhibit such a behavior.

p

Fig. 1 displays ATI spectra obtained from Eq. (6), for
time delays 0 ≤ φ ≤ 2π. In order to perform a direct
comparison with the results in [8], we integrate the yield
over the solid angle [Eq. (10)]. In the upper part of the
ﬁgure [Fig. 1.(a)], we consider the same parameters as
in [8], while in the lower part [Fig. 1.(b)] we choose a
higher intensity for the IR ﬁeld [22]. In the ﬁgure, there
exist two distinct behaviors, within two energy regions.
For photoelectron energies near the low-energy end of
the spectra, the peaks exhibit maximal intensities near
φ = (2n+1)π/2, i.e., if the electron is released close to the
times for which the electric ﬁeld is maximal. For higher
energies, the yield presents a clear minimum around such
a delay, and the spectra extends to much higher energy
ranges if the delay is vanishing, i.e., if the electron reaches
the continuum at the electric-ﬁeld crossings. This be-
havior agrees with the ﬁndings in [8], and becomes more
extreme as the laser-ﬁeld intensity increases.

Both energy regions appear to be dependent on the
driving-ﬁeld intensity. For instance, for Fig. 1.(a), max-
ima near φ = (2n + 1)π/2 are observed roughly for
ATI orders 12 . N . 20 (0 . p2/2 . 13.3eV ), while
for Fig. 1.(b), this region lies within 32 . N . 40
(0 . p2/2 . 16.4eV ). Beyond such energy regions, the
yield exhibit minima for such delays. Apart from that, for
high-energy photoelectrons, there exist additional min-
ima for the higher driving-ﬁeld intensity [c.f. Fig. 1.(b)].

Such a behavior can be readily seen from Eqs. (8) and
(9), or, more speciﬁcally, from the angle-integrated yield
[Eq.(10)]. Indeed, we expect ηp to be the superposition
of two types of contributions, coming respectively from
the non-trivial part of the action α and from the dipole
matrix elements d±. Physically, the former corresponds
to the phase the electron acquired leaving at a particular
instant, and the latter are speciﬁc to the initial state in
which the electron is bound.

In Fig. 2, we display the isolated contributions from
such terms, integrated over the solid angle [Eq. (10)], for
distinct ATI orders. In order to disentangle the eﬀect due
to the dipole matrix element and that due to the non-

4

(10)), for argon (Ip = 0.58 a.u.)

FIG. 1:
(Color online) Direct above-threshold ionization
spectra, integrated over the solid angle and in linear scale
(Eq.
interacting with a
monochromatic ﬁeld of frequency ω = 0.057 a.u. and an
attosecond-pulse train (Eq.
(4)), as functions of the time
delay between both driving ﬁelds. Panels (a) and (b) have
been computed for an intensity of I = 3.3 × 1013W/cm2 and
I = 5 × 1014W/cm2 for the low-frequency laser ﬁeld, respec-
tively. In panels (a) and (b), the ATI orders (labelled with
the number of photons from the ground state) correspond to
photoelectron energies roughly between 0 and 36.5 eV, and
0 and 47.4 eV, respectively, due to the ponderomotive shift.
The yield has been computed from Eq. (6), with ζ = 0.04.
The intensities of the attosecond pulse trains have been cho-
sen as Ih = I/10, i.e., one tenth of those of the low-frequency
ﬁeld.

trivial part of the action, in addition to considering 1s
initial states, we computed spectra in the broad gaussian
(GBR) approximation, for which dz(p + A(t)) = const
[Eq. (11)]. In this case, d+ = 1 and d− = 0, so that the
eﬀect caused by the non-trivial part of the action, i.e.,
sin α and cos α in Eq. (6), can be directly visualized (c.f.
gray curves in the upper panels).

We observe that the non-trivial part of the action leads
to a highly oscillating pattern, which, for even or odd ATI
peaks, have maxima or minima at φ = nπ, respectively.
As the electron energy increases, the oscillating region
becomes increasingly ﬂatter, and the amplitude of the

5

FIG. 2: Upper panels: modulus squared of the transition am-
plitudes (8) and (9), integrated over the solid angle, for 1s ini-
tial states (black line) and within the broad gaussian approx-
imation (grey line), as functions of the time delay between
the attosecond-pulse train and the IR ﬁeld. Lower panels:
|d+|2 and |d−|2 integrated over the solid angle, for 1s initial
states. We considered argon under the inﬂuence of an IR ﬁeld
of I = 3.3 × 1013W/cm2 superposed to an attosecond-pulse
train of Ih = I/10 (Panel (a) in Fig. 2). The curves in the
upper panels have been normalized so that their maximum
values are unity, and those in the lower panel to the maxi-
mum value of D(−)
. The numbers N in the ﬁgure denote the
ATI orders.

I

oscillations are always larger near φ = nπ. It is, however,
clear that the action, by itself, is not responsible for the
behavior exhibited in Fig. 1 and shown in detail in Fig. 2,
for initial 1s states (c.f. black curves in the upper panels).
In fact, even though this term leads to several extrema,
it does not cause an overall enhancement or suppression
of the yield near φ = nπ, as observed for the low- and
high-order ATI peaks respectively.

The integral

D(±)

I = 2π

1

−1

Z

|d±|2d(cosθ)

(18)

of |d±|2 over the solid angle sheds some light in this be-
havior (c.f.
lower panels in Fig. 2). The contributions
from d− exhibit a minimum at φ = (2n+1)π/2, while the
behavior of those from d+ depend on the energy region in
question. Near the ionization threshold, the latter contri-
butions exhibit maxima near the delays φ = (2n + 1)π/2.
As the ATI order increases, such maxima become ﬂat-
ter, until the concavity of D(+)
changes and the yield
starts to exhibit maxima at φ = nπ. Such contribu-
tions are dominant, with respect to those from d−, and
are present both in Eq. (8) and (9). This behavior gets
more pronounced as the driving-ﬁeld intensity increases
(higher intensities lead also to sets of secondary maxima

I

FIG. 3: (Color online) Angular distributions for the ATI di-
rect electrons, in a logarithmic scale, for the same ﬁeld and
atomic parameters as in Fig. 1. The upper and lower panels
have been computed for an intensity of I = 3.3 × 1013W/cm2
and I = 5 × 1014W/cm2 for the low-frequency laser ﬁeld, re-
spectively. The yields are displayed as functions of the time
delay φ = ωtd and orientation angle θ between the laser ﬁeld
and the ﬁnal electron momenta. The ATI orders N are indi-
cated on the upper parts of the panels, and all contours have
been normalized to the highest yield in the ﬁgure (left panels).

I

in D(±)
, which contribute to the additional structure ob-
served in Fig. 1.(b)). One should also note that, very near
the threshold, for φ = nπ, D(−)
. This causes the
minima observed for η(p) in Fig. 1(a), for initial 1s states.
In contrast, the yield from the broad-gaussian approxi-
mation exhibits maxima in this case.

I > D(+)

I

Therefore, the behavior reported in [8] is not only due
to the phase the electron obtains when it is ejected in
the continuum by the attosecond-pulse train, or, in other
words, to the momentum transfer from the ﬁeld to the
electron. Additionally, it is related to the initial state in
which the electron is bound, which, in our model, is a
1s state. Indeed, such a behavior is absent in the broad
gaussian approximation, which, physically, corresponds
to an electron initially bound in a highly localized state.
Such a strong dependence on the initial electronic bound
state is, in a sense, quite unusual for phenomena occur-
ring in the context of atoms in strong laser ﬁelds.

The ATI angular distributions, depicted in Fig. 3, con-
ﬁrm this trend.
In fact, the ﬁgure shows distributions
symmetric upon θ → π − θ and φ → π − φ, in which it
is possible to identify three distinct energy regions. Near
the threshold (N = 15 and N = 32 for the lower and
higher intensity, respectively), there exist annular max-
ima, centered around φ = π/2. Such maxima are most
pronounced for θ = 0 and θ = π, but also occur for other
alignment angles. As the photoelectron energy increases
(middle and right panels in the ﬁgure), the ring-shaped
maxima split and move towards φ = nπ and θ = nπ,
which are the maxima observed for high enough ATI or-

B. High-harmonic generation

(b)

φ = 0.25π

(d)

φ = 0.75π

ders. Other, less pronounced maxima are also seen, as
well as additional substructure. Such a pattern is due to
interference eﬀects and comes from the non-trivial part
of the action. As the driving-ﬁeld intensity increases, this
pattern gets more complicated, but the overall behavior
remains.

Subsequently, we address the question of whether the
eﬀects reported in [6, 7], for HHG in a near-infrared laser
ﬁeld superposed to a time-delayed attosecond-pulse train,
are present in our framework. Speciﬁcally, intensity vari-
ations from one to two orders of magnitude in the plateau
harmonics have been observed, whose prominence, and
even existence, was strongly aﬀected by the time delay
φ = ωtd. Moreover, the resolution of the harmonic peaks,
and the plateau structure, with enhancements of either
all plateau harmonics, or only near its low-energy end,
were observed to depend very much on this parameter.

In [6], such eﬀects have been attributed to quantum-
trajectory selection: In HHG, in the absence of the at-
tosecond pulses, there exists one set of trajectories, which
mainly contribute to the yield. Such trajectories merge
at the cutoﬀ, i.e., the maximal energy for which HHG oc-
curs, and correspond to a longer and a shorter excursion
time for the electron in the continuum [12]. By using an
attosecond-pulse train, one is splitting this set into two,
due to the fact that the electron is released in the contin-
uum with non-vanishing velocity, and, at the same time,
selecting a trajectory of this set, by ﬁxing the electron
emission time.

Thus, the attosecond pulses allow one to perform
quantum-trajectory selection at the single-atom response
level. For solely an IR laser ﬁeld, it is only possible to per-
form such a selection at the macroscopic level, by control-
ling the propagation conditions [12]. In support of this
argument, classical simulations have been performed in
[6] for an electron returning to its parent ion. Thereby,
the initial electron velocity has been estimated from the
average frequency in the attosecond-pulse train, which
in [6], has been composed by ﬁve harmonics (N = 11 to
N = 19).

In Fig. 4, we present HHG spectra computed with Eq.
(14), in the broad gaussian approximation. Such spec-
tra are highly dependent on the time delay td between
the low-frequency ﬁeld and the attosecond-pulse train,
and diﬀer in the cutoﬀ energy, and in the high-harmonic
in the exam-
strengths and resolutions.
ples provided in the ﬁgure, the cutoﬀ energies vary from
roughly Ip + 1.8Up [Fig. 4.(a)] to Ip + 2.5Up [Fig. 4.(c)],
and the intensities of the plateau harmonics diﬀer in up
to two orders of magnitude. Furthermore, for partic-
ular time delays, the plateau harmonics are unequally
enhanced. For instance, in Figs. 4.(b) and 4.(c), the low-
plateau harmonics are more than one order of magnitude
larger than those near its high-energy end. Such a group

Speciﬁcally,

6

 

 

l

)
s
t
i
n
u
 
.
b
r
a
(
 
d
e
Y
 
c
n
o
m
r
a
H

i

i

g
o
L

0
1

1

0

-1

-2

-3

-4

-5

-6
1

0

-1

-2

-3

-4

-5

-6

(a)

φ = 0

(c)

φ = 0.5π

 

 

 

 

 

-3

1

0

-1

-2

-4

-5

-6
1

0

-1

-2

-4

-5

-6

 

-3

15 20 25 30 35 40 45 50 55 60 65 70
Harmonic Order N

15 20 25 30 35 40 45 50 55 60 65 70
Harmonic Order N

FIG. 4: High-harmonic spectra for neon (Ip = 0.79 a.u.) in-
teracting with a monochromatic ﬁeld of intensity I = 5 ×
1014W/cm2, and frequency ω = 0.057 a.u., and a train of at-
tosecond pulses of intensity Ih = 1013W/cm2 (Eq. (4)), and
several time delays between the attosecond pulse train and
the IR ﬁeld. We considered the orbits with the ﬁve shortest
pairs of excursion times t − t′. In the ﬁgure, we only show the
harmonic orders for which Ω > Ip.

varies from the lower half [Fig. 4.(b)] to the lowest few
harmonics [Fig. 4.(c)] of the plateau. The spectra are
identical over ωtd → ωtd ± π (not shown). This is a con-
sequence of the fact that |dΩ(ωtd)|2 = |dΩ(ωtd ± π)|2. In
particular, for ωtd = nπ, the plateau harmonics exhibit
maximal intensities in this context.

The eﬀects observed in Fig. 4 are in qualitative agree-
ment with those reported in [6, 7]. In order to ﬁnd out
whether they are due to quantum-orbit selection, they
will be analyzed in terms of the orbits of an electron re-
combining with its parent ion. For that purpose, we solve
Eq. (17) for a ﬁxed start time. The real parts of its solu-
tions can be directly associated to the return times t of
a classical electron in an external ﬁeld.

Fig. 5 depicts the real parts of such return times for
the six shortest orbits, as functions of the harmonic order,
for the time delays in the previous ﬁgure. The orbits are
denoted by the numbers (i, j), which increase with the
electron excursion time in the continuum. Depending on
the time delay, the return times, and the maximal har-
monic energies are signiﬁcantly altered. This shows that
the changes in the initial conditions of the electron being
ejected considerably aﬀect its subsequent dynamics. Fur-
thermore, the return times occur in pairs, i.e., for a single
ionization time, there is always a shorter and a longer
travel time for the electron in the continuum. Such pairs
of orbits coalesce at the maximally allowed harmonic en-
ergies, which considerably vary with the delay φ. Such
variations are explicitly given in Table I. In particular,

7

as little time as possible in the continuum. This yields
a large overlap between such a wave packet and that of
a bound electron, and, consequently, prominent harmon-
ics. Finally, there may be eﬀects related to quantum in-
terference, which suppress or enhance particular sets of
harmonics. Since, due to the attosecond-pulse train, the
electron is being ejected with a large probability for all
cases, we expect that the main diﬀerence will be due to
wave-packet spreading. Hence, the shorter the electron
excursion time τ = t − t′ in the continuum is, the more
prominent the corresponding harmonics should be.

We will now analyze the contributions of each pair of
orbits to the spectrum. Such contributions are presented
in Fig. 6. Panel 6.(a) shows that, for an attosecond-pulse
train in phase with the low-frequency ﬁeld, the main con-
tributions come from the orbits (1, 2). This occurs for two
main reasons. First, the harmonics from this set of or-
bits are two orders of magnitude larger than those from
the remaining pairs. This is a consequence of the fact
that τ is very short for such a pair. Furthermore, for
this speciﬁc phase, the cutoﬀ energy for (1, 2) extends to
a relatively large harmonic order (c.f. Fig. 5 and Table
1), so that the contributions from the remaining pairs of
orbits are overshadowed.

For a delay of φ = 0.25π [Fig. 6.(b)], this picture starts
to change. In fact, although the harmonics from (1,2) are
much stronger than those from the remaining pairs, the
maximal kinetic energy for (1, 2) lies near a much lower
harmonic order (near N = 35). Thus, beyond such en-
ergy, the corresponding contributions are exponentially
decaying and the harmonics intensities, as well as the cut-
oﬀ energy near 2.11Up, are mainly determined by (3, 4).
This causes the double plateau structure in the ﬁgure,
and provides an alternative explanation for the enhance-
ments only in the low-plateau harmonics reported in [6].
For φ = 0.5π [Fig. 6.(c)], instead, there is a very steep
intensity drop at the the low-energy end of the plateau.
This is a consequence of the very low cutoﬀ for the orbits
(1, 2), near the 19th harmonic. For higher energies, the
main behavior in the spectrum is determined by (3, 4).
Finally, for φ = 0.75π [Fig. 6.(d)], the maximal energy
for (1, 2) is so close to the ionization potential, that such
a pair does not play any role. Consequently, there is an
overall decrease of at least one order of magnitude in the
spectrum. At the same time, the orbits (3,4) become
increasingly shorter. Around ωtd = 0.75π, such latter
orbits have become the shortest contributing and the in-
tensity starts to increase, until, at ωtd = π, the same
pattern as for vanishing time delay is recovered. The
contributions from pairs of orbits with longer excursion
times are much less relevant due to wave-packet spread-
ing.

Structured spectra, however, are only obtained if sev-
eral pairs of orbits are taken into account. One should
note that, if one employs orbits starting from (3,4) and
vanishing time delays between the attosecond-pulse train
and the IR ﬁeld, there seems to be an improvement in
the resolution of the spectra (c.f. blue line in Fig. 6.(a)).

FIG. 5: (Color online) Real part of the recombination times
as a function of the high-harmonic order, for neon (Ip = 0.79
a.u.)
interacting with a monochromatic ﬁeld of intensity
I = 5 × 1014W/cm2, and frequency ω = 0.057 a.u. and an
attosecond-pulse train of intensity Ih = 1013W/cm2, com-
posed of an inﬁnite number of harmonics (Eq. (4)). Parts
(a), (b), (c) and (d) correspond to delays φ = 0, φ = 0.25π,
φ = 0.5π and φ = 0.75π between the attosecond-pulse train
and the low-frequency driving wave, respectively. In the ﬁg-
ure, we only show the harmonic orders for which Ω > Ip, and
the pairs of orbits are indicated by the natural numbers (i, j),
which increase according to the electron excursion time in the
continuum. The ionization times are indicated by the blue
dashed lines, and the numbers in the upper part of the ﬁg-
ure give the approximate kinetic energy of the electron upon
return, in units of the ponderomotive energy Up.

Orbits

Ekin(t, t

)/Up

′

(1,2)
(3,4)
(5,6)

φ = 0
1.80
1.65
1.62

φ = 0.75π

φ = 0.25π
0.93
2.11
1.37

φ = 0..5π
0.26
2.50
1.25

–
2.43
1.32

TABLE I: Maximum kinetic energies Ekin(t, t′) = (N ω −
Ip)/Up, in units of the ponderomotive energy, for an elec-
tron along the three pairs of orbits displayed in Fig. 5. No
entry means that this energy is very close to the ionization
potential.

the largest variations occur for the set of orbits (1,2),
namely from the ionization potential to Ip + 1.8Up.

Each of such local maxima potentially corresponds to a
cutoﬀ in the harmonic spectra. Whether, however, they
will lead to only minor features or to a sharp decrease
in the high-harmonic yield will depend on three main is-
sues. First, it is necessary that the electron reaches the
continuum with a large ionization probability. Second,
due to the fact that the electronic wave packet spreads
with time, it is desirable that such a wave packet spends

8

to the fact that, in [6], only a ﬁnite and relatively small
group of harmonics has been used, whereas, in our com-
putations, we have employed the attosecond-pulse limit
for an inﬁnite set of harmonics.

In fact, if the attosecond-pulse train is composed by a
relatively small number of harmonics (such as in [6]), it is
possible to deﬁne a main frequency for this train. Hence,
it is reasonable to assume that electron is being ejected
in the continuum by a photon of such a frequency, and
thus with nonvanishing velocity. This will cause a split-
ting of the trajectories into the “downhill” and “uphill”
transitions, which correspond to the ejection of the elec-
tron in- or opposite to- the direction of the laser ﬁeld,
respectively, and which will be selected according to the
time delay.

On the other hand, if the attosecond pulse train is
composed by an inﬁnite number of frequencies, the un-
certainty relation will no longer allow one to deﬁne a main
frequency for it. Consequently, the physical picture of an
electron being released by a photon of a speciﬁc frequency
and reaching the continuum with a constant velocity is
no longer applicable. However, it is still possible to de-
ﬁne a speciﬁc time t′ for which the electron is ejected,
and determine the corresponding return times.

IV. CONCLUSIONS

In conclusion, we have shown that an attosecond-pulse
train superposed to a strong, near-infrared laser ﬁeld can
be used for controlling above-threshold ionization (ATI)
and high-order harmonic generation (HHG). This control
is exerted by using the attosecond pulses, which are time
delayed with respect to the infrared ﬁeld, to constrain
the instant in which an electronic wave packet is ejected
in the continuum. Since this wave packet will either re-
combine with its parent ion, generating high harmonics,
or contribute to the above-threshold ionization spectrum,
both phenomena are strongly aﬀected by such pulses.

Similar investigations, which led to similar eﬀects to
those in this paper, have been performed in [6, 8], em-
ploying the numerical solution of the Schr¨odinger equa-
tion. In this work, however, we go beyond such studies,
and trace all features observed to quantum-interference
eﬀects between the possible pathways of the electronic
wave packet. In particular, the model used in this paper,
based on the Strong-Field Approximation (SFA) allows
one to investigate the diﬀerent ingredients involved in the
computation of the transition amplitude, and how they
are inﬂuenced by the attosecond-pulse train, in a detailed
and transparent way.

For ATI, we restrict ourselves to the direct electrons,
i.e., those that reach the detector without rescattering
with its parent ion. We consider an attosecond-pulse
train composed by an inﬁnite group of harmonics and we
sum over all periods of the driving ﬁeld. In this case, we
observed an extension in the photoelectron energy if the
attosecond-pulse train is in phase with the IR ﬁeld (i.e.,

(Color online) Contributions of isolated pairs of
FIG. 6:
orbits to the high-harmonic spectra for the same atomic
and external-ﬁeld parameters in Figs. 4 and 5, and delays
φ = 0, φ = 0.25π, φ = 0.5π and φ = 0.75π between the
attosecond-pulse train and the low-frequency driving wave
(Figs. 6(a), 6.(b), 6.(c) and 6.(d), respectively).
In the ﬁg-
ure, we only show the harmonic orders for which Ω > Ip. The
contributions from speciﬁc pairs of orbits are depicted in the
same colors as those employed in Fig. 5, for depicting each
corresponding pair. For comparison, the spectra computed
with the ten shortest orbits and with orbit 3 to 10 are given
as the thick lines in the ﬁgure. The numbers on the upper
parts of the ﬁgure give the approximate kinetic energy of the
electron upon return, in units of the ponderomotive energy.

In [6], resolved harmonics have been related to select-
ing a particular trajectory for the returning electron. In
our case, however, it appears to be an interference eﬀect
between several orbits for the returning electron. The
fast oscillations observed here are possibly not harmon-
ics (due to the periodicity of the process), but are caused
by the interference of diﬀerent quantum orbits originat-
ing from (launched from) the same half cycle.

With regard to the above discussion, we should point
out that the absence of discrete harmonics in the spec-
tra displayed in this work is due to the fact that we are
considering orbits starting only in the ﬁrst cycle of the
laser ﬁeld, instead of over many cycles. Therefore, we do
not have enough periodicity to obtain discrete harmonic
peaks. This is however not a problem in our context,
since we concentrate our investigations on how quantum-
interference eﬀects inﬂuence the main structure of the
spectra. By considering a restricted range of electron
start times, such eﬀects can be more clearly seen and
interpreted.

The above-discussed behavior is very similar to that
observed in [6]. Figs. 4-6, however, have been plotted
for a set of time delays diﬀerent from those employed
in such a reference. Such discrepancies may be related

for delays φ = nπ).

p

In [8], this has been attributed to the fact that, in this
case, the electrons are ejected at a zero crossing of the IR
ﬁeld. Hence, they gain the maximal possible momentum
from the ﬁeld, namely p = ±2
Up. In this paper, we
have shown that this mechanism does play a role, which,
in our framework, is implicit in the non-trivial part of the
action. However, in order to obtain the above-mentioned
eﬀect, the dipole matrix elements from a 1s hydrogenic
state are also a necessary ingredient. Physically, such
matrix elements are related to the initial state where the
electron is bound and, in the SFA, contain all the infor-
mation about the atomic bound potential. Furthermore,
we have shown that such an eﬀect only occurs if the pho-
toelectron energy is suﬃciently far from the ionization
threshold. In fact, for low ATI orders, maximal intensi-
ties are obtained for φ = (2n + 1)π/2. This is also due
to an interplay between the phase the electron acquires
when it reaches the continuum and its initial bound state.
Apart from such studies, we have observed that the
ATI angular distributions are strongly dependent on this
delay, and on the photoelectron energy. Near the ion-
ization threshold, such distributions exhibit very pro-
nounced maxima for backscattered electrons (alignment
angle θ = nπ) which leave at peak-ﬁeld times (φ =
(2n + 1)π/2). As the photoelectron energies increase,
such maxima move towards the zero crossings of the elec-
tric ﬁeld (φ = 2nπ). This behavior is in agreement with
that observed for the ATI spectra.

For HHG, depending on the time delay between the
attosecond-pulse train and the IR ﬁeld, we observed de-
viations in almost 30% in the cutoﬀ energy. Furthermore,
the plateau structure is highly sensitive to the time delay
φ. Indeed, we found that, for certain ranges of this pa-
rameter, the low-plateau harmonics are one to two orders
of magnitude stronger than those near its high-energy
end. The precise sets of harmonics in such a double-
plateau structure depend very much on φ. For our par-
ticular parameters, the set of strong harmonics moved
towards lower energies as φ distanced itself from a zero
crossing of the electric ﬁeld.

Our results can be traced back to the interplay of two
sets of orbits for an electron returning to its parent ion.
Speciﬁcally, the maximal return electron energy in the
shortest set of orbits changes from 0 to 1.8Up, as the
ejection time of the electron is varied. These orbits yield
a group of very strong harmonics, whose extension can
be manipulated by controlling the time delay φ. The re-
maining harmonics are mainly determined by the second
shortest pair of orbits, and are considerably weaker.

In this context, a noteworthy aspect is that, in con-
trast to ATI, for which the eﬀects mentioned in this pa-
per also depend on the initial electron state, in HHG they
appear to be due to controlling electron orbits with an
attosecond-pulse train. Indeed, whereas in ATI such ef-
fects do not occur for initial localized bound states, i.e.,
in the broad gaussian approximation, for HHG they are
already present in this case.

9

The results for HHG also agree to a great extent with
those reported in [6]. However, their interpretation, as
well as the time delays for which they occur, are some-
what diﬀerent. In fact, in [6], all features are explained by
selecting a single orbit from the shortest pair, and by the
splitting in this set of orbits due to the fact that the elec-
tron is reaching the continuum with non-vanishing veloc-
ity. Such diﬀerences are possibly due to the fact that, in
[6], only a small group of harmonics has been employed
for producing the attosecond-pulse train, while, in Eq.
(4), we consider the limit of an inﬁnite number of har-
monics. We therefore expect the agreement to increase if
a larger number of harmonics is taken when constructing
the attosecond-pulse-train.

V. APPENDIX

In this appendix, we explicitly provide the time-
dependent expression adopted in Ref. [16]. In this case,
the time-dependent dipole moment reads

t

d(t) = i

dt′

d3kd∗

z(k + A(t))dz(k + A(t′))

−∞
′

Z
E(t

Z
) exp[iS(t, t

′

, k)],

(19)

with the action

1
2

t

t′

Z

′

S(t, t

, k) = −

[k + A(τ )]2dτ − Ip(t − t

′

).

(20)

Alternatively to the procedure adopted in this paper,
one may integrate Eq.(19) over the intermediate momen-
tum using the saddle point equation (15). This yields the
equation

bt =

iπEh
σ

∞

n=0
X

(−1)n

t
(2π/i(t − t
−∞

Z

′
n + iǫ))3/2

(21)

∗
z(kst + A(t))dz(kst + A(t
d

′
n)) exp[iS(t, t

′
n, kst)],

with the action given by formula (20), to which a Fast
Fourier transform routine is then applied. In Eq. (21),
kst = −(1/(t − t′
dτ A(τ ), and the sum extends
over t′
n ≤ t. Due to the wave-packet-spreading eﬀects
(described by the ((2π/i(t − t′
n + iǫ))3/2), the main con-
tributions to the sum in Eq. (21) come from few t′
n that
are the closest to t.

n))

t
t′
n

R

Acknowledgments

This work has been ﬁnanced in part by the Deutsche
Forschungsgemeinschaft (European Graduate College
“Interference and Quantum Applications”, SFB407,
SPP1078 and SPP1116, 436POL)), spanish MEC grant
FIS-2005-04627,
the ESF Program QUDEDIS, and
the Marie Curie European Program MRTN-CT-2003-
505138,XTRA. C.F.M.F. would like to thank the ICFO

and the Universidade do Algarve for their kind hospital-

ity.

10

[1] For a review c.f. P. Agostini and L. DiMauro, Rep. Prog.

Phys. 67, 813 (2004).

[2] M. Hentschel, R. Kienberger, Ch. Spielmann, G.A. Rei-
der, N. Miloˇsevi´c, T. Brabec, P.B. Corkum, U. Heinz-
mann, M. Drescher and F. Krausz, Nature 414, 509
(2001).

[3] M. Schn¨urer, Ch. Streli, P. Wobrauschek, M. Hentschel,
R. Kienberger, Ch. Spielmann, and F. Krausz, Phys. Rev.
Lett. 85, 3392 (2000); M. Drescher, M. Hentschel, R.
Kienberger, M. Uiberacker, V. Yakovlev, A. Scrinzi, T.
Westerwahlbesloh, U. Kleineberg, U. Heinzmann, and F.
Krausz, Nature 419, 803 (2002).

[4] H. Niikura, F. L´egar´e, R. Hasbani, A. D. Bandrauk, M.
Yu. Ivanov, D. M. Villeneuve and P. B. Corkum, Nature
417, 917 (2002).

[5] R. Kienberger, M. Hentschel, M. Uiberacker, Ch. Spiel-
mann, M. Kitzler, A. Scrinzi, M. Wieland, Th. Wester-
walbesloh, U. Kleineberg, U. Heinzmann, M. Drescher,
F. Krausz, Science 297, 1144 (2002); A. Baltuska, Th.
Udem, M. Uiberacker, M. Hentschel, E. Goulielmakis,
Ch. Gohle, R. Holzwarth, V. S. Yakovlev, A. Scrinzi, T.
W. H¨ansch, and F. Krausz, Nature 421, 611 (2003).
[6] K. J. Schafer, M. B. Gaarde, A. Heinrich, J. Biegert,
and U. Keller, Phys. Rev. Lett. 92, 023003 (2004); M.
B. Gaarde, K. J. Schafer, A. Heinrich, J. Biegert, and
U. Keller, Phys. Rev. A 72, 013411 (2005); J. Biegert,
A. Heinrich, C. P. Hauri, W. Kornelis, P. Schlup, M. P.
Anscombe, M. B. Gaarde, K. J. Schafer and U. Keller,
J. Mod. Opt. 53, 87 (2006); J. Biegert, A. Heinrich, C.
P. Hauri, W. Kornelis, P. Schlup, M. P. Anscombe, K. J.
Schafer, M. B. Gaarde and U. Keller, Laser Physics 15,
899 (2005).

[7] P. Johnsson, K. Varj´u, T. Remetter, E. Gustafsson,
J. Mauritsson, R. Lopez-Martens, S. Kazamias, C.
Valentin, Ph. Balcou, M. B. Gaarde, K. J. Schafer, and
A. L’Huillier, J. Mod. Opt. 53, 233 (2006).

[8] P. Johnsson, R. L´opez-Martens, S. Kazamias, J. Maurits-
son, C. Valentin, T. Remetter, K. Varj´u, M. B. Gaarde,
Y. Mairesse, H. Wabnitz, P. Sali`eres, Ph. Balcou, K. J.
Schafer, and A. L’Huillier, Phys. Rev. Lett. 95, 013001
(2005).

[9] For a review c.f. T. Brabec and F. Krausz, Rev. Mod.

Phys. 72, 545 (2000).

[10] M. Drescher, M. Hentschel, R. Kienberger, G. Tempea,
C. Spielmann, G. A. Reider, P. B. Corkum and F. Krausz,
Science 291, 1923 (2001).

[11] N. A. Papadogianis, B. Witzel, C. Kalpouzos and D.

Charalambidis, Phys. Rev. Lett. 83, 4289 (1999); P. M.
Paul, E. S. Toma, P. Breger, G. Mullot, F. Aug´e, Ph.
Balcou, H. G. Muller, and P. Agostini, Science 292, 1689
(2001).

[12] Ph. Antoine, A. L’Huillier and M. Lewenstein, Phys. Rev.

Lett. 77, 1234 (1996).

[13] Y. Mairesse, A. de Bohan, L. J. Frasinski, H. Merdji,
L. C. Dinu, P. Monchicourt, P. Breger, M. Kovaˇcev, R.
Ta¨ieb, B. Carr´e, H. G. Muller, P. Agostini and P. Sali`eres,
Science 302, 1540 (2003).

[14] Y. Mairesse, A. de Bohan, L. J. Frasinski, H. Merdji,
L. C. Dinu, P. Monchicourt, P. Breger, M. Kovaˇcev, T.
Auguste, B. Carr´e, H. G. Muller, P. Agostini and P.
Sali`eres, Phys. Rev. Lett. 93, 163901 (2004); J. Maurits-
son, P.Johnsson, R. L´opez-Martens, K. Varj´u, W. Kor-
nelis, J. Biegert, U. Keller, M. B. Gaarde, K. J. Schafer,
and A. L’Huillier, Phys. Rev. A 70, 021801(R) (2004).

[15] P. B. Corkum, Phys. Rev. Lett. 71, 1994 (1993); K. C.
Kulander, K. J. Schafer, and J. L. Krause in: B. Piraux et
al. eds., Proceedings of the SILAP conference, (Plenum,
New York, 1993).

[16] M. Lewenstein, Ph. Balcou, M. Yu. Ivanov, A. L’Huillier
and P. B. Corkum, Phys. Rev. A 49, 2117 (1994).
[17] W. Becker, S. Long, and J. K. McIver, Phys. Rev. A 41,
4112 (1990); ibid. 50, 1540 (1994); M. Lewenstein, K. C.
Kulander, K. J. Schafer and Ph. Bucksbaum, Phys. Rev.
A 51, 1495 (1995).

[18] P. Sali`eres, B. Carr´e, L. LeD´eroﬀ, F. Grasbon, G.
G. Paulus, H. Walther, R. Kopold, W. Becker, D.B.
Miloˇsevi´c, A. Sanpera and M. Lewenstein, Science 292,
902 (2001).

[19] The SFA consists in neglecting the atomic potential in
the propagation of the electron in the continuum, the
laser ﬁeld when the electron is bound or rescatters, and
the excited states of the atom in question.

[20] For the parameter range employed in this paper, we ob-
tained practically identical results from such a limit, and
from Eq. (6), for ζ . 0.04.

[21] C. Figueira de Morisson Faria, H. Schomerus and W.

Becker, Phys. Rev. A 66, 043413 (2002).

[22] For this latter intensity, tunneling ionization may also
play a role and compete with the ionization induced by
the attosecond pulse train. Hence, it may be necessary
to take into account tunneling ionization in the transi-
tion amplitude (1). This case is, however, considered to
illustrate the eﬀects that may arise at high laser intensity.

