6
0
0
2
 
n
u
J
 
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
m
o
t
a
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
4
0
0
6
0
6
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Spatial separation of large dynamical blue shift and harmonic generation

Mette B. Gaarde∗ and Mitsuko Murakami
Department of Physics and Astronomy, Louisiana State University, Baton Rouge, LA 70803-4001

Reinhard Kienberger
Max Planck Institute for Quantum Optics, Garching, D-85748 Germany

We study the temporal and spatial dynamics of the large amplitude and frequency modulation
that can be induced in an intense, few cycle laser pulse as it propagates through a rapidly ionizing
gas. Our calculations include both single atom and macroscopic interactions between the non-linear
medium and the laser ﬁeld. We analyze the harmonic generation by such pulses and show that
it is spatially separated from the ionization dynamics which produce a large dynamical blue shift
of the laser pulse. This means that although the frequency modulation is very sensitive to the
initial laser focusing conditions, the harmonic spectrum is much less so. We ﬁnd that the ionization
dynamics play an essential role in creating conditions that are favorable for the generation of isolated
attosecond pulses.

PACS numbers:

In their pioneering experiments

reported in [1],
Hentschel et al. demonstrated the generation of single
attosecond XUV pulses by 7 fs, 750 nm laser pulses inter-
acting with a neon gas. As a ﬁrst application, these XUV
pulses were used to probe the sub-cycle time dependence
of the laser electric ﬁeld emerging from the neon gas. A
surprisingly large dynamical blue shift was observed in
this way, with a maximum value of approximately 35%
of the laser frequency, a result which was not well repro-
duced by theory.

Ionization is intrinsic to all highly non-linear laser mat-
ter interactions. It contributes free electrons to the in-
teraction medium which induces a temporal and spatial
variation in the refractive index during propagation. This
causes both self-phase modulation and defocusing of the
ﬁeld [2]. The experimental results in [1] raise a number of
questions: i) Can such a large frequency modulation be
caused by ionization driven self-phase modulation? ii) If
so, how is it consistent with the observed harmonic cutoﬀ
energy around 90 eV, which indicates a relatively mod-
erate interaction intensity around 5 × 1014 W/cm2 [3]?
And iii) what is the role of the ionization dynamics in
creating conditions favorable for the formation of single
attosecond pulses?

In this paper we answer these questions by analyzing
the temporal and spatial ionization dynamics of an in-
tense few-cycle pulse as it propagates through a neon gas
cell and generates harmonics [4], using parameters simi-
lar to those of the experiment in [1]. We show that in the
beginning of the gas cell a large laser frequency modula-
tion builds up rapidly when the intensity is still high, and
then slows down toward the end of the cell because the
intensity is reduced by defocusing. We ﬁnd that, quite
generally, the harmonic generation is spatially separated
from the frequency modulation of the driving ﬁeld since

∗Electronic address: gaarde@phys.lsu.edu

the XUV radiation is built up predominantly in the sec-
ond half of the medium. Furthermore, we show that the
frequency modulation is very sensitive to small changes in
the initial focusing conditions of the laser beam, whereas
the intensity of the beam after propagation and the har-
monic spectrum is not. Therefore, even though the XUV
pulse is an ideal probe of the laser ﬁeld after its interac-
tion with the gas, the harmonic spectrum and in particu-
lar its cutoﬀ energy are poor indicators of the magnitude
of the ionization driven dynamics. Finally we show that
the ionization dynamics lead to a driving pulse at the end
of the medium which has been spatially and temporally
reshaped in a way that facilitates the generation of single
attosecond XUV bursts.

Our description of the intense-laser matter interaction
includes both the response of a single atom to the laser
pulse, and the collective response of the macroscopic gas
to the focused laser beam. We solve the wave equation for
the driving and the generated ﬁelds by space marching
through the gas, using the slowly evolving wave approx-
imation (SEWA) [4]. At each plane in the propagation
direction z, we calculate the single atom dynamics by
solving the time dependent Schr¨odinger equation. The
non-linear atomic response is then used as the source
terms in the wave equation for marching to the next plane
in z. This approach is described in detail in [5].

For the propagation of the linearly polarized driving
ﬁeld E1(t) we include two source terms due to the ion-
ization of the medium [2]:

∂Jp(t)
∂t
∂Jabs(t)
∂t

=

=

E1(t)

e2Ne(t)
me
γ(t)Ne(t)IpE1(t)
|E1(t)|2

∂
∂t

,

(1)

(2)

where e and me are the electron charge and mass, Ne(t) is
the electron density, γ(t) is the ionization rate, and Ip is
the atomic ionization potential. All the time-dependent
quantities are also functions of the cylindrical coordinates

2

FIG. 1: (Color online) (a) Time dependent ionization proba-
bility of a neon atom exposed to a 750 nm, 7 fs laser pulse with
a peak intensity of 1015 W/cm2. Pvol(t) is shown with solid
line, PADK is shown with dashed line. (b) Intensity depen-
dent correction factor for three diﬀerent pulses: 7 fs duration,
cosine carrier (open circles), 5 fs duration, cosine carrier (open
triangles), 5 fs duration, sine carrier (ﬁlled circles).

r and z. The plasma oscillation term Jp(t) gives rise to
a spatial and temporal variation of the refractive index
which causes defocusing and self-phase modulation. The
absorption term Jabs(t) describes the loss of energy from
the laser ﬁeld due to the ionization of the medium. This
term is small for all the cases discussed in this paper. The
source term for the harmonic radiation is given by the
non-linear polarization ﬁeld, which is proportional to the
single atom time-dependent dipole moment, calculated
using the strong ﬁeld approximation [8], and the density
of neutral atoms.

To describe the short pulse ionization dynamics cor-
rectly it is crucial to accurately calculate Ne(t) and γ(t)
with sub-cycle precision. Our calculation of Ne(t) orig-
inates in a numerical solution of the TDSE within the
single active electron approximation [6]. We deﬁne the
ionization probability Pvol(t) from the probability den-
sity of the wave function outside of a small volume around
the ion core, which can be continuously evaluated during
the calculation. In Fig. 1(a) we show Pvol(t) (solid line)
for a 750 nm, 7 fs driving pulse with a peak intensity
of 1015 W/cm2. Because of its short duration, the ion-
ization probability at the end of the pulse is only about
15%.

Ideally, we would directly couple our numerical solu-
tion of the TDSE to the solution of the wave equation
and use Pvol(t) to describe the time dependent ioniza-
tion. Currently, we do not have the computational ap-
paratus to do so. We also cannot directly use instan-
taneous tunnel ionization rates proposed by Ammosov,
Delone, and Krainov (ADK) [7] since these give rise to
much larger ionization probabilities at high intensities
than the numerical TDSE solution. However, we ﬁnd
that for a given peak intensity, the ionization probability
PADK(t) calculated from ADK rates diﬀers from Pvol(t)
by only a constant factor β, as long as the intensity is be-
low the (ADK) saturation intensity. We determine β as
the ratio between Pvol(t) and PADK(t) at the end of the
laser pulse. The dashed line in Fig. 1(a) shows βPADK (t)

FIG. 2: (Color online) Spatiotemporal dynamics of frequency
modulation of 750 nm, 7 fs pulse propagating through 3 mm
of neon gas. See text for details.

which is in excellent agreement with Pvol(t).

We next calculate β(I0) by comparing PADK (t) and
Pvol(t) for many diﬀerent peak intensities, I0. This func-
tion is shown in Fig. 1(b), open circles. We have cal-
culated β(I0) for diﬀerent pulse durations and ﬁnd that
it depends only weakly on the duration and the abso-
lute phase of the driving pulse. Examples are shown
in Fig. 1(b) for driving pulse durations of 5 fs and
two diﬀerent carrier envelope phases. Finally, we use
β(I0)PADK (t) to calculate the source terms Ne(t) and
γ(t) for each point in the non-linear medium, where I0
is the peak intensity of the driving pulse at that point.
The insensitivity of β(I0) to the duration and phase of
the driving pulse ensures that this is justiﬁed even as the
pulse changes shape and phase during propagation.

Fig. 2 illustrates the spatial and temporal dynamics of
the frequency modulation experienced by a laser pulse
during propagation through a rapidly ionizing neon gas.
As in [1], the incoming laser pulse has a wavelength of
750 nm and a duration of 7 fs. The laser beam has a con-
focal parameter of 4.2 cm and its focus is in the center of
a 3 mm long neon gas jet with a density of 5 × 1018 cm−3.
In the absence of the non-linear medium the peak inten-
sity in the focus would be 9 × 1014 W/cm2.

In 2(a) we show the on-axis electric ﬁeld of the laser
pulse after propagation through the neon gas. Its time
dependent frequency, shown in (b), is calculated from the
separation between consecutive peaks and zeros of the
electric ﬁeld in (a). The pulse exhibits a large frequency
chirp with a shape characteristic of self phase modula-
tion. The maximum blue shift which occurs near the
peak of the pulse is very large, approximately 22%, al-
though still smaller than the 35% shift that was reported
in [1]. This will be discussed in more detail below.

Fig. 2(c) shows how this large blue shift is accumulated
during propagation. The dashed line (left axis) shows

the on-axis energy density and the solid line (right axis)
shows the blue shift, as functions of the propagation dis-
tance z. At each point in z, the blue shift has been found
as the maximum value of the instantaneous frequency as
plotted in (b). At the beginning of the gas where the
intensity is high, defocusing is very strong. The energy
density is reduced by almost a factor of two by the end
of the gas. This intensity variation in turn controls the
build-up of the blue shift which accumulates rapidly in
the ﬁrst half of the gas and saturates towards the end.

The solid line in Fig. 2(d) shows the radial variation
of the blue shift at the end of the gas (left axis). The
blue shift is largest on axis and decreases as a function
of r. The dashed and dot-dashed lines (right axis) show
the radial variation of the laser intensity at the begin-
ning and at the end of the medium, respectively. The
radial variation of the blue shift closely follows that of
the incoming laser ﬁeld, in agreement with the result in
(c) that the blue shift is predominantly generated at the
beginning of the gas. Experimentally, the laser ﬁeld is
probed by the XUV pulse after refocusing both beams in
to a second gas jet by a mirror placed several meters from
the ﬁrst jet [1]. The XUV beam in the second medium
is much smaller than the laser beam and therefore only
probes its on-axis frequency modulation [9]. In principle,
the radial variation of the dynamical blue shift could be
probed by slightly misaligning the two beams.

The ionization driven dynamics of the laser pulse has
important consequences for the harmonic generation, and
therefore for the formation of attosecond XUV pulses as
these are synthesized from a range of harmonics near the
cutoﬀ [1]. Fig. 3 shows the radially integrated harmonic
spectrum at the end of the neon gas. As a result of the
frequency shift of the laser pulse, the harmonic struc-
tures in the spectrum are not at odd multiples of the
incoming laser frequency. As a result of the defocusing
of the laser beam, the harmonic spectrum exhibits two
diﬀerent cutoﬀs. The high energy cutoﬀ around 170 eV is
determined by the peak intensity of the incoming beam
(≈ 9 × 1014 W/cm2) [3], whereas the dominant low en-
ergy cutoﬀ around 90 eV corresponds to the reduced peak
intensity in the second half of the medium. In an experi-
ment, it is likely that only the low energy cutoﬀ would be
observed as the high energy cutoﬀ is orders of magnitude
weaker [10].

The insets show how the XUV radiation around 90 eV
(left inset) and above 155 eV (right inset) build up during
propagation. The highest energies are only generated
over a short distance in the beginning of the medium
and are then reabsorbed through the remainder of the
gas.
In contrast, the 90 eV photons are generated all
through the medium. The saturation of this signal at
the end of the medium is due to phase matching. For
longer propagation lengths one would observe a periodic
increase and decrease of the yield. The total energy in a
5 eV range around 90 eV is approximately 10 pJ.

Fig. 3 shows that the harmonic spectrum and its cutoﬀ
energy are poor indicators of the propagation dynamics

3

FIG. 3: (Color online) Radially integrated harmonic spectrum
at end of the neon gas. The insets show the build-up along
the propagation direction of the XUV radiation around 90 eV
and 155 eV (left and right inset, respectively).

of the driving ﬁeld. In a rapidly ionizing, long medium
the harmonic generation is spatially separated from the
defocusing and self-phase modulation experienced by the
laser ﬁeld.
In particular, both the yield and the pho-
ton energy of the spectral cutoﬀ are essentially decoupled
from the dynamical blue shift of the laser pulse.

This decoupling is further demonstrated in Fig. 4. We
show results of a calculation where the focusing con-
ditions of the incoming laser beam have been slightly
changed compared to Fig. 2 while its energy has been
kept constant. The new beam has a tighter focus with
a confocal parameter of 3 cm and a peak intensity of
12.6 × 1014 W/cm2. This corresponds to decreasing the
beam waist by less than 20%.

Fig. 4(a) compares the propagation dynamics of the
two laser beams, showing the z-dependence of the on-axis
energy density and the on-axis maximum frequency
shift, as in Fig. 2(c). The higher initial intensity gives
rise to more free electrons, which in turn cause stronger
defocusing. This means that the two beams have almost
identical
intensities at the end of the medium, and
therefore give rise to very similar harmonic spectra, as
shown in Fig. 4(b). However, the peak dynamical blue
shift of the more tightly focused beam is much higher
than before and reaches almost 35% by the end of the
medium. This answers the ﬁrst two questions posed
in the introduction:
i) Ionization induced self phase
modulation can indeed induce a 35% frequency shift
of the laser pulse in conditions very similar to those in
[1], and ii) because of defocusing, the harmonic cutoﬀ
energy is essentially decoupled from the magnitude of
the blue shift.

To answer question iii) about the inﬂuence of the ion-
ization dynamics on the formation of attosecond pulses,
Fig. 5(a) shows the three dimensional spatiotemporal
proﬁle of the intensity of the laser pulse at the end of the
neon gas. We have used laser parameters as in Fig. 3, and
the absolute phase of the input electric ﬁeld is given by a
cosine driver. The strong temporal and spatial reshaping

(a)

(b)

1.4

1.2

1.0

0.8

0.6

)
s
t
i
n
u
 
.
b
r
a
(
 
h
t
g
n
e
r
t
S

1.4

)

1

1.3

 w
f
o
 
s
t
i
n
u
(
 
y
c
n
e
u
q
e
r
F

1.2

1.1

)
s
t
i
n
u
 
.
b
r
a
(
 
d
l
e
i
Y

107

106

105

104

103

102

0.4

-1.5

-1

-0.5

0.5

1

0
z (mm)

1.0

1.5

101
0

20

40

60

80

100

120

Frequency (eV)

FIG. 4: (Color online) We compare the build-up of the fre-
quency modulation and the harmonic spectrum generated by
two laser beams with the same energy but slightly diﬀerent
focusing conditions. Thick lines show results of a more tightly
focused beam than that used in Figs. 2 and 3 (thin lines).

of the laser beam that takes place in the beginning of the
medium results in a broad, divergent beam with a large
radial phase variation, in which the peak of the pulse oc-
curs at diﬀerent times for diﬀerent radial positions. In
particular, this means that the pulse on axis has been
shortened to a duration of less than two optical cycles
(5 fs) compared to the initial 7 fs duration.

FIG. 5:
(Color online) Spatiotemporal proﬁle of the laser
pulse at the end of the neon gas. In (a) we have used condi-
tions as in Fig. 3, and (b) show a laser pulse that gives rise
to the same harmonic cutoﬀ energy around 90 eV, but has a
lower initial peak intensity (5 × 1014 W/cm2).

The XUV radiation near the cutoﬀ energy, which is
used to synthesize attosecond pulses, is only generated at

4

the highest intensities. The laser pulse shown in Fig. 5(a)
will give rise to one XUV burst on axis [11], and one or
several bursts oﬀ axis half a cycle later. In the nearﬁeld,
the XUV time proﬁle will therefore in general consist of
several attosecond bursts. However, the oﬀ-axis XUV
radiation is generated by a strongly divergent wavefront
and is much less collimated than the on-axis XUV radi-
ation. A spatial ﬁlter placed in the farﬁeld can therefore
also act as a temporal ﬁlter, selecting only the single, col-
limated attosecond XUV burst generated on or close to
the axis [1, 12].

To demonstrate that the ionization dynamics play
a crucial role in producing the laser pulse shown in
Fig. 5(a), we show in Fig. 5(b) the nearﬁeld proﬁle of a
laser pulse with a lower initial intensity (5 × 1014 W/cm2
and a confocal parameter of 6 cm). This pulse gives rise
to the same spectral cutoﬀ around 90 eV. The absence
of spatiotemporal reshaping of this pulse makes it much
less ideal for generation of single attosecond bursts: there
is no shortening of the pulse on axis, and XUV bursts
generated in consecutive half-cycles of the ﬁeld will have
similar divergence properties because of the smooth ra-
dial structure of the beam.

In summary, we have analyzed the propagation and
harmonic generation dynamics of an intense few-cycle
laser pulse. We showed that the frequency modulation
induced by rapid ionization in the non-linear medium
can be very large, and can indeed reach a value of 35%
in conditions very similar to those in [1]. We discussed
that whereas the frequency modulation is very sensitive
to the laser focusing conditions, the harmonic spectrum
is less so. Most importantly, we showed that the ioniza-
tion driven spatiotemporal reshaping of the laser beam
is very important in creating conditions favorable for the
generation of isolated bursts of attosecond XUV pulses.

The authors are grateful to F. Krausz for discussions of
the experiment in [1]. This material is based upon work
supported by the Louisiana Board of Regents through
grant number LEQSF(2004-07)-RD-A-09 and by the Na-
tional Science Foundation through grant number PHY-
0449235.

[1] M. Hentschel et al., Nature 414, 509 (2001).
[2] S. C. Rae and K. Burnett, Phys. Rev. A 46, 1084 (1992).
[3] J. L. Krause, K. J. Schafer, and K. C. Kulander, Phys.

Rev. Lett. 68, 3535 (1992).

[4] T. Brabec and F. Krausz, Rev. Mod. Phys. 72, 545

[5] M. B. Gaarde, K. J. Schafer, A. Heinrich, J. Biegert, and

U. Keller, Phys. Rev. A 72, 013411 (2005).

[6] K. J. Schafer and K. C. Kulander, Phys. Rev. Lett. 78,

(2000).

638 (1997).

[7] M. V. Ammosov, N. B. Delone, and V. P. Krainov, Zh.
Eksp. Teor. Fiz. 91, 2008 (1986) [Sov. Phys. JETP 64,
1191 (1986)].

[8] M. Lewenstein et al., Phys. Rev. A 49, 2117 (1994).
[9] The farﬁeld mirror actually blocks a few mm of the cen-
tral part of the laser beam. The calculated frequency
modulation of the near-axis part of the laser beam af-
ter reﬂection on such a mirror is almost indistinguishable
from the on-axis behavior as shown in Fig. 2(b).

[10] A decrease of the cutoﬀ energy as a result of defocusing
has been studied in detail previously, see for instance K.
Miyazaki and H. Takada, Phys. Rev. A 52, 3007 (1995).
[11] A. de Bohan, P. Antoine, D. B. Milosevic, and B. Piraux,

Phys. Rev. Lett. 81, 1837 (1998).

[12] This will be investigated in detail in a forthcoming paper.

