6
0
0
2
 
l
u
J
 
0
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
m
o
t
a
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
4
8
0
7
0
6
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Ultracold Rb-OH collisions and prospects for sympathetic cooling

Manuel Lara,1 John L. Bohn,1 Daniel Potter,2 Pavel Sold´an,3 and Jeremy Hutson2
1JILA, NIST and Department of Physics, University of Colorado, Boulder, CO 80309-0440
2Department of Chemistry, University of Durham,
South Road, Durham, DH1 3LE, United Kingdom
3Doppler Institute, Department of Physics, Faculty of Nuclear Sciences and Physical Engineering,
Czech Technical University, Bˇrehov´a 7, 115 19 Praha 1, Czech Republic
(Dated: December 15, 2013)

We have computed ab initio cross sections for cold collisions of Rb atoms with OH radicals. We
−11 cm3/s at temperatures in the range 10-100 mK at
predict collision rate constants of order 10
which molecules have already been produced. However, we also ﬁnd that in these collisions the
molecules have a strong propensity for changing their internal state, which could make sympathetic
cooling of OH in a Rb buﬀer gas problematic in magnetostatic or electrostatic traps.

PACS numbers: 34.20.Mq, 34.50.-s, 33.80.Ps

A great way to make something cold is to place it in
thermal contact with something else even colder. Thus,
for many years, it has been possible to cool one species
of ion sympathetically, by placing it in contact with an-
other species that is being actively cooled [1, 2]. More
recently, ultracold neutral atoms have also been sympa-
thetically cooled [3]. At slightly higher temperatures,
atoms and molecules have been sympathetically cooled in
a helium buﬀer gas [4]. Molecules are widely regarded as
worth cooling to ultralow temperatures (typically around
1µK), where de Broglie wavelengths become large, and
intermolecular interactions are dominated by long-range
forces. Under such circumstances, the possibility of per-
manent electric dipole moments is expected to lead to
novelties in such areas as precision measurement, colli-
sions and chemistry, quantum degenerate matter, and
quantum information theory [5].

A host of molecular cooling techniques have been pro-
posed [5], but two that stand out are buﬀer-gas cooling
(BGC), in which the cold He gas cools the molecules,
and Stark deceleration (SD), in which polar molecules are
slowed by carefully designed time-varying electric ﬁelds
[6]. These techniques tend to produce “lukewarm” gases,
with translational temperatures in the 10-100 mK range.
They are therefore somewhat at a disadvantage with re-
spect to the direct production of molecules by photoas-
sociation from a gas of ultracold atoms [7]. Nevertheless,
BGC and SD are extremely appealing for the far greater
variety of molecular species that they can cool.

In this Letter we are concerned with the possibility
of turning a 10 mK gas of molecules into a 10 µK gas,
by sympathetically cooling with Rb. For this cooling
to be eﬀective, the cross sections must be favorable.
Namely, elastic scattering should occur frequently (with
large cross sections σel), to make the necessary thermal
inelastic collisions that
contact. On the other hand,
change the state of the molecules should occur infre-
quently (with small cross sections σinel). This is because
either magnetostatic or electrostatic trapping demands

that the molecules remain in a well-deﬁned internal state.
Until now, cross sections for m-level-changing cold col-
lisions of alkali atoms with molecules were wholly un-
known. In this Letter we present the ﬁrst such collision
results, using a set of complete ab initio potential energy
surfaces (PES’s), and incorporating the hyperﬁne struc-
ture of the collision partners.

∼

Our prototype system for this study consists of OH
molecules in a bath of Rb atoms. This is a particularly
timely example: the OH radical has been successfully
slowed by Stark deceleration techniques in at least two
laboratories, which can now produce
10 mK packets
of these molecules on demand [6, 8]. At the same time,
Rb is easily cooled and trapped in copious quantities at
tens or hundreds of µK, making it an ideal target for
the molecules. In addition, the Rb-OH collision system
is subject to a “harpooning” process, similar to that in
Rb-NH [9], where during a collision the valence electron
jumps from Rb to OH [10]. This process is without prece-
dent in the cold collisions literature. Thus, even apart
from sympathetic cooling, the Rb-OH scattering system
is quite rich from a cold collisions perspective.

We begin by describing the potential energy surfaces
(PES’s) of the system, as functions of (R, θ), where R is
the distance between the atom and diatom, and θ is the
angle that the Jacobi vector ~R makes with the OH axis.
The OH monomer has a 2Π ground state arising from
a π3 conﬁguration, while the ground state of Rb is 2S.
This produces 1Π and 3Π states for linear RbOH, which
split into 1A′, 1A′′ and 3A′, 3A′′ surfaces at nonlinear
geometries. We will refer to these as the covalent states.
In addition, RbOH has an ion-pair state analogous to the
ones previously found for RbNH [9]. The ion-pair thresh-
old for Rb+ (1S) + OH− (1Σ+) lies only 2.35 eV above
and produces a 1Σ+ (1A′)
the ground state at R =
∞
state that cuts steeply down, crossing the covalent states
near 6 ˚A. This is an actual crossing at linear geometries,
where the ion-pair and covalent states have diﬀerent sym-
metries, but there are avoided crossings between the two

states of 1A′ symmetry at nonlinear geometries. There
is therefore a conical intersection between the two 1A′
surfaces at linear geometries.

Potential energy surfaces for all 5 electronic states of
RbOH were calculated by complete active space self-
consistent ﬁeld (CASSCF) calculations followed by mul-
tireference conﬁguration interaction (MRCI). A full de-
scription will be given elsewhere [11]. All calculations
used the MOLPRO package [12], with aug-cc-pVTZ ba-
sis sets [13] in uncontracted form for O and H and the
ECP28MWB small-core quasirelativistic eﬀective core
potential [14] for Rb, with the valence basis set from
Ref. [15]. The CASSCF calculation included all conﬁgu-
rations that can be formed from the lowest (10,3) orbitals
of (a′, a′′) symmetry, with the lowest (5,1) orbitals doubly
occupied. Energies were calculated in Jacobi coordinates
(R, θ) on a grid of 25 unequally spaced points in R from
2 to 12 ˚A and 11 Gauss-Lobatto quadrature points in
θ. The two 1A′ surfaces were transformed to obtain two
quasidiabatic diagonal surfaces and a coupling surface,
using a mixing angle derived from matrix elements of
the OH ˆLz operator. Finally, the quasidiabatic covalent
using C6 and C7
energies were extrapolated to R =
coeﬃcients obtained from coupled cluster (CCSD) calcu-
lations at R = 15, 25 and 100 ˚A. The singlet and triplet
sum and diﬀerence surfaces were expanded in normalized
associated Legendre functions and the radial coeﬃcients
were interpolated using the reciprocal-power reproducing
kernel Hilbert space (RP-RKHS) method [16, 17].

∞

∼

The resulting diabatic covalent surfaces have wells 337
and 511 cm−1 deep at linear Rb-OH geometries for the
singlet and triplet surfaces respectively. For the A′ sur-
faces this linear well is the absolute minimum, but the A′′
surfaces have absolute minima at non-linear geometries
125◦) with depths of 405 and 615 cm−1 respec-
(θ
tively. The ion-pair state is very much deeper, with a
26000 cm−1 below the neutral threshold.
well

≈

famfa i
|

To perform scattering calculations on these surfaces,
we expand the wave function into an appropriate basis
set. This set will consist of the quantum numbers of the
atom and diatom in the separated limit. For the atom,
electronic (sa) and nuclear (ia) spins are coupled to make
in the lab frame. For the diatom, the
total spin
electronic wave function is speciﬁed in Hund’s coupling
case (a) by the total electronic angular momentum j,
with projections m in the lab frame and ω in the frame
rotating with the molecule. As usual, ω is separated into
its orbital and spin components, ω = λ + σ. Linear com-
)/√2 are constructed
binations
i
|−
to produce states of good parity appropriate to the zero-
electric-ﬁeld case we consider here. Finally, j is coupled
to the nuclear spin id of the hydrogen atom to yield total
diatom spin
. The partial wave quantum num-
fdmfdi
|
bers
account for the relative orientation of the
LMLi
|
collision pair in the lab frame. Thus the basis states of

λω
= (
|

¯λ¯ωǫ
|

+ ǫ

−

ω

λ

i

i

2

(saia)famfai|

our calculation are given by
sd¯λ¯ωǫ(jid)fdmfdi|
.
LMLi
(1)
|
1)j−sd+L and the
In this basis the total parity p = ǫ(
lab-projection of total angular momentum, md + ma +
ML, are conserved quantities. In zero ﬁeld, the total an-
= f d+fa+L would also be conserved;
gular momentum
however, we anticipate considering the action of a ﬁeld
on the collisions, which would mix diﬀerent
values. We
F
therefore do not exploit this symmetry here.

−

F

Cast in this basis, the Schr¨odinger equation for Rb-
OH collisions takes the standard form of a set of close-
coupled equations in the variable R. To solve these, we
ψ−1dψ/dR us-
propagate the log-derivative matrix Y
ing a variable-step version of Johnson’s algorithm [18].
Because of the multiple PES’s and the inclusion of hy-
perﬁne degrees of freedom, the total number of scattering
channels required to solve the complete problem includ-
ing spin (in excess of 25,000) is prohibitively large.

≡

To overcome this obstacle, we exploit a kind of frame-
transformation procedure [19]. We identify a suitable
radius R = R0, and deﬁne R < R0 and R > R0 as
the “short-range” and “long-range” parts of the calcula-
tion, respectively. For Rb-OH, we choose R0 = 17 a0.
In the short-range region, the PES’s are deep, and the
hyperﬁne eﬀects are small. We therefore compute Y in
a basis of decoupled nuclear spins and neglect couplings
between blocks of the Hamiltonian with diﬀerent nuclear
spin projections mia or mid. In this pilot study, we have
neglected the inﬂuence of the ion-pair channel.

At long range, R > R0, the full hyperﬁne structure is
restored, and Y is transformed into the basis (1) for fur-
ther propagation and matching to spherical Bessel func-
tions to yield scattering matrices. In this region, collision
channels in which the molecule is excited into higher-
lying rotational or spin-orbit states are already strongly
closed. We therefore eliminate these channels.
In the
inner region, we use partial waves up to L = 28 and ro-
tational states up to j = 11/2. In the outer region, we
employ partial waves up to L = 22, but with full hy-
perﬁne structure of the j = 3/2 rotational ground state.
Because of these approximations, no single calculation
requires more than 2000 channels [11]. Numerical checks
suggest that the magnitudes of cross sections computed
in this way are accurate to within a factor of

2.

For concreteness, we calculate cross sections for a beam
experiment in which the incident wave vector is coin-
cident with the laboratory quantization axis. Energy-
dependent cross sections for two diﬀerent initial states of
the collision partners are shown in Fig. 1. In the ﬁrst
case, Fig. 1(a), the Rb atom is initially in its “stretched”
, and the molecule is in its
state, with
i
higher-lying, f parity state, and also spin stretched, with
. Both these states are weak-magnetic-
fdmfdi
|
i
ﬁeld seeking, meaning that they can be trapped magnet-
ically. In addition, OH in this state can be trapped elec-

famfa i
|
22
|

22
|

=

=

∼

(a)

-6

-4

-2

0

10

10

10

10

Collision Energy (K)

 

 

 

Elastic

 Inelastic

 

Elastic

 Inelastic

 

 

2

2

)

m
c
(
 

)

m
c
(
 

-11

10

-12

10

-13

10

-14

10

-11

10

-12

10

-13

10

-14

10

(b)

-6

-4

-2

0

10

10

10

10

Collision Energy (K)

FIG. 1: Rb-OH collision cross sections versus energy. Solid
(dashed) lines represent elastic (inelastic) cross sections. In
(a) is shown results for the incident channel |2Π3/2, fdmf d =
22, f iOH |famf a = 22iRb, where both the atom and diatom
are weak-magnetic-ﬁeld seeking, and the OH is also weak-
electric-ﬁeld seeking.
In (b) is shown the incident channel
|2Π3/2, fdmf d = 11, eiOH |famf a = 1 − 1iRb. Again, both
species are in weak-magnetic-ﬁeld seeking states, but the OH
is now in a strong-electric-ﬁeld seeking state. The points in-
dicate the Langevin cross section, Eqn. (2)

trostatically. Solid lines denote elastic cross sections σel,
in which all internal quantum numbers are retained after
the collision, and dashed lines refer to inelastic cross sec-
tions σinel, which represents the sum of partial cross sec-
tions to many possible outcomes distinct from the initial
channel (including ma and mj-changing collisions that
do not release energy at zero ﬁeld).

For collisions between S-state atoms, being in a
stretched state greatly reduces inelastic cross sections.
This is simply because the mfa projection of one atom
cannot be reduced at the expense of raising mfa of the

3

other atom. Rather, to conserve angular momentum,
such a collision can occur only if the partial wave projec-
tion ML can change, which requires an anisotropic inter-
action. For two S-state atoms, the only anisotropic inter-
action is the magnetic dipole interaction between valence
electrons, which is very weak. For Rb-OH collisions, by
contrast, the PES itself is highly anisotropic, providing a
ready avenue for spin-changing collisions. Indeed, inelas-
tic scattering is as likely as, or more likely than, elastic
scattering over much of the energy range. This trend is
1 mK),
especially pronounced at low energies (below
where the Wigner threshold law sets in. The elastic cross
section must tend to a constant at threshold, but ex-
oergic inelastic processes must yield cross sections that
diverge as 1/√E. Note that the actual magnitudes of
cross sections in this limit are strongly subject to details
of the PES, details which are typically uncovered only
by experiments. Thus the cross sections in Fig. 1, while
suggestive, cannot be taken as deﬁnitive predictions.

∼

At higher energies, many partial waves can contribute
to the scattering, and the threshold laws are less signiﬁ-
cant. Because the electron spin of the OH is strongly tied
to the rotating molecule, spin orientation in the lab frame
is completely disrupted during a collision. This process
can be approximated simply by a Langevin model [10]:
for a given energy E, there is a maximum partial wave
L(E) for which E lies above the centrifugal barrier of the
C6/R6 + ~2L(L + 1)/2µR2. Here
long-range potential
C6 = 325Eha6
0 is the isotropic Van der Waals coeﬃcient
of the PES [11], and µ the reduced mass of the colli-
sion pair. In the Langevin model, we assume that any
partial wave smaller than L(E) contributes to inelastic
scattering with unit probability, i.e., any time the atom
and molecule are near one another, they are essentially
guaranteed to disrupt the electron’s spin. This idea leads
to a cross section

−

σLangevin(E) = 3π

(2)

1/3

.

C6
4E (cid:19)

(cid:18)

This cross section is also shown in Fig. 1(a), by the solid
symbols. It is clearly getting the trend and the order of
magnitude of the cross sections correct.

We therefore predict that Rb-OH elastic cross sections,
at temperatures of tens of mK typical of Stark deceler-
ators, will be on the order of 10−13 cm2. At the cor-
responding collision velocities of several hundred cm/s,
this corresponds to elastic collision rate constants on the
order of 10−11 cm3/s, which is easily large enough to
provide suﬃcient thermal contact to allow sympathetic
cooling in overlapped traps of OH and Rb. However,
inelastic rate constants are of the same order of magni-
tude, which bodes ill for sympathetic cooling, at least in
magnetostatic or electrostatic traps. Including the ion-
pair channels would likely only disrupt the internal states
more severely, and would not change this basic conclusion
about sympathetic cooling.

1

−

=

=

1
|

famfa i
|

We turn now to an alternative pair of initial states,
whose scattering cross sections are shown in Fig. 1 (b).
Here the atom is in its lowest magnetically trappable
, and the molecule is in
state, with
i
its lower-energy e state, with total spin
11
fdmfdi
i
|
|
(also magnetically trappable). At zero ﬁeld, both σel and
σinel are energy-independent at low energies, since all exit
channels are iso-energetic with the incident channel. In
nonzero ﬁeld, the
Rb channel lies above other
1
i
−
m-components in energy, and σinel would again diverge.
By the same token, sympathetic cooling is possible at
state and Rb
1
low energies for OH molecules in the
|
atoms in the
state. This is the lowest-energy chan-
nel of all: there are no inelastic channels energetically
available and σinel will vanish. These states are not mag-
netically trappable, but could be conﬁned in an optical
or microwave [20] dipole trap or an alternating current
trap [21]. A small static magnetic ﬁeld will be needed to
maintain the projection quantum numbers.

11
|

11
|

OH
i

1
|

−

1

i

i

At higher collision energies, other forms of inelastic
scattering become energetically allowed. Once the colli-
sion energy surpasses the height of the p-wave centrifugal
barrier (at about 1.6 mK), the molecule can shed angu-
lar momentum into the partial wave degree of freedom.
At this point σinel climbs to a large value, comparable to
σel. Further, at about 4mK, the f = 2 hyperﬁne state
of OH becomes energetically allowed, providing another
route to inelastic collisions. By examining the partial
cross sections, we ﬁnd that these two avenues for inelas-
tic collisions are roughly equally likely. At still higher
collision energies, σinel is again roughly approximated by
the Langevin result (2), although there is now more struc-
ture, owing to a large number of Feshbach resonances to
ﬁne-and hyperﬁne excited states.

These results present a cautionary tale for sympathetic
cooling using alkali atoms. One may regard inelastic
scattering as a “Murphy’s Law” process [22]. Namely,
if the internal state of the molecule can change to pro-
duce an unfavorable result, it will do so. The key to
making sympathetic cooling viable lies in eliminating un-
desirable channels as far as possible. For example, a light
collision partner with a small C6 coeﬃcient will produce
a centrifugal barrier at higher energy, preventing partial
waves from accepting angular momentum. This circum-
stance explains, at least partly, the ability of a He buﬀer
gas to cool molecules without badly disrupting spin ori-
entation [23, 24, 25].
In the present context of alkali
atoms, consider Li, which is about 12 times lighter than
Rb, and about half as polarizable. Its p-wave centrifu-
gal barrier upon colliding with OH is on the order of 10
mK. In addition, a molecule that is better described by
Hund’s coupling case (b), in which the electron’s spin is
only weakly coupled to the molecular rotation axis, may
help weaken σinel below the Langevin limit [25].

In summary, we have performed the ﬁrst ab initio
scattering calculations for an open-shell, ground state

4

molecule colliding with an alkali atom, incorporating the
hyperﬁne structure of both collision partners. The results
suggest that elastic cross sections are suﬃciently large for
sympathetic cooling to occur, yet equally large inelastic
cross sections probably hinder this application. Nonethe-
less, the results do not preclude the possibility that, by
applying electric or magnetic ﬁelds, inelastic cross sec-
tions could be suppressed [26, 27]. This will be the sub-
ject of a future study.

ML and JLB gratefully acknowledge the NSF and the
W. M. Keck Foundation, PS acknowledges the MˇSMT
ˇCR (grant No. LC06002).

[1] R. E. Drullinger ⁀et al., Appl. Phys. 22, 365 (1980).
[2] D. J. Larson et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 57, 70 (1986).
[3] This was ﬁrst reported by C. J. Myatt et al., Phys, Rev.

Lett. 78, 586 (1997).

[4] R. deCarvalho et al., Euro. Phys. J. D 7, 289 (1999).
[5] See the special issue of Euro. Phys. J. D, 31, pp. 149-445

(2004), and references therein.

[6] S. Y. T. van de Meerakker, N. Vanhaecke, and G. Meijer,

Ann. Rev. Phys. Chem. 57, 159 (2005).

[7] K. M. Jones, E. Tiesinga, P. D. Lett, and P. S. Julienne,

Rev. Mod. Phys. 78, 483 (2006).

[8] J. R. Bochinksi, E. R. Hudson, H. J. Lewandowski, and

J. Ye, Phys. Rev. A 70, 043410 (2004).

[9] P. Sold´an and J. M. Hutson, Phys. Rev. Lett. 92, 163202

(2004).

[10] R. D. Levine and R. B. Bernstein, Molecular Reaction
Dynamics and Chemical Reactivity (Oxford, New York,
1987).

[11] M. Lara et al., unpublished.
[12] H.-J. Werner, P. J. Knowles, R. Lindh, M. Sch¨utz, et al.,
MOLPRO quantum chemistry package, version 2002.6
(2002); http://www.molpro.net/

[13] T. H. Dunning, Jr., J. Chem. Phys. 90, 1007 (1989).
[14] T. Leininger et al., Chem. Phys. Lett. 255, 274 (1996).
[15] P. Sold´an, M. T. Cvitaˇs, and J. M. Hutson, Phys. Rev.

A 67, 054702 (2003).

[16] T.-S. Ho and H. Rabitz, J. Chem. Phys. 104, 2584 (1996).
[17] P. Sold´an and J. M. Hutson, J. Chem. Phys. 112, 4415

(2000).

[18] B. R. Johnson, J. Comput. Phys. 13, 445 (1973).
[19] U. Fano and A. R. P. Rau, Atomic Collisions and Spectra

(Academic Press, Orlando, 1986).

[20] D. DeMille, D. R. Glenn, and J. Petricka, Euro. Phys. J.

D 31, 375 (2004).

[21] J. van Veldhoven, H. L. Bethlem, and G. Meijer, Phys.

Rev. Lett. 94, 083001 (2005).

[22] R. A. J. Matthews, Proc. Roy. Inst. Gr. Br. 70, 75 (1997).
[23] J. D. Weinstein et al., Nature 395, 148 (1998).
[24] J. L. Bohn, Phys, Rev. A 61, 040702 (2000); ibid, 62,

032701 (2000).

[25] R. V. Krems, A. Dalgarno, N. Balakrishnan, and G. C.

Groenenboom, Phys. Rev. A 67, 060703 (2003).

[26] C. Ticknor and J. L. Bohn, Phys. Rev. A 71, 022709

(2005).

[27] R. V. Krems, Int. Rev. Phys. Chem. 24, 99 (2005).

