atoms

E-mail: meschede@iap.uni-bonn.de

Institut f¨ur Angewandte Physik, Universit¨at Bonn, Wegelerstr. 8, D-53115 bonn,
Germany

Y Miroshnychenko, W Alt, I Dotsenko, L F¨orster,
M Khudaverdyan, A Rauschenbeutel and D Meschede

6 Precision preparation of strings of trapped neutral
0
0
2
 
l
u
J
 
1
3
 
 
]
h
p
-
m
o
t
a
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
4
9
2
7
0
6
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Abstract. We have recently demonstrated the creation of regular strings of neutral
caesium atoms in a standing wave optical dipole trap using optical tweezers [Y.
Miroshnychenko et al., Nature, in press (2006)]. The rearrangement is realized atom-
by-atom, extracting an atom and re-inserting it at the desired position with sub-
micrometer resolution. We describe our experimental setup and present detailed
measurements as well as simple analytical models for the resolution of the extraction
process, for the precision of the insertion, and for heating processes. We compare two
diﬀerent methods of insertion, one of which permits the placement of two atoms into
one optical micropotential. The theoretical models largely explain our experimental
results and allow us to identify the main limiting factors for the precision and eﬃciency
of the manipulations. Strategies for future improvements are discussed.

Precision preparation of strings of trapped neutral atoms

2

1. Introduction

Neutral atoms stored in light induced potentials form a versatile tool for studying
quantum many body systems with controlled interactions. One of the most interesting
cases occurs if the coherence of such processes is preserved, and hence the build-up of
many body quantum correlations can be studied in detail. Such experimental systems
are of great interest for quantum information processing [1], and, more general, quantum
simulation [2]. Using far detuned optical dipole traps, neutral atoms can be well conﬁned
in various geometrical conﬁgurations, while at the same time oﬀering long coherence
times of their internal states [3, 4].

Two general approaches towards the realization of suitable neutral atom systems
can be distinguished:
In the typical ”top-down” approach one starts with a large
sample of Bose-condensed atoms which are then adiabatically transferred into a three-
dimensional optical lattice. A close to perfect array of 105 to 106 atoms is then obtained
with almost exactly one atom per site by inducing the Mott insulator state [5]. For this
system, the method of spin dependent transport [6] has made possible the creation of
large-scale entanglement by inducing controlled, i.e. phase coherent, collisions between
neighbouring atoms. However, due to the small distance between adjacent atoms, the
manipulation and state detection of individual atoms is still a big challenge.

This problem is overcome in our ”bottom-up” approach where strings of trapped
neutral atoms are created one by one. We have experimentally demonstrated [7] that
regular strings consisting of up to 7 atoms spaced several potential well apart can be
created in a one-dimensional optical lattice. Due to the larger interatomic distance, we
are able to address individual atoms reliably [8]. Moreover, the exact number of empty
potential wells between two atoms has been measured [9], enabling the method of spin
dependent transport in this system.

Small strings of neutral atoms are not only excellent experimental objects to
implement controlled coherent collisions, they are also well suited for deterministic
coupling using cavity-QED concepts [10]. Here, atom-atom entanglement can be created
by synchronous interaction of two atoms with a single mode of the cavity ﬁeld. Typical
modes have diameters of a few 10 µm, compatible with the interatomic separations on
the order of 5-15 µm in our strings.

In this manuscript we give a detailed analysis of the properties and limitations of

our atom sorting apparatus which we use to create such regular strings.

2. Experimental tools

2.1. Standing wave optical dipole traps

We trap neutral caesium atoms in a red-detuned optical standing wave dipole trap,
It is formed by two counter-propagating
oriented horizontally (HDT) (see ﬁgure 1).
laser beams with parallel linear polarization, generating a chain of potential well located
at the intensity maxima. For a Nd:YAG laser, the periodicity is λHDT/2 = 532 nm. The

Precision preparation of strings of trapped neutral atoms

3

Figure 1. Scheme of the experimental setup for the rearrangement of trapped atoms.
Two counter-propagating laser beams produce a horizontally oriented optical standing
wave dipole trap (HDT). After loading an exact number of caesium atoms from a
magneto-optical trap (MOT) into the HDT, a ﬂuorescence picture, recorded with an
intensiﬁed CCD camera (ICCD), reveals the initial positions of the atoms. A second,
vertically oriented standing wave dipole trap (VDT) is used as optical tweezers to
extract a selected atom out of the HDT and to reinsert it at the desired position
into the HDT. The ICCD image shows four atoms which have been rearranged into a
regular string in the HDT (exposure time 1 s).

beams are focused to a waist radius of wHDT = 19 µm yielding a Rayleigh range of 1 mm.
An optical power of 1 W per beam results in a measured trap depth of U 0
HDT = 0.8 mK.
Individual atoms trapped in the HDT can be extracted and reinserted with another
optical standing wave trap used as optical tweezers. This trap (VDT) is oriented verti-
cally and perpendicularly to the HDT. The standing wave is created by retro reﬂecting
the linearly polarized beam of an Yb:YAG laser (λVDT = 1030 nm). This laser beam
is focused to a waist radius of wVDT = 10 µm. The typical power of 0.3 W creates a
measured trap depth of U 0
VDT = 1.4 mK. The power of the VDT laser beam is controlled
by an electro optical modulator (EOM).

2.2. Magneto-optical trap

Our vacuum chamber consists of a glass cell connected to an ultra-high vacuum main
chamber and a caesium reservoir separated from the chamber by a valve. An ion getter
pump maintains a background gas pressure below 10−

10 mbar.

We use a high gradient magneto-optical trap (MOT) as a source of single atoms for
our experiments [11]. The laser system of the MOT consists of two diode lasers in Littrow
conﬁguration, frequency-stabilized by polarization spectroscopies. The cooling laser is
F ′ = 3/F ′ = 5 crossover transition and shifted by an acousto
stabilized to the F = 4
F ′ = 5. The
optic modulator (AOM) to the red side of the cooling transition F = 4
z-axis of the MOT coincides with the axis of the VDT, whereas the two other axes of
the MOT are in the x-y-plane at 450 to the axis of the HDT. The saturation parameter
s = I
I0
I0 = 1.1 mW/cm2: saturation intensity of the caesium D2 transition; Γ = 2π

of each MOT beam is s = 0.5 (I: intensity of the cooling laser;

5.2 MHz:

1 +

2∆
Γ

→

→

−

2

1

h

i

(cid:0)

(cid:1)

·

Precision preparation of strings of trapped neutral atoms

4

Figure 2. Experimental setup with the detection optics for the MOT ﬂuorescence.
The ﬂuorescence light is collected and collimated by an objective. One part of the
ﬂuorescence signal is spatially and spectrally ﬁltered and detected with an avalanche
photo diode (APD). The other part is only spectrally ﬁltered and sent into an intensiﬁed
CCD camera.

linewidth of the excited state 6P3/2; ∆ = 1.5 Γ: detuning of the cooling laser). The
MOT repumping laser is stabilized to the F = 3
F ′ = 4 transition. It is linearly
polarized and propagates along the axis of the HDT. We typically use 1 µW focused to
about 0.5 mm.

→

The high magnetic ﬁeld gradient of the MOT (∂B/∂z = 340 G/cm) is produced by
water cooled magnetic coils mounted symmetrically with respect to the glass vacuum
cell. The magnetic ﬁeld can be switched within 60 ms (mainly limited by the eddy
currents in the metal parts of the coils). Due to the high ﬁeld gradient, the spontaneous
loading rate of Caesium atoms from the thermal background vapor into the MOT is
negligibly slow.

In order to load the MOT, we temporarily reduce the magnetic ﬁeld gradient to
∂B/∂z = 25 G/cm for the time τload to increase the capture cross section. Varying the
loading time τload from few tens to few hundred milliseconds, we can select a speciﬁc
average number of loaded atoms ranging from 1 to 50.

The atoms are transferred from the MOT into the HDT by simultaneously operating

both traps for several tens of milliseconds.

2.3. Atom detection

The procedures described in this paper rely on our ability to nondestructively determine
the exact number and the position of trapped atoms by detecting their ﬂuorescence. For
this purpose the ﬂuorescence light is collected by a homemade long working distance
microscopic objective (NA=0.29), covering about 2 % of the solid angle [12]. The
ﬂuorescence is monitored in the time domain by an avalanche photo diode (APD, type
SPCM200 CD2027 from EG&G, quantum eﬃciency 50 % at 852 nm) and spatially by an

Precision preparation of strings of trapped neutral atoms

5

Figure 3.
Histogram of the APD counts detected within the integration time
τint = 60 ms after loading ﬁve atoms on average into the MOT (1800 repetitions).
The peaks correspond to diﬀerent number of atoms in the MOT.

intensiﬁed CCD camera (ICCD, type PI-MAX:1K,HQ,RB from Princeton Instruments
with image intensiﬁer Gen III HQ from Roper Scientiﬁc, quantum eﬃciency 10 % at
852 nm) [13], see ﬁgure 2.

2.3.1. Atom number detection Our atom counting method exploits the fact that each
atom contributes equally to the intensity of the MOT ﬂuorescence signal and on the high
signal to noise ratio of our detection system, allowing us to distinguish discrete levels in
τint photons
the APD count rate. For n trapped atoms we detect Nn = (Rstray+n
during the integration time τint, see ﬁgure 3. Here, Rstray is the count rate due to the
stray light and the detector background, and R1atom is the actual one-atom ﬂuorescence
rate. For typical MOT parameters we detect R1atom = 35000/s and Rstray = 25000/s.

R1atom)

·

·

1/2

The standard deviation of the detected photon number is fundamentally limited by
Poisson statistics to N −
. Fluctuations of the MOT laser beams including intensity,
n
phase and pointing stability are taken into account in analogy with the description of
intensity noise in laser beams by a global relative intensity noise RIN = δN 2/N 2 where
δN 2 represents the rms-value of these ﬂuctuations. In our case RIN = 0.012

0.022.

In order to distinguish between n and n + 1 atoms, the total width of the peaks
n)1/2) has to be
In order to distinguish atom numbers with

corresponding to neighboring atom numbers (∆N = (Nn + RIN
compared to their separation R1atomτint.
better than 95% conﬁdence, the ratio

N 2

·

−

kn =

∆N
Nn+1 −

=

Nn

(cid:18)

Rstray
R1atom

+ n

(cid:19) s

1
(Rstray + nR1atom)τint

+ RIN

(1)

must be smaller than 1/4. In our experiments, RIN begins to dominate this ratio for
integration times τint ≃
60 ms. This time was chosen discriminating atom numbers from
the APD signal, since it is short compared to other experimental procedures, and longer

Precision preparation of strings of trapped neutral atoms

6

times do not improve the signal to noise ratio. This method allows us to discriminate 1
to 20 atoms in the MOT with a conﬁdence level above 95 %.

2.3.2. Atom position detection The positions of the atoms in the HDT are determined
by illuminating them with an optical molasses and detecting the ﬂuorescence with the
ICCD camera. At the same time, the optical molasses cools the trapped atoms, en-
abling continuous observations of up to one minute [13]. We detect about 160 photons
per atom on the ICCD camera within the 1 s exposure time. The y-positions of the
individual atoms trapped in the HDT (see ﬁgure 1) are determined by binning the pix-
els of the ICCD image in the vertical z-direction after suitably clipping the image to
minimize background noise. The resulting one-dimensional intensity distribution along
the y-direction is ﬁtted with a sum of Gaussians, which are used as an approximation
to the line spread function of our imaging system [9]. We deﬁne the centers of the
Gaussians as the y-positions of the atoms, which can be determined with a precision
of 140 nm rms (below the wavelength of the imaging light) within 1500 ms (1000 ms
of exposure and 500 ms read-out and image processing).
In this way we are able to
determine the number of potential wells separating two simultaneously trapped atoms.

Since we want to transport atoms over distances up to 1 mm with submicrometer
accuracy, it is essential to obtain a precise calibration of camera pixel to the position in
the object plane of the microscope objective.

For this calibration we take advantage of the fact that the atoms in the HDT are
trapped in the potential minima separated by exactly λHDT/2 = 532 nm. Therefore,
the measured distance between two simultaneously trapped atoms d given in units of
camera pixels must correspond to an integer multiple of λHDT/2 in the object plane:

αd = nλHDT/2,

where α is the calibration parameter in µm/pixel. In order to determine α we have ﬁrst
accumulated about 500 images with two to four atoms trapped in the HDT. Then we
have determined the interatomic separations in each image, resulting in n
700 distance
values di, shown in ﬁgure 4. In order to avoid any inaccuracy caused by overlapping
peaks at short distances, only separations of more than 10 µm then were taken into
account. To ﬁnd the periodicity of the distribution we construct a function built by
summing the delta functions at the positions of each di

≈

f (y) =

δ(di −

y)

and Fourier transform it:

n

1
n

i=1
X

1
√2π

±

Z

−∞

g(k) =

∞

f (y)e2πikydy =

e2πikdi.

1
√2π n

n

i=1
X

The real part of the Fourier transform of g(k) is shown in ﬁgure 4. The most prominent
0.0003) 1/pixel corresponds to the spatial frequency of the
peak at k0 = 0.9336(

(2)

(3)

(4)

Precision preparation of strings of trapped neutral atoms

7

Figure 4. Histogram of measured distances and its fourier transfor. The only one
prominent contribution at k0 = 0.9336 wells/pixel corresponds to the periodicity of
λHDT/2 in the object plane of the microscope objective. The inset shows the original
function f (y). Here, for presentation purposes each delta function was replaced by a
Gaussian with the width of 0.05 pixel.

standing wave pattern:
α
λHDT/2

k =

.

(5)

±

This yields the calibration parameter α = 0.4967(

0.0002) µm/pixel.

The error of this value is dominated by the statistical error due to the ﬁnite sample
and the 130 nm-uncertainty in the determination of each distance [9]. The statistical
error is estimated by randomly selecting a subset of n/2 distances and determining
α by the above mentioned calculations on this subset. Using 20 diﬀerent subsets the
standard deviation (δα)n/2 was determined. The statistical error for the full set is
therefore (δα)n = (δα)n/2/√2. The slight modiﬁcation of the wave length λHDT in the
Rayleigh zone by the Guoy phase is on the order of 10−

5 and hence negligible here.

2.4. Three-dimensional transport of atoms

We transport atoms in the x-y-plane using the HDT. Vertical transport of the atoms
along the z-direction is realized by the VDT.

2.4.1. Transportation along the y-direction An “optical conveyor belt” [14] along the
trap axis is realized by means of acousto-optic modulators (AOMs) installed in each
arm of the HDT, see ﬁgure 1. Mutually detuning the AOM driving frequencies using a
dual-frequency synthesizer, detunes the frequencies of the two laser beams. As a result,
the standing wave pattern moves along the axis of the trap.

Precision preparation of strings of trapped neutral atoms

8

The optical conveyor belt allows us to transport the atoms over millimeter distances
with submicrometer precision [9, 14] within several milliseconds. The accuracy of the
transportation distance is limited to 190 nm by the discretisation error of our digital
AOM-driver [9].
In this experiment we typically transport atoms over a few tens of
micrometers within a few hundred microseconds.

2.4.2. Transportation along the x-direction Displacement of the HDT along the x-
direction is realized by synchronously tilting the mirrors M1 and M2, see ﬁgure 1, in
opposite directions around the z-axis using piezo-electric actuators. For tilt angles below
0.1 mrad the variation of the interference pattern is small and to a good approximation
pure x-translation is realized.

We typically move atoms in the x-direction by two times the waist radius of the
HDT (ca. 40 µm) with a precision of a few micrometers within 50 ms. The maximum
transportation distance is limited to about 40 µm by the dynamic range of the actuators.
The minimal transportation time is limited to about 10 ms by the bandwidth of the
PZT-system.

2.4.3. Transportation along the z-direction The VDT acts as optical tweezers and
extracts and reinserts atoms in the z-direction. To axially move the standing wave
pattern of the VDT, the retro-reﬂecting mirror M3 is mounted on a linear PZT stage,
see ﬁgure 1.

In our experiments the VDT transports an atom over about 70 µm along the z-axis
by applying a sinusoidal voltage ramp to the PZT within 50 ms. The precision of the
transportation is limited to a few micrometers by the hysteresis of the piezo-crystal,
whereas the transportation time is limited by the inertia of the mirror.

3. Positioning individual atoms in the HDT

3.1. Outline of the distance-contlor procedure

≥

Immediately after loading the HDT with n
2 atoms, they are randomly distributed
over an interval of about 100 µm along the axis of the trap. In order to create regular
strings with a target interatomic separation dt, atoms are repositioned one by one with
the VDT-optical tweezers. For this, the initial positions of all atoms are ﬁrst determined
by recording and analyzing a ﬂuorescence ICCD image, see ﬁgure 5(a). Then, the atoms
are rearranged in the HDT by sequential application of the “distance-control” operation:
The string of atoms in the HDT is transported horizontally along the trap axis, such that
the rightmost atom arrives at the y-position of the VDT (yVDT), see ﬁgure 5(b). After
adiabatically switching on the VDT, this atom is transported upwards by approximately
three times the waist of the HDT, out of its region of inﬂuence.

This atom is then extracted with the optical tweezers (c). The rest of the string
in the HDT is transported along the y-axis until the leftmost atom of the string ar-

Precision preparation of strings of trapped neutral atoms

9

Figure 5. Distance-control operation [7]. After the initial positions of all the atoms
are determined (a), the rightmost atom is transported to the position of the VDT
(b). This atom is extracted vertically with the optical tweezers out of the HDT (c).
The rest of the atoms is transported along the axis of the horizontal trap, so that the
leftmost atom arrives at the target separation dt from the axis of the VDT (d). The
extracted atom is inserted at the desired position into the HDT (e). Note that the
ﬂuorescence spots, corresponding to respective atoms, were colored for visualization
purposes.

rives at yVDT + dt (d). The procedure is completed by reinserting the extracted atom
at this position into the HDT (e). Each operation permutes the order of the atoms,
and after n
1 steps an equidistant string of n atoms is formed. Figure 6 shows ICCD
images of equidistant strings of up to seven atoms with interatomic separations of 15 µm.

−

A perfect distance-control procedure would extract and re-insert an atom with
100 % eﬃciency at a separation to the next atom given in terms of an exactly known
number of micropotentials always, i. e., multiple of λHDT/2. We have developed a
model of extraction and re-insertion in order to study the physical limitations of the
repositioning procedure.

Precision preparation of strings of trapped neutral atoms

10

Figure 6. Equidistant strings of n atoms created by rearranging the atoms of the
string applying n

1 times the distance-control operation.

−

3.2. Extraction of an atom

For extraction, the VDT-optical tweezers needs to overcome the HDT trapping forces.
In both the HDT and VDT standing wave dipole traps conﬁnement in the axial direction
is almost two orders of magnitude tighter than in the radial direction, the maximal axial
forces are thus much larger than the radial forces. For comparable potential depths of
the HDT and the VDT, an atom in the overlap region will therefore always follow the
axial shift of the traps.

Successful extraction of a single atom not only requires eﬃcient handling of the
atoms between the HDT and VDT traps. In addition, other atoms present in the vicinity
must remain undisturbed. We have thus deﬁned and analyzed a minimal separation of
atoms tolerable on extraction, which is equivalent to an eﬀective “width of the optical
tweezers”.

3.2.1. Theoretical model of the width of the optical tweezers
In this model motion in
the traps is treated classically, for at the atomic temperature of about 60 µK for the
typical depths of the traps in our experiments the mean oscillatory quantum numbers
are nrad ≈

3 for the VDT, and nrad ≈

400, nax ≈

90, nax ≈

6 for the HDT.

Precision preparation of strings of trapped neutral atoms

11

Figure 7. Trapping potentials along the z-axis. The trapping potential in the overlap
region of the two traps is the sum of the Gaussian proﬁle of the radial conﬁning
potential of the HDT and of the standing wave of the VDT. An atom at the bottom
of the HDT experiences light forces of the standing wave, too.

We consider two crossed standing wave optical dipole traps. For simplicity, we
assume that all the spatial manipulations are carried out within the Rayleigh-range of
the standing wave dipole traps, i. e., we neglect the change of the curvature of the wave
fronts. In this approximation, each dipole trap is described by three parameters: the
waist radius of the Gaussian beam, the depth of the trap, and the periodicity of the
standing wave. Atoms are trapped in the diﬀerent potential wells of the standing wave
of the HDT and are extracted purely along the z-direction. The motion occurs in the
y-z-plane only. Therefore, we consider one-dimensional potentials along the z-axis at
diﬀerent y-positions in the y-z-plane with x = 0.

In order to separate the eﬀects of the potential shape and the atomic motion on
the process of extraction, we ﬁrst model the case of atoms at zero temperature, where
the energy of the atoms is well deﬁned. Later, the inﬂuence of the thermal energy dis-
tribution is discussed.

Tweezers potential Consider an atom at rest trapped at the bottom of a micropoten-
tial of the HDT at y = 0, which coincides with the axis of the VDT. At this position
the HDT-potential in the z-direction has a Gaussian shape with waist wHDT and depth
U 0
HDT. After switching on the VDT, in addition to the Gaussian potential of the HDT,
a periodic potential with depth U 0
VDT and period λVDT/2 is superimposed in the z-
direction, see ﬁgure 7. Since the HDT and VDT laser frequencies are far apart, the
trapping potentials are added incoherently, and the atom is then additionally subject
to the forces of the VDT standing wave.

During extraction of the atom during the z-direction it is conveyed at the bottom of
the micropotential away from the axis of the HDT. Due to the Gaussian radial proﬁle of
the HDT, the depth of the local potential minima changes along the z-axis and reaches
its minimum at the distance zmax = wHDT/2 from the axis of the HDT. Here the slope of
the Gaussian is maximal and the eﬀective depth of the local micropotential, see ﬁgure 8,
can be approximated as

Ueﬀ ≈

U 0

VDT −

1
π√e

λVDT
wHDT

U 0

HDT.

(6)

Precision preparation of strings of trapped neutral atoms

12

Figure 8. Decrease of the eﬀective depth of the potential well. Due to the Gaussian
shape of the conﬁning potential of the HDT in the z-direction, the depth of the standing
wave pattern reaches its minimum at the distance wHDT/2 from the axis of the HDT. If
the eﬀective depth Ueﬀ is greater than zero, the atom remains trapped in the standing
wave and will be ﬁnally extracted with the VDT a). Otherwise, the atom always rolls
down during the extraction b).

(7)

(8)

(9)

The condition for extracting the atom from the HDT is given by

Ueﬀ > 0.

Now, consider an atom is trapped at some other position y

= 0 along the HDT.
The potential along the z-direction will be the sum of the same Gaussian potential well
of the HDT with depth U 0
HDT and of the periodic potential of the VDT, but now with

2

2y
2
VDT . The sum of the two potentials at the lateral position

the reduced depth U 0
y generalizes (6) to

VDT e−

w

Ueﬀ(y)

U 0

VDT e−

2

2y
2
VDT

w

1
π√e

λVDT
wHDT

U 0

HDT.

≈

−
yT < y < yT along the HDT, where condition
Consequently, there exists some region
(7) holds, and where atoms will be extracted by the VDT. Figure 9(a) shows the
probability pnoextr for an atom to remain trapped in the HDT after the extraction as
the function of the lateral position y. The critical position yT deﬁned by the condition
Ueﬀ(yT) = 0 is

−

yT =

wVDT
√2 s

ln

π√e

(cid:18)

wHDT
λVDT

U 0
U 0

VDT

HDT (cid:19)

.

This equation characterizes the width of the optical tweezers, yT, as a function of
the trap parameters for atoms at zero temperature.
It shows that the lowering of
U 0
VDT reduces the extraction width 2yT, from which the atoms will be extracted. For
T = 0 K and neglecting quantum eﬀects, this region can be made arbitrary small at
VDT = λVDT
U 0

π√ewHDT U 0

HDT.

Thermal atomic motion We now model atomic motion in the dipole trap by an ensemble
in thermal equilibrium at temperature T in a three-dimensional harmonic potential. We
assume that the energy of the atoms is Boltzmann-distributed [15]:
2(kBT )3 E2e−

f (E, T ) =

E/(kBT ).

(10)

1

6
Precision preparation of strings of trapped neutral atoms

13

Figure 9. Probability for an atom not to be extracted from the HDT. a) atoms at
T = 0 K. b) atoms at temperatures T1 (solid line) and T2 (dashed line), with T1 > T2.

For an atom with a ﬁxed energy E the condition for the extraction analogous to (7) is

For a given temperature T the fraction of atoms with an energy above Ueﬀ is given by

Ueﬀ(y)

E > 0 .

−

p(U) =

∞

f (E, T )dE ,

max

Ueﬀ ,0

{

}

Z

which therefore is the fraction pnoextr of the atoms not extracted from the HDT. As a
function of the lateral position y we have

pnoextr(y)

p(Ueﬀ(y)) =

≡

1
2 "(cid:18)

Ueﬀ(y)
kBT

+ 1

+ 1

exp

.

(13)

Ueﬀ(y)
kBT

(cid:19)

#

−

(cid:18)

2

(cid:19)

Figure 9(b) shows pnoextr for the same trap parameters as in ﬁgure 9(a). Atomic
motion causes “softening” of the edges of the extraction zone. An increasing temperature
causes narrowing of the region of eﬃcient extraction.

Here we deﬁne the region inﬂuenced by the optical tweezers [

yT, yT], see

−

ﬁgure 9(b), by

pnoextr(yT)

0.99.

≤

In order to optimize the extraction resolution we vary U 0
while still guarantying eﬃcient extraction in the center. We therefore choose U 0
fulﬁlling the condition

VDT such that yT is minimal

VDT

pnoextr(y = 0) = 0.01

and get the minimal region of inﬂuence [
pnoextr(yopt

T ) = 0.99.

−

yopt
T , yopt

T ] from

(11)

(12)

(14)

(15)

(16)

Precision preparation of strings of trapped neutral atoms

14

Figure 10. Comparison of the experimental data and the respective theoretical
expectation.
a) Fit of PHDT (solid line) to the experimental data (points) for
U 0
VDT/kB = 0.3 mK. b,c) The function PHDT with parameters from a) except
U 0
VDT/kB = 3.1 mK and U 0
VDT/kB = 16.8 mK, respectively. The depth of the HDT is
U 0
HDT/kB = 0.8 mK.

3.2.2. Measurement of the width of the optical tweezers We have experimentally
determined the width 2yT of the optical tweezers as a function of the depth of the VDT
by loading the HDT with atoms distributed over a region larger than yT, extracting
atoms with the VDT, and analyzing the distribution of the atoms remaining in the
HDT. Images of the atoms in the HDT were taken before and after extraction, and used
to calculate the probability PHDT(y) of the atoms to remain trapped in the HDT after the
extraction. In this measurement, the depth of the HDT was ﬁxed (U 0
HDT/kB = 0.8 mK),
whereas the depth of the VDT was varied over two orders of magnitude from 0.3 to
16.8 mK. The corresponding plots for U 0
VDT/kB = 0.3 mK, 3.1 mK and 16.8 mK are
presented in ﬁgure 10.

3.2.3. Analysis In ﬁgure 10, the measured data are compared to the theoretical
model described by (13). Free ﬁt parameters for the data of ﬁgure 10(a) include the
temperature T of the atoms, the waist of the VDT wVDT along the axis of the HDT,
and the position of the VDT y0, relative to the picture. The ﬁt to the data set for the
depth of the VDT at U 0
VDT/kB = 0.3 mK, corresponding to a power of the incoming
VDT laser beam of 0.06 W, yields

T = 60(

1) µK and wVDT = 11.6(

0.2) µm,

±

±

see ﬁgure 10(a). The temperature thus obtained is in the range of the typical tempera-
tures measured by other methods [16]. Whereas the error is probably too small and un-
derestimate the systematic inﬂuence of the approximations of the model. Also, the ﬁtted
value of the waist of the VDT is in reasonable agreement with the value of 10.1(
1.4) µm
determined from the oscillation frequency measurements. In ﬁgure 10(b) and (c) we have
plotted the model function pnoextr(y) at U 0
VDT/kB = 16.8 mK,
respectively, without further adjustment of T and wVDT, ﬁnding good agreement with
the experimental data.

VDT/kB = 3.1 mK and U 0

±

Using the quantitative deﬁnitions (15) and (16) we can determine the optimal width
of the optical tweezers for our current experimental parameters, i. e., for the depth of

Precision preparation of strings of trapped neutral atoms

15

Table 1. Width of the tweezers 2yopt

T for diﬀerent parameters

U 0

HDT
kB

(mK)

VDT
kB
current experiment

U 0

(mK)

T (µK)

wHDT
λVDT

wVDT
λVDT

Fr

yopt
T (µm)

1

2
3

4
5

0.8

0.51

60.0
stronger focusing of optical tweezers
60.0
60.0

0.51
0.51

0.8
0.8

lower atom temperature
0.017
0.0088

0.8
0.8

1.0
0.084

19

19
19

19
19

9.8

0.015

11.7

4.9
2.45

4.9
2.45

0.025
0.025

0.482
0.920

5.9
2.9

2.9
0.5

the HDT of 0.8 mK and the atomic temperature of T = 60 µK. Using (15) we ﬁnd
the optimal depth of the VDT at U 0
VDT/kB = 0.5 mK. The corresponding width of the
optical tweezers is calculated with (16) to be 2yopt

11.7 µm, see Tab. 1.

T = 2

·

3.2.4. Towards ultimate resolution Ultimate resolution of the optical tweezers is
realized, if a single potential well of the HDT is addressed only. Here, we use our model
in order to develop strategies for the reduction of the width of our optical tweezers. It
depends on the depth and waist of the VDT, of the HDT, and on the temperature of the
atoms. Experimentally, variation of the depth of the traps is straight forwardly realized
by changing the power of the respective laser (up to 20 W for the VDT laser and 1.2 W
for each beam for the HDT laser). Changing the waist size of the traps requires a new
lens system, and lowering of the atomic temperature could be achieved by e. g. Raman
sideband cooling technique [17].

In the following analysis we ignore further experimental eﬀects not included in our
model, e. g., drifts of the traps, ﬂuctuations of the trap depths, or heating in the traps,
which become relevant for ultimate precision.

Universal extraction function In order to introduce dimensionless parameters, we rewrite
(8) in the form

Ueﬀ(y)
kBT

2

2y
2
VDT

= sT

w

e−

 

Fr

,

!

−

where the normalized tweezers potential depth is

sT =

U 0
VDT
kBT

and

Fr =

1
π√e

U 0
U 0

HDT

VDT

λVDT
wHDT

(17)

(18)

(19)

Precision preparation of strings of trapped neutral atoms

16

Figure 11. Contour plot for pnoextr(yopt
will remain trapped in the HDT with 99 % probability.

T , Fr) = 0.99. Outside the white area atoms

is a relative measure of the forces exerted by the HDT (
VDT (

VDT/λVDT). The condition of the extraction (7) translates into

U 0

∼

U 0

HDT/wHDT) compared to

∼

Fr < 1.

The condition (15) that the target atom is eﬃciently extracted out of the HDT, is

satisﬁed for

sT =

8.4

.

Fr

1

−

(20)

(21)

Now we rewrite (16) in terms of the dimensionless parameters sT and Fr and use the
substitution 20 to ﬁnd the connection between the optimal width of the optical tweezers
yopt
T and the dimensionless parameter Fr:

pnoextr(yopt

T , Fr) = 0.99,

which is plotted in ﬁgure 11.

From this ﬁgure we can already infer two strategies for improved resolution: the
value of Fr should be about unity, and the waist of the VDT should be as small as
possible. Fr can be increased by increasing the depth of the HDT, by reducing wHDT
and by lowering the temperature T of the atoms, see (19) and (18).

Examples of optical tweezers In Table 1 we have listed possible parameters for the traps
which would improve the extraction resolution. In line 1 we have optimized U 0
VDT for
our experimental parameters. In lines 2-3 we project parameters for improved resolution
by changing the focus of the VDT, in lines 4 and 5 the eﬀect of lower temperatures is

Precision preparation of strings of trapped neutral atoms

17

Figure 12. Axial insertion. An atom trapped in one of the potential wells of the
standing wave of the VDT, is inserted into the Gaussian potential well of the HDT by
axially moving the VDT along the z-direction.

shown (about 1 µK and 0.1 µK which can be obtained with Raman cooling [18] and
quantum degenerate gases).

3.3. Insertion of an atom

After extraction, the atom is trapped in the potential of the VDT. In order to re-insert
the atom into a potential well of the HDT, the VDT potential is merged with the HDT
and ﬁnally switched oﬀ. There are two alternative methods to insert an atom back into
the HDT: “axial insertion” and “radial insertion”.

Axial insertion In this case, the process of extraction of an atom is simply reversed:
the VDT axially transports the atom to the axis of the HDT, see ﬁgure 12, and then
the VDT is adiabatically switched oﬀ, leaving the atom in the HDT. The whole process
of axial insertion takes about 70 ms.

Radial insertion For radial insertion, the two traps are ﬁrst radially separated by dis-
placing the axis of the HDT in the positive x-direction, see ﬁgure 13(a). Then the
atom in the VDT is transported downwards to the vertical position of the horizontal
trap, see ﬁgure 13(b). Along the x-axis, the atom in this conﬁguration is conﬁned in
the Gaussian-shaped radial potential of the VDT. In the next step, the VDT is then
merged with the Gaussian-shaped radial potential of the HDT by moving the HDT ra-
dially towards the x-position of the VDT, see ﬁgure 13(c). In the ﬁnal step the VDT is
adiabatically switched oﬀ, which releases the atom to the HDT, see ﬁgure 13(d). The
process of radial re-insertion takes about 210 ms.

A radical diﬀerence of the two alternative insertion methods occurs if the HDT
already holds an atom within the width of the optical tweezers. During axial insertion
the VDT exerts the same forces as during the extraction of an atom. Therefore,
the achievable ﬁnal distance between two atoms in the HDT is limited to the width
of the optical tweezers, because atoms within the extraction region will be extracted
downwards by the VDT during the re-insertion. In contrast, if the two traps are merged
radially, the VDT does not exert any forces which could push an atom out of the HDT.

Precision preparation of strings of trapped neutral atoms

18

Consequently, for radial insertion there are no limitations on the ﬁnal separations. In
particular, the ﬁnal distance between two atoms could be set to zero. In this way, two
atoms could be joined in a single micropotential of the standing wave of the HDT. A
disadvantage of the radial insertion is additional heating of the atom in the HDT, see
Sec. 3.3.

The ultimate goal of insertion is to reliably place an atom into a given micropotential
of the HDT, for instance an integer number of potential wells away from the neighboring
atom, but without inﬂuencing it.

3.3.1. Insertion precision There are two independent eﬀects inﬂuencing the precision
of the insertion, i. e., how accurately an atom can be placed at a desired position of the
HDT: the thermal motion in the VDT and the position ﬂuctuations of the VDT relative
to the HDT. Both of them equally aﬀect the axial and the radial insertion. Therefore,
the following theory applies to both methods of insertion.

Thermal distribution in the VDT Before contact with the HDT atoms in the VDT
are distributed thermally along the y-direction (the axis of the HDT) in an approxi-

mately harmonic potential with oscillation frequency Ωrad =
the distribution in this case is a Gaussian,

4U 0
mw2

VDT

VDT

q

. It is known that

(22)

(23)

(24)

pT(y) =

mΩ2
rad
2πkBT

s

mΩ2

rady2/(2kBT ).

e−

The width of this distribution

δytherm =

wVDT

2 s

kBT
U 0

VDT

can also be expressed in terms of the VDT waist radius and the sT-parameter, combining
U 0

VDT and the temperature, see (18):

δytherm =

wVDT
2s1/2
T

.

Spatial ﬂuctuations of the VDT Since the VDT and the HDT laser beams are guided
by independent mechanical setups, their relative position is subject to radial and axial
ﬂuctuations. In our model these ﬂuctuations are taken into account by δyﬂuct represent-
ing the rms-amplitude of the ﬂuctuations of the VDT axis.

For our typical experimental parameters, the width of the thermal distribution is
on the order of 0.5 µm, and δyﬂuct is about 0.5 µm. Assuming these ﬂuctuations are
Gaussian distributed the rms-amplitude of the combined ﬂuctuation is:

δyinsert =
q
0.7 µm is the width of the distribution of the probability to ﬁnd
The value of δyinsert ≈
an atom along the HDT axis p(y). Since this value is larger than the size of one HDT

ﬂuct .

therm + δy2

(25)

δy2

Precision preparation of strings of trapped neutral atoms

19

Figure 13. Radial insertion of an atom. a) An atom in the VDT after the extraction.
The traps are separated by displacing the HDT along the x-direction. b) The atom
in the VDT is transported to the z-position of the HDT. c) The traps are merged by
moving the HDT along the x-direction towards the VDT. d) Evolution of the radial
potentials of the traps along the x-axis for steps b) and c).

micropotential, the distribution extends over several potential wells, see ﬁgure 14(a).

Insertion into HDT micropotentials by “projection” In the last step of the insertion,
the traps are merged and the VDT is ﬁnally switched oﬀ. Due to the periodicity of the
HDT, the distribution p(y) is changed:
its envelope reﬂects the width of the original
distribution before the traps were merged, but under this envelope the distribution is
now modulated with the periodicity of the standing wave of the HDT, see ﬁgure 14(b).
In harmonic approximation, the distribution in each micropotential is described again
by a Gaussian of width

δymicropot =

λHDT
2√2π s

kBT
U 0

HDT

,

where T is the temperature.

It is clear that the insertion precision will be improved by better localization of the
atoms, i. e., with lower atomic temperature and deeper VDT potentials. Ultimately, for
λHDT/2 the ﬁnal distribution will be concentrated into a single micropotential.
δyinsert ≪
This limit corresponds to “perfect” insertion.

Precision preparation of strings of trapped neutral atoms

20

Figure 14. Spatial distribution p(y) with the width yinsert is projected onto the
standing wave of the HDT as both traps are merged (a). This distribution after
the projection (b). The width of the envelope remains almost unchanged, but the
probability is spatially modulated with the periodicity of the HDT.

3.3.2. Experimental studies of the insertion precision We have carried out a series of
measurements in order to experimentally study the dependence of the insertion precision
on atomic temperature and on the depth of the VDT predicted by the above model.
For this purpose we have loaded atoms into the HDT and extracted the rightmost atom
with the VDT, the rest of the atoms was expelled out of the HDT by switching it oﬀ for
30 ms. The events with no or too closely spaced atoms were discarded. The atom in the
VDT was then cooled with optical molasses, and placed back into the HDT using the
method of axial re-insertion. The ﬁnal positions of the inserted atoms were determined
and the standard deviation δyinsert was calculated. For δyinsert & 0.5λHDT we can neglect
the discretization of the positions due to the periodic structure of the HDT [19].

3.3.3. Analysis Figure 15(a) shows the dependence of the measured insertion accuracy
δyinsert on the depth of the VDT. The corresponding graph for the radial insertion, see
ﬁgure 18(b), shows comparable insertion precision as expected.

Temperature of the atoms The temperature was varied by performing the measurement
with (squares) and without the cooling step in the VDT (triangles). The huge diﬀerence
in δyinsert qualitatively demonstrates the temperature dependency of the insertion pre-
cision and points out the importance of the cooling step. The extraction process itself
can heat up the atom if it is initially not located on the VDT axis: the atom remains

Precision preparation of strings of trapped neutral atoms

21

Figure 15. a) Insertion precision as a function of the depth of the VDT. The triangular
points present the insertion precision for the experimental sequence without cooling of
the atoms before re-insertion. The rectangular points are the results of the insertion
precision with the cooling step. b)Zoom of a) showing the data for precooled atoms.
The solid line is the ﬁt of (26) to the experimental data. In this experiment we have
used the axial insertion method. Every point corresponds to about 25 repetitions of
the experiment.

at its y-position until it is released from its HDT potential well and starts to oscillate
radially in the VDT. Therefore we have to cool the atom before insertion to achieve a
good insertion precision.

Depth of the VDT In order to insert the atoms at diﬀerent UVDT, we have ﬁrst extracted
and cooled the atoms at a ﬁxed depth U extr
VDT to insure constant cooling parameters, and
then adiabatically changed the depth to UVDT. During this ramp, the temperature of
the atoms adiabatically changes to T = T0
VDT [16]. Using this temperature
in (25) and (23) we obtain the expected insertion precision

UVDT/U extr

p

b2
UVDT/kB

+ δy2

ﬂuct.

δyexp(UVDT) =

s
√T0
p
4√U extr
VDT/kB

The parameter b = wVDT

2

is a combination of the waist of the VDT, of the

trap depth where the atom was cooled and the temperature. We have independently
determined δyﬂuct = 0.26(
0.03) µm by measuring the position of an atom in the
VDT over the typical duration of an experimental run (200 sec). Equation (26) was
then ﬁtted to the experimental data with the ﬁt parameter b, see ﬁgure 15(b), yielding
b = 0.52(

0.05) µm mK1/4.

±

±

±

VDT/kB = 1.6(

0.3) mK and the independently measured wVDT =
1.4) µm we calculate the corresponding temperature of the atom in the VDT
10.1(
after the cooling step to be T0 = 13(
4) µK. This temperature is smaller than the typ-
ical temperatures measured in the HDT. The diﬀerence between these values could be
explained by the fact that the multi mode operation of our HDT laser impairs the cool-
ing process in the HDT [21], or by systematic errors due to approximations in our model.

±

±
Using U extr

(26)

Precision preparation of strings of trapped neutral atoms

22

Figure 16. Distribution of the separations between two simultaneously trapped atoms
after setting their distance to 15 µm with our distance-control operation [20]. The
histogram clearly shows that the distances are integer multiples of the standing wave
period λHDT/2, and extending over only about 4 standing wave potential wells. The
solid line is a theoretical ﬁt with a Gaussian envelope (dashed line) centered at 15.31 µm
and having a 1/√e-halfwidth of 0.71 µm. The narrow peaks under this envelope have
a 1/√e-halfwidth of 0.130 µm, corresponding to the precision of an individual distance
measurement [9].

Periodicity of the HDT Until now we have analyzed the insertion precision in the frame
of reference of our ICCD camera. Much more important is the insertion precision rela-
tive to a ﬁxed point in the HDT, e. g., another atom. Here we have prepared a pair of
atoms with a ﬁxed separation using our distance-control operation, Sec. 3.1. Instead of
ﬁnal positions we now measure ﬁnal distances, see ﬁgure 16. Here the periodicity of the
HDT is clearly visible as it is expected from ﬁgure 14(b). In the distance measurement
the random axial shot–to–shot ﬂuctuations of the HDT standing wave pattern cancel
out, whereas in position measurements relative to the ICCD this modulation is smeared
out.

The insertion precision relative to a second atom in the HDT is on the same order of
magnitude as δyinsert measured in the previous section. This allows us to set a distance
between two atoms with an accuracy corresponding to about four potential wells of the
HDT.

3.4. Insertion induced heating

As discussed in section 3.3, the method of radial insertion allows us to place an atom
arbitrary close to other atoms in the HDT. It turns out that during this insertion an
atom in the HDT at the position of the VDT is heated up. This heating eﬀect limits the

Precision preparation of strings of trapped neutral atoms

23

Figure 17. Radial potential of the two traps. During the radial merging of the traps,
an atom in the radial potential of the HDT has a potential energy Ea relative to the
bottom of the potential well of the VDT. The inset shows the respective geometry of
the traps.

usable depth of the VDT, such that a compromise between a high precision of insertion
and tolerable heating is required.

3.4.1. Adiabatic model Consider an atom trapped in the HDT at the y-position of the
VDT, when the traps are axially separated along the x-direction. Along this direction
the potential is the sum of two Gaussians, i. e., the radial potentials of the two traps.
Just before the two traps are merged, the potential shape is shown in ﬁgure 17. For
kBT
HDT, the atom stays near the bottom of the HDT potential until it falls down
into the VDT potential. With respect to the bottom of this potential, it has an energy
U 0
of approximately Ea ≈
HDT. Adiabatically switching oﬀ of the VDT causes
the atom to be adiabatically cooled to the ﬁnal atomic energy [16]:

VDT −

U 0

U 0

≪

Eﬁnal

a ≈

Ea

s

U 0
HDT
HDT + U 0

U 0

VDT

,

where the diﬀerence between wVDT and wHDT has been neglected. The condition for the
atom to remain trapped in the HDT is Eﬁnal
HDT, yielding an upper limit for the
depth of the VDT

a < U 0

(27)

(28)

VDT . 3U 0
U 0

HDT,

otherwise the atom will be lost.

3.4.2. Measurement of the heating eﬀect One atom on average was loaded into the
HDT and transported to the y-position of the VDT axis. For the third step, the HDT
with the atom was transported in the x-direction, and the VDT was switched on. At
the fourth step, the atom was transported back towards the VDT as it would occur
during the radial insertion. Thereafter, the VDT was adiabatically switched oﬀ. The
ﬁnal image reveals then the presence or loss of the atom in the HDT. Figure 18(a) shows
the survival probability of the atom after this manipulation.

Precision preparation of strings of trapped neutral atoms

24

Figure 18. Optimal depth of the VDT. a) The survival probability of an atom in
the HDT as a function of the depth of the VDT. Every point is the result of about 35
repetitions of the experiment. b) The insertion precision as a function of the depth of
the VDT. Every point corresponds to about 35 radial insertions with a single atom.
The shaded areas show the experimentally unfavorable ranges of the depth of the VDT.

3.4.3. Analysis The experimental data in ﬁgure 18(a), show that starting from a
VDT depth of about 2.5 mK, the atoms in the HDT were heated up and lost during
the radial insertion procedure. Since the depth of the HDT for this experiment was
0.8 mK, the condition (28) results in U 0
VDT < 2.4 mK, which reasonably agrees with the
experimentally observed value.

At the same time, the lower limit on the depth of the VDT is dictated by
the insertion precision, which deteriorates with the reduction of the VDT depth.
Figure 18(b) shows the insertion precision, measured for the same depth of the HDT
using the radial insertion method. For VDT depths below 1.2 mK the insertion precision
is dominated by the thermal component and starts to deteriorate, see (23).

The non shaded regions in ﬁgure 18 indicate the range of experimentally useful
depths of the VDT. For our typical experimental parameters there is a non empty
overlap of these regions. It can be further enlarged by increasing the depth of the HDT
according to (28).

Precision preparation of strings of trapped neutral atoms

25

3.5. Conclusion

Using optical tweezers we have repositioned individual atoms inside a standing wave
optical dipole trap with a precision on the order of the periodicity of the trap. Regular
string containing 2 to 7 atoms have been prepared atom–by–atom. We have modeled
and experimentally analyzed the processes of extraction and insertion of a single atom
in detail. We have identiﬁed the main limiting factors and proposed strategies for future
improvements.

We demonstrate two methods of insertion, one of which has no limitation on the
ﬁnal distances between the atoms after the re-insertion. It can therefore be made as
small as zero, i. e., placing two atoms into the same potential well of the standing
wave. We have found suitable parameters of the traps, which allow us to perform the
re-insertion eﬃciently and with high precision.

References

[1] European Commission, 2005 Quantum Information Processing and Communication in Europe

Luxembourg: Oﬃce for Oﬃcial Publications of the European Communities

[2] Feynman R P, 1982 Int. J. Theor. Phys. 21 467
[3] Davidson N, Lee H J, Adams C S, Kasevich M and Chu S, 1995 Phys. Rev. Lett. 74 1311
[4] Ozeri R, Khaykovich L and Davidson N, 1999 Phys. Rev. A 59 R1750
[5] Greiner M, Mandel O, Esslinger T, H¨ansch T W and Bloch I, 2002 Nature (London) 415 39
[6] Mandel O et al., 2003 Nature (London) 425 937
[7] Miroshnychenko Y, Alt W, Dotsenko I, F¨orster L, Khudaverdyan M, Meschede M, Schrader D and

Rauschenbeutel A 2006 Nature (London) in press

[8] Schrader D, Dotsenko I, Khudeverdyan M, Miroshnychenko Y, Rauschenbeutel A and Meschede

D 2005 Phys. Rev. Lett. 93 150501

[9] Dotsenko I, Alt W, Khudaverdyan M, Kuhr S, Meschede S, Miroshnychenko Y, Schrader D and

Rauschenbeutel A 2005 Phys. Rev. Lett. 95 033002

[10] You L, Yi X X and Su X H 2003 Phys. Rev. A 68 032308
[11] Haubrich D, Schadwinkel H, Strauch F, Ueberholz B, Wynands R and Meschede D 1996 Europhys.

Lett. 34 663

[12] Alt W 2002 Optik 113 142
[13] Miroshnychenko Y, Schrader D, Kuhr S, Alt W, Dotsenko I, Khudaverdyan M, Rauschenbeutel A

and Meschede D 2003 Optics Express 11 3498-3502

[14] Kuhr S, Alt W, Schrader D, M¨uller M, Gomer V and Meschede D 2001 Science 293 278
[15] Bagnato V, Pritchard D E and Kleppner D 1987 Phys. Rev. A 35 4354-4358
[16] Alt W, Schrader D, Kuhr S, M¨uller M, Gomer V and Meschede D 2003 Phys. Rev. A 67 033403
[17] Lee H J, Adams C S, Kasevich M, Chu S 1997 Phys. Rev. Lett. 76 26582661
[18] Perrin H, Kuhn A, Bouchoule I and Salomon C 1998 Europhys. Lett 42 395-400
[19] Falk W 1984 Nucl. Instrum. and Methods in Phys. Res. 220 473
[20] Miroshnychenko Y, Alt W, Dotsenko I, F¨orster L, Khudaverdyan M, Schrader D, Reick S and

Rauschenbeutel A 2006 quant-ph/0606113

[21] Schrader D 2004 Ph.D. Thesis Universit¨at Bonn

