6
0
0
2
 
l
u
J
 
7
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
m
o
t
a
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
8
4
2
7
0
6
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Photodetachment of cold OH− in a multipole ion trap

S. Trippel, J. Mikosch, R. Berhane, R. Otto, M. Weidem¨uller, and R. Wester∗
Physikalisches Institut, Universit¨at Freiburg, Hermann-Herder-Straße 3, 79104 Freiburg, Germany
(Dated: February 18, 2014)

−

The absolute photodetachment cross section of OH
anions at a rotational and translational tem-
perature of 170 K is determined by measuring the detachment-induced decay rate of the anions in a
multipole radio-frequency ion trap. In comparison with previous results, the obtained cross section
shows the importance of the initial rotational state distribution. Using a tomography scan of the
photodetachment laser through the trapped ion cloud, the derived cross section is model-independent
and thus features a small systematic uncertainty. The tomography also yields the column density
anions in the 22-pole ion trap in good agreement with the expected trapping potential
of the OH
of a large ﬁeld free region bound by steep potential walls.

−

PACS numbers: 33.80.Eh,33.80.Ps,33.70.Ca,95.30.Ky

Photodetachment of the excess electron from a neg-
ative ion represents a fundamental light-matter interac-
tion process that reveals detailed information on atomic
and molecular structure and dynamics. The additional
electron is only bound by virtue of electron correlations,
therefore its binding energy depends sensitively on the
entangled multi-electron wavefunction. Spectroscopic in-
formation, obtained from photoelectron energy measure-
ments, is used to study the electronic, vibrational and
rotational Eigenstate spectrum of anionic and neutral
molecules. This also yields insight in transition states
structures of reactive collisions of neutral molecules [1].
In addition, ultrafast time-resolved studies of wavepacket
or electron rearrangement dynamics inside clusters have
employed anion photoelectron spectroscopy [2]. Multi-
photon electron detachment in short laser pulses provides
information on the electron-atom interaction in strong
laser ﬁelds [3]. Cross sections for photodetachment reveal
complementary information to photoelectron spectra and
serve to challenge calculations for bound-free transition
matrix elements [4].

The most detailed photodetachment cross section stud-
ies on a molecular anion have been carried out for the
hydroxyl anion OH−. Much of the work on OH− has fo-
cused on relative cross sections. Near threshold, compar-
ison of the relative cross section as a function of electron
energy with Wigner threshold laws allows for precise tests
of the long-range electron-neutral interactions. Specif-
ically, the subtle coupling of the two lowest Λ-doublet
states has been observed, which leads to a long-range
electron-dipole interaction [5, 6]. Also, relative cross sec-
tion measurements for transitions of speciﬁc rotational
states have been carried out for OH− [7, 8]. These results
indicate deviations of the photodetachment cross section
from s-wave electron detachment calculations. Interpre-
tation, however, is obscured by the incomplete knowledge
of the OH− rotational population. Even for the OH−
anion only one absolute cross section measurement has
been performed to date [9], which is found to deviate by
an order of magnitude from calculated values [4].

An important application of rotational-state depen-
dent absolute cross sections are models of the nega-
tive ion abundance in planetary atmospheres as well as
in interstellar molecular clouds, because in these low-
temperature environments photodetachment by cosmic
radiation represents an important loss channel for nega-
tive ions. In the interstellar medium, negative ions have
not been detected up to now [10], but their importance
is still under debate [11].

In this letter we present a scheme to measure absolute
photodetachment cross sections of trapped molecular an-
ions. The combination of negative ion photodetachment
with cooling and trapping of molecular anions in a radio-
frequency multipole trap [12] allows us to study photode-
tachment with a well-controlled rotational state distribu-
tion. The scheme yields absolute cross sections with little
systematic uncertainties and without resorting to theo-
retical models. We apply the method to OH− anions that
are trapped in a 22-pole rf ion trap and cooled in a helium
buﬀer gas to a temperature of 170 K. We show that the
obtained absolute cross section value only agrees, within
the experimental accuracy, with previous knowledge, if
its dependence on the OH− rotational state is taken into
account, which exempliﬁes the importance of controlling
the rotational temperature.

A number of previous photodetachment studies have
employed negative ions in traps.
In a Penning trap,
the photodetachment of H− near threshold [13] and of
multiply charged metal cluster anions has been observed
[14]. The lifetime of dipole-bound negative ions has been
found to be limited by blackbody radiation induced pho-
todetachment [15]. Photodetachment of gold anions in
a hyperbolic Paul trap revealed the existence of reso-
nances in the cross section [16]. Metastable states of
negative ions have been studied with photodetachment
spectroscopy as a function of storage time in a Zajfman
ion trap [17]. The high-order multipole radio-frequency
trap that is employed in this work allows trapping of
molecular ions in an approximate box potential [12], in
contrast to the harmonic conﬁnement of the classical Paul

trap that is used for a precise localization and manipu-
lation of single ions [18]. Multipole ion traps have at-
tracted attention, because buﬀer gas cooling of molecules
and clusters reaches thermal equilibrium not only for the
translational, but also for the internal degrees of freedom
for temperatures down to 10 K. These traps are therefore
applied in laboratory astrophysics [19], highly sensitive
electronic [20] and infrared [21, 22] spectroscopy, and as
a source of cold molecular ions for collision studies [23].
Photodetachment of an ensemble of N trapped neg-
ative ions leads to an additional loss channel for the
trapped ions. The rate equation for the number of
trapped ions is obtained by integrating in cylindrical co-
ordinates over the rate equation for the spatial density n
of the ions in the trap,

dN
dt

Z

= −

σpdΦ(r, φ)n(r, z)rdrdφdz − ΓN

(1)

where σpd is the total cross section for OH− photodetach-
ment at the employed laser wavelength. Φ is photon ﬂux
density of the laser, which is taken to be constant along
the laser beam parallel to the z-axis. Γ denotes the loss
rate due to residual gas collisions. Cylindrical symmetry
is assumed for the trapping potential so that the ion den-
sity n becomes independent of the angle φ. Assuming fur-
ther a dilute ion cloud with negligible ion-ion interaction,
the integration of the density n(r, z) over the z-direction
yields the particle number N times a single-particle col-
umn density ρ(r). The remaining two-dimensional over-
lap integral in Eq. 1 is evaluated by assuming a narrowly
focused laser beam such that the ion density ρ(rL) at
the position of the laser beam is constant over the laser
beam cross section and can thus be moved in front of the
integral. The integral is then given by the total photon
ﬂux through the ion trap FL =
Φ(r, φ)rdrdφ, and one
obtains

R

dN
dt

= −[σpdρ(rL)FL + Γ]N.

(2)

This equation is solved by an exponential decay with a
rate kpd(rL) + Γ given by the square brackets, which is
the quantity that can be measured experimentally.

To back out the absolute cross section, the ion column
density ρ(rL) needs to be determined. This is achieved
by scanning the photodetachment laser through the dis-
tribution of trapped ions and measuring at each laser po-
sition rL the decay rate kpd(rL), which is proportional to
ρ(rL) according to Eq. 2. With the normalization condi-
tion for ρ(rL) one obtains directly the absolute photode-
tachment cross section

and the absolute single-particle column density to ﬁnd
an ion at a radius rL

σpd =

kpd(r)rdrdφ

1
FL Z

ρ(rL) =

kpd(rL)
kpd(r)rdrdφ

.

R

(3)

(4)

2

FIG. 1: Schematic view of the 22-pole ion trap with the rf
electrodes for radial, and the cylindrical dc end-cap electrodes
for axial conﬁnement. The position of the photodetachment
laser is scanned along the vertical axis.

Thus the determination of both the cross section and the
density only requires measurements of quantities that are
directly accessible in an experiment.

In the experiment, OH− anions are stored in a 22-
pole ion trap [12], shown schematically in Fig. 1. The
trap is cooled to 170 K, which strongly increases the life-
time of the trapped ions. A focused helium neon laser
at 632.8 nm is passed through the trap, which photode-
taches OH− (electron aﬃnity 1.83 eV [8]) in a one-photon
transition.
In the trap ions are stored in a cylindrical
structure of 22 stainless steel rods of 40 mm length and
10 mm inscribed diameter, alternatingly connected to the
two phases of the radio-frequency voltage. An eﬀective
potential is formed with a radial scaling proportional to
r20, which leads to steep potential walls around an almost
ﬁeld free trapping volume. In the axial direction the ions
are trapped by cylindrical entrance and exit electrodes of
6.6 mm inner diameter.

The trap is loaded with a packet of about 103 NH

−
2 an-
ions which are chemically converted into OH− ions in the
−
trap within a few seconds of storage time. NH
2 ions are
produced by dissociative attachment of slow secondary
electrons to NH3 in a pulsed supersonic expansion of 90%
Ne and 10% NH3 that is ionized by a counter-propagating
−
2 keV electron beam. The NH
2 anions are accelerated,
mass selected in a Wiley-McLaren time-of-ﬂight mass
spectrometer [24], decelerated again, and focused into
the ion trap. Inside the trap they are collisionally cooled
to energies below the trapping potential by a high density
pulse of helium buﬀer gas. A continuous ﬂow of helium
buﬀer gas thermalizes the translational and internal de-
grees of freedom of the trapped ions within a fraction of
a second with the temperature of the surrounding wall,
which is cooled to 170 K by coupling to a liquid nitrogen
bath. OH− ions are produced in the trap via the reaction
NH
+ NH3 by mixing traces of water to
the helium buﬀer gas [6]. After an arbitrary time of stor-
age the ions are extracted from the trap by pulsing the
trap exit electrode to an attractive potential. The ions
are then deﬂected towards a multichannel plate detec-

2 + H2O → OH

−

−

]
s
t
i
n
u

 
.

b
r
a
[
 
y
t
i
s
n
e
t
n

i
 

n
o

I

310

210

10

1

0

10

20

30

40

50
Storage time [s]

−

FIG. 2: Measured OH
ion signal as a function of storage
time in the trap. The upper set of points shows the signal in
absence of the photodetachment laser. The lower points show
that, when the laser is switched on at 10 s, a fast additional
loss channel due to photodetachment appears. The decay
rates are obtained from exponential ﬁts (solid lines).

tor which records time-of-ﬂight spectra. Careful analysis
−
2 ions are
of these spectra showed that after 10 s all NH
converted into OH−.

The photodetachment HeNe laser (Carl Zeiss Jena),
which travels parallel to the symmetry axis of the trap,
has a wavelength of 632.8 nm and a power of (3.0 ±
0.1) mW, which corresponds to a photon ﬂux of FL =
(9.5 ± 0.3) · 1015 /s. With a telescope and a convex lens
the beam is focused to a waist of 210 µm which is placed
in the middle of the trap. The laser beam is moved radi-
ally through the trap by moving the convex lens with a
translation stage. The laser light is switched on and oﬀ
via an electro-mechanic shutter to perform consecutive
measurements with and without laser interaction.

Figure 2 shows the measured ion intensity as a func-
tion of storage time. The upper curve corresponds to
a background measurement without laser interaction.
It yields a loss rate due to residual gas collisions of
Γ = (7.5 ± 0.3) · 10−3 s−1 corresponding to a lifetime
of the trapped ions of (133 ± 6) s. The lower curve shows
the ion intensity as a function of storage time when the
laser, positioned in the middle of the trap, is switched on
10 s after loading the trap. The striking diﬀerence in the
loss rate from the trap is caused by photodetachment of
the negative ions by the laser photons, the only possible
laser-driven process.

To determine the absolute cross section with Eq. 3, a
measurement of the laser-induced detachment rate kpd(r)
is performed as a function of the radial position r of
the laser, as shown in Fig. 3 (left vertical axis). Us-
ing Eq. 4 the detachment rate is normalized to reﬂect
the r-dependent ion column density (right vertical axis
in Fig. 3). This measurement shows that the ion den-
sity drops oﬀ near ±3 mm. It is experimentally veriﬁed

3

that this density drop is not introduced by clipping of
the laser beam at the end-cap electrodes by expanding
the trapped ion cloud in a weaker trapping potential.

To further analyze the shape of the measured density
distribution of Fig. 3, a calculation of the ion density in
the trap is performed. Coulomb repulsion between the
ions is expected to be too weak to produce these maxima
in the ion distribution, given that the plasma parameter
is estimated to be about 10−4. We therefore calculate
the three-dimensional density distribution ρ(~r) assuming
a dilute, non-interacting ion cloud at a constant tem-
perature, using ρ(~r) ∝ exp(− V (~r)
kBT ), where V (~r) is the
trap potential as a function of the position ~r, kB is the
Boltzmann constant and T is the absolute temperature.
The trapping potential is assumed to be a superposition
of the rf-induced eﬀective potential, proportional to r20,
and the static potential of the two end-cap electrodes
[25]. After integration over the axial coordinate, this cal-
culation yields the column density (solid line in Fig. 3).
In this calculation the eﬀective radius of the rf-induced
potential has been decreased by 10 % to match the ex-
perimental width of the ion density, which is assumed
to account for deviations from the assumed symmetry of
the trapping ﬁeld. The calculation reproduces the max-
ima of the density qualitatively correct. It also allows to
inspect their origin, which stems from a slight decrease
of the column length for small r due to the repulsive
end-cap potential accompanied by a small increase of the
trapping potential of 2-3 mV. If the z-dependence of the
potential is neglected, a rectangular distribution of simi-
lar radial extension without the peaks is obtained, which
is shown in Fig. 3 as dashed line. The measured left/right
asymmetry shows a deviation from cylindrical symmetry,
which is most likely due to ﬁeld inhomogeneities intro-
duced by an asymmetric placement of ground electrodes
outside of the trap.

Integration of kpd(r) over the entire trap and division
by the traversing photon ﬂux gives the absolute photode-
tachment cross section, as shown in Eq. 3. The integral
is evaluated for r to run from 0 to large radial distances
in Fig. 3. Assuming to ﬁrst order that cylindrical sym-
metry holds, despite the observed up-down asymmetry,
the integrals for the left and right half of the distribution
are averaged to derive the cross section. Their diﬀer-
ence yields the dominant contribution to the accuracy
of the cross section. We thus obtain for photodetach-
ment of OH− at 632.8 nm an absolute cross section of
(5.6 ± 1.4) × 10−18 cm2.

The one previous measurement of the absolute OH−
photodetachment cross section by Branscomb [9] states
a cross section of approximately 12.5×10−18 cm2 near
630 nm. Theoretical work, neglecting internal degrees of
freedom, indicates a cross section smaller than 10−18 cm2
at this wavelength [4]. These two values lie above and be-
low of our measured valued outside of its accuracy. These
deviations can be explained by to the eﬀect of rotational

 

 

s
1

/

 

 

d
p
k

0.4

0.35

0.3

0.25

0.2

0.15

0.1

0.05

0

 

 
2

m
c
1

/

 

 

 

y
t
i
s
n
e
d
n
m
u
o
c
e
c

l

 

l

i
t
r
a
p
-
e
g
n
S

i

l

7

6

5

4

3

2

1

0

-0.3

-0.2

-0.1

0

0.1

0.2

0.3

Laser beam position 

 cm 

FIG. 3: Measured photodetachment rate (left axis) and de-
rived ion column density (right axis) as a function of the laser
beam position (open symbols, their size represents the ob-
tained accuracy). The solid (dashed) line shows the calcu-
lated column density taking into account (neglecting) the de-
pendence of the trapping potential on the z-direction.

excitation of the OH− anions. By summing up the H¨onl-
London factors for photodetachment into all accessible
ﬁnal states [8, 26], it turns out that the rotational con-
tribution to the photodetachment cross section is given
by a factor proportional to (2J + 1), where J is the ro-
tational state of OH−. This leads to a photodetachment
cross section ratio for thermal distributions at 0 K, 170 K,
and 900 K of 1:4.9:9.7. These ratios explain our much
larger value compared to the calculation and they ex-
plain the factor between our value and the measurement
by Branscomb, assuming the unknown rotational tem-
perature in his experiment amounts to 900 K, which is
reasonable for the employed discharge ion source. The
notable implication of this analysis is that internally cold
OH− ions (J = 0) should have a much smaller photode-
tachment cross section which would make them signiﬁ-
cantly more stable in interstellar environments.

In conclusion, we have developed and employed a
scheme to measure absolute photodetachment cross sec-
tions of negative ions in a multipole ion trap. Applied to
OH− anions an absolute cross section is obtained and a
signiﬁcant dependence on the rotational quantum state
of OH− is deduced. Furthermore, the column density of
the ions in the trap is measured in situ and is compared
to calculations of the trapping potential.

The rotational state dependence of the photodetach-
ment cross section may be relevant for models of negative
ion abundances in interstellar space where low rotational
temperatures prevail. To shed more light on the pos-
sible existence of anions in space we intend to extend
our work towards photodetachment at lower tempera-
tures and of larger molecules such as polyaromatic hy-
drocarbons. These experiments will be aided by the high

4

sensitivity of the presented scheme, which allows to ac-
cess photodetachment cross sections down to 10−21 cm2.

This work is supported by the Deutsche Forschungs-
gemeinschaft and the Elitef¨orderprogramm der Landess-
tiftung Baden-W¨urttemberg.

E-mail: roland.wester@physik.uni-freiburg.de

∗
[1] D. M. Neumark, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. 7, 433 (2005).
[2] A. Stolow, A. E. Bragg, and D. M. Neumark, Chem. Rev.

[3] R. Reichle, H. Helm, and I. Kiyan, Phys. Rev. Lett. 87,

[4] Ø. Soerensen and L. Veseth, Physica Scripta 59, 299

104, 1719 (2004).

243001 (2001).

(1995).

[5] P. A. Schulz, R. D. Mead, P. Jones, and W. C.

Lineberger, J. Chem. Phys. 77, 1153 (1982).

[6] J. R. Smith, J. B. Kim, and W. C. Lineberger, Phys.

[7] C. Delsart, F. Goldfarb, and C. Blondel, Phys. Rev. Lett.

Rev. A 55, 2036 (1997).

89, 183002 (2002).

[8] F. Goldfarb, C. Drag, W. Chaibi, S. Kr¨oger, C. Blondel,
and C. Delsart, J. Chem. Phys. 122, 014308 (2004).

[9] L. M. Branscomb, Phys. Rev. 148, 11 (1966).
[10] Y. Morisawa, H. Hoshina, Y. Kato, Z. Simizu, S. Kuma,
N. Sogoshi, M. Fushitani, S. Watanabe, Y. Miyamoto,
T. Momose, et al., Publ. Astr. Soc. Japan 57, 325 (2005).

[11] S. Petrie and E. Herbst, Ap. J. 491, 210 (1997).
[12] D. Gerlich, Physica Scripta T59, 256 (1995).
[13] O. Harms, M. Zehnpfenning, V. Gomer,

D. Meschede, J. Phys. B 30, 3781 (1997).

and

[14] A. Herlert, K. Hansen, L. Schweikhard, and M. Vogel,

Hyperﬁne Int. 127, 529 (2000).

[15] L. Suess, Y. Liu, R. Parthasarathy, and F. Dunning, J.

Chem. Phys. 119, 12890 (2003).

[16] R. Champeau, A. Crubellier, D. Marescaux, D. Pavolini,

and J. Pinard, J.Phys.B 31, 249 (1998).

[17] A. Naaman, K. G. Bhushan, H. B. Pedersen, N. Altstein,
O. Heber, M. L. Rappaport, R. Moalem, and D. Zajfman,
J. Chem. Phys. 113, 4662 (2000).

[18] D. Leibfried, R. Blatt, C. Monroe, and D. Wineland, Rev.

Mod. Phys. 75, 281 (2003).

[19] D. Gerlich and M. Smith, Physica Scripta 73, C25 (2006).
[20] O. V. Boyarkin, S. R. Mercier, A. Kamariotis, and T. R.

Rizzo, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 128, 2816 (2006).

[21] O. Asvany, P. Kumar, B. Redlich,

I. Hegemann,
S. Schlemmer, and D. Marx, Science 309, 1219 (2005).
[22] J. Mikosch, H. Kreckel, R. Wester, R. Plasil, J. Glosik,
D. Gerlich, D. Schwalm, and A. Wolf, J. Chem. Phys.
121, 11030 (2004).

[23] H. Kreckel, M. Motsch, J. Mikosch, J. Glosik, R. Plasil,
S. Altevogt, V. Andrianarijaona, H. Buhr, J. Hoﬀmann,
L. Lammich, et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 95, 263201 (2005).
[24] W. Wiley and I. McLaren, Rev. Sci. Inst. 26, 1150 (1955).
[25] SimIon 3D Version 7.0, Idaho National Engineering and

[26] P. A. Schulz, R. D. Mead, and W. C. Lineberger, Phys.

Environmental Laboratory.

Rev. A 27, 2229 (1983).

