APS/123-QED

Suppression of Reabsorption via Modulation of Light

Anthony R. Gorges, Ansel J. Foxley, David M. French, Christopher M. Ryan, and Jacob L. Roberts
Department of Physics, Colorado State University, Fort Collins, CO 80523
(Dated: February 21, 2014)

Reabsorption, the multiple scattering of spontaneously emitted photons in optically thick gases,
is a major limitation to eﬃcient optical pumping and laser cooling in ultracold gases. We report
mitigation of reabsorption using spatial and frequency modulation of laser light illuminating such
gases. We developed a semi-classical model that successfully describes the reabsorption process
when frequency-modulated light is present. It was necessary to extend the treatment in the model
beyond a simple two-atom picture in order to reproduce our experimental results.

PACS numbers: 32.80.Lg, 32.80.Pj, 32.80.Qk, 42.50.Vk

6
0
0
2
 
l
u
J
 
4
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
m
o
t
a
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
5
1
2
7
0
6
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Reabsorption has continually plagued laser cooling
schemes by critically limiting the eﬃciency of optical
pumping, and therefore cooling rates, in optically thick
gases of ultracold atoms. This is because the multi-
ple scattering of spontaneously emitted photons in these
gases, which constitutes reabsorption, results in undesir-
able heating and depolarization of the optically pumped
atoms. The limitations due to reabsorption have been
observed experimentally in studies showing a decrease
in laser cooling eﬃciency with increasing optically thick-
ness [1, 2, 3, 4, 5]. The eﬀects of reabsorption are be-
lieved to be a main reason why Bose-Einstein Conden-
sates (BECs) cannot be created using non-evaporative
laser cooling techniques. Understanding and mitigating
the eﬀects of reabsorption should allow marked improve-
ments to optical pumping and laser cooling in ultracold
gases.

To date, experimental and theoretical work [6, 7, 8, 9,
10] has focused on the use of trap geometry and tightly
conﬁning trap potentials to decrease reabsorption. For
instance, by using elongated traps the average density
of the gas can be maintained while reducing the optical
depth in one direction out of the cloud, making it easier
for photons to escape out of the narrow direction [6, 9].
In other work, optical lattices have been used to mit-
igate reabsorption since their naturally strong conﬁne-
ment potentials allow for operation in the festina lente
regime[2, 8].

In contrast, little attention has been paid to a care-
ful consideration of how alterations of the optical pump-
ing or laser cooling light could be used to reduce reab-
sorption eﬀects. This Letter presents experimental ev-
idence of the reduction of reabsorption by simultane-
ously altering the frequency spectrum of and creating
a spatial interference pattern in the applied laser light.
These techniques are broad reaching and should reduce
the amount of reabsorption regardless of trap geometry or
conﬁnement strength. Furthermore, this paper presents a
semi-classical model which explains our experimental re-
sults. Unlike previous theoretical descriptions [6, 7], our
model includes physics beyond a simple two-atom treat-
ment since a more complete description of the nature of

FIG. 1: A picture of reabsorption. The quantum states (solid
horizontal lines) and light (diagonal lines) involved in the
two-photon reabsorption process are illustrated. The atom
is driven from one momentum state (po) to another (p1) in
the same hyperﬁne magnetic sublevel by a combination of
pump light (Ωp1, Ωp2) and spontaneous emission in the ultra-
cold cloud (Ωs1, Ωs2). While reabsorption still occurs when
a light with a single frequency illuminates the cloud, in this
ﬁgure we illustrate the case in which two lasers with two dif-
ferent detunings (∆1 and ∆2) are used.

spontaneous emission and interparticle correlations in a
many-atom ultracold gas needs to be taken into account
in order to explain our experimental observations.

There are two reabsorption processes, both of which
rely on pump and scattered photons [11]. The ﬁrst pro-
cess is a one-photon scattering wherein a newly created
scattered photon scatters one or more times before es-
caping the optically thick gas. While this multiple scat-
tering introduces undesirable heating and depolarization
of the atoms, the one-photon process is dependent upon
the detuning of the laser and thus can be nearly elim-
inated with a suﬃciently large detuning. The second
process is a two-photon Raman scattering phenomenon
in which a scattered photon simultaneously scatters with
a pump photon of the same frequency (Fig. 1). Since the
scattered photons do not in general travel in the same di-
rection as the pump photon, this two-photon scattering
drives atoms from one momentum state to another. The
net eﬀect is momentum diﬀusion that results in heating.
Unlike the one-photon process, the two-photon process
is independent of detuning since scattered photons have
the same frequency as the pump photons which create

2

FIG. 2: Normalized Heat per Photon vs Experimental Conﬁg-
uration for two laser experiment. Conditions are labeled and
clearly show a diﬀerence between two I/2 beams illuminating
the cloud simultaneously and one beam at I.

FIG. 3: Normalized Heat per Photon vs Experimental Conﬁg-
uration for single laser/multiplexed AOM experiment. Con-
ditions are labeled and show no diﬀerence between two I/2
beams illuminating the cloud simultaneously and one beam
at I.

them, meaning the two-photon process is ultimately the
In the remainder of
main contributor to reabsorption.
this Letter, reabsorption will therefore refer to the two-
photon process.

Because reabsorption relies on the pump and scattered
light being the same frequency, one could imagine that
using two lasers with diﬀerent detunings should reduce
the amount of reabsorption, since not all of the pump and
scattered photons will have the same frequency. Guided
by this reasoning, we investigated the eﬀect the num-
ber of distinct frequency components in the pump light
had on reabsorption by illuminating an ultracold cloud
of atoms with pump light containing one or more fre-
quency components and measuring the resulting heating.
Since the heat imparted is related to the amount of re-
absorption, measuring the imparted heat allowed us to
determine if alterations in the pump light altered the re-
absorption. We were able to reduce the amount of reab-
sorption with multiple-frequency pump light. However,
we found that using frequency modulation alone was not
suﬃcient to reduce reabsorption; the beams associated
with the diﬀerent frequency components must create an
interference pattern in space with a characteristic length
scale smaller than the mean free path of the photons in
the cloud. This was illustrated in the results of two dif-
ferent data sets, one with an interference pattern and one
without, in which an ultracold cloud of 85Rb atoms was
heated by laser light with two distinct frequency compo-
nents.

To test the eﬀect of multiple frequency component
pump light on reabsorption, 85Rb atoms were ﬁrst pre-
pared in a magneto-optic trap (MOT) using standard
techniques [12]. A typical experimental cycle involved
the MOT being loaded, a 15 ms CMOT stage [13], and

then 3 ms of an optical molasses. The MOT, at this
point, had temperatures between 10 and 20 µK with a
peak optical depth (OD) of approximately 10 and atom
numbers of about 100 million. The cooling light was then
shut oﬀ and 1 ms later the cloud was heated by one or
more laser beam pulses. An Acoustic Optical Modulator
(AOM) controlled the heating pulses, with typical pulse
lengths of 40-1600 µs. The heat pulses were set to be
in the range of 40 to 60 MHz blue detuned of the 85Rb
cycling transition. After the heating pulse, the atoms un-
derwent an 18 ms free expansion before ﬁnally being im-
aged via absorption imaging. From the size of the cloud
after expansion, the kinetic energy increase of the atoms
due to the heating pulses was determined. Changes in
the amount of reabsorption manifested themselves as a
change in the amount of heat (kinetic energy) imparted
by the heating pulses.

To characterize these changes, we introduce a quantity
called ”heat per photon”. Heat imparted in a cloud in
the absence of saturation goes as C1I∆t+C2I 2∆t where
C1 is a coeﬃcient of one-photon scattering, C2 is a coeﬃ-
cient of two-photon scattering, I is the total intensity of
the beam, and ∆t is the pulse length. Heat per photon is
deﬁned as C1+C2I, the heat divided by I∆t. This quan-
tity allows us to compare data sets taken under diﬀerent
intensity and pulse length conditions.

Our ﬁrst set of experiments used two separate lasers
(laser 1 and laser 2) detuned by several MHz or more
from each other to generate the heating pulses. These
pulses were co-propagated and used to simultaneously
apply heat to the atom cloud. The separate laser beams
had diﬀerent phase and amplitude spatial proﬁles, and
so overlapping the beams produced a spatial interference

∼

pattern. The heating pulses had a 1.5 mm spot size and
had an intensity I/Isat of about 10 at full intensity. 40
µs pulses were used to heat the cloud under four dif-
ferent conditions. Three of these conditions were: laser
1 at I1; laser 2 at I2; and laser 1 at I1/2 and laser 2
at I2/2 simultaneously. Since I1
I2, all three of these
conditions had roughly the same total intensity. Any re-
duction in reabsorption would be expected to result in
the simultaneous data imparting less heat to the cloud
than the full intensity conditions. The fourth condition
was an average of laser 1 alone at I1/2 and laser 2 alone
at I2/2, called the averaged separate data. The averaged
separate data represents a lower limit to the amount of
reduction in reabsorption which could be realized. Data
were taken with a variety of intensities, detunings, atom
number, and pulse lengths. A sample set of data is shown
in Fig. 2, but the same general trends were observed in
all data sets. There is no statistical diﬀerence between
the averaged separate and simultaneous conditions. The
full intensity conditions, however, show a clear increase
as compared to the simultaneous.

In the second set of experiments, a single laser was used
to create two separate heating pulses. This was accom-
plished by sending two radio frequencies into an AOM
which produced two deﬂected, non-overlapped beams
separated in frequency by 10 MHz. The results of a typi-
cal experiment are shown in Fig. 3. The conditions shown
are the same as in the previous experiment, with the laser
1 and laser 2 now referring to the two AOM deﬂected
beams. Unlike the ﬁrst set of experiments, no spatial in-
terference pattern was present since the two beams were
separate deﬂections of the same original beam. In con-
trast to the ﬁrst set of experiments, the heat per photon
for the simultaneous case was similar to that of the full
intensity individual beams.

To explain the dependence of our results on the pres-
ence of an interference pattern, we developed a model
of the two-photon reabsorption process where the pump
light and the spontaneous emission light are treated
semi-classically for a typical atom in the cloud. The
pump and spontaneous emission light are described by
time-dependent Rabi frequencies Ωp and Ωs, respectively.
Once Ωp and Ωs are known, the transition rate from one
momentum state to another (i.e from
in Fig. 1)
is calculated to estimate heating rate due to reabsorption.
We assume that there are two distinct frequency com-
ponents in the pump light and so we write (in a rotating-
wave approximation) Ωp = Ω1 + Ω2ei∆ωt, where ∆ω is
the diﬀerence between the frequencies of the two com-
ponents and Ωα = dEα
2~ , where α=1 or 2, d is the
dipole matrix element, and Eα is equal to the elec-
tric ﬁeld amplitude associated with beam α. To model
the spontaneous emission light, we treat each atom as
a classical oscillator driven by the pump light. Thus,
Ωs = κ PN
i=1 eiφi (Ω1 + Ω2ei∆ωt+iθi) where Ωα and ∆ω
have the same deﬁnitions as above and κ is a constant

1
|

2
|

to

i

i

3

i

i

to

2
|

1
|

[16]. The summation is over the N atoms whose spon-
taneous emission is in the proper direction to contribute
transition. Because the spacing of the
to the
atoms in the gas is random and on average greater than
the pump light wavelength, the phase of the spontaneous
emission from each atom (φi) is random as well. θi al-
lows for spatial variation in the phase between the two
frequency components (i.e. an interference pattern). Ωs
can be written in the form Ωs = κ′(Ω1eiφ′
2 ) where
κ′ will vary from atom to atom but will on average be
√N κ. Under our assumptions, φ′ will vary randomly
from atom to atom as well. The relationship between θ′
and φ′ depends on the values of θi. If there is no spatial
interference pattern, then θi = 0 for all i and θ′ = φ′. In
the opposite limit of a rapidly varying interference pat-
tern, θi and thus θ′ will be random, with θ′ having no
correlation to φ′.

+ Ωiθ′

|

i

i

i

i

1

to

to

2
|

1
|

i
, and the evolution from
i

With this model of Ωp and Ωs, we can calculate the
transition rate from
due to two-photon reab-
2
|
sorption. Since an atom will experience transition to
many momentum states other than the
state once
state, population does not build up in
it is in the
is governed by a
2
2
1
|
|
|
rate equation. To calculate the rate, we input Ωp and
Ωs into the optical Bloch equations for the three-state
system shown in Fig. 1 [15]. In the course of our calcula-
tion, we adiabatically eliminate the upper state, include
to other momentum states
transitions from
i
as phenomenological decay rates, ignore the eﬀectively
small AC stark shifts, and integrate the equation for the
dipole (ρ12 in standard notation) assuming slow variation
. Following this
of the populations of states
i
procedure, we ﬁnd the transition rate (R),

and

and

2
|

1
|

1
|

2
|

i

i

i

R

∼ {

Ω4
1
∆2
1

+

+

Ω4
2
∆2
2

1Ω22
2Ω2
∆1∆2

′
cos(φ

′

θ

.

)
}

−

(1)

The dependence of the reabsorption rate on the pres-
ence of a spatial interference pattern is contained in the
last term of Eq. (1). In the absence of any interference
pattern, the last term will contribute maximally to the
reabsorption rate, as was the case with the second set
of experiments. With the presence of a rapidly varying
interference pattern, θ′
φ′ will vary rapidly and the
last term will average to zero over all of the atoms in
the cloud and not contribute to the overall reabsorption
rate. The interference pattern created in the overlap of
the two separate beams in the ﬁrst set of experiments
was suﬃcient to introduce enough phase variation to vir-
tually eliminate the contribution due to the last term in
Eq. (1), resulting in signiﬁcantly less reabsorption.

−

For a physical interpretation of this result, we begin
by noting that two-photon reabsorption involves a co-
herent transition. If there were a suﬃciently fast varia-
tion between the phase of the light driving the two legs
of the transition, the transition rate would be reduced.
For the detunings we used, however, the response time

4

Our semi-classical model of reabsorption predicts that
the reduction in reabsorption scales linearly with the
number of beams that have suﬃcient spatial and fre-
quency variation from one another. This is supported
by the counter-propagating reabsorption test where we
saw a reduction in the reabsorption by half. Therefore,
it should be possible to reduce the reabsorption beyond
a factor of two by creating additional frequency compo-
nents with the AOM, separating the components, and
then either deliberately altering the phase of their beam
proﬁles relative to one another with diﬀusers or sending
them into the atom cloud at suﬃciently diﬀerent prop-
agation directions. Our current experimental conﬁgura-
tion prevents such a test from being conducted in a prac-
tical manner, since the use of a free space MOT requires
the heat beam path and imaging path to be the same
to avoid problematic center-of-mass motion. This limits
the propagation directions and prevents the insertion of
optics like diﬀusers in the heat beam paths. However, in
the future, the MOT atoms will be loaded into a far oﬀ
resonance optical trap which will remove the restrictions
encountered with a free space MOT, allowing tests with
more than two frequencies to be conducted.

In summary, our experiments have successfully demon-
strated the mitigation of reabsorption using beam mod-
ulation techniques. Our results are explained by a semi-
classical model. The model indicates that the physics of
multiple light scatterers in a random gas medium must
be considered in order to understand our results. Un-
derstanding the reabsorption process will allow current
optical techniques to be modiﬁed, which should increase
the eﬃciency of optical pumping schemes and promises
to improve the lowest temperatures that can be achieved
in optically thick gases using laser cooling techniques.

One of us (DMF) acknowledges support of the Re-
search Corporation. This work was funded by the
AFOSR, grant number FA9550-06-1-0190.

[1] D. J. Han, M. T. DePue, and D. S. Weiss, Phys. Rev. A

63, 023405 (2001).

[2] Vladan Vuletic et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 81, 5768 (1998).
[3] H. Perrin et al., Europhys. Lett. 46, 141 (1999).
[4] A. J. Kerman et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 84, 439 (2000).
[5] D. Boiron et al., Phys. Rev. A 53, R3734 (1996).
[6] Y. Castin, J. I. Cirac, and M. Lewenstein, Phys. Rev.

[7] J. I. Cirac, M. Lewenstein, and P. Zollar, Europhys.

Lett. 80, 5305 (1998).

Lett. 35, 647 (1996).

85, 4249 (2000).

[8] S. Wolf, S. J. Oliver, and D. S. Weiss, Phys. Rev. Lett.

[9] M. Vengalattore et al., Phys. Rev. A 67, 063412 (2003).
[10] L. Santos et al., Phys. Rev. A 63, 063408 (2001).
[11] For the purposes of this paper, pump photons are photons
incident on the cloud, coming directly from the lasers.
Scattered photons are spontaneously emitted by an atom

FIG. 4: Heat per photon vs intensity for the single laser,
counter-propagating experiment. Circles are a single beam
at full intensity, triangles are two simultaneously counter-
propagating beams each at half intensity. The slope gives the
value of the C2 coeﬃcient. The insert shows the interference
pattern, which moves at velocity v. λ = 780 nm.

∼

1
of an atom’s dipole (
∆ ) is a few nanoseconds. Thus,
for pump light with multiple frequency components but
no interference pattern, the resulting spontaneous emis-
sion will follow the pump light eﬀectively instantaneously.
There is no chance to introduce any variation between
the phases of the pump and spontaneous emission light.
With an interference pattern, however, the source of the
spontaneous emission light seen by an atom will vary as
diﬀerent sets of atoms are illuminated at diﬀerent times.
Since there is no correlation in the positions of the atoms,
this variation in which atoms are illuminated will in turn
lead to a phase variation between the pump and sponta-
neous emission light, disrupting reabsorption.

To further conﬁrm our model’s prediction, we revis-
ited the two-frequency AOM experiments. Again, two
beams were created and then separated after the AOM.
However, unlike the previous experiments which used co-
propagating beams, this time the heating pulses were
made to be counter-propagating, resulting in an interfer-
ence pattern (see Fig. 4). This interference pattern meets
all of the necessary conditions for reabsorption mitigation
contained in our model. Fig. 4 shows the results of one of
these experiments. Since we are plotting heat per pho-
ton (C1+C2I), the slope of the intensity proﬁle before
saturation occurs gives the coeﬃcient for the two-photon
Raman scattering process [17]. The intensity of the two
separate heating pulses was adjusted so that each beam
introduced the same amount of heat into the cloud when
applied individually. Our theory predicts for this set of
conditions a reduction in C2 by a factor of 1
2 ; we mea-
sured a reduction of 0.457
.034. Other tests with diﬀer-
±
ent parameters indicated the same general result [18].

after it absorbs a pump photon.

[12] E. L. Raab et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 59, 2631 (1987).
[13] W. Petrich et al., J. Opt. Soc. Am. B 11, 1332 (1994).
[14] Kathryn Moler et al., Phys. Rev. A 45, 342 (1992).
[15] P. Meystre and M. Sargent III, Elements of Quantum
Optics, 2nd. ed. (Springer-Verlag, New York, 1991).

[16] In writing the constant κ, we ignore the 1

r decrease in the
amplitude of the spontaneously emission. This approxi-
mation does not aﬀect the model’s relevant conclusions.
[17] These data were taken at lower intensities from previous

5

sets, so that saturation was not a concern.

[18] This last set of experiments shows that the phase jit-
ter between the separate lasers in the ﬁrst set of experi-
ments was not responsible for the reabsorption reduction.
Also, the ﬁrst set of experiments shows that it is the
interference pattern and not the change to the counter-
propagating beams responsible for the reduction of reab-
sorption in this last set of data.

