6
0
0
2
 
g
u
A
 
2
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
m
o
t
a
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
6
1
2
8
0
6
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Fabrication of alignment structures for a ﬁber resonator by use of deep-ultraviolet
lithography

Xiyuan Liu∗ and Karl-Heinz Brenner
Lehrstuhl f¨ur Optoelektronik, Universit¨at Mannheim,
B6 23-29, D-68131 Mannheim, Germany.

Marco Wilzbach,† Michael Schwarz, Thomas Fernholz, and J¨org Schmiedmayer
Physikalisches Institut der Universit¨at Heidelberg,
Philosophenweg 12, D-69120 Heidelberg, Germany.
(Dated: Published December 2005)

We present a novel method to mount and align an optical-ﬁber-based resonator on the ﬂat
surface of an atom chip with ultrahigh precision. The structures for mounting a pair of ﬁbers,
which constitute the ﬁber resonator, are produced by a spin-coated SU-8 photoresist technique by
use of deep-UV lithography. The design and production of the SU-8 structures are discussed. From
the measured ﬁnesses we calculate the coupling loss of the SU-8 structures acting as a kind of ﬁber
splice to be smaller than 0.013 dB.

INTRODUCTION

resonator strongly depends on losses introduced by mis-
alignment, it is a good way to measure the coupling eﬃ-
ciency and alignment precision of the SU-8 ﬁber splice.

Although integrated optics is a widespread and impor-
tant ﬁeld in today’s technology, especially in the telecom-
munication sector, integrated optics is also beginning to
gain in importance in other areas, such as atomic physics
and quantum optics.
In the developing ﬁeld of quan-
tum information processing, the manipulation of neu-
tral atoms with so-called atom chips provides a new, ex-
tremely promising approach [1, 2]. The concept relies
on the capability to control magnetically trapped atoms
that hover micrometers above a microstructured surface
that carries electric currents and charges to provide the
necessary ﬁelds. As far as we know, integrated optical
access to trapped atoms has not yet been implemented
on these atom chips.

An important step will be the on-chip detection of sin-
gle atoms that can be achieved with an optical ﬁber res-
onator [3]. In our approach, the ﬁbers are mounted in
a superstructure fabricated from SU-8 resist that pro-
vides positioning and alignment accurately and easily.
The ﬁbers can easily be inserted by hand and are auto-
matically aligned with submicrometer precision.

SU-8 is an epoxy-based, chemically ampliﬁed solvent-
developed negative resist that is typically patterned with
365-436 nm UV aligners. Its speciﬁc properties facilitate
the production of thick structures with smooth, nearly
vertical sidewalls [4]. Because of the high mechanical,
chemical, and thermal stability of the polymerized SU-8,
it has been used to fabricate a wide range of microcompo-
nents, such as optical planar waveguides with outstand-
ing thermal stability and controllable numerical aper-
tures, mechanical parts such as microgears for engineer-
ing applications, microﬂuidic systems, and microreactors
for biochemical processing [5].

To assess the quality of the alignment structures, we
use the ﬁber resonator itself. Since the ﬁnesse of the

FIBER RESONATOR SETUP

The ﬁber setup is sketched in Fig. 1(a). We use a
Fabry-Perot-type resonator that is produced by coupling
two pieces of single-mode ﬁber (4.9 µm mode ﬁeld diam-
eter) with dielectric mirrors glued to the outer ends of
the ﬁbers [6]. A small gap of a few micrometers between
the inner ends of the ﬁbers provides access to magneti-
cally trapped atoms that interact with the light ﬁeld. An
important property of a resonator is its ﬁnesse which can
be written as

F =

δν
∆ν

≈

π
αi
P
i

,

(1)

where αi is the loss factor per single pass, δν is the free
spectral range, and ∆ν is the full width at halfmaximum
of the resonances. The approximation is valid for F ≫ 1.
For a more detailed description of resonator theory we
refer the reader to the textbooks listed in Refs.
[7] and
[8]. With a resonator of suﬃcient ﬁnesse (F > 100), the
additional loss caused by light scattering inside the gap
by atoms can be used to detect the presence of even single
atoms in the gap [3]. To obtain a high enough ﬁnesse, the
ﬁber ends must be aligned with submicrometer precision.

Intrinsic losses

In the following, all the loss mechanisms of the intact
ﬁber resonator are referred to as intrinsic losses, i.e., all
the losses without introducing the gap. The losses are
basically determined by the quality of the glued mirrors

2

at the ends of the ﬁber. The loss caused by the ﬁber itself
is 3 dB/km as stated by the manufacturer. With a typical
length of L = 10 cm for our resonators, this is equivalent
to a negligible loss of 0.0003 dB or 0.007 %. In principle,
the transmission through the mirrors is determined by
the properties of the dielectric stack and can be chosen to
meet speciﬁc requirements. But the thickness of the glue
layer, the alignment precision, internal losses, and the
surface roughness limits the achievable reﬂectivity. The
most important limitation, which cannot be overcome,
is the spreading of the unguided light mode in the glue
layer and within the mirror itself. This leads to a reduced
coupling of the reﬂected light back into the ﬁber.

integral of the ﬁber optical ﬁeld modes. The eﬃciency de-
creases quadratically with the geometric parameters for
small deviations from perfect alignment. We found that
the crucial parameters for eﬃcient light coupling are the
transversal misalignment and the angle between the op-
tical axes of the two ﬁber pieces. Because of the weak
dependence of the mode ﬁeld diameter in the near ﬁeld,
the coupling loss caused by longitudinal misalignment is
not so critical. One must take into account that Fres-
nel backreﬂection at the gap surfaces leads to a coupled
system of three resonators. But the inﬂuence of longitu-
dinal mode symmetry on the resonator ﬁnesse vanishes
for small gap sizes.

Losses caused by the gap

DEEP-ULTRAVIOLET LITHOGRAPHY BY USE
OF SU-8 PHOTORESIST

After cutting the resonator and introducing the gap,
the light coupling between the two pieces will be reduced,
thus introducing additional loss, which results from light
scattering at the newly introduced surfaces and from
transversal, angular, and longitudinal misalignment. The
relevant geometric parameters are shown in Fig. 1(b).
Rotational misalignment converts a potentially imperfect
core-cladding concentricity into transversal misalignment
[9].

Structure requirements

The alignment structures for the ﬁber resonator must
meet some speciﬁc requirements. They must be able to
tolerate temperature changes and gradients. In typical
experiments with atoms trapped in microscopic poten-
tials, the currents carried by the metallic structures lead
to a local temperature increase of as much as 100 ‰.
Furthermore, the structure must be taller than the ﬁber
radius (r = 67.5 µm) and an exposure in thick resist is
needed. To prevent lateral and angular misalignment,
i.e., parallel and perpendicular to the substrate plane,
an undercut sidewall proﬁle is superior to a vertical side-
wall proﬁle. With such a proﬁle, the separation between
the sidewalls decreases proportional to the distance from
the substrate surface [see Fig. 2(c)], thus clamping the
ﬁber. To meet these requirements, SU-8 is highly suit-
able, because of its thermal stability and outstanding
lithographic performance. The undercut sidewall pro-
ﬁle can be obtained by optimization of the lithographic
process steps. The optimization techniques include ﬁne-
tuning of the exposure dose and the postexposure bake
(PEB) time.

(a) Fiber resonator of length L, including a gap
FIG. 1:
of length z. Dielectric mirrors are glued to the outer ends
of the resonator. (b) Sketches of the possible misalignments
at the gap. The mode of diameter 2w0 that leaves the ﬁrst
ﬁber, diverges and is partially coupled into the second ﬁber,
which exhibits a longitudinal displacement z, a transversal
displacement m, and an angle misalignment θ.

For a ﬁber with a single-step refractive index pro-
ﬁle, a Gaussian approximation [10] for the fundamen-
tal mode ﬁeld distribution can be used. Typically, the
Gaussian approximation deviates by less than 1% from
the true mode ﬁeld. In general, the power coupling ef-
ﬁciency for two ﬁbers can be calculated by the overlap

FIG. 2:
(a) Layout of the alignment structure, (b) a mag-
niﬁed part (dotted rectangle), and (c) the undercut sidewall
proﬁle.

The layout of the desired alignment structure with

ﬁbers is shown in Fig. 2. This design includes funnels
to simplify the insertion of the ﬁber. To avoid angular
misalignment, the total length of the alignment structure
was chosen to be 6000 µm, and it is divided into several
subsegments to reduce stress induced by thermal expan-
sion.

Optimization of the fabrication process

The process for the fabrication of alignment structures
includes substrate coating, soft bake, UV exposure, PEB,
and development. Each process has a strong inﬂuence on
the ﬁnal structure, and there are complex interrelations
among the single process steps. Substrate cleaning and
dehydrate baking prior to spin coating can improve SU-8
adhesion. An insuﬃcient soft bake results in mask adhe-
sion and an uneven resist layer. On the other hand, a too
long soft bake time causes stress and cracking in the ﬁ-
nal structures. The degree of polymerization is controlled
by both the exposure dose and the bake conditions. All
these interrelations increase the complexity of optimiza-
tion. To accelerate the optimization process, we limited
the variation of the process to parameters that have the
strongest inﬂuence on the ﬁnal results. Speciﬁc to our
project, the slight undercut sidewall proﬁle is important
and can be optimized by varying the exposure dose and
the PEB conditions. Compared with the PEB conditions,
the exposure dose has a stronger inﬂuence on the side-
wall proﬁle, therefore the optimization was performed by
a variation of the exposure dose.

The entire process is described in detail in the follow-
ing. To improve the adhesion of SU-8 ﬁlms, the gold-
coated silicon substrates were cleaned in an ultrasonic
bath for 5 min at room temperature. They were sub-
sequently rinsed in distilled water and then dehydrated
on a hot plate at 200 ‰ for 1 h immediately before use.
After cooling to room temperature, approximately 3 g of
SU-8 50 resist was spread over 5 cm × 5 cm of the sub-
strate around the central area. Spin coating the resist at
500 rpm for 20 s, followed by 2000 rpm for 20 s produced
an approximately 90 µm thick ﬁlm. The coated ﬁlm was
then prebaked on a hot plate in two steps to evaporate
the solvent. In the ﬁrst step we used a temperature of
65 ‰ for 10 min. Then the temperature was ramped up
to 95 ‰ for approximately 6 min and then held constant
at 95 ‰ for 2 h. After cooling to room temperature, the
substrate was exposed with the desired pattern mask by
use of a standard 365 nm UV light source. To optimize
the undercut sidewall proﬁle, we used a reduced expo-
sure dose. During the PEB time, the exposed area of
the SU-8 ﬁlm was selectively polymerized. The postbake
process was also performed in two steps. The substrate
was placed on the hot plate at 65 ‰ for 1 min. This
step is necessary to avoid an image ﬂow before the resist
is slightly polymerized. Then the substrate was immedi-

3

ately put on another hot plate at 95 ‰ for 10 min. After
the PEB, the substrate was removed from the hot plate
and cooled to room temperature. Finally, the nonpoly-
merized regions of the SU-8 ﬁlm were removed in SU-8
developer for 12 min. To observe the sidewall proﬁle,
the substrate was cut with a precision dicing saw. The
microscopic images of the sidewall proﬁles are shown in
Fig. 3 for diﬀerent exposure times. The pictures indicate
that the degree of undercut becomes larger with smaller
exposure doses. This result can be explained by light
diﬀraction at the mask aperture. Because the adhesion
of the resist to the substrate decreases with lower ex-
posure, we chose a compromise between an acceptable
undercut and a suﬃcient adhesion, which corresponds to
that in Fig. 3(b)).

FIG. 3: Microscope images of the cross section of SU-8 struc-
tures with exposure time increasing from (a) to (d).

RESULTS

We determined the quality of the SU-8 ﬁber splice in-
directly by ﬁrst measuring the ﬁnesse of an intact res-
onator and then splitting and inserting it into the struc-
tures. We recorded the transmitted light intensity while
scanning the laser over several free spectral ranges of the
ﬁber resonator. A model function was ﬁtted to the data,
yielding the ﬁnesse according to Eq.
(1). The results
were averaged over several hundred runs of the experi-
ment. The ﬁnesses of two intact resonators were found
to be F1 = 110.4 ± 0.3 and F2 = 152.8 ± 1.1. After cut-
ting the resonators and polishing the surfaces, the pieces
were introduced into the SU-8 structures. We observed
the ﬁber ends under a microscope and minimized the gap
sizes to touching ﬁbers. The ﬁnesses were then measured
to be F1 = 101.1 ± 0.5 and F2 = 132.0 ± 1.3, thus giv-
ing an additional average loss of α = (0.29 ± 0.04)% or
(0.013±0.002) dB. Neglecting other additional losses, this

corresponds to a pure lateral misalignment of m = 150
nm or a pure angular misalignment of θ = 6.3 × 10−3 rad
≈ 0.36◦. To test thermal stability, we varied the temper-
ature of the substrate between 20 and 70 ‰. The ﬁnesse
of the inserted ﬁber resonator showed no change during
heating.

CONCLUSION

In summary, we have demonstrated a method for align-
ing ﬁbers on a ﬂat surface by using SU-8 superstruc-
tures. The aligned ﬁbers represent a Fabry-Perot-type
resonator for atomic physics to detect atoms. We have
investigated the diﬀerent loss mechanisms for this type
of ﬁber resonator. We then introduced the layout of the
SU-8 alignment structures, which enables easy position-
ing and alignment, and because of the undercut sidewall
proﬁle, also oﬀers a method of ﬁxing the ﬁber position.
To achieve this structure, we optimized the lithographic
process. Furthermore we demonstrated a technique for
quantifying the losses that are due to misalignment with
the help of the ﬁber resonator itself. The ﬁnesse mea-
surement indicated that the SU-8 superstructures are of
superior quality.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

We thank S. Groth for supplying gold-coated silicon
substrates. This research was partly supported by Euro-
pean Union contract IST-2001-38863 (Atom Chip Quan-
tum Processor collaboration) and the Landesstiftung
Baden/W¨urttemberg Forschungsprogramm Quantenin-
formationsverarbeitung.

4

∗ Electronic address: xiyuanl@rumms.uni-mannheim.de
† Electronic address: wilzbach@physi.uni-heidelberg.de
[1] R. Folman, P. Kr¨uger, J. Schmiedmayer, J. Denschlag
and C. Henkel, “Microscopic atom optics: From wires to
an atom chip”, Adv. At. Mol. Opt. Phys. 48, 263-356
(2002).

[2] R. Folman, P. Kr¨uger, D. Cassettari, B. Hessmo, T.
Maier and J. Schmiedmayer, “Controlling cold atoms us-
ing nano-fabricated surfaces: Atom Chips”, Phys. Rev.
Lett. 84, 4749-4752 (2000).

[3] P. Horak, B.G. Klappauf, A. Haase, R. Folman, J.
Schmiedmayer, P. Domokos and E.A. Hinds, “Possibil-
ity of single atom detection on a chip”, Phys. Rev. A 67,
043806/1-9 (2003).

[4] Microchem,
50;

http://www.microchem.com,

SU-8
SU-8
http://aveclafaux.freeservers.com/SU-8.html.

photo-resist

The

NANO
for MEMS,

[5] R. Ruhmann, K. Pfeiﬀer, M. Falenski, F. Reuther, R.
Engelke and G. Gr¨utzner, “SU-8: a high performance
material for MEMS applications”, Polymers in MEMS,
http://www.microchem.com/resources/tok ebeam resist.pdf.

[6] M. Wilzbach, Physikalisches Institut der Universit¨at Hei-
delberg, Philosophenweg 12, D-69120 Heidelberg, Ger-
many, is preparing a manuscript to be called “Building
micro-cavities with optical ﬁbers for single atom detec-
tion.”

[7] W. Demtr¨oder, “Laser Spectroscopy”, Springer Verlag,

Berlin - Heidelberg (2003).

[8] A.E. Siegman, “Lasers”, University Science Books, Mill

Valley, CA (1986).

[9] M. Saruwatari and K. Nawate, “Semiconductor laser to
single-mode ﬁber coupler”, Appl. Opt. 18 (11), 1847-
1856 (1979).

[10] A. Ghatak and K. Thyagarajan, “Introduction to ﬁber

optics”, Cambridge University Press (1998).

