6
0
0
2
 
g
u
A
 
1
3
 
 
]
h
p
-
m
o
t
a
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
4
1
3
8
0
6
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

EPJ manuscript No.
(will be inserted by the editor)

Towards measuring nuclear-spin-dependent and isotopic-chain
atomic parity violation in Ytterbium

K. Tsigutkin1, J. E. Stalnaker1a, D. Budker1,2, S. J. Freedman1,2, and V. V. Yashchuk3
1 Department of Physics, University of California, Berkeley, CA 94720-7300
2 Nuclear Science Division, Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, Berkeley CA 94720
3 Advanced Light Source Division, Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, Berkeley CA 94720

Received: date / Revised version: date

Abstract. We discuss experiments aimed at measurements of atomic parity nonconservation (PNC) eﬀects
in the 6s2 1S0 → 5d6s 3D1 transition (408 nm) in atomic Ytterbium (Z=70). According to theoretical
predictions, the PNC-induced E1 amplitude of this transition is ∼ 100 times larger than the analogous
amplitude in Cs. Such an experiment will determine diﬀerences in PNC eﬀects between diﬀerent hyperﬁne
components for odd-neutron-number Yb isotopes and, thereby, will allow measurements of the nuclear
anapole moments in nuclei with unpaired neutrons. In addition, measurements of PNC in diﬀerent isotopes
would give information on neutron distributions within the nuclei. The apparatus designed and built for
this experiment is described, and results of measurements towards understanding of systematic eﬀects
inﬂuencing the accuracy, and the current status of the ongoing PNC measurements are presented.

PACS. 32.80.Ys Weak-interaction eﬀects in atoms – 32.70.-n Intensities and shapes of atomic spectral
lines – 32.60.+i Zeeman and Stark eﬀects

1 Introduction

Atomic ytterbium (Yb) was proposed as a system for mea-
suring the eﬀects of parity nonconservation (PNC) by D.
DeMille [1] who pointed out a rather non-obvious enhance-
ment of the PNC transition amplitude arising due to con-
ﬁguration mixing in addition to relative proximity of the
excited 5d6s 3D1 and 6s6p 1P1 states of opposite nominal
parity (Fig. 1). The PNC-induced 6s2 1S0 → 5d6s 3D1
transition amplitude has been calculated [1,2,3] to be two
orders of magnitude larger than the PNC amplitude in
cesium where high-precision measurements have been car-
ried out [4,5].

While the accuracy of the theoretical calculations of
PNC eﬀects in Yb is at a ∼ 20% level [2,3], there is
little hope that it will ever reach sub-one-percent levels
achieved for Cs and other single-electron systems (see, for
example, review [6]). Therefore, the motivation for PNC
experiments in Yb is not testing the Standard Model via
a comparison of high-precision theory and experiment,
but rather probing low-energy nuclear physics by compar-
ing PNC eﬀects on either a chain of naturally occurring
Yb isotopes (168Yb-0.13%, 170Yb-3.04%, 171Yb-14.28%,
173Yb-16.13%, 174Yb-31.83%, 176Yb-12.76%), or in dif-
ferent hyperﬁne components of the same odd-neutron-
number isotope (171Yb-nuclear spin I = 1/2 or 173Yb-I =

a Present address: National Institute of Standards and Tech-

nology, 325 S. Broadway Boulder, CO 80305-3322

Fig. 1. Low-lying energy eigenstates of Yb and transitions
relevant to the PNC experiment.

5/2). The former would yield information on the mean-
square neutron radii in the chain of isotopes, while the
latter would probe nuclear-spin-dependent PNC, which is
sensitive to the nuclear anapole moments (see, for exam-
ple, reviews [6,7]) that arise from weak interactions be-
tween the nucleons. Both of these types of measurements
probe nuclear physics that is exceedingly diﬃcult to ac-

2

K. Tsigutkin et al : Towards measuring nuclear-spin-dependent and isotopic-chain atomic parity violation...

cess by other means, and neither relies on high-precision
theory.

2 Preliminary experiments

Experimental work towards an Yb-PNC measurement has
started at Berkeley several years ago, and, in its initial
phase, was directed towards measurement of various spec-
troscopic properties of the Yb system of direct relevance to
the PNC measurement, including determination of radia-
tive lifetimes [8], measurement of the Stark-induced am-
plitudes, hyperﬁne structure, isotope shifts, and dc-Stark
shifts of the 6s2 1S0 → 5d6s 3D1,2 transitions, and the
quadrupole moment of the latter transition (λ = 404 nm)
[9], and the forbidden magnetic-dipole (M1) amplitude of
the former transition (λ = 408 nm) [10]. For the measure-
ment of the forbidden magnetic-dipole transition ampli-
tude (≈ 10−4 µB), we used the M1-(Stark-induced)E1 in-
terference technique. A simple atomic system where tran-
sition amplitudes and interferences are well understood
has proven useful for gaining insight into curious Jones
dichroism eﬀects that had been studied in condensed-matter
systems at extreme conditions and whose origin had been
a matter of debate (see Ref. [11] and references therein).
Most recently [12], we reported on an experimental
and theoretical study of the dynamic (ac) Stark eﬀect on
the 6s2 1S0 → 5d6s 3D1 forbidden transition. A general
framework for parameterizing and describing oﬀ-resonant
ac-Stark shifts was presented. A model was developed to
calculate spectral line shapes resulting from resonant ex-
citation of atoms in an intense standing light-wave in the
presence of oﬀ-resonant ac-Stark shifts. A bi-product of
this work was an independent determination (from the
saturation behavior of the 408-nm transition) of the Stark
transition polarizability, which was found to be in agree-
ment with our earlier measurement [9].

The present incarnation of the Yb PNC experiment
(described below) involves a measurement using an atomic
beam. An alternative approach would involve working with
a heat-pipe-like vapor cell. Various aspect of such an ex-
periment were investigated, including measurements of col-
lisional perturbations of relevant Yb states [13], nonlinear
optical processes in a dense Yb vapor with pulsed UV-
laser excitation [14], and an altogether diﬀerent scheme
for measuring PNC via optical rotation on a transition
between excited states [15].

3 Experimental technique for the PNC
measurement

The general idea of the present Yb-PNC experiment is to
excite the forbidden 408-nm transition (Fig. 1) with res-
onant laser light in the presence of a static electric ﬁeld.
The purpose of the electric ﬁeld is to provide a reference
Stark-induced transition amplitude, much larger than the
PNC amplitude. In such a Stark-PNC interference method
[16,17], one is measuring the part of the transition prob-
ability that is linear in both the reference Stark-induced

Fig. 2. Possible orientation of ﬁelds for PNC-Stark interfer-
ence experiment. In both cases, light is applied collinearly with
x.

amplitude and the PNC amplitude. In addition to enhanc-
ing the PNC-dependent signal, employing the Stark-PNC
interference technique provides for all-important reversals
allowing one to separate the PNC eﬀects from various sys-
tematics.

We begin the discussion of the experiment by consid-
ering the rotational invariant to which the PNC-Stark-
interference term is proportional. Since the eﬀect violates
parity and conserves time-reversal invariance, we require
the rotational invariant to be P-odd and T-even. The two
conﬁgurations which have been used for Stark-interference
experiments of this type are shown in Fig. 2.

Geometry One was used in the Cs Stark-interference
experiment [18] and Geometry Two was used in an early
Stark-interference experiment in Tl [19]. The rotational
invariant for Geometry One is given by

where σ is the helicity of the excitation light. For Geom-
etry Two, the invariant is

σ · (E × B),

(E · B)([E × E] · B),

(1)

(2)

where E is the electric ﬁeld of the (linearly polarized) light.
The two geometries have very diﬀerent characteristics
and are sensitive to diﬀerent sets of systematics. Neither
geometry is clearly superior. One advantage of Geometry
Two is an additional suppression of spurious M1-Stark in-
terference, one of the most important systematic eﬀects
in precision PNC-Stark interference experiments. In both
Geometries One and Two, this eﬀect can be minimized by
the use of a power-build-up cavity to generate a stand-
ing light wave. Since a standing wave has no net direc-
tion of propagation, k, any transition rate which is linear
in the M1 amplitude (proportional to k × E) will cancel
out. However, this is the only source of suppression of
the M1-Stark interference in Geometry One. This can be
seen by replacing σ in the rotational invariant (1) with k.
This is a T-even, P-even rotational invariant which arises
from M1-Stark interference. Geometry Two, on the other
hand, is such that the M1 and Stark amplitudes are out of
phase. Thus, the M1 and Stark amplitudes do not interfere
and therefore do not produce additional interference terms

K. Tsigutkin et al : Towards measuring nuclear-spin-dependent and isotopic-chain atomic parity violation...

3

which can change with the changing ﬁelds and mimic the
PNC-Stark interference. This geometry can even be used
in the absence of a power-build-up cavity (and in fact was
in the work of Ref. [19]). Thus, the M1-Stark interfer-
ence term requires a misalignment of the ﬁelds along with
a net direction of propagation resulting from an imper-
fect standing wave. This additional reduction of M1-Stark
interference has led us to choose Geometry Two for the
PNC-Stark experiment.

The rotational invariant (2) highlights some of the
salient features of our experiment: the PNC eﬀect reverses
with dc electric ﬁeld (E), and does not reverse with the
magnetic ﬁeld (B); however, the presence of the magnetic
ﬁeld is necessary. In fact, the magnetic ﬁeld should be
strong enough so that the transitions to diﬀerent Zeeman
components of the upper state are resolved (because the
PNC eﬀect averaged over all Zeeman components is zero).
Another reversal is ﬂipping the axis of the light polariza-
tion with respect to the E-B plane, which also changes the
sign of the PNC eﬀect.

4 PNC signatures for even and odd isotopes

Here we address brieﬂy the eﬀect of the weak mixing be-
tween 3D1 and 1P1 states on the 6s2 1S0 → 5d6s 3D1
transition. In the present experiment, the forbidden tran-
sition rate is enhanced by applying a DC electric ﬁeld to
Yb atoms which mixes the 3D1 and 1P1 states. In order
to discriminate the weak mixing contribution to the tran-
sition rate, a magnetic ﬁeld is applied leading to Zeeman
splitting of the transition into several components. In the
case of the Geometry 2 (Fig. 2), for the even (I = 0) Yb
isotopes, the transition is split onto three components. For
the odd isotopes, due to the hyperﬁne splitting of the 3D1
state, the magnetic ﬁeld produces diﬀerent Zeeman pat-
terns for upper levels with diﬀerent values of the total
angular momentum F ′, but in each case, there is an even
number of Zeeman components.

A Stark-induced transition amplitude is generally ex-
pressed in terms of real scalar (α), vector (β), and tensor
(γ) transition polarizabilities [16,9], however, for the case
of a J = 0 → J ′ = 1 transition, only the vector transition
polarizability contributes. The transition amplitude be-
tween states with total angular momenta and projections
F, M and F ′, M ′ takes the form1

AStark
F MF ′M ′
= iβF F ′(−1)q (E × E)q hF, M, 1, −q|F ′, M ′i ,

(3)

where q = M − M ′ labels the spherical component and
hF, M, 1, −q|F ′, M ′i is a Clebsch-Gordan coeﬃcient. The
transition amplitude arising due to PNC can be expressed
as

AP N C

F MF ′M ′ = iξF F ′ (−1)qE qhF, M, 1, −q|F ′, M ′i .
(4)
1 The (−1)q factor was inadvertently omitted in some of our
earlier publications. This has not aﬀected any of the quoted
results.

Fig. 3. (a) Level diagram and Zeeman-component spectrum
for 1S0 →3 D1 transition for even Yb isotopes. (b) Same for
1S0 F = 1/2 →3 D1 F = 3/2 for 171Yb. The small arrows
indicate the eﬀect of the Stark-PNC interference term – a small
relative enhancement of some components and a suppression
of others – that reverses with E and θ.

Here ξF F ′ characterizes the PNC-induced electric-dipole
transition amplitude.

Assuming that the magnetic ﬁeld is perpendicular to
the electric ﬁeld and is strong enough to resolve the Zee-
man components of the transition, that the light propa-
gates parallel to the electric ﬁeld, and selecting the quan-
tization axis along the magnetic ﬁeld, we obtain the fol-
lowing results for the transition rates. For isotopes with
zero nuclear spin, the transition rates to Zeeman sublevels
M ′ = 0, ±1 are:

R0 =

I

β2E2 sin2 θ + 2ξ βE sin θ cos θ

R±1 =

(cid:2)

(cid:3)
β2E2 cos2 θ − 2ξ βE sin θ cos θ

I

(5)

(6)

,

,

(cid:3)

8π
c
4π
c

(cid:2)

where I is the light intensity. In these expressions, we ne-
glect the term in the transition rate which is quadratic
in PNC mixing. For an arbitrary angle of the light po-
larization θ, there are generally three components of the
transition as shown in Fig. 3a. Neglecting Stark shifts, the
distance between adjacent peaks corresponds to an energy
diﬀerence

∆E ≈ gµ0M ′B ,

(7)

where g is the Land´e factor, µ0 is the Bohr magneton,
and B is the magnetic ﬁeld. The eﬀect of the Stark-PNC
interference is to change the relative strength of the two
extreme components of the transition with respect to the
central component. Expressions (5,6) show explicitly that
the PNC eﬀect reverses with both E and θ.

As an example of a transition for an odd isotope, con-
sider F = 1/2 → F ′ = 3/2 of 171Yb (Fig. 3b). Since
the magnetic moment of the ground 1S0 F = 1/2 state
is solely due to the nucleus, the Zeeman splitting of this
state is three orders of magnitude smaller than that of

4

K. Tsigutkin et al : Towards measuring nuclear-spin-dependent and isotopic-chain atomic parity violation...

the 3D1 F = 3/2 state and is unresolved at the magnetic-
ﬁeld strength of interest. Therefore, the total rates for the
transitions to the upper-state Zeeman components M ′ are
sums of the respective rates. The vector transition polar-
izability βF F ′ is related to that for an isotope with zero
nuclear spin (β) according to

βF F ′ = β(−1)I+F

(2F ′ + 1)(2F + 1)

p

1 F ′ I
F 0 1 (cid:27)

(cid:26)

,

(8)

where the brackets denote a 6j-symbol [20]. The distance
between peaks is determined by

∆E ≈ gF ′ µ0M

B ,

′

where gF ′ is given by

gF ′ = g ·

F ′(F ′ + 1) + J ′(J ′ + 1) − I(I + 1)
2F ′(F ′ + 1)

.

In calculating the PNC amplitude, one needs to take into
account both the nuclear-spin-independent eﬀect (as in
the case of the even isotopes), as well as the nuclear spin-
dependent contribution, including the eﬀect of the nuclear
anapole moment. The PNC signature for this transition is
an asymmetry between the two pairs of Zeeman compo-
nents of the transition (Fig. 3b) which, once again, re-
verses with E and θ.

In addition, we note that the F = 1/2 → F ′ = 1/2
transition of 171Yb is not inﬂuenced by the PNC eﬀect
under the discussed conditions. This transition is split by
the magnetic ﬁeld into two Zeeman components, whose
intensities must be invariant under the B-ﬁeld reversal.
Thus, the PNC asymmetry cancels. The total rates for
these two Zeeman components turn out to be equal and
independent of the polarization angle θ. Observation of
this transition gives us an additional handle to study sys-
tematics.

Using the theoretical value of ξ ≃ 10−9 ea0 [2,3] com-
bined with the measured β ≃ 2 × 10−8 ea0/(V/cm) [9,12],
we can estimate the relative asymmetry in the line shapes.
For example, for R0 and θ = π/4, and for E = 1 kV/cm,
the asymmetry is ≃ 10−4, with the nuclear spin-dependent
and isotope-dependent eﬀects expected at a few percent
of that (depending on a speciﬁc model).

5 Apparatus and signals

A schematic of the Yb-PNC apparatus is shown in Fig.
4. A beam of Yb atoms is produced (inside of a vacuum
chamber with a residual pressure of ≈ 5 × 10−6 Torr)
with an eﬀusive source (not shown), which is a stainless-
steel oven loaded with Yb metal. The oven is outﬁtted
with a multi-slit nozzle providing initial collimation of the
atomic beam. The oven is operated with the front ≈ 100◦C
hotter than the rear to avoid clogging of the nozzle. The
typical operating temperatures are 500◦C in the rear and
600◦C in the front. In order to reduce the Doppler width of
the 408-nm transition and the overlap between its various

Fig. 4. Schematic of the present Yb-PNC apparatus. Not
shown are the atomic-beam oven and the vacuum chamber
containing all the depicted elements, except the photomul-
tiplier (PMT), photodiode (PD), and the photodiode light-
guide. PBC–power buildup cavity.

(9)

(10)

Fig. 5. Schematic of the optical setup and the frequency-
locking systems. EOM–electro-optical modulator, FP-Fabry-
Perot. The “diode laser” producing 649-nm light consists of a
commercial master laser (New Focus Vortex) and a home-made
injection-locked diode ampliﬁer.

hyperﬁne and isotopic components, a downstream exter-
nal vane collimator was installed. The collimator provides
a collimation angle of ≈ 1◦ in the horizontal direction.
This reduces the Doppler width of the 408-nm transition
to ≈ 12 MHz. The transparency of the collimator is esti-
mated to be ≈ 90%. The vane collimator is mounted on a
movable platform, allowing precise alignment of its angle
relative to the atomic beam during the experiment, as well
as its removal from the beam.

Downstream from the collimator, the atoms enter the
main interaction region where the Stark- and PNC-induced
transition takes place. The light at the transition wave-
length of 408.345 nm is produced by doubling the output
of a Ti:Sapphire laser (see schematic of the optical ar-
rangement, Fig. 5). A Coherent 899 Ti:Saphire laser is
pumped by ≈ 12 W from a Spectra Physics 2080 argon-ion

K. Tsigutkin et al : Towards measuring nuclear-spin-dependent and isotopic-chain atomic parity violation...

5

laser operating on all lines. The Ti:Sapphire laser produces
≈ 1.2 W of light at 816 nm. This light is frequency dou-
bled using a commercial bow-tie resonator with a Lithium-
Triborate (LBO) crystal (Laser Analytical Systems Wave-
train cw). The output of the frequency doubler is ≈ 80 mW.
The 408-nm light is coupled into a power buildup cav-
ity (PBC). We operate the cavity in the confocal regime
(mirror radii of curvature and the mirror separation are
25 cm) in order to maintain a relatively large diameter
of the light beam by simultaneously exciting many degen-
erate transverse modes. This is important for our abil-
ity to control the ac-Stark shifts without compromising
the size of the signals. Precision optical mounts are used
for PBC mirrors with micrometer adjustments for the
horizontal and vertical angles and the pivot point of the
mirror face. The mirrors are attached with RTV adhe-
sive to thin aluminum rings. It was hoped that the thin
wall aluminum frame and RTV adhesive would reduce
birefringent-induced stress resulting from the adhesion as
well as from thermal expansion and contraction. The alu-
minum frame of one of the mirrors is attached to a piezo-
electric ceramic which is attached to the optical mount.
The three micrometer adjustments of one of the optical
mounts are eﬀected with precision, vacuum compatible
pico-motors (New Focus 8302-v) to allow for adjustment
of the cavity alignment while in vacuum. The ﬁnesse of the
PBC was measured using the cavity-ring-down method to
be F = 4240(70). The fraction of the incident light power
that could be coupled through the cavity was typically 10-
18%, limited to a large extent by the losses in the mirrors
(measured at about 240 ppm per bounce). We note that
the losses for the mirrors presently used in this experiment
are ≈ 40 times larger than those for the mirrors used in
some other PBCs (e.g., those in Refs. [18,21]). A reason
for such relatively high losses is that our wavelength is
signiﬁcantly shorter. (The losses are expected to be sig-
niﬁcantly lower in the state-of-the-art mirrors presently
on order).

The Coherent 899 Ti:Sapphire laser is rated to have
a short-term instability (eﬀective line width) of 500 kHz.
In order to reduce the line width of the laser (which is
necessary for eﬃcient coupling into the PBC) an electro-
optic modulator (EOM) was placed inside the laser cav-
ity. Changing the voltage across the EOM changes the in-
dex of refraction of the crystal and therefore the optical-
path length. The EOM is capable of extremely fast re-
sponse with a ≈ 5 MHz bandwidth, limited by the speed
of the electronics. The EOM is a double-crystal assem-
bly (LINOS Optics PM 25 IR); the crystals are cut at
Brewster’s angle to minimize loss and are compensated
to prevent walk oﬀ of the beam. It is possible to insert
the EOM into the cavity and achieve lasing with minimal
realignment of the laser. The output of the laser drops
≈ 5 − 10% when the EOM is added. The laser is locked to
the PBC using the fm sideband technique [22].

We found that using the PBC as the “master” cavity
leads to frequency oscillations at acoustic frequencies. In
order to remove these oscillations, the resonant frequency
of the cavity is locked to a more stable confocal Fabry-

Perot etalon, once again using the fm sideband locking
technique. Thus, the stable (scannable) cavity provides
the master frequency, with the power-build-up cavity serv-
ing as the secondary master for the laser.

The relative frequency of the laser light is determined
using a homemade spherical-mirror Fabry-Perot interfer-
ometer operating at 408 nm (not shown in Fig. 5). Since
the experiment relies on a detailed understanding of the
spectral line shape of the transition over a region of ≈
100 MHz, a frequency reference with closely spaced fre-
quency markers is needed. To this end, the interferometer
is operated with the mirror spacing chosen so that the
transverse cavity modes overlap at frequency intervals of
∆νres = c/(2 N L), with N = 7 (c is the speed of light,
and L is the mirror separation) [23]. This allows one to
achieve relatively closely spaced frequency markers with-
out making an excessively long cavity. The interferometer
consists of two mirrors each of which has a radius of curva-
ture of R = 50 cm and the mirrors are separated a distance
38.9 cm. This results in a spacing between the cavity res-
onances of 55.12 MHz. The cavity is made of invar and
placed in an evacuated, passively thermally stabilized en-
closure. The frequency drifts of the cavity resonances are
≈ 1 MHz/min.

For the PNC measurements, we plan to take most of
the data with an electric-ﬁeld magnitude in the interaction
region of 1.5 kV/cm. The electric ﬁeld is generated with
two copper electrodes with dimensions 4.4x2.5x0.4 cm3
separated by a 6.8-cm gap. In the inter-electrode gap,
nine equidistant copper frames are placed for producing
a homogeneous voltage drop along the optical axis of the
cavity. These frames are connected between each other
and the electrodes through 10-MΩ 0.1%-accuracy high-
voltage resistors forming a voltage divider. A 10-kV volt-
age is supplied to the E-ﬁeld plates by a SPELLMAN
CZE1000R power supply modiﬁed to allow computer con-
trolled switching of the voltage polarity. During prelim-
inary diagnostic experiments where higher electric ﬁeld
was desirable (see, for example, the data in Figs. 6 and
7), the inter-electrode frames were removed and the gap
was reduced to 1 cm. Fields of 12 kV/cm can be reliably
obtained without breakdown.

The magnetic ﬁeld is generated by a pair of rectangular
coils having dimensions: 12(width)x3.2(height)x1(depth)
cm3 and separated by a 1.4-cm gap. The coils are designed
to produce a uniform (1% non-uniformity) axial magnetic
ﬁeld up to 100 G within the region where the atomic beam
intersects the waist of the power-buildup cavity (see Fig.
4). The coils a powered by a computer-controlled power
supply allowing modulation and reversal of the magnetic
ﬁeld.

Light emitted from the interaction region at 556 nm
(Fig. 1) resulting from the second step of the ﬂuorescence
cascade following excitation to the 5d6s 3D1 state is col-
lected with a light guide and detected with a photomulti-
plier tube. Because of the ﬁeld requirements in the inter-
action region, it is diﬃcult to achieve eﬃcient light detec-
tion. In order to improve the detection eﬃciency for the
PNC experiment a separate downstream detection region,

6

K. Tsigutkin et al : Towards measuring nuclear-spin-dependent and isotopic-chain atomic parity violation...

dedicated to monitoring the number of atoms making a
transition is used. We utilize the fact that 65% of the
atoms excited to the 5d6s 3D1 state decay to the meta-
stable 6s6p 3P0 state (Fig. 1). These atoms are probed by
resonantly exciting them (with 649-nm light) out of the
6s6p 3P0 state to the 6s7s 3S1 state. The subsequent ﬂuo-
rescence is detected in a region free of other experimental
components.

The 649-nm light is derived from a single-frequency
diode laser (New Focus Vortex) producing ≈ 1.2 mW of cw
output that is ampliﬁed in home-made injection-locking
system to ≈ 7 mW of light sent into the detection region.
The detection region consists of two optically polished
curved aluminum reﬂectors. One reﬂector, which has hemi-
spherical shape with a radius of curvature of 8.9 cm, covers
the upper hemisphere with respect to the intersection of
the 649-nm laser beam with the atomic beam. The second
reﬂector is parabolic and is located below the beam in-
tersection. This reﬂector is positioned in such a way that
the focal point of the parabola coincides with the center
of curvature of the upper reﬂector and with the beam in-
tersection. Fluorescent light from the atoms excited with
the 649-nm light is collected onto a plastic light guide
through a 5-cm diameter opening in the upper reﬂector.
The light-guide is a “Winston cone” [24] designed to ef-
ﬁciently condense the light to the output diameter of the
light guide of 1 cm matched to the active area of a sil-
icon photodiode. The use of a photodiode with a higher
quantum eﬃciency than a photomultiplier tube (aﬀorded
by larger signals in the detection region) further improves
the detection eﬃciency. We estimate a detection eﬃciency
of ≈ 40% for the atoms in the 6s6p 3P0, corresponding to
≈ 26% of the atoms excited to the 5d6s 3D1 .

Examples of signals obtained with the present appara-

tus are shown in Figs. 6 and 7.

6 Statistical sensitivity

Based on various parameters achieved in the present ap-
paratus, one can estimate the statistical sensitivity of the
PNC experiment. One straightforward way to do it is to
note that the Stark-interference technique is a tool for
raising the signal above the background and controlling
systematic eﬀects. It does not, however, improve the sta-
tistical sensitivity for a shot-noise-limited experiment, but
merely allows one to achieve the shot-noise limit. Because
of this, one can ignore the Stark-interference nature of the
experiment in the estimate of the statistical sensitivity of
the PNC measurement, and consider instead the statisti-
cal sensitivity for direct excitation of the PNC amplitude
without any static electric ﬁeld.

With ≈ 5 W of circulating power in the power-build-
up cavity, using a detection eﬃciency of 26% as discussed
above, and a quantum eﬃciency of the photodiode of ≈
90%, we arrive at the number of detected transitions per
second of ≈ 0.7. Thus, for a shot-noise-limited experiment,
τ (s),
the fractional precision is δE1PNC/E1PNC ≈ 1/
where τ is the total integration time of the experiment.

p

 

55 MHz

176

Yb

0.06

 

0.04

173

Yb (5/2-3/2)

17 MHz

]

V

[
 
y
t
i
s
n
e
n

t

I

0.12

0.10

0.08

0.02

0.00

-60

-40

-20

0

20

40

Frequency shift [MHz]

Fig. 6. An example of the 556-nm ﬂuorescence signal detected
in the interaction region recorded as the frequency of the 408-
nm light was swept across resonances corresponding to two
neighboring isotopic an hyperﬁne components of the Stark-
induced transition. E=12 kV/cm, B=0.

A realistic integration time of 104 s, gives a fractional
precision of ≈ 1%.

Achieving this statistical sensitivity seems quite real-
istic given the current apparatus. A preliminary analysis
of systematic eﬀects indicates that systematic errors can
be controlled at this level as well. Pushing the precision of
the experiment to a level beyond this point will require a
signiﬁcant amount of eﬀort, most notably a dramatic im-
provement in the power-build-up cavity in order to achieve
the necessary statistical sensitivity. While it is diﬃcult to
project the ultimate sensitivity of a PNC experiment in
Yb, the current status of the experiment gives us reason
to hope that a high precision experiment is possible.

7 Analysis of systematics

The current Yb-PNC apparatus has been designed to min-
imize systematic eﬀects, and the majority of the system-
atic eﬀects we anticipate will result only in a combina-
tion of multiple apparatus imperfections. Several rever-
sals are available (electric and magnetic ﬁelds, and light-
polarization angle) to control systematics. An additional
helpful feature is a speciﬁc characteristic light-detuning
dependence of the PNC asymmetry.

Our general approach to dealing with systematics is
similar to that employed, for example, in Refs. [25,26]. We
begin by making a list of all reasonable apparatus imper-
fections (ﬁeld misalignments, inhomogeneities, imperfect
reversals, etc.), and write out all possible P,T-even rota-
tional invariants that produce the same signature as the
PNC eﬀect upon reversals. We can then artiﬁcially im-
pose exaggerated combinations of imperfections in order
to measure (and, where possible, minimize) the remain-
ing imperfections. A detailed analysis of the systematics
will be given elsewhere. At present, we are conﬁdent that

K. Tsigutkin et al : Towards measuring nuclear-spin-dependent and isotopic-chain atomic parity violation...

7

 

22 MHz

174

 

Yb

B=31 G

 

61(6), 459 (1995)

]
.
u
.
a
[
 
y
t
i
s
n
e
t
n
I

0.25

0.20

0.15

0.10

0.05

0.00

Division, of the U.S. Department of Energy under contract
DE-AC03-76SF00098.

References

1. D. DeMille, Physical Review Letters 74(21), 4165 (1995)
2. S.G. Porsev, G. Rakhlina Yu, M.G. Kozlov, JETP Letters

3. B.P. Das, Physical Review A 56, 1635 (1997)
4. C.S. Wood, S.C. Bennett, J.L. Roberts, D. Cho, C.E. Wie-

man, Canadian Journal of Physics 77(1), 7 (1999)

5. J. Guena, M. Lintz, M.A. Bouchiat, Physical Review A

(General Physics) 71, 042108 (2005)

6. J.S.M. Ginges, V. Flambaum, Physics Reports 397(2), 63

(2004)

7. W.C. Haxton, C.E. Wieman, in Annual Review of Nuclear

and Particle Science (2001), Vol. 51, pp. 261–293

8. C.J. Bowers, D. Budker, E.D. Commins, D. DeMille, S.J.
Freedman, A.T. Nguyen, S.Q. Shang, M. Zolotorev, Phys-
ical Review A 53(5), 3103 (1996)

9. C.J. Bowers, D. Budker, S.J. Freedman, G. Gwinner, J.E.
Stalnaker, D. DeMille, Physical Review A 59(5), 3513
(1999)

10. J.E. Stalnaker, D. Budker, D.P. DeMille, S.J. Freedman,
V.V. Yashchuk, Physical Review A 66(3), 31403 (2002)
11. D. Budker, J.E. Stalnaker, Physical Review Letters 91(26),

263901/1 (2003)

12. J.E. Stalnaker, D. Budker, S.J. Freedman, J.S. Guzman,
S.M. Rochester, V.V. Yashchuk, Physical Review A 73,
043416 (2006)

13. D.F. Kimball, D. Clyde, D. Budker, D. DeMille, S.J. Freed-
man, S. Rochester, J.E. Stalnaker, M. Zolotorev, Physical
Review A 60(2), 1103 (1999)

14. B. DeBoo, D.F. Kimball, C.H. Li, D. Budker, Journal of
the Optical Society of America B-Optical Physics 18(5),
639 (2001)

15. D.F. Kimball, Physical Review A 63, 052113 (2001)
16. M.A. Bouchiat, C. Bouchiat, Journal de Physique I 36(6),

493 (1975)

17. R. Conti, P. Bucksbaum, S. Chu, E.D. Commins,
L. Hunter, Physical Review Letters 42(6), 343 (1979)
18. C.S. Wood, S.C. Bennett, D. Cho, B.P. Masterson, J.L.
Roberts, C.E. Tanner, C.E. Wieman, Science 275(5307),
1759 (1997)

19. P.S. Drell, E.D. Commins, Physical Review A 32, 2196

(1985)

20. I.I. Sobelman, Atomic Spectra and Radiative Transitions,
Springer Series on Atoms and Plasmas, 2nd edn. (Springer,
New York, 1992)

21. C.J. Hood, H.J. Kimble, J. Ye, Physical Review A 64(3),

033804/1 (2001)

22. R.W.P. Drever, J.L. Hall, F.V. Kowalski, J. Hough,
G.M. Ford, A.J. Munley, H. Ward, Applied Physics B-
Photophysics and Laser Chemistry B31(2), 97 (1983)
23. D. Budker, S.M. Rochester, V.V. Yashchuk, Review of Sci-

entiﬁc Instruments 71(8), 2984 (2000)

24. R. Winston, W.T. Welford, J.C. Miano, P. Bentez, Non-
imaging optics (Elsevier Academic Press, Amsterdam ;
Boston, Mass., 2005)

25. A.T. Nguyen, D. Budker, D. DeMille, M. Zolotorev, Phys-

ical Review A 56(5), 3453 (1997)

26. B.C. Regan, E.D. Commins, C.J. Schmidt, D. DeMille,

Physical Review Letters 88(7), 071805 (2002)

-40

-20

0

20

40

Frequency shift [MHz]

Fig. 7. Same as in Fig. 6, but the scan is over the 174Yb
resonance whose Zeeman components are split by an applied
magnetic ﬁeld. The PNC signature is the relative suppres-
sion/enhancement of the central peak with respect to the two
side peaks that is odd in E and even in B.

initially, systematics should be under control at a ∼ 1%
level, suﬃcient for reliable measurements of the isotopic
and hyperﬁne PNC eﬀects.

8 Conclusions and acknowledgements

We have reported on the progress in the experiment mea-
suring parity-nonconservation eﬀects in ytterbium, which
takes advantage of an extraordinary anticipated enhance-
ment of atomic PNC eﬀects (by two orders of magnitude),
compared to, for example, Cs. The Yb-PNC experiment
relies on proven, although challenging, experimental tech-
niques of atomic physics. The atomic structure of Yb is
vastly diﬀerent from the structure of atoms which have
previously been studied in atomic PNC experiments, so
the speciﬁc features of the experiment are quite diﬀerent
from the earlier work, although there are many features
drawn from earlier PNC experiments [19,4,25]. The seven
stable isotopes of Yb will allow for the ﬁrst measurement
of atomic PNC eﬀects in a chain of isotopes. Assuming
the weak-charge variation between the isotopes as pre-
dicted by the Standard Model, this will provide a unique
way of measuring the variation of neutron r.m.s. radii
in an isotopic chain. Conversely, if the neutron radii are
known, one can measure the isotopic variation of the nu-
clear weak charge independent of uncertainties associated
with atomic theory. Measurements of the PNC eﬀect on
diﬀerent hyperﬁne components of the transition of atoms
with non-zero nuclear spin nuclei (171Yb and 173Yb) will
allow for the ﬁrst measurements of the nuclear anapole
moment in nuclei with unpaired neutrons.

The authors thank A. Dilip, B. P. Das, and M. G. Ko-
zlov for useful discussions. This work has been supported
by NSF (Grant 0457086), and by the Director, Oﬃce of
Science, Oﬃce of Basic Energy Sciences, Nuclear Science

