6
0
0
2
 
p
e
S
 
0
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
m
o
t
a
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
6
6
1
9
0
6
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Experimental study of laser detected magnetic resonance based on atomic alignment

Gianni Di Domenico,∗ Georg Bison, Stephan Groeger, Paul Knowles,
Anatoly S. Pazgalev, Martin Rebetez, Herv´e Saudan, and Antoine Weis
Physics Department, University of Fribourg, Chemin du Mus´ee 3, 1700 Fribourg, Switzerland
(Dated: September 20, 2006)

We present an experimental study of the spectra produced by optical/radio-frequency double
resonance in which resonant linearly polarized laser light is used in the optical pumping and detection
processes. We show that the experimental spectra obtained for cesium are in excellent agreement
with a very general theoretical model developed in our group [1] and we investigate the limitations of
this model. Finally, the results are discussed in view of their use in the study of relaxation processes
in aligned alkali vapors.

PACS numbers: 32.60.+i, 32.30.Dx, 07.55.Ge, 33.40.+f

I.

INTRODUCTION

Optically pumped alkali vapor magnetometers (OPM)
using circularly polarized light are widely used in many
applications. One of the most common realizations is
the so-called Mx magnetometer [2], where circularly po-
larized light is used to create a macroscopic spin polariza-
tion (orientation) in a vapor of alkali atoms at an angle
of 45 deg with respect to the static magnetic ﬁeld B0
under investigation. A small additional magnetic ﬁeld
B1(t), hereafter referred to as radio-frequency or rf ﬁeld,
oscillating at a frequency close to the Larmor frequency,
induces oscillations of sublevel coherences in the sample.
These coherent oscillations lead to a modulation of the
transmitted light power at the rf frequency, which shows
a resonant behavior when the rf frequency is close to the
Larmor frequency. Either the resonant amplitude change
or the resonant phase change can be used to infer the
magnetic ﬁeld modulus. Discharge lamps are commonly
used light sources for alkali OPMs. Such lamps emit
a broad spectrum and can be used for optical pumping
only when a single ﬁne structure component, typically
the D1-line for alkalis, is isolated by means of an appro-
priate ﬁlter [3].

Pumping with circularly polarized light builds up a
vector polarization (orientation), while pumping with lin-
early polarized light leads to the creation of a tensor po-
larization (alignment) in the atomic ground state, pro-
vided that it has an angular momentum larger than 1/2.
The ground state of alkali atoms has an electronic an-
gular momentum J = 1/2, which can not be aligned.
However, the hyperﬁne interaction with the nuclear spin
I splits the ground state into two hyperﬁne levels with
total angular momenta F± =
, which can be
|
1. An alignment can therefore
aligned provided F
be prepared, or detected, if the light source has a suﬃ-
cient spectral resolution to excite a single hyperﬁne tran-
sition.
In general, this is not the case for the Doppler
and pressure–broadened spectrum of discharge lamps.

1/2

I
|

≥

±

∗Electronic address: gianni.didomenico@unifr.ch

The ﬁrst detection of an optically induced alignment
was reported in 4He[4]. Later, both DC signals and sig-
nals oscillating at the fundamental and at the second har-
monic of the alignment precession frequency have been
observed in 87Rb via birefringence measurements [5] us-
ing a double beam technique. In [6] the authors observed
the alignment in a lamp-pumped 87Rb vapor by analyz-
ing the induced linear birefringence of the vapor while
using the same light beam for pumping and probing the
atoms. The creation and detection of atomic alignment
with radiation from a discharge lamp becomes possible
when using an isotope ﬁltering technique [5, 6] for isolat-
ing speciﬁc hyperﬁne components. However, that tech-
nique is restricted to Rb and can neither be applied to
Na nor to K, where the lamp emission spectrum leaves
the hyperﬁne structure unresolved, nor to Cs for which
no isotope ﬁlters are available.

Due to their narrow spectral widths (several MHz
compared to the Doppler broadening of several hundred
MHz), tunable lasers provide a way to selectively drive
an isolated optical hyperﬁne transition, a very eﬀective
way to create an alignment with linearly polarized light.
Narrow-band tunable laser sources are therefore an in-
teresting alternative to spectral lamps for magnetomet-
ric applications. Their use in Mx magnetometers has
been demonstrated [7] and it could be shown that laser-
based alkali magnetometers yield a superior magnetomet-
ric performance compared to lamp pumped devices [7, 8].
A discussion of laser pumping with circularly and linearly
polarized light in 4He can be found in [9, 10]. Those au-
thors investigated several magnetometry techniques us-
ing both orientation and alignment signals and observed
magnetic resonances by applying either rf ﬁelds, light in-
tensity modulation, polarization modulation, or laser fre-
quency modulation. A variant of the latter technique in
which the polarization of the transmitted light was mea-
sured, rather than its intensity, was realized with 87Rb
by [11, 12].

In a recent publication [1], our group presented a the-
oretical study of the spectra produced by optical/radio-
frequency double resonance devices in which resonant lin-
early polarized light is used in the optical pumping pro-
cess. That study led to very general algebraic results,

valid for atomic states with arbitrary angular momenta,
for arbitrary rf intensities, and for arbitrary geometries,
valid however only for low laser light power. Therefore,
our goal was to investigate experimentally the domain of
validity of this theoretical model.

In this work, we present an experimental investigation
of the magnetic resonance spectra produced in a cesium
vapor in which an alignment is created and detected by
a single linearly polarized laser beam. We show that the
experimental spectra obtained for cesium are in excellent
agreement with the theoretical model presented in [1] and
we investigate the limitations of this model. In contrast
to prior work reported in [5, 6, 9] we detect the signal at
both the ﬁrst and second-harmonic of the applied rf ﬁeld.
This oﬀers the possibility of detecting the alignment in
low magnetic ﬁelds where the quadratic Zeeman splitting
is negligible. The technique reported in [6] is insensitive
to alignment in small ﬁelds since the signals at the ﬁrst
harmonic cancel each other in the low ﬁeld limit.

II. EXPERIMENTS

A. Principle

The experimental geometry, shown in Fig. 1, is identi-
cal to the one described in [1]. A linearly polarized laser
beam, resonant with a given hyperﬁne transition, cre-
ates an atomic alignment in a room temperature vapor
of cesium atoms by optical pumping. This alignment is
driven coherently by simultaneous interactions with the
optical ﬁeld, a static magnetic ﬁeld B0, a much weaker
rotating magnetic ﬁeld B1, and is aﬀected by relaxation
processes. The rf ﬁeld B1 rotates in a plane perpendicu-
lar to B0 at frequency ω. The steady state dynamics are
probed by monitoring the transmitted light power.

The precession of the alignment driven by the rf ﬁeld
leads to modulations of the transmitted power at both
the fundamental and the second harmonic of the rf fre-

g

B0

w

a

B1

k

FIG. 1: Geometry of double resonance spectroscopy involv-
ing linearly polarized light. The oscillating ﬁeld B 1 rotates
in a plane perpendicular to the static ﬁeld B 0. The linear
polarization vector ǫ makes an angle γ with the static ﬁeld
B 0, and the phase of B 1 is characterized by α.

2

polarizer

B0

B1

l /2

cell

PD

Linear
polarization

coils

Ramp
generator

rf
generator

I/U

DFB
laser

DAVLL

to the rf coils

Personal
Computer

Lock In 
Amplifier

FIG. 2: Sketch of the experimental setup. A paraﬃn-coated
glass cell containing Cs vapor was placed inside a three-layer
mumetal shield. The shield contained Helmholtz coils to pro-
duce the static magnetic ﬁeld B 0, and radio-frequency coils to
produce the rotating magnetic ﬁeld B 1. The DFB diode laser
was stabilized to the Fg = 4 → Fe = 3 transition of the Cs D1
line by means of a dichroic atomic vapor laser lock (DAVLL).
A linear polarizer followed by a half-wave plate (λ/2) were
used to prepare linearly polarized light at an angle γ with
respect to B 0. The transmitted light power after the cell was
monitored by a nonmagnetic photodiode (PD) whose signal
was ampliﬁed by a low-noise transimpedance ampliﬁer and
analyzed by a lock-in ampliﬁer. The function generator driv-
ing the rf ﬁeld also served as reference for the lock-in ampliﬁer.
The resonance spectra were recorded by a personal computer
which controlled the rf frequency scan.

quency ω. Lock-in detection is used to record spectra of
the ﬁrst and second harmonic signals and the results are
compared with the theoretical predictions of [1]. We in-
vestigated the eﬀects of the experimental parameters on
the spectral line shapes of the in-phase and quadrature
components of both signals.
In particular, we studied
the dependence of the signals on the angle γ between the
linear polarization vector and the static ﬁeld, the depen-
dence on rf power, and the dependence on light power.

B. Experimental setup

The measurements were done using a room tempera-
ture cesium vapor in vacuum conﬁned within a paraﬃn-
coated spherical glass cell (28 mm diameter). The ex-
perimental setup is shown in Fig. 2. The cesium va-
por cell was isolated from ambient magnetic ﬁelds by a
three-layer mumetal shield. Inside the shield, a pair of
Helmholtz coils produced a static magnetic ﬁeld B0 of
about 3 µT perpendicular to the light propagation di-
rection. Additional orthogonal pairs of Helmholtz coils
(only one pair is shown in Fig. 2) were used to com-

g
≈

→

pensate residual transverse ﬁelds and gradients. An rf
magnetic ﬁeld B1, rotating at approximately 10 kHz in
the plane perpendicular to the static magnetic ﬁeld, was
created by a set of two pairs of Helmholtz coils, wound
on the same supports as the static ﬁeld coils. The laser
beam used to pump and probe the atomic vapor was
894 nm) stabilized
generated by a DFB diode laser (
to the 6S1/2, Fg = 4
6P1/2, Fe = 3 hyperﬁne component
by means of a dichroic atomic vapor laser lock (DAVLL)
[13]. A linear polarizer followed by a half-wave plate pre-
pared linearly polarized light of adjustable orientation γ
with respect to B0. After the half-wave plate, the re-
maining degree of circular polarization was smaller than
1%. The light power transmitted through the cell was de-
tected by a nonmagnetic photodiode, whose photocurrent
was ampliﬁed by a low-noise transimpedance ampliﬁer.
The resulting signal was analyzed by a lock-in ampliﬁer
tuned either to the ﬁrst or second harmonic of the rf fre-
quency. Magnetic resonance spectra were recorded by
sweeping the rf frequency and simultaneously recording
the in-phase and quadrature signals from the lock-in am-
pliﬁer. The ﬁrst harmonic and second harmonic signals
were recorded in sequential scans under identical condi-
tions.

III. DRAM THEORETICAL MODEL

The double resonance alignment magnetometer model
(DRAM model) developed in [1] provides algebraic ex-
pressions for the expected resonance signals.
In that
model, the line shapes are calculated following a three-
step approach: creation of alignment by optical pump-
ing, magnetic resonance, and detection of the oscillating
steady state alignment. In practice, the three steps occur
simultaneously and the approach is valid only if steady
state conditions are reached for the ﬁrst two steps. As ex-
plained in [1], the approach is thus valid only if the opti-
cal pumping rate is negligible compared to the relaxation
rates, i.e., for low light powers. The model calculates the
evolution of the alignment multipole moments m2,q via
a density matrix approach, where the moments m2,q are
deﬁned with respect to a quantization axis aligned with
B0 and relax with rates Γ|q|. The third step probes the
state of the m2,q and results in detectable signals.

Only the most relevant equations needed for the anal-
ysis of the presented measurements are reproduced here.
The magnetometer signals which are modulated at the
rf frequency ω and at its second harmonic 2ω, can be
written as

Sω(t) =

S2ω(t) =

A0 hω(γ) [ Dω cos (ωt
−
Aω sin (ωt
−
−
A2ω cos (2ωt
−
D2ω sin (2ωt
−

A0 h2ω(γ) [

α)
α)] ,

2α)
2α)] ,

−
−

(1a)

(1b)

where
A0 is the alignment produced by the linearly polar-
ized laser light in the ﬁrst step of the model. The phase of

3

(3a)

(3c)

(3d)

(4)

the rf ﬁeld with respect to k
B0 is α (cf. Fig. 1). The
angular dependencies of the ﬁrst and second harmonic
signals are given by

×

hω(γ) =

(2 sin 2γ + 3 sin 4γ) ,

(2a)

h2ω(γ) =

(1

4 cos 2γ + 3 cos 4γ) ,

(2b)

3
16
3
32

−

where we have chosen an alternative representation of the
expressions given in [1]. The ﬁrst and second harmonic
signals have both absorptive, Aω, A2ω, and dispersive,
Dω, D2ω, components in their line shapes, given by

Dω =

Aω =

D2ω =

A2ω =

δ Γ0ω1(Γ2

−

2ω2
1)

2 + 4δ2
Z
2 + 4δ2)Γ1 + Γ2ω2
1(cid:3)

,

Γ0ω1 (cid:2)(Γ2

Z
1(2Γ1 + Γ2)

δ Γ0ω2

,

Γ0ω2

Z
1(Γ1Γ2 −
Z

2δ2 + ω2
1)

,

,

(3b)

with

Z = Γ0 (cid:0)Γ2

2 + 4δ2(cid:1)

1 + δ2(cid:1) (cid:0)Γ2
+ (cid:2)Γ1Γ2 (2Γ0 + 3Γ2)
+ (Γ0 + 3Γ2) ω4
1 .

4δ2 (Γ0 −

−

3Γ1)(cid:3) ω2
1

In Eqs. (3) and (4), ω1 = γF B1 is the Rabi frequency of
the rf ﬁeld where γF is the Land´e g-factor of the ground
state hyperﬁne level F . The detuning, δ = ω
ω0, is the
diﬀerence between the radio frequency ω and the Larmor
frequency ω0 = γF B0.

−

IV. ANALYSIS OF THE RESONANCE SIGNALS

Typical measurements of the in-phase and quadrature
spectra of the ﬁrst and second harmonic signals are shown
in Fig. 3. Each pair of curves was recorded in a single
scan, with a lock-in time constant of 10 ms, and a sweep
rate of 1 Hz/s. Note that the same scan parameters were
used for all other magnetic resonance spectra presented in
this paper. The data of Fig. 3 were obtained with a laser
light power of 0.1µW (approximate Gaussian proﬁle, 1/e2
full width of 3.7 mm horizontally and 3.2 mm vertically),
an rf ﬁeld Rabi frequency of ω1/(2π) = 3.8 Hz, and an an-
gle between the linear polarization vector and the static
magnetic ﬁeld of γ = 75 deg.

In practice, lock-in detection of the signals given by
Eqs. (1) with respect to the rf frequency ω adds a phase
φl, selectable in the lock-in ampliﬁer, and a small pick-
up signal p(1,2)(A,D) (smaller than 1% of the signal at
maximum) to each of the line shapes in Eqs. (3). The
pick-up is due to direct inductive coupling between the
rf ﬁeld coils and the photodiode readout wires: as ex-
pected, it varied with rf power but not with δ. Due to

4

ampliﬁer dependent gains and light power dependent ef-
A0. In total, nine free
fects other than the creation of
parameters were needed to ﬁt an in-phase plus quadra-
ture signal pair, while only thirteen were needed to ﬁt
all four signals simultaneously since the physics param-
eters (ω0, ω1, Γ0, Γ1, and Γ2) were the same for both
harmonics. All results for those parameters reported in
this paper were taken, when possible, from simultaneous
four-spectra ﬁts.

Leaving ∆α= (α + φl) free during the ﬁts to the data
had the advantage of simplifying the experimental proce-
dure and gave access to the phase information, which was
used to adjust the direction of the static magnetic ﬁeld.
Indeed, for the measurements testing the angular depen-
dence of the resonance signals (see
V), it is important
that the static magnetic ﬁeld is exactly perpendicular to
the laser beam wave vector, as shown in Fig. 1. This is
the case when the phase mismatch ∆α obtained from the
ﬁtting procedure is independent of the angle γ between
the polarization and the static magnetic ﬁeld.

§

In order to check the validity of the model developed
in [1], the theoretical line shapes were ﬁtted to the ex-
perimental data: the resulting curves are plotted with
the experimental data in Fig. 3. The solid lines were
obtained using Eqs. (3) with three independent relax-
ation rates: Γ0 for the relaxation of populations, Γ1 for
1 coherences, and Γ2 for the
the relaxation of ∆M =
relaxation of ∆M =
2 coherences. As a result of the ﬁt
we obtained Γ0/(2π) = 1.64(2) Hz, Γ1/(2π) = 2.93(2) Hz
and Γ2/(2π) = 3.08(2) Hz.

±

±

≡

Note that the longitudinal relaxation rate Γ0 is quite
diﬀerent from the transverse relaxation rates Γ1,2, demon-
strating that it is not possible to obtain a good ﬁt with
a simpler model with only one single relaxation rate
Γ
Γ0 = Γ1 = Γ2. In that case the line shape functions
have a relatively simple algebraic form which is given
in [1]. A ﬁt of the simpliﬁed model is shown as dashed
curves in Fig. 3 and yielded a χ2-minimizing value of
Γ/(2π) = 2.80(4) Hz. As expected, the ﬁt quality is poor
compared to the model with three independent relaxation
rates.

Since the values of the transverse rates Γ1 and Γ2 diﬀer
by less than 5%, it is possible to use a model with two
Γ1 = Γ2, without sig-
Γ0 and ΓT ≡
relaxation rates, ΓL ≡
niﬁcantly degrading the ﬁt quality. Curves representing
a ﬁt with only two independent relaxation rates (ΓL, ΓT )
are not shown in Fig. 3 because they are indistinguish-
able from the solid lines obtained with three independent
relaxation rates. However, we found that the ratio of Γ1
to Γ2 depends on the angle γ, and that it changes with
laser power. Therefore, the model with three relaxation
rates will be used for the rest of this work.

Note that the use of a rotating rf ﬁeld is crucial for
the quality of the ﬁts. Magnetic resonance experiments,
and in particular optically pumped magnetometers, usu-
ally use a linearly polarized rf ﬁeld. The implementation
of such a ﬁeld is technically less demanding and its use
is justiﬁed, in high-Q oscillators with a single resonance

FIG. 3: (Color online) Measurements (circles) of the in-phase
and quadrature magnetic resonance signals detected as am-
plitude modulations of the transmitted light power. (a) First
harmonic signals. (b) Second harmonic signals. The statisti-
cal uncertainty on each data point is smaller than the symbol
size. The solid lines (blue) are ﬁts of the theoretical line
shapes given by Eqs. (3) with three independent relaxation
rates. The dashed lines (red) are ﬁts of the theoretical line
shapes given by Eqs. (3) with only one independent relax-
ation rate Γ ≡ Γ0 = Γ1 = Γ2. The details of the experimental
conditions and ﬁt results are in the text.

φl, the in-phase and quadrature spectra are, in general, a
mixture of dispersive and absorptive line shapes. Indeed,
after demodulation of the signal given by Eq. (1a), we
obtain the following expressions which were used to ﬁt
the in-phase and quadrature spectra

Iω(δ) = gωA0hω(γ) [

(Dω + p1D) cos (α+φl)

Qω(δ) = gωA0hω(γ) [

+(Aω + p1A) sin (α+φl)] (5a)

(Aω + p1A) cos (α+φl)
(Dω + p1D) sin (α+φl)] (5b)

−
A similar mix of A2ω and D2ω was used for the second
harmonic signal given by Eq. (1b). Due to frequency de-
pendent phase shifts in the signal treatment electronics,
both the eﬀective φl and the pickup terms (p1A, p1D, p2A,
p2D) were diﬀerent for the ω and 2ω signals. Global de-
tection factors, gω and g2ω, were also required to model

5

FIG. 4: (Color online) Dispersive component of the magnetic
resonance signal oscillating at frequency ω measured under
the following conditions: the angle between the linear polar-
ization vector and the static ﬁeld was γ = 25 deg, the laser
light power was 0.1 µW, and the rf ﬁeld Rabi frequency was
ω1/(2π) = 4.8 Hz. Graph (a) (blue) was measured with a ro-
tating rf ﬁeld and graph (b) (red) with an oscillating rf ﬁeld.
The solid line is a ﬁt of the theoretical line shape to the curve
obtained with the rf rotating ﬁeld. The slight diﬀerence in
linewidth suggests that the Rabi frequency in the two mea-
surements was not perfectly equal although we increased the
amplitude of the oscillating rf ﬁeld by a factor 2.

frequency, by the rotating wave approximation by virtue
of which the precessing spins interact only with the circu-
larly polarized component of the rf ﬁeld that co-rotates
with the spins.

When using an oscillating rf ﬁeld one obtains the spec-
trum (b) shown in Fig. 4, while the use of a rotating rf
ﬁeld yields the spectrum (a). Spectrum (b) shows a sec-
ond weak resonance located approximately 33 Hz above
the main resonance. That diﬀerence frequency corre-
sponds to the diﬀerence of the Larmor frequencies of the
Fg = 4 and Fg = 3 ground state hyperﬁne levels due to
the nuclear magnetic moment term in the expression for
the gyromagnetic ratio gF .

→

The structure can be explained as follows: Optical
pumping aligns both the Fg = 3 and the Fg = 4 ground
states and magnetic resonance transitions can be driven
within these two states. The resonance in the Fg = 3
state is not detected directly since the laser frequency is
adjusted to the Fg = 4
Fe = 3 transition. However,
spin exchange collisions can transfer the alignment from
the Fg = 3 to the Fg = 4 state where it can be detected.
In principle, this opens a way for the experimental study
of alignment transfer collisions. In our experiment, the
use of a rotating rf ﬁeld allowed us to record spectra with-
out contamination from the Fg = 3 state. This is due to
the gF -factors of both states having opposite signs, so
that they precess in opposite directions, and the rotat-
ing ﬁeld thus co-rotates with one species only, i.e., the
Fg = 4 atoms.

FIG. 5: (Color online) Angular dependence of the amplitude
of the ﬁrst (blue, solid line) and second (red, dashed line)
harmonic signals on the angle γ between the light polarization
ǫ and the magnetic oﬀset ﬁeld B 0. Each experimental data
point is the result of a measurement and ﬁt of the magnetic
resonance spectra as explained in §IV. The measurements
were made using a light power of 0.07 µW and a rf ﬁeld Rabi
frequency of 2.4 Hz. The lines were found by ﬁtting the hω
and h2ω functions given by Eqs. (2) to the experimental data.

V. ANGULAR DEPENDENCE

Our theoretical DRAM model gives algebraic results
which are valid for arbitrary geometries. To check the an-
gular dependencies predicted by the model we measured
and ﬁt the magnetic resonance spectra for diﬀerent val-
ues of γ, the angle between the linear polarization vector
and the static magnetic ﬁeld. All ﬁt qualities were com-
parable to that of Fig. 3. From the ﬁts, the amplitudes
of the ﬁrst and second harmonic signals were determined
and the results are plotted as circles in Fig. 5. The solid
and dashed lines represent the theoretical angular depen-
dencies hω and h2ω given by Eqs. (2). The agreement is
very good.

A crucial point for these measurements was the quality
of the linear polarization, a parameter found to be par-
ticularly important for small angles.
Indeed, both the
ﬁrst and second harmonic signals should disappear when
γ is very small, and therefore any small contamination
of circular polarization produces a visible parasitic res-
onance signal. For that reason we used a high quality
Glan-prism to produce linear polarization with a degree
of circular polarization (DOCP) on the order of 0.1%.
However, the imperfection of the half-wave plate used
to rotate the polarization vector somewhat degraded the
quality of the polarization.
In spite of that, a DOCP
of less than 1% could be maintained over the range of
angles γ investigated, which proved to be suﬃcient for
the measurements. Careful inspection of the angular de-
pendence of the second harmonic signal (h2ω in Fig. 5)
reveals that all experimental points near γ = 0 lie be-
low the theoretical curve. This is a typical eﬀect from

6

FIG. 7: Saturation of the resonant absorptive signals Aω and
A2ω as a function of the Rabi frequency ω1/(2π) of the rf
ﬁeld. (a) On-resonance amplitude of the ﬁrst harmonic signal
measured for an angle γ = 25.5 deg. (b) On-resonance am-
plitude of the second harmonic signal measured for an angle
γ = 90 deg. For these measurements, the light power was
ﬁxed to 0.1 µW. The solid lines are ﬁts of the DRAM theo-
retical model [Eqs. (6)] to the experimental data.

In particular, note the appearance of the narrow spec-
tral feature in the ﬁrst harmonic signal as the rf power
is increased. This feature emerges as predicted by the
DRAM theoretical model for ω1 > Γ2/√2. As discussed
in [1], it can be explained as a product of the creation of
a ∆M = 2 coherence by a second order interaction with
the rf ﬁeld, followed by the evolution of that coherence in
the oﬀset ﬁeld, and back-transfer to a ∆M = 1 coherence
by an additional interaction with the rf ﬁeld, which can
then be detected at the ﬁrst harmonic frequency ω. In
2.16 s−1 and we indeed
our measurement, Γ2/√2 = 2π
observe this narrow spectral feature when ω1/(2π) be-
comes larger than 2.16 Hz. Note that this feature allows
an easy calibration of the rf voltage applied to the coils
in terms of the resulting Rabi frequency ω1.

×

In view of potential applications in magnetometry the
angles γ which maximize the resonance signals are of
particular interest. Theory predicts γ = 25.5 deg for
the maximum of the ﬁrst harmonic and γ = 90 deg for
the second harmonic signal (cf. Fig. 5). We studied the
saturation of the absorptive component of the resonance
spectra at those angles by changing the amplitude of the
rf ﬁeld and determining the on-resonance amplitudes, i.e.,
Aω(δ = 0) for γ = 25.5 deg and A2ω(δ = 0) for γ = 90 deg.
The results are presented in Fig. 7, together with ﬁts of
the DRAM theoretical model functions given by:

Aω(δ = 0) =

A2ω(δ = 0) =

Γ0Γ2ω1
Γ0Γ1Γ2 + (Γ0 + 3Γ2)ω2
1
Γ0ω2
1
Γ0Γ1Γ2 + (Γ0 + 3Γ2)ω2
1

,

.

(6a)

(6b)

The absorptive component of the ﬁrst harmonic signal
goes through a maximum at ω1/(2π) = 1.05 Hz and then

FIG. 6: Resonance spectra measured with an angle γ = 75 deg
and for diﬀerent Rabi frequencies of the rf ﬁeld: (a) ω1/(2π) =
0.95 Hz, (b) ω1/(2π) = 2.4 Hz, (c) ω1/(2π) = 4.8 Hz. The
left column shows in-phase and quadrature components of the
ﬁrst harmonic signal, and the right column shows in-phase
and quadrature components of the second harmonic signal.
For these measurements, the light power was 0.1 µW.

circular polarization contamination, as veriﬁed by inten-
tionally increasing the DOCP, e.g., by using a polarizer
of poorer quality.

VI. DEPENDENCE ON THE RF POWER

The DRAM theoretical model gives algebraic results
which are valid for arbitrary rf intensities.
Its predic-
tions were checked by measuring and ﬁtting magnetic
resonance spectra for selected values of the Rabi fre-
quency of the rf ﬁeld. Three sets of illustrative spec-
tra are presented in Fig. 6 together with the respective
ﬁts. The resonance curves were measured at a ﬁxed
angle γ = 75 deg and for ω1/(2π) = 0.95 Hz, 2.4 Hz,
and 4.8 Hz. The quality of the ﬁts does not depend
on the rf intensity. Moreover, all twelve curves were
ﬁtted with the same unique set of physics parameters.
In the presented data, the common values for relaxation
rates are Γ0/(2π) = 1.64(1) Hz, Γ1/(2π) = 2.98(1) Hz and
Γ2/(2π) = 3.05(1) Hz. This shows that the evolution of
the resonance spectra with rf power is well described by
the DRAM theoretical model.

7

FIG. 8: Global amplitude factor gωA0 from Eq. (5) of the
ﬁrst harmonic resonance signal as a function of the laser
power PL measured for γ = 25.5 deg. Each experimental
data point is the result of a measurement and a ﬁt of the
magnetic resonance spectra as explained in §IV. For these
measurements, the Rabi frequency of the rf ﬁeld was ﬁxed
at ω1/(2π) = 3.8 Hz. The solid line is a ﬁt of the function
given by Eq. (7) to the experimental data. The dashed lines
represent the quadratic parts of the ﬁt function and the lin-
ear asymptote to Eq. (7) which has a zero crossing at the
saturation power P sat

ω = 0.67(3) µW.

decays to zero when the rf power is further increased,
while the second harmonic signal saturates at a constant
value when the rf amplitude tends to inﬁnity. The ex-
cellent agreement of the model function with the experi-
mental data proves the validity of the DRAM model for
arbitrary rf intensities.

VII. DEPENDENCE ON LIGHT POWER:
LIMITS OF VALIDITY OF THE MODEL

As mentioned before, the validity of the three step
model is limited to low laser powers. In that regime, one
expects a quadratic dependence of the signals on laser
power PL. This is due to the fact that (in lowest order)
the alignment produced in step one is proportional to PL
and that the detection process (measurement of light ab-
sorption/transmission) is also proportional to PL. The
limits of the model’s validity are thus expected to show
up as a deviation from a quadratic power dependence
when increasing the laser power. To check this point, we
have measured the magnetic resonance spectra for diﬀer-
ent values of the laser power. For each value of PL, the
ﬁrst and second harmonic signals were ﬁtted using the
procedure described in
IV, and the global amplitude
factors gωA0 and g2ωA0 of Eqs. (5) were determined (re-
A0 is the alignment initially created in step
member that
one of the model, and the gω, g2ω factors are experimen-
tal detection amplitude gains). The results are plotted
in Fig. 8 for gωA0 measured at an angle γ = 25.5 deg.
The graph for g2ωA0 is very similar to that of gωA0 and

§

FIG. 9: Relaxation rates as a function of the laser power PL
measured for γ = 25.5 deg. Each triplet (Γ1, Γ2, Γ3) is the
result of a measurement and a ﬁt of the magnetic resonance
spectra as explained in §IV, starting from the same experi-
mental data which were used for Fig. 8. The circles represent
Γ0/(2π), the squares Γ1/(2π) and the triangles Γ2/(2π). The
solid lines are linear ﬁts to the experimental data.

is therefore omitted. Moreover, the following discussion
of the dependence on laser power of the ﬁrst harmonic
signals is also valid for the second harmonic.

As expected, we observe in Fig. 8 that the resonance
signals increase quadratically with PL for low light power
only. We found that the power dependence is well repre-
sented by the empirical function

gωA0 = Cω

G2
1 + G

(7)

where Cω is a constant and G = PL/P sat
is a saturation
parameter which measures the applied light power nor-
malized to the saturation power P sat
ω . As can be seen
in Fig. 8, the empirical dependence of Eq. (7) gives an
excellent ﬁt to the data. The ﬁt of the data in Fig. 8
yields P sat

ω = 0.67(3) µW.

ω

This is a quite astonishing but very satisfactory result.
It is astonishing because the power dependence cannot
be reproduced in a simple way by an extension of the
model in [1]. Equation (7) can be interpreted in terms
of two factors: the ﬁrst one, G/(1 + G), describing the
saturation of the initial alignment creation and the sec-
ond one, G, describing the probing of the steady state
alignment. For a closed J = 1/2
J = 1/2 transition
pumped by circularly polarized radiation (DROM) one
can prove the exact validity of that dependence for arbi-
J ′
trary light powers PL. However, for transitions J
between states of arbitrary angular momenta, linearly
polarized optical pumping produces not only a ground
state alignment but also higher order multipole moments
and each interaction with the light transfers populations
and coherences back and forth between these multipole
moments. In this sense it is astonishing that the probing
process which detects only alignment components leads

→

→

8

ble resonance alignment magnetometers developed in [1].
We have shown that it is valid for any geometry (i.e., any
relative directions of the laser beam, the light polariza-
tion vector, and the static magnetic ﬁeld) and for any rf
power, as long as the laser power is kept small. Moreover,
we have investigated the role of laser power to determine
the domain of parameters for which the DRAM model is
valid. The measurement of the laser power dependence
allowed us to extend the DRAM model with an empir-
ical algebraic formula to light powers which exceed the
expected validity limit of the model. Finally, the data
analysis revealed that three relaxation rates are neces-
sary to ﬁt the DRAM model to the experimental data,
which, in principle, opens a way to investigate in detail
relaxation mechanisms in aligned alkali vapors.

to the simple power dependence given by Eq. (7). The
result is satisfactory because it gives an algebraic expres-
sion for the DRAM signals even for light powers which
exceed the anticipated validity limit of the model.

In Fig. 9 we have plotted the relaxation rates corre-
sponding to the measurements of Fig. 8. They increase
linearly with laser power, as expected, to ﬁrst order,
when taking into account the depolarization of light in-
teractions (see [1]). For low light power, we see that
Γ2 and therefore a model with two relaxation rates
Γ1 ≈
Γ1 = Γ2) is suﬃcient. However, as
Γ0 and ΓT ≡
(ΓL ≡
soon as PL becomes non-negligible compared to P sat
ω , a
model with three independent relaxation rates becomes
necessary. The values of the relaxation rates extrap-
olated to zero laser power are Γ0/(2π) = 1.35(1) Hz,
Γ1/(2π) = 2.53(1) Hz and Γ2/(2π) = 2.51(1) Hz. These
values are cell and temperature dependent, but do not
depend on the angle γ between the light polarization
and the static magnetic ﬁeld. However, we observed that
the rate at which the relaxation rates increase with laser
power depend on γ.

VIII. CONCLUSION

In this experimental work, we have veriﬁed the valid-
ity of the very general DRAM theoretical model for dou-

This work was supported by grants from the Swiss
National Science Foundation (Nr. 205321–105597), from
the Swiss Innovation Promotion Agency, CTI (Nr. 8057.1
LSPP–LS) and from the Swiss Heart Foundation.

Acknowledgments

[1] A. Weis, G. Bison, and A. S. Pazgalev, Phys. Rev. A 74,

80, 645 (2005), DOI: 10.1007/s00340-005-1773-x.

033401 (2006).

[9] H. Gilles, B. Cheron, and J. Hamel, J. Phys. II France 2,

[2] A. L. Bloom, Appl. Opt. 1, 61 (1962).
[3] W. Happer, Rev. Mod. Phys. 44, 169 (1972).
[4] W. E. Bell and A. L. Bloom, Phys. Rev. Lett. 6, 623

781 (1992).

2253 (2001).

[5] B. S. Mathur, H. Y. Tang, and W. Happer, Phys. Rev.

(1961).

A 2, 648 (1970).

69, 4 (1990).

[10] H. Gilles, J. Hamel, and B. Cheron, Rev. Sci. Instr. 72,

[11] D. Budker, D. F. Kimball, S. M. Rochester, V. V.
Yashchuk, and M. Zolotorev, Phys. Rev. A 62, 043403
(2000).

torev, Phys. Rev. A 65, 055403 (2002).

[13] K. L. Corwin, Z.-T. Lu, C. F. Hand, R. J. Epstain, and

C. E. Wieman, Appl. Opt. 15, 3295 (1998).

[6] E. B. Aleksandrov and M. V. Balabas, Opt. Spectrosc.

[12] D. Budker, D. F. Kimball, V. V. Yashchuk, and M. Zolo-

[7] E. B. Aleksandrov, M. V. Balabas, A. K. Vershovskii,
A. E. Ivanov, N. N. Yakobson, V. L. Velichanskii, and
N. V. Senkov, Opt. Spectrosc. 78, 325 (1995).

[8] S. Groeger, A. S. Pazgalev, and A. Weis, Appl. Phys. B

