6
0
0
2
 
t
c
O
 
3
 
 
]
h
p
-
m
o
t
a
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
2
2
0
0
1
6
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Compression and localization of an
atomic cloud in a time dependent optical
lattice

Will Williams
wdwilliams@wisc.edu

M. Saffman
Department of Physics, 1150 University Avenue, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison,
WI, 53706

Abstract: We analyze a method to compress a cloud of cold atoms in a far
off resonance optical lattice by dynamically changing the lattice parameters
while cooling the atoms with optical molasses. Particle motion in the
time dependent lattice is studied numerically using a three dimensional
semiclassical model. We show that smoothly varying the lattice spacing
from a large to a small value results in compression of more than 75% of
the atoms initially in a Gaussian distributed cloud with standard deviation
of 50 m m into a single site of a two-dimensional lattice. The lattice site has
an area of A = 0.76 l 2 with l
the wavelength of the trapping beam. We
demonstrate that an increase in the optical depth by a factor of at least 175
is possible.

© 2012 Optical Society of America

OCIS codes: 020.7010,140.7010,140.3320,230.6120

References and links

[1] S. Chu, J. E. Bjorkholm, A. Ashkin, and A. Cable, “Experimental Observation of Opti-

cally Trapped Atoms,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 57, 314 (1986).

[2] J. D. Miller, R. A. Cline, and D. J. Heinzen, “Far-Off-Resonance Optical Trapping of

Atoms,” Phys. Rev. A 47, R4567 (1993).

[3] M. D. Barrett, J. A. Sauer, and M. S. Chapman, “All-Optical Formation of an Atomic

Bose-Einstein Condensate,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 87, 010404 (2001).

[4] T. Kinoshita, T. Wenger, and D. S. Weiss, “All-optical Bose-Einstein condensation using

a compressible crossed dipole trap,” Phys. Rev. A 71, R011602 (2005).

[5] T. P. Meyrath, F. Schreck, J. L. Hanssen, C. S. Chuu, and M. G. Raizen, “A high frequency
optical trap for atoms using Hermite-Gaussian beams,” Opt. Express 13, 2843 (2005).

[6] S. Bergamini, B. Darqui´e, A. Browaeys, and P. Grangier, “Single atoms in optical traps,”

J. Phys. IV 116, 205 (2004).

[7] D. Schrader, I. Dotsenko, M. Khudaverdyan, Y. Miroshnychenko, A. Rauschenbeutel, and
D. Meschede, “Neutral Atom Quantum Register,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 93, 150501 (2004).

[8] D. D. Yavuz, P. B. Kulatunga, E. Urban, T. A. Johnson, N. Proite, T. Henage, T. G. Walker,
and M. Saffman, “Fast Ground State Manipulation of Neutral Atoms in Microscopic Op-
tical Traps,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 96, 063001 (2006).

[9] J. Sebby-Strabley, R. T. R. Newell, J. O. Day, E. Brekke, and T. G. Walker, “High-density
mesoscopic atom clouds in a holographic atom trap,” Phys. Rev. A 71, R021401 (2005).

[10] M. Saffman and T. G. Walker, “Entangling single and N atom qubits for fast quantum

state detection and transmission,” Phys. Rev. A 72, 042302 (2005).

[11] M. G. Raizen, A. M. Dudarev, Q. Niu, and N. J. Fisch, “Compression of Atomic Phase
Space Using an Asymmetric One-Way Barrier,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 94, 053003 (2005).

[12] M. Vengalattore, W. Rooijakkers, R. Conroy, and M. Prentiss, “Suppression of photon
rescattering due to spatial anisotropy in a cold atomic gas,” Phys. Rev. A 67, 063412
(2003).

[13] S. L. Winoto, M. T. DePue, N. E. Bramall, and D. S. Weiss, “Laser cooling at high density

in deep far-detuned optical lattices,” Phys. Rev. A 59, R19 (1999).

[14] S. Wolf, S. J. Oliver, and D. S. Weiss, “Suppression of Recoil Heating by an Optical

Lattice,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 85, 4249 (2000).

[15] P. Rudy, R. Ejnisman, A. Rahman, S. Lee, and N. P. Bigelow, “An all optical dynamical

dark trap for neutral atoms,” Opt. Express 8, 162 (2001).

[16] N. Friedman, L. Khaykovich, R. Ozeri, and N. Davidson, “Compression of cold atoms
to very high densities in a rotating-beam blue-detuned optical trap,” Phys. Rev. A 61,
R031403 (2000).

[17] J. J. McClelland, “Atom-Optical Properties Of A Standing-Wave Light-Field,” J. Opt. Soc.

Am. B 12, 1761 (1995).

15, 237 (2001).

[18] W. Wohlleben, F. Chevy, K. Madison, and J. Dalibard, “An Atom Faucet,” Eur. Phys. J. D

[19] W. Ketterle, K. B. Davis, M. A. Joffe, A. Martin, and D. E. Pritchard, “High-Densities of
Cold Atoms in a Dark Spontaneous-Force Optical Trap,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 70, 2253 (1993).

[20] V. Elman and A. Hemmerich, “Near-resonant dark optical lattice with increased occupa-

tion,” Phys. Rev. A 72(4), 043410 (2005).

[21] M. Vengalattore, R. S. Conroy, and M. G. Prentiss, “Enhancement of Phase Space Den-
sity by Increasing Trap Anisotropy in a Magneto-Optical Trap with a Large Number of
Atoms,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 92, 183001 (2004).

[22] L.-M. Duan, J. I. Cirac, P. Zoller, and E. S. Polzik, “Quantum Communication between

Atomic Ensembles Using Coherent Light,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 85, 5643 (2000).

[23] A. Haase, D. Cassettari, B. Hessmo, and J. Schmiedmayer, “Trapping neutral atoms with

a wire,” Phys. Rev. A 64, 043405 (2001).

1.

Introduction

During the last few decades there has been intense development of methods to cool and localize
atomic samples with optical ﬁelds. Conservative trapping potentials can be created using far off
resonance light beams that are focused to a small spot(1; 2). These far off resonance traps have
become widely used as a starting point for achieving Bose Einstein condensation(3; 4; 5), as
well as for experiments with single atoms(6; 7; 8). There is currently much interest in ﬁnding
ways to load a large number of atoms at high densities into optical traps(9). This is important for
creating large condensates, as well as highly localized atomic ensembles for quantum logic and
communications(10). The phase space density of atomic clouds can be increased using laser or
evaporative cooling as well as by novel approaches such as asymmetrical optical barriers(11).
Heating due to photon rescattering limits the phase space density that can be reached by optical
cooling although spatially anisotropic samples(12) as well as optimized cooling techniques in
optical lattices(13; 14) have led to improved performance. Dynamically changing the optical
potential in conjunction with optical cooling can also increase phase space density. Compres-
sion of an atomic cloud was also achieved in a trap created by rapidly rotating a single blue
detuned beam(15; 16).

In this paper we present a method for compressing atoms in a MOT into a single well of
a periodic optical lattice. We use numerical simulations to study the performance of a novel
protocol for transferring a three-dimensional distribution of atoms into a single well of a pla-
nar lattice. The anisotropic well is elongated perpendicular to the plane of the lattice which
minimizes heating and repulsion due to photon rescattering(12) and is well suited for applica-
tions that require mode matching between a Gaussian laser beam and a pencil shaped atomic
ensemble(10). The technique can also be extended to a three dimensional lattice to create a
spherically shaped localized cloud of atoms.

w

The proposed method is to dynamically change the angle between the lattice forming beams
to conﬁne the atoms in a single lattice site that is initially large, and is made smaller without the
atoms escaping. This can be done conveniently using a one-dimensional spatial light modulator
(SLM) with a linear array of N pixels as shown in Fig 1. Atoms of temperature T are localized
within a distance d r
kBT /U from the origin in a well of depth U that is created by a
focused laser beam with Gaussian waist w. The atoms have a vibrational oscillation frequency
of n = (2/w)
U/m, where m is the mass of an atom. Provided the well is made smaller on a
time scale that is long compared to the oscillation frequency, the atoms will tend to be trapped
in the center of the well and get compressed. Under this adiabatic condition, optical molasses
is not necessary to spatially compress the atoms but there will be no increase in phase space
density. By combining the dynamic lattice reshaping with optical cooling the atoms can be
compressed to higher phase space density.

p

p

∼

The compression of the atomic cloud, which is described in detail in Sec. 2, is accomplished
by using the SLM to change the angle between the lattice beams in a speciﬁed sequence. Section
3 presents results of numerical simulations that validate the proposal. Finally, Sec. 4 discusses
applications and limitations of the technique as well as some alternative compression geome-
tries.

2. Theory

We describe a technique to compress atoms in a single site of a two-dimensional lattice by
dynamically changing the angles between the lattice beams. The conservative optical potential
for a two-level atom including the effects of saturation is(17)

U(r) =

¯hD
2

ln

1 +

(cid:20)

I(r)
Is

1
(1 + 4D 2/g 2) (cid:21)

,

(1)

Fig. 1. Schematic of proposed setup. The setup consists of 2 SLMs which compress the
atom cloud by dynamically controlling the amplitude of the laser beams. Additional cooling
beams provide optical molasses during the compression.

−

(2)

where I(r) is the optical intensity distribution, Is is the saturation intensity, g
linewidth, D = w
atomic transition frequency.

w a is the detuning from resonance, w

is the natural
is the optical frequency, and w a is the

−

Consider two equal intensity plane traveling waves with wavevectors k j = k(cos q
j is the angle each beam makes with the x

j ˆy) where k is the wavenumber and q

j ˆx +
axis.

the angle between the beams is 2q and the intensity is

sin q
When q 1=-q 2=q

I(x, y) = 4I0 cos2 [k sin(q )y]

l
where I0 is the intensity of each wave. The periodicity of the intensity is thus L (q ) =
2 sin(q )
where l
is the wavelength of the light. To achieve compression in one dimension q
is increased
from 0 to p /2 radians. Doing so decreases the periodicity from inﬁnity (a plane wave with uni-
form intensity) to l
2 , the periodicity of a single standing wave. To accomplish two dimensional
compression another set of traveling waves are added with their bisector orthogonal to the bi-
sector of the ﬁrst pair as in the conﬁguration shown in Fig. 1. By arranging for the second pair
of waves to be polarized orthogonally to the ﬁrst pair we obtain1

I(x, y) = 4I0

cos2 [k sin(q )x] + cos2 [k sin(q )y]
(cid:9)

.

(cid:8)

(3)

This intensity produces a two dimensional lattice pattern with periodicity of L

in both the x
and y directions. Each site of the lattice has an area of A(q ) =
increases from 0,
the area of each well decreases as shown in Fig. 2. If the initial value of q
is small enough the
central well will be large enough to contain essentially all of the atoms. Any atoms that start
in the central well will stay there during the compression of the wells as long as they are not
hot enough to travel over the intensity barrier into the next well. If some of the atoms escape
the central well, the method can be repeated to obtain better compression. A similar protocol is
also possible using standing waves as will be discussed in Section 4.

l 2
4 sin2(q )

. As q

The compression protocol thus relies on the following sequence. We start with a cloud of
cold atoms and superimpose a two-dimensional lattice of optical trapping beams created by

1Superposition of the orthogonally polarized pairs of beams creates a ﬁeld that has a spatially varying polarization
state. In a real multilevel atom the optically induced potential depends on the polarization when there is a nonzero
vector or tensor polarizability. We assume in this paper that polarization effects are negligible so that the potential is
accurately described using the intensity of Eq. (3). This is true for alkali atom ground states provided the wavelength
is sufﬁciently far detuned from the strong D lines.

Fig. 2. Left: Contour Plot of the interference pattern created by four traveling waves, as
described in the text, with q = p /8. Regions of higher intensity are shown in white. Thin
white lines have been drawn between each row and column. Right: The intensity along the
axis as a function of q . When q = 0, there is a plane wave with equal intensity over all
y
−
space. As q
increases, a two dimensional structure forms and the well area decreases. If the
atoms are cool enough that they cannot travel over the intensity barrier, they are forced to
compress as q
increases. Regions of higher intensity are shown in black here.

Fig. 3. (Color Online) Left: Contour plot of the intensity of the trap along the y
axis as
q changes by equal increments. Right: Number of atoms in the lattice at the end of a
compression sequence with q changing by 0.7 deg. at each step. If some of the atoms have
a local minimum that is not the central well, they end up far from the central well, as shown
by the secondary peaks.

−

two pairs of crossing beams propagating along ˆx and ˆy as shown in Fig. 1. The initial value of
q = q min is chosen small enough such that almost all the atoms are conﬁned in the central lattice
well. We then increase q by a small step which spatially compresses the atoms but also heats
them since the well area decreases. The increase in temperature is removed by applying optical
molasses for a short cooling time Tc, after which the lattice beam angles are again changed.
This sequence is repeated until the atoms have been compressed into a lattice site with small
area created by the maximum crossing angle q = q max.

In a real experiment with a SLM there is a ﬁnite resolution with which the angle q can be
set. If q
is abruptly changed by too large an amount atoms may get trapped in a local minimum
of the optical potential, and not be swept towards the center of the lattice as illustrated in Fig.
3. In addition if the initial value of q
is not small enough some of the atoms will not start in
the central well and will not end up at the origin. To avoid these problems a large number of
SLM pixels are needed so that the steps in q are small (alternatively an analog scanning device
such as an acousto-optic beam deﬂector or scanning mirror could be used). It is convenient if
the amount of heating incurred at each step is approximately constant, since Tc can then be held
constant. This will be the case if the fractional change in the area of each lattice site is held

Fig. 4. Left: The number of the SLM pixel turned on at each step in the compression
sequence. This represents the best possible ﬁt allowed by the SLM for a 3% change in
well area at each step. Right: Percent change in well area for the compression scheme as a
function of compression step.

constant. In an experiment with a ﬁnite number of SLM pixels this requirement cannot be met
exactly. For the simulations shown below we assumed the SLM’s shown in Fig. 1 each had 640
pixels and that the range in q was from q min = 0.063 to q max = 35 deg. The pixels used at each
compression step were chosen to approximate as well as possible a 3% change in well area
between steps, as shown in Fig. 4.

3. Numerical Results

×

−

Atomic compression was simulated numerically using Newtonian dynamics. The equation of
(cid:209) U was used to update the velocity and position of each atom during the com-
motion m¨r =
pression protocol. Interatomic collisions were not accounted for. The atomic parameters were
62P3/2) at l = 852 nm and with
chosen to correspond to the D2 transition of Cs (62S1/2 −
decay rate g = 2p
5.22 MHz. The laser beams used to create the lattice potential were as-
sumed transmitted through a SLM with rectangular pixels and then focused into the region
containing the atomic sample as shown in Fig. 1. The SLM is assumed illuminated with an
elliptically shaped Gaussian beam that is thinner than the height of each pixel but covers all of
the SLM pixels in the x
y plane. The lenses between the SLM and the atom trapping region
provide a Fourier transform of the ﬁeld distribution so that switching a single SLM pixel into
the transmitting state results in a beam in the trapping region with a Gaussian envelope along z
(perpendicular to the plane of the lattice), and a Sinc squared envelope in the plane. Provided
that the width of the Sinc function is at least a few times larger than the size of the lattice site
created at q min the numerical results do not depend on the exact form of the transverse ﬁeld
distribution.

−

Comparing the difference between the intensity pattern created by a plane wave and a plane
wave enveloped by a sinc squared function with FWHM = 200 m m, the only noteworthy dif-
ference is on the ﬁrst step. For the ﬁrst step, the atoms are not conﬁned near the bottom of the
well and the FWHM of the sinc squared is smaller than the FWHM of the central well created
by plane waves by about 48%. This results in a different number of atoms lost on the ﬁrst step.
After step 1, the percent difference of the FWHM’s drops rapidly and is below 1% by step
5. Since the atoms are conﬁned near the bottom of the well after step 1, the small difference
between the two potentials is negligible. We have therefore used interfering plane waves in the
x
y plane for the numerical work, and assumed the focused beams were circular with waists
−
of wz = wy = 100 m m (for e.g. a beam propagating along ˆx) in calculations of optical power
requirements.

The beam detuning was D = 2p

106 W/m2 which
results in a well depth of U0/kB = 6 mK for the above parameters. This choice of detuning and

5 GHz and the peak intensity was 2

×

×

Fig. 5. (Color Online) The initial Gaussian distribution a), the ﬁnal number density over 25
lattice sites b), the ﬁnal number density over 25 lattice sites plotted to a maximum of 5% to
show the atoms that have escaped into adjacent wells c), and a histogram with bins deﬁned
by the lattice area A(q max) to display the ﬁnal compression results d).

105 photons/sec and requires a total power of 5W for
intensity gives a scattering rate of 7.8
each pair of beams. This high power is a result of illuminating the entire SLM with a cylindrical
beam whose parameters ﬁt the width of the SLM but only opening two pixels at a time. Note
that the effective well depth is only 3 mK since for traveling waves the wells are connected at
50% of the maximum intensity. For all simulations, discrete steps were used to compress the
atoms, as discussed in Sec. 2.

×

−

Optical cooling is necessary since the atoms heat as they are being compressed. Cooling by
three dimensional molasses was simulated by testing the probability that a photon is scattered
at every time step using an approximation to the three dimensional distribution of the optical
ﬁeld as described in (18). If the atom scattered a photon, the atom’s momentum was changed
by ¯hk along the appropriate cooling beam for absorption and then in a random direction in
three dimensions for emission. The dipole emission pattern of a real atom was approximated
by a spherically uniform emission probability. The intensity of each cooling beam was set
to 1.09 W/m2, or I/Is = .1 where Is is the saturation intensity, and the detuning was set to
g /2. To avoid the effects of differential ground and excited state AC Stark shifts due to
D =
the lattice beams, the cooling and lattice beams were ﬂashed on and off out of phase with each
other at a rate of 4 MHz. The rate was sufﬁciently large compared to the highest vibrational
frequency encountered to avoid loss of atoms during the periods when the lattice beams were
off. The temperature of the atoms was monitored and when either the cooling time exceeded 3
ms or all three Cartesian components of the temperature were below 180 m K, the next step in
compression was taken. The Doppler temperature for 6 cooling beams each with I/Is = .1 is
about 160 m K in the x, y, and z directions.

The initial atom distribution was a Gaussian with standard deviations of s x = s y = s z =
50 m m. The initial temperature was set to Ta = 140 m K in x, y and z. The cloud was then placed
in the potential deﬁned by the ﬁrst step in the lattice compression. The simulation involves 158
steps and q was allowed to vary between 0.063 and 35 deg. (a maximum of 70 deg. between
two beams) according to the allowed values of q produced by the SLM. We chose q max = 35
deg. to correspond to an experiment where there may only be 70 deg. of access on each side of
the trapping region. This will produce a minimum lattice site area of A(q max)

0.55 m m2.

≃

Fig. 6. Left: Percent of atoms captured within the minimum well area A(q max) per step of
compression (solid line) and percentage of atoms captured in the central well(dashed line).
Right: Plot of one over the effective volume for one atom per step of compression.

The results of a simulation run with 5000 atoms are shown in Fig. 5. The cooling and com-
pression time per step varied from a maximum of 3 ms to a minimum of 100 m s with a total
cooling and compression time of 115 ms. The cooling time at the beginning of the compres-
sion scheme is longer since the change in well area is larger. Near the end of the simulation,
when the compression steps are fairly equal, the cooling time was
1.2 ms per step. The ﬁnal
compression captured 77.7% of the atoms in the central well with 84.8% of the atoms within a
20 m m square around the central spot. The loss of atoms in the central well is due to the initial
placement of the Gaussian cloud in the optical potential, the temperature of the atoms, and the
discrete nature of the SLM. The largest loss of atoms occurs in the ﬁrst stage of compression
where the percent change in well area is about 160%. About 9% of the atoms are lost in the
ﬁrst step, see Fig. 6. This initial loss could be reduced at the expense of higher laser power by
having more SLM pixels or deeper wells. Once the cloud is safely contained in the lattice site,
there is a steady decrease in atoms since the effective well depth of the trap is 3 mK and the
temperature of the cloud is kept around 175 m K, which leads to a nonzero escape rate. Even
though the total number captured in the central well decreases, the density of the atoms, deﬁned
as the number of atoms within the central well divided by the volume of the well, still increases
after every step as shown in Fig 6.

∼

4. Discussion

1011 cm−

∼
1012 cm−

3. Densities of order 1012 cm−

The ﬁnal density of the cloud will be limited by both photon rescattering and atomic collisions.
3 while dark MOTs(19) and dark
Typical high density MOTs provide densities
3 have
optical lattices(20) have been used to reach
∼
also been obtained in a highly anisotropic elongated bright MOT(21). We therefore expect that
the ﬁnal density achievable by this compression scheme will be on the order of 1012 cm−
3. For
the parameters used above Fig. 6 shows that such a density is reached at the ﬁnal compression
stage for a MOT which initially contains only a single atom. The compression scheme may
therefore be suitable for loading single atoms into sites of an optical lattice with sub wavelength
periodicity. In this context the compression scheme provides an effective zoom lens with a
magniﬁcation ratio of about 100 which would be difﬁcult to achieve with a conventional design.
Additional numerical simulations show that it is possible to direct the atoms into a preferred
lattice site, instead of the central site, by introducing a small phase shift between the beams at
each compression step.

Although only a very small number of atoms will ﬁt into a wavelength scale lattice site
without exceeding density limits imposed by optical cooling the intermediate stage of the com-
pression appears attractive for creating atomic ensembles with large optical depth. This is of
interest for studying quantum state mapping between light and small atomic ensembles(22).

Fig. 7. Lattice well area (left), peak density (center) and optical depth (right) as a function
of the beam angle q . The calculations assumed wz = 0.1 cm, a relative temperature of
kBTa/U0 = 0.15/6. = .025 and that 80% of the N = 104 atoms initially in the MOT are
captured into the lattice site.

The initial, spherically symmetric MOT cloud has an optical depth, for a narrow beam with a
¥ dz s na(x = 0, y = 0, z) where na(x, y, z)
width that is small compared to the MOT, of od =
is the atomic density and s = 3l 2
a /(2p ) is the resonant cross section for a two-level atom with
transition wavelength l a. Assuming for example a MOT with Gaussian density distribution
with s x = s y = s z = 50 m m as in the previous section, and N = 104 atoms we ﬁnd od = 0.2,
which would imply a very weak interaction between a probe beam and the MOT atoms.

−

R

However, these same 104 atoms can be rapidly compressed into a cigar shaped lattice
site to achieve an optical depth of about 35. To show this we examine the regime where
the atomic temperature is small compared to the well depth (as in our numerical simula-
tions). The atomic density distribution inside each elongated well will then be Gaussian with
s x = s y = [L (q )/(√2p )]
kBTa/U0. The atomic density distribu-
tion can then be approximated by

kBTa/U0, and s z = (wz/2)

p

p

na(x, y, z) =

N
(2p )3/2s xs ys z

e−

(x2/2s 2

x +y2/2s 2

y +z2/2s 2
z )

(4)

We can deﬁne the optical depth as od =
ln(Pout/Pin) where Pin, Pout are the power incident
on and after the atomic cloud. Accounting for the Gaussian transverse distribution of a radially
symmetric laser beam and its’ diffractive spreading as it propagates along the cloud we ﬁnd

−

od =

4s
w2

L/2

0 Z
−

L/2

dz

Z
0

drr

na(r , z)

2r 2/[w2

0(1+z2/z2

R)],

e−

(5)

1
1 + z2/z2
R

x2 + y2, w0 is the beam waist and zR = p w2

where r =
0/l . This expression is valid provided
the beam intensity is everywhere small so that there is no saturation of the absorption. When the
atomic density has a Gaussian proﬁle as in Eq. (4) we can extend the limits of the z integration
to

and get the analytical expression

p

±

od = N

3l
√2ps

R(1+4s 2
x /w2
z2
0)
2s 2
z

e

z

1 + 4s 2

x /w2
0

zR

Erfc

q

x /w2
0

1 + 4s 2
√2s z





,



(6)

q
t2
z
0 dt e−
R

where Erfc(z) = 1

(2/√p )

−

is the complementary error function.

Figure 7 shows the calculated well area, peak density, and optical depth as a function of beam
for N = 104 atoms initially in the MOT. At q = 0.4 deg. the peak density reaches the
angle q
photon rescattering limit of about 1012 cm−
3, but the optical depth along z is od = 35 for a
probe beam with waist w0 = 3.0 m m. This is a factor of 175 increase compared to the value in

¥
¥
¥
Fig. 8. Comparison of two interfering traveling waves (left) and two interfering standing
waves (right) with high intensity shown in white. Both interference patterns are created with
q =p /8 givingp /4 between beams. The traveling wave produces a 1D interference pattern
while the standing wave produces a 2D lattice structure. The incident beam propagation
directions are shown superimposed behind the plots.

the initial MOT, and is large enough to allow close to complete absorption of a photon in the
atomic cloud. The radial optical depth is less than unity which implies that the cloud is optically
thin for radially directed photons so heating due to photon rescattering will be minimized(21).
This approach to compression is an alternative to anisotropic magnetic traps(23). Using the
same beam parameters as in Sec. 3, but with wz = 0.1 cm and only needing to illuminate 14
strips on the SLM, we would need about 1 W of power for each pair of beams.

Finally we consider some alternative compression geometries. The compression scheme with
four traveling waves was chosen since it has a relatively simple experimental setup and com-
pression in 2D can occur in one step. One drawback is that the wells are connected at 50% of
the intensity. This effectively wastes half of the well depth requiring better cooling and more
powerful lasers. There are alternative conﬁgurations that do not suffer from this problem. If all
the laser beams initially propagate in the same direction, say q = 0, there will be no interfer-
ence pattern. Each beam can then be moved in a particular direction to its ﬁnal position. If the
beams are moved smoothly, the optical potential also changes smoothly. For example, starting
with three lasers beams propagating along q = 0 and smoothly moving two of the beams to
q = 120 deg and q =
120 deg, the atoms will be compressed into the central well whose ﬁnal
area is a very small A = 2l 2/(3√3) = 0.38l 2. However, this requires a chamber with 240 deg.
of access. If the ﬁnal positions cannot be reached due to chamber limitations, the ﬁnal cloud
will be asymmetric.

−

Another approach relies on retro-reﬂecting the beams to create standing waves. Keeping the
same conﬁguration as the two traveling waves case, the result of interfering all four beams
comprising the two standing waves is

I(x, y)

cos2 (kx cos(q )) cos2 (ky sin(q )) .

∼

(7)

This results in a two-dimensional intensity pattern, as opposed to the traveling wave case
which results in a one-dimensional lattice, see Fig. 8. The compression has to be done in steps,
see Fig. 9. In the ﬁrst step, a pair of beams with bisector along ˆx is separated which compresses
the atoms along the ˆy axis, while they ﬁll wells which are distributed along ˆx. Then the process
is repeated for a pair of beams with bisector along ˆy. Increasing q now results in compression
along the ˆx direction. Since after step 1, all of the atoms are located in wells along the x-axis,

Fig. 9. (Color Online) Compression schematic using standing waves. The ﬁrst step (top
row) uses 2 pairs of standing waves with bisector along ˆx. The second step (bottom row)
uses 2 pairs of standing waves with bisector along ˆy. This simulation uses the same beam
parameters given in Section 3.

at the beginning of step 2, all of the atoms should be trapped in the central trough of the 1D
standing wave on the x-axis. As in step 1, as q
increases, the area of the wells decrease and all
the atoms will be compressed to a single well located at x = y = 0 with well area of A = l 2/2.
Contrasting with the traveling wave case, all of the wells are completely separated which is a
more efﬁcient usage of laser power. Experimentally, however, a retroreﬂection arrangement is
more difﬁcult to implement.

In conclusion the result of the protocol described here is two-dimensional compression of a
cloud of atoms. While this paper focuses on two-dimensional compression, three-dimensional
compression is also possible by adding two more traveling waves whose bisector is along ˆz.
The result is a three-dimensional lattice which compresses in the same manner as the two-
dimensional case.

The results of numerical simulations show that a high percentage of atoms can be compressed
50 m m to a lattice site with area A =
from an atomic cloud with a standard deviation of
0.55 m m2. This is possible for a small number of atoms such that the ﬁnal density does not
exceed limits set by photon scattering and collisions. We also show that a partial compression
up to beam angles of q
0.4 deg. is an effective way of capturing atoms from a small, low
optical density MOT, into a pencil shaped optical trap with od = 35. An atomic sample conﬁned
in this way is well suited for experiments requiring strong interactions between light and atomic
ensembles.

∼

∼

This work was supported by an Advanced Opportunity Fellowship from the University of

Wisconsin and NSF grant CCF-0523666 .

