6
0
0
2
 
t
c
O
 
0
3
 
 
]
h
p
-
m
o
t
a
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
2
7
2
0
1
6
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Coherent Quantum Engineering of Free-Space Laser Cooling

Josh W. Dunn,1 J. W. Thomsen,2 Chris H. Greene,1 and Flavio C. Cruz1, 3
1JILA, University of Colorado and National Institute of Standards and Technology,
and Department of Physics, University of Colorado, Boulder, Colorado 80309-0440
2The Niels Bohr Institute, Universitetsparken 5, 2100, Copenhagen, Denmark
3Instituto de Fisica Gleb Wataghin, Universidade Estadual de Campinas, CP. 6165, Campinas, SP, 13083-970, Brazil
(Dated: August 7, 2013)

We perform a quantitative analysis of the cooling dynamics of three-level atomic systems inter-
acting with two distinct lasers. Employing sparse-matrix techniques, we ﬁnd numerical solutions
to the fully quantized master equation in steady state. Our method allows straightforward deter-
mination of laser-cooling temperatures without the ambiguity often accompanied by semiclassical
calculations, and more quickly than non-sparse techniques. Our calculations allow us to develop an
understanding of the regimes of cooling, as well as a qualitative picture of the mechanism, related
to the phenomenon of electromagnetically induced transparency. Eﬀects of the induced asymmetric
Fano-type lineshapes aﬀect the detunings required for optimum cooling, as well as the predicted
minimum temperatures which can be lower than the Doppler limit for either transition.

PACS numbers: 32.80.Pj, 42.50.Vk, 32.80.Wr

Laser cooling has led to tremendous achievements,
enabling extremely precise measurements (see, for ex-
ample, Ref.
[1]), the development of highly accurate
atomic clocks [2], and the production and manipula-
tion of quantum-degenerate gases [3]. The atomic in-
ternal structure greatly restricts the species for which
laser cooling can be applied successfully, and determines
whether ultracold temperatures (on the order of a few
µK) can be achieved. The basic Doppler cooling mech-
anism [4, 5], based on momentum transfer from a near-
resonant light beam, has a minimum temperature (typ-
ically a few hundred µK) proportional to the scattering
rate (linewidth) of the atomic transition, and given by the
balance between friction (cooling) and diﬀusion (heating)
in the atom-laser interaction. Lower temperatures can
be achieved either by exploiting the multilevel hyperﬁne
structure (Sisyphus [6, 7], Raman [8], VSCPT [9]), by
modifying the atomic scattering (spontaneous emission)
for example in a near-resonant cavity [10], or, more re-
cently, by using weakly allowed, narrow two-level optical
transitions in a second-stage for atoms that have been
pre-cooled by other means [11, 12]. Here, we explore cool-
ing by dissipative radiation-pressure forces [5] in three-
level systems under two-color excitation. Similar schemes
have been studied previously for trapped ions [13, 14].
In the electromagnetically-induced-transparency (EIT)
regime, e.g., with a weak ”probe”, and a strong ”dress-
ing” laser, an eﬀective two-level system is engineered that
allows sideband cooling of ions to the ground state of the
trapping potential [14, 15].

This Letter presents a general method that uses co-
herent quantum interference to tailor an atom’s internal
energy structure that makes it more amenable to simple
Doppler cooling in free space. To exploit the eﬀects of
quantum interference, at least three internal atomic lev-
els and two lasers with distinct frequencies must be uti-
lized. There are three basic types of three-level systems
— the Λ-, V-, and Ξ-systems — each classiﬁed accord-

ing to the ordering of the bare quantum states in energy,
and the possible decay pathways. The Λ-conﬁguration is
commonly used for studying of EIT [16] and related phe-
nomena. Here we focus on a Ξ-type system, also known
as a cascade conﬁguration. We note, however, that our
general conclusions can be applied to any type of three-
level system, and can be extended to systems with more
than three levels. In particular, we will focus our discus-
sion on a cascade system suggested by Magno et al. [17] as
a simpler second-stage cooling scheme for alkaline-earth
atoms, which has recently been demonstrated for mag-
nesium [18]. The level structure and internal parame-
ters for this system are depicted in Fig. 1. The cooling
scheme is more eﬀective for Λ-type three-level systems
having metastable lower states, but also works for ladder
systems with an upper state narrower than the intermedi-
ate one [17]. This cooling technique seems well suited for
alkaline-earths, which are good candidates for the next-
generation optical atomic clocks, studies of ultracold col-
lisions, optical Feshbach resonances [19], and achieve-
ment of quantum degeneracy [20]. Other elements with
similar structure include Zn, Cd, and Hg. For lighter
alkaline-earth atoms, such as Ca and Mg, for which tech-
niques other than Doppler cooling are impossible or too
diﬃcult to be used [17], it will facilitate trapping in opti-
cal potentials and lattices. Our treatment solves the fully
quantum-mechanical equations of motion for the three-
level atom in the ﬁeld of both lasers. The dynamics of this
system are determined exactly using numerical methods,
giving quantitative predicted laser-cooling temperatures.
The results of these calculations then provide us with
a basis for a more intuitive interpretation of the cooling
mechanism. Along these lines, we develop a dressed-state
picture of the system dynamics that makes qualitative
predictions that agree well with the numerical calcula-
tions.

Fig. 1 shows the internal atomic states in order of in-
creasing energy as |0i, |1i, and |2i. The transition en-

2

V (1)
laser(x) + V (2)
laser(x) is the Hamiltonian of the atom-laser
system, and the superoperator Liouvillian L describes
eﬀects due to coupling of the atom to the vacuum photon
ﬁeld, resulting in spontaneous emission [21].

Eq. (1) treats all the atomic degrees of freedom (inter-
nal and external) quantum mechanically, so its solutions
generally provide an accurate description of the atom’s
dynamics. We thus avoid much of the ambiguity and
diﬃculty associated with semiclassical approximations
of the system. For reasonable temperatures, however,
the number of numerical basis states required to directly
solve the problem, even in one dimension, is impractical
for most computers. Here we resolve this problem with-
out resorting to Monte Carlo methods by noting that
the matrix for the linear system equivalent to Eq. (1) is
very sparse — i.e., only a small fraction of its elements
are nonzero. The particular structure shared by Liouvil-
lian operators L describing relaxation processes simplify
the numerics. Starting from the microscopic properties
of atomic operators comprising this so-called Lindblad
form of L, we construct a matrix with the zero elements
eliminated. The steady-state solution of Eq. (1) is then
found using standard sparse-matrix inversion or propa-
gation techniques. The result is an exact direct solution
of a fully-quantized master equation.

(cid:11)

(cid:10)

p2/2m

The steady-state density matrix has been calculated
this way in one dimension. The average kinetic energy
= Tr(ρ p2/2m), which we equate with
is then
1
2 kBT , where T is the temperature and kB is Boltzmann’s
constant. The large parameter space of the three-level
atom two-laser problem has been explored, e.g., vary-
ing the detunings, δ1 and δ2, as well as the strengths
Ω1 and Ω2 of the two lasers. However, we ﬁnd that the
laser strengths are better characterized in terms of how
strongly they dress the atom. The relevant non-resonant
saturation parameters, s1 and s2, for the respective tran-
sitions, are

si =

1
2

Ω2
i
i + (Γi/2)2 .
δ2

(2)

D

The parameter space has three distinct regimes. In the
ﬁrst, with s1 & 1 and s2 arbitrary, only heating occurs,
as expected from Doppler-cooling theory since the lower
transition is driven strongly. In the second, with s1 ≪ 1
and s2 ≪ 1, cooling occurs only to the Doppler limit for
the lower transition T (1D)
= ~Γ1/2kB, and only in the
range near δ1 = −Γ1/2. In this case, laser 2 has no ef-
fect, as this amounts to simple two-level Doppler cooling
on the lower transition with laser 1. In the ﬁnal regime,
when s1 ≪ 1 and s2 & 1, cooling occurs down to sub-
stantially below T (1D)
D . Figure 2 illustrates cooling in this
regime for the particular case of 24Mg mentioned above,
with the temperature normalized to T (1D)
D , and with the
bare two-photon resonance (δ1 + δ2 = 0) denoted by the
dashed line. The steady-state temperature is plotted as
a function of δ1 and δ2 for s1(δ1) = 0.001 and s2(δ2) = 1.
Note that the saturation parameters are being held ﬁxed

0

and ~ω(2)

FIG. 1: Left side: Atomic conﬁguration for the three-level
cascade system in 24Mg, utilizing the (3s2) 1S0 → (3s3p)
1P1 → (3s3d) 1D2 transition, with levels denoted by |0i, |1i,
and |2i, respectively. The quantum interference between var-
ious excitation pathways in this system can be used to in-
crease the eﬀectiveness of laser cooling. The energy of the
lower and upper transition is ~ω(1)
0 , respectively.
The frequency and detuning for each laser is labeled by ωi
and δi, respectively, for i = 1, 2. The spontaneous-emission
linewidths of the states |1i and |2i are Γ1 and Γ2, respectively.
Right side: Characteristics of the dressed 24Mg cascade sys-
tem, with s1(δ1) = 0.001 and s2(δ2) = 1. Real (top graph)
and imaginary (bottom graph) parts of the eigenvalues of the
Hamiltonian in Eq. (3), with dressed atomic states labeled for
the manifold. The real parts are the energies and the imagi-
nary parts are the eﬀective linewidths of the dressed atomic
system. Both are plotted as functions of the dressing laser
detuning δ2, with ﬁxed δ1 = 0.

0

and ~ω(2)

ergy of the lower transition, |0i → |1i, and of the upper
transition, |1i → |2i, are ~ω(1)
0 , respectively.
We include two lasers, of frequency ω1 and ω2, and de-
ﬁne their detunings from the appropriate atomic transi-
tions as δi = ωi − ω(i)
0 , for i = 1,2. The intensities of
lasers 1 and 2 are characterized by their Rabi frequencies
Ω1 = − h0|d|1i · E1(x) and Ω2 = − h1|d|2i · E2(x), re-
spectively, where d is the electric-dipole operator of the
atom and Ei is the electric-ﬁeld amplitude for the ith
laser. The spontaneous-emission linewidths of states |1i
and |2i are Γ1 and Γ2, respectively (88 MHz and 2.2 MHz,
respectively, for 24Mg). The time evolution for the atom
moving in the laser ﬁeld, with mass m and center-of-mass
momentum operator p, is described by the master equa-
tion,

˙ρ(t) =

i
~ [ρ, H] + L [ρ] ,

(1)

where ρ is the reduced density matrix of the atom system,
the vacuum photon ﬁeld degrees of freedom having been
traced over, H = p2/2m + ~ω(1)
|2i h2| +

|1i h1| + ~ω(2)

0

0

3

FIG. 2: (Color online) Steady-state laser-cooling tempera-
tures for a 24Mg three-level cascade system, as a function of
the two detunings δ1 and δ2, obtained from exact numeri-
cal solutions of Eq. (1). The detuning-dependent saturation
parameter for the lower transition (perturbative probe laser)
is s1(δ1) = 0.001 for both plots, and for the upper transi-
tion (dressing pump laser) is s2(δ2) = 1 and 5 in the upper
and lower plot, respectively . The temperature is normalized
to the one-dimensional Doppler limit for the lower transition
T (1D)
D = 7~Γ1/40kB [22], which is the optimum temperature
expected for cooling with just one laser. The dashed line in-
dicates the location of the bare two-photon resonance. This
example illustrates the main parameter regime where sub-
Doppler cooling occurs. Note that, in order to hold the sat-
uration parameters ﬁxed as the detuning is varied, the Rabi
frequencies Ωi, for i = 1,2, are continuously adjusted.

as the detunings are varied, so that the Rabi frequencies
are being continuously adjusted. We see the lowest tem-
peratures, on the order of 10−2 T (1D)
D , in the quadrant
with δ1 > 0 and δ2 < 0, as well as less extreme cooling in
other regions. Observe that the lowest temperatures are
obtained for frequencies detuned to the blue of the two-
photon resonance. This seems counterintuitive, since a
red detuning is usually required in order to have a net
decrease of atomic kinetic energy in a photon-scattering
event. Qualitative understanding of the cooling mecha-
nism emerges from analysis of the simpler Hamiltonian,

H =

~

2

Ω1

0
Ω1 −2δ1 − iΓ1
0

Ω2





0
Ω2
−2(δ1 + δ2) − iΓ2

.





(3)

Its complex eigenvalues have real dressed energies, and
imaginary parts giving dressed-state linewidths — that
is, a measure of the coupling of the dressed states to
the photon vacuum. These dressed energies and widths
are plotted on the right side of Fig. 1 as functions of
δ2, for the same parameters used in Fig. 2. The can-
cellation of one of the widths can be viewed as an EIT
eﬀect: since laser 1 is perturbative while laser 2 strongly
dresses the upper transition, the new eigenstates of the
system, denoted |+i and |−i, are well approximated as
linear combinations of the bare states |1i and |2i. These
states have the modiﬁed energies and widths shown in
Fig. 1. The linewidth modiﬁcations can be viewed as a
Fano interference [23], in which the dressing laser transi-
tions caused by the probe laser enable multiple coherent
pathways among the bare states. Constructive or de-
structive interference respectively increases or decreases
the atomic linewidth.

The cooling mechanism is thus qualitatively explained
as ordinary two-level Doppler cooling. But instead of us-
ing a transition between two bare states of an atom, the
transition occurs between a (mostly) unmodiﬁed ground
state, and a dressed excited state, with a shifted energy
and a new linewidth that can be narrower than the bare
linewidth of the lower transition. As the probe laser is
scanned, the detuning relative to the dressed energy lev-
els is varied, but since these levels are shifted from their
bare energies, resonance occurs for diﬀerent detunings
than are encountered in the bare system.
In fact, the
shifts of the eigen-energies in Fig. 1 from the bare ener-
gies explain the apparent observation of blue two-photon
cooling in Fig. 2. In the dressed system, the bare two-
photon resonance is no longer meaningful, and the cool-
ing region is in fact to the red of a dressed resonance.

An additional caveat applies when mapping this sys-
tem onto Doppler cooling theory: the lineshapes are not
Lorentzian, but are in fact asymmetric Fano lineshapes
for the dressed system, as shown in the upper part of
Fig. 3 as a function of δ1 for a ﬁxed value of δ2 = −Γ1/2.
This fact changes the optimum-detuning condition into a
new one: maximum cooling for a given transition occurs
when the probe laser is detuned from the dressed excited

4

where v is the atomic velocity. Since the detuning of
the laser and the resonant atomic velocity are linearly
related, the derivative of the absorption spectrum with
respect to δ1 also yields a maximum in the cooling force.
This is evident in normal Doppler cooling because the
optimum detuning occurs when δ = −Γ/2, which is the
inﬂection point of the Lorentzian. In general then, for
asymmetric lineshapes, the optimum detuning does not
obey such a simple relation, but depends on the degree
of asymmetry.

From this complete picture of the cooling mechanism
as a weak probe applied to a dressed three-level system,
the minimum expected temperatures can now be deter-
mined, allowing for the detuning modiﬁcation due to
asymmetric lineshapes. The lower part of Fig. 3, the ra-
tio of the maximum slope of a Lorentzian lineshape with
width Γ1 to the slope of the asymmetric lineshape, as a
function of δ1 with δ2 = −Γ1/2. For comparison, fully
quantum numerical results are indicated by data points.
This ratio provides an indication of the expected cooling
for the dressed system relative to the Doppler limit for
the lower transition. Note that the expected tempera-
ture, due to the asymmetric lineshape, is predicted to be
lower than the upper-transition Doppler limit, indicated
by the horizontal dotted line in the lower plot of Fig. 3.
This prediction is supported by the numerical data.

In conclusion, coherent engineering of an atomic three-
level system can optimize the eﬀectiveness of two-level
Doppler cooling. By strongly driving a particular tran-
sition between two excited internal states of the atom,
dressed energy eigenstates are created with modiﬁed
linewidths which, due to mixing, can vary anywhere in
the range between the smallest and the largest of the two
bare linewidths. Smaller linewidths lead to lower temper-
atures, but the additional eﬀect of asymmetries in the
linewidths of the dressed states can lead to even lower
temperatures, below the Doppler limit of the upper tran-
sition. The ability to tailor the degree of cooling lends
this technique additional utility. A dressing scheme can
be suited to the characteristics of a particular atom, and
real-time adjustment of the cooling properties can allow
narrowing of the velocity-capture range as an atomic gas
is cooled. Utilizing such coherent eﬀects should lead to
relatively simple schemes for cooling far below the typical
Doppler limit.

We thank N. Andersen and C. Oates for helpful dis-
cussions. J.W.D. and C.H.G. acknowledge support from
the National Science Foundation; J.W.T. acknowledges
support from the Calsberg and Lundbeck Foundation;
F.C.C. acknowledges support from FAPESP, CNPq and
AFOSR.

FIG. 3: Upper plot: Absorption spectrum (solid line) as a
function of δ1, illustrating the asymmetric lineshapes for the
dressed system, for a ﬁxed dressing-laser detuning δ2 = −Γ1.
The peak of each lineshape is located at a dressed eigen-
energy, and lineshapes at the same energies and widths, but
with Lorentzian (symmetric) linshapes are plotted with dot-
ted lines. As an example, optimum-cooling detunings relative
to the leftmost resonance are illustrated with a black arrow
for the true asymmetric lineshape and with a gray arrow for
the hypothetical symmetric-lineshape case. The value of the
optimum detuning, as well as the slope of the lineshape is seen
to be diﬀerent for these two cases. Lower plot, solid line: the
ratio of the maximum slope of a Lorentzian lineshape with
width Γ1 to the slope of the asymmetric lineshape, as a func-
tion of δ1 with δ2 = −Γ1/2. This ratio provides an indication
of the expected cooling for the dressed system relative to the
Doppler limit for the lower transition. For comparison, fully
quantum numerical results are indicated by data points.

state precisely to the inﬂection point of the absorption
spectrum. This can be understood by noting that the
force f applied to the atom due to the laser beam is pro-
portional to the absorption rate, for a given δ1. As is
often utilized in semiclassical cooling theories, the fric-
tion coeﬃcient α for the atom moving in the laser ﬁeld
is given by

α = −

f (v),

d
dv

(4)

[1] P. Gill, ed., Proceedings of the 6th Symposium on Fre-
quency Standards and Metrology, St. Andrews, Scotland

(World Scientiﬁc, 2001).

[2] M. Takamoto, F. Hong, R. Higashi, and H. Katori, Na-

5

ture 435, 321 (2005).

[3] M. Anderson, J. Ensher, M. Matthews, C. Wieman, and

E. Cornell, Science 269, 198 (1995).

[4] P. Lett, W. Phillips, S. Rolston, C. Tanner, R. Watts,
and C. Westbrook, J. Opt. Soc. Am. B 6, 2084 (1989).
[5] H. J. Metcalf and P. van der Straten, Laser Cooling and

Trapping (Springer-Verlag, New York, 1999).

[14] C. Roos, D. Leibfried, A. Mundt, F. Schmidt-Kaler,
J. Eschner, and R. Blatt, Physical Review Letters 85,
5547 (2000).

[15] I. Marzoli, J. I. Cirac, R. Blatt, and P. Zoller, Phys. Rev.

A 49, 2771 (1994).

[16] M. Fleischhauer, A. Imamoglu, and J. P. Marangos, Rev.

Mod. Phys. 77, 633 (2005).

[6] J. Dalibard and C. Cohen-Tannoudji, J. Opt. Soc. Am.

[17] W. C. Magno, R. L. C. Filho, and F. C. Cruz, Phys. Rev.

B 6, 2023 (1989).

A 67, 043407 (2003).

[7] P. J. Ungar, D. S. Weiss, E. Riis, and S. Chu, J. Opt.

Soc. Am. B 6, 2058 (1989).

[8] M. Kasevich and S. Chu, Phys. Rev. Lett. 69, 1741

(1992).

[9] A. Aspect, E. Arimondo, R. Kaiser, N. Vansteenkiste,
and C. Cohen-Tannoudji, J. Opt. Soc. Am. B 6, 2112
(1989).

[10] H. Chan, A. Black, and V. Vuleti´c, Physical Review Let-

ters 90, 63003 (2003).

[11] H. Katori, T. Ido, Y. Isoya, and M. Kuwata-Gonokami,

Physical Review Letters 82, 1116 (1999).

[12] T. Kuwamoto, K. Honda, Y. Takahashi,
T. Yabuzaki, Physical Review A 60, 745 (1999).

and

[13] G. Morigi, J. Eschner, and C. H. Keitel, Phys. Rev. Lett.

85, 4458 (2000).

[18] N. Malossi, S. Damkjaer, P. L. Hansen, L. B. Jacobsen,
L. Kindt, S. Sauge, J. W. Thomsen, F. C. Cruz, M. Alle-
grini, and E. Arimondo, Phys. Rev. A 72, 051403 (2005).
[19] R. Ciury lo, E. Tiesinga, and P. Julienne, Physical Review

A 71, 30701 (2005).

[20] Y. Takasu, K. Maki, K. Komori, T. Takano, K. Honda,
M. Kumakura, T. Yabuzaki, and Y. Takahashi, Physical
Review Letters 91, 40404 (2003).

[21] C. Cohen-Tannoudji, J. Dupont-Roc, and G. Grynberg,
Atom-Photon Interactions (Wiley, New York, 1998).
[22] Y. Castin, H. Wallis, and J. Dalibard, J. Opt. Soc. Am.

B 6, 2046 (1989).

[23] U. Fano, Phys. Rev. 124, 1866 (1961).

