6
0
0
2
 
v
o
N
 
7
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
m
o
t
a
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
5
7
1
1
1
6
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Light forces in ultracold photoassociation

E. Gomez, A. T. Black, L. D. Turner, E. Tiesinga, P. D. Lett1
1National Institute of Standards and Technology, Gaithersburg, Maryland 20899
(Dated: July 23, 2013)

We study the time-resolved photoassociation of ultracold sodium in an optical dipole trap. The
photoassociation laser excites pairs of atoms to molecular states of large total angular momentum
at high intensities (above 20 kW/cm2). Such transitions are generally suppressed at ultracold tem-
peratures by the centrifugal barriers for high partial waves. Time-resolved ionization measurements
reveal that the atoms are accelerated by the dipole potential of the photoassociation beam. We
change the collision energy by varying the potential depth, and observe a strong variation of the
photoassociation rate. These results demonstrate the important role of light forces in cw photoas-
sociation at high intensities.

PACS numbers: 42.50.Vk, 33.20.-t, 33.70.-w

INTRODUCTION

Photoassociation spectroscopy is a ﬂexible and precise
tool for determining molecular level structures [1] and
binding energies [2], as well as atomic lifetimes [3] and
scattering lengths [4]. In photoassociation (PA) a photon
excites a pair of colliding atoms into a bound molecular
level. The frequency of the excitation laser determines
the vibrational and rotational level of the molecule pro-
duced. Typically, photoassociation spectroscopy of ul-
tracold atoms is performed at intensities on the order of
the saturation intensity. Studies of photoassociation at
higher intensities have focused on PA rate limits [5, 6, 7],
rather than the photoassociation spectrum.

We present a spectroscopic study of high-intensity pho-
toassociation in trapped, ultracold sodium atoms. The
spectra reveal excitation to molecular states of unexpect-
edly large angular momentum, given the initial temper-
ature of the atoms. These spectral features persist even
in a Bose-Einstein condensate, for which all but s-wave
collisions are ordinarily suppressed. At ﬁrst glance, the
excitation of these high rotational states seems to be at
odds with conservation of angular momentum. We show
that the excitation to states of large angular momentum
is explained by atoms accelerating in the attractive dipole
potential created by the photoassociation beam.

Photoassociative production of molecules into states
carrying nominally forbidden angular momenta has pre-
viously been observed and explained by an array of
causes. An experiment in a cesium magneto-optical trap
used the trapping laser to excite quasimolecules at long
range. There the resonant dipole-dipole interaction pro-
vided suﬃcient kinetic energy to produce eight rotational
lines [8]. A similar experiment in sodium observed up to
22 lines arising from the same interaction [9].
In two-
photon, “ladder-type” photoassociation in potassium, a
forbidden excitation to a doubly excited high-rotational
state proceeded oﬀ-resonance through a nearby rota-
tional state [10]. As expected for such oﬀ-resonant pro-
cesses, the states of large angular momentum appeared

only at fairly high intensity (∼ 200 W/cm2). In contrast
to the above results, the present work demonstrates the
production of surprisingly high angular momenta aris-
ing from a single laser frequency at the photoassociation
transition.

We obtain PA spectra showing the rotational series for
a nearly forbidden transition to a molecular level disso-
ciating to the Na 2S +2 P3/2 asymptote. At low pho-
toassociation intensities, the rotational spectra comprise
transitions to molecular states of low total angular mo-
mentum, as expected for the temperature of the atomic
sample. Increasing the PA intensity causes spectral fea-
tures corresponding to states of high angular momentum
to appear. Measuring the time-dependent PA rate with
1 µs resolution reveals oscillations in the PA signal, as
well as a prompt step in the signal that depends on the
rotational quantum number. We compare the signal to a
Monte Carlo model of atomic dynamics in the Gaussian
dipole potential of the PA beam. The comparison shows
that mechanical eﬀects induced by the photoassociation
laser produce the high-angular-momentum peaks in the
spectrum.

EXPERIMENTAL SETUP

We capture 23Na atoms in a crossed dipole trap as
described previously [11]. We start with a dark-spot
magneto-optical trap (MOT) at 300 µK, loaded by a Zee-
man slower, and transfer the atoms into the dipole trap.
A 100 W ytterbium ﬁber laser focused to a 1/e2 waist
of 60 µm captures the atoms in a crossed beam conﬁgu-
ration. After 10 seconds of MOT loading, we switch on
the dipole trap beams at full power for 50 ms and then
apply optical molasses for an additional 30 ms to improve
the loading into the dipole trap. We load 3 × 106 atoms
into the crossed dipole trap at a temperature of 50 µK
and a density of 1014 cm−3. Ramping down the ﬁber
laser power produces a Bose-Einstein condensate (BEC)
of 150 000 atoms after 9 seconds. At all stages the atoms

are mostly unpolarized in the F = 1 hyperﬁne state.

A photoassociation laser beam is focused through the
atoms and produces an ion signal. Most of the data
presented here was obtained from thermal atoms in the
dipole trap, with some additional results obtained from
the MOT and BEC stages. The PA laser excites the
atoms to the rotational levels of the v = 48 vibrational
level of a 1g potential. At short internuclear separa-
tions, this 1g potential correlates to the Na2 11Πg Born-
Oppenheimer potential, and at large separations to the
Na 2S + Na 2P3/2 atomic limit. A second photon from
the same laser ionizes the molecule produced (see inset
to Fig. 1). The experiment occurs in a metal vacuum
chamber and a microchannel plate operating at a po-
tential of −2 kV detects the ions produced, with a time
resolution better than 1 µs. The PA transition to the
1g level is weakly allowed by singlet-triplet mixing, but
it still presents a relatively strong one-color ionization
signal. This level has been the subject of many previous
photoassociation studies [12, 13, 14, 15, 16]. The use of a
weak transition allows the resolution of rotational levels
at high intensities, which otherwise might be unresolved
due to power broadening and state mixing.

We tightly focus the single-mode, ﬁber-coupled PA
laser to 1/e2 radii between 14 and 22 µm and use PA
powers up to 370 mW, giving peak intensities as high
as 100 kW/cm2. For comparison, previous high-intensity
cw photoassociation studies have made use of beam in-
tensities up to 1 kW/cm2 [5, 6, 7, 17]. The Gaussian
PA laser beam creates a dipole potential with a depth of
6 mK at the maximum intensity. As we describe later,
we determine the beam waist both from the motion of
the atoms in the PA laser potential, and directly using a
beam proﬁler.

ROTATIONAL SPECTRUM

Figure 1 shows the ion signal spectra from photoas-
sociation in the crossed dipole trap. We scan the fre-
quency of the PA laser and at each frequency apply a
10 ms pulse of PA light to atoms initially at a temper-
ature of 50 µK. The upper spectrum, taken at a PA in-
tensity of 26 kW/cm2, shows a clear rotational sequence
up to J = 6, with energy Erot = BvJ(J + 1), where
Bv/h = 540 ± 40 MHz is the rotational constant and J is
the magnitude of the angular momentum. At these tem-
peratures, only the ﬁrst three peaks are clearly visible in
the lower spectrum, which was taken at 1 kW/cm2.

The incoming scattering state in the photoassociation
process is described by its collision energy E and its par-
tial wave ℓ, the magnitude of the orbital angular momen-
tum of the atom pair ~ℓ. For the excited 1g molecules, the
angular momentum is given by ~J = ~L + ~S + ~ℓ, where ~L
is the total electron orbital angular momentum and ~S is
the total electron spin. Electric-dipole transitions satisfy

J =

1

2

3

4

5

6

2

)
s
t
i
n
u
 
.
b
r
a
(
 
l
a
n
g
s
 
n
o
I

i

3

2

1

0

3

2

1

0
0

+
Na2

v=48

l

a
i
t
n
e
t
o
p
 
c
m
o
t
a
r
e
t
n
I

i

1g

+

+

S1/2+P3/2

S1/2+S1/2

Internuclear radius

10

20

30

Frequency offset (GHz) from 16894.14 cm-1

FIG. 1: Rotational spectrum of the v=48 vibrational level of
the 1g potential in a dipole trap. The lower (upper) trace
shows the spectrum at low (high) intensities. The initial tem-
perature of the atoms is approximately 50 µK, the upper trace
PA laser power is 200 mW and its waist is 22.3 ± 2.2 µm. The
markers above the peaks show a ﬁt to a rotational sequence
running from J = 1 to J = 6. The inset is a schematic energy
level diagram showing the relevant molecular potentials and
indicating the photoassociation and ionization processes.

the selection rule ∆ℓ = 0; hence, the scattering state can
only be excited to rotational levels J satisfying

ℓ − |~L + ~S| ≤ J ≤ ℓ + |~L + ~S|.

(1)

We now consider the appropriate values for ~L and ~S.

For individual atoms, the electronic orbital angular
momentum is a good quantum number.
In molecules
with well-separated electron clouds, as in the current
case, the total electronic orbital angular momentum L is
given by the magnitude of the vector sum of the atomic
components. Thus L = 1 for the excited 1g molecule
dissociating to the S + P limit.

The 1g potential in question is a mixture of singlet
(S = 0) and triplet (S = 1) character. In fact, the v=48
vibrational level of this potential has about 99.5% 11Πg
character [14, 18]. The remaining ≈0.5% is divided be-
tween the 13Σ+

g and 13Πg Born-Oppenheimer states.

g and a3Σ+

The electronic part of the scattering wavefunction is
a linear superposition of the X1Σ+
u electronic
ground states. The precise linear superposition is deter-
mined by the hyperﬁne state of the atoms. Selection rules
for electric-dipole transitions also require that only u ↔ g
and ∆S = 0 transitions are allowed. Consequently, the 1g
vibrational level can only be accessed through the a3Σ+
u
component of the scattering state, giving S = 1 in Eq. 1.
The triplet character of the 1g state is small, making the
transition only weakly allowed. The natural line width
of the transition is 70 kHz [15], and the observed width is

limited by hyperﬁne structure (unresolved in the current
experiment) to ≃ 30 MHz [15].

TIME DEPENDENCE OF THE ION SIGNAL

3

Inserting L = 1 and S = 1 into Eq. 1 gives the partial
wave contributions for each rotational level J. The lowest
partial wave contributions for J=1, 2, 3, 4, 5, and 6 are
s, s, p, d, f , and g, respectively. At low collision energies,
the largest contribution to the transition comes from the
lowest allowed partial wave.

The height of the centrifugal barrier for p and d waves
in sodium is 1.0 mK and 5.3 mK respectively [19], much
bigger than the 50 µK temperature of the atoms in the
dipole trap. The outer vibrational turning point of the
v=48 state lies inside the centrifugal barrier. Classically,
this would preclude photoassociation to this state for all
but s wave scattering. Barrier tunnelling predicts that s
and p waves should contribute signiﬁcantly to the signal
at the temperature of the atoms in the dipole trap (as
shown in the lower spectrum of Fig. 1), but the upper
spectrum in Fig. 1 shows a clear signal even for J = 6
(g wave collisions).
In fact, unusually high rotational
levels are observed even for a Bose-Einstein condensate,
in which only s-wave contributions are expected. If we
initiate forced evaporation in the crossed dipole trap to
produce a condensate [11] and then apply the PA laser,
we see a signal up to J = 4 (d waves). Acquisition of a
full spectrum in the BEC was not attempted due to the
much lower repetition rate. The presence of high partial
waves depends strongly on the PA intensity; they are not
visible at low intensities.

The two-step, one-color ion signal described above de-
pends in principle on both the photoassociation and ion-
ization steps (see inset to Fig. 1). However, the ionization
step acts only as a saturated probe of the excited state
population. The results presented here are not sensitive
to modest power broadening or structure in the ioniza-
tion step.

The eﬀect of the photoassociation and ionization step
can be separated using two-color photoassociation.
In
this case, the beams from two independently tunable
lasers are overlapped to form the PA beam. We ﬁx the
frequency of one laser and scan the frequency of the sec-
ond laser across a rotational peak (J = 4), with a scan
range of 1.6 GHz. We repeat the scan for diﬀerent fre-
quencies of the ﬁrst laser, varying its frequency over a
range of 600 MHz centered on the J = 4 transition. The
scan shows a signal only when either laser is on reso-
nance with the transition to the J = 4 rotational level.
The absence of additional structure is consistent with the
ionization step acting only as a probe, and with the ab-
sence of signiﬁcant multiphoton processes leading to high
angular momenta.

To determine the mechanism responsible for the ap-
pearance of high-J features in the spectrum, we study
the time dependence of the ion signal for diﬀerent rota-
tional levels. We capture the atoms in the crossed dipole
trap and monitor the ion signal as a function of time af-
ter we turn on the PA laser. Figure 2 shows the time
dependence observed for diﬀerent rotational levels, each
averaged over several trap loading cycles. The general
structure has an initial step, a prompt signal, which is
present only for low J values, followed by several oscil-
lations. At long times (greater than 250 µs), the os-
cillations damp and the PA rate becomes constant. The
spectrum in Fig. 1 reﬂects integration over this long-time
rate. The time of ﬂight of the ions to the microchannel
plate is below 1 µs, as conﬁrmed by the short delay be-
tween PA turn-on and the initial step in the ion signal
for the J = 1 and J = 2 traces. Each of the rotational
lines has between 10 and 16 hyperﬁne components, which
are essentially unresolved due to inhomogeneous energy
broadening. The visibility of the ion signal oscillations
is higher when the PA laser is tuned to the blue of the
center of this hyperﬁne manifold, and lower when tuned
to the red. The ion signals shown in Fig. 2 were obtained
with the PA laser tuned to produce the highest integrated
ion signal.

The oscillatory signal of Fig. 2 suggests that the pho-
toassociation laser inﬂuences the motion of the atoms,
which in turn aﬀects the photoassociation rate. As the
PA laser is detuned red of the sodium D lines, it forms an
attractive dipole “PA potential”. Following the turn-on
of the PA beam, this PA potential accelerates atoms to-
wards the beam center. Consequently, both the relative
collision energy and the atomic density increase rapidly
at short times and then oscillate. The oscillation period
is close to T /2, where T is the period of a single atom in
the harmonic part of the potential. The period observed
is consistent with a value of T calculated from the atomic
polarizability, and measured values of the PA beam waist
and power. The PA rate increases with both collision en-
ergy and density, and the two eﬀects combine to give a
maximum PA rate after a time of roughly T /4.

The initial step in the ion signal (at t = 0 in Fig. 2)
is not related to the oscillations described, but rather
reﬂects the initial temperature and density of atoms in
the crossed dipole trap. The initial step is clearly visible
for J = 1 and 2 (due to s wave collisions), is barely visible
for J = 3 (p waves), and is absent for J = 4 (d waves) and
5 (f waves). This is consistent with the initial ultracold
temperatures in the crossed dipole trap. We observe that
the height of the initial step of the J = 2 peak is linear
in the PA laser intensity, indicating that the ionization
transition is a saturated probe of the PA rate.

The loss of visibility in the oscillations after a few pe-

)
s
t
i
n
u
 
.
b
r
a
(
 
l
a
n
g
s
 
n
o
I

i

5

4

3

2

J=1

0

50

100

150

200

250

FIG. 2: (color online) Time dependence of the ion signal for
diﬀerent rotational levels J = 1 through J = 5. The PA laser
turns on at t = 0. For clarity the traces are displaced ver-
tically. All trace maxima have been normalized to one. The
data are shown in black, with simulated signal overplotted in
red. The initial temperature was 50 µK, the dipole trap 1/e2
radius was 85 µm and the dipole trap depth was 500 µK. The
PA beam 1/e
radius was 21 µm. PA beam power was nomi-
nally 250 mW; the actual measured power for each peak was
used in the simulation.

2

riods is due to dephasing in the anharmonic PA poten-
tial. The PA laser has a Gaussian transverse proﬁle and
many atoms are far from the center where the harmonic
approximation holds. The signal also decays slowly for
long times as the atoms are lost from the dipole potential
either due to mechanical eﬀects or photoassociation.

thermalization of

The observed oscillations are much faster than the
characteristic time for
the atom
cloud [20]. In any case, no oscillations are expected for
a sample remaining in thermal equilibrium as it evolves
from one temperature to another. Furthermore, increas-
ing the temperature in a harmonic trap would reduce the
density of atoms; by contrast, we infer an initial increase
in density. Density oscillations due to the sudden addi-
tion of a deep dimple potential were studied theoretically
in Ref. [21] in the context of atoms near condensation in
a one-dimensional gas. Despite having a thermal cloud,
we infer similar density oscillations from our photoasso-

4

ciation signal.

We also study the ion signals in the MOT in the ab-
sence of the crossed dipole trap. The MOT is opti-
mized for dipole trap loading, with lower temperatures
and lower densities than in our previous MOT PA ex-
periments [22]. Spectra taken in the MOT reveal a ro-
tational series similar to that measured in the crossed
dipole trap (Fig. 1), with peaks up to J = 7, despite
the sub-millikelvin MOT temperatures. Furthermore, no
signal appears when the PA beam illuminates the MOT
for durations less than 1 ms. This is the case even for
the low rotational peaks J = 1 and J = 2. However,
for longer durations an ion signal does appear, reaching
a steady state after 30 ms. This cw signal is comparable
in strength to that in the crossed dipole trap, despite the
initial density in the MOT being of order 1010 cm−3.

Apparently, atoms from the MOT are trapped in the
PA potential over time, reaching suﬃcient density to pro-
duce a visible PA signal only after a few milliseconds de-
lay. We test this interpretation by keeping the PA laser
on continuously, but detuned 40 MHz from the J = 2 PA
resonance, to achieve steady-state trapping in the PA po-
tential. As expected, no ion signal is observed while the
If the frequency of the PA
PA beam is oﬀ-resonance.
beam is suddenly shifted onto resonance, a steady ion
signal appears instantly. No oscillations similar to those
in Fig. 2 are observed.

If, in the above test, we suddenly double the PA beam
power as we shift the frequency onto resonance, the ion
signal does exhibit oscillations on a time scale similar to
those in Fig. 2. Atoms already trapped in the PA poten-
tial suddenly gain kinetic energy, leading to the oscillat-
ing signal. This shows that the mechanism responsible
for high angular momentum peaks in our MOT PA spec-
trum is the same as for the dipole trap experiments.

The advantage of working with the crossed dipole trap
is that it provides a high-density sample in which an
ion signal appears immediately after we turn on the PA
beam. In this way we have good control over the density
and temperature of the sample before we introduce the
PA laser. Furthermore, the range of oscillation frequen-
cies of the atoms is smaller than in the MOT because
the crossed dipole trap is contained within one Rayleigh
length of the PA laser beam. Hence, the visibility of the
oscillations in the dipole trap is higher than in the MOT.

MONTE CARLO SIMULATION OF THE ION
SIGNAL

We perform a classical Monte Carlo simulation of the
ion signal as a function of time. The key components
of the simulation are a description of the initial atomic
positions and velocities; a calculation of the motion of
the atoms; and a model for the ion signal, which makes
use of the collisional energy dependence of the PA rate.

We initialize the atoms with the position and velocity
distributions for the crossed dipole trap. We then intro-
duce the PA potential and calculate the resulting classical
motion of the atoms. A typical potential depth is around
2 mK, which is much larger than the temperature of the
atoms. The simulation exploits the cylindrical symmetry
of the experiment, and considers only the motion in the
plane perpendicular to the PA beam propagation direc-
tion. Motion along the PA beam axis is neglected, as
the dipole force is small in this direction. We divide the
radial coordinate into 100 bins and collect all the atoms
that fall into each bin as a function of time. We obtain
the relative velocity vmn between all possible pairs of
atoms m, n in a particular bin to calculate the collision
energy Emn = µv2
mn/2µ, with µ the reduced
mass. The simulated ion signal S at a given time step in
the simulation is given by [14]

mn/2 = ~2k2

,

niNiIiD

S(ω−ω0) =

πvmn
k2
mn

Z(Emn)
(ω − ω0 − ∆)2 + γ2

mn

X
i

Emn
(2)
where ni, Ni, and Ii are the density, atom number, and
PA laser intensity respectively for the bin i. The aver-
age runs over all pairs of atoms in bin i. Z(E) corre-
sponds to the intensity-normalized stimulated width for
a collisional energy E and can be well approximated by
the Wigner threshold law Z(E) ∝ Eℓ+1/2 at low ener-
gies. γmn = γ0 + IiZ(Emn) is the total width, with γ0
the natural width. ω is the frequency of the laser, and
∆ = AIi − Emn is the shift from the unperturbed reso-
nant frequency ω0 for the transition due to the collisional
energy Emn and the light shift AIi. The signal S is lin-
ear in I at low intensities, due to the saturation of the
ionization transition.

The input parameters for the simulation are the initial
distributions of atoms in the dipole trap (determined by
the dipole trap waist, depth and the initial temperature),
the power of the PA laser beam, its beam waist and the
light shift. We obtain the waist from the measured PA
laser power and the frequency of the oscillating ion sig-
nal. The waist obtained this way is consistent with the
one measured directly with a scanning knife-edge beam
proﬁler. We measure the s-wave light shift with short
PA pulse durations on the J = 2 peak, and use this
experimentally-determined light shift for all rotational
peaks.

DISCUSSION

The simulations conﬁrm that the oscillations observed
in the ion signal are due to the motion of the atoms in
the PA potential. This motion causes a periodic mod-
ulation of the density at the bottom of the potential,
which is mainly responsible for the signal. There is also
an energy modulation, since the atoms gain a maximum

5

kinetic energy when they reach the bottom of the poten-
tial. The energy increase is what makes it possible to see
high rotational levels in Fig. 1, which would otherwise
be absent due to the centrifugal barrier.

In an initial simulation, we assume Wigner threshold
law behavior and include only the lowest partial wave al-
lowed for the rotational peak in question. This simple
model reproduces the essential structure of the oscilla-
tion, characterized by a strong initial peak followed by
further oscillations of diminishing amplitude. Quantita-
tive agreement is not, however, achieved and the height
of the prompt ion signal is not reproduced accurately.

To obtain quantitative agreement with the data we ex-
tended the simulation to include the full hyperﬁne struc-
ture of each rotational peak. In this extended model, the
ion signal at each time step is found by summing Eq. 2
over the hyperﬁne substates f of the rotational state in
question,

Shfs(ω) =

S(ω − ωf ).

(3)

X
f

Here ωf is the unperturbed resonant frequency of each
hyperﬁne transition. A diﬀerent function Zf (E) must
be used for the intensity-normalized stimulated width of
each hyperﬁne transition. This stimulated width is a sum
over all contributing partial waves and Zeeman sublevels
of the colliding atoms [1, 23].

The simulated ion signal Shfs is shown in Fig. 2 su-
perimposed on the experimental signal. The amplitude
of the simulated signal is normalized to the experiment.
To accurately reproduce the experimental procedure, the
simulation was performed for a range of laser tunings ω,
and the tuning yielding the greatest integrated ion signal
was selected. Because our lasers have a nominal 5 MHz
stability, the simulated signal is a weighted sum of the
time series over an appropriate range of detunings.

The simulation reproduces the oscillations, and also
shows a prompt ion signal due to s and p wave photoas-
sociation. This prompt signal is reproduced for J = 1, 2
and 3, with the largest prompt signal for J = 2. The
agreement between simulation and experiment is best
for J = 4, possibly because the signal is dominated by
a single partial wave (d-wave). Lower rotational peaks
have signiﬁcant contributions from two or more partial
waves, and consequently are more sensitive to the molec-
ular structure model. The eﬀect of the dominant partial
wave in each time series is manifest as the initial peak be-
comes progressively steeper for angular momenta above
J = 2.

We also found that the simulation consistently showed
reduced visibility of the oscillations when the simulated
laser frequency was set red of the transition center, and
enhanced visibility when set to the blue.

In a further series of experiments, we explore diﬀerent
energy regimes by repeating the measurement at various
PA potential depths. We increase the depth up to 6 mK

104

103

102

)
s
t
i
n
u
 
.
b
r
a
(
 
l
a
n
g
s
 
n
o
i
 
d
e
t
a
r
g
e
t
n
I

i

101

10

100
Power (mW)

1000

FIG. 3: Power dependence of the integrated ion signal for
J = 4 (black circles) and J = 5 (red squares). The lines
radii is 14 µm.
correspond power law ﬁts. The PA laser 1/e

2

by changing the laser power. As we increase the depth of
the potential, we observe an increase in the oscillation fre-
quency of the ion signal. The oscillation frequency scales
as the potential depth raised to the power 0.55 ± 0.09,
consistent with the square-root dependence expected for
oscillation in a Gaussian potential.

We study the dependence of the magnitude of the ion
signal on the potential depth. Figure 3 shows the in-
tegrated ion signal as a function of the PA laser power
for the J = 4 (circles) and J = 5 (squares) peaks. The
J = 5 signal is considerably weaker and for low powers it
is buried in the noise. The signal follows approximately
a power law. At high powers we observe a saturation of
the signal that happens at a lower power for J = 4 than
for J = 5.

The PA lineshape suﬀers considerable modiﬁcations at
high powers. The observed shifts become larger than
the line width at low powers, and the spectrum is power
broadened. This suggests that the saturation of the sig-
nal in Fig. 3 is a consequence of the line shape modiﬁca-
tions, which aﬀect the denominator of Eq. 2.

Simulations support the hypothesis that this satura-
tion is due to power broadening of the PA transition,
with simulated ion signals saturating as power broad-
ening becomes signiﬁcant. Further, in simulations this
saturation occurs at higher intensities for J = 5 than
for J = 4, as expected from the behaviour of the stim-
ulated width function Zf (E). The simulation produces
a power-law dependence, but with a diﬀerent exponent
to that observed experimentally. The accuracy of the
molecular structure input is much more important for
the power dependence than it is for the time dependence
of the signal.

CONCLUSION

6

In summary, we study the mechanical eﬀects present
in high intensity photoassociation. The time resolution
of the ion signal provides clear evidence for oscillations
of the atoms inside the PA laser potential. We present a
simulation that closely reproduces the experimental re-
sults. The PA potential gives the atoms enough energy
to excite higher rotational levels, an excitation which
is strongly forbidden by centrifugal barriers in an un-
perturbed thermal gas at the dipole trap temperature.
In particular, when we start with a Bose-Einstein con-
densate, we observe partial wave contributions up to d
waves. The potential created by the PA laser imparts
collision energy to the atoms in a controlled, albeit non-
monochromatic way. The present results additionally
demonstrate the use of time-resolved photoassociation to
study rapid density dynamics in an atomic cloud [21].
The understanding of mechanical eﬀects will play an im-
portant role in future studies of ultracold photoassocia-
tion at high intensities.

We thank Fredrik Fatemi for providing his earlier ob-

servations of high rotational levels at high intensity.

[1] E. Tiesinga, K. M. Jones, P. D. Lett, U. Volz, C. J.
Williams, and P. S. Julienne, Phys. Rev. A 71, 052703
(2005).

[2] K. M. Jones, S. Maleki, S. Bize, P. D. Lett, C. J.
Williams, H. Richling, H. Kn¨ockel, E. Tiemann,
H. Wang, P. L. Gould, et al., Phys. Rev. A 54, R1006
(1996).

[3] W. I. McAlexander, E. R. I. Abraham, and R. G. Hulet,

Phys. Rev. A 54, R5 (1996).

[4] J. R. Gardner, R. A. Cline, J. D. Miller, D. J. Heinzen,
H. M. J. M. Boesten, and B. J. Verhaar, Phys. Rev. Lett.
74, 3764 (1995).

[5] I. D. Prodan, M. Pichler, M. Junker, R. G. Hulet, and

J. L. Bohn, Phys. Rev. Lett. 91, 080402 (2003).

[6] C. McKenzie, J. H. Denschlag, H. H¨aﬀner, A. Browaeys,
L. E. E. de Araujo, F. K. Fatemi, K. M. Jones, J. E.
Simsarian, D. Cho, A. Simoni, et al., Phys. Rev. Lett.
88, 120403 (2002).

[7] S. D. Kraft, M. Mudrich, M. U. Staudt, J. Lange,
O. Dulieu, R. Wester, and M. Weidem¨uller, Phys. Rev.
A 71, 013417 (2005).

[8] A. Fioretti, D. Comparat, C. Drag, T. F. Gallagher, and

P. Pillet, Phys. Rev. Lett. 82, 1839 (1999).

[9] J. P. Shaﬀer, W. Chalupczak, and N. P. Bigelow, Phys.

Rev. Lett. 83, 3621 (1999).

[10] W. C. Stwalley and H. Wang, J. Mol. Spectrosc. 195,

194 (1999).

[11] R. Dumke, M. Johanning, E. Gomez, J. D. Weinstein,
K. M. Jones, and P. D. Lett, New J. Phys. 8, 64 (2006).
[12] P. D. Lett, K. Helmerson, W. D. Phillips, L. P. Ratliﬀ,
S. L. Rolston, and M. E. Wagshul, Phys. Rev. Lett. 71,
2200 (1993).

[13] L. P. Ratliﬀ, M. E. Wagshul, P. D. Lett, S. L. Rolston,

and W. D. Phillips, J. Chem. Phys 101, 2638 (1994).
[14] R. Napolitano, J. Weiner, C. J. Williams, and P. S. Juli-

enne, Phys. Rev. Lett. 73, 1352 (1994).

[15] K. M. Jones, P. D. Lett, E. Tiesinga, and P. S. Julienne,

Phys. Rev. A 61, 012501 (1999).

Rev. Mod. Phys. 78, 483 (2006).

[20] M. Mudrich, S. Kraft, K. Singer, R. Grimm, A. Mosk,
and M. Weidem¨uller, Phys. Rev. Lett. 88, 253001 (2002).
[21] N. P. Proukakis, J. Schmiedmayer, and H. T. C. Stoof,

Phys. Rev. A 73, 053603 (2006).

[16] K. M. Jones, S. Maleki, L. P. Ratliﬀ, and P. D. Lett, J.

[22] F. K. Fatemi, K. M. Jones, P. D. Lett, and E. Tiesinga,

Phys. B 30, 289 (1997).

[17] U. Schl¨oder, C. Silber, T. Deuschle, and C. Zimmermann,

Phys. Rev. A 66, 061403(R) (2002).

[18] M. Movre and G. Pichler, J. Phys. B 10, 2631 (1977).
[19] K. M. Jones, E. Tiesinga, P. D. Lett, and P. S. Julienne,

Phys. Rev. A 66, 053401 (2002).

[23] C. Samuelis, E. Tiesinga, T. Laue, M. Elbs, H. Kn¨ockel,
and E. Tiemann, Phys. Rev. A 63, 012710 (2001).

7

