EPJ manuscript No.
(will be inserted by the editor)

6
0
0
2
 
v
o
N
 
0
3
 
 
]
h
p
-
m
o
t
a
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
2
0
3
1
1
6
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Controllable 3D atomic Brownian motor in optical
lattices

Claude M. Dion1,a, Peder Sj¨olund1, Stefan J. H. Petra1, Svante Jonsell1,b, Mats Nyl´en1,
Laurent Sanchez-Palencia2, and Anders Kastberg1

1 Department of Physics, Ume˚a University, SE-90187 Ume˚a, Sweden
2 Laboratoire Charles Fabry de l’Institut d’Optique, CNRS, Univ. Paris-Sud, Campus Polytechnique,

RD-128, F-91127 Palaiseau cedex, France

Abstract. We study a Brownian motor, based on cold atoms in optical lattices,
where atomic motion can be induced in a controlled manner in an arbitrary di-
rection, by rectiﬁcation of isotropic random ﬂuctuations. In contrast with ratchet
mechanisms, our Brownian motor operates in a potential that is spatially and
temporally symmetric, in apparent contradiction to the Curie principle. Simula-
tions, based on the Fokker-Planck equation, allow us to gain knowledge on the
qualitative behaviour of our Brownian motor. Studies of Brownian motors, and
in particular ones with unique control properties, are of fundamental interest be-
cause of the role they play in protein motors and their potential applications in
nanotechnology. In particular, our system opens the way to the study of quantum
Brownian motors.

1 Introduction

Brownian motors are devices capable of converting the energy of the random, isotropic motion
of Brownian particles into useful work, for instance driving the particles into a directed motion,
without any macroscopic force [1,2]. This possibility is not trivial in the face of fundamental
symmetry and thermodynamic laws. Indeed, realising a Brownian motor requires that the
system must be (i) asymmetric and (ii) brought out of thermodynamic equilibrium. On one
hand, the need for asymmetry to extract directed motion out of random ﬂuctuations is intuitive
and is underpinned by the Curie principle, which states that asymmetric dynamics cannot
emerge in a system possessing both spatial and temporal symmetries [3]. On the other hand,
the need for working out of equilibrium comes from the second law of thermodynamics, which
states that the total entropy always increases. Surprisingly enough, these two requirements are
generally suﬃcient for realising a Brownian motor, although no rigorous proof is available so
far [2]. In his lectures of physics, Richard Feynman describes a seminal ratchet mechanism
able to rectify noise [4], based on an original idea of Smoluchowski [5]. Up to now, essentially
all suggestions and tentative demonstrations of ratchet eﬀects and Brownian motors rely on
that archetype principle, based on the application of a force, asymmetric either in space or
in time, albeit one whose macroscopic average vanishes. However, it was suggested in ref. [6]
that a ratchet eﬀect can be induced in spatially and temporally symmetric potentials, provided
that asymmetric jumps occur between potentials that are spatially shifted. It should be noted
also that previous realisations of Brownian motors typically inherently lack the possibility

a e-mail: claude.dion@tp.umu.se
b Current address: Department of Physics, University of Wales Swansea, Singleton Park, Swansea

SA2 8PP, United Kingdom

2

Will be inserted by the editor

of inducing motion in any direction in three dimensions and are diﬃcult to control, as the
asymmetry is built into the system.

Interestingly, systems of cold atoms in dissipative optical lattices oﬀer plenty of possibilities
to investigate standard problems of statistical physics with an unprecedented accuracy [7]. In-
deed, these have proved to be highly controllable and versatile systems [7,8]. Hence, dissipative
optical lattices have been used recently to study several eﬀects, such as mechanical bistabil-
ity [9,10], spatial diﬀusion in random or quasi-periodic structures [11,12,13,14], and stochastic
resonance [15,16,17]. Ratchet eﬀects have also been investigated in dissipative optical lattices
with either a spatial [18,19], or a temporal asymmetry [20,21,22,23].

In this work, we review our recent experimental realisation of a Brownian motor based on the
model proposed in ref. [6], using an ultra-cold gas of atoms trapped in a stationary dissipative
double optical lattice [24], and provide further analysis of the rectiﬁcation mechanism. Our
Brownian motor operates with a mechanism where the potentials are both temporally and
spatially symmetric. Moreover, in contrast to other rectiﬁcation mechanisms reported so far,
the motion can be induced in any direction in three dimensions with a controlled speed. This
new type of Brownian motor opens up possibilities for fundamental studies of noise-induced
directed motion. The underlying principle is very general and is potentially transferable to
molecular motors and to applications in nano-electronics and chemistry [6].

We start by presenting in sec. 2 the basic working principle of our Brownian motor. Then,
in sec. 3, we discuss its experimental realisation with cold atoms in a double optical lattice. In
sec. 4, we investigate the qualitative behaviour of the Brownian motor, using classical simula-
tions based on the Fokker-Planck equation. Then, we discuss in sec. 5 how this system could be
extended to a regime relevant for the study of quantum Brownian motors. Finally, we summarise
our results in sec. 6.

2 Brownian motor with symmetric potentials

The basic rectiﬁcation mechanism demonstrated in this work is depicted in ﬁg. 1 (see also refs. [6,
24]). Depending on their internal state, the atoms are subjected to one of two three-dimensional
periodic potentials (UA and UB, represented in 1D in ﬁg. 1) with identical periods. In the
simplest situation, the potentials are identical but possibly spatially shifted. At suﬃciently low
temperature, the atoms are trapped in the wells of the potentials. In addition, they are assumed
to undergo a Brownian motion in each potential and can be transferred to a neighbouring site
via thermal activation. Ever so often, an atom will be pumped from one internal state to the
other, resulting in random jumps between potentials UA and UB, with rates γA→B and γB→A.

Fig. 1. Rectiﬁcation mechanism. Atoms move in two symmetric potentials UA(z) and UB(z) that
are coupled via the asymmetric optical pumping rates γA→B and γB→A (γA→B ≫ γB→A). a) The
potentials are in phase. The transfer from the long lived state B, to the transient state A, and back,
will not lead to biased motion. b) A phase shift ϕ (6= 0, π) is introduced. Spatial diﬀusion will be
strongly facilitated in one direction, leading to a drift velocity vd. [Taken from P. Sj¨olund, S. J. H.
Petra, C. M. Dion, S. Jonsell, M. Nyl´en, L. Sanchez-Palencia, and A. Kastberg, Phys. Rev. Lett. 96,
190602 (2006). Copyright (2006) by the American Physical Society.]

Will be inserted by the editor

3

The asymmetry that eventually gives rise to controlled rectiﬁcation is caused by a pronounced
diﬀerence in the transfer rates between the potentials (γA→B 6= γB→A). In the case where
γA→B > γB→A, an atom will spend most of the time in the long lived state (B), and will
oscillate near the bottom of a trapping site. At random times, it is pumped to the transient
state (A), from where it returns quickly to state B. This excursion may drastically aﬀect the
motion of the atoms.

If the two potentials are identical and in phase [ﬁg. 1(a)], this excursion will not aﬀect the
dynamics of the atoms. If the potentials are diﬀerent, but still in phase, the change of state
may result in a slight heating and increase the probability for an atom to be transferred to a
neighbouring trapping site. This diﬀusion is symmetric. Qualitatively, the same occurs if the
potentials are shifted by half a spatial period of the lattices, since no direction is favoured. The
situation changes drastically if the relative phase between the potentials is shifted [ﬁg. 1(b)].
During the time spent in lattice A, the atom experiences a potential with an incline that depends
on the phase shift. The diﬀusion is then enhanced in a given direction, and correspondingly
reduced in the opposite direction. While the potentials are symmetric and stationary, the atoms
are propelled in a speciﬁc direction, which can be controlled by modifying the phase shift.

It is straightforward to extend the principle to three-dimensional potentials and to obtain
a controlled motion in any direction. This mechanism works despite the absence of spatial as
well as of temporal asymmetry, in apparent contradiction to the Curie principle [3]. Instead,
the combined dynamics, made up of phases of Hamiltonian motion interrupted by stochastic
dissipative processes, provides the asymmetry [6]. In our system, the directed motion is induced
for atoms switching between two state-dependent periodic potentials that are coupled via optical
pumping. The rectiﬁcation process emanates from the fact that the couplings between the two
potentials used, via the vacuum ﬁeld reservoir, are strongly asymmetric.

3 Experimental realisation

This Brownian motor is realised, in a completely controllable fashion, using cold caesium atoms
in a double optical lattice [24,30,31,32]. The interaction of an atom with the interference pattern
from a number of laser beams creates a spatially periodic potential (optical lattice), due to a
second-order interaction between an atomic dipole and the light ﬁeld [7,8]. With the laser
frequency of the optical lattice close to an atomic resonance, spontaneous emission of photons
leads to dissipation. In addition to the trapping potential, we then have Sisyphus cooling [25,
26,27], providing friction and momentum diﬀusion in our system, and resulting in a Brownian
motion of the atoms [28,29].

In our setup, described in detail in refs. [30,31,32], we superpose two optical lattices, each
being formed from the interference of four laser beams, resulting in tetragonal lattice struc-
tures [7,33]. In lattice A, the atomic state trapped is the Fg = 3 hyperﬁne structure levels of
the ground state of Cs (6s 2S1/2), while lattice B, spatially overlapped with the former, traps
atoms in the Fg = 4 state. The diﬀerence in energy between these two ground states is large
enough to enable spectrally selective optical lattices, while at the same time being small enough
that the diﬀerence in the periodicity of the lattices (which depends on the wavelength of the
light) is negligible on the physical scale of the region of interaction with the atoms.

The lasers are tuned near the D2 resonance (6s 2S1/2 → 6p 2P3/2) at 852 nm. More specif-
ically, lattices A and B are tuned close to the Fg = 3 → Fe = 4 and Fg = 4 → Fe = 5
resonances, respectively. The latter is a closed transition, so the rate of optical pumping out
of lattice B will be slow, while the former is an open transition, such that the probability of
optical pumping from lattice A to lattice B is high. The relative spatial phase between the two
lattices can be controlled accurately, along any direction in space, by changing the path lengths
of the individual laser beams [30,31,32].

The experimental sequence is as follows. We start with a cloud of laser-cooled Cs atoms at a
temperature of a few microkelvins. The two optical lattices are then turned on, trapping some
108 atoms, with a ﬁlling fraction of about 5%. The atoms are left to interact with the lattices
for a time τ , after which the lattice beams are abruptly turned oﬀ. Since no trapping potential

4

Will be inserted by the editor

Fig. 2. Induced directed drift in the vertical (z) direction as a function of the relative spatial phase ϕ
for an interaction time τ of 350 ms.

is present any longer, the atoms will fall due to gravity and reach a detection probe located
∼ 5 cm below the interaction region with the optical lattices. This time-of-ﬂight technique [27]
gives the arrival time of atoms at the probe, which will depend on both the vertical (z) position
and the velocity of the atoms at the time of release. The initial velocity of the atoms in the
double optical lattice can then be straightforwardly extracted from this arrival time, provided
the distance between the interaction region and the probe is known [24].

Sample data are presented in ﬁg. 2, where the velocity of the atomic cloud in the double
optical lattice is plotted as a function of the spatial shift between the lattices, for lattice A
detuned 35.9Γ from the Fg = 3 → Fe = 4 transition with an irradiance of 0.5 mW/cm2
per laser beam, and lattice B detuned 40.0Γ from the Fg = 4 → Fe = 5 transition, with
6.1 mW/cm2 per beam (Γ is the natural linewidth of the 6p 2P3/2 state). As expected, no
drift is observed when the relative spatial phase, ϕ, is 0, π or 2π. For all other phase shifts, the
data of ﬁg. 2 clearly show an induced drift, with opposite extrema around π/2 and 3π/2. The
maximum drift velocity observed here is ≈ 0.8 mm/s, or 1/4 of an atomic recoil. It has been
proven in ref. [24] that the drift velocity in the lattice is constant in time, i.e., independent of
the interaction time τ .

As the lattice structures are periodic in all three dimensions and the relative spatial shifts
can be adjusted independently along the x, y or z directions, the drift can be induced in any
direction in space. This was evidenced in [24] by direct imaging of the atom cloud.

4 Classical simulations

In order to understand the qualitative behaviour of our Brownian motor, we have performed
simulations of a classical atomic cloud in an optical lattice. We thus consider Brownian particles
which can be in one of two internal states, indexed by j. The Brownian motion is characterised
by the momentum diﬀusion constant Dv(x) and the external potentials Uj(x). The Fokker-
Planck equation (FPE) [34] for the probability distribution Wj(x, v, t) of a particle in state j
located at x with velocity v, written in time units of the friction coeﬃcient and in space units
of the typical variation scale of the potentials (so that all variables are dimensionless) is given
by [6]

[∂t + v∂x] Wj + ∂v hv + ∇ ˜Uj(x) + Dv(x)∂vi Wj = ˜γj′→j(x)Wj′ − ˜γj→j′ (x)Wj .

(1)

The actual potentials created by the optical lattices are slightly more complicated than the
simple sine function model given in ﬁg. 1. First, the diﬀerent irradiances of the lasers used
to create each lattice results in distinct potential depths. Moreover, the interaction strength
also depends on the magnetic sublevel of the atom, such that the latter will feel variations in

Will be inserted by the editor

5

Fig. 3. Optical lattice potential along the z [U (x = 0, y = 0, z)] and x [U (x, y = 0, z = 0)] axes for (a)
a Jg = 1/2 → Je = 3/2 transition; (b) an atom in the F = 4, MF = +4 state, eq. (4).

the potential as it is transferred from one lattice to the other and as it is optically pumped
between MF states. Second, the actual potentials in our system have diﬀerent shapes in diﬀerent
directions.

The simplest atomic system which undergoes a Sisyphus eﬀect consists in two atomic levels
of total angular momentum Jg = 1/2 in the ground state and Je = 3/2 in the excited state [28].
The resulting optical lattice potential is then

U±(x) =

8¯h∆′
0
3

cos2(kxx) + cos2(kyy) ∓ cos(kxx) cos(kyy) cos(kzz)
(cid:3)
(cid:2)

(2)

for an atom in the Mg = ±1/2 substate, where ∆′
0 is the light shift and the k’s are the eﬀective
magnitude of the wave vectors along the axes [7]. We see that along z the potential is simply
sinusoidal, while in the two transverse directions, deep wells are separated by shallower minima,
as shown in ﬁg. 3(a).

To get a qualitative picture of the eﬀect of the shape of the potential, we have performed

numerical simulations of the FPE (1) in a 2D geometry, using the potential

˜Uj(x) = Aj (cid:2)

cos2(x/2 + ϕj,x) + 1 − cos(x/2 + ϕj,x) cos(z + ϕj,z)
(cid:3)

,

(3)

based on eq. (2) for y = 0, with parameters A = 200, Dv = 75, and ˜γA→B = 3˜γB→A = 7.5,
for a phase shift chosen either in the z or x directions, resulting in a drift velocity vdz or vdx,
respectively. First, we see in ﬁg. 4(a) that the overall variation of the drift velocity as a function
of the phase shift along z is very similar to the one observed experimentally (see ﬁg. 2). One
main diﬀerence is that there is a plateau close to ϕ = 0 or 2π where the drift velocity is very
small, i.e., the Brownian motor mechanism is very weak in these regions. In contrast, in the
experiment we get a clear directed motion even for minute phase diﬀerence between the lattices.
Also, the simulation gives a maximum eﬀect for phase shifts of ϕ ≈ 2π/3 and 4π/3, while in
the experiment the maximum drift is seen at ϕ ≈ π/2, 3π/2.

We observe, as expected, that the shape of the potential has a strong inﬂuence on the drift
velocity for a given phase shift. A signiﬁcant Brownian motor eﬀect is seen only when the
minima of the deep potentials of both lattices are close together, but slightly displaced. This
is easily explained as the atoms spend most of their time close to the absolute minima of the
long lived potential B, and the force they feel when switching to the shorter-lived lattice A will
be bigger for the steeper slopes of the deep minima than the shallower ones.

In reality, the Brownian motor with caesium atoms will show a less pronounced diﬀerence
along the diﬀerent directions, as the hyperﬁne structure is more complex than that obtained
for the 1/2 → 3/2 atomic transition. Optical pumping from the cooling process leads to a
polarisation of the atoms in the lattice, and most will be found in the extreme MF = ±F

6

Will be inserted by the editor

Fig. 4. Results from numerical simulations of the Brownian motor mechanism for the vertical (z) and
horizontal (x) directions: (a) for a Jg = Mg = 1/2 atom; (b) for a Fg = MF = 4 atom. The drift
velocity vd is plotted as a function of the relative spatial phase ϕ ≡ ϕA − ϕB, varied independently
along z or x.

states. For a caesium atom in the Fg = 4, MF = ±4 state, the lattice potential is given by

U±(x) =

4¯h∆′
0
45 (cid:8)

23

cos2 (kxx) + cos2 (kyy)
(cid:3)
(cid:2)

∓ 44 cos (kxx) cos (kyy) cos (kzz)

.

(4)

The potential is still sinusoidal along z, while in the two transverse directions, the minima are
separated by regions where the potential is essentially ﬂat, as shown in ﬁg. 3(b). Running the
same simulations as before, but using now

˜Uj(x) = Aj (cid:8)

23/44

cos2(x/2 + ϕj,x) + 1
(cid:2)

(cid:3)

− cos(x/2 + ϕj,x) cos(z + ϕj,z)

,

(5)

we see in ﬁg. 4(b) that the diﬀerence between the x and z directions is less pronounced than
before.

(cid:9)

(cid:9)

5 Towards a quantum Brownian motor

As seen in the previous section, the main features of our Brownian motor can be qualitatively
described using a purely classical model. This is because, although of an essential quantum
nature, the coupling between the potentials is driven by spontaneous emission processes which
can be treated as semi-classical random jumps [35]. Nevertheless, it opens the way for the
creation of a quantum Brownian motor [36]. It could be realised at very low temperatures, for
instance, at high potential depths, where the motion will clearly be quantised, or by going to a
regime where tunnelling between potential wells will become important. Another possibility is
to explore possible quantum resonances that are predicted for atomic ratchets [37,38].

One diﬃculty with the current setup is that the parameters that are the potential depth,
the magnitude of the diﬀusion, and the transition rates between the two lattices all depend on
both the irradiance and the detuning of the optical lattice lasers. Changing either thus results
in a diﬀerent set of parameters. Going to far-detuned lattices and adding additional lasers to
induce diﬀusion and control the transfer between the lattices would allow for an investigation
of the eﬀect of individual parameters.

6 Conclusion

In summary, we have realised a Brownian motor for cold atoms, based on a dissipative double
optical lattice. This is based on a new rectiﬁcation mechanism of noise in which the potentials

Will be inserted by the editor

7

are all symmetric but spatially shifted with asymmetric transition rates. As our Brownian
motor relies on spatially symmetric potentials, it allows for a great control of the direction
and magnitude of the induced drift velocity. Numerical simulations have shown that a simple
model describing the motion of Brownian particles shifting between two sinusoidal potentials
captures the main features of this Brownian motor. Because of the level of control it oﬀers, our
system is promising for the study of the general properties and dynamics of Brownian motors.
In particular, it should allow the investigation of quantum versions of these.

Acknowledgements

This research was conducted using the resources of the High Performance Computing Center
North (HPC2N). We thank the Knut och Alice Wallenbergs stiftelse, Carl Tryggers stiftelse,
Kempestiftelserna, Magnus Bergwalls stiftelse, the Swedish Research Council, and SIDA/SAREC
for ﬁnancial support.

References

1. P. H¨anggi, F. Marchesoni, and F. Nori, Ann. Phys. (Leipzig) 14, 51 (2005).
2. P. Reimann, Phys. Rep. 361, 57 (2002).
3. P. Curie, Journal de Physique, 3e s´erie 3, 393 (1894).
4. R. P. Feynman, R. B. Leighton, and M. Sands, in The Feynman Lectures on Physics (Addison-

Wesley, Reading, Mass., 1963), Chap. 46.

5. M. von Smoluchowski, Phys. Z. 13, 1069 (1912).
6. L. Sanchez-Palencia, Phys. Rev. E 70, 011102 (2004).
7. G. Grynberg and C. Robilliard, Phys. Rep. 355, 335 (2001).
8. P. S. Jessen and I. H. Deutsch, Adv. At. Mol. Opt. Phys. 37, 95 (1996).
9. G. Grynberg, C. Trich´e, L. Guidoni, and P. M. Visser, Europhys. Lett. 51, 506 (2000).
10. P. M. Visser and G. Grynberg, Eur. Phys. J. D 12, 403 (2000).
11. P. Horak, J.-Y. Courtois, and G. Grynberg, Phys. Rev. A 58, 3953 (1998).
12. G. Grynberg, P. Horak, and C. Mennerat-Robilliard, Europhys. Lett. 49, 424 (2000).
13. L. Guidoni, C. Trich´e, P. Verkerk, and G. Grynberg, Phys. Rev. Lett. 79, 3363 (1997).
14. L. Guidoni, B. D´epret, A. di Stefano, and P. Verkerk, Phys. Rev. A 60, R4233 (1999).
15. L. Sanchez-Palencia, F.-R. Carminati, M. Schiavoni, F. Renzoni, and G. Grynberg, Phys. Rev.

Lett. 88, 133903 (2002).

59, 493 (2002).

16. M. Schiavoni, F.-R. Carminati, L. Sanchez-Palencia, F. Renzoni, and G. Grynberg, Europhys. Lett.

17. L. Sanchez-Palencia and G. Grynberg, Phys. Rev. A 68, 023404 (2003).
18. C. Mennerat-Robilliard, D. Lucas, S. Guibal, J. Tabosa, C. Jurczak, J.-Y. Courtois, and G. Gryn-

berg, Phys. Rev. Lett. 82, 851 (1999).

19. C. Robilliard, D. Lucas, and G. Grynberg, Appl. Phys. A 75, 213 (2002).
20. M. Schiavoni, L. Sanchez-Palencia, F. Renzoni, and G. Grynberg, Phys. Rev. Lett. 90, 094101

21. P. H. Jones, M. Goonasekera, and F. Renzoni, Phys. Rev. Lett. 93, 073904 (2004).
22. R. Gommers, P. Douglas, S. Bergamini, M. Goonasekera, P. H. Jones, and F. Renzoni, Phys. Rev.

(2003).

Lett. 94, 143001 (2005).

23. R. Gommers, S. Bergamini, and F. Renzoni, Phys. Rev. Lett. 95, 073003 (2005).
24. P. Sj¨olund, S. J. H. Petra, C. M. Dion, S. Jonsell, M. Nyl´en, L. Sanchez-Palencia, and A. Kastberg,

Phys. Rev. Lett. 96, 190602 (2006).
25. S. Chu, Rev. Mod. Phys. 70, 685 (1998).
26. C. N. Cohen-Tannoudji, Rev. Mod. Phys. 70, 707 (1998).
27. W. D. Phillips, Rev. Mod. Phys. 70, 721 (1998).
28. J. Dalibard and C. Cohen-Tannoudji, J. Opt. Soc. Am. B 6, 2023 (1989).
29. L. Sanchez-Palencia, P. Horak, and G. Grynberg, Eur. Phys. J. D 18, 353 (2002).
30. H. Ellmann, J. Jersblad, and A. Kastberg, Phys. Rev. Lett. 90, 053001 (2003).
31. H. Ellmann, J. Jersblad, and A. Kastberg, Eur. Phys. J. D 22, 355 (2003).

8

Will be inserted by the editor

32. S. J. H. Petra, P. Sj¨olund, and A. Kastberg, J. Opt. A.: Pure Appl. Opt. 8, 381 (2006).
33. P. Verkerk, D. R. Meacher, A. B. Coates, J.-Y. Courtois, S. Guibal, C. Salomon, and G. Grynberg,

Europhys. Lett. 26, 171 (1994).

34. H. Risken, The Fokker-Planck Equation, 2nd ed. (Springer, Berlin, 1989).
35. G. Lindblad, Commun. Math. Phys. 48, 119 (1976).
36. P. H¨anggi and G.-L. Ingold, Chaos 15, 026105 (2005).
37. E. Lundh and M. Wallin, Phys. Rev. Lett. 94, 110603 (2005).
38. E. Lundh, Phys. Rev. E 74, 016212 (2006).

