All-optical atom surface traps implemented with one-dimensional planar diﬀractive
microstructures

O. Alloschery, R. Mathevet, and J. Weiner∗
IRSAMC/LCAR
Universit´e Paul Sabatier, 118 route de Narbonne,
31062 Toulouse, France
(Dated: July 23, 2013)

We characterize the loading, containment and optical properties of all-optical atom traps im-
plemented by diﬀractive focusing with one-dimensional (1D) microstructures milled on gold ﬁlms.
These on-chip Fresnel lenses with focal lengths of the order of a few hundred microns produce
optical-gradient-dipole traps. Cold atoms are loaded from a mirror magneto-optical trap (MMOT)
centered a few hundred microns above the gold mirror surface. Details of loading optimization are
reported and perspectives for future development of these structures are discussed.

PACS numbers: 32.80.Pj,81.16.Ta,39.25.+k
Keywords: cold atom; diﬀraction; microstructure

I.

INTRODUCTION

Manipulation and control of matter at the micro- nano- and atomic level has become increasingly important for
the investigation of cold quantum gases [1], atom interferometry [2], quantum information processing [3] and precision
positioning of atoms on or under surfaces [4, 5]. For the most part magnetic forces have been used in order to take
advantage of favorable scaling laws and on-chip integration technologies as component size reduces to the micron
scale [6, 7, 8]. The implementation of optical forces has proceeded more slowly because the subwavelength electro-
magnetic ﬁeld localisation required to achieve comparable scaling-law advantages has been more diﬃcult to realize.
Earlier work has emphasized remote, table-top preparation of optical trap arrays with subsequent projection into the
closed vacuum system containing the cold atoms [9] or the use of “optical tweezers” either for long-range transport of
cold-atom condensates [10] or for the sorting of individual atoms in 1D strings [11]. Recent developments in integrated-
and nano-photonics [12], however have renewed interest in all-optical approaches to atom and molecule manipulation
using on-chip planar architectures [13, 14]. Optical forces are of interest because of their wide applicability to atoms,
molecules and clusters. They rely on electrical polarization, independent of net magnetic dipole moment, while most
molecules are singlets with no net magnetic dipole in the electronic ground state. Here we report a study using planar
diﬀractive focusing to load an elongated optical dipole trap with cold atoms from a 3-D mirror magneto-optical trap [7]
oriented 100 − 500 µm above a gold mirror surface.

II. OVERALL EXPERIMENTAL SETUP

Figure 1 shows a schematic of the overall setup. The MMOT, cooling and repumping near the Cs [S1/2, F=4] →
Cs [P3/2, F′=5] and the Cs [S1/2, F=3] → Cs [P3/2, F′=3] transitions respectively, produces a cloud of cold cesium
atoms several hundred microns from the gold mirror surface. The MMOT is loaded from background Cs vapor and
captures ≃ 3 × 106 atoms with a density of ≃ 3 × 1011 cm−3 at a temperature of ≃ 30 µK. The surface itself is formed
from a gold layer 400 nm thick evaporated onto a 25 mm square, 1 mm thick fused silica substrate. Two laser beams
reﬂect in the horizontal x − z plane while two counterpropagating beams along the vertical y axis plus the external
magnetic ﬁeld gradient complete the standard six-beam MOT conﬁguration. A focused ion beam (FIB) is used to mill
at the mirror center a pattern of horizontal slits so as to produce a Fresnel diﬀraction lens with a 1-D focus. When
illuminated from behind the mirror with an intense laser beam tuned far to the red of the Cs D2 line, the structure
forms a Fresnel far-oﬀ resonance dipole trap (FFORT). This FFORT is loaded with cold atoms from the MMOT. We
have studied cold Cs atom trapping using diﬀractive structures with focal lengths of 500 µm and 200 µm.

∗Electronic address: jweiner@irsamc.ups-tlse.fr

6
0
0
2
 
v
o
N
 
9
 
 
]
h
p
-
m
o
t
a
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
2
9
0
1
1
6
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

2

FIG. 1: Schematic of the MMOT/FFORT setup. A–Gold mirror focused-ion-beam (FIB)-milled at center with 1-D Fresnel
diﬀraction lens. B–Laser beams and magnet coils (blue rings) forming the MMOT. Green cloud of cold Cs atoms is trapped
500 µm from the mirror surface. C–Fresnel far oﬀ-resonant trap (FFORT)
at the MMOT center at a distance typically 100
laser beam illuminating the mirror and Fresnel structure from the rear. D–Zoom of the Fresnel structure at the mirror center
with 500 µm focal length. Overall Fresnel motif dimensions: 209 µm
28 µm with 12 slits on
each side. FFORT laser beam: focused gaussian TEM00 on the Fresnel structure with 230 µm intensity (1/e2) spot diameter.

206 µm; central slit width:

≃

×

−

Fresnel
structure

diffuser
x,y PZT

single−mode

fiber

Laser
diode

λ/2

z

CCD

FIG. 2: Schematic of the Fresnel structure optical characterization system. The piezoelectric element dithers the diﬀusing
screen to eliminate speckle in the spatial intensity distribution.

A. Fresnel Lens Characterization

In order to verify the planar Fresnel lens designs we developed a separate test setup that directly measures the
focal properties of these devices. Figure 2 shows the arrangement. A laser beam issuing from a stabilized laser diode
coupled to a single-mode ﬁber is linearly polarized and impinges on the FIB-milled Fresnel structure from the back
(substrate side). A diﬀuser plate placed on the output side maps the spatial intensity of the diﬀracted light in planes
parallel to the structure plane. A piezoelectric element dithers the diﬀuser plate in the x − y plane to eliminate the
eﬀects of speckle, and a microscope objective images the diﬀuser intensity pattern onto a CCD camera. The distance
between the diﬀuser-plate-imaging-objective combination and the Fresnel structure is systematically increased along
z. At each distance an image of the pattern is recorded on the CCD camera and integrated along x, the long axis of
the Fresnel slits, thereby generating a series of proﬁles of the intensity distribution along y as a function of z. The
resulting measured intensity map in the y − z plane is then compared with numerical simulations to verify design
accuracy. Figures 3 and 4 show the measured proﬁle and the numerical simulation respectively for the 500 µm focal
length Fresnel motif. The intensity proﬁles in the transverse focal plane and along the longitudinal axis are plotted
in Figs. 5 and 6. These plots show that the simulated transverse focus proﬁle (red curve) is signiﬁcantly sharper than
the measured CCD image (green curve). The black-dashed curve shows the simulated focal proﬁle averaged over the
eﬀective spatial resolution of 2.4 µm (×10 image magniﬁcation; CCD pixel element 24 µm square). Overall dimensions
of the simulated focal spot along the x, y, z directions are 192 µm, 2 µm, 35 µm, respectively. The excellent agreement
between the measured proﬁle and the spatially averaged calculated proﬁle indicates that the red-curve simulation well
represents the actual focus characteristic of the Fresnel lens. These results support and encourage the use of numerical
simulations to explore more elaborate lens designs.

3

FIG. 3: Measured spatial intensity map in the y
z
plane. Coordinate axes indicated in Fig. 1 and mea-
surement setup in Fig. 2. Focal distance is designed for
500 µm.

−

FIG. 4: Numerical simulation of the diﬀractive pattern
for the structure measured in Fig. 3.

FIG. 5: Intensity proﬁles in the transverse focal plane
(y-axis). Red curve shows the results of the simulation
in Fig. 4. Black dashed curve is the simulation averaged
over the spatial resolution of the optical measurement sys-
tem. Green curve is the measured intensity, normalized
to unity at the peak.

FIG. 6: Intensity proﬁle along the longitudinal symmetry
axis (z-axis). Red curve shows the numerical simulation
of Fig. 4. Green curve shows the measured intensity, nor-
malized to unity at the peak. Dimensions of the simu-
lated focus spot (FWHM) in the x, y, z directions are are
192 µm, 2.0 µm, 35 µm, respectively.

B. Atom Trap Imaging System

The atoms trapped in the MMOT and in the FFORT are imaged by an absorption proﬁle of a probe laser beam
tuned near the F = 4 → F′ = 5 transition. Figure 7 shows a schematic of the absorption imaging system which
registers a double image: one from atom absorption followed by mirror reﬂection, the other from mirror reﬂection
followed by atom absorption. We therefore obtain two projections from orthogonal directions and thus a 3D view
of the atom distribution. Figure 8 shows a typical image of the distribution of cold atoms trapped in the MMOT
when the trap center is located ≃ 500 µm away from the mirror surface. The optical thickness of trapped atoms in
the MMOT would be suﬃcient to attenuate the probe laser beam almost to extinction if tuned to the absorption
resonance peak. Therefore, for the MMOT images, the probe is tuned oﬀ-resonance by about four natural atomic
line widths in order to maintain linearity between absorption probability and atom number. For atoms trapped in
the FFORT, the imaging laser is resonant with the F = 4 → F′ = 5 transition. The distance from the MMOT to
the mirror plane can be varied either by mechanically moving the mirror closer to the atoms with a vernier screw
adjustment or by adding a bias magnetic ﬁeld that translates the cloud center. Figure 9 shows that the minimum
distance before atom loss from the trap becomes signiﬁcant is ≃ 300 µm. We believe that the onset of this loss
occurs because the vertical beams of the MMOT are partially occulted by the mirror. At the center of the mirror the
resulting sharp edge diﬀraction produces a shadow about 100 µm wide that begins to perturb the MMOT loading
rate at a comparable distance from the mirror surface.

Note that since the Fresnel lens is engraved on the mirror, all beams reﬂecting on the surface are diﬀracted by

4

D
C
C

u

v

z

x

FIG. 7: Schematic of the absorption imaging system used to detect cold atoms in the MMOT and in the FORT. Green spot
at focus of intense oﬀ-resonance red laser beam represents trapped atoms. Two green spots on the CCD plane represent the
absorption images focused by the blue lens. Note that CCD plane is rotated by an angle of 45 degrees with respect to the
mirror plane. Therefore trap images are foreshortened by √2 in the z direction.

the structure. This includes the imaging beam, whose diﬀracted part is not collected by the imaging lens. There is
therefore a region where we lose all information about the number of atoms. From geometrical considerations, the size
of this blind region is half the width of the structure in the x direction, so typically ∼ 100 µm. In the next generation
of structures, this size will be reduced to obtain a 75 µm x 200 µm footprint. Absorption is thus decreased by a factor
of 3 but this reduction permits imaging atoms down to 35-40 µm above the surface.

2

2
u [µm]

2
v [µm]

2

FIG. 8: Double absorption image (see Fig. 7). Left (right)
image side is the projection of atom cloud on the u-axis
(v-axis), corrected by a √2 foreshortening.

FIG. 9: Number of atoms contained in the MMOT as
function of distance from the mirror surface. Blue trian-
gles correspond to the mechanical approach (via a vernier
screw translation) of the mirror surface to the MMOT,
and red circles correspond to a translation of the mag-
netic ﬁeld minimum (via a small external bias ﬁeld).

III. FFORT ATOM LOADING FROM MMOT

A. Trapped atom number

We have carried out a series of measurements to optimize FFORT loading from the MMOT. Figure 10 shows an
absorption image of the atoms trapped in the FFORT with 500 µm focal length. We have also investigated 200 µm
focal length structures; but, in addition to atom loss from mirror proximity (Fig. 9) technical limitations associated
with imaging discussed in section II B, restrict systematic studies reported here to 500 µm focal-length devices.

We ﬁrst measured the trapped atom number as a function of FFORT laser power. The results are shown in Fig. 11
and, above a threshold of 20 mW, indicate a linearly increasing number of atoms. As the trapping laser power grows,
the eﬀective volume of the FFORT grows as well — ﬁrst in the central focal region, then in the small secondary
maxima adjacent to the main peak (see Figs. 5, 6). For these measurements the dipole-gradient trap laser detuning
was ﬁxed at ≃ 0.5 nm to the red of the Cs resonance line.

5

2

2
u [µm]

2
v [µm]

2

FIG. 10:
(see Fig. 7).
Double absorption image
Left(right) image side is the projection of atom cloud on
the u-axis (v-axis), corrected by a √2 foreshortening. Im-
age recorded 30 ms after MMOT extinction.

FIG. 11: Atom number vs. FFORT laser power.

Next Fig. 12 plots the atom number in the FFORT as a function of red detuning. We found that a detuning of
≃ −0.25 nm produced the optimum atom number. The rapid fall-oﬀ at smaller detunings is due to absorptive heating
while at larger detunings it is primarily due to the inverse relation between trap depth and detuning. The data shown
in Figs. 11, 12 were recorded 30 ms after extinguishing the MMOT so as to purge untrapped atoms from the imaging
ﬁeld of view.

B. Loading eﬃciency

We also determined loading eﬃciency, deﬁned as the ratio of trapped atoms to the initial atom number in the
MMOT. The relatively poor spatial overlap between the MMOT and the FFORT (compare Figs. 8, 10), results in a
rather low loading eﬃciency of only a few per cent.

In order to evaluate the number of trapped atoms initially in the volume of the diﬀraction pattern of the lens, we
carried out an optical pumping experiment through the structure. With the dipole trap laser oﬀ, we ﬁrst pump all
MMOT atoms (Cs [S1/2, F=4]) to the F=3 state with a 200 µs pulse resonant on the F = 4 → F′ = 4 transition.
Then, we illuminate the structure from behind with a F = 3 → F′ = 3 resonant 200 µs pulse, which pumps the atoms
back to the F=4 state. As this laser goes through the lens, only the atoms in the diﬀraction pattern are aﬀected.
We then take a usual absorption image on the F = 4 → F′ = 5 transition. Atoms outside the diﬀraction pattern are
still in the F = 3 state, and thus transparent to this probe. Comparing the number of atoms in the central peak of
this distribution to the number of atom in the FFORT, we can conclude that the capture eﬃciency of the dipole trap
approaches unity.

C. Temperature after release

Finally we also measured the atom temperature in the conﬁning y direction within the trap by monitoring the atom
cloud ballistic expansion after trap release [15]. The results, as a function of trap detuning are shown in Fig. 13. The
FFORT-trapped atoms are found to be signiﬁcantly colder than the atoms in the MMOT (∼ 6 µK vs. ∼ 30 µK). The
origin of this extra cooling eﬀect has not yet been thoroughly investigated. However from numerical simulation we
estimate the trapping frequency along the conﬁning axis to be about 13 kHz. Since a mechanical shutter extinguishes
the FFORT in about 1 ms, we speculate that part of the cooling eﬀect comes from adiabatic expansion just prior to
ballistic release. Note also that the temperature starts to decline with detuning beyond ∼ 1 nm, where decreasing
trap depth might lead to some evaporative cooling eﬀect.

6

FIG. 12: Atom number vs. FFORT detuning.

FIG. 13: Trap temperatures vs. FFORT red detuning.

FIG. 14: Numerical simulation of the diﬀractive pattern
for a 1-D array of ﬁve 200 µm focal length structures
measured in Fig. 15.

FIG. 15: Intensity proﬁle in the transverse focal plane (y-
axis) for 1D array of ﬁve 200 µm focal length lenses. Red
curve shows the results of the simulation in Fig. 14. Black
dashed curve is the simulation averaged over the spa-
tial resolution of the optical measurement system. Green
curve is the measured intensity, normalized to unity at
the peak.

IV. PERSPECTIVES

Several diﬀerent directions for development of these planar, all-optical atom trapping structures remain to be
exploited. As the work presented here shows, the most promising involve not only miniaturisation but integration of
structure functionality directly onto the chip. First, we are investigating 1D trap arrays as shown in Figs. 14 and 15
and 2D arrays as well. We are also developing variable-focal-length lenses useful for capturing atoms far from the
mirror and guiding them into very small volumes close to the surface. Second, we are exploring the integration of the
optical structures with on-chip microelectronic circuitry and micromechanical (MEMS) devices for each array element.
Dynamic addressing of the trapped cold atoms either electrically with integrated current-carrying wires or optically
with laser spots provide typical examples. Finally, miniaturization can be greatly improved by reducing the size of
FIB-milled Fresnel elements while maintaining adequate trapping eﬃciency. Further reduction to about a 10 µm
footprint should be possible by taking advantage of subwavelength surface wave phenomena [16, 17]. Development of
planar arrays together with atom transport and dynamic array-element addressing, opens the way to applications in
quantum gate implementation and precision atom doping of surfaces.

Acknowledgments

Support from the Minist`ere d´el´egu´e `a l’Enseignement sup´erieur et `a la Recherche under the programme ACI-
“Nanosciences-Nanotechnologies,” the R´egion Midi-Pyr´en´ees [SFC/CR 02/22], and FASTNet [HPRN-CT-2002-
00304] EU Research Training Network, is gratefully acknowledged. Technical assistance of H. Lezec and the fabrication

facilities of the Caltech Kavli Nanoscience Institute are also gratefully acknowledged.

7

[1] W. H¨ansel, P. Hommelhoﬀ, T. W. H¨ansch and J. Reichel, Nature 413, 498-501 (2001).
[2] Y-J. Wang, D. Z. Anderson, V. M. Bright, E. A. Cornell, Q. Diot, T. Kishimoto, M. Prentiss, R. A. Saravanan, S. R. Segal

[3] M Wilzbach, A. Haase, M. Schwarz, D. Heine, K. Wicker, X. Liu, K-H. Brenner, S. Groth, T. Fernholz, B. Hessmo, and

and S. Wu, Phys. Rev. Lett. 94, 090405 (2005).

J. Schmiedmayer, Fortschr. Phys. 54, 746-764 (2006).

[4] J. J. McClelland, S. B. Hill, M. Pichler, and R. J. Celotta, Adv. Materials 5, 575-580 (2004).
[5] R. Long, T. Rom, W. H¨ansel, T. W. H¨ansch, J. Reichel, Eur. Phys. J. D 35, 125-133 (2005).
[6] J. D. Weinstein and K. G. Libbrecht, Phys. Rev. A 52, 4004 (1995).
[7] J. Reichel, W. H¨ansel, and T. W. H¨ansch, Phys. Rev. Lett. 83, 3398 (1999).
[8] D. Cassettari, A. Chenet, R. Folman, A. Haase, B. Hessmo, P. Kr¨uger, T. Maier, S. Schneider, T. Calarco, and J.

Schmiedmayer, Appl. Phys. B 70, 721 (2000)

[9] R. Dumke, M. Volk, T. Muther, F. B. J. Buchkremer, G. Birkl, and W. Ertmer, Phys. Rev. Lett. 89, 097903 (2002).
[10] T. L. Gustavson, A. P. Chikkatur, A. E. Leanhardt, A. Gorlitz, S. Gupta, D. E. Pritchard, and W. Ketterle, Phys. Rev.

[11] Y. Miroshnychenko, W. Alt, I. Dotsenko, L. Forster, M. Khudaverdyan, D. Meschede, D. Schrader, and A. Rauschenbeutel,

[12] Technical Digest, Integrated Photonics Research and Applications and Nanophotonics, ISBN 1-55752-807-1, (Optical Society

[13] S. Eriksson, M. Trupke, H. F. Powell, D. Sahagun, C. D. J. Sinclair, E. A. Curtis, B. E. Sauer, E. A Hinds, Z. Moktadir,

C. O. Gollasch, and M. Kraft, Eur. Phys. J. D 35, 135 (2005).

[14] Y. B. Ovchinnikov, Phys. Rev. A 73, 033404–1-10 (2006).
[15] R. Grimm and M. Weiedem¨uller, Adv. At. Mol. Phys. 42, 95-113 (2000).
[16] H. J. Lezec, A. Degiron, E. Devaux, R. A Linke, L. Martin-Moreno, F. J. Garcia-Vidal, and T. W. Ebbesen, Science 297,

820-822 (2002).

[17] G. Gay, O. Alloschery, B. Viaris de Lesegno, C. O’Dwyer, J. Weiner, and H. J. Lezec, Nature Phys. 2, 262-267 (2006).

Lett. 88, 020401–1-4 (2002).

Nature 442, 151 (2006).

of America, Washington, DC, 2006).

