6
0
0
2
 
v
o
N
 
6
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
m
o
t
a
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
6
4
2
1
1
6
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Optical Magnetometry

Dmitry Budker1, 2, ∗ and Michael Romalis3, †
1Department of Physics, University of California, Berkeley, CA 94720-7300
2Nuclear Science Division, Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, Berkeley CA 94720
3Department of Physics, Princeton University, Princeton, NJ 08544
(Dated: February 2, 2008)

Some of the most sensitive methods of measuring magnetic ﬁelds utilize interactions of resonant
light with atomic vapor. Recent developments in this vibrant ﬁeld are improving magnetometers
in many traditional areas such as measurement of geomagnetic anomalies and magnetic ﬁelds in
space, and are opening the door to new ones, including, dynamical measurements of bio-magnetic
ﬁelds, detection of nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR), magnetic-resonance imaging (MRI), inertial-
rotation sensing, magnetic microscopy with cold atoms, and tests of fundamental symmetries of
Nature.

PACS numbers:

I. MEASURING MAGNETIC FIELDS WITH
ATOMS AND LIGHT

It has been nearly half a century since the techniques
of measuring magnetic ﬁelds using optical pumping and
probing of alkali atoms were realized in the pioneering
work of Dehmelt [1], Bell and Bloom [2, 3] and fur-
ther developed by Cohen-Tannoudji, Dupon-Roc, and
co-workers, see, for example, Refs.
[4, 5]. The general
idea of the method is that light which is near-resonant
with an optical transition creates long-lived orientation
and/or higher order moments in the atomic ground state
that subsequently undergo Larmor spin precession in the
magnetic ﬁeld. This precession modiﬁes the optical ab-
sorptive and dispersive properties of the atoms and this
modiﬁcation is detected by measuring the light trans-
mitted through the atomic medium. Recent reviews of
resonant magneto-optics have been given in Refs. [6, 7].

∼

The ﬁelds of resonant magneto-optics and atomic mag-
netometry have been experiencing a new boom driven
by technological developments, speciﬁcally by the ad-
vent of reliable, small, inexpensive, and easily tunable
diode lasers on the one hand, and by the reﬁnement of
the techniques of producing dense atomic vapors with
long (in some cases
1 s) ground-state relaxation times
on the other. These technical advances have enabled
atomic magnetometers to achieve sensitivities rivaling
[8, 9, 10, 11] and even surpassing [12] that of most Super-
conducting Quantum Interference Device (SQUID) based
magnetometers that have dominated the ﬁeld of sensi-
tive magnetometers for a number of years [13]. Atomic
magnetometers have the intrinsic advantage of not re-
quiring cryogenic cooling, and oﬀer a signiﬁcant poten-
tial for miniaturization.
In contrast to SQUIDs that
measure magnetic ﬂux through a pick-up loop, atomic
magnetometers measure magnetic ﬁeld directly. Atomic

∗Electronic address: budker@berkeley.edu
†Electronic address: romalis@princeton.edu

magnetometers can be conﬁgured so that their output is
related to the magnitude of the magnetic ﬁeld through
fundamental physical constants, so that no calibration is
required.

Presently, the most sensitive atomic optical mag-
netometer is the spin-exchange-relaxation-free (SERF)
magnetometer whose demonstrated sensitivity exceeds
10−15 T/√Hz, with projected fundamental limits below
10−17 T/√Hz [12]. SERF magnetometers also oﬀer a
possibility of spatially-resolved measurements with mil-
limeter resolution.

The present-day interest in optical magnetometers is
driven by numerous and diverse applications, a partial
list of which includes tests of the fundamental symme-
tries of Nature, search for man-made and natural mag-
investigation of the dynamics of the
netic anomalies,
geomagnetic ﬁelds (including attempts at earthquake
prediction), material science and investigation of mag-
netic properties of rocks, detection of magnetic micropar-
ticles at ultra-low concentrations, detection of signals
in nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) and magnetic-
resonance imaging (MRI), direct detection of magnetic
ﬁelds from the heart and the brain, magnetic microscopy,
and measuring magnetic ﬁelds in space.

In this paper, we outline the basic principles and fun-
damental limits of the sensitivity of optical atomic mag-
netometers, and discuss several speciﬁc applications.

II. GENERAL FEATURES AND LIMITS OF
SENSITIVITY OF OPTICAL MAGNETOMETERS

A general schematic of an optical atomic magnetome-
ter is shown in Fig. 1.
In many magnetometers, the
resonant medium is a vapor of alkali atoms (Rb, Cs, or
K) contained in a glass bulb. Because atomic polariza-
tion is generally destroyed when atoms collide with the
walls of the bulb, cells ﬁlled with buﬀer gas are commonly
used. The gas ensures that the atoms optically polarized
in the central part of the cell take a long time to diﬀuse
to the walls. Another technique for reducing wall relax-

ation is application of a non-relaxing coating, typically,
paraﬃn, on the cell walls (see below). As mentioned
above, the light sources of choice today are diode lasers;
however, discharge lamps – the original light sources for
atomic magnetometers – are still used in most commer-
cial atomic magnetometers, and can achieve sensitivity
comparable to lasers in some research applications [14].
Figure 1 shows separate light sources for pumping and
probing with orthogonal light beams. There exist many
magnetometer conﬁgurations that diﬀer by relative direc-
tion and spectral tuning of the pump and probe light. In
some schemes, pumping and probing is performed by the
same beam. The two most common detection modes are
monitoring the intensity and polarization of the trans-
mitted probe light. The latter method has certain in-
trinsic advantages, such as its ability to detect very small
polarization-rotation angles, and a reduced sensitivity to
the laser-intensity noise. Shown in Fig. 1 is an all-optical
magnetometer; no other electromagnetic ﬁelds are ap-
plied to the atoms apart from the magnetic ﬁeld being
measured and the pump and probe light. Some magne-
tometers require additional means for excitation of spin
precession. A weak magnetic ﬁeld oscillating at the Lar-
mor frequency is commonly used for this purpose [2, 10].
Other techniques include application of microwave ﬁelds
[15] and all-optical excitation using various types of mod-
ulation of the light beams: intensity, frequency or polar-
ization [3, 7].

Light Source 
(Probe) 

Magnetic field 

Resonant  
atomic medium 

Detector 

Light Source 
(Pump) 

 

FIG. 1: A general schematic of an all-optical atomic magne-
tometer. Pump light polarizes the atoms, atomic polarization
evolves in the magnetic ﬁeld, and the resultant state of the
atoms’ polarization is detected by measuring transmission or
polarization rotation of the probe light.

Quantum mechanics sets fundamental limits on the
best sensitivity that can be achieved in a magnetic-ﬁeld
measurement using atoms. One such limit is associated
with projection noise resulting from the fact that if an
atom is polarized in a particular direction, a measure-
ment of the angular-momentum projection m on an or-
thogonal direction yields a random result (+1/2 or -1/2
in the simplest case of angular momentum F = 1/2). Ig-
noring factors of order unity that depend on particulars
of the system (for example, the total value of the angular
momentum F , and the relative contributions of diﬀer-
ent Zeeman sublevels), the sensitivity of a magnetic-ﬁeld
measurement performed for a time T with an ensemble

2

(1)

of N atoms with coherence time τ is

δB

≃

1
gµB

¯h
√N τ T

,

where µB is the Bohr magneton, g is the ground-state
Land´e factor, and ¯h is the Planck’s constant. Equation
(1) is derived by noticing that a measurement with a
single atom with a duration of τ produces an uncertainty
in the Larmor precession angle on the order of 1 rad.
With N atoms, this is improved by √N , and repeating
the measurement multiple times gains another factor of

p

T /τ .
Recently, a possibility of overcoming the projection
noise in magnetometry using spin-squeezing techniques
– where quantum states are prepared with unequal dis-
tribution of uncertainty between conjugate observables,
in this case, the projections of the angular momentum
on two orthogonal directions – was discussed and demon-
strated (see Ref.
[16] and references therein). Unfortu-
nately, an improvement in sensitivity using spin squeez-
ing appears possible only on a time scale signiﬁcantly
shorter than the spin-relaxation time [17].

In optical magnetometry, in addition to the atomic
projection noise, there is also photon shot noise. For
example, if the measured quantity is the rotation angle
ϕ of the light polarization, the shot noise is

δϕs ≃

1
˙NphT

.

2q

(2)

Here ˙Nph is the probe-photon ﬂux (in photons/s) after
the atomic sample. Depending on the details of a partic-
ular measurement, either the spin noise (1) or the photon
noise (2) may dominate. However, if a measurement is
optimized for statistical sensitivity, the two contributions
to the noise are generally found to be comparable [11, 18].
Another potential source of noise in atomic magne-
tometers is the AC Stark shift caused by the probe
and/or pump laser, which generates a ﬁctitious magnetic
ﬁeld proportional to the degree of circular polarization of
the light [19]. Even in the absence of technical sources
of intensity or polarization ﬂuctuations, quantum ﬂuctu-
ations generate noise of the ﬁctitious magnetic ﬁeld [20].
However, the noise due to AC Stark shifts can, in princi-
ple, be eliminated by choosing a laser frequency where it
crosses zero [21] or a geometry where the ﬁctitious ﬁeld
is orthogonal to the measured magnetic ﬁeld. Never-
theless, in practical implementations of magnetometers,
light shifts due to drifts of laser properties are often a
signiﬁcant concern.

The ultimate sensitivity of atomic magnetometers is
given by the product of three quantities in Eq. (1), the
magnetic moment of the atoms (gµB), the square root
of the number of atoms involved in the measurement,
and the square root of the spin-relaxation time. Con-
sequently, to improve the sensitivity of a magnetome-
ter, the number of atoms in the system and their spin-
relaxation time should be maximized.

that

limit

There are

several mechanisms

spin-
relaxation time, one of the most important being depo-
larization caused by collisions with the cell walls that
enclose the atomic vapor. Surface relaxation can be re-
duced by using a coating that has a low adsorption energy
for atoms, so they spend less time bound to the surface
of the cell. Among such coatings, paraﬃn and other ma-
terials with long chains of hydrocarbons were found to
work well with alkali metals [22]. In a seminal study [23]
Bouchiat and Brossel demonstrated that spin relaxation
on paraﬃn is caused by two eﬀects of comparable size,
magnetic dipolar interaction and spin-rotation coupling.
Magnetic dipolar relaxation is dominated by interaction
between the magnetic moment of the electron and mag-
netic moments of protons in the coating. They showed
that replacing hydrogen with deuterium, which has about
three times smaller nuclear magnetic moment, reduces
this type of relaxation. Despite work by several groups
over the years, surface coating is still a rather laborious
process with some degree of “black magic” that does not
always yield reproducible results. While collisions with
bare glass are generally completely depolarizing for alkali
atoms, high-quality coatings can allow more than 10,000
bounces before depolarization, which also implies that
even if a small fraction of the surface has defects, this
will ruin the performance of the coating.

≈

Another way to improve magnetometer sensitivity is to
increase the density of alkali-metal atoms, as was studied,
for example, in Ref. [24]. This typically requires increas-
ing the temperature of the cell, although alternative ap-
proaches using light-induced desorption have been inves-
tigated [25]. Since paraﬃn coatings do not work at tem-
800 C, high-density magnetome-
peratures higher than
ters usually use a buﬀer gas to slow down the diﬀusion
of alkali-metal atoms to cell walls. Slow atomic diﬀusion
combined with spatially resolved optical detection also
allows many independent measurements of the magnetic
ﬁeld inside one cell [12]. As the density is increased, at
some point, the spin relaxation time becomes dominated
by collisions between alkali-metal atoms and the product
N τ approaches a constant, so that shot-noise sensitivity
no longer increases with density. Thus, relaxation due to
collisions between alkali-metal atoms represents a funda-
mental obstacle to improvement in sensitivity for a given
cell volume.

Collisions between alkali-metal atoms are dominated
by the spin-exchange process in which the electron spins
of the colliding atoms rotate with respect to their com-
bined spin, which is conserved in the collision. Even
though such collisions conserve the total spin, they can
lead to loss of spin coherence. All alkali atoms have non-
zero nuclear spin, I, and their ground states are split
into two hyperﬁne-structure components, characterized
by the total angular momentum F = I
1/2. The direc-
tion of magnetic precession, determined by the relative
orientation of the electron spin with respect to the to-
tal angular momentum, is opposite for the two hyperﬁne
states. Thus, in the presence of a magnetic ﬁeld, the

±

3

spin-exchange collisions that randomly transfer atoms
between the two hyperﬁne states normally lead to spin-
relaxation, as atomic angular momenta acquire random
angles with respect to each other.

As was ﬁrst realized by Happer [26, 27], it is possi-
ble to suppress the eﬀects of spin-exchange relaxation by
increasing the rate of spin-exchange collisions until it ex-
ceeds the Larmor precession frequency. The eﬀect is quite
similar to Dicke narrowing [28] in microwave and opti-
cal spectroscopy or motional narrowing in NMR. In the
rapid spin-exchange regime, we may no longer speak of
magnetic precession of atoms in an individual hyperﬁne
state. Instead, each atom experiences an average preces-
sion in the same direction as would a free atom in the
F = I + 1/2 state. This is because atoms, while being re-
distributed among the sublevels, spend more time in this
state, which has a higher statistical weight and higher
electron-spin polarization. As a result, in a weak exter-
nal magnetic ﬁeld, the average angular momentum of the
atomic vapor precesses without spin-exchange relaxation,
although at a rate that is slower than the precession rate
for a free atom. The slowing down of the spin preces-
sion rate depends on the distribution of atoms among
magnetic sublevels and is thus a sensitive function of the
optical pumping process [29]. This dependence on local
optical pumping conditions may lead to non-uniformity
of the spin precession frequency over the volume of the
cell and broadening of the resonance signal. The problem
can be avoided by operating the magnetometer near zero
magnetic ﬁeld.

In this regime the Zeeman resonance linewidth is not
broadened at all by spin-exchange collisions and the alkali
metal density can be increased to about 1014 cm−3, four
orders of magnitude higher than in traditional atomic
magnetometers. Eventually the relaxation time becomes
limited by “spin-destruction” collisions between alkali-
metal atoms that do not conserve the total spin of the
colliding pair. Several mechanisms of comparable impor-
tance have been identiﬁed for such relaxation [30], but
some aspects of this process remain poorly understood
[31]. The measured spin-destruction cross-sections are
smaller for lighter alkali-metal atoms and result in a fun-
damental limit on the sensitivity of a K magnetometer
of about 10−17V −1/2 T/Hz1/2 [32], where V is the active
volume of the sensor in cm3.

The

regime

spin-exchange-relaxation-free

can be
achieved only in a magnetic ﬁeld range of less than about
10 nT. At higher magnetic ﬁelds such as the Earth’s ﬁeld,
it is possible to use a single SERF magnetometer as a 3-
axis null-detector with external feedback [33]. The pos-
sibility of reducing spin-exchange relaxation in a ﬁnite
magnetic ﬁeld has also been explored [34]. The idea is to
pump most atoms into a stretched state with m = I +1/2
where they cannot undergo spin-exchange collisions due
to conservation of angular momentum. This technique
works at any magnetic ﬁeld, but it cannot completely
eliminate spin-exchange relaxation, since a high optical
pumping rate required to put atoms into the stretched

4

ited dynamic range. An important benchmark for the
magnetometer’s dynamic range is the geomagnetic ﬁeld
50 µT of interest in many applications. While tra-
∼
ditional rf-optical double resonance magnetometers have
operated in this range from their inception (see, for ex-
ample, Ref.
[37]), diode-laser-based all-optical magne-
tometers for the geophysical range have been also de-
veloped recently (Refs.
[38, 39, 40, 41], for example).
At geomagnetic ﬁelds, sensitive atomic magnetometers
have to contend with the complications arising from the
nonlinear Zeeman eﬀect caused by the Breit-Rabi mix-
ing of hyperﬁne energy levels. The nonlinear Zeeman
eﬀect leads to a splitting of the magnetic resonance into
multiple lines (see, for example, Ref.
[39]). Several ap-
proaches have been proposed to alleviate the adverse ef-
fects of the nonlinear Zeeman eﬀect in all-optical magne-
tometers, including synchronous optical pumping at the
quantum revival frequency given by the quadratic cor-
rection to the Zeeman energies (Ref. [42] and references
therein), and selective excitation and detection of coher-
ences (that correspond to high-order polarization multi-
poles) between “stretched” Zeeman sublevels unaﬀected
by nonlinear Zeeman eﬀect [43, 44, 45].

Another important property of a magnetometer is
whether it is scalar or vector, i.e., whether it measures
the total magnitude, or speciﬁc cartesian component(s)
of the magnetic ﬁeld. While knowing all three vector
components of a ﬁeld provides a more complete informa-
tion about the ﬁeld, a truly scalar sensor has an advan-
tage in that the device is insensitive to the orientation of
the sensor with respect to the ﬁeld, which is important
for operation on a mobile platform.

Many magnetometer applications require operation at
frequencies lower than 1 Hz where 1/f noise is often dom-
inant. Atomic magnetometers have an intrinsic advan-
tage over other types of sensors in this regard because
they use a sensing element with very simple structure
that does not generate intrinsic 1/f noise usually ob-
served in solid-state systems with many nearly degener-
ate energy states [46]. In practical situations, signiﬁcant
1/f noise may arise due to external elements, such as
laser ﬂuctuations caused by air currents. Such noise may
be reduced using spin modulation techniques [47].

Atomic magnetometers operating in a ﬁnite ﬁeld natu-
rally tend to be of the scalar type as they rely on the reso-
nance between an rf ﬁeld or a modulated light ﬁeld with
Zeeman-split energy eigenstates of an atom. However,
there is a standard technique (see, for example, Refs.
[33, 48, 49]) for converting a scalar sensor into a vector
one that relies on the fact that if a small bias ﬁeld is ap-
plied to the sensor in a certain direction in addition to the
ﬁeld to be measured, then the change in the overall ﬁeld
magnitude is linear in the projection of the bias ﬁeld on
the main ﬁeld, and is only quadratic (and generally neg-
ligible) in the projection on the orthogonal plane. Thus,
applying three orthogonal bias ﬁelds consecutively, and
performing three measurements of the overall magnetic-
ﬁeld magnitude, one reconstructs the overall ﬁeld vector.

FIG. 2: Comparison of Zeeman resonances for diﬀerent modes
of operation in a potassium vapor with density n = 7 × 1013
cm−3. Points: Spin-exchange broadened resonance with a
full width at half maximum of 3 kHz observed in a magnetic
ﬁeld of 10 µT when spin polarization is low. Dashed line:
Resonance is narrowed to a full width of 350 Hz at the same
magnetic ﬁeld by pumping a large fraction of atoms into a
stretched state parallel to the magnetic ﬁeld. Solid line: At
a ﬁeld of 5 nT, the resonance width is 2 Hz due to complete
elimination of spin-exchange broadening in the the rapid spin-
exchange regime. (Adapted from Ref. [18].)

spin state in the presence of other relaxation processes
also contributes to the resonance linewidth. For an op-
timal pumping rate the minimum resonance linewidth
is given by the geometric mean of the spin-exchange and
spin-destruction rates [18, 35]. This method for reduction
of spin-exchange broadening has been used for narrow-
ing of a microwave resonance in an alkali-metal atomic
clock [35] and to improve the sensitivity of a resonant
magnetometer for detection of very weak RF ﬁelds [18].
However, this technique does not signiﬁcantly improve
the sensitivity for measurements of static ﬁelds because
excitation of large spin coherences, necessary to obtain
an optimal signal/noise ratio, removes the atoms from
the stretched spin state [36].

In Fig. 2 we show the Zeeman resonance curves ob-
tained in a dense alkali-metal vapor in three diﬀerent
regimes. Spin-exchange broadening for low spin polariza-
tion is reduced by a factor of 10 by pumping most atoms
into a stretched spin state. The linewidth can be further
reduced by a factor of more than 100 in a very low mag-
netic ﬁeld, where spin-exchange relaxation is completely
eliminated.

III. ADDITIONAL CHARACTERISTICS OF A
MAGNETOMETER

Apart from sensitivity, there are many other charac-
teristics of a magnetometer that are important for spe-
ciﬁc applications. We have already mentioned that some
of the most sensitive magnetometers operate best at
relatively small magnetic ﬁelds, i.e., they have a lim-

In practice, it may be convenient to apply all three bias
ﬁelds simultaneously and modulate them at diﬀerent fre-
quencies. Synchronous detection of the magnetometer
output at a corresponding frequency yields the value of
the cartesian component of the magnetic ﬁeld being mea-
sured.

For practical operation at ﬁnite ﬁelds, atomic magne-
tometers require a feedback loop to keep the frequency of
the excitation locked to resonance as the magnetic ﬁeld
is changing. One approach is to use a phase-sensitive
detector with an external feedback loop and a voltage-
controlled oscillator. Another approach, which is of-
ten simpler, is a self-oscillating magnetometer that uses
the measured spin-precession signal to directly generate
the rf-ﬁeld in a positive feedback loop [37]. All-optical
self-oscillating atomic magnetometers have been demon-
strated recently, utilizing transitions between hyperﬁne
[50] and Zeeman sublevels [51, 52].

An important characteristic of a magnetometer is how
fast the device responds to a change in the magnetic ﬁeld.
The time response of a passive atomic magnetometer to
a small variation in the magnetic ﬁeld is usually equiva-
lent to a ﬁrst-order low-pass ﬁlter with a time constant τ .
Hence the natural bandwidth of such a magnetometer is
equal to (2πτ )−1 Hz. If it is desirable to make measure-
ments on a time scale T < τ , one can adjust the operating
parameters of the magnetometer, such as the probe beam
intensity, so τ = T . If the number of atoms N is ﬁxed,
then according to Eq. (1), one loses in sensitivity as T −1
for short times. However, if the number of alkali atoms
can be increased and the spin-coherence time is limited
by collisions between alkali atoms, then the sensitivity de-
creases only as T −1/2. With ﬁxed number of atoms and
light power, it is possible to increase the bandwidth of
a magnetometer with external feedback by using a large
gain in the feedback loop. However, if the bandwidth is
increased by a factor K over the natural bandwidth, the
magnetometer output noise also increases by the same
factor K [53].

It is also interesting to consider the response of a mag-
netometer to an instantaneous change in the magnetic
ﬁeld. Since Larmor precession has no inertia, a mag-
netometer based on such precession responds instanta-
neously to a change in the ﬁeld. Our knowledge of the
new value of the frequency will be at ﬁrst very uncertain,
but will improve with time as T 3/2 (the best scaling for
the uncertainty of a single-tone-frequency determination
from a noisy signal [54]). This is discussed in the con-
text of a practical self-oscillating magnetometer in Ref.
[52], where the eﬀect of additional noise sources such as
photodetector and ampliﬁer noise are also considered.

In the case of portable and space-borne magnetome-
ters, important characteristics include “heading errors”
– the dependence of the reading of the magnetometer
on the orientation of the sensor with respect to the
ﬁeld being measured, as well as the existence of “dead
zones,” i.e., spatial orientations where the magnetometer
loses its sensitivity. Other parameters of importance in-

5

clude size and power consumption of the sensor system.
A recent trend is utilization of vertical-cavity surface-
emitting lasers (VCSEL) as light sources which provide
on the order of a milliwatt of light resonant with the
D-lines of rubidium and cesium, do not require an exter-
nal cavity, and consume only a few milliwatts of power.
Miniaturization of the vapor cells to millimeter scales
can be done using more or less standard techniques (see,
for example, Ref.
[55] for a description of a prototype
optical-rotation magnetometer using a 3-mm diameter
paraﬃn-coated Cs cell). Another approach, particularly
appealing for future mass production of miniaturized low-
cost magnetometers, is manufacturing of an integrated
sensor package incorporating a VCSEL laser, an alkali-
vapor cell, optics, and a detector using the wafer produc-
tion techniques well developed by the semi-conductor in-
dustry. The ﬁrst magnetometers based on this approach
with a grain-of-rice sized integrated sensor have been re-
cently constructed [56, 57], demonstrating a sensitivity
of 50 pT/√Hz, with anticipated improvement by several
orders of magnitude with further optimization.

A favorable feature of magnetometers with a small va-
por cell is their reduced sensitivity to magnetic-ﬁeld gra-
dients that can lead to additional spin relaxation, line
broadening, and performance degradation. Magnetome-
ters utilizing buﬀer-gas free anti-relaxation coated cells
are also less sensitive to small ﬁeld gradients, because
each atom samples the volume of the cell during its
many bounces between the walls in the course of a re-
laxation time. This leads to a signiﬁcant averaging of
the magnetic-ﬁeld inhomogeneities. A systematic study
of the eﬀects of the gradients on the Rb ground-state spin
relaxation in a coated cell is presented in Ref. [58] along
with a survey of earlier work.

IV. APPLICATIONS

A. Biological magnetic ﬁelds

Detection of magnetic ﬁelds of biological origin allows
non-invasive studies of the time dependence and spa-
tial distribution of biocurrents. Most biological magnetic
ﬁeld studies have focused on detection of the ﬁelds from
the heart and the brain. Measurements of the magnetic
ﬁelds generated by the heart (magnetocardiography) pro-
vide richer diagnostic information about heart function
than traditional electrocardiography and do not require
placing electrical contacts on the patient [59]. Useful di-
agnostic information is obtained by measuring the spatial
distribution of the magnetic ﬁeld during diﬀerent parts of
the heart cycle. Most magnetocardiography studies have
been performed in magnetically shielded rooms, but they
are considered too expensive for clinical application, and
widespread use of magnetocardiography requires devel-
opment of relatively low-cost sensors that can operate
in unshielded environment. Measuring magnetic ﬁelds
generated by the brain (magnetoencephalography) has

been used extensively for functional brain studies [60].
Magnetic ﬁelds associated with a particular sensory in-
put, such as auditory, visual or tactile stimulation, are
recorded by averaging the signals over many presenta-
tions of the same stimulus. Detailed measurements of
the spatial distribution of the magnetic ﬁeld around the
head allows one to identify regions of the brain that be-
come active during processing of the sensory input. How-
ever, spatial localization is complicated by the fact that
the inverse problem of ﬁnding the current distribution re-
sponsible for a particular magnetic ﬁeld distribution does
not have a unique solution. Additional information, such
as MRI data and sophisticated numerical algorithms are
used for spatial localization. Magnetoencephalography
also ﬁnds increasing use in clinical diagnostic applica-
tions, for example for treatment of epilepsy [61].

The ﬁrst measurements of biological ﬁelds with an
atomic magnetometer were performed in the 70s [62] but
this approach was not widely pursued and the majority of
biomagnetic applications relied on SQUID magnetome-
ters. Recent progress in atomic magnetometry has again
attracted interest in their application for measurements
of biological magnetic ﬁelds with non-cryogenic sensors.
Figure 3 shows examples of magnetic ﬁelds from the heart
and the brain detected with atomic magnetometers. The
cardio-magnetometer is based on optical-rf double res-
onance and uses Cs atoms at 30◦C, allowing it to be
placed close to a human body [63]. Cardiomagnetic ﬁelds
are recorded sequentially on a grid of points above hu-
man chest. Measurements of the brain magnetic ﬁeld
have been performed with a potassium SERF magne-
tometer which operates at the vapor cell temperature of
180◦C and uses a multi-channel photodetector to simul-
taneously record the spatial distribution of the magnetic
ﬁelds [64]. Even though heating is required to maintain
the operating temperature of the cell positioned close to
the subject’s head, it is technically easier and cheaper to
do than maintaining cryogenic temperature at the sensor,
as required in the case of SQUIDs.

B. Fundamental applications

Many fundamental interactions reduce at low energy
to a spin coupling similar to magnetic interaction since
the spin is the only vector available in the rest frame
of the particle. Atomic magnetometers are intrinsically
sensitive probes of the spin precession and hence play an
important role in tests of fundamental symmetries. An
example of the magnetometers’ versatile nature is a Cs
magnetometer constructed at Amherst. It was used to
set a limit on parity (P) and time-reversal invariance (T)
violating electron electric dipole moment (EDM) d that
generates d ~E
~S coupling [65], on violation of Lorentz
invariance manifested as a spin coupling ~b
~S to a back-
ground vector ﬁeld ~b [66], and on spin-dependent forces
that can be mediated by axions [67].

·

·

Magnetometers based on nuclear (rather than electron)

6

FIG. 3: Examples of biological magnetic ﬁelds recorded with
atomic magnetometers. a) Time traces (averaged over 100
heartbeats) of the out-of-chest component of the magnetic
ﬁeld from a human heart recorded on 36 grid points spaced by
4 cm. The underlying map is a snapshot of the ﬁeld distribu-
tion at the moment of strongest magnetic activity (R-peak).
The scale of the map ranges from -30 pT (blue) to +60 pT
(red). Figure courtesy Prof. A. Weis. b) Magnetic ﬁelds
recorded from a brain in response to an auditory stimulation
by a series of short clicks (averaged over about 600 presenta-
tions). The prominent feature at 100 ms after the stimulus
is the evoked response in the auditory cortex, most clearly
seen as a diﬀerence in the magnetic ﬁelds recorded by diﬀer-
ent channels. In contrast, ambient ﬁeld drifts, such as seen
before the stimulus, generate similar signals in all channels.
Figure courtesy Dr. H. Xia.

spin precession also play an important role in tests of fun-
damental symmetries. While nuclei, such as 3He, have a
magnetic moment smaller than that of an electron by
three orders of magnitude, they also display much longer
spin relaxation time τ and thus can be competitive with
electron-spin magnetometers in magnetic ﬁeld measure-
ments [68]. In the searches for non-magnetic spin inter-
actions, the smallness of the nuclear magnetic moment is
actually an advantage as it reduces the sensitivity to spu-
rious magnetic eﬀects. Measurements of nuclear spin pre-

cession of 199Hg have been used to set a limit on the EDM
of the mercury atom, which is also the tightest limit on
an EDM of any particle. This result constrains possible
violation of charge-parity (CP) symmetry due to super-
symmetric particles [69]. Comparison of 129Xe and 3He
precession sets the most stringent limit on the Lorentz-
violating vector coupling to a nuclear spin [70, 71].

A number of new ideas for tests of fundamental sym-
metries using atomic magnetometers are presently being
explored, such as searches for a permanent electric dipole
moment using laser-cooled Cs atoms in an optical lattice
[72] or an atomic fountain [73], and the possibility of
using ultra-sensitive magnetometers for detecting P and
T violating magnetization in solid-state samples induced
by an applied electric ﬁeld [74] or an internal ﬁeld of a
ferroelectric (see Ref. [75] and references therein).

C. Measuring magnetic ﬁelds in space

Measurements of planetary and interplanetary mag-
netic ﬁelds have been integral to space missions from their
early days [76, 77]. The on-board instruments designed
for such missions have been able to successfully meet var-
ious inherent design challenges, including the necessity to
have a very broad dynamic range for the instrument, as
the magnetic ﬁelds to be measured could vary by many
orders of magnitude between planetary ﬂy-bys and the
craft’s sojourn in interplanetary space. Other challenges
include stringent requirements on reliability, the ability
to withstand thermal and mechanical stresses associated
with the launch and varying conditions during the ﬂight;
limited weight and size; power consumption, the ability
to characterize and correct for errors due to the craft
spin, etc.

Most spacecraft measuring magnetic magnetic ﬁelds
currently rely on ﬂux-gate magnetometers because of
their small size and power consumption. However, op-
tically pumped 4He magnetometers are used in most ad-
vanced space applications because of their relative sim-
plicity, reliability and high absolute accuracy. In a 4He
magnetometer, a weak electric discharge excites helium
atoms to the metastable 23S1 state, and optical pumping
with a 4He discharge lamp is employed to polarize and
detect spin precession of atoms in the metastable state.
Such instruments typically have sensitivity on the order
10 pT/√Hz and have been successfully ﬂown on
of 1
Ulysses [78] and Cassini [79, 80] missions, recently pro-
viding new information about magnetospheres of Saturn
[81] and its moon Enceladus [82]. Laser-pumped 4He
magnetometers are presently being developed and have
demonstrated sensitivity of 200 fT√Hz [83] while their
fundamental sensitivity limit is estimated to be about
5 fT√Hz [84].

−

Deployment of more sensitive magnetometers in space
will enable magnetic ﬁeld measurements in weak-ﬁeld
space environments, as in the outer heliosphere and in
the local interstellar medium. At distances from the

7

sun beyond about 80 astronomical units, the strength
of the ambient, nominally dc, magnetic ﬁeld could be as
[85] and refer-
low as a few tens of picotesla (see Ref.
ences therein), near the limit of detectability of currently
used sensors. Fluctuations of magnetic ﬁelds in space are
caused by plasma process and have a bandwidth on the
order of 1 Hz, corresponding to typical electron cyclotron
frequency in the outer heliosphere. Atomic magnetome-
ters are ideally suited for measurements of such ﬁelds.

D. Atomic magnetometers and nuclear magnetic
resonance

One of the rapidly growing applications of atomic mag-
netometers is detection of NMR signals. NMR is usually
detected with inductive rf pick-up coils whose sensitivity
drops at low frequency, precluding many applications of
low-ﬁeld NMR. SQUID magnetometers have been widely
used for NMR detection at low frequencies [86], but they
still require cryogenic cooling, negating one of the main
advantages of low-ﬁeld NMR – the absence of a cryo-
genic superconducting magnet. Atomic magnetometers
can be used in place of SQUIDs to detect the magnetic
ﬁeld generated by the nuclear magnetization [87, 88, 89].
One of the promising applications is “remote” NMR,
where spin polarization, NMR-signal encoding and de-
tection are performed sequentially in diﬀerent parts of
the apparatus [90]. Such remote NMR [91] and MRI [92]
has recently been demonstrated with an atomic magne-
tometer.

For both remote and in-situ NMR detection, having
the NMR sample and the magnetometer sensor spatially
separated (as, for example, in Refs. [91, 92]) has exper-
imental advantages, such as an ability to apply an inde-
pendent, relatively strong magnetic ﬁeld to the sample,
which is not “seen” by the sensor if a proper geomet-
rical arrangement is used. On the other hand, atomic
magnetometers can achieve an even higher sensitivity by
taking advantage of contact interactions between alkali-
metal and nuclear spins. These interactions have been
particularly well studied for noble gas atoms [93] and
can be described by a scalar Fermi-contact interaction
between the two spins. For heavy noble gases, such as
129Xe, this interaction can enhance the magnetic ﬁeld
produced by nuclear magnetization by a large factor on
the order of 600. Thus, by allowing noble gas atoms to
interact directly with the alkali-metal vapor, one can ob-
tain high sensitivity to low concentration of 129Xe spins
[89].

The contact interaction between nuclear and electron
spins is also useful for inertial rotation sensing. Nu-
clear spins make good quantum gyroscopes because of
their long spin coherence time, but their magnetic mo-
ment causes signiﬁcant precession in stray magnetic ﬁelds
[94]. An alkali-metal magnetometer can then serve two
purposes, to measure the ambient magnetic ﬁeld and to
detect the inertial precession of nuclear spins with high

sensitivity. The requirement for magnetic ﬁeld stability
is rather stringent. For example, a stray magnetic ﬁeld
of 1 fT would cause a false spin precession rate for 3He
of about 0.04 degrees/hour, more than can be tolerated
in a navigation-grade gyroscope. A SERF magnetometer
can achieve this level of magnetic sensitivity, allowing it
to be used for cancelation of stray magnetic ﬁelds and
enabling a competitive nuclear-spin rotation sensor [95].
Another new application of atomic magnetometers is
for detection of nuclear quadrupole resonance (NQR) sig-
nals.
In crystalline materials nuclei with a quadrupole
moment are aligned by the electric ﬁeld gradient and can
generate a weak rf signal following application of a res-
onant rf pulse. The physics of this phenomenon can be
understood in the language of alignment-to-orientation
conversion [96], a process well studied in atomic physics.
For practical applications, it is particularly important
that NQR signals do not average out in materials with
randomly oriented crystallites such as powders. Reso-
nance frequencies are highly material-speciﬁc and typi-
cally range from 0.1 to 5 MHz. Detection of NQR is a
promising technique for identiﬁcation of explosives, since
most explosive materials contain the 14N nuclei, possess-
ing a large quadrupole moment. However, widespread
use of NQR for this purpose has been limited due to
the weakness of the NQR signals, which are typically
detected with an rf coil only after substantial signal av-
eraging [97]. Detection of weak radio-frequency signals
requires modiﬁcation of usual atomic-magnetometer ar-
rangements that are designed for detection of quasi-DC
magnetic ﬁelds. A tunable magnetometer for detection
of weak rf ﬁeld can be realized by using a bias ﬁeld to
tune the Zeeman energy splitting to the frequency of the
rf ﬁeld [18, 98]. Recently such magnetometer has been
built for operation at 423 kHz with a sensitivity of 0.24
fT/Hz1/2 and bandwidth of 600 Hz and used to detect
NQR signals from ammonium nitride [99]. A detailed
analysis of the fundamental limits on sensitivity of an rf
atomic magnetometer [18] and an inductive pick-up coil
show that atomic magnetometer has higher sensitivity up
to frequencies of about 50 MHz [100].

E. Magnetometery with cold atoms

Recent breakthroughs in laser cooling and trapping
have opened new avenues for precision measurements us-
ing long-lived, near-stationary collections of atoms.
In
particular, far-oﬀ-resonance optical traps provide a be-
nign environment for trapping atoms with negligible pho-
ton scattering rates and storage lifetimes in excess of 300
s in an ultra-high vacuum environment [101]. Thus, the
spin-coherence time of laser-cooled and trapped atoms
can be substantially longer than the typical value of 1
s obtained in a buﬀer gas or surface-coated cell. How-
ever, due to the small volume of atom traps and lim-
its on atomic number density from cold collisions, the
total number of trapped atoms is typically on the or-

8

−

108, many orders of magnitude smaller
der of 106
−
than 1011
1015 atoms contained in a cm-sized vapor
cell. While trapped atoms do not have the highest sen-
sitivity to uniform magnetic ﬁelds, they are particularly
well suited for making ﬁeld measurements with high spa-
tial resolution corresponding to the trap size, where va-
por cells do not work well because spin-relaxation time
quickly decreases with cell size. Such high resolution
magnetic microscopes ﬁnd a range of applications, from
studies of magnetic domains [102] to imaging of currents
on integrated circuits [103].

Two magnetometery techniques have been re-
cently demonstrated with Rb Bose-Einstein condensates
(BEC). The ﬁrst involves holding the condensate in a
weak magnetic trap so the energy of interaction with the
magnetic ﬁeld to be measured causes a perturbation of
the trapping potential and changes the local atomic den-
sity [104, 105]. With a typical chemical potential in a
weak magnetic trap on the order of 1 nK one gets a mag-
netic ﬁeld sensitivity of about 1 nT. The other technique
[106, 107] is similar to measurements done with hot atoms
– the BEC is held in an optical dipole trap and spin pre-
cession is measured using phase-contrast imaging with an
oﬀ-resonant circularly-polarized probe beam. This non-
destructive imaging allows monitoring of spin precession,
as shown in Fig. 4. The magnetic ﬁeld sensitivity ob-
tained with this method is 900 fT (in a single run with
250 ms integration time and an integrating area of 100
square microns). In both methods cooling atoms to quan-
tum degeneracy improves measurement sensitivity, but
whether the coherence of the BEC plays a direct role is
presently an open question.

V. BRIGHT FUTURE

Recent progress in atomic magnetometry techniques
can be expected to have a signiﬁcant impact in four
general areas. The ﬁrst is the development of ro-
bust laser-pumped atomic magnetometers, largely driven
by recent availability of electronically-tunable VCSEL
and distributed-feedback (DFB) semiconductor lasers.
Such magnetometers can replace existing discharge-
lamp-pumped devices, providing higher sensitivity in
geological, military, and space applications. The sec-
ond area is the development of micro-fabricated mm-size
magnetometers, which will open entirely new applica-
tions of magnetic monitoring in a wide range of envi-
ronments. The third area is the increasing use of atomic
magnetometers as sensitive detectors for weak signals,
in NMR, biological applications, magnetic microscopy,
and inertial rotation sensing. The fourth area is the ex-
ploration of the frontier of magnetic sensitivity, where
atomic magnetometers are already surpassing SQUID
sensors and can be expected to reach sensitivities signif-
icantly below 10−17 T/Hz1/2. This will enable new mea-
surements in materials science, improve the precision of
fundamental physics tests, and may lead to entirely un-

expected discoveries. The future of measuring magnetic
ﬁelds with atoms and light is indeed bright.

9

FIG. 4: Detection of eﬀective magnetic ﬁeld by imaging of
Larmor precession in a Bose-Einstein condensate of 87Rb
[107]. The condensate contained 1.4 million atoms, optically
trapped with trapping frequencies of 4.2 Hz × 155 Hz × 400
Hz. A uniform bias magnetic ﬁeld of 16 µT is applied, while
a far-detuned circularly polarized laser beam is focused onto
the condensate with a waist of 7.6 µm to simulate the ef-
fects of an additional localized magnetic ﬁeld. Part (a) shows
a sequence of 32 individual normalized atomic-spin-sensitive
phase-contrast images taken after an evolution time of 50 ms
and spaced in time by 100 µs. The variation of the brightness
of the images with a period of ≈5 frames is due to Larmor pre-
cession of the atomic spins. Part (b) shows a pseudocolor map
of the phase of Larmor precession as a function of position in
microns. The phase corresponds to the eﬀective magnetic
ﬁeld shown in Part (c) as a function of position in the central
portion of the condensate, demonstrating the high resolution
and precision of the technique. The gaussian phase shift fol-
lows the intensity proﬁle of the far-detuned laser beam, and
the solid line is a ﬁt to this proﬁle. Figure courtesy Drs. M.
Vengalattore and J. Higbie.

Acknowledgments

This work is supported by DOD MURI grant # N-
00014-05-1-0406. We are grateful to E. Alexandrov, M.
Balabas, G. Bison, S. Bale, W. Gawlik, J. Higbie, M. Led-
better, I. M. Savukov, D. Stamper-Kurn, A. Sushkov, M.
Vengalattore, and A. Weis for providing valuable input
for this review.

[1] H. Dehmelt, Phys. Rev. 105, 1924 (1957).
[2] W. Bell and A. Bloom, Phys. Rev. 107, 1559 (1957).
[3] W. Bell and A. Bloom, Phys. Rev. Lett. 6, 280 (1961).
[4] J. Dupont-Roc, S. Haroche, and C. Cohen-Tannoudji,

Phys. Lett. A 28a, 638 (1969).

[5] J. Dupont-Roc, Rev. Phys. Appl. 5, 853 (1970).
[6] D. Budker, W. Gawlik, D. F. Kimball, S. M. Rochester,
V. V. Yashchuk, and A. Weis, Rev. Mod. Phys. 74, 1153
(2002).

[7] E. B. Alexandrov, M. Auzinsh, D. Budker, D. F. Kim-
ball, S. M. Rochester, and V. V. Yashchuk, J. Opt. Soc.
Am. B 22, 7 (2005).

[9] H. Gilles, J. Hamel, and B. Cheron, Rev. Sci. Instrum.

[10] A. Weis and R. Wynands, Optics and Lasers in Engi-

72, 2253 (2001).

neering 43, 387 (2005).

[11] D. Budker, D. F. Kimball, S. M. Rochester, V. V.
Yashchuk, and M. Zolotorev, Phys. Rev. A 62, 043403
(2000).

[12] I. K. Kominis, T. W. Kornack, J. C. Allred, and M. V.

Romalis, Nature 422, 596 (2003).

[13] J. Clarke, in SQUID Sensors: Fundamentals, Fabrica-
tion, and Applications, edited by H. Weinstock (Kluwer
Academic, The Netherlands, 1996), pp. 1–62.

[8] E. B. Aleksandrov, M. V. Balabas, A. K. Vershovskii,

[14] S. Groeger, A. S. Pazgalev, and A. Weis, Appl. Phys.

and A. S. Pazgalev, Technical Physics 49, 779 (2004).

B. 80, 645 (2005).

10

[15] A. K. Vershovskii, A. S. Pazgalev, and E. B. Aleksan-

5830, 170 (2005).

drov, Technical Physics 45, 88 (2000).

[42] S. J. Seltzer, P. J. Meares, and M. V. Romalis,

[16] G. M. Geremia, J. K. Stockton, and H. Mabuchi, Phys.

physics/0611014 (2006).

Rev. Lett. 94, 203002 (2005).

[43] E. B. Alexandrov, A. S. Pazgalev, and J. L. Rasson,

[17] M. Auzinsh, D. Budker, D. F. Kimball, S. Rochester,
J. E. Stalnaker, A. O. Sushkov, and V. Yashchuk, Phys.
Rev. Lett. 93, 173002 (2004).

[18] I. M. Savukov, S. J. Seltzer, M. V. Romalis, and K. L.

Sauer, Phys. Rev. Lett. 95, 0630041 (2005).

[19] W. Happer and B. Mathur, Phys. Rev. 163, 12 (1967).
[20] M. Fleischhauer, A. B. Matsko, and M. O. Scully, Phys.

Rev. A 62, 013808/1 (2000).

[21] I. Novikova, A. B. Matsko, V. L. Velichansky, M. O.
Scully, and G. R. Welch, Phys. Rev. A 63, 063802/1
(2001).

[22] H. Robinson, E. Ensberg, and H. Dehmelt, Bull. Am.

[23] M. A. Bouchiat and J. Brossel, Phys. Rev. 147, 41

Phys. Soc. 3, 9 (1958).

(1966).

[24] V. A. Sautenkov, M. D. Lukin, C. J. Bednar,
I. Novikova, E. Mikhailov, M. Fleischhauer, V. L.
Velichansky, G. R. Welch, and M. O. Scully, Phys. Rev.
A 62, 023810/1 (2000).

[25] E. B. Alexandrov, M. V. Balabas, D. Budker, D. En-
glish, D. F. Kimball, C. H. Li, and V. V. Yashchuk,
Phys. Rev. A 66, 042903/1 (2002).

[26] W. Happer and H. Tang, Phys. Rev. Lett. 31, 273

(1973).

(1977).

23405 (2005).

[28] R. H. Dicke, Phys. Rev. 89, 472 (1953).
[29] I. M. Savukov and M. V. Romalis, Phys. Rev. A 71,

[30] C. J. Erickson, D. Levron, W. Happer, S. Kadlecek,
B. Chann, L. W. Anderson, and T. G. Walker, Phys.
Rev. Lett. 85, 4237 (2000).

[31] S. Kadlecek, L. W. Anderson, and T. G. Walker, Phys.

Rev. Lett. 80, 55125515 (1998).

[32] J. Allred, R. Lyman, T. Kornack, and M. Romalis,

Phys. Rev. Lett. 89, 130801 (2002).

[33] S. Seltzer and M. V. Romalis, Appl. Phys. Lett. 85,

4804 (2004).

Opt. Spectrosk. 82, 14 (1997).

[44] V. V. Yashchuk, D. Budker, W. Gawlik, D. F. Kimball,
Y. P. Malakyan, and S. M. Rochester, Phys. Rev. Lett.
90, 253001 (2003).

[45] S. Pustelny, D. F. J. Kimball, S. M. Rochester, V. V.
Yashchuk, W. Gawlik, and D. Budker, Phys. Rev. A 73,
023817 (2006).

[46] M. B. Weissman, Rev. Mod. Phys. 60, 537571 (1988).
[47] Z. Li, R. T. Wakai, and T. G. Walker, Appl. Phys. Lett.

89, 134105 (2006).

[48] E. B. Alexandrov, M. V. Balabas, V. N. Kulyasov, A. E.
Ivanov, A. S. Pazgalev, J. L. Rasson, A. K. Vershovskii,
and N. N. Yakobson, Meas. Sci. Technol. (UK) 15, 918
(2004).

[49] O. Gravrand, A. Khokhlov, J. L. L. Mouel, and J. M.

Leger, Earth Planets Space 53, 949 (2001).

[50] A. B. Matsko, D. Strekalov, and L. Maleki, Opt. Com-

mun. 247, 141 (2005).

[51] P. D. D. Schwindt, L. Hollberg, and J. Kitching, Rev.

Sci. Instrum. 76, 126103 (2005).

[52] J. Higbie, E. Corsini, and D. Budker, Rev. Sci. Instrum.

(2006).

[53] J. Bechhoefer, Rev. Mod. Phys. 77, 783 (2005).
[54] D. C. Rife and R. R. Boorstyn, IEEE Trans. Inform.

[55] M. V. Balabas, D. Budker, J. Kitching, P. D. D.
Schwindt, and J. E. Stalnaker, J. Opt. Soc. Am. B, Opt.
Phys. 23, 1001 (2006).

[56] P. D. D. Schwindt, S. Knappe, V. Shah, L. Hollberg,
J. Kitching, L. A. Liew, and J. Moreland, Appl. Phys.
Lett. 85, 6409 (2004).

[57] S. Knappe, P. D. D. Schwindt, V. Gerginov, V. Shah,
L. Liew, J. Moreland, H. G. Robinson, L. Hollberg, and
J. Kitching, Journal of Optics A: Pure and Applied Op-
tics 8, S318 (2006).

[58] S. Pustelny, D. F. J. Kimball, S. M. Rochester,
V. V. Yashchuk, and D. Budker, Phys. Rev. A
(physics/0608109) (2006).

[27] W. Happer and A. C. Tam, Phys. Rev. A 16, 1877

Theory 20, 591 (1974).

[34] S. Appelt, A. Ben-Amar Baranga, A. R. Young, and

[59] R. Fenici, D. Brisinda, and A. M. Meloni, Expert Re-

W. Happer, Phys. Rev. A 59, 2078 (1999).

view of Molecular Diagnostics 5, 291 (2005).

[35] Y. Y. Jau, A. B. Post, N. N. Kuzma, A. M. Braun,
M. V. Romalis, and W. Happer, Phys. Rev. Lett. 92,
110801/1 (2004).

[36] S.

J.

Smullin,
lakis, R. K. Ghosh,
http://arxiv.org/abs/physics/0611085 (2006).

G. Vasi-
and M. V. Romalis,

Savukov,

I. M.

[37] A. Bloom, Appl. Opt. 1, 61 (1962).
[38] M. Stahler, S. Knappe, C. Aﬀolderbach, W. Kemp, and

R. Wynands, Europhys. Lett. 54, 323 (2001).

[39] V. Acosta, M. P. Ledbetter, S. M. Rochester, D. Bud-
ker, D. F. Jackson-Kimball, D. C. Hovde, W. Gaw-
lik, S. Pustelny, and J. Zachorowski, Phys. Rev. A 73,
053404 (2006).

[40] C. Andreeva, G. Bevilacqua, V. Biancalana, S. Cartal-
eva, Y. Dancheva, T. Karaulanov, C. Marinelli, E. Mar-
iotti, and L. Moi, Appl. Phys. B, Lasers Opt. 76, 667
(2003).

[41] E. Alipieva, C. Andreeva, L. Avramov, G. Bevilaqua,
V. Biancalana, E. Borisova, E. Breschi, S. Cartaleva,
Y. Dancheva, S. Gateva, et al., Proceedings of SPIE

[60] M. H¨am¨al¨ainen, R. Hari, R. J. Ilmoniemi, J. Knuutila,
and O. V. Lounasmaa, Rev. Mod. Phys. 65, 413497
(1993).

[61] A. C. Papanicolaou, E. M. Castillo, R. Billingsley-
Marshall, E. Pataraia, and P. G. Simos, International
Review of Neurobiology 68, 223 (2005).

[62] M. N. Livanov, A. N. Kozlov, A. V. Korinevskii, V. P.
Markin, S. E. Sinelnikova, and I. A. Kholodov, Doklady
Akademii Nauk SSSR 238, 253 (1977).

[63] G. Bison, R. Wynands, and A. Weis, Appl. Phys. B. 76,

325 (2003).

[64] H. Xia, A. B. Baranga, D. Hoﬀman, and M. V. Romalis,

Appl. Phys. Lett. (2006).

[65] S. A. Murthy, J. Krause, D., Z. L. Li, and L. R. Hunter,

Phys. Rev. Lett. 63, 965 (1989).

[66] C. J. Berglund, L. R. Hunter, J. Krause, D., E. O.
Prigge, M. S. Ronfeldt, and S. K. Lamoreaux, Phys.
Rev. Lett. 75, 1879 (1995).

[67] A. N. Youdin, J. Krause, D., K. Jagannathan, L. R.
Hunter, and S. K. Lamoreaux, Phys. Rev. Lett. 77, 2170

11

(1996).

74, 4515 (2003).

[68] H. Gilles, Y. Monfort, and J. Hamel, Rev. Sci. Instrum.

[69] M. V. Romalis, W. C. Griﬃth, J. P. Jacobs, and E. N.

Fortson, Phys. Rev. Lett. 86, 2505 (2001).

[70] D. Bear, R. E. Stoner, R. L. Walsworth, V. A. Kosteleck,
and C. D. Lane, Phys. Rev. Lett. 85, 5038 (2000).
[71] D. Bear, R. E. Stoner, R. L. Walsworth, V. A. Kosteleck,
and C. D. Lane, Phys. Rev. Lett. 89, 209902 (2002).
[72] C. Chin, V. Leiber, V. Vuletic, A. J. Kerman, and

S. Chu, Phys. Rev. A 63, 0334011 (2001).

[73] J. M. Amini, C. T. M. Jr.,

and H. Gould,

http://arxiv.org/physics/0602011 (2006).

[74] S. K. Lamoreaux, Phys. Rev. A 66, 022109 (2002).
[75] D. Budker, S. K. Lamoreaux, A. O. Sushkov, and O. P.

[90] A. J. Moul´e, M. M. Spence, S. Han, J. A. Seeley, K. L.
Pierce, S. Saxena, and A. Pines, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
U. S. A 100, 9122 (2003).

[91] S. Xu, S. M. Rochester, V. V. Yashchuk, M. H. Don-
aldson, and D. Budker, Rev. Sci. Instrum. 77, 083106
(2006).

[92] S. Xu, V. V. Yashchuk, M. H. Donaldson, S. M.
Rochester, D. Budker, and A. Pines, Proc. Natl. Acad.
Sci. U. S. A p. 0605396103 (2006).

[93] S. R. Schaefer, G. D. Cates, T.-R. Chien, D. Gonatas,
W. Happer, and T. G. Walker, Phys. Rev. A 39, 5613
(1989).

[94] K. F. Woodman, P. W. Franks, and M. D. Richards,

Journal of Navigation 40, 366 (1987).

[95] T. W. Kornack, R. K. Ghosh, and M. V. Romalis, Phys.

Sushkov, Phys. Rev. A 73, 022107 (2006).

Rev. Lett. 95, 230801 (2005).

[76] N. F. Ness, Space Sci. Rev. (Netherlands) 11, 459

[96] D. Budker, D. F. Kimball, S. M. Rochester, and J. T.

(1970).

[77] M. H. Acuna,

in Encyclopedia of planetary sciences,
edited by J. H. Shirley and R. W. Fairbridge (Chap-
man & Hall, London, 1997).

[78] A. Balogh, in IEE Colloquium on ‘Satellite Instrumen-
tation’ (IEE, London, UK, 1988), vol. Digest No.12, pp.
2/1–3.

[79] D. J. Southwood, A. Balogh, and E. J. Smith, J. Br.

Interplanet. Soc. (UK) 45, 371 (1992).

Urban, Chem. Phys. Lett. 378, 440 (2003).

[97] A. N. Garroway, M. L. Buess, J. B. Miller, B. H. Suits,
A. D. Hibbs, G. A. Barrall, R. Matthews, and L. J.
Burnett, IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens. (USA) 39,
1108 (2001).

[98] M. P. Ledbetter, V. M. Acosta, S. M. Rochester,
and V. V. Yashchuk,

D. Budker, S. Pustelny,
physics/0609196 (2006).

[99] S.-K. Lee, K. L. Sauer, S. J. Seltzer, O. Alem, and M. V.

[80] M. W. Dunlop, M. K. Dougherty, S. Kellock, and D. J.

Romalis, Appl. Phys. Lett. (in press) (2006).

Southwood, Planet. Space Sci. (UK) 47, 1389 (1999).

[100] I. M. Savukov, S. J. Seltzer, and M. V. Romalis, Sub-

[81] M. K. Dougherty, N. Achilleos, N. Andre, C. S. Arridge,
A. Balogh, C. Bertucci, M. E. Burton, S. W. H. Cowley,
G. Erdos, G. Giampieri, et al., Science 307, 1266 (2005).
[82] M. K. Dougherty, K. K. Khurana, F. M. Neubauer,
C. T. Russell, J. Saur, J. S. Leisner, and M. E. Bur-
ton, Science 311, 1406 (2006).

[83] R. E. Slocum, G. Kuhlman, L. Ryan, and D. King,
in Oceans 2002 (IEEE. Conference Proceedings (Cat.
No.02CH37362)., 2002), vol. 2, pp. 945–51.

[84] D. D. McGregor, Rev. Sci. Instrum. 58, 1067 (1987).
[85] L. F. Burlaga, N. F. Ness, C. Wang, J. D. Richardson,
F. B. McDonald, and E. C. Stone, Astrophysical Journal
618, 10741078 (2005).

[86] Y. S. Greenberg, Rev. Mod. Phys. 70, 175 (1998).
[87] C. Cohen-Tannoudji, J. DuPont-Roc, S. Haroche, and

F. Laloe, Phys. Rev. Lett. 22, 758 (1969).

[88] V. V. Yashchuk, J. Granwehr, D. F. Kimball, S. M.
Rochester, A. H. Trabesinger, J. T. Urban, D. Budker,
and A. Pines, Phys. Rev. Lett. 93, 160801 (2004).
[89] I. M. Savukov and M. V. Romalis, Phys. Rev. Lett. 94,

1230011 (2005).

mitted (2006).

[101] K. M. O’Hara, S. R. Granade, M. E. Gehm, T. A.
Savard, S. Bali, C. Freed, and J. E. Thomas, Phys. Rev.
Lett. 82, 4204 (1999).

[102] M. R. Freeman and B. C. Choi, Science 294, 1484

(2001).

[103] S. Chatraphorn, E. F. Fleet, F. C. Wellstood, L. A.
Knauss, and T. M. Eiles, Appl. Phys. Lett. 76, 2304
(2000).

[104] S. Wildermuth, S. Hoﬀerberth, I. Lesanovsky, E. Haller,
L. M. Andersson, S. Groth, I. Bar-Joseph, P. Kruger,
and J. Scmiedmayer, Nature 435, 440 (2005).

[105] S. Wildermuth, S. Hoﬀerberth, I. Lesanovsky, S. Groth,
P. Krger, J. Schmiedmayer, and I. Bar-Joseph, Appl.
Phys. Lett. 88, 264103 (2006).

[106] J. M. Higbie, L. E. Sadler, S. Inouye, A. P. Chikkatur,
S. R. Leslie, K. L. Moore, V. Savalli, and D. Stamper-
Kurn, Phys. Rev. Lett. 95, 0504011 (2005).

[107] M. Vengalattore, J. M. Higbie, L. E. Sadler, S. R. Leslie,

and D. Stamper-Kurn (2006), to be submitted.

