6
0
0
2
 
v
o
N
 
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
m
o
t
a
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
3
0
0
1
1
6
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Probing Ultracold Collisional Dynamics with Frequency-Chirped Pulses

M.J. Wright,1,∗ J.A. Pechkis,1 J.L. Carini,1 and P.L. Gould1
1Department of Physics, U-3046, University of Connecticut, Storrs, CT 06269
(Dated: 2nd February 2008)

We report on the dynamics of ultracold collisions induced by near-resonant frequency-chirped
light. A series of identical chirped pulses, separated by a variable delay, is applied to an ultracold
sample of 85Rb, and the rate of inelastic trap-loss collisions is measured. For small detunings of the
chirped light below the atomic resonance, we observe that the rate of collisions induced by a given
pulse can be increased by the presence of an earlier pulse. We attribute this to the enhancement
of short-range collisional ﬂux by the long-range excitation of atom pairs to an attractive molecular
potential. For larger detunings and short delays, we ﬁnd that a leading pulse can suppress the rate
of collisions caused by a following pulse. This is due to a depletion of short-range atom pairs by the
earlier pulse. Comparison of our data to classical Monte-Carlo simulations of the collisions yields
reasonable agreement.

PACS numbers: 32.80.Pj, 32.80.Qk, 34.50.Rk.

Recent years have witnessed enhanced capabilities in
controlling both the external and internal degrees of free-
dom of atoms and molecules. Laser cooling and evapo-
rative cooling of atoms [1] and the coherent control of
excitation processes in molecules [2, 3] represent prime
examples. The possibility of combining these two ar-
eas, i.e., applying coherent control techniques to ultra-
cold systems, has generated a great deal of interest, es-
pecially in the context of using short laser pulses to pro-
duce ultracold molecules by photoassociating ultracold
atoms [4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15]. Part of the
appeal is the prospect of controlling the internal state
distribution of the resulting molecules. Understanding
and controlling the dynamics of the formation process
In the present work, we
will be key to these eﬀorts.
explore the nanosecond time-scale dynamics of a closely-
related process: ultracold atomic collisions induced by
frequency-chirped light [16], shown in Fig. 1. By varying
the delay between successive pulses of chirped light, we
observe that the collisions induced by a given pulse can
be either enhanced or suppressed by the presence of a
preceding pulse, depending on the range of frequencies
spanned by the chirp. If the chirp encompasses frequen-
cies close to the atomic resonance, long-range excitation
to the R−3 potential (R is the internuclear separation)
leads to collisional ﬂux enhancement. For chirps centered
well below the atomic resonance, eﬃcient adiabatic ex-
citation by the ﬁrst chirp depletes the short-range atom
pairs available to be excited by the second chirp.

A number of previous experiments [6, 17, 18, 19, 20]
have employed time-dependent excitation with ﬁxed-
frequency light to investigate dynamical eﬀects in ul-
tracold atomic interactions. The frequency-chirped light
utilized in the present work is unique in two important
ways [16]: 1) the chirp provides adiabatic, and therefore

∗Present address:
Innsbruck, Technikerstraße 25, 6020 Innsbruck, Austria

Institut f¨ur Experimentalphysik, Universit¨at

very eﬃcient, excitation of atom pairs; and 2) the wide
range of frequencies spanned by the chirp results in the
nearly simultaneous excitation of atom pairs over a wide
range of R.

In the experiment, we illuminate trapped ultracold
85Rb atoms with pulses of frequency-chirped light and
measure the resulting collisional rate constant β for in-
elastic processes which lead to ejection from the magneto-
optical trap (MOT) [16]. Such trap-loss collisions occur
when atom pairs, initially excited to an attractive molec-
ular potential by a chirped pulse, arrive at short range
(e.g., R < 100 a0, where a0 is the Bohr radius) in the ex-
cited state. The rate constant β is determined by ﬁtting
the decay curve for the number of atoms in the MOT.
There are two contributions to this decay: ultracold col-
lisions occurring at a rate per atom βn, where n is the
atomic density; and collisions with background gas oc-
curring at a rate per atom γ. We are careful to operate
at suﬃciently low densities that radiative repulsion ef-
fects [21] are negligible, resulting in a constant eﬀective
volume for the MOT cloud. We also operate at low back-
ground pressures, ∼10−10 torr, yielding long MOT life-
times: γ−1∼50 s. This is achieved by loading the primary
MOT with a slow beam generated from a second MOT
located in a separate vacuum chamber [22]. In addition
to the collisions induced by the frequency-chirped light,
the MOT itself has an inherent rate of trap-loss collisions.
This contribution to β is carefully measured by monitor-
ing decays in the absence of the chirped light. The values
for β reported here have had this contribution subtracted.
The chirped light can cause non-collisional perturbations
to the MOT, especially when the chirp passes through
resonance. The time-averaged ﬂuorescence per atom and
the volume of the MOT cloud can both increase (up to
3% and 30%, respectively) due to atomic excitation by
the chirped light. These fractional changes are minimized
by reducing the number of chirps per cycle, and are ac-
counted for in determining absolute values of β. In the
present work, we are interested in the collisional dynam-
ics and, therefore, focus on the dependence of β on the

(a) Enhancement

(b) Depletion

Chirp Period ~ 200 ns

r

y
g
e
n
E

Time

1

2

1

2

Internuclear Distance R

Figure 1: Schematic of the frequency-chirped excitation and
resulting collisions, showing enhancement (a) and depletion
(b) eﬀects. Each frame shows the ground-state (5S+5S) and
excited-state (5S+5P3/2) potentials and the evolution of col-
liding atom pairs. The vertical lines delineate the range of
frequencies spanned by each positive chirp (1 and 2). In (a),
chirped pulse 1 excites atom pairs at long range (top frame).
This range is centered close to the 5S → 5P3/2 atomic res-
onance in (a) and well below resonance in (b). These pairs
accelerate on the excited-state potential, then spontaneously
decay back to the ground state (middle frame), providing en-
hanced short-range collisional ﬂux for chirped pulse 2 (bottom
frame).
In (b), chirped pulse 1 excites atom pairs at short
range (top). These excited pairs collide inelastically (mid-
dle), leaving a depleted pair distribution (dashed curve) to be
sampled by chirped pulse 2 (bottom).

delay between successive chirped pulses.

The primary MOT is conﬁgured in the phase-stable
geometry [23] which reduces ﬂuctuations in the proper-
ties of the trapped sample. It is operated with an axial
ﬁeld gradient of 12 G/cm, a total (sum of all six beams)
peak intensity of 40 mW/cm2, and a detuning of -1.5Γ
with respect to the 5S1/2(F=3) → 5P3/2(F’=4) cycling
transition at 780 nm. Here Γ = 2π(5.9 MHz) is the nat-
ural linewidth of this transition. A separate repumping
laser, tuned to the 5S1/2(F=2) → 5P3/2(F’=3) transi-
tion, is used to prevent population from accumulating in
the lower ground-state hyperﬁne level.

The frequency-chirped light is produced by a rapid
ramp of the current driving an external-cavity diode
laser. To minimize the resulting amplitude modulation,
a small portion of this chirped light is used to injection
lock a separate “slave” diode laser [24]. This master-slave
arrangement also results in a signiﬁcantly higher output
power being available to the experiment. The laser light

2

Frequency (f)

Intensity ( )I

Pulse Delay = 600 ns

Time (t)

Figure 2: Timing scheme for the multiple chirps. The laser
frequency f undergoes a series of linear chirps. The same por-
tion of each chirp is selected by a synchronized acousto-optical
modulator, resulting in a series of identical frequency-chirped
pulses of intensity I. The delay between pulses is varied by se-
lecting every nth pulse (n = 1, 2, 3, . . .), thus maintaining the
properties of the individual chirps. This ﬁgure, for example,
shows n = 3.

is linearly polarized and focused onto the trapped sam-
ple. Its diameter (∼100 µm) approximately matches that
of the atom cloud. For the work reported here, the fre-
quency increases linearly by 1 GHz in 100 ns, resulting
in a chirp rate of +10 GHz/µs, and the peak intensity
is ﬁxed at 70 W/cm2. An acousto-optical modulator
(AOM) selects the central portion of each chirp, yield-
ing a 40 ns FWHM Gaussian pulse.

The timing of successive chirps is key to the present
work and is shown in Fig. 2. The MOT is turned oﬀ
for 150 µs every 722 µs. The repumping light remains
on continuously in order to correct any optical pumping
caused by the chirped pulses. During the MOT-oﬀ time,
a train of chirped pulses, spaced by τ , illuminates the
MOT. A periodic current ramp is applied to the master
laser, resulting in a symmetric triangle-wave frequency
modulation (1 GHz amplitude, 200 ns period) of the slave
laser output. The AOM selects the positive-slope por-
tion of a given chirp cycle. The shortest possible delay
between chirps (τ =200 ns) is obtained by selecting ad-
jacent positive ramps. Increasing delays are obtained by
selecting every nth positive ramp. This ensures that the
details of individual chirps do not change as the delay be-
tween chirps is varied. The number of chirps per MOT-oﬀ
window is kept constant at either 40 (for the data in Fig.
3) or 80 (for the data in Fig. 4).

We ﬁrst examine the delay dependence of β for a cen-
ter detuning (relative to the 5S1/2(F=3) → 5P3/2(F’=4)
cycling transition) of the chirp ∆c/(2π) = -300 MHz.
In this case, the intensity of the chirped light is still
rather high when it passes through the atomic resonance.
Therefore, we expect signiﬁcant excitation of atom pairs
at long range (R>600 a0). On the other hand, the chirp
also encompasses larger detunings and the correspond-
ing shorter-range excitations. We expect this combina-
tion of long-range and short-range excitations to lead to
ﬂux enhancement [25], as shown in Fig. 1a. In this pro-
cess, a large number of atom pairs are initially excited

at long range by light tuned near the atomic resonance.
The atoms accelerate towards each other on the attrac-
tive potential, but because this curve is rather ﬂat at
long range, the atoms do not gain suﬃcient kinetic en-
ergy to escape from the trap before spontaneous emission
returns the pair to the essentially ﬂat ground-state poten-
tial. Although their kinetic energy is too low for escape,
the atomic trajectories have been signiﬁcantly altered. In
particular, the atoms have been deﬂected towards each
other and will therefore approach more closely than their
original trajectories would have allowed. If the atom pair
is now excited again, but this time at shorter range (by
light detuned farther from the atomic resonance), the at-
tractive molecular potential is much steeper and the ex-
cited atom pair will pick up suﬃcient energy to escape.
The initial excitation at long range has thus enhanced the
collisional ﬂux available for the second excitation at short
range. With ﬁxed-frequency light (at both small and
large detunings), this ﬂux enhancement happens contin-
uously [25]. However, the trajectories themselves have a
temporal dependence. We have previously probed these
dynamics using delayed pulses [18]: a ﬁrst pulse of near-
resonant light to excite at long range, followed by sec-
ond pulse of far-detuned light to re-excite at short range.
When the delay between these pulses matches the time
it takes the atoms to go from long range to short range,
an enhancement in the collisional loss rate is seen.
In
the present work, the frequency chirp includes both the
near-resonant and oﬀ-resonant light. The long-range ex-
citation from one chirp enhances the ﬂux available for
short-range excitation by the following chirp. Since the
excitation by the chirped light is time dependent, we ex-
pect the overall trap-loss collision rate to depend on the
timing between successive chirps.

In Fig. 3a, we show the collisional trap-loss rate con-
stant β as a function of delay between pulses of chirped
light with ∆c/(2π)= -300 MHz. The results are normal-
ized to the value at the longest delay (2 µs), since in
this limit, the pulses act independently. The data do in-
deed display an enhancement peak centered at a delay
of 400 ns. A maximum enhancement factor of 2.4±0.3
is observed. Results of Monte-Carlo simulations, dis-
cussed below, are shown in Fig. 3b. They show the
same qualitative behavior as the data, but with a smaller
peak occurring at shorter delay. We note that in the
independent-pulse limit and using a time-averaged num-
ber of chirped pulses per second νc = 5.5x104 s−1, the
absolute value of β is 4.7x10−12 cm3s−1. This result is
slightly (∼40%) higher than, but consistent with, our pre-
viously measured value for these parameters [16] when we
correct for νc and account for the factor of 2.0 enhance-
ment (see Fig. 3a) resulting from the 500 ns delay used
in that experiment.

We now examine the delay dependence for the case of
a larger (more negative) center detuning for the chirp. A
thorough discussion of the detuning dependence of the
collision rate, for both positive and negative chirp direc-
tions, and at a ﬁxed delay between chirped pulses, will

3

0+
U
1g
0-
g
1U

(a)

(b)

¥
b
/
b

¥
b
/
b

2.5

2.0

1.5

1.0

0.5

0.0

2.5

2.0

1.5

1.0

0.5

0.0

0

400 800 1200 16002000
Delay Between Successive
Chirps (ns)

Figure 3: Dependence of collisional rate constant on delay
between chirped pulses: (a) experimental results; (b) Monte-
Carlo simulation results for diﬀerent molecular states, as indi-
cated. All results are normalized to the case of inﬁnite delay.
For the -300 MHz center detuning used here, enhancement is
seen for short delays.

be forthcoming [26]. For a center detuning of ∆c/(2π)= -
600 MHz, the frequency does not pass through the atomic
resonance. Therefore, we expect that long-range excita-
tion should not play an important role and that the ﬂux
enhancement discussed above should not occur. In fact,
we expect just the opposite: depletion, as shown in Fig.
1b. Since the frequency-chirped light is rather intense,
it is very eﬃcient at adiabatically exciting atom pairs
which have an internuclear separation R such that they
are resonant at some point during the chirp.
Immedi-
ately following the chirped pulse, all atom pairs within
the spherical shell deﬁned by the endpoints of the chirp
will be excited via this rapid adiabatic passage. Since this
excitation is primarily at short range, where the excited
molecular potential is steep, the majority of these atom
pairs will gain suﬃcient kinetic energy to escape from the
trap. These pairs are thus not available to be excited by a
second chirped pulse which immediately follows the ﬁrst.
We therefore expect fewer collisions to be induced by a

1.25

(a)

¥

b
/
b

¥
b
/
b

1.00

0.75

0.50

0.25

0.00
1.25

1.00

0.75

0.50

0.25

0.00

0

(b)

0+
U
1g
0-
g
1U

400

800

1200

Delay Between Successive
Chirps (ns)

Figure 4: Dependence of collisional rate constant on delay
between chirped pulses: (a) experimental results; (b) Monte-
Carlo simulation results for diﬀerent molecular states, as indi-
cated. All results are normalized to the case of inﬁnite delay.
For the -600 MHz center detuning used here, depletion is seen
at the shortest delay.

second pulse when the delay is short. However, if this
second chirped pulse is delayed suﬃciently, the thermal
atomic motion has time to ﬁll in the depleted atom-pair
distribution and the two pulses will act independently.
We can estimate the expected persistence time for this
depletion as ∆R/vt, where ∆R∼400 a0 is the width of
the spherical shell (from 500 a0 to 900 a0) and vt ∼15
cm/s is the thermal velocity. This yields a time scale of
∼150 ns.

In Fig. 4a, β for this larger detuning of ∆c/(2π) = -600
MHz is plotted as a function of delay between successive
pulses of chirped light. As in Fig. 3, the data are normal-
ized to the long-delay (independent-pulse) limit. At the
shortest achievable delay, 200 ns, a depletion of 22%±6%
is observed. The Monte-Carlo simulations, shown in Fig.
4b, are in reasonable agreement with the data. They pre-
dict an even larger depletion, ∼50%, for delay of 100 ns,
shorter than we have so far been able to achieve in the
experiment.

4

The simulated results shown in Figs. 3b and 4b are
obtained from Monte-Carlo calculations of the collisions,
which treat the atomic motion classically. The initial
conditions for an atom pair, i.e., relative position and
velocity vectors, are chosen randomly according to the
appropriate distribution. A uniform spatial density and
a temperature of 50 µK are assumed. This pair is then
subject to the ﬁrst frequency-chirped pulse. The prob-
ability for excitation to an attractive molecular poten-
tial is then calculated using the Landau-Zener formula
[27, 28]. A given atom pair is either excited or not, with
a weighting given by this excitation probability. If the
pair is excited, its motion on the attractive potential is
followed until spontaneous emission (SE) occurs. The
probability for SE is exponential with a time constant
equal to the molecular state lifetime. Once SE occurs,
the atom pair returns to the ground state, assumed to be
ﬂat, and follows a straight-line trajectory. Meanwhile,
the second chirped pulse, delayed by τ , illuminates the
atom pair and the above calculation is repeated. If the
atom pair arrives at suﬃciently short range (R<100 a0)
in the excited state, as a result of excitation by either
chirped pulse, that particular trajectory is considered a
trap-loss event. A large number (e.g., 2x105) of trajecto-
ries are run and the fraction of them resulting in trap loss
is a measure of relative value of β. This process is then
repeated for various values of τ and for the four Hund’s
case (c) long-range molecular states: 0+
g , and 1u.
The C3 coeﬃcients and lifetimes of these states are taken
from [29]. We do not include the 2u state in the simu-
lations, because its decay (and excitation) is forbidden
except at the very longest range [29].

u , 1g, 0−

The simulations include only two frequency-chirped
pulses whereas the experiment utilizes a train of N>>1
(typically N=40 or 80) pulses per MOT-oﬀ window. We
can consider two contributions to β(τ ): β1 from a single
chirp and β2 arising from the interaction between two
successive chirps. Note that β1 is independent of τ (for
τ =∞, the simulation result is 2β1), while β2 vanishes for
τ =∞. The value of β2 can be either positive, indicating
enhancement, or negative, indicating depletion. From
the τ dependence of the simulated value of β, we can
extract β1 and β2. The quantity to be compared with
experiment would then be N(β1+β2). Since we are inter-
ested primarily in the dependence on delay, the compar-
isons are made using values of β normalized to the case
of inﬁnite delay.

As seen in Figs. 3 and 4, the simulated values of β
describe the experimental results rather well.
It is in-
teresting that the diﬀerent molecular potentials all ex-
hibit a similar delay dependence, despite the fact that
their radiative lifetimes and C3 coeﬃcients vary signiﬁ-
cantly. For the -300 MHz center detuning (Fig. 3), the
enhancement peak in the simulation occurs at a some-
what shorter delay and is less pronounced in comparison
to the experiment. For the -600 MHz center detuning
(Fig. 4), the depletion is more pronounced in the simu-
lation than in the experiment. These diﬀerences may be

5

due to simpliﬁcations in the simulations. The motion is
treated classically and the eﬀects of hyperﬁne structure
are not included. Also, in a given run of the simulation,
a single excited molecular potential is assumed.

In summary, we have investigated the dynamics of ul-
tracold atomic collisions induced by pulses of frequency-
chirped light. We ﬁnd generally good agreement between
our measurements and the results of Monte-Carlo simu-
lations. The rate of inelastic trap-loss collisions caused
by a given chirped pulse is modiﬁed by the presence of a
preceding pulse. The extent of this modiﬁcation depends
on the delay between the two pulses. Varying this de-
lay allows us to probe the collisional dynamics. We see
two main eﬀects. First, when the chirp includes frequen-
cies near the atomic resonance, the resulting excitation
of long-range atom pairs by the ﬁrst pulse leads to an en-
hancement of the collisional ﬂux available for the second
pulse. The time scale for this enhancement is set by the
trajectories of excited atom pairs which have decayed at
long range. Second, when the chirp includes frequencies
far from resonance, short-range atom pairs are eﬃciently
excited and caused to collide by the ﬁrst pulse, leading
to a reduction in collisions induced by the second pulse.
This depleted distribution of short-range atom pairs is
eventually ﬁlled in by the thermal motion. The fact that

we see signiﬁcant depletion at the shortest delay indi-
cates that the chirped excitation of available atom pairs
by rapid adiabatic passage is indeed eﬃcient.

Our ﬁndings have several important consequences that
are relevant to eﬀorts to form ultracold molecules by
pulsed photoassociation of ultracold atoms. The time-
dependent enhancement in collisional ﬂux caused by
chirped-pulse excitation of long-range atom pairs may
beneﬁt these eﬀorts. On the other hand, our observation
of depletion indicates that this process must be consid-
ered in experiments utilizing high-repetition-rate short-
pulse lasers. The cold atoms ﬁll in the depleted pair
distribution rather slowly. Finally, we point out that
our depletion eﬀect is closely related to the production
of a “hole” in the ground-state collisional wavefunction
[9, 12]. Such a hole is associated with mixing bound
levels into the continuum state and is predicted to lead
directly to the production of weakly-bound ground-state
molecules.

We thank Steve Gensemer and Christiane Koch for
useful discussions. This work was supported in part by
the Chemical Sciences, Geosciences and Biosciences Di-
vision, Oﬃce of Basic Energy Sciences, U.S. Department
of Energy.

[1] H.J. Metcalf and P. van der Straten, Laser Cooling and

Lindinger, Phys. Rev. A 73, 023414 (2006).

Trapping (Springer-Verlag, New York, 1999).

[15] B.L. Brown, A.J. Dicks, and I.A. Walmsley, Phys. Rev.

[2] S.A. Rice and M. Zhao, Optimal Control of Molecular

Lett. 96, 173002 (2006).

Dynamics (Wiley, New York, 2000).

[3] M. Shapiro and P. Brumer, Principles of Quantum Con-
trol of Molecular Processes (Wiley, New York, 2003).
[4] M. Machholm, A. Guisti-Suzor, and F. Mies, Phys. Rev.

A 50, 5025 (1994).

[16] M.J. Wright, S.D. Gensemer, J. Vala, R. Kosloﬀ, and

P.L. Gould, Phys. Rev. Lett. 95, 063001 (2005).

[17] H.M.J.M. Boesten, C.C. Tsai, B.J. Verhaar, and D.J.

Heinzen, Phys. Rev. Lett. 77, 5194 (1996).

[18] S.D. Gensemer and P.L. Gould, Phys. Rev. Lett. 80, 936

[5] A. Vardi, D. Abrashkevich, E. Frishman, and M. Shapiro,

(1998).

J. Chem. Phys. 107, 6166 (1997).

[6] F. Fatemi, K.M. Jones, H. Wang, I. Walmsley, and P.D.

Lett., Phys. Rev. A 64, 033421 (2001).

[7] J. Vala, O. Dulieu, F. Masnou-Seeuws, P. Pillet, and R.

Kosloﬀ, Phys. Rev. A 63, 013412 (2001).

[8] M. Vatasescu, O. Dulieu, R. Kosloﬀ, and F. Masnou-

Seeuws, Phys. Rev. A 63, 033407 (2001).

[9] E. Luc-Koenig, R. Kosloﬀ, F. Masnou-Seeuws, and M.

Vatasescu, Phys. Rev. A 70, 033414 (2004).

[19] C. Orzel, S.D. Bergeson, S. Kulin, and S.L. Rolston,

Phys. Rev. Lett. 80, 5093 (1998).

[20] A.L. de Olivera, M.W. Mancini, V.S. Bagnato, and L.G.

Marcassa, Phys. Rev. Lett. 90, 143002 (2003).

[21] T. Walker, D. Sesko, and C. Wieman, Phys. Rev. Lett.

64, 408 (1990).

[22] Z.T. Lu, K.L. Corwin, M.J. Renn, M.H. Anderson, E.A.
Cornell, and C.E. Wieman, Phys. Rev. Lett. 77, 3331
(1996).

[10] E. Luc-Koenig, M. Vatasescu, and F. Masnou-Seeuws,

[23] A. Rauschenbeutel, H. Schadwinkel, V. Gomer, and D.

Eur. Phys. J. D 31, 239 (2004).

Meschede, Opt. Commun. 148, 45 (1998).

[11] C.P. Koch, E. Luc-Koenig, and F. Masnou-Seeuws, Phys.

[24] M.J. Wright, P.L. Gould, and S.D. Gensemer, Rev. Sci.

[12] C.P. Koch, R. Kosloﬀ, and F. Masnou-Seeuws, Phys.

[25] V. Sanchez-Villicana, S.D. Gensemer, and P.L. Gould,

Rev. A 73, 033408 (2006).

Rev. A 73, 043409 (2006).

[13] U. Poschinger, W.
C.P.

Weidem¨uller,
physics/0604140 (2006).

Salzmann, R. Wester, M.
Kosloﬀ,
Koch,

and

R.

[14] W.

Salzmann, U. Poschinger, R. Wester, M.
Weidem¨uller, A. Merli, S.M. Weber, F. Sauer, M.
Plewicki, F. Weise, A.M. Esparza, L. W¨oste, and A.

Instrum. 75, 4718 (2004).

Phys. Rev. A 54, R3730 (1996).

[26] M.J. Wright, J.A. Pechkis, J.L. Carini, S. Kallush, R.

Kosloﬀ, and P.L. Gould, to be published (2006).
[27] L.D. Landau, Phys. Z. Sowjetunion 2, 46 (1932).
[28] C. Zener, Proc. R. Soc. London A 137, 696 (1932).
[29] P.S. Julienne and J. Vigue, Phys. Rev. A 44, 4464 (1991).

