6
0
0
2
 
c
e
D
 
3
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
m
o
t
a
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
3
3
1
2
1
6
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Accumulation and thermalization of cold atoms in a ﬁnite-depth magnetic trap

R. Chicireanu, Q. Beauﬁls, A. Pouderous, B. Laburthe-Tolra, E.
Mar´echal, J. V. Porto†, L. Vernac, J. C. Keller, and O. Gorceix
Laboratoire de Physique des Lasers, CNRS UMR 7538, Universit´e Paris 13,
99 Avenue J.-B. Cl´ement, 93430 Villetaneuse, France and
† National Institute of Standards and Technology, Gaithersburg, Maryland 20899, USA
(Dated: February 2, 2008)

We experimentally and theoretically study the continuous accumulation of cold atoms from a
magneto-optical trap (MOT) into a ﬁnite depth trap, consisting in a magnetic quadrupole trap
dressed by a radiofrequency (RF) ﬁeld. Chromium atoms (52Cr) in a MOT are continuously optically
pumped by the MOT lasers to metastable dark states. In presence of a RF ﬁeld, the temperature
of the metastable atoms that remain magnetically trapped can be as low as 25 µK, with a density
of 1017 atoms.m−3, resulting in an increase of the phase-space density, still limited to 7.10−6 by
inelastic collisions. To investigate the thermalization issues in the truncated trap, we measure the
free evaporation rate in the RF-truncated magnetic trap, and deduce the average elastic cross section
for atoms in the 5D4 metastable states, σel = 7.0 × 10−16m2. We ﬁnally discuss the possibilities for
using this scheme of continuous accumulation and RF evaporation to rapidly reach high phase-space
densities from a MOT.

PACS numbers: 32.80.Pj, 47.45.Ab, 32.80.Cy

Magneto-optical trapping is one of the greatest recent
advances in atomic and molecular physics, opening many
new areas in physics, including the study of Bose-Einstein
condensation in dilute systems. One of the advantages of
a magneto-optical trap (MOT), is that cooling and trap-
ping are simultaneous. However, inherent limitations of
the cooling mechanism, for example light-assisted colli-
sions or multiple scattering of light, limit typical phase-
space densities to 10−7 when strong ﬂuorescence lines are
involved in the cooling transition [1]. To reach higher
phase-space densities, it is usually necessary to use se-
quential operations, such as cooling in molasses, load-
ing in conservative traps, and forced evaporation, which
greatly limits the rate at which a Bose-Einstein conden-
sates (BEC) can be produced.

New possibilities arise for atoms whose electronic level
structure includes metastable dark states (such as Sr,
Er, Yb, or Cr). Spontaneous emission from the excited
state of the cooling transition depumps atoms into a dark
metastable state, which can be trapped, either optically,
or magnetically. This provides an interesting means to
continuously accumulate atoms in a magnetic trap [2], or
for a continuous loading of an optical or magnetic waveg-
uide. Cold metastable atoms are directly produced inside
the waveguide or the trap, which reduces heating associ-
ated with the sequential loading from a MOT. This may
have promising applications in the prospect of continu-
ously producing a coherent beam of atoms, by perform-
ing forced evaporation as the atoms propagate along a
waveguide [3].

In this paper, we study the accumulation of metastable
chromium atoms in a magnetic trap (MT), dressed by a
radiofrequency (RF) ﬁeld (see Fig 1) [4] [5]. As in [2]
and [6], chromium atoms in the 7S3 ground state are
captured in a MOT, and depumped to dark metastable

states 5D4,3. We observe diﬀerent regimes as a function
of the RF frequency. When the RF frequency is small,
atoms in internal states adiabatically connected to high
ﬁeld seeking states at small magnetic ﬁelds are accumu-
lated in a (3D) W-shaped potential. When the RF fre-
quency ν is larger than the MOT temperature TMOT ,
i.e. hν > kBTMOT (where h is the Planck constant, and
kB the Boltzmann constant), atoms in low-ﬁeld seeking
states are accumulated in a ﬁnite-depth potential. In this
latter case, we achieve the continuous loading of a trap
where evaporation is also continuous.

The purpose of this paper is to carefully study the ac-
cumulation of atoms in such a ﬁnite-depth trap, including
the analysis of the diﬀerent loss and heating mechanisms,
the role of elastic collisions and the issues of evaporation
and thermalization. We will show that fairly large phase-
space densities can be reached. In the case of chromium,
the gain in phase-space density is nevertheless limited by
large inelastic loss rates associated with collisions with
atoms from the MOT, and by large inelastic collision
rates between metastable atoms.

In the ﬁrst part of this paper, we describe our exper-
imental observations, which show the fast (300 ms) pro-
duction of a cloud whose phase-space density can reach
7.10−6. This is about a ﬁfty fold increase compared to
what is typically obtained in standard MOTs, and a ten
fold increase in the phase-space density compared to the
Cr MOT we operate.

In the second part, we present a theoretical model
based on rate equations for the atom number and the
total energy of the sample, to interpret our experimental
results and determine which processes limit the phase-
space density. This model includes loading and loss pro-
cesses, and assumes that thermal equilibrium is reached
on a timescale which is short compared to the timescales

2

commercial synthesizer, a 11 dB pre-ampliﬁer, and a 10
W ampliﬁer, sending the RF power to a copper coil (2.5
turns, 10 cm diameter). After a given time τ (= 3s for
most experiments reported in this paper) during which
we run the MOT without any repumper, we shine the red
7 P3) for 4 ms, and
repumping light (663 nm for 5D4 →
capture an image of the cloud, using dark ground absorp-
tion imaging along the horizontal y axis (1:1 imaging,
using a telescope with two 2 inch diameter achromatic
doublet lenses, and a CCD camera), with a 100 µs res-
onant pulse well below optical saturation. Our imaging
resolution is limited by the size of the camera pixels, 6.5
µm. The repumping time, 4 ms, is long enough for all
atoms in the 5D4 state to be repumped to the 7S3 elec-
tronic ground state, but still short compared to all other
timescales in the experiment. In addition, the recoil en-
ergy associated with repumping is negligible compared to
the kinetic energy of the atoms. We therefore consider
that the temperature and densities measured for atoms
in the 7S3 after repumping are equal to those of atoms
in the 5D4 state before repumping.

p

For in situ density measurements, the absorption pic-
tures are taken in presence of the magnetic ﬁeld gra-
dient. We analyze the images by a ﬁtting procedure
which assumes thermal equilibrium in a trap potential
V (x, y, z) = mSgJµBB′
x2 + y2 + 4z2 (mS is the mag-
netic sublevel, gJ = 1.5 the Land´e factor, µB the Bohr
magneton, and B′ = 9 G/cm the magnetic ﬁeld gra-
dient). From this analysis, we ﬁrst deduce the total
atom number. The cloud size, typically 500 µm, is small
enough that we can neglect the Zeeman eﬀect on the cy-
cling transition (the Zeeman shift is less than one tenth
of the linewidth). Since the atomic sample is unpolarized
and the magnetic ﬁeld is inhomogeneous, we assume an
average Clebsch Gordan coeﬃcient of 3/7 for the reso-
nant photon absorption cross section σabs = 3λ2
2π (where
λ = 425.5 nm is the photon wavelength), correspond-
ing to an uniform magnetic sub-level distribution. From
optical pumping calculations simulating an unpolarized
sample, we estimate that the corresponding error bar on
the number of atoms is
15 percent: this is the main
contribution to the error bar in the density and in the
determination of chromium inelastic loss parameters de-
scribed later in this paper.

±

We measure the number of atoms accumulated in the
truncated MT, as a function of time τ , for diﬀerent RF
frequencies ν. At any frequency, we observe an exponen-
tial loading of the trap, and we plot in Fig 2 the 1/e ac-
cumulation time Tload as a function of the RF frequency.
The accumulation time increases approximately linearly
from 0.3 s for ν = 1 MHz to 1.4 s for ν > 6M Hz. With-
out RF, the accumulation time is 1.4 s. In Fig 3, we show
the steady state atom number after 3 s of accumulation
in the truncated MT as a function of the RF frequency.
the ex-
act analysis of the absorption images is complicated.

Since the atom cloud is not polarized,

FIG. 1: Relevant level structure for chromium. The cooling transition
is 7S3 →7 P4. Atoms are depumped to the 5D4 metastable state. For
this state, we also present a sketch of the RF dressed magnetic Zeeman
eigen energies. Along the x axis, the avoided crossing occurs at RRF .
The density proﬁles are also qualitatively represented (shaded area) for
atoms in the MOT (a), and for metastable states depending on the sign
of their magnetic quantum number (b) and (c).

associated with loss processes. We also assume that the
trap depth is large enough for the thermal distribution in
the truncated trap to be identical to the thermal distri-
bution in the non-truncated trap ([7], [8]). The compar-
ison between our experimental data and our simulation
points towards a strong heating process due to collisions
between the magnetically trapped atoms and the MOT
atoms, which strongly limits the achieved phase-space
density.

In the third part, we describe additional experiments,
which allowed us to measure the evaporation rate, by
comparing the loss rates and the heating rates with
and without RF. From these measurements, we infer
the average cross section for elastic collisions between
metastable chromium atoms, which was never measured
before. This measurement indicates that thermalization
is not achieved when the atoms are accumulated in the
truncated magnetic trap at low RF frequencies. We ﬁ-
nally discuss the consequences of our observations in the
prospect of reaching high phase-space densities by con-
tinuously accumulating atoms in a truncated trap.

CONTINUOUS ACCUMULATION IN A
RF-DRESSED MAGNETIC TRAP

Our experimental setup was described in a previous
paper [6]. Chromium atoms are heated to 1500 C, de-
celerated in a Zeeman slower, and captured in a MOT
whose magnetic ﬁeld gradient is 18 G/cm in the verti-
cal direction, and 9 G/cm in the other two directions.
Compared to reference [6], the MOT laser beam 1/e2 ra-
dius is reduced to 3 mm. Here, we speciﬁcally study the
accumulation of 52Cr atoms in the 5D4 state, in pres-
ence of a RF ﬁeld. We generate the RF ﬁeld Bz using a

3

FIG. 2: Accumulation time in the truncated MT Tload, as a function
of the RF frequency.

p

For sake of simplicity, we will assume in this pa-
per that all atoms experience an average potential
mSgJ µBB′
x2 + y2 + 4z2, where mS is an average mag-
netic quantum number, which we deduce from direct tem-
perature measurements. The density proﬁle at thermal
x2 + y2 + 4z2),
equilibrium is nMT = n0exp(
where T is the temperature, and V0 = mSgJ µBB′. From
the analysis of the absorption images, we can deduce the
1/e radius of the cloud d, as well as the peak atom density
n0 = 7
, where O.D. is the experimental central op-
6
tical depth. After 3 s of accumulation, the observed peak
atom density is almost independent of the RF frequency,
except when this frequency is set below approximately 1
MHz (see Fig 4).

V0/kBT

O.D.
dσabs

p

−

FIG. 3: Atom number after 3 s of accumulation, as a function of the
RF frequency (squares). Solid line : theory (see text).

FIG. 4: Peak atom density after 3 s of accumulation (squares). Solid
line : theory (see text).

In addition to density measurements, we perform di-
rect temperature measurement, by analyzing the free-fall
expansion of the atoms after release from the magnetic
trap. The current in the coils producing the magnetic
ﬁeld gradient is switched oﬀ in 500 µs. Eddy currents
generate a non-negligible bias magnetic ﬁeld at the atom
location for more than 5 ms, but this does not modify
the ballistic expansion of the atoms. To deduce the tem-
perature, we therefore analyze times of ﬂight larger than
600 µs, by ﬁtting the integral of the absorption images
by gaussian functions. Although the initial shape of the
cloud is not gaussian, we numerically checked that the
systematic error bar associated to this procedure is less
than 10 percent, when ﬁtting the vertical direction (along
which the extension of the cloud is the smallest), for tem-
peratures on the order of 60 µK.

Using this temperature and the measured 1/e size of
the cloud in situ d, we deduce the mean magnetic quan-
tum number mS = kBT /dgJµBB′ of the atoms in the
MT. Interestingly, mS does not change much with the
RF frequency, staying close to 2.

In ﬁgure 6, we show the steady state phase-space den-
sity after τ =3 s of accumulation, as a function of the
RF frequency. Because the measured temperature of the
atoms decreases with decreasing RF frequency (Fig 5),
and because the measured peak atom density remains al-
most constant (Fig 4), the phase-space density increases
at low RF frequencies (Fig 6), to reach a maximum value
1.5) 10−6 at ν = 1.5 MHz. The error bar is
of (7.0
due to the systematic errors on the density and on the

±

4

FIG. 5: Temperature of the atoms after 3s of accumulation, as a
function of the RF frequency. The experimental error bar on the tem-
perature is about 10 µK. Solid line : theory (see text). Experimental
points at the left of the vertical dotted line correspond to a situation
where thermal equilibrium is not reached (see text).

temperature measurements (see above). The maximum
phase-space density value is signiﬁcantly higher than typ-
ical phase-space densities achieved in a MOT involving a
strong resonance line.

For frequencies lower than 1.5 MHz, this trend inverts:
when lowering the RF frequency, the density of the atoms
decreases (see Fig 4), and we infer a decrease of the phase-
space density, instead of an increase. For such low RF
frequencies, the atoms in the low-ﬁeld seeking states see
a trap whose depth is lower than the MOT temperature,
and most of them are therefore not trapped. However, for
frequencies on the order of 800 kHz or below, new inter-
esting features appear in the absorption images. The 1/e
size of the imaged cloud becomes much larger, and the
atom lifetime is longer than the lifetime measured at 1
MHz. We interpret these pictures as resulting from atoms
trapped in the W-shaped adiabatic potential correspond-
ing to states, dressed by the RF ﬁeld, adiabatically con-
nected to high-ﬁeld-seeking states at B=0 [4],[5]. Indeed,
the cloud size increases linearly with RF frequency, and
its vertical position also shifts linearly with RF frequency,
as is expected in the RF-dressed potential, whose size is
determined by RRF = hνRF /gJµBB′ (see Fig. (1)). For
low RF frequencies, we found that the number of atoms
increases before decreasing for large RF power. We at-
tribute this eﬀect to higher harmonic frequencies appear-
ing at high RF power : a substantial power of the second
harmonics of the RF frequency is then exciting the atom
sample, so that the atoms reaching 2RRF have a large
probability of being extracted from the dressed trap.

In the remaining of this paper, we will focus on RF fre-
quencies larger than 1 MHz, for which we only trap low-

FIG. 6: Phase-space densities after 3 s of accumulation in the RF
trap, as a function of the RF frequency (Squares). Solid line: theory.
Experimental points at the left of the vertical dotted line correspond
to a situation where thermal equilibrium is not reached (see text).

ﬁeld seeking states. One of the main goals of this paper
is to quantitatively understand the achieved phase-space
densities in this regime. In the next part, we describe a
theoretical model, which assumes that the elastic scat-
tering rate is high enough to insure thermal equilibrium.
Then, in Part 3, we will experimentally determine the
elastic scattering rate, in order to determine in which
RF regime this theoretical model is expected to be valid.

THEORETICAL MODEL AND
INTERPRETATION

Our theoretical model for the accumulation of the
atoms in the RF-truncated magnetic trap is based on
rate equations for the number of atoms and the total
energy of the system. It is elaborated from [7] and [9].
We include in our model the density dependent loss pro-
cesses, assuming that the density proﬁle of the atoms is,
at all time, well described by the Boltzmann distribu-
tion at thermal equilibrium in the non-truncated trap.
This relies on two main assumptions: ﬁrst, the elastic
collision rate is large enough to reach thermal equilib-
rium on the timescale of the experiment (deﬁned by the
dominant loss process); second, the trap depth is large
enough compared to the magnetic trap temperature, so
that one can neglect modiﬁcations in the thermal distri-

bution linked to the ﬁnite depth of the potential ([7], [8]).
In our experiment, thermal equilibrium is most likely not
reached at the beginning of the loading of the MT, when
the number of atoms is still small. For this reason, we
do not expect this model to describe the dynamics of the
loading. However, the steady state reached at the end
of the accumulation is the one predicted by our model,
provided the rate of elastic collisions in the 5D4 state is
high enough (or if the steady state density proﬁle is close
enough to the Boltzmann density distribution).

To be able to capture the physics of the accumula-
tion in the truncated MT, our model takes into account
the loading of the atoms and various loss mechanisms.
The key point for the loading parameters is that the
loading rate and the average energy per atom loaded in
the MT both depend on the RF frequency. We exper-
imentally checked that the MOT atom number is not
modiﬁed by the presence of the RF ﬁeld. We there-
fore assume that the production rate of atoms in the
metastable states does not depend on the RF frequency
ν. However, once the atoms decay into the 5D4 state,
we assume that they are only trapped if their total en-
ergy is smaller than the trap depth. The loading rate
Γ(ν) is therefore obtained by multiplying Γ, the loading
rate without RF, by the probability P (ν) that an atom
transferred from the MOT - at a position (x, y, z), and
with a velocity v - into the metastable state has a total
energy Etot = 1/2mv2 + V0
x2 + y2 + 4z2 smaller than
the depth of the truncated MT, mShυ:

p

5

(3)

E(ν)
kBTMOT

= RD

dud3

−→r (u +

V0√x2+y2+4z2
kB TM OT

−(x2 +y2+4z2)

)√ue−ue

2w2

M OT

dud3

−→r √ue−ue

RR4

−(x2 +y2 +4z2)

2w2

M OT

Our model includes diﬀerent loss mechanisms:
(i) collisions with the background gas, mostly hot

atoms coming from the oven (rate Γ0);

(ii) losses corresponding to inelastic collisions with

atoms from the MOT, with a rate

Γ1 = 1/N

d3rβP DnMOT (~r)nMT (~r)

(4)

Z

where N is the total number of atoms in the magnetic
trap, and βP D is the inelastic loss parameter for collisions
between D atoms and P atoms;

L3n2

L2n0/23, where n0 is

the MT peak atom density);

(iii) two-body losses (rate Γ2 ≡
(iv) three-body losses (rate Γ3 ≡

0/33. In general
L3 has to be measured. However, in the limit of the
existence of a weakly bound dimer, L3 is related to the
scattering length of the atoms to the fourth power [10]);
¯h
md2 , where µ
is the atom magnetic moment, ∆µ is the change in mag-
netic moment due to the Majorana spin ﬂip, C is a nu-
merical factor, on the order of 3, and d is the 1/e radius
of the cloud [11]);

(v) Majorana losses (rate Γmaj = C µ
∆µ

Γ(ν) = P (ν)Γ

(1)

(vi) Evaporation related to elastic collisions, with rate

P (ν) can be evaluated numerically by integrating the
phase-space density over the domain D deﬁned by the
condition Etot < mShυ :

Γev:

dud3

−→r √ue−ue

P (ν) = RD

dud3

−→r √ue−ue

RR4

−(x2+y2 +4z2)

2w2

M OT

−(x2+y2 +4z2)

2w2

M OT

(2)

−

In this formula, we have used the fact that the
phase-space density is proportional to the spatial den-
x2 + y2 +
sity in the MOT, nMOT (−→r ) = n0,MOT exp(
4z2)/2w2
MOT ), and to the √u exp(
u) factor coming
from the free space kinetic energy distribution. This
MOT density mostly reproduces the experimental one,
and allows great mathematical simpliﬁcations. We found
in our simulations that the exact form of the MOT den-
sity mainly aﬀects the loading parameters and the results
of our simulations at low RF frequencies, but doesn’t
modify much the inelastic loss parameters that we de-
duce from the simulations.

−

We also calculate the average total energy per atom

trapped in the truncated MT, E(ν):

√2
8

(5)

f (η)

Γev =

Γel ×
where Γel = n0σel ¯v is the elastic collision rate, with
8kB T
πm the mean
σel the elastic cross section and ¯v =
thermal velocity. η is the ratio of the trap depth to the
trapped atom temperature, and f (η) is given in equation
(11) of ref [8] (which is valid for η

4).

q

We neglect any elastic collisions between atoms in the
metastable states and atoms from the MOT [12]. The
atom number and total energy rate equations read:

≥

dN
dt

−

= Γ(ν)

(Γ0 + Γ1 + Γ2 + Γ3 + Γmaj + Γev)N (6)

d(9/2N T )
dt

= E(ν)Γ(ν)

− Xi=0,1,2,3,maj,ev

fiΓiN T

(7)

where the fikBT ’s describe the average energy loss
when one atom is lost by the corresponding mechanism.

In a linear trap, one shows that f0 = 9/2, f2 = 3,
f3 = 5/2, fmaj = 5/2. For instance, to evaluate f2,
one needs to integrate over the whole cloud the local in-
elastic rate L2n2
MT (r) times the local mean energy of the
atoms V (r) + 3/2kBT :

f2Γ2N T =

L2 Z

−

d3rn2

MT (r) (V (r) + 3/2kBT )

(8)

If the trap is deep enough, fev = η + 1 (see [8]). In

addition,

Z

.

f1Γ1N T =

d3rβP DnMOT (~r)nMT (~r)(V (r) + 3/2kBT )(9)

×

We stress that there are few adjustable parameters,
1016 m−3, TMOT = 120 µK and
since n0,MOT = 7.5
wMOT = 100 µm are independently measured. As shown
below, we determine L2 from an independent measure-
ment. Γ3 and Γev both depend on the scattering length
a, which is used as a free parameter here. Γ and βP D are
the two other free parameters.

×

±

±

×

0.3

0.5)

We numerically solve equations (6) and (7) using the
experimentally measured mS for each RF frequency. We
ﬁrst ﬁt our numerical results to the experimental results
for large RF frequencies (ν > 4 MHz). In this regime, we
expect that evaporation is negligible, because the trap
depth is much larger than the temperature of the atoms:
for instance, a RF frequency of 8 MHz corresponds to
η > 10, so that the evaporation time is much longer than
the accumulation time in the truncated trap. Therefore,
we set Γev = 0 for the comparison to the experiment at
large RF frequencies. The comparison to our experimen-
tal results for the temperature and number of atoms after
107 s−1
3 s of accumulation set the parameters Γ = 3.3
10−10 cm3s−1. The error
and βP D = (4.9
bars are respectively the statistic error bar of the ﬁt, and
the systematic error bar associated to the uncertainty on
the total atom number. With these values, the agree-
ment between theory and experiment is satisfactory, for
RF frequencies exceeding 4 MHz (see Fig 3, 4, 5 and 6).
We note that the value of βP D that we deduce from our
analysis is close to what was measured in reference [13].
For large RF frequencies, we checked that evapora-
tion, Majorana losses, and three-body losses are negli-
gible. The only other parameter which is not negligible
is the inelastic two-body loss parameter, which is mea-
sured independently in our experiment (see below). The
main conclusion of our analysis at high RF frequencies is
that inelastic collisions with atoms from the MOT limit
the total number of atoms that are accumulated in the
MT, and produce a strong heating: the temperature of
the atoms in the MT, which, in absence of collisions,
could be as low at TMOT /3 [2], raises to about 100 µK for
large RF frequencies. This drastically limits the achieved
steady state phase-space density.

6

At RF frequencies lower than 4 MHz, the role of evap-
oration is not negligible. However, we ﬁnd that varying
the elastic cross section σel does not lead to large modi-
ﬁcations of the numerical results, so that it is in practice
impossible to deduce from a ﬁt a precise value of the elas-
tic scattering rate. In addition, for the lowest frequencies,
our model, which relies on the assumption that the gas
is thermalized to the Boltzmann distribution, may not
be fully applicable. The loading time Tload of the atoms
in the truncated MT gets smaller and smaller as the RF
frequency decreases (see Fig. 2): at low RF frequencies,
the spatial overlap between the MT and the MOT gets
better and better, which increases the loss rate related
to inelastic collisions with atoms from the MOT (process
(ii)), and reduces Tload. Therefore, Boltzmann thermal
equilibrium is not necessarily reached before the steady
state. This will be studied in detail in the following sec-
tion.

FIG. 7: η as a function of the RF frequency. For η ≤ 4, the density
distribution at thermal equilibrium is modiﬁed by the trap truncation,
which is not taken into account in the theoretical model.

Eﬀects linked to the small trap depth (and their con-
sequences on the thermal distribution) may also have an
important role at low RF frequencies. Our model, assum-
ing that the thermal distribution in the truncated trap
is identical to the one in a inﬁnite depth potential, will
4 [8]. Although the sample is
only be valid provided η
not polarized, the measurement of the 1/e radius of the
cloud d provides a good estimate for η, the ratio of the
trap depth (mShν) to the trap temperature kBT = V0d,
because this ratio does not depend on mS. We plot η in
Fig 7, and ﬁnd that our theoretical model may not be
applicable when the RF frequency is smaller than about
2 MHz.

≥

EVAPORATIVE COOLING AND
THERMALIZATION IN A RF-TRUNCATED
MAGNETIC TRAP

To investigate thermalization issues, we perform a new
set of experiments to measure the lifetime and the heat-
ing rate of atoms in the 5D4 state with and without
the RF ﬁeld. For these experiments, the atoms are ﬁrst
accumulated without RF for 3 s in the magnetic trap.
Then, the MOT is switched oﬀ, and the number of atoms
and temperature of the cloud are measured after an ad-
justable delay t. This second step of the experiment is
ﬁrst realized without RF, then in presence of a 3 MHz
RF ﬁeld.

When no RF ﬁeld is applied, we measure the decay
of the metastable atoms in the MT (see Fig 8), from
which we deduce the inelastic loss parameter L2 (see Fig
8, which shows a clear non-exponential decay). We ﬁtted
the data of Fig 8 assuming, in addition to a one-body
loss, a two-body loss parameter. Given the low atomic
density, we assume that three-body processes are neg-
ligible. During the decay, the cloud volume increases
approximately linearly. In the ﬁt of Fig 8, we assume a
linear dependence to the volume on time, based on a ﬁt
to the measured time-dependent size. We found the in-
10−11
elastic loss parameter to be L2 = (3.3
cm3s−1 (in agreement with [13]). The respective error
bars are statistic error bar of the ﬁt, and systematic error,
mostly coming from the uncertainty on the total number
of atoms. We stress that this inelastic loss parameter is
much larger than the expected dipolar relaxation rate,
which rules out dipolar relaxation as the main inelastic
loss channel [14].

0.5)

0.5

×

±

±

We repeat this lifetime experiment in presence of a 3
MHz RF ﬁeld during the decay. Then, the decay of the
cloud is modiﬁed by evaporation, which changes both the
total loss rate, and the evolution of the temperature (see
Fig 9). Our goal is to use these observations to estimate
the evaporation rate and infer the elastic collision rate.
However, one must ﬁrst evaluate the modiﬁcation of the
lifetime of the cloud linked to spilling of atoms out of the
trapping volume set by the RF frequency: the experi-
mentally observed heating produces atoms whose energy
is larger than the trap depth. They then leave the trap,
without undergoing elastic collision, assuming that the
mean free path of the atoms is larger than the size of
the sample. Heating without RF translates into spilling
when RF is applied, and the rate at which spilling oc-
curs is therefore linked to the heating rate without RF.
We measure the time evolution of the 1/e radius of the
0.1 s−1, the
cloud d without RF to estimate Γspill ≈
rate of atoms leaving the trapping volume set by the RF
frequency, i.e. the rate of atoms spilled out of the trap
volume.

From the atom number decay at short times, we de-
duce the experimental values of the atom loss rates with-

7

FIG. 8: Decay of atoms in the D state (squares). Solid line: result
of the ﬁt (see text). The dotted line is a result of a purely exponential
ﬁt of the experimental data for t> 5s. The dashed line is a result of an
exponential ﬁt for t< 1s.

0.22 s−1.

out RF (see Fig 8), Γloss = 1/Tloss = 1/2.4 s−1, and
with RF, Γloss,RF = 1/1.35 s−1. We can therefore esti-
mate the value of Γev + Γspill = Γloss,RF −
Γloss = 0.32
s−1. From this equality, we obtain a ﬁrst estimate for the
evaporation rate from the modiﬁcation in the lifetime of
the cloud in presence of RF: Γev ≈
We deduce an additional independent estimate for the
evaporation rate by comparing the heating rate in the RF
truncated trap to the heating rate without RF. With the
3 MHz RF ﬁeld on, we observe no substantial heating, as
proven by temperature measurements as the hold time t
is varied (see Fig 9). This indicates that the cooling rate
due to evaporation balances the heating rate related to
two-body inelastic collisions. For RF frequencies higher
than 3 MHz, the cloud does heat, whereas we observe
cooling when the RF frequency is lower. This observa-
tion allows us to make a second determination of Γev.
Using (7), assuming only one-body, two-body losses and
evaporation, and taking into account the experimental
observation that dT
0, we have:

dt ≈

9
2

dN
dt

T

f0N T Γ0 −

f2N T Γ2 −

≈ −

(η + 1)ΓevN T (10)

from which we deduce, using eq.(6):

Γev ≈

(9/2
−
η + 1

f2)Γ2
9/2

−

(11)

8

theoretical model can be used to analyze the evaporation
during the decay, i.e. if thermal equilibrium is achieved
throughout the decay, so that we can use equation (11).
To be able to describe the cloud by the Boltzmann dis-
tribution throughout the decay, it is necessary that a
suﬃcient number of elastic collisions take place during
the typical evolution time of the cloud. It is diﬃcult to
deﬁne exactly a timescale to reach thermal equilibrium,
as relaxation to the Boltzmann distribution is not expo-
nential when this relaxation is driven by intraparticles
collisions (as can be seen for example from eq. (14) in
[7]). We perform numerical simulations of the Boltzmann
equation, and ﬁnd that, in practice, a ratio of about 4
elastic collisions per inelastic collision is enough to main-
tain the energy distribution of the most populated states
close to a Boltzmann distribution.
In our experiment,
Γel
66. The distribution should therefore be
Γ2 ≈
close to the Boltzmann distribution, and our determi-
nation of the elastic scattering rate in the 5D4 state is
therefore self-consistent.

20
1/3.3 ≈

We now can turn back to the analysis of the experi-
ments described in the ﬁrst part of this paper, and to
the issue of thermal equilibrium in these experiments.
For the continuous accumulation in the RF truncated
trap, the loading time is mostly set by inelastic collisions
with the MOT atoms. For low RF frequencies, for which
the spatial overlap between the MT and the MOT is the
best, the loading time Tload is short, between 300 ms and
1s (see Fig 2). Therefore, the elastic scattering rate is
too small to provide thermal equilibrium at the end of
the loading process. In Fig 10, we plot the approximate
number of collisions before the steady state of accumu-
lation is reached, qualitatively given by nMT σel ¯vTload/2.
From Fig. 10, we expect a lack of thermalization at RF
frequencies below 4 MHz.

FIG. 9: Time evolution of the temperature without RF (squares) and
with a ν = 3 MHz RF ﬁeld (triangles). Lines are guides for the eye.
The error bar illustrate the typical combined statistical and systematic
errors on temperature measurements.

We estimate Γ2,t=0 = Γloss −

Γ0, where Γ0 = 1/T0 =
1/9 s−1 is the loss rate at large time delays t, for which
the atom number is small enough to neglect inelastic col-
lisions (see Fig 8). We attribute Γ0 to the eﬀect of col-
lisions with the background gas (mostly hot atoms com-
ing from the oven). The 1/e size of the cloud and the
3.5,
experimentally measured temperature give mS ≈
and an average trap depth to trap temperature ratio of
η
(11) that
1. We therefore deduce from eq.
±
0.04 s−1, in reasonable agreement with our
Γev = 0, 2
ﬁrst estimate.

5.5

±

≈

4

±

±

From these measurements, we deduce the elastic colli-
sion rate, using eq. (5) and eq. (11) of ref [8] to estimate
11 s−1 (er-
the evaporation fraction f (η): Γel = 20
ror bars respectively correspond to statistical error on Γev
and to the estimated systematic error on η). The experi-
mentally measured temperature is 100 µK, and the peak
density 1011 cm−3, at t = 0. We therefore infer an aver-
10−16
age elastic cross section of σel =(7.0
m2, close to the unitary limit at this temperature. The
error bars respectively correspond to the statistical er-
ror, and the estimated systematic error (dominated by
the estimate of η). This is, to our knowledge, the ﬁrst
measurement of an elastic cross section for a transition
element in a metastable state. It should be mentioned
that, in relation with the prospect for Bose-Einstein con-
densation with alkaline earth elements, the elastic cross
section was also recently determined in metastable Ca
[15].

3.5 )

1.4

×

±

±

Using this average collision rate, we now check if our

Preliminary numerical simulations based on the Boltz-

FIG. 10: Number of elastic collision before the steady state is reached
when atoms are accumulated in the RF-truncated magnetic trap. When
this number is smaller than approximately 4, thermal equilibrium is not
reached, and our theoretical model does not apply.

mann equation show that indeed thermalization is not
achieved at low RF frequencies. For higher RF frequen-
cies, these simulations also show that thermalization is
not perfect. Since thermalization is not achieved in the
experiment, especially at low RF frequency, the agree-
ment between experimental results and theory may look
surprisingly good. Such a good agreement relies on the
fact that, at each RF frequency, the experimental den-
sity proﬁle is always well ﬁtted by a density proﬁle assum-
x2 + y2 + 4z2.
ing thermal equilibrium in a potential V0
Therefore all loss terms in the system are well described
by the terms Γi and fiΓi in equations (6) and (7), which
therefore still describe the experimental system, even
if thermal equilibrium is not reached. For these rea-
sons, the measurements of the inelastic loss parameters of
chromium given in this paper should be correct. Further-
more, even if technically temperature and phase-space
densities are not deﬁned at the left of the vertical dot-
ted line in Fig 5 and 6, the quantities we plotted still
have a relevant physical meaning: we measured the spa-
tial densities and the total energy of the system, which
will deﬁne the thermodynamics quantities of the sample,
once thermal equilibrium is reached.

p

In this paper, we have studied the accumulation of
metastable atoms in a magnetic trap of ﬁnite depth. We
demonstrated that phase-space densities 50 times larger
than the typical ones in a MOT can be reached in less
than 1s. However, we showed that inelastic collisions
with atoms from the MOT reduce the loading time of
the atoms in the trap so much that thermalization is not
reached when the trap depth is too small. In addition,
the heating rate associated with these inelastic collisions
greatly reduce the achievable phase-space densities. This
feature may be speciﬁc to chromium. With atoms for
which such a loss process is reduced, we suggest that the
continuous accumulation of atoms in a ﬁnite depth trap
(either a magnetic trap or a dipole trap) could be an
eﬃcient way to rapidly reach high phase-space densities.
Finally, we also studied the inelastic collision properties

9

of metastable chromium atoms, as well as their elastic
properties, providing the ﬁrst measurement of the elastic
scattering rate for chromium atoms in the 5D4 state. The
ratio of the elastic rate to the inelastic rate is close to
ﬁve, ruling out traditional forced evaporation techniques
to reach BEC in these states.

Acknowledgements: LPL is Unit´e Mixte (UMR 7538)
of CNRS and of Universit´e Paris Nord. We acknowl-
edge ﬁnancial support from Conseil R´egional d’Ile-de-
France (Contrat Sesame), Minist`ere de l’Education, de
l’Enseignement Sup´erieur et de la Recherche, European
Union (FEDER -Objectif 2), and IFRAF (Institut Fran-
cilen de Recherche sur les Atomes Froids).

[1] C. G. Townsend et al Phys. Rev. A 52, 14231440 (1995)
[2] J. Stuhler et al., Phys. Rev. A, 64, 031405(R) (2001)
[3] T. Lahaye, Phys. Rev. Lett, 93, 093003 (2004)
[4] O. Zobay and B. M. Garraway, Phys. Rev. A 69, 023605

[5] Y. Colombe et al., Europhysics Letters 67, 593-599,

[6] R. Chicireanu et al., Phys. Rev. A 73, 053406 (2006)
[7] O. J. Luiten et al., Phys. Rev. A 53, 381 (1996)
[8] R. deCarvalho and J. Doyle, Phys. Rev. A 70, 053409

(2004)

(2004)

(2004)

[9] D. Comparat et al., Phys. Rev. A 73, 043410 (2006)
[10] P. O. Fedichev et al., Phys. Rev. Lett., 77, 2921 (1996).
See also the experimental demonstration of this scaling
law, T. Weber et al., Phys. Rev. Lett., 91, 123201 (2003)

[11] W. Petrich et al. Phys. Rev. Lett. 74, 3352 (1995)
[12] The elastic cross section between atoms of the MOT and
atoms of the MT is not known. However, even assuming
that it reaches the unitary limit, the thermalization rate
of the MT by the MOT atoms is always small compared
to Γ1

[13] P. O. Schmidt et al., J. Opt. B: Quantum Semiclass. Opt.

[14] S. Hensler et al., Appl. Phys. B, 77, 765-772 (2003)
[15] D. Hansen and A. Hemmerich, Phys. Rev. Lett., 96,

5 S170 (2003)

073003 (2006)

