6
0
0
2
 
c
e
D
 
5
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
m
o
t
a
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
1
5
1
2
1
6
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Attosecond time-scale multi-electron col lisions in the Coulomb four-body problem:
traces in classical probability densities

Agapi Emmanouilidou1,2 and Jan Michael Rost1,3
1 KITP, University of California Santa Barbara, Santa Barbara, CA 93106
2 ITS, University of Oregon, Eugene, Oregon 97403-5203
3Max Planck Institute for the Physics of Complex Systems, 01187 Dresden, Germany
(Dated: August 12, 2013)

In the triple ionization of the Li ground state by single photon absorption the three electrons
escape to the continuum mainly through two collision sequences with individual collisions separated
by time intervals on the attosecond scale. We investigate the traces of these two collision sequences
in the classical probability densities. We show that each collision sequence has characteristic phase
space properties which distinguish it from the other. Classical probability densities are the closest
analog to quantum mechanical densities allowing our results to be directly compared to quantum
mechanical results.

PACS numbers: 32.80.Fb

I.

INTRODUCTION

The theoretical treatment of multiple ionization pro-
cesses by single photon absorption is highly complex with
no analytic solution. In the energy domain, the diﬃculty
is that one has to account for the correlated motion of the
electrons in the asymptotic form of the ﬁnal continuum
state. In the time domain, this diﬃculty can be avoided
at the expense of propagating the fully coupled few-body
Coulomb problem in time.

One can surmount the obstacles in the theoretical
treatment of the triple photo-ionization from the ground
state of Lithium, for a wide range of energies, by formu-
lating the four-body break-up process quasiclassically [1].
This implies classical propagation of the Coulomb four-
body problem using the classical trajectory Monte Carlo
(CTMC) phase space method. CTMC has often been
used to describe break-up processes induced by particle
impact [2, 3, 4, 5] with implementations diﬀering usually
in the way the phase space distribution of the initial state
is constructed. We use a Wigner transform of the initial
quantum wave function for the initial state, and this is
why we call our approach “quasi”-classical. Naturally,
the electron-electron interaction is treated to all orders
in the propagation, and any diﬃculties with electron cor-
relation in the ﬁnal state are absent, since the method is
explicitly time-dependent. The results from the quasi-
classical formulation for a wide range of energies [1] were
found to be in very good agreement with experimental re-
sults [6, 7] as well as theoretical ones available for higher
excess energies [8, 9].

Moreover, our classical results allow for a detailed anal-
ysis of the physical processes in terms of the classical
trajectories: As we have demonstrated, the triply photo-
ionizing trajectories can be organized in groups according
to the respective sequence of electron-electron collisions
[10]. According to this collision scheme we have iden-
tiﬁed two main sequences that lead to triple ionization
from the Li ground state. An indirect veriﬁcation of the
collision scheme could be achieved by measurement of

the electronic angular correlation probability: we have
shown for excess energies close to threshold [10], that the
classiﬁcation scheme of ionizing trajectories can explain
the electronic angular correlation probability in terms of
the dominant “T-shaped” pattern of the three escaping
electrons. The electronic angular correlation probability
is not yet known experimentally. However, it should be
measurable with state of the art experimental techniques.

In the current paper, we explore the manifestations in
classical probability densities of the two main collision
sequences the three electrons follow to ionize from the
ground state of Li. While our previous treatment of the
collision sequences was on the level of single trajectories
[1, 10] we now treat them on the level of ensemble av-
erages. Our motivation for doing so is that probability
densities are the closest classical analog to quantum me-
chanics. In quantum mechanics the probability density is
deﬁned directly through the quantum mechanical wave-
function. In classical physics probability densities can be
easily computed allowing for a visualization of the dif-
ferences between classical and quantum mechanical ob-
servables and for exploring the correspondence principle.
Our ideas should be a useful tool for identifying and un-
derstanding collision mechanisms in other systems where
collision processes play an important role, e.g., strongly
driven atomic systems.

Finally, the collision sequences in triple ionization of
Li take place on an attosecond time scale. While the
ﬁrst collision, in each ionization path, occurs around a
couple of attoseconds after photoabsorption the second
collision takes place around 70 attoseconds. This is an-
other interesting aspect of our work: the emergence of
attosecond laser pulses represents one of the most excit-
ing developments in ultrafast laser science over the past
few years [11, 12]. Attosecond pulses raise the prospect
of studying electronic wave-packet motion on the time
scales at which this motion occurs in nature, namely, the
atomic unit of time (1 a.u.=24 attoseconds). These time
scales show why attosecond pulses are new tools for ex-
ploring electronic processes at their natural time-scale

and at dimensions shorter than even atomic-dimensions.
The advancement of ultra-short laser science and its so
far success in exploring and controlling electronic motion
[13] renders a future direct experimental veriﬁcation of
our collision sequences possible.

II. TIME-DEPENDENT QUASICLASSICAL
DESCRIPTION OF IONIZATION

Typically, there are two structurally diﬀerent con-
tributions
in quantum mechanical matrix elements
hψf |O(t)|ψii, the wavefunctions ψi,f and the operator
O(t). We call our description quasiclassical because we
use the full wavefunctions ψi – exactly translated to a
phase space density ρ(γ) through a Wigner transform –
while the subsequent propagation of the density in time
is performed fully classically. Here, we are interested in
ﬁnal states with all three electrons of Li in the contin-
uum. Since we propagate the entire four body system
over very long times, we can simply project onto mo-
mentum states (corresponding to a measurement at the
detector). In practise, this is done by binning ﬁnal mo-
menta of trajectories, very similarly as in the experiment.

A. The initial phase space density for single
photon multiple ionization

The construction of the initial phase space density ρ(γ)
in our quasiclassical formulation of the triple photoion-
ization of Li has been detailed in [1], here we give only a
brief summary. We formulate the triple photoionization
process from the Li ground state (1s22s) as a two step
process [9, 14, 15]. First, one electron absorbs the photon
(photo-electron) at time t = tabs = 0. Then, due to the
electronic correlations, redistribution of the energy takes
place resulting in three electrons escaping to the contin-
uum. It is the latter step that we describe in our formu-
lation. We ﬁrst assume that the photo-electron is a 1s-
electron. It absorbs the photon at the nucleus (r1 = 0),
an approximation that becomes exact in the limit of high
photon energy [16]. The photon could also be absorbed
by the Li 2s-electron. However, the cross section for pho-
ton absorption from a 1s orbital is much larger than from
a 2s orbital [17]. Hence, we can safely assume that the
photo-electron is a 1s electron which signiﬁcantly reduces
the initial phase space to be sampled. Also, by virtue of
their diﬀerent character the electrons become practically
distinguishable and allow us to neglect antisymmetriza-
tion of the initial state. We denote the photo-electron by
1, the other 1s electron by 2 and the 2s electron by 3. Im-
mediately after photon absorption, we model the initial
phase space distribution of the remaining two electrons,
1s and 2s, by the Wigner transform of the corresponding
initial wavefunction ψ(r1 = 0, r2, r3), where ri are the
electron vectors starting at the nucleus. We approximate
the initial wavefunction as a simple product of hydro-

2

genic orbitals φZi
i (ri) with eﬀective charges Zi, to facil-
itate the Wigner transformation. The Zi are chosen to
reproduce the known ionization potentials Ii, namely for
the 2s electron Z3 = 1.259 (I3 = 0.198 a.u.) and for the
1s electron Z2 = 2.358 (I2 = 2.780 a.u.). (We use atomic
units throughout the paper if not stated otherwise.) The
excess energy, E, is given by E = Eω − I with Eω the
photon energy and I = 7.478 a.u. the Li triple ionization
threshold energy. Following these considerations, the ini-
tial phase space density is given by

ρ(γ) = N δ(r1)δ(ε1 + I1 − ω)

Wφ

Zi
i

(ri, pi)δ(εi + Ii)

Yi=2,3

(1)

with normalization constant N .

To determine which fraction of ρ(γ) leads to triple ion-
ization, the phase space distribution must be followed in
time.

B. The evolution of classical phase space densities

The evolution of a classical phase space density is de-
termined by the classical Liouville equation, which may
be obtained within the quantum mechanical phase space
Wigner formalism [18] by taking the limit ~ = 0 [19, 20],

∂ρ(Γ(t))
∂t

= Lclρ(Γ(t)).

(2)

The initial phase space values are

Γ(0) ≡ γ ,
(3)
and Lcl is the classical Liouville operator which is deﬁned
by the Poisson bracket {H, }, with H the Hamiltonian of
the system. In our case H is the full Coulomb four-body
Hamiltonian. In practice, Eq. (2) amounts to discretizing
the initial phase space, assigning weights to each discrete
point γj = (pj(0), qj(0)) according to ρ(γj), and evolv-
ing in time each initial condition γj with the Coulomb
four-body Hamiltonian. This amounts to propagating
electron trajectories using the classical equations of mo-
tion (CTMC). Regularized coordinates [21] are used to
avoid problems with electron trajectories starting at the
nucleus.

C. Diﬀerent triple ionizing collision sequences and
their phase space ensembles

An important ﬁnding of our previous studies [10] is
that the triple ionizing trajectories can be organized in
classes according to their ionization-driven properties. In
particular, we found two main classes consisting of those
trajectories that triply ionize through the (12,13) colli-
sion sequence and those that ionize through the (12,23)
collision sequence. In the ﬁrst class the path to ioniza-
tion proceeds with photo electron 1 knocking out, succes-
sively, electrons 2 and 3. In the second class the photo-
electron 1 ﬁrst knocks out electron 2 and then, electron

3

2 knocks out electron 3. More abstractly speaking, each
class deﬁnes an ensemble of trajectories which we label
α = I and α = II for the (12,13) and the (12,23) collision
sequences, respectively.

For completeness, we brieﬂy describe what we deﬁne
as a momentum transferring electron-electron collision
along a trajectory with time dependent electron posi-
tions ri(t), i = 1, 2, 3 (see [10]). The term responsible
for momentum transfer between electrons i and j is their
−1
ij , rij = ri−rj . Hence, we
Coulomb repulsion V (rij ) = r
identify a collision between electron i and j (ij) through
the momentum transfer

α dγ denotes integration over initial phase space
where
which contains only those trajectories that belong to the
R
ensemble α. The propagation begins at the time tabs = 0
of photoabsorption. Eq. (8) amounts to a) propagating
all the trajectories of the ensemble α from time tabs up to
t, b) computing for each trajectory the observable A(t),
c) selecting only those trajectories which satisfy A(t) = a
and adding together their weights. Note, that the proba-
bility to ﬁnd at time t the value a for the observable A(t)
is given by Pα(a, t)da.

Finally, the classical average of the observable A(t)

over the ensemble α is simply [22]

Dij := −

∇V (rij ) dt ≡

Fij dt

(4)

t2

Z

t1

t2

Z

t1

under the condition that V(rij (tk)), k = 1, 2 are local
minima in time with t2 > t1, while rij = |ri − rj|. This
automatically ensures that the integral of Eq. (4) includes
the “collision” with a local maximum of V(rij (t)) at a
time t1 < tM < t2. During the time interval t1 < t < t2,
all four particles interact with each other. Hence, the
deﬁnition Eq. (4) is only meaningful if the collision redis-
tributes energy dominantly within the subsystem given
by the three-body Li+-Hamiltonian, Hij , of the nucleus
and the electrons i and j involved in the actual collision,

Hij = Hi + Hj +

(5)

1
|ri − rj|

,

with

where

˙Hij ≡

dHij
dt

≈ 0 for t1 < t < t2 ,

(6)

Hi = p2

i /2 − Z/ri

(7)

are hydrogenic two-body Hamiltonians with charge Z =
3 of the Lithium ion.

Our goal is to investigate whether the two main ion-
ization sequences we have previously identiﬁed using
Eq. (4), manifest themselves on an ensemble average
level with properties that clearly distinguish one from
the other, thus reinforcing the validity of our classiﬁca-
tion scheme. To this end we need classical observables
deﬁned over arbitrary phase space ensembles α, in our
case the two ensembles I and II.

D. Classical probability densities for observables
over a classical phase space ensemble

The probability density Pα(a, t) to ﬁnd the value a for
the observable A at time t under the ensemble α is given
by

Pα(a, t) =

Zα

δ(a − A(γ, t))ρ(γ)dγ,

(8)

hA(t)iα =

A(γ, t)ρ(γ)dγ.

Zα

(9)

III. ENSEMBLE AVERAGES OF ENERGY AND
THE MAIN COLLISION SEQUENCES

That the ensembles I and II, deﬁned by the two main
collision sequences, leave diﬀerent traces on classical av-
erages is obvious from Fig. 1. This and all other results
have been obtained at an excess energy of E = 0.9 eV,
that is fairly close to threshold [1]. Firstly, we see in
Fig. 1a that the electron pair potential energies h1/r12iI
(solid line) and h1/r13iI (dashed line) have well deﬁned
maxima at t12 = 1.6 and t13 = 65 attoseconds, even
when averaged over all trajectories that ionize through
the (12, 13) collision sequence. Note that h1/r23iI (dot-
ted line) decreases monotonically. Thus, all trajectories
triply ionizing through the (12, 13) collision sequence,
satisfy as an ensemble the ﬁrst criterion of this sequence,
namely, maxima in the potential energies of the electron
pairs 12 and 13 participating in collisions. They also sat-
isfy as an ensemble the second criterion, that is, while
the h1/r12iI potential energy changes during the 12 col-
lision the energy of the three-body Hamiltonian hH12iI,
see Eqs. 5, 6, remains constant and while the h1/r13iI
potential energy changes during the 13 collision the en-
ergy of the three-body Hamiltonian hH13iI remains con-
stant. This is clearly demonstrated in Fig. 1b: hH12iI
(thin solid line) remains almost constant near t12 = 1.6
as, while it changes around t13 = 65 as, as should be the
case since during the 13 collision it is the hH13iI energy
(thin dashed line) that is conserved. Similarly, hH13iI re-
mains constant around t13 = 65 as, while it changes near
t12 = 1.6 as, since during the 12 collision it is the hH12iI
energy that is conserved. We also plot hH23iI (thin dot-
ted line) to demonstrate that it changes both, around the
t12 and t13 collision times. One may summarize the two
criteria for triple ionizing ensembles of trajectories as

(A) A maximum in time of the ensemble average
h1/rij iα deﬁnes a collision and its time tij between
electrons i and j.

(B) Near the time of collision tij the corresponding
three-body energy hHij iα of the ensemble remains
approximately constant.

4

FIG. 1: Averages over ensembles α = I (left, a)–b)) and α =
II (right, c)–d)), see Eq. (9). The upper panels show the
interelectronic repulsions, h1/r12iα (solid), h1/r13iα (dashed),
and h1/r23iα (dotted). The lower panels show in addition
the three-body energies with thin lines hH12iα (solid), hH13iα
(dashed), hH23iα (dotted).

These criteria apply also to ensemble II for the collision
sequence (12,23) as one can see in Figs. 1c and 1d. The
collisions 12 and 23 are well deﬁned and take place with
maxima in h1/r12iII at t12 = 1.7 as and in h1/r23iII
t23 = 69 as, the corresponding three-body energies re-
main almost constant around these times.

It is important to keep in mind that the collisions de-
scribed above are not binary but three-body collisions in-
volving two electrons and the nucleus. If we were dealing
j /2 + 1/ |ri − rj|
with binary collisions then
instead of hHiji would be constant during the ij colli-
(cid:11)
sion, which is not the case as one can easily show. For
simplicity we will identify in the following a collision by
ij. However, it is always understood that the nucleus is
part of the collision and that ij refers to the three-body
Hamiltonian Hij as given in Eq. (5).

i /2 + p2
p2
(cid:10)

IV. PROBABILITY DENSITIES

A. Position

The probability densities for the Cartesian positions
of each of the three electrons i, given by Eq. (8) where
A(γ, t) = qi(γ, t) with q = x, y or z, do not oﬀer much
information regarding the identity of the electron pairs
that participate in each collision, see Fig. 2. However,
they contain information about the electron pairs dur-
ing the collisions: Fig. 2 shows that the probability den-

FIG. 2: Top panel: Pα(xi, t) for electrons i = 1, 2, 3 (from
left to right) for the α = I ensemble; Bottom panel: as for the
top panel but for Pα(yi, t).

sity of the Cartesian coordinates of electrons 2 and 3
remain almost constant until 1.6 and 65 as, respectively,
the times that electron 1 knocks them out in the 12 and
13 collisions of the (12, 13) collision sequence. In addi-
tion, the probability density of the y and z component
of the photoelectron 1 does not change up to 1.6 as, the
time of collision of electron 1 with 2. This is expected for
small times since the photoelectron’s initial momentum
is along the x-axis. Similar conclusions can be drawn for
the (12, 23) collision sequence.

Due to our choice of initial conditions for the photo-
electron (electron 1 always starts at r = 0 with initial
momentum along the x-axis) our model has cylindrical
symmetry around the x-axis. As a result the probabil-
ity density of yi is equal to that of zi. Moreover, since
the invariance under the parity operation y → −y of
the Hamiltonian is not broken through the initial condi-
tions, Eq. (1), the corresponding distributions P(yi, t)
are symmetric about yi = 0, the same holds of course
for the zi-coordinates and for all times, see Fig. 2. These
symmetry properties extend to observables which respect
them, such as, e.g., individual electron momenta.

B. Momentum

The probability densities of the Cartesian momentum
components for each of the electrons allow for a deeper in-
sight into the mechanism of the electron collisions taking
place during the two main sequences. During an ij col-
lision the transfer of energy between electrons i and j is
mediated through their mutual repulsion, V (rij ). As dis-
cussed above, we have deﬁned the collision time tij as the
time ˙V (rij ) = 0 with Vij maximal, see Eq. (4). However,
a collision may formally be deﬁned to last between two
minima of Vij at times t1 < tij and t2 > tij . During the
time the two electrons approach each other, t1 < t < tij,

˙V (rij ) > 0, while for tij < t < t2,

˙V (rij ) < 0.

This has diﬀerent consequences for the correspond-
ing time evolutions of the individual hydrogenic energies
Hi(t) of the two electrons, Eq. (7), the one which suf-
fers a net loss of energy in the collision (the impacting
electron) and the one which overall gains energy in the
collision (the impacted electron), see Fig. 3. The latter
˙Hj > 0 for
gains energy throughout the collision that is,
t1 < t < t2. On the other hand, the impacting elec-
˙Hi < 0 for
tron looses energy up to a time ts, that is
t1 < t < ts with ts > tij (ts > tij follows from Eqs. (5, 6)
and ˙V (rij ) = 0 at time tij) while for ts < t < t2 the im-
pacting electron gains energy ˙Hi > 0. From Eqs. (5) and
(6) we can determine the change of a hydrogenic energy
˙Hj in time during a collision with electron i. On the one
hand we have

dHj
dt

∂Hj
∂rj

= pj · ˙pj +

· pj .

(10)

On the other hand we have

˙pj ≈ −

= Fij −

∂Hij
∂rj

∂Hj
∂rj

.

Inserting Eq. (11) into Eq. (10) leads to

dHj
dt

= pj · Fij ,

(11)

(12)

which shows, that the change of the hydrogenic energy
of electron j does not only depend on the modulus of the
electron-electron force Fij but also on its direction rela-
tive to the momentum pj of electron j. We recall at this
point that the present analysis of the collision sequences
in terms of the rate of change of the single electron ener-
gies Hi does by no means imply that we have calculated
the evolution of trajectories with Hi. All observables
are evaluated with our numerical results for the triple
ionizing trajectories from the propagated full four-body
Coulomb Hamiltonian, as we have already pointed out in
section IIA.

In Fig. 3 the ensemble averages hHiiα clearly illustrate
the diﬀerence between the impacting and the impacted
electron for each three-body collision. For trajectories
from the ensemble α = I (Fig. 3a) electron 1 transfers
energy to electron 2 during the 12 collision as can be seen
from the sharp decrease of hH1iI followed by an increase
beginning at t = 2.4 as while at the same time the energy
hH2iI of the impacted electron 2 increases. The pattern
is repeated during the 13 collision where a decrease in
hH1iI is followed by an increase at 79 as, while at the
same time hH3iI of the impacted electron 3 is increasing.
The pattern of the hydrogenic energies during collisions
is also fullﬁlled for the ensemble II as can be seen in
Fig. 3b.

Describing the collisions using the rate of change of the
single electron Hamiltonians has the advantage that the
eﬀect of the nucleus is “folded in”. As a result both, the
early collision which takes place close to the nucleus and

5

FIG. 3: Single electron energy averages hHiiα of electrons 1
(solid), 2 (dashed), 3 (dotted) for the ensemble α = I ( a))
and α = II ( b)).

the latter one which takes place far away from it (for both
ensembles I and II), exhibit exactly the same pattern, see
Fig. 3. This becomes even clearer when one compares
Fig. 3 with the probability densities of the momentum
component along the x-direction for all three electrons in
Figs. 4, 5 and 6. The momentum along the x-direction
of the impacting electron 1 in ensemble I switches form
decreasing to increasing at times 3.5 as for the 12 collision
and 79 as for the 13 collision. This is a consequence of
˙H1 switching sign at 2.4 as for the 12 and at 79 as for
the 13 collision. The time of 3.5 as, where px,1 starts
to increase in the 12 collision, is diﬀerent from the time
2.4 as, where ˙H1 switches sign, while both times are the
same in the 13 collision. The reason is that for the 12
collision the x, y, z-coordinates are not equivalent, with
the transfer of momentum taking place mainly along the
x-direction, while for the later 13 collision the x, y, z-
coordinates are almost equivalent. This is illustrated in
Fig. 7, with p1 · F21 = 0 at 2.4 as and px,1 · F21 = 0
at 3.5 as. The nucleus has a signiﬁcant eﬀect on the
12 collision while it has a small one on the 13 collision
as seen by the more prominent increase of px,1 at 79 as
when compared to its increase at 3.5 as. The change
with time of px,1 during the 12 collision is due to F21
and the −∂H1/∂r1 force from the nucleus, while in the
13 collision the change of px,1 is mainly due to F31. In
Figs. 5 and 6 we see that px,2 and px,3 increase during
the time the respective electrons 2 and 3 are impacted
by electron 1, in agreement with ˙H2 > 0 and ˙H3 > 0
during the 12 and 13 collisions. Similar conclusions can
be drawn for the α = II ensemble.

C.

Inter-electronic angles

Finally, we discuss the time evolution of the inter-
electronic angles. For large times and quasi-free motion
ri ∝ pit, the inter-electronic angles refer to the relation
between positions as well as momenta of the electrons.
The dynamics in the angle is governed by two principles:

(A) Collisions between two electrons lead to a minimum
of the angle θij between the participating electrons

6

FIG. 7: Averaged angles as a function of time over the α =
I ensemble. Solid: angle φ between F21 and p1 in a) and
between F31 and p1 in b); Dashed: angle φ between F21 and
px,1 in a) and between F31 and px,1 in b); Dash-dotted: angle
φ between F12 and p2 in a) and between F13 and p3 in b);
Dotted: angle φ between F12 and px,2 in a) and between F13
and px,3 in b).

i and j, i.e., θij(tij ) ≈ 0, if the collision happens at
time tij .

(B) Electrons tend to move away from each other min-
imizing their mutual repulsive interaction. This
leads to an interelectronic angle of 180◦, if none
of the electrons suﬀers a collision through the third
electron.

With these two principles, we recognize in Fig. 8 the ﬁrst
collision early on (small angle, criterion A) and we also
infer that a second collision happens around 65 as, but
not between electrons 1 and 2, since suddenly the in-
crease of their mutual angle towards 180◦ (criterion B) is
stopped and θ12 shrinks again towards its ﬁnal value of
90◦, giving rise to the “T-shape” structure of the three
escaping electrons [10]. This is true for both collision se-
quences, (12,13) and (12,23). The ﬁrst collision happens
in both cases between electrons 1 and 2, and then elec-
tron 3 imposes a second collision with one of the partners
forming the angle in Fig. 8, namely with electron 1 (up-
per panels) and electron 2 (lower panels). Finally, since
in both cases the last colliding electron pair is not the 12,
θ12 approaches 90◦.

The evolution of P(θ13), Fig. 9, and P(θ23), Fig. 10,
diﬀers much more for the respective two sequences (upper
and lower panels). However, there is a similarity across
the two ﬁgures, namely the pattern in the upper(lower)
panel of Fig. 9 is similar to that in the lower(upper) panel
of Fig. 10.

The reason is that in the case of θ13 only the α = I en-
semble (upper panel of Fig. 9) leaves the visible imprint
of a collision, bringing θ13 close to zero while it rapidly
approaches 180◦ afterwards, since it is the last collision
and electrons 1 and 3 move away from each other after-
wards. The same, but now for electrons 2 and 3, is true
for the α = II ensemble (lower panel of Fig. 10).

In the other two panels (lower panel of Fig. 9 and upper
panel of Fig. 10) one recognizes with the sudden turn

FIG. 4: Momentum distributions Pα(px, t) for electron 1 for
the α = I (top) and α = II (bottom) ensemble. The left
panels show the evolution for short times in greater detail.

FIG. 5: Same as Fig. 4 but for electron 2.

FIG. 6: Momentum distribution Pα(px, t) for electron 3 for
the α = I (left) and α = II (right) ensemble.

away from 180◦ for the respective interelectronic angle a
collision with the third electron (criterion B), in case of
Fig. 9 the collision partner is electron 2 and in case of
Fig. 10 electron 1.

Finally, it is worthwhile to note and understand the
great variation in the width of the initial distribution for
the angles across the three ﬁgures. P(θ12, 0) is most
strongly conﬁned to values around zero since the 12-
collision happens at an early time and electron 1, having
absorbed the photon energy, starts with relatively high
velocity close to the origin (position of the nucleus). In
the short time (1.7 as) before the collision the momen-
tum vector of electron 1 cannot change substantially, so
electron 1 keeps its direction.

The condition for the ﬁrst collision, r1(t12) ≈ r2(t12),
implies also that the angles θ13 and θ23 should be similar
at early times. This is indeed the case, comparing the up-
per left panels of Figs. 9 and 10, where in both cases the
maximum of the initial distribution is around 50◦, while
for the lower left panels the widely spread initial distribu-
tion is centered about 90◦. The latter indicates no clear
preference in the initial mutual angle between electrons 2
and 3 reﬂecting the expectation value of an uncorrelated
(product) wavefunction for the Lithium ground state as
used here. Moreover, one should keep in mind that when-
ever electron 3 is involved one would expect a wider dis-
tribution due to the larger size of the 2s initial electron
density compared to the 1s density for electrons 1 and 2.

V. CONCLUSIONS

We have investigated the two main collision paths the
three electrons follow to escape to the continuum from
the ground state of Li after single photon absorption on
an ensemble level. Studying the classical probability den-
sities for the two ensembles of trajectories correspond-
ing to the two main collision sequences we were able to
identify the traces these sequences leave on the classical
probability densities. Furthermore, we could show that
each of the two ensembles has unique manifestations on
the ensemble average level which clearly distinguish one
from the other. Being able to distinguish the two main
attosecond time scale collision sequences on an ensem-
ble level holds promise for a future direct observation of
these collision sequences with the advancement of ultra-
short laser technology.

7

FIG. 8: Same as Fig. 4 but for the probability density of the
inter-electronic angle θ12, Pα(θ12, t). The arrows indicate the
time of the collision tij .

FIG. 9: Same as in Fig. 8 but for the inter-electronic angle
θ13.

8

FIG. 10: Same as in Fig. 8 but for the inter-electronic angle
θ23.

9

[1] A. Emmanouilidou and J.M. Rost, J. Phys. B 39, L99

[11] P. Agostini and L. F. DiMauro, Rep. Prog. Phys. 67, 813

[2] R. Abrines and I.C. Percival Proc. Phys. Soc. London 88,

[12] M. Yu. Ivanov and I. A. Walmsley , J. Mod. Opt. 52, No.

(2004).

2-3 (2005).

(2006).

861 (1966).

16 1983 (1983).

[3] D.J.W Hardie and R.E. Olson J. Phys. B: At. Mol. Phys.

[4] D. Eichenauer, N. Gr¨un and W. Scheid, J. Phys. B: At.

Mol. Phys. 14, 3929 (1981).

[5] J.S. Cohen J. Phys. B: At. Mol. Phys. 18, 1759 (1981).
[6] R. Wehlitz, M-T Huang, B.D. DePaola, J.C. Levin, I.A.
Sellin, T. Nagata, J.W. Cooper and Y. Azuma, Phys.
Rev. Lett. 81, 1813 (1998).

[7] R. Wehlitz,T. Pattard, M-T Huang,

I.A. Sellin, J.
Burgd¨orfer and Y. Azuma, Phys. Rev. A 61, 030704
(2000).

[8] J. Colgan, M. S. Pindzola, and F. Robicheaux, Phys.
Rev. Lett. 93, 053201 (2004); Phys. Rev. A 72, 022727
(2005).

[9] T. Pattard and J. Burgd¨orfer, Phys. Rev A 63,

020701(R) (2001).

(2006).

[13] M. Drescher, M. Hentschel, R. Kienberger, M. Uiber-
acher, V. Yakovlev, A. Scrinziand, th. Westerwalbesloh,
U. Kleineberg, U. Heinzmann and F. Krausz, Nature
419, 803 (2002).

[14] T. Schneider, P. L. Chocian, and J. M. Rost, Phys. Rev.

Lett. 89, 073002 (2002).

[15] J. A. R. Samson, Phys. Rev. Lett. 65, 2861 (1990).
[16] P. K. Kabir and E. E. Salpeter, Phys. Rev. 108,1256

(1957).

[17] A. Emmanouilidou, T. Schneider and J. M. Rost,

J. Phys. B 36, 2714 (2003).

[18] E. Wigner Phys. Rev. 40, 749 (1932).
[19] E.J. Heller, J. Chem. Phys. 65, 1289 (1976).
[20] T. Geyer and J. M. Rost J. Phys. B 35, 1479 (2002).
[21] P. Kustaanheimo and E. Stiefel, J. Reine Angew. Math.

218, 204 (1965).

[10] A. Emmanouilidou and J.M. Rost, J. Phys. B 39, 4037

[22] J.M. Rost, Phys. Rep. 297, 271 (1998).

