Gadolinium Iron Garnet as a Solid State Material for an Electron

Electric Dipole Moment Search

Steve K. Lamoreaux

Yale University, Department of Physics,

P.O. Box 208120, New Haven, CT 06520-8120

(Dated: Jan 11, 2007)

Abstract

The possibility of a solid state electron electric dipole moment (EDM) experiment based on

Gadolinium Iron Garnet (GdIG) is investigated. GdIG appears to exhibit superparamagnetism

and this eﬀect can be used to enhance the electric-ﬁeld-induced EDM signal at relatively a high

temperatures, as compared to a simple paramagnetic system such as Gadolinium Gallium Garnet.

The sensitivity of a GdIG based experiment might be large enough that an improvement by over

three orders of magnitude, compared to the existing electron EDM limit, could be obtained at a

modest temperature of 4 K, assuming that the superparamagnetic eﬀect is not suppressed at this

temperature, and that the spin relaxation time remains suﬃciently rapid.

PACS numbers:

7
0
0
2
 
n
a
J
 
7
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
m
o
t
a
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
8
9
1
1
0
7
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

1

I.

INTRODUCTION

Following the original suggestion of Shapiro [1], we have been investigating the possi-

bility of an improved electron EDM measurement by use of paramagnetic insulating solids

together with modern magnetometry [2]. The basic idea is that when a paramagnetic in-

sulating solid sample is subjected to an electric ﬁeld, if the constituent atoms or ions of

the solid have an electric dipole moment, the atom or ions spins will tend to become spin-

polarized. Because the atoms or ions carry a magnetic moment, the sample acquires a net

magnetization. We previously identiﬁed Gadolinium Gallium Garnet (GdGG) as possibly

the best paramagnetic system for this study, and have done preliminary measurements in-

dicating that the anticipated sensitivity can be achieved, assuming that spin-glass eﬀects do

not enter at temperatures of order 10 mK [3]. Unfortunately, such eﬀects appear to become

important near 0.1 K [4], and this will limit the noise and ultimate sensitivity of a GdGG

based experiment. We are continuing to investigate the ultimate sensitivity of a GdGG

based experiment, however, according to the data in [4], the magnetic susceptibility has a

peak near 0.1 K.

We also have performed an experiment based on the converse eﬀect: When a ferromag-

netic sample is magnetized, an electric polarization develops within it when the constituent

ions or atoms carry an EDM[5] . To understand this experiment fully, the initial (zero ﬁeld)

magnetic permeability of the materials used in that work (Gadolinium Yttrium Iron Gar-

nets) needs to be known. In a literature search for the initial permeability of these materials,

a single reference was found [6], and an interesting eﬀect is evident in the data presented

there for GdIG. Shown in Fig. 1 are the values for the real part of the relative permeability
µ′ (from µ = µ′ + iµ′′) multiplied by the measurement temperature and plotted against

temperature. The linearity of the plot is striking, and shows a paramagnetic behavior. This

is rare for ferrites and ferromagnetic materials; usually, the susceptibility falls rapidly with

temperature and this fact led us to consider pure paramagnetic systems such as GdGG. An

earlier solid state experiment that employed a nickel zinc ferrite suﬀered from this loss in

susceptibility at low temperature.[7]

For solid state electron EDM experiment that employs an applied electric ﬁeld, materials

with as as large of a magnetic susceptibility as possible are desired. This is because the

2

EDM-induced magnetic ﬁeld signal is (mks units)

B = χdeE∗/µa

(1)

where χ is the magnetic susceptibility, de is the electron EDM, E∗ is the eﬀective electric

ﬁeld (net electric ﬁeld at the lattice site of interest times the relativistic atomic or ionic

enhancement factor), and µa is the magnetic moment of the paramagnetic atoms or ions that

carry the electron EDM. We see immediately that χ should be as large as possible. Note that

the sample temperature does not explicitly enter into this formula. We are therefore free to

use whatever means possible to increase χ. As can be seen from the data in [6], the relative
permeability of GdIG is µ′ = χ + 1 = 58 at 77 K; this is already equal to permeability

of GdGG at 40 mK. If the trend in relative permeability shown in Fig. 1 continues to

suﬃciently temperature (4 K), a sensitive experiment, using GdIG instead of GdGG, will

be possible. Scaling the results of [2] to a relative initial permeability of 1000 (four times
that of GdGG at 10 mK), with sample area 10 cm2, indicates an experimental sensitivity
10−27 ecm√sec, with 10 kV/cm applied to the sample at a modest temperature of 6

of 2

×

K. Thus, in one second of measurement, a sensitivity at the level of the best experimental

limit for the electron EDM [8] can be achieved.

II. PREVIOUS WORK

There have been results from three solid state electron EDM experiments reported. The
ﬁrst of these, mentioned above, used a nickel-zinc ferrite, with µ′ = 11 at 4 K. Our recent

work employed GdGG, and obtained a better value than [7], but not as large as we had

anticipated. This is due in part to the wrong values of the electric ﬁeld being used in [3, 7].

The internal electric ﬁeld at a site on a cubic lattice site is given by [9] as ǫE0/3 where ǫ is

the dielectric constant, and E0 is the externally applied ﬁeld strength, i.e., the ﬁeld between

the sample ﬁeld plates without the dielectric material. However, the analysis presented

in [9] is applicable only when the frequency of the applied ﬁeld is much higher than the

ion vibration frequency or principal phonon modes as there is an implicit assumption that

the ion position does not change with application of the ﬁeld. Clearly, these are optical

frequencies, and the results must be modiﬁed for a static ﬁeld. This problem was carefully

treated in [11] where the change in equilibrium position due to the applied ﬁeld is taken

3

into account, see Sec. VI of that paper. A more reﬁned calculation is presented in [12], and

when modiﬁed by a more reﬁned relativistic enhancement factor [13], the energy shift of a
10−26 e cm (the present experimental limit [8])
Gd+3 ion, due to an electron EDM of 1.6

is

×

∆ε = 3.8

10−22 eV

×

for an internal electric ﬁeld of E = 10 kV/cm (externally applied ﬁeld E0 = ǫE). It should

be noted that for this calculation, ǫ

30 was used, whereas we found ǫ = 19 for both single

≈

crystal and polycrystalline samples, and that the electron EDM energy shift is proportional

to a factor (see [11], Eq. (44)),

(2)

(3)

X =

1)E
(ǫ
−
32πenGd

=

(ǫ

−

1)E0
ǫ

1
32πenGd

,

and in the limit of large ǫ, the sensitivity is independent of ǫ. We can calculate the apparent
electric ﬁeld at a Gd+3 ion site, by taking the ionic enhancement factor as 2.2 from [13],

3.8

×

10−22 eV
30

= 2.2

1.6

×

×

10−27 ecm

Eapparent

E0 →

Eapparent = 3.6 kv/cm

(4)

when E0 = 10 kV/cm, so the ﬁeld is reduced by a factor of three at the ion site compared

to the applied ﬁeld. Interestingly, this is the ﬁeld expected within a spherical cavity in a

dielectric material, for large values of dielectric constant. Clearly, the value E = ǫE0/3 used

in [7] is probably not correct, although the correction in that case is relatively small because

ǫ = 2.2 for the nickel-zinc ferrite used in that work.

Furthermore, when using a diﬀerent value for the dielectric constant for diﬀerent GdGG

samples, the factor X discussed above must be modiﬁed. As mentioned already, this factor

makes the experimental sensitivity independent of ǫ for ǫ >> 1. This means that the limit

obtained in relation to the eﬀorts [3] are a factor of 1.5 too small, taking ǫ

20 compared

≈

to ǫ = 30 in [11], without modifying X. Also, a density correction has to be applied also

that varies between samples.

III. SUPERPARAMAGNETISM: GADOLINIUM IRON GARNET

Superparamagnetism exists in a ferromagnetic system when the size of the domains be-

comes so small that the interaction energy between domains, or the energy required for

4

domain wall movement, is below the thermal ﬂuctuation energy, kbT . A magnetized ferro-

magnet is actually in a metastable state, and the relaxation time to the ground state for a

domain-domain interactions can be described by an Ahrrenius-type equation,

τ = τ0 exp(KuV /kbT )

(5)

where Ku is the uniaxial anistropy constant, and V is the volume of a particle or domain.

[14] In this context, it is useful to think of the spin of a domain as undergoing a Brownian

motion around the easy axis, with Ku being the energy to change alignment from one easy

axis to another. Alternatively, we can apply the same equation to the movement of a domain

wall (e.g., increase in domain volume), with KuV replaced by an appropriate “activation

energy” associated with an increase in domain volume, in which case

τ = τ0 exp(Ed/kbT )

(6)

where Ed is the energy barrier for domain wall movement. It is generally accepted that at low

frequencies and low ﬁelds, the relaxation time is determined by domain wall movement.[10]

If the time (e.g., the inverse of the frequency of an oscillating magnetic ﬁeld) of an ex-

perimental measurement of a magnetic property is longer than τ , a ferromagnetic material

can behave as a superparamagnetic system, with the properties that the susceptibility in-

creases as 1/T and that there is very little magnetic hysteresis. On the other hand, for

faster times, hysteresis becomes important, and the system appears as a usual ferromagnet.

Normally, V is large, and τ becomes inﬁnite for all practical purposes. Nevertheless, there

are well-known instances where V is small enough for τ to be small, the most famous of

which is the superparamagnetic limit on the density of a hard drive of a few hundred gigabits

per square inch. A smaller bit size, as determined by the thickness of the magnetic layer

(to restrict the transverse ﬁeld leakage distance) is unstable against thermal ﬂuctuations.

Increasing this density is of course an area of active research. Although not named as such,

superparamagnetism was ﬁrst investigated by Oliver Heaviside in 1887 [15]. He showed that

ﬁnely powdered iron dust, “Worked up with wax into solid cores (1 wax to 5 or 6 iron by

bulk),” showed no hysteresis eﬀects, or, in his words, the eﬀect of the iron in such a state

is, “Exactly equivalent to self-inductance.”

For the EDM problem, superparamagnetism is useful, as we have discussed already. As

shown in Fig. 1, we see that the real part of the relative initial permeability of GdIG can

5

be described by

µ′(T ) =

5830 K
T

−

17.8

(7)

where the constant part probably represents the ﬁnite accuracy of the data, but does suggest
that µ′ = 1 at 310 K, which is well below the Curie temperature of GdIG, 590 K, but is close

to the “compensation temperature” where the three sublattice magnetization cancel [9]. A

question remains as to the range of validity of this relation; it is probably not overly hopeful

to assume that it is unmodiﬁed to temperatures approaching 4 K. It is interesting to note

that in [6], for GdYIG materials, the relative permeability falls with temperature. It is of

course not possible to tell if this is due to the domain size, due to a diﬀerent value of Ku,
or due to domain movement. In [6], the “dispersion frequency” (peak in µ′′ as a function of

frequency) increases for GdYIG mixtures at the temperature is lowered; this is the opposite

of what is expected for superparamagnetism. There are no dispersion frequencies listed

for GdIG except for 77 K where the ﬁrst dispersion frequency is given as 27 MHz. It is

impossible to know how the scaling varies with temperature based on this single value; in

addition, it is likely that only a small subset of the sample spins contribute to the observed

eﬀect. Diﬀerent domains can have diﬀerent Eb, so as the temperature is lowered, there will

likely be a gradual decrease in τ .

As the correlation time decreases, the noise due to spin ﬂuctuations appear in a narrower

frequency range, and therefore have a larger contribution near zero frequency, where an

EDM experiment would be performed[13]. In a fundamental sense, if the relative permeabil-

ity continues to increase as 1/T , at suﬃciently low temperature, the correlation time will

increase as exp(Ed/kbT ) as will the zero frequency spin noise, and will eventually outpace
the increase in µ′ = 1 + χ′, the real part of the susceptibility.

Using the results in [19], we can determine the eﬀects of the relaxation time in a quan-
1022/cc, and the magnetic

titative fashion. The density of Gd+3 in GdIG is ρGd = 1.24

×

moment comes mostly from the Gd which has µa = 7µb where µb is the Bohr magneton. A

signal to noise of unity indicates the level with which an EDM can be discriminated above

background noise. The results in [19] can be recast to give an EDM sensitivity, in terms of

the sample volume V ,

(8)

so to achieve de = 1.6

10−27 ecm in one second of averaging, for E∗ = 10kV/cm, V = 10

×

de =

µ0µ2

a√2ρGdT1

χeE∗√V

6

cc, and χ = 1000 requires that T1 < 10−10 sec, or a relaxation frequency of about 1 GHz.

On the other hand, we can ask what level of sensitivity can be achieved at 77 K, with χ = 57
10−25 ecm√sec, so
10−28 ecm can be achieved. Therefore a substantial

10−9 sec and E∗ = 10 kV/cm: de = 2

in one day of averaging, a limit of 7

and T1 = 1/(2π

27MHz) = 5

×

×

×

×

improvement in the experimental limit appears as imminently feasible if even cooling to 50

K or so is possible.

Of course, GdIG can be permanently magnetized when a large enough magnetic ﬁeld is

applied. The arguments above assume that the applied ﬁelds are very small. For GdIG,

the super- paramagnetism is a non-linear eﬀect, in that it disappears above some critical

ﬁeld, of value to be determined. An earlier study of the susceptibility of GdIG has a large

applied ﬁeld so the superparamagnetic eﬀect is not evident.[16] More recent studies [17] of

the magnetic properties of GdIG show that the susceptibility remains relatively large at 5 K.

However, the slope, hence inferred susceptibility, at zero ﬁeld in Fig. 9 of [17] is determined

by the sample geometry; for a spherical sample in a solenoid, the eﬀect of the “demagnetizing

ﬁeld” limits the apparent susceptibility to χ = M/B0 = 3 in the limit of large χ (or µ) (see

Eq. (5.115) of [18]), which is close to inferred value of χ for all of the curves in Fig. 9.

The maximum ﬁeld can be estimated by use of a simple Ising model, which shows that a

ferromagnetic system has paramagnetic properties at low ﬁelds while in the demagnetized

state. The sample begins to acquire a signiﬁcant magnetization in an external ﬁeld when

the applied ﬁeld is larger than

B0 =

µ0Ms
χ

(9)

where Ms is the saturation magnetization. If we take χ = 1000, Ms = µaρGd, we ﬁnd that

B0 = 9 Gauss.

IV. POSSIBLE EXPERIMENT

As shown in Fig. 2, operation of a solid state EDM experiment at temperature near 4 K

will allow the use of a “warm”-bore system as heat loads are not so much of an issue. The

heat shields and dewar will have to be made of materials with low electrical conductivity

(plastics, G-10), and their thermal conductivity could be improved by incorporating thin

wires which would not contribute as much Johnson noise as continuous metal sheets. The

entire system could be easily contained in a superconducting shield.

7

The magnetic ﬁeld due to an EDM of de = 1.6

10−27 ecm, with E∗ = 10 kV/cm,

χ = 1000 is

×

B =

= 0.2 fT.

χedeE∗
µa

(10)

By placing a superconducting pickup loop with inductance Lp around the sample, the ﬂux

Φ = BA = LpI can be converted to a current. This current can be measured in two ways,

either by placing another loop around magnetometer cell, or by sending the current to a

SQUID magnetometer.

For the ﬁrst option, the present best magnetometer noise has been achieve in a spin-

exchange-relaxation-free (SERF) potassium (K) magnetometer, at the level of 0.1 fT/√Hz

[20].

If the sample is relatively large compared to the magnetometer, it will be possible

to have a smaller loop around the magnetometer and step up the ﬁeld at the magnetome-

ter. The optimal transfer of signal occurs when the magnetometer coil inductance matches

the pickup coil inductance. An order of magnitude increase in the ﬁeld magnitude at the

magnetometer is not beyond comprehension.

A simpler approach is to use a SQUID magnetometer.

If we treat the SQUID as a

current measuring device, its sensitivity is determined by the fractional ﬂux quantum noise,

typically 1µΦ0/sqrtHz for commercial grade SQUIDs, and an order of magnitude better for

research units. The input current is converted to a SQUID ﬂux through a coupling coil’s

mutual inductance, which is typically 0.2 µA/Φ0 [21], where Φ0 is the superconductor ﬂux
quantum. Taking a sample area of 10 cm2, using B = 0.2 fT, and LP = 5 µH (which is

about a factor of two larger than the SQUID input inductance), a current Ip = 40 fA is

generated, implying a SQUID signal of 0.2 µΦ0/√Hz, a factor of ﬁve below the intrinsic

SQUID sensitivity . It is unlikely that use of a transformer to better match Lp to the input

inductance would help as most any pickup loop will be within an order of magnitude of the

SQUID input inductance.[22]

We see immediately that the magnetometer method oﬀer at least a factor of 10 better

signal to noise that the SQUID method. The magnetometer method can be further im-

proved by use of a ﬂux concentrator loop, as mentioned above. The possibility of such an

improvement when using a conventional magnetometer was already mentioned in [2]. On

the other hand, the simplicity of the SQUID system is quite attractive, and the sensitivity

of the magnetometer conﬁguration is possibly better than the ﬂuctuation noise of the sam-

ple. If this latter point proves correct, the added complexity of an atomic magnetometer is

8

An even simpler experimental concept is shown in Fig. 3. Here, two disks of GdIG

sandwich a magnetometer, and although the loss in signal is at least a factor of ﬁve for 1 cm

thick disks, separated by 3 cm, the sensitivity is comparable to the SQUID method outlined

unwarranted.

above.

V. REQUIRED STUDIES

There are a number of issues that need to be addressed to evaluate the eﬃcacy of GdIG

for a solid state electron EDM experiment. The following is a listing, not necessarily in

order of importance or complete, of points to be addressed:
1. Determine the eﬀective electric ﬁeld E∗ for GdIG which includes both the atomic en-

hancement and the dielectric shielding. There is no reason to suspect that there should be

surprises compared to previous calculations.

2. Calculate the eﬀective electric ﬁeld susceptibility, noting that the electric ﬁeld couples
signiﬁcantly to only the Gd+3 spins. Most of the magnetization of GdIG comes from Gd+3

at temperatures below 77 K.
3. Verify the 1/T scaling of the permeability to low temperature, and measure µ′′ as a

function of frequency and temperature. The latter should give the most sensitive measure

of the domain relaxation time, and will provide a means to determine the minimum oper-

ating temperature. These are the most important parameters in regard to the design of an
experiment. It could be that only a small fraction of the domains contribute to µ′′ so the

scaling in [19] must be modiﬁed; the value of T1 is no longer simply determined. Also the

issue of domain rotation vs. growth needs to be studied. If domain rotation is the principal

contribution to the relaxation time, then the results in [19] again need to be modiﬁed.

4. Establish the maximum magnetic ﬁeld that can be applied before the sample begins to

acquire a permanent magnetization. This is related to the low-frequency hysteresis, which

is important regarding permanent magnetization due to displacement, currents, microdis-

charges, and leakage currents.

5. Determine the eﬀects of sample preparation on the superparamagnetic properties. As the

crystalline structure of the sample becomes coarser, it might be expected that the super-

paramagnetic eﬀect will be suppressed, due to the V factor in the exponent of the Arrhenius

9

time, or an increase in the energy required for domain wall movement.

6. Determine the degree to which residual sample magnetization can be eliminated. The

limiting residual magnetism will place limitations on the types of magnetometry that can

be used. Also the stability to the residual magnetization is important. Given that the Curie

temperature of GdIG is near room temperature, it should be possible to anneal a sample

while it is placed in a magnetic shield. Careful handling and avoidance of exposure to large

magnetic ﬁelds will ensure that the residual magnetization remains low. A crucial related

point is addressed in (4) above.

VI. CONCLUSION

GdIG exhibits the behavior normally associated with a superparamagnetic system, so

it is probably fair to refer to GdIG as having this property. Unfortunately, the initial

permeabilities of the rare earth garnets have not been extensively studied, and a signiﬁcant

amount of eﬀort will be required to assess the suitability of GdIG for a solid state electron

EDM experiment. Nevertheless, GdIG has potential to provide the basis of an experiment

that can achieve a truly signiﬁcant improvement in the electron EDM limit. As a ﬁnal note,

GdIG will be useful as a cryogenic ferrite and will certainly ﬁnd applications in cryogenic

electronic systems. In particular, if the permeability remains large at 4 K, GdIG will be

very useful in the construction of low noise ampliﬁers, including DC parametric ampliﬁers.

VII. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

I thank Prof. D. Budker for critical comments on the manuscript, and A.O. Sushkov for

pointing out the importance of the domain structure in determining the spin noise.

VIII. APPENDIX: DETUNING OF THE GRADIOMETER CONDITION DUE

TO SAMPLE PERMEABILITY

In our work[3], we employed a superconducting pickup loop, operated in a concentric

loop planar gradiometer conﬁguration. Unfortunately, the permeability of the sample alters

the pickup loop inductances, and spoils the gradiometer tuning, and reduces the experiment

10

sensitivity slightly because the loop inductance is increased. In the case of a single loop or

radius a around an inﬁnitely long cylinder of permeability µ and radius b, the increase in

inductance is [23],

and

δL = 2µ0a2

Φ(k)[K1(ka)]2dk

∞

Z

0

(11)

(12)

where µ0 is the permeability of free space, K1(ka) is the ﬁrst order modiﬁed Bessel function,

Φ(k) =

(µ

−

(µ

1)kbI0(kb)I1(kb)

−
1)kbK0(kb)I1(kb) + 1 ≈

I0(kb)
K0(kb)

where I0 and K0 are the zero-order modiﬁed Bessel functions, and the approximation holds

when µ >> 1. The eﬀect of ﬁnite length is small, provided that length ℓ

2b, which is the

≥

case for the experiment. In the case a = b for a loop directly on a cylinder, δL

≈
0.1 µH, for a = 1.2 cm, a 20% eﬀect. When a = √2b, δL = 0.02 µH, a much smaller eﬀect.

6µ0a

≈

The loss in sensitivity is around 10%, leaving the principal problem due to this eﬀect as

the detuning of the gradiometer condition, which is temperature dependent, and of order

10%. Usually, gradiometers are fabricated to provide 1% common mode rejection. We see

a substantial limitation to the degree of common mode rejection possible when there is a

permeable sample in the central loop.

[1] F.L. Shapiro, Sov. Phys. Uspekhi 95, 145 (1968).

[2] S.K. Lamoreaux, Phys. Rev. A (2002).

[3] C.-Y. Liu and S.K. Lamoreaux, Mod. Phys. Lett A 19, 1235 (2004).

[4] P. Schiﬀer et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 74, 2379 (1995).

[5] B.J. Heindenreich et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 95, 253004 (2005).

[6] G.E. McDuﬃe, Jr., J.R. Cunningham, Jr., and E.E. Anderson, Jour. App. Phys., Supplement

[7] B.V. Vasil’ev and E.V. Kolycheva, Sov. Phys. JETP 47, 243 (1978).

[8] B.C. Regan, E.D. Commins, C.J. Schmidt, and D. DeMille, Phys. Rev. Lett. 88, 071805

to Vol. 31, 47S (1960).

(2002).

[9] Charles Kittel, Introduction to Solid State Physics, 4th Ed. (Wiley, New York, 1971).

11

[10] Richard M. Bozorth, Ferromagnetism (Van Nostrand, Princeton, N.J., 1951). See, e.g., Chap.

18., where it is pointed out that the usual mechanism for magnetization is by domain move-

[11] S. Kuenzi, O.P. Sushkov, V.A. Dzuba, and J.M. Cadogan, Phys. Rev. A 66, 032111 (2002).

[12] T.N. Muckhamedjanov, V.A. Dzuba, and O.P. Sushkov, Phys. Rev. A 68, 042103 (2003).

[13] V.A. Dzuba, O.P. Sushkov, W.R. Johnson, and U.I. Safranova, Phys. Rev. A 66, 032105

[14] L. N´eel, Ann. Geophys. C.N.R.S. 5, 99 (1949).

[15] O. Heaviside, The Electrician, Sept. 25, 1885, p. 375. (Reprinted in Electrical Papers by Oliver

Heaviside, vol. II, p. 159 (Macmillan and Co., London, 1892).)

[16] W.P. Wolf and R.M. Bozorth, Phys. Rev. 124, 449 (1961).

[17] T. Yamagishi et al., Philosophical Magazine, 85, 1819 (2005).

[18] J.D. Jackson, Classical Electrodynamics, 2nd Ed. (Wiley, New York, 1975).

[19] D. Budker et al., Phys. Rev. A 73, 022107 (2006).

[20] J.C. Allred et al, Phys. Rev. Lett. 89, 130801 (2002).

[21] Quantum Design, Technical Speciﬁcation for DC SQUID.

[22] Quantum Design, SQUID Application Note 1052-202.

[23] W.R. Smythe, Static and Dynamic Electricity (McGraw-Hill, New York, 1950); Chap. 8, prob.

ment.

(2002).

15.

12

data 1
   linear

 
y = − 17.8*x + 5.83e+003

]

K

[
 
 

T
 
×
 
 
’

µ

5000

4500

4000

3500

3000

2500

2000

1500

1000

500

0
50

100

150

200

250

300

T  [K]

FIG. 1: The values of GdIG relative initial permeability taken from [6], and plotted as T µ′(T ) vs.
T . The linear form shows that µ′

1/T + constant.

∝

13

GdIG
Disks

4 K
Region

+HV

-HV

Warm Bore
  Regions

Magnetometer
    Cell 
(or SQUID at 4 K)

Gradiometer and
  Magnetometer Loop

Vacuum Gap
  Insulation

Magnetometer light access
   (possibly fiber bundle)

Superconducting
   Shields

FIG. 2: Schematic of a cryostat with a warm bore that incorporates a SERF magnetometer. Two

disks of GdIG have opposite sign high voltage applied to electrodes on the disk faces, with a

ground plane iplaced between the disks. A SQUID magnetometer could be incorporated instead,

in which case a second warm bore is not required. If it turns out that the magnetic properties of

GdIG remain favorable to 4 K (or below), the warm bores can be dispensed with if a SQUID is

employed. However, as pointed out in the text, better sensitivity can be achieved with an atomic

magnetometer, in which case a single warm bore would be required, with the GdIG held at 4 K.

14

Magnetometer probe light

-V

+V

4K

4K

77K
Shield

FIG. 3: Schematic of a cryostat with a warm bore that incorporates a SERF magnetometer between

two disks of GdIG that have opposite sign high voltage applied and a ground plane is placed between

the disks. For disk separation larger than the thickness of the disks, there is a substantial loss in

magnetic ﬁeld signal at the magnetometer location, compared to the internal ﬁeld of the GdIG

samples.

15

