Atom interferometry using wavepackets with constant spatial

separations

Edward Su, Saijun Wu, Mara Prentiss

Department of Physics, Harvard University, Cambridge, MA, 02138 and

Division of Engineering and Applied Science,

Harvard University, Cambridge, MA, 02138

(Dated: October 30, 2012)

Abstract

We demonstrate a standing wave light pulse sequence that places atoms into a superposition

of displaced wavepackets with precisely controlled separations that remain constant for times as

long as 1 s. The separated wavepackets are subsequently recombined resulting in atom interference
10−34 J, and can provide acceleration measurements

patterns that probe energy diﬀerences of

that are insensitive to platform vibrations.

≈

PACS numbers: 39.20+q 03.75.Dg

6
0
0
2
 
c
e
D
 
1
3
 
 
]
h
p
-
m
o
t
a
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
8
1
0
1
0
7
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

1

The precision of an interferometric energy measurement is fundamentally limited by

the interrogation time of the experiment. Atoms conﬁned in magnetic waveguides remain

trapped for times longer than a second, suggesting the possibility of measuring energy dif-

ferences with an uncertainty < ¯h/2; however, this remarkable precision cannot be obtained

if the decoherence time of the atoms is much shorter than the trap lifetime. Early atom

interferometry experiments using atoms conﬁned in magnetic waveguides showed that the

external state coherence of the atoms decayed quite quickly, limiting interferometric mea-

surements to times < 10ms [1, 2]. More recent experiments using Bose condensates [3] have

shown that the external state coherence can be preserved for approximately 100ms, where

the decoherence is dominated by atom-atom interactions. Interferometry experiments using

either condensed atoms in a weak trap, or using non-condensate atoms in a waveguide with

precise angular alignments were also limited to

100ms by decoherence [4, 5], though here

atom-atom interactions do not play a role.

≈

In this paper, we demonstrate an atom interferometry scheme where the wavepacket sep-

aration is constant during most of the measurement. Using guided atoms, we are able to

extend interferometer interrogations times beyond one second. We demonstrate the phase

stability of the interferometer by measuring the phase shift due to gravity, which increases

linearly with interaction time in contrast with more traditional interferometers where the

gravitationally induced phase shift is a quadratic function of time. We also probe the deco-

herence induced by spatial variations in the magnetic potential by comparing the decoherence

rates for wavepackets with diﬀerent spatial separations. Finally, we demonstrate that this

type of interferometer is more robust in the presence of vibration than conventional inter-

ferometers, which should enable precision measurements even in noisy environments such as

moving platforms.

In a typical Talbot-Lau matterwave interferometer [6, 7], an atom wavepacket is split

by a spatially periodic potential at a time t=0. The split portions of the wavepacket then

separate so that the distance between them increases linearly with time until a time t=T/2,

when a second spatially periodic potential causes some parts of the wavepacket to move

back toward each other. The separation then decreases linearly with time until some of the

atom wavepackets recombine at a time T. The recombined wavepackets interfere, resulting

2

FIG. 1: Recoil diagram of the 4-pulse scheme

in a spatial variation in the atomic density that can be observed by measuring the Bragg

scattering of an optical probe.

In many such experiments, oﬀ-resonant optical standing

waves are used to create the periodic periodic potentials that are applied at times t=0 and

t=T/2.

The interferometric technique presented here employs a 4-pulse scheme (Fig. 1). We

apply three pulsed oﬀ resonant optical standing waves at times t = 0, Ts, and T

Ts where

−

T can be much greater than Ts as shown in ﬁgure 1. These pulsed standing waves form

spatially dependent phase gratings that diﬀract the atoms; here the duration of the pulses

is suﬃciently short that the Raman-Nath condition is satisﬁed. The ﬁrst pulse causes the

wavepackets to split and begin to separate; its eﬀect is identical to that of the ﬁrst pulse

in a traditional Talbot-Lau interferometer. However, we quickly apply a second pulse at

a time Ts, where wavepackets that were initially separating at a velocity δv have achieved

a separation of d = δvT s. The second pulse change the momentum of the wavepackets so

that now there are parts of each wavepacket that have the same momentum. For times from

t = Ts to t = T

Ts these parts move with a ﬁxed separation, though the center of mass of

−

the wavepacket may be moving quite rapidly. At time t = T

Ts, a third standing wave pulse

−

is then applied to change the momentum of the parts of the wavepacket so that they are

propagating toward each other. This pulse is analogous to the second pulse in a traditional

Talbot-Lau interferometer, and as in that case there are portions of the wavepacket that

overlap at time t = T to form an atomic density grating. This sequence of pulses could

be applied in free space, but we chose to apply them along the free propagation direction

of atoms trapped in a magnetic waveguide. Conﬁning the atoms to the guide allows us to

extend the interrogation time beyond one second.

3

A brief theoretical description follows [8]: ﬁrst we describe the backscattered electric ﬁeld

in terms of the corresponding Fourier component of the atomic density. Using the ﬁrst order

Born approximation, this is given at time T + τ by:

Eb(τ ) =

igEpTr(ˆρ(T )eiQ(ˆx+

ˆpτ
m ))

−

(1)

Where Ep is the probe light electric ﬁeld, g is a constant that depends on the atomic sample

distribution and the atomic polarizability, ˆρ(T ) is the single atom density matrix at time T ,

and ˆx and ˆp are the spatial and momentum operators for atomic motion along ex.

The expression for the atomic density matrix comes from considering the interaction

between the the magnetically conﬁned 87Rb atoms at 20µK and the phase gratings formed

by the standing wave light pulses. The amplitude of the nth diﬀraction order created by the

grating is proportional to the nth order Bessel function inJn(θ), where θ =

ΩACdt is the

R

integrated light shift during each light pulses.

The atomic motion along ex is only approximately free since the waveguide potential

is not perfectly translation-invariant along this direction. We choose T >> Ts >> τ , so

that Ts is suﬃciently short that the atomic motion can be decoupled into motion along
ex and transverse motion, governed by the Hamiltonian H0 = ˆp2
T

2m + H⊥. During the time
2m + V (ˆr) is considered. Assuming an initial atomic
ensemble that is uniformly distributed along x with a spatial extension L >> λ, Eq. (1) is

T , the full Hamiltonian H = ˆp2

2Ts ∼

−

related to the initial atomic density matrix ˆρ(0) given by (we set ¯h = m = 1 in following

two equations):

Eb(τ ) =

−

igEpJ−1(2θ3 sin Q2

2 (Ts + τ ))

×

Jm1(θ1)Jm1+1(θ1)Jm2(θ2)Jm2−1(θ2)eiφm

Pm1,m2
Tr(ˆρ(δxm, δpm, 0)ei(ˆp(T )−δpm)Qτ eiQTs ˆp(T )e−iQTs ˆp(0))

×

(2)

Here φm = (2m1 + 1) Q2
2 (Ts + τ ), δxm = m1QTs, δpm = (m1 + m2)Q. We
introduce ˆρ(δx, δp, 0) = ei(δxˆp+δpˆx) ˆρe−i(δxˆp+δpˆx) that describes an atomic ensemble that is
identical to ˆρ(0), but has a displaced mean position and momentum. ˆp(T ) = ei ˆHT ˆpe−i ˆHT is

2 τ + (2m2 −

1) Q2

the momentum operator at time T in the Heisenberg picture. We shall interpret the third line

of Eq. (2) as the overlap between two atomic mixed states, both start from ˆρ(δxm, δpm, 0), one

is shifted along ex with d = QTs and propagates for time T , while the other ﬁrst propagates
for time T and is then shifted along ex with (1 + τ
Ts

)d. Diagrammatically, this is summarized

with the blue and green paths in Fig.1. This interpretation provides a close link between

4

FIG. 2: Contrast oscillations with T=30ms, red line is the ﬁt

Eq. (2) and the ﬁdelity decay problem discussed in [9] where the time-dependent overlap of

two initially identical states evolving according to a phase space displaced Hamiltonian was

theoretically investigated. If such an overlap decay is not very sensitive to δxm or δpm, a

sum rule for the Bessel functions can be applied to simplify the second line of Eq. (2) and

we end up with (choose θ2 = θ3):

igEpJ1(2θ1 sin Q2
Eb(τ ) =
Tr(ˆρ(0)eiQ(Ts+τ )ˆp(T )e−iQTs ˆp(0))

−

2 τ )J 2

−1(2θ2 sin Q2

2 (Ts + τ ))

×

(3)

Our experiment uses the apparatus described in reference [5]. We conﬁne laser-cooled

87Rb atoms in a 2D quadrupole magnetic ﬁeld, generated by four 200mm

100mm

1.5mm

×

×

permalloy foils poled in alternating directions. Approximately 107 laser-cooled 87Rb atoms

in the ground state F=1 hyperﬁne level are loaded into this magnetic guide with a transverse

gradient of 70G/cm, resulting in a cylindrically-shaped atom sample 1cm long and 150µm

wide. The transverse oscillation frequencies of the atoms in the guide are on the order of 80

Hz, estimated by displacement induced oscillations of the atomic sample using absorption

images. A very weak harmonic potential along the guiding direction is estimated in [8] to

be 0.09 Hz.

The standing wave ﬁelds formed by two nearly counter-propagating laser beams with

diameters of 1.6 mm are aligned along the magnetic guide direction. Precise angular adjust-

ment is achieved by tuning the orientation of the magnetic guide using two rotation stages
10−4 radians. The optical ﬁelds are detuned approximately 120 MHz above the
F’=2 D2 transition of 87Rb atoms, and the standing wave pulse duration is 300 ns.

to within 2

F=1

×

→

We probe the λ/2 atomic density grating by turning on only one of the traveling wave beams;

the other beam is attenuated and shifted by 6 MHz to serve as an optical local oscillator,

where the combined intensity is measured using a ﬁber-coupled avalanche photodetector.

5

FIG. 3: a): contrast decay and gaussian ﬁt; b): acceleration induced phase shift. Here d = 2 ¯hk

m Ts

is the wavepacket separations

Assuming that the initial atomic sample is described by a Maxwell-Boltzmann velocity

distribution, the backscattering signal at time T + τ is given by:

Eb(τ )

∝

J 2
−1(2θ2 sin 4ωr(Ts + τ ))
−(2vr τ /ξT)2+i(kaTs(T −Ts)+ϕ1,2−ϕ3,4)

×

C(Ts, T )τ e

(4)

Where ξT =

¯h

√2mkBT is the thermal deBroglie wavelength of the atoms. ωr = ¯hk2/2m =
3.771kHz is the recoil frequency, vr = ¯hk/m = 5.8mm/s is the recoil velocity of Rb87.

2π

×

For convenience in later discussions, Eq. (4) also includes the standing wave phase ϕi = ϕ(Ti)
at the time of each standing wave pulse and we use the notation ϕi,j = ϕi −
assume the amplitude decay of the echo signal in Eq. (4) is given by a phenomenological

ϕj. We also

dephasing factor C(Ts, T ). For ﬁxed T and Ts, Eq. (4) describes a τ dependent dispersive-

shaped backscattering amplitude. In repeated experiment, the amplitude of the τ dependent

backscattering curve is recorded together with its phase; this phase reﬂects the relative

distance between the nodes of the standing wave and the atom density grating [6].

According to Eq. (4), the backscattering amplitude is an oscillatory function of Ts. This is

conﬁrmed experimentally as shown in Fig. 2 where Ts is varied from 160 µs to 280µs. When

a small imaginary part is added to θi to account for eﬀects due to spontaneous emission, our

observations demonstrate good agreement with the expected values.

With ﬁxed Ts at the peak values of the amplitude oscillations, we will now consider

the T dependence of the backscattering signals. Fig. 3a gives examples of the echo decay

at various d = 2vrTs. The displayed data corresponds to wavepacket separations of d =

0.84, 2.4, 5.53, 11.40µm. The decay data is approximately ﬁt by a Gaussian decay function

6

FIG. 4: separation dependence of a): contrast decay rate; b): phase shift rate

C(d, T )

e−(γ(d)T )2

∝

, where the decay is faster for larger wavepacket separations. In Fig. 3b

we see the phase readout is a linear function of interrogation time T for all 17 data sets with

d from 0.84µm to 11.4µm, in agreement with Eq. (4). From the phase shifts, we consistently

retrieve an acceleration a = 83.4mm/s2 , due to a small component of gravity along the

standing wave/magnetic guide direction ex [8]. The sensitivity of the interferometer phase

to this acceleration is a linear function of the separation d in Fig. 4b and gives phase shift
rate ω(d) = 2π(17.12d/µm)s−1.

The contrast decay rate γ(d) retrieved from the same set of data is plotted against d in
Fig. 4a and also shows linear dependence given by γ(d) = 2π(0.473 + 0.106d/µm)s−1. The

escape of atoms from the guiding region due to collisions with the walls of the 4cm vacuum
0.25s−1 that cannot fully account for the

glass cell is measured to be ˜γ(d

2π

0)

→

∼

×

observed d independent decay. This is probably because the gaussian ﬁt only approximates

the atomic ensemble. Indeed, for long interaction time T the decay exhibits an exponential

feature, which is clearly seen in Fig. 5a where the echo decay with a minimum separation

of d = 0.418µm and Ts = 35.4µs is plotted. For such a small separations, the phase of the

backscattering signal remains stable for T > 1sec, where the interrogation time is limited

by the collisions with the glass walls. The origin of gaussian decay (Fig. 3) characteristic of

short interrogation times and the exponential decay (Fig. 5) characteristic of long times is

ont yet clear [8].

Now we consider the eﬀect of phase noise in the standing waves on the sensitivity of

our device, induced for example by vibrations of mirrors in the standing wave optical path.

For T >> T s, the standing wave phase variation due to time dependent changes in mirror

positions is given by ϕ1,2 is not correlated with ϕ3,4, and the mirror vibrations induce interfer-

7

FIG. 5: a): contrast decay; b): phase shift of a 4-pulse echo at 0.4 µm separations. Inset in b) is

the residual after a linear ﬁt

FIG. 6: a): interferometry phase for a 4-pulse scheme with 4.8µm and a regular 3-pulse interfer-

ometer under same noise level; b): residuals

ometer phase noise given by Nϕ,mirror(Ts, T ) = q2 < [ϕ(t)
depend on T. This is diﬀerent from a 3-pulse atom interferometer with mirror-induced phase
noise given by N ′

2ϕ(t + T /2) + ϕ(t + T )]2 >t, where increases in

ϕ(t + Ts)]2 >t, which does not

ϕ,mirror(T ) = q< [ϕ(t)

−

−

sensitivity due to increases in interaction time necessarily also result in increases in phase

noise. In contrast, in the four pulse scheme considered here T can be increased to improve

the sensitivity, while keeping Nϕ,mirror(Ts) unaﬀected.

This eﬀect is illustrated in ﬁgure Fig. 6 where we compare the 3-pulse and the 4-pulse

interferometer phase readouts under the same noisy environmental conditions. A white noise

voltage source that is passed through a 100Hz low-pass ﬁlter is ampliﬁed and applied to a

piezo-driven mirror in the optical path. As shown in Fig. 6, the mirror vibration randomizes

the phase of the 3-pulse interferometer for T greater than 5ms. Under the same conditions,

the phase of the 4-pulse interferometer operates is stable for times longer than 150ms. The

resulting sensitivity to acceleration exceeds that the 3-pulse case. The insensitivity of the

8

4-pulse scheme to low-frequency mirror vibrations is a feature of speed-meters.
evaluating Eq. (2) in the classical limit would give a phase factor ei md

Indeed,
¯h (v(T )−v(0)) with the

phase proportional to the velocity diﬀerences over the interrogation time.

In summary, we have used a 4-pulse grating echo scheme to study the dephasing of the

external state coherence of magnetically guided atoms. We conﬁrm that for small wavepacket

separations, the the measured decay in the coherent bacsckattering signal is dominated by

the loss of atoms due to collisions with the walls of the glass cell, where the backscattered

phase could be reliably detected for interrogation times exceeding one second. We also

showed that a four pulse interferometer can provide acceleration measurements with very

long integration times that are insensitive to apparatus vibrations.

In the future, such a system could study the quantum stability of wavepackets due to

displaced potentials

[9] by deliberately introducing time dependent variations in the po-

tential along the waveguide direction [10]. We notice that the reduction from Eq. (2) to

Eq. (3) requires a phase-space independent ﬁdelity amplitude. This restriction is removable

in a modiﬁed echo scheme with sub-recoil cooled atoms, where the ﬁrst pulse in Fig. 1 is

replaced with a double pulse [11] that symmetrically splits the matterwaves to

2¯hk and is

±

re-collimated after Ts/2 instead with a ﬁrst-order Bragg pulse.

We thank insightful discussions from Prof. Eric Heller. This work is supported by MURI

and DARPA from DOD, NSF, ONR and U.S. Department of the Army, Agreement Number

W911NF-04-1-0032, and by Draper Lab.

[1] Y. Wang and et. al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 94, 090405 (2005).

[2] S. Wu, E. Su, and M. Prentiss, Eur. Phys. J. D 35, 111 (2005).

[3] G.-B. Jo and et al, Cond-mat/0608585 (2006).

[4] O. Garcia and et. al., Phys. Rev. A 74, 031601 (2006).

[5] S. Wu and et al, physics/0608083.

[6] S. Cahn and et.al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 79, 784 (1997).

(2002).

[8] S. Wu and et al, in preparations.

9

[7] D. Strekalov, A. Turlapov, A. Kumarakrishnan, and T. Sleator, Phys. Rev. A 66, 23601

[9] C. Petitjean, D. Bevilaque, E. Heller, and P. Jacquod, quant-ph/0612003 (2006).

[10] F. L. Moore and et. al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 75, 4598 (1995).

[11] S. Wu, Y. Wang, Q. Diot, and M. Prentiss, Phys. Rev. A 71, 43602 (2005).

10

