7
0
0
2
 
r
a

M
 
8
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
m
o
t
a
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
8
7
1
3
0
7
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

APS/123-QED

A Quantum Similarity Study of Atomic Density Functions:

Insights from Information Theory and the Role of Relativistic

Eﬀects

A. Borgoo+, M. Godefroid++, P. Indelicato+++, F. De Proft+, and P. Geerlings+∗

+Vrije Universiteit Brussel (Free University of Brussels VUB),

Departement of General Chemistry (ALGC),

Pleinlaan, 2, 1050 Brussels Belgium

++Service de Chimie quantique et Photophysique - CP160/09,

Universit Libre de Bruxelles, Av. F.D. Roosevelt 50, 1050 Brussels Belgium and

+++Laboratoire Kastler Brossel, cole Normale Suprieure (ENS) et Universit

Pierre et Marie Curie-Paris 6, F-75231 Paris CEDEX 05, France

Abstract

A novel Quantum Similarity Measure (QSM) is constructed, based on concepts from Information

Theory.

In an application of QSM to atoms, the new QSM and its corresponding Quantum

Similarity Index (QSI) are evaluated throughout the periodic table, using the atomic electron

densities and shape functions calculated in the Hartree-Fock approximation. The periodicity of

Mendeleev’s Table is regained for the ﬁrst time through the evaluation of a QSM. Evaluation of

the Information Theory based QSI demonstrates however that the patterns of periodicity are lost

due to the renormalization of the QSM, yielding chemically less appealing results for the QSI. A

comparison of the information content of a given atom on top of a group with the information

content of the elements in the subsequent rows reveals another periodicity pattern.

Relativistic eﬀects on the electronic density functions of atoms are investigated. Their impor-

tance is quantiﬁed in a QSI study by comparing for each atom, the density functions evaluated

in the Hartree-Fock and Dirac-Fock approximations. The smooth decreasing of the relevant QSI

along the periodic table illustrates in a quantitative way the increase of relativistic corrections with

the nuclear charge.

PACS numbers:

1

I.

INTRODUCTION

Quantiﬁcation of molecular similarity using an electron density based Quantum Similar-

ity Index (QSI) yields compact information on the similarity in shape and extent of the

electron density distribution of various molecules. These data can be used as descriptor in

comparative discussions of molecular structure and reactivity [1]. In recent years one notices

a multitude of methodological studies on various aspects of Quantum Similarity of molecules

such as the use of diﬀerent separation operators [2], the replacement of the density by more

appropriate, reactivity oriented functions [3, 4], within the context of conceptual DFT [5]

and the peculiarities arising in the comparison of enantiomers [6, 7].

Most remarkably the ﬁeld of similarity of isolated atoms remained practically unexplored,

with the exception of two papers by Carb´o and coworkers [8, 9] and a third one by the present

authors [10]. In the ﬁrst paper [8] atomic self-similarity was studied, whereas the second

one [9] contains a relatively short study on atomic and nuclear similarities, leading to the

conclusion that atoms bear the highest resemblance to their neighbors in the Periodic Table.

In [10] we reported results of the Carb´o index, which turns out to mask the periodicity of

Mendeleev’s Table, followed by results of an Information Theory based approach, where

the Information Discrimination was evaluated for atomic electron density functions. Hereby

the periodicity in the atomic electron density and shape functions throughout Mendeleev’s

Table was regained. The relevance of Information Theory in applications to electron density

functions of atoms has also been conﬁrmed in a study of the N-derivative of the Shannon

entropy of shape functions [11].

The present work is, in a ﬁrst part, concerned with the construction of a new Quantum

Similarity Measure (QSM) along the lines of the study in [10]. The simpliﬁcation of the

density function based Quantum Similarity Index to a shape based expression emphasizes

the potential of the shape function as an alternative to the density function. The use of

the shape function as a fundamental descriptor of atomic and molecular systems is indeed a

current topic of investigation in the domain of Quantum Chemical description of atoms and

molecules [12, 13, 14]. After deﬁning the mentioned Information Theory based QSM and

the corresponding QSI, they are evaluated for all pairs of atoms in the Periodic Table. The

results are interpreted and investigated for patterns of periodicity.

In the second part of this work we investigate the relativistic eﬀects on the electron

2

density functions of atoms and their quantiﬁcation using QSI. From the relativistic eﬀects

on total energies one can infer these eﬀects have implications for the electron densities, as

visualized in [11] for the Rn atom. The eﬀect of relativity on atomic wave functions has

been studied in the pioneering work of Burke and Grant [15] who presented graphs and

tables to show the order of magnitude of corrections to the hydrogenic charge distributions

for Z = 80. The relative changes in the binding energies and expectation values of r due to

relativistic eﬀects are known from the comparison of the results obtained by solving both

the Schrdinger and Dirac equations for the same Coulomb potential. The contraction of

the ns-orbitals is a well known example of these relativistic eﬀects. But as pointed out by

Desclaux in his “Tour historique” [16], for a many-electron system, the self-consistent ﬁeld

eﬀects change this simple picture quite signiﬁcantly. Indeed, contrary to the single electron

solution of the Dirac equation showing mainly the mass variation with velocity, a Dirac-Fock

calculation includes the changes in the spatial charge distribution of the electrons induced by

the self-consistent ﬁeld. The framework of QSI oﬀers a simple way of quantifying relativistic

eﬀects on atomic electron densities via a comparison between non relativistic Hartree-Fock

and relativistic Dirac-Fock electron density functions.

II. METHODOLOGY

A. Quantum Similarity Indices and Information Theory

Our work is situated in the context of a mathematically rigorous theory of Quantum

Similarity Measures (QSM) and Quantum Similarity Indices (QSI) as developed by Carb´o

[2, 17]. This theory encompasses quantum objects, e.g. atomic and molecular systems.

Following Carb´o, we deﬁne the similarity of two atoms (a and b) as a QSM Zab(Ω),

Zab(Ω) =

ρa(r1) Ω(r1, r2) ρb(r2) dr1dr2

R

where Ω(r1, r2) is a positive deﬁnite operator. Renormalization to

SIΩ =

Zab(Ω)
√Zaa(Ω)√Zbb(Ω)

,

(1)

(2)

yields a QSI SIΩ with values comprised between 0 and 1.

By choosing the operator Ω(r1, r2) to be the Dirac- δ(r1-r2) function, expression 1 reduces

to an overlap integral, yielding the simplest form of the Carb´o Similarity Index, (SIδ),

3

after normalization. Using shape functions deﬁned as σ

ρ/N (N being the number of

≡

electrons), the QSI for density functions simpliﬁes to a QSI for shape functions. This yields

the important result that by investigating the similarity between two systems, we are in fact

comparing their shape functions. This motivates the investigation of the shape based QSM,

found by substitution of ρ by σ in expression 1.

For the construction of a new QSM, we considered the introduction of concepts from In-

formation Theory [19], which has recently been of increasing relevance to quantum chemical

research in general [18] and to the investigation of the electron densities in position and

momentum space in particular. (A thorough discussion can be found in the pioneering work

of Gadre and Sears [20].) In our previous work we reported on the information entropy of

atomic density and shape functions respectively deﬁned as

∆Sρ

a ≡ Z

ρa(r) log

ρa(r)
Na
N0 ρ0(r)

dr

(3)

(4)

Z
with ρ0(r) the density of the prior or reference atom. As motivated in [10] we set the

∆Sσ

a ≡

∆Sρ
a
Na

=

σa(r) log

σa(r)
σ0(r)

dr

density function of the prior equal to the density of the noble gas preceding the atom under

investigation in the periodic table, scaled by the factor Na

N0 , where Na and N0 are the number
of electrons, respectively of atom a and its reference. In this way the prior density ρ0(r) and

the density of atom a, ρa(r), yield the same number of electrons upon integration. It was

shown [10] that these quantities reﬂect the periodic evolution of chemical properties in the

Periodic Table and that Kullback’s interpretation can be formulated in terms of chemical

information stored in the density functions when we make this particular choice for the prior

densities.

Following the conclusions in [10], one can see that it would be interesting to compare the

Information Entropy, evaluated locally, ∆Sρ

a(r)
QSM. To that purpose the integrand in expression 3 is considered as a function, which gives

, of two atoms by use of a

Na
N0

≡

ρa(r) log ρa(r)
ρ0(r)

the Information Entropy locally at a given point r. The construction of the corresponding

QSM becomes straightforward by considering the overlap integral (with Dirac δ as separation

operator) of the local Information Entropies of two atoms a and b

Zab(δ) =

ρa(r) log

ρb(r) log

Z

ρa(r)
Na
N0 ρ0(r)

ρb(r)
Nb
N0′ ρ0′(r)

dr

≡ Z

∆Sρ

a(r)∆Sρ

b (r)dr.

(5)

4

A QSI can be deﬁned by normalizing the QSM as before, via expression 2. The QSM and

the normalized QSI give a quantitative way of studying the resemblance in the information

carried by the valence electrons of two atoms. Expression 5 can be rewritten in the form 2
by identiﬁcation of the operator Ω[ρa(r1), ρb(r2); ρ0(r1), ρ′

−
r2), where we explicitly write the functional dependence on ρa(r1) and ρb(r2) and the para-
metrical dependence on ρ0(r1) and ρ′

0(r2)] = ln ρa(r1)
ρ0(r1)

ln ρb(r2)
ρ′
0(r2)

δ(r1

Nb
′
N
0

Na
N0

0(r2).

The obtained QSI trivially simpliﬁes to a shape based expression

SI(δ) =

∆Sσ

R
a (r)∆Sσ

a (r)dr

∆Sσ

a (r)∆Sσ

b (r)dr
∆Sσ

,

b (r)∆Sσ

b (r)dr

qR

qR

(6)

where a shorthand notation is used by omitting the explicit dependency of r. The simpliﬁca-

tion can be generalized from the local information distance operator ∆Sρ(r) to any operator

F ρ(r), which is linear in ρ (thus satisfying F ρ(r) = NF σ(r)), as follows :

a (r)F ρ
F ρ

b (r)dr
b (r) F ρ
F ρ

b (r)dr

=

R
a (r) F ρ
a (r)dr

F ρ

a (r)F σ
F σ

b (r)dr
b (r) F σ
F σ

b (r)dr

.

(7)

R
a (r)dr
a (r) F σ

F σ

qR

qR

qR

qR

In agreement with the fact that the shape function completely determines the properties

of a system, as discussed in [21], the relevance of the QSI as a tool to compare physical

properties of atomic electron density functions is conﬁrmed. This characteristic distinguishes

the QSI above, together with the Carb´o QSI from other similarity measures (e.g. Euclidian

distance [22], Tanimoto [23] and Hodgkin-Richards [24]).

B. Atomic electron density functions

1. Non-relativistic atomic electron density functions

The atomic electron density functions were evaluated from non-relativistic numerical

Hartree-Fock wave functions optimized on the LS-term ground state of neutral atoms (nu-

clear charge 3

103), as speciﬁed in the Table of electron conﬁguration and term

Z

≤

≤

value given by Bransden and Joachain or the NIST website [25, 26]. The extension of

the original Froese-Fischer’s code by Gaigalas [27] allows the calculation of term-dependent

Hartree-Fock orbitals for any single open subshell case. However, for the two-open subshells
cases, this version is limited to (ns)(n′l)N (l = 0, 1, 2, 3, . . .), (np)N (n′l) (l = 0, 1, 2, 3, . . .)

5

and (nf )(n′d) conﬁgurations. This computer code then covers all the ground levels of the
periodic table, except atoms with ground conﬁguration f N ≥2d. For these speciﬁc systems,

we used the “MCHF atomic-structure package ATSP2K” [28], relying on the combination

of the second-quantization approach in the coupled tensorial form, the generalized graphical

technique and angular momentum theory in orbital, spin and quasispin spaces and on the

use of reduced coeﬃcients of fractional parentage [29].

In the non-relativistic Hartree-Fock approximation, in its single-conﬁguration version, the

atomic wave function is limited to one conﬁguration state function (CSF) [30]

απLSMLMSi
simultaneous eigenfunction of the inversion operator, the orbital angular momentum L2, the

|

,

spin angular momentum S2 and their projections Lz and Sz, that can be built from the

one-electron spin-orbitals

ψi(r) = Rnl(r)Y m

l (θ, φ)χ1/2,ms(σ)

rPnl(r)Y m

l (θ, φ)χ1/2,ms(σ).

(8)

≡

α denotes all the information needed to specify unambiguously the term considered (conﬁg-

uration and coupling tree). The optimized one-electron numerical radial functions

}
are used to determine the corresponding LS-dependent electron density function from the

Pnl(r)

{

following expression

1
4π Xnl
where qnl is the occupation number of the subshell considered. In the case of uncompletely

ρ(r) =

P 2
nl(r)
r2

qnl,

(9)

ﬁlled subshells, spherical averaging over the (ML, MS) term components was applied, yielding

a spherical electron density function, as elaborated in [10]. In an LS-dependent Hartree Fock

scheme, the radial wave functions are allowed to vary, for a given electronic conﬁguration,

from one term to another. Eq. 9 should then strictly be read as

An easy way of testing the calculated density function ρ(r) is to check that its integration

ρ(r)

ραLS(r)

≡

yields the total number of electrons
∞

4π

Z
0

ρ(r)r2dr =

qnl = N,

Xnl

as expected from the normalization constraint of the Hartree-Fock numerical one-electron

(10)

(11)

radial wave functions.

6

2. Relativistic atomic electron density functions

For the purpose of quantifying the relativistic eﬀects on the electron density functions,

we evaluate the similarity of Hartree-Fock and Dirac-Fock density functions using a point

nucleus aproximation. In the relativistic scheme, the atomic wave function is, in the most

general case, a combination of conﬁguration state functions (CSF’s)

eigenfunction of the inversion operator, the total angular momentum J2 and its projection

Jz. ν denotes all the necessary information for specifying the relativistic conﬁguration

completely. The CSF are built on the one-electron Dirac four-spinor

πJMJ i

|

=

cν|

νπJMJ i

Xν

ψi(r) =

Pi(r)χµi
iQi(r)χµi

κi(Ω)
−κi(Ω)

1
r









(12)

(13)

κi(Ω) is a two-dimensional vector harmonic.

It has the property that Kψi(r) =

where χµi
κψi(r) where K = β(σ

L + 1).

·

The large

P (r)

and small

Q(r)

components are solutions of a set of coupled integro-

{

}

{

}

diﬀerential equations [31]. The mixing coeﬃcients

are obtained by diagonalizing the

cν}

{

matrix of the no-pair Hamiltonian containing the magnetic and retardation terms [32]. The

two coupled variational problems are solved iteratively. For a complete discussion on rela-

tivistic atomic structure we refer to [33]. The present calculations have been performed using

the MDF/GME program of Desclaux and Indelicato [34] including both the magnetic and

retardation part of the Breit interaction in the self-consistent process, but not the vacuum

polarization.

It is to be noted that the relativistic scheme rapidly becomes more complicated than

the corresponding non-relativistic one. For example, if the ground term of Carbon atom is

described, in the non-relativistic one-conﬁguration Hartree-Fock approximation, by a sin-

gle CSF

1s22s22p2 3P

, the relativistic equivalent implies the speciﬁcation of the J-value.

|

i

For J = 0 corresponding to the ground level of Carbon, the following two-conﬁguration

description becomes necessary

“1s22s22p2”(J = 0)
i

|

= c1|

1s22s2(2p∗)2(J = 0)
i

+ c2|

1s22s22p2(J = 0)
i

,

7

implicitly taking into account the relativistic mixing of the two LS-terms ( 1S and 3P )
arising from the 2p2 conﬁguration and belonging to the J = 0 subspace. p∗ and p correspond

to the j-values, j = 1/2 (κ = +1) and j = 3/2 (κ =

2), respectively.

−

By averaging the sublevel densities,

ρ(r) =

1
(2J + 1)

+J

XMJ =−J

ρJMJ (r)

the total electron density becomes spherical for any open-shell system, as found in the non-

relativistic scheme [10], and can be calculated from

ρ(r) =

1
4π Xnκ

nκ(r) + Q2
P 2
r2

nκ(r)

qnκ,

where qnκ is the occupation number of the relativistic subshell (nκ).

(14)

(15)

III.

INFORMATION THEORY QSM AND QSI FOR ATOMIC DENSITY FUNC-

TIONS

In this section the results of the QSM and QSI, evaluated for shape functions of all pairs

of atoms in the periodic table are discussed. To facilitate the interpretation of the results

of the Information Theory based QSM and QSI a graphical representation of the Carb´o

QSM (ﬁgure 1) and QSI (ﬁgure 2), already mentioned in [10], is given. The results of all

the possible pairs of atomic shape functions are given in a 3 dimensional graph, where the

vertical axis indicates the QSM or QSI value of the atoms with nuclear charges Za and Zb.

These ﬁgures show that the general trend for any ﬁxed Za is similar for all atoms: all the

cross-sections of the 3 dimensional graphs show the same evolution. In ﬁgure 3 we show

the cross-section of the results of the QSM between Pb (Z = 82) and all other atoms. The

general trend of the overlap QSM of the density functions increases monotonically with

increasing volume of the atoms, as pointed out in [9].

The evaluation of the Information Theory based QSM (ﬁgure 4) was found to be positive

for all investigated atoms reveals a picture corresponding to the periodicity of Mendeleev’s

Table, which can be distinguished by looking at the cross-section for Pb in ﬁgure 5. The

results correspond to the evolution of chemical properties ﬁrst of all in the sense that for

each period the QSM increases gradually from the ﬁrst column to the last. Ionization energy

and Hardness are properties which reveal a similar evolution throughout [35]. Secondly in

8

FIG. 1: Overlap integral of the non-relativistic Hartree-Fock shape functions (the QSM appearing

in the deﬁnition of the Carb´o QSI) evaluated for all pairs of atoms. A monotonic trend of increasing

QSM for heavier atoms is revealed. The vertical axis corresponds to the QSM of the atoms with

nuclear charges Za and Zb given by the axes in the plane.

the sense that neighboring atoms with large nuclear charge diﬀer less than neighboring light

atoms, e.g. the diﬀerence between the QSM values of two atoms in the ﬁrst period is large

in comparison to the diﬀerence in QSM between two neighboring Lanthanides. Considering

all the cross-sections of Figure 4 reveals that the periodicity is regained throughout by the

choice of the reference atoms, as it yields low QSM values for atoms similar to the chosen

prior. One notes however that the QSM does not reveal results, which reach maxima when

a given atom is compared with another atom of the same group. Moving to the QSI, the

periodicity of the QSM is lost due to the normalization (ﬁgures 6 and 7). In ﬁgure 7 the

change of prior is still visible due to the gaps (discontinuities) at the positions where the

prior changes, but the normalization blends out the clear periodic evolution of the QSM

in graph 5. This leads to the conclusion that the normalization, which yielded the nearest

neighbor eﬀect for the Carb´o QSI in ﬁgure 2, can overwhelm the characteristics of a QSM.

Changing the point of view, we can opt to investigate which atom of a given period of

9

FIG. 2: The Carb´o QSI evaluated for all pairs of atomic non-relativistic Hartree-Fock shape func-

tions, revealing a nearest neighbour eﬀect [10]. The vertical axis corresponds to the QSI of the

atoms with nuclear charges Za and Zb, indicated by the axes in the plane.

the table belongs to a certain column and in which way the atoms should be ordered within

the period. This can be done by investigating the QSI with the top atoms of each column

as prior. Formulated in terms of Kullback Liebler information discrimination the following

is evaluated. For instance, when we want to investigate the distance of the atoms Al, Si,

S and Cl from the N-column (group Va), we consider the information theory based QSI

in expression 5, where the reference densities ρ0 and ρ0′ are set to ρN , ρA to ρAl, ρSi, ρP ,

etc. respectively and ρB to ρP , i.e. we compare the information contained in the shape

function of N to determine that of P , with its information on the shape function of Al,

Si, S, Cl. The data in table I reveal a 1. for the element P (by construction) with values

continuously decreasing from unity for the elements to the left and to the right of the

N-column. This pattern is followed for the periods 3 up to 6, taking As, Sb and Bi as

reference, with decreasing diﬀerence along a given period (see Figure 8) in accordance with

the results above. Note that the diﬀerence from 1. remains small, due to the eﬀect of the

10

FIG. 3: The cross section of the graph in ﬁgure 1 for Zb = 82. The vertical axis gives the QSM

value for P b with the atom with nuclear charge Za.

renormalization used to obtain the QSI.

TABLE I: Numerical results of the QSI with prior atoms set to the elements on top of the columns.

The information present in the shape function of N to obtain information on that of A is compared

with the information present in the shape function of N to obtain information about N -group atom

of the corresponding period.

Al: 0.98656 Si: 0.99688 P: 1. S: 0.99735 Cl: 0.99031

Ga: 0.99880 Ge: 0.99971 As: 1. Se: 0.99973 Br: 0.99897

In: 0.99957 Sn: 0.99989 Sb: 1. Te: 0.99990 I: 0.99961

Tl: 0.99986 Pb: 0.99996 Bi: 1. Po: 0.99996 At: 0.99987

11

FIG. 4: Information Entropy based QSM for pairs of atoms in the periodic table, with the noble gas

of the previous row as prior for each given atom. A clear periodic character can be distinguished.

A non-relativistic Hartree-Fock approach was used.

IV.

INVESTIGATION OF RELATIVISTIC EFFECTS

In this section we discuss the relativistic eﬀects on atomic electron density functions. We

ﬁrst illustrate the diﬀerence of the radial density functions D(r) deﬁned as [25],

D(r)

4πr2ρ(r),

≡

calculated in the Hartree-Fock (HF) and Dirac-Fock (DF) approximations for the ground

state 6p2 3P0 of Pb I (Z = 82) according to equations 9 and 15, respectively. These are

plotted in ﬁgure 9, which shows the global relativistic contraction of the shell structure.

Another interesting observation can be done from ﬁgure 10 displaying, as was done in

[11] for the Rn atom, the accumulated diﬀerence between the DF and the HF radial density

functions 16 deﬁned as

(16)

(17)

∆D(r)

r

≡ Z

0 (cid:16)

DDF(r′)

DHF(r′)

dr′

−

(cid:17)

12

FIG. 5: The cross section of the graph in ﬁgure 4 for Zb = 82. The periodic character is regained.

as a function of r, the radial distance to the nucleus. We see in this way that there is an

excess charge, varying between 0 and 0.9 due to relativistic eﬀects. One notices that the

contraction of the total radial density function reveals a shell structure. Since the densities

are normalized to the same number of electrons, the accumulated diﬀerence converges to 0

for large values of r.

Employing the framework of QSI to compare non-relativistic Hartree-Fock electron den-

sity functions ρHF (r) with relativistic Dirac-Fock electron density functions ρDF (r) for a

given atom, the inﬂuence of relativistic eﬀects on the total density functions of atoms can

be quantiﬁed via the QSI deﬁned below

ZHF,DF (δ) =

ρHF (r) ρDF (r) dr

R

SIδ =

ZHF,DF (δ)
√ZHF,HF (δ)√ZDF,DF (δ)

,

(18)

(19)

where δ is the Dirac-δ operator.

In ﬁgure 11 we supply the QSI between atomic densities obtained from numerical Hartree-

Fock calculation and those obtained from numerical Dirac-Fock calculations, for all atoms

of the periodic table. The results show practically no relativistic eﬀects on the electron

13

FIG. 6:

Information Entropy based QSI for pairs of atoms in the periodic table, with the noble

gas of the previous row as prior for each given atom. The vertical axis corresponds to the QSI of

the atoms with nuclear charges Za and Zb given by the axes in the plane.

densities for the ﬁrst periods, the inﬂuence becoming comparatively large for heavy atoms.

To illustrate the evolution through the table the numerical results of the carbon group

elements are given in table II and highlighted in the graph in ﬁgure 11. From the graph it

is also noticeable that the relativistic eﬀects rapidly gain importance for atoms heavier than

Pb.

Investigation of the convergence of the QSI in function of the radius r can shed some

light on the importance of core region of the density functions for the QSI. In ﬁgure 12 we

plot, for the Pb atom, the numerical results of the QSI deﬁned as

ZHF,DF (δ; r) =

SIδ(r) =

Ω ρHF (r′) ρDF (r′) dΩdr′
R

r
0
R
ZHF,DF (δ;r)
√ZHF,HF (δ;r)√ZDF,DF (δ;r)

(20)

(21)

where the integration over Ω represents the integration over all angles. The plot shows a

very fast convergence, the total QSI value being reached already for r = 0.2 a0 . This result

14

FIG. 7: A cross section for Zb = 82 of the graph of Information entropy QSI in ﬁgure 6. The

change of reference atom is still visible, but the periodicity is not regained.

TABLE II: Numerical results of the QSI for the carbon group, highlighted in graph 11.

Atom QSI

C 0.99999

Si

0.99996

Ge

0.99945

Sn 0.99661

Pb 0.96776

15

demonstrates the dominance of the inner region of the density function for this type of QSI.

This picture does not reﬂect the inﬂuence of relativistic eﬀects on the valence electrons,

which is visible in the accumulated diﬀerence in ﬁgure 9. The rapid convergence of the QSI

can be accounted to the fact that the densities, in the overlap integral, themselves are much

larger in regions of small radius r, whereas the clear inﬂuence of relativistic eﬀects in the

accumulated diﬀerence picture is due to the fact that the diﬀerence between Hartree-Fock

FIG. 8: Results of the information theory based QSI with the atom on top of the column as prior.

The symbol in the legend indicates the period of the investigated atom and the nuclear charge

Z-axis indicates the column of the investigated atom. (For example Ga can be found as a square

and Dirac-Fock radial densities remains of the same order of magnitude, converging to zero,

Z = 5).

as can be seen in ﬁgure 9.

V. CONCLUSION

In this communication we report on the development and calculation of a new, Informa-

tion Theory based, Quantum Similarity Measure (QSM) and its corresponding Quantum

Similarity Index (QSI) for atoms, using their density functions and shape functions. We

show that a QSM constructed with the Kullback Leibler Information Entropy loses its peri-

odic character upon normalization. One might say that the normalisation renders the QSI

insensitive to certain characteristics, clearly present in the QSM. To regain the periodicity

with the information theory based QSM, the choice of the prior for each atom as the density

of the noble gas of the previous row, normalized to the same number of electrons in the

16

FIG. 9: DF and HF density distributions D(r) = 4πr2ρ(r) for the neutral Pb atom (Z = 82). The

contraction of the ﬁrst shells is clearly visible.

FIG. 10: Accumulated diﬀerence between the DF and the HF densities of Pb.

17

FIG. 11: Similarity of non-relativistic Hartree-Fock with relativistic Dirac-Fock atomic density

functions with highlighted results for the CIV group atoms.

atom under investigation, is crucial. The results of the QSM are in agreement with chemical

intuition in the sense that the diﬀerence in QSM of two successive light atoms is large in

comparison to the diﬀerence in QSM of two successive heavy atoms, meaning that light

atoms next to each other in the Table diﬀer more than neighboring heavy atoms. When

looking at the results of Lanthanides and Actinides in particular we ﬁnd high similarities

indeed. This interpretation is not regained by looking at the QSI, with the prior set to the

noble gas atoms. It is rewarding that the comparison of information content of the shape

function of a given top atom in a column with the atoms of the subsequent period(s) reveals

another periodicity pattern.

The visualization of the inﬂuence of relativistic eﬀects on the radial density distribution

reveals a shell structured excess charge, corresponding to the contraction of the charge

distribution. The importance of relativistic eﬀects for the electron density functions and

shape functions of atoms has been quantiﬁed via a study based on QSI. A plot of the QSI as

a function of the nuclear charge shows that the densities of light atoms are barely inﬂuenced

by including the relativistic corrections and that the inﬂuence of relativistic eﬀects increases

18

FIG. 12: Convergence of the QSI of HF and DF densities of Pb, as a function of r, revealing the

large inﬂuence of the inner region of the density function.

monotonically with the nuclear charge of the neutral atom throughout the Periodic Table.

As suggested by the investigation of: i) the Carb´o QSI, ii) the Information Theory based

QSI and iii) relativistic eﬀects via the Carb´o QSI for atoms, the Carb´o QSI reﬂects the

similarity of the core region of the density function, i.e.

it fails to reﬂect the importance

of the valence electrons, which is essential from a chemical point of view.

It would be

interesting to investigate if the valence region can be given more weight in a similarity

study, by introducing an appropriate separation operator in the deﬁnition of the QSI.

Although correlation eﬀects are neglected in the present work, a similar QSM/QSI ap-

proach can be used for investigating how much the electron densities are aﬀected by cor-

relation, comparing the same atom in the single- and multi-conﬁguration non relativistic

Hartree Fock approximations.

Acknowledgments

M.G. thanks the Communaut franaise of Belgium (Action de Recherche Concerte) and the

Belgian National Fund for Scientiﬁc Research (FRFC/IISN convention) for their ﬁnancial

19

support. Laboratoire Kastler Brossel is Unit´e Mixte de Recherche du CNRS n◦ 8552

[1] E. Besal, R. Carb, J. Mestres and M. Sol, Molecular Similarity I, Topics in current Chemistry,

Springer-Verlag, Berlin 173, 31 (1995).

[2] P. Bultinck, X. Girones, R. Carb´o-Dorca, Rev. Comp. Chem. 21, 127 (2005).

[3] G. Boon, F. De Proft, W. Langenaeker, P. Geerlings, Chem. Phys. Lett. 295, 122 (1998).

[4] G. Boon, W. Langenaeker, F. De Proft, H. De Winter, J. Tollenaere, P. Geerlings, J. Phys.

Chem. A 105, 8805 (2001).

[5] P. Geerlings, F. De Proft, W. Langenaeker, Chem. Rev. 103, 1793 (2003).

[6] G. Boon, F. De Proft, C. Van Alsenoy, P. Bultinck, P. Geerlings, J. Phys. Chem. A 107, 11120

[7] P. Geerlings, G. Boon, C. Van Alsenoy, F. De Proft, Int. J. Quant. Chem. 101, 722 (2005).

[8] M. Sol`a, J. Mestres, J.M. Oliva, M. Duran, R. Carb´o, Int. J. Quant. Chem. 58, 361 (1996).

[9] D. Robert, R. Carb´o-Dorca, Int. J. Quant. Chem. 77, 685 (2000).

[10] A. Borgoo, M. Godefroid, K. D. Sen, F. De Proft and P. Geerlings, Chem. Phys. Let. 399,

(2003).

363 (2004).

[11] K. D. Sen, F. De Proft, A. Borgoo, P. Geerlings, Chem. Phys. Lett. 410, 70 (2005).

[12] P. Geerlings, F. De Proft, P. W. Ayers in “Theoretical Aspects of Chemical Reactivity”, Theo-

retical and Computational Chemistry 19, A. Toro Labb´e Ed., Elsevier (Amsterdam), 1 (2006).

[13] P. W. Ayers, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 97, 1995 (2000).

[14] P. W. Ayers, F. De Proft, P. Geerlings, Phys. Rev. A, in press.

[15] V.M. Burke and I.P. Grant, Proc. Phys. Soc. 90, 297 (1967).

[16] J.-P. Desclaux, Desclaux’s chapter in “The relativistic Electronic Structure Theory Book”,

Theoretical and computational chemistry 11 Relativistic Electronic Structure Theory part 1

fundamentals, Ed.: Peter Schwerdtfeger (Elsevier 2002, ISBN: 0 444 51249 7).

[17] R. Carb´o, J. Arnau, L. Leyda, Int. J. Quant. Chem. 17, 1185 (1980).

[18] R. F. Nalewajski, R. G. Parr, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 97, 8879 (2000).

[19] S. Kulback, R. A. Leibler, Ann. Math. Stat. 22, 79 (1951).

[20] R. S. Gadre, B. S. Sears, Phys. Rev. A 32, 5 (1985).

[21] P. Bultinck, R. Carb´o-Dorca, J. Math. Chem. 36, 2 (2004).

20

[22] J. Cioslowski, E. Fleismann, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 113, 65 (1991).

[23] For a recent analysis of this and other similarity indices see G. M. Maggiora, J. D Petke,

J. Mestres, J. Math. Chem., 31, 251 (2002).

[24] E. E. Hodgkin, W. G. Richards, Int. J. Quant. Chem.:Quant. Biol. Symp., 14, 105 (1987).

[25] B.H. Bransden and C.J. Joachain, “Physics of Atoms and Molecules”, Prentice Hall (Pearson

Education Ltd, Harlow, England, 2003).

[26] “Ground levels and ionization energies for the neutral atoms” on the National Institute of

Standards and Technology,

http://physics.nist.gov/PhysRefData/IonEnergy/tblNew.html .

[27] G. Gaigalas and C. Froese Fischer, Comp. Phys. Commun. 98, 255 (1996).

[28] C. Froese Fischer, G. Tachiev, G. Gaigalas and M. Godefroid, “An MCHF atomic-

structure package for large-scale calculations”, Comp. Phys. Commun.

(submitted);

http://atoms.vuse.vanderbilt.edu/.

[29] G. Gaigalas, Z. Rudzikas and C. Froese Fischer, J. Phys. B: At. Mol. Opt. Phys. 30, 3747

(1997).

York, 1977).

[30] C. Froese Fischer, The Hartree-Fock Method for Atoms: A Numerical Approach (Wiley, New

[31] P. Indelicato, Phys. Rev. A 51, 1132 (1995) .

[32] P. Indelicato, Phys. Rev. Lett. 77, 3323 (1996) .

[33] I. P. Grant in ”Atomic, Molecular & Optical Physics” (AIP Ed.: G.W.F. Drake,1996).

[34] J. P. Desclaux and P. Indelicato 2004, The relativistic atomic program MDFGME, an update

version of the code ﬁrst published by J.P. Desclaux in Comp. Phys. Commun. 9, 31 (1975)

http://dirac.spectro.jussieu.fr/mcdf.

[35] S. B. Liu, F. De Proft, R. G. Parr, J. Phys. Chem A 101 37 (1997)

21

