7
0
0
2
 
r
a

M
 
3
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
m
o
t
a
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
9
1
2
3
0
7
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Nonsequential double ionization: a comparison of classical simulations and S-matrix
results

Phay J. Ho,1, 2 X. Liu,3 and W. Becker2
1Department of Physics and Astronomy, University of Rochester, 600 Wilson Blvd., Rochester, NY 14627, USA
2Max Born Institute for Nonlinear Optics and Short-Pulse Spectroscopy, Max-Born-Strasse 2A, Berlin 12489, Germany
3State Key Laboratory of Magnetic Resonance and Atomic and Molecular Physics,
Wuhan Institute of Physics and Mathematics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Wuhan 430071, P.R.China
(Dated: February 1, 2014)

In a fully classical simulation, we investigate the recollision mechanism of non-sequential double
ionization (NSDI) and its manifestation in the end-of-pulse electron momentum distributions. We
compare two diﬀerent electron-electron potentials: a soft-core Coulombic potential and a Yukawa
potential. We also implement the strong-ﬁeld approximation (SFA), which is commonly made in
quantum-mechanical S-matrix calculations, in our classical simulations and study its consequences.
We ﬁnd that, regardless of the form of the e-e potential, the SFA modiﬁes the momentum distribu-
tions and recollision dynamics signiﬁcantly, but more so for the long-range than for the short-range
e-e interaction. Surprisingly, our classical results, especially those obtained with the Yukawa poten-
tial under the SFA, agree well with the results from the S-matrix calculations with a contact e-e
interaction. This implies that the recollision dynamics initiated by a quantum tunneling process
and a purely classical process do not deviate much from each other. Furthermore, our classical
predictions of travel times are consistent with the results from the simple-man model, and the most
probable thermalization time is found to be within 0.15 and 0.25 laser periods.

PACS numbers: 32.80.Rm, 32.60.+i

I.

INTRODUCTION

Correlated electron dynamics of atoms and molecules
in intense radiation ﬁelds remains a challenging and fas-
cinating research topic. One interesting e-e correlated
phenomenon is the so-called non-sequential double ion-
ization (NSDI), which has been observed in all inert gas
atoms [1]. Many eﬀorts have been devoted to understand
the e-e correlation underlying this process. For instance,
S-matrix calculations [2, 3, 4, 5] have been used to exam-
ine the role of a three-step recollision scenario in NSDI:
one electron ﬁrst tunnels out of the nucleus, collects en-
ergy from the laser ﬁeld and carries it back to the ion to
accomplish the second ionization [6]. In addition to re-
lying on this recollision scenario, these calculations make
use of the so-called strong-ﬁeld approximation (SFA) [7],
in which the nuclear interaction of the recolliding elec-
tron and the outgoing electrons as well as the interaction
of the bound electrons with the laser ﬁeld are suppressed.
A crucial ingredient of the recollision scenario is the
form of the electron-electron interaction. In the S-matrix
calculation with the SFA, this potential, by which the
returning electron kicks out the second electron, enters
only in ﬁrst-order Born approximation. Essentially two
choices have been examined: the Coulomb repulsion po-
tential [2, 4, 5] and a three-dimensional (3-d) contact
potential [3, 5]. Figures 1 (a) and (b) show that the
end-of-pulse momentum distributions along the laser po-
larization axis obtained from these two potentials have
few or no NSDI electron pairs with small or opposite
momenta. Apart from this, these two distributions are
rather diﬀerent. The Coulomb potential predicts that
the two NSDI electrons are most likely to have diﬀer-

ent longitudinal momenta, loosely speaking one fast and
one slow electron, whereas the contact potential predicts
that both NSDI electrons are mostly like to have about
the same longitudinal momentum [5]. Recently, these
features of the contact and the Coulombic potentials
have been reproduced remarkably well from 3-d semi-
classical calculations based on a statistical model that
uses the same rescattering scenario employed in the S-
matrix calculations [8, 9, 10], and a quasistatic tunneling
rate [11]. Semiclassical trajectory calculations that start
from quantum-mechanical tunneling but thereafter track
two-electron classical trajectories have been presented in
a series of papers [12]. Even though in these simulations
all interactions are Coulomb interactions, the results are
rather similar to the S-matrix results for contact interac-
tions [3, 5, 8, 9, 10]. Interestingly, we ﬁnd that the NSDI
features of the contact interaction from the 3-d calcu-
lations can even be captured with a 2-d semi-classical
calculation, as shown in Figs. 1(c) and (d).

However, it is not clear whether these distinct features,
which have been observed in the S-matrix results, are ex-
clusively related to the range of the e-e interaction (long
range versus short range or zero range). For example,
they might also be artifacts of the assumptions made in
the SFA. Also, it is of interest whether or not they are
of quantum-mechnical origin, in the sense that they are
dependent on the ﬁrst electron being born by tunneling.
To clarify these issues, we perform NSDI calculations us-
ing the classical ensemble method [13]. Our results sug-
gest that the diﬀerent features are the combined eﬀect
of the SFA and the form of e-e correlation used in the
S-matrix and semi-classical calculations and can be re-
produced without tunneling.

2

is given by

H =

2

(cid:18)

Xi=1

2

~pi|
|
2

~ri|
+ Vn,i(
|

) + ~ri ·

~F (t)

(cid:19)

+ Vee(r12), (1)

~r2|

~r1 −
|

where Vn,i are the nuclear binding potentials experienced
by the two electrons (i = 1, 2), Vee is the electron-electron
(e-e) repulsion potential and r12 =
is the dis-
tance between the two electrons. This Hamiltonian al-
lows tracking the electron pair throughout the laser pulse
under the simultaneous inﬂuence of the laser ﬁeld and
the nuclear potentials. Previously, we have successfully
used the aligned-electron version of this 2-e model to re-
produce the features of the experimental NSDI ion-count
data and the momentum distributions [14]. In this paper,
we employ both 2-d and 3-d classical-ensemble methods
to examine the consequences of the range of the e-e cor-
relation (long range vs. short range) and the eﬀects of
the SFA on the NSDI dynamics. Mostly, the 2-d results
will be presented.

In this method, one million or more Newtonian two-
electron (2-e) trajectories that follow the Hamiltonian
(1) are used to obtain the classical response of a single
2-e atom to the inﬂuence of a linearly polarized intense
laser pulse. Our 780 nm (ω = 0.0584 a.u.) laser pulse
has a peak intensity of 0.3 PW/cm2 and a trapezoidal
envelope with a symmetric 2-cycle turn-on and turn-oﬀ
and a 4-cycle plateau. Prior to turning on the ﬁeld, the
electrons’ positions and momenta form a micro-canonical
ensemble with an energy of
2.50 a.u. and zero total
angular momentum.

−

III. FINAL MOMENTUM DISTRIBUTIONS

To illustrate the features of and the diﬀerences be-
tween the long-range and short-range e-e interactions in
NSDI, we perform several calculations using Coulombic
and Yukawa e-e repulsion potentials, with each electron
subjected to the same soft-core Coulombic nuclear po-
tential [15], which has the familiar form

Vn,i(ri) =

(2)

2
−
r2
i + a2

.

p

We use a = 1.0 to avoid auto-ionization in our ensemble
of classical trajectories in the absence of the laser ﬁeld.
In order to simulate the experimental data, we look for
the characteristics of a long-range versus a short-range
e-e interaction by examining the end-of-pulse NSDI lon-
gitudinal electron momentum distributions, which have
all the transverse momenta integrated over, and relating
them to the dynamical details of the associated double-
electron ejection mechanism.

Figure 2(a) shows the 2-e longitudinal momentum dis-
tribution obtained with a 3-d classical calculation using a
soft-core Coulombic e-e repulsion potential with the form

VLR,ee(r) =

1
√r2 + b2

(3)

FIG. 1: Two-electron longitudinal momentum distributions
calculated from the S-matrix element that incorporates the
tunneling-recollision scenario in the SFA. The two panels in
the top row are obtained from a 3-d calculation with (a) the
Coulomb repulsion potential and (b) a contact repulsion po-
tential. The two panels in the bottom row are obtained from
(c) a 3-d and (d) a 2-d statistical quasi-static-tunneling model
that employs a contact repulsion potential. All panels are
calculated for a Ti:Sapphire laser with a peak intensity of
I = 0.55 PW/cm2. The vertical and horizontal red dashed
lines mark P1L = ±1.5pUp and P2L = ±1.5pUp. Panels
(a), (b) and (c) are taken from [9].

In Sec.

Our paper is organized as follows. In Sec. II, we ﬁrst
brieﬂy introduce our two-electron (2-e) classical model
III, this clas-
and the computational method.
sical method is used to compute the ﬁnal momentum
distributions of NSDI electrons via either a long-range
or a short-range e-e repulsion potential, and these clas-
sical distributions are compared with the corresponding
S-matrix results. In Sec. IV, we present a quantitative
analysis of the recollision mechanism that leads to NSDI
for both the long-range and the short-range e-e interac-
tion. In Sec. V, we identify the distinct classical NSDI
trajectories and analyze their individual contribution to
the ﬁnal momentum distributions. We then examine the
eﬀect of the SFA on our classical results and relate them
to the S-matrix results in Sec. VI. A summary is then
presented in Sec. VII.

II. CLASSICAL MODEL

In our classical model, the Hamiltonian of a two-
electron atom in an intense laser ﬁeld, described in the
long-wavelength approximation by its electric ﬁeld ~E(t),

3

0.75

Up or

Up and
1.5

1.5
Up and
p1L| ≈
p2L| ≈
|
|
p
Up. Note that these four momentum fea-
p2L| ≈
|
tures can be captured in detail both qualitatively and
quantitatively with a reduced-dimensional 2-d calcula-
tion using the same form of the e-e potential in Eq. (3),
as shown in Fig. 2(b).

0.75

p

p

p

These classical predictions from the long-range poten-
tial (3) are consistent with the COLTRIMS measure-
ments in He [16], Ne [17], and Ar [18] in the intensity
regime of NSDI. In particular, like our classical distribu-
tions, all these experiments recorded electron pairs in all
four quadrants, with the fractions in the ﬁrst and third
quadrants being dominant. Also, dominant oﬀ-axis pop-
ulation [feature (iv) above] has so far been observed in
experiments on He [16] and Ar [19]. We will show that
this oﬀ-axis population is the signature of the Coulombic
or long-range e-e repulsion. It disappears in the limit of a
short-range e-e repulsion. Feature (iv) has also been seen
in 1d simulations, both in quantum [20] and in classical
[21] calculations.

To illustrate this, we perform diﬀerent classical calcu-

lations using a Yukawa potential, which has the form

VSR,ee(r) =

exp[

λ

r2 + b2
1]

.

−
p
√r2 + b2

(4)

Note that in the limit of λ = 0, this Yukawa potential
is reduced to Eq. (3). Since there is excellent agreement
between the 3-d and 2-d calculations using a soft-core
potential, we restrict our calculations with the Yukawa
potential to 2-d. With b1 = b = 0.1, Figs.
2(c) and
(d) show that, at λ = 0.5 and 2.0, the momentum dis-
tributions still possess remnants of the long-range repul-
sion signature (iv). As a new feature, there is a high
concentration of electron pairs with momenta around
0.7UP . The presence of these low-
p1L| ≈ |
|
momentum electron pairs can be regarded as a signature
of an intermediate-range e-e interaction.

p2L| ≈

In order to reach the limit of a short-range interac-
tion, the value of λ in the Yukawa potential (4) must
be further increased. However, calculations with large
values of λ require signiﬁcantly increased computation
time. Fortunately, we ﬁnd that the momentum distribu-
tion calculated with λ = 4 already simulates the features
of a short-range e-e interaction suﬃciently well. This is
due to the fact that, at λ = 4, the interaction energy of
the electron pair drops by more than a factor of 50 when
the two electrons move merely 1 a.u. away from each
other. Furthermore, comparison between Figs. 2(e) and
(f) shows that raising the value of λ from 4 to 8 does not
modify the momentum distribution signiﬁcantly. Thus,
it is suﬃcient to extract the classical features of a short-
range e-e interaction from calculations using the Yukawa
potential with λ = 4.

Comparison between Figs. 2(b) and (e) shows that
one can identify two tendencies as the e-e interaction
is changed from long range to short range. First, as
expected, the Coulombic repulsion signature (iv) disap-
pears and the regions with the highest density of NSDI

FIG. 2: Two-electron longitudinal momentum distributions
for NSDI obtained from the classical ensemble method at
I = 0.3 PW/cm2. Panels (a) and (b) are calculated with a
3-d and 2-d soft-core Coulomb e-e repulsion potential respec-
tively. The remaining panels are calculated with 2-d Yukawa
e-e repulsion potentials for diﬀerent λ values of (c) 0.5, (d)
2.0, (e) 4.0 and (f) 8.0. The vertical and horizontal (red)
dashed lines mark P1L = ±1.5pUp and P2L = ±1.5pUp. In
each plot, the transverse momenta have been integrated over.
Each distribution is plotted on a linear gray scale with the
darker regions representing higher density.

2

2

p

<
∼

<
∼

Up and

p1L|
|

with b = 0.1. First, we identify four features of this
distribution and, below, we will examine how they are
modiﬁed in the limit of a short-range e-e interaction: (i)
the NSDI momenta are largely conﬁned to the region
where
Up, with Up is the
p2L|
|
peak ponderomotive energy of an electron in the laser
ﬁeld; (ii) the majority of the NSDI population is con-
centrated in the ﬁrst and third quadrants, implying that
with high probability the two NSDI electrons are emit-
ted to the same side of the nucleus along the laser polar-
ization axis; (iii) there are nonnegligible populations in
the second and fourth quadrants, which represent NSDI
events with opposite-side double-electron emission; (iv)
this distribution has well developed maxima on either
p1L| ≈
side of the diagonal p1L = p2L, such that either
|

p

=

= 1.5

p2L|
|

events are closer to the diagonal p1L = p2L and near
p1L|
Up. Second, in the regions near the
|
origin, especially in the 2nd and 4th quadrants, the pop-
ulation density becomes higher. Otherwise, the location
of the cutoﬀs and the relative population distribution in
the four quadrants remain largely unchanged.

p

Before we examine the dynamics of the NSDI events in
both long-range and short-range interactions, it is inter-
esting to observe that our classical calculations capture
some essential features of the S-matrix and the semi-
classical calculations, even though they do not include
tunneling and go beyond the SFA. Comparison of Figs. 1
(a) and (b) on the one hand with Figs. 2 (b) and (f) on
the other shows rather good agreement. Especially, in
the case of the long-range e-e interaction, the most prob-
able NSDI events have one fast and one slow electron,
and we will show later that our classical analysis sug-
gests that the recolliding electron is likely to be the slow
electron. Apart from these agreements, there are two
noticeable diﬀerences between our classical predictions
and the S-matrix results. First, our classical momentum
distributions exhibit a higher population in the second
and fourth quadrants regardless of the form of the e-e
interaction. Second, as the e-e interaction changes from
Coulomb to contact interaction, the S-matrix distribu-
tions become much more extended in the ﬁrst and third
quadrants, and there is less population near the origin in
all four quadrants. The role of the SFA and of tunneling
in this context will be examined below.

IV. TRAVEL TIMES AND THERMALIZATION
TIMES

To understand in detail the NSDI dynamics caused by
long-range or short-range e-e potentials, we follow indi-
vidual NSDI events in both potentials throughout the
laser pulse. We ﬁnd that the rescattering mechanism
without tunneling continues to drive NSDI for both po-
tentials. For each NSDI event, we determine three times
that characterize its temporal evolution: the time tsi of
the single-ionization event, the time trecol of the recolli-
sion, and the time tNSDI of double ionization. Note that
such characterization is in line with the three-step recol-
lision model underlying the S-matrix and semi-classical
calculations. For our classical simulations, a completely
accurate determination of these times is not possible since
they have to be extracted during the course of non-
equilibrium and chaotic 2-e dynamics. Here, we adopt
the following working deﬁnitions. We deﬁne tsi as the
time when one of the electrons ﬁrst has its kinetic en-
ergy greater than the combined energy of its nuclear and
e-e interactions. Hence, tsi marks the “time of birth” of
the electron that later will recollide with the ion. The
second time trecol we deﬁne as the time of closest ap-
proach between the recolliding and the bound electron.
The double-ionization time tNSDI is deﬁned as the time
when both electrons ﬁrst have their individual kinetic

4

FIG. 3: Travel time distribution for the recolliding electron of
all NSDI trajectories obtained from the 2-d classical ensemble
method with (a) long-range and (b) short-range e-e repulsion
potentials. Each distribution is scaled to unity at the highest
count.

energies greater than their nuclear potential energies.

With these three diﬀerent times, we can statistically
quantify the NSDI processes in our 2-d classical ensem-
ble of atoms in both e-e potentials. Similar quantiﬁcation
schemes with diﬀerent working deﬁnitions have been used
to obtain the individual distributions of trecol and tNSDI
in connection with the laser phase [22, 23]. Here, we ex-
amine the distribution of two consecutive time intervals,
trecol, among the NSDI trajecto-
trecol −
ries, in order to obtain the time scales associated with
the recollision mechanism.

tsi and tNSDI −

The diﬀerence between trecol and tsi is the time interval
that the rescattering electron travels outside the vicinity
of the nucleus before returning to the nucleus for the rec-
ollision, in short the “travel time”. Figures 3(a) and (b)
show that the probability distributions of the travel time
tsi of all NSDI trajectories obtained from the 2-d
trecol −
soft-core Coulombic e-e interaction and the Yukawa e-
e repulsion potential with λ = 4 are very similar: both
distributions are concentrated within certain well-deﬁned
ranges of the travel time. These are centered about the
travel times ttr = 0.1, 0.5, 1.15, 1.75, and 2.2 T , where
T = 2π/ω. The classical simple-man model (or, equiva-
lently, the SFA) yields the values ttr = 0.65, 1.2, 1.7, and
2.2 T ; see, e.g. Ref. [24]. The close agreement between
the travel times calculated from the present classical 2-d
simulation, which contains all interactions, and from the
simple-man model, which ignores the nuclear potentials,

5

an ensemble of just two electrons. Figures 4 (a) and
(b) show that both long-range and short-range e-e in-
teractions generate some NSDI events with very short
or close to zero thermalization time. Previously stud-
ied using quantum S-matrix and simple-man approaches
[2, 3, 4, 5, 8, 9, 10] tacitly assumed zero thermalization
time. However, Fig. 4 shows that most of the NSDI tra-
jectories exhibit a longer thermalization time, even as
long as 4.0 T (not shown in Fig. 4), for both forms of the
e-e potential. In the case of the long-range e-e interac-
tion, these events develop two local maxima near 0.15 T
and 0.25 T . Similarly, the distribution of tthermal for the
short-range e-e potential has one broad dominant peak
near 0.2 T . Liu et al. performed a semiclassical statis-
tical simulation [26] of the experimental ion-momentum
distributions of triple and quadruple nonsequential ion-
ization of neon [27, 28]. They obtained a best ﬁt for
0.17 T , in close agreement with the range be-
tthermal ≈
tween 0.15 T and 0.25 T displayed in Fig. 4. Regardless of
the form of the e-e potentials, only less than 25% of the
NSDI events have tthermal > 0.5 T . These long-tthermal
events contribute signiﬁcantly to the production of elec-
tron pairs with opposite longitudinal momenta and ions
with low longitudinal momentum [14, 23, 29].

V. LONG AND SHORT TRAVEL TIME
TRAJECTORIES

As mentioned earlier, both long-range and short-range
e-e interactions are very eﬀective in producing NSDI with
only one recollision. For the further analysis, we subdi-
vide these single-recollision events into short-travel-time
(STT) and long-travel-time (LTT) trajectories, according
to their travel times being shorter or longer than 0.2T .
Figure 3 shows that both the long-range and the short-
range e-e interaction produce more LTT than STT tra-
jectories. But the short-range interaction leads to more
STT trajectories (more than 25%) than the long-range
interaction (fewer than 20%).

Analysis of our trajectories shows that the ﬁnal mo-
menta of the electron pairs of LTT and STT trajectories
are quite diﬀerent. Figures 5(a) and (b) show that, re-
gardless of the form of the potential, signiﬁcantly nonzero
momenta are almost exclusively generated by LTT tra-
jectories. For either interaction, the contribution of the
STT trajectories is relatively minor. For the long-range
interaction, it is insigniﬁcant for all momenta; cf. Fig. 2
(a) on the one hand and Figs. 5 (a) and (b) on the other.
For the short-range interaction, the STT trajectories do
make important contributions for low momenta.

Dynamically, LTT and STT trajectories are quite dif-
ferent. Figure 6 demonstrates their diﬀerences with tra-
jectories that have both electrons ejected and recolliding
within the same laser cycle. Here, we point out three dif-
ferences among the LTT and STT trajectories that hold
for both the long-range and short-range e-e interaction.
First, during recollision the energy carried by the rescat-

FIG. 4: Thermalization time distribution for the recolliding
electron of all NSDI trajectories obtained from the 2-d classi-
cal ensemble method with (a) long-range and (b) short-range
e-e repulsion potentials. Each distribution is scaled to unity
at the highest count.

is very remarkable. It is interesting to observe that the
complex saddle-point approximation to the SFA, like the
full classical simulation shown here, also yields a solu-
0.1T ), which
tion with a very short travel time (ttr ≈
exclusively contributes to harmonic generation with har-
monic order below the ﬁrst ionization energy [25]. The
close agreement between the present calculations with
zero-range, short-range, and long-range potentials im-
plies that the travel times of the rescattering electron
are potential independent and their well-deﬁned ranges
are mainly determined by the interaction with the laser
ﬁeld. Among the classical NSDI events, those with travel
times shorter or longer than T can be regarded as single-
or multiple-recollision events, respectively. In particular,
of the NSDI events mediated by the long-range and the
short-range interaction, more than 90% and 80%, respec-
tively, are single-recollision events. A detailed analysis of
the single-recollision events will be presented later in the
paper.

The second time interval, tNSDI −

trecol, is the time
delay between double ionization and recollision. This
quantity is sometimes interpreted as the “thermaliza-
tion time”, tthermal,
the time that is needed for
both electrons to acquire enough energy from the rec-
ollision process such that they can liberate themselves
from the nucleus [26]. Even though the terminology
refers to a large number of electrons we use it here for

i.e.

6

FIG. 5: Classical 2-e longitudinal momentum distributions of
two sub-ensembles of NSDI trajectories: LTT (left column)
and STT (right column) trajectories. The panels in the top
and bottom rows are obtained from the soft-core Coulomb e-
e repulsion potential and the Yukawa e-e repulsion potential,
respectively. The vertical and horizontal (red) dashed lines
mark P1L = ±1.5pUp and P2L = ±1.5pUp. In both plots,
the transverse momenta have been integrated over. The dis-
tributions are plotted on a linear gray scale with the darker
regions representing higher density.

tering electron of an LTT trajectory is larger than that
of an STT trajectory.
In particular, the energy of the
rescattering electron of an LTT trajectory can be higher
than the ionization potential of its bound electron [see
Figs. 6(a) and (e)], while this is not the case for an STT
trajectory [see Figs. 6(c) and (g)]. Second, the recolli-
sion of an LTT trajectory can take place over a wide
range of laser phases, especially near zero ﬁeld strength,
and still free both electrons. On the other hand, for an
STT trajectory, the time of the recollision is mainly re-
stricted to laser phases where the ﬁeld strength is near
its maximum. This implies that laser suppression of the
nuclear potential barrier is important in leading to the
double-electron ejection. Third, after recollision, both
the bound and the rescattering electrons of an LTT tra-
jectory tend to execute a short longitudinal excursion in
the direction of incidence of the rescattering electron and
are likely to move away together in the opposite direction
of incidence. The STT trajectories, on the other hand,
are likely to have both electrons executing a rather long
longitudinal excursion in the direction of incidence of the
rescattering electron. Subsequently, both electrons tend
to drift away together in the direction opposite to the
direction of incidence if the e-e interaction is long range,
but in opposite directions if it is short range.

FIG. 6: (Color online) Time evolution of the energy and the
longitudinal displacement of NSDI electrons during the ﬁrst
5 laser cycles. The top panel of each column plots the time
evolution of the laser electric ﬁeld F (t) with the peak ampli-
tude E0. The remaining panels of each column display the
energy E and the transverse displacement x of the two NSDI
electrons of a trajectory, respectively. The second and third
row correspond to a representative LTT and STT trajectory,
respectively, obtained with the soft-core Coulombic e-e repul-
sion potential, the fourth and ﬁfth to the same for the Yukawa
e-e repulsion potential. Note that the energy of each electron
is the sum of its kinetic, nuclear binding, e-e repulsion, and
laser-dipole energies. The curves referring to the recolliding
and the bound electron are painted orange (grey) and blue
(black), respectively.

VI. EFFECTS OF THE SFA

So far, we have focused on the diﬀerent features of
NSDI mediated by a long-range or a short-range e-e in-
teraction while both electrons are continuously subject to
the Coulombic nuclear potential. However, it is not clear
how robust these features are to the form and inﬂuence
of the nuclear potential. This is especially important be-
cause the SFA ignores the nuclear potential after an elec-
tron has become free [30]. In particular, we want to know
the eﬀect of suppressing the recolliding electron’s interac-

7

FIG. 7: Travel time distribution for the recolliding electron of
all NSDI trajectories obtained from the 2-d classical ensemble
method under the SFA with (a) long-range and (b) short-
range e-e repulsion potentials.

tion with the nucleus in NSDI processes, one though not
the only approximation made by the SFA. Here, we will
not artiﬁcially enforce the second approximation of the
SFA, where the laser interaction of the bound electron is
ignored. We can do that because the bound electron of
each classical trajectory is bound so deeply in its nuclear
potential well that the laser ﬁeld practically has no ef-
fect on it. This is evident from Fig. 6, which shows that
the energy of the bound electron of diﬀerent trajectories
is rather constant during the time interval between the
birth of the rescattering electron and its recollision.

Thus, in order to mimic the SFA, we construct an ex-
plicitly time-dependent nuclear potential for each elec-
tron by replacing the electron-nucleus interaction poten-
tial (2) according to (i = 1, 2)

Vn,i(ri)

2
Vn,i(ri, t) = fi(t) −
r2
i + a2

,

→

(5)

p

If the rescattering electron, say electron
with a = 1.
#1, is ﬁrst ionized and has satisﬁed the supplementary
condition of having moved more than 10 a.u. away from
the core at t = t0, then we turn oﬀ its interaction with
the nucleus according to

1,
e−µ(t−t0)/T ,

if t
t0
≤
if t > t0

(6)

f1(t) =

(cid:26)
f2(t) = 1,

where µ = 40 and T is the laser period. In the limit when
µ = 0, this nuclear potential is reduced to the soft-core
potential. These factors of f1(t) and f2(t) and our cho-
sen value of µ ensure that once the rescattering electron
leaves the nucleus and begins its longitudinal excursion,
its binding potential is turned oﬀ smoothly and exponen-
tially in time, whereas the form of the nuclear potential
for the bound electron remains unaltered even after dou-
ble ionization [31].

Note that our deﬁnition of t0 is to ensure that we begin
turning oﬀ the nuclear potential of the rescattering elec-
tron only when its nuclear attraction has become small,
i.e. when it is far away from the nucleus. Here we have
chosen the distance of 10 a.u. for the supplementary con-
dition, because this distance is less than half of the jitter
radius of the electron, which is √I/ω2
27 a.u., in a laser

≈

FIG. 8: Thermalization time distribution for the recolliding
electron of the LTT NSDI trajectories obtained with the soft-
core Coulombic (left column) and the Yukawa (right column)
e-e repulsion potential without (top row) and with (bottom
row) the SFA. Each distribution is scaled to unity at the high-
est count.

ﬁeld with I = 0.3 PW/cm2. Thus, this supplementary
condition provides us with a suﬃciently long time win-
dow before the time of recollision to turn oﬀ the nuclear
interaction smoothly in time. Furthermore, with µ = 40,
we can ensure that the nuclear interaction of the rescat-
tering electron is turned oﬀ promptly and eﬀectively long
before the recollision takes place. Failure to turn oﬀ the
nuclear interaction of the rescattering electron smoothly
in time prior to recollision can produce a large number of
unrealistic NSDI events that involve self-ionization [32].
An immediate consequence of the SFA as expressed in
the turned-oﬀ potential (6) is that it eliminates NSDI
events caused by LTT trajectories with a travel time
longer than one cycle, cf. Figs. 3 and 7. This is so
because the nuclear potential (2) is essential to refocus-
ing the ﬁrst-ionized electron towards the nucleus. In its
absence, due to the electron-electron repulsion, it will be
deﬂected for good and not return anymore to the vicin-
ity of the ion [33]. Comparison of Figs.
3 and 7 also
shows that the travel time of the ﬁrst recollision event
can be regarded as a rather robust feature both for the
long-range and for the short-range e-e interaction, since
the individual patterns are only altered slightly when the
rescattering electron’s nuclear interaction is turned oﬀ
exponentially in time.

Despite the fast turn-oﬀ of the nuclear interaction ac-
cording to Eq. (6), the rescattering electron of the STT
trajectories may still experience a non-negligible nuclear
interaction prior to the recollision for a large fraction of
its travel time. Hence, in order to clearly demonstrate
the eﬀect of the SFA, we need to choose the sub-ensemble
of the LTT trajectories. They have a travel time longer
than 0.2T , so that their rescattering electrons spend more
than half of their travel time with the strength of their
nuclear interaction suppressed by more than a factor of
50. In particular, we demonstrate the eﬀect of the SFA
on the thermalization-time distribution and the end-of-

8

FIG. 9: Classical 2-e longitudinal momentum distributions
under the SFA for LTT trajectories obtained from (a) the
soft-core Coulomb e-e repulsion potential and (b) the Yukawa
e-e repulsion potential. The vertical and horizontal (red)
dashed lines mark P1L = ±1.5pUp and P2L = ±1.5pUp.
In both plots, the transverse momenta have been integrated
over. Panels (a) and (b) are to be compared with Figs. 5 (a)
and (c), respectively.

pulse electron momentum distribution for the LTT tra-
jectories.

Figure 8 shows that under the SFA the production of
LTT trajectories with a very short thermalization time
is suppressed signiﬁcantly regardless of the form of the
e-e potential. Apart from this, the distributions obtained
with and without the SFA display similar characteristics.
First, there are relatively few trajectories with thermal-
ization times longer than 0.5 T . Second, the location of
the local maximum in each distribution is in the range
of 0.15 to 0.25 T . These similarities combined with the
similar range of travel times (cf. Fig. 7) indicate that for
the LTT trajectories the SFA only slightly modiﬁes the
recollision scenario and its time scales.

Having only slight modiﬁcations in the recollision pro-
cess, however, does not guarantee that the classical cal-
culations with the SFA should reproduce the essential
features of the ﬁnal-state momentum distributions from
the corresponding calculations without the SFA. Fig-
ures 5(a), 5(c), 9(a), and 9(b) allow us to compare the
momentum distributions of the LTT trajectories that are
obtained, roughly speaking, with and without the SFA.
The comparison shows that the SFA has a dramatic eﬀect
on NSDI events caused by the long-range e-e interaction;
cf. Figs. 5(a) and 9(a). The SFA produces NSDI elec-
trons with higher momenta such that the boundary of the
Up
distribution is pushed beyond
p2L|
|
while the population in the region where both
and
p2L|
Up is strongly diminished.
|
Also, while the majority of the population remains in
p
the 1st and 3rd quadrants, the SFA leads to one ad-
ditional change, namely the highest-population-density
regions become well separated, and each region is lo-
calized and moves away from the diagonal p1L = p2L.
This implies that NSDI events under the SFA are more
likely to produce one fast and one slow electron. This is

= 2.5
p1L|
p
|

are smaller than 1.5

p1L|
|

=

FIG. 10: Momentum distributions of the rescattering and
bound electrons in LTT trajectories obtained with the soft-
core Coulombic (left column) and the Yukawa (right column)
e-e repulsion potential. The panels in the top and bottom
rows are obtained without and with the SFA, respectively.
The orange (gray) and blue (black) lines correspond to the
momentum distribution of the rescattering and the bound
electron, respectively.

reminiscent of the characteristics of the distribution ob-
tained via S-matrix and semi-classical calculations with
the Coulombic e-e interaction, even though our results
are not identical with those.

=

±

p

p

= 2.0

p2L|
|

p1L|
|
1.5

The SFA also modiﬁes the appearance of the momen-
tum distribution from the short-range e-e interaction;
cf. Fig. 9(b). Even though the modiﬁcation is notice-
able, it still retains the main features of the short-range
interaction without the SFA. For instance, the cutoﬀs
are still near
Up and the regions
with the highest population density are still centered near
p1L = p2L =
Up. The noticeable change is that
there is now relatively little population near the origin,
on both the x and the y axis and in the 2nd and 4th
quadrant. Surprisingly, this classical distribution under
the SFA adequately mimics the overall features of the
distribution obtained via S-matrix and semi-classical cal-
culations using a contact interaction. This good match
suggests that these features have a classical origin and are
not dependent on the electron being born by tunneling.
With our classical ensemble method, one can further
determine the eﬀect of the SFA directly on the rescat-
tering and the bound electron by examining their ﬁnal
momentum distributions for all LTT trajectories. Due
to the strong coupling between the two electrons, turn-
ing oﬀ the recolliding electron’s nuclear potential has a
substantial eﬀect not only on this electron but also on
the bound electron, as is shown in Fig. 10. For the long-
range e-e interaction, the distributions of the rescatter-
ing and the bound electron have a similar range of ﬁnal
longitudinal momenta, extending from about
Up to
Up, when the nuclear interaction of the rescattering
2
electron is present at all times. But the two distributions
have diﬀerent shapes. The distribution of the rescatter-

p

p

−

2

ing electron peaks at zero momentum, whereas the distri-
bution of the bound electron electron has a double-peak
structure with a deep valley at zero momentum. Thus,
we can roughly label the rescattering and the bound elec-
tron as the slow and the fast electron, respectively. How-
ever, Fig.
10(c) shows that the SFA permutes these
labelings. Both electrons now have a double-peak struc-
ture.
the rescattering electron has become the faster
electron, and its momentum range has expanded to be-
tween
Up, with very little population of
p
p
Up [34]. Momenta this high
momenta smaller than
can only be the result of the rescattering electron be-
ing backscattered by the bound electron and thereafter
acquiring momentum from the laser ﬁeld [34]. As for
the bound electron, its momentum distribution under the
SFA also has a pronounced double-peak structure with
a relatively small fraction of its population having near
zero momentum. However, its range is still limited to
Up.
between

Up and 3

Up and 2

p

−

2

3

2

−

p

p

p

p

The situation, however, is rather diﬀerent for the short-
range e-e interaction. With and without out the SFA,
the momenta of both electrons are between
Up and
Up, but the distributions are not identical; the rescat-
2
tering electron is more likely to have a small momentum
than the bound electron. Under the SFA, the range of
the momenta of both electron remains the same, but the
momentum distributions of both electrons become almost
identical, exhibiting pronounced valleys around zero mo-
mentum. This signals very eﬃcient momentum sharing
among the two during the recollision. The absence under
the SFA of high momenta implies that the rescattering
electron experiences little backscattering from the bound
electron for the short-range e-e interaction.

−

It is remarkable that the eﬀect of the SFA is much
larger for the Coulombic than for the short-range e-e in-
teraction. Without the SFA, the two potentials yield mo-
mentum distributions that are rather similar; cf. Figs. 10
(a) and (b). With the SFA, the Coulombic interaction
produces very many electrons with unusually high mo-
menta [Figs. 10 (c) and 9 (a)], which betray the typical
Coulomb signature of one fast and one slow electron. In
contrast, for the short-range e-e interaction, the eﬀect of
the SFA is much weaker and tends to produce electrons
with closely related momenta. For the short-range inter-
action, the momentum distribution of Fig. 10 (d), which
was obtained with the SFA, agrees quite well with the
corresponding S-matrix and the semiclassical results.

9

monly made in S-matrix calculations, by gradually elim-
inating the electron-nucleus interaction when the ﬁrst-
ionized electron reaches a certain distance from the nu-
cleus. We identify a distinct signature of the long-range
e-e interaction in the momentum distribution. Several
features of our classical calculations can be observed in
the experimental data, depending on the atomic species
on the one hand and the form of the e-e interaction on
the other.

Unlike their eﬀect in the quantum-mechanical S-
matrix calculations, the soft-core Coulombic and the
Yukawa potential produce fairly similar classical NSDI
momentum distributions, as long as the strong-ﬁeld ap-
proximation is not invoked. The notable exception is that
the short-range potential tends to produce more electrons
with the same or almost the same longitudinal momenta.
In addition, for both potentials the distributions of the
travel time – that is, the time between ionization and rec-
ollision – are rather similar, and they are in close agree-
ment with the prediction from the simple-man model, ex-
cept for the existence of trajectories with very short travel
times below 0.2T , which are not provided by the simple-
man model. The latter are more important in the case of
the short-range than the long-range potential. Further-
more, the most probable thermalization time – that is,
the time between recollision and the electrons becoming
free – extracted from our classical calculations is within
the range of 0.15 T to 0.25 T . This is of the same order as
the value that yielded the best agreement of a statistical
model with experimental data for nonsequential multiple
ionization.

Surprisingly, we ﬁnd that our adaptation of the SFA
can modify the momentum distributions substantially,
while having little or no eﬀect on the travel time distri-
bution. One common feature is that the SFA suppresses
trajectories with long travel time when the longitudinal
momenta of both electrons both are low or have opposite
sign. In the case of the short-range e-e interaction, we
compare our classical simulations augmented by our SFA
with the S-matrix and the semi-classical calculations that
employ a contact interaction. The agreement of these re-
sults is quite good. This implies that tunneling is not
neccessary to generate the features from of the contact
interaction. For a long-range potential, the discrepan-
cies between our classical and the S-matrix calculations
are more pronounced. These discrepancies can be due to
the ﬁrst-order Born approximation used in the S-matrix
calculations.

VII. SUMMARY

Acknowledgments

In summary, we have carried out classical simulations
of nonsequential double ionization with the electron-
electron repulsion potential represented either by a soft-
core Coulombic or by a Yukawa potential. We have also
mimicked the strong-ﬁeld approximation, which is com-

This work was supported by DOE Grant DE-FG02-
05ER15713. PJH acknowledges the summer fellow-
ship from Deutscher Akademischer Austausch Dienst
(DAAD) and discussions with J. H. Eberly.

10

[1] A. L’Huillier, L. A. Lompr´e, G. Mainfray, and C. Manus,
Phys. Rev. A 27, 2503 (1983); D. N. Fittinghoﬀ, P. R.
Bolton, B. Chang, and K. C. Kulander, Phys. Rev. Lett.
69, 2642 (1992); B. Walker, B. Sheehy, L. F. DiMauro,
P. Agostini, K. J. Schafer, and K. C. Kulander, Phys.
Rev. Lett. 73, 1227 (1994); S. Augst, A. Talebpour, S.
L. Chin, Y. Beaudoin, and M. Chaker, Phys. Rev. A 52,
R917 (1995); A. Talebpour, C.-Y. Chien, Y. Liang, S.
Larochelle, and S. L. Chin, J. Phys. B 30, 1721 (1997);
S. Larochelle, A. Talebpour, and S. L. Chin, J. Phys. B
31, 1201 (1998).

[2] A. Becker and F. H. M. Faisal, Phys. Rev. A 59, R1742
(1999); A. Becker and F. H. M. Faisal, Phys. Rev. Lett.
84, 3546 (2000); ibid. 89, 193003 (2002).

[3] R. Kopold, W. Becker, H. Rottke, and W. Sandner, Phys.

mer, B. Feuerstein, C. Crespo L´opez-Urrutia, J. Deipen-
wisch, A. Dorn, D. Fischer, C. H¨ohr, P. Neumayer, C. D.
Schr¨oter, J. Ullrich, H. Rottke, C. Trump, M. Wittmann,
G. Korn, and W. Sandner, Phys. Rev. A 65, 035401
(2002).

[20] M. Lein, E. K. U. Gross, and V. Engel, Phys. Rev. Lett.

[21] Phay J. Ho, Phys. Rev. A 72, 045401 (2005).
[22] Phay J. Ho and J. H. Eberly, Phys. Rev. Lett. 95, 193002

85, 4707 (2000).

(2006).

[23] S. L. Haan, L. Breen, A. Karim, and J. H. Eberly, Phys.

Rev. Lett. 97, 103008 (2006).

[24] S. V. Popruzhenko, Ph. A. Korneev, S. P. Goreslavski,
and W. Becker, Phys. Rev. Lett. 89, 023001 (2002).
[25] D. B. Miloˇsevi´c and W. Becker, Phys. Rev. A 66, 063417

Rev. Lett. 85, 3781 (2000).

(2002).

[4] S. P. Goreslavski and S. V. Popruzhenko, Opt. Express
8, 395 (2001); S. V. Popruzhenko and S. P. Goreslavskii,
J. Phys. B 34, L239 (2001).

[5] S. P. Goreslavskii, S. V. Popruzhenko, R. Kopold, and

W. Becker, Phys. Rev. A 64, 053402 (2001)
[6] P. B. Corkum, Phys. Rev. Lett. 71, 1994 (1993).
[7] L. V. Keldysh, Zh. Eksp. Teor. Fiz. 47, 1945 (1964) [Sov.
Phys. JETP 20, 1307 (1965)]; F. H. M. Faisal, J. Phys.
B 6, L312 (1973); H. R. Reiss, Phys. Rev. A 22, 1786
(1980).

[8] C. Figueira de Morisson Faria, X. Liu, H. Schomerus, and

W. Becker, Phys. Rev. A 69, 012402(R) (2004).

[9] C. Figueira de Morisson Faria, H. Schomerus, X. Liu, and

W. Becker, Phys. Rev. A 69, 043405 (2004).

[10] C. Figueira de Morisson Faria, X. Liu, A. Sanpera, and

M. Lewenstein, Phys. Rev. A 70, 043406 (2004).

[11] See, e.g., A. M. Perelomov, V. S. Popov, and M. V.
Terentev, Sov. Phys. JETP 23, 924 (1966), and M. V.
Ammosov, N. B. Delone, and V. P. Kra˘inov, Sov. Phys.
JETP 64, 1191 (1986).

[12] J. Chen, J. Liu, L. B. Fu, and W. M. Zheng, Phys. Rev. A
63, 011404(R) (2000); L. B. Fu, J. Liu, and S.-G. Chen,
Phys. Rev. A 65, 021406(R) (2002); J. Chen and C. H.
Nam, Phys. Rev. A 66, 053415 (2002);

[13] R. Panﬁli, J. H. Eberly, and S. L. Haan, Opt. Express 8,

431 (2001).

[14] Phay J. Ho, R. Panﬁli, S. L. Haan, and J. H. Eberly,

Phys. Rev. Lett. 94, 093002 (2005).

[15] See, e.g., J. Javanainen, J. H. Eberly, and Q. Su, Phys.
Rev. A 38, 3430 (1987); and Q. Su and J. H. Eberly,
Phys. Rev. A 44, 5997 (1991).

[16] V. L. B. de Jesus. A. Rudenko, B. Feuerstein, K. Zrost, C.
D. Schr¨oter, R. Moshammer, and J. Ullrich, J. Electron
Spectrosc. Relat. Phenom. 141, 127 (2004).

[17] R. Moshammer, J. Ullrich, B. Feuerstein, D. Fischer, A.
Dorn, C. D. Schr¨oter, J. R. Crespo L´opez-Urrutia, C.
H¨ohr, H. Rottke, C. Trump, M. Wittmann, G. Korn, K.
Hoﬀmann, and W. Sandner, J. Phys. B 36, L113 (2003).
[18] B. Feuerstein, R. Moshammer, D. Fischer, A. Dorn, C. D.
Schr¨oter, J. Deipenwisch, J. R. Crespo Lopez-Urrutia,, C.
H¨ohr, P. Neumayer, J. Ullrich, H. Rottke, C. Trump, M.
Wittmann, G. Korn, and W. Sandner, Phys. Rev. Lett.
87, 043003 (2001).

[19] M. Weckenbrock, M. Hattass, A. Czasch, O. Jagutzki, L.
Schmidt, T. Weber, H. Roskos, T. L¨oﬄer, M. Thomson,
and R. D¨orner, J. Phys. B 34, L449 (2001); R. Mosham-

[26] X. Liu, C. Figueira de Morisson Faria, W. Becker, and

P. B. Corkum, J. Phys. B 39, L305 (2006).

[27] A. Rudenko, K. Zrost, B. Feuerstein, V. L. B. de Jesus,
C. D. Schr¨oter, R. Moshammer, and J. Ullrich, Phys.
Rev. Lett. 93, 253001 (2004).

[28] K. Zrost, A. Rudenko, Th. Ergler, B. Feuerstein, V. L. B.
de Jesus, C. D. Schr¨oter, R. Moshammer, and J. Ullrich,
J. Phys. B 39, 40 (2006).

[29] Phay J. Ho and J. H. Eberly, Opt. Express 11, 2826

(2003).

[30] The short-range electron-electron interaction has been,
in the zero-range limit, interpreted as a three-body in-
teraction whose action is restricted to the position of the
nucleus. Hence, in this sense, the short-range e-e inter-
action may reﬂect the presence of the nuclear potential.
However, in the SFA it is only treated in the ﬁrst-order
Born approximation [9].

[31] One can also turn oﬀ the nuclear potential of the bound
electron after double ionization, such that both electrons
are free of the inﬂuence of the nucleus in their ﬁnal state.
However, doing so only increases the ﬁnal momentum
of the bound electron slightly and does not aﬀect our
conclusion regarding the eﬀect of the SFA.

[32] In the case when the nuclear interaction of the rescat-
tering electron is not turned oﬀ substantially at the time
of recollision, it is possible that the rescattering electron
can be recaptured by its weak but nonnegligible nuclear
potential if it transfers a substantial fraction of its energy
to free the bound electron. Note that the nuclear inter-
action of the rescattering electron is not restored and is
diminished continuously in time, even if it is recaptured.
Thus, shortly after the escape of the bound electron, the
nuclear attraction of the recaptured rescattering electron
will become suﬃciently weak that it can no longer hold
the recaptured electron and the electron will become ion-
ized.

[33] Phay J. Ho and J. H. Eberly, Phys. Rev. Lett. 97, 083001

(2006).

[34] For elastic rescattering in the simple-man model, the clas-
sical limit for the momentum is p20Up. For inelastic
rescattering, that is, for NSDI, this limit is lower, cf. D.
B. Miloˇsevi´c and W. Becker, Phys. Rev. A 68, 065401
(2003). The limit of about 3pUp observed in the present
simulations about exhausts this simple-man limit.

