6
9
9
1
 
v
o
N
 
2
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
m
o
t
a
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
0
2
0
1
1
6
9
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

An all-optical gray lattice for atoms

H. Stecher, H. Ritsch, P. Zoller
Institute for Theoretical Physics, University of Innsbruck, A-6020 Innsbruck, Austria

F. Sander, T. Esslinger and T. W. H¨ansch
Sektion Physik, Universit¨at M¨unchen, D-80799 Munich, Germany
and
Max-Planck-Institut f¨ur Quantenoptik, D-85748 Garching, Germany
(July 22, 2013)

We create a gray optical lattice structure using a blue de-
tuned laser ﬁeld coupling an atomic ground state of angular
momentum J simultaneously to two excited states with angu-
lar momenta J and J − 1. The atoms are cooled and trapped
at locations of purely circular polarization. The cooling pro-
cess eﬃciently accumulates almost half of the atomic popula-
tion in the lowest energy band which is only weakly coupled
to the light ﬁeld. Very low kinetic temperatures are obtained
by adiabatically reducing the optical potential. The dynamics
of this process is analysed using a full quantum Monte Carlo
simulation. The calculations explicitly show the mapping of
the band populations on the corresponding momentum inter-
vals of the free atom. In an experiment with subrecoil mo-
mentum resolution we measure the band populations and ﬁnd
excellent absolut agreement with the theoretical calculations.

PACS: 32.80.Pj, 33.80.Ps, 42.50.Vk

I. INTRODUCTION

Remarkable progress has been made in cooling and
trapping of neutral atoms by laser ﬁelds. An outstand-
ing success was the demonstration of Bose-Einstein con-
densation [1–3], which was achieved by combining laser
cooling techniques with magnetic trapping and evapora-
tive cooling. The quest to observe quantum many body
eﬀects by manipulating atoms merely using laser light
has spurred researchers to invent new cooling techniques.
Extremely narrow momentum distributions have been
demonstrated by velocity-selective coherent population
trapping [4–6], Raman cooling [7] and adiabatic cooling
[8–10]. Subrecoil cooling of atoms in mesoscopic traps
has been proposed (e.g. in Ref. [11,12]) and recently suc-
cessfully demonstrated yielding a dramatic increase in
the phase space density of the atomic vapor [13].

Atoms interacting with spatially periodic light-induced
potentials can be accumulated in an array of microscopic
traps. The quantum motion of atoms in these optical
lattices has been subject of extensive research [14]. The
fascinating perspective that quantum statistical eﬀects
might become observable in optical lattices has stimu-
lated the search for new types of optical lattices. Very
promising schemes aiming at high atomic densities are
gray optical lattices in which the trapped atoms are al-

most decoupled from the light ﬁeld [15]. This reduces
the density limitation by light induced atom-atom inter-
actions. A one dimensional gray lattice using a laser ﬁeld
in combination with a magnetic ﬁeld has recently been
proposed [15] and theoretically investigated [16]. Exper-
imental demonstrations of magnetic ﬁeld induced dark
lattices in two and three dimensions are described in Ref.
[17].

In this work we present an alternative and very simple
way to eﬃciently accumulate atoms in a gray optical lat-
tice structure. Our scheme merely uses a single frequency
laser ﬁeld [18] and can be adapted to many alkali atoms.
The adiabatic release of atoms trapped in the optical lat-
tice is studied both theoretically and experimentally. We
use a full quantum Monte Carlo wave function simulation
to follow the atomic evolution during the lowering of the
potential. It is shown that the band populations are in-
deed mapped on the corresponding momentum intervals
of the free atom, as was suggested by Kastberg et al. [9]
for adiabatic cooling in a bright optical lattice. This pop-
ulation mapping is accurate if optical pumping between
diﬀerent bands is negligible during the adiabatic release.
In an experiment with subrecoil momentum resolution
we demonstrate the population measurement of individ-
ual bands using our gray optical lattice. For a wide range
of parameters we ﬁnd excellent agreement between the-
oretically calculated band populations and the measured
values. This establishes population mapping by adia-
batic release as an experimental tool to investigate the
interaction of atoms with a spatially periodic potential.
We give a theoretical description of the gray optical
lattice in section II and calculate its eigenfunctions in
section III. Numerical simulations of the stationary en-
ergy and position distribution using rate equations and
quantum Monte Carlo wave function techniques are pre-
sented in section IV. The adiabatic release is theoretically
investigated in section V and experimentally in section
VI. Section VII gives an outlook to experiments with high
atomic densities.

II. OPTICAL LATTICE CONFIGURATION

We consider a one dimensional laser ﬁeld acting simul-
taneously on two atomic transitions coupling an atomic

1

⊥

−

ground state manifold with total angular momentum
Jg = J to two diﬀerent excited levels with angular mo-
1. The ﬁeld consists of
menta Je1 = J and Je2 = J
two counterpropagating waves with mutally orthogonaly
linear polarization (lin
lin). Fig. 1 illustrates the spa-
tially varying polarization of the standig wave. The light
ﬁeld shall be detuned to the blue of both transitions and
the resulting optical couplings shall have the same order
of magnitude [19]. This can be realized on the D1 line
of the alkali atoms Rb, Na and Li. The two excited lev-
els are formed by hyperﬁne manifolds with the splitting
EJe2 )/¯h. An essential part of the system
∆HF := (EJe1 −
is the oﬀ-resonant coupling of the Je2 manifold with the
detuning ∆J + ∆HF .

−

The interaction of the oscillating atomic dipole with
the standing wave causes spatially periodic light shifts in
the atomic ground state manifold. In regions of purely
σ+ (σ−) polarized light the atoms are optically pumped
into the m=Jg (m =
Jg) ground state, which is decou-
pled from the light ﬁeld and experiences no light shift
or optical excitation. At locations of linearely polarized
light all ground state sublevels are coupled to the ex-
cited states and are shifted towards higher energies. In
this semiclassical picture we expect that the atoms are
cooled by a Sisyphus mechanism and accumulated in dark
states at locations of pure σ-polarization. In a picture
which treats the atomic motion quantum mechanically
the atomic wavefunction always has a ﬁnite spatial ex-
tend and can not be completely decoupled from the light
ﬁeld. We therefore expect the formation of a gray opti-
cal lattice. Our situation is qualitatively similar to that
of magnetic ﬁeld induced dark optical lattices, where lo-
calized dark states are created by combining a standing
wave with a magnetic ﬁeld [15,17]. In the following we
outline our calculations using the example of a J = 1
ground state. This allows to demonstrate the essential
physics using a minimal number of Zeeman sublevels.

A model Hamiltonian for the Jg = 1

Je1 = 1, Je2 =
0 system, which includes the kinetic energy is found in
Ref. [20]. To simplify the following discussions, we as-
sume low saturation, which allows to adiabatically elim-
inate the excited atomic states [21]. Then the Hamilto-
nian can be written as:

→

H =

+ HAF

P 2
2M

(1)

with

HAF =

U1 +

U0

¯h
2 (cid:18)

cos(kx + π/4)2

(2)

2
3

+

(cid:2)
1

|

(cid:19)

1
|
2
3

i h
U0

1

|

1

i h−
|−
cos(kx

π/4)2

−
1
i h

(

1

(cid:19)

1
|
|−
cos(kx + π/4)cos(kx

+

(cid:2)

|

(cid:3)

i h−

−

1

)
|
π/4)
(cid:3)

cos(kx + π/4)2 + cos(kx
(cid:0)

−

π/4)2

(cid:1)

¯h
2 (cid:18)

−

U1

−

U1
0
2 |

×
0
i h

|

+¯h

i

m
|

where M is the atomic mass, k the modulus of the light
wave vector and
the m-th Zeeman substate of the
ground state manifold. UJej = ∆Jej sJej /2 is the eﬀective
interaction potential (=light shift), where ∆Jej = ωlaser
−
ωJej is the detuning and sJej = Ω2
ej /2) is
the saturation parameter for the transitions between the
ground state manifold and the excited state manifolds.
The optical pumping rates for the ground states are pro-
−1
portional to the parameter ΓJej = sJej γJej , where γ
Jej
are the lifetimes of the excited levels.

Jej /(2∆2

Jej + γ2

III. OPTICAL POTENTIALS AND
EIGENFUNCTIONS

To calculate the adiabatic potentials we diagonalize
the atom-ﬁeld Hamiltonian HAF at each spatial point
x separately. This yields the spatial dependence of the
eigenvalues and eigenstates.
In a semiclassical picture
these eigenvalues amount to the light shifts experienced
by an atom at rest in the corresponding states and acts
as a potential for slowly moving atoms. Fig. 2 shows
these adiabatic potentials for the case of a Jg = 1 to
Jej = 1, 0 transition. Due to the threefold degeneracy
of the unperturbed Jg = 1 atomic ground state, we
ﬁnd three adiabatic potentials. The energetically low-
est potential curve exhibits minima of zero light shift at
locations of purely circular polarization. At the same
spatial points x the maxima for the highest potential
are found. The constant potential can be attributed
to atoms in the m = 0 state, which experience a con-
stant light shift in space and hence feel no (semiclassi-
cal) force. Atoms in state m = 1 are drawn towards re-
gions of σ+-polarization, where they experience minimal
(=zero) light shift. Atoms in the m =
1 are repelled
from this σ+-area (uppermost curve). The magnitude of
both forces is comparable and an atom moving in the
σ+-region spends most of its time in the weakly coupled
m = 1 state. Therefore the semiclassical picture predicts
a trapping force towards areas of circular polarization. In
addition the corresponding optical pumping rates show
the right spatial dependence to provide a Sisyphus cool-
ing mechanism for moving atoms, as they are pumped
into the locally less coupled (i.e. the energetically lower
lying) states.

−

We now include the motional degrees of freedom and
calculate the eigenstates of the full Hamiltonian H. The
diagonalization is performed numerically on a discrete
spatial grid extending over several wells of the optical
potential with periodic boundary conditions. The calcu-
lated discrete eigenstates correspond to the energy bands
of the full spatially periodic lattice structure. At energies
above the well depth we ﬁnd delocalized wavefunctions
(unbound states) whereas at low energies the states are
well localized (bound states). The atomic position dis-
tribution
of the energetically lowest eigenstate
is plotted with a dashed line in Fig. 2. The chosen ver-

ψg(x)
|
|

2

2

tical oﬀset is the ground state energy. As expected we
ﬁnd a strong localization of the wavefunction at the po-
tential minimum of each well. Its width is a fraction of
the optical wavelength and depends on the detuning and
the intensity of the light ﬁeld. The momentum spread
associated with the ﬁnite size of the optical wells pre-
vents the existence of eigenstates exactly decoupled from
the light ﬁeld. Nevertheless we ﬁnd, that the localized
states of lowest energy exhibit only a very small optical
coupling to the two excited levels and hence they have
correspondingly low light shifts and energies.

The energy intervals between the lowest states are con-
siderably larger than the recoil energy and reach up to
a few hundred recoil shifts. Experimentally they deter-
mine the Raman resonances found in ﬂuorescence or in
probe absorption spectra [14]. With increasing energy
the interval sizes decrease due to the anharmonicity of
the potential. This leads to inhomogeneous broadening
of the probe absorption resonances.

The tunnel coupling between two equivalent states of
neighbouring potential wells can be estimated from the
eigenenergies of a two well calculation. The coupling
leads to an energy splitting between the corresponding
symmetrical and antisymmetrical states. For the param-
eter regions and time scales we consider in the following,
the tunnel coupling between the bound low energy states
of the single wells is so small, that we can view the po-
tential wells as independent. For situations with ﬁnite
tunnel coupling it would be advantageous for calculations
to use Bloch eigenfunctions of the optical lattice as the
numerical basis [20].

IV. ENERGY AND POSITION DISTRIBUTIONS

We now calculate the steady state distributions of
atoms in the optical lattice. They allow to judge the eﬀec-
tiveness of the involved cooling and conﬁnement mech-
anisms on the basis of quantities as the mean energy,
the position spread or the population of the energetically
lowest bound states.

The inclusion of the spontaneous scattering of photons
in addition to the coherent atom-laser ﬁeld dynamics im-
plies a dynamical redistribution of the population among
the various atomic states eventually leading towards a
steady state [22,20,11]. We calculate the steady state
population distribution in a similiar approach as demon-
strated in Refs. [15,12,20] using two methods: a rate
equation apporach based on the Raman transition matrix
elments between the eigenstates [22,12] and a Quantum
Monte Carlo wave function simulation technique (QM-
CWFS) relying on a Bloch-state expansion of the atomic
wavefunctions [20,11]. This allows to realistically treat
periodic spatial geometries still maintaining a numeri-
cally tractable grid size. We expect the rate equations to
give fairly accurate results for the bound states, where
the tunnel coupling is small, and less accuracy for states

with energies near and above the potential well depth.

The stationary position and momentum distributions
obtained by the QMCWFS are shown in Fig. 3. The
upper plot shows the total position distribution (solid
curve) as well as the contributions of the various Zeeman
sublevels (dashed curves). As expected the m = 0 state
is almost not populated and shows no spatial variation.
The localization towards points of purely circular polar-
ization is state selective. We ﬁnd better localization with
increasing ﬁeld strength. Due to the strong spatial con-
ﬁnement to roughly ∆x = λ/8, we ﬁnd a correspondingly
large width of the momentum distribution of δp > 8¯hk,
which is shown in the lower plot of Fig. 3. The obtained
results are in excellent agreement with the results of the
rate equation model as shown below.

The optical pumping rates scale with the parameters
ΓJej , which depend on the lifetimes of the excited states
and on the detuning and the intensity of the laser ﬁeld.
Their relative magnitude can be tailored to a large extend
by a suitable choice of these two laser parameters. The
UJej and opti-
possible ranges of obtainable light shifts
ΓJej may be limited by the available
cal pumping rates
laser intensity and by the magnitude of the atomic hy-
perﬁne splitting. An unfavourable choice of parameters
can lead to additional unwanted oﬀ-resonant couplings
to other atomic hyperﬁne levels.

∝

∝

→

The inﬂuence of the lightshift UJej and optical pump-
ing rate parameters ΓJej is demonstrated in Fig. 4 for
Jej = 2, 1 transition of the 87Rb D1-line.
the Jg = 2
We chose this transition as an example, because the hy-
perﬁne splitting allows a wide range of this parameters.
The ﬁgure shows the occupation probabilities for three
sets of parameters. The data points marked with ’*’ cor-
respond to a situation, where the coupling to the excited
state manifold Je1 = 2 is near resonant and the cou-
pling to the Je2 = 1 manifold is oﬀ resonant. The data
points marked with ’+’ correspond to a situation with
couplings of equal strengths. The highest ground state
occupation probability of 43% was found in the ﬁrst case
with U1 = 500 ER, U2 = 1000 ER and Γ1/Γ2 = 0.02.
In all cases a large fraction of the atomic population is
concentrated in the lowest few (gray) states. This cor-
responds to strong spatial localization of the atoms, a
Jej = 1, 0
result, which we obtain for the Jg = 1
transition also by the QMCWFS. The computation time
required for QMCWFS for transitions with Jg > 1 is so
high, that we selectively performed Monte Carlo simula-
tions to verify the rate equation results. For transitions
with higher angular momentum Jg the population of the
ground state (lowest band) is higher, because the rel-
ative magnitude of the Clebsch-Gordan coeﬃcients for
Jg and m =
the states with m =
The energy distributions in the example strongly de-
viate from thermal distributions of the same mean en-
ergy. Therefore we do not have a thermal equilibrium
state to which one could consistently attribute a tem-
perature. The ground state population for the case with

1) changes.

(Jg

→

±

±

−

3

≈

20% higher than

U2 = 1000 ER and Γ1/Γ2 = 0.02 is
for a thermal distribution of same mean energy
i ≈
130 ER. So the temperature deduced from the relative
populations of the lowest two levels kBT12 = 76 ER diﬀers
by
25% from the corresponding value kBT34 = 96 ER
obtained from levels n = 3 and n = 4. The disagreement
becomes more signiﬁcant for higher n.

E
h

≈

i

E
h

The mean energy

of the atoms, which is e.g. of
central importance for loading of a purely magnetic trap,
and the stationary value of the atomic population P1 of
the lowest energy band are key quantities with respect
to a possible direct observation of quantum statistical
eﬀects. The dependence of
, P1 and P2 on the light
E
i
h
shift U2 for ﬁxed ratios Γ1/Γ2 = 0.1 and U1 = U2/3 is
shown in Fig. 5. This case corresponds to a laser tuned
Jej = 2, 1 transitions. A
far to the blue of the Jg = 2
probability of P1 = 45% to ﬁnd the atom in the lowest
energy eigenstate is achieved for parameters well in the
reach of experimental capabilities.

→

V. ADIABATIC RELEASE

−

−

2¯hk to

It has been suggested in recent experimental work
[9,10] that the populations of an optical lattice can be
directly experimentally measured by an adiabatic release
of the atoms from the lattice and a subsequent measure-
ment of the resulting atomic velocity distribution. If the
release is fully adibatic, the atoms from the lowest (ﬁrst)
band will be mapped exactly to the momentum inter-
¯hk and +¯hk and the second band will be
val between
¯hk and ¯hk to 2¯hk. The
mapped to the intervals
−
1)¯hk
n-th band will be mapped on the
and the (n
1)¯hk to n¯hk intervals. Nonadiabaticity and
incoherent redistribution of the atoms during the release
will alter the mapping and the assignment of the band
populations of the lattice and the momentum intervals of
the free atoms will be less accurate. We have performed
a QMCWFS with a time dependent laser intensity to
quantitatively verify the mapping between the stationary
population distribution of the lattice and the momentum
distribution of the free atom. All the eﬀects of nonadia-
baticity and incoherent spontaneous redistribution of the
atoms during the release are fully accounted for in this
model.

n¯hk to

(n

−

−

−

−

The time evolution of the atomic momentum distri-
bution is shown in Fig. 6 for an gradual turnoﬀ of the
lattice ﬁeld. For t = 0 we start with the steady state
distribution, which we calculated by the rate equation
approach disussed above. The atoms are localized in the
lattice and correspondingly the momentum distribution
is broad. When the lattice ﬁeld intensity is reduced, the
momentum distribution becomes narrower due to adia-
batic cooling. For the given example the optical potential
(t/τ )2) as it would oc-
varies as UJej (t) = UJej (0)exp(
cur if an atom leaves a Gaussian beam transversly at a
constant velocity. The chosen time scale of the turnoﬀ

−

τ = √2 τR (where τR = 2π¯h/ER is the recoil time) is
long compared to the oscillation period of atoms in the
lattice wells but short compared to the lifetime of the low-
est dark levels. The lightshift parameters U1 = 200 ER,
U0 = 100 ER and the optical pumping rates Γ1 = 3 ER/¯h
and Γ0 = 1 ER/¯h are the same as in Fig. 3.

≫

The narrowing of the momentum distribution contin-
ues for t
τ down to a width of roughly one recoil mo-
mentum. From the resulting momentum distribution we
calculate the probability WN to ﬁnd an atom in the in-
terval between
N ¯hk and +N ¯hk. We ﬁnd W1 = 37, 9%,
W2 = 56, 4% and W3 = 68, 1%. This agrees to within
less than 1% with the corresponding initial (steady state)
populations of the lattice P1 = 37, 4%, P1 + P2 = 56, 3%
and P1 + P2 + P3 = 67, 9%. A comparison for higher
momenta is limited by the accurracy of the rate equation
approach.

−

VI. EXPERIMENT

To demonstrate the experimental feasibility of the pro-
posed method to measure the band populations of the
optical lattice, we performed an experiment with the ap-
paratus described in Refs. [6,10]. Our gray lattice scheme
Jej = 3, 2 transitions of the
is realized on the Jg = 3
85Rb D1-line (where J is the total angular momentum of
the atom).

→

A pulsed beam of cold Rubidium atoms is directed
vertically downwards and crosses a standing wave ﬁeld
(lattice ﬁeld), which induces the optical potentials of the
dark lattice. The atoms are cooled into the lattice sites
and are then gradually released from the optical potential
due to the Gaussian shape of the lattice ﬁeld. Below the
lattice ﬁeld the momentum distribution of the atoms is
measured with a resolution of one third of the photon
recoil.

The lattice ﬁeld is induced by a standing wave oriented
along the x-axis and has a frequency tuned ∆3 = 26 γ3
Je1 = 3 transition. The
to the blue of the Jg = 3
→
hyperﬁne-splitting between the two excited states of the
D1-line is ∆HF = 65 γ3 and the detuning of the sec-
ond excited states is ∆2 = 91 γ3. The incoming beam
of the standing wave is linearly polarized along the z-
axis and the reﬂected beam is polarized along the y-axis.
The Gaussian waists of the beams are wz = 1.35 mm in
z-direction and wy = 0.48 mm in y-direction. This corre-
sponds to a 0.4 ms time of ﬂight of the atoms (3.2 m/s)
through the waist wz. The region of the lattice ﬁeld
is shielded against stray magnetic ﬁelds to well below
0.5 mG. A second standing wave overlaps the lattice ﬁeld.
J = 3 transition of the 85Rb
It is tuned to the J = 2
D2-line and optically pumps the atoms into the J = 3
groundstate.

→

To determine the atomic momentum distribution a
pinhole, 75 µm in diameter, is placed 5 mm below the
standing wave axis and the spatial distribution of those

4

atoms passing through the pinhole is measured 9.6 cm
further down by imaging the ﬂuorescence in a sheet of
light. The sheet of light is formed by a standing wave
which is resonant with the J = 3
J = 4 closed cy-
cle transition of the D2-line. For each set of parameters
we accumulate 200 single shot images and subtract the
separately measured background. To obtain a one dimen-
sional momentum distribution in x-direction we integrate
the two dimensional distributions along the y-axis.

→

Fig. 7 shows an experimentally measured momentum
distribution (dotted curve) in comparison with the cor-
responding distribution obtained from the QMCWFS
(solid curve). The initial distribution for the Monte Carlo
simulation was the steady state distribution of the optical
lattice in the center of the Gaussian beam. The calcula-
tion was performed as explained in section V but using
a ﬁner momentum grid. The plotted curves are in good
agreement except for a small fraction of atoms. In the ex-
periment more atoms are found at higher velocities and
less at low velocities. This can be related to the ﬁnite
interaction time. The atoms in the experiment do not
reach the steady state distribution in the center of the
Gaussian beam and some fast atoms are not yet cooled
into the lattice wells.

−

−

→

For the experimental data we count the number of
¯hk to +¯hk
atoms detected in the momentum intervals
and
2¯hk to +2¯hk corresponding to the populations in
the lowest energy band and the two lowest energy bands,
respectively. These experimentally obtained populations
are plotted in Fig. 8 with data points versus the lightshift
Je1 = 3 transition in the center of
U3 on the Jg = 3
the Gaussian beam. The data points were recorded for
several intensities and ﬁxed detuning. The solid line rep-
resents the (steady state) band populations in the lattice
calculated for the center-of-beam parameters using the
rate equation approach. The experimentally measured
populations and the calculated steady state populations
agree within 5% over the full investigated range of pa-
rameters. This is remarkable, because the calculation
was based only on the detunings and the intensities in the
center of the Gaussian beam and the comparison involves
no ﬁt parameter. The small deviations for high lightshift
parameters U3 towards higher ground state population
for the experimental values can be attributed to a small
but ﬁnite spontaneous emission probability during the
release of the atoms, which especially eﬀects the energet-
ically higher lying less dark states and which transfers
additional population to the ground state.

VII. OUTLOOK

An interesting ﬁeld for future experimental and theo-
retical work is the interaction of a high density atomic
It
sample [23] with a periodic optical potential [24].
has been suggested [25,26] that quantum statistical ef-
fects may tend to cluster bosonic atoms within a single

well of an optical potential and that laser-like sources for
matter waves might become feasible. In our theoretical
work we have not included any atom-atom interaction.
Thus we can only speculate that the low photon scatter-
ing rate for atoms trapped in a gray optical lattice leads
to much higher achievable atomic densities than for the
case of bright optical lattices. This optimism is based on
the assumption that atom-atom perturbations by dipole-
dipole interaction and reabsorption of scattered photons
are much reduced for atoms trapped in a dark state. The
atomic densities necessary for the observation of quantum
statistical eﬀects are considerably lower in steep poten-
tials compared to the cases of wide traps or free particles.
The optical potentials of gray optical lattices can have an
energy spacing much larger than the recoil energy and
the trapped atoms can be cooled to mean energies of the
same order of magnitude. We reached in one dimension
a ground state occupation probability of
50%, so that
— extended to three dimensions — already two atoms
located in the same potential well are suﬃcient for quan-
tum statistical eﬀects to become relevant. This might be
observable even at average ﬁlling factors below one atom
per lattice site.

≈

In conclusion, we have theoretically and experimen-
tally studied a gray optical lattice structure which com-
bines a low photon scattering rate with a high population
in the lowest energy band. The lattice is formed by cou-
pling an atomic ground state to two excited states. The
atoms are trapped at locations of purely circular polar-
isation which allows an extension of the scheme to two
and three dimensions using the same ﬁeld conﬁgurations
as for bright optical lattices. We have numerically simu-
lated the dynamics of atoms adiabatically released from
the optical potential and the mapping of the band pop-
ulations on the corresponding momentum intervals. The
quantitative agreement with the band populations mea-
sured in the experiment shows that adiabatic release is
a promising tool to study the density dependence of the
band populations in an optical lattice.

VIII. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

We wish to thank P. Marte, A. Hemmerich, T. Pel-
lizzari, S. Marksteiner and K. Ellinger for many helpful
and stimulating dicussions. This work was supported
by the ¨Osterreichischer Fonds zur F¨orderung der wis-
senschaftlichen Forschung under grants No. S6506/S6507
and by the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft.

[1] M. H. Anderson et al., Science 269, 198 (1995).
[2] C. C. Bradley et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 75, 1687 (1995).
[3] K. B. Davis et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 75, 3969 (1995).

5

1 D
-
J

J

F
H

J

J-1

J

s -

s +

FIG. 1. Schematic setup of the gray optical lattice.

[4] A. Aspect et al., Phys. Rev. Lett.61, 826 (1988).
[5] J. Lawall et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 75, 4194 (1995).
[6] T. Esslinger et al., Phys. Rev. Lett 76, 2432 (1996).
[7] M. Kasevich and S. Chu, Phys. Rev. Lett.69, 1741

(1992).

(1995).

(1994).

[8] J. Chen et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 69, 1344 (1992).
[9] A. Kastberg et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 74, 1542 (1995).
[10] T. Esslinger et al., Opt. Lett. 21, 991 (1996).
[11] R. Dum et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 73, 2829 (1994).
[12] T. Pellizzari and H. Ritsch, Europhys. Lett. 31 , 133

[13] H. J. Lee et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 76, 2658 (1996).
[14] M. G. Prentiss, Science 260, 1078 (1993); G. P. Collins,

Phys. Today 46, 17 (1993), and Refs. therein.

[15] G. Grynberg and J.-Y. Courtois, Europhys. Lett, 27, 41

[16] K.I. Petsas et al., Phys. Rev. A 53, 2533 (1996).
[17] A. Hemmerich et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 75, 37 (1995).
[18] The optical lattice described in Ref. [10] is induced by
coupling a ground state with angular momentum J to
two excited states with angular momenta J and J + 1.
For this case the localized atoms are oﬀ-resonantly cou-
pled to the excited state with angular momentum J + 1
and decoupled from the excited state with angular mo-
mentum J.

[19] It is also possible to build up the lattice structure with
two laser ﬁelds, each coupling one of the two excited
states to the ground state. The frequency diﬀerence be-
tween this two ﬁelds should be small, so that their rela-
tive phase mismatch can be ignored over the size of the
experimental setup. Otherwise one obtains an additional
superlattice structure [12,27].

[20] P. Marte et al., Phys. Rev. A 47, 1378 (1993)
[21] This assumption is not essential here and might not be
the experimentally optimal case, but it greatly reduces
the calculational eﬀort.

[22] Y. Castin and J. Dalibard, Europhys. Lett. 14, 761

(1991).

[23] see e.g. K. Ellinger, J. Cooper and P. Zoller, Phys. Rev.

A 49, 3909 (1995), and Refs. therein.

[24] E. V. Goldstein et al., Phys. Rev. A 53, 2604 (1996)
[25] R. C. J. Spreuuw, Europhys. Lett. 32, 469 (1995).
[26] H. M. Wiseman and M. J. Collet, Phys. Lett. A 202, 246

[27] R. Grimm , J. S¨oding and Yu. B. Ovchinikov, JETP.

(1996).

Lett. 61, 5 (1995).

FIG. 2. Adiabatic potentials Vdark, Vbright and Vm=0 (solid
curves) and the atomic position distribution of the lowest en-
ergy eigenfunction ψg shifted by the corresponding eigenen-
ergy (dashed line) for the Jg = 1 → Jej = 1, 0 system for
U1 = 400 ER and U0 = 400 ER.

6

D
D
(cid:13)
3.

and

FIG.

Position

momentum
distribution for U1 = 200 ER, U0 = 100 ER, Γ1 = 3 ER/¯h
and Γ0 = 1 ER/¯h for the Jg = 1 → Jej = 1, 0 system. The
uppermost lines give the total distributions, while the lower
lines give the partial contributions of the various Zeeman sub-
states. The dotted curves correspond to the m = 0 substate.
The momentum distribution is normalized and given in units
of (¯hk)−1, the position distribution is periodic and given in
arbitrary units.

FIG. 5.

Ground P1 and ﬁrst excited band P2 pop-
ulations (short dashed curves), the corresponding energies
E1, E2 and the mean energy hEi (dot dashed line) for the
Jg = 2 → Jej = 2, 1 system as a function of the laser intensity
∝ U2 for ﬁxed ratios of the lightshift potentials U1/U2 = 1/3
and of the optical pumping rates Γ1/Γ2 = 0.1.

FIG. 4. Population of the low energy eigenstates for the
Jg = 2 → Jej = 2, 1 system for various lightshifts U2 and
ratios of the optical pumping rates Γ1/Γ2

FIG. 6. Normalized atomic momentum distribution dur-
ing various stages of the ﬁeld turnoﬀ t = 0, t = 2 τR and
t = 4 τR for a Jg = 1 → Jej = 1, 0 system and for the same
parameters as in Fig. 3. The optical potential decreases as
2 (t/τR)2). The units on the vertical
UJej (t) = UJej (0)exp(− 1
axis are (¯hk)−1.

7

Momentum Distribution

QMCWFS

0.3

0.2

0.1

0

80

60

40

20

)

%

(
 
 

n
o
i
t

l

a
u
p
o
P

Experiment

(cid:13)

(cid:13)

(cid:13)

(cid:13) 5

-15

-10

-5 (cid:13)

(cid:13) 0 (cid:13)
(cid:13)
p  (hk)
FIG. 7. Normalized momentum distribution of the atoms
after their adiabatic release from the lattice. The QMCWF
simulation corresponds to the solid line, while the dashed line
gives the corresponding experimental result for ∆3 = 26 γ3
and U3 = γ3/4. The units on the vertical axis are (¯hk)

−1.

15

10

Band Populations

Band 1+2

Band 1

100

200

U3  (ER)

300

FIG. 8. Population of the lowest (lower curve) and lowest
two (upper curve) bands of the optical lattice as a function
of the lightshift as obtained by quantum rate equations (solid
lines) in comparison to the experimentally measured results
(data points) for the Jg = 3 → Jej = 3, 2 transition of the
85Rb D1-line. The detuning was chosen to be ∆3 = 26 γ3 to
the blue of the Jg = 3 → Je1 = 3 transition.

8

