6
9
9
1
 
v
o
N
 
2
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
m
o
t
a
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
9
1
0
1
1
6
9
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Band Population Measurements
in a
Purely Optical Dark Lattice

Frank Sander, Tilman Esslinger, and Theodor W. H¨ansch
Sektion Physik, Ludwig-Maximilians Universit¨at M¨unchen, D-80799 Munich, Germany and
Max-Planck-Institut f¨ur Quantenoptik, D-85748 Garching, Germany

Herwig Stecher and Helmut Ritsch
Institute for Theoretical Physics, University of Innsbruck, A-6020 Innsbruck, Austria
(December 16, 2013)

We create a dark optical lattice structure using a blue de-
tuned laser ﬁeld coupling an atomic ground state of total
angular momentum F simultaneously to two excited states
with angular momenta F and F − 1, or F and F + 1. The
atoms are trapped at locations of purely circular polariza-
tion. The cooling process eﬃciently accumulates almost half
of the atomic population in the lowest energy band which is
only weakly coupled to the light ﬁeld. The populations of the
two lowest energy bands reaches 70%. Kinetic energies on the
order of the recoil energy are obtained by adiabatically reduc-
ing the optical potential. The band populations are directly
mapped on free particle momentum intervals by this adiabatic
release. In an experiment with subrecoil momentum resolu-
tion we measure the band populations and ﬁnd good absolute
agreement with the theoretically calculated steady state band
populations.

laser cooling and trapping, atomic physics in general

I. INTRODUCTION

Optical lattices present a unique quantum-mechanical
system for the study of matter waves interacting with
a perfectly periodic potential. The periodic potential is
formed by the light shift that an atom experiences in a
near-resonant standing wave. The atoms can be cooled
to the minima of the optical potential forming a periodic
array of microscopic traps [1]. It is a fascinating question
whether atom-atom-interactions [2] and quantum statis-
tical eﬀects, similar to those observed in magnetic traps
[3], can be studied in optical lattices when two or more
atoms occupy a single lattice site. This requires a tech-
nique for achieving much higher atomic densities than
possible in optical lattices at present. To overcome the
density limit that is due to light induced interactions be-
tween atoms optical lattices have been proposed [4,5],
in which the ﬂuorescence rate for the trapped atoms is
strongly reduced. They are referred to as dark or gray
optical lattices and have been demonstrated [6] using a
scheme that requires a static magnetic ﬁeld.

In this paper we describe and experimentally investi-
gate a new type of dark (or gray) optical lattice that
utilizes merely an optical ﬁeld. The lattice combines eﬃ-

cient accumulation of the atoms in the lowest energy level
of the optical potential with a reduced ﬂuorescence rate
for the localized atoms. We have studied [7,8] the adia-
batic release of atoms from the dark optical lattice both
theoretically and experimentally with the result that the
band populations are indeed mapped on the correspond-
ing momentum intervals of the free atom, as it was sug-
gested by Kastberg et al. [9] for adiabatic cooling in a
bright optical lattice. This population mapping is accu-
rate, if optical pumping between diﬀerent bands is negli-
gible during the adiabatic release. In an experiment with
a slow beam of Rb atoms we utilize this population map-
ping to measure the band populations of the purely opti-
cal dark lattice. For a wide range of parameters we ﬁnd
excellent agreement between the measured band popula-
tions and theoretically calculated values. This establishes
population mapping by adiabatic release as an experi-
mental tool to investigate the interaction of atoms with
a spatially periodic potential.

II. PURELY OPTICAL DARK LATTICE

To create the optical lattice we use a standing wave con-
sisting of two counter propagating waves with mutually
orthogonal linear polarizations (lin⊥lin). In this conﬁg-
uration the polarization changes periodically from σ to
π polarization along the standing wave axis. Detuning
and intensity are chosen such, that the laser ﬁeld cou-
ples a ground state manifold with integer total angular
momentum F to two excited state manifolds with angu-
lar momenta F and F − 1. Fig. 1 illustrates the situa-
tion for the simplest example of a F = 1 → F = 1, 0
transition pair. The interaction of the oscillating atomic
dipole with the standing wave causes spatially periodic
light shifts in the atomic ground state manifold. In re-
gions of purely σ+ (σ−) polarized light the atoms are
optically pumped into the mF =1 (mF = −1) ground
state, which is decoupled from the light ﬁeld and experi-
ences no light shift or optical excitation. At locations of
linearly polarized light all ground state sublevels are cou-
pled to excited states [10]. In this case all ground state
sublevels are light shifted towards higher energies, if the
laser ﬁeld is tuned to a frequency higher than both tran-

1

sition frequencies (blue detuning). In this semi classical
picture of point like atoms one expects that the atoms
are cooled by a Sisyphus mechanism [11] and accumu-
lated in dark states at locations of pure σ-polarization.
In a picture which treats the atomic motion quantum me-
chanically the atomic wave function always has a ﬁnite
spatial extent and can not be completely decoupled from
the light ﬁeld. Therefore a dark (gray) optical lattice
with a low ﬂuorescence rate and long coherence times is
formed [8]. Low ﬂuorescence rates for the localized atoms
are achieved, even if the lattice is operated at small de-
tunings. The situation is qualitatively similar to that
of magnetic ﬁeld induced dark optical lattices, where lo-
calized dark states are created by combining a standing
wave with a magnetic ﬁeld [4,6].

t
f
i
h
s
t
h
g
i
l

s +

lin

s -light

dark state

p -light

no dark state

F=1
F=0

F=1

F=1
F=0

F=1

FIG. 1. The purely optical dark lattice on a F = 1 → 1, 0
transition pair. The atoms are accumulated at locations of
pure σ polarization in the standing wave, where they largely
decouple from the light ﬁeld [10].

We have also investigated a second conﬁguration [7],
in which a purely optical dark lattice is formed in a sim-
ilar way on a F → F, F + 1 transition pair with integer
angular momentum F . The laser ﬁeld forms a lin⊥lin
standing wave and is tuned between the two transitions.
To understand the underlying mechanism consider ﬁrst
the coupling of the laser ﬁeld only to the F → F transi-
tion. For any polarization and for any position in space
one substate ψnc of the ground state manifold is not cou-
pled to the light ﬁeld. All other substates of the ground
state manifold couple to the light and are light shifted
towards higher energies, because the laser ﬁeld is tuned
to a frequency higher than the transition frequency. Now
complete the picture and consider additionally the cou-
pling of the laser ﬁeld to the F +1 excited state manifold.
Here the laser ﬁeld is detuned towards lower frequency
and introduces additional spatially varying light shifts
towards lower energies. This aﬀects all substates of the
ground state manifold. The state ψnc, which so far was

2

unshifted, undergoes the largest light shift towards lower
energy. As a result a dark optical lattice is formed, since
optical pumping on the (far detuned) F → F + 1 tran-
sition is negligible. In spite of low optical pumping dy-
namics on the F → F + 1 transition the coupling to the
F → F transition allows for an eﬃcient Sisyphus cool-
ing [11] of the atoms to the minima of the lowest optical
potential.

III. ADIABATIC MAPPING

E

E

E

P3

P2

P1
q [hk]

1

-1

-1

tightly bound(cid:13)
atoms

q [hk]

1

-1

q [hk]

1

adiabatic
mapping

 free atoms

FIG. 2. Band structure during the adiabatic release. Ver-
tical axis: energy of the Bloch states. Horizontal axis: Bloch
index. The three lines correspond to the three lowest energy
bands.

It has been suggested in recent experimental work [9,7]
that the populations of an optical lattice can be directly
experimentally measured by an adiabatic release of the
atoms from the lattice and a subsequent measurement
of the resulting atomic momentum distribution. Fig. 2
shows schematically the band structure of the lattice dur-
ing the adiabatic release. The plot on the left side corre-
sponds to a situation of high laser ﬁeld intensity, i. e. of
deep optical potentials. The atoms are tightly bound
to the lattice sites and tunneling between neighboring
potential wells is negligible. Therefore the lowest energy
bands are ﬂat [12]. For lower ﬁeld intensity (central plot)
the wave functions of neighboring wells can overlap and
the energy bands have a corresponding curvature. If the
ﬁeld is completely switched oﬀ and no lattice interac-
tion is present, the band structure is that of a free par-
ticle. The segments of the energy-momentum-parabola
E = P 2/(2M ) are plotted on the right side in the re-
duced zone scheme. If the release is fully adiabatic, the
population from the lowest (ﬁrst) band is mapped exactly
to the momentum interval between −¯hk and +¯hk and the
second band will be mapped to the intervals −2¯hk to −¯hk
and ¯hk to 2¯hk. The n-th band will be mapped on the
−n¯hk to −(n−1)¯hk and the (n−1)¯hk to n¯hk momentum
intervals. Nonadiabaticity and incoherent redistribution
of the atoms during the release will modify this mapping.
The assignment between the band populations of the lat-
tice and the momentum intervals of the free atoms will be
less accurate. We have performed a full quantum Monte

s
-
Carlo simulation with a time dependent laser intensity to
quantitatively verify the mapping between the stationary
population distribution of the lattice and the momentum
distribution of the free atom. For the three lowest en-
ergy bands the deviations between the band populations
and the calculated fraction of atoms to be found in the
corresponding momentum interval are below 1% [8].

IV. EXPERIMENT

For an experimental demonstration of the purely optical
dark lattice and the band population measurement, we
have performed an experiment [8] with the apparatus de-
scribed in Refs. [13,7]. The purely optical dark lattice is
realized on the F = 3 → F = 3, 2 transitions of the 85Rb
D1-line.

A pulsed beam of cold Rubidium atoms is directed
vertically downwards and crosses a standing wave ﬁeld
(lattice ﬁeld), which induces the optical potentials of the
dark lattice (Fig. 3). The atoms are cooled into the lattice
sites and are then gradually released from the optical
potential due to the Gaussian shape of the lattice ﬁeld.
Below the lattice ﬁeld the momentum distribution of the
atoms is measured with a resolution of one third of the
photon recoil.

l /4

the lattice ﬁeld is shielded against stray magnetic ﬁelds
to well below 0.5 mG. A second standing wave overlaps
the lattice ﬁeld. It is tuned to the F = 2 → F = 3 tran-
sition of the D2-line and optically pumps the atoms into
the F = 3 ground state.

To determine the momentum distribution we place
a pinhole of 75 µm diameter 5 mm below the standing
wave axis. The atoms that pass through the pinhole ex-
pand horizontally in two dimensions according to their
transversal momentum. A transversal momentum of 1 ¯hk
is translated into 170 µm transversal displacement in a
plane 9.6 cm below the pinhole. The spatial distribution
of the atoms in this plane is imaged by recording the ﬂu-
orescence in a sheet of light with a CCD camera. The
sheet of light is formed by a standing wave which is res-
onant with the F = 3 → F = 4 closed cycle transition
of the D2-line. For each set of parameters we accumu-
late 200 single shot images and subtract the separately
measured background. To obtain a one dimensional mo-
mentum distribution in x-direction we integrate the two
dimensional distributions along the y-axis.

Band Population

Band 1+2

Band 1

80

60

40

20

]

%

[
 
n
o
i
t
a
l
u
p
o
P

CCD camera

FIG. 3. Experimental setup. A cold beam of Rb atoms
crosses the standing wave. Due to the Gaussian beam proﬁle
the atoms are adiabatically released from the optical lattice.
The momentum distribution is detected below the standing
wave. See text.

The lattice ﬁeld is induced by a standing wave oriented
along the x-axis and has a frequency tuned ∆3 = 26 Γ =
2π·145 MHz to the blue of the F = 3 → F = 3 transition.
The hyperﬁne-splitting between the two excited states of
the D1-line is 65 Γ. Correspondingly the detuning with
reference to the F = 3 → F = 2 transition is ∆2 = 91 Γ.
The incoming beam of the standing wave is linearly po-
larized along the z-axis and the reﬂected beam is polar-
ized along the y-axis. The Gaussian waists of the beams
are wz = 1.35 mm in z-direction and wy = 0.48 mm in
y-direction. This corresponds to a 0.4 ms time of ﬂight of
the atoms (3.2 m/s) through the waist wz. The region of

3

100

300
Lightshift U3 [recoil energies]

200

FIG. 4. Measured populations (data points) of the lowest
and of the two lowest bands of the optical lattice as a function
of the light shift U3 induced by the F = 3 → F = 3 transition.
The solid lines are the steady state result of a rate equation
calculation for the center of beam parameters.

We count the number of atoms detected in the mo-
mentum intervals −¯hk to +¯hk and −2¯hk to +2¯hk cor-
responding to the populations in the lowest energy band
and the two lowest energy bands, respectively. These
experimentally obtained band populations are plotted
as data points in Fig. 4. The light shift is given by
U3 = s3∆3((2∆3/Γ)2 + 1)−1/2, where s3 is the resonant
saturation parameter on the F = 3 → F = 3 transition
in the center of the Gaussian beam. The data points
were recorded for several intensities and ﬁxed detuning.
The solid lines represent the (steady state) band popula-
tions in the lattice calculated [8] for the center-of-beam
parameters using a rate equation approach. The experi-

mentally measured populations and the calculated steady
state populations agree within 5% over the full range
of investigated parameters. This is remarkable, because
the calculation is based only on the detunings and the
intensities in the center of the Gaussian beam and the
comparison involves no ﬁt parameter. Small deviations
for the experimental values towards higher ground state
population are found for high light shift parameters U3.
This can be attributed to the small but ﬁnite spontaneous
emission probability during the release of the atoms. It
mainly aﬀects energetically higher lying states and trans-
fers additional population to the ground state.

V. CONCLUSION

In conclusion, we have theoretically and experimentally
studied purely optical dark optical lattices which combine
low photon scattering rates with a high population in the
lowest energy bands. Long coherence times in this bands
allow for adiabatic manipulations and for the observation
of non-dissipative eﬀects in periodic potentials [14]. The
lattice is formed by coupling an atomic ground state to
two excited states. The atoms are trapped at locations of
purely circular polarization which permits an extension
of the scheme to two and three dimensions using the same
ﬁeld conﬁgurations as for bright optical lattices [15]. The
adiabatic population mapping between the energy bands
and free particle momentum intervals allows a direct de-
termination of the band populations. We measured the
band populations over a wide range of lattice parame-
ters. The quantitative agreement of the measured band
populations with the calculated results shows that adia-
batic mapping is a promising tool to study the density
dependence of the band populations in an optical lattice.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

to Peter Marte for his

We are grateful
stimulat-
ing and inspiring contributions, and the Deutsche
Forschungsgemeinschaft for their support of the project.
Helmut Ritsch and Herwig Stecher wish to thank
the ¨Ostereichischer Fonds zur F¨orderung der wis-
senschaftlichen Forschung for their support under the
grant No. S6506/S6507.

[1] M. G. Prentiss, Science 260, 1078 (1993); G. P. Collins,
Physics Today 46, 17 (1993); and references therein.
[2] K. Ellinger, J. Cooper and P. Zoller, Phys. Rev. A 49,
3909 (1995), and Refs. therein; C. G. Townsend, N. H.
Edwards, C. J. Cooper, K. P. Zetie, C. J. Foot, A. M.
Steane, P. Szriftgiser, H. Perrin, and J. Dalibard, Phys.
Rev. A 52, 1423 (1995).

[3] M. H. Anderson, J. R. Ensher, M. R. Mathews, C. E.
Wieman, and E. A. Cornell, Science 269, 198 (1995); C.
C. Bradley, C. A. Sackett, J. J. Tollett, and R. G. Hulet,
Phys. Rev. Lett. 75, 1687 (1995); K. B. Davis, M.-O.
Mewes, M. R. Andrews, N. J. van Druten, D. S. Durfee,
D. M. Kurn, and W. Ketterle, Phys. Rev. Lett. 75, 3969
(1995).

[4] G. Grynberg and J.-Y. Courtois, Europhys. Lett, 27, 41

(1994).

[5] T. Pellizzari and H. Ritsch, Europhys. Lett. 31, 133
(1995); J. Guo and P. Berman, Phys. Rev. A 48, 3225
(1993).

[6] A. Hemmerich, M. Weidem¨uller, T. Esslinger, C. Zim-
mermann, and T. H¨ansch, Phys. Rev. Lett. 75, 37 (1995).
[7] T. Esslinger, F. Sander, A. Hemmerich, H. Ritsch, M.
Weidem¨uller, and T. W. H¨ansch, Opt. Lett. 21, 991
(1996).

[8] H. Stecher, H. Ritsch, P. Zoller, F. Sander, T. Esslinger,
and T. W. H¨ansch, Phys. Rev. A, scheduled for 1. Dec.
1996.

[9] A. Kastberg, W. D. Phillips, S. L. Rolston, R. J. C.
Spreeuw, and P. S. Jessen, Phys. Rev. Lett. 74, 1542
(1995).

[10] Choosing the quantization axis along the electric ﬁeld
vector at locations of linear polarization simpliﬁes the
analysis. The light ﬁeld then induces π-transitions
(∆m = 0). At locations of purely circular polarization
the light ﬁeld induces σ-transitions if the quantization
axis is chosen along the standing wave axis. These con-
ventions are used in Fig. 1.

[11] J. Dalibard and C. Cohen-Tannoudji, J. Opt. Soc. Am.

B 6, 2023 (1989).

[12] N. W. Ashcroft and N. D. Mermin, Solid state physics,

Int. Ed., Saunders College Publishing (1976)

[13] T. Esslinger, F. Sander, M. Weidem¨uller, A. Hemmerich,
and T. W. H¨ansch, Phys. Rev. Lett. 76, 2432 (1996).
[14] M. B. Dahan, E. Peik, J. Reichel, Y. Castin, and C. Sa-
lomon, Phys. Rev. Lett. 76, 4508 (1996); S. R. Wilkin-
son, C. F. Bharucka, K. W. Madison, Q. Niu, and M. G.
Raizen, Phys. Rev. Lett. 76, 4512 (1996).

[15] A. Hemmerich and T. W. H¨ansch, Phys. Rev. Lett. 70,
410 (1993); A. Hemmerich, C. Zimmermann, and T. W.
H¨ansch, Europhys. Lett. 22, 89 (1993); G. Grynberg, B.
Lounis, P. Verkerk, J.-Y. Courtois, C. Salomon, Phys.
Rev. Lett. 70, 2249 (1993).

4

