7
9
9
1
 
n
a
J
 
9
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
m
o
t
a
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
4
1
0
1
0
7
9
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Symmetry breaking in crossed magnetic and electric ﬁelds

C. Neumann, R. Ubert, S. Freund, E. Fl¨othmann, and K. H. Welge
Fakult¨at f¨ur Physik, Universit¨at Bielefeld, Universit¨atsstraße 25, D-33615 Bielefeld, Federal Republic of Germany

M. R. Haggerty and J. B. Delos
Physics Department, College of William and Mary, Williamsburg, Virginia 23187
(September 28, 2013)

We present the ﬁrst observations of cylindrical symmetry breaking in highly excited diamagnetic
hydrogen with a small crossed electric ﬁeld, and we give a semiclassical interpretation of this eﬀect.
As the small perpendicular electric ﬁeld is added, the recurrence strengths of closed orbits decrease
smoothly to a minimum, and revive again. This phenomenon, caused by interference among the
electron waves that return to the nucleus, can be computed from the azimuthal dependence of the
classical closed orbits.

32.60.+i, 03.65.Sq, 05.45.+b

In 1969, Garton and Tomkins reported what they
called “quasi-Landau resonances”—oscillatory modula-
tions in the near-ionization absorption spectrum of bar-
ium in a strong magnetic ﬁeld [1]. Edmonds analyzed
these oscillations semiclassically by considering the mo-
tion of the Rydberg electron in the plane perpendicular
to the magnetic ﬁeld [2]. In this plane there is a simple
family of closed orbits: classical electron orbits that start
at the ionic core and, moving under the combined eﬀect
of the Coulomb and magnetic ﬁelds, eventually return to
the core. He found that Bohr-Sommerfeld quantization
of these orbits predicts energy level spacings equal to the
period of the modulations seen in the experiment. Later
experiments have demonstrated that the absorption spec-
tra of highly-excited atoms in various ﬁeld conﬁgurations
are inﬂuenced by many two- and three-dimensional closed
orbits [3,4,5,6].

According to closed orbit theory [7,8], each classical or-
bit that starts at the atom carries along with it a portion
of the outgoing electron wave. If such an orbit returns
to the nucleus, its companion wave interferes with the
steady stream of outgoing waves, and this interference
produces an oscillation in the absorption spectrum. The
return of the electron, and the resulting interference oscil-
lation in the spectrum, is called a recurrence. The period
of the oscillation is inversely proportional to the classical
action of the closed orbit, and its strength is proportional
to the electron current density in the neighborhood of
that orbit. Thus, the more that orbits are focused on
the atom, the stronger the associated oscillation in the
spectrum, i.e., the stronger the recurrence.

Most of the experiments and theory to date have dealt
with Rydberg atoms in static external ﬁelds along a sin-
gle axis—magnetic [3], electric [4], or parallel electric and
magnetic ﬁelds [5]. In such cylindrically symmetric sys-
tems, the angular momentum component Lz (i.e., pφ)
along the ﬁeld axis (ˆz) is conserved. Classical orbits are

therefore organized into cylindrical families, with orbits
within a family diﬀering from one another only by a ro-
tation about the z axis. When orbits in a family return
to the core, they do so in a perfect circular focus, giving
a strong recurrence.

The dynamics is profoundly changed when the cylin-
drical symmetry is broken by crossing the magnetic ﬁeld
with an electric ﬁeld. Now instead of a continuous fam-
ily of classical orbits returning in perfect focus, only two
isolated orbits return exactly to the origin. Meanwhile,
the nonconservation of pφ makes it impossible to sepa-
rate the φ motion [9]. There have been several studies
of recurrences in crossed ﬁelds [6], but none of them ad-
dress the present issue: the transition from symmetry
to asymmetry; i.e., from two to three nonseparable de-
grees of freedom. How the dynamics behaves under such
symmetry change and how it is described in semiclassical
theory is a basic problem [10]. What is the signature of
symmetry breaking in an atomic absorption spectrum?

In this letter we report the ﬁrst experiments on the dy-
namical evolution of Rydberg hydrogen atoms in a strong
magnetic ﬁeld when the cylindrical symmetry is broken
by adding a small crossed electric ﬁeld. We present re-
sults obtained for the Garton-Tomkins-Edmonds (GTE)
recurrence, which shows the characteristic signature of
symmetry breaking. (We have observed the same signa-
ture for other orbits [11].) We also present a quantitative
semiclassical theory capable of describing this symmetry
breaking, and use it to calculate the evolution of the re-
currence strength.

a. Experiment. The experiments are performed, as
previously [12], with deuterium atoms in a beam colli-
mated along the magnetic ﬁeld axis, excited at the cen-
ter of the crossed ﬁelds by pulsed lasers perpendicular
to the atomic beam. The excitation occurs in two steps,
D(1s) + hν1 → D(2p) + hν2 → D∗(n, mℓ = 0), to ener-
gies near the ﬁeld-free ionization limit (n ≈ 62–112). D∗

1

atoms in long-lived states, proceeding at thermal veloc-
ity, are detected via electrons created by ﬁeld ionization.
Electrons from atoms promptly ionized within the inter-
action region are prevented from crossed-ﬁeld drifting by
turning oﬀ the crossed electric ﬁeld quickly after the ex-
citation, and are trapped there temporarily then released
to the detector. The combined signal of the two electron
groups is thus proportional to the total absorption cross
section [11].

The Hamiltonian for hydrogen in crossed ﬁelds (in

atomic units, ¯h = e = me = 1) is
2 p2 − 1/r + 1

2 BLz + 1

H = 1

8 B2(x2 + y2) + F x.

(1)

R

Due to a classical scaling law for this system, the shapes
of classical orbits do not depend on the energy E, elec-
tric ﬁeld strength F , and magnetic ﬁeld strength B sep-
arately, but only on the scaled energy ǫ ≡ EB−2/3 and
scaled electric ﬁeld f ≡ F B−4/3. The classical action
p · dq scales as S = ˜Sw, where ˜S is a scaled action
S ≡
that also only depends on ǫ and f , and w ≡ B−1/3. We
use the method of scaled variable recurrence spectroscopy
[12]: we measure the photoabsorption cross section σ as
a function of w while varying the laser frequency and ex-
ternal ﬁelds simultaneously in such a way as to keep ǫ
and f constant. According to closed orbit theory, such
a spectrum is a smooth background plus a sum of sinu-
soidal oscillations,

σ(w) = C0 +

Ck sin

˜Skw − γk

,

(2)

Xk

(cid:16)

(cid:17)

where C0 is the absorption in the absence of recurrences;
the sum is over classical closed orbits; Ck is the recur-
rence amplitude of orbit k; and γk is an additional phase
related to the Maslov index. All of the quantities in
Eq. (2) are constant or slowly-varying across a scaled
spectrum, except for w. Thus, the absolute-square of
the Fourier transform of a scaled spectrum with respect
to w produces a recurrence spectrum, which has a peak
2
(the “recurrence strength”) at the scaled
of height |Ck|
action ˜Sk of each classical closed orbit.

The GTE recurrence reported in this paper, the lowest-
action peak in these recurrence spectra, results from the
family of “rotator”-type orbits that lie in the z = 0 plane.
Figure 1(a) shows this recurrence peak for a range of
scaled electric ﬁelds, exhibiting the essential signatures
of symmetry breaking and the transition from 2 to 3 non-
separable degrees of freedom. The falloﬀ and revival be-
havior, qualitatively observed also for other rotator and
vibrator type orbits, can be explained by a semiclassical
theory of symmetry breaking.

b. Classical and semiclassical symmetry breaking. As
explained in the introduction, the perpendicular electric
ﬁeld destroys the cylindrical symmetry of hydrogen in a
magnetic ﬁeld. It can be shown that from each family k
of formerly-closed orbits, just two isolated orbits return

(a)

(b)

0.01

0.00

0.02

0.01

0.00

0.02

f

0.03

0.04

0.03

0.05

0.04

0.05

1.0

1.2

1.0

1.2

~
S / (2π)

the

strength of

FIG. 1. These segments of (a) experimental and (b)
scaled action spectra show how cylindrical
theoretical
symmetry breaking aﬀects
the Gar-
ton-Tomkins-Edmonds recurrence. The data are for deu-
terium at constant scaled energy ǫ = −0.15, where the clas-
sical dynamics is fully chaotic. B was scanned from 1 T to
6 T, i.e., 61.7 ≥ w ≥ 34.0. The GTE recurrence peak is
shown for several values of the (scaled) strength of the per-
pendicular electric ﬁeld (the vertical scale is arbitrary). Both
experiment and theory show that the recurrence is strongest
when f = 0, where it is enhanced by perfect focusing due to
cylindrical symmetry. As the electric ﬁeld is increased, the
strength falls oﬀ quickly, vanishes, then increases again in a
weak revival about 10% of the original peak height. The dis-
agreement about the position of the minimum (f ≈ 0.030 vs.
0.012) and revival (f ≈ 0.040 vs. 0.018) is unexplained.

to the origin when f 6= 0 (see Figs. 2(a) and (b)). From a
classical perspective, therefore, one might expect a sud-
den drop in the recurrence strength when the electric
ﬁeld is turned on. However, electron waves, unlike clas-
sical trajectories, diﬀract. Therefore, the whole family
of returning trajectories, even those that miss the atom,
still contributes to the recurrence. But waves arriving
from diﬀerent directions have diﬀerent phases, so their
interference is partially-destructive, and the strength of
the recurrence is reduced.

The phase of the returning wave from each direction in
the kth family is given by the classical action of the orbit
returning from that direction. After symmetry is broken,
that action SF
k (φ) (here measured to the orbit’s perihe-
lion) depends on φ, the orbit’s azimuthal launching angle,
and on F , the electric ﬁeld strength. A theorem of clas-
sical mechanics asserts that the change in action caused
by the electric ﬁeld is proportional to the time-integral of
the perturbing Hamiltonian over the unperturbed trajec-
tory: ∂SF
(∂H/∂F )dt. It follows that, to ﬁrst
order in F , the actions of orbits within a family have a

k /∂F = −

R

2

(a)

4000

(b)

10

(c)

10

B

F

y

0

y

0

y

0

-4000

4000

-10

10

-10

0

x

0

x

0

x

10

FIG. 2. Even a slight perpendicular electric ﬁeld destroys the classical cylindrical symmetry. These ﬁgures were computed
for the parameters ǫ = −0.15, f = 0.012, and B = 3 T; distances are measured in Bohr radii. (a) The family of electron
orbits associated with the GTE recurrence. These orbits lie in the (x, y) plane, perpendicular to B. For nonzero electric ﬁeld,
only two orbits (shown with heavy lines) return exactly to the nucleus. (b) A closeup of the trajectories as they approach the
nucleus. The two closed orbits return to the nucleus diagonally; all others follow near-parabolic paths near the nucleus. (c)
2
The symmetry-broken returning wavefunction |ψ|
associated with the same family of orbits, computed using the actions of
Eq. (4). The wavefunction is generally large where the trajectories are dense, but destructive interference at the nucleus leads
to a weak predicted recurrence amplitude at this choice of parameters.

f = 0.000
f = 0.012
f = 0.024
f = 0.036

295.0

290.0

)
φ
(
S

285.0

280.0

275.0

0

φ1

π/2

π
φ (rad)

φ2

3π/2

2π

FIG. 3. Action S(φ) vs. starting angle φ for the GTE family
of orbits, for 4 diﬀerent scaled electric ﬁeld strengths. Action
is measured at the orbit’s closest approach to the nucleus,
in units of ¯h. Actual values (symbols) are compared with the
classical perturbation theory estimate of Eq. (4) (curves). For
f = 0 (cylindrical symmetry), the action is independent of φ.
The two surviving orbits occur at the indicated angles φ1 and
φ2

≈ φ1

+ π.

sinusoidal dependence on φ [13]:
k (φ) = SF =0
SF
= SF =0

k + F · dk(φ) Tk
⊥
1
k),
k Tk cos(φ − φ
k + F d

(3)

(4)

(see Fig. 3) where dk(φ) ≡ h−r(t)i is the time-averaged
dipole moment of the orbit starting in direction φ, d⊥
k is
the magnitude of the component of dk in the x-y plane,
and Tk is the return time, all for the unperturbed orbit.
The two closed orbits that survive the symmetry breaking
are those with the extremal actions; their actions deﬁne
the amplitude of the sinusoid.

The returning electron wave near the nucleus is a co-
herent superposition of waves arriving from each tra-
jectory’s ﬁnal direction, each with a phase given by

3

exp[iSF
k (φ)]. The returning wavefunction for the GTE
recurrence, calculated in this way, is shown in Fig. 2(c).
c. Falloﬀ of recurrence strength A detailed analysis
shows that the recurrence amplitude for weakly-broken
cylindrical symmetry is the coherent sum of contributions
from each orbit in the family. Each orbit contributes
nearly the same amplitude, but with a phase that varies
according to Eq. (4). The net result is that Eq. (2) is
replaced with σF = C0 +

k σF

k , where

k

k = CF =0
σF
= Cf =0

k

1
2π Z
(cid:26)
⊥
J0(f ˜d
k

0

2π

P
dφ sin[SF

k (φ) − γk]

(cid:27)

˜Tkw) sin( ˜Sf =0

k w − γk).

(5)

(6)

The integral in Eq. (5) is over the orbits of family k,
parameterized by their initial azimuthal angles φ; i.e.,
this is the coherent superposition of waves having phases
that vary with φ. Equation (6) follows from substituting
Eq. (4) into Eq. (5), evaluating the integral, and convert-
ing to scaled variables.

We see that each oscillation in the absorption spec-
trum is multiplied by a Bessel function that accounts for
the partially-destructive interference of the contributing
orbits. The Fourier transform of Eq. (6) over the experi-
mental range of w predicts the height and shape of each
peak in the recurrence spectrum. This theoretical pre-
diction, evaluated for the GTE recurrence, is shown in
Fig. 1(b).

It is seen that experiment and theory agree about the
shape of the strength falloﬀ curve, including the strength
of the revival relative to that of the f = 0 peak. There is
a remaining unexplained disagreement about the electric
ﬁeld strengths at which the minimum and revival occur;
the discrepancy is by about a factor of 2.5. Similar anal-
yses of other families of orbits give similar results: exper-

Delos, Phys. Rev. Lett. 74, 1538 (1995); J. Gao and J. B.
Delos, Phys. Rev. A 49, 869 (1994).

[5] Parallel ﬁelds: J.-M. Mao, K. A. Rapelje, S. J. Blodgett-
Ford, J. B. Delos, A. K¨onig, and H. Rinneberg, Phys.
Rev. A 48, 2117 (1993); A. D. Peters, C. Jaﬀ´e, and J. B.
Delos, Phys. Rev. Lett. 73, 2825 (1994); H. H. Fielding,
J. Wals, W. J. van der Zande, and H. B. van Linden van
den Heuvell, Phys. Rev. A 51, 611 (1995); M. Courtney,
Phys. Rev. A 51, 4558 (1995).

[6] Crossed ﬁelds: G. Wiebusch, J. Main, K. Kr¨uger, H. Rot-
tke, A. Holle, and K. H. Welge, Phys. Rev. Lett. 62, 2821
(1989); G. Raithel, M. Fauth, and H. Walther, Phys. Rev.
A 44, 1898 (1991); 47, 419 (1993); A. D. Peters and J. B.
Delos, Phys. Rev. A 47, 3020 (1993); 47, 3036 (1993).
[7] M. L. Du and J. B. Delos, Phys. Rev. A 38, 1896 (1988);

38, 1913 (1988).

[8] E. G. Bogomol’ny˘ı, Pis’ma Zh. Eksp. Teor. Fiz. 47, 445
(1988) [JETP Lett. 47, 526 (1988)]; Zh. Eksp. Teor. Fiz.
96, 487 (1989) [Sov. Phys. JETP 69, 275 (1989)].

[9] The three-dimensional version of closed orbit theory used
by Raithel, Fauth, and Walther [6, 1993 reference] applies
if the electric ﬁeld is suﬃciently strong, but diverges as
cylindrical symmetry is approached.

[10] Stephen C. Creagh, Annals of Physics 248, 60 (1996).
[11] Further details will be presented in a future publication.
[12] A. Holle, J. Main, G. Wiebusch, H. Rottke, and K. H.

Welge, Phys. Rev. Lett. 61, 161 (1988).

[13] The one important exception is the orbit parallel to the
magnetic ﬁeld. That orbit has no dipole moment along F,
so the perturbation of the action is second order in the
electric ﬁeld.

iment and theory agree about the pattern of the falloﬀ,
but theory predicts that the falloﬀ should be more rapid
(by about the same factor) than actually seen in the ex-
periment. We do not at this time see the reason for this
discrepancy.

It is to be noted that Eq. (5) is applicable through the
whole transition—from perfect cylindrical symmetry to
fully-broken symmetry. In the former case (f = 0), the
integrand in Eq. (5) is constant and the recurrence gives
only the usual sinusoidal modulation of the absorption.
In the latter case (f large), the integral can be evaluated
by the method of stationary phase, and the result is the
contribution from the two isolated returning orbits (in-
cluding correct Maslov indices). The revival occurs when
their phase diﬀerence reaches 2π and they again interfere
constructively.

Conclusions. The most important result of this work
is an illumination of the diﬀerence between classical and
quantum mechanical symmetry breaking. Classically,
even the slightest symmetry breaking destroys the perfect
focus, leaving only two surviving closed orbits, and reduc-
ing the density of returning trajectories instantaneously
from inﬁnite to ﬁnite. For strong symmetry breaking,
only the two surviving closed orbits contribute signiﬁ-
cantly. However, in quantum mechanics there is an inter-
mediate regime of weak symmetry breaking for which the
contributions of the whole family of orbits—not just the
ones that remain closed—must be considered together.

In this regime, the strength of the recurrence is de-
termined by the degree of constructive and destructive
interference across the whole returning wave. The strong
recurrence for exact symmetry corresponds to pure con-
structive interference, and the minimum and revival—
purely nonclassical eﬀects—are caused by the dominance
of destructive and constructive interference, respectively,
across the wavefront. This signature of symmetry break-
ing is seen in experiment and is predicted by a uniform
semiclassical theory, though there is a remaining discrep-
ancy about the values of the electric ﬁeld at which the
minima and revivals appear.

[1] W. R. S. Garton and F. S. Tomkins, Astrophys. J. 158,

839 (1969).

[2] A. R. Edmonds, J. Phys. (Paris) Colloq. 31, C4 (1970).
[3] Magnetic: J. Main, G. Wiebusch, A. Holle, and K. H.
Welge, Phys. Rev. Lett. 57, 2789 (1986); J. Main,
G. Wiebusch, K. Welge, J. Shaw, and J. B. Delos, Phys.
Rev. A 49, 847 (1994), T. van der Veldt, W. Vassen,
W. Hogervorst, Europhys. Lett. 21, 903 (1993).

[4] Electric: U. Eichmann, K. Richter, D. Wintgen, and
W. Sandner, Phys. Rev. Lett. 61, 2438 (1988); M. Court-
ney, H. Jiao, N. Spellmeyer, D. Kleppner, J. Gao, and J. B.

4

