7
9
9
1
 
v
o
N
 
8
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
m
o
t
a
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
9
2
0
1
1
7
9
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Extended Classical Over–Barrier Model for Collisions of Highly

Charged Ions with Conducting and Insulating Surfaces

Jens J. Ducr´ee∗, Fulvio Casali, and Uwe Thumm†

J. R. Macdonald Laboratory, Department of Physics, Kansas State University, Manhattan,

Kansas 66506-2604, USA

(February 9, 2008)

Abstract

We have extended the classical over–barrier model to simulate the neutral-

ization dynamics of highly charged ions interacting under grazing incidence

with conducting and insulating surfaces. Our calculations are based on sim-

ple model rates for resonant and Auger transitions. We include eﬀects caused

by the dielectric response of the target and, for insulators, localized surface

charges. Characteristic deviations regarding the charge transfer processes

from conducting and insulating targets to the ion are discussed. We ﬁnd

good agreement with previously published experimental data for the image

energy gain of a variety of highly charged ions impinging on Au, Al, LiF and

KI crystals.

PACS numbers: 34.50.Dy, 34.70.+e, 79.20.Rf

Typeset using REVTEX

∗permanent address: Institut f¨ur Kernphysik, Wilhelm Klemm–Str. 9, D–48149 M¨unster

†corresponding author

1

I. INTRODUCTION

Within the past decade, a rapidly increasing number of research projects has been de-

voted to the investigation of interactions between highly charged ions (HCI) and surfaces

(for recent reviews see [1–3]). These activities are of importance for present and future appli-

cations, such as semiconductor fabrication, nanostructure technology, and surface chemistry.

They are also of interest to basic research due to the challenging interplay of fundamental

electronic interactions to be considered in the detailed understanding of the highly complex

interaction dynamics. By now, a certain level of consent has emerged with regard to charge

exchange and ionization processes that take place before an HCI gets in close contact with

a metal target surface, and a mainly classical approach, the ”classical over-barrier model”

(COM), ﬁrst presented by Burgd¨orfer, Lerner, and Meyer [4,5], was found to adequately rep-

resent the most important physical aspects of the electron capture, recapture, and emission

sequence [5–11].

Typically, an incident HCI captures several conduction band electrons at large distances

from the surface into highly excited states which leads to the temporary formation of a

”hollow ion” in front of the surface. At ion–surface distances that are smaller than or about

equal to the classical radii of active HCI orbitals, the theoretical description becomes more

diﬃcult due to the strong perturbation of the initial electron distribution of the surface and

the intricate molecular dynamics involved. For this reason, most ﬁrst–principle calculations

have been applied to incident ions in low charge states [12–15]. For higher incident charge

states the detailed quantum mechanical treatment is complicated by a large number of ionic

states that are energetically degenerate with the target conduction band, and a ﬁrst–principle

approach remains a formidable task [16–19].

Most experiments with incident HCI have been performed for conducting and semicon-

ducting surfaces with typical workfunctions of about 5 eV. These experiments focused on

total electron yields [20], energy–resolved Auger [21–24] and X–ray [25,26] spectra, as well

as deﬂection angles [27], and ion–neutralization [28–30] measurements. Recently, several

2

experiments have been carried out, where HCI beams are incident on insulating surfaces,

primarily on ionic crystals, such as LiF [31–34]. The unique band structure of LiF with a

large workfunction of 12 eV and a wide band gap of 14 eV (Fig. 1) that elevates the an-

tibinding 2p–band above the vacuum level provides an interesting opportunity to scrutinize

previous theories about the role of the conduction band in the charge exchange process.

In contrast to metal surfaces, LiF and other insulating surfaces do not provide unoccupied

conduction band states into which resonant loss from excited projectile states might occur,

and pronounced diﬀerences are expected in the neutralization dynamics of HCIs in front of

metal and insulating surfaces. Furthermore, the capture of electrons from an insulator leads

to the local accumulation of positive surface charges that modify the charge transfer dynam-

ics in comparison with metals. The capture–induced accumulation of localized charges on

insulator surfaces has very recently been addressed in a few independent theoretical stud-

ies [35–37] and is a central aspect of the extentions to the COM discussed in this paper.

Measurements on LiF surfaces [34] clearly exhibit the expected discrepancies with respect

to conducting targets and can coherently be interpreted by a retarded onset for electron

capture and characteristic deviations in the succeeding charge transfer sequence.

In this paper, we adopted the basic framework of the COM suggested by Burgd¨orfer et

al. for the interaction of slow HCIs with metal surfaces [2,4]. Diﬀerent versions of COMs

have been applied to successfully model charge exchange, energy gain, and trajectory eﬀects

in collisions of HCIs with atoms [38,39] and clusters ( C60) [6–8,11]. Within the COM, the

neutralization dynamics is described by means of an eﬀective single electron potential which

governs the classical motion of electrons that are going to be either resonantly captured into

hydrogenic projectile levels or resonantly lost to unoccupied states of a metal target con-

duction band. For charge transfer to occur, an active electron must overcome the potential

barrier between projectile nucleus and target surface. Electron transfer becomes classically

possible if the electron initially occupies a state that lies above this potential barrier and if

vacancies exist in the resonant ﬁnal state into which the electron transits. As the projectile

moves along a classical trajectory, both projectile and target levels experience variable level

3

shifts and change their relative energetic positions with respect to the potential barrier, the

position and height of which also changes as a function of the projectile–surface distance.

In order to perform simulations involving insulating surfaces we have extended the orig-

inal COM [2,4] by modifying the dielectric response of the surface to the external projectile

charge and by including local surface charges. These local charges are built up on the in-

sulator surface during the charge transfer sequence and decay on a time scale that is given

by the conductivity of the insulator. The local surface charges inﬂuence active electrons

and the projectile motion. In this work we will discuss the inﬂuence of these excess surface

charges on electron transfer and projectile deﬂection in detail and comment on the recent

and related theoretical work of Borisov et al. [35] and H¨agg et al. [36].

We have organized this paper as follows.

In Section II we review the main physical

elements of our COM simulations, such as eﬀective potentials (Sec. II A), local workfunc-

tion changes (Sec. II B), electronic transition rates (Sec. II C), and the projectile motion

(Sec. II D).

In Section III A we discuss in detail the neutralization dynamics in front of

the surface in terms of the evolution of level occupations, potentials, projectile charge and

motion above metal and insulator surfaces. In Section III B we compare our results with

previously published experimental and computed data on image energy gains of the projec-

tile over a wide range of initial charge states. Our conclusions are contained in Section IV.

We use atomic units (a.u.) throughout this paper unless speciﬁed otherwise.

II. OUTLINE OF THE EXTENDED COM

A. Potentials seen by an active electron

Within the dynamical COM charge exchange is described in terms of classical charge

currents between energetically shifted valence states of the target and shifted hydrogenic

projectile levels. These continuous charge currents correspond to electronic transition rates

for resonant capture and loss and occur as soon as the potential barrier Vb of the total

4

eﬀective potential Vtot drops below the target workfunction W . The total potential acting

on an active electron is given by

Vtot(qp, x, z, Xp, R, t) = Vproj(qp, x

Xp, z

R) + Vim,p(qp, x

Xp, z + R)

−

−

−

+ Vim,e(z) + Vlocal(x, z, t)

(2.1)

where x and z will denote the electronic coordinates in the collision plane parallel and

perpendicular to the surface–projected motion, respectively. The projectile distance from

the surface is denoted by R. The projectile coordinate along the projection of the trajectory

on the surface is Xp. The coordinate x0 < 0 refers to the location on the surface where,

at time t0, charge transfer starts (Fig. 2). The origin of our coordinate system is located

on the intersection of the topmost lattice plane (at z = R = 0) and the collision plane.

The jellium edge is located half a lattice constant above the uppermost lattice plane of the

crystal. The potential saddle is located at zb. The projectile is assumed to reach its point of

closest approach to the surface at time t = 0, and the surface projection of this point deﬁnes

x = Xp = 0. For our applications in this paper, it is suﬃcient to consider trajectories with

surface projections along the [100] direction that intersect surface lattice points and deﬁne

the projectile coordinate Yp = 0 (see Section IIIB2 below). A more general approach would

average over many trajectories with Yp coordinates inside a surface unit cell.

The ﬁrst term in (2.1) represents the interaction of the active electron with the projectile

and is modeled by the Coulomb potential

Vproj(qp, x

Xp, z

R) =

−

−

qp(R)
Xp)2 + (z

.

R)2

−

−

(x

q

−

The projectile charge

qp(R) = qnuc,p −

an(R)

n
X

depends on the nuclear charge qnuc,p of the HCI and the projectile shell occupations an. The

index n labels the principal quantum number of projectile shells.

Surface charge distributions produced in response to the external charges of the projectile

and the active electron are included in (2.1) in form of the projectile image potential Vim,p and

5

(2.2)

(2.3)

the self–image potential of the active electron Vim,e. These potentials can be derived within

linear response theory. Along an axis that is perpendicular to the surface and includes the

projectile nucleus (i.e. for x = Xp), approximate expressions for these potentials, appropriate

for grazing–incidence collisions, are given by [40]

Vim,p(qp, 0, z + R) =

∞

2qp
πvp Z

0

dω Re

ǫ(ω)
1
1 + ǫ(ω) ! ·

−

 

ω
vp

 

K0

(z + R

2zim)

−

!

and the self–image potential of the active electron

Vim,e(z) =

∞

1
πvp Z

0

−

dω Re

ǫ(ω)
1
1 + ǫ(ω) ! ·

−

 

K0

2

ω
vp

 

(z

zim)

−

!

where vp denotes the projectile velocity and K0 is a modiﬁed Bessel function.

Equations (2.4) and (2.5) refer to the dielectric response of the target material to a moving

external charge in the undispersive approximation [40], for which the dielectric function

ǫ(~k, ω) is independent of the momentum ~k. Following reference [41], we approximate the

dielectric function

(2.4)

(2.5)

(2.6)

ǫ(ω) = ǫ∞ +

ǫ∞

ǫ0 −
(ω/ω0)2

−

1

−

i(ω/ω0)γ

by its static (ǫ0 = ǫ(0)) and optical (ǫ∞ = ǫ(

)) limits, the resonance frequency ω0, and a

∞
positive inﬁnitesimal constant γ. Table I contains these constants for the two ionic crystals

used in this work. Both image potentials are referred to the image plane at zim > 0. In

applications to metals, we identify the image plane with the jellium edge, such that zim

becomes equal to half a lattice constant. For ionic insulator crystal targets, we inserted

the negative ion radius for zim, i.e. we assume that the induced positive image charge is

located in the vicinity of the high density anionic electron cloud above the target. A similar

independent study of the dynamic dielectric response of alkali halides was recently published

by H¨agg et al. [36] in which, as in (2.4), (2.5), and (2.6), the linear response theory result of

Abajo and Echenique [40] was combined with a non–dispersive single–pole ﬁt to the dielectric

function. The main diﬀerence to our approach appears to be the use of a small but ﬁnite

damping constant γ in the work of H¨agg et al.. We also note that B´ar´any and Setterlind

6

[6] have developed a COM for capture from a dielectric sphere of radius a and frequency

independent, non–dispersive dielectric constant ǫ. Their limit a

corresponds to an

→ ∞

insulating surface with simpliﬁed image interactions that include dielectric screening eﬀects

in terms of a frequency independent, multiplicative factor (1

ǫ)/(1 + ǫ).

For metal surfaces, we can take the limits ǫ

in (2.4) and (2.5) and obtain the simple

−

7→ ∞

asymptotic forms [42]

V metal
im,p (qp, 0, z + R) =

z + R

2zim

V metal
im,e (z) =

−

4(z

zim)

.

qp

−
1

−

(2.7)

(2.8)

In order to avoid the unphysical singularity of the electron self–image potential at z = zim,

we truncate and steadily connect the total image potential to the bulk potential given by

the lower limit of the metal conduction band by extending the constant bulk potential to

a small distance outside zim. Our choice for zim is a little larger than corresponding values

obtained by ﬁtting LDA calculations [43].

It is, however, suﬃciently realistic within the

overall precision of our model.

The capture of electrons from a solid leads to a linear surface charge distribution along

the surface–projected path of the projectile (Fig. 2). For a metal surface, these local charge

densities vanish instantaneously and do not inﬂuence the charge exchange sequence or the

motion of the projectile due to high surface plasmon frequencies of the order of 1016sec−1.

In contrast to metal surfaces, typical decay times for excess surface charges on insulators are

by far too long to compensate local charge accumulations at the collision time scale. As a

consequence the ion is followed by a linearly stretched trail of surface charges qi(xi) generated

at times ti, i = 0, . . . , imax(Xp) at locations xi, for which the projectile is at distances R(ti)

above the surface. The charge depends on the ion–surface distance R through the implicit

dependence of xi on R.

We assume the excess surface charges to decay exponentially with a time constant τ . We

can approximate τ by having charge currents ~j restore the electric neutrality as depicted in

Figure 3. The driving force of these currents are electric ﬁelds ~E = σ~j caused by the local

7

surface charges

qi(xi, t) = qi(xi) exp

t

ti
−
τ (cid:19)

,

(cid:18)−

ti

t

≥

(2.9)

due to local charges qi(xi) generated at times ti, i = 0, 1, 2, . . . when charge transfer took

place. By choosing a hemisphere around the excess surface charge as Gaussian surface,

Gauss’ theorem leads to the decay time τ = (2πσ)−1 in terms of the macroscopic conductivity

σ. Typical values for σ are 107(Ωcm)−1 for metals and σ

1

10−6(Ωcm)−1 for ionic crystals,

≃

·

such as a LiF crystal, at room temperature. For LiF this simple estimate yields τ

10−7s

≃

which lies about seven orders of magnitude above the collision time of typically 10−14s. This

means that after capture sets in and while the HCI continues to interact with the surface, a

positive linear charge distribution

λ(x, t) =

qi(xi) exp[

2πσ(t

ti)]δ(x

xi)

−

−

−

qi(xi)δ(x

xi)

λ(x)

−

≡

(2.10)

imax(Xp)

Xi
imax(Xp)

≈

Xi

remains on the surface–projected projectile path on the ionic crystal’s surface. This charge

distribution pulls down the potential barrier and tends to repel the HCI from the surface.

Its contribution to the total eﬀective potential (2.1) amounts to

Vlocal(x, z, t) =

1

ǫ(0)
−
ǫ(0) + 1 


[qj,cell]
z

−

+

x0

Z

Xp(t)

dx′

λ(x′, t)

z2 + (x′

(2.11)

.

x)2 


−



The term [qj,cell] represents the integer charge withdrawn from the active surface cell by an



q

active electron that crosses the barrier, e.g. [qj,cell] = 1 for 0 < qj,cell ≤
(2.11) constitutes an average over previously transferred (non–integer) charges. For metal

1. The integral in

surfaces, both λ and Vlocal vanish.

The positive excess charge λ(x′)dx′ within a small interval dx′ near x′ polarizes the

surrounding ionic crystal. This polarization eﬀectively screens the local charge λ(x′)dx′

and is the origin of the Mott–Littleton correction [44,45] to the ground–state energy of

the crystal. This screening correction is approximately included in (2.11) in terms of the

8

static dielectric screening function (ǫ(0)

1)/(ǫ(0) + 1). A Mott–Littleton correction is also

−

included in the work of Borisov et al. [35] and H¨agg et al. [36]. Instead of our multiplicative

screening factor in (2.11) Borisov et al. introduce this correction as an additive contribution

to the attractive interaction of the active electron with the left–behind hole on the surface.

The approach of H¨agg et al.

resembles our approximation in that the screening of the

capture–induced surface charge is included as a multiplicative factor which asymptotically,

for z

, becomes equal to a frequency independent dielectric screening function; it diﬀers

→ ∞

from (2.11) due to the inclusion of (i) dynamical screening of excess surface charges and (ii)

fractional ionicity eﬀects close to the surface in reference [36].

We note that in our version of the COM a continuous classical charge current is used to

represent charge transfer. In our discussion of local surface charges, the discretized charge qi

is used for convenience only and corresponds to the (small) portion of an elementary charge

that is transferred during one timestep of the numerical propagation (see Section II C 4,

below). In contrast, Borisov et al. [35] and H¨agg et al. [36] enforce charge quantization and

consider local excess surface charges of at least one positive elementary charge.

B. Local workfunction

We now examine the dynamic change of the local workfunction while the projectile draws

a certain amount of charge from a speciﬁc surface atom on an insulating surface. In order

to estimate the local workfunction of an ionic crystal, we assume that target electrons are

captured from an anion on the surface lattice. The energy necessary to remove a loosely

bound valence electron from a surface anion can be approximated by the aﬃnity Eq

bind of the

free anion (3.4 eV for free F− ions) and by adding the interactions of the detaching electron

with all other target ions as a Madelung–background potential VM ad,bg (Fig. 4). This leads

to the workfunction

W (rq

anion) = Eq

bind + VM ad,bg(rq

anion).

(2.12)

9

We evaluated VM ad,bg at the mean radius rq

anion of the outermost ionic nℓ–shell (n = 2,ℓ = 1

for LiF), directly above the anion’s lattice site,

VM ad,bg(rq

anion) =

Xj

~Rj −

Qj
rq
anionˆez|

|
where ˆez is a unit vector along the positive z axis. Since the contribution of the active surface

anion is included via its binding energy, the active anion is exempted in the Madelung

sum over all lattice sites ~Rj in (2.13). Without taking screening eﬀects into account, we

assume Qj =

1 for all anionic charges and Qj = 1 for all cathionic charges in (2.13).

−

Equation (2.12) yields values of 11.65 eV for LiF and 8.21 eV for KI and thus reproduces the

(2.13)

experimentally determined workfunctions (12 eV for LiF and 8.2 eV for KI [46]) suﬃciently

well within the overall accuracy of our approach.

In order to include the eﬀect of the net capture–induced local charge qj,cell > 0 residing

within the active surface lattice cell j on the local workfunction, we added qj,cell to the

original anionic charge Qj =

1 and obtain the new charge q = Qj + qj,cell, a corresponding

−

new ionic binding energy Eq

bind and, by using the Cowan code [47], an adjusted ionic radius

rq
anion. Inserting these quantities into both terms of (2.12) supplies the adjusted workfunction

W (rq

anion). Since the dynamical COM simulates continuous charge currents, we interpolate

between discrete rq

anion–values. In this way we can compute the local workfunction (2.12) as

a function of the capture–induced local surface charge qj,cell within the active anion’s unit

cell. In contrast to the approach of H¨agg et al. [36], we do not include fractional ionicity and

screening eﬀects in the local workfunction. In agreement with the papers of Borisov et al.

[35] and H¨agg et al. [36], our local workfunction includes a Madelung sum for the interaction

of the detaching/ionizing negative charge with the ionic crystal and an additional term for

the interaction with the excess surface charge on the active anion site. However, in contrast

to these authors, we relate the additional term to the aﬃnity of a free anion of charge

Qj =

−

1 and interpolate (using atomic ionization potentials) to eﬀective charges q >

1,

−

as dictated by the non–charge–quantized version of the COM. For LiF, we allow for at most
one electron to be captured from an active F− site, such that qj,cell ≤

1. For KI, we take the

10

large number of outer shell electrons on I− in account by removing this restriction.

In Figure 5 we show the various contributions to the total electronic potential (2.1) for

50 keV Xe15+ ions that approach a LiF surface at a grazing angle of 1◦. The potentials are

displayed along an axis perpendicular to the surface that includes the projectile nucleus. The

projectile is on the incident part of the trajectory at a distance R = 10 a.u. in front of the

surface. The remaining projectile charge qp(R = 10) amounts to 2.8, i.e.

Xp
x0 λ(x)dx = 12.2.
R

C. Transition rates

In this section, we summarize the approximations that lead to simple analytical expres-

sions for resonant and Auger transition rates, closely following references [2,4]. These rates

are then combined in form of a system of coupled classical rate equations in order to describe

the occupation dynamics of projectile levels.

1. Resonant gain

We represent the electronic structure of the projectile by its spectrum of energy lev-

els εn(R) and their occupations an(R). Both quantities change during the motion of the

projectile. We assume hydrogenic shells with binding energies

εn(R) =

2

1
2  

qef f,n(R)
n

!

−

that depend on the eﬀective charges

Xn′
The matrix Sn,n′ accounts for screening eﬀects and is determined under the simplifying

qef f,n(R) = qnuc,p −

Sn,n′an′(R).

assumption of full inner screening and no screening by outer and equivalent electrons (Sn,n′ =

1 for n > n′ and Sn,n′ = 0 otherwise). The classical model of a continuous charge ﬂow over

the potential barrier in conjunction with discrete energy levels (2.14) requires the deﬁnition

(2.14)

(2.15)

11

of energy bins. We designate energy bins by [εn(R)]. Each bin is attributed to a projectile

shell n and includes electronic energies ε within the interval

[εn(R)]

[

1
2

≡

(εn −

εn−1) + Vim,p + Vim,e + Vlocal ,

εn) + Vim,p + Vim,e + Vlocal]

1
2

(εn+1 −

(2.16)

(2.17)

(2.18)

including corrections for level shifts due to image charge interactions and localized surface

charges. Thus the charge current I transferred classically from the surface into the energy

bin [εn(R)] is considered to feed the n’th energetically shifted shell of the projectile.

The resonant gain current (i.e. the resonant gain rate) I rg

n from the surface into a par-

ticular n-manifold of the HCI is given by the product

I rg
n (R, t) = σ(R)jn(R, t)

of the current density

jn(z) =

1
4 Z

min(−W,εn+1/2)

max(Vb,εn−1/2)

dED(E)

2(E

Vb),

−

q

and the cross section σ. The conduction band density of states in free–electron–gas approxi-

mation is given by D(E) = V √2/π2√E

V0, where

V0 is the lower valence band limit with

−

−

respect to the ionization threshold (cf. Fig. 1). Values for the targets investigated in this

work are V0 = 10.6, 10.9, 15.9, 14 and 10.5 eV, respectively for Au(polycrystalline) [10,48],

Au(110) [10,48], Al [48], LiF [46], and KI [49]. V is a volume which we assume to be one

(a.u.)3 for the following. The factor

2(E

Vb) is the classical velocity of active electrons

while passing the potential barrier. The energetic bottom of the conduction band lies V0

below the ionization threshold, and the geometrical factor 1/4 in (2.18) relates the isotropic

−

q

density of states, D(E), to the electron current along the positive surface normal. The cross

section

∆x
2 (cid:19)
is equal to the classically allowed area over the potential saddle through which the current

σ = π

(2.19)

(cid:18)

2

representing active electrons needs to ﬂow. The eﬀective width ∆x(t) =

|
the saddle at any time is given implicitly by the two solutions x1 and x2 of

x1(t)

x2(t)

of

−

|

12

εn(R) + Vim,p(qp, x

Xp, zb + R) + Vim,e(zb) + Vlocal(x, zb, t) = Vtot(qp, x, zb, Xp, R, t) (2.20)

−

where, as in (2.4), the nuclear image potential is evaluated on the axis x = Xp.

We note that the valence band density of states of an ionic crystal per se is poorly

represented with the free electron gas model. H¨agg et al. [36] used classical Monte Carlo

techniques in order to simulate the over–barrier dynamics of target electrons that are released

from an anionic center by the highly charged projectile. Their Monte Carlo study indicates

that the electron is eﬀectively captured from LiF at a projectile surface distance that is

about 3 a.u. closer to the surface than the onset of classical electron capture across the

potential barrier. Interestingly, our numerical results, including capture rates modeled with

reference to the free electron density of states, also indicate a delayed onset between the

initiation of a classical over–barrier current and the projectile–surface distance where one

elementary charge has been transferred (see Section IIIA below). Furthermore, we point

out that previous dynamical COM studies on electron capture in collisions with C60 [7] have

shown a rather weak dependence of ﬁnal projectile charge states and critical capture radii

on variations in the resonant capture rates. We therefore conclude, that within the overall

accuracy of the COM and in view of the narrow valence band of ionic crystals, the free

electron gas model is suﬃciently realistic for providing acceptable estimates for resonant

capture rates. The agreement of our simulated projectile energy gains with experiments for

ionic crystal surfaces provides further support for this approximation (see Section IIIB2,

below).

The rate of electron loss from atomic energy levels into unoccupied bulk levels can be

obtained from the electron’s orbital frequency of revolution

(2.21)

multiplied with its probability to hit the saddle region that is approximately given by

2. Resonant loss

fn =

q2
ef f,n
2πn3

13

P (εn) = [zcrit(εn)

z]/zcrit(εn)

−

where zcrit(εn) denotes the critical distance where the ﬁrst electron capture occurs into shell

n [4],

For insulators, particularly for LiF with no unoccupied band levels below the vacuum level,

resonant loss is irrelevant, and I rl

n = 0.

Intraatomic Auger transitions induce small changes in the projectile occupation during

the interaction with the surface. Following reference [4] we express the Auger rates by a

simple analytic ﬁt through data points

that have been calculated with the Cowan code [47] for fast transitions between two given

shells ni and nf .

I rl
n (z) = fn ·

P (εn).

3. Auger processes

Γni,nf =

5.06
(ni −

10−3
·
nf )3.46

4. Rate equations

(2.22)

(2.23)

(2.24)

The dynamically varying projectile populations are obtained as solutions to the coupled

set of classical rate equations

dan
dt

= Θ(An −

an)Γrg

n −

anΓrl

n + wf,n

Xn′>n
where the degeneracy of shell n is given by An = 2n2. Θ is the unit step function. The

Xn′<n

Γn′,nwi,n′

2wi,n

Γn,n′wf,n′

(2.25)

−

(empirical) statistical factor wf,n = 1/(1+1.5an) corrects for the decrease in Auger transition

rates due to increasing populations an of the ﬁnal level. The statistical factor wi,n = 1

2 an(an−

1) takes the equivalence of electrons in the initial shell into account.

14

D. Projectile motion

Before reaching the ﬁrst critical over–barrier radius, the motion of the incoming HCI is

solely aﬀected by its attractive self–image force. For metal surfaces this force is given by

Fim,p−p(R) =

−  

2(R

zim) !

2

qp

−

(2.26)

and for insulating surfaces by the derivative of (2.4). After the projectile has reached the

ﬁrst critical over–barrier distance, charge transfer begins and, for insulators, the self–image

force (2.26) starts to compete with the repulsive force created by localized surface charges

(2.11). For grazing collisions, the latter force is weak, due to the large projectile velocity

component parallel to the surface, which rapidly increases the distance between previously

created surface charges and the HCI.

At distances R smaller than the largest radius of occupied atomic orbitals,

in, the
electron clouds of the incoming HCI and the surface ions begin to penetrate each other. The

r

h

accurate description of this situation would require detailed quantum dynamical calculations,

which are far beyond the overall simplistic nature and accuracy of the COM. In order to

determine the classical motion of the projectile, we employ the Thomas–Fermi model and

use the Thomas–Fermi–Moli`ere potential energy [50],

WT F M (r) =

qnuc,t

qnuc,p ·
r

r
a (cid:19)

.

φ

·

(cid:18)

This interatomic potential includes the Coulomb repulsion between the two nuclear charges

qnuc,p and qnuc,t of the HCI and a target atom, respectively, and a screening function φ that

depends on the internuclear distance r scaled by the screening length a,

(2.27)

(2.28)

with

αi}

{

{

=

0.35, 0.55, 0.10

,

βi}

{

}

{

=

0.3, 1.2, 6.0

.

}

3

φ(

) =

αi exp

r
a

Xi=1
a = 0.88534/

βi

r
a (cid:19)
(cid:18)−
q2/3
nuc,p + q2/3

nuc,t ,

r

15

For for small perpendicular projectile velocity components, as typically given in grazing

incidence collisions, the interaction of the HCI with an array of surface atoms or ions is well

represented by taking the planar average of (2.27) [51],

WT F M (R) =

2πaqnuc,pqnuc,t
d2
αi
βi

exp

3

Xi=1

φ′

R
a (cid:19)
R
a (cid:19)

(cid:18)

βi

(cid:18)−

φ′(

) =

R
a

(2.29)

where, for simplicity, we have assumed a square lattice with lattice constant d.

For ionic crystals that are composed of two diﬀerent ion species, we apply (2.29) sepa-

rately to surface lattices of anions and cathions. This results in the planar averaged potential

WT F M (R) = W anion

T F M (R) + W cathion

T F M (R)

(2.30)

where W anion

T F M + W cathion

T F M are constructed according to (2.29) with qnuc,t replaced by the

respective nuclear charges of anions and cathions and with the distance d between anions

or between cathions, respectively.

The force exerted on the projectile by the capture–induced surface charge distribution

(2.10) is repulsive with a parallel component that accelerates the projectile in positive x–

direction. It is given by

~Flocal(Xp, R) =

ǫ(0)
1
ǫ(0) + 1

dx′ λ(x′, t) (R , Xp −
(R2 + (Xp −
1)/(ǫ(0) + 1) accounts for the static dielectric screening (cf. equ. (2.11)).

x′)
x′)2)3/2 .

(2.31)

qp

−

Xp

x0

Z

The factor (ǫ(0)

−

The eﬀect of this force on the projectile motion parallel to the surface is small. For 30 keV

Xe15+ incident under a grazing angle of 1◦ on LiF, it changes the parallel component of the

projectile velocity by 0.2 %.

The net force on the projectile is now given by the negative gradient of WT F M , the

projectile self–image force (2.26), and (2.31),

~Fnet(Xp, R) =

(WT F M (R)) + Fim,p−p(R)

ˆez + ~Flocal(Xp, R).

(2.32)

)

d
dR

(−

16

III. NUMERICAL RESULTS AND DISCUSSION

In this section we are going to discuss the pronounced diﬀerences in the above–surface

neutralization dynamics between insulating and conducting targets as predicted by our sim-

ulations. All electronic interactions depend strongly on the projectile’s position on its tra-

jectory (Xp(t), R(t)), which, in turn, depends on the charge state evolution qp(t) and, for

insulator targets, on the trail of positive excess surface charges. Due to this coupling of

nuclear and electronic degrees of freedom, the reconstruction of measured projectile deﬂec-

tion angles and projectile energy gains will supply support for the speciﬁc interaction model

implemented in our simulation. Even though it is not yet possible to extract direct evidence

from the experimental data for the time evolution of many quantities included in our simu-

lation, such as shell populations and level shifts (Sec. III A), good agreement between energy

gain measurements and theory (Sec. III B) supports the validity of our model assumptions.

A. Interaction dynamics

Fig. 6a shows the simulated projectile charge evolution for Xe15+ ions colliding with an

Al target in one case, and a LiF crystal in the other. The incident projectile energy is

50 keV at a grazing incidence angle of 1◦. For Al, the ﬁrst critical distance for classical

over–barrier capture is Rc ≈
and image charges, which compared with the Al target are reduced by the altered dielectric

38. In the case of LiF, the interplay of the large workfunction

response function, eﬀectively shifts the onset of charge transfer by about 10 a.u. to Rc ≈
Our version of the COM does not impose charge quantization. By rounding to nearest

30.

integer charges, the neutralization sequence is therefore completed when the projectile charge

becomes smaller than 0.5 . In comparison with LiF, we ﬁnd that for the same ion–surface

distance R the early onset of electron transfer on Al leads to smaller projectile charges above

the metal target.

Diﬀerences in the time evolution of resonant gain processes become apparent by com-

17

paring resonant gain rates (Fig. 6b and Fig. 7a) or projectile level occupations (Fig. 6c and

Fig. 7b) for the two targets and incident Xe15+ ions. On the Al target, the n=18 shell of

the projectile becomes strongly populated with ﬁlling rates of the order of 1014s−1 (Fig. 7).

For LiF, resonant gain transfer occurs into the n=14, 13, and 12 shells. The sharp maxima

of the gain rates on LiF exceed the metal rates by almost two orders of magnitude. The

average neutralization rates, however, i.e. the slopes of the corresponding shell occupations

(Fig. 6a and (Fig. 7b), are only slightly higher in LiF. The interruption of the projectile

neutralization between R = 19 and R = 21 coincides with the transient increase of Vb above

W in Fig. 8(b). Resonant loss processes are either forbidden (LiF) or contribute with neg-

ligible rates (Al). For the Al target, shells below the resonantly populated level n=18 are

populated in Auger transitions.

The regularly spaced spikes in the resonant gain rate for Xe15+ impinging on LiF (Fig. 6b)

originate in the capture–induced local surface charges. As the surface–projected path of the

ion enters a new surface cell containing a single ﬂuorine F− ion, the workfunction is reset

to its original value W = 12 eV, such that the local Fermi level suddenly moves upwards

thereby stimulating over–barrier capture. The corresponding workfunction changes amount

to up to 6 eV (Fig. 8b), whereas oscillations in the barrier height Vb of the potential saddle

remain comparatively small with an amplitude of less than 1 eV as the ion travels over the

surface cell boundaries. This relatively inert behavior of Vb can be explained by the moderate

inﬂuence of the local surface charges on the total potential Vtot near the saddle position zb

which is situated typically a few a.u. in front of the ﬁrst bulk layer (see also Fig. 5). We

note that, if capture from a given anion proceeded, the local workfunction would increase

by about 10 eV per unit capture–induced surface charge. However, due to the high transfer

rates of up to 1016s−1 the continuous current of negative charge is quickly cut oﬀ at the

moment when the Fermi level is shifted below the saddle point Vb (”over–barrier cut-oﬀ”).

In other words, the local workfunction change (i.e. the shift of the Fermi level towards lower

energies and below Vb) generated by capture–induced surface charges produces the peaked

structures in the resonant gain rates. For the Al target, the absence of local surface charges

18

results in a comparatively steady evolution of the gap between Vb and W (Fig. 8a) and

results in the mostly smooth development of the dominant resonant gain rates in Figure 7a.

Considering the characteristic discrepancies in the resonant exchange mechanisms, it is

surprising that the average rate of neutralization is very similar for both targets. The eﬀects

of the low alkali halide workfunction on the onset of charge exchange, the reduced dielectric

response of the insulator, and local surface charges appear to be counterproductive. As will

be shown below (Sec. III B), this interplay is also related to the strikingly small diﬀerences

between the image energy gains of a particular HCI on LiF and Al targets.

In Figure 9 we compare ion trajectories for grazingly incident 20 keV Xe15+ on Al and

LiF surfaces. At large distances, the magnitude of the perpendicular velocity component

vz|
steadily increases due to the attractive projectile self–image force. The short range TFM–

|

potential in (2.27) causes the inversion of the trajectory in a small region that measures

about 2 a.u. relative to the vertex of the trajectory leading to nearly specular reﬂection.

For the LiF target the attenuated dielectric response of the insulator weakens the image

attraction in comparison with a metal target. We simulated this eﬀect in a separate calcu-

lation for LiF where we replaced the insulator speciﬁc dielectric response in the projectile

(self–) image interactions by the asymptotic response of a perfect metal, taking (2.26) and

the limit ǫ

in (2.4). This yields a noticeable change in the ion trajectory. Before

→ ∞

capture sets in at large R, only the image force acts on the HCI and the “metal dielectric

response” trajectory for LiF nearly coincides with the ion trajectory in front of Al. The re-

placement of the insulator–speciﬁc dielectric response by the metallic response on LiF moves

the onset of charge transfer 13 a.u. closer to the surface. This shifts the potential barrier

upwards due to the more repulsive (unscreened) projectile image term (2.4), thus reduces

the amount of charge captured, and more than doubles the overall energy gain above the

target, clearly leading away from both our dynamical COM with insulator–speciﬁc response

and experimental results (see Sec. III B).

In another separate simulation we have eliminated all eﬀects due to the capture–induced

positive surface charge distribution on LiF (Fig. 9). The local surface charges add to the

19

projectile repulsion near the surface. The vertex is now located about 0.1 a.u. closer to the

ﬁrst bulk layer than for the genuine 50 keV Xe15+–LiF simulation including local surface

charges. This small shift suggests that the direct inﬂuence of these surface charges on the

projectile trajectory is rather small. The large discrepancy of 12.8 eV in the image energy

gains between both simulations (see Section III B 2) originates mainly from deviations in

the neutralization dynamics leading to a higher average projectile charge in front of the

surface when local surface charges are disabled. This can be understood by considering

that the component Vlocal in (2.11) pulls down the potential barrier (2.1) and also the

projectile energy levels (2.16) and thus counteracts electron loss due to level promotion

into the continuum (if an occupied level gets promoted to the continuum, we assume that

the level is instantaneously ionized).

The distance of closest approach to the surface under grazing incidence is determined by

the initial velocity component perpendicular to the surface, the total kinetic energy gain of

the HCI at the turning point, and by the composition of the target material via the screened

interatomic interaction (2.27). Our simulations yield turning points at R = 1.1 and 1.3 for

Xe15+ ions impinging on Al and LiF, respectively, at an incident energy of 30 keV and an

incidence grazing angle of 1◦.

B. Image energy gains

After having presented detailed results on the interaction dynamics in the previous sec-

tion, we are now going to demonstrate that the extended dynamical COM can quite ac-

curately reproduce previously published (measured and simulated) data on image energy

gains for both conducting and insulating crystals over a wide range of initial projectile

charge states. Our simulations as well as recent experiments [29] show that the neutraliza-

tion of the HCI is completed prior its reﬂection for a wide range of initial projectile charge

states. The inversion of the perpendicular velocity component v⊥ takes place at a distance

of a few atomic units above the surface (Fig. 9), and the measurable diﬀerence between the

20

asymptotic incident and reﬂection angles of an ion beam can be straightforwardly correlated

to the net image energy gain [52,27].

1. Metals

Image energy gains of a HCI impinging on metal surfaces are characterized by an ap-

proximate q3/2

p –increase with the initial projectile charge state qp [9,10,27]. A lower limit

for the energy gain can be deduced by assuming that the projectile is instantaneously and

completely neutralized at the ﬁrst critical distance Rc ≃
refer to this estimate as ”simple COM”. The energy gain for large qp is then given by the

√8qp + 2/(2W ) [53]. We shall

analytical formula

∆E =

q2
p
4Rc

=

W q3/2
p
4√2

.

(3.1)

Consequently, ∆E/W should be independent of the target material.

The simple COM can be improved by letting one electron transfer to the HCI each time

the over–barrier condition is fulﬁlled at consecutive critical radii for the ﬁrst, second, etc.

capture. This version of the COM is called the ”staircase model” [10]. In contrast to the

dynamical COM (Sec. II A), in the simple and staircase model the charge transfer current is

quantized. For energy gains of Xeq+ projectiles on an Al surface, the staircase model almost

coincides for all initial charges qp with the dynamical COM, and the simple model predicts, as

expected, lower energy gains for all qp (Fig. 10). Except for the highest charge states, both,

the staircase and dynamical COMs agree with the experimental gains of Winter et al. [52],

even though the more elaborate dynamical COM employs transition rates that depend on

the width and depth of the potential saddle. The simple model underestimates the measured

energy gain, except for the highest charge states, where agreement with the experiment may

be fortuitous. Except for the simple COM, all simulations intersect the experimental error

bars for charge states qp ≤

30. All simulations show the general q3/2

p –trend.

The deviation in the experimental data from the approximate q3/2

p –proportionality of the

energy gain in all COM versions above qp ≃

26 (Fig. 10) has been scrutinized by Lemell et al.

21

[10]. The authors rule out both saturation eﬀects in the surface charge density ﬂuctuations

induced by the HCI at R = Rc and eﬀects due to the parallel velocity of the HCI. They

conclude that the measured deviation from the q3/2

p –proportionality is due to incomplete

screening of outer shells at decreasing R which, for high initial projectile charges, leads to a

faster decrease of the eﬀective projectile charge and, therefore, to a diminished increase in

the energy gain as a function of qp. However, as far as we know, the initial charge state qp

at which the experimentally observed plateau appears has not yet been reliably calculated

within any COM (see also the review article of Winter [29] and references therein). Figure 10

also shows that the staircase COM calculation of Lemell et al. [10] agrees with our results.

Kurz et al. [54] have analyzed total electron yields for higher charge states as a function of

the inverse projectile velocity. Their data for Xeq+, q = 34 . . . 50 and Thq+, q = 61 . . . 79 on

gold surfaces under perpendicular incidence provide, if at all, weak evidence for a deviation

of the energy gain from the q3/2–proportionality (Fig. 11). We note that the experimental

method of reference [54] is prone to larger errors than the deﬂection angle method [52]. Our

dynamical COM data for Thorium are near the upper end of the experimental error bars.

In Figure 12 we compare our dynamical COM results for 150 keV ions on Au with energy

gains measured by Meyer et al. [28] and with the COM simulation of Lemell et al. [10]. The

experimental results show good overall agreement with our calculations for both projectiles

but fall systematically short of the dynamical COM values above qp ≃

30.

Energy gains for 50 keV Xe ions directed under a grazing incidence angle of 1◦ on alkali

halide crystals (LiF and KI) have been measured recently by Auth et al. [31,33] by using

the deﬂection angle method [52]. Our extended dynamical COM simulations agree with

experiment for the KI target for qp < 17 (Fig. 13). However, experiment and simulation

tend to deviate in a systematic way for the LiF target, where, for low and intermediate

incident charge states, the measured values slightly exceed our simulations. We tried to

2. Insulators

22

identify an adjustable parameter in order to further improve the agreement with experiment

for both targets.

In the oncoming paragraphs we will discuss several of the eﬀects that

appear in our insulator extension of the COM and use Xe15+ on LiF and KI, with an energy

gains of 43.6 eV and 31.8 eV, as a reference.

At ﬁrst we take a closer look at eﬀects that are induced by the surface charges. We

observe that the restriction of one removable charge per F− ion (which we did not apply

to iodine for its vast number of outer shell electrons) lowers the energy gain by 1.6 eV.

Furthermore, disregarding all capture–induced surface charges (cf. curves labeled qlocal = 0

in Fig. 13) increases the energy gain of Xe15+ on LiF to 56.3 eV. For the KI target, however,

the neglect of surface charges increases the energy gain to 37.0 eV for incident Xe15+ which

lies above the experimental error bars. Our numerical results show the expected increase

for energy gains at all charge states if we discard surface charges. For the KI target, the

inclusion of capture–induced surface charges improves the agreement between simulated and

measured energy gains.

With respect to the ionic conductivities, we note that σ has to be increased by more than

six orders of magnitude in order to induce any signiﬁcant change in the energy shifts. Despite

our crude estimates for σ and the order–of–magnitude derivation of the time constant τ in

(2.9), we can therefore exclude life–time eﬀects of capture–induced surface charges on the

simulated energy gains.

The image plane is located at one anionic radius above the uppermost bulk layer. This

choice constitutes an upper limit for zim. Alternatively, as an accurate value is diﬃcult to

assess and the concept of an image plane is not well deﬁned for ionic crystals, one could use

zim as an adjustable parameter. Placing the charge distribution at the topmost lattice plane

diminishes the image energy for Xe15+ by 1.6 eV on LiF. For KI the energy gain slightly

increases by 0.6 eV.

We have performed all simulations with free–electron densities of states and a constant

volume factor V = 1 in the transition rates (2.17), which is a rather poor approximation for

an ionic crystal and may not give suﬃcient credit to the characteristics of a particular crystal;

23

the negative ﬂuorine ion possesses six 2p–electrons, whereas iodine ion holds a large number

of loosely bound electrons. In an attempt to work this information into the simulation, we

reduced the resonant gain rates (2.17) for the LiF target by a factor of 5. As a result we ﬁnd

that these modiﬁed rates lead to energy gains on LiF that lie inside the experimental error

bars for all charge states. In a more realistic representation of the target electronic structure,

more attention must be given to the valence electrons of the anions. The above–mentioned

discrepancies for KI and higher charges of the incident projectile may be related to the

simpliﬁed representation of the target electronic structure inherent in our implementation

of the dynamic COM.

As explained in Section IIA, our simulations were limited to trajectories with Yp = 0,

for which the collision plane intersects anionic and cathionic nuclei along the [100] direction.

Since in surface scattering experiments the incident ion beam illuminates a surface area

that is large compared with a surface unit cell, we addressed the sensitivity of our simulated

energy gains to changes in Yp. For Yp = 0.5d, corresponding to surface–projected trajectories

half way between ionic rows, we ﬁnd for 30 keV Xe15+ projectiles incident under 1◦ on LiF

a kinetic energy gain of 44.6 eV, compared to 43.6 eV for trajectories with Yp = 0 and

an experimental value [33] of 53.2 eV. The slightly larger energy gain is consistent with

the increased average distance of capture–induced surface charges from the projectile. The

change in energy gain with Yp is suﬃciently small such that, within the overall accuracy of

our calculation, we do not need to include a time–consuming average over trajectories with

diﬀerent Yp in our simulation.

IV. CONCLUSIONS

In this work we applied and discussed extensions to the classical over–barrier model

that include insulator speciﬁc eﬀects such as capture–induced local surface charges, local

workfunction changes, and the dielectric response of the target. A detailed study of the

interaction mechanism has been presented in terms of the time evolution of projectile level

24

occupations, transition rates, and several other quantities involved in the neutralization

process.

Our results are in good agreement with previously published experimental data for highly

charged ions impinging on two diﬀerent alkali halide ionic crystals. In order to verify the

basic framework of our implementation of the dynamical COM, we have disabled all eﬀects

related to insulators and found good agreement with energy gain measurements for a variety

of incident ion charge states and metal targets.

Acknowledgments

We acknowledge helpful discussions with H.J. Andr¨a, L. H¨agg, and C.O. Reinhold. This

work was supported by the Division of Chemical Sciences, Basic Energy Sciences, Oﬃce of

Energy Research, U.S. Department of Energy, by the Kansas Center for Advanced Scientiﬁc

Computing sponsored by the NSF EPSCoR/K*STAR program, and by the National Science

Foundation. One of us (JJD) is supported in part by the German Bundesministerium f¨ur

Bildung, Wissenschaft, Forschung und Technologie under contract no. 13N6776/4.

25

REFERENCES

[1] H.J. Andr¨a et al., in Proceedings of the XVII International Conference on the Physics

of Electronic and Atomic Collisions, Brisbane, Australia, 1991, edited by W.R.

MacGillivray, I.E. McCarthy and M.C. Standages (Adam Hilger, N.Y. 1992).

[2] J. Burgd¨orfer, in Review of Fundamental Processes and Applications of Atoms and Ions,

edited by C.D. Lin (World Scientiﬁc, Singapore, 1993).

[3] F. Aumayr, in Proceedings of the XIX. International Conference on the Physics of

Electronic and Atomic Collisions, Whistler, Canada, 1995, AIP Conference Proceedings

306 (AIP Press, Woodbury, N.Y. 1995).

[4] J. Burgd¨orfer, P. Lerner, and F. Meyer, Phys. Rev. A 44, 5674 (1991).

[5] J. Burgd¨orfer, C. Reinhold, and F. Meyer, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res. Sect. B

[6] A. B´ar´any and C.J. Setterlind, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res. Sect. B 98, 184

98, 415 (1995).

(1995).

[7] U. Thumm, J. Phys. B 27, 3515 (1994); 28, 91 (1995).

[8] U. Thumm, T. Ba¸stuˇg, and B. Fricke, Phys. Rev. A 52, 2955 (1995).

[9] J. Burgd¨orfer, C. Reinhold, L. H¨agg, and F. Meyer, Aust. J. Phys. 49, 527 (1996).

[10] C. Lemell, H.P. Winter, F. Aumayr, J.Burgd¨orfer, and F. Meyer, Phys. Rev. A 53, 880

(1996).

[11] U. Thumm, Phys. Rev. A 55, 479 (1997).

[12] J. Burgd¨orfer, E. Kupfer, and H. Gabriel, Phys. Rev. A 35, 4963 (1987).

[13] U. Thumm, J. Phys. B 25, 421 (1992); U. Thumm and J.S. Briggs, Nucl. Instrum.

Methods Phys. Res. Sect. B 40/41, 161 (1989); 43, 471 (1989); 47 476 (1990).

26

[14] A. Borisov, D. Teillet-Billy, and J. Gauyacq, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res. Sect.

B 78, 49 (1993).

[15] S.A. Deutscher, X.Yang, and Burgd¨orfer, Phys. Rev. A 55, 466 (1997).

[16] U. Wille, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res. Sect. B 100, 303 (1995).

[17] A. Borisov, R. Zimny, D. Teillet-Billy, and J. Gauyacq, Phys. Rev. A 53, 2457 (1996).

[18] P. K¨urpick and U. Thumm, Phys. Rev. A 54, 1487 (1996).

[19] P. Nordlander, Phys. Rev. B 53, 4125 (1996).

[20] F. Aumayr, H. Kurz, D. Schneider, M.A. Briere, J.W. McDonald, C.E. Cunningham,

and H.P. Winter, Phys. Rev. Lett. 71, 1943 (1993).

[21] H.J. Andr¨a, A. Simionovici, T. Lamy, A. Brenac, G. A. Pesnelle, Europhys. Lett. 23,

[22] F.W. Meyer, C.C. Havener, and P.A. Zeijlmans van Emmichoven, Phys. Rev. A 48,

[23] J. Limburg, J. Das, S. Schippers, R. Hoekstra, and R. Morgenstern, Phys. Rev. Lett.

[24] M. Grether, A. Spieler, R. K¨ohrbr¨uck, and N. Stolterfoht, Phys. Rev. A 52, 426 (1993).

[25] J.-P. Briand, L. de Billy, P. Charles, S. Essabaa, P. Briand, R. Geller, J.-P. Declaux, S.

Bliman, and C. Ristori, Phys. Rev. Lett. 65, 159 (1990).

[26] M. Schulz, C. Cocke, S. Hagmann, M. St¨ockli, and H. Schmidt–Boecking, Phys. Rev. A

44, 1653 (1991).

[27] H. Winter, J. Phys: Condens. Matter 8, 10149 (1996).

[28] F.W. Meyer, L. Folkerts, H.O. Folkerts, and S. Schippers, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys.

Res. Sect. B 98, 443 (1995).

27

361 (1993).

4476 (1993).

73, 786 (1994).

[29] S. Winecki, C. Cocke, D. Fry, and M. St¨ockli, Phys. Rev. A 53, 4228 (1996).

[30] Q. Yan, D.M. Zehner, F.W. Meyer, and S. Schippers, Phys. Rev. A 54, 641 (1996).

[31] Ch. Auth, T. Hecht, T. Igel, and H. Winter, Phys. Rev. Lett. 74, 5244 (1995).

[32] J. Limburg, S. Schippers, R. Hoekstra, R. Morgenstern, H. Kurz, F. Aumayr, and HP.

Winter, Phys. Rev. Lett. 75, 217 (1995).

[33] Ch. Auth and H. Winter, Phys. Lett. A 217, 119 (1996).

[34] J. Limburg, S. Schippers, R. Hoekstra, R. Morgenstern, H. Kurz, M. Vana, F. Aumayr,

HP. Winter, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res. Sect. B 115, 237 (1996).

[35] A.G. Borisov, V.Sidis, and H.Winter, Phys. Rev. Lett. 77, 1893 (1996).

[36] L. H¨agg, C.O. Reinhold, and J. Burgd¨orfer, Phys. Rev. A 55, 2097 (1997).

[37] F. Casali and U. Thumm, Bull. Am. Phys. Soc. 41, 1129 (1996).

[38] A. B´ar´any, G. Astner, H. Cederquist, H. Danared, S. Huldt, P. Hvelplund, A. Johnson,

H. Knudsen, L. Liljeby, and K.-G. Rensfeld, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res. B 9,

397 (1985).

[39] A. Niehaus, J. Phys. B 19, 2925 (1986).

[40] F.J. Garc´ıa de Abajo and P.M. Echenique, Phys. Rev. B 46, 2663 (1992).

[41] R. Lowndes and D. Martin, Proc. Roy. Soc. London A, 473 (1969).

[42] J. Jackson, Classical Electrodynamics, 2nd ed. (Wiley, N.Y. 1975).

[43] P.J. Jennings, R.O. Jones and W.Weinert, Phys. Rev. B 37, 6113 (1988).

[44] N.F. Mott and M.J. Littleton, Trans. Faraday Soc. 34, 485 (1938).

[45] G.D. Mahan, Phys. Rev. B 21, 4791 (1980).

[46] M. Piacentini and J. Anderegg, Solid State Commun. 38, 191 (1981).

28

[47] R. Cowan, The Theory of Atomic Structure and Spectra (University of California Press,

[48] N.W. Ashcroft and N.D. Mermin, Solid State Physics (W.B. Saunders, Philadelphia

Berkeley, 1981).

1976).

[49] W.P. O’Brien, Jr. and J.P. Hernandez, Phys. Rev. B 8, 3560 (1974).

[50] G. Moli`ere, Z. Naturforschg.2a 133 (1949).

[51] D. S. Gemmell, Rev. Mod. Phys. 46, 129ﬀ (1974).

[52] H. Winter, Ch. Auth, R. Schuch, and E. Beebe, Phys. Rev. Lett. 71, 1939 (1993).

[53] J. Burgd¨orfer and F. Meyer, Phys. Rev. A 47, R20 (1993).

[54] H. Kurz, F. Aumayr, HP. Winter, D. Schneider, M.A. Briere, and J.W. McDonald,

Phys. Rev. A 49, 4693 (1994).

29

FIGURES

FIG. 1. The band structure of the ionic LiF crystal with a large workfunction of 12 eV and

a wide band gap of 14 eV. The (polycrystalline) gold target represents a typical metal with a

workfunction of about 5 eV and a continuum of unoccupied conduction band states above the

Fermi level.

FIG. 2. The linear capture–induced charge distribution λ(x, t) trailing the path of the ion

(schematically). The capture sequence starts when the incident highly charged ion reaches the

critical over–barrier distance at a position (Xp, R) = (x0, Rc) at time t0. For our applications to

ionic crystals, we assume that electrons are captured from the closest surface anion.

FIG. 3. Classical currents ~j that are driven by the ﬁeld ~E = σ~j of a capture–induced surface

charge restore electric neutrality. A decay time constant τ can be derived from the macroscopic

conductivity σ by applying Gauss’ theorem to the current ~j and a Gaussian surface given by a

hemisphere with the positive excess surface charge in its center.

FIG. 4. The charge state dependent local workfunction W of LiF is approximated by splitting

potentials acting on a bulk atom into an anionic contribution, the ionic binding energy Eq

bind, and

the Madelung background potential VM ad,bg representing the rest of the bulk. The distance rq

anion

denotes the orbital radius of the most loosely bound subshell of the ionic state and is dynamically

adjusted to the excess local capture–induced charge q.

FIG. 5. Contributions to the total electronic potential Vtot for 50 keV Xe15+ approaching a

LiF surface at an angle of 1◦ along an axis perpendicular to the surface that includes the projectile

nucleus. The projectile is on the incident part of the trajectory at R = 10 and qp(R = 10) = 2.8.

FIG. 6. Results for Xe15+ at Ekin = 50 keV and an incidence angle of 1◦. Time evolution of

the projectile charge state for LiF and Al surfaces (a). Resonant gain rates on LiF for the two

highest resonantly populated shells (b). Projectile shell occupations on LiF (c).

30

FIG. 7. Results for Xe15+ (Ekin = 50 keV) ions impinging under 1◦ grazing incidence conditions

on an Al surface. Time evolution of the resonant gain rates for the highest resonantly populated

shells (a). Shell occupation (b). Charge exchange primarily takes place via resonant gain into the

n = 18 shell.

FIG. 8. Results for Xe15+ ions impinging with Ekin = 50 keV at an grazing angle of 1◦ on

Al and LiF surfaces. The plot shows the time evolution of the potential barrier Vb, the target

workfunction W , and the projectile shell occupations of the most active shells. Vb and W display

characteristic oscillations on LiF, whereas all potentials evolve smoothly on Al (see text for details).

FIG. 9. Projectile trajectory in terms of the perpendicular projectile velocity component vz

versus R for 20 keV–Xe15+ ions impinging under 1◦ on Al and LiF. The ﬁrst two curves exhibit

standard dynamical COM simulations on these targets. The next two curves show simulation

results for the same Xe15+ projectile on LiF when local surface charges have been disabled in the

third and a large “metal” value for the dielectric susceptibility ǫ

has been chosen for the

7→ ∞

fourth curve. Xp = 0 corresponds to the vertex of the full simulation for LiF.

FIG. 10. Experimental [52], simulated staircase COM results [10], and our simulated energy

gains (dynamical COM) for Xeq+ (3.7 q keV, 1.5◦) on an Al surface. The simple model assumes

instantaneous complete neutralization at the ﬁrst critical distance Rc and sets a lower boundary

for projectile energy gains. The staircase COM instantaneously transfers one charge unit each

time the over–barrier condition is fulﬁlled. In the dynamical COM continuous charge currents ﬂow

between projectile and surface with rates derived from a classical model.

FIG. 11. Experimental [54] and our simulated data (dynamical COM) for very high charge

state ions impinging on polycrystalline gold.

FIG. 12. Experimental [28], simulated staircase COM results [10], and our simulated data

(dynamical COM) for 150 keV Iq+ and Pbq+ ions with charge states qp ≤

36 on Au.

31

FIG. 13. Experimental energy gains [33] compared with our dynamical COM simulations. Re-

sults obtained by neglecting capture–induced local surface charges are labeled as qlocal = 0.

Table I. Static limit (ǫ0), optical limit (ǫ∞) and characteristic frequency ω0 used in

(2.6) for the dielectric response of LiF and KI crystals at T=290◦C [41].

ǫ0

ǫ∞ ω0 in 10−3 a.u.

LiF 9.00 1.93

KI 5.09 2.65

1.39

0.46

32

LiF

Au

E [eV]

conduction

band

valence

band

conduction

band

-5.1

-10.6

-12

-14

Figure 1

+

R

+

e

Rc

e

e

+

e

+

+

+

++

+
+
x,tλ(    )

(      )
0    0x ,t  

Xp

Figure 2

+

j E||

Figure 3

Madelung background

VMad,bg

ionic binding energy

q
bindE

^ez

qranion

+

+

--

-

+

Li

jR

+

-

F

-

+

Figure 4

Vtot
Vproj
Vim,p
Vim,e
Vlocal
W

R=10 a.u.

qp(R)=2.8
zim=2.57 a.u.

Xe15+ on LiF

]

V
e
[
 
l
a
i
t
n
e
t
o
p

10

5

0

−5

−10

−15

−20

−25

zb

5.0
z [a.u.]

3.0

3.5

4.0

4.5

5.5

6.0

6.5

7.0

Figure 5

Xe15+ on LiF
Xe15+ on Al

p
q
 
e
g
r
a
h
c
 
.
j
o
r
p

15.0

12.5

10.0

7.5

5.0

2.5

0.0

1x1016

5x1015

]

1
−

s
[
 

n

g
r

2x1015

i

I
 
e
t
a
r
 
n
a
g
 
t
n
a
n
o
s
e
r

5x1014

2x1014
8.0

n
a
 
n
o
i
t
a
p
u
c
c
o
 
l
e
v
e

l

6.0

4.0

2.0

LiF

LiF

a

n=14
n=13
n=12

b

n=14 
n=13 
n=12 
n=11 

c

0.0

0

5

15

10

20
perpendicular distance R [a.u.]

25

30

35

40

Figure 6

a

b

n=18

Al

n=18
n=14
n=13
n=12

Al

]

1
−

s
[
 

n

g
r

i

I
 
e
t
a
r
 
n
a
g
 
t
n
a
n
o
s
e
r

1.5x1014

1x1014

5x1013

2x1013

10.0

8.0

6.0

4.0

2.0

0.0

n
a
 
n
o
i
t
a
p
u
c
c
o
 
l
e
v
e

l

5

10

15

20

25

30

35

40

perpendicular distance R [a.u.]

Figure 7

  Vb
  W
n=19
n=18
n=17

Al

a

  Vb
  W
n=15
n=14
n=13

LiF

∆R

]

V
e

[
 
y
g
r
e
n
e

2

0

−2

−4

−6

0

−5

]

V
e
[
 
y
g
r
e
n
e

−10

−15

−20

10

15

20

25

30

35

40

perpendicular distance R [a.u.]

b

Figure 8

metal: Al
insulator: LiF
LiF: qlocal = 0
LiF: ε
oo

]
.
u
.
a
[
 

i

R
 
e
c
n
a
t
s
d
 
r
a
u
c
d
n
e
p
r
e
p

i

l

60

50

40

30

20

10

0

−1200

−1000

−800

−600
parallel distance Xp [a.u.]

−400

−200

0

Figure 9

Expt.: Winter et al.
dynamical COM   
simple COM
staircase COM
staircase COM: Lemell et al. 

Xeq+ on Al

]

i

V
e
[
 
n
a
g
 
y
g
r
e
n
e

200

180

160

140

120

100

80

60

40

20

0

0

5

10

15

20

25

30

35

initial projectile charge qp

Figure 10

Xeq+ on Au (Kurz et al.)
Thq+ on Au (Kurz et al.)
Xeq+ on Au: dynamical COM  
Thq+ on Au: dynamical COM 

1000

800

600

400

200

]

i

V
e
[
 
n
a
g
 
y
g
r
e
n
e

0

30

40

50

60

70

80

initial projectile charge qp

Figure 11

 Iq+  on Au (Meyer et al.)
Pbq+ on Au (Meyer et al.) 
 Iq+  on Au (dyn. COM) 
Pbq+ on Au (dyn. COM) 
simulation (Lemell et al.)

]

i

V
e
[
 
n
a
g
 
y
g
r
e
n
e

250

200

150

100

50

0

8

10

12

14

16

28

30

32

34

36

38

20

22
18
initial projectile charge qp

24

26

Figure 12

Xeq+ on LiF (Winter et al.)
Xeq+ on LiF (dyn. COM)  
Xeq+ on KI (Winter et al.)  
Xeq+ on KI (dyn. COM)
Xeq+ on LiF: qlocal = 0
Xeq+ on KI:  qlocal = 0

80

70

60

50

40

30

20

10

]

i

V
e
[
 
n
a
g
 
y
g
r
e
n
e

0

0

2

4

6

8

10
initial projectile charge qp

12

14

16

18

20

Figure 13
Figure 13

