7
9
9
1
 
v
o
N
 
8
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
m
o
t
a
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
0
3
0
1
1
7
9
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Interactions of Ar9+ and metastable Ar8+ with a Si(100) surface

at velocities near the image acceleration limit

J. Ducr´ee∗, J. Mrogenda, E. Reckels, M. R¨uther, A. Heinen, Ch. Vitt, M. Venier,

Institut f¨ur Kernphysik, Westf¨alische Wilhelms–Universit¨at M¨unster, Wilhelm–Klemm–Str. 9,

Laboratoire de Physico–Chimie Th´eorique, C.N.R.S. et Universit´e de Bordeaux I, 351 Cours de

J. Leuker, and H.J. Andr¨a

D–48149 M¨unster, Germany

R. D´ıez Mui˜no

Lib´eration, 33405 Talence Cedex, France

(February 21, 2014)

Abstract

New Auger LMM spectra and preliminary model simulations of Ar9+

and metastable Ar8+ ions interacting with a clean monocrystalline n–doped

Si(100) surface are presented. By varying the experimental parameters, sev-

eral yet undiscovered spectroscopic features have been observed providing

valuable hints for the development of an adequate interaction model. On our

apparatus the ion beam energy can be lowered to almost mere image charge

attraction. High data acquisition rates could still be maintained yielding an

unprecedented statistical quality of the Auger spectra.

32.80.Dz, 34.50.Dy, 34.70.+e, 36.20.Kd, 79.20.Rf

Typeset using REVTEX

∗corresponding author, email: ducree@uni–muenster.de

1

I. INTRODUCTION

The interactions of highly charged ions (HCI) with surfaces have attracted the strong

interest of several research groups in the past, getting a strong boost in the last decade due

to the increasing availability of high performance HCI ion sources and improvement of other

experimental equipment.

In recent years, various technological applications of HCI surface collisions have been

conceived, in particular for the wide ﬁeld of micro– and nanoscopic surface modiﬁcation. In

order to foster these eﬀorts, a better understanding of the diﬀerent stages of the scattering

process has to be attained. Experimentalists hope to take advantage of the quick charge

exchange processes and the release of the large amount of potential energy stored in the

HCI. Unfortunately little consent has been accomplished among researchers on the time

scales and the location of these processes although a comprehensive series of spectra and

interpretations has been published on this crucial issue so far.

According to the classical overbarrier model [1,2], the neutralization of the HCI sets in

at a critical distance of typically Rc ≃
on the target workfunction W and the initial charge q of the HCI. In the region below

15˚A in front of the ﬁrst bulk layer. Rc depends

Rc, target band electrons are successively captured into resonant ionic Rydberg states with

q

n

≃

· qR∞/W . As soon as more than two electrons have been transferred, the highly
excited hollow atom starts to relax via autoionization processes yielding low energy electrons.

X–ray emission is strongly suppressed for light nuclei. Several studies [3,4] have been carried

out showing that the overwhelming fraction of the reﬂected particles is neutral and suggesting

that the projectile charge q is already compensated on the incoming path. Nevertheless, it is

commonly accepted by now [5] that the intraatomic transition rates involved in the cascade

are by far too slow to perform a complete relaxation of the neutralized HCI in front of the

surface.

Autoionization spectra originating from highly charged ions containing initial inner shell

vacancies are characterized by a strong and intense low energy region and a uniquely shaped

2

high–energy branch which can unambiguously be ascribed to intraatomic transitions involv-

ing the inner shell vacancy. Despite of the low transition rates, certain peak structures can

even be associated with Auger emission from fully populated shells neighboring the initial

core conﬁguration.

In order to clarify the evolution from Rydberg populations to fully occupied lower shells

and motivated by new experimental ﬁndings [6–8] about large fractions of subsurface emis-

sion within the autoionization spectra, additional interaction mechanisms have been pos-

tulated and worked into simulations [9–11]. Also a comparison between Auger spectra for

the same HCI projectile impinging on diﬀerent target species [12] and a new theoretical ap-

proach [13] shed new light on the interaction scenario. It seems that the energetic positions

of target and projectile electronic states play an important role in all direct inner shell ﬁlling

mechanisms below the surface. After the HCI has penetrated into the bulk, band electrons

can shield the HCI core charge and directly feed the lower lying hollow atom states while

generating a plasmon or an electron hole pair [14,15] (MCV processes). For projectiles with

high kinetic energies, electrons can be directly transferred from bulk atom levels into inner

projectile levels yielding a velocity dependent ﬁlling rate [9].

In an attempt to extract information on particular transition types from the spectra,

experimentalists have analyzed L–Auger spectra of Ar9+ ions impinging on tungsten [16–19],

copper [20] and gold [6]. These early eﬀorts have been obstructed by the large number of

initial M–shell conﬁgurations that had to be considered in the interpretation of the LMM

spectra with a few distinctive structures only. In recent years, research activities focused

on K–Auger spectra of hydrogenlike second row ions C5+, N6+, O7+, F8+, Ne9+ [8,21–23]

and Ar17+ [3] instead. Some clearly pronounced peak regions can be identiﬁed in most of

these spectra and assigned to a comparatively small set of initial L–shell conﬁgurations. A

strong systematic dependence of the relative peak intensities of these KLL spectra on the

experimental conditions has provided valuable information about the contributing ionic shell

conﬁgurations.

In this paper, we present several series of L–Auger spectra emitted during the interaction

3

of Ar9+ and metastable “heliumlike” Ar8+ ions impinging with beam energies between 8eV

and 4.6keV and diﬀerent experimental geometries on a n–doped Si(100) crystal. For the

ﬁrst time, we discovered signiﬁcant modiﬁcations of the shape of the autoionization spectra

for diﬀerent projectile energies well below 1keV and for diﬀerent observation and interaction

geometries. They include two geometries which largely suppress the detection of all subsur-

face electron emission. The so obtained spectra exhibit a unique peak proﬁle which largely

deviates from spectra taken under all other experimental geometries.

These eﬀects are very surprising because in the energy regime below 1keV all collisional

M–shell sidefeeding can generally be ruled out and MCV rates can be treated in a static

approximation.

In order to understand the behavior of the spectra at diﬀerent incident

energies we developed an interaction model taking into account the special role of the 3d–

subshell which mediates an eﬃcient M–shell ﬁlling via valence band electrons within the

bulk. Incorporating this model into a Monte Carlo simulation, the observed alterations in

the subpeak intensities and positions can qualitatively be reproduced. This model is exper-

imentally supported by a series of L–Auger spectra emitted by metastable Ar8+ projectiles.

Under the same experimental conditions, the Ar8+ LMM Auger peak structures turn out to

be amazingly similar to the Ar9+ LMM structures.

Section II will introduce to the experimental setup implemented for our measurements.

In Section III, we display several sets of autoionization spectra as obtained under speci-

ﬁed experimental conditions. Section IV will describe how the LMM subpeaks in our Ar9+

spectra can be assigned to particular groups of intraatomic transitions. The next Section V

outlines the basic ingredients of the subsurface interaction model which we employ for the

simulation of the Auger spectra. In Section VI, we extract information about the evolution of

the projectile neutralization and Auger emission from the combined analysis of experimental

observations and the simulation results. Further experimental proof for the portrayed inter-

action mechanism will be given along the discussion of the L–Auger spectra of metastable

Ar8+ projectiles in Section VII. Finally, in Section VIII, we summarize the basic ﬁndings of

this paper and give a short outlook on future research.

4

II. EXPERIMENTAL SETUP

Highly charged ions are extracted by a ﬁxed voltage of -20kV from an ECR ion source,

developed in our laboratory. The metallic vacuum chamber of the source can be ﬂoated

on selectable potentials UQ with respect to earth potential. These ions are q/m–separated

by a double focusing sector magnet system including an aberration correction lens. Two

electrostatic Einzel lenses convey the beam through the intermediate stages of a diﬀerentially

pumped vacuum system which is needed to maintain the pressure gradient between the ECR

source (p

1

·

≃

10−6mbar) and the UHV target chamber (p

10−12mbar). Before hitting

5

·

≃

the grounded Si wafer, the ions pass through two deceleration lenses which are optimized

for a maximum of ions deposited on the target surface of approximately 1cm2.

The kinetic ion energy distribution is recorded by an ion spectrometer which is mounted

on the beam axis close behind the movable target. For Ar9+ and Ar8+ beams, the full width

at half maximum never exceeded 2eV per charge. The center of the peak is a measure

for the kinetic projectile energy after deceleration Ekin = q

(UQ + UP ) where UP is the

·

plasma potential which builds up between the plasma and the walls of the ECR source. An

averaged value of UP = 12V has been observed with variations over months of less than

2V.

±

The Si(100) surface has been prepared by successive cycles of Ar1+ sputtering at grazing

incidence and annealing until all impurities have disappeared from AES spectra and good

LEED patterns have shown up.

The geometry within the target chamber is displayed in Fig. 1(a). The beam axis inter-

sects the target surface at an angle Θ. Electrons are detected by an electrostatic entrance

lens followed by a 150◦ spherical sector analyzer at an angle Ψ with respect to the surface. In

most measurements we chose Θ + Ψ = 90◦. As Ψ approaches 0◦ in Fig. 1(b), the path length

inside the solid for electrons which are emitted below the surface drastically increases such

that the detection of above or near surface emission is clearly favored. Due to the chamber

alignment and the large acceptance angle of η = 16

6◦ of our electron spectrometer en-

trance lens, below–surface emission is always observed, but to a much smaller extent than

±

5

above or near surface emission. The absolute spectral intensity in the (Ψ

0◦)–geometries

≃

greatly diminishes, though. By rotating the target of Fig. 1(a) around the ion beam axis

with the surface normal pointing out of the image plane, the condition of Θ + Ψ = 90◦ could

be relaxed, and geometries with Θ = 5◦ and Ψ = 0◦ have been achieved.

The eﬀective incident energy of the ions on the surface is given by Ekin plus the energy

gain resulting from the image charge acceleration [24]

Eim ≃

W
3√2

q3/2

(1)

where the work function W equals 4.6eV for our Si target and q = 9. Accordingly, there will

always remain a minimum incident energy of approx. 29eV leading to an additional perpen-

dicular projectile velocity component ∆v⊥ = q2

Eim/m. Thus the interaction period of the

·

ion in front of the surface can principally not be stretched above an upper limit depending on

q and W even though the original perpendicular velocity component v⊥ = q2Ekin/m

cos(Θ)

·

of the projectile may vanish by selecting UQ =

UP or Θ

−
When the incident energy Ekin is lowered the beam spreads up at the target (Liouville’s

7→

0◦.

theorem) and incident angles may deviate from their nominal values Θ. In the energy domain

Ekin < Eim, the projectile path is strongly bent by the attractive image acceleration causing

increased eﬀective incident angles Θef f , especially for small Θ. Hence the values given for

Θ in this paper are intended to delineate the chamber geometry rather than the eﬀective

scattering geometry of an individual projectile.

Projectile penetration depths at the stage of complete neutralization and deexcitation

can be estimated by multiplying v⊥ by a typical overall interaction time of 10−14s. With

E⊥ = 1

2 mv2

⊥ expressed in eV, the perpendicular path length zpen of the Ar projectile within

the bulk can be attained from zpen = 0.22˚A

·qE⊥[eV]. This implies that at energies E⊥ in
the range of 100eV, zpen stays below one lattice constant amounting to 5.43˚A for Si. TRIM

simulations [25] performed for a 10eV and a 100eV Ar1+ beam impinging on a Si crystal at

perpendicular incidence yield average lateral ranges of 3

1˚Aand 10

4˚A, respectively. These

±

±

distances refer to the total penetration depth until the ion is stopped within the bulk.

6

III. EXPERIMENTAL OBSERVATIONS

Using the apparatus described in the preceeding section, we have measured secondary

electron spectra emitted by Ar9+ and metastable Ar8+ ions during their interaction with the

Si wafer. In this work we will focus on examining the well deﬁned high energy L–Auger peaks

covering the interval between 120eV and 300eV. The spectra also feature a low energy part

which extends up to more than 100eV. The analysis of electron spectra in this energy domain

is aggravated by a lack of substructures, the superposition of kinetic and intraatomic emission

and their sensitivity to stray electromagnetic ﬁelds. Regarding the high energy branch, we

point out that no background due to kinetic electron emission has to be considered for

121eV since the collision energies Ecoll = Ekin + Eim are smaller than the lower

Ekin ≤
bound of the spectral region to be examined. By selecting UQ =

20V< UP = 12

2V,

−

±

we can prevent HCIs from reaching the grounded target. Only projectiles that are partially

neutralized before the deceleration stages and secondary electrons which are generated by

collisions of the HCIs with beam transport lens elements (these are on negative potentials)

can hit the target where they may set free secondary electrons. We discovered that both

contributions are negligible.

In Fig. 2 we present three Ar9+ spectra measured under Θ = 45◦ and with Ekin = 9eV,

121eV and 1953eV. This and all following spectra are normalized to the total intensity in

the L–Auger region between 160eV and 240eV. Considering that at maximum one L–Auger

process per ion takes place, this type of normalization method is suitable to display the

intensity shifts between L–transition subgroups as discussed in this paper. We note that the

calibration of the spectra to the absolute beam intensity is prone to errors which emerge

from the uncertainty in the correction factors compensating geometrical and kinetic eﬀects.

At ﬁrst we recognize the general shape of an Ar9+ LMM spectrum featuring a dominant

peak at 211eV, a broad structure reaching down to about 120eV on the low energy side and

a shoulder sitting on the high energy tail of the spectrum. At Ekin = 9eV, this shoulder can

be resolved into two subpeaks of almost equal height at 224eV and 232eV. Proceeding to

7

higher Ekin, the 232eV–peak disappears and the 224eV–peak gains intensity. Presumably

due to the poor statistical quality, the latter 232eV–substructure cannot unambiguously be

identiﬁed in de Zwarts [18] measurement1 which was taken under the same experimental

geometry and roughly the same incident energy on a tungsten target.

The data acquisition statistics of our spectra exhibits a remarkably high quality. Beam

current shifts during measurements are compensated by an online normalization of the

spectra to the overall charge current Iq hitting the target. The accumulated counts per
1eV energy channel in the (Θ = 45◦,Ekin = 121eV)–spectrum amount to more than 200,000

at the 211eV–maximum letting the relative error drop below 0.3%. We note that each

spectrum in Fig. 2 has been recorded in a single ﬁve minute run. This is possible due to

the high current Iq = 125nA on the target which can be converted into a particle current

Ip by dividing Iq over the projectile charge q and applying a correction factor compensating

secondary electron emission. Multiplying Ip by an appropriate geometrical factor, it can be

shown that the overall experimental count rate in the high energy branch roughly correlates

to the emission of one high energy electron per incoming HCI.

The spectral series of Ar9+ ions impinging on Si(100) with constant Ekin = 121eV in

Fig. 3 displays the variation of the relative peak intensities with the experimental geometry.

Recalling Fig. 2, we discover that the presence of a strong 232eV–subpeak is connected to

minimum perpendicular velocities v⊥. In the measurement under Θ = 90◦, the observation

angle Ψ is very ﬂat and a second broad peak region evolves around 198eV. Switching to

the other “grazing observation” alignment at Θ = 5◦, Ψ = 0◦, this structure is preserved

proving that its presence is related to a small observation angle Ψ rather than the direction

of incidence Θ or Θef f .

Under Θ = 5◦, the perpendicular projectile penetration into the bulk is principally

1There has obviously been a mistake in the calibration of the plot on the energy axis that has

been corrected in [17].

8

limited to less than one lattice constant. The severe discrepancy between the two spectra

under Θ = 5◦ and Θ = 5◦, Ψ = 0◦ in Fig. 3 illustrates the extreme above–surface sensitivity

of the (Ψ = 0◦)–measurements since the physics of interaction is only determined by Θef f

and Ekin which remain constant. We deduce that the broad peak region is generated above

or at least near the ﬁrst bulk layer. Because this region looses its weight under Ψ = 45◦ when

electrons originating from all interaction phases are detected, above–surface processes only

supply a minor fraction of the total high energy emission. Nevertheless, the ratio between

the detected above– and below–surface emission is strongly enhanced at grazing observation

Ψ = 0◦ and small projectile penetration depths.

To obtain a quantitative estimate, we ran TRIM calculations [25] for Ar1+ ions colliding

with a Si target. The results show that a few percent of the incoming particles are reﬂected

for Ekin = 121eV and 2keV complying with the preceeding interpretation of the (Ψ = 0◦)–

spectra. We point out that one has to be careful about adopting these ﬁndings for HCI

beams because the TRIM code solely employs potentials which are strictly speaking only

valid for onefold ionized ground state projectiles. For incident energies of less than 10eV

when Eim > Ekin, the code fails to produce physically meaningful output since it obviously

misrepresents the potentials evolving from the complex coupling of the HCI–surface system.

These potentials are decisive for the calculation of the HCI trajectory along the prolonged

interaction period in front of the surface and the reﬂection probability. At such low incident

energies, no experimental data on reﬂection coeﬃcients of Arq+ impinging on Si(100) are

available in the literature or refers to grazing incidence conditions where the physics of

interaction is diﬀerent despite the similar vertical velocity components. The detection of the

unique peak proﬁle at grazing observation combined with the oncoming discussion may be

regarded as indirect experimental evidence for the existence of reﬂected projectiles.

The shifts of the upper edge of the 211eV–peak in Fig. 3 can consistently be explained

by an enhanced below–surface damping of the emitted electrons at Θ = 90◦ which is more

eﬀective than at Θ = 5◦, Ψ = 0◦ due to the higher perpendicular velocity component v⊥.

In Fig. 4 we show spectra of Ar9+ ions impinging on a n–Si(100) surface under diﬀerent

9

incident angles with minimal kinetic energies, i.e. Ekin = 9eV. For Θ = 5◦ and Θ = 45◦, the

spectra are nearly identical reﬂecting the fact that the self–image attraction is greater than

the kinetic projectile energy so that the eﬀective angle of incidence Θef f becomes almost

independent of its original value Θ. While approaching perpendicular incidence, the same

broad region between 160eV and 205eV as in Fig. 3 pops up again. For the two diﬀerent

(Ψ = 0◦)–geometries, the main peaks exhibit about the same height. Since v⊥ is minimal

in all four spectra, the upper edge of the 211eV–peak remains sharp and does not shift to

lower energies due to bulk damping as in Fig. 2. Even more, the high energy branches above

211eV coincide almost perfectly. Keeping in mind our particular choice of normalization

method and the minimum incident energy Ekin = 9eV, the latter feature suggests that the

peak intensity within the high energy tail region results from above–surface emission which

is insensitive to bulk damping of the outgoing electrons.

In Fig. 5 we present another series of Ar9+ spectra taken at a ﬁxed angle Θ = 90◦ (i.e.

Ψ = 0◦) for diﬀerent incident energies Ekin. As the point of emissions moves deeper into

the solid, below–surface contributions are successively ﬁltered out by bulk damping. The

double–peak proﬁle transforms into a single unstructured maximum widening to the low

energy side as Ekin increases. The low energy bounds of the 198eV maximum coincide at

Ekin = 9eV and 121eV. The spectrum measured at Ekin = 121eV demonstrates that the

appearance of the broad peak structure under Ψ = 0◦ and the 232eV–peak occurring solely

at minimal v⊥ are obviously not immediately linked to each other.

The combined analysis of the spectra in Figs. 2–5 renders the following preliminary

picture which will be supported by further evidence and simulations in the next sections.

The dominant 211eV–peak originates from below–surface emission since its center moves

downward, it broadens and its intensity decreases when long path length of the emitted

electrons through the bulk to the spectrometer entrance can be assumed. Furthermore,

it does not disappear with growing v⊥. This also holds for the lower lying part of the

spectrum. Two equally intense subpeaks on the high–energy shoulder exclusively appear

when v⊥ is minimized. As v⊥ increases, the 224eV–peak gains intensity while the 232eV–

10

peak quickly vanishes. This behavior suggests a dependence of the 232eV–intensity on the

above–surface interaction time even though the resulting emission process may occur after

surface penetration.

The broad peak region between 160eV and 205eV under Ψ = 0◦ and Ekin ≤
represents near– or above–surface emission since the “detection window” is shallow and the

121eV

chamber geometry favors detection of above–surface transitions at the same time. Subsurface

contributions are shielded by bulk damping. For reasons that will be given in Section VII,

it is likely that it is made up of a small fraction of above–surface emission from partially

screened incoming or ionized reﬂected particles. The preceeding experimental ﬁndings will

play a crucial role in the conception of an interaction model in Section VI.

IV. ENERGETIC GROUPING OF ATOMIC LMM TRANSITIONS

In this section we will attribute some spectral features occurring in the energy range

between 150eV and 300eV to distinct groups of LMM Auger transitions. The energetic

overlap between neighboring groups will “fortunately” turn out to be suﬃciently small such

that relative peak intensities can be related to the participation of distinguished Auger

processes. Furthermore, certain projectile deexcitation mechanisms can deﬁnitively be ruled

out if no intensity is measured in their proper energy range. By merely comparing peak

energies, we obtain valuable hints concerning the HCI–solid interaction which supplement

the experimental observations of Section III before launching any simulation. At the present

state of research, peak energies can be evaluated more accurately than transition rates for

the HCI solid system.

We employ the well known Cowan code [26] in order to simulate conﬁguration energies

based on spherically symmetrized wave functions for free atoms and ions.

In order to

calculate Auger transition energies within the bulk, we have to take into account the eﬀect of

the self induced charge cloud consisting of valence band (VB) electrons which surrounds the

HCI. First approaches have been made on this behalf [13,27] using the density functional

11

theory (DFT). Results show that the nonlinear screening eﬀects due to the electron gas are

to a good approximation equivalent to the screening by outer shell “spectator” electrons in

a free atom.

The hollow atom entering the bulk looses all Rydberg shell electrons due to the screening

by the target electron gas. The radii of the resonantly populated orbitals are of the order

of the capture distances, i.e. about 10˚A and therefore much larger than the Thomas–Fermi

screening length of less than one ˚Angstrøm as derived in a free electron gas model. Therefore

all Rydberg levels will be depleted leaving behind the original 1s22s2p5 core conﬁguration

and possibly some M–, N– and O–shell electrons. The target electron gas will swiftly take

over the role of the outer electrons to screen and so neutralize the HCI charge. A good

estimate for the reaction rate of the electron gas to the HCI “point charge” perturbation

is provided by the plasmon frequency which lies in the vicinity of 1016s−1 for metals. This

is way above typical rates of the other HCI bulk interaction processes and we can thus

assume that the HCI core screening by VB electrons is instantaneous. Except for the special

handling of the transitions with 3d–participation, which will be outlined below, all subsurface

Auger transition energies given in this paper will hence be derived for neutral initial states

possessing a total amount of q M– and N–shell electrons and singly ionized ﬁnal states.

Let us now look at the grouping of LMM transitions which is plotted in Fig. 6. The

histogram displays the energetic positions of all LMM transitions originating from initial

2p53sxpydz–conﬁgurations (nM = x+y+z

9) of “hollow” Ar9+ atoms which are neutralized

≤

via q

nM “spectator” electrons in the N–shell. Angular momentum coupling as in [5]

−

is not taken into account. Each transition is weighted by unity in the plot discarding

transition rates and statistical factors due to diﬀerent subshell occupations. For the sake

of clarity, the whole spectrum is convoluted by a Gaussian function of constant width 2eV.

This modiﬁcation evens out conglomerations of Auger lines at certain energies which are an

artifact of strictly applying the spectator electron approximation. The width is suﬃciently

small not to lead to an additional overlap of LMM subgroup intensities.

Within the same group, Auger transition energies generally tend to increase steadily

12

with the overall shell population. For comparison, the dotted line in Fig. 6 represents an

autoionization spectrum of Ar9+ ions impinging on a Si(100) surface at Ekin = 121eV and

Θ = Ψ = 45◦ as reproduced from the experimental data in Fig. 2.

Fig. 6 reveals that LMM Auger transitions involving a free and initially neutral Ar

atom can cover the energy interval between 166eV (2p53s24s2p5

2p63s04s2p5) and 267eV

7→

(2p53d9

2p63d7). For convenience, the groups of LMM transitions displayed in Fig. 6

7→

and the following part of the paper are classiﬁed by the angular ℓ quantum numbers of two

participating M–shell electrons. In all cases, the ﬁnal states are made up of the atomic 2p–

level, the remaining M–core states and an appropriate continuum state. For LMM processes,

we omit the 2p–level in our notation.

The low energy part of the LMM spectrum can be assigned to 3ss– and 3sp–transitions.

The higher 3sp–intensity can be explained by their statistical weight and their 3p–

contribution clearly enhancing the transition rates. The fact that the two small peaks

arising in some spectra between 190eV and 200eV fall into the 3sp–peak region in Fig. 6

might be fortuitous. Due to our coarse resolution concerning the energetic grouping, we are

not able to ascribe these peaks to particular 3sp–transitions.

Several reasons indicate that the dominant peak region around 211eV is composed of 3pp–

transitions out of a massively occupied M–shell instead of 3sd–transitions the energy range

of which also covers this peak region. At ﬁrst, it is intuitively plausible, considering that

all three bound state wave functions possess the same angular momentum, that the by far

highest LMM rates are calculated for the 3pp–group. Secondly, the sharp upper edge of the

211eV–maximum resembles the upper boundary of the 3pp–curve which is composed of 3pp–

transitions out of a completed M–shell. Due to level ﬁlling statistics, a sharp edge is unlikely

to form if its corresponding transitions take place out of intermediate shell occupations.

Thirdly, atomic structure calculations yield that 3pp–energies accumulate around 211eV for

all initial 3s2pydz–conﬁgurations (y + z

5), regardless of the particular choice of y and

z. This automatically implies that prior to the majority of all 3pp–decays either more than

seven electrons have to be captured into the M–shell or the induced charge cloud provides

≥

13

an equivalent screening eﬀect.

According to the LMM grouping in Fig. 6 we can assign the two subpeaks on the high

energy shoulder of the LMM–maximum to 3sd– and 3pd–transitions, respectively. 3pp–

processes are unlikely to contribute to the region above 213eV since they require at least

one 3s–vacancy along with a ninefold occupied M–shell. These initial conﬁgurations will

immediately be converted into 3s2–conﬁguration due to the very fast super Coster–Kronig

(sCK) decay channel involving three M–shell electron levels.

The spectral range of the 3pd–peak is cut oﬀ at about 235eV and 3dd–transitions do

obviously not produce enough intensity to appear with a distinct peak region in the spectra.

These observations provide experimental evidence that the 3d–level cannot be completely

populated within the bulk and that quick sCK transitions tend to carry 3d–populations into

lower lying sublevels before LMM transitions take place. The missing structures and the

spectral range of the high energy tail extending above 300eV suggest that it consists of the

large variety of LXY transitions with X,Y

N, O

rather than 3dd–transitions.

∈{

}

The LMM cut–oﬀ at 235eV can be understood by taking a deeper look at the eﬀective

projectile potential Vef f within the bulk (see Fig. 7) which is deformed with respect to the

corresponding free ionic Coulomb potential V f ree

Coul . Close to the projectile nucleus r

eﬀective potential Vef f converges into V f ree

Coul . At intermediate distances r

a0, the

≪
a0, the screening

≃

of outer levels and the electron gas starts to act on the projectile levels. In this domain Vef f

is well represented by a free atom potential V screen

Coul which is screened by outer shell spectator

electrons. All nl–subshells with energies Enl

b are elevated by a subshell dependent amount

of ∆Enl

b with respect to V f ree

Coul . Far away from the nucleus the eﬀective potential Vef f merges

into V0 denoting the bottom of the valence band.

Fig. 8 displays the M–sublevel binding energies Enl

b of Ar9+ as a function of the total

M–shell population nM . The values have been calculated by the Cowan code for spectator

electron conﬁgurations, i.e. for the potential V screen

. This modeling has proven to yield

Coul

good agreement with experimental and more sophisticated theoretical results in the past.

In a work by Schippers et al. [5], the main KLL peak energies of the hydrogenlike second

14

row ions C5+, N6+, O7+, F8+ and Ne9+ have been reproduced. Arnau et al. [27] have

demonstrated that the spectator electron model complies with DFT calculations including

nonlinear screening eﬀects for hydrogenlike Ne9+ ions in an Al target. Detailed calculations

even reveal that the induced charge density tries to mimic the shape of the wavefunctions

of the neighboring unoccupied atomic level.

In Fig. 8 we added 2p–binding energies of hydrogenlike C5+ and Ne9+ as obtained from

the spectator model and for comparison the DFT calculation for Ne9+ as a function of the

total L–shell population nL. Following [27], the screening of the atomic spectator electrons

resembles the screening by the VB electron gas because the inner atomic levels are energet-

ically separated from the VB much like they are separated from next higher subshell in a

free atom. This argument holds for the Ar9+ 3s– and 3p–level and also for nearly all L–shell

levels in hydrogenlike HCIs which are situated between the C5+ and Ne9+ curves.

The evolution of the 3d–sublevel energies with nM in Fig. 8 diﬀers from the lower lying

subshells, though. We observe that the 3d–level binding energies are signiﬁcantly closer

to the VB and grow above V0 as soon as more than ﬁve electrons populate the M–shell.

We performed a DFT calculation showing that 3d–electrons are already lost to the VB

continuum for nM > 4. The spectral cut–oﬀ in the 3pd–transition domain in Fig. 6 can now

be explained by omitting all contributions from 3pd–transitions with nM > 4. Aiming to

correct for the shape of Vef f which largely deviates from V screen

for Enℓ

and 8), we shift the atomic 3d–level to V0 for nM ≤
compared to the mere spectator electron model. In this manner we derive the experimental

Coul

b ≃
4 to attain higher transition energies

V0 (see Figs. 7

3sd– and 3pd–peak positions on the high energy shoulder within an accuracy of 2% and 1%,

respectively.

15

V. MONTE CARLO SIMULATION OF THE SUBSURFACE INTERACTION

PHASE

In order to elucidate the interaction mechanism which eventually generates the measured

spectra we worked out a Monte Carlo simulation [28]. Our goal was to reproduce the intensity

shifts of the observed spectra for diﬀerent incident energies in Fig. 2. On the analogy of

previous simulations by Schippers et al. [5], Page et al. [10] and Stolterfoht et al. [11] on the

L–shell ﬁlling of hydrogenlike highly charged ions at metal surfaces, we only keep track of

the populations of the two innermost projectile shells containing at least one vacancy and

focus on the most dominant transition rates. The ionic cores are neutralized by N–shell

spectator electrons. Among all intraatomic Auger processes, only those yielding an electron

above the vacuum level are considered.

During the simulation, the three M–subshell populations are recorded continuously.

Transition rates, transition energies and sublevel energies are evaluated dynamically at each

iteration step according to the particular

n3s|
next, only the fastest transition which is derived statistically from its nominal rate takes

–conﬁguration. From one step to the

n3d}

n3p|

{

place. The Monte Carlo method implies the averaging of the simulation results over a suﬃ-

cient amount of projectiles. We ﬁnd that the simulated spectra converge after N

1

105

≃

·

particle runs and chose N = 1

106. In our implementation of the subsurface cascade, each

·

particle is started at the ﬁrst bulk layer with a ﬁxed angle of incidence Θ = 45◦ and energy

Ekin. For Ekin = 121eV and 2keV we assume an initially empty M–shell.

A. Intraatomic rates

The LMM rates are evaluated by a ﬁt expression proposed by Larkins [29] for free

multiply ionized atoms possessing no N–shell spectator electrons. Accordingly, if one or two

of the n electrons of a subshell which could contain n0 electrons are involved in an Auger

process, the Auger rate calculated using the formulae appropriate for a ﬁlled shell Γf illed
ℓ1ℓ2

is

16

reduced by n/n0 or [n(n

1)]/[n0(n0 −

−

1)], respectively. Values for Γf illed

ℓ1ℓ2 are only supplied

for 3ss–, 3sp– and 3pp–transitions in the literature which account for the greatest part of

the overall LMM intensity in the literature. For 3sd–, 3pd– and 3dd–transitions, we scale the

LMM rates Γf illed

3ℓd

to reproduce the experimental peak heights. Table I lists the six Γf illed
ℓ1ℓ2

rates which are held constant for diﬀerent simulations.

These LMM rates should not be greatly aﬀected by the embedding of the HCI into

the electron gas because they chieﬂy depend on the radii of the participating M–subshells

which remain fairly unchanged. To show this we recall that the shape of the induced charge

cloud is similar to the N–shell. Within the hydrogen atom approximation, the radii of the

screening cloud rsc and the atomic shells (schematically inserted in Fig. 7) both scale with

(n

1)2

1 + 1

2 [1

−

{

ℓ(ℓ+1)
(n−1)2 ]
}

−

. The ratio rsc/r3p = 2.5 with sc = 4p has to be related to the ratio

r3p/r3s amounting to 0.83. Due to its great extension, the screening electron cloud should

therefore have a minor impact on the M–shell orbitals and hence on the LMM rates given

in Table I.

Since we do not resolve N–sublevels, Coster–Kronig MMN transitions have to be handled

by a global base rate for each M–level pair. In a simple approach, we weight each MMN base

rate by the initial M–sublevel occupation and ﬁnal state vacancies such that the average rate

amounts to 3

1014s−1. For the purposes of this paper, only the order of magnitude with

·

respect to the other transition types matters. We remark that Armen and Larkins [30] have

calculated transition rates for MMN decay channels which are of the order of 4

1014s−1,

·

depending strongly on the angular coupling. This is in suﬃciently good agreement with

our assumption. Only MMN transitions with a ﬁnal state above the continuum level are

included leaving over solely (3s)(3d)N transitions which are of particular importance for the

initial phase of the interaction.

The sCK MMM rates are known to be 10 to 100 times faster than any rates for Auger

transitions possessing the initial and ﬁnal holes in diﬀerent principal shells. In our simulation,

they mainly serve to regroup any M–shell conﬁguration into the appropriate M–shell ground

17

state before LMM transitions take place. To achieve this, we utilize a base rate of 1

1015s−1

·

which is scaled by the M–subshell occupation statistics. In Table II we put together the

average number of MMM processes per particle and the average M–sublevel occupation at

the time of MMM emission for the two sCK transitions which are relevant for our simulation.

B. MCV ﬁlling within the bulk

Target levels below V0 can be ﬁlled by transitions involving electrons of valence band

states (C) which are perturbed by the ionic core. The energy gain is conveyed either onto

another VB electron which is emitted into the continuum or a collective excitation (plasmon)

is created in the medium. The theoretical approach including the charge displacement in

the description of the excited outgoing electrons is much more complicated and, at present,

only unperturbed valence band states (V) are included in the calculations [14,15]. The VB

electrons take on the role of outer shells in a free atom.

Using DFT to describe the interaction between the ion and the metal valence band and

following the same scheme as in [15], we have derived MCV rates for the Ar9+–Si system.

Table III lists the rates per spin state ΓM CV

3ℓ

into the three M–sublevels with the number of

initial M–shell electrons nM as parameter. These MCV rates still have to be multiplied by

the number of unoccupied ﬁnal states in the particular M–sublevel to attain actual transition

rates between two atomic conﬁgurations. ΓM CV

denotes the overall MCV rate into the M–

tot

shell after carrying out the appropriate statistics. Since sCK transitions are much faster than

MCVs (cf. Table II), we only consider “Coster–Kronig ﬁnal states” as initial conﬁgurations

in the DFT calculation. The transition rates are independent of the projectile velocity vp

equaling their static values for all incident energies occurring in this work.

Table III reveals that ΓM CV

3d

assumes by far the highest values. Taking into account the

high degeneracy of the 3d–level, eﬀective rates ΓM CV

3d

exceed ΓM CV

3p

and ΓM CV

3s

by more than

one and two orders of magnitude, respectively. With increasing nM , MCV transfer into the

3p–state accelerates reaching the ΓM CV

3d

values at low nM . This is important considering that

18

for nM > 4 the 3d–shell vanishes and MCVs into the 3p–level constitute the most eﬀective

M–shell ﬁlling mechanism which is eventually responsible for the formation of the dominant

211eV–peak.

C. Collisional ﬁlling

For projectile energies above 1keV, sidefeeding into the HCI M–shell due to direct electron

transfer from target atom core levels supplies a velocity dependent ﬁlling rate. The transfer

crossection increases with the energetic vicinity of inner projectile and target states [31]

which is maximum for the Ar9+ 3s–level with the 2p–bulk level of Si possessing E2p

b = 109eV

(cf. Fig 8). Experimentally, a Si target LMM Auger peak for spectra with Ekin ≥
observed which is directly connected to the vacancy transfer. For 2keV projectiles traveling

1keV can be

through a silicon crystal in (100)–direction, collisional ﬁlling supplies a 3s–sidefeeding rate

of Γcoll

3s = vp/d = 1.8

·

1014s−1 going on the assumption of one electron transfer per collision.

Within the energy range below 1keV, collision frequencies are small and the distance of

closest approach is too large even for head–on collisions to allow a suﬃcient level crossing

for sidefeeding [31].

D. Simulation of the 121eV– and 2keV–spectra

In Fig. 9 we plot the experimental spectra from Fig. 2 into three subplots and compare

them with our simulation results which are convoluted by a Gaussian function of 3eV width.

In this section we look at the Ar9+ spectra and postpone the discussion of the Ar8+ spectra

which are displayed in the same plot to Section VII. The diﬀerence between the simulated

spectra in (a) and (b) stems from collisional ﬁlling which is exclusively enabled for Ekin =

2keV. In addition, we performed a convolution of the 2keV–spectrum with an exponential

function with a decay length of 3 a.u. to compensate for elastic and inelastic energy losses

of electrons on their way through the bulk region. For Ekin < 2keV, this damping becomes

negligible due to the shallow projectile penetration.

19

The intensity ratios among the diﬀerent LMM subgroups and their peak positions are

approximately reproduced. The 3pp–region displays too much intensity, though which might

be caused by the LMM rate ﬁt formula (cf. Section V A) overestimating the 3pp–rates for

high M–populations, see also [29] (Table VI). The 3ss–intensity is clearly too low suggesting

that other transitions types not considered in our model may contribute to this region. The

enhancement of the 3sd–peak parallel to the disappearance of the 3pd–peak and intensity

gain of the 3sp–region towards the Ekin = 2keV–spectrum as a consequence of the collisional

ﬁlling can nicely be observed (cf. Table I). The average M–sublevel populations at the time

of LMM emission (cf. Table I) indicate that the high energy shoulder is generated along

the early subsurface interaction phase. On the other hand, the dominant 3pp–peak occurs

at high M–populations beneﬁtting from the growing MCV rates into the 3p–level and the

disappearance of the 3d–level towards high nM . The missing 3dd–intensity conﬁrms the

presence of the fast MMN and MMM decay channels which inhibit the buildup of 3d–

populations larger than one.

In the experimental spectra, the low energy tail displays much less structure than the

simulation indicating that the mere spectator electron model might be incomplete. We

carried out other simulations where 20% of the LMM transitions start out from singly

ionized initial conﬁgurations such that the peak regions loose part of their intensity to

the low energy side. Doing so the intensity dip around 200eV gets partially ironed out

and the low energy tail stretches beyond 160eV. A similar eﬀect could be induced by the

consideration of L2,3MMM double Auger processes [32] for which Carlson and Krause [33]

measured a relative contribution to all radiationless transitions of 10

2% and energy shifts

±

of more than 10eV [34]. For the sake of the clarity of the displayed simulation results we

did not implement this correction in Fig. 9.

20

E. Simulation for a statistical initial M–population

It is very surprising that by reducing the incident energy from about 121eV to 9eV, a

signiﬁcant shift in the relative peak intensities still takes place. On the one hand velocity

dependent below–surface ﬁlling can be ruled out in this energy domain, on the other hand

this eﬀect must originate from diﬀerent subshell populations at the time of LMM emission.

Let us assume for the moment that individual M–subshells of each particle are ﬁlled statisti-

cally (by a Poisson distribution which is cut oﬀ at the subshell degeneracy) at the ﬁrst bulk

layer according to their respective degeneracy, i.e.

=2/18, 6/18 and 10/18, multiplied

by the mean total M–shell population

for ℓ = 3s–, 3p– and 3d–level, respectively. In

n3ℓi

h

nM i
h

Fig. 9 we present results of a Monte Carlo simulation with

nM i
h

= 2.

For a greater part of these initial conﬁgurations, new M–shell redistribution channels

open up via MMNs and sCKs which are energetically forbidden for nM = 0 and carry part

of the 3d–population immediately into the 3p– rather than the 3s–level. The simulations

in Fig. 9(b,c) and Table I indeed reproduce the intensity shift from the 3sd–peak to the

3pd–peak at 232eV going from Ekin =121eV to 9eV. We remark that this simple model of

an initial M–shell population before bulk penetration does not hold exactly for the Ar8+

simulation where we set n3s = 1,

= 1 and

= 1. We are going to provide a

n3pi

h

n3di

h

physical motivation for the model in Section VII.

VI. THE EVOLUTION OF THE SUBSURFACE CASCADE

According to the experimental clues and arguments of Sections III and IV, the over-

whelming part of the high energy branch originates from below–surface emission. For this

phase, we designed the simulation presented in the previous section. In the following we de-

scribe the evolution of the subsurface cascade on the basis of the simulation results combined

with the experimental data.

As the HCI penetrates into the crystal bulk region all electrons that have previously

21

been captured into outer Rydberg levels will be lost and band electrons will neutralize the

core charge over a distance of roughly the Debye screening length of the electron gas. Thus

a second generation of hollow atoms emerges within the bulk.

Prior to any electron capture, the O–shell of the Ar9+ core is the uppermost ionic shell

to still ﬁt below V0. As long as not more than two electrons populate inner levels, solely

XCV transitions (with X

L, M, N, O

) can proceed. Since the XCV transition probability

∈{

}

increases with the eﬀective screening and degeneracy of the ﬁnal level, XCVs preferably

populate the O–shell. Before any signiﬁcant NOO and MNO Auger emission can take place,

the rapid XCV ﬁlling successively pushes the O– and N–shell above V0. This period is

accompanied by LCV, LNO, LMN transitions etc. creating the smoothly decreasing part

of the spectrum above the 3pd–edge. We note that this early phase of the neutralization

may already start before complete bulk penetration when the projectile travels through the

vacuum tail of the valence band.

The loss of whole atomic shells into the valence band stops when the M–shell is reached.

At this point of the scenario, a low M–shell population with a statistical preference for

the 3d–level (due to its high degeneracy) is likely to occur. MMN–CK processes transfer

these 3d–electrons quickly into the 3s–level before a large 3d–population can accumulate.

Other MMN transitions (3p)(3d)N and later (3s)(3p)N are energetically forbidden. This

M–shell redistribution is accelerated by high speed sCK processes with rates of the order

of 1015s−1. Whereas 3sdd–transitions are immediately possible, MMM transitions into the

3p–level require nM > 3. Along this early M–shell redistribution phase the M–population

remains fairly constant at nM ≃
MMM process. Thus 3sd–LMM processes out of initial 3s2d–constellations are characteristic

2 + n3s, though because one M–electron is lost along each

for this phase causing the 224eV–peak in the experimental spectra. It lasts comparatively

long because the condition nM ≃

2 keeps the MCV rates (cf. Table III) minimal.

The Ar9+ core will always be surrounded by an induced VB charge cloud (C) because

the number of bound states nb below V0 is smaller than the projectile core charge q = 9

(Fig. 8). Hence MCV processes continue to populate empty M–levels faster and faster with

22

increasing nM . As soon as nM > 3 is satisﬁed, 3pdd–sCKs become energetically possible

and a 3p–population builds up while the 3d–population remains approximately at one due

to the presence of the MMN and sCK decay channels. 3dd–transitions require the transient

formation of very unstable M–shell conﬁguration that are unlikely to occur so they do

not appear in the spectra. At nM > 4, the 3d–level vanishes into the valence band thus

interrupting further 3sd– and 3pd–emission. Since the 3pp–LMM transitions possess much

higher rates than any other LMM transitions they clearly prevail during this later stage of

the subsurface interaction.

The dominant peak which is centered at 211eV for Ekin ≤

121eV in Fig. 2 corresponding

to 3pp–transitions with nM ≥
for the high MCV rates into the 3d– and later the 3p–level. The intensity gain of the 3sd–

7 provides evidence for the described mechanism, in particular

peak with respect to the 3pd–peak for high Ekin is consistent with the greater time window

of the former transition during the early interaction phase. This eﬀect furthermore veriﬁes

the assumption of collisional sidefeeding into the 3s–level and therefore the 224eV–peak

assignment by itself. All phases are accompanied by 3ss– and 3sp–LMM transitions which

constitute the low energy tail and the region around the two faint subpeaks between about

180eV and 200eV, respectively.

VII. SPECTRA OF METASTABLE Ar8+ PROJECTILES

Seeking to extract additional experimental evidence for the described Ar9+ interaction

mechanism, we performed a series of measurements involving metastable (2p53s) Ar8+ ions

colliding at Θ = 45◦ and various kinetic energies with a Si crystal (Fig. 10). A straight

comparison with the corresponding Ar9+ series in Fig. 2 shows that the general shape of the

spectra is unaﬀected by the additional 3s–electron except for a slight enhancement of the

3ss– and 3sp–intensities. In fact, the only new structure observed is a small peak arising at

247eV for Ekin = 8eV and generally for lowest perpendicular projectile velocities v⊥ which

can also be deduced from Fig. 11.

23

The 247eV–peak has been discussed in detail in [36] along with corresponding peaks

which occur under similar conditions in the spectra of second row ions in 1s2s–conﬁgurations.

It can be assigned to so called LMVW transitions in the course of which the 3s–electron

jumps into the 2p–vacancy. The emitted electron comes from a level possessing a binding

energy which equals the target workfunction W = 4.6eV for silicon. Due to the shape of

the subsurface potential Vef f (Fig. 7), these levels cannot exist after projectile penetration

into the bulk occurred. As mentioned earlier in Section IV, the strong decrease in spectral

intensity above 235eV gives evidence for this assertion.

The identiﬁcation of an above–surface LMVW peak suggests that inner atomic shells

X

M, N, O, . . .
}

∈{

could be partially ﬁlled before bulk penetration by an autoionization

process XVW VW . We mentioned earlier that also MCV set in with continuously increas-

ing rates as the HCI travels through the vacuum tail of the valence band. Compared to the

MCV ﬁlling within the bulk, these near–surface M–shell ﬁlling channels are likely to proceed

signiﬁcantly slower, though. Since sCK processes require certain minimum M–shell popula-

tions they are widely inhibited for these constellations. One can thus expect that a very slow

projectile might enter the bulk region with a low M–shell population

2 favoring the

nM i ≃

h

3d–level due to its degeneracy. This way we can motivate the ansatz for the simulation of

the spectra at minimum Ekin in Section V E, even though an explicit experimental evidence

is still missing.

The astonishing similarity of the rest of the Ar8+ and the Ar9+ data bears out our

previous assumption of fast MCV, MMN and sCK processes within the bulk redistributing

any M–shell population swiftly into the 3s–level. In order to compensate for the additional

3s–electron in Ar8+ M–shell, sCKs have to proceed before an LMM transition takes place.

This automatically implies that the M–shell must be suﬃciently populated and quickly

replenished at this point. Because a large M–shell population far in front of the surface

would be in contradiction to all previous experiments we can exempt the above–surface

zone as the origin of the emitted electrons. This obviously also holds for the 3pd–peak at

232eV.

24

We made use of the great correspondence of the Ar8+ and the Ar9+ spectra to check

the mechanisms and rates entering our interaction model. For the simulations on Ar8+

projectiles which are also shown in Fig. 9 we kept the same transitions types and rates

but added an 3s–electron to the initial M–shell population. Within the accuracy of our

interaction model, the similarity of the two series is well reproduced.

VIII. SUMMARY AND DISCUSSION

In this work we have presented detailed experimental results on the interaction of Ar9+

and metastable Ar8+ ions impinging on a Si(100) crystal. Doing so we focused on autoion-

ization spectra measured at low impact energies. In this energy domain, we identiﬁed several

new spectral features which alter with the perpendicular projectile velocity component and

with the angle of incidence and observation. A consistent interaction model has been sug-

gested for which MCV processes and the energetic vicinity of the Ar9+ 3d–subshell to the

bottom of the silicon valence band play a decisive role.

The subsurface interaction phase has been simulated using a Monte Carlo code. Feeding

the code with realistic transition rates, we have been able to reconstruct the experimental

peak positions and intensity shifts for diﬀerent projectile energies. Our results give indirect

evidence for a very eﬀective below–surface MCV ﬁlling as postulated by theory. In contrast to

KLL spectra of hydrogenlike second row ions impinging on metal surfaces, the main intensity

of the Ar9+ LMM spectra is located on the high energy side of the peak region corresponding

to a massively occupied 3p–subshell. We demonstrated that this peculiar shape of the high

energy region is linked to the special role of the 3d–subshell which mediates a fast M–shell

ﬁlling in the beginning and later disappears due to the screening of the valence band electron

gas.

We presented spectra measured at small observation angles with respect to the surface

parallel. They contain a high intensity peak region which most likely originates from Auger

emission of incoming or reﬂected projectiles which do not experience the full bulk screening,

25

yet. In addition, we spotted a distinct peak in the Ar8+ spectra for the lowest perpendicular

incident velocities which can be explained by a unique above–surface process involving the

L–vacancy and two electrons from the resonantly populated shells.

HCI beams have been deemed a candidate for future surface modiﬁcation techniques for

some time. It has been demonstrated that single ions can give rise to nanoscale size features

on certain surfaces [37]. Also sputter yields on insulators could be signiﬁcantly enhanced by

using slow HCIs instead of fast singly charged projectiles. At very low kinetic energies, the

energy deposition concentrates on a very small area which extends approximately one lattice

constant in the vicinity of the ﬁrst bulk layer. In this manner, an energy of several keV can

be carried into this zone where it might be converted into activation energy for processes

like sputtering, crystal growth and surface catalysis. Research in this ﬁeld is under way and

ﬁrst results have been presented already.

IX. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

This work is sponsored by the German Bundesministerium f¨ur Bildung, Wissenschaft,

Forschung und Technologie under contract no. 13N6776/4. We are also grateful for the sup-

port by the Ministerium f¨ur Wissenschaft und Forschung des Landes Nordrhein–Westfalen.

26

REFERENCES

[1] J. Burgd¨orfer, P. Lerner, and F. W. Meyer, Phys. Rev. A 44, 5674 (1991).

[2] J. Ducr´ee, F. Casali, and U. Thumm, accepted by Phys. Rev. A (1998).

[3] F. W. Meyer, L. Folkerts, H. O. Folkerts, and S. Schippers, Nucl. Instrum. Methods

Phys. Res., Sect. B 98, 441 (1995).

[4] S. Hatke, A. Hoﬀknecht, S. Hustedt, J. Limburg, I. G. Hughes, R. Hoekstra, W. Heiland,

and R. Morgenstern, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res., Sect. B 115, 165 (1996).

[5] S. Schippers, J. Limburg, J. Das, R. Hoekstra, and R. Morgenstern, Phys. Rev. A 50,

540 (1994).

[6] F. W. Meyer, S. H. Overbury, C. D. Havener, P. A. Zeijlmans van Emmichoven, and

D. M. Zehner, Phys. Rev. Lett. 67, 723 (1991).

[7] R. K¨ohrbr¨uck, M. Grether, A. Spieler, N. Stolterfoht, R. Page, A. Saal, and J. Bleck-

Neuhaus, Phys. Rev. A 50, 1429 (1994).

[8] S. Hustedt, J. Freese, S. M¨ahl, W. Heiland, S. Schippers, J. Bleck-Neuhaus, M. Grether,

R. K¨ohrbr¨uck, and N. Stolterfoht, Phys. Rev. A 50, 4993 (1994).

[9] J. Limburg, S. Schippers, I. Hughes, R. Hoekstra, R. Morgenstern, S. Hustedt, N. Hatke,

and W. Heiland, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res., Sect. B 98, 436 (1995).

[10] R. Page, A. Saal, J. Thomaschewski, L. Aberle, J. Bleck-Neuhaus, R. K¨ohrbr¨uck, M.

Grether, and N. Stolterfoht, Phys. Rev. A 52, 1344 (1995).

[11] N. Stolterfoht, A. Arnau, M. Grether, R. K¨ohrbr¨uck, A. Spieler, R. Page, A. Saal, J.

Thomaschewski, and J. Bleck-Neuhaus, Phys. Rev. A 52, 445 (1995).

[12] J. Limburg, S.Schippers, R. Hoekstra, R. Morgenstern, H. Kurz, M. Vana, F. Aumayr,

and H. Winter, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res., Sect. B 115, 237 (1996).

27

[13] A. Arnau, P. A. Zeijlmans van Emmichoven, J. I. Juaristi, and E. Zaremba, Nucl.

Instrum. Methods Phys. Res., Sect. B 100, 279 (1995).

[14] R. D´ıez Mui˜no, A. Arnau, and P. M. Echenique, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res.,

Sect. B 98, 420 (1995).

Lett. 76, 4636 (1996).

[15] R. D´ıez Mui˜no, N. Stolterfoht, A. Arnau, A. Salin, and P. M. Echenique, Phys. Rev.

[16] S. T. de Zwart, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res., Sect. B 23, 239 (1987).

[17] L. Folkerts and R. Morgenstern, Journal de Physique Colloque C1, suppl. no 1, 541

[18] S. T. de Zwart, A. G. Drentje, A. L. Boers, and R. Morgenstern, Surf. Sci. 217, 298

[19] H. J. Andr¨a, A. Simionovici, T. Lamy, A. Brenac, G. Lamboley, S. Andriamonje, J. J.

Bonnet, A. Fleury, M. Bonnefoy, M. Chassevent, and A. Pesnelle, Z. Phys. D 21, suppl.,

[20] R. K¨ohrbr¨uck, K. Sommer, J. P. Biersack, J. Bleck-Neuhaus, S. Schippers, P. Ronci, D.

Lecler, F. Fremont, and N. Stolterfoht, Phys. Rev. A 45, 4653 (1992).

[21] H. J. Andr¨a, A.Simionovici, T. Lamy, A. Brenac, and A. Pesnelle, Europhys. Lett. 23,

[22] L. Folkerts and R. Morgenstern, Europhys. Lett. 13, 377 (1990).

[23] J. Limburg, J. Das, S. Schippers, R. Hoekstra, and R. Morgenstern, Phys. Rev. Lett.

73, 786 (1994).

[24] H.Winter, C. Auth, R. Schuch, and E. Beebe, Phys. Rev. Lett. 71, 1939 (1993).

[25] J. F. Ziegler, J. P. Biersack, and U. Littmark, in The Stopping and Range of Ions in

(1989).

(1989).

135 (1991).

361 (1993).

28

Solids, edited by J. F. Ziegler (Pergamon Press, New York, 1985), Vol. 1.

[26] R. D. Cowan, The Theory of Atomic Structure and Spectra (University of California

Press, Berkeley, 1981).

3399 (1995).

1986), Vol. I: Basics.

[27] A. Arnau, R. K¨ohrbr¨uck, M. Grether, A. Spieler, and N. Stolterfoht, Phys. Rev. A 51,

[28] M. H. Kalos and P. A. Whitlock, Monte Carlo Methods (John Wiley & Sons, New York,

[29] F. P. Larkins, J. Phys. B 4, L29 (1971).

[30] G. B. Armen and F. P. Larkins, J. Phys. B 24, 741 (1991).

[31] M. Grether, A. Spieler, R. K¨ohrbr¨uck, and N. Stolterfoht, Phys. Rev. A 52, 426 (1995).

[32] T. ˚Aberg, in Atomic Inner–Shell Processes I: Ionization and Transition Probabilities,

edited by B. Crasemann (Academic Press, New York, 1975), Chap. 9, pp. 353–375.

[33] T. A. Carlson and M. O. Krause, Bull. Amer. Phys. Soc. 10, 455 (1965).

[34] K. Siegbahn, C. Nordling, A. Fahlman, R. Nordberg, K. Hamrin, J. Hedman, G. Jo-

hansson, T. Bergmark, L. O. Werme, R. Manne, and Y. Baer, ESCA Applied to Free

Molecules (North–Holland, Amsterdam, 1969).

[35] E. J. McGuire, in Atomic Inner–Shell Processes, edited by B. Crasemann (Academic

Press, New York, 1975), Vol. I, Chap. 7, pp. 293–330.

[36] J. Ducr´ee, J. Mrogenda, E. Reckels, M. R¨uther, A. Heinen, Ch. Vitt, M. Venier, J.

Leuker, and H. J. Andr¨a, submitted to Phys. Rev. Lett. (unpublished).

[37] D. C. Parks, R. Bastasz, R. W. Schmieder, and M. St¨ockli, J. Va. Sci. Technol. B 13,

941 (1995).

29

FIGURES

FIG. 1. Target chamber geometry. (a) The HCI beam collides with the target surface at an

incident angle Θ. Electrons are emitted at an observation angle Ψ with respect to the target

surface towards the spectrometer entrance lens. In most experiments, we chose Θ + Ψ = 90◦. For

0◦, electron emission originating from all interaction phases can be detected. (b) At grazing

Ψ

≫

observation Ψ = 0◦, the detection of electrons emitted from below the surface is suppressed due to

their damping on the long path through the bulk towards the spectrometer lens. Only electrons

emitted from the above–surface zone are not aﬀected such that spectral regions stemming from

transitions of incoming or reﬂected projectiles gain intensity with respect to regions ascribed to

below–surface emission.

FIG. 2. Experimental spectra of Ar9+ projectiles impinging at a ﬁxed incident angle of

Θ = 45◦ and various energies on a n–Si(100) surface. All spectra in this paper are normalized

on the portrayed peak region between 160eV and 240eV. The error at the peak maximum of

the (Ekin = 121eV)–spectrum is smaller than 0.3%. With increasing incident energy Ekin, the

224eV–peak begins to outgrow the 232eV–peak and the main peak moves from 211eV to 208eV.

FIG. 3. Ar9+ spectra at Ekin = 121eV and varying incident angles Θ. The intensities of the

two subpeaks on the shoulder above 211eV alter with v⊥ in the same way as in Fig. 2. For the two

geometries at Ψ = 0◦, a second broad peak region evolves around 198eV which we associate with

emission from partially ionized incoming or reﬂected particles.

FIG. 4. Ar9+ spectra at Ekin = 9eV and Θ as parameter. The perpendicular velocity compo-

nent v⊥ is minimal in all four measurements and Θef f thus stays roughly constant due to the image

potential. Due to our normalization method, the high energy shoulder above 211eV is untouched

by changing the nominal incident angle Θ. At Ψ = 0◦, the broad region around 198eV pops up

again.

30

FIG. 5. Series of Ar9+ spectra taken at ﬁxed angles Θ = 90◦ and Ψ = 0◦ with varying Ekin.

For Ekin = 9eV and 121eV, we can still distinguish two separate peaks around 198eV and 211eV.

For higher Ekin, the 211eV–peak disappears and the broad structure washes out while extending

to lower energies. The 232eV–peak can only be found for minimum v⊥.

FIG. 6. This histogram displays the energetic positions of LMM Auger transitions originat-

ing from neutral “hollow” Ar9+ atoms comprising all possibles (2p53sxpydz)–conﬁgurations with

nM = x + y + z

≤

9. Angular coupling shifts have been neglected. The neutralization for con-

ﬁgurations possessing less than q = 9 electrons in the M–shell has been established via (q

nM )

−

“spectator” electrons in the N–shell. Each transition has been weighted by unity discarding tran-

sition rates and statistical factors due to diﬀerent subshell occupations.

FIG. 7. Potential Vef f (schematic) induced by an HCI core which is embedded into an electron

gas. V f ree

Coul denotes a free ionic Coulomb potential. By adding outer spectator electrons to the atom,

a screened Coulomb potential V screen

Coul

forms which is implemented in our Cowan code calculations

(spectator electron model). At large distances from the nucleus, the potential Vef f seen by an active

electron merges into the bottom of the valence band V0. Electrons occupying states above V0 cannot

be bound by the ionic core. They are lost to the valence band continuum. As level binding energies

Enl

b approach V0, level shifts ∆Enl
b

increasingly deviate from the spectator electron model.

FIG. 8. Binding energies ranges of hollow atom Ar9+ 3ℓ–subshells as a function of the total

M–shell population. Within the spectator electron model, the 3d–shell moves above the bottom of

the valence band V0 as soon as more than ﬁve electrons populate this level. For comparison, we

added the 2p–level binding energies of C5+ and Ne9+ as a function of the total L–population nL

and a DFT calculation [27] for the Ne9+–Al system.

31

FIG. 9. Simulation of the experimental (cf. Fig. 2) Ar9+ and Ar9+ spectra at Θ = 45◦ for

Ekin = 2keV (a) 121eV (b) and 10eV (c). For the (Ekin = 10eV)–simulation, a statistically

distributed M–shell population with

= 2 at the bulk entrance (see text) is implemented.

nM i
h

The intensity ratios between the LMM transition subgroups as a function of Ekin display the same

systematics as the experiment. For the Ekin = 2keV, we enforce a correction for elastic and inelastic

bulk damping by convolving the original spectrum with an exponential function of decay length of

3 a.u..

Fig. 3.

FIG. 10. Experimental spectra of metastable Ar8+ projectiles impinging at a ﬁxed incident

angle of Θ = 45◦ and varying Ekin on a n–Si(100) surface. Despite the initial 3s–electron, the

general shape of the spectra is very similar to the corresponding Ar9+ spectra in Fig. 2. Only the

3ss– and 3sp–region intensities are slightly enhanced. The small peak at 247eV occurs at minimal

v⊥ and can be assign to above–surface LMVW emission [36].

FIG. 11. Experimental spectra of metastable Ar8+ projectiles impinging at Ekin = 8eV and

diﬀerent incident angles Θ on a n–Si(100) surface. All spectra exhibit the small peak at 247eV as

expected for the minimum perpendicular projectile velocity components v⊥. At Ψ = 0◦, the broad

peak around 198eV pops up again, cf. Figs. 3–5. In the (Θ = 5◦, Ψ = 0◦)–geometry, its intensity

is reduced with respect to the 211eV–peak as compared to the corresponding Ar9+ spectrum in

32

TABLES

process

3ss

3sp

3pp

3sd

3pd

3dd

Γf illed
3ℓ1ℓ2

3.31

1012

5.29

1013

1.98

1014

6.20

1014

1.65

1015

4.13

1014

·

·

·

·

·

·

= 2)

nM i
Ekin = 9eV (
h
0.1)
4.5
0.8% (2.0
|
|

0.0)
5.1
15.9% (1.6
|
|

0.0)
5.5
72.5% (1.4
|
|

1.4)
0.5
5.3% (1.2
|
|

1.4)
1.5
4.6% (0.6
|
|

2.4)
0.4
0.8% (0.4
|
|

Ekin = 121eV

Ekin = 2keV

0.1)
4.3
1.0% (2.0
|
|

0.1)
4.1
2.0% (2.0
|
|

0.0)
5.1
17.1% (1.7
|
|

0.0)
5.0
22.1% (2.0
|
|

0.0)
5.5
70.0% (1.5
|
|

0.0)
5.4
66.8% (2.0
|
|

1.5)
0.4
7.2% (1.2
|
|

1.4)
1.4
3.7% (0.8
|
|

2.3)
0.2
1.0% (0.5
|
|

1.4)
0.3
7.4% (2.0
|
|

1.2)
1.2
1.4% (1.5
|
|

2.2)
0.1
0.4% (1.2
|
|

TABLE I. Monte Carlo simulation results on LMM processes for Ar9+ impinging on Si(100)

with Ekin = 9eV, 121eV and 2keV. Γf illed

3ℓ1ℓ2 gives the LMM rate for a ﬁlled M–shell as required for the

implemented ﬁt formula [29]. For each simulation, we list the relative intensity and, in brackets, the

average (n3s|
the evolution of the subsurface cascade.

n3p|

n3d)–conﬁguration at the time of LMM decay which provides information about

process

3sdd

3pdd

= 2)

Ekin = 9eV (
h

nM i
2.4)
0.4
66.2% (0.2
|
|

2.8)
0.2
16.3% (1.0
|
|

Ekin = 121eV

Ekin = 2keV

2.4)
0.2
81.8% (0.2
|
|

1.5)
0.2
21.0% (1.0
|
|

2.2)
0.1
11.7% (1.0
|
|

2.4)
0.1
17.9% (1.5
|
|

TABLE II. Monte Carlo simulation results on MMM processes for Ar9+ impinging on Si(100)

with Ekin = 9eV, 121eV and 2keV. The table lists the average occurrence of each transition type

and, in brackets, the average M–sublevel population at the time of MMM emission. Other sCK

transitions are energetically forbidden.

33

nM

0

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

ΓM CV
3s

[s−1]

9.92

1011

1.21

1013

·

·

–

–

–

–

–

–

ΓM CV
3p

[s−1]

ΓM CV
3d

[s−1]

ΓM CV
tot

[s−1]

2.07

1012

2.54

1013

3.26

1013

4.46

1013

6.53

1014

5.78

1014

4.48

1014

3.27

1014

·

·

·

·

·

·

·

·

6.61

1013

9.18

1013

1.22

1014

1.44

1014

·

·

·

·

–

–

–

–

8.10

1014

1.08

1015

1.41

1015

1.70

1015

2.61

1015

1.74

1015

9.17

1014

3.27

1014

·

·

·

·

·

·

·

·

TABLE III. MCV rates for the Ar9+/Si system. The table lists MCV transition rates per spin

state ΓM CV

3ℓ

for each M–sublevel and the overall MCV rate ΓM CV

taking into account occupation

tot

statistics as evaluated by DFT calculations. nM gives the initial number of M–electrons. The rates

refer to initial M–shell ground state conﬁgurations. For nM = 0, MCV processes ﬁlling the 3d–level

possess by far the highest rates. As the subsurface cascade proceeds and nM > 4, the 3d–level

vanishes and the MCVs into the 3p–level rapidly populate the M–shell.

34

spectrometer
lens

(a)

Fig. 1a

Ψ

Si(100)

(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)
(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)
(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)
(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)
(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)
(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)
(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)
(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)
(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)
(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)
(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)
(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)
(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)
(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)
(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)
(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)
(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)
(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)
(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)
(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)
(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)
(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)
(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)
(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)

Θ

9+

Ar  -beam

spectrometer
lens

=0°Ψ

η/2

(b)

Fig. 1b

Si(100)

(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)
(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)
(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)
(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)
(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)
(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)
(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)
(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)
(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)
(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)
(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)
(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)

Θ

=90°

9+

Ar  -beam

Ekin=  9eV
Ekin= 121eV
Ekin=1953eV
Θ=45°

0.030

0.020

0.010

]
s
t
i
n
u
 
.
b
r
a
[
 
y
t
i
s
n
e
t
n
I
 
d
e
z

i
l

a
m
r
o
N

0.000

150

170

190

210
Electron Energy [eV]

230

250

270

Fig. 2

Θ= 5° 
Θ=45° 
Θ=90°
Θ=5°,Ψ=0° 

Ekin=121eV

0.02

]
s
t
i
n
u
 
.
b
r
a
[
 
y
t
i
s
n
e
t
n
I
 
d
e
z

i
l

a
m
r
o
N

0.00

150

170

190

210
Electron Energy [eV]

230

250

270

Fig. 3

Θ= 5°
Θ=45°
Θ=90°
Θ=5°,Ψ=0°  

Ekin=9eV

  0.02 

]
s
i
t
n
u
 
.
b
r
a
[
 
y
t
i
s
n
e
t
n
I
 
d
e
z

i
l

a
m
r
o
N

  0.00 

150

170

190

210
Electron Energy [eV]

230

250

270

Fig. 4

Ekin=   9eV
Ekin= 121eV
Ekin=1008eV
Ekin=4617eV
Θ=90°

]
s
i
t
n
u
 
.
b
r
a
[
 
y
t
i
s
n
e
t
n
I
 
d
e
z

i
l

a
m
r
o
N

 0.00 

120

140

160

180
Electron Energy [eV]

200

220

240

260

Fig. 5

Ar9+: Θ=45°, Ekin=121eV

3pd

3dd

3sp

3pp

3sd

11

10

9

8

7

6

5

4

3

2

1

]
s
t
i
n
u
 
.
b
r
a
[
 
y
t
i
s
n
e
t

n

I

3ss

0
160

170

180

190

200

210

230
Electron Energy [eV]

220

240

250

260

270

Fig. 6

E

0

W

0V

(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)
(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)
(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)
(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)
(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)
(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)
(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)
(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)
(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)
(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)

vacuum states

screen

(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)
(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)
(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)
(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)
(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)
(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)
(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)
(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)
(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)
(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)
(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)
(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)
(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)
(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)
(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)
(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)

valence
band

CoulV

effV

free
V
Coul

3d

3p

∆

nlE
b

3s

Fig. 7

0

r
3p

r
sc

r

valence
band

C

l
n
 

b

−30

]

V
e
[
 
 

E
 
y
g
r
e
n
E
 
g
n
d
n
B

i

i

 
l
l

e
h
s
b
u
S

0
W

−10

V0
−20

−40

−50

−60

−70

−80

−90

3d

3p

3s

1

2

3

4

5
Total Shell Population nM,nL

6

7

8

Ne

3d: Ar9+ 
3p: Ar9+
3s: Ar9+
2p: C5+
2p: Ne9+
Ne9+: DFT 
9

Fig. 8

Ar9+: expt.
Ar9+: simul.
Ar8+: expt.
Ar8+: simul.

Θ=45°

]
s
t
i

n
u
 
y
r
a
r
t
i
b
r
a
[
 
y
t
i
s
n
e
t
n
I
 
d
e
z

i
l

a
m
r
o
0.0N

Ekin=2keV

(a)

(b)

(c)

Ekin=121eV

Ekin=10eV

150 160 170 180 190 200 210 220 230 240 250
Electron Energy [eV]

Fig. 9

Ekin=   8eV
Ekin=  96eV
Ekin=1696eV
Θ=45°

0

]
s
t
i
n
u
 
.
b
r
a
[
 
y
t
i
s
n
e
t
n
I
 
d
e
z

i
l

a
m
r
o
N

Ar8+

0
150

170

190

210
Electron Energy [eV]

230

250

270

Fig. 10

Θ= 5°
Θ=45°
Θ=90°
Θ=5°,Ψ=0° 

Ekin=8eV

]
s
t
i
n
u
 
.
b
r
a
[
 
y
t
i
s
n
e
t
n
I
 
d
e
z

i
l

a
m
r
o
N

0.0

0.0

Ar8+

0.0

150

170

190

210
Electron Energy [eV]

230

250

270

Fig. 11

