8
9
9
1
 
r
a

M
 
0
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
m
o
t
a
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
2
1
0
3
0
8
9
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Diagnostic criterion for crystallized beams

Harel Primack ∗ and Reinhold Bl¨umel †
Fakult¨at f¨ur Physik, Albert-Ludwigs-Universit¨at, Hermann-Herder-Str. 3, D-79104 Freiburg,
Germany
(February 2, 2008)

Abstract

Small ion crystals in a Paul trap are stable even in the absence of laser
cooling. Based on this theoretically and experimentally well–established fact
we propose the following diagnostic criterion for establishing the presence of a
crystallized beam: Absence of heating following the shut–down of all cooling
devices. The validity of the criterion is checked with the help of detailed
numerical simulations.

29.20.Dh, 05.45.+b, 32.80.Pj, 42.50.Vk

Typeset using REVTEX

∗Email: harel@phyc1.physik.uni-freiburg.de

†Email: blumel@phyc1.physik.uni-freiburg.de

1

The production of crystallized beams is the holy grail of storage ring physics [1,2]. As
a matter of fact crystallization has already been achieved in a miniature storage ring with
essentially stationary ions [3]. Crystallization in high energy storage rings, however, remains
an elusive goal although many laboratories throughout the world are working on the problem
(see, e.g., [4–7]). Apart from electron cooling [8], laser cooling [9,10] is now employed by
some groups [4–7] as the most eﬃcient and most promising method to achieve the low
beam temperatures required for beam crystallization. Judging from the enormous progress
achieved in the past few years success seems imminent. But while it is straightforward to
observe ion crystals in traps [11] directly with the help of CCD cameras [12–16], it is very
diﬃcult to observe the internal structure of a fast beam in a storage ring directly with optical
means. As a matter of fact, no such observation has been reported so far. Other imaging
methods may require structural changes of existing storage rings which are both technically
diﬃcult and costly. In view of these diﬃculties it becomes imperative to devise diagnostic
tools diﬀerent from direct optical observation that are capable of distinguishing between a
crystallized and a non-crystallized beam. It is the purpose of this paper to suggest a simple
diagnostic criterion capable of making this distinction. The criterion is based on a hysteresis
eﬀect ﬁrst described experimentally in connection with ion crystals in a Paul trap [13]. It is
rooted in the observation that once an ion crystal has been produced, e.g., by laser cooling,
it remains stable even in the absence of laser cooling [16]. Since in the center–of–mass frame
the ion beam in a storage ring has similar physics to that of ions in a Paul trap, we suggest
to use absence of heating as a diagnostic criterion for the crystalline state of an ion beam in
a storage ring.

Before proceeding to the analytical and numerical treatment of absence of heating, let
us introduce an intuitive picture using the classical phase space of the ion beam. Due to
the interplay between the (eﬀectively time–dependent) conﬁning forces and the Coulomb
interaction between ions the dynamics of the ions is in general chaotic, resulting in energy
diﬀusion. Nevertheless, the crystalline state and its vicinity correspond to a region in phase
space in which the dynamics is linear and thus regular. Hence, if linearly stable, this region
can be described as a regular island in phase space [17–19] in which the trajectories are
dynamically trapped. As a consequence, the time–averaged gain in energy or action is zero.
This is equivalent with the absence of heating. Because of the possibility of dynamic trapping
of phase–space trajectories in regular islands, it is now clear on physical grounds why ion
crystals can survive even in the absence of a cooling mechanism. We call these crystals
stable. Thus, we formulate the following diagnostic criterion for beam crystallization: A
beam in a storage ring is crystallized if no heating occurs following the shut–down of all
cooling devices. Our criterion works for stable crystals. It is important to emphasize that
the simplest possible ion crystal in a storage ring, the linear chain [20,21], is of this type if
the density is low (see discussion below). It is equally important to emphasize the possibility
of unstable crystals for which our criterion does not work. The phase–space trajectory of
an unstable crystal is linearly unstable near the crystalline state in the absence of cooling.
A crystalline state may nevertheless exist if the cooling is strong enough to overcome the
dynamical instability. The resulting crystal is called unstable since in the absence of cooling
In this paper we focus
the linear instability leads to heating and melting of the crystal.
our attention exclusively on the physics of stable crystals deferring discussion of unstable
crystals to a separate publication [22].

2

In the remainder of this paper we discuss the physics, the validity and the limits of
applicability of the proposed beam–crystallization criterion. We illustrate the discussion
with the results of numerical simulations of a model that captures the essence of the physics
of crystallization of very low density beams. The model consists of N ions subject to the
time–dependent Hamiltonian

where

is the kinetic energy,

H = K + Vint + Vconf

K =

N

X
i=1

~P 2
i
2m

Vint = X

1≤j<i≤N

Z 2e2
4πǫ0

1
~Ri − ~Rj (cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)

is the Coulomb interaction potential, and

Vconf =

hΦ0 cos(Ωt)(X 2

i − Y 2

i ) − Ψ0(X 2

i + Y 2

i − 2Z 2

i )i

N

X
i=1

is the conﬁning potential. Here ~Ri = (Xi, Yi, Zi) are the Cartesian coordinates of the ith
ion in the rest frame of the beam, ~Pi are its momenta, m denotes the mass of the ions,
Ze is their charge, Ω is the frequency of the conﬁning ﬁelds as seen from the rest frame
of the moving ion and Φ0, Ψ0 are positive constant parameters. The coordinate system is
oriented such that the Z axis corresponds to the beam axis and the X, Y plane is orthogonal
to the beam. The conﬁning potential Vconf contains a dynamic (time dependent) strongly
focusing part in the transverse X, Y directions that models the action of the quadrupole
focusing magnets, and a bucket–like static part that models the bunching along the beam
direction (Z-axis). The similarity of (1)–(4) to the Hamiltonian of an N particle Paul trap
is apparent. It allows us to draw useful analogies from the well–developed ﬁeld of ion traps.
The time–dependent part of the conﬁning potential Vconf gives rise to the micromotion [23]
of the beam particles. Away from the crystalline conﬁguration the micromotion results in
fast heating of the beam, a phenomenon that is completely analogous to the radio–frequency
(rf) heating of ion clouds in a Paul trap [23].

The equations of motion derived from (1) can be conveniently scaled and are given by:

¨xi = −γx ˙xi + λ0

¨yi = −γy ˙yi + λ0

(xi − xj)
|~ri − ~rj|3 + [a − 2q cos(2τ )] xi ,
(yi − yj)
|~ri − ~rj|

3 + [a + 2q cos(2τ )] yi ,

N

N

N

X
j6=i,j=1

X
j6=i,j=1

¨zi = −γz ˙zi + λ0

(zi − zj)
|~ri − ~rj|3 − 2azi ,

X
j6=i,j=1

3

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

where we used the following deﬁnitions:

Ωt ≡ 2τ , ~Ri ≡ l0~ri , λ0 ≡

Z 2e2
πǫ0mΩ2l3
0

, a ≡

8Ψ0
mΩ2 , 2q ≡

8Φ0
mΩ2 .

(8)

In the above equations we added a (possibly anisotropic) damping eﬀected by the damping
constants γx, γy, γz to model the laser cooling.

In our computations we model N = 5 ions of 24Mg+ with q = 0.2 and a = q2/64. The
external frequency Ω is 2π×3 MHz and the length scale l0 is chosen to be 1 µm. The damping
serves as our control parameter. With this choice of parameters the typical spatial extension
of the ion ensemble in z direction is about four times the extension in the x, y directions. In
other words, our parameters are chosen such that the ions experience a focusing force that is
about four times stronger in the x, y directions compared to the z direction. For this choice
of parameters the linear chain is the lowest energy crystalline conﬁguration of our model
system [20,21]. The integration of the equations of motion (5)–(7) was performed using a
variable–order, variable–step Adams method [24].

Although our model of ﬁve ions seems like a caricature of a real beam in a storage ring, it
captures the essence of cooling and crystallization of low-density beams in strongly focusing
machines. An indication to this eﬀect is the following observation. When we simulated
anisotropic cooling, i.e., γx = γy = 0, γz = γ > 0, we faced the same problem as the
experiments: with anisotropic cooling it is very diﬃcult to create Coulomb crystals with
reasonable choices of γ. Moreover, we think of our model as describing a typical section of
the beam rather than a system consisting of a small number of ions. This is substantiated
by the fact that near the linear crystal state essentially only the nearest neighbor Coulomb
interactions are important, since the Coulomb force reduces like the square of the distance.
Hence the number of total ions is not of primary importance. We note that the static
conﬁning potential is suitable for bunched beams, while periodic boundary conditions that
preserve linear density are suitable for coasting beams. We emphasize that our calculations
are microscopic and do not suﬀer from any further approximations beyond the choice of the
model Hamiltonian (1).

In order to keep things as simple as possible, and since the applicability of our crystalliza-
tion criterion does not depend on the type of cooling scheme used to produce a crystallized
beam, we illustrate the criterion and the physics of beam crystallization with the help of
isotropic cooling, i.e. γx = γy = γz = γ > 0.

Many of our numerical results reported below are discussed within the framework of ion
temperature T . The temperature here is only a convenient way of expressing the experi-
mentally measured mean–square of the ion velocity. We follow the convention used by the
˙~Ri)2i ≡ 3kBT /m,
experimentalists and use the standard thermodynamic relation h(
where h· · ·i denote averaging over ions. We thus avoid all questions of the thermodynamic
relevance of deﬁning a temperature for ﬁve particles as well as the question of how to deﬁne
a temperature in the presence of a strong coherent drive.

˙~R − h

Before embarking on the central point of diagnosing the crystal state, we present some
relevant results relating to the cooling and crystallization process itself. We show that, de-
pending on the cooling strength γ, an initially prepared generic hot ion cloud [15,16] evolves
according to three qualitatively diﬀerent scenarios. In ﬁgure 1 we show the temperatures
of our ﬁve ion ensemble as a function of (scaled) time τ , and for three diﬀerent values of

4

γ. Curve (a) shows the temperature for γ = 10−4. The temperature decays exponentially
(∼ exp(−γτ )) right from the beginning of the simulation. This is the strong damping regime.
Curve (b) of ﬁgure 1 shows a qualitatively diﬀerent behavior for an intermediate choice of
the cooling strength γ = 7 × 10−6. The beam is in the state of a hot cloud over a substantial
period of time (much longer than 1/γ). It collapses suddenly (at an exponential rate) to
zero temperature from some time on. This behavior is called intermittent [25]. Curve (c)
of ﬁgure 1, for γ = 10−6, shows a hot beam which remains hot over the total time interval
of our simulations (τmax = 108 = 100/γ) although the cooling is constantly switched on. In
this case the cooling is balanced by the rf heating. The heating is due to Coulomb collisions
(intra-beam scattering) in the presence of the time–dependent ﬁelds in (1). This mechanism
is also active in ion traps [26] and has been identiﬁed as the dominant heating mechanism in
storage ring beams [4]. In both the weak and the intermediate cooling regimes the end result
of the simulations, i.e., the zero temperature state, is the linear chain. This is illustrated
in ﬁgure 2. It shows the z-coordinates of our ﬁve-ion ensemble corresponding to curve (b)
of ﬁgure 1. After a chaotic transient lasting for about 0 ≤ τ ≤ 6 × 106 we see a sudden
crystallization of the ﬁve ions into stationary positions approximately equi-spaced on the
z axis. Inspection of the x and y coordinates shows xi ≈ 0, yi ≈ 0. Thus, the crystalline
state corresponds to a linear chain. In our simulations, as seen from ﬁgure 2, the spacing
of the ions is ∆z ≈ 30µm. The linear chain is the natural crystalline conﬁguration for very
low density crystalline beams. It does not suﬀer from the problem of shear heating [2], a
serious obstacle on the way to three-dimensionally crystallized beams in presently existing
accelerator storage rings. Thus, establishing the linear chain is an important corner stone
on the way to more complicated crystal conﬁgurations. Chaotic transients similar to the
one shown in ﬁgure 1 were described earlier by Hoﬀnagle and Brewer [25] in connection with
the two-ion Paul trap.

5

)

K

(

FIG. 1. Three diﬀerent scenarios for the time evolution of an initially hot state (cloud) of ions:
(a) Immediate crystallization (γ = 10−4, strong damping regime), (b) intermittency (γ = 7 × 10−6,
intermediate damping regime) and (c) persistent cloud (γ = 10−6, weak damping regime).

6

FIG. 2. Time dependence of the z coordinates of the ﬁve ions of the intermittent case (b)
of ﬁgure 1. The ions crystallize out of a transiently chaotic state at τ ≈ 6.5 × 106 and arrange
themselves regularly spaced in a crystallized linear chain. The lattice spacing in the crystalline
state is ∆z ≈ 30µm.

The statistical signiﬁcance of the results shown in ﬁgures 1 and 2 is substantiated in ﬁgure
3. It gives a global view of the cooling process by showing the ﬁnal beam temperatures after
τmax = 100/γ for a wide range of γ values and a few initial conditions each. It shows also the
temperatures in the cloud state in the intermittent cases. We observe that for small cooling
power the beam remains in a hot state over the entire observation time 0 ≤ τ ≤ τmax.
The temperature of the hot state decreases with increasing cooling strength. For strong
cooling, crystallization takes place immediately. For intermediate cooling power there is
intermittency, but the overall transition from a cloud to a crystal state is sharp as a function
of γ.

7

)

K

(

FIG. 3. Beam temperatures as a function of cooling strength γ. Crosses: Final beam temper-
atures after a run time of τ = 100/γ. Circles: Beam temperature shortly before the onset of the
sharp crystallization transition in the intermittent regime.

We now turn to the key point of this paper: The absence of heating of ion crystals.
Absence of heating serves as a simple diagnostic tool for the crystalline state of ion beams.
In order to demonstrate the absence
We shall focus here exclusively on linear crystals.
of heating, we picked three diﬀerent initial conditions of the ion beam close to the linear
crystalline state and integrated the equations of motion with the damping switched oﬀ
(γ = 0). In ﬁgure 4 we plot the resulting temperatures as a function of the time for three
representative cases, in which the initial temperatures were 6.7 × 10−3 K, 6.7 × 10−2 K
and 6.7 × 10−1 K. The integration was carried out over the time interval 0 ≤ τ ≤ 107
which corresponds to ≈ 3 × 106 cycles of the focusing force. For the two cases at lower
temperature, we clearly observe the absence of heating. This means that even when there
is no cooling, the beam remains very close to the linear crystalline state for a very long
time. As expected, when the initial temperature is large enough (about 1 K in our case) the
crystal melts quickly due to rf heating and the temperature increases dramatically. After
an initial fast “blow–up” phase the heating continues on a slower scale. The initial blow–up
shown in ﬁgure 4 strongly resembles the beam blow-up shown in [5] after switch–oﬀ of the
electron cooler. From ﬁgure 4 we conclude that if the linear crystal is cold enough, then it
can maintain itself even if the cooling power is switched oﬀ.

8

)

K

(

FIG. 4. Time dependence of beam temperatures for three diﬀerent initial conditions close to
the crystalline conﬁguration with no cooling (γ = 0). Upper curve: Initial temperature is 6.7×10−1
K, middle curve: Initial temperature is 6.7 × 10−2 K, lower curve: Initial temperature is 6.7 × 10−3
K. The upper curve shows strong heating. It does not correspond to a crystalline state. The two
cases with lower initial temperatures show absence of heating. They correspond to a crystallized
beam according to the proposed diagnostic criterion.

A few comments are in order now. First, as discussed above, our criterion fails to
identify unstable crystals. Second, especially if the cooling process is rapid, we may produce
a disordered, “glassy” state without geometric order that may be stable in the absence of
cooling. Thus our criterion would wrongly identify a glass as a crystal. In general, therefore,
applying the strictest standards, our criterion is neither necessary nor suﬃcient for the proper
identiﬁcation of geometrically ordered crystalline states. However if we restrict ourselves to
low–density ion beams, which is the current experimental trend, then we are in much better
shape. Indeed, if the ion density is small enough, the beam will crystallize to a linear chain,
which excludes glassy states. This is substantiated by the work of Hasse and Schiﬀer [21]
and by the work of Habs [20] as well as by our numerical simulations. Quantitatively it
<
requires λ ≡ λ0/∆3
∼ 1. Moreover, a detailed analytical investigation which we carried
z
out and will appear elsewhere [22] indicates that the linear crystal is stable in the absence
of cooling, provided that in the two-dimensional parameter space of the Mathieu equation
the interval ([a, a + 4.21λ], q) is contained in a stable region. This is the case if ∆z is large
enough, i.e., for very low density beams. Hence the above analysis indicates that for small
values of the parameter λ our no-heating criterion is both necessary and suﬃcient for the

9

identiﬁcation of a linear crystal. Let us note that in our simulations λ ≈ 2 × 10−3. Indeed,
we never encountered a glassy state and our linear crystal was stable even without cooling
in full agreement with the above discussion.

In practice our diagnostic criterion may be applied according to the following three steps:

1. We start with a hot beam.

2. The cooling devices are switched on (e.g. electron and/or laser cooling) resulting in a

cold beam whose state (crystal or not) is to be determined.

3. All cooling devices are switched oﬀ.

If the beam is indeed crystallized, no heating will be observed. The beam remains crystal-
lized. If the beam is just cold, but not crystallized, heating is observed after shut–down of
the cooling devices. We emphasize that the shut-down should occur slowly, not abruptly.
This is because in our simulations we noticed that a sudden switch–oﬀ of the damping re-
sults in a phase–jump in the time dependence of the ion trajectories leading to instantaneous
heating of the system that may be strong enough to disrupt the crystalline state. However,
there is no problem if the shut–down is slow on the scale of the micromotion of the beam
particles.

A last comment concerns the beam observation time scale after shut–down of the cooling
devices. It is clear that even if the beam was crystallized, it will heat slowly due to, e.g.
ﬂuctuations in the conﬁning ﬁelds and the ambient thermal radiation. When we talk about
heating after shut–down of the cooling devices we mean the fast rf heating due to the time–
dependent conﬁning ﬁelds in (1). Since the noise processes are much slower than rf heating,
there should be no problem to separate the two mechanisms experimentally.

To summarize, in this paper we proposed a beam diagnostic criterion for deciding whether
an ion beam in a storage ring is crystallized or not. The criterion is simple to apply and
does not require any technical installations that are not already present in existing storage
rings. With the help of model calculations we demonstrated that the criterion works well for
low–density crystallized ion chains. The criterion has a limited range of validity, but since
we expect that the ﬁrst crystalline geometry achieved in a storage ring will be the linear
chain, the crystallization criterion may play an important role in proving experimentally the
presence of a crystallized beam in a storage ring.

The authors acknowledge fruitful discussions with R. Grimm and with M. Weidem¨uller.
H. P. is grateful for a MINERVA postdoctoral scholarship. R. B. is grateful for ﬁnancial
support by the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (SFB 276).

10

REFERENCES

[1] J. P. Schiﬀer and P. Kienle, Z. Phys. A 321, 181 (1985).
[2] A. Rahman and J. P. Schiﬀer, Phys. Rev. Lett. 57, 1133 (1986).
[3] G. Brikl, S. Kassner and H. Walther, Europhys. News 23, 143 (1992).
[4] D. Habs and R. Grimm, Ann. Rev. Nucl. Part. Sci. 45, 391 (1995).
[5] H.-J. Miesner, R. Grimm, M. Grieser, D. Habs, D. Schwalm, B. Wanner, and A. Wolf,

Phys. Rev. Lett. 77, 623 (1996).

[6] J. S. Hangst, M. Kristensen, J. S. Nielsen, O. Poulsen, J. P. Schiﬀer, P. Shi, Phys. Rev.

[7] J. S. Hangst, J. S. Nielsen, O. Poulsen, P. Shi, and J. P. Schiﬀer, Phys. Rev. Lett. 74,

Lett. 67, 1238 (1991).

4432 (1995).

[8] H. Danared, Physica Scripta T59, 121 (1995).
[9] T. W. H¨ansch and A. L. Schawlow, Opt. Commun. 13, 68 (1975).
[10] S. Stenholm, Rev. Mod. Phys 58, 699 (1986).
[11] P. K. Ghosh, Ion Traps (Clarendon Press, Oxford, 1995).
[12] J. Hoﬀnagle, R. G. DeVoe, L. Reyna, and R. G. Brewer, Phys. Rev. Lett. 61, 255 (1988).
[13] F. Diedrich, E. Peik, J. M. Chen, W. Quint and H. Walther, Phys. Rev. Lett. 59, 2931

(1987).

Rev. Lett. 59, 2935 (1987).

Nature 334, 309 (1988).

[14] D. J. Wineland, J. C. Bergquist, W. M. Itano, J. J. Bollinger, and C. H. Manney, Phys.

[15] R. Bl¨umel, J. M. Chen, E. Peik, W. Quint, W. Schleich, Y. R. Shen and H. Walther,

[16] R. Bl¨umel, C. Kappler, W. Quint, and H. Walther, Phys. Rev. A 40, 808 (1989).
[17] E. Ott, Chaos in Dynamical Systems, (Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 1993).
[18] J. Guckenheimer and P. Holmes, Nonlinear Oscillations, Dynamical Systems and Bi-

furcations of Vector Fields, (Springer, New York, 1983).

[19] A. J. Lichtenberg and M. A. Lieberman, Regular and Stochastic Motion, (Springer, New

York, 1983).

[20] D. Habs, in Frontiers of particle beams, Lecture notes in Physics 296, ed. M. Month

and S. Turner, (Springer, New-York, 1988).

[21] R. W. Hasse and J. P. Schiﬀer, Ann. Phyc. 203, 419 (1990)
[22] H. Primack and R. Bl¨umel, in preparation.
[23] H. Dehmelt, Adv. At. Mol. Phys. 3, 53 (1967).
[24] NAG Fortran Library Manual, Mark 14, The Numerical Algorithm Group Limited,

[25] J. Hoﬀnagle and R. G. Brewer, Phys. Rev. A 50, 4157 (1994).
[26] R. G. Brewer, J. Hoﬀnagle, R. G. DeVoe, L. Reyna, and W. Henshaw, Nature (London)

Oxford, England, 1990.

344, 305 (1990).

11

