8
9
9
1
 
y
a
M
 
4
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
m
o
t
a
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
9
1
0
5
0
8
9
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

High resolution spectroscopy of muonium

K. Jungmann ∗

Physikalisches Institut der Universit¨at Heidelberg
Philosophenweg 12
D-69120 Heidelberg, Germany

The hydrogen-like muonium atom (µ+e−) consists of a positive muon
(µ+) and an electron (e−). Since it was ﬁrst observed by Hughes et al.
in
1960 [1], a series of precision experiments could be carried out testing bound
state Quantum Electrodynamics (QED) and the nature of the muon as a
point-like leptonic particle [2]. Precision values for fundamental constants
could be obtained, including the ﬁne structure constant α and the muon’s
magnetic moment µµ [2]. Since no internal structure could be revealed for
leptons down to dimensions of 10−18m, the accuracy of theoretical calcu-
lations of term energies is higher than for the natural hydrogen atom and
its isotopes deuterium and tritium as well as exotic hydrogen-like systems
which contain hadrons. Internal structure eﬀects of these particles spoil the
precision of theoretical results. Of particular interest for precision muonium
experiments, which are carried out in order to test standard theory and to
extract accurate values for fundamental constants, are the ground state hy-
perﬁne structure splitting ∆νHF S [3] and the 1s-2s interval ∆ν1s2s [4]. Both
cases involve the n=1 ground state in which the atoms can be produced in
suﬃcient quantities.

In the case of the ground state hyperﬁne structure splitting the present
experimental accuracy [3] is about half the size of the strong interaction
contributions and about three times as large as the contribution from weak
interaction. At the Los Alamos Meson Physics Facility, LAMPF (USA),
an experiment is performed by a Yale-Heidelberg-LAMPF-Sussex collabo-
ration which aims for an improved determination of ∆νHF S and the muon’s
magnetic moment µµ from microwave measurements of two Zeeman transi-
tions in a 1.7 T magnetic ﬁeld [5]. The experiment uses the ”old muonium”
technique to obtain resonance lines narrower than the natural linewidth.
At LAMPF the surface muon beam can be chopped in bunches which are
comparable in their length to the muon’s lifetime of τµ = 2.20µs, typically
4µs. A substantially reduced linewidth of the transitions can be obtained, if

1

the signal is observed only after a period which is long compared to τµ. An
all the time ﬁxed phase relationship between the atoms and the microwave
ﬁeld, to which the atoms are exposed, is essential. Line widths (FWHM) as
narrow as half the natural line width of 145 kHz could be recorded [5]. The
experiment was carried out at LAMPF both with magnetic ﬁeld sweep and
with microwave frequency scanning. The analysis is close to be completed
and about half an order of magnitude improvement is expected for both for
the zero ﬁeld ground state hyperﬁne splitting and the magnetic moment of
the muon [6]. An improved value for the mass of the muon can be expected.
The experiment appears to be mainly limited by statistics.

In the muonium atom the optical 1S-2S two-photon transition oﬀers the
highest resolution of all possible electromagnetic transitions. An experiment
to precisely measure the 1s-2s frequency interval has been started at the
worldwide brightest pulsed surface muon source at present, the ISIS facil-
ity of the Rutherford Appleton Laboratory (RAL) in Chilton, UK, by a
Heidelberg-Oxford-Rutherford-Sussex-Yale-Novosibirsk collaboration [4,7].
The muonium atoms are produced by stopping a muon beam close to the
surface of a SiO2 powder target. Every 20 msec 85(15) muonium atoms in
the 1S state leave the target surface with thermal velocities into the adjacent
vacuum region. The F=1 component of the 12S1/2 − 22S1/2 transition could
be excited by Doppler-free two-photon laser spectroscopy with a pulsed laser
beam generated by frequency doubling of the output of an excimer laser
pumped dye laser ampliﬁer which was fed from a cw ring dye laser. The
two-photon transition was observed by the photoionization of the 2S state
with a third photon from the same laser ﬁeld and the subsequent detection of
the slow muon released in the process. The presently reached experimental
accuracy is approximately the size of the diﬀerence in the Lamb shift contri-
butions between hydrogen and muonium. The experimental uncertainty is
dominated by properties of the necessary intense UV laser light. First there
is an ac Stark shift and second a frequency chirping arose during the fast
pumping process of the laser ampliﬁer. A new laser laser system consisting
of a Ti::sapphire laser seeded alexandrite ring laser ampliﬁer, the output of
which will be frequency tripled, promises more than an order of magnitude
lower chirp and higher experimental accuracy. It is an essential feature of
the laser system that time dependent phse ﬂuctuations, which have been the
source of the major contribution to the systematic errors in previous mea-
surements, are compensated at the MHz level by means of an electro-optic
device in the resonator of the ring laser ampliﬁer. The experiment aims has

2

had a successful run in December 1997 in which at resonance a signal rate of
9 events per hour was observed for 3 MJ laser energy at 244 nm wavelength.
The experiment ultimately aims for a determination of the 1s-2s interval at
the MHz level. At this accuracy the most precise value of the muon mass
can be extracted.

An improved knowledge of the muon mass is essential for the success of
a new measurement of the muon’s magnetic anomaly, which may contain
contributions from physics beyond the standard model and promises a clean
test of the renormalizability of electroweak interactions [8]. Such an experi-
ment is being set up at the Brookhaven National Laboratory, Upton, USA.

The accuracy of both spectroscopic experiments on muonium described
above could be further improved at a pulsed surface muon beam of signiﬁ-
cantly higher particle ﬂux. Such beam could be provided by the JHF. The
microwave experiment would beneﬁt from a pulsed muon source of pulses
with up to ≈ 4 µsec and any pulse separation above 15 µsec The laser ex-
periments, however, would need a similar pulse length but a repetition rate
which matches the laser repetition rate which typically is of order 50 Hz. In
addition to the muonium experiments, investigations of fundamental atomic
systems like muonic hydrogen and muonic helium could be performed at
levels of accuracy which could yield important information on properties of
the respective nuclei at low momentum transfer. A variety of possible ex-
periments in muonic atomic systems has been considered by Boshier et al.
recently [8].

This work is supported in part by the German Bundesminister f¨ur Bil-
dung und Forschung (BMBF), the US Department of Energy (DOE), the
British Engineering and Research Council (EPSERC) and a NATO research
grant.

∗ This work contains results achieved by the muonium hyperﬁne structure col-

laboration and the Muonium 1s-2s collaboration.

The muonium hyperﬁne structure collaboration at LAMPF consists of:

S. Dhawan, V.W. Hughes, D. Kawall, W. Liu M. Grosse-Perdekamp Yale Uni-
versity; K. Jungmann, G. zu Putlitz, I. Reinhard, University of Heidelberg; M.G.
Boshier University of Sussex; O. van Dyck, C. Pillai, LAMPF F.G. Mariam, Brookhaven
National Laboratory;
The muonium 1s-2s collaboration at RAL consists of:
A. Großmann, K. Jungmann, J. Merkel, V. Meyer, G. zu Putlitz, I. Reinhard,

3

R. Santra, K. Tr¨ager, L. Willmann, University of Heidelberg; P.E.G. Baird, P.
Bakule, S. Cornish, I. Lane, L.W. Lin, P.G.H. Sandars, University of Oxford W.T.
Toner, G.H. Eaton, C.A. Scott, M. Towrie, Rutherford Appleton Laboratory; M.G.
Boshier University of Sussex; V.W. Hughes, Yale University; S.N. Bagayev, A. Dyschkhoﬀ
Y. Matyugin, ILP Novosibirsk

References

(1960) 63.

1 V.W. Hughes, D.W. McColm, K. Ziock, and R. Prepost, Phys.Rev.Lett.5

2 V.W. Hughes and G. zu Putlitz, in: ”Quantum Electrodynamics”, p. 822ﬀ,
T. Kinoshita (ed.), World Scientiﬁc, Singapore (1990) and references therein.

3 F.G. Mariam, W. Beer, P.R. Bolton, P.O. Egan, C. J. Gardner, V.W. Hughes,
D.C. Lu, P.A. Souder, H. Orth, J. Vetter, U. Moser, and G. zu Putlitz, Phys.
Rev. Lett. 49 (1982) 993.

4 F. Maas, P.E.G. Baird, J.R.M. Barr, D. Berekeland, M.G. Boshier, B. Braun,
G.H. Eaton, A.I. Ferguson, H. Geerds, V.W. Hughes, K. Jungmann, B.M.
Matthias, P. Matousek, M.A. Persaud, G. zu Putlitz, I. Reinhard, E. Riis,
P.G.H. Sandars, W. Schwarz, W.T. Toner, M. Towrie, L. Willmann, K.A.
Woodle, G.Woodman, and L. Zhang, Phys.Lett.A187 (1994) 247; see also:
S. Chu, A.P. Mills, A.G. Yodh, K. Nagamine, Y. Miyake, T. Kuga, Phys.
Rev. Lett. 60, 101 (1988)

5 M.G. Boshier, S. Dhawan, X. Fei, V.W. Hughes, M. Janousch, K. Jungmann,
W. Liu, C. Pillai, R. Prigl, G. zu Putlitz, I. Reinhard, W. Schwarz, P.A.
Souder, O. van Dyck, X. Wang, K.A. Woodle, Q. Xu, Phys.Rev. A52 (1995)
1948.

6 V.W. Hughes, in: Atomic Physics Methods in Modern Research, K. Jung-
mann, J. Kowalski, I. Reinhard and F. Tr¨ager (eds.), Springer, Heidelberg
(1997) p. 21.

7 K. Jungmann, in: Atomic Physics 14, D.J. Wineland, C.E. Wieman and S.J.
Smith (eds.), AIP Press, New York, p. 102 (1994) and Phys.Bl. 51, 1159
(1995).

8 B.L. Roberts, Z.Phys.C 56 (1992) S109 , and V.W. Hughes, in: Gift of
Prophecy, E.C.G. Sudarshan (ed.), World Scientiﬁc, Singapore, (1995) p.
222.

9 M.G. Boshier, Comm. At.Mol.Phys. 33, 17 (1996).

4

