8
9
9
1
 
y
a
M
 
4
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
m
o
t
a
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
1
2
0
5
0
8
9
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Preprint 0 (2013) ?–?

1

High-Precision Storage Ring for g-2 of the Muon and
Possible Applications in Particle and Heavy Ion
Physics ∗

Klaus P. Jungmann a

a

Physikalisches Institut, University of Heidelberg, D-69120 Heidelberg, Germany
E-mail: jungmann@physi.uni-heidelberg.de

A new superferric magnetic storage ring with highly homogeneous ﬁeld at
1.45 T and weak electrostatic focussing is described which has been set up at the
Brookhaven National Laboratory (BNL), USA, for a precision measurement of the
magnetic anomaly of the muon. The toroidal storage volume has a radius of 7 m and
a diameter of 9 cm. Precision magnetic ﬁeld determination based on pulsed NMR
on protons in H2O yields the ﬁeld to better than 0.1 ppm everywhere within the
storage region. Follow on experiments using the setup have been already suggested
to search for a ﬁnite mass of the muon neutrino and to search for an electric dipole
moment of the muon with signiﬁcantly increased accuracy. The high homogeneity
of the ﬁeld suggests the usage of such devices as a mass spectrometer for heavier
particles as well.

1.

Introduction

Trapping of elementary particles in combined magnetic and electric ﬁelds has
been very successfully applied for obtaining properties of the respective species
and for determining most accurate values of fundamental constants. The mag-
netic anomaly of fermions a = 1
· (g − 2) describes the deviation of their magnetic
2
g-factor from the value 2 predicted in the Dirac theory. It could be determined
for electrons and positrons in Penning traps by Dehmelt and his coworkers to
10 ppb [1]. Accurate calculations involving almost exclusively the ”pure” Quan-
tum Electrodynamics (QED) of electron, positron and photon ﬁelds allow the

∗ This article describes in part results from work performed by the muon g-2 collaboration at
BNL and working groups on the muon neutrino mass and the muon electric dipole moment.

2

K. Jungmann / High-Precision Storage Ring for ...

most precise determination of the ﬁne structure constant α [2] by comparing ex-
periment and theory in which α appears as an expansion coeﬃcient. The high
accuracy to which calculations in the framework of QED can be performed is
demonstrated by the satisfactory agreement between this value of α and the ones
obtained in measurements based on the quantum Hall eﬀect [3] as well as the
ac-Josephson eﬀect and the gyromagnetic ratio of protons in water [4], or the
number extracted from the very precisely known Rydberg constant [5] using an
accurate determination of the neutron de Broglie wavelength [6] and well known
relevant mass ratios [7]. Moreover, the excellent agreement of α values deter-
mined from the electron magnetic anomaly and from the hyperﬁne splitting in
the muonium atom [8] may be interpreted as the most precise reassurance of
the internal consistency of QED, as the ﬁrst case involves QED of free particles
whereas in the second case distinctively diﬀerent bound state QED approaches
need to be applied [9].

The anomalous magnetic moment of the muon aµ has a (mµ/me)2 ≈ 4 · 104
times higher sensitivity to heavier particles and other than electromagnetic in-
teractions. They can be investigated carefully, as very high conﬁdence in the
validity of calculations of the dominating QED contribution arises from the suc-
cess of QED describing this quantity for the electron.

For the muon aµ has been measured in a series of three experiments at
CERN [10] all using magnetic muon storage. Contributions arising from strong
interaction amount to 60 ppm and could be identiﬁed in the last of these mea-
surements.

At the Brookhaven National Laboratory a new dedicated experiment is being
set up to determine the muon’s magnetic anomaly which aims for 0.35 ppm
relative accuracy meaning a 20 fold improvement over previous results. At this
level it will be particularly sensitive to contributions arising from weak interaction
through loop diagrams involving W and Z bosons (1.3 ppm). The experiment
promises further a clean test of renormalization in weak interaction. The muon
magnetic anomaly may also contain contributions from new physics [12,13,14].
A variety of speculative theories can be tested which try to extend the present
Standard Model in order to explain some of its not yet understood features. This
includes muon substructure, new gauge bosons, supersymmetry, an anomalous
magnetic moment of the W boson and leptoquarks. Here this measurement is

K. Jungmann / High-Precision Storage Ring for ...

3

Table 1
Sensitivity to new physics of the g-2 experiment at BNL aiming for 0.35 ppm relative accuracy.

new physics

sensitivity

other experiments

Λ
mµ∗
Λ
aW

≥ 5 TeV
≥ 400 GeV
≥ 400 GeV
≥ 0.02

Muon substructure
excited muon
W±-boson substructure
W± anomalous
magnetic moment
≤ 130 GeV
m
Supersymmetry
right handed W±
mW ′ ≤ 250 GeV
e
≤ 500 GeV
mH
heavy Higgs boson
≤ 4 · 10−20ecm
Muon electric dipole moment Dµ

R-bosons

W

a for substructure ∆aµ ∼ m2

µ/Λ2

LHC similar
LEP II similar
LEP II ∼100-200 GeV
LEP II ∼0.05,
LHC ∼0.2
Fermilab pp similar
Fermilab pp similar

complementary to searches carried out in the framework of other high energy
experiments. In some cases the sensitivity is even higher (Table 1).

2. The Brookhaven g-2 Magnet

In the BNL experiment polarized muons are stored in a magnetic storage
ring of highly homogeneous ﬁeld B and with weak electrostatic focussing using
quadrupole electrodes around the storage volume. The diﬀerence frequency of the
e
spin precession and the cyclotron frequencies, ωa = aµ
mµc B, is measured, with
mµ the muon mass and c the speed of light, by observing electrons/positrons from
the weak decay µ± → e± + 2ν. For relativistic muons the inﬂuence of a static
electric ﬁeld vanishes [15], if aµ = 1/(γ2
−1) which corresponds to γµ = 29.3 and a
µ
muon momentum of 3.094 GeV/c, where γµ = 1/q1 − (vµ/c)2 and vµ is the muon
velocity. The momentum needs to be met at the 10−4 level for a corresponding
correction to be below the desired accuracy for aµ. For a homogeneous ﬁeld the
magnet must have iron ﬂux return and shielding. To meet this, the particular
momentum requirement and to avoid magnetic saturation of the iron a device of
7 m radius was built. It has a C-shaped iron yoke cross section with the open side
facing towards the center of the ring. It provides 1.4513 T ﬁeld in a 18 cm gap.
The magnet is energized by 4 superconducting coils carrying 5177 A current. The
storage volume inside of a Al vacuum tank has 9 cm diameter.

The magnetic ﬁeld is measured by a newly developed narrow band magne-

4

K. Jungmann / High-Precision Storage Ring for ...

tometer system which is based on pulsed nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) of
protons in water. It has the capability to measure the ﬁeld absolute to ≈50 ppb
[16]. The ﬁeld and its homogeneity are continuously monitored by 366 NMR
probes which are embedded in the Al vacuum tank and distributed around the
ring. Inside the storage volume a trolley carrying 17 NMR probes arranged to
measure the dipole ﬁeld and several important multipole components as well a
fully computerized magnetometer built from all nonferromagnetic components is
used to map the ﬁeld at regular intervals. The accuracy is derived from and re-
lated to a precision measurement of the proton gyromagnetic ratio in a spherical
water sample [17]. The ﬁeld homogeneity at present is about 25 ppm. It will be
improved to the ppm level using mechanical shimming methods and a set of elec-
trical shim coils. The ﬁeld integral in the storage region is known at present to
better than 1 ppm at any time and ﬁeld drifts of a few ppm/hour were observed.
It can be expected that with additional shimming and thermal insulation for the
magnet yoke the ﬁeld path integral can be known to 0.1 ppm.

The weak focussing is provided by electrostatic quadrupole ﬁeld electrodes
with 10 cm separation between opposite plates. They cover four 39◦ sections of
the ring. The electric ﬁeld is applied by pulsing a voltage of ±24.5 kV for ≈ms
duration to avoid trapping of electrons and electrical breakdown [18].

Due to parity violation in the weak muon decay process the positrons are
emitted preferentially in/opposite to the muon spin direction causing a time de-
pendent variation of the spatial distribution of decay particles in the muon eigen-
system which translates into a time dependent variation of the energy distribution
observed by detectors ﬁxed inside the ring.

The improvements over previous experiments include an azimuthally sym-
metric iron construction for the magnet with superconducting coils, a larger gap
and higher homogeneity of the ﬁeld, an electron/positron detector system cover-
ing a larger solid angle and using segmented detectors and improved electronics.
A major advantage is the two orders of magnitude higher primary proton inten-
sity available at the AGS Booster at BNL. A new feature will be ultimately the
direct injection of muons into the storage volume using an electromagnetic kicker
as compared to ﬁlling the ring with decay muons from injected pions which has
been employed so far.

In order for the new muon g-2 experiment to reach its design accuracy be-
sides the ﬁeld also the muon mass respectively its magnetic moment needs to
be known to 0.1 ppm or better. An improvement beyond the present 0.36 ppm

K. Jungmann / High-Precision Storage Ring for ...

5

g-2 magnet pro(cid:12)le

include

here

(please glue in)

Figure 1. Cross sectional view of the magnet iron construction (left). Preliminary analysis of
the observed muon spin precession signal in the new experiment (right).

accuracy of this constant can be expected from both microwave spectroscopy of
the muonium atom’s (µ+e−) hyperﬁne structure and from laser spectroscopy of
the muonium 1s-2s transition [19].

3. Experiments beyond Muon g-2 using the Ring

The large installation with the highly homogeneous ﬁeld seems to be attrac-
tive for further experiments. Of particular interest are applications where the
homogeneous ﬁeld is used in a mass spectrometer.

3.1. Particle Physics Experiments

Among the seriously discussed suggestions are the use of the magnet for
searching for a ﬁnite mass of the muon neutrino [20]. By injecting relativistic
pions and comparing the positions of the decay muons after one single turn in
the magnet with the ones of pions one can expect a sensitivity to about 8 keV/c2
which is 20 times better than the present limit [21]. Due to relativistic kinematics
this method is less sensitive to the precision of the present knowledge of the pion
mass compared to the previously employed technique [21].

6

K. Jungmann / High-Precision Storage Ring for ...

A very promising approach seems to be the proposed search for a perma-
nent electric dipole moment of the muon [22]. For such an experiment major
modiﬁcations of the magnet setup would be required which involve the applica-
tion of a radial electric ﬁeld and the switching from electrostatic to alternating
gradient focussing by replacing the pole tips of the magnet with appropriately
shaped pieces of iron. In case of a ﬁnite electric dipole moment a time dependent
asymmetry in the muon decay rates counted above and below the storage region
is expected as a signature. Such an experiment may achieve up to four orders
of magnitude improvement and could reach a level of sensitivity at which several
theoretical models, particularly such involving supersymmetry, could be tested.

3.2. Heavy Ion Physics Possibilities

In the ﬁeld of stored heavy ions unfortunately the weak focussing device
cannot be expected to contribute to studies of and searches for crystalization
of ion beams, as this phenomenon is prohibited by instabilities caused by radial
deplacement dependent particle precession [23]. However, if the ﬁeld homogeneity
were sacriﬁced for alternating gradients and just the basic circular topology of
the iron yoke and the ﬁeld exciting coils were kept, one would have a chance to
observe the eﬀect.

The highly homogeneous ﬁeld of the g-2 magnet looks promising for preci-
sion mass measurements of heavy ions. The ﬁeld homogeneity and the accurate
knowledge of the ﬁeld integral can only be maintained, if the ﬁeld is kept at a
constant level. Therefore, only such experiments can be considered which do not
need any variation of the ﬁeld, i.e. the momentum of the particles to be injected
into the ring needs to be adjusted appropriately. Among the possibilities one
can expect accurate determinations of diﬀerences between very close masses, e.g.
isomers, through their slightly diﬀerent orbits and rotation frequencies. Neigh-
bouring isotopes could be compared by additionally varying the momentum of
diﬀerent particles to be compared in their masses prior to injection.

4. Conclusions

The new Brookhaven g-2 magnet is a powerful device which is expected to
guarantee the success of the experiment it has been designed for. Important ques-
tions in particle physics can be addressed with minor modiﬁcations subsequently.

K. Jungmann / High-Precision Storage Ring for ...

7

Finally the concept of a circular uniform iron ring yoke with four circular coils
for ﬁeld excitation may ﬁnd applications in precision heavy ion measurements.

5. Acknowledgments

The author would like to thank the organizers of the 3rd Euroconference
on ”Atomic Physics with Stored Highly Charged Ions” for the stimulating atmo-
sphere in nice surroundings and for support. This work was sponsored in part by
the German Bundesminister f¨ur Bildung und Forschung.

The people who contributed within the g-2 collaboration to the present status of the

experiment: D.H. Brown, R.M. Carey, W. Earle, E. Efstathiadis, E.S. Hazen, F. Krienen, J.P.
Miller, V. Monich, J. Ouyang, O. Rind, B.L. Roberts‡, L.R. Sulak, A. Troﬁmov, G. Varner, W.A.

Worstell Boston University; J. Benante, H.N. Brown, G. Bunce, J. Cullen, G.T. Danby, J.

Geller, H. Hseuh, J.W. Jackson, L. Jia, S. Kochis, R. Larsen, Y.Y. Lee, W. Meng, W.M.
Morse‡, C. Pai, I. Polk, R. Prigl, S. Rankowitz, J. Sandberg, Y.K. Semertzidis, R. Shutt, L.

Snydstrup, A. Soukas, A. Stillman, T. Tallerico, M. Tanaka, F. Toldo, D. Von Lintig, K. Woodle,

Brookhaven Nat. Lab.; T. Kinoshita, Y. Orlov, Cornell Univ.; D. Winn, Fairﬁeld Univ.;

J. Gerhaeuser, W. Frauenfeld, A. Grossmann, K. Jungmann, G. zu Putlitz, P. von Walter,

Univ. of Heidelberg; P.T. Debevec, W. Deninger, D.W. Hertzog, C. Polly, S. Sedykh, D.

Urner Univ. of Ilinois; U. Haeberlen, MPI f.Med.Forschung, Heidelberg; P. Cushman, L.

Duong, S. Giron, J. Kindem, R. McNabb, D. Miller, C. Timmermans, D. Zimmerman Univ. of

Minnesota; L.M. Barkov, A. Chertovskikh, V.P. Druzhinin, G.V. Fedotovich, D.N. Grigorev,

V.B. Golubev, B.I. Khazin, I. Logashenko, A. Maksimov, Yu. Merzliakov, N.M. Ryskulov, S.

Serednyakov, Yu.M. Shatunov, E. Solodov, Inst. of Nucl. Phys., Novosibirsk; K. Endo, H.

Hirabayashi, S. Ichii, S. Kurokawa, T. Sato, A.Yamamoto, KEK; M. Iwasaki Tokyo Institute

of Technology K. Ishida, Riken; H. Deng, A. Disco, S.K. Dhawan, F.J.M. Farley, X. Fei, M.
Grosse-Perdekamp V.W. Hughes‡, D. Kawall, S.I. Redin, Yale Univ.; ‡ Spokespersons

References

p. 322

[1] R. Van Dyck, Jr.,in Quantum Electrodynamics, T. Kinoshita, ed. (World Scientiﬁc, 1990),

[2] T. Kinoshita, IEEE Trans.Instr.Meas. 44, 498 (1995); Rep.Prog.Phys. 59, 1459 (1996);

IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas. 46, 108 (1997)

[3] M. E. Cage et al., IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas. 38, 284 (1989)
[4] E.R. Williams et al., IEEE Trans.Instrum.Meas.38, 233 (1989)

8

K. Jungmann / High-Precision Storage Ring for ...

[5] Th. Udem et al., Phys. Rev. Lett 79, 2646 (1997)
[6] E. Kr¨uger et al., Metrologia 32, 117 (1995); IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas. 46, 101 (1997)
[7] Particle Data Group, Phys.Rev. D54, 1 (1996)
[8] M.G.Boshier et al., Comm. At. Mol. Phys. 33, 17 (1996)
[9] T. Kinoshita and D.R. Yennie, in loc.cit. [1], p. 1 (1990)

[10] F.J.M. Farley and E. Picasso, in loc.cit. [1], p.479 (1990) and J. Bailey et al., Nucl. Phys.

B 150, 1 (1979)

Scientiﬁc, 1994), p.222

[11] BNL proposal E821 and V.W. Hughes in A Gift of Prophecy, E.C.G. Sudarshan, ed. (World

[12] P. Mery et al., Z.Phys. C 46, 229 (1990)
[13] J. Lopez et al., Phys.Rev. D 49, 366 (1994); G. Couture and H. Konig, Phys. Rev D 53,
555 (1996); U. Chattopathyay and P. Nath, Phys. Rev. D 53, 1648 (1996); T. Moroi Phys.
Rev. D 53, 6565 (1996)

[14] F.M. Renard et al., Phys.Lett.B 409, 398 (1997)
[15] V. Bargmann, L. Michel and V. Telegdi, Phys.Rev.Lett. 2 435 (1959)
[16] R. Prigl et al., Nucl.Instr.Meth. A 304, 349 (1996)
[17] W.D. Phillips et al., Metrologia 13, 81 (1977)
[18] W. Flegel and F. Krienen, Nucl.Instr.Meth. 113, 549 (1973)
[19] K. Jungmann in Atomic Physics 14, D.J. Wineland, C.E. Wieman and S.J. Smith, ed. (AIP

Press, 1994), p. 105

[20] P. Cushman, P. Nemethy et al., private communication (1997)
[21] G. Borchert, this Euroconference
[22] Y. Semertzidis et al., Letter of Intent to BNL-AGS (1997)
[23] A. Ruggiero, BNL-Report 49529 (1993)

