8
9
9
1
 
y
a
M
 
4
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
m
o
t
a
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
0
2
0
5
0
8
9
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

MEASUREMENT OF THE MUONIUM 1S-2S TRANSITION FREQUENCY

V.Meyer1, S.N.Bagayev5, P.E.G.Baird2, P.Bakule2, M.G.Boshier4, A.Breitr¨uck1, S.L.Cornish2,
S.Dychkov5, G.H.Eaton3, A.Grossmann1, D.H¨ubl1, V.W.Hughes6, K.Jungmann1, I.C.Lane2, Yi-Wei Liu2,
D.Lucas2, Y.Matyugin5, J.Merkel1, G.zuPutlitz1, I.Reinhard1, P.G.H.Sandars2, R.Santra1, P.Schmidt1,
C.A.Scott3, W.T.Toner3, M.Towrie3, K.Tr¨ager1, C.Wasser1, L.Willmann1 and V.Yakhontov1

1Physikalisches Institut, Universit¨at Heidelberg, Philosophenweg 12, D-69120 Heidelberg, D
2Clarendon Laboratory, University of Oxford, Oxford OX1 3PU, UK
3Rutherford Appleton Laboratory, Chilton, Didcot, Oxon OX11 0QX, UK
4University of Sussex, Physics Department, Brighton BN1 9QH, UK
5 Institute of Laser Physics, Novosibirsk 630090, RU
6Gibbs Laboratory, Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut 06520-8121, USA

A new measurement of the 1S-2S energy split-
ting of muonium by Doppler-free two-photon spec-
troscopy has been performed at the Rutherford Ap-
pleton Laboratory in Chilton, Didcot, UK. Increa-
sed accuracy is expected compared to a previous
experiment [1]. Spectroscopy of this transistion
promises an improvement of the muon mass value.

One-electron atoms, being the most fundamen-
tal atomic systems, provide excellent tests for bound
state quantum electrodynamics (QED) and ren-
der the possibility of highly precise measurements
of fundamental constants. As the energy levels
of the natural hydrogen isotopes (hydrogen, deu-
terium and tritium) and hydrogen-like exotic sys-
tems with hadronic nuclei (e.g. muonic helium, pi-
onium and many others) are inﬂuenced by the ﬁnite
size and internal structure of the hadrons, the in-
terpretation of highly precise measurements in such
systems is limited by todays insuﬃcient knowledge
of the nuclear size eﬀects. The hydrogen-like muo-
nium atom (µ+e−) consists of two leptons from
two diﬀerent generations [2]. No internal struc-
ture is known for leptons down to dimensions of
order 10−18 m; therefore muonium is free from nu-
clear structure eﬀects. The level energies can be
calculated to very high accuracy exclusively by the
theory of bound state Quantum Electrodynamics
(QED). The potential for high precision studies has
been demonstrated in a long series of microwave
measurements and theoretical calculations of the
ground state hyperﬁne structure splitting [2], from
which accurate values for fundamental constants
(muon mass mµ and ﬁne structure constant α) were

obtained [2]. The optical 1S-2S transition oﬀers
a higher resolution than the ground state hyper-
ﬁne structure splitting, because of the much higher
transition frequencies (and QED contributions) and
the same 144 kHz narrow natural linewidth, which
is due to the muon lifetime τµ≈2.2µsec.

+

Ar
Laser

Ti:sapphire
Laser

FM Saturation
Spectroscopy

Wavemeter  +
Interferometer

Heterodyne-
measurement

AOM

Optical 
Fibers

Alexandrite
Laser

Frequency
tripling

Fast beam
diagnostics

To Vacuumchamber

Figure 1: Laser system employed in the experi-
ment.

This experiment was performed at the worlds
brightest pulsed surface muon source at the Ruther-
ford Appleton Laboratory (RAL) in Chilton, UK.
The 12S1/2(F=1) → 22S1/2(F=1) transition was
induced by Doppler-free two-photon laser spectro-
scopy using two counter-propagating laser beams
of wavelength λ = 244 nm [1]. The atoms were
formed by electron capture after stopping positive
muons close to the surface of a SiO2 powder target.
A fraction of these diﬀused to the surface and left

1

the powder at thermal velocities (7.43(2) mm/µs)
for the adjacent vacuum region.

The necessary high power UV laser light was
generated by frequency tripling the output of an
alexandrite ring laser ampliﬁer in crystals of LBO
and BBO. Typically UV light pulses of energy 3 mJ
and 80 nsec (FWHM) duration were used. The
alexandrite laser was seeded with light from a con-
tinuous wave Ti:sapphire laser at 732 nm which was
pumped by an Ar ion laser. Fluctuations of the
optical phase during the laser pulse were compen-
sated with an electro-optic device in the resonator
of the ring ampliﬁer to give a frequency chirping of
the laser light of less than about 5 MHz. The laser
frequency was calibrated by frequency modulation
saturation spectroscopy of a hyperﬁne component
of the 5-13 R(26) line in thermally excited iodine
vapour. The frequency of the reference line is about
700 MHz lower than 1/6 of the muonium transition
frequency. The cw light was frequency up-shifted
by passing through two acousto-optic modulators
(AOM’s). The muonium reference line has been
calibrated preliminarily to 3.4 MHz at the Insti-
tute of Laser Physics in Novosibirsk. An indepen-
dent calibration at the National Physics Labora-
tory (NPL) at Teddington, UK is under way.

The 1S-2S transition was detected by the pho-
toionization of the 2S state by a third photon from
the same laser ﬁeld. The slow muon set free in
the ionization process is accelerated to 2 keV and
guided through a momentum and energy selective
path onto a microchannel plate particle detector
(MCP). Background due to scattered photons and
other ionized particles can be reduced by requiring
that the MCP count falls into a 100 nsec wide win-
dow centered at the expected time of ﬂight for mu-
ons and by additionally requiring the observation
of the energetic positron from the muon decay. On
resonance an event rate of 9 per hour was observed.
The line shape distortions due to frequency chir-
ping were investigated theoretically [3,4] and ex-
perimentally by observing resonances in deuterium
and hydrogen in the same experimental setup. A
careful analysis is in progress.

This work was supported by the BMBF (Ger-
many), the EPSERC (United Kingdom), the DOE
and NSF (United States), by INTAS and NATO
through research grants.

References

[1] F.E. Maas, B. Braun, H. Geerds, K. Jung-
mann, B.E. Matthias, G. zu Putlitz, I. Rein-

2

Figure 2: The 12S1/2(F=1)→22S1/2(F=1) transi-
tion signal in muonium, not corrected for systema-
tic shifts due to frequency chirping and ac Stark
eﬀect.

hard, W. Schwarz, L. Willmann, L. Zhang,
P.E.G. Baird, P.G.H. Sandars, G.S. Wood-
man, G.H. Eaton, P. Matousek, W.T. Toner,
M. Towrie, J.R.M. Barr, A.I. Ferguson, M.A.
Persaud, E. Riis, D. Berkeland, M.G. Boshier,
and V.W. Hughes, ”A measurement of the
1S-2S transition frequency in muonium”,
Phys.Lett. A187, 247 (1994)

[2] V.W. Hughes and G. zu Putlitz, Quantum
Electrodynamics, T. Kinoshita (ed.), ”Muo-
nium”, World Scientiﬁc, Singapore, p. 822.
(1990) and V.W. Hughes, Atomic Physics
Methods in Modern Research, K. Jungmann,
J. Kowalski, I. Reinhard, F. Tr¨ager (ed.)
”High Precision Atomic Spectroscopy of Muo-
nium and Simple Muonic Atoms” Springer,
Heidelberg p. 21 (1997)

[3] V. Yakhontov and K. Jungmann, ”Light-shift
calculation in the ns-states of hydrogenic sys-
tems”, Z.Phys.D38, 141 (1996)

[4] V.L. Yakhontov, R. Santra and K. Jungmann,
”3-photon ionization of hydrogenic atoms by
non-monochromatic laser ﬁeld”, europhysics
conference abstracts 21C, 356 (1997)

