8
9
9
1
 
c
e
D
 
0
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
m
o
t
a
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
8
3
0
2
1
8
9
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Proceedings of the International School of Physics “Enrico Fermi”
Course 140, 1998

Bose-Einstein Condensation of Atomic Hydrogen

Daniel Kleppner, Thomas J. Greytak, Thomas C. Killian, Dale G. Fried,
Lorenz Willmann, David Landhuis, and Stephen C. Moss

Department of Physics Massachusetts Institute of Technology Cambridge, Massachusetts 02139

1. – INTRODUCTION

Bose-Einstein condensation in atomic hydrogen was observed for the ﬁrst time just a
few weeks before this session of the Enrico Fermi School, and so these lectures constitute
a somewhat breathless ﬁrst report. However, the search for Bose-Einstein condensation
(BEC) in hydrogen began many years ago, and it has a long and colorful history. Out
of that history emerged an extensive body of knowledge on the behavior of hydrogen at
low temperatures that provided the foundation for achieving BEC in hydrogen. Much
of it has been described in reviews [1-4]. Consequently, we will dwell on only those
features of that research that provide essential background, and concentrate on the most
recent developments in which BEC in hydrogen advanced from a long period of being
tantalizingly close, to being real.

2. – ORIGINS OF THE SEARCH FOR BEC IN AN ATOMIC GAS

In April, 1976, W. C. Stwalley and L. H. Nosanow published a letter summarizing
[5]. Because there are
behaves like a simple

studies on the equation of state of spin-polarized hydrogen, H
↓
no bound states of molecular hydrogen in the triplet state, H
↓
monatomic gas, but a gas with a remarkable property. Because of the weak H
potential and the atom’s low mass, H
Consequently, it might be possible to cool H
That paper essentially launched the search for BEC in an atomic gas.

↓
remains a gas at temperatures down to T = 0.
to the quantum regime and achieve BEC.
It triggered a

- H

↓

↓

↓

c(cid:13) Societ`a Italiana di Fisica

1

2

DANIEL KLEPPNER, THOMAS J. GREYTAK, et al.

ﬂurry of experiments and enough activity for an entire session of the December, 1978,
APS meeting to be devoted to the stabilization of hydrogen [6].

q

The critical density for the BEC transition in a non-interacting gas is nc = 2.612Λ−3
T ,
2π¯h2/kBT m is the thermal de Broglie wavelength. Because nc depends
where ΛT =
on the product of temperature and mass, for a given density hydrogen condenses at a
higher temperature than any other atom. Hydrogen oﬀered two other attractions as a
candidate for BEC. The hydrogen atom is generally appealing for basic studies because
its structure and interactions can be calculated from ﬁrst principles. Furthermore, H
↓
constitutes a nearly ideal Bose gas: it has an anomalously small s-wave scattering length
and its interactions are weak.

In the years since the search for BEC in atoms started, there was a revolution in
techniques for cooling and manipulating atoms using laser-based methods that culmi-
nated in the achievement of BEC in alkali metal atoms [7-9]. In light of these advances,
hydrogen’s special attractions must be viewed from a new perspective. Spin-polarized
hydrogen’s unique property of remaining a gas at T = 0 is evidently not essential for
BEC. Although all species except helium should be solid at sub-kelvin temperatures,
laser-cooled atoms do not even liquefy because they never hit surfaces. In the absence
of surface collisions, a gas to liquid transition requires three-body collisions to initiate
nucleation. At the densities used to achieve BEC in alkali metal atom systems, however,
the three-body recombination rate is so low that it can be neglected at all but the high-
est densities. Hydrogen’s relatively high condensation temperature is also not a crucial
advantage. Laser cooling methods make it is possible to cool alkali metal gases to the
microkelvin regime, far colder than possible by conventional cryogenic means. Once the
atoms have achieved the laser-cooling temperature limit, they can be eﬃciently cooled
into the nanokelvin regime by evaporative cooling. Finally, hydrogen’s close to ideal
behavior must now be regarded as a serious experimental disadvantage. This is because
all routes to BEC used so far involve evaporative cooling. Evaporation requires collisions
for maintaining thermal equilibrium as the system cools. Because of hydrogen’s small
scattering length, its collision cross section is tiny and evaporation is much slower than
in other systems.

Nevertheless, now that hydrogen can be Bose-Einstein condensed, its simplicity con-
tinues to give the atom unique interest. The techniques, condensate size, and the general
conditions for condensation are diﬀerent from those of other realizations and one can
expect that this new condensate will open complementary lines of research.

1
2 , mp =

Spin polarized hydrogen is created by the magnetic state selection of hydrogen at
cryogenic temperatures. In high magnetic ﬁelds the electron and proton spin quantum
numbers are me =
. The
↓
governing parameter in magnetic state selection is the interaction energy in a strong
magnetic ﬁeld, B. In temperature units, this is To = µBB/kB = 0.67(B/tesla) K. Here
µB is the Bohr magneton, and kB is Boltzmann’s constant. For a ﬁeld of 10 T, which is
readily achieved in a superconducting solenoid, To = 6.7 K. At a temperature of 0.3 K
2To/T ), which is about 10−20. The spin
exp(
the ratio of densities n(H

and me = + 1

2 , mp =

1
2 for H

1
2 for H

±

−

±

↑

)

) / n(H
↑

↓

∼

−

BOSE-EINSTEIN CONDENSATION OF ATOMIC HYDROGEN

3

polarization is essentially 100%.

↓

Another crucial experimental parameter in creating H

is the binding energy for ad-
sorption on a liquid helium surface, Eb. Hydrogen must make collisions with a cold
surface in order to thermalize at cryogenic temperatures, but if the atoms become ad-
In thermal equilibrium, the surface density σ
sorbed the gas will rapidly recombine.
and volume density n of H
Eb/kBT ). For hydrogen-
helium, Eb = 1 K. Consequently, for temperatures below about 0.1 K the atoms move
to the walls where they can recombine by two- and three-body processes. The initial
searches for BEC were in the temperature regime 0.2
0.7 K. The critical density at a
temperature of 0.5 K is nc = 6.8

are related by σ = ΛTn exp (

1019 cm−3.

∼

−

↓

Spin-polarized hydrogen was ﬁrst stabilized by I. F. Silvera and J. T. M. Walraven in
1980 [10], and magnetically conﬁned by the M.I.T. group [11]. In these experiments the
ﬁeld of a superconducting solenoid provided both state-selection and axial conﬁnement.
Radial conﬁnement was provided by a superﬂuid helium-coated surface.

The highest density achieved with H

1018 cm−3,
at a temperature of 0.55 K [3]. The density was limited by three-body recombination,
a process that had been predicted by Kagan et al. [12]. Because the heat generation in
three-body recombination increases as the cube of the density, at higher density the gas
would essentially self-destruct. An alternative route to BEC was required.

under controlled conditions was 4.5

×

↓

×

3. – HYDROGEN TRAPPING AND COOLING

The new route toward BEC led to temperatures in the microkelvin regime where nc
is so low that three-body recombination is unimportant. At temperatures much below
0.1 K, however, surface adsorption and recombination become prohibitive. To avoid
surfaces, Hess suggested strategies for conﬁning H
atoms (in the “low ﬁeld seeking”
states) in a magnetic trap, and cooling the gas by evaporation [13].

↑

Trapping and cooling requires an irreversible process for losing energy.

In laser-
cooling and trapping experiments, this process is spontaneous emission. Unfortunately,
laser methods are not well suited to hydrogen. Aside from the lack of convenient light
sources, the laser cooling temperature limit for hydrogen is relatively high. The limit is
determined by the recoil energy for single photon emission, and in hydrogen it is more
than a millikelvin. The method proposed by Hess employed elastic scattering for both
trapping and cooling.

The magnetic trap proposed by Hess consists of a long quadrupole ﬁeld to conﬁne the
atoms radially with axial solenoids at each end to provide axial conﬁnement—an elon-
gated variant of the “Ioﬀe-Pritchard” conﬁguration [14]. The Ioﬀe-Pritchard potential
is

(1)

V (r) =

(αρ)2 + (βz2 + θ)2

θ,

−

p

with radial potential gradient α, axial curvature 2β, and bias energy θ. At low energies

the potential is quasi-harmonic with radial and axial oscillation frequencies

DANIEL KLEPPNER, THOMAS J. GREYTAK, et al.

4

(2a)

(2b)

α
m(βz2 + θ)

ωρ =

ωz =

p

r

2β
m

The trapping ﬁelds are produced inside a cell that conﬁnes the gas cloud while atoms
are loaded into the trap. The walls of the helium-coated cell are held at a temperature
of about 275 mK. The cell is ﬁlled with a puﬀ of hydrogen and helium from a low
temperature discharge and the walls of the cell are then cooled, making them “sticky.”
Atoms with high energy leave the trap and stick to the walls. Thermal contact between
the walls and the trapped gas is broken because these atoms are unable to return. The
trapped gas cools by evaporation and reaches an equilibrium temperature of about 1/12th
the trap depth.

To further cool the gas, Hess proposed a process of forced evaporation. The height of
the potential barrier is slowly decreased, allowing energetic atoms to escape and thus re-
ducing the average energy of the system. As the system’s reduced energy is redistributed
by collisions, the temperature falls. Unlike ordinary evaporation which has a tempera-
ture limit determined by the vapor pressure of the material, forced evaporation can be
continued to almost arbitrarily low temperatures. The process is surprisingly eﬃcient
because the escaping atoms carry away a great deal of energy, (5

10)kBT per atom.

Spin-polarized hydrogen was conﬁned by a pure magnetic trap in 1987 by the M.I.T.
group [15] and also in Amsterdam [16]. Shortly thereafter, in the ﬁrst demonstration of
forced evaporative cooling the M.I.T. group achieved a temperature of 3 mK [17].

∼

In all of these experiments, the atoms were studied by monitoring the hydrogen ﬂux
as the atoms were dumped from the trap. With this technique [17,18], the ﬁeld of one of
the axial conﬁning coils is reduced, allowing the atoms to escape from the trap. Once out
of the trap, the hydrogen rapidly adsorbs on the walls of the cell and recombines. This
heat of molecular recombination—4.6 eV per event—is measured by a small bolometer
within the cell but outside the trap. If the conﬁnement ﬁeld is reduced rapidly compared
to the thermalization time, then the atom ﬂux as a function of barrier height reveals the
energy distribution of the gas. From this the temperature can be inferred. A typical
energy distribution is shown in ﬁg. 1. Integrating the signal gives a measure of the total
number N of atoms trapped.

The density can also be determined by observing the decay of the trapped gas. The
primary decay mechanism in H
is dipolar relaxation, a process in which the spin angular
momentum of a pair of atoms is transferred to their orbital angular momentum, while
one or both of the atoms makes a transition to an untrapped state and escapes. Because
gn2, where
dipolar relaxation is a two-body process, the density decays according to ˙n =
the dipolar decay constant g has been calculated [19, 20] and also measured [15, 16]. The
10−15 cm3s−1 [21]. The total sample decays according to
calculated value is g = 1.2

−

↑

×

BOSE-EINSTEIN CONDENSATION OF ATOMIC HYDROGEN

5

Fig. 1. – Energy distribution of trapped H
after evaporative cooling: plot of the atom ﬂux
as the trap barrier is rapidly lowered. The atom ﬂux is measured by detecting the molecular
recombination heat on a sensitive bolometer. Calculated distributions for three temperatures
are shown.

↑

˙N =

κgN where

−

(3)

(4)

R
R
For dipolar decay the number of trapped atoms decays according to

κ =

exp [
exp [

2V (r)/kBT ] dV
V (r)/kBT ] dV

.

−
−

N (0)/N (t) = 1 + κgnot.

Hence, the initial peak density no can be extracted from a plot of N (0)/N (t). An example
1/5 and the characteristic decay time at
of such a plot is shown in ﬁg. 2. Typically κ
a density of 1014 cm−3 is 40 s.

∼

Dipolar relaxation takes place predominantly where the density is high. This is at
the minimum of the trap where the mean energy is low. Just as evaporation cools
by removing the most energetic atoms, dipolar relaxation heats by removing the least

6

DANIEL KLEPPNER, THOMAS J. GREYTAK, et al.

Fig. 2. – Determination of the sample density by observing decay due to dipolar relaxation.
Five samples were indentically prepared and then held for varying times (horizontal axis) before
being dumped from the trap. The integrated recombination signal from the dump gives the
number of atoms in the trap, and is plotted on the vertical axis. The straight line ﬁt indicates
a density of 6.0

−3. From [50]

1013 cm

×

energetic atoms. Consequently, the trapped gas comes to a thermal equilibrium in which
cooling due to evaporation is balanced by heating due to dipolar relaxation.

↑

These attempts to reach BEC in H

stopped short of the quantum degenerate regime
by about a factor of six in phase space density [22]. Several complications arose. The
diagnostic technique of dumping the atoms out of the trap began to give ambiguous
results because the energy distributions of the samples would change signiﬁcantly during
the dumping process. The sensitivity of the detection process was not suﬃcient. The
eﬃciency of the evaporative cooling process degraded signiﬁcantly, precluding further
cooling. Finally, even if the quantum degnerate regime could be reached, a condensate
would degenerate during the sample dumping process, and would have been unobservable.
These complications required a new diagnostic technique and a more eﬃcient evaporation
process.

BOSE-EINSTEIN CONDENSATION OF ATOMIC HYDROGEN

7

4. – OPTICAL DETECTION OF TRAPPED HYDROGEN

Trapped hydrogen can be detected in situ by photoabsorption using one- and two-
photon transitions. The Amsterdam group has used both methods. Using a Lyman-α
light source they observed absorption of the principal transition [23]. However, the ab-
sorption spectrum has a large natural linewidth and displays structure due to the inho-
mogeneous magnetic ﬁeld, limiting its use for analyzing momentum. They also observed
the 1S-3S and 1S-3D transitions using resonantly enhanced two-photon excitation ex-
ploiting a virtual state near 2P [24]. The 1S-3S transition is insensitive to magnetic
ﬁelds and is potentially well suited for analyzing momemtum at temperatures down to
1 µK. The 1S-3D transition has a matrix element that is ten times larger, but a natural
linewidth that is ten times broader.

We have employed two-photon Doppler-free spectroscopy of the 1S-2S transition, us-
ing two-photons from a single laser tuned to 243 nm, twice the Lyman-α wavelength.
The spectrum is essentially unperturbed by the magnetic ﬁeld. This method provides
excellent momentum resolution but suﬀers from the low excitation rate of a forbidden
transition.
In two-photon spectroscopy using a single light source normally only the
narrow Doppler-free spectrum is observed, excited by counter-propagating laser beams
that eliminate the ﬁrst order Doppler eﬀect. However, at very low temperatures in our
experiment the broad Doppler-sensitive spectrum is also visible, excited by absorbing two
photons from the same laser beam. Because the momentum distribution in a condensate
is much narrower than in a normal gas at the same temperature, the Doppler-sensitive
In addition to its application to
spectrum is well suited to probing the condensate.
observing BEC, Doppler-free spectroscopy of cold trapped hydrogen has a potential ap-
plication to the precision spectroscopy of hydrogen, in which the 1S-2S transition plays
a central role [25]. Under suitable conditions, time-of-ﬂight broadening disappears and
a spectral resolution close to the natural linewidth of 1.3 Hz should be possible [26].

In our method [27], the atoms are excited by a pulse of 243 nm radiation. For
observing BEC the pulse length is typically 0.4 ms, but for spectroscopic studies pulses
as long as 5 ms have been used. (In the absence of an electric ﬁeld we have observed
that the 2S atoms live for close to the natural lifetime, 122 ms [27].) Because of the low
excitation rate, it is not feasible to observe photoabsorption. Instead, the excited atoms
are detected by switching on an electric ﬁeld which Stark-quenches the 2S state, mixing
it with the 2P state which promptly decays. The emitted Lyman-α photon is detected.
A diagram of the apparatus is shown in ﬁg. 3. The energy equation for two-photon
excitation of an atom from state i to f , with initial momentum pi and ﬁnal momentum
pf = pi + ¯h(k1 + k2), where k1 and k2 are the wave vectors of the laser beams, is

(5)

2hν =

p2
f c2 + (mc2 + 2hνo)2

p2
i c2 + (mc2)2.

q

− q

where the rest mass of the atom in the initial state is m and νo is the unperturbed

8

DANIEL KLEPPNER, THOMAS J. GREYTAK, et al.

Fig. 3. – Schematic diagram of the apparatus. The superconducting magnetic coils create
trapping potential that conﬁnes atoms near the focus of the 243 nm laser beam. The beam
is focused to a 50 µm waist radius and retroreﬂected to produce the standing wave required
for Doppler-free two-photon absorption. After excitation, ﬂuorescence is induced by an applied
electric ﬁeld. A small fraction of the 122 nm ﬂuorescence photons are counted on a microchannel
plate detector. The bolometer is used for diagnostic purposes. Not shown is the trapping cell
which surrounds the sample and is thermally anchored to a dilution refrigerator. The actual
trap is longer and narrower than indicated in the diagram.

transition frequency. Expanding, we obtain

(6)

ν = νo +

(k1 + k2)
4πm

·

pi

(1

ǫ)

+

−

¯h(k1 + k2)2
8πm

(1

ǫ)

−

−

νop2
i
2(mc)2

+O

hν
mc2 (cid:19)

(cid:18)

3

.

|

∆νD1
{z

}

|

∆νR
{z

}

∆νD2
| {z }

×

Here ∆νD1 and ∆νD2 are the ﬁrst and second order Doppler shifts, respectively, ∆νR
10−8 is a relativistic correction which
is the recoil shift, and ǫ = 2hνo/mc2 = 1.1
accounts for the mass change of the atom upon absorbing energy 2hνo. For hydrogen in
1 Hz, and can be neglected. In the Doppler-sensitive
the submillikelvin regime, ∆νD2
conﬁguration, k1 = k2 and ∆νR = 6.7 MHz.
(All frequencies are referenced to the
2.6 MHz. In the Doppler-
243 nm laser source). At a temperature of 50 µK, ∆νD1
free conﬁguration, k1 =
k2, and there is no recoil or ﬁrst order Doppler broadening.
Doppler-free excitation is achieved by retro-reﬂecting the laser beam. Nevertheless, in
this conﬁguration the Doppler-sensitive line is also excited, with the atom absorbing two
photons from a single laser beam.

≪

∼

−

BOSE-EINSTEIN CONDENSATION OF ATOMIC HYDROGEN

9

Fig. 4. – Spectra of low density samples at a series of temperatures. The linewidth is given
by the ﬁnite interaction time as an atom traverses the Gaussian laser beam. The exponential
lineshape arises from an average over a Maxwell-Boltzmann distribution of velocities. As the
√T . The laser power
sample cools, the characteristic velocity decreases and the line narrows
was about 7 mW, and densities were in the range 1012

1013cm−3.

∼

∼

ν

−

∼

νo)

exp(

Far from quantum degeneracy, the lineshape for Doppler-sensitive excitation is the
familiar Gaussian curve characteristic of a Maxwell-Boltzmann distribution. The shape
for Doppler-free excitation, however, is quite diﬀerent—a cusp-shaped double exponential
/δo). The linewidth parameter δo is determined by the
[28]: I(ν
time of ﬂight of an atom across the laser beam: δo = u/2πdo where u =
2kBT /m is the
most probable velocity and do is the waist diameter of the laser beam. This expression
is valid for an untrapped gas far from quantum degeneracy. It neglects collisions and
other broadening mechanisms, and the natural linewidth of 1.3 Hz. An example of this
Doppler-free lineshape is shown in ﬁg. 4. A panoramic spectrum showing the Doppler-free
and the recoil-shifted Doppler-sensitive lines is shown in ﬁg. 5.

νo |

− |

p

−

If the atoms are conﬁned in a radially harmonic trap, the Doppler-free spectrum
consists of a central line at frequency νo plus a series of sidebands spaced by twice the
trap frequency, lying under the exponential curve [29]. The intensity of the sidebands is

10

DANIEL KLEPPNER, THOMAS J. GREYTAK, et al.

Fig. 5. – Composite 1S-2S two-photon spectrum of trapped hydrogen before condensation. The
intense, narrow peak arises from absorption of counter-propagating photons by the normal gas,
and exhibits no ﬁrst-order Doppler broadening. The wide, low feature on the right is from
absorption of co-propagating photons. The solid line is the recoil-shifted, Doppler-broadened,
Gaussian lineshape of the normal gas corresponding to T = 40 µK. Zero detuning is taken for
unperturbed atoms excited Doppler-free. All frequencies are referenced to the 243 nm excitation
radiation.

governed by the ratio of the atom cloud diameter to laser beam diameter. If this ratio is
less than 1, only the cental line is excited, an example of Dicke narrowing.

5. – EVAPORATIVE COOLING

The physical principles and experimental considerations of evaporative cooling have
been described in detail by Ketterle and van Druten [30]. We summarize here some of
the principal points.

Evaporative cooling occurs when highly energetic atoms are permitted to escape from
a trap at a rate that is kept suﬃciently low for the remaining gas to maintain a quasi-
thermal equilibrium. In this situation the energy distribution is thermal except that it is
truncated at the depth of the trap, Vtrap. The crucial parameters governing evaporative

BOSE-EINSTEIN CONDENSATION OF ATOMIC HYDROGEN

11

species

m (amu)

a (nm)

σel (cm2)

Tc (µK)

H [31]
Li [33]
Na [35]
Rb [37]

1
7
23
87

0.0648 [32]
-1.45 [34]
2.8 [36]
5.4 [38]

−15

−13

−12

−12

10
10
10
10

1.06
5.2
1.90
7.3

×
×
×
×

50
0.30
2.0
0.67

nc (cm−3)
1014
1012
1014
1014

1.8
1.5
1.5
2.2

×
×
×
×

Nc
109
103
107

106

2

×

Table I. – Comparison of the atomic species that have been Bose condensed. For each cited
experiment, a is the scattering length, σel is the elastic scattering cross section, Tc is the tem-
perature of the onset of BEC, nc is the density of the thermal cloud at the onset, and Nc is the
maximum number of condensate atoms.

cooling are:

The elastic collision rate. This determines the rate of thermalization. The low tem-
perature collision cross section in a Bose gas is determined by the s-wave scattering
length, a. The elastic collision cross section for identical particles is σel = 8πa2, and
the elastic collision rate is Γel = √2nσel¯v, where n is the density and ¯v =
8kBT /πm.
Table I shows values of a and σel for hydrogen and a number of alkali metal atoms.
Hydrogen’s anomalously small scattering length is conspicuous. In consequence, its elas-
tic scattering cross section is smaller than that of the alkali metal atoms by a factor of a
thousand or more, and evaporative cooling proceeds at a correspondingly low rate.

p

The cooling path. The ratio of trap depth to thermal energy, η

Vtrap/kBT is an
important parameter in determining the most eﬃcient evaporation path. The rate at
which atoms with enough energy to escape from the trap are generated is approximately
proportional to η exp(
ηkBT . If η is large, each
escaping atoms carries away a great deal of energy, enhancing the eﬃciency of cooling,
but because the number of these atoms is small, their evaporation proceeds slowly. If
η is too small, the atoms can escape too rapidly for the system to thermalize, and the
eﬃciency falls.

η). Each atom carries away energy

≡

∼

−

Trap geometry. In a square-well potential, the density of a trapped gas is independent
√T : evaporation
of its energy, and the elastic collision rate Γel = √2n¯vσ decreases as ¯v
slows as the temperature falls.
In a trap, however, as the cloud cools the atoms are
compressed into the region of lowest potential, and the density of the gas increases as its
temperature falls. As a result, in a harmonic trap the evaporation rate increases with
T −5/2. Consequently,
falling temperature as Γel
the functional form of the trap shape is a critical design factor. Because the evaporation
rate in a trap increases as the temperature falls, one can achieve conditions of runaway
evaporation in which evaporation, once started, can proceed faster and faster.

T −1. In a quadrupole trap, Γel

∼

∼

∼

Loss processes.

If there were no loss mechanisms in the trapped gas, the time for
evaporation could be made as long as desired and the magnitude of Γel would be unim-
portant. However, loss processes are inevitable. In experiments with alkali metal atoms
the principal loss is scattering of atoms out of the trap by collisions with the warm back-
ground gas in the cell. The loss rate is independent of the density of the trapped gas.

12

DANIEL KLEPPNER, THOMAS J. GREYTAK, et al.

(At very high density, however, loss due to 3-body recombination plays the limiting role.)
In the cryogenic environment of atomic hydrogen experiments, the major loss process is
dipolar decay at a rate proportional to density. Because both the dipolar decay rate and
Γel vary linearly with density, the conditions for runaway evaporation are not achieved.

6. – EVAPORATION TECHNIQUES

In the initial demonstration of evaporative cooling the atoms were permitted to es-
cape over a saddle point in the magnetic ﬁeld at one end of the long cylindrical trap.
Evaporation is forced by lowering this axial conﬁnement ﬁeld while simultaneously hold-
ing the radial conﬁnement ﬁelds ﬁxed. Energetic atoms are able to escape out the end of
the trap. With this method, called saddle point evaporation, it was possible to achieve
conditions close to BEC in hydrogen, but the cooling power was not adequate to cross
the barrier.

The ineﬃciency of the evaporation process has been explained by Surkov et al. [39].
In saddle point evaporation atoms escape only along the z-axis. For an atom to escape,
Vtrap, where Vtrap
it must have a suﬃcient energy in the axial degree of freedom, Ez ≥
is the trap depth as set by the saddle point potential. Because only the z-motion is
involved, the evaporation is inherently one-dimensional. If the axial and radial motion
mix rapidly, then all atoms with total energy E
Vtrap can promptly escape. At high
energy this mixing takes place in our trap because of the coupling of radial and transverse
co-ordinates.

≥

As the energy decreases and the trap becomes more harmonic, the mixing time length-
ens. When it becomes comparable to the collision time, the evaporation rate falls. This is
because the collision of an energetic atom generally transfers it to lower energy: the atom
is knocked back into a trapped energy regime. Mixing is governed by the adiabaticity
parameter, Φ = ˙ωρ/ω2
ρ, which quantiﬁes the fractional change in the radial oscillation
frequency per oscillation period as the atom moves along the trap axis (see eq. 2). For
Φ
1, the probability of transfering the energy from radial to longitudinal during one
radial oscillation is

Φ. Using ˙ωρ = (dωρ/dz)(dz/dt) we obtain

≪

∼

(7)

Φ = vz

βz√m

.

α

βz2 + θ

p
10−3. However, the probability for scattering
For our trap at the threshold for BEC, Φ
during a radial period, 2πΓel/ωρ, is about ten times higher. Hence, the evaporation is
essentially one-dimensional. Surkov et al. have shown that in this situation the cooling
rate decreases by a factor of about 4η compared to the rate at which evaporation would
proceed in three dimensions [39]. For hydrogen, such a decrease in the already low
evaporation rate proves fatal. The eﬀects of one-dimensional evaporation have been
studied by Pinske et al. [40].

∼

The bottleneck of saddle point evaporation is avoided by the technique of radia-
tive evaporation, “rf evaporation,” originally proposed by Pritchard [41], which permits

BOSE-EINSTEIN CONDENSATION OF ATOMIC HYDROGEN

13

evaporation in three dimensions. A radio-frequency oscillating magnetic ﬁeld drives
transitions between the trapped state and some other (untrapped) hyperﬁne sub-level,
causing the atom to be ejected from the trap. In hydrogen the trapped hyperﬁne state
is (F = 1, m = 1), and the rf transition is predominantly to the state (1,0). The reso-
nance occurs for atoms in a region of the trap where the ﬁeld magnitude B0 satisﬁes the
resonance condition ¯hωrf = µBB0. Here µBB0 is the Zeeman splitting between the hy-
perﬁne sub-levels. The transition matrix element is ¯hΩR = µBB⊥/√2, where B⊥ is the
amplitude of the rf ﬁeld perpendicular to B0. The probability of an atom experiencing a
hyperﬁne sub-level transition as it traverses the resonance region can be estimated using
the Landau-Zener theory. The trapping ﬁeld is assumed to vary linearly with gradient
B′ in the vicinity of the resonance, and the atom traverses the region at speed v. The
probability of a two-level atom making a transition as it traverses the resonance region
R/µBB′v [42]. The hydrogen F = 1 state is actually
is p = 1
a three level system. Vitanov and Suominen have solved the multilevel Landau-Zener
problem [43], and we apply their results to our situation. The probability Pm that an
atom originally in the state (1,1) emerges in the state (1, m) is

ζ) where ζ = 2π¯hΩ2

exp(

−

−

(8a)

(8b)

(8c)

p)2
p)p

P1 = (1

−
P0 = 2(1
P−1 = p2

−

For large ζ the atom absorbs two rf photons and emerges in the (1,-1) state, which is
ejected. In our experiment ζ is small, and there is only a small probability of leaving
the trapped (1,1) state. Transitions are primarily to the (1,0) state. Atoms in this state
simply fall out of the trap.

For small ζ, the probability of being ejected during one radial oscillation is

4ζ. As
in the previous discussion on radial and longitudinal mixing, scattering sets a lower limit
10−3. This requires a Rabi frequency of ΩR ≥
of ζ
1 kHz or an rf ﬁeld strength
10−7 T. (In other atomic systems dipolar relaxation can impose a more stringent
B⊥
requirement on the transition rate [30].)

≥
≥

2π

×

∼

To implement rf evaporation in a cryogenic environment methods had to be developed
to eliminate eddy current losses and rf shielding by the cell. This was accomplished using
a plastic cell design in which heat transport is provided by a superﬂuid helium jacket
10−7 T, and ﬁelds can be applied
around the cell. The rf ﬁeld amplitude is typically 7
with frequencies up to 46 MHz. RF evaporation is switched on at a trap depth of about
1.1 mK, where the sample temperature is typically 120 µK.

×

In addition to driving evaporation, the rf ﬁeld is used to ﬁnd the temperature of the
sample. The temperature is measured by sweeping the rf resonance through the trap
and measuring the atom ejection rate as a function of frequency [41].

The ﬁeld at the bottom of the trap, the axial bias ﬁeld θ/µB, is a critical parameter
because it determines the curvature of the potential minimum and provides the zero point
for determining the trap depth. If the ﬁeld is too large the trap is harmonic, the eﬀective

14

DANIEL KLEPPNER, THOMAS J. GREYTAK, et al.

volume is large, and the density is small.
If the bias ﬁeld is too low, the condensate
is strongly conﬁned and suﬀers a high dipolar decay rate. The optimum bias ﬁeld is
approximately kBT /µB. In such a ﬁeld the thermal cloud is tightly conﬁned, but the
condensate can spread out due to interactions. In our experiments the bias ﬁeld energy
is about θ
(3/5)kBT . The bias ﬁeld is measured by applying the rf ﬁeld at a low
frequency and sweeping the frequency up until atoms start to leave the trap.

≃

We have neglected the eﬀect of gravity. For H

at a temperature of 50 µK the
gavitational scale height kBT /mg is 4 cm, which is comparable to the vertical size of
the cloud. For higher mass atoms, which condense at lower temperatures, gravity can
be important. In such a case the surface of constant B0 is no longer an equipotential.
Evaporation occurs primarily from the bottom of the cloud, and becomes one-dimensional
[30].

↑

7. – COLD-COLLISION FREQUENCY SHIFT

At low temperature, in the limit a

ΛT, only s-wave collisions are important. These
collisions give rise to a mean interaction energy, and they introduce frequency shifts into
radiative transitions. Such eﬀects can be analyzed by kinetic theory starting with the
Boltzmann transport equation [44, 45], or described by mean ﬁeld theory based on the
pseudopotential [46]. Both approaches give the same result for a homogenous system:
the mean ﬁeld energy of an atom in a gas with density n is

≪

where the density normalized second order correlation function g2(x) is [47]

˜U n =

4π¯h2a
m

n

g2(0),

×

g2(x) =

1
nN Xi6=j

Ψ
h

|

δ(ri

rj

−

−

x)

Ψ

.

i

|

Here Ψ is the wave function for the system. (For a Bose gas far from degeneracy, g2(0) =
2.) Because the scattering lengths for 1S-1S and 1S-2S collisions are not identical,
the energy to excite an atom to the 2S state from a gas of 1S atoms is shifted by an
amount [48]

h∆νcol =

4π¯h2n
m

(a1S−2S −

a1S−1S)g2(0).

The frequency shift ∆νcol
is known as a cold collision frequency shift. For a non-
degenerate gas the two-photon sum frequency is shifted by ∆νcol = nχ, where χ =
a1S−1S)/m. Once χ is known, the density can be determined directly by
4¯h(a1S−2S −
measuring the frequency shift. In addition, a measurement of χ can be used to check the
theoretical calculations of the scattering lengths. The 1S-1S scattering length is known
accurately from theory: a1S−1S = 0.0648 nm [32], and a1S−2S has also been computed:
a1S−2S =

2.3 nm [49].

−

(9)

(10)

(11)

BOSE-EINSTEIN CONDENSATION OF ATOMIC HYDROGEN

15

The cold-collision shift of the 1S-2S transition plays a key role in our experiments,
allowing us to measure the density rapidly in situ. Furthermore, because the density in
a Bose-Einstein condensate in H
is much higher than the density of the normal gas, the
cold-collision frequency shift provides an unmistakable signature of the condensate.

↑

To measure the frequency shift parameter χ, a series of line scans were taken at
diﬀerent densities as shown in ﬁg. 6a. The initial density was established by monitoring
the two-body dipolar decay rate, as described above. During successive laser scans of a
single trapped sample the density decayed because of collisions with helium gas generated
by heating due to the laser. The area under each photoexcitation curve is proportional
to the total number of atoms, making it possible to infer the density for each scan. The
line center for each curve was corrected for the eﬀects of density inhomogeneities due to
the trapping potential. From a plot of frequency vs. density, like the one shown in ﬁg. 6b,
the value of χ can be determined. From a series of such measurements taken at diﬀerent
1010 n Hz cm3. The theory of
densities and temperatures, we obtained χ =
cold-collision frequency shifts in an inhomogeneous system is not yet fully understood,
but assuming eq. 11 is still valid, we deduce a1S−2S =
0.3 nm, in fair agreement
with the prediction [50].

0.8

3.8

1.4

−

−

±

×

±

8. – OBSERVATION OF THE CONDENSATE

×

Bose-Einstein condensation in hydrogen was achieved at a temperature of about 50 µK
1014 cm−3 [31]. Its onset was revealed by unmistakable new features
with a density of 1.8
in the spectrum, shown in ﬁg. 7. In the Doppler-sensitive line there is a narrow peak,
shifted somewhat to the red of the line center, and there is a similar line to the red of
the Doppler-free line. (Note: the Doppler sensitive peak was not observed until after
these lectures.) The shift of these lines reveals a density signiﬁcantly higher than in the
normal gas, as expected for the condensate.

Before BEC was observed in the spectrum there were strong indications that con-
densation was taking place from a study of the evolution of the density of the thermal
cloud with decreasing temperature. The density of the non-condensed gas fraction was
determined from the cold-collision frequency shift; the temperature was inferred from
the trap depth, set by the frequency of the rf signal. A plot is shown in ﬁg. 8. In these
observations the value of η typically varied between 7 and 5 with decreasing temperature.
The solid line in ﬁg. 8 is the BEC boundary for η = 6. Because the normal gas cannot
exist to the left of the boundary, the density simply falls along the boundary. Once the
system reaches the boundary, as the temperature is further reduced the normal atoms
are forced into the condensate. Because the observations are at a laser frequency tuned
so that only atoms from the normal gas are excited, the condensed atoms, which are
at such a high density that they are frequency-shifted out of range, are not observed.
Consequently, the density of the thermal cloud merely tracks the BEC line.

Because of the condensate’s high density, its dipolar decay rate is so high that, in
isolation, it would disappear in about one second. However, because the condensate is
continuously fed by the normal gas, its lifetime is several seconds. Its time evolution is

16

DANIEL KLEPPNER, THOMAS J. GREYTAK, et al.

Fig. 6. – (a) Series of spectra of a single sample used for a measurement of χ. The ﬁrst scan is
at the maximum density and exhibits the largest red shift. Subsequent scans, at lower densities,
are smaller and less shifted. Five of the forty spectra are shown. (b) Shift of the spectrum
as a function of sample density. The density is inferred from the integrated signal. For this
particular sample χ =

10−10 Hz cm3. From [50].

3.30

0.6

−

±

×

shown in the series of spectral scans shown in ﬁg. 9. As the density in the condensate
decreases, the red shift decreases and the total signal becomes smaller, ﬁnally vanishing.

BOSE-EINSTEIN CONDENSATION OF ATOMIC HYDROGEN

17

Fig. 7. – Composite 1S-2S two-photon spectrum of trapped hydrogen after condensation.
–
spectrum of sample without a condensate;
–spectrum emphasizing features due to a condensate.
The high density in the condensate shifts a portion of the Doppler-free line to the red. The
condensate’s narrow momentum distribution gives rise to a similar feature near the center of
the Doppler-sensitive line. From [31].

◦

•

9. – PROPERTIES OF THE CONDENSATE

±

×

1.1

The peak condensate density no,c is found from the red cut-oﬀ of the spectrum. As
1015 cm−3. The peak mean ﬁeld energy of an
shown in ﬁg. 10, no,c = 4.8
atom in the condensate, ˜U no,c/kB = 4π¯h2ano,c/kBm = 1.9 µK, is much larger than
the energy interval between the radial vibrational states of the trap, ¯hωρ/kB = 190 nK.
Consequently, the shape of the condensate is determined by the mean ﬁeld energy rather
than the wave function of the trap’s ground state. The density proﬁle, in the Thomas-
V (r)/ ˜U .
Fermi approximation, is n(r) = no,c −
is found by integrating the density over the volume of the condensate. The result is

With the Thomas-Fermi wavefunction, the total number of atoms in the condensate

(12)

Nc =

29/2π ˜U 3/2 n5/2
o,c
15ω2

ρ ωz m3/2 = (1.1

±

0.6)

109 atoms.

×

18

DANIEL KLEPPNER, THOMAS J. GREYTAK, et al.

Fig. 8. – Density of non-condensed fraction of the gas as the trap depth is reduced along the
cooling path. The density is measured by the optical resonance shift, and the trap depth is set
by the rf frequency. The lines (dash, solid, dot-dash) indicate the BEC phase transition line,
assuming a sample temperature of (1/5th, 1/6th, 1/7th) the trap depth. The scatter of the data
reﬂects the reproducibility of the laser probe technique and is dominated by alignment of the
laser beam to the sample. From [31].

The oscillation frequencies (eqs. 2) are ωρ = 2π
10.2 Hz.
The diameter of the condensate is 15 µm and its length is 5 mm. The huge aspect ratio,

0.11 kHz, and ωz = 2π

3.90

×

×

±

∼

400, gives the condensate a thread-like shape.
The fraction of atoms in the condensate is small because the condensate is rapidly
depleted by dipolar relaxation. The condensate size is limited by the low evaporative
cooling rate in the normal gas, which supplies cold atoms to the condensate [51]. The
fraction, f = Nc/(Nn + Nc), can be found from the integrated area of the normal and
condensate Doppler-free spectra, taking into account that although the entire condensate
is in the laser beam, only a portion of the normal gas interacts with the laser. The
condensate fraction can also be found by comparing the number of condensate atoms,
determined from no,c and the trap geometry, with the number of normal atoms found by
integrating the Bose occupation function weighted by the trap density of states. (The
temperature is measured from the Doppler-sensitive spectrum of the normal gas.) The
trap shape cancels in the comparison. The methods are in good agreement at f = 6+6
−3%.

]
s
/
s
t
n
u
o
c
[

 
 
 
l
a
n
g
s

i

1000

500

0

1000

500

0

BOSE-EINSTEIN CONDENSATION OF ATOMIC HYDROGEN

19

0.8 s

2.5 s

4.2 s

9.2 s

-0.75

-0.5

-0.25

0

-0.5

-0.75
0
laser detuning [MHz]

-0.25

Fig. 9. – Time evolution of the condensate. Each spectrum is obtained in 0.67 s. As the
condensate disappears the spectrum narrows, indicating a reduction in density, and gets weaker,
indicating a reduction in condensate population. The last panel shows the background count
rate. From [31].

Both methods assume thermal equilibrium, which may not be justiﬁed.

In calculating the density and size of the condensate, we have taken g2(0) = 1 in
computing the mean ﬁeld energy (eq. 9), but g2(0) = 2 in calculating nc,o (eq. 11).
Although this appears contradictory, it yields a condensate fraction that is consistent
with the observed intensity ratio of the photoexcitation spectra and with the fraction
109
predicted in ref. [51]. If we consistently take g2(0) = 1, then eq. 12 yields Nc = 6
109 and f = 14%. In
and f = 25%. If we consistently take g2(0) = 2, then Nc = 3
a homogeneous condensate in thermal equilibrium one expects g2(0) = 1, however this
may not apply under our experimental conditions. The problem clearly requires further
study.

×

×

The Doppler-free lineshape of the normal gas displays puzzling behavior at the con-
densation transition. As seen in ﬁg. 11, above the the transition temperature the line
displays a roughly symmetric shape, as expected for the density distribution in the trap.
When the condensate is present, the line develops a large asymmetry toward the red.

20

DANIEL KLEPPNER, THOMAS J. GREYTAK, et al.

Fig. 10. – Doppler-free spectrum of the condensate (broad feature) and normal gas (narrow
feature). The dashed line is proportional to the number of condensate atoms at a density
proportional to the detuning, for an equilibrium density distribution with peak density no,c =
4.8

1015 cm−3 in a parabolic trap. From [31].

×

The ratio of normal to condensate volumes is about 103, so that this feature cannot be
explained simply by penetration of the normal gas into the condensate.

10. – PROSPECTS

As one expects whenever a novel system is created, the observation of BEC in hy-
drogen has led to some new questions. In particular, the nature of the photoexcitation
spectrum from the condensate appears to be more subtle than previously appreciated.
The cold-collision shift has proven to be an invaluable diagnostic tool, but beyond that it
has led to an experimental value for an excited-state s-wave scattering length—the ﬁrst
such determination to our knowledge. One can conceive of methods for extending such
measurements to other excited states.

Perhaps the most dramatic aspect of the hydrogen condensate is its size, more than
thirty times larger than previous condensates, with prospects for large improvements.
Thus, hydrogen should be a natural candidate for any application that requires an intense

BOSE-EINSTEIN CONDENSATION OF ATOMIC HYDROGEN

21

]
s
/
s
t
n
u
o
c
[

 
 
l
a
n
g
s
 

i

60000

40000

20000

0
-100

-80

-60

-40

-20

0

40
laser detuning [kHz]

20

Fig. 11. – Doppler-free spectrum of normal fraction above and below the onset of BEC. The
symmetric spectrum (above Tc, open symbols) suddenly becomes asymmetric (ﬁlled symbols)
when the condensate forms. Temperatures for the three spectra are about 120 µK (open squares),
53 µK (open circles), 44 µK (ﬁlled circles). From [31].

source of coherent atoms.

The techniques for achieving BEC in hydrogen evolved over a long time, and the
apparatus reﬂects a great deal of history. Vast improvements would be possible if one
were to start from scratch. In particular, the detection eﬃciency for Lyman-α photons is
10−5, the chief loss in signal being due to the low optical collection solid
only about 2
×
10−2 sr. An apparatus designed for optical access would provide a much
angle, 1.6
higher signal rate, permitting a more precise study of the condensate’s properties and its
dynamical behavior.

×

The size of the condensate is currently limited by the initial density of hydrogen that
can be loaded into the trap. Improvements should be possible. On a more speculative
note, if it were possible to increase the thermalization rate of a hydrogen sample by
introducing an impurity atom into the trapped hydrogen gas, a major increase in the
condensate size might be achieved.

22

DANIEL KLEPPNER, THOMAS J. GREYTAK, et al.

11. – Acknowledgements

Many people played important roles in the MIT work on spin-polarized hydrogen
over the years. We especially wish to acknowledge those who contributed directly to
the trapping and spectroscopy experiments: Claudio L. Cesar, John M. Doyle, Harald
F. Hess, Greg P. Kochanski, Naoto Masuhara, Adam D. Polcyn, Jon C. Sandberg, and
Albert I. Yu.

This research is supported by the National Science Foundation and the Oﬃce of Naval
Research. The Air Force Oﬃce of Scientiﬁc Research contributed in the early phases.
L.W. acknowledges support by Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft. D.L. and S.C.M. are
grateful for support from the National Defense Science and Engineering Graduate Fel-
lowship Program.

REFERENCES

[1] Greytak, T. J. and Kleppner, D., in New Trends in Atomic Physics, Les Houches
Session 38, 1982 edited by Grynberg, G., and Stora, R., (North Holland, 1984).
[2] Silvera, I. F., and Walraven, J. T. M., in Progress in Low Temperature Physics,

edited by Brewer, D. F. and Stora, R., (North Holland, Amsterdam, 1984), p. 139.

[3] Hess, H. F., Bell, D. A., Kochanski, G. P., Kleppner, D., and Greytak, T. J.,
Phys. Rev. Lett., 52 (1984) 1520; Bell, D. A., Hess, H. F., Kochanski, G. P.,
Buchman, S., Pollack, L., Xiao, Y. M., Kleppner, D., and Greytak, T. J., Phys.
Rev. B, 34 (1986) 7670.

[4] Greytak, T. J., in Bose-Einstein Condensation, edited by Griffin, A., Snoke, D. W.,

and Stringari, S, (Cambridge University Press, 1995), p. 131.

[5] Stwalley, W. C., and Nosanow, L. H., Phys. Rev. Lett., 36 (1976) 910.
[6] Bull. Am. Phys. Soc. 23, 85 (1978).
[7] Anderson, M. H., Ensher, J. R., Matthews, M. R., Wieman, C. E., and

Cornell, E. A., Science, 269 (1995) 198.

[8] Davis, K. B., Mewes, M.-O., Andrews, M. R., Van Druten, N. J., Durfee, D. S.,

Kurn, D. M., and Ketterle, W., Phys. Rev. Lett., 75 (1995) 1687.

[9] Bradley, C. C., Sackett, C. A., Tollet, J. J. , and Hulet, R. G., Phys. Rev. Lett.,
75 (1995) 1687; Bradley, C. C., Sackett, C. A., and Hulet, R. G., Phys. Rev. Lett.,
78 (1997) 985.

[10] Silvera, I. F. and Walraven, J. T. M., Phys. Rev. Lett., 44 (1980) 164.
[11] Cline, R. W., Greytak, T. J., and Kleppner, D., Phys. Rev. Lett., 47 (1981) 1195.
[12] Kagan, Yu., Vartanyantz, I. A., and Shlyapnikov, G. V., Sov. Phys. JETP, 54

(1980) 590.

[13] Hess, H. F., Phys. Rev. B, 34 (1986) 3476.
[14] Pritchard, D., Phys. Rev. Lett., 51 (1983) 1336.
[15] Hess, H. F., Kochanski, G. P., Doyle, J. M., Masuhara, N. , Kleppner, D., and

Greytak, T. J., Phys. Rev. Lett., 59 (1987) 672.

[16] van Roijen, R., Berkhout, J. J., Jaakkola, S., and Walraven, J. T. M., Phys.

Rev. Lett., 61 (1988) 931.

[17] Masuhara, N., Doyle, J. M., Sandberg, J. C., Kleppner, D., Greytak, T. J.,

Hess, H. F., and Kochanski, G. P., Phys. Rev. Lett., 61 (1988) 935.

BOSE-EINSTEIN CONDENSATION OF ATOMIC HYDROGEN

23

[18] Doyle, J. M., Sandberg, J. C., Masuhara, N., Yu, I. A., Kleppner, D. and

Greytak, T. J., J. Opt. Soc. Am. B, 6 (1989) 2244.

[19] Lagendijk, A., Silvera, I. F., and Verhaar, B. J., Phys. Rev. B, 3 (1986) 626.
[20] Stoof, H. T. C., Koelman, J. M. V. A., and Verhaar, B. J., Phys. Rev. B, 38 (1988)

4688.

[21] In evaluating g from [19] and [20], we have taken g = 2(Gdd→aa + Gdd→ad + Gdd→ac) +
Gdd→cd + 2Gdd→cc using the low ﬁeld and zero temperature values for the rate constants.
When one atom changes hyperﬁne state (F = 1
F = 0) both atoms are lost from the
trap because the hyperﬁne energy (71 mK) is much greater than the trap depth.

→

[22] Doyle, J. M., Sandberg, J. C., Yu, I. A., Cesar, C. L., Kleppner, D., and

Greytak, T. J., Phys. Rev. Lett., 67 (1991) 603.

[23] Setija, I. D., Werij, H. G. C., Luiten, O. J., Reynolds, M. W., Hijmans, T. W.,

and Walraven, J. T. M., Phys. Rev. Lett., 70 (1993) 2257.

[24] Pinkse, P. W. H., Mosk, A., Weidem¨uller, M., Reynolds, M. W., Hijmans, T. W.,

and Walraven, J. T. M., Phys. Rev. Lett., 79 (1997) 2423

[25] Udem, T., Huber, A., Gross, B., Reichert, J., Prevedelli, M., Weitz, M., and

H¨ansch, T. W., Phys. Rev. Lett., 79 (1997) 2646.

[26] Kleppner, D., The Hydrogen Atom, ed. Bassani, G. F.,

Inguscio, M., and

H¨ansch, T. W., Springer Verlag (Berlin), 1989, p68.

[27] Cesar, C. L., Fried, D. G., Killian, T. C., Polcyn, A. D., Sandberg, J. C.,
Yu, I. A., Greytak, T. J., Kleppner, D., and Doyle, J. M., Phys. Rev. Lett., 77
(1996) 255.

[28] Bord´e, C., C. R. Hebd. S´ean. Acad. Sci. B, 282 (1976) 341; Biraben, F., Bassini, M.,

and Cagnac, B., J. Phys. (Paris), 40 (1979) 445.

[29] Cesar, C. L., Ph.D.

thesis, M.I.T., 1997 (unpublished); Cesar, C. L. and

Kleppner, D., to be published.

[30] Ketterle, W. and Van Druten, N. J., in Advances in Atomic, Molecular, and Optical
Physics, edited by Bederson, B. and Walther, H., (Academic Press, San Diego, 1996),
No. 37, p. 181.

[31] Fried, D. G., Killian, T. C., Willmann, L., Landhuis, D., Moss, S. C.,

Kleppner, D., and Greytak, T. J., Phys. Rev. Lett., 81 (1998) 3811.

[32] Jamieson, M. J., Dalgarno, A., and Kimura, M., Phys. Rev. A, 51 (1995) 2626.
[33] Bradley, C. C., Sackett, C. A., and R. G. Hulet, Phys. Rev. Lett., 78 (1997) 985.
[34] Abraham, E. R. I., McAlexander, W. I., Sackett, C. A., and Hulet, R. G., Phys.

Rev. Lett., 74 (1995) 1315.

[35] Stamper-Kurn, D. M., Andrews, M. R., Chikkatur, A. P.,

Inouye, S.,

Meisner, H.-J., Stenger, J., and Ketterle, W., Phys. Rev. Lett., 80 (1998) 2027.

[36] Tiesinga, E., Williams, C. J., Julienne, P S., Jones, K M., Lett, P D., and

Phillips, W D., J. Res. Natl. Inst. Stand. Technol., 101 (1996) 505.

[37] E. A. Burt, E. A., Ghrist, R. W., Myatt, C. J., Holland, M. J., Cornell, E. A.,

and Wieman, C. E., Phys. Rev. Lett., 79 (1997) 337.

[38] Vogels, J. M., Tsai, C. C., Freeland, R. S., Kokkelmans, S. J. J. M. F.,

Verhaar, B. J., and Heinzen, D. J., Phys. Rev. A, 56 (1997) R1067.

[39] Surkov, E. L., Walraven, J. T. M., and Shlyapnikov, G. V., Phys. Rev. A, 49

(1994) 4778; 53 (1996) 3403.

[40] Pinske, P. W. H., Mosk, A., Weidem¨uller, M., Reynolds, M. W., and

Hijmans, T. W., Phys. Rev. A., 57 (1998) 4747.

[41] Pritchard, D. E., Helmerson, K., and Martin, A. G., in Atomic Physics 11, edited
by Haroche, S., Gay, J. C., and Grynberg, G., (World Scientiﬁc, Singapore, 1989)
p. 179.

24

DANIEL KLEPPNER, THOMAS J. GREYTAK, et al.

23 (1981) 3107.

Rev. A, 35 (1987) 3825.

45 (1992) R2671.

[42] Rubbmark, J. R., Kash, M. M., Littman, M. G., and Kleppner, D., Phys. Rev. A,

[43] Vitanov, N. V. and Suominen, K.-A., Phys. Rev. A, 56 (1997) R4377.
[44] Verhaar, B. J., Koelman, J. M. V. A., Stoof, H. T. C., and Luiten, O. J., Phys.

[45] Tiesinga, E., Verhaar, B. J., Stoof, H. T. C., and Van Bragt, D., Phys. Rev. A,

[46] Pathria, R. K., Statistical Mechanics (Pergamon Press, New York, 1972), p. 300.
[47] Van Hove, L., Phys. Rev., 95 (1954) 249.
[48] A diﬀerent expression was presented in the lecture, and this expression requires some
justiﬁcation. It is not obvious that the 1S-2S scattering leads to the same expression
for the mean ﬁeld energy as 1S-1S scattering. The reason has to do with the nature of
excitation, in which not one particular 1S atom is excited but every 1S atom is given a
small component of 2S excitation. Details will be published elsewhere.

[49] Jamieson, M. J., Dalgarno, A., and Doyle, J. M., Mol. Phys., 87 (1996) 817.
[50] Killian, T. C., Fried, D. G., Willmann, L., Landhuis, D., Moss, S. C.,

Greytak, T. J., and Kleppner, D., Phys. Rev. Lett., 81 (1998) 3807.

[51] Hijmans, T. W., Kagan, Yu., Shlyapnikov, G. V., and Walraven, J. T. M., Phys.

Rev. B, 48 (1993) 12886.

