EPJ manuscript No.
(will be inserted by the editor)

9
9
9
1
 
b
e
F
 
0
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
m
o
t
a
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
8
5
0
2
0
9
9
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Cold inelastic collisions between lithium and cesium in a
two-species magneto-optical trap

U. Schl¨odera, H. Engler, U. Sch¨unemannb, R. Grimm, and M. Weidem¨ullerc

Max-Planck-Institut f¨ur Kernphysik, 69029 Heidelberg, Germany

submitted to Euro. Phys. J. D, special issue on “Laser Cooling and Trapping”, December 1998

Abstract. We investigate collisional properties of lithium and cesium which are simultaneously conﬁned in
a combined magneto-optical trap. Trap-loss collisions between the two species are comprehensively studied.
Diﬀerent inelastic collision channels are identiﬁed, and inter-species rate coeﬃcients as well as cross sections
are determined. It is found that loss rates are independent of the optical excitation of Li, as a consequence
∗
of the repulsive Li
-Cs interaction. Li and Cs loss by inelastic inter-species collisions can completely be
attributed to processes involving optically excited cesium (ﬁne-structure changing collisions and radiative
escape). By lowering the trap depth for Li, an additional loss channel of Li is observed which results from
ground-state Li-Cs collisions changing the hyperﬁne state of cesium.

PACS. 34.50.Rk Laser-modiﬁed scattering and reactions – 32.80.Pj Optical cooling; trapping

1 Introduction

Cold collisions between trapped, laser-cooled atoms have
been the subject of extensive research in the past years
[1]. In contrast to collisions of thermal atoms, the col-
lision process between cold atoms is extremely sensitive
to the long-range part of the inter-atomic interaction al-
lowing precise determination of molecular potentials [2]
and atomic lifetimes [3]. In the presence of light ﬁelds,
molecular excitation during the collisional process is non-
negligible, leading to phenomena such as light-induced col-
lisions [4,5], photoassociation [2], optical shielding of in-
elastic processes [6] and formation of cold ground-state
molecules [7].

Investigations have almost exclusively concentrated on
binary collisions between atoms of the same species [1,8].
Light-induced cold collisions between two diﬀerent species
(heteronuclear collisions) strongly diﬀer from single-species
collisions (homonuclear collisions). The excited-state in-
teraction potential for two diﬀerent species is of much
1/R6 at large
shorter range (van-der-Waals potential
interatomic separations R) than the excited state poten-
tial for two atoms of the same species (resonant-dipole
1/R3). In the homonuclear case, the duration
potential
of the cold collision is much longer than the excited-state
lifetimes [9] so that the dynamics of the collisional process
greatly depends on the atom-light interaction during the
a Present address: Physikalisches Institut, Eberhard-Karls-

∝

∝

Universit¨at, 72076 T¨ubingen, Germany
b Present address: BASF AG, DWL/LP - L426, 67056 Lud-
wigshafen, Germany

c e-mail: m.weidemueller@mpi-hd.mpg.de

collision process. For the heteronuclear case, even a cold
collision takes less time than the lifetimes of the excited
atomic states. The collision process is therefore essentially
determined by the asymptotic states which are initially
prepared, much like classical “hot” collisions.

However, the low temperatures of laser-cooled atoms
lead to a large extension of the molecular wavepacket
formed during the cold collision. The wavepacket spreads
over typically some fraction of an optical wavelength which
is of the same order of magnitude as the range of the
interaction potentials. A light-induced cold collision be-
tween two diﬀerent species is therefore highly quantum-
mechanical with mainly the s-wave scattering distribution
determining the cross-section, in contrast to homonuclear
collisions involving excited atoms [10].

Only recently, simultaneous trapping of two diﬀerent
atomic species has been reported [11,12,13]. In this ar-
ticle, we present the ﬁrst investigation on inelastic cold
collisions between lithium and cesium, i.e. the lightest and
the heaviest stable alkali. This extreme combination opens
intriguing perspectives for future experiments related to
the large diﬀerence in mass and electron aﬃnity of the
two atomic species, e.g., sympathetic cooling of lithium
by optically cooled cesium [14] and the formation of cold
polar molecules with large electric dipole moment which
could be trapped electrostatically [15]. In our experiments,
both species are simultaneously conﬁned in a combined
magneto-optical trap. Trap loss is studied by analyzing
the decay of the trapped particle number after interrup-
tion of the loading ﬂux, both in presence and in absence
of the other species. By choosing appropriate trap param-
eters, diﬀerent trap loss processes based on inelastic colli-

2

U. Schl¨oder et al.: Cold inelastic collisions between lithium and cesium in a two-species magneto-optical trap

U(R)

[cm   ]-1

14900

11700

0

*

Li  + Cs

*
Li + Cs

Li + Cs

R

[A]

100

Fig. 1. Long-range interaction energies plotted schematically
as a function of internuclear distance for the ground and ﬁrst
excited states of lithium and cesium.

sions between lithium and cesium are identiﬁed, and the
corresponding cross sections and rate coeﬃcients are de-
termined.

The speciﬁc features of inelastic cold collisions between
two diﬀerent species are introduced in Sec. 2 with em-
phasis on the peculiarities of the Li-Cs system. The com-
bined magneto-optical trap for simultaneous conﬁnement
of lithium and cesium is described in Sec. 3. In Sec. 4
detailed quantitative studies of trap loss through inelastic
Li-Cs collisions are presented. Sec. 5 summarizes the main
results.

2 Two-species cold collisions

2.1 Quasi-molecular potentials

When two cold atoms approach each other, the interac-
tion between the atoms leads to the formation of quasi-
molecular states. The leading term in the long-range part
of the interaction arises from the dipole-dipole interaction.
If both atoms are in their ground state, the potential en-
ergy is given by the well-known van-der-Waals expression
Wgg = C6/R6. The coeﬃcient C6 can be estimated by
treating the two atoms A and B as simple two-level sys-
tems with transition frequencies ωi = 2πc/λi and electric
dipole moments di (i = A or B). Second-order perturba-
tion theory yields

C6

≃ −

4d2

Ad2
¯h(ωA + ωB)

B

.

The van-der-Waals interaction between two ground state
atoms is thus always attractive as shown in Fig. 1.

If one collision partner arrives in an excited state, the
nature of the interaction depends on whether both atoms
belong to the same species, or whether two diﬀerent species
collide. For the homonuclear quasi-molecule, the inter-
action potential is given by the resonant-dipole interac-
tion Wge = C∗3 /R3 with the perturbative two-level result
2d2. In the heteronuclear case with atom A in the
C∗3
excited state and atom B in the ground state, one obtains
a van-der-Waals potential Wge = C∗6 /R6 with

≃ ±

(1)

(2)

C∗6

≃

4d2
Ad2
¯h(ωA −

B
ωB)

.

The relative value of the transition energies determines the
character of the interaction. If the collision partner with
the larger (smaller) resonance frequency is excited, the
interaction is generally repulsive (attractive) as indicated
in Fig. 1 for the case of lithium and cesium. As we will
see, this general feature of the excited state van-der-Waals
interaction has important implications on the collisional
properties of two diﬀerent species.

≪

ωB)/(ωA + ωB)

The van-der-Waals coeﬃcients C6 and C∗6 diﬀer by the
1 resulting in a much
factor (ωA −
steeper potential for the excited state than for the ground
state (see Fig. 1). Although the two-level approximation
is an oversimpliﬁed model for the complex level schemes
of real atoms, the numerical values for the coeﬃcients C6,
C∗3 and C∗6 derived from the two-level approach reproduce
the right orders of magnitude for alkali dimers. For more
accurate determination of the long-range molecular po-
tentials, elaborate models including spin-orbit eﬀects and
interacting molecular states have been developed [16].

2.2 Inelastic processes

Inelastic collisions in a trap lead to loss of atoms when
the kinetic energy gain of the colliding atom is larger than
the trap depth. If the energy gain is smaller than the trap
depth, the atom is retained in the trap, but the inelastic
collision represents a signiﬁcant heating mechanism. Due
to the low temperatures achieved in a magneto-optical
trap (MOT), the initial kinetic energy of the collision part-
ners can be neglected with respect to the interaction en-
ergy. In the presence of light ﬁelds, two basic processes
were identiﬁed for cold inelastic collisions involving opti-
cal excitation of the colliding pair [10,17]: ﬁne-structure
changing collisions (FC) and radiative escape (RE). For
two diﬀerent species, an exoergic energy-exchange reaction
A∗ +B
ωB) may also take place. Due to
the repulsive A∗-B potential and the large energy defect
associated with this reaction as compared to other inelas-
tic processes, we conjecture that this process has negligible
inﬂuence.

A+B∗ +¯h(ωA

→

−

When a photon from the light ﬁeld is absorbed during
the collision, the colliding partners are accelerated towards
each other on the strongly attractive potential of the ex-
cited state. The FC mechanism is based on coupling of
the excited molecular state to another ﬁne-structure or
hyperﬁne-structure state with lower asymptotic energy,
which occurs at typical distances smaller 10 ˚A. The kinetic
energy gain of the atom pair is the diﬀerence between the
absorbed photon energy and the energy of the lower ex-
cited ﬁne-structure state. The RE mechanism relies on the
spontaneous emission of a photon during acceleration on
the excited molecular potential. The gain of kinetic en-
ergy is then given by the diﬀerence in energy between the
absorbed and the emitted photon.

Both mechanisms involve one collision partner in the
excited state. The excitation probability of the collisional
quasi-molecule is largest when the detuning δ of the light
ﬁeld from the atomic resonance is compensated by the in-
teraction energy. The corresponding internuclear distance

U. Schl¨oder et al.: Cold inelastic collisions between lithium and cesium in a two-species magneto-optical trap

3

−

−

−

−

−

is called the Condon point RC deﬁned by the condition
Wgg(RC ) = ¯hδ. For typical detunings of a
Wge(RC )
MOT (δ =
6) Γ , with Γ denoting the inverse lifetime
(1
of the excited state), the Condon point has values around
2000 ˚A for homonuclear collisions with the long-
500
range 1/R3 resonant-dipole potential, and much smaller
150 ˚A for heteronuclear collisions with
values around 50
the shorter-range 1/R6 excited state van-der-Waals po-
tential. At distances smaller than the Condon point, the
colliding atoms quickly decouple from the light ﬁeld due to
the increasing energy shifts induced by the interatomic in-
teraction. Taking typical relative velocities ¯v = 0.1
1 m/s
30 ns,
in a MOT and typical radiative lifetimes Γ −
the semiclassical probability of reaching small internuclear
distances on an excited state molecular potential (“sur-
vival probability”) is small for homonuclear collisions, but
might get close to unity for heteronuclear ones.

−
≃

1

In addition to the excited-state inelastic collisions, col-
lisions involving both colliding atoms in the ground state
may occur. In particular, hyperﬁne-changing collisions (HFC)
releasing the ground state hyperﬁne energy, similar to the
FC mechanism in the excited state, can play a role for
losses in shallow traps.

2.3 Cold lithium-cesium collisions

The special case of a cold Li-Cs collision shows some pecu-
liar features. The lithium and cesium level schemes for the
ground and ﬁrst excited states are shown in Fig. 2. Life-
1 = 27 ns
times for the Li and Cs excited states are (ΓLi)−
1 = 30 ns, respectively. The S1/2 - P3/2 transi-
and (ΓCs)−
tions (D2 line) at 671 nm for Li and 852 nm for Cs are used
for cooling and trapping. Due to the diﬀerence in transi-
tion energy, the quasi-molecular potential for a Li-Cs colli-
sion is repulsive for all substates with Li∗+Cs asymptotes,
and attractive for all substates with Li+Cs∗ asymptotes
[16] as indicated in Fig. 1. The repulsive long-range in-
teraction for the Li∗-Cs pair has already experimentally
been demonstrated by spectroscopic measurements in a
hot Li-Cs vapor [18]. Due to the small initial kinetic en-
ergy with respect to the interatomic interaction potential,
a Li∗-Cs pair is prevented from reaching small internuclear
separations where inelastic processes can occur.

Possible inelastic channels for Li-Cs collisions are there-
fore hyperﬁne-changing collisions for ground state Li and
Cs, as well as FC, HFC and RE collisions involving Cs∗.
Momentum and energy conservation require that only 5%,
i.e. mLi/(mLi + mCs) (mi = mass of the atoms), of the re-
leased energy is transferred to the heavier collision partner
Cs. When the two-species MOT is optimized for maximum
15 GHz)
capture velocity for each species (trap depth
with h = Planck’s constant), Li loss is induced by Cs when
the total energy release is larger than
16 GHz, while
the energy release for Li-induced Cs loss has to be larger
than
300 GHz. The hyperﬁne splittings of Li, Li∗,
Cs and Cs∗ are therefore too small to induce trap loss.
However, for a slightly shallower Li-MOT, the hyperﬁne
energy of the ground-state Cs may just be suﬃcient to

×

∼

∼

∼

×

×

h

h

h

7Li

10.1 GHz

3/2

P2
2   
2P1/2
2   

671 nm

133

Cs

2
6   

P3/2

16613 GHz

P2
6   
852 nm

1/2

2S1/2
2   

Liδ

0.8 GHz

F=2
F=1

S2
6   

1/2

δ

Cs

9.2 GHz

F=4

F=3

Fig. 2. Level schemes for the ground and ﬁrst excited states
for lithium and cesium.

induce loss of Li, while the Cs collisions partner remains
in the MOT.

With laser cooling, much lower temperatures are achieved

2

∼

∼

50 µK) than for Li (

1 mK), mainly because of
for Cs (
k2/m with
the great diﬀerence in photon recoil energy ¯h
m denoting the mass of the atom and ¯hk the momentum
of an absorbed photon. The mean speed for Li atoms at
TLi = 1 mK is ¯vLi = 1.7 m/s. This has to be compared to
the mean Cs speed ¯vCs = 0.1 m/s for a Cs temperature of
TCs = 50 µK. The Cs atoms can therefore be considered
at rest before the collision, and the mean relative velocity
¯vLiCs between cold Li and Cs is solely determined by the
Li temperature.

3 Combined cesium-lithium trap

A schematic view of the experiment is presented in Fig.
3. The apparatus is an extension of a MOT for Li which
is described in detail in Ref. [19]. The combined magneto-
optical trap for lithium and cesium consists of three mutu-
ally orthogonal pairs of counter-propagating laser beams
for each species with opposite circular polarization, inter-
secting at the center of an axially symmetric magnetic
quadrupole ﬁeld. Field gradients are 14 G/cm along the
vertical axis, and 7 G/cm in the horizontal directions. The
light ﬁeld of the MOT is formed by retroreﬂected beams
with a 1/e2-diameter of 15 mm. Total laser power is about
15 mW for the Cs-MOT at 852 nm and 27 mW for the Li-
MOT at 671 nm. Completely separated optics is used for
the two wavelengths. The same windows are used for each
trapping laser beam at 852 nm and 671 nm. The light is
coupled into the vacuum chamber with a small angle be-
tween the 671 nm-beam and the 852 nm-beam.

The laser beams are provided exclusively by diode lasers.

For the trapping of cesium, a diode laser is operated close
6P3/2(F = 5) cycling transition
to the 6S1/2(F = 4)

→

4

U. Schl¨oder et al.: Cold inelastic collisions between lithium and cesium in a two-species magneto-optical trap

Fig. 3. Experimental setup of the two-species MOT. Not shown are the laser beam for Li deceleration, and the two CCD
cameras imaging the trapped atoms from diﬀerent directions.

→

of the cesium D2 line at 852 nm. To avoid optical pump-
ing into the other hyperﬁne ground state, a second laser
beam from a diode laser resonant with the 6S1/2(F =
3)
6P3/2(F = 4) transition is superimposed with the
trapping beam. Both lasers are frequency-stabilized rela-
tive to absorption lines from Cs vapor cells at room tem-
perature. The error signal of the servo loops is provided
by the frequency-dependent circular dichroism of Cs va-
por in a glass cell, to which a longitudinal magnetic ﬁeld
of some tens of Gauss is applied. The dichroism is mea-
sured as the diﬀerence in absorption between the left- and
right-circular components of a linearly polarized beam.
Trapping of lithium is accomplished with diode lasers in a
master-slave injection-locking scheme as described in [19].
2P3/2
The lasers operate close to the 2S1/2(F = 2)
transition and the 2S1/2(F = 1)
2P3/2 transition, re-
spectively, of the lithium D2 line at 671 nm 1. One of the
lasers is locked to Doppler-free absorption lines measured
by radio-frequency spectroscopy [21]. The second laser is
stabilized with respect to the ﬁrst by a tunable oﬀset-
frequency lock [22].

→

→

∼

Both MOTs are loaded from eﬀusive atomic beams
which can be interrupted by mechanical shutters (see Fig.
3). The Cs oven at a temperature of typically 85 ◦C is
continuously ﬁlled during operation by running a current
of
2 A through a set of nine Cs dispensers. The Cs
MOT accumulates atoms from the slow velocity tail (v
≤
10 m/s) of the Maxwell distribution. Typically, close to 106
1.5 ΓCs) are trapped with a
atoms (at a detuning δCs =
−
loading time constant of several seconds. Lithium has to be
evaporated at much higher temperatures. The small mass
of Li results in much higher atom velocities. Atoms with
600 m/s are decelerated in a compact Zeeman
velocity v
slower by an additional laser beam at 671 nm [19]. The
trapped atoms are shielded from the Li atomic beam by a
small beam block [19]. At a Li oven temperature of 450 ◦C,
the loading rate is around 108 atoms/s, yielding up to 109

≤

1 The excited-state hyperﬁne splitting of Li is of the same

order as the natural linewidth and can thus not be resolved.

trapped Li atoms. The steady-state number of trapped Li
atoms can be adjusted over a wide range by decreasing the
loading ﬂux through attenuation of the Zeeman-slowing
laser beam. Densities for the Cs and the Li MOT range
between 109 and 1010 atoms/cm3.

The ﬂuorescence of the trapped atoms is monitored
by two calibrated photodiodes with narrow-band inter-
ference ﬁlters at 852 nm and 671 nm, respectively. Shape
and position of the two atomic clouds are measured with
two CCD cameras. From these measurements, the num-
ber of trapped atoms and the density are determined. The
cameras are looking from diﬀerent directions yielding 3D
information on the position of the Li and Cs cloud.

The clouds are not necessarily overlapping. To super-
impose both clouds, we found it most simple and repro-
ducible to shift the Li onto the Cs cloud by slightly fo-
cusing the retroreﬂected beams at 671 nm and thus in-
troducing a controlled radiation-pressure imbalance. The
Li cloud turned out to be more sensitive to a radiation-
pressure imbalance than the Cs cloud.

Cooling in the Li-MOT is based on Doppler forces
[19], while polarization-gradient forces are acting on the
trapped Cs [20]. As a consequence of the diﬀerent mech-
anisms, temperatures of the Li cloud in the MOT are
above the Doppler temperature (TLi ≈
1 mK), while the
Cs cloud is cooled to sub-Doppler temperatures (TCs ≈
50 µK). Fig. 4 shows a ﬂuorescence picture of simultane-
ously trapped Li and Cs atoms. Due to its much lower
temperature the Cs cloud occupies a much smaller vol-
ume than the Li cloud, as indicated by the density pro-
ﬁles in Fig. 4. This particular property of the Li/Cs system
greatly simpliﬁes quantitative collisional studies.

Binary inelastic collisions between lithium and cesium
lead to loss from the two-species MOT. One indication of
this loss is a decrease of the steady-state particle number
of one species when the other species is also loaded into
the combined MOT. In Fig. 5, the temporal evolution of
the trapped particle number during loading is shown to il-
lustrate the inﬂuence of inter-species collisions. First, only
Cs is loaded into the MOT until the steady-state number

U. Schl¨oder et al.: Cold inelastic collisions between lithium and cesium in a two-species magneto-optical trap

5

4 Quantitative studies

4.1 Measurement procedures

Inelastic collisions can be studied quantitatively by mea-
suring rate coeﬃcients for the loss of particles from the
trap. The temporal evolution of the trapped particle num-
ber NA for the species A under the presence of species B
is described by the rate equation

dNA
dt

= LA

αANA

βA

−

−

Z

n2
A d3r

γAB

−

Z

nAnB d3r (3)

where nA,B denote the local densities and LA the loading
rate for species A. The loss rate coeﬃcient αA in the sec-
ond term of Eq. 3 characterizes trap loss by collisions with
background particles. Inelastic binary collisions between
trapped particles are described by the last two terms in
Eq. 3. The rate coeﬃcients βA and γAB denote the loss
rate coeﬃcient for collisions between atoms of the same
species and between diﬀerent atomic species, respectively.
These coeﬃcients can be expressed in terms of trap-loss
cross sections βA = ¯vAAσA and γAB = ¯vABσAB where ¯vAA
and ¯vAB denote the relative speed between two atoms of
species A and between species A and B, respectively.

The rate coeﬃcients for trap loss in Eq. 3 can be in-
ferred from the decay of the ﬂuorescence signal after inter-
ruption of the loading ﬂux for species A (LA = 0 in Eq. 3).
Species B is still continuously loaded into the two-species
= 0). The ﬂuorescence signal from the MOT
MOT (LB
is proportional to the particle number when the cloud of
trapped atoms is not optically thick which is well fulﬁlled
in all our measurements. Analysis of the data is simpliﬁed
by the fact that, for low numbers of trapped particles,
the cloud extension is determined solely by the tempera-
ture (temperature-limited regime) [23]. In this regime, the
root-mean-square radius rA of the Gaussian spatial den-
sity distribution is independent of the number of parti-
cles which we have carefully checked for our two-species
MOT [24]. Thus, the quadratic loss term can be written as
the volume
−
of the species A cloud. The volume VA stays constant dur-
ing the decay of the trapped particle number. In addition,
the Li cloud is generally much larger than the Cs cloud
(see Fig. 4). The third term in Eq. (3) therefore simpliﬁes
to
γ ˆnLiNCs where ˆnLi = NLi/VLi denotes the Li peak
−
density.

A/√8VA where we call VA =

√2πrA
(cid:0)

βAN 2

(cid:1)

3

With these simpliﬁcations, the decay of the trapped

particle number NA is described by

dNA
dt

=

αA +

− (cid:18)

γAB
VLi

NB

NA

(cid:19)

−

βA
√8VA

N 2
A

(4)

where A and B stand for Li or Cs. In the general case, NA
and NB are coupled by the inelastic inter-species collisions
(see Fig. 5). However, when the loading ﬂux for species
B is large compared to the loss rate by inter-species colli-
sions, i.e. LB >> γBANANB/VLi, the steady-state particle
number NB,0 is not inﬂuenced by the presence of species

Fig. 4. Camera picture of simultaneously trapped lithium and
cesium atoms. The density distributions shown above are mea-
sured separately for lithium and cesium using narrow-band ﬁl-
ters in front of the CCD camera.

Fig. 5. Temporal evolution of the number of trapped lithium
and cesium atoms during loading of the two-species MOT with
and without the other species present.

is reached. Then, as Li is also ﬁlled into the trap by open-
ing the atomic beam shutter, the number of trapped Cs
decreases which indicates inelastic Li-Cs collisions result-
ing in a trap loss of Cs. After a new steady state has
established, loading of Cs is stopped by shuttering the Cs
beam, and the light ﬁeld at 852 nm is interrupted for a
short moment, resulting in quick escape of all Cs atoms.
Without Cs, the number of trapped Li further increases
which shows that inter-species collisions also induce Li
loss.

6
6

U. Schl¨oder et al.: Cold inelastic collisions between lithium and cesium in a two-species magneto-optical trap

(a)

without Li

(b)

without Li

with Li

with Li

Fig. 6. Decay of ﬂuorescence for Cs in the two-species MOT
with and without trapped Li (δCs = −1.5 ΓCs, δLi = −3 ΓLi).
The ﬂuorescence signal
is proportional to the number of
trapped atoms NCs. The lower graphs show the residuals from
a ﬁt to Eq. 5.

A. In this case, the rate equations for A and B become
decoupled, and Eq. 4 has the simple analytical solution

NA(t) =

˜αAt

NA,0e−
βA
˜αA (1

1 + NA,0
√8VA

e−

˜αAt)

−

(5)

with the eﬀective decay rate coeﬃcient ˜αA = αA+γABNB,0/VLi.
The coeﬃcients αA and βA in Eq. (4) are determined
by ﬁtting Eq. (5) to the ﬂuorescence decay without the
species B loaded into the MOT (NB,0 = 0). A typical ex-
ample is depicted in Fig. 6. We have found no inﬂuence of
the trapping light for species B on the rate coeﬃcients for
species A. However, to exclude any possible ambiguities,
the trapping light for species B is not interrupted during
the measurements without species B being loaded into the
trap. In addition, we observe no inﬂuence of the species
B atomic beam on the decay characteristics of species A
when opening the beam shutter and interrupting one arm
of the MOT laser beams so that no species B atoms are
trapped.

As shown in Fig. 6, the ﬂuorescence decay changes
signiﬁcantly when the second species is also conﬁned in
the two-species MOT. By adjusting the loading ﬂuxes,
the particle number NB,0 is decoupled from the decay of
species A which is checked by monitoring the ﬂuorescence
of species B. Besides the initial particle number NA,0, the
inter-species rate coeﬃcient γAB is the only free ﬁtting
parameter used since the single-species parameters αA and
βA are kept ﬁxed to the values determined without B.

In this way, determination of γAB is uncorrelated to the
evaluation of αA and βA which greatly reduces the ﬁtting
errors.

Experimental errors in the determination of the parti-
cle numbers NA,0 and NB,0 are 25%, while the trap vol-
umes VA and VB are accurate to within 15%. The errors
given in the following refer to the combination of experi-
mental errors with the statistical errors of the ﬁtting pro-
cedures. Not included are possible systematic errors in
the particle number determination which we estimate to
about 50%. Comparison of the values for βA from our mea-
surements with previous values measured in single-species
MOTs provide a consistency check for our data analysis
and the inﬂuence of systematics.

4.2 Lithium-induced cesium loss

Following the procedures described in the preceding sec-
tion, we have studied the trap loss of Cs atoms resulting
from inelastic Li-Cs collisions. Li and Cs are loaded for
about 30 s to their steady-state particle numbers (NCs,0
≃
106 at δCs =
3ΓLi). The
decay of the Cs ﬂuorescence is monitored with and with-
out Li after the Cs loading ﬂux is interrupted. In addition,
the Li ﬂuorescence is observed during the decay of the Cs
ﬂuorescence to verify that NLi,0 is independent of NCs.
For each set of measurements, a camera picture is taken
to measure the spatial volume VLi of the Li cloud.

108 at δLi =

1.5ΓCs, NLi,0

−

≈

−

We ﬁrst investigate the inﬂuence of the population of
the lithium 2P3/2 excited state on γCsLi. After the Cs load-
ing is interrupted, the average Li excitation is adjusted
by periodically chopping the trapping light. The chopping
frequency of 100 kHz is slow compared to the internal dy-
namics of the Li atoms determined by ΓLi, but fast com-
pared to the dynamics of the trapped particles. Therefore,
the average excitation of the Li atoms scales linearly with
the ratio of the on/oﬀ time intervals (duty cycle) 2. At
100 % duty cycle (no chopping), the average excited-state
population ΠLi∗ is 0.06(1) at a detuning δLi =
3 ΓLi. To
determine the population, the ﬂuorescence rate is mea-
sured as the function of detuning for a ﬁxed number of
trapped atoms. The excited-state population is then de-
duced from two-level theory by ﬁtting a Lorentzian to the
data. The volume VLi of the Li MOT increases with de-
creasing duty cycle from 1.3(1) mm3 at 100 % duty cy-
cle to 3.0(3) mm3 at 30%. The Li temperature does not
change signiﬁcantly with the duty cycle (TLi = 0.9(2) mK
at δLi =

3 ΓLi).

−

The data presented in the left graph of Fig. 7 show that
the Cs loss rate coeﬃcient γCsLi has the constant value of
10 cm3/s at δCs =
1.5ΓCs and δLi =
γCsLi = 1.1(2)
3ΓLi). The coeﬃcient exhibits no signiﬁcant dependence
−
on the Li excitation. This observation can be regarded as

10−

×

−

−

2 The Li loading rate changes with the duty cycle resulting in
a decay of NLi,0 to a new steady-state value. Therefore, Eq. 5
can not be used in this measurement. The Li decay is measured
by monitoring the Li ﬂuorescence. The observed decay of NLi,0
is incorporated into Eq. 4.

U. Schl¨oder et al.: Cold inelastic collisions between lithium and cesium in a two-species magneto-optical trap

7

3

2

1

v
L

i

[

m
/
s
]

Fig. 7. Left graph: Rate coeﬃcient for lithium-induced cesium
loss γCsLi as a function of the lithium population of the excited
2P3/2 state (δCs = −1.5 ΓCs, δLi = −3 ΓLi). The excitation was
controlled by square-wave modulation of the lithium trapping
light. Right graph: Rate coeﬃcient for lithium-induced cesium
loss as a function of the lithium detuning δLi (δCs = −1.5 ΓCs).
The dashed line corresponding to the right abscissa shows the
variation of the mean lithium velocity ¯vLi with detuning.

a direct consequence of the repulsive interaction between
excited Li and ground-state Cs as discussed in Sec. 2.3.
Excited Li in the MOT therefore does not contribute to
the trap loss of Cs.

−

×

−

10−

10 cm3/s at δLi =

×
10 cm3/s at δLi =

In a second set of measurements, the dependence of
γCsLi on the detuning δLi of the trapping light for Li is in-
vestigated. As shown in the right graph of Fig. 7, the inter-
species rate coeﬃcient steadily increases with increasing
detuning from 0.6(1)
1 ΓLi to
3.0(6)
6 ΓLi. Changing δLi has
10−
two major consequences: the temperature of Li increases
with increasing detuning as demonstrated in [19], and the
excitation probability for Li is modiﬁed. The dashed line in
Fig. 7 gives the dependence of ¯vLi = ( 8
3 kBTLi/mLi)1/2 on
the Li detuning as measured for our Li MOT [19]. As dis-
cussed in Sec. 2.3, the Li velocity determines the average
relative velocity between lithium and cesium ¯vLiCs
¯vLi.
Since the change in ¯vLi essentially reproduces the mea-
sured trend of the rate coeﬃcient, it follows that the cross
section σCsLi = γCsLi/¯vCsLi for Li-induced Cs loss is in-
104 ˚A2
dependent on the Li detuning (σCsLi = 0.7(2)
at δCs =
1.5 ΓCs). The data again indicate that the Li
excitation plays no role in inelastic Li-Cs collisions.

×

≈

−

−

×

10−

The rate coeﬃcient γCsLi = 1.1(2)

10 cm3/s at
δCs =
1.5 ΓCs is about one order of magnitude larger
11 cm3/s
than the homonuclear coeﬃcient βCs = 2.0(4)
measured under the same conditions but without lithium
in the trap [24] 3. The corresponding cross sections σCsLi =
104 ˚A2, however, are
0.7(2)
of the same order of magnitude due to the much smaller
relative velocities of the Cs atoms (see Sec. 2.3).

104 ˚A2 and σCs = 2.0(4)

10−

×

×

×

To investigate the inﬂuence of optical Cs excitation,
the detuning δCs of the Cs-trapping light is switched to

3 The value of βCs is consistent with earlier measurements in

a Cs MOT by Sesko et al. [5].

Fig. 8. Left graph: Dependence of the loss rate coeﬃcient for
lithium-induced cesium loss γCsLi on the cesium detuning δCs
(δLi = −3 ΓLi). Right graph: Same data, but plotted versus the
average population of the Cs 6P3/2 state as determined from
the detuning.

a given value after interruption of the Cs loading ﬂux.
The Li detuning is kept ﬁxed at δLi =
3 ΓLi resulting in
−
106 Li atoms at a
a constant number of NLi,0 = 5(2)
3 in the MOT. As shown
109 cm−
density ˆnLi = 1.7(7)
in the left graph in Fig. 8, one observes a decrease of the
rate coeﬃcient by a factor of ﬁve for increasing detuning
δCs. At higher detuning, γCsLi rises up again.

×

×

Changing the detuning of the Cs MOT has two eﬀects:
excitation of the Cs 6P3/2 state depends on the detuning,
and the Cs trap becomes shallower at larger detunings. In
addition, the Cs temperature becomes lower at larger de-
tuning due to polarization-gradient cooling [20], but this
does not eﬀect the rate coeﬃcient since the relative veloc-
ity is determined by the Li temperature only. The increase
of the rate coeﬃcient at
4 ΓCs can be attributed
δCs
to the decrease of the MOT depth. The MOT might even-
tually become shallow enough to allow for trap loss due to
Li-Cs collisions changing the Cs hyperﬁne structure. From
a simpliﬁed yet realistic picture for the capture range of
the Cs MOT [25], we expect this process to become rel-
evant at detunings below
4 ΓCs consistent with the
≈ −
observed increase of γCsLi. The decrease of γCsLi with de-
4 ΓCs, however, must be related to the
δCs
tuning for
change in the Cs excitation.

−

≥

−

≤

The average population of the Cs in the P3/2 state
in the MOT decreases with the detuning. As described in
Sec. 2.2, the relevant inelastic processes for trap loss occur
at internuclear distances around 10 ˚A. Due to the large
relative velocities of about 1 m/s, excitation of Cs sur-
vives over an internuclear distance of about 300 ˚A. The
Cs atoms might therefore be excited at separations be-
fore the interatomic interaction energy becomes relevant
100 ˚A), and still reach the inner interaction zone.
(RC ≈
The modiﬁcation of the excitation probability by the in-
teraction potential therefore plays a minor role for the
probability for an excited atom to reach the inner inter-
action zone in the excited state. It seems therefore appro-
priate to expect a linear increase of γCsLi with the average
excited state population in the MOT.

8

U. Schl¨oder et al.: Cold inelastic collisions between lithium and cesium in a two-species magneto-optical trap

To support this picture, the right graph in Fig. 8 shows
the same data as in (a), but now plotted versus the av-
erage population ΠCs∗ of the Cs P3/2 state. The excited-
state population is measured as described above for Li.
The rate coeﬃcient scales proportional to the average P3/2
population indicating that excitation relevant for the in-
elastic processes indeed occurs at large internuclear dis-
tances where the modiﬁcation of the energy through the
quasi-molecular potential can be neglected. In addition,
the rapid decrease of the rate coeﬃcient with decreasing
Cs excitation shows, that inelastic Li-Cs∗ collisions are the
main channel for Li-induced Cs trap loss.

The strong decrease of the rate coeﬃcient with in-
creasing detuning constitutes an important diﬀerence to
homonuclear collisions where the trap loss rate is found
to increase with increasing detuning [5]. In the homonu-
clear case, the colliding atoms are decoupled from the light
ﬁeld already at distances around 1000 ˚A due to the long-
range resonant-dipole interaction. The rate coeﬃcient for
homonuclear collisions can be increased by primarily ex-
citing the atoms at smaller internuclear separations, i.e. at
larger detunings from resonance for the attractive inter-
action potential, resulting in a larger survival probability.

4.3 Cesium-induced lithium loss

The investigation of Cs-induced Li loss from the MOT pro-
ceeds similar to the experiments on Li-induced Cs loss.
Cesium is permanently loaded, and at a given moment
the Li loading ﬂux is interrupted for a measurement of
the Li trap decay. It has now to be ensured that the
steady-state number NCs,0 of trapped Cs is independent
of the number of trapped Li NLi, i.e., the Cs loading rate
has to be chosen large compared to the Li-induced Cs
loss rate. By decreasing the Li loading ﬂux, the steady-
state Li particle number in the MOT is adjusted to values
comparable to the largest achievable Cs particle number
106). Under these conditions, the Cs ﬂu-
(NLi,0
orescence shows only a marginal dependence on the num-
ber of trapped Li atoms so that Eq. 5 can be used to an-
alyze the data. At the corresponding low Li densities, the
decay of the Li ﬂuorescence was found to be purely expo-
nential indicating that quadratic Li loss can be neglected
(βLiNLi,0/√8VLi
αLi,eﬀ in Eq. 5).

NCs,0

≈

≃

From energetical considerations discussed in Sec. 2.3,
trap escape of a Cs atom through an inelastic Li-Cs colli-
sion has to be accompanied by the loss of the involved Li
atom, since the largest share of the released energy is taken
by the Li. In Fig. 9, the ratio between the loss rate coeﬃ-
cient for a Cs-induced Li loss γLiCs and the coeﬃcient for
a Li-induced Cs loss γCsLi is depicted as function of the Li
detuning δLi. For
γCsLi,
which shows that both collisions partners simultaneously
leave the trap. Since the Cs trap escape is essentially de-
termined by collisions involving excited Cs, this collision
channel is also the main source for Li loss.

3ΓLi one observes γLiCs

δLi

≈

≥

−

≪

Interestingly, at smaller detunings, an additional loss
channel for Li atoms opens which is not accompanied by

Fig. 9. Ratio between the loss coeﬃcients for cesium-induced
lithium loss γLiCs and lithium-induced cesium loss γCsLi versus
lithium detuning δLi (δCs = −1.5 ΓCs).

the loss of the Cs atoms. A possible process releasing suﬃ-
cient energy for the escape of Li without providing enough
energy for Cs is represented by inelastic collisions between
Cs and Li both in the ground state (hyperﬁne-changing
collisions, see Sec. 2.2). In particular, in the MOT nearly
all ground-state Cs atoms occupy the 6S1/2(F = 4) level.
Collisions changing the hyperﬁne state of the Cs would
9 GHz of energy to the Li atom, which
transfer around h
corresponds roughly to the Li trap depth at small detun-
ings 4.

×

≈

−

To further investigate the hypothesis that the addi-
tional Li loss is a manifestation of hyperﬁne-changing col-
lisions, we have changed the Li trap depth by square-wave
modulation of the Li trapping light [26] as explained in the
preceding section. At full duty cycle, the trap depth is es-
timated from the laser power to be around 15 GHz. Lower-
ing the duty cycle thus reduces the trap depth suﬃciently
to allow for the inset of loss through hyperﬁne-structure
change of the Cs ground state. As shown in Fig. 10 for
δLi =
4 ΓLi, the loss rate coeﬃcient for Cs-induced Li loss
γLiCs drastically increases when the duty cycle is reduced
40%. At a duty cycle of 20%, a
below a critical value of
10 cm3/s is measured,
rate coeﬃcient of γLiCs = 5(1)
104 ˚A2.
corresponding to a cross section of σLiCs = 3(1)
The square-wave modulation method has formerly been
used to identify ﬁne-structure changing collisions in a pure
Li MOT which releases 5 GHz energy to each Li collision
partner [26]. In these experiments, a sudden increase of
the rate coeﬃcient βLi with decreasing duty cycle was ob-
served when the duty cycle was lowered beyond the value
corresponding to 5 GHz trap depth. We have performed
equivalent measurements on βLi for the same trap param-
eters as the data set shown in Fig. 10, but with maxi-
mum Li loading ﬂux to achieve large numbers of trapped
108). This leads to a measurable inﬂuence
Li (NLi,0
of βLi on the trap loss [24]. The rate coeﬃcient βLi in-
12 cm3/s for duty cycles between
creases from 5(2)
10 cm3/s at duty cycles below
10−
60% and 100% to

10−
1

10−

≈

×

×

×
∼

×

4 For Li, the trap depth steadily increases with detuning in

the parameter ranges considered here [19].

U. Schl¨oder et al.: Cold inelastic collisions between lithium and cesium in a two-species magneto-optical trap

9

small internuclear distances in the excited state. The ex-
cited quasi-molecular wavepacket might even oscillate for
some periods in the molecular potential well before spon-
taneous emission occurs. Inelastic Li-Cs processes such as
changes of the Cs ﬁne-structure state or the spontaneous
emission of a red-detuned photon are then likely to take
place. Both processes release suﬃcient energy for the es-
cape of both atoms from the trap, and our trap loss exper-
iments do not distinguish among them. The cross section
for such inelastic Li-Cs∗ collisions scales with the aver-
age Cs excitation in the MOT, and acquires a value of
104 ˚A2 at maximum excited- state
σCsLi = σLiCs = 0.7(2)
populations around 1
2 , which corresponds to a trap loss
rate coeﬃcient of γCsLi = γLiCs = 1.1(2)

10 cm3/s.

×

10−

≈

Collisions involving lithium and cesium in the ground
state generally do not transfer suﬃcient energy to over-
come the trap energy barrier. If, however, the lithium
trap depth is decreased below
9 GHz, lithium atoms
eventually escape from the trap after having undergone a
Li-Cs collision in which the cesium changes its hyperﬁne
ground state. The cesium atom will be retained in the
trap since only 5% of the released energy is transferred
to the cesium. Our measurements yield a cross section
104 ˚A2 for a ground-state Li-Cs
larger than σLiCs = 3
collision with change of the Cs hyperﬁne state. The lower
bound for the corresponding rate coeﬃcient is γLiCs =
5(1)

10 cm3/s.

×

10−

×

×

Homonuclear Cs trap loss collisions give about the
same inelastic cross sections as Li-Cs collisions, while homonu-
clear Li collisions have a cross section which is more than
one order of magnitude smaller. Due to the small exten-
sion of the ground-state and the excited state interaction
potentials, the Li-Cs cross sections are essentially deter-
mined by the s-wave contribution. To our best knowledge,
the short-range part of the Li-Cs molecular potential has
not yet been theoretically investigated. Detailed knowl-
edge on the ﬁne details of the short-distance molecular
potential is necessary to perform calculations on the rela-
tive importance of ﬁne-structure changing and radiative-
escape processes and to estimate trap-loss cross sections.

Our investigations of inelastic processes between lithium
and cesium represent an important step towards a new
class of experiments with binary atomic mixtures. Such
mixtures open new perspectives for collisional studies in
conservative potentials like magnetic or optical traps, for
the formation and trapping of cold polar molecules through,
e.g., photoassociation, or for the investigation of two-species
Bose condensates [28]. Starting from our two-species MOT,
we plan to transfer the cold lithium and cesium simulta-
neously into a far-detuned optical dipole trap [29] for the
investigation of elastic Li-Cs collisions with the prospect
to sympathetically cool lithium with optically cooled ce-
sium [14].

Fruitful discussions with O. Dulieu are greatfully acknowledged.
We thank D. Schwalm for his encouragement and support. This
work was supported in part by the Deutsche Forschungsge-
meinschaft in the frame of the Gerhard-Hess-Programm.

Fig. 10. Loss rate coeﬃcient of cesium-induced lithium loss
γLiCs versus the duty cycle of square-wave modulation of the
trap light (δCs = −3 ΓCs, δLi = −4 ΓLi).

×

40% 5. We ﬁnd that the sudden increase in βLi sets in at a
slightly lower critical duty cycle than the increase of γLiCs
shown in Fig. 10. This indicates, that the corresponding
kinetic energy gain transferred to the lithium through an
inelastic ground-state Li-Cs collisions must be larger than
5 GHz. The only process releasing suﬃcient energy to
h
explain the observations is therefore an inelastic collision
changing the Cs hyperﬁne state. Note, that inelastic Li∗-
Cs collisions changing the Li excited-state ﬁne structure,
which would release h
10 GHz and which are relevant
for trap loss through inelastic Li∗-Li collisions [26,27], are
excluded by the repulsive quasi-molecular potential (see
Sec. 2.3).

×

5 Conclusions

Our results can be summarized in the following picture of
binary inelastic Li-Cs collisions in a combined magneto-
optical trap. Lithium and cesium approach each other with
a mean relative velocity
1 m/s which is determined by
the lithium temperature. Since the MOT is operated with
near resonant light, atoms can absorb a trapping photon
when the interaction energy is still small compared to ¯hδ,
i.e. at internuclear separations larger than the Condon
point at about 100 ˚A.

≈

When the lithium absorbs a trapping photon at 671 nm,
the excited Li and ground-state Cs repel each other and
inelastic processes are prevented (optical shielding). The
rate coeﬃcient for trap loss by Li-Cs collisions is therefore
found to be independent of the average Li excitation in the
two-species MOT. When a 852 nm-photon is absorbed by
the Cs, Li and Cs∗ are accelerated by the attractive molec-
ular potential. Due to the comparatively large relative ve-
locity, the Cs excitation survives over distances around
300 ˚A. The probability is therefore high to reach very
5 These values are consistent with rate coeﬃcients from Li-
MOT measurements by Kawanake et al. [26] and Ritchie et al.
[27].

10

U. Schl¨oder et al.: Cold inelastic collisions between lithium and cesium in a two-species magneto-optical trap

21. G.C. Bjorklund, M.D. Levenson, W. Lenth, C. Ortiz, Appl.

Phys. B 32, (1983) 145.

22. U. Sch¨unemann, H. Engler, R. Grimm, M. Weidem¨uller,

M. Zielonkowski, Rev. Scient. Instr. 70, (1999) 242 .

23. C.G. Townsend, N.H. Edwards, C.J. Cooper, K.P. Zetie,
C.J. Foot, A.M. Steane, P. Szriftgiser, H. Perrin, J. Dalibard,
Phys. Rev. A 52, (1995) 1423.

24. U. Schl¨oder, Diploma thesis, Universit¨at Heidelberg 1998,

25. K. Lindquist, M. Stephens, C. Wieman, Phys. Rev. A 46,

unpublished.

(1992) 4082.

26. J. Kawanake, K. Shimizu, H. Tanaka, F. Shimizi, Phys.

Rev. A 48, (1993) R883.

27. N.W.M. Ritchie, E.R.I. Abraham, Y.Y. Xiao, C.C.
Bradley, R.G. Hulet, P.S. Julienne, Phys. Rev. A 51, (1995)
961.

28. C.K. Law, H. Pu, N.P. Bigelow, J.H. Eberly, Phys. Rev.
Lett. 79, (1997) 3105; H. Pu, N.P. Bigelow, Phys. Rev. Lett.
80, (1998) 1130; H. Pu, N.P. Bigelow, ibid., 1134.

29. R. Grimm, M. Weidem¨uller, Yu.B. Ovchinnikov, Adv. At.

Mol. Opt. Phys., in press.

References

1. Extensive reviews are given by P. Julienne, A. Smith,
K. Burnett, in Advances in Atomic, Molecular and Optical
Physics ed. by B. Bederson and H. Walther, Vol. 30 (Aca-
demic Press, San Diego 1992), 141; T. Walker, P. Feng, ibid.,
Vol. 34, (1994) 125; J. Weiner, ibid., Vol. 35, (1995) 45; P.D.
Lett, P.S. Julienne, W.D. Phillips, Ann. Rev. Phys. Chem.
46, (1995) 423; K.-A. Suominen, J. Phys. B 29, (1996) 5981;
J. Weiner, V.S. Bagnato, S. Zilio, P. S. Julienne Rev. Mod.
Phys. 71, (1999) 1.

2. P.D. Lett, W.D. Phillips, L.P. Ratcliﬀ, S.L. Rolston, M.E.
Wagshull, Phys. Rev. Lett. 71, (1993) 2200; J. Miller, R.
Cline, D.J. Heinzen, ibid., 2204.

3. W.I. McAlexander, E.R.I. Abraham, R.G. Hulet Phys. Rev.

A 54, (1996) R5.

4. M. Prentiss, A. Cable, J. Bjorkholm, S. Chu, E. Raab, D

Pritchard, Opt. Lett 13, (1988) 452.

5. D. Sesko, T. Walker, C. Monroe, A. Gallagher, C. Wieman,

Phys. Rev. Lett. 63, (1989) 961.

6. S. Bali, D. Hoﬀmann, T. Walker, Europhys. Lett. 27, (1994)

273.

7. A. Fioretti, D. Comparat, A. Crubellier, O. Dulieu, F.
Masnou-Seewes, P. Pillet, Phys. Rev. Lett. 80, (1998), 4402;
T. Takekoshi, B.M. Patterson, R.J. Knize, Phys. Rev. Lett.
81, (1998) 5105; A. N. Nikolov, E. E. Eyler, X. T. Wang, J.
Li, H. Wang, W. C. Stwalley, P. L. Gould, Phys. Rev. Lett.
82, (1999) 703.

8. Simultaneous trapping of two diﬀerent Rb isotopes is re-
ported by W. S¨uptitz, G. Wokurka, F. Strauch, P. Kohns,
W. Ertmer, Opt. Lett. 19, (1994) 1571.

9. S.D. Gensemer, P.L. Gould, Phys. Rev. Lett. 80, (1998)
936; C. Orzel, S.D. Bergeson, S. Kulin, S.L. Rolston, ibid.,
5093.

10. P.S. Julienne, J. Vigu`e, Phys. Rev. A 44, (1991) 4464.
11. M.S. Santos, P. Nussenzveig, L.G. Marcassa, K. Helmer-
son, J. Fleming, S.C. Zilio, V.S, Bagnato, Phys. Rev. A 52,
(1995) R4340; G.D. Telles, L.G. Marcassa, S.R. Muniz, S.G.
Miranda, A.Antunes, C.Westbrook, and V.S. Bagnato, Phys.
Rev. A 59, (1999) R23.

12. W. Scherf, V. Wippel, T. Fritz, D. Gruber, L. Windholz,
poster presented at the 6th EPS Conference on Atomic and
Molecular Physics 1998, Europhys. Conf. Abstr. 22D, (1998)
p. 6-31.

13. J.P. Shaﬀer, W. Chapulpczak, N.P. Bigelow, Phys. Rev.
Lett. 82, (1999) 1124; J.P. Shaﬀer, W. Chapulpczak, N.P.
Bigelow, preprint (1998).

14. H. Engler, I. Manek, U. Moslener, M. Nill, Yu.B. Ovchin-
nikov, U. Schl¨oder, U. Sch¨unemann, M. Zielonkowski, M.
Weidem¨uller, R. Grimm, Appl. Phys. B 67, (1998) 709.

15. S.K. Sekatskii, JETP Lett. 62, (1995) 916; S.K. Sekatskii

and J. Schmiedmayer, Europhys. Lett. 36, (1996) 407.

16. B. Bussery, Y. Achkar, M. Aubert-Frecon, Chem. Phys.

17. A. Gallagher, D.E. Pritchard, Phys. Rev. Lett. 63, (1989)

18. C. Vadla, C.-J. Lorenzen, K. Niemax, Phys. Rev. Lett. 51,

116, (1987) 319.

957.

(1983) 988.

19. U. Sch¨unemann, H. Engler, M. Zielonkowski, M. Wei-

dem¨uller, R. Grimm, Opt. Comm. 158, (1998) 263.

20. A.M. Steane, M. Chowdhury, C.J. Foot, J. Opt. Soc. Am.

B 9, (1992) 2142.

