9
9
9
1
 
b
e
F
 
2
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
m
o
t
a
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
9
5
0
2
0
9
9
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

The helium atom in a strong magnetic ﬁeld

W.Becken, P.Schmelcher and F.K. Diakonos∗
Theoretische Chemie
Physikalisch-Chemisches Institut
Im Neuenheimer Feld 253
69120 Heidelberg
Federal Republic of Germany

Abstract

We investigate the electronic structure of the helium atom in a magnetic ﬁeld between B = 0 and
B = 100a.u.. The atom is treated as a nonrelativistic system with two interacting electrons and a ﬁxed
nucleus. Scaling laws are provided connecting the ﬁxed-nucleus Hamiltonian to the one for the case
of ﬁnite nuclear mass. Respecting the symmetries of the electronic Hamiltonian in the presence of a
magnetic ﬁeld, we represent this Hamiltonian as a matrix with respect to a two-particle basis composed
of one-particle states of a Gaussian basis set. The corresponding generalized eigenvalue problem is solved
numerically, providing in the present paper results for vanishing magnetic quantum number M = 0 and
even or odd z-parity, each for both singlet and triplet spin symmetry. Total electronic energies of the
ground state and the ﬁrst few excitations in each subspace as well as their one-electron ionization energies
are presented as a function of the magnetic ﬁeld, and their behaviour is discussed. Energy values for
electromagnetic transitions within the M = 0 subspace are shown, and a complete table of wavelengths
at all the detected stationary points with respect to their ﬁeld dependence is given, thereby providing a
basis for a comparison with observed absorption spectra of magnetic white dwarfs.

1

Introduction

Since the astrophysical discovery of strong magnetic ﬁelds on the surfaces of white dwarfs (≤ 105 Tesla) and
neutron stars (≈ 108 Tesla) the interest in the behaviour and the properties of matter in strong magnetic
ﬁelds has increased enormously.
In the case of atoms in strong magnetic ﬁelds most of the literature is
concerned with the hydrogen atom. The eigenvalues and the eigenfunctions of the hydrogen atom are,
therefore, known very precisely and for many excited states [1–7]. For the hydrogen atom in a strong
magnetic ﬁeld it was possible to perform a comparison of the theoretical predictions resulting from ab initio
computations with the data obtained from astronomical observation. The results provided an overwhelming
evidence for the existence of hydrogen in the atmosphere of the corresponding astrophysical objects [6].
However, there are several spectral features and structures which can not be explained by hydrogenic spectra
like for example in the spectrum of the magnetic white dwarf GD229 [8–10], which leads to the conjecture
that there are further components in the atmospheres, i.e. atoms with more than one electron.

∗Permanent address: Department of Physics, Univ. of Athens, GR-15771 Athens, Greece

1

So far our knowledge about atoms with more than one electron in strong magnetic ﬁelds is very sparse.
Most of the ab initio computations on more electron systems deal with two-electron systems, i.e. the helium
atom, the hydrogen anion and the helium-like kations [6, 11–14]. For two-electron atoms the investigations
cover much smaller parts of the spectrum than it is the case for the hydrogen atom, and their accuracy is
considerably poorer. To perform a comparison with astrophysical observation, however, accurate transition
energies for a large set of ﬁeld strengths have to be available which requires even more accurate data for the
total energies. In particular in the relevant regime of intermediate ﬁeld strengths, for which the diamagnetic
energies and the Coulomb energies are of the same order of magnitude, there does not exist suﬃciently
accurate data for a large number of excited states which would allow this comparison. The reason is that for
example the numerical basis set methods established so far have their starting point either in the low-ﬁeld
regime or in the high-ﬁeld regime and are, therefore, especially adapted to their corresponding regimes but
fail to be eﬀective in the opposite regime, thereby leaving a gap in a certain regime where none of them
provides a good convergence.

The scope of the present paper is to introduce one uniform basis set method which is capable of accurately
describing two electron systems for arbitrary ﬁeld strengths. We present numerical results for the energy
levels of the ground state and a considerable number of excited states of the helium atom in a magnetic
ﬁeld ranging from B = 0a.u. to B = 100a.u. (B = 1a.u. corresponds to 2.35 · 105Tesla).

In order to perform a detailed comparison of our numerical data with already existing ones, let us ﬁrst
provide an overview of the results present in the literature so far. Almost all of the results we mention here
are variational, i.e. they provide upper bounds for the exact energy values. However, we have to distinguish
between Hartree-Fock calculations and calculations which take into account the electronic correlation.

The ﬁrst Hartree-Fock calculations on helium in a strong magnetic ﬁeld have been performed in 1976
by Virtamo [15]. Virtamo has provided the global ground-state energies of helium in very strong ﬁelds
(B = 80a.u. up to B = 8 × 104a.u.). In this regime the lowest energy is achieved by aligning both spins
antiparallel to the magnetic ﬁeld which means that the global ground state in question is a spin triplet
state. The same state is also investigated in the work of Pr¨oschel et al.[12]. They use a Slater-determinantal
approach starting from Landau-levels in order to cover a slightly broader regime of ﬁeld strengths as Virtamo
(B ∼ 2.1a.u. to B ∼ 2.1 × 104a.u.). Hartree-Fock results for several other states besides the ground state
of helium in the high-ﬁeld regime are provided in the works of Ivanov [14, 16] where the singlet and triplet
states are considered for positive total z-parity and magnetic quantum numbers m = 0, −1 as well as for
negative z-parity and m = 0. Here the magnetic ﬁeld ranges from B = 0a.u. to B = 100a.u. occupying 11
ﬁeld strengths and thus includes both the low-ﬁeld and high-ﬁeld regime as well as the intermediate regime.
4a.u. and B = 8 × 103a.u.) the
On an even ﬁner grid of ﬁeld strengths (34 values between B = 8 × 10−
energies of the triplet ground state and several triplet excited states but no singlet states are given in the
work of Thurner et al.[13]. In the latter work there exists a gap in the list of eigenenergies for several states
in the vicinity of B ∼ 1a.u. because the ansatz of the applied approach changes in the intermediate regime
from a spherical to a cylindrical symmetry and thus fails to provide accurate results in the intermediate
regime. An important work is also the Hartree-Fock study of Jones, Ortiz and Ceperley [17]. They present
4a.u.
the HF-energies for the global low-ﬁeld ground state for various ﬁeld strengths between B = 8 × 10−
and B = 8a.u. and thus also address the intermediate regime. They additionally provide energies for several
excited states (but those results are crude approximations providing no upper bounds).

In comparison to the considerable number of Hartree-Fock investigations there are much less data avail-
able on fully correlated calculations of helium so far. Mueller, Rau and Spruch [18] obtain variational
upper-bound estimates of the binding energies of the triplet states with negative z-parity and the magnetic
quantum numbers m = 0 and m = −1 and of the singlet ground state which has positive z-parity and
m = 0. Their ﬁeld strengths range from B ∼ 4.2a.u. to B ∼ 2.1 × 104a.u.. A similar high-ﬁeld regime

2

(B = 4.2a.u.,42a.u.,420a.u.) is addressed by the work of Vincke and Baye [19] which also presents varia-
tional estimates for binding energies. They consider the singlet and triplet states for positive z-parity and
m = 0, −1, −2. The ﬁrst correlated calculations in the intermediate regime have been provided by Larsen
[20] who has given the energies of the singlet states with positive z-parity and m = 0, −1 or with negative
z-parity and m = 0 as well as the triplet ground state for the four ﬁeld strengths B = 0.2, 0.5, 1.0, 2.0a.u..
Park and Starace [21] have computed upper and lower bounds for the singlet ground state in the low-ﬁeld
regime between B = 0a.u. and B = 0.15a.u.. Recently, Jones, Ortiz and Ceperley [22] have applied a
released-phase quantum Monte Carlo method to the helium atom. Energies for spin triplet states with both
positive and negative z-parity and m = 0, −1 are given for ﬁeld strengths from B = 0a.u. up to B = 8.0a.u..
Though in principle the results of those investigations are variational their numerical values must be handled
with care when using them as upper bounds for the helium energies. The reason is that due to the statistical
character of their method the results possess error bars which might trespass the exact values of the helium
energies. Very recently the ﬁnite-element technique has as well been used to calculate energies for several
singlet and triplet states of helium in a magnetic ﬁeld[23]. Also this approach does not provide a signiﬁcant
improvement.

In the present work we use a Gaussian basis set method which permits to perform fully correlated
calculations on singlet and triplet states of helium with arbitrary spatial symmetry. This basis set method
has been developped by Schmelcher and Cederbaum [24] for molecules and has already successfully been
applied to the hydrogen molecule ion [25] and to the neutral hydrogen molecule [26, 27] in strong magnetic
ﬁelds. We translate this basis set in order to be applicable to ab initio calculations of atoms in strong
magnetic ﬁelds. We remark that using for example a Hylleraas basis set yields more accurate results in the
ﬁeld-free or weak-ﬁeld case due to explicitely correlated orbitals. However, it is not eﬃcient and accurate in
the presence of a strong magnetic ﬁeld due to the spherical symmetry of the exponentials [28]. In contrast
to this our basis set described in detail in sec. III below can be adapted to any ﬁeld strength.

All the helium states considered are classiﬁed according to a maximal set of conserved quantities, which
we choose to be the total spin S2, the z-component Sz of the total spin, the total spatial magnetic quantum
number M and the total spatial z-parity Πz. For twenty ﬁeld strengths from B = 0a.u. up to B = 100a.u.
numerical helium energies for singlet and triplet states are given for M = 0 and for Πz = 0, 1. In each of
these two subspaces we present the energies of the ground state and the ﬁrst ﬁve excited states for singlet
and four excited states for triplet spin symmetry. The accuracy of our method in the ﬁeld-free case can
be determined by comparison of our results with the very precise ﬁeld-free values calculated by Braun et
4. We do
al.[29], Accad et al.[30] or by Drake et al.[31], and our relative deviation ranges from 10−
not observe this accuracy to drop considerably with increasing magnetic ﬁeld, which means that our basis
set method produces accurate results in particular in the intermediate regime. Both with respect to the
achieved relative accuracy as well as with respect to the number of excited states our investigation provides
therefore valuable results. Data for M 6= 0 will be presented in a future work. The stationary components
of the transitions obtained in the present investigation provide an important part of the data which have
very recently been used to show the presence of helium in the atmosphere of the magnetic white dwarf
GD229[10].

6 to 10−

In detail we proceed as follows.

In section II we discuss the inﬂuence of the ﬁnite nuclear mass, i.e.
the scaling relations which connect the Hamiltonian for a ﬁnite nuclear mass to a Hamiltonian with inﬁnite
nuclear mass. In all of the remaining sections, we consider the nonrelativistic case with inﬁnite nuclear mass
and an electron spin g-factor equal 2. Section III starts with the nonrelativistic Hamiltonian of a helium
atom with inﬁnite nuclear mass in a magnetic ﬁeld. The corresponding symmetries of this Hamiltonian are
discussed and serve for constructing a suitable basis set. The matrix representation of the Hamiltonian with
respect to this basis gives rise to an eigenvalue problem. The results of its diagonalization are discussed

3

in section IV where we present total energies, ionization energies and transition energies as well as the
wavelengths of their stationary components, all of them given under the assumption of inﬁnite nuclear mass.

2 Finite nuclear mass scaling relations and further corrections

We use a nonrelativistic approach to the helium atom. This is justiﬁed because the relative changes in
the helium energies due to relativistic eﬀects are smaller than the relative accuracy of our nonrelativistic
energies [32]. Additionally for simplicity we use an electron spin g-factor equal 2 throughout the paper. The
following scaling laws as well as all of our numerical results can trivially be adapted to a g-factor of any
desired accuracy by multiplying every occuring spin operator or eigenvalue with g
2 .

Though our electronic structure calculations will be carried out with the assumption of an inﬁnite nuclear
mass, they can, by means of a scaling law, be translated into results with a ﬁnite nuclear mass. The latter
are necessary in order to achieve the accuracy for a detailed comparison with astrophysical data. The idea
to introduce such a scaling relation is not new but has already been applied to one-electron systems earlier
[33]. In order to be demonstrate how this idea is applied on the helium atom, we will start with the full
Hamiltonian describing a neutral system with two interacting electrons with masses 1 and charge −1 in
the Coulomb ﬁeld of a nucleus with charge two and ﬁnite mass M0 in a magnetic ﬁeld B. Assuming a
vanishing pseudomomentum of the center of mass (see refs.
[34–36] for a pseudoseparation of the center
of mass motion for neutral systems in a magnetic ﬁeld) one obtains the following exact pseudoseparated
Hamiltonian (which is established in the symmetric gauge A(r) = 1

2B × r)

2

Xi (cid:18)
1
+
2M0

He =

1
2µ

p2

i +

1
2µ′

1
8µ

B · li +

(B × ri)2 −

+ B · si

+

2
|ri|

1
|r2 − r1|

1
4

(cid:19)

(cid:19)

pipj − pi(B × rj) +

(B × ri)(B × rj)

,

(1)

=j (cid:18)
Xi
M0+1 is the reduced mass and µ′ = M0

M0

where µ = M0
1 (we use atomic units throughout the paper). We
−
take into account the dominant part of the ﬁnite mass corrections by introducing these quantities µ, µ′ and
neglect the mass polarization terms represented by the sum over (i 6= j). Our basic idea is now ﬁnd a scaling
law joining the spectrum of the remaining part H(M0, B) in the ﬁrst line of the Hamiltonian He with the
spectrum of the inﬁnite-mass Hamiltonian H(∞, ¯B) at a suitable diﬀerent ﬁeld strength ¯B. The neglect of
the mass polarization terms of the sum over (i 6= j) in eq.(1) is justiﬁed by the fact that they are expected
to provide a smaller correction to the total energy than the corresponding diagonal mass corrections, i.e.
the replacement of the masses by reduced ones.

We will show how it is possible to establish a relation between the operators H(M0, B) and H(∞, ¯B)
themselves which is even more fundamental than only a relation between the corresponding spectra. The
relation in question cannot be a simple Unitarian because such a transformation would leave the spectrum
Instead, we will show that there is an unique way how to represent H(M0, B) in the form
invariant.
1 = αH(∞, ¯B) + β, where α is a number and β is a suitable operator commuting with the
U H(M0, B)U −
Hamiltonian.

Before factoring out a suitable prefactor α the terms of H(M0, B) must be transformed in such a way
that their mutual ratios possess the correct inﬁnite-mass values, i.e. all ratios must neither contain µ nor µ′.
The misproportion between the kinetic energy and the Coulomb energy terms is the only one which cannot
be absorbed in the parameter B or be removed by separating a suitable additive operator β commuting with
the Hamiltonian. Thus we are obliged to introduce the canonical scale transformation r → 1
µ r, p → µp of

4

6
the coordinates themselves. We realize this transformation by the Unitarian U = e−

i ln µ

2 (xp+px), yielding

U H(M0, B)U −

1 = µ

2

1
2

"

Xi (cid:18)

p2

i +

( 1
µ2 B × ri)2 −

1
8

2
|ri|

(cid:19)

+

1
|r2 − r1| #

+

2

Xi (cid:18)

1
2µ′

B · li + B · si

(2)

(cid:19)

The operator si of the spin degree of freedom is not aﬀected by the above transformation, and li = ri × pi is
also unchanged because the scaling factors of ri and pi cancel each other. The expression in square brackets
is already an essential part of the desired inﬁnite-mass Hamiltonian at the adjusted ﬁeld strength ¯B = 1
µ2 B:
only the Zeeman orbital and spin term at the ﬁeld strength ¯B are missing. These operators can be provided
by hand, which must be repaired by subtracting the same operators at the end where they almost cancel
exactly the original Zeeman and spin terms leaving only a contribution of order B

U H(M0, B)U −

1 = µ

1
2

p2

i +

1
2

1
8

¯B · li +

( ¯B × ri)2 −

+ ¯B · si

+

2
|ri|

1
|r2 − r1| #

+

−µ

¯B · li − µ ¯B · si +

B · li + B · si

(3)

1
2µ′

2

"
Xi (cid:18)
2

Xi (cid:18)

1
2

M0 :

(cid:19)

(cid:19)

Therefore we obtain

U H(M0, B)U −

1 = µ · H(∞, B/µ2) −

B ·

(li + si)

(4)

1
M0

Xi

In particular, the spectrum of H(M0, B) is identical with the spectrum of the unitarily equivalent operator
represented by the right side of (4). The latter spectrum can be simply connected to the spectrum of
H(∞, B/µ2) itself because the operators
i B · si commute with the Hamiltonian: we will use
in the following section an angular momentum and spin basis, in the case of which the additional operator
− 1

(li + si) gives rise to a trivial energy shift of order B
M0 .

i B · li and

P

P

M0 B ·

i
P

3 Symmetries, Hamiltonian and Basis sets

3.1 Symmetries and Hamiltonian

In the following we assume the magnetic ﬁeld to point in the +z-direction. Then the Hamiltonian H(∞, B)
for inﬁnite nuclear mass at given ﬁeld strength B (in the following we will omit the argument ′∞′) reads

H =

1
2p2

i + 1

2Blzi + B2

8 (x2

i + y2

i ) −

2

Xi=1 (cid:16)

2
ri

|

|

+ Bszi

+

(cid:17)

1
|r2 − r1|

2
ri

r2

The sum contains the one-particle operators, i.e. the Coulomb potential energies −
the ﬁeld of the nucleus as well as their kinetic energies, already splitted into the part 1
term 1
i + y2
1

of the electrons in
2 p2
i , the Zeeman
i ), and their spin energies Bszi. The two-particle operator

2Blzi and the diamagnetic term B2
represents the electron-electron repulsion energy.

r1
−
There exist four independent commuting conserved quantities: the total spin S2, the z-component Sz
of the total spin, the z- component Lz of the total angular momentum and the total spatial z-parity Πz.
In the following calculations we consider separately each subspace of a speciﬁed symmetry, i.e. with given
eigenvalues of S2, Sz, Lz and Πz.

8 (x2

|

|

|

|

(5)

5

3.2 The underlying one-particle basis set

The key ingredient of our basis set method is the Gaussian one-particle basis set which is our starting point
for the construction of spatial two-particle states. According to the azimuthal symmetry with respect to the
magnetic ﬁeld axis, cylindrical coordinates are suitable for representing the one-particle basis functions

Φi(ρ, ϕ, z) = ρnρiznz ie−

αiρ2

βiz2

−

eimiϕ

i = 1, ..., n ,

where αi and βi are positive nonlinear variational parameters and the exponents nρi and nzi obey the
following restrictions:

nρi = |mi| + 2ki ; ki = 0, 1, 2, ... with mi = ... − 2, −1, 0, 1, 2, ...
nzi = πz i + 2li ;

li = 0, 1, 2, ... with πz i = 0, 1

|e−

αiρ2

The basis function Φi is an eigenfunction of the z-component of the angular momentum with eigenvalue mi
mi
and an eigenfunction of the z-parity with eigenvalue (−1)πz i. The Gaussian-like expression ρ|
is
identical with the ρ-dependence of the lowest Landau-state in the ﬁeld B if we choose αi to be B
4 and thus
represents an adjustment to the existence of the magnetic ﬁeld (see e.g. eq. (8) in [36]). The monomials
ρ2ki and znz i are suitable for describing excitations. The ﬂexibility of our basis set which permits us to
choose suitably the values of the nonlinear parameters αi and βi is one of its major advantages: For low ﬁeld
strengths an isotropic choice αi = βi will be reasonable where the αi, βi cover a regime which allows the Φi
to optimally approximate Slater-type orbitals. At high ﬁeld strengths, however, where the magnetic ﬁeld
destroys the spherical symmetry of the problem, an isotropic basis set method would be ineﬃcient. Here we
choose the distribution of the αi to be peaked around B
4 whereas the βi are well-tempered in a large regime.
The best choice of the αi and βi has been computed by the requirement to solve optimally the one-
particle problem of the H-atom or the He+-ion in a magnetic ﬁeld of given strength B. To achieve this,
we applied the following optimization procedure. For any given one-particle subspace (m, πz) which will
be involved in the later on two-particle conﬁgurations we have chosen a suitable number, typically 20, of
functions of the type (6) with the same one-particle quantum numbers (mi = m, πz i = πz) but diﬀerent
starting values αi and βi. With respect to this basis we built up the overlap matrix and the matrix of the
one-particle Hamiltonian, representing a generalized eigenvalue problem for the one-particle energies. Now,
we determined systematically the values of the αi and βi which minimized the energy eigenvalues of the one-
particle ground state or a desired excited state. Our tool was a repeated reconstruction and diagonalization
of the matrices directed by the pattern-search-method applied in the {αi, βi} space. We remark that due to
the large number of parameters it is very time consuming to ﬁnd the best selection of parameters {ki, li}.
Additionally the starting values for the nonlinear parameters αi and βi have to be chosen carefully in order
to ﬁnd a ”good” minimum close to the global one on the complicated hypersurface.

3.3 The two-particle basis set

Our basic idea for solving the time-independent Schr¨odinger equation for the Hamiltonian (5) is to construct a
basis set of suitable two-particle states |qi each of which is itself an eigenstate of the conserved quantities with
eigenvalues M, Πz, S, Sz, respectively. With respect to this not necessarily orthonormal basis we construct
a matrix representation Hpq of the Hamiltonian and deﬁne an overlap matrix Spq by

(6)

(7)

(8)

(9)

(10)

Hpq
Spq

:= hp|H|qi

:= hp | qi

6

where the states |pi, |qi lie in the same subspace of given eigenvalues of M, Πz, S, Sz. By construction, the
matrix H is hermitian and the matrix S is hermitian and positive deﬁnite. Additionally to these general
properties, in the special case of the basis sets we use, all the matrix elements turn out to be real. By solving
the ﬁnite-dimensional generalized real-symmetric eigenvalue problem

(11)

(12)

(13)

(14)

we obtain eigenvectors c whose corresponding eigenvalues E are strict upper bounds to the exact eigenvalues
of the Hamiltionian (5) within the given subspace.

We choose our two-particle basis functions to be direct products of a pure spatial part |ψqi with a pure

spin part |χqi:

The spin part is assumed to be one of the usual orthonormal singlet or triplet spin eigenstates. This means
that the overlap matrix is nontrivial purely due the spatial part,

(H − ES) · c = 0

|qi = |ψqi ⊗ |χqi

Spq = hψp|ψqi ,

and each matrix element of the Hamiltonian decomposes in a spatial and a spin contribution:

Hpq = hψp|Hspat|ψqi + Spq hχp|Hspin|χqi

The spin contribution hχp|Hspin|χqi is trivial and equals +B · Sz, according to (5), and therefore it vanishes
for singlet states or is either −B, 0 or +B for triplet states. Due to its prefactor Spq it can simply be
absorbed as a shift in the energy eigenvalue E in eq.(11). Since a spin singlet state is antisymmetric and
a triplet state is symmetric with respect to particle exchange, the spatial part associated to a spin singlet
state must be symmetric whereas the spatial part associated to a spin triplet state must be antisymmetric.
In contrast to the spin part the spatial part is by no means trivial and it is an art to ﬁnd a suitable
ﬁnite-dimensional basis set for accurately approximating the Hilbert space of bound states of Hspat. This
is the reason why we spent so much eﬀort on providing a powerful one-particle basis set (see sec. 3.2). It
serves now as a good starting point to compose the desired two-particle states. We choose a two-particle
basis state to be

|ψqi

:= b†i b†j |0i

i = 1, ..., n ,

j = i, ..., n ,

(15)

where b†i is a creation operator of the i-th one-particle basis state |ii = b†i |0i whose position representation
is given by (6). This means that we will treat the helium atom by a full Conﬁguration Interaction (full
CI) approach within the one-particle basis set of states |ii. Depending on whether the spin part |χqi is a
singlet or triplet state, the operators b†i must be bosonic or fermionic, respectively.

Now, in order to establish a basis set of two-particle states spanning the subspace with the given pure val-
ues of the total magnetic quantum number M and the total z-parity Πz, we must select all the combinations
i, j with

mi + mj = M
mod(πz i + πz j, 2) = Πz
yielding a dimension N of the constructed two-particle basis set which is in general smaller than n(n+1)
.
We remark that for triplet spin symmetry those states in (15) with i = j fail to exist which means that the
dimension N for triplet subspaces is in general smaller than for singlet subspaces.

(16)

(17)

2

,

7

3.4 Matrix elements

In order to calculate the matrix elements of the Hamiltonian (5), we must rewrite its spatial part in second
quantization, ˆHspat = ˆHI + ˆHII, where ˆHI and ˆHII denote the second-quantized counterparts of the familiar
one- and two-particle operators whose position representations read

The next step now is to calculate the spatial matrix elements according to (14). With |ψqi := b†i b†j |0i and
|ψpi := b†kb†l |0i a straightforward calculation leads to

HI (p, r) = 1

2 B · l + 1

8(x2 + y2) −

2
r

|

|

HII (r1, r2) =

2p2 + 1
r1
r2

1

|

−

|

hψp|ψqi
ψp| ˆHI |ψq

ψp| ˆHII |ψq

D

D

E

E

=

=

=

hi|ki hj|li ± hi|li hj|ki

hi|HI |ki hj|li ± hi|HI |li hj|ki

+ hj|HI |li hi|ki ± hj|HI |ki hi|li

hij|HII |kli ± hij|HII |lki

,

(18)

(19)

(20)

(21)

(22)

where |iji := |ii ⊗ |ji and where the sign ’±’ stands for ’+’ in the singlet case and for ’−’ in the triplet
case.

All the n(n+1)

2

diﬀerent one-particle matrix elements hi|HI |ki are relatively easily evaluated (see Appendix
B). Each matrix elements hi|HI |ki equals a prefactor depending on the parameters of |ii and |ki times the
one-particle overlap hi|ki, reﬂecting the fact that the one-particle operators do not only conserve the total
magnetic quantum number M and the total z-parity Πz but also the magnetic quantum numbers and
z-parities of the individual one-particle states. We remark that the mentioned prefactors in the matrix
elements of the Zeeman term do not even depend on any basis state, rendering them purely proportional to
the overlap, hi| 1

2mkB hi|ki. Thus the Zeeman term just gives rise to a shift in the energies.

2 B · l|ki = 1

The only coupling between two-particle states composed of one-particle states with diﬀerent combinations
of magnetic quantum numbers or z-parities arises due to the two-particle operator of the electron-electron
interaction. In contrast to the one-particle matrix elements the evaluation of the matrix elements hij|HII |kli
is by no means trivial (see Appendix C). An additional problem is the large number of diﬀerent two-particle
matrix elements which is of the order N (N +1)
. This means that a sophisticated and
detailed analysis of the analytical representation of the two-particle matrix elements by means of series of
diﬀerent representations of hypergeometric functions has been necessary in order to achieve an eﬀective
numerical implemetation and an acceptable CPU time for performing a calculation for one given ﬁeld
strength. Details on the representation of the quantities hij|HII |kli are given in Appendix C.

rather than n(n+1)

2

2

4 Results and discussion

4.1 Spectroscopic notation and properties

Before presenting the numerical results of our calculations we shall explain our spectroscopic notation in the
presence of the ﬁeld as well as its correspondence to the ﬁeld-free notation. According to the four conserved
1)Πz where (2S + 1) is the spin multiplicity and
quantities M , Πz, S2 and Sz we denote a state by ν2S+1
Sz M (
−
ν = 1, 2, 3, ... is the degree of excitation within a given subspace. If obvious, we will omit the index Sz in the
following. In the present paper we will investigate and show results for the subspaces 10+, 30+, 10−, 30−.

8

For vanishing ﬁeld, there exists a one-to-one correspondence between our ﬁeld notation and the common
ﬁeld-free notation n2S+1
Sz LM (see Table 1). It is given by the fact that for bound helium eigenstates of L2 and
Lz we have (−1)Πz = (−1)L+M . The latter relation is not in general true for multi-electron systems because
for a conﬁguration containing two angular momenta l1, l2 we have (−1)Πz = (−1)l1+l2+M . For helium and
B = 0, however, all doubly excited states lie in the continuum[37] which means that all the helium states
below the one-particle ionization threshold T (B = 0) = −2.0a.u. must be one-particle excitations with
l1 = 0 and l2 = L.

We emphasize that the mentioned one-to-one correspondence for B = 0 does not contradict the fact that
the L2-symmetry is higher than the Πz-symmetry: At a ﬁnite ﬁeld strength the former is broken whereas the
latter is still valid. The ﬁeld free notation becomes meaningless for ﬁnite ﬁeld and could only be maintained
1)Πz state at a ﬁnite ﬁeld develops
as a labelling device for the energy eigenstates because a given ν2S+1
1)Πz state at B = 0 which, in turn, is identical with one
in a unique way from the equally labelled ν2S+1
1)Πz
Sz LM state. We remark that energy curves within a subspace of given symmetries 2S+1
unique n2S+1
are not expected to cross [38], whereas crossings between curves of diﬀerent subspaces are allowed.

Sz M (
−

Sz M (
−

Sz M (
−

In Table 1 we also provide the energies of the ﬁeld free states which have been very precisely calculated
by Accad et al. [30] or by Drake et al. [31]. We want to keep track of the energetical order of the states for
several reasons. The ﬁrst reason is that we need the energies for associating the energy quantum numbers
ν to the states. It would not be suﬃcient to use the same counting n as in the ﬁeld free case because there
exist diﬀerent states with the same n but diﬀerent L which possess the same Πz-symmetry, as is evident
already for the states 310+ and 410+.

The second reason is to point out the approximate degeneracy of the ﬁeld free states with the same
energy quantum number n but diﬀerent L. Whereas the electron-electron interaction is only able to slightly
perturb the otherwise exact degeneracy of those states, we will see that the magnetic ﬁeld will completely
remove this degeneracy. This eﬀect can even be observed for the behaviour of the corresponding states in the
H atom and thus is primarily an eﬀect of the magnetic ﬁeld alone rather than of the two-particle character
of the He atom. It occurs in addition to the well-known removal of the degeneracy of states with the same
quantum number L but diﬀerent M whose energies split for ﬁnite ﬁeld in (2L + 1) diﬀerent energy values.
The properties of the ﬁeld free states of helium summarized in Table 1 serve as a good starting point for

presenting our data for ﬁnite ﬁelds.

4.2 Aspects for the selection of basis functions

In order to obtain accurate results by our basis set method two major diﬃculties have been overcome by an
optimal selection of basis functions. The ﬁrst diﬃculty is the limited number n of one-particle functions from
eq.(6) which can be used to describe the exact wave function. The second diﬃculty, which is not completely
independent from the previous one, is to describe electronic correlation by using a basis composed of one-
particle states.

One manifestation of correlation is the fact that diﬀerent electrons avoid occupying the same region in
space which we expect to be the consequence of the electron-electron repulsion as well in a magnetic ﬁeld.
In particular, we decribe this by two electrons tending to occupy two regions in opposite directions from the
breaks the indepen-
nucleus which corresponds to the situation ϕ2 −ϕ1 = π. The Coulomb interaction
dent conservation of the z-components lz 1, lz 2 of the two angular momenta, only leaving the sum Lz = lz 1+lz2
as conserved quantity. A Fourier representation of the angular part of any fully correlated two-particle wave
m1,m2 Am1m2ei(m1ϕ1+m2ϕ2). In order to obtain an eigenfunction
function Ψ(r1, r2) is given by Ψ(ϕ1, ϕ2) =
ϕ1).
of Lz we must demand the constraint m1 + m2 = M , yielding Ψ(ϕ1, ϕ2) = eiM ϕ1
This expression contains angular correlation as can already be seen explicitely by considering the lowest

m,meim(ϕ2

m AM

P

r1

r2

−

−

−

1

|

|

P

9

cosine term Bm cos m(ϕ2 − ϕ1) contained in the series above: assuming Bm to be negative, Ψ(ϕ1, ϕ2) is
largest for ϕ2 − ϕ1 = π and lowest for ϕ2 − ϕ1 = 0. Therefore, it appears fruitful to choose one-particle wave
functions with opposite magnetic quantum numbers ±1 and ±2 or even higher angular momenta combining
to a total magnetic quantum number M = 0 in order to describe well the angular correlation. Correlation
can also been described by wave functions possessing a node at the nucleus position and thus allowing the
two electrons to be located in opposite directions with respect to the nucleus.

The maximum dimension N of the Hamiltonian matrix is limited by CPU and storage resources. Through
a very eﬃcient implementation (see appendices A,B,C) of the matrix elements and by optimized storage
usage we were able to push the number of two-particle basis functions to N ≈ 4300 which represents the
limit with respect to linear dependencies of similar basis functions resulting in instabilities of the numerical
diagonalisation of the generalized eigenvalue problem (11).

Let us discuss the strategy for the selection of basis functions for the example of the subspace 0+. We
ﬁrst focus on the basis functions optimized for a nuclear charge Z = 1, i.e. the hydrogen atom. We selected
31 functions with the symmetry 0+, among which 13 have a ρ-exponent equal 2 instead of 0 in order to
describe correlation with the aid of their nodes. For further improving the description of correlation we used
also each 13 functions with mπz = ±1+ and mπz = ±2+ as well as each 13 functions with mπz = 0− and
mπz = ±1−. The ﬁrst excited state is already rather well described by this basis set but is still improved
by adding basis functions optimized for excitations of the H atom in a magnetic ﬁeld. Whereas for the ﬁrst
excited state correlation eﬀects are still important the higher excitations are, like in the ﬁeld free case, more
and more dominated by one-electron excitations for which automatically the two electrons are spatially
separated. Therefore, higher excitations were throughout described by adding functions with values ki = 1
or li = 1 in eqs.(7) and (8) which are subsequently optimized to describe the corresponding higher excitations
within the 0+ subspace of hydrogen.

In order to describe higher excitations of the He atom the optimization for Z = 1 is suﬃcient because
the nucleus with Z = 2 is screened by the inner electron. For the ground state and the ﬁrst two excited
states, however, we have observed important contributions also from functions optimized for Z = 2. Here
we used a similar selection scheme as for the functions optimized for Z = 1, but only half the number of
functions.

Altogether we arrive at a number of n = 244 diﬀerent one-particle states, from which N1 = 4378 two-
particle states for singlet and N3 = 4288 two-particle states for triplet spin symmetry can be composed
according to eq.(15).

In a similar manner, we built up the basis for the 0− subspace by involving functions optimized for Z = 1
as well as for Z = 2. We observe the eﬀect of the latter optimized functions to be less signiﬁcant in the 0−
case than in the 0+ case. This appears natural since in any two-particle state with 0− symmetry at least one
electron is in an excited one-particle state and is only attracted by a screened nucleus with eﬀective charge
closer to Z = 1 than to Z = 2. Due to this reason we used altogether n = 195 one-particle states which is
slightly less than in the 0+ case. According to eq.(15) we obtain N1 = N3 = 3600 two-particle states for the
singlet and triplet subspace, respectively. The numbers N1 and N3 do not diﬀer due to the fact that the
identical spatial one-particle quantum numbers which are always forbidden for the triplet two-particle states
do not occur for the 0− singlet subspace either because two diﬀerent one-particle z-parities are required to
form an odd total z-parity.

In the following subsection we discuss the results of our He calculations. Their accuracy is estimated by
comparison with the ﬁeld free data. If available, we provide also a comparison of our data for ﬁnite ﬁeld
strengths with the literature.

10

4.3 Energies for ﬁnite ﬁeld strengths

4.3.1 Results for M = 0 and even z-parity

a) Results for the singlet states ν10+

For the singlet subspace ν10+ we present the ground state and the ﬁrst four excitations, i.e. 1 ≤ ν ≤ 5.
In the low-ﬁeld and part of the intermediate regime the 110+ state is the global ground state. The numerical
results for the total energy of the 110+ state as a function of the magnetic ﬁeld are shown in Table 2. We
observe that apart from B = 0 and B = 0.08 our results for the energies are throughout lower and thereby
better than the best ones given in the literature. We remark that the 110+ state is the state which causes the
most diﬃculties for an accurate description by our method. The ﬁrst reason is that it is the only state for
which both electrons considerably occupy the one-particle ground state which forces the two electrons to be
close to each other in a narrow domain of space and which thus gives rise to a relatively strong contribution
of electronic correlation. The second reason is that the mentioned one-particle ground state, which would
be a Slater-type orbital for B = 0, possesses a cusp at the origin which is diﬃcult to obtain accurately by
a superposition of Gaussians. This second eﬀect, however, can be expected to become less important with
increasing ﬁeld strength since the cusp in the direction perpendicular to the ﬁeld axis is smoothened out by
the increasing dominance of the magnetic ﬁeld.

The overall increase of the total energies (see Table 2) with increasing ﬁeld strength has its origin in the
strongly increasing kinetic energy in the presence of the external ﬁeld. The total binding energy of the two
electrons can be obtained from the total energies E(B) in Table 2 by subtracting the minimal energy B of
two free electrons in the ﬁeld, yielding E(B) − B (here and in the following all ionizations are considered
with ﬁxed quantum numbers).

However, for an analysis of the electronic structure the one-electron ionization energies for the process
He → He+ + e− are much more sensitive. The corresponding one-particle ionization threshold T (B) is
provided in the fourth column of Table 2. This threshold T can easily be obtained as the sum of the
2 of the ionized electron and the total one-particle energy E(1)
lowest Landau-energy B
tot (Z = 2) of the other
electron in the Coulomb ﬁeld of the nucleus with charge Z = 2 in the presence of the magnetic ﬁeld.
This quantity E(1)
tot (Z = 2), in turn, can be received from the highly accurate values for the one-particle
binding energy E(1)
[5]. First we extract the total energies for
bind(Z = 1) computed by Kravchenko et al.
bind(Z = 1)) := E(1)
Z = 1 from (−E(1)
2 , and then we use the nuclear charge scaling relation
E(Z, B) = Z 2E(Z = 1, B/Z 2) in ref.[6], yielding

tot (Z = 1) − B

T (B) = B − 4E(1)

bind(Z = 1, B/4)

(23)

This threshold T lies essentially closer to the values E(110+) than the higher threshold B for two-particle
ionization. We consider it in fact to be the optimal reference point for the total energies, and as expected
the total energies of the excitations ν10+ which are given in Table 3 approach closer and closer to the value
T with increasing excitation. In agreement with the mentioned considerations about the special diﬃculties
in achieving accurate results for the ground state we obtain much preciser values for the excitations within
the same basis set.

The one-particle ionization energies for all the states ν10+, 1 ≤ ν ≤ 5, i.e. the values of E(B) − T (B),
are given in Fig.1 as a function of the magnetic ﬁeld. A logarithmic scale on the energy axis is necessary
for covering the three orders of magnitude for the diﬀerent states. We observe that though the ground
state 110+ becomes monotonically stronger bound with increasing ﬁeld strength this is not in general the
case for the excitations. Below B∼0.005a.u. none of the energies diﬀers considerably from its ﬁeld free
value. Between B∼0.005a.u. and B∼0.1a.u. a rearrangement takes place which is caused by the increasing

11

dominance of the magnetic forces over the Coulomb forces. The ﬁrst eﬀect to be observed is that the 410+
state leaves the energetical vicinity of the 310+ state. According to Table 1, for B = 0 these states would
coincide with the states 31S0 and 31D0, respectively, and thus both correspond to the same energy quantum
number n = 3. The degeneracy of these two states is only slighty disturbed in the ﬁeld-free case whereas a
ﬁnite ﬁeld removes this approximate degeneracy completely above B∼0.01a.u..

At B∼0.08a.u. the states 410+ and 510+ experience an avoided crossing. It can be recognized well even
though the strong curvature of the graphs would make a ﬁner grid of calculated energy values on the ﬁeld
axis desirable. The present grid is, nevertheless ﬁne enough to observe that the calculated points are well
aligned, conﬁrming the good convergence of our calculations.

b) Results for the triplet states ν30+

For the triplet subspace ν30+ we present the ground state and the ﬁrst three excitations, i.e. 1 ≤ ν ≤ 4.
The numerical results together with the available data from the literature are given in Table 4. Much more
data are available in the literature than for the singlet states. These numbers convincingly demonstrate that
our approach to the solution of the two-electron problem in a strong magnetic ﬁeld is superior to any other
method existing in the literature.

Among the three related triplet states with Sz = 0, ±1 the one with Sz = −1 possesses the lowest energy
due to the spin shift BSz. Therefore, we have given in Table 4 those lowest energies. Although for B = 0
00+ (i.e. Sz = 0) stays above it
the singlet state 110+ is the global ground state and the triplet state 13
10+(Sz = −1) to become the
for any ﬁeld strength, the spin shift (−B) causes the related triplet state 13
−
ground state within the M = 0 subspace above B ∼ 1.112a.u.. For the triplet ground state it is within our
approach much easier to obtain accurate results than for the singlet ground state. This can be understood in
the following picture: in the triplet ground state only one of the electrons occupies the one-particle ground
state with the cusp whereas the other one occupies already predominantly an excited one-particle state and
thus gives rise to a lower correlation contribution than in the singlet ground state.

In analogy to the case of the singlet states we provide in Fig.1 the dependence of the one-particle
ionization energies on the ﬁeld strength for the triplet states. The reference threshold T (B) has the same
value as for the singlet case because, following our general deﬁnition of the threshold, we keep the spins
ﬁxed.

We observe that the ionization energy of any state ν30+ in Fig.1 behaves similarly to the ionization
energy of its singlet counterpart (ν + 1)10+. This relationship has its origin in the fact that two states
diﬀering only with respect to their spin symmetry possess according to the ﬁeld free notation in Table 1
similar contributions to their energies. The only diﬀerence with respect to the matrix elements of eqs.(20)-
(22) for two such states is the sign of the exchange terms. Those might be small if the particles are
suﬃciently spatially separated as it is the case for all states apart from the 110+ state. This statement is
conﬁrmed by the fact that the singlet-triplet splitting is particularly small between the 410+ state and the
330+ state. These states belong to the ﬁeld free states 31D0 and 33D0 (see Table 1), respectively, and the
one-particle orbitals with d-symmetry involved here are even more spatially separated from the participating
s-orbitals than the p-orbitals playing a role in other states with larger singlet-triplet splitting. Of course
this argumentation breaks down when the magnetic ﬁeld destroys the spherical symmetry suﬃciently and
causes a mixture of total angular momenta. Consequently, the splitting between the 410+ state and the
330+ state grows considerably at B ∼ 0.02.

4.3.2 Results for M = 0 and odd z-parity

a) Results for the singlet states ν10−

12

For the singlet subspace ν10− we present the ground state and the ﬁrst four excitations, i.e. 1 ≤ ν ≤ 5.
For B ≤ 0.08, even the energies for the state 610− show an excellent convergence. The corresponding data are
presented in Table 5. For a graphical representation we choose the ionization energies which are calculated
from the total energies with respect to the same threshold T (B) as in the case of the 0+ subspace. The
reason is that in a one-electron ionization process of helium constrained to keep 0− symmetry the ionized
electron can adopt the negative z-parity, allowing the remaining electron to occupy the one-particle ground
state which possesses 0+ symmetry. The ionized electron, in turn, has the same Landau energy B
2 as in the
0+ case because the z-parity does not have any inﬂuence on the Landau energy which is only assigned to
the transversal degrees of freedom.

The curves for the ionization energies are shown in Fig.2. We observe that for very low ﬁelds the 610−
state and the 510− state are approximately degenerate which is in agreement with the fact that for two values
of ν, µ within the same bracket of the sequence (1), (2), (3, 4), (5, 6), (7, 8, 9), (10, 11, 12)... the two states ν10−
and µ10− correspond to the same quantum number L according to Table 1. As in the 0+ subspace, this
approximate degeneracy is removed for ﬁelds above B ∼ 0.02. The region between B ∼ 0.02 and B ∼ 0.1
exhibits some avoided crossings.

b) Results for the triplet states ν30−

In contrast to the singlet case there exist much more data in the literature for the triplet state. In Table
10− (i.e. Sz = −1), 1 ≤ ν ≤ 5. Again our

6 we have listed them together with our results for the states ν3
−
results are better than any references for ﬁnite ﬁeld strengths.

The ionization energies for the ν3
−

10− states are also shown in Fig.2. As in the singlet case, we achieved a
good convergence even for the ﬁfth excited state 630− below B = 0.08. The singlet-triplet splitting between
the states ν10− and ν30− behaves similar as a function of the ﬁeld like the corresponding splitting in the
1/30+ subspaces.

4.4 Transitions

In order to interpret experimental spectra from magnetic white dwarfs like GD229, it is necessary to de-
termine transition energies from our total energies. The selection rules for electric dipole transitions are
∆S = 0, ∆Sz = 0 for the spin degrees of freedom and ∆M = 0, ∆Πz = ±1 or ∆M = ±1, ∆Πz = 0 for
the spatial degrees of freedom. With the data presented we are able to treat the ∆M = 0 transitions. We
obtain a spectrum of 30 transition energy curves for singlet transitions and 24 ones for triplet transitions
which we show in Fig.3a and 3b, respectively. In both logarithmic representations, we observe singularities
belonging to zeros in the transition energies which arise due to level crossings of the initial state and the
ﬁnal state.

Since the magnetic ﬁeld of a white dwarf is not constant but varies by a factor of two for a dipole geometry,
the spectrum of wavelengths is in general smeared out. Transitions whose wavelengths are stationary with
respect to the magnetic ﬁeld, however, reﬂect themselves by characteristic absorption edges in the observable
spectrum.

Due to this important role of the stationary lines we have summarized all transitions showing stationary
points in Tables 7 and 8. The position and the wavelength of each stationary point have been determined
by interpolation using the relatively crude grid of our calculations. This allows us to perform a comparison
of the stationary components with the observed spectrum of the magnetic white dwarf GD229 [10]. Indeed,
the accurate data on many excited states presented here are part of an analysis accomplished very recently
[10] which clearly shows that there is strong evidence for the existence of He in the atmosphere of GD229.
This might also be the case for other magnetic white dwarfs and therefore the present data will serve

13

astrophysicists for further comparison with observational data.

5 Conclusions and Outlook

We have investigated the electronic structure of the helium atom in a magnetic ﬁeld by a fully correlated
approach. We assumed the nucleus to possess inﬁnite mass but provided scaling laws how to connect our
ﬁxed-nucleus results to the data which should be expected for the true ﬁnite nuclear mass. One of the goals
of our work, the identiﬁcation of the features in the spectrum of the white dwarf GD229 with electronic
transitions in atomic helium, has already successfully been demonstrated[10]. This has been possible due
to the high accuracy of our calculations on many excited states considering the electronic structure for
magnetic ﬁelds for 0 ≤ B ≤ 100a.u., i.e. 0 ≤ B ≤ 2.3505 · 107 Tesla.

The starting point of our ab initio treatment of the helium atom in a magnetic ﬁeld was its full ﬁxed-
nucleus Hamiltonian which possesses four conserved quantities: the total spin S2 and its z-component
Sz, the z-component Lz of the electronic angular momentum and the electronic z-parity Πz. Due to the
magnetic ﬁeld the spherical rotational invariance is broken resulting in the fact that the total electronic
angular momentum L2 fails to be a conserved quantity for nonvanishing ﬁeld B 6= 0. Our full conﬁguration
interaction approach has been able to overcome the diﬃculty that the symmetry of the system changes from
purely spherical for B = 0 to mainly cylindrical for high ﬁelds. To this purpose we used a one-particle basis
set of anisotropic Gaussians furnished with monomials in the coordinates ρ or z transversal or longitudinal
to the ﬁeld axis, respectively. The degree of anisotropy has been obtained as a result from the direct
optimization of the nonlinear parameters for the transversal or longitudinal Gaussian by the requirement to
solve optimally the one-particle problem of the H atom or the He+ ion in a magnetic ﬁeld of given strength.
The one-particle basis functions were composed to two-particle states of pure total symmetry in the sense
of the four conserved quantities mentioned above. In the present paper, we have provided results for the
singlet and triplet states in the subspaces with vanishing spatial magnetic quantum number M = 0 and
positive or negative z-parity.

In each of these subspaces we have built up a matrix for the Hamiltonian and for the overlap between the
nonorthogonal two-particle states which provided a variational estimation for the energy eigenvalues after
the diagonalization of a generalized eigenvalue problem. By very elaborate techniques for the evaluation
of the matrix elements we were able to treat matrix dimensions of about 4000 within less than one day
CPU time on a moderate Silicon Graphics workstation. The relative accuracy of the results for the energies
5 for the triplet states or general excited states
ranged between 10−
for 2 < ν < 5. To achieve this, a careful selection of the basis functions was necessary, i.e. combinations
of one-particle magnetic quantum numbers m = ±1, ±2, ... were important to describe correlation whereas
one-particle functions describing high excitations of the one-particle systems H or He+ provided the major
contribution also for high excitations of the two-particle system He.

4 for the singlet ground states and 10−

To enable a comparison of our calculated transitions with the observed spectra of magnetic white dwarfs,
we have determined all the stationary points associated to the transitions between states with M = 0 and
diﬀerent z-parities. It turned out that the stationary points in the regime B ∼ 0.1 and B ∼ 0.3 can be
identiﬁed with lines in the spectrum of the white dwarf GD229 which is even further conﬁrmed by transitions
involving M = −1 and positive z-parity[10, 41]. This provides strong evidence for the existence of helium
in the atmosphere of this white dwarf. The present data will additionally be helpful in order to see whether
there is evidence for helium also in other magnetic cosmic objects.

In order to complete the treatment of the electronic structure of helium in a magnetic ﬁeld, we will in
the near future calculate data for subspaces with higher magnetic quantum numbers for both odd and even

14

z-parity. Furthermore, a detailed investigation of the oscillator strengths as a function of the magnetic ﬁeld
is necessary in order to estimate properly the intensities of the transitions.

Acknowledgements. The Deutsche Studienstiftung (W.B.) and the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft
(W.B.) are gratefully acknowledged for ﬁnancial support. P.S. acknowledges many helpful discussions during
the CECAM workshop on ’Atoms in strong magnetic ﬁelds’. F.K.D. acknowledges ﬁnancial support by the
European Union. It is a pleasure for us to thank U. Kappes for many fruitful discussions as well as for his
input with respect to the computational aspects of the present work.

A The overlap matrix elements

In the following we only give the results for the analytic representation of the matrix elements. The evaluation
of the overlap integral is very simple because it factors into an integral over the transversal coordinate ρ
and an integral over the longitudinal coordinate z. Both integrals can be reduced to a Gaussian type
∞

, n ≥ 0, yielding for the dependence of the one-particle overlap hi|ki on the parameters of the

γt2

tne−

0
R
states |ii and |ki:

hi|ki = δmimkδπz iπz k · π

(24)

3
2

(nz ik − 1)!! ( nρik
nρ ik
nz ik
2 +1

2 )!
nz ik +1
2

2

2 α

ik

β

ik

where we deﬁne (−1)!! := 1 and γik := γi + γk. The Kronecker Delta symbols reﬂect the orthogonality of
two one-particle states with diﬀerent magnetic quantum numbers or diﬀerent z-parities. We observe that
the overlap is real and all the parameters of the wave functions |ii and |ki enter symmetrically in eq.(24).

B The one-particle matrix elements

B.1 The matrix elements of the kinetic energy

The matrix elements of the operator (p + 1
we consider

2 B × r)2 are evaluated by using cylindric coordinates in which

(p +

B × r)2 = −

1
2

1
2   

∂2
∂ρ2 +

∂2
∂
∂ϕ2 +
∂ρ !
(Tρ + Tϕ + Tz + TZeeman + Tdia) ,

1
ρ2

1
ρ

+

=:

∂2
∂z2 + iB

∂
∂ϕ

−

B2ρ2

1
4

!

where Tρ, Tϕ, Tz represent the Laplacian, TZeeman is the Zeeman term and Tdia the diamagnetic term. The
evaluation of any of the matrix elements hi|Ti|ki is relatively simple since the derivatives generate prefactors
but leave the types of the integrals unchanged in comparison to the overlap integral. A consequence is that
the results are found to be proportional to the overlap hi|ki between the same two states. In detail we have

hi|Tρ|ki = hi|ki ·

hi|Tϕ|ki = hi|ki ·

nρ

2

kα2

−
2αiαk
αik
αik
m2
k
nρik
0





(

i +2(nρinρk+nρik)αiαk−
nρikαik

nρ

2

i α2

k

; nρik 6= 0
; nρik = 0 




; nρik 6= 0
; nρik = 0 )

15

(25)

(26)

(27)

o

(cid:17)

hi|Tz|ki = hi|ki ·

nz k(1

nz k)β2

−

i +(2nz inz k+nz ik−
(nz ik−
1)βik

1)βiβk+nz i(1

nz i)β2
k

−

; nzik 6= 1

hi|TZeeman|ki = hi|ki ·

hi|Tdia|ki = hi|ki ·

n
1
mkB
2
nρik + 2
2αik

·

1
8

B2

(28)

(29)

(30)

Again we observe that each matrix element is real and symmetric with respect to an interchange of the
states |ii and |ki. Due to the selection rules in the prefactor hi|ki the occurence of the single quantity mk
does not destroy this symmetry. Physically, the proportionality to hi|ki means that the operator of the
kinetic energy does not couple one-particle states involving diﬀerent magnetic quantum number or z-parity.

B.2 The matrix elements of the electronic Coulomb interaction with the nucleus

The evaluation of the matrix elements of the one-particle operator VI = 1
r is much more complicated than
the other one-particle matrix elements discussed above. The reason is that the Coulomb potential possesses
a spherical symmetry rather than the cylindrical symmetry of the basis functions. We have overcome
this diﬃculty by applying a Singer transformation[42], leaving for the spacial integrations the convenient
Gaussian types. The remaining integration due to the Singer transformation, however, is not as simple but
it can be solved by involving the Gaussian hypergeometric function 2F1, yielding

hi|VI |ki = − hi|ki · β

2F1

nρik
2 + 1 , 1
2 ,

nρik+nz ik
2

+ 3

2 ; 1 − βik
αik

(31)

1
2
ik

Γ

Γ

(cid:16)

nρik+nz ik
2
nρik+nz ik
2

+ 1

(cid:17)

+ 3
2

(cid:16)

(cid:16)

(cid:17)
It is important to remark that very elaborate techniques are necessary to evaluate the function 2F1 for the
various occuring arguments with a high accuracy and with an acceptable eﬃciency. The standard expansion
of 2F1(a, b, c; z) in a power series of z is by no means suﬃcient because a singularity of 2F1(a, b, c; z) for
z = 1 constrains the convergence domain of such a series to |z| < 1. The consequence is that for βik
≪ 1
αik
the convergence of the standard series would be arbitrarily slow. Moreover, for βik
> 2 the application of
αik
the standard series is completely useless. Using basis sets whose parameters αi, βi usually cover the range
4 up to 105, we have thus been obliged to use various formulas for suitable analytic continuations
from 10−
13 for the
of 2F1(a, b, c; z) to the domain |z| ≥ 1 [43]. By these techniques we achieved an accuracy of 10−
one-particle interaction integrals with no loss of eﬃciency compared with the simple integrals of the kinetic
energy.

We remark that also the matrix elements of the electron-nucleus interaction are proportional to the
overlap hi|ki. This is in agreement with the fact that the spherically symmetric Coulomb potential VI = 1
r
neither breaks the azimuthal symmetry nor disturbs the behaviour of the one-particle basis functions under
the reﬂection z → −z.

C The two-particle matrix elements

In contrast to the one-particle matrix elements treated above we cannot provide a single formula for the
eﬃcient and accurate calculation of the matrix elements hij|HII |kli of the two-particle interaction. The
reason is the large number of diﬀerent cases due to the various constellations of the individual one-particle
functions which have to be treated diﬀerently in order to ensure a fast and highly accurate evaluation. We
therefore provide in the following only an outline of the procedure and indicate the necessary techniques.
Details can be obtained from the authors upon request.

16

∞
−∞

First we apply a Singer transformation[42] in order to remove the Coulomb singularity in the integrand
r2)2
.
of the matrix elements, thereby introducing the new variable u according to
Although the underlying symmetry of the basis set is cylindrical, it is advantageous to carry out the spatial
integrations in Cartesian coordinates. The z1z2-integral can always be factored out, and the coupling
between the two particles can be removed by the subsitution z1 → z1 − u2
βik+u2 . The resulting integral can be
decomposed into a sum of (nz ik + 1) integrals each factoring in two pure z1 and z2 integrals of the Gaussian
type

which can easily be evaluated.

∞0 du e−
R

= 2
√π

β(u)z2

u2(r1

r2

r1

−

−

1

|

|

znz e−

|

|

R

−

+

mk|

+2kik
i(mi
e−
1)kik(x1 − i sgn(mi)y1)|
1 + y2

The transversal part of the electron-electron integral is much more complicated than the z-integration.
mi
mk)ϕ1 gives rise to factors (kik + 1) · (|mi| + 1) · (|mk| + 1) according
First each term ρ|
1
mk| in Cartesian coordinates
to its decomposition to (x2
(again the same number of expressions arises for particle 2). Next, the particle decoupling transformation
analoguous to the one mentioned above multiplies the number of integrals by an additional large factor nd.
At this stage, all the Gaussian integrations in x1, x2, y1, y2, z1 and z2 can be carried out, resulting in
functions of the remaining variable u of type u2(1 + a1u2)r1(1 + a2u2)r2(1 + a3u2)r3(1 + a4u2)r4, where the
ri are positive or negative integers or half-integers. The coordinates can always be chosen such that one ri
is a positive integer. Multiplying out the factor (1 + aiu2)ri enables us to reduce the remaining u-integral
to an expression involving the Appell hypergeometric function F1(a, b, b′, c; t1, t2).

|(x1 + i sgn(mk)y1)|

mi

For each of the N (N +1)

2

matrix elements hij|HII |kli, we thus have to evaluate nd · {(kik + 1) · (|mi| +
1) · (|mk| + 1)}2 · (nz ik + 1) · (ri + 1) times the function F1 with in general various diﬀerent arguments
a, b, b′, c. Only the two arguments t1, t2 are universal for a ﬁxed matrix element: t1 = βik
, and t2 =
1 − (αik+αjl)βikβjl
(βik+βjl)αikαjl

. For |t1| ≪ 1 and |t2| ≪ 1 we implemented the usual standard series expression of

βik+βjl

P

∞m=0

F1(a, b, b′; c; t1, t2) =

(a,m)(b,m)
(c,m)(1,m) 2F1(a + m, b′; c + m; t2) tm

1 , where 2F1(a, b; c; z) = ∞
n=0
P

(a,n)(b,n)
(c,n)(1,n) zn is
the Gaussian hypergeometric function. However, the fact that for many basis functions either the argument
|t1| or |t2| or even both happen to lie close to 1 or above makes this standard representation useless since
its convergence domains are the unit circles with respect to t1 and t2[44]. Therefore, it was necessary to
use a large number of analytic continuation formulas for F1 each of which is valid for one speciﬁed class of
arguments a, b, b′, c. Even more, we have systematically compared the CPU times for altogether more than
50 ways how to evaluate F1 and selected the fastest one for each class of arguments, involving e.g. all of the
continuation formulas for the Gaussian hypergeometric function 2F1(a, b, c; z) given in eqs.(15.3.3-15.3.12)
in ref.[43]. We have additionally derived new formulas for 2F1(a, b, c; z) adapted for parameter constellations
not covered in ref.[43], and we investigated the diﬀerent possibilities how to reduce F1 to 2F1 or one of its
derivatives.

We point out that without such a systematic analysis of the convergence properties of series represen-
tations for F1 the present work would not have been possible: The reduction of CPU time for the same
12) of our representation of the series compared to the most primitive selection of continuation
accuracy (10−
formulas is about 103.

17

References

[1] H. Friedrich, Phys.Rev. A 26, 1827 (1982)

[2] W. R¨osner, G. Wunner, H. Herold and H. Ruder, J.Phys. B 17, 29 (1984)

[3] D. Wintgen and H. Friedrich, J.Phys. B 19, 991 (1986)

[4] M.V. Ivanov, J.Phys. B 21, 447 (1988)

[5] Yu.P. Kravchenko, M.A. Liberman and B. Johansson, Phys.Rev. A 54, 287 (1996)

[6] H. Ruder, G. Wunner, H. Herold und F. Geyer, Atoms in Strong Magnetic Fields, Springer Verlag A-A

1994.

L36 (1998)

[7] P. Schmelcher and W. Schweizer, Atoms and Molecules in Strong External Fields, Plenum Press 1998

[8] R.F. Green and J. Liebert, Pub. Astr. Soc. Pac 93, 105 (1980)

[9] G.D. Schmidt et al. ApJ 350, 758 (1990)

[10] S. Jordan, P. Schmelcher, W. Becken and W. Schweizer, Astronomy & Astrophysics Letters 336, L33-

[11] G. Thurner, H. Herold, H. Ruder, G. Schlicht and G. Wunner, Phys. Letters, 89A, no. 3, 133 (1982)

[12] P. Pr¨oschel, W. R¨osner, G. Wunner, H. Ruder and H. Herold, J.Phys. B 15, 1959 (1982)

[13] G. Thurner, H. K¨orbel, M. Braun, H. Herold, H. Ruder and G. Wunner, J.Phys. B 26, 4719 (1993)

[14] M.V. Ivanov, Opt. Spectrosc. (USSR) 70 (2) (1991)

[15] J. Virtamo, J.Phys. B 9, 751 (1976)

[16] M.V. Ivanov, J.Phys. B 27, 4513 (1994)

[17] M.D. Jones, G. Ortiz, D.M. Ceperley, Phys. Rev. A 54, 219 (1996)

[18] R.O. Mueller, A.R.P. Rau and L. Spruch Phys. Rev. A 11 789 (1975)

[19] M. Vincke and D. Baye, J. Phys B 22 2089 (1989)

[20] D.M. Larsen, Phys.Rev. B 20, 20 (1979)

[21] C.-H. Park and A.F. Starace, Phys.Rev. A 29, 442 (1984)

[22] M.D. Jones, G. Ortiz, D.M. Ceperley, Phys.Rev. E 55, 6202 (1997)

[23] M. Braun, W. Schweizer, H. Elster, Phys.Rev. A 57, 3739 (1998)

[24] P. Schmelcher and L.S. Cederbaum, Phys.Rev. A 37, 672 (1988)

[25] U. Kappes and P. Schmelcher, J.Chem.Phys. 100, 2878 (1994); Phys.Rev. A 51, 4542 (1995); Phys.Rev.

A 53, 3869 (1996)

18

[26] T. Detmer, P. Schmelcher, F.K. Diakonos and L.S. Cederbaum, Phys.Rev. A 56, 1825 (1997)

[27] T. Detmer, P. Schmelcher, L.S. Cederbaum, Phys.Rev. A 57, 1767 (1998)

[28] A. Scrinzi, private communications

[29] M. Braun, W. Schweizer and H. Herold, Phys.Rev.A 48, 1916 (1993)

[30] Y. Accad and C.L. Pekeris, Phys.Rev. A 24, 516 (1971)

[31] G.W.F. Drake and Z.-C. Yan, Phys.Rev. A 46 2378 (1992)

[32] Z. Chen and S.P. Goldman, Phys. Rev. A 45, 1722 (1992)

[33] V.B. Pavlov-Verevkin and B.I. Zhilinskii, Phys. Letters, 78A, no. 3, 244 (1980)

[34] B.R. Johnson, J.O. Hirschfelder and K.-H. Yang, Reviews of Modern Physics 55, 109 (1983)

[35] P. Schmelcher, L.S. Cederbaum and U. Kappes, Conceptual Trends in Quantum Chemistry, Kluwer

Academic Publisher 1994, p.1-51

[36] P. Schmelcher and L.S. Cederbaum, Phys.Rev. A 43, 287 (1991)

[37] W.B. Westerveld, F.B. Kets, H.G.M. Heideman and J. van Eck, J.Phys. B 12 15 2575 (1979)

[38] J. von Neumann und E.P. Wigner, Eigenwerte bei adiabatischen Prozessen, Physik. Zeitschrift. XXX,

467 (1929)

[39] J.D. Baker, D.E. Freund, R.N. Hill and J.D. Morgan III, Phys. Rev.A 41, 1247 (1990)

[40] J.D. Baker, R.N. Hill and J.D. Morgan III, in Relativistic, Quantum Electrodynamic, and Weak Inter-
action Eﬀects in Atoms, edited by Walter Johnson, Peter Mohr, and Joseph Sucher, AIP Conf. Proc. No.
189 (American Institute of Institute of Physics, New York, 1989), pp. 123-145.

[41] W. Becken and P. Schmelcher, in preparation

[42] K. Singer, Proc. R. Soc. Lond. A 402, 412 (1960)

[43] M. Abramowitz and I.A. Stegun, Handbook of mathematical functions, Dover Publications, 1972

[44] Appell et Kamp´e de F´eriet, Les fonctions hyperg´eometriques et hypersph´eriques, Gauthier-Villars et

Cie, Editeurs, Paris 1926

19

10.00

1.00

0.10

0.01

]
.
u
.
a
[
)
)

(

B
T
−
E
(
−

Fig.1

110+

210+

310+

410+

510+

130+

230+

330+

430+

0.001

0.01

1.0

10.0

100.0

0.1
B[a.u.]

1.00

0.10

]
.
u
.
a
[
)
)

(

B
T
−
E
(
−

0.01

Fig.2

630−

610−

0.1
B[a.u.]

130−

230−

330−

430−

530−

110−

210−

310−

410−

510−

0.001

0.01

1.0

10.0

100.0

Fig.3a

10

1.0

0.1

0.01

0.001

]
.
u
.
a
[
|

E
∆

|

0.001

0.01

1.0

10.0

100.0

0.1
B[a.u.]

Fig.3b

0.1

]
.
u
.
a
[
|

E
∆

|

0.01

0.001

0.001

0.01

1.0

10.0

100.0

0.1
B[a.u.]

Figure Captions

Fig.1. Ionization energies of the singlet and triplet states k10+ and n30+, k = 1, ..., 5, n = 1, ..., 4. The solid
lines correspond to the singlet states, the dashed ones show the triplet states. Apart from the state 110+
every singlet state possesses a triplet counterpart which is separated only by a small singlet-triplet splitting.

Fig.2. Ionization energies of the singlet and triplet states k10− and n30−, k = 1, ..., 6, n = 1, ..., 6. The solid
lines correspond to the singlet states, the dashed ones show the triplet states.

Fig.3 (a) Transition energies for the singlet transitions µ10+ → ν10−, µ = 1, ..., 5, n = 1, ..., 6 as a function
of the ﬁeld strength. The curves are interpolated on a grid of ﬁeld strengths given by our calculations.
(b) Transition energies for the triplet transitions µ30+ → ν30−, µ = 1, ..., 4, n = 1, ..., 6 as a function of the
ﬁeld strength.

9
9
9
1
 
b
e
F
 
2
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
m
o
t
a
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
9
5
0
2
0
9
9
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

1

arXiv:physics/9902059v1  [physics.atom-ph]  22 Feb 1999

1

T
a
b
l
e
s

1)Πz and the familiar ﬁeld free
Table 1: Correspondence table between the ﬁeld notation ν2S+1M (
notation n2S+1LM for the lowest 55 singlet states and the lowest 54 triplet states of He. We have
also provided the precise total zero-ﬁeld energy of each state given in the literature.

−

ﬁeld free

ﬁeld
ν2S+1M (

1)Πz

ﬁeld free

n2S+1LM
—

ﬁeld
ν2S+1M (

1)Πz

−

Energy
−2.903724377a
−2.145974046a
−2.1238430864b

−2.061271988a
−2.0556207328b

−2.0551463620b

−2.033586717a
−2.0312798461b

−2.0312551443b

−2.0310696504b

−2.0211137c
−2.0200158361b

−2.0200029371b

−2.0200007108b

1

1

2

1

2

1

1

±

±

±

n2S+1LM
11S0
21S0
21P0
21P
±
31S0
31D0
31D
31D
±
31P0
31P
±
41S0
41D0
41D
41D
±
41F0
41F
41F
41F
±
41P0
41P
±
51S0
51D0
51D
51D
±
51F0
51F
51F
51F
±
51G0
51G
51G
51G
51G
±
51P0
51P

±

±

±

±

±

±

±

2

3

1

2

1

3

2

1

4

2

3

1

−2.0199059899b

1
±
a Baker et al. (1990) [39]
b Drake et al. (1992) [31]
c Accad et al. (1971) [30]

−
110+
210+
110−
11(±1)+
310+
410+
11(±1)−
11(±2)+
210−
21(±1)+
510+
610+
21(±1)−
21(±2)+
310−
31(±1)+
11(±2)−
11(±3)+
410−
41(±1)+
710+
810+
31(±1)−
31(±2)+
510−
51(±1)+
21(±2)−
21(±3)+
910+
41(±1)−
41(±2)+
11(±3)−
11(±4)+
610−
61(±1)+

—
130+
130−
13(±1)+
230+
230−
23(±1)+
330+
13(±1)−
13(±2)+
430+
330−
33(±1)+
530+
23(±1)−
23(±2)+
430−
43(±1)+
13(±2)−
13(±3)+
630+
530−
53(±1)+
730+
33(±1)−
33(±2)+
630−
63(±1)+
23(±2)−
23(±3)+
830+
43(±1)−
43(±2)+
13(±3)−
13(±4)+

±

±

23S0
23P0
23P
±
33S0
33P0
33P
±
33D0
33D
33D
±
43S0
43P0
43P
±
43D0
43D
43D
±
43F0
43F
43F
43F
±
53S0
53P0
53P
±
53D0
53D
53D
±
53F0
53F
53F
53F
±
53G0
53G
53G
53G
53G

±

±

±

±

±

±

±

±

±

1

1

1

2

1

1

2

1

2

3

1

1

2

1

2

3

1

2

3

4

Energy

—
−2.175229378a
−2.133164191b

−2.068689067a
−2.058081084b

−2.055636309b

−2.036512083a
−2.032324354b

−2.031288847b

−2.031255168b

−2.02261624c
−2.020551187b

−2.020021027b

−2.020002957b

−2.020000711b

2

Table 2: Total energies E of the singlet ground state
110+, one-electron ionization threshold T and, if available,
best energy values given in the literature, as a function of
the magnetic ﬁeld strength B

B

E(110+)

literature

T

−2.903351 −2.903724377a −2.000
−2.903346
−2.903342
−2.903340
−2.903270
−2.903036
−2.902083 −2.90195d
−2.898290
−2.892035
−2.872501 −2.8714d
−2.855859 −2.85385e
−2.787556 −2.77585d
−2.729508 −2.7272e
−2.507952
−2.329780 −2.3266e
−0.574877
3.064582
11.267051
38.076320
84.918313

0.0000
0.0008
0.004
0.008
0.020
0.040
0.080
0.160
0.240
0.400
0.500
0.800
1.000
1.600
2.000
5.000
10.000
20.000
50.000
100.000
a Baker et al. (1990) [39]
d Thurner et al. (1982) [11]
e Larsen (1979) [20]

−1.999599960
−1.997999000
−1.995995995
−1.989975001
−1.979900008
−1.959600176
−1.918402804
−1.876414090
−1.790105922
−1.734628064
−1.561526260
−1.440989741
−1.058421519
−0.788842154
1.456132354
5.609851957
14.47840453
42.45369755
90.43945348

3

Table 3: Total energies E of the excited singlet states ν10+ for 2 ≤ ν ≤ 5 as a function of the
magnetic ﬁeld strength B as well as ﬁeld free reference values

B

E(210+)

E(310+)

E(410+)

E(510+)

−2.055613

−2.033579

−2.145912

−2.061255

0.0000
0.0000 (lit.) −2.145974046a −2.061271988a −2.055620732852245b −2.033586717026a
0.0008
−2.145911
0.004
−2.145869
0.008
−2.145743
0.020
−2.144852
0.040
−2.141787
0.080
−2.130812
0.160
−2.096743
0.240
−2.054961
0.400
−1.965307
0.500
−1.908671
0.800
−1.736422
1.000
−1.617870
1.600
−1.241729
2.000
−0.975861
5.000
1.252363
10.000
5.393200
20.000
14.248991
50.000
42.207510
100.000
90.180690
a Baker et al. (1989) [40]
b Drake et al. (1992) [31]

−2.061246
−2.061028
−2.060374
−2.056838
−2.050850
−2.036626
−1.999728
−1.956971
−1.865411
−1.807640
−1.632339
−1.511771
−1.130213
−0.861382
1.379993
5.530945
14.396817
42.368689
90.351969

−2.033531
−2.032867
−2.031451
−2.026808
−2.018836
−1.995610
−1.945128
−1.902875
−1.814978
−1.758191
−1.584566
−1.464143
−1.081100
−0.811912
1.432270
5.585430
14.453455
42.428159
90.414700

−2.055607
−2.055489
−2.055122
−2.052030
−2.038691
−2.004123
−1.962448
−1.919910
−1.830581
−1.773700
−1.599198
−1.478551
−1.096276
−0.826959
1.416706
5.569418
14.437004
42.411075
90.395965

4

Table 4: Total energies E of the triplet states ν3
−
ﬁeld strength B. We have also provided the results given in the literature so far.

10+ (Sz = −1) for 1 ≤ ν ≤ 4 as a function of the magnetic

E(130+)

E(230+)

E(330+)

E(430+)

B

this work

literature

this work

literature

this work

lit.

this work

literature

5

378a

0.0000 −2.175220 −2.175229

−2.068687 −2.068689
067472a
−2.069480 −2.069278i
−2.072505 −2.072302i

−2.055630
−2.055636309453b
0.0008 −2.176019 −2.175050f
−2.056424
−2.179190 −2.178220f
0.004
−2.059507
−2.183098 −2.1830(5)g −2.075969 −2.0760(1)g −2.063153
0.008
−2.084626
−2.194461
0.020
−2.072654
−2.096580 −2.092686i
−2.212236 −2.211222f
−2.083143
0.040
−2.243958 −2.2438(3)g −2.121107 −2.1209(1)g −2.087409
0.080
−2.123762
−2.166290
−2.296318
0.160
−2.206689 −2.1927f
−2.162609
−2.339560
0.240
−2.279523 −2.2615f
−2.412723 −2.4112f
−2.235815
0.400
−2.454347 −2.4528h
0.500
−2.279382
−2.321985
−2.573615 −2.5737(3)g −2.443352 −2.4395(9)g −2.403631
0.800
−2.650655 −2.6492h
1.000
−2.482164
−2.520902
−2.867620 −2.8669(5)g −2.736687 −2.7330(8)g −2.698755
1.600
−2.999708 −2.9982h
−2.829137
−2.867135
2.000
−3.768199 −3.7667h
−3.584967
−3.624558
5.000
10.000 −4.627450 −4.626h
−4.432177
−4.473459
20.000 −5.772448 −5.771h
−5.564582
−5.607619
50.000 −7.815256 −7.814h
−7.590520
−7.635847
100.00 −9.843074 −9.842h
−9.605634
−9.652632

−2.036511 −2.036512
083098a

−2.037278
−2.039893
−2.042333 −2.0413(4)g
−2.048567
−2.060290
−2.082249 −2.0687(9)g
−2.105446
−2.143909
−2.217383
−2.261303
−2.386891 −2.3497(21)g
−2.465921
−2.682563 −2.6665(26)g
−2.813101
−3.568584
−4.415350
−5.547290
−7.563695
−9.586289

a Baker et al. (1989) [40]
b Drake et al. (1992) [31]
f Jones et al. (1996) [17]
g Jones et al. (1997) [22]
h Ivanov (1994) [16]
i Thurner et al. (1993) [13]

Table 5: Total energies E of the states ν10−, 1 ≤ ν ≤ 6 as a function of the magnetic ﬁeld strength B as well
as ﬁeld free reference values and the values for ﬁnite ﬁeld, if available. For B > 0.1a.u., the energy values for
the 610− state are not optimally converged
B

E(610−)

E(110−)

E(410−)

E(510−)

E(210−)

E(310−)

6

0.0000

0.0008
0.004
0.008
0.020
0.040
0.080
0.160
0.240
0.400
0.500

0.800
1.000

1.600
2.000

5.000
10.000
20.000
50.000
100.000

−2.031014

−2.031252

−2.055015

−2.019877

−2.019999

−2.019824
−2.018337
−2.014716
−2.005504
−1.994681
−1.970825

−2.031238
−2.030983
−2.030349
−2.026727
−2.017663
−1.997336
−1.957118
−1.916192
−1.831436
−1.776662

−2.030994
−2.030463
−2.028842
−2.020802
−2.006440
−1.983478
−1.942289
−1.900745
−1.815130
−1.759971

−2.055009
−2.054868
−2.054438
−2.051758
−2.044641
−2.027515
−1.990787
−1.952090
−1.870342
−1.816921

−2.019958
−2.019427
−2.018198
−2.012781
−2.000816
−1.976059
−1.934541
−1.892719
−1.806747
−1.751519

−2.123412
−2.123843430864b −2.0551463620b −2.0312551443b −2.03106965b −2.020002937b −2.019905990b
−2.123413
−2.123388
−2.123314
−2.122782
−2.120940
−2.114310
−2.093203
−2.065812
−2.000350
−1.954646
−1.95455e
−1.802966
−1.692794
−1.69185e
−1.331851
−1.072194
−1.06905e
1.137045
5.270657
14.124717
42.086569
90.064304

1.437859
5.591347
14.459766
42.434863
90.420669

1.428117
5.581403
14.449668
42.424712
90.410339

1.408108
5.560836
14.428726
42.403449
90.388895

1.355762
5.506354
14.372781
42.346227
90.330942

−1.076152
−0.806576

−1.578773
−1.458395

−1.151043
−0.883229

−1.648143
−1.529609

−1.103929
−0.834929

−1.085324
−0.816003

−1.587531
−1.467297

−1.605029
−1.485166

b Drake et al. (1992) [31]
e Larsen (1979) [20]

Table 6: Total energies E of the triplet states ν3
−
provided the results given in the literature so far.

10− (Sz = −1) for 1 ≤ ν ≤ 6 as a function of the magnetic ﬁeld strength B. We have also

E(130−)

E(230−)

E(330−)

E(430−)

E(530−)

E(630−)

B

this work

literature

this work

literature

this work

literature

this work

lt.

this work

lt.

this work

lt.

7

0.0000 −2.132910

0.0008 −2.133710
−2.136889
0.004
−2.140826
0.008
−2.152378
0.020
−2.170822
0.040
−2.205130
0.080
−2.266575
0.160
−2.322032
0.240
−2.422361
0.400
−2.480172
0.500
−2.638222
0.800
−2.733813
1.000
−2.987185
1.600
−3.135142
2.000
5.000
−3.959235
10.000 −4.848590
20.000 −6.011488
50.000 −8.059466
100.00 −10.079973

354b

084b

−2.047603
−2.059120

−2.033081
−2.035896

−2.058016 −2.058081

−2.032298 −2.032324

−2.058810 −2.0584f
−2.061884 −2.0615f

−2.075054
−2.088326 −2.086102i

−2.031252
−2.133164
−2.031255168b
191b
−2.1323f
−2.032038
−2.1344f
−2.034870
−2.1408(8)g −2.065499 −2.0655(5)g −2.039077 −2.0350(10)g −2.037514
−2.041411
−2.169276i
−2.046510
−2.2050(6)g −2.111478 −2.1100(3)g −2.079242 −2.0578(14)g −2.064505
−2.262806i
−2.103193
−2.3198f
−2.141609
−2.4196f
−2.216039
−2.260925
−2.388624
−2.468471
−2.686687
−2.817461
−3.573739
−4.420729
−5.552682
−7.577781
−9.592135

−2.154912 −2.112992i
−2.196517 −2.1868f
−2.275521 −2.2463f
−2.322570

−2.9873(8)g −2.760330 −2.7596(8)g −2.706990 −2.6749(6)g

−2.6397(9)g −2.455054 −2.4545(6)g −2.407425 −2.3925(7)g

−2.838224
−3.596162
−4.444111
−5.576755
−7.602384
−9.616899

−2.893357
−3.657879
−4.509715
−5.645191
−7.672999
−9.688173

−2.118891
−2.157959
−2.233362
−2.278711

−2.537231

−2.487761

−2.020538
−2.020551187b
−2.021293
−2.023839
−2.026642
−2.033564
−2.041394
−2.056648
−2.095063
−2.133225
−2.207275
−2.252044
−2.379366
−2.459030
−2.676877
−2.807405
−3.563137
−4.409789
−5.541487
−7.566423
−9.580675

−2.020002957b
−2.020753
−2.022647
−2.023039
−2.025840
−2.035472
−2.051347

b Drake et al. (1992) [31]
f Jones et al. (1996) [17]
g Jones et al. (1997) [22]
i Thurner et al. (1993) [13]

Table 7: Overview over all of the stationary points found in of
the singlet transitions µ10+ → ν10− for µ = 1, ..., 5, ν = 1, ..., 5
in the range 0 ≤ B ≤ 100a.u.. The main part of the errors
arises due to the interpolation over the relatively crude grid of
ﬁeld strengths. For high wavelengths, the ﬁnite accuracy of the
energy values themselves contributes also to error in the energies.

wavelength/A

position B/a.u. max/min

−

Component
1)Πz
ν2S+1M (
210+ → 110−
210+ → 210−
210+ → 210−
210+ → 310−
210+ → 310−
210+ → 410−
210+ → 410−
210+ → 510−
210+ → 510−
310+ → 210−
310+ → 210−
310+ → 210−
310+ → 310−
310+ → 310−
310+ → 410−
310+ → 410−
310+ → 510−
310+ → 510−
410+ → 210−
410+ → 310−
410+ → 310−
410+ → 410−
410+ → 410−
410+ → 510−
410+ → 510−
410+ → 610−
510+ → 410−
510+ → 510−
510+ → 510−

3665 ± 13
4291 ± 5
5169 ± 11
3258 ± 5
3475 ± 6
2949 ± 10
3073 ± 5
2797 ± 5
2905 ± 5
90300 ± 3000
43600 ± 1000
18518 ± 100
10655 ± 40
17350 ± 40
7916 ± 40
10250 ± 10
6969 ± 40
8538 ± 5
666000 ± 190000
18000 ± 12
52800 ± 110
13850 ± 200
41630 ± 220
11530 ± 100
22750 ± 30
9730 ± 12
25000 ± 2000
34390 ± 40
23000 ± 600

min
18.3 ± 0.3
min
0.140 ± 0.005
max
0.899 ± 0.003
min
0.184 ± 0.005
max
0.68 ± 0.02
min
0.17 ± 0.02
max
0.625 ± 0.005
min
0.200 ± 0.005
max
0.605 ± 0.005
max
0.023 ± 0.001
min
0.11 ± 0.02
min
8.9 ± 0.2
min
0.14 ± 0.01
max
1.45 ± 0.1
min
0.18 ± 0.01
max
1.05 ± 0.10
min
0.18 ± 0.01
max
0.98 ± 0.06
0.008 ± 0.004
min
0.0188 ± 0.0002 min
min
6.6 ± 0.3
min
0.032 ± 0.002
max
1.75 ± 0.01
min
0.025 ± 0.002
1.28 ± 0.02
max
0.0239 ± 0.0003 min
0.059 ± 0.001
min
0.0085 ± 0.0015 max
min
0.067 ± 0.005

8

−

position B/a.u. max/min

Table 8: Same as Table 7 but for the triplet transitions µ30+ →
ν30− for µ = 1, ..., 4, ν = 1, ..., 6
Component
wavelength/A
1)Πz
ν2S+1M (
130+ → 130−
130+ → 230−
130+ → 230−
130+ → 330−
130+ → 330−
130+ → 430−
130+ → 430−
130+ → 530−
130+ → 530−
230+ → 230−
230+ → 230−
230+ → 230−
230+ → 330−
230+ → 330−
230+ → 430−
230+ → 430−
230+ → 530−
230+ → 530−
330+ → 330−
330+ → 330−
330+ → 430−
330+ → 430−
330+ → 430−
330+ → 430−
330+ → 530−
330+ → 530−
330+ → 530−
330+ → 530−
330+ → 630−
430+ → 330−
430+ → 330−
430+ → 430−
430+ → 430−
430+ → 430−
430+ → 430−
430+ → 530−
430+ → 530−
430+ → 530−
430+ → 530−

min
40 ± 2
min
0.224 ± 0.005
max
2.25 ± 0.02
min
0.281 ± 0.005
max
1.51 ± 0.01
min
0.293 ± 0.005
max
1.39 ± 0.01
min
0.299 ± 0.005
max
1.34 ± 0.02
max
0.05 ± 0.01
min
0.17 ± 0.01
min
26.6 ± 0.3
min
0.24 ± 0.01
max
3.65 ± 0.15
min
0.26 ± 0.01
max
2.23 ± 0.06
min
0.27 ± 0.01
max
1.87 ± 0.05
min
0.026 ± 0.003
min
20.5 ± 0.5
min
0.039 ± 0.003
max
0.14 ± 0.02
min
0.25 ± 0.02
max
4.5 ± 0.3
min
0.030 ± 0.002
max
0.135 ± 0.015
min
0.275 ± 0.015
max
2.6 ± 0.3
0.032 ± 0.002
min
0.0225 ± 0.0015 max
min
0.08 ± 0.02
0.0062 ± 0.0002 max
min
0.064 ± 0.001
max
0.17 ± 0.03
min
0.26 ± 0.04
max
0.014 ± 0.001
min
0.068 ± 0.005
max
0.18 ± 0.02
min
0.31 ± 0.03

1869 ± 5
3184 ± 3
4289 ± 3.5
2503 ± 3
2837 ± 2
2292 ± 3
2522 ± 1
2197 ± 5
2394 ± 1
56500 ± 2100
39900 ± 300
12090 ± 25
9347 ± 3
16130 ± 45
6990 ± 10
9180 ± 5
6186 ± 10
7630 ± 3.5
18000 ± 2000
37428 ± 80
12400 ± 1000
22200 ± 100
21650 ± 50
40600 ± 40
10400 ± 300
15950 ± 100
15450 ± 50
21000 ± 55
9400 ± 100
477000 ± 15000
150000 ± 90000
96500 ± 1000
20150 ± 300
206000 ± 5000
181000 ± 12000
31400 ± 400
16800 ± 500
44700 ± 3000
38000 ± 6000

9

References

[1] H. Friedrich, Phys.Rev. A 26, 1827 (1982)

[2] W. R¨osner, G. Wunner, H. Herold and H. Ruder, J.Phys. B 17, 29 (1984)

[3] D. Wintgen and H. Friedrich, J.Phys. B 19, 991 (1986)

[4] M.V. Ivanov, J.Phys. B 21, 447 (1988)

[5] Yu.P. Kravchenko, M.A. Liberman and B. Johansson, Phys.Rev. A 54, 287 (1996)

[6] H. Ruder, G. Wunner, H. Herold und F. Geyer, Atoms in Strong Magnetic Fields, Springer Verlag A-A

1994.

L36 (1998)

[7] P. Schmelcher and W. Schweizer, Atoms and Molecules in Strong External Fields, Plenum Press 1998

[8] R.F. Green and J. Liebert, Pub. Astr. Soc. Pac 93, 105 (1980)

[9] G.D. Schmidt et al. ApJ 350, 758 (1990)

[10] S. Jordan, P. Schmelcher, W. Becken and W. Schweizer, Astronomy & Astrophysics Letters 336, L33-

[11] G. Thurner, H. Herold, H. Ruder, G. Schlicht and G. Wunner, Phys. Letters, 89A, no. 3, 133 (1982)

[12] P. Pr¨oschel, W. R¨osner, G. Wunner, H. Ruder and H. Herold, J.Phys. B 15, 1959 (1982)

[13] G. Thurner, H. K¨orbel, M. Braun, H. Herold, H. Ruder and G. Wunner, J.Phys. B 26, 4719 (1993)

[14] M.V. Ivanov, Opt. Spectrosc. (USSR) 70 (2) (1991)

[15] J. Virtamo, J.Phys. B 9, 751 (1976)

[16] M.V. Ivanov, J.Phys. B 27, 4513 (1994)

[17] M.D. Jones, G. Ortiz, D.M. Ceperley, Phys. Rev. A 54, 219 (1996)

[18] R.O. Mueller, A.R.P. Rau and L. Spruch Phys. Rev. A 11 789 (1975)

[19] M. Vincke and D. Baye, J. Phys B 22 2089 (1989)

[20] D.M. Larsen, Phys.Rev. B 20, 20 (1979)

[21] C.-H. Park and A.F. Starace, Phys.Rev. A 29, 442 (1984)

[22] M.D. Jones, G. Ortiz, D.M. Ceperley, Phys.Rev. E 55, 6202 (1997)

[23] M. Braun, W. Schweizer, H. Elster, Phys.Rev. A 57, 3739 (1998)

[24] P. Schmelcher and L.S. Cederbaum, Phys.Rev. A 37, 672 (1988)

[25] U. Kappes and P. Schmelcher, J.Chem.Phys. 100, 2878 (1994); Phys.Rev. A 51, 4542 (1995); Phys.Rev.

A 53, 3869 (1996)

10

[26] T. Detmer, P. Schmelcher, F.K. Diakonos and L.S. Cederbaum, Phys.Rev. A 56, 1825 (1997)

[27] T. Detmer, P. Schmelcher, L.S. Cederbaum, Phys.Rev. A 57, 1767 (1998)

[28] A. Scrinzi, private communications

[29] M. Braun, W. Schweizer and H. Herold, Phys.Rev.A 48, 1916 (1993)

[30] Y. Accad and C.L. Pekeris, Phys.Rev. A 24, 516 (1971)

[31] G.W.F. Drake and Z.-C. Yan, Phys.Rev. A 46 2378 (1992)

[32] Z. Chen and S.P. Goldman, Phys. Rev. A 45, 1722 (1992)

[33] V.B. Pavlov-Verevkin and B.I. Zhilinskii, Phys. Letters, 78A, no. 3, 244 (1980)

[34] B.R. Johnson, J.O. Hirschfelder and K.-H. Yang, Reviews of Modern Physics 55, 109 (1983)

[35] P. Schmelcher, L.S. Cederbaum and U. Kappes, Conceptual Trends in Quantum Chemistry, Kluwer

Academic Publisher 1994, p.1-51

[36] P. Schmelcher and L.S. Cederbaum, Phys.Rev. A 43, 287 (1991)

[37] W.B. Westerveld, F.B. Kets, H.G.M. Heideman and J. van Eck, J.Phys. B 12 15 2575 (1979)

[38] J. von Neumann und E.P. Wigner, Eigenwerte bei adiabatischen Prozessen, Physik. Zeitschrift. XXX,

467 (1929)

[39] J.D. Baker, D.E. Freund, R.N. Hill and J.D. Morgan III, Phys. Rev.A 41, 1247 (1990)

[40] J.D. Baker, R.N. Hill and J.D. Morgan III, in Relativistic, Quantum Electrodynamic, and Weak Inter-
action Eﬀects in Atoms, edited by Walter Johnson, Peter Mohr, and Joseph Sucher, AIP Conf. Proc. No.
189 (American Institute of Institute of Physics, New York, 1989), pp. 123-145.

[41] W. Becken and P. Schmelcher, in preparation

[42] K. Singer, Proc. R. Soc. Lond. A 402, 412 (1960)

[43] M. Abramowitz and I.A. Stegun, Handbook of mathematical functions, Dover Publications, 1972

[44] Appell et Kamp´e de F´eriet, Les fonctions hyperg´eometriques et hypersph´eriques, Gauthier-Villars et

Cie, Editeurs, Paris 1926

11

