9
9
9
1
 
n
u
J
 
3
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
m
o
t
a
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
1
4
0
6
0
9
9
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

ELECTRON COLLISIONAL BROADENING OF ISOLATED LINES FROM

MULTIPLY-IONIZED ATOMS∗

H. R. GRIEM† and Yu. V. RALCHENKO‡

†Institute for Plasma Research, University of Maryland, College Park, MD 20742, USA

‡Department of Particle Physics, Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot 76100, Israel

Abstract—Recent experimental and theoretical (both improved semiclassical and fully

quantum-mechanical) line broadening calculations for B III and Ne VII ∆n = 0 transi-

tions with n = 2 and 3, respectively, are discussed. The disagreements by about a factor

of 2 between the fully quantum-mechanically calculated and both measured and semi-

classically calculated widths can be explained in terms of violations of validity criteria

for the semiclassical calculations and nonthermal Doppler eﬀects. Only the quantum

calculations allow a clear separation of elastic and inelastic scattering contributions

to the width. For B III, elastic scattering contributes about 30%, for Ne VII inelastic

scattering dominates. This allows rather direct comparisons with benchmark electron-

ion scattering experiments. Additional independent determinations of line widths for

multiply-ionized, nonhydrogenic ions are called for, but meanwhile caution should be

exercised in the use of corresponding semiclassically calculated widths, e.g., in opacity

calculations or for plasma density diagnostics.

1. INTRODUCTION

Most spectral lines observed in laboratory experiments or lines emanating from stellar

atmospheres are, as far as their Stark broadening is concerned, in the category of isolated

lines. Such lines, per deﬁnition, have widths, not to mention shifts, which are smaller than

separations between the perturbed and the relevant perturbing levels. Relevant in this

context are especially levels connected to upper or lower levels of the transition by electric

dipole matrix elements, i.e., levels which would contribute to the Stark shift of the line

in an external electric ﬁeld. Furthermore, if these widths are small enough, such that the

required timescale for the Fourier transform of the line proﬁle (in angular frequency units)

is large compared with the duration of important electron-ion collisions, then the impact
∗Partially supported by the US-National Science Foundation and the Israeli Academy of Sciences and

INTAS.

1

approximation to the general theory can be used to calculate widths (and shifts) of the

Most important is generally the (full) width, γ, which according to Baranger1 can be

resulting Lorentzian proﬁles.

written as

∞

γ = Ne Z

0

vF (v)

× 

σuu′ (v) +

σℓℓ′(v) +

|fu(θ, v) − fℓ(θ, v)|2dΩ

dv,

(1)

Xu′6=u



Xℓ′6=ℓ

Z



in terms of cross sections σuu′ and σℓℓ′ for electron-collisional inelastic transition rates from

upper (u) and lower (ℓ) levels into the perturbing levels u′ and ℓ′, respectively. These cross

sections are functions of the initial electron velocity v, and the σv-product is averaged using

the electron velocity distribution function F (v) as weight function. The ensuing inelastic

contribution to the line broadening, often called lifetime broadening, is as expected, e.g.,
from the original work of Lorentz.2 However, the last (elastic) scattering term is less intuitive.

It involves the diﬀerence of elastic scattering amplitudes f on upper and lower levels. These

quantities depend on velocity v and scattering angle Θ, and were it not for the cross term
−fuf ∗

ufℓ , the integrals over v and Θ would simply give the sum of total elastic scattering

ℓ −f ∗

rates on upper and lower levels. However, this cross term can be very important, especially

for ∆n = 0 transitions, and cause strong cancellations. This could already have been
inferred from the semiclassical, adiabatic phase shift limit,3,4 which had been applied also
for the case of monopole-dipole interactions6,7 (quadratic Stark eﬀect) at the time of the ﬁrst
realistic Stark broadening calculations of isolated lines from neutral atoms6 and ions8,9 in

low charge states. These calculations all used the semiclassical approximation and were only

done to the lowest nonvanishing order in the interaction, the phase-shift calculations being
a notable exception to this.6,7,10 Results of such calculations, and a dispersion relation11

between widths and shifts, were actually used to optimize the choice of minimum impact

parameters and strong-collision terms in perturbative semiclassical calculations of widths
and shifts.12 For neutral and singly-ionized atoms this procedure is surprisingly accurate,
especially for the widths.13 In other words, remaining errors are much smaller than the

strong-collision contributions given in Tables IVa and V of Ref. 12, which are rather large.

For lines from multiply-ionized atoms, both measurements and calculations have been

much more diﬃcult and are still relatively rare. The experimental problems lie in the

development of suitable, i.e., optically thin and homogeneous, plasma sources capable of

obtaining the high densities and temperatures required, and in the application of density and

2

temperature diagnostics. Most successful in this regard has been the gas-liner pinch work at
Bochum;14 comparisons15 of some of these results with linear-pinch-discharge experiments16

are also possible and interesting. As to calculations, various versions of a semiempirical
method17 had been rather successful13 in predicting widths of many lines from low charge

states. However, along isoelectronic sequences, and for ∆n = 0, n = 3 transitions in
multiply-ionized Li-like,18 Be-like19 and B-like20 ions, signiﬁcant disagreements were found,

measured widths being larger than most calculated widths for the higher members of the
isoelectronic sequences. For ∆n = 0, n = 2 transitions, measured widths for (Li-like) B III21
and, perhaps, also for C IV22 disagree with most semiclassical and semiempirical estimates

in a similar way.

The semiempirical estimates were based on Eq. (1) in the sense that the eﬀective Gaunt
factor approximation23,24 was used for the cross sections of dipole-allowed collision-induced

transitions, e.g., from the upper level of the line, with an extrapolation to below-threshold

energies (velocities) to account for elastic scattering from ions in the upper state of the line.

At least in Ref. 17, the lower level width calculated in the same way was simply added,

i.e., the interference term, −fuf ∗

ℓ − f ∗

ufℓ , mentioned above was neglected, as were collision-

induced transitions caused by other than dipole (Λ = 1) interactions, i.e., monopole (Λ = 0),

quadrupole (Λ = 2), etc., interactions. The major diﬀerence between these semiempirical

and previous versions of semiclassical calculations is that in the latter the equivalents of

the Gaunt factors are actually calculated using classical path integrals of the dipole in-

teraction, supplemented by estimates of strong-collision contributions. Recently proposed

improvements to this procedure will be discussed in Sec. 3 after a more detailed discussion

of experiments in Sec. 2. Fully quantum-mechanical calculations are reviewed in Sec. 4,

followed by a summary and some recommendations.

2. EXPERIMENTS

The stringent requirements for accurate measurements of Stark broadening parameters

have been summarized before, in connection with the ﬁrst critical data evaluation for isolated
ion lines,25 but are diﬃcult to reconcile with the high densities and temperatures necessary

for multiply-ionized atoms. Moreover, at that time, electron densities remained well under
1018 cm−3 and temperatures below 5 eV. Additional critically reviewed data26−27 (see also

Ref. 28 for an updated bibliography) range to higher densities, by about an order of mag-

nitude, and to temperatures as high as 20 eV. The high-aspect ratio, cylindrical, gas-liner
(gas-puﬀ) z-pinch14 was designed to facilitate measurements of multiply-ionized ions under

optimal conditions, which can be well and independently (of Stark broadening) measured.

3

In this gas-liner pinch, a driver gas, hydrogen or helium, is injected axially as a concentric

hollow gas cylinder near the wall of the discharge vessel, while a test gas is injected in

controlled (small) amounts near the axis. In this manner one ideally obtains optically thin

line emission from a nearly homogeneous, albeit transient, plasma near the discharge axis.

Great care is taken to have suﬃcient pre-ionization for the driver gas to facilitate uniform

breakdown of the main discharge and to avoid, hopefully, instabilities during the implosion
of this low-aspect ratio gas-puﬀ pinch. Typical implosion velocities are about 107 cm/sec,
corresponding to Reynolds numbers over 104, suggesting the development of hydrodynamic
turbulence.29 (Magnetic ﬁeld eﬀects are not likely to inhibit such turbulence because of the
relatively large ion-ion collision frequency, namely ν ≈ 109 sec−1 for ∼ 100 eV proton-proton
collisions, compared to proton cyclotron frequencies of ωci ≈ 108 sec−1 at typical ﬁelds of
1 T.) The timescale for development and decay of the turbulence30 is τ ≈ ℓ/∆v, if ℓ is a
characteristic length, say 1 cm, and ∆v ≈ 106 cm/sec a typical spatial diﬀerence of velocities.

This suggests τ ≈ 1µsec, somewhat less than the time to peak compression, but longer than

the duration of signiﬁcant line emission.

While the driver gas may therefore be highly turbulent during the time of interest, the

heavier test-gas ions have collisional mean-free-paths of >

∼ 0.1 cm against collisions with

protons; they may therefore average over several eddies, especially during the implosion.

In any case, the test gas ions can have signiﬁcant nonthermal velocities, which could be of

the same order as thermal velocities of the driver gas and therefore much larger than their

thermal velocities.

It is not clear to what extent the otherwise very powerful (collective) Thomson-scattering
diagnostic31,32 is capable of distinguishing between thermal and nonthermal (test gas) ion

motions. (This would be diﬀerent in case of plasma turbulence associated with nonlinear

plasma waves.) Moreover, it usually measures temperatures and electron density only in a

rather small fraction of the emitting volume, which may not be entirely representative of

the average conditions along the line of sight for the spectroscopic measurements. Only very
recently,22,33 with the help of a 2-dimensional detector array, have scattering spectra also

been taken radially-imaged to check the homogeneity in regard to density and temperature

and to verify that, e.g., argon as test-gas was restricted to a small, near-axial region. Axial
imaging of emission spectra with krypton as test gas34 as function of test-gas concentra-

tion suggests a stable plasma column for concentrations below 1%, but inhomogeneities at

higher levels, indicating macroscopic instabilities. However, these observations cannot be

interpreted as evidence against fully developed, ﬁne-scale turbulence in case of small test-gas

4

concentrations as used for line proﬁle measurements. In principle, the eﬀective tempera-

ture for the Doppler width of lines of test-gas ion could be determined from the width
of the impurity peak in the scattering spectrum,31,32 but the corresponding error is fairly

large at the small concentrations needed to avoid self-absorption of strong lines. Finally, to
conclude19 from the absence of bulkshifts of scattering spectra (i.e., from the absence of net

velocities of the emitting plasma volume) that there is no additional (to thermal Doppler

broadening) Doppler broadening of the lines from test-gas ions, is premature. However,

these observations do indicate that any turbulent eddies are smaller than 1 mm.

For narrow lines, the possibility of systematic errors in Stark widths due to underesti-
mates of the Doppler broadening29 evidently remains. It is made even more plausible, in
the case of C IV ∆n = 0, n = 2 transitions,22 by the observation of a Doppler splitting
of the lines corresponding to less than or about 4 × 106 cm/sec, i.e., about half the implo-

sion velocity. So far it is not understood why these streaming velocities are not completely

randomized by collisions or turbulence.

3. SEMICLASSICAL CALCULATIONS

Stimulated by the various disagreements between measured widths and semiclassical

calculations, which were already discussed in Sec. 1, two improvements to these semiclas-
sical calculations have been proposed. The ﬁrst of these was an attempt by Alexiou35

to improve the estimates for strong-collision impact parameter and strong-collision term

by insisting that unitarity of the path integrals of the electron-ion interaction energy be

preserved also during the interaction, not only over the entire collision as in previous semi-

classical calculations. This distinction is important for hyperbolic perturber paths, because

of the compensation between eﬀects during approach and separation occurring especially for

dipole interactions. (These cancellations had been noticed already in the context of electron-
collisional broadening of ionized-helium lines.36) Strong-collision impact parameters in the
usual calculations are of the order12

ρmin =

¯h
mv

n2
Z

=

λ
2π

n2
Z

,

(2)

λ being the de Broglie wavelength of the perturbing electron and Z the (spectroscopic)

charge, e.g., Z = 3 for B III, etc. This ﬁrst improvement is therefore probably not realistic
unless n2/2πZ >

∼ 1, which is not fulﬁlled for the lines showing large disagreements with

previous semiclassical calculations. The 2π in Eq. (2) was apparently omitted in Ref. 35, as

was the eﬀect of curvature on the distance of closest approach in estimating the validity of

the long-range dipole approximation.

5

The second improvement,37 by the same author, was to replace the lowest order, dipole

interactions, perturbation theory by a numerical solution of the time-dependent equations

to all orders, and to include long-range quadrupole interactions. This nonperturbative

approach no longer requires the unitarity check, but of course still a minimum impact

parameter, etc., to avoid errors from breakdown of the semiclassical approximation and

of the long-range approximation to the exact electron-ion Coulomb interactions. Both of
these errors were again severely underestimated15 in the same manner as discussed in the

preceding paragraph.

In spite of these potentially serious problems,

the nonperturbative semiclassical
calculations37,38 give widths, e.g., for the Ne VII 2s3s-2s3p singlet and triplet lines which
agree within reasonable errors with gas-liner experiments,38 whereas previous calculations

yielded smaller widths by as much as a factor of 2. A similar discrepancy is found if com-
parison is made with a fully quantum-mechanical close-coupling (CC) calculation,39 albeit

only for the rather similar 3s-3p transition in Ne VIII.

As will be discussed in the following sections, such large disagreements may be the rule

rather than the exception for strong isolated lines from multiply-ionized atoms, i.e., for lines
for which n2/Z is near or below 1.

4. QUANTUM-MECHANICAL CALCULATIONS

Fully quantum-mechanical, CC, calculations of electron impact broadening were pub-
lished almost 30 years ago for resonance lines of Mg II40 and Ca II,41 and a few years later
also of Be II.42 It was already noticed at that time that the close-coupling (CC) calculations

gave widths which were less than half the measured width for Be II, and less than a third
of the semiclassically calculated width. Except for the impact approximation,1 the colliding

electron is treated in these calculations exactly and on an equal footing with the (active)

bound electrons, with which it interacts via the complete Coulomb interaction rather than

only its long-range multipole expansion. In other words, except for numerical errors from

using, e.g., an insuﬃciently complete system of basis functions, insuﬃcient number of ac-

tive bound electrons, or insuﬃcient energy resolution, the CC calculations should be almost

exact. They have therefore also been continued as part of the Opacity Project with results
published for lines from some transitions in Li- and Be-like ions39 and for ∆n = 0, n = 2
transitions in C III.43 For the latter lines, elastic scattering contributions to the width are

particularly important, providing 20–55% of the line widths.

Meanwhile, completely quantum-mechanical calculations were also made for the electron
broadening of H-like44,45 and He-like46,47 multiply-charged ions (overlapping lines). Here

6

the emphasis was on line spectra from Z
∼ 6 ions, encouraging the use of the distorted-
wave44,47 approximation, thus signiﬁcantly reducing the numerical eﬀort in comparison with

>

CC-calculations. As a matter of fact, it turned out that the additional phase shifts even

for L = 0 partial waves remained small so that no unitarization or higher order calculation

was required. (L is the angular momentum, in units of ¯h, of the scattered electron.) The

L value corresponding to the minimum impact parameter in semiclassical calculations, see

Eq. (2), is

Lmin =

n2
Z

,

(3)

and a corresponding eﬀective strong collision term was determined in Ref. 44 by a ﬁt to

the sum over partial waves of the expression for the line width. (Remember, however, that
n2/Z >

>
∼ 2π is required for the semiclassical approximation.) All

∼ 2π and therefore Lmin

of these calculations used the full Coulomb interaction, and (red) shifts were calculated as

well in Refs. 45-47. They are mostly due to the Λ = 0, penetrating monopole interactions,
which for the 1s and 1s2 lower states are also important for the interference between elastic

scattering terms.

Returning to isolated lines, the discrepancies between measured widths and nonpertur-

batively, semiclassically, calculated widths on one side, and the fully quantum-mechanical
calculations just mentioned, have encouraged some new calculations29,48 using the converg-
ing close-coupling (CCC) method.49−51 This method is a standard close-coupling approach,

except that discrete and continuum target states are obtained by diagonalizing the Hamil-

tonian in a large orthogonal Laguerre basis. The coupled equations are formulated in mo-

mentum space; the convergence can therefore be easily tested by increasing the basis size.
This method has been shown to give very similar results52 for inelastic and elastic electron-
ion cross sections to the RMPS (R-matrix with pseudo states) method,53 but avoids the

diﬃculties associated with the oscillatory behavior of wave functions in coordinate space.

The ﬁrst use of the CCC method for line broadening calculations was for the case of the
B III 2s-2p (Li-like) resonance doublet measured21 on the gas-liner pinch. Special attention

was paid to the elastic scattering term in Eq. (1), which decreases much faster with electron

energy E than the 1/E decay of the 2s and 2p (non-Coulomb) elastic cross sections. The

cancellation between upper and lower level elastic scattering is substantial; simply using

the sum of elastic cross sections would lead to an overestimate of the elastic scattering

contribution to the line width by a factor of about 6 at Te = 10 eV. However, because of

this cancellation and the somewhat erratic energy dependence, there is more uncertainty

in the elastic than in the inelastic contributions. Collision-induced 2s-2p excitation and

7

deexcitation transitions give the major contribution to the line width, and CCC, RMPS and
Coulomb-Born with exchange54 (CBE) calculations all give very similar cross sections, the

latter being typically 20% larger than the two strong-coupling results. Most importantly,

over 90% of the total cross section comes from L <

∼ 6, i.e., from the nonclassical region.

Finally, inelastic scattering associated with ∆n ≥ 1 transitions, estimated using the CBE

approximation, was found to contribute only 5% to the calculated width, vs. typically 35

and 60% from elastic and ∆n = 0 inelastic scattering, respectively. Moreover, the CCC
width was even smaller, by less or about 10%, than the ﬁrst R-matrix method results39 in

the temperature range of interest (5–10 eV).

Further evidence for the severe discrepancies mentioned above is obtained by a compar-
ison of new CCC calculations48 for the 2s3s-2s3p singlet and triplet lines of Ne VII (Be-like)
with experiments19,38 and nonperturbative semiclassical calculations.37 In this case, two
bound electrons are actively involved in the scattering process, while the 1s2 innershell
electrons can be considered as part of a frozen core. (This was veriﬁed48 by comparisons

between the full Hartree-Fock and frozen-core Hartree-Fock calculations using the Cowan
code.55) In analogy to the B III case, 3s-3p inelastic and super-elastic transition rates are

again a major contribution to the line width, followed by 3p-3d transition rates. For these

dipole (Λ = 1) cross sections about 50% of the total cross section arises from L ≥ 9 for

the singlet s-p and triplet p-d transitions, and from L ≥ 7 for the triplet s-p and singlet

p-d transitions. The L >

∼ 2π criterion is thus fulﬁlled only marginally. Also, the distance

of closest approach for, e.g., an L = 5 classical electron is about equal to the boundstate
radius,15,48 which causes the long-range interaction used in the semiclassical calculations to

fail. The semiclassical results are therefore again rather questionable. Note also that CCC

and CBE cross sections for these large dipole cross sections are within 10% of each other,
and that dipole cross sections for 2s3ℓ-2p3ℓ transitions contribute about 10%,48 although

they were ignored in semiclassical calculations. The ∆n ≥ 1 collisional cross sections for

excitation or deexcitation of the 3ℓ electron are at the percent level, but were also included

in Ref. 48.

The 2s3s-2s3d quadrupole (Λ = 2) transition rates contribute only about 3% to the total
quantum-mechanical inelastic transition rate,48 also at Te = 20 eV, in part because of the
relatively large threshold energies (∼ 9 eV). This is in contrast to the semiclassical result,37

to which the quadrupole (Λ = 2) channel contributes 15% of the total width. Because this

total width is about twice the quantum-mechanical result, the Λ = 2 cross sections actually

diﬀer by an order of magnitude. This is not very surprising, because in this case L <

∼ 5

8

partial waves are most important; semiclassical and long-range interaction approximations

are both clearly inappropriate. This might have been inferred by analyzing Fig. 11 of Ref.

56, in which nonperturbative, semiclassical contributions to the line width are shown as a

function of impact parameter. The excluded region here corresponds to L ≈ 3 for the cases

of only Λ = 1 and for both Λ = 1 and 2 interactions.

This leaves the elastic scattering contribution, which is essentially ignored in the semi-

classical calculations. For this contribution, only L <

∼ 2 partial waves are important, which

are entirely in the quantum-mechanical and short-range interaction (Λ = 0, etc.) regimes.

As for B III, there is again strong cancellation of upper- and lower-level scattering ampli-

tudes, by about an order of magnitude, for the electron energies of interest. The contribution

to the electron collisional line widths is only about 8 and 10%, respectively, for singlet and
triplet lines. The estimated errors in the quantum calculation,48 using a comparison of
results obtained from Eq. (1) and from a formulation in terms of T-matrix elements,12,57

from CCC calculations, are actually ±15%, mostly related to resonances in the electron-ion

scattering.

5. SUMMARY AND RECOMMENDATIONS

It should be clear to the reader that in contrast to a previous assertion,58 there is still

no convincing convergence between measurements and calculations of electron-collisional

widths of strong isolated lines from multiply-ionized atoms, and for that matter, not even for
the 2s-2p resonance line of Be II.42 As far as the measurements are concerned, the observed

trends along isoelectronic sequences are particularly striking. This observed slower decay

with spectroscopic charge Z than predicted by most calculations is especially pronounced

for lines which are relatively insensitive to electron broadening in comparison with higher

n-lines. This slower decay occurs for n = 3 lines and probably also for n = 2 lines.

It

is, therefore, suggested that some of the other line broadening mechanisms compete with

the broadening by electrons. Of these, Stark broadening by ions comes to mind, but has
been shown theoretically12 not to be suﬃcient to explain discrepancies by a factor of about

2. (Note that there is no question concerning the validity of semiclassical calculations for

perturbing ions.) The proposed additional Doppler broadening due to turbulent or other

nonthermal motions of the emitting ions provides a more likely explanation. It had been

invoked before to explain the unexpectedly large widths of singlet and triplet 2s-2p lines of
CV in laser-produced plasmas.59

Hopefully the uncertainties in the interpretation of measurements of relatively small

Stark widths will be removed, e.g., by measurements on other plasma light sources, by

9

precision measurements of the impurity peak in collective Thompson scattering spectra, or

by the measurement of Doppler widths of lines with negligible Stark widths. If then the

discrepancy with, e.g., CCC calculations should still persist, one would have to accept the

possibility of some broadening mechanism not yet considered. Finding any substantial error

in the quantum calculations for conditions well inside the regime of validity of the impact

approximation is not a realistic option, since they agree very well with, e.g., benchmark

experiments of the most important inelastic cross section for the B III 2s-2p lines, namely,
the 2s-2p excitation cross section.60 Although the elastic scattering contribution remains

less accurate, even a 50% error in this contribution would increase the calculated width only

by 15%. (For the Ne VII 3s-3p lines, such correction would require an increase of the elastic

scattering contribution by a factor 2.5.)

Although numerical improvements in the calculation of elastic scattering amplitudes

would be very desirable, the pattern appears to be that the corresponding contribution to

the width decreases with Z, while inelastic, dipole-allowed inelastic contributions dominate.

They are quite accurately represented by the CBE approximation, which in turn explains

the surprising accuracy of some semiempirical estimates. However, the perturbative or

nonperturbative semiclassical calculations cannot be trusted, if partial-wave contributions

L <

∼ 2π are important and/or if distances of closest approach approaching boundstate radii

are responsible for much of the broadening. A practical criterion for the validity of these
calculations is n2/Z >

∼ 2π. This appears to be consistent with our recent quantum-mechanical

calculation for the N IV ∆n = 0, n = 3 singlet line, which accounts for 70% of the measured

width. For a more detailed analysis of the transition from the quantum-mechanical to the

semiclassical regime, a good example is provided by an analogous discussion of electron
scattering on bare nuclei.61

REFERENCES

1. Baranger, M., Phys. Rev., 1958, 112, 855.

2. Lorentz, H. A., Proc. Roy. Acad. Sci. (Amsterdam), 1906, 8, 591.

3. Lindholm, E. Ark. Mat. Astron. Fys., 1941, 28B, No. 3; 1945, No. 17.

4. Foley, H. M., Phys. Rev., 1946, 69, 616.

6. Griem, H. R., Baranger, M., Kolb, A. C. and Oertel, G. K., Phys. Rev., 1962, 125,

177.

10

7. Roberts, D. E. and Davis, J., Phys. Lett., 1967, 25A, 175.

8. Br´echot, S. and Van Regemorter, H., Ann. Astrophys., 1964, 27, 432.

9. Sahal-Br´echot, S., Astron. Astrophys., 1969, 1, 91; 2, 322.

10. Roberts, D. E., Astron. Astrophys., 1970, 6, 1.

11. Griem, H. R. and Shen, C. S., Phys. Rev., 1962, 125, 196.

12. Griem, H. R., Spectral Line Broadening by Plasmas, Academic, New York (1974).

13. H. R. Griem, Principles of Plasma Spectroscopy, Cambridge University Press, Cam-

bridge (1997).

Hampton (1987).

press).

37, 498.

14. Kunze, H.-J., in Spectral Line Shapes, Vol. 4, ed. R. J. Exton, Deepak Publish,

15. Griem, H. R., in Spectral Line Shapes, Vol. 10, ed. R. Herman, AIP Conf. Proc. (in

16. Puri´c, J, Djeniˆze, S., Sreckovi´c, A., Platiˇsa, M. and Labat, J., Phys. Rev. A, 1988,

17. Griem, H. R., Phys. Rev. A, 1968, 165, 258.

18. Glenzer, S., Uzelac, N. I. and Kunze, H.-J., Phys. Rev. A, 1992, 45, 8795.

19. Wrubel, Th., Ahmad, I., B¨uscher, S., Kunze, H.-J. and Glenzer, S., Phys. Rev. E,

1998, 57, 5972.

20. Glenzer, S., Hey, J. D. and Kunze, H.-J., J. Phys. B, 1994, 27, 413.

21. Glenzer, S. and Kunze, H.-J., Phys. Rev. A, 1996, 53, 2225.

22. B¨uscher, S., Wrubel, Th., Ahmad, I. and Kunze, H.-J., in Spectral Line Shapes, Vol.

10, ed. R. Herman, AIP Conf. Proc. (in press).

23. Van Regemorter, H., Astrophys. J., 1962, 136, 906.

24. Seaton, M. J., in Atomic and Molecular Processes, ed. D. R. Bates, Academic Press,

New York (1962).

25. Konjevi´c, N. and Wiese, W. L., J. Phys. Chem. Ref. Data, 1976, 5, 259.

11

26. Konjevi´c, N. and Dimitrijevi´c, M. S., J. Phys. Chem. Ref. Data, 1984, 13, 649.

27. Konjevi´c, N. and Wiese, W. L., J. Phys. Chem. Ref. Data, 1990, 19, 1307.

28. Fuhr, J. R. and Felrice, H. R., http://physics.nist.gov.linebrbib.

29. Griem, H. R., Ralchenko, Yu. V. and Bray, I., Phys. Rev. E, 1997, 56, 7186.

30. Landau, L. D. and Lifshitz, E. M., Hydrodynamics, Nauka, Moscow (1986).

31. DeSilva, A. W., Baig, T. J., Olivares, I. and Kunze, H.-J., Phys. Fluids B, 1992, 4,

32. Wrubel, Th., Glenzer, S., B¨uscher, S. and Kunze, H.-J., J. Atmos. Terr. Phys., 1996,

458.

58, 1077.

33. Wrubel, Th., B¨uscher, S., Ahmad, I. and Kunze, H.-J., in Proceedings of the 11th APS

Topical Conference on Atomic Processes, ed. M. S. Pindzola and E. Oks, AIP Conf.

Proc., New York (1998).

34. Ahmad, I., B¨uscher, S., Wrubel, Th. and Kunze, H.-J., Phys. Rev. E, 1998, (in press).

35. Alexiou, S., Phys. Rev. A, 1994, 49, 106.

36. Griem, H. R. and Shen, K. Y., Phys. Rev., 1961, 122, 1490.

37. Alexiou, S., Phys. Rev. Lett., 1995, 75, 3406.

phys., 1996, 306, 1028.

39. Seaton, M. J., J. Phys. B, 1988, 21, 3033.

40. Bely, O. and Griem, H. R., Phys. Rev. A, 1970, 1, 97.

38. Wrubel, Th., Glenzer, S., B¨uscher, S., Kunze, H.-J. and Alexiou, S., Astron. Astro-

41. Barnes, K. S. and Peach, G., J. Phys. B, 1970, 3, 350; Barnes, K. S., J. Phys. B,

1971, 4, 1377.

42. Sanchez, A., Blaha, M. and Jones, W. W., Phys. Rev. A, 1973, 8, 774; see also

Hadziomerspahic, D., Platisa, M., Konjevi´c, N. and Popovic, M., Z. Physik, 1973,
262, 169.

43. Seaton, M. J., J. Phys. B, 1987, 20, 6431.

44. Griem, H. R., Blaha, M. and Kepple, P. C., Phys. Rev. A, 1979, 19, 2421.

12

45. Nguyen, H., Koenig, M., Benredjem, D., Caby, M. and Coulaud, G., Phys. Rev. A,

1986, 33, 1279.

46. Koenig, M., Malnoult, P. and Nguyen, H., Phys. Rev., 1988, 38, 2089.

47. Griem, H. R., Blaha, M. and Kepple, P. C., Phys. Rev. A, 1990, 41, 5600.

48. Ralchenko, Yu. V., Griem, H. R., Bray, I. and Fursa, D. V., Phys. Rev. A (submitted).

49. Bray, I., Phys. Rev. A, 1994, 49, 1066.

50. Bray, I. and Stelbovics, A. T., Adv. At. Mol. Phys., 1995, 35, 209.

51. Fursa, D. V. and Bray, I., J. Phys. B, 1997, 30, 757.

52. Bartschat, K., Burke, P. G. and Scott, M. P., J. Phys. B, 1997, 30, 5915.

53. Bartschat, K., Hudson, E. T., Scott, M. P., Burke, P. G. and Burke, V. M., J. Phys.

B, 1996, 29, 115.

(1993).

Berkeley (1981).

54. Shevelko, V. P. and Vainshtein, L. A., Atomic Physics for Hot Plasmas, IOP, Bristol

55. Cowan, R. D. The Theory of Atomic Structure and Spectra, Univ. of California Press,

56. Alexiou, S., Calisti, A., Gauthier, P., Klein, L., LeBoucher-Dalimier, E., Lee, R. W.,
Stamm, R. and Talin, B., J. Quant. Spectrosc. Radiat. Transfer, 1997, 58, 399.

57. Peach, G. in Atomic, Molecular and Optical Physics Handbook, ed. G. W. F. Drake,

AIP Press, New York (1996).

Proc. 386, AIP, New York (1997).

58. Alexiou, S., in Spectral Line Shapes, Vol. 9, ed. M. Zoppi and L. Ulivi, AIP Conf.

59. Iglesias, E. J. and Griem, H. R., Phys. Rev. A, 1988, 38, 301.

60. Woitke, O., Djuri´c, N., Dunn, G. H., Bannister, M. E., Smith, A.C.H., Wallbank, B.,

Badnell, N. R. and Pindzola, M. S., Phys. Rev. A, 1998 (in press).

61. Williams, E. J., Rev. Mod. Phys., 1945, 17, 217.

13

