Calculation of the positron bound state with the copper atom

V. A. Dzuba, V. V. Flambaum, G. F. Gribakin, and C. Harabati

School of Physics, The University of New South Wales, Sydney 2052, Australia

(February 21, 2014)

Abstract

A new relativistic method for calculation of positron binding to atoms is
presented. The method combines a conﬁguration interaction treatment of
the valence electron and the positron with a many-body perturbation theory
description of their interaction with the atomic core. We apply this method
to positron binding by the copper atom and obtain the binding energy of 170
meV (±10%). To check the accuracy of the method we use a similar approach
to calculate the negative copper ion. The calculated electron aﬃnity is 1.218
eV, in good agreement with the experimental value of 1.236 eV. The problem
of convergence of positron-atom bound state calculations is investigated, and
means to improve it are discussed. The relativistic character of the method
and its satisfactory convergence make it a suitable tool for heavier atoms.

9
9
9
1
 
n
u
J
 
4
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
m
o
t
a
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
9
4
0
6
0
9
9
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Typeset using REVTEX

1

I. INTRODUCTION

Bound states of positrons with neutral atoms have not been detected experimentally
yet. For a long time the prevailing view was that neutral atoms do not bind positrons.
For example, Aronson et al [1] proved that positron binding to hydrogen is not possible,
and Gertler et al [2] showed that a ground-state helium atom could not bind a positron.
In a number of calculations positron binding was observed for alkalis and second column
atoms [3–5]. However, important physical eﬀects, such as virtual or real positronium (Ps)
formation, were neglected in those works. As a result, the binding was largely considered
as an artifact of the approximations used, or the positron bound states found were unstable
against Ps emission. This situation has clearly changed now. Firstly, a many-body theory
calculation by Dzuba et al. [6] indicated that atoms with larger dipole polarizabilities and
ionization potentials greater then 6.8 eV (Ps binding energy) can bind positrons, and pre-
dicted positron binding energies for Mg, Zn, Cd and Hg. Subsequently, a number of recent
calculations have shown and even proved, for a few lighter atoms, that positron-atom bound
states do exist, [7–16].

For the problem of positron-atom binding the atoms should be divided into two groups:
those with the ionization potential I smaller than 6.8 eV, and those with I > 6.8 eV. For the
former the lowest fragmentation threshold of the positron-atom system is that of a positive
ion and a Ps atom. Consequently, positron binding to such atoms should rather be described
as binding of the Ps to the corresponding positive ion. Indeed, the ‘ion + Ps’ component
in their wave function is large, as shown by the calculations for Li-e+, Na-e+ and He 23S-e+
[7,9–12]. For atoms with I > 6.8 eV the positron-atom bound state is indeed an ‘atom + e+’
system, at large positron-atom separations. However, the process of virtual Ps formation
in this system is very important [6], especially when I is close to 6.8 eV. This eﬀect makes
positron-atom bound states a strongly correlated atomic system. The correlations in it are
stronger than those one ﬁnds in its electron analogues, atomic negative ions. This feature
makes the positron-atom bound complexes very interesting for the atomic theory. This also
makes them a challenging testing ground for applications of modern numerical methods of
atomic structure calculations.

The main diﬃculty in calculations of positron interaction with atoms comes from the
strong electron-positron Coulomb attraction which leads to virtual positronium formation
[6]. One can say that it gives rise to a speciﬁc short-range attraction between the positron
and the atom, in addition to the usual polarizational potential which acts between a neutral
target and a charged projectile [17–19]. This attraction can not be treated accurately by
In our earlier works [6,18,19] we
perturbations and some all-order technique is needed.
used the Ps wave function explicitly to approximate the virtual Ps-formation contribution
to the positron-atom interaction. The same physics may also explain the success of the
stochastic variation method in positron-atom bound state calculations (see [12] and Refs.
therein). In this approach the wave function is expanded in terms of explicitly correlated
Gaussian functions which include factors exp(−αr2
ij) with interparticle distances rij. Using
this method Ryzhikh and Mitroy obtained positron bound states for a whole range of atoms
with both I < 6.8 eV (Li, Na, and He 23S), and I > 6.8 eV (Be, Mg, Zn, Cu, and Ag). This
method is well suited for few-particle systems. Its application to heavier systems is done by
considering the Hamiltonian of the valence electrons and the positron in the model potential

2

of the ionic core. However, for heavier atoms, e.g., Zn, the calculation becomes extremely
time consuming [15], and its convergence cannot be ensured.

Another non-perturbative technique is conﬁguration interaction (CI) method widely used
in standard atomic calculations. This method has been applied to the positron-copper bound
state in [16]. In this work the single-particle orbitals of the valence electron and positron are
chosen as Slater-type orbitals, and their interaction with the Cu+ core is approximated by
the sum of the Hartree-Fock and model polarization potentials. The calculation shows slow
convergence with respect to the number of spherical harmonics included in the CI expansion,
Lmax = 10 being still not suﬃcient to extrapolate the results reliably to Lmax → ∞.

In the present work we calculate the ground states of Cu-e+ and Cu− systems using a
CI calculation within a spherical cavity of ﬁnite radius R. This procedure facilitates the
convergence of the CI expansion in the diﬃcult positron-atom case, and we show how to
extrapolate the results to the R → ∞ limit. The CI method which we use is based on the
combined relativistic conﬁguration interaction and many-body perturbation theory method
(CI+MBPT) developed in our earlier work [20] for precise calculations of many-electron
atoms with more than one valence electron. It was shown there that correlations between the
core and valence electrons are very important and often contribute more to the energy than
the correlations between the valence electrons. The core-valence correlations are included
into the eﬀective CI Hamiltonian of valence electrons by means of many-body perturbation
theory. This allows us to achieve high accuracy in calculations of atomic energies and
transition amplitudes. In the present work we adapt this approach to the positron problem.
As a single-particle basis for the CI calculations we use B-splined [21] Hartree-Fock wave
functions in the cavity of ﬁnite radius R. The B-spline technique has been successfully used
in atomic calculations for many years (see, e.g., review [22]) and has been recently incor-
porated with the CI+MBPT method [23]. The use of B-splines ensures good convergence
of the CI calculation with respect to the number of radial orbitals. Convergence is further
controlled by varying the cavity radius, while the eﬀect of a ﬁnite cavity size on the energy
of the system is taken into account analytically.

We have chosen the copper atom for the positron bound-state calculations for several
reasons. First, this atoms looks like a good candidate for positron-atom bounding. It has a
large polarizability of 40 a.u. [24], and its ionization potential I = 7.724 eV [25] is not too
far from the Ps binding energy of 6.8 eV, which ensures a sizable contribution of virtual Ps
to the positron-atom attraction. Second, copper has a relatively simple electronic structure
with only one valence electron above closed shells. This makes the positron-copper problem
eﬀectively a two-particle problem well suited for application of the CI+MBPT method.
Third, there are accurate experimental data and a number calculations for the energy of the
copper negative ion. Thus, we can test our method on Cu− and compare the results with
those obtained by other techniques. Last but not least, the existence of the positron-copper
bound state was predicted by Ryzhik and Mitroy [13] in the framework of the stochastic
variational method, which allows us to compare the results obtained with the two diﬀerent
techniques.

II. METHOD OF CALCULATION

3

A. Eﬀective Hamiltonian

We use the relativistic Hartree-Fock method in the V N −1 approximation to obtain the
single-particle basis sets of electron and positron orbitals and to construct an eﬀective Hamil-
tonian. The main point for this choice is the simplicity of the MBPT, as discussed in Ref.
[20]. The self-consistent potential is determined for the Cu+ ion and the single-particle
states of the external valence electron and the positron are calculated in the ﬁeld of the
frozen core.

The two-particle electron-positron wave function is given by the CI expansion,

Ψ(re, rp) =

Cijψi(re)φj(rp),

Xi,j

where ψi and φj are the electron and positron orbitals respectively. The expansion coef-
ﬁcients Cij are to be determined by the diagonalization of the matrix of the eﬀective CI
Hamiltonian acting in the Hilbert space of the valence electron and the positron,

H CI

eﬀ = ˆhe + ˆhp + ˆhep,

ˆhe = cαp + (β − 1)mc2 −

+ V N −1
d

− ˆV N −1

exch + ˆΣe,

ˆhp = cαp + (β − 1)mc2 +

− V N −1
d

+ ˆΣp,

Ze2
re
Ze2
rp

ˆhep = −

e2
|re − rp|

− ˆΣep,

d

and V N −1

where ˆhe and ˆhp the eﬀective single-particle Hamiltonians of the electron and positron,
and ˆhep is the eﬀective electron-positron two-body interaction. Apart from the relativistic
Dirac operator, ˆhe and ˆhp include the direct and exchange Hartree-Fock potentials of the core
electrons, V N −1
exch , respectively. The additional ˆΣ operators account for correlations
involving core electrons (see [20] for a detailed discussion). We calculate ˆΣ using the second-
order MBPT in the residual Coulomb interaction. ˆΣe describes the interaction between
the valence electron and the electrons of the core. All four second-order diagrams for the
ˆΣe are presented in Fig. 1. ˆΣp is the correlation interaction between the positron and the
core. In the second-order ˆΣp is represented by a sole digram in Fig. 2. Both operators are
often called correlation potentials, because these non-local operators can be included into
the equations for the single-particle orbitals together to the Hartree-Fock potential. ˆΣe and
ˆΣp are energy-dependent operators, which are diﬀerent for the electron and the positron.
They are calculated separately for each partial wave, (s1/2, p1/2, p3/2, etc.). However, at
large distances both operators have the same asymptotic behaviour,

Σe(r, r′), Σp(r, r′) ≃ −

αe2
2r4 δ(r − r′),

where α is the dipole polarizability of the atomic core. This asymptotic form comes from the
dipole contribution of the ﬁrst diagram in Fig.1 for the electron, and diagram in Fig.2 for
the positron. Formula (3) with some empirical cut-oﬀ at small distances is often used as an
approximation for the correlation potentials, and is usually called ‘polarization potential’.

4

(1)

(2)

(3)

ˆΣep is another type of correlations between the external particles and and core electrons.
It can be described as screening of Coulomb interaction between the external electron and
positron by the core electrons. There are in all six second-order diagrams for ˆΣep. Three of
them are shown in Fig. 3. The other three can be obtained from them by mirror reﬂection
with respect to the vertical axis. When the electron and the positron are well outside the
atomic core ˆΣep is given by the following asymptotic expression,

Σep(re, rp) ≃

αe2re · rp
er3
r3
p

.

(4)

Similarly to Eq. (3), this formula is often used to construct rough approximations for ˆΣep.
Such potentials are called ‘di-electronic correction’, or ‘two-body polarization potential’.

Diagrammatic expansions in Figs. 1, 2 and 3 enable one to include valence-core corre-
lations in an ab initio manner. To increase the accuracy of the calculations higher-order
contributions to ˆΣ can be taken into account eﬀectively, by introducing a numerical factor
before ˆΣ. For example, the coeﬃcient for ˆΣe can be chosen by ﬁtting the energies of the
neutral atom states to the experimental data. In doing so the important non-local structure
of the operators is preserved.

B. Basis set

We use B-spline basis functions [21] to calculate the diagrams for ˆΣ and to construct
the single-particle orbitals for the CI expansion (1). For this purpose the atomic system is
conﬁned to a cavity of radius R, and the wave functions are set to zero at r = R. For a suﬃ-
ciently large R the error introduced by this boundary condition is very small for atomic-size
binding energies, ∼ exp(−2κR), where κ is related to the binding energy as ǫB = κ2¯h2/2m.
However, for weakly bound states, e.g. those of the positron with the atom, this error has
to be considered more carefully (see below). The interval [0, R] is divided into a number
of segments and B-splines are constructed on them as piecewise polynomials of a certain
degree. They are bell-shaped overlapping smooth functions. With an appropriate choice of
the radial mesh they can approximate atomic wave functions to a very high precision. Note
that it is not convenient to use B-splines directly in CI or MBPT calculations because of
their non-orthogonality. Instead, we use their linear combinations which are eigenstates of
the single-particle Hartree-Fock Hamiltonian. This ensures orthogonality, allows to separate
core and valence states and improves convergence, since only a relatively small number of
lower Hartree-Fock eigenstates are suﬃcient for the convergence of the CI calculation. This
also means that while we use the same B-splines for the electron and positron states the
resulting single-particle basis states are diﬀerent, because the Hartree-Fock Hamiltonians
for the electrons and positrons are diﬀerent. Another advantage of the use of B-splines is
that the convergence can be controlled by the cavity radius R (its reduction leads to a more
rapid convergence), while its eﬀect on the energy is taken into account analytically.

5

C. Eﬀect of ﬁnite cavity size

The choice of the cavity radius R (see above) is dictated by a compromise between the
convergence rate and the required accuracy of the calculations. On one hand, the radius must
be large enough to accommodate the wave function of the state under investigation, e.g.,
the positron-atom bound state. On the other hand, smaller radii mean faster convergence,
both with respect to the number of radial orbitals and, which is especially important for
positron-atom calculations, to the number of angular harmonics. This eﬀect is very strong
since convergence is determined by the cavity volume which is proportional to R3, and having
a smaller radius means that one needs fewer basis states to describe the wave function.

The problem of convergence is crucial for the positron-atom interaction. As discussed
in the Introduction, the positron tends to form virtual Ps with the external atomic electron
[6,17,18]. The positronium radius rPs ∼ 2a0 can be small compared to the characteristic
size of the positron-atom bound state wave function, r ∼ 1/κ ≫ a0, where a0 is the Bohr
radius. To describe Ps at large separations from the atom expansion (1) needs to be ex-
tended to very high values of angular momentum L and principal quantum number n to
account accurately for the virtual Ps formation. This problem is well known in positron-
atom scattering calculations, see e.g. [26]. Smaller cavity radii force virtual Ps to be at
smaller distances, thereby improving the convergence signiﬁcantly. However the energy of
the system is aﬀected. Therefore, the convergence and the accuracy of the calculation can
be really improved only if the eﬀect of a ﬁnite-radius cavity on the energy is taken into
account.

To consider the eﬀect of cavity on the energy of the system let us consider the problem
of a particle weakly bound in an s state by a ﬁnite-range potential.
‘Weakly bound’ here
means that the binding energy is much smaller than the typical scale of the potential. This
is deﬁnitely true for positron-atom bound states whose binding energy is much smaller than
1 eV. To determine the radial wave function χ(r) at large distances it is suﬃcient to impose
on it a boundary condition

= −κ ,

1
χ

dχ
dr

(cid:12)
(cid:12)
r=a
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)

(5)

at the outer radius r = a of the potential well [27]. The κ parameter is related to the
energy of the bound state ε = −κ2¯h2/2m, and determines the asymptotic form of the wave
function, χ(r) ≃ Ae−κr.

The boundary condition is unchanged when we place the system in the cavity of ﬁnite
radius R, R > a, provided the energy of the bound state is still small. However, the wave
function must now turn into zero at the cavity radius, χ(R) = 0. This shifts the energy
of the weakly bound state up from ε to some other value εR, which depends on the radius
of the cavity. The Schr¨odinger equation for a < r < R, where the potential is vanishingly
small, is

dχ2
dr2 + εRχ(r) = 0,
After solving it with boundary conditions (5) and χ(R) = 0, one obtains a negative eigen-
value, εR = −κ2

R¯h2/2m, where

(6)

¯h2
2m

6

if R is not too small, R − a > κ−1. As one can see, for R → ∞ the solution of Eq. (7),
κR, approaches its asymptotic value κ, and the energy in the cavity εR → ε. For a smaller
cavity radius the eigenvalue becomes positive, εR = k2

R¯h2/2m, where kR is found from

κ = κR/ tanh[κR(R − a)],

κ = kR/ tan[kR(R − a)].

(7)

(8)

This means that the state which is bound may appear as unbound due to the eﬀect of the
cavity. Equation (8) is valid for kR(R − a) < π
2 . Otherwise, κ < 0, and the energy is too
high, so that it remains positive even when the cavity wall is removed.

Equations (7) and (8) can be used to ﬁnd the inﬁnite-cavity energy ε = −κ2¯h2/2m from
the energy εR calculated for the ﬁnite cavity radius R. It is important that these formulae do
not depend on the shape of the binding potential and contain only one unknown parameter
a. The value of a can be found by comparing calculations with two diﬀerent cavity radii R.
Note that the wave function is also aﬀected by the ﬁnite cavity size. This should be
taken into account in calculations of the annihilation rate and other matrix elements. The
annihilation rate is proportional to the probability of ﬁnding the positron close to the atom.
For a ≪ R the wave function at r <
∼ a is aﬀected via normalization only. The change of the
normalization can be found by comparing the normalization integral for r > a calculated
numerically within the cavity,

with the analytical value

R

Z
a

χ2(r) dr ,

∞

Z
a

e−2κr dr =

e−2κa.

1
2κ

III. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION

A. Copper negative ion

To test the method and ﬁnd out what accuracy can be achieved we ﬁrst apply it to the
copper negative ion. This is an eﬀective two-particle problem technically very similar to
the positron-copper interaction considered above. It should be mentioned that for Cu− only
the electron ˆΣ-operator is involved (Fig. 1), and for the screening of the electron-electron
interaction, instead of the diagrams on Fig. 3, one must use similar diagrams presented in
[20] (Fig.4). The results of calculations for Cu and Cu− are presented in table I together with
the experimental values. The energies are given with respect to the Cu+ core. The accuracy
of the Hartree-Fock approximation is very poor. The binding energy of the 4s electron in
neutral Cu is underestimated by about 20%, while the negative ion Cu− appears altogether
unbound (its energy lies above that of the neutral atom). The inclusion of core-valence
correlations ( ˆΣ) does improve the energy of the neutral atom, but the negative ion is still
not bound. The standard CI method, in contrast, takes into account the valence-valence

7

correlations, while neglecting the core-valence correlations. It does produce binding for the
negative ion, but the binding energy is almost two times smaller than the experiment value.
Only when both core-valence and valence-valence correlations are included the accuracy
improves signiﬁcantly. It is equal to 2.6% for the ionization potential of the neutral atom and
10% for the electron aﬃnity, which is quite good for a relatively simple ab initio calculation.
The remaining discrepancy is mostly due to third and higher-order correlation corrections
in ˆΣ, since the conﬁguration expansion for Cu− converges rapidly, and the corresponding
error is small.

To simulate the eﬀects of higher-order terms in ˆΣ and thus further improve the accuracy
of calculations we introduce numerical factors before the ˆΣe operators to ﬁt the lowest s,
p and d energy levels of the neutral copper atom. These factors are fs = 1.17, fp = 1.42
and fd = 1.8 in the s, p and d channels, respectively. Table I shows that these factors also
signiﬁcantly improve the calculated electron aﬃnity. It is natural to assume that the same
procedure should work equally well for the positron-atom problem.

Results of other calculations of the electron aﬃnity of copper are presented in table II.
Note that only a coupled-cluster (CC) method produces a result more accurate than ours.
It is interesting to mention among other results the results by Mitroy and Ryzhikh [13,16]
who calculated Cu− for the same purpose as we do, i.e., to gauge the accuracy of their
method for the positron-atom problem. Their ﬁrst result for electron aﬃnity to copper,
0.921 eV, was obtained by the stochastic variational method, while another result 0.916 eV
was achieved in the standard CI calculation. Both methods are variational in nature and
diﬀer basically by the form of the trial two-electron wave function. Since the two results
agree well with each other, good convergence has probably been achieved in both methods.
However there is a noticeable discrepancy between their result and the experimental electron
aﬃnity value. From our point of view the most probable source of this discrepancy is
approximate treatment of the ˆΣ operator of the valence-core interaction.
In their works
Mitroy and Ryzhikh use approximate expressions for the core polarization potentials, based
on asymptotic formulae (3) and (4), which include only dipole core polarization in the local
energy-independent form. Note again that the actual ˆΣ operator is energy dependent. It is
diﬀerent for diﬀerent angular momenta, and for the electron and positron, while approximate
expression (3) is always the same. Note also that the screening operator ˆΣep depends not only
on the states involved but also on the multipolarity of the Coulomb integral. Approximate
formula (4) describes the dipole part of screening only, however, other Coulomb multipoles
are also screened. Even though the largest contribution to screening comes from the dipole
term, monopole and quadrupole screening can not be neglected. For example, monopole
screening directly contributes to the diagonal Hamiltonian matrix elements in important
conﬁgurations like 4s2 in Cu−, while dipole screening aﬀects only the oﬀ-diagonal matrix
elements.

B. Positron binding to copper

The binding energy of Cu− is about 0.045 a.u. It corresponds to a bound-state parameter
κ ≈ 0.3, and the cavity does not have a noticeable eﬀect on the calculated energies of Cu−,
let alone Cu. The relative error introduced by the cavity can be easily estimated from Eq.
(7), and even for a moderate R = 15a0 it does not exceed 0.1% for the electron aﬃnity.

8

For the positron bound state the situation is diﬀerent. As indicated by the calculation of
Ref. [13], the κ value for the Cu-e+ bound state is about 0.1. This is why we have performed
the calculation of the positron-atom bound state using two diﬀerent cavity radii, R = 15a0
and R = 30a0, to make sure that convergence is really achieved. The convergence pattern
with respect to the number of basis states used is illustrated in Figs. 4 and 5. Both plots
show the energy of the electron-positron pair moving in the ﬁeld of Cu+, with respect to the
energy of the Cu+ ion (in atomic units). Empty circles correspond to R = 15a0, while solid
ones correspond to R = 30a0. Dashed line shows the ground-state energy of the neutral
copper atom. The positron-atom state is bound when its energy is below the dashed line.
Fig. 4 shows the electron-positron energy of Cu-e+ as a function of the number of radial
basis functions in each electron and positron partial wave, n. The total number of partial
waves is ﬁxed by Lmax = 10. Note that convergence is visibly faster for the smaller cavity
radius. For R = 15a0 saturation begins at n ≈= 10 while for R = 30a0 the same level of
saturation can be seen only at n ≈= 18. Fig. 5 shows the Cu-e+ energy as a function of
the number of partial waves included, while the number of radial wave functions in each
wave is ﬁxed at n = 16 for R = 15a0 and n = 22 for R = 30a0. Saturation can be clearly
achieved for both radii at Lmax >
∼ 10. The diﬀerence in energy at the last (lowest) points
for R = 15a0 and R = 30a0 in both ﬁgures is the eﬀect of a ﬁnite cavity radius. It shifts
the energy obtained in the R = 15a0 calculation up with respect to the R = 30a0 result.
This eﬀect can be easily taken into account using the formulae presented in section II C. It
turns out that the results for both cavity radii coincide, i.e., yield identical κ from Eq. (7),
for the atomic potential radius of a = 5.5a0. The ﬁnal binding energy obtained is 0.0062
a.u., or 170 meV. This should be compared to the result of Ryzhikh and Mitroy [13], which
is 0.005518 a.u. or 150 meV. From the discussion of the accuracy of calculations which
follows we conclude that the diﬀerence between two results is within the accuracy of both
methods. A similar value is achieved in the CI calculation [16], which used 14 radial orbitals
in each partial wave up to Lmax = 10, after extrapolation to Lmax = ∞. However, the latter
procedure has considerable uncertainties.

There are several factors which aﬀect the accuracy of our calculations.

• The accuracy of calculation of ˆΣ and contributions of higher-order correlations. This
can be estimated by comparing calculations with and without the ﬁtting parameters,
as discussed in section III A. The introduction of the ﬁtting parameters for the electron
part of the correlation operator ˆΣe reduces the binding energy by about 0.0009 a.u.
However, the relevant uncertainty must be considerably smaller. Firstly, we saw that
the use of ﬁtting parameters really improves the calculated electron aﬃnity of copper.
We should expect the same eﬀect for the positron binding energy. Secondly, the eﬀects
of the ﬁtting parameters on the electron and positron operators ˆΣe and ˆΣp largely
cancel each other.

• Incompleteness of the basis set. We have seen from Figs 4 and 5 that the level of
convergence achieved is very high and the corresponding uncertainty is small. Never-
theless, there is a hidden uncertainty related to the radial coordinate mesh used, the
number of splines and other parameters which determine the details of the numerical
procedure. Varying these parameters shows that their eﬀect on the binding energy
does not exceed 0.001 a.u., when estimated conservatively.

9

• Finite cavity radius. This eﬀect on the binding energy calculated at R = 30a0 is very
small (∼ 0.0001 a.u.). Since the results for R = 15a0 and R = 30a0 coincide for very
reasonable value of the positron-atom potential radius a = 5.5aB, it is reasonable to
believe that the corresponding uncertainty is very small too.

Note that the diﬀerence between our calculated electron aﬃnity of copper and the exper-
imental value is 0.00066 a.u. If this value is compared with the numbers presented above, it
is evident that it also gives a reasonable estimate of the accuracy of the calculation of the
positron-copper binding energy (about 10%). Since the accuracy of calculations by Mitroy
and Ryzhikh [13] is not discussed in their paper the only thing we can do to estimate it is
to use the same approach. Their best result for Cu− diﬀers from the experimental value by
0.0116 a.u. (20%). If we adopt this value as the uncertainty of their result for the positron
binding by copper, we see that the two results for Cu-e+ bound state agree with each other
within the accuracy of the methods.

10

REFERENCES

[1] I. Aronson, C. J. Kleinman and L Spruch, Phys. Rev. A 4, 841 (1971).
[2] F. H. Gertler, H. B. Snodgrass, and L. Spruch, Phys. Rev. 172, 110 (1968).
[3] D. C. Clary, J. Phys. B 9, 3115 (1976).
[4] S. J. Ward, M. Horbatsch, R. P. McEachran, and A. D. Stauﬀer, J. Phys. B 22, 3763

[5] R. Szmytkowski, J. Phys. II France 3, 183 (1993); R. Szmytkowski, Acta Physica

[6] V. A. Dzuba, V. V. Flambaum, G. F. Gribakin, and W. A. King, Phys. Rev. A 52,

Polonica A 84, 1035 (1993).

(1989).

4541 (1995).

[7] G. G. Ryzhikh and J. Mitroy, Phys. Rev. Lett. 79, 4124 (4124).
[8] K. Strasburger and H. Chojnacki, J. Chem. Phys. 108, 3218 (1998).
[9] G. G. Ryzhikh and J. Mitroy, J. Phys. B. 31, L265 (1998); 31 3465 (1998);
[10] J. Yuan, B. D. Esry, T. Morishita, and C. D. Lin, Phys. Rev. A 58, R4 (1998).
[11] G. G. Ryzhikh and J. Mitroy, J. Phys. B. 31, L401 (1998).
[12] G. G. Ryzhikh, J. Mitroy and K. Varga, J. Phys. B. 31, 3965 (1998).
[13] G. G. Ryzhikh and J. Mitroy, J. Phys. B. 31, 4459 (1998).
[14] G. G. Ryzhikh and J. Mitroy, J. Phys. B. 31, 5013 (1998).
[15] J. Mitroy and G. G. Ryzhikh, J. Phys. B. 32, 1375 (1999).
[16] J. Mitroy and G. G. Ryzhikh, J. Phys. B. 32, 2831 (1999).
[17] V. A. Dzuba, V. V. Flambaum, W. A. King, B. N. Miller, and O. P. Sushkov, Phys.

Scripta T 46, 248 (1993).

[18] G. F. Gribakin and W. A. King, J. Phys. B 27, 2639 (1994).
[19] V. A. Dzuba, V. V. Flambaum, G. F. Gribakin, and W. A. King, J. Phys. B 29, 3151

(1996).

[20] V. A. Dzuba, V. V. Flambaum, and M. G. Kozlov, Phys. Rev. A 54, 3948 (1996).
[21] C. deBoor, A Practical Guide to Splines ( Springer, New York, 1978).
[22] J. Sapirstein and W. R. Johnson, J. Phys. B 29, 5213 (1996).
[23] V. A. Dzuba and W. R. Johnson, Phys. Rev. A 57, 2459 (1998).
[24] A. A. Radtsig and B. M. Smirnov, Parameters of Atoms and Atomic Ions: Handbook
(Energoatomizdat, Moscow, 1986); CRC Handbook of Physics and Chemistry, 69th edi-
tion, Editor-in Chief R. C. Weast (Boca Raton, Florida, CRC Press, 1988).

[25] C. E. Moore, Atomic Energy Levels, Natl. Bur. Stand. Circ. No. 467 (U.S. GPO, Wash-

ington, DC, 1958), Vol. III.

[26] I. Bray and A. Stelbovics, Phys. Rev. A 48 4787 (1993).
[27] L. D. Landau and E. M. Lifshitz, Quantum Mechanics, 3rd ed. (Pergamon Press, Oxford,

[28] C. W. Bauschlicher Jr., S. P. Walch, and H. Partridge, Chem. Phys. Lett. 103, 291

[29] C. M. Marian, Chem. Phys. Lett. 173, 175 (1990).
[30] P. Schwerdtfeger and G. A. Bowmaker, J. Chem. Phys. 100, 4487 (1994).
[31] P. Neogrady, V. Kello, M. Urban, and A. J. Sadrej, Int. J. Quantum Chem. 63, 557

UK, 1977).

(1984).

(1997).

[32] H. Hotop and W. C. Lineberger, J. Phys. Chem. Ref. Data 14, 731 (1975).
[33] R. C. Bilodeau, J. Phys. B, 3885 (1998).

11

TABLES

TABLE I. Ground state energies of Cu and Cu− calculated using diﬀerent approximations (a.u.).

RHFa
RHF + Σb
CIc
CI +Σd
CI + f × Σe
Experimentf

Cu

−0.23830
−0.27672
−0.23830
−0.27672
−0.28394
−0.28394

Cu−
−0.20309
−0.27280
−0.26424
−0.31802
−0.32869
−0.32935

Electron aﬃnity

−0.03521
−0.00392
0.02594
0.04130
0.04475
0.04541

aRelativistic Hartree-Fock; a single-conﬁguration approximation, no core-valence correlations are
included.
bSingle-conﬁguration approximation, core-valence correlations are included by means of MBPT.
cStandard CI method.
dCI+MBPT method, both core-valence and valence-valence correlations are included.
eΣ for s-wave is taken with factor f = 1.18 to ﬁt the Cu ground state energy.
f References [25,33].

TABLE II. Electron aﬃnities of Cu (eV). Comparison with other calculations and experiment.

Aﬃnity

1.06
1.01
1.199
1.236
0.921
0.916
1.218

1.226
1.2358

Ref.

[28]
[29]
[30]
[31]
[13]
[16]

[32]
[33]

Method

Theory

Nonrelativistic MR CI calculations
MR CI calculations in the DK no-pair formalism

Relativistic coupled cluster method
Nonrelativistic stochastic variational method
Nonrelativistic CI method
Present work

Experiment

12

a

b

a

a

a

n

b

m

b

FIGURES

α

n

3

α

m

n

b

4

FIG. 1. Second-order diagrams for the self-energy of the valence electron ( ˆΣe operator). Sum-

mation of excited electron states α and β and core hole states m and n is assumed.

FIG. 2. Second-order diagram for the positron self-energy ( ˆΣp operator). Double line denotes

a

c

b

d

a

c

α
n

a

c

b

d

b

d

n

β

3

FIG. 3. Screening of the positron-electron Coulomb interaction ( ˆΣep operator).

β

α

n

1

β

α

n

α
n

1

a

b

positron states.

β

α

2

2

13

-0.25

-0.26

-0.27

-0.28

-0.29

0

5

10

15

20

FIG. 4. Energy of Cue+ as a function of the number of radial electron and positron basis
functions in each partial wave (Lmax = 10). Open circles are for R = 15a0, and solid ones for
R = 30a0.

14

-0.26

-0.27

-0.28

-0.29

0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

1

FIG. 5. Energy of Cue+ as a function of maximal orbital momentum of the electron and
positron orbitals in the CI expansion. Open circles are for R = 15a0, and solid ones for R = 30a0.

15

