9
9
9
1
 
p
e
S
 
2
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
m
o
t
a
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
5
4
0
9
0
9
9
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Magnetic Field Induced Two-Body
Phenomena in Atoms

Peter Schmelcher and Lorenz S. Cederbaum

Theoretische Chemie, Universit¨at Heidelberg, Im Neuenheimer Feld
229, 69120 Heidelberg, Federal Republic of Germany

Abstract

We report on a number of recently discovered phenomena which
arise due to the interaction of the collective (CM) and internal
motion of atoms moving in magnetic ﬁelds. For neutral atoms
the properties of the so-called giant dipole states are discussed
and their experimental preparation is outlined. For ions mov-
ing in magnetic ﬁelds the energy ﬂow between the collective and
electronic motions is studied. For low CM velocities this results
in a crossover from localization to delocalization with respect to
the spreading of the mixing of the CM and internal motion in
quantum number space. Large CM velocities induce for both the
classical as well as quantum ion the self-ionization process. Future
perspectives for both multi-electron atoms as well as molecules are
drawn.

1

Introduction

External magnetic ﬁelds are well-known to have a strong impact on the
properties of particle systems. A number of intriguing phenomena in
diﬀerent areas of physics like, for example, the quantum Hall eﬀect in
solid state physics or the interplay of regularity and chaos in few-body
atomic systems [1] have their origin in the combination of the magnetic
and Coulomb forces. By nature the Coulomb potential together with
the paramagnetic and diamagnetic interaction represents a nonsepara-
ble and nonlinear problem already on the one-particle level. As a con-
sequence both the dynamics as well as the electronic structure of atoms
or molecules [2] are subject to severe changes in the presence of a strong
magnetic ﬁeld.

In the present article we review on selected recent developments for
Rydberg atoms in strong laboratory magnetic ﬁelds and outline future

1

perspectives. We also provide concrete suggestions how to experimen-
tally access and observe the corresponding atomic states and processes.
Of course, similar phenomena are to be expected also for astrophysical
ﬁeld strengths but the focus in this work is on highly excited atoms
exposed to laboratory ﬁeld strengths. Our central issue are phenom-
ena and eﬀects arising due to the nonseparability of the center of mass
and internal motion for two-body systems in external magnetic ﬁelds
and/or crossed electric and magnetic ﬁelds [3]. Due to the smallness of
the ratio of the electron to nuclear mass one might be, at ﬁrst glance,
tempted to believe that the eﬀects of the coupling of the collective and
internal motion provide only tiny corrections to the overall dynamics.
This is however in general not correct and indeed we will provide a num-
ber of diﬀerent physical situation in which even the correct qualitative
behaviour cannot be obtained without including the interaction of the
center of mass and relative motion. Prominent eﬀects due to this inter-
action are the chaotic classical diﬀusion of the center of mass [4, 5, 6, 7],
the existence of giant dipole states for neutral atoms and dynamical phe-
nomena like the self-ionization process for rapidly moving ions in strong
magnetic ﬁelds. As we shall see in the following the ongoing research in
this area reveals more and more of the beautiful phenomena created by
the competition of magnetic and Coulomb forces.

In detail we proceed as follows. Section I gives ﬁrst a brief account of
the separation of the CM motion for neutral particle systems in magnetic
ﬁelds and subsequently investigates a class of decentred magnetically
dressed Rydberg states possessing a huge electric dipole moment. A
possible experimental set-up for the preparation of these states as well
as applications to the positronium atom are discussed. Section II reviews
on recent developments for ionic systems like the classical self-ionization
process for rapidly moving ions in magnetic ﬁelds. A number of most
recently discovered quantum properties of ions in ﬁelds are outlined and
clearly indicate that quantization introduces a number of new features.

2 Neutral atoms in magnetic ﬁelds

2.1 Giant dipole states in crossed ﬁelds

In the absence of an external magnetic ﬁeld the CM and electronic mo-
tions of an atom separate due to the conservation of the total canonical
momentum P. P is the generator for coordinate space translations which
represent a symmetry for any system of particles interacting through a

2

potential which depends only on the distances of the particles. In a ho-
mogeneous magnetic ﬁeld this symmetry is lost since the Hamiltonian
depends explicitly on the vector potential associated with the external
ﬁeld. Nevertheless, there exists a so-called phase space translation group
which represents a symmetry in the presence of the external ﬁeld. This
group is generated by the so-called pseudomomentum. Historically the
pseudomomentum was implicitly used by Lamb [8] in order to perform a
so-called pseudoseparation of the CM motion for the hydrogen atom in a
homogeneous magnetic ﬁeld. In the late seventies a more profound math-
ematical treatment of the pseudoseparation for two-body systems was
achieved [9]. In the eighties and nineties the pseudoseparation for many-
body systems has been reviewed (see ref.[10] and references therein) and
it was adapted to the needs of molecular physics [11].

In order to perform the pseudoseparation transformation as men-
tioned above one starts with the Hamiltonian of the atom in the labora-
tory frame which reads for a two-body system

HL =

2

Xi=1

[

1
2mi

(pi −

eiAi)2

r1 −
eiEri] + V (
|

r2|
)

−

(1)

{

×

2 B

ri, pi}

where ei, mi, Ai and E denote the charges, masses, vector potential and
are the Cartesian coordinates
electric ﬁeld vector, respectively.
and momenta in the laboratory coordinate system. Subsequently one
chooses a certain gauge for the vector potential Ai belonging to the
magnetic ﬁeld B. Most commonly this is done by introducing the sym-
metric gauge Ai = 1
ri. As a next step a coordinate transformation
from laboratory to relative and center of mass coordinates follows. Fi-
nally the pseudomomentum is introduced as a canonical momentum of
the center of mass coordinate by performing a corresponding transfor-
mation in momentum space which gives the ﬁnal transformed Hamilto-
nian. Choosing, according to the above, a speciﬁc gauge in the labora-
tory Hamiltonian has, however, a serious drawback: It is not possible
to discern between gauge dependent and gauge invariant terms in the
transformed Hamiltonian. In order to extract the physics, which is in-
herently gauge-independent, from the transformed Hamiltonian it is a
central issue to identify gauge invariant parts of it. The necessity of a
gauge-invariant approach has been realized in the nineties by diﬀerent
authors [12, 13, 14] which have chosen diﬀerent approaches in order to
obtain a gauge-independent formalism and results for the problem of
two interacting particles. Most importantly it was ﬁnally shown [14, 15]

3

that there exists a potential picture (see below) due to a number of
gauge-invariant terms emerging from the generalized pseudoseparation.

Let us consider the ﬁnal Hamiltonian resulting from the afore-mentioned

gauge independent pseudoseparation [14]

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

=

+

H

T

V

=

T

1
2µ

(p

qA(r))2

−

where

and

=

1
2M

(K

eB

r)2 + V (r) +

v2
D + KvD

M
2
M and ˆµ = mM0

−

×
ˆµ where µ = mM0

V
with the charge q = eµ
M0−m are diﬀerent
reduced masses. K is now the constant vector of the pseudomomen-
r, p
tum which contains a term linear in the external electric ﬁeld.
}
denote the canonical pair of variables for the internal relative motion.
vD = (E×B)
is the drift velocity of free charged particles in crossed ex-
ternal ﬁelds. The latter is independent of the charges and masses of the
particles. The Hamiltonian (1) is the sum of two terms: The kinetic
energy

of the relative motion and the potential

B2

{

.

The explicit form of the kinetic energy

depends on the chosen
gauge via the vector potential A. The important novelty with respect
. Apart
to our Hamiltonian
from the Coulomb potential V and the constant term M
D + KvD V
contains an additional potential term

is the appearance of the potential term
2 v2

H

V

T

V

T

Vo =

1
2M

(K

eB

−

×

r)2

The latter is gauge independent, i.e. does not contain the vector po-
tential, and, therefore, fully deserves the interpretation of an additional
potential for the internal motion with the kinetic energy (2). Apart
from the constant K2
2M the potential Vo contains two coordinate depen-
B)r consists of
dent parts. The term linear in the coordinates
two Stark terms: one which is due to the external electric ﬁeld E and
a second one which is a motional Stark term with an induced constant
electric ﬁeld 1
B). The latter electric ﬁeld is always ori-
ented perpendicular to the magnetic one and arises due to the collective
motion of the atom through the homogeneous magnetic ﬁeld. Besides the
linear terms there exists a quadratic, i.e. diamagnetic, term e
r)2

M ((K + M vD)

e
M (K

−

×

×

2

2M (B

×

4

in the potential Vo which is of great importance for the main subject of
the present section, i.e. the existence of giant dipole states of two-body
system in external ﬁelds.

2

V

V

V

−

−

−

In the following we discuss the qualitative properties of the poten-
. Figure 1 shows for the choice B = (0, 0, B), K = (0, K, 0) and
tial
a vanishing external electric ﬁeld a two-dimensional intersection of the
potential
for z = 0. In the neighbourhood of the coordinate origin
the Coulomb potential dominates. This regime corresponds in ﬁgure 1
to the tube around the origin of the coordinate plane (x, y). With in-
axis (y = 0) the Stark
creasing distance from the origin along the x
term ( −e
M )BKx increases and becomes eventually comparable with the
Coulomb potential. This means that we encounter an approximately lin-
ear raise of the potential for positive values of the x
coordinate. For neg-
coordinate eventually a saddle point emerges. In
ative values of the x
this coordinate regime the diamagnetic term of eq.(4) represents a small
correction. For even larger distances the Coulomb potential becomes
small and the shape of the potential
is more and more determined
by the diamagnetic term ( e
2M )B2(x2 + y2). Due to the competition of
the Stark and diamagnetic terms our potential
develops an outer min-
imum and a corresponding potential well. The existence of both the
saddle point and the outer minimum/well depends, of course, on the
values of the magnetic ﬁeld strength and the motional/external electric
ﬁeld strength. For a derivation and discussion of the corresponding con-
ditions we refer the reader to the literature [14, 15]. We emphasize that
the potential Vo is inseparably connected with the ﬁnite nuclear mass.
0 and the described
Assuming an inﬁnite nuclear mass simply yields Vo ≡
features of the total potential
The above-discussed properties of our potential

have important
implications on the dynamical behaviour of the atom. First of all, we
observe that the ionization of the atom can take place only in the di-
rection of the magnetic ﬁeld axis: In the direction perpendicular to the
magnetic ﬁeld vector the diamagnetic term e
r)2 is dominating
for large distances ρ = (x2 + y2)1/2 and causes a conﬁning behaviour.
The second important observation is the fact that the existence of the
outer well leads to new weakly bound states in this well. Let us pro-
vide some main characteristics of these states. In refs.[14, 15] an explicit
approximation formula has been given for the position of the outer min-
B + KM
K 3−2MB , y = z = 0. Hence, for a laboratory ﬁeld
imum: x0 ≃ −
2.35 T esla and a motional/external electric ﬁeld of the
strength B
∼
m the minimum is located at a distance of about
2.8
order of E
∼

disappear.

2M (B

103 V

×

×

V

V

V

K

2

5

×

10−6m from the Coulomb singularity. For states in the outer well
5.3
the electron and proton are therefore separated about 100,000 times as
much as they are in the ground state of the hydrogen atom without ex-
ternal ﬁelds, i.e. we encounter a strongly delocalized atom of mesoscopic
size. Since the well exists only on the half-hyperplane with a negative
Stark term (see ﬁg.1) these states possess a huge permanent electric
dipole moment of the atom. This is in contrast to the well-known Ryd-
berg states in a pure magnetic ﬁeld which do not exhibit a permanent
dipole moment. For energies close to the minimum the outer well is
approximately an anisotropic harmonic potential. Low-lying quantum
states can therefore be described by an anharmonic oscillator in a mag-
netic ﬁeld [14]. The ﬁeld-dependent kinetic energy (see eq.(2)) hereby
determines the extension of the wave function in the plane perpendicu-
lar to the magnetic ﬁeld. The deviation of the exact energies from those
of the harmonic approximation changes, as expected, signiﬁcantly with
increasing degree of excitation. It grows stepwise and a major contri-
bution to the anharmonicity comes from the quantum number nz i.e.
the excitation in the direction parallel to the magnetic ﬁeld. This can
also be seen in perturbation theory for higher terms of the expansion
of the Coulomb potential where the major contributions to the energy
corrections are due to those terms containing high powers of z. For
the computational techniques to obtain energies and wavefunctions for
a large number of states in the outer well as well as a detailed discussion
of their properties we refer the reader to ref.[14].

2.2 Experimental preparation

At this point it is natural to pose the question how one can experi-
mentally prepare hydrogen atoms in crossed ﬁelds in their giant dipole
states. This question has been investigated and discussed in detail in
ref.[16]. We provide here the key ideas of the approach developed in
this work. The important parameter which controls the formation of
the outer well and is at disposal to the experimentalist is the external
electric ﬁeld strength. The preparation scheme consists of a sequence
of steps which correspond to diﬀerent electric ﬁeld conﬁgurations. The
ﬁrst step excites the atom in the presence of a magnetic ﬁeld but no
electric ﬁeld from the ground state with a laser pulse to a highly excited
Rydberg state. In the second step an electric ﬁeld is switched on within
a time period of a few ns to a value E = Ec which corresponds to the
existence of a shallow outer well. Subsequently, during the third step the

6

electric ﬁeld is kept constant for a time period ∆t. The Rydberg states
prepared in step one are localized in the Coulomb well. After the switch-
ing of the electric ﬁeld to Ec (step two) their energy is above the saddle
point. Keeping the electric ﬁeld constant during the third time step has
the reason to achieve a signiﬁcant spreading of the prepared state over
the shallow outer well. Thereafter, in a third step, the electric ﬁeld is
switched to its ﬁnal value Ef which corresponds to a deep outer well.
This last step of the preparation procedure captures the wave packet in
the outer well and a signiﬁcant portion of the hydrogen atoms therefore
ends up in low-energy states of the outer well. The second switching of
the electric ﬁeld to its ﬁnal value Ef is much slower than the ﬁrst fast
switching to the value Ec. The reason herefore is the broadening of the
ﬁnal energy distribution during the trapping of the hydrogen atoms in
the outer well. An adiabatic second switching is therefore obligatory in
order to end up with a narrow ﬁnal energy distribution. Figure 2 shows
the ﬁnal energy distribution in the outer well resulting from calculations
for an ensemble of classical trajectories which simulate the behaviour of
the highly excited Rydberg states during the above-discussed steps of
preparation. It can clearly be seen that the maximum of the energy dis-
tribution is below the ionization threshold (vertical dashed line in ﬁgure
2) and therefore a signiﬁcant part of the prepared outer well states is
strictly bound. For further details of the experimental setup and prepa-
ration like, for example, the speciﬁc switching procedures of the electric
ﬁeld or the inﬂuence of electric stray ﬁelds on the preparation scheme
we refer the reader to ref.[16].

Let us provide some remarks with respect to the experimental detec-
tion of the giant dipole states of the hydrogen atom in crossed electric
and magnetic ﬁelds. Direct state-to-state transitions for bound states in
the outer well should be observable in the radio-frequency regime. The
energy gap between the ground and ﬁrst excited state corresponds, for
the above-given ﬁeld strengths, to a frequency of the order of magnitude
of a few tens of MHz. Alternatively the large electric dipole moment
suggests itself for detection which could be achieved through deﬂection
of the atoms by a slightly inhomogeneous electric ﬁeld [17]. Even though
the binding energies of the states in the outer well are relatively small
they should be stable as long as collisional interaction is prevented.

We have discussed the existence and properties as well as the experi-
mental preparation and detection of giant dipole states for the hydrogen
atom in crossed ﬁelds. The electric ﬁeld can hereby be either an external
one or due to the collective motion of the hydrogen atom through the

7

magnetic ﬁeld. For these states the magnetic interaction is dominating
the Coulomb attraction in the plane perpendicular to the magnetic ﬁeld
whereas parallel to the magnetic ﬁeld we exclusively encounter Coulomb
forces. The electric ﬁeld causes the decentred character of these states
[18, 19, 20]. Of course this kind of states does not only exist for one-
electron atoms but should occur also for more-electron systems. Indeed
it is a challenging question to ask for the existence and properties of
decentred multielectron atoms in crossed external ﬁelds. Moreover one
can imagine giant dipole molecules which, due to the presence of several
heavy particles, might possess completely diﬀerent features compared to
atoms.

2.3 Application to Positronium

∼

∝

Besides the above-drawn general perspective there exists an intriguing
application of the above results to exotic two-body systems, namely the
positronium atom [21, 22]. Since the distance of the minimum of the
outer well from the Coulomb singularity is approximately proportional
EM
to the total mass of the two-body system (
B2 ) we expect that the
giant dipole states for positronium are signiﬁcantly less extended than
those of hydrogen. At the same time the critical electric ﬁeld strength
necessary for the existence of the outer well scales with M − 2
3 . As a
consequence the typical reduction of size for ﬁxed ﬁeld strength is of
the order of 10, i.e. for B
2.35 T the extension of the Rydberg state
is several thousand Bohr radii. The giant dipole states located in the
outer well and the traditional Rydberg states located in the Coulomb
well are separated by a wide and high potential barrier. For the positro-
nium atom this has important consequences: the potential barrier pre-
vents the particles from contact and therefore decreases the annihilation
rate by many orders of magnitude. Indeed, for typical laboratory ﬁeld
strengths the lifetime can become many years and low-lying outer well
states of positronium can, for all practical purposes, be considered as
stable [21, 22]. Crossed ﬁelds oﬀer therefore a unique opportunity for
the stabilization of matter-antimatter two-body systems. For a detailed
investigation of the positronium atom including dipole transition rates,
tunneling probabilities as well as spectra and wavefunctions resulting
from both perturbation theoretical and ﬁnite element calculations we
refer the reader to refs.[21, 22]. We conclude with an important result of
ref.[22] which should be of relevance to astrophysical situations: For suf-
ﬁciently strong ﬁelds the energetically lowest decentred outer well state

8

becomes the global ground state of the atom. This statement holds
for both the hydrogen atom as well as the Positronium atom. As a
consequence the ground state of isolated positronium in strong crossed
external ﬁelds is prevented from annihilation and represents a long-lived
state.

3 Atomic ions in magnetic ﬁelds

3.1 Basic properties

For a charged atom in a magnetic ﬁeld the interaction of its collective
motion with the electronic motion is more intricate than for neutral
species. From a physical point of view it is evident that the crudest
picture for the CM motion describes the ion as an entity in the magnetic
ﬁeld with a charge and mass identical to the net charge and total mass
of the ion. For neutral systems the net charge of the system is zero and
the crudest picture for the behaviour of the CM is a free straightlined
motion through the magnetic ﬁeld. However, as we shall see below, we
encounter coupling terms for the ions CM and electronic motions which
can mix them up heavily thereby causing a number of interesting energy
transfer processes between the degrees of freedom.

From a formal point of view the maximum number of commuting
constants of motion is the same for neutral as well as charged systems.
For neutral species, however, one can choose the three components of the
total pseudomomentum K which are exclusively associated with the CM
motion of the system. As a consequence the CM coordinates are cyclic
and can be completely eliminated by the so-called pseudoseparation from
the Hamiltonian (see section 2.1). For charged systems the only maxi-
mal set of commuting constants of motion is (K2
Lk, Kk) where K⊥ is
⊥,
the component of the pseudomomentum perpendicular to the magnetic
Lk is the component of the total angular momentum parallel
ﬁeld and
to the ﬁeld. This set of quantities is not exclusively associated with
the CM motion but involves both the CM and internal degrees of free-
dom. Unlike the neutral system the CM coordinates cannot completely
be eliminated from the Hamiltonian. To simplify the Hamiltonian one
therefore uses a transformation [23] which possesses a certain analogy to
the transformations in the neutral case thereby arriving at the following
ﬁnal form

=

H1 +

H2 +

H3

H

(6)

9

(7)

(8)

(9)

where

P

2M (cid:18)

−

B

R

×

(cid:19)

Q
2

2

1

H1 =
α
M (cid:18)

H2 = e

B

P

× (cid:18)

−

B

R

×

(cid:19)(cid:19)

r

Q
2

H3 =

1
2m (cid:18)

p

−

e
2

B

r +

×

Q
2

m2
M 2

B

r
(cid:19)

×

2

+

1
2M0 (cid:18)

p +

e
2 −

Q
2M

m
M

(cid:18)

(M + M0)

B

r
(cid:19)

×

(cid:19)

+ V

2

where m, M0 and M are the electron, nuclear and total mass, respectively.
α = (M0 + Zm)/M and V is the Coulomb potential. For the vector
potential A we have adopted the symmetric gauge. The magnetic ﬁeld
vector B again is assumed to point along the z-axis. (R, P) and (r, p)
are the canonical pairs of variables for the CM and relative motion,
respectively.

H

The Hamiltonian

consists of three parts which introduce diﬀerent
types of interaction. The part
H1 in eq.(6), which involves solely the
CM degrees of freedom, describes the cyclotron motion of a free pseu-
doparticle with mass M and charge Q in a homogeneous magnetic ﬁeld
(see comments at the beginning of this subsection). This zeroth order
picture is, in general, not suﬃcient to describe the CM motion of the ion.
In fact the behaviour of the CM can deviate strongly from the motion
H1 and exhibits a variety of diﬀerent phe-
given by the Hamiltonian
nomena depending on the parameter values (energy, ﬁeld strength, CM
velocity) [23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28]. The origin of this rich dynamics lies in
particular in the Hamiltonian
H2 in eq.(7) which describes the coupling
of the CM and electronic degrees of freedom. It represents a motional
Stark term with a rapidly oscillating electric ﬁeld which is determined by
the dynamics of the system. Because of this ”dynamical” electric ﬁeld
the collective and internal motion will, in general, mix up heavily.
H3
in eq.(8) contains only the electronic degrees of freedom and describes,
to zeroth order, the relative motion of the electron with respect to the
nucleus.

10

3.2 Mixing and localization properties for the col-

lective and electronic motions

The Hamiltonian
H2 in eq.(7) destroys the picture of a decoupled CM
and electronic motion and causes an interaction of these motions whose
strength depends on several parameters (CM and internal energy, ﬁeld
strength). In the following we outline both classical and quantum eﬀects
and phenomena due to this interaction [23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28]. We hereby
pursue the track of an increasing strength of the coupling of the collective
and internal motion which can in particular be achieved by increasing
the energy of the CM motion.

In order to investigate the signiﬁcance and eﬀects of the coupling
H2 one can use the following method for formally solving
Ψ = EΨ. The most natural way is to

Hamiltonian
the total Schr¨odinger equation
expand the total wave function Ψ in a series of products

H

Ψ(R; r) =

cpqΦL

p (R)ψq(r)

(10)

Xp,q

p ΦL

p = EL

H1ΦL

obey the Schr¨odinger equation

where cpq are the coeﬃcients of the product expansion. The functions
ΦL
p for a free particle
p }
{
with charge Q and mass M in a homogeneous magnetic ﬁeld, i.e. they are
the corresponding Landau orbitals. One proper choice for the functions
in the expansion (9) (see also below) are the eigenfunctions of the
ψq}
{
H3ψq = EI
q ψq (q stands collectively for all
electronic Hamiltonian, i.e.
electronic quantum numbers). If we insert the product expansion (9) for
the total wave function Ψ in the total Schr¨odinger equation and project
on a simple product ΦL
p′ψq′ we arrive at the following set of coupled
equations for the coeﬃcients

:
H2 + EL + EI )c = Ec
(
. EL and EI are the
where c is the column vector with components
cpq}
{
and internal
diagonal matrices which contain the Landau energies
energies
, respectively. The original problem of the investigation
of the signiﬁcance and eﬀects of the couplings among the CM and elec-
tronic degrees of freedom is now reduced to that of the solution of the
eigenvalue problem (10).
H2 contains the matrix elements of the cou-
pling Hamiltonian
H2. These elements can, via certain commutation
relations, be transformed into pure dipole transition matrix elements of
the CM as well as internal degrees of freedom (see ref.[23] for details)

EL
p }

EI
q }

cpq}

(11)

{

{

{

H2 =

−

ieα(EL
p′

EL
p )

ΦL
p′

R
|

ΦL
|

p i ·

· h

[B

ψq′

r
]
ψqi
|
|

× h

−

(12)

11

Obviously the coupling matrix elements (
H2){p′q′}{pq} vanish if the two
Landau states ΦL
p′ and ΦL
p . Tran-
sitions, therefore, do occur only for total states which involve diﬀerent
states of the collective motion with respect to their energy.

p possess the same energy EL

p′ = EL

{

{

ψq}

ψq}

The expansion (9) with

being the eigenfunctions of the elec-
H3 is particularly adequate if the coupling is suﬃ-
tronic Hamiltonian
ciently weak which means that the series contains only a few dominant
terms. Otherwise, i.e.
in the case that many terms contribute signiﬁ-
cantly to the sum, the mixing of the CM and electronic motion is strong
and may require for its proper and eﬃcient description either a diﬀer-
ent choice for the functions
or an alternative approach (see below)
to the expansion (9). Let us evaluate the importance of the coupling
terms for diﬀerent physical situations at laboratory ﬁeld strengths. We
hereby concentrate on the He+-ion moving in a magnetic ﬁeld. The
simplest way to treat the couplings is to assume that the electronic wave
functions are to zeroth order well-described by the ﬁeld-free hydrogenic
wave functions and to take into account the electronic diamagnetic in-
teraction via perturbation theory. This description is appropriate for
laboratory ﬁeld strengths for not too high electronic excitations, i.e. for
a ﬁeld strength of a few Tesla typically up to n = 10
20. The relevant
indicator for the mixing of CM and electronic motions is the quotient of
the coupling κ and the energy spacing ∆ of the corresponding diagonal
matrix elements in (EL + EI ). For electronic states belonging to the
same principal quantum number n (the latter being not too large) i.e.
for the case of dominant intramanifold coupling, we obtain [23]

−

where N is the principal quantum number of the Landau orbitals. For
n = 10 and a typical laboratory ﬁeld strength B = 2.35T N has to be of
108 to make the coupling κ as large as the
the order of magnitude N
energy spacing ∆. The corresponding energy of the CM motion is some
10eV . For the case of intermanifold coupling, i.e. the coupling of states
belonging to diﬀerent n-manifolds we obtain

≈

Choosing B = 10T and n = 10 the requirement that κ should be of the
1010, i.e. a CM energy of the ion of
order of magnitude of ∆ yields N
≈
a few keV. This means that at these energies the couplings become not

(κ/∆)

√N B
M

n2

∝

(κ/∆)

√N B
M

∝

Bn5

12

(13)

(14)

only dominant for states within the same n manifold but also important
for states belonging to adjacent n manifolds.

The above considerations provide an idea how important the coupling
of the CM and electronic motion is for diﬀerent values of the parameters
>
n(internal energy),N (CM energy), B(ﬁeld strength). In the case κ
∼1 we
∆
encounter a strong mixing of the Landau orbitals ΦL
p and the electronic
functions ψq. The expansion (9) of an eigenfunction Ψ of
involves
therefore a large number of wave functions
which means that the
typical spatial extension of Ψ with respect to the electronic coordinates
is much larger than that of the individual functions ψq. A perturbation
theoretical approach with respect to the coupling Hamiltonian
H2 is
not appropriate in this case. Instead, as already mentioned above, an
eﬃcient description of the wave function might either be achieved by a
in the expansion (9) or
better (intuitive) choice for the functions
by pursuing a conceptually diﬀerent approach (see below).

ψq}

ψq}

H

{

{

On the other hand side it is interesting to consider the situation of
increasing internal energy
H3 for ﬁxed ﬁeld strength. It is well-known
that the ﬁxed nucleus one-electron atom undergoes a classical transi-
tion from regularity to chaos with increasing excitation energy and the
quantized atom shows the corresponding quantum signatures of chaos
[1]. Perturbation theory with respect to the magnetic interaction terms
is only applicable for suﬃciently small ﬁeld strengths/internal energies
which corresponds, in a classical language, to the regime for which phase
space is dominated by regular structures. Treating the ion in the inter-
mediate case of mixed regular and chaotic classical phase space is a
diﬃcult task. However for another limiting case, namely the situation
of a completely chaotic phase space (Coulomb- and diamagnetic interac-
tion are of equal strength) a statistical approach to the matrixelements
and spectrum of the Hamiltonian
H3 seems appropriate. Such an ap-
proach has been developed in ref.[26] and allows to extract important
statistical properties for the mixing of the electronic (due to
H3) and
CM (due to
H3 is hereby rep-
H1) wave functions. The Hamiltonian
resented by a random matrix ensemble, i.e.
the Gaussian orthogonal
ensemble (GOE), which is the appropriate semiclassical description of a
completely chaotic system [29]. The GOE provides the ﬂuctuations of
the chaotic levels. The mean level density (MLD) as a function of en-
ergy, ﬁeld strength and in particular electronic angular momentum Lz is
a key ingredient for the speciﬁcation of the random matrix ensemble and
can in our case be obtained via the semiclassical Thomas-Fermi formula
[26]. It represents the density of irregular states. The size of the matrix

13

H1,

H2 and

H2 can be determined from a semiclassical relation between
elements of
oﬀ-diagonal matrix elements of an operator, and the Fourier transform
of its classical autocorrelation function [30]. For more details on the con-
crete appearance of the statistical-semiclassical model for the moving ion
we refer the reader to ref.[26] and report here only on some major re-
sults. Of particular interest are the properties of the eigenvectors which
are obtained through diagonalization of the total matrix Hamiltonian
consisting of the parts
H3. For suﬃciently low CM energies
we encounter an exponential localization of the components of the eigen-
vectors around some maximum component. With increasing CM energy
the localization length λ, which reﬂects the typical length of the mixing
process in the space of the quantum states, increases. In ref.[26] it was,
however, shown that the eigenvectors of this statistical model possess
a ﬁnite length Lc. At some critical CM energy the localization length
becomes therefore larger than Lc, i.e. larger than the size of the system
in the space of the quantum states, and we encounter a crossover from
localization to delocalization. We conclude with the remark that there
exists an intriguing analogy of a simpliﬁed version of the above statisti-
cal model with models for transport in disordered ﬁnite-size wires whose
localization lengths and related properties are known exactly.

3.3 Energy transfer processes for rapidly moving

atomic ions

In the present subsection we focus on the situation of a rapidly moving
highly excited ion. The corresponding CM energy is much larger than
the initial electronic binding energy. Since the coupling of the collective
and electronic motion will be large, energy exchange processes between
the CM and electronic motion are extremely relevant and provide some
intriguing new phenomena [24, 25, 27, 28]. The study of both the clas-
sical as well as quantum properties provides additional insight into our
understanding of the quantization on the classical energy ﬂow.

The classical energy exchange equation for the CM energy Ecm and

for the internal energy Eint = µ

2 ˙r2 + V reads as follows [24, 25]

d
dt

d
dt

−

Ecm =

Eint = eα

B

˙R

˙r

(cid:17)

×

(cid:16)

(15)

This equation shows that a permanent ﬂow of energy from the CM to
the electronic degrees of freedom and vice versa has to be expected. Let
us consider a typical classical trajectory corresponding to the above-

14

described situation of a rapidly moving highly excited Rydberg atom.
After a transient time of bound oscillations in the internal motion (en-
ergy) a strong ﬂow of energy from the CM to the internal motion takes
place. The internal energy is hereby increased above the threshold for
ionization , Eth = 0, and the ion eventually ionizes, i.e. the electron
escapes in the direction parallel to the magnetic ﬁeld. Note that the
motion of the electron is conﬁned in the direction perpendicular to the
magnetic ﬁeld.

×

×

106a.u.(1.7

Figure 3 provides a prototype example for such an ionizing trajec-
tory. The subﬁgures 3a and 3b illustrate the time-dependencies of the
CM-energy and the z-component of the internal relative coordinate, re-
spectively. After the above-mentioned initial phase of oscillations there
10−10s) a sudden loss
occurs at approximately T = 7
of CM kinetic energy simultaneously accompanied by an increase in the
internal energy which causes the electron to move away from the nucleus
in the positive z-direction. The transferred energy, which is in our case
10−3 a.u.(0.2eV ), corresponds to a small
of ﬁgure 3 approximately 6
fraction of the total initial CM energy which is for our example about
12.2677 a.u. (333.8eV ). This self-ionization process is only possible due
to the presence of the coupling term
H2 in the Hamiltonian (7) which
involves both the internal and CM degrees of freedom. The ionization
time for an individual trajectory depends, apart from its intrinsic dy-
namics, on the ﬁeld strength and in particular on the CM kinetic energy
of the ion.

×

−

In order to gain an idea of the statistical measure for the ionization
process it is instructive to consider for an ensemble of trajectories the
fraction of ionized orbits as a function of time. The initial internal
energy is chosen to correspond to a completely chaotic phase space of the
He+
ion if the nuclear mass were inﬁnite. In ﬁgure 4 we have illustrated
the fraction of ionized orbits as a function of time up to T = 1010 a.u.
for a series of diﬀerent CM energies and for a strong laboratory ﬁeld
strength B = 23.5T . For an initial CM energy of Ecm = 0.053 a.u. which
s about 70% of
corresponds to an initial CM velocity of Vcm = 8.4
the trajectories are ionized within a time of T = 109 a.u. (2.4
10−8s)
which is the tenth part of the integration time. In contrast to this we
have for Ecm = 0.01 a.u. only about 30% of ionized orbits within the
total integration time of T = 1010 a.u. (2.4
10−7s). The ionization
process depends, therefore, very sensitively on the initial CM kinetic
energy of the ion.

103 m

×

×

×

The above investigations have shown the existence of the self-ionization

15

process through energy transfer from the CM to the electronic motion
for the classically moving ion in a magnetic ﬁeld. For the limit of very
highly excited electronic states and a large CM energies it is expected
that the above described behaviour reﬂects the true dynamics of the
ion. The natural question arises now how quantization changes or en-
riches this picture for the typical energies accessible experimentally. It
is well-known that quantization can alter the eﬀects observed in classi-
cal dynamics (see ref.[32] and references therein). Very recently an ap-
proach which consists of a combination of semiclassical and wave packet
propagation techniques has been developed which is appropriate for the
description of the quantum dynamics of the highly excited and rapidly
moving quantum ion in a magnetic ﬁeld. The results of the corresponding
investigations [27] show that the quantum self-ionization obeys a time
scale which is by orders of magnitude larger than the corresponding clas-
sical process. The typical ionization times are for both the classical as
well as quantum processes much smaller than the life times of the highly-
excited Rydberg states. In addition the ionization signal is seemingly
aﬀected by quantum coherence phenomena which yield strong ﬂuctua-
tions for the time-dependence of the ionization rate. More studies have
to be performed in order to elucidate the dynamics in the semiclassical
and deep quantum regime both theoretically as well as experimentally
[31].

Let us comment on a very recent application [28] of the eﬀects of the
coupling and mixing of the collective and internal motion in exotic atoms.
It was shown that one can stimulate, by using present-day laboratory
magnetic ﬁelds, transitions between the lm sub-levels of fast µHe+ ions
formating in muon catalyzed fusion. This gives a possibility to drive
the population of the lm sub-levels by applying a ﬁeld of a few Tesla,
which aﬀects the reactivation rate of the fusion process and is especially
important to its Kα X

ray production.

To conclude, we have discussed a number of intriguing phenomena
for two-body atoms in magnetic ﬁelds which have their origin in the
nonseparability of the CM and internal motion causing an interaction of
the collective and internal motion. It has to be expected that this in-
teraction will induce even more phenomena for multi-electron atoms or
molecules. For the case of heteronuclear molecules the relevant coupling
Hamiltonian contains both the vibrational and rotational degrees of free-
dom and new vibrational or rotational structures as well as dynamical
processes might therefore arise once the coupling becomes signiﬁcant i.e.
comparable to the spacing of the vibrational or rotational energy levels.

−

16

Figure captions

Figure 1: A two-dimensional intersection of the potential
perpendicular of the magnetic ﬁeld.

V

in the plane

Figure 2: Distribution over energy in the outer well after the prepa-
ration is completed. In the calculation a magnetic ﬁeld strength B = 14T
was used. The ionization threshold is shown by a vertical dashed line.
The inset shows the spreading of the trajectories over the saddle point
into the outer well during the intermediate time step of a constant elec-
tric ﬁeld Ec.

Figure 3: (a) The CM energy as function of time.

(b) The z-
component of the internal relative coordinate as a function of time.
The total and initial internal energy of the ionizing trajectory are E =
10−2eV, respectively. The ﬁeld strength
333.68eV and Eint =
is B = 23.5T.

8.16

×

−

Figure 4: The ionized fraction for an ensemble of 250 trajectories as
a function of time.From top to bottom the CM-energies belonging to the
ionization curves are ECM = 1.45, 0.63, 0.47, 0.34, 0.27eV , respectively.
10−3eV. The ﬁeld
The initial internal energy is always Eint =
strength is B = 23.5T.

9.25

−

×

References

[1] H.Friedrich and D.Wintgen, Phys.Rep. 183, 37 (1989)

[2] Atoms and Molecules in Strong External Fields, Plenum Press New

York (1998), ed. by P.Schmelcher and W.Schweizer

[3] P.Schmelcher and L.S.Cederbaum, Structure and Bonding, Vol.86,

p.27-62, Springer Verlag 1997.

17

[4] P.Schmelcher and L.S.Cederbaum, Physics Letters A 164, 305 (1992)

[5] P.Schmelcher and L.S.Cederbaum, Zeitschrift f”ur Physik D 24, 311

(1992)

[6] P.Schmelcher, Journal of Physics B 25, 2697 (1992)

[7] H.Friedrich, Theoretical Atomic Physics, Springer 1998

[8] W.E.Lamb, Phys.Rev.85, 259 (1952)

[9] J.E.Avron, I.W.Herbst and B.Simon, Ann.Phys.(NY) 114, 431

[10] B.R.Johnson, J.O.Hirschfelder and K.H.Yang, Rev.Mod.Phys. 55,

(1978)

109 (1983)

[11] P.Schmelcher, L.S.Cederbaum and U.Kappes, Kluwer Academic
Publishers, Conceptual Trends in Quantum Chemistry, 1-51 (1994)

[12] I.Dzyaloshinskii, Phys.Lett.A 165, 69 (1992)

[13] D.Baye, N.Clerbaux and M.Vincke, Phys.Lett. A 166, 135 (1992)

[14] O.Dippel, P.Schmelcher and L.S.Cederbaum, Phys.Rev.A 49, 4415

(1994)

[15] P.Schmelcher and L.S.Cederbaum, Chem.Phys.Lett.208, 548 (1993)

[16] V.Averbukh, N.Moiseyev, P.Schmelcher and L.S.Cederbaum,

Phys.Rev.A 59, 3695 (1999)

[17] M.Fauth, H.Walter and E.Werner, Z.Phys.D 7, 293 (1987);

G.Raithel, M.Fauth and H.Walter, Phys.Rev. A 47, 419 (1993)

[18] V.G.Bezchastnov and A.Y.Potekhin, J.Phys.B15, 3349 (1994)

[19] A.Y.Potekhin, J.Phys.B27, 1073 (1994)

[20] V.B.Bezchastnov, J.Phys.B28, 167 (1995)

[21] J.Ackermann, J.Shertzer and P.Schmelcher, Phys.Rev.Lett.78, 199

[22] J.Shertzer, J.Ackermann and P.Schmelcher, Phys.Rev.A58, 1129

(1997)

(1998)

18

[23] P.Schmelcher and L.S.Cederbaum, Phys.Rev.A 43, 287 (1991)

[24] P.Schmelcher and L.S.Cederbaum, Phys.Rev.Lett.74, 662 (1995)

[25] P.Schmelcher, Phys.Rev.A 52, 130 (1995)

[26] D.M.Leitner and P.Schmelcher, Phys.Rev.A58, R3383 (1998)

[27] V.S.Melezhik and P.Schmelcher, subm. to Phys.Rev.Lett.

[28] V.S.Melezhik and P.Schmelcher, Phys.Rev.A 59, 4264 (1999)

[29] O.Bohigas, S.Tomsovic and D.Ullmo, Phys.Rep.223, 43 (1993)

[30] M.Feingold and A.Peres, Phys. Rev. A34, 591 (1986)

[31] S.A.Aseyev, V.V.Petrunin and V.S.Letokhov, Comm.At.Mol.Phys.

33,41 (1996)

[32] F.Haake, ’Quantum Signatures of Chaos’, Springer Verlag 1991

19

0.22

0.17

0.11

0.06

y
t
i
l
i
b
a
b
o
r
P

0.00
−4.3e−04

−4.0e−04

−3.7e−04
Energy (a.u.)

−3.4e−04

−3.1e−04

1.9e+04

1.3e+04

7.0e+03

1.0e+03

)
.
u
a
(
 

.

Y

−5.0e+03

−5.0e+03

1.5e+04

3.5e+04

5.5e+04

X (a.u.)

