9
9
9
1
 
t
c
O
 
9
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
m
o
t
a
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
6
4
0
0
1
9
9
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Antiproton transfer from antiprotonic He to noble gas contaminants

G.V.Margagliotti, G.Pauli, L.Santi, S.Tessaro, A. Voronin, E.Zavattini

The state dependent quenching mechanism of metastable antiprotonic He atoms by contaminants
is suggested to explain existing experimental data. The eﬀect of antiproton transfer from the an-
tiprotonic He to noble gas contaminants is shown to play a signiﬁcant role. Preliminary estimations
have been done in the framework of the coupled channels model. The obtained results support the
idea of strong dependence of quenching cross-sections on the antiprotonic states quantum numbers
and enable to explain qualitatively existing discrepancies between experimental results, obtained for
diﬀerent contaminant densities. New observable eﬀects are predicted.

I. INTRODUCTION.

Recent intensive studies [1–6] of the antiproton (p) delayed annihilation in Helium allowed the discovery of unique
features of antiprotonic He systems. Theoretical explanation of abnormal lifetime (τ ∼ 10−6s) of certain antiproton
fraction in He requires the existence of antiprotonic He systems which have radiative and Auger de-excitation lifetime
of the order of 10−6 s and are very stable with respect to the thermal collisions with surrounding He atoms.

It was ﬁrst suggested by Condo [7] and validated by further detailed studies [8–13] that highly excited circular
(or near circular) states of antiprotonic He atoms (He+p)N,L (here N is principal quantum number and L is the
angular momentum quantum number of the antiprotonic state) should have extremely small (in atomic scale) Auger
de-excitation rates (λA ≪ 106 s−1for N, L>36). The lifetime of such highly excited antiprotonic atoms, if they are
isolated from collisions with surrounding medium, is determined by the radiative transitions and is of the order of 10−6
s. This fact motivates for treating antiprotonic He atom as a system responsible for delayed annihilation. Meanwhile,
the complete understanding of the problem can be obtained only carefully analyzing the eﬀects of the collisions of
such a system with surrounding medium [15–17].

It has been shown in [17] that diﬀerent states of metastable antiprotonic atoms could be aﬀected by several colli-
sional quenching mechanisms, which are Stark transitions to nonstable states, collisionally induced Auger decay and
rearrangement processes, like short living molecular ion formation.

In this paper we analyze those rearrangement collisions which result in the antiproton transfer from high metastable
states of the antiprotonic He (with principal quantum number N ≥ 40) to noble gas contaminant atoms. Some
remarkable features enable to distinguish this process among others. First, one can expect that such transfer of
antiproton to nonhelium atom will result in the fast Auger de-excitation [13] and following annihilation of antiproton
on the contaminant nucleus, which can be checked experimentally. Second, it is reasonable to expect classical character
of antiprotonic transfer, thus the corresponding reaction cross-sections should be of the order of geometrical atomic
cross-sections at least for certain states of antiprotonic He. We will show that taking into account antiproton transfer
mechanism, it is possible to obtain qualitative explanation of existing experimental data on contaminant quenching, in
particular about the apparent discrepancy between experimental results on noble gas contaminant quenching obtained
by diﬀerent experimental groups.

II. EXPERIMENTAL OVERVIEW.

Existing experimental results on quenching of antiprotonic atom metastable states by noble gas contaminants were
obtained by OBELIX collaboration (PS 201) [3] and CERN group (PS205) [4]. The averaged over diﬀerent metastable
states quenching cross-sections obtained by the two groups are shown in Table 1, with their corresponding ratios.

Contaminant
Ne
Ar
Xe

σ1
quench

σ2
quench
2*10−17cm2 10−20cm2
7*10−17cm2 4*10−20cm2
2*10−16cm2 3*10−18cm2

quench/σ2
σ1
2*103
1.7*103
0.6*102

quench

Table I. Quenching cross-section for diﬀerent contaminants obtained by OBELIX (1) and PS205 (2) groups.

A dramatic diﬀerence between the results of the two groups can be seen, specially for Ne and Ar. We must notice
that the mentioned experiments have been done under diﬀerent conditions, among which we outline the diﬀerent
contaminant concentration. In OBELIX experiment the same quenching rate was observed with concentrations of

1

noble gas contaminant several orders of magnitude less than in PS205 experiment. Unfortunately, there are no data
obtained in the overlapping ranges of contaminant densities.

Such a discrepancy suggests the idea that quenching eﬀects are very diﬀerent for diﬀerent metastable antiprotonic
states in the sense that the lifetime of certain metastable states is measurable for small contaminant concentrations
only, while for big enough concentrations it becomes too short to be distinguished from the prompt peak. Thus the
averaged over antiprotonic states quenching cross-section becomes a function of contaminant density.

We will show that estimation of the antiproton transfer rates supports for such an explanation of the diﬀerence in

extracted quenching cross-section values.

III. REARRANGEMENT COLLISIONS.

The correct description of inelastic collisions of an antiprotonic atom with medium atoms requires taking into
account simultaneously all possible reaction channels. We will show, however, that it is meaningful to distinguish
the antiproton transfer mechanism among other processes and treat it separately. Let us ﬁrst make some qualitative
remarks. We will be interested in the reaction:

(He+p)N,L + A −→

He+epA+

−→

(cid:2)

(cid:3)

He(A++p)N ′,L′
(cid:2)

(cid:3)

+ e

where A reads essentially for a contaminant atom present in the surrounding medium.
In this reaction the exchange of electron and antiproton between He and contaminant atom A takes place, which
results in a virtual formation of the molecular system [He+epA+]. The energy excess is then transferred to an Auger
electron of the contaminant atom, while the molecular ion [He(A++p)N ′,L′] is formed in the ﬁnal state. We notice
that the more simple reaction:

(He+p)N,L + A −→ He + (A+p)N ′,L′

occurs with signiﬁcant probability only in the resonance case, i.e. when bounding energy of (He+p)N,L is equal to
that of (A+p)N ′,L′. In nonresonance case an energy excess (which characteristic value in mentioned reactions is about
0.1 eV) is transferred to atomic nuclei relative motion and no term crossing takes place in this case. Thus reaction
probability turns to be exponentially small. An obvious exception is antiprotonic Helium collision with He atoms of
surrounding medium:

(He+p)N,L + He −→ He + (He+p)N,L

As it follows from our calculations, reaction (3) takes place for antiprotonic states with principal quantum number
N > 42. Such states are already quenched within short time by Stark de-excitation collisions [16,17] and can not be
observed within the delayed component. In the same time we will show that reaction (1) for Ne and Ar contaminants
aﬀect certain states belonging to the observed delayed fraction.

The amplitude of reaction (1) is determined by the overlapping of the antiprotonic wave function of (He+p)N,L and
the antiprotonic wave function of (A++p)N ′,L′. We will show later, that there is a repulsive barrier in the eﬀective
interaction of antiprotonic He and noble gas atom, which prevents close collisions. Clearly antiproton transfer has
a chance only if the interatomic separation becomes small enough during the collision, to ensure overlapping of the
wave function of antiproton centered on He, and that of medium atoms. This last condition determines the reaction
probability dependence on antiprotonic quantum numbers. We will show that for the interaction of antiprotonic He
with Ne and Ar, antiproton transfer takes place for states with N ≥ 40.

We search the wave function of the system (He+p)N,L+ A in the form:

A. Formalism.

Φ =

αΨe
ϕe
β(cid:3)
(cid:2)

F{αβγ}

X
αβγ

+

χp
γ

P
b
χp
γ
X
αβγδ e

{αβγδ}ϕe

α

P hge
b

β i Yδ

Ψ+e
e

2

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

α, Ψe

β, χp

The functions ϕe

Ψ+e
β ,
e

γ are the eigenfunctions of the electron in the ﬁeld of He nuclei, contaminant atom electron
wave function, and p wave function in the ﬁeld of He nuclei, screened by electron in the ground state respectively. The
χp
γ, Yδ are the electron wave function of contaminant ion (with charge +1), the p wave function centered
functions
on contaminant nuclei, the wave function of the nuclei relative motion in bound (molecular) state respectively.
P is
e
the permutation operator, which antisymmetrizes the total electronic wave function. The expansion coeﬃcient F{αβγ}
b
has the sense of the nuclei relative motion wave function in the scattering state, while ge
{αβγδ} can be interpreted as
Auger electron wave function. F{αβγ}and ge
{αβγδ} include reaction amplitudes to be ﬁnd.

The mentioned form of the wave function enables to take into account physically important eﬀects of exchange of
the electrons and antiproton between nuclei, as well as the antisymmetrization of the electronic wave-function. We
obtain the coupled equations system for functions F{αβγ}, ge
{αβγδ} by substituting expansions (4) in the Shrodinger
equation for the interacting systems.

For the purpose of qualitative estimations of the rate of the exchange mechanism, we have truncated the mentioned

equation system to only few coupled equations.

B. Interaction potential.

The coupled equation system for F{αβγ}, ge

{αβγδ} can be transformed into the one-channel Shrodinger equation for

the relative nucleus motion in the elastic channel F{α0β0γ0} ≡ F{ξ0} :

(cid:16)

TA +
b

V {ξ0}
AHe − i
b

W {ξ0}
c

AHe − E{ξ0}

(cid:17) F{ξ0} = 0

(5)

Such an equation includes a complex nonlocal interaction term

AHe. This interaction describes elastic
scattering and absorption into inelastic channels and depends on quantum numbers {ξ0}. It turns out that leading
V {ξ0}
AHe of such eﬀective interaction have local form and can be interpreted as antiprotonic atom-
terms of the real part
b
media atom potential in given state. We should mention that both local and nonlocal terms in
AHe are
important for reaction rates calculation, nevertheless the analysis of local real terms alone turns to be very useful
. Such a potential for (He+p)N,L−He interaction is shown on Fig.1. Important features of this potential are the
following:

V {ξ0}
AHe − i
b

W {ξ0}
c

V {ξ0}
AHe − i
b

W {ξ0}
c

1. There is a repulsive barrier between (He+p)N,L and He at internuclear distance 3 au< R < 5.5 au (Fig.1). The
height of this barrier strongly depends on N,L (see also [15]). Its height is about 0.2 eV for N=38, L=37 and is
negligible for N > 42. Such a barrier appears as a result of antisymmetrization of 3-electron wave function of
interacting (He+p)N,L−He atoms and represents an eﬀect of Pauli repulsion. The minimum classically allowed
interatomic separation distance, which is determined by this repulsive part of eﬀective interaction, plays an
important role for determination of quenching reaction rates. For the antiprotonic state with N=39 it was
found to be Rc = 5.3 au. The repulsive barrier appears also in (He+p)N,L−Ne and (He+p)N,L−Ar eﬀective
interaction. As it follows from our calculations Ne and Ar can penetrate to short enough distances during the
collision with antiprotonic He and this is a crucial point for estimation of antiprotonic transfer reactions.

2. At the internuclear distances R from 1 au. to 3 au., the (He+p)N,L−He potential is attractive. This attraction
is mainly due to the p exchange between the two nuclei. The range of the attractive part is determined by the
overlapping of antiprotonic states, centered on the two nuclei; it vanishes rapidly as soon as the internuclear
distance becomes grater than two mean radii of antiprotonic state with quantum numbers N and L. This part
of interaction is important for antiprotonic transfer reactions.

3. At large internuclear distances there is a weak polarization attraction between (He+p)N,L and contaminant

atom A:

This long range attractive interaction radically enhances inelastic cross-sections, specially in case of low temperatures
AHe depends on contaminant. This last statement is important for understanding the

(T<300K). The constant C{ξ0}
diﬀerence in quenching eﬀect of noble gas contaminants.

V {ξ0}
AHe → −
b

C{ξ0}
AHe
R6

3

We should mention that imaginary part

W {ξ0}
AHe of the eﬀective interaction is localized mainly at internuclear distances
R ≤3 au. Thus the repulsive barrier between (He+p)N,L and He for N < 42 prevents close collisions, which may
c
result in intensive inelastic transitions and quenching of metastable antiprotonic states.

(He+p)N,L.

cm−3.

In this subsection we present the estimation of the antiproton transfer cross-sections for diﬀerent states of

We found strong dependence of quenching cross-sections on the principal quantum number of the antiprotonic

atoms. In particular, the corresponding cross-sections of antiproton transfer for the states with 40 ≤ N < 42 are:

C. Quenching cross-sections.

σN e,Ar
40≤N <42 ≈ 10−17cm2

Mentioned states become short-living (τ ≈ 10−7 s) in the presence of noble gas contaminants with density ρ ≈ 1018

In the same time the antiproton transfer probability for states with N ≤ 39 is negligible(see Fig.2). Such a
”threshold” behavior of the transfer cross-section as a function of principal quantum number is clear from the following
qualitative argument. As it follows from the properties of eﬀective interatomic interaction, the less is N of given
antiprotonic state the higher is the repulsive barrier and the bigger is interatomic separation during the collision. On
the other hand the less is N, the less is the overlapping of the antiprotonic functions centered on He and contaminant
atom, respectively for given interatomic separation. We have found that N=40 plays a role of critical number for
antiproton transfer from He to Ne and Ar.

D. Experimental check.

The existing experimental data on noble gas contaminant quenching can now be explained in terms of state depen-

dent quenching mechanism.

The antiprotonic transfer reactions aﬀect the population of the states with 40 ≤ N < 42. These states are long
living in the absence of contaminants. Rather small concentration of contaminant gases, like those used by OBELIX
(ρ ≈ 1017cm−3), can produce measurable eﬀects (λquench ≈ 106s−1). The averaged over states quenching cross-section,
derived from OBELIX data, correspond to the antiproton transfer reaction cross-sections.

Much higher concentration of contaminant Ne or Ar( ρ ≈ 1020cm−3), used in PS205 experiment, produce quenching
rates λquench ≈ 108s−1, which make impossible to distinguish such states from the prompt peak. On the other hand the
states with N < 40 are not quenched by antiproton transfer reactions. The main contaminant quenching mechanism
for these states is induced Auger de-excitation [16,17] (see Fig.2). The corresponding quenching cross-sections are
[17]:

σN e,Ar
N <40 ≈ 10−19cm2

The concentration of noble gas contaminants required to produce measurable quenching of these states is ρ ≈
1020cm−3, corresponding to those used in PS205 experiment. Thus it may be expected that the results obtained by
PS205 experiment refer to the quenching of states with N < 40. This fact enables to understand qualitatively the
discrepancy between the results of the two experimental groups (OBELIX and PS205) for Ne and Ar contaminant
quenching [3,4]. The diﬀerence in the contaminant densities (ρ ≈ 1017 cm−3 for PS205, and ρ ≈ 1020 cm−3 for
OBELIX) correspond to the diﬀerence between the extracted values of the average quenching cross-sections.

Some experiments can be suggested to clarify the situation.
First it seems reasonable to obtain results for the whole range of contaminant densities to check if asymptotic

behaviors of quenching rates, which are diﬀerent in the two experiments, match at the intermediate densities.

The direct check of the antiproton transfer reactions could be the observation of heavy fragments produced by

antiproton annihilation on contaminant nuclei among the delayed events.

The laser spectroscopy methods, similar to those applied for observing H2 assisted resonances [5], seem to be also
useful to study noble gas contaminant quenching. In fact, inducing laser transition from state with N=39 to states
with N ≥ 40 in the presence of Ne or Ar at densities ρ ≈ 1018cm−3, one should observe resonance in annihilation
events having width proportional to the contaminant concentration.

4

IV. CONCLUSION.

We have found that the approach, in which the state dependence of quenching rates is taken into account, enables
to explain existing experimental data. The mentioned above antiproton transfer reaction rates indeed have very sharp
dependence on antiprotonic Helium state quantum numbers. The theoretical model suggested here, is based on the
following statements.

1. For the states with N < 42 and Auger transition multipolarity ∆l > 3 there is a repulsive barrier which prevents
from close collisions in ”antiprotonic atom-medium atoms” interaction and therefore plays a stabilizing role. The
physical reason of such barrier is Pauli repulsion of the saturated electronic shell of noble gases and the electron
of antiprotonic He. The mentioned barrier determines the minimum separation between atoms during collision,
on which quenching reaction rates critically depend.

2. The leading contaminant quenching mechanism of metastable antiprotonic He states with 40 ≤ N < 42 is
antiproton transfer reaction, followed by fast antiproton annihilation on the contaminant nucleus. The cross-
section of this type of reactions is estimated to be:

σN e,Ar
40≤N <42 ≈ 10−17cm2

In the same time the noble gas contaminant quenching of states with N < 40 is two orders of magnitude less.

3. The evolution of the antiprotonic atoms passes through the stage of molecular ion formation, especially in the
presence of noble gas contaminant. This fact was ﬁrst pointed out by E. Zavattini [14]. In the present work we
studied short living antiprotonic molecular ion formation. In the same time the problem of possible existence
of long living states of antiprotonic molecular ion remains an open question.

Experimental test of the above presented theoretical results may include direct observation of heavy fragments
among the delayed annihilation events, produced by antiproton annihilation on contaminant nuclei as well as laser
induced transitions from states with N < 40 to states with N ≥ 40 in the presence of Ne or Ar at concentrations
ρ ≈ 1018cm−3.

V. ACKNOWLEDGMENT.

One of the authors (AV) would like to thank P. Valiron, J. Carbonell and G. Korenman for useful discussions and

express his special acknowledgment to Italian Istituto Nazionale di Fisica Nucleare (INFN) for ﬁnancial support.

[1] M.Iwasaki et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 67 (1991) 1246
[2] T.Yamazaki et al., Nature 361 (1993) 238; T.Yamazaki et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 63 (1989) 1590
[3] A. Bertin et al., Il Nuovo Cimento A 110 (1997) 419
[4] E. Widmann et al., Phys. Rev. A 49 (1995) 2870
[5] B.Ketzer et al., J.Chem. Phys 109 (1998) 424
[6] J. Eades et al., Hyperﬁne Interactions 103 (1996) 329
[7] G.T. Condo, Phys. Lett. 9 (1964) 65
[8] J.E. Russel, Phys. Rev. Lett. 23 (1969) 63; Phys. Rev. 188 (1969) 187; Phys. Rev. A 1 (1970) 721; A 1 (1970) 735; A 1

(1970) 742

[9] I. Shimamura , Phys. Rev. A 46 (1992) 3776

[10] T.Yamazaki and K.Ohtsuki, Phys. Rev. A 45 (1992) 6202
[11] N.Morita et al., Nucl. Instr. meth. A 330 (1992) 439
[12] V.I. Korobov and D.D. Bakalov, Phys. Rev. A 57 (1998) 1662
[13] O.D. Dalkarov, A.Yu. Voronin, Sov. Pisma JETP 60 (1994) 158
[14] L. Bracci and E. Zavatini, Phys. Rev. A 41 (1990) 2352
[15] P. Valiron, S. Sauge, J.Carbonell, ”Collisional stability of antiprotonic helium atomcules” Talk on MESH workshop, Udine,

Italy 1996

5

[16] G. Ya. Korenman ”Eﬀects of collisions on antiprotonic helium metastable states”, INP MSU Preprint 97-I/452 (1997)
[17] A.Yu.Voronin, O.D. Dalkarov”Collisional dynamics of metastable antiprotonic atoms in He” Talk on MESH workshop,

Udine, Italy 1996

[18] B. Ketzer et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 78 (1997) 1671

6

V (10
4

-3

 a.u.)

2

0

-2

-4

-6

-8

(N,L,)=(38,37)

(N,L)=(41,40)

2,5

3,0

3,5

5,0

5,5

4,0

4,5
R(a.u.)

FIG. 1. State dependent antiprotonic atom-media He atom repulsive barrier

7

Log σ (cm2)

-16

-17

-18

-19

-20

-21

-22

-23

Molecular ion formation

N

Induced Auger decay

Stark transitions

36

37

38

40

41

42

39

N

FIG. 2. Ne contaminant quenching cross-sections as a function of antiprotonic atom state principal quantum number

8

