Coherent Backscattering of Light by Cold Atoms

G. Labeyrie∗, F. de Tomasi†, J.-C. Bernard∗, C. A. M¨uller∗, C. Miniatura∗ and R. Kaiser∗
* Institut Non Lin´eaire de Nice, UMR 6618, 1361 route des Lucioles, F-06560 Valbonne.
† now at Dipartimento di Fisica, Universita di Lecce, via Arnesano.
(February 2, 2008)

9
9
9
1
 
v
o
N
 
8
 
 
]
h
p
-
m
o
t
a
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
0
1
0
1
1
9
9
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Light propagating in an optically thick sample experiences
multiple scattering.
It is now known that interferences al-
ter this propagation, leading to an enhanced backscattering,
a manifestation of weak localization of light in such diﬀuse
samples. This phenomenon has been extensively studied with
classical scatterers. In this letter we report the ﬁrst experi-
mental evidence for coherent backscattering of light in a laser-
cooled gas of Rubidium atoms.

Transport of waves in strongly scattering disordered
media has received much attention during the past years
when it was realized that interference can dramatically
alter the normal diﬀusion process [1–3]. In a sample of
randomly distributed scatterers, the initial direction of
the wave is fully randomized by scattering and a diﬀusion
picture seems an appropriate description of propagation
when the sample thickness is larger than the scattering
mean free path [4]. This model neglects all interference
phenomena and predicts a transmission of the medium
inversely proportional to sample thickness. This is the
familiar Ohm’s law. However, interferences may have
dramatic consequences such as a vanishing diﬀusion con-
stant [5]. In this situation, the medium behaves like an
insulator (strong localization). Such a disorder induced
transition has been reported for microwaves and for light
In fact, even far from this insulating regime, in-
[6].
terferences already hamper the diﬀusion process (weak
localization). This has been demonstrated in coherent
backscattering (CBS) experiments. Upon coherent illu-
mination of a static sample, a random speckle pattern
is generated. This pattern is washed out by conﬁgura-
tion averaging except in a small angular range around the
backscattering direction where constructive interferences
originating from reciprocal light paths enhance diﬀuse
reﬂection from the sample [7]. This eﬀect has been ob-
served for light in a variety of diﬀerent media such as
suspensions of powder samples, biological tissues or Sat-
urn’s rings [8], as well as for acoustic waves [9]. Among
other interesting features such as universal conductance
ﬂuctuations [10] or lasing in random media [11], CBS is
a hallmark of coherent multiple scattering.

Atoms as scatterers of light oﬀer new perspectives. The
achievements of laser cooling techniques [12,13] in the
last decade now allow to manipulate and control samples
of quantum scatterers. Cold atoms are unique candi-

dates to move the ﬁeld of coherent multiple scattering
to a fully quantum regime (quantum internal structure,
wave-particle duality, quantum statistical aspects). For
instance, the coupling to vacuum ﬂuctuations (sponta-
neous emission) is responsible for some unusual proper-
ties of the scattered light (elastic and inelastic spectra
[14,15]). Also, information encoding in atomic internal
states can erase interference fringes like in some ”which-
path” experiments [16]. Furthermore, it is now possible
to implement situations where the wave nature of the
atomic motion is essential [12,13].

In our experiment, the scattering medium is a laser-
cooled gas of Rubidium atoms which constitutes a per-
fect monodisperse sample of strongly resonant scatter-
ers of light. The quality factor of the transition used
in our experiment is Q = νat/∆νat ≈ 108 (D2 line at
λ = c/νat = 780 nm, intrinsic resonance width ∆νat =
Γ/2π = 6 MHz). The scattering cross section can thus
be changed by orders of magnitude by a slight detun-
ing of the laser frequency νL. This is a new situation
compared to the usual coherent multiple scattering ex-
periments where resonant eﬀects, if any, are washed out
by the sample polydispersity. Moreover in our sample
the duration τD (delay time) of a single scattering event
largely dominates over the free propagation time between
two successive scattering events : for on-resonant excita-
tion (δ = νL − νat = 0), this delay is of the order of
τD ≈ 2/Γ = 50 ns corresponding to free propagation of
light over 15 m in vacuum. In such a situation, particular
care must be taken to observe a CBS eﬀect. Indeed, when
atoms move, additional phaseshifts are involved. Conﬁg-
uration averaging will only preserve constructive inter-
ference between reciprocal waves if the motion-induced
optical path change ∆x does not exceed one wavelength
[17]. A rough estimate is ∆x = vrmsτD < λ, a cri-
terium which can be written in the more appealing form
kvrms < Γ. Thus, for resonant excitation, the Doppler
shift must be small compared to the width of the res-
onance. For Rubidium atoms illuminated by resonant
light, one ﬁnds vrms < 4.6 m/s corresponding to a tem-
perature T = 200 mK. Much lower temperatures are eas-
ily achieved by laser cooling thus allowing observation
of interference features in multiple scattering. However,
up to now, only incoherent eﬀects in multiple scatter-
ing, like radiation trapping [18], have been investigated
in cold atomic vapors [19].

We prepare our atomic sample by loading a magneto-
optical trap (MOT) from a dilute vapor of Rubidium 85

1

atoms [12] (magnetic gradient ∇B ≈ 7 G/cm, loading
time tload ≈ 0.7 sec). Six independent trapping beams
are obtained by splitting an initial laser beam slightly
detuned to the red of the trapping transition (power per
beam 30 mW, FWHM diameter 2.8 cm, Rubidium sat-
uration intensity Isat ≈ 1.6 mW/cm2, δ ≈ −3Γ). The
repumper is obtained by two counterpropagating beams
from a free running diode laser tuned to the F = 3 →
F ′ = 3 transition of the D2 line. Fluorescence measure-
ments yield N ≈ 109 atoms corresponding to a spatial
density nat ≈ 2 × 109 cm−3 at the center of the cloud
(gaussian proﬁle, FWHM diameter ≈ 7 mm). The veloc-
ity distribution of the atoms in the trap has been mea-
sured by a time-of-ﬂight technique to be vrms ≈ 10 cm/s,
well below the limit imposed by the above velocity cri-
terium. To observe coherent backscattering (CBS) of
light, we alternate a CBS measurement phase with a
MOT preparation phase. During the CBS phase, the
magnetic gradient and trapping beams of the MOT are
switched oﬀ (residual power per beam 0.2 µW). The CBS
probe beam (FWHM ≈ 6 mm, spectral width ∆νL ≈ 1
MHz) is resonant with the closed trapping transition of
the D2 line : F = 3 → F ′ = 4. A weak probe is used to
avoid saturation eﬀects (power 80 µW, on-resonant sat-
uration s = 0.1). The optical thickness of the sample,
measured by transmission, is η ≈ 4 and remains con-
stant, within a few percent, during the whole duration of
the CBS measurement phase (2.5 ms). The correspond-
ing extinction mean free path ℓ ≈ 2 mm is consistent
with an estimation deduced from our ﬂuorescence mea-
surements, taking a scattering cross-section at resonance
σres = 3λ2/2π.

CCD

P2

BS

l/4

L

COLD ATOMIC
CLOUD

P1

PROBE LASER

FIG. 1. The CBS detection scheme. P1, P2 : polarizers;
λ/4 : quarter-wave plate; BS : beam-splitter (T = 90%); L :
analysis lens (f = 500 mm).

The CBS detection setup is shown in Fig.1. It involves
a cooled CCD camera in the focal plane of a converg-
ing lens (f = 500 mm). A polarization sensitive detec-
tion scheme, generally allowing to eliminate the single
scattering contribution [20], is used for signal recording
in various polarization channels. For a linear incident
polarization, we record the scattered light with (linear)

2

polarization parallel (”parallel” channel) or orthogonal
(”orthogonal” channel) to the incident one. We also use
a circular incident polarization by inserting a quarter-
wave plate between the beam-splitter and the sample. In
the ”helicity preserving” channel the detected polariza-
tion is circular with the same helicity (sign of rotation
of the electric ﬁeld referenced to the wave propagation
direction) as the incident one : as an example, no light is
detected in this channel in the case of the back-reﬂection
by a mirror. This is the channel mostly used in pre-
vious studies, because it allows to eliminate the single
scattering contribution (for dipole-type scatterers). The
”helicity non-preserving” channel is obtained for a de-
tected circular polarization orthogonal to the previous
one. Teﬂon or dilute milk samples were used to ﬁnd the
exact backward direction, to cross-check the polarization
channels and to test the angular resolution of our set-up.
During the MOT phase (duration 10 ms), probe beam
and detection scheme are switched oﬀ while the MOT
is switched on again to recapture the atoms. After this
phase a new atomic sample is reproduced. The whole se-
quence is repeated for a typical duration of 1 min with a
detected ﬂux typically about 1800 photons/pixel/sec. A
”background” image, representing less than 10% of the
full signal level (due mainly to scattering from the re-
pumper by hot atoms in the cell), is substracted from
the ”CBS” image to suppress stray light contributions.

FIG. 2.

Fig. 2 (color image in appendice) shows the CBS im-
ages obtained from our laser-cooled Rubidium vapor in
the various polarization channels. We clearly observe en-
hanced backscattering in all four polarization channels
whereas for a thick teﬂon sample we only found pro-
nounced cones in the polarization preserving channels.
This enforces the idea that low scattering orders are dom-
inant in our experiment [21] which is not surprising con-
sidering the relatively small optical thickness of our sam-
ple. The intensity enhancement factors, deﬁned as the
ratio between the averaged intensity scattered in exactly
backward direction and the large angle background are
1.11, 1.06,1.08 and 1.09 for the helicity preserving, he-
licity non-preserving, orthogonal and parallel channels
respectively. The detected light intensities in these chan-
nels, normalized to that of the linear parallel channel,
are 0.76, 0.77, 0.54 and 1. A closer look at Fig.2d re-
veals that the cone exhibits a marked anisotropy in the
(linear) parallel polarization channel: the cone is found
to broader in the (angular) direction parallel to the inci-
dent polarization. This eﬀect has already been observed
in classical scattering samples and is also a signature of
low scattering orders [21].

For a more quantitative analysis of the CBS cone,
we report in Fig.3 a section of image 2a (helicity non-
preserving channel), taken after an angular average was

performed on the data (this procedure is justiﬁed when
the cone is isotropic, as in Fig.2a). The measured cone
width ∆θ is about 0.57 mrad, nearly six times larger than
our experimental resolution of 0.1 mrad. Taking into ac-
count the experimental resolution, we compared our data
to a calculation (dotted line) involving only double scat-
tering [7]. The experimental value ℓ ≈ 2 mm for the
mean free path was used in the calculation, leaving the
enhancement factor as free parameter. Even though the
assumptions underlying this theoretical model (isotropic
double scattering, semi-inﬁnite medium) are rather crude
in our case, the shape of the CBS cone is nicely repro-
duced. We plan, in further studies, to investigate in more
details the contributions of diﬀerent scattering orders by
carefully analyzing the CBS cone shape.

1,10

1,05

y
t
i
s
n
e
t
n
i
 
d
e
l
a
c
s

1,00

-3

-2

-1

1

2

3

0
q (mrad)

FIG. 3. Atomic CBS cone in the helicity non-preserving
channel. The experimental proﬁle (solid line) is a section of
the 2D image of Fig. 2a (after angular averaging). The dashed
curve is a ﬁt by a model assuming only double scattering,
with the mean free path determined experimentally and the
enhancement factor the only adjustable parameter.

One important aspect in CBS studies has always been
the enhancement factor in the backscattering direction,
due to the constructive interferences between reciprocal
paths. In the helicity preserving channel, this enhance-
ment factor is known to be 2 for independent scatter-
ing by classical scatterers [8], as single scattering can be
ruled out in that polarization channel. In our experiment
with cold atoms however, we measure a backscattered en-
hancement of 1.06, clearly less than 2 ! This reduction
cannot be attributed to the experimental resolution, as
we have measured enhancement factors on milk (using a
dilution giving the same cone width as the atomic one) of
1.8. However, in our situation several processes could re-
duce the cone contrast. The ﬁrst one is single scattering,
which does not contribute to CBS. Due to the presence of
several Zeeman sublevels in the groundstate of Rubidium

3

atoms, Raman processes, i.e. light scattering with change
of the atomic internal sublevel, have to be considered. In
such events, the polarization of the scattered light dif-
fers from the incident polarization and single scattering
is not eliminated even in the helicity preserving channel.
Another consequence of the atom’s internal structure is a
possible imbalance between the amplitudes of the recip-
rocal waves : atoms in diﬀerent internal states can have
diﬀerent scattering cross sections (resulting from diﬀer-
ent Clebsch-Gordan coeﬃcients). They can thus be seen
as partial polarizers which can imbalance the amplitude
of the paths which interfere for CBS. Furthermore ﬁnite-
size eﬀects should also be taken into account. Indeed our
sample does not have the standard slab geometry and the
gaussian shape of the probe beam is known to reduce the
enhancement factor. We are currently investigating these
eﬀects to determine their respective magnitudes for our
situation. Also, some more subtle phenomena might play
an additional role in the cone reduction. For instance,
with classical scatterers, the radiated and the incident
light have identical frequencies (elastic scattering). This
is no longer true for atoms for which the resonant ﬂuores-
cence spectrum displays inelastic structures in addition
to the usual elastic component [14,15]. Because of Ra-
man scattering, even in the weak saturation limit (weak
probe intensity), atoms have a non-negligible probabil-
ity to undergo inelastic scattering [15]. The role of these
rather complex spectral properties in coherent backscat-
tering has yet to be studied both theoretically and ex-
perimentally.

In summary we have reported the ﬁrst observation
of coherent backscattering of light by a sample of laser
cooled atoms. These ﬁrst results indicate that in our sys-
tem low scattering orders are dominant, as expected from
optical thickness measurements. The exact value of the
enhancement factor and the precise shape of the cone is
not yet fully understood and requires more experimen-
tal and theoretical investigations. Further experiments
will include studies of the eﬀect of the probe beam in-
tensity (which determines the amount of inelastic scat-
tering) and detuning. Detuning the laser frequency from
the atomic resonance leads to an increased mean free
path ℓ = 1/natσ . Indeed, we already observed that the
measured width ∆θ of the coherent backscattering cone
decreases when the probe frequency is detuned from res-
onance, as expected from the scaling ∆θ ∝ λ/ℓ [7]. It
would be very interesting to extend these experiments to
new regimes. Weak and strong localization of light in
gaseous Bose-Einstein condensates and of atomic matter
waves in random optical potentials certainly present a
great challenge for the near future.

We would like to thank the CNRS and to the PACA
Region for ﬁnancial support. We also thank the POAN
Research Group. Finally, we would like to deeply thank
D. Delande, B. van Tiggelen and D.Wiersma for many
stimulating discussions.

[1] Sharvin, D.Yu., & Sharvin,Yu.V., JETP Lett. 34, 272-

275 (1981).

[2] Scattering and Localization of Classical Waves in Ran-
dom Media, P. Sheng, Eds. (World Scientiﬁc, Singapore,
1990).

[3] Mesoscopic Quantum Physics, E. Akkermans, G. Mon-
tambaux, J.-L. Pichard & J. Zinn-Justin, Eds., Elsevier
Science B.V. (North Holland, Amsterdam, 1995).

[4] Chandrasekhar, S., Radiative transfer (Dover, New York,

1960).

[5] Anderson, P.W., Phys. Rev. 109, 1492-1505 (1958).
[6] Wiersma, D.S., Bartolini, P., Lagendijk, A. & Righini, R.
Nature 390, 671-673 (1997); Gresillon, S., et al., Phys.
Rev. Lett. 82, 4520-4523 (1999); Genack, A.Z. & Garcia,
N., Phys. Rev. Lett. 66, 2064-2067 (1991).

[7] van Tiggelen, B.A., Lagendijk, A. & Tip, A., J. Phys.:

Condens. Matter 2, 7653-7677 (1990).

[8] Wiersma, D.S., van Albada, M.P., van Tiggelen, B.A.
& Lagendijk, A., Phy. Rev. Lett. 74, 4193-4196 (1995);
Yoo, K.M., Tang, G.C. & Alfano, R.R., Appl. Opt. 29,
3237-3239 (1990); Mishchenko, M.I., Astrophys. J. 411,
351-361 (1993).

[9] Tourin, A., Derode, A., Roux, P., van Tigelen, B.A. &

Fink, M., Phys. Rev. Lett. 79, 3637-3639 (1997).
[10] Scheﬀold, F. & Maret, G. Phys. Rev. Lett. 81, 5800-5803

(1998).

[11] Cao, H., et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 82, 2278-2281 (1999).
[12] Laser Manipulation of Atoms and Ions, E. Arimondo,
W.D. Phillips & F. Strumia, Eds. (North Holland, Ams-
terdam, 1992).

[13] Anderson, M.H., Ensher, J.R., Matthews, M.R., Wie-
man, C.E. & Cornell, E.A., Science 269, 198-201 (1995).
Davis, K.B., et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 75, 3969-3973 (1995).

[14] Mollow, B.R., Phys. Rev. 188, 1969-1975 (1969).
[15] Gao, B., Phys. Rev. A 50, 4139-4156 (1994).
[16] Itano, W.M., et al., Phys. Rev. A 57, 4176-4187 (1998).
[17] Golubentsev, A.A., Sov. Phys. JETP 59, 26-34 (1984).
[18] Holstein, T., Phys. Rev. 72, 1212-1233 (1947).
[19] Fioretti, A., Molisch, A.F., Muller, J.H., Verkerk, P. &
Allegrini, M., Optics Comm. 149, 415-422 (1998).
[20] van Albada, M.P. & Lagendijk, A., Phys. Rev. Lett. 55,
2692-2695 (1985); Wolf, P.-E. & Maret, G., Phys. Rev.
Lett. 55, 2696-2699 (1985).

[21] van Albada, M.P., van der Mark, M. & Lagendijk, A.,

Phys. Rev. Lett. 58, 361-364 (1987).

4

This figure "fig2.gif" is available in "gif"(cid:10) format from:

http://arXiv.org/ps/physics/9911010v1

