A New Hypothesis for Layers of High Reﬂectivity Seen in MST Radar Observations

Indian Institute of Tropical Meteorology, Dr. Homi Bhabha Road , Pune 411 008(India). E-mail: asnani@giaspn01.vsnl.net.in or Prof.asnani@vsnl.com

⋆

⋆ Department of Physics, University of Pune, Pune 411 007(India). E-mail: rama@physics.unipune.ernet.in

G. C. Asnani⋆ and M. K. Rama Varma Raja⋆

⋆

0
0
0
2

 
r
a

 

M
4
1

 
 
]
h
p
-
o
a
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 

1
v
8
2
0
3
0
0
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

We have worked with MST Radar located at Gadanki, Tirupati, India(13.47 degree N, 79.18 degree E). Altitude
of the location is approximately 100 meters. This is the ﬁrst and only MST Radar operating in India.
It is in
Tropical Monsoon region. Monsoon moves northward across Tirupati around 1st June and withdraws southward
across Tirupati in the ﬁrst week of December. Our interest has been to examine the characteristics of vertical velocity
and other wind characteristics associated with monsoon. We examined the characteristics of range-compensated
2 SNR). We call this as Reﬂectivity. We examined the MST Radar data set for 14 months
Signal-to-Noise ratio (r
(September 1995 to November 1996 except May 1996). The height range considered for the analysis was between 3.6
km and 21 km above ground. Our ﬁndings have been on the following lines:

1) Except on Thunderstorm occasions, high reﬂectivity-regions are in the form of layers 1-2 km thick. One such
high-reﬂectivity layer is always present near tropopause level 17 km. Below the tropopause, there is a bunch of such
high-reﬂectivity layers, generally 3-4 in number, between 4 and 11 km. The atmospheric layer between 11 and 15 km
is generally free from high reﬂectivity layer.

2) On a thunderstorm occasion, there is a deep high-reﬂectivity layer extending from 4-11 km. After the passage

of the thunderstorm, this deep layer of high reﬂectivity breaks up into layers.

3) Layers of high reﬂectivity occur throughout the year even outside monsoon season, when ITCZ is far away from
the region and they cannot be attributed as originating from deep convective clouds. When visual observation and
MST observations are taken simultaneously at Gadanki, visual clouds are estimated to be at the same levels as the
high reﬂectivity layers seen through MST observations. Indian satellite pictures over Gadanki also suggest similar
heights of clouds as given by MST Radar for high reﬂectivity layers.

4) Satellite pictures in infra-red range show much more extensive areas of cloudiness than the pictures in the satellite

visible range. In other words, there are extensive sub-visual clouds in the atmosphere.

5) Every month early morning and late evening, in twilight hours we see beautiful cirrus clouds in the form of cloud

streets, streaks or sheets on several occasions which may or may not be clearly visible at other hours.

6) On looking at the sky frequently, one gets the impression that the sky is not clear even though we do not see
clouds or haze layers. In these haze layers, appear clouds in the form of cloud streets, streaks or cloud sheets at some
times. The appearance of these clouds gives the clear impression that there are waves in the atmosphere which give
visible clouds in the region of upward motion associated with these waves. Again in each bigger wave cloud, there
are smaller and smaller wave clouds and clearances; there are waves within waves. When the clouds disappear, they
leave a sort of haze. Hence, the clouds form out of haze and leave some haze after dissipating. Even when there
are no visible clouds during the day or night, the structure of the atmosphere is patchy in appearance. One gets
a clear impression that there are waves and waves, bigger and smaller waves in the atmosphere which are creating
patches of haze and sometimes visible clouds in the atmosphere. These are due to gravity-type waves with a very wide
spectrum of horizontal and vertical wavelengths. As we know from theoretical and observational evidence, horizontal
wavelengths are 1-2 orders of magnitude larger than vertical wavelengths. If and when they occur in the atmosphere,
they have a tendency to take horizontally spread layered structure with vertical depth 1-2 orders of magnitude smaller
than horizontal extent.

7) In the atmosphere, we visualize three classes of waves: a.Inertial waves or Rossby-type waves: Their horizontal
extent is of the order of a few thousand kilometers and vertical wavelengths of the order of 10 km. In the mechanism
of their formation, we have to consider the rotation of the earth and the resulting coriolis force. Their period is
of the order of a few days. b. Gravity waves: These arise mainly from local horizontal pressure gradients arising
out of gravitational weight of the overlying air column, air accelerating from higher pressure towards lower pressure.
Horizontal accelerations and displacements are accompanied by appropriate vertical accelerations and displacements
to conform to the requirements of law of conservation of mass i.e., equation of continuity.

Vertical displacements and accelerations of air parcels can also arise from buoyancy forces. Heavier parcel tends to
sink down while lighter air parcels tend to rise up in an environment of horizontal density gradients. These are called
Brunt-Vaisala oscillations. These horizontal gradients of density arise out of diﬀerences in temperature, humidity and
hydro-meteor loading.

This hydrometeor-loading needs a little elaboration:

1

(i) Every parcel of cloud air contains at least one hydrometeor in liquid water or solid form. Inside each hydrometeor

is an aerosol which acts as a nucleus which has induced condensation and/or freezing.

(ii) Invariably, hydrometeor has higher density than the surrounding air. As such, it tends to fall down due to

gravitational force.

(iii) As it descends down, it exchanges sensible heat and moisture with its environment. Hence, its volume, mass,

and density undergo a change during its descent.

(iv) As the hydrometeor descends down with gravitational acceleration through the air parcel, there is frictional
resistance/viscous resistance to its vertical motion. soon, the hydrometeor loses its acceleration and descends down
with what is called ”Terminal velocity”. Where has its weight gone? Its weight is taken up by the air parcel which
is oﬀering resistance to its vertical movement and acceleration. In other words, the air parcel becomes heavier to the
extent it has taken over the gravitational acceleration of the falling hydrometeor. If the hydrometeor falls with its
terminal velocity, it means that its entire weight is taken over by the air parcel. As such the air parcel has become
heavier by the total weight of the hydrometeor; the density of the air parcel has eﬀectively increased.

If only half of the gravitational acceleration of the descending hydrometeor has been taken over by the air parcel,

then the weight of the air parcel has increased only by half the weight of the hydrometeor.

The hydrometeor gradually loses its gravitational acceleration and gives its weight to the surrounding air parcel
gradually and not instantaneously. As such, the air parcel takes the load of the hydrometeor gradually during the
downward trajectory of the descending hydrometeor.

In many calculations, for the sake of simplicity, it is assumed that as soon as condensation or freezing takes place
in the atmosphere, the load of the hydrometeors is immediately taken over by the surrounding air. However, we have
to recognize that the hydrometeor-loading occurs gradually through a ﬁnite interval of time.

We should also remember that during the fall, the hydrometeor is simultaneously undergoing a change in its volume,
mass and density. Hence, a realistic, quantitative estimate of hydrometeor loading eﬀect on the air parcel needs careful
calculation. However, nature takes care of the process and creates varying density eﬀects on the cloud air parcel as
the hydrometeor descends.

(v) In addition to buoyancy fall of the hydrometeor, there are upward and downward motions of air parcels inside
the cloud. These upward and downward motions of air parcels inside the cloud create further complications in the
calculation of hydrometeor-loading eﬀect on air parcel.

(vi) In addition to pure buoyancy forces operating in a class of waves called gravity waves, there also occur what
are known as Kelvin-Helmholtz waves due to presence of vertical shear of horizontal winds which is almost always
present.

(vii) This class of gravity waves of Kelvin-Helmholtz type have very small wavelengths of the order of centimeters
and meters and correspondingly small periods of the order of a few minutes. Earth’s rotation or Coriolis force does
not perceptibly come into the calculations for these waves.

c. Inertio-Gravity waves: Between the two extremes of large inertial waves and small gravity waves, there is an
intermediate class of waves which may be termed as inertio-gravity waves in which Coriolis force plays some role along
with gravity force. There is literature on the subject of inertio-gravity waves (1,2,3, etc.), but more work needs to be
done on this class of waves. Orographic inﬂuence also come into play.

8) When we ﬂy in an aircraft, large-scale weather and clouds are inﬂuenced by Rossby-type waves. When we look
at the sky through cockpit or through the window near the window-seat, during day time, we immediately get the
view of air clouds at diﬀerent levels and also gravity waves of various dimensions near the ﬂight level. We see fairly
large waves with estimated wavelengths of the order of tens of kilometers, along with embedded smaller and smaller
waves, thick clouds, thin clouds, thinner clouds, space ﬁlled with haze and space clear of visible clouds.

In our view, MST Radar reﬂectivity pattern gives us spot view of these numerous beautiful waves.
9) We have analyzed the ﬁeld of MST Radar reﬂectivity as seen at Gadanki along with MST Radar measured wind

ﬁelds. We have interpreted the reﬂectivity ﬁelds within a conceptual model given below:

(i) Inertio-gravity waves in the atmosphere generate layers of upward/downward motion, high/low humidity and
high/low temperature lapse rates. The layers of upward and downward motion are regularly seen in the vertical wind
ﬁeld given by MST Radar. The vertical wavelength of these inertio-gravity waves has wide spectrum depending on
orography and diabatic heating; vertical wavelength of about 5 km is a more frequently observed wavelength. The
corresponding horizontal wavelength is of the order of 200 km, the more dominant wavelength visible in satellite
picture is 500 km in the direction of wind and 1000 km across the wind.

The layers of high relative humidity created by inertio-gravity waves are favorable for the formation of layered

clouds, which we call ”Mother Cloud Layers”; these clouds may be visible or sub-visible.

(ii) Hydrometeors inside a ”Mother Cloud Layer” tend to fall down attaining their respective terminal velocities.
During their stay inside the clouds, the hydrometeors exchange heat, moisture, mass and momentum with the en-
vironmental air on small micro-scales. These exchanges between the hydrometeors and the ”Mother Clouds’s air”

2

create strong gradients of temperature, humidity, density and momentum. Density variations are also created through
hydrometeor-loading.

Electrical charges are also generated during the processes of condensation, evaporation, freezing, melting and

sublimation.

These micro-physical gradients in density along with prevailing wind ﬁeld in the vertical generate internal gravity
waves in the form of Brunt-Vaisala oscillations, Kelvin-Helmholtz waves and other waves of diﬀerent horizontal and
vertical wavelengths. These wavelengths range from a few millimeters to tenths of meters in the vertical and from a few
meters to about thousand meters in the horizontal. Known laws of physics and dynamics suggest that the wavelengths
may be still smaller, equivalent to the distances between adjacent parcels of air exchanging heat moisture, mass and
momentum, with the hydrometeor embedded in the parcel.

(iii) The strong gradients of temperature, humidity and density created by these micro-physical and micro-dynamical
processes in the air surrounding the hydrometeor or an ensemble of hydrometeors cause strong variations in the
refractive index of air parcel, in respect of electro-magnetic lidar and radar beams impinging on the air parcels. In
turn, this causes high reﬂectivity/scatter of the impinging lidar/radar beam. In respect of VHF MST radar Bragg-type
reﬂection/scatter is a dominant type of reﬂection/ scatter.

We examined the size of air parcels giving the highest values of reﬂectivity, at Gadanki. We came to the conclusion

that their horizontal extent is of the order of 1 km while their vertical extent is of the order of 100 m.

Indian MST radar beam oriented in vertical has a half-wavelength of about 3m. As such, Indian MST radar is
capable of detecting reﬂectivity patterns of vertical wavelengths of the order of about 6m. These small-scale variations
in reﬂectivity appeared in the form of very delicate embroidery inside the large-scale reﬂectivity of the ”Mother Cloud
Layer”.

(iv) These variations in the reﬂectivity pattern may look like turbulent ﬂuctuation in the atmosphere. If we do
not associate these ﬂuctuations with clouds and hydrometeors inside the clouds, the clouds might appear as clear-air
turbulence as has been prevalent in the current explanation appearing in literature connected with MST radars. This
prevalent explanation has faced paradoxes, the main paradox being of thin horizontal sheets of turbulence.

If we free our thinking from the concept of clear-air turbulence and turn our thinking in the direction of visible or
sub-visible clouds containing hydrometeors, the apparent paradoxes of clear-air turbulence causing high- MST radar
reﬂectivity get immediately resolved.

The existence of sub-visible clouds occupying much larger area than the visible clouds has now been established
beyond question, through latest observations by satellites in the infra-red range, by aircraft ﬂying through cirrus cloud
air and by lidars operating in high altitude aircraft sending their beams through visible and sub-visible cloud layers.
(v) Using over 2,50,000 observational data points for MST radar reﬂectivity and vertical wind shear (deduced from
corresponding MST radar wind observations) spread over 14 months (from 1995 September to 1996 November), we
plotted scatter diagrams of MST radar reﬂectivity versus vertical wind shear. We are pleasantly surprised to ﬁnd
that reﬂectivity decreases almost exponentially as vertical wind shear increases. If mechanical turbulence was the
main cause of high reﬂectivity, we should see reﬂectivity increasing with vertical wind shear, and not decreasing
almost exponentially. Scatter diagrams for each of the 14-months are presented in4. Also, Scatter diagrams for four
representative months (January, April, July and October), for Indian monsoon region, are presented in5,6. This
shows that mechanical turbulence is not the principal cause of high-MST radar reﬂectivity.7 had hypothesized that
turbulence may not be the primary cause of high-reﬂectivity seen in MST radars.

(vi) Knowing the importance of cirrus clouds, the world scientiﬁc community launched the programme known as
FIRE (First ISCCP Regional Experiment). This FIRE programme concentrated on the study of layer clouds (Cirrus
Clouds in the upper troposphere and low level stratus clouds in the lower troposphere). FIRE I programme was
executed during the period 1985-1990 while FIRE II programme was executed during the period 1990-1995. FIRE
III programme is proposed to be executed in the beginning of this new millennium, with particular emphasis on the
tropics. Results of FIRE I have been summarized in a special issue of Monthly Weather Review (November, 1990);
results of FIRE II have been summarized in a special issue of Journal of Atmospheric Sciences (December, 1995).
This topic is an important component of CLIVAR programme in the tropics.

The results of FIRE I and FIRE II have broadly conﬁrmed that there is ﬁne micro structure inside the layered
clouds which can be interpreted easily, atleast qualitatively, in terms of micro-physical and micro-dynamical processes
presented above.

Also, the latest Numerical Modeling Work on Cirrus Clouds (for example8,9,10) show that there are ﬁne-scale

structures of various in-cloud parameters including temperature, humidity and ice-concentrations.

In fact in our view these ﬁne scale structures created inside the visible or sub-visible ”Mother Cloud Layers” can

cause steep refractive index gradients suﬃcient to cause high-MST radar reﬂectivity.

10) We expect that the conceptual model of MST radar reﬂectivity presented above will give a new orientation to
the thinking and interpretation of MST radar reﬂectivity. It will provide a satisfactory, physically and dynamically
acceptable, interpretation of the reﬂectivity patterns seen in the MST radar observation.

3

11) A few corollaries follow from this conceptual model:
(i) Since, high-MST radar reﬂectivity layer, 1-2 km thick, is always observed near the tropopause, it may or may not
be directly connected to inertio-gravity waves. The mechanism for the formation and sustenance of high-reﬂectivity
layer is realized as follows:

(a) The temperature near the tropopause level are very cold ( 200 K); temperature lapse rate is stable, 2-4 degree
C/km; as such vertical mixing of air is inhibited and is weak. Relative humidity below the tropopause is high11.
Water substance and aerosols injected into the upper troposphere by deep convection near ITCZ remains below the
tropopause while the relative humidity is very low above the tropopause. Water substance and aerosols form visible
or sub-visible cirrus cloud layer or haze layer below the tropopause. Through the micro-physical and micro-dynamical
processes mentioned earlier, the air layer develops strong vertical gradients or discontinuities in the refractive index
with respect to MST radar beam impinging on the air there. This gives high-reﬂectivity echoes near the tropopause
level on all days of the year.

When the cloud gets dissolved, it leaves large number of aerosols suspended there. By themselves, aerosols are not
likely to be detected by MST radar. But the layer of high content of aerosols can be detected and has been detecting
near the tropopause (12,13,14 etc.).

In the tropics, ITCZ injects aerosols and moisture which remain trapped in the layer immediately below the
tropopause. In extra-tropics, this injection is done by extra-tropical cyclone waves and polar front. On the same
reasoning, as given for tropics, a layer with high content of aerosols and thin cirrus ice crystals will also get formed
below the tropopause in extra-tropics. Thus a layer having high content of aerosols and thin cirrus cloud is expected
to envelope the whole earth’s atmosphere near tropopause. This has been substantiated by observations of (Nee
et al., 1995, 1998; FIRE I and FIRE II observations and their results published in the Special issues of Monthly
Weather in November 1990 and Journal of Atmospheric Sciences in December 1995 respectively). Asnani et al.15 had
hypothesized the existence of an aerosol layer near tropical tropopause, based on the same mechanism mentioned
above.

(ii) As we have stated above, observations conﬁrm existence of alternate layers of upward and downward motion
with vertical depth of 2-3 km. We should expect accumulation and depletion of both water substance and aerosol
substance near the levels of vertical convergence. Further vertical upward motion tends to create higher relative
humidity and higher temperature lapse rate; vertical downward motion tends to do the opposite, creating stable lapse
rate and drier air. Hence we should expect to ﬁnd layers of high and low relative humidity in the vertical. Sensitive
instrumentation is required to detect this type of structure in the atmosphere; this structure is likely to be missed by
the ordinary radiosonde instruments. Such layers have been detected by special eﬀort16.

(iii) As stated earlier, these alternate layers of upward and downward motion are associated with inertio-gravity
waves, which are always present in the atmosphere. These vertical wave motion will also tend to split large convective
clouds, particularly in their decaying stage, into layered clouds. While convective instability in the atmosphere tends
to generate deep convective clouds in the tropical atmosphere, these inertio-gravity waves inhibit the formation and
sustenance of these deep convective clouds in the tropical atmosphere.

(iv) Cirrus clouds have a capacity to retain their existence for a long time, even away from the source of their
formation. Hence, visible or sub-visible cirrus clouds are likely to be seen at many places, with or without deep
convective clouds. The upward vertical motion associated with inertio-gravity waves tends to generate cirrus clouds,
visible or sub-visible at many places in the atmosphere. If nothing else, these clouds inﬂuence the radiative heat
budget of the earth’s atmosphere.

Acknowledgment: The authors thank Prof. D. Narayana Rao and his group at Department of Physics, Sri
Venkateswara University, Tirupati (India) for considerable help in Indian MST Radar data collection and analy-
sis. Mr. M. K. Rama Varma Raja thanks Dr. (Mrs.) P. S. Salvekar and the Director, Indian Institute of Tropical
Meteorology for providing necessary support and facilities during the course of research work.

1 Muraoka, Y., T. Sugiyama and K. Kawahira, 1988: Cause of a monochromatic inertia-gravity wave breaking observed by

the MU radar, Geophys. Res. Lett., 15, 1349-1352.

2 Wurtele, M. G., Datta, A. and Sharman, R. D., 1996: The propagation of gravity- inertia waves and Lee waves under a

critical level. J. Atmos. Sci., 53, 1505-1523.

3 Joseph, B., 1997: Chaotic mixing by internal inertia-gravity waves. Phys. Fluids, 9, 945-962.
4 Rama Varma Raja, M. K., 1999: ” Parameterization of Cloudiness Over India and Neighbourhood ”, Ph.D. Thesis submitted

to University of Pune, Pune-411007, India.

4

5 Rama Varma Raja, M. K., G. C. Asnani and P. S. Salvekar, 1999a: MST Radar Data can Reveal Micro-Structure of Clouds”.
Preprints of 29th Conference on Radar Meteorology (American Meteorological Society), Montreal, Canada (July 1999), pages
343-346.

6 Rama Varma Raja, M. K., G. C. Asnani, P. S. Salvekar, A. R. Jain, D. Narayana Rao, P. Kishore, S. Venkoba Rao and
M. Hareesh, 1999b: Layered Clouds In The Indian Monsoon Region. Proc. Ind. Acad. Sci. (Earth and Planetary Sciences),
Paper accepted for Publication in the December 1999 issue of the Journal.

7 Asnani, G. C., M. K. Rama Varma Raja, D. Narayana Rao, P. S. Salvekar, P. Kishore, T. Narayana Rao and P. B. Rao,
1998a: Patchy Layered Structure of Tropical Troposphere As Seen By Indian MST Radar. STEP HANDBOOK (As a
Proceedings of the 8th International Workshop on Technical and Scientiﬁc Aspects of MST Radar held at Bangalore during
15-20 December, 1997), Editor Belva Edwards, SCOSTEP SECRETARIAT, BOULDER, CO, USA, pages 192-195.

8 Sassen, K. and Dodd, G. C., 1989: Haze particle Nucleation Simulations in Cirrus clouds and Applications for Numerical

Lidar Studies. J. Atmos. Sci., 46, 3005-3014.

9 Khvorostyanov, V. I. and Sassen, K., 1998a: Cirrus Cloud Simulation Using Explicit Microphysics and Radiation. Part I:

Model description. J. Atmos. Sci., 55, 1808-1821.

10 Khvorostyanov, V. I. and Sassen, K., 1998b: Cirrus Cloud Simulation Using Explicit Microphysics and Radiation. Part II:

Microphysics, Vapor and Ice mass budgets, and optical and radiative properties. J. Atmos. Sci., 55, 1822-1845.

11 Newell, R. E., Zhu, Y., Reed, W.J., and Waters, J. W., 1997: Relationship between tropical upper tropospheric moisture
and eastern tropical paciﬁc sea surface temperature at seasonal and interannual time scales. Geophys. Res. Lett., 24, 25-28.
12 Nee, J.B., G.B. Wang, P.C. Lee and S. B. Lin, 1995: Lidar studies of particles and temperatures of the atmosphere: First

results from National Central University lidar. Radio Science, 30, 1167-1175.

13 Nee J. B., Len C. N. and Chen, W. N., 1998: Lidar observations of the cirrus cloud in the tropopause at Chung-Li (25 degree

N, 121 degree E). J. Atmos. Sci., 55,2249-2257.

14 Schroder, F. and Strom, J., 1997: Aircraft measurements of sub-micrometer aerosol particles (¡ 7nm) in the midlatitude free

troposphere and tropopause region. Atmos. Res.,44, 333-356.

15 Asnani, G. C., M. K. Rama Varma Raja and P. S. Salvekar, 1998b: Aerosol Layer Near Tropical Tropopause. J. Aerosol Sci.

(USA), 29,suppl.1, pp. s649-s650.

16 Iselin, J. P. and W. J. Gutowski Jr., 1997: Water Vapour Layers in Strom-Fest Rawinsonde Observations, Mon. Wea. Rev.,

125, 1954-1963.

5

