1

On the eﬀect of small-scale oceanic variability

on topography-generated currents

A. ´Alvarez

SACLANT Undersea Research Centre, La Spezia, Italy

E. Hern´andez-Garc´ıa and J. Tintor´e

Instituto Mediterr´aneo de Estudios Avanzados, CSIC-Universitat de les Illes Balears,

Palma de Mallorca, Spain

Short title: EFFECTS OF SMALL SCALE VARIABILITY ON OCEANIC CURRENTS

0
0
0
2

 
r
a

M
2

 

 
 
]
h
p
-
o
a
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 

1
v
9
0
0
3
0
0
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

2

Abstract.

Small-scale oceanic motions, in combination with bottom topography, induce mean

large-scale along-isobaths ﬂows. The direction of these mean ﬂows is usually found to

be anticyclonic (cyclonic) over bumps (depressions). Here we employ a quasigeostrophic

model to show that the current direction of these topographically induced large-scale

ﬂows can be reversed by the small-scale variability. This result addresses the existence

of a new bulk eﬀect from the small-scale activity that could have strong consequences

on the circulation of the world’s ocean.

3

Introduction

Small-scale ocean motions have an important eﬀect on oceanic ﬂows several orders

of magnitude larger than them. The best-known bulk eﬀect of small-scale processes is a

substantial contribution to the transport of heat, salt, momentum, and passive tracers in

all parts in the world’s oceans. This eﬀect is usually included in ocean circulation models

by modifying the transport and mixing properties of the ﬂuid from their molecular values

to larger ones, giving rise to eddy-diﬀusion approaches of increasing sophistication and

predictive power [Neelin and Marotzke, 1994]. The transport processes parametrized

by these eﬀective changes of the diﬀusive ﬂuid properties have been shown to control

important aspects of the Earth’s climate [Danabasoglu et al., 1994].

Beyond eddy diﬀusion approaches, physical eﬀects of small-scale activity are still

poorly understood. For this reason, the nature and variability of small-scale oceanic

motions have been exhaustively examined in diﬀerent oceanographic contexts [Wunsch

and Stammer, 1995]. Given the nature of small-scale activity – disordered, ﬂuctuating

and turbulent – a contribution to diﬀusion and dispersion eﬀects is obvious on physical

grounds. But a more coherent inﬂuence of processes occurring at small-scales on

large scales motions is unexpected unless some oceanographic factor is able to get a

signiﬁcant mean component out of the ﬂuctuating behavior. Bottom topography is one

of such factors breaking the symmetry of the ﬂuctuation statistics, and thus provides a

dynamical link for energy transfer from the small to the large scale.

Evidence has been accumulated in the last decade showing that mean ﬂows

4

following the topographic contours are often found in the vicinity of topographic

features of diﬀerent scales [Klein and Siedler, 1989; Pollard et al., 1991; de Madron

and Weatherly, 1994; Brink, 1995]. These topographically generated currents have been

shown to inﬂuence both local and global aspects of the Earth’s climate [Dewar, 1998].

For example, large-scale motions related to topographic anomalies have been found in

the North and South Atlantic playing a major role in determining regional circulation

and climatic characteristics [Lozier et al., 1995; Saunders and King, 1995].

Coriolis force, topography and ﬂuctuations have been pointed out as the main

ingredients to generate these along-isobaths coherent motions

[Alvarez et al.,

1997; Alvarez and Tintor´e, 1998; Alvarez et al., 1998]. Brieﬂy, Coriolis force links

topography to the dynamics of ocean vorticity. Thus changes in ocean depth provide a

symmetry breaking factor distinguishing according to their vorticity content otherwise

isotropic mesoscale ﬂuctuations. The result is that the mean eﬀect of small-scale

ﬂuctuations does not average to zero yielding the existence of mean ﬂows. Finally, the

topographic structure determines the circulation patterns of the originated currents.

On the basis of present knowledge, anticyclonic (cyclonic) tendencies are expected

over bumps (depressions) for generated mean ﬂows over topography. However, Alvarez

et al. [1998] pointed out that these circulations tendencies could be strongly dependent

on the properties of the small-scale variability. They theoretically addressed the

possibility that the above mentioned circulation pattern could be even reversed (cyclonic

(anticyclonic) circulations over bumps (depressions)) by the action of the small scales.

The same eﬀect is predicted when considering bottom friction instead of viscosity as the

5

damping mechanism [Alvarez et al., 1999]. The present Letter attempts to elucidate,

by means of computer simulations, if the direction of these mean ﬂows is sensitive to the

statistical characteristics of the small-scale, as it was argued on theoretical grounds.

Model and results

To explore in detail the possible relations between large and small scales in the

presence of topography an ideal ocean represented by a single layer of ﬂuid subjected

to quasigeostrophic dynamics will be considered. Baroclinic eﬀects which in real

oceans give rise to meso-small scale activity are modeled here by an explicit stochastic

forcing with prescribed statistical properties [Williams, 1978]. This term might also

be considered as representing any high frequency wind forcing components and other

processes below the resolution considered in the numerical model. This random forcing,

in combination with viscous dissipation, will bring the ocean model to a statistically

steady state. While highly idealized, the simplifying modeling assumptions above arise

from our interest in isolating just the essential processes by which small-scale variability

leads to topography-generated currents.

Within our approximations, the full ocean dynamics can be described by [Pedlosky,

1987]:

∂∇2ψ

∂t

+ hψ, ∇2ψ + hi = ν∇4ψ + F ,

(1)

The ocean dynamics described by Eq. (1) is an f-plane quasigeostrophic model

6

where ψ(x, t) is the streamfunction, F (x, t) is the above mentioned stochastic vorticity

input, ν is the viscosity parameter and h = f ∆H/H0, with f the Coriolis parameter,

H0 the mean depth, and ∆H(x) the local topographic height over the mean depth. The

Poisson bracket or Jacobian is deﬁned as

[A, B] =

∂A
∂x

∂B
∂y

−

∂B
∂x

∂A
∂y

.

(2)

A set of numerical simulations has been carried out to determine the dependence

of the large scale pattern circulation on the structure and variability of the small-scales.

The description of the numerical model and diﬀerent parameters employed in the

simulations are summarized in Appendix A. A randomly generated bottom topography

is used in all the cases. As a way of changing in a continuous manner the statistical

properties of the forcing F (x, t) we assume it to be a Gaussian stochastic process of

zero mean, white in time, and spatial spectrum given by S(k) ∝ k−y, where k is the

wavenumber. A positive exponent y represents relative-vorticity ﬂuctuations more

dominant at the large scales, whereas negative y represents ﬂuctuations dominant at the

smaller scales. The distribution of ﬂuctuation variance among the scales can thus be

controlled by varying y. The spectrum of the energy input corresponding to the above

stochastic vorticity forcing is also white in time, with a wavenumber dependence given

by the relation E(k) = S(k) k−2. We have started ﬁrst considering a situation where

the small-scale variability is described by S(k) ∝ k0. This power-law has been observed

for vorticity forcing induced by winds in the Paciﬁc ocean [Freilich and Chelton, 1985].

The model has been integrated until a stationary state is achieved. Figure 1b shows the

7

mean currents obtained from this speciﬁc simulation. In the mean state the currents do

not average to zero, despite the isotropy of the ﬂuctuations and dissipation. Instead the

ﬁnal mean state is characterized by the existence of large-scale mean currents strongly

correlated with bottom topography. The spatial correlation coeﬃcient between the

streamfunction and the bottom topography is for this case 0.85. This positive spatial

correlation implies the existence of mean anticyclonic (cyclonic) circulations over bumps

(depressions). As a next step, we have modeled the action of small-scales as a noisy

process with a correlation described by the power-law k4.8. This spectrum describes

a situation where the small-scale variability is more energetic than the one induced

by the previous k0 power-law. The response of the system is drastically changed by

this small-scale activity. As shown in Figure 1c the mean state of the ocean displays a

pattern of circulation practically uncorrelated with bottom topography. Speciﬁcally, the

spatial correlation coeﬃcient is 0.091. Increasing again the exponent of the power law

to S(k) ∝ k6, we obtain the generation of mean currents anticorrelated with bottom

topography, as it can be observed from Figure 1d. The spatial correlation coeﬃcient is

−0.77 in this case of high small-scale activity, indicating the existence of mean cyclonic

(anticyclonic) motions over bumps (depressions). Note that Figures 1c and d display

topography-generated currents much weaker than those obtained for the k0 power-law

case, Figure 1b. This feature comes from the scale-selective character of the viscosity,

more eﬃcient at small scales where the forcing energy is most localized in the k4.8 and

k6 cases. Besides this eﬀect, it should also be mentioned that forcing with a k0 spectral

power-law directly provides more energy input to the large-scale components than the

8

k4.8 and k6 forcings. Additional numerical simulations, for diﬀerent initial conditions

and noise and topography realizations, consistently conﬁrm the results of the simulations

presented in Fig. 1, that is the sensibility of the large-scale circulations not only to the

particular structure of the underlying topography but also to the characteristics of the

small-scale variability of the environment. In particular, as the small-scale content in

the vorticity forcing is augmented with respect to the large-scale one, mean currents are

always seen to reverse direction.

Conclusion

On the basis of the property of potential-vorticity conservation, anticyclonic

(cyclonic) motions are traditionally expected over topographic bumps (depressions)

[Pedlosky, 1987]. If potential vorticity is not preserved because of the presence of

some kind of forcing mechanism, then diﬀerent circulation patterns can be generated.

Small-scale activity constitutes a systematic and persistent forcing of the circulation

in the whole ocean. Due to the relatively small and fast space and time scales that

characterize this variability, the physical characteristics of this forcing are usually

described in terms of their statistical properties

[Williams, 1978]. In other words,

small-scale activity can be considered as a ﬂuctuating background in which the

large-scale motions are embedded. The relevance of the role played by this ﬂuctuating

environment in modifying the transport and viscous properties of the large scales is

widely recognized. Beyond these diﬀusive and viscous eﬀect of the small-scale activity,

the numerical results presented in this Letter show that in the presence of bottom

9

topography, statistical details of the variability of the small-scales can induce diﬀerent

large-scale oceanic circulations. The strength of this eﬀect will be aﬀected by the

spectral characteristics of the topographic and forcing ﬁelds as well as by the real

baroclinic nature of the ocean. Preliminary computer simulations indicate that the

strength of the mean currents increases when the topography contains more proportion

of large-scale features. This eﬀect and the dependence of the current direction on the

forcing spectral exponent, presented in Fig. 1, nicely validates the theoretical results

in [Alvarez et al., 1998]. Extension of the theoretical methods to the baroclinic case

is in progress. However, a complete analysis of the inﬂuence of diﬀerent forcings and

topography shapes can only be addressed numerically. The shape of the topography

was already shown to play a fundamental role in the energy transfer between diﬀerent

scales in baroclinic quasigeostrophic turbulence [Treguier and Hua, 1988]. Finally, the

results shown in this Letter stress the need for a better observational characterization of

the space and time variability of oceans at small-scales in order to achieve a complete

understanding of the large-scale ocean circulation.

Appendix A: Numerical model description

Numerical simulations of Eq. (1) have been conducted in a parameter regime of

geophysical interest. A value of f = 10−4s−1 was chosen as appropriate for the Coriolis

eﬀect at mean latitudes on Earth and ν = 200m2s−1 for the viscosity, a value usual for

the eddy viscosity in ocean models. We use the numerical scheme developed in Cummins

[1992] on a grid of 64 × 64 points. The distance between grid points corresponds to 20

10

km, so that the total system size is L = 1280 km. The algorithm, based on Arakawa

ﬁnite diﬀerences and the leap-frog algorithm, keeps the value of energy and enstrophy

constant when it is run in the inviscid and unforced case. The consistent way of

introducing the stochastic term into the leap-frog scheme can be found in Alvarez et al.

[1997]. The amplitude of the forcing has been chosen in order to obtain ﬁnal velocities

of several centimeters per second. The topographic ﬁeld is randomly generated from a

isotropic spectrum containing, with equal amplitude and random phases, all the Fourier

modes corresponding to scales between 80 km and 300 km. The model was run for

5 × 105 time steps (corresponding to 206 years) after a statistically stationary state was

reached. The streamfunction is then averaged during this last interval of time.

Acknowledgments.

Financial support from CICYT (AMB95-0901-C02-01-CP and MAR98-0840), and from

the MAST program MATTER MAS3-CT96-0051 (EC) is greatly acknowledged. Comments of

two anonymous referees are also greatly appreciated.

11

References

Alvarez, A., E. Hern´andez, and J. Tintor´e, Noise-sustained currents in quasigeostrophic

turbulence over topography, Physica A,247, 312-326, 1997.

Alvarez, A., and J. Tintor´e, Topographic stress: Importance and parameterization, Ocean

modeling and parameterization, edited by E. P. Chassignet and J. Verron, Kluwer

Academic Publishers, Netherlands, 1998.

Alvarez, A., E. Hern´andez, and J. Tintor´e, Noise rectiﬁcation in quasigeostrophic forced

turbulence, Phys. Rev. E,58, 7279-7282, 1998.

Alvarez, A., E. Hern´andez, and J. Tintor´e, Noise-induced ﬂow in quasigeostrophic turbulence

with bottom friction, Phys. Lett. A,261,, 179-182, 1999.

Brink, K. H., Tidal and lower frequency currents above Fieberling Guyot, J. Geophys.

Res.,100, 10817-10832, 1995.

Cummins, P. F., Inertial gyres in decaying and forced geostrophic turbulence, J. Mar. Res.,

50, 545-566, 1992.

Danabasoglu, G., J. C. MacWilliams, and P. R. Gent, The role of mesoscale tracer transports

in the global ocean circulation, Science, 264, 1123-1126, 1994.

de Madron, D. X., and G. Weatherly, Circulation, transport and bottom boundary layers of

the deep currents in the Brazil Basin, J. Mar. Res., 52, 583-638, 1994.

Dewar, W. K., Topography and barotropic transport control by bottom friction, J. Mar. Res.,

56, 295-328, 1998.

Freilich, M. H., and D. B. Chelton, Wavenumber spectra of Paciﬁc winds measured by the

Seasat scatterometer, J. Phys. Oceanogr., 16, 741-757, 1985.

12

Klein, B., and G. Siedler, On the origin of the Azores current, J. Geophys. Res., 94, 6159-6168,

1989.

Lozier, M., W. Owens, and R. Curry, The climatology of the North Atlantic, Prog. Oceanogr.,

36, 1-44, 1995.

Neelin, D. J., and J. Marotzke, Representing ocean eddies in climate models, Science, 264,

1099-1100, 1994.

Pedlosky, J. Geophysical Fluid Dynamics, 212 pp., Springer-Verlag, New York, 1987.

Pollard, R., M. Griﬃths, S. Cunningham, J. Read, F. Perez, and A. Rios, A study of the

formation, circulation, and ventilation of Eastern North Atlantic Central Water, Prog.

Oceanogr., 37, 167-192, 1991.

Saunders, P., and B. King, Bottom currents derived from a shipborne ADCP on WOCE cruise

A11 in the South Atlantic, J. Phys. Oceanogr., 25, 329-347, 1995.

Treguier, A. M., and B. L. Hua, Inﬂuence of bottom topography on stratiﬁed quasi-geostrophic

turbulence in the Ocean, Geophys. Astrophys. Fluid Dynamics, 43, 265-305, 1988.

Williams, G. P., Planetary circulations:1. Barotropic representation of Jovian and terrestrial

turbulence, J. Atmos. Sci., 35, 1399-1426, 1978.

Wunsch, C., and D. Stammer, The global frequency-wavenumber spectrum of oceanic

variability estimated from TOPEX/POSEIDON altimetric measurements, J. Geophys.

Res., 100, 24895-24910, 1995.

A. Alvarez, SACLANT Undersea Research Centre, 19138 San Bartolomeo, La Spezia,

Italy. (e-mail: alvarez@saclantc.nato.int)

13

E. Hern´andez-Garc´ıa and J. Tintor´e, Instituto Mediterr´aneo de Estudios Avanzados,

CSIC-Universitat de les Illes Balears, 07071 Palma Mallorca, Spain. (e-mail:

emilio@imedea.uib.es; dfsjts0@ps.uib.es)

Received September 01, 1999; revised November 23, 1999; accepted January 19, 2000.

14

Figure 1. a) Random bottom topography. Maximum and minimum topography heights

are 500m and −599m, respectively, over an average depth of 5000m. b) Computed mean

streamfunction ψ(x, t) in m2s−1 for the case when the small-scale variability is described

by a spectral power law k0. Bottom topography levels have been superimposed (black

lines) as reference over the streamfunction ﬁeld. The strong correlations between the

streamfunction and topography are clear from this ﬁgure. c) Same as b) but with power

spectra law k4.8. In this case the ﬂow remains practically uncorrelated with the underlying

topography (black lines). d) For k6 the ﬂow is anticorrelated with the topography.

This figure "figpaper.gif" is available in "gif"(cid:10) format from:

http://arXiv.org/ps/physics/0003009v1

