Low cloud properties inﬂuenced by cosmic rays

Nigel D. Marsh and Henrik Svensmark1

1Danish Space Research Institute, Copenhagen, Denmark

(Dated: February 9, 2014)

Abstract

The inﬂuence of solar variability on climate is currently uncertain. Recent observations have

indicated a possible mechanism via the inﬂuence of solar modulated cosmic rays on global cloud

cover. Here we show that the inﬂuence of solar variability is strongest in low clouds (≤ 3km).

These are liquid water clouds which points to a microphysical mechanism involving enhanced

aerosol formation. If conﬁrmed it suggests that the average state of the Heliosphere is important

for climate on Earth. The estimated response in low clouds due to a doubling of solar activity is

a 1.4 Wm−2 warming.

0
0
0
2

 

y
a
M
6
2

 

 
 
]
h
p
-
o
a
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 

1
v
2
7
0
5
0
0
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

1

I.

INTRODUCTION

The recent discovery that total cloud cover and solar modulated galactic cosmic ray

ﬂux (GCR) are correlated [1, 2] suggests that solar variability may be linked to climate

variability through a chain involving the solar wind, GCR and clouds. The solar wind is a

continuous ﬂow of energetic charged particles (mainly protons and electrons with energies

∼KeV) which are released from the sun as a plasma carrying a ﬁngerprint of the solar

magnetic ﬁeld throughout inter-planetary space. Inﬂuences from the solar wind are felt at

distances well beyond Neptune, possibly up to 200 AU from the sun. This region of space

is known as the Heliosphere. GCR consists of very energetic particles (mainly protons and

He nuclei with typical energies 1 - 20GeV) that originate from stellar processes within our

galaxy. Their ﬂux through the solar system is modulated by the shielding eﬀects of the

solar wind whose strength is dependent on the level of solar activity. Those incident at the

Earth are additionally modulated by the geomagnetic ﬁeld [3, 4] with cut-oﬀ rigidities of

15 - 0.1GeV/c from equator to geomagnetic poles. The implication from the observed total

cloud cover - GCR correlation is that climate on Earth could be inﬂuenced by the average

state of the Heliosphere (Heliospheric Climate).

Solar forcing of the Earths climate can be classiﬁed into direct and indirect processes. The

simplest direct mechanism is through variations in solar radiative output which is known

to vary by 0.1% over the last solar cycle, this corresponds to a change of 0.3 W/m2 at

the top of the Earths atmosphere. It is currently believed that this eﬀect is too small to

have had a dominant inﬂuence on surface climate, although variations in solar irradiance

may have been larger back in time [5].

Indirect eﬀects include solar induced changes in

atmospheric transparency inﬂuencing the radiative budget of the planet [1, 2, 6, 7, 8, 9].

One possibility is that changes in the solar output of ultra violet (UV) radiation aﬀects

temperatures in the stratosphere through absorption by ozone, which has the potential to

inﬂuence the large-scale dynamics of the troposphere [10, 11, 12].

The observed GCR-cloud correlation introduces another quite diﬀerent solar inﬂuence

with the suggestion that atmospheric ionisation produced by GCR [1, 2] aﬀects cloud mi-

crophysical properties. GCR is the dominant source of atmospheric ionisation at altitudes

1-35km over the land and 0-35km over the oceans, which are regions of the atmosphere in

which clouds form. Clouds are of considerable importance for the Earth’s radiation budget,

2

although their exact role is currently uncertain. Their inﬂuence on the vertically integrated

radiative properties of the atmosphere result from cooling through reﬂection of incoming

short wave radiation, and heating through trapping of outgoing long wave radiation. The

net radiative impact of a particular cloud is mainly dependent upon its height above the

surface and its optical thickness. High optically thin clouds tend to heat while low optically

thick clouds tend to cool [13]. The current climatic estimate for the net forcing of the global

cloud cover is ∼ 27.7 W/m2 cooling [13, 14, 15]. Thus a signiﬁcant solar inﬂuence on global

cloud properties is potentially important for the Earths radiation budget [1, 2, 7]. However,

the spatial properties of cloud formation vary considerably. For example, the physics of

high ice clouds is quite diﬀerent to that for low liquid clouds [16] thus atmospheric ionisa-

tion need not inﬂuence all cloud types. To understand both the physical mechanism and

the radiative impact of GCR modulated clouds it is important to understand which cloud

types are aﬀected by atmospheric ionisation. Presented here is satellite evidence revealing

that both low cloud cover and inferred low cloud top temperatures are varying with solar

activity.

II.

ISCCP D2 MONTHLY CLOUD OBSERVATIONS

State of the art satellite observations of cloud properties are available as monthly averages

from the International Satellite Cloud Climate Project (ISCCP) D2 analysis derived from

the Top Of Atmosphere (TOA) radiance for the period July 1983 to September 1994 [17, 18,

19, 20]. Infrared (IR) measurements are preferred due to their superior spatial and temporal

homogeneity over visual observations that can only be detected during daylight. cloud cover

is obtained from an algorithm using the TOA IR statistics to identify the cloudiness on an

equal area grid (280km x 280km). Cloud top temperatures (CT) and pressures (CP) are

obtained from an ISCCP IR model constrained by water vapour and vertical temperature

proﬁles retrieved from the TIROS Observed Vertical Sounder (TOVS) [20]. CT and CP are

found by assuming an opaque cloud, i.e. emissivity ǫ = 1, and adjusting the clouds pressure

level (eﬀectively cloud height) in the model until the reconstructed outgoing IR ﬂux at TOA

matches that observed. Based on retrieved CP, clouds are divided into Low > 680hP a

(< 3.2km), Middle = 680 − 440hP a (3.2 − 6.5km), and High < 440hP a (> 6.5km).

Figure 1 indicates that while the low cloud cover clearly co-varies with GCR over the

3

whole period, the middle and high clouds do not. The spatial distribution of this low

cloud cover correlation is shown in ﬁgure 2a. A 14.2 % area of the Earth displays a highly

signiﬁcant correlation with GCR - see ﬁgure caption.

FIG. 1: Monthly mean values for global anomalies of a) high (< 440hP a), b) middle (440−680hP a),

and c) low (> 680hP a) cloud frequencies (blue) with GCR observed by the Climax neutron monitor

(red, normalised to May 1965). The anomalies are ﬁrst calculated on an equal area grid by

subtracting the corresponding time mean for each individual month before averaging over the

globe. The global average of the annual cycle over this period for high, middle and low IR detected

clouds is 13.5%, 19.9%, and 28.0% respectively.

The agreement between 12 month running means of GCR and low cloud cover is extremely

good, r=0.86. However, at these time scales GCR ionisation is not the only mechanism

aﬀecting low clouds, there are of course many other decadal processes in the climate system

which are important. The small diﬀerences in leads and lags are close to the satellites

resolution and one should not expect a perfect correlation. What is surprising is that despite

4

these limitations a signal of solar variability in low cloud cover is dominant at time-scales

longer than 1 year. Svensmark 1998 argued that there is a better agreement with GCR

rather than solar irradiance for total cloud cover. This is also true for the low cloud cover

in ﬁgure 1c, which suggests that low cloud cover is responding to cosmic ray ionisation in

the atmosphere rather than direct changes in solar irradiance.

Currently satellites cannot detect multi-layer cloud, thus high and middle clouds can

obscure clouds below. From this point of view low clouds contain the least contaminated

signal giving greater conﬁdence to this result. However, if a cloud is transmissive (ǫ < 1)

then the satellite observes both radiation from below the cloud and radiation from the

cloud itself. Since ISCCP deﬁnes all clouds to be opaque, the CT of transmissive clouds is

overestimated such that their altitude appears lower in the IR model than in reality. For

the case of transmissive clouds CT represents a weighted average based on emissivity of the

clouds present in a column scene. However, the long term trend in low clouds is not explained

by an artifact due to mixing with clouds from above since there is no anti-correlated signal

in Middle and High clouds (ﬁgure 1a and b). But low clouds could be contaminated with

overlaying very thin undetected transmissive cloud, e.g., high thin cirrus, and the signal of

solar variability could be due to undetected high cloud. This is perhaps more intuitive since

GCR atmopsheric ionisation is greater at higher altitudes and, stratospheric heating due to

UV possesses a strong solar signal [21, 22]. However, it will be shown that this is not the

case.

Although the ISCCP analysis poorly detects high very thin cloud, a comparison with

HIRS (High resolution Infrared Radiation Sounder) measurements suggests that ISCCP

captures the general trends of high thin cloud [23]. If a solar signal does exist in high cloud,

for whatever reason, one would expect to see a signal in those high clouds that are detected

by ISCCP, ﬁgure 1a. However, no such signal is observed, thus there are good reasons to

believe that the long term trends in low cloud cover are due to real low clouds responding

to GCR.

The low cloud top temperature parameter also correlates with GCR over large regions

of the Earth. Figure 2b reveals a band of signiﬁcantly high correlation centered around the

tropics, while there are no signiﬁcant correlations for middle and high cloud top tempera-

tures (not shown). The ISCCP IR statistics cannot easily distinguish very low cloud top

temperatures, which are relatively warm, from surface temperatures. Thus the modelled

5

FIG. 2: Global correlation maps of GCR with anomalies of a) Low IR cloud cover, and b) Low IR

cloud top temperature (CT). The low IR cloud frequencies are calculated as in ﬁgure 1c, while the

low cloud CT are obtained from the ISCCP IR model. White pixels indicate regions with either

no data or an incomplete monthly time series. The correlation coeﬃcients are calculated from the

12 month running mean at each grid point. Regions of the Earth with a correlation coeﬃcient

≥ 0.6 are a) 14.2%, and b) 29.6%. The probability, p, of obtaining these areas of Earth with a

correlation coeﬃcient ≥ 0.6 from a random signal is p < 0.1%. The random signals were generated

by scrambling the phases of each cloud ﬁeld’s fourier transformed temporal variations, and allowing

for their respective spatial correlations. Thus in the above correlation maps the total area of Earth

with coeﬃcients ≥ 0.6 is signiﬁcant at better than the 99.9% level.

surface temperatures, ST, will be contaminated with temperatures from very low cloud. It

is interesting to note that ST contains a very similar GCR correlation map (not shown) as

that for low cloud CT in ﬁgure 2b. The lack of correlation at high latitudes in ﬁgure 2b is

currently not understood.

III. THE POSSIBLE INFLUENCE OF CLOUD MICROPHYSICS.

The opaque cloud assumption in the ISCCP IR model excludes micro-physical properties

and so constrains cloud variability to appear only in cloud ’model height’, thus introducing

6

an element of artiﬁcial variability into CT. Observed properties of low level maritime clouds

suggests that they are not opaque [24]. Relaxing the opaque assumption allows for cloud

variability to additionally manifest itself through changes in cloud optical depth, i.e., ǫ < 1.

Cloud optical depth depends on processes aﬀecting the cloud drop size distribution, and

cloud thickness. Since all atmospheric liquid water droplets form on cloud condensation

nuclei (CCN), the drop size distribution depends on the density of atmospheric aerosols

activated as CCN, while cloud thickness is inﬂuenced by atmospheric vertical temperature

proﬁles. The abundance of CCN is determined by both the level of supersaturation and the

number of aerosols present in the atmosphere able to act as CCN. Increases in supersat-

uration, typically between 0.1% and a few percent, activates increasingly smaller aerosols.

A solar signal could enter low cloud properties through inﬂuencing: atmospheric vertical

temperature proﬁles, water vapour, or aerosol to CCN activation processes. In the following

it is argued that the latter is a more likely explanation.

Thermodynamic properties of the atmosphere where low clouds form are aﬀected via

changes to tropospheric circulation. Studies with general circulation models have indicated

that solar induced variability in the stratosphere can inﬂuence the the vertical circulation of

the troposphere [10, 11, 12]. However, TOVS observations of the vertical proﬁles of water

vapour and temperature demonstrate little correlation with GCR (not shown). This suggests

that the inﬂuence of variability in solar irradiance on local thermodynamic properties in the

atmosphere is not responsible for the observed changes in low cloud properties. This might

not be surprising given that variability in solar irradiance agrees poorly with changes in low

cloud properties [2].

Assuming typical atmospheric water vapour saturation of upto a few percent, the abun-

dance of CCN is determined through properties of the background aerosol size distribu-

tion (∼ 0.01 − 1.0µm). Production of aerosol can be due to many processes involving:

gas-particle conversion, droplet-particle conversion, i.e., evaporation of water droplets con-

taining dissolved matter, and bulk particles from the surface, e.g., smoke, dust, or pollen

[16]. Observations of spectra in regions of low cloud formation indicate that aerosols are

produced locally. In the troposphere it has been suggested that ionisation contributes to

the gas-particle formation of ultraﬁne (< 0.02µm) aerosol. Model studies indicate that this

process could contribute a stable concentration of several hundred particles cm−3 at sizes

> 0.02µm [25]. This is comparable to the total number of condensation nuclei in maritime

7

air ( 100cm−3) [16]. Observations of aerosol growth into the aged aerosol distributions gen-

erating CCN have been interpreted to be inﬂuenced by the presence of ionisation [25, 26, 27].

Once activated, water droplets can themselves be charged, which increases their eﬃciency

in capturing other droplets and aerosols [28]. These processes inﬂuence growth rates and

lifetimes, and thus the resulting droplet distribution (of the order 10µm) of a cloud. Thus

the role of ionisation in aerosol-cloud droplet formation is potentially important for a GCR

induced mechanism aﬀecting low cloud properties.

IV. CONCLUSIONS

Based on the ISCCP D2 IR cloud data there is a clear correlation between GCR and

properties of low clouds in contrast to middle and high clouds. Since the correlation is

seen both in low cloud cover and low cloud top temperature, the case for solar induced

variability of low clouds is strengthened. Observations of atmospheric parameters from

TOVS do not support a solar-cloud mechanism through tropospheric dynamics inﬂuenced

by UV absorption in the stratosphere.

Instead, it is argued that a mechanism involving

solar modulated GCR is possible. It has been speculated for some time that ionisation is

important for aerosol production and growth in the troposphere, and recent studies in the

aerosol community highlight this point. It is not unreasonable to imagine that systematic

variations in cosmic ray ionisation could aﬀect atmospheric aerosols acting as CCN and

hence cloud properties. If such mechanisms can be conﬁrmed the implications for clouds

and climate are far reaching, and suggests that Heliospheric climate can inﬂuence climate

on Earth. Based on observations, Lockwood et al have shown that since 1964 the strength

of the solar magnetic ﬂux, shielding the Earth from GCR, has increased by 41% while GCR

has decreased by 3.7% [29]. Further, they claim that the solar magnetic ﬂux has more than

doubled over the last century. Based on this doubling and assuming a GCR - Low cloud

mechanism exists, a crude estimate for the century trend in low cloud radiative forcing is a

warming of 1.4W m−2 [30]. Thus, if there is a systematic variation in low cloud properties

caused by solar variability it could have important implications for the evolution of Earth’s

8

climate.

[1] H. Svensmark and E. Friis-Christensen, J. Atm. Sol. Terr. Phys. 59, 1225 (1997).

[2] H. Svensmark, Phys. Rev. Lett. 81, 5027 (1998).

[3] D. Lal and B. Peters, Cosmic ray produced radioactivity on the Earth, Encyclopedia of Physics

(Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 1967).

[4] J. Herman and R. Goldberg, Sun, Weather, and Climate, Tech. Rep. SP 426, NASA (1978).

[5] J. Lean, J. Beer, and R. Bradley, Geophys. Res. Lett. 22, 3195 (1992).

[6] E. Ney, Nature 183, 451 (1959).

[7] R. Dickinson, Bull. Am. Met. Soc. 56, 1240 (1975).

[8] M. Pudovkin and S. Veretenenko, J. Atmos. Terr. Phys. 57, 1349 (1995).

[9] B. Tinsley, J. Geomag. Geoelectr. 48, 165 (1996).

[10] M. Geller and J. Alpert, J. Atmos. Sci. 37, 1197 (1980).

[11] J. Haigh, Science 272, 981 (1996).

[12] D. Shindell, D. Rind, N. Balabhandran, J. Lean, and P. Lonergan, Science 284, 305 (1999).

[13] D. Hartmann, in Aerosol-Cloud-Climate Interactions, edited by P. V. Hobbs (Academic Press,

San Diego, 1993), p. 151.

[14] V. Ramanathan, R. Cess, E. Harrison, P. Minnis, B. Barkstrom, E. Ahmad, and D. Hartmann,

Science 243, 57 (1989).

[15] P. Ardanuy, L. Stowe, A. Gruber, and M. Weiss, J. Geophys. Res. 96, 18537 (1991).

[16] H. Pruppacher and J. Klett, Microphysics of Clouds and Precipitation (Kluwer, Dordrecht,

1997).

[17] R. Schiﬀer and W. Rossow, Bull. Am. Met. Soc. 64, 779 (1983).

[18] R. Schiﬀer and W. Rossow, Bull. Am. Met. Soc. 66, 1498 (1985).

[19] W. Rossow and R. Schiﬀer, Bull. Am. Met. Soc. 72, 2 (1991).

[20] W. Rossow, A. Walker, D. Beuschel, and M. Roiter, International Satellite Cloud Climatology

Project (ISCCP): Documentation of New Cloud Datasets, World Meteorological Organization,

Geneva (1996).

[21] K. Labitzke and H. van Loon, Ann. Geophysicae 11, 1084 (1993).

[22] H. van Loon and K. Labitzke, J. Atm. Sol. Terr. Phys. 61, 53 (1999).

9

[23] Y. Jin, W. Rossow, and D. Wylie, J. Clim. 9, 28502 (1999).

[24] A. Heymsﬁeld, in Aerosol-Cloud-Climate Interactions, edited by P. V. Hobbs (Academic Press,

San Diego, 1993), p. 97.

[25] R. Turco, J.-X. Zhao, and F. Yu, Geophys. Res. Lett. 25, 635 (1998).

[26] U. H˜orrak, J. Salm, and H. Tammet, J. Geophys. Res. 103, 13909 (1998).

[27] F. Yu and R. Turco, Geophys. Res. Lett. 27(6), 883 (2000).

[28] A. Barlow and J. Latham, Quart. J. R. Met. Soc. 109, 763 (1983).

[29] M. Lockwood, R. Stamper, and M. Wild, Nature 399, 437 (1999).

[30] N. Marsh and H. Svensmark, Cosmic Rays, Clouds and Climate (2000), in press.

10

