0
0
0
2

 

n
u
J
 

3
2

 
 
]
h
p
-
o
a
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 

1
v
1
6
0
6
0
0
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Monte Carlo study of the scattering error of a quartz

reﬂective absorption tube

Jacek Piskozub

Institute of Oceanology PAS

Powsta´nc´ow Warszawy 55 81-712 Sopot, Poland

piskozub@iopan.gda.pl

Scripps Institution of Oceanography, University of California, San Diego

Piotr J. Flatau

La Jolla, CA 92130-0221

pﬂatau@ucsd.edu

J. V. Ronald Zaneveld

College of Oceanic and Atmospheric Sciences, Oregon State University

104 Ocean Admin Bldg Corvallis, OR 97331-5503

February 2, 2008

In Press: Journal of Atmospheric and Oceanic Technology, 2000

Abstract

A Monte Carlo model was used to study the scattering error of an absorption meter with a
divergent light beam and a limited acceptance angle of the receiver. Reﬂections at both ends
of the tube were taken into account. Calculations of the effect of varying optical properties
of water, as well as the receiver geometry, were performed. A weighting function showing
the scattering error quantitatively as a function of angle was introduced. Some cases of the
practical interests are discussed

1 INTRODUCTION

Light absorption is the essential element required for marine phytoplankton growth. The re-
gion of the upper ocean illuminated by sunlight is responsible for most of marine primary
production. Absorption and scattering of phytoplankton control the light ﬁeld (at least for

1

Case 1 waters which comprise a large majority of ocean waters), and thus, affect the spectral
reﬂectance of the ocean surface. Such spectral changes provide information about ocean color
(Gordon and Morel, 1983)

In all radiative transfer modeling of the marine environment the inherent optical properties
(IOPs) are either the necessary input parameters, or in the case of inverse problems, the output
of the calculations. This makes them important in marine optics studies. The measurement of
the attenuation coefﬁcient is relatively easy; an attenuation meter consists of a collimated light
source and a collimated light detector at a known distance. The only major problem in the
attenuation measurement are photons from outside sources or the ones reﬂected on the instru-
ment scattered into the light beam, causing an underestimation of the attenuation coefﬁcient
value. The detector has a ﬁnite aperture so that some of the forward scattered photons will
be counted as part of the direct beam, also causing an underestimation. However, the mea-
surement of the components of the attenuation, the absorption and scattering coefﬁcients, is
inherently much more difﬁcult, and researchers have been striving to minimize the measure-
ment errors of these parameters for most of this century.

The central idea behind any absorption measurement is to project a beam of light through
an absorbing medium. If one could measure all of the unabsorbed light of the direct beam,
as well as all of the scattered light, the only light lost would be the absorbed light. Thus,
absorption meters tend to be arranged to collect as much of the scattered light as possible. The
absorption coefﬁcient measured in any optical device has two major sources of error, both of
which are due to the fact that natural suspensions tend to scatter light as well as absorb it.
In practice, the scattered light traverses a longer path through the absorbing medium and so
is more likely to be absorbed (the path length ampliﬁcation factor). Secondly, not all of the
scattered light is collected due to the geometry of the absorption meter (the scattering error).

One of the choices to measure in situ absorption is the cylindrical reﬂection tube. Such
a tube needs to be be long enough to provide a sufﬁcient optical path to measure the low
absorption values typical for Case1 waters below 580nm. Any photon scattered forward off
the instrument axis is, at least in theory, reﬂected by the tube walls until it reaches the detector.
An ideal instrument of this kind should also have a reﬂector inside of the source end to collect
the backscattered photons.

The ﬁrst working prototypes of such a device were developed by Zaneveld and co- workers
(Zaneveld and Bartz, 1984; Zaneveld et al., 1990). One of the greatest problems of making
a practical reﬂective tube is the reﬂectivity coefﬁcient of the walls. A Monte Carlo study
of the performance of a reﬂective tube absorption meter (Kirk, 1992) shows that the results
quickly deteriorate with reﬂectivity decreasing from 100%. As it is virtually impossible to
produce perfect reﬂecting walls, especially ones that would not deteriorate with prolonged use
of the instrument, the concept of a quartz glass tube surrounded by air was proposed instead
(Zaneveld et al., 1990). Assuming smooth surfaces of the tube, all photons encountering the
wall at an angle to the wall surface smaller than the critical angle, 41◦, must be internally
reﬂected. Therefore, a clean quartz reﬂection tube should collect all photons scattered in the
angular range between 0◦ and 41◦ (if multiple scattering is neglected). However, the large
losses of photons scattered at angles above 41◦ are the main theoretical source of error for
quartz tube absorption meters.

The Monte Carlo calculations by Kirk (1992) were conducted for a prototype absorption
tube with an almost parallel light beam resembling the Wetlabs ac-9 absorption meter. The

2

results showed that the relative error of absorption is always positive and increases linearly
with the ratio of scattering to absorption. The error increases with decreasing wall reﬂectance
and acceptance angle of the receiver. Another study by Hakvoort and Wouts (1994) used a
Lambertian light source. In this case the absorption error decreases with the decreasing angle
of photon acceptance. However, early prototypes of HiStar, the new Wetlabs spectrophotome-
ter, has a diverging beam limited to 20◦. The receiving end of the tube is illustrated in Fig. 1.
It consists of a Light Shaping Diffuser (LSD) in front of a lens. The ﬁber transmits light to a
spectrometer. Such an arrangement results in a large receiving area which through the use of
the LSD and the lens translates into the small acceptance angle needed by the spectrometer.

In this paper we take account of the reﬂections at both ends of the tube, that were neglected
by previous studies of this kind. We also extend previous results by considering a more realistic
arrangement, by introducing weighting functions that quantitatively show the scattering error
as a function of angle, and by providing calculations for some cases of practical interest.

2 CALCULATION SETUP

The Monte-Carlo code used was adopted from the code written to determine the effects of self-
shading on an in-water upwelling irradiance meter (Piskozub 1994). This is a forward Monte
Carlo algorithm, meaning that the photons are traced in the forward direction starting from the
light source. An absorption event ends a photon’s history. The low values of the optical depth
inside the absorption tube make this approach comparatively efﬁcient.

The absorption tube studied (called henceforth α-TUBE) is a cylindrical shell of inner
radius r=0.006 m and length d=0.23 m which corresponds to the dimensions of the HiStar
quartz reﬂective tube (see Fig. 1). Thickness of the quartz wall is ∆r=0.002 m. The indices of
refraction used are 1.33 for water and 1.41 for quartz.

The photons inside the α-TUBE are traced along their three dimensional trajectories. The
scattering or absorption events inside the volume of the water sample are deﬁned by inherent
optical properties of the medium: the absorption coefﬁcient of the medium a, scattering coef-
ﬁcient b, and the scattering phase function β(θ). Random numbers are used to choose whether
a given photon traveling from point (x,y,z) towards direction (θ, ϕ) will reach the wall or the
end of the cylinder. Otherwise, it is assumed that the photon ends its trajectory inside the liq-
uid medium, and the type of the event (scattering or absorption) is determined by comparing a
random number to the single scattering albedo ω0 value. All random number used in the code
are uniformly distributed in the open interval (0, 1).

We deﬁne the Cartesian coordinate system such that the axis of the tube is co-located with
the z-axis, and the center of the source end of the tube deﬁnes the origin of the coordinate
system. Therefore, θ is the angle between the photon direction and the tube axis and ϕ is the
angle of projection of the photon direction onto the x-y plane. In every scattering event the
new direction of the photon is chosen using the relevant phase function.

The source of photons is assumed to be within a circle of the radius r = 1.5 mm emitting
photons into a cone of 25◦ half-width. This represents the ﬁber head. The angular distribution
of photons is assumed to be Lambertian up to the 25◦. The position of the photon entering
the tube itself is calculated, taking into account the distance from the ﬁber head to the tube
entrance (0.019 m) and refraction from air to water at the mouth of the reﬂective tube.

3

Figure 1: Schematic representation of the reﬂective tube absorption meter setup discussed in the
paper

Such an α-TUBE, deﬁned above, is similar to the prototype WET Labs HiStar, but it does
not precisely model the detailed radiance structure surrounding both the source and the receiver
ends of the reﬂective tube. We believe that those details are of minor importance in comparison
to neglecting the albedo of the tube ends. Therefore we introduced the albedo of the source
end for photons returning to it from inside the tube, for which we estimated the albedo as 0.3
(0.2 being the diffuse albedo and 0.1 the specular albedo). This is a rough assumption of the
combined effects of the input window and the silver colored metal surface around the ﬁber
head.

The quartz walls are treated as ideally smooth, reﬂecting and refracting photons according
to geometrical optics. The direction of a refracted photon is determined in the code by Snell’s
law and probability of reﬂection and refraction by Fresnel’s law. However, no polarization
effects are included. The photons are also followed inside the quartz, which is assumed to be
non-absorbing. All photons leaving the outer surface of the quartz tube are treated as lost. The
tube is assumed to be surrounded by an ideally black medium.

The receiver end of the tube is treated as a smooth surface reﬂecting 8% of the incident
photons. This corresponds to the angular average of reﬂection for the glass window and the
Light Shaping Diffuser (LSD) used. It is assumed that a photon hitting the diffuser plate at an
angle θ reaches the receiver with a probability proportional to the angular diffusion distribution
(or scattering angle proﬁle) of the LSD. The Light Shaping Diffuser used in the instrument is a
Physical Optics Corporation 20◦ LSD. Also, we use in the calculations two other diffusers: 60◦
LSD and 95◦ LSDs. The angles are half-widths of the angular diffusion function. This means
that, for example, a 60◦ LSD has a 50% transmission efﬁciency at angle 30◦. The angular
diffusion distribution used was determined by the least-square ﬁts of the experimental curves
provided by the producer. The 20◦ LSD was approximated by two Gaussian functions (with
all angles in degrees):

L20(θ) = A exp"−0.5(cid:18) θ

B(cid:19)2# + (1 − A)"−0.5(cid:18) θ

C(cid:19)2#

(1)

where A = 0.85, B = 8.0◦, C = 15.3◦. The 60◦ LSD was approximated by a single Gaussian

4

Figure 2: Light diffusing characterisitics of the Light Shaping Diffusers for three different types of
diffusers.

function:

L60(θ) = A exp"−0.5(cid:18) θ

B(cid:19)2#

(2)

where A = 1.0 and B = 24.5◦. Finally, the 95◦ LSD was approximated by a Gompertz
function (Gompertz, 1825):

L95(θ) = A exp(cid:20)− exp(cid:18)−(cid:18) θ − θ0

B (cid:19)(cid:19)(cid:21)

(3)

where A = 1.0, B = 7.33◦ and θ0 = 50.75.

The shapes of the three LSD diffusion angle proﬁles are presented in Figure 2. The standard
Petzold scattering phase function for open turbid waters was used (Petzold 1972) except for
the calculations of the effect of the phase function shape on the measurement error where
Henyey-Greenstein phase functions (Henyey and Greenstein, 1941) were used.

Each Monte Carlo calculation was performed twice: one to determine how many photons
are recorded if there is no absorption and scattering (P0) and the other for the IOPs (absorp-
tion, scattering and phase function) of the aquatic medium being studied (P). We deﬁne the

5

measured absorption am as Kirk (1992):

am = (1/d) ln(P0/P )

(4)

where d is the length of the cylinder.

It must be noted that the ﬁrst program run corresponds to calibration of the instrument in
“ideal water,” not in air. We use the water index of refraction for this medium so as not to
inﬂuence the new photon direction in refraction events. Therefore, the results are different
from what one would obtain if the tube was ﬁlled with air. Such a non-scattering and non-
absorbing liquid medium does not exist. However, it is the most obvious reference value to
use in the calculations aimed at studying the calibration of the instrument, because it does
not introduce any photon losses due to scattering (b=0) and does not change the behavior of
photons on the quartz-liquid border.

3 RESULTS

3.1 SEMI-ANALYTICAL CONSIDERATIONS
In this section we present qualitative arguments related to the optical phenomena inﬂuencing
the fate of photons in the absorption tube. The purpose of this is to provide approximate results
that can be compared with exact Monte Carlo results later. The semi- analytic results give a
better understanding of the underlying physics. If, for example, the IOPs of the studied water
sample are assumed to be: b=0.8 m−1, a=0.2 m−1, and the Petzold San Diego Harbor (turbid
water) phase function, one can expect that 4.5% (exp(−ad)) of all photons will be absorbed
and 16.8% (exp(−bd)) will be scattered in the water volume inside the quartz tube.

The phase function used, determines that 92.9% of all scattering events take place in the
0-41◦ range. Assuming for simplicity, that before scattering, all photons traveled parallel to
the tube axis, all those scattered photons will be reﬂected back into the tube on all encounters
with the tube wall. Similarly, all photons backscattered into the range of 139-180◦ stay in the
tube on their way back to the source end. These represent 0.3% of all photons. The remaining
6.8% of all scattered photons are scattered into the range 41-139◦. These photons have a large
probability of leaving the tube on the ﬁrst encounter with the wall. The angles to the z-axis
at which those photons travel make it virtually certain that they will leave the tube before
reaching either end, unless they are scattered close to 41◦. For example at θ = 45◦, a photon
scattered in the very center of the tube will hit the wall 9 times before reaching the end of the
tube making the probability of not leaving it < 10−8. The 6.8% of scattered photons that are
lost translates into 1.1% of all traced photons being lost through the walls.

After the absorption and scattering losses are taken into account, 94.3% of all traced pho-
tons reach the receiver end of the tube. Thus, the assumption of 8% specular albedo of the
receiver end of the tube means that 7.5% of all traced photons are reﬂected from the receiver
end of the tube. Absorption and scattering losses result in only 7.1% of all initial photons
coming back to the source end after being reﬂected. The backscattered photons, which are
attenuated in a pathlength approximately equal to the tube length, increase this number to
7.2%.

6

Another important aspect of a quartz absorption tube is the length of the path that the pho-
tons travel in quartz instead of water. Any distance traveled in quartz decreases the attenuation
due to the negligible absorption coefﬁcient in the visible range of the spectrum (Kirk 1992).
This decreases the measured absorption values because the receiver is reached by more pho-
tons due to the shorter path through the absorbing medium. In the studied tube geometry, the
ratio of tube diameter to wall thickness is only 6:1, and considering that every time the photon
goes across the water volume it needs to cross the wall twice (out and back into the tube) it
would seem that this effect must be overwhelming. However, due to Snell’s law and the nar-
row angles between the direction of most photons and the wall, the average path of photons in
quartz is much smaller.

3.2 SANITY CHECKS OF THE MONTE CARLO RESULTS
Even if rough approximations of the results are possible with simple arithmetic calculations,
Monte Carlo modeling includes all optical phenomena taking place inside the tube. This can
be illustrated by comparing the approximate values from the previous section to the results of
a Monte Carlo run using 40 million photons with the same IOPs. The number of photons lost
through the walls is 1.74% (estimated above as 1.1%). The discrepancy can be explained by
the divergence of the input beam: photons entering the tube at an angle may leave it through
the walls, even if scattered from its original direction at less than the angle of total internal
reﬂection, resulting in higher scattering losses.

The Monte Carlo derived absorption losses percentage is 4.09% (semi-analytically esti-
mated as 4.5%). The reason for this is that the path length of the photons is in quartz instead
of in water. The Monte Carlo code makes it possible, by tracing each photon individually,
to calculate the average path traveled by the photons in water to be 21.15 cm and in quartz:
2.83cm. This means that the path in water is 8% shorter than the length of the reﬂective tube,
a value much higher than that calculated by Kirk (1992) for a parallel beam in which only the
scattered photons encounter the walls. The losses by absorption on the front end of the tube
are 4.84% of all photons (estimated as 5.0%). The small difference is the net result of smaller
absorption losses and greater scattering losses.

The effect of the shortened optical path, described above, is not very grave if the way the
instrument is calibrated is taken into account. All calibration techniques involve a comparison
of the received signal (that is the number of photons reaching the receiver) for the measured
sample with pure water or air values. Using pure water almost completely removes the error
due to non-scattered photons traveling partly inside the wall, as the effect will be identical for
water of any IOPs. Calibrating the instrument in air leaves some error due to path length in
quartz because air has a different index of refraction making the path length in quartz shorter.
There is, however, a much bigger source of error in calibrating the instrument without water,
which is the removal of total internal reﬂection on the quartz wall by surrounding both its sides
by the same medium.

3.3 VARIATION IN THE SCATTERING-ABSORPTION RATIO
It was shown by Kirk (1992) that for a reﬂective tube absorption meter propagating an almost
parallel beam, that the ratio of the measured to the true value of the absorption coefﬁcient

7

am/a increases linearly with b/a at a rate depending on the phase function used. We decided
to test whether such a relationship will hold for the relatively divergent light beam and limited
acceptance angle of the α-TUBE. Figure 3 shows that this is indeed the case for all studied
angles of acceptance (depending on the LSD type used). The slope coefﬁcients w of the linear
ﬁt

am = a + wb

(5)

are 0.194 for 20◦ LSD, 0.139 for 60◦ LSD, and 0.0957 for 95◦ LSD. These results suggest that
the scattering losses of the instrument increase with the decreasing angle of acceptance of the
receiver. It must be noted that the values of the coefﬁcient w depend on the scattering phase
function used.

Figure 3 shows that there is a small offset in Equation 5. Its general version am = a+wb+o

(where o is the offset) can be transformed to

a =

am − wc − o

1 − w

(6)

which, for a given phase function and absorbing tube geometry, allows for determining the
true a value if attenuation c is measured independently. The parameters w and o may be
calculated for the given absorption meter geometry if the phase function is known at least
approximately. The values of the coefﬁcient w, for the physically important range of Henyey-
Greenstein asymmetry parameter g and the 20◦ LSD receiver are shown in Figure 4.

3.4 VARIATION IN THE SCATTERING PHASE FUNCTION
The measurement error in absorption depends on the scattering phase function of the aquatic
medium (Kirk, 1992). To study the effect of the scattering phase function on absorption mea-
sured by the given instrument setup with 20◦ LSD, we performed a sequence of Monte Carlo
calculations for the Henyey-Greenstein phase function (Henyey and Greenstein 1941) by vary-
ing the asymmetry parameter g

β(θ) =

1 − g2
− 2g cos θ)3/2

(1 + g2

(7)

where g is a parameter determining the shape of the phase function. In this paper we assume
range of g from g = 0 (isotropic scattering) to g = 1 (forward scattering).

The results in Fig. 5 show am/a as a function of the asymmetry parameter. They were
obtained by running the code for the studied tube equipped with three different LSD plates
(20◦, 60◦, and 95◦). As expected, for g approaching 1 the am/a ratio is close to 1 as all
photons are scattered almost in the direction that they were headed before the scattering. For a
more realistic range of g values between 0.8 and 0.9 (Mobley, 1994) the measured absorption
increases when g decreases due to the greater scattering losses of the photons. The value of
am/a < 1 for g = 0.95 and 95◦ LSD is not a statistical error, but the effect of the slightly
longer path of scattered photons in the quartz, in comparison to the non-scattering ”ideal water”
which results in decrease of absorption.

For small g values the am/a values (Fig. 5) approach the maximum (a+b)/a at which all
the scattered photons are lost and the measured value of absorption equals the total attenuation.

8

Figure 3: Ratio of the measured to the true absorption coefﬁcient am/a as a function of the
scattering-absorption ratio b/a and a = 0.2m−1, Petzold ”turbid” phase function for three dif-
ferent Light Shaping Diffusers in front of the receiver lens.

9

Figure 4: The slope coefﬁcient w as a function of Henyey-Greenstein asymmetry factor g for the
20◦ LSD receiver geometry.

10

Figure 5: Ratio of the measured to the true absorption coefﬁcient am/a as a function of the Henyey-
Greenstein scattering phase function asymmetry parameter g; a = 0.2m−1, b = 0.8m−1, Petzold
turbid phase function, for three different Light Shaping Diffusers in front of the receiver lens. Solid
lines are third order polynomial ﬁt.

11

Figure 6: Ratio of the measured to the true absorption coefﬁcient am/a as a function of the accep-
tance angle of the receiver, a = 0.2m−1, b = 0.8m−1, Petzold turbid phase function.

In the case studied (a+b)/a = 5. However, even for an isotropic scattering phase function (g=0)
the value of the scattering error does not reach this maximum value because some photons are
scattered at angles small enough to be recorded by the receiver. Again, the ﬁgure shows that
increasing the angle of acceptance of the receiver decreases the absorption error for all realistic
phase functions.

3.5 VARIATION IN THE ACCEPTANCE ANGLE
Results presented by Kirk (1992) for a reﬂective tube absorption meter with an almost parallel
beam show a rapidly increasing value of am/a with the acceptance angle decreasing below
90◦. On the other hand, Hakvoort and Wouts (1994) suggest that for the reﬂective tube with
Lambertian light source and metallic reﬂective walls, the measurement error increases with
the acceptance angle of the receiver. The Monte Carlo code was run for several values of the
receiver angle of acceptance to test if the similiar situation arises for the α-TUBE. No Light
Shaping Diffuser was used in this case. The results are presented in Figure 6.

It can be seen that for large acceptance angles (> 40◦) the am/a values have a similar shape

12

to that of a parallel beam case. However, for acceptance angles in the 0 −40◦ range a minimum
can be observed, instead of a high peak as in the case of a parallel beam. The reason for that
is that the source beam is more divergent than the angle of acceptance. For small acceptance
angles the receiver accepts some scattered photons that would not be accepted if they reached
the receiver without a scattering event. This is because their angle of incidence is reduced by
the scattering event. This reduces the scattering error of the absorption measurement. Unlike
the Lambertian source case, there is no major increase of am/a values for large acceptance
angles (although a small increase above 120◦ may be discerned). It should be noted that the
LSD plate used in the instrument corresponds roughly to an acceptance angle of 20◦. Although
this angle is close to a local minimum of am/a, it is still within the range of the highest levels
of absorption error.

3.6 ANGULAR FUNCTION OF PHOTON LOSS PROBABIL-
ITY W (θ)
Full understanding of the mechanism of scattering loss is not possible without determining the
angular relationship of the scattering error of the reﬂective tube absorption meter. The fraction
of scattered light lost because of the absorption after being scattered at a given angle can be
deﬁned as a loss function W (θ). The angular integral of this function multiplied by the phase
function is the error of the measured absorption value ε = am − a

ε = Z π

0

W (θ)β(θ) sin(θ)dθ

(8)

The advantage of the W function is that it is not dependent on the shape of the phase
function but only on the tube geometry. This is true only if multiple scattering is neglected
because a second scattering event inﬂuences the fate of a photon already scattered. In order
to differentiate among the possible sources of the scattering loss error of the absorption value
we decided to calculate three variants of the W function (a) W0(θ) for scattering losses due to
photons lost through the tube walls, (b) W1(θ) same as W0(θ) and for scattering losses due to
additional photons absorbed by the source (”front”) end of the tube, (c) W2(θ) same as W1(θ)
and for scattering losses due to additional photons lost on the LSD.

By ”additional photons” we mean that only the difference between the number of photons
lost by the absorption and scattering and the ”ideal” water is taken into account.
In each
of the three cases the actual value of W for angle range is derived by dividing the number of
photons scattered into the angular sector and subsequently lost by the sum of these photons plus
the number of photons scattered into the same sector which are subsequently recorded by the
receiver. Fig. 7 presents the W functions calculated by running the code for 40 million photons
with a = 0.2m−1, b = 0.8m−1, Petzold turbid phase function, and 20◦ LSD. In this case the
number of multiple scattered photons is 7% of all which are scattered. That means that the
inﬂuence of the phase function shape on the W function is of secondary importance. All three
functions have the sigmoid shape for the forward scattered photons between 0 − 90◦. There
is no sharp step at 41◦ and 139◦ because the divergence of the beam causes some photons to
travel at an angle to the tube axis before scattering which allows photons to escape through the
wall even if scattered at an angle smaller than the total internal reﬂection angle. On the other
hand, a photon scattered at more than 41◦ back towards the axis may survive the encounter

13

with the wall without being refracted out of the tube. The symmetrical shape of W0 is caused
by the fact that losses on the ”front” end are not taken into account. A photon backscattered
at angle 180 − φ has the same chance of being lost through the walls as the one scattered at
φ. The symmetry is broken only by the assumed diffusive albedo of the light source end of the
tube because some photons leave the tube by the wall after being diffused on its source end.

Adding the photon losses on the light source end of the tube (function W1) changes the
symmetry. Most of the backscattered photons are lost in this way as well as some of the
forward scattered. The latter is caused by two reasons. Some forward-scattered photons are
reﬂected by the receiver end of the tube back towards the source end. However, it is even
more important that some of the forward scattered photons are absorbed on the ”front” end
because they were scattered after they were reﬂected on the receiver end. The reverse direction
of those photons before scattering complicates the W (θ) function, but we decided to include
these scattering events in the statistics used to calculate the functions because they contribute
to the total scattering losses.

Receiver end losses are caused by more photons missing the receiver due to reaching it at
a wider angle after a scattering event. This changes the picture by, paradoxically, decreasing
the photon losses for photons that were scattered in the forward direction (function W2). This
means that scattering a photon by a small angle increases its probability of being accepted by
the receiver compared to the average of non-scattered photons. This is caused again by the
source beam being wider than the acceptance angle of the receiver. The discrepancy between
W1 and W2, especially at scattering angles close to 0, is also partly caused by the inclusion of
photons scattered on their way back to the source end of the tube. One of its consequences is
that the population of photons scattered at close to 0 degree is different from the population of
non-scattered photons.

The shape of the W functions for angles greater than 90◦ is not important for the scattering
error estimates because only a fraction of all the photons is backscattered. For the W2 function
which includes all the photon losses due to scattering, the loss of backscattered photons is
close to 100%. Therefore, the best ﬁt approximations to W0, W1 and W2 were calculated for
the range 0 − 90◦ only. The three functions were ﬁtted with a 4-parameter sigmoid

W (x) = y0 +

A

(1 + exp(−(x − x0)/B))

(9)

where for W0 we have A = 0.935, B = 2.53◦, x0 = 26.72◦, y0 = 0.061, for W1 we have
A = 0.841, B = 3.35◦, x0 = 25.75◦, y0 = 0.157, and for W2 we have A = 0.901, B = 2.58◦,
x0 = 26.79◦, y0 = 0.095.

4 CONCLUSIONS

Monte Carlo calculations of the scattering error for the HiStar prototype absorption meter show
that the different blueprint of the instrument (more divergent light beam and a limited angular
view of the receiver) in comparison to other reﬂective tube absorption meters does inﬂuence
the error. Due to additional scattering losses by the view limited receiver the absorption error
is greater for all combinations of moderate optical parameters. It is possible to correct the error
by careful calibration, and the results presented in this paper for the turbid water Petzold phase

14

Figure 7: The photon loss probability W (θ) as a function of the scattering angle, a = 0.2m−1,
b = 0.8m−1, Petzold turbid phase function. These three functions represent (a) W0 which deﬁnes
losses of photons leaving the tube through the quartz walls, (b) W1 same as W0 and losses on the
light source end of the cylinder, (c) W2 which is the same as W1 but with losses on the receiver-end.

15

function are a step in this direction. Independent measurements of attenuation may improve the
error correction for water samples of known (at least approximately) phase functions as shown
in the paper. However, the source of inter-instrumental discrepancy in absorption measurement
that is more difﬁcult to correct is their different responses to phase function variability. One
possible solution is to use the photon loss function W. If the phase function of the studied
sea-water is known (or is possible to be estimated by comparing it to known phase functions
of similar water samples), the W function makes it possible to calculate directly the value of
the scattering error for the sample.

Our calculations show that the main source of the absorption error is the view limited
receiver. Therefore, we suggest that if technically possible (it would diminish the amount of
light collected by the receiver optical ﬁber) a diffuser of wider angular characteristics should
be used in the instrument receiver setup.

5 REFERENCES

Bricaud A., Babin M., Morel. A., and Claustre H., 1995: ”Variability in the chlorophyll-
speciﬁc absorption coefﬁcients of natural phytoplankton: analysis and parameterization,” J.
Geophys. Res. , 100, 13321–13332.

Gompertz B., 1925: ”On the Nature of the Function Expressive of the Law of Human Mortal-
ity,” Phil. Trans. Roy. Soc. London., 115, 513.

Gordon H. R. and Morel, A. 1983: ”Remote assessment of ocean color for interpretation of
satellite visible imagery, a review” in Lecture notes on coastal and estuarine studies, vol. 4,
Springler Verlag, New York, 114pp.

Hakvoort J.H.M, Wouts R. 1994: ”Monte Carlo modelling of the light ﬁeld in reﬂective tube
type absorption meter,” Proc. SPIE , 2258, Ocean Optics XII, 529–538.

Henyey, L. G., and J. L. Greenstein, 1941: ”Diffuse radiation in the galaxy,” Astrophys. J., 93,
70–83.

Kirk, J.T.O, 1992: ”Monte Carlo modeling of the performance of a reﬂective tube absorption
meter,” Appl. Opt., 31, 6463–6468

Mobley, C. D., 1994, Light and water: radiative transfer in natural waters, Academic Press,
San Diego.

Petzold, T. J., 1972: ”Volume scattering functions for selected ocean waters,” SIO Ref. 72-78,
Scripps Institution of Oceanography, Univ. of California, San Diego.

Piskozub J., 1994: ”Effects of surface waves and sea-bottom on self-shading of in-water opti-
cal instruments” in Ocean Optics XII, Proc. SPIE, 2258, 300–308.

16

Pope R.M., Fry E.S., 1997: ”Absorption spectrum (380-700 nm) of pure water. II. Integrating
cavity measurements,” Appl. Opt., 36, 8710–8723.

Zaneveld J.R.V, Bartz R, 1984: ”Beam attenuation and absorption meters” in Ocean Optics
VII, M.A. Blizard ed., Proc. SPIE, 489, 318–324.

Zaneveld J.R.V, Bartz R., Kitchen J.C, 1990: ”A reﬂective tube absorption meter,” in Ocean
Optics X, R.W. Spinard ed., Proc. SPIE, 1302, 124-136.

17

