PIPAER

PIPAER-IEEC-TN-1100/2100
ESTEC Contract No. 14071/99/NL/MM

PARIS Interferometric Processor Analysis and Experimental Results

Theoretical Feasibility Analysis

G. Ruﬃni, F. Soulat

IEEC-CSIC Research Unit

Gran Capit`a, 2-4, 08034 Barcelona, Spain

August 31, 2000

0
0
0
2

 

v
o
N
4
1

 

 
 
]
h
p
-
o
a
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 

1
v
7
2
0
1
1
0
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Contents

1 Abstract

2 Introduction

3 State-of-the-Art, Review

3.1 Historical overview . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3.2 The goal of this research . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

4 Background and Applicable Models

4.1 Statistics of the ﬁeld . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4.2 The Fresnel-Huygens-Kirchhoﬀ integral for the ﬁeld . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4.3 Geometrical Optics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4.3.1 Corrections to the Geometrical Optics approximation: frequency de-
pendence . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4.4 The WAF zone . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

5 Simulation Tools: fresnel and speckles

5.1 fresnel . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5.1.1 Random ocean . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5.1.2 Elfouhaily spectrum . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5.1.3 Field calculation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
speckles . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5.2.1
Specular point determination . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5.2.2 Field computation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

5.2

6 Coherence and Structure Functions

6.1 The coherence and structure functions, and the coherence time . . . . . . .
6.2 Doppler spread of the reﬂected signal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

7 Statisitical Properties of the Reﬂected Fields

7.1 Analysis of ﬁeld correlations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7.2 Filtering . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

8 Simulation experiments with winding number and GIP

8.1 The uses of winding number . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

9 Recommendations for Post-processing Procedures

9.1 The PIP instrument: architecture and data products . . . . . . . . . . . . .

2

4

6

7
7
8

10
10
11
12

14
15

17
17
18
18
18
19
19
21

23
23
32

38
38
41

46
46

49
49

10 Conclusions and Future Work

10.1 What we have found: PIP’s superior performance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10.2 What we’d now like to know: future work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

11 Acknowlegments

51
51
52

53

Chapter 1

Abstract

Abstract

Several experimental results show that it is possible to extract useful phase information
from reﬂected GPS signals over the oceans. In this work we begin the development of the
theoretical background to account for these results and fully understand the phenomena
involved. This information will then be used to deﬁne and carry out new experiments
to evaluate the feasibility of using the phase from reﬂected GPS signals for altimetric
purposes and the advantages of using interferometric combinations of the signals at diﬀerent
frequencies—the PIP concept.

We focus on the coherence properties of the signals, including the PIP interferometric
combination of phases in the diﬀerent frequencies. In this work we will concentrate on a
static, 8 m high receiver (at least in regards to the simulations), and an inﬁnitely removed
static source. As the ocean moves, the received ﬁeld will pick up a random phase. We
want to understand the behavior of this phase, as the goal is to carry out altimetric mea-
surements using phase ranging. We will also keep in mind that this random phase carries
geophysical information (intuitively, the bigger the signiﬁcant wave height, the larger the
phase excursions).

Our simulations are based on the Fresnel integral and use simulated Gaussian oceans
using the Elfouhaily et al. spectrum. The simulation tool, FRESNEL, is capable of gen-
erating time series of the reﬂected ﬁeld at diﬀerent frequencies, and then analyzing their
properties. This software is written in IDL.

The most important point we need to answer is whether the signal can be tracked in the
aforementioned situations. As we show, the PIP combination of the signals helps clean the
signal from noise—the more correlated the signals at diﬀerent frequencies the more eﬀective
is the PIP mechanism. The following questions are speciﬁcally addressed:

• What is the reﬂected ﬁeld spectrum? This is determined by the orbital ocean motion,
for a static receiver. We also discuss the moving case and show that it depends on
the system gain.

• Does the winding number accumulate, or does it average to zero? Winding number
refers to phase accumulation. Large phase excursions (many cycles) are seen in our
simulations. Our simulations show, however, that there isn’t a preferred direction for
phase winding. This means that altimetric phase measurements can be accurate.

• What are the theoretical values for the average values of the interferometric ﬁelds?
How do the ﬁelds correlate across frequencies? We show that the most important

4

factor is the relation between signiﬁcant wave height and the (real or synthetic) elec-
tromagnetic wavelength.

• What is the coherence time of the signals (the reﬂected phase)? We show it is longest
for the PIP combination. For rough seas, the correlation between the ﬁelds (and
therefore interferometric coherence) in diﬀerent frequencies disappears, and the co-
herence time goes to zero even for the interferometric combinations. In calmer ocean
conditions, however, our results indicate that the interferometric combination remains
coherent while the individual signals lose coherence rapidly.

• What is the structure function of the reﬂected phase? We see a good ﬁt with a random

walk model, with a drift rate proportional to wind speed.

• In what ways is the PIP interferometric signal diﬀerent and, presumably, superior to

the original ones? Coherence, a basic element for altimetric purposes.

Finally, we discuss the robustness of altimetric phase measurements after low-pass ﬁl-
tering the PIP combination. We show that low-pass ﬁltered PIP data can provide more
robust and accurate altimetric measurements to detect slow-varying geophysical signals in
the ocean.

5

Chapter 2

Introduction

This is the sum of Technical Notes PIPAER-IEEC-TN-1100 and PIPAER-IEEC-TN-2100,
Theoretical Feasibility Analysis. The inputs to this WP are

1. GMV/IEEC Proposal GMVSA1123/99 (GMV)

2. Relevant literature

The outputs are

1. This technical note

2. Recommendations for experiments and post-processing procedures

And the Tasks:

1. Review the relevant documentation

2. Establish the worst and best case scenarios for the concept applicability

3. Issue recommendations for experiments and post-processing procedures

4. Prepare this technical note

In addition we analyze some issues relating to the architecture of the proposed PIP

instrument.

6

Chapter 3

State-of-the-Art, Review

3.1 Historical overview

The PIP idea can be traced back to the PARIS concept [Mart´ın-Neira, 1993], where the
use of GNSS signals as sources of opportunity for bistatic altimetry was ﬁrst proposed.
The goal of the present research is to assess the possibilities of using the phase information
of the reﬂected signal from a PARIS GNSS system for altimetric purposes. In particular,
we will study the merits of using the phase from a dual frequency GNSS system in an
interferometric fashion. Other uses of reﬂected phase data can also be envisioned (surely
the temporal behavior of phase ﬂuctuations and other characteristics contain geophysical
information about the sea surface) but we will not explicitly investigate this possibility in
what follows. Rather, we will, for now, content ourselves with providing the background
for discussion of these ideas in future work. This is a natural byproduct of our interest in
phase altimetry, as we will see.

That the GPS signal reﬂected from the ocean surface can retain coherence under some
conditions has been demonstrated in the past.
In [Auber et al., 1994] we have the ﬁrst
report of a GPS receiver “locking” onto a sea-reﬂected signal. Motivated by this somewhat
surprising event, tracking of reﬂected signals was later seeked and achieved for extended
periods of time in a series of experiments with ﬂights (over the Chesapeake Bay and the
Eastern Shore of Virginia) at an altitude of up to 5500 m [Garrison et al., 1996]. This
was accomplished using an Ashtech Z-12 oﬀ-the-shelf receiver with a LHCP nadir looking
antenna, and it was observed that carrier lock was obtained. This particular receiver would
not have been able to track otherwise.

On the other hand, several groups have to date successfully analyzed reﬂected data
in order to correlate the direct and reﬂected signals with clean code replicas. In the ex-
periment carried out by ESA in September 1997 two receivers were employed, operating
independently of each other, one tracking the direct signal with an up-looking antenna, the
other recovering the reﬂected signal via a down-looking LHCP 9 dB helical antenna over an
18 m bridge near Rotterdam (The Netherlands), the “Zeeland Brug”. After ampliﬁcation,
each of the signals was sent to a diﬀerent GPS receiver (GEC Plessey builder kit 2). The
receivers down-converted the signals to IF (4.309 MHz, with a bandwidth of 1.9 MHz).
The IF signals were sent directly to a high-performance sampling card, which sampled the
data at 6.25 MHz with 2 MHz bandwidth. They were then cross-correlated with replicas of
the signal adjusted for Doppler due to satellite motion and with 20 ms duration (20 C/A
code periods). Using the correlation delay data from the direct and reﬂected signal, this

7

group solved for the height of the bridge over mean surface (which depended on the tide)
as well as a hardware bias constant via a least squares ﬁtting procedure. In addition, the
receivers recorded standard RINEX ﬁles, including SNR. The GPS signals were deemed
usable if the SNR of the reﬂected signal was greater than 6 to 9 dB, and if the geome-
try was favorable (visibility and multi-path were rather complicated in some geometrical
conﬁgurations, which were then excluded). Signiﬁcant Wave Height during the experiment
was around 1.4 meters (equivalent to a height standard deviation σζ of about 35 cm), and
the altimetric performance was rather poor, as only the C/A code could be used for corre-
lation (in general, a 1% of the chip length is assumed to be the optimal precision for one
measurement—this is 3 m for C/A code). A very good description and further details can
be found in [Caparrini, 1998].

The IEEC Earth Sciences Department has been able to reproduce the analysis of the
Bridge Experiment data with similar results. The analysis tools for the generation of the
GPS signals and their correlation with the received ones have been developed in Matlab.

Another aspect of the Bridge Experiment analysis carried out by ESA was the attempt
to extract phase information from the data. The ﬁrst attempt of phase processing was an
evaluation of Doppler frequency based on zero-crossings counting [Caparrini, 1998]. The
approach was to ﬁrst multiply the signal by an appropriate clear replica of the PRN code
of a satellite in view. It was then expected that a peak in the Fourier transform of the
resulting signal would appear at the IF plus the Doppler frequency. The direct approach
was not deemed feasible, however, due to the limited length of the signals (only 10 ms long),
which did not allow for enough spectral resolution. The signal multiplied by the replica was
instead ﬁrst ﬁltered with a rather narrow ﬁlter in order to eliminate all but the expected
Doppler-shifted component. After that, frequency was estimated using the zero-crossings
count for each 10 ms stream of data, with rather good results for both the direct and the
reﬂected signal. This suggested that the reﬂected signal still contained a certain degree of
coherence. A second study was then devoted to the measurement of the relative tide height
(that is, the diﬀerence in the height measurements at diﬀerent times through the diﬀerence
in the number of zero-crossings between the direct and the reﬂected signals). The reasoning
was that if the phase could be measured at all, it would be only up to a phase bias. If the
bias is assumed to be constant over some short measurement times, then the change in the
phase between those times would be related directly to the change in delay between the
direct and the reﬂected signals. This calculation, however, could not be carried through
because the data was too noisy and the intervals between data measurements too far apart
in time.

3.2 The goal of this research

As we have seen, several experimental results show that it is possible to extract useful phase
information from reﬂected signals. In the analysis sketched below we will begin to develop
the theoretical background to account for these results. The goal of this work is to continue
this development and analysis of past work to fully understand the phenomena involved.
This information will then be used to deﬁne and carry out new experiments to evaluate the
feasibility of using the phase from reﬂected GPS signals for altimetric purposes.

We will focus on the coherence of the signals, including the interferometric combination
of phases in the diﬀerent frequencies. In this work we will concentrate on a static, 8 m high
receiver (at least in regards to the simulations), and an inﬁnitely removed static source. As

8

the ocean moves, the received ﬁeld will pick up a random phase. We want to understand
the behavior of this phase, as the goal is to carry out altimetric measurements using phase
ranging. We will also keep in mind that this random phase carries geophysical information
(intuitively, the bigger the signiﬁcant wave height, the larger the phase excursions).

The PIP concept concept consists in combining two phases from the signals at diﬀerent
frequencies.
Imagine a very smooth and slowly changing ocean. By combining the two
phases we obtain a slowly changing interferometric phase. In some sense we would expect
that this interferometric phase will be less sensitive to small ripples in the ocean and thus
provide a more robust ranging tool for altimetry.

Several implementations of this concept can be envisioned: a static receiver on a coast or
bridge to monitor tides or ﬂoods as well as sea state. Or deployment on boats, aircraft and
spacecraft for global altimetric or oceanographic measurements. Carrier altimetric signals
over the oceans, even when seen by a fast moving Low Earth Orbiter, will mostly be low
frequency. A strong topographic signal over the oceans would be a slope of 1 meter every
100 km. As seen by the LEO (traveling at 7 km/s, say), this translates into 0.35 Hz in L1,
a rise of 5 cycles in 100/7 seconds. In L25, this becomes 0.01 Hz.

On the other hand, the roughness and motion of the sea will induce high frequency
“jitter” on the received signal. This is a nuisance for altimetry, and this is where we expect
the PIP concept to bring added value, as the interferometric combination should be less
sensitive to these eﬀects. It is appropriate to recall here the old ado, “What is noise to
some is signal to others.” This jitter may contain very useful information.

In the author’s mind, the most important point we need to answer is whether the signal
can be tracked in the aforementioned situations. As we will see, the PIP concept will help
clean the signal from noise. For the most part, we will focus in this work on the low altitude,
static receiver situation. The moving cases at higher altitudes will be left for future work,
as we will discuss in the last Chapter.

In this report we will address, among others, the following questions:

1. What is the reﬂected ﬁeld spectrum?

2. Does the winding number (to be described below) accumulate, or does it average to

zero?

3. What are the theoretical values for the average values of the interferometric ﬁelds?

That is, how do the ﬁelds correlate across frequencies?

4. What is the coherence time of the signals (the reﬂected phase)?

5. What is the structure function of the reﬂected phase?

6. In what ways is the interferometric signal diﬀerent and, presumably, superior to the

original ones?

9

Chapter 4

Background and Applicable
Models

The Rayleigh criterion deﬁnes a surface to be smooth if σζ < λ/(8 cos θ), where σζ is the
surface height standard deviation, θ is the incidence angle with respect to the normal to
the surface. A more stringent condition is provided by the Fraunhofer criterion, which is
used to deﬁne the far-ﬁeld distance of an antenna, σζ < λ/(32 cos θ). A surface becomes
smooth under two conditions: σζ ∼ 0 or θ ∼ 90o. The eﬀective roughness of the surface is
therefore σζ cos θ [Beckmann et al., 1963].
Several aspects must be considered to understand the scattering phenomenon. We will
examine two limiting situation models.
In one case, we can assume that the surface is
made up of many independent mirrors (specular points) whose contributions to the ﬁeld
add up incoherently. The other limit is that of a surface which deviates from ﬂatness only
slightly. These two cases must be treated diﬀerently. The goal in both cases will be to
understand the behavior of the received phase and modulus. Let us keep in mind in the
back of our heads that, at the end, we should look at the relative phase between the two
available wavelengths, which should be a statistically better behaved quantity than either
of the two phases.

4.1 Statistics of the ﬁeld

In this subsection we brieﬂy review some of the results in [Beckmann et al., 1963], concern-
ing the sum

n

U = reiψ =

eiφj .

Xj=1

(4.1)

This is relevant to understand what happens when we sum the ﬁelds in a rough reﬂection
situation. We state the result for two illuminating conditions:

1. A uniformly distributed phase from −π to π.
2. A normal phase distribution with standard deviation σ.

In the ﬁrst case the resulting phase has again a uniformly distributed phase, but the modulus
has the so-called Rayleigh distribution p(r) = 2r
n exp(−r2/n)—and therefore has a non-zero
average (the average is proportional to n1/2). In the second case we ﬁnd that the components

10

of the resulting phasor are normally distributed (which is a quite general result following
directly from the Central Limit Theorem) and that

hr2i = n2e−σ2

+ n(1 − e−σ2

).

(4.2)

In this beautiful expression we can see the coherent and incoherent contributions to the
ﬁeld modulus. Beckmann summarizes:

Outside a narrow cone (or wedge) about the direction of specular reﬂection,
the amplitude of the ﬁeld scattered by a rough surface is always Rayleigh-
distributed; if the surface is very rough, and grazing incidence is excluded, the
amplitude of the scattered ﬁeld is Rayleigh-distributed everywhere.

The specularly scattered ﬁeld is composed of a coherent component and a random, Hoyt-
distributed component. When the surface is very rough, the latter becomes incoherent and
the former vanishes. In fact, if the surface height distribution is normal with deviation σζ,
then

).

(4.3)

hr2i = n2e−(4πσζ cos θ/λ)2

+ n(1 − e−(4πσζ cos θ/λ)2

Thus, we see that the magnitude of the reﬂected ﬁeld should depend mainly on the ratio
of signiﬁcant wave height to wavelength. We will obtain a related result through more
sophisticated analysis below.

Some veriﬁcation of these ideas via simulations can be found in [Daout et al., 1999],
where the authors, using a 1-D bistatic scattering simulator, reproduce the mentioned
aspects of the phase statistical distribution. The surface is there simulated by facets, and
the Kirchhoﬀ theory for the scattering ﬁeld from each facet is used to accumulate the rays
with regard to their phase. The phase histograms they show verify very clearly the ideas
just discussed. In particular, that the signal is very coherent at low elevations.

4.2 The Fresnel-Huygens-Kirchhoﬀ integral for the ﬁeld

This is basically the scalar Kirchhoﬀ approximation, valid for surfaces with large radii of
curvature compared to wavelength. Let the incoming ﬁeld be described by1

Uo(p) =

eikr
r

.

(4.4)

The Fresnel integral for the scattered ﬁeld is (see [Born & Wolf, 1993, p. 380, eq. 17])

U (p) = −i

4π Z R ·

eik(r+s)

rs

(~q · ˆn) dS.

(4.5)

The vector ~q = (~q⊥, qz) is the scattering vector: the vector normal to the plane that would
specularly reﬂect the rays in the direction we are looking. This vector is a function of the
incoming and outgoing unit vectors ~ni and ~ns, ~q = k(ˆni − ˆns). The scattering vector is
related to the specular angle β through cos β = ˆz · ˆq/q. Note, as an aside, that in the
nadir case all wind direction dependence disappears (surface anisotropy). Changing wind
direction is akin to performing a rotation in the surface, and the integral is invariant under
rotations in the nadir case. The nadir case is special because R[~q(~x)] = ~q(R[~x]).

1Here we do a scalar treatment, think of U as a component of the ﬁeld.

11

4.3 Geometrical Optics

This is the process that dominates in specular scattering when the frequency is large (i.e.,
the wavelength is small compared to the wave height and to the surface correlation length).
The case of L-band scattering from the ocean is at best borderline “high-frequency”, and
we are carrying out some separate studies within the framework of GNSS-OPPSCAT2 to
understand the relevance of this approximation in such circumstances. To this end, we have
developed the speckles software tool, written in IDL (Interactive Data Language). In Ge-
ometrical Optics the surface height standard deviation is assumed to be at least of the order
of the electromagnetic wavelength. According to the analysis in [Beckmann et al., 1963],
the resulting wave will be largely incoherent. There is an important ingredient in our sit-
uation, however, and that is because we have a Woodward Ambiguity Function (WAF) at
our disposal to select a given surface patch, as we will see shortly. This means that we can
ﬁlter ﬁeld contributions from a rather small area.

In the Geometrical Optics approximation to the Kirchhoﬀ theory for electromagnetic
scattering, the physical picture can be understood in terms of a specular point model.
That is, the ﬁeld at the receiver is the superposition of the ﬁelds generated by a number of
”mirrors” (not ﬂat mirrors, thought, rather parabolic caps) on the scattering surface which
are oriented in the correct manner. The radiation from each specular point is as coherent
as the incoming radiation, but there is no coherence in the phase relationship between
the radiation out-coming from the diﬀerent mirrors if the surface height distribution has
a large range. The result is that there is power at the receiver, but that the phase of the
received signal is randomly distributed and the power is simply proportional to the number
of scatterers. The behavior of the resulting phase will depend on the geometry, on the
number and distribution of mirrors, and also on the temporal variation of these quantities.
The goal of this section is to understand this relationship and quantify it.

It is useful here to stop and give a physical picture of the specular point model—one of
the two ingredients in Geometrical Optics. We will treat here the radiation coming from
each mirror separately, as was mentioned above. Since the size of each mirror is small
compared to the Fresnel zone, we can use the Fraunhofer approximation (plane waves all
the way through) to estimate the out-coming ﬁeld.

Recall that the Fresnel integral for the scattered ﬁeld is

U (p) = −i

4π Z R ·

eik(r+s)

rs

(~q · ˆn) dS.

(4.6)

In the far ﬁeld (both emitter and receiver are very far compared to the size of the scatterer,
i.e, the size of the scatterer is much smaller that the Fresnel zone), and since our integral
is near a specular point with ˆn ≈ ˆq, we ﬁnd that

U (p) = −i
4π

eik(r′+s′)

r′s′

Z R · e−i~q·~r (~q · ˆn) dS,

(4.7)

see Figure 4.1 for a pictorial deﬁnition of the involved vectors. Here all we have done is
to approximate k(r + s) ≈ k(r′ + s′) − ~q · ~r. Now, let us focus on a single specular point:
imagine that there is only one specular point on the surface. This means ~q · ˆn = q. To
perform the integral let us use a coordinate system in which the z axis is parallel to ~q. In

2ESA Contract 13461/99/NL/GD, Utilization of Scatterometry Using Sources of Opportunity.

12

z

0

k
      i

r

r´

r

x

Figure 4.1: Vector geometry for scattering.

~n·ˆz = d2x. We need to compute
I = qZ R · e−iq z(x,y) d2x,

U = −i
4π

eik(r′+s′)

r′s′

I.

I ≈ I0 = q Rspece−iq zspecZ e−i q

2 ∇2

ijz|spec

xixj d2x

= q Rspece−i~q·~rspec

= iRspece−i~q·~rspec

2π

ijz(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)spec(cid:19)

.

2π

−iq det1/2(cid:18)∇2
ijz(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)spec(cid:19)
det1/2(cid:18)∇2

This result, that the square root of an inverse determinant follows from a Gaussian integral
is a much used result in Quantum Field Theory (see for instance, Quantum Field Theory
by L. H Ryder, Cambridge Univ Press 1996 for a derivation). It can be seen to follow from
extending

Z e−αx2

dx = r π

α

to higher dimensions. Now, it is not hard to show that det1/2(cid:18)∇2

= √r1r2—
the determinant just yields the products of the radii of curvature at the specular point:

ijz(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)spec(cid:19)−1

13

this coordinate system the tangent plane at the specular plane is therefore parallel to the
x-y plane. Hence, dS = d2x

where

Now we use the stationary phase approximation. The idea is that as q gets larger the
integral gets contributions only very near the specular point—the contributions farther out
cancel out. Then,

(4.8)

(4.9)

(4.10)

(4.11)

(4.12)

the determinant is invariant under coordinate transformations of the surface, so we can
use a coordinate system along the principal directions—the surface is then described as
a simple parabola. The result is then immediate (the radius of curvature is the inverse
of the second derivative in such coordinates and the matrix becomes diagonal in such a
coordinate system, so the computation of the determinant just yields the product of the
diagonal terms). Finally,

U0(p) = −i
4π

eik(r′+s′)

r′s′

· iRspece−i~q·~r

2π

= Rspec

2

e−ik(rspec+sspec)

rspecsspec

√r1r2

det1/2(cid:18)∇2

ijz(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)spec(cid:19)

(4.13)

(4.14)

The coeﬃcient Rspec depends on the Fresnel coeﬃcients and on the local geometry—we
will discuss this below. The cross section is given by the ratio of the resulting ﬁeld squared
divided by the ﬁeld squared at the surface (given above) times 4πr2. The result is

σ =

4πr2|U|2
|Uo|2 = |Rspec|2πr1r2.

(4.15)

For all this to work, some requirements have to be met on top of those from the Kirchhoﬀ
approximation. Basically, this is a high frequency approximation—q has to be large. Let
us look at things in 1D, along one of the radii of curvature. The integral is essentially of
the form

−lx

dx eiqx2/rx

J = Z lx
= qrx/qZ lx√q/rx
−lx√q/rx

eiu2

du.

(4.16)

(4.17)

For the integral to become √π, we need lxpq/rx to be large—of the order of 10. The

expression for the incoherent sum of all the specular points is now immediate from Equation
4.14, given a large height deviation. This expression for the ﬁeld is also useful for a not-so-
incoherent sum of the ﬁelds—we will return to this point below.

4.3.1 Corrections to the Geometrical Optics approximation:

frequency

dependence

In this section we add a comment on the next order corrections to the Geometrical Optics
approximation. This is not a crucial section for the work at hand and can be taken as a
small aside, but we believe it will be useful in future work.

In reality the surface is not a parabola and other terms appear. These are frequency
dependent corrections to the ﬁeld. In order to obtain the corrections we need to expand
the integrand as a Taylor series beyond the well-behaved parabolic term. The basic idea
for this type of computation is that

and that

I(b) = Z e−ax2+bxdx = e−b2/4aqπ/a,
dbn I(b)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)b=0
= Z e−ax2+bxxndx.

dn

14

From this we can compute

The expansion is

Z e−ax2

x4dx =

12

(4a)2qπ/a.

I = qZ R · e−iq z(x,y) d2~x = I0 + I4 + ..., .

(4.18)

I4 = q Rspece−iq zspec −iq

4! ∇4

ijklz(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)specZ xixjxkxle−i q

2 ∇2

ijz|spec

xixj d2~x.

(4.19)

2 ∇2

ij z|spec

xixj d2~x

(4.20)

where

Now,

and

I4 = q Rspece−iq zspec −iq
= q Rspece−iq zspec −iq

4! ∇4
4! ∇4

ijklz(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)specZ xixjxkxle−i q
ijklz(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)spec
klz(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)spec(cid:19)−1
ijz(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)spec(cid:19)−1(cid:18)−iq∇2

+

(cid:18)−iq∇2

2π

(4.21)

−iq det1/2(cid:18)∇2

ijz(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)spec(cid:19)
ijz(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)spec(cid:19)−1(cid:18)∇2

ijklz(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)spec(cid:18)∇2

klz(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)spec(cid:19)−1

I4 = Rspece−iq zspec −2π√r1r2

q 4! Rspece−iq zspec ∇4

(4.22)
In a future implementation of speckles (see discussion below), we would like to include
these second order eﬀects. These eﬀects can also be accounted for theoretically using,
e.g., Gaussian statistics. At the end the ﬁnal expression must depend only on the usual
parameters. Note that the I4 has units of length. Thus, aside from constants, these
higher order corrections may be of the form σζ
l·q , say. In this last expression we see that
this correction is indeed inversely proportional to frequency, as it should, since Geometric
Optics is a high frequency limit.

4.4 The WAF zone

If the signal is ﬁltered by cross-correlation with several C/A (or P) code periods at the
delay and frequencies corresponding to the specular zone, for instance, only the surface
patch in the ﬁrst Delay and Doppler zone will contribute (let us call it the “WAF zone”
to associate as well as distinguish this concept from the concept of Fresnel zone). This is
described by the equation

SNR(τ, fc) =

1

kTS BD ·

λ2

(4π)3 Z PtGtGr

1R2
2

R2

σ0
rt χ2(~ρ, t, δτ, δf ) dA.

which is a slight reﬁnement of a similar equation in [Zavorotny et al., 1999] and which can
be found in the review [Ruﬃni et al., 1999]. The important thing to keep in mind is that
the support in the integrand, the WAF zone, is the intersection of four spatial zones:

1. The receiver antenna footprint.

15

2. The annulus zone deﬁned by the Λ2 function in χ2.
3. The Doppler zone deﬁned by the |S|2 function in χ2.
4. The scattering cross section coeﬃcient σ0.

The WAF, through its support, selects a given portion of the surface from which power

is measured.

To get a feeling for these numbers, the area involved in the reﬂection is of the order of
10 km2 for an aircraft and 1000 km2 for a Low Earth Orbiter. For h >> cτ , where τ is
the chip length (1 µs for C/A code) and h the receiver height), the one-WAF (or one-chip
here) area can be approximated by AW AF = 2πhcτ / cos2 θ. Note that AW AF increases only
linearly with altitude.

We can add another element at this point. In the above discussion, the WAF is assumed
to result from choosing a given delay and Doppler in the reﬂected signal. However, as time
passes the signal reﬂected by a given surface element cannot be characterized by a ﬁxed
Delay and Doppler: both will change as the situation evolves. It is clear, however, that
a more sophisticated WAF algorithm can be devised that focuses on that speciﬁc surface
patch. This observation opens the door to longer integration times, which can be useful for
altimetric purposes.

Figure 4.2: Nadir case ﬁrst chip radius size for C/A and P codes. This is for a static situ-

ation, no Doppler ﬁltering aﬀects the result (based on the simple formula s = √2 ∗ h ∗ τc),

where τc is the chip length in meters (300 m for C/A code).

16

Chapter 5

Simulation Tools: fresnel and
speckles

These are two modeling tools we have developed to understand, via a computer simulation,
some of the characteristics of the reﬂected ﬁeld. fresnel models the reﬂected ﬁeld (just the
carrier part after removing the source time-dependence) using an ocean model and direct
integration of the Fresnel-Huygens-Kirchhoﬀ integral described above. We have carried out
several types of simulations: a slowly vertically moving receiver, a static receiver, a realistic
ocean and a so-called chaotic ocean. We will focus here on the static realistic ocean case.
speckles has been developed with two goals in mind. We will eventually attempt
to compute the reﬂected ﬁeld using a GO method: ﬁnding ﬁrst the specular points and
integrating just around these to sum up the resulting ﬁeld. We will just outline here
some of its characteristics and initial results. We have found that this is very diﬃcult to
do (in general, comparisons with the Fresnel integral are poor). We have seen, however
that the number of specular points correlates reasonably well with the reﬂected Fresnel
ﬁeld, specially in rough ocean simulated conditions. We are attempting to understand
this phenomenon better, and to study its implications: GO, in some form of another, is
presently the leading model used for the analysis of reﬂected power in GPSR. It is a simple
method, and experimental results to date seem to validate it. We would like to understand
its somewhat puzzling high performance, since L-band is not really high-frequency in the
ocean surface case. That is, GO is not, strictly speaking applicable in the whole range
of ocean conditions with an L-band instrument—the wavelength in neither large of short
enough. Nonetheless, some semi-empirical modiﬁcations of this model are currently being
successfully used. We would like to understand this success and, more importantly, its
limitations. We will brieﬂy mention some of this work, although it is not central to the
study.

5.1

fresnel

This routine ( written in Interactive Data Language—IDL) integrates the ﬁeld from the
ocean surface below, using nadir incidence. The receiver is hovering a few meters over
the water. The ocean model is Gaussian (we use a routine from B. Chapron using the
Elfouhaily spectrum) [Elfouhaily et al., 1997], “chaotic” (random heights, moving) and a
non-Gaussian simulations are planned for future work. The software simulates the reﬂected
complex ﬁeld at L1, L2 and L5 frequencies. The goals of this part of the work were to show

17

that the simulation is possible, to compare the behavior of the ﬁeld in the diﬀerent cases,
and to assess the potential of the PIP idea.

5.1.1 Random ocean

The random ocean is generated by choosing a height standard deviation. The code assigns
a random height with the desired characteristic to each 10 cm by 10 cm square of the
reﬂecting surface. In addition, a velocity random ﬁeld is chosen, and each square moves up
and down with a chosen period.

5.1.2 Elfouhaily spectrum

The procedure to compute the ocean state, based on the IDL routine kindly supplied by B.
Chapron, is, starting from the energy spectrum, to generate a plausible random spectrum.
To do this, the square root of the energy spectrum is taken, and a uniformly random phase
appended to it. The appropriate time dependence is also added to this random phase—
using the dispersion relation for gravity ocean waves. Then, the inverse Fourier transform
is taken. Using this procedure, a moving, random ocean with the appropriate spectral
characteristics is generated. Using a uniform random phase distribution in the diﬀerent
frequencies means that the resulting ocean is Gaussian. This can be changed, of course,
but we have not attempted to analyze the subtleties of non-uniform phase distributions in
this work.

Generally the sea state is characterized by its power spectrum. As the sea evolves in a
random process, the spectral density of sea elevations is obtained by the Fourier transform
of the autocorrelation function of the elevations ζ(x, y). The spectral density can also be
estimated by the Fourier transform of one realization of ζ(x, y) [Blackman and Tukey, 1958]:

F (kx, ky) = |T F [ζ(x, y)]|2

If we determine the matrix φ of random phases uniformly distributed between 0 and 2π,
the sea height at the point r = (x, y) is:

ζ(r) = T F −1[qF (kx, ky)eiφ]

Thus the probability density functions of heights and slopes are Gaussian. For this study
we use the uniﬁed spectrum of [Elfouhaily et al., 1997]. This is just a consequence of the
Central Limit Theorem applied to sums of harmonics.

5.1.3 Field calculation

The ﬁeld is calculated as a complex number using the Fresnel integral expression:

U (p) = −i

4π Z R ·

eik(r+s)

rs

(~q · ˆn) dS.

(5.1)

To be precise, we Fraunhofer-expand the part of the integrand corresponding to s the
distance to the inﬁnitely far transmitter. That is, we write s = ks′ − ~kin · ~x in the phase
part of the integrand, where ~x denotes the position of the scattering point. Thus, the
integrand becomes,

U (p) = −i
4π

eiks′

s′ Z R ·

eikr−~kin·~x

r

(~q · ˆn) dS.

18

(5.2)

We actually throw out all the s′ dependence (in eﬀect assuming an incoming plane wave,
as well as on the Fresnel coeﬃcient ) and obtain

U (p) = −i

4π Z R ·

eikr−~kin·~x

r

(~q · ˆn) dS.

(5.3)

This means that the outgoing ﬁeld would be a plane wave if the surface were ﬂat, with unit
modulus.

The ocean surface is divided into squares 10 cm wide (or less), and an area of up to
200x200 meters is integrated. For the most part we will concentrate on the ﬁrst chip zone,

with radius r = √2 ∗ h ∗ τc.

The resulting ﬁeld is a complex number in this scalar treatment, U (p(t)) = reiφ(t). In

order to evaluate the phase as the receiver moves up we take

with w(t) = eiφ(t). Summing the δφi yields the overall phase. This method is related to
the deﬁnition of winding number of a curve around the origin in the complex plane:

δφi = ln(w(ti)/w(ti−1))

(5.4)

I = Iγ

dz
z

= Iγ

d(ln z) = Xi

ln

zi
zi−1

.

(5.5)

A full cycle, 360 degrees, is equivalent to 19 (L1), 24 (L2), 25 (L5), 86 (L12) or 568 (L25)
cm. We will return to this deﬁnition shortly.

5.2

speckles

As mentioned above, this code has been developed to study the use of Geometric Optics for
the study of ocean surface reﬂections in L-band. It will also be used to study specular point
statistics, using both Gaussian and, eventually, non-Gaussian models. Taking a Gaussian
ocean model, we determine the specular points distribution and compute the reﬂected ﬁeld
using geometrical optics. We are to compare this to straight integration of Fresnel integral.
Then the analysis will be compared with a non-linear ocean model.

5.2.1 Specular point determination

We consider the incident radiation as a plane wave normal to a Gaussian surface and a
receiver at (xr, yr, zr). The point (x, y, ζ) of the surface is considered to be a specular point
if the slopes follow rather clear geometrical conditions (see for instance [D.E.Freund 1997]):

(5.6)

(5.7)

Our approach consists in the detection of slope variations around the expected specular
slopes deﬁned above. We compute at each point P of the surface, and for both directions
x and y, the expected specular slope S—i.e. the slope needed to reﬂect the incident wave
to the receiver—and the slopes of the facets located just before (slope S[before]) and after
(slope S[after]) the point P. The condition for P to be a speckle is that (S[before]-S) and

dζ
dx

dζ
dy

=

=

x − xr
zr − ζ
y − yr
zr − ζ

.

19

(S -S[after]) must be of the same sign. This determination is attractive because we doesn’t
need to deﬁne any tolerance on the specular slopes. We are neglecting saddle point by this
approch (saddle points are not well deﬁned in discrete spaces).

Then an analysis is made on the radius of curvature at the specular point. The Kirchhoﬀ

approximation leads to a condition on the radius of curvature at the specular facet,

The product of the principal radii of curvature can be computed using the derivatives of

qq√r1r2 > 10.

(5.8)

Figure 5.1:
Fresnel contours for the 10 by 10 surface patch under and 8 meter high
receiver. U10=8 m/s. The colored contours represent the ocean instantaneous topography,
with higher areas represented brighter. The line pairs are iso-lambda delay curves for L1
and L2 (4, 10 and 20 lambdas are shown).

20

ζ(r), see [Barrick, 1968]:

|r1r2| = (cid:16)1 + ζ 2

y(cid:17)2
x + ζ 2
xy(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)
ζxxζyy − ζ 2

(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)

The following Figures (5.2 to 5.4) present the specular point position (circles) for three
diﬀerent times on the moving surface. The receiver is located at 8 meters above the surface,
which has a 5 m by 5 m dimension and 1 cm of resolution. The stars correspond to the
specular points that are under the curvature condition. The specular distribution is greatly
modiﬁed within 10 ms.

Figure 5.2: Specular points position for Time = 0 s

Figure 5.3: Specular points position for Time = 10 ms

5.2.2 Field computation

The idea is to compute the Fresnel ﬁeld with the contribution of scatterers only. We
integrate on the vicinity of each mirror. The result is then compared to the straight Fresnel

21

Figure 5.4: Specular points position for Time = 20 ms

computation. To date these comparisons have not been very successful. It appears that
in order for the Geometric Optics approach to work at this level (not after substantial
averaging) we need to impose more stringent frequency or surface scale characteristics
and/or take into account higher order eﬀects. If the main contribution is from specular
points, as we suspect, the key may be to calculate the ﬁeld from each scatterer to higher
order than the stationary phase approximation. Work in this area is planned for the future.

22

Chapter 6

Coherence and Structure Functions

6.1 The coherence and structure functions, and the coher-

ence time

Another question that needs to be answered is how the sea surface motion and varying
geometry aﬀect the coherence of the reﬂected signal. There are several models for the
sea spectrum, and these can be used to try to extract this information. Consider the
toy model of one-dimensional scattering, with static, lined up, receiver and transmitter,
with the scatterer (a single facet) also in line but now moving up and down with average
speed v. It is easy to see that the correlation of the direct and the scattered signal is zero
unless the coherent integration time is less than the characteristic time of the surface at
GPS wavelengths. The coherent integration time is roughly that time for which the RMS
phase error is 1 radian [Thomson et al., 1990]. More precisely, let the coherence function
be deﬁned by

,

(6.1)

1

T Z T

0

c(T ) = (cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)

eiφ(t)dt(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)

where φ(t) is the error phase. Then, the coherence time is the time T it takes for hC(T )2i to
drop to 0.5—say [Thomson et al., 1990]. Note that for long times the coherence function
can also be related to the magnitude of the zero-frequency spectral component of the
(windowed) normalized ﬁeld associated to the error phase (that is, in our simulations, the
Fourier transform of the normalized ﬁeld). We will get back to this point below.

The coherence time of the GPS signal is about 2–3 hours. What about the reﬂected
signal? If the WAF zone and the sea surface are ﬁxed, we should expect the same. If we
include time dependence (and we ignore all motions), we can rewrite the equation on the
statistics of the signal by

U (t) = reiψ = Xj

eiφj−iωt = e−iωtXj

eiφj ,

(6.2)

so the resulting ﬁeld is as coherent as the incident one. But in real situations neither of this
is the case. Both the ocean surface and the WAF patch are moving (although this second
eﬀect can be corrected in principle by the use of SAR techniques). The characteristic time
of the surface can roughly be deﬁned as the time it takes the surface to move a wavelength—
in the present case λ/v. This thought experiment is useful to understand the limitation
in coherent integration time for a moving surface like the ocean. An advantage of using

23

a synthetic wavelength using two GNSS frequencies is that this coherent integration time
should be longer. We will verify in a moment that this is the case.

An associated concept to the coherence function is the structure function of the phase.

This is deﬁned by

s(T ) = h(φ(t + T ) − φ(t))2it.

(6.3)

It gives us a measure of how tied up are two points in the phase as we vary their temporal
separation. If this phase drift can be approximated by a random walk stochastic process
[Herring, 1990],

(6.4)
we can use the associated “Geophysically Induced Phase drift” (GIP) rate √d as a geo-
physical parameter if it correlates well to U10 in our models. This parameters has units of
cycle per square root second. We will check this below (but let us anticipate that it does).

s(T ) = d · T

The coherence time and the structure function are related. In fact,

hC(T )2i =

1

T 2 Z T

0 Z T

0 hei(φ(t)−φ(t′ ))idt dt′.

(6.5)

If we assume Gaussian statistics for the phase ﬂuctuations [Thomson et al., 1990] we can
simplify things considerably,

hC(T )2i =
=

For a random walk process, then,

hC(T )2i =

e−s(t′−t)/2 dt dt′.

0

1

T 2 Z T
T Z T

0 Z T
0 (cid:18)1 −

2

τ

T(cid:19) e−s(τ )/2 dτ.

2

T Z T

0 (cid:18)1 −

τ

T(cid:19) e−d·τ /2 dτ.

(6.6)

(6.7)

(6.8)

See Figure 6.1 for a graph of this function for various drift rates.

Note that in this model hC(T )2i decreases to zero as time increases. This fact alerts us
that there is something amiss: we see in our simulations large phase excursions (certainly
much larger than a cycle), but there is coherence left at large times—see Figures 6.2, 6.3, 6.4
and 6.5. How is this possible? The Gaussian model for phase ﬂuctuations does not really
apply to our situation, however. Gaussian means that phase excursions probabilities are
bell-shaped, of course. Are they? In our simulations the phase of the reﬂected signal gathers
about a point in the complex plane—the ﬁeld does seem to have a Gaussian distribution
about an average point. The cumulative phase does not have to have such a distribution,
however. In fact, it could conceivably indulge in arbitrarily large excursions while spending
more time in that average ﬁeld point: this would still result in a Gaussian ﬁeld distribution.
However, the probability distribution for such a phase history would not be a Gaussian
distribution (centered about 0, say). It would consist of a series of Gaussian-like humps
spaced one cycle apart, with the one about zero the largest.
In this situation we could
well have a very long coherence time (since the phase modulo 2π could be a rather narrow
Gaussian distribution about a point) while the structure function may show high drift. This
type of behavior is evident in our simulations when plotting the ﬁeld points (see Figure 6.6).
Note that the interferometric signal has a stronger average ﬁeld value. See Figure 6.7 for a
histogram of the L25 cumulative phase illustrating the multiple-hump distribution that we
alluded to.

24

Figure 6.1:
per square root second.

hC(T )2i for a random walk with drift rates of √d =0.5, 1.0, 2.0 and 3.0 cycles

25

Figure 6.2: This is a plot with the structure function (left) and the coherence function
for the case U10=6 m/s, 43 m side 10 cm resolution simulation at 8 m height. This is 0.4
meters height standard deviation. From top to bottom, L1, L2, L5 and L12, L25 ﬁelds.
The drift rates are 4.2, 2.1, 1.1, 6.2, 2.5 cycles per square root second. Coherence times
0.04, 0.06, 0.08, 0.09 and 0.3 seconds.

26

Figure 6.3: This is a plot with the structure function (left) and the coherence function for
the case U10=1 m/s. From top to bottom, L1, L2, L5 and L12, L25 ﬁelds. The drift rates
are 1.9, 0.9, 0.8, 1.4, 1.3 cycles per square root second. Simulation size is 19 m side, 10 cm
resolution, and height standard deviation is 3 cm.

27

Figure 6.4: This is a plot with the structure function (left) and the coherence function for
the case U10=3 m/s. From top to bottom, L1, L2, L5 and L12, L25 ﬁelds. The drift rates
are 0.8, 1.0, 1.0, 1.0, 1.5 cycles per square root second. Simulation size is 19 m side, 10 cm
resolution, and height standard deviation is 8 cm, receiver height 8 m.

28

Figure 6.5: This is a plot with the structure function (left) and the coherence function for
the case U10=4 m/s. From top to bottom, L1, L2, L5 and L12, L25 ﬁelds. The drift rates
are 3.7, 2.1, 1.6, 2.1, 1.8 cycles per square root second. Simulation size is 19 m side, 10 cm
resolution, and height standard deviation is 12 cm, receiver height 8 m. See next Figure
for further analysis of this particular simulation.

29

Figure 6.6: Refer to the previous ﬁgure. This is a plot of the ﬁeld in the complex plane
for L2, L5 and L25, and it serves to illuminate the diﬀerence between the structure function
and the coherence function. The ﬁeld mean for L2 is (-0.06,-0.1), for L5 is (-0.1,-0.1), and
for L25 (-0.6,-0.20), much larger. The standard deviation is about 1 for all of them. In this
19 meter simulation, U10=4 m/s, height standard deviation was 12 cm, receiver height 8
m.

30

Figure 6.7:
in the previous ﬁgure. The highest peak corresponds to the initial zero phase.

In these two plots we depict the phase and phase histogram for the L25 ﬁeld

31

Notice that the above discussion is relevant to understand the coherence properties that
were found in the Bridge Experiment reﬂected signal (integration times where of 10 ms,
short enough for the static approximation to work in that geometry). In longer time scales
the accumulated phase will pick up a random component, but if there is an overall phase
change (due for instance, to a tide) it should be distinguishable from the random part
(which should not add nor subtract to the overall phase on the average).

6.2 Doppler spread of the reﬂected signal

Another thought experiment is useful.
function of time as

Imagine that the surface height is varying as a

ζ(t) = αt + Ar(t),

where α is a constant and the second term adds a random, noise-like displacement between
−A and A. We can think of this as the eﬀect of a tide superimposed on the wave mo-
tion on the sea. The scattered phase will not be coherent if A is large enough, but the
accumulated phase will certainly contain information about α. What happens if there are
many scatterers, how fast is the residual phase varying? This will give us a feel for the
Phase Lock Loop (PLL) bandwidth required for tracking. It is not hard to see that the
bandwidth required will be less than 100 Hz (assuming that the sea surface vertical speed
is not greater than 10 m/s), in a static geometry (or if a static-WAF is used). The largest
frequency present in the signal cannot be greater than the contribution due to the fastest
moving surface patch—the result is always the linear combination of such contributions,
U (t) ∼ reiψ(t) = Pn
j=1 eiφj(t). Now, if the maximal orbital velocity for a wave is 10 m/s
(see Figure 6.8, this implies a Doppler of 2 × 10/λ ≈ 100 Hz (remember that the signal is
bouncing oﬀ the surface). Thus, a sampling rate of at least 200 Hz is required to retrieve
the phase of the reﬂected signal (even if the SNR is high enough). In our simulations we
have seen that it is safe to sample the signal at such rate.

Here is another useful question: given that a receiving LEO is moving at, say, 7 km/s,
would it be possible to integrate coherently (correlate) the direct and reﬂected signals for
1 ms, if the LEO antenna has a footprint of 10 meters? Note that this “eye on the sea” is
moving very fast over the surface, and this is introducing a random, time-dependent phase
to the signal. The answer is no. But if the footprint is enlarged enough, yes. This may
be an important problem for the PIP, but there are ways through which it could be ﬁxed.
One obvious one is to use a WAF that sticks to a given surface patch, or that it moves
slowly over the sea surface. Some of these ideas are discussed within the context of the
GNSS-OPPSCAT project (Report WP3320). To get an idea of the induced Doppler, we
can reason that the scattered ﬁeld is just a sum of the type

F = R(t)eiΦ(t) ≈

ri(t)eiφi(t),

N

Xi=1

which already looks like a Fourier sum if we approximate ri(t) as constant and the exponent
by its ﬁrst derivative. Thus, we can guess that the maximum frequency in the spectrum is
simply Doppler due to the fastest moving patch on the ocean. As an upper bound we can
use 10 m/s—see Figure 6.9. Multiplying times 2 and dividing by λ we obtain a scattering
Doppler of about 100 Hz.

32

To be a bit more precise, let us write

F = ZAW AF

eiqzzd2x = ZAW AF

eiqz(z0+ ˙zt)d2x,

using the simpler backscattering expression in the Fraunhofer zone. Notice the restriction
of the integral to the (static) WAF zone. Let us now rewrite the transform of the ﬁeld:

˜F (ω) = Z F eiωtdt = Z eiqzzoZ ei(ωt−qz ˙z)dtdx

∼ ZA(q ˙z≡ω)

e−iqzzod2x,

if we assume that vertical motions take over a “long enough” time compared to the time
scale associated to the frequency we are interested in. This is saying that the spectral
component at a given frequency is proportional to the area on the surface moving at the
right speed to produce that frequency.

We can extend this reasoning to the moving-receiver case. There are two limiting
situations we can think about. One is the “high gain” situation. Let us ﬁrst discuss this
situation—we will get back to the low gain situation at the end. Assume for now the
ocean is frozen. In this situation the WAF zone is very small (due to antenna or processing
gain) and coherence time is deﬁnitely inﬂuenced by the fact that as the receiver moves the
contributing surface is changing. If the WAF zone is smaller than the correlation length of
the ocean (certainly an extreme case, but never mind), the coherence time is limited by l/v,
where v is the receiver speed and l is the correlation length of the surface—assuming large
enough height deviations. To be more precise, if we use a replica with ﬁxed Doppler and
Delay, the “eye on the sea” will move over the ocean at a speed similar to the receiver’s.
This will introduce additional bandwidth in the carrier if the ocean is rough—even if is
frozen. This bandwidth will be mainly proportional to ocean surface rugosity, not to ocean
surface motion. It can be very large (kHz), depending on the receiver speed and the WAF
area size. Following the above reasoning, and keeping in mind that the WAF zone is now
a moving ﬁlter on the ocean surface,

F (t) = ZAW AF (t)

eiqzz(~x)d2x = Z ΞW AF (~x − ~vt) eiqzz(~x)d2x

= Z ΞW AF (~x) eiqzz(~x+~vt)d2x
= ZAW AF

eiqzz(~x+~vt)d2x

Now let us look at ˙F (t):

˙F (t) = ~v ·ZAW AF

~∇(cid:16)eiqzz(~x+~vt)(cid:17) d2x = ~v ·Z∂AW AF

eiqzz(~x+~vt) ˆn dl

(6.9)

where the last is an integral over the boundary of the WAF area and ~n is the normal to
the boundary. The result illustrates the “edge eﬀect”, i.e., that the change is just due
to the change at the boundary of the WAF area. We have used a 2D version of Green’s
theorem in the last step. This equation says that the change in the ﬁeld is proportional to
the variation of the ﬁeld contribution at the edges of the WAF area (properly mapped in
the velocity direction). The faster the velocity and the larger the diﬀerence, the larger the

33

rate of change of the ﬁeld. To relate this to the spectrum, note that this will contribute
a high frequency componene to the spectrum. Whether this is a relatively large or small
contribution depends on the total ﬁeld, which is proportional to the total area. Thus,
for large WAF zones this high frequency eﬀect contributes a small portion of the total
spectrum.

If we allow for a moving surface, z = z(~x, t) it is readily seen that the complete result

is the sum of two distinct eﬀects:

˙F (t) = ~v ·Z∂AW AF

eiqzz(~x+~vt,t) ˆn dl +Z ΞW AF (~x − ~vt) ∂t(cid:16)eiqzz(~x,t)(cid:17) d2x.

Let us now return to

F (t) = ZAW AF (t)

eiqzz(~x)d2x = Z ΞW AF (~x − ~vt) eiqzz(~x)d2x

and compute the Fourier transform:

˜F (ω) = Z Z ∞

−∞

dt eiωt ΞW AF (~x − ~vt) eiqzz(~x)d2x.

(6.10)

(6.11)

(6.12)

To evaluate this, let us assume for simplicity and without loss of generality that ΞW AF is
a box of size S moving along in the x direction with velocity vx:
ΞW AF (~x − ~vt) = Ξx(x − vxt) · Ξy(y).

(6.13)

Then

Hence,

Z ∞

−∞

dt eiωt ΞW AF (~x − ~vt) = 2

Ξy(y)eiωx/vx

w

sin(ωS/vx).

(6.14)

˜F (ω) =

2 sin(ωS/vx)

ω

Z Ξy(y) eiωx/vx eiqzz(~x)d2x.

(6.15)

The characteristic time is roughly given by S/vx, as can be seen from the multiplying sinc.
Frequencies higher than vx/S are supressed by this factor. The power in frequencies smaller
than this are modulated by the horizontal roughness of exp iqzz(~x) in the scale deﬁned by
vx/ω in the direction of motion:
if the surface does not vary in that scale, there will be
little power at the frequency vx/S.

In this approximation we have implicitly assumed a very small WAF in relation to the
geometry, since we have worked in the Fraunhofer approximation. This means that all the
points in the reﬂecting patch have the same geometry and generate the same geometrically
induced Doppler. In recent experimental conditions this is hardly the case, and the Doppler
of the reﬂected signal is dominated by the Doppler amplitude of the WAF and glistening
zones. If the glistening zone is large enough, then radiation will be received from the entire
WAF. The Doppler span of the WAF zone determines then the Doppler spread of the
received ﬁeld. This is the basic mechanism for Delay-Doppler mapping and the basis for
the relationship betweeen waveforms and the characteristics of the sea surface. Even if we
restrict the signal to the ﬁrst chip in the C/A code, there will be quite a bit of geometric
Doppler. This second source of Doppler is in principle removable by many means: high
antenna gain or processing gain. By any of these means we can reduce the patch to the
Fraunhofer zone mantaining SNR. It will then become increasingly important to use SAR

34

Ti(ms) Ocean motion (Hz) Geometric (Hz) Edge (Hz)

1
5
10
20
50

200
200
200
200
200

1000
200
100
50
20

1
7
14
28
70

Table 6.1: Back of the envelope calculations for Doppler spread induced by ocean motion,
geometry and edge eﬀects. Note that above 20 ms edge eﬀects force the use of focusing.

techniques to focus and eliminate the edge eﬀect we just discussed. We plan to revisit these
calculations extending them to the Fresnel zone in future work.

of the signal is ocean motion–that cannot be anticipated and compensated for.

The ultimate limit to the Doppler width and therefore to the coherent integration time
The size of the ﬁrst Fresnel zone for a receiver at 350 km is about 2√2hλ or about 1 km.
In this narrow area, the geometric Doppler spans about 200 Hz edge to edge (the receiver
looking down and is moving along at 7 km/s) and the corresponding integration time is 5
ms. This Doppler is of the same order of magnitude of ocean induced spread. Integration
times longer than 10 ms will certainly begin to be sensitive to ocean motion. The edge
eﬀect we discussed earlier will also start to play a role at longer integration times : for a 1
km WAF (roughly corresponding to 5 ms integration time) the corresponding frequency is
of 7 Hz— still too small to make spotlight processing necessary. This may be the best way
to retrieve ocean induced Doppler spread. See Table-6.1 for a summary of these ideas.

We have two diﬀerent new ways to extract sea-state information from the Carrier band-
width, by playing with the eye location. One the one hand, we can use a static WAF to
measure vertical velocities—this will entail using SAR techniques from moving platforms.
On the other, we can measure surface roughness by letting the WAF drift over the surface
at a speed of choice. This is just a matter of tuning the matched ﬁlter appropriately, and
it could even be done from a static platform.

35

Figure 6.8: The ocean surface and vertical velocity for a wind of U 10 = 8 m/s, Elfouhaily
spectrum. The contour denotes the zero value in each case.

36

Figure 6.9: Ocean heights and vertical velocities using the Elfouhaily et al. spectrum for
wind speeds of U10=1,3,5,..,17 m/s. Note that due to limitations in the simulation size
values for U10 above 12 m/s suﬀer from saturation.

37

Chapter 7

Statisitical Properties of the
Reﬂected Fields

7.1 Analysis of ﬁeld correlations

In this section we address the question of the correlation between the ﬁelds at diﬀerent
frequencies (say L1 and L2 and the future L5) for diﬀerent sea conditions. An approach to
this problem is to rewrite the Fresnel integral using the “zone” concept. That is, we classify
areas in the surface according to their distance to the receiver. We assume we are in the
Fraunhofer-emitter zone, so the distance to the emitter plays no role in this discussion. The
idea is then to rewrite the ﬁeld as a sum of ﬁeld contributions from equal delay (r)zones:

Uq = qZ rmax

rmin

eiqrA′(r)dr.

This idea can be found in [Berry, 1972]. The function A′(r) is an “areal” density function
that takes into account how much area contributes to each zone. It’s exact expression is
not of immediate concern. In the case of a ﬂat surface it just becomes one. In order to
extend the integration over the whole r-axis, let us simply extend the deﬁnition of A′(r) to
be zero outside rmin and rmax. We then have,

Uq = qZ ∞

−∞

eiqrA′(r)dr.

We can now read: the ﬁeld is the Fourier transform of A′(r). And the question about the
relationship of the ﬁeld between frequencies becomes a question on the relationship between
the Fourier components of this areal function at diﬀerent frequencies.

Let us forget for now the meaning of the areal function, and just think in terms of the
Fourier transform of a function with limited support, since we are looking at the Fourier
transform of a function with support L ≡ rmin − rmax. The larger the support of the
function, the more small-scale structure can be found in the Fourier transform—everything
else the same. We are accostumed to thinking about this fact in the opposite domain:
a function with a lot of small time-scale structure will have a large bandwidth—a large
support in the frequncy domain.

Intuitively, the larger the support two given nearby frequency components will end up
sampling the pulse at more separated regions. It is useful to think about two sine functions
of slightly diﬀerent frequencies, running side by side. As a rule of thumb, we expect that the

38

correlation between these Fourier components will be sensitive to the correlation function
of the (areal) function at a distance (∆λ) ∗ L/λmean. This is because ∆λ is the sampling
distance diﬀerence gained per cycle, and ∗L/λmean is the number of cycles available in a
region of size L. Therefore, before carrying out any calculation we can say that if the
areal function is correlated at the distance dictated by this (maximal possible) frequency
separation, then we will see correlation in the ﬁelds.
It helps to look at the separation
between the equi-delay contours in the surface of integration. If this separation is smaller
than the correlation length of the surface, then high correlation between the ﬁelds is possible.
There is an extra consideration, however. We have been assuming that the separation
between contours is constant, but this is not the case. That is, we have been implicitly
assuming that the contours are ﬁxed on the surface, and all we have considered is the
correlation between this contours. But in fact, as the ocean moves, the contours move,
especially with large seas. This introduces an additional source of decorrelation, which gets
worse with larger seas. The time-correlation between the ﬁelds is given by

hUq1U∗q2it = q1q2Z hA′1(r)A′2(r′)iteiq1r−iq2r′

drdr′.

This is a diﬃcult beast to deal with, so we will change strategy.

The correlation between the ﬁelds can also be calculated in another manner. It will be
useful to approximate things entirely in the Fraunhofer zone, i.e., with both transmitter
and receiver in the far ﬁeld, assuming Gaussian statistics. The ﬁeld in the nadir case is
given, in 1-D and up to a constant, by

Now,

and

eiqz(x)dx.

U = qZA
|U|2 = q2ZAZA
h|U|2i = q2ZAZAheiq(z(x)−z(x′))idxdx′.

eiq(z(x)−z(x′))dxdx′,

(7.1)

(7.2)

(7.3)

# ,

Now, if we assume Gaussian statistics, with

P (z(x) − z(x′)) =

1

2πσ2p1 − ρ2(x − x′)

exp"−

z(x)2 − 2ρ(x − x′)z(x)z(x′) + z2(x′)

2σ2(1 − ρ2(x − x′))

(7.4)
we can carry out these calculations explicitly. Here σ is the height standard deviation
from the (zero) mean, and ρ is the correlation function of the surface.
It is healthy to
keep in mind that in the gaussian case, there are the only parameters, together with the
frequencies, that can appear in the ﬁnal expressions.
If we further assume a Gaussian
correlation function with correlation length l, the answer to any question must be expressed
in terms of dimensionally meaningful expressions contantaining, σ, l, λ1 and λ2.

For the case at hand, the key result is ([Beckmann et al., 1963], p. 190)

heiq1z(x)+q2z(x′)i = exp(cid:20)−

1
2

σ2(q2

2)(cid:21) .
1 + 2ρ(x − x′)q1q2 + q2

This implies, for instance,

hU1U∗2i = q1q2ZAZA

exp(cid:20)−

1
2

σ2(q2

1 − 2ρ(x − x′)q1q2 + q2

2)(cid:21) dxdx′.

(7.5)

(7.6)

39

In the following we use a simple approximation,

ρ(u) = 1 − |u|/l,

|u| ≤ l,

(7.7)

else zero. In this simple case we model a Gaussian correlation function by a linear approx-
imation. For simplicity we will also work in the 1-D case. The ﬁrst step now is to deﬁne
u = x − x′, and v = x + x′. The Jacobian of this change of variables is 1/2. The integral
becomes (let A be a 1-D area from −L to L)

√2L

hU1U∗2i = q1q2Z

√2LZ
= √2Lq1q2Z

−

−

√2L−u
√2L+u
−
√2L
√2L

du dv

2

exp(cid:20)−

1
2

σ2(q2

2)(cid:21)
1 − 2ρ(u)q1q2 + q2

du exp(cid:20)−

1
2

σ2(q2

2)(cid:21) .
1 + 2ρ(u)q1q2 + q2

(7.8)

(7.9)

Now, using our simpliﬁed correlation function model (and we will henceforth assume that
L > l), we ﬁnd

hU1U∗2i = 2√2L(cid:18) l

σ2 (cid:16)1 − e−σ2q1q2(cid:17) e−σ2∆q2/2 + q1q2(√2L − l)e−σ2(q2

1+q2

2)/2(cid:19) .

(7.10)

For L-band, q = 2k is about 60 per meter. If σ is greater than 0.1 m, σ2 ∗ q2 is greater
than 40, and all the exponential terms in this expression vanish, except for exp[−σ2∆q2/2].
That is, for σ > 0.1 m,

hU1U∗2i ∼

2√2Ll
σ2

e−σ2∆q2/2.

It also follows that

C(U1, U2) =

hU1U∗2i

qhU1U∗1ihU2U∗2i

∼ e−σ2∆q2/2.

(7.11)

(7.12)

Figure 7.1: The coherency factor C(U1, U2) (dashed) and C(U2, U5) for the case l = 5 and
L = 20. There is not much sensitivity in either case to L or l.

40

According to this result, the critical parameter in any reasonable ocean state is simply
the signiﬁcant wave height. Imagine for instance an ocean with a very large correlation
length and large height standard deviation. This is mirror-like ocean with a global up-
down displacement. It is quite clear that ih this example hU1U∗2i will be zero, since this
product will be a number in the complex plane with a reasonable magnitude and a rather
random phase. The average of such a complex number is zero.

The general result, relevant for smaller signiﬁcant wave heights, is

C(U1, U2) =

l

σ2 (cid:16)1 − e−σ2q1q2(cid:17) e−σ2∆q2/2 + q1q2(√2L − l)e−σ2(q2
2(cid:17) + q2

1(√2L − l)e−σ2q2

1(cid:17) + q2

1(cid:17)(cid:16) l

σ2 (cid:16)1 − e−σ2q2

r(cid:16) l

σ2 (cid:16)1 − e−σ2q2

1+q2

2)/2

.

2(√2L − l)e−σ2q2
2(cid:17)

(7.13)

We show a plot for the case l = 5 and L = 20 in Figure 7.1.

Although we did not discuss it, it is rather immediate that the average ﬁeld for the pure
ﬁelds are governed again by exp [−σ2q2/2]—this can be read oﬀ Equation 7.5 assuming a
zero correlation function to infer hexp [iqz(x)]i = exp [−σ2q2/2].
We have checked this trend in our data. In general, the interferometric combination
average ﬁelds are larger. For instance, for a σζ= 79 cm simulation (50 seconds at 0.0025
temporal resolution, 44 m size, spatial resolution 10cm, U10=1100cmpers)—see Figure 7.4,
the L1, L2, L5, L12, L25 average ﬁelds were:

L1: (+0.03,−0.01)
L2: (+0.00,−0.06)
L5: (−0.04, +0.03)
L12: (−0.02, +0.09)
L25: (−0.12, +0.07)

while for U10=4 ms, σζ= 12 cm simulation, 19 m side (see Figures 6.5 , 6.6 and 6.7 for
more details about this simulation)

L1: (+0.05,−0.03)
L2: (−0.06,−0.12)
L5: (−0.04, +0.10)
L12: (−0.09, +0.12)
L25: (−0.63, +0.20)

This is where the real strength of PIP becomes evident. Moreover, low-pass ﬁltering (see
next section) does not change these numbers much—the average ﬁeld is robust.

The Fraunhofer approximation has given us a useful means to understand the correlation
properties of the signals in diﬀerent frequencies. We should note, however, that in the GPS
case we are not in the Fraunhofer zone—we are in the WAF zone, which is is usually
substantially larger. Understanding all the implications of the extension to the WAF zone
involves the analysis of the “beast” in Equation 7.1 which is substantially more complicated
by the factors inthe areal function. This is left for future work.

7.2 Filtering

Another way to understand and take advantadge of the coherence proporties is to focus
on the low frequency aspects of the reﬂected signals for the static case. As we mentioned

41

above, in the static situation the coherence function of the scattered phase is related to the
zeroth Fourier component of the ﬁeld—see Equation 6.1. Filtering the signal to retrieve slow
varying geophysical signals is thus a plausible approach. As an example, we show in Figure
7.3 the ﬁelds with and without ﬁltering at 0.5 Hz (relevant for the case of a LEO). The
result is quite good, as can be seen. This behavior is also expected from the analysis above
of the average ﬁeld above, of course. The interferometric combination is again superior,
especially L25. For the satellite of aircraft case, good modeling of the receiver position and
ﬁltering can be used to remove all but the slowly varying geophysical signals from the phase
drift.

Important points: ﬁltering doesn not seem to aﬀect the ﬁeld mean value (a very desirable
result). It does signiﬁcantly reduce the scatter, however. For instance, in Figure 7.2, we
have the ﬁelds for a 3 m/s wind. The standard deviations of the ﬁeld go from 0.87, 0.82,
0.79, 0.73, 0.68 to 0.51, 0.51, 0.49, 0.48, 0.29 (for L1, L2, L5, L12, L25) after 0.5 Hz ﬁltering
of the ﬁelds. See also the results for higher wind speed is Figures 7.3 and 7.4. The mean
ﬁeld remains virtually unchanged after this process.

42

Figure 7.2: These are plots of the ﬁelds and phases for the case U10=3m/s (σζ = 18 cm),
with an ocean patch of 43 m, resolution 10 cm. The top is the original time series, the
second is with a ﬁeld ﬁlter at 0.5 Hz. Temporal resolution in all the simulations is of 0.0025
seconds.

43

Figure 7.3: These are plots of the ﬁelds and phases for the case U10=6 m/s (σζ = 42 cm),
with an ocean patch of 43 m, resolution 10 cm. The top is the original time series, the
second is with a ﬁeld ﬁlter at 0.5 Hz.

44

Figure 7.4: These are plots of the ﬁelds and phases for the case U10=11m/s (σζ = 79
cm), with an ocean patch of 43 m, resolution 10 cm. The top is the original time series, the
second is with a ﬁeld ﬁlter at 0.5 Hz. See the next ﬁgure for the corresponding (unﬁltered)
coherence and strucuture functions. This is complete simulation, with the ocean going from
ﬂat to moving to ﬂat. Observe the picked up winding number. Filtering at 0.5 Hz did not
entirely cure the problem in this case.

45

Chapter 8

Simulation experiments with
winding number and GIP

Consider the following scenario. The receiver is static. Initially the ocean is calm, totally
ﬂat. Then a disturbance gradually appears, peaks, and slowly disappears. The ocean ﬁnal
state is the same as the original state: total ﬂatness. We have run several simulations with
this scenario. The result is that the winding number of the ﬁeld history is non-zero. That
is, the ﬁeld can loop several times arond zero.

The ﬁrst example is in Figure 8.1 and accompanying Figure 8.2. How is this possible?
As can be seen in the example in Figure 8.3, the sum of zero-winding-number curves can
result in a winding number 1 curve. Since the resulting total ﬁeld is a linear combination
of such ﬁelds, all that we need to show is how the moving ocean can generate such winding
number zero curves. This is easy: the only requirements are that a) the initial and ﬁnal
phase be the same, with the phase moving in between, and b) that the ﬁeld magnitude
increase or decrease before returning to its original value. It is possible to imagine examples
based on GO reasoning (a usefull approximation, at any rate) to obtain this behaviour.
Suppose, for instance, that the distance from a specular point to the receiver decreases and
then increases, while the radius of curvature decreases then increases. It is easy to see that
this yields a clockwise loop in phasor space (with the usual angular convention used in the
complex plane).

We have seen the phase dispersion eﬀect, very much related to winding number (which
is a special case of the ﬁrst when initial and ﬁnal states are the same), in all wind conditions,
with U10=2 m/s and up. At ﬁrst sight this poses a signiﬁcant problem in the use of phase
for altimetry. How can we use a “deﬁting” measure for altimetry? It is now very important
to characterize the statistical and geophysical properties of this phase drift (Geophysically
Induced Phase drift, or GIP for short).

8.1 The uses of winding number

Winding number, or more generally, phase dispersion under a moving ocean is certainly
related to sea state characteristics. An interesting Gedanken1: imagine a satellite tracking
a reﬂection over a smooth region, then rough, then smooth again. The winding number
induced will be related to the roughness encountered. We have already seen that, in general,

1Gedanken (thought) experiments are little mental exercises for exploring hypothetical experiments. The
terminology comes from Einstein’s work, who is said to have engaged in them even when he was very young.

46

Figure 8.1: Simulation: 20 meters side, res=10cm, max ocean 4 m/s U10 with a peak σζ
of 12 cm, sine fourth modulation. Note that in the bottom row we present the FFT power
of the normalized ﬁeld. The zero component is basically the coherence function mentioned
earlier. The interferometric component shows a higher degree of coherence.

the phase drifts without a speciﬁc chirality in our simulations. It remains to be seen if non-
gaussian eﬀects in the surface can lead to chirality, or preferred rotation direction. If this
is the case, this phenomenon could conceivably be used for geophysical measurements. We
have already seen that GIP is related to wind speed in our simulations.

47

Figure 8.2:
winding number of -1.

In this Figure we illustrate the L2 ﬁeld phasor in Figure 8.1, which has a

Figure 8.3: Winding number magic: four curves with winding number 0 yield a winding
number 1 curve after being added. The trick can be done with 2 curves. In this case they
all turn in the same direction. Changing that will result in an ellipse.

48

Chapter 9

Recommendations for
Post-processing Procedures

Based on the work carried out so far, we are prepared to outline some of the possible
incarnations of the PIP concept. What we must emphasize is that the strength lies in the
noise cancellation in the interferometric combination. Filtering is best carried out after this
combination.

9.1 The PIP instrument: architecture and data products

Based on our results, we have the following suggestions.

1. Use two wideband (200 Hz for the static receiver, possibly more for the moving case)

PLL’s to extract the phase in each frequency.

2. Combine the phases and low-pass ﬁlter to recover altimetric trends. The normalized
interferometric ﬁeld is more coherent, so it can be used to track slow-varying altimetric
changes (such as a tide). We have seen that the interferometric ﬁels is a more robust
source, with a better deﬁned phase.

3. Use phase drift as a geophysical parameter More generally, the phase and power time

series are probably rich information source of sea state.

To be more precise, the following recipes for PIP implementation can be conceived: One,
the most natural one perhaps, is the Single PLL PIP (SPIP)

1. Multiply the two signals, form the interferometric signal.

2. Filter from 0 to 0.5 Hz

3. Use a single PLL to extract the phase.

The disadvantadge is that the ﬁeld magnitude will oscillate quite a bit. This may not be
important, given that a ﬁlter will be used. An alternative would be to used two PLLs
(MPIP)

1. Extract the phase in L1 and in L2

2. Combine the two phases

49

3. Filter from 0 to 0.5 Hz.

This is probably similar to the previous case, but it takes the ﬁeld magnitude out of the
picture from the very beginning—probably not a good thing. Finally, a non-contender is
to

1. Filter from 0 to 0.5 Hz

2. Extract the phase in L1 and in L2

3. Combine the two phases

This is a bad option, it makes no use of the jitter cancellation across frequencies.

We have focused on the static case. For other situations we just need to work with

excess phase and carry out the same ﬁltering process.

50

Chapter 10

Conclusions and Future Work

10.1 What we have found: PIP’s superior performance

1. The mean ﬁeld is largest for the PIP case L25 for all sea conditions. In general the
mean ﬁeld is proportional to exp [−σ2q2/2], where q = 4π/λ and λ is the pure or
interferometric wavelength.

2. The coherence integration time is consequently substantially larger for the interfer-
ometric combination, especially L25 (if the mean sea level scatter is very large the
eﬀect disappears, of course). The interferometric phase is coherent in a reasonable
range of sea conditions, unlike the single frequency phases. This implies that the PIP
interferometric combination is superior to extract altimetric low frequency trends in
the phase, as we discussed at the beginning.

3. The phase in our simulations behaves like a random walk, and the drift rate is directly
related to sea state: in general, the larger the wind speed, the higher the drift rate.
This implies that a system capable of tracking the phase of the reﬂected signals can
provide, aside from altimetric measurements, sea state information.

4. Filtering the received ﬁeld does not aﬀect its mean value, while decreasing its scatter.
It can probably be used for altimetric purposes, as it removes noise but leaves the
slow-varying geophysical signals alone.

5. No long-term trends in phase drift chirality have been detected in our simulations
with Gaussian ocean models based on [Elfouhaily et al., 1997]. We have performed
simulations up to 2 minutes long. This is good news for our altimetric eﬀorts. It seems
that despite the phase drift present, and the winding number it can lead to, in practice
this eﬀect should not introduce systematic eﬀects on altimetric determination. It is
important to check that the simulations are correctly imitated by nature, of course.
Among other things, non-Gaussian eﬀects in the sea could conceivably lead to real
drifting.

The single most important parameter in the correlation between the ﬁelds at diﬀerent
frequencies is the signiﬁcant wave height. This has to be compared to the synthetic wave-
length. For rough seas, the correlation bethween the ﬁelds (and therefore interferometric
coherence) in diﬀerent frequencies disappears, and the coherence time goes to zero even for
the interferometric combinations. In calmer ocean conditions, however, our results indicate
that the interferometric combination remains coherent.

51

10.2 What we’d now like to know: future work

Due to the limited scope of this study we were not able to cover all the interesting aspects
of this problem. Future theoretical work includes the extension of the present results to the
case in which the receiver is far away from the ground and is moving. We would also like
to understand the impact of changing the ocean statistics from gaussian to non-gaussian.
Another important aspect that deserves further research is to extend the analysis to a
bistatic situation. So far, our simulations have only considered the monostatic case. We
intend to continue this work within the scope of PARIS-α:

1. Examine more realistic situations (higher, faster). This includes, in particular, un-
derstanding the issues that will arise in the aircraft and LEO scenario, and it will
require larger simulations—in fact it may impossible to simulate the ocean with the
required size and resolution, as the WAF zone are increases linearly with height.

2. Understand the theoretical issues involving the correlations and Doppler spread of

the reﬂected ﬁelds without using the Fruanhofer approximation for the receiver.

3. Extend the analysis to the bistatic situation.

4. Carry out a detailed study of phase drift versus wind speed.

5. Look deeper at the advantages (which we have seen and are expected) of using even

closer frequencies. This may result in recomendations for GALILEO, for instance.

6. Understand the impact of non-Gaussian ocean eﬀects.

7. Understand better the possible sources of chirality in GID. This is important to assure

altimetric accuracy.

8. Obtain and analyze data for the static situation.

9. Understand the eﬀectiveness of GO or its higher order corrections.

It is rather clear that experimental work is needed in this ﬁeld. The most important
experiment for the concept at this point, is a redo of the bridge experiment: a static
receiver over the moving ocean, using both L1 and L2. The desired product from such
an experiment from the point of view of the present work, would time-series’ of the ﬁelds.
MEATEX campaigns will also provide aircraft data which will be very useful to understand
some of these issues.

52

Chapter 11

Acknowlegments

This is a document produced for ESA under ESTEC Contract No. 14071/99/NL/MM. The
author’s are grateful to ESA for funding and permission to freely distribute this document,
and are especially grateful to Manuel Martin-Neira of ESTEC, the technical oﬃcer in charge
of this contract, for very valuable comments and suggestions during the course of this
research. .

53

Bibliography

[Auber et al., 1994] Auber, J.-C., Bilbaut, A., Rigal,J.-M., Characterization of multipath
on land and sea at GPS frequencies, Proceedings of the 7th International Technical
Meeting of the Satellite Division of the Institute of Navigation, part 2, ION-GPS-94,
Sept 94, pp. 1155-1171

[Beckmann et al., 1963] Beckmann, P., Spizzichino, A., The scattering of Electromagnetic

Waves from Rough Surfaces, Artech House, Inc., Nordwood, MA, 1987.

[Berry, 1972] Berry, M.V., On deducing the form of surfaces from their diﬀracted echoes,

J. Phys. A: Gen Phys 5, 272-91.

[Born & Wolf, 1993] Born, M., Wolf, E., Principles of Optics, Sixth Edition, Pergamon

Press, 1993.

[Caparrini, 1998] Caparrini, M., Using reﬂected GNSS signals to estimate surface features

over wide ocean areas.

[Chapron et al., 1999] Chapron, B., Kerbaol, V., Vandemark, D., Elfouhaily, T., Impor-
tance of peakedness in sea surface slope measurements and application, submitted to
Journal of Geophysical Res. , March 1999.

[Cox and Munk, 1954] Cox and W. Munk, Measurement of the roughness of the sea surface
from photographs of the Sun’s glitter, Journal of the Optical Society of America, vol.
44, pp. 838–850, Nov. 1954.

[Daout et al., 1999] Daout, F., Schmitt, Characterization of the Bistatic scattered distri-

bution, 1999.

[Elfouhaily et al., 1997] Elfouhaily, T., Chapron, B., Katsaros, K., Vandemark, D., A uni-
ﬁed directional spectrum for long and short wind-driven waves, Journal of Geophysical
Res. vol 102, no. C7, p. 15,781–1,796, July 15, 1997.

[Garrison et al., 1996] Garrison, J.L., Katzberg, S.J., Howell, C.T., Detection of Ocean
Reﬂected GPS signals: theory and experiment, IEEE Southeaston ’97, Blacksburg,
USA, April 12–14, 1997

[Garrison et al., 1999] Garrison, J.L., Russo, A., Ferebee, M.J., Mickler, D., Armatys,
M., The GPS Ocean Reﬂection Experiment on Sapartan 251, ION-99 (Institute of
Navigation of US), Nashville, Tennessee, Sep 14-17, 1999.

[Feynman, 1985] QED, the strange thery of light and matter, Princeton U. Press, 1985.

54

[Herring, 1990] Geodesy by Radio Interferometry: Tha Application of Kalman Filtering
to the Analysis of Very Long Baseline Interferometry Data, J. Geophys. Res., Vol 95
No B8, 12,561–12,581, August 10 1990.

[Komjathy et al., 1998a] Komjathy, A., Zavorotny, Axelrad, P., Born, G., Garrison, J.,
GPS signal scattering from sea surface: comparison between experimental data and
theoretical model, presented at the 5th International Conference on Remote Sensing
for Marine and Coastal Environments, San Diego, 5–7 October, 1998, submitted for
publication to Remote Sensing of Environment.

[Mart´ın-Neira, 1993] Mart´ın-Neira, M., A passive reﬂectometry and interferometry system

(PARIS): application to ocean altimetry, ESA Journal, vol 17, pp 331-355, 1993.

[Ruﬃni et al., 1999] Ruﬃni. G, E. Cardellach , A. Rius, J.M. Aparicio, Report WP1000
to ESA Contract 13461/99/NL/GD, Utilization of Scatterometry Using Sources of
Opportunity.

[Thomson et al., 1990] Thomson, R.A., Moran, J.M., Swenson, G.W., Interferometry and

Synthesis in Radio Astronomy, Wiley and Sons, 1990.

[Zavorotny et al., 1999] Zavorotny, V.U., Voronovich, A.G., Scattering of GPS signals from
the ocean with wind remote sensing application, IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sensing,
in press.

55

