1
0
0
2
 
r
p
A
 
4
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
o
a
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
6
7
0
4
0
1
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

EUROPEAN ORGANIZATION FOR NUCLEAR RESEARCH

CERN/SPSC 2000-041
SPSC/P317 Add.2
October 17, 2000

CLOUD: AN ATMOSPHERIC RESEARCH FACILITY AT CERN

B. Fastrup, E. Pedersen
University of Aarhus, Institute of Physics and Astronomy, Aarhus, Denmark

E. Lillestol
University of Bergen, Institute of Physics, Bergen, Norway

M. Bosteels, A. Gonidec, J. Kirkby*, S. Mele, P. Minginette, B. Nicquevert, D. Schinzel, W. Seidl
CERN, Geneva, Switzerland

P. Grundsøe, N. Marsh, J. Polny, H. Svensmark
Danish Space Research Institute, Copenhagen, Denmark

Y. Viisanen
Finnish Meteorological Institute, Helsinki, Finland

K. Kurvinen, R. Orava
University of Helsinki, Institute of Physics, Helsinki, Finland

K. H¨ameri, M. Kulmala, L. Laakso, C.D. O’Dowd
University of Helsinki, Lab. of Aerosol and Environmental Physics, Helsinki, Finland

V. Afrosimov, A. Basalaev, M. Panov
Ioﬀe Physical Technical Institute, Dept. of Fusion Technology, St. Petersburg, Russia

A. Laaksonen, J. Joutsensaari
University of Kuopio, Department of Applied Physics, Kuopio, Finland

V. Ermakov, V. Makhmutov, O. Maksumov, P. Pokrevsky, Y. Stozhkov, N. Svirzhevsky
Lebedev Physical Institute, Solar and Cosmic Ray Research Laboratory, Moscow, Russia

K. Carslaw, Y. Yin
University of Leeds, School of the Environment, Leeds, United Kingdom

T. Trautmann
University of Mainz, Institute for Atmospheric Physics, Mainz, Germany

F. Arnold, K.-H. Wohlfrom
Max-Planck Institute for Nuclear Physics (MPIK), Atmospheric Physics Division, Heidelberg, Germany

D. Hagen, J. Schmitt, P. Whiteﬁeld
University of Missouri-Rolla, Cloud and Aerosol Sciences Laboratory, Rolla, USA

K.L. Aplin, R.G. Harrison
University of Reading, Department of Meteorology, Reading, United Kingdom

R. Bingham, F. Close, C. Gibbins, A. Irving, B. Kellett, M. Lockwood
Rutherford Appleton Laboratory, Space Science & Particle Physics Depts., Chilton, United Kingdom

J.M. M¨akel¨a
Tampere University of Technology, Department of Physics, Tampere, Finland

D. Petersen, W.W. Szymanski, P.E. Wagner, A. Vrtala
University of Vienna, Institute for Experimental Physics, Vienna, Austria
CLOUD† Collaboration

∗) spokesperson
†) Cosmics Leaving OUtdoor Droplets

Contents

1 Introduction

1.1 Overview . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1.2 An Atmospheric Research Facility at CERN . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

2 Particle beam

4
4
2.1 Beam requirements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.2 Beam simulations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2.3 Alternative ionisation sources
9
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2.4 Experimental area layout . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10

3 Background measurements in the East Hall

12
3.1
Instrumentation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
3.2 East Hall tests . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13

4 Conclusions

1
1
1

14

ii

1 Introduction

1.1 Overview

At its meeting on 6 September 2000, the SPSC suggested that CLOUD [1, 2] should be
considered as a facility rather than a single experiment. We welcome this suggestion, which
corresponds with earlier informal discussions that we had with CERN management. This
document therefore places CLOUD in the framework of a CERN facility for atmospheric
research.
It also addresses some questions raised by the SPSC at the same meeting,
concerning the use of a CERN PS beam.

1.2 An Atmospheric Research Facility at CERN

Clouds are the familiar but complex engines of the world’s weather and climate. Basic
questions remain unanswered about the physicochemical production of the aerosols on
which the water droplets or ice crystals form. Under certain conditions, ionisation of the
air by cosmic rays may play a vital part. Theoretical studies and direct observations
of ion eﬀects from aircraft and balloons give important clues, but adequate laboratory
facilities to investigate the microphysics under controlled conditions on the ground do not
yet exist.

The experimental concept of CLOUD begins with studies of the various microphysical
processes by which cosmic rays may aﬀect cloud formation in the atmosphere. The initial
programme contains ﬁve groups of experiments dealing with (1) nucleation and growth
of aerosols, (2) formation of cloud droplets, (3) production of condensable vapours, (4)
creation of ice nuclei, and (5) dynamics of stratospheric clouds. This programme is only
indicative, and the actual investigations will respond to our experimental results and
associated theoretical developments.

For performing the CLOUD investigations we propose (Figs. 1 and 2) to combine
a novel expansion cloud chamber with a reactor chamber and associated experimental
systems for gas and particle analysis. Reasons for designating CLOUD as CERN’s Atmo-
spheric Research Facility are as follows:

• The concept of a facility is appropriate for the comparatively large and complex

experimental programme of CLOUD.

• CLOUD is a ‘general purpose’ detector. Flexibility is required because we do not
know what we shall discover or where rapid experimental and theoretical develop-
ments may lead us.

• No such facility is presently available to atmospheric scientists at any other location

worldwide.

• A time span for the experiments of several years is envisaged.

• Our team already includes atmospheric scientists from 10 institutes in 5 countries
but we can expect others to propose experiments when they know of the existence
of the facility and its unrivalled capabilities.

1

Figure 1: Perspective view of the proposed CERN Atmospheric Research Facility,
CLOUD.

2

Figure 2: Cut-away view of CLOUD.

3

Why at CERN? We consider the use of a CERN particle beam to be crucial. Carefully-
controlled and precisely-delivered particle ionisation at natural GCR intensities and ion-
isation densities (corresponding to minimum ionising particles) is a central part of this
experiment. Experiments by members of our collaboration and others have obtained use-
ful results with traditional sources of ionisation such as X rays and radioactive sources.
But to make further progress requires a beam from a particle accelerator. Only a particle
beam can closely duplicate the characteristics of cosmic rays throughout the atmosphere
and deliver a precisely known ionisation with the ﬂexibility of intensity, timing, spatial
distribution and penetration range that the facility requires.

In addition, CLOUD relies heavily on CERN’s expertise with bubble-chambers and
cryogenic temperature control (required to within 0.01K stability). We also need assis-
tance from CERN for the technical integration of what we consider to be a large and
complex experiment, as well as for computing support.

It is this combination of a particle beam and specialised technical expertise that makes
CERN uniquely suitable for the proposed facility. In a broader context, the creation of the
Atmospheric Research Facility will give very positive signals (1) that particle physics has
direct relevance to terrestrial concerns, and (2) that CERN welcomes cross-disciplinary
research proposed by scientists in its member states who are not particle physicists.

2 Particle beam

2.1 Beam requirements

The primary task of CLOUD is to investigate how galactic cosmic rays (GCRs) may
inﬂuence cloud formation. To do this we plan to establish realistic atmospheric conditions
inside a cloud chamber and reactor chamber, and irradiate the chambers with a particle
beam to provide a realistic and adjustable source of “cosmic rays”. We can estimate the
beam intensities required for CLOUD as follows.

The desired beam intensity is between 1× and about 10× the natural GCR ﬂux at a
given altitude. This will allow us to measure the dependence of any observed eﬀects on
ionisation rate and ion pair concentration, and to extrapolate reliably across the range of
natural ionisation in the atmosphere. The highest beam intensities will help to amplify
and expose eﬀects before they are measured at natural ionisation levels. Beam-oﬀ data
will be also be recorded, under conditions with the chamber clearing ﬁelds on and oﬀ,
respectively, corresponding to 0.01× and 1× the natural GCR ion pair concentrations
at ground level. The optimum operating energy of the proposed T11 beam is near the
maximum (3.5 GeV/c) in order to minimise beam particle scattering.

CLOUD will measure processes over the full range of tropospheric and stratospheric
conditions. At ground level, the average GCR intensity is about 0.02 cm−2s−1, whereas
at altitudes of 15–20 km it is about a factor 100 larger, varying between about 0.8 and
2.3 cm−2s−1 depending on geomagnetic latitude (Fig. 3a).

The maximum required time-averaged beam intensity is therefore about 10 × 2 =
20 cm−2s−1. The beam is spread over a large transverse area of 30 cm × 30 cm ≃ 1000 cm2
in order to duplicate the quasi-uniform GCR irradiation, as closely as possible, over the
ﬁducial volume. This is achieved by defocusing the quadrupole magnets in the T11

4

Figure 3:
a) The charged particle intensity and b) the small ion pair concentration
vs. altitude, measured at several latitudes with cutoﬀ rigidities, Rc, as indicated. The
data were recorded by Lebedev Physical Institute [3] in or near 1990, corresponding to a
sunspot maximum (but without solar proton events), i.e during a cosmic ray minimum.
The horizontal bars show the typical experimental statistical errors.

5

beamline. The time-averaged maximum beam intensity is then 20 × 1000 = 2 · 104 s−1.
If we assume a 0.5 s beam pulse from the CERN PS every 5 s, then the maximum beam
intensity is 5 × 2 · 104 = 105 /pulse. This is comfortably within the maximum performance
of 7 × 105 /pulse for the T11 beamline at 3.5 GeV/c, assuming 2 × 1011 protons/pulse on
the target.

The minimum beam intensity (apart from beam-oﬀ) is 1× the natural GCR radiation
at ground level. This is a factor 1000 below the maximum required intensity (a factor 100
for the atmospheric attenuation and a factor 10 for 1× the GCR intensity rather than
10×), i.e. a time-averaged intensity of 20 s−1, or 100 /pulse, assuming 1 pulse every 5 s.

These beam estimates are summarised in Table 1.

Table 1: Summary of the minimum and maximum beam conditions for CLOUD. One
beam pulse per 5 s is assumed, as well as a transverse beam size of 30 × 30 cm2. ‘GCR’
signiﬁes the natural GCR intensity at the indicated altitude.

Simulated

Simulated

GCR intensity altitude (km)

Beam intensity Clearing
(particles/pulse)

ﬁeld

0.01 × GCR
1 × GCR
2 × GCR
10 × GCR
0.01 × GCR
1 × GCR
10 × GCR

0
0
0
0
10
10
10

0
0
102
103
0
104
105

on
oﬀ
oﬀ
oﬀ
oﬀ
oﬀ
oﬀ

2.2 Beam simulations

The calculations in §2.1 provide useful estimates of the beam requirements for CLOUD.
However they under-estimate the actual beam requirements since they take no account
of diﬀusion losses of ions to the chamber walls or of ion-ion recombination. We have
therefore performed a 3-dimensional simulation which includes these eﬀects. The results
are shown in Figs. 4–7 and are described below.

GCR (no beam) conditions: The equilibrium ion pair concentration due to the back-
ground GCR ﬂux1 is about 500 cm−3 averaged over the cloud chamber volume (Fig. 5b).
This value is slightly higher than typical measured values at ground level (Fig. 3b) since
atmospheric aerosols scavenge small ions. The equilibrium concentration is reached af-
ter about 10 minutes (Fig. 4b shows a typical time evolution)—which is characteristic of
small ion lifetimes in the atmosphere. The mean ion pair concentration can be readily
1The GCR ﬂux will be monitored by roof of recuperated plastic scintillation counters over the CLOUD

facility.

6

Figure 4: Mean ion pair concentration in the cloud chamber vs. time for the ambient GCR
ﬂux and a) no beam and clearing ﬁeld on, and b) 100 particles /pulse (× 1 pulse per 5s)
and clearing ﬁeld oﬀ. The chamber conditions correspond to aerosol-free air at ground
level (293 K and 101 kPa). The ion pair concentration is assumed to be zero at t=0.

Figure 5: The equilibrium ion pair concentrations in the cloud chamber for no beam
and the ambient GCR ﬂux, a) with clearing ﬁeld, and b) without clearing ﬁeld. The
chamber conditions correspond to aerosol-free air at ground level (293 K and 101 kPa).
The projections show a central slice through the chamber in the vertical plane, with the
beam axis along y = 25 cm.

7

Figure 6: The equilibrium ion pair concentrations in the cloud chamber for the ambient
GCR ﬂux and a beam of a) 100 particles /pulse (×1 pulse per 5s), and b) 103 particles
/pulse. The chamber conditions correspond to aerosol-free air at ground level (293 K and
101 kPa).

Figure 7: The equilibrium ion pair concentrations in the cloud chamber for a beam of
a) 104 particles /pulse, and b) 105 particles /pulse. The chamber conditions correspond
to aerosol-free air at 10 km altitude (223 K and 26 kPa).

8

reduced below the natural GCR level by turning on the clearing ﬁeld. With 1 kVm−1
electric ﬁeld, small ions are cleared from the cloud chamber in 4 s, and this reduces the
mean ion concentration to about 1% of the atmospheric values at ground level (Figs. 4a
and 5a). The clearing ﬁeld can therefore be used very eﬀectively to turn oﬀ ion-induced
processes in the cloud and reactor chambers, since the ion-mediated eﬀects generally occur
on timescales that are long (several minutes to hours) compared with the clearing time.
Note that, depending on their size, charged aerosols are not swept out by the clearing
ﬁeld due to their low mobilities.

Ground-level conditions: Data taken without beam and with various clearing ﬁeld
settings will provide the lowest ionisation measurements at ground level conditions. For
higher ionisations at ground level conditions, the beam is used. The expected ionisation
concentrations for 100 particles /pulse and 103 particles /pulse are shown in Figs. 6a) and
b), respectively, assuming 1 pulse /5 s. These beam intensities produce rather modest
increases in the ion pair concentrations since the cross-sectional area of the cloud chamber
illuminated by the beam is about a factor 2.5 less than that illuminated by GCR. To obtain
the desired factor 10 increase in ion pair concentration above atmospheric values requires
a beam intensity of about 4 × 103 particles /pulse.

10 km conditions: The expected ionisation concentrations for 104 particles /pulse
and 105 particles /pulse at 10 km conditions are shown in Figs. 7a) and b), respectively.
The mean ion pair concentrations at these high altitudes are about 3000 cm−3 for high
geomagnetic latitudes (Fig. 3b). These beam intensities therefore reasonably well cover
the desired range, although a maximum beam intensity of about 2 ×105 particles /pulse is
required to reach 10× the natural GCR level at 10 km altitude. Finally we note that the
ground-level background GCR in CLOUD decreases in signiﬁcance for increasing altitude
conditions, and is essentially negligible (∼1%) at 10 km conditions.

2.3 Alternative ionisation sources

The basic goal of CLOUD is to duplicate atmospheric and cosmic ray conditions in the
laboratory. Cosmic rays consist mostly of pion and electron secondaries in the upper
troposphere, and decay muons near ground level. The primary cosmic rays mostly inter-
act in the (∼2λ) material above the tropopause. Therefore, essentially throughout the
troposphere, charged cosmic rays comprise minimum ionising particles.

The requirements of the ionisation source for CLOUD are as follows:

• Capability to deposit a precisely known quantity of ionisation at a precisely known

location inside the cloud chamber and reactor chamber.

• An ionisation density (dE/dx) that is characteristic of minimum ionising particles.

• Easily adjustable in intensity over the required range of 1–10× the natural cosmic

ray intensities found in the troposphere—a factor of about 1000.

• Ability to traverse the walls and liquid cooling layers of the cloud chamber and
reactor chamber. This sets a minimum energy for a particle beam of about 1 GeV/c,
taking multiple Coulomb scattering also into account.

9

• Known timing. This is necessary for the study of fast processes and also for ice
nucleation studies to distinguish between deposition nucleation and freezing nucle-
ation.

Other sources of ionising radiation include ultraviolet (UV) radiation, radioactive
sources and X ray sources. UV radiation is excluded since it induces photochemical reac-
tions among the trace gases. In the case of radioactive sources, α emitters are excluded
by their high ionisation density and short range, and β emitters are excluded since they
cannot be placed inside the cloud chamber, and their range is insuﬃcient to penetrate
the chamber walls.

Gamma radioactive sources are impractical; they would need to be distributed around
the outer surfaces of the cloud chamber and reactor chamber, and even then would provide
imprecisely-known and non-uniform ionisation in the ﬁducial volumes. The maximum
required intensity is equivalent to 1000 times the ground-level GCR intensity at a distance
of about 1 m from the source. This represents a signiﬁcant radiation hazard and poses
handling and safety problems. Furthermore it is diﬃcult to adjust the intensity of a
gamma source over the required range, and there are no timing capabilities. X ray sources
have similar limitations, with the added problem that, since the range of X rays is shorter,
large absorption and non-uniformities result from the detector material.

A careful search of the literature [4] has uncovered many little-known laboratory stud-
ies of ion-induced eﬀects on aerosol formation since the 1960’s using traditional ionisation
sources (e.g. refs. [5, 6, 7]). Members of our collaboration have also studied these processes
more recently using X rays and α particles from 241Am sources [8]. Although some useful
results have been obtained, these studies have generally been unable to characterise the
aerosol processes adequately. There are two reasons for this:

1. Lack of control of the ionisation at near-atmospheric intensities.

2. Non-uniformities of deposited ionisation. We have shown [9] that local variations
of ion density (for example, from an α source) give rise to non-linear aerosol charg-
ing eﬀects, which will directly aﬀect ion-induced aerosol processes. This makes it
diﬃcult to relate results obtained with such sources to the real atmosphere.

The limitations of traditional sources have hindered further progress with these experi-
ments.

In contrast, a GeV beam from a particle accelerator ideally matches the requirements
It can deliver a precise quantity
of a well-deﬁned and reproducible ionisation source.
of ionisation with a precisely known spatial distribution, and at an exactly known time.
Until now, as far as we know, no one has used an accelerator beam for such studies. By
combining this ideal ionisation source with an advanced detector of unrivalled capabilities,
CLOUD oﬀers excellent prospects for a breakthrough in ion-aerosol-cloud research.

2.4 Experimental area layout

At its meeting on 6 September 2000, the SPSC emphasized the importance of maximising
the remaining free space in the T11 beamline after CLOUD is installed, in order to
maintain the highest ﬂexibility for future detector tests. Together with PS Division staﬀ
we have therefore developed a new beam layout, which is shown in Figs. 8 and 9. By

10

1
1

Figure 8: Updated experimental area layout of the CLOUD facility at the CERN PS in the T11 beamline of the East Hall.

Figure 9: Perspective view of the CLOUD facility in the T11 beamline of the East Hall

re-conﬁguring the concrete shielding blocks at the end of the present T11 beamline and
by minimising the footprint of the facility, the free space along the beamline will decrease
by only 1 m after CLOUD is installed (from the present 11 m to 10 m).

3 Background measurements in the East Hall

Another question raised by the SPSC concerned the ambient background level in the
East Hall. Accordingly we have measured the atmospheric small ion concentrations and
variability in the East Hall during operation of the CERN PS.

3.1

Instrumentation

The measurements were performed with a Programmable Ion Mobility Spectrometer
(PIMS) which we have developed in Reading [10]. This device involves a sampling cylinder
in which the ions are drifted onto a well-insulated axial electrode under the inﬂuence of
an electric ﬁeld. The PIMS is ventilated by a fan which draws air through the cylinder at
about 2 ms−1. A sensitive current ampliﬁer integrates the ion charges collected. The small
ion concentration is directly proportional to the air conductivity, which is calculated from

12

the measured current, and the sampling tube’s geometry and ventilation rate. Typical
currents are a few 100 femtoamperes. The PIMS is calibrated by means of two operating
modes—ion-induced voltage decay and direct ion current measurement—under micropro-
cessor control [11]. A rigorous calibration procedure has been developed for atmospheric
operation under demanding and variable environmental conditions [4], including a new in
situ method for direct calibration of the current ampliﬁer [12].

Figure 10: Locations of the ﬁve measurement sites in the CERN East Hall.

3.2 East Hall tests

Atmospheric small ion concentrations were measured at various East Hall locations, as
indicated in Fig. 10, on 5th October 2000 from 11h30-17h00 local time. During this time
the CERN PS was delivering about 3 pulses per supercycle onto the East Hall Target
North (the target for the T9, T10 and T11 beamlines) at an average intensity of 2 × 1011
protons/pulse. During the tests the T11 beam was oﬀ and the adjacent T10 beam was
on.

At each site, the PIMS instrument was operated using an automated sequence of
voltage decay measurements (sampled at 2 Hz) and current measurements (the micropro-
cessor calculates averages of ten 1 Hz samples) every three minutes. The system leakage
current and op-amp input oﬀset voltage were also sampled to compensate the measured
ion currents for temperature-dependent eﬀects [10].

13

Ion measurements were made for approximately 30 minutes at each location. The
negative air conductivity and negative ion concentration were calculated as described in
[4], and are presented in Table 2. The calculation of ion concentration assumes that the
negative small ions have a mean mobility of 1.9 cm2V−1s−1 [13].

Table 2: Measurements of the atmospheric negative ion conductivity and negative small
ion number concentration in the East Hall. The negative ion concentrations are ap-
proximately equal to the ion pair concentrations. During all measurements the PS was
operating and delivering beam to Target North (the T9/10/11 target) and the adjacent
secondary beam (T10) was on.

No. Location

Conductivity
(×10−15 S/m)
Mean

σ

Ion concentration
(cm−3 )
σ

Mean

1 T11 control room
2 T11 beam area, 3m oﬀ-axis, beam oﬀ
3 T11 beam axis, beam oﬀ
4 Outside East Hall
Inside East Hall
5

12.2
8.1
12.9
13.5
14.1

5.6
6.6
6.3
5.0
6.0

401
266
424
444
464

184
217
207
197
197

Typical atmospheric air negative conductivities (which are directly proportional to the
small ion concentrations) in urban air at Reading are around 13 · 10−15 S/m, with short-
term (of order tens of minutes) variability up to 100% (see, for example, Fig. 37 on p. 58
of the CLOUD proposal). These conductivities correspond to around 400 ion pairs cm−3,
and are comparable to ground-level values measured elsewhere (e.g. Fig. 3b). The values
measured in the East Hall are quite similar, and show no evidence for any signiﬁcant
increase in the ambient ion background. These measurements provide a realistic test of
backgrounds for CLOUD since air is the active material in the detector and ion number
concentration is the parameter of interest. We conclude that low background conditions
exist in the East Hall for the CLOUD studies.

4 Conclusions

We are proposing a European facility at CERN where atmospheric scientists can inves-
tigate the role of natural ionisation in aerosol and cloud formation. The concept of a
facility is appropriate for the comparatively large and complex experimental programme
of CLOUD extending over several years, and in view of the need for ﬂexibility in a ﬁeld
where rapid progress may be expected in the next few years.

CLOUD’s requirements include a variable particle beam, techniques derived from
CERN’s bubble-chamber experience, exacting cryogenic temperature control, and the
skills in integration, experimental management and data-processing for which CERN is
well known. For all these reasons, CERN is uniquely suited to host the facility.

14

The facility would use a 3.5 GeV/c secondary beam from the CERN PS in the T11
beamline of the East Hall. Beam intensities between 100 and 105 particles/pulse are
required to cover the desired range of 1–10 × the cosmic ray intensities found in the
atmosphere. We have experimentally veriﬁed low background conditions in the East Hall
for the proposed studies.

The CLOUD detector would occupy a permanent space at the end of the T11 beamline,
reducing the free space available for test experiments from the present 11 m to 10 m.
CLOUD would take data during about one half of the yearly operation of the East Hall,
leaving the T11 beamline available for test experiments during the remaining time.

Unique in the world, this facility will open up an essentially new ﬁeld of atmospheric
research. Its primary task, as described in the CLOUD proposal, is to pursue the question
of how cosmic rays may inﬂuence cloud microphysics.
If clouds respond to the solar
variations that modulate the cosmic rays reaching the Earth, there are consequences for
the evaluation of climate change. To settle the issue, one way or the other, is therefore of
urgent global importance.

Acknowledgements

We would like to thank Jean-Pierre Delahaye, Luc Durieu, Dieter M¨ohl and Jean-Pierre
Riunaud of the CERN PS Division for their invaluable assistance.

References

[1] CLOUD collaboration (B. Fastrup et al.), A study of the link between cosmic rays
and clouds with a cloud chamber at the CERN PS, CERN proposal SPSC/P317,
SPSC 2000-021 (2000).

[2] CLOUD collaboration (B. Fastrup et al.), Addendum to the CLOUD proposal,

CERN SPSC/P317 Add.1, SPSC 2000-030 (2000).

[3] V.I. Ermakov, G.A. Bazilevskaya, P.E. Pokrevsky, and Y.I. Stozhkov, Ion balance

equation in the atmosphere, J. Geophys. Res. 102 (1997) 23413.

[4] K.L. Aplin, Instrumentation for atmospheric ion measurements, Ph.D. thesis,

Univ. Reading, UK (2000).

[5] J. Bricard et al., Formation and evolution of nuclei of condensation that appear in

air initially free of aerosols, J. Geophys. Res. 73 (1968) 4487.

[6] T.P. Burke and J.A. Scott, The production of condensation nuclei by alpha radiation,

Proc. Royal Irish Academy 73, A (1973) 151-158.

[7] K.G. Vohra, M.C. Subba Ramu and T.S. Muraleedharan, An experimental study of
the role of radon and its daughter products in the conversion of sulphur dioxide into
aerosol particles in the atmosphere, Atmospheric Environment 18 (1984) 1653.

15

[8] J.M. M¨akel¨a, Studies on irradiation induced aerosol particle formation processes in
air containing sulphur dioxide, Ph.D. thesis, Univ. Helsinki, Acta Polytechnica Scan-
dinavica, Applied Physics Series 82 (1992).

[9] C.F. Clement and R.G. Harrison, Enhanced localised charging of radioactive aerosols,

J. Aerosol. Sci. 31, 3 (2000) 363–378.

[10] K.L. Aplin and R.G. Harrison, A computer-controlled Gerdien atmospheric ion

counter, Rev. Sci. Inst. 71, 8 (2000) 3037-3041.

[11] R.G. Harrison and K.L. Aplin, A multimode electrometer for atmospheric ion mea-

surements, Rev. Sci. Inst., in press (2001).

[12] R.G. Harrison and K.L. Aplin, Femtoampere current reference stable over atmo-

spheric temperatures, Rev. Sci. Inst. 71, 8 (2000) 3231-3232.

[13] V.A. Mohnen, Formation, nature and mobility of ions of atmospheric importance,
in Electrical processes in atmospheres, ed. H. Dolezalek, Springer Verlag, Darmstadt
(1974).

16

