1
0
0
2
 
l
u
J
 
8
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
o
a
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
5
4
0
7
0
1
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Wave duration/persistence statistics, recording
interval, and fractal dimension∗

Alastair D. Jenkins
DNMI Marine Forecasting Centre,
Allégaten 70, 5007 Bergen, Norway

ABSTRACT

The statistics of sea state duration (persistence) have been found to
be dependent upon the recording interval ∆t. Such behavior can be ex-
plained as a consequence of the fact that the graph of a time series of an
environmental parameter such as the signiﬁcant wave height has an ir-
regular, “fractal” geometry. The mean duration τ can have a power-law
dependence on ∆t as ∆t → 0, with an exponent equal to the fractal di-
mension of the level sets of the time series graph. This recording interval
dependence means that the mean duration is not a well deﬁned quan-
tity to use for marine operational purposes. A more practical quantity
would be the “useful mean duration” τ u =E[(
τi)], where
each interval [ti, ti + τi] satisfying the appropriate criterion is weighted
by its duration, and thus by approximately the amount of useful work
that can be performed during a calm interval of the same length.

τ 2
i )/(

P

P

INTRODUCTION

The duration or persistence statistics of sea state and other environmental param-
eters are important for purposes such as marine engineering operations, in which,
for example, useful work can only be performed if the signiﬁcant wave height h is
less than a particular value h0. Over recent decades a number of observational and
theoretical studies have been made, in order to relate the statistical behavior of the
∗Submitted to the International Journal of Offshore and Polar Engineering, 2001 July 16

1

(1)

(2)

duration of various sea state criteria to, for example, the probability distribution
of the wave height, its seasonal variation, and other parameters (e.g. Houmb and
Vik 1975, Graham 1982, Tsekos and Anastasiou 1996, Soukissian and Theochari
2001). The general case is that an observational time series can be described by
a state vector X(t) in a ﬁnite-dimensional space S which depends on time t, and
can be thought of as a particular realization of a random variable X(t, ω), where
ω is an element of a suitable probability space.

To ﬁnd the duration statistics corresponding to a certain criterion C ⊂ S, we
consider the time intervals Ii = [ti−, ti+] which satisfy the following conditions:

(i) X(t) ∈ C,
(ii) X(ti− − ǫ−) , X(ti+ + ǫ+) 6∈ C

ti− < t < ti+,

for sufﬁciently small ǫ−, ǫ+ > 0.

If the total observation time is ﬁnite, condition (ii) should be modiﬁed appropri-
ately if X(t) ∈ C at the start and/or end of the observation period. Each interval
Ii has a duration τi = ti+ − ti−, and the mean duration τ is deﬁned as

τ = E

(1/N)

"

τi

,

#

i
X

where N is the total number of intervals satisfying the criterion C and E[·] is the
mathermatical expectation. In the present study we will consider the particular
case of X being a scalar quantity, such as the signiﬁcant wave height h, and crite-
rion C being a simple condition such as the wave height being below a particular
value (X < x0).

It is almost invariably the case that time series of observed environmental pa-
rameters have a noisy, irregular appearance, so that measurements recorded at fre-
quent intervals show considerable structure which does not appear if the measure-
ments are recorded less frequently. Although this may partly be due to the effect
of errors in the measurement or of sampling variability, the phenomenon has been
recognized as a manifestation of fractal behaviour, shared with such phenomena
as the irregularity of coastlines and of the surfaces of snowﬂakes (Mandelbrot
1983). Indeed, the behaviour is usually so irregular that it is impossible to deﬁne
the time derivative dX/dt: the usual limit (X(t + ∆t) − X(t)) /∆t does not exist
as ∆t → 0. A well-understood example of a stochastic process with fractal be-
haviour is Brownian motion (Lévy 1965), which can be thought of as the limiting
case of a random walk as the time steps of the walk become inﬁnitesimally small.
An example of a fractal time series is shown in Fig. 1.

2

X(t) > x0

X(t) < x0

X(t)

x=x0

 3
x

 2

 1

 0

 0

 5

 10

 15

t

 20

Fig. 1: Example of a fractal time series X(t), in this case from a Brownian
process, the scale units being arbitrary. The upper part of the ﬁgure illustrates the
intervals where X(t) satisﬁes the condition X(t) < x0 = 1.25, and it can be seen
that there are very many very short intervals satisfying this condition in places
where the graph of X(t) crosses the line x = x0.

3

More seriously from the point of view of calculating duration statistics from
measurements is the fact that if the graph of X(t) crosses x0 during an interval
[t0, t0 + ǫ], it may cross x0 again inﬁnitely many times within the same interval.
This means that the number of intervals satisfying X < x0 is inﬁnite, so any
estimate of τ using values of X(t) sampled at successive recording intervals ∆t
will become smaller and smaller as ∆t → 0. That this is indeed the case was
shown by Soukissian and Theochari (2001), who, for time series of signiﬁcant
wave height and wave period, give formulae for mean duration of the form τ =
a + b log(∆t/δ0), where a, b, and δ0 are constants. (This is for a collection of
conditions C which require the wave height and wave period to be between various
different values, but the asymptotic behaviour of the estimate of τ as ∆t → 0
should be the same since the boundaries of the sets C are as smooth as the line
x = x0.)

DURATION DISTRIBUTION

The expression τ = a + b log(∆t/δ0) cannot be asymptotically valid for ∆t → 0,
as it will lead to negative values of mean duration for sufﬁciently small values of
∆t. The only possible limits of τ as ∆t → 0 are a ﬁnite positive value or zero
(we assume here that the measurements take place over a ﬁnite period so that the
maximum value of τi is ﬁnite).

To make more speciﬁc predictions of the behaviour of the duration statis-
tics, we introduce the concept of the fractal dimension, or, more speciﬁcally,
the Hausdorff-Besicovich dimension (Hausdorff 1919), as applied to level sets of
X(t), that is, sets which consist of the values of t where the graph of X(t) crosses
horizontal lines of the form x = x0. If we consider all the coverings of a set S with
balls of radius smaller than ρ, the Hausdorff-Besicovitch dimension D is deﬁned
d is inﬁnite if d < D and zero if
as the value of d where limρ→0 inf ρm<ρ
d > D. In the case of Brownian motion, where X(t) is a one-dimensional ran-
P
dom walk (Lévy 1965), the level sets have D = 1
2. Fractional Brownian motion
BH(t), described by Mandelbrot and Ness (1968), where H is the Hurst exponent,
0 < H < 1, and with H = 1
2 corresponding to ordinary Brownian motion, has
level sets with D = 1 − H. If X(t) is a random function whose values at different
values of t are completely uncorrelated, it will have level sets with D = 1.

m ρm

The distribution of the lengths of the intervals Ii satisfying X(t) < x0 depends
on the distribution of points of the corresponding level set L, since each of the
intervals is bounded by two points in L. If we cover L with balls of radius ρ, the

4

total number of balls required will be of the order of N(τi > ρ), the number of
intervals with duration greater than ρ. But by the deﬁnition given above of fractal
dimension, the number of balls required is of order ρ−Dφ(ρ), where φ(ρ) is some
function which obeys

φ(ρ) ρǫ = 0

and

lim
ρ→0

φ(ρ) ρ−ǫ = ∞

lim
ρ→0

for ǫ > 0. The function φ could, for example, be a logarithm. [Note that the
notation φ(ρ) will be used for any function satisfying Eq. 3.]

Thus we have

N(τi > ρ) ∼ ρ−Dφ(ρ).

The mean duration is then given by

τ ∼

τmax

ρ−Dφ(ρ) dρ

τmax

ρ−D−1φ(ρ) dρ

.

τmin

(cid:18)Z

(cid:19) (cid:30) (cid:18)Z

τmin

(cid:19)

The upper integration limit τmax can be taken to be the total observation time T ,
and the lower limit can be taken to be the recording interval ∆t. We then have,
for 0 < D < 1,

τ ∼

T 1−D − ∆t1−D
−D − T −D
∆t

·

φ(∆t) D
1 − D

,

∼ T 1−D∆tD φ(∆t) · D/(1 − D)

since T ≫ ∆t.

For D = 0 we have

τ ∼ φ(∆t),

and for D = 1 we have

τ ∼ ∆t φ(∆t).

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

For D > 0, the mean duration tends to zero as ∆t → 0. For marine and offshore
engineering purposes this means that it is a parameter which is not particularly
informative if we record observations at frequent intervals, in spite of the fact
that we would expect the environmental data to be more useful if sampled more
often. The reason for the poor behaviour of τ for small values of ∆t is that it
over-represents very short intervals which contribute very little to the engineering

5

work which could, for example, be performed. If we weight each interval by its
length τi, we obtain what we can call the useful mean duration:

τ u = E

τ 2
i

τi

=

ρ2 dN(ρ)
ρ dN(ρ)

.

(cid:17)i

h(cid:16)X

(cid:17) . (cid:16)X

R
Using Eq. 4, we obtain τ u ∼ (const.) · T for 0 ≤ D ≤ 1, independent of ∆t.
R
The most useful way of presenting the distribution of duration of intervals Ii is to
determine the fraction of the time F (τi > τ ) occupied by the intervals of more
than a speciﬁed length (e.g. Graham 1982), and this also requires weighting them
according to their length:

(9)

F (τi > τ ) = (1/T ) E

= (1/T )

(10)

τ 2
i

#

"

τi>τ
X

τ
ρ dN(τi > ρ)

T
Z

FIELD MEASUREMENTS

Feder (1988) has performed a fractal analysis on 3 years of wave data from Tromsø-
ﬂaket on the Norwegian continental shelf. After performing a seasonal adjustment
on the time series of the signiﬁcant wave height, he calculated a cumulative sum,
effectively integrating the results with respect to time, to obtain a record X(t)
which he then found to have fractal behavior with a Hurst exponent H = 0.92,
corresponding to a ‘level set’ fractal dimension of 0.08. The asymptotic fractal
behaviour was found for time scales between 3 hours and 10 days. However, the
wave record itself is more irregular, in fact very discontinuous: if the cumulative
sum of the wave height record has D = 0.08, the wave height record itself, ob-
tained by taking differences, will have level sets which have a fractal dimension
of min(1 + 0.08, 1) = 1.

Hence for any limiting wave height h0 there may be periods of ﬁnite duration
where the wave height is crossing over and under h0 at virtually every recording
interval. The asymptotic behaviour of τ will thus be

τ ∼ ∆t φ(∆t)

as ∆t → 0.

(11)

Such a strong dependence on ∆t is a very good reason for using the useful mean
duration τ u deﬁned in Eq. 9 and the useful fractional duration distribution deﬁned
in Eq. 10.

Although the predicted behavior in Eq. 11 appears to be inconsistent with the
logarithmic curve ﬁt to the data of Soukissian and Theochari (2001), the part of

6

their Fig. 3 which represents recording intervals of under 6 hours can be repre-
sented approximately by τ ∝ ∆t.

CONCLUSION

The analysis presented here shows that duration statistics of ocean waves and
other environmental parameters whose time dependence has an irregular, noisy
behaviour, may be related to the fractal characteristics of the relevant time se-
ries. In particular, the asymptotic behaviour of the so-called ‘mean duration’ of,
for example, intervals where the wave height is below a certain level, is in general
strongly dependent on the recording interval of the observations, for example hav-
ing a power-law dependence with an exponent equal to the Hausdorff-Besicovitch
dimension of the associated level set.

Previously published analyses of ocean wave records show that signiﬁcant
wave height time series are noisy, with densely distributed discontinuities, leading
to a level-set fractal dimension of 1 and consequently to mean duration estimates
approximately proportional to the recording interval. An alternative useful mean
duration is proposed, weighting each interval with its actual duration, which is
more meaningful in terms of, for example, the amount of work which can be
performed during maritime engineering operations.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENT

This work was partly supported by the Commission of the European Commu-
nities under contract EVK3-CT-2000-00026 of the Fifth Framework Programme
(MAXWAVE project). The author is solely responsible for the work and it does
not represent the opinion of the Community. The Community is not responsible
for any use that may be made of the data appearing herein.

REFERENCES

Feder, J (1988). Fractals, Plenum Press, New York.

Graham, C (1982). “The parameterization and prediction of wave height and wind
speed persistence statistics for oil industry operational planning purposes,”
Coastal Eng, Vol 6, pp 303–329.

7

Hausdorff, F (1919). “Dimension und äusseres Mass,” Math Annalen, Vol 79,

pp 157–179.

Houmb, OG, and Vik, I (1975). “On the duration of sea state,” Proc 3rd Int Conf
Port and Ocean Eng under Arctic Conds (POAC), Fairbanks, Alaska, pp 241–
261.

Lévy, P (1965). Processus Stochastiques et Mouvement Brownien, Gauthier-

Villars, Paris.

Mandelbrot, BB (1983). The Fractal Geometry of Nature, Freeman, New York.

Mandelbrot, BB, and Ness, JWV (1968). “Fractional brownian motions, fractional

noises and applications,” SIAM Rev, Vol 10, No 4, pp 422–437.

Soukissian, TH, and Theochari, Z (2001). “Joint occurrence of sea states and
associated durations,” Proc 11th Int Offshore and Polar Eng Conf, Stavanger,
Norway, Vol III, pp 33–39.

Tsekos, C, and Anastasiou, K (1996). “Persistence statistics of marine environ-
mental parameters from Markov theory, part 2: Analysis in continuous time,”
Appl Ocean Res, Vol 18, pp 243–255.

8

List of Figures

1

Example of a fractal time series X(t), in this case from a Brown-
ian process, the scale units being arbitrary. The upper part of the
ﬁgure illustrates the intervals where X(t) satisﬁes the condition
X(t) < x0 = 1.25, and it can be seen that there are very many
very short intervals satisfying this condition in places where the
graph of X(t) crosses the line x = x0.

. .

. .

. .

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

. .

3

9

