2
0
0
2
 
g
u
A
 
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
o
a
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
3
0
0
8
0
2
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Towards a new technique of incoherent scatter
signal processing.

O. I. Berngardt, B. G. Shpynev

Institute of Solar-Terrestrial Physics,
POBox 4026, Irkutsk, 664033, Russia
(berng@iszf.irk.ru)

Abstract

This paper oﬀers a new technique of incoherent scattering signal pro-
cessing. The technique is based on the experimentally observed comb
structure of the spectral power of separate realizations. The technique
implies determining the positions and amplitudes of peaks in separate
realizations, the formation - on their basis - of the spectral power of an
individual realization not distorted by the smoothing function, and a sub-
sequent summation of such spectra for the realizations. The technique has
been tested using data from the Irkutsk incoherent scatter radar, both for
the case of the incoherent scattering from thermal irregularities of plasma
and for the case of the aspect scattering from instabilities elongated with
the geomagnetic ﬁeld.

1 Introduction.

The incoherent scatter (IS) method is one of a number of ionospheric remote
sensing techniques. The method provides geophysical parameters of the iono-
sphere over a wide height range (from 100 to 1000 km), with spatial and tempo-
ral resolution determined by the form of the sounding pulse, and by the particu-
lar procedure of processing the received signal [Holt et al., 1992]. The accuracy
of geophysical parameters determination in this case is usually governed by
many parameters: ionospheric parameters, and parameters of the receiver (for
instance, the background noise temperature), the method of the received signal
processing, the type of sounding signal, the received signal averaging time, and
by the spectral resolution of the method (or by the delay resolution in the case
of a correlational processing of the signal). Furthermore, it is often necessary to
improve the spectral resolution without impairing the spatial resolution. A con-
ventional approach in handling this problem involves using special (‘composite’)
signals, with a subsequent special-purpose processing of the received signal [Far-
ley,1972; Sulzer, 1993; Lehtinen,1986]. However, situations can at times arise
where it is not appropriate to use composite pulses (from energy considerations

1

or auxillary conditions, for example), so that it is necessary to have a technique
which would work well with traditional (’simple’) pulsed signals.

There are currently two main techniques for processing the received backscat-
tered signal: the correlational technique, and the spectral technique [Evans,
1963]. Since the correlation function (obtained by applying the former type of
processing) and the spectral power of the received signal (obtained by applying
the latter type of processing) are related by the Wiener-Khintchin theorem, the
two types of processing are equivalent in principle.

This paper is concerned with the method of improving the spectral resolution
of the incoherent scatter method, based on the properties of the received signal
according to the data from the Irkutsk incoherent scatter (IS) radar without
using composite sounding signals.

2 The existing technique for processing the sig-

nal, and experimental data

Let us consider the radar equation relating the spectral power of the scattered
signal to ﬂuctuation parameters of dielectric permittivity. Within the approxi-
mation of the single scattering, in the far zone of the antenna, the mean spectral
power of the received signal < |u(ω)|2 > is deﬁned by a statistical radar equation
[Berngardt and Potekhin, 2000] which - under the assumption of the spatial ho-
mogeneity of the spectral density of the irregularities and its weak dependence
on the modulus of the wave vector Φ(ν, −→r , −−→er k) = Φ(ν, −→er r0 − −→er 2k0) reduces
to:

(1)

(2)

< |u(ω)|2 >=

S(ω − ν) < |uteor(ν)|2 > dν

Z

< |uteor(ν)|2 >= V0 Z

Φ(ν, −→er r0, −−→er2k0)|g(−→er )|2d−→er

R

−→
k ) =

here Φ(ν, −→r ,

< ǫ(t, −→r )ǫ∗(t+∆t, −→r +∆−→r ) > exp(−iνt+i

−→
−→
k
k ∆−→r ) dνd
(2π)4
- is the steady-state spectral density of permittivity irregularities; g(−→er ) is the
beam factor determined by the product of the beams of the transmit and receive
antennas; −→er = −→r /r is a unit vector in a given direction; V0 is the sounding vol-
ume; r0 is the mean distance to it; k0 is the wave number of the sounding wave;
and < |uteor(ω)|2 > is the theoretical spectrum of backscattering not distorted
by the smearing function S(ω).

The problem of improving the spectral resolution in this case implies using
a(ω − ν)o(ν)dν|2 deter-
the deconvolution operation with the kernel S(ω) ≈ |
mined by the form of the sounding signal and the receiving window and usually
having the property:

R

dS(ω)
dω

= 0; when ω = 0;

d2S(ω = 0)
dω2

< 0,

2

Spectrum 1
Spectrum 2
Averaged spectrum (over 1000 pulses)
Spectral ’smearing’ function

−10000

−5000

5000

10000

0
Frequency (Hz)

Figure 1: Form of the spectral power of two successive realizations of the in-
coherently scattered signal (dotted line, and dashed line), mean spectral power
(averaged over 1000 realizations, thick solid line), spectral density of the ’smear-
ing’ function (dash-dotted line).

that is, having only one maximum at the zero frequency.
Thus, formally, we need to deﬁne the DECON V - deconvolution operation:

< |uteor(ν)|2 >=< |u(ω)|2 > DECON V S(ω − ν)

To carry out such an operation we make use of the linearity of the averaging

operation:

< |uteor(ν)|2 >=< |u(ω)|2 DECON V S(ω − ν) > .

Hence, to improve the spectral resolution, it is necessary to apply the decon-
volution operation to each realization of spectral power and accumulate result
spectrums over the realizations. Generally the problem (4) is not simpler com-
pared with the initial one (3); however, in the case of its simpliﬁed solution, one
may take advantage of the following experimental evidence of the structure of
spectra of separate realizations.

Figure 1 presents the structure of spectral power of two successive realiza-
tions of the scattered signal in sounding with the pulse of a duration of 750
ms and the length of the receiving window of 750 ms. For comparison, the ﬁg-
ure also shows the form of the accumulated (averaged) spectral power, and the
model form of the ’smearing’ function. Theoretically, the form of the smearing

(3)

(4)

3

function depends on a large number of ionospheric parameters (on the electron
density proﬁle, on the experimental geometry with respect to the geomagnetic
ﬁeld), and can diﬀer rather strongly from the model form [Shpynev, 2000]; how-
ever, the model form is applicable in the case of qualitative estimations.

It is apparent from the ﬁgure that the spectra of individual realizations diﬀer
rather strongly from one another, which suggests that the processes are occur-
ring at a high rate when compared with the repetition frequency of sounding
pulses, and is in agreement with existing data (the lifetime of thermal irregu-
larities is on the order of 200 mks, which is signiﬁcantly less than the interval
between separate sounding runs - at the Irkutsk IS radar it is about 40 ms).

In spite of a relatively strong variability from realization to realization, the
ﬁne ’comb’ structure of the spectra is conserved. Consider the characteristics
of such a comb structure. Figure 2 presents the frequency dependence of the
amplitude of the peaks (solid line), the frequency dependence of the width of
the peaks (line with circles), and a total number of peaks at a given frequency
for the entire set of the realizations used in the analysis (line with triangles). It
is evident from Figure 2 that the width of the peaks varies within 1-2 spectral
widths of the sounding signal. The peaks are concentrated mainly in the band
of the mean spectral power of the received signal, and the amplitude and occur-
rence frequency drop when the frequency of the peak is shifted with respect to
the zero frequency.

3 Technique for solving the problem - deconvo-

lution before an averaging.

The above characteristics of spectra of separate realizations of the received signal
suggest that the initial (not convoluted with the smearing function) spectral
power of the received signal has a comb structure with delta-shaped combs.
Furthermore, the width of the peaks in the experimentally measured spectrum
is determined solely by the properties of the smearing function. This permits us
to relatively easily perform a deconvolution in (4). Indeed, within the framework
of this assumption, a ’nonsmoothed’ spectral power of a separate realization has
the form:

|uteor(ω)|2 =

Aiδ(ω − ωi)

Then, within a constant factor, we have

|u(ωj)|2 =

AiS(ωj − ωi)

(5)

(6)

We take into consideration that the function S(ω) is unknown but it is suﬃ-
ciently narrowbanded when compared with a total spectral width u(ω), and the
peaks in the spectral power of a separate realization are suﬃciently isolated from

N

Pi = 1

N

Pi = 1

4

each other, which permits us to neglect the inﬂuence of one peak on another.
Then the amplitude of the observed peaks in |u(ωj)|2 will be proportional to
the amplitude of the peaks in the ’nonsmeared’ spectrum |uteor(ω)|2, and theirs
location are the same:

|u(ωj)|2 = S(0)Aj + o(ωj)

(7)

N

Pi = 1

where o(ωj) =

AiS(ωj − ωi) − S(0)Aj is a small addition which - in

the case of a suﬃcient separation of the peaks (larger than the width of the
smearing function S(ω))) becomes zero. In accordance with the expression (7),
we determine the amplitudes Ai and the frequencies ωi from experimentally
measured spectra |u(ω)|2, which corresponds to the solution of the system:




ω=ωi = 0
< 0

d
dω |u(ω)|2
(cid:12)
d2
dω2 |u(ω)|2
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
ω=ωi
(cid:12)
Ai = |u(ωi)|2
(cid:12)
Upon determining in this way the set of pairs of the parameters Ai and ωi,
it is also possible to obtain the ’nonsmeared’ spectrum of a single realization
|uteor(ω)|2 by applying a deconvolution in (4).
If we exactly know the form
of the smearing function S(ω), the amplitudes Ai can be determined not in
accordance with the last equation of the system (8) but by solving a system of
linear equations for amplitudes with due regard for the form of the smearing
function (6).

(8)



4 Discussion of results

The technique suggested here was used in processing the data on incoherent
scattering from thermal irregularities of ionospheric plasma using measurements
from the Irkutsk incoherent scatter radar. Because of the suggested technique
(5,8) was obtained for noice absence, the experimental data for testing was used
with high signal-to-noice ratio.

Figure 3 gives an example of a processing of incoherent scatter data in terms
of the model of (5,8). The thick solid line corresponds to a theoretical spectrum
< |uteor(ω)|2 > calculated in terms of this model; the dotted line shows the
spectrum < |u(ω)|2 > measured by a traditional technique, and the thin line
< |uteor(ν)|2 > S(ω −ν)dν which - in an ideal variant of the
plots the function
known S(ω) - must coincide with < |u(ω)|2 >. Figure 3 clearly shows a good
agreement between the mean spectral power obtained as a result of a standard
processing (dotted line) and the spectrum with deconvolution which is convo-
luted with the theoretical smearing function (thin solid line), which suggests a
suﬃciently good deconvolution operation when calculating < |uteor(ω)|2 > by
the algorithm of (5,8).

R

5

Peak amplitude (averaged,norm.units)
Peak width (averaged,Hz)
Number of peaks (averaged, norm.units)

3000

2000

1000

)
z
H

(
 

i

t

h
d
w
 
k
a
e
P

−10000

−5000

0
Frequency (Hz)

5000

0
10000

Figure 2: Frequency dependence of the mean parameters of the spectral power
comb structure for single realization (averaging over 1000 realizations): mean
amplitude of the peaks (solid line, arbitrary units), mean width of the peaks
(line with circles, 1000 Hz correspond to the spectral width of the sounding
signal), and the number of realizations having a peak at a given frequency (line
with triangles, arbitrary units).

6

With precomputing (new)
Without precomputing (standart)
With precomputing, then convolved.

−10000

−5000

5000

10000

0
Frequency (Hz)

Figure 3: Mean spectral power of the incoherently scattered signal (dashed line),
mean spectral power of the signal calculated by the proposed technique (thick
solid line) and calculated by the proposed technique, followed by a convolu-
tion with the spectral smearing function (dotted line). Accumulation - 1000
realizations.

7

The relatively high dispersion level of the resulting spectrum < |uteor(ω)|2 >
(spectrum with high spectral resolution) is associated with the comb structure
of some of the realizations. Indeed, an actual averaging at a given frequency
occurs only over realizations involving a peak at a given frequency. Thus, to
an averaging over 1000 realizations there corresponds an averaging over about
70-100 real realizations involving a peak at a given frequency. It is evident from
Figure 3 that in the convolution with the smearing function this dispersion de-
creases to a level similar to the weak dispersion level of a standard spectrum.
Since the inverse problem of obtaining physical parameters of the ionosphere
from the mean spectral power of the received signal is usually solved by ﬁtting
the spectral form using the method of least squares [Holt et al., 1992], such
a dispersion should not increase substantially the error of determining the pa-
rameters when compared with standard processing techniques in the case of
averaging over an equal number of realizations.

Taking into account the real ’smearing’ function when calculating the ampli-
tudes Ai (which implies solving a system of linear equations for the amplitudes
Ai (6)) does not give any perceptible decrease in the dispersion of the spectrum,
which suggests that the dispersion of spectra is associated with inadequate ac-
cumulation. An example of a processing of spectra following the proposed tech-
nique, which implies solving (8) and a direct solution of the system (6), is given
in Figure 4.

5 Using the technique in the real incoherent scat-

tering experiment.

The technique suggested has been used for incoherent scattering signal pro-
cessing during November 15, 2001 experiment. All the data have obtained
at Irlutsk Incoherent Scattering Radar(53N,103E). The radar operates in stan-
dard regime with the following parameters: Sounding frequency 158 MHz, Pulse
power 2.6MWt Pulse duration 750mks Pulse repeating frequency 24.4Hz An-
tenna pattern main lobe is elongated with Earth magnetic ﬁeld and nearly
vertical. The November 15, 2001 experiment is characterized by high electron
density in the main ionospheric maximum ( > 106cm−3 ). In the daytime the
signal-to-noice relation exceeds 20, and the conditions are ideal for analysis of
the incoherent scattering spectra structural pecularities. In parallel with tra-
ditional processing of the IS signals, the row samples (realizations) have been
recordered(approximately 1.4 GByte, for the 8:00LT-23:00LT period). These
data become a basis for the experimental comparison of the new technique with
standard one. The comaprison has been done by the following technique. For
given altitude range the incoherent scattering signal realizations (the pair of
its quadrature components) has been cutted and processed by the two diﬀerent
techniques: the standard one and the new one.

The ﬁrst (standard technique) uses fast Fourier transform, accumulation of
the obtained spectrums and using this averaged power spectrum as a source for

8

−10000

−5000

5000

10000

0
Frequency (Hz)

Figure 4: Form of the spectrum with the removal of the eﬀect of the smearing
function by a direct solution of the system (6), with due regard for the form of
the smearing function (dotted line), and by a simple detection of maxima (8)
(thick line).

Maximums detecting
Accurate solution

9

Figure 5: Electron and Ion temperatures during the November 15, 2001 exper-
iment obtained with standard technique (top) and new technique (bottom).

the Te and Ti calculation by the standard temperature calculation technique
[Shpynev, 2000]. The averaged power spectrum has been compared with model
ones convolved with the smoothing function, which depends on pulse duration
and electron density.

The second (new technique) uses fast Fourier transform and deconvolving
of the unaveraged spectrum with the smoothing function followed by the ac-
cumalation of the result. The result (’unconvolved’ power spectrum) have been
used as a source for the Te and Ti calculation by the standard temperature
calucaltion technique [Shpynev, 2000], but it have been comparised with madel
spectrum, without its convolving with smoothing function.

All the parameters (averaging time - 6 min) has been the same.
The results are shown at Figure 5. As one can see from comparison, the
diﬀerence between temperatures obtained diﬀers slightly. For the new technique
the systematical decreasing of the Te and systematical increasing of the Ti are
observed. You can see this clearly from the Figure 6 (Temperatures for the
290km height). This error is within experiment error and comparison results
could be stated as well. An another aspect of the obtained results is theirs
smoother dependence on time - their time variations is smaller (as one can see
from Figure 6 too).

10

Figure 6: Electron and Ion temperatures during the November 15, 2001 exper-
iment obtained with standard technique (solid line) and new technique (dashed
line) at 290km.

6 Conclusion

A technique has been suggested for improving the spectral resolution in the case
of the incoherent scattering when sounding by simple (squared) pulses. The
method is based on an experimental model of single spectra of the scattered
signal realizations. Furthermore, the model of a single realization spectrum
represents a comb structure, the sum of delta-functions of a diﬀerent amplitude
at diﬀerent frequencies convoluted with a certain function that is determined
by the form of the sounding signal and of the receiving window. In terms of
such an empirical model, it is possible to perform a deconvolution of the mean
spectral power of the received signal with the smearing function in order to
obtain the mean spectral power, at the stage of analysis of separate realizations,
which is equivalent to an improvement of the spectral resolution of the method.
Furthermore, the model parameters are derived by a simple determination of the
positions and amplitudes of local maxima of the individual realizations spectra,
which does not require much computer time and can be implemented in the
real-time mode. Also, the technique does not require knowing the form of
the ’smearing’ function and could therefore be used to improve the spectral
resolution over a wide range of cases.

The proposed technique appears to be able to be extended also to other
types of single backscattering from the ionosphere. As an example, Figure 7 il-
lustrates the processing of experimental data on another type of singly backscat-

11

With precomputing (new)
Without precomputing (standart)
With precomputing, then convolved.

−10000

−5000

5000

10000

0
Frequency (Hz)

Figure 7: Mean spectral power of the backscattered signal from the E-layer
irregularities elongated with the geomagnetic ﬁeld (dashed line), mean decon-
volved spectral power of the signal calculated by the proposed technique (thick
solid line), and calculated by the proposed technique with a subsequent convo-
lution with the spectral smearing function (dotted line). Accumulation - 1000
realizations.

tered signal from the ionosphere - backscattering from the E-layer irregularities
elongated with the geomagnetic ﬁeld. All curves in this case are similar to the
curves in Figure 3 and, as in the case of Figure 3, there is a good agreement of
< |uteor(ω)|2 > to the spectrum < |u(ω)|2 > with the removal of the convolution
with the smearing function S(ω).

So, the proposed technique of incoherent scattered signal processing (5,8)
could be used in some cases for increasing the spectral resolution of the inco-
herent scattering method. But, to use this technique one needs good signal to
noice ratio, and narrow enought spectral smoothing function to one could use
approximation (8) which does not depend on spectral smoothing function S(ω),
instead of accurate solution of (6).

Acknowledgments

Authors are grateful to A.V.Medvedev for fruitful descussions. Work has been
carried out under partial support of RFBR grants #00-15-98509 and #00-05-
72026 .

12

References

[Berngardt and Potekhin (2000)] Berngardt O.I. and Potekhin A.P., Radar
equations in the radio wave backscattering problem, Radiophysics and Quan-
tum electronics, 43(6), 484–492, 2000

[Evans (1963)] Evans J.V., Theory and practice of ionosphere study by Thom-

son scatter radar, Proc.IEEE, 57, 496–530,1963

[Farley (1972)] Farley D.T., Multiple-pulse incoherent scatter correlation func-

tion measurements, Radio Science, 7(6), 661–666, 1972

[Holt et al. (1992)] Holt J.M., Rhoda D.A., Tetenbaum D., van Eyken A.P.
Optimal analysis of incoherent scatter radar data, Radio Science, 27(3), 435–
447, 1992

[Lentinen (1986)] Lehtinen M.S., Statistical theory of incoherent scatter radar

measurements, Ph.D.Thesis.- Univ. of Helsenki, -1986 -97p.

[Shpynev (2000)] Shpynev B.G., Methods of Processing Incoherently Scattered
Signals with the Fadaray Eﬀect Taken Into Account., Ph.D.Thesis, Irkutsk,
2000, 142 p.(in Russian)

[Sulzer (1993)] Sulzer M.P., A new type of alternating code for incoherent scat-

ter measurements, Radio Science, 28, 995–1001, 1993

13

