2
0
0
2
 
t
c
O
 
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
o
a
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
8
0
0
0
1
2
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Large Scale Weather Control Using Nuclear
Reactors

Moninder Singh Modgil
Email:msingh@iitk.ac.in
Department of Physics,
Indian Institute of Technology, Kanpur, 208016,
India

21 September 2002

Abstract

It is pointed out that controlled release of thermal energy from ﬁssion
type nuclear reactors can be used to alter weather patterns over signiﬁ-
cantly large geographical regions. (1) Nuclear heat creates a low pressure
region, which can be used to draw moist air from oceans, onto deserts. (2)
Creation of low pressure zones over oceans using Nuclear heat can lead to
Controlled Cyclone Creation (CCC).(3) Nuclear heat can also be used to
melt glaciers and control water ﬂow in rivers.

1 Transforming Deserts

In this paper we point out that Nuclear reactors can be used for large
scale weather control, e.g., cause rain downpour over perennial drought
areas such as - African Sahara, and create one of worlds most fertile and
lush regions. Heat from ground based nuclear reactors can be used to
create a large scale low pressure region over Sahara, and pull moist air
above Atlantic and Arabic Oceans into Northern Africa. Desert sand is
essentially crushed powdered stone. It is common experience of anyone
walking barefoot on a stone pavement in any large temple of India, that
stone both heats and cools quickly. The stone is almost unbearably hot for
bare feet in summer, and cold in winter. This is the reason for temperature
extremes of both the unpopulated deserts, and the densely populated
metropolises, which are essentially forests of stone and concrete.

Sahara air heats up during day and this creates a daily low-pressure
region. The heat from Sahara surface escapes into outer space during
the night, and resulting cooling creates a high-pressure region, which re-
pels any moist air coming in from the Atlantic or Arabic Oceans. Thus
the suction eﬀect of low pressure regions during day heating is nulliﬁed.

1

Saharan weather system is like a spring undergoing small contractions
and expansions diurnal heating expansions, followed by nocturnal cool-
ing contractions. Rapid cooling of desert air during night occurs because
of lack of cloud cover, and absence of aerosols in desert air, which in other
circumstances would trap the heat and prevent sharp temperature drop.
The desert weather system is therefore inherently insuﬃcient to pull moist
Atlantic or Arabic Oceans air over to interior (non-coastal) regions, and
cause regular rainfall. This is to be contrasted to regular yearly Monsoon
over South Asian Sub-Continent. Green cover in Indian subcontinent gen-
erates aerosols in form of pollen grains, which help to trap heat, and thus
prevent daily highs and lows of temperature and pressure. This enable
formation of sustained low pressure region, which acts like a pump, to
suck moist air from, Arabic Ocean, Indian Ocean and Bay of Bengal; onto
the Indian Plane. Thus long term Forest Sustained maintainence of a low
pressure region over a large land mass is essential to draw moist air from
an ocean, and cause large scale rainfall, over that region.

Sustained low pressure over Sahara could be achieved by
(1) Heating air by open air ground based nuclear reactors, during
(2) Injecting aerosols and providing cloud cover

earlier part of night.
during evenings to reduce loss of heat during night to outer space.

As the incoming moist air from Atlantic and Arabic Oceans reaches
interior Sahara regions during latter half of night, the nuclear reactors
could be switched oﬀ, and the natural nightly cooling of desert air, com-
bined with presence of artiﬁcially injected aerosols should lead to early
morning rainfall. Existing weather codes running on Super Computers
(Crays) in principle should be capable of modeling and reﬁning this idea.
Deserts such as Sahara (Africa), Gobi (China), Thar (Rajasthan, India),
southern regions of north America (Mexico, Nevada, Texas, California)
can virtually be wiped out from face of this earth. Deserts therefore are
a species threatened with extinction.

The idea can actually be tested in India or Iraq. These countries
Important issue in such a experiment is
already have nuclear reactors.
the height above the ground. Lets see what happens when an open air
nuclear reactor is installed on desert plane. The reactors should be directly
exposed to air, without any concrete building or housing, and switched
on. As the heat content builds up, the ensuing local low pressure will start
sucking air from neighboring regions. This will create a desert sand-storm.
We see that now the energy of reactor is being used up in accelerating
the sand particles. This means that a large part of the energy will not
be available, to suck in moist air above oceans. We now also see that
while energy from sun, does generate strong winds in desert, this energy
is being used in accelerating sand particles in air, and is not getting used in
bringing in moist ocean air. The sand thus is damping out the circulation
being generated by heating of ground by sun, and heating of air close to
ground by nuclear reactor.

Now I introduce reader to concept of boundary layer. When wind
blows over ground, energy of wind is transferred to sand or dust particles

2

on the ground, and sends them ﬂying into air. This is really a form of
friction between the stationary ground and moving air (wind). The region
of wind near the ground therefore is moving slower because it is in the
so called boundary layer, region of air slowed by friction from ground
or boundary. If one glances up on a windy cloudy day, one notices, that
clouds high up are moving faster while clouds closer to ground are moving
slower or hardly moving. The reason is that closer clouds are in boundary
layer. Therefore it is important to keep the reactor out of boundary layer,
so that energy transferred from reactor to wind, does not get dissipated
in sending sand spinning into air. What if the reactor is at a height of say
50 or 100 meters above ground? It can be installed on top of a TV tower
or on roof a skyscraper. Now the winds being circulated will be generated
50 or 100 meters above ground, and will not dissipate all their energy
in sucking sand particles from desert ﬂoor. However, a small quantity of
lighter sand or dust particles will still be sucked into air, and sent high
into atmosphere (1 to 2 Kilometers). We will have a large scale circulation
build up in desert air, which will not be sand strom. These lighter and
smaller dust particles sucked out from ground and sent spinning high into
the atmosphere will act as natural aerosols - centers for formation of rain
droplets.

Timed controlled use of nuclear reactors and Aerosol injections can be
used to provide daily cloud cover and thus cool hot Indian Metropolises
such as Delhi in summer, and reduce mass suﬀering of populace.

2 Melting Glaciers Military and Chess
in Indian Sub-Continent

Weather control using Nuclear Reactors and Cray Super Computers; also
has potential military applications.
Its possible to use heat generated
by nuclear reactors to control melt down of snow in Himalayan glaciers.
These glaciers feed rivers, which run through plains of Pakistan, India,
Bangladesh and China. Thus, in principle, an enemy with nuclear power,
and a good Intelligence, can install nuclear reactors in Himalayan Glaciers,
and use them for disrupting economies of these nations. The whole process
would look like a series of natural catastrophes. This Indirect Nuclear
Threat (INT) has a very good chance of success in destroying an enemy,
in contrast to the direct nuclear threat, which has only deterrence or
preventive capability via MAD - Mutually Assured Destruction. Vital
question for countries in this region is - has a foreign power been actively
pursuing this particular method of Indirect Nuclear Threat (INT)?

Lets consider the following issue of national and international interest,
as a possible motive for application of this idea. Will the Western Capi-
talist Conglomerate really need Kashmir as Part of a Long Term Strategic
Plan to overthrow the remaining twin threats Communism in China and
Muslim fundamentalists in Pakistan?

Precedents:

3

To support analysis of this issue, we cite in beginning following prece-

dents.

(1) Economic breakdown of USSR (Communist Russia) was used to
dismember the communist state. The issue whether the economic break-
down was a natural result of communist policies or caused by capitalist
intelligence does not concern us in this paper.

(2) In Kosovo, plea of genocide lead to military intervention of UNO

and physical occupation of Kosovo by NATO troops.

(3) India was befriended and latter deceived by China, and lost strate-

gically important Himalayan peaks.

The ﬁrst precedent tells us that economic breakdown can be used as
an eﬀective weapon for battling or neutralizing threat of an enemy nation.
The second precedent tells us that western capitalism has perfected and
demonstrated eﬀectiveness of a new tactical weapon, which exploits weak-
nesses of local people of a geographical region. The new tactical weapon
is

Combined use of international diplomacy (UNO), military strategy

and technological know how, over a period of few years.

This eventually leads to the physical occupation of the geographical
region by troops of western Capitalist nations, on humanitarian grounds.
One notes that in Kosovo, it was the Muslim population, which was get-
ting massacred, and the Christian Capitalists intervened as their saviors.
A similar genocide of Muslims in Kashmir is likely to lead to a repeat
UNO occupation of Kashmir. It appears that the Indian Nation may be
heading for another deception by USA this time. India may loose rest
of Kashmir to USA. We note with alarm that - USA already has the re-
source of a large number of existing spare nuclear reactors. These existing
spare nuclear reactors were the power source of their older ﬂeet of nuclear
propelled submarines.

Its likely that this idea of using Indirect Nuclear Threat, emerged, as
a result of brain storming on how to use or dispose of these old reactors.
Its extremely likely, that the idea has already been successfully tested, in
causing ﬂoods in Pakistan few years back. Support for such a thesis is
provided by following reports

(1) Western civilians were airlifted to the Siachin Glacier region using
helicopters by Pakistanis. Their purpose or motive was not clear. This
happened just when the Pakistanis ﬁrst moved into the region.

(2) Pakistani authorities captured smuggled radioactive nuclear fuel

on Afghan-Pakistan border. Reasons for smuggling were not clear.

One can visualize that having demonstrated the success of this idea;
the USA intelligence would have shifted to using newer and smaller, state
of the art, nuclear reactors. Its likely that these new state of art small
nuclear reactors are currently being deployed in Himalayan Glaciers to
weaken or ﬁnish oﬀ the remaining fortresses of threats to western cap-
italist society Muslim Pakistan, and Communist China. Flooding of
BrahmaPutra would eﬀect Tibet, China and Bangladesh, while ﬂooding
of Sindhu would eﬀect Pakistan. Flooding of Ganges and Yamuna can

4

be used to weaken opposition to Christianity in Indian states of Uttar
Pradesh and Bihar, and as a general tactical weapon.

On hindsight the communist Chinese military planners did well for
themselves, to capture the Himalayan peaks in early sixties. The reason
being that this geographical region contains glaciers and snow, which feeds
the rivers, which ﬂows through their planes. Strategically, it was a good
move on part of Chinese, even though the idea of indirect nuclear threat
(INT) may not even have occurred to the Chinese military planners.

In chess, as in warfare and life good strategic moves are moves de-
signed to avoid loss through a short tactical combination. In any general
conﬂict, such as war, chess etc., knowledge of opponents plan can be used
to neutralize the oﬀensive. This is the reason for existence of intelligence
agencies. However, if an opponent is given time to carry out a plan, due to
lack of awareness on ones part, defeat becomes unavoidable. An ambitious
chess player studies his and other players past losses to learn lessons for
future games. It has been estimated that to become a chess grandmaster,
one has to loose 500 tournament chess games. Aside from the strategic use
of Himalayas Indirect Nuclear Threat. (INT) mentioned in this paper, its
possible to tactically use the height advantage, with space-age weapons.
USA may be having long terms plans for colonizing rest of Himalayas and
use as a powerful platform for exercising world control.

3 Generating Cyclones using Nuclear Re-
actors - Storm-Bringer Cometh

Its even possible to generate severe cyclones using a nuclear reactor about
30 meters under the water in a sea such as Bay of Bengal. The nuclear
reactors heat up the water, which in turn warms the air. Energy equiv-
alent of many nuclear bombs can be injected into the atmosphere. The
warmth in the atmosphere creates a local low-pressure region, and cooler
air from neighboring areas starts moving towards it and assumes the form
of a cyclone. Its possible to analyze how the resulting cyclone will move,
using the Cray Super computers USA has for weather prediction. In an
appropriate weather condition, and wind directions in Bay of Bengal, the
method of Indirect nuclear threat (INT) may have actually been used to
create the Orissa cyclone towards end of 1999. The motive of the cyclone
could be conversions to Christianity. One notes with concern the preced-
ing Killing of the Australian missionary by so called Dara Singh in the
region.

Also note that UNO had declared the 1990-2000 decade, as the decade
of natural disasters. It appears to be part of propaganda of a long plan,
already in an advanced stage of completion.

5

4 Melting Polar Ice Caps using Nuclear
Reactors Global Flooding and Green House
Brain Wash

There have been reports of thinning of ice cover in Arctic (North Pole).
It has been attributed to Green House eﬀect. It has been estimated that
the North Poles ice cap will be totally melted within next 50 years. The
area will then be available for mining of oil deposits and other valuables.
Its likely that the melting of North polar ice cap is being accomplished
by nuclear reactors embedded within ice cap. Its likely that research on
Green house eﬀects, is part of propaganda to distract mass attention from
actual causes. Its likely that Western Capitalist Oil and other mining cor-
porations sponsor such a project. We may use the short hand Greenwash,
for Green house brain wash inspired by the green color of US currency -
dollar.

5 Conclusions

It was Einstein who ﬁrst pointed out that matter was a hidden source of
enormous energy, in the sense that matter could be converted into energy.
Since almost the whole mass of an atom of matter resides in its nucleus,
therefore this form of energy may be termed as nuclear energy. Einstein
suﬀered a nervous breakdown when atomic energy was unleashed in a
military application over Japan. Einstein had visited Japan in 1920s and
liked the nation. His psychological suﬀering lasted for a period of nearly
5 years. Here we see ﬁrst instance of successful application of nuclear
energy how to drive Einstein mad. Other applications of Atomic energy
to date include, nuclear power plants, nuclear propelled submarines and
ships, and last but not the least, nuclear medicine. Modern Medical tech-
niques of MRI (Magnetic Resonance Imaging), PET (Positron Emission
Tomography) scan, are essentially medical applications of nuclear energy.
Einsteins medical condition was possibly triggered as a Karmic back re-
action, of hundreds of thousands who suﬀered in the nuclear blasts over
Hiroshima and Nagasaki. The fact that those who actually delivered the
bomb did not suﬀer just indicates their minor role in chain of events. It
appears that there may be a connection between nuclear energy and ones
psychological state, which needs to be explored.

In this paper we have outlined large-scale weather control as another
potential application of nuclear energy. The method is simplicity itself
use the heat from a nuclear reactor to melt ice, or heat air and water. We
observe that in these applications, the nuclear energy is doing the job of
sun. One is reminded of Oppenheimers experience of witnessing the ﬁrst
man-made nuclear explosion, brighter than a thousand suns.
It would
be worthwhile for worlds government to see if such a mischief is being
carried out unannounced in their backyards. It would be also worthwhile
to explore if thinning Arctic ice cover and Global warming is a play of few

6

mischievous capitalist boys.
In conclusion we cite the hit lead song from the ﬁlm refugee which was
partly instrumental in leading the author to these ideas. The ﬁlm is about
two lovebirds, separated by a man-made border. The lovers live near a
river, which ﬂows, through India into Pakistan. The ﬁrst line of the song
is as follows.
Panchi, Nadia, Pavan ke Jhonke; koi sarhad na inhein roke.
Sarhad Insanoo ke liye hei; Soocho, tumne aur maine kya paya Insaan
hoke.

The translation reads -

No boundary stops Bird, River, and gusts of wind.
Boundaries are for humans; think, what you and I gained, by being human.

7

