3
0
0
2
 
y
a
M
 
6
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
o
a
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
1
7
0
5
0
3
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Relation of Atmosphere Surface Pressure Fluctuations
with Geomagnetic and Cosmic Factors

M.B.Bogdanov, A.V.Fedorenko

Saratov State University, ul.Astrakhanskaya 83, Saratov, 410026 Russia
e-mail: BogdanovMB@info.sgu.ru; FedorenkoAV@info.sgu.ru

We present results of the digital spectral analysis of the time series con-
taining the daily samples of the atmosphere surface pressure measured at
Saratov city from Jan 1, 1995 to Dec 31, 1999. We calculated also cross
correlation functions between the pressure ﬂuctuations and the planetary
geomagnetic indices, Ap and Cp, and cross correlation function between these
ﬂuctuations and the cosmic-ray intensity. Two peaks detected in the calcula-
ted power spectrum are related, probably, with the atmosphere tidal waves.
The relation of the pressure ﬂuctuations with the Ap index of the geomagnetic
activity is statistically insigniﬁcant. The cross correlation function between
the pressure ﬂuctuations and the Cp index has the maximal value 0.044±0.023
at the pressure time delay 4d. The statistically signiﬁcant negative correlation
is discovered between the surface pressure ﬂuctuations and the cosmic-ray
intensity. The cross correlation function has two minima: at the zero time
delay with the value −0.068 ± 0.023, and at the pressure time delay 12d with
the value −0.087 ± 0.023. The negative correlation between the pressure
and the cosmic-ray intensity is observed at the pressure time delay as long
as 17d and can be explained by the so-called condensation mechanism of an
interaction of the cosmic rays with the atmosphere.

The problem of an investigation of the inﬂuence of cosmic factors on the
Earth’s atmosphere attracts the attention of many researchers. Among these
factors there are tidal interactions with the Moon and the Sun as well as the

1. Introduction

1

nutational motion of the Earth’s rotation axis and the proper nutation of
the Earth (motion of the pole) [1]. Cosmic rays of solar and galactic origin
also interact with the atmosphere. The ﬂuxes of these cosmic rays depend
on a state of the Earth’s magnetosphere and, as a consequence, on the solar
activity [2]. The aim of our current study is the investigation of possible
relation of the atmosphere surface pressure ﬂuctuations with geomagnetic
and cosmic factors using the digital spectral analysis of time series and the
cross correlation functions calculations.

2. Observational data

We examined the time series containing the daily samples of the atmos-
phere surface pressure measured by the mercury barometer at Saratov city
(51◦.5 N; 46◦.0 E; h = 80 m) from Jan 1, 1995 to Dec 31, 1999 at 12 hours of
third time zone. As a ﬁrst stage, we subtracted from the pressure samples the
main annual harmonic with the period equal to the tropical year (365.d2422).
The amplitude A = 5.36 hPa and the phase φ = 1.44 rad. of this harmonic
have been determined by ﬁtting to the time series a sinusoid using the least
squares method.

Cosmic rays are not registered at Saratov city. However the ﬂux of galac-
tic cosmic rays of high energies which can to penetrate in atmosphere down
to the sea level has a high correlation at diﬀerent points of some region.
Therefore we used the daily data on cosmic rays measured at Apatity sta-
tion. The cosmic-ray ﬂux samples have been ﬁltered by the moving average
digital ﬁlter using the averaging interval time length 200d.

The data on Ap and Cp planetary geomagnetic indices accepted from the

Space Physics Interactive Data Resource (http://spidr.ngdc.noaa.gov/).

3. Calculation and analysis of power spectrum

We used for the spectral analysis of the time series containing the daily
samples of atmosphere surface pressure with subtracted main annual harmo-
nic the classical version of the power spectrum estimation based on calcula-
tion of the Fourier transform of an autocorrelation function with the Tukey’s
spectral window [3]. The maximal time delay of the autocorrelation function

2

was chosen 450d. In this case the number of degrees of freedom equal to 11,
and the half-power bandwidth is 0.00296 cycles per day. The upper frequency
boundary of the calculated spectrum was chosen 0.10 cycles per day.

Several well-deﬁned peaks there are in the power spectrum. We adopted
for periods of feasible harmonics which correspond to these peaks to be equal
to the periods of peak maximal points and the error of the estimation of
a period to be determined by a value of the half-power bandwidth. Two
peaks with the periods 29d.9 ± 2d.7 and 16d.4 ± 0d.8, probably, are the tidal
harmonics Mm(27d.55) and Mf (13d.66), respectively [1]. The peaks with
periods 45d.4 ± 6d.1 and 11d.8 ± 0d.4, probably, are related with the modes
of proper atmosphere oscillations [4].

4. Investigation of correlation between surface pressure
and geomagnetic activity

We calculated cross correlation functions between the pressure ﬂuctu-
ations and the planetary geomagnetic indices Ap and Cp for diﬀerent time
delays of the pressure measured in integer days numbers. The relation of the
pressure ﬂuctuations with the Ap index of geomagnetic activity is statistically
insigniﬁcant. The cross correlation function between the pressure ﬂuctuations
and the Cp index has a maximum value 0.044 ± 0.023 at the pressure time
delay 4d. This result is in a good accordance with the data of Mustel et al.
[5].

It is clear that the magnetic ﬁeld of the Earth not aﬀect directly on the
atmosphere air. A relation of atmosphere parameters variations with the
geomagnetic activity is a consequence of its relation with factors of the solar
activity including the X-ray and the UV-radiation of solar ﬂares, the solar
cosmic rays, and the modulation of a galactic cosmic-ray ﬂux. Therefore it is
interest to examine a relation of the pressure ﬂuctuations with the primary
factors of the solar activity.

5. Investigation of correlation between surface pressure
and cosmic-ray intensity

According to the modern conception, the main canal of the solar ac-
tivity inﬂuence on the Earth’s troposphere is a modulation of the ﬂux of

3

galactic cosmic rays of high energies which can to penetrate in atmosphere
down to the sea level [2]. Investigations of correlations between the atmo-
sphere characteristics and the cosmic-ray intensity can potentially elucidate
the mechanism of an interaction of cosmic rays with the Earth’s atmosphere.
We calculated the cross correlation function between the pressure ﬂuctu-
ations and the cosmic-ray intensity. The values of this function are negative
and small enough, but mostly are statistically signiﬁcant. The cross correla-
tion function has two minima: at the zero time delay (apparently, a moment
of the Forbush decreases in cosmic-ray intensity) with the value −0.068 ±
0.023, and at the pressure time delay 12d with the value −0.087 ± 0.023.
The negative correlation between the pressure and the cosmic-ray intensity
is observed at the pressure time delay as long as 17d. This result is in a good
accordance with the data of Grigor’ev et al.
[6], who studied the variation
of surface pressure after the Forbush decreases of cosmic-ray intensity at
Yakutsk city using the epoch superposition method. These authors have
found that the response of the pressure variations to the Forbush decreases
has on average duration 13d and amplitude +2 hPa, respectively.

The negative correlation between the surface pressure and the cosmic-ray
intensity can be explained by the so-called condensation mechanism of an
interaction of cosmic rays with the atmosphere air. Cosmic rays can produce
hygroscopic clusters in the lower atmosphere through ionization. This must
result in a certain increase and decrease in pressure if the cosmic-ray intensity
decreases and increases, respectively.

It is interesting that negative correlation between the surface pressure and
the cosmic-ray intensity exists also for negative pressure time delays down
to −5d. This eﬀect can be connected partly with the ﬁnite duration of the
Forbush decrease. Another explanation of the forward negative correlation is
an inﬂuence of a microwave radiation of solar ﬂares. This radiation also can
produce the water molecular clusters in the lower layers of the atmosphere
[7].

1. Maksimov I.V. Geophysical forces and ocean waters. Gydrometeoizdat,
Leningrad, 1970 (in Russian).
2. Avdyushin S.I.,Danilov A.D. Geomagnetism and Aeronomy. 2000. V.40.
P.545.

References

4

3. Jenkins G.M., Watts D.G. Spectral analysis and its applications. Holden-
Day, Inc., San Francisco, 1968.
4. Tudrij V.D.,Kolobov N.V. Fluctuations of cyclonic processes in northern
hemisphere of the Earth. Gydrometeoizdat, Leningrad, 1984 (in Russian).
5. Mustel E.R,Chertoprud V.E.,Mouloukova N.B. Scientiﬁc Information of
Astronomical Council of the USSR Academy of Sciences. 1986. V.60. P.161
(in Russian).
6. Grigor’ev V.G.,Bezrodnykh I.P.,Morozova E.I., Timofeev V.E.,Skryabin
N.G. Geomagnetism and Aeronomy. 2002. V.42. P.520.
7. Kondrat’ev K.Ya., Nikol’skii G.A. Investigation of the Earth from Space.
1995. No 5. P.3 (in Russian).

5

