3
0
0
2
 
t
c
O
 
0
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
o
a
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
2
9
0
0
1
3
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

The GNSS-R Eddy Experiment I: Altimetry from Low Altitude Air-
craft

G. Rufﬁni, F. Soulat, M. Caparrini, O. Germain
Starlab, C. de l’Observatori Fabra s/n, 08035 Barcelona, Spain, http://starlab.es
M. Mart´in-Neira
ESA/ESTEC, Keplerlaan 1, 2200 Noordwijk, The Netherlands, http://esa.int

Abstract

We report results from the Eddy Experiment, where a synchronous GPS receiver pair was ﬂown on an
aircraft to collect sampled L1 signals and their reﬂections from the sea surface to investigate the altimetric
accuracy of GNSS-R. During the experiment, surface wind speed (U10) was of the order of 10 m/s, and
signiﬁcant wave heights of up to 2 m, as discussed further in a companion paper. After software tracking
of the two signals through despreading of the GPS codes, a parametric waveform model containing the
description of the sea surface conditions has been used to ﬁt the waveforms (retracking) and estimate the
temporal lapse between the direct GPS signals and their reﬂections. The estimated lapses have then been
used to estimate the sea surface height (SSH) along the aircraft track using a differential geometric model.
As expected, the precision of GNSS-R ranges was of 3 m after 1 second integration. More importantly, the
accuracy of the GNSS-R altimetric solution with respect to Jason-1 SSH and in situ GPS buoy measure-
ments was of 10 cm, which was the target with the used experimental setup. This new result conﬁrms the
potential of GNSS-R for mesoscale altimetric monitoring of the ocean, and provides an important milestone
on the road to a space mission.

Keywords: GNSS-R, GPS-R, altimetry, meosocale, PARIS, waveform, retracking, bistatic.

1.

Introduction

Several Global Navigation Satellite System
(GNSS) constellations and augmentation systems
are presently operational or under development,
such as the pioneering US Global Positioning Sys-
tem (GPS), the Russian Global Navigation Satellite
System (GLONASS) and the European EGNOS. In
the next few years, the European Satellite Naviga-
tion System (Galileo) will be deployed, and GPS
will be upgraded with more frequencies and civil-
ian codes. By the time Galileo becomes opera-
tional in 2008, more than 50 GNSS satellites will
be emitting very precise L-band spread spectrum
signals, and will remain in operation for at least a
few decades. Although originally meant for (mil-
itary) localization, these signals will no doubt be
used within GCOS/GOOS∗ in many ways (e.g., at-
mospheric sounding). We focus here on the bud-
ding ﬁeld known as GNSS Reﬂections, which aims
at providing tools for remote sensing of the ocean

surface (especially sea surface height and roughness)
and the atmosphere over the oceans.

This paper reports a new development of the
GNSS-R altimetric concept (PARIS). The PARIS
concept (Passive Reﬂectometry Interferometric Sys-
tem [12]) addresses the exploitation of reﬂected
Global Navigation Satellite Systems signals for al-
timetry over the oceans. Ocean altimetry, the mea-
surement of Sea Surface Height (SSH), is indeed
one of the main applications of the GNSS-R pas-
sive radar concept. GNSS-R can give automatically
integrated measurements in the GNSS reference sys-
tem. In addition, this technique can provide the un-
precedented spatio-temporal samplings needed for
mesoscale monitoring of ocean circulation. It is at
mesoscale where phenomena such as eddies play
a fundamental role in the transport of energy and
momentum, yet current systems are unable to probe
them.

∗Global Climate Observing System/Global Ocean Observing System.

2003WorkshoponOceanographywithGNSSReﬂections

2

Many GNSS-R altimetry and scatterometry ex-
periments have been carried out to date, and the
list continues to grow thanks to dedicated efforts
in Europe and the US. GNSS-R experimental data
has now been gathered from Earth ﬁxed receivers
([1, 13, 20, 2] among others), aircraft ([9, 7, 3, 11, 8]
among others), stratospheric balloons ([6, 4] among
others), and from space platforms ([10] among oth-
ers). This experimental work is converging to a uni-
ﬁed understanding of the GNSS-R error budget, but
so far these experiments have focused on waveform
modeling and short term ranging precision. None to
date have attempted to retrieve a mesoscale altimet-
ric proﬁle as provided by monostatic radar altimeters
such as Jason-1.

In the four main sections of this paper we re-
port PARIS altimetric processing results using data
from the 09-27-2002 Eddy Experiment, carried out
in the frame of the European Space Agency “PARIS
Gamma” contract. The ﬁrst section addresses the
issue of tracking the direct and reﬂected GPS sig-
nals, which consist in appropriately placing the de-
lay and Doppler gating windows and in despread-
ing the GPS signals by means of correlation with
clean replicas. Tracking produces incoherently aver-
aged waveforms (typically with a cadence of 1 sec-
ond). The extraction of the information needed for
the altimetric algorithm from the waveforms is de-
scribed in the second section. This is the retracking
step, and it yields to the so-called measured tempo-
ral lapse (or lapse, for short) between the direct and
reﬂected signal. In the third section, the altimetric
algorithm (producing the Sea Surface Height esti-
mates) is described and, ﬁnally, results are presented
in the fourth section.

2. Data collection and pre-processing

2.1. Data set

The GNSS-R data set was gathered during an air-
borne campaign carried out by Starlab in Septem-
ber 2002. The GPS/INS (Inertial Navigation Sys-
tem) equipped aircraft overﬂew the Mediterranean
Sea, off the coast of Catalonia (Spain), northwards
from the city of Barcelona for about 150 km (Fig-
ure 1). This area was chosen because it is crossed by
a ground track of the Jason-1 altimeter (track num-
ber 187). The aircraft overﬂew this track during the
Jason-1 overpass, for precise comparison. In addi-

tion, a GPS buoy measurement of the SSH on a point
along the same track was obtained, basically to vali-
date the Jason-1 measurement†.
During the experiment,

the aircraft overﬂew
twice the Jason-1 ground track, both in the South-
North direction and back, gathering about 2 hours
of raw GPS-L1 IF data sampled at 20.456 MHz (see
[17] for the experimental setup). In this paper, we
focus on the data processing of the ascending track,
i.e., from P1 to P2 in Figure 1, with the Jason-1 over-
pass happening roughly in the middle of the track.

2.2. Tracking GNSS-R signals

Altimetry with GNSS-R signals is based on the mea-
surement of the temporal lapse between the time of
arrival of the direct GNSS signal and the time of ar-
rival of the same signal after its reﬂection from the
target surface. Successful tracking of both signals is
the ﬁrst step for altimetric processing.

Under general sea conditions, GPS signals re-
ﬂected from a rough sea surface cannot be tracked by
a standard receiver, because of the signal corruption
due to the reﬂection process itself (in GPS terminol-
ogy, the signal is affected by severe multipath from
the sea clutter). For this reason, a dedicated soft-
ware receiver has been developed‡. The high level
block diagram of this receiver is shown in Figure 2.
The processor is composed of two sub-units, one
for each signal. The unit which processes the direct
signal— the master unit —uses standard algorithms
to track the correlation peak of the signal, both in
time and frequency. The unit which processes the
reﬂected signal— the slave unit —performs correla-
tions blindly, with time delay and frequency settings
which depend on those of the master unit.

One of the most relevant tracking parameters is
the temporal span of the correlations, i.e., the coher-
ent integration time used to despread the GPS signal.
The coherent integration time was set here to 10 mil-
liseconds: it was veriﬁed that with this value the ra-
tio of the correlation peak height and the out-of-the-
peak ﬂuctuations achieved a maximum. In practical
terms, an integration time of 10 milliseconds sim-
pliﬁes the tracking process, as the duration of this
time interval is a sub-multiple of the GPS navigation
bit duration (with the 50 Hz navigation code in L1).
Moreover, we believe that longer correlation times
provide some protection from aircraft multipath by

†The buoy campaign was carried out by the Institut d’Estudis Espacials de Catalunya (IEEC).
‡STARLIGHT, also described in [2].

2003WorkshoponOceanographywithGNSSReﬂections

3

Figure 1: Flight trajectory.

mimicking a higher gain antenna (a belief supported
by tests with shorter integration times).

3. Retracking the waveforms

Once a correlation waveform is obtained for both
the direct and reﬂected signals, the lapses can be es-
timated. We emphasize that this is not as trivial as
considering the maximum sample of each waveform
or the waveform centroid, for instance, as the bistatic
reﬂection process deforms severely the signals and,
in general, such distortions will displace the wave-
form maximum or centroid location. Moreover, the
sampling rate of 20.456 MHz, while much higher
than the Nyquist rate for the C/A code, is equivalent
to an inter-sample spacing of 49 ns—about 15 light-
meters. This coarseness in the lapse estimation is
not sufﬁcient to reach the ﬁnal altimetric precision
target. The main challenge for GNSS-R using the
GPS Coarse Acquisition (C/A) code is to provide
sub-decimetric altimetry using a 300 m equivalent
pulse length, something that can only be achieved
by intense averaging with due care of systematic ef-
fects. For reference, pulse lengths in monostatic al-
timeters such as Jason-1 are almost three orders of
magnitude shorter.

For these reasons, the temporal position of each
waveform (the delay parameter) is estimated via a
Least Mean Squares model ﬁtting procedure. This is
the so-called retracking process, an otherwise well-
known concept in the monostatic altimetric com-
munity. The implementation of accurate waveform
models (for direct and reﬂected signals) is funda-
mental to retracking. Conceptually, a retracking
waveform model allows for the transformation of the
reﬂected waveform to an equivalent direct one (or
vice-versa), and a coherent and meaningful compar-
ison of direct and reﬂected waveforms for the lapse
estimation.

3.1. Waveform model

The natural model for retracking of the direct signal
waveforms is the mean autocorrelation of the GPS
C/A code in presence of additive Gaussian noise,
which accounts mainly for the receiver noise. As
far as the reﬂected signal is concerned, the model is
not so straightforward. In fact, the reﬂection process
induces modiﬁcations on the GNSS signals which
depend on sea surface conditions (directional rough-
ness), receiver-emitter-surface kinematics and ge-
ometry, and antenna pattern. Among all these quan-

2003WorkshoponOceanographywithGNSSReﬂections

4

master unit

DIRECT SIGNAL

PROCESSOR

time delay
frequency

FRONT−END

FRONT−END

CORRELATOR

slave unit

direct signal
correlations

reflected signal
correlations 
(waveforms)

RHCP
antenna

LHCP
antenna

Figure 2: Simpliﬁed block diagram of the GNSS-R tracking concept.

tities, the least known ones are those related to the
sea surface conditions. In principle, these quantities
should be considered as free parameters in the model
for the reﬂected signal waveform and estimated dur-
ing the retracking process along with the delay pa-
rameter of the waveform.

On the basis of the two most quoted models in
the literature for bistatic sea-surface scattering ([14]
and [21]), we have developed an upgraded waveform
model for the reﬂected signal. This new model, as
the two aforementioned, is based on the Geometric
Optics approximation of the Kirchhoff theory—that
is to say, with a tangent plane, high frequency and
large elevation assumption, which is reasonable for
the quasi-specular sea-surface scattering at L-band
([17]). The main characteristics of this model are
the following:

• a fully bistatic geometry (as in [21], but not in

[14]),

• the description of the sea surface through
the L-band Directional Mean Square Slope§
(DMSSL) (as in [21]), and

• the use of a fourth parameter, the signiﬁcant
wave height (SWH), to describe the sea sur-
face (as in [14], but not in [21]).

of systematic effects must be considered. We fore-
see a higher and non-negligible impact of SWH if
the GPS P-code (the Precision code) or similar codes
in Galileo are used, since they are an order of mag-
nitude shorter.

3.2.

Inversion scheme

The retracking process has been performed through
a Least Mean Squares ﬁt of the waveforms with
the models described. Because of the speckle
noise affecting the reﬂected signal waveforms, the
ﬁt has not been performed on each complex wave-
form obtained from the 10 ms correlations. Rather,
these waveforms have ﬁrst been incoherently aver-
aged:
the average of the magnitude of a hundred
10 ms waveforms has then been used to perform the
inversion—i.e., 1 second incoherently averaged real
waveforms have been generated for retracking. In
this way, reﬂected/direct temporal lapses have been
produced at 1 Hz rate.

In both cases, the ﬁt of the waveform has been
performed over three parameters:
the time delay,
a scaling factor and the out-of-the-peak correlation
mean amplitude.

The geophysical parameters that enter in the
model of the reﬂected signal waveform have not
been jointly estimated here. These parameters have
been set to some reasonable a priori value obtained
from other sources of information (Jason-1 for wind
speed, ECMWF for wind direction) or from theory
(for the sea slope PDF isotropy coefﬁcient). For con-

We have checked that the impact of SWH mismod-
eling in our case is negligible, since the GPS C/A
code equivalent pulse width is about 300 meters.
Nonetheless, we emphasize that all potential sources

§See [8] for a discussion on the role of wavelength in the deﬁnition of DMSS.

2003WorkshoponOceanographywithGNSSReﬂections

5

venience, we describe the sea surface state using a
wind speed parameter, wind direction and the sea
slope PDF isotropy coefﬁcient. Using a spectrum
model, these parameters can be univocally related
to DMSSL with the assumption of a mature, wind-
driven sea (the sea spectrum in [5] has been used in
this case). We emphasize that DMSSL is the actual
parameter set needed in the reﬂection model under
the Geometric Optics approximation.

Concerning the reﬂected signal waveform, re-
tracking has been performed using only the lead-
ing edge and a small part of the trailing edge, since
the trailing edge is more sensitive to errors in the
input parameters (including geophysical parameters
and antenna pattern).

4. The altimetric algorithm

The output of the retracking process is the time
series of measured lapses. The next step is ﬁnally
SSH estimation. In order to solve for this quantity,
we have used a differential algorithm:
the classi-
cal PARIS equation (see [12]) has not been directly
Instead, a model for the lapse over a refer-
used.
ence surface near the local geoid has been built, and
the difference of this reference lapse and the mea-
sured one has been modeled as a function of the
height over the reference surface. We call this the
differential PARIS equation (Equation 1). We note
that the aircraft INS has been used to take into ac-
count the direct-reﬂected antenna baseline motion
and that we have also included both dry and wet tro-
pospheric delays in the model by using exponential
models for them with different scale heights and sur-
face values derived from surface pressure measure-
ments and surface tropospheric delays obtained from
ground GPS and SSM/I¶).
The differential PARIS equation writes

∆DM = ∆D − ∆M = 2 δh sin(ǫ) + b,

(1)

where

• ∆D is the measured lapse, in meters, as esti-

mated from the data,

• ∆M is the modeled lapse, in meters, based on
an ellipsoidal model of the Earth, GPS con-
stellation precise ephemeris, aircraft GPS/INS
precise kinematic processing, and a tropo-
spheric model,

• δh is the normal offset between the sea surface

and the (model) ellipsoid surface,

• ǫ is the GPS satellite elevation angle at the
specular point of reﬂection, over the ellipsoid,
and

• b is the hardware system bias.

The precision obtained after 1-second of incoher-
ent averaging in the estimation of ∆DM using this
approach is displayed in Table 1. For each PRN
number, the root mean squared error of the 1-second
lapse is shown (in meters). It is roughly of 3 m. This
noise level is as expected from the C/A code bistatic
ranging in our experimental setup (antenna gain, al-
titude, etc.) and consistent with earlier experiments.

5. Results

The algorithm outlined in the previous section
has been used with data from the three better be-
haved GPS satellites. The other two visible satel-
lites appeared to be severely affected by aircraft-
induced multipath (probably due to the landing gear
and wing surfaces). A SSH proﬁle has been retrieved
for each satellite and the average value of the three
proﬁles is shown in Figure 3 along with the Jason-
1 SSH, Mean Sea Level (MSL) and one SSH value
obtained with the control buoy. This solution has
been obtained setting a model wind speed of 10 m/s
(values provided by Jason-1 along the track vary be-
tween 9 and 13 m/s), wind direction of 0 degrees
North (values provided by ECMWF vary between
30 and -20 deg North), and sea slope PDF isotropy
coefﬁcient equal to 0.65 (the theoretical value for a
mature, wind-driven sea according to [5]). It is im-
portant to underline that the use of constant values
for the geophysical parameters along the whole track
(more than 120 km) induces non-linear errors on the
ﬁnal altimetric estimation. Nonetheless, the bias of
the ﬁnal solution with respect to the SSH (the error
mean) is 1.9 cm while the root mean error is 10.5 cm.

¶Special Sensor Microwave Imager, a passive microwave radiometer ﬂown aboard United States Defense Meteorological Satellite
Program.

2003WorkshoponOceanographywithGNSSReﬂections

6

PRN Complete track Beginning of the track

8
24
27

3.5 m
3.4 m
2.9 m

2.7 m
2.8 m
2.7 m

Table 1: Precision in the estimation of the time lapses (root mean squared error of the lapses, in meters).

m

49.5

49.4

49.3

49.2

49.1

49

48.9

48.8

48.7

48.6

41.4

41.6

42

42.2

41.8
lat [deg N]

Figure 3: Final altimetric result. The red line represents the average altimetric result of the three GPS satellite analyzed ﬁltered over a
20 km—i.e., 400 seconds, the aircraft speed being about 50 m/s. The black line represents the Jason-1 SSH, while the green dashed
line represents the MSL. The blue diamond is the SSH measurement obtained from the reference buoy.

6. Conclusion

The Eddy Experiment has validated the use of
PARIS as a tool for airborne sea surface height mea-
surements, providing both the precision and accu-
racy predicted by earlier experimental and theoreti-
cal work. We have observed that the use of a wave-
form model for the reﬂected signal, based on geo-
physical parameters describing the sea surface con-
ditions, is essential for the accuracy of the altimetric
solution—a fact which may explain earlier results
in which no geophysical retracking was performed
(e.g., [15]). The accuracy achieved by our algorithm
is of the order of 1 decimeter, but we expect that fur-
ther analysis and reﬁnements, such as the inclusion
of DMSSL parameters in the inversion procedure,
will improve these numbers.

Our sensitivity analysis has also shown that the
altitude of this ﬂight was not optimal for GNSS-R
altimetry and made the experiment more prone to

aircraft multipath problems. A higher altitude ﬂight
would lead to a smaller angular span of the reﬂect-
ing area on the sea surface, thus reducing the impact
of geophysical parameters, antenna pattern and air-
craft multipath on the retracking process of the lead-
ing edge, making the overall altimetric solution more
robust. Higher altitudes are also needed to better un-
derstand the space-borne scenario.

We would like to emphasize that GNSS-R sig-
nals can be proﬁtably used also for scatterometric
measurements (i.e., speculometry, from the Latin
word for mirror, “speculo”, see [16]).
In a par-
allel paper ([8]), the inversion of GNSS-R Delay-
Doppler Maps for sea-surface DMSSL estimation is
presented for the same data set. The next step is to
merge the altimetric and speculometric processing in
an attempt to provide an autonomous GNSS-R com-
plete description of the sea—topography and surface
conditions.

We believe the Eddy Experiment is an important

2003WorkshoponOceanographywithGNSSReﬂections

7

milestone on the road to a space mission. We un-
derline that the obtained precision and accuracy are
in line with earlier experiments and theoretical error
budgets (see, e.g., [10]). We note that the same error
budgets have been used to investigate and conﬁrm
the strong impact of space-borne GNSS-R altimetric
mission data on mesoscale ocean circulation mod-
els ([18, 19]). Further analysis of existing datasets
(which could be organized in a coordinated database
for the beneﬁt of the community) and future experi-
ments at higher altitudes will continue to reﬁne our
understanding of the potential of this technique.

Acknowledgments

This study was carried out under the ESA con-
tract TRP ETP 137.A. We thank EADS-Astrium
and all sub-contractors (Grupo de Mecanica del
Vuelo, Institut d’Estudis Espacials de Catalunya,
Collecte Localisation Satellites, and Institut Franc¸ais
de Recherche pour l’Exploitation de la Mer) for their
collaboration in the project, and the Institut Car-
tograﬁc de Catalunya for ﬂawless ﬂight operations
and aircraft GPS/INS kinematic processing. Finally,
we thank Irene Rubin from CRESTech, for provid-
ing us with SSM/I IWV (Integrated Water Vapor)
data.

All Starlab authors have contributed signiﬁ-
cantly; the Starlab author list has been ordered ran-
domly.

References

balloon experiment: GPS reﬂection for wind
speed retrieval from the stratosphere. To ap-
pear in Remote Sensing of Environment, 2003.

[5] T. Elfouhaily, B. Chapron, K. Katsaros, and
D. Vandemark. A uniﬁed directional spectrum
for long and short wind-driven waves. Jour-
nal of Geophysical Research, 102(15):781–
796, 1997.

[6] J.L. Garrison, G. Rufﬁni, A. Rius, E. Cardel-
lach, D. Masters, M. Armatys, and V.U. Za-
vorotny. Preliminary results from the GPSR
mediterranean balloon experiment
(GPSR-
MEBEX).
In Proceedings of ERIM 2000,
Charleston, South Carolina, USA, May 2000.

[7] L. Garrison, S. Katzberg, and M. Hill. Effect
of sea roughness on bistatically scattered range
coded signals from the GPS. Geophysical Re-
search Letters, 25:2257–2260, 1998.

[8] O. Germain, G. Rufﬁni, F. Soulat, M. Ca-
parrini, B. Chapron, and P. Silvestrin. The
GNSS-R Eddy Experiment II: L-band and opti-
cal speculometry for directional sea-roughness
retrieval from low altitude aircraft. In Proceed-
ings of the 2003 Workshop on Oceanography
with GNSS-R. Starlab, July 2003.

[9] A. Komjathy. GPS surface reﬂection using air-
craft data: analysis and results. In Proceedings
of the GPS surface reﬂection workshop. God-
dard Space Flight Center, July 1998.

[1] M. Caparrini. Using reﬂected GNSS signals to
estimate surface features over wide ocean ar-
eas. Technical Report EWP 2003, ESA report,
December 1998.

[2] M. Caparrini, L. Rufﬁni, and G.Rufﬁni. Gnss-
r altimetry with gps l1 data from the bridge 2
campaign. In Proceedings of the 2003 Work-
shop on Oceanography with GNSS-R. Starlab
Barcelona, July 2003.

[3] E. Cardellach, J.M. Aparicio, A. Rius, J.S., and
J. Torrobella. Application of the PARIS con-
cept to transoceanic aircraft remote sensing.
Technical report, 2001. PARIS Alpha WP5200
- ESA Contract 14285/85/NL/PB.

[10] S. Lowe, J.L. LaBrecque, C. Zuffada, L.J. Ro-
mans, L. Young, and G.A. Hajj. First space-
borne observation of an earth-reﬂected gps sig-
nal. Radio Science, 37(1):1–28, 2002.

[11] S. Lowe, C. Zuffada, Y. Chao, P. Kroger,
J.L LaBreque, and L.E. Young.
5-cm pre-
cision aircraft ocean altimetry using GPS
reﬂections. Geophysical Research Letters,
(29):4359–4362, 2002.

[12] M. Martin-Neira. A PAssive Reﬂectometry and
Interferometry System (PARIS): application to
ocean altimetry. ESA Journal, 17:331–355,
1993.

[4] E. Cardellach, G. Rufﬁni, D. Pino, A. Rius,
A. Komjathy, and J. Garrison. Mediterranean

[13] M. Mart´in-Neira, M. Caparrini,

J. Font-
Rossello, S. Lannelongue, and C. Serra. The

2003WorkshoponOceanographywithGNSSReﬂections

8

PARIS concept: An experimental demonstra-
tion of sea surface altimetry using GPS re-
IEEE Transactions on Geo-
ﬂected signals.
science and Remote Sensing, 39:142–150,
2001.

[14] G. Picardi, R. Seu, S. G. Sorge, and M. Martin-
Bistatic model of ocean scatter-
Neira.
ing. IEEE Trans. Antennas and Propagation,
46(10):1531–1541, 1998.

[15] A. Rius,

J.M. Aparicio, E. Cardellach,
M. Martin-Neira, and B. Chapron. Sea surface
state measured using GPS reﬂected signals.
Geophysical Research Letters, 29(23):2122,
2002.

[16] G. Rufﬁni, M. Caparrini, O. Germain,
F. Soulat, and J. Lutsko. Remote sensing of
the ocean by bistatic radar observations: a re-
view. Technical report, PARIS Beta WP1000 -
ESA ESTEC Contract No. 15083/01/NL/MM,
2001. Available online at http://starlab.es.

[17] F. Soulat.

Sea surface remote-sensing
with GNSS and sunlight reﬂections. Doc-
toral Thesis, Universitat Polit`ecnica de
Catalunya/Starlab, 2003.

[18] P.Y. Le Traon, G. Dibarboure, G. Rufﬁni, and
E. Cardellach. Mesoscale ocean altimetry re-
quirements and impact of GPS-R measure-
ments for ocean mesoscale circulation map-
ping.
the 2003 Work-
shop on Oceanography with GNSS-R. Starlab
Barcelona, July 2003.

In Proceedings of

[19] P.Y. Le Traon, G. Dibarboure, G. Rufﬁni,
O. Germain, A. Thompson, and C. Mathew.
GNSS-R measurements for ocean mesoscale
circulation mapping - an update. In Proceed-
ings of the 2003 Workshop on Oceanography
with GNSS-R. Starlab Barcelona, July 2003.

[20] R.N. Treuhaft, S.T. Lowe, C. Zuffada, and
Y. Chao. 2-cm gps altimetry over crater lake.
Geophysical Research Letters, 22(23):4343–
4346, December 2001.

[21] V. Zavorotny and A. Voronovich. Scattering of
GPS signals from the ocean with wind remote
sensing application. IEEE Trans. Geoscience
and Remote Sensing, 38(2):951–964, 2000.

