3
0
0
2
 
t
c
O
 
4
 
 
]
h
p
-
o
a
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
0
2
0
0
1
3
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

where

or

or

A note on the use of the word ’likelihood’ in statistics and
meteorology

Stephen Jewson, Anders Brix and Christine Ziehmann ∗
Risk Management Solutions, London, United Kingdom

November 23, 2013

Abstract

We highlight the diﬀerent uses of the word likelihood that have arisen in statistics and meteorology,
and make the recommendation that one of these uses should be dropped to prevent confusion and
misunderstanding.

1 Introduction

We discuss the diﬀerent meanings of the word likelihood as used in classical statistics and meteorology.
In section 2 we describe how the word is used in classical statistics, and in section 3 we describe how it
has been used in meteorology. In section 4 we discuss the diﬀerences and express the opinion that one of
the two uses should be dropped. In section 5 we summarize.

2 Classical statistics deﬁnition of likelihood

Imagine that we have two datasets xi and yi, for a range of values of i. We might attempt to build a
statistical model for xi in terms of yi, or yi in terms of xi.
As an example we will consider linear regression, and will consider building a model for yi in terms of xi.
The model we will consider can be written in the following equivalent ways:

yi = α + βxi + σei

ei ∼ N (0, 1)

yi ∼ N (α + βxi, σ2

)

p(yi|xi) = N (α + βxi, σ2

)

L(α, β, σ) = p(y|x, α, β, σ)

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

To ﬁt the parameters (α, β, σ) of this model given the data xi and yi one would typically consider ﬁnding
those parameters that maximise the likelihood L(α, β, σ), where L is deﬁned as:

In the case of linear regression, this happens to be equivalent to ﬁnding parameters that minimise the
sum of squared errors.
We note that the deﬁnition of L as L(α, β, σ) = p(y|x, α, β, σ) arises because we are using xi to model yi
i.e. x is the ’input’, ’independent variable’, ’predictor’, ’regressor’, ’explanatory variable’ or ’covariate’,
while y is the ’output’, ’dependent variable’, ’regressand’, ’response variable’ or ’predictand’.
If we had set out to use yi to model xi (using linear regression, or any other model) then the likelihood
would have been deﬁned as L(θ) = p(x|y, θ) where θ represents the parameters of this new model. We

∗Correspondence address: RMS, 10 Eastcheap, London, EC3M 1AJ, UK. Email: x@stephenjewson.com

see that the deﬁnition of likelihood is thus entirely dependent on what is being used to model what, and
what model is being used.
In general, once we have decided on a model then the likelihood is the probability density (or, for discrete
rather than continuous models, just the probability) of the predictand given the predictors, as a function
of the parameters of the model.
Use of the word likelihood in this context comes from the original works of Fisher in the 1920s, such
as Fisher (1922). A recent overview of the use of the likelihood in statistical inference is given by Casella and Berger
(2002), and likelihood-based ﬁtting of parameters is also discussed in Press et al. (1992).

2.1 Application to making probabilistic forecasts

We now consider a meteorological application: making probabilistic forecasts. Probabilistic forecasts
are made by taking the inherently non-probabilistic output from numerical models (consisting of, for
example, single integrations, ensemble members, or ensemble means and spreads) and ﬁtting a statistical
model to them to generate probabilities. In other words, given a non-probabilistic model forecast f we
make a probabilistic forecast of the observations o. Our forecast can be written as p(o|f ) i.e. a probability
distribution of diﬀerent possible observations, given the forecast we have available. Note that the notation
p(o|f ) does not yet specify what model is used to convert f to o.
For temperature, a reasonable way to make a probabilistic forecast is to use linear regression, with the
input fi being either a single forecast or an ensemble mean. This then means we can write:

If we wish to use information from the mean mi and spread si of an ensemble forecast, then we can use
the spread regression model of Jewson et al. (2003):

p(oi|fi) = N (α + βfi, σ2

)

2
p(oi|fi) = N (α + βmi, (γ + δsi)

)

(6)

(7)

The usual way to ﬁt the parameters of either of these models would be to ﬁnd those parameters that
maximise the likelihood, deﬁned as L = L(α, β, σ) = p(o|f, α, β, σ) (for the regression model) or L =
L(α, β, γ, δ) = p(o|f, α, β, γ, δ) (for the spread regression model). The likelihood is deﬁned as p(o|f )
simply because we are trying to predict the observations o from the forecast f . If, for some reason, we
wanted to predict the forecast from the observations (it is not immediately obvious why one would want
to do this, but there may be reasons), then we would deﬁne the likelihood as p(f |o).

3 Murphy and Winkler deﬁnition of likelihood

Murphy and Winkler (1987) (henceforth MW) discuss ways in which one can validate probabilistic fore-
casts, and in particular introduce the following deﬁnitions:

• p(f |o) is the likelihood

• p(o) is the base rate

• p(o|f ) is the calibration

• p(f ) is the reﬁnement

4 Discussion

Following this paper, a number of other meteorologists (such as Jolliﬀe and Stephenson (2003) and Wilks
(2001)) have used the word likelihood to refer to p(f |o) and the word calibration to refer to p(o|f ).

We see that the MW deﬁnition of the word likelihood is subtly diﬀerent from the original deﬁnition as
used in classical statistics. In particular, MW deﬁne likelihood once and for all as p(f |o) irrespective of
whether o is being modelled in terms of f , or f is being modelled in terms of o. The classical statistics
deﬁnition of likelihood, on the other hand, depends on what is being used to model what.
This creates some confusion, especially when one tries to apply classical statistical methods to forecast
calibration as described in section 2.1. Because of this, we advocate that the MW deﬁnition should not
be used. Our reasons for taking this position are:

• The classical statistical deﬁnition of the word likelihood is the original deﬁnition.

• It is used, and understood, by many thousands of applied mathematicians.

• It has been in use for over 80 years.

• The MW deﬁnition is a restriction of the original deﬁnition.

• It is only used, and understood, by a very small number of meteorologists involved in the ﬁeld of

probabilistic forecast veriﬁcation.

• It is very recent.

5 Summary

Statisticians have used the phrase likelihood for over 80 years, with a particular meaning, following Fisher
(1922). A relatively recent paper by Murphy and Winkler (1987) attempts to redeﬁne this word when
applied to meteorological forecasts and observations. This undermines the original meaning, creates
confusion, and is not very helpful in building connections between statistics and meteorology. We there-
fore strongly advise that meteorologists working in forecast veriﬁcation should not use the deﬁnition
of Murphy and Winkler (1987), and should stick to the original deﬁnition of Fisher (1922).

6 Acknowledgements

SJ would like to thank Beth Ebert for helpful discussions (although she doesn’t necessarily agree with
the views expressed in the article).

References

G Casella and R L Berger. Statistical Inference. Duxbury, 2002.

R Fisher. On the mathematical foundations of statistics. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society,

A, 222:309–368, 1922.

S Jewson, A Brix, and C Ziehmann. A new framework for the assessment and calibration of ensemble

temperature forecasts. ASL, 2003. Submitted.

I Jolliﬀe and D Stephenson. Forecast Veriﬁcation: A Practioner’s Guide in Atmospheric Science. Wiley,

J Murphy and R Winkler. A general framework for forecast veriﬁcation. Monthly Weather Review, 115:

W Press, S Teukolsky, W Vetterling, and B Flannery. Numerical Recipes. Cambridge University Press,

2003.

1992.

1330–1338, 1987.

D Wilks. Statistical methods in the atmospheric sciences. Academic Press, 2001.

