4
0
0
2
 
n
u
J
 
7
 
 
]
h
p
-
o
a
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
5
2
0
6
0
4
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

GEOPHYSICAL RESEARCH LETTERS, VOL. ???, XXXX, DOI:10.1029/,

The Eddy Experiment: accurate GNSS-R ocean altimetry from
low altitude aircraft
G. Ruﬃni, F. Soulat, M. Caparrini, O. Germain1 and M. Mart´ın-Neira2

During the Eddy Experiment, two synchronous GPS re-
ceivers were ﬂown at 1 km altitude to collect L1 signals
and their reﬂections from the sea surface for assessment of
altimetric precision and accuracy. Wind speed (U10) was
around 10 m/s, and SWH up to 2 m. A geophysical para-
metric waveform model was used for retracking and estima-
tion of the lapse between the direct and reﬂected signals
with a 1-second precision of 3 m. The lapse was used to
estimate the SSH along the track using a diﬀerential model.
The RMS error of the 20 km averaged GNSS-R absolute al-
timetric solution with respect to Jason-1 SSH and a GPS
buoy measurement was of 10 cm, with a 2 cm mean diﬀer-
ence. Multipath and retracking parameter sensitivity due
to the low altitude are suspected to have degraded accu-
racy. This result provides an important milestone on the
road to a GNSS-R mesoscale altimetry space mission.

1. Introduction

Several Global Navigation Satellite System (GNSS) con-
stellations and augmentation systems are presently oper-
ational or under development, such as the pioneering US
Global Positioning System (GPS), the Russian Global Nav-
igation Satellite System (GLONASS) and the European EG-
NOS. In the next few years, the European Satellite Nav-
igation System (Galileo) will be deployed, and GPS will
be upgraded with more frequencies and civilian codes. By
the time Galileo becomes operational, more than 50 GNSS
satellites will be emitting very precise L-band spread spec-
trum signals, and will remain in operation for at least a
few decades. Although originally meant for localization,
these signals will no doubt be used within GCOS/GOOS1 in
many ways (e.g., atmospheric sounding). We focus here on
the budding ﬁeld known as GNSS Reﬂections, which aims
at providing instruments and techniques for remote sensing
of the ocean surface (in particular, sea surface height and
roughness) and the atmosphere over the oceans.

GNSS-R altimetry (also known as PARIS, Passive Reﬂec-
tometry Interferometric System Mart´ın-Neira [1993]), the
exploitation of reﬂected Global Navigation Satellite Sys-
tems signals for the measurement of Sea Surface Height
(SSH), holds the potential to provide the unprecedented
spatio-temporal samplings needed for mesoscale monitoring
of ocean circulation.
It is at mesoscale where phenomena
such as eddies play a fundamental role in the transport of
energy and momentum, yet current systems are unable to
probe them.

1Starlab, C. de l’Observatori Fabra s/n, 08035 Barcelona,

Spain, http://starlab.es

2ESA/ESTEC, Keplerlaan 1, 2200 Noordwijk, The

Netherlands, http://esa.int

Copyright 2008 by the American Geophysical Union.
0094-8276/08/$5.00

Many GNSS-R experiments have been carried out to date,
and the list continues to grow thanks to dedicated eﬀorts in
the US and Europe. GNSS-R experimental data has now
been gathered from ground receivers, aircraft, stratospheric
balloons and from space (see Caparrini et al.
[2003] for
a brief summary of experimental work). While this work is
converging into a uniﬁed understanding of the GNSS-R error
budget, these experiments have focused on waveform mod-
eling and short term ranging and altimetric precision (e.g.,
Lowe et al. [2002a,2002b] and Rius et al. [2002]). However,
none to date have accurately retrieved a mesoscale altimet-
ric proﬁle as provided by monostatic radar altimeters such
as Jason-1, which is our aim here.

In this paper we report GNSS-R altimetric results using
data from the Eddy Experiment (09-27-2002). The next sec-
tion addresses the issue of tracking the direct and reﬂected
GPS signals, which consist in appropriately placing the de-
lay and Doppler gating windows and in despreading the GPS
signals by means of correlation with clean replicas. Tracking
produces incoherently averaged waveforms (typically with a
cadence of 1 second). The extraction of the information
needed for the altimetric algorithm from the waveforms is
described in the third section. This is the retracking step,
and it yields to the so-called measured temporal lapse (or
lapse, for short), in meters, between the direct and reﬂected
signal, i.e., the relative pseudo-range. In the fourth section,
the altimetric algorithm (producing the SSH proﬁle) is de-
scribed and, ﬁnally, results are discussed in the last section.

2. Data collection and pre-processing

The GNSS-R data set was gathered during an airborne
campaign carried out in September 2002. The GPS/INS
(Inertial Navigation System) equipped aircraft overﬂew the
Mediterranean Sea, oﬀ the coast of Catalonia (Spain), north-
wards from the city of Barcelona for about 150 km (Fig-
ure 1). As in Rius et al. [2002], this area near the Barcelona
airport was chosen because it is crossed by a ground track
of the Jason-1 altimeter (track number 187).

The aircraft overﬂew twice the Jason-1 ground track,
both in the South-North direction and back, gathering about
2 hours of raw GPS-L1 IF data sampled at 20.456 MHz (see
Soulat [2003] for further details). Here we focus on the data
processing of the 40 minute long ascending track, i.e., from
P1 to P2 in Figure 1, with the Jason-1 overpass coinciding
in time roughly during the middle of the track. In addition,
a GPS buoy measurement of the SSH on a point along the
same track was taken. Given the small tides in the area and
the close temporal sampling, tide eﬀects could not introduce
more than 1 cm error in the comparisons of GPS-R and Ja-
son, and no more than 2 cm for GPS-buoy measurements.

Altimetry with GNSS-R signals is based on the measure-
ment of the temporal lapse between the time of arrival of
the direct GNSS signal and the time of arrival of the same
signal after its reﬂection from the target surface. Successful
tracking of both signals is the ﬁrst step for altimetric pro-
cessing. Under general sea conditions, GPS signals reﬂected
from a rough sea surface cannot be tracked by a standard

1

X - 2

STARLAB PREPRINT 30052004-01: ACCURATE GNSS-R ALTIMETRY FROM AIRCRAFT

receiver, because of the signal corruption due to the reﬂec-
tion process. For this reason, a dedicated software receiver
has been developed2. The processor is composed of two
sub-units, one for each signal. The unit which processes the
direct signal—the master unit—uses standard algorithms to
track the correlation peak of the signal, both in time and
frequency. The unit which processes the reﬂected signal—
the slave unit—performs correlations with time delay and
frequency settings derived from those of the master unit.
The coherent integration time was set to 10 milliseconds:
it was veriﬁed that with this value the ratio of the correla-
tion peak height and the out-of-peak ﬂuctuations achieved
a maximum. Moreover, long correlation times appeared to
provide some protection from aircraft multipath by mimick-
ing a higher gain antenna.

3. Retracking the waveforms

Once a GNSS-R correlation waveform is obtained from
both the direct and reﬂected signals the lapse can be esti-
mated. This is not a trivial matter, as the bistatic reﬂec-
tion process deforms severely the reﬂected signal. The main
challenge for GNSS-R using the GPS Coarse Acquisition
(C/A) code is to provide sub-decimetric altimetry using a
300 m equivalent pulse length, something that can only be
achieved by modeling and intense averaging with due care
of systematic eﬀects. For reference, pulse lengths of modern
monostatic altimeters such as Jason-1 are more than two
orders of magnitude shorter.

For these reasons, we estimated the temporal location
of each waveform (the delay parameter) via a Least Mean
Squares model ﬁtting procedure. This is the so-called re-
tracking process (as is known in the monostatic altimet-
ric community). The implementation of accurate waveform
models (for direct and reﬂected signals) is fundamental to
retracking. Conceptually, a retracking waveform model al-
lows for the transformation of the reﬂected waveform to an
equivalent direct one (or vice-versa), and a meaningful com-
parison of direct and reﬂected waveforms for the lapse esti-
mation.

Figure 1. Total ﬂight trajectory. The data processed
from P1 to “P2
corresponds to the ascending track:
shortened”.

The natural model for retracking the direct signal wave-
form is the mean autocorrelation of the GPS C/A code in
presence of additive Gaussian noise, which accounts mainly
for the receiver noise. As far as the reﬂected signal is con-
cerned, the model is not so straightforward.
In fact, the
reﬂection process induces modiﬁcations on the GNSS sig-
nals which depend on sea surface conditions (directional
roughness), receiver-emitter-surface kinematics and geome-
try, and antenna pattern, all of which have to be taken into
account. In principle, quantities relating to sea surface con-
ditions could be considered as free parameters in the model
for the reﬂected signal waveform, and estimated during the
retracking process along with the delay parameter of the
waveform.

On the basis of the two most quoted models in the litera-
ture for bistatic sea-surface scattering (Picardi et al. [1998]
and Zavorotny et al. [2000]), we have developed an upgraded
waveform model for the reﬂected signal. This model, as the
two aforementioned, is based on the Geometric Optics ap-
proximation to the Kirchoﬀ theory—that is to say, with tan-
gent plane, high frequency and large elevation assumptions,
which are reasonable for the quasi-specular sea-surface scat-
tering at L-band (Soulat [2003]). The main characteristics of
this model are a) the implementation of a fully bistatic ge-
ometry (as in Zavorotny et al. [2000]Caparrini et al. [2003],
but not in Picardi et al. [1998]), b) the description of the sea
surface through the L-band Directional Mean Square Slope3
(DMSSL) (as in Zavorotny et al. [2000]), and c) the use of
a fourth parameter, the signiﬁcant wave height (SWH), to
describe the sea surface (as in Picardi et al. [1998], but not
in Zavorotny et al. [2000]). We have checked that the im-
pact of SWH mismodeling in our case is negligible, since the
GPS C/A code equivalent pulse width is about 300 meters.
We foresee a higher and non-negligible impact of SWH if the
sharper GPS P-code or future Galileo wide codes are used.
Because of the speckle noise aﬀecting the reﬂected sig-
nal waveforms, the retracking ﬁt was not performed on each
complex waveform obtained from the 10 ms correlations.
Rather, these waveforms were ﬁrst incoherently averaged:
the average of the magnitude of a hundred 10 ms waveforms
was then used to perform the inversion—i.e., 1 second inco-
herently averaged real waveforms were generated for retrack-
ing. In this way, reﬂected/direct temporal lapses were pro-
duced at a 1 Hz rate. In both cases, the ﬁt of the waveform
was performed over three parameters: the lapse, a scaling
factor and the out-of-the-peak correlation mean amplitude.
Retracking of the reﬂected signal waveform was performed
using only the leading edge and a small part of the trailing
edge, since the trailing edge is more sensitive to errors in
the input parameters (including geophysical parameters and
antenna pattern). The geophysical parameters that enter in
the model of the reﬂected signal waveform were not jointly
estimated here. These parameters were set to some reason-
able a priori value obtained from other sources of informa-
tion (Jason-1 for wind speed, ECMWF for wind direction, or
from theory (for the sea slope PDF isotropy coeﬃcient)—see
Germain et al., Soulat et al. [2003] for more details.

For convenience, we describe the sea surface state using
wind speed, wind direction and the sea slope PDF isotropy
coeﬃcient. Using a spectrum model, these can be uniquely
related to the directional mean square slope parameters as
seen in L-band, DMSSL, with the prior assumption of a ma-
ture, wind-driven sea (the sea spectrum in Elfouhaily et al.
[1997] was used in this case). We emphasize that DMSSL
is the actual parameter set needed in the reﬂection model
under the Geometric Optics approximation.

Finally, we note that the inclusion of only a small part
of the trailing edge makes the retracking algorithm, i.e., the
estimation of the three free parameters, more robust with
respect to eventual inaccuracies in the value of the ﬁxed
parameters.

STARLAB PREPRINT 30052004-01: ACCURATE GNSS-R ALTIMETRY FROM AIRCRAFT

X - 3

Sea level over the reference ellipsoid (wcor) (filtered @400s, ~20km) wsp 10m/s wdi 0deg
10ms, 220 deg, delay rms= [ 3.5        3.34        2.92 ]

49.8

49.6

49.4

49.2

48.8

48.6

48.4

48.2

49

m

PRN08
PRN24
PRN27
mean
T/P SSH (20 km)
 
buoy B227

41.4

41.6

42

42.2

41.8
lat [deg N]

Figure 2. Final altimetric results. The legend indicates this solution was obtained with a 10 m/s wind speed, 0 degrees
direction, 10 ms coherent integration time and nominal antenna pattern. It also indicates the lapse RMS for each PRN,
in meters. Individual altimetric results for each satellite are shown in red, green and blue. The black line represents the
average altimetric result of the three GPS satellites boxcar ﬁltered over 20 km—i.e., 400 seconds, the aircraft speed being
about 50 m/s—while the dotted, solid black line represents the Jason-1 SSH. The blue diamond is the SSH measurement
from the reference buoy.

4. Altimetric algorithm

The output of the retracking process is the time series
of measured lapses. The ﬁnal step in GNSS-R altimetry is
SSH estimation. In order to solve for this quantity, we used
a diﬀerential algorithm: a model for the lapse over a refer-
ence surface near the local geoid was constructed, and the
diﬀerence of this reference lapse and the measured one was
modeled as a function of the height over the reference sur-
face. We note that the aircraft INS data was used to take
into account the direct-reﬂected antenna baseline motion
and that we also included both dry and wet tropospheric
delays in the model. Exponential models for tropospheric
delays were used with diﬀerent scale heights and surface val-
ues derived from surface pressure measurements and surface
tropospheric delays obtained from ground GPS (see Ruﬃni
et al. [1999] and references therein) and SSM/I4.
The diﬀerential altimetric equation writes

∆DM = ∆D − ∆M = 2 δh sin(ǫ) + b,

(1)

where ∆D is the measured lapse (in meters) as estimated
from the data, ∆M is the modeled lapse, based on an
ellipsoidal model of the Earth, GPS constellation precise
ephemeris, aircraft GPS/INS precise kinematic processing,
and a tropospheric model, δh is the normal oﬀset between
the sea surface and the (model) ellipsoid surface, ǫ is the
GPS satellite elevation angle at the specular point of reﬂec-
tion, over the ellipsoid, and b is the hardware system bias.
The precision obtained after 1-second of incoherent aver-

aging in the estimation of ∆DM using this approach was
roughly of 3 m, as expected (given the antenna gain, alti-
tude, etc.) and consistent with earlier experiments.

5. Results

The algorithm outlined in the previous section was imple-
mented to process data from the three better behaved GPS
satellites among the four satellites with the highest eleva-
tion angle. In fact, one of these four satellites appeared to
be severely aﬀected by aircraft-induced multipath (probably
due to the landing gear and wing surfaces). A SSH proﬁle
was retrieved for each satellite and the average value of the
three proﬁles is shown in Figure 2 along with the Jason-1
SSH, Mean Sea Level (MSL) and one SSH value obtained
with the control buoy. This solution was obtained setting
a model wind speed of 10 m/s (values provided by Jason-1
along the track vary between 9 and 13 m/s), wind direction
of 0 degrees North (values provided by ECMWF vary be-
tween 30 and -20 deg North), and sea slope PDF isotropy
coeﬃcient equal to 0.65 (the theoretical value for a mature,
wind-driven sea according to Elfouhaily et al. [1997]).

Inter-satellite altimetric agreement was moderate, with
an average inter-satellite altimetric spread of 10 cm. We be-
lieve that discrepancies were caused by multipath from the
aircraft surfaces. Hence, the location of the antennas (espe-
cially the down-looking one) is an important consideration
for future experiments. We also highlight the role of the an-
tenna gain pattern: altimetric solutions appeared to be quite

X - 4

STARLAB PREPRINT 30052004-01: ACCURATE GNSS-R ALTIMETRY FROM AIRCRAFT

sensitive to rotations of the antenna pattern (which was not
azimuthally symmetric) away from the measured orienta-
tion. The solutions were also quite sensitive to the choice
of other input parameters, especially DMSSL. According
to our simulations, the impact of all these parameters will
decrease rapidly at higher altitudes.

For simplicity, ﬁxed DMSSL parameters were used along
the whole track. It is important to underline that the use
of constant values for the geophysical parameters along the
whole track (more than 120 km) induces errors on the ﬁnal
altimetric estimation. Nonetheless, the bias of the ﬁnal so-
lution with respect to the SSH (the error mean) was 2 cm
while the root mean error was 10 cm (Figure 2).

6. Conclusion

While the precision of the GNSS-R technique has been
analyzed in previous experiments, the novelty here is the
demonstration of absolute altimetry. We have observed that
the use of a waveform model for the reﬂected signal, incorpo-
rating parameters to describe the sea surface conditions, is
essential for the accuracy of the altimetric solution. The ac-
curacy achieved by the retracking altimetric algorithm used
here was of the order of 1 decimeter, with a spatial reso-
lution of 20 km. Future experiments targeting higher chip
rate codes (such as the GPS P-code instead of the used
C/A-code) should improve these results. Sensitivity anal-
ysis has also shown that the altitude of this ﬂight was not
optimal for GNSS-R altimetry and made the experiment
more prone to aircraft multipath problems. The angular
span of the ﬁrst-chip zone decreases with altitude—reducing
the impact of geophysical parameters, antenna pattern and
aircraft multipath on the retracking process of the leading
edge—producing a more robust altimetric solution. Higher
altitude ﬂights are thus now needed, also to better under-
stand the GNSS-R space scenario.

We believe the Eddy Experiment is an important mile-
stone on the road to a space mission. We underline that the
obtained precision is in line with earlier experiments and the-
oretical error budgets (see, e.g., Lowe et al. [2000a,2000b]).
We note that the same error budgets have been used to
investigate and conﬁrm the strong impact of space-borne
GNSS-R altimetric mission data on mesoscale ocean circu-
lation models (Letraon et al. [2003]).

Finally, and as discussed in Germain et al., Soulat et al.
[2003], we would like to emphasize that GNSS-R signals can
be proﬁtably used also for surface roughness measurements,
and that the two measurements are very synergic. Altimet-
ric and sea roughness GNSS-R processing can be merged in
an attempt to provide an autonomous complete description
of the sea—yielding topography and surface conditions. Fur-
ther analysis of existing datasets (which could be organized
in a coordinated database for the beneﬁt of the community)
and future experiments at higher altitudes will continue to
reﬁne our understanding of the potential of this technique.

Acknowledgments. This study was carried out under the
ESA contract TRP ETP 137.A. We thank EADS-Astrium and all
sub-contractors (CLS, IEEC, IFREMER, GMV) for their collab-
oration in the project, and the Institut Cartograﬁc de Catalunya
for ﬂawless ﬂight operations and aircraft GPS/INS kinematic pro-
cessing. The buoy measurement was provided by IEEC. Finally,
we thank CRESTech, for providing us with SSM/I Integrated
Water Vapor data.

All Starlab authors have contributed signiﬁcantly; the Starlab

author list has been ordered randomly.

Notes

System.

1. Global Climate Observing System/Global Ocean Observing

2. The Starlab STARLIGHT processor, also described in Ca-

parrini et al. [2003].

3. See Germain et al. [2003] for a discussion on the role of wave-

length in the deﬁnition of DMSS.

4. Special Sensor Microwave Imager, a passive microwave ra-
diometer ﬂown by the US Defense Meteorological Satellite
Program.

References

Caparrini, M., L. Ruﬃni

and G. Ruﬃni, PARFAIT:
the
GNSS-R coastal
2003 Workshop on Oceanography with GNSS-R, Star-
arXiv.org
lab Barcelona,
(http://arxiv.org/abs/physics/0311052).

2003. Available

in Proceedings

altimetry,

July

at

of

Elfouhaily, T., B. Chapron, K. Katsaros and D. Vandemark, A
uniﬁed directional spectrum for long and short wind-driven
waves, JGR, 102(15):781–796, 1997.

Germain, O., G. Ruﬃni, F. Soulat, M. Caparrini, B. Chapron,
II:
and P. Silvestrin, The GNSS-R Eddy Experiment
sea-
L-band and optical
in Pro-
roughness
ceedings of
the 2003 Workshop on Oceanography with
GNSS-R, Starlab, July 2003. Available at http://arXiv.org
(http://arxiv.org/abs/physics/0310093).

speculometry for directional

from low altitude aircraft,

retrieval

Le Traon, P.-Y., G. Dibarboure, G. Ruﬃni, O. Germain,
A. Thompson , GNSS-R measurements for ocean mesoscale
circulation mapping - an update, in Proceedings of the 2003
Workshop on Oceanography with GNSS-R, Starlab Barcelona,
July 2003. Available at http://starlab.es.

Lowe, S., J.L. LaBrecque, C. Zuﬀada, L.J. Romans, L. Young and
G.A. Hajj, First spaceborne observation of an earth-reﬂected
GPS signal, RS, 37(1):1–28, 2002.

Lowe, S., C. Zuﬀada, Y. Chao, P. Kroger, J.L LaBreque, and L.E.
Young, 5-cm precision aircraft ocean altimetry using GPS re-
ﬂections,GRL, (29):4359–4362, 2002.

Mart´ın-Neira, M., A PAssive Reﬂectometry and Interferometry
System (PARIS): application to ocean altimetry, ESA Jour-
nal, 17:331–355, 1993.

Picardi, G., R. Seu, S. G. Sorge and M. Mart´ın-Neira, Bistatic
model of ocean scattering, IEEE TAP, 46(10):1531–1541,
1998.

Rius, A., J.M. Aparicio, E. Cardellach, M. Mart´ın-Neira, B.
Chapron, Sea surface state measurements using GPS reﬂected
signal, GRL, 29 (23), 2122, 2002.

Ruﬃni, G., Kruse, L.P., Rius, A., B¨urki, B., Cucurull, L., Flores,
A., Estimation of Tropospheric Zenith Delay and Gradients
over the Madrid Area Using GPS and WVR Data, , Sea sur-
face state measurements using GPS reﬂected signal, GRL, 26
(4), 447, 1999.

Soulat, F., Sea surface remote-sensing with GNSS and sun-
light reﬂections, Doctoral Thesis, Universitat Polit`ecnica de
Catalunya/Starlab, 2003. Available at http://starlab.es.

Zavorotny, V. and A. Voronovich, Scattering of GPS signals from
the ocean with wind remote sensing application, IEEE TGRS,
38(2):951–964, 2000.

G. Ruﬃni, Research Department, Starlab, C. de l’Observatori,

s/n, 08035 Barcelona, Spain. (giulio.ruﬃni@starlab.es)

