GEOPHYSICAL RESEARCH LETTERS, VOL. ???, XXXX, DOI:10.1029/,

The Eddy Experiment II: GNSS-R speculometry for directional
sea-roughness retrieval from low aircraft
O. Germain, G. Ruﬃni, F. Soulat, M. Caparrini,1 B. Chapron2 and P. Silvestrin3

We report on the retrieval of directional sea-roughness
(the full directional mean square slope, including direction
and isotropy) through inversion of Global Navigation Satel-
lite System Reﬂections (GNSS-R) data collected during an
experimental ﬂight at 1 km altitude. The emphasis is on the
utilization of the entire Delay-Doppler Map (DDM) in order
to infer ocean roughness directional parameters. Obtained
estimates are analyzed and compared to Jason-1 measure-
ments and ECMWF numerical weather model outputs. We
highlight the impact of long waves on scatterer velocity and
the Delay Doppler spectrum.

1. Introduction

Several GNSS constellations and augmentation systems
are presently operational or under development, including
the pioneering US Global Positioning System (GPS) and the
forthcoming European system, Galileo. These all-weather,
long-term, stable and precise L-band signals can be used for
bistatic remote sensing of the ocean surface, an emerging
concept known as GNSS-R.

Among several applications, two classes have rapidly
sea-surface altimetry (see

emerged in the community:

1Starlab, C. de l’Observatori Fabra s/n, 08035 Barcelona,

Spain, http://starlab.es

2Ifremer, Technopˆole de Brest-Iroise BP 70, 2920

Plouzan´e, France, http://ifremer.fr

3ESA/ESTEC, Keplerlaan 1, 2200 Noordwijk, The

Netherlands, http://esa.int

Copyright 2014 by the American Geophysical Union.
0094-8276/14/$5.00

Data

4
0
0
2
 
l
u
J
 
8
 
 
]
h
p
-
o
a
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
7
3
0
7
0
4
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

]

m

[
 
y
a
e
D

l

200

100

0

−100

−200

−300

Ruﬃni et al. [2004] and references therein) and sea-surface
“speculometry” (a term discussed below), the determina-
tion of gravity wave sea roughness. Although this paper
addresses the latter, we note here the intrinsic capability of
GNSS-R for providing co-located measurements of both sur-
face roughness and sea level with high spatial and temporal
resolution. Co-location can help quantify the relationship
of velocities in the upper ocean (as driven by wind stress
forcing) with surface height dynamics.

As detected at L-band, the GNSS-R return is dominated
by sea surface roughness elements at a scale for which grav-
itational attraction is the major restoring force. GNSS-R
surface roughness measurements are therefore strongly cor-
related to the gravity dominated wave distribution.

In terms of operational applications, the expected rela-
tively high spatial and temporal measurements can be used
to constrain global ocean wave models (WAM) for bet-
ter forecasts. With regards to scientiﬁc applications, sea
roughness data can help quantify atmosphere-ocean cou-
pling, including momentum and energy ﬂuxes—e.g., through
the drag coeﬃcient for hurricane modeling—as well as sur-
face wave acceleration, breaking/whitecapping and gas ex-
In particular, air-sea CO2 ﬂux is an important
change.
ingredient in understanding the ocean’s biogeochemical re-
sponse to, and its inﬂuence on, climate change. As now un-
derstood and experimentally demonstrated, a very promis-
ing approach to quantify CO2 ﬂux will be to better quan-
tify the surface fractional area, which is readily measur-
able from surface slope measurements. Recent studies at
NASA/Wallops (FEDS.98, the Flux Exchange Dynamics
Study) indicate that surface roughness (through its relation
to Fractional Area) is a much better quantiﬁer of the air sea
gas ﬂux than the traditionally used wind speed (Watson et
al. [1999]). Using GNSS-R to extract gravity surface slope
statistical properties, temporal spatial climatologies could
be inferred to help quantify the role of the ocean in taking
up increases of CO2.

In addition, global L-band sea-roughness data is impor-
tant for L-band radiometric missions, such as SMOS (Soil
Moisture and Ocean Salinity) and AQUARIUS, in order to
separate roughness and salinity contributions to L-band ra-
diometric brightness measurements.

Inferring sea roughness from GNSS-R data requires (i)
a parametric description of the sea surface, (ii) an electro-
magnetic and instrument model for sea-surface scattering
at L-band and (iii) the choice of a GNSS-R data product to
be inverted. In the literature, there is quite an agreement
It has been recognized that the
on the two ﬁrst aspects.
scattering of GNSS signals can be modeled as a Geomet-
ric Optics process (GO), where the fundamental physical
process is the scattering from mirror-like surface elements.
This is the reason for the use of the term “speculometry”
here, which stems from the Latin word for mirror, speculo.
Therefore, the most important features of the sea surface in
GNSS-R are described by the statistics of facet slopes and
their curvatures at scales larger than the electromagnetic
wavelength (λ).

The statistical distribution of facet slopes is described
by the bi-dimensional sea-surface slope probability density

1  

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

−200

−150

−100

−50

50

100

150

200

0
Doppler [Hz]

Figure 1. Example of GPS-R Delay-Doppler Map.

1

X - 2

GERMAIN ET AL.: GNSS-R SPECULOMETRY FROM LOW ALTITUDE AIRCRAFT

PRN−08
PRN−10
PRN−29
Jason (Ku−band)

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

S
S
M

 
l
a
t
o
T

i

 
 
 
 
]
g
e
d
[
 
h
t
u
m
z
A
F
D
P
 
e
p
o
S

 

l

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
y
p
o
r
t
o
s
I
 

F
D
P
 
e
p
o
S

l

0.05

0.045

0.04

0.035

0.03

0.025

0.02

0.015

80

60

40

20

0

−20

−40

−60

−80

1

0.9

0.8

0.7

0.6

0.5

0.4

0.3

0.2

0.1

0

41.5

42

Latitude North [deg]

42.5

PRN−08
PRN−10
PRN−29
ECMWF wind direction

41.5

42

Latitude North [deg]

42.5

PRN−08
PRN−10
PRN−29

41.5

42

Latitude North [deg]

42.5

Figure 2. DMSSλ estimation with the DDM least-
square inversion approach, along the descending (North
to South) track—MSS top, SPA middle and SPI bottom.
The total MSS (Ku-Band) measured by Jason-1 and the
ECMWF wind direction are also shown for comparison.

function (PDF). Under a Gaussian assumption, three pa-
rameters suﬃce to fully deﬁne the PDF: the directional
mean square slope DMSSλ, which results from the integra-
tion of the ocean energy spectrum at wavelengths larger
than λ. The symbol DMSSλ is a symmetric tensor which
englobes the three parameters deﬁning the ellipsoidal shape
of the slope PDF: scale (total MSS), direction (Slope PDF
azimuth) and isotropy (Slope PDF isotropy).

It is important to note that DMSSλ has rarely been em-
phasized as the geophysical parameter of interest in the liter-
ature. Instead, most authors link sea roughness to the near
surface wind vector, which is thought to be more useful for

oceanographic and meteorological users. Unfortunately, this
is somewhat misleading, as the relationship between surface
wind and roughness is not one-to-one and requires an addi-
tional modeling layer. The connection between DMSSλ and
wind is aﬀected by other factors (e.g., swell, fetch and degree
of maturity), as is well known in the altimeter community
(see Gourrion et al. [2002]).

Also,

for simplicity the product typically inverted in
GNSS-R speculometry is a simple Delay Waveform, that is,
a 1D delay map of the reﬂected signal amplitude. Using a
single GNSS emitter, the wind speed can be inferred assum-
ing an isotropic slope PDF (see, e.g., Komjathy et al. [2000],
Garrison et al. [1998, 2002], or Cardellach et al. [2003]). At-
tempts have also been made to measure the wind direction
by ﬁxing the PDF isotropy to some theoretical value (around
0.7) and using at least two satellites reﬂections with diﬀer-
ent azimuths (see, e.g., Zuﬀada et al. [2000], Armatys et al.
[2000] and Garrison et al. [2003] ).

As investigated in the frame of the ESA OPPSCAT
project (Ruﬃni et al. [2000]), it is possible to work with a
product of higher information content, the 2D DDM of the
reﬂected signal amplitude. The provision of an extra dimen-
sion opens the possibility of performing a robust estimation
of all the DMSSλ parameters. In Elfouhaily et al.
[2002],
a simple and rapid method based on the moments of the
DDM was proposed to estimate the full set of DMSSλ. Un-
fortunately, this approach neglects the impact of the bistatic
Woodward Ambiguity Function and antenna gain modula-
tion and provides only a ﬁrst order approximation solution.
Here we focus on a direct ﬁtting/inversion of the DDM for
the retrieval of directional roughness, and analyze GNSS-R
data collected during the Eddy Experiment. The campaign
and altimetric data analysis of this experiment is reported
in Ruﬃni et al. [2004] and Soulat [2003] (where the analysis
of optical data was also carried out). The primary goal of
the paper is to investigate the full exploitation of the bidi-
mensional GNSS-R DDM product to infer the set of three
DMSSλ parameters. The driver of the study has been the
exhaustive exploitation of the information contained in the
DDM product. The approach here relies on a least-squares
ﬁt of the speculometric model, as discussed in the third sec-
tion. In the fourth section, results are compared to ancillary
data (Jason-1 radar altimeter, ECMWF numerical weather
model). Finally, another important outcome of the paper
is put forward: we show good evidence that a small part
of the DDM Doppler spread can be attributed to the “scat-
terer velocity”, i.e., the rapid motion of the λ (or larger)
sized sea-surface facets following the long waves.

2. Data collection and pre-processing

As discussed in Ruﬃni et al.

[2004], the data set (i.e.
direct and reﬂected GPS signals together with the aircraft
kinematic data) was gathered during an airborne campaign
carried out in September 2002. The aircraft overﬂew the
Mediterranean Sea, oﬀ the coast of Catalonia (Spain), north-
wards from the city of Barcelona for about 150 km at 1000
m altitude and 45-75 m/s speed. The area is crossed by the
ground track #187 of the Jason-1 radar altimeter, which
the aircraft overﬂew during the satellite overpass, for pre-
cise comparison. The track was oveﬂown twice, ﬁrst during
the ascending pass (from South to North) at low speed (45-
60 m/s) and second during the descending pass (from North
to South) at a faster speed (65-75 m/s) due to wind. The
time shift between the two passes over a same point on the
track ranged from 45 min to 2h 15 min. During the ascend-
ing pass, PRNs 08, 10 and 24 were visible with elevations
spanning 30o to 85o while PRNs 08, 10 and 29 were visible

GERMAIN ET AL.: GNSS-R SPECULOMETRY FROM LOW ALTITUDE AIRCRAFT

X - 3

the Jason-1 σ0 co-located measurements at 1 Hz sampling
(7 km) and 20 km resolution. The Jason-1 MSS was ob-
tained through the simple relationship MSS= κ/σ0, κ being
the eﬀective (empirical) Fresnel coeﬃcient, here set to 0.45.
As expected, we observed that the level and dynamic of MSS
decreased with longer wavelength (from 2 cm in Ku-band to
19 cm in L-band). The low dynamic of L-band MSS impeded
any clear trend comparison although the measurements of
PRN-10 seem in good agreement with Jason-1. The Jason-
1 wind speed, derived from both the Ku-band σ0 and the
signiﬁcant wave height (of about 2 m), ranged from 9 to 13
m/s along the track. Translating this wind speed into L-
band MSS through the spectrum of Elfouhaily et al. [1997]
yields values between 0.0220 and 0.0255, in-line with GNSS-
R results. However, we emphasize that the assumption of a
wind-driven spectrum was not really warranted during the
campaign: the presence of swell deﬁnitely had a signiﬁcant
impact.

SPA estimation results are presented on the middle plot.
The inter-PRN consistency is here very satisfying and the
apparent discrepancy in the southern part of the track can
be explained as a degenerate solution of the estimation prob-
lem. The inversion of DDM for the SPA is degenerate in at
least two cases: when the transmitter is at zenith or when
the receiver moves towards the transmitter. In these scenar-
ios, the Delay-Doppler lines mapping the glistening zone are
fully symmetric around the receiver direction and it becomes
impossible to distinguish a slope PDF from its mirror image
about the receiver direction. This eﬀect is clearly observed
here where the two found SPA (-20o and 80o) are indeed
symmetric around the aircraft heading direction (30o). In
this part of the track, the azimuth of PRN-08 is about 50o,
almost aligned with the aircraft heading direction. In the
northern part of the track, the estimated SPA matches very
well with the wind direction provided by ECMWF. In the
southern part, the mismatch reaches up to 50o. However,
we underline that wind is not the only element driving SPA
and that swell also contributed in this case. Besides, the
accuracy of ECMWF wind direction is estimated to 20o.

Finally, the bottom plot shows the SPI variations along
It is worth pointing out that the wind-driven
the track.
spectrum of Elfouhaily et al.
[1997] for a mature sea pre-
dicts a SPI value around 0.65, largely insensitive to wind

Scatterer velocity
Jason wind speed

during the descending track with elevations between 40o and
75o. The conﬁguration of this test ﬂight was not optimized
for speculometry:
from such low altitude, the sea-surface
reﬂective area is essentially limited by the PRN C/A code,
and the glistening zone is coarsely Delay-Doppler mapped.
The raw GPS signals were acquired with a modiﬁed Tur-
boRogue receiver, sampled at 20.456 MHz and pre-processed
with a dedicated software composed of two sub-units fed
with the direct and reﬂected signals. Correlations were
computed along 81 delay lags while the Doppler dimen-
sion spanned -200 to 200 Hz with a step of 20 Hz. The
coherent/incoherent integration times were respectively set
to 20 milliseconds and 10 s, meaning that the averaged DDM
were produced at the rate of 0.1 Hz after summation of 500
incoherent looks (see Figure 1 for a sample waveform).

3. Speculometric model and DDM inversion

In the Zavorotny et al.

[2000] GNSS-R GO model, the
link between the DDM mean power at delay-Doppler P (τ, f )
and the sea-surface slope PDF

(sx, sy) is given by

P (τ, f ) =

dxdy

Z
χ

2

P

Gr
t R2
R2

r ·

q4
q4
z · P (cid:18)

qx
−
qz

, −

qy
qz (cid:19) ·
fc

[τm(x, y)

τc

τ, fm(x, y)

f ] ,

(1)

P

−

−

−

−
where Gr is the receiver antenna pattern, Rt and Rr the dis-
tances from generic point on sea-surface to transmitter and
receiver, (qx, qy, qz) the scattering vector, χ the Woodward
Ambiguity Function (WAF),
the slope PDF, τm(x, y)
and fm(x, y) the delay-Doppler mapping on sea-surface and
(τc, fc) the extra delay/Doppler of the geometric specular-
point with respect to direct signal (also called DDM “cen-
ters”). Accounting for the receiver mean thermal noise PN
and including a scaling parameter α, the mean amplitude
of the DDM can be written as A(τ, f ) =
α.P (τ, f ) + PN .
As discussed above,
is described by the DMSSλ parameter
set, which deﬁnes an elliptic quadratic form in the 2D space
of slopes. Mean-square slopes along major and minor prin-
cipal axes are often called MSS up-wind (mssu) and MSS
cross-wind (mssc) respectively. In the following, we will re-
fer to the Total MSS (MSStot=2√mssu.mssc, proportional
to the ellipse area), the Slope PDF azimuth (SPA, the di-
rection of semi-major axis with respect to North) and the
Slope PDF Isotropy (SPI, equal to mssc/mssu).

p

P

The data inversion was performed through a minimiza-
tion of the mean square diﬀerence between model and
data DDMs. Numerical optimization was carried out
by a steepest-slope-descent algorithm with a Levenberg-
Marquardt type adjustment. The main diﬃculty stemmed
from the presence of several nuisance parameters in the for-
ward model (mainly τc and fc but also α). The DDM centers
were aﬀected by the aircraft trajectory (altitude and vertical
velocity) to ﬁrst order but also by geophysical parameters
(sea level, currents, etc.). They needed to be accurately
known in order to estimate DMSSλ. For this reason, the
DMSSλ and nuisance parameters were jointly estimated in
an iterative manner.

4. Results and analysis

]
s
/
m

[
 
d
e
e
p
S

14

13

12

11

10

9

8

7

6

5

The values of DMSSλ estimated along the descending
track of the ﬂight are shown on Figure 2. The top plot
illustrates the variations of total MSS. As observed, the
inter-PRN consistency is reasonable in the southern part
of the track but worsens slightly in the northern part. For
comparison, the total MSS in Ku-band was derived from

41.3

41.4

41.5

41.6

41.7

41.8

41.9

42

42.1

42.2

Latitude North [deg]

Figure 3. Average scatterer velocity obtained when
assuming a perfect match of ascending/descending MSS
and the ﬁrst order MSS model. It correlates fairly well
with wind speed and the observed swell from optical data.

X - 4

GERMAIN ET AL.: GNSS-R SPECULOMETRY FROM LOW ALTITUDE AIRCRAFT

speed. The signiﬁcant departure from this reference value is
a probable signature of under-developed sea with the pres-
ence of swell. However, the poor consistency among PRN
remains an issue. Further work is needed to validate the
accuracy of SPI estimation and to better understand the
potential information contained in this product.

∼

As a second outcome of this campaign analysis, we now
discuss the signature of “scatterer velocity” in the data, i.e.,
the signature of fastly moving sea-surface facets with size
(curvature) larger than
20 cm. Such signature was dis-
covered when comparing the total MSS along the ascend-
ing and descending tracks, as estimated by the least-squares
approach: a drastic discrepancy (up to 33%) was observed
for two passes shifted by less than hour over the same track
point. As a simple check, we inverted the data with the sim-
pler ﬁrst-order analytic method proposed in Elfouhaily et al.
[2002], MSS=λ2B2/(2V 2 sin2 ǫ) , where ǫ is the transmitter
elevation, V is the receiver speed and B is the DDM Doppler
bandwidth: the results do resemble the ones obtained with
the least-squares approach and the ascending/descending
discrepancy remains.

Multipath eﬀects could conceivably lead to a Doppler
width modulation. However, some azimuth dependence
should have been observed and was not. Another possible
cause could be a changing aircraft attitude between ascend-
ing and descending tracks, but the aircraft roll and pitch
values were checked to be nominal along both tracks. More-
over, a change in yaw would slightly impact the antenna
pattern ground projection but would translate only into a
Doppler bandwidth cut and never a broadening. The most
likely explanation was that of a geophysical signature: the
Doppler spectrum width was modulated by the motion of
specular facets on sea-surface. While the inversion approach
assumed a still surface, the relative velocity between receiver
and scatterer should be taken into account for proper DDM
inversion. At high receiver velocities this assumption is ﬁne
because the scatterer velocity impact will not be signiﬁcant.
At the low speeds in the Eddy Experiment, however, scat-
terer velocity becomes relevant. This analysis is consistent
with the fact that the MSS estimated in the ascending track
(slower aircraft speed, from 45 to 60 m/s) showed abnor-
mal high values compared to the ones estimated during the
ascending track (faster speed, from 65 to 75 m/s).

±

Assuming that the MSS did not vary signiﬁcantly be-
tween the times of the ascending and descending passes,
we can roughly solve for the scatterer velocity vs (assumed
here to point along the track for simplicity) using the ﬁrst
order equation MSS=λ2B2/(2V 2 sin2 ǫ) and considering the
relative velocity between sea-surface scatterers and aircraft,
vs for the ascending/descending passes. Using this
i.e., V
scheme with all possible pairs of measurements and aver-
aging, the plot of Figure 3 results. The scatterer velocity
variations correlate well with the variations of wind speed.
From the dispersion relation, the average speed of 8 m/s
corresponds to long waves of about 45 m wavelength, a re-
sult consistent with optical observations of the swell vector
(wavelength and direction, see Soulat [2003]). A more de-
tailed analysis can be carried out taking into account the
correct deformation of the Doppler lines on the surface and
searching for a scatterer velocity vector.

5. Conclusion

We have reported the ﬁrst inversion of GNSS-R full
Delay-Doppler Maps for the retrieval of the sea-surface di-
rectional mean square slope, DMSSλ. The estimates have
shown good inter-PRN consistency (except for SPI) and fair
agreement with other sources of data.

In addition, we have discussed a new geophysical signa-
ture in GNSS-R: the sea-surface scatterer velocity. Sea-
surface scatterers can easily travel at velocities reaching 5-10

m/s and their motion may impact the DDM Doppler band-
width of slow-moving receivers. The detection of such a
geophysical signature opens new opportunities for GNSS-R
speculometry: to measure either DMSSλ or a combination
of DMSSλ and scatterer velocity, depending on the aircraft
speed.

Finally, we emphasize that the ﬂight was not optimized
for speculometry: higher and faster ﬂights are needed in the
future in order to consolidate the concept of DDM inversion
for DMSSλ estimation and to test new concepts for increased
inversion resolution.

Acknowledgments. The data analysis and the experimen-
tal campaign were respectively carried out under the ESA con-
tracts TRP-ETP-137.A and 3-10120/01/NL/SF (OPPSCAT).
We thank the Institut Cartograﬁc de Catalunya for ﬂawless ﬂight
operations and aircraft GPS/INS kinematic processing. All Star-
lab authors have contributed signiﬁcantly; the Starlab author list
has been ordered randomly.

References

Armatys, M., A. Komjathy, P. Axelrad, and S. Katzberg. A com-
parison of GPS and scatterometer sensing of ocean wind speed
and direction. In Proc. IEEE IGARSS, Honolulu, HA, 2000.
Cardellach, E., G. Ruﬃni, D. Pino, A. Rius, A. Komjathy, and
J. Garrison, Mediterranean balloon experiment: GPS reﬂec-
tion for wind speed retrieval from the stratosphere. Rem. Sens.
Env., 2003.

Elfouhaily, T., B. Chapron, K. Katsaros, and D. Vandemark, A
uniﬁed directional spectrum for long and short wind-driven
waves, JGR, 102(15):781–796, 1997.

Elfouhaily, T., D. Thompson, and L. Linstrom, Delay-Doppler
analysis of bistatically reﬂected signals from the ocean surface:
Theory and application. IEEE TGRS, 40(3):560–573, 2002.
Garrison, J.L., Katzberg, J.L., Eﬀects of sea roughness on bistati-
cally scattered range coded signals from the Global Positioning
System, GRL, vol 25, n. 13, 1998.

Garrison, J.L., Wind speed measurement using forward scattered

GPS signals. IEEE TGRS, 40:50–65, 2002.

Garrison, J.L., Anisotropy in Reﬂected GPS Measurements
in Proceedings of the 2003 Workshop on
of Ocean Winds,
Oceanography with GNSS-R, Starlab, July 2003. Available at
http://starlab.es/gnssr2003/proceedings/.

Gourrion, J., D. Vandemark, S. Bailey, and B. Chapron, Investi-
gation of C-band altimeter cross section dependence on wind
speed and sea state, Can. J. Remote Sensing, Vol. 28, No. 3,
pp. 484-489, 2002.

Komjathy, A., V. Zavorotny, P. Axelrad, G.H. Born, and
J.L. Garrison, GPS signal scattering from sea surface: Wind
speed retrieval using experimental data and theoretical model.
Rem. Sens. Env., 73:162–174, 2000.

Ruﬃni, G., J.L. Garrison, E. Cardellach, A. Rius, M. Armatys,
and D. Masters. Inversion of GPS-R delay-Doppler mapping
waveforms for wind retrieval. In Proc. IEEE IGARSS, Hon-
olulu, HA, 2000.

Ruﬃni, G., F. Soulat, M. Caparrini, O. Germain and M. Martin-
Neira , The Eddy Experiment I: Accurate GNSS-R ocean al-
timetry from low altitude aircraft, to appear in GRL, 2004.

Soulat, F., Sea surface

reﬂections,

sunlight
Polit`ecnica de Catalunya/Starlab,
http://starlab.es/library.html.

remote-sensing with GNSS and
Doctoral
Universitat
at

2003. Available

Thesis,

Watson W. G., et al., NASA/GODDARD Research Activities for
the Global Ocean Canrbon Cycle: A Prospectus for the 21st
Century, December 99.

Zavorotny V., and A. Voronovich, Scattering of GPS signals from
the ocean with wind remote sensing application, IEEE TGRS,
38(2):951–964, 2000.

Zuﬀada, C., and T. Elfouhaily, Determining wind speed and di-
rection with ocean reﬂected GPS signals, In Proc. of Sixth
Int. Conf. on Remote Sensing for Marine and Coastal Envi-
ronments, Charleston, 2000.

G. Ruﬃni, Research Department, Starlab, C. de l’Observatori,

s/n, 08035 Barcelona, Spain. (giulio.ruﬃni@starlab.es)

