4
0
0
2
 
l
u
J
 
5
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
o
a
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
2
8
0
7
0
4
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

A link between an ice age era and a rapid polar shift

W. Woelﬂi∗ and W. Baltensperger†

February 2, 2008

The striking asymmetry of the ice cover during
the Last Global Maximum suggests that the North
Pole was in Greenland and then rapidly shifted
to its present position in the Arctic See. A sce-
nario which causes such a rapid geographic polar
shift is physically possible. It involves an additional
planet, which disappeared by evaporation within the
Holocene. This is only possible within such a short
period, if the planet was in an extremely eccentric
orbit and hot. Then, since this produced an inter-
planetary gas cloud, the polar shift had to be pre-
ceded by a cold period with large global temperature
variations during several million years.

In the Last Global Maximum the ice cover on
the North American continent reached the region
of present New York and in Europe of North Ger-
many, while East Arctic Siberia was ice free. This
well known asymmetry is corroborated by current
research. The palaeolithic Yana RHS site [1] at
71◦N, well inside the polar circle, was populated
27 000 years ago. This is referred to as ”A surpris-
ing survival story” [2]. Alternatively, the site is an
indication that the climate in that region was mild.
Clearly, the Sun was not warmer since on the North
American continent the climate was cold. In arctic
Siberia, a mild climate could only result from lower
latitude.

The postulate of a geographic polar shift is more
than a century old. The striking asymmetry of the
ice cover on the northern hemisphere in the Last
Global Maximum would disappear, if the north pole
had then been situated within Greenland, shifted
by about 18◦ from its present position in the Arctic
Ocean [3]. Considering this shift, the Yana RHS site
would have a position of about 53◦N, appropriate
for hunting and living all year round. Of course,
other regions also experienced changes. For in-

∗Institute for Particle Physics, ETHZ H¨onggerberg,
e-mail:

CH-8093 Z¨urich, Switzerland (Prof.
woelﬂi@phys.ethz.ch .

emerit.);

†Centro Brasileiro de Pesquisas F´ısicas, Rua Dr. Xavier
e-mail:

Sigaud,150, 222 90 Rio de Janeiro, Brazil;
baltens@cbpf.br

stance in the Amazon palaeo sand dunes have been
found at the Equator [4]. Before the shift, these
were at a latitude of about 18◦N, which crosses the
present Sahara desert. The assumed turn of the
globe similarly explains climate changes of many
regions.
Since the South Pole remained within
Antarctica, the resulting climate changes on the
southern hemisphere were less spectacular.

How can a polar shift arise? The shape of the ro-
tating Earth is determined by hydrostatic equilib-
rium; the Earth has a slight bulge along the Equa-
tor. For this reason, the rotation axis perpendicular
to the equatorial plane is stable. If, suddenly, the
Earth got a further deformation in some oblique
direction, the stable position of the rotation axis
would be in a diﬀerent direction. Then, geographi-
cally, the present rotation axis would start to move
around this stable direction. This motion would
continue until the Earth had completely relaxed
into a new hydrostatic equilibrium shape. During
the polar wandering, Earth’s angular momentum
is strictly conserved. Since the Earth is nearly a
sphere the rotation axis makes a small angle of less
than a minute of arc with the angular momentum
vector so that its direction approximately also re-
mains pointing to a ﬁxed star. It is the globe itself
that moves. The path of the rotation axis on the
globe is a spiral. The diﬀerence between end point
and starting point is the geographic polar shift. A
turn in the spiral takes about 400 days (Chandler
period). For simplicity, we shall describe the decay
of the diﬀerence between Earth’s actual shape and
its equilibrium shape for the instantaneous rotation
axis by a relaxation time. Then, for a signiﬁcant
shift, the relaxation time must be longer than about
100 days. Otherwise the motion stops too soon.
This required slow relaxation characterizes a plas-
tic behavior, a concept of the 20th century which
was missing in early treatments of the problem. A
solid would relax with the speed of sound and a
liquid with the speed of liquid ﬂow. Since matter
needs to be displaced only about 10 km, the equi-
librium shape of Earth would be reached within less

1

than one day in these cases. Thomas Gold [5] called
attention to the fact that with a slow relaxation (of,
say, 1000 days for global deformations) a geographic
polar shift becomes possible. Numerically, the mo-
tion is obtained from two equations. First, a relax-
ation equation of the inertial tensor describes the
gradual replacement of the old equatorial bulge and
additional deformation by a new equatorial bulge
belonging to the instantaneous rotation axis. Sec-
ond, the equation of motion of the gyroscope, the
Euler equation, determines the path of the rotation
axis in coordinates ﬁxed to the Earth. Admittedly,
this is a simpliﬁed treatment of the problem. Most
statements of this paper are based on simple esti-
mates. More detailed models may change numbers
or perhaps even conclusions. The required shift of
18◦ can be obtained by a stretching deformation
with an amplitude of 1 per mil in a direction 30◦
to the initial rotation axis assuming a relaxation
time of 1000 days. Note that the maximum change
of latitude which is larger than the ﬁnal change, is
reached in 200 days. The violent variation of cli-
mate evidenced by frozen mammoths thus becomes
plausible.

What can cause this assumed sudden additional
deformation? An asteroid hitting the Earth would
introduce a lot of energy and momentum into one
point. This is not suitable for a soft displacement of
large quantities of matter. We need a more globally
acting force.

Let us suppose that an additional planet, hence-
forth called Z, passes near the Earth. Its gravita-
tional attraction accelerates the Earth. At Earth’s
center, inertia compensates the perturbing gravi-
tational force.
In the part of the Earth near Z,
the gravitational attraction dominates, while on the
far side, it is the inertia. Therefore this tidal force
stretches the globe along the direction to Z. If the
closest approach between the centers of Earth and
of Z is 20 000 km and their relative velocity 40 km/s,
then the passage lasts for about 500 s ≈ 8 minutes.
In this time a stretching amplitude of 6.5 km must
be built up. It is easy to estimate the equilibrium
deformation for a constant tidal force [6]. The dy-
namic problem is far more complicated. We simply
suppose that the peak tidal force then has to be an
order of magnitude larger. With this assumption
and giving Z the mass of Mars, the closest approach
between the centers of Z and Earth is about 15 000
km. A close approach indeed! This shows that the
mass of Z cannot be smaller than that of Mars. Ob-
viously, a larger planet passing at a greater distance
would have more time and could produce the defor-
mation in a smoother way.

This planet Z does not exist any more. How can
it have disappeared in the short time span of the
Holocene? Only the Sun can achieve this by ei-
ther evaporating or swallowing Z. Every possibility
must be considered to this end. The relative ve-
locity between Earth and Z is a planetary velocity
determined by the mass of the Sun. The momen-
tum transfer during the close approach amounts to
only about 1 % of the momentum of Z, so that its
orbit changes little. Therefore, already before the
approach, the orbit of Z must have been extremely
eccentric.
Indeed, Z had to approach the Sun as
close as compatible with its existence, say to a per-
ihelion distance of about 4 million km. Near the
perihelion Z was heated by solar radiation and tidal
work, thus was liquid and shining. A highly eccen-
tric orbit has a small angular momentum. This can
suﬀer a relative change of order ±10 % during the
close approach between Z and Earth, and the re-
sulting relative change of the perihelion distance is
twice as big. The disappearance of Z during the
short Holocene indicates that the angular momen-
tum of Z’s orbit decreased in the actual event. Nev-
ertheless, a direct drop into the Sun after the close
approach seems unlikely.

During the close approach the tidal forces on Z
were larger than those on Earth. Z may have been
torn into two or more pieces (called Zn). The fact
that Z was liquid and hot inside facilitated its disin-
tegration. A disruption of Z implies that the mass
of Z was smaller than Earth’s since otherwise the
Earth would have been broken up too. This re-
stricts the possible mass of Z to a range of one order
of magnitude.

Since Z was hot it lost matter by evaporation.
For a Mars sized planet this is limited by the es-
cape energy of the particles. Atoms or ions evap-
orate rather than molecules. The evaporation rate
from the pieces Zn is dramatically increased. Con-
tinued tidal work between Sun and the parts Zn
causes their perihelion distances to shrink. This,
combined with a continuously diminishing escape
velocity, may lead to the complete evaporation of
the objects Zn within the Holocene.

Atoms and ions (from Zn also molecules) evapo-
rated into interplanetary space. Particles are not
blown away by radiation pressure provided their
ﬁrst excitation energy lies beyond the main solar
spectrum. Atoms and ions of this type remained in
orbits bound to the Sun. Yet, even these particles
scatter part of the solar radiation (mostly Thom-
son scattering, visible as violet-blue). This limits
their lifetime; due to Poynting-Robertson drag [7]
they spiral into the Sun. While Z was hot, a cloud

2

of particles existed in interplanetary space, which
screened part of the solar radiation.
It is an ob-
served fact [8] that about 3 million years ago the
mean temperature of Earth started to decrease and
to ﬂuctuate. We conclude that Z must have been
in the highly eccentric orbit since that time. In re-
ality and in this model the era of glaciation has a
beginning.

The distance of approach necessary for a polar
shift, say 20 000 km, deﬁnes a target which is minute
compared to the surface of the sphere at Earth’s dis-
tance from the Sun (150 million km). Therefore for
a polar shift event Z probably crossed this sphere
millions of times, even assuming that the plane of
its orbit remained within a few degrees from the
ecliptic. On the other hand, the trial period could
not have lasted much longer since otherwise Z would
have collided with one of the inner planets consider-
ing that the distance of approach for a polar shift is
not much larger than the sum of the radii relevant
for a collision. To sum up, the occurrence of the po-
lar shift together with the fact that Z disappeared
in less than 10 000 years require that Z had been in
an extremely eccentric orbit during several million
years. During this time the gas cloud aﬀected the
climates of the planets.

This cloud of atoms and ions in interplanetary
space probably has complex properties. Two parti-
cles in planetary orbits typically have a suﬃciently
high relative velocitiy so that their collision is in-
elastic and accompanied by light emission. This
reduces their relative kinetic energy. The orbits be-
come more similar. The width of the cloud shrinks.
This in turn shortens the time between collisions.
The dynamics of the cloud furthermore depends on
the lifetime of the particles. If the Earth is in the
cloud, part of the solar radiation is screened and
Earth’s temperature globally reduced. (Actually, if
the Earth were in an isotropically distributed cloud,
the incidence of radiation would be enhanced by
backscattering.) However, if the cloud is restricted
to a narrow solid angle, the Earth – being outside
the cloud – is exposed to the full radiation from
most of the solar surface and in addition some scat-
tered radiation from the cloud. In this situation the
climate can be globally warmer than it is at present
[9]. When the Earth is in the cloud, atoms and
ions ﬂow into Earth’s atmosphere. This is clearly
demonstrated by the sharply peaked measured oc-
currence of impurities in the ice of Antarctica dur-
ing the cold periods [10]. During the last three mil-
lion years the mass of Z decreased due to evapora-
tion and the perihelion distance of Z shrank because
of tidal work. Both eﬀects enhanced the evapora-

tion rate. Thus the temperature of the cold peri-
ods decreased with time and its variations became
larger [8, 9, 10]. The time dependence of the screen-
ing depends on the external forcing on Earth and
on the particles. We expect that this, in conjunc-
tion with the feedbacks on Earth, will form a basis
for understanding the observed temperature vari-
ations, in particular the Dansgaard-Oeschger [11]
events. At present, the basic distribution of cli-
mates on Earth follows plausible rules. Therefore,
the surprising climate variations during the ice age
era are the result of a violent action from the out-
side on the intrinsically well behaved climate system
with displaced poles. The inclination, i.e. the an-
gle between Earth’s orbit and the invariant plane
(perpendicular to the solar system’s angular mo-
mentum), should be an important parameter for the
screening of the solar radiation. Since Earth’s incli-
nation has a period of 100 kyr, this can be the key
for the observed dominant temperature variations
of the last 700 kyr [10, 12, 13, 14].

The origin of the postulated planet Z is not
known. It may have been a moon of Jupiter or it
may have come from outside the planetary system.
This ice age era with its temperature variations is a
strange and possibly unique period in Earth’s his-
tory. Correspondingly, the occurrence of a planet
like Z has to be extremely rare. Z presumably lost
energy through resonances with Jupiter and other
planets in a time of the order of one million years
[7, 15]. The fact that it simultaneously lost angu-
lar momentum and entered an extremely eccentric
orbit is not exceptional [15]. There are not many
adjustable parameters in the model. The mass of Z
prior the end of the Pleistocene is between 1/10 of
Earth’s mass and Earth’s mass. The perihelion dis-
tance is such that Z is hot during the Pleistocene.
We assume 4 Mio km but this number depends on
the treatment of the heating of Z by irradiation and
tidal work. The major semi-axis and eccentricity of
Z’s orbit must combine to an aphelion distance that
is larger than the radius of Earth’s orbit. How-
ever, a much larger value of the major semi-axis
would inhibit suﬃciently frequent interactions with
the Earth [16]. An extreme eccentricity makes the
orbit sensitive to loss of angular momentum during
the close encounter and thereby helps Zn to disap-
pear during the Holocene. Further orbital parame-
ters which would deﬁne Z’s position at given time
are not determined. We can only discuss typical
behaviours of an orbiting Z [16].

Striking mysteries of palaeoclimate can be ex-
plained by a geographic polar shift near the end
of the Pleistocene. Therefore, there have been nu-

3

merous attempts [17] to ﬁnd a mechanism for such
a shift. This paper describes one of these. At the
present stage, the paper tries to call attention to
the fact that a shift of the geographic position of
the poles is physically possible. This is a catas-
trophic event as evidenced by frozen animals and
muck in arctic Siberia. Their C14 ages mostly scat-
ter around 11 500 years before present. It is an open
question, why some frozen carcasses have diﬀerent
C14 ages.

In this model the polar shift results from the close
passage of an additional planet in our planetary sys-
tem. A polar shift scenario in which this planet is
in a moderately eccentric orbit could also be con-
sidered. In this case there would be no gas cloud
and no ice age era. The additional planet could
be expelled from the solar system or driven into
the Sun by resonances in a time of the order of a
million years. However, the condition that Z must
disappear within the Holocene limits the scenarios
to a narrow range.
In this case Z must be in an
extremely eccentric orbit so that it is hot and evap-
orates. It then follows that the polar shift must be
preceded by a cold period with vigorous tempera-
ture ﬂuctuations during a few million years. The
ice age era which lasted for about 3 million years
[8] is such a period. The model explains that it had
a beginning and end. With the rapid disappearance
of Z, the ice age era is an inevitable precursor of the
pole shift event.

References

[1] V.V. Pitulko, P.A. Nikolski, E.Yu. Girya, A.E.
Basilyan, V.E. Tumskoy, S.A. Koulakov, S.N.
Astakhov, E.Yu. Pavlova and M.A. Anisimov,
The Yana RHS site: Humans in the Arctic Be-
fore the Last Glacial Maximum, Science 303,
52-59 (2004).

[2] R. Stone, A Surprising Survival Story in the

Siberian Arctic, Science, 303, 33 (2004).

[3] W. Woelﬂi, W. Baltensperger and R. Nufer,
An Additional Planet as a Model for the Plei-
stocene Ice Age,
http://arxiv.org/abs/physics/0204004 .

[4] A.C. Filho, D. Schwartz, S.H. Tatuni and T.
Rosique, Amazonian Paleodunes Provide Ev-
idence for Drier Climate Phase during the
Late Pleistocene-Holocene, Quaternary Re-
search, 56, 205-209 (2002).

[5] T Gold, Instability of the Earths Axis of Rota-

tion, Nature 175, 526 (1955).

[6] W. Woelﬂi and W. Baltensperger, A possible
explanation for Earths climatic changes in the
past few million years,
http://xxx.lanl.gov/abs/physics/9907033 (In
this preprint the authors had not yet appre-
ciated the importance of the screening of the
gas cloud).

[7] C.D. Murray and S.F. Dermott, Solar System

Dynamics, Cambridge 1999.

[8] R. Tiedemann, M. Sarntheim and N.J. Shack-
leton, Astronomic time scale for the Pliocene
Atlantic δ18O and dust ﬂux records of Ocean
Drilling site 659. Paleoceanography 9, 619-638
(1994).

[9] Ana Christina Ravelo, Dyke H. Andreasen,
Mitchell Lyle, Annette Olivarez Lyle, and
Michael W. Wara, Regional climate shifts
caused by gradual global cooling in the Pliocene
epoch, Nature 429, 263-267 (2004).

[10] EPICA community members, Eight glacial cy-
cles from Antartic ice core, Nature 429, 623-
628 (2004).

[11] Greenland ice-core project (GRIP) Members,
Climate instability during the last interglacial
period recorded in the GRIP ice core, Nature
364, 203-207 (1993).

[12] R.A. Muller and G.M. McDonald, Glacial cy-
cles and orbital inclination, Nature 377, 107-
108 (1995).

[13] R.A. Muller and G.M. McDonald, Glacial cy-
cles and Astronomical Forcing, Science 277,
215-218 (1997).

[14] W. Woelﬂi and W. Baltensperger, A correla-
tion between Earths inclinations and the times
of the cold events recorded in Devils Hole cli-
mate data,
http://arxiv.org/abs/physics/0209070 .

[15] N. Murray and M. Holman, The role of chaotic
resonances in the solar system, Nature 410,
773-779 (2001).

[16] R. Nufer, W. Baltensperger and W. Woelﬂi,
Long term behaviour of a hypothetical planet
in a highly eccentric orbit,
http://xxx.lanl.gov/abs/astro-ph/9909464 .

4

[17] Ch.H. Hapgood, Earths Shifting Crust, Pan-

theon Books Inc., New York (1958).

5

