4
0
0
2
 
p
e
S
 
0
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
o
a
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
7
9
0
9
0
4
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Making use of the information in ensemble weather forecasts:
comparing the end to end and full statistical modelling
approaches

Stephen Jewson∗

December 24, 2013

Abstract

We discuss how ensemble weather forecasts can be used, and highlight the advantages and disad-

vantages of two particular methods.

1 Introduction

Traditionally weather forecasts have been generated from single integrations of weather simulation models.
Recently, however, ensemble integrations have also been used to generate weather forecasts. Ensemble
integrations are created from the same weather simulation models as are run for the single integrations
but run in parallel in a number of diﬀerent conﬁgurations. Each conﬁguration gives a slightly diﬀerent
forecast. From the point of view of forecasting temperature, the main reason for the ensemble approach
to weather forecasting is that the average of the forecasts from the diﬀerent models is a better prediction
than the forecasts from the individual models themselves.
There are also other possible beneﬁts from ensemble forecasts such as:

1. that the spread across the ensemble could be used to give a useful indication of the uncertainty in

2. that the ensemble spread could be used to predict the width of the distribution of future forecast

changes (Jewson and Ziehmann, 2003)

3. that the temporal correlations in the ensemble could be used to predict temporal correlations (Jewson,

the forecast 1

2003a)

4. that the spatial correlations in the ensemble could be used to predict spatial correlations

Given all this potential information, how should such ensemble weather forecasts be used by entities who
wish to predict the distribution of some variable that depends on the weather? We will discuss the pros
and cons of two methods: the ﬁrst is the end to end approach (Palmer (2002)), and the second we will
call the full statistical modelling approach.

2 End to end use of ensemble forecasts

2.1 Uncalibrated end to end use of ensemble forecasts

Uncalibrated end to end use of ensemble forecasts works as follows. Each ensemble member from an
ensemble forecast is converted directly into a variable of user interest. This gives a number of values for
the user variable, and these are then interpreted as samples from an estimate of the future distribution
of this variable.
This approach is not accurate, as is well known, because the weather simulations in the ensemble need
extensive calibration before they can be considered as good estimates of the future weather. This leads
to the following method.

∗Correspondence address: RMS, 10 Eastcheap, London, EC3M 1AJ, UK. Email: x@stephenjewson.com
1This is often assumed to be true, although as appropriately sceptical empiricists we observe that this has never been
proven. In other words forecasts derived using the spread and past forecast error statistics have never been shown to be
better than forecasts derived using past forecast error statistics alone. Our own research (Jewson (2003b) and Jewson et al.
(2003)) has so far failed to show any material beneﬁt of using the spread as a predictor in either weather or seasonal forecasts

2.2 Calibrated end to end use of ensemble forecasts

The problem of lack of calibration in the ensemble members can be partly overcome.
If we consider
temperature, which is reasonably close to normally distributed, then the mean and the standard deviation
of the ensemble can be adjusted rather easily (using calibration methods such as those described in Jewson
(2004)) while still preserving the individual ensemble members. The calibrated ensemble members can
then be converted into the variable of user interest.
This method would be appropriate in some cases. However, it has two limitations. These are discussed
below.

2.2.1 The correlation problem

For some users of weather forecasts the temporal correlation structure of the weather is important (in
addition to the marginal distribution of weather at a ﬁxed time). As an example, consider a business that
cares about the distribution of possible amounts of money that it will lose due to the weather over the
next ten days, and imagine that it is the number of freezing days that drives loss. The autocorrelation in
weather variability needs to be predicted correctly for the distribution of loss to be predicted. Weather
that is highly correlated in time is more likely to lead to a run of freezing days and hence a very high loss.
Correlation is not perfectly forecasted by numerical weather prediction models, and, like all other aspects
of forecasts, needs calibration (Jewson (2003a)). The catch is that it is very diﬃcult, if not impossible,
to perform correlation calibration and still preserve the ensemble members. Thus if one restricts oneself
to the end to end use of ensembles one can never avail oneself of an optimum forecast of the correlation.

2.2.2 The ensemble size problem

For some users of weather forecasts the extreme tails of the distribution of future weather are important.
By deﬁnition, these are not well sampled by ensemble forecasts with only a small number of members. For
instance, consider a business that goes bankrupt if it freezes during the next 10 days, but that freezing
has a probability of 1 in 100. End to end use of ensembles for ensemble sizes that are not much greater
than 100 will not estimate the probability of bankrupty very well.

3 Full statistical modelling of ensemble forecasts

The limitations of end to end use of ensembles can be overcome using what we will call the ’full statistical
modelling method’. This method works by ’deconstructing’ the ensemble completely into a probabil-
ity distribution (or probabilistic forecast). The original members are lost, and all that remains is the
estimated distribution of future weather. This distribution is estimated as an optimal combination of
information from the ensemble and from past forecast errors using methods such as those that we describe
in Jewson (2004).
The advantages of this method are a) the entire distribution of future temperatures can be predicted
in an optimal way, making use of all available information including correlation information from past
forecast error statistics and b) the ensemble size can be increased as large as is needed (by resampling
the forecast distribution) and can hence capture low probability events.

4 Summary

We have discussed the end to end and full statistical modelling methods for making use of the information
present in weather forecast ensembles. We ﬁnd that the end to end method has two shortcomings: sub-
optimal correlation forecasts and limited ensemble size. These are both overcome by using the full
statistical modelling method.

5 Acknowledgements

Thanks to Christine Ziehmann for some interesting discussions on this topic.

6 Legal statement

SJ was employed by RMS at the time that this article was written.
However, neither the research behind this article nor the writing of this article were in the course of his
employment, (where ’in the course of their employment’ is within the meaning of the Copyright, Designs
and Patents Act 1988, Section 11), nor were they in the course of his normal duties, or in the course
of duties falling outside his normal duties but speciﬁcally assigned to him (where ’in the course of his
normal duties’ and ’in the course of duties falling outside his normal duties’ are within the meanings of the
Patents Act 1977, Section 39). Furthermore the article does not contain any proprietary information or
trade secrets of RMS. As a result, the author is the owner of all the intellectual property rights (including,
but not limited to, copyright, moral rights, design rights and rights to inventions) associated with and
arising from this article. The author reserves all these rights. No-one may reproduce, store or transmit,
in any form or by any means, any part of this article without the author’s prior written permission. The
moral rights of the author have been asserted.
The contents of this article reﬂect the author’s personal opinions at the point in time at which this article
was submitted for publication. However, by the very nature of ongoing research, they do not necessarily
reﬂect the author’s current opinions.
In addition, they do not necessarily reﬂect the opinions of the
author’s employer.

References

arxiv:physics/0310079, 2003a.

2003b.

S Jewson. Do medium range ensemble forecasts give useful predictions of temporal correlations?

S Jewson. Moment based methods for ensemble assessment and calibration. arXiv:physics/0309042,

S Jewson. A summary of our recent research into practical methods for probabilistic temperature fore-

casting. arxiv:physics/0409096, 2004.

S Jewson, F Doblas-Reyes, and R Hagedorn. The assessment and calibration of ensemble sea-
forecasts of equatorial Paciﬁc ocean temperature and the predictability of uncertainty.

sonal
arxiv:physics/0308065, 2003.

S Jewson and C Ziehmann. Using ensemble forecasts to predict the size of forecast changes, with appli-

cation to weather swap value at risk. Atmospheric Science Letters, 4:15–27, 2003.

T Palmer. The economic value of ensemble forecasts as a tool for risk assessment: From days to decades.

Quarterly Journal of the Royal Meteorological Society, 128(581):747–774, 4 2002.

