4
0
0
2
 
t
c
O
 
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
o
a
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
3
0
0
0
1
4
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Leaking method approach to surface transport
in the Mediterranean Sea from a numerical
ocean model

Judit Schneider a,1 Vicente Fern´andez b,2
and Emilio Hern´andez-Garc´ıa b,3

aUniversity Potsdam, Institute for Nonlinear Dynamics, Potsdam, Germany
bInstituto Mediterr´aneo de Estudios Avanzados IMEDEA (CSIC-UIB) , Campus
de la Universitat de les Illes Balears, E-07122 Palma de Mallorca, Spain. 4

Abstract

We use Lagrangian diagnostics (the leaking and the exchange methods) to character-
ize surface transport out of and between selected regions in the Western Mediter-
ranean. Velocity ﬁelds are obtained from a numerical model. Residence times of
water of Atlantic origin in the Algerian basin, with a strong seasonal dependence,
are calculated. Exchange rates between these waters and the ones occupying the
northern basin are also evaluated. At surface, northward transport is dominant,
and involves ﬁlamental features and eddy structures that can be identiﬁed with the
Algerian eddies. The impact on these results of the presence of small scale turbulent
motions is evaluated by adding Lagrangian diﬀusion.

Key words:
Mediterranean Sea, Lagrangian transport, dynamical structures, exchange rates,
ocean modelling

1 Introduction

Ocean currents transport water in such a way that parcels initially close be-
come distant after some time (dispersion). Eventually water masses of dif-

1 jotes@agnld.uni-potsdam.de
2 v.fernandez@uib.es
3 Corresponding author: emilio@imedea.uib.es
4 http://www.imedea.uib.es/

Preprint submitted to Elsevier Science

26 July 2004

ferent origins are put into contact, allowing them to interchange their con-
tents of heat, chemicals or nutrients (mixing). These two processes, dispersion
and mixing, have a profound impact on the physical, chemical and biologi-
cal dynamics of the ocean. The rapid development of Lagrangian techniques
(Mariano et al., 2002) is enhancing our understanding of them. For example,
ﬂoater experiments, that directly track the motion of the water parcel on
which the ﬂoater has been deployed, reveal irregular trajectories and strong
dependence of them on the precise position and timing of the release. The in-
ﬂuence of coherent structures on the trajectories, such as trapping by eddies,
is also observed.

One of the theoretical frameworks that is being used to understand the above
phenomena comes from the mathematical study of dynamical systems (Wiggins,
1992). This approach identiﬁes the main dynamical structures that provide the
skeleton organizing the full set of particle trajectories. Irregular trajectories
and sensitive dependence on initial conditions are interpreted as the direct
manifestation of the chaotic nature of ﬂuid trajectories in the ocean. Coher-
ent structures such as eddies and fronts are also linked to well studied objects
in the dynamical systems approach.

Although techniques for the identiﬁcation of dynamical structures in time-
periodic velocity ﬂows are well established since long time ago (Ottino, 1989;
Wiggins, 1992), the consideration of aperiodic ﬂows, as occurring in the turbu-
lent ocean, is much more recent. A variety of methods are being tested on more
or less idealized dynamical systems (Haller and Poje, 1998; Coulliette and Wiggins,
2001) and some of them applied to realistic geophysical settings (Lacorata et al.,
2001; Kuznetsov et al., 2002; Joseph and Legras, 2002; d’Ovidio et al., 2004).
A particularly simple methodology was proposed in Schneider et al. (2002)
and applied to idealized geophysical ﬂows (Schneider et al., 2003). The so-
called leaking method consists in identifying the initial positions of particles
that leave a given spatial region within a long enough interval of time. Alterna-
tively, starting positions of trajectories which end in a given region can also be
identiﬁed. In both cases, the geometrical structures of these sets of positions
are related to objects of dynamical relevance. In the context of chaotic dynam-
ical systems, they are shown to have a fractal structure, i.e. ﬁne details with
self-similar properties at arbitrarily small scales. The meaning of this in the
ocean context is that these sets will show a ﬁne ﬁlamentary structure which
resembles satellite observations of sea surface temperature or ocean color im-
ages. From a practical point of view, the ﬁne structure is the responsible for
the diﬀerent fate of trajectories starting in close and apparently equivalent
positions. The structures revealed by the leaking method allow the identiﬁ-
cation of the transport routes between ocean regions, as well as the barriers
to transport. The method was originally developed to display the geometry
of the transport structures. But it also gives readily the relevant time scales
for escape from selected regions or residence times, an information of evident

2

oceanographic interest (Buﬀoni et al., 1997).

In the present paper, we apply the leaking method to a realistic surface veloc-
ity ﬁeld of the Mediterranean Sea obtained from a primitive equation ocean
model. We focus in the Western Mediterranean, and characterize surface wa-
ter exchange between a northern and a southern sub-basins, which are areas
occupied by water masses of diﬀerent characteristics.

The Paper is organized as follows: In Sect. 2 we summarize the essential details
of the Mediterranean Sea oceanography needed for the rest of the Paper,
and we deﬁne the regions analyzed. Sect. 3 introduces the numerical model
and Sect. 4 describes the methodology used, i.e. the leaking and the related
exchange methods. Residence times and Lagrangian structures for leaking out
of the southern part of the Western Mediterranean are presented in 5.1, and
rates of north-south exchange and associated structures in 5.2. In Subsection
5.3 we explore what modiﬁcations of the above results would be induced by
unresolved small-scale turbulence, modelled here as a Lagrangian diﬀusion
process. The ﬁnal Section contains our conclusions.

2 Mediterranean Sea background

The Mediterranean is a mid-latitude semi-enclosed sea connected with the
Atlantic Ocean via the Strait of Gibraltar. It is composed of two principal
basins, the western and the eastern basins which are connected by the strait
of Sicily. The main oceanographic characteristic of the Mediterranean Sea as
a whole is that it is an evaporative basin (evaporation exceeds precipitation),
and the deﬁcit of water is supplied by the inﬂow of Atlantic waters from the
Strait of Gibraltar. This is considered to be the main forcing mechanism of
the Mediterranean circulation. In a simpliﬁed view of the surface circulation,
Atlantic waters coming from the Strait of Gibraltar ﬂow eastward along the
North African coast, forming the so called Algerian current. When this current
reaches the Strait of Sicily, it bifurcates. One branch follows a cyclonic (an-
ticlockwise) path around the Western Mediterranean Basin, while the other
branch crosses the Strait of Sicily into the eastern basin where it also follows
a general cyclonic path. The longer the water stays in the Mediterranean, the
saltier it becomes due to mixing with adjacent water masses and to evapora-
tion.

The Eastern and Western Mediterranean basins themselves can be divided
in several sub-basins, which are separated by topographic features (straits or
channels) and clearly characterized by diﬀerent water masses, patterns of cir-
culation and characteristic forcing mechanisms (e.g heat ﬂuxes, wind stress,
rivers discharge, etc). Indeed, each of the sub-basins present a variability de-

3

Fig. 1. The Western Mediterranean. The coastline is nearly identical to the 16 m
isobath, which is the one used by the numerical model. The two rectangular boxes
are the regions among which transport will be addressed. The southern box contains
relatively fresh water of Atlantic origin, and the northern one Mediterranean saltier
one.

pendent on the local forcing variability and on its own dynamics. This fact
makes the Mediterranean surface circulation to be depicted as diﬀerent inter-
acting scales, including large scale, sub-basin and mesoscale. The interaction
between the local (sub-basin) circulation and the general circulation, and the
connections and water transports between sub-basins, is still an open ﬁeld of
research of the oceanography in the Mediterranean Sea (Astraldi et al., 1999).

We concentrate in this Paper in the western basin, and characterize surface
transport processes involving the relatively fresh water of Atlantic origin that
ﬁlls the southern part of the basin: its residence time and its interchanges with
the saltier water in the north. Fig. 1 displays the Western Mediterranean. The
two rectangular boxes are associated to the north and south regions containing
mainly the two diﬀerent water masses. The southern box extends from 36N to
39N, and the northern one from 39N to 45.5N. The longitudinal extent of both
is from 0 to 9E. The location of these geographical boundaries is arbitrary to
some extent, but we have selected the boundary between the two regions to
be at the same latitude as the Ibiza channel (the pass between Ibiza, the most
occidental island of the Balearic cluster, and the Spanish coast) where it is
known than an intense water exchange occurs (Pinot et al., 2002).

4

3 Mediterranean Sea numerical model

In this study, we have used the DieCAST (Dietrich for Center Air Sea Tech-
nology) numerical ocean model applied to the Mediterranean Sea with realistic
coastlines and topography. DieCAST (Dietrich, 1997) is a primitive equation,
z-level, ﬁnite diﬀerence ocean model using the hydrostatic, incompressible and
rigid lid approximations.

We summarize here some of the main properties of the model setup (see
Fern´andez et al. (2004) for more details). The horizontal resolution is 1/8 de-
grees while the vertical direction is discretized in 30 levels. Horizontal eddy
viscosity and diﬀusivity are speciﬁed to have constant values of Ah = Kh =
10 m2s−1, and are represented by a Laplacian operator. The use of these
rather small values of dissipation in DieCAST is possible by the use of fully
fourth-order-accurate numerics with special care to reduce numerical disper-
sion (Dietrich, 1997). It is noticeable that these values coincide with the value
of the eddy diﬀusivity estimated by Okubo (1971) from measurement of tracer
dispersion at several scales. Okubo results can be summarized in his empirical
formula for the diﬀusivity (in m2s−1) as a function of spatial scale l (in m):
10−4 l1.15. This gives 10m2s−1 for our horizontal grid resolution
Kh = 2.055
103m is the approximate spacing corresponding to 1/8 of de-
(l = ∆x
gree at Mediterranean latitudes). Vertical viscosity and diﬀusivity are based
on Pacanowski and Philander (1981), with background vertical viscosity and
diﬀusivity set at near-molecular values (0.01 and 0.002 cm2s−1, respectively).
In order to focus on the transport mechanisms intrinsic to the internal dy-
namics of the Mediterranean, we force the model with a perpetual year using
a monthly climatological wind stress and monthly climatological sea surface
temperature and salinity (Dietrich et al., 2004). Tracer and momentum time
step is 15 minutes. Model outputs are stored as instantaneous values each
model day.

×
12

≈

×

In this climatological conﬁguration, the model has been able to reproduce
the correct general circulation of the basin and the major circulation features
(see Fern´andez et al. (2004)). We used for this study the instantaneous model
Eulerian velocity data from the second model level (representing the velocity
ﬁeld of a layer of 11.6 m of thickness, centered at a depth of 16 m). Using the
second layer avoids the rather direct wind inﬂuence suﬀered by the ﬁrst one.
The data correspond to four years (18 to 21) of a simulation taken after the
model has reached an equilibrium state for the surface circulation.

We consider just the horizontal components of the velocity. Lagrangian motion
in the horizontal is the adequate framework to compare with usual Lagrangian
measurements, in which typical oceanographic buoys are transported by the
ﬂow while remaining at a ﬁxed depth. Vertical velocities in the ocean are about

5

three or four orders of magnitude smaller than the horizontal ones, so that the
horizontal ﬂow is nearly divergenceless to a good approximation in most of the
considered areas (exceptions are the places of deep water formation, which are
not resolved by the climatological forcing used here). Nevertheless, true ﬂuid
particles will ﬁnally leave the considered layer in the vertical direction at long
times, so that the transport properties established here should be considered
(as ﬂoater experiments) as a tool to explore the transport processes limited
to the surface layers.

4 Lagrangian diagnostics - The leaking method

The leaking method (Schneider et al., 2003, 2002), originally developed to vi-
sualize Lagrangian structures in complex ﬂows, focus on a ﬁnite preselected
region out of the full region accessible to the ﬂow. One introduces at an ini-
tial moment t0 a large number of ﬂuid particles in this region and lets them
to be transported by the ﬂow for a time span τ , deﬁnitely longer than the
natural time scale of the ﬂow. The particles are only followed until they exit
the selected region. Thus, the initial (t = t0) positions of these trajectories
deﬁne the location of long lifetimes inside the region. These initial positions
either align in ﬁlamental features that can be shown to identify contracting
directions in the ﬂow (Ott and T´el, 1993), or they delineate coherent struc-
tures such as eddies. These structures are called the stable manifold of the
invariant set or simply the stable manifold (Ott and T´el, 1993). The ﬁnal
(t = t0 + τ ) positions of the same trajectories fall also either on coherent
structures or on ﬁlaments along which trajectories are about to escape the
preselected region. The tangents of this unstable manifold correspond to the
local stretching directions (Ott and T´el, 1993). The shape and location of the
obtained structures are functions of time (t0 for the stable and tf for the
unstable manifold) as long as the ﬂow is time-dependent. The resolution of
the ﬁlamental structures depends in addition on the initial number of tracers
used (from more particles ﬁner structures can be recovered) and the length of
simulated time τ (ﬁnding the appropriate simulation time is a crucial point:
simulating for too short times, not all particles will be aligned along the con-
tracting/stretching directions, whereas when simulating for a too long time
the ﬁne ﬁlamental structures fade out and disappear because of the decreas-
ing number of particles that trace them). In the cases in which the transported
particles undergo standard chaotic motion, the number of ﬂuid particles N(t)
that have not yet exit the region after a time t
(t0, tf ) decays exponentially
N(t0) eκ(t−t0) (Ott and T´el, 1993; Jung et al., 1993), from which a es-
N(t)
cape rate κ can be measured. Its inverse has the meaning of a residence time
in the region. In the presence of coherent structures, however, this exponential
decay slows down into a power-law at long times. Although we are restricting

≈

∈

6

to horizontal motion in this Paper, we mention that the leaking method can be
applied also to more complex threedimensional situations (Tuval et al., 2004).

In addition to the original leaking method, we propose here a modiﬁed version
of it (that we can call the exchange method) in order to get additional informa-
tion about exchange rates and transport structures between two sub-basins:
we want to consider two diﬀerent regions (the northern and southern boxes in
the Western Mediterranean map of Fig. 1) and calculate the transport prop-
erties between them. One of the two regions will be ﬁlled up randomly with
particles. Then, the motion of the particles is calculated. In contrast to the
original leaking method, particles are free to leave their starting region and to
move in the whole Mediterranean. But at the moment in which they (eventu-
ally) enter the second region, the simulation of their motion is stopped. These
particles are then counted as exchanged ones. Again, the local tangents to the
initial and ﬁnal distributions of non-exchanged particles identify contracting
and stretching directions, and coherent structures (and the same applies to
the distribution of exchanged ones) . In addition, the initial positions of the
exchanged particles identify the exchange set, i.e., the initial locations that
contribute to transport to the second area within the considered time span.
Time scales for transport among the regions can be conveniently deﬁned (see
Sect. 5.2).

Motion of particles is calculated by using the Eulerian velocity ﬁelds, previ-
ously stored from the numerical simulation. Linear interpolation in time is used
to downsize the 1 day interval between stored data to the 0.5 hour time-step of
the 4-order Runge-Kutta used in the trajectory calculation. In space, we use
bilinear interpolation to compute velocities in between the model gridpoints.

5 Results

5.1 Exit process and residence times in the southern Western Mediterranean

We apply the leaking method to the southern box depicted in Fig. 1 (comprised
between 0 and 9E and between 36N and 39N). This box is traversed by the
Algerian current, ﬂowing eastwards, and contains mainly low-salinity water
masses of Atlantic origin (S < 37.5 psu). We estimate the residence times
inside the box, and the geometrical paths of escape.

We put at random initial positions a large number of particles in the box. We
then follow numerically during τ = 90 days the trajectories of the N(t0) =
122352 particles that were not started in land. Particles are marked as escaped
when they ﬁrst leave the box, and their trajectories are no longer followed.

7

Fig. 2. Left: The initial positions of particles which did not leave the southern box
during an interval of time (t0, t0 + τ ), with the starting time t0 at the beginning of
Winter of the ﬁrst simulation year and τ = 90 days. They trace the stable manifold
of the invariant set, and local tangents identify contracting directions. Right: Final
positions of the above particles, tracing out the unstable manifold and the stretching
directions.

The ﬁnal positions of particles which remain in the box until the end of the
simulation depict the unstable manifold and stretching directions, whereas
their initial positions are associated to the stable manifold and contracting
directions. Fig. 2 shows an example of such structures, obtained by starting the
Lagrangian integrations at a time t0 corresponding to the ﬁrst day of Winter
(in this paper, Winter will denote the months of January, February and March,
i. e. the ﬁrst 90 days of the year, Spring the next three months, Summer the
following ones, until Autumn which will comprise October, November and
December).

We see complex geometrical structures with ﬁlamental features and also the
presence of eddies. The initial location of non-escaped particles is far from
compact and is interleaved with the initial location of the escaped ones, so
that small displacements in this initial position will change the fate of the
particle. We see that escape is more frequent when starting in the eastern
part of the box, whereas particles started in the west have more chances to
become trapped in structures suggestive of Algerian eddies.

The ﬁne structure of the geometry of the escaping and non-escaping sets is
better appreciated in Fig. 3. It can be though qualitatively as a blow up of
Fig. 2, although, for clarity, it has been produced in a diﬀerent way: a number
of particles has been integrated for τ = 30 days, but considering the leaking
from the smaller region shown in Fig. 3. Although diﬀerent in detail, the main

8

Fig. 3. Idem as Fig. 2, but using a smaller box in the leaking approach, and an
integration time of τ = 30 days. Qualitatively, it can be considered as a blow-up of
Fig. 2.

features should be similar to the ones in Fig. 2. Filaments, eddies, and the
entanglement between escaping and non-escaping positions, are particularly
clear here.

·

The escape rate from the original [0,9E]
[36N,39N] box can be calculated from
×
the decay of N(t), the number of non-escaped particles after a time t. For the
same example of launching the particles in Winter, as before, Fig. 4 displays a
clear exponential decay during the integration time, so that a escape or leaking
10−2 days−1 for the Winter example of the ﬁgures) can be obtained
rate (1.93
from an exponential ﬁtting. The inverse of the rate can be interpreted as a
residence time inside the region (51.8 days for the example before). Table 1
shows the seasonal dependence of the rates, with the faster escape in Autumn
and the slower in Summer. The yearly averaged residence time in the southern
basin is 59.4 days. This residence time is comparable to estimations based on
lagrangian data, which gives a few months on average for a particle to escape
from the Algerian basin (Millot, 1991; Salas et al., 2002).

Seasonal cycle is the main component of variability in the leaking rates (the
model is forced by a seasonal atmospheric cycle), but note also the existence
of a signal of interannual variability, which reﬂects non-forced interannual
changes in ocean surface mesoscale structures due to the non-linear character
of the ocean dynamics.

9

Season

leaking rates (days−1)

(std (days−1))

Winter

Spring

Summer

Autumn

10−2
10−2
10−2
10−2

1.93

1.38

1.39

2.02

·

·

·

·

10−3)
10−3)
10−3)
10−3)

(1.69

(1.55

(2.35

(1.54

·

·

·

·

10−2

1.68

Yearly Average
Table 1
Leaking rates out of the southern box for each season, averaged over 4 years, and
the yearly average, with the corresponding standard deviation (std) characterizing
the dispersion among the four years. Rates are in 1/day.

(3.40

·

·

10−3)

140000

120000

100000

80000

60000

)
t
(

N

40000

20000

0

10

20

30

60

70

80

90

40

50

time (days)

Fig. 4. The number of particles that did not leave the southern box in Fig. 1 after
being deployed at the beginning of Winter in the ﬁrst simulation year (symbols).
The escape rate is obtained by an exponential ﬁtting (dashed line).

5.2 North-South exchange

We focus here on transport between the northern and southern regions of the
western Mediterranean, by using the modiﬁed leaking method, or exchange
method.

There is observational evidence of an intense interchange of surface waters be-
tween these two regions, in which northern saltier waters are transported to the
south to close the cyclonic western Mediterranean circulation, but also south-

10

ern fresher waters are found in the north (Pinot et al., 2002; Pascual et al.,
2002). The routes of transport for this exchange, specially for the northward
transport, are not still very well deﬁned.

A particle started in the south is considered to be exchanged to the north when
it ﬁrst hits the northern box, and viceversa. Exchange during τ = 90 days is
nearly equivalent to a simple crossing of the 39N parallel. This is so because
o f the location of the boxes and of the coast, and because particles leaving
the southern box towards the east will need a time longer than three-four
months to reach the northern box moving along the Italian coast. Therefore,
with the given geometry of the surroundings of the boxes, the exchange is
comparable to a simple crossing, and the exchange rate equivalent to a crossing
rate. Nevertheless, in the computations we use the criteria presented when
explaining the exchange method.

As before, we initially ﬁll-up the southern (northern) box with a large number
of particles. N(t0) = 105791 (N(t0) = 93675) of them did not start in land
and were followed until exchange to the other box occurred. Figure 5 shows
the decay in the number of non-exchanged particles starting from the southern
box in Winter of the ﬁrst simulation year. It is clear that the decay now is
not a simple exponential. The reason is that, as time advances, the particles
are in average further and further away from the target region, so that the
rate decreases in time. However, we can deﬁne an average exchange rate as
κ = τ −1 ln (N(t0)/N(tf )), which characterizes the eﬀective rate of exchange
between the two regions during the considered integration time. For the exam-
10−3 days−1. Note that, given that the inverse of
ple of Fig. 5 we ﬁnd κ = 2.91
this value (343.6 days) is much longer than the integration time (τ = 90) we
can not take it as a reliable average residence time. The value of κ however,
when multiplied by the volume of water associated to the initial box, would
give an estimation of the eﬀective volume transport rate towards the second
box during the integration time.

·

Table 2 summarizes the seasonal (τ = 90) crossing rates κ among the two
boxes, averaged over 4 years, with the corresponding standard deviations giv-
ing an indication on the interannual variability in the crossing rates.

We see that there is a seasonal variability of the crossing rates, being Winter
the season in which more exchange occurs in both directions, and also the one
recording the maximum imbalance between them. This imbalance is strong
during all the seasons except Autumn, so that there is a net annual rate
from south to north, implying that surface Atlantic waters from the Algerian
basin are, on average, crossing the 39N line and mixing with saltier waters in
the north. This northward surface transport must be compensated by a net
southward transport of saltier (denser) water in deeper layers.

11

110000

90000

)
t
(

N

70000

50000

0

10

20

30

60

70

80

90

40

50

time (days)

Fig. 5. The number of non-exchanged particles N (t), i.e. the ones that did not
exchange to the northern box a time t after starting from the southern one in
Winter of the ﬁrst simulation year (symbols). The dashed line is an exponential
function decaying with the average rate κ deﬁned in the text.

N to S

(std)

S to N

(std)

Winter

Spring

Summer

Autumn

3.06

2.38

2.91

3.03

10−3
10−3
10−3
10−3

(2.75

(1.39

(6.91

(3.18

10−4)
10−3)
10−4)
10−4)

10−3
10−3
10−3
10−3

6.59

5.89

6.11

3.83

·

·

·

·

(6.43

(1.24

(1.31

(5.96

10−4)
10−3)
10−3)
10−4)

·

·

·

·

·

·

·

·

·

·

Yearly Average

2.84

10−3

(3.16

10−4)

5.6

10−3

(1.2

10−3)

·

·

·

·

·

·

Table 2
Seasonal exchange rates between the two boxes (in day−1) averaged over the 4 years,
and the associated standard deviation (std) characterizing variability among the 4
year s.

To get more insight into the transport routes, we investigate the initial and
ﬁnal positions of the particles released in each of the boxes. We plot in Fig. 6
the exchange set from south to north, i.e. the set of southern initial conditions
which bring water to the northern box during the interval of time τ . The shape
of the exchange set changes each season, according to the seasonal dependence
of the exchanging or crossing rates. The exchange set is smallest in Autumn
in correspondence to the smaller crossing rate in Table 2. The exchange set is

12

Fig. 6. Exchange sets towards the northern box starting in the south at diﬀerent
seasons (ﬁrst simulation year): Upper left: Winter, upper right: Spring, lower left:
Summer, lower right: Autumn.

denser close to the boundary between the regions, indicating an easier crossing
towards the north for the particles starting there, but it extends deep into the
interior of the southern box, forming ﬁlamental structures interleaved with
the non-exchanged set. Eddy structures, specially their outer parts, are clearly
involved in the northern transport.

The eastern part of the Algerian region tends to be excluded from the exchange
set, specially in Autumn. Particles started there will be transported eastward
by the Algerian current. This can be seen when plotting the ﬁnal positions of
the particles which did not exchange into the northern box. As the previous
pictures, Fig. 7 shows these positions for particles started in the southern box
in Winter. Non-exchanged particles followed the Algerian current along the
African coast towards the East. Shortly before reaching the Strait of Sicily,

13

Fig. 7. Final positions (after τ = 90 days) of particles launched in Winter (ﬁrst
simulation year) in the southern box which did not exchange to the North.

the current splits into two parts: one going into the Tyrrhenian Sea (reaching
the northern box along this route would take more than the 90 days used
in this computation), and the other one following the coastal current along
the African coast into the eastern basin of the Mediterranean. However, some
particles are still in their initial southern box. They seem to be trapped in
several vortexes close to the African coast.

Fig. 8 shows another sequence of the exchange sets, but this time towards
the southern box for particles launched in the north. In comparison with the
exchange sets in Fig. 6, here they are more restricted to the neighborhood of
the crossing boundary, except for the presence of a coastal current along the
Spanish coast (Catalan current), more visible in Autumn and less intense in
the Summer. In accordance with the smaller crossing set, the crossing rates
shown in Table 2 are also smaller. At all seasons, the exchange set excludes
a region starting north of the Mallorca channel (the strait between Ibiza and
Mallorca islands) and extending northeast. This identiﬁes the location of a
strong current transporting particles in the northeast direction.

To get additional indications of the mixing between diﬀerent water masses, we
plot in Fig. 9 ﬁnal positions of particles which exchanged from the northern
towards the southern box during the 90 days integration, starting in Winter.
Many particles are tracing out the same structures as particles launched in the
south: both are showing the routes of transport of the main circulation in the
basin, partly going to the eastern basin of the Mediterranean. Thus mixing
of water from both origins is occurring along these routes. There are however

14

Fig. 8. Exchange sets towards the southern box starting in the north at diﬀerent
seasons (ﬁrst simulation year): Upper left: Winter, upper right: Spring, lower left:
Summer, lower right: Autumn.

diﬀerences. For example there is some accumulation of particles southwest
of Sardinia island, indicating that many of the exchanged particles remain
recirculating in that area. In addition, eddy structures are less evident here,
in particular for the further reaching particles, than in Fig. 6. From this and
other comparisons between Figs. 6, 7, 8 and 9, we can conclude that transport
mediated by vortices is more important for the south-north direction than for
the reverse, corresponding to the abundance and origin of these structures
close to the Algerian coast (Millot, 1999; Salas et al., 2002).

15

Fig. 9. Final positions (after τ = 90 days) of particles launched in Winter (ﬁrst
simulation year) in the northern box which did exchange to the South.

5.3 The impact of additional diﬀusive processes

Our ocean model velocity ﬁelds, as any others obtained from models or data
of ﬁnite resolution, lack structures below the horizontal grid size, which is 1/8
of degree (10-12 km) in our case. Computation of Lagrangian trajectories uses
spatial interpolation to follow the particles and thus Lagrangian geometrical
features can be obtained that are smaller than this limit (see for example
Fig. 3). Thus there is the question on how realistic are these small structures
and how the diﬀerent rates calculated here will change when including smaller
scales in the numerical model. A convenient way to include unresolved scales
in Lagrangian computations is to add to the velocity ﬁeld experienced by
the Lagrangian particle a ﬂuctuating term representing small-scale turbulence
(Griﬀa, 1996; Mariano et al., 2002): ˙x(t) = v(x(t), t) + √2KΓ(t). This gives
additional diﬀusion to particle trajectories. Usually Γ(t) is taken to be a Gaus-
sian Markov process with a memory time that for Mediterranean modelling is
of the order of some days (Buﬀoni et al., 1997; Falco et al., 2000). This kind
of Markov process leads to a situation that is somehow in between the purely
deterministic calculation using the model velocity ﬁeld alone, and the larger
stochasticity that is obtained when Γ(t) is a memoryless white noise. Here, to
explore the impact of irregular unresolved motions in the opposite extreme to
the deterministic situation considered in the previous sections, we use for Γ(t)

16

N to S

(std)

S to N

(std)

Winter

Spring

Summer

Autumn

3.11

2.45

3.04

2.77

10−3
10−3
10−3
10−3

(2.74

(2.61

(6.81

(7.22

10−4)
10−4)
10−4)
10−4)

6.82

6.19

6.38

4.07

10−3
10−3
10−3
10−3

·

·

·

·

·

·

·

·

·

·

·

·

·

·

·

(6.59

(1.23

(1.4

·
(6.53

·

10−4)
10−3)
·
10−3)
10−4)

·

·

Yearly Average

2.84

10−3

(2.99

10−4)

5.87

10−3

(1.2

10−3)

Table 3
Exchange rates (in day−1, averaged over the 4 simulation years) between the two
boxes at diﬀerent seasons, and the associated standard deviation (std), in the pres-
ence of Lagrangian diﬀusion. To be compared with table 2.

h

Γ(t)Γ(t′)

t′).
a Gaussian white noise of zero mean and correlations
We take for its strength K the same value of the horizontal diﬀusivity Kh
used in the model simulations Kh = 10 m2s−1, which in turn was the same
value, as discussed in Sect. 3, estimated by Okubo (1971), as the eﬀective
diﬀusivity at the scale of the model grid. After integrations suﬃciently longer
than the memory time, no signiﬁcant diﬀerences are expected between us-
ing this uncorrelated motion or the more realistic Markov process (Griﬀa,
1996; Buﬀoni et al., 1997; Falco et al., 2000; Mariano et al., 2002) for the La-
grangian diﬀusion.

= δ(t

−

i

Table 3 shows the recalculated exchange rates, to be compared with table 2.
We see that the impact of adding Lagrangian diﬀusion is not strong. In most of
the cases the eﬀect is the intuitively expected slight acceleration of the rates,
although there is a case in which diﬀusion slows down the exchange process.
This will occur when diﬀusion kicks-oﬀ particles from the ﬁne structures in
the main transport routes.

In Fig. 10 we show examples of the spatial Lagrangian structures obtained in
the presence of diﬀusion. We plot the exchange set towards the northern box
starting in Winter in the southern box (to be compared with the diﬀusionless
ﬁrst panel in Fig. 6) and the ﬁnal positions of particles started in the south-
ern box and not exchanged with the northern one (to be compared with the
diﬀusionless Fig. 7). We see that the main characteristics of the deterministic
evolution are retained. However, the smallest structures, including the ﬁnest
ﬁlaments, are smoothed out, and this will occur in all the types of Lagrangian
structures visualized. This does not mean that the sensitive dependence of
the fate of particles to small displacements is lost. At the contrary, since both
exchanged and non-exchanged sets are smoothed-out, they become still more

17

Fig. 10. Geometric structures in the presence of Lagrangian diﬀusion. Left: Exchange
set towards the north of particles started in Winter in the southern box. To be
compared with the diﬀusionless case in the ﬁrst panel of Fig. 6. Right: Final positions
(after τ = 90 days) of particles launched in Winter in the southern box which did
not exchange to the north. To be compared with the diﬀusionless case of Fig.7.

intimately interleaved (mixed) at the smallest scales than in the absence of
diﬀusion.

6 Conclusion

In this Paper we have analyzed and quantiﬁed, from surface velocity ﬁelds
provided by a numerical model, several transport processes involving diﬀerent
water masses in the Western Mediterranean. We have characterized their sea-
sonal variability by calculating seasonal exchange rates and residence times.
The geometry of the exchange sets and the transport routes has also been
investigated.

Residence times smaller than a season have been found inside a southern
region representing the Algerian basin. Eddies and other complex structures
are involved in the exit process from this region, being the eastern part of the
region the one with fastest escape.

Exchange of Atlantic waters towards the northern basin occurs at a higher
rate, in the surface layer, than the reverse exchange. In agreement with Millot
(1999), eddies in the Algerian basin play an important role in this transport,
that is very seasonal and presents also a component of interannual variability.
We expect the transport of saltier water towards the south to be more intense
in deeper layers, but at surface it involves only the areas close to the boundary
between the regions, and the Catalan current. Eddy structures are not so
prominent for this transport.

18

Small-scale turbulent process, modelled here as Lagrangian diﬀusion, modify
the exchange rates in some small amount, but does not change the qualitative
picture. Furthermore, the main structures and routes of transport remain,
although they become smeared out (implying stronger mixing) at small scales.

The time scales obtained using the present Lagrangian approach based on
a climatological numerical simulation of the Mediterranean are only a ﬁrst
approximation to the dynamics of the real Mediterranean. A numerical sim-
ulation using more accurate synoptic atmospheric forcing, including water
mass formation, and a 3D study would give more realistic results. However,
we showed that the actual conﬁguration of the model gives enough complexity
to deﬁne ﬁlamental structures and routes of transport between regions in the
Mediterranean, as well as to deﬁne the complex transport by mesoscale eddies.

To conclude, we have shown that tools such as the leaking and the exchange
methods are able to identify and characterize dynamical structures in aperiodic
realistic ﬂows, such as our numerically generated Mediterranean circulation.
The methods allow to visualize the exchange sets and transport routes in a
fast and eﬃcient way. Understanding and good modelling of these structures
is important to improve forecasting in practical situations: active or passive
tracers released on places belonging to the exchange sets, such as for example
an oil spill, will spread towards the target region.

Acknowledgements

We acknowledge ﬁnancial support from MCyT (Spain) and FEDER under
projects REN2001-0802-C02-01/MAR (IMAGEN) and BFM2000-1108 (CONOCE),
and from a MCyT-DAAD (Germany) joint program. JS is thankful for ﬁnan-
cial support from the International Max Planck Research School (IMPRS) for
Biomimetic Systems in Golm.

References

M. Astraldi, S. Balopoulos, J. Candela, J. Font., M. Gacic, G.P. Gasparini,
B. Manca, A. Theocharis, J. Tintor´e, 1999. The role of straits and channels
in understanding the characteristics of Mediterranean circulation. Progr.
Oceanogr. 44, 65-108.

G. Buﬀoni, P. Falco, A. Griﬀa, E. Zambianchi, 1997. Dispersion processes
and residence times in a semi-enclosed basin with recirculating gyres: An
application to the Tyrhenian Sea. J. Geophys. Res. 102 (C8), 18699-18713.
C. Coulliette, S. Wiggins, 2001. Intergyre transport in a wind-driven, quasi-

19

geostrophic double gyre: An application of lobe dynamics. Nonlinear Proc.
Geophys. 8, 69-94.

D.E. Dietrich, 1997. Application of a modiﬁed ’a’ grid ocean model having
reduced numerical dispersion to the Gulf of Mexico circulation. Dyn. of
Atm. and Oceans 27, 201-217.

D.E. Dietrich, R.L. Haney, V. Fern´andez, S. A. Josey, J. Tintor´e, 2004. Air-Sea
ﬂuxes based on observed annual cycle surface climatology and ocean mode
l internal dynamics: a non-damping zero-phase-lag approach applied to the
Mediterranean Sea. J. Mar. Systems, in press.

F. d’Ovidio, V. Fernandez, E. Hern´andez-Garc´ıa and C. Lopez, 2004. Mixing
structures in the Mediterranean Sea from Finite-Size Lyapunov Exponents.
Geophys. Res. Lett., in press.

P. Falco, A. Griﬀa, P.M. Poulain, E. Zambianchi, 2000. Transport properties
in the Adriatic Sea as deduced from drifter data. J. Phys. Oceanogr. 30,
2055-2071.

V. Fern´andez, D.E. Dietrich, R.L. Haney, J. Tintor´e, 2004. Mesoscale, sea-
sonal and interannual variability in the Mediterranean Sea using a numerical
ocean model. Progr. Oceanogr., in press.

A. Griﬀa, 1996. Applications of stochastic particle models to oceanographic
problems. in Stochastic Modelling in Physical Oceanography, R.J. Adler, P.

Muller, and B.L. Rozovskii, Eds. Birkhauser, Boston. pp. 114-140.
G. Haller, A.C. Poje, 1998. Finite time transport in aperiodic ﬂows. Physica

D 119, 352-380.

B. Joseph, B. Legras, 2002. Relation between kinematic boundaries, stirring,
and barriers for the Antarctic Polar vortex. J. Atm. Sci. 59, 1198-1212.
C. Jung, T. T´el and E. Ziemniak, 1993. Application of scattering chaos to

particle transport in a hydrodynamical ﬂow. Chaos 3, 555-568.

L. Kuznetsov, M. Toner, A.D. Kirwan Jr., C.K.R.T. Jones, L.H. Kantha, J.
Choi, 2002. The loop current and adjecent rings delineate d by Lagrangian
analysis of the new-surface ﬂow. J. Marine Res. 60, 405-429.

G. Lacorata, E. Aurell, A. Vulpiani, 2001. Drifter dispersion in the Adriatic
Sea: Lagrangian data and chaotic model. Annales Geophysicae 19, 121-129.
A.J. Mariano, A. Griﬀa, T.M. ¨Ozg¨okmen, E. Zambianchi, Lagrangian analysis
and predictability of coastal and ocean dynamics 2000, 2002. J. Atm. Ocean.
Tech. 19, 1114-1125.

C. Millot, 1991. Mesoscale and seasonal variabilities of the circulation on the
Western Mediterranean. Dynamics of Atmospheres and Oceans, 15, 179-214.
C. Millot, 1999. Circulation in the Western Mediterranean Sea. J. Mar. Syst.,

20, 423-442.

A. Okubo, 1971. Oceanic diﬀusion diagrams. Deep-Sea Research 18, 789-802.
J.M. Ottino, 1989. The kinematics of mixing: stretching, chaos and transport.

Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK.

R.C. Pacanowski, S.G.H. Philander, 1981. Parameterization of vertical mixing
in numerical models of tropical oceans. J. Phys. Oceanogr. 11, 1443-1451.
A. Pascual, B. B. Nardelli, G. Larnicol, M. Emelianov, D. Gomis, 2002. A case

20

of an intense anticyclonic eddy in the Balearic Sea (Western Mediterranean).
J. Geophys. Res., 107 (C11), 3183, doi:10.1029/2001JC000913.

J.M. Pinot, J.L. L´opez-Jurado, M. Riera, 2002. The CANALES experiment
(1996-1998). Interannual, seasonal, and mesoscale variability of the circula-
tion in the Balearic channels. Progr. Oceanogr. 55, 335-370.

J. Salas, C. Millot, J. Font, E. Garc´ıa-Ladona, 2002. Analysis of mesoscale
phenomena in the Algerian Basin observed with drifting buoys and infrared
images. Deep-Sea Res., 49, 2, 245-266.

J. Schneider, T.T´el, 2003. Extracting ﬂow structures out of tracer data. Ocean

J. Schneider, T. T´el, Z. Neufeld, 2002. Dynamics of leaking Hamiltonian sys-

Dynamics 53, 64-72.

tems. Phys. Rev. E 66, 066218.

E. Ott and T. T´el, 1993. Chaotic scattering: an introduction, Chaos 3, 417-426.
I. Tuval, J. Schneider, O. Piro, T. T´el, 2004. Opening up fractal structures of

three dimensional ﬂows via leaking. Europhys. Lett. 65, 633-639.

S. Wiggins, 1992. Chaotic Transport in Dynamical Systems. Springer Verlag,

New York.

21

