4
0
0
2
 
t
c
O
 
6
 
 
]
h
p
-
o
a
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
9
3
0
0
1
4
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Probabilistic forecasts of temperature: measuring the utility of
the ensemble spread

Stephen Jewson∗

January 19, 2014

Abstract

The spread of ensemble weather forecasts contains information about the spread of possible future
weather scenarios. But how much information does it contain, and how useful is that information
in predicting the probabilities of future temperatures? One traditional answer to this question is
to calculate the spread-skill correlation. We discuss the spread-skill correlation and how it interacts
with some simple calibration schemes. We then point out why it is not, in fact, a useful measure for
the amount of information in the ensemble spread, and discuss a number of other measures that are
more useful.

1 Introduction

Forecasts of the expected surface air temperature over the next 15 days are readily available from com-
mercial forecast vendors. The best of these forecasts have been proven to be consistently better than
climatology and such forecasts are widely used within industry. There is also demand within industry
for probabilistic forecasts of temperature i.e.
forecasts that predict the whole distribution of tempera-
tures. Such forecasts are much more useful than forecasts of the expectation alone in situations where
the ultimate variables being predicted are a non-linear function of temperature, as is commonly the case.
Probabilistic forecasts of temperature can be made rather easily from forecasts of the expected tempera-
ture using linear regression. The parameters of the regression model are derived using past forecasts and
past observations after these forecasts and observations have been converted to standardized anomalies
using the climatological mean and standard deviation. Probabilistic forecasts made in this way provide
a standard against which forecasts made using more sophisticated methods should be compared, and it
turns out that they are hard to beat (our own attempts to beat regression, which have more or less failed,
are summarised in Jewson (2004)).
Regression-based probabilistic forecasts have a skill that doesn’t vary with weather state. It has been
shown, however, that the uncertainty around forecasts of the expectation does vary with weather state
and that these variations are predictable, to a certain extent, using the spread of ensemble forecasts (see,
for example, Kalnay and Dalcher (1987), and many others). What is not clear is whether the level of
predicability in the variations of the uncertainty is useful in any material sense or whether the beneﬁcial
eﬀect on the ﬁnal forecast of the temperature distribution is too small to be relevant. How might we
investigate this question of how much useful information there is in the ensemble spread?
One method that is frequently used to assess the amount of information in the spread from ensemble fore-
casts is the spread-skill correlation (SSC), deﬁned in a number of diﬀerent ways (see for example Barker
(1991), Whitaker and Loughe (1998) and Hou et al. (2001)). SSC is usually calculated before the ensem-
ble forecast has been calibrated (i.e. before it has been turned into a probabilistic forecast). However, it
is the properties of the forecast after calibration that we really care about. In this article we investigate
some of the properties of the spread-skill correlation, and in particular how it interacts with the cali-
bration procedure. We will show that, under certain combinations of the deﬁnition of the SSC and the
calibration procedure, the SSC is the same before and after the calibration, implying that pre-calibration
estimates of the SSC can be used to predict post-calibration values.
However we also note that even the post-calibration SSC is not a particularly good indicator of the level
of useful information that can be derived from the ensemble spread and we describe how it can be possible
that the SSC is high but the ensemble spread is eﬀectively useless as a predictor of the future temperature
distribution.

∗Correspondence address: RMS, 10 Eastcheap, London, EC3M 1AJ, UK. Email: x@stephenjewson.com

Finally we present some simple measures that improve on the SSC and that can be used to ascertain
whether the information in the ensemble spread is really useful or not.

2 The linear anomaly correlation

We start by reviewing some of the properties of the linear anomaly correlation (LAC). This will help us
understand how to think about the properties of the SSC.
The amount of information in a temperature forecast from an NWP model is commonly measured using
the LAC between the forecast and an analysis. One of the reasons that the LAC is a useful measure
is that it is conserved under linear transformations, and so if the forecast is calibrated using a linear
transformation (such as linear regression) then the LAC post-calibration is the same as the LAC pre-
calibration. This means that one doesn’t actually have to perform the calibration to know what the
post-calibration LAC is going to be.

3 The spread-skill correlation

In a similar way the SSC is commonly applied to the output from NWP models to assess the ability of
the model to capture variations in the uncertainty (see for example Buizza (1997)).
Four commonly used deﬁnitions of SSC are:

(1)
(2)

(3)
(4)

(5)

(6)

SSC1 = linear correlation(|e|, s)
SSC2 = linear correlation(e2, s)
SSC3 = linear correlation(|e|, s2)
SSC4 = linear correlation(e2, s2)

where e are the forecast errors and s is the ensemble spread.
In the same way that predictions of the mean temperature must be calibrated, so must predictions of
the uncertainty. In Jewson et al. (2003) we argued that both an oﬀset and a scaling are needed in this
calibration: this allows for both the mean level of uncertainty and the amplitude of the variability of
the uncertainty to be set correctly. We have proposed and tested various models that can be used for
this calibration: a summary of our results is given in Jewson (2004). All the models we propose are
generalisations of linear regression. The two models of most relevance to the current discussion are
standard deviation and variance based spread regression models deﬁned by:

Ti ∼ N (mean = α + βmi, standard deviation = γ + δsi)

and

Ti ∼ N (mean = α + βmi, variance = γ2 + δ2s2
i )

where Ti is the temperature anomaly on day i, mi is the ensemble mean anomaly on day i, si is the
ensemble spread anomaly on day i and where anomalies are deﬁned by subtracting a climatological
seasonal cycle in the mean and dividing by a climatological seasonal cycle in the spread. α, β, γ and δ are
free parameters: we call γ and γ2 the spread-skill bias correction and δ and δ2 the spread-skill regression
coeﬃcient, while we call γ + δs and γ2 + δ2s2 the spread-skill oﬀset.
Which of the standard deviation or variance based calibration models is better is not clear a-priori but
can be answered for any particular data set by comparing the in-sample or out-of-sample likelihoods
achieved by the two models.
It would be very useful if the SSC (for any of the above deﬁnitions) were the same before and after
calibration (for either of the above calibration methods). Then, as with linear correlation, the pre-
calibration SSC could be used to predict the post-calibration SSC and we would not actually have to
perform the calibration to calculate the post-calibration SSC.
We now investigate whether the SSC has this useful property, which we will call conservation.

4 Conservation properties of the spread-skill correlation

The conservation properties of the SSC are straightforward and somewhat obvious. They can be derived
based on the observation that linear correlations are not aﬀected by linear transformations of either
variable.
Under the standard deviation based spread regression model the spread skill correlation deﬁned as either
SSC1 or SSC2 will be conserved because these measures base the SSC on s and the calibration of s is
simply a linear tranformation. The SSC measures based on s2 will not, however, be conserved when using
standard deviation based spread regression.
Alternatively under the variance based spread regression model the spread skill correlation deﬁne as either
SSC3 or SSC4 will be conserved because these measures base the SSC on s2 and the calibration of s2 is
now a linear transformation. However SSC1 and SSC2 will not be conserved under the variance based
spread regression model.
Together these results suggest that the choice of which SSC measure to choose is not arbitrary but should
be inﬂuenced by whichever of the calibration models works better for the data in hand.

5 The oﬀset problem

We have shown that the SSC can be conserved during calibration as long as the deﬁnition of SSC is chosen
to match the method used for the calibration. There is, however, a problem with the SSC as a measure
for the amount of information in a probabilistic forecast. This problem is caused by the spread-skill oﬀset
given by γ + δs in equation 5 and by γ2 + δ2s2 in equation 6.
When the oﬀset is large relative to the amplitude of the variability of the uncertainty we ﬁnd ourselves
in a situation in which predictions of the variations of the uncertainty are more or less irrelevant, even if
they are very good, simply because they don’t contribute much as a fraction of the total uncertainty.
In such cases the SSC may be large but the ensemble spread could be ignored without reducing the skill of
the calibrated forecast: linear regression would work as well as spread regression. We clearly need other
measures to assess whether the spread is really useful that take into account the size of the calibrated
variations in uncertainty. Since this question depends crucially on the oﬀset and the oﬀset can only be
derived during the calibration procedure it will not be possible to estimate the usefulness of the spread
before calibration has taken place.
This is a fundamental diﬀerence between forecasts of spread and forecasts of the expectation, since, as we
have seen, it is possible to estimate the information in a forecast of the expectation before the calibration
has taken place. This diﬀerence arises because when we predict the mean temperature we are concerned
with predicting changes from the normal while when we predict the uncertainty we are only interested in
the extent to which our estimate of the uncertainty improves the forecast of the temperature distribution.
Thus we are interested in actual values of the uncertainty rather than just departures from normal.

6 Other measures of the utility of ensemble spread

Because of the oﬀset problem with the SSC we now suggest some alternative methods for measuring
the usefulness of the ensemble spread. All of these measures can only be calculated after calibration, as
explained above.

6.1 Coeﬃcient of variation of spread

Our ﬁrst measure is the coeﬃcient of variation of spread deﬁned as:

COVS =

σσ
µσ

(7)

where σσ is the standard deviation of variations in the uncertainty or the spread, and µσ is the mean
level in the uncertainty or the spread.
COVS was introduced in Jewson et al. (2003) and measures the size of the variations of the spread relative
to the mean spread. Values for the COVS versus lead time for ECMWF ensemble forecasts for London
Heathrow are given in that paper.
If the post-calibration COVS is small then that implies that the variations in the uncertainty are small
relative to the mean uncertainty, and, depending on the level of accuracy required, that it may be
reasonable to ignore the variations in the uncertainty completely and model it as constant i.e. that linear
regression may be as good as spread regression.

6.2 Spread mean variability ratio

The limitation of using the COVS to understand the importance of variations in the ensemble spread is
it doesn’t take into account the size of the variations in the mean temperature. One can imagine the
following two limiting cases:

1. The expected temperature is the same every day but the standard deviation of possible temperatures
varies. In this case forecasts of the uncertainty of temperature would be very useful. We call this
a ‘mean constant spread varies’ world.

2. The expected temperature varies from day to day but the standard deviation of possible tempera-
tures is constant. In this case forecasts of the uncertainty of temperature would not be useful. We
call this a ‘mean varies spread constant ’ world.

In order to distinguish between these two scenarios we deﬁne the spread-mean variability ratio as:

where σσ is the standard deviation of variations in the uncertainty or the spread and σµ is the standard
deviation of variations in the expected temperature.
An alternative deﬁnition based on variance would be:

SMVR1 =

SMVR2 =

σσ
σµ

σ2
σ
σ2
µ

(8)

(9)

The SMVR measures the size of variations of the spread relative to the size of the variations of the mean.
Small values of the SMVR imply that we are close to the mean-varies-spread-constant world while large
values of SMVR imply that we are close to the mean-constant-spread-varies world.
Figure 1 shows the post-calibration SMVR1 for the forecasts used in Jewson et al. (2003). We see that
the SMVR is small at all leads, with smallest values at the shortest leads. We thus see that we are much
closer to the mean-varies-spread-constant world than we are to the mean-constant-spread-varies world,
and hence that predicting variations in the uncertainty is likely to be less useful than it would be in a
world in which the SMVR were larger.

6.3 Impact on the log-likelihood

The ﬁnal measure of the utility of forecasts of spread that we present is simply the change in the cost
function that is being used to calibrate and evaluate the forecast. We ourselves prefer to evaluate
probabilistic forecasts of temperature using the log-likelihood from classical statistics (Fisher (1912),
Jewson (2003)) and hence we consider the change in the log-likelihood due to the inclusion of information
from the ensemble spread as a measure of how useful that information is. When we evaluated the
usefulness of the spread in temperature forecasts derived from the ECMWF ensemble using this method
we found that the spread was not very important (Jewson, 2004).
One aspect of our comparison of forecasts using log-likelihoods in Jewson (2004) is that we calculated log-
likelihood based on the whole distribution of future temperatures. This was deliberate: it is predicting
the whole distribution of temperature that we are interested in. However, if instead we were mainly
interested in the tails of the distribution then a version of the log-likelihood based only on the tails would
be more appropriate and the ensemble spread would perhaps be more useful.

7 Summary

We have considered how to measure the importance of variations in the ensemble spread when making
probabilistic temperature forecasts. First we have considered the interaction between measures of the
spread-skill correlation (SSC) and the methods used to calibrate the forecast. We ﬁnd that certain deﬁ-
nitions of SSC are conserved through the calibration process for certain calibration algorithms, implying
that the choice of SSC measure to be used should be linked to the choice of calibration method.
However we also discuss why the SSC is not a particularly useful measure of the information in the
ensemble spread and explain how a high value of the SSC does not necessarily mean that the spread
improves the quality of the ﬁnal forecast because of the possibility of a large oﬀset in the calibrated
uncertainty.

We have discussed some alternative and preferable diagnostics that focus on the role the spread plays in
the ﬁnal calibrated forecast. The ﬁrst of these diagnostics measures the size of variations in the uncertainty
relative to the mean uncertainty and the second measures the size of variations in the uncertainty relative
to the size of the variations in the expected temperature. We calculate the latter for a year of forecast
data and ﬁnd that we are much closer to a world in which the mean varies and the spread is ﬁxed than
we are to a world in which the the spread varies and the mean is ﬁxed. This seems to partly explain why
we see so little improvement in the skill of probabilistic forecasts when we add the ensemble spread as
an extra predictor.

Thanks to Jeremy Penzer and Christine Ziehmann for some interesting discussions on this topic.

8 Acknowledgements

9 Legal statement

SJ was employed by RMS at the time that this article was written.
However, neither the research behind this article nor the writing of this article were in the course of his
employment, (where ’in the course of their employment’ is within the meaning of the Copyright, Designs
and Patents Act 1988, Section 11), nor were they in the course of his normal duties, or in the course
of duties falling outside his normal duties but speciﬁcally assigned to him (where ’in the course of his
normal duties’ and ’in the course of duties falling outside his normal duties’ are within the meanings of the
Patents Act 1977, Section 39). Furthermore the article does not contain any proprietary information or
trade secrets of RMS. As a result, the author is the owner of all the intellectual property rights (including,
but not limited to, copyright, moral rights, design rights and rights to inventions) associated with and
arising from this article. The author reserves all these rights. No-one may reproduce, store or transmit,
in any form or by any means, any part of this article without the author’s prior written permission. The
moral rights of the author have been asserted.
The contents of this article reﬂect the author’s personal opinions at the point in time at which this article
was submitted for publication. However, by the very nature of ongoing research, they do not necessarily
In addition, they do not necessarily reﬂect the opinions of the
reﬂect the author’s current opinions.
author’s employer.

R
V
M
S
 
n
o
i
t
a
r
b

i
l

a
c
 
t
s
o
p

5
.
0

4
.
0

3
.
0

2
.
0

1
.
0

0
.
0

0

2

6

8

4

lead

Figure 1: The SMVR1 calculated from one year of ECMWF ensemble forecasts for London Heathrow
calibrated using the standard deviation based spread regression model.

References

Climate, 4:733–742, 1991.

T Barker. The relationship between spread and forecast error in extended range forecasts. Journal of

R Buizza. Potential forecast skill of ensemble prediction and spread and skill distributions of the ECMWF

ensemble prediction system. Mon. Wea. Rev., 125:99–119, 1997.

R Fisher. On an absolute criterion for ﬁtting frequency curves. Messenger of Mathematics, 41:155–160,

129:73–91, 2001.

1912.

2003.

D Hou, E Kalnay, and K Droegmeier. Objective veriﬁcation of the SAMEX ensemble forecasts. MWR,

S Jewson. Use of the likelihood for measuring the skill of probabilistic forecasts. arXiv:physics/0308046,

S Jewson. A summary of our recent research into practical methods for probabilistic temperature fore-

casting. arxiv:physics/0409096, 2004.

S Jewson, A Brix, and C Ziehmann. A new framework for the assessment and calibration of ensemble

temperature forecasts. Atmospheric Science Letters, 2003.

E Kalnay and A Dalcher. Forecasting forecast skill. Monthly Weather Review, 115:349–356, 1987.

J Whitaker and A Loughe. The relation between ensemble spread and ensemble mean skill. Monthly

Weather Review, 126:3292–3302, 1998.

