5
0
0
2
 
b
e
F
 
6
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
o
a
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
5
8
0
2
0
5
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Global monitoring of tropospheric water vapor
with GPS radio occultation aboard CHAMP

S. Heise, J. Wickert, G. Beyerle, T. Schmidt, and Ch. Reigber

GeoForschungsZentrum Potsdam (GFZ), Dep. Geodesy and Remote Sensing,
Telegrafenberg, Potsdam, Germany

Abstract

The paper deals with application of GPS radio occultation (RO) measurements
aboard CHAMP for the retrieval of tropospheric water vapor proﬁles. The GPS
RO technique provides a powerful tool for atmospheric sounding which requires
no calibration, is not aﬀected by clouds, aerosols or precipitation, and provides an
almost uniform global coverage. We brieﬂy overview data processing and retrieval
of vertical refractivity, temperature and water vapor proﬁles from GPS RO obser-
vations. CHAMP RO data are available since 2001 with up to 200 high resolution
atmospheric proﬁles per day. Global validation of CHAMP water vapor proﬁles with
radiosonde data reveals a bias of about 0.2 g/kg and a standard deviation of less
than 1 g/kg speciﬁc humidity in the lower troposphere. We demonstrate poten-
tials of CHAMP RO retrievals for monitoring the mean tropospheric water vapor
distribution on a global scale.

Key words: CHAMP, GPS radio occultation, water vapor, troposphere

1 Introduction

The implementation of the Global Positioning System (GPS) enabled the de-
velopment of the radio occultation (RO) technique (e.g. Melbourne et al.,
1994; Kursinski et al., 1997) for remote sensing of the Earth’s atmosphere.
This technique exploits atmospheric refraction of GPS signals observed aboard
Low Earth Orbiting (LEO) satellites. Basic observable is the atmospheric ex-
cess phase which is used for the retrieval of meteorological quantities. The po-
tentials of GPS RO measurements for providing vertical atmospheric proﬁles of
refractivity, temperature and water vapor have been demonstrated for the ﬁrst

Email address: stefan.heise@gfz-potsdam.de (S. Heise).

Preprint submitted to Elsevier Science

2 February 2008

time by the GPS/MET experiment (e.g. Ware et al., 1996; Kursinski et al.,
1997). The CHAMP (Challenging Minisatellite Payload) GPS RO experiment
was successfully started on Feb. 11, 2001 (Wickert et al., 2001) and is acti-
vated continuously since mid of 2001. Considering current and planned LEO
satellite missions (e.g. GRACE or COSMIC), GPS RO data will provide a
valuable data base for climatological investigations and improvement of global
weather forecasts in the future. One challenge in processing GPS radio oc-
cultation measurements is the data analysis in the lower troposphere. The
refractivity retrieved from GPS RO data shows a negative bias in relation
to meteorological data (Ao et al., 2003; Beyerle et al., 2004), which leads to
a corresponding bias in the retrieved speciﬁc humidity. Reasons for this bias
are GPS receiver tracking errors, uncorrected multipath in signal propagation
and critical refraction. The application of advanced retrieval techniques, as
the Full Spectrum Inversion (FSI) method (Jensen et al., 2003), reduces the
refractivity bias signiﬁcantly (Wickert et al., 2004). The FSI is implemented
to the current version (005) of the operational data analysis software at GFZ
Potsdam, which is available since February 2004.

2 Retrieval technique

The retrieval of atmospheric proﬁles from GPS occultation measurements has
been described in detail by a number of authors (e.g. Melbourne et al., 1994;
Kursinski et al., 1997; Wickert et al., 2004). Brieﬂy, the GPS measurements
recorded by a receiver onboard a LEO (50 Hz sampling rate in case of CHAMP)
are used together with high precision orbit information (LEO and occulting
GPS satellite) to derive the atmospheric excess phase with millimetric accu-
racy. These data are transformed into proﬁles of the ray path bending angle
α(a), where a denotes the so-called impact parameter. Assuming spherical
symmetry the Abel transform (e.g. Fjeldbo et al., 1971) is applied to invert
α(a) into refractivity proﬁles N(r), where r denotes the ray path tangential
altitude.

N(r) = 77.6

p
T

+ 3.73 · 105 pw
T 2

(1)

The atmospheric refractivity N(r) (Eq. 1) is related to air pressure (p), air
temperature (T ) and water vapor pressure (pw). Assuming dry air conditions,
refractivity is direct proportional to air density and the pressure proﬁle can
be derived by downward integration of the refractivity proﬁle assuming hydro-
static equilibrium. The temperature proﬁle is calculated consecutively by Eq.
1. The validation of CHAMP dry temperature proﬁles with radiosonde data
as well as ECMWF analyses shows a temperature bias less than 0.5 K (RMS
deviation 1–2 K) between 250–20 hPa (Wickert et al., 2004).

2

(a)

(b)

Fig. 1. (a): Statistical comparison (zonal mean) of CHAMP refractivity (product
version 005, 159,672 proﬁles, May 2001 to August 2004) with ECMWF. (b): Number
of proﬁles in relation to proﬁle availability at 10 km altitude corresponding to left
panel.

However, the dry air assumption is not valid over wide areas of the mid and
lower troposphere, leading to an ambiguity of the dry and wet refractivity
term (Eq. 1). To deal with this problem, additional meteorological informa-
tion is necessary. There are diﬀerent retrieval techniques using such informa-
tion. Gorbunov and Sokolovskiy (1993) describe an iterative algorithm which
uses external temperature information (e.g. from ECMWF analyses) to sepa-
rate dry and wet part of the measured refractivity. In result, pressure and
humidity proﬁle are derived from the refractivity data. Another approach
to retrieve both humidity and temperature proﬁle is the 1Dvar technique
(Healy and Eyre, 2000). This optimal estimation method requires background
information (temperature, humidity and pressure) as well as error character-
istics of the measurement (refractivity) and the background (e.g. ECMWF).
A further approach, in the following referred to as direct water vapor pressure
(DWVP) retrieval, has been developed at GFZ Potsdam. Here background
(ECMWF) temperature and pressure information are used to calculate water
vapor pressure (pw) directly form refractivity data applying Eq. 1. The dif-
ference between the so derived pw and background humidity information is
used to adapt the background pressure for a recalculation of pw. The pressure
values converge very quickly and the procedure is stopped after the second
iteration step. The known negative refractivity bias in the lower troposphere
(Fig. 1(a)) states a general problem for the humidity derivation. To avoid
DWVP retrieval outliers especially in that region, deviations between back-
ground and retrieval humidity are restricted to the double ECMWF humidity
error of the current proﬁle during the iteration.

At GFZ Potsdam both, 1Dvar and DWVP algorithms are implemented for
tropospheric water vapor retrieval. In the following we present results from
both techniques and compare these with radiosonde measurements.

3

(a)

(b)

(c)

Fig. 2. Comparison of vertical speciﬁc humidity (a), temperature (b) and refractiv-
ity(c) proﬁles derived from CHAMP DWVP and 1Dvar retrieval with radiosonde
Lindenberg and ECMWF data. Example for occultation 226, October 25, 2002,
22:27 UTC, 51.44◦N, 14.66◦E.

3 Results and validation

To give an impression on the retrieval results, Fig. 2(a) shows an example of
CHAMP 1Dvar and DWVP speciﬁc humidity in comparison to radiosonde and
ECMWF data. Both CHAMP retrievals come to quite similar results reveal-
ing signiﬁcant improvement of the background (ECMWF) speciﬁc humidity in
comparison to radiosonde data. Nevertheless, 1Dvar shows a slightly smoother
result than DWVP. This has been observed in several cases and can be con-
sidered as a general diﬀerence between both retrievals. Obviously, DWVP is
more sensitive to vertical structures in the input refractivity than 1Dvar. Fig.
2(b) reveals good agreement between radiosonde and ECMWF temperature
proﬁles. The 1Dvar temperature shows only small deviations from the back-
ground. Finally, radiosonde, ECMWF and CHAMP refractivity proﬁles are
given in Fig. 2(c). Especially between 600 and 800 hPa the CHAMP refrac-
tivity shows better agreement to the radiosonde observation than ECMWF.
This obviously corresponds to improvements of the CHAMP humidity retrieval
above the background humidity in this altitude range.

The 1Dvar and DWVP retrieval results have been validated with radiosonde
data. Fig. 3 (a)-(c) show the statistical comparison (bias and standard devia-
tion) of vertical speciﬁc humidity proﬁles from ECMWF, 1Dvar and DWVP
with coinciding radiosonde proﬁles on a global scale. For the years 2002 and
2003 about 13,400 coincidences have been found (see Fig. 3 (e), coincidence
radius: 300 km spatial and 3 hours temporal). Radiosonde data were quality
checked by comparison with ECMWF and have been ignored in case of more
than 10% refractivity deviation. As can be seen from Fig. 3(b) and (c), the

4

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

(e)

Fig. 3. Statistical comparison (years 2002-2003) of vertical speciﬁc humidity proﬁles
from global radiosonde stations with: (a) ECMWF, (b) 1Dvar, (c) DWVP. Corre-
sponding comparison of CHAMP and radiosonde refractivity is shown in (d). Blue
lines represent bias, red lines standard deviation. Number of compared data points
(coincidence radius: 300 km, 3 hours) is shown in (e).

statistical comparison of 1Dvar and DWVP with radiosonde data comes to
quite similar results. The negative CHAMP refractivity bias (Fig. 3(d)) leads
to a speciﬁc humidity bias of of about -0.2 g/kg in the lower troposphere.
Nevertheless, the standard deviation is similar to the result from radiosonde
comparison with ECMWF (Fig. 3(a)). By comparing Fig. 3(a)-(d) it has to
be noticed that between 600 and 500 hPa DWVP shows a slightly stronger
relation to the refractivity data than 1Dvar which seems to be more inﬂuenced
by the background (ECMWF) data in this region.

4 Global application

The CHAMP humidity proﬁles may be used for investigation of mean seasonal
or medium term water vapor distribution on a global scale. Due to rather low
data exploitation in the lower troposphere (see Fig. 1(b) and Fig. 3(e)) and
accuracy restrictions at low humidity levels in the upper troposphere, the mid
troposphere region is most appropriate for such investigations. Fig. 4(a) shows
the mean global water vapor distribution at 500 hPa pressure level derived
from DWVP results for the northern summer season of 2002 according to
a grid of 2.5◦ resolution in latitude and 5.0◦ in longitude respectively. The
corresponding data coverage (proﬁles per pixel) is shown in 4(b). It has to
be mentioned that current and planned LEO RO missions like GRACE and
COSMIC will provide a signiﬁcantly extended data base which will allow for
global coverage within much shorter time scales than the CHAMP mission
alone. Furthermore, RO data will be of growing interest for climatological
investigations in the future if ﬁrst medium and long term RO data sets become
available.

5

(a)

(b)

Fig. 4. (a): CHAMP DWVP mean global water vapor distribution at 500 hPa for
northern summer conditions (June–August 2002). (b): Data coverage according to
(a) (12575 data points).

5 Conclusions

The 1Dvar and DWVP techniques state valuable tools for the humidity re-
trieval from occultation refractivity measurements in the mid and lower tro-
posphere. Statistically, both methods come to comparable results. Even if
a unique separation of dry and wet refractivity components is not possible,
the derived humidity information may be improved above the background
(e.g. ECMWF) provided that temperature background and refractivity mea-
surement are of suﬃcient quality. Advanced retrieval techniques like the FSI
method signiﬁcantly reduced the negative refractivity bias in the lower tro-
posphere. Nevertheless, the refractivity retrieval needs further improvement.
Potentials of CHAMP RO data for global water vapor monitoring have been
demonstrated. The CHAMP RO experiment generates the ﬁrst long-term RO
data set. Following satellite missions like GRACE and COSMIC will signif-
icantly extend the RO database improving the capabilities for global water
vapor monitoring and climatological investigations.

Acknowledgements

Many thanks to Sean Healy for helpful comments and instructions concerning
the implementation of 1Dvar. We thank Katrin Sch¨ollhammer and the Insti-
tute for Meteorology at the Free University Berlin for delivering radiosonde
data and the ECMWF for supplying global weather analyses.

References

Ao C. O., Meehan, T. K., Hajj, G. A., Mannucci, A. J., Beyerle, G.: Lower
troposphere refractivity bias in GPS occultation retrievals, J. Geophys. Res.,
108 (D18), 4577, doi:10.1029/2002JD003216, 2003.

Beyerle G., Wickert, J., Schmidt, T., Reigber, C.: Atmospheric sounding by
global navigation satellite system radio occultation: An analysis of the neg-
ative refractivity bias using CHAMP observations, J. Geophys. Res., 109,
D01106, doi:10.1029/2003JD003922.

6

Fjeldbo, G., Kliore, A. J., and Eshleman, V. R.: The neutral atmosphere of
Venus as studied with the Mariner V radio occultation experiments, Astron.
J., 76,2,123-140,1971.

Gorbunov, M. E., and Sokolovskiy, S. V.: Remote sensing of refractivity from
space for global observations of atmospheric parameters, Report 119, Max
Planck Institut fr Meteorologie, Hamburg, 1993.

Healy, S. B., and Eyre, J., R.: Retrieving temperature, water vapour and
surface pressure information from refractive-index proﬁles derived by radio
occultation data: A simulation study, Q. J. R. Meteorol. Soc., 126, 1661-
1683, 2000.

Jensen, A. S., Lohmann, M., Benzon, H. H., Nielsen, A.: Full Spectrum inver-
sion of radio occultation signals, Radio Sci., 38(3): 10.1029/2002RS002763,
2003.

Kursinski, E. R., Hajj, G. A., Hardy, K. R., Schoﬁeld, J. T. and Linﬁeld, R.:
Observing Earth’s atmosphere with radio occultation measurements using
the Global Positioning System, J. Geophys. Res., 102, 23429–23465, 1997.
Melbourne, W. G., Davis, E. S., Hajj, G. A., Hardy, K. R., Kursinski, E. R.,
Meehan, T. K., and Young, L. E.: The application of spaceborne GPS to
atmospheric limb sounding and global change monitoring, JPL Publication,
94–18, Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Pasadena, California, 1994.

Ware R., Exner, M., Feng, D., Gorbunov, M., Hardy, K., Melbourne, W.,
Rocken, C., Schreiner, W., Sokolovsky, S., Solheim, F., Zou, X., Anthes, R.,
Businger, S., and Trenberth K.: GPS soundings of the atmosphere from low
earth orbit: Preliminary results, Bull. Amer. Meteor. Soc., 77, 19–40, 1996.
Wickert J., Reigber, C., Beyerle, G., K¨onig, R., Marquardt, C., Schmidt, T.,
Grunwaldt, L., Galas, R., Meehan, T. K., Melbourne, W. G., and Hocke, K.:
Atmosphere sounding by GPS radio occultation: First results from CHAMP,
Geophys. Res. Lett., 28, 3263–3266, 2001.

Wickert J., Schmidt, T., Beyerle, G., K¨onig, R., Reigber, C., and Jakowski,
N.: The radio occultation experiment aboard CHAMP: Operational data
analysis and validation of atmospheric proﬁles, J. Meteorol. Soc. Japan,
82(1B), 381–395, 2004.

7

