5
0
0
2
 
n
u
J
 
3
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
o
a
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
6
1
1
6
0
5
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Persistence in a Simple Model for Earth’s
Atmosphere Temperature Fluctuations

Arturo Berrones
Posgrado en Ingenier´ıa de Sistemas

Universidad Aut´onoma de Nuevo Le´on

AP 126 - F, Cd. Universitaria

San Nicol´as de los Garza, NL 66450, M´exico.

February 21, 2014

Keywords: climate models; stochastic processes; long memory eﬀects; long-

range correlations; complex systems.

Abstract

The eﬀect caused by the presence of a number of distinct time
scales in a simple stochastic model for Earth’s atmosphere tempera-
ture ﬂuctuations is studied. The model is described by a dissipative
dynamics consisting of a set of coupled stochastic evolution equations.
The system shows features that resemble recent observations. In con-
trast to other approaches, like autoregressive models, the ﬂuctuations
of atmosphere’s temperature depend on parameters with clear phys-
ical meaning. A reduced version of the model is constructed and its
temporal autocovariance function is explicitly written.

1 Introduction

Interaction among processes with several length and time scales is common
to a variety of complex systems. For instance, the long-range temporal cor-
relations found in signals from a variety of ﬁelds can be associated with an
[1, 2, 3, 4, 5]. In particular, it is an
interplay of a number of time scales

1

extended belief that the persistence observed in the temperature ﬂuctuations
of the Earth’s atmosphere is a consequence of its feedback with more slow
dynamical components in the climate system, like the oceans and Earth’s
surface [3]. Persistence at short time scales is related to the everyday life
observation that is very likely to experience similar weather conditions over
a given region in a time scale of few days. The existence of this short-term
correlations make weather forecasting possible. Climate’s persistence is also
found for larger time scales, however its characterization is a more diﬃcult
task [6]. In some recent experiments, the temperature records from diﬀer-
ent places around the globe have been analyzed. The observations indicate
the existence of universal power-laws C(t) ∼ t−r describing the correlations
of the temperature ﬂuctuations around its mean seasonal value. Although
there is some disagreement about the value of the exponent r, the fact that
the persistence in temperature ﬂuctuations can indeed be characterized by
power-law autocorrelation functions is ﬁrmly established [6].
It has been
reported by some authors that for time scales that range from ∼ 1 to ∼ 25
years, correlations measured on data from meteorologic stations placed on
small islands decay with an exponent r ∼ 0.4, while for continental stations
data are closer to r ∼ 0.7 [7]. According to other authors [8], the persistence
is even more pronounced for the oceanic regions (being roughly characterized
by a 1/f noise), while in the inner continents r ∼ 1 (in terms of the power
spectrum, a white noise at low frequencies), with a transition region in the
coastal zones in which r ∼ 0.7.

The emergence of long-range temporal correlations is a non-trivial feature
that can be used to test models of Earth’s climate [7]. The understanding
of the long-range temporal correlations is fundamental because they charac-
terize the interaction among the diﬀerent climate components [8]. There is
some controversy respecting the description made by large scale models of
the atmospheric temperature variability [8, 9, 10, 11, 6]. The purpose of
the present Letter is to introduce a conceptual stochastic model for the ﬂuc-
tuations of Earth’s atmospheric temperature, or more precisely, its radiated
energy (for a survey on conceptual climate models see, for instance, Imkeller
and Monahan [12]). It will be shown that the model displays qualitative
features that closely resemble observations.
In contrast with other simple
stochastic models of atmospheric temperature ﬂuctuations, like autoregres-
sive models [13, 14], all the parameters of the presented model have direct
physical interpretation. Additionally, as it will be discussed below, the model
introduced here also reveals statistical features that are reminiscent of recent

2

observations on the spatial structure of the climate network. Therefore, this
work is intended to be a contribution towards the construction of realistic
and unexpensive algorithms for Earth’s climate simulation.

The model is based on energy balance [15]. In the Earth, as in the other
planets with a solid crust, the inﬂux of solar radiation is balanced by the
outﬂow from the surface and the atmosphere. In the simplest description of
this process, the Earth is treated as a single point. Let’s denote by y and x
the global averages of the radiation emitted by the atmosphere and by the
surface (oceans and land) respectively. A fraction of the Sun’s total radiation
is immediately reﬂected back into space and other is absorbed by the atmo-
sphere. The remainder of the ﬂux is transmitted through the atmosphere and
reaches the surface, which in turn absorbs some of the radiation and reﬂects
the rest. The radiation absorbed by the surface is then radiated back as heat.
The surface radiates the absorbed energy in the Infra Red (IR) region of the
spectra. It turns out that the atmosphere is not transparent to IR radiation,
essentialy due to the presence of the so-called greenhouse gases. Let’s denote
by a the fraction of IR radiation absorbed by the atmosphere. A fraction
b of the total radiation absorbed by the atmosphere is directed towards the
surface and the rest ﬁnally loses into space. All this considerations are put
togheter in the well known zero dimensional energy balance model:

y = A + ax
x = B + by

(1)

where the constants A and B are the net contribution made to y and x by the
solar radiation ﬂux, taking into account that some heat is removed by water’s
evaporation from surface. The constant a is called the Infra Red (IR) absorp-
tion coeﬃcient. All the constants in Eqs. (1) are calculated averaging over
a year and over the entire Earth’s surface. Assuming a blackbody process,
the average atmosphere’s temperature is given by y = νT 4, where ν is the
Stefan-Boltzmann constant. In spite of its simplicity, the zero dimensional
energy balance model is capable of predicting with very good accuracy the
mean Earth’s surface temperature. Another interesting prediction of the zero
dimensional energy balance model is the increment of the mean temperature
as the coupling parameters a and b grow.

In this Letter a spatially extended and time dependent generalization of
model (1) is introduced. The Letter is organized as follows:
in Section 2
the model is introduced and the temporal and spatial correlations are dis-

3

cussed numerically. A reduced version of the model is constructed and for-
mally solved in the framework of the Langevin approach. A discussion of the
statistical properties of the solution is given. Some conclusions and future
directions are discussed on Section 3.

2 The Model

The model (1) is generalized by the assumption that energy balance is satis-
ﬁed locally and a transient time is necessary in order to achieve a stationary
state. A set of N cells is considered.
In each cell, atmosphere interacts
with the surface through the local atmosphere’s IR absorption coeﬃcient
an and the local fraction of heat that the atmosphere returns towards the
surface, bn. Each component, atmosphere and surface, has its own intrinsic
local response time. The cells of each component interchange radiation via
a diﬀusive process. The model is written

(2)

˙yn = d1∆yn − λn[yn − (An + anxn)] + εn(t)
˙xn = d2∆xn − γn[xn − (Bn + bnyn)].
In this equation (λn)−1 and (γn)−1 are the local response times of the atmo-
sphere and the surface, respectively. The symbol ∆ is the discrete Laplacian
and d1, d2 represent the diﬀusion coeﬃcients of each component. The term
εn(t) is a Gaussian white noise, without correlations between diﬀerent cells.
The meaning of the rest of the terms follow from the zero dimensional energy
balance model (1). In particular, yn gives the radiation emitted by the at-
mosphere in the site n at a given time. The atmosphere is expected to have
shorter intrinsic response times that the surface. The radiation emitted by
the surface at time t in cell n is represented by xn. The noise reﬂects the more
rapid variations, or weather. Periodic boundary conditions are taken. The
constants λn, γn, An, Bn, an and bn are assumed to be independent variables,
such that averages over index (in the limit N → ∞) give the corresponding
values of the parameters of the zero dimensional energy balance model, A,
B, a, b; and the eﬀective inverse response times for the atmosphere and the
surface. The ﬁrst important thing to notice with model (2) is that it recovers
the zero dimensional energy balance model. This can be seen averaging Eq.
(2) over the cells in the limit N → ∞. The following reduced version of Eq.
(2) is obtained:

˙y = −λ[y − (A + ax)] + ε(t),

(3)

4

˙x = −γ[x − (B + by)].

From the fact that Eq. (3) represents an overdamped dynamics in a parabolic
potential, the system converges to a stationary state with mean value given
by the solution of the zero dimensional energy balance model. This result
shows that the model (2) is capable to represent with good approximation the
mean behavior of energy in the coupled atmosphere - surface system. Now
it will be argued that Eq. (2) can give realistic descriptions of temperature
ﬂuctuations as well. A large variability over the intrinsic characteristic times
of the surface around the globe is expected to exist, as a consequence of the
diﬀerent response times present in the geosphere, hydrosphere, cryosphere
and biosphere. At ﬁrst instance, this situation is modeled by treating the
γn’s like independent random variables taken from a uniform probability
distribution. On the other hand, under the basis of the relative homogeniety
of the atmosphere composition, it will be assumed by now that the response
time to perturbations of the atmosphere is the same in all cells.
In what
follows, the value λn = λ = 1 is used. Under these assumptions, the time
unit is deﬁned as the mean atmospheric response time. The model represents
the interaction between a hierarchy of time scales, ranging from minutes-days
to geological times. From this point of view, it would be therefore reasonable
to assume that 1/λ lies in the intermediate scales, roughly in the range from
weeks to months. This and other important aspects about the deﬁnition of
the parameters in the model are intended to be reﬁned by the author in the
near future by close cooperation with climate experts. At this point the main
goal is limited to explore the capabilities of the model (2), in order to give
qualitatively realistic statistical descriptions of the temperature ﬂuctuations
present in the Earth’s atmosphere.

Figure 1 (a) is a log-log plot of the power spectrum of the time series
of the atmosphere’s temperature in a particular cell. This time series is
obtained from the corresponding time series for yn(t) under the assumption
of a blackbody process. The parameters an, bn, An and Bn are left constant
and set to their experimental global averages: an = a = 0.96, bn = b = 0.61,
An = A = 179.36W/m2 and Bn = B = 47.82W/m2
[15]. The values γn are
drawn from a uniform distribution on the range (0, 0.2). The noise values
εn(t) are uniformly distributed over the interval (−1, 1)W/m2. The diﬀusion
coeﬃecients are taken as d1 = d2 = 1. System size is N = 50. The power
spectrum is consistent with a power law at low frequencies, with exponent
∼ −0.25. This exponent of the power spectrum implies a power law decay

5

of correlations at large times, C(t) ∝ t−r, with r ∼ 0.75. An alternative
approach is given in Figure 1 (b). In order to characterize the correlations,
the sum of the temperature values on time at a given cell is studied, resulting
in:

t

Yn(t) =

Tn(τ )

(4)

τ =1
X
where Tn(τ ) stands for the atmosphere’s temperature at cell n and time τ .
The signal Yn(t) is then compared to a random walk. In Figure 1 (b) the
standard deviation of Yn(t) as a function of time is plotted. For large times
(roughly greater than 50 time units), σ ∼ t0.648, which implies a power law
decay of the autocorrelation function at large times, with exponent ∼ 0.7.
This result is consistent with Figure 1 (a).

( a )

 (b)

0.001

)
 
f
 
(
 
S

0.001

0.01

f

0.1

1

10

100

1000

t

Figure 1:
(a): Log-log plot of the power spectrum of a temperature signal
generated by the term y3(t) of the model (2). The parameters are as discussed
in the text. The power spectrum is consistent with the power-law S(f ) ∼
f −0.25. This indicates a power-law decay of the autocorrelation function given
by C(t) ∼ t−0.75 for time scales between ﬁve and 1000 time units. Figure
1 (b): An alternative way to estimate the autocorrelation function for the
same situation as in Figure 1 (a). The standard deviation as a function of
time of the sum of the temperature signal is plotted in a log-log graph. The
graph shows a clear diﬀerence with respect the behavior expected from a
random walk. The standard deviation is consistent with σ(t) ∼ t−0.65, which
indicates C(t) ∼ t−0.7 for time scales up to 1000 time units.

An analysis of the radiation spectrum has been carried out for the same

1

0.1

)
t
(
 
v
d
t
s

0.01

6

experimental setup as above. Results indicate that radiation and tempera-
ture spectra are essentially equivalent, diﬀering at must by a normalization
factor. This numerical ﬁnding is consistent with recent studies which suggest
that a strongly correlated signal preserves its correlation properties after an
even polynomial transformation [17].

0.01

)
 
f
 
(
 
S

0.001

0.001

0.01
f

0.1

Figure 2: Log-log plot of the power spectrum of a temperature signal gen-
erated by the term x3(t) of the model (2). The parameters are the same as
in previous Figure, except for d2 = 0. A power-law S(f ) ∝ f −0.6 is plotted
for comparision.

The model is also capable to show scaling behavior for surface’s temper-
ature. As an example, the power spectrum of surface’s temperature ﬂuctu-
ations of an induvidual cell is shown in Figure 2. The system has the same
parameter values as before, but d2 = 0. Notice that with this choice of the
parameters, the coupling with the atmosphere is essential for the emergence
of scaling in surface’s temperature.

The model displays an interesting spatial structure. In Figure 3 a case
is considered in which system size is N = 200 and the other parameters are
the same as in the case presented in Figure 1. The spatial autocorrelation
function C(n) is inferred from the power spectrum of the temperature values
vector at a ﬁxed time. A least-square ﬁt of the power spectrum to a power-
law function indicates that S(k) ∼ k−0.22, which implies that the spatial
autocorrelation function can be roughly characterized by C(n) ∼ n−0.78 for
spatial scales in the range from one to 200 cells. Further numerical analysis
of the same model setup indicates that if larger spatial scales are considered,
the power spectrum displays a crossover to white noise at low frequencies.

In a more realistic description, the parameters (besides γn) must have

7

)
 
k
 
(
 
S

0.01

0.01

0.1

k 

Figure 3: Log-log plot of the power spectrum of the spatial vector of tem-
perature values vector at a ﬁxed time. The parameters are as discussed in
the text. For this situation, in which there is no local variability in the pa-
rameters (besides γn), the power spectrum indicates a power-law decay of
the spatial autocorrelation function for scales in the range from one to 200
cells, characterized by C(n) ∼ n−0.78.

′

some local variability due, for instance, to diﬀerences in the Earth’s albedo
and in the solar radiation ﬂux over diﬀerent regions. As an example, a
case in which An = A + ǫn and Bn = B + ǫ
n is discussed in Figure 4 (a).
The ǫ’s are independent random variables uniformly distributed in the range
(−1, 1)W/m2. The other parameters are chosen as before. The power spec-
trum presented in Figure 4 (a) indicates a crossover between two diﬀerent
scaling regimes. For scales from 50 to 1000 cells the correlation function
is consistent with C(n) ∼ n−0.8, while for shorter scales C(n) ∼ n−0.25. A
situation in which also the coupling parameters have local variability is pre-
sented in Figure 4 (b). The values of bn are set as bn = b + ρn, where ρn
is uniformly distributed over the interval (−0.15, 0.15). The parameters an
are taken as an = 0.98 for all n, which implies a stronger mean coupling.
The other parameters are the same as in Figure 4 (a). In Figure 4 (b) the
correlation decay is faster for the short scales and slower for the large scales
in comparision to Figure 4 (a). This eﬀect can be interpreted as an increment
of large scale coherence as the mean coupling grows, while the spatial coher-
ence at short scales decreases due to the increment in the local variability.
The scaling of the spatial autocorrelation function displayed by the model
is reminiscent of recent observations on the spatial structure of the climate
network, which indicate that nodes in the climate system conform a network

8

with the small-world property [16]. This property is related to the presence
of signiﬁcant correlations between distant nodes.

( a )

( b )

exponent -0.25
exponent -0.80

exponent  -0.32
exponent -0.72

-3

10

)
 
k
 
(
 
S

-4

10

0.001

-3

10

)
 
k
 
(
 
S

-4

10

0.001

0.01

k

0.1

0.01

k

0.1

Figure 4: This situation is similar to Figure 3, except from the fact that
some parameters besides the γn’s have local variability. In Figure 4 (b) the
local variability and the mean coupling parameter a have larger values than
in Figure 4 (a). See the text.

The numerical ﬁndings strongly suggest that the model (2) shows qual-
itative features that are close to the observations. However, a more precise
deﬁnition of the parameters is needed. For instance, a diﬀerent choice of the
scale separation between the γ’s and λ in general lead to diﬀerent proper-
ties of the autocorrelations. Another aspect to be reﬁned is concerned with
the already mentioned spatial variability of the parameters. This question is
closely related with the deﬁnition of the size associated to cells. In a real-
istic model setup, the parameter values come from spatial averages over the
region n. In the simple 1d + 1 situation discussed here, this would be global
averages over a given latitudinal interval. As already said, these and other
relevant questions are intended to be investigated by the author in the near
future, working in close contact with climate experts.

In order to gain insight into the model (2) it is discussed analitically its
reduced version given by Eq. (3). Without loss of generality, the constants
A and B are chosen equal to zero. The term ε(t) is a Gaussian white noise,
deﬁned through the moments hε(t)i = 0,
) and with
all higher moments equal to zero. The diﬀusion constant is a parameter that
measures the strenght of the noise. The function δ(t − t
) is a Dirac’s delta.
In the absence of coupling x and y simply converge exponentially to the

= Dδ(t − t

ε(t)ε(t

D

E

)

′

′

′

9

λ and 1

2λ with characteristic times 1

stationary state hyi = x = 0, hy2i = D
γ . It
will be assumed that λ > γ so one of the dynamics is f ast and the other is
slow. Strictly speaking, the system has three time scales, being the third one
associated with the noise. However this time scale has an inﬁnite separation
with respect to the other two. In the language of control theory, we can see
y like an output system with uncertainties (noise) that has feedback with an
input whose response time is diﬀerent from the time scale of y. Applying
a Laplace transform over time to Eq. (3) and assuming for simplicity the
initial conditions x(0) = y(0) = 0, one gets

sy(s) = −λy(s) + λax(s) + ε(s),
sx(s) = −γx(s) + γby(s).

Solving Eq. (5) for y(s) and x(s), and by the use of the Faltung Theorem,
a formal solution for y(t) in terms of the noise is found. This solution can
be used to write explicitly the covariance function, that describes the ﬂuctu-
ations around the mean value. 1 For large times, the covariance function is
given by the following expression:

hy(t)y(t + T )i = q1eµ1T + q2eµ2T

where

q1 =

D
16K 2 (λ − γ + 2k)

λ − γ + 2K
λ + γ + 2K

 

+

γ − λ + 2K
γ + λ

!

q2 =

D
16K 2 (γ − λ + 2K)

γ − λ + 2K
γ + λ − 2K

 

+

λ − γ + 2K
γ + λ

!

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

(9)

(10)

1This covariance function can also be derived from a general initial value problem for

a linear system of stochastic diﬀerential equations of arbitrary dimension.

µ1 = −

− K

γ + λ
2

µ2 = −

+ K

γ + λ
2

10

2

γ + λ

2 !

K = v
 
u
u
t

− γλ(1 − ab)

(11)

In the region of interest of the parameter space, correlations decay monoton-
ically with a characteristic time

τ =

.

(12)

γ+λ
2

−

γ+λ
2

− γλ(1 − ab)

1

2

r(cid:16)

(cid:16)

(cid:17)

(cid:17)
It must be realized that τ is greater than any of the two intrinsic times.
Therefore, because of the feedback there is an emergence of large memory.
The characteristic time becomes inﬁnitely large when γ → 0 with λ ﬁnite.
This result is consistent with previous works on reduced models of tempera-
ture ﬂuctuations [18].

1

)
t
(
 
v
o
c

0.1

0.1

1

t

10

Figure 5: Log-log plot of the covariance function Eq. (6) with the param-
eters as discussed in the text. The covariance cannot be ﬁtted to a single
exponential for a time interval greater than any of the two intrinsic times.

The reduced model typically shows a region in which none of the two
intrinsic time scales is dominant and correlations cannot be adequately ﬁtted
by a single exponential. For instance, with γ = 0.2, λ = 1, a = 0.96, b = 0.64
m2 )2, the covariance function is not exponential for time scales
and D = 1( W
approximately an order of magnitude greater than the intrinsic time of the
fast variable, as Figure 5 shows. Approximation to a power-law or other type
of slow decay by a sum of exponentials with diﬀerent characteristic times has

11

been discussed in several ﬁelds [19, 20]. In particular, this mechanism has
been already proposed in [14], in order to explain the persistence found in
atmosphere’s temperature record, by ﬁtting the coeﬃcients of a 3d AR(1)
type process to data.

3 Conclusions

The features shown by the spatially extended stochastic model presented
here motivates the construction of realistic and simple algorithms for the
prediction of Earth’s temperature distribution and ﬂuctuations. In this spa-
tially extended situation the parameters vary locally, so there is a number
of characteristic times. In order to gain insight on the extended model, a
reduced version of it has been constructed and the covariance function ex-
plicitly written.

One of the future directions of the work is to conduct a more general
study of the spatially extended model, in close connection to climate research
to have plausible parameter values. A study of the presented model in the
context of general systems with several time scales is also intended. The study
of such systems is important in ﬁelds like control theory, inhomogeneous
media and predator-pray systems among others [1, 2, 3, 4, 5].

Acknowledgements

The author is grateful for the valuable comments given by the unknown
reviewers of the present Letter. The author acknowledges partial ﬁnancial
support by SEP under proyect PROMEP/103.5/05/372.

References

[1] A. Berrones, H. Larralde, Simple model of a random walk with arbitrarily

long memory, Phys. Rev. E 63 (2001) 031109.

[2] K. Pyragas, Control of chaos via extended delay feedback, Phys. Lett. A

[3] K. Hasselmann, Stochastic climate models, Part I,Tellus 28 (1976) 473–

206 (1995) 323–330.

485.

12

[4] G. Diezemmann, G. Hinze, H. Sillescu, Stochastic models for hetero-
geneus relaxation: Application to inhomogeneus optical lineshapes, J.
Non-Cryst. Solids 307-310 (2002) 57–65.

[5] N. Berglund, B. Gentz, The eﬀect of additive noise on dynamical hys-

teresis, Nonlinearity 15 (2002) 605–632.

[6] M. L. Kurnaz, Application of detrended ﬂuctuation analysis to monthly
average of the maximum daily temperatures to resolve diﬀerent climates,
Fractals 12 4 (2004) 365–373.

[7] R. Govindan, D. Vjushin, S. Brenner, A. Bunde, S. Havlin, H. Schellnhu-
ber, Global climate models violate scaling of the observed atmospheric
variability, Phys. Rev. Lett. 89 (2002) 028501.

[8] K. Fraedrich, R. Blender, Scaling of atmosphere and ocean temperature
correlations in observations and climate models, Phys. Rev. Lett. 90 10
(2003) 108501.

[9] D. Vyushin, I. Zhidkov, S. Havlin, A. Bunde, and S. Brenner, Volcanic
Forcing Improves Atmosphere-Ocean Coupled General Circulation Model
Scaling Performance, Geophys. Res. Lett. 31 (2004) L10206.

[10] A. Bunde, J. F. Eichner, S. Havlin, E. Koscienly-Bunde, H. J. Schellnhu-
ber, D. Vyushin, Comment on ”Scaling of atmosphere and ocean tem-
perature correlations in observations and climate models”, Phys. Rev.
Lett. 92 3 (2004) 039801.

[11] K. Fraedrich, R. Blender, Reply to comment on ”Scaling of atmosphere
and ocean temperature correlations in observations and climate models”,
Phys. Rev. Lett. 92 3 (2004) 039802.

[12] P. Imkeller, A. Monahan, Conceptual stochastic climate models, Stochas-

tics and Dynamics 2 (2002) 437–462.

[13] A. Kiraly, I. Janosi, Stochastic modeling of daily temperature ﬂuctua-

tions, Phys. Rev. E 65 (2001) 051102.

[14] R. Caballero, S. Jewson, A. Brix, Long memory in surface air temper-
ature: detection, modeling, and application to weather derivative valua-
tion, Climate Research 21 2 (2001) 127–140.

13

[15] B. Cushman-Roisin,
Prentice-Hall (1994).

Introduction to Geophysical Fluid Dynamics,

[16] A. A. Tsonis, Is global warming injecting randomness into the climate

system?, Eos 85 21 (2004) 361–364.

[17] Z. Chen, K. Hu, P. Carpena, P. Bernaola-Galvan, H. E. Stanley, P.
Ch. Ivanov, Eﬀect of nonlinear ﬁlters on detrended ﬂuctuation analysis,
Phys. Rev. E 71 (2005) 011104.

[18] K. Fraedrich, U. Luksch, R. Blender, 1/f model for long-time memory
of the ocean surface temperature, Phys. Rev. E 70 (2004) 037301.

[19] R. Anderson, The power law as an emergent property, Memory and

Cognition 29 (2001) 1061–1068.

[20] J. Bouchaud, Power laws in economics and ﬁnance: some ideas from

physics, Quantitative Finance 1 1 (2001) 105–112.

14

