5
0
0
2
 
t
c
O
 
6
 
 
]
h
p
-
o
a
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
2
4
0
0
1
5
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Atmospheric hypotheses’ of Earth’s global
warming

Vladimir Shaidurov∗

February 20, 2014

Abstract

Two hypotheses are presented, outlining a new cause for global
warming. We propose that the crucial factor in global warming is
the amount and position of water vapour through the atmosphere.
The purpose of this report is to open the debate and to encourage
discussion among scientists.

When analyzing the mean-year trend of the Earth’s surface temperature
for the past 140 years (see for Figure 1(a)) one can discern two sections of
monotone linear increase of temperature during two last industrial centuries.
The ﬁrst one begins somewhere in the period 1906-1909. The previous seg-
ment demonstrates a weak decrease in the temperature trend, not increase
(see for Figure 1(b)), though this includes the beginning of industrial pe-
If we
riod, with a subsequent increase in production of greenhouse gases.
suppose that it is not only greenhouse gases that launched global warming,
then what could be an additional cause of the comparatively sudden change
of mean-year trend of the Earth’s surface temperature? We should look for
a phenomenon of cosmic scale during this time which could have given rise
to beginning of global warming with a signiﬁcant probability. On the 30th
September 1908 Tungus meteorite crossed almost all of the atmosphere and
exploded. Instrumental measures with numerical modelling reconstruct an
∗Institute of Computational Modeling of Siberian Branch of Russian Academy of Sci-

ences

1

explosion of the power of approximately by 15 Mt TNT at an altitude ap-
proximately of 10 km. Such an explosion could cause considerable stirring of
the high layers of atmosphere and change its structure.

Hypothesis 1. The Tungus meteorite considerably changed the thermo-
protective properties of the Earth’s atmosphere and turned out to be one of
the agencies which launched global warming.

From our point of view, water vapor plays a more important role in
Earth’s thermal regime than other gases. The point is that additionally to the
usual accumulation of heat because of increasing temperature, water vapour
(as molecules of H2O) possesses three more signiﬁcant properties in the real
range of pressure and temperature in the lower layers of atmosphere: liquid-
gas transition, solid-liquid transition, and dissociation into ions (H2O →
H+ + OH−). At constant temperature each of these transitions consumes
heat, and the opposite transitions give the same heat that is more often
greater than energy due to moderate changes of temperature. Moreover, the
considerable heat capacity of water in comparison with the atmospheric gases
makes the World Ocean a very important accumulator of heat and source
of vapour. Together, the complex of atmosphere, land surface, and ocean,
assimilates 25% of the solar radiation incident on the Earth. After all stages
of reradiation 97% of this energy goes out of Earth. Of the components of
this complex, changes in amount of water vapor form the primary inﬂuence
on assimilation of solar radiation.

For a rough estimate for the inﬂuence of increase or decrease of primary
assimilation of solar energy, let as look at the minimal temperature reached
at the Earth’s surface: -89o in the Antarctic. Thermal processes inside the
Earth do not lead to signiﬁcant temperature diﬀerences at the surface in the
absence of solar heating. Other parts of the Earth’s surface are at greater
distance from center and liquid core owing to the Earth’s shape. Having an
average temperature of land surface and ocean of about +15o, we see that
the increase of assimilation of solar energy by 1% would entail an increase of
temperature by more than 4o in stationary regime.

But the real dynamic regime intensiﬁes this eﬀect. The point is that
the average increase of land and ocean temperature produces higher aver-
age absolute humidity. In its turn, this raises the assimilation ability of the
atmosphere even at constant content of carbon dioxide. But increasing the
average ocean temperature is responsible for lower water solubility of carbon
dioxide, which then arrives in the atmosphere. Moreover, increase in land

2

temperature is responsible for growth of bogs, at least in Northern Russia,
due to the removal of permafrost deep down. The rise in area and activity
of bogs leads to more active production of methane. Thus, a self-stimulated
process was launched for the increase of average temperature of the Earth’s
surface. Therefore the rise of greenhouse gas concentration is more a conse-
quence of warming but not a main reason.

Hypothesis 2: The above mentioned variant of self-stimulated process
(with a permanent rise of average absolute humidity, and resulting concen-
tration of carbon dioxide and other greenhouse gases) was launched in 1908
after the atmosphere reconstruction due to the Tungus meteorite.

Following a further examination of the curve in Figure 1(a), one can
see oscillatory behavior in the period 1945 - 1976. What was happened in
this time? The 16th July 1945 saw the ﬁrst explosion of a nuclear bomb,
and this heralded the period of nuclear bomb tests. From the standpoint
of atmosphere hypothesis the nuclear tests in the atmosphere are opposite
to consequences of the Tungus meteorite. When a nuclear charge explodes
at the Earth’s surface or in the atmosphere, the shock wave vents water
vapor from the troposphere to the stratosphere through tropopause. For
some period (≈ 3 years) water vapor in the stratosphere and aerosol, and
dust in the troposphere and stratosphere suﬃce for the defense of the Earth
from solar radiation. But then all gradually settled, and global warming
continued. All nuclear explosions above the ground and the sea together
gave rise to tendency for decreasing the global temperature of Earth’s surface.
The last nuclear test in open atmosphere was on the 16th October 1980. All
subsequent nuclear tests were under the ground or the sea, which does not
generates the shock wave reaching the stratosphere. But the tendency of
global warming recommenced earlier, approximately in 1977. Discordance
between beginning of second period of warming and the ﬁnish of nuclear
tests in the open atmosphere may be attributed to superposition with cyclic
variations of temperature, which were apparent before 1908 too.

Now let us raise a question about some regulation of the protective prop-
erties of the atmosphere.
In the ﬁrst instance we have the previous con-
sideration of nuclear explosions in the open atmosphere. But this gave a
comparatively short-term eﬀect because of the gradual subsidence of ice in
pearl clouds through the tropopause, due to their greater density when com-
pared with air. However, clouds reﬂect the signiﬁcant part of solar radiation.
But in the mesosphere there is one more type of clouds, the so called silver

3

clouds. They persist much longer. The distinction is the following. Almost
the whole of the stratosphere and mesosphere consists of molecular oxygen
O2 and molecular nitrogen N2. Also ozone O3 is formed in comparatively
small quantities with the help of solar radiation. The ﬁrst distinction is the
temperature gradient: temperature grows with altitude in the stratosphere,
approximately from -55o to 0o and diminishes in the mesosphere, from about
0o to -95o (see Fig. 2). The second distinction consists in the diﬀerent pres-
sure and density, which are several times less in the mesosphere than in the
stratosphere. Therefore, water vapour in the troposphere (such as is formed
during atmospheric nuclear tests), comes to a temperature below freezing
point almost everywhere except its upper border. Thus it forms crystals
having greater density than the ambient gas. In rapidly moving ﬂows the
crystals migrate down through the tropopause into the troposphere. High
speeds and agitation do not end this process quickly; it may continue for
months depending upon the tropospheric humidity in the test region.

But water vapour in the mesosphere is another matter. At a pressure
hundreds of times less than at atmospheric pressure at sea level, the freezing
point of water vapour shifts to a vastly negative temperature without the
intermediate liquid state (see Fig. 3). Therefore there exists a sizable layer
spanning the higher part of the stratosphere and lower part of the mesosphere
where water is in the gas state. The mesospheric composition is slightly
distinct from the stratospheric one at signiﬁcant, with less density of gases.
The gaseous state of water vapor has lower density than the ambient gases
(atomic masses of H2O, O2, and N2 equal 18, 32, and 28, respectively).
Therefore it has some tendency to move up in rapidly moving ﬂows with
some stirring against the background of diﬀusion. When it migrates, gas
climbs to a temperature below freezing point, crystallizes and migrates down.
There it evaporates missing the liquid state, and the process repeats. Thus,
mesopause with a strongly negative temperature of around -95o prevents
water vapor leaving beyond the upper bound of the mesosphere.

From these discussions the following idea results about some deceleration
and possible ceasing of global warming. With this purpose it is possible to
start reconstruction of the protective layer in middle part of mesosphere,
which consists of water vapor. For this it is enough to transport and com-
bust molecular hydrogen, H2 in the appropriate part of the mesosphere. The
ambient quantity of molecular oxygen and ozone is enough to generate water
vapor, which will be 9 times greater by weight than the transported hydro-
gen. Along with this, the density of molecular hydrogen is small enough in

4

comparison with that of the ambient gases over the region of transport that
it induces lift. Therefore hydrogen may serve as a means for transport itself.
Modern technical tools seem to be suﬃcient to realize such a transport in
small parts and to observe the consequences. In addition, modern mathemat-
ical and computational modeling are at level when more detailed quantitative
estimates are possible both for the immediate eﬀects of such intervention as
well as its inﬂuence on global climate.

Note the obvious environmental safety of this suggestion since the com-
bustion of hydrogen in higher level of atmosphere can generate water vapor
only. Combustion of small amounts gives the possibility of observing any
change before it becomes too dramatic.

Acknowledgements: In conclusion I express my gratitude to Professor
J. Levesley and Professor A. Gorban for the invitation to visit the University
of Leicester and for fruitful work and discussions.

References

[1] Climate Change 2001: Working Group I: The Scientiﬁc Basis.

http://www.grida.no/climate/ipcc tar/wg1/Footnote.

[2] Windows to the Universe. The Regents of the University of Michi-
gan. University Corporation for Atmospheric Research (UCAR).
http://www.windows.ucar.edu.

[3] Phases

Diagrams

University

of

Waterloo.

http://www.science.uwaterloo.ca.

[4] U.S. Standard Atmosphere, 1976. U.S. Government Printing Oﬃce,

Washington, D.C.

5

 

 

Figure 1: (a) The Earth’s surface temperature is shown year by year (red bars) and approximately
decade by decade (black line, a ﬁltered annual curve suppressing ﬂuctuations below near decadal time-
scales). There are uncertainties in the annual data (thin black whisker bars represent the 95% conﬁdence
range) due to data gaps, random instrumental errors and uncertainties, uncertainties in bias corrections
in the ocean surface temperature data and also in adjustments for urbanization over the land. Over both
the last 140 years and 100 years, the best estimate is that the global average surface temperature has
increased by 0.6 ± 0.2o C. (b) Additionally, the year by year (blue curve) and 50 year average (black
curve) variations of the average surface temperature of the Northern Hemisphere for the past 1000 years
have been reconstructed from “proxy” data calibrated against thermometer data (see list of the main proxy
data in the diagram). The 95% conﬁdence range in the annual data is represented by the grey region.
These uncertainties increase in more distant times and are always much larger than in the instrumental
record due to the use of relatively sparse proxy data. Nevertheless the rate and duration of warming of
the 20th century has been much greater than in any of the previous nine centuries. Similarly, it is likely
that the 1990s have been the warmest decade and 1998 the warmest year of the millennium. (The ﬁgure
is reprinted from [1].)

6

Figure 2: The average temperature proﬁle through Earth’s atmosphere. (The
ﬁgure is reprinted from [2].)

 

7

 

Figure 3: The pressure, the freezing point of water vapor, and the tempera-
ture of average atmosphere depending on altitude. (The data are taken from
[2], [3], [4].) The abscissa is the altitude in km. The pressure is plotted at
left ordinate as logarithm of mercury column in mm. The temperature is
plotted at right ordinate in Celsius degree. The red line gives an estimate of
the pressure at corresponding altitude. The blue line gives the freezing point
of water vapor depending on pressure (at corresponding point). The black
line demonstrates the temperature of average atmosphere at corresponding
altitude and copies the analogous graph from Figure 2 in some diﬀerent form.
The node of intersection 1 indicates the point of formation for pearl clouds;
the node 2 does for silver ones. Between them the water vapor is in gas state.
Near above and near below it is in solid state.

8

