5
0
0
2
 
t
c
O
 
2
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
o
a
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
3
0
2
0
1
5
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Statistical modelling of tropical cyclone genesis: a non-parametric
model for the annual distribution

Tim Hall, GISS∗
and
Stephen Jewson

February 2, 2008

Abstract

As part of a project to develop more accurate estimates of the risks due to tropical cyclones,
we describe a non-parametric method for the statistical simulation of the location of tropical cyclone
genesis. The method avoids the use of arbitrary grid boxes, and the spatial smoothing of the historical
data is constructed optimally according to a clearly deﬁned merit function.

1 Introduction

We are interested in developing more accurate methods for the estimation of the various risks associated
with tropical cyclones, such as the risks of extreme winds, extreme rainfall and extreme storm surge. The
methods for tropical cyclone risk assessment described in the scientiﬁc and engineering literature can be
categorised into local methods and basin-wide methods. Local methods estimate the risk of high winds,
rain or surge at a coastal location using information from historical tropical cyclone events that made
landfall near that location. Basin-wide methods estimate risks using a model for the entire life-cycle
of tropical cyclones, from genesis to lysis. There are also methods in between, that model a part of
the life-cycle of tropical cyclones. Some examples of local methods are described in Jagger et al. (2001)
and Murnane et al. (2000), and some examples of basin-wide methods are described in Drayton (2000),
Fujii and Mitsuta (1975), Vickery et al. (2000), Emanuel et al. (2005), Darling (1991) and Chu and Wang
(1998). The basin-wide methods, if they can be made to work well, are potentially the most accurate
and the most useful. They are potentially the most accurate because they make use of all the available
historical data, and they are potentially the most useful because they can give estimates of any of the
various risks associated with tropical cyclones. For instance a basin-wide model could be used to estimate
the risk of a tropical cyclone occurring at any point in the basin, not only over land: this could be useful
for shipping and the oﬀshore oil industry. And it could also be used to estimate the risk of a tropical
cyclone having an impact on more than two locations during its lifetime, such as the risk of a hurricane
hitting both Puerto Rico and Florida: this could be useful for insurance companies that may sell insurance
in both places. Basin-wide models also have another advantage, which is that they can accommodate the
inclusion of weather, seasonal and year-ahead forecasts more easily than local models.

Given these potential advantages of basin-wide tropical cyclone risk models, and because of various
shortcomings in the basin-wide methods described in the literature, we have initiated a project to build
a new basin-wide tropical cyclone model from scratch. One of the features of the model is that we
are paying great attention to the use of carefully designed statistical procedures and methodologies. In
particular:

• By using non-parametric statistical methods we avoid the use of arbitrary grid boxes within the
basin. The modelled properties of tropical cyclones are allowed to vary smoothly in space (and
time), as they presumably do in reality.

• We use a merit function (the likelihood) that allows us to perform an objective comparison among

diﬀerent models

• All lengthscales and timescales used to select the data used in the model are derived optimally

according to the merit function

∗Correspondence address: Email: tmh1@columbia.edu

• We evaluate our merit function in out-of-sample tests, to avoid overﬁtting and to account correctly

for parameter uncertainty.

• We start with simple methods, and build up to more complex methods, again to avoid overﬁtting.

Following the various methods described in the literature (and cited above), we divide the problem

of basin-wide tropical cyclone modelling into various steps:

1. Modelling annual rates

2. Modelling the distribution of genesis in space and time

3. Modelling tracks

4. Modelling intensity along tracks, including lysis

5. Modelling wind ﬁelds

6. Modelling storm surge

7. Modelling rainfall

So far we have only considered step 3, the modelling of the shape of tropical cyclone tracks
(see Hall and Jewson (2005a), Hall and Jewson (2005b) and Hall and Jewson (2005c)). We have now
turned our attention to step 2, the modelling of genesis, and that is the subject of this article. A ﬁrst
look at step 1 is described in Khare and Jewson (2005).

As in our track modelling we are focussing initially on the Atlantic basin, and the data we use is the
‘oﬃcal’ National Hurricane Centre track data set, known as HURDAT (Jarvinen et al., 1984). We only
use data from 1950, since this is the only data that we consider to be suﬃciently reliable. Reliability
increases from 1950 onwards because starting from 1950 doppler radar was routinely used to determine
wind speed. HURDAT data from 1950 to 2004 contains 524 tropical cyclones, and these are the data
that we will use. Each storm has a unique data genesis point, and these 524 genesis locations are the
input for our statistical model for genesis.

2 Data

3 Method

As discussed in the introduction, our aim is to build models that possess a number of desirable features.
The genesis model that we now describe, that possesses these features, is a two-dimensional kernel density
with the bandwidth ﬁtted using cross-validation. The two dimensions are longitude and latitude: at this
point we ignore variations in genesis by season or by year, although we intend to consider these in a later
study. The model gives a probability density f (x, y) for tropical cyclone genesis at the point (x, y) of:

f (x, y) =

1
N σxσy

N

Xi=1

K

x − xi
σx

,

(cid:18)

y − yi

σy (cid:19)

where the xi and yi are the longitudes and latitudes of the historical genesis points, σx and σy are
bandwidths in the longitudinal and latitudinal directions, and K is a kernel function. Large values for
the bandwidths create a very smoothed density and small values create a very multi-modal density.
The kernel K must satisfy

and the 1

N term ensures that

as it must for f to be a probability density.
For convenience and simplicity we use a Gaussian kernel with σx = σy, and so:

K(x, y)dxdy = 1,

f (x, y)dxdy = 1,

Z Z

Z Z

K(x, y) =

exp

1
2π

− x2 + y2
2
(cid:18)

(cid:19)

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

which gives:

f (x, y) =

1
2πN σ2

N

Xi=1

exp

− (x − xi)2 + (y − yi)2
2σ2
(cid:18)

(cid:19)

(5)

The optimal bandwidth σ is determined using a jack-knife cross-validation procedure as follows:

• We loop over a range of values for the bandwidth

• We loop over the 55 years of data

• For each value of the bandwidth, for each year of data, and for each genesis point that occurs within
that year, we calculate the density at that point using expression 1, but eliminating all the data
points in the same year from the sum

• For each value of the bandwidth, we calculate the likelihood score as the product of the densities

at all genesis points

• We ﬁnd the value of the bandwidth that gives the highest likelihood score

4 Results

We now show the results from the ﬁtting of the kernel density to the observed genesis points. The variation
of the likelihood score with the bandwidth is shown in ﬁgure 1. There is a very clear maximum of the
likelihood function at a bandwidth of 210km. Figure 2 shows the historical hurricane genesis locations,
and estimated densities based on the kernel model. Panel (a) shows the historical genesis locations, panel
(b) shows a density derived using a bandwidth of 100km, panel (c) shows a density derived using the
optimal bandwidth of 210km, and panel (d) shows a density derived using a bandwidth of 500km. The
eﬀects of undersmoothing and oversmoothing can be seen very clearly in panels (b) and (d).

4.1 Simulations

Having ﬁtted a probability density function to the observed hurricane genesis points, we can now simulate
as many hurricane genesis points as we desire. The simulation method we use works as follows:

• We normalise the density f (x, y) to have a maximum value of 1.

• We simulate random values of (x, y) from a region that covers the entire domain. x and y are

simulated from independent uniform distributions.

• We then either accept or reject each simulated value of (x, y) randomly, with a probability given

by the normalised density.

Figure 3 shows three realisations from such simulations, each of 524 points (in panels (b), (c) and
(d)) along with the 524 historical genesis points (in panel (a)). We can see that the simulations follow
the pattern of historical genesis reasonably closely, but are diﬀerent in detail, as we would expect.

One of the shortcomings of the model described above, apparent in ﬁgure 3, is that there are a
number of genesis points that have been simulated over land. This is non-physical in most cases, although
there are occasional genesis points over Florida and the Yucatan in the observations. Non-physical genesis
points in the simulations can be rejected to solve this problem.

5 Conclusions

We have described a statistical model for the location of hurricane genesis. Our model is a non-parametric
kernel density, with the bandwidth ﬁtted using a cross-validation procedure that optimises the out-of-
sample likelihood. The advantages of this approach include:

• not having to deﬁne grid boxes

• the use of a clear merit function

• making the best use of the historical data by avoiding over- or under-ﬁtting

This model is intended as the ﬁrst model in a hierarchy, and as such it can probably be beaten by
a more complex model. Its value is that it sets an initial standard. Because of the use of a well-deﬁned
merit function it will be easy to check whether the model has been beaten or not.

There are a number of ways that one might try to improve the performance of this model, such as:

• The introduction of seasonality. Figure 4 shows the observed genesis points by month. There are

distinctively diﬀerent patterns in each month.

• The introduction of diﬀerent smoothing in the longitude and latitude directions.

• The use of kernels other than the gaussian kernel (although we have no particular reason to think

that this will give an improvement, it may).

In Emanuel et al. (2005) there is some discussion of issues related to whether the historical genesis
data is accurate prior to the introduction of satellite observations in the 1970s. If this is considered an
important issue then it would be easy to reﬁt the current model but using only the more recent data.

References

P Chu and J Wang. Modelling return periods of tropical cyclone intensities in the vicinity of Hawaii.

Journal of Applied Meteorology, 39:951–960, 1998.

R Darling. Estimating probabilities of hurricane wind speeds using a large-scale empirical model. Journal

of Climate, 4:1035–1046, 1991.

M Drayton. A stochastic basin-wide model of Atlantic hurricanes. 2000. 24th Conference on Hurricanes

and Tropical Meteorology.
http://ams.confex.com/ams/last2000/24Hurricanes/abstracts/12797.htm.

K Emanuel, Ravela S, Vivant E, and Risi C. A combined statistical-deterministic approach of hurricane

risk assessment. Unpublished manuscript, 2005.

T Fujii and Y Mitsuta. Synthesis of a stochastic typhoon model and simulation of typhoon winds.

Technical report, Kyoto University Disaster Prevention Research Institute, 1975.

T Hall and S Jewson. Statistical modelling of tropical cyclone tracks part 1: a semi-parametric model

for the mean trajectory. arXiv:physics/0503231, 2005a.

T Hall and S Jewson. Statistical modelling of tropical cyclone tracks part 2: a comparison of models for

the variance of trajectories. arXiv:physics/0505103, 2005b.

T Hall and S Jewson. Statistical modelling of tropical cyclone tracks part 3: modelling the autocorrelation

in track shape. arXiv:physics/0509024, 2005c.

T Jagger, J Elsner, and X Niu. A dynamic probability model of hurricane winds in coastal counties of

the United States. Journal of Applied Meteorology, 40:853–863, 2001.

B Jarvinen, C Neumann, and M Davis. A tropical cyclone data tape for the North Atlantic Basin, 1886-
1983: Contents, limitations, and uses. Technical report, NOAA Technical Memorandum NWS NHC
22, 1984.

S Khare and S Jewson. Year ahead prediction of US landfalling hurricane numbers. arxiv:physics/0507165,

2005.

R Murnane, C Barton, E Collins, J Donnelly, J Elsner, K Emanuel, I Ginis, S Howard, C Landsea, K Liu,
D Malmquist, M McKay, A Michaels, N Nelson, J O’Brien, D Scott, and T Webb III. Model estimates
hurricane wind speed probabilities. EOS, 81:433–438, 2000.

P Vickery, P Skerlj, and L Twisdale. Simulation of hurricane risk in the US using an empirical track

model. Journal of Structural Engineering, 126:1222–1237, 2000.

Figure 1: The out-of-sample log-likelihood versus bandwidth for the kernel density model described in
the text. The maximum log-likelihood is at a bandwidth of 210km.

Figure 2: Panel (a) shows the observed tropical cyclone genesis locations for the period 1950 to 2004
(524 points), and panels (b), (c) and (d) show kernel densities estimated using bandwidths of 100km,
210km and 500km respectively.

Figure 3: Panel (a) shows the observed genesis locations for tropical cyclones in the period 1950 to 2004.
There are 524 points. Panels (b), (c) and (d) each show 524 simulated genesis locations from the model
described in the text.

Figure 4: The observed tropical cyclones genesis locations for the period 1950 to 2004, by month. There
is a clear variation of genesis location by month, suggesting that the model described in the text could
possibly be improved by including time as a third dimension in the kernel density.

