5
0
0
2
 
c
e
D
 
0
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
o
a
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
1
9
0
2
1
5
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Statistical modelling of tropical cyclone tracks: modelling cyclone
lysis

Tim Hall, GISS∗
and
Stephen Jewson

January 13, 2014

Abstract

We describe results from the ﬁfth stage of a project to build a statistical model of tropical cyclone
tracks. The previous stages considered genesis and the shape of tracks. We now consider in more
detail how to represent the lysis (death) of tropical cyclones. Improving the lysis model turns out to
bring a signiﬁcant improvement to the track model overall.

1 Introduction

The impact of tropical cyclones on communities in various parts of the world motivates the develop-
ment of accurate methods for estimating tropical cyclone risks. One set of methods that have been used
for estimating these risks are the so-called basin-wide tropical cyclone models, examples of which have
been described in Fujii and Mitsuta (1975), Drayton (2000), Vickery et al. (2000) and Emanuel et al.
(2005). These models attempt to represent the entire life-cycle of tropical cyclones statistically, and
thus allow the generation of an unlimited number of random but realistic cyclones that can be used
for risk estimation. This article describes the latest results from a research eﬀort aimed at developing
new and more accurate basin-wide tropical cyclone models. Our previous articles on this subject have
described models for mean tropical cyclone tracks (Hall and Jewson, 2005a), for the variance of ﬂuctua-
tions around the mean (Hall and Jewson, 2005b), for the autocorrelation of the ﬂuctuations around the
mean (Hall and Jewson, 2005c), and for genesis (Hall and Jewson, 2005d). Hall and Jewson (2005c) also
included a very simple representation of the death, or lysis, of tropical cyclones. We now describe a model
that gives a more realistic representation of lysis, by modelling the probability of lysis as a function of
location. We ﬁnd that this signiﬁcantly improves the performance of the track simulation overall.

We continue with our focus on tropical cyclones in the Atlantic basin, and the data we use is the ‘oﬃcial’
National Hurricane Center track data set, known as HURDAT (Jarvinen et al., 1984). We only use data
from 1950, since this is the only data that we consider to be suﬃciently reliable. HURDAT data from
1950 to 2003 contains 524 tropical cyclones, and these are the data that we use.

2 Data

3 Methods

In Hall and Jewson (2005c) we show simulations of Atlantic hurricane tracks, and make a number of
comparisons between the simulated tracks and the historical observations. The simulated tracks are
somewhat realistic, but a detailed comparison with observations indicates various systematic errors. We
are gradually testing various possible improvements to the model in order to reduce these errors to a more
acceptable level. One process that was only represented in a very rudimentary fashion in Hall and Jewson
(2005c) is the lysis of hurricanes: simulated hurricanes originate from historical genesis points, and each is
given a lifetime equal to the lifetime of the historical hurricane that originated from the same point. This
gives a realistic distribution of hurricane lifetimes overall (by deﬁnition) but also leads to some physical

∗Correspondence address: Email: tmh1@columbia.edu

inconsistencies. For instance, some simulated hurricane tracks wander into regions where real hurricanes
would die, and too many hurricanes die in regions where real hurricanes only die infrequently. This, in
turn, aﬀects the distribution of the density of hurricane tracks in diﬀerent regions, and would ultimately
aﬀect estimates of risk.

To remedy these problems we now describe a more complex lysis model. The model is very
similar to the models we use for genesis and track dynamics in the papers cited above in that it is a
non-parametric model based on spatial averaging of the behaviour of the observations. The optimum
averaging length-scale is determined using cross-validation, with ‘optimum’ deﬁned by maximising the
out-of-sample likelihood. At each time step, every simulated hurricane has a probability p of lysis. This
probability varies in space, and is determined as follows:

• A two dimensional Gaussian window, with lengthscale L, is constructed around the current location
of a simulated hurricane. We then note that every historical storm point in the basin is either the
last point of a hurricane track, or not.

• p is estimated as the sum of the Gaussian weights over the last points divided by the sum of the

Gaussian weights over all points.

The lengthscale L is determined from historical data using a maximum out-of-sample likelihood

jack-knife cross-validation scheme as follows:

• For a given value of L, for each year, and for each observed hurricane point in that year, we calculate

the value of p as above, but only using data from all other years.

• The likelihood for the actual outcome for that hurricane point is then calculated. This likelihood

is either p if the hurricane point is the last for that track, or 1 − p otherwise.

• The likelihood for each year is calculated as the sum of the likelihoods for all points in that year.

• The lengthscale L is varied to ﬁnd the maximum of the likelihood.

There are various beneﬁts from using a non-parametric scheme based on the methods of cross-
validation and out-of-sample likelihood, such as the avoidance of overﬁtting and the optimisation of
out-of-sample performance of the model. These beneﬁts are discussed in more detail in our previous
articles.

4 Results

We now show some results from the model described above.

First, in ﬁgure 1, we show the out-of-sample likelihood as a function of the lengthscale L. There
is a very clear maximum at 360km (accurate to within a tolerance of 10km). The maximum represents a
balance between two competing eﬀects: (1) decreasing L increases random sampling errors, as fewer lysis
events receive signiﬁcant weight; and (2) increasing L results in averaging of real spatial structure in the
lysis distribution.

In ﬁgure 2 we show the locations of historical hurricane lysis (panel (a)) and three realisations of
simulations of lysis from the track model of Hall and Jewson (2005c), but with the new lysis scheme.
The new lysis model is reasonable, in that the overall distribution of locations of observed hurricane
lysis is captured, but it is not perfect. There are too few deaths oﬀ the coast of Newfoundland and too
many in the region North of the Canary Islands. We think that these discrepancies are caused by the
track model, rather than lysis directly. A good lysis model is necessary, but not suﬃcient, for a realistic
lysis distribution, because the lysis distribution and the tracks are coupled. For reasons we have yet
to determine there is a weak tendency for our simulated tracks to curve eastward too far south. The
new lysis model has greatly improved this problem compared to Hall and Jewson (2005c), but a small
discrepancy remains. A few too many simulated storms move into the eastern subtropical Atlantic where
historical storms, and, thus, historical lysis events, are rare. The lysis model must rely on remote lysis
events to ultimately kill these storms. This is an advantage, as it prevents the simulated storms from
wandering even further a ﬁeld. However, it also generates lysis events where none occur historically.

Figure 3 shows tracks simulated from the track model. This ﬁgure should be compared with ﬁgure
14 in Hall and Jewson (2005c). In comparison with that ﬁgure, we see that (a) the spurious point of
track convergence in the East Atlantic has disappeared and (b) the high density of tracks oﬀ the East

Coast of the US has been simulated more realistically. However, as noted above, there is still a weak
tendency for storms to bend too far eastward in the subtropical Atlantic.

We now consider a more quantitative evaluation of the performance of the track model with the
new lysis process. Figure 4 is a new version of ﬁgure 17 from Hall and Jewson (2005c), and ﬁgure 5
is a new version of ﬁgure 18. They are created by simulating 20 realisations from the track model,
each with 524 hurricanes. These 20 realisations deﬁne a distribution for the numbers of tracks crossing
lines of latitude and longitude in a 54 year track set, and these distributions can be compared with the
observed numbers of tracks crossing these lines. One would hope that the observations would lie within
the distribution created from the statistical model. In ﬁgure 4, which shows numbers of tracks crossing
lines of latitude, we see close consistency between the observations (dotted line) and the distribution of
simulated tracks (illustrated using solid lines at plus and minus one standard deviation). The results are
much better than those from the previous model, and the systematic error of having too few storms at
certain latitudes has been ﬁxed (it seems that the problem was that too many storms were dying too
early in their life, and were not reaching the region of high storm density oﬀ the east coast of the US). In
ﬁgure 5, which shows numbers of tracks crossing lines of longitude, the model results at low latitudes are
consistent with the observations. The results at higher latitudes (in the westerlies) are good, but there
are still some slight discrepancies in the far east of the domain. Again, however, the major systematic
errors in the previous model have disappeared.

Figure 6 is a repeat of ﬁgure 20 from the earlier paper, but now for the new track model. The
ﬁrst panel shows the density of hurricane points from the simulations (based on the ensemble of 20
realisations used in the previous ﬁgures), while panel (b) shows the same for observations. Panel (c)
shows the diﬀerence between the two, and panel (d) shows the standard deviation of the ensemble. The
track model now simulates the density of tracks consistently with the observations almost everywhere,
except in a very small region oﬀ the coast of Georgia and the Carolinas. In this region the observations
show a very high density of tracks. The model also simulates a high density of tracks in this region,
but the peak density is lower and the location of the maximum is shifted slightly to the south. These
diﬀerences appear to be signiﬁcant.

4.1 Landfalling rates

In ﬁgures 7 and 8 we show various aspects of a diagnostic designed to analyse the extent to which
our model simulates the correct number of tracks making landfall in diﬀerent regions. We use a simple
representation of the North and Central American eastern coastline, as shown in the map in the left panel
in each ﬁgure. This modelled coastline consists of 39 straight line segments of diﬀerent lengths (using
diﬀerent length segments gives a better ﬁt than using identical length segments). In the right hand panels
of both ﬁgures we straighten this coastline out, with the horizontal axis running from North to South,
and with 10 reference points marked on the map and the graph to help understand the correspondence
between the two.

In the top right hand panel of ﬁgure 7 the black line shows the observed rate at which hurricanes
crossed each of the 39 straight line segments, in numbers of hurricanes per 100km per year, based on the
54 years from 1950 to 2003. There are very large ﬂuctuations in the crossing rate depending on location
on the coast. The highest rates from this analysis are at Cape Hatteras, followed by some parts of Florida.
It is clear from the high level of variability in the rates from segment to segment that the crossing rate at
each location depends in a sensitive way on the geometry of the coastline and the geometry and variability
of the hurricane tracks. This has implications for the extent to which these results can be considered
general: if we repeated this analysis with a slightly diﬀerent approximation for the coastline then they
might look very diﬀerent. It is therefore only reasonable to compare crossing rates between model and
observations when both are calculated for exactly the same coastline (as we will do below). Our crossing
rates should not, however, be compared with results from the same analysis that use diﬀerent models
for the coastline. For instance, the results that are shown on page 172 of Diaz and Pulwarty (1997)
were generated using a diﬀerent approximation to the coastline. As a result, although the pattern of
landfall rates displays similarly located minima and maxima the relative magnitudes of these extrema are
diﬀerent, and the maximum landfall rates in that analysis are in Florida rather than near Cape Hatteras.
The red lines in the top right panel of ﬁgure 7 show the crossing rates derived from simulations
from the model. Each line corresponds to one of the 54 year realisations described above, and there
are 20 lines corresponding to the 20 realisations. We see considerable variability between the diﬀerent
realisations: this suggests that the historical observed crossing rates themselves could have been rather
diﬀerent, and are very aﬀected by randomness. For instance, some of the realisations have the highest
crossing rates in Florida rather than Cape Hatteras, and there are many locations where the crossing

rates vary by a factor of 2 or more between diﬀerent 54 year realisations. We will investigate this latter
point further below.

The middle panel of ﬁgure 7 shows the mean crossing rates for the simulations from all 20 realisa-
tions together. The agreement between the model and the observations in this and the top panel suggests
that various features in the observations are real, rather than statistical artefacts. These include the deep
minimum of rates between points C and D, on the North East coast of Florida.

The lower right panel of ﬁgure 7 shows the standard deviation across the 20 realisations. There are
considerable variations in this standard deviation with location, with a pattern that resembles the mean.
These variations show that not only is the mean crossing rate aﬀected by the geometry of the coastline
and the tracks, but also the variability among diﬀerent 54 year samples.

Figure 8 shows three more ways in which we can compare the observed and simulated landfalling
rates. First, the top right hand panel shows the observed landfall rates, with the plus and minus one
standard deviation range for the model, derived from the 20 realisations. Second, the middle panel shows
the diﬀerence between the mean model rate and the observations, divided by the ensemble standard
deviation. Considering these two diagnostics we see that there are two places in particular where the
observations may be inconsistent with the simulations: between B and C, and between G and H. Does
this indicate ﬂaws in the model? In fact it seems likely that the diﬀerence between B and C is related
to the errors in the simulation of the high density of tracks oﬀ the coast of the Carolinas, as illustrated
in ﬁgure 6 and discussed above. This is because the location of the diﬀerence in coastal rates is directly
‘downstream’, in a track sense, from the high density region. The diﬀerent between G and H is smaller,
although more signiﬁcant, is less easy to understand.

The lower right hand panel in ﬁgure 8 shows the ratio of the observed crossing rates to the model
ensemble standard deviation. This gives an indication of where the observed rates are most aﬀected by
randomness: high values indicate that the role of randomness is small and that the observed rates are
presumably a good estimator of the (unknown) real rates, while smaller values indicate that there is a
large eﬀect of randomness. In general, this ratio follows the observed rates. In other words, it is more
or less the case that in regions where there are more hurricanes the landfalling rates can be estimated
more accurately than in regions where there are fewer hurricanes (as one might expect). This is of some
relevance to the insurance industry, as follows. One would expect property insurance rates to be lower
in regions where landfalling rates are observed to be lower on average. However, one would also expect
insurance rates to depend, in part, on the uncertainty in the estimation of the hurricane rates. Some of
the regions where the observed rates are low, but the uncertainty is high (i.e. there is the possibility that
the observed rates are only low by good fortune over the last 54 years), should, perhaps, have higher
insurance rates than one might otherwise expect.

5 Conclusions

We have described the latest version of our hurricane track model. Relative to the previous version, we
have included a more realistic lysis process. Ultimately, we hope to model ﬂuctuations in the pressure
of hurricanes as well as the tracks, and a good pressure model would take care of lysis automatically.
However, pressure modelling is not simple, and at this point we have created a purely empirical model
for lysis based on the observed distribution.

The new lysis model has signiﬁcantly improved the simulation of hurricane tracks, has removed
the major systematic errors in our model, and has partly solved the problem of how to simulate the high
density of tracks oﬀ the US East Coast. A few smaller systematic errors remain, such as the precise
location and magnitude of the peak density of tracks in this region.

There is still more work to do, however. We have not addressed the question of the non-normality
of the residuals in the track model, as shown in ﬁgure 11 in Hall and Jewson (2005c). Presumably better
modelling of the residuals would lead to further improvements in the large-scale behaviour of the tracks.
And our model is also entirely non-seasonal at this point, even though the genesis of hurricanes, and
possibly also the track dynamics and lysis, are deﬁnitely not constant across the hurricane season. If one
is interested in the seasonal variation of risk then modelling these seasonal variations is imperative. And
modelling seasonal variations correctly may also help in the modelling of overall annual risk.

References

H Diaz and R Pulwarty. Hurricanes. Springer Verlag, 1997.

M Drayton. A stochastic basin-wide model of Atlantic hurricanes. 2000. 24th Conference on Hurricanes

and Tropical Meteorology.
http://ams.confex.com/ams/last2000/24Hurricanes/abstracts/12797.htm.

K Emanuel, Ravela S, Vivant E, and Risi C. A combined statistical-deterministic approach of hurricane

risk assessment. Unpublished manuscript, 2005.

T Fujii and Y Mitsuta. Synthesis of a stochastic typhoon model and simulation of typhoon winds.

Technical report, Kyoto University Disaster Prevention Research Institute, 1975.

T Hall and S Jewson. Statistical modelling of tropical cyclone tracks part 1: a semi-parametric model

for the mean trajectory. arXiv:physics/0503231, 2005a.

T Hall and S Jewson. Statistical modelling of tropical cyclone tracks part 2: a comparison of models for

the variance of trajectories. arXiv:physics/0505103, 2005b.

T Hall and S Jewson. Statistical modelling of tropical cyclone tracks part 3: modelling the autocorrelation

in track shape. arXiv:physics/0509024, 2005c.

T Hall and S Jewson. Statistical modelling of tropical cyclone tracks part 4: a non-parametric model for

the annual distribution of genesis. arXiv:physics/0510203, 2005d.

B Jarvinen, C Neumann, and M Davis. A tropical cyclone data tape for the North Atlantic Basin, 1886-
1983: Contents, limitations, and uses. Technical report, NOAA Technical Memorandum NWS NHC
22, 1984.

P Vickery, P Skerlj, and L Twisdale. Simulation of hurricane risk in the US using an empirical track

model. Journal of Structural Engineering, 126:1222–1237, 2000.

Figure 1: The variation of the out-of-sample likelihood with the averaging length-scale for the lysis model
described in the text.

Figure 2: The observed locations of hurricane lysis for the 524 storms from 1950 to 2003 (panel (a)),
and three simulations of hurricane lysis, each for 524 storms, for the model described in the text.

Figure 3: Observed (panel (a)) and three realisations of simulated hurricane tracks from the model
described in the text.

Figure 4: The number of tracks from observations and from simulations that cross certain lines of latitude
(equally spaced from 10N to 50N, from bottom to top), in a northward direction (left panel) and in a
southward direction (right panel).

Figure 5: The number of tracks from observations and from simulations that cross certain lines of
longitude (equally spaced from 80W to 20W, from left to right), in a eastward direction (panel (a)) and
in a westward direction (panel (b)).

Figure 6: Track densities for model and observations. Panel (a) shows the track density for the model,
averaged over 20 realisations of 524 storms. Panel (b) shows the track density for observations, for 524
storms. Panel (c) shows the diﬀerence of these densities, and panel (d) shows the standard deviation of
the density from the model (across the 20 simulations of 524 storms).

Figure 7: The left hand panel shows a model for the coastline of North and Central America, consisting
of 39 segments. The right hand panels show various diagnostics for the number of hurricanes crossing each
of these segments in the observations and in the model. The top panel shows 54 years of observations
(black line) and 20 realisations of 54 years from the model (red lines). The middle panel shows the
observations and the mean of the model realisations. The lower panel shows the standard deviation of
the model realisations.

Figure 8: As for ﬁgure 8, but now panel (a) shows the observations, with lines for plus and minus
one standard deviation from the model, panel (b) shows the diﬀerence between model and observations
normalised using the standard deviation from the model and panel (c) shows the observations divided by
the standard deviation from the model.

