5
0
0
2
 
c
e
D
 
5
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
o
a
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
5
3
1
2
1
5
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Statistical modelling of tropical cyclone tracks: non-normal
innovations

Tim Hall, GISS∗
and
Stephen Jewson

February 2, 2008

Abstract

We present results from the sixth stage of a project to build a statistical hurricane model. Previous
papers have described our modelling of the tracks, genesis, and lysis of hurricanes. In our track model
we have so far employed a normal distribution for the residuals when computing innovations, even
though we have demonstrated that their distribution is not normal. Here, we test to see if the track
model can be improved by including more realistic non-normal innovations. The results are mixed.
Some features of the model improve, but others slightly worsen.

1 Introduction

There is considerable interest in modelling the shapes and intensities of tropical cyclone tracks, and, in par-
ticular, where those tracks make landfall. For example, models have been proposed by Fujii and Mitsuta
(1975), Drayton (2000), Vickery et al. (2000) and Emanuel et al. (2005). The development of these mod-
els has mostly been motivated by the interests of the insurance industry, although one would imagine
that the results from such models could also be used by others who are aﬀected by tropical cyclones.

None of the models cited above is entirely satisfactory, and given the increasing damage caused
by tropical cyclones it seems appropriate to revisit the question of how to build such models. To this
end, we have undertaken to build a new tropical cyclone track and intensity model from scratch, paying
particular attention to using well-deﬁned and appropriate statistical methodologies. Our focus is on the
Atlantic, although the methods we are developing should be directly applicable to other basins.

We have made considerable progress towards building a new tropical cyclone simulation model.

Our previous papers have considered how to model the following components:

• the mean tracks of hurricanes (Hall and Jewson, 2005a)

• the variance of ﬂuctuations around the mean tracks (Hall and Jewson, 2005b)

• the autocorrelation of ﬂuctuations around the mean tracks (Hall and Jewson, 2005c)

• the annual pattern of hurricane genesis (Hall and Jewson, 2005d)

• the annual pattern of lysis (death) of hurricanes (Hall and Jewson, 2005e)

The results shown in Hall and Jewson (2005e) show that, in combination, these ﬁve models do a
good job of simulating the main features of hurricane track behaviour, but that they are also deﬁcient in
some respects when compared with the observations in detail. In particular, the area immediately oﬀ the
coast of Georgia and the Carolinas does not show suﬃcient track density (see ﬁgure 6 of Hall and Jewson
In this paper we test whether this problem can be solved by more accurate modelling of
(2005e)).
the residuals. Diagnostics in Hall and Jewson (2005c) showed that these residuals were not normally
distributed, although up to now we have modelled them as normal (i.e. we have forced the simulations
with normal innovations). We now attempt to model the distribution of the residuals more accurately by
saving the residuals from the ﬁtting process, and resampling them to create the innovations that force
the simulation model. This eﬀectively guarantees that the innovations have the correct distribution. We
then test the model at a macroscopic level to see whether this improves the overall track simulation.

∗Correspondence address: Email: tmh1@columbia.edu

2 Method

The model used in Hall and Jewson (2005e) uses normally distributed innovations (noise forcing) to
generate track simulations, and the macroscopic results are reasonably good, as shown in that paper.
However, a detailed analysis of the residuals from the model, as described in Hall and Jewson (2005c),
has shown that, in fact, the residuals from the model are not normally distributed. In particular, ﬁgure
11 of that paper shows that the residuals are close to normally distributed up to around plus and minus
two standard deviations, but that beyond that are fat-tailed i.e. have higher probability density than
the normal distribution. This suggests that simulations forced by normally distributed random noise are
never likely to be exactly correct. Fitting a normal distribution to the long-tailed residuals is likely to
give a distribution that has too high probability density in the central range of the distribution, and too
low probability density in the tails. Exactly how such microscopic details of the model then aﬀect the
macroscopic behaviour of the simulated tracks is hard to understand, but one might imagine that the
resulting simulated tracks might be too variable, but with too few really extreme ﬂuctuations.

How should we deal with this situation? There are a number of possible approaches. First, it
is possible that we could reformulate the model in such a way that the residuals become normal. For
example, we could transform the ﬂuctuations around the mean tracks to normal distributions, which
would likely lead to normal residuals. Alternatively, we could try to avoid reformulating the model,
and simply accept the non-normality of the residuals and model it directly. After all, why should the
residuals be normally distributed in the ﬁrst place? This latter approach is the approach that we take in
this paper. Since there is no obvious parametric distribution to use to model these fat-tailed residuals,
we use a simple non-parametric approach. The residuals from the ﬁtting process are stored. During the
simulations, they are then resampled randomly and used as innovations.

There are a number of assumptions built into this method, that we haven’t checked at this point. In
particular, we are assuming that the residuals are identically distributed throughout the basin, throughout
the season, and for storms of diﬀerent origin. In detail this assumption is likely to be wrong, and there are
very likely to be variations in the distributions of the residuals with all these three factors. The question
is, whether these variations are large enough to warrant making the simulation model more complex to
incorporate them. We will leave this question for a future study.

There is also a slight contradiction inherent in our model, in that the smoothing lengthscales for
variance and autocorrelation are ﬁtted using the likelihood for a normal distribution, even though, as
mentioned above, the distribution is not exactly normal.

3 Results

We now show some results from applying the non-normal residual simulations described above. These
results should all be compared with the equivalent results for the previous version of the model, described
in Hall and Jewson (2005e).

• In ﬁgure 1 we show locations of hurricane lysis from observations and the model (to be compared
with ﬁgure 2 in Hall and Jewson (2005e)). The results seem neither better nor worse than before.

• In ﬁgure 2 we show simulated tracks (to be compared with ﬁgure 3). The tracks look reasonable,

but again it is very hard to say, by eye, whether the simulations have improved.

• In ﬁgure 3 we show the rates of storms crossing lines of latitude (to be compared with ﬁgure 4).
Again, there is little diﬀerence, except perhaps a small improvement in the northward crossing rates
at the highest latitudes.

• In ﬁgure 4 we show the rates of storms crossing lines of longitude (to be compared with ﬁgure 5).
The two models are not distinguishable in most places, but the new model is perhaps slightly worse
for easterly crossing in the furthest west and slightly better for westerly crossing between 70W and
40W.

• In ﬁgure 5 we see that density of storms points throughout the basin (to be compared with 6). This
time, there is a deﬁnite improvement in the new model: the high density of tracks oﬀ the coast of
Cape Hatteras that is seen in the observations is now well simulated by the model. We can perhaps
attribute this to the new simulation method using innovations which are mostly smaller, and hence
there being a greater number of simulated storms that move along tracks similar to the mean track,
and hence end up in this particular area.

• In ﬁgure 6 and ﬁgure 7 we see various diagnostics related to landfalling rates in the model and
observations (to be compared with ﬁgures 7 and 8). Perhaps the most useful of these diagnostics
is the middle panel of ﬁgure 7, which shows very clearly where the model and observations are in
agreement, and where not. The results are mixed: between G and H the model has improved, while
between F and G is has got worse.

Overall, it is not possible to say whether the new model is better or worse than the previous model.
There has been an improvement in the most obvious ﬂaw in the old model, but in other places the model
has deteriorated. That switching from normal to non-normal innovations causes improvements in some
regions, but reduces the quality of the model in others, suggests that the behaviour of the residuals varies
in space, and that modelling them as identically distributed in space is not entirely correct.

4 Conclusions

We have described the latest version of our model for the simulation of hurricane tracks. The only change
from the previous version is in the modelling of the residuals: previously we had modelled the residuals
as normal, even though we knew that that wasn’t entirely correct. Now we have corrected this, and are
modelling the residuals using resampling in order to capture the correct distribution.

The results of this experiment are interesting: we have clearly improved the performance of the
model in the region where we felt the performance was most deﬁcient, which is the model’s ability to
simulate the high density of tracks just oﬀ the coast of Cape Hatteras. However, at the same time, the
model’s performance has deteriorated elsewhere. This seems to imply that it would be worth increasing
the complexity of the model to allow the distribution of the residuals to vary in space, according to
whatever variations are present in the observations. This is an obvious priority for future work.

References

M Drayton. A stochastic basin-wide model of Atlantic hurricanes. 2000. 24th Conference on Hurricanes

and Tropical Meteorology.
http://ams.confex.com/ams/last2000/24Hurricanes/abstracts/12797.htm.

K Emanuel, Ravela S, Vivant E, and Risi C. A combined statistical-deterministic approach of hurricane

risk assessment. Unpublished manuscript, 2005.

T Fujii and Y Mitsuta. Synthesis of a stochastic typhoon model and simulation of typhoon winds.

Technical report, Kyoto University Disaster Prevention Research Institute, 1975.

T Hall and S Jewson. Statistical modelling of tropical cyclone tracks part 1: a semi-parametric model

for the mean trajectory. arXiv:physics/0503231, 2005a.

T Hall and S Jewson. Statistical modelling of tropical cyclone tracks part 2: a comparison of models for

the variance of trajectories. arXiv:physics/0505103, 2005b.

T Hall and S Jewson. Statistical modelling of tropical cyclone tracks part 3: modelling the autocorrelation

in track shape. arXiv:physics/0509024, 2005c.

T Hall and S Jewson. Statistical modelling of tropical cyclone tracks part 4: a non-parametric model for

the annual distribution of genesis. arXiv:physics/0510203, 2005d.

T Hall and S Jewson. Statistical modelling of tropical cyclone tracks part 5: modelling cyclone lysis.

arXiv:physics/0512091, 2005e.

P Vickery, P Skerlj, and L Twisdale. Simulation of hurricane risk in the US using an empirical track

model. Journal of Structural Engineering, 126:1222–1237, 2000.

Figure 1: The observed locations of hurricane lysis for the 524 storms from 1950 to 2003 (panel (a)),
and three simulations of hurricane lysis, each for 524 storms, for the model described in the text.

Figure 2: Observed (panel (a)) and simulated hurricane tracks from the model described in the text.

Figure 3: The number of tracks from observations and from simulations that cross certain lines of latitude
(equally spaced from 10N to 50N, from bottom to top), in a northward direction (left panel) and in a
southward direction (right panel).

Figure 4: The number of tracks from observations and from simulations that cross certain lines of
longitude (equally spaced from 80W to 20W, from left to right), in a eastward direction (panel (a)) and
in a westward direction (panel (b)).

Figure 5: Track densities for model and observations. Panel (a) shows the track density for the model,
averaged over 20 realisations of 524 storms. Panel (b) shows the track density for observations, for 524
storms. Panel (c) shows the diﬀerence of these densities, and panel (d) shows the standard deviation of
the density from the model (across the 20 simulations of 524 storms).

Figure 6: The left hand panel shows a model for the coastline of North and Central America, consisting
of 39 segments. The right hand panels show various diagnostics for the number of hurricanes crossing each
of these segments in the observations and in the model. The top panel shows 54 years of observations
(black line) and 20 realisations of 54 years from the model (red lines). The middle panel shows the
observations and the mean of the model realisations. The lower panel shows the standard deviation of
the model realisations.

Figure 7: As for ﬁgure 6,but now panel (a) shows the observations, with lines for plus and minus
one standard deviation from the model, panel (b) shows the diﬀerence between model and observations
normalised using the standard deviation from the model and panel (c) shows the observations divided by
the standard deviation from the model.

