On the Lagrangian Dynamics of Atmospheric Zonal Jets and
the Permeability of the Stratospheric Polar Vortex

I. I. Rypina, F. J. Beron-Vera and M. G. Brown

Rosenstiel School of Marine and Atmospheric Science, University of Miami, Miami, Florida

H. Kocak
Departments of Computer Science and Mathematics, University of Miami, Coral Gables,

Florida

M. J. Olascoaga and I. A. Udovydchenkov
Rosenstiel School of Marine and Atmospheric Science, University of Miami, Miami, Florida

Submitted to the Journal of the Atmospheric Sciences.

6
0
0
2
 
y
a
M
 
8
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
o
a
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
5
5
1
5
0
6
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Corresponding author address:

I. I. Rypina, RSMAS/AMP, University of Miami, 4600 Rickenbacker Cswy., Miami,

FL 33149 (irypina@rsmas.miami.edu)

abstract

2

The Lagrangian dynamics of zonal jets in the atmosphere are considered, with particular

attention paid to explaining why, under commonly encountered conditions, zonal

jets serve as barriers to meridional transport. The velocity ﬁeld is assumed to be

two-dimensional and incompressible, and composed of a steady zonal ﬂow with an

isolated maximum (a zonal jet) on which two or more travelling Rossby waves are

superimposed. The associated Lagrangian motion is studied with the aid of KAM

(Kolmogorov–Arnold–Moser) theory, including nontrivial extensions of well-known

results. These extensions include applicability of the theory when the usual statements

of nondegeneracy are violated, and applicability of the theory to multiply periodic

systems, including the absence of Arnold diﬀusion in such systems. These results,

together with numerical simulations based on a model system, provide an explanation of

the mechanism by which zonal jets serve as barriers to meridional transport of passive

tracers under commonly encountered conditions. Causes for the breakdown of such a

barrier are discussed. It is argued that a barrier of this type accounts for the sharp

boundary of the Antarctic ozone hole at the perimeter of the stratospheric polar vortex

in the austral spring.

3

1. Introduction

It is now generally accepted that the stratospheric polar vortices in both hemispheres

provide eﬀective barriers to meridional transport of passive tracers. Although there are

diﬀerences between the northern and southern hemispheres and dependence on height,

winds at high latitudes throughout most of the stratosphere in the winter and early

spring are characterized by a nearly zonal jet; the polar vortex can be deﬁned as the

region poleward of the jet core, and available evidence suggests that the transport barrier

is nearly coincident with the jet core. The polar vortex in the northern hemisphere is

generally present only in the winter and early spring. The stronger southern hemisphere

polar vortex often persists for most of the year, being strongest in the winter and spring.

Also contributing to the generally stronger southern hemisphere polar vortex is the

observation that Rossby wave perturbations to the background ﬂow at high latitudes

in the middle and upper stratosphere are generally weaker in the southern hemisphere

than in the northern hemisphere. A more complete discussion of these topics can be

found in Bowman (1993), Dahlberg and Bowman (1994), McIntyre (1989) and Holton

et al. (1995).

Much recent interest in the stratospheric polar vortices derives from observations of

the Antarctic ozone hole and, to a lesser extent, its northern hemisphere counterpart.

The annual formation of the Antarctic ozone hole is controlled by chemical processes in

the stratosphere (Lefevre et al. 1994; Webster et al. 1993). These processes will not be

discussed here except to note that the combination of sunlight and cold temperatures

that occurs in the polar region in the early spring triggers ozone depletion. The focus

of the work reported here is explaining the mechanism by which the stratospheric polar

vortex provides a barrier to the meridional transport of a passive tracer, such as ozone

concentration. Such a barrier provides an explanation of why, under typical austral

early spring conditions in the middle and upper stratosphere, the ozone hole does not

spread via turbulent diﬀusion to midlatitudes.

4

An explanation of the mechanism by which the polar vortex acts as a barrier

to meridional transport has been provided by McIntyre (1989) and is generally

well-accepted. The argument assumes that, on a particular isentropic surface, the

dynamics are well approximated by a “shallow water” model that conserves potential

vorticity. The wind ﬁeld is assumed to be a superposition of a steady zonal ﬂow with

a well-deﬁned maximum (a zonal jet) and a nonsteady perturbation. The potential

vorticity distribution associated with the background steady ﬂow is assumed to be

characterized by a strong meridional potential vorticity gradient at the latitude of the

core of the zonal jet. Because air parcels are constrained to lie on a surface of constant

potential vorticity, the background potential vorticity gradient will serve as a barrier

to meridional transport provided that the nonsteady perturbation to the vorticity

distribution is not too strong.

In this paper an alternative explanation of the mechanism by which the polar

vortex acts as a barrier to meridional transport is presented. Our explanation relies

heavily on results relating to Hamiltonian dynamical systems. In particular, KAM

(Kolmogorov–Arnold–Moser) theory (see, e.g., Arnold et al. 1986) plays a central role

in our work. Details will be presented below, but a synopsis of our argument can be

given now. According to the each of many variants of the KAM theorem, if a steady

streamfunction is subjected to certain classes of time-dependent perturbations, some

nonchaotic trajectories (which lie on tori in a higher dimensional phase space) survive

in the perturbed system. We argue that, under most conditions, the invariant tori that

are most likely to survive in the perturbed system are those in close proximity to the

core of the zonal jet, and that these provide a barrier to meridional transport.

The connection between KAM tori and the meridional transport barrier at the

perimeter of the stratospheric polar vortex has been discussed, albeit brieﬂy, in both

the meteorological literature (Pierce and Fairlie 1993) and the mathematics literature

(Delshams and de la Llave 2000). Other aspects of dynamical systems theory have been

5

applied to the stratospheric polar vortices and described in the meteorological literature

(see, e.g., Binson and Legras 2002; Bowman 1993; Koh and Legras 2002; Koh and Plumb

2000; Ngan and Shepherd 1999a, b). The relationship between our work and several of

these studies will be discussed below.

There is also a close connection between our work and that of Bowman (1996),

in spite of the fact that the arguments presented in that paper are unrelated to

dynamical systems. In both our work and that of Bowman (1996) the streamfunction

is assumed to consist of a steady background on which a sum of travelling Rossby

waves is superimposed. Bowman’s model was based on an empirical ﬁt to observations.

In addition to this observational foundation, our model is loosely motivated using

dynamical arguments and chosen, in part, because rigorous mathematical results are

available for streamfunctions of this general form. Using entirely diﬀerent arguments

than those given by Bowman (1996), we provide an explanation for his observation

that for a moderate strength perturbation the transport barrier in the proximity of

the jet core is expected to break down when one of the Rossby waves included in the

perturbation has a phase speed close to that of the wind speed at the core of the jet.

The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. In the next section, a simple

analytic form of the streamfunction is derived. This consists of a steady background

ﬂow – a zonal jet – on which two travelling Rossby waves are superimposed. In a

reference frame moving at the phase speed of one of the Rossby waves, the ﬂow consists

of a steady background ﬂow on which a time-periodic perturbation is superimposed.

In section 3, the Lagrangian motion in such a model is discussed with the aid of two

variants of the KAM theorem. We explain why, under typical conditions, particle

trajectories near the core of the zonal jet in the perturbed system lie on KAM invariant

tori which provide a barrier to meridional transport. In section 4, we consider a more

general model of the streamfunction, consisting of a zonal jet on which three of more

travelling Rossby waves are superimposed. The Lagrangian motion is discussed with

the aid of yet another variant of the KAM theorem. It is argued that the conclusions

of section 3 are unchanged for a more general multiperiodic perturbation. In section

5 we summarize and discuss our results. Our KAM-theorem-based explanation of the

meridional transport barrier is contrasted to the potential vorticity barrier explanation,

and suggestions for future work are presented.

2. A simple, dynamically motivated model of the streamfunction

Our study focuses on elucidating the mechanism by which the zonal jet at the edge

of the stratospheric polar vortex serves as a barrier to the meridional transport. Because

of our focus on the zonal jet, it is natural to make use of a β-plane approximation

with β = (2Ω/re) cos ϕo deﬁned at the latitude ϕo of the core of the zonal jet. Here

Ω = 2π/(1day) is the angular frequency of the earth and re = 6371 km is the earth’s
10−11s−1m−1. Also, our interest
radius. We shall assume that ϕo = 60◦ so β = 1.14

×

is in Lagrangian motion over time scales of a few months or less. This is suﬃciently

short that diabatic processes can be neglected. The assumption of ﬂow on an isentropic

surface, together with incompressibility, allows the introduction of the streamfunction,

ψ(x, y, t), u =

∂ψ/∂y, v = ∂ψ/∂x, with x increasing to the east from an arbitrarily

chosen longitude and y increasing to the north from ϕo. The Lagrangian equations of

motion are then

dx
dt

=

∂ψ
∂y

,

−

dy
dt

=

∂ψ
∂x

.

It is well known that these equations have Hamiltonian form, H(p, q, t)

ψ(x, y, t).

↔

This connection is exploited extensively in sections 3 and 4.

Consistent with our focus on zonal jets we shall assume that

ψ(x, y, t) = ψ0(y) + ψ1(x, y, t)

where u0(y) =

∂ψ0/∂y has a single extremum – a maximum – at y = 0. We outline

now the steps of a derivation of a particular choice of ψ0(y) and ψ1(x, y, t). The

−

−

6

(1)

(2)

same streamfunction has been used previously by del-Castillo-Negrete and Morrison

(1993), and Kovalyov (2000). Our presentation follows that of del-Castillo-Negrete and

Morrison; more details can be found in that work. The simple analytical expressions

for ψ0(y) and ψ1(x, y, t) that are presented below (see equation 12) are far too

simple to mimic the complexity of realistic stratospheric ﬂows. But our model of the

streamfunction is dynamically motivated and has approximately the correct length

and time scales. This model streamfunction is used to produce numerical simulations

to illustrate some important qualitative features of more realistic ﬂows. In spite of

its simplicity, our analytic model of the streamfunction includes all of the essential

qualitative features of the stratospheric polar vortex that are needed to understand why

it acts as a meridional transport barrier.

vorticity conservation dictates that

Consistent with our assumption of 2-d incompressible ﬂow on a β-plane, potential

∂

2ψ
∇
∂t −

∂ψ
∂y

∂

2ψ

∇
∂x

+

∂ψ
∂x

∂

2ψ

∇
∂y

+ β

= 0.

∂ψ
∂x

Substitution of (2) into (3) yields, after linearization (treating ψ1 as a small perturbation

∂
∂t ∇

2ψ1 + u0(y)

2ψ1 + (β

u′′
0(y))

∂ψ1
∂x

= 0.

−

∂
∂x∇

The assumption that ψ1 has the form of a zonally propagating wave ψ1 =

φ(y) exp(ik(x

ct)) (or a superposition of such waves) yields the Rayleigh–Kuo

to ψ0),

−

equation,

(u0(y)

c)(φ′′(y)

k2φ(y)) + (β

u′′
0(y))φ(y) = 0.

−

−

−

Problems associated with critical layers, where u0(y) = c, and stability considerations

lead to diﬃculties ﬁnding physically relevant solutions to this equation. We consider

here the Bickley jet velocity proﬁle

u0(y) = U0sech2

y
L(cid:17) ,

(cid:16)

7

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

8

(7)

(8)

(9)

where U0 and L are constants. It was ﬁrst shown by Lipps (1962) that for this velocity

proﬁle the Rayleigh–Kuo equation (5) admits two symmetric neutrally stable (Im c = 0)

where the Ai i = 1, 2 are dimensionless amplitudes. It is straightforward to verify that

(6) and (7) constitute a solution to (5) provided

solutions,

and

φi(y) = AiU0Lsech2

y
L(cid:17) ,

(cid:16)

U0L2k2 = 6c

6c2

4U0c + βU0L2 = 0.

−

The condition for the existence of two neutrally stable waves is

βL2/U0 < 2/3.

(10)

When this inequality is satisﬁed, (9) has two real roots; the corresponding wavenumbers

are given by (8). It should be noted that for these solutions to (5), (β

u′′
0(y))/(u0(y)

c)

−

−

is bounded at the critical layers; this is a necessary condition for the existence of

neutrally stable solutions (Kuo 1949).

The environment is deﬁned by the parameters β, U0 and L, which, via (8) and (9),

ﬁx c1, k1, c2, and k2 provided (10) is satisﬁed. But, because of the periodic boundary

conditions in x, only a discrete set of k are allowed. At ϕ0 = 60◦ (this choice ﬁxes β as

noted above) these are

kn =

, n = 1, 2, . . . .

2n
re

(11)

For most choices of U0 and L, (11) conﬂicts with (8) and (9). This issue was discussed by

del-Castillo-Negrete and Morrison (1993) who argued that initial disturbances for which

(8) and (9) are inconsistent with (11) should relax, via a barotropic-instability-induced

decrease in U0 and increase in L, to a state for which (8), (9) and (11) are self-consistent.

9

We avoid this issue by choosing U0 and L that correspond to such a self-consistent state.

Speciﬁcally, we have chosen U0 = 62.66 m/s, L = 1770 km, corresponding to zonal

wavenumbers n = 2 and n = 3. These waves have eastward propagating phase speeds,

c2/U0 = 0.205 and c3/U0 = 0.461. The streamfunction is then

ψ(x, y, t) =

U0L tanh (cid:16)

−

y
L (cid:17) + A3U0L sech2
+ A2U0L sech2

y
L (cid:17) cos(k3(x
y
L (cid:17) cos(k2(x

(cid:16)

(cid:16)

−

−

c3t))

c2t)).

(12)

An important observation is that the time dependence associated with one of the two

Rossby waves in (12) can be eliminated by viewing the ﬂow in a reference frame moving

at the phase speed of that wave. The choice of which wave to absorb into the background

ﬂow is arbitrary. In the reference frame moving at speed c3 the streamfunction is

ψ(x, y, t) = c3y

U0L tanh (cid:16)

−

y
L(cid:17) + A3U0L sech2
+ A2U0L sech2

y
L (cid:17) cos(k3x)
y
L (cid:17) cos(k2x

(cid:16)

(cid:16)

σ2t)

−

(13)

where σ2 = c2k2

c3k2 = k2(c2

c3). Note that σ2 is negative because in the reference

−

−

frame moving at the faster n = 3 wave, the n = 2 wave has westward propagating

phases.

3. A steady background ﬂow subject to a periodic perturbation

In this section we consider streamfunctions of the general form

ψ(x, y, t) = ψ0(x, y) + ψ1(x, y, σt)

(14)

where ψ1 is a periodic function of t with period 2π/σ. Equation (13) is a special case

of equation (14). All of the concepts discussed in this section apply to the more general

class (14). The particular form (13) is used for numerical simulations to illustrate the

relevant important concepts. In the section that follows we consider a slightly larger and

more geophysically relevant class of streamfunctions corresponding to a multiperiodic

10

perturbation ψ1. It will be seen that almost all of the results presented in this section

generalize in a straightforward fashion to multiperiodically perturbed systems.

We begin with a discussion of the importance of the background steady contribution

to the streamfunction ψ0(x, y) in (14). If, as we have assumed, in the rest frame the

streamfunction has the form of a zonal ﬂow on which a sum of zonally propagating

Rossby waves are superimposed (as in (12)), the problem of lack of uniqueness of

ψ0(x, y) arises immediately; the choice of which travelling wave to absorb into the

background is arbitrary. Because the purely zonal rest frame contribution to ψ0(x, y)

(

U0L tanh(y/L) in (13)) is always present and is generally larger than whichever

−
travelling wave contribution is absorbed into ψ0, we discuss ﬁrst the special case

ψ = ψ0(y).

The Hamiltonian form of the Lagrangian equations of motion (1) was noted

earlier. The special case ψ = ψ0(y) corresponds, trivially, to the so-called action-angle

representation of the motion in which (p, q)

→
of motion in terms of action-angle variables (I, θ) are dI/dt =

→

(I, θ), H(p, q)

¯H(I). The equations

∂ ¯H/∂θ = 0,

−

dθ/dt = ∂ ¯H/∂I

≡

ω(I); these equations can be trivially integrated. Note that I

and θ are deﬁned in such a way that the motion is 2π-periodic in θ with angular

frequency ω(I). When ψ = ψ0(y), we may take I =

yR, θ = x/R and ¯H = ψ0, where

−

R = re cos ϕo. With these simple substitutions the original Lagrangian equations of

motion (1) have action-angle form. For systems of this type ω(I) is simply a relabelling

of u(y) and T (I) = 2π/ω(I) is the time required for a trajectory to circle the earth.

Action-angle variables and, in particular, the quantity dω(I)/dI play a crucial role in

much of the discussion that follows.

The choice ψ0(y) =

U0L tanh(y/L) corresponds to ¯H(I) = U0L tanh(I/(RL)),

−

ω(I) = ∂ ¯H/∂I = (U0/R) sech2(I/(RL)). Figure 1a shows the corresponding streamlines

in the (x, y)-plane (the trivial x-dependence is included for comparison to Fig. 3), and

plots of u0(y) =

∂ψ0/∂y = U0 sech2(y/L), ω(I) and ω′(I). Note that at the jet core,

−

11

T (I) has a local minimum, ω(I) has a local maximum and ω′(I) = 0.

Fig. 1.

Now consider a superposition of the background zonal jet ψ0(y) and one of the two

Rossby wave perturbations included in (12). In the reference frame moving at the phase

speed of the Rossby wave the ﬂow is steady. The corresponding streamfunction is

ψ(x, y) = cy

U0L tanh (cid:16)

−

y
L (cid:17) + AU0L sech2

y
L (cid:17) cos(kx)

(cid:16)

(15)

where the phase speed c, wavenumber k and the dimensionless wave amplitude A are

written without subscripts. Nondimensionalization (ψ

ψ/(U0L), x

kx, y

y/L)

→

→

→

reveals that there are two irreducible dimensionless parameters, A and c/U0. A

bifurcation diagram in (A, c/U0) for this system is shown in Fig. 2. This ﬁgure shows

that there are three regions, corresponding to topologically distinct streamfunction

structures, and two critical curves that separate these regions. Level surfaces of ψ in

each of the three regions and on the two critical lines are shown in the ﬁgure. Holding

A

= 0 constant while c/U0 is increased reveals all possible streamfunction topologies.

For small c/U0 the streamfunction is characterized by hyperbolic heteroclinic chains

both above and below a spatially periodic eastward jet near y = 0. As c/U0 is increased,

a critical value is encountered, at which the two hyperbolic heteroclinic chains merge

and the eastward jet disappears. A further increase of c/U0 leads to the formation of

homoclinic hyperbolic chains above and below a westward jet. As a second critical

value of c/U0 is passed, the hyperbolic homoclinic chains are destroyed via saddle-node

annihilation. For large c/U0 the ﬂow is everywhere westward without stagnation points.

Similar behavior was noted previously by del-Castillo-Negrete and Morrison (1993)

using essentially the same model. The importance of Fig. 2 is that it shows that

depending on the choice of A and c/U0, the zonal jet may be strong, weak or absent

entirely. If A and c/U0 correspond to a pair which lies on the critical line at which

the two hyperbolic heteroclinic chains merge, the eastward jet disappears and the

chain of unstable and stable manifolds near y = 0 is unstable to an arbitrarily small

6
Rossby wave perturbations to zonal jets.

Fig. 2.

12

time-dependent perturbation. For the stratospheric polar vortex the relevant (usually)

domain of the (A, c/U0) parameter space is small values of both parameters (see, e.g.,

Bowman, 1996). It should be emphasized, however, that when more than one Rossby

wave is superimposed on the background zonal jet, as in (13), the choice of which

Rossby wave to absorb into the background is arbitrary. Under such conditions the

claim that the background ﬂow topology corresponds to the small c/U0 region in Fig. 2

is justiﬁed only if this is true for (Ai, ci/U0) for all of the waves present. Although the

preceding discussion was motivated by a particular model streamfunction, equation (15),

the qualitative features that we have described are expected to be broadly applicable to

For any steady streamfunction ψ = ψ(x, y) the Lagrangian equations of motion (1)

can be transformed to action-angle form. The equations of motion in action-angle form

are identical to the equations described above, but the transformation from ψ(x, y) to

¯H(I) is more complicated than the trivial relabelling of coordinates described above.

More generally, I( ¯H) = (2π)−1

y(x, ¯H)dx where ¯H = ψ and the
0 x(y′, ¯H)dy′.
R
(The equivalence of the two forms of I( ¯H) given above follows from integration by parts.

integral is around a closed loop in (x, y), and θ = ∂G/∂I with G(y, I) =

x(y, ¯H)dy =

(2π)−1

−

H

H

y

Note also that on a given level surface of ψ, x(y) or y(x) may be multi-valued, dictating

that some care be exercised when using these equations, and that there is ﬂexibility

in choosing the lower limit in the integral deﬁning G.) It is often necessary to deﬁne

action-angle variables in diﬀerent regions of (x, y) in a piecewise fashion. We emphasize,

however, that once this is done the form of the equations of motion in action-angle

variables is that given above. It is important to keep in mind that I is simply a label

for a particular trajectory or, equivalently, for a particular level surface of ψ(x, y).

For A = 0.3, c/U0 = 0.461, plots of

= (u2 + v2)1/2, ω(I), T (I) and ω′(I) are

|
shown in Fig. 3 for trajectories in the vicinity of the jet core only. Note that, in

u
|

qualitative agreement with Fig. 1, Fig. 3 shows that in the vicinity of the jet core, T (I)

has a local minimum, ω(I) has a local maximum and ω′(I) = 0. These features play an

important role in the considerations that follow.

Fig. 3.

13

We turn our attention now to periodically perturbed systems of the form (14), of

which (13) is a special case. With x and y bounded, trajectories lie in a 3-dimensional

bounded phase space (x, y, t mod 2π/σ). The usual way to view trajectories in such a

system is to construct a Poincare section, which is a slice of the 3-d space corresponding

to t mod 2π/σ = constant. Three examples, corresponding to the system described by

(13) with three choices of the perturbation strength A2, are shown in Fig. 4. On these

plots regular (nonchaotic) trajectories appear as discretely sampled smooth curves,

while chaotic trajectories appear as sets of discrete samples that ﬁll areas. In the

A2 = 0 limit all trajectories are nonchaotic; each curve seen in Fig. 4a can be thought

of as a 2-d slice of a torus in (x, y, t mod 2π/σ). For small perturbation strength A2

some of the unperturbed tori are seen to survive, while other tori break up forming

chains of island-like structures that are surrounded by chaotic seas. In general, as

the perturbation strength increases more tori are destroyed and the motion becomes

Before proceeding, it is instructive to make some seemingly trivial comments

about the geometry of systems of the form (14). The tori of the unperturbed system

can be thought of as either 1-d surfaces in (x, y) or 2-d surfaces in the 3-d space

(x, y, t mod 2π/σ). Because the unperturbed streamfunction does not depend on σ the

latter view seems like an unnecessary complication, but it turns out to be very useful.

The regular trajectories in the perturbed systems shown in Fig. 4 lie on tori (of the

second type) of the unperturbed system that survive under perturbation. Because each

surviving torus is a 2-d surface in the 3-d space (x, y, t mod 2π/σ), each such torus

divides the 3-d space into disjoint ‘inside’ and ‘outside’ regions. A consequence of this

is that in the (x, y)-plane each surviving torus represents an impenetrable barrier to

transport.

increasingly chaotic.

Fig. 4.

14

The survival of some of the tori of the unperturbed system under small perturbation,

as illustrated in Fig. 4, is predicted by the KAM theorem (see, e.g., Arnold et al. 1986;

Poschel 2001). Before giving a more precise statement of the theorem, it is instructive

to note that the mechanism that leads to the destruction of the tori of the unperturbed

system is excitation of resonances by the time-periodic perturbation. Resonances are

excited when the ratio of the frequency of the perturbation σ to the frequency of the

motion on the unperturbed torus ω(I) is the ratio of integers. Generically, a continuum

of ω(I) values are present. Under such conditions a ﬁxed σ excites inﬁnitely many

resonances. In practice, however, the low-order resonances (e.g., 2 : 1) are the most

important.

With this as a heuristic background, a form of the KAM theorem suitable for

systems of the form (14) can now be stated. According to the theorem, tori in the

vicinity of those tori in the unperturbed system for which ω(I)/σ is suﬃciently irrational

survive in the perturbed system provided the strength of the perturbation is suﬃciently

weak and a nondegeneracy condition, ω′(I)

= 0, is satisﬁed. The condition that ω(I)/σ

is suﬃciently irrational is expressed quantitatively by a Diophantine condition; this will

not be discussed further as this condition is not central to our arguments.

On the other hand, the nondegeneracy condition plays a critical role in our

arguments. In the simplest form of the theorem this condition is ω′(I)

= 0 (or in higher

dimensions det(∂ωi/∂Ij)

= 0). This condition guarantees the invertibility of ω(I), whose

importance stems in part from the fact that the theorem guarantees that the torus

corresponding to that value of I for which ω(I)/σ is suﬃciently irrational survives in the

perturbed system. This was the form of the nondegeneracy condition in Kolmogorov’s

(1954) original statement of the theorem. Already in his original proof of the theorem,

Arnold (1963) noted (in a footnote) that an alternate form of the nondegeneracy

condition, the isoenergetic condition, could be used instead. Subsequently, Bruno (1992)

and Russmann (1989) announced forms of the theorem that employ less restrictive

6
6
6
15

nondegeneracy conditions.

The Russmann nondegeneracy condition is of particular interest in the present

study. The condition is most naturally stated in words: for an autonomous system with

N + 1 degrees of freedom the image of the frequency map I

ω(I) may not lie on

→

any hyperplane of dimension N that passes through the origin. To our knowledge, all

published formulations of the KAM theorem to date that make use of the Russmann

nondegeneracy condition apply to autonomous systems. To apply such a result to (14)

this system must ﬁrst be written as an equivalent autonomous two degree-of-freedom

system with a bounded phase space. The required transformation is a special case of

the transformation described at the end of the following section. After performing

this transformation, the Russmann condition reduces to a statement that in the 2-d

(σ, ω)-space, the locus of points (σ, ω(I)) must not fall on a line that passes through the

origin. This condition is violated only when ω(I) = ωo, a constant. For our purposes,

the signiﬁcance of the Russmann nondegeneracy condition is that, for systems of the

form (14), it is satisﬁed in a domain that includes an isolated zero of ω′(I). The price

paid for making use of the relatively weak Russmann nondegeneracy condition is that

a slightly less strong form of the theorem is proved. As noted above, the Kolmogorov

condition ω′(I)

= 0 can be used to prove that the torus corresponding to a particular

value of I in the unperturbed system survives in the perturbed system. In contrast,

when the Russmann form of the theorem is applied in the vicinity of a torus for which

I = I0 where ω′(I0) = 0 (an isolated zero) the theorem guarantees only that some tori

identiﬁed by I-values near I0 will be present in the perturbed system. Thus, when the

Russmann form of the theorem is applied it is not appropriate to refer to surviving

tori (see, e.g., Sevryuk 1995, 2006, for a more complete discussion of this issue). For

our purposes this distinction is unimportant in that it makes no diﬀerence whether

the I = I0 torus survives under perturbation; it is important to know only that some

nearby tori are present in the perturbed system as any such torus provides a barrier to

6
16

transport.

Because of its generality, we have chosen to emphasize the importance of the

Russmann nondegeneracy condition in our discussion of the stability of tori in the

vicinity of that for which ω′(I) = 0. It is worth noting, however, that other arguments

have been used to establish essentially the same result for area-preserving mappings

(Delshams and de la Llave 2000; Sim´o 1998).

Consider again the Poincare sections shown in Fig. 4. This ﬁgure shows that not

only do the tori corresponding to trajectories near the jet core (where ω′(I) = 0) persist

in the perturbed system, but these tori appear to be the most resistant to breaking.

Numerical simulations based on model systems reveal that, in general, tori near that

for which ω′(I) = 0 tend to be the most resistant to breaking. Interestingly, for the

model parameters used to construct Fig. 4, σ/ω at the jet core is approximately 0.95.

The signiﬁcance of this ratio is its closeness to unity. On two nearby tori, one on each

side of the jet core, the strongest possible (1 : 1) resonance is excited. In spite of this,

tori in the vicinity of the jet core are seen to be preserved for moderate perturbation

strengths. The reason for the surprising stability of tori near that for which ω′(I) = 0

will be described below. We emphasize, however, that the stability of tori near that for

which ω′(I) = 0 is not absolute. If, for instance, σ happens to be identical to ω(I) at

the jet core where ω′(I) = 0, thereby exciting a 1 : 1 resonance on the jet core, tori near

the jet core are not among the last to break up as the perturbation strength increases.

The fact that tori for which ω′(I) = 0 are strongly resistant to breaking has

been noted in the mathematical literature; Gaidashev and Koch (2004) refer to the

“remarkable stability” of such tori. Systems which satisfy this condition are generally

described as “shearless” or “nontwist” in the mathematical literature, and have been

extensively studied in recent years (see, e.g., del-Castillo-Negrete and Morrison 1993;

Dullin and Meiss 2003; Morozov 2002).

We turn our attention now to resonance widths as a means to explain the remarkable

17

stability of tori satisfying the nontwist condition. Resonance widths are important

because when neighboring resonances overlap, the intervening tori generally break up;

the widely used Chirikov deﬁnition of chaos is based on overlapping resonances (see, e.g.,

Chirikov 1979; Chirikov and Zaslavsky 1972; Lichtenberg and Lieberman 1983). Recall

that resonances are excited on tori for which ω(I)/σ is rational. Resonance widths are

controlled by the degree of rationality of ω/σ, the perturbation strength and a simple

geometric factor, which we now consider. A simple analysis (see, e.g., Abdullaev 1993)

reveals that resonance widths scale like ∆I

ω′(I)

−1/2, or ∆ω

ω′(I)

1/2. Because

∼ |

|

∼ |

|

resonances are excited at discrete values of ω, it is the width ∆ω, rather than ∆I,

that is important in determining whether neighboring resonances overlap. Because

∆ω

ω′(I)

1/2 small values of ω′(I) are generally associated with small resonance

∼ |

|

widths, and generally more surviving KAM tori. (The resonance width estimates just

quoted follow from a simple perturbation analysis. When ω′(I) = 0 at the resonance,

the width of the resonance ∆ω depends on ω′′(I) at the resonance. The exact form of

this expression is not essential to our argument. What is important is the observation

that ∆ω is small when ω′ is small.)

In the vicinity of the jet core a narrow band of ω-values will be present. Resonances

will be excited in this band, but only for very special values of σ will these be low-order

resonances. The associated widths of these resonances are small owing to the smallness

1/2 in this region. As a result, mostly nonchaotic motion is preserved near

the jet core, not because resonances are not excited, but because the corresponding

resonance widths are usually so small that neighboring resonances don’t overlap.

Excitation of a low-order resonance very close to the jet core can overcome the smallness

1/2 and change this picture, so the stability of tori near the jet core is not

of

ω′(I)

|

|

of

ω′(I)

|

|
absolute.

In this section we have considered a steady zonal jet on which two travelling

Rossby waves are superimposed. Either of the two Rossby waves can be absorbed into

18

a modiﬁed steady background ﬂow. We have shown, using well-known results relating

to KAM theory, that, provided certain conditions are met, a typically narrow band of

nonchaotic trajectories in the vicinity of the jet core, each lying on a KAM invariant

torus, persists in the two wave system and provides a barrier to meridional transport.

The barrier is linked to the remarkable stability of KAM tori for which ω′(I) has an

isolated zero. The conditions that need to be met for such a barrier to be present are:

(1) the rest frame phase speeds of both Rossby waves should not be comparable to the

wind speed at the jet core; (2) the Rossby wave amplitudes must not be too large; and

(3) low order resonances in the immediate vicinity of the jet core in the moving frame

must not be excited.

4. A steady background ﬂow subject to a multiperiodic perturbation

In this section we consider streamfunctions of the form

ψ(x, y, t) = ψ0(x, y) + ψ1(x, y, σ1t, . . . , σN t)

(16)

where ψ1 is a multiperiodic function with constituent periods 2π/σi, i = 1, 2, . . . , N. It

should be noted that a steady zonal ﬂow on which a sum of N + 1 zonally propagating

Rossby waves is superimposed has the form (16) when viewed in the reference frame

moving at the phase speed of one of the Rossby waves. The N = 1 problem treated

in the previous section is seen to be a special case of the problem treated here. In

this section we show that most of the results discussed in the previous section carry

over to the larger and more realistic class of problems considered here with only minor

modiﬁcation.

An important observation relating to systems of the form (16) is that one need only

consider frequencies that are incommensurable, i.e., have the property that the ratio

of all pairs of frequencies is irrational. Consider, for example, a multiperiodic function

with periods 4 and 6 days. This function is a simple periodic function with period 12

19

days. In general, a reduction of the number of frequencies can be achieved whenever two

more of the frequencies are commensurable. Thus, without loss of generality, it may be

assumed that σ1, σ2, . . . , σN are incommensurable, i.e., that ψ1 is a quasiperiodic with

N incommensurable frequencies.

Systems of the form (16) have been intensively studied in recent years. A proof

of the KAM theorem for such systems has been provided by Jorba and Sim´o (1996).

Several points relating to the Jorba–Simo work are noteworthy. First, the theorem is

formulated as a nonautonomous perturbation to an autonomous one degree of freedom

system, so the unperturbed Hamiltonian, which must satisfy a nondegeneracy condition,

is the system deﬁned by ψ0(x, y) (after transforming to the action-angle representation).

Second, the nondegeneracy condition that the unperturbed Hamiltonian is assumed

to satisfy is the Kolmogorov condition ω′(I)

= 0. Third, Diophantine conditions

must be satisﬁed by both σi/ω and σi/σj (i

= j). The second point is of particular

importance in the present study. Loosely speaking, the Jorba–Simo work shows that the

principal diﬀerence between the periodic perturbation problem and the quasiperiodic

perturbation problem is that in the former problem the surviving KAM tori undergo

periodic oscillations in (x, y), while in the latter problem the surviving KAM tori

undergo quasiperiodic oscillations in (x, y). Jorba and Simo refer to the latter motion as

a “quasiperiodic dance.” For our purposes, this distinction is unimportant; in both cases

the surviving KAM tori provide a barrier in (x, y) to transport, as we shall describe in

more detail later in this section.

All of the mathematical diﬃculties associated with a quasiperiodic perturbation ψ1

are present even for N = 2. Because, among all N

2, the N = 2 case is the most

≥

convenient choice for numerical purposes, it is natural to focus on that choice. With

6
6
20

this in mind we have chosen, for numerical purposes, to use the streamfunction

ψ(x, y, t) = c3y

−

y
L (cid:17) + A3U0Lsech2
U0L tanh (cid:16)
y
L(cid:17) cos(k2x

y
L (cid:17) cos(k3x)
σ2t) + A1U0Lsech2

(cid:16)

(cid:16)

−

+ A2U0Lsech2

y
L(cid:17) cos(k1x

(cid:16)

−

σ1t).

(17)

In the A1 = 0 limit this is identical to the streamfunction described by equation

(13). Note that physically equation (17) represents a zonal ﬂow corresponding to

ψ(y) =

U0L tanh(y/L) on which three travelling Rossby-like waves are superimposed in

−

a reference frame moving with speed c3, the phase speed of the zonal wavenumber three

wave. For convenience, we have assumed that the new perturbation term corresponds
to zonal wavenumber one, k1 = 2π/(2πre cos 60◦) = 2/re, and has the same sech2(y/L)

meridional structure as the k2 and k3 modes. However, unlike the k2 and k3 modes,

which had some dynamical justiﬁcation, the k1 mode is simply an ad-hoc additive

perturbation which is included to illustrate some properties of quasiperiodic systems.

With this in mind we have chosen σ1/σ2 to be the golden mean (√5

1)/2 (whose

−

continued fraction representation identiﬁes it as the most irrational real number).

Numerical simulations based on the system deﬁned by (17) are shown in Figs. 5

and 6. Figure 5 shows the time evolution of two sets of air parcels at times ranging

from t = 0 to t = 81 days. The initial conditions are chosen to fall on two zonal lines

y = constant on opposite sides of the zonal jet. It is seen that after 81 days each side of

the jet is well stirred, as indicated by what appears to be random distributions of dots

on each side of the jet, but there is no transport across a wavy boundary near the core of

the jet. The cause of this behavior is a thin band of KAM invariant tori near the jet core

that survive in the perturbed system and form a meridional transport barrier. This thin

band of KAM invariant tori that separate the polar from the midlatitude region in our

idealized system undulates in a quasiperiodic fashion in time; this is the “quasiperiodic

dance” referred to by Jorba and Simo. Further support for this interpretation of Fig. 5

is provided by the results shown in Fig. 6. In that ﬁgure, for the same model system,

21

Fig. 5.

Fig. 6.

ﬁnite time Lyapunov exponents are shown as a function of initial condition for a set

of air parcel trajectories that spans the zonal jet. This ﬁgure shows that the region

in the immediate vicinity of the jet core is characterized by small Lyapunov exponent

estimates. This behavior is consistent with the interpretation that there is a narrow

band of surviving tori (on which motion is nonchaotic) in this region.

The qualitative features of Figs. 5 and 6 are consistent with available observational

evidence. Consistent with Fig. 5 are satellite-based measurements of ozone distributions

in the austral spring; see, e.g., Bowman and Mangus (1993) or the NASA/TOMS web

site (http://jwocky.gsfc.nasa.gov/eptoms/ep v8.html). These observations consistently

reveal a sharp boundary between low ozone concentration air inside the stratospheric

polar vortex and high ozone concentration air outside the polar vortex. Aircraft-based

measurements (see, e.g., Starr and Vedder 1989) reveal an even sharper boundary

between these regions than is suggested by satellite-based measurements; this is not

surprising given that the satellite measurements are integral measurements through the

entire atmosphere. Our Fig. 6, which indicates that the perimeter of the polar vortex

is a narrow nonchaotic barrier that separates two predominantly chaotic regions, is

consistent with Fig. 8 in Koh and Legras (2002), Fig. 2 in Pierce and Fairlie (1993) and

the observation by Chen (1994) that imbedded in the narrow barrier between the inside

and outside of the vortex is a potential vorticity contour that grows at a locally minimal

rate.

Figures 5 and 6 suggest that the most robust of the tori of the original system

are those in the vicinity of the core of the jet where ω′(I) = 0. This observation is

not surprising as it is consistent with the discussion in the previous section relating to

resonance widths. But the observation does serve to identify a weakness in our argument,

however, inasmuch as the Jorba–Simo proof of the KAM theorem for quasiperiodic

systems makes use of the simplest (Kolmogorov) nondegeneracy condition ω′(I)

= 0.

Thus the Jorba–Simo form of the KAM theorem does not address the stability of tori

6
22

near the jet core, i.e., those that are apparently the most stable. (One might argue that

the theorem holds for tori that are arbitrarily close to that for which ω′(I) = 0, but this

is not entirely satisfactory in our view given our focus on the jet core.) What is needed

to rigorously complete our argument is a proof of the KAM theorem for quasiperiodic

systems (16) that makes use of a Russmann-like nondegeneracy condition rather than

the Kolmogorov condition. So far as we are aware, such a proof has not been published

to date. Our numerical simulations, including but not limited to Figs. 5 and 6, strongly

suggest that the theorem holds for quasiperiodic systems (16) for which the background

ω′(I) has an isolated zero.

We turn our attention now to justifying the claim, made above without proof, that

for quasiperiodic systems (16) KAM tori provide a barrier to transport. Recall that

for periodic systems (14) this property was established by noting that each KAM torus

is a 2-dimensional surface in the 3-dimensional space (x, y, t mod 2π/σ) that divides

the 3-d space into nonintersecting “inside” and “outside” regions. An extension of the

same argument applies to the quasiperiodic problem. To see this, note ﬁrst that the

nonautonomous 1 degree-of-freedom system described by equations (1) and (16) can be

written as an equivalent autonomous N + 1 degree-of-freedom system,

dqi
dτ

=

∂H
∂pi

,

dpi
dτ

=

∂H
∂qi

,

−

i = 1, 2, . . . , N + 1

(18)

where qi = σit, pi =

ψ/σi, i = 1, 2, . . . , N, and qN +1 = y, pN +1 = x, with

−

H(p, q) = ψ(pN +1, qN +1; q1, q2, . . . , qN ) +

σipi.

(19)

N

X
i=1

It is straightforward to verify that (18) and (19) reduce to dt/dτ = 1, equations (1)

and dψ/dt = ∂ψ/∂t. An important property of the transformed system (18, 19) is

that each trajectory is constrained by the presence of N integrals (sometimes called

constants of the motion), i.e., N functions fi(p, q), i = 1, 2, . . . , N for which dfi/dτ = 0.

These integrals are H and fi = qi/σi −

qN /σN , i = 1, 2, . . . , N

1. If one additional

−

23

independent integral can be found, the system (18, 19) can be solved by quadratures

and is said to be integrable. (This should come as no surprise because the original

system (1, 16) also lacks only one integral to render it integrable.) For our purposes,

the principal signiﬁcance of the N integrals is that, because of their presence, each

trajectory in the 2(N + 1)-dimensional phase space, lies on a surface of dimension

2(N + 1)

N = N + 2. In a near-integrable system of this type in which both KAM

−

tori and chaotic trajectories are present, the tori have dimension equal to the number

of degrees of freedom, N + 1. In the N + 2-dimensional space that are ﬁlled by chaotic

trajectories, the N + 1-dimensional KAM tori serve as impenetrable transport barriers.

(The signiﬁcance of these numbers is that the dimension of the KAM tori is one less

than the dimension of the space that the chaotic trajectories ﬁll. Note, for example,

that in (x, y, z) the 1-d circle x2 + y2 = 1, z = 0 divides the 2-d z = 0 plane into

nonintersecting inside and outside regions, but the same 1-d circle does not divide the

3-d (x, y, z) volume into nonintersecting inside and outside regions.)

The argument just given shows that in the system described by (18) and (19)

Arnold diﬀusion does not occur. Loosely speaking, this is the process which allows

chaotic trajectories to bypass KAM invariant tori. This process occurs in near-integrable

autonomous systems with N

3 degrees of freedom which, under perturbation, are

≥

constrained by only one integral H. For such systems phase space has dimension 2N,

chaotic trajectories lie on surfaces of dimension 2N

1, while KAM invariant tori have

−

dimension N; for N

3 these tori do not serve as impenetrable barriers to the chaotic

≥

trajectories. The cause of the absence of Arnold diﬀusion in the system described

by (18) and (19) is the integrals in addition to H that constrain the motion of all

trajectories.

In this section we have argued that, with some minor modiﬁcations, the conclusions

of the previous section carry over to a multiperiodic perturbation. Unlike the results

of the previous section, however, the multiperiodic argument lacks mathematical

24

rigor in that, to date, no proof of a KAM theorem for quasiperiodically perturbed

Russmann-nondegenerate Hamiltonians has been published. Numerical simulations

provide strong evidence that such a result holds. With this in mind, we state with some

conﬁdence that the qualitative features that were described in the previous section – the

robust nature of nonchaotic trajectories near the jet core that serve to isolate chaotic

trajectories on opposite sides of the jet – are expected to be seen whether there are 2 or

20 Rossby waves superimposed on the background zonal jet.

5. Summary and discussion

In this paper we have argued, using several nontrivial extensions of the basic KAM

theorem, that, under commonly encountered conditions, the zonal jet at the perimeter

of the stratospheric polar vortex provides a robust barrier to the meridional transport

of passive tracers. In the model employed, the perturbation to the background steady

zonal jet was assumed to consist of a sum of travelling Rossby waves. The transport

barrier is comprised of a typically narrow band of nonchaotic trajectories, each lying on

a KAM invariant torus which is labelled by I, that survive in the perturbed system.

These tori tend to be the most resistant to break-up under perturbation because they

are close to the unperturbed streamline near the jet core for which ω′(I) = 0 and

because resonance widths ∆ω are approximately proportional to

ω′(I)

1/2. The required

|

|

extensions to the basic KAM theorem that we have made use of to arrive at this

conclusion are: 1) applicability of the theorem to multiperiodic systems, including the

absence of Arnold diﬀusion in such systems; and 2) applicability of the theorem when

the usual (Kolmogorov) nondegeneracy condition ω′(I) = 0 is violated. Our argument

falls short of complete mathematical rigor because, to our knowledge, published proofs of

the KAM theorem for quasiperiodically perturbed systems make use of the Kolmogorov

nondegeneracy condition, rather than the Russmann condition, as required for our

purposes. (Note, however, that numerical simulations strongly suggest that the theorem

25

is satisﬁed for Russmann-nondegenerate streamfunctions subject to quasiperiodic

perturbations, indicating that our argument is ﬁrmly, if not rigorously, grounded.) Also,

it should be emphasized that even rigorous applicability of a form of the theorem to

trajectories in the vicinity of the jet core will not guarantee that for all perturbations

the corresponding tori will survive and provide a barrier to meridional transport. KAM

invariant tori may not survive in the perturbed system for some combination of the

following reasons: (1) the phase speed of one of the more energetic Rossby waves is close

to the zonal velocity at the jet core; (2) the perturbation excites a low-order resonance

on one of the tori in close proximity to that for which ω′(I) = 0; or (3) the amplitude

of the perturbation is too large. In spite of these caveats, our simulations suggest that,

under conditions similar to those found in the austral winter and spring, the transport

barrier near the core of the zonal jet at the perimeter of the polar vortex is very robust.

Our KAM-theory-based explanation of the mechanism by which the stratospheric

polar vortex serves as a barrier to meridional transport of passive tracers (such as

ozone-depleted air within the vortex) diﬀers from the potential vorticity barrier argument

introduced originally by McIntyre (1989, see also Juckes and McIntyre 1987). According

to that argument, on a given isentropic surface potential vorticity (hereafter PV) is

nearly constant following individual air parcels and the PV distribution associated

with the background zonal jet is characterized by nearly uniform distributions on each

side of the jet separated by a region near the core of the jet within which the PV

gradient is strong. If the perturbation to the background PV is suﬃciently weak that

the background meridional PV structure is largely intact in the perturbed system, then

PV conservation leads to the expectation that the PV gradient maximum near the jet

core should serve to inhibit meridional transport, i.e., that the PV gradient maximum

serves as a “PV-barrier.”

The PV-barrier argument has several weaknesses. First, there is no reason to expect

that, in general, the vorticity distribution associated with a zonal jet is characterized

26

by a meridional gradient with a prominent maximum near the jet core. The meridional

gradient of the background relative vorticity is the second derivative of u0(y). It is easy

to construct examples of jet-like zonal velocity proﬁles whose second derivative does

not have a local maximum near the jet core – a quadratic, for example. Second, even

when u′′

0(y) does have a peak near the jet core, the PV-barrier argument holds only for

a very weak perturbation. Let U and L denote characteristic velocity and length scales

with the subscripts 0 and 1 used to denote background and perturbation, respectively.

The ratio of the magnitude of the relative vorticity of the perturbation to that in the

background is

ζ1/ζ0

= O((L0/L1)(U1/U0)). Under typical ozone-trapping conditions

|

|

in the stratosphere this ratio is not small owing to the fact that L0/L1 is greater than

unity. Under typical trapping conditions ζ1/ζ0 is order unity. Under such conditions the

relative vorticity structure of the background ﬂow is not expected to strongly constrain

the perturbed system. Third, even when the background zonal jet is characterized by a

relative vorticity distribution with a maximum meridional gradient near the jet core and

the perturbation is very weak, this argument suggests that the transport barrier should

be broad, diﬀuse and stationary (centered at the latitude of the maximum background

vorticity gradient), as opposed to being a narrow, wobbly nearly impermeable barrier.

Observational evidence supports the latter view. And fourth, the PV-barrier argument

provides no insight into why the transport barrier breaks down (as is readily conﬁrmed

in simulations) when one of the dominant Rossby wave phase speeds is comparable to

the jet core velocity, or when a low order resonance is excited by one of the dominant

Rossby waves. In contrast, our KAM-theory-based argument: (1) is robust inasmuch as

it requires only that u0(y) has a local maximum, but assumes nothing about u′′

0(y); (2)

holds when

ζ1/ζ0

is O(1) (the KAM theorem assumes that the perturbation is small

|

|

but numerical simulations reveal that provided no low-order resonances are excited,

KAM tori survive even when (U1/U0) is O(1)); (3) naturally explains the occurrence

of a narrow impermeable barrier that wobbles in the vicinity of the jet core, and the

27

observation that within this narrow region neighboring trajectories diverge from one

another only very slowly; and (4) naturally accounts for the breakdown of the barrier

when one of the dominant Rossby wave phase speeds is comparable to the jet core

velocity, or when a low order resonance is excited by one of the dominant Rossby waves.

The foregoing arguments should not be interpreted as an assertion that the

PV-barrier argument is incorrect. Rather, we are arguing that a PV-barrier is not a

necessary condition for trapping of air inside the polar vortex, and that a barrier of

this type at the perimeter of the polar vortex is probably also not typical. The latter

point is supported by the analysis, based on analyzed winds, of Paparella et al. (1997).

Figure 2 in that paper shows that the vortex edge is often not associated with a strong

meridional PV gradient, but that the vortex edge does appear to be reliably identiﬁed

as a maximum of kinetic energy. This behavior is in good qualitative agreement with

our arguments (recall our Fig. 3) in that in the background environment the trajectory

for which ω′(I) = 0 is close to that for which the kinetic energy is maximum.

The transport barrier at the perimeter of the stratospheric polar vortex that we

have identiﬁed as being due to a thin band of KAM invariant tori can be described as

a Lagrangian coherent structure. The subject of Lagrangian coherent structures has

been extensively studied in recent years (see, e.g., Haller 2000, 2001; Haller and Yuan

2000, 2002; Malhotra and Wiggins 1998; Shadden et al. 2005). In most applications the

Lagrangian coherent structures of interest are the stable and/or unstable manifolds of

perturbed hyperbolic points. Unlike the KAM tori in our study, which constitute global

barriers for transport, such invariant manifolds are barriers for transport only in a local

sense and for suﬃciently short time. Also, while KAM tori are associated with regular

motion, the stable and unstable manifolds are generically associated with chaotic motion

in the vicinity of their points of intersections (homoclinic points).

A natural and important extension of the mostly theoretical work reported here is

to use analyzed winds (following, e.g., Bowman 1993, 1996, or Koh and Legras 2002)

28

to more thoroughly test the predictions made here versus those of the PV-barrier

paradigm. An empirical study of this type must employ spherical coordinates, i.e.,

ψ = ψ(λ, ϕ, t) on a selected isentropic surface where λ and ϕ are longitude and latitude,

respectively. Questions that could be addressed with such a model include the following.

Is our hypothesized rest frame decomposition of ψ, ψ(λ, ϕ, t) = ψ0(ϕ) + ψ1(λ, ϕ, t) where

ψ1 is a superposition of zonally propagating Rossby waves, a good approximation? Are

vorticity distributions consistent with the PV-barrier paradigm? Is the transport barrier

a thin wobbly region on which Lagrangian motion is nonchaotic, as we predict? Is

the transport barrier associated with a maximum PV gradient, a maximum of kinetic

energy, or something else? Is the breakup of the transport barrier on a given isentropic

surface caused by either the phase speed of one of the dominant Rossby waves being

comparable to the wind speed at the jet core or the excitation of a low-order resonance,

as we have suggested?

grant CMG0417425.

Acknowledgment. This work was supported by the U.S. National Science Foundation,

29

Abdullaev, S. S., 1993: Chaos and the Dynamics of Rays in Waveguide Media. vol. 6, Gordon

references

Arnold, V. I., 1963: Proof of a theorem of A. N. Kolmogorov on the persistence of

quasi-periodic motions under small perturbations of the Hamiltonian. Russ. Math.

and Breach.

Surveys, 18, 9–36.

Arnold, V. I., V. V. Kozlov, and A. I. Neistadt, 1986: Mathematical Aspects of Classical and

Celestial Mechanics. vol. 3 of Encyclopedia of Mathematical Sciencies, Springer.

Binson, J., and B. Legras, 2002: Relation between kinematic boundaries, stirring, and barriers

for the Antartic polar vortex. J. Atmos. Sci., 59, 1,198–1,212.

Bowman, K. P., 1993: Large-scale isentropic mixing properties of the antartic polar vortex

from analysed winds. J. Geophys. Res., 98, 23,013–23,027.

Bowman, K. P., 1996: Rossby wave phase speeds and mixing barriers in the stratosphere. part

I: Observations. J. Atmos. Sci., 53, 905–916.

Bowman, K. P., and N. J. Mangus, 1993: Observations of deformation and mixing of the total

ozone ﬁeld in the antartic polar vortex. J. Atmos. Sci., 50, 2915–2921.

Bruno, A. D., 1992: On conditions for nondegeneracy in Kolmogorov’s theorem. Soviet Math.

Chen, P., 1994: The permeability of the antartic vortex edge. J. Geophys. Res., 99,

Chirikov, B. V., 1979: A universal instability of many-dimensional oscillator systems. Phys.

Dokl., 45, 221–225.

20,563–20,571.

Rep., 52, 265–379.

Chirikov, B. V., and G. M. Zaslavsky, 1972: Stochastic instability of nonlinear oscillations.

Sov. Phys. Usp., 14, 549–672.

Dahlberg, S. P., and K. P. Bowman, 1994: Climatology of large-scale isentropic mixing in the

Artic winter stratosphere from analysed winds. J. Geophys. Res., 99, 20,585–20,599.

30

del-Castillo-Negrete, D., and P. J. Morrison, 1993: Chaotic transport by Rossby waves in

shear ﬂow. Phys. Fluids A, 5(4), 948–965.

Delshams, A., and R. de la Llave, 2000: KAM theory and a partial justiﬁcation of Greene’s

criterion for non-twist maps. SIAM J. Math. Anal., 31, 1,235–1,269.

Dullin, H. R., and J. D. Meiss, 2003: Twist singularities for symplectic maps. Chaos, 13,

Gaidashev, D., and H. Koch, 2004: Renormalization and shearless invariant tori: numerical

1–16.

results. Nonlin., 17, 1713–1722.

Chaos, 10, 99–108.

Haller, G., 2000: Finding ﬁnite-time invariant manifolds in two-dimensional velocity ﬁelds.

Haller, G., 2001: Lagrangian structures and the rate of starin in a partition of two-dimensional

turbulence. Phys. Fluids, 13, 3,365–3,385.

Haller, G., and G. Yuan, 2000: Lagrangian coherent structures and mixing in two-dimensional

Haller, G., and G. Yuan, 2002: Lagrangian coherent structures from approximate velocity

turbulence. Physica D , 147, 352–370.

data. Physics Fluid, 14, 1851–1861.

Holton, J. R., P. R. Haynes, M. E. McIntyre, A. R. Douglas, R. B. Rood, and L. Pﬁster, 1995:

Stratosphere-troposphere exchange. Rev. Geophys., 33, 403–439.

Jorba, ´A., and C. Sim´o, 1996: On quasi-periodic perturbations of elliptic equilibrium points.

SIAM J. Math. Anal., 27, 1,704–1,737.

Juckes, N. M., and M. E. McIntyre, 1987: A high-resolution one-layer model of breaking

planetary waves in the stratosphere. Nature, 328, 590–596.

Koh, T. Y., and B. Legras, 2002: Hyperbolic lines and the stratospheric polar vortex. Chaos,

12, 328–394.

Koh, T. Y., and R. A. Plumb, 2000: Lobe dynamics applied to barotropic rossby wave

breaking. Physics Fluids, 12, 1518–1528.

31

Kolmogorov, A. N., 1954: On the persistence of conditionally periodic motions under as

small change of the Hamilton function. Dokl. Akad. Nauk SSSR, 98, 525–530. Engl.

transl. in G. Casati and J. Ford (eds), Stochastic Behavior in Classical and Quantum

Hamiltonian Systems, Lect. Notes Physics 93: 51–56 (1979).

Kovalyov, S., 2000: Phase space structure and anomalous diﬀusion in a rotational ﬂuid

Kuo, H., 1949: Dynamic instability of two-dimensional non-divergent ﬂow in a barotropic

experiment. Chaos, 10, 153–165.

atmosphere. J. Meteor., 6, 105–122.

Lefevre, F., G. P. Brasseur, I. Folkins, A. K. Smith, and P. Simon, 1994: Chemestry of the

1991–1992 stratospheric winter – 3-dimensional model simulations. J. Geophys. Res.,

Lichtenberg, A. G., and M. A. Lieberman, 1983: Regular and Stochastic Motion. Springer.

Lipps, F., 1962: The barotropic stability of the mean winds in the atmosphere. J. Fluid Mech.,

99, 8183–8195.

12, 397–407.

Malhotra, N., and S. Wiggins, 1998: Geometric structures, lobe dynamics, and Lagrangian

transport in ﬂows with aperiodic time-dependence, with applications to Rossby wave

ﬂow. J. Nonlinear Sci., 8, 401–456.

McIntyre, M. E., 1989: On the antartic ozono hole. J. Atmos. Terr. Phys., 51, 29–43.

Morozov, A., 2002: Degenerate resonances in hamiltonian systems with 3/2 degrees of

freedom. Chaos, 12, 539–548.

Ngan, K., and T. G. Shepherd, 1999a: A closer look at chaotic advection in the stratosphere.

Part I: Geometric structure. J. Atmos. Sci., 56, 4,134–4,152.

Ngan, K., and T. G. Shepherd, 1999b: A closer look at chaotic advection in the stratosphere.

Part II: Statistical diagnostics. J. Atmos. Sci., 56, 4,153–4,166.

Paparella, F., A. Babiano, C. Basdevant, A. Provenzale, and P. Tanga, 1997: A lagrangian

study of the antartic polar vortex. J. Geophys. Res., 102, 6765–6773.

32

Pierce, R. B., and T. D. Fairlie, 1993: Chaotic advection in the stratosphere: Implications for

the dispersal of chemically perturbed air from the polar vortex. J. Geophys. Res., 98,

Poschel, J., 2001: A lecture on the classical KAM theorem. Proc. Symp. Pure Math., 69,

18,589–18,595.

707–732.

Russmann, H., 1989: Non-degeneracy in the perturbation theory of integrable dynamical

systems. Number Theory and Dynamical Systems, M. M. Dodson and J. A. G. Vickers,

Eds., London Math. Soc. Lect. Notes Series, Cambridge University, pp. 5–18.

Sevryuk, M. B., 1995: KAM-stable Hamiltonians. J. Dyn. Cont. Sys., 1, 351–366.

Sevryuk, M. B., 2006: Partial preservation of frequencies in KAM theory. Nonlin., 19,

1099–1140.

Shadden, S. C., F. Lekien, and J. E. Marsden, 2005: Deﬁnition and porperties of Lagrangian

coherent structures from ﬁnite-time Lyapunov exponents in two-dimensional aperidic

Sim´o, C., 1998: Invariant curves of analytic perturbed nontwist area preserving maps. Regul.

ﬂows. Physica D , 212, 271–304.

Chaotic Dyn., 3(3), 180–195.

Starr, W. L., and J. F. Vedder, 1989: Measurements of ozono in the antartic atmosphere

during august and september 1987. J. Geophys. Res., 94, 11,449–11,463.

Webster, C. R., et al., 1993: Chlorine chemistry on polar stratospheric cloud particles in the

antartic winter. Science, 261, 1130–1134.

Printed February 2, 2008.

33

Figure Captions

Fig. 1. For the streamfunction ψ0(y) =
U0L tanh(y/L): (a) selected level surfaces of ψ0;
(b) u0(y); (c) ω(I); (d) T (I); (e) ω′(I). In this and subsequent ﬁgures, d denotes days and

−

distance is measured in Mm; 1 Mm = 1000 km.

Fig. 2. Bifurcation diagram in the (A, c/U0) parameter space corresponding to the

streamfunction ψ(x, y) = cy

U0L tanh(y/L) + AU0Lsech2(y/L) cos(kx). There are three

−

topologically distinct regions and two critical curves separating these regions. Selected level

surfaces of ψ(x, y) in each of the three regions and on the two critical curves are shown. In the

level surface plots zonal wavenumber three is assumed so k = k3, and 0

k3x

6π.

≤

≤

Fig. 3. For the streamfunction ψ(x, y) = c3y

U0L tanh(y/L) + A3U0Lsech2(y/L) cos(k3x)

−

u
with A3 = 0.3, c3/U0 = 0.461: (a) selected level surfaces of ψ(x, y); (b)
(y) at k3x = π/2;
|
|
(c) ω(I); (d) T (I); and (e) ω′(I). In (b), (c), (d) and (e) only values of y and I corresponding

to the shaded region near the jet core in (a) are shown.

Fig. 4. Poincare sections corresponding to the system described by equations (1) and (13)

with A3 = 0.3 for three values of A2: 0 (upper plot), 0.1 (middle plot), and 0.7 (lower plot).

Note the robustness of the tori in the vicinity of the jet core.

Fig. 5. Time evolution of two sets of 25000 points that at t = 0 fall on zonal lines on opposite

sides of the core of the zonal jet in the system described by equations (1) and (17) with

A3 = 0.3, A2 = 0.4, A1 = 0.075. Note that, although trajectories are predominantly chaotic,

there is no transport across an undulating barrier in the vicinity of the jet core.

Fig. 6. Finite-time Lyapunov exponent estimates as a function of initial position for the

system described by equations (1) and (17) with A3 = 0.3, A2 = 0.4, A1 = 0.075. The

integration time for the estimates shown is 86.5 days. Note that the region in the vicinity of

the jet core is characterized by small Lyapunov exponent estimates.

34

Figures

35

Fig. 1. For the streamfunction ψ0(y) =

U0L tanh(y/L): (a) selected level surfaces of

ψ0; (b) u0(y); (c) ω(I); (d) T (I); (e) ω′(I). In this and subsequent ﬁgures, d denotes

−

days and distance is measured in Mm; 1 Mm = 1000 km.

36

Fig. 2. Bifurcation diagram in the (A, c/U0) parameter space corresponding to the

streamfunction ψ(x, y) = cy

U0L tanh(y/L)+AU0Lsech2(y/L) cos(kx). There are three

−

topologically distinct regions and two critical curves separating these regions. Selected

level surfaces of ψ(x, y) in each of the three regions and on the two critical curves are

shown.

In the level surface plots zonal wavenumber three is assumed so k = k3, and

0

k3x

6π.

≤

≤

37

Fig.

3.

For

the

streamfunction ψ(x, y)

=

c3y

U0L tanh(y/L) +

A3U0Lsech2(y/L) cos(k3x) with A3 = 0.3, c3/U0 = 0.461:

(a) selected level sur-

faces of ψ(x, y); (b)

(y) at k3x = π/2; (c) ω(I); d) T (I); and (e) ω′(I). In (b), (c), (d)

u
|

|

and (e) only values of y and I corresponding to the shaded region near the jet core in

−

(a) are shown.

38

Fig. 4. Poincare sections corresponding to the system described by equations (1) and

(13) with A3 = 0.3 for three values of A2: 0 (upper plot), 0.1 (middle plot), and 0.7

(lower plot). Note the robustness of the tori in the vicinity of the jet core.

39

Fig. 5. Time evolution of two sets of 25000 points that at t = 0 fall on zonal lines

on opposite sides of the core of the zonal jet in the system described by equations (1)

and (17) with A3 = 0.3, A2 = 0.4, A1 = 0.075. Note that, although trajectories are

predominantly chaotic, there is no transport across an undulating barrier in the vicinity

of the jet core.

40

Fig. 6. Finite-time Lyapunov exponent estimates as a function of initial position for

the system described by equations (1) and (17) with A3 = 0.3, A2 = 0.4, A1 = 0.075.

The integration time for the estimates shown is 86.5 days. Note that the region in the

vicinity of the jet core is characterized by small Lyapunov exponent estimates.

