6
0
0
2
 
g
u
A
 
7
 
 
]
h
p
-
o
a
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
7
7
0
8
0
6
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

GEOPHYSICAL RESEARCH LETTERS, VOL. X, XXXX, DOI:10.1029/2006XXXXXXXXX, 2006

Persistent Transport Barrier on the West Florida Shelf
M. J. Olascoaga,1 I. I. Rypina,1 M. G. Brown,1 F. J. Beron-Vera,1 H. Ko¸cak,2
L. E. Brand,1 G. R. Halliwell1 and L. K. Shay1

Analysis of drifter trajectories in the Gulf of Mexico has
revealed the existence of a region on the southern portion of
the West Florida Shelf (WFS) that is not visited by drifters
that are released outside of the region. This so-called “for-
bidden zone” (FZ) suggests the existence of a persistent
cross-shelf transport barrier on the southern portion of the
WFS. In this letter a year-long record of surface currents
produced by a Hybrid-Coordinate Ocean Model simulation
of the WFS is used to identify Lagrangian coherent struc-
tures (LCSs), which reveal the presence of a robust and
persistent cross-shelf transport barrier in approximately the
same location as the boundary of the FZ. The location of
the cross-shelf transport barrier undergoes a seasonal oscil-
lation, being closer to the coast in the summer than in the
winter. A month-long record of surface currents inferred
from high-frequency (HF) radar measurements in a roughly
60 km × 80 km region on the WFS oﬀ Tampa Bay is also
used to identify LCSs, which reveal the presence of robust
transient transport barriers. While the HF-radar-derived
transport barriers cannot be unambiguously linked to the
boundary of the FZ, this analysis does demonstrate the fea-
sibility of monitoring transport barriers on the WFS using a
HF-radar-based measurement system. The implications of
a persistent cross-shelf transport barrier on the WFS for the
development of harmful algal blooms on the shoreward side
of the barrier are considered.

1. Introduction

Yang et al. [1999] presents the results of the analysis of
trajectories of satellite-tracked drifters released during the
period February 1996 through February 1997 on the conti-
nental shelf in the northeastern portion of the Gulf of Mex-
ico (GoM). Inspection of the drifter trajectories depicted in
Figure 2 of that paper reveals the presence of a trajectory-
free triangular-shaped region on the southern portion of the
West Florida Shelf (WFS), which has been referred to by
those authors as a “forbidden zone” (FZ). Although little
can be inferred about the spatio-temporal variability of the
FZ from the aforementioned ﬁgure, the FZ almost certainly
wobbles with a complicated spatio-temporal structure. This
expectation ﬁnds some support in the seasonal analysis of

1Rosenstiel School of Marine and Atmospheric Science,

University of Miami, Miami, Florida, USA.

2Departments of Computer Science and Mathematics,

University of Miami, Miami, Florida, USA.

Copyright 2006 by the American Geophysical Union.
0094-8276/14/2006XXXXXXXXX$5.00

drifter trajectories presented by Morey et al. [2003], which
also included trajectories of drifters released on the conti-
nental shelf in the northwestern portion of the GoM.

The presence of the FZ suggests the existence of a seem-
ingly robust barrier on the WFS that inhibits the transport
across the shelf. This cross-shelf transport barrier not only
can have implications for pollutant dispersal, but may also
be consequential for harmful algal blooms on the shoreward
side of the barrier.

In this letter we employ methods from dynamical systems
theory to attain a twofold goal. First, we seek to demon-
strate the robustness of the suggested cross-shelf transport
barrier on the WFS in the inspection of drifter trajectories
through the analysis of simulated surface currents. Second,
we seek to demonstrate the feasibility of monitoring trans-
port barriers on the WFS using high-frequency (HF) radar
measurements.

2. Lagrangian Coherent Structures (LCSs)

Theoretical work on dynamical systems [e.g., Haller ,
2000; Haller and Yuan, 2000; Haller , 2001a, b, 2002; Shad-
den et al., 2005] has characterized transport barriers in un-
steady two-dimensional incompressible ﬂows as Lagrangian
coherent structures (LCSs). The theory behind LCSs will
not be discussed in this letter. We note, however, that the
LCSs of interest correspond to the stable and/or unstable
invariant manifolds of hyperbolic points.

An invariant manifold can be understood as a material
curve of ﬂuid, i.e., composed always of the same ﬂuid par-
ticles. Associated with a hyperbolic point in a steady ﬂow
there are two invariant manifolds, one stable and another
one unstable. Along the stable (unstable) manifold, a ﬂuid
particle asymptotically approaches the hyperbolic point in
forward (backward) time. Initially nearby ﬂuid particle tra-
jectories ﬂanking a stable (unstable) manifold repel (attract)
from each other at an exponential rate. These manifolds
therefore constitute separatrices that divide the space into
regions with dynamically distinct characteristics. Further-
more, being material curves these separatrices cannot be
traversed by ﬂuid particles, i.e., they constitute true trans-
port barriers. In an unsteady ﬂow there are also hyperbolic
points with associated stable and unstable manifolds. Un-
like the steady case, these hyperbolic points are not still but
rather undergo motion, which is typically aperiodic in pre-
dominantly turbulent ocean ﬂows. As in the steady case, the
associated manifolds also constitute separatrices, and hence
transport barriers, albeit in a spatially local sense and for
suﬃciently short time. The latter is seen in that generically
there is chaotic motion in the vicinity of the points where
the stable and unstable manifolds intersect one another after

1

X - 2

OLASCOAGA ET AL.: PERSISTENT TRANSPORT BARRIER ON THE WEST FLORIDA SHELF

Figure 1. Sequence of snapshots of FTLE ﬁeld (1) computed backwards in time using surface currents generated by a
HYCOM simulation of the WFS for year 2004. Maximizing ridges of FTLE ﬁeld deﬁne attracting LCSs, which approximate
unstable manifolds and thus constitute transport barriers. Note the presence of a triangular-shaped area on the southern
portion of the WFS with small FTLEs bounded by the western Florida coast on the east, the lower Florida keys on the
south, and large maximizing ridges of FTLE ﬁeld on the west. The latter constitute a barrier for cross-shelf transport,
which is seen to undergo a seasonal oscillation approximately about the western boundary of the FZ.

successively stretching and folding. These intersections lead
to the formation of regions with a highly intricate tangle-like
In these regions trajectories of initially nearby
structure.
ﬂuid particles rapidly diverge and ﬂuid particles from other
regions are injected in between, which constitutes a very
eﬀective mechanism for mixing.

Identiﬁcation of LCSs, which is impossible from naked-
eye inspection of snapshots of simulated or measured veloc-
ity ﬁelds and at most very diﬃcult from the inspection of
individual ﬂuid particle trajectories, is critically important
for understanding transport and mixing of tracers in the
ocean. The computation of ﬁnite-time Lyapunov exponents
(FTLEs) provides practical means for identifying repelling
and attracting LCSs that approximate stable and unstable
manifolds, respectively. The FTLE is the ﬁnite-time aver-
age of the maximum expansion or contraction rate for pairs
of passively advected ﬂuid particles. More speciﬁcally, the
FTLE is deﬁned as

τ
t (x) :=

σ

t+τ
ln k∂xϕ
t

(x)k,

(1)

1
|τ |

where k k denotes the L2 norm and ϕt+τ
: x(t) 7→ x(t + τ )
is the ﬂow map that takes ﬂuid particles from their initial
location at time t to their location at time t + τ. The ﬂow

t

map ϕt+τ
regarded as a dynamical system obeying

t

is obtained by solving the ﬂuid particle motion

˙x = u(x, t),

(2)

where the overdot stands for time diﬀerentiation and u(x, t)
is a prescribed velocity ﬁeld. Repelling and attracting LCSs
are then deﬁned [Haller , 2002; Shadden et al., 2005] as max-
imizing ridges of FTLE ﬁeld computed forward (τ > 0) and
backward (τ < 0) in time, respectively.

We remark that while LCSs are fundamentally a La-
grangian concept, the algorithm used to identify such struc-
tures requires a high resolution Eulerian description of the
ﬂow. Recently, Lekien et al. [2005] has successfully applied
this theory to identify transport barriers using HF-radar-
derived surface velocity in the east Florida coast.

3. LCSs Derived from Simulated Currents

Numerical model output provides a ﬂow description
u(x, t) that is suitable for use to identify LCSs. Also, it
has the advantage of allowing for a spatio-temporal coverage
that is impossible to attain with existing observational sys-
tems. Here we consider a year-long record of surface currents

OLASCOAGA ET AL.: PERSISTENT TRANSPORT BARRIER ON THE WEST FLORIDA SHELF

X - 3

produced by a Hybrid-Coordinate Ocean Model (HYCOM)
simulation along the WFS for year 2004.

The year-long record of simulated currents consists of
daily surface velocity ﬁelds extracted in the WFS domain
◦
-resolution, free-running HYCOM simulation
from a 0.04
◦
-resolution At-
itself nested within a 0.08
of the GoM,
lantic basin data assimilative nowcast, which was gener-
ated at the Naval Research Laboratory as part of a Na-
tional Oceanographic Partnership Program in support of the
Global Ocean Data Assimilation Experiment [Chassignet
et al., 2006b, a]. The Atlantic nowcast was forced with re-
alistic high-frequency forcing obtained from the U. S. Navy
NOGAPS operational atmospheric model. It assimilated sea
surface temperature and anomalous sea surface height from
satellite altimetry with downward projection of anomalous
temperature and salinity proﬁles. The nested GoM model
was free-running and driven by the same high-frequency at-
mospheric forcing. The topography used in both models
was derived from the ETOPO5 dataset, with the coastline
in the GoM model following the 2 m isobath. Both models
included river runoﬀ.

Figure 1 shows snapshots of FTLE ﬁeld, which were com-
puted using the software package MANGEN, a dynami-
cal systems toolkit designed by F. Lekien that is available
at http://www.lekien.com/∼francois/software/mangen. At
each time t the algorithm coded in MANGEN performs
the following tasks. First, system (2) is integrated using
a fourth-order Runge–Kutta–Fehlberg method for a grid of
particles at time t to get their positions at time t + τ , which
are the values of the ﬂow map at each point. This requires
interpolating the velocity data, which is carried out employ-
ing a cubic method. Second, the spatial gradient of the ﬂow
map is obtained at each point in the initial grid by central
diﬀerencing with neighboring grid points. Third, the FTLE
is computed at each point in the initial grid by evaluating
(1). The previous three steps are repeated for a range of t
values to produce a time series of FTLE ﬁeld. Here we have
set τ = −60 d so that the maximizing ridges of the FTLE
ﬁelds shown in Figure 1 correspond to attracting LCSs. The
choice τ = −60 d was suggested by the time it takes a typical
ﬂuid particle to leave the WFS domain. Clearly, some par-
ticles will exit the domain before 60 d of integration. In this
case, MANGEN evaluates expression (1) using the position
of each such particles prior exiting the domain. Note that
due to the choice τ = −60 d the time series of computed
FTLE ﬁelds based on our year-long record of simulated cur-
rents can only have a 10-month maximum duration.

The regions of most intense red tonalities in each panel
of Figure 1 roughly indicate maximizing ridges of FTLE
ﬁeld. These regions are seen to form smooth, albeit highly
structured, curves that constitute the desired LCSs or trans-
port barriers. Of particular interest is the triangular-shaped
area on the southern portion of the WFS with small FTLEs
bounded by the western Florida coast on the east, the lower
Florida keys on the south, and large maximizing ridges of
FTLE ﬁeld on the west. The latter constitute a cross-shelf
transport barrier that approximately coincides in position
with the western boundary of the FZ identiﬁed in Yang et al.

[1999]. This is most clearly visible during the period May
through September. The sequence of snapshots of FTLE
ﬁeld in Figure 1 also reveals a seasonal movement of the
cross-shelf transport barrier, being oﬀshore during the win-
ter and closer to the coast during the summer, which is in
agreement with drifter observations [Morey et al., 2003].

4. LCSs Derived from Measured Currents

Figure 2 shows a sequence of snapshots of FTLE ﬁeld
computed using surface velocity inferred from HF radar
measurements taken during September 2003 in an approx-
imately 60 km × 80 km domain on the WFS oﬀ Tampa
Bay.

The HF radar measurements consist of measurements
made with Wellen radars, which mapped coastal ocean sur-
face currents over the above domain with 30-minute inter-
vals [Shay et al., 2006]. The computation of FTLEs was
performed backward in time (τ = −60 h) so that the maxi-
mizing ridges of FTLE ﬁeld in Figure 2 indicate attracting
LCSs, which are analogous to perturbed unstable invariant
manifolds. The numerical computation of the FTLEs was
not carried out using the MANGEN software package. In-
stead, we developed our own MATLAB codes, which, em-
ploying a methodology similar to that outlined in the previ-
ous section, allowed us to more easily handling FTLE com-
putation based on velocity data deﬁned on an irregular and
totally open domain.

The transport barrier character of the attracting LCSs
identiﬁed in the FTLE ﬁelds depicted in Figure 2 is illus-
trated by numerically simulating the evolution of three clus-
ters of ﬂuid particles. One of the clusters (black spot in the
ﬁgure) is initially chosen on top of one LCS, while the other
two clusters (dark-blue and magenta spots in the ﬁgure) are
initially located at one side and the other of the LCS. Look-
ing at the evolution of the clusters in time, we note that
the black cluster remains on top of the LCS and stretches
along it as time progresses. Also note that dark-blue and
magenta clusters remain on two diﬀerent sides, indicating
the absence of ﬂux across the LCS.

We remark that LCSs are identiﬁable in the region cov-
ered by the HF radar system through the whole month of
September 2003. However, because of the limited domain of
the radar footprint and the short deployment time window,
we cannot say with certainty that any of the observed struc-
tures corresponds to the boundary of the FZ. In spite of this
uncertainty, our analysis of the HF radar measurements is
highly encouraging inasmuch as it demonstrates the feasi-
bility of tracking the evolution of the boundary of the FZ in
near real time.

5. Biological Implications

In addition to being an interesting physical feature whose
underlying dynamics deserves further study, the cross-shelf
transport barrier on the WFS also has potentially important
biological implications.

The toxic dinoﬂagellate Karenia brevis has a rather re-
stricted spatial distribution, primarily the GoM [Kusek
et al., 1999]. While K. brevis exists in low concentrations in

X - 4

OLASCOAGA ET AL.: PERSISTENT TRANSPORT BARRIER ON THE WEST FLORIDA SHELF

Figure 2. As in Figure 1 but using HF-radar-derived surface currents in a roughly 60 km × 80 km domain on the WFS oﬀ
Tampa Bay. The black, dark-blue, and magenta spots in each panel indicate clusters of passively advected ﬂuid particles
tracked from their initial location in the upper-left panel. Note how the black spot stretches along one of the identiﬁed
LCSs and the dark-blue and magenta spots ﬂanking this LCS are attracted to the LCS but do not cross it.

vast areas of the GoM, it occasionally forms blooms along
the northern and eastern coasts of the GoM [Wilson and
Ray, 1956; Geesey and Tester , 1993; Tester and Steidinger ,
1997; Dortch et al., 1998; Kusek et al., 1999; Magana et al.,
2003]. The largest and most frequent blooms, however, oc-
cur along the southern portion of the WFS [Steidinger and
Haddad , 1981; Kusek et al., 1999]. Where these occur, there
can be widespread death of ﬁsh, manatees, dolphins, turtles,
and seabirds as a result of the brevetoxins produced by K.
brevis [Bossart et al., 1998; Landsberg and Steidinger , 1998;
Landsberg, 2002; Shumway et al., 2003; Flewelling et al.,
2005]. The brevetoxins also end up in an aerosol, which
aﬀects human respiration [Backer et al., 2003; Kirkpatrick
et al., 2004]. Being slow growing while fast swimming algae
[Chan, 1978; Brand and Guillard , 1981], dinoﬂagellates have
the highest potential for achieving high population densities
as a consequence of biophysical accumulation rather than
actual growth. As a result of expatriate losses, K. brevis
(and other dinoﬂagellates) would be expected to develop
large blooms only in regions where stirring by currents is
Indeed, many dinoﬂagellate blooms tend to occur in
low.
enclosed basins such as estuaries and lagoons, where expa-
triate losses are reduced. However, as mentioned above, K.
brevis often forms large blooms along the open coastline of
the southern portion of the WFS, typically inside the FZ.

We hypothesize that the cross-shelf transport barrier as-
sociated with the FZ provides a mechanism that reduces K.
brevis expatriation. A corollary of this hypothesis is that
this barrier allows the nutrients from land runoﬀ to accu-

mulate near the coastline rather than being swept away by
currents. While we cannot explain why K. brevis often dom-
inates over other species of dinoﬂagellates in the FZ, we can
predict that slow growing dinoﬂagellates will be more preva-
lent within the FZ than outside.

6. Summary

In this letter we have shown that, when analyzed using
dynamical systems methods, a year-long record of surface
currents produced by a regional version of HYCOM reveals
the presence of a cross-shelf transport barrier on the south-
ern portion of the WFS, which is in approximately the same
location as the boundary of the FZ identiﬁed earlier by Yang
et al. [1999] using satellite-tracked drifter trajectories. The
simulated cross-shelf transport barrier was robust, being
present in all seasons while undergoing a seasonal oscilla-
tion. The simulated cross-shelf transport barrier was closer
to shore in the summer months than in the winter months
in agreement with observations [Morey et al., 2003]. HF
radar measurements were analyzed in a similar fashion and
this analysis demonstrated the feasibility of experimentally
monitoring transport barriers on the WFS using a system
that can be operated in near real time.

Acknowledgments. We thank I. Udovydchenkov for useful
discussions. MJO was supported by NSF grant CMG-0417425
and PARADIGM NSF/ONR-NOPP grant N000014-02-1-0370.
IAR, MGB, FJBV, and HK were supported by NSF grant CMG-
0417425. LKS and the WERA HF Radar deployment and anal-
yses were supported by ONR grant N00014-02-1-0972 through
the SEA-COOS program administered by UNC-CH. The NOAA

OLASCOAGA ET AL.: PERSISTENT TRANSPORT BARRIER ON THE WEST FLORIDA SHELF

X - 5

ACT program provided partial travel support for the WERA de-
ployment personnel. We thank T. Cook, B. Haus, J. Martinez,
and S. Guhin in deploying and maintaining the radar along the
WFS.

References

Backer, L. C., et al. (2003), Recreational exposure to aerosolized
brevetoxins during Florida red tide events, Harmful Algae, 2,
19–28.

Bossart, G. D., D. G. Baden, R. Y. Ewing, B. Roberts, and S. D.
Wright (1998), Brevetoxicosis in manatees (Trichechus mana-
tus Latirostris) from the 1996 epizoodic: gross, histopathologic
and immunocytochemical features, Toxicol. Pathol., 26, 276–
282.

Brand, L. E., and R. R. L. Guillard (1981), The eﬀects of con-
tinuous light and light intensity on the reproduction rates of
twenty-two species of marine phytoplankto, J. Exp. Mar. Biol.
Ecol., 50, 119–132.

Chan, A. T. (1978), Comparative physiological study of marine
diatoms and dinoﬂagellates in relation to irradiance and cell
size. I. Growth under continuous light, J. Phycol., 14, 396–402.
Chassignet, E. P., H. E. Hurlburt, O. M. Smedstad, G. R. Hal-
liwell, P. J. Hogan, A. J. Wallcraft, R. Baraille, and R. Bleck
(2006a), The HYCOM (HYbrid Coordinate Ocean Model)
data assimilative system, J. Mar. Sys., in press.

Chassignet, E. P., H. E. Hurlburt, O. M. Smedstad, G. R. Halli-
well, P. J. Hogan, A. J. Wallcraft, and R. Bleck (2006b), Ocean
prediction with the HYbrid Coordinate Ocean Model (HY-
COM), in Ocean Weather Forecasting: An Integrated View of
Oceanography, edited by E. P. Chassignet and J. Verron, pp.
413–436, Springer.

Dortch, Q., C. Moncreiﬀ, W. Mendenhall, M. Parsons, J. Franks,
and K. Hemphill (1998), Spread of Gymnodinium breve into
in Harmful Algae, edited by
the northern Gulf of Mexico,
B. Reguera, J. Blanco, M. L. Fernandez, and T. Wyatt, pp.
143–144, Xunta de Galicia and Intergovernmental Oceano-
graphic Commission of UNESCO.

Flewelling, L. J., et al. (2005), Brevetoxicosis: Red tides and ma-

rine mammal mortalities, Nature, 435, 755–756.

Geesey, M., and P. A. Tester (1993), Gymnodinium breve: ubiqui-
tous in Gulf of Mexico waters?, in Toxic Phytoplankton Blooms
in the Sea, edited by S. T. J. and Y. Shimizu.

Haller, G. (2000), Finding ﬁnite-time invariant manifolds in two-

dimensional velocity ﬁelds, Chaos, 10, 99–108.

Haller, G. (2001a), Distinguished material surfaces and coherent

structures in 3D ﬂuid ﬂows, Physica D, 149, 248–277.

Haller, G. (2001b), Lagrangian structures and the rate of starin
in a partition of two-dimensional turbulence, Phys. Fluids, 13,
3365–3385.

Haller, G. (2002), Lagrangian coherent structures from approxi-

mate velocity data, Physics Fluid, 14, 1851–1861.

Haller, G., and G. Yuan (2000), Lagrangian coherent structures
and mixing in two-dimensional turbulence, Physica D, 147,
352–370.

Kirkpatrick, B., et al. (2004), Literature review of Florida red
tide: Implications for human health eﬀects, Harmful Algae, 3,
99–115.

Kusek, K. M., G. Vargo, and K. Steidinger (1999), Gymnodin-
imum breve in the ﬁeld, in the lab, and in the newspaper-a
scientiﬁc and journalistic analysis of Florida red tides, Contri.
Mar. Sci., 34, 1–229.

Landsberg, J. H. (2002), The eﬀects of harmful algal blooms on

aquatic organisms, Rev. Fish. Sci., 10, 113–390.

Landsberg, J. H., and K. A. Steidinger (1998), A historical re-
view of Gymnodinium breve red tides implicated in mass mor-
talities of the manatee (Trichechus manatus Latirostris) in
Florida, USA, in Harmful Algae, edited by B. Reguera, M. L.
Fernandez, and T. Wyatt, pp. 97–100, Xunta de Galicia and
Intergovernmental Oceanographic Commission of UNESCO.
Lekien, F., C. Coulliette, A. J. Mariano, E. H. Ryan, L. K. Shay,
G. Haller, and J. E. Marsden (2005), Pollution release tied
to invariant manifolds: A case study for the coast of Florida,
Physica D, 210, 1–20.

Magana, H. A., C. Contreras, and T. A. Villareal (2003), A his-
torical assessment of Karenia brevis in the western Gulf of
Mexico, Harmful Algae, 2, 163–171.

Morey, S. L., P. J. Martin, J. J. O’Brien, A. A. Wallcraft, and
J. Zavala-Hidalgo (2003), Export pathways for river discharged
fresh water in the northern Gulf of Mexico, J. Geophys. Res.,
108 (C10), 3303, doi:10.1029/2002JC001674.

Shadden, S. C., F. Lekien, and J. E. Marsden (2005), Deﬁnition
and properties of Lagrangian coherent structures from ﬁnite-
time Lyapunov exponents in two-dimensional aperidic ﬂows,
Physica D, 212, 271–304.

Shay, L. K., J. Martinez-Pedraja, T. M. Cook, B. K. Haus, and
R. H. Weisberg (2006), Surface current mapping using Wellen
radars, J. Atmos. Oceanogr. Thech. , in press.

Shumway, S. E., S. M. Allen, and P. D. Boersma (2003), Marine
birds and harmful algal blooms: sporadic victims or under-
reported events?, Harmful Algae, 2, 1–17.

Steidinger, K. A., and K. Haddad (1981), Biologic and hydro-

graphic aspects of red-tides, BioScience, 31, 814–819.

Tester, P. A., and K. A. Steidinger (1997), Gymnodinium breve
Initiation, transport, and consequences of

red tide blooms:
surface circulation, Limnol. Oceanogr., 42, 1039–1051.

Wilson, W. B., and S. M. Ray (1956), The occurrence of Gymno-
dinium breve in the western Gulf of Mexico, Ecol., 37, 388.
Yang, H., R. H. Weisberg, P. P. Niiler, W. Sturges, and W. John-
son (1999), Lagrangian circulation and forbidden zone on the
West Florida Shelf, Cont. Shelf. Res., 19, 1221–1245.

M. J. Olascoaga, I. I. Rypina, M. G. Brown and F. J. Beron-
Vera, RSMAS/AMP, University of Miami, 4600 Rickenbacker
Cswy., Miami, FL 33149, USA. (jolascoaga@rsmas.miami.edu)

H. Ko¸cak, Departments of Computer Science and Mathemat-
ics, University of Miami, 1365 Memorial Dr., Coral Gables, FL
33124, USA.

L. E. Brand, RSMAS/MBF, University of Miami, 4600 Rick-

enbacker Cswy., Miami, FL 33149, USA.

G. R. Halliwell and L. K. Shay, RSMAS/MPO, University of

Miami, 4600 Rickenbacker Cswy., Miami, FL 33149, USA.

