6
0
0
2
 
g
u
A
 
7
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
o
a
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
8
7
1
8
0
6
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

JOURNAL OF GEOPHYSICAL RESEARCH, VOL. ???, XXXX, DOI:10.1029/,

Evolution of surface gravity waves over a submarine canyon
R. Magne1,5, K. A. Belibassakis2, T. H. C. Herbers3, Fabrice Ardhuin1,
W. C. O’Reilly4, and V. Rey5

Abstract. The eﬀects of a submarine canyon on the propagation of ocean surface waves
are examined with a three-dimensional coupled-mode model for wave propagation over
steep topography. Whereas the classical geometrical optics approximation predicts an abrupt
transition from complete transmission at small incidence angles to no transmission at
large angles, the full model predicts a more gradual transition with partial reﬂection/transmission
that is sensitive to the canyon geometry and controlled by evanescent modes for small
incidence angles and relatively short waves. Model results for large incidence angles are
compared with data from directional wave buoys deployed around the rim and over Scripps
Canyon, near San Diego, California, during the Nearshore Canyon Experiment (NCEX).
Wave heights are observed to decay across the canyon by about a factor 5 over a dis-
tance shorter than a wavelength. Yet, a spectral refraction model predicts an even larger
reduction by about a factor 10, because low frequency components cannot cross the canyon
in the geometrical optics approximation. The coupled-mode model yields accurate re-
sults over and behind the canyon. These results show that although most of the wave
energy is refractively trapped on the oﬀshore rim of the canyon, a small fraction of the
wave energy ‘tunnels’ across the canyon. Simpliﬁcations of the model that reduce it to
the standard and modiﬁed mild slope equations also yield good results, indicating that
evanescent modes and high order bottom slope eﬀects are of minor importance for the
energy transformation of waves propagating across depth contours at large oblique an-
gles.

1. Introduction

Waves are strongly inﬂuenced by the bathymetry when
they reach shallow water areas. Munk and Traylor [1947]
conducted a ﬁrst quantitative study of the eﬀects of bottom
topography on wave energy transformation over Scripps and
La Jolla Canyons, near San Diego, California. Wave refrac-
tion diagrams were constructed using a manual method, and
compared to visual observations. Fairly good agreement was
found between predicted and observed wave heights. Other
eﬀects such as diﬀraction were found to be important else-
where, for sharp bathymetric features (e.g. harbour struc-
tures or coral reefs), prompting Berkhoﬀ [1972] to intro-
duce an equation that represents both refraction and diﬀrac-
tion. Berkhoﬀ’s equation is based on a vertical integration
of Laplace’s equation and is valid in the limit of small bot-
tom slopes. It is widely known as the mild slope equation
(MSE). A parabolic approximation of this equation was pro-
posed by Radder [1979], and further reﬁned by Kirby [1986]
and Dalrymple and Kirby [1988].

1Centre Militaire d’Oc´eanographie, Service

Hydrographique et Oc´eanographique de la Marine, 29609
Brest, France.

2Department of Naval Architecture and Marine

Engineering, National Technical University of Athens, PO
Box 64033 Zografos, 15710 Athens, Greece.

3Department of Oceanography, Naval Postgraduate

School, Monterey, CA 93943, USA.

4Integrative Oceanography Division, Scripps Institution of

Oceanography, La Jolla, CA 92093, USA.

5Laboratoire de Sondages Electromagn´etique de

l’Environnement Terrestre, Universit´e de Toulon et du Var,
La Garde, France.

Copyright 2008 by the American Geophysical Union.
0148-0227/08/$9.00

O’Reilly and Guza [1991, 1993] compared Kirby’s [1986]
refraction-diﬀraction model to a spectral geometrical optics
refraction model based on the theory of Longuet-Higgins
[1957]. The two models generally agreed in simulations of
realistic swell propagation in the Southern California Bight.
However, both models assume a gently sloping bottom, and
their limitations in regions with steep topography are not
well understood. Booij
[1983], showed that the MSE is
valid for bottom slopes as large as 1/3 for normal wave in-
cidence. To extend its application to steeper slopes, Mas-
sel [1993 ; see also Chamberlain and Porter, 1995] modiﬁed
the MSE by including terms of second order in the bottom
slope, that were neglected by Berkhoﬀ [1972]. This modiﬁed
mild slope equation (MMSE) includes terms proportional to
the bottom curvature and the square of the bottom slope.
Chandrasekera and Cheung [1997] observed that the cur-
vature terms signiﬁcantly change the wave height behind a
shoal, whereas the slope-squared terms have a weaker in-
ﬂuence. Lee and Yoon [2004] noted that the higher order
bottom slope terms change the wavelength, which in turn
aﬀects the refraction.
In spite of these improvements, an
important restriction of these equations is that the vertical
structure of the wave ﬁeld is described by the Airy solu-
tion of waves over a horizontal bottom. Hence the MMSE
cannot describe the wave ﬁeld accurately over steep bot-
tom topography. Thus, Massel [1993] introduced an addi-
tional inﬁnite series of local modes (’evanescent modes’ or
’decaying waves’), that allows a local adaptation of the wave
ﬁeld [see also Porter and Staziker, 1995], and converges to
the exact solution of Laplace’s equation, except at the bot-
tom interface. Indeed, the vertical velocity at the bottom
is still zero, and is discontinuous in the limit of an inﬁnite
number of modes. Recently, Athanassoulis and Belibassakis
[1999] added a ’sloping bottom mode’ to the local mode se-
ries expansion, which properly satisﬁes the Neuman bottom
boundary condition. This approach was further explored by
Chandrasekera and Cheung, [2001] and Kim and Bai, [2004].
Although the sloping-bottom mode yields only small correc-
tions for the wave height, it signiﬁcantly improves the accu-
racy of the velocity ﬁeld close to the bottom. Moreover, this

1

X - 2

MAGNE ET AL.: WAVES OVER SUBMARINE CANYONS

mode enables a faster convergence of the series of evanescent
modes, by making the convergence mathematically uniform.
As these steep topography models are becoming available,
one may wonder if this level of sophistication is necessary to
accurately describe the transformation of ocean waves over
natural continental shelf topography. It is expected that if
such models are to be useful anywhere, it should be around
steep submarine canyons. Surprisingly, a geometrical optics
refraction model that assumes weak amplitude gradients on
the scale of the wavelength, usually corresponding to gentle
bottom slopes, was found to yield accurate predictions of
swell transformation over Scripps canyon [Peak, 2004]. The
practical limitations of mild slope approximations for natu-
ral seaﬂoor topography are clearly not well established.

The goal of the present paper is to understand the prop-
agation of waves over a submarine canyon, including the
practical imitations of geometrical optics theory for the as-
sociated large bottom slopes. Numerical models will be
used to sort out the relative importance of refraction, and
diﬀraction eﬀects. Observations of ocean swell transforma-
tion over Scripps and La Jolla Canyons, collected during
the Nearshore Canyon Experiment (NCEX), are compared
with predictions of the three-dimensional (3D) coupled-
is called NTUA5 because its
mode model. This model
present implementation will be limited to a total of 5 modes
[Belibassakis et al., 2001]. This is the ﬁrst veriﬁcation of
a NTUA-type model with ﬁeld observations, as previous
model validations were done with laboratory data. This ap-
plication of NTUA5 to submarine canyons is not straight-
forward since the model is based on the extension of the
two-dimensional (2D) model of Athanassoulis and Belibas-
sakis [1999], and requires special care in the position of the
oﬀshore boundary and the numerical damping of scattered
waves along the boundary. Further details on these and soft-
ware developments, and a comparison with results of the
SWAN model [Booij et al., 1999] for the same NCEX case
are given by Gerosthathis et al. [2005].

Here, model results are compared with two earlier mod-
els which assume a gently sloping bottom. These are the
parabolic refraction/diﬀraction model REF/DIF1 (V2.5)
[Kirby, 1986], applied in a spectral sense, and a spectral
refraction model based on backward ray tracing [Dobson,
1967 ; O’Reilly and Guza, 1993]. A brief description of the
coupled-mode model and the problems posed by its imple-
mentation in the NCEX area is given in section 2. Although
our objective is the understanding of complex 3D bottom
topography eﬀects in the NCEX observations, this requires
some prior analysis, performed in section 3, of reﬂection and
refraction patterns over idealized 2D canyons. Results are
presented for realistic transverse canyon proﬁles, including a
comparison with the 2D analysis of infragravity wave obser-
vations reported by Thomson et al. [2005]. Comparisons of
3D models with ﬁeld data are presented in section 4 for rep-
resentative swell events observed during NCEX. Conclusions
follow in section 5.

2. Numerical Models

The fully elliptic 3D model developed by Belibassakis et
al.
[2001] is based on the 2D model of Athanassoulis and
Belibassakis [1999]. These authors formulate the problem
as a transmission problem in a ﬁnite subdomain of variable
depth h2(x) (uniform in the lateral y-direction), closed by
the appropriate matching conditions at the oﬀshore and in-
shore boundaries. The oﬀshore and inshore areas are consid-
ered as incidence and transmission regions respectively, with
uniform but diﬀerent depths (h1, h3), where complex wave
potential amplitudes ϕ1 and ϕ3 are represented by complete
normal-mode series containing the propagating and evanes-
cent modes.

The wave potential ϕ2 associated with h2 (region 2), is

given by the following local mode series expansion:

ϕ2(x, z) = ϕ−1(x)Z−1(z; x) + ϕ0(x)Z0(z; x)

+

ϕn(x)Zn(z; x),

(1)

∞

n=1
X

is

where ϕ0(x)Z0(z; x)

the propagating mode and
ϕn(x)Zn(z; x) are the evanescent modes. The additional
term ϕ−1(x)Z−1(z; x) is the sloping-bottom mode, which
permits the consistent satisfaction of the bottom boundary
condition on a sloping bottom. The modes allow for the lo-
cal adaptation of the wave potential. The functions Zn(z; x)
which represent the vertical structure of the nth mode are
given by,

Z0(z, x) =

cosh[k0(x)(z + h(x))]
cosh(k0(x)h(x))

,

(2)

Zn(z, x) =

cos[kn(x)(z + h(x))]
cos(kn(x)h(x))

, n = 1, 2, ...,

(3)

Z−1(z, x) = h(x)

3

+

z
h(x)

"(cid:18)

(cid:19)

(cid:18)

z
h(x)

2

#

(cid:19)

,

(4)

where k0 and kn are the wavenumbers obtained from the
dispersion relation (for propagating and evanescent modes),
evaluated for the local depth h = h(x):

2

ω

= gk0 tanh k0h = −gkn tan knh,

(5)

with ω the angular frequency

As discussed in Athanassoulis and Belibassakis [1999], al-
ternative formulations of Z−1 exist, and the extra sloping-
bottom mode controls only the rate of convergence of the
expansion (1) to a solution that is indeed unique. The modal
amplitudes ϕn are obtained by a variational principle, equiv-
alent to the combination of Laplace’s equation, the bottom
and surface boundary conditions, and the matching condi-
tions at the side boundaries, leading to the coupled-mode
system,

∞

n=−1
X

′
′′
n(x) + cmn(x)ϕn(x) = 0,
n(x) + bmn(x)ϕ
amn(x)ϕ

for

(m = −1, 0, 1, ...)

(6)

where amn, bmn and cmn are deﬁned in terms of the Zn
functions, and the appropriate end-conditions for the mode
amplitudes ϕn ; for further details, see see Athanassoulis
and Belibassakis [1999]. The sloping-bottom mode ensures
absolute and uniform convergence of the modal series. The
rate of decay for the modal function amplitude is propor-
tional to (n−4). Here, the number of evanescent modes is
truncated at n = 3, which ensures satisfactory convergence,
even for bottom slopes exceeding 1.

This 2D solution is further extended to realistic 3D bot-
tom topographies by Belibassakis et al. [2001]. In 3D, the
depth h2 is decomposed into a background parallel-contour
surface hi(x) and a scattering topography hd(x, y). The
3D solution is then obtained as the linear superposition of
appropriate harmonic functions corresponding to these two
topographies. There is no limitation on the shape and am-
plitude of the bottom represented by hd(x, y) except that
hd > 0, which can always be enforced by a proper choice of
hi, for further details see Belibassakis et al. [1999]. The wave
potential solution over the 2D topography (hi) is governed
by the equations described previously. The wave potential
associated with the scatterers (hd) is obtained as the solu-
tion of a 3D scattering problem. The decomposition of the

MAGNE ET AL.: WAVES OVER SUBMARINE CANYONS

X - 3

3. Idealized 2D canyon proﬁles

3.1. Transverse section of La Jolla Canyon

We investigate monochromatic waves propagating at nor-
mal
incidence over a transverse section of the La Jolla
Canyon (Figures 1,2), which is relatively deep (120 m) and

wide (350 m). Oblique incidence will not be considered for
this canyon because the results are similar to those obtained

for Scripps Canyon (discussed below).

topography in hd and hi is not uniquely deﬁned by the con-
straints that hi is invariant along y and hd > 0, and there is
thus no simple physical interpretation of the scattered ﬁeld
which corresponds to both reﬂection and refraction eﬀects.
The main beneﬁt of this decomposition is that the scattered
wave ﬁeld propagates out of the model domain along the
entire boundary, which greatly simpliﬁes the speciﬁcation of
the horizontal boundary conditions.

In practice we chose

hi(x) = min {h(x, y)

for

y ∈ [ymin, ymax]} .

(7)

Further, the bathymetry hi + hd is modiﬁed by including
a transition region for y < ymin and y > ymax in which hd
goes to zero at the model boundary, so that no scattering
sources are on the boundary and waves actually propagate
out of the domain. This modiﬁcation of the bathymetry does
not change the propagation of the incoming waves, provided
that the oﬀshore boundary is in uniform water depth, as in
the cases described by Belibassakis et al. [2001], or in deep
enough water so that a uniform water depth can be pre-
scribed without having an eﬀect on the waves. Solutions
are obtained by solving a coupled-mode system, similar to
Eq.(5), but extended to two horizontal dimensions (x, y),
and coupled with the boundary conditions ensuring outgoing
radiation. The spatial grid for the scattered ﬁeld is extended
with a damping layer all around the boundary [Belibassakis
et al., 2001].

Both 2D and 3D implementations of this NTUA5 model
are used here to investigate wave propagation over a sub-
marine canyon. If we neglect the sloping-bottom mode and
the evanescent modes, and retain in the local-mode series
only the propagating mode ϕ0(x, y), this model (NTUA5)
exactly reduces to MMSE [e.g. Chandrasekara and Cheung,
1997],

h + f2(∇h)

ϕ0(x, y) = 0,

(8)

2

∇

ϕ0(x, y) +

·∇ϕ0(x, y)

∇(CCg)
CCg
2
0 + f1∇
k

2

+

(cid:2)

2

(cid:3)

where f1 = f1(x, y) and f2 = f2(x, y) are respectively func-
tions dependent on the bottom curvature and slope-squared
terms. From Eq.(7), the MSE is obtained by further ne-
glecting the curvature and slope-squared terms.

In the following sections, these two formulations (MSE
and MMSE) will be compared to the full 5-mode model
to examine the importance of steep bottom slope eﬀects,
which are fully accounted for in this model. The MSE and
MMSE solutions are obtained by exactly the same scatter-
ing method described above with the same computer code
in which the high order bottom slope terms and/or evanes-
cent modes are turned oﬀ. For 3D calculations, our use of
a regular grid sets important constraints on the model im-
plementation due to the requirements to have the oﬀshore
boundary in deep water and suﬃcient resolution to resolve
the wavelength of waves in the shallowest parts of the model
domain. These constraints put practical limits on the do-
main size for a given wave period and range of water depths.
Here a minimum of 7 points per wavelength in 10 m depth
was enforced, in a domain that extends 4–6 km oﬀshore.
Such a large domain with a high resolution leads to memory
intensive inversion of large sparse matrices. However, the
NTUA, MSE and MMSE models are linear, and thus the
propagation of the diﬀerent oﬀshore wave components can
be performed separately, sequentially or in parallel.

Before considering the full complexity of the 3D Scripps-
La Jolla Canyon system, we ﬁrst examine the behavior of
these models in the case of monochromatic waves propagat-
ing over 2D idealized canyon proﬁles (transverse sections
of the actual canyons). We consider both the relatively
wide La Jolla Canyon where infragravity wave reﬂection
was reported recently [Thomson et al. 2005], and the nar-
row Scripps Canyon, that was the focus of the NCEX swell
propagation study.

Figure 1. Bathymetry around La Jolla and Scripps
canyons, and deﬁnition of transverse sections for ideal-
ized calculations.

)

m

(
 

h
t
p
e
d

0

20

40

60

80

100

120

140
0

200

400

800

1000

1200

600
x (m)

Figure 2. Water depth across the La Jolla canyon sec-
tion.

Reﬂection coeﬃcients R for the wave amplitude are com-

puted using the MSE, the MMSE, and the full coupled-mode
model NTUA5. R is easily obtained using the natural de-
composition provided by the scattering method, and is de-

ﬁned as the ratio between the scattered wave potential am-
plitude, up-wave of the topography, and the amplitude of

X - 4

MAGNE ET AL.: WAVES OVER SUBMARINE CANYONS

the imposed propagating wave. In addition, a stepwise bot-
tom approximation model developed by Rey [1992], based on
the matching of integral quantities at the boundaries of ad-
jacent steps, is used to evaluate R [see Takano, 1960; Miles,
1967; Kirby and Dalrymple, 1983]. This model is known
to converge to the exact value of R, and will be used as a
benchmark for this study.

resonance conditions, leading to constructive or destructive
interferences. Both the MSE and MMSE models are found
to generally overestimate the reﬂection at high frequencies,
whereas the NTUA5 model is in good agreement with the
benchmark solution. The sloping-bottom mode included in
NTUA5 has a negligible impact on the wave reﬂection in
this and other cases discussed below. The only other dif-
ference between the NTUA5 and the MMSE models is the
addition of the evanescent modes which, through their eﬀect
on the near wave ﬁeld solution modify signiﬁcantly the far
ﬁeld, including the overall reﬂection and transmission over
the canyon.

Thomson et al. [2005] investigated the transmission of
infra-gravity waves with frequencies in the range 0.006–
0.05 Hz across this same canyon. Based on pressure and
velocity time series at two points located approximately at
the ends of the La Jolla section these authors estimated en-
ergy reﬂection coeﬃcients as a function of frequency. In a
case of near-normal incidence they observed a minimum of
wave reﬂection at about 0.04 Hz, generally consistent with
the present results (ﬁgure 3). Thomson et al. [2005] further
found a good ﬁt of their observations to the theoretical re-
ﬂection across a rectangular trench as given by Kirby and
Dalrymple [1983] in the limit of long waves, and neglecting
evanescent modes. This approximation is appropriate for
the long infragravity band for which the eﬀects of evanescent
modes are relatively weak. The observations of Thomson
et al. [2005] also agree well with the various models applied
here to the actual canyon proﬁle (ﬁgure 3). At higher swell
frequencies (f > 0.05 Hz), the MSE, MMSE and NTUA
model results diverge for normal incidence (ﬁgure 3). How-
ever, contrary to the beach-generated infragravity waves,
swell arrives from the open ocean and thus always reaches
this canyon with a large oblique angle, for which the diﬀer-
ences between these models are small (not shown).

3.2. Transverse section of Scripps Canyon
3.2.1. Normal incidence

The north branch of the canyon system, Scripps Canyon,
provides a very diﬀerent eﬀect due to a larger depth (145
m) and a smaller width (250 m). Scripps Canyon is also
markedly asymmetric with diﬀerent depths on either side.
A representative section of this canyon is chosen here (Fig-
ure 4). The bottom bottom slope locally exceeds 3, i.e. the
◦
with the vertical. Reﬂec-
bottom makes an angle up to 70
tion coeﬃcient predictions for waves propagating at normal
incidence over the canyon section are shown in Figure 5. R
decreases with increasing frequency without the pronounced
side lobe pattern predicted for the La Jolla Canyon section.
Again, the NTUA5 results are in excellent agreement with
the exact solution. The MSE dramatically underestimates R
at low frequencies, and overestimates R at high frequencies.
However, the MMSE is in fairly good agreement with the
benchmark solution in this case, suggesting that the higher
order bottom slope terms are important for the steep Scripps
Canyon proﬁle reﬂection, while the evanescent modes play
only a minor role.
3.2.2. Oblique incidence

The swell observed near Scripps Canyon generally arrives
at a large oblique angle at the oﬀshore canyon rim. To exam-
ine the inﬂuence of the incidence angle θi, a representative
swell frequency f = 0.067 Hz was selected, and the reﬂection
coeﬃcient was evaluated as a function of θi. The amplitude
reﬂection coeﬃcient R is very weak when θi is small, and
as θi increases, R jumps to near-total reﬂection within a
narrow band of direction around 35◦ (Figure 6).

.

Figure 3. Amplitude reﬂection coeﬃcient R for waves
propagating at normal incidence over the La Jolla canyon
section (ﬁgure 2) using several numerical models, and ob-
served infragravity reﬂections for near-normal incidence
angles [Thomson et al., 2005]

Figure 4. Water depth across the Scripps canyon section.

The canyon proﬁle is resolved with 70 steps which was
found to be suﬃcient to obtain a converging result. The
predicted values of R as a function of wave frequency f
(Figure 3), are characterized by maxima and minima, which
are similar to the rectangular step response shown in Mei
and Black [1969], Kirby and Dalrymple [1983a], and Rey et
al. [1992]. The spacing between the minima or maxima is
deﬁned by the width of the step or trench, which imposes

MAGNE ET AL.: WAVES OVER SUBMARINE CANYONS

X - 5

gle θB, all the wave energy is trapped, and no energy goes
through the canyon. This sharp transition does not depend
on the magnitude of the gradient which may even be in-
ﬁnite. For a shelf depth H1 and maximum canyon depth
Hmax, this threshold angle is given by

θB = arcsin

(9)

C1
Cmax

(cid:16)

(cid:17)

where C1 and Cmax are the phase speeds for a given fre-
quency corresponding to the depths H1 and Hmax. Thus θB
increases with increasing frequency as the phase speed dif-
ference diminishes at high frequencies. For Scripps Canyon,
H1 = 24 m, and Hmax = 145 m. At f = 0.067 Hz this gives
◦
θB = 38
. As a result, for θi < θB, no reﬂection is pre-
dicted by refraction theory (dashed line), and all the wave
energy is transmitted through the canyon. This threshold
value separates distinct reﬂection and refraction (trapping)
phenomena, respectively occurring for θi < θB and θi > θB.
The elliptic models that account for diﬀraction predict
a smoother transition. For θi < θB, weak reﬂection is pre-
dicted. For θi > θB, a fraction of the energy is still transmit-
ted through the canyon. This transmission of wave energy
across a deep region where sin θi/C1 exceeds 1/Cmax, vio-
lates the geometrical optics approximation. This transmis-
sion is similar to the tunnelling of quantum particles through
a barrier of potential in the case where the barrier thickness
is of the order of the wavelength or less [Thomson et al.,
2005]. The wave ﬁeld near the turning point of wave rays in
the canyon decays exponentially in space on the scale of the
wavelength [e.g. Chao and Pierson, 1972], and that decay-
ing wave excites a propagating wave on the other side of the
canyon. This coupling of both canyon sides generally de-
creases as the canyon width or the incidence angle increase
[Kirby and Dalrymple, 1983; Thomson at al., 2005]. The sig-
niﬁcant diﬀerences between MSE and MMSE at small angles
θi < θB are less pronounced for θi > θB.

These two regimes are illustrated by the evolution of the
wave potential amplitude over the Scripps canyon section.
In ﬁgure 7, results of various elliptic models (MSE, MMSE
and NTUA5) are compared with a parabolic approxima-
tion of the MSE (the REF/DIF1 model of Dalrymple and
Kirby [1988]). It should be noted that the model grid ori-
entation is chosen with the main axis along the incident
wave propagation direction, in order to minimize large an-
In that conﬁg-
gle errors in the parabolic approximation.
uration, the parabolic approximation (REF/DIF1 a) does
not predict any reﬂection, but gives an indication of the
expected shoaling of the incident waves across the canyon.
◦
For θi = 30
< θB, weak reﬂection (about 10%) is predicted
by the MMSE and NTUA5 (ﬁgure 7.a). MSE considerably
overestimates the reﬂection, and thus underestimates the
transmitted energy down-wave of the canyon section. A
partial standing wave pattern is predicted up-wave of the
canyon as a result of the interference of incident and re-
ﬂected waves. The largest amplitudes, about 20% larger
than the incident wave amplitude, occur in the ﬁrst antin-
ode near the canyon wall.

◦
For a larger wave incidence angle (e.g. 45

> θB), an al-
most complete standing wave pattern is predicted by the el-
liptic models up-wave of the canyon, with an exponential tail
that extends across the canyon to a weak transmitted com-
ponent (see also Figure 5.b for the reﬂection coeﬃcient pat-
◦
tern). Finally, transmission is extremely weak for θi = 70
(ﬁgure 7.c). A good estimate of the reﬂection coeﬃcient can
also be obtained with the parabolic model REF/DIF1 b by
choosing the x-axis to be aligned with the canyon trench
(ﬁgure 7b,c thick dashed lines).

Figure 5. Reﬂection coeﬃcient for the Scripps Canyon
section as a function of frequency predicted by various
◦
models. (a) normal incidence θi = 0
. All
models collapse on the same curve in (b).

◦
, (b) θi = 45

Figure 6. Reﬂection coeﬃcient for waves of period
T = 16 s propagating over the Scripps Canyon section as
a function of the wave incidence angle θi (0 corresponds
to waves travelling perpendicular to the canyon axis).

Indeed, for a wave train propagating through a medium
with phase speed gradient in one dimension only, geometri-
cal optics predicts that beyond a threshold (Brewster) an-

X - 6

MAGNE ET AL.: WAVES OVER SUBMARINE CANYONS

◦
rotated 45

relative to North to place the oﬀshore boundary

in the deepest region of the domain. Models were run for

many sets of incident wave frequency and direction (f , θ).

◦
, (b) θi = 45

Figure 7. Wave amplitude over the Scripps Canyon
section, for T = 16 s and diﬀerent incident angles (a)
◦
θi = 30
. The canyon
depth proﬁle is indicated with a thin dashed line. The
MMSE result is in distinguishable from that of NTUA5
in all panels, and all models except for REF/DIF1 give
the same results in (b) and (c).

◦
, and (c) θi = 70

4. West Swell Over Scripps Canyon

The models used in the previous section (MSE, MMSE,
NTUA5, REF/DIF1, refraction) are now applied to the real
3D bottom topography of the Scripps-La Jolla Canyon sys-
tem, and compared with ﬁeld data from directional wave
buoys deployed around the rim and over Scripps Canyon
during NCEX.

4.1. Models Set-up

The implementations of MSE, MMSE, NTUA5, and
REF/DIF1 use two computational domains with grids of
275 by 275 points (Figure 8). The larger domain with a grid
resolution of 21 m is used for wave periods longer than 15 s.
The smaller domain, with a higher resolution of about 15 m,
is used for 15 s and shorter waves. The y-axis of the grid is

Figure 8. Computational domain for (a) T > 15 s, and
(b) T ≤ 15 s. Also shown are the NTUA5 solutions for
the real part of the wave potential amplitude for waves
◦
with periods (a) T = 16 s, and (b)
arriving from 270
T = 15 s, superimposed on the 10, 30, 100, 200, and
300 m depth contours.

MAGNE ET AL.: WAVES OVER SUBMARINE CANYONS

X - 7

The CPU time required for one (f, θ) wave component
calculation with the NTUA5 model (with 3 evanescent
modes) is about 120 s on a Linux computer with 2Gb of
memory and a 3 GHz processor. The wave periods and oﬀ-
shore directions used in the computation range from 12 to
◦
22 s and 255 to 340 degrees respectively, with 0.2 s and 2
increments. The minimum period 12 s corresponds to the
shortest waves that can be resolved with 7 points per wave-
length in 10 m depth. Shorter waves are not considered here
because they may be aﬀected by local wind generation, not
represented in the models used here, and are also generally
less aﬀected by the bottom topography.

direction bin (bandwidth 0.005 Hz by 5 degrees), computed
over the ﬁnest available bathymetry grid, with 4 m resolu-
tion. The model is identical to the CREST model described
by Ardhuin et al. [2001], and validated by Ardhuin et al.
[2003] on the U.S. East coast. The energy source term set
to zero here. This propagation-only version of the model is
also called CRESTp, and is similar to the model used by
O’Reilly and Guza [1993] and Peak [2004]. It was further
validated on the West coast of France [Ardhuin, 2006].

4.2. Model-Data Comparison

Long swell from the west was observed on 30 Novem-
ber 2003, in the absence of signiﬁcant local winds. In the
present analysis we use only data from Datawell Directional
Waverider buoys. The Torrey Pines Outer Buoy is per-
manently deployed by the Coastal Data Information Pro-
gram (CDIP), and located about 15 km oﬀshore of Scripps
Canyon. That buoy provided the deep water observations
necessary to drive the wave models. The directional dis-
tribution of energy for each frequency was estimated from
buoy measurements of displacement cross-spectra using the
Maximum Entropy Method [Lygre and Krogstad, 1986]. The
NCEX observations were made at six sites around the head
of Scripps Canyon (ﬁgure 9).

All spectra used in the comparison,

including the oﬀ-
shore boundary condition, were averaged from 13:30 to 16:30
UTC, so that the almost continuous record yields about 100
degrees of freedom for each frequency band with a width of
0.005 Hz. On that day the wind speed close to the coast did
−1, as measured by the CDIP Torrey Pines
not exceed 3 m s
Glider port anemometer, and the National Data Buoy Cen-
ter (NDBC) buoy 46086, located 70 km West of San Diego
and representative of the entire modelled area.

The observed narrow oﬀshore spectrum has a single peak
with a period of 14.5 s, and a mean direction of 272 de-
grees, corresponding to an incidence angle θi (relative to
◦
the Scripps Canyon axis) of 65

(Figure10).

Figure 9. Location of directional wave buoys at the
head of the Scripps canyon, and wave rays for an oﬀ-
◦
shore direction of 272
and a period of 15.4 s, correspond-
ing to a frequency just below the peak of the observed
swell on November 30. Contrary to the backward ray
tracing model used for estimating the wave spectrum at
nearshore sites, rays were integrated forward from paral-
lel directions and equally spaced positions at 15 m inter-
vals along the oﬀshore boundary at x = 0, 10 km to the
West of the buoys, practically in deep water.

Transfer functions between the local and oﬀshore wave
amplitudes were evaluated at each of the buoy locations
and used to transform the oﬀshore spectrum. The back-
ward ray-tracing refraction model directly evaluates energy
spectral transfer functions between deep water, where the
wave spectrum is assumed to be uniform, and each of the
buoys located close to the canyon, based on the invariance
of the wavenumber spectrum along a ray [Longuet-Higgins,
1957]. A minimum of 50 rays was used for each frequency-

Figure 10. Directional wave spectrum at Torrey Pines
Outer Buoy at 15:00 UTC on 30 November 2003.

The model hindcasts are compared with observations in
Figure 11. While the local ampliﬁcation of the wave height
at the head of canyon varies with the incident wave direc-
tion, a dramatic reduction of the wave height downwave of
the rim of this canyon is predicted for all directions. Thus

X - 8

MAGNE ET AL.: WAVES OVER SUBMARINE CANYONS

in ﬁgure 12.a-b with NTUA5 predictions at sites 34 at the
head of the canyon, and 37 behind the canyon.

◦
the selected west swell case (Tp = 14.5s, θ = 272
) is rep-
resentative of the general wave transformation in this area,
for low frequency swells arriving a large range of directions.
Signiﬁcant wave heights Hs were computed from the mea-
sured and predicted wave spectra at each instrument loca-
tion, including only the commonly modelled frequency range
(f1 = 0.05 Hz, f2 = 0.08 Hz). The predicted Hs is given by

Hs = 4

M (f, θ)E(f, θ)df dθ

,

(10)

f2

θ2

(cid:18)Z

f1 Z

θ1

1/2

(cid:19)

where E(f, θ) is the observed oﬀshore frequency-directional
spectrum and M (f, θ) is the model prediction of the ratio
between the local and oﬀshore wave energies for the fre-
quency f and oﬀshore direction θ, obtained by squaring the
sea surface elevation transfer function.

Observations show a dramatic variation in wave height

across the canyon (ﬁgure 11).

Figure 11. Comparison of predicted and observed sig-
niﬁcant wave height (12s < T < 22s) for the 30 Novem-
ber 2003 swell event. Instrument locations are shown in
ﬁgure 9.

Figure 12. Amplitude transfer functions at site 34 (a)
and site 37 (b), deﬁned as the ratio of the local and
oﬀshore wave amplitude modulus and computed with
NTUA 5.

The oﬀshore wave height is slightly enhanced at sites 33
and 34, in water depths of 34 and 23 m respectively, along
the north side of the canyon, and slightly reduced on the
shelf north of the canyon at site 35, in 34 m depth. A dra-
matic reduction in wave heights is observed at sites 36, 37
and 32, over the Canyon and on the south side, where the
water depths are 111, 49 and 24 m, respectively. Between
buoys 34 and 36 the wave height drops by a factor 5 over
a distance of only 150 m, that is less than the 216 m wave-
length at the peak frequency (at the shallowest of the two
sites). Such a pattern is generally consistent with refrac-
tion theory as illustrated by forward ray-tracing in ﬁgure 9.
Whereas rays crossing the shelf north of the canyon show the
expected gradual bending towards the shore, rays that reach
the canyon northern wall are trapped on the shelf, and reach
the shore in a focusing region north of the canyon (Black’s
beach). From that oﬀshore direction, and an oﬀshore ray
spacing of 15 m, no rays are predicted to cross the canyon,
so that the south side of the canyon is eﬀectively sheltered
from 16 s Westerly swells, in agreement with the observed
extremely low wave heights (ﬁgure 11, see also Peak [2004]).
The amplitude transfer functions (M (f, θ)1/2) are not overly
sensitive to the wave frequency and direction, as illustrated

Up-wave of the canyon (instruments 33, 34, 35), all mod-
els are found to be in fairly good agreement with the ob-
servations. However, REF/DIF1 underestimates the wave
height at site 34. At this site, wave energy is strongly fo-
cused by refraction, with rays turning by more that 90◦ (ﬁg-
ure 9). The parabolic approximation does not allow such a
large variation in wave direction. Over and down-wave of
the canyon (instruments 32, 36, 37), the wave heights pre-
dicted by MSE, MMSE and NTUA5 agree reasonably well
with the observations, whereas REF/DIF1 slightly overesti-
mates the wave height. For f < 0.06 Hz few rays cross the
canyon and the energy predicted by the refraction model is
extremely low, about 5% of the oﬀshore energy the total en-
ergy. This strong variation in wave energy across the canyon
is reduced by diﬀraction, which is not taken into account in
this refraction model, resulting in an under-prediction of the
wave height at the sheltered sites 32, 36, and 37.

The sea state at that time also include an important
contribution from higher frequencies (ﬁgure 13). Signiﬁ-
cant wave heights computed over a wider frequency range
(0.05 < f < 0.2Hz), by adding the refraction model results
to the low-frequency results of other models, vary little be-
tween the models, now dominated by short wave energy.

MAGNE ET AL.: WAVES OVER SUBMARINE CANYONS

X - 9

ference in oﬀshore and local spectra on ﬁgure 13), while
diﬀraction eﬀects are signiﬁcant, in that area, only up to
0.07 Hz. Further conﬁrmation of the trapping of low fre-
quency waves is provided by another case observed on 12
December 2003 (Figure 14), which we analyze with the same
method. The observed spectra are averaged from 12:00 UTC
to 15:00 UTC.The observed spectrum has three peaks with
a period of 20, 12.5 and 9 s, a mean direction of 270, 270
and 285 degrees respectively and a signiﬁcant wave height
of 1.9m.

Figure 13. Comparison of predicted and observed fre-
quency spectra at (a) site 35, and (b) site 37, for the 30
November 2003 swell event.

Figure 15. Comparison of predicted and observed sig-
niﬁcant wave height (12s < T < 22s) for the 12 Decem-
ber 2003 swell event. Instrument locations are shown in
ﬁgure 9.

The model hindcasts are compared with observations in
Figure 15. Signiﬁcant wave heights Hs were computed from
the measured and predicted wave spectra at each instrument
location, including only the commonly modelled frequency
range (f1 = 0.05Hz, f2 = 0.08Hz). On that day the wind
−1, as measured by the CDIP
speed did not exceed 7 m s
Torrey Pines Glider port anemometer, but reached 13.5 m,
blowing from the North West, at NDBC buoy 46086. Such a
wind is capable of generating a local wave ﬁeld with frequen-
cies down to 0.095 Hz for fully-developed wave conditions.
As in the previous case, a large variation in wave height
was observed across the Canyon (Figure 15). Again, that
variation remains limited to a factor 10 diﬀerence for any
wave frequency (compare Figure 16a and b), whereas the
geometrical optics approximation predicts much larger gra-
dients. We note a general agreement of the predicted wave
height by the models, with an underestimation of the re-
fraction model for sites located down-wave of the Canyon.
The predicted frequency spectra are represented on Figure
16a,b at sites 35 and 37. At site 35, located up-wave of the
Canyon wall, NTUA5 and REF/DIF1 models are in a good
agreement with the measurement for the low frequency peak
(0.05 Hz), but underestimate the 0.08Hz peak. The refrac-
tion model overestimates the low frequency peak, but is in
good agreement with the 0.08Hz peak. At site 37, located
down-wave of the Canyon, NTUA5 and REF/DIF1 predict
a strongly attenuated low frequency peak, as is observed,
whereas the refraction model predicts no energy transmis-
sion across the canyon. Below a cut-oﬀ frequency of about
0.065 Hz, the canyon acts as a complete barrier in the ge-
ometrical optics approximation. The energy in the second
peak at 0.08 Hz is only reduced by a factor 4 across the
canyon, an eﬀect well described by all models, and thus at-
tributable to refraction. All models generally agree with the

Figure 14. Directional wave spectrum at Torrey Pines
Outer Buoy at 12:00 UTC on 12 December 2003.

However, wave heights are still markedly diﬀerent be-
tween the buoys. It thus appears that refraction plays an
important role for frequencies up to 0.14 Hz (see the dif-

X - 10

MAGNE ET AL.: WAVES OVER SUBMARINE CANYONS

observations for 0.07 < f < 0.2, within the spectrum mea-
surement conﬁdence interval, except for an overestimation
of the refraction model for the high frequency peaks (0.11
and 0.14 Hz) of the spectrum. However, due to the local
wind sea generation between the oﬀshore buoy and loca-
tions around the canyon, these propagation models are not
reliable for f > 0.095 Hz.

5. Summary

Observations of the evolution of swell across a sub-
marine canyon obtained in the nearshore canyon experi-
ment (NCEX), were compared with predictions of refrac-
tion and combined refraction-diﬀraction models including
the coupled-mode model NTUA5 valid for arbitrary bottom
slope [Athanassoulis and Belibassakis, 1999; Belibassakis et
al., 2001]. Predictions of a spectral refraction model are
in good agreement with observations [see also Peak, 2004
for the entire experiment], demonstrating that refraction is
the dominant process in swell transformation across Scripps
Canyon. The geometrical optics approximation, on which
the refraction model is based, turned out to be very robust.
Accurate spectral predictions were obtained with taht model
even in cases where the wave energy changes by a factor of
10 over three quarters of a wavelength.

For waves longer than 12 s, even larger gradients are pre-
dicted by the refraction model, but these gradients are not
observed. At those frequencies, accurate results were ob-
tained with the NTUA5 model and elliptic mild slope equa-
tion models that include diﬀraction, which acts as a lim-
iter on the wave energy gradients. Diﬀerences between the
models were clariﬁed with 2D simulations using represen-
tative transverse proﬁles of La Jolla and Scripps Canyons,
showing the behavior of the far wave ﬁeld as a function of
the incidence angle. The underestimation by the refraction
model may be interpreted as the result of wave tunnelling,
i.e. a transmission of waves to water depths greater than
allowed by Snel’s law, for obliquely incident waves [see also,
Thomson et al., 2005 ]. This tunnelling eﬀect cannot be
represented in the geometrical optics approximation, and
thus the refraction model predicts that all wave energy is
trapped for large incidence angles relative to the depth con-
tours, while a small fraction of the wave energy is in fact
transmitted across the canyon. Although diﬀerent from the
classical diﬀraction eﬀect behind a breakwater [e.g. Mei
1989], this tunnelling is a form of diﬀraction in the sense
that it prevents a sharp spatial variation of wave amplitude,
and induces a leakage of wave energy in areas forbidden by
geometrical optics.

Observations were also compared with a parabolic
refraction-diﬀraction model that is known to be inaccurate
for large oblique wave directions relative to the numerical
grid, and is shown here to overestimate the amplitude of
waves transmitted across the canyon and underestimate the
amplitude of waves focused at the head of the canyon. Fi-
nally, depending on the bottom proﬁle and incidence an-
gle, higher order bottom slope and curvature terms (incor-
porated in modiﬁed mild slope equations and NTUA5), as
well as evanescent and sloping-bottom modes (included in
NTUA5) can be important for an accurate representation of
wave propagation over a canyon at small incidence angles.
For large incidence angles, that are more common for natu-
ral canyons across the shelf break, the standard mild slope
equation (MSE) gives an accurate representation of the vari-
ations in surface elevation spectra that is similar to that of
the full NTUA5 model. Yet, further analysis of NCEX bot-
tom velocity and pressure measurements may show that the
MSE or other mild slope models may not accurately rep-
resent near bottom wave properties, as also discussed by
Athanassoulis et al. [2003].

Acknowledgments. The authors acknowledge the Oﬃce of
Naval Research (Coastal Geosciences Program) and the National
Science Foundation (Physical Oceanography Program) for their
ﬁnancial support of the Nearshore Canyon Experiment. Steve El-
gar provided bathymetry data, Julie Thomas and the staﬀ of the
Scripps Institution of Oceanography deployed the wave buoys,
and Paul Jessen, Scott Peak, and Mark Orzech assisted with the
data processing. Analysis results of the infragravity wave reﬂec-
tions across La Jolla Canyon were kindly provided by Jim Thom-
son. The authors also acknowledge anonymous referees for their
useful comments and suggestions.

Figure 16. Comparison of predicted and observed fre-
quency spectra at (a) site 35, and (b) site 37, 12 Decem-
ber 2003 swell event.

In the two events most of the wave evolution is accounted
for by refraction. However, diﬀraction is included in the
models based on the MSE and its extensions, and this eﬀect
allows for a tunnelling of wave energy across the canyon.
In these models, wave heights across the canyon are thus
larger, in better agreement with observed wave heights and
wave spectra at the sheltered sites 32, 36 and 37 (ﬁgures 11,
13, 15).

The diﬀerences between NTUA5, MSE and MMSE model
predictions are very small and thus only NTUA5 results are
shown in ﬁgure 13. It may appear surprising that the wave
height behind the canyon is still 20% of the oﬀshore wave
height whereas the 2D simulations with comparable inci-
dence angles yield wave heights much less than 5%. How-
ever, the Scripps Canyon is neither inﬁnitely long nor uni-
form along its axis. The three-dimensional topography ap-
parently reduces the blocking eﬀect of long period swells
that was found over two-dimensional canyons.

MAGNE ET AL.: WAVES OVER SUBMARINE CANYONS

X - 11

References

Ardhuin, F., Quelles mesures pour
´etats de mer en zone cˆoti`ere?,
l’Atelier Experimentation et Instrumentation,
[http://www.ifremer.fr/aei2006/resume long/T1S3/14-
aei2006-55.pdf], 2006.

la pr´evistion des
in Communications de
in French.

Ardhuin, F., T. H. C. Herbers, and W. C. O’Reilly, A hybrid
Eulerian-Lagrangian model for spectral wave evolution with
application to bottom friction on the continental shelf, J. Phys.
Oceanogr., 31 (6), 1498–1516, 2001.

Ardhuin, F., T. H. C. Herbers, W. C. O’Reilly, and P. F.
Jessen, Swell transformation across the continental shelf. part
II: validation of a spectral energy balance equation, J. Phys.
Oceanogr., 33, 1940–1953, 2003.

Athanassoulis, G. A., and K. A. Belibassakis, A consistent
coupled-mode theory for the propagation of small amplitude
water waves over variable bathymetry regions, J. Fluid Mech.,
389, 275–301, 1999.

Athanassoulis, G. A., K. A. Belibassakis, and Y. G. Geor-
giou, Transformation of the point spectrum over variable
bathymetry regions,
the 15th Interna-
tional Polar and Oﬀshore Engineering Conference, Honolulu,
Hawaii, ISOPE, 2003.

in Proceedings of

Belibassakis, K. A., G. A. Athanassoulis, and T. P. Gerostathis,
A coupled-mode model for the refraction-diﬀraction of linear
waves over steep three-dimensional bathymetry, Appl. Ocean
Res., 23, 319–336, 2001.

Berkhoﬀ, J. C. W., Computation of combined refraction-
diﬀraction, in Proceedings of the 13th international conference
on coastal engineering, pp. 796–814, ASCE, 1972.

Booij, N., A note on the accuracy of the mild-slope equation,

Coastal Eng., 7, 191–203, 1983.

Booij, N., R. C. Ris, and L. H. Holthuijsen, A third-generation
wave model for coastal regions. 1. model description and vali-
dation, J. Geophys. Res., 104 (C4), 7,649–7,666, 1999.

Chamberlain, P. G., and D. Porter, The modiﬁed mild slope equa-

tion, J. Fluid Mech., 291, 393–407, 1995.

Chandrasekera, C. N., and K. F. Cheung, Extended linear
refraction-diﬀraction model, J. of Waterway, Port Coast.
Ocean Eng., 123 (5), 280–286, 1997.

Chandrasekera, C. N., and K. F. Cheung, Linear refraction-
diﬀraction model for steep bathymetry, J. of Waterway, Port
Coast. Ocean Eng., 127 (3), 161–170, 2001.

Chao, Y.-Y., and W. J. Pierson, Experimental studies of the re-
fraction of uniform wave trains and transient wave groups near
a straight caustic, J. Geophys. Res., 77 (24), 4545–4553, 1972.
Dalrymple, R. A., and J. T. Kirby, Models for very wide-angle
water waves and wave diﬀraction, J. Fluid Mech., 192, 33–50,
1988.

Dobson, R. S., Some applications of a digital computer to hy-
draulic engineering problems, Tech. Rep. 80, Department of
Civil Engineering, Stanford University, 1967.

Gerosthathis, T., K. A. Belibassakis, and G. Athanassoulis,
Coupled-mode, phase-resolving model
for the transforma-
tion of wave spectrum over steep 3d topography. a parallel-
architecture implementation, in Proceedings of OMAE 2005
24th International Conference on Oﬀshore Mechanics and
Arctic Engineering, June 12-17, 2005 - Halkidiki, Greece, pp.
OMAE2005–67,075, ASME, 2005.

Kim, J. W., and K. J. Bai, A new complementary mild slope

equation, J. Fluid Mech., 511, 25–40, 2004.

Kirby, J. T., Higher-order approximations in the parabolic equa-
tion method for water waves, J. Geophys. Res., 91 (C1), 933–
952, 1986.

Kirby, J. T., and R. A. Dalrymple, Propagation of obliquely in-
cident water waves over a trench, J. Fluid Mech., 133, 47–63,
1983.

Lee, C., and S. B. Yoon, Eﬀect of higher-order bottom variation
terms on the refraction of water waves in the extended mild
slope equation, Ocean Eng., 31, 865–882, 2004.

Longuet-Higgins, M. S., On the transformation of a continuous
spectrum by refraction, Proceedings of the Cambridge philo-
sophical society, 53 (1), 226–229, 1957.

Lygre, A., and H. E. Krogstad, Maximum entropy estimation of
the directional distribution in ocean wave spectra, J. Phys.
Oceanogr., 16, 2,052–2,060, 1986.

Massel, S. R., Extended refraction-diﬀraction equation for surface

waves, Coastal Eng., 19 (5), 97–126, 1993.

Mei, C. C., Applied dynamics of ocean surface waves, second ed.,

World Scientiﬁc, Singapore, 740 p., 1989.

Mei, C. C., and J. L. Black, Scattering of surface waves by rect-
angular obstacles in water of ﬁnite depth, J. Fluid Mech., 38,
499–515, 1969.

Miles, J. W., Surface wave scattering matrix for a shelf, J. Fluid

Mech., 28 (1), 755–767, 1967.

Munk, W. H., and M. A. Traylor, Refraction of ocean waves: a
process linking underwater topography to beach erosion, Jour-
nal of Geology, LV (1), 1–26, 1947.

O’Reilly, W. C., and R. T. Guza, Comparison of spectral refrac-
tion and refraction-diﬀraction wave models, J. of Waterway,
Port Coast. Ocean Eng., 117 (3), 199–215, 1991.

O’Reilly, W. C., and R. T. Guza, A comparison of two spectral
wave models in the Southern California Bight, Coastal Eng.,
19, 263–282, 1993.

Peak, S. D., Wave refraction over complex nearshore bathymetry,
Master’s thesis, Naval Postgraduate School, available in PDF
from the NPS library website, see http://www.nps.edu, 2004.
Porter, D., and D. J. Staziker, Extensions of the mild-slope equa-

tion, J. Fluid Mech., 300, 367–382, 1995.

Radder, A. C., On the parabolic equation method for water wave

propagation, J. Fluid Mech., 95, 159–176, 1979.

Rey, V., Propagation and local behaviour of normally inci-
dent gravity waves over varying topography, Eur. J. Mech.
B/Fluids, 11 (2), 213–232, 1992.

Rey, V., M. Belzons, and E. Guazzelli, Propagation of surface
gravity waves over a rectangular submerged bar, J. Fluid
Mech., 235, 453–479, 1992.

Takano, K., Eﬀets d’un obstacle parall´el´epip´edique sur la propa-
gation de la houle, La houille blanche, 15, 247–267, 1960.
Thomson, J., S. Elgar, and T. Herbers, Reﬂection and tunneling
of ocean waves observed at a submarine canyon, Geophys. Res.
Lett., 32, L10602, doi:10,1029/2005 GL 022834, 2005.

Fabrice Ardhuin, Centre Militaire d’Oc´eanographie, Service
Hydrographique et Oc´eanographique de la Marine, 29609 Brest,
France. (ardhuin@shom.fr)

