6
0
0
2
 
g
u
A
 
9
 
 
]
h
p
-
o
a
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
5
0
1
8
0
6
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Lagrangian transport through an ocean front in the

North-Western Mediterranean Sea

Ana M. Mancho

Instituto de Matem´aticas y F´ısica Fundamental,

Consejo Superior de Investigaciones Cient´ıﬁcas (CSIC),

Serrano 121, 28006 Madrid, Spain

Emilio Hern´andez-Garc´ıa

Instituto Mediterr´aneo de Estudios Avanzados,

IMEDEA (CSIC - Universitat de les Illes Balears)

E-07122 Palma de Mallorca, Spain

Des Small and Stephen Wiggins

School of Mathematics, University of Bristol,

Bristol BS8 1TW, United Kingdom

Vicente Fern´andez

Istituto Nazionale di Geoﬁsica e Vulcanologia INGV,

Via Donato Creti 12, 40128 Bologna, Italy

June 29, 2006

1

Abstract

We analyze with the tools of lobe dynamics the velocity ﬁeld from a numerical

simulation of the surface circulation in the Northwestern Mediterranean Sea. We iden-

tify relevant hyperbolic trajectories and their manifolds, and show that the transport

mechanism known as the ‘turnstile’, previously identiﬁed in abstract dynamical sys-

tems and simpliﬁed model ﬂows, is also at work in this complex and rather realistic

ocean ﬂow.

In addition nonlinear dynamics techniques are shown to be powerful

enough to identify the key geometric structures in this part of the Mediterranean. In

particular the North Balearic Front, the westernmost part of the transition zone be-

tween saltier and fresher waters in the Western Mediterranean is interpreted in terms

of the presence of a semipermanent “Lagrangian barrier” across which little transport

occurs. Our construction also reveals the routes along which this transport happens.

Topological changes in that picture, associated with the crossing by eddies and that

may be interpreted as the breakdown of the front, are also observed during the simu-

lation.

2

1 Introduction

Ocean water masses of different origins have distinct contents of salt, heat, nutrients and

chemicals. Currents transport them, and energetic mesoscale features are responsible for

most of their mixing with surrounding waters.

Vortices are the most well studied of such structures. Frequently they are long lived,

and their cores remain relatively protected from the neighboring areas, so that water

trapped inside could maintain its biogeochemical properties for long time, being trans-

ported with the vortex. In steady horizontal velocity ﬁelds, the centers of vortices are

readily identiﬁed as elliptic points in the streamfunction level sets. The presence of closed

streamlines around them is the mathematical reason for the isolation of the vertex core

from the exterior ﬂuid.

When the velocity ﬁeld changes in time, closed streamlines are replaced by more

complex structures, some of which can be related in idealized cases to the Kolmogorov-

Arnold-Moser tori of dynamical systems theory. For slowly varying velocity ﬁelds vortex

cores remain coherent during some time, but there is vigourous stirring of the surround-

ing ﬂuid that ﬁnally leads to water mixing. In order to understand this mixing process,

one should focus on features of the velocity ﬁeld different from the elliptic points charac-

terizing the vortex cores. Since some time ago (Ju et al. 2003; Ide et al. 2002; Mancho et al.

2004) hyperbolic trajectories (trajectories with saddle-like stability properties which are

solutions to a dynamical system) have been recognized as the structures responsible for

most of the stretching and generation of intertwined small scales that ﬁnally leads to mix-

ing. In particular there are Distinguished Hyperbolic Trajectories (DHTs), characterized

by its special persistence as compared with the other hyperbolic structures, that act as the

organizing centers of the ﬂuid stirring processes.

3

Despite the great amount of attention devoted to the identiﬁcation and characteriza-

tion of vortices and their dynamics in oceanographic contexts (Olson 1991; Puillat et al.

2002; Ruiz et al. 2002; Isern-Fontanet et al. 2006), there are few studies focussed on hy-

perbolic objects, and most of them in idealized settings. A possible reason for this may be

that the intrinsic instability of trajectories close to hyperbolic points makes more difﬁcult

their identiﬁcation, in contrast with the recurrent character of trajectories in vortices that

allow their tracking for long times from in situ and satellite measurements. In addition,

whereas many aspects of vortex dynamics can be analyzed in a Eulerian framework, hy-

perbolic trajectories are deﬁned by their Lagrangian characteristics and only in this frame

can they be fully characterized (Ide et al. 2002; Mancho et al. 2004).

In this Paper we identify relevant hyperbolic trajectories from the surface velocity ﬁeld

of the Western Mediterranean Sea, obtained from a three dimensional model simulation

under climatological atmospheric forcing. Our aim is to show that transport mechanisms,

in particular the so called ‘turnstile’ mechanism, previously identiﬁed in abstract dynam-

ical systems (Channon and Lebowitz 1980; Bartlett 1982; MacKay et al. 1984; Wiggins

1992), and discussed in the context of rather simple model ﬂows (Rom-Kedar et al. 1990;

Beigie et al. 1994; Samelson 1992; Duan and Wiggins 1996), are also at work in this com-

plex and rather realistic ocean ﬂow. More broadly, nonlinear dynamics techniques are

shown to be powerful enough to identify the key geometric structures in this part of the

Mediterranean.

Western Mediterranean surface layers (up to a depth of about 150 m) contain Modiﬁed

Atlantic Waters of rather different characteristics (Millot 1999). Fresher waters (salin-

ity about 36.5 psu) recently entered from the Atlantic occupy the Algerian Basin at the

South and older and saltier waters (salinity above 38 psu) occupy the Northern part of

the area. The dynamics of the contact zone between these two surface water masses,

4

and eventually their mixing, is important to understand the physical and biogeochemical

properties of the Western Mediterranean. We focus on one of the oceanographic struc-

tures known to be of importance in these processes, the so-called North Balearic Front

(L ´opez-Garc´ıa et al. 1994; Pinot et al. 1995; Millot 1999). It extends roughly along the

Southwest-Northeast direction at the North of the Balearic Islands, with signiﬁcant dis-

placements and deformations. It is characterized by a strong salinity jump of about 0.6

psu (37.4 psu to the South and 38.0 to the North) down to 150 m depth. This identiﬁes the

front as the main transition zone between the two water masses. In Winter a weak but

detectable temperature gradient of 0.5-1 K/5 km can be observed in satellite images.

After selecting an interval of time in our simulation during which the front is well

formed, we explore the transport properties of the surface velocity ﬁeld in the region,

and ﬁnd the relevant Lagrangian structures, hyperbolic points and their manifolds, re-

sponsible for the establishment and permanence of the front. The location of the front is

identiﬁed as a “Lagrangian barrier” across which transport is small (as quantiﬁed with

the tools of lobe dynamics), and occurs via ﬁlaments that entrain water along transport

routes that we identify. The presence of eddies strongly affect the Lagrangian structures

in a process that can be interpreted as the break-down of the front.

The Paper is organized as follows: In Section 2 we introduce some of the dynamical

systems concepts that will be used in the following. Section 3 describes our numerical

ocean model and Section 4 addresses the adaptation of the standard algorithms to the

kind of oceanographic data provided by the model. Section 5 contain our main results

and the conclusions are summarized in Section 6.

5

2 Distinguished Hyperbolic Trajectories and their Mani-

folds

In recent years there have been many applications of the dynamical systems approach to

transport in oceanographic ﬂows. Recent reviews are Jones and Winkler (2002); Wiggins

(2005); Samelson and Wiggins (2006). In this section we describe the basic ideas that we

will use in our analysis. Although the same concepts are of use in three dimensional

ﬂows, we describe here just the two dimensional situation, since as discussed below the

structures we identify can be considered two dimensional to a good approximation dur-

ing the time scales relevant here.

Stagnation points are well known features of steady ﬂows that generally play an im-

portant role in “organizing” the qualitatively distinct streamlines in the ﬂow. For exam-

ple, saddle-type stagnation points can occur on boundaries where streams of ﬂow tan-

gential to the boundary coming from opposite directions meet and then separate from

that boundary. Saddle-type stagnation points can occur in the interior of a ﬂow at a point

where ﬂuid seems to both converge to the point along two opposite directions and di-

verge from it along two different directions.

In steady ﬂows the stagnation point is a

trivial example of a ﬂuid particle trajectory (i.e., it is a “solution,” in this case a ﬁxed point

solution, of the equations for ﬂuid particle motions deﬁned by the velocity ﬁeld) and the

saddle point nature is manifested by the fact that there are directions for which nearby

trajectories approach the stagnation point at an exponential rate and move away from

the stagnation point at an exponential rate. These directions are sometimes referred to as

“stagnation streamlines”. They deﬁne material curves that “cross” at the stagnation point

and typically form the boundaries between qualitatively distinct regions of ﬂow.

A related “time-dependent” picture as that described above exists for unsteady ﬂows,

6

with both similar, as well as much more complex, implications for transport. In unsteady

ﬂows a stagnation point at a given time –or rather, an Instantaneous Stagnation Point

(ISP)– is a location at which velocity vanishes at that time. The sequence of locations is

generally nota ﬂuid particle trajectory (Ide et al. 2002). The true analog of the saddle-type

stagnation point of steady ﬂows is a Distinguished Hyperbolic Trajectory (DHT) (Ide et al.

2002). “Hyperbolic” is the dynamical systems terminology for “saddle-type”. These are

ﬂuid particle trajectories that have (time-dependent) directions for which nearby trajec-

tories approach and move away from the DHT at exponential rates. “Distinguished”

is a notion that is discussed in detail in Ide et al. (2002), but the idea is that these are

the key, isolated hyperbolic trajectories that serve to organize the transport behavior in

a ﬂow because they remain substantially more localized (in a well deﬁned sense, see

Ide et al. (2002)) than neighboring hyperbolic trajectories. Ide et al. (2002), Ju et al. (2003),

and Mancho et al. (2004) develop the algorithms that allow us to compute DHTs in a given

ﬂow. They are iterative methods that start with a ﬁrst guess for the DHT positions in an

interval of time (i.e. an initial curve in space and time) and then reﬁne the space-time

curve by imposing the criteria of hyperbolicity and localization. In the ﬂows considered

here, a good ﬁrst guess is the location of ISPs, since it turns out that a DHT is often found

in the neighborhood of an Eulerian ISP.

Just as in the steady case, there are analogs to the stagnation streamlines: in the dy-

namical systems terminology these are referred to as the stable and unstable manifolds of the

DHT, and they are time-dependent material curves. In dynamical systems terminology

the fact that they are material curves means that they are invariant, i.e. a ﬂuid particle

trajectory starting on one of these curves must remain on that material curve during the

course of its time evolution. “Stable manifold” means that trajectories starting on this

material curve approach the DHT at an exponential rate as time goes to inﬁnity, and “un-

7

stable manifold” means that trajectories starting on this material curve approach the DHT

at an exponential rate as time goes to minus inﬁnity. Mancho et al. (2003, 2004) develop

the algorithms that enable us to compute the stable and unstable manifolds of hyperbolic

trajectories.

In unsteady ﬂows stable and unstable manifolds of DHTs can intersect in isolated

points different from the DHTs. This is a fundamental difference with respect to steady

ﬂows, and give rise to moving regions of ﬂuid bounded by pieces of stable and unstable

manifolds, the so called “lobes”. Since the manifolds are material lines, ﬂuid can not cross

them by purely advective processes and thus they are perfect Lagrangian barriers (diffu-

sion, or motion along the third dimension can however induce cross-manifold transport).

Motion of the “lobes” is thus the mechanism responsible for mediating Lagrangian trans-

port between different regions. References describing “lobe dynamics” in general are

Rom-Kedar and Wiggins (1990); Beigie et al. (1994); Wiggins (1992); Malhotra and Wiggins

(1998); Samelson and Wiggins (2006). Examples of applications of lobe dynamics to oceano-

graphic ﬂows are Ngan and Shepherd (1997); Rogerson et al. (1999); Yuan et al. (2001, 2004);

Miller et al. (2002); Deese et al. (2002). We will describe these ideas more fully in the con-

text of transport associated with the Balearic front in the Mediterranean.

3 The Ocean Circulation Model

In this work we analyze velocity ﬁelds which are obtained from an ocean model, DieCAST

(Dietrich 1997), adapted to the Mediterranean Sea (Dietrich et al. 2004; Fern´andez et al.

2005). The 3D primitive equations are discretized with a fourth-order collocated control

volume method. In zones adjacent to boundaries a conventional second order method is

used. A fundamental feature of control volume based models is that the predicted quan-

8

tities are control volume averages, while face-averaged quantities are used to evaluate

ﬂuxes across control volume faces (Sanderson and Brassington 1998). These quantities

are computed using fourth-order approximations and numerical dispersion errors are

further reduced in the modiﬁed incompressibility algorithm by Dietrich (1997).

Horizontal resolution is the same in both the longitudinal (φ) and latitudinal (λ) direc-

tions, with ∆φ= (1/8) of degree and ∆λ = cos λ∆φ thus making square horizontal control

volume boundaries. Vertical resolution is variable, with 30 control volume layers. The

thickness of control volumes in the top layer is 10.3 m and they are smoothly increased

up to the deepest bottom control volume face at 2750 m. Thus ETOP05 bathymetry is

truncated at 2750 m depth and it is not ﬁltered or smoothed.

Horizontal viscosity and diffusivity values are constant and equal to 10 m2 s−1. For

the vertical viscosity and diffusivity, a formulation based on the Richardson number de-

veloped in Pacanowski and Philander (1981) is used, with background values set at near-

molecular values (10−6 and 2 × 10−7 m2s−1 respectively). We use monthly mean wind

stress reanalyzed from 10 m wind output from ECMWF, as chosen for the Mediterranean

Sea Models Evaluation Experiment (Beckers et al. 2002). The heat and the freshwater

ﬂuxes used to force the model are model-determined from monthly climatological SST

and SSS as described in Dietrich et al. (2004). The only open boundary is the Strait of

Gibraltar, where inﬂow conditions are set similar to observations and outﬂow is model-

determined by upwind. Everywhere else, free-slip lateral boundary conditions are used.

All bottom dissipation is represented by a conventional nonlinear bottom drag with a co-

efﬁcient of 0.002. Lateral and bottom boundaries are thermally insulating. The model is

initialized at a state of rest with the annual mean temperature and salinity ﬁelds taken

from the climatological data. The spin-up phase of integration is carried out for 16 years.

Each year is considered to have 12 months 30 days length each (i.e. 360 days). The cli-

9

matological forcings we use are adequate to identify the mechanisms and processes oc-

curring under typical or average circumstances. Under this approach, high frequency

motions are weak in our model and a daily sampling is adequate. The impact on trans-

port of disturbances containing high frequencies, such as storms or wind bursts, is not

the focus of the present Paper and would need speciﬁc modelling beyond climatological

forcing.

We focus on velocity ﬁelds obtained at the second layer which has its center at a depth

of 15.93 m. This is representative of the surface circulation and is not as directly driven

by wind as the top layer. We have recorded velocities, temperatures and salinities in

this model layer for ﬁve years. Dynamical systems approaches have already been ap-

plied to this data set, in particular Lyapunov techniques to quantify mixing strength

(d’Ovidio et al. 2004), and the “leaking” approach (Schneider et al. 2005) to quantify

escape and residence times in several areas. Here we concentrate in the Northwestern

region and apply the methods of lobe dynamics to characterize transport processes in the

North Balearic Front area.

Figure 1 shows an example of the output of the model for the velocity ﬁeld in the

selected layer of the Western Mediterranean Sea at day 649 (the 19th day of the tenth

month –October– of the second year). Two well known currents, the Northern Current

ﬂowing southwards close to the Spanish coast and the Balearic Current associated with

the North Balearic Front and ﬂowing northeastwards North of the Balearics, are observed

although signiﬁcantly deformed by the presence of eddies. The Figure shows also the ISPs

of the velocity ﬁeld: circles for the elliptic and crosses for the saddle-type ones.

The velocity ﬁeld has small vertical components, so that this is not strictly a two di-

mensional ﬂow. With vertical velocities of the order of 10−5 m/s, particles in the sec-

ond model layer require about 13 days to traverse the layer. But during that time this

10

year = 2, month = 10, day = 19

day = 649

44N

43N

42N

40N

39N

t
a

l

41N

38N

1W

0

1E

2E

3E

5E

6E

7E

8E

9E

4E
lon

Figure 1: Velocity ﬁeld at 15.93 m depth in the Northwestern Mediterranean at simulation

day 649 (October). The Westernmost coast is the Spanish one, the islands are the Balearics,

and the Easternmost coasts are portions of Corsica and Sardinia. Circles indicate elliptic

ISPs and crosses indicate saddle-type ISPs.

11

vertical velocity is not constant. Averaging over the relevant time scales we ﬁnd effec-

tive velocities of 0.1-0.7 m/day, depending on location and season (d’Ovidio et al. 2004;

Schneider et al. 2005), and thus residence times in the second layer are between two

weeks and several months. As a rule of thumb we can consider that trajectories preserve

two dimensionality during time intervals of about 20 days. Since most of our trajectory

integrations will be restricted to time intervals below that duration, they can be consid-

ered two dimensional to a good approximation.

By inspection of the temperature and salinity model outputs we identify a four month

interval starting on October of the second simulation year (i.e. Autumn and early Winter)

as an example in which gradients are strong most of the time and thus the North Balearic

Front well deﬁned (see Fig. 2). We select this interval of time as our study case for which

dynamic structures will be calculated.

4 Computation of Trajectories and Manifolds in Mediter-

ranean Data Sets

our velocity ﬁeld are

The equations of motion that describe the horizontal evolution of particle trajectories in

dφ
dt
dλ
dt

=

=

u(φ, λ, t)
Rcos(λ)
v(φ, λ, t)
R

(1)

(2)

where u and v represent the eastwards and northwards components of the surface veloc-

ity ﬁeld coming from the simulations described in the previous section, R is the radius of

the Earth (6400 km in our computations), φ is longitude and λ latitude. Particle trajec-

tories must be integrated in equations (1)-(2) and since information is provided just in a

12

discrete space-time grid, a ﬁrst issue to deal with is that of interpolation of discrete data

sets. A recent paper by Mancho et al. (2006) compares different interpolation techniques

in tracking particle trajectories. Bicubic spatial interpolation in space (Press et al. 1992)

and third order Lagrange polynomials in time are shown to provide a computationally

efﬁcient and accurate method. We use this technique in our computations. However we

notice that bicubic spatial interpolation in space as discussed in Press et al. (1992) requires

an equally spaced grid. Our data input is expressed in spherical coordinates, and the grid

is not uniformly spaced in the latitude coordinate. In order to interpolate in an uniformly

spaced grid, we transform our coordinate system (λ, φ) to a new coordinate system with

coordinates (µ, φ). The latitude λ is related to the new coordinate µ

Our velocity ﬁeld is now on a uniform grid in the (µ, φ) coordinates. The equations of

motion in the old variables are transformed to a new expression in the new variables,

µ = ln|secλ + tanλ|

dφ
dt
dµ
dt

=

=

u(φ, µ, t)
Rcos(λ(µ))
v(φ, µ, t)
Rcos(λ(µ))

λ =

− 2 atan(e−µ) .

π
2

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

where λ(µ) is obtained by inverting Eq. (3), i.e.

Once trajectories are integrated from these equations, for presentation purposes one

can convert µ values back to latitudes λ just by using (6).

Distinguished hyperbolic trajectories and their unstable and stable manifolds are the

main dynamical systems objects that we use to describe and quantify transport. Our ve-

locity data set lasts only for a ﬁnite time, it is highly aperiodic in time, and turbulent.

Computation of hyperbolic trajectories for this kind of ﬂow is discussed in Ju et al. (2003)

13

and in Ide et al. (2002), where algorithms for their computation are developed. A novel

technique to compute stable and unstable manifolds of hyperbolic trajectories in aperi-

odic ﬂows is developed in Mancho et al. (2003). In Mancho et al. (2004) these hyperbolic

trajectory and manifold computation algorithms are combined into a uniﬁed algorithm

and successfully applied to a turbulent wind driven, quasigeostrophic double-gyre. We

will now apply these same algorithms to compute hyperbolic trajectories and their stable

and unstable manifolds that we will use to describe and quantify transport associated

with the North Balearic front.

5 Lagrangian structures and transport in the Balearic Sea

We focus on the region North of the Balearic Islands, the Balearic Sea. The main oceanic

structures known to be present there are the Balearic current and the associated North

Balearic Front (L ´opez-Garc´ıa et al. 1994; Millot 1999). This last feature is known to rep-

resent a transition zone between saltier and fresher waters in the Western Mediterranean.

The salinity ﬁelds obtained from our computer simulation display signiﬁcant salinity gra-

dients (and also temperature gradients in Winter–in Summer the surface layer is heated

in a rather homogeneous way) in the area (see Fig. 2). Our aim here is to interpret the

presence of the gradients and the front in terms of a semipermanent “Lagrangian barrier”

across which little transport occurs. This construction would also reveal the routes along

which this transport happens. Topological changes in that picture, associated with the

crossing by eddies and that may be interpreted as the breakdown of the front, are also

observed during the simulation.

Gradients are rather well deﬁned during Autumn of the second simulation year and

early Winter of the third one. During this period we ﬁnd a long interval (from day

14

Figure 2: Salinity front and manifolds at days 649 and 657. Salinity (in psu) is color coded

as indicated by the color bar. The black circles denote the DHT in the West (HW) and

the DHT in the East (HE). These are the DHTs whose unstable (red) and stable (blue)

manifolds, respectively, are used to construct the Lagrangian boundary of the front. The

blue dots are boundary intersection points, as described in the text.

649 to day 731) in which a Lagrangian structure constructed using stable and unstable

manifolds of DHTs remains persistent and acts as a partial barrier to transport. Its lo-

15

cation is well correlated with the salinity gradients, so that it can be interpreted as a

Lagrangian identiﬁcation of the North Balearic Front. The weak transport across the

structure can be described in terms of lobe dynamics. The situation resembles the one

in Coulliette and Wiggins (2001) in which quasigeostrophic dynamics has been used to

model a double gyre situation and the central jet between the two gyres in that problem

plays a similar role as that of the Balearic current in our problem. Lobe dynamics was

there successfully applied to quantify transport across the jet, occurring by the so called

turnstile mechanism. However in the more realistic data set analyzed here we need to

generalize some ideas used there. For example, in Coulliette and Wiggins (2001) DHTs

stay on one dimensional boundaries for all time (as boundaries are invariant), however in

our scenario the relevant current does not start nor end on clear one dimensional bound-

aries. This introduces some ambiguity in the identiﬁcation of the relevant DHTs (and of

the saddle-type ISPs used as starting positions in the iterative algorithm of (Mancho et al.

2004) that we use to determine the DHTs) from which to compute the manifolds that will

deﬁne the Lagrangian barrier. Most of the time, however, pieces of manifolds computed

from different DHTs in the same area rapidly converge towards each other, thus indicat-

ing that the location of the dominant hyperbolic curve is not a property of the particular

choice of DHTs, but a property of the ﬂow. Changes in the topology of the ﬂow cause this

convergence property to be lost. This happens at the end of the interval of time chosen in

our study case and will be commented on below.

5.1 Cross frontal transport: the turnstile mechanism

The geometric objects used to characterize transport by lobe dynamics methods are con-

structed by the rules discussed in (Malhotra and Wiggins 1998; Coulliette and Wiggins

2001; Samelson and Wiggins 2006). Here we describe in some detail these procedures in

16

a way that is particular to our ﬂow situation. Figs. 2 - 4 illustrate the construction at days

649 and 657. Fig. 2 contains all the dynamic structures superimposed on a salinity ﬁeld,

whereas for clarity only the ’boundary’ and the ’lobes’ are displayed in Figs. 3, and 4,

respectively.

1. Two DHTs should be identiﬁed, one in the western part of the front to be character-

ized and another in the eastern, that persists close to their initial positions during

the whole time interval of interest (denoted by [t0, tN]). Since our algorithm to locate

DHTs uses saddle ISP positions as ﬁrst guesses, ﬁgures displaying ISPs such as Fig.

1 are used to estimate these positions and the temporal persistence of the ISPs. The

positions calculated for the selected DHTs are plotted in Figs. 2 - 6 as black dots and

labelled as HW (the western one) and HE (the eastern one).

2. As the mean current ﬂows eastwards we proceed as in Coulliette and Wiggins (2001)

and compute the unstable manifold of the western DHT and the stable manifold of

the one in the East. They are the red and blue lines in Fig. 2, respectively. For clarity

in the presentation, of the two branches of each manifold (one at each side of the

DHT from which they emanate) we display in Fig. 2 only the one pointing in the

direction of the other DHT. Along both pieces of manifolds, in the region between

the two DHTs, the dominant direction of motion is from west to east. As character-

istic in unsteady ﬂows, both manifolds intersect repeatedly. Some of the intersection

points are marked with cyan dots. It is also typical that the unstable manifold (red)

of a DHT (HW in this case) emerges from it relatively straight, whereas it ﬂuctuates

widely when approaching the vicinity of the opposite DHT. In the same way, the

stable manifold (blue) of HE joins it smoothly, but displays characteristic oscillations

when close to the western DHT. The stable and unstable manifolds displayed in Fig.

17

2 a) have been computed after backwards and forwards time integration of a small

segment in the direction of the stable and unstable linear subspaces in the neigh-

borhood of the DHT for time periods of 14 and 19 days, respectively. Integrations

for longer time periods provide longer manifolds. However due to the restrictions

of the two dimensional approximation, a time period beyond 20 days is not com-

pletely trustworthy. In practice this means that the pieces of the manifold that are

far from the DHT may deviate from the true manifold as those pieces are the ones

obtained with longer time integrations. For instance, the unstable manifold in Fig.

2 b) has been computed for a time integration of 27 days. This means that unstable

structure in the far East is not completely reliable. However the piece of manifold

governing the turnstile mechanism, which is closer to the DHT, is obtained with

numerical integrations below the validity limit of 20 days and predictions obtained

from them are correctly approached in the two dimensional approximation.

3. Between the beginning and the end of the chosen time interval, we choose a se-

quence of times at which to analyze the manifold positions and compute objects

relevant for Lagrangian transport. The sequence of “observation times” is denoted

by t0 < t1 < t2 < . . . < tN−1 < tN. We note that the ti do not need to be equally

spaced. In order to illustrate the construction of boundaries and the turnstile mech-

anism for crossing the boundaries we need only two times, and for this purpose we

will choose to show days 649 and 657.

4. At each of the selected times ti , a “boundary” is constructed by choosing a ﬁnite

piece of the unstable manifold of the western DHT, [HW, bti], and a ﬁnite piece of the

stable manifold of the eastern DHT, [bti, HE], so that they intersect in precisely one

point, bti, which is called a boundary intersection point. The points {bti }, in addition to

18

satisfying an ordering constraint speciﬁed below, should be selected in such a way

that a boundary relatively straight, i.e. free of the violent oscillations displayed by

each of the manifolds when approaching the opposite DHT, is obtained. Since the

boundary is pinned at the points HW and HE we obtain a sequence of boundaries

that ﬂuctuate in time but remain approximately in the same place. Figure 2 shows

the selection of the boundary intersection points b649 and b657 at times 649 and 657,

respectively. For clarity, Fig. 3 displays just the resulting boundaries.

Since the boundary is made of material lines, no ﬂuid can cross it by horizontal ad-

vection processes, except at the observation times t1, t2, ..., tN at which the boundary

is redeﬁned. At these times, the only way ﬂuid at one side of the boundary can be

transferred to the other side is by the turnstile mechanism described and quanti-

ﬁed below. If this transport amount is small (as it will be shown to be the case),

the boundary can be characterized as a “barrier”, and gradients will be maintained

across it. As seen in Fig. 2, the position of the boundary is well correlated with the

position of the salinity front thus conﬁrming that the dynamical systems techniques

developed here are useful to identify the North Balearic front in terms of Lagrangian

objects.

5. Construct turnstiles at ti. At time ti we consider the point, denoted by b−

ti+1, that

will evolve into the boundary intersection point bti+1 (clearly, we cannot do this at

tN). Since the stable and unstable manifolds are invariant, this point is also on both

the stable and unstable manifolds. In the same way, b+

ti−1 is the location at time ti of

the boundary intersection point that was located at bti−1 at the previous time ti−1.

The additional constraint that needs to be imposed when choosing the sequence

{bti} is that b−

ti+1 results “upstream” (i.e. closer to HW along its unstable manifold,

or further from HE along its stable manifold) from bti. This introduces a restriction

19

Figure 3: Boundaries at days 649 and 657 constructed from a (ﬁnite length) segment of

the unstable manifold of HW and a (ﬁnite length) segment of the stable manifold of HE.

The boundary intersection points are denoted by b649 and b657, respectively.

on the choice of bti+1 once bti is chosen. Since ordering of points along manifolds

is preserved by time evolution, it turns out that b+

ti−1 would be “downstream” from

bti. Figures 2, 3 and 4 display some of these intersection points, showing that our

selection satisﬁes the ordering constraints. The segments of stable and unstable

20

manifolds between bti and b−

ti+1 (and between bti and b+

ti−1) trap regions of ﬂuid,

and these regions of ﬂuid deﬁned in this way are referred to as lobes. Some of them

can be seen in Fig. 2, and more clearly in Fig. 4.

6. Consider the evolution of the turnstile lobes from ti to ti+1. In this case b−

ti+1 evolves

to the boundary intersection point, bti+1, and the boundary intersection point at ti

evolves to a point b+

ti, which is also on both the stable and unstable manifolds. Then

the lobes between bti+1 and b+

ti represent the time evolution of the turnstile lobes

from ti to ti+1. Note that, because of the way in which the boundary is redeﬁned

at each observation time, and because of the different shape of the manifolds when

close or far from the DHT from which they emanate, each lobe is on opposite sides

of the boundary at the two considered times. These turnstile lobes contain all the

ﬂuid that has crossed the boundary between ti and ti+1. This transport process is

illustrated more clearly in Fig. 4 where the lobes experiencing the turnstile mecha-

nism are plotted before and after crossing the boundary.

The geometric construction performed at every observation time ti as explained above

allows us to calculate the amount of transport occurring across the boundary during each

time interval.

In computing the area A(Γ ) of a lobe Γ we use the formula

A(Γ ) = −R2

sin λdφ

Z∂Γ

(7)

where the integration is around the closed curve which forms the boundary of the lobe.

That this formula gives the area can be seen by considering the differential form ω ≡

−R2sinλdφ, calculating its differential (Spivak 1965): dω = R2cosλdφdλ which is iden-

tical to the area element on the sphere in spherical coordinates, and recalling Stokes theo-

21

Figure 4: Turnstile lobes from day 649. There is precisely one intersection point between

b649 and b−

657, which implies that there are two lobes in the turnstile. The bottom ﬁgure

shows the evolved position of these lobes at day 657. Comparing the two ﬁgures, one can

see that the turnstile lobe to the North of the boundary at day 649 has moved to the South

of the boundary at day 657, and the turnstile lobe to the South of the boundary at day 649

has moved to the North of the boundary at day 657 (the location of the boundary itself

can be seen in Fig. 3).

22

rem (Spivak 1965):

ω =

dω.

Z∂Γ

ZΓ

(8)

For day 649, as shown in Fig. 4, the two turnstile lobes have areas of 493.2km2 (the lobe

below the boundary, to the east) and 716.9km2 (the lobe to the west above the boundary).

At day 657, the eastern lobe is above the new boundary, and the western lobe is below it.

Assuming that the divergence of the surface ﬂow can be neglected so that the areas are

unchanged – in numerical experiments we have never observed more than a 3% change

– we can calculate the ﬂux across the barrier to be (716.9 − 493.2)km2 = 223.7km2, in the

southerly direction.

Modiﬁed Atlantic Waters occupy the surface layers of the area until an average depth

of about 150m. Using as an approximation for the mean horizontal speed of this water

mass the values at the second model layer considered here, multiplication of the 150m

depth by the area of the lobes gives 33.56 × 109m3 in 8 days, or an average ﬂux over this

interval of 0,049 Sv (1Sv=106m3/s). The average ﬂux obtained from area calculations of

further turnstile lobes until the middle of November remains below that value (the aver-

age is 0.025 Sv, always southwards). This should be compared to the 0.75-0.5 Sv which are

transported by the Balearic current. We see that cross-boundary transport is small dur-

ing this time interval and thus the Lagrangian boundary acts as a ”barrier to transport”

permitting only small amounts of mixing between Northern and Southern waters. It will

maintain a salinity (and thus density) front that we identify with the observed North

Balearic front. There is some indeterminacy in the deﬁnition of the boundary that we

identify as the front, arising from some freedom in the selection of the the intersections

{bti}. But other choices can only displace the boundary by a distance of the order of the

size of the lobes, which we see is small when not too close to the DHTs, and in fact also of

23

the order of the width of the transition region in salinity distributions such as the one in

Fig. 2, i.e. the width of the front.

5.2 Spatio-temporal structure of cross frontal transport

Since the only way in which our constructed Lagrangian boundaries can be crossed is via

the turnstile mechanism, the earlier and later location of the turnstile lobes reveals the

dominant routes along which the weak cross-front transport occurs. Figure 5 shows the

time evolution of a pair of turnstile lobes, one initially above and the other initially below

the boundary, as they evolve in time. The crossing of the boundary by the turnstile mech-

anism occurs between days 676 and 681, and the remaining panels in the ﬁgure show the

position of these lobes at some earlier and later times. The sequence illustrate that lobes

move essentially along the boundary except when close to HE, where they are ejected as

ﬁlaments transverse to the front (the one initially in the south ejected towards the north

and reciprocally for the one started in the north) and when close to HW, where they have

also the shape of transverse ﬁlaments and they become entrained into the boundary re-

gion. Fig. 5 also illustrates how lobes transport water of different salinity (coded in colors)

and how the above routes for lobe motion and shape correlate with the salinity distribu-

tion in the area. Note that the length of the manifolds and the whole process depicted in

Fig. 5 lasts only 21 days, so that the plotted manifolds remain approximately horizontal,

with only small corrections from the vertical ﬂow.

5.3 An Eddy-front interaction: disruption of the Lagrangian boundary

Not all ﬂow conﬁgurations allow the geometric construction identifying the Lagrangian

boundary and the associated turnstile lobes to be performed. It may happen that no pair

of DHTs persist in a given area long enough to support the mechanism, or their manifolds

24

0

1E

2E

3E

4E

5E

6E

7E

lon

681b

+
b
674

day = 664

−
b674

681b−−

43.5N

43  N

42.5N

42  N

41.5N

40.5N

40  N

39.5N

39  N

t
a

l

41  N

(a) Evolution of the turnstile lobes at day 674

backwards in time to day 667, or, in other

words, the location on day 667 of the lobes that

are turnstile lobes at day 674. The notation

b−−
681 denotes the evolution of the boundary in-

tersection point at day 681 backwards two ob-

servation times (to day 674 and to the current

time, day 667).

day = 674

43.5N

43  N

42.5N

42  N

41.5N

40.5N

40  N

39.5N

39  N

t

a

l

41  N

−
b681

b
674

38.5

38

37.5

37

36.5

38.5

38

37.5

37

36.5

day = 681

day = 688

43.5N

43  N

42.5N

42  N

41.5N

40.5N

40  N

39.5N

39  N

t
a

l

41  N

43.5N

43  N

42.5N

42  N

41.5N

40.5N

40  N

39.5N

39  N

t

a

l

41  N

0

1E

2E

3E

4E

5E

6E

7E

lon

(c) The turnstile lobes evolved to day 681.

++
b
674

b681

0

1E

2E

3E

4E

5E

6E

7E

lon

(d) The turnstile lobes evolved to day 688.

The notation b++

674 denotes the evolution of the

boundary intersection point at day 674 forwards

two observation times (to day 681 and to the

0

1E

2E

3E

4E

5E

6E

7E

lon

current time, day 688).

(b) Turnstile lobes at day 674.

Figure 5: The spatio-temporal structure of cross frontal transport described by lobe dy-

namics. Salinity (in psu) is color coded as indicated by the color bar.

can fail to intersect. It may also happen that manifolds started at relatively close DHTs do

not converge to the same curve but remain signiﬁcatively distinct, so that a unique well

38.5

38

37.5

37

36.5

38.5

38

37.5

37

36.5

25

deﬁned boundary can not be properly identiﬁed. In such cases, the turnstile transport

mechanism is not the most relevant one. At the end of the simulation interval analyzed

here we observe a change in the topology that signals the end of the predominance of the

turnstile mechanism in a process that can be interpreted as the breakdown of the front by

the interaction with an eddy. As a ﬁrst symptom, calculations of turnstile lobe areas reveal

an increase in cross-front transport starting at day 674 (middle of November). The average

transport between days 674 and 700 is of 0.303 Sv (southwards), still smaller than the

Balearic current transport but signiﬁcantly larger than the average cross-frontal transport

during the previous month (0.025 Sv, also southwards). At day 711, stable manifolds

emerging from HE and from another rather close DHT cease to converge into each other,

signaling the end of a situation with an essentially unique well deﬁned boundary. Later,

at day 731 our algorithm is unable to ﬁnd the location of HE starting from ISPs in the area.

This probably means that HE has moved away from the area under study. The black dot

in Fig. 6 is another DHT found in the region. But its stable manifold (i.e., the ﬁnite length

of manifold that we are able to compute) does not intersect the unstable manifold from

HW, thus revealing that is in fact a DHT different from HE, and that it can not support the

turnstile mechanism. The time evolution of the unstable manifold from HW suggests that

the reason from the change in behavior is the breakdown of the Lagrangian barrier by

the crossing of an eddy, identiﬁed by the rolling up of the manifold around an elliptic ISP

(Fig. 6). Note that even in this situation the manifold position is well correlated with the

salinity distribution, thus indicating that still Lagrangian structures are relevant. But the

transport mechanism is clearly different from the turnstile described above, being more

appropriately described as water transport inside an eddy.

26

(a) Day 733. The unstable manifold of HW does

not appear to intersect the stable manifold of

H ′

E. The unstable manifold is strongly inﬂu-

enced by the circulation associated with the el-

liptic ISP immediately to the lower right of H ′
E.

(c) Day 742. The earlier Lagrangian barrier

now appears completely destroyed as a result

of the inﬂuence of the eddy.

(b) Day 736. As the elliptic ISP moves further

away from H ′

E its inﬂuence carries the unstable

manifold with it.

Figure 6: The mechanism of the disruption of the Lagrangian barrier by an eddy. Salinity

(in psu) is coded in colors as indicated by the color bar. Red dots are ISPs of elliptic

character. Green dots are saddle ISPs. Also shown as black dots are the DHTs HW and

H ′
E.

27

6 Conclusions

In this work we have applied in a systematic way some tools developed in the context

of dynamical systems theory and known generically as ‘lobe dynamics’. The computer

generated surface velocity ﬁeld studied here is more complex and less regular that other

velocity ﬁelds previously considered in this context, but we have found that one of the

main mechanisms of transport by lobe motion, the turnstile, is still at work. The method-

ology includes the construction of a ‘barrier’ across which to compute transport, and in

our application to the Northwestern Mediterranean dynamics it has been identiﬁed with

one of the main oceanographic structures present here, the North Balearic Front. Trans-

port across it proceeds in the form of ﬁlaments that are entrained into the front close to

a DHT ‘upstream’, and released also in the form of ﬁlaments close to another DHT lo-

cated ‘downstream’. The ejection of these ﬁlaments at that location can explain recent

observations of waters saltier than expected just east of the island of Menorca (Emelianov

2006). The identiﬁcation of the DHTs and the calculation of their locations is by itself an

important subject, since they organize the ﬂow in the area and, because of this and of the

sensitivity of the trajectories in their neighborhood, they are candidates for launch loca-

tions in efﬁciently designed drifter release experiments (Poje et al. 2002; Molcard et al.

2006).

Despite the success of the approach described here, much work remains to be done

in order to develop dynamical systems techniques into a collection of systematic tools

for analyzing general oceanographic data. A classiﬁcation and understanding of the dif-

ferent topological regimes leading to qualitatively different modes of transport and the

transitions among them, similar to the existing ones for steady and time-periodic ﬂows,

would be desirable for the cases of turbulent aperiodic ﬂows. A characteristic of the dy-

28

namical systems approach is that it provides an unusually high detailed description of the

spatio-temporal structure of Lagrangian transport. Therefore it may well turn out to be

the optimal tool for analyzing data from ocean models with much higher spatio-temporal

resolution (e.g., higher frequency atmospheric forcing and more resolved spatial scales)

which capture more physical processes. This would enable us to better deﬁne, for exam-

ple, the process of the destruction of a barrier. In addition, consideration of the impact of

non-Lagrangian processes such as diffusion, of vertical motions, and of strong localized

perturbations beyond climatological forcing such as storms, would be needed to have a

more complete vision of transport phenomena and mechanisms.

Acknowledgements

A.M.M. acknowledges the MCyT (Spanish Government) for a Ram ´on y Cajal Research

Fellowship and ﬁnancial support from MEC (Spanish Government) reference MTM2004-

00797 and the Royal Society-CSIC cooperation agreement reference B2003GB03. E.H.-

G. acknowledges ﬁnancial support from MEC and FEDER through Project CONOCE2

(FIS2004-00953). We also acknowledge M. Emelianov for communicating us results from

a recent cruise before publication. D.S. and S. W. acknowledge ﬁnancial support from

ONR Grant No. N00014-01-1-0769.

References

Mech., 28, 295–317.

Bartlett, J. H., 1982: Limits of stability for an area-perserving polynomial mapping. Cel.

Beckers, J.-M., M. Rixen, P. Brasseur, J.-M. Brankart, A. Elmoussaoui, M. Cr´epon, Herbaut,

29

F. Martel, F. V. den Berghe, L. Mortier, A. Lascaratos, P. Drakopoulos, G. Korres, K. Nit-

tis, N. Pinardi, E. Masetti, S. Castellari, P. Carini, J. Tintor´e, A. ´Alvarez, S. Monserrat,

D. Parrilla, R. Vautard, and S. Speich, 2002: Model intercomparison in the Mediter-

ranean: MEDMEX simulations of the seasonal cycle. J. Mar. Sys., 33, 215–251.

Beigie, D., A. Leonard, and S. Wiggins, 1994: Invariant manifold templates for chaotic

advection. Chaos, Solitons, and Fractals, 4(6), 749–868.

Channon, S. R. and J. L. Lebowitz, 1980: Numerical experiments in stochasticity and ho-

moclinic oscillations. Ann. New York Acad. Sci., 357, 108–118.

Coulliette, C. and S. Wiggins, 2001:

Intergyre transport in a wind-driven, quasi-

geostrophic double gyre: An application of lobe dynamics. Nonlinear Processes in Geo-

physics, 8, 69–94.

Deese, H. E., L. J. Pratt, and K. R. Helfrich, 2002: A laboratory model of exchange and

mixing between western boundary layers and subbasin recirculation gyres. J. Phys.

Oceanogr., 32(6), 1870–1889.

Dietrich, D., 1997: Application of a modiﬁed “a” grid ocean model having reduced nu-

merical dispersion to the Gulf of Mexico circulation. Dyn. Atmos. Oceans, 27, 201–217.

Dietrich, D., R. Haney, V. Fern´andez, S. Josey, and J. Tintor´e, 2004: Air-sea ﬂuxes based

on observed annual cycle surface climatology and ocean model internal dynamics: a

non-damping zero-phase-lag approach applied to the Mediterranean sea. J. Mar. Sys.,

52, 145–165.

d’Ovidio, F., V. Fern´andez, E. Hern´andez-Garc´ıa, and C. L ´opez, 2004: Mixing structures

in the Mediterranean sea from ﬁnite-size Lyapunov exponents. Geophys. Res. Lett., 31,

L12203 (1–4), doi:10.1029/2004GL020328.

30

Duan, J. Q. and S. Wiggins, 1996: Fluid exchange across a meandering jet with quasi-

periodic time variability. J. Phys. Oceanogr., 26, 1176–1188.

Emelianov, M., 2006: Personal communication.

Fern´andez, V., D. Dietrich, R. Haney, and J. Tintor´e, 2005: Mesoscale, seasonal and inter-

annual variability in the Mediterranean sea using a numerical ocean model. Progress in

Oceanography, 66, 321–340.

Ide, K., D. Small, and S. Wiggins, 2002: Distinguished hyperbolic trajectories in time de-

pendent ﬂuid ﬂows: analytical and computational approach for velocity ﬁelds deﬁned

as data sets. Nonlinear Processes in Geophysics, 9, 237–263.

Isern-Fontanet, J., Garc´ıa-Ladona, and J. Font, 2006: The vortices of the Mediterranean

sea: an altimetric perspective. J. Phys. Ocean., 36, 87103.

Jones, C. K. R. T. and S. Winkler, 2002: Invariant manifolds and Lagrangian dynamics in

the ocean and atmosphere. Handbook of dynamical systems, North-Holland, Amsterdam,

55–92.

Chaos, 13, 1449–1457.

Ju, N., D. Small, and S. Wiggins, 2003: Existence and computation of hyperbolic trajecto-

ries of aperiodically time-dependent vector ﬁelds and their approximations. Int. J. Bif.

L ´opez-Garc´ıa, M., C. Millot, J. Font, and E. Garc´ıa-Ladona, 1994: Surface circulation vari-

ability in the Balearic Basin. J. Geophys. Res., 99 (C2), 3285–3296.

MacKay, R. S., J. D. Meiss, and I. C. Percival, 1984: Transport in Hamiltonian systems.

Physica D, 13, 55–81.

31

Malhotra, N. and S. Wiggins, 1998: Geometric structures, lobe dynamics, and Lagrangian

transport in ﬂows with aperiodic time-dependence, with applications to Rossby wave

ﬂow. J. Nonlinear Science, 8, 401–456.

Mancho, A. M., D. Small, and S. Wiggins, 2004: Computation of hyperbolic and their sta-

ble and unstable manifolds for oceanographic ﬂows represented as data sets. Nonlinear

Processes in Geophysics, 11, 17–33.

— 2006: A comparison of methods for interpolating chaotic ﬂows from discrete velocity

data. Computers & Fluids, 35, 416–428.

Mancho, A. M., D. Small, S. Wiggins, and K. Ide, 2003: Computation of stable and

unstable manifolds of hyperbolic trajectories in two-dimensional, aperiodically time-

dependent vector ﬁelds. Physica D, 182, 188–222.

Miller, P. D., L. J. Pratt, K. R. Helfrich, and C. K. R. T. Jones, 2002: Chaotic transport of

mass and potential vorticity for an island recirculation. J. Phys. Oceanogr., 32(1), 80–102.

Millot, C., 1999: Circulation in the western Mediterranean sea. J. Mar. Sys., 20, 423–442.

Molcard, A., A. Poje, and T. ¨Ozg ¨okmen, 2006: Directed drifter launch strategies for La-

grangian data assimilation using hyperbolic trajectories. Ocean Modell., 12, 268–289.

Ngan, K. and T. G. Shepherd, 1997: Chaotic mixing and transport in Rossby wave critical

layers. J. Fluid. Mech., 334, 315–351.

Olson, D., 1991: Rings in the ocean. Annu. Rev. Earth Planet. Sci., 19, 283–311.

Pacanowski, R. C. and S. G. H. Philander, 1981: Parametrization of vertical mixing in

numerical models of tropical oceans. J. Phys. Oceanog., 11(11), 1443–1451.

32

Pinot, J. M., J. Tintor´e, and D. Gomis, 1995: Multivariate analysis of the surface circulation

in the Balearic sea. Prog. Oceanog., 36, 343–376.

Poje, A. C., M. Toner, A. D. Kirwan, and C. K. R. T. Jones, 2002: Drifter launch strategies

based on Lagrangian templates. J. Phys. Oceanogr., 32(6), 1855–1869.

Press, W. H., S. A. Teukolsky, W. T. Vetterling, and B. P. Flannery, 1992: Numerical Recipes

in C. Cambridge University Press.

years. J. Mar. Sys., 31, 245–259.

Puillat, I., I. Taupier-Letage, and C. Millot, 2002: Algerian eddies lifetime can be near 3

Rogerson, A. M., P. D. Miller, L. J. Pratt, and C. K. R. T. Jones, 1999: Lagrangian motion

and ﬂuid exchange in a barotropic meandering jet. J. Phys. Oceanogr., 29, 2635–2655.

Rom-Kedar, V., A. Leonard, and S. Wiggins, 1990: An analytical study of transport, mix-

ing, and chaos in an unsteady vortical ﬂow. J. Fluid Mech., 214, 347–394.

Rom-Kedar, V. and S. Wiggins, 1990: Transport in two-dimensional maps. Arch. Rat. Mech.

Anal., 109, 239–298.

Ruiz, S., J. Font, M. Emelianov, J. Isern-Fontanet, C. Millot, J. Salas, and I. Taupier-Letage,

2002: Deep structure of an open sea eddy in the Algerian Basin. J. Mar. Sys., 33–34,

179–195.

431–440.

Samelson, R. and S. Wiggins, 2006: Lagrangian Transport in Geophysical Jets and Waves.

Springer-Verlag, New York.

Samelson, R. M., 1992: Fluid exchange across a meandering jet. J. Phys. Oceanogr., 22,

33

Sanderson, B. and G. Brassington, 1998: Accuracy in the context of a control-volume

model. Atmosphere-Ocean, 36, 355–384.

Schneider, J., V. Fern´andez, and Hern´andez-Garc´ıa, 2005: Leaking method approach to

surface transport in the Mediterranean sea from a numerical ocean model. J. Mar. Sys.,

57, 111–126.

Spivak, M., 1965: Calculus on Manifolds. Perseus Books, New York.

Wiggins, S., 1992: Chaotic Transport in Dynamical Systems. Springer-Verlag, New York.

— 2005: The dynamical systems approach to Lagrangian transport in oceanic ﬂows. Annu.

Rev. Fluid Mech., 37, 295–328.

Yuan, G.-C., L. J. Pratt, and C. K. R. T. Jones, 2001: Barrier destruction and Lagrangian

predictabilty at depth in a meandering jet. Dyn. Atmos. Oceans, 35, 41–61.

— 2004: Cross-jet Lagrangian transport and mixing in a 2 1

2 layer model. J. Phys. Oceanogr.,

34, 1991–2005.

34

