6
9
9
1
 
t
c
O
 
5
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
o
a
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
1
1
0
0
1
6
9
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

THE NON-ORGANIC THEORY OF THE GENESIS OF
PETROLEUM

Samar Abbas
Dept. of Physics ,Utkal University
Bhubaneswar-751004, India

and

Institute of Physics
Bhubaneswar-751005, India 1

e-mail : abbas@iopb.ernet.in

Abstract

Recent advances in interdisciplinary ﬁelds as diverse as astrophysics, cosmo-
geophysics, nuclear geology, etc. have led to interesting developments in the
non-organic theory of the genesis of petroleum. This theory, which holds
that petroleum is of an abiogenic primordial origin, provides an explanation
for certain features of petroleum geology that are hard to explain within
the standard organic framework. If the non-organic theory is correct, then
hydrocarbon reserves would be enormous and almost inexhaustable.

1. address for correspondence

1

(1) INTRODUCTION

Petroleum is the foundation of this Industrial Civilization.

It is from
petroleum that the world obtains its chemicals, its fuel for automobiles, en-
gines, airplanes, etc. and its energy supply for its power stations. Empires
have risen and fallen due to the annexation or loss of oil ﬁelds. Hence, the ori-
gin of petroleum and the assurance of future energy supplies is of the utmost
importance if this world is to continue as it is. It is generally believed that
currently recoverable crude oil resrerves will be nearing exhaustion within a
few decades. This estimate is based on the conventionally accepted (organic)
theory of the origin of petroleum.

However it does not necessarily follow that this civilization will fall into
darkness. The origin of petroleum still, despite the immense amount of
research devoted to it, has more uncertainties concerning it than any other
common natural substance 1 .

There are two basic frameworks : the standard organic theory; and the
nonorganic theory. The former holds that petroleum is of an organic origin
and is the currently favoured proposal. It predicts limited reserves worldwide;
moreover Indian reserves are predicted as minimal. The latter maintains that
it is of a non-organic genesis, supposedly of primordial origin. On the basis
of this theory, oil resources would be much larger than those predicted by
the biogenic theory. India, oil-poor in the biogenic framework, is predicted
to be oil-rich in the non-organic one.

Unfortunately the abiogenic theory and its implications are not well
known. Moreover, both opposing sides have taken uncompromising, even
fundamentalist views on occasions. There is hence a crucial need, especially
for nations such as India, to objectively assess the situation and investigate
the latter possibility more carefully; especially since, as we shall discuss be-
low, the evidence in favour of either candidate is inconclusive and the question
still remains an open one.

2

(2) THE ORGANIC THEORY

(a) Outline

The organic theory holds that the ﬁrst stage of the genesis of petroleum
involves plankton (single-celled organisms that ﬂoat on the oceans). These
die and gradually accumulate on the ocean ﬂoor. Other sediments start
accumulating too, and after a few million years the plankton are buried under
several km of sediment. The plankton, which have remained unoxidised,
under the increased values of pressure and temperature, are now transformed
into kerogen. Under favourable conditions of time and temperature this
kerogen, after further burial and heating, is transformed, via cracking, into
petroleum and natural gas. These then migrate towards the surface and
end up either reaching it (and drying up to yield bitumen or tar) or being
arrested on the way in traps (where, millions of years later, drillers of the
present industrial age make their big strikes) 2 .

(b) Advantages

biological theory:

Traditionally, the following points have been considered as supporting the

(1) Since it is known that hydrocarbons can be produced by photosyn-

thesis, it is natural to expect petroleum to be of an organic origin..

(2) Molecules thought to be of biological origin, e.g.: porphyrins, iso-
prenoids, hopanoids, etc. were found in petroleum, thereby providing sup-
port for the organic theory.

(3) The organic carbon in plants is depleted in carbon-13 due to the pro-
cess of photosynthesis. In dead organic material the C-13 is further depleted
due to radioactive decay. Since it was found that most petroleum and natural
gas showed the same depletion, it was viewed as a strong proof in favour of
an organic origin.

(4) Sediments are the most important host rocks yielding petroleum, i.e.
the oil produced from oil wells is generally obtained from a porous sandstone
deep below. Often sediments are associated with biological material that
could have acted as a source of the petroleum.

3

(5) The existence of large quantities of oil shale from which a hydrocarbon
mix similar to petroleum could be distilled was seen as a support in favour
of an organic origin. This followed easily, since the oil shale was taken to
be the kerogen source rock which, on suﬃcient burial, purportedly yielded
petroleum.

(c) Disadvantages

However the following observations go against the organic theory :
(1) The discovery that meteorites contain hydrocarbons came as a great
blow to advantages no. 1 and 2 of the organic theory. Porphyrins and
isoprenoids have been found on meteorites 3 . In addition, the outer planets
contain large amounts of hydrocarbon.

(2) The concentration of oil in the Middle East implies that that region
must have been exceptionaly proliﬁc in plant and animal life over long periods
of the Earth’s history. This is unlikely, since life tends to be more dispersed,
even today.

(3) The biological supports of optical activity and an odd-even eﬀect
disappear at low levels. There is a sharp cutoﬀ to the eﬀect of optical activity:
Petroleum in Philippi’s study 4 was found to be optically active if derived
from a reservoir with a temperature below 66 C, but surprisingly petroleum
from deeper levels of the same ﬁeld did not exhibit the phenomenon of optical
activity. T. Gold proposed that a certain bacteria ceases action above 66 C
5 , but he unfortunately did not suggest any candidates.

(4) Methane occurs in giant ocean rifts, in continental rifts and the lakes
that occur nearby, e.g. dissolved in the waters of the East African Lake Kivu
6 , as methane hydrates in permafrost, in active volcanic and mud volcanic
regions, as well as at great depths of more than 10 km as geopressured gas
etc. A biological origin for this methane can be virtually ruled out.

In light of these diﬃculties one should consider the other rival nonorganic
theories as serious possibilities. They forecast much larger oil reserves than
previously imagined and that too in regions which, according to the organic
theory, should be devoid of all petroleum.

4

(3) THE NON-ORGANIC THEORY

(a) Historical Development

The Non-organic theory of the genesis of petroleum has a long history,
dating back to the early days of the oil industry. Its development has led to
the birth of a number of variants, the most important of which are outlined
below :

(i) Metal Carbide Theory

The founder of the non-organic theory was Mendeleev, the Russian chemist
who proposed the modern version of the periodic table. In 1877, he wrote
that the petroleum deposits of the world seem to be controlled more by large-
scale tectonic features than by the ages of sedimentary rocks 7 . To explain
these observations he put forth the metal carbide theory. Many contempo-
rary investigators, mostly Russian, supported Mendeleev’s view.

In this model metal carbides deep within the earth reacted with water at
high temperatures to form acetylene which subsequently condensed to form
heavier hydrocarbons (as is readily formed in the lab). The following reaction

CaC2 + 2H2O = C2H2 + Ca(OH)2
is still popular amongst some astronomers and certain Russian geologists

as a major petroleum-forming possibility 2,p.271.

5

(ii) Nebular Condensation Theory

In 1890 Sokoloﬀ proposed that ‘bitumina’, at that time meaning the whole
range of hydrocarbons from petroleum to tar, precipitated as rain onto the
newly forming earth from the original nebular matter from which the So-
lar System was formed.
In modern terminology he simply suggested that
petroleum originated from meteorites. Later, he claimed, this petroleum was
ejected from the earth’s interior into the surface sediments 8 . Recently this
idea has been supported by F. Hoyle, who proposes that not only oil, but life
itself has extra-terrestrial origins 9 .

This postulate involves outgassing of the mantle via volcanic activity 10 .

(iii) Volcanic Origin Theory

(iv) Earthquake Outgassing

This theory proposes that outgassing occurs via deep faults, and that
this is still occurring today. The detailed mechanism has a long history.
V.I.Vernadsky ( 1933 ) propounded the notion that hydrocarbon compounds
would be stable against dissociation and oxidation at great depths and would
replace carbon dioxide as the chief carbon-bearing ﬂuid. N.A.Kudryavtsev (
1959 ) set forth the observations supporting what was later to be known as
Kudryavtsev’s rule (to be discussed shortly).

T.Gold 5,11 has become the main proponent of the idea of a non-organic
origin in the West. Due to his initiative, a hole was drilled into crystalline
basement rock which Gold predicted should yield petroleum. Only noncom-
mercial quantities of petroleum, if any, were found. Moreover most of Gold
’s colleagues were not convinced. However, recently a nearby hole did strike
oil (see below). This is now the most commonly known variant.

However,since Western nations either possess or control much of the
world’s petroleum reserves, there is no incentive to innovate. Since the nonor-
ganic theory predicts petroleum in much larger quantities and in areas hith-
erto considered unfavourable, it is petroleum-poor countries like India who
stand most to gain. Hence ,it is they who should take the risks of exploring
the non-organic theory, both theoretically and experimentally.

These are the prime variants of the theory. From now on, the word

6

‘non-organic theory ’ shall be taken to propound merely a primordial ( i.
e. dating from the birth of the Earth ) origin of petroleum which has been
migrating outwards from great depths of the Earth to form all hydrocarbon
deposits from tar and tar sands to oil shale. The detailed mechanisms men-
tioned above shall not complicate the issue during the course of the following
discussion.

(b) Outline of the Theory

The theory suggests that most of the hydrocarbons on earth are in fact
primordial. Carbonaceous chondrites appear to have been the most abun-
dant source rock during the formation of the earth. This type of meteorite
contains a signiﬁcant amount of hydrocarbons. As the earth formed, it would
have acquired these hydrocarbons via accretion (bodies of roughly equal size
clumping together through collisions), and later through meteorite impacts
(including hydrocarbons formed by the reaction of meteoritic carbon with
H2 at high pressures and temperatures on impact). Then as the earth grad-
ually cooled, a solid crust developed, while the interior remained liquid or
semisolid. The volatile substances would be expelled from the interior. It is
such gases that yielded, after biological modiﬁcation, the present atmosphere.
That hydrocarbons are being evolved from the inner parts of the earth is ev-
ident from the presence of mud volcanoes, ﬂames seen during earthquakes,
etc. On the way up, it is supposed, the oil ( dissolved in methane ) would
be trapped in suitable formations creating the world’s oil and gas, tar sands,
oil shales, bitumen, mud volcanoes, etc 11 . Kropotkin and Valyaev pointed
out that the hydrocarbons, carried upwards by streams of compressed gases,
would have two possible destinies : 1. In volcanic regions, they would be oxi-
dised to carbon dioxide and water, and 2. In ‘cool’ regions the hydrocarbons
would form oil and gas reservoirs after condensation from the rising stream
at levels possessing the requisite values of temperature and pressure 12.

(c) Evidence in favour of the Non-Organic Theory

(i) Geographical Location

The major oil ﬁelds of the world are concentrated on or near belts of

7

major tectonic activity or in fact along fault zones. Some of the phenomenal
Arabian ﬁelds, the world’s largest petroleum province, lie along the Persian
Zagros Mt. belt. The large North Sea reserves that have made much of
Northern Europe self suﬃcient in oil production lie along the North Sea
trench. The oil ﬁelds of Indonesia and Burma closely follow the seismic belt
running from New Guinea to Burma, while the oil ﬁelds of Gujarat appear to
be associated with the Cambay fault. Hydrocarbons are found in the Red Sea
rift Valley, the East African rift and the eastern branch of the Paciﬁc Rift.
These and many other examples that exist should illustrate the association of
hydrocarbons with large deep-seated cracks in the Earth’s crust rather than
any local sediments. However, note that the idea of deep-seated cracks may
also be required to explain the migration of petroleum within the organic
theory.

According to the non-organic theory, petroleum should occur universally
in areas of tectonic activity. This does not appear to hold true, and this
seems to be a problem for the non-organic theory.

(ii) Multilevel Fields

It is observed that petroleum, in at least small quantities ,is often present
in horizons below many accumulations, largely independant of the composi-
tion and mode of formation of the horizon. This is known as Kudryavtsev’s
rule, and several examples of it have been noted 13 . The suggestion that
the petroleum seeps from underneath is supported by the evidence of frac-
tionation, although this can also be explained by migration from deep source
rocks within the organic framework as well.

Methane-bearing strata in the same column show a progressive deple-
tion in the isotope carbon-13 as one rises from lower levels to higher levels
14. The organic theory holds that petroleum originating from source rocks
buried several km within the earth explains these properties. The oil and
gas formed would migrate upwards, thereby explaining both fractionation
and Kudryavtsev’s rule. However, this eﬀect would be a natural consequence
of the upward migration of primordial gases, with the heavier isotopes of
carbon rising more slowly than the lighter one.

8

(iii) Stability with Depth

It was once thought that petroleum and natural gas would not be able
to survive at depths greater than a few tens of kilometres below the sur-
face as the temperatures occuring there exceeded those observed to destroy
petroleum and natural gas in labs. Hence, it was reasoned, it was pointless
to look for either the fuel or its origin in the depths of the Earth. However
that picture has changecd radically. Huge quantities of gas have been dis-
covered at great depths e.g. in the Anadarko basin in Oklahoma.Reservoirs
of ‘geopressured gas’ have been found to underlie all major oil bearing re-
gions. These are sandstones and shales containing enormous amounts of gas
dissolved in salt brines. Reserves of such gas are estimated at 60000 TCF
(trillion cubic feet )in the U.S. alone 15, exceeding by several factors the total
conventional gas reserves of the world.

In addition vast domains of gas exist in open fractures of non-sedimentary
basement rock. A deep hole currently being drilled in Germany has found
these at depths of up to 4km 16 . Theory had to be revised, and Chekaliuk 17
showed that not only could natural gas exist at extreme depths but petroleum
could, too. The earlier experiments had simply not been done at the correct
pressures.
In fact, the pressures encountered stabilize oil and natural gas
against dissociation despite extreme temperatures, so that methane could
exist up to 30km with only 5 % dissociated. Further thermodynamic cal-
culations show that petroleum itself is mostly stable between 30 to 300 km.
Although this is heartening from the perspective of the non-organic theory,
this does not necessarily go against the organic theory, as we discussed earlier.
Sugisaki and Nagamine have recently investigated the thermodynamic
equilibrium of light hydrocarbon gases 18. Thermodynamic equilibrium of a
gas is revealed by the concentrations of its constituents. They studied the
reaction

CH4 + C3H8 = 2C2H6
At equilibrium the graph of [CH4]x[C3H8] vs. [C2H6] is a graph of con-
stant slope. Moreover, the temperature of equilibrium can be calculated from
this graph. It was found that hydrocarbon gases released by crushing plu-
tonic rock and natural gas from deep wells displayed these features, indicat-
ing chemical equilibrium. On the other hand, gases issuing from a peat bog,
shallow gas wells, and, signiﬁcantly, pyrolysis products from kerogen, coal
and other organic substances did not , although the temperature was 350 C

9

(thus exceeding the equilibrium temperature of 180 C for the plutonic gases)
and the longest experimental period was 555 days. Quite naturally this is a
puzzle , since if kerogen were the source of petroleum, then the hydrocarbons
released through pyrolysis of kerogen should display the chemical equilibrium
shown by the deep-level hydrocarbons. It should be noted that this work,18
pertains to thermodynamic equilibrium of light hydrocarbon gases and not
to the stability of the same.

The team explained these observations in terms of the organic theory as
follows: After the decomposion of petroleum, kerogen and other heavy hy-
drocarbons, the gases attain chemical equilibrium at the high temperatures
existing at great depths. As the gas cools, either by upward migration or by
cooling of the volcanic rock (in the case of the plutons), the gas composition
is frozen in once the temperature becomes so low that the gas composition ef-
fectively freezes in. To explain the negative result, i.e. the lack of equilibrium
of the pyrolysis products, they are forced to make the rather unilluminating
assumption that the rate of reaction was so slow that equilibrium could not
be attained even after 1 1

2 years.

A far more natural explanation, which the authors cited above chose
not to investigate, is using the non-organic theory.
If it is assumed that
the hydrocarbons are primordial and originate from the depths of the earth,
then they would naturally display the signatures of chemical equilibrium as
it would have been subject to high temperatures for a much longer time. As
the hydrocarbons migrate upwards, they would, at shallow levels, be invaded
by bacteria thereby losing the signatures of equilibrium.

Critics suggest that oxidation would destroy any petroleum anyway turn-
ing the hydrocarbons into CO2 , H2O and coke, the constituents of volcanic
gases. Since these come from deep inside the Earth, the primordial hydro-
carbons, even if they existed, would have been destroyed. However that is
not the full story. Substantial evidence indicates that unoxidised carbon
exists at great depths. Unoxidised carbon can also exist at great depths
within the organic framework, coke being produced by the decomposition of
hydrocarbons.

10

(d) The Existence of Unoxidised Carbon at Great Depths

The following evidence suggests that large masses of unoxidised carbon

exist at great depths:

(i) Diamonds

Diamonds provide evidence of the existence of carbon at great depths in

an unoxidised form, i.e. other than CO2, since diamond is pure carbon.

The diamonds might have been associated with extremely violent ex-
plosions, since if the diamonds had risen slowly along with magma of the
type spewed out by conventional volcanoes (e.g. Hawaii), they would have
been transformed into graphite. As thermodynamical calculations and ex-
perience in the production of artiﬁcial diamonds show, diamonds must be
cooled quickly to exist. Moreover the associated host rock contains other
high pressure minerals like peridotite, (believed to be one of the principal
constituents of the mantle), etc. The primary deposits of diamonds are the
rare kimberlite pipes, named after the now legendary South African town of
Kimberley which was once the chief source of these stones. These are deep
vertical shafts, funnel-like near the surface and gradually narrowing with
depth, presumably becoming a ﬁssure extending all the way to the upper
mantle where the pressure and temperature are suitable for the formation of
diamonds (45 kbars and 1000 C approx.). Why are they so deep? How were
they formed?Moreover ,if they are volcanic in origin, as they appear to be,
why is no lava associated with them? The only plausible conclusion is that
the pipes were caused by extremely violent eruptions of gas that blasted a
hole through 150km of overlying dense rock. The observation that the pore
spaces of natural diamonds contain highly compressed gases including CO2
19 and the result that heavy hydrocarbons clearly distinguishable
and CH4
from the surrounding rocks exist in the East Siberian pipes 20 , including
the observation that bore holes into these pipes yield signiﬁcant quantities
of CH4

21 enforce the conclusion that

(1)Unoxidised carbon exists in the outer mantle in the form of methane

and hydrocarbons, as does pure carbon.

11

(2)Volatile-rich regions exist in the inhomogeneous mantle which have
been giving oﬀ hydrocarbon gases long after the formation of the earth’s
crust which can build up such great pressures that they simply crack through
the crust in violent explosions.

(ii) Earthquakes

The eruptions of gas mentioned above, the generation of which is not dis-
puted by the organic theory, should cause earthquakes. In fact, earthquakes
have ben observed to be associated with gas ejection throughout recorded
history :

(a) Greco-Roman civilization :

Anaxagoras ﬁrst proposed the theory that gases (’air’) were the cause of
earthquakes 5,p.49. Seneca,Pliny,Pausanias and Aelian mention the evolution
of ‘wind’, strange animal behaviour, great ﬂames rising from the ground, loud
roaring noises, foul smell and peculiar fog and the development of peculiar
odour and muddy appearance in the water of wells and springs occuring
several days or months prior to the earthquake.

(b) Anglo-Saxon Age :

Newton wrote that he felt ‘sulphuurous fumes’were the cause of earth-
quakes 5,p.51 . Mitchell (1761) reasoned that gases caused the slow,visible
oceanlike waves that roll across landscapes during major earthquakes. He
also points out that the sudden deaths of large numbers of ﬁsh would be
most naturally explained by the evolution of poisonous gases from vents in
the ocean ﬂoor. Alexander von Humboldt (1822) summarized the then ac-
cepted theory as ‘elastic ﬂuids seeking an outlet to diﬀuse themselves into the
atmosphere’being the cause of earthquakes. Thousands of ﬁsh, many of a na-
ture previously unknown to local ﬁshermen, were found ﬂoating on the water
in Monterrey Bay on the day of the destructive San Fransisco earthquake of
18 April 1906 5,p.63. Similar reports come from Japan. Hydrogen Sulphide,
highly toxic to ﬁsh, is a likely candidate, killing the bottom dwelling ﬁsh that
are not normally caught.

(c) Chinese civilization :

More recently, at the Sungpan-Pingwu easrthquake (Aug. 1976), out-

12

bursts of natural gas from rock ﬁssures were reported. Moreover, these some-
times ignited, creating ﬁreballs. A total of 1000 were sighted. A few hours
before the earthquake, the water in local wells was observed to exhibit a
violent bubbling 5,p.61−62.

These reports spanning recorded history show that methane gas is closely
associated with earthquakes. In fact it is not unreasonable to suggest that
earthquakes are caused by enormous build-ups of highly compressed gases
containing mostly methane. This is in fact a strong support in favour of the
non-organic theory , since the amounts of methane evolved are too large to
have been produced by biological sources.

(iii) Mud Volcanoes

Mud volcanoes are volcanoes that, instead of ejecting lava and gas like
ordinary lava volcanoes, emit mud and gas instead. The cones built up by
them, consisting of solidiﬁed mud, are similar to, but smaller than, those built
by the lava volcanoes. They emit mostly methane, while smaller amounts
of other hydrocarbons are also present, including other inorganic gases like
He, H2, CO2 or steam. Many mud volcanoes simply eject high pressured
unconsolidated mud. In contrast, lava volcanoes emit mostly carbon dioxide
and water. Mud volcanoes closely follow the underlying fault lines. This is
not just commomplace, but holds for all mud volcano regions of the world.
Moreover, the quantities of gas required to produce the Soviet mud volcano
ﬁelds have been estimated to be several times the total gas content of the
largest known gas ﬁeld 5,p.101. How does one explain this?

The conventional explanation in terms of the organic framework is that
the gas is generated by bacterial action on the organic content of the mud.
However, this has some problems:

(1)The gas so generated would bubble up on a continuous basis, and hence
extremely violent explosions of the type observed in the major mud volcano
regions of the world would be extremely unlikely, as large concentrations of
gas most probably not build up.

(2)Chemical analysis reveals that the methane also contains signiﬁcant
amounts of ethane,propane and other hydrocarbons. Moreover, mercury,
helium and other trace elements occur in the gases. The carbon isotope
ratio is sometimes quite diﬀerent from that expected to be obtained from a
biologically derived material.

13

The inorganic explanation is that the gradually upward migrating gaseous
hydrocarbons build up beneath impervious rocks, and then after having built
up suﬃcient pressure, smash through the overlying rock, creating violent
explosions of the type observed. These violent displacements of gas will
cause violent turbulence of the water, which would stir up the ﬁne-grained
sediment, creating the mud so characteristic of these volcanoes.

(iv) Pockmark-like Craters on the Ocean Floor

Crater-like markings on the ocean ﬂoor have been reported from the Adri-
atic, the North Sea, the Gulf of Mexico, the Orinoco Delta, the South China
Sea, the Baltic, the Aegean, near New Zealand, and oﬀ Nova Scotia 22. Sonar
experiments in the North Sea reveal shallow, circular ridges ranging from a
few metres to 200 metres in diameter over an area of 20000 square kilometres,
roughly coinciding with the oil and gas producing region. It appears that in-
dividual events were responsible for creating large ﬁelds of these ‘pockmarks’,
since one set of pockmarks occurs 10m below an overburden of more recent
sediment, while the other is visible on the surface. Hence it is estimated that
while one such event occurred within the last thousand years, another oc-
curred 10000 years ago. Since small trickles of gas produce small steep-sided
cones of mud (as in the Gulf of Mexico, where bubbles issue from the top
of these miniature volcanoes), sudden releases of gas must be responsible for
the craters. Primordial gas is a good candidate to explain the pockmarks.

The author also points out a remarkable coincidence between the major

mud volcano regions of the world and the major oil-producing areas :

1. The Persian Gulf
1. The Caspian
3. Indonesia
4. Venezuela
The South Alaskan mud volcanoes emit mostly carbon dioxide and are
situated near lava volcanoes. Only 3 mud volcano regions are not correlated
with any oil-producing regions : S. Italy, N Zealand, Black Sea. This con-
nection arises naturally in the non-organic approach, since mud volcanoes
indicate cool regions of hydrocarbon migration.

(e) Extra-terrestrial Hydrocarbons

14

(i) Meteorites

If primordial hydrocarbons were incorporated in the earth during the pro-
cess of formation, then one should expect to ﬁnd such substances in ancient
material dating from the formation of the solar system. Such material exists
in the form of carbonaceous chondrites, a class of meteorites. Moreover, this
type of meteorite seems to be very common. In fact, asteroids and interplan-
etary material seem to be of largely carbonaceous derivation 23.

Materials previosly thought to be exclusively biological in origin have now
been found on meteorites. Porphyrin-type molecules are found in meteorites
and are almost certainly not of a biological derivation 3.

The outer planets have their atmospheres largely in the form of hydrocar-
bons, chieﬂy methane. Uranus’ atmosphere may contain as much as 14% of
methane gas 24,p.221. Neptune’s atmosphere consists of hydrogen, helium and
methane while the inner liquid shell is thought to consist of water, methane
and ammonia 24,p.233.

(ii) Planets

(iii) Comets

Halley’s comet (1986) was found to emit hydrocarbon gases. The core
was observed to be black, presumably because of it being composed of car-
bonaceous material. Lang and Whitney describe the interior as blacker than
coal ,its blackness perhaps being due to ‘an admixture of minerals, organic
compounds and metals’ 24,p.254.

(iv) Isotope and Trace Element Anomalies

The following peculiarities point to an extensive upward migration of
deep ﬂuids. Moreover, mantle-derived material occurs in association with
petroleum :

(a) HELIUM
The noble gas helium is closely associated with petroliferous regions. In
fact the world obtains its commercial supply of helium by separation from
natural gas 11,p.69.

15

(b) ARGON -40
The noble gas argon and its isotope Ar-40 occur in extraordinarily high
concentrations in gas ﬁelds 11,p.70. Moreover, assuming the source of the 0.1%
Ar by volume in the huge Panhandle gas ﬁeld to be the source rock itself
implies that the source rock must have been 100% potassium to supply the
required levels of Ar-40 29. Moreover, high values of Ar-40/Ar-36 are taken
as an indication of mantle-derived material 29,p.417 ; strikingly petroleum dis-
plays this signature.

(f) Experimental Veriﬁcation

The ﬁnal proof would involve an actual experimental veriﬁcation of the
theory. Deep wells are good tests, since organic materials cannot occur in
crystalline basement rocks. Several are under way :

The Kola Superdeep Hole

At 12 km, this is the world’s deepest well ( 1984 ). Located in the Kola
peninsula, now Russia, it reached deep down into the crystalline basement.
The drilling released ﬂows of gas at all levels. The liberated gases included
30 .
helium, hydrogen, nitrogen, methane and other hydrocarbons and CO2
This provides convincing support for the suggestion that hydrocarbon gases
exist at such great depths inside the earth that they cannot be of a biological
origin.

The German Deep Hole

This hole is located in Windischeschenbach ( Oberpfalz ) The depth
reached during the pilot drilling programme was 4 km ( 1990 ). From 3.2 km
down the drill encountered increasingly common cases of highly concentrated
salt brines with gases like methane and helium in open caves in the rock 16 ,
but no petroleum .

16

The Swedish Hole

The discovery of an oil and/or gas ﬁeld in a location ruled out by the
organic theory would settle the matter once and for all. Hence, T. Gold
5,p.172, after studying various formations across the world, concluded that the
Siljan Ring, Sweden was the best candidate for the job. This is the largest
impact crater in Europe. According to the non-organic theory the impact
could have led to the formation of sizeable hydrocarbon deposits since the
fractures created by the impact would favour the upward migration of pri-
mordial hydrocarbons. Although the ﬁeld was located primarily on the basis
of seismic data, numerous oil seeps have been noted in the small sedimen-
tary deposits of the ring-shaped depression marking the crater, carbonates
characteristic of oxidised methane occur in the area and seismic observations
reveal zones of porosity stacked on top of one another. Hence the primary
indications were favourable.

Finally , T. Gold succeeded in convincing investors and a project began
to prospect for petroleum in the area. This was largely supported by the
state-owned Swedish electricity utility Vattenfall. Drilling began in 1986.
By late 1987 a depth of 6.5 km had been attained, but no large commercial
deposits had been discovered 25 . Opponents saw in this the death knell
of the non-organic theory ( claiming the hydrocarbons detected were from
the lubricating drilling mud injected into the ground during drilling ), while
T. Gold proclaimed a victory ( claiming that signiﬁcant amounts of hydro-
carbons were discovered, and that large amounts lay beneath ) 26. Due to
drilling diﬃculties, the project stopped short of its target.
It can be said
that this did not rule in favour of either proposition.

However, in 1989 the Swedish drilling company Dala Djupgas Produktions
recovered a small quantity of oil from 6.7 km below the Siljan Ring. Again
critics dismissed the ﬁnd as being recycled drilling ﬂuid. The tables were
turned yet again when the same co. discovered oil in 1991 even at the shallow
depth of 2.8 km at a nearby well, the horizon of the petroleum being basement
granite 27 . Moreover the previous objection was nulliﬁed as the drilling ﬂuid
used in this case was water only. The proponents of the organic theory
claimed that this oil was merely oil that had seeped into underlying ﬁssures
in the basement rock from oil shales, since the petroleum found in the oil
shales and that in the basement rock were chemically very similar. However,
the non-organic theory explains this as being due to the upward migration of

17

primordial petroleum; the two oils are similar because their common source
is the same. The upward migrating hydrocarbons would have produced both
the deep oil and the oil shales, the shale providing a good trap rock that
could absorb the oil on its way up. Hence, the case appears to have recently
swung in favour of the non-organists.

Only drilling in the future by men of the calibre of Col. Drake ( the
discoverer of the world’s ﬁrst oil-ﬁeld ), Dad Joiner ( the discoverer of the
giant E. Texas oil-ﬁeld ) and P. Higgins ( the discoverer of the Spindletop
oil-ﬁeld ) can yield the answer to this intriguing question.

(4) CONCLUSION

The positive and negative features of the classical organic theory have
been discussed. This has been the traditionally accepted proposal, much
work having been done in this ﬁeld. The rival non-organic theory has so far
not been accepted due to the successes of the biological theory to date in
elucidating certain properties of oil-ﬁelds. However, new results from deep
holes all across the world are diﬃcult to describe in terms of the biological
theory.
It has been shown that these new observations can be naturally
explained within the non-organic framework, and that the older biological
supports (mainly relating to the presence of supposedly biological material
in petroleum) can also be incorporated. Hence a duplex theory combining
features of both theories may be the ﬁnal victor. This would perhaps involve
the enrichment of existing organic hydrocarbon deposits through non organic
hydrocarbons.

The abiogenic theory derives much of its support from diverse and exotic
ﬁelds such as astrophysics, cosmogeophysics, thermodynamics, nuclear geol-
ogy, etc, and considerable strides in the comprehension of these ﬁelds has led
to a impressive growth of information in support of the non-organic theory.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

The author would like to thank Prof. S. Mohanty and Prof. A. Abbas
for fruitful discussions and many kind suggestions. The author thanks the
referees for helpful comments.

This work is supported through a fellowship of the University Grants

Commision, New Delhi, India.

18

REFERENCES

1. Hedberg, H. D., ‘Geologic aspects of origin of petroleum’, Amer. Assoc.

Petrol. Geol. Bull. 48 (1964) 1755-1803

2. Encyclopedia of Physical Science and Technology, ed. R. A. Meyers,

Academic Press (Orlando, Florida U.S.A.) 1987 Vol. 10 p.269-280

3. Hodgson, G. W. and Baker, B.L..‘Porphyrins in meteorites: Metal
complexes in Orgueil, Murray, Cold Bokkeveld and Mokoia-carbonaceous
chondrites ’, Geochim. Cosmochim. Acta 33 (1969) 943-958

4. Philippi, G. T. ‘On the depth, time and mechanism of origin of the
heavy to medium-gravity naphthenic crude oils’ , Geochim. Cosmochim.
Acta 41 (1977) 33-52

5. Gold, T. , ‘Power from the Earth’, J.M.Dent and Sons Ltd. London

6. Deuser W. G. et al. ‘Methane in Lake Kivu: new data bearing on its

origin ’, Science 181 (1973) 51-54

7. Mendeleev, D. ‘L’origine du petrole ’, Revue Scientiﬁque, 2e Ser. ,VIII,

1987

409-416

8. Sokoloﬀ, W. ‘Kosmischer Ursprung der Bituminas’, Bull. Soc. Imp.

Natural Moscau, Nuov. Ser. 3 (1889) 720-739

9. Hoyle, F.and Wickramasinghe, C. , Newscientist 76 (17 Nov.1977)

p.402 , as well as

Newscientist 77 (19 Jan.1978) p.139
Nature 266 (1977) 241-243
Nature 270 (1977) 323-324
10. North, F. K. ‘Petroleum Geology’, Allen and Unwin Inc. 1985 p.37-42
11. Gold ,T. ‘The origin of natural gas and petroleum, and the prognosis

for future supplies’, Ann. Rev. En. 10 (1985) 53-77

12. Kropotkin, P.N. ,and Valyaev, B.M. ‘Development of a theory of deep-
seated ( inorganic and mixed ) origin of hydrocarbons’, Goryuchie Iskopae-
mye : Problemy Geologii i Geokhimii Naftidov i Bituminoznykh Porod
(N.B.Vassoevich, ed.), pp.133-144. Akad. Nauk SSSR.

13. Kropotkin , P.N., and Valyaev, B.M. ‘Tectonic control of Earth out-
gassing and the origin of hydrocarbons’, Proc. 27th Intern. Geol. Congr. 13
(1984) 395-412 VNU Science Press.

19

14. Galimov, E.M. ‘Isotopic Composition of carbon in gases of the Earth’s

Crust ’, Internat. Geol. Rev. 11 (1969) 1092-1103

15. National Geographic , ‘Natural Gas- The Search goes on’ 154 ( Nov.

1978 ) p.632-p.651

16. BMFT ( Bundes-Ministerium fuer Forschung und Technologie ) -
Journal ( Journal of the German Ministry of Research and Technology )
Nr.3 June 1990 p.13

17. Chekaliuk, E.B. ‘The thermal stability of hydrocarbon systems in
geothermodynamic systems ’, Degazatsiia Zemli i Geotektonika (P.N.Kropotkin,
ed.), pp.267-272

18. R. Sugisaki and K. Nagamine , ‘Evoluton of light hydrocarbon gases
in subsurface processes :Constraints from chemical equilibrium ’, Earth and
Planetary Science Letters 133 (1995) 151-161

19. Melton, C.E., and Giardini, A.A. ‘The composition and signiﬁcance
of gas released from natural diamonds from Africa and Brazil’, Amer. Min-
eralogist 59 (1974) 775-782

20. Kravtsov,A.I. et al ‘Distribution of gas-oil-bitumen shows in the Yaku-

tian diamond province’,Int. Geol. Rev. 27 (1985) 1261-1275

21. Kravtsov, A.I., et al.‘Gases and bitumens in rocks of the Udachnaya

pipe ’, Dokl. Akad. Nauk SSSR, Earth Sci. Sect. 228 (1976) 231-234

22. Hovland, M., et al .‘Characteristic features of pockmarks on the North

Sea ﬂoor and Scotian Shelf’, Sedimentology 31 (1984) 471-480

23. Chapman, C.R.,‘The nature of asteroids ’, Scientiﬁc American 232 (

Jan.1975 ) 24-33

University Press 1991

24. K. R. Lang and C. A. Whitney , ‘Wanderers in Space’, Cambridge

25. Newscientist 115 ( 24 Sept.1987 ) p.26
26. Gold , T. , Newscientist 116 ( 15 October 1987 ) p.67
27. Aldhous, P. , Nature Vol. 353 ( 1991 ) p.593
28. Ozima, M. , ‘Noble Gas State in the Mantle ’, Rev. of Geophysics 32

( November 1994 ) 405-426

29. Pierce, A.P. et al ‘Uranium and Helium in the Panhandle gas ﬁeld,

Texas and adjacent areas’, US Geol. Surv. Prof. Paper 454-G

30. Kozlovsky, Ye. A. ‘The world’s deepest well’, Scientiﬁc American

251 ( no. 6, 1984 ) 98-104

20

