6
9
9
1
 
t
c
O
 
0
3
 
 
]
h
p
-
o
a
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
1
2
0
0
1
6
9
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

On the mechanism of decadal oscillations in a coarse resolution
ocean model

G. Lenderink1
KNMI, De Bilt, The Netherlands
and
R.J. Haarsma
KNMI, De Bilt, The Netherlands

February 2, 2008

1Corresponding author address: Ir. G. Lenderink, Royal Netherlands Meteorological Institute, P.O.

Box 201, 3730 AE De Bilt, The Netherlands, e-mail=lenderin@knmi.nl

Abstract

The mechanism that causes an interdecadal oscillation in a coarse resolution sector ocean
model forced by mixed boundary conditions is studied. The oscillation is characterized by large
ﬂuctuations in convective activity and air/sea heat exchange on a decadal time scale. When
the convective activity is large, a strengthening of the southeastward surface ﬂow advects more
relatively fresh water from the northwestern part of the basin into the convective area, which
reduces the convective activity. Similarly, when the convective activity is small, the ﬂow of
relatively fresh water is weak, which enables the expansion of the convective area. The peri-
odically strengthening and weakening of the southeastward surface ﬂow at the polar boundary
of the basin is revealed by a negative polar cell in the meridional overturning. The existence
of a halocline and an inverse thermocline with cool and fresh water above a warm and salty
subsurface is essential for the oscillation. Further, the oscillation critically depends on how the
ocean circulation, and especially the surface circulation, responds to anomalous convective ac-
tivity. Horizontal boundaries turn out to play an important role in the dynamical response of
the ocean circulation. That the dynamical reponse is essential to the oscillation is conﬁrmed
with two simple (conceptual) models, and some idealized ocean experiments. Finally, the sensi-
tivity of the oscillation to salt perturbations and the restoring constant for the air/sea heatﬂux
is investigated.

1

Introduction

In order to determine whether the increasing concentration of greenhouse gases is aﬀecting our
climate one needs to have a clear picture of natural climate variability. It has since long been
argued that a considerable part of natural climate variability on decadal and longer timescales
is due to variability of the ocean circulation (Bjerknes 1964; Broecker 1985, Kushnir 1993). In
particular the density driven ocean circulation called thermohaline circulation (THC) is thought
to be responsible for a substantial part of the natural climate variability on decadal and longer
time scales.

The THC is driven by ﬂuxes of heat and freshwater at the oceans surface. The freshwater ﬂux
is caused by evaporation, precipitation, river run oﬀ and sea-ice melt or accretion. The net eﬀect
of these ﬂuxes on the surface salinity is often accounted for by a virtual salinity ﬂux. Simple
parameterizations of these heat and salt ﬂuxes are often used to investigate the variability and
stability of the THC. Often used are the so-called mixed boundary conditions (MBCs), consisting
of a ﬁxed salt ﬂux and a time varying heat ﬂux which restores the sea surface temperature (SST)
towards an apparent atmospheric temperature. Commonly used values of the restoring constant
are 50 W m−2 K−1 (Haney 1971) or even higher, which usage actually pins the SST down to
the prescribed atmospheric temperature. MBCs reﬂect that there is a direct feedback between
the SST and the heatﬂux, whereas a direct feedback between the sea surface salinity (SSS) and
the freshwater ﬂux does not exist. However, relatively large errors in the heatﬂux may occur as,
using MBCs, the SST is forced towards a ﬁxed atmospheric temperature, whereas in reality the
atmosphere closely adapts to the SST in most areas. On the other extreme, some researchers use
a ﬁxed heatﬂux. This however neglects the possible inﬂuence of the ocean on climate variability
as the ocean is now basically forced to transport a ﬁxed amount of heat.

With these relatively simple boundary conditions variations of the THC on decadal and
longer time scales were obtained. In this study we will concentrate on the (inter)decadal time
scale. Weaver and Sarachik (1991) (hereafter WS91) ﬁrst found decadal variability in an ocean
model forced by MBCs. Thereafter many others also reported oscillations using diﬀerent bound-
ary conditions and models (Chen and Ghil 1995; Greatbatch and Zhang 1995; Cai 1995; Weisse
et al. 1994; Weaver et al. 1993 (hereafter Wea93); Myers and Weaver 1994, Moore and Reason
1993; Huang and Chou 1994; Yin and Sarachik 1995 (hereafter YS95); Drijfhout et al. 1996).
Decadal variability was also found with the inclusion of a thermodynamical sea ice model (Zhang
et al. 1995; Yang et Neelin 1994).

Most of the current research concentrates on the development of boundary conditions which
parameterize the atmospheric feedbacks more realistically, and the investigation of the stability
and variability of the THC using these boundary conditions (Rahmstorf 1994; Cai and Godfrey
1995; Chen and Ghil 1995). Although we recognize the importance of this we decided not to
pursue this approach in this paper. We feel that a clear picture of the mechanisms causing
decadal variability using simple boundary conditions is still lacking, and that such a picture

1

could be helpful in understanding the oceans behavior when the atmospheric feedbacks are
represented more properly.

Using ﬁxed heat and/or salt ﬂuxes several authors (Huang and Chou 1994; Greatbatch and
Zhang 1995; Cai 1995, Chen and Ghil 1994) have noticed the similarity between diﬀerent forms
of variability. Greatbatch and Zhang (1995) ﬁrst noticed the similarity of their oscillation using
ﬁxed heat and salt ﬂuxes with an oscillation obtained in a globally coupled model (Delworth et
al. 1993). Although there is not yet a complete and clear picture of the mechanism of these
oscillations, there is a growing consensus that these oscillations are basically caused by the same
mechanism. For MBCs however the picture of the mechanisms causing interdecadal variability
is more confusing. Weaver and Sarachik (1991) explain their oscillation by the advection of
a positive salt anomaly interacting with convection. Yin and Sarachik (1995), however, argue
that the same oscillation is mainly set by a stabilizing ﬂow of relatively fresh water from the
polar boundary, and the destabilizing inﬂux of relatively warm water below the surface into the
convective area. In Moore and Reason (1993) a more complicated mechanism of their oscillation
is sketched where convection combined with a strong negative feedback of anomalous advection
of fresh water in the surface layer and salty water at a larger depth plays a role. They argue
that a dynamical interaction between the convective activity and the strength of the surface
ﬂow is essential, whereas Yin and Sarachik (1995) are ambiguous on this point. Finally, Zang
et al. (1995) argue that their oscillation is caused by the thermal insulation eﬀect of sea-ice.

It is tempting to question whether or not the mechanism causing oscillations with MBCs
are really so diﬀerent. But before being able to answer this question one should have a clear
conceptual picture of the mechanisms causing oscillations. With this paper we aim to establish
a clear picture of the mechanism causing the oscillation in WS91. This oscillation has also
been studied in WS93 and in YS95. Large variations in convective activity and the air/sea
heat ﬂux are characteristic of this oscillation. The oscillation turns out to be mainly driven by
convection and advection. The impact of convection and advection on the heat and salt budgets
of the convective area is carefully estimated. Our analysis indicates that the oscillation crucially
depends on how the surface ﬂow responds to anomalous convective activity. The advection
by the surface ﬂow of fresh water into the convective area mainly determines the convective
activity. We show that the period of the oscillation is mainly determined by the timescale of
this advective feedback.

In this paper we do not describe a new mechanism. Several processes and feedbacks that
are potentially important are already mentioned in literature. Our aim is to clarify the role of
these feedbacks and processes, and to complete the picture of the mechanism as far as possible.
Yin and Sarachik (1995) already gave a quite extensive description similar to ours of many
important processes. Our conclusions however diﬀer from theirs mainly concerning the question
what determines the time scale and the amplitude of the oscillation, and we will therefore focus
on these diﬀerences. Our description of the response of the surface ﬂow to anomalous convective
activity also shows a large resemblance with the mechanism described by Moore and Reason

2

(1993). Finally, several authors (Winton 1996a; Greatbatch and Peterson 1995) also proposed
that boundary waves might play a role. This aspect of the oscillation is also studied in this
paper.

Besides the question concerning the mechanism of the oscillation, information about the
sensitivity and robustness of the oscillation (to changes in parameter values, forcing, inclusion
of other processes like sea-ice and/or atmospheric feedbacks, atmospheric noise or perturbations)
is important. Two of our experiments shed some light on this. We show that the oscillation
is fairly insensitive to perturbations in the surface salinity. This contrasts highly with the
sensitivity of steady states obtained by a spin-up with restoring conditions. With MBCs these
steady states usually show a high sensitivity to surface salinity perturbations, and a polar
halocline catastrophy is easily invoked. Furthermore, we show that the oscillation is rather
insensitive to the restoring constant for the surface temperature. Our results on this point agree
with those in YS95.

The contents of the paper is as follows. In section 3 we reproduce the oscillation of WS91,
and in section 4 a detailed analysis of the oscillation is given. In section 5 several sensitivity runs
are performed. A comparision with the results of Yin and Sarachik (1995) is made in section 6.
A summary and conclusions are given in section 7. In the appendix we investigate the possibility
of convective oscillations in a two box model.

2 The model

The ocean model used is basically a ”GFDL” type model. It uses the usual budget equations for
temperature, and salinity with diﬀusion parameterizing the eddy-transports. The momentum
equations are split in a barotropic and a baroclinic part. For the barotropic part the ”Sverdrup-
balance” is solved (see Lenderink and Haarsma 1994, hereafter LH94). As we use a ﬂat bottomed
ocean the barotropic part is completely determined by the windstress only. The equations for
the baroclinic velocity ﬁeld are solved in time. An asynchronous time integration (Bryan 1984)
is used to slow down internal gravity and Kelvin waves. In Wea93 and YS95 it has been shown
that the asynchronous time integration does not signiﬁcantly aﬀect the oscillation. An eddy
viscosity is used in both horizontal as vertical direction, whereas the horizontal and vertical
advection of momentum is neglected. The equation of state is similar to the one employed in
LH94. A convective mixing scheme is employed after each timestep. It is the standard mixing
scheme as employed in the GFDL Bryan-Cox code. Starting from the surface level the densities
of each pair of levels (ﬁrst level 1 and 2, then level 3 and 4 etc.) are compared and the levels
are mixed completely in case of an unstable stratiﬁcation. Thereafter, the procedure is repeated
starting from the second level.

The model basin extends from the equator to 64 oN and extends 60 degrees in longitudinal
direction. The ocean basin is 4000 meters deep and bottom topography is not included. The
horizontal resolution is 3.75 o in longitudinal and 4.00 o in latitudinal direction. The layer

3

thicknesses are (from the surface to the bottom) 40, 40, 80, 140, 250, 350, 400, 450, 500, 550,
600 and 600 meters. The timestep for the ocean model is 4 days. For the horizontal and vertical
diﬀusivity we used 1 103 m2 s−1 and 0.6 10−3 m2 s−1 respectively, and for the horizontal and
vertical viscosity 2.5 105 m2 s−1 and 1 10−3 m2 s−1.

3 The oscillation

3.1 Reproduction of the oscillation

We performed an experiment similar to the experiments described in Wea93 and WS91. First,
we spun our model up from rest using restoring conditions We used forcing ﬁelds and parameter
values similar to the ones used in Wea93 and WS91. The temperature and salinity proﬁle to
which the surface is restored, which are the same as in WS91, are shown in Fig. 1. For the
restoring timescale we used 20 days. The zonal windstress also equals the proﬁle used in WS91.
After the system reached its equilibrium state with restoring conditions, we diagnosed the
E-P ﬁeld needed to sustain this state. This ﬁeld as shown in Fig 2 closely resembles Fig.
2c in Wea93. The spinup state is characterized by deep convection along the polar boundary.
Relatively shallow convection up to 1000 meter also occurs at 50 oN. The meridional overturning
circulation as shown in Fig 3 is very similar to Fig. 6b of Wea93 and consists of a positive
overturning cell of 13 Sv with sinking motion at the polar boundary. Switching to mixed
boundary conditions, this state collapses after a small salinity perturbation (-0.1 psu in one
surface gridbox only) in the convective area. Deep convective mixing at the polar boundary
vanishes, meanwhile, however, convective activity at lower latitudes increases in strength and
the system starts to oscillate on a decadal timescale. We ran the model another 2500 years
during which the system continues to oscillate. We analyzed the oscillation after approximately
2000 years of integration.

Fig. 4 and Fig. 5 show the convective activity and the meridional overturning at 6 times
during the oscillation. We start our description at t = 0 years when the convective activity is
strong. A relatively weak positive overturning cell and a fairly strong negative polar cell are
shown. In the next 3 years shallow convective mixing is decreasing, whereas deep convective
mixing to the ocean bottom continues. At the same time both negative and positive overturning
cell increase in strength. Shortly after t = 4 years deep convective mixing disappears completely.
The negative overturning cell collapses in one year time, and the maximum of the overturning
displaces to the polar boundary. Shallow convection starts again only a few years after the
collapse of the negative cell, shortly before t = 6 years. In the following years, ﬁrst a spreading
of the convective area and a decrease in strength of the positive overturning cell, and then a
gradual retreat of the convective area, a deepening of convective mixing at the northeastern
corner and an increase in strength of the overturning cell is observed. During these years the
polar cell monotonically increases in strength. After 13 years the circulation approximately
equals the circulation at t = 0 and a new cycle starts.

4

3.2 A simple area mean picture

Fluctuations in convective activity are a dominant feature of the oscillation.
In response to
the convective activity the atmospheric heatﬂux and also the oceanic meridional heat transport
display large variations (see below and also WS91). We therefore concentrate on the area Acon
indicated in Fig. 4. The area Acon is approximately the smallest rectangular enclosure of the
area where the convective activity changes during the oscillation. In Fig. 6 we show the area
mean temperature and salinity as a function of depth and time. In this ﬁgure we also plotted
the time evolution of the convective fraction. Here, the convective fraction is deﬁned as the area
aﬀected by convective mixing at a certain depth divided by the total area Acon. It is shown
that the strongest ﬂuctuations in temperature and salinity occur in the upper 700 meters of the
ocean. The main convective activity is conﬁned to the upper 1000 meters. In the upper 600
meters about 90 % of the area is aﬀected by convection, and between 600 and 1000 meters still 60
% of the area is aﬀected. Below 1000 meters, however, this measure sharply decreases to about
20 %. In the following we will therefore concentrate on the upper part of the ocean. Figure 6
shows a warm subsurface and a fresh surface ocean in the nonconvective phase. In this phase the
salinity gradient (halocline) keeps the ocean stably stratiﬁed, whereas the temperature gradient
(inverse thermocline) tends to destabilize the stratiﬁcation. During the convective phase the
heat contained by the anomalous warm subsurface ocean is rapidly released to the atmosphere.
This heatﬂux is shown in Fig. 7. At the same time the surface becomes considerably saltier.

In order to investigate which processes dominate the evolution in the convective area Acon
we deﬁned a surface and a subsurface box in Acon and investigated their evolution in time.
The surface box Bu consists of the uppermost three levels (0-160 m) and the subsurface box Bl
consists of the next two levels (160-550 m). We have chosen these levels for Bl because in the
nonconvective phase these levels contain the major part of the heat that is subsequently given
oﬀ to the atmosphere in the convective phase.

We plotted in Figs. 8a,b the mean temperature and salinity for both boxes. The large
variations in the surface (of Bu) salinity and the subsurface (of Bl) temperature are again
clearly visible. We focus on the cause of these variations. Thereto, we plotted in Figs. 8c,d
the time derivative of the surface salinity and the subsurface temperature. We also plotted the
contribution of horizontal advection and convection. Figure 8c shows that horizontal advection
and convection almost completely determine the surface salinity balance. Horizontal and vertical
diﬀusion (not shown) are of only of secondary importance when considering the box averaged
values, although locally they could play a role. The surface heat balance is mainly determined
by convection and the atmospheric heatﬂux (not shown). The atmospheric heatﬂux keeps the
surface temperature close to the atmospheric temperature. The ﬂuctuations of the surface box
temperature are mainly caused by the contribution of the temperature of level 3 – which is
less aﬀected by the surface heatﬂux – to the box mean. For the subsurface box Bl horizontal
advection provides for a nearly constant source of heat and salt. These heat and salt ﬂuxes

5

are mainly due to the meridional overturning which advects heat and salt from the equator
northward just below the surface. In the absence of convection the temperature and salinity
of the subsurface rise due to this term. When convective activity is large the convective ﬂux
however causes a decrease in the subsurface temperature and salinity.

A relatively simple picture of the dominant processes in the convective area now emerges.
First, consider t = 0, when the convective activity is large. At this time an increasing amount
of fresh water due to horizontal advection enters the surface box. The area with convection is
decreasing in response to the increasing advection of fresh water water into the convective aea.
The surface salinity decreases further because of the decreasing amount of salt mixed up by
convection. At the same time a gradual warming of the subsurface ocean is observed because
the heat entering the subsurface by horizontal advection is no longer released to the atmosphere
in the area where convection is suppressed. The nonconvective part of the box is therefore
responsible for the rise in the box mean temperature. After 5 years convection is completely
suppressed by the ﬂow of relatively fresh water entering the surface box. Shortly thereafter, the
anomalous ﬂow of fresh water breaks down (see also Fig. 5), and the advection of salt becomes
for a short time even positive. The resulting rise in surface salinity quickly re-enables convection.
As will be discussed below, the positive feedback of convection in an ocean with relatively warm
and saline water beneath a fresh and cool surface layer now results in a rapid growth of the
convective area. This rapid growth is revealed by the sharp rise in the convective salt source for
the surface box from 6 to 8 years. The convective area now starts to decrease again due to the
cooling of the subsurface box and the increasing advection of fresh water into the surface box.

4 The Mechanism

In this section we will explain the mechanism of the oscillation. The processes responsible for
the expansion and retreat of the convective area are studied. By deﬁnition, ﬂuctuations in
convective activity are caused by changes in the vertical temperature and salinity gradient. We
focus on the surface salinity and the subsurface temperature because these contribute most to
the variations in the density gradient. In the ﬁrst subsection we will consider the role of the
subsurface temperature and surface salinity. We will argue that, with a steady ocean circulation
that does not respond to the ﬂuctuations in convective activity, convection is self-sustaining
and that changes in the subsurface temperature and surface salinity do not cause oscillatory
behavior. We therefore propose that ocean dynamics play a role. In the second subsection we
will show in a conceptual model that changes in the surface advection due to the ocean dynamics
can give rise to oscillations in convective activity. Finally in the third and the fourth subsection
we will investigate the dynamic reponse, and the associated changes in advection, during the
convective and the nonconvective phase, respectively.

6

4.1 The expansion and retreat of the convective area.

The role of the subsurface temperature can be summarized as follows. First consider the retreat
of the convective area. Convection is suppressed only after the heat anomaly contained in the
subsurface ocean is released to the atmosphere. With a warm subsurface ocean convection
continues because of the unstable temperature gradient. In this case a typical heat anomaly is
released in two year time, where we used a layer thickness of 400 m, a temperature anomaly
of 2 oC, and an atmospheric heat ﬂux of 50 W m−2. Similarly, the warming of the subsurface
during the nonconvective phase is a precondition for the triggering of convection. This warming
of the subsurface during the nonconvective phase is somewhat slower than the cooling during
the convective phase, but still relatively fast.

When convection starts in the northeastern corner, convection mixes up a large amount of
heat and salt to the surface. The heat is rapidly lost to the atmosphere, whereas the surface
salinity remains high, and becomes a source of salt for the surrounding ocean. The mixing of
salt to the surface and the subsequent horizontal spreading due to advection and diﬀusion, cause
– in concert with the relatively low inﬂux of fresh water by advection – a rapid expansion of
the convective area. Due to the convective feedback, the expansion of the convective area even
continues a short time while the advection of fresh water is already increasing. Thereafter, the
net advection of fresh water into the convective area increases due to the increasing southeast-
ward surface velocity and the increased surface salinity gradient. The increased advection of
fresh water causes a reduction of the convective activity, and eventually establishes a complete
suppression of convection.

In the appendix we show that convection is locally self-sustaining. With a steady, not
responding to the convective activity, circulation convective activity will not oscillate. The
mechanism proposed in Yin (1995, see also section 6) does not operate in that case: Within a
reasonable parameter regime, the subsurface warming when convection is oﬀ is not large enough
to trigger the onset of convection; when convection is on, the surface freshening due to the
increased surface salinity gradient is not large enough to suppres convection. Instead locally two
states – a convective and a nonconvective – exist and hysteresis occurs (see also LH94, LH96).
This leaves us with the question why the system oscillates. We propose that the ocean dynamics,
and especially the changes in the surface advection of salt caused by the ocean dynamics, play
an important role. In the next paragraph we will ﬁrst investigate the role of ocean dynamics in
a conceptual model. Thereafter, we will investigate it in the ocean model.

4.2 A conceptual model for the oscillation

The conceptual model is shown in Fig. 9. It consists of two boxes: a surface box with salinity
S and a subsurface box with temperature T . The temperature of the surface box and the
salinity of the subsurface box are kept constant in time. Convective mixing with a strength C
occurs between the boxes. Furthermore, a polar overturning cell with strength O, which advects

7

relatively fresh water into the convective area, is shown. The system is linearized around a mean
convective state, and T , S, C and O are therefore anomalous variables.

Let us ﬁrst consider the eﬀect of the subsurface temperature in isolation. The subsurface
temperature will rise when the convective activity is low due to the advection of warm water by
the meridional overturning, and fall when the convective activity is high:

dT
dt

=

θC,

−

C = κT,

where θ is a positive constant. The convective activity on the other hand is dependent on the
subsurface temperature. It will be high when the subsurface temperature is high:

where κ is a positive constant. Solving this system yields a damped exponential. The mechanism
of the decay is simple: convection causes a cooling of the subsurface, which reduces the convective
activity further. This feedback will be called the convective temperature feedback.

We continue with the surface salinity.

If we consider the eﬀect of convection in isolation
a growing exponential is obtained in a similar way. In words, convection mixes salt up to the
surface; the resulting increase in surface salinity destabilizes the stratiﬁcation further and causes
an increase in convective activity. This feedback will be called the convective salinity feedback.
Within this conceptual model, the convective temperature and salinity feedback generate
decay and ampliﬁcation of the convective activity, respectively. They are unable to generate
oscillatory behavior. This is because there is no time lag between the convective ﬂuxes and the
convective activity. The essential time lag is provided by the advection of relatively fresh water
into the convective area in response to changes in convective activity. This advective feedback
can be described as follows. The strength of the polar cell increases when the convective activity
is anomalously high:

Furthermore, the advection of relatively fresh water into the convective area by O is represented
by

and the convective activity is related to the surface salinity by

In these equations ζ, γ and σ are all positive constants. Solving this system yields a second
order ordinary diﬀerential equation:

dO
dt

= ζC.

dS
dt

=

γO,

−

C = σS.

d2O
dt2 + ζγσO = 0.

8

The solution of this equation is a harmonic oscillation with a time scale 2π/√ζγσ. From the
data of the ocean model we estimate σ = 1 (psu)−1 – the convective activity is normalized –, ζ =
3 Sv yr−1, and γ = 0.1 psu (Sv yr)−1. This gives a time scale of 11 years. The estimates for the
parameters are obviously not very precise, but the (inter)decadal time scale seems nevertheless
robust. The physical picture of the oscillation is:

. . . weak convective activity C

slow overturning O and weak advection

high

surface salinity and strong convective activity C

fast overturning O . . .

→

→

→

The systems oscillates because there is a phase lag between the convective activity and advection
of fresh water into the convective area. This phase lag is clearly shown with the retreat of the
convective area. The maximum in convective activity occurs between 10 and 12 years – in Figs.
8 c,d the convective ﬂuxes are maximal at t = 10 years; the convective fraction q in Fig. 6
is maximal after 12 years. The maximum in the advection of fresh water in Fig. 8 c occurs
approximately one quarter period later, at t = 15 years. The phase lag is however not so evident
when the convective activity reaches its minimum at t = 5 years: the maximum in the advection
of salt at t = 6 years in Fig. 8 c only lags the minimum of convective activity about one year.
This is due to the occurrence of a fast boundary wave, which will be discussed in the following.
In the next two paragraphs we will focus on the dynamical response of the ocean model, in
particular the dynamical response of advection, during two phases of the oscillation. In the ﬁrst
paragraph we will focus on the convective phase, and in particular the end of the convective
phase during which the convective area retreats. In the second paragraph we will focus on the
nonconvective phase.

4.3 Advection during the convective phase

To complete the picture of the mechanism of the oscillation, the relation between convective
activity and the net advection of fresh water into the convective area has to be established.
In this section we will discuss this relation during the convection phase. We will focus on the
period during which the convective area retreats.

The net advection of fresh water is determined by both the surface salinity gradient and
the strength of the ﬂow. The surface salinity gradient is established by two eﬀects. First,
precipitation creates a pool of fresh water outside the convective area mainly in the northwestern
corner of the basin. Second, convection is responsible for a positive salinity anomaly in the
convection area. In the convective phase both the surface salinity gradient and the southeastern
surface ﬂow increase. In order to estimate the contribution of changes in the strength of the
surface ﬂow and changes in the surface salinity gradient seperately, we divided the surface
velocity into a time mean vm and an anomalous part v′. We computed the net advection by the
mean velocity and the anomalous velocity. The changes in the advection of fresh water by the
S represents the changes due to surface salinity changes only. We denote the
mean ﬂow vm
S to anomalous convective activity shortly by the static response of advection,
response of vm

· ∇
· ∇

9

because it is the response in an ocean with ﬁxed, not responding to anomalous convective
activity, velocities. The net advection by the anomalous velocity v′
S is the dynamic response
of advection, which is due to changes in the strength of the ﬂow.

· ∇

· ∇

· ∇

S and v′

We concentrated on two times, t = 0 and t = 4, during the retreat of the convective area.
At t = 0 the convective area is still relatively large. In Fig. 10 a,b the SSS and the convective
activity are shown. In Fig. 10 c,d we plotted vm and v′, and the horizontal advection due to
S. Both vm and v′ advect fresh water into the southern part
these velocities: vm
of the convective area; the contribution of vm to the advection is about about two to four times
larger than the contribution of v′. The southeastern direction of the mean ﬂow vm is due to a
combination of the windstress, which mainly forces the southward component of the ﬂow, and
the density gradient caused by dense water trapped along the northern boundary of the basin,
which mainly forces the eastward component of the ﬂow. For t = 4 the convective area is only
small with deep convection near the northeastern corner. As shown in Fig. 11 the anomalous
southward ﬂow clearly points into the convective area now, whereas at t = 0 years the anomalous
ﬂow was mainly parallel with the convective border. The horizontal ﬂow is consequently more
eﬃcient in causing a freshening of the convective area. Both vm and v′ now contribute almost
equally to the advection into the convective area.

It is shown that the dynamic response of the advection of fresh water is large at the end of
convective phase. During most of the time however the static response dominates. In addition,
horizontal diﬀusion (see YS95) has approximately the same eﬀect as the static response of ad-
vection. Because the dynamic response of advection seems to be so small compared to the static
response and horizontal diﬀusion, it could be argued that the dynamic response is not essential.
The results of our conceptual model indicate that this is not the case. The formulation of the
advective feedback in our conceptual model can be considered to represent the dynamic response
of advection linearized around a mean salinity gradient. The phase lag between the advection
of fresh water and the convective activity causes the oscillatory behavior. Since convection is a
fast process, the horizontal salinity gradient is almost in phase with the convective activity. The
static response of advecton is therefore approximately in phase with the convective activity, and
does not give rise to oscillatory behavior. In the following we will therefore concentrate on the
cause of the anomalous velocities.

In order to get some feeling for the response of the circulation to changes in convective activity
we ﬁrst consider the following idealized situation. Suppose that we have the following idealized
situation with uniform anomalous convective activity in a certain area of the ocean and that
this convective activity causes an uniform density anomaly in this area. Further, assume that
advective processes did not yet displaced the density anomaly. This situation is schematically
depicted in Fig.12 a. If we assume geostrophy, which is nearly perfectly fulﬁlled on the scales
considered, the anomalous surface velocity associated with the density anomaly is a cyclonic
circulation along the boundary of the convective area. At depth the direction of ﬂow is reversed.
Upwelling at the western boundary just north of the convective area, and downwelling just south

10

of the convective area now close the circulation. In this situation, the anomalous surface ﬂow
would therefore be parallel with the convective border and would not advect fresh water into
the convective area. The dynamic response of advection is therefore zero in this situation.

It is obvious that at the end of the convective phase our model is not in the idealized situation
sketched above. At t = 4 years the the anomalous velocities are clearly directed into the convec-
tive area. Based on data of the ocean model, we sketched in Fig. 12b the situation that is more
appropriate for the end of the convective phase. In this situation horizontal advection caused a
displacement of the density anomaly at depth. This is for example visible at a depth below 1000
m (not shown) where a dense, negative temperature anomaly is trapped in the northeastern
corner of the basin. Associated with the density anomaly is also a surface circulation that is
directed into the convective area (see also Fig. 11e below). Besides horizontal advection, also
vertical advection plays a large role in causing anomalous densities. Anomalous downwelling
in a stratiﬁed ocean causes a negative density anomaly; similarly, anomalous upwelling causes
a positive density anomaly. Therefore, the anomalous downwelling at the eastern boundary
just south of the convective area in Fig. 12 a causes a negative density anomaly. Anomalous
upwelling at the border of the convective area similarly creates a positive density anomaly north
of the convective area. The importance of upwelling in creating horizontal density and thus
velocity anomalies has also been appreciated by Moore and Reason (1993).
In our case, the
anomalous upwelling near the polar boundary during the convective phase, which is for example
revealed by the pictures of the meridional streamfunction, causes a positive density anomaly
at the northern boundary. This density anomaly causes an easterly surface velocity into the
convective area.

In order to quantify the role of density changes at diﬀerent depths in causing surface velocity
anomalies, we used the following diagnostic tool. Anomalous velocity ﬁelds are computed from
the anomalous density ﬁeld using the assumption that the ocean circulation is in geostrophic
balance. Because the ocean is to a very high degree geostrophic the anomalous velocity ﬁelds
obtained from this procedure and the observed anomalous velocity ﬁeld are almost indistinguish-
able. Then we computed the anomalous surface velocity due to density anomalies at diﬀerent
levels of the ocean. Performing this procedure for the anomalous density below 550 m, we ob-
tained the results as depicted in Fig. 11e. It is shown that about 60 % of the southeastward
velocity near the northeastern corner, and consequently about 60 % of the horizontal advection
of fresh water into the convective area is due to the density changes below 550 m. The oscillation
is therefore not only a surface and subsurface phenomenom; also changes at depth are important
in determining the dynamical reponse of the ocean model. We also performed this procedure
for t = 0 years. It turned out that the major part of the anomalous velocities is due to the
density changes in the upper few hundred meters of the ocean. The anomalous ﬂow only has a
small component into the convective area, and transported therefore only few fresh water into
the convective area.

11

4.4 Advection during the nonconvective phase

It is already shown in Fig. 5 that during the nonconvective phase the negative overturning cell at
the polar boundary collapses. This is due to the occurrence of a boundary Kelvin wave. Kelvin
waves have been observed in several studies of variability in coarse resolution ocean model, and
some authors claim their essential role for variability. (Winton 1996a; Greatbatch and Peterson
1995). Strictly speaking this wave is not resolved in coarse resolution ocean models, however,
these models do generate a numerical wave with equivalent characteristics (Winton 1996a). In
a strongly stratiﬁed equatorial ocean the propagation speed of this wave is fast. In the weakly
stratiﬁed polar ocean however the wave considerably slows down and could be responsible for
decadal variability.

The physics of this wave can be understood as follows. Consider an area with downwelling
at the eastern boundary in a stratiﬁed ocean. This introduces a local density minimum by the
downward advection of lighter water. The negative density anomaly introduces a cyclonical
circulation at depth and an anti-cyclonical surface circulation. The corresponding vertical circu-
lation at the boundary with upwelling south and downwelling north of the anomaly, now leads
to a northward displacement of the downwelling area. In a stratiﬁed ocean the wave therefore
travels cyclonically around the basin.

To illustrate the propagation of the Kelvin wave, we plotted in Fig. 13 the vertical velocity as
a function of time along part of the boundary. This part consists of the polar part of the eastern
boundary (HE to NE in Fig. 13) and the polar boundary (NE to NW). The vertical velocity
occuring at the boundary is for a large part responsible for the zonally integrated vertical mass
transport as depicted in plots of the meridional overturning. From t = 0 to t = 4 the downwelling
1000 km south of the polar boundary is clearly visible. When after 5 years deep convection at
the northeastern boundary stops, the downwelling area starts to travel cyclonically along the
boundary. In about two years time the wave reaches the polar boundary, which is also revealed
by the collapse of the negative, polar overturning cell in Fig. 5. Thereafter the wave travels
along the polar boundary to the west, while slowly reducing in strength. The time scale of the
wave propagating along the boundary is about ﬁve years.

The eﬀect of the Kelvin wave on the ocean dynamics, in particular the advection of salt
at the surface, is illustrated in Fig. 14. Figure 14 shows the surface salinity, convective depth,
anomalous velocity, and surface salt advection due to the anomalous velocity are shown for three
diﬀerent times, t = 5.33, t = 6.00 and t = 7.00 years. At t = 5.33 years, the Kelvin wave is still
located at the eastern boundary, approximately at 56 oN. The anti-cyclonical surface circulation
at the eastern boundary associated with the Kelvin wave advects relative saline water northward.
This rapidly turns convection on – in the appendix it is argued that a change in the surface
velocity is necessary for the re-initialization of convection. At t = 6 years, the boundary wave
is located in the northeastern corner of the basin, and one year later it is about halfway the
northern boundary. Associated with the propagation of the Kelvin, the strong eastward surface

12

ﬂow along the northern boundary of the basin turns into a weakly western ﬂow. With the
relatively weak (south)eastern surface ﬂow, or even westerly ﬂow, the convective area expands
rapidly. Thereafter, the eastern surface ﬂow starts to increase again. To summarize, the role of
the Kelvin wave is mainly twofold: First, the northward surface ﬂow associated with the wave
re-initializes convection rapidly after its suppression. Second, it resets the ocean from a state
with the strong, (south)eastern surface ﬂow to a state with a weak surface ﬂow, so that the
convective activity is able to expand rapidly. The dynamical response of the ocean during the
nonconvective phase is therefore dominated by the Kelvin wave. On the other hand, the role of
Kelvin waves during the convection phase seems to be minor. We could not ﬁnd any evidence
of wave activity during this period.

The suggestion of Winton (1996a) that the Kelvin wave, when it reaches the energetic western
boundary current, inﬂuences the overturning and therefore modiﬁes the advection of heat and
salt from the south into the convective area seems not likely.
In the previous section it was
shown that the suppression of convection is mainly due to the anomalous advection of fresh
water from the northwest into the convective area. Furthermore, Wintons hypothesis implies
that the suppression of convection is due to the slow down of the positive overturning circulation
(because the overturning advects salt into the convective area) while actually an increase in
strength of the positive overturning cell is observed between t = 0 and t = 4 years. We therefore
conclude that boundary waves play a role in the sense that they cause the rapid re-initialization
of convection and reset the strong (south)eastern surface ﬂow at the end of the convective phase,
which enables the convective area to expand. There are no indications that the suppression of
convection is due to boundary waves. The underlying physics responsible for the propagation
of the wave are however important during the whole cycle of the oscillation. Density anomalies
due to anomalous upwelling and downwelling at the boundary determine for a large part the
dynamic response of the advection of fresh water into the convective area. Boundaries therefore
play an important role in the mechanism of the oscillation.

4.5 Experiments with ﬁxed velocity ﬁelds

To conﬁrm once more that a dynamical response of the ocean model to anomalous convective
activity is essential, we performed a few idealized experiments with the ocean model. Thereto,
we ran the ocean model with stationary velocity ﬁelds. For the velocity ﬁelds we used the
mean velocity ﬁeld and also two instantaneous, diagnosed velocity ﬁelds. As a measure of the
convective activity we show the integrated heatﬂux in Fig. 15. For the ﬁrst experiment we ﬁrst
integrated the model during two periods forward in time, and then switched over to the mean
velocity ﬁeld. For the other two experiments we integrated the model to t = 10 years and to t
= 15 years respectively, and then kept the velocity ﬁeld ﬁxed. These times are chosen because
the southeastward velocity at the surface into the convective area are then respectively maximal
and minimal. The strength of this ﬂow determines the time scale at which the surface salinity of
the convective area tends to approach the salinity of the northwestern corner, which potentially

13

(see the Appendix) could be important for the occurrence of the oscillation. With the velocity
ﬁelds used a wide range of realistic relaxation time scales is covered. None of these integrations,
however, yielded self sustained oscillations in convective activity on a (inter)decadal time scale.
After switching to a steady velocity ﬁeld all runs only showed small variations on a very short
time scale. No (inter)decadal oscillations were found. These experiments therefore indicate that
ocean dynamics play an essential role in (inter)decadal oscillations.

4.6 Summary of the mechanism

We start the cycle in the phase with weak convective activity. A short time later convection
is completely suppressed due to the strong advection of relatively fresh surface water from the
northwestern polar boundary into the convective area. When convection stops the downwelling
area just south of the convective area at the eastern boundary of the basin begins to travel
cyclonically around the basin as a boundary Kelvin wave. The movement of the downwelling
area is revealed by a collapse of the negative overturning cell near the polar boundary. The
advection of relatively fresh water from the polar area into the convective area breaks down, and
convection starts again at the eastern boundary. When convection is oﬀ, the subsurface becomes
warm and saline compared to the surface due to the inﬂux of heat and salt at depth. In the
nonconvective phase this stratiﬁcation has become very unstable – that is, potentially convective
(see LH96) – using MBCs. The relatively weak advection of fresh water (weak southeasterly
ﬂow) and the large amount of salt mixed up by the convective patch at the boundary cause a
rapid growth of convection. During the subsequent strong convective phase the heat contained
in the subsurface ocean between approximately 160 and 600 meter deep is rapidly released to
the atmosphere. The cooling of the subsurface tends to stabilize the stratiﬁcation. At the same
time the advective inﬂux of fresh water increases. This increase is due to the increased horizontal
salinity gradient between the convective area and the pool of fresh water at the northwestern part
of the basin, and the increased southeastward ﬂow into the convective area. The anomalous ﬂow
is caused by density anomalies at depth due to horizontal advection, and anomalous upwelling
and downwelling near boundaries. The area with convection declines, followed by a complete
shut down of convection and the propagation of the boundary wave.

5 Sensitivity experiments

5.1 Sensitivity to salt perturbations

For stationary equilibrium states the response of the ocean circulation to surface salinity per-
turbations is usually large with MBCs. Often the meridional overturning completely collapses,
called a polar halocline catastrophy (Bryan 1986). In other experiments the response is some-
what more moderate (LH96). We therefore tested the sensitivity of this oscillation to surface
salinity perturbations.

14

We perturbed the reference run after 16 years with respectively 0.4 psu and 0.8 psu the
area Acon. At this moment the convective activity is low, the heatloss to the atmosphere is
small and the polar cell is strong. The response of the atmospheric heatﬂux and the strength
of the polar cell to both perturbations is shown in Fig. 16. The perturbation causes anomalous
convective activity, which is responsible for the moderate increase in atmospheric heatﬂux. In
response to this, the polar cell increases in strength. An increase in the advection of fresh
water into the convective area results. The anomalous convective activity rapidly disappears,
and the polar cell breaks down. The perturbation results in a small phase shift in the order
of one year. We repeated this experiment and perturbed the same area with the same salt
anomalies, but now after 19 years. The response of the heatﬂux, as shown in Fig. 16, is much
more vigorous compared to the previous experiment. The heatloss increases to 0.45 PW for
the 0.4 psu anomaly, and to 0.60 PW for the 0.8 psu anomaly. The more vigorous response
is due to the warming of the subsurface which takes place between year 16 and year 19. The
negative cell now increases rapidly in strength. This causes a freshening of the convective area,
which results in a reduction of the convective activity and the atmospheric heatloss. For the
largest perturbation the decrease in convective activity even triggers a collapse of the negative
overturning cell, for the smallest perturbation the collapse does not take place. In the long term
the response of the circulation to these perturbations is surprisingly small. Only small phase
shifts in the oscillation are observed. The reason why the perturbed runs synchronize is not
investigated in detail, but apparently it is due to the dynamics of the ocean. In section 6 we will
argue that with a nondynamical picture of the oscillation this behavior of the oscillation cannot
be explained.

5.2 Sensitivity to the restoring constant

The value of the restoring constant for the SST employed in Wea93 is approximately 100 W
m−2 K−1, which is generally thought to be unrealistically high. In addition, the thermohaline
circulation has shown to be rather sensitive to perturbations when a short restoring time scale is
used – a sensitivity which largely diminishes when longer restoring time scales are used (Power
and Kleeman 1994, Zhang et al. 1993). Therefore, we investigated the robustness of the oscilla-
tion with respect to the restoring timescale. In YS95 a similar experiment was performed with
similar results.

We performed an integration with the ocean model in which the restoring constant is slowly
reduced from 100 W m−2 K−1 to 25 W m−2 K−1 during a period of 11,000 years. The slow
rate of change allows the system to remain statistically close to equilibrium. We started with a
state after 2000 years of the run in section 3. During the time integration the system remains
oscillating. As a measure of the oscillation we considered the integrated atmospheric heatﬂux
over the polar part of the basin, from 32 oN to 64 oN, which is a good indication of convective
activity. In Fig. 17 we plotted parts of this time series for 5 diﬀerent periods of 100 years. The
value of the restoring constant α during these periods is approximately 100, 81, 62, 44, and 25

15

W m−2 K−1, respectively. The results of the time periods in between are similar.

Fig. 17 shows that the timescale of the oscillation increases from 12 years to 16 years when
the restoring constant decreases. The increase is small considering to the large range over which
α varies. The increase of the time scale is due to several eﬀects. First, the heat exchange between
the ocean and the atmosphere becomes less eﬃcient, which implies that the timescale for the
cooling of the subsurface due to convection becomes longer, thus increasing the timescale of
the oscillation. Second, since the cooling becomes less eﬃcient the impact of convection on the
ocean density becomes less. This slows down the response of the ocean circulation to changes in
convective activity, which results in an increase of the time scale of the oscillation. In Lenderink
(1996) we show in a two box model with a dynamical feedback that the second eﬀect is likely
to be dominant.

The amplitude of the variations in the integrated heatﬂux remains nearly constant. For α
= 25 W m−2 K−1 the amplitude of the oscillation only decreases with 40 % compared to the
reference run. This insensitivity is surprising considering that α directly inﬂuences atmospheric
heatﬂux. The insensitivity is partly related to the size of the convective area. An increase in
the size of the convective area compensates for the local decrease in heatloss, and makes the
area integrated heatﬂux fairly insensitive to the restoring constant. The insensitivity can also
be understood as follows. The amplitude of the oscillation is mainly determined by the rate of
subsurface warming, which is largely determined by the strength of the meridional overturning.
Since the meridional overturning is fairly insensitive to the restoring constant, so is the amplitude
of the oscillation.

We also performed a run with the restoring constant decreased to 10 W m−2 K−1. During this
run the oscillation stopped, which indicates that the oscillation occurs only when the subsurface
ocean is able to release heat to the atmosphere with a relatively fast time scale.

6 Comparison with Yin and Sarachik (1995)

In Yin and Sarachik (1995) a similar mechanism of the oscillation is proposed. They also argue
that the increased advection of relatively fresh water, which is due to the increased horizontal
salinity gradient and a strengthening of the southeastern ﬂow, supresses convection. On the other
hand, they argue that the onset of convection is solely due to the warming of the subsurface. In
our opinion, however, the warming of the subsurface is a necessary pre-condition. The actual
triggering is due to changes in the surface salinity.

They argue that the basic mechanism of the oscillation is grasped in a simple box model,
which is described in Yin (1995). The physical mechanism that leads to the oscillation is sketched
in Fig. 18. It is basically Welander’s oscillation – that is, the oscillation results because no stable
equilibrium states exist. In the convective state the advection of fresh water supresses convection;
in the nonconvective state the advection of heat at the subsurface triggers convection. With the
box model they argue that the oscillation occurs when the time scale for the surface freshening is

16

shorter than the time scale of the subsurface warming. However, because the advection of fresh
water is described by a simple relaxation condition, it is not clear where the ocean dynamics
come in. The results of the box model suggests that the suppression of convection could be
caused by a surface freshening solely due to the increased salinity gradient. Our experiments
with the ocean model with a stationary circulation proof that this is not the case. Furthermore,
with this mechanism salt perturbations would result in a phase shift of the oscillation.
If,
for example, one triggers convection before the subsurface heat ﬂux actually destabilizes the
stratiﬁcation (between phase 2 and phase 3 in Fig. 18) the system would immediately switch
to the convective phase (phase 1). The perturbed run would therefore be out of phase with the
run that is not perturbed. Such a phase shift was however not observed in the perturbation
experiments with the ocean model. In contrast, even with fairly large perturbations we were
not able to cause a signiﬁcant phase shift. Yin’s box model will be analyzed in the appendix. It
will be shown that oscillations in a box model only occur in an unlikely part of the parameter
space. In a more realistic parameter space, convection is selfsustaining and no oscillations occur.
Ocean dynamics are therefore important.

To conclude, all our experiments indicate that ocean dynamics play an essential role. This
has an important impact for the time scale of the oscillation. In Yin’s case the time scale is
mainly determined by the rate of subsurface warming. But, since the warming of the subsurface
is a relatively fast process (order of a few years), it cannot explain the (inter)decadal time scale
of the oscillation. In our view, this time scale is mainly determined by the ocean dynamics. It
is mainly determined by the time it takes for the surface circulation to responds to anomalous
convective activity.

7 Summary and Conclusions

We investigated the mechanism causing a decadal oscillation in an ocean model forced by MBCs.
The oscillation is similar to the oscillation described in WS91, Wea93 and also in YS95. The
oscillation is characterized by large ﬂuctuations in convective activity and atmospheric heatﬂux
in a relatively small area in the northeastern part of the basin. The meridional overturning and
the meridional heattransport show signiﬁcant variations on a decadal time scale in response to
the convective activity. The phase relationship between convective activity and the strength
of meridional overturning (given by the amplitude of the positive overturning cell with water
ﬂowing poleward at the surface) shows a signiﬁcant lag. The maximum of the overturning
coincides with a minimum in convective activity. An overturning cell at the polar boundary
with water ﬂowing equatorward at the surface also displays large ﬂuctuations. This negative
cell is strongest just before the deep convection at the eastern boundary disappears. The cell
disappears just after the deep convection is turned oﬀ.

The mechanism can be summarized as follows. At the end of the convective phase an
increasing amount of fresh water is ﬂowing from the polar boundary southeastward into the

17

convective area. The southward ﬂow is shown in the meridional overturning by the polar cell.
Eventually, convection is completely shut oﬀ. The propagation as a Kelvin wave of the main
area of downwelling at the eastern boundary causes a rapid collapse of the negative cell. The
southeastern ﬂow at the surface weakens, and the advection of fresh water decreases. The
resulting surface salinity rise, together with a rapid subsurface warming, initialize convection at
the eastern boundary. Thereafter convection rapidly expands because of a convective instability.
Convection mixes heat and salt to the surface; the heat is rapidly released to the atmosphere
whereas the surface salinity anomaly remains, expands horizontally and triggers convection in
the neighboring gridcells. The positive surface salinity anomaly due to convection causes an
increase in the surface salinity gradient. The increased surface salinity gradient, together with
increasing southeastward velocities at the surface, cause an increase in the net advection of fresh
water into the convective area. In response to the slowly increasing inﬂux of fresh water and a
rapid cooling of the subsurface the convective activity again decreases.

With this paper we aimed to answer the question as to whether the ocean dynamics play an
essential role in the oscillation. With a conceptual model we showed that a phase shift between
the inﬂux of fresh water into the convective area and the convective activity causes oscillatory
behavior. The phase lag between the advection and the convective activity is introduced by the
dynamic response of the surface velocity. The negative polar cell increases in strength during
the convective phase, and therefore advects more fresh water into the convective area, which
reduces the convective activity.

Our results strongly suggests that the period of the oscillation is determined by the the time
scale at which the advection of fresh water into the convective area responds to changes in con-
vective activity. The rate of the subsurface warming has only a small impact on the time scale
of the oscillation. In Lenderink (1996) we explored this point further. It furthermore turns out
that the amplitude of the oscillation is mainly determined by the rate of subsurface warming.
This contradicts the results of Yin (1995) and YS95 who argued that the time scale of the oscil-
lation is mainly set by the subsurface warming. In Yin (1995) the subsurface warming actually
destabilizes the stratiﬁcation. In our case a warming of the subsurface only is a necessary, but
not suﬃcient condition to trigger of convection.

The main question is therefore what causes the change of the ﬂow into the convective area.
We ﬁrst considered the convective phase. Associated with the convective activity is upwelling
and downwelling at the eastern and northern boundary, which introduces a positive density
anomaly north of the convective area and a negative density anomaly south of the convective
area (see also Moore and Reason 1993). Horizontal advection also displaces the density anomaly
northward. The net results of these processes is that - in response to anomalous convective
activity - the densest water tends to be trapped in the northeastern corner of the basin. The
anomalous surface ﬂow associated with this density anomaly is now a southeastward ﬂow into
the convective area which acts to suppress convection. During the nonconvective phase the
occurrence of a Kelvin wave plays an important role. It re-initialiazes convection and it resets

18

the southeastern surface ﬂow.

Lateral boundaries determine the dynamic response of the ocean model to a large extent.
Because the processes at the boundary are obviously not well described in coarse resolution
ocean models, this fact causes our major concern. The model bahavior could change dramati-
caly when the processes at the boundary are represented more realistically. In a recent paper,
Winton (1996b) proposes that decadal oscillations are greatly damped when bottom topography
is included. The inclusion of bottom topography changes the dynamic response because poten-
tial energy can be directly converted into the barotropic mode with bottom topography, whereas
without bottom topography potential energy can only be converted into the baroclinic mode.
The adjustment of the thermal winds to the no-normal ﬂow condition at the eastern boundary
changes with the inclusion of bottom topography. This agrees with the results of Moore and
Reason (1993). They found a decadal oscillation in a global ocean model with a ﬂat bottom,
but did not ﬁnd an oscillation with realistic bottom topography.

Zhang et al. (1995) found an oscillation in an ocean model coupled to a thermodynamical
ice model. They contributed the oscillation to the thermal insulating eﬀect of sea-ice. However,
their oscillation shows the same phase relationship between the convective activity and the sur-
face ﬂow. In addition, the surface salinity also shows a sharp gradient between the convective
area and the northwestern boundary. This suggest that the mechanism described in this paper
might operate. Therefore, we also performed a few experiments with an ice model included.
The results (not described in this paper) seem to conﬁrm our hypothesis. Oscillations caused
by the mechanism described in this paper with a time scale of 15-20 years were obtained with
a freshwater forcing that causes a pool of fresh water in the northwestern corner. It even seems
that oscillations are more easily invoked because the ice-layer pushes convection south of the
polar boundary, which facilitates the formation of the negative overturning cell at the polar
boundary. These results suggest that the mechanism described in this paper is fairly robust in
coarse resolution ocean models. It remains however to be veryﬁed whether the oscillation also
occurs when the processes occuring at the boundary are represented more realistically.

Appendix A

A two box model

The oscillation that is found by Welander (1982) in a two box model has often been used to
explain the occurrence of decadal oscillations in ocean models. The oscillation occurs when, with
a certain heat and freshwater forcing, both the convective and the nonconvective equilibrium
state do not exist. This results in oscillations between the convective and the nonconvective
state.

19

In a box model the net eﬀect of the advective and diﬀusive exchange between the boxes and
the surrounding ocean has to be parameterized. A relaxation condition or a ﬁxed ﬂux are often
used as simple parameterizations of these ﬂuxes. Using a relaxation condition for the advection
of salt into the surface box, only the static response of advection to changes in convective activity
is represented. We will show that in such a box model, using a forcing that is realistic in the
sense that it forces an halocline and inverse thermocline structure, the occurrence of oscillations
is unlikely.

The box model

In this section we solve a simple two box model. For simplicity we assumed that the volume of
the surface equals that of the subsurface box. This assumption does not aﬀect our conclusions as
long as the volumes of both boxes are of the same order. Both the temperature (T) and salinity
(S) of the surface (labeled with a subscript u) and the subsurface (labeled with a subscript l)
box are dynamical variables. The equations are given by:

dTu
dt
dTl
dt
dSu
dt
dSl
dt

= α(Tatm

Tu) + τ ∆(Tl

Tu)

−

= qT

l (T b
l

= qS

u (Sb
u

= qS

l (Sb
l

−

−

−

Tl) + τ ∆(Tu

Tl)

Su) + τ ∆(Sl

Su)

Sl) + τ ∆(Su

Sl)

−

−

−

−

(1)

The notation is similar to the one used in LH94. The ﬁrst terms on the right hand side denote
the eﬀect of advection, diﬀusion and atmospheric forcing. The constants T b
l can
be considered to be the characteristics of the water ﬂowing into the boxes. The advective
timescale q−1 is determined by ﬂow velocity. Here, the superscript denote either salinity (S)
or temperature (T). The surface temperature Tu is relaxed with a restoring constant α to the
atmospheric temperature T atm. The second terms on the right hand side represent convective
mixing, which occurs in case of an unstable stratiﬁcation. The convective timescale is given by
τ −1, and ∆ is either 0 or 1 dependent on the stratiﬁcation. The equation of state is linear:

u and Sb

l , Sb

ρ = ρo

kT T + kSS,

−

where ρo, kT and kS are positive constants.

Solutions of the box model

We solve these equations similar to the method used in LH94. The stationary solutions are
determined by putting the lefthand sides of (1) to zero. Then we solve the system for the non-
convective equilibrium (∆ = 0) and the convective equilibrium (∆ = 1). For the nonconvective
equilibrium this yields:

Tu = T b
l

Tl

−

Tatm

−

20

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

and for the convective equilibrium:

Sl

−

Su = Sb
l

Sb
u,

−

Tl

Tu =

1 +

+

−

−

"

"

Sl

Su =

1 +

+

τ
α

τ
qS
u

−1

τ
qT
l #

(T b
l

−

Tatm)

−1

τ
qS
l #

(Sb
l

Sb
u).

−

kT (T b
l

Tatm) < kS(Sb
l

Sb
u)

−

−

T < Φ

S.

Φ

The nonconvective equilibrium now exists if and only if:

We abbreviate this to

Similarly, the convective equilibrium exists if and only if:

−1

1 +

+

τ
α

τ
qT
l #

"

T >

Φ

1 +

"

τ
qS
u

+

τ
qS
l #

−1

S.

Φ

If we consider the space spanned by ΦT and ΦS the possible solutions can be visualized as
follows. The equations 4 and 5 divide this space into four parts. If we impose the following
condition on the timescales:

τ
α

+

τ
qT
l

>

+

τ
qS
u

τ
qS
l

,

the four parts are as shown in Fig. 19a. If this condition is not fulﬁlled the four parts are as
shown in Fig. 19b. Similar to LH94 we labeled these four parts with regime 0, I, II and III.
In regime 0 only the nonconvective state exists; in regime I only the convective state exists; in
regime II both the convective and the nonconvective state exists, and in regime III no equilibrium
solutions are found and the system oscillates. It should be noted that, strictly speaking, the
condition given by Eq. 6 is only determined by the restoring timescales valid for the convective
phase.

Convective oscillations in a box model

The Welander oscillation is similar to the oscillations we obtain in regime III. We only consider
positive values for ΦT and ΦS because only in this part of the parameter space is a halocline
and an inverse thermocline established. If the decadal oscillations found in the ocean model are
identiﬁed with regime III, the condition given by Eq. 6 therefore has to satisﬁed.

The restoring constants for the subsurface box qS

l are mainly determined by the ﬂow
velocity in the ocean. There is a priori no reason to assume these constants to be diﬀerent. If
we therefore assume qS

l Eq. 6 becomes:

l and qT

l = qT

α < qS
u .

21

Because the restoring to the atmospheric temperature is fast compared to the advective timescale
this conditions is not fulﬁlled.

In the convective phase the vertical temperature and salinity gradient are determined by
the timescale of the advective (atmospheric) processes and the time scale of the convective
process. As show by Eq. 3 the vertical gradient increases with increasing advective timescales
and a decreasing convective timescale. The longest advective timescale mainly determines the
vertical gradient. The temperature gradient is mainly determined by qT
l because the atmospheric
restoring is fast. Because qS
l are both advective timescales and are thus of the same order,
the salinity gradient is determined by both qS
l . It is unlikely that the salinity gradient
stabilizes the stratiﬁcation in the convective state as Eq. 6 is not likely to be fulﬁlled. The
parameter space is given by Fig. 19b. Oscillations as a results of regime III do not occur with
a forcing that establishes a halocline and an inverse thermocline. Instead the system is in that
part of the parameter space where regime II exists. Convection is selfsustaining and hysteresis
occurs.

u and qS

u and qS

l , Sb

l , and Sb

One could therefore conclude that either the formulation of the forcing for the box model is
not appropriate, or an external force is missing to obtain convective oscillations. One could for
example assume that the characteristics T b
u of the water entering the area considered
depend on the convective activity because the direction of the ﬂow changes due to the changes in
the convective activity. In the ocean model this is visible at the northeastern boundary between
t = 4 and t = 6 years, when convection is completely suppressed. At t = 4 years a strong south-
ward ﬂow transport relatively fresh water into the convective area, which suppresses convection
completely just after t = 5 years. When the velocity ﬁeld does not change, convection would
remain oﬀ, even in spite of the subsurface warming when convection is oﬀ. The nonconvective
state is selfsustaining. Due to the boundary Kelvin wave, however, the surface ﬂow reverses
sign, and the northward ﬂow advects much saltier water into the area. This rapidly re-initializes
convection. The subsurface warming is therefore a necessary, but not suﬃcient condition to give
a convective oscillation.

Yin’s oscillation

In Yin (1995) a similar box model is solved. In contrast to our analysis Yin obtained decadal
oscillations. Yin however assumed that the subsurface salinity is ﬁxed. The salinity gradient
when convection occurs is now determined by the rate of surface freshening only, whereas without
this assumption it is also limited by the advective timescale for the subsurface. Mathematically,
it is equivalent with using an inﬁnite restoring constant for the subsurface salinity. Using this
and assuming that α >> qT

l , Eq. 6 becomes

For positive ΦT and ΦS regime III therefore only occurs if the timescale of the surface freshening
is shorter than the timescale of the subsurface warming. This result is in accordance with Yin

l < qS
qT
u .

22

(1995).

Acknowledgments. This work was initiated during a visit of the ﬁrst author to Andrew
Weaver and his group. Many thanks. Thanks are also due to Nanne Weber, Wim Verkley and
Frank Selten for comments on earlier versions of the manuscript. This work has been supported
by the Netherlands Organization for Scientiﬁc Research (NWO) project VVA.

23

References

1-82.

[1] Bjerknes, J., 1964: Atlantic air-sea interaction. Advances in Geophysics, Academic Press,

[2] Broecker, W. S., D. M. Peteet, and D. Rind, 1985: Does the ocean-atmosphere system have

more than one stable mode of operation? Nature, 315, 21-26.

[3] Bryan, K., 1984: Accelerating the convergence to equilibrium of ocean-climate models. J.

Phys. Oceanogr., 14, 666-673.

[4] Cai, W., 1995: Interdecadal variability driven by mismatch between surface ﬂux forcing

and oceanic freshwater/heat transport. J. Phys. Oceanogr., 25, 2643-2666.

[5] Cai, W., and S. J. Godfrey, 1995: Surface Heatﬂux parameterizations and the variability

of the thermohaline circulation. J. Geophys. Res., Vol. 100, No. C6, 10,679-10,692.

[6] Cai, W., R. J. Greatbatch, and S. Zhang, 1995: Interdecadal variability in an ocean model
driven by a small, zonal redistribution of the surface buoyancy ﬂux. J. Phys. Oceanogr.,
Vol. 25, No. 9, 1998-2010.

[7] Chen, F., and M. Ghil., 1995: Interdecadal variability of the thermohaline circulation and

high-latitude surface ﬂuxes. J. Phys. Oceanogr., Vol. 25, No. 11, 2547-2568.

[8] Delworth, T., S. Manabe, and R. J. Stouﬀer, 1993: Interdecadel variability of the thermo-

haline circulation in a coupled ocean-atmosphere model. J. Climate, 6, 1993-2011.

[9] Drijfhout, S., C. Heinze, M. Latif, and E. Maier-Reimer., 1996: Mean Circulation and
Internal Variability in an Ocean Primitive Equation Model. J. Phys. Oceanogr., Vol. 26,
No. 4., 559-580.

[10] Greatbatch, R. J., and S. Zhang, 1995: An interdecadal oscillation in an idealized ocean

basin forced by constant heat ﬂux. J. Climate, Vol. 8. No. 1, 81-91.

[11] Greatbatch, R. J., and K. A. Peterson, 1995: Interdecadal variability and ocean thermoha-

line adjustment. submitted to J. Geophys. Res.

[12] Haney, R. L., 1971: Surface thermal boundary condition for ocean circulation models. J.

Phys. Oceanogr., 1, 241-248.

Clim. Dyn., 9, 391-409.

[13] Huang R. X., and L. Chou, 1994: Parameter sensitivity study of the saline circulation.

[14] Huang R. X., 1993: Real freshwater ﬂux as a natural boundary conidtion for the salinity
balance and thermohaline circulation forced by evaporation nad precipitation. J. Phys.
Oceanogr., 23, 2428-2446.

24

[15] Kushnir, Y., 1994: Interdecadal variations in the North Atlantic sea surface temperature

and associated atmospheric conditions. J. Climate, Vol. 7, 141-157.

[16] Lenderink, G., and R.J. Haarsma, 1994: Variability and multiple equilibria of the thermo-
haline circulation associated with deep water formation. J. Phys. Oceanogr., Vol. 24, No.
7, 1480-1493.

[17] Lenderink, G., and R.J. Haarsma, 1996: Modeling Convective Transitions in the presence

of sea-ice. J. of Phys. Oceanogr., Vol 26, 8, p 1448-1467.

[18] Lenderink, G., 1996: Decadal oscillations in a box model with a dynamical feedback. to be

submitted to J. Phys. Oceanogr.

[19] Myers, P. G. and A. J. Weaver, 1992: Low-frequence internal oceanic variability under

seasonal forcing. J. Geophys. Res., 97, 9541-9563.

[20] Moore, A. M., and J. C. Reason, 1993: The response of a global ocean general circulation
model to climatological surface boundary conditions for temperature and salinity. J. Phys.
Oceanogr., Vol. 23, No. 2, 300-328.

[21] Power, S. B., and R. Kleeman, 1994: Surface heat ﬂux parameterization and the response

of OGCMs to high latitude freshening. Tellus, 46A, 86-95.

[22] Rahmstorf, S., 1994: Rapid climate transitions in a coupled ocean atmosphere model.

Nature, Vol. 372, 82-85.

[23] Weaver, A. J., and E. S. Sarachik, 1991 (WS91): Evidence for decadal variability in an
ocean general circulation model: an advective mechanism. Atmosphere-Ocean, 29, 197-231.

[24] Weaver, A.J., J. Marotzke, P. F. Cummins, and E. S. Sarachik, 1993 (Wea93): Stability

and variability of the thermohaline circulation. J. Phys. Oceanogr., 1, 39-60.

[25] Welander, P., 1982: A simple heat salt oscillator. Dyn. Atmos. Oceans, 6, 233-242.

[26] Weisse, R., U. Mikolajewicz, and E. Maier-Reimer, 1994: Decadal variability of the North-

Atlantic in an ocean general circulation model. J. Geophys. Res., 99, 12411-12421.

[27] Winton, M., 1996a: On the role of horizontal boundaries in parameter sensitivity and
decadal-scale variability of coarse resolution ocean general circulation models. J. Phys.
Oceanogr., Vol. 26, No. 3, 289-304.

[28] Winton, M., 1996b: The damping eﬀect of bottom topography on internal decadal scale

oscillations of the thermohaline circulation. J. Phys. Oceanogr., Submitted.

[29] Yang, J., and J. D. Neelin, 1993: Sea ice interaction with the thermohaline circulation.

Geophys. Res. Lett., 20, 217-220.

25

[30] Yin. F., and E. S. Sarachik, 1995: Interdecadal thermohaline oscillations in a sector ocean
general circulation model: advective and convective processes. J. Phys. Oceanogr., 25,
2465-2484.

[31] Yin. F., 1995: A mechanistic model of the ocean interdecadal thermohaline oscillations. J.

Phys. Oceanogr., 25, 3239-3246.

[32] Zhang, S., R. J. Greatbatch, and C. A. Lin, 1993: A reexamination of the polar halocline
catastrophy and implications for coupled ocean-atmosphere modeling. J. Phys. Oceanogr.,
2, 287-299.

[33] Zhang, S., C. A. Lin, and R. J. Greatbatch, 1995: A decadal oscillation due to the coupling
between an ocean model an a thermodynamical sea-ice model. J. Mar. Res, 53, 79-106.

26

Figures

Figure 1: Restoring temperature and salinity for the reproduction experiment.

Figure 2: Diagnosed E-P (evaporation - precipitation) ﬂux in m yr−1.

27

Figure 3: Meridional overturning (Sv) spin-up circulation as a function of latitude and
depth.

28

Figure 4: Convective activity during oscillation in the polar part of the basin north of 30
oN. Shading correspond with convective mixing until approximately (from light to dark) 200
m, 900 m, 2200 m, and 4000 m, respectively. Also shown is the area where we considered
the mean quantities.

29

Figure 5: Meridional overturing at every 3 years during the oscillation.

30

Figure 6: Area mean temperature and salinity and convective fraction as a function of time
and depth. At the left-hand side depth in levels, right-hand side depth in meters.

31

mean heatflux

0

-20

-40

-60

-80

)
2
^
m
(
/
W

-100

-120

0

10

20
time (years)

30

40

Figure 7: Mean heatﬂux from the atmosphere to the surface box as a function of time.

32

salinity

temperature

0

5

10
time (years) 

15

20

5

10
time (years) 

15

20

surface salt budget

subsurface heat budget

a

33.8

33.6

 
U
S
P

33.4

33.2

33.0

c

0.4

0.2

0.0

-0.2

-0.4

0

 
r
a
e
y
/
U
S
P

5

10
time (years) 

15

20

5

10
time (years) 

15

20

Figure 8: Salinity (a) and temperature (b) of the surface box (solid line) and the subsurface
box (dotted line). Salinity budget for surface box (c) and heatbudget lower box (d) (short
dash: advection, long dash: convection, dot-dash: net E-P, solid: time derivative salinity
(c) or temperature (d)).

b

12

11

10

 
s
u
i
s
l
e
C

9

8

0

d

0.5

0.0

 
r
a
e
y
/
C

-0.5

-1.0

-1.5

0

33

surface box

salinity

S

(constant temperature)

pool of fresh
     water

convective
activity

C

overturning
O

subsurface
     box

temperature

T

(constant salinity)

Figure 9: A conceptual model for the oscillation. Shown are a surface box with variable
salinity S, a subsurface box with variable temerature T, and a polar overturning cell with
strength O. The convective activity between the boxes is denoted with C.

34

Figure 10: Surface salinity (a), convective depth (b), mean velocity (vm) and advection
S) in psu yr−1(c), and anomalous velocity (v′) and advection by
by mean velocity (vm
anomalous velocity (v′
S) at t = 0 years.

· ∇
· ∇

35

Figure 11: Similar to Fig. 10 but than for t = 4 years. Also shown are the anomalous
velocity due to the density anomaly beneath 550 m, and the advection due to this velocity
(e).

36

upper ocean

deep ocean

upper ocean

deep ocean

37

Figure 12: Sketches of the relationship between convection, density anomalies, and anoma-
lous velocity ﬁelds. The density anomaly is depicted by the dashed area. Anomalous veloc-
ities are shown by the arrows.

Figure 13: Time development of vertical velocity at 1000 m as a function of distance
(km) along the boundary. HE corresponds to 32 oN along the eastern boundary, NE the
northeastern corner, and NW the northwestern corner of the basin.

38

Figure 14: Surface salinity, deep-water formation, anomalous surface velocity, and surface
salt advection (psu yr−1) due to anomalous velocity during the weak convective phase.

39

x
u
l
f
t
a
e
h
 
.
s
o
m
t
a

0

-0.1

-0.2

-0.3

-0.4

-0.5

-0.6

-10

0

10

50

60

70

20
40
30
time (years) 

Figure 15: Integrated atmospheric heat ﬂux as a function of time. Upper curve: ocean
velocity ﬁxed after 15 years, middle curve: ocean velocity after 19 years set to the mean
velocity during the ﬁrst two cycles, and lower curve: ocean velocity ﬁxed after 10 years.

40

-1

-2

-3
-4
-5

-6

-7

-8
-9

-10
-11

0

-0.1

-0.2

-0.3

-0.4

-0.5

-0.6

-1

-2

-3

-4

-5

-6

-7

-8

-9

-10

0

-0.1

-0.2

-0.3

-0.4

-0.5

-0.6

)
v
S

(
 
l
l

e
c
 
r
a
o
p

l

)

W
P

(
 
x
u

l
f
t

a
e
h

 
.
s
o
m
t
a

)
v
S

(
 
l
l

e
c
 
r
a
o
p

l

)

W
P

(
 
x
u
l
f
t
a
e
h
 
.
s
o
m
a

t

10

15

20

25

30

35

40

45

50

10

15

20

25

30

35

40

45

50

10

15

20

25

30

35

40

45

50

10

15

20

25

35

40

45

50

30
time (years)

Figure 16: Heatﬂux and strength polar cell as function of time. Upper two panels salinity
perturbation after 16 years, lower two panels salinity perturbation after 19 years (solid line:
nonperturbed run, long dash: 0.4 PSU, short dash: 0.8 PSU.

41

Integrated Heatflux

-0.6

100

100 W/(m^2 K)

120

140

160

180

200

-0.6

2700

81 W/(m^2 K)

2720

2740

2760

2780

2800

-0.6

5500

62 W/(m^2 K)

5520

5540

5560

5580

5600

-0.6

8200

44 W/(m^2 K)

8220

8240

8260

8280

8300

0.0

 
W
P

-0.3

0.0

 
W
P

-0.3

0.0

 
W
P

-0.3

0.0

 
W
P

-0.3

0.0

 
W
P

-0.3

-0.6

25 W/(m^2 K)

11000

11020

11040

11060

11080

11100

time 

Figure 17: Atmospheric heat ﬂux integrated over the polar part of the basin of diﬀerent
values of the restoring constant α.

42

phase 2
fast 
freshening

cool
fresh

warm
salty

cool
salty

cool
salty

phase 1

convection
starts

convection
stops

cool
fresh

cool
salty

cool
fresh

warm
salty

slow
warming

phase 3

surface

sub−
surface

Figure 18: Simple sketch of the mechanism of decadal oscillations by Yin

SF

a
777777777777III
777
777
777777777777
777
777
777777777777
777
777
777777777777
777777777777
777777777777
777777777777
777777777777
777777777777
777777777777
777777777777
777777777777
777777777777

I
2222222222222
2222222222222
2222222222222
2222222222222
2222222222222
2222222222222
F T
2222222222222
2222222222222
2222222222222
2222222222222
2222222222222
2222222222222
2222222222222

II

O

b

I

SF
77777777777777
77777777777777
II
77777777777777
77777777777777
77777777777777
77777777777777
77777777777777
77777777777777
77777777777777
77777777777777
77777777777777

2222222222222
2222222222222
2222222222222
2222222222222
2222222222222
F T
2222222222222
2222222222222
2222222222222
2222222222222
2222222222222
2222222222222
2222222222222
2222222222222

III

O

Figure 19: Solutions of the box model with the nonconvective regime O, the convective
regime I, the regime with both the convective and the nonconvective solution II, and the
oscillatory regime III

43

