A comparison of two operational wave assimilation
methods

A.C. Voorrips∗
Royal Netherlands Meteorological Institute (KNMI)

P.O. Box 201, 3730 AE De Bilt, The Netherlands

C. de Valk †
Delft Hydraulics

P.O. Box 177, 2600 MH Delft, The Netherlands

Submitted to The Global Atmosphere and Ocean System

7
9
9
1
 
r
a

M
 
1
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
o
a
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
6
2
0
3
0
7
9
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

∗Supported by the Technology Foundation (STW). Partly aﬃliated to Delft University of Technology, Faculty
of Technical Mathematics and Informatics, P.O. Box 5031, Delft, The Netherlands. E-mail: voorrips@knmi.nl

†Presently at ARGOSS, P.O. Box 61, 8325 ZH Vollenhove, The Netherlands. E-mail: valk@argoss.nl

1

Abstract

A comparison is carried out between two operational wave forecasting/assimilation

models for the North Sea, with the emphasis on the assimilation schemes. One model is
the WAM model, in combination with an optimal interpolation method (OIP). The other

model, DASWAM, consists of the third generation wave model PHIDIAS in combination
with an approximate implementation of the adjoint method.

In an experiment over the period February 19 - March 30, 1993, the models are driven

by the same wind ﬁeld (HIRLAM analysis winds), and the same observation data set is as-
similated. This set consists of a) spectra from three pitch-and-roll buoys and b) Synthetic

Aperture Radar (SAR) spectra from the ERS-1 satellite. Three analysis/forecast runs are
performed: one without assimilation, one with assimilation of buoy measurements only,

and one with all data assimilated. For validation, observations from four buoys, altimeter
data from ERS-1 and Topex-Poseidon, and scatterometer data from ERS-1 are used.

A detailed analysis of the ”Wadden Storm” (February 20-22) shows the very diﬀer-
ent nature of the two assimilation schemes: the wave and wind ﬁeld corrections of the

WAM/OIP scheme are all in the vicinity of the observations, whereas the DASWAM ad-
justments are more of a global nature. The impact of some individual buoy and SAR

observations is visualized. A comparison of the performance of the two schemes is some-
what obscured by the very diﬀerent behaviour of the two ﬁrst-guess runs.

A statistical analysis over the whole 39-day period gives the following results. In a
comparison with buoy observations it is shown that a positive impact of wave data assimi-

lation remains until about 12 hours in forecast in both models. At the buoy locations, the

impact of OIP assimilation in WAM is larger, both at analysis time and in the short-term
forecast. Comparison with altimeter wave heights also shows a slightly larger impact of

WAM/OIP than of DASWAM. The impact of assimilation of buoy observations is larger
than the impact of satellite SAR observations, at least partly because of the larger amount

of buoy data.

The wind speed corrections applied by both assimilation schemes did not signiﬁcantly

improve or deteriorate the quality of the winds, compared to either platform or satellite
wind measurements. For DASWAM, this is an indication that a better representation

of error covariances in the cost function and a retuning of the wave model can further
improve its performance.

2

1 Introduction

Application of data assimilation to operational wave modelling is a quickly developing subject.

It was only a decade ago that ﬁrst attempts were reported to improve the wave forecast by

correcting the wave ﬁeld with recent observations (Komen, 1985). Since then, the number of

near-real time available wave and wind observations has grown drastically because of the launch

of earth-observing satellites, notably the ERS-1 and ERS-2. At many forecast centres, this has

been the inspiration for the development of methods which can make use of observations in the

operational wave forecasting cycle. In this paper, the performance of two of these methods will

be compared.

The ﬁrst line of assimilation schemes consisted of sequential, time- independent methods

which were all speciﬁcally designed to assimilate integral wave parameters, especially signiﬁcant

wave height (e.g. Thomas, 1988; Janssen et al, 1989; Lionello et al, 1995). These methods are

computationally cheap, and some success in improving the wave forecast has been reported

(e.g. G¨unther et al, 1993). This has led to implementing such a system in the operational

wave analysis/forecast cycle at the European Centre for Medium-Range Weather Forecasts

(ECMWF).

However, in other cases the impact of this type of systems has proved to be small (Burgers

et al, 1992; Mastenbroek et al, 1994; Bidlot et al, 1995). As suggested by the last two studies,

this may be caused partly by the fact that signiﬁcant wave height observations alone do not

contain suﬃcient information for a proper update of the wave spectrum. Recently, sequential

assimilation systems have been developed which are also capable of assimilating observations

of the full wave spectrum (Hasselmann et al, 1994b, 1996b; Voorrips et al, 1996; Breivik et

al, 1996). Voorrips et al showed the additional impact of the use of spectral information, by a

comparison with a method based on signiﬁcant wave height assimilation.

Another line of algorithms consists of multi-time-level, variational assimilation schemes,

which minimise the misﬁt between model and observations over a certain time interval (e.g.,

de Valk and Calkoen, 1989; de Valk, 1994; Barzel and Long, 1994; Bauer et al, 1994; de las

Heras et al, 1995; Holthuijsen et al, 1996; Hersbach, 1997). The advantage of multi-time-level

methods is that the model dynamics is taken into account explicitly during the assimilation.

The dynamics of wind sea and swell are very diﬀerent, the former being determined largely

by the most recent wind forcing, and the latter by wave propagation. This diﬀerence aﬀects

the statistics of wind sea and swell: the spatial and temporal scales of correlation for swell are

variable and generally much larger than for wind sea. Multi-time-level methods can take this

3

explicitly into account by letting the model completely re-generate the analysis after adjustment

of the forcing of the model. This will be an advantage in particular for the analysis of swell,

especially if assimilated observations and model output locations of interest are spread over a

large area, so the analyses can beneﬁt from remote observations. Another potential advantage

of multi-time- level methods is control over the way in which information from observations

made at diﬀerent instants of time is integrated.

The drawback of these variational methods is that they are much more demanding in terms

of computer power than the single-time-level methods described above. Therefore, full imple-

mentation of the variational technique has so far only been applied to parameter estimation

studies (Hersbach, 1997). Schemes which are used for state estimation still need simpliﬁcations

in order to restrict the computer time. De Valk and Calkoen (1989) and Bauer et al (1994)

apply a simpliﬁed wave model during the minimization of the cost function. Holthuijsen et al

(1996) avoid the iteration in the minimization of the cost by assuming a parabolic dependence of

the cost function on the control parameters, and they apply a strongly simpliﬁed approximation

of the wind ﬁeld in order to reduce the number of control parameters.

In this paper, we compare the performance of two assimilation schemes, both of which

have been implemented in a wave analysis/forecasting cycle for the North Sea. The ﬁrst scheme,

DASWAM, is a multi-time-level variational method based on adjustment of the wind forcing

history (de Valk and Calkoen, 1989; de Valk, 1994). The second scheme, OIP (Optimal In-

terpolation of Partitions: Voorrips et al, 1996), is a sequential method which assimilates wave

spectra using the concept of spectral partitioning to reduce the computational burden (see Ger-

ling, 1992, and section 3). The purpose of the comparison is to assess whether the dynamically

consistent analyses of the variational scheme lead to more realistic analyzed ﬁelds and better

forecasts than the OI scheme, which uses ﬁxed covariance ﬁelds. Attention is paid not only to

the wave ﬁelds, but also to the wind ﬁeld update by the assimilation schemes. Furthermore,

the eﬀect of diﬀerent types of wave measurements is studied.

For a 39-day period in February/March 1993, the wave models are run with the same

input winds, and the assimilation schemes are fed with the same wave observations. The

period includes the ”Wadden Storm” (20-23 February), which is a highly interesting event, in

which signiﬁcant wave heights up to 10 m were measured in the North Sea. The observations

come from directional wave buoys and ERS-1 SAR. The results are validated against buoy

measurements, ERS-1 and Topex-Poseidon altimeter measurements, and ERS-1 scatterometer

data.

In sections 2 and 3, the two assimilation/forecast models are summarized. Section 4

4

describes the comparison experiment, of which the results are discussed in section 5. Some

conclusions are drawn in section 6.

2 Adjoint method (DASWAM)

2.1

Introduction

The wave data-assimilation scheme DASWAM developed at Delft Hydraulics is an example of

a multi-time-level variational data-assimilation method. It was implemented around 1990 for

a wave model covering the North Sea and the neighbouring part of the Atlantic Ocean (de

Valk, 1994). Oﬀ-line tests were reported in (Delft Hydraulics et al, 1994). In (Delft Hydraulics,

1995), a real-time test producing analyses and forecasts every 6 hours over a period of seven

months was reported.

The basis of this approach is that possible errors in model input data are corrected in

order to minimize the misﬁt of the analyses to observations and other available data, with

the numerical model as a dynamic constraint (Hasselmann et al, 1994a). The minimization is

carried out by an iterative descent method (Fletcher, 1987), using the model itself to evaluate

the cost associated to a trial value of the model inputs, and using the adjoint model to compute

the gradient of the cost to the model inputs, e.g. (Luenberger, 1969). For numerical models with

a ﬁnite-dimensional state computed at discrete time levels, the adjoint model is nothing else

than the application of the chain rule to keep track of the gradient of the cost to the state, also

called adjoint state or costate. This section discusses the wave model under consideration and

speciﬁc choices made concerning the input data to be corrected (controls), the cost functional

measuring the misﬁt of analyses to observations, and the solution to the minimization problem.

2.2 Model

The wave prediction model applied by Delft Hydraulics is the third generation model PHIDIAS

implemented by Delft Hydraulics (van Vledder, 1994). It solves the evolution equation for the

wave action density A(k, r, t):

∂
∂t

(

+ (cg + U)

∂
∂r −

·

xΩ)

(

∇

·

∂
∂k )

A = Sin + Sds + Snl + Sbot

(1)

Here k the wave number, r position, t time, U surface current, cg group velocity and Ω angular

frequency. The right hand side terms Sin, Sds, Snl and Sbot are, respectively, the source terms for

wind input, dissipation through white- capping, non-linear wave-wave interactions, and bottom

dissipation. They are taken equivalent to the original WAM source terms (WAMDI, 1988).

5

The model is thus quite similar to the original WAM model, the main diﬀerence being that the

action density is computed on a wavenumber/direction grid, whereas in WAM, the variance

density is computed on a frequency/direction grid. The wavenumber grid consists of 25 grid

points, with equal spacing of the logarithm of the wavenumber, between 0.0036 rad/m and 1.01

rad/m, corresponding to 0.03 Hz and 0.5 Hz in deep water. The directional grid consists of 12
points with uniform spacing of 30◦.

For wave prediction for the North Sea region, the model was implemented on a rotated

spherical grid with pole in Venice; see ﬁgure 1. This choice results in relatively high resolution

in the southern North Sea, and low resolution near Iceland. As a boundary condition on

the open boundaries of the model, for wavenumbers pointing to the interior of the domain a

vanishing gradient of the action density in the direction normal to the boundary is imposed.

In the absence of information from other sources, this appears to be a reasonable choice, but

substantial errors can be expected in the region near the western boundary facing the Atlantic

Ocean.

2.3 Controls

In the application of variational inverse modelling within the wave forecasting cycle to estimate

the current state of the model, model inputs to be corrected are naturally time-varying inputs

(forcing, boundary conditions, etc.). Forcing by wind is generally regarded as a major source of

error in numerical wave predictions and analyses. As a consequence, wind ﬁelds over a preceding

time-interval (the assimilation window) have been chosen as controls. For the regional model

for North Sea and north-east Atlantic Ocean described earlier, the assimilation window was

ﬁxed at 72 hours. For this regional model, errors in boundary conditions are another major

source of error, but the correction of boundary conditions has not been implemented so far.

The most obvious drawback of wind ﬁelds as controls is the huge dimension of a wind

ﬁeld sequence. However, this presents only a minor problem in practice (see below). Secondly,

there is the problem of constructing physically realistic wind ﬁelds. There are limits to the

information about wind ﬁelds obtainable from a restricted set of wave observations (de Valk,

1994), so we cannot expect that the wind ﬁeld reconstructions will also be consistent with the

physics of the atmosphere. The most complete solution is to couple the wave model to an

atmospheric model and develop an assimilation method for the compound model (Hasselmann

et al, 1988), provided that the diﬃcult problem of selecting controls for an atmospheric model

has been sorted out. A provisional solution is to parameterize the wind ﬁeld sequence or to

incorporate additional constraints on the wind ﬁeld sequence, such as geostrophy. In the current

6

implementation of the algorithm, smoothness of wind ﬁeld corrections is imposed by a tensor

product B-spline representation of corrections ∆u and ∆v to the wind vector components u

and v (de Boor, 1987):

and

∆u(x, y) =

u Bj(x)Bk(y)
αj,k

∆v(x, y) =

v Bj(x)Bk(y)
αj,k

Xj,k

Xj,k

(2)

(3)

with x and y the longitudinal and latitudinal coordinates, respectively. The spline coeﬃcients
u and αj,k
αj,k
v
the start of a data-assimilation run. For each 3-hourly wind ﬁeld, a diﬀerent set of spline
components is assumed. For each j, Bj is a piecewise cubic function with compact support

represent the perturbation applied to the ﬁrst-guess wind ﬁeld and are zero at

determined by the knot points, which were placed at every third mesh point of the wave model

grid. The B-spline basis functions are, except for shifts, identical in terms of the coordinates

of the rotated spherical grid. This results in smoother wind ﬁeld adjustments in the North.

Other constraints are not imposed at present.

2.4 Cost functional

The cost functional should reﬂect the statistics of errors in observations and in ﬁrst guesses of

model inputs. In general, a suitable choice is the negative of the logarithm of the posterior den-

sity of the model inputs, i.e. their conditional probability density relative to the observations.

When the cost function contains only terms expressing the misﬁt to observations, minimizing

it is equivalent to maximum likelihood estimation of the model inputs. The misﬁt of wave

analyses to observations and the misﬁt of wind retrievals to ﬁrst guess wind ﬁelds will appear

in separate terms of the cost functional. For most types of spectral wave observations, appro-

priate cost function terms can be derived straightforwardly by approximating the sea surface

as stationary and Gaussian. For directional wave buoys and measured SAR spectra, cost func-

tions have been implemented in this way. However, in the tests reported in this paper, inverted

SAR spectra were used for which no error statistics are available (see section 4.1). Also, the

available parameters of directional wave buoy spectra did not allow reconstruction of the 1st

and 2nd order Fourier coeﬃcients of the directional spreading functions which are used in the

cost functional term for these buoys (again, see section 4.1). Therefore, it was decided to for-

mulate cost functionals for both SAR and wave buoy data in terms of inverted directional wave

spectra. Directional spectra were derived from the wave buoy data of mean variance density,

mean direction and directional spread (Kuik et al, 1988) over 10 distinct frequency intervals

7

by assuming a cos2s directional distribution for each of the intervals. Then these spectra were

transformed to the spectral grid of the model (but now in the frequency/direction domain)

using interpolation. The cost functional term for an inverted spectrum from SAR and from a

wave buoy used is a simple sum of squares

F pred(fi, θj)
h

−
σ2

F obs(fi, θj)

2

i

i,j
X

(4)

with F pred the model prediction of the wave variance spectrum at the grid point and time-
level of the observed wave variance spectrum F obs. The variance σ2 was taken identical for all

spectral bins for both SAR and wave buoys. This simplistic approach has at least the advantage

that the eﬀects of spectra from diﬀerent instruments on the analysis is independent of statistical

assumptions, so they can easily be compared. However, from a statistical point of view, it is

not an optimal choice.

As mentioned in the previous section, deviations from ﬁrst guess wind ﬁelds were repre-

sented by B-splines. Deviations from ﬁrst guess wind ﬁelds were penalized by a cost functional
term of the form of a sum of squares of all B-spline coeﬃcients αj,k

of all wind ﬁelds,

u , αj,k
v

weighed by a single constant. The weight was chosen suﬃciently small, so that the magnitudes

of wind ﬁeld corrections did not signiﬁcantly restrict the inﬂuence of the wave observations on

wind ﬁeld reconstructions. This may not be very realistic, but was motivated by the situation

that no adequate model of the covariance structure of wind prediction errors had yet been im-

plemented. Aspects which do aﬀect the outcomes are the spatial correlation length, determined

by the knot distances of the B-spline basis, and the assumed mutual independence of the spline

coeﬃcients of consecutive 3-hourly wind ﬁelds. This latter assumption was found unrealistic

in previous tests (Delft Hydraulics et al, 1994): time-series of wind ﬁeld adjustments appeared

rather bumpy, and storm systems were often found to be adjusted only at a single instant.

2.5 Numerical solution

To solve large-scale minimization problems, several eﬃcient and storage-eﬀective descent meth-

ods are available which require only functional evaluations (based on the forward model) and

gradient evaluations (based on the adjoint model). We implemented a limited-memory BFGS

method (Liu and Nocedal, 1988).

Still, applying this iteration scheme using a third-generation wave model would require

much more computational eﬀort and time than a forecast run, because both the model and

its adjoint need to be run over the assimilation window (see 2.3) at least once per iteration.

8

At this stage, approximation of the model within the minimization procedure seems the only

way out. The prerequisite of such an approximate model should be that for wind ﬁelds close

to the ﬁrst-guess ﬁeld, the response of the approximate model should be close to the response

of the real third-generation model. In (Bauer et al, 1994), an approximation of the tangent

linear model of WAM is used. This is very good for wind ﬁelds very close to the ﬁrst guess, but

deteriorates when the disturbance of the wind ﬁeld becomes larger. We chose instead to use

a nonlinear second-generation wave model, tuned to the third-generation model. This should

give a better response when the true wind ﬁeld is rather far away from the ﬁrst guess.

The wave ﬁeld in the approximate second-generation model is discretized on the same grid

as PHIDIAS. Advection and wave dissipation are modelled in the same way as in PHIDIAS.

The main diﬀerence from PHIDIAS is the way in which wave growth is modelled, which is the

most expensive part of a third- generation model. After advection, the procedure involves (a)

extracting wind-sea parameters from the advected spectra in a manner similar to (Janssen et

al, 1989); (b) updating these wind-sea parameters from friction velocity, using growth curves

tuned to the third-generation model; (c) computing a parameterized wind-sea peak. In parallel,

the advected spectrum is dissipated as in WAM to deal with the swell components, and is then

combined with the computed wind sea peak by taking the maximum of both.

Some details of the diﬀerent steps in the computation follow below. In the extraction of

wind-sea parameters (a), the parameters extracted are the total variance, mean wave period

Tm (deﬁned in section 4.2) and mean direction θw over a wind-sea region of the spectral domain

determined from the friction velocity following (Janssen et al, 1989), with friction velocity

determined from U10 according to the Charnock relationship. In (b), two growth curves are

used: one for energy, and the other for period, expressed as a function of wave age (with all

variables made dimensionless using the friction velocity). The two growth curves were ﬁtted

to calculations with a single-gridpoint re-implementation of WAM without advection (De Valk

and Calkoen, 1989, Section 4.2). First an eﬀective wave growth duration is estimated from

the wind-sea mean period and energy and the friction velocity, deﬁned as the average of the

wave growth durations computed from energy and from mean period. Then the energy and

mean period at the next time-level are computed each according to their own growth curves.

This procedure ensures that discontinuities in the growth in the case of changing winds are

minimized in both mean period and energy. The parameterization of the wind-sea peak (c)

is of the JONSWAP form (Hasselmann et al, 1973; Komen et al, 1994, p. 187) but with
diﬀerent coeﬃcients to match the WAM spectra. A cos2 directional distribution was assumed,

independent of frequency. Weaknesses of the current version are the directional relaxation and

9

the behaviour of the spectral peak shortly after a sudden decrease in wind speed.

When comparing this second-generation model approximation with PHIDIAS or WAM,

diﬀerences in signiﬁcant wave height in the order of 0.5-1 m were frequently observed. Therefore,

assimilation with this model may be eﬀective for correcting relatively large errors in wind ﬁelds

but probably not for correcting small errors, if it is assumed that the WAM model results have

a smaller error than the observed diﬀerence with the 2nd generation approximation.

The second-generation approximation was not only used in the minimization of the cost

function, but also to produce the analyses. The motivation is that due to diﬀerences between

the second- and third-generation model, analyses produced using these models driven by the

same wind ﬁelds may be diﬀerent. Using the second-generation model for the analysis has the

advantage that the wind ﬁeld corrections have been obtained with the same model.

As a result of the approximations made, producing the analysis over a 72 h interval

performing 10 iterations to minimize the cost functional requires about twice the computational

eﬀort as running the forecast over a 36 h interval using the third-generation model. The

overhead of data-assimilation in comparison to a third-generation model forecast without data-

assimilation is therefore about 200 %.

3 Optimal interpolation of spectral partitions (OIP)

3.1

Introduction

This section describes the wave data assimilation / forecasting system which is currently at

a semi-operational stage at KNMI (Voorrips et al, 1996; Voorrips, 1997). Multi-time-level

variational assimilation methods have been used at KNMI for parameter estimation (de las

Heras et al, 1995; Hersbach, 1997), but research for state estimation and wave forecasting

is concentrating on single-time-level, sequential methods. The latter techniques are generally

less computationally demanding and have been applied successfully in meteorological forecast

models. The drawback of such techniques is, however, that the model dynamics cannot be

incorporated explicitly.

Previous experience has been obtained with the optimal interpolation method applied to

wave height and wave period measurements (Janssen et al, 1989; Lionello and Janssen, 1990;

Burgers et al, 1992; Mastenbroek et al, 1994). Optimal interpolation is a statistical method

which determines the minimum error variance solution for the model state, by combining a

model ﬁrst-guess ﬁeld and observations, with prespeciﬁed forecast and observation error covari-

ances.

10

The method which is used in the present study is also an optimal interpolation method,

but an extended version which assimilates observations of full wave spectra. The main spectral

characteristics of the spectrum are described by a reduced number of parameters, which limits

the computational burden which would be imposed by a full optimal interpolation method. The

method was devised and applied to ERS-1 SAR spectra by Hasselmann et al (1994b, 1996b).

Voorrips et al (1996) adapted this ”Optimal Interpolation of Partitions” (OIP) method for the

use of pitch-and-roll buoy data and applied it to the North Sea area. In their experiments, they

showed an improvement in wave analysis and forecast performance compared to the scheme of

Burgers et al (1992) in the North Sea case, due to the possibility of assimilating spectral and

directional details of the wave spectrum.

Since OIP is a sequential method, every assimilation step is performed only for one ﬁxed

time level, processing all available observations near that particular time. In a standard op-

erational setting, observations are grouped at 3-hourly intervals, so the assimilation scheme is

called every three hours. The computation time needed for the assimilation step is only a few

percent of that of a 3-hour run of the WAM model, so the additional cost of assimilation with

The description of the WAM/OIP scheme below is concise. For an extensive description

the OIP scheme is negligible.

we refer to Voorrips et al (1996).

3.2 Wave model

The wave model which is used is the WAM model, Cycle 4 (WAMDI, 1988; G¨unther et al,

1992; Komen et al, 1994). It solves the wave transport equation

∂F
∂t

+

∇ ·

(cgF ) = Sin + Sds + Snl + Sbot

(5)

where F (f, θ, r, t) is the frequency-directional wave variance density spectrum at location r and

time t and cg(D(r), f ) is the group velocity depending on the local depth D(r) and frequency

f . The right-hand side represents the source terms due to wind input, dissipation through

white-capping, nonlinear wave-wave interactions and bottom dissipation, respectively.

The model is implemented on a 1

3 degree latitude

1
2 degree longitude grid (approximately

×

32 km grid spacing), which includes the North Sea and part of the Norwegian Sea, see ﬁgure 1.

The Norwegian Sea is included mainly in order to capture wave systems which are generated

in this area, and which propagate as swell into the North Sea afterwards. At each grid point,

the wave variance density spectrum is discretized in 25 frequencies ranging from 0.04 to 0.4 Hz,

and in 12 directions.

11

In the version of the model used in this study, the open boundary of the model is not

forced by externally generated wave ﬁelds. Instead, the spectra at the boundary are deﬁned to

be equal to 90 % of the spectrum at the neighbouring grid point within the model region, thus

simulating a wave growth with a ﬁnite fetch when the wind is blowing into the model region.

Currently, tests are being performed with open boundary forcing by the global WAM version

which runs at ECMWF.

3.3 Assimilation method

3.3.1 Outline

As mentioned above, computational eﬃciency of the OIP method is enhanced by projecting the

full wave spectrum onto a small number of parameters, corresponding to so-called partitions,

before the actual assimilation is performed. This leads to the following step-wise approach:

Partitioning of all observed and model spectra, i.e. division of each spectrum into a few

distinct segments. The physical interpretation of each segment (”partition”) is that it

represents a wave system, corresponding to a certain meteorological event (swell from a

distant storm in the past, wind sea which is generated by local wind). Every partition is

described by three mean parameters: its total energy, mean direction and mean frequency.

Cross-assignment of partitions of diﬀerent spectra: connect partitions which are so close

to each other in mean spectral parameters that they can be supposed to represent the

same wave system.

Optimal interpolation of the mean parameters from observed and model partitions which

are cross-assigned. Thus, an analyzed ﬁeld of partition parameters is obtained.

Update of each spectrum locally, based on the ﬁrst-guess spectrum and on the analyzed

partition parameters.

Update of the driving wind ﬁeld as well, if there is a wind sea-component in the spectrum.

•

•

•

•

•

3.3.2 Spectral partitioning

The concept of spectral partitioning was introduced by Gerling (1992). It is a method to describe

the essential features of a two-dimensional wave spectrum F (f, θ) with only a few parameters,

by separating the spectrum into a small number of distinct segments, so-called partitions. The

partitioning is a purely formal procedure; however, the partitions can be interpreted physically

12

as representing independent wave systems. Details of the formalism used to calculate the

partitions can be found in Hasselmann et al (1994b, 1996b) and in Voorrips et al (1996).

As said, the physical interpretation of a partition will be that of a wave system, which has

a diﬀerent meteorological origin than other partitions in the spectrum. The data assimilation

scheme makes use of this interpretation. The underlying assumption is that components of the

discretized spectrum which lie within a partition are fully correlated with each other, whereas

components from diﬀerent partitions are uncorrelated. This assumption is not entirely correct

(wave systems may inﬂuence each other through dissipation and non-linear interactions), but it

is generally a reasonable approximation. Having made this approximation, one can limit oneself

to calculating only a few integrated parameters of every partition, and perform the assimilation

on these integrated parameters rather than on the full spectrum. The assimilation scheme as

designed by Hasselmann et al (1994b, 1996b) uses three parameters per partition: the total

energy of each partition, the mean frequency and the mean direction.

Each partition is regarded to be either swell, or wind sea, or mixed wind sea/swell ac-

cording to a criterion involving the wind speed and the mean wave vector of the partition (cf

Voorrips et al, 1996).

3.3.3 Partitioning of buoy spectra

The original partitioning scheme (Hasselmann et al, 1994b, 1996b) can only be applied to a

full two-dimensional wave spectrum, such as a model spectrum or an inverted SAR spectrum.

Pitch-and-roll buoy data, however, contain only the one-dimensional wave spectrum E(f ), plus

limited information about the directional distribution. To assimilate these data as well, an

adapted version of the partitioning scheme was developed (Voorrips et al, 1996) which needs

only E(f ) and the mean wave propagation direction θ(f ) as a function of frequency. Tests with

synthetic buoy spectra which were extracted from full spectra showed good agreement between

the two partitioning schemes.

3.3.4 Cross-assignment of partitions

The next step in the assimilation procedure is to merge the model ﬁrst-guess and observed

partition parameters into an analyzed ﬁeld of parameters. We have assumed that diﬀerent

partitions within a spectrum are uncorrelated, since they are created by diﬀerent meteorological

events. So, we want to treat these partitions separately from each other in the assimilation. On

the other hand, partitions in diﬀerent spectra (e.g., model and observed spectra, or two model

spectra at diﬀerent locations) are correlated if they are created by the same event. Therefore,

13

we have to deﬁne a cross-assignment criterium between the partitions of two diﬀerent spectra,

in order to decide whether a partition in one spectrum represents the same wave system as a

partition in the other spectrum.

The criterium which is used is based on the distance in spectral space between the mean

parameters of two partitions. The ones which are closest to each other are cross-assigned. In

case the number of partitions in the observed and model spectra do not match, additional

assumptions are needed. For details, we refer to Voorrips et al (1996).

3.3.5 Optimal interpolation of partition parameters

When the cross-assignment is done, the mean parameters of the model and observed partitions

can be combined to obtain an analyzed ﬁeld of partition parameters. An important input

for the OI procedure are the error covariances of the errors in the observed and the model

parameters. The covariances were obtained by calculating long-term statistics of diﬀerences

betweeen observations and model forecasts. The observation errors were assumed to be spatially

independent. For the model forecasts, an error correlation length of 200 km was found. The

error variances of observations and model values were taken to be equal and dependent on wave

energy (Voorrips et al, 1996).

3.3.6 Update of wave spectra and wind ﬁeld

The analyzed partition parameters from the optimal interpolation are now combined with the

ﬁrst-guess spectra to obtain analyzed spectra. Every ﬁrst-guess partition is multiplied by a

scale factor and shifted in the (f, θ) plane such that its mean parameters are equal to the

parameters obtained by the optimal interpolation. Small gaps in the spectrum which arise by

the diﬀerent shifts for diﬀerent partitions are ﬁlled by two-dimensional parabolic interpolation.

When a wind sea partition is present in the spectrum, the driving wind ﬁeld is modiﬁed

using a simple growth curve relation (Voorrips et al, 1996). The new winds are used until the

next wind ﬁeld is read in, which is half a wind time step later (90 minutes).

4 Comparison of the DASWAM and OIP assimilation

methods

4.1 Assimilation experiment

The performance of the DASWAM and WAM/OIP forecasting/assimilation systems (resp. sec-

tions 2 and 3) was compared by running the two models for the same period, with the same

14

input data (wind forcing and assimilated observations), and by evaluating the results against

independent observations.

The selected period starts at 0 h GMT, February 19, 1993, and ends at 0 h GMT, March

30, 1993. We chose this relatively long period (39 days) with quickly changing meteorological

conditions, as to be able to test the methods in many diﬀerent situations. The period includes

the Wadden Storm (February 20-23), in which wave heights up to 10 m were observed. To

create an initial condition at the start of the period, the models were run over the previous two

days without assimilation. Wind ﬁelds used were 3-hourly analyses from the High Resolution

Limited Area Model (HIRLAM; K˚allberg, 1990), which is the operational weather prediction

model at KNMI.

Two types of observations were used for the assimilation:

•

•

wave buoy data: 3-hourly observations of spectral density, mean direction and direc-

tional spread over 10 frequency bands between 0.03 and 0.5 Hz, from the locations North

Cormorant (NOC), AUK and K13 in the North Sea (see ﬁgure 1).

126 ERS-1 wave mode SAR spectra obtained from the Max-Planck Institut f¨ur Meteo-

rologie, Hamburg. The SAR spectra were inverted to wave spectra using model output

from a global WAM model as a ﬁrst guess in the inversion following Hasselmann and

Hasselmann (1991) and Hasselmann et al (1996a).

Once every 24 hours, starting at 00 h GMT, runs were performed which consisted of two

parts: (a) an ”analysis” run over the previous time period, in which data were assimilated; and

(b) a 24 hours ”forecast” run, starting from the analyzed model state obtained after run (a). The

time period used for the analysis run (a) diﬀers for the two assimilation methods. For the OIP

method, which is a sequential method, it was suﬃcient to perform a 24-hour analysis, starting

from the model state obtained at the end of the previous analysis run. For DASWAM, which

is a multi-time-level variational method, an analysis window of 72 hours was chosen, in order

to assimilate all relevant observations consistently with the model dynamics (see subsection

2.3). During the analysis run (a), DASWAM uses the second generation approximate model (cf

subsection 2.5), whereas in the forecast run (b), it uses the third generation model PHIDIAS.

WAM/OIP uses the WAM model both in the analysis and in the forecast run (b). Note that

the ”forecast” runs (b) were performed with analyzed, not forecast wind ﬁelds. This was done

to ensure that the only diﬀerence between an analysis and a forecast lies in the assimilation of

wave observations; in this way, the impact of the assimilation is easily monitored.

Three types of analysis runs (a) were performed, each with a subsequent forecast run (b):

15

•

•

•

•

•

•

•

•

A run without assimilation (NOASS run);

A run in which only the wave buoy data were assimilated (NOSAR run);

A run in which both wave buoy and SAR data were used (SAR run).

The NOASS run is used as a reference to study the impact of the real assimilation runs NOSAR

and SAR. The SAR run is done in order to study the additional impact of the SAR data, added

to the (much larger but less homogeneous) amount of buoy data. Note that whereas the NOASS

”assimilation run” (a) and ”forecast run” (b) are identical for the WAM/OIP system, they are

diﬀerent for DASWAM: in (a), the second-generation wave model is used, in (b) the third-

generation PHIDIAS model is used. As will be seen in section 5, the results of these can diﬀer

substantially.

Observations which were not assimilated are wave buoy spectra from the location Schier-

monnikoog Noord (SON) close to the Dutch coast (ﬁgure 1), ERS-1 (OPR) and Topex-Poseidon

(MGDR) radar altimeter signiﬁcant wave height and wind speed data, and ERS-1 (OPR) scat-

terometer wind velocity data. These data were not not assimilated in order to have a reference

for the validation of the results.

4.2 Evaluation method

parameters

signiﬁcant wave height Hs;

Results of the various assimilation runs were evaluated based on results for the wave and wind

mean wave period Tm = m0/m−1 with mi =

s(f, θ)f idf dθ the ith-order spectral moment,

or equivalently, the mean wave frequency fm = 1/Tm;

R

low-frequency wave height, H10 = 4√E10, where E10 is the total variance of all waves

mean wave direction θw;

with periods above 10 s;

wind speed at 10 m above the surface U10.

Model results of these parameters were validated against buoy measurements at NOC, AUK,

K13 and SON. The ﬁrst three buoys were used during the assimilation, so they are mainly of in-

terest for forecast validation. Additionally, signiﬁcant wave height and wind speed corrections

16

could be checked against altimeter observations from the ERS-1 and Topex-Poseidon satel-

lites. Finally, the wind velocity corrections were compared to measurements from the ERS-1

scatterometer.

From ERS-1, the OPR products were used. A bias correction to the ERS-1 altimeter

wave height data was applied using the formula (Queﬀeulou et al, 1994)

H corr

s = 1.19H OP R

s

+ 0.19[m].

(6)

(7)

From TOPEX-POSEIDON, the GMDR data were used. The TOPEX wind speeds are also

known to have a bias compared to buoy observations (Gower, 1996; Komen et al, 1996). Here

we apply the correction of Komen et al:

U corr

10 = 0.877U M GDR

10

+ 0.39[m/s].

The evaluation will be split in two parts. In subsection 5.1, we will study the most inter-

esting part of the investigated period, namely the Wadden storm (20-23 March). Through time

series and maps, diﬀerences in the characteristics of wave models and assimilation methods, and

the impact of SAR observations will be illustrated. In subsection 5.2, the overall performance

of the schemes will be presented through a statistical analysis of model results against buoy

and satellite data over the full period.

5 Results

5.1.1 Wind ﬁelds

5.1 The Wadden Storm, 20-23 February 1993

Figure 2 shows four HIRLAM wind ﬁelds at the height of the Wadden storm, from February 20,

15 h GMT until February 21, 9 h GMT. Within 12 hours, the maximum of the north-westerly

storm moves quickly from the North of Scotland, through the North Sea to the German Bight.

In ﬁgure 3, measured and modeled wind speeds are given at four North Sea locations, which are

indicated in ﬁgure 1. For the southerly locations K13 and SON, the agreement between model

and observations is satisfactory. At AUK, and especially at NOC, however, the model wind

speed is signiﬁcantly lower than the platform observations. The underestimation is almost 10

m/s at the maximum of the storm.

Only few satellite wind speed measurements are available during the storm, to complement

the platform measurements. From these measurements, no consistent bias of the model wind

speed can be inferred, although occasionally, large diﬀerences between model and observations

17

are found. An additional problem here is that the quality of altimeter measurements of wind

speeds above 20 m/s (which occur at the height of the storm) is not well-known, due to lack of

statistics in most comparisons between conventional and satellite measurements (e.g., Gower,

1996; Komen et al, 1996).

From the above, one can see two good reasons to use the Wadden Storm in a study of

wave data assimilation schemes. First, the extreme north-westerly winds will generate high

waves which can travel over a large distance into the North Sea. This is a typical situation in

which assimilation of data in the northern and central North Sea can improve the wave forecast

in the South. Second, the poor quality of the model winds at the height of the storm will leave

suﬃcient room for the assimilation of wave observations to have a large impact on the analysis

and prediction of the sea state.

5.1.2 NOASS runs

In this paragraph, we compare the results of the various model runs without assimilation.

The diﬀerence between the three wave models used will be of importance when comparing the

performance of the data assimilation schemes, in which we are mostly interested.

Figures 4 and 5 show time series of, respectively, signiﬁcant wave height and mean wave

period at the same positions. Three types of model runs, all without assimilation, are presented:

the WAM NOASS analysis run, the DASWAM NOASS analysis run with the second generation

model, and the DASWAM NOASS 24 hour forecast runs with the third generation model

PHIDIAS, starting every day at 00 GMT from the NOASS analyzed wave ﬁeld. Although all

model runs have been performed with the same wind ﬁeld, the results are quite diﬀerent. The

WAM run severely underestimates the wave height at the peak of the storm, at all platforms.

The DASWAM NOASS analysis run, on the other hand, gives good results for NOC, K13

and SON, and less underprediction at AUK. The DASWAM NOASS forecast run starting

from February 20, 00 GMT, gives again much lower wave heights at the peak of the storm,

in fact comparable to the heights obtained with the WAM model. The mean period results

(ﬁg. 5) give essentially the same result: good performance by the 2nd generation model, and

underestimation by the 3d generation models. The underestimation is largest for the DASWAM

NOASS forecast run.

The underestimation of the wave height and period by the third-generation models is at

least partly explained by the underprediction of wind speed as was found in paragraph 5.1.1.

The absence of bias in the second- generation runs is surprising, given the poor model wind

ﬁelds. Since the second-generation model is meant to be an approximation to PHIDIAS, it seems

18

that some retuning is needed. Due to the mismatch between the two models, the assimilation

of wave observations in the second-generation model will lead to wind speed corrections which

are not optimal for PHIDIAS.

5.1.3 Assimilation runs

Figures 6 and 7 show NOSAR and NOASS results, respectively for WAM/OIP and for DASWAM,

versus buoy observations. The model analyses are much closer to the observations than the

NOASS results, not only at the three locations of which the data were assimilated, but also at

SON (especially for WAM/OIP, ﬁgure 6). For both systems, the memory of the assimilation

(i.e., the time within which the NOSAR forecast relaxes back the NOASS forecast) varies be-

tween 6 hours for the northerly stations and 12 hours for the southerly locations, where the

impact of the assimilation ”upstream”, at AUK and NOC, is felt in the forecast. This period is

relatively short: for both systems, results have been reported where the impact lasted over 24

hours (Delft Hydraulics, 1995; Voorrips et al, 1996). Since wind sea dominates in this period,

improvements in the wave ﬁeld are more quickly lost than in a pure swell situation.

Although the analyses seem comparable when looking only at the time series of the

analyzed buoys, the nature of the assimilation is quite diﬀerent. Figure 8 shows the WAM

NOASS analyzed wind and wave ﬁelds at February 20, 21 GMT, and the increments due to

the NOSAR assimilation. The wave height increments are clearly centered around the buoy

locations, as is dictated by the ﬁxed error covariance structure in the OI scheme. The wind

speed corrections are also quite local. North of NOC, the wind speed is not updated, since the

wave ﬁeld here was computed to be swell in this part of the model. Figure 9 shows the same

ﬁelds for DASWAM. The corrections here are entirely diﬀerent. As can be seen from ﬁgure 4,

the DASWAM NOASS analysis correctly predicts the wave height at NOC, but underpredicts

at AUK. The variational DASWAM system responds to this by changing its control, the wind

ﬁeld, between the two stations. In this way, the model manages to increase the wave height at

AUK. Thus, although the obtained wave height at AUK is approximately the same for the two

schemes, the spatial distribution of the update is entirely diﬀerent.

At the time of the presented updates, the ERS-1 satellite passed. In ﬁgures 8 and 9, the

altimeter track is indicated, which passes close to AUK and K13. Figures 10 and 11 compare

the measured and modeled wind speed and wave height along the track. Both methods manage

to draw the modeled wave height closer to the measurements after assimilation, even though

the altimeter measurements are not assimilated themselves. The wind speed is also updated,

but both methods clearly do not draw the model wind ﬁeld closer to the altimeter observations.

19

Apparently, the assumptions underlying the wind update are not perfect. This is even the case

for DASWAM, where the assimilation is consistent with the (second-generation) wave model,

but not with the dynamics of the atmosphere (see section 2).

The impact of assimilation of the ERS-1 SAR observations on the results during the

Wadden storm was small in general. The chance that the SAR can have an impact is not

large: one needs high waves coming from the Norwegian Sea and bad swell prediction by the

model, at exactly the time that SAR observations are made, which is only once or twice per

day. In one case, however, observations of an important track caused a clear improvement in

the Norwegian Sea. Figure 12 shows the track at February 20, 21 GMT, in the left panels. One

can see the impact which the SAR observations have on the WAM/OIP analyzed wave height

in the Norwegian Sea. The mean wave direction is eastward in this area, so the area of impact

travels towards the Norwegian coast. Twelve hours later, a Topex-Poseidon track measures

the wave height across the Norwegian Sea (ﬁg. 13). One can clearly see the improvement in

the modeled wave height near the Norwegian coast, because of the SAR assimilation 12 hours

earlier.

5.2 Statistical results over the period February 19 - March 30, 1993

5.2.1 Buoy measurements

The results of the analysis/forecast runs over the 39-day period February 19 - March 30 have

been validated against measurements at the locations NOC, AUK, K13 and SON. Tables 1 -

8 compare the NOASS (no assimilation) with the NOSAR (assimilation of only buoy measure-

ments) runs, in terms of the root mean square error (RMSE)

sX
i
Five parameters are compared: signiﬁcant wave height (Hs), low-frequency signiﬁcant wave

RMSE(x) =

(xmod

i −

xobs
i

)2

(8)

height (H10), mean wave period (Tm), mean wave direction (θw), and wind speed U10. Results

are given for the last analysis time (+0 h), and for the forecast times +6 h and +12 h. In

order to reduce noise due to the relatively low number of runs (39), for each time the results

have been combined with those of 3 hours earlier, leading to a maximum of 78 model/observed

values for each forecast time. At analysis time, the absolute value of the RMSE is given for the

NOASS run. Subsequently, for all three times the ratio of the NOSAR RMSE and the NOASS

RMSE is given, expressing the relative impact of the assimilation on the analysis and forecast.

For wind speed, only the reduction is given at analysis time, since the assimilation schemes do

not make corrections to the forecast wind speed.

20

For most locations and wave parameters, the performance of the WAM and DASWAM

NOASS runs is comparable. The main diﬀerence is the larger bias in wave height and period for

WAM at the most northerly location, NOC. The diﬀerence in RMSE here is mainly caused by

the diﬀerence in bias (not shown), which has already been noted in the discussion of the Wadden

Storm results. The bias of the HIRLAM wind speed compared to platform observations is

around -4.5 m/s at NOC, and around -1 m/s for the other locations. Again, the underestimation

of wave height and period by the WAM model seems to be consistent with the underestimation

of the wind speed. Another reason for the larger underestimation by WAM at NOC may be

that the WAM model domain extends not as far westward as the DASWAM domain (ﬁg. 1).

Consequently, external swell from the Atlantic Ocean is more easily missed.

The impact of the assimilation on the analysis is locally much larger for the WAM/OIP

scheme than for DASWAM: for instance, the RMS error in wave height at K13 is reduced to

37 % of the NOASS RMSE (table 5), whereas for DASWAM the reduction is only to 87 % (table

6). This is a direct consequence of the diﬀerent nature of the schemes: optimal interpolation

draws the model to the measurements mainly in the vicinity of the observation, whilst the

impact of the adjoint method is more global. Comparison of the impacts on wave height at

SON (not assimilated), illustrates this. The reduction in RMSE by the WAM/OIP scheme is

here 76 % of the NOASS RMSE (table 7), which is a much less dramatic improvement then

at the assimilated location K13; the reduction by DASWAM is 92 % (table 8), which is more

comparable to the 87 % at K13.

Also in the forecast, the impact of the WAM/OIP scheme on the RMSE is generally higher

than the impact of DASWAM, although the diﬀerence is much smaller than at analysis time.

Averaged over all four wave parameters and over the three locations with roughly the same

NOASS quality (AUK, K13, SON), the reduction factor for the RMSE is 75 % for WAM/OIP

vs. 93 % for DASWAM for the +3/+6 h forecasts, and 90 % vs 95 % for the +9/+12 h forecasts.

Clearly, for the short term forecasts, the strong local correction of the OIP scheme is still of

importance.

In the period considered, the impact of the assimilation on the forecast is seen up to around

12 hours. This is a shorter period than reported both for DASWAM (Delft Hydraulics, 1995)

and for WAM/OIP (Voorrips et al, 1996). Probably, the impact is relatively small because in

this period, wind sea was in general the dominating wave system in the North Sea. In periods

in which swell is of more importance (this happens for instance in summer periods, see Delft

Hydraulics, 1995), the impact period is longer.

Both schemes also correct the wind speed during the assimilation (tables 1 - 8). The cor-

21

rection does not lead to a signiﬁcant improvement or deterioration of the model wind compared

to the platform observations. At AUK, the reduction (WAM/OIP) or growth (DASWAM) of

the RMSE is large, but based on an insuﬃcient number of observations.

The impact of SAR assimilation in addition to the assimilation of buoy observations turned

out to be negligible in the comparison with the buoy observations. This is to be expected, since

especially in the neighbourhood of the buoys, the inﬂuence of the buoy measurements is much

larger than the SAR observations, which are sparse and often far away from the buoy location.

5.2.2 Satellite measurements

Tables 9 and 10 show a comparison of WAM/OIP and DASWAM analyzed wave height and wind

speed with measurements from the ERS-1 and Topex-Poseidon altimeters. For the comparison

two regions are deﬁned (ﬁg. 1): region I covers the North Sea, and region II covers part of the

Norwegian Sea. All altimeter measurements within one model grid box are averaged into one

”super-observation”. Since the grids of the two model diﬀer, the number of super-observations

diﬀers too.

Comparison with both satellites shows a negative bias of the HIRLAM (NOASS) wind of

around 0.6 m/s in area II, and a small positive bias (around 0.2 m/s) in region I. These biases are

smaller than those found in the platform comparison (-4.5 m/s for NOC in area II, and around

-1 m/s for AUK, K13 and SON in area I). Diﬀerences between the TOPEX and ERS-1 results

are much smaller than those between the comparison with platform measurements (tables 1-8)

and with altimeter measurements. This is suprising, since the calibration of the TOPEX winds

(7) has been obtained by a comparison with measurements from the same platforms (Komen

et al, 1996). One way to explain the apparent discrepancy is the assumption that the model

wind speed error is not homogeneous over the analysis areas in this relatively short period.

Another reason may be that the altimeters (TOPEX with the correction (7)) underestimate

the wind speed at very high winds, like in the Wadden Storm. For the wind speed range above

20 m/s, not enough data are available to make a reliable validation of the altimeter wind speed

algorithms.

For both models, the NOASS wave height in the northern region (region II) is negatively

biased compared to the altimeter measurements. This is consistent with the buoy comparison

at NOC. The negative bias is worse for the WAM model than for DASWAM’s second generation

model, which is also in agreement with the buoy comparison results. Apart from the wind speed

bias, the wave height bias may be caused by the absence of external boundary information,

which is of main importance for the Norwegian Sea (swell entering from the Atlantic).

22

In the North Sea region, assimilation reduces the mean error in wave height for both

models (although the Topex-Poseidon comparison for DASWAM is not convincing). Again,

the impact caused by the WAM/OIP scheme is somewhat larger. In the Norwegian Sea, there

is still some impact for the WAM/OIP model, but it is much smaller than in region I. The

reason that the impact is larger than for DASWAM in region II is probably the fact that the

WAM NOASS model results are more negatively biased: the impact in this region is only the

reduction of the bias.

The impact of the SAR observations is again very small. Only for WAM/OIP, and only

in region II, a small positive impact can be noted. Again, this is the most likely candidate:

region II, because the impact from buoys is smaller for the Norwegian Sea, and WAM/OIP,

because it has the largest bias to correct.

The correction of the wind speed by the assimilation schemes has no signiﬁcant impact

on the quality, when compared to observations. This result conﬁrms the results of the buoy

A comparison with the ERS-1 scatterometer wind velocity data shows essentially the same

results as the altimeter wind speed measurements.

comparison.

5.3 Discussion

Summarizing the buoy and satellite comparisons described above, the following main results

are obtained. First, both the OIP/WAM and the DASWAM assimilation scheme manage to

improve the wave analysis ﬁeld, and the short term forecast, if not too far from the assimilation

sites. Second, the OIP scheme has a somewhat larger eﬀect than DASWAM, both on the

analysis and on the forecast. Third, the wind speed corrections applied by both schemes do

not signiﬁcantly aﬀect the quality of the wind ﬁeld.

The second result is surprising, since the multi-time-level variational method of DASWAM

is a more sophisticated assimilation scheme than the rather ad hoc optimal interpolation scheme

OIP. The constraint of the model evolution equations to the analysis in DASWAM should lead

to a physically consistent correction to the model parameters, while the OIP scheme does not

take the assimilation history into account.

The fact that the wind speed corrections of DASWAM do not improve on the (rather poor)

ﬁrst-guess wind ﬁeld gives an indication why DASWAM does not perform better: apparently,

the choice of the control variables (wind speed) is not optimal, or the error statistics attributed

to them in the cost function are not correct. Probably, both aspects play a role. The absence

of bias in the second-generation NOASS results given the biased wind speed, indicates that

23

this wave model cannot be assumed to be perfect, as is implicated by the adjoint method (the

model equations are a strong constraint in the minimization of the cost function). Hence, the

control variables should include wave model errors as well as wind speed. Also, a wind ﬁeld

representation by splines, without correlation between the velocity components and without

temporal correlation between consecutive ﬁelds, is not optimal.

It is not in itself a problem that the second-generation wave model used for analysis diﬀers

from the forecast model in the DASWAM suite, because the wind speed corrections which are

determined by the assimilation are never used by the forecast model: only the analyzed wave

ﬁeld after the assimilation is used as an initial condition for PHIDIAS, the third- generation

forecast model. However, naturally the model analysis and hence the following forecast will

improve when the second-generation model is improved. The results shown here suggest that

some retuning of the model may be useful.

The principle of variational assimilation is quite powerful, and it seems that relatively

small adaptations to the DASWAM scheme (better representation of the error statistics, retun-

ing of the second-generation wave model) may greatly enhance its performance.

The OIP scheme behaved reasonably well for a rather simple assimilation method, and

from the present study it is not evident how its performance could be improved without major

modiﬁcations. Like with DASWAM, the wind ﬁeld corrections were not successful. However, in

the OIP setup the wind speed correction is only a postprocessing based on simple assumptions

(growth curves), and its signiﬁcance for the wave ﬁeld analysis is limited. Neither is the wind

update in comparable OI schemes necessarily unsuccessful:

in the global WAM model, some

improvement of the ECMWF ﬁrst- guess winds was obtained by assimilation of ERS altimeter

wave heights using an optimal interpolation scheme (P.A.E.M. Janssen, personal communica-

tion). The reason why the wind speed update in the present setup is not successful may be that

in these experiments, continually wave observations are assimilated at ﬁxed locations with very

little time delay. Thus, the assumption underlying the update scheme that at every assimilation

timestep the wave ﬁeld error is in equilibrium with the wind ﬁeld error, is in fact violated.

6 Conclusion

In this paper, a close comparison has been carried out between the two wave forecast/assimilation

models WAM/OIP and DASWAM, with the emphasis on the assimilation. WAM/OIP is an

example of a rather simple, optimal interpolation method. DASWAM is a multi-time-level

variational method, with some approximations to reduce the required computation time.

24

The diﬀerent properties of the two assimilation schemes are illustrated in an analysis of

the most interesting period which was investigated, the ”Wadden Storm” of February 20-22,

1993. The corrections of the OIP scheme are localized around the observation sites, whereas the

DASWAM scheme corrects the wave and wind ﬁeld more globally, both in space and time. The

performance of the two schemes during the Wadden storm, with respect to buoy observations, is

somewhat obscured due to the large negative bias of the ﬁrst-guess WAM run in the Norwegian

Sea, and by the diﬀerent behaviour of the two wave models which play a role in the DASWAM

method. The bias may be caused either by the too low HIRLAM winds (as is supported by the

platform measurements at NOC and AUK), or by the fact that the WAM model domain does

not extend far enough to the West.

A statistical analysis of the model results against buoy measurements over the period

February 19 - March 30, 1993, shows that the OIP scheme draws the model closer to the

assimilated observations than DASWAM does. Most of the diﬀerence disappears quickly in the

forecast, but the impact of OIP remains slightly larger at the observation locations. After 12

hours, most of the impact of the assimilation is lost. This is probably due to the fact that during

most of the period, wind sea was the dominating wave system in the North Sea. Comparison of

the model analysis results with independent ERS-1 and Topex-Poseidon altimeter wave height

measurements conﬁrms the negative bias of WAM in the Norwegian Sea. In the North Sea, a

positive impact of the buoy assimilation is seen in the two methods. In the Norwegian Sea, the

impact of OIP is larger, probably because the quality of the WAM ﬁrst-guess is worse.

The wind speed corrections which are the result of the assimilation, do not improve or

deteriorate signiﬁcantly the quality of the wind ﬁelds, as compared to measurements from

platforms, the ERS-1 and Topex-Poseidon altimeters, or the ERS-1 scatterometer.

The more elaborate variational scheme of DASWAM did not lead to more accurate wave

analyses or predictions. In the wind-sea dominated test period, the better tuned statistical basis

of OIP proved eﬀective, whereas the potential of DASWAM for making non-local adjustments

did not show any clear advantages. It is suspected that improvements in the description of the

error statistics in the cost function, together with a retuning of the approximate wave model

which is used in the analysis, may show the advantages of the variational method more clearly.

The impact of the SAR assimilation is generally small, especially in the North Sea, where

the number of buoy observations is much larger than the number of SAR observations. In the

Norwegian Sea, some impact is shown in the WAM/OIP scheme at analysis time. In this region,

the number of conventional observations is small, and assimilation of satellite observations is

expected to become increasingly important in the future.

25

Acknowledgments

The authors would like to thank Peter Groenewoud from ARGOSS who performed the test

runs with DASWAM, Patrick Heimbach from MPIM for the supply of the inverted ERS-1 SAR

spectra, Jean Tournadre from IFREMER for the ERS-1 altimeter and scatterometer data, and

Edwin Wisse from the Technical University Delft for the Topex-Poseidon altimeter data.

Part of this work was carried out in the framework of the European Coupled Atmo-

sphere/Wave/Ocean (ECAWOM) project which is funded by the MAST (Marine Science and

Technology) Programme of the European Union.

References

[1] Bauer, E., I.R. Young and K. Hasselmann (1994), ”Data assimilation using a Green’s

function approach”, in: Komen et al (1994).

[2] Barzel, G., and R.B. Long (1994), ”Wave model ﬁtting using the adjoint technique”, in:

Komen et al (1994).

[3] Bidlot, J.-R., F. Ovidio and D. Van den Eynde (1995), ”Validation and improvement of

the quality of the operational wave model MU-WAVE by the use of ERS-1 satellite data”,

Report MUMM/T3/AR04, MUMM, Brussels, Belgium, 53 p.

[4] Breivik, L.-A., M. Reistad and H. Schyberg (1996), ”Assimilation of ERS SAR wave spectra

in a numerical wave prediction model”, DNMI Research Report 31, ISSN 0332-9879, 36

p.

[5] Burgers, G., V.K. Makin, G. Quanduo and M. de las Heras (1992), ”Wave data assimilation

for operational wave forecasting at the North Sea”, 3rd International Workshop on Wave

Hindcasting and Forecasting, May 19-22, 1992, Montreal, Canada, 202-209.

[6] de Boor, C. (1978), ”A practical guide to splines”, Springer Verlag.

[7] de las Heras, M.M., G. Burgers and P.A.E.M. Janssen (1995), ”Wave data assimilation in

the WAM wave model”, J. Marine Systems 6, 77-85.

[8] de Valk, C.F., and C.J. Calkoen (1989), ”Wave data assimilation in a third generation

wave prediction model for the North Sea - an optimal control approach”, Report X38,

Delft Hydraulics, Delft, Netherlands, 123 p.

26

[9] de Valk, C.F. (1994), ”A wind and wave data assimilation scheme based on the adjoint

technique”. In: Komen et al (1994).

[10] Delft Hydraulics, HeereMac v.o.f., Shell Internationale Petroleum Maatschappij and Meteo

Consult (1994), ”ERS-1 pilot project Wavewatch - Impact of wave data from ERS-1 and

buoys on wave forecasts and oﬀshore safety. Phase 1: oﬀ-line demonstration”, Report

H1688, Delft Hydraulics, Delft, Netherlands.

[11] Delft Hydraulics (1995), ”MAESTRO, A marine information system to support oﬀshore

operations - Real-time data-assimilation and wave forecasting”, Report H1829, Delft Hy-

draulics, Delft, Netherlands.

[12] Fletcher, R. (1987), ”Practical methods of optimization”, John Wiley and Sons, Chichester.

[13] Gerling, T.W. (1992), ”Partitioning sequences and arrays of directional ocean wave spectra

into component wave systems”, J. Atm. Oc. Techn. 9, 444-458.

[14] Gower, J.F.R. (1996), ”Intercalibration of wave and wind data from TOPEX/POSEIDON

and moored buoys oﬀ the west coast of Canada”, J. Geophys. Res. 101, 3817-3829.

[15] G¨unther, H., S. Hasselmann and P.A.E.M. Janssen (1992), ”Wamodel Cycle 4”, DKRZ

Tech. Report 4, DKRZ, Germany, 102 p.

[16] G¨unther, H., P. Lionello and B. Hanssen (1993), ”The impact of the ERS-1 altimeter

on the wave analysis and forecast”, Report GKSS 93/E/44, GKSS Forschungszentrum

Geesthacht, Geesthacht, Germany, 56 p.

[17] Hasselmann, K., T.P. Barnett, E. Bouws, H. Carlson, D.E. Cartwright, K. Enke, J.A.

Ewing, H. Gienapp, D.E. Hasselmann, P. Kruseman, A. Meerburg, P. M¨uller, D.J. Olbers,

K. Richter, W. Sell and H. Walden (1973), ”Measurements of wind-wave growth and swell

decay during the Joint North Sea Wave project (JONSWAP)”, Dtsch. Hydrogr. Z. Suppl.

A 8(12), 95 p.

[18] Hasselmann, K., S. Hasselmann, E. Bauer, C. Bruning, S. Lehner, H. Graber and P.

Lionello (1988), ”Development of a satellite SAR image spectra and altimeter wave height

data assimilation system for ERS-1”, Report 19, Max Planck Institut f¨ur Meteorologie,

Hamburg, Germany.

27

[19] Hasselmann, K., and S. Hasselmann (1991), ”On the nonlinear mapping of an ocean wave

spectrum into a SAR image spectrum and its inversion”, J. Geophys. Res. C96, 10713-

10729.

21-25.

[20] Hasselmann, S., G.J. Komen and K. Hasselmann (1994a), ”The general minimization

problem”. In: Komen et al (1994).

[21] Hasselmann, S., C. Br¨uning and P. Lionello (1994b), ”Towards a generalized optimal

interpolation method for the assimilation of ERS-1 SAR retrieved wave spectra in a wave

model”, Proc. Second ERS-1 Symp., Oct. 11-14, 1993, Hamburg, Germany, ESA SP-361,

[22] Hasselmann, S., C. Br¨uning, K. Hasselmann and P. Heimbach (1996a), ”An improved

algorithm for the retrieval of ocean wave spectra from synthetic aperture radar image

spectra”, J. Geophys. Res. 101 (C7), 16615-16629.

[23] Hasselmann, S., P. Lionello and K. Hasselmann (1996b), ”A wind- and wave- data assim-

ilation scheme”, to appear in J. Geophys. Res.

[24] Hersbach, H. (1997), ”Application of the adjoint of the WAM model to inverse wave

modelling”, submitted to J. Geophys. Res.

[25] Holthuijsen, L.H., N. Booij, M. van Endt, S. Caires, C. Guedes Soares (1996), ”Assimilation

of buoy and satellite data in wave forecasts with integral control variables”, submitted to

J. Marine Systems.

Res. C94, 973-993.

ual, SMHI.

SP-221, 21-25.

[26] Janssen, P.A.E.M., P. Lionello, M. Reistad and A. Hollingsworth (1989), ”Hindcasts and

data assimilation studies with the WAM model during the Seasat period”, J. Geophys.

[27] K˚allberg, P. (editor) (1990), ”The HIRLAM forecast model, level 1”, documentation man-

[28] Komen, G.J. (1985), ”Introduction to wave models and assimilation of satellite data in

wave models”, in ”The use of satellites in climate models”, ESA Scientiﬁc Publication

[29] Komen, G.J., L. Cavaleri, M. Donelan, K. Hasselmann, S. Hasselmann and P.A.E.M.

Janssen (1994), ”Dynamics and Modelling of ocean waves”, Cambridge University Press.

28

[30] Komen, G.J., A.C. Voorrips and J.P.T. Hersbach (1996), ”Assimilation of satellite mea-

surements in a sea state forecasting model,” Proc. of the Symposium on Operational

Oceanography and Satellite Observation, Biarritz, France, October 1995, 93-103.

[31] Kuik, A.J., G. Ph. van Vledder and L.J. Holthuijsen (1988), ”A method for the routine

analysis of pitch-and-roll wave buoy data”, J. Phys. Oceanogr. 18, 1020-1034.

[32] Lionello, P., and P.A.E.M. Janssen (1990), ”Assimilation of altimeter measurements to

update swell spectra in a wave model”, Proc. of the International Symposium on Assimila-

tion of Observations in Meteorology and Oceanography, Clermont-Ferrand, France, August

1990, 241-246.

[33] Lionello, P., H. G¨unther and B. Hansen (1995), ”A sequential assimilation scheme applied

to global wave analysis and prediction”, J. Marine Syst. 6, 87-107.

[34] Liu, D.C. and J. Nocedal (1988), ”On the limited memory BFGS method for large scale

optimization”, Technical report NAM 03, Northwestern University, Evanston.

[35] Luenberger, D.G. (1969), ”Optimization by vector space methods”, John Wiley and Sons,

Inc., N.Y.

No 94-08.

[36] Mastenbroek, C., V.K. Makin, A.C. Voorrips and G.J. Komen (1994), ”Validation of ERS-

1 altimeter wave height measurements and assimilation in a North Sea wave model”, The

Glob. Atm. Oc. System 2, 143-161.

[37] Queﬀeulou, P., A. Bentamy, Y. Quilfen and J. Tournadre (1994), ”Validation of ERS-1 and

TOPEX-POSEIDON wind and wave measurements”, IFREMER Techn. Rep. DRO-OS

[38] Thomas, J. (1988), ”Retrieval of energy spectra from measured data for assimilation into

a wave model”, Q. J. R. Meteorolog. Soc. 114, 781-800.

[39] van Vledder, G. Ph. (1994), ”PHIDIAS, A program for the computation of wind wave

energy”, Report H1861, Delft Hydraulics, Delft.

[40] Voorrips, A.C., V.K. Makin and S. Hasselmann (1996), ”Assimilation of wave spectra

from pitch-and-roll buoys in a North Sea wave model”, KNMI Memorandum OO-96-02.

To appear in J. Geophys. Res.

29

[41] Voorrips, A.C. (1997), ”Optimal Interpolation of Partitions: a data assimilation scheme

for NEDWAM-4”, KNMI Scientiﬁc Report. To appear.

[42] WAMDI group: S. Hasselmann, K. Hasselmann, E. Bauer, P.A.E.M. Janssen, G.J. Komen,

L. Bertotti, P. Lionello, A. Guillaume, V.C. Cardone, J.A. Greenwood, M. Reistad, L.

Zambresky and J.A. Ewing (1988), ”The WAM model - a third generation ocean wave

prediction model”, J. Phys. Oceanogr. 15, 566-592.

30

Parameter N NOASS RMSE N OSAR

-3h - 0h
m
m
s
deg
m/s

1.23
1.31
1.63
13.73
5.12

40
40
40
40
40

N OASS (%) N OSAR
-3h - 0h
38
39
36
59
107

80
76
71
78

N OSAR
N OASS (%)
N OASS (%)
+3h - +6h +9h - +12h

Table 1: RMS error reduction for WAM/OIP at NOC.

Parameter N NOASS RMSE N OSAR

N OSAR
N OASS (%)
N OASS (%)
+3h - +6h +9h - +12h

-3h - 0h
m
m
s
deg
m/s

0.87
0.85
0.89
18.46
5.59

N OASS (%) N OSAR
-3h - 0h
82
82
104
80
103

92
97
101
101

Table 2: RMS error reduction for DASWAM at NOC.

Parameter N NOASS RMSE N OSAR

N OSAR
N OASS (%)
N OASS (%)
+3h - +6h +9h - +12h

-3h - 0h
m
m
s
deg
m/s

0.86
0.91
1.00
14.53
2.78

N OASS (%) N OSAR
-3h - 0h
32
33
36
51
77

72
64
73
96

Table 3: RMS error reduction for WAM/OIP at AUK.

40
40
40
40
40

67
67
59
59
13

Parameter N NOASS RMSE N OSAR

-3h - 0h
m
m
s
deg
m/s

0.71
0.87
1.16
25.24
2.91

67
67
59
59
13

N OASS (%) N OSAR
-3h - 0h
65
60
88
86
133

84
78
88
95

N OSAR
N OASS (%)
N OASS (%)
+3h - +6h +9h - +12h

Hs
H10
Tm
θw
U10

Hs
H10
Tm
θw
U10

Hs
H10
Tm
θw
U10

Hs
H10
Tm
θw
U10

93
91
91
93

94
95
102
102

89
85
82
99

96
96
96
92

Table 4: RMS error reduction for DASWAM at AUK.

31

Parameter N NOASS RMSE N OSAR

-3h - 0h
m
m
s
deg
m/s

0.40
0.18
0.51
17.37
1.92

72
72
48
48
72

N OASS (%) N OSAR
-3h - 0h
37
71
47
36
98

69
54
63
83

N OSAR
N OASS (%)
N OASS (%)
+3h - +6h +9h - +12h

Table 5: RMS error reduction for WAM/OIP at K13.

Parameter N NOASS RMSE N OSAR

N OSAR
N OASS (%)
N OASS (%)
+3h - +6h +9h - +12h

-3h - 0h
m
m
s
deg
m/s

0.41
0.33
0.67
15.83
2.13

N OASS (%) N OSAR
-3h - 0h
87
86
97
96
100

94
83
103
97

Table 6: RMS error reduction for DASWAM at K13.

Parameter N NOASS RMSE N OSAR

N OSAR
N OASS (%)
N OASS (%)
+3h - +6h +9h - +12h

-3h - 0h
m
m
s
deg
m/s

0.41
0.35
0.59
15.10
2.37

N OASS (%) N OSAR
-3h - 0h
76
67
94
93
98

76
58
68
122

Table 7: RMS error reduction for WAM/OIP at SON.

72
72
48
48
72

75
75
42
42
75

Parameter N NOASS RMSE N OSAR

-3h - 0h
m
m
s
deg
m/s

0.54
0.47
0.90
16.53
2.35

75
75
42
42
75

N OASS (%) N OSAR
-3h - 0h
92
84
78
104
100

104
98
92
97

N OSAR
N OASS (%)
N OASS (%)
+3h - +6h +9h - +12h

Hs
H10
Tm
θw
U10

Hs
H10
Tm
θw
U10

Hs
H10
Tm
θw
U10

Hs
H10
Tm
θw
U10

91
81
83
106

94
87
99
98

89
76
89
105

94
91
87
104

Table 8: RMS error reduction for DASWAM at SON.

32

I
I
I
I
I
I
II
II
II
II
II
II

I
I
I
I
I
I
II
II
II
II
II
II

area

satellite

run

SAR

340
ERS-1
NOASS
340
ERS-1 NOSAR
340
ERS-1
510
TOPEX NOASS
510
TOPEX NOSAR
510
SAR
TOPEX
662
ERS-1
NOASS
662
ERS-1 NOSAR
662
ERS-1
TOPEX NOASS
1764
TOPEX NOSAR 1764
1764
TOPEX

SAR

SAR

N wave height wind speed
σ
σ
1.84
0.72
1.90
0.53
1.89
0.53
1.68
0.53
1.69
0.43
1.68
0.42
2.29
0.78
2.28
0.77
2.44
0.77
2.37
0.76
2.38
0.75
2.37
0.73

bias
0.15
0.31
0.30
0.47
0.49
0.50
-0.86
-0.86
-0.82
-0.45
-0.41
-0.42

bias
-0.36
-0.17
-0.16
-0.26
-0.12
-0.14
-1.37
-1.24
-1.18
-1.25
-1.14
-1.08

Table 9: Altimeter statistics for WAM/OIP.

area

satellite

run

SAR

NOASS

ERS-1
298
ERS-1 NOSAR 298
298
ERS-1
TOPEX NOASS
496
TOPEX NOSAR 496
496
TOPEX
ERS-1
407
ERS-1 NOSAR 407
407
ERS-1
TOPEX NOASS
779
TOPEX NOSAR 779
779
TOPEX

SAR
NOASS

SAR

SAR

N wave height wind speed
σ
σ
1.86
0.72
2.03
0.55
2.06
0.56
1.67
0.64
1.69
0.64
1.69
0.73
2.34
0.88
2.32
0.81
2.28
0.91
2.33
0.88
2.27
0.79
2.31
0.85

bias
0.02
0.08
0.11
0.21
0.18
0.23
-0.53
-0.56
-0.56
-0.30
-0.38
-0.34

bias
0.22
0.21
0.27
0.40
0.34
0.32
-0.81
-1.06
-1.33
-0.37
-0.44
-0.40

Table 10: Altimeter statistics for DASWAM.

33

Figure 1: Map of the area. Plusses indicate the DASWAM (Delft Hydraulics model) area.
Double solid lines are the boundary of the WAM (KNMI model) domain. Single solid lines
indicate areas I and II, which are used for the statistical analysis of model results against
altimeter observations. Filled squares indicate the position of four wave buoys. NOC: North
Cormorant; AUK: Auk Alpha; SON: Schiermonnikoog Noord.

34

Figure 2: Wind ﬁelds at the maximum of the Wadden storm. Upper left: February 20, 15 h
GMT. Upper right: February 20, 21 h GMT. Lower left: February 21, 3 h GMT. Lower right:
February 21, 9 h GMT.

35

Figure 3: Modeled and observed wind speed at four locations for the period February 19-24,
1993 (the ”Wadden Storm”). Markers: observations. Solid line: HIRLAM model results.

36

Figure 4: Modeled and observed signiﬁcant wave height at four locations for the period
February 19-24, 1993. All model runs without assimilation. Markers: observations. Dotted
line: NOASS analysis run with WAM. Dashed line: NOASS analysis run with DASWAM (2nd
generation model). Solid lines: 24 hour NOASS forecast runs with DASWAM (3d generation
model), starting every day at 0 GMT from the DASWAM NOASS analysis.

37

Figure 5: Modeled and observed mean wave period at four locations for the period February
19-24, 1993. Line types and markers as in ﬁgure 4.

38

Figure 6: WAM/OIP signiﬁcant wave height results for the period February 19-24, 1993.
Markers: observations. Thick solid line: WAM NOSAR analysis run. Thin solid lines: WAM
NOSAR forecast runs. Dotted line: WAM NOASS run.

39

Figure 7: DASWAM signiﬁcant wave height results for the period February 19-24, 1993.
Markers: observations. Thick solid line: DASWAM NOSAR analysis run. Thin solid lines:
DASWAM NOSAR forecast runs. Dotted lines: DASWAM NOASS forecast runs.

40

Figure 8: WAM/OIP model wind and wave height ﬁelds at February 21, 21 GMT. Upper left:
HIRLAM wind ﬁeld. Upper right: Hs for the NOASS run. Lower left: increments of U10 for the
NOSAR assimilation run. Lower right: increments of Hs for the NOSAR run. Also indicated
is the ERS-1 altimeter track and the location of the four buoys.

41

Figure 9: DASWAM model wind and wave height ﬁelds at February 21, 21 GMT. Upper left:
HIRLAM wind ﬁeld. Upper right: Hs for the NOASS run. Lower left: increments of U10 for
the NOSAR assimilation run. Lower right: increments of Hs for the NOSAR run.

42

Figure 10: Comparison of WAM/OIP and ERS-1 altimeter for the track of February 20, 21
GMT (the track is shown in ﬁgure 8). Upper panel: signiﬁcant wave height. Lower panel:
Wind speed. Small square markers: altimeter observations. Stars: corresponding NOASS
(analysis) model results. Plusses: NOSAR (analysis) results. Large squares: buoy and platform
observations at K13 and AUK.

43

Figure 11: Comparison of DASWAM and ERS-1 altimeter for the track of February 20, 21
GMT (the track is shown in ﬁgure 9). Symbols: as in ﬁgure 10.

44

Impact of SAR assimilation on the signiﬁcant wave height with the WAM/OIP
Figure 12:
system. Left panels: wave height ﬁelds at February 20, 21 h GMT, when the ERS-1 passed
over. Plusses indicate the SAR observations. Upper left: wave ﬁeld of the SAR analysis run.
Lower left: diﬀerence between the SAR and the NOSAR analyses at the same time. Right
panels: wave ﬁelds at February 21, 9 h GMT, when the Topex-Poseidon passed. The thick sold
line indicates its altimeter track. Upper right: SAR analysis. Lower right: diﬀerence with the
NOSAR analysis.

45

Figure 13:
Comparison of WAM/OIP SAR and NOSAR runs with TOPEX-POSEIDON
altimeter wave height at February 21, 9 GMT. The altimeter track is shown in ﬁgure 12, right
panels. Markers: altimeter wave height. Plusses: SAR assimilation results. Stars: NOSAR
assimilation results.

46

