0
0
0
2

 
r
a

 

M
1
2

 
 
]
h
p
-
d
e
m

.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 

1
v
8
4
0
3
0
0
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

On the uniqueness of the surface sources of evoked potentials

Alejandro Cabo∗, Carlos Handy and Daniel Bessis.

Center of Theoretical Studies of Physical Systems

Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta U.S.A.

Abstract.

The uniqueness of a surface density of sources localized inside a spatial region R and

producing a given electric potential distribution in its boundary B0 is revisited. The

situation in which R is ﬁlled with various metallic subregions, each one having a deﬁnite

constant value for the electric conductivity is considered. It is argued that the knowledge

of the potential in all B0 fully determines the surface density of sources over a wide class of

surfaces supporting them. The class can be deﬁned as a union of an arbitrary but ﬁnite

number of open or closed surfaces. The only restriction upon them is that no one of the

closed surfaces contains inside it another (nesting) of the closed or open surfaces.

* On leave in absence from the: Group of Theoretical Physics, Instituto de Cibern´etica,

Matem´atica y F´isica, Calle E, No. 309 Vedado, La Habana, Cuba.

email: cabo@cidet.icmf.inf.cu

1

I. INTRODUCTION.

The uniqueness problem for the sources of the evoked potential in the brain is a relevant

research question due to its role in the development of cerebral electric tomography [1],

[2] , [3], [4] . Since long time ago, it is known that the general inverse problem of the

determination of volumetric sources from the measurement of the potential at a surface is

not solvable in general [5], [6]. However, under additional assumptions about the nature

of the sources, solutions can be obtained [7], [8], [9]. The supplementary assumptions can

be classiﬁed in two groups: the physically grounded ones, which are ﬁxed by the nature

of the physical problem and the ones which are imposed by invoking their mathematical

property of determining a solution, but having in another hand, a weak physical foundation.

The resumed situation implies that the determination of physical conditions implying the

uniqueness of the sources for the evoked potentials remains being an important subject of

study. Results in this direction could avoid the imposition of artiﬁcial conditions altering

the real information on the sources to be measured.

The question to be considered in this work is the uniqueness of the sources for evoked

potentials under the assumption that these sources are localized over surfaces. This issue

was also treated in Ref. [1] by including also some specially deﬁned volumetric sources. The

concrete aim here is to present a derivation of the results enunciated in [1] for the case of

open surfaces and to generalize it for a wider set of surfaces including closed ones.

We consider that the results enunciated in Ref. [1] are valid and useful ones. Even more,

we think that a relevant merit of that paper is to call for the attention to the possibility

for the uniqueness for classes of surface density of sources. Speciﬁcally, in our view, the

conclusion stated there about the uniqueness of the sources of evoked potentials as restricted

to sources distributed in open surfaces is eﬀectively valid. In the present work, the central

aim is to extend the result for a wider set of surfaces including closed ones by also furnishing

an alternative way to derive the uniqueness result. The uniqueness problem for the special

class of volumetric sources discussed in [1] is not considered here in any way.

2

The physical system under consideration is conformed by various volumetric regions,

each of them having a constant value of the conductivity, separated by surface boundaries

at which the continuity equations for the electric current is obeyed. It should pointed out

that the special volumetric sources examined in Ref. [1] are not addressed here. The precise

deﬁnition of the generators under examination is the following. The sources are assumed

to be deﬁned by continuous and smooth surface densities lying over a arbitrary but ﬁnite

number of smooth open or closed surfaces. The unique constraint to be imposed on these

surfaces is that there is no nesting among them. That is, there is no closed surface at which

interior another open or closed of the surfaces resides. This class of supports expands the one

considered in Ref. [1] and in our view is suﬃciently general to create the expectative for the

practical applications of the results. It should be stressed that the boundaries between the

interior metallic regions are not restricted by the ”non-nesting” condition. That is, the fact

that the skull and the few boundaries between cerebral tissues can be visualized as nearly

closed surface does not pose any limitation on the conclusion. The ”non-nesting” condition

should be valid only for the surfaces in which the sources can be expected to reside. For

example, if by any mean we are sure that the sources stay at the cortex surface, then the

uniqueness result apply whenever the portion of the cortex implied does not contains any

closed surface.

The paper is organized as follows. An auxiliary property is derived in the form of a

theorem in the Section II. In Section III the proof of uniqueness for the kind of sources

deﬁned above is presented.

II. GREEN THEOREM AND FIELD VANISHING CONDITIONS

Let us consider the potential φ generated by a source distribution concentrated in the

”non-nested” set of open or closed surfaces deﬁned in last Section, which at the same time are

contained within a compact and simply connected spatial region R. The set R, as explained

before, is formed by various connected subregions Ri, i = 0, 1, ...n each of them ﬁlled with

3

a metal having a constant conductivity σi. Also, let Bij the possibly but non necessarily

existing, boundary between the subregions Ri and Rj and B0 the boundary of R. For the

sake of a physical picture, we can interpret B0 as the surface of the skull, R as the interior

of the head and the subregions Ri as the ones containing the various tissues within the

brain. It is deﬁned that the exterior space of the head corresponds to R0. In addition, let

Si, i = 1, ...m the surfaces pertaining to the arbitrary but ﬁnite set S of non-nested open

or closed surfaces in which the sources are assumed to be localized. The above mentioned

deﬁnitions are illustrated in Fig.1.

Then, the Poisson equation satisﬁed by the potential φ in the interior region of R can

be written as

∇2φ (−→x ) =

g (−→x ) = −

,

g (−→x )
σ (−→x )
−→
−→
J (−→x ) ,
∇.

(1)

(2)

where

−→
J are the impressed currents (for example, generated by the neuron ﬁrings within the

brain) and the space dependent conductivity is deﬁned by

σ (−→x ) = σi

f or −→x ∈ Ri.

(3)

It should be noticed that the conductivities are diﬀerent from zero only for the internal

regions to R. The vacuum outside is assumed to have zero conductivity and the ﬁeld satis-

fying the Laplace equation. In addition outside the support of the sources where g = 0 the

Laplace equation is also satisﬁed.

The usual boundary conditions within the static approximation, associated to the con-

tinuity of the electric current at the boundaries, take the form

σi

∂φ
∂ni

|x ∈ Bij = σj

∂φ
∂nj

|x ∈ Bij ,

(4)

where ∂ni symbolizes the directional derivative along a line normal to Bij but taken in the

limit of x− > Bij from the side of the region Ri.

A main property is employed in this work in obtaining the claimed result. In the form

of a theorem for a more precise statement it is expressed as

4

Theorem.

Let φ is a solution of the Laplace equation within an open and connected spatial region

R∗. Assume that ϕ have a vanishing electric ﬁeld over an open section of certain smooth

surface S ∗ which is contained in an open subset Q of R∗. Let the points of the boundaries

between Q and R∗ have a minimal but ﬁnite distance among them. Then, the potential φ

is a constant over any open set contained in R∗.

As a ﬁrst stage in the derivation of this property, let us write the Green Theorem as

applied to the interior of the open region Q deﬁned in the Theorem 1 in which a ﬁeld

ϕ satisﬁes the Laplace equation. Then, the Green Theorem expresses ϕ evaluated at a
particular interior point −→x in terms of itself and its derivatives at the boundary BQ as

follows.

ϕ (−→x ) = ZBQ

′

−→
s
.

d




−→
∇x

′ ϕ(cid:18)−→

x

′(cid:19) −

−→
∇x

′




1
−→x −

(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)

−→
x

′(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)




′(cid:19)
ϕ(cid:18)−→


x

(5)

1
−→x −

(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)

−→
x

′(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)

where the integral is running over the boundary surface BQ which is described by the coordi-

−→
x

′

nates

. This relation expresses the potential as a sum of surface integrals of the continuous

and bounded values of ϕ and its derivatives. Those quantities are in addition analytical in
all the components of −→x , if the point have a ﬁnite minimal distance to the points in BQ.

These properties follow because Q ⊂ R∗ and then, ϕ satisﬁes the Laplace equation in any

open set in which Q and its boundary is included. But, due to the ﬁnite distance condition
among the point −→x and the points of BQ, the expression (5) for ϕ should be an analytical
function of all the coordinates of −→x . Figure 2 depicts the main elements in the formulation

of the Green Theorem.

Further, let us consider that S ∗ is siting inside the region Q. Then, as this surface is an

equipotential and also the electric ﬁeld over it vanishes, it follows that no line of force can

have a common point with it. This is so because the divergence of the electric ﬁeld vanishes,

then it is clear that the existence of nonvanishing value of the electric ﬁeld at another point

of the line of force will then contradicts the assumed vanishing of the divergence. Therefore,

the lines of forces in any suﬃciently small open neighborhood containing a section of S ∗

5

should tend to be parallel to this surface on approaching it, or on another hand, the electric

ﬁeld should vanish. Next, it can be shown that in such neighborhoods the lines of forces can

not tend to be parallel.

Let us suppose that lines of forces exist and tend to be tangent to the surface S ∗ and

consider the integral form of the irrotational property of the electric ﬁeld as

IC

−→
E . d

−→

l = ZC1

−→
E . d

−→

l + ZC2

−→
E . d

−→

l = ZC1

−→
E . d

−→
l = 0

(6)

where the closed curve C is constructed as follows: the piece C1 coincides with a line of force,

the piece C2 is ﬁxed to rest within the surface S ∗ and the other two pieces necessary to close

the curve are selected as being normal to the assumed existing family of lines of forces. The

deﬁnitions are illustrated in Fig. 3. By construction, the electric ﬁeld is colinear with the

tangent vector to C1 and let us assume that we select the segment of curve C1 for to have a

suﬃciently short but ﬁnite length in order that the cosine associated to the scalar product

will have a deﬁnite sign in all C1. This is always possible because the ﬁeld determined by (5)

should be continuous. Then Eq. (6) implies that the electric ﬁeld vanish along all C1 as a

consequence of the integrand having a deﬁnite sign and then should vanish identically. Since

this property is valid for any curve pertaining to a suﬃciently small open interval containing

any particular open section of S ∗, it follows that in certain open set containing S ∗ there will

be are no lines of forces, or what is the same, the electric ﬁeld vanish.

To ﬁnish the proof of the theorem, it follows to show that if ϕ and the electric ﬁeld vanish

within a certain open neighborhood N, included in an arbitrary open set O pertaining to the

region R∗ in which the Laplace equation is obeyed, then ϕ and the electric ﬁeld vanish in all

O . Consider ﬁrst that Q is an open set such that O ⊂ Q and also suppose that the smallest

distance form a point in O to the boundary BQ of Q has the ﬁnite value δ. Then, the Green

Theorem (5) as applied to the region Q expresses that the minimal radius of convergence of

ϕ considered as analytical function of any of the coordinates is equal or greater than δ.

Imagine now a curve C starting in an interior point P of N and ending at any point P1 of

O. Assume that C is formed by straight lines pieces (See Fig. 4). It is then possible to deﬁne

6

ϕ as a function of the length of arc s of C as measured form the point P . It should be also

valid that in any open segment of C, not including the intersection point of the straight lines,

the potential ϕ is an analytical function of s. Furthermore, let consider C as partitioned in

a ﬁnite number of segments of length σ < δ. Suppose also, that the intersection points of

the straight lines are the borders of some of the segments. It can be noticed that ϕ vanishes

in any segment of C starting within N because it vanishes in N exactly. Thus, if ϕ and

the electric ﬁeld are not vanishing along all C, there should be a point over the curve in

which the both quantities do not vanish for an open region satisfying s > so, and vanish

exactly for another open interval obeying s < so. However, in this case, all the derivatives

of ϕ of the electric ﬁeld over s vanish at so. This property in addition with the fact that the

Taylor series around so should have a ﬁnite radius of convergence r > δ, as it assumed in

the Theorem 1, leads to the fact that ϕ and the electric ﬁeld should vanish also for s > so.

Henceforth, the conclusion of the Theorem 1 follows: the potential ϕ and its corresponding

electric ﬁeld vanish at any interior point of R∗.

III. UNIQUENESS OF THE NON-NESTING SURFACE SOURCES

Let us argue now the uniqueness of the sources which are deﬁned over a set of non nested

surfaces S producing speciﬁc values of the evoked potential φ at the boundary B0 of the

region R. For this purpose it will be assumed that two diﬀerent source distributions produce

the same evoked potential over B0. The electrostatic ﬁelds in all space associated to those

sources should be diﬀerent as functions deﬁned in all space. They will be called φ1 and φ2.

As usual in the treatment of uniqueness problems in the linear Laplace equation, consider

the new solution deﬁned by the diﬀerence φ = φ1−φ2. Clearly ϕ corresponds to sources given

by the diﬀerence of the ones associated to φ1 and φ2. It is also evident that φ has vanishing

values at B0. Then, since the sources are localized at the interior of R and φ satisﬁes the

Laplace equation with zero boundary condition at B0 and at the inﬁnity, it follows that the

ﬁeld vanishes in all R0, that is, in the free space outside the head. Therefore, it follows

7

that the potential and the electric ﬁeld vanish in all B0 when approaching this boundary

from the free space (R0). The continuity of the potential, the boundary conditions (3) and

the irrotational character of the electric ﬁeld allows to conclude that φ and the electric ﬁeld

also vanish at any point of B0 but now when approaching it from any interior subregion

Ri having a boundary Bi0 with the free space. Moreover, if the boundary surface of any of

these regions which are in contact with the boundary of R is assumed to be smooth, then it

follows from Theorem 1 that the potential φ and its the electric ﬁeld vanish in all the open

subsets of Ri which points are connected through its boundary Bi0 with free space by curves

non-touching the surfaces of S. It is clear that this result hold for all the open subsets of

these Ri in which Laplace equation is satisﬁed excluding those which are also residing inside

one of the closed surfaces Si in the set S.

It is useful for the following reasoning to remark that if we have any boundary Bij

between to regions Ri and Rj, and the potential φ and the electric ﬁeld vanish in certain

open (in the sense of the surface) and smooth regions of it, then Theorem 1 implies that the

potential and the electric ﬁeld also vanish in all the open subsets of Ri and Rj which are

outside any of the closed surfaces in S. Since the sources stay at the surfaces in S the ﬁeld φ

in some open region of R included inside certain of the closed surfaces Si will not necessarily

satisfy the Laplace equation in any interior point of R and Theorem 1 is not applicable.

Let us consider in what follows a point P included in a deﬁnite open vicinity of a subregion

Ri. Suppose also that P is outside any of the closed surfaces in S . Imagine a curve C which

join P with the free space and does not touch any of the surfaces in S. It is clear that, if

appropriately deﬁned, C should intersect a ﬁnite number of boundaries Bij including always

a certain one Bj0 with free space. Let us also assume that C is adjusted in a way that in each

boundary it crosses, the intersection point is contained in a smooth and open vicinity (in

the sense of the surface) of the boundary (See Fig. 1 and 5). Then, it also follows that the

curve C can be included in open set OC having no intersection with the non-nested surfaces

in S. This is so because the region excluding the interior of the closed surfaces in S is also

connected if the Si are disjoint . But, from Theorem 1 it follows that φ and the electric ﬁeld

8

must vanish in all OC. This should be the outcome because the successive application of the

Theorem 1 to the boundaries intersected by the curve C permits to recursively imply the

vanishing of φ and the electric ﬁeld in each of the intersections of OC with the subregions Ri

through which C passes. The ﬁrst step in the recursion can be selected as the intersection

of C with Bj0 at a point which by assumption is contained in an open neighborhood of the

boundary Bj0. As the electric ﬁeld and φ vanish at free space, the ﬁelds in the ﬁrst of the

considered intersection of Oc should vanish. This fact permits to deﬁne another open and

smooth neighborhood of the next boundary intersected by C in which the ﬁeld vanish and

so on up to the arrival to the intersection with the boundary of the region Ri containing

the ending of C at the original point P. Therefore, the electric ﬁeld and the potential should

vanish at an arbitrary point P of R with only two restrictions: 1) P to be contained in an

open neighborhood of some Ri and 2) P to reside outside any of the surfaces in S. Thus, it is

concluded that the diﬀerence solution φ and its corresponding electric ﬁeld, in all the space

outside the region containing the sources vanish. Henceforth, it implies that the diﬀerence

between the two source distributions also should be zero over any of the open surface in the

set S. This is necessary because the ﬂux going out from any small piece of the considered

surface is zero, which means that the assumed continuous density of surface sources exactly

vanish. This completes the proof of the conclusion of Ref.

[1] in connection with sources

supported by open surfaces. It only rests to show that the sources are also null over the

closed Si.

Before continuing with the proof, it is illustrative to exemplify from a physical point of

view how the presence of nested surfaces among the Si destroys the uniqueness. For this aim

let us let us consider that a closed surface Si has another open or closed of the surface Sj

properly contained inside it. That means that an open set containing Sj is contained inside

Si. Imagine also that Si is interpreted as the surface of a metal shell connected to the ground;

that is, to a zero potential and that the surface Sj is the support of an arbitrary density of

sources. As it is known from electrostatics theory, the charge density of a metal connected to

the ground is always capable to create a surface density of charge at Si such that it exactly

9

cancels the electric ﬁeld and the potential at the outside of Si, in spite of the high degree

of arbitrariness of the charge densities at the interior. That is, for nested surfaces in S, it

is not possible to conclude the uniqueness, because at the interior of a nesting surface, and

distributed over the nested ones, arbitrary source distributions can exist which determine

exactly the same evoked potential at the outside boundary B0.

Let us ﬁnally show that if no nesting exists the uniqueness also follows. Consider any

of the closed surfaces, let say Si. As argued before φ and the electric ﬁeld vanish at any

exterior point of Si pertaining to certain open set containing Si. Then, the ﬁeld created by

the diﬀerence between the sources associated to the two diﬀerent solutions assumed to exist

should be diﬀerent from zero only at the interior region. That zone, in the most general

situation can be ﬁlled by a ﬁnite number of metallic bodies with diﬀerent but constant con-

ductivities. The necessary vanishing of the interior ﬁeld follows from the exact conservation

of the lines of forces for the ohmic electric current as expressed in integral form by

Z d−→s . σ (−→x )

−→
E (−→x ) = 0.

(7)

Let us consider a surface T deﬁned by the all the lines of forces of the current vector

passing through an arbitrarily small circumference c which sits on a plane being orthogonal

to a particular line of force passing through its center. Let the center be a point at the

surface Si . Because, the above deﬁned construction, all the ﬂux of the current passing

trough the piece of surface of Si (which we will refer as p) intersected by T is exactly equal

to the ﬂux through any intersection of T with another surface determining in conjunction

with p a closed region. By selecting a suﬃciently small radius for the circumference c it can

be noticed that the sign of the electric ﬁeld component along the unit tangent vector to the

central line of forces should be ﬁxed. This is so because on the other hand there will be an

accumulation of charge in some closed surface. Now, let us consider the fact that the electric

ﬁeld is irrotational and examine a line of force of the current density which must start at

the surface Si. It should end also at Si, because in another hand the current density will not

be divergence less. After using the irrotational condition for the electric ﬁeld in the form

10

IC

−→
E . d

−→

l = ZC1

−→
E . d

−→

l + ZC2

−→
E . d

−→

l = ZC1

−→
E . d

−→
l = 0

(8)

in which C1 is the line of force starting and ending at Si and C2 is a curve joining the

mentioned points at Si but with all its points lying outside Si where φ = φ1-φ2 and the

electric ﬁeld vanish. Let us notice that the electric ﬁeld and the current have always the

same direction and sense as vectors, because the electric conductivity is a positive scalar.

In addition, as it is argued above, the current can not reverse the sign of its component

along the tangent vector of line of forces. Therefore, it follows that also the electric ﬁeld

can‘t revert the sign of its component along a line of force. Thus, the integrand of the line

integral over the C1 curve should have a deﬁnite sign at all the points, hence implying that

φ and the electric ﬁeld should vanish exactly in all C1. Resuming, it follows that the electric

ﬁeld vanish also at the interior of any of the closed surfaces Si. Therefore, the conclusion

arises that the diﬀerence solution φ = φ1-φ2 = 0 in all the space, thus showing that the

evoked potential at B0 uniquely ﬁxes the sources when they have their support in a set of

non nesting surfaces S.

Acknowledgments

We would like to thank the helpful discussions with Drs. Augusto Gonz´alez , Jorge Riera

and Pedro Vald´es. One of the authors ( A.C.) also would like acknowledge the support for the

development of this work given by the Christopher Reynolds Foundation (New York,U.S.A.)

and the Center of Theoretical Studies of Physical Systems of the Clark Atlanta University

(Atlanta, U.S.A). The support of the Associateship Programme of the Abdus Salam Inter-

national Centre for Theoretical Physics (Trieste Italy) is also greatly acknowledged.

11

Figure Captions

Fig.1. An illustration of a simply connected region R constituted in this case by only

two simply connected subregions R1 and R2 having a boundary B12.The boundary with free

space is denoted by B0. The set of non-nesting surfaces S have four elements Si , i = 1, ..4.

two of them open and other two closed ones. A piece wise straight curve C joining any

interior point P of R and a point O in the free space is also shown.

Fig.2. Picture representing the region Q in which a ﬁeld ϕ satisﬁes the Laplace equation

and its value at the point −→x is given by the Green integral (5).

Fig.3. The contour employed in the line integral in Eq. (6).

Fig.4. Picture of the region Ri and the open neighborhood N in which the ﬁeld ϕ vanish

exactly . A piece wise straight line curve C joining a point P ∈ N and certain point P1 in

Ri is also shown.

Fig.5. Scheme of the curve C and the open region OC containing it.

12

REFERENCES

[1] A. Amir, IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng. 41 (1994)1.

[2] J.J. Riera, Physical Basis of Electrical Cerebral Tomography (in Spanish)

PhD. Dissertation, Cuban Center for Neuro Sciences, Havana, 1999.

[3] P. Nunez, Electric Fields of the Brain, Oxford University Press, New York 1981.

[4] C. J. Aine, Critical Review in Neurobiology 9 (1995) 229.

[5] H. Hemholtz, Ann. Phys. Chem.(ser 3) 29 (1853)211 and 353.

[6] J. Hadamard, Lecture on the Cauchy Problem in linear partial diﬀerential equations, Yale

University Press, New Haven, 1923.

[7] M. Scherg and D. Von Cramon, Neurophysiology 62 (1985)44.

[8] G. Wahba, Spline Models for Observational Data, SIAM, Phyladelﬁa, 1990.

[9] J.J. Riera, E. Aubert,, P. Vald´es, R. Casanova and O. Lins, Advances in Biomagnetism

Research 96, Springer Verlag, New York, 1996.

13

