0
0
0
2

 
r
a

 

M
9
2

 
 
]
h
p
-
d
e
m

.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 

1
v
4
9
0
3
0
0
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Generalized Optimal Current Patterns and

Electrical Safety in EIT

William R.B. Lionheart∗

Jari Kaipio †

Christopher N. McLeod‡

February 20, 2014

Abstract

There are a number of constraints which limit the current and volt-
ages which can be applied on a multiple drive electrical imaging system.
One obvious constraint is to limit the maximum Ohmic power dissipated
in the body. Current patterns optimising distinguishability with respect
to this constraint are singular functions of the diﬀerence of transconduc-
tance matrices with respect to the power norm. (the optimal currents of
Isaacson). If one constrains the total current (L1 norm) the optimal pat-
terns are pair drives. On the other hand if one constrains the maximum
current on each drive electrode (an L∞ norm), the optimal patterns have
each drive channel set to the maximum source or sink current value. In
this paper we consider appropriate safety constraints and discuss how to
ﬁnd the optimal current patterns with those constraints.

1

Introduction

The problem of optimizing the drive patterns in EIT was ﬁrst considered by
Seagar [1] who calculated the optimal placing of a pair of point drive electrodes
on a disk to maximize the voltage diﬀerences between the measurement of a
homogeneous background and an oﬀset circular anomaly. Gisser, Isaacson and
Newell [2] argued that one should maximize the L2 norm of the voltage diﬀer-
ence between the measured and calculated voltages constraining the L2 norm of
the current patterns in a multiple drive system. Later [3] they used a constraint
on the maximum dissipated power in the test object. Eyuboglu and Pilking-
ton [4] argued that medical safety legislation demanded that one restrict the
maximum total current entering the body, and if this constraint was used the
distinguishability is maximized by pair drives. Yet another approach [5] is to
ﬁnd a current pattern maximizing the voltage diﬀerence for a single diﬀerential
voltage measurement.

∗ Department of Mathematics, UMIST, UK
† Department of Applied Physics, University of Kuopio, Finland
‡ School of Engineering, Oxford Brookes University,UK

1

2 Medical Electrical Safety Regulations

We will review the current safety regulations here, but notice that they were
not designed with multiple drive EIT systems in mind and we hope to stimulate
a debate about what would be appropriate safety standards.

For the purposes of this discussion the equipment current (“Earth Leakage
Current” and “Enclosure Leakage Current”) will be ignored as the emphasis is
on the patient currents. These will be assessed with the assumption that the
equipment has been designed such that the applied parts, that is the electronic
circuits and connections which are attached to the patient for the delivery of
current and the measurement of voltage, are fully isolated from the protective
earth (at least 50M Ω).

IEC601 and the equivalent BS5724 specify a safe limit of 100 µA for current
ﬂow to protective earth (“Patient Leakage Current”) through electrodes at-
tached to the skin surface (Type BF) of patients under normal conditions. This
is designed to ensure that the equipment will not put the patient at risk even
when malfunctioning. The standards also specify that the equipment should
allow a return path to protective earth for less than 5 mA if some other equip-
ment attached to the patient malfunctions and applies full mains voltage to
the patient. Lower limits of 10 µA (normal) and 50 µA (mains applied to the
patient) are set for internal connections, particularly to the heart (Type CF),
but that is not at present an issue for EIT researchers.

The currents used in EIT ﬂow between electrodes and are described in the
standards as “Patient Auxiliary Currents” (PAC). The limit for any PAC is a
function of frequency, 100 microamps from 0.1Hz to 1 kHz; then 100f µA from
1 kHz to 100 kHz where f is the frequency in kHz; then 10 mA above 100 kHz.
The testing conditions for PAC cover 4 conﬁgurations; the worst case of each
should be examined.

1. Normal conditions. The design of single or multiple current source tomo-
graphs should ensure that each current source is unable to apply more than the
maximum values given.

2. The PAC should be measured between any single connection and all the
other connections tied together. a) if the tomograph uses a single current source
then the situation is similar to normal conditions (above) b) if the tomograph
uses multiple current sources then as far as the patient is concerned the situation
is the same as normal conditions. The design of the sources should be such that
they will not be harmed by this test.

3. The PAC should be measured when one or more electrodes are discon-
nected from the patient. This raises issues for multiple-source tomographs : a)
if an isolated-earth electrode is used then the current in it will be the sum of the
currents which should have ﬂowed in the disconnected electrodes; they could all
be of the same polarity. The isolated-earth electrode should therefore include
an over-current sensing circuit which will turn down/oﬀ all the current sources.
b) If no isolated-earth electrode is used then the situation is similar to normal
conditions.

4. The PAC should be measured when the disconnected electrodes are con-
nected to protective earth. This introduces no new constraints given the tomo-
graph is fully isolated.

2

3 Constrained Optimization

Let V = (V1, . . . , VK)T be the vector of potentials measured on electrodes when
a pattern of currents I = (I1, . . . , IK)T is applied. These are related linearly by
R the transfer impedance matrix: V = RI. For simplicity we will assume the
same system of electrodes is used for current injection and voltage measurement.
We will also assume that the conductivity is real and the currents in-phase to
simplify the exposition. A model of the body is used with our present best
estimate for the conductivity and from this we calculate voltages Vc for the same
current pattern. Our aim is to maximize the distinguishability kV − Vck2 =
k(R − Rc)Ik2. The use of the L2 norm here corresponds to the assumption
that the noise on each measurement channel is independent and identically
distributed. If there were no constraints on the currents the distinguishability
would be unbounded.

The simplest idea [2] is to maximize k(R − Rc)Ik2 subject to kIk2 ≤ M for
some ﬁxed value of M . The solution of this problem that I is the eigenvector of
R−Rc corresponding to the largest (in absolute value) eigenvalue. One problem
is this is that the 2-norm of the current has no particular physical meaning. In
a later paper [3] it was proposed that the dissipated power be constrained, that
is I · V = I T RI. The optimal current is the eigenvector of (R − Rc)R−1/2. (The
inverse implied in the expression R−1/2 has to be understood in the generalized
sense, that is one projects on to the space orthogonal to (1, . . . , 1)T and then
calculates the power 1/2.)
In practical situations in medical EIT the total
dissipated power is unlikely to be an active constraint, although local heating
eﬀects in areas of high current density may be an issue. Even in industrial
applications of EIT, the limitations of voltages and currents handled by normal
electronic devices mean that one is unlikely to see total power as a constraint.
One exception might be in EIT applied to very small objects.

As we have seen a reasonable interpretation of the safety regulations is to
limit the current on each electrode to some safe level Imax. We will refer to this
as an L∞ constraint. This corresponds to a convex system of linear constraints
−Imax ≤ Ik ≤ Imax. When we maximize the square of the distinguishabilty,
which is a positive deﬁnite quadratic function of I, with respect to this set of
constraints it is easy to see that the maximum must be a vertex of the convex
polytope {I : maxk{|Ik|} = Imax, Pk Ik = 0}. For example, for an even number
2n of electrodes the 2nCn vertices are the currents with each Ik = ±Imax, and
an equal number with each sign.

If one wanted to be safe under the multiple fault condition that all the
electrodes driving a current with the same sign became disconnected, and the
safety mechanism on the isolated-earth failed, one would employ the L1 con-
straint Pk |Ik| ≤ 2Imax. Again this gives a convex feasible set. In this case
a polyhedron with vertices I such that all but two Ik are zero, and those two
are Imax and −Imax. These are the pair drives as considered by Seagar, and by
Eyuboglu and Pilkington.

Another constraint which may be important in practice is that the current
sources are only able to deliver a certain maximum voltage Vmax close to their
power supply voltage. If the EIT system is connected to a body with transfer
impedance within its design speciﬁcation then the constraints −Vmax ≤ Vk ≤
Vmax will not be active. If they do become active then the additional linear
constraints in I space −Vmax ≤ R−1I ≤ Vmax (here R−1 is to be interpreted as

3

the generalized inverse), will still result in a convex feasible region.

When any of the linear constraints are combined with quadratic constraints
such as maximum power dissipation the feasible set of currents is still convex
but its surface is no longer a polytope.

4 Numerical Results

Although we can easily ﬁnd the vertices of the feasible region there are too many
for it to be wise to search exhaustively for a maximum of the distinguishability.
For 32 electrodes for example there are 32C16 > 6 × 108.
Instead we use a
discrete steepest ascent search method of the feasible vertices. That is from
a given vertex we calculate the objective function for all vertices obtained by
changing a pair of signs, and move to which ever vertex has the greatest value
of the objective function. For comparison we also calculated the L2 optimal
currents, the optimal currents for the power constraint, and the optimal pair
drive (L1 optimal).

We used a circular disk for the forward problem, and the EIDORS Matlab
toolbox [6] for mesh generation and forward solution. The mesh and conduc-
tivity targets can be seen in Figure 5. Our results are interesting in that for
the cases we have studied so far the L∞ optimal currents have only two sign
changes. The distinguishabilies given in Table 5 should be read with caution,
as it is unfair somewhat unfair to compare for example power constrained with
L∞ patterns. They are designed to optimise diﬀerent criteria. However the
contrast between pair drive and L∞ is worth noting as the majority of existing
EIT systems can only drive pairs of electrodes.

5 Conclusions

If using optimal current patterns it one sure be sure to use the right constraints.
We suggest that in many situations the L∞ constraint may be the correct one.
We have demonstrated that it is simple to compute these optimal patterns, and
the instrumentation required to apply these patterns is much simpler than the
L2 or power norm patterns. While still requiring multiple current sources, they
need only be able to switch between sinking and sourcing the same current.

References

[1] A.D. Seagar, Probing with low frequency electric current, PhD Thesis,

University of Canterbury, Christchurch, NZ, 1983.

[2] G. Gisser, D. Isaacson and J.C. Newell, Current topics in impedance imag-

ing, Clin. Phys. Physiol. Meas., 8 Suppl A, pp39–46, 1987.

[3] G. Gisser, D. Isaacson and J.C. Newell, Electric Current computed-
tomography and eigenvalues, SIAM J. Appl. Math., 50 pp.1623-1634, 1990.

[4] Eyuboglu B.M and Pilkington T.C. Comment on Distinguishability in
Electrical-Impedance Imaging, IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng.,40, pp.1328-
1330,1993

4

Constraint
L1 Best pair drive
L2
Power
L∞

Single anomaly Two anomalies

L2-norm of voltage diﬀerences

353.2179
546.7841
303.6108
1199.9447

347.3579
571.9161
311.9452
968.2656

Table 1: Voltage diﬀerence for one and two anomalies with a variety of con-
straints. The constraint levels have been chosen so that the maximum electrode
current is the same on each

1

0.5

0

−0.5

−1

1

0.5

0

−0.5

−1

5

10

15

5

10

15

Figure 1: Optimal current patterns. Continuous line is the L∞ norm, − ◦ − is
the L2 optimal, · · · power norm optimal and −− is L1 optimal (pair drive).

[5] Breckon W.R., Measurement and reconstruction in electrical impedance
tomography, in ‘Inverse problems and imaging’, Ed. G.F. Roach, Pitman
Res. Notes in Math., 245 , pp1-19, 1991.

[6] Vauhkonen M. et al, A Matlab Toolbox for the EIDORS project to recon-

struct two- and three-dimensional EIT images, these proceedings.

5

600

400

200

0

−200

−400

−600

600

400

200

0

−200

−400

5

10

15

5

10

15

Figure 2: Voltage diﬀerence measurements for one and two anomalies. For key
see ﬁgure 5

Figure 3: Mesh and conductivity anomalies.

6

