1
0
0
2
 
t
c
O
 
3
 
 
]
h
p
-
d
e
m

.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
0
1
0
0
1
1
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Non-Linear Dynamics in Patients with Stable Angina
Pectoris 1
G. Krstaˇci´ca, M. Martinisb, E. Vargovi´cc, A. Kneˇzevi´cb, A.
Krstaˇci´cd
Institute for Cardiovascular Disease and Rehabilitationa, ”Rudjer Boˇskovi´c”
Instituteb, CDV infoc, University Clinic ”Vuk Vrhovac”d, Zagreb, Croatia

Abstract

Dynamic analysis techniques may quantify abnormalities in heart rate
behaviour based on non-linear and fractal analysis.The applicability of
these new methods for detecting complex heart rate dynamics in coro-
nary heart disease is not well established. To investigate the clinical and
prognostic signiﬁcance of fractal dimension and detrended ﬂuctuation
analysis, two diﬀerent groups were studied, group of patients with stable
angina pectoris without previous myocardial infarction, and age-matched
healthy controls. The fractal dimension of the RR series was determined
using the rescaled range (R/S) analysis technique. To quantify fractal
longe-range-correlation properties of heart rate variability, the detrended
ﬂuctuation analysis (DFA) technique was used. The heart rate variabil-
ity was characterized by a scaling exponent α, separately for short-term
(< 11 beats) and for long-term (> 11 beats) time scales. The results of
data sets show the existence of crossover phenomena between short-time
scales. In patients with stable angina pectoris the short-term fractal scal-
ing exponent (α1) was signiﬁcantly lower (0.95 ± 0.05 vs. 1.08 ± 0.06; p
< 0.05), while there were no diﬀerences in the long-term fractal scaling
exponent (α2)(1.37 ± 0.26 vs. 1.39 ± 0.04; p<0.05). The patients with
stable angina pectoris also had higher fractal dimension than a healthy
control group (p < 0.05). The short-time scaling exponent and fractal
dimension are better than other heart rate variability parametars in dif-
ferentiating patients with stable angina pectoris from healthy subjects.
Dynamic analysis may thus complement traditional analysis in detecting
altered heart rate behaviour.

1Presented at Computers in Cardiology, September 23-26, 2001 - Rotterdam, The

Netherlands

1

1 Introduction

Heart rate variability (HRV) [1, 2] reﬂects the modulation of the cardiac function
by autonomic and other physiological systems, and its measurements from am-
bulantory electrocardiography (ECG) recordings during an exercise ECG test
may be a useful method for both clinical and scientiﬁc purposes.

Traditional linear statistical measures provide limited information about
HRV, because non-linear mechanisms may also be involved in the genesis of
HR dynamics. A number of new methods have recently been developed to
quantify complex heart rate dynamics. They may uncover abnormalities in the
time series data, which are not apparent when using conventional linear statis-
tical methods. This study tested the hypothesis that fractal measurements of
HRV are altered in patients with stable angina pectoris [3, 4].

2 Methods

2.1 Patients

Twenty ﬁve consecutive patients with stable angina pectoris and without pre-
vious myocardial infarction were included in the analysis after the history of
chest pain and non-invasive cardiovascular diagnostic measurements (ECG at
rest, echocardiography, 24 hours ECG, vectorcardiography, exercise ECG test
and laboratory coronary risk factors measurements) with ECG evidence of is-
chemic STsegment depression (> 0.1 mV) during an exercise test. They were 57
± 6 years old, 12 male. No cardiac medication was allowed on the day of test-
ing, and b - blocking therapy was withdrawn at least 7 days before and calcium
antagonists at least 2 days before. Patients with anginal chest pain, silent is-
chemic ST-segment depression during the 24 hour ECG recording and diabetes
mellitus were excluded. The control group consisted of 20 randomly selected age
matched (mean age 58 ± 8 years), and sex matched (11 male) healthy subjects.
After a complete non-invasive eexamination and their medical history all pa-
tients revealed no cardiovascular disease or use of medication. All controls had
normal ECG at rest, echocardiographic data (M-mode, 2D dimensional and
Doppler echocardiography), normal arterial blood pressure and fasting blood
glucose. Subjects with evidence of ischemic ST-segment depression during the
exercise ECG test or the 24 hour ECG recording were not included. An exercise
ECG on all subjects was obtained using a symptom or ECG changes limited

2

test, increasing the workload in a controlled manner. A horizontal or downslop-
ing ST-segment depression of > 0. mV occurring 0.08 seconds after the J point
was considered to be of ischemic origin.

2.2 Analysis of HRV

Series of RR intervals were obtained from high resolution ECG (sampling fre-
quency 1000 Hz), and the recording time scale during the exercise ECG test was
approximately about 1500 beats. The ECG data were digitized by the Vawe-
book 512 (Iotech. Cal. USA), and transferred to a computer for analysis. The
RR interval series was passed through a ﬁlter that eliminated noise, artifacts
and premature beats. All RR interval series were ﬁrst edited automatically,
after which careful manual editing was performed by visual inspection of each
RR interval. After this, all questionable portions were excluded manually, and
only segments with > 85 % sinus beats were included in the ﬁnal analysis.

The fractal dimension of the RR interval series was determined by the
”Rescaled range” (R/S) analysis [5]: R(n)/S(n) ∼ nH , where H is the Hurst’s
exponent, an important parameter used to characterize the time series. H ∼
log(R/S)/log(n) where n is the length of the time box.

If the Hurst exponent is approximately about 0.5, it represents an ordinary
In the cases where H is < 0.5, it means
random walk or Brownian motion.
negative correlation between the increments (antipersistent time series) and if
it is > 0.5, it means positive correlation between the increments (persistent time
series which are plentiful in nature).

The Hurst exponent is related to the fractal dimension (FD): H = E + 1 +
FD, where E is the Euclidean.dimension ( E = 0 for point, 1 for line and 2 for
surface). The relation between H and FD of the graph of a random fractal is
FD = 2H for one dimensional signal. While H vary from 0 to 1, FD decreases
from 2 to 1.

The Hursts exponent as well as the fractal dimension were determined for
the whole time series during the exercise ECG, and also separately for each
program of exercise including half a minute baseline ECG before the exercise
and six minutes of relaxation after the exercise (Figs.1 and 2).

To quantify fractal long-range correlation properties of HRV, the detrended
ﬂuctuation analysis (DFA) technique [6], which is a modiﬁed root-mean-square
(rms) analysis of a random walk, was used. The method quantiﬁes the presence
or absence of fractal long-range correlation properties. The rms ﬂuctuation of

3

integrated and detrended time series is calculated by the formula

where

F (n) = v
u
u
t

1
N

[y(k) − yn(k)]2 ,

y(k) =

(R(i) − R)

N

X
k=1

k

X
i=1

and yn(k) is the regression line through the data y(i) in the box of length n. This
computation is repeated over all time scales (box sizes n) in order to characterize
the relationship between F(n), the average ﬂuctuation, as a function of box size.
Typically, F (n) will increase with box size n. A linear relationship in a log–log
plot indicates the presence of power law (fractal) scaling. In this study, HRV
was characterized by a scaling exponent α, the slope of the linear relationship
between log F(n) and log n, separately for short-term (< 11 beats, α1 ), and
long-term (> 11 beats, α2) ﬂuctuations in the RR series data (Fig.3).

2.3 Statistical analysis
Results are expressed as mean ± standard deviation (SD). The p value < 0.05
was considered signiﬁcant.

3 Results

The baseline clinical and heart rate variables of healthy controls and patients
with stable angina pectoris are listed in Table 1. There were no diﬀerences
observed in conventional statistical linear measures of the HRV (average RR
intervals and SDNN in the time domain and LF/HF ratio in frequent domain).
The results of exercise data sets show the existence of crossover phenomena
between short-time scales when using the DFA method. A signiﬁcant diﬀerence
was found between patients with stable angina pectoris and healthy controls
in short-time scales (0.95 ± 0.05 vs. 1.08 ± 0.06) as can be seen in Figure 3.
However there were no signiﬁcant diﬀerences in long-term series. The fractal
dimension was signiﬁcantly higher in patients with stable angina pectoris.

The main ﬁndings of this study are compared with healthy controls. Because
of a relatively small patient population, the results of this study do not allow
us to draw conclusions regarding the lack of the prognostic value of HRV in

4

Clinical data (n=45):
Age (yrs)
Men/women
ECG at rest (freq.)
VPCs/hour
LV ejection fraction(%)
E/A wave
Exercise ECG data:
Average RR interval (ms)
SDNN (ms)
LF/HF ratio
Hurst’s exponent
Fractal dimension
α1
α2

* p value < 0.05

Healthy Controls (n=20) Patients with SAP (n= 25)
58 ± 8
11/9
74
3 ± 0.7
71 ± 6
1.4 ± 0.2

57 ± 6
12/13
81
4 ± 2.7
63 ± 9
0.8 ± 0.2

874 ± 108
149 ± 41
3.2 ± 1.5
0.81 ± 0.05
1.19 ± 0.07
1.08 ± 0.06
1.39 ± 0.04

856 ± 114
139 ± 40
3.5 ± 1.7
0.64 ± 0.07 *
1.36 ± 0.09 *
0.95 ± 0.05 *
1.37 ± 0.26

Table 1: The clinical and heart rate variables of subjects in the study

traditional measurements, but do give preliminary information on the usefulness
of fractal analysis methods in risk stratiﬁcation of patients with stable CHD.

4 Conclusions

Patients with stable angina pectoris had loss normal fractal characteristics in
heart rate variability estimated by non-linear dynamic measures of heart rate
behaviour. The measurement of a short-term fractal scaling exponent gives
complementary information on abnormal HR behaviour in patients with SAP
in relation to other standard measurements. The present study shows that
normal fractal properties of RR interval dynamics are altered in patients with
SAP. Dynamic analysis of HRV gives independent information that probably
cannot be detected by the traditional linear analysis technique. Healthy subjects
have a distinct circadian rhythm of HRV, but this rhythm seems to be blunted
in coronary heart disease (CHD) patients. Fractal correlation properties and
fractal dimension in this study may reﬂect an altered neuroanatomic interaction
that may predispose patients to the development of CHD. Further studies in
a larger population will be needed to further deﬁne the clinical utility of new

5

fractal measurements of HRV for risk stratiﬁcation in patients with CHD.

References

[1] Huikuri H.V. Heart rate variability in coronary artery disease. Journal of

Internal Medicine. 1995; 237: 349-357.

[2] Goldgerger A.L. Non-linear dynamics for clinicans: chaos theory, fractals,

and complexity at the bedside. Lancet. 1996; 347: 1312-1314.

[3] Makikalio T.M, Ristimae T., Airaksinen K.E, Peng C. K., Goldgerger A.L,
Huikuri H.V. Heart rate dynamics in patients with stable angina and utility
of fractal and complexity measures. Am. Journal of Cardiology. 1998; 81:
27-31.

[4] Tulppo M.P, Makikallio T.H, Seppanen T, Laukkanen R.T, huikuri H.V.
Vagal modulation of heart rate during exercise: eﬀects of age and physical
ﬁtness. Am J. Physiol. 1998; 274: 424H-429.

[5] Feder J. Fractals, 1988; Plenum Press, New York.

[6] Peng C.K., Havlin S., Stanley H.E., Goldberger A.L. Quantiﬁcation of scal-
ing exponents and crossover phenomena in heartbeat time series. Chaos,
1995; 5: 82-87.

6

Figure 1: Example of RR intervals in one typical ergometric measurement;
RR intervals in unforced regime (pretrigger, Pt.) with a cubic polynomial ﬁt;
deviations from the ﬁtting curve; and the R/S calculation result of the Hurst
exponent H in comparison with random data, H=0.5.

7

Figure 2: Hurst exponents for diﬀerent regimes in ergometric measurements;
Pretrigger (Pt.), Program I, Program II and Relaxation (30 sec., 3 min., 3
min., 6 min. duration, respectively), with the cubic polynomial ﬁt before the
R/S calculation. Open squares correspond to healthy subjects, ﬁlled squares to
ill subjects and stars to suspected subjects.

8

Figure 3: RR intervals analysed using the DFA method showing the diﬀerence
between healthy and ill (SAP) subjects.

9

