1
0
0
2
 
c
e
D
 
2
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
d
e
m

.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
1
3
0
2
1
1
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

What does the correlation dimension of the human heart rate measure?

M. S¨akki, J. Kalda
Institute of Cybernetics, Tallinn Technical University, Akadeemia tee 21, 12618 Tallinn, Estonia

M. Vainu
Tallinn Diagnostic Center, P¨arnu mnt. 104, Estonia

M. Laan
N˜omme Children Hospital, Laste 1, Tallinn, Estonia

It is shown that for the heart rate variability, ﬁnite values of the correlation dimension D (cal-
culated by the Grassberger-Procaccia algorithm) cannot be considered as an evidence for a de-
terministic chaos inside the heart. Finiteness of D is explained by ﬁnite resolving power of the
recording apparatus. The correlation dimension depends both on the short-time variability of the
heart rhythm, and on the resolving power of the electrocardiogram. In principle, it can be used as
a certain measure of short-time variability of the signal, but its diagnostic value on test groups was
negligible.

PACS numbers: PACS numbers: 87.10.+e, 87.80.Tq, 05.45.-a, 05.45.Tp

Heart rate variability (HRV) is often thought to be
driven by deterministic chaos inside the heart. This chaos
is explained in terms of dynamics of the complex of sino-
atrial and atrio-ventricular nodes, which has been suc-
cessfully modeled as a system of non-linear coupled os-
cillators, responsible for the heart rhythm [1, 2]. As a
consequence, correlation dimension and related quanti-
ties (like Lyapunov exponents and Kolmogorov entropy,
etc.) have been thought to be important non-linear mea-
sures of HRV. In particular, Babloyantz and Destexhe
concluded [3] that high values of the correlation dimen-
sion indicate the healthiness of the heart. Later, the cor-
relation dimension of the heart rate signal has been cal-
culated in a vast number of papers. On the other hand,
it has been pointed out that physiological time-series are
typically non-stationary and noisy, and therefore, the cor-
relation dimension cannot be calculated reliably [4, 5, 6].
In the case of the human heart, the “noise” comes from
the autonomous nervous system in the form of inputs
regulating the heart rate (cf. [7, 8, 9]). These mostly
non-deterministic signals suppress almost completely the
underlying deterministic signal. This makes it very un-
likely that the formally calculated correlation dimension
does really correspond to the dimensionality of an in-
trinsic attractor. Thus, a natural question arises, what
does the correlation dimension of the human heart rate
measure?

Our answer to the posed question is based on very
simple observations, which are valid for healthy patients:
(a) the long-time variability of the inter-beat intervals
(around 500 ms) is typically much higher than the vari-
ability on the time scale of few heart beats (less than 50
ms); (b) for those periods, when the mean heart rate is
high (i.e. when the subject is performing physical exer-
cise) the heart rate variability is low; (c) the heart rate
is controlled by non-deterministic and eﬀectively random
signals arriving from the autonomous nervous system. As

a consequence, in time delay coordinates, an HRV time-
series generates a baseball bat-shaped cloud of points.
Although the theoretical value of the correlation dimen-
sion of such a cloud is inﬁnite, the ﬁnite resolution of
the recording apparatus, ﬁnite length of the time-series,
and the linear structure of the cloud result in a smaller
value. This is evident for a very narrow “bat”, which is
eﬃciently one-dimensional. In what follows we show that
the correlation dimension reﬂects the geometrical size of
the cloud of points.

The experimental data analyzed in this paper have
been recorded at Tallinn Diagnostic Center. The record-
ings of ambulatory Holter-monitoring (24 hours, approxi-
mately 100 000 data points) were obtained during regular
diagnostical examinations and covered over 200 patients
with various clinically documented diagnoses (including
also many healthy patients). The main groups of patients
are shown in Table 1. The resolving power of recordings
was 6 ms (sampling rate of 180 Hz). The diagnostics and
data veriﬁcation has been made by qualiﬁed cardiologist;
the data preprocessing included also ﬁltering of artifacts
and arrhythmias.

Healthy IHD SND VES PCI RR FSK

No. of patients
Mean age
Std. dev. of age

103
45.5
20.5

8

11

16

7

11

6

65.4 50.0 55.9 47.3 55.5 11.7
11.4 19.3 14.3 11.6 14.4 4.6

TABLE I: Test groups of patients. Abbreviations are as
follows: IHD - Ischemic Heart Disease (Stenocardia); SND -
Sinus Node Disease; VES - Ventricular Extrasystole; PCI -
Post Cardiac Infarction; RR - Blood Pressure Disease; FSK -
Functional Disease of Sinus Node.

The concept of correlation dimension has been intro-
duced by Grassberger and Procaccia [10], and is de-
signed to reﬂect the number of degrees of freedom of
a deterministic system (or the dimensionality of an at-
tractor, which, in principle, can be fractal). For em-

pirical time-series, the phase variables are typically not
known. It is expected that the attractors in the phase
space are topologically equivalent to the attractors in
a reconstructed phase space with time-lag coordinates
{x(t), x(t + τ ), . . . x[t + (m − 1)τ ]}, as long as the em-
bedding dimensionality m (the dimensionality of the re-
constructed phase space) exceeds the dimensionality of
the attractor D; here x(t) is the signal, and τ is a rea-
sonably chosen time lag. This circumstance is exploited
by the Grassberger-Procaccia method [10] for the calcu-
lation of the correlation dimension. To begin with, the
second order correlation integral is deﬁned as

C2(r) =

2

N (N − 1) X

i<j

θ(r− | ri − rj |),

(1)

is

the Heaviside function, and ri =
where θ(r)
{x(ti), x(ti + τ ), . . . , x[t + (m − 1)τ ]}, is a point in the
reconstructed phase space, and i = 1, 2, . . . , N counts
the moments of discretized time. For small r, the cor-
relation integral is expected to scale as C2(r) ∝ rD2 ,
assuming that D2 < m. The exponent D ≡ D2 is called
the correlation dimension of the system.

A non-linear dynamical system may be chaotic and
then the phase trajectory ﬁlls the entire phase space.
In that case, the correlation dimension D2 is equal to
the number of degrees of freedom (the dimensionality
of the phase space minus the number of conservation
laws). This is why D2 is often considered as a measure of
the complexity of the system. Babloyantz and Destexhe
[3] studied the correlation dimension of the sequence of
RR-intervals of human heart rate. For healthy patients
and data series consisting of 1000 intervals, they found
D = 5.9 ± 0.4. It is widely recognized that life threaten-
ing heart pathologies lead to the reduction of the com-
plexity of the HRV signal, c.f. [11]. Correspondingly, the
correlation dimension of the heart rate has been often
considered as a measure for the healthiness of the heart.
However, the heart is not an isolated system. Although
the heart rhythm is generated by the complex of oscilla-
tory elements, its rate is controlled by non-deterministic
inputs arriving from the autonomous nervous system. In
particular, these inputs lead to the increase of heart rate
when the subject is under physical stress, and to slowing
down when the subject is at rest, c.f. [8]. Healthy heart
responds easily to these signals, and is able to adapt to
a wide range of beating rates. This responsiveness gives
rise to the high variability of the heart rate. Severe heart
diseases decrease the responsiveness of the heart with re-
spect to the whole spectrum of signals arriving from the
autonomous nervous system; this leads to the loss of ap-
parent complexity of the HRV signal.

The heart is more responsive with respect to the signals
of the autonomous nervous system when the heart rate
is slow, i.e. when the patient is at rest. In that case, the
heart rate variability is driven by weaker signals, like the
ones generated by respiration and blood-pressure oscilla-
tions. These two stimuli are quasi-periodic, the periods
being respectively a few and 10–20 seconds. It should be

2

noted that respiration can be mode-locked to the heart
rate. This mode-locking has been demonstrated by si-
multaneous recording of ECG and respiration activity,
together with the technique called cardiorespiratory syn-
chrogram [12]. The ratio of the mode-locked periods can
be small, 2:1, 3:1, 5:2, etc., and the phenomenon can give
rise to certain patterns in the reconstructed phase space.
These patterns can be easily treated as the traces of an
attractor of a non-linear deterministic system, therefore
we discuss this aspect in more details.

As mentioned above, the HRV signal generates a
baseball-bat-shaped cloud of points. For certain patients,
the presence of less densely populated satellite clouds can
be observed, see Fig. 1. The analysis of the ﬂuctuation
function F (ν) = h|tn − tn+ν |i reveals the presence of an
oscillatory component, see Fig. 2a (the angular braces
denote averaging over n). By dividing the entire 24-hour
HRV record into one-hour intervals, and calculating the
amplitude of the oscillatory component of the ﬂuctua-
tion function for each interval, we were able to locate the
periods responsible for the satellite clouds in the recon-
structed phase space, see Fig. 2b. These were always the
periods before falling asleep, around 10 or 11 pm, charac-
terized by a low heart rate and a high respiration-driven
short-time variability. The phase between the heart rate
and respiration is locked during tens of seconds, conﬁrm-
ing the observations of Kurths et al. [12]. In a certain
sense, the heart and respiratory complex act as a sys-
tem of coupled oscillators; however, by no means it does
evidence for a deterministic dynamics inside the heart.

<  4
≥ 4 
≥ 8
≥ 16
≥ 32
≥ 64

tn +1 /ms/

tn +2 + τ = 552 ms
tn +2 = 512 ms

800

552
512

400

552

400

512

800

tn  /ms/

FIG. 1: Two-dimensional intersection of 3-dimensional recon-
structed phase space for a patient with pronounced mode-
locking between heart rate and respiration. The number of
points per unit cell is given in gray-scale coding.

Our working hypothesis is that the non-linear deter-
ministic dynamics inside the heart is almost completely
suppressed by the signals arriving from the autonomous
nervous system. These signals obey a noise-like com-
ponent. Therefore, theoretically, the correlation dimen-
sion is inﬁnite. The reported relatively small values of
the correlation dimension are to be attributed to the

(a)

23:58:50

1250

1000

(b)
ν

3

Reliable correlation dimension analysis is possible only
for more or less stationary time series, cf. [4]. Meanwhile,
HRV signal is highly non-stationary, as is evidenced by
the multifractal structure of its long-time dynamics [16].
The most stationary period in the heart rate dynamics
is the sleeping time. This is why we studied only the
nocturnal part of the HRV records. The correlation di-
mension was determined as the slope of the correlation
integral C2(r) in log-log plot by performing root-mean-
square ﬁt for the almost linear part (at small values of r)
of the curve, see Fig. 3. Note that the leftmost horizontal
part of the curve is due to the limited resolving power (6
ms) of the medical equipment:
if two RR-intervals dif-
fer less than 6 ms, they are recorded to be of the same
length. The scaling exponents ranged from D = 4.2 to
D = 5.1 and were almost uncorrelated with the diagnoses
(see Table 2).

IHD
89.4

SND
21.9
34.1

VES
3.5
12.0
66.8

PCI
18.4
17.6
52.9
73.0

p,% 
Healthy
IHD
SND
VES
PCI
RR

RR
2.4
7.1
45.7
67.6
95.7

FSK
71.5
69.4
54.4
25.2
26.7
15.9

TABLE III: p-values of the Student test for the seven group
of patients. Abbreviations are explained in Table 1.

Further we generated two surrogate time-series with
Gaussian noise: (i) plain Gaussian noise added to a mean
rate (see Fig. 4c); (ii) time-series with variable mean rate
and modulated noise, generated according to the formula

tn = a + b sin(f n) + cg(n)p1.1 + sin(f n),

(3)

see Fig. 4b. Here, tn denotes the duration of n-th in-
terval; g(n) is a random normally distributed value with
zero mean and standard deviation equal to 1. The term
b sin(f n) models the variability of the mean heart rate
due to physiological processes (physical activity, blood

a)

b)

c)

n

FIG. 3: Heart beat intervals (in arbitrary units) are plotted
versus the beat number: (a) a real patient; (b) surrogate data
(modulated Gaussian noise); (c) plain Gaussian noise added
to a constant “heart” rate.

1

4

16

64

256

1024

4096 16384

FIG. 2: Patient with 3:1 mode locking between heart rate and
respiration: (a) heart beat intervals (in milliseconds) plotted
versus the beat number. Heart rate has a pronounced oscilla-
tory component; vertical lines mark the period of three heart
beats, horizontal lines indicate the sequences with coherent
phase. (b) Fluctuation function (arbitrary units) is plotted
versus the time lag ν (in heart beats); the oscillating compo-
nent is magniﬁed.

ﬁnite length of the time series and ﬁnite resolution of
the recording apparatus. This hypothesis is supported
by the fact that typically, the correlation dimension has
been found to be at the limit (or beyond) of a credible
analysis. Indeed, it has been suggested [4, 13] that the
calculation of the correlation dimension D is reliable, if
the number N of data-points in the time series
N >

∼ 10D/2+1.
In Table 2, this criterion is compared with the data of
some papers.

(2)

Ref. [3] Ref. [5] Ref. [14] Ref. [15]

Correlation dimension 5.5–6.3 9.6–10.2 2.8-5.8
Length of the data set
Required length

2 · 104
106

103
104

104
104

4–7
2 · 104
3 · 104

TABLE II: Data from papers devoted to the correlation di-
mension analysis: experimental values of correlation dimen-
sion, lengths of the underlying data sets, and data-set lengths
required by Eq. 2.

In order to test our hypothesis we aimed to construct
such random time series (using an algorithm as simple as
possible), the correlation integral of which is similar to
the correlation integrals of the time series of real patients.
First we analyzed the sequences of RR-intervals extracted
from ECG recordings. The correlation dimension was
calculated according to the Grassberger-Procaccia algo-
rithm. The six-dimensional embedding phase space was
used for calculations. The choice of the embedding di-
mensionality was motivated as follows. To begin with,
the analysis for phase space with m > 6 is not reliable
due to sparse clouds of points (see Eq. 2). Further, m = 6
does still make sense, because most of the previous stud-
ies have reported D <

∼ 6.

tn 

tn

tn

0
ln C2(r)

D = 4.9

-5

-10

-15

-20

0.00

D = 5.9

a real patient

surrogate data

gaussian noise

1.82

3.64

5.46

ln r

7.28

FIG. 4: Correlation integrals of a healthy patient, a plain
Gaussian signal, and a modulated Gaussian signal in loga-
rithmic plot. Embedding dimensionality m = 6.

pressure oscillations, etc.). The term p1.1 + sin(f n) re-
ﬂects the empirical observation that the short-time vari-
ability of heart rhythm increases together with the mean
heart beat interval. Note that both the square-root and
sinusoidal dependances are rather arbitrary, the model is
not sensitive neither with respect to the particular func-
tional dependencies nor with respect to the modulation
frequency f . The numerical values of these parameters
have been chosen as follows: a = 500 ms, b = 110 ms,
f = 0.005, c = 3.5 ms; the values of tn were rounded to
the nearest multiple of 6 ms (the “resolving power”).

For a Gaussian signal, the correlation dimension is in-
ﬁnite and the scaling exponent should be equal to the
embedding dimension m = 6. This is exactly what is ob-

4

served for plain unmodulated Gaussian time-series, see
Fig. 5. However, for the noise of modulated amplitude,
the ﬁnite size eﬀects are signiﬁcant. As a result, the cor-
relation integral in Fig. 6 is almost indistinguishable from
the ones of real patients, see Fig. 4. The scaling expo-
nent D of such time-series depends on the amplitude of
the Gaussian noise and on the resolving power (which,
unlike in the case of real apparatus, was also freely ad-
justable). By adjusting the above deﬁned parameters b,
c, and the resolving power, we were able to obtain the
values ranging from D = 4 to D = 6.

In conclusion, comparative analysis of real and sur-
rogate data conﬁrmed our working hypothesis that the
ﬁnite values of correlation dimension D, calculated ac-
cording to the Grassberger-Procaccia algorithm cannot
be considered as an evidence for the deterministic chaos
inside the heart. Instead, ﬁnite values of D can be as-
cribed to the ﬁnite-size eﬀects and the speciﬁc results de-
pend both on the resolving power of the apparatus, and
on the degree of short-time variability (and also, on the
maximal embedding dimensionality). Therefore, D can
be used as a certain measure of short-time variability of
the signal, but care must be taken to obtain comparable
results. The diagnostic and/or prognostic value of this
measure is possible, but not conﬁrmed on our patient
groups. It should be also noted that for some patients,
patterns (satellite clouds) are observed in time delay co-
ordinates (see Fig. 3). These patterns are typically due
to the respiratory sinus arrhythmia and mode coupling
between respiration and heart rhythm and are not re-
lated to the (possibly) derministic dynamics inside the
heart. The values of D are not sensitive with respect to
the presence of such satellite clouds.

The support of Estonian Science Foundation grant No.
4151 is acknowledged. The authors are grateful to Prof.
J. Engelbrecht for useful discussions.

[1] L. Glass, M.R. Guevara, A. Shrier, and R. Perez, Physica

D, 7, 89,(1983).

[2] B.West, A. Goldberger , G. Rooner, and V. Bhargava,

Physica D 17, 198 (1985).

[3] A. Babloyantz, A. Destexhe, Biol. Cybern. 58, 203

(1988).

[4] H. Kantz, T. Schreiber, Chaos 5(1), 143 (1995).
[5] J.K. Kanters, N.H. Holstein-Rathlou, and E.Agner, J.

Cardivasc. Electrophys. 5, 591 (1994).

[8] D.L. Kaplan, M. Talajic, Chaos 1, 251 (1991).
[9] M. Rosenblum, J. Kurths, Physica A 215, 439 (1995).
[10] P. Grassberger, J. Procaccia, Physica D 9, 189 (1983).
[11] J.B. Bassingthwaighte, L.S. Liebovitch, and B.J. West,
Fractal Physiology, Oxford Univ. Press, New York 1994.
[12] C. Sch¨afer, M.G. Rosenblum, J. Kurths, and H.H. Abel,

Nature 392, 240 (1998)

[13] L. Smith, Phys. Lett. A 133, 283 (1988).
[14] R. Govindan, K. Narayanan, M. Gopinathan, Chaos 8,

[6] A. Bezerianos, T. Bountis, G. Papaioannou, P. Poly-

495 (1998).

doropoulus, Chaos 5, 95 (1995).

[7] R.M. Berne and N.M. Levy, Cardiovascular Physiology.

Eighth edition. Mosby, New York 2001.

[15] S. Guzzetti et al, Cardiovasc. Res. 31, 441 (1996).
[16] P.Ch. Ivanov et al, Nature 399, 461 (1999).

