2
0
0
2
 
v
o
N
 
9
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
d
e
m

.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
5
8
0
1
1
2
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Threadlike bundle of tubules running inside blood vessels: New anatomical structure

Xiaowen Jiang,∗ Byung-Cheon Lee, Chunho Choi, Ku-Youn Baik, and Kwang-Sup Soh†
Biomedical Physics Lab., School of Physics, Seoul National University, Seoul, 151-747, Korea

Hee-Kyeong Kim
School of Chemical Engineering, Seoul National University

Hak-Soo Shin
Department of Physics Education, Seoul National University

Kyung-Soon Soh
College of Oriental Medicine, Sae Myong University, Chungbook Korea

Byeung-Soo Cheun
School of Biochemistry, Inha University, Inchon, Korea
(Dated: February 21, 2014)

According to current anatomy, the arteries and veins do not have threadlike structures running
inside the vessels. Despite such prevailing knowledge here we report on observation of a novel
structure inside the blood vessels of rats and rabbits, which is a semi-transparent elastic bundle of
tubules whose diameters are of 10µm order. This is a rediscovery of the Bong Han ducts1,2 which
have not been conﬁrmed because the observing method was not known. We found a new procedure
of observing the intra blood vessel ducts (IBVD) which are too thin, fragile, and semi-transparent to
be detected in ordinary surgical operation. The method we contrived is to let blood be coagulated
around the IBVD so that they become thick and strong by intravenous injection of 10 per cent
dextrose solution at the vena femoralis. A piece of thickened IBVD sample is treated with urokinase
to remove blood clots and the thin thread of IBVD is embedded inside of a string of ﬁbrin.

Threadlike structures inside blood vessels of rats and
rabbits which are semi-transparent milky white, elastic,
and whose diameters are about 50µm are observed de-
spite current knowledge of animal anatomy and physiol-
In this let-
ogy that does not admit such a structure.
ter we present the method for observing intravenous and
intra-arterial threadlike tissues and their tubular sub-
structures.

A representative sample of the thickened IBVD is
shown in Fig.1 where the threadlike structure (a)
branches to two smaller ones (b, c) at the bifurcation
point (d). It is inside the inferior vena cava of a rat that
branches to the left and right iliac vena cava which are in-
cised slowly with a micro dissecting spring scissor (length
105mm, blade 7mm, straight) while the right-side end of
the IBVD is held by a micro dissecting forceps (length
100mm,serrated,curved) to keep it tight which is some-
what strong and elastic.

The existence of the IBVD is not an abnormal state of
the particular rat as we have examined nine more cases
with similar results without exception, and there are IB-
VDs in other veins and arteries as we found them at
the vessels: the jugular vein, the cardiac vein, the pul-

∗A permanent address: Dept. of Veterinary, College of Agriculture,
Yanbian University, Jilin, China
†Correspondence:
kssoh@kmc.snu.ac.kr; URL: http://kmc.snu.ac.kr/~kssoh

Kwang-Sup

Electronic

address:

Soh;

FIG. 1: View of the Intra Blood Vessel Ducts (IBVD) hold
tight with a forceps.
It looks thick because of coagulated
blood clots. It bifurcates at the branching point of the ab-
dominal aorta to the left and right iliac arteries. a, The IBVD.
b, c, Two branches of the IBVD. d, The branch point. e, The
boundaries of severed vessel walls. Scale bar 0.6mm.

monary vein and artery, the clavicular vein, the ascend-
ing aorta, superior vena cava, carotid artery, the hep-
atic portal vein, the inferior vena cava, the caudal vena
cava, the abdominal aorta, the renal veins, the cranial
abdominal vein and the right and left iliac veins etc..
The existence of the IBVD is not conﬁned to a rat but
probably to all vertebrates including humans. For this

2

FIG. 2: Two parts of an intra blood vessel ducts cross at
the lower left corner inside a water drop with sharp curved
boundaries. The IBVD is torn to two pieces at a point ( not
seen) which bend to cross each other. The sample is treated
with urokinase to remove blood clots. Tubular substructures
are seen inside the two ducts. Scale bar 50µm.

FIG. 3: A sample of the IBVD with blood coagulated is ap-
plied with electric ﬁeld (25V, across 5mm) by two sharp elec-
trodes. The sample is disintegrated slowly, and the scattered
tubules appeared after washing with water. Scale bar 50µm.

we examined four rabbits observing similar IBVDs in-
side the pulmonary artery, the inferior vena cava, the
iliac vein, and even inside the heart (the right atrium).
We consider that threads of tubules inside blood vessels
are remarkable enough to get wide attention.

Some basic properties of the IBVD are immediately
seen. They are soft, elastic, and semi-transparent, their
diameters are varying about 50m, and up to 3cm long we
were able to take a sample. The IBVDs looked thick due
to the coagulated blood clots around them, which is, in
fact, the reason we could see them as in Fig.1. One vial
of ﬁbrinolytic agent urokinase 100,000 I.U. is dissolved
in 100ml saline, which is used to dissolve the blood clot
at about 37‰ for two or three hours. After urokinase
treatment the IBVD is observed to be embedded inside
a string of ﬁbrins which were precipitated around the
’seed’ of the thin IBVD. The IBVD is stained well by
methylene blue (0.02%) .The threadlike IBVDs are com-
posed of smaller tubules like a bundle of multiple tubes
bound by ﬁbers. Fig.2 shows a good sample of the IBVD
after urokinase treated where two threads of an IBVD
cross at the lower left corner inside a water-drop with
sharp curved boundaries. The IBVD is torn to two pieces
which bend to cross each other in this specimen. Tubular
substructures are visible inside of the two threads.

It is easy to mistake a string of coagulated ﬁbrins
for the IBVD when taking the samples. However, the
ﬁbrin-string does not have tubular substructure. Another
method of revealing the substructure is to use electri-
cal separation technique. Fig.3 shows scattered tubules
on a slide where an electric ﬁeld (25 V) is applied by
two sharp electrodes (two 23 gauge syringe needles, 5mm
apart) for few minutes on the sample in a drop of saline
water (0.9%). By repeating the process of applying elec-
tric ﬁeld and water washing one gets the clotted tissue

disintegrated to leave the separated tubules. We do not
understand the separation mechanism yet.

It is diﬃcult to ﬁnd the IBVDs in ordinary surgical op-
erations because they are too thin, semi-transparent and
feeble, and shrivel once cut . In the case it is thick due to
blood coagulation around it no one would have tried to
remove the blood to expose the thin thread. After many
failures, we observed the ﬁrst sample only in the por-
tal vein of a rat , thereafter we examined one rat per day
with increasing number of IBVDs observed inside various
vessels, and there were some cases even outside of blood
vessels. Our search for the IBVD is motivated by the
long forgotten theory in early 1960’s by Bong Han Kim[?
] who claimed that not only the IBVD but also a host
of similar ducts forms a circulatory network throughout
the body whose anatomical and physiological signiﬁcance
are profound and epoch-making as explained in his book
in English.[? ] His theory has not been conﬁrmed by
others despite intense search in 1960’s , and the reason
for the lack of reproducibility is that he did not disclose
the method based upon staining of which no one has
yet found the formula and technique. Without such a
method it is extremely diﬃcult to search the Bong Han
ducts.

It is our contribution to establish a relatively simple
procedure to locate the ducts inside the blood vessels
of rats and rabbits, and to observe their substructure
of tubules. Novel it may be to ﬁnd the threadlike duct
inside blood vessels, its detail components, physiological
functions and the whole network and medical application
are far more surprising according to Bong Han theory[?
? ] which calls for attention from researchers in various
ﬁelds.

Methods

We obtained rats (Sprague Dawley, 20 weeks old,
∼900g) and rabbits(New Zealand White, ∼2000g) from
the Laboratory Animal Center of Seoul National Uni-
versity with permission Animal Care and Use Commit
for searching a circulatory system expected from Tra-
ditional Korean Medicine. At 25th minute after a rat is
anesthetized an intravenous injection of 10% dextrose so-
lution is done at the left vena femoralis. At 55th minute
about 35ml is injected, and the jugular vein is cut to
bleed by itself. At 80th minute the dextrose injection is
stopped and the frontal side of the rat is incised. Stom-
ach, intestine, abdominal fat, ribs, and side muscles and
ﬂesh are removed such that blood systems are exposed
for easy operation. At 130th minute searching of the IB-
VDs begins from the inferior vena cava and lasts more
than two hours taking samples to be examined. The time
may vary depending upon the subject animal and the op-
erator’s skill.

We do not know the role and mechanism of dextrose
solution that happened to be injected for other purpose.
But somehow it seems to help the IBVD to be more no-
ticeable, stronger to be pulled out long, and less blood is
clotted around.

A variation is to omit the injection of the dextrose
water, in which case more blood is clotted around the
IBVD and it is less tenacious than in the ﬁrst method. In
the third variation where we omitted both the dextrose
injection and the bleeding in jugular vein the IBVD is
weakest, easily broken, and more blood is clotted around
than the ﬁrst. Furthermore due to much blood in the
vessels it is hard to search the IBVDs. Thus it would

3

be hard to ﬁnd the IBVD without the help of dextrose
injection.

The IBVDs are usually found inside ﬁbrin-strings
which are formed with blood coagulated around them,
and can be somewhat cleaned up during sampling by
heparin saline water(100,000units heparin 25mg, saline
50ml). The searching process was ﬁrst done with a stereo-
scopic microscope, but it could be done without it once
experienced with few cases. The raw sample is treated
with urokinase (100,000units urokinase 1vial at 100ml
saline water) to expose the IBVD, or electric ﬁeld is ap-
plied to separate tubules.

Acknowledgments

Soh(SNU) is indebted to Professor Marco Bischof
for the second reference, and for helps to Drs.Do-
Hyun Kim(M.D.), Dae-Hun Park(V.M.D.), Jong-Han
Lee(O.M.D.), and Chung-Hyun Lee(V.M.D.).

This work is supported in part by BK21 Korea Re-
search Foundation, Korea Science and Engineering Foun-
dation, Ministry of Industry and Resources, NongHyup
SNU branch, and Samsung Advanced Institute of Tech-
nology.

Jiang and Kim contributed equally by performing
surgery under direction of Soh(SNU) who conducted this
work with the research plan made with Shin. Shin found
the electrical technique to separate the IBVD ductules.
Lee developed the urokinase technique.

