2
0
0
2
 
v
o
N
 
9
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
d
e
m

.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
6
8
0
1
1
2
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Method for Observing Intravascular BongHan Duct

Xiaowen Jiang,∗ Byung-Cheon Lee, Chunho Choi, Ku-Youn Baik, and Kwang-Sup Soh†
Biomedical Physics Lab., School of Physics, Seoul National University, Seoul, 151-747, Korea

Hee-Kyeong Kim
School of Chemical Engineering, Seoul National University

Hak-Soo Shin
Department of Physics Education, Seoul National University

Kyung-Soon Soh
College of Oriental Medicine, Sae Myong University, Chungbook Korea

Byeung-Soo Cheun
School of Biochemistry, Inha University, Inchon, Korea
(Dated: February 21, 2014)

A method for observing intra blood vessel ducts which are threadlike bundle of tubules which
form a part of the BongHan duct system. By injecting 10% dextrose solution at a vena femoralis
one makes the intravascular BongHan duct thicker and stronger to be easily detectable after incision
of vessels. The duct is semi-transparent, soft and elastic, and composed of smaller tubules whose
diameters are of 10µm order, which is in agreement with BongHan theory.

I. NTRODUCTION

Recently observation of hidden anatomical structures
of threadlike ducts inside blood vessels was reported.[? ]
These threads of tubular bundles are intravascular Bong-
Han ducts.

According to the BongHan theory [? ? ] there is a cir-
culatory system that is completely diﬀerent from blood
systems, lymphatic systems, and nervous systems. The
system is composed of BongHan ducts of which acupunc-
ture meridian system of Traditional Korean Medicine is
a subsystem. In addition to the meridians there is a host
of network of BongHan ducts in which BongHan liquid
ﬂows, and the liquid is quite distinct from blood, or other
known ﬂuids inside animals or humans.

The BongHan theory claimed that some parts of Bong-
Han ducts run inside arteries and veins as threadlike bun-
dles of tubules ﬂoating in the ﬂow of blood. However,
no one has conﬁrmed it despite intensive search for it in
1960s, and thus the theory itself has been disregarded for
almost forty years. The main reason for not reproduc-
ing BongHan’s results is that the staining material and
method, the key technique in BongHan theory, were not
disclosed.

In this paper we present a completely new method
which is distinctively diﬀerent from BongHan’s staining
approach. Our method is a relatively simple procedure to
disclose intra blood vessel ducts (IBVD) which form part

∗A permanent address: Dept. of Veterinary, College of Agriculture,
Yanbian University, Jilin, China
†Correspondence:
kssoh@kmc.snu.ac.kr; URL: http://kmc.snu.ac.kr/~kssoh

Kwang-Sup

Electronic

address:

Soh;

of the net of BongHan ducts. We have not yet developed
to search other ducts such as inside lymph vessels and
nerves, and under the skin. Nevertheless our new ﬁnding
is easily reproducible by others, and will usher to further
studies of the BongHan duct system such as histological,
chemical, and physiological analysis.

II. METHODS

Our principal contribution is the discovery of the new
method to reveal and take samples of BongHan ducts
inside arteries and veins. These IBVDs were found in
various large blood vessels of rats and rabbits. We ex-
amined successfully ten rats (Sprague Dawley, 900g) and
four rabbits (New Zealand White, 2000g) which were
obtained from the Laboratory Animal Center of Seoul
National University with ACUC permission for studying
acupuncture meridian systems. The following is a rep-
resentative example of surgery operation with a rat, and
the time varies depending upon the subject animal and
the details of operation. The procedure for rabbits is
similar.

An intravenous injection of 10% dextrose solution at
the left vena femoralis is started after anesthetization.
At 30th minute about 35ml dextrose is injected, and the
jugular vein is cut to bleed by itself. At 55th minute
the frontal side of the rat is incised, and internal organs,
ﬂesh, and side muscles are removed so that blood systems
are exposed for operational ease. Around this time the
dextrose injection is stopped. At 105th minute after be-
ginning of the dextrose injection the search of the IBVD
starts from the inferior vena cava and lasts more than
two hours taking samples from various blood vessels.

2

FIG. 2: Bifurcation of a BongHan duct

FIG. 1: An intravascular duct in an inferior vena cava

We do not understand the mechanism of the 10% dex-
trose solution which seems to help the IBVD to become
thicker, and stronger so that it is easily noticeable and
to be stretched out long. Without the dextrose solution
the IBVD is too thin and weak to be seen.

The IBVD is buried inside a string of ﬁbrins with blood
coagulated around it, and becomes thick, which is the
reason we can ﬁnd it inside the opened vessel. The blood
clot is dissolved by urokinase treatment. One vial of ﬁbri-
nolytic agent urokinase 100,000 I.U. is dissolved in 100ml
saline water. The IBVD with blood clot is immersed into
the urokinase solution at about 37‰ for two or three
hours to obtain the IBVD inside the ﬁbrin string.

III. RESULTS

Basic properties of the IBVD are in agreement with
BongHan theory.[? ? ] They are soft, elastic, and
semi-transparent. Their diameters are about 50µm. The
IBVD has many smaller tubules like a bundle bound with
ﬁber. The small tubule is about 10µm in diameter, and
is stained well with methylene blue (0.02%)

An example of IBVD coagulated with ﬁbrin inside the
incised inferior vena cava is shown in Fig.1 The IBVD
starts from above the tip of the syringe needle. (gauge
23, 5ml/cc), and is parallel with the needle

Fig.2 shows that an IBVD bifurcates to two IBVDs
where the inferior vena cava branches to the left and right
iliac veins. This branching is in complete agreement with
BongHan theory.

Entangled BongHan tubules which was found inside
atrium is shown in Fig.3. BongHan theory also claims
that there are multiple of IBVDs inside a heart.

We observed an IBVD inside the abdominal aorta that
is hold by several two-threads stretched out to the vessel
wall like a ladder. The distances between the rungs are
about 1.5cm. Those side threads might be smaller IBVDs

FIG. 3: Entangled BongHan ducts inside atrium

or simply attaching ﬁbers which requires further studies.

IV. DISCUSSION

It is an immediate question that why the IBVD is not
found in surgeries which have been done millions of times.
The main reason is that the IBVD itself is too thin, semi-
transparent, and weak to be detected or captured unless
special care is taken. In an ordinary surgery a divided
IBVD shrivels and is enshrouded with blood clots which
can not be restored unless treated by urokinase or similar
material.

Our method is to inject 10% dextrose solution which
makes the IBVD thicker and stronger by ﬁbrins of coag-
ulated blood around it. The IBVD may be a ’seed’ for
ﬁbrins to gather around it, and dextrose may enhance
this eﬀect. It requires further studies to ﬁnd the mecha-
nism of this phenomenon. Another eﬀect of the dextrose
solution is to dilute blood inside the vessel so that the
blood clotted IBVD is more noticeable because the di-
luted blood becomes almost transparent. Without such

3

diluted blood the IBVD can not be seen easily.

disconnected.

It is possible to mistake a string of coagulated ﬁbrins
for the IBVD when taking samples. The ﬁbrin-string
does not have tubular substructures. Furthermore it is
very improbable that the ﬁbrin-string without the ’seed’
of the IBVD branches to two pieces at the same anatom-
ical positions for all the rats.

The limitation of our method is that it applies to the
BongHan ducts only inside blood vessels. Nevertheless,
this conﬁrmation of BongHan theory is the ﬁrst one ever
achieved, and will open vast areas of work for biological
and medical research, and Traditional Korean Medicine.
Taking just one example, we might wonder what is the
eﬀect of surgery when BongHan ducts are left cut and

Acknowledgments

Soh(SNU) thanks Professor Marco Bischof for the ref-
erence 3, and is indebted to M.D. Do-Hyun Kim, V.M.D.s
Dae-Hun Park and Chung-Hyun Lee, and O.M.D. Jong-
Han Lee.

This work is supported in part by BK21 KRF, KOSEF,
and Ministry of Industry and Resources, NongHyup SNU
branch, and Samsung Advanced Institute of Technology.

