2
0
0
2
 
c
e
D
 
6
 
 
]
h
p
-
d
e
m

.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
9
2
0
2
1
2
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Changes in the Hurst exponent of heartbeat
intervals during physical activities

M. Martinis1, A. Kneˇzevi´c1, G. Krstaˇci´c2 and E. Vargovi´c3
1Rudjer Boˇskovi´c Institute, Zagreb, Croatia
2Institute for Cardiovascular Disease and Rehabilitation, Zagreb, Croatia
3CDV info, Zagreb, Croatia

The fractal scaling properties of the heartbeat time series are studied in a con-
trolled ergometric regime using the Hurst rescaled range R/S analysis. The long-time
”memory eﬀect” quantiﬁed by the value of the Hurst exponent H > 0.5 is found to
increase during progresive physical activity at healthy subjects in contrast to those
having stable angina pectoris (SAP), where it is decreasing. We argue that this
ﬁnding may be used as a useful new diagnostic parameter for short heartbeat time
series.

The output of many physiological systems, such as the normal human heart-
beat time series, are extremely inhomogeneous and nonstationary. They ﬂuc-
tuate in an irregular and complex manner, even under resting conditions. The
presence of scaling properties suggest that the regulatory systems are operat-
ing far from equilibrium and application of fractal analysis may provide a new
approach to recognize deseased states by studying changes in the scaling prop-
erties. It has been observed that fractal scaling is degraded in some deseased
states [1, 2, 3].

The heart rate variability (HRV) under controlled physical activity is not
well studied [4, 5]. The time series of heartbeat intervals (RR intervals), used
in various analyses, are usually holter type data or data from steady state mea-
surement. The conventional statistical analysis of the ambulatory ECG (Holter)
records is, however, limited. The great wealth of data about the dynamics of the
heart that is contained in such records is usually reduced to characterize only
the mean heart rate and the presence and frequency of some abnormal elec-
trocardiographic complexes. The analysis of long-time correlations is largely
ignored. One possible reason for this is that in the study of twenty four hour
HRV, in a natural setting, the subjects are constantly changing their level of
physical activity. These changes are unpredictable and the comparison of such
time series are diﬃcult. However, some heart deseases, such as stable angina
pectoris (SAP), are clearly visible only under physical activity. That has given

1

Figure 1: RR intervals of a healthy (top) and a SAP (bottom) subject in one
of our ergometric measurements.

us a reason for investigating the scaling properties of heartbeat intervals in a
various well deﬁned ergometric regimes.

Fluctuations in RR intervals during one of our ergometric measurements are
shown in Fig.1. Both time series look very similar and we canot say, without
knowing, which one is from a healthy and which one is from a SAP individual.
Diﬀerent self-similar time series can be clasiﬁed into random or non-random
series by estimating their Hurst exponent [6]. In order to determine the long-
time dependencies in time series of RR intervals during controlled physical ac-
tivity, we apply the rescaled range (R/S) method [7], to estimate the Hurst
exponent.
In fact, we are interested in the capability of the R/S method to
distinguish the patients with SAP from the healthy subjects. For a heartbeat

2

time series data of length N { u(n) , n = 1, . . . , N }, where u(n) ≡ RR(n) =
t(Rn+1) − t(Rn) is the nth RR interval deﬁned as a diﬀerence in time position
for R-wave peaks, we calculate the running means u(n) for a given n and the
accumulated deviations from the mean X(l,n), l=1,...,n:

The range R(n) is the distance between the minimum and the maximum value
of X, and is rescaled by dividing it by the standard deviation S(n):

u(n) =

u(k),

1
n

n

X
k=1

X(l, n) =

[u(k) − u(n)].

l

X
k=1

R(n) = maxlX(l, n) − minlX(l, n),

S(n) = v
u
u
t

1
n

n

X
k=1

(u(k) − u(n))2.

The rescaled range (R/S) is a dimensionless quantity and for large n it is ex-
pected to show a power law dependence:

where H is the Hurst exponent. If the time series is long enough, the relationship
between the fractal dimension D and the Hurst exponent (H) is

The time series of RR intervals can be divided into three distinct categories:
H<0.5, H=0.5 and H>0.5. The case H=0.5 correspond to random or uncorre-
lated RR intervals. If H > 0.5, the RR intervals are persistent and characterized
by long-time correlations or ”memory’ eﬀects on all time scales. The strength
of the persistence increases as H approaches 1.0. The impact of the present on
the future can be estimated through the correlation function (C)

Most of natural phenomena show persistent behavior with H∼ 0.7 [7, 8]. The
time series with H < 0.5 is antipersistent, which means that RR intervals are
negatively correlated.

R(n)/S(n) ∼ nH,

D = 2 − H.

C = 2(2H−1) − 1.

3

Program Belt angle (◦) Belt velocity (km/h)

P1
P2
P3
P4
P5

10
12
14
16
18

2.7
4
5.5
6.9
8

Table 1: Deﬁned regimes in ergometric measurement: Brouce protocol.

The time series of RR intervals in our controled ergometric measurement
(Fig.2) had a time duration of about 15 min. (≃ 2000 beats). This type of
measurement is used as a routine in everyday clinical diagnostic procedure,
because some heart deseases, such as SAP, usually become transparent under
physical activities.

The ECG ergometric data were digitized at sampling time of 1 ms by the
WaveBook 512 (Iotech. Cal. USA), and transferred to a computer for further
analysis. The RR interval series was passed through a ﬁlter that eliminates
noise and artefacts. All R-wave peaks were ﬁrst edited automatically, after
which a careful manual editing was performed by visual inspection of the each
RR interval. After this, all questionable portions were excluded manually, and
only segments with > 90% sinus beats were included in the ﬁnal analysis. The
location of the R-wave peaks was determined with a resolution of 1 ms.

Each measurement consists of stationary state part (pretriger Pt), few stages
of running (P1-P4) on an inclined belt and a period of relaxation (Re). Diﬀerent
regimes of physical activity are deﬁned according to the standard Bruce protocol
(Table 1), with a time duration of 3 min for each program. The pretriger part
has a variable duration and is limited for analysis to the ﬁrst 30 sec in each
measurement. The relaxation period is restricted to 6 min.

The R/S analysis was performed on four separated regimes: stationary state
Pt, running programs P1, P2 and relaxation Re. Patients were divided in two
groups: one with the evidence of ishemic ST-segment depression of more than
1 mV (SAP subjects), and the control group of healthy subjects. Selection of
subjects was performed by a cardiologist according to the generally accepted
medical knowledge. Before starting with the R/S calculation, we performed a
polynomial regresion (trendline) ﬁt on the original RR interval data, in order
to compensate for the global nonstationarity in the data caused by the physical

4

Figure 2: RR intervals in an ergometric measurement. The global nonstation-
arity as result of physical activity is clearly seen. Pt correspond to stationary
state measurement, P1-P4 to running stages on a belt with increasing intensity,
and Re to a relaxation period after stopping the moving belt.

5

Figure 3: (a)Typical shape of HRV in the ergometric measurement, (b) RR
intervals in Program 1 with 3rd degree polynomial regresion trendline, (c) de-
viations from the polynomial trendline, (d) R/S results for deviation signal in
comparison with random data result (H=0.5).

activity. The R/S calculation was performed on the deviation of the original RR
intervals from the trendline. The main steps are shown in Fig.3 for P1 regime.
The procedure adopted here is to calculate R/S for a box of n elements, starting
with the ﬁrst two elements. In each next step one more element is added, and
R/S is calculated for the wider box. The process is continued until the box of
length N (the whole data set) is reached. The Hurst exponent H is evaluted as
a slope of the least-square ﬁt line on log(R/S) vs. log(n) plot. In this way, we
preserve the ordering of RR intervals during calculation.

The average Hurst exponent H in four analysed regimes, with corresponding
It

statistical error bars are shown in Fig.4, for healthy and SAP subjects.

6

includes 14 independent measurements on 7 healthy + 7 SAP subjects.

The Hurst exponent H exceeds 0.5 in all cases and ranges from 0.6–0.9 de-
pending on the regime type. For RR intervals in the Pt regime, H for both
healthy and SAP subjects is about 0.7 and we cannot distinguish them. The
situation is diﬀerent in regimes under physical activity. The diﬀerence between
healthy/SAP subjects is clearly seen in the P1–P2 program of controlled run-
ning, in our analysis. The Hurst exponent for healthy subjects increases with
increased running intensity, while H for SAP subjects decreases in the same
(P1–P2) regimes. Our time series are too short for reliable connection of the
scaling exponent with the fractal dimension. However, if the scaling exponent
reveals the complexity of the underlying pattern, we may say that the complex-
ity of the RR pattern in running is decreased in the healthy heart, but increased
in the sick heart. The conclusion is opposite from what it would be expected in
a stationary state measurement [3]. It could be connected with the heart reac-
tion on well deﬁned excitation. The healthy heart restricts ﬂexibility according
to restrict outside condition: well deﬁned excitation – well deﬁned reaction.
The sick heart, under well deﬁned excitation, probably produces ”mess” in the
reaction, and a more complex pattern of ﬂuctuation.

In the relaxation part, which is a recovery period after running, the Hurst
exponents for healthy and SAP subjects are moving towards each other and to
the values found in the Pretrigger state (Pt).

These preliminary results of the R/S analysis show a clear separation in the
value of the Hurst exponent under controlled physical activity. Further studies
If the found trend
in larger populations are needed to conﬁrm this result.
would continue on larger statistics, the Hurst R/S method could be useful in
separating SAP subjects from healthy ones, especially in borderline cases where
clinical diagnosis cannot be set from ECG measurement only.

In conclusion, we have shown that ﬂuctuations in heartbeat time series in
a controlled ergometric regimes exibit fractal properties when analysed by a
rescaled range method (Fig.4). The rescaled range (R/S) for ergometric mea-
surements is very well described by the Hurst empirical law R/S ∼ nH , for
2 ≤ n ≤ 400, where the Hurst exponent H > 0.5 increases for healthy sub-
jects, in contrast to SAP subjects where it is found to be decreasing, during
progressive physical activity.

References

7

Figure 4: Average Hurst exponents with corresponding 1σ error bars for diﬀer-
ent regimes of ergometric measurement; Pretrigger (Pt), Program 1 (P1), Pro-
gram 2 (P2) and Relaxation (Re). Dots are for healthy subjects, and squares
are for SAP subjects.

8

[1] C. K. Peng, S. Havlin, H. E. Stanley, and A. L. Goldberger, Chaos 5, 82

[2] P. Ch. Ivanov, L. A. N. Amaral, A. L. Goldberger, S. Havlin, M. G. Rosen-

blum, Z. R. Struzik, and H. E. Stanley, Nature 399, 461 (1999).

[3] C. L. Bolis and J. Licinio, eds.: The autonomic Nervous System, World

Health Organization, Geneva, 1999.

[4] Y. Yamamoto, Y. Hoshikawa, and M. Miyashita, J. App. Phys. 81, 1223

(1995).

(1996).

[5] P. B. De Petillo, d’Armand Speers, and U. E. Ruttimann, Comp. in Biology

and Medicine 20, 393 (1999).

[6] H. E. Hurst, Trans. Am. Soc. Civ. Eng. 116, 770 (1951).

[7] J. Feder: Fractals, Plenum Press, NY, 1988, pp. 149-183.

[8] P. Barat, N. K. Das, D. Ghose, and B. Sinha, Physica A 262, 9 (1999);

B. Hoop, H. Kazemi, and L. Liebovitch, Chaos 3, 1, 27 (1993).

9

