3
0
0
2
 
n
a
J
 
8
 
 
]
h
p
-
d
e
m

.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
1
1
0
1
0
3
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Spectral Statistics of RR Intervals in ECG

Mladen MARTINIS, Vesna MIKUTA-MARTINIS, Andrea KNEˇZEVI ´C, and
Josip ˇCRNUGELJ

Division of Theoretical Physics
Rudjer Boˇskovi´c Institute, Zagreb, Croatia

The statistical properties (ﬂuctuations) of heartbeat intervals (RR intervals) in
ECG are studied and compared with the predictions of Random Matrix Theory
(RMT). It is found that heartbeat intervals only locally exhibit the ﬂuctuation pat-
terns (universality) predicted by the RMT. This ﬁnding shows that heartbeat dy-
namics is of the mixed type where regular and irregular (chaotic) regimes coexist and
the Berry-Robnik theory can be applied. It is also observed that the distribution of
heartbeat intervals is well described by the one-parameter Brody distribution. The
parameter β of the Brody distribution is seen to be connected with the dynamical
state of the heart.

1

Introduction

The time series of heartbeat intervals (RR intervals), used in various analy-
ses, are usually Holter type data or data from steady state ambulatory mea-
surements. The great wealth of data about the dynamics of the heart that
is contained in such ECG records is usually reduced to characterize only the
mean heart rate and the presence and frequency of some abnormal electrocar-
diographic complexes. The analysis of short-range and long-range ﬂuctuations
and its universality are largely ignored.1) The normal human heartbeats display
considerable variability and nonstationarity over time. The result is that ﬂuctu-
ations of heartbeat intervals around the mean value are irregular and complex,
even under resting conditions, Fig. 1. A number of new methods have been
proposed to quantify these complex ﬂuctuations, mainly based on the nonlinear
and fractal analysis. 2),3),4),5)

In this paper we examine the possibility that the distribution of heartbeat

intervals exhibits universality of the type predicted by the RMT. 6)

1

2 Statistical analysis of heartbeat intervals

The heartbeat time series of an human represents an ordered sequence of R-
waves (QRS-complexes) occuring at times {t1, t2, · · · , ti, · · ·}. In this form the
heartbeat dynamics can be regarded as a fractal stochastic point process on a
time-line. The point process is completely described by the set {ti}, or equiva-
lently by the set of RR-intervals deﬁned as {RR(i) = ti+1 − ti,

i = 1, 2, · · ·}.

To see the universality in beat-to-beat RR interval ﬂuctuations we need to
magnify the heartbeat spectrum {ti} so that mean spacing is unity. Let us ﬁrst
determine the number of heartbeats up to time t. It is given by the staircase
function N(t):

N(t) =

θ(t − ti)

Xi

where θ(t) is the step function.

In order to be able to compare statistical properties of heartbeat spectra,
in particular the ﬂuctuations around the mean value, with the predictions of
the RMT it is necesary to normalize (unfolde) the time spectrum {ti} to {τi}
in such a way that the mean spacing between neighbouring τi is unity. This is
achieved by the mapping

τi = ¯N(ti), Si = τi+1 − τi

where ¯N (t) denotes the smoothed staircase which account for the mean trend
in N(t) and Si is the normalized heartbeat spacing. The ”local” mean spacing
is deﬁned as ∆(t) = [d ¯N (t)/dt]−1 so that Si becomes

During the real time measurements, we always deal with the ﬁnite number of
heartbeats, say n. In that case, we deﬁne the ”global” mean spacing as

Si =

ti+1 − ti
∆[(ti+1 + ti)/2]

.

∆ =

RR(i) =

1
n − 1

n−1

Xi=1

tn − t1
n − 1

so that Si = RR(i)/∆.

There are two important statistical measures that we shall use to charac-
terize the heartbeat spectra {τi}. One is the nearest-neighbor heartbeat spac-
ing distribution P (S)dS which gives the probability to ﬁnd τi in the interval

2

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(S, S + dS). P (S) is a short range statistics, it measures the short range corre-
lations between heartbeats. Its behaviour for small spacing, S → 0,

P (S) ≈ const × Sβ

(5)

determines the type of short range correlations between heartbeat intervals.
Two cases can be distinguished: a) when β = 0 meaning that the short range
ﬂuctuations of {Si} are just those of uncorrelated random numbers, i.e. Pois-
sonian with a well-known phenomenom of attraction (clustering), and b) when
β 6= 0 meaning that the long range fractal ﬂuctuations are present in the se-
quence of Si that is characterized by the phenomenom of repulsion. The uni-
versal statistics (no free parameters) predicted by the RMT 6) are given by

Sexp(−

PGOE(S) =

S2), β = 1,

PP oisson(S) = exp(−S), β = 0,
π
π
2
4
32
π2 S2exp(−
The GOE (Gaussian orthogonal ensemble) distribution, known as a Wigner
distribution, should be valid for irregular (chaotic) systems with an antiunitary
symmetry, whereas GUE (Gaussian Unitarian Ensemble) should apply if the
system has no such symmetry.

S2), β = 2,

PGU E(S) =

4
π

(6)

To avoid the smoothing procedure on a measured data, it is easier and less

ambiguous to study the inegrated or the cumulative RR intervals

I(S) =

P (S)dS

S

Z
0

which yields a useful statistics even for small sample of RR intervals. This gives

IP oisson(S) = 1 − exp(−S), IW igner(S) = 1 − exp(−

π
4

S2),

and a nonanalytical expression for IGU E(S).

Another important statistics, not considered here, is the spectral rigidity
∆3 of Dyson and Metha 7) which characterizes the long-range correlations of
heartbeats. It can be related to the Hurst exponent 8),9) associated with the
heartbeat time series.

(7)

(8)

3

Figure 1: Time series of RR intervals as a function of beat number from a
person during an ergometric measurement.

3 Results and discussion

Time series of RR intervals were measured at the Institute for Cardiovascular
Disease and Rehabilitation in Zagreb. Each masurement of ECG was over a
time duration of about 15 min. (≃ 2000 heartbeats), in a controlled ergometric
regime. These type of measurements are used as routine in everyday clinical
diagnostic practice, because some heart deseases, such as stable angine pectoris
(SAP), usually become transparent under physical activities.

The ECG data were digitized by the WaveBook 512 (Iotech. Cal. USA),
and transferred to a computer. The RR interval series was passed through a
ﬁlter that eliminates noise and artefacts. All R-wave peaks were ﬁrst edited
automatically, after which a careful manual editing was performed by visual
inspection of the each RR interval. After this, all questionable portions were
excluded manually, and only segments with > 90% sinus beats were included in
the ﬁnal analysis.

Each measurement consisted of stationary state part (pretrigger Pt), a few
stages of running (P1-P4) and a period of relaxation (Re), Fig. 1. Here we
report on the universality analysis of RR interval ﬂuctuations in the pretrigger

4

10) Our patients were divided in two groups: one with
and P1 period only.
the evidence of ishemic ST-segment depression (SAP subjects), and the control
group of healthy subjects. Selection of subjects was performed by a cardiologist
according to the generally accepted medical knowledge.

The integrated RR interval distributions I(S) are shown in Fig.2 together
with IW (S). Clearly the universal, parameter free, distributions PP oisson, PW
and PGU E of RMT are excluded. A possible reason for this is that heart is a
very complex system of nonlinearly coupled biological oscillators whose motion
is partly regular and partly irregular (chaotic) or mixed . Another possibility
is that universality is only local.10)

The ﬁrst theoretical step towards the understanding of the regular-irregular
coexistence in a dynamical system was the work by Berry and Robnik 11) in
which they oﬀered a semiclassical model for P (S) known as the Berry-Robnik
formulae. It is to be applied at large intervals S > 1. At small and intermediate
intervals S < 1 the Brody distribution 12)

PB(S) = aSβexp(−bSβ+1), a = (β + 1)b, b = {Γ(

β + 2
β + 1

)}β+1

(9)

gives better ﬁtting results. The Brody distribution becomes Poisson at β = 0
and Wigner for β = 1.

Figure 3 shows that the Brody distribution ﬁts very well the ECG measured
distribution of RR intervals. Each subject has its own value of β which might
be an indicator of a dynamical state of the heart. Indeed, Fig. 4 clearly shows
that β could be a useful parameter for separating SAP subjects from healthy
ones.

4 Conclusion

In this paper we have investigated the possibility that ﬂuctuations of RR inter-
vals exhibit universal statistical laws. It is found, Fig. 2, that this is not so.
Heart is a complex nonlinear system with many coexisting regular and irreg-
ular motions which manifest themselves through the nonuniversal ﬂuctuations
of RR intervals. It is also found, Fig. 3 and 4, that the one-parameter Brody
distribution could be used successfuly to describe the ﬂuctuation pattern of
RR intervals. The parameter β of the Brody distribution is seen, Fig. 4,to be
connected with the dynamical state of the heart.

Further studies in larger populations are needed to conﬁrm these interesting

results.

5

Figure 2: Integrated RR interval distributions I(S), in P1 period, in comparison
with Wigner distribution.

6

Figure 3: RR interval distributions, in Pt period, from three diﬀerent per-
[S = (RR −
sons in comparison with the one parameter Brody distribution.
RRmin)/RR]

7

Figure 4: Brody parameter β as a function of a healthy state of the heart.

8

Acknowledgements

This work was supported by the Ministry of Science and Technology of the
Republic of Croatia.

References

[1] R. J. Gibbons et al., J. Am. Coll. Cardiol. 33 (1999), 2092.

[2] L. Glass, J. Cardiovasc, Electrophysiol. 10 (1999), 1358.

[3] A. L. Goldberger, Lancet 347 (1996), 1312.

[4] C. K. Peng, S. Havlin, H. E. Stanley, and A. L. Goldberger, Chaos 5 (1995),

82.

[5] P. Ch. Ivanov, L. A. N. Amaral, A. L. Goldberger, S. Havlin, M. G. Rosen-

blum, Z. R. Struzik, and H. E. Stanley, Nature 399 (1999), 461.

[6] M. L. Metha, Random Matrices (Academic Press, San Diego 1991).

[7] F. J. Dayson and M. L. Metha, J. Math. Phys. 4 (1963) 701.

[8] J. Feder, Fractals (Plenum Press, NY, 1988).

[9] M. Martinis, A. Kneˇzevi´c, G. Krstaˇci´c, and E. Vargovi´c, submitted to

Phys. Rev. Lett.

[10] Programs P 1 − P 4 include controled physical activity on the moving belt.
Interesting transitory phenomenae between Poisson and Wigner type dis-
tributions are observed. Detailed analysis will be reported elsewhere.

[11] M. V. Berry and M. Robnik, J. Phys. A: Math. Gen. 17 (1984), 2413.

[12] T. A. Brody, Lett. Nuovo Cimento, 7 (1973), 482.

9

