3
0
0
2
 
b
e
F
 
7
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
d
e
m

.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
7
9
0
2
0
3
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Electron capture decay of
indium-111 human carbonic anhydrase I:
A time diﬀerential K X ray coincidence
perturbed angular correlation study

Christopher Haydock∗
Research Computing Facility
Mayo Foundation, Rochester, MN, USA

The relaxation eﬀects in the perturbed angular correlation spectra of 111In human carbonic an-
hydrase I (HCA I) are the result of chemical transmutation and/or the complex Auger cascades
that follow the electron capture decay of 111In. Time diﬀerential K X ray coincidence perturbed
angular correlation (PAC) spectroscopy shows that these relaxation eﬀects are independent of the
Auger cascade intensity. This suggests that chemical transmutation is responsible for the relaxation
eﬀects, and that bond breaking and damage product formation around the decay site resulting from
localized energy deposition by Auger and Coster-Kronig electrons probably occur in the microsec-
ond time regime. Numerical simulations of chemical transmutation relaxation eﬀects in the time
diﬀerential PAC spectrum of 111In HCA I are also presented.

Introduction

Perturbed angular correlation spectroscopy (PAC) is
a potential technique for investigating hot atom chem-
istry following electron capture decay of a radionuclide
probe [1, 2]. As is the case with M¨ossbauer emission
spectroscopy, it may be possible to identify the chemi-
cal form of the probe nuclide coordination complex dur-
ing the nuclear lifetime [3, 4]. The average Auger and
Coster-Kronig electron yield is signiﬁcantly diminished
when the vacancy cascade following electron capture in-
cludes the emission of a K X ray as compared to when
it does not. It is in principle possible to study the de-
pendence of hot atom chemistry on the intensity of Auger
and Coster-Kronig emissions by detecting the nuclear ra-
diations of perturbed angular correlation or M¨ossbauer
emission spectroscopy in coincidence with K shell X
rays [5, 6]. Given the very limited knowledge of hot atom
chemistry of electron capture nuclides that are possible
perturbed angular correlation probes, one may ask only
a yes or no question. Does or does not the hot atom
chemistry depend electron emission intensity? To answer
this, a chemical transmutation model and a dose depen-
dent damage model are constructed for the perturbed
angular correlation spectra following electron capture.
Both models encompass several alternative pictures of
the hot atom chemistry. The simplest hot atom chem-
istry of the chemical transmutation model is very sim-
ilar to β+ decay on the nanosecond time scale. Note
that β+ decay is energetically forbidden for 111In. The
multiple Auger ionization processes are followed by com-
plete electron recombination that leaves the daughter nu-
clide in a metastable state with both the atomic number
and valence decreased by one unit from the parent. The
metastable state is the result of the change in charge
rather that charge neutralization or Auger electron irra-
diation. The metastable state of the daughter nuclide

decays within tens of nanoseconds to the ground state
coordination complex of the daughter and ligands. How-
ever, any hot atom chemistry involving an excited state of
the daughter that decays thereafter into the ground state
complex is equally consistent with the chemical transmu-
tation model. The only requirement is that the excited
state be independent of Auger emission intensity. The
dose dependent damage model pictures radiolytic frag-
mentation of probe coordination complex ligands. The
amplitudes and rates of ligand ﬂuctuations increase with
the intensity of the Auger emissions. Though uncer-
tain about the details of hot atom chemistry both mod-
els predict perturbed angular correlation spectra. The
comparison of these spectra with experimental data in-
dicates whether or not the hot atom chemistry during
the nanoseconds following electron capture depends on
Auger emission intensity.

A partial decay scheme for 111In and 111mCd is shown
in Fig. 1. Perturbed angular correlation spectra of the
isomeric 111mCd decay provide the quadrupole interac-
tion parameters of the ground state coordination com-
plex in the chemical transmutation model and the ligand
relaxation parameters at zero dose in the dose depen-
dent damage model. Following 111In electron capture
decay the 111Cd daughter is in a 120 picosecond nuclear
excited state that initiates the 171–245 keV gamma cas-
cade. Processes occurring faster than the lifetime of this
initial nuclear state, including dissipation of thermal hot
spots [3, 8], do not inﬂuence perturbed angular correla-
tion spectra. The spectra reﬂect the hot atom chemistry
occurring during the lifetime of the intermediate state.
Indirect eﬀects involving the diﬀusion of water radicals
are not observed. A great variety of radiochemical and
radiobiological experiments show that direct and indirect
processes together result in damage that is proportional
to the Auger emission intensity. For example, when zinc
bovine carbonic anhydrase is X ray irradiated just above

48.54 m

5/2+

2.8047 d

111In

EC

g   171.28 keV M1+E2

120 ps

84.5 ns

g   245.40 keV E2

111Cd

FIG. 1: Partial decay scheme for 111In and 111m
Cd [7]. The
half-life of each level is labeled. The 171–245 keV gamma
cascade follows the electron capture decay of 111In; the 48.5
minute 111m
Cd state decays by the 151–245 keV gamma cas-
cade. Both cascades share the same 245 keV 5/2+ 111Cd
intermediate nuclear state.

the zinc K edge, enzyme activity and zinc release assays
indicate signiﬁcant Auger inactivation [9]. The more in-
tense Auger emissions accompanying 111In decay can be
expected to inactivate HCA I even more eﬀectively. The
combined direct and indirect eﬀects are Auger emission
intensity dependent. An Auger dependent eﬀect on the
nanosecond time scale can be detected with K X ray co-
incidence perturbed angular correlation spectroscopy.

Materials and Methods

Human carbonic anhydrase I was

isolated from
freshly outdated erythrocytes [10]. The apoenzyme
was obtained by dialysis at 4◦C against pyridine-2,6-
dicarboxylic acid [11]. HCA I activity was assayed spec-
trophotometrically with p-nitrophenyl acetate (Sigma
Chemical Co., St. Louis, Missouri) as substrate [12].
Conventional time diﬀerential gamma-gamma perturbed
angular correlation spectra of 111In labeled HCA I were
measured on a movable two detector perturbed angular
correlation spectrometer [13]. A 2 by 2 inch cylindrical
BC-404 plastic scintillator with 0.25 inch centered side
bore for internal sample mounting and RCA 8575 photo-
tube detected the K X rays. Coincidence gating electron-
ics, including a time to pulse height converter for coinci-
dence timing K X rays and the gamma-gamma cascade,
selected either K X ray coincidence or anti-coincidence
spectra for storage and analysis. Carrier free 111In in 0.05
molar HCl (Du Pont de Nemours & Co. Inc., Wilming-
ton, Delaware) was ordered at two week intervals. Apo-

2

HCA I was incubated for 48 h with 111In in 100 mM
HEPES buﬀer (Research Organics Inc., Cleveland, Ohio)
at pH 7.7 with sodium citrate acting as carrier for in-
dium.
In order to hold constant both the volume and
total indium concentration, the speciﬁc activity of the
111In stock was adjusted with cold indium chloride. Af-
ter labeling with indium, the eﬀects of HCA I rotational
motions on the perturbed angular correlation spectrum
were diminished by adding sucrose to a ﬁnal concentra-
tion by weight of 50%. Seven labeled protein samples
were prepared from each shipment of 111In. A perturbed
angular correlation spectrum was accumulated for 46 h
from each sample. The ﬁrst and last samples were run
as incubation controls. These samples were measured for
an initial twelve h as 111In-citrate; HCA I was added,
and the measurement was continued for another 34 h.
The time integral perturbation factors accumulated for
20 min intervals monitored the HCA I labeling reaction.
All spectra from shipments that did not give excellent la-
beling were discarded. Three of the ﬁve non-control sam-
ples per shipment were measured in K X ray coincidence
mode and two in K X ray anti-coincidence mode. A total
of 52 coincidence mode samples and 36 anti-coincidence
mode samples were combined for analysis. All sample
preparations and measurements were done at 21 ± 1◦C.
Electron capture gamma-gamma perturbed angular
correlation spectra measure the ensemble average elec-
tric quadrupole relaxation of the daughter nucleus spin.
Magnetic dipole interactions are assumed to be negligi-
ble. The measurable parameters are model dependent.
All models must contain one or more rate constants that
characterize the time dependence of the quadrupole in-
teractions.
In the chemical transmutation model, spin
relaxation is the result of the decay of a metastable
state of the daughter nucleus coordination complex. This
metastable state might be a valence electron, coordi-
nation geometry, or ligand conformation state.
In any
case, the quadrupole interaction parameters of the ini-
tial metastable state are the frequency mean, frequency
standard deviation, asymmetry, and the mean lifetime of
the state. The initial state decays into the ground state
coordination complex. The interaction parameters of the
ground state are the frequency mean, frequency standard
deviation, asymmetry, and Euler rotation angles relative
to the initial state. The initial and ground state interac-
tion frequencies are independent Gaussian distributions.
Each individual daughter nucleus interacts with the ini-
tial and ground state coordination complexes at ﬁxed
quadrupole frequencies that are randomly and indepen-
dently sampled from the respective Gaussian distribu-
tions. The lifetimes of the initial interactions are given
by an exponential distribution. In addition to relaxation
from coordination complex decay, the chemical transmu-
tation model includes relaxation from overall molecular
tumbling by multiplying the spectrum with an exponen-
tial factor.

g
The dose dependent damage model ascribes the spin
relaxation to ligand reorientation in the coordination
complex. The quadrupole interaction parameters of the
coordination complex are the mean frequency, frequency
standard deviation, asymmetry, rotation angle standard
deviation, and jump rate. These ﬁve parameters depend
linearly on dose to the coordination complex and have
a baseline value for the zero dose coordination complex.
The electric ﬁeld gradient orientation distribution is de-
ﬁned by rotations from a reference orientation, where the
rotation angle distribution is Gaussian and the rotation
axis distribution is isotropic. Note that though there is a
single reference orientation in this interaction model, the
perturbed angular correlation spectrum is for an isotropic
source because the interactions of each daughter nucleus
are averaged over random orientations when the spec-
trum is computed. The interaction frequency distribu-
tion is a Gaussian. Both the interaction frequency and
orientation are sampled after every jump. The time in-
tervals between jumps are exponentially distributed.

In both the chemical transmutation and dose depen-
dent damage models, the interaction of each individual
daughter nucleus is piecewise static and each set of model
parameters speciﬁes a probability distribution function
for piecewise static interactions. The perturbation factor
(which is loosely refered to as the perturbed angular cor-
relation spectrum), is the average over this probability
distribution of the perturbation factor of each piecewise
static interaction. For a piecewise static interaction aver-
aged over random source orientations, the perturbation
factors are [13],

Gkk(t) =

(−1)2I+ma+mb

XmambN n
I
m′

×

(cid:18)

I

k

I

k

a −ma N (cid:19) (cid:18)

b −mb N (cid:19)

I
m′

× hmb|Λ(t)|maihm

′
b|Λ(t)|m

∗
′
ai

(1)

,
o

a, mb, and m′

where k is an even index, t is the delay time between
emission of the two gamma rays from the daughter nu-
cleus gamma-gamma cascade, I is the spin of the inter-
mediate nuclear state, ma, m′
b index mag-
netic substates of the intermediate state, the matrix ele-
ment coeﬃcients are the Wigner 3-j symbols, and Λ(t) is
the piecewise static time evolution operator. Since only
G22(t) is usually measurable, it is refered to as the pertur-
bation factor. The index N takes all integer values with
absolute value less than or equal to k and the primed
magnetic substate indices are given by m′
a − ma + N = 0
and m′
b − mb + N = 0. Since the perturbation factor
is always computed at a series of time points, it is ap-
propriate to express the piecewise static time evolution
operator as a series operator product of interval evolu-
tion operators. The interval evolution operator for the
time interval (t′, t) is a series operator product of static

3

(2)

evolution operators,

′

Λ(t

, t) =

−iHj tj /¯h,

e

J

Yj=J ′

where Hj is the jth time independent interaction Hamil-
tonian, J is the index of the ﬁrst Hamiltonian with ac-
tive interval overlapping (t′, t), J ′ is the index of the last
Hamiltonian with active interval overlapping (t′, t), and
tj is the time overlap of (t′, t) and the active time in-
terval of the jth Hamiltonian. Matthias et al. [14] give
the electric quadrupole Hamiltonian matrix elements for
arbitrary intermediate spin, interaction frequency, asym-
metry parameter, and y convention [15] orientation. The
quadrupole interaction frequency is speciﬁed by the an-
gular frequency ω0. By deﬁnition, ω0 equals 3 times the
quadrupole interaction frequency for integer spin and 6
times the quadrupole interaction frequency for half inte-
ger spin. When the electric quadrupole Hamiltonian is
axially symmetric ω0¯h equals the smallest nonvanishing
eigenvalue diﬀerence. The angular frequency ω0 is fre-
quently reported with correct numerical value but with
the erroneous dimension of Hertz [16].

The piecewise static perturbation factors were evalu-
ated by repeated extension of the time evolution oper-
ators in increments of 0.025(2π/ω0), where ω0 was the
mean angular frequency of the ground state or zero dose
coordination complex. The evolution operator at each
time point was extended to the next time point by ma-
trix multiplication with a time interval evolution opera-
tor. Each time interval evolution operator was a product
of static evolution operators with the Hamiltonian in-
dices and overlap intervals indicated in Eq. (2). The in-
teraction Hamiltonians were diagonalized [17]; the static
evolution operators were expressed in diagonal form with
the eigenvalues, transformed back into the magnetic sub-
state representation with the eigenvectors, and multiplied
together to give the time interval evolution operators.
Since in the parameter domain of interest the pertur-
bation factor time intervals were an order of magnitude
smaller than the typical static Hamiltonian active time
interval, most interval evolution operators were a single
static evolution operator and each Hamiltonian diagonal-
ization generated many interval evolution operators. The
time interval evolution operators were repeatedly multi-
plied to give the evolution operators at a series of 160
time points. The matrix elements of the evolution oper-
ators were inserted in Eq. (1) to give the piecewise static
perturbation factors at these time points.

The piecewise static perturbation factor probability
distribution function was averaged by Monte Carlo in-
tegration [18]. Perturbation factor error estimates were
calculated from the deviation of subaverages around the
overall average as a function of the spectrum delay time.
Gaussian interaction frequency and rotation angle dis-
tributions were generated by summing uniform random

4

0.1

0.08

0.06

0.04

0.02

)
t
(

2
2
G

variates. Excited state and orientation lifetimes were
generated by logarithmic transform of uniform random
Isotropic rotation direc-
numbers on the unit interval.
tions were generated by an acceptance-rejection tech-
nique [19]. Random numbers uniform on the unit interval
were generated by a 32-bit linear congruential pseudo-
random generator with divisor 231 − 1 and multiplier 75.

Initially the qualitative dependence of the perturbation
factor on parameter space of the chemical transmutation
and the dose dependent damage models was coarsely sur-
veyed. The chemical transmutation model metastable
state lifetime, ground state rotation angle, and relative
magnitude of the metastable and ground state mean in-
teraction frequency parameters were varied. Based on
the preliminary survey and known ground state coordi-
nation complex parameters, a crude estimate was made
of the parameter point that ﬁt the data. This ﬁt was re-
ﬁned by varying the unknown parameters one at a time
until the residuals were about the same magnitude as the
experimental error. The chemical transmutation model
ground state frequency mean, frequency standard devia-
tion, and asymmetry and the overall tumbling relaxation
time constant were ﬁxed at the known values. The Euler
rotation angles relative to the initial state were ﬁxed at
values found in the preliminary survey to give strong spin
relaxation. The initial metastable state was assumed to
be axially symmetric, and the frequency mean and fre-
quency standard deviation were varied.

The preliminary dose dependent damage model param-
eter survey ﬁxed the mean frequency, frequency standard
deviation, and asymmetry parameters at the known zero
dose coordination complex values, and varied the rota-
tion angle standard deviation and jump rate parameters.
By comparing of the results of this search and the per-
turbation factor measured by Bauer et al. [20] with the
assumption that spin relaxation is due to molecular tum-
bling, values were identiﬁed for the rotation angle stan-
dard deviation and jump rate parameters approximately
equivalent to the molecular tumbling time constant of the
zero dose coordination complex. The preliminary search
also yielded the initial parameter point for ﬁtting the
dose dependent damage model to the data. The mean
frequency, frequency standard deviation, asymmetry, ro-
tation angle standard deviation, and jump rate parame-
ters were all varied.

During the preliminary parameter space searches and
parameter reﬁnement, the perturbation factors were
computed by averaging 103 piecewise static interactions.
The standard deviations of these perturbation factors
were fairly independent of spectrum delay time and typi-
cally about 0.01. The displayed perturbation factors were
averaged over 104 interactions to give a standard devia-
tion of about 0.003. All calculations were done on a DEC
VAX 3600 or Silicon Graphics 4D workstation.

20

40

80

100

120

60
t (ns)

FIG. 2: Chemical transmutation model for HCA I perturbed
angular correlation spectra. The triangles with standard er-
ror markers are the K X ray anti-coincidence spectrum and
the stars with standard error markers are the K X ray coinci-
dence spectrum. The solid curve is an approximate ﬁt of the
chemical transmutation model to the data. The dotted curve
is the least squares ﬁt of Bauer et al. [20] to the 111m
Cd HCA
I perturbed angular correlation spectrum.

Results and Discussion

The measured K X ray coincidence and anti-
coincidence perturbed angular correlation spectra for
111In HCA I in 50% sucrose are shown in both Figs. 2
& 3. Figure 2 shows theoretical spectra for the chem-
ical transmutation model at parameter values listed in
Table I and Fig. 3 shows theoretical spectra for the dose
dependent damage model at parameter values listed in
Table II. The procedure for approximately ﬁtting the
models is given in the methods section. Relaxation in
the chemical transmutation model spectra results from
metastable coordination complex decay and molecular
tumbling. Evidently these mechanisms can account for
all relaxation experimentally observed in 111In HCA I
perturbed angular correlation spectra. Since the coordi-
nation complex initial metastable state is assumed to be
independent of the Auger emission intensity, the chemi-
cal transmutation model predicts equality of the K X ray
coincidence and anti-coincidence spectra.

Relaxation in the dose dependent damage model spec-
tra results from ligand reorientation. The absence of
molecular tumbling relaxation in this model is a matter of
convenience. Additional high precision 111mCd HCAB I
spectra would be required to establish the correct balance
of relaxation due to internal and overall motion. The the-

TABLE I: Chemical transmutation model quadrupole inter-
action parameters for perturbed angular correlation spectra
of HCA I.

111m

Cd

111In

−1)

Metastable state
Freq. mean (s
Freq. SD
Asymmetry
Lifetime (ns)

Ground state

−1)

Freq. mean (s
Freq. SD
Asymmetry
Euler angles (φ, θ, ψ)

Tumbling lifetime(ns)

-
-
-
0.0

95 × 106
18%
0.68
-
81

133 × 106
50%
0.0
66

95 × 106
18%
0.68
0, π/2, 0
81

0.1

0.08

0.06

0.04

0.02

)
t
(

2
2
G

20

40

80

100

120

60
t (ns)

FIG. 3: Dose dependent damage model for HCA I perturbed
angular correlation spectra. The experimental data is identi-
cal to that displayed in Fig. 2. The solid curve is an approx-
imate ﬁt of the dose dependent damage model to the data.
The dotted curve is an approximate ﬁt to the 111mCd HCA I
perturbed angular correlation spectrum with relaxation from
ligand reorientation rather than molecular tumbling. The
dashed curve is the dose dependent damage model for the K
X ray coincidence HCA I perturbed angular correlation spec-
trum derived by linear interpolation of the model parameters
for the 111mCd and K X ray anti-coincidence spectra.

oretical K X ray coincidence and anti-coincidence spectra
for the dose dependent damage model depend upon the
relative Auger emission intensities. The electron cap-
ture decay of 111In in coincidence with a cadmium K
X ray yields on average 11.0 Auger and Coster-Kronig
electrons and in anti-coincidence yields on average 16.8

5

TABLE II: Dose dependent damage model quadrupole inter-
action parameters.

Freq. mean (s−1)
Freq. SD
Asymmetry
Rotation SD
Jump lifetime (ns)

111mCd
95 × 106
18%
0.68
◦
25
26.5

111In (k+)
127 × 106
47.6%
0.468
◦
37.7
18.1

111In (k−)
133 × 106
53%
0.43
◦
40
16.5

electrons (R. W. Howell, private communication). The
anti-coincidence yield must be corrected for the eﬃciency
of detection for K X rays. The corrected anti-coincidence
yield,

′
Y
k− =

(1 − ω)
1 − ǫω

Yk− +

ω(1 − ǫ)
1 − ǫω

Yk+,

(3)

where ǫ is the K X ray detection eﬃciency, ω is the prob-
ability per decay of K X ray emission, Yk− is the perfect
anti-coincidence yield, and Yk+ the K X ray coincidence
yield. At the estimated detection eﬃciency for cadmium
K X rays of 23%, the corrected anti-coincidence Auger
electron yield is 13.0. The ratio Yk+/Y ′
k− = 11/13 in-
terpolates the K X ray coincidence parameters between
the zero dose and K X ray anti-coincidence parameters
in the dose dependent damage model. The ratio of the
diﬀerence between the K X ray coincidence and zero dose
parameters to the diﬀerence between the K X ray anti-
coincidence and zero dose parameters is 11/13, see Ta-
ble II. The experimental 111In HCA I K X ray coinci-
dence and anti-coincidence spectra are identical. How-
ever, since the diﬀerence in the theoretical K X ray co-
incidence and anti-coincidence spectra is small enough
relative to the experimental error, the dose dependent
damage model may not be conﬁdently rejected.

Conclusions

The indistinguishability of the experimental 111In
HCA I K X ray coincidence and anti-coincidence spec-
tra suggests that during the ﬁrst 10−8 seconds following
electron capture decay the hot atom chemistry is inde-
pendent of the Auger and Coster-Kronig electron emis-
sion intensity. As demonstrated by the dose dependent
damage model, the experimental data do not conclusively
rule out dependence of hot atom chemistry on emission
intensity. The diﬀerence between the HCA I K X ray
coincidence and anti-coincidence spectra could be signif-
icantly increased by detecting Kβ X rays for the coinci-
dence spectrum, increasing the detection eﬃciency of all
K X rays for the anti-coincidence spectrum, and possibly
by measuring at liquid nitrogen temperature.

Special thanks are due to Kandula S. R. Sastry and

Franklyn G. Prendergast for their continued encourage-
ment and support of this project. Lynda McDowell pu-
riﬁed HCA I and helped with indium binding assays.
Heiner Winkler introduced me to the Monte Carlo proce-
dure [21] for computing a perturbation factor by averag-
ing over the probability distribution of piecewise static
interactions. Roger Howell provided electron yields.
Alexander Halpern has called to my attention refer-
ences [1, 2, 3, 9]. This work was supported in part by
National Institutes of Health grant 1 R03 RR02219-01.

∗ Electronic address: haydock@mailaps.org; Current ad-

dress 1326 2nd St. NW, Rochester, MN 55901
[1] J. P. Adloﬀ, Radiochim. Acta 25, 57 (1978).
[2] P. Boyer and A. Baudry, in Hot Atom Chemistry, edited
by T. Matsuura (Elsevier, Amsterdam, 1984), pp. 315–
347.

[3] H. Sano and P. G¨utlich, in Hot Atom Chemistry, edited
by T. Matsuura (Elsevier, Amsterdam, 1984), pp. 265–
302.

[4] M. Alﬂen, C. Hennen, F. Tuczek, H. Spiering, P. G¨utlich,

and K. Zs., Hyperﬁne Interact. 47, 115 (1989).

[5] C. Haydock and K. S. R. Sastry, in Proceedings of the
8th International Congress of Radiation Research (1987),
vol. 1, p. 67.

[6] T. Kobayashi, K. Fukumura, T. Kitahara,
S. Shimizu, J. Phys. Colloq. pp. C28–29 (1979).

and

[7] C. M. Lederer and V. S. Shirley, eds., Table of Isotopes
(John Wiley, New York, 1978), pp. 516–523, seventh ed.,

6

A = 111, URL http://ie.lbl.gov/toi/nucSearch.asp.
[8] H. Kim and D. D. Dlott, J. Chem. Phys. 94, 8203 (1991).
[9] B. Diehn, A. Halpern, and G. St¨ocklin, J. Am. Chem.

Soc. 98, 1077 (1976).

[10] R. G. Khalifah, D. J. Strader, S. H. Bryant, and S. M.

Gibson, Biochemistry 16, 2241 (1977).

[11] J. B. Hunt, M.-J. Rhee, and C. B. Storm, Anal. Biochem.

79, 614 (1977).

[12] P. Y. and J. T. Stone, Biochemistry 6, 668 (1967).
[13] H. Frauenfelder and R. M. Steﬀen,

in Alpha-, Beta-
and Gamma- Ray Spectroscopy, edited by K. Siegbahn
(North-Holland, Amsterdam, 1965), vol. 2, chap. XIXA,
pp. 997–1198.

[14] E. Matthais, W. Schneider, and R. M. Steﬀen, Ark. Fys.

24, 97 (1963).

[15] H. Goldstein, Classical Mechanics

(Addison-Wesley,
Massachusetts, 1980), pp. 606–610, 2nd ed., appendix
B.

[16] R. Bauer, Q. Rev. Biophys. 18, 1 (1985).
[17] B. T. Smith, J. M. Boyle, J. J. Dongarra, B. S. Gar-
bow, Y. Ikebe, V. C. Klema, and C. B. Moler, Ma-
trix Eigensystem Routines - EISPACK Guide (Springer-
Verlag, Berlin, 1976), no. 6 in Lecture Notes in Computer
Science, 2nd ed.

[18] F. James, Rep. Prog. Phys. 43, 1145 (1980).
[19] M. P. Allen and D. J. Tildesley, Computer Simulation of
Liquids (Clarendon Press, Oxford, 1989), chap. Random
numbers, pp. 345–351.

[20] R. Bauer, P. Limkilde, and J. T. Johansen, Biochemistry

15, 334 (1976).

[21] E. Gerdau, H. Winkler, B. Giese, W. Gebert, and
J. Braunsfurth, Hyperﬁne Interact. 1, 469 (1976).

