Non-linear and scale-invariant analysis of the Heart Rate

Variability

J. Kalda, M. S¨akki

Institute of Cybernetics, Tallinn Technical University,

Akadeemia tee 21, 12618 Tallinn, Estonia

Tallinn Diagnostic Center, Estonia

Tallinn Children Hospital, Tallinn, Estonia

M. Vainu

M. Laan

Abstract

Human heart rate ﬂuctuates in a complex and non-stationary manner. Elaborating eﬃcient

and adequate tools for the analysis of such signals has been a great challenge for the researchers

during last decades. Here, an overview of the main research results in this ﬁeld is given. The

following question are addressed: (a) what are the intrinsic features of the heart rate variability

signal; (b) what are the most promising non-linear measures, bearing in mind clinical diagnostic

and prognostic applications.

3
0
0
2
 
r
a

M
 
0
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
d
e
m

.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
1
4
0
3
0
3
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

1

A.

INTRODUCTION

The heart rate of healthy subjects ﬂuctuates in a complex manner. These nonstationary

and nonlinear ﬂuctuations are related mainly to a nonlinear interaction between competing

neuroautonomic inputs: parasympathetic input decreases and sympathetic stimulation in-

creases the heart rate. Meanwhile, heart pathologies may decrease the responsiveness of the

heart and lead to a failure to respond to the external stimuli. Evidently, such pathologies

lead to an overall reduction of the heart rate variability (HRV). Understanding the diagnos-

tic and prognostic signiﬁcance of the various measures of HRV has a great importance for

the cardiology as a whole, because unlike the invasive methods of diagnostics, the required

measurements are low-cost and are harmless for the patients. A particularly important ap-

plication is the prognostics of the patients with increased risk of sudden cardiac death. While

the “linear measures” of HRV are nowadays widely used in clinical practice, the importance

of more complicated measures have been hotly disputed in the scientiﬁc literature during

the recent decades.

The layout of this review is as follows. In the ﬁrst section, general aspects of the heart

rate generation, electro cardiogram (ECG) structure, and data acquisition are discussed. In

the second section, we give a brief overview of the “linear era” of the HRV analysis. Section

three is devoted to the early studies of the non-linearity of HRV, ie. to the methods based

on the reconstructed phase space analysis. Here we also provide the modern view on the

applicability of these methods. In section four, we discuss the self-aﬃne and multi-aﬃne

aspects of HRV (including the wavelet-transform-based techniques). Section ﬁve deals with

the phenomenon which can be referred to as “intertwining of low- and high variability peri-

ods”. Section six examines the eﬀect of synchronization between heart rate and respiration.

Section seven provides a brief conclusion.

B. HEART RATE GENERATION, ECG, AND DATA ACQUISITION

The quasi-periodic contraction of cardiac muscle is governed by the electrical signal, which

is generated by the sino-atrial (SA) node — a set of electrically active cells in a small area

of the right atrium. The signal spreads through the atrial muscle leading to its contraction.

It also spreads into a set of specialized cells - the atrio-ventricular (AV) node. Further

2

the signal spreads via the His-Purkinje bundle (which is a fractal-like set of electrically

conductive ﬁbers) to the myocardial cells causing their contraction. ECG is measured as

the electrical potential between diﬀerent points at the body surface. The activity of the SA

node by itself is not reﬂected on the ECG. The electrical activation of the atrial cells leads

to the appearance of the P-wave of the ECG. Q, R, S and T waves (see Fig. 1) are caused by

the electrical activity of the ventricular muscle. The heart rate is generally measured as the

RR-interval tRR — the time-lag between two subsequent R-pikes (R-pike itself corresponds

to the ventricular contraction). For the HRV analysis, only the normal heart activity is

taken into account. All the QRS-complexes are labelled as normal or arrhythmic. Note that

even for healthy patients, some heartbeats can be arrhythmic. Normal-to-normal interval

tN N is deﬁned as the value of tRR for such heartbeats, which have both starting and ending

R-pikes labelled as normal (see Fig. 1).

QRS-complex

R

tNN
(RR-interval)

P

T

U

ST
segment

SQ

PR
interval

QT
interval

tNN
(ms)

1000

750

500

250

0

FIG. 1: Left image: normal ECG recording.

Image at right: tN N sequences of low- and high

variability.

Typically, HRV analysis is based on the 24-hour recordings of the Holter-monitoring.

Shorter ECG recordings can be used for this purpose, as well; however, in that case it is

impossible to observe the long-scale variations and compare the sleep-awake diﬀerences in the

heart rhythm. Portable apparatus stores the ECG data as the time-dependent voltage U(t)

either on a tape or on a PC ﬂash card; the sampling rate is 125 Hz or higher. The data are

later analyzed by computer software. Typical commercial software allows visualization of the

3

ECG recording, automated or semi-automated recognition of arrhythmias and artifacts, and

the calculation of the standard “linear” characteristics of the HRV. Most often, a research

devoted to the methods of non-linear dynamics is based on plain sequences of NN-intervals,

and disregards the details of the continuous ECG recordings. Other aspects of ECG, eg. the

clustering of arrhythmic beats [1] and dynamics of QT intervals [2] are also of high clinical

importance, but somewhat understudied and will be not discussed here.

ECG recorder

Signal digitization

QRS complex and 
RR-interval identification

equip m ent: recorder 
m ercial 
and service 
softw are

C o m

Standard  linear
characteristics

ASCII 
data-file

Research-specific PC-code: 
post-filtering, data analysis

Scale-invariant  
measures

Phase-space
based measures

FIG. 2: The analysis of the heart rate variability: the scheme of data acquisition and analysis.

The experimental data serving as the bases of the original research performed by the

authors of the review were recorded (a) at the Tallinn N˜omme Hospital (children) and

(b) Tallinn Diagnostic Centre (adult subjects); the scheme of data acquisition is presented

in Fig. 2. For the group (a), the recordings of ambulatory Holter-monitoring covered 12

healthy subjects of mean age 11.5

3.3 years, 6 children with clinically documented sinus

node disease (mean age 11.5

1.9 years), and 12 subjects with miscellaneous diagnosis. The

±

±

sampling rate of the ECG was 125Hz. For the group (b), speciﬁcs are given in Table 1.

These data have been obtained during regular diagnostical examinations of more than 200

patients, the ECG sampling rate has been 180 Hz. The diagnostics and data veriﬁcation has

been made by qualiﬁed cardiologist. The data preprocessing included ﬁltering out falsely

detected QRS-complexes (artifacts and arrhythmias).

C. LINEAR MEASURES OF HRV

The clinical importance of the heart rate variability (HRV) was ﬁrst noted in 1965 by Hon

and Lee [3]. Since then, the statistical properties of the interbeat interval sequences have

attracted the attention of a wide scientiﬁc community. An increased risk of post-infarction

4

Healthy IHD SND VES PCI RR FSK

No. of patients

103

8

11

16

7

11

6

Mean age

45.5

65.4 50.0 55.9 47.3 55.5 11.7

Std. dev. of age

20.5

11.4 19.3 14.3 11.6 14.4 4.6

TABLE I: Test groups of patients. Abbreviations are as follows: IHD - Ischemic Heart Disease

(Stenocardia); SND - Sinus Node Disease; VES - Ventricular Extrasystole; PCI - Post Cardiac

Infarction; RR - Blood Pressure Disease; FSK - Functional Disease of Sinus Node.

mortality was associated with the reduced HRV by Wolf et al. in 1977 [4].

Wider attention to the problem has been attained in the early 1980s, when Akselrod et

al. introduced the spectral methods for the HRV analysis [5]. The spectral characteristics

are generally referred to as “frequency-domain characteristics” and are opposed to the “time

domain methods”, which are derived directly from the tN N -sequence. In the late 1980s, the

clinical importance of HRV became generally recognized. Several studies conﬁrmed that

HRV was a strong and independent predictor of mortality following an acute myocardial in-

farction [6]–[8]. As a result of this, a breakthrough has been achieved: the “linear” measures

of HRV became important tools of clinical practice.

A non-exhaustive list of the parameters which are currently used in medical practice, is as

follows: the mean NN interval; the diﬀerence between night and day heart rate; longest and

shortest NN intervals; the standard deviation of the NN interval (SDNN, typically calculated

over 24-hour period); the standard deviation of locally (usually 5 min) averaged NN intervals

(SDANN); the mean of the 5-minute standard deviation of the NN interval (averaged over 24

h; SDNN index); the square root of the mean squared diﬀerences of successive NN intervals

(RMSSD), the percentage of interval diﬀerences of successive NN intervals greater than 50

ms (pNN50), the spectral power of high- and low-frequency ﬂuctuations in NN-sequences.

D. RECONSTRUCTED PHASE SPACE

It is widely accepted that the heart rhythm generation in the complex of sinus-node

and atrio-ventricular node can be well described by nonlinear dynamical models, where SA

node and AV node form a system of nonlinear coupled oscillators [9, 10]. The model has

been proven to be viable and predicts several experimentally observed phenomena, such as

5

Wenckebach and Mobitz type II arrhythmias and bistable behavior [10]. This deterministic

non-linear model predicts that the phase trajectories of an healthy heart lie on an attractor

of the coupled system of oscillators. Consequently, one should be able to observe well-deﬁned

patterns on the Poincar`e sections of the phase-space. Note that in the case of physiological

data, there is no information, what might be the canonical variables. Therefore, the phase

trajectory is reconstructed in time-delay coordinates U(t), U(t + τ ), . . . , U[t + (D

1)τ ]

−

[or tN N (n), t(n + 1), . . . , t(n + D

1)]. Here D is the so called embedding dimensionality,

−

i.e. the dimensionality of the reconstructed phase-space. It is expected that the real phase

trajectory is mapped to the reconstructed trajectory by a smooth transform.

Exactly such a reasoning has lead to the idea that the dynamical characteristics from the

theory of non-linear dynamics could be used for the diagnostic purposes. The early studies

by Babloyantz et al. [11] gave rise to extensive studies in 1990s [12]–[15]. The experimental

observations seemingly conﬁrmed the theoretical expectations. Particularly, the correlation

dimension of the continuous ECG recording (i.e.

the recorded voltage as a function of

time) has been reported to be between 3.6 and 5.2. The conclusion has been that the

dynamics of the heart of healthy persons is less regular than that of persons with severe

cardiac pathologies. Correspondingly, the correlation dimension has been often thought

to be a measure for the healthiness of the heart. The other tools of the analysis of non-

linear dynamical systems (such as Lyapunov exponents; Kolmogorov, Shannon, pattern, and

approximate entropies; etc) have been exploited in an equal extent.

The correlation dimension of a data sequence is typically calculated according to the

Grassberger-Procaccia algorithm [16]. In a reconstructed phase space of dimensionality D,

the correlation sum C =

Pi,j θ(r

− |i −

expected to behave as a power-law C

) is calculated as a function of the radius r; it is

rj|
rν(D). Here ri denotes the D-dimensional radius-
∝

vector of the i-th data-point, and θ(r) stands for the Heaviside function. The correlation

dimension dc is found as the limit of ν at large values of D (in fact, it is expected that for

D > dc, the exponent ν is independent of D, and in that case ν = dc).

However, there are various arguments leading us to the conclusion that the formally

calculated correlation dimension of a heart rhythm does not correspond to the dimensionality

of an intrinsic attractor; similarly, the formally calculated Lyapunov exponents, entropies

etc. do not describe the respective aspects of underlying non-linear dynamics. First, it

has been pointed out that physiological time-series are typically non-stationary and noisy,

6

and therefore, the correlation dimension cannot be calculated reliably [17, 18, 19]; this

fact is nowadays widely accepted.

In the case of human heart, the “noise” comes from

the autonomous nervous system in the form of inputs regulating the heart rate (cf. [20,

21, 22]): from the viewpoint of underlying nonlinear deterministic system, these eﬀectively

non-deterministic signals perform the role of high level noise. It should be also noted that

some inputs of the autonomous nervous system may lead to quasi-periodic signals — an

easy source of false detection of low-dimensional chaos and apparent patterns in simple time

delay maps, see Fig. 3–4. Thus, respiration gives rise to the signal of typical period of 4s;

the eﬀect is most pronounced when the patient is at rest, and is stronger for young persons.

Second, it has been emphasized that a reasonable ﬁtting of a correlation sum to a power

law does not necessarily mean that the obtained exponent is the correlation dimension of

the underlying dynamical system; instead, thorough non-automatable veriﬁcation procedure

has to be done [23]. Third, the length of the data sequences is often inadequate for reliable
calculation of high values of the correlation dimension dc >
∼

6, cf. [15, 23].

n < 4
8 > n
≥
16 > n
≥
32 > n
≥
64 > n
≥
n
 64

 4 
 8
 16
 32

≥

tN+1 (ms)

tN+2 + τ = 552 ms
tN+2 = 512 ms

800

400

400

800

tN (ms)

tNN
(ms)

750

500

250

0

FIG. 3: A cross-section of the 3-dimensional reconstructed phase space for a patient with pro-

nounced 4:1 mode-locking (see also Section G); around the central cloud of points, three major

satellite-clouds can be seen; these satellite-clouds correspond to the sequence of interbeat intervals,

shown on the right-hand plot. The observed oscillations with period 4 can be attributed to the

modulation of the heart rate by respiration.

The above discussed research results can be summarized as follows: (a) the correlation

7

tN+1 (ms)

800

400

tN+2 + τ = 744 ms
tN+2 = 704 ms

n < 4
8 > n
≥
16 > n
≥
32 > n
≥
64 > n
≥
128>n
≥
n
 128

 4 
 8
 16
 32
 64

≥

400

800

tN (ms)

tNN
(ms)

750

500

250

0

FIG. 4: The same as in Figure 3. Mode-locking (4:1 and 5:1) is weaker, but the heart rate

modulation by the respiration is signiﬁcant. One can distinguish two branches of the central cloud,

which are caused by the respiratory modulation.

sums of human heart rate follow typically a scaling law; (b) in most cases, the scaling

exponents are not the correlation dimensions. This leads us to a natural question: what is

the physical meaning of these formally calculated exponents? Our answer to this question

is based on simple observations, valid for healthy patients: (a) the long-time variability

of the inter-beat intervals is typically much higher than the variability on the time scale

of few heart beats; (b) for those periods, when the mean heart rate is high (when the

subject is performing physical exercise) the heart rate variability is low; (c) the heart rate

is controlled by eﬀectively random non-deterministic inputs arriving from the autonomous

nervous system. As a consequence, in time delay coordinates, an HRV time-series generates

a baseball bat-shaped cloud of points. Although the theoretical value of the correlation

dimension of such a cloud is inﬁnite, the ﬁnite resolution of the recording apparatus, ﬁnite

length of the time-series, and the linear structure of the cloud result in a smaller value. This

is evident for a very narrow “bat”, which is eﬃciently one-dimensional.

Our conjecture passes also a quantitative test: the correlation sum of surrogate data-

sets constructed using Gaussian random data-series and mimicking the features (a)–(c) (see

Fig. 5) scales almost identically to that of clinical HRV data, see Fig. 6 and Ref. [24].

To conclude, the reconstructed-phase-space-based measures fail in describing a determin-

8

FIG. 5: Time series for real HRV data (a), surrogate data (b), and Gaussian noise (c); the beat

interval tn is plotted versus the beat number n.

FIG. 6: The correlation sum C2(r) (as a function of the radius r) of surrogate data scales almost

identically to the real clinical data.

istic chaos inside the heart, because the deterministic dynamics is suppressed by essentially

intermittent signals arriving from the autonomous nervous system and regulating the heart

rhythm. However, some ﬁne-tuned measures (eg. various entropies, cf. [25]) can be useful in

describing the level of short-time variability of the heart rhythm, and complement the linear

quantity pNN50 (which also measures the high-frequency component of HRV).

E. SCALE-INDEPENDENT MEASURES.

Recent studies have shown that scale-invariant characteristics can be successfully applied

to the analysis of the heart rate variability [26]–[29]. However, this conclusion has been

9

disputed, and certain scale-dependent measures (particularly, the amplitude of the wavelet

spectra at speciﬁc time-scale) have been claimed to provide better results [30]. The scale-

independent methods have been believed to be more universal, subject-independent, and to

reﬂect directly the dynamics of the underlying system, unlike the scale-dependent methods

which may reﬂect characteristics speciﬁc to the subject and/or to the method of analysis [29].

Opposing argument has been that certain heart disorders aﬀect the heart rate variability

at a speciﬁc scale or range of scales; owing to this circumstance, at the properly chosen

time-scale, scale-dependent measures may provide a useful information [30].

The simplest relevant scale-independent measure is the Hurst exponent H, which has

been introduced to describe statistically self-aﬃne random functions f (r) of one or more

variables [31]. Such a function is referred to as fractional Brownian function and satisﬁes

the scaling law

D[f (r1)

f (r2)]2

E ∝ |

r1 −

r2|

2H.

−

Note that H = 1/2 is a special case of ordinary Brownian function — the increments of the

function are delta-correlated, and f (r) can be thought to be the displacement of a Brownian

particle as a function of time r. Therefore, in the case of H < 1/2, there is a negative long-

range correlation between the increments of the function. Analogously, H > 1/2 corresponds

to a positive correlation. Note that the early scale-invariant studies of HRV were based on

power spectra [32, 33], an aspect closely related to the scaling exponent H.

Many phenomena in nature exhibit this kind of scale-invariance, and lead to fractional

Brownian time-series [31]. The same is true for the heart rate variability: after ﬁltering out

short-scale components with τ < 30s (corresponding to the respiratory rhythm, to the blood-

pressure oscillations, and to the pathological Cheyne-Stokes respiration), the ﬂuctuation

function F (n), deﬁned as

F (ν) =

tn −

tn+ν|i

h|

∝

revealed a good scaling behavior F (ν)

νH [26]. While for healthy patients, the increments

of the heart rhythm were found to be signiﬁcantly anticorrelated resulting in H < 1/2, the

heart rhythm of the patients with dilated cardiomyopathy was essentially Brownian with

H

1/2 [26]. In the case of our patient groups, there was no signiﬁcant correlation between

≈

the diagnosis and the Hurst exponent, and there were many healthy subjects with H

1/2,

≈

see Fig. 7. Finally, various techniques, such as detrended ﬂuctuation analysis [27], detrended

(1)

10

time series analysis [35], and wavelet amplitude analysis [34] have been proposed to ﬁne-tune

the Hurst-exponent-based approach.

FIG. 7: The ﬂuctuation function F (ν) is plotted versus the time lag ν. Almost straight line

indicates a good scaling behavior F (ν)

νH (here with H = 0.50).

∝

Complex non-stationary time-series cannot be described by a single scaling exponent H.

Indeed, simple scaling behavior is expected if there is a Gaussian distribution of increments.

However, even in the case of Gaussian functions, the scaling exponent is not necessarily

constant over the whole range of scales. Instead, it can be a slow (eg. logarithmic) function

of the scale, so that other descriptions (such as stretched exponentials) may be required.

Physiological time-series are typically non-Gaussian. For such functions, scale-invariance

can be very complicated. A non-exhaustive way to describe such behavior is to calculate

the multifractal spectrum of Hurst exponents [43]. Therefore, it is not surprising that the

human heart rate signal was found to obey a multi-aﬃne structure [28, 29].

Qualitatively, a multifractal time-series behaves as follows.

If the whole time-series is

divided into short segments, each segment can be characterized by its own Hurst exponent

h (referred to as the Lipschitz-H¨older exponent). Then, the distribution of segments of ﬁxed

values of h is self-similar, and is described by a fractal dimension f (h). Technically, the

spectrum f (h) can be calculated by the means of wavelet transform, cf. [29]. This scheme

includes the calculation of the scaling exponents τ (q) (referred to as the mass exponents),

which describe, how the q-th moment of the wavelet transform amplitude scales with the

wavelet width. The scaling exponents τ (2) and τ (5) have been found to have a signiﬁcant

prognostic value (for the post-infarction prognosis) [29]. The wavelet transform amplitudes,

11

calculated for a speciﬁc wavelet width (

5 min) have been claimed to be of even higher

≈

prognostic value [30]. However, independent studies have shown that the scale-invariant

measures seem to be superior tools [36]. It should be also noted that the wavelet transform

amplitude at a ﬁxed time-scale is closely related to the linear measure SDANN. Substituting

the robust standard deviation by a wavelet transform amplitude is a technical ﬁne-tuning

which cannot be expected to result in a qualitatively new information.

The multifractal structure of the heart rate signal has several consequences. Thus, the

q-th order structure function (a concept borrowed from the theory of the fully-developed

turbulence) of the heart rate interval has a scaling behavior, with the scaling exponent ζ(q)

being a function of q[37]. Note that this spectrum of exponents is very closely related to the

above-mentioned τ (q) spectrum (both describing the same physical phenomenon, diﬀerences

being of a technical kind). However, the wavelet-transform-based technique makes a more

complete utilization of the underlying data and therefore, τ (q) spectrum can be expected to

yield somewhat superior prognostic and/or diagnostic results.

Another aspect related to the multifractal nature of the heart rhythm, is the multiscale

entropy (MSE) [38]. While the single-scale entropies (approximate entropy, Shannon en-

tropy) are related to the short-time dynamics of the heart rhythm and to the probability

distribution function of points in the reconstructed phase space, the multiscale entropy ex-

tends these concepts to longer time-scales. MSE is not directly reducible to the multifractal

spectra f (h) [or τ (q)]; however, both techniques address the question of how wide is the

range of dynamics for the mean heart rate (averaged over a time T ), depending on the

time-scale T . The clinical usefulness of the MSE is still unclear (apart from the fact that it

has been claimed to distinguish between healthy subjects and patients with congestive heart

failure [38])

F.

INTERMITTENCY OF THE HRV

Multifractal spectrum addresses only one aspect of the non-Gaussianity of the time-series

increments by revealing the possible range of scaling laws for the long-range [at time-scale

of many (

1) heartbeat intervals] dynamics of mean heart rhythm. However, the short-

≫

time variability of heart rhythm is also ﬂuctuating in a complex manner.

It has been

pointed out that the NN-sequences of healthy subjects consist of intertwined high- and low-

12

variability periods [12]. This conclusion can be easily veriﬁed by a simple visual observation

of the NN-sequences, see Fig. 8. The quantitative analysis of such a behavior is based on

the distribution law of the low-variability periods [39, 40], which will be discussed below.

Another aspect of such an intertwining is the clustering of the periods of similar mean heart

rate: the heart rate signal can be divided into segments of diﬀerent mean heart rate, with

distinct boundaries between these segments; there is a power-law segment-length distribution

of the segments [41].

tNN
(ms)

750

500

FIG. 8: For healthy patients, the high- and low-variability periods of the heart rhythm are inter-

twined.

In order to analyze quantitatively the intertwining of high- and low-variability periods,

we have studied distribution of low-variability periods and showed that typically, it follows

a multi-scaling Zipf’s law. Originally, the Zipf’s law has been formulated by G. K. Zipf for

the frequency of words in natural languages [42]. For a given language (e.g. English), the

frequency (the number of occurrences divided by the total number of words) of each word

is calculated on the bases of a large set of texts. The ranks are determined by arranging

the words according to their frequency f : the most frequent word obtains rank r = 1, the

second frequent — r = 2 etc. It turns out that for a wide range of ranks (starting with

r = 1), there is a power law p(r)

1. This law is universal, it holds for all

r−α, where α

∝

≈

the natural languages and for a wide variety of texts [42]. Furthermore, similar scaling laws

describe the rank-distribution of many other classes of objects, as well. Thus, when cities

are arranged according to their population s, the population of a city s

r−α, with α

1

≈

∝

[42]. Another example is the income-rank relationship for companies; here we have again
(r + r0)−α, and α

1 [42]. In the most general form, the law can be formulated as p

α

≈

∝

is not necessarily close to unity [43]. This more general form of the law can be applied to

the distribution of scientists according to their citation index, to the distribution of internet

13

sites according to the number of visitors etc.

The Zipf’s law is characteristic to such dynamical systems at statistical equilibrium, which

satisfy the following conditions: (a) the system consists of elements of diﬀerent size; (b) the

element size has upper and lower bounds; (c) there is no intermediate intrinsic size for the

elements. The human heart rate, when divided into the low-variability periods, satisﬁes all

these requirements. The duration τ of these periods varies in a wide range of scales, from few

to several hundreds of heart beats. Thus, one can expect that the rank-length distribution

r(τ ) follows the Zipf’s law,

First we have to deﬁne the local heart rate variability as the deviation of the heart rate

τ −γ.

r

∝

(2)

from the local average,

δ(n) = [tN N (n)

tnn(n)

]/

− h

tnn(n)
h

i

;

i

the local average is calculated using a narrow (

5-second-wide) Gaussian weight-function.

≈

Then, the low-variability regions are deﬁned as consecutive sequences of intervals with

δ(n)

< δ0; the length τ of such a region is measured as the number of beats in the se-

|
quence. Further, all the low-variability regions are numbered (to identify them later), and

|

arranged according to their length; regions of equal length are ordered randomly. In such a

way, the longest observed region obtains rank r = 1, second longest — r = 2, etc. Typically,

the length-rank relationship reveals multiscaling properties, i.e. within a certain range of

scales, the scaling law (2) is observed, the scaling exponent γ being a (non-constant) function

of the threshold level, γ = γ(δ0); see Fig. 9.

It is not surprising that the scaling behavior is not perfect. Indeed, the heart rhythm is a

non-stationary signal aﬀected by the non-reproducible daily activities of the subjects. The

non-stationary pattern of these activities, together with their time-scales, is directly reﬂected

in the rank-length law. This distribution law can also have a ﬁngerprint of the characteristic

time-scale (10 to 20 seconds) of the blood pressure oscillations (which modulate the level

of HRV, cf. [44]). It should be emphasized that the problem of the non-reproducible daily

activities aﬀects also the reliability of the other scale-invariant measures and is probably

the main obstacle preventing the clinical application of the seemingly extremely eﬃcient

diagnostic and prognostic techniques. Finally, there is a generic reason why the Zipf’s law

is non-perfect at small rank numbers: while the Zipf’s law is a statistical law, each rank-

14

γ

 

=

 
-

3

.

4

2

γ

 

=

 
-

2
.
3

0

δ

0

 

=

 

0

,

0

5

γ
 

=

 -

1
.
9

3

δ

0 

=

 

0

,

0

8

δ

0 

=

 
0
,
1

2

1000

r

100

10

1

3

10

30

l

100

300

1000

FIG. 9: Multi-scaling behavior: the rank of low-variability intervals is plotted against the length

of the intervals. The scaling exponent γ depends on the threshold value δ0.

length curve is based only on a single measurement. In particular, there is only one longest

low-variability period (likewise, only one most-frequent word), the length of which is just

as long as it happens to be, there is no averaging whatsoever. For large ranks, the relative

statistical uncertainty can be estimated as 1/√r.

The distribution function of the low-variability periods as a whole contains a signiﬁcant

amount of diagnostically valuable information, which is not covered by any other (linear

or nonlinear) measure of HRV. The most part of this information seems to be reﬂected

(according to the Student test analysis using the test groups of Table 1) by the parameters

r100 (the rank of the interval with τ = 100), rmax (the maximal observed rank), and τend (the

scale at which the scaling law breaks; for a precise deﬁnition, see Ref. [40]). These measures

allow a clear distinction between the healthy subjects and the IHD, VES, and PCI groups

[40], see also Table 2.

15

TABLE II: p-values of the Student test. Data in the topmost triangular region (with label A) are

calculated using the parameter ln τend. Triangular region B corresponds to the parameter ln rmax.

Since multiple tests were carried out, modiﬁed Bonferroni correction [45] has to be applied. Gray
background highlights the tests with the adjusted signiﬁcance p′ < 3%. The control parameter

value δ0 = 0.05 has been used.

G. MODE LOCKING BETWEEN HEART RHYTHM AND RESPIRATION

As mentioned above, respiration aﬀects (modulates) the heart rhythm. This eﬀect is

mediated by the blood pressure, and the eﬀect known as baroreﬂex (heart rhythm depends

on the blood pressure). The heart is most responsive with respect to the signals of the

autonomous nervous system when the heart rate is slow, i.e. when the patient is at rest. In

that case, the heart rate variability is driven by weaker signals, like the signals induced by

respiration, which (due to their quasi-periodic nature) may lead to a mode-locking. In the

case of mode-locking, the heart rate is automatically slightly adjusted so that the respiration

and heart beat periods relate to each other as (small) integers. As a result, the decorrelation

time between the heart rhythm and respiration can be very long. This is the eﬀect which

is in most cases the cause of the patterns (isolated clouds of points) observable in the

reconstructed phase space (see Fig. 3).

The mode-locking has been studied using bivariate data (simultanious ECG and respira-

tion data) and the technique called cardiorespiratory synchrogram [44]. Also, a univariate

data analysis method using the angle-of-returntime map has been elaborated [46]. In that

case, the data-set is used to reconstruct the phase of forcing (breathing) and the phase of

oscillator (heart). These phases are plotted versus each other; in the case of mode-locking,

disjoint clouds of points will appear.

Recently, we have developed an independent, intuitive and easy to use method of mode-

16

locking detection from univariate data (RR-interval sequence), which is based on analysis of

the ﬂuctuation function F (ν), deﬁned by Eq. 1 [24]. The ﬂuctuation function of the patients

with mode-locking revealed a presence of an oscillatory component, see Fig. 10b. By dividing

the entire 24-hour HRV record into one-hour intervals, and calculating the amplitude of the

oscillatory component (via a wavelet transform) of the ﬂuctuation function for each interval,

we were able to locate the periods responsible for the satellite clouds in the reconstructed

phase space. These were always the periods before falling asleep, around 10 or 11 pm,

characterized by a low heart rate and a high respiration-driven short-time variability. The

phase between the heart rate and respiration is locked during tens of seconds, conﬁrming

the observations of Kurths et al. [44]. Thus, in a certain sense, the heart and respiratory

complex act as a system of coupled oscillators. Finally we note that a speciﬁc feature of

the patients with strong mode-locking was the presence of well-deﬁned “satellite clouds”

in time-delay map (see Fig. 3). Therefore, the time-delay map can be also used to detect

mode-locking; however, this method is non-quantitative, less sensitive than the ﬂuctuation-

function-based technique, and does not give a hint, which mode-locking modes are observed.

The presence of a natural quantitative measure [the wavelet transform amplitudes] is also

the main advantage of our approach over the alternative method.

As compared with the alternative techniques, our method of mode-locking detection

is very simple and does not require synchronous respiration rhythm recording (unlike the
thorough method [44]), and can be conveniently used to ﬁnd relatively short (>
∼

locking periods from a 24-hour recording. Besides, it provides a natural measure to quantify

10 min)

the degree of mode-locking (unlike the method of using the angle-of-returntime map [46]).

H. CONCLUSIONS

Below is an attempt to classify the measures of heart rate variability.

1. “linear” methods — based on standard statistical measures and on the Fourier analysis.

These are the only methods, which are widely used in clinical practice.

2. “nonlinear” methods:

(a) scale-invariant methods:

i. single-scaling analysis (calculation of the Hurst exponent H);

17

(a)

23:58:50

1250

1000

(b)
ν

1

4

16

64

256

1024

4096 16384

FIG. 10: Patient with 3:1 mode locking between heart rate and respiration: (a) heart beat intervals

(in milliseconds) plotted versus the beat number. Heart rate has a pronounced oscillatory com-

ponent; vertical lines mark the period of three heart beats, horizontal lines indicate the sequences

with coherent phase. (b) Fluctuation function (arbitrary units) is plotted versus the time lag ν (in

heart beats); the oscillating component is magniﬁed.

ii. multi-scaling analysis — calculation of the exponent spectra [Lipschitz-

H¨older spectrum f (h), mass exponents τ (q), or structure function exponent

spectrum ζ(q)]; these seem to be the most promising measures, at least for

prognostic purposes;

iii. calculation of the multi-scale entropy;

iv. analysis of the HRV-data segments with similar mean heart rate;

v. analysis of the distribution law of low-variability periods (performs well in

diagnostic tests, there are no prognostic tests yet);

(b) scale-dependant methods:

i. performing a phase-space analysis (entropy-based measures, correlation di-

mension, Lyapunov exponents etc);

ii. calculating wavelet spectra at speciﬁc time-scales;

iii. heart rhythm and respiration mode-locking analysis.

Human heart rate ﬂuctuates in a complex and non-stationary manner. Elaborating eﬃ-

cient and adequate tools for the analysis of such signals has been a great challenge for the

researchers during last decades. The above given long list of nonlinear techniques proves

that the research has been successful, various important features of such time-series have

18

revealed. However, there is no consensus of which methods are most eﬃcient from the point

of view of clinical applications. On the one hand, this is caused by the high non-stationarity

and irreproducibility of these time-series: the complex measures of HRV depend not only on

the healthiness of the heart, but also on the daily habits of the subject [47] and on the ran-

dom events of the recording day. On the other hand, dialogue between physicists and doctors

seems to be ineﬃcient: physicists publish research results based on small test groups; doctors

are waiting for follow-up studies using extended and homogeneous test groups, but there

seems to be no-one who has both necessary resources (funding, mathematical education,

access to clinical data-bases), and motivation of doing such analysis.

This study has been supported by the Estonian Science Foundation grant No 4151.

Acknowledgments

References

[1] Liebovitch, L.S. et al., Nonlinear properties of cardiac rhythm abnormalities. Phys.

Rev. E, 1999, 59, 3312–3319.

[2] Lass, J., Biosignal Interpretation: Study of Cardiac Arrhytmhmias and Electromag-

netic Field Eﬀects on Human Nervous System, pp 13-6. PhD theses, TTU press,

2002.

[3] Hon E.H., Lee S.T., Electronic evaluations of the fetal heart rate patterns preceding

fetal death, further observations Am. J. Obstet. Gynec., 1965, 87, 814–826.

[4] Wolf M.M., Varigos G.A., Hunt D., Sloman J.G., Sinus arrhythmia in acute myocardial

infarction. Med. J. Australia, 1978, 2, 52–53.

[5] Akselrod S., Gordon D., Ubel F.A., Shannon D.C., Barger A.C., Cohen R.J., Power

spectrum analysis of heart rate ﬂuctuation: a quantitative probe of beat to beat

cardiovascular control. Science, 1981, 213, 220–222.

[6] Kleiger R.E., Miller J.P., Bigger J.T., Moss A.J., and the Multi-center Post-Infarction

Research Group, Decreased heart rate variability and its association with increased

19

mortality after acute myocardial infarction. Am. J. Cardiol., 1987, 59, 256–262.

[7] Malik M., Farrell T., Cripps T., and Camm A.J., Heart rate variability in relation to

prognosis after myocardial infarction: selection of optimal processing techniques. Eur.

Heart J., 1989, 10, 1060–1074.

[8] Bigger J.T., Fleiss J.L., Steinman R.C., Rolnitzky L.M., Kleiger R.E., Rottman J.N.

Frequency domain measures of heart period variability and mortality after myocardial

infarction. Circulation, 1992, 85, 164–171.

[9] West B.J., Goldberger A.L., Rooner G. and Bhargava V., Nonlinear dynamics of the

heartbeat. 1. The av junction: passive conduct on active oscillator. Physica D, 1985,

17, 198 – 206.

[10] Engelbrecht, J., Kongas, O., Driven oscillators in modelling of heart dynamics. Ap-

plicable Anal., 1995 57, 119–144.

[11] Babloyantz A., Destexhe A., Is the normal heart a periodic oscillator? Biol. Cybern.,

1988, 58, 203–211.

1997, 389, 492–495.

[12] Poon C.S., Merrill C.K., Decrease of cardiac chaos in congestive heart failure. Nature,

[13] Voss A., Kurths, J., Kleiner, H.J., Witt, A., Wessel, N., Saparin, P., Osterziel, K.J.,

Schurath, R., and Dietz, R., The application of methods of non-linear dynamics for the

improved and predictive recognition of patients threatened by sudden cardiac death.

Cardiovasc. Res., 1996 31, 419–433.

[14] Pincus, S., Approximate entropy (ApEn) as a complexity measure. Chaos, 1995, 5,

[15] Govindan, R.B., Narayanan, K., and Gopinathan, M.S., On the evidence of deter-

ministic chaos in ECG: Surrogate and predictability analysis. Chaos, 1998, 8, 495 –

110–117.

502.

[16] Grassberger, P. and Procaccia, J., Measuring the strangeness of a strange attractor,

Physca D, 1983 9, 189–208.

20

5(1), 143–154.

601.

York 2001.

A, 1995, 215, 439–450.

Cambridge 1997.

(4 pages).

1061–1075.

[17] Kantz, H., Schreiber, T., Dimension estimates and physiological data. Chaos, 1995,

[18] Kanters, J.K., Holstein-Rathlou, N.H., and Agner, E., Lack of evidence for low-

dimensional chaos in heart rate variablity. J. Cardivasc. Electrophys., 1994, 5, 591–

[19] Bezerianos, A., Bountis, T., Papaioannou, G., and Polydoropoulus, P., Nonlinear time

series analysis of electrocardiograms. Chaos, 1995, 5, 95–101.

[20] Berne, R.M. and Levy, N.M., Cardiovascular physiology. Eighth edition. Mosby, New

[21] Kaplan, D.L. and Talajic, M., Dynamics of heart rate. Chaos, 1991, 1, 251–256.

[22] Rosenblum, M. and Kurths, J., A model of neural control of the heart rate. Physica

[23] Kantz, H. and Schreiber, T. Nonlinear time series analysis, Cambridge Univ. Press,

[24] S¨akki, M, Kalda, J, Vainu, M, and Laan, M, What does the correlation dimension of

the human heart rate measure? e-print http://arxiv.org/abs/physics/0112031, 2001

[25] Zebrowski, J.J., Poplawska, W., Baranowski, R., Buchner, T., Symbolic dynamics

and complexity in a physiological time series. Chaos, Solitons, Fractals, 2000, 11,

[26] Peng C.K., Mietus, J., Hausdorﬀ, J.M., Havlin, S., Stanley, H.E., and Goldberger,

A.L., Long-range anticorrelations and non-Gaussian behavior of the heartbeat. Phys.

Rev. Lett., 1993, 70, 1343–1347.

[27] Peng, C.K., Havlin, S., Stanley, H.E., and Goldberger, A.L., Quantiﬁcation of scaling

exponents and crossover phenomena in nonstationary heartbeat time series. Chaos,

1995, 5 (1), 82–87.

21

[28] Ivanov, P.Ch., Rosenblum, M.G., Amaral, L.A.N., Struzik, Z., Havlin, S., Goldberger,

A.L., and Stanley, H.E., Multifractality in human heartbeat dynamics, Nature, 1999,

399, 461–465.

2388–2391.

[29] Amaral, L.A.N., Goldberger, A.L.,

Ivanov, P.Ch., and Stanley, H.E., Scale-

independent measures and pathologic cardiac dynamics. Phys. Rev. Lett., 1998, 81,

[30] Thurner, S. Feurstein, M.C., and Teich, M.C., Multiresolution wavelet analysis of

heartbeat intervals discriminates healthy patients from those with cardiac pathology.

Phys. Rev. Lett., 1998, 80 1544–1547.

[31] Mandelbrot, B.B., and Van Ness, J.V., Fractional Brownian motion, fractional noises

and applications, SIAM Rev., 1968, 10, 422-434.

[32] Kobayashi M., Musha T., 1/f ﬂuctuation of heart beat period. IEEE Trans. Biomed.

Eng., 1982, 29, 456–457.

[33] Yamamoto Y., Hughson R.L., Coarse-graining spectral analysis: new method for

studying heart rate variability. J. Appl. Physiol., 1991, 71, 1143–1150.

[34] Ashkenazy, Y., Lewkowicz, M., Levitan, J., Moelgaard, H., Bloch Thomsen, P. E.,

and Saermark, K., Discrimination of the healthy and sick cardiac autonomic nervous

system by a new wavelet analysis of heartbeat intervals Fractals, 1998 6, 197–203.

[35] Ashkenazy, Y., Lewkowicz, M., Levitan, J., Havlin, S., Saermark, K., Moelgaard, H.,

and Bloch Thomsen, P. E., Discrimination of the healthy and sick cardiac autonomic

nervous system by a new wavelet analysis of heartbeat intervals. Fractals, 1999, 7,

85–91.

[36] Saermark, K., Moellery,M., Hintzey, U., Moelgaardz, H., Bloch Thomsenx, P.E.,

Huikuri, H., Makikiallio, T., Levitan, J., and Lewkowicz, M., Comparison of recent

methods of analyzing heart rate variability. Fractals, 2000 8, 315–322.

[37] Lin, D. C. and Hughson, R. L., Modeling Heart Rate Variability in Healthy Humans:

A Turbulence Analogy. Phys. Rev. Lett., 2001, 86, 1650–1653.

22

[38] Costa, M., Goldberger, A. L., and Peng C.-K., Multiscale Entropy Analysis of Complex

Physiologic Time Series. Phys. Rev. Lett., 2002, 89, 068102 (4 pages).

[39] Kalda, J., Vainu, M. and S¨akki, M., The methods of nonlinear dynamics in the analysis

of heart rate variability for children. Med. Biol. Eng. Comp., 1999, 37, 69–72.

[40] Kalda, J, S¨akki, M, Vainu, M, and Laan, M, Zipf’s law in human heartbeat dynamics.

e-print http://arxiv.org/abs/physics/0110075 (4 pages, 2001).

[41] Bernaola-Galv´an, P., Ivanov, P. Ch., Amaral, L.A.N., and Stanley, H. E., Scale Invari-

ance in the Nonstationarity of Human Heart Rate. Phys. Rev. Lett., 2001, 87, 168105

[42] Zipf, G.K., Human Behavior and the Principle of Least Eﬀort. Cambridge, Addison-

(4 pages).

Wesley, 1949.

[43] Mandelbrot, B.B., The Fractal Geometry of Nature, Freeman, San Francisco, 1983.

[44] Sch¨afer, C., Rosenblum, M.G., Kurths, J., and Abel, H.H., Heartbeat Synchronized

with Ventilation. Nature, 1998, 392, 239–240.

[45] Jaccard, J. and Wan, C.K., LISREL approaches to interaction eﬀects in multiple

regression. Thousand Oaks, CA, Sage Publications, 1996).

[46] Janson, N.B., Balanov, A.G., Anishchenko, V.S., and McClintock, P.V.E., Phase Syn-

chronization between Several Interacting Processes from Univariate Data. Phys. Rev.

Lett., 2001, 86(9), 1749–1752.

[47] Struzik, Z. R., Revealing local variability properties of human heartbeat intervals with

the local eﬀective h¨older exponent. Fractals, 2001, 9, 77–93.

23

