3
0
0
2
 
l
u
J
 
1
3
 
 
]
h
p
-
d
e
m

.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
7
5
1
7
0
3
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

1

GPCALMA: a Grid Approach to Mammographic Screening
S. Bagnascoa, U. Bottiglib, P. Cerelloa, P. Deloguc, M. E. Fantaccic, E. Lopez Torresd, G. L. Masalab,
P. Olivab, A. Reticoc, S. Stumbob

aI.N.F.N., Sezione di Torino, Italy.

bStruttura Dipartimentale di Matematica e Fisica dell’Universit`a di Sassari and Sezione I.N.F.N. di
Cagliari, Italy

cDipartimento di Fisica dell’Universit`a and Sezione I.N.F.N. di Pisa, Italy

dCEADEN, Habana, Cuba

The next generation of High Energy Physics experiments requires a GRID approach to a distributed computing
system and the associated data management: the key concept is the ¨Virtual Organisation¨(VO), a group of
geographycally distributed users with a common goal and the will to share their resources. A similar approach is
being applied to a group of Hospitals which joined the GPCALMA project (Grid Platform for Computer Assisted
Library for MAmmography), which will allow common screening programs for early diagnosis of breast and, in
the future, lung cancer. HEP techniques come into play in writing the application code, which makes use of
neural networks for the image analysis and shows performances similar to radiologists in the diagnosis. GRID
technologies will allow remote image analysis and interactive online diagnosis, with a relevant reduction of the
delays presently associated to screening programs.

1. Introduction

A reduction of breast cancer mortality in
asymptomatic women is possible in case of early
diagnosis [1], which is available thanks to screen-
ing programs, a periodical mammographic exami-
nation performed for 49-69 years old women. The
GPCALMA Collaboration aims at the develop-
ment of tools that would help in the early diagno-
sis of breast cancer: Computer Assisted Detection
(CAD) would signiﬁcantly improve the prospects
for mammographic screening, by quickly provid-
ing reliable information to the radiologists.

A dedicated software to search for massive le-
sions and microcalciﬁcation clusters was devel-
oped recently (1998-2001):
its best results in
the search for massive lesions (microcalciﬁcation
clusters) are 94% (92%) for sensitivity and 95%
(92%) for speciﬁcity. Meanwhile,
in view of
the huge distributed computing eﬀort required
by the CERN/LHC collaborations, several GRID
It was soon understood
projects were started.
that the application of GRID technologies to a

database of mammographic images would facil-
itate a large-scale screening program, providing
transparent and real time access to the full data
set.

The data collection in a mammographic screen-
ing program will intrinsically create a distributed
database,
involving several sites with diﬀerent
functionality: data collection sites and diagnos-
tic sites, i.e. access points from where radiolo-
gists would be able to query/analyze the whole
distributed database. The scale is pretty similar
to that of LHC projects: taking Italy as an ex-
ample, a full mammographic screening program
would act on a target sample of about 6.8 mil-
lion women, thus generating 3.4 millions mam-
mographic exams/year. With an average size of
60 M B/exam, the amount of raw data would be
in the order of 200 T B/year: a screening program
on the European scale would be a data source
comparable to one of the LHC experiments.

GPCALMA was proposed in 2001, with the
purpose of developing a ¨GRID application¨, based

2

on technologies similar to those adopted by the
CERN/ALICE Collaboration. In each hospital,
digital images will be stored in the local database
and registered to a common service (Data Cata-
logue). Data describing the mammograms, also
known as metadata, will also be stored in the
Data Catalogue and could be used to deﬁne an
input sample for any kind of epidemiology study.
The algorithm for the image analysis will be sent
to the remote site where images are stored, rather
than moving them to the radiologist’s sites. A
preliminary selection of cancer candidates will be
quickly performed and only mammograms with
cancer probabilities higher than a given thresh-
old would be transferred to the diagnostic sites
and interactively analysed by one or more radiol-
ogists.

2. The GPCALMA CAD Station

The hardware requirements for the GPCALMA
CAD Station are very simple: a PC with SCSI
bus connected to a planar scanner and to a
high resolution monitor. The station can pro-
cess mammograms directly acquired by the scan-
ner and/or images from ﬁle and allows human
and/or automatic analysis of the digital mammo-
gram. The software conﬁguration for the use in
local mode requires the installation of ROOT[2]
and GPCALMA, which can be downloaded ei-
ther in the form of source code from the respec-
tive CVS servers. The functionality is usually
accessed through a Graphic User Interface, or,
for developers, the ROOT interactive shell. The
Graphic User Interface (ﬁg. 1) allows the acquisi-
tion of new data, as well as the analysis of exist-
ing ones. Three main menus drive the creation of
(access to) datasets at the patient and the image
level and the execution of CADe algorithms. The
images are displayed according to the standard
format required by radiologists: for each image,
it is possible to insert or modify diagnosis and an-
notations, manually select the Regions of Interest
(ROI) corresponding to the radiologists geomet-
rical indication. An interactive procedure allows
zooming, either continously or on a selected re-
gion, windowing, gray levels and contrast selec-
The
tion, image inversion, luminosity tuning.

Figure 1. The GPCALMA Graphic User Inter-
face. Three menus, corresponding to the Patient,
the Images and the CAD diagnosis levels, drive
it. On the left, the CAD results for microcal-
ciﬁcations and masses are shown in red squares
and green circles, together with the radiologist’s
diagnosis (blue circle). On the right, the image
colours are inverted. The widget drives the up-
date of patient and image related metadata.

human analysis produces a diagnosis of the breast
lesions in terms of kind, localization on the image,
average dimensions and, if present, histological
type. The automatic procedure ﬁnds the ROI’s
on the image with a probability of containing an
interesting area larger than a pre-selected thresh-
old value.

3. Grid Approach

The amount of data generated by a national
or european screening program is so large that
they can’t be managed by a single computing cen-
tre. In addition, data are generated according to
an instrinsically distributed pattern: any hospital
participating to the program will collect a small
fraction of the data. Still, that amount would
be large enough to saturate the available network
connections.

The availability of the whole database to a radi-
ologist, regardless of the data distribution, would
provide several advantages:

• the CAD algorithms could be trained on a
much larger data sample, with an improve-
ment on their performance, in terms of both
sensitivity and speciﬁcity.

• the CAD algorithms could be used as real
time selectors of images with high breast
cancer probability (see ﬁg. 2): radiologists
would be able to prioritise their work, with
a remarkable reduction of the delay between
the data acquisition and the human diagno-
sis (it could be reduced to a few days).

• data associated to the images (i.e., meta-
data) and stored on the distributed system
would be available to select the proper input
for epidemiology studies or for the training
of young radiologists.

These advantages would be granted by a GRID
approach: the conﬁguration of a Virtual Organ-
isation, with common services (Data and Meta-
data Catalogue, Job Scheduler, Information Sys-
tem) and a number of distributed nodes provid-
ing computing and storage resources would al-
low the implementation of the screening, tele-
training and epidemiology use cases. However,
with respect to the model applied to High En-
ergy Physics, there are some important diﬀer-
ences: the network conditions do not allow the
transfer of large amounts of data, the local nodes
(hospitals) do not agree on the raw data transfer
to other nodes as a standard and, most impor-
tant, some of the use cases require interactivity.
According to these restrictions, our approach to
the implementation of the GPCALMA Grid ap-
plication is based on two diﬀerent tools: AliEn [3]
for the management of common services, PROOF
[2] for the interactive analysis of remote data
without data transfer.

3.1. Data Management

The GPCALMA data model foresees several
Data Collection Centres 2 , where mammograms
are collected, locally stored and registered in the
Data Catalogue.
In order to make them avail-
able to a radiologist connecting from a Diagnostic
Centre, it is mandatory to use a mechanism that
identiﬁes the data corresponding to the exam in

3

Figure 2. The screening use case: Data Collection
Centres store and register the images and the as-
sociated metadata in the AliEn Data Catalogue.
Radiologists, from Diagnosis Centres, start the
CAD remotely, without raw data transfer, mak-
ing use of PROOF. Only the images correspond-
ing to cancer probability larger than the selected
threshold are moved to the Diagnosis Centre for
the real-time visual inspection. Eventually, the
small fraction of undeﬁned cases can be sent to
other radiologists.

a site-independent way: they must be selected by
means of a set of requirements on the attached
metadata and identiﬁed through a Logical Name
which must be independent of their physical loca-
tion. AliEn implements these features in its Data
Catalogue Services, run by the Server: data are
registered making use of a hierarchical namespace
for their Logical Names and the system keeps
track of their association to the actual name of the
physical ﬁles. In addition, it is possible to attach
metadata to each level of the hierarchical names-
pace. The Data Catalogue is browsable from the
AliEn command line as well as from the Web
portal; the C++ Application Program Interface
(API) to ROOT is under development. Metadata
associated to the images can be classiﬁed in sev-
eral categories: patient and exam identiﬁcation
data, results of the CAD algorithm analysis, ra-
diologist’s diagnosis, histological diagnosis. etc..
Some of these data will be directly stored in the

4

Data Catalogue, but some of them may be stored
in dedicated ﬁles and registered: the decision will
be made after a discussion with the radiologists.
A dedicated AliEn Server for GPCALMA has
in collaboration with the
been conﬁgured [4],
AliEn development team. Fig. 3 shows a screen-
shot from the WEB Portal.

Figure 3. Screenshot from the GPCALMA AliEn
WEB Portal. Making use of the left side frame,
the site can be navigated. General Information
about the AliEn project, the installation and con-
ﬁguration guides, the status of the Virtual Or-
ganisation Services can be accessed. On the main
frame, the list of the core services is shown, to-
gether with their status.

3.2. Remote Data Processing

Tele-diagnosis and tele-training require interac-
tivity in order to be fully exploited, while in the
case of screening it would be possible - altough
not optimal - to live without. The PROOF Par-
allel ROOt Facility system [2] allows to run in-
teractive parallel processes on a distributed clus-
ter of computers. A dedicated cluster of several
PCs was conﬁgured and the remote analysis of a
digitised mammogram without data transfer was
recently run. As soon as input selection from the
AliEn Data Catalogue will be possible, more com-
plex use cases will be deployed. The basic idea is
that, whenever a list of input Logical Names will
be selected, that will be split into a number of

sub-lists containing all the ﬁles stored in a given
site and each sub-list will be sent to the corre-
sponding node, where the mammograms will be
analysed.

4. Present Status and Plans

The project is developing according to the orig-
inal schedule. The CAD algorithms were rewrit-
ten in C++, making use of ROOT, in order to be
PROOF-compliant; moreover, the ROOT func-
tionality allowed a signiﬁcant improvement of the
Graphic User Interface, which, thanks to the pos-
sibility to manipulate the image and the asso-
ciated description data, is now considered fully
satisfactory by the radiologists involved in the
project. The GPCALMA application code is
available via CVS server for download and in-
stallation; a script to be used for the node con-
ﬁguration is being developed.The AliEn Server,
which describes the Virtual Organisation and
manages its services, is installed and conﬁgured;
some AliEn Clients are in use, and they will soon
be tested with GPCALMA jobs. The remote
analysis of mammograms was successfully accom-
plished making use of PROOF. Presently, all but
one the building blocks required to implement the
tele-diagnosis and screening use cases were de-
ployed. As soon as the implementation of the
data selection from the ROOT shell through the
AliEn C++ API will be available, GPCALMA
nodes will be installed in the participating hos-
pitals and connected to the AliEn Server, hosted
by INFN. Hopefully, that task will be completed
by the end of 2004.

5. Acknowledgments

The authors wish to thank the AliEn develop-
ment team for their support and guidance in the
installation and conﬁguration of the GPCALMA
server.

REFERENCES

1. Lancet 2000, 355, 1822-1823.
2. http://root.cern.ch.
3. http://alien.cern.ch.
4. http://gpcalma.to.infn.it.

