3
0
0
2
 
v
o
N
 
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
d
e
m

.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
4
0
0
1
1
3
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

3-Dimensional Mapping of Corneal Topography and Thickness

Jos´e B. Almeida and Sandra Franco
Universidade do Minho, Departamento de F´isica, 4710-057 Braga, Portugal.∗
(Dated: February 2, 2008)

An optical system that provides topographical maps of both external and internal corneal surfaces
as well as the latter’s thickness map is here described. Optical sections of the cornea are obtained
by illumination with a collimated beam expanded in a fan shape by a small rotary cylindrical lens.
The light diﬀused from the cornea is observed by two cameras and processed in order to yield the
surfaces’ proﬁles.

The optical system used to project a thin rotating line on the cornea consists of a white light
source provided with optical ﬁber bundle output which is ﬁrst conditioned by a set of lenses so
that it would produce a spot on the cornea. A small cylinder lens is used to expand the beam in
one direction so that a thin line illuminates the cornea, rather than a spot. The cylinder lens is
provided with motor driven rotation about an axis normal to its own in order to rotate the line on
the cornea such that the projected line scans the whole cornea; the illuminator is completed with a
slit aperture.

The cornea is not perfectly transparent, scattering some of the light that traverses it; this fact is
used for its observation by two cameras. These are placed at pre-deﬁned angles with the illumination
axis, so that optical sections of the cornea can be seen; the use of two cameras avoids the need for
camera rotation in synchronism with the cylinder. The two cameras’ images can be combined in
order to simulate a single virtual rotating camera.

Image processing is used to extract information about the corneal surfaces proﬁles and thickness
from the optical sections. Several peculiar aspects of processing are discussed, namely the corneal
edge detection algorithm, the correction for angle of view and deformation due to observation of the
inner surface through the cornea.

PACS numbers: 42.66.Ct; 42.30.-d; 87.57.-s.

I.

INTRODUCTION

With the advent of refractive surgery precise corneal
pachymetry thickness has become increasingly impor-
tant, as parameters related to corneal shape and thick-
ness must be accurately measured in order to ensure
safety and accuracy ever more complex interventions.
Knowledge of corneal thickness is also useful when study-
ing corneal pathological conditions such as keratoconus,
[1, 2, 3] investigating corneal physiology [4, 5] and in
contact lens research. [6, 7, 8, 9, 10]

Many pachymetry techniques have been developed for
the determination of central corneal thickness, with op-
tical pachymetry the most commonly used. However,
this technique is slow and the results are subjective be-
cause the operator must operate the doubling device,
estimating the point at which the lines corresponding
to the two corneal surfaces either just touch or over-
lap, depending on the method used. On the other
hand ultrasonic pachymeters do not require much train-
ing and produce more rapid and objective results, al-
though they require an anesthetized cornea, forbidden
to some practitioners in some countries. New pachy-
metric methods based on optical technology have re-
cently been developed and clinically applied, some of
them providing pachymetric maps and not only central

∗Electronic address: bda@ﬁsica.uminho.pt

thickness. Confocal microscopy, videopachymetry, three-
dimensional topography marketed as Orbscan, optical to-
mography, non-contact and contact specular microscopy,
and low-coherence interferometry are other techniques
used in the measurement of corneal thickness. A review
of these methods has been published.[11]

The authors developed an optical corneal tomographer
that uses two CCD cameras and an innovative illuminat-
ing system that allows thickness measurements along any
desired meridian and also motorized scanning of the en-
tire cornea. The optical principles and technical details
of a precursor apparatus have been described. [12, 13, 14]

II. SYSTEM DESCRIPTION

The optical part of the system consists of an illumi-
nator and two CCD cameras (COU 2252) provided with
55 mm telecentric lenses; this is complemented by an ap-
propriate headrest and data processing computer. Fig.
1 shows a picture of the optical components, where it
is possible to see the special arrangement of illuminator
and the two cameras.

The illuminator is aligned with the visual axis and
comprises a quartz halogen light source an optical ﬁber
bundle, a collimator, a small cylindrical lens, a convex
lens and an apodizing aperture slit, see Fig. 2. After the
beam is collimated, a small cylindrical lens expands it in
a fan. This lens has the shape of a rod with a diameter
of 5 mm and is held in a mount that can be rotated to

2

FIG. 1: View of the optical components; notice the two cam-
eras and the illuminator.

produce rotary scanning of all of the cornea. The fan
is then focused on the corneal surface by a convex lens
projecting a thin strip of light whose orientation follows
the cylinder lens’ orientation.

FIG. 3: Vertical section of an eye showing the cornea as a
grey arc; the iris can be seen as the white saturated area with
the lens sitting in the center.

faster rotation scanning then would be possible if a single
camera had to be rotated in synchronism with the lens.

FIG. 2: Detailed view of the illuminator showing the rotation
mechanism and the apodizing slit.

The light diﬀused by both surfaces and the inner
cornea is collected by two video cameras placed at 60◦
with the light beam and deﬁning with the visual axis
planes perpendicular to each other. Each camera sees
an image similar to Fig. 3, where the cornea appears as
a gray area in with the shape of an arc; in the origi-
nal colored image the cornea appears in dark blue and
can be easily distinguished from the iris, which is usu-
ally shown in diﬀerent color, frequently bright orange.
Obviously the arc’s orientation depends on the camera
and on the cylinder lens’ orientation, as shown in Fig.
4. The data of the two cameras is then used to compute
the corneal thickness. The two cameras act like a sin-
gle virtual camera that can be rotated with the cylinder
lens; the advantage of using two cameras is that it allows

FIG. 4: Oblique section of the cornea obtained by the camera
on the horizontal plane when the projected light strip makes
◦
an angle of approximately 45

with the vertical direction.

Figure 5 illustrates the working principle. A light beam
incident on the cornea is scattered on the inside and the
scattered light can be observed at an angle to the inci-
dence direction; since a corneal meridian is illuminated
the scattered light produces the arc shape already men-

Beam

t’

Observation

3

edges of the gray arc image of the cornea using the
method known as ”adaptive thresholding” reported by
Hachicha et al. [15]. The procedure involves the analy-
sis of the gray-level along a scan line crossing the corneal
image and comparing this to a predeﬁned threshold level.
A pixel Pi is selected as an ”edge point,” when it veriﬁes
the two simultaneous conditions:

I(Pi) ≥ Imin + 0.5(Imax − Imin)
I(Pi−1) < Imin + 0.5(Imax − Imin)

(1)

where the pixels are ranked from 1 to N across the pro-
ﬁle, I(Pi) is the gray-level at pixel Pi and Imin, Imax
are the gray-level minimum and maximum, respectively.
Hachicha et al. [15] used a threshold of 0.3(Imax−Imin) in
their work but we found that increasing the factor from
0.3 to 0.5 gave us more reliable results. The discrete edge
points are then joined by spline ﬁtting, allowing determi-
nation of the normal direction and apparent thickness
measured along that direction.

mm

0.5

FIG. 5: Working principle: the illuminating beam traverses
the cornea and scattered light is observed at an established
angle; the observed thickness t′
is apparent and must be cor-
rected by software.

tioned. The shape and width of the arc have information
about the corneal’s shape and thickness but data pro-
cessing is needed to retrieve the correct values for those
parameters.

III. DATA PROCESSING

A considerable amount of processing is necessary in or-
der to recover the true shape and thickness of the cornea
from the cameras’ images we will detail the various steps
below. Fortunately processing speed is not important
because all the collected data can be saved for later pro-
cessing, reducing considerably the observation time.

The illustration in Fig. 3 was obtained by the camera
laying on the horizontal plane when the projected light
strip was vertical; this image depicts a vertical section
of the cornea and the corresponding image on the verti-
cal camera carries no information because it is reduced
to a bright straight line. The situation is reversed when
the projected strip is horizontal but for all other situ-
ations there is information in both images, which must
be processed in order to obtain the image that would be
seen by a virtual camera on a plane always normal to the
projected strip. The ﬁrst processing step consists in the
application of simple trigonometric rules to recover the
virtual camera’s image.

The second processing step consists in detecting the

-2 -1

0

1

2

3

mm

FIG. 6: Corneal proﬁle along a vertical meridian obtained by
edge detection and spline ﬁtting on the acquired image.

The corneal thickness was computed from the distance
between the two edge proﬁles aﬀected by corrections to
allow for the observation angle and corneal curvature.
The former of these corrections was detailed in previ-
ous work [14] and consists only in dividing the apparent
thickness by the sine of the observation angle; the latter
was performed considering the optical magniﬁcation pro-
duced by an average curvature and could be improved
by iterative processing, using pre-determined curvature
at each point. We are presently developing the software
for data display in the form of topographical and pachy-
metric maps; for the moment we can produce proﬁle and
thickness graphics along any chosen meridian, as illus-
trated in Figs. 6 and 7.

IV. CONCLUSION

The authors describe a novel optical system designed
to provide topographical maps of both corneal surfaces
and corneal pachymetry. Although not fully devel-
oped the system is already capable of delivering clini-
cally meaningful information, relevant for diagnosis and
surgery.

The authors describe the optical system used to project
a thin rotating line on the cornea. This is obtained with
a white light source provided with optical ﬁber bundle
output; the light from the ﬁber bundle is ﬁrst conditioned

mm

0.62

0.6

0.58

0.56

0.54

0.52

-3

-2

-1

1

2

3

mm

FIG. 7: Corneal thickness from the proﬁle in Fig. 6 vs. dis-
tance from the visual axis.

by a set of lenses so that it would produce a spot on the
cornea. A small cylinder lens is used to expand the beam
in one direction so that a thin line illuminates the cornea,

4

rather than a spot. The cylinder lens is provided with
motor driven rotation about an axis normal to its own
in order to rotate the line on the cornea such that the
projected line scans the whole cornea.

The cornea is not perfectly transparent, scattering
some of the light that traverses it; this fact is used for
its observation by two cameras. These are placed at pre-
deﬁned angles with the illumination axis, so that optical
sections of the cornea can be seen; the use of two cameras
avoids the need for camera rotation in synchronism with
the cylinder. The two cameras’ images can be combined
in order to simulate a single virtual rotating camera.

Image processing was used to extract information
about the corneal surfaces proﬁles and thickness from
the optical sections. Several peculiar aspects of process-
ing were presented and discussed, namely the corneal
edge detection algorithm, the correction for angle of view
and deformation due to observation of the inner surface
through the cornea. Some examples of observed corneal
proﬁles were shown.

[1] M. A. Paraﬁta, J. M. Gonz´alez-M´eijome, J. A. D´ıaz, and
E. Yebra-Pimentel, Arch. Soc. Esp. Oftalmol. 75, 633
(2000).

[2] R. B. Mandell and K. A. Polse, Arch. Ophthalmol. 82,

182 (1969).

[3] C. Edmund, Acta Ophthalmol. 65, 145 (1987).
[4] A. Tomlinson, Acta Ophthalmol. 50, 73 (1972).
[5] S. G. El Hage and C. Beaulne, Am. J. Optom. Physiol.

[6] R. K. Rivera and K. A. Polse, Optom. Vis. Sci. 73, 178

Opt. 50, 863 (1973).

(1996).

[7] T. L. Sanders, K. A. Polse, M. D. Sarver, and M. G.
Harris, Am. J. Optom. Physiol. Optics 52, 393 (1975).
[8] J. A. Bonanno and K. A. Polse, Am. J. Optom. Physiol.

Opt. 62, 74 (1985).

[9] B. A. Holden, D. F. Sweeney, A. Vannas, K. T. Nils-
son, and N. Efron, Invest. Ophthalmol. Vis. Sci. 26, 1489
(1985).

[10] B. A. Holden, J. J. McNally, G. W. Mertz, and H. A.

Swarbrick, Acta Ophthalmol. 63, 684 (1985).

[11] M. A. Paraﬁta, E. Yebra-Pimentel, M. J. Gir´aldez,

J. M. Gonz´alez-M´eijome,

and
J. Gonz´alez-P´erez,
in Recent Research Developments in Op-
A. Cervi˜no,
tics, edited by S. G. Pandalai (Research Signpost, India,
2002), pp. 33–51.

[12] S. Franco, J. B. Almeida, and M. Paraﬁta, J. Refract.

Surg. 16, S661 (2000), re-printed from [16].

[13] S. Franco, J. B. Almeida, and M. Paraﬁta, in Vision
Science and its Applications – VSIA (Optical Society of
America, Monterey, California, USA, 2001), pp. 148–151.
[14] S. Franco, J. B. Almeida, and M. Paraﬁta, in 3rd Inter-
national Congress of Wavefront Sensing and Aberration-
Free Refractive Correction (Interlaken, Switzerland,
2002), vol. 18 of J. Refract. Surg., pp. S630–S633.
[15] A. Hachicha, S. Simon, J. Samson, and K. Hanna, Com-
put. Vision Graphics Image Process. 47, 131 (1989).
[16] S. Franco, J. B. Almeida, and M. Paraﬁta, in Vision
Science and its Applications, edited by V. Lakshmi-
narayanan (OSA, Washington D.C., 2000), vol. 35 of
Topics in Optics and Photonics Series, pp. 297–301.

