4
0
0
2
 
n
u
J
 
0
3
 
 
]
h
p
-
d
e
m

.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
7
5
1
6
0
4
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Optimization and performance of an optical cardio-magnetometer

Georg Bison,∗ Robert Wynands,† and Antoine Weis
Department of Physics, University of Fribourg,
Chemin du Mus´ee 3, 1700 Fribourg, Switzerland
(Dated: February 2, 2008)

Cardiomagnetometry is a growing ﬁeld of noninvasive medical diagnostics that
has triggered a need for aﬀordable high-sensitivity magnetometers. Optical
pumping magnetometers are promising candidates satisfying that need since
it was demonstrated that thy can map the heart magnetic ﬁeld. For the op-
timization of such devices theoretical limits on the performance as well as an
experimental approach is presented. The promising result is a intrinsic mag-
netometric sensitivity of 63 fT/√Hz a measurement bandwidth of 140 Hz and
a spatial resolution of 28 mm.

2008 Optical Society of America

c
(cid:13)
OCIS codes:

1.

Introduction

Biomagnetometry is a rapidly growing ﬁeld of noninva-
sive medical diagnostics1.
In particular, the magnetic
ﬁelds generated by the human heart and brain carry valu-
able information about the underlying electrophysiolog-
ical processes2. Since the 1970s superconducting quan-
tum interference devices (SQUIDs) have been used to de-
tect these generally very weak biomagnetic ﬁelds3. The
magnetic ﬁeld of the human heart is the strongest bio-
magnetic signal, with a peak amplitude of 100 pT, but
since this is still orders of magnitude weaker than typi-
cal stray ﬁeld interference the measurement of such sig-
nals could initially only be performed inside expensive
magnetically-shielded rooms (MSR). Progress in medi-
cal research in the past decade has motivated a need for
more aﬀordable cardiomagnetic sensors. Recently, mul-
tichannel SQUIDs were developed that no longer require
shielding due to the use of gradiometric conﬁgurations.
Such devices are commercially available but are still quite
expensive in both capital and operational costs.

Optical pumping magnetometers (OPM) have been
widely known since the 1960s4, and oﬀer both high sen-
sitivity and reliable operation for research5 and applica-
tions like geomagnetometry6. Since OPMs usually work
with a near room-temperature thermal alkali metal va-
por, they avoid the need for the cryogenic cooling that
makes SQUIDs so costly and maintenance intensive. Our
goal was to develop an aﬀordable, maintenance-free de-
vice that is both sensitive and fast enough to measure
the magnetic ﬁeld of the human heart. In order to be
competitive with the well-established SQUIDs, a cardio-
magnetic sensor has to oﬀer a magnetic ﬁeld sensitivity
of at least 1 pT with a bandwidth of about 100 Hz. Fur-

∗Electronic address: georg.bison@unifr.ch
†Present address: Physikalisch–Technische Bundesanstalt, Bun-
desallee 100, 38116 Braunschweig, Germany

thermore, the spatial resolution of the sensor has to be
better than 4 cm, the standard separation of grid points
during mapping.

Since the cardiomagnetometry community is mainly
interested in one of the components of the magnetic ﬁeld
vector, one might think of using vector-type OPMs like
the Hanle magnetometer7 or the Faraday magnetometer,
devices which operate in zero ﬁelds only8. However, these
devices lose their sensitivity in the presence of even tiny
ﬁeld components in directions perpendicular to the ﬁeld
of interest. The broadening caused by such transverse
ﬁeld components must be kept well below the width of
the magnetometer resonance8, thus limiting those com-
ponents to values below a few tenths of pT. Accord-
ingly, optical vector magnetometers cannot be used for
cardiomagnetometry in a straightforward way since the
heart ﬁeld features time-varying transverse ﬁeld compo-
nents on the order of 100 pT. We have therefore con-
centrated on the Mx OPM, which exhibits a fast re-
sponse and which has been shown to be suﬃciently sen-
sitive in an unshielded environment. Furthermore, lamp-
pumped Mx OPMs were used for the ﬁrst biomagnetic
measurements9 with optical magnetometers in the early
1980s, although that work was discontinued. Instead of
lamps, we use diode lasers as a light source in order to
build a device that will scale to the many channels needed
for fast mapping of the cardiomagnetic ﬁeld.

2. Principle of scalar OPM operation

Optically pumped magnetometers operate on the prin-
ciple that the optical properties of a suitable atomic
medium are coupled to its magnetic properties via the
atomic spin. The ensemble average of the magnetic mo-
ments associated with the spins can be treated as a classi-
F
cal magnetization vector M = NF gF µBh
/¯h in space.
i
= NF tr(ρF F) with tr ρF = 1 is the total
F
Here NF h
i
angular momentum of NF atoms in an optical hyper-
ﬁne level F where ρF is the density matrix and gF the
Land´e factor of the state. Optical magnetometers detect

2

The ﬁrst term describes the precession of M around the
magnetic ﬁelds. The second term describes the longitu-
dinal (γ1) and transverse (γ2) relaxation of M. The third
term represents the eﬀect of optical pumping with circu-
larly polarized light that creates the magnetization. It
can be treated as an additional relaxation leading to an
equilibrium orientation aligned with the k-vector of the
incoming light at the pumping rate ΓP . Both relaxations
add up to the eﬀective relaxation rates Γ1,2 = γ1,2 + ΓP .
In the case of small Brf amplitudes, Eq. (2) can be solved
using the rotating–wave approximation10 which leads to
a steady-state solution where M rotates around B0 at
the driving frequency ωrf .

The optical property used in the Mx magnetometer is
the optical absorption coeﬃcient which determines the
power, P , of the light transmitted through the medium.
For circularly polarized light, the transmitted power is
proportional to the projection of M on the k-vector of the
incoming light. Therefore, the precessing magnetization
results in a modulation of the absorption index measur-
able as an oscillation of P . The in-phase and quadrature
components of P with respect to the driving ﬁeld can be
obtained from Eq. (2):

Pip(δ) =

P0 sin(2θ)

Pqu(δ) =

P0 sin(2θ)

−

−

Ω2

rf Γ2/Γ1 + Γ2

Ωrf δ

Ωrf Γ2

Ω2

rf Γ2/Γ1 + Γ2

2 + δ2 , and (3)
(4)
2 + δ2 .

−

ωL
Here Ωrf = γF Brf is the Rabi frequency and δ = ωrf
the detuning of the oscillating ﬁeld B1 from the Larmor
frequency. The constant P0 combines all factors such
as the initial light power, the number of atoms in the
sample, and the cross section for light-atom interactions
determining the absolute amplitude of the signal. The
components can be measured using phase-sensitive de-
tection. The signals are strongest for θ = 45◦, which was
used in all experiments.

Both Pip and Pqu show resonant behavior near δ = 0.
Pqu has an absorptive Lorentzian line shape, and Pip has
a dispersive Lorentzian line shape with the same half
width expressed as

Ω2

∆ωHW =

2 = Γ2√S + 1 .

rf Γ2/Γ1 + Γ2
Here S = Ω2/(Γ1Γ2) is the saturation parameter of the rf
ﬁeld. Figure 2(a) shows measured line shapes under con-
ditions optimized for maximal magnetometric sensitivity
(see Sec. 4 for details).

(5)

q

Signal Pip is of particular interest because it has a dis-
persive shape, featuring a steep linear zero-crossing at
In this region Pip can be used to measure the
δ = 0.
deviation of B0 from the value that corresponds to ωrf .
The same is true for the deviation of the phase diﬀerence
ϕ between the measured oscillation and the driving ﬁeld
from -90◦ (see Fig. 2(b)). The phase diﬀerence ϕ can be
calculated from Pip and Pqu, yielding

tan ϕ =

Pqu
Pip

=

Γ2
δ

.

(6)

Fig. 1. Basic geometry of the Mx-magnetometer setup:
The laser (la) emits a beam that traverses the sample
(sa) at angle θ with respect to the magnetic ﬁeld B0.
The transmitted power is detected by a photodetector
(pd). The static magnetic ﬁeld B0 is aligned along the
z-direction. The oscillating magnetic ﬁeld B1 is aligned
along the x-direction.

changes of the medium’s optical properties induced by
the precession of M in a magnetic ﬁeld Btot. The fre-
quency of this precession, the Larmor frequency ωL, is
proportional to the modulus of Btot:

ωL =

gF µB
¯h

Btot
|

| ≡

γF |

Btot

.

|

(1)

For Cs the constant of proportionality, γF , has a value of
2π
3.5Hz/nT. All atomic vapor magnetometers measure
the magnetic ﬁeld via a direct or indirect measurement
of the Larmor frequency.

×

A. The Mx magnetometer

In the case of the Mx magnetometer, a magnetic-
resonance technique is used to measure the Larmor fre-
quency directly, by employing two perpendicular mag-
netic ﬁelds B0 and B1. The static magnetic ﬁeld B0
is aligned along the z-direction. As Fig. 1 shows, the
k-vector of the laser beam lies in the yz-plane and is ori-
ented at an angle θ with respect to the z-direction. The
magnetometer is sensitive to the modulus of B0. The
oscillating magnetic ﬁeld B1 = ˆxBrf cos ωrf t is aligned
along the x-direction with an amplitude much smaller
than B0.

In order to introduce the basic concepts we discuss the
simplest case of an F = 1/2 state. The motion of M
under the inﬂuence of B0 and B1 is then given by the
Bloch equations:

˙Mx
˙My
˙Mz





=









Mx
My
Mz

γF Brf 2 cos ωrf t
0
γF B0







× 




γ2Mx
γ2My
γ1Mz

− 



+ ΓP 






−

M0 sin θ
M0 cos θ

(2)

.





Mx
My
Mz

−
−
−

3

(9)

(10)

(11)

Fig. 3. Nyquist plots for three diﬀerent values of S. The
solid line is for S = 1, the dashed lines are for S = 0.25
(nearly round) and S = 4 (elliptical), respectively. If ωrf
is scanned towards increasing values the system evolves
clockwise through the Nyquist plot.

lineshape of the phase signal depends only on Γ2, it is
easier to calibrate in absolute ﬁeld units. Furthermore,
light amplitude noise, for instance caused by ﬂuctuating
laser intensities, does not directly aﬀect the phase sig-
nal, since both Pip and Pqu scale in the same way with
light intensity. Only the much weaker coupling via the
light shift can cause the phase signal to reﬂect light am-
plitude noise. Considering those practical advantages of
the phase signal we concentrate in the following sections
on the sensitivity of the phase signal to magnetic ﬁeld
changes.

B. Nyquist plots

The lineshapes Pip(δ), and Pqu(δ) of the magnetic reso-
nance have a major inﬂuence on the magnetometric sen-
sitivity. The magnetic resonances in Eqs. (3) and (4)
can be interpreted as a complex transfer function t(ω)
connecting the current that drives the rf-coils, Ii =
I0 exp(iωt) + c.c., and the photocurrent Ip = t(ω)Ii of
the photodiode. By setting the eﬀective transverse re-
laxation rate Γ2 as the unit of frequency and using the
normalized detuning x (= δ/Γ2), t can be written in di-
mensionless units as:

t = t0

√S(i + x)
1 + S + x2 .

(7)

(8)

A parametric plot of t(x) in the complex plane — called
a Nyquist plot — was found to be useful for the inspec-
tion of experimental data.
In this representation t(x)
appears as an ellipse with diameters dr and di for the
real (in-phase) and imaginary (quadrature) components
respectively (see Fig. 3):

dr = t0

di = t0

S
1 + S
r
√S
1 + S

.

(a) Measured magnetic resonance lineshapes of
Fig. 2.
the in-phase (a1) and quadrature signals (a2), measured
in a single sweep of 20 s with the cardiomagnetometer
placed in a poorly shielded room. Magnetic 50 Hz line
interference was suppressed using a 4th order lowpass ﬁl-
ter (time constant 10 ms). The half-width, derived from a
ﬁt, was ∆ωHW/2π = 173Hz. (b) Magnetic resonance line
shape of the oscillation phase measured with respect to
the driving ﬁeld Brf . The data was obtained in real time
using a digital lock-in ampliﬁer. The ﬁtted half-width is:
∆ωϕ

HW/2π = 109 Hz.

−

The phase signal changes from ϕ = 0 at low frequencies
to ϕ =
π at high frequencies. For practical reasons it
is preferable to shift the phase by 90◦ so that it passes
through zero in the center of the resonance (δ = 0). This
can easily be done by shifting the reference signal by π/2
using the corresponding feature of the phase detector. In
mathematical terms that 90◦ shift is equivalent to the
transformation Pqu

Pqu, yielding

Pip and Pip

→ −

→

tan ϕ′ =

δ
Γ2

.

−

The width of the phase signal ∆ωϕ
HW is smaller than
∆ωHW because it is not aﬀected by rf power broaden-
ing, i.e., it is independent of Ωrf :

∆ωϕ

HW = Γ2 < ∆ωHW .

The narrower lineshape of the phase signal is exactly
compensated by a better S/N ratio of Pip [see Eqs. (5),
(10), and (11)] resulting in a statistically equivalent mag-
netic ﬁeld resolution for both signals. However, since the

4

Fig. 4. Nyquist plot of a resonance with S = 1 when
an interfering sine wave of amplitude ri and phase ϕi is
added. A phase oﬀset of ∆ϕ in the demodulation due to
a poorly adjusted lock-in phase leads to a rotated ellipse.

The saturation parameter of the rf transition, S, can be
extracted from the ratio of the two diameters:

S =

Ω2
Γ1Γ2

=

d2
r
d2
i −

1.

(12)

Figure 4 shows a Nyquist plot of a resonance for a
situation in which an interfering sine wave is added to
the photocurrent, leading to a shifted ellipse. The am-
plitude ri and the phase ϕi of the interference can be
easily extracted from the Nyquist plot. A phase shift
in the demodulation leads to a rotated ellipse.
In this
situation the spectra of in-phase Pip(δ) and quadrature
Pqu(δ) components as a function of rf detuning appear
asymmetric.

By means of Nyquist plots it is easy to distinguish
between an asymmetry caused by improper adjustment
of the lock-in phase and one caused by inhomogeneous
broadening. The latter causes a deviation from the ellip-
tical shape. One model for inhomogeneous broadening is
to assume a gradient in the static magnetic ﬁeld. Since
we use buﬀer-gas cells the atoms do not move over large
distances during their spin coherence lifetime so that in-
homogeneous magnetic ﬁelds are not averaged out. In-
stead, atoms at diﬀerent locations in the cell see diﬀerent
magnetic ﬁelds, resulting in an inhomogeneous broaden-
ing of the magnetic resonance line.

Figure 5 shows calculated Nyquist plots for diﬀerent
gradients of the static ﬁeld B0. The simplest model for
such an inhomogeneity is a constant gradient dBz/dz
over the length lz of the cell. This is expressed by a
convolution of the theoretical magnetic resonance signals
t(x) [see Eq. (9)] with the normalized distribution of mag-
netic ﬁelds g(x) which, in this case, is a constant over the
interval

2xg =

lzdBz/dz .

(13)

γF
Γ2

Since g(x) vanishes everywhere except for

xg ≤

−

x

≤

xg

Fig. 5. Nyquist plots for diﬀerent magnetic ﬁeld distri-
butions, each scaled to ﬁt in a square of length 1. Part
(a) shows the deviation from circular for constant mag-
netic ﬁeld distributions. The innermost trace is for an
unperturbed resonance. The two outer traces are cal-
culated for ﬁeld distribution widths of xg = 40 Γ2 and
400 Γ2, respectively. Part (b) shows the deviation from
circular for linear ﬁeld distributions. The (outer) circular
trace is for an unperturbed resonance. The other two are
calculated for distribution widths of xg = 5 Γ2 and 10 Γ2,
respectively.

the convoluted resonance t′ is given by

t′(x) =

t(x

x′) g(x′) dx′ ,

(14)

xg

−xg

Z

−

which can be evaluated analytically

t′ =

√S
4 xg
ln

−

ln

1 + S + (xg −
1 + S + (xg + x)2

(cid:8)

(cid:2)

x)2

(cid:9)

arctan

x
xg −
√1 + S

(cid:9)(cid:3)

(cid:18)

(cid:19)

−

i
(cid:8)
2 xg r
+ arctan

S
1 + S

(cid:26)
xg + x
√1 + S

(cid:18)

.

(cid:19)(cid:27)

(15)

The main eﬀect of the constant magnetic ﬁeld distribu-
tion is to broaden the resonance, to decrease the ampli-
tude, and to make the line shape diﬀer from a Lorentzian.
In the Nyquist plot this is seen by a deformation of the
elliptical trace towards a rectangular trace as shown in
Fig. 5(a). The eﬀect is clearly visible in Fig. 5(a) for
rather large widths of the magnetic ﬁeld distribution;
in the experiment, however, the eﬀect can be detected
for much smaller inhomogeneities due to the large sig-
nal/noise ratio.

3. Experimental Setup

The magnetometer described here was part of the device
used by us to measure the magnetic ﬁeld of the human
heart11,12. The setup was designed so that a volunteer
could be placed under the sensor, with his heart close

5

→

An extended-cavity diode laser outside the shielded
room was used as a light source. The laser frequency
F = 3 transi-
was actively stabilized to the F = 4
tion of the Doppler broadened Cs D1 line (894 nm) using
DAVLL spectroscopy13 in an auxiliary cell. The light
was delivered to the magnetometer sensor proper by a
multimode ﬁber (800 µm core diameter). After being
collimated, the light was circularly polarized by a combi-
nation of a polarizing beam-splitter and a multiple-order
quarter-wave plate. The circularly polarized light then
passed through a glass cell containing the Cs vapor and
a buﬀer gas to prevent the atoms from being depolarized
by wall collisions. The cell could be heated to 65◦ C us-
ing hot air which ﬂowed through silicon tubes wrapped
around the cell holder. The light power, P , transmit-
ted through the glass cell was detected by a photodiode
specially selected to contain no magnetic materials. A
current ampliﬁer (FEMTO Messtechnik, model DLPCA-
200) converted the photocurrent into a voltage that was
fed to the input of the lock-in ampliﬁer. The detection
method resulted in a noise level 5 to 20% above the elec-
tron shot noise in the photodiode (Fig. 7). The digi-
tal lock-in ampliﬁer (Stanford Research Systems, model
SR830) demodulated the oscillation of P with reference
to the applied oscillating magnetic ﬁeld. That ﬁeld was
generated by two extra windings on each of the Bx coils
and was powered by the analog output of the reference
function generator contained within the lock-in ampliﬁer.
The built-in function generator has the advantage that it
delivers a very pure sine wave (phase locked to the syn-
chronization input) and its amplitude can be controlled
via the GPIB interface of the lock-in ampliﬁer.

In order to record magnetic resonance lineshapes the
lock-in ampliﬁer was synchronized to a reference fre-
quency supplied by a scanning function generator. The
data measured by the lock-in (amplitudes of the in-phase
and quadrature signals) were transmitted in digital form
to a PC, thus avoiding additional noise.

4. Optimization

Although the theory of optical magnetometry is well
known4, predictions about the real performance of a
magnetometer, especially when it is operating in weakly
shielded environments, are diﬃcult to make. The perfor-
mance depends on laser power, rf power, cell size, laser
beam proﬁle, buﬀer-gas pressure, and the temperature-
dependent density of Cs atoms. The size of the cells and
the buﬀer gas pressure were dictated by the available
cells: We used 20 mm long cells with 20 mm diameter
including 45 mbar Ne and 8 mbar Ar with a saturated Cs
vapor. Since the cell is oriented at 45◦ with respect to B0,
the transverse spatial resolution was 28 mm. The cross
section of the laser beam was limited by the 8 mm aper-
tures of the optical components (polarizers and quarter-
wave plates).

Fig. 6. Schematic of the experimental setup. Light from
the diode laser is delivered via an optical ﬁber (of) to
the experiment in the magnetically shielded room (msr).
The light is collimated by a lens (le) and polarized by
a polarizing beam splitter cube (po). The beam splitter
(bs) reﬂects 50% of the beam to photodiode 1 (pd1) used
for monitoring of the initial light power. The remaining
beam passes a quarter-wave plate (λ/4) providing circu-
lar polarized light to the glass cell (gs) that contains the
atomic medium. Photodiode 2 (pd2) measures the trans-
mitted light intensity. Its signal is ampliﬁed by a current
ampliﬁer and fed to the lock-in ampliﬁer (lia). The ref-
erence output of the lia drives the radio frequency coils
(rfc). The reference frequency of the lia is controlled by a
sweep generator (sg). Automatic control and data aqui-
sition is done by a PC via the GPIB bus.

to the glass cell containing the Cs sample. For moving
the volunteer with respect to the sensor—necessary for
mapping the heart magnetic ﬁeld—a bed on a low friction
support was used.

×

×

2.3

The magnetometer sensor head itself was placed in a
room with moderate magnetic shielding. The room was
2.5 m3 in volume shielded by a 1 mm µ-metal
1.7
layer and an 8 mm copper-coated aluminum layer. For
low frequencies, the shielding factor was as low as 5 to
10, whereas 50 Hz interference was suppressed by a factor
of 150. Inside the shielded room, surrounding the sensor
itself, three coil pairs were placed for the three dimen-
sional control of the magnetic ﬁeld.
In the z-direction
(vertical) two round 1 m diameter coils were used. To
make room for the patient, the spacing between the coils
had to be 62 cm, far away from the Helmholtz optimum
of 50 cm. The two coil pairs for the transverse magnetic
ﬁelds (x and y directions) formed four of the faces of a
cube 62 cm on a side. All six coils were driven inde-
pendently by current sources so that the sum and the
diﬀerence of the currents in each coil pair could be cho-
sen independently. This allowed us to control not only
the magnetic ﬁeld amplitudes in all three directions, but
also the gradients dBi/di. The ﬁeld components and gra-
dients were adjusted to produce a homogeneous ﬁeld of
5 µT in the z direction.

6

enough to perform biomagnetic measurements on adults.
In the walk-in shielding chamber available in our labo-
ratory the magnetic noise level was about one order of
magnitude larger than the strongest magnetic ﬁeld gen-
erated by the heart. In order to compensate for this the
actual cardiomagnetic measurements were done with two
magnetometers in a gradiometric conﬁguration11. How-
ever, the optimal working parameters where determined
for a single magnetometer channel only.

Since all time series recorded in this environment are
dominated by magnetic ﬁeld noise, the straightforward
way of measuring the intrinsic noise could not be ap-
plied. As an alternative approach a lower limit for the
intrinsic noise can be calculated using information the-
ory. The so-called Cram´er–Rao lower bounds14 gives a
lower limit on how precisely parameters, such as phase or
frequency, can be extracted from a signal in the presence
of a certain noise level. For the following discussion we
assume that the signal is a pure sine wave aﬀected by
white noise with a power spectral density of ρ2. We de-
ﬁne the signal-to-noise ratio RSN as the rms amplitude,
A, of the sinusoidal signal divided by the noise amplitude,
σ, for the measurement bandwidth, fbw:

RSN =

=

A
σ

A
ρ√fbw

.

(17)

For a magnetometer generating a Larmor frequency
proportional to the magnetic ﬁeld, Eq. (1), the ultimate
magnetic sensitivity is limited by the frequency measure-
ment process. The Cram´er–Rao lower bound for the vari-
ance, Vω, of the frequency measurement14 is used (Ap-
pendix 7) to calculate ρB

ρB =

σB
√fbw

=

4√3√fbw
γF RSN

.

(18)

For cardiac measurements a bandwidth of fbw = 100 Hz
is required. This together with a typical value for
RSN of 104 results in a magnetic ﬁeld resolution of
315 fT/Hz1/2. In order to be competitive with SQUID-
based cardiomagnetometers that feature an intrinsic
noise of 5. . . 20 fT/Hz1/2 this level of performance is not
suﬃcient. For that reason we have concentrated on a dif-
ferent mode of operation where the phase signal is mea-
sured by digital lock-in detection.

In this mode of operation ωrf has a ﬁxed value near the
Larmor frequency. The information about the magnetic
ﬁeld is obtained from the phase shift of the magnetometer
response at that frequency. The Cram´er–Rao bound for
a phase measurement of a signal with known frequency is
used in Appendix 8 to calculate the NEM for that case:

Equations (18) and (19) deﬁne the bandwidth:

ρB =

Γ2
γF RSN√fbw

.

f0 =

Γ2
4√3

,

(19)

(20)

Fig. 7. Root power spectrum of the photocurrent when
the driving ﬁeld is in resonance with the Larmor fre-
quency. The data sample was recorded at 54◦ C under
conditions optimized for maximum magnetometric sensi-
tivity with a resolution bandwidth of 1 Hz (sampling time
1 s). The amplitude measured by the lock-in ampliﬁer
corresponds to the upper horizontal line. The amplitude
of the central peak is depressed, since it is slightly broad-
ened by the Hanning window used by the FFT spectrum
analyzer (see text). The level ρI is the shot-noise level
calculated from the DC-photocurrent. The dashed line
marks the rms noise measured at 23 kHz. The RSN with
105. The
respect to the calculated shot-noise level is 5
rms noise is a factor of 1.55 higher than ρI resulting in a
RSN of 3.2

105.

×

×

A.

Intrinsic resolution

Our magnetometer produces a signal which was propor-
tional to the magnetic ﬁeld changes. The noise of the
signal in a perfectly stable ﬁeld therefore determines the
smallest measurable magnetic ﬁeld change, called the
noise equivalent magnetic ﬁeld (NEM). The NEM is given
by the square root, ρB, of the power spectral density, ρ2
B,
of the magnetometer signal, expressed in T/Hz1/2. The
rms noise, σB, of the magnetometer in a given bandwidth
fbw is then

σB = ρB

fbw.

(16)

p

A straightforward way to measure the intrinsic sensitivity
would be to extract the noise level from a sampled mag-
netometer time series via a Fourier transformation. How-
ever, that process requires very good magnetic shielding
since the measured noise is the sum of the magnetic ﬁeld
noise and the intrinsic noise of the magnetometer. Many
studies under well-shielded conditions have been carried
out in our laboratory, leading to the result that optical
magnetometers are in principle sensitive enough to mea-
sure the magnetic ﬁeld of the human heart. However,
the shielding cylinders used in these investigations were
too small to accommodate a person. The present study
investigates which level of performance can be obtained
in a weakly shielded environment with a volume large

7

Larger light powers also increase the S/N ratio but the
eﬀect can be overcompensated by magnetic resonance
broadening, resulting in a degradation of the magneto-
metric resolution.

Using feedback to stabilize the magnetic resonance
conditions is another way to increase the bandwidth.
Figure 8(c) shows the frequency response of the OPM
in both the free-running (without feedback) mode and
in the phase-stabilized mode where the phase signal is
used to stabilize ωrf to the Larmor frequency ωL. For
large loop gain the bandwidth is mainly limited by loop
delays.

A third method to achieve large bandwidths is the so-
called self-oscillating mode. In this mode the oscillating
signal measured by the photodiode is not demodulated
but rather phase-shifted and fed back to the rf-coils. For
a 90◦ phase shift the system then oscillates at the Larmor
frequency. In order to measure the magnetic ﬁeld, the
frequency of this oscillation has to be measured. Mag-
netic ﬁeld changes then show up — at least theoretically4
— as instantaneous frequency changes. In practice, reac-
tion times smaller than a single Larmor period have been
observed15.

Of the three modes outlined above, the latter two both
rely on frequency measurements. The self-oscillating
magnetometer provides a frequency that has to be mea-
sured. The phase-stabilized magnetometer measures the
frequency via a reference frequency locked to the Lar-
mor frequency. As a consequence, both methods suﬀer
from the reduced magnetometric resolution predicted by
Eq. (18). Therefore, we have concentrated on the free-
running mode of operation for which the magnetometric
resolution is given by Eq. (19) and the bandwidth by
Eq. (22).

Thanks to the rather high light power required for
optimal magnetometric resolution at higher cell tem-
peratures, the cut-oﬀ frequency of the magnetometer
was 95 Hz. The bandwidth of the device under these
conditions can be extracted from the transfer function
(Fig. 8(b)) and is about 140 Hz. Because of the time con-
stant of the lock-in ampliﬁer, the measured bandwidth is
95 Hz one would expect for
10 Hzsmaller than the π/2
a ﬁrst order low-pass ﬁlter [Eq. (22)].

×

C. Experimental lineshapes

Figure 9 shows a Nyquist plot with experimental data
and a model simultaneously ﬁt to the in-phase and
quadrature components of the data. The data show a cer-
tain asymmetry that can not be reproduced by the model.
The Nyquist plots for diﬀerent magnetic ﬁeld distribu-
tions (Fig. 5) suggest that the asymmetry is caused by
inhomogeneous magnetic ﬁelds. Unfortunately the mod-
els discussed in Sec. 2 B do not ﬁt the data correctly, im-
plying that higher-order gradients cause the deformation
of the measured lineshape. The fact that the asymmetry
is more pronounced for high rf amplitudes indicates that
inhomogeneous rf-ﬁelds — causing the diﬀerent parts of
the ensemble to contribute with diﬀerent widths — have

Fig. 8. Frequency response of the magnetometer, mea-
sured by recording the response to an oscillating mag-
netic ﬁeld generated by a test coil. The dots show mea-
sured points recorded in free running mode under condi-
tions optimized for maximal magnetometric resolution.
(a) Calculated ﬁrst-order low-pass ﬁlter corresponding
(b) Fitted
to a spin polarization lifetime of 1.67 ms.
frequency response taking into account (a) and the 4th
order low-pass ﬁlter of the lock-in ampliﬁer (time con-
stant = 30 µs). (c) Measured frequency response in the
phase-stabilized mode.

for which both approaches yield the same magnetometric
sensitivity. For bandwidths larger than f0, a phase mea-
surement is more advantageous whereas for bandwidths
smaller than f0 a frequency measurement gives the higher
sensitivity.

B. Bandwidth

In addition to the sensitivity, the bandwidth, i.e., the
speed with which the magnetometer signal follows mag-
netic ﬁeld changes, is an important feature of a magne-
tometer. The steady-state solutions of the Bloch equa-
tions, Pqu and Pip [Eqs. (3) and (4)], follow small ﬁeld
changes at a characteristic rate Γ2, corresponding to a
delay time tauS = Γ−1
2 . Since the steady state is only
reached exponentially, the frequency response is that of
a ﬁrst order low-pass ﬁlter [see Fig. 8(a)] with a (-3 dB)
cut-oﬀ frequency fC given by

and hence a bandwidth of

fC =

=

= ∆ν2 ,

1
2πτS

Γ2
2π

fbw =

=

=

∆ν2 ,

1
4τS

Γ2
4

π
2

(21)

(22)

where ∆ν2 is the half width of the phase signal measured
in Hz.

To achieve maximum sensitivity, atomic magnetome-
ters aim at a maximum τS, at the cost of a reduced band-
width of typically a few tenths of Hz. A large bandwidth
can be obtained by increasing the light power since that
leads to shorter τS and therefore to higher bandwidth.

8

the measured sine wave and show up in the power spec-
trum as sidebands. The low frequency ﬂicker noise of the
magnetic ﬁeld thus generates a continuum of sidebands
that sum up to the background structure surrounding
the peak in Fig. 7. The estimation of the intrinsic sen-
sitivity is based on the assumption that those sidebands
would disappear in a perfectly constant magnetic ﬁeld.
The amplitude noise of the signal is mainly due to the
electron shot noise in the photodiode, which generates
a white noise spectrum. For frequencies which are more
than 1 kHz away from the resonance, the noise level drops
to the white noise ﬂoor. The electron shot noise is the
fundamental noise level that can not be avoided. The
noise spectral density ρI can be calculated from the DC
current IDC ﬂowing through the photodiode:

ρI =

2eIDC .

(23)

p

At room-temperature the measured rms noise in the
spectrum was 5% to 20% above the shot-noise level, de-
pending on induced noise on the photocurrent and the
laser frequency stabilization that could cause excess noise
in the light intensity. The rms noise rose rapidly for
higher temperatures because of the increasing leakage
current in the photodiode. Unfortunately,
in the ex-
perimental setup the photodiodes were in good thermal
contact with the Cs cell and, given that the optimal op-
erating temperature of the Cs cells turned out to be in
the range of 50◦ C to 60◦ C, the photodiode produced
an excess noise larger than the shot noise of the pho-
tocurrent. Figure 7 shows a spectrum recorded under
conditions optimized for maximal magnetometric resolu-
tion. At 53◦ C the measured rms noise was higher than
the shot noise by a factor of 1.55. However, this limita-
tion can be overcome easily since the photodiodes do not
need to be close to the Cs cell and thus can be operated
at room-temperature. In order to avoid the problem of
drifting values of ρ during the optimization of ρB, the
theoretical shot noise level ρI was used for ρ in Eq. 17
instead of the measured noise.

±

The amplitude A of the signal can be extracted from
the FFT-spectrum by integrating the spectrum over
three points (
1 Hz) around the center frequency. The
procedure was needed since the Hanning window used
by the spectrum analyzer to reconstruct the spectrum
causes a slight broadening of the central peak. The val-
ues calculated in that way are in good agreement with
those measured by the lock-in ampliﬁer.

The third parameter needed to calculate the intrinsic
sensitivity is the half-width Γ2 of the magnetic resonance.
The value was extracted from a magnetic resonance spec-
trum recorded by the lock-in ampliﬁer during a frequency
sweep of the applied oscillating magnetic ﬁeld. As dis-
cussed in Section 4 C a constant-gradient model was ﬁt
to the data in order to extract Γ2.

For optimizing in a three-dimensional parameter space,
the time for one measurement had to be kept as short as
possible. When the lock-in ampliﬁer signal was used as

Fig. 9. The dots represent a Nyquist plot of the magnetic
resonance measured under optimized conditions. The
solid line is a ﬁt of Eq. (15) with added oﬀset and phase
rotation to the measured data. The ﬁt model assumes a
constant magnetic ﬁeld distribution. The oﬀset is indi-
cated by the dot close to the origin. The short diameter
of the ellipse is drawn in order to illustrate the phase
rotation of 2.4◦.

to be considered. Unfortunately, models for such inhomo-
geneities do not lead to analytic line shapes. An empirical
model which assumes the measured resonance consists of
a sum of several resonances, each at a diﬀerent position
and with a diﬀerent width, can be ﬁt to the data. The
data can be ﬁt perfectly if the number of subresonances
is high enough. However, such ﬁts have a slow conver-
gence and do not provide the needed information about
the width and amplitude of the resonance in single ﬁt
parameters. For practical reasons (during the optimiza-
tion more than 2000 spectra were ﬁt) we decided to use
the constant magnetic ﬁeld distribution model for ﬁtting
data similar to the ones in Fig. 9.

Magnetic ﬁeld inhomogeneities have much less inﬂu-
ence on the shape of the phase signal resulting in more re-
liable values for Γ2. The phase signal represents the speed
with which the resonance evolves through the Nyquist
plot. Using both the phase signal and the Nyquist plot,
the in-phase and quadrature components of the resonance
were reconstructed, however, the frequency scaling were
given by the phase signal only.

D. Optimization measurements

For the optimization of the NEM given by Eq. (19) the
S/N ratio of the lock-in input signal and the linewidth Γ2
have to be measured. Figure 7 shows a frequency spec-
trum recorded at the input of the lock-in ampliﬁer using a
FFT spectrum analyzer. The frequency ωrf was tuned to
the center of the magnetic resonance so that the modula-
tion of the photocurrent was at its maximum amplitude.
The power spectrum shows a narrow peak at ωrf sur-
rounded by noise peaks that characterize the magnetic
ﬁeld noise. Monochromatic magnetic ﬁeld ﬂuctuations,
e.g., line frequency interference, modulate the phase of

9

Fig. 10.
Dependence of the magnetic resonance
linewidth on the rf amplitude Urf . The points are ex-
tracted from measured magnetic resonance spectra by
least squares ﬁtting of model Eq. (15). The phase sig-
nal (a) has a constant linewidth whereas the common
widths of the in-phase and quadrature signals (b) in-
crease rapidly with rf amplitude. The solid line repre-
sents a model ﬁtted to the data that assumed an ad-
ditional broadening caused by inhomogeneous magnetic
ﬁelds.

a measure for A [see Eq. (17)] and the noise was calcu-
lated from the DC current it was not necessary to record
a FFT spectrum for each set of parameters of the op-
timization procedure. In that way the time for a single
NEM measurement was reduced to the 20 s sweep time of
ωrf plus the time needed to measure the DC current and
the temperature of the cell. The measurement was con-
trolled by a PC running dedicated software for recording
and ﬁtting the magnetic resonance signals. The ampli-
tude of the rf ﬁeld, Brf , was changed automatically by
the software, resulting in series of typically ten NEMs as
a function of Brf . A typical optimization run was made
by recording many such series while the system slowly
heated up. Repeating those runs for diﬀerent light pow-
ers ﬁnally resulted in data for the whole parameter space.

5. Results

A. Dependence on rf amplitude

Fig. 11. Amplitude of the in-phase (a1) and quadra-
ture (a2) signals as a function of rf amplitude Urf . The
points represent values extracted from measured mag-
netic resonance spectra. The solid lines show a model ﬁt
to the data points (see text). The quadrature amplitude
a2 is equal to the amplitude of the incoming sine wave
on resonance (δ = 0).

model. The Nyquist plot (see Fig. 9) shows that higher
order gradients are present and the excellent agreement
in Fig. 10 suggests that they can be treated as an addi-
tional broadening.

Figure 11 shows the amplitudes of the in-phase and
quadrature magnetic resonance signals. The amplitudes
where extracted from the same spectra used for Fig. 10.
The ﬁt model used to explain the amplitudes (solid lines
in Fig. 11) was based on Eqs. (10) and (11) with a back-
ground proportional to Brf . The origin of the background
was an inductive pick up of the B1 ﬁeld by the photocur-
rent loop which caused an additional phase-shifted sine
wave to be superposed on the photocurrent. As discussed
in the theory part (see Fig. 4) that lead to an oﬀset in the
measured amplitudes of the magnetic resonance signal.

The NEM as a function of rf amplitude is inversely
proportional to the quadrature amplitude (a2 in Fig. 11),
since the linewidth of the phase signal and the shot noise
do not change with rf amplitude. The optimal rf ampli-
tude was determined from the data shown in Fig. 11 and
corresponds to S = 1.

The ﬁrst study made with the magnetometer examined
the dependence of the magnetic resonance on the rf am-
plitude Brf measured a series of spectra recorded at room
temperature. Figure 10 shows the dependence of the
magnetic resonance signal width on the rf amplitude
measured by the coil voltage Urf . The width of the phase
signal (see Fig. 10) was ﬁt with a constant, whereas the
common width of the in-phase and quadrature compo-
nents were given by Eq. (5). To ﬁt the widths correctly,
a constant width had to be added to Eq. (5). The ad-
ditional constant width can be interpreted as a residual
broadening caused by magnetic ﬁeld inhomogeneities of
higher order than the one considered in the line ﬁtting

B. Dependence on temperature and light power

As described in section 4 D the dependence of the NEM
on the temperature was recorded while the system was
slowly heated. The rf amplitude was automatically
scanned so that for every temperature the optimal rf am-
plidude could be determined. Figure 12 shows a contour
plot of the NEM as a function of temperature and light
power. If the light power is increased, the temperature
(and hence Cs atom density) has also to be increased
to maintain optimal resonance conditions. Figure 13(b)
shows the power transmitted through the cell relative to
the incident light power. A relative transmission of 0.37

58

56

54

52

50

48

46

64

66

68 70

8

10

12

14

16

18

20

22

Fig. 12. Contour plot of the magnetometric resolution
(NEM) as a function of temperature and light power.
The map is calculated by numeric interpolation from
seven optimization runs (indicated by vertical lines). The
labels at the contours mark the NEM in fT/Hz1/2. The
points of minimal NEM for each optimization run are
indicated by points. The connecting line is a cut along
Including the
which the data of Fig. 13 are obtained.
variation of the rf amplitude 970 parameter sets were
recorded and analyzed to produce the map.

Fig. 13. Magnetic resonance parameters as a function
of incident light power: (a) shows the width of the phase
signal that determines the cut-oﬀ frequency of the mag-
netometer bandwidth; (b) shows the DC transmission
through the Cs cell relative to the incident light power;
(c) is the signal/noise ratio of the lock-in input signal
with respect to calculated shot noise; (d) shows the NEM
at the points indicated in Fig. 12.

corresponds to an absorption length which matches the
cell length. Taking into account losses at the windows,
a density corresponding to 1.4 absorption lengths was
found to be optimal.

For each light power the optimal temperature is indi-
cated by a dot in Fig. 12. Plotting the NEM along the
optimum temperature power curve, i.e., the curve con-
necting the dots, results in the plot shown in Fig. 13(d).

10

For light powers below 15 µW and the corresponding
temperatures the sensitivity rapidly degrades. The loss
in sensitivity is less pronounced if the power and tem-
perature are chosen above the optimum. Values for RSN
of up to 500 000 (114 dB) were measured at a resolution
bandwidth of 1 Hz.

The optimal magnetic ﬁeld resolution of our magne-
tometer is reached at a light power of 15 µW and a tem-
perature of 53◦ C. With that set of parameters, the us-
able bandwidth of the magnetometer was determined by
a cut-oﬀ frequency of about 80 Hz (see Fig. 13(a)). In
order to meet the required 100 Hz bandwidth a slightly
larger light power can be used. All characterizing mea-
surements (cf. Figs. 2, 8, 9, and 7) were therefore per-
formed with a light power of 20 µW at 54◦ C.

6. Conclusion

Optimizing the performance of the magnetometer has
led to a set of parameters for which the device oﬀers
a large sensitivity and a large bandwidth. Both require-
ments can be met at the same time because of rather
large linewidths that turned out to be optimal. Under
these conditions the high magnetometric sensitivity re-
lies on the achieved very high signal/noise ratios. The
system has the potential to operate at a RSN of 500000
(Fig. 7) and we hope to be able to demonstrate this once
the photodiodes can be removed from the heated Cs cell.
However, even using the measured RSN of 320000, the
intrinsic sensitivity of 100 fT/Hz1/2 is good enough for
less demanding cardiomagnetic measurements.

The magnetometer bandwidth of 140 Hz in the free-
running phase-detecting mode (Fig. 8) is high enough
for cardiac measurements. The phase-detecting mode
avoids the fundamental limitations associated with fre-
quency measurements using short integration times.

An important open experimental question is whether
the predicted intrinsic sensitivity can be reached using
several of the present OPMs in a higher order gradiome-
ter geometry. With gradiometric SQUID sensors it is
possible to achieve NEM value on the order of 20fT/Hz1/2
in unshielded environments16.
In future we plan to
use cells with spin-preserving wall coatings rather than
buﬀer-gas cells as sensing elements. Coated cells have
the advantage that the atoms traverse the volume many
times during the spin coherence lifetime, therefore aver-
aging out ﬁeld inhomogeneities. We are therefore conﬁ-
dent that the present limit from ﬁeld gradients can be
overcome and that optical magnetometers can reach an
operation mode limited by their intrinsic sensitivity.

7. Appendix A: The Cram´er–Rao bound for fre-
quency measuring magnetometers

For the measurement of the frequency ω of a sine wave
with a rms amplitude A sampled at N
1 points sepa-
rated by time intervals Ts the Cram´er–Rao lower bound
for the variance Vω of ω in the presence of white Gaussian

≫

amplitude noise of variance σ2 is given by14:

Vω =

12σ2
A2T 2

M N

,

where TM = N Ts is the total time interval for one
frequency determination. The bandwidth on the input
side of the lock-in ampliﬁer is therefore Fbw = 1/2Ts =
N/2TM , that at the output is fbw = 1/2TM . With the
deﬁnition of the signal-to-noise ratio, Eq. (17), Vω can be
expressed independently of the number of samples:

Vω =

12ρ2
A2T 2

i Fbw
M N

=

6
SNT 3
M

R2

.

(25)

Ideal measuring processes are limited by that condition
only. Frequency measurements by a FFT with peak in-
terpolation is a Cram´er–Rao bound limited measuring
process14.

From that bound a lower limit for the performance of a
frequency measuring magnetometer can be derived. The
so-called self-oscillating Mx magnetometer4 is of this type
since it supplies an oscillating signal with a frequency
proportional to the magnetic ﬁeld. With Eq. (1) it follows
that the root spectral density of the measurement noise
ρB is given by:

ρB =

VB
fbw

=

4√3√fbw
γF RSN

.

s

(26)

8. Appendix B: The Cram´er–Rao bound for
phase measuring magnetometers

The Cram´er–Rao lower bound for the measurement of
the phase of a signal with known frequency is given by14:

An example of a measurement process limited only by
that condition is the lock-in phase detection where the
phase is calculated from the in-phase and quadrature out-
puts of the lock-in ampliﬁer [see Eq. (7)].
In order to
calculate the variance Vϕ of the phase measurement we
assume a white amplitude noise spectrum with a power
spectral density ρ2:

Vϕ =

σ2
A2N

.

Vϕ =

ρ2
A22TM

.

Using this expression and the deﬁnition of RSN [Eq. (17)],
Eq. (28) can be written as

σ2
ϕ = Vϕ =

ρ2fbw
A2 =

fbw
R2

SN

.

From the measured phase ϕ, the detuning δ = ωrf
−
ωL can be derived. For ϕ
1, Eq. (7) leads to δ
≈
Γ2ϕ. Using Eq. (1), the detuning can be expressed as a

≪

(27)

(28)

(29)

magnetic ﬁeld diﬀerence ∆B = δ/γ which leads, together
with Eq. (29), to the magnetic ﬁeld resolution σB:

(24)

σB =

σδ
γF

=

σϕΓ
γF

=

Γ√fbw
γF RSN√fbw

.

The root spectral density of the noise in the ∆B mea-
surement, ρB = σB/f 1/2

bw , is thus given by:

11

(30)

(31)

ρB =

Γ
γF RSN√fbw

.

Acknowledgments

This work was supported by grants from the Schweiz-
erischer Nationalfonds and the Deutsche Forschungsge-
meinschaft. The authors wish to thank Martin Rebetez
for eﬃcient help in understanding the frequency response
of the magnetometer and Paul Knowles for useful discus-
sions and a critical reading of the manuscript.

References

1. W. Andr¨a and H. Nowak eds., Magnetism in

Medicine (Wiley-VCH, Berlin 1998).

2. J. P. Wikswo, “Biomagnetic sources and their mod-
els,” in Proceedings of the Seventh International
Conference on Biomagnetism, New York, 13–18 Au-
gust 1989 , S. J. Williamson, ed., p. 1 (1989).

3. D. Cohen, E. A. Edelsack, and J. E. Zimmerman,
“Magnetocardiograms taken inside a shielded room
with a superconducting point-contact magnetome-
ter,” Appl. Phys. Lett. 16, 278 (1970).

4. A. L. Bloom, “Principles of Operation of the Rubid-
ium Vapor Magnetometer,” Appl. Opt. 1, 61 (1962).
5. J. Dupont-Roc, S. Haroche, and C. Cohen-
Tannoudji, “Detection of very weak magnetic ﬁelds
(10–9 Gauss) by 87Rb-zero-ﬁeld level crossing reso-
nances,” Phys. Lett. 28A, 638 (1969).

6. E. B. Alexandrov and V. A. Bonch-Bruevich,
“Optically pumped atomic magnetometers after 3
decades,” Opt. Eng. 31(4), 711–717 (1992).

7. A. Kastler, “The Hanle Eﬀect and its use for the
measurement of very small magnetic ﬁelds,” Nucl.
Instr. Meth. 110, 259–265 (1973).

8. D. Budker, D. F. Kimball, S. M. Rochester, V. V.
Yashchuk, and M. Zolotorev, “Sensitive magnetom-
etry based on nonlinear magneto-optical rotation,”
Phys. Rev. A 63, 043 403 (2000).

9. M. N. Livanov, A. N. Kozlov, S. E. Sinelnikova, J. A.
Kholodov, V. P. Markin, A. M. Gorbach, and A. V.
Korinewsky, “Record of the Human Magnetocardio-
gram by the Quantum Gradiometer with Optical
Pumping,” Adv. Cardiol. 28, 78 (1981).

10. S. Kanorsky, S. Lang, S. L¨ucke, S. Ross, T. H¨ansch,
and A. Weis, “Millihertz magnetic resonance spec-
troscopy of Cs atoms in body-centered-cubic 4He,”
Phys. Rev. A 54, R1010 (1996).

11. G. Bison, R. Wynands, and A. Weis, “A laser-
pumped magnetometer for the mapping of human
cardiomagnetic ﬁelds,” Appl. Phys. B 76 (2003).

12. G. Bison, R. Wynands, and A. Weis, “Dynamical
mapping of the human cardiomagnetic ﬁeld with a
room-temperature, laser-optical sensor,” Optics Ex-
press 11 (2003).

13. K. L. Corwin, Z.-T. Lu, C. F. Hand, R. J. Ep-
stain, and C. E. Wieman, “Frequency-stabilized
diode laser with the Zeeman shift in an atomic va-
por,” Appl. Optics 37(15) (1998).

14. D. C. Rife and R. R. Boorstyn, “Single-Tone
Paramter Estimation from Discrete-Time Observa-
tions,” IEEE Transactions on Information Theory
20(5) (1974).

12

16.

15. P. Dyal, R. T. J. Jr., and J. C. Giles, “Response
of self-oscillating rubidium vapor magnetometers
to rapid ﬁeld changes,” Rev. Sci. Instrum. 40(4)
(1969).
I. Tavarozzi, S. Comani, C. D. Gratta, G. L. Ro-
mani, S. D. Luzio, D. Brisinda, S. Gallina, M. Zi-
marino, R. Fenici, and R. D. Caterina, “Magneto-
cardiography: current status and perspectives. Part
I: Physical principals and instrumentation,” Ital.
Heart J. 3, 75 (2002).

