5
0
0
2
 
n
a
J
 
4
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
d
e
m

.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
7
2
1
1
0
5
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Polarized Helium to Image the Lung

Mich`ele Leduc and Pierre Jean Nacher
leduc@lkb.ens.fr - nacher@lkb.ens.fr
Laboratoire Kastler Brossel, ENS, 24 rue Lhomond, F75005 Paris1

Abstract The main ﬁndings of the european PHIL project (Polarised Helium
to Image the Lung) are reported. State of the art optical pumping techniques
for polarising 3He gas are described. MRI methodological improvements allow
dynamical ventilation images with a good resolution, ultimately limited by gas
diﬀusion. Diﬀusion imaging appears as a robust method of lung diagnosis. A
discussion of the potential advantage of low ﬁeld MRI is presented. Selected
PHIL results for emphysema are given, with the perspectives that this joint
work opens up for the future of respiratory medicine.

Introduction

In 1994 ﬁrst images of Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) were published
showing pulmonary cavities of a dead mouse, inﬂated with optically polarised
129Xe gas [1]. Soon after, research teams in the USA and in Germany, associat-
ing atomic and MRI physicists with radiologists, demonstrated the possibility
to image human lung airways using inhaled 3He [2, 3].

These gases are chemically inert, non radioactive noble gases, both of nuclear
spin 1/2. They are spin polarised prior to inhalation by optical pumping meth-
ods, which means that a large non equilibrium magnetization is obtained by
orientation of the magnetic moments of the gas nuclei. Then the gas is inhaled
in the lungs and imaged by MRI in conventional scanners tuned to the NMR
frequency of the gas atoms. This method allows visualising the intrapulmonary
airspaces ﬁlled with the gas, instead of the tissues examined by conventional
proton MRI. The large polarisation of the gas (up to 80%) compensates for the
lower density of nuclear spins in the gas.

Images of the gas in the lungs can thus be recorded during a breathhold
with a high resolution. Furthermore, the MRI acquisition sequences can be fast
enough to provide dynamical ventilation data. Mapping physical parameters
such as local relaxation times or apparent diﬀusion coeﬃcients (ADC) indirectly
provide information on the lung function or may reveal subtle changes in the
microstructure of the airways. It is generally recognized that this new imaging
method has unprecedented potential for morphological and functional analysis
of the lung. It is expected to be a novel addition to the arsenal of pulmonary
diagnostic tests and could enable the development of MRI in the chest, tradi-
tionally hampered by the low number density of protons and the magnetic ﬁeld
inhomogeneities that exist at the air-tissues boundaries in the lung.

1Laboratoire Kastler Brossel is a unit´e de recherche de l’Ecole Normale Sup´erieure et de

l’Universit´e Pierre et Marie Curie, associ´ee au CNRS (UMR 8552).

PHIL: a European consortium to study emphysema

It was decided in 2000 to put forward a European consortium, coordinated by
one of the authors (M.L.), to link the eﬀorts of nine teams in ﬁve diﬀerent
countries. Participants were selected for their pre-existing know-how and com-
plementary competences in atomic physics (Paris, Mainz and Krakow), MRI
methodology and instrumentation (Orsay and Lyon), radiology and respiratory
medicine (Mainz, Sheﬃeld and Copenhagen) and animal model studies (Madrid
and Lyon).

The PHIL consortium (“Polarised Helium to Image the Lung”, [4]) joined
eﬀorts to demonstrate the potential and the validity of the new non invasive
method as a diagnostic and prognostic tool for given lung pathologies: emphy-
sema and selected Chronical Obstructive Pulmonary Diseases (COPD), such
as bronchitis and bronchiolitis. This choice was motivated by the frequent oc-
currence of these diseases and the very high cost of their treatment for society:
10% of the population and 25% of the smokers suﬀer from COPD, which is the
fourth cause of mortality in Europe. The core of the project was to perform a
clinical trial on a large group of patients with the 3He MRI method and with
conventional techniques: pulmonary function tests, High Resolution Computed
Tomography (HRCT), Krypton scintigraphy. An important objective of the
PHIL project was to provide new tools for the study of COPD, aiming at dif-
ferentiation of various types of diseases, as well as their detection at an early
stage, with expectation that in the long range the ﬁndings of the project could
lead to monitoring therapeutic treatment.

Polarising 3He by metastability exchange optical pumping
The only candidates as inhaled gaseous tracers are 3He and 129Xe, which are
spin 1/2 noble gas atoms (isotopes with higher nuclear spins are disregarded,
because they are too sensitive to nuclear relaxation processes). 3He has been
chosen for several reasons: It provides much larger NMR signals, as its magnetic
moment is nearly three times larger than that of 129Xe. The 3He atoms can be
polarised in larger quantities and to higher polarisation rates. Helium does not
cross the alveolar air/blood barrier and remains conﬁned within the air spaces.
It is absolutely harmless and induces no side eﬀects, whereas xenon is known
as a potent anaesthetic at high concentrations.

3He can be polarised by two established methods which rely on optical pump-
ing techniques. Optical pumping is a very eﬃcient method to control the atomic
spin state through interaction with a resonant light beam carrying angular mo-
mentum. In the presence of a magnetic guiding ﬁeld B and of weak relaxation
processes, the net result of the repeated light absorption and re-emission cycles
is a change in the relative populations of the involved atomic sublevels, i.e.
creation of spin orientation. For polarising 3He, two routes are possible: spin
exchange optical pumping (SEOP) [5], with indirect transfer of angular mo-
mentum from a polarised laser beam to the 3He nuclei via alkali metal atoms

2

(usually rubidium), and metastability exchange optical pumping (MEOP) [6],
with direct transfer of angular momentum from resonant laser light to 3He
atoms. Each technique has its own advantages and limitations. For instance,
SEOP directly operates at high pressure but is a slow process (several hours
are required to polarise helium), while MEOP is a much faster process (it only
takes seconds to polarise 100 cm3 of gas at 1 mbar), but only operates at low
pressure (
mbar) and requires further compression for its application to lung
MRI. SEOP has been used for several imaging experiments [7], but MEOP has
been preferred for human lung imaging in the PHIL project because of its faster
production rates and higher nuclear polarisations.

The principle of a 3He optical pumping experiment using MEOP is illustrated
in ﬁgure 1. A fraction of the helium atoms are excited by a plasma discharge to

∼

Resonant 
laser beam
(1083 nm)

Helium cell

++

B

RF

21P0
1083 nm 
OP transition

21S0

Metastability
exchange 
collisions

Circular

polariser

11S0

Figure 1: Left: schematic view of an optical pumping setup. In a low-pressure
10−6) of
helium-3 gas cell, a weak RF discharge promotes a small fraction (
the atoms into the excited metastable state 23S, where resonant absorption of
the circularly polarised 1083 nm light can occur. Repeated cycles of absorp-
tion/emission of photons transfer a substantial polarisation in the 23S state.
Nuclear polarisation is transferred to the ground state atoms by metastability
exchange collisions. Right: atomic levels of helium-3 and physical processes
involved in the OP cycle.

∼

a metastable energy state, where they can absorb resonant light to be optically
pumped. For the 3He isotope in this excited metastable state, an eﬃcient cou-
pling between the nucleus and the electrons (the hyperﬁne interaction) results
in a strong entanglement of electronic and nuclear spins. Therefore optical ori-
entation of the electronic angular momentum simultaneously induces nuclear
orientation as well. This nuclear orientation is rapidly transferred to the atoms
having remained in the ground state through metastability exchange collisions.
This process corresponds to a very short interaction between an excited atom
and a ground state atom, which results in a fast exchange of the electronic
excitations of the colliding atoms with no change in the nuclear orientations.

3

s
s
In actual gas polarisation devices, a uniform magnetic ﬁeld (of order 1 mT)
is applied over the whole setup to prevent magnetic relaxation. Powerful ﬁbre
lasers at 1083 nm are used for eﬃcient optical pumping [8]. MEOP-based gas
polarisation, which requires compression of the polarised gas, was developed for
PHIL following two routes with complementary advantages:

- Centralised production of very high grade hyperpolarised gas and transport
to the MRI centre. The Mainz group pioneered the development of dedicated
systems for massive production of hyperpolarised 3He gas [9]. Sophisticated
piston compressors lead to unrivalled performance in terms of output pressure,
gas polarisation and production rate. Such facilities deliver remarkably large
ﬂux (tens of bar litres per day) of high grade polarised 3He: over 80% at
the production unit, still reaching 60% after shipping by air (from Mainz to
Copenhagen or to Sheﬃeld) [10]. The transportation problems were overcome
using special containers preventing magnetic relaxation and appropriate iron-
free glass for the storage cells containing the gas.

- On-site production of gas with compact polarisers implemented next to the
MRI scanner. The delivered gas may be of lower grade (3He is diluted in a
neutral gas like nitrogen, or produced with lower polarisation, of order 40%),
but problems with storage and transportation are avoided. The key element of
the system developed by the Paris group is a compact polarisation-preserving
peristaltic compressor that allows production of polarised gas next to or inside
the MRI scanner [11]. Two diﬀerent prototypes of such compact and robust
polarisers were built, and are ready for possible commercial production.

Pulmonary ventilation images: resolution and dynamics

Figure 2 displays chest MRI images obtained at 1.5 Tesla with conventional
proton MRI (left) and polarised helium MRI (right). On the proton scan, most

Figure 2: Chest MR images (1 cm thick slices) of the same normal subject.
Left: fast spin-echo proton image. Right: FLASH 3He image of the gas in the
lungs. The NMR frequency is changed from 64 MHz for protons to 49 MHz for
3He. Courtesy of J. Wild, Academic Radiology dept., U. of Sheﬃeld.

4

tissues are visible, but the lung parenchyma does not appear: this is due partly
to the low density of the lung tissues, partly to the shortening of the transverse
relaxation time T2 by the non-uniform magnetisation of the inhomogeneous
parenchyma in the high magnetic ﬁeld of the scanner. On the helium scan, the
gas-ﬁlled pulmonary air spaces are the only visible part of the chest. Shortening
of T2 by susceptibility eﬀects is less severe thanks to the rapid gas diﬀusion at
the alveolar scale, a well known motional averaging and line narrowing eﬀect. A
set of 15-20 such slices at adjacent positions in the chest allows re-constructing
a 3D map of gas distribution in the lungs.

Another attractive possibility oﬀered by the 3He-MRI technique is access to
dynamical parameters of the lung ventilation. A typical temporal resolution of
order 0.1 s is required to monitor the respiratory cycle. For ultra-fast imag-
ing, a radial acquisition strategy combined with a sliding window method was
developed. This method, referred as SPIRO (Sliding Pulmonary Imaging for
Respiratory Overview), allows a regional quantiﬁcation of dynamical ventila-
tion parameters using a single breath of polarised gas. Figure 3 shows two
series of helium lung images (here 2D projections) taken during a respiratory
cycle. They show the gas ﬂowing ﬁrst down the trachea, then into the bronchi

Figure 3: Dynamic images collected using a sliding window radial sequence [12];
the time interval between displayed images is 0.5 s. Top row: healthy normal
subject, from the ﬁrst part of an inhalation of 300 ml of 3He polarized to 40%.
Bottom row: COPD patient showing regions of ventilation obstruction in both
lungs, particularly in the upper lobes, and a delayed emptying/depolarization
of gas in the lower left lobe which could be indicative of air trapping. Courtesy
of J. Wild, Academic Radiology dept., U. of Sheﬃeld.

and ﬁnally in the peripheral lung. Clear diﬀerences are visible between a nor-
mal subject (top row) and a patient suﬀering from COPD (bottom row), with
wedge-shaped defects indicating that some pulmonary zones are poorly venti-
lated. Key functional parameters can be extracted from the images, such as

5

gas arrival time, ﬁlling time constant, and gas volume. Regional maps of such
parameters can be used to assess the degree of the disease severity.

The resolution of these helium images, even if superior to that of competing
techniques, is however intrinsically limited and does not allow visualising the
airways at the scale of the alveoli (of order 0.1 mm). Proton MRI can reach
micrometric resolution for small objects if suﬃcient signal to noise ratio is
achieved. The same resolution is not possible for helium MRI, due to the rapid
diﬀusion of the gas inside the airways. MRI relies on frequency encoding of
the position through the use of magnetic ﬁeld gradients, sequentially applied
along various directions in space. If G is a ﬁeld gradient applied along the x
direction, the NMR frequency change across a distance δx is δf = γGδx (γ=32
MHz/T is the gyromagnetic ratio of 3He). To resolve details of size δx, G must
1/γGτ. When dealing
be applied for a time τ such that τ δf
∼
with a gas, the observation time τ is actually limited by the diﬀusion of the gas
80 mm2/s is the diﬀusion coeﬃcient of 3He in
over δx, namely τ
air). Thus the resolution is limited to δx
, of order 0.4 mm for a
conventional scanner with typical gradients reaching 0.3 mT/cm.

δx2/D (D

1, hence δx

(D/γG)

1/3

∼

∼

∼

∼

Apparent Diﬀusion Coeﬃcient
In spite of the limitations on image resolution with 3He-MRI, measurements of
apparent diﬀusion coeﬃcients (ADC) can provide relevant information on the
lung microstructure. When diﬀusing freely in air (in the absence of restrict-
ing walls or barriers), helium atoms are displaced on average by an amount
√Dτ , e.g. 0.9 mm after a time τ =10 ms. In the lung, free diﬀusion occurs at
such time scales only in larger airways, while collisions with the walls of smaller
airways and of alveoli reduce displacements of helium atoms. A time- and scale-
dependent ADC is introduced to characterise this restricted diﬀusion. It is not
easy to relate this reduced value to a detailed description of the microstructure
of the lung at the alveolar level due to its complexity. However measuring ADC
values can be useful to assess pathological changes. For instance in emphy-
sema, the restrictions to diﬀusion are reduced due to expansion of alveoli and
modiﬁcation of connectivity between them, which results in an increased ADC.
Several NMR techniques can be used to measure diﬀusion coeﬃcients. They
rely on applying a sensitising gradient to imprint a non-uniform magnetisation
pattern during a given time, and on measuring the resulting magnetisation de-
cay. The ratio of images recorded with and without such a diﬀusion-sensitising
gradient is used to compute a diﬀusion map. Figure 4 displays ADC maps ob-
tained in the lung with a standard technique (diﬀusion weighting by a bipolar
gradient pair). One observes an increase by more than a factor two for the mean
ADC value for a COPD patient compared to a normal subject. One also notes
a signiﬁcant diﬀerence between the ADC histograms recorded for an asymp-
tomatic smoker and a normal subject; this indicates that ADC measurements
have a potential for detection of mild COPD diseases.

6

Ventilation

ADC map

ADC Histogram (cm²/s)

Normal

Smoker

COPD

Figure 4: Left to right: gas distribution images, ADC maps and ADC his-
tograms in 3 subjects (top to bottom). Courtesy of J. Wild, Academic Radiol-
ogy dept., U. of Sheﬃeld.

Low ﬁeld versus high ﬁeld for 3He MRI?

In conventional proton MRI, high magnetic ﬁelds are used to obtain suﬃcient
equilibrium proton magnetisation and NMR signal. Noise arises from thermal
(Johnson) noise in the patient’s tissues and in the NMR receiving coil. Usually,
the former noise source dominates; for a given magnetisation, both the NMR
signal and the noise are proportional to frequency (i.e. to the ﬁeld). For 3He-
MRI with optically pumped gas, the magnetisation of the gas and hence the
signal to noise ratio (SNR) do not depend on the ﬁeld (this contrasts with
the usual proton MRI for which the equilibrium magnetisation, and hence the
SNR, increase linearly with the ﬁeld). However this breaks down at very low
ﬁeld (below about 30 mT, depending on the coil size and technology), where
the patient noise decreases below the thermal noise of the coil.

The PHIL Partner in Orsay demonstrated that there is no SNR penalty
when using a low ﬁeld MRI scanner at 0.1 T [13]. On the contrary, there is an
important beneﬁt of low-ﬁeld operation: with reduced gradients arising from the
magnetic susceptibility of tissues, transverse relaxation times are much longer
at 0.1 T than at 1.5 T. Weaker ﬁeld gradients can then be used for imaging or
ADC measurements. This allows measuring diﬀusion coeﬃcients at longer time
scales, thus providing more information on the connectivity of lung air spaces.
A precise way of measuring ADC coeﬃcients in this case is through the decay
of spin echo trains.

7

However, shortening of transverse relaxation times can also be viewed as a
useful contrast mechanism since it depends on the lung microstructure. It was
for instance demonstrated to be more sensitive to the degree of lung inﬂation
at 1.5 T than at 0.1 T [14].

A clear advantage of operating at low ﬁeld is the reduced cost and increased
ﬂexibility of the imaging system: an open geometry can be designed, and stand-
ing or sitting patients may be examined. Studies at ultra low ﬁeld in a home
made vertical scanner at 3 mT have started with the PHIL Partner in Paris
[15]. This could open up possibilities of low-cost dedicated scanners for the
screening or follow-up of lung diseases.

Emphysema studies with 3He MRI

The PHIL multicentre clinical trial, after upgrading the hardware and software
of the involved MRI scanners according to the 3He MRI standards, put forward
a standardized protocol to study a signiﬁcant number of patients and healthy
volunteers for reference. Pre-existing sequences initially used in Mainz were
adapted and optimized at the diﬀerent sites: ventilation distribution (breath-
hold), apparent diﬀusion coeﬃcient (breath hold) and dynamic ventilation (sin-
gle respiratory cycle). The protocol also included pulmonary function tests to
assess severity scores. Data were recorded in a data base and ﬁnally submitted
to a statistical analysis, which provided a wealth of information, still not fully
exploited [16].

The subjects were divided in three groups: 79 patients with proven COPD,
among whom 17 suﬀered from alpha-1-ATD (anti-trypsin deﬁciency) and 37
healthy volunteers. A score number referring to the degree of abnormality
was attributed to each subject. Comparison between HRCT, MRI ﬁndings
and abnormality scores showed that MRI correlates better with pulmonary
function tests than HRCT. The vast majority of MRI ﬁndings consisted of
wedged shaped defects, even subjects with normal HRCT showed ventilation
defects. The comparison of ADC with emphysema index and mean lung density
was also exploited. ADC measurements clearly separated the healthy subjects
3He MRI proved also to be able
from those with emphysema of any type.
to distinguish between diﬀerent diseases by using a combination of ventilation
distribution and ADC mapping. After assessing all the results, one general
ﬁnding is that HRCT is usually more sensitive but MRI is more speciﬁc. A
positive feature of the 3He MRI method is that a single exam provides several
unique complementary informations at the same time (morphology, ventilation
defects, average of air spaces, even in-vivo oxygen concentration and uptake
that can be derived from the local relaxation times).

The animal models studies of PHIL provided very complementary results
[17]. Diﬀerent models of lung diseases were induced in rats with chemicals such
as elastase or cadmium chloride. To some extent these models mimic human
emphysema. The rat groups treated with cadmium showed clear ventilation
defects, corresponding to non-ventilated areas of the partially collapsed lung.

8

ADC and post-mortem morphometric measurements were compared. The most
signiﬁcant ﬁnding of this work is the excellent correlation between the ADC data
and the morphometric ones, which allow direct quantiﬁcation of alveolar size.
Complementary to experiments in clinical trials, in which the available popula-
tion generally have suﬀered chronic diseases, emphysema in animals was mildly
developed to evaluate the technique for early diagnosis. In that perspective, low
ﬁeld scanners could be highly useful, as the system successfully built in Krakow
with a permanent magnet of 0.08 T based on a permanent magnetic material
of new generation. Such low cost scanners are adapted to imaging small animal
lungs and may be especially valuable for pharmaceutical research.

Conclusion

In this multidisciplinary work, atomic physicists played a prominent role at the
early stage of the technique. The 3He polarisation methods were ﬁrst devel-
oped in the 80’s for the needs of polarised quantum ﬂuids physics, for polarised
targets in nuclear physics and more recently for neutron spin ﬁlters at reac-
tors. Finally, in view of application to MRI, the metastability exchange optical
pumping method was pushed to its limits and very appropriate polarisers were
constructed by the PHIL consortium. They bring a satisfactory solution for
clinical implementation of 3He MRI, either by remote production of high grade
gas or in-situ table-top polarisation. There is still room for improvement of fast
dedicated MRI sequences and signal to noise enhancement. Great expectation
is also related to dedicated low ﬁeld scanners, with possible extension of the
3He MRI lung imaging method to developing countries.

The PHIL consortium has shown that 3He MRI can be routinely performed
on a signiﬁcant number of patients and shows interesting new insights into
common lung diseases, COPD and emphysema. It proves superior in attaining
3D lung function in the lungs, and is more closely correlated with routine lung
function tests than HRCT. The method has already been tested in other lung
diseases, and more studies are planned or have started. These include lung
transplant assessment, cystic ﬁbrosis (the most common genetic lung disease),
asthma and lung cancer. The technology has proved of huge potential interest
in these areas, because it is non-invasive and does not require ionising radiation,
an extremely important feature, especially in longitudinal follow-up of children.
It could also be very beneﬁcial for the development of novel therapies, reducing
the size of trials and the number of sacriﬁced animals.

References

[1] M.S. Albert, G.D. Cates, B. Driehuys et al., Nature 370, 199 (1994): Bi-

ological MRI using laser-polarized 129Xe

[2] J.R. MacFall, H.C. Charles, R.D. Black et al., Radiology 200, 553 (1996):
Human lung air spaces: potential for MRI with hyperpolarized 3He

9

[3] H.U. Kauczor, D. Hofmann, K.F. Kreitner et al., Radiology 201, 564
(1996): Normal and abnormal pulmonary ventilation: Visualization at
hyperpolarized 3He MRI

[4] cf. http:// www.phil.ens.fr. The PHIL project has been supported by the

EC contract QLG1-2000-01559 running from 12/2000 to 06/2004.

[5] T.G. Walker and W. Happer, Rev. Mod. Phys. 69, 629 (1997): Spin-

exchange optical pumping of noble-gas nuclei

[6] P.-J. Nacher and M. Leduc, J. Physique 46, 2057 (1985): Optical pumping

in 3He with a laser

[7] T. Chupp and S. Swanson, Adv. At. Mol. Opt. Phys. 45, 51 (2001): Med-

ical imaging with laser polarised noble gases

[8] G. Tastevin, S. Grot, E. Courtade et al., Appl. Phys. B 78, 145 (2004): A
broadband Yb-doped tunable ﬁber laser for He optical pumping at 1083nm

[9] J. Becker, J. Bermuth, M. Ebert et al., Nucl. Instr. Meth. Phys. Res. 402,

327 (1998): Interdisciplinary experiments with polarized 3He

[10] E.J.R Van Beek, J. Schmiedeskamp, J.M. Wild et al., Eur. Radiol. 13, 2583
(2003): Hyperpolarized 3He MRI of the lungs: improving accessibility to
gas using a central production facility and transport by air

[11] P.-J. Nacher, G. Tastevin, X. Maˆitre et al., Eur. Radiol. 9 B18 (1999): A

peristaltic compressor for hyperpolarised helium

[12] J. Wild, M.N.J. Paley, L. Kasuboski et al., Magn. Reson. Med. 49, 991
(2003): Dynamic radial projection MRI of inhaled hyperpolarized 3He

[13] E. Durand, G. Guillot, L. Darrasse et al., Magn. Reson. Med. 47, (2002)
75: CPMG measurements and ultrafast imaging in human lungs with hy-
perpolarized 3He at low ﬁeld (0.1 T)

[14] L. de Rochefort, A. Vignaud, X. Maˆitre et al., Proc. 12th ISMRM meeting
ISSN 1545-4436, 2724 (2004): Inﬂuence of lung ﬁlling on T2* values in
human at 1.5 T with hyperpolarised 3He

[15] C.P. Bidinosti, J. Choukeife, G. Tastevin et al., Magnetic Resonance Ma-
terials in Physics, Biology, and Medicine (MAGMA) 16, 255 (2004): MRI
of the lung using hyperpolarized 3He at very low magnetic ﬁeld (3 mT)

[16] K.K. Gast, A. Dahmen, C.P. Heussel et al., Proc. 12th ISMRM meeting
ISSN 1545-4436, 1673 (2004): 3He-MRI in a european multicenter trial in
COPD and emphysema PHIL

[17] G. Peces-Barba, J. Ruiz-Cabello, Y. Cremillieux et al., Eur. Resp. J. 22,
14-19 (2003): 3He diﬀusion coeﬁcient: correlation to morphometry in a
model of mild emphysema

10

