An X-ray vision of cataract

Andrea Antunes,1 Ang´elica M.V. Safatle,2 Paulo S.M. Barros,2 and S´ergio L. Morelh˜ao1, ∗
1Instituto de F´ısica, Universidade de S˜ao Paulo, CP 66318, 05315-970 S˜aoPaulo, SP, Brazil†
2Faculdade de Medicina Veteri´aria, Universidade de S˜ao Paulo, 05508-900 S˜aoPaulo, SP, Brazil
(Dated: February 2, 2008)

This work reports the exploitation of diﬀraction enhanced X-ray imaging (DEI) for studying
cataract in addition to the ﬁnding of heavy scattering centers of light, probably Ca-rich precipitates
in cataractous lenses. DEI selectively probes diﬀuse-scattering, refraction, and absorption properties
of features in the lenses. Fiber cell compaction areas and dilute distribution of precipitates are
identiﬁable, as well as highly absorbing aggregations providing contrast even in the conventional
radiography setup. This ﬁnding opens new opportunities for clinical diagnosis, for understanding
the causes of cataract, and in developing medicines for this disease.

PACS numbers: 87.59.-e; 61.10.-i; 87.19.Xx
Keywords: Crystalline lens, X-ray imaging, X-ray radiography, cataract, synchrotron radiation

5
0
0
2
 
n
u
J
 
8
 
 
]
h
p
-
d
e
m

.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
0
7
0
6
0
5
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

INTRODUCTION

Cataract, or eye lens opacity, is an important oph-
thalmic disease [1, 2] and the leading cause of eye surg-
eries in the world, aﬀecting the life quality of millions
of people. Intraocular lens implantation is a successful
treatment, minimally invasive with quick rehabilitation,
low complication rate, and aﬀordable for most popula-
tions. However, it is still necessary to understand the
direct causes of this disease at a molecular level in order
to prevent, postpone, or correct the vision loss at early
stages of cataract.

Almost all of the transparency loss is due to light scat-
tering and, consequently, the subject of most works done
in recent years is to identify the mechanisms by which the
biochemical or cellular changes lead to the visible light
scattering that clouds the lenses [3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8]. Such
scattering requires abrupt density variations, or refrac-
tive index ﬂuctuations, in a length scale comparable to
the wavelength of the visible light [9]. Fiber cell com-
paction in age-related cataract [10, 11] produces density
variations over much larger scales to explain alone the
diﬀuse light scattering observed in the catarogenesis.

Morphological studies are intimately related to the
availability of characterization techniques. Since visible
light microscopy in the later 19th century [12] to trans-
mission and scanning electron microscopy of our times
[11, 13, 14], the lens structure were extensively studied.
Acoustic and ultrasonic properties [15, 16] and Raman
signature [17, 18, 19] of healthy and cataractous crys-
talline lenses have also been reported.

Sophisticated optical imaging techniques [20, 21, 22]
are important tools for in vivo clinical diagnosis of
cataract, and to establish statistical correlations between
the patient’s medical history and the degrees and types
(nuclear/cortical) of cataract.

However, it is not possible to probe with visible light
the internal structure of its own scattering centers and,
on the other hand, electron microscopy is restricted by

FIG. 1: Diﬀraction enhanced X-ray imaging (DEI) of crys-
talline lenses: a) normal and b) cataractous lenses in air; and
the same c) normal and d) cataractous lenses in water. Air
(water) exposures reveal mostly surface (internal) structures.
White areas in the cataractous lens (d) are compact aggrega-
tion of dense precipitates. X-ray photon energy is 20 KeV.

sample preparation procedures and small probing areas.
Therefore, a detail analysis of the density ﬂuctuations on
the entire lens scale cannot be properly accomplished by
optical neither electron microscopy.

X-ray absorption radiography has been applied in med-
ical diagnosis for characterization of hard tissues such as
bones and teeth. Crystalline lenses are made of soft tis-
sues and for this reason no previous attempt of studying
cataract by X-ray radiography has been reported.

With the worldwide advances of synchrotron facili-

ties, new X-ray imaging techniques are been developed
for selected applications of interest in materials science
In one of such techniques, known as
and medicine.
diﬀraction enhanced imaging (DEI), the X-ray diﬀrac-
tion phenomenon in crystals (Bragg diﬀraction) allows
to separate the absorption, scattering, and refraction ef-
fects present when a monochromatic low-divergence X-
ray beam is transmitted through the materials [23]. This
technique is very sensitive to any density ﬂuctuation and
it has already been applied for analyzing soft tissues, as
for instance in cancer diagnosis [24].

The present work exploits DEI for studying cataract.
It also reports the ﬁnding of surprising distributions of
heavy scattering centers in cataractous canine lenses. In
vitro crystalline lenses were investigated by the very short
wavelength (0.062nm) of X-ray photons at 20 KeV. DEI
of entire lenses are obtained at diﬀerent positions of the
analyzed crystal to selectively enhance the scattering, re-
fraction, and absorption properties of the observed fea-
tures. Regions of ﬁber cell compaction and distributions
of heavy precipitates are the most common features. In
some cases, dense aggregations providing absorption con-
trast even in the conventional radiography setup are ob-
served. The relevance of this ﬁnding for the understand-
ing of cataract is discussed.

RESULTS

Signiﬁcant X-ray scattering occurs at the lens surface
owing to the air-lens interface. It is responsible for most
of the observable features in air exposures, useful to in-
spect changes in the surface morphology during cataro-
genesis, as shown in Figs. 1(a) and 1(b) where DEI from
healthy and cataractous lenses are compared.

However, to reveal internal density ﬂuctuations the
majority of the surface scattering has to be avoided. It
is possible by immersing the lens in a medium of nearly
the same density of the lens tissue, in this case deionized
water. A very clean and uniform image is that obtained
in Fig. 1(c) for water exposure of the healthy lens, while
large and well deﬁned scattering regions around the nu-
clei, and also in small amounts at outer regions, are ob-
served in Fig. 1(d) for the cataractous lens.

As summarized in Fig. 2, the image contrast crite-
rions of DEI allows characterization of the scattering
properties of the observed internal structures in the
lenses. Diﬀuse-scattering, refraction, and absorption im-
ages were collected respectively at the tail (T), shoulder
(S), and center (C) of the analyzer window, some good
examples are shown in Fig. 3.
In the former type of
image, the amounts of diﬀuse-scattering around the in-
ternal structures are consistent to the type of scattering
expected for an aggregation of tiny precipitates without
a well deﬁned boundary, as in Figs. 3(a) and 3(c). On
the other hand, refraction images have shown aggrega-

2

FIG. 2: Principles of contrast in diﬀraction enhanced imag-
ing (DEI) technique. a) The interaction of a monochromatic
low-divergence (≈ 50µrad in the vertical direction) incident
X-ray beam (0) with the tissues provides three major features
on the transmitted beam: an intensity reduction (1) due to ei-
ther photoabsorption and diﬀuse scattering; slight deviations
in the beam direction (2) caused by refraction on large re-
gions with diﬀerent densities; and diﬀuse scattering (3) due
to interface roughness and/or tiny density ﬂuctuations as for
microscopic particles. Transmitted beam images are recorded
after convolution with b) the analyzer window provided by
the acceptance angle for Bragg diﬀraction in a highly perfect
crystal. Away from the analyzer tails (T) only diﬀuse scatter-
ings (3) are accepted in the detection system (CCD of 50µm
resolution). The shoulder (S) are very sensitive to angular
deviations and thus to the eﬀect of refraction (2), while the
center (C) is mostly sensitive to direct absorption (1). For X-
ray photons of 20 KeV, the FWHM of the analyzer window
is about 4 µrad. More details on the experimental setup can
be found elsewhere. [23]

tions with dense cores, Fig. 1(d) and 3(d), capable to
refract X-rays in an opposite sense of air bubbles, arrow
in Fig. 3(f). It indicates that the precipitates are denser
than the lens tissue.

By recording the transmitted beam image before the
analyzer, as in conventional absorption radiography, the
X-ray attenuation through aggregates with dense cores
provide visible contrast in some cases. A few millimeters
in length observed in frontal view, e.g. Fig. 3(a), pro-
vide a lateral attenuation in side view, Fig. 3(b), that is
comparable to the attenuation of bones. Although ele-
mental analysis is necessary to assure the composition of
the precipitates, they probably are rich in calcium.

Dilute concentrations of precipitates without cores
have also been observed, Figs. 3(e) and 3(f), as well
as clinical cases of cataract with well-deﬁned Y-sutures
In these
but with no distinct amounts of precipitates.
cases, which correspond to 60% of the analyzed cases,
there are signiﬁcant scattering at the suture marks that
can be generated either by local compaction of ﬁber cells

3

FIG. 3: Cataractous lenses by X-ray imaging techniques. Diﬀuse-scattering (DS), refraction (R), and absorption (A) images
corresponding respectively to the T, S, and C positions of the analyzer window in Fig. 2. a) DS-image of the same lens in
Fig. 1(d), and b) side view in absorption radiographic setup (recorded on image plate); the inset shows the A-image (bar = 1
cm). c) DS-image and d) R-image of lens with well localized precipitation and dense core; the top-dark/bottom-white refraction
contrast of the core is reversed in a bubble air (white arrow). e) DS-image and f) R-image of lens with dilute concentration
of precipitates around the nuclei and visible Y-sutures. g) i) k) DS-images emphasizing regions of diﬀuse-scattering at the
contour of the lenses as well as along the Y-sutures, whose marks (ﬁber cell compaction regions) are better visualized on h) j)
l) R-images. The images were recorded on a CCD of 50µm resolution.

or accumulation of precipitates along the marks, as for
instance in Figs. 3(g) through 3(l). Refraction images
show the extension of compaction areas while diﬀuse-
scattering images can revel the presence or not of pre-
cipitates at the sutures. Absorption images (center of
the analyzer window) provide essentially the same infor-
mation of diﬀuse-scattering ones.

Twenty clinical cases of canine cataract were investi-
gated here, and classiﬁed by ophthalmic exam as partial
or total opacity regarding the extension of cloudiness in
the lens volume. All cases had severely compromised vi-
sion before surgery. No correlations to speciﬁc causes
were established.

DISCUSSION

Two distinct potential sources of light scattering in
cataractous lenses have been founded by DEI. Total opac-
ity, i.e. entire lens clouded according to ophthalmic clas-
siﬁcation, could be correlated either to visibility of Y-
sutures or presence of precipitates at nuclei areas. Lenses
with precipitates at areas away from the nuclei and with-
out contrast of suture marks are the partial opacity cases.

Biochemical changes responsible for compaction of
ﬁber cells at Y-sutures are not age-related ones. Al-
though signiﬁcant compaction occurs as a function of
ageing [10], visible marks owing to compaction were ob-
served even in cataractous lenses from young animals,
Fig. 3(f). The DEI visibility of sutures and other observ-
able features are still to be correlated to possible causes

of cataract. But, independently of their causes, the vis-
ibility of sutures seems to be related to changes in the
tissue at the lens scale while in the partial opacity cases
the tissue changes are localized at areas with precipitates.
Mammal lenses are basically the same tissue, with very
similar spectroscopic Raman signatures [19], and nearly
the same microstructure [14]. The precipitates founded
here in canine lens could also be occurring in Human
lens, but it is still to be investigated by DEI. In any case,
establishing the chemical composition of the precipitates
as well as the mechanism responsible for their occurrence
can be relevant for developing drugs capable to avoid or
dissolve the formation of precipitates at early stages of
partial cataract.

CONCLUSION

Diﬀraction enhanced X-ray imaging is a very powerful
technique for in vitro studying distinct types of cataract.
The wealthness of details available in the images can be
useful for elaborating classiﬁcation schemes correlating
speciﬁc DEI features with potential causes of cataract
such as ageing, diabetics, usage of medicines, or even
ultra-violet light exposure.

The authors gratefully acknowledge Z. Zhong of the
NSLS for valuable discussions and beam-time at the
3544), and C.
X15A beamline (under proposal No.
Parham for the expert technical assistance. This work
was supported by the Brazilian agency CNPq (proc. No.
150329/2003-2 and 301617/95-3), and by the research
founding oﬃces PRP and CCInt of the Univ. of S˜ao
Paulo.

∗ Electronic address: morelhao@if.usp.br
† Electronic address: antunes@if.usp.br

.

[1] N.S. Jaﬀe and J. Horwitz, in Lens and Cataract, Vol.
3, Textbook of Ophthalmology, eds. S.M. Podos and M.
Yanoﬀ, Gower Medical Publishing, New York, 1992.
[2] N.A.P. Brown and A.J. Bron, in Lens disorders: a clini-
cal manal of cataract diagnosis, Butterworth-Heinemann

4

Ltd., Oxford, 1996.

[3] K.J. Al-Ghoul et al., Exp. Eye Res. 62, 237-251 (1996).
[4] J. Dillon, L. Zheng, J.C. Merriam and E.R. Gaillard,

Exp. Eye Res. 68, 785-795 (1999).

[5] V.L. Taylor and M.J. Costello, Exp. Eye Res. 68, 163-174

(1999).

[6] R.J.W. Truscott, The International Journal of Biochem-

istry & Cell Biology 35, 1500-1504 (2003).

[7] D. Tang, D. Borchman, A.K. Schwarz, M.C. Yappert,
G.F.J.M. Vrensen, J. van Marle and D.B. DuPr´e, Exp.
Eye Res. 76, 605-612 (2003).

[8] S. Bassnett and R. McNulty, J. Exp. Biology 206, 4353-

4361 (2003).

[9] K.O. Gilliland et al., Mol. Vis. 7, 120-130 (2001).
[10] K.J. Al-Ghoul, R.K. Nordgren, A.J. Kuszak, C.D. Freel,
M.J. Castello and J.R. Kuszak, Exp. Eye Res 72, 199-214
(2001).

[11] C.D. Freel, K.J. Al-Ghoul, J.R. Kuszak and M.J.

Costello, BMC Ophthalmology 3, 1-9 (2003).
[12] C. Rabl, Z. Wissensch. Zool. 67, 1-138 (1900).
[13] W.L. Jongebloed, J.J.L. van der Want, J.G.F. Worst and
D. Kalicharan, Scanning Microscopy 12, 653-665 (1998).
[14] J.R. Kuszak, R.K. Zoltoski and C. Sivertson, Exp. Eye

Res. 78, 673-687 (2004).

[15] C.L. de Korte, A.F.W. van der Steen, J.M. Thijssen, J.J.
Duindam, C. Otton and G.J. Puppels, Exp. Eye Res. 59,
617-627 (1994).

[16] H. Tabandeh, M. Wilkins, G. Thompson, D. Nassiri, and
A. Karin, J. Cataract Refract. Surg. 26, 838-842 (2000).
[17] R.J. Erckens, W.F. March, F.H. Jongsma, J.P. Wicksted,
F. Hendrikse, E.E. Smit and M. Motamedi, J. Cataract
Refract. Surg. 27, 1065-1070 (2001).

[18] C. Medina-Guti´errez, C. Frausto-Reyes, J.L. Quintanar-
Stephano, R. Sato-Berr´u and O. Barbosa-Garc´ia, Spec-
trochimica Acta A 60, 1573-1577 (2004).

[19] A. Antunes, S.E. Abud-Filho, M.L.A. Temperini and S.L.

Morelh˜ao, Laser Phys. Lett. 2, 415-420 (2005).

[20] B.R. Masters, Optics Express 3, 332-338 (1998).
[21] C.D. DiCarlo, W.P. Roach, D.A. Gagliano, S.A. Bop-
part, D.X. Hammer, A.B. Cox and J.G. Fujimoto, J. of
Biomedical Optics 4, 450-458 (1999).

[22] T. Kuroda, T. Fujikado, N. Maeda, T. Oshika, Y. Hi-
rohara and T. Mihashi, Am. J. Ophthalmol.134, 1-9
(2002).

[23] Z. Zhong, W. Thomlinson, D. Chapman and D. Sayers,

Phys. Res. A 450, 556-567 (2000).

[24] D. Chapman, E. Pisano, W. Thomlinson, Z. Zhong, R.E.
Johnston, D. Washburn and D. Sayers, Brest. Dis. 10,
197 (1998).

