Biological Cybernetics manuscript No.
(will be inserted by the editor)

5
0
0
2
 
c
e
D
 
6
 
 
]
h
p
-
d
e
m

.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
0
5
0
2
1
5
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Time delay and partial coherence analyses to identify cortical
connectivities

R. B. Govindan1, Jan Raethjen1, Kathrin Arning1, Florian Kopper1, G¨unther Deuschl1 ⋆

Department of Neurology, Christian-Albrechts University of Kiel, Schittenhelmstrasse 10, D-24105 Kiel, Germany

Received: February 2, 2008/ Revised version: February 2, 2008

Abstract Recently it has been demonstrated by Albo
that partial coherence analysis is sensitive to signal to
noise ratio (SNR) and that it will always identify the
signal with the highest SNR among the three signals as
the main (driving) inﬂuence. We propose to use time de-
lay analysis in parallel to partial coherence analysis to
identify the connectivities between the multivariate time
series. Both are applied to a theoretical model (used
by Albo) to analyse the connections introduced in the
model. Time delay analysis identiﬁes the connections
correctly. We also apply these analyses to the electroen-
cephalogram (EEG) and electromyogram (EMG) of es-
sential tremor patients and EEG of normal subjects while
bimanually tapping their index ﬁngers. Biologically plau-
sible cortico-muscular and cortico-cortical connections
are identiﬁed by these methods.

1 Introduction

Coherence measures the degree of linear association (in
frequency domain) between the two signals (Amjad et
al. 1997; Halliday et al. 1995). The common inﬂuence
of the third signal on the correlation between two sig-
nals is addressed by partial coherence analysis (Lopes
et al. 1980; Turbes and Schneider 1989; Halliday et al.
1995; Sherman et al. 1997; Kocsis et al. 1999; Mima et
al. 2000a; Timmermann et al. 2003; Kubota et al. 2003;
Raethjen et al. 2004). Understanding the role of more
than one signal in the correlation between two signals
has led to the graphical model (Dahlhaus 2000; Rosen-
berg et al. 1998). If the partial coherence between two
signals is zero (is below the pre-deﬁned conﬁdence limit),

⋆ Correspondence: Prof. Dr. G. Deuschl
(e-mail:g.deuschl@neurologie.uni-kiel.de)
Department of Neurology, Christian-Albrechts University of
Kiel, Schittenhelmstrasse 10, D-24105 Kiel, Germany
FAX: 0049-431-5978502

it is usually concluded that the presumed signal whose
contributions are removed by partial coherence, is re-
sponsible for the correlations (coherence) between the
two signals. Alternatively, the conclusion that the pre-
sumed signal has caused the other two signals has been
drawn (Gersch and Goddard 1970). This idea has been
used by Gersch to identify the source of the epileptic
foci (Gersch and Goddard 1970). But the concept of at-
tributing the causal (driver) nature to a signal when it
abolishes the coherence between the two signals upon
partial coherence analysis, is questioned in the recent
past (Albo et al. 2004). It has been demonstrated by
(Albo et al. 2004) using an AR2 model as source sig-
nal and two of its time delayed versions as response
signals that partial coherence analysis can yield spuri-
ous results. In this model, the source signal namely the
AR2 process is contaminated with the highest amount
of noise. In one of the time delayed versions of AR2,
a slightly less amount of noise is added. Yet another
time delayed version of AR2 is left out as noise free.
This is labeled as Case I in (Albo et al. 2004). Upon
partial coherence analysis, they found that the signal
with the highest signal to noise ratio (SNR) which, in
their case, is the last version stated above, was incor-
rectly identiﬁed as driver signal. They provide further
evidences for skepticism of partial coherence technique
by analysing the neuronal data (theta rhythms) recorded
from diﬀerent centers of the limbic system of the rat. At
the end they propose to use Granger causality analysis
(Bernasconi and K¨onig 1999; Liang et al. 1998; Baccala
and Sameshima 2001; Kami´nski et al. 2001) to identify
the causal relation between the diﬀerent neuronal sig-
nals.

From the above discussion it is clear that a zero value
of partial coherence between three signals need not nec-
essarily imply that the connection between the two sig-
nals are established only through the third signal. Even
if the results of partial coherence are correct, from a
zero value of partial coherence, one cannot understand
the nature (direction) of interaction between the signals.

2

R. B. Govindan, Jan Raethjen, Kathrin Arning, Florian Kopper, G¨unther Deuschl

Time delay between the signals allows to identify the di-
rection of the information ﬂows. By analysing the time
delay between the signals, we can verify the results of the
partial coherence and also we can understand the nature
of the interaction between the signals. Though from the
delay analysis we can understand the nature of informa-
tion ﬂow, it will be diﬃcult to judge whether or not the
connection between two centers is direct or indirect. In
the foregoing discussion we ascribe the direction of in-
formation ﬂow between centers based on delay analysis
and/or partial coherence analysis. In an ideal situation
both analyses should yield the same results. Since the re-
sults of the partial coherence analysis are susceptible to
SNR of the signals, in an experimental setting, it will be
very diﬃcult to rely on the results of one of the analyses
alone. In this study we use delay analysis in parallel to
the partial coherence analysis. In this study we only con-
sider the correlations between three signals. In parallel
we estimate the delay between the three distinguishable
pairs. Based on the results of these analyses, we estab-
lish the connection and direction (from delay analysis)
between the three signals considered. Many physiologi-
cal questions are related only to processes happening in
a particular frequency band and hence the natural selec-
tion will be frequency speciﬁc methods. We use the max-
imising coherence method to identify the delay between
the two signals at a given frequency (Carter 1987; Govin-
dan et al. 2005; Raethjen et al. 2005). Due to the time
delay between the two signals there will be (time) mis-
alignment between them. Because of this misalignment
the coherence estimated between the two signals will be
slightly reduced. In order to compensate for this reduc-
tion in the coherence and thereby to estimate the time
delay, we artiﬁcially shift the time series by a time lag.
Coherence in a selected frequency band is estimated as
a function of lag. Coherence will increase as a function
of lag and reach a maximum value at the time lag equal
to the time delay between the two signals.

First, we perform time delay and partial coherence
analyses for the model used in (Albo et al. 2004) to iden-
tify the connections (used) between the diﬀerent vari-
ables of the model. We ﬁnd that the time delay analy-
sis unambiguously identiﬁes the direction of interaction
between diﬀerent variables of the model. Using these
techniques we analyse the electroencephalogram (EEG)
and electromyogram (EMG) of essential tremor (ET) pa-
tients, to understand the direction of interaction between
the two tremor related cortical areas in the region of the
mesial premotor cortex close to the SMA and the region
of the primary sensorimotor cortex (MC). In this case,
partial coherence analysis identiﬁes that the connection
between the two cortical signals is mainly established
through the third (muscle) signal with the highest SNR
whereas the time delay analysis identiﬁes entirely diﬀer-
ent connections. In another application, we apply these
techniques to the EEG recordings from the left and right
sensorimotor cortical regions and midline region of nor-

mal subjects during bimanual ﬁnger movements to un-
derstand the ﬂow of the movement related information.
In one of these examples (all cortical areas show compa-
rable SNR), both analyses yield conforming results while
in the other example again the results of delay analysis
diﬀer from the partial coherence analysis.

2 Materials and Methods

2.1 Data acquisition

Details of spectral analysis of ET can be found in (Raethjen
et al. 2005). This study was approved by the local ethics
committee and all the subjects gave informed consent. In
a dimly lit room, subjects are asked to sit on a comfort-
able chair in a slightly supine position with both hands
held against gravity (for normal subjects the hands are
kept in a comfortable position to execute rhythmic bi-
manual movement of the index ﬁngers) while the fore-
arms are supported. EEG is recorded with 64-channel
EEG system (Neuroscan) with standard electrode posi-
tions (Klem et al. 1999). Surface EMG is recorded bipo-
larly from EMG electrodes attached to wrist extensors
and ﬂexors of both arms. In the case of normal subjects
during the bimanual ﬁnger tapping the EMG electrodes
are positioned on the index extensors and ﬂexors muscles
of the forearm. EEG and EMG data are sampled at a
rate of 1000 Hz. EEG and EMG are band pass ﬁltered on
line between 0.01 to 200 Hz and 30-200 Hz, respectively.
Data are stored in a computer and are analysed oﬄine.
Each recording lasted for 1-4 minutes. Artefacts like eye
blinks, base-line shift, etc., are discarded by visual in-
spection. Further, EMG signals are full wave rectiﬁed
(magnitude of the deviations from mean value) and EEG
is made reference free by constructing second (spatial)
derivative, Laplacian (Hjorth 1991; Hjorth 1975).

2.2 Methods

Let x(t), y(t) and z(t) be the three simultaneously mea-
sured signals of length N . Let the sampling frequency be
s Hz. Following (Halliday et al. 1995), we calculate co-
herence and partial coherence as follows: We divide the
signals in to M disjoint time segments of length L, such
that N = LM . We calculate, power spectra Sxx, Syy, Szz
and cross-spectra Sxy, Sxz and Syz in each of the disjoint
windows. Finally, we average these quantities across all
the segments to get the estimate of the same. We esti-
mate coherence between the signals x and y as follows:
2
Cxy(ω) = (cid:12)
Sxy(ω)(cid:12)
Syy(ω) . Similarly, we es-
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12) d
(cid:12)
timate the partial coherence between the three signals
x(t), y(t) and z(t) as follows:

Sxx(ω)
d

d

d

/

Cxy|z(ω) =

d

CYxy(ω) −
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12) d
(1 −

CYxz(ω)
d

Cxz(ω))(1 −

d

2

,

CYzy(ω)(cid:12)
(cid:12)
d
(cid:12)
Czy(ω))
d

Time delay and partial coherence analyses to identify cortical connectivities

3

d

where
CYij (ω) is a complex valued function whose mag-
nitude is called coherency (Halliday et al. 1995) between
the two signals i and j. The over-cap indicates the es-
timate of that quantity. In the following discussions, for
the sake of convenience, we use these quantities without
over-cap. The conﬁdence limit for coherence at 100%
α is 1 − (1 − α)1/(M−1). Similarly the conﬁdence limit
for partial coherence at 100% α is 1 − (1 − α)1/(M−2)
(Brillinger 1981; Halliday et al. 1995). In our calculations
we have set α = .99. Any value of coherence above the
conﬁdence limit is considered to show signiﬁcant corre-
lation between the time series and the value of coherence
below this conﬁdence limit indicates lack of correlation
between the two time series. For the interpretation of
partial coherence we refer to Sect. 1. In the above spec-
tral estimations, we choose a segment length of L = 1s
which results in a frequency resolution of 1 Hz for the
estimated spectral quantities. However, one can choose
diﬀerent segment lengths to have a good compromise be-
tween sensitivity and reliability of the estimated quanti-
ties.

We extend the coherence analysis to estimate the
time delay between the two signals x(t) and y(t). Anal-
ogous to cross-correlation, if there is a time delay δ be-
tween the two signals, the value of coherence will be
slightly reduced. In order to compensate for this reduc-
tion in the coherence due to δ, we shift one of the time
series say x(t) (assuming x(t) is the time delayed ver-
sion of y(t)), by a constant time lag τ . We discard the
extra τ points (in sample units) in y(t) to have the same
length for both time series. We estimate the coherence
C(τ )ω0 in a selected frequency band ω0 as a function
of τ . The value of C(τ )ω0 will increase as a function of
τ and reach a maximum value when τ = δ. This proce-
dure is repeated for the other time series y(t) to estimate
the time delay from x(t) to y(t). This idea of estimating
the time delay by maximising the coherence has been
successfully applied to acoustic signals (Carter 1987). A
similar idea using phase synchronisation, has been em-
ployed to estimate the time delay between and among
diﬀerent meteorological variables (Rybski et al. 2003).
Since coherence measure is sensitive to the length of the
data, we discard the points corresponding to maximum
τ from both time series, and consider only the length of
the time series which is integer multiple of the segment
length L. In this way C(τ )ω0 estimated at diﬀerent val-
ues of τ will have the same conﬁdence limit. This ensures
that the maximum value of the coherence is reached only
because of the time delay and not because of the diﬀerent
lengths of the data used in the estimation of the C(τ )ω0 .
We have used the conﬁdence limit (see above) to as-
sess the signiﬁcance of C(τ )ω0 . For the theoretical model
which is AR2 and its time delayed variants, one can ob-
tain the error-bar of the delay from standard deviations
of the delays estimated for several realisations of the AR2
process. In order to get the error-bars of the estimated
delay (variability of the delay) for the biological data, we

use surrogate analysis (Kantz and Schreiber 1997). We
synthesise surrogate data for this purpose by exploiting
one of the basic assumptions of spectral analysis: that
the data in disjoint segments are independent (Halliday
et al. 1995). We shuﬄe the disjoint segments of the time
series from which the original spectrum is estimated.
This is done only for one of the time series from which
time delayed information is assumed to ﬂow to another
time series. Then, we repeat this procedure for the other
time series. Thus, in this type of surrogate the original
spectrum of both the time series is preserved but only
the cross spectrum will be diﬀerent. We prepare 19 dif-
ferent surrogates for each of our analyses and calculate
the time delayed coherence function C(τ )sur
for each of
ω0
the realisations. We make a null hypothesis that C(τ )ω0
calculated for the original time series x(t) and y(t) is
due to spurious correlations. We estimate the signiﬁ-
cance of the diﬀerence S(τ ) between C(τ )ω0 and C(τ )sur
ω0
], where
as S(τ ) = (cid:12)
(cid:12)
< . > indicates the average over all the surrogates and
σ[.] represents the standard deviation between diﬀerent
realisations. If S(τ ) > 2 then we reject the null hypothe-
sis that C(τ )ω0 is due to spurious correlation (Kantz and
Schreiber 1997; Theiler et al. 1992). Though we compute
S(τ ) for all values of τ at which C(τ )sur
ω0 and C(τ )ω0 are
estimated, for simplicity we report here only S(τ = δ).
When the null hypothesis is rejected, we calculate the
error-bars of the delay as follows: We subtract C(τ )sur
ω0
from C(τ )ω0 and estimate delay for each surrogate sub-
tracted realisation. We report the mean value of these
delays as the delay between the two time series and their
standard deviation as the error-bar of the delay. For the
sake of clarity, we plot

− < C(τ )surr

/σ[C(τ )surr

ω0 >(cid:12)
(cid:12)

C(τ )ω0

ω0

C′(τ )ω0 = (cid:2)C(τ )ω0

− < C(τ )surr
− [C(ω0)− < C(ω0)surr >] .

ω0 >(cid:3)

Note that C(ω0) is the value of the coherence at τ = 0
and < C(ω0)surr > is the average of all the surrogates
at τ = 0. By this deﬁnition, C′(τ )ω0 will pass through
a zero value at τ = 0 and reach a maximum value at
τ = δ. Based on the above arguments we calculate the
delay between the two time series as

δ = max

C′(τ )ω0 .

τ

The preference of this method over other conventional
methods of delay estimation is discussed in (Govindan
et al. 2005). It has been shown by Carter (Carter 1987)
that the uncertainty in the estimation of coherence due
to the time delay between the two time series is pro-
portional to 1/L (where L is the FFT length used in
the estimation of the spectral quantities). In order to
favor the estimation of the time delay, we increase the
uncertainty in the coherence estimation by decreasing
L (which in turn results in the poorer frequency reso-
lution of the spectral estimates). Sometimes, decreasing

4

R. B. Govindan, Jan Raethjen, Kathrin Arning, Florian Kopper, G¨unther Deuschl

the frequency resolution may result in the loss of coher-
ence (as the spectral quantities are poorly estimated)
which should be checked before proceeding to the delay
analysis. In the forgoing analysis, we have used a fre-
quency resolution of 5 Hz for the theoretical model and
a frequency resolution of 2 Hz for the biological systems.
As this method relies on the bias (due to delay) in the
(coherence) estimator, results obtained might be sensi-
tive to the other factors causing the bias in the coherence
estimate. In addition to delay, the other two dominant
factors which can aﬀect coherence estimator are the FFT
length L (see above) and the SNR of the signals. As dis-
cussed above the FFT length is coupled to the delay
(Carter 1987) in causing the bias in the coherence es-
timate. By properly choosing this value (usually in the
range of 1/5 sec to 1/2 sec) one can minimise the eﬀect
due to this bias. The bias caused by SNR cannot be ad-
dressed directly. However, the error-bars of the delay es-
timate to some extent can reﬂect the eﬀect of SNR on the
delay estimate. Further, length of the dataset can cause
bias in the coherence. For a given system, the number
of points for the time shifted coherence is kept the same
(for all pair combinations, see above) to avoid this bias.
Since all the time shifted coherence analysis is done for
the same number of points (see above) it will not aﬀect
the ﬁnal results.

3 Application to Model system

In this section we test our hypothesis that delay can
serve as a measure to identify the direction of interac-
tion, in a group of three coherent signals and can over-
come the methodological pitfalls inherent to partial co-
herence analysis (Albo et al. 2004). We choose to use the
model used in (Albo et al. 2004) which is an AR2 process
(source) and its time delayed versions as response sig-
nals. AR2 processes have been used to model biological
processes (Honerkamp 1994; Timmer et al. 1998a; Tim-
mer et al. 1998b). The model is given by:

X1(t) = X0(t − δ1) + η1(t)
X2(t) = X0(t) + η2(t)
X3(t) = X0(t − δ2) + η3(t),

where X0(t) = 0.8X0(t − 1) − 0.5X0(t − 2) + η0(t) is a
AR2 process. ηi(t) are Gaussian white noise processes
with zero mean and unit variance. We assume 1000 Hz
as sampling frequency. We set δ1 = 3 ms, δ2 = 5 ms,
var(η1(t)) = 0.04, var(η2(t)) = 0.06 and var(η3(t)) =
0.0. In this model, there is a delayed ﬂow of informa-
tion from X2(t) to X1(t) and X3(t) with a delay of 3
and 5 ms, respectively. Also there is delayed informa-
tion ﬂow from X1(t) to X3(t) with a delay of 2 ms. By
construction of the model, X2(t) is the mediator as it is
solely responsible for the existence of (establishing the
connection between) X1(t) and X3(t).

Results of the delay, coherence and partial coher-
ence analyses for this model are given in Fig. 1. Fig-
ures 1(b,c,f) show a signiﬁcant coherence between the
three time series. Figures 1(d,g,h) display partial coher-
ence between the time series X and Y accounting for
the common inﬂuence of the third time series Z and is
indicated by X − Y /Z.

Figure 1 will appear here.
In Fig. 1d the partial coherence between X1(t) and
X2(t) accounting for the common inﬂuence of X3(t) is
insigniﬁcant seemingly indicating that the connection
between X1(t) and X2(t) is mainly established through
X3(t). In Fig. 1(g,h) there is a decrease in the (partial)
coherence (compared to their coherence shown in Fig.
1(c,f), respectively) when the inﬂuence of the third sig-
nal is removed. One may conclude that the third signal
in Fig. 1(g,h) also shares some of its signal with the
other two variables but is not solely responsible for the
correlation between these two. Thus, the partial coher-
ence analysis already indicates that all signals are inter
connected but X3(t) with the highest SNR is identiﬁed
as the main inﬂuence (mediator) to establish the con-
nection between the other variables within this network.
The direction of interaction introduced in the model is
shown in Fig. 1j. The connections identiﬁed by partial
coherence analysis are shown in Fig. 1k.

Now, we consider the results of the delay analysis
shown in Fig. 1(a,e,i). In Fig. 1a there is a delay of
3 ± 0.35 ms from X2(t) to X1(t) and the signiﬁcance
of deviation from the surrogates is S(δ) = 69.3. In Fig.
1e there is a delay of 2 ± 0.28 ms from X1(t) to X3(t)
and the signiﬁcance of deviation from the surrogates is
S(δ) = 102.87. In Fig. 1i there is delay of 5 ± 0.47 ms
from X2(t) to X3(t) and the signiﬁcance of deviation
from the surrogates is S(δ) = 91.24. In all these cases,
S(δ) is greater than 2 standard deviations indicating
that the correlations in C(τ )ω0 are not spurious. From
delay analysis, it is clear that there is ﬂow of informa-
tion from X2(t) to X1(t) and X3(t) with a delay of 3 and
5 ms, respectively. The fact that X1(t) and X2(t) both
project to X3(t) but no information ﬂows from X3(t) to
X1(t) or X2(t) clearly rules out that X3(t) is the main
inﬂuence as suggested by the partial coherence analysis.
Conclusion based on the delay analysis is shown in Fig.
1l.

We also have repeated the analysis for slightly higher
intensity of noise to check the robustness of the delay
analysis to noise. There is no change in the ﬁnal con-
clusion drawn in Fig. 1l except for the increase in the
error-bar of the delay estimate. The results of the par-
tial coherence analysis remain consistent with Fig. 1(k).
Based on the delay values, in Fig. 1k, we draw the arrows
from source (which is X2 signal) to targets (which are
X1 and X2). Further there is a delayed ﬂow of informa-
tion from X1 to X3, and hence we have drawn an arrow
from X1 to X3. Although partial coherence analysis has
wrongly identiﬁed X3 as the mediator between the two

Time delay and partial coherence analyses to identify cortical connectivities

5

signals (Fig. 1d), a slight reduction in the (partial) co-
herence values in Fig 1 g and h when X3 is partialised
for X1 and X2 (compare to Fig. 1c and 1f, respectively)
indicates that X1 and X2 are also directly connected or
share a common source with X3. If X3 had been the sole
source as identiﬁed by the partial coherence analysis in
Fig. 1d, its coherence with the other two signals should
not have diminished when partialised for the third signal.
Thus, based on the delay analysis and from the above
discussion we establish the connectivities between the
variables of the model as shown in Fig. f.

If we consider an another diﬀerent situation in the
above model, with var(η2 = 0) and var(η1), var(η3) are
non-zeros, and with var(η3) > var(η1), then the results
of the partial coherence will clearly identify that the con-
nection between X1 and X3 are established through X2
indicating that X2 is the source signal. Delay analysis
will also yield similar results. However, in this case, as
well as in the above scenario, though we can argue the
connection (direction of the information ﬂow) between
two centers based on the delay analysis we cannot clearly
judge whether or not they are directly or indirectly cou-
pled. Thus, the results of both analyses should be inter-
preted with great care in the presence of cross-channel
relations.

Further, for the above model, one can obtain similar
results by cross-correlation analysis or by phase synchro-
nisation analysis (Rybski et al. 2003). But for biological
data, we are interested in the nature of interaction be-
tween the two signals in a particular frequency band. So
in the next section we continue to use the maximising
coherence method.

4 Application to Biological systems

In this section we perform the delay and partial coher-
ence analyses to identify the connection between the cor-
tical and muscle signals by applying them to (i) the EEG
and EMG time series in ET patients (ii) the EEG of nor-
mal subjects while performing rhythmic bimanual tap-
ping of their index ﬁngers. We also show that the results
of partial coherence analysis tend to identify the signal
with the highest SNR as the mediator through which the
connection between the other two signals is established.
We calculate the signal to noise ratio (SNR) of the signal
by considering the ratio of the power at the desired fre-
quency to noise level. We use the mean value of power in
the frequency range of 100 to 200 Hz as noise level (up-
per cut oﬀ of our ﬁlter is at 200 Hz). Connections and
nature of interactions identiﬁed by delay analysis are dif-
ferent from those identiﬁed by partial coherence analysis
and provide biologically conceivable interpretation.

Before proceeding any further, we construct cortico-
muscular isocoherence maps (Raethjen et al. 2005; Govin-
dan et al. 2005) for all the cases discussed below. In the
case of ET, there are two distinct regions (hot spot) with

signiﬁcant cortico-muscular coherence at the tremor fre-
quency, one in the frontal and midline regions, and an-
other in the region of the contralateral primary senso-
rimotor cortex. In the normal subjects the voluntary
rhythms of both hands are represented in the right and
left sensorimotor areas and also in the frontal/midline re-
gion. As in the tremor patients this secondary hot spot
likely reﬂects an involvement of premotor cortical ar-
eas (e.g.) SMA (Raethjen et al. 2005). In both cases we
take an electrode from each region displaying maximum
cortico-muscular coherence to identify the connections
between the diﬀerent cortical areas.

4.1 Application to ET

ET is a common movement disorder characterised by
postural tremor of the arms (Deuschl et al. 1998). Other
neurological abnormalities are typically absent in essen-
tial tremor (Findley and Koller 1987). Experimental stud-
ies on animals (Llin´as and Volkind 1973; Lamare 1984)
and on human beings (Jenkins et al. 1993; Hallett and
Dubinsky 1993; Bucher et al. 1997) show that diﬀer-
ent parts of the brain are involved in essential tremor.
Evidence for the involvement of the thalamus in the
tremor oscillations is also known (Hua et al. 1998; Ben-
abid et al. 1991; Schuurman et al. 2000). The role of cor-
tical motor centers is currently under debate (Halliday
et al. 1998; Raethjen et al. 2005; Hellwig et al. 2001).
We consider two ET patients which we label ET1 and
ET2. These two subjects display cortico-muscular coher-
ence at the tremor frequency (4 and 5 Hz) in a frontal
area close to the midline, possibly supplementary motor
area (SMA) and in the area of the sensorimotor cortex
(MC). We are interested in the tremor related connec-
tivities of these two motor regions with each other and
with the periphery. For ET1, results of delay, coherence
and partial coherence analyses are given in Fig. 2.

Figure 2 will appear here.
The muscle spectrum in Fig. 2j shows tremor oscilla-
tions around 4 Hz. Fig. 2b displays the cortico-cortical
coherence between F2 (SMA) and C2 (MC). There is a
signiﬁcant coherence at the tremor frequency of 4 Hz.
Fig. 2(c,f) display a signiﬁcant cortico-muscular coher-
ence at the tremor frequency of 4 Hz (Mima and Hallett
1999a; Mima and Hallett 1999b; Mima et al. 2000b; Hal-
liday et al. 1998). In Fig. 2d, (partial) coherence between
F2 and C2 accounting for the common inﬂuence of EMG
is vanished at the tremor frequency of 4 Hz seemingly
indicating that the external tremor is mainly responsi-
ble for the coupling between these areas. However, in
Fig. 2(g,h) partial cortico-muscular coherence account-
ing for the other cortical area is also slightly reduced
compared to the coherences shown in Fig. 2(c,f). This in-
dicates that these two regions are also coupled (Raethjen
et al. 2005). Thus the partial coherence analysis seems to
support the notion that all recording sites are connected

6

R. B. Govindan, Jan Raethjen, Kathrin Arning, Florian Kopper, G¨unther Deuschl

in a motor network with the peripheral tremor being the
leading inﬂuence of tremor related activity. SNR of F2,
C2 and EMG are 1.52, 10.25 and 70.58, respectively. By
comparing the SNR values we see that partial coherence
analysis has identiﬁed the signal with the highest SNR as
the main mediator within the cortico-muscular network
as predicted by the model (Albo et al. 2004).

To establish the direction of the diﬀerent connec-
tions we again perform the delay analysis. We choose
the tremor frequency of 4 Hz as ω0. Fig. 2a shows a
delay of 7 ± 0.67 ms from C2 to F2 and 3 ± 0.88 ms
from F2 to C2 and the signiﬁcances of deviation from
the surrogates are S(7) = 4.72 and S(3) = 3.36. Fig.
2e shows a delay of 19 ± 9.78 ms from F2 to EMG
and the signiﬁcance of deviation from the surrogates
is S(19) = 2.86. Fig. 2i shows a delay of 9 ± 3.83 ms
from EMG to C2 and 11 ± 3.71 ms from C2 to EMG
and the signiﬁcances of deviation from the surrogates
are S(9) = 15.82 and S(11) = 15.83. Signiﬁcance of de-
viation from the surrogates in all the cases are greater
than 2 standard deviations indicating C(τ )ωo is not due
to spurious correlations. There is a uni-directional ﬂow
from F2 to EMG and a bi-directional ﬂow between F2
and C2. Also there is a bi-directional ﬂow between C2
and EMG. Thus the cortical areas both inﬂuence each
other while the EMG only exerts some inﬂuence on one
of the cortical sites. This dominance of cortico-muscular
ﬂow and relative lack of musculo-cortical interaction in-
dicates that the EMG cannot be the main inﬂuence re-
sponsible for the cortico-cortical interaction as inferred
from the partial coherence analysis. On the contrary the
two cortical areas mutually exchange information and
both project to the EMG thereby contributing to the
peripheral tremor rhythm. Cortico-cortical connections
and the cortico-muscular connections based on the delay
analysis are shown in Fig. 2l. For the details of discus-
sion of cortico-muscular and musculo-cortical delays we
also refer to (Govindan et al. 2005).
Figure 3 will appear here
The results of delay, coherence and partial coher-
ence analyses for ET2 are shown in Fig. 3. As seen
for ET1, there is a signiﬁcant cortico-cortical coherence
between FCZ (SMA) and C4 (MC) (see Fig. 3b) at
the tremor frequency of 5 Hz shown in Fig. 3j. Also,
there is a signiﬁcant cortico-muscular coherence for both
SMA (FCZ) and MC (C4) as shown in Fig. 3(c,f) at
the tremor frequency of 5 Hz. In Fig. 3d partial coher-
ence between FCZ and C4 accounting for the common
inﬂuence of EMG is insigniﬁcant again seemingly indi-
cating that EMG is mainly responsible for the tremor re-
lated correlations between FCZ and C4. As seen in Fig.
2(g,h) for ET1, also for ET2 (see Fig. 3(g,h)), the par-
tial cortico-muscular coherence accounting for the com-
mon inﬂuence of the other cortical region is signiﬁcant
but has slightly reduced compared to their correspond-
ing coherences shown in Fig. 3(c,f). This again shows
(as concluded for ET1) that these two regions also seem

to couple leading to a reduction in the coherence when
the inﬂuence of the other cortical region is removed.
The SNR values for FCZ, C4 and EMG are 20.25, 26.64
and 161.22, respectively. Thus the partial coherence has
again identiﬁed the EMG signal with the highest SNR
as the mediator.

For delay analysis, we choose ω0 as 5 Hz which is
the tremor frequency. In Fig. 3a, there is a delay of
3 ± 1.92 ms from FCZ to C4 and the signiﬁcance of
deviation from the surrogates is S(3) = 14.06. In Fig.
3e, there is a delay of 25 ± 10.42 ms from FCZ to EMG
and the signiﬁcance of deviations from the surrogates is
S(25) = 5.05. In Fig. 3i, there is a delay of 18 ± 9.21
ms from C4 to EMG and the signiﬁcance of deviation
from the surrogates is S(18) = 13.01. In all the cases the
signiﬁcance of deviations from the surrogates is greater
than 2 standard deviations indicating that the correla-
tions in C(τ )ω0 are not spurious. There is a clear uni-
directional ﬂow from FCZ to C4 in Fig. 3a. Also there is
uni-directional ﬂow from FCZ to EMG in Fig. 3e. In Fig.
3i there is uni-directional ﬂow from C4 to EMG. There
is no ﬂow from EMG to the cortical centers to account
for the cortico-cortical connection as suggested by the
partial coherence analysis. Based on the delay analysis,
the cortico-cortical connections and the cortico-muscular
connections are given in Fig. 3l and this conclusion is dif-
ferent from the conclusion drawn from partial coherence
analysis (see Fig. 3k).

In both cases, there is a cortico-muscular delay of
11-20 ms from MC to muscle. This is in keeping with
the experimentally observed conduction time of 15 ± 2
ms between cortex to muscle (Rothwell et al. 1991). The
longer cortico-muscular delay of 19-25 ms between the
frontal (SMA) region and muscle may indicate a diﬀer-
ent pathway or mode of interaction with the periphery.
The musculo-cortical delay (EMG-MC) found in ET1
is in keeping with normal latencies of somatosensory
evoked cortical potentials and indicates that the periph-
eral tremor is also fed back to cortex. The cortico-cortical
delay of 3-7 ms between SMA and MC is in agreement
with the delay of 3-6 ms between premotor stimulation
and its eﬀect on the motor cortex recently studied with
transcranial magnetic stimulation (Civardi et al. 2001).
In the above examples, EMG has the highest SNR
and hence it is identiﬁed as the main mediator, through
which the (tremor related) cortical connections are es-
tablished, by partial coherence analysis. This would im-
ply feedback of the tremor rhythm to the cortex as the
main mechanism for the cortico-muscular and cortico-
cortical coherence. But, based on the delay analysis we
can clearly show that the SMA and MC both share
tremor related activity themselves which in turn is trans-
mitted to the muscle. This is an argument that the cor-
tex being part of the central generating network of ET
(Hellwig et al. 2001; Raethjen et al. 2004). While the
disappearance of the cortico-cortical coherence when the
common inﬂuence of the EMG is removed, is a method-

Time delay and partial coherence analyses to identify cortical connectivities

7

ological artefact the remaining albeit slightly reduced
cortico-muscular coherence after accounting for the in-
ﬂuence of the other cortical signal is interpretable. It
indicates a somewhat independent connection of both
areas with the peripheral tremor possibly intermittently
sharing their tremor related activity (Raethjen et al.
2005). This tremor related cortico-cortical interaction
is bidirectional in the ﬁrst example. In the second pre-
sented case the main information ﬂow seems to be from
SMA to MC. In summary, this study provides evidence
that tremor related correlations are transmitted from
SMA or MC to muscle, but due to the low (tremor re-
lated) signal content in the cortex this connection is not
correctly identiﬁed by partial coherence analysis.

4.2 Application to cortical activity related to bimanual
rhythmic movements in Normal subjects

In this section we perform the time delay analysis to
identify the interaction between the left and right sen-
sorimotor cortices and the midline area of healthy sub-
jects during bimanual rhythmic movements of the index
ﬁngers. This study will throw light on the cortical net-
work involved in bimanual movements. In a recent study
(Pollok et al. 2004), it has been shown that the rhythm
of voluntary unilateral hand movements is represented
in the contralateral sensorimotor cortex as part of the
central generating network of these voluntary rhythms.
For bimanual movements it has been postulated that
the cortical midline areas (especially SMA) play a ma-
jor role (J¨ancke et al. 2000; Lang et al. 1990; Stephan
et al. 1999; Donchin et al. 2001; Immisch et al. 2001).
On the other hand the interhemispheric connections via
the corpus callosum between the primary sensorimotor
cortices on both sides seem to be important (Eliassen
et al. 2000; Brinkman and Kuypers 1973; Andres et
al. 1999). As the more bilaterally organised SMA and
the more lateralized primary sensorimotor cortices are
also tightly linked by projection ﬁbers, one may postu-
late that all three cortical areas take part in the control
of bilateral movements. It has recently been proposed on
the basis of monkey experiments that the SMA is not a
superordinate center for bimanual movement coordina-
tion but only part of an interconnected cortical network
in both hemispheres (Kazennikov et al. 1999).

We consider two subjects, hs1 and hs2. All the cor-
tical areas (electrodes) used for this study displayed sig-
niﬁcant cortico-muscular coherence at the tapping fre-
quency. But in this study we are interested in the move-
ment related cortico-cortical connections. Again we com-
pare the results of the delay analysis with the partial co-
herence analysis. The results of partial coherence analy-
sis are also compared with the SNR of the cortical sig-
nals.

For hs1, the results of the delay, coherence and partial
coherence analyses are given in Fig. 4. There is a signiﬁ-
cant synchronised activity between the two index ﬁnger

extensor and ﬂexor muscles around 4 Hz as displayed
by their coherence spectrum in Fig. 4j. Fig. 4(b,c,f) dis-
play signiﬁcant cortico-cortical coherence at the tapping
frequency of 4 Hz (see Fig. 4j) as well as in other fre-
quency bands. In Fig. 4d, the partial coherence between
the cortical signals from the left and right hemispheres,
accounting for the common inﬂuence of the midline area
(represented by CPZ) is insigniﬁcant at the tapping fre-
quency as well as in the other frequency bands. This
seemingly indicates that the tapping related activity in
the two hemispheres is coupled through the midline area
(CPZ). In Fig. 4(g,h) the partial coherences between one
of the hemispheres and the midline accounting for the
inﬂuence of the other hemisphere remain signiﬁcant but
have also slightly reduced compared to coherence shown
in Fig. 4(c,f), respectively. This indicates that these ar-
eas also share some tapping related and other activi-
ties between them. Based on these arguments one would
conclude in Fig. 4k that the midline region is the main
mediator bringing in the coupling between the two hemi-
sphere. However, the reduction of the partial coherence
accounting for the inﬂuence of the lateral cortical ar-
eas (C4/C3) indicates that they also have direct connec-
tions. The SNR values for C3, C4 and CPZ are 51.28,
53.02 and 82.59, respectively. Thus, the partial coher-
ence analysis detects the recording site with the highest
SNR as the leading inﬂuence among the three (Albo et
al. 2004). Now we look at the results of the delay esti-
mation.

Figure 4 will appear here
We choose ω0 as 4 Hz at which there is a synchro-
nised activity between the two ﬁngers. In Fig. 4a there
is a delay of 6 ± 0.88 ms from C4 to C3 and the signif-
icance of deviation from the surrogates is S(6) = 78.64.
In Fig. 4e, there is a delay of 2 ± 0.41 ms from CPZ to
C3 and the signiﬁcance of deviation from the surrogates
is S(2) = 89.79. In Fig. 4i there is a delay of 3 ± 0.74 ms
from C4 to CPZ and the signiﬁcance of deviation from
the surrogates is S(3) = 150.2. In all the cases, the (sig-
niﬁcance of) deviation from surrogates is greater than
2 standard deviations indicating that C(τ )ω0 obtained
in all the cases are not spurious. In Fig. 4a there is a
uni-directional ﬂow from C4 to C3. Fig. 4e, shows a uni-
directional ﬂow from CPZ to C3. In Fig. 4i there is a
uni-directional ﬂow from C4 to CPZ. Based on these re-
sults, we can conclude that there is a movement related
information ﬂow directly from right to left hemisphere
via the midline area. Interestingly, the sum of the delay
from C4 to CPZ and from CPZ to C3 (5 ms) is very close
to the direct delay between C4 and C3 (6 ms). Thus, we
cannot exclude that the transmission between C4 and
C3 calculated by maximising coherence only reﬂects the
indirect transmission via the midline area (CPZ) which
was detected as the main mediator in the partial coher-
ence analysis. However, the fact that partial coherence
results are also in keeping with direct connections be-
tween C4 and C3 and that the midline has the highest

8

R. B. Govindan, Jan Raethjen, Kathrin Arning, Florian Kopper, G¨unther Deuschl

SNR are arguments against the midline being the sole
factor in connecting the three cortical areas. In fact, the
delay analysis shows that the midline area (CPZ) only
projects to C3 while C4 projects both to C3 and CPZ
thus being the most inﬂuential area within this network
of three cortical areas. Connections based on the delay
estimation are shown in Fig. 4l.

Next we consider hs2 for which the results of the de-
lay, coherence and partial coherence analyses are given in
Fig. 5. In an earlier work (Pollok et al. 2004), it has been
shown that healthy subjects while performing bimanual
movements exhibited signiﬁcant cortico-muscular coher-
ence at the movement frequency and also at double the
movement frequency. The coherence at both frequencies
are considered to be the movement related cortical rep-
resentations. In this subject, we observe cortico-cortical
coherence at the tapping frequency and/or at double the
tapping frequency. Based on the results of earlier work
(Pollok et al. 2004), we interpret a complete loss of co-
herence between two cortical areas at both the frequen-
cies (tapping and double the tapping frequency) when
the common inﬂuence of the third cortical area is re-
moved, as the insigniﬁcant partial coherence. There is a
signiﬁcant coherent rhythm in both index ﬁngers at 3-6
Hz shown in Fig. 5j. In Fig. 5(b,c) there is a signiﬁcant
cortico-cortical coherence between midline and lateral
electrodes that showed coherence with the peripheral
voluntary movement rhythm. However the coherence is
signiﬁcant between the hemispheres only at double the
tapping frequency (6-7 Hz) (see Fig. 5f). In Fig. 5h, the
partial coherence between the two hemispheres account-
ing for the common inﬂuence of the midline region is
insigniﬁcant, seemingly indicating that the connection
between the hemispheres are established through the
midline. In Fig. 5d there is a reduction in the partial
coherence at double the tapping frequency (compare to
Fig. 5b), between FCZ and C3 when the common inﬂu-
ence of C4 is removed but the coherence at the tapping
frequency remains almost the same. In Fig. 5g, the par-
tial coherence remains almost the same (see Fig. 5c) at
the basic as well as double the tapping frequency be-
tween FCZ and C4 when the common inﬂuence of C3 is
removed. The SNR of FCZ, C3 and C4 are 44.07, 29.65
and 35.01, respectively. They are almost comparable to
each other. Fig. 5k shows the main cortico-cortical con-
nections based on the results of partial coherence anal-
ysis.

Figure 5 will appear here.
We choose ω0 as 6 Hz as there is signiﬁcant coherence
at this frequency in all the three pairs. In Fig. 5a there is
a delay of 6±1.83 ms from C3 to FCZ and a delay of 15±
3.3 ms from FCZ to C3. The signiﬁcances of deviation
from the surrogates are S(6) = 9.86 and S(15) = 10.26,
respectively. In Fig. 5e, there is delay of 16±6.17 ms from
FCZ to C4 and the signiﬁcance of deviation from the
surrogates is S(16) = 15.61. In Fig. 5i, there is a delay
of 14 ± 6.29 ms from C4 to C3 and the signiﬁcance of

deviation from the surrogates is S(14) = 5.68. In all the
cases, the signiﬁcance of deviation from the surrogates
is greater than 2 standard deviations indicating that the
correlations in C(τ )ω0 are not spurious. In Fig. 5a, there
is a bi-directional ﬂow between FCZ and C3. In Fig. 5e,
there is a uni-directional ﬂow from FCZ to C4. In Fig.
5i, there is a uni-directional ﬂow from C4 to C3. Based
on these arguments the cortico-cortical connections with
the direction of the information ﬂows are given in Fig.
5l. Based on the results of partial coherence analysis, one
would expect a tapping related synchronisation between
FCZ and C4 and that C3 gains access to C4 mainly
through FCZ. This is in keeping with the connections
obtained from the delay analysis. Again the reduction in
the partial coherence between FCZ and C3 accounting
for the common inﬂuence of C4 indicates that there also
is a direct connection between C4 and C3 with a ﬂow
mainly from C4 to C3. This is exactly what we ﬁnd in
the delay analysis. Thus, in this case the results obtained
from both the analyses are not contradictory because the
SNR at the three recording sites are comparable and are
in accordance with our starting hypothesis the partial
coherence analysis yielded valid results in this case.

Taking in to account the relatively large variability
(error-bars), the delay between the right and left senso-
rimotor cortices of 6 and 14 ms is in keeping with the
well known latencies of transcallosal inhibition around
8-15 ms (Meyer et al. 1995; De Gennaro et al. 2004; De
Gennaro et al. 2004; Schmierer et al. 2000). The delay
between the midline area and the sensorimotor cortex is
slightly shorter than the transcallosal delay which is in
keeping with the shorter latencies of inhibitory eﬀects
on the primary motor cortex evoked by premotor cortex
stimulation (3-6 ms) in humans (Civardi et al. 2001).

The results of our analyses in these two cases show
that all three (bilateral sensorimotor cortices and mid-
line area) cortical areas are connected and that the mid-
line area (possibly SMA) is not necessarily the lead-
ing source of the activity related to bimanual rhythmic
movement. Thus our data support the hypothesis that a
bilateral interconnected cortical network including mid-
line structures (e.g. SMA) is involved in bimanual coor-
dination (Kazennikov et al. 1999).

5 Conclusion

In order to understand the complex interactions between
3 or more signals, partial coherence is used as a potential
tool. But partial coherence analysis is sensitive to SNR
(Albo et al. 2004). On the other hand, for data from
multichannels, multivariate analysis has been shown to
perform well in terms of identifying the complex inter-
action patterns underlying the system compared to the
pair-wise analysis (Kus et al. 2004). In many physio-
logical situation there will be delay between the signals
(M¨uller 2003; Timmermann et al. 2003; Govindan et

Time delay and partial coherence analyses to identify cortical connectivities

9

al. 2005; Pollok et al. 2004). In this work, as a com-
plementary approach to partial coherence analysis, we
use delay analysis to identify the connections and the
nature of interaction between the signals.

In cases where results of partial coherence are af-
fected by SNR, we establish the connections between
centers based on the delay. As mentioned in the intro-
duction, though we can argue about the direction of in-
formation ﬂows based on the delay analysis, it cannot
distinguish between direct or indirect connection. How-
ever, as shown in our examples delay analysis can often
help to detect spurious overall results of the partial co-
herence analysis. In these cases some reduction in par-
tial coherence compared to coherence is typically seen
also for those two connection that remained after par-
tialization. This hints at a weaker direct connection also
between those two centers for which partial coherence
became insigniﬁcant, and it justiﬁes to interpret the de-
lay between them as direction of at least some ﬂow of
information.

The application to EEG and EMG data shows that
the combination of both methods while monitoring the
SNR of all recording sites greatly improves the interpre-
tation of the results. In case of biological systems, there
is a large variability (as revealed by surrogate analysis)
in the delay estimated by maximising coherence analy-
sis. Though this can partly be attributed to methodolog-
ical problems, the major reason for this variation may
be the complex connections and the mode of interac-
tion between cortical and subcortical centers (Williams
et al. 2002; Marsden et al. 2000; Marsden et al. 2001).
Application of time delay analysis to complex (theoreti-
cal) networks may help to understand the delay results
of biological systems. This will be pursued in our future
work.

Even though there is a large variability in the magni-
tude of the delay, direction of information ﬂow is clearly
revealed by the delay analysis. However, the whole idea
of using delay analysis to identify the connection and
interaction is valid only when there is a non-zero de-
lay between two signals. In case of zero delay between
two signals, and to ﬁnd out the direct and indirect cou-
pling, one has to opt for methods like Extended Granger
Causality (Chen et al. 2004) to identify the connections
and interactions between the signals but this is beyond
the scope of the current work.

6 Acknowledgement

This work is supported by Deutsche Forschungsgemein-
schaft (German Research Council). We would like to
thank Mrs. Lange for her assistance in recording high
quality data.

References

Albo Z, Prisco GVD, Chen Y, Rangarajan G, Truccolo W,
Feng J, Vertes RP, Ding M (2004) Is partial coherence
a viable technique for identifying generators of neural
oscillations? Biol Cybern 90:318-326

Amjad AM, Halliday DM, Rosenberg JR, Conway BA (1997)
An extended diﬀerence of coherence test for compar-
ing and combining several independent coherence es-
timates:theory and application to the study of motor
units and physiological tremor. J Neurosci Methods
73:69-79

Andres FG, Mima T, Schulman AE, Dichgans J, Hallett M,
Gerloﬀ C (1999) Functional coupling of human corti-
cal sensorimotor areas during bimanual skill acquisition.
Brain 122:855-870

Baccala LA, Sameshima K (2001) Partial directed coherence:
a new concept in neural structure determination. Biol
Cybern 84:463-474

Benabid AL, Pollak P, Gervason C, Hoﬀmann D, Gao DM,
Homme M, Perret JE (1991) Long-term suppression of
tremor by chronic stimulation of the ventral intermedi-
ate thalamic nucleus. The Lancet 337:403-406

Bernasconi C, K¨onig P (1999) On the directionality of cor-
tical interactions studied by structural analysis of elec-
trophysiological recordings. Biol Cybern 81:199-210
Brillinger DR (1981) Time series - Data analysis and theory,

2nd edn. Holden Day, San Francisco

Brinkman J, Kuypers HG (1973) Cerebral control of con-
tralateral and ipsilateral arm, hand and ﬁnger move-
ments in the split-brain rhesus monkey. Brain 96:653-
674

Bucher SF, Seelos KC, Dodel RC, Reiser M, Oertel WH
(1997) Activation mapping in essential tremor with
functional magnetic resonance imaging. Ann Neurol
41:32-40

Carter GC (1987) Coherence and time delay estimation.

IEEE 75:236-255

Civardi C, Cantello R, Asselman P, Rothwell JC (2001) Tran-
scranial magnetic stimulation can be used to test con-
nections to primary motor areas from frontal and medial
cortex in humans. NeuroImage 14:1444-1453

Chen Y, Rangarajan G, Feng J, Ding M (2004) Analysing
multiple nonlinear time series with extended Granger
causality. Phys Lett A 324:26-35

Dahlhaus R (2000) Graphical interaction models for multi-

variate time series. Metrika 51:157-172

Deuschl G, Bain P, Brin M (1998) Consensus statement of
the movement disorder society on tremor. Mov Disord
13:2-23

De Gennare L, Bertini M, Pauri F, Cristiani R, Curcio G, Fer-
rara M, Rossini PM (2004) Callosal eﬀects of transcra-
nial magnetic stimulation (TMS):the inﬂuence of gender
and stimulus parameters. Neurosci Res 48:129-137
De Gennaro L, Ferrara M, Bertini M, Pauri F, Cristiani R,
Curcio G, Romei V, Fratello F, Rossini PM (2003) Re-
producibility of callosal eﬀects of transcranial magnetic
stimulation (TMS) with interhemispheric paired pulses.
Neurosci Res 46:219-227

Donchin O, Gribova A, Steinberg O, Bergman H, Cardoso
de Oliverira S, Vaadia E (2001) Local ﬁeld potentials
related to bimanual movements in the primary and sup-
plementary motor cortices. Exp Brain Res 140:46-55

10

R. B. Govindan, Jan Raethjen, Kathrin Arning, Florian Kopper, G¨unther Deuschl

Eliassen JC, Baynes K, Gazzaniga MS (2000) Anterior and
posterior callosal contributions to simultaneous biman-
ual movements of the hands and ﬁngers. Brain 123:2501-
2511

Findley LJ, Koller WC (1987) Essential tremor:a review.

Neurology 37:1194-1197

Gersch W, Goddard GV (1970) Epileptic focus

loca-

tion:spectral analysis method. Science 169:701-702
Govindan RB, Raethjen J, Kopper F, Claussen JC, Deuschl
G (2005) Estimation of time delay by coherence analy-
sis. Physica A 350:277-295

Gribova A, Donchin O, Bergman H, Vaadia E, Cardosa de
Olivera S (2002) Timing of bimanual movements in hu-
man and non-humans primates in relation to neuronal
activity in primary motor cortex and supplementary
motor area. Exp Brain Res 146:322-335

Hallett M, Dubinsky RM (1993) Glucose metabolism in the
brain of patients with essential tremor. J Neurol Sci
114:45-58

Halliday DM, Rosenberg JR, Amjad AM, Breeze P, Conway
BA, Farmer SF (1995) A frame work for the analysis of
mixed time series/point process data-theory and appli-
cation to the study of physiological tremor, single mo-
tor unit discharges and electromyograms. Prog Biophys
Mol Biol 64:237-278

Halliday DM, Conway BA, Farmer SF, Rosenberg JR (1998)
Using electroencephalography to study functional cou-
pling between cortical activity and electromyograms
during voluntary contractions in humans. Neurosci Lett
241:5-8

Hellwig B, H¨außler S, Schelter B, Lauk M, Guschlbauer G,
Timmer J, L¨ucking CH (2001) Tremor-correlated corti-
cal activity in essential tremor. The Lancet 357:519-523
Hjorth B (1991) Principles for transformation of scalp EEG
from potential ﬁeld into source distribution. J Clin Neu-
rophysiol 8:391-396

Hjorth B (1975) An on-line transformation of EEG scalp po-
tentials into orthogonal source derivations. Electroen-
cephalogr Clin Neurophysiol 39:526-530

Honerkamp J (1994) Stochastic dynamical systems. New

York:VCH

Hua SE, Lenz FA, Zirh TA, Dougherty PM (1998) Thala-
mic neuronal activity correlated with essential tremor.
J Neurosurg Psychiatry 64:273-276

Immisch I, Waldvogel D, Gelderen Pv, Hallett M (2001) The
role of the medial wall and its anatomical variations for
bimanual antiphase and in-phase movements. Neuroim-
age 14:674-684

J¨ancke L, Peters M, Himmelbach M, N¨osselt T, Shah J, Stein-
metz H (2000) fMRI study of bimanual coordination.
Neuropsychologia 38:164-174

Jenkins IH, Bain PG, Colebatch JG, Thompson PD, Findley
LJ, Frackowiak RSJ, Marsden CD, Brooks DJ (1993)
A positron emission tomography study of essential
tremor:evidence for overactivity of cerebellar connec-
tions. Ann Neurol 34:82-90

Kami´nski M, Ding M, Truccolo WA, Bressler SL (2001)
Evaluating causal relations in neural systems:granger
causality, directed transfer function and statistical as-
sessment of signiﬁcance. Biol Cybern 85:145-157
Kantz H, Schreiber T (1997) Nonlinear time series analysis.

Cambridge University Press.

Kazennikov O, Hyland B, Corboz M, Babalian A, Rouiller
EM, Wiesendanger M (1999) Neural activity of sup-
plementary and primary motor areas in monkeys and
its relation to bimanual and unimanual movement se-
quences. Neurosci 89:661-674

Klem GH, Jasper HO, Elgerl HH (1999) The ten-twenty
electrode system of the International Federation, in:
Deuschl G, Eisen A (ed) Recommendations for the prac-
tice of clinical Neurophysiology: Guidelines of the Inter-
national Federation of Clinical Neurophysiology. Elec-
troencephalogr Clin Neurophys Suppl 52:3-

Kocsis B, Bragin A, Buzaki G (1999) Interdependence of mul-
tiple theta generators in the hippocampus: a partial co-
herence analysis. J Neurosci 19:6200-6212

Kubota D, Colgin LL, Casale M, Brucher FA, Lynch G (2003)
Endogenous waves in hippocampal slices. J Neurophys-
iol 89:81-89

Ku´s R, Kami´nski M, Blinowska K.J. (2004) Determination of
EEG activity propagation:Pair-Wise versus multichan-
nel estimate. IEEE Tran Biomed Eng 51:1501-1510
Lamarre Y (1984) Animal models of physiological, essential
and Parkinsonian-like tremors. Findley LJ and Capildeo
R (ed) Movement disorders:tremor. Macmillan Press,
London:183

Lang W, Obrig H, Lindinger G, Cheyne D, Deecke L (1990)
Supplementary motor area activation while tapping bi-
manually diﬀerent rhythms in musicians. Exp Brain Res
79:504-514

Liang H, Ding M, Nakamura R, Bressler SL (2000) Causal in-
ﬂuence in primate cerebral cortex during visual pattern
discrimination. Neuroreport 11:2875-2880

Llin´as R, Volkind RA (1973) The olivocerebellar system:
functional properties as revealed by harmaline-induced
tremor. Exp Brain Res 18:69-87

Lopes da Silva FH, Vos JE, Mooibroek J, Van Rotterdam
A (1980) Relative contributions of intracortical and
thalamocortical processes in the generation of alpha
rhythms, revealed by partial coherence analysis. Elec-
troencephalogr Clin Neurophysiol 50:449-456

Marsden JF, Ashby P, Limousin-Dowsey P, Rothwell JC,
Brown P (2000) Coherence between cerebellar thala-
mus, cortex and muscle in man. Brain 123:1459-1470

Marsden JF, Limousin-Dowsey P, Ashby P, Pollak P, Brown
P (2001) Subthalamic nucleus, sensorimotor cortex and
muscle interrelationships in Parkinson’s disease. Brain
124:378-388

Meyer BU, Roricht S, Graﬁn von Einsiedel H, Kruggel F,
Weindl A (1995) Inhibitory and excitatory interhemi-
spheric transfers between motor cortical areas in normal
humans and patients with abnormalities of the corpus
callosum. Brain 118:429-440

Mima T, Matsuoka T, Hallett M (2000) Functional coupling
of human right and left cortical motor areas demon-
strated with partial coherence analysis. Neurosci Lett
287:93-96

Mima T, Hallett M (1999a) Cortico-muscular coherence: a

review.J Clin Neurophysiol 16:501-511

Mima T, Hallett M (1999b) Electroencephalographic analysis
of cortico-muscular coherence:reference eﬀect, volume
conduction and generator mechanism. Clin Neurophys-
iol 110:1892-1899

Mima T, Steger J, Schulman AF, Gerloﬀ C, Hallett M (2000)
Electroencephalographic measurement of motor cortex

Time delay and partial coherence analyses to identify cortical connectivities

11

internally triggered unilateral and simultaneous bilat-
eral one digit movements. A high resolution EEG study.
Eur J Neurosci 10:765-770

Vertes RP, Albo Z, Viana Di Prisco G (2001) Theta rhyth-
mically ﬁring neurons in the anterior thalamus: impli-
cations for the mnemonic function of Papey’s circuit.
Neuroscience 104:619-625

Williams D, Tijssen M, Bruggen Gv, Bosch A, Insola A, Laz-
zaro VD, Mazzone P, Oliviero A, Quartarone A, Speel-
man H, Brown P (2002) Dopamine-dependent changes
in the functional connectivity between basal ganglia and
cerebral cortex in humans. Brain 125:1558-1569

control of muscle activity in humans. Clin Neurophysiol
111:326-337

M¨uller T, Lauk M, Reinhard M, Hetzel A, L¨ucking CH, Tim-
mer J (2003) Estimation of time-delays in biological sys-
tems. Annals Biomed Eng 31:1423-1439

Pollok B, Gross J, Dirks M, Timmermann L, Schnitzler A
(2003) The cerebral oscillatory network of voluntary
tremor. J Physiol 554:871-878

Raethjen J, Govindan RB, Kopper F, Deuschl G (2005) Cor-
tical involvement in the generation of essential tremor.
(submitted)

Raethjen J, Lindemann M, Morsnowski A, Dumpelmann M,
Wenzelburger R, Stolze H, Fietzek U, Pﬁster G, Elger
CE, Timmer J, Deuschl G (2004) Is the rhythm of physi-
ological tremor involved in cortico-cortical interactions?
Mov Disord 19:458-465

Rosenberg JR, Halliday DM, Breeze P, Conway BA (1998)
Identiﬁcation of patterns of neuronal connectivity-
partial spectra, partial coherence, and neuronal inter-
actions. J Neurosci Methods 83:57-72

Rothwell JC, Thompson PD, Day BL, Boyd S, Marsden CD
(1991) Stimulation of the human motor cortex through
the scalp. Exp Physiol 76:159-200

Rybski D, Havlin S, Bunde A (2003) Phase synchronisation
in temperature and precipitation records. Physica A
320:601-610

Schmierer K, Niehaus L, R¨oricht, Meyer BU (2000) Conduc-
tion deﬁcits of callosal ﬁbres in early multiple sclerosis.
J Neurosurg Psychiatry 68:633-638

Schuurman PR, Bosch DA, Bossuyt PMM, Bonsel GJ, van
Someren EJW, de Bie RMS, Merkus MP, Speelman JD
(2000) A comparison of continuous thalamic stimulation
and thalamotomy for suppression of severe tremor. N
Engl J Med 342:461-468

Sherman DL, Tsai YC, Rossell LA, Mirski MA, Thakor NV
(1997) Spectral analysis of a thalamus-to-cortex seizure
pathway. IEEE Trans Biomed Eng 44:657-664

Stephan KM, Binkofski F, Halsband U, Dohle C, Wunderlich
G, Schnitzler A, Tass P, Posse S, Herzog H, Sturm V,
Zilles K, Seitz RJ, Freund HJ (1999) The role of ventral
medial wall motor areas in bimanual co-ordination. A
combined lesion and activation study. Brain 122:351-
368

Theiler J, Longtin A, Galdrikan B, Farmer JD (1992) Testing
for nonlinearity in time series: The method of surrogate
data. Physica D 58:77-94

Timmer J, Lauk M, Pﬂeger W, Deuschl G (1998a) Cross-
spectral analysis of physiological tremor and muscle
activity. I: Theory and application to unsynchronised
EMG. Biol Cybern 78:349-357

Timmer J, Lauk M, Pﬂeger W, Deuschl G (1998b) Cross-
spectral analysis of physiological tremor and muscle ac-
tivity. II: Theory and application to synchronised EMG.
Biol Cybern 78:359-368

Timmermann L, Gross J, Dirks M, Volkmann J, Freund HJ,
Schnitzler A (2003) The cerebral oscillatory network of
Parkinsonian tremor. Brain 126:199-212

Turbes CC, Schneider GT (1989) Directionality of neu-
ral signals in central nervous system neural networks.
Biomded Sci Instrum 25:1-5

Urbano A, Babiloni C, Onorati P, Carducci F, Ambrosini A,
Fattorini L, Babiloni F (1998) Responses of human pri-
mary sensorimotor and supplementary motor areas to

12

R. B. Govindan, Jan Raethjen, Kathrin Arning, Florian Kopper, G¨unther Deuschl

Figure captions

Fig. 1 Results of delay, coherence and partial coherence
analyses for model system. In b,c,f coherence between
the time series X and Y is displayed and is indicated
by X − Y . In d,g,h partial coherence between the time
series X and Y accounting for the common inﬂuence of
the third time series Z is displayed and is indicated by
X − Y /Z. Horizontal dotted lines in b,c,f and d,g,h rep-
resent the 99% conﬁdence limit for coherence and partial
coherence, respectively. In a,e,i results of the delay anal-
ysis between the time series X and Y is displayed and
is indicated by X − Y . Here, as well as in the forego-
ing discussions, negative values of τ indicate that the
time series of X is shifted backwards in time to iden-
tify the delayed ﬂow of information from Y to X. In d
partial coherence between X1(t) and X2(t) accounting
for the common inﬂuence of X3(t), is insigniﬁcant indi-
cating that X1(t) and X2(t) are communicating mainly
through X3(t). a There is a delay of 3 ms from X2(t) to
X1(t). e There is a delay of 2 ms from X1(t) to X3(t). i
There is a delay of 5 ms from X2(t) to X3(t). j Connec-
tions and the direction of interactions used in the model.
k Main connections identiﬁed by partial coherence anal-
ysis. However, though there is a signiﬁcant (partial) co-
herence in (g,h), a reduction compared to the coherence
in (c,f) indicates a weaker direct connection also between
X1(t) and X2(t). l Connections and the directions of in-
teraction identiﬁed by delay analysis.

Fig. 2 Results of delay, coherence and partial coher-
ence analyses for ET1. Quantities plotted in a-i,k,l have
the same meaning as in Fig. 1. In b,c,f there is a signif-
icant coherence between the time series X and Y (indi-
cated by X − Y ) at the tremor frequency of 4 Hz which
is shown is in j. In d partial coherence between F2 and
C2 accounting for the common inﬂuence of EMG, is in-
signiﬁcant (at the tremor of 4 Hz) indicating that the
connection between the SMA (F2) and MC (C2) is es-
tablished mainly through the EMG. In g,h there is a
signiﬁcant partial cortico-muscular when the inﬂuence
of the other cortical area is removed. However the slight
reduction compared to the coherence in (c,f) indicates
a weaker direct connection also between F2 and C2. a
There is a delay of 7 ms from C2 to F2 and 3 ms from
F2 to C2. e There is a delay of 19 ms from F2 to EMG.
i There is a delay of 11 ms from C2 to EMG and 9 ms
from EMG to C2. For the sake of clarity, the abscissas
in a,e,i are plotted in diﬀerent scales.

Fig. 3 Results of delay, coherence and partial coher-
ence analyses for ET2. Quantities plotted in a-i,k,l have
the same meaning as in Fig. 1. In b,c,f there is a signif-
icant coherence between the time series X and Y (indi-
cated by X −Y ) at the tremor frequency of 5 Hz which is
shown in j. In d partial coherence between FCZ and C4
accounting for the common inﬂuence of EMG, is insignif-
icant (at the tremor of 5 Hz) indicating that EMG is
mainly inﬂuencing the SMA (FCZ) and MC (C4). In g,h

there is a signiﬁcant partial cortico-muscular coherence
when the inﬂuence of the other cortical area is removed,
but it has reduced compared to the cortico-muscular co-
herence (shown in c,f) indicating an indirect connection
also between the two cortical areas. a There is a delay of
3 ms from FCZ to C4. d There is a delay of 25 ms from
FCZ to EMG. i There is a delay of 20 ms from C4 to
EMG. For the sake of clarity, the abscissas in a,e,i are
plotted in diﬀerent scales.

Fig. 4 Results of delay, coherence and partial coher-
ence analyses for hs1. Quantities plotted in a-i,k,l have
the same meaning as in Fig. 1. In j there is a signiﬁcant
coherence at the tapping frequency of 4 Hz between the
EMG recorded from both ﬁngers. In b,c,f there is a sig-
niﬁcant coherence between the time series X and Y (in-
dicated by X − Y ) at the tapping (coherent) frequency
of 4 Hz which is shown in j. Also, there is a signiﬁcant
coherence in all the other frequency bands. In d par-
tial coherence between C3 and C4 accounting for the
common inﬂuence of CPZ, is insigniﬁcant (at the tap-
ping frequency of 4 Hz as well as in the other frequency
bands) indicating that the connection between C3 and
C4 is established mainly through CPZ. In g,h there is
a signiﬁcant partial cortico-cortical coherence between
left/right hemisphere with the midline region when the
inﬂuence of the other hemisphere is removed. However, a
slight reduction in the partial coherence compared to the
coherence shown in (c,f) indicates that these two hemi-
spheres are also (weakly) coupled. a There is a delay of 6
ms from C4 to C3. e There is delay of 2-3 ms from CPZ
to C3. i There is a delay of 3-4 ms from C4 to CPZ. For
the sake of clarity, the abscissas in a,e,i are plotted in
diﬀerent scale.

Fig. 5 Results of delay, coherence and partial coher-
ence analyses for hs2. Quantities plotted in a-i,k,l have
the same meaning as in Fig. 1. In j there is a signif-
icant coherence at the tapping frequency of 4 Hz be-
tween the EMG recorded from both ﬁngers. In b,c there
is a signiﬁcant coherence between the time series X and
Y (indicated by X − Y ) at the tapping (coherent) fre-
quency of 4 Hz (as well as at the double the tapping
frequency) which is shown is in j. In f there is a signiﬁ-
cant coherence at double the tapping frequency, 6-7 Hz.
In h partial coherence between C3 and C4 accounting for
the common inﬂuence of FCZ, is insigniﬁcant indicating
that the connection between C3 and C4 is established
mainly through FCZ. In d,g there is signiﬁcant partial
coherence between left/right hemisphere with the central
region when the inﬂuence of the other hemisphere is re-
moved but the slight reduction (compared to the coher-
ence shown in b,c) indicates that these hemispheres are
also (weakly) coupled. However, though there is a signif-
icant (partial) coherence in (d,g), a reduction compared
to the coherence (at double the tapping frequency) in
(b,c) indicates a weaker direct connection also between
C3 and C4. a There is a delay of 6 ms from C3 to FCZ
and a delay of 15 ms from FCZ to C3. e There is a delay

Time delay and partial coherence analyses to identify cortical connectivities

13

of 16 ms from FCZ to C4. i There is a delay of 14 ms
from C4 to C3. For the sake of clarity, the abscissas in
a,e,i are plotted in diﬀerent scale.

(a) 

0.04

0.02

0

ω

0

)
τ
(
’

C

−0.02

−0.04

−0.06

(d) 

1

e
c
n
e
r
e
h
o
C

 
l
a
i
t
r
a
P

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

0

(g) 

e
c
n
e
r
e
h
o
C

 
l
a
i
t
r
a
P

1

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

0

(b) 

e
c
n
e
r
e
h
o
C

1

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

0

(e) 

0.05

0

0

ω

)
τ
(
’

C

−0.05

−0.1

−0.15

e
c
n
e
r
e
h
o
C

 
l
a
i
t
r
a
P

1

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

0

 
−X
X
2
1

 
−X
X
2
1

 
−X
X
3
1

−15

−10

−5

5

10

15

0
τ (ms)

5

10
20
15
Frequency [Hz]

25

30

5

10
20
15
Frequency [Hz]

25

30

 
/X
−X
X
3
2
1

 
−X
X
3
1

 
−X
X
3
2

5

10
20
15
Frequency [Hz]

25

30

−15

−10

−5

5

10

15

0
τ (ms)

5

10
15
20
Frequency [Hz]

25

30

 
/X
−X
X
2
3
1

(h) 

 
/X
−X
X
1
3
2

 
−X
X
3
2

25

30

5

10
20
15
Frequency [Hz]
 
X
2

(j) 

 
X
1

 
X
3

5

20
15
10
Frequency [Hz]
 
X
2

(k) 

 
X
1

 
X
3

25

30

−15

−10

−5

5

10

15

0
τ (ms)

 
X
2

 
X
3

(l) 

 
X
1

(c) 

e
c
n
e
r
e
h
o
C

(f) 

e
c
n
e
r
e
h
o
C

1

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

0

1

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

0

(i) 

0.1

0.05

0

ω

0

)
τ
(
’

C

−0.05

−0.1

−0.15

−3

x 10

5

0

(a) 

0

ω

)
τ
(
’

C

(d) 

e
c
n
e
r
e
h
o
C

 
l
a
i
t
r
a
P

(g) 

e
c
n
e
r
e
h
o
C

 
l
a
i
t
r
a
P

0.5

0.4

0.3

0.2

0.1

0

0.5

0.4

0.3

0.2

0.1

0

(j) 

0

10

m
u
r
t
c
e
p
S

−1

10

−2

10

−3

10

(b) 

e
c
n
e
r
e
h
o
C

0.5

0.4

0.3

0.2

0.1

0

0

ω

)
τ
(
’

C

0.02

0.015

0.01

0.005

0

−0.005

−0.01

−0.015

(h) 

e
c
n
e
r
e
h
o
C

 
l
a
i
t
r
a
P

0.5

0.4

0.3

0.2

0.1

0

(c) 

e
c
n
e
r
e
h
o
C

(f) 

e
c
n
e
r
e
h
o
C

0.5

0.4

0.3

0.2

0.1

0

0.5

0.4

0.3

0.2

0.1

0

0

ω

)
τ
(
’

C

0.005

−0.005

−0.015

F2−C2 

F2− C2 

F2−EMG 

−5
−20

−15

−10

0

5

10

−5
τ (ms)

F2−C2/EMG 

5

10
20
15
Frequency [Hz]

25

30

5

10
20
15
Frequency [Hz]

25

30

(e) 

F2−EMG 

C2−EMG 

5

20
15
10
Frequency [Hz]

25

30

F2−EMG/C2 

C2−EMG/F2 

−10

0

20

30

10
τ (ms)

(i) 

0.015

5

10
15
20
Frequency [Hz]

25

30

C2−EMG 

5

10

20
15
Frequency [Hz]

25

30

EMG 

5

(k) 

20
15
10
Frequency [Hz]
F2 

25

30

−20

−10

10

20

0
τ (ms)
F2 

(l) 

C2 

C2 

EMG 

EMG 

0

5

25

30

20
15
10
Frequency [Hz]

FCZ−C4 

FCZ−C4 

FCZ−EMG 

(a) 

0.01

0

0

ω

)
τ
(
’

C

−0.01

−0.02

(d) 

0.2

e
c
n
e
r
e
h
o
C

 
l
a
i
t
r
a
P

0.15

0.1

0.05

0

(g) 

0.2

e
c
n
e
r
e
h
o
C

 
l
a
i
t
r
a
P

0.15

0.1

0.05

0

(j) 

0

10

−1

10

−2

10

m
u
r
t
c
e
p
S

−3

10

(b) 

0.2

e
c
n
e
r
e
h
o
C

0.15

0.1

0.05

(e) 

0.01

0.005

0

0

ω

−0.005

)
τ
(
’

C

−0.01

−0.015

−0.02

−0.025

(h) 

0.2

e
c
n
e
r
e
h
o
C

 
l
a
i
t
r
a
P

0.15

0.1

0.05

0

(c) 

0.2

e
c
n
e
r
e
h
o
C

0.15

0.1

0.05

(f) 

0.2

e
c
n
e
r
e
h
o
C

0.15

0.1

0.05

(i) 

0.02

0.01

0

ω

0

)
τ
(
’

C

−0.01

−0.02

−0.03

−40

−0.03

−10

−5

0
τ (ms)

5

10

FCZ−C4/EMG 

0

5

10
20
15
Frequency [Hz]

25

30

0

5

10
20
15
Frequency [Hz]

25

30

FCZ−EMG 

C4−EMG 

5

20
15
10
Frequency [Hz]

25

30

−10

0

30

40

10
τ (ms)

20

FCZ−EMG/C4 

C4−EMG/FCZ 

0

5

20
15
10
Frequency [Hz]

25

30

C4−EMG 

5

10
20
15
Frequency [Hz]

25

30

EMG 

10
20
15
Frequency [Hz]

25

30

5

(k) 

FCZ 

20

40

−20

(l) 

0
τ (ms)

FCZ 

C4 

EMG 

C4 

EMG 

0

5

20
15
10
Frequency [Hz]

25

30

(a) 

0.01

0

ω

)
τ
(
’

C

0

−0.01

−0.02

(d) 

(g) 

e
c
n
e
r
e
h
o
C

 
l
a
i
t
r
a
P

e
c
n
e
r
e
h
o
C

 
l
a
i
t
r
a
P

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

0

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

0

(j) 

0.4

0.3

0.2

0.1

e
c
n
e
r
e
h
o
C

(c) 

0.8

e
c
n
e
r
e
h
o
C

0.6

0.4

0.2

e
c
n
e
r
e
h
o
C

0.6

0.4

0.2

(i) 

0

ω

)
τ
(
’

C

0

2

0

−2

−4

−6

−8

e
c
n
e
r
e
h
o
C

0.6

0.4

0.2

0

0

−1

ω

)
τ
(
’

C

1

0

−2

−3

−4

−5

(h) 

e
c
n
e
r
e
h
o
C

 
l
a
i
t
r
a
P

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

0

C3−C4 

(b) 

0.8

C3−C4 

C3−CPZ 

−0.03

−20

−10

0
τ (ms)

10

20

C3−C4/CPZ 

(e) 

5
−3
x 10

10
20
15
Frequency [Hz]

25

30

0

5

10
20
15
Frequency [Hz]

25

30

C3−CPZ 

(f) 

0.8

C4−CPZ 

5

20
15
10
Frequency [Hz]

25

30

−3

−1

1

0
τ (ms)

3

5

5
−3

x 10

20
15
10
Frequency [Hz]

25

30

C3−CPZ/C4 

C4−CPZ/C3 

C4−CPZ 

5

10
20
15
Frequency [Hz]

25

30

5

10
20
15
Frequency [Hz]

25

30

−10

−10

−5

0
τ (ms)

5

10

EMG−EMG

(k) 

C3 

C4 

(l) 

C3 

C4 

CPZ 

CPZ 

0

0

5

20
15
10
Frequency [Hz]

25

30

FCZ−C3 

FCZ−C4 

−30

−20

−10

10

20

30

0
τ (ms)

5

10
20
15
Frequency [Hz]

25

30

5

10
20
15
Frequency [Hz]

25

30

(d) 

FCZ−C3/C4 

FCZ−C4 

C3−C4 

(b) 

0.5

e
c
n
e
r
e
h
o
C

0.4

0.3

0.2

0.1

0

(e) 

0.02

0.01

0

ω

0

)
τ
(
’

C

(h) 

−0.01

−0.02

−0.03

e
c
n
e
r
e
h
o
C

 
l
a
i
t
r
a
P

0.5

0.4

0.3

0.2

0.1

0

(a) 

0.01

FCZ−C3 

0

−0.01

ω

)
τ
(
’

C

0

−0.02

−0.03

−0.04

e
c
n
e
r
e
h
o
C

 
l
a
i
t
r
a
P

0.5

0.4

0.3

0.2

0.1

0

0.5

e
c
n
e
r
e
h
o
C

 
l
a
i
t
r
a
P

0.4

0.3

0.2

0.1

0

(g) 

(j) 

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

e
c
n
e
r
e
h
o
C

5

10
20
15
Frequency [Hz]

25

30

−20

−10

0

20

30

40

10
τ (ms)

5

−3

x 10

10
20
15
Frequency [Hz]

25

30

FCZ−C4/C3 

C3−C4/FCZ 

5

10
20
15
Frequency [Hz]

25

30

10
20
15
Frequency [Hz]

25

30

5

(k) 

C3 

FCZ 

EMG−EMG 

0

0

5

10
20
15
Frequency [Hz]

25

30

C4 

C3 

C4 

C3−C4 

−20

(l) 

−10
τ (ms)
FCZ 

0

10

(c) 

e
c
n
e
r
e
h
o
C

0.5

0.4

0.3

0.2

0.1

0

(f) 

e
c
n
e
r
e
h
o
C

0.5

0.4

0.3

0.2

0.1

0

(i) 

ω

0

−2

)
τ
(
’

C

1

0

−1

−3

−4

−5

−6
−30

