6
0
0
2
 
r
a

M
 
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
d
e
m

.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
9
0
0
3
0
6
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Niederhauser’s Model for Epilepsy
and Wavelet Methods

J. P. Trevi˜no1, V. H. Castillo1, H.C. Rosu1, J. L. Mor´an L´opez1,
and J. S. Murgu´ıa2
IPICyT - Instituto Potosino de Investigaci´on Cient´ıﬁca y Tecnol´ogica,

1

Apdo Postal 3-74 Tangamanga, 78231 San Luis Potos´ı, S.L.P., M´exico.

2

Universidad Aut´onoma de San Luis Potos´ı, 87545 San Luis Potos´ı, S.L.P., M´exico.

emails: jpablo, vcastillo, hcr, moran-lopez@ipicyt.edu.mx, ondeleto@uaslp.mx

January 17, 2014

Wavelets and wavelet transforms (WT) could be a very useful tool to analyze
electroencephalogram (EEG) signals. To illustrate the WT method we make use
of a simple electric circuit model introduced by Niederhauser [1], which is used to
produce EEG-like signals, particularly during an epileptic seizure. The original
model is modiﬁed to resemble the 10-20 derivation of the EEG measurements.
WT is used to study the main features of these signals.

1 Brain and Neurons

The body of animals, including the human being, is controlled by the nervous
system. This system has a primary division: central and peripheral. The brain,
or cerebrum, the cerebelum, and the spinal cord form the central nervous system,
while the peripheral structure is integrated by long nerves that reach every part
of the body. The brain is organized in zones which perform speciﬁc tasks, which
nowadays are the subject of more detailed studies.

At the microscopic scale, the basic functional units of the brain and nerves
are a class of excitable cells called neurons. The human brain alone contains
about 1011 neurons which come in diﬀerent shapes and sizes but have the same
general morphology. The soma (body) of a neuron can measure from 1 µm
up to 1 mm across, contains the nucleus, and has two main sets of membrane
elongations:

(i) dendrites are prolongations through which the neuron receives informa-

tion from other neurons

to the outside.

(ii) the axon is the main prolongation through which a neuron sends signals

1

Figure 1: This is a photomicrograph from Cajal’s preparations (housed in
the Museo Cajal at the Cajal Institute, Madrid, Spain) of a neuron from
the cerebral cortex of a newborn infant,
impregnated by the Golgi stain.
The soma, the axon, and the dendrites are easy to identify. Courtesy of
http://nobelprize.org/medicine/articles/cajal/

2 Brain Cortex

A well-deﬁned spatial organization of the human brain is through stacks of lay-
ers. The outermost layer is the cortex in which many of the higher activities
are performed: memory, attention, perceptual consciousness, thought, and lan-
guage. This layer is about 3 mm only, but despite the small dimension is of
basic interest in the research of neuro-physiologists because it engenders impor-
tant features of the human thought. The cortex is usually studied through the
electric signals that produces. The way to detect these signals is through the
electroencephalogram (EEG), which is basically a record of the electric activity
as obtained by electrodes on the scalp. The EEG could be understood as a
superposition of the individual signals coming from each neuron in a given lapse
of time [2]. This makes it a very useful tool as an experimental surface measure
of the activity of a certain number of neurons that are of speciﬁc interest [3].

2.1 Basics of EEG

The history of EEG begins in 1875 when Richard Caton (1842-1926) in Liverpool
discovered the existence of electrical signals from the exposed brain of rabbits
and monkeys. This discovery was done by employing the galvanometer invented
seventeen years earlier by Lord Kelvin. Later, in 1913, the Russian physiologist
V. V. Pradvich-Neminsky published the ﬁrst EEG ever recorded from a dog.

2

At the present time, the EEG is one of the most important methods for the
study of neural activity at the level of the brain cortex. It is usually a tool for
diagnosis of several important disorders such as autism, language problems, and
epilepsy, as well as motor damages.

To obtain EEG data, electrodes should be positioned onto the scalp of the
patient. The distribution of the electrodes along with the reference used to mea-
sure the signal is called derivation. Though there are several types of derivations,
the most commonly used is the 10-20 one. Its name comes form the fact that
the electrode arrangement is referred to proportions of skull measures (10%, 20%
and so on).

Figure 2: The 10-20 conﬁguration is the most common to obtain EEG data for
diagnosis. The number of electrodes depends on the equipment available and
the required precision.

3 Niederhauser’s Model of Epilepsy

In the original setup of the EEG, the signal is sent from the scalp to moving
needles which record it on a sheet of paper. Nowadays, experts make use of
samplers and computers to create data sets to represent the EEG as a set of
channels which resemble the usual EEG. Since the EEG is a set of time series
which reﬂect the activity of diﬀerent groups of neurons, it is possible to describe
the behavior of a cluster of neurons with a few simple interaction rules. This
was the basic idea of Niederhauser [1] who proposed a discrete model on which
we will focus in the following. The model takes into account basic features of
real neurons to produce an EEG like signal at normal periods and also through
the so-called epileptic seizures, which roughly means a sudden start of a regime
of strong oscillations.

On the other hand, epilepsy is a very complicated disease and has diﬀerent
manifestations. The model proposed by Niederhauser is thus referred solely to

3

epileptic seizures possessing apparent dominant frequencies. These crises are
associated to the hypersynchrony of large groups of neurons and some degree
of order is considered theoretically. The neuronal units (called neuronions) are
distributed within a rectangular zone array with a set of simple interaction rules.
The neuronions are programmed to transport electric charge from one zone to
another in a conditional way when a threshold charge diﬀerence is reached. If
the charge diﬀerence is below the threshold, the neuronion has only a small
probability to ﬁre. The target zone of each neuron is random and a threshold
value for the charge transportation has to be set up at the beginning of the
simulation.

The original model considers 2

104 neuronions distributed over nine regions
in a rectangular 3
3 array as shown in ﬁg. 3. The most important parameter
of the model is the threshold voltage which is in direct correspondence with
the ﬁring threshold of a real neuron. If a large threshold value is chosen, the
output of the simulation will resemble a normal EEG signal, whereas a small
threshold value will yield a seizure-like output. To make the original model more
realistic, a larger number of neurons were distributed over a 4
4 arrangement
shown in ﬁg. 3 that ﬁts better the simplest 10-20 derivation. We found that
the output signal did not change signiﬁcantly (see ﬁg. 4), which means that the
conﬁguration of the zones is not a critical parameter in the modeling.

×

×

·

Figure 3: Left: the original Niederhauser’s conﬁguration. Right: the 10-20
conﬁguration.

4

Figure 4: Output signals generated by our simulations of the original Nieder-
hauser’s model (top) and the 10-20 derivation (bottom).

4 Wavelet Theory

Wavelet transforms (WT) are generalized Fourier transforms that in the last
two decades have been extensively used to investigate special features of real
functions such as scalar one dimensional ﬁelds, and more usually, time series.
The WT has signiﬁcant advantages over the common Fourier transforms. The
most simple way to argue in favor of the WT is that, unlike the non-localized
Fourier spectrum, the WT gives details of the signal at diﬀerent resolutions and
portions of the entire signal.

In general, wavelets are functions in the class ψ(t)

L2(R) with the following

∈

properties:

Cψ =

∞

Z

0

2
ˆψ(ω)
|
|
ω
|

dω <

∞

∞

|
ψ(t)dt = ˆψ(0) = 0,

Z

−∞

(1)

(2)

where ˆψ(ω) =

eiωtψ(t)dt is the Fourier transform of ψ(t).

R

The ﬁrst equation is an admissibility condition, while the second one is the
zero mean condition. The function ψ(t), known as the mother wavelet, can be
used to build an orthonormal basis of translated and dilated functions of the
form

5

ψa,b(t) =

1
√a

ψ

t

b
−
a (cid:19)

(cid:18)

.

The WT of a function f that we denote by ˆfa,b(t) is deﬁned as the scalar

product in L2(R) of the function with the chosen wavelet:

.
f, ψa,bi
h
The WT measures the variation of f in a neighborhood of size proportional to
a centered on point b.

(4)

ˆfa,b(t) =

One fundamental property that is required in order to analyze singular be-
havior is that ψ(t) has enough vanishing moments. A wavelet is said to have n
vanishing moments if and only if it satisﬁes

∞

Z

−∞

tkψ(t)dx = 0, for k = 0, 1, . . . , n

1

−

and

∞

Z

−∞

tkψ(t)dt

= 0, for k

n.

≥

−

This means that a wavelet with n vanishing moments is orthogonal to poly-
nomials up to order n
1. In fact, the admissibility condition requires at least
one vanishing moment. So the wavelet transform of f (t) with a wavelet ψ(t) with
n vanishing moments is nothing but a “smoothed version” of the nth derivative
of f (t) on various scales. When one is interested to measure the local regularity
of a signal this concept is crucial.
In the plots of ﬁg. 5 we used Daubechies
wavelets with 8 and 20 vanishing moments, respectively.

As the set of wavelets form a basis, any function can be decomposed into

the linear combination

with coeﬃcients

f (t) =

xm
n ψm,n(t),

Xm Xn

xm
n =

∞

Z

−∞

f (t)ψm,n(t)dt,

ψm,n(t) = 2m/2ψ(2mt

n).

−

where the basis functions are deﬁned in terms of the mother wavelet as follows

In the wavelet approach the fractal character of a certain signal can be
inferred from the behavior of its power spectrum P (ω), which is the Fourier
transform of the autocovariance (also termed autocorrelation) function and in
diﬀerential form P (ω)dω represents the contribution to the variance of a signal
from frequencies between ω and ω + dω.

6

(3)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

(9)

6
Indeed, it is known that for self-similar random processes the spectral be-

havior of the power spectrum is given by [4, 5]

(10)

(11)

Pϕ(ω)

ω

−γf ,
|

∼ |

var xm

n ≈

(2m)

−γf .

where γf is the spectral parameter of the wave signal.

In addition, the variance of the wavelet coeﬃcients possesses the following

behavior [5]

These results will be employed to study the output of the Niederhauser

model, and also of real EEG data for comparison purposes.

5 WT and EEG Signals

It is relatively easy to use wavelet theory to analyze EEG data, although the
interpretation of the results is not so easy. There is previous work that links the
time series analysis through the WT to the analysis of EEG data. The detection
of the so called epileptic spikes is explained in [6], where the authors also men-
tion a comparison between this method and the available software within the
medical community. In this work, wavelet theory will be applied to the model
by Niederhauser in the particular case of epilepsy.

The normal EEG is sometimes thought of as a chaotic signal. There is some
discussion about this issue in [7] and previous works, where Lyapunov exponents
theory is used to measure chaos. Wavelet analysis provides a simple algorithm
to determine the fractal dimension (closely related to the Hausdorﬀ-Besicovich
dimension) of a curve, and therefore conclude whether it is a fractal or not.

In ﬁg. 5 simulations of the EEG with the original Niederhauser’s model are
shown. The wavelet coeﬃcients reveal a fractal behaviour in the normal EEG
while in the epileptic seizure, the coeﬃcients cannot give us such information.
We ﬁnd that during the epileptic seizure there is a dominance of a given scale,
which could be interpreted as an ordering of neurons at a certain scale.

The behaviour of the output of the modiﬁed system is qualitatively the same.
This means that the fractal and nonfractal feature of the respective episodes are
constant. From these computations one could conclude that the normal EEG
has a fractal feature. Despite these results, the same analysis for real EEG is
missing, though the same results are expected. Additionally, the results of the
simulations support the idea that at an epileptic seizure there is some degree of
order in the EEG signals.

6 Conclusions

We reconsidered the simple electric circuit model of Niederhauser for epilepsy
with minor modiﬁcations. We conﬁrm that it is capable to reproduce speciﬁc
features of EEG data such as frequency or scale dominance at a seizure and
fractality at normal periods. This model is useful for checking diﬀerent methods

7

Figure 5: The time series above correspond to the 5th zone of an original Nieder-
hauser’s arrangement. Plots (a) and (b): an epileptic seizure event simulation
is shown for which the wavelet coeﬃcients do not display a self-similar fractal
structure. Plots (c) and (d): a normal EEG simulation is shown for which the
wavelet coeﬃcients could be argued to have a fractal behaviour.

8

for EEG signal analysis and gives insight to non-medic students on certain basic
features of epilepsy. It could even give a clue of the causes and behaviour of
the disease itself if appropriate modiﬁcations are performed. As an example,
we used wavelet transform analysis since we believe it could be a useful tool
in getting a wealth of information about particular features of the EEG signals
from pathological conditions in diﬀerent patients to speciﬁc details about a given
patient. In the future, we hope to make further modiﬁcations of the model and
the analysis of the data through wavelet analysis to seek for more details of
epileptic disorders and their relationships to neuronal dynamical features at the
level of the whole brain. A software development with characteristics similar to
current software, such as spike detection, through wavelet transform is under
consideration.

7 Acknowledgment

This work was partially sponsored by grants from the Mexican Agency Consejo
Nacional de Ciencia y Tecnolog´ıa through project No. 46980-R.

References

44: 35-39 (2002).

[1] J.J. Niederhauser, “Simple electric model for epilepsy”, IEEE Potentials

[2] J.J. Wright and D.T.J. Liley, “Dynamics of the brain at a global and mi-
croscopic scales: neural networks and the EEG”, Behavioral and Brain
Sciences 19: 285-320 (1996).

[3] G. Buzs´aki and A. Draguhn, “Neuronal oscillations in cortical networks”,

Science 304, 1926-1929 (2004).

[4] G.W. Wornell and A.V. Oppenheim, “Wavelet-based representations for a
class of self-similar signals with applications to fractal modulation”, IEEE
Trans. Inform. Theory 38, 785-800 (1992).

[5] W.J. Staszewski and K. Worden, “Wavelet analysis of time series: Coherent

structures, chaos and noise”, Int. J. Bif. Chaos 3, 455 (1999).

[6] M. Latka and Z. Was, “Wavelet analysis of epileptic spikes”, Phys. Rev. E

67: 052902 (2003).

[7] Y.-C. Lai et al., “Inability of Lyapunov exponents to predict epileptic

seizures”, Phys. Rev. Lett. 91: 068102 (2003).

9

