6
0
0
2
 
r
a

M
 
5
 
 
]
h
p
-
d
e
m

.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
5
2
0
3
0
6
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Visual Saliency and Attention as Random Walks on Complex Networks

Luciano da Fontoura Costa
Instituto de F´ısica de S˜ao Carlos. Universidade de S˜ao Paulo,
S˜ao Carlos, SP, PO Box 369, 13560-970, phone +55 16 3373 9858,
FAX +55 16 3371 3616, Brazil, luciano@if.sc.usp.br
(Dated: 20th Feb 2006)

The unmatched versatility of vision in mammals is totally dependent on purposive eye movements
and selective attention guided by saliencies in the presented images. The current article shows how
concepts and tools from the areas of random walks, Markov chains, complex networks and artiﬁcial
image analysis can be naturally combined in order to provide a uniﬁed and biologically plausible
model for saliency detection and visual attention, which become indistinguishable in the process.
Images are converted into complex networks by considering pixels as nodes while connections are
established in terms of ﬁelds of inﬂuence deﬁned by visual features such as tangent ﬁelds induced by
luminance contrasts, distance, and size. Random walks are performed on such networks in order to
emulate attentional shifts and even eye movements in the case of large shapes, and the frequency of
visits to each node is conveniently obtained from the eigenequation deﬁned by the stochastic matrix
associated to the respectively driven Markov chain. It is shown that frequently visited nodes tend
to correspond to points of high salience in the image. In the case of random walks driven by tangent
ﬁelds, there is a deﬁnite tendency to emphasize not only high curvature points but also convergences
of the tangent ﬁeld and even the salience of lines in terms of their respective lengths. Because the
frequency of visits is found to be strongly correlated with the nodes degree (strengths), a direct
correspondence is established between topological hubs and activity hubs. Two visiting strategies
are considered during the tangent based random walks: uniformly random and preferential choice
for edges leading to nodes with high degrees/strengths.

PACS numbers: 87.19.Dd, 87.57.Ce, 89/75.Hc

The ability to focus attention on important things is a

deﬁning characteristic of intelligence. (R. J. Shiller)

I.

INTRODUCTION

Vision [1] is the ability, given a speciﬁc scene, to rec-
ognize the existing objects and their respective proper-
ties (e.g. position, rotation, size, etc). Although vision
is natural to animals, achieving maximum ﬂexibility in
primates, all attempts by science and technology to em-
ulate this ability have failed completely — full ﬂedged
vision is simply too complex. Artifacts (e.g.
shadows
and occlusion) and noise always present in images imply
a degenerated mapping from real scenes to the biological
visual representation, so that the eﬀective recognition of
objects ultimately demands on intelligence comparable
to that of primates. Actually, even the natural solutions
of vision have been achieved at great cost and diﬃculty.
Though nearly 50% of the human cortex is dedicated at
varying degrees to visual analysis and integration, only a
very small region of the visual space, the area falling onto
the fovea, can be carefully analyzed at higher resolution
by such a formidable parallel computing system at any
time. Even so, the remaining several limitations of vision
are attested by a myriad of optical illusions.

The serious limitations of the cortical hardware in pro-
cessing vision ultimately implied the retina to perform
eﬀective pre-processing in order to ﬁlter out redundan-
cies (luminance correlations) before forwarding the vi-

sual information to the brain, via the lateral geniculate
nucleus [2]. This is to a great extent achieved by detec-
tion of the borders of the objects in images, which tend
to be associated to luminance contrasts. Because only
the fovea, an area of the retina accountable for about
just one degree of the visual ﬁeld, is engaged in high
resolution image analysis, it is important to have also ef-
fective means for moving this small window along time
and space, through saccadic eye movements [2], so as
to integrate the most important portions (saliencies) of
the image into a sensible whole. Extensive experimen-
tal investigation has shown that points exhibiting high
contrast (e.g. [3, 4]) and/or curvature (e.g. [5]) tend to
play a decisive role in saliency deﬁnition and detection.
Other important facts established experimentally include
the presence in the primary visual cortex of many neu-
rons which are orientation sensitive, exhibiting the so-
called simple and complex receptive ﬁelds, in the sense
of being capable of estimating the tangent ﬁeld along the
retinotopic representation of the scene [2]. Because of
the decreasing resolution along the retina as one moves
from its center to the periphery, it is reasonable to as-
sume that the saliency of local portions of the image to
be inversely related to the distance from those portions
to the center of the fovea (or attention). In addition to
gaze shift driven by saliences, more subtle visual mech-
anisms are performed on the peripherical visual ﬁeld in
order to decide where to look next. The shifts of atten-
tion driven by saliences involving or not eye movements
are the main subject of this article.

In spite of the intense and extensive experimental and

theoretical research in visual perception, relatively few
physics-based approaches have been proposed for salience
detection and selective attention. In addition to the now
classical work of Brockmann and Geisel [6], who modeled
human scanpaths in terms of stochastic jumps in random
quenched salience ﬁelds, a more recent model of gaze
shift has been reported by Boccignone and Ferraro [7],
who used non-local transition probabilities over a previ-
ously estimated saliency ﬁeld upon which a constrained
random walk was performed. The present work com-
bines recent results from the areas of complex networks
(e.g. [8, 9, 10]), Markov models (e.g. [11]), random walks
(e.g. [12, 13]), and artiﬁcial image analysis (e.g. [14, 15])
in order to develop a simple and yet uniﬁed and biologi-
cally plausible model naturally integrating gaze shift and
salience detection. One of the main theses supported in
the current work is that

saliency ⇋ selective attention

i.e., saliencies and selective attention would be inher-
ently intertwined in the mammals visual system (and
possibly also in artiﬁcial vision). The model suggested
in the current article involves representing the image ob-
jects as a complex network such that each part of the
image (or object) is mapped as a node and connections
between these nodes are established in terms of speciﬁc
visual features such as the tangent ﬁeld induced by the
image contrasts, distance between points/objects, and
size of objects. The image under analysis is henceforth
represented in terms of the matrix A, whose elements
(i, j) (i = 1, 2, . . . , Nx and j = 1, 2, . . . , Ny) are called
pixels and the gray-level value A(i, j) is proportional to
the image luminance (only black and white images are
considered here).

First, we address the case of selective attention driven
by tangent ﬁelds. Images can have their borders detected
(a procedure similar to that performed by the retina)
and a random walk performed along the herein deﬁned
tangent ﬁeld. The steady state of the visits to nodes
is conveniently calculated from the eigenequation involv-
ing the stochastic matrix associated to the respectively
driven Markov chain. Interestingly, the saliencies of the
image are naturally revealed by the most frequently vis-
ited nodes, at the same time as these points act as bea-
cons for the random walk, therefore naturally integrating
selective attention/gaze shift and saliency manifestation.
The eﬀects of having the connections in the complex net-
work representation of the image to be unit or inversely
proportional to the distance between pairs of points, as
well as random walks characterized by uniformly ran-
dom choice of next moves or preferential to the degree of
the target nodes, are considered and discussed. Another
interesting ﬁnding is the strong correlation identiﬁed be-
tween the frequency of visits to nodes and the respective
degrees/strengths.

The ﬁrst step in the proposed model involves trans-
forming the image into a complex network Γ. As in

2

the retina, special attention is given to the pixels deﬁn-
ing high luminance contrasts typically found at the bor-
ders of objects. These pixels can be conveniently de-
tected by using the Sobel or Laplacian of Gaussian ﬁl-
ters (e.g. [1, 14]). The orientations deﬁned by such edges
(parallel to them) can be estimated directly from the gra-
dient estimation provided by the Sobel operator or by the
spectral method for tangent and curvature ﬁeld estima-
tion [14]. As the current article is restricted to binary
images, the latter method for tangent ﬁeld estimation
has been applied. The orientation of the edge at position
(i, j) is henceforth represented as α(i, j).

The connections of the complex network Γ representing
the image are established as follows: each detected edge
element (i, j) is connected through unit and symmetric
weights with all other edge elements (p, q) lying on the
straight line passing by (i, j) with inclination α(i, j). An
alternative connectivity scheme also considered in this
work involves assigning weights which are symmetric but
instead of being unitary, are set as being inversely propor-
tional to the distance between the pixels (i, j) and (p, q).
Note that the network connections therefore correspond
to visual associations induced by strong contrasts in the
image, accounting for the tendency of human vision to
follow straight lines. Actually, this representation of an
image in terms of a complex network can be understood
as a particular case of the methodology suggested in [15],
where pixels are connected while taking into account the
similarity between their properties (in the case of the
current work, their tangent ﬁeld).

Figure 1 illustrates an image (a) as well as its respec-
tive weight matrix (b) of the associated complex network
considering unit weights. The weight matrix considering
strengths inversely proportional to the distance between
pairs of edge elements would be visualized as a nearly
diagonal matrix, so it is not shown.

Observe that, at this point, we have neither salience de-
tection nor attention dynamics implemented in our model
yet. In order to try to obtain both these important con-
cepts in a simple and integrated way, traditional [18] and
preferential random walks are performed on the complex
network. The stochastic matrix S1 associated to tradi-
tional random walks can be inferred from the respective
weight matrix W of the complex network as

od(i) = X
k

W (k, i)

S1(i, j) = W (i, j)/od(j)

(1)

(2)

Preferential walks are alternatively performed so as to
randomly choose the next edge (among those emanating
from the current node) with probability directly propor-
tional to the degree (or strength) of the respective target
nodes. In this case, he respective stochastic matrix be-
comes:

3

shape at the bottom of the ﬁgure). The dominance of
such a point of convergence ultimately implied the re-
mainder of the image to become darker, because of the
normalization of the normalization of gray-level varia-
tion adopted for the sake of better visualization. Also
interesting is the fact that longer lines, or sets of aligned
lines, tend to be characterized by higher frequency of
visits to all involved nodes, suggesting another dimen-
sion of the salience in visual structures, namely as being
proportional to the lenght of the aligned structures. An-
other important point to be born in mind is that the
anysotropies of the representation of objects into a or-
thogonal (e.g. [14, 16]) lattice imply the lines to result
with a degree of jaggedness which is dependent of the
respective line orientation, with the highest quality lines
veriﬁed for the horizontal and vertical orientations. The
frequency of visits obtained by considering weights in-
versely proportional to the distance between connected
nodes are given in Figures 2(b). Although the vertices
have again resulted as being particularly salient, the con-
vergence at the circular shape is much weaker than for
the ‘traditional walks’, as a consequence of the fading
eﬀect of the edges along distance.

The results obtained for inversely proportional weights
and random walks with preferential choice of move-
ments (favoring destination nodes which have higher out-
strength) are shown in Figure 2(c). The interesting ef-
fect of this alternative dynamics implied some elements
of the image to become signiﬁcantly more salient, as is
the case with the circular shape. Figure 2(d) shows the
saliency ﬁeld obtained while disconsidering the circular
shape. The most salient ﬁgure now corresponds to the
vertical line. It is particularly remarkable that this line,
and not the horizontal line (both of which presenting null
jaggedness), have been highlighted. This is explained
because the vertical line is the subject of more cross-
ings with other lines than the horizontal one, therefore
attracting more converging movements emanating from
the other parts of the image. Figure 3 shows the corre-
lation between the frequency of visits f and the outde-
gree od observed for the case shown in Figure 2(d). It
is clear from this result that pixels which are topological
hubs tend to be activity hubs also, in a superlinear way,
accounting for the enhancement of saliency implied by
the preferential random walks. A strong linear correla-
tion has been observed for the traditional random walks,
suggesting the use of pixels outdegree as predictors of
dynamical activity and saliency.

In order to illustrate the generality of the model sug-
gested for integrating visual attention and saliency, we
consider brieﬂy the possibility to treat images containing
several objects (i.e. disks with varying radius). Tthe ex-
tension to other visual features such as texture, color, dis-
parity, etc, is immediate. The choice of movement during
the random walk consider two quantities: (I) an individ-
ual saliency index s(i) is previously assigned to each ob-
ject i (as in [7], but here the orientation of the movements
is not chosen uniformly in the interval [0, 2π]); and (II)

(a)

(b)

FIG. 1: The original binary image (a) and its respective
weight matrix (c) obtained by ‘traditional’ random walk with
unit weights.

v(i) = X
k

od(k) | W (k, i) 6= 0

Sw(i, j) = W (i, j)/v(j)

(3)

(4)

The outdegree (or outstrength, a term often reserved
for weighted networks) of a node i therefore corresponds
to the sum of all weights of outbound edges along the
column i of the stochastic matrix. Both the above matri-
ces necessarily follow the particular eigenvalue equation
~f = S ~f , so that the frequency of visits to nodes in the
steady state is immediately given by the respective val-
ues of the eigenvector ~f associated to the unit eigenvalue,
normalized so that Pi fi = 1.

While the random walks provide the means to mimic
the tangent ﬁeld driven attention shift, the saliencies can
be deﬁned as the most frequently visited nodes during
a long walk. Figure 2 shows the obtained saliency ﬁeld
for the image in Figure 1(a), assuming ‘traditional’ ran-
dom walks. Higher activities are denoted by clearer gray
levels. Interestingly, the saliencies not only tended to cor-
respond to high curvature points (vertices along the out-
lines of the objects) but also resulted particularly marked
at the convergence of the tangents (i.e. into the circular

4

(a)

(c)

(b)

(d)

FIG. 2: Saliency ﬁelds obtained for ‘traditional’ random walks with unit (a) and inversely proportional (b) weights. Preferential
random walks considering the original image with (c) and without (d) the circular shape.

FIG. 3: The superlinear correlation between the frequency
of visits to pixels and their respective outdegree obtained for
preferential random walks.

the distance between each object and the current point
of attention. Here we deﬁne the weights w(i, j) of the
respectively associated matrix as w(i, j) = s(i)/d(i, j),
where s(i) is the individual saliency deﬁned as being
equal to the square root of the radius of disk i and d(i, j)
expresses the distance between the centroids of the disks
i and j. The overall saliency is determined in the same
way as for the case of tangent driven random walks. Fig-
ure 4 shows one of the considered images (a) and the
respectively obtained saliency ﬁeld (b). The resulting
saliencies are related to the individual saliency as well as
that of the neibhboring objects (i.e.
larger disks, such
as the righthand part of the image), reﬂecting their den-
sity and respective distances, implying the objects at the
borders to be less salient.

5

(a)

(b)

FIG. 4: An 1000×1000 pixels image containing 100 disks with
varying sizes (a), and the respectively obtained saliencies (b)
expressed by the gray-level of the disks.

All in all, this work has proposed a simple and uni-
ﬁed model of selective attention and salience detection
founded on several concepts from the areas of complex
networks, Markov models, random walks, and artiﬁcial
image analysis. This model is conceptually appealing be-
cause of the natural integration of attention and salience
deﬁnition, the ﬂexibility to be used at varying spatial
scales and considering diﬀerent driven mechanisms, and
the interesting correlations between simulated activity
and network topology, not to mention the simple math-
ematics involved. The potential of the approach has
been illustrated with respect to simultaneous detection
of vertices and convergences as well as identifying over-
all salience in a ﬁeld of disks with varying sizes. Future
developments could consider the respective convergence
time implied by each case, as well as the number of visited
nodes and edges (e.g. [17]) along time. Also interesting
would be the application of the proposed methodology
for the analysis of images of neuronal cells, allowing the
identiﬁcation of branches and vertices while also enhanc-
ing the convergences of processes which is typically found
in those cells. The results for the tangent driven random
walks also suggest the development of a computationally
eﬀective algorithm for saliency detection where all image
pixels falling under the tangent lines deﬁned by the edges
would be incremented.

Luciano da F. Costa is grateful to CNPq (308231/03-1)

for ﬁnancial sponsorship.

[1] D. Marr, Vision (Henry Holt and Company, 1982).
[2] M. J. Tov´ee, An introduction to the visual system (Cam-

[3] D. Parkhurst, K. Law, and E. Niebur, Vision Res. 42,

bridge, 1996).

107 (2002).

[4] G. Krieger, I. Rentschler, G. Hauske, K. Schill, and
C. Zetsche, Spat. Vis. – Special Issue ‘Object Recog.’
13, 201 (2000).

[5] F. Attneave, Psych. Review 61, 183 (1954).
[6] D. Brockmann and T. Geisel, Neurocomp. 32–33, 643

(2000).

[7] G. Boccignone and M. Ferraro, Physica A 331, 207

[8] R. Albert and A. L. Barab´asi, Rev. Mod. Phys. 74, 47

[9] M. E. J. Newman, SIAM Review 45, 167 (2003), cond-

(2004).

(2002).

mat/0303516.

[10] S. Boccaletti, V. Latora, Y. Moreno, M. Chavez, and D.-

U. Hwang, Physics Reports (2006), accepted.

[11] P. Br´emaud, Markov Chains: Gibbs Fields, Monte Carlo

Simulation, and Queues (Springer Verlag, 2001).

[12] B. Tadic, Eur. Phys. J. B 23, 221 (2001).

[13] L. da F. Costa and O. Sporns (2006), q-bio.NC/0602021.
[14] L. da F. Costa and R. M. C. Jr, Shape Analysis and
Classiﬁcation: Theory and Practice (CRC Press, 2001).

[15] L. da F. Costa (2004), cond-mat/0403346.
[16] R. Klette and A. Rosenfeld, Digital Geometry (Morgan

Kaufmann, 2004).

[17] L. da F. Costa (2006), physics/0601118.
[18] Namely random walks in which the next edge to be
trailed is chosen with uniform probability among the
edges connected to the current node.

6

