6
0
0
2
 
l
u
J
 
3
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
d
e
m

.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
1
0
2
7
0
6
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

A Two Phase Harmonic Model for Left
Ventricular Function

Shay Dubi

a,1, Chen Dubi b, Yonatan Dubi c

aSackler Faculty of Medicine, Tel Aviv University, Israel
bUnit of Mathematics, Negev Academic College, Basel 9 Beer Sheva, Israel
cPhysics Department, Ben-Gurion University, Beer Sheva 84105, Israel

Abstract

A minimal model for mechanical motion of the left ventricle is proposed. The model
assumes the left ventricle to be a harmonic oscillator with two distinct phases,
simulating the systolic and diastolic phases, at which both the amplitude and the
elastic constant of the oscillator are diﬀerent. Taking into account the pressure
within the left ventricle, the model shows qualitative agreement with functional
parameters of the left ventricle. The model allows for a natural explanation of heart
failure with preserved systolic left ventricular function, also termed diastolic heart
failure. Speciﬁcally, the rise in left ventricular ﬁlling pressures following increased
left-ventricular wall stiﬀness is attributed to a mechanism aimed at preserving heart
rate and cardiac output.

Key words: Left Ventricular motion, Harmonic oscillator, Diastolic heart failure

1 Motivation

1.1 General

The left ventricle (LV) is a highly complex mechanical system. Left ventricular
function is determined by both internal and external factors such as myocar-

Email addresses: shay@naiot.com (Shay Dubi ), chend@sce.ac.il (Chen

Dubi), dubij@bgu.ac.il (Yonatan Dubi).
1 This work was performed in partial fulﬁlment of the requirements for a Ph.D.
degree of S. Dubi, Sackler Faculty of Medicine, Tel Aviv University, Israel

Preprint submitted to Elsevier Science

dial contractility, myocardial stiﬀness, preload, afterload, rhythm and pace,
size, shape etc [1]. All these factors combine to regulate left ventricular mo-
tion, which may be characterized by three basic distinguishing attributes: (1)
the motion is periodic, including a diastolic expansion phase and a systolic
contraction phase, (2) the period is divided unequally between the diastolic
and the systolic phases, the former being generally twice as long as the lat-
ter [2] and, (3) the forces generated by the left ventricle are in accordance
with Frank-Starling law of the heart [1], ], which states that the larger the LV
volume, the greater the energy of its contraction and hence diastolic stretch
actually increases LV contractility.

Motivated by the fact that LV dysfunction and heart failure are associated
with alterations in the mechanical motion of the left ventricle [3,4,5] , sim-
ulating this motion has become a major challenge. The use of both theoret-
ical tools (such as ﬁnite element geometrical construction[6], ﬂuid-dynamics
based computation [7,8], Immersed Boundary method [9] etc.) and experimen-
tal tools (such surgically implanted track markers [10,11], magnetic resonance
tagging [12,13] etc.) have been utilized for such simulation. As a common
factor, many of the theories attempt to include an abundance of factors inﬂu-
encing the left ventricle, to achieve quantitative resemblance between theory
and experimental data. While some success has been achieved in describing
normal LV function, the models are far from adequate in describing LV dys-
function or the eﬀect of cardiac assist devices, and further progress is needed
before such models may be utilized for clinical applications [14].

1.2 Diastolic heart failure

Heart failure (HF) is a clinical syndrome that can result from structural or
functional cardiac disorders, impairing the ability of the ventricle to ﬁll with
or eject blood [15]. The clinical manifestations of HF are dyspnea and fatigue,
which may limit exercise tolerance, and ﬂuid retention, which may lead to
pulmonary and peripheral oedema. Diastolic heart failure (DHF) is the clinical
syndrome of heart failure associated with preserved LV ejection fraction (an
index of LV systolic function and contractility, deﬁned as the ratio of LV stroke
volume to end diastolic volume). DHF accounts for approximately 40% of heart
failure cases [16,17] and carries a signiﬁcant morbidity, comparable to that of
systolic heart failure [18,19]. Diastolic abnormalities of the LV may be related
to increased myocardial stiﬀness and impaired relaxation [20,21,22], leading
to an essentially mechanical dysfunction, resulting in the inability of the left
ventricle to ﬁll with blood at low ﬁlling pressures during diastole [23,24].

The mechanisms underlying increased myocardial stiﬀness can be divided into
factors that are intrinsic or extrinsic to the myocardium [25]. Myocardial fac-

2

tors include cellular factors, such as impaired calcium homeostasis and changes
in Titin sarcomeric proteins, which act as viscoelastic springs that provide a re-
coiling force during diastole [26], and extracellular factors, including changes in
extracellular matrix morphology (i.e. ﬁbrosis) leading to increased myocardial
stiﬀness [27]. Relaxation is an energy-dependent process, and abnormalities
in cellular energy supply and utilization can lead to impaired relaxation [28].
Both abnormalities may result in a physiological state in which diastolic LV
pressures are elevated, leading to elevated left atrial and pulmonary venous
pressures, exercise intolerance [29,30] and acute pulmonary oedema [31,32].

Despite its prevalence and signiﬁcant morbidity there are currently very few
models that can simulate DHF as an integral part of the mechanical motion
of the LV [33]. Such simulation would be beneﬁcial for promoting our under-
standing of the underlying pathophysiology of DHF and simulating treatment
modalities, and as such provided much of the motivation for developing a
minimal model for LV motion.

1.3 Scope

In this paper we develop a qualitative minimal approach to describe the motion
of the LV. Generalizing the simple linear harmonic oscillator, we qualitatively
mimic the full ventricular cycle, with all three basic distinguishing attributes
described above. Further more, our model naturally describes the mechanics
of DHF, and thus provides a baby-step towards a more rigorous model for LV
function in DHF.

The rest of this paper is organized as follows. In Sec. 2 we describe and justify
our model. In Sec. 3 we discuss the relation between our model and DHF, and
Sec. 4 is devoted to a summary.

2 The model

2.1 Preliminaries

As a mathematical introduction, in this section we discuss the simple harmonic
oscillator, describe the general solution and show its relation to the properties
of the LV. A simple harmonic oscillator (e.g. a mass attached to a spring, an
elastic band etc.) is described by Hooke’s law, that is the larger the displace-
ment from equilibrium the stronger the restoring force acting on the body. In
the simplest case, the restoring force is proportional to the displacement, and

3

thus Newton’s law is of the form

r′′(t) =

Kr(t) ,

−

where K is the proportionality (elastic) constant between the force and the
displacement, its physical meaning is the amount of force required to stretch
the oscillator by one unit length (per unit mass).

The solution of Eq. (1) depends on the sign of K. If K is negative, the general
solution is

r(t) = r+ exp(√

Kt) + r

exp(

−

−

√

−

−

Kt) ,

where r+ and r
are constants determined by the initial conditions of the
oscillator. Notice that this solution is ”unstable”, that is r(t) will increase
indeﬁnitely with the time t. Thus, this solution is inappropriate for describing
an oscillating body.

−

For a positive K, the solution is periodic,

r(t) = r0 cos(√Kt + φ) ,

(1)

(2)

(3)

where the radial amplitude r0 and the phase φ are constants, which are deter-
mined by the initial conditions of the oscillator. The frequency of oscillations
is given by ø = √K, and the period (i.e. the duration of a single cycle) is
ts = 2π/ø. We notice that if r(t) stands for the LV radius, than this solution
already possesses two of the LV characteristics described in the introduction.
Obviously, the motion is periodic, and the force (given by the right hand side
of Eq. 1) is in agreement with Starlings law.

However, the third characteristic of the LV - the unequal division of the cardiac
cycle - is unfulﬁlled by the simple harmonic oscillator. Following, we introduce
a generalization to the simple oscillator, based on a physiologic mechanism,
which inherently incorporates this feature.

2.2 Basic model

In this section we describe our generalization of the simple harmonic oscilla-
tor. We start by examining the physiologic origin of systolic and diastolic LV
function.

The transition from diastole to systole stems from excitation-contraction cou-
pling. The trigger for systole is the electrical excitation of cardiac muscle cells
(action potential), which raises the free intra-cellular Ca2+ concentration, thus
activating cellular contraction. Contraction leads to elevation of ventricular
wall tension, elevation of intra-ventricular pressure and eventually ejection of

4

blood from the ventricle, when a positive pressure gradient is achieved. For di-
astolic relaxation to occur, intra-cellular Ca2+ concentration must be actively
reduced, leading to myocardial relaxation [34].

In essence, this can be simpliﬁed to a model in which systole begins when
the LV wall is abruptly stiﬀened (isovolumic contraction) leading to LV pres-
sure elevation and systolic contraction, after-which the ventricle is suddenly
relaxed (isovolumic relaxation), followed by a pressure decline and diastolic
ﬁlling. Even a model based on this simpliﬁcation would require consideration
of additional factors such as, e.g. environmental eﬀects, blood ﬂow (rheolog-
ical) eﬀects, spatial form of the LV, energy considerations etc.). This type of
analysis is probably beyond mathematical rigour.

We thus suggest a phenomenological model for LV function. We describe the
LV as a cylindrical elastic membrane. The model thus consists of a harmonic
oscillator, for which both the elastic constant K (and thus the frequency) and
the radial amplitude r0 diﬀer between the systolic and the diastolic phase.
Since the systolic (diastolic) phase are deﬁned by a decrease (increase) of
the LV radius r(t), both the elastic constant and the amplitude will depend
on the sign of the derivative, r′(t) . This will mimic the sudden stiﬀening
and relaxation of the cardiac muscle due to changes in intra-cellular Ca2+
concentration. The force induced by the intra-ventricular pressure, F , is given
(in the cylindrical approximation) by F (t) = 2πr(t)P (t), where P (t) is the
internal pressure (divided by the LV wall mass and height). Assuming that in
the systolic and diastolic phases the pressures Ps and Pd are approximately
constant, we obtain the following equation for the radius of the LV,

r′′(t) + Ks(r

r0,s) + 2πrPs = 0,

r′(t) < 0

r′′(t) + Kd(r

r0,d) + 2πrPd = 0,

r′(t) > 0

(systolic phase)

(diastolic phase)

−

−






where Kd and Ks are the eﬀective elastic constants at the diastole and systole
respectively, and r0,d and r0,s are the amplitudes at the diastole and systole,
respectively. Eq. 4 is subjected to the initial conditions

r(0) = rmax;

r′(0) = 0

where rmax is the maximal radius of the LV, and to the following conditions:

(1) r(t) is a continuous function.
(2) The motion is periodic; that is, if T is the period of the function, then

(4)

(5)

Let us start by examining each branch of the solution separately, starting with

r(0) = r(T ) = rmax.

5

Eq. (4) for the the systolic phase. Demanding that the solution is stable yields
the condition Ks > 2πPs. Denoting Ksr0,s
= rs and taking in account the
2πPs
initial conditions (Eq. (5)), we have the solution

Ks

−

r(t) = (rmax

r0) cos

Ks

2πPst

+ r0.

−

(cid:18)q

−

(cid:19)

(6)

π

, for which r(ts) = (rmax

The motion is governed by Eq. (6) as long as the ﬁrst derivative of the solution
is negative. The derivative changes sign (from negative to positive) at ts =
rmax. Thus, rmin =
2πPs
√Ks
rmax (where rmin is the minimal LV radius) is the initial condition for the
2r0
motion in the diastolic phase, i.e. the solution for the diastolic part of Eq. (4)
is subjected to the initial conditions,

r0) cos π + r0 = 2r0

−
−

−

−

r(ts) = rmin;

r′(ts) = 0.

(7)

(8)

(9)

(10)

Denoting rd = K2r0,d
2πPd

K2

−

, the solution for the diastolic stage is given by

r(t) = (rmin

rd) cos

Kd

2πPd(t

ts)

+ rd.

−

(cid:18)q

−

−

(cid:19)

As in the systolic phase, this branch of the solution is valid when t is in
the interval ts
2πPd, øs =
√Ks
2πPd we obtain the solution for a single cycle,

ts +
≤
2πPs and ød = √Kd

. Denoting td = π/√Kd

2πPd

√Kd

≤

−

−

t

π

−

−

r(t) = 


(rmax
(rmin

−
−



rs) cos(øst) + rs;
rd) cos(ød(t

≤
ts)) + rd;

0

t

≤
ts

ts

−

t

ts + td

≤

≤

From continuity at t = ts and periodicity (i.e. r(ts + td) = r(0)) we obtain the
relation

rs = rd =

rmax + rmin
2

.

We thus obtain a full solution for the motion of the LV, characterized by the
four parameters ts, td, rmax and rmin. The ratio between td (the duration
of diastole) and ts (duration of systole) is td/ts
2. The parameters rmax
and rmin may vary and are determined by both the elastic constants and the
pressures in the diﬀerent phases.

≈

In Fig. 1 we plot the LV volume for several cycles, actual LV data taken
from a healthy human subject using non-invasive magnetic resonance imaging
technique, adopted from K. Kindberg [13] (dashed line) and a ﬁt with Eq. (9)
(solid line). As seen, the model yields fair agreement with the data, and results
in the ratio between the diastolic and systolic times, td/ts = 2.152.

6

)
l

m

(
 
e
m
u
l
o
v

65

55

45

35

1

2
time (tbeat)

3

4

Fig. 1. Dashed line: LV volume, data taken from a healthy human subject using
non-invasive magnetic resonance imaging technique, adopted with permission from
πr(t)2, as extracted from the model, as a function
Ref. [13]. Solid line : LV volume,
of time (in units of a single cycle period, tbeat). The ﬁt between the model and data
yields a ratio between the diastolic and systolic times, td/ts = 2.152.

∝

3 Diastolic heart failure

As described in Sec. 1.2, diastolic abnormalities in DHF patients include in-
creased LV stiﬀness and elevated LV ﬁlling pressures, leading to the symptoms
of heart failure. In this section we intend to answer two questions:

(1) Can we simulate the increased LV stiﬀness within our model?
(2) Can this model predict and explain the increase of pressure?

For the ﬁrst question, the answer seems fairly simple: In the suggested model,
LV stiﬀness is represented by the coeﬃcients Ks and Kd. Thus, in terms of the
suggested model, the disease can be simulated by increasing Kd by an amount
∆K.

In order to answer the second question we note that in DHF patients there
seems to be no signiﬁcant change in the heart rate, and thus no real change in
the duration of the diastole (or systole) [32,35]. Since the duration of the phases
is deﬁned by the frequencies øs and ød, from their deﬁnition we have that ød
2πPd remains constant. Thus, if Kd
remains constant only if the term Kd
is increased by a portion ∆K, then Pd must also increase by ∆K
2π . Hence, this
model indeed predicts the rise in pressure. In other words, once the diastolic
stiﬀness of the LV wall increases, a compensation is achieved by increasing the
pressure, in order to prevent a signiﬁcant change in heart rate.

−

7

4 Summary

In summary, a naive harmonic model for the mechanical motion of the left
ventricle was developed. The model consists of a generalized harmonic oscil-
lator, for which both the radial amplitude and the elastic constant depend on
the direction of the motion, yielding both the systolic and diastolic phases of
the cardiac cycle, and allows for a qualitative simulation of left ventricular
motion.

Despite its simplicity, the model yields a natural explanation for diastolic
heart failure, in which the left ventricular wall is stiﬀened and diastolic ﬁlling
pressures are increased. Our model suggests that the rise in diastolic ﬁlling
pressures is required in order to maintain ventricular volume when the heart
rate is not signiﬁcantly changed, as is the clinically observed case [32].

One can postulate a correlation between the model and physiological phe-
nomena as follows: Maintaining cardiac output (CO) is essential for normal
function. The CO is a product of heart rate and stroke volume. In DHF pa-
tients, the stroke volume remains unchanged [36,35] and hence slowing heart
rate should be prevented, or CO will be reduced. However, when our model
is considered, if LV volumes are to be maintained despite increased stiﬀening
(again, as is the clinical ﬁnding), LV pressures have to be increased or heart
rate decreased. It is thus concluded that the increased LV pressures are the re-
sult of a forced compensation, aimed at maintaining heart rate and CO when
the LV wall is stiﬀened.

Finally, we note that while the model presented here is very much the minimal
model for LV function, additional phenomenological details, such as ventricular
pressure- volume loops and atrial parameters may be added in future studies.
Such additions would render the model analytically unsolvable, yet numerical
solutions may be possible, and may advance our understanding of diﬀerent
physiological phenomena.

References

[1] Lionel HO, Mechanisms of cardiac contraction and relaxation. In: Zipes DP,
Libby P, Bonow RO, Braunwald E, editors. Braunwld’s heart disease 7th
edition. Elsevier Saunders, Philadelphia PA, USA 2005, p. 476.

[2] Tortora GJ, Derrickson B, Principles of anatomy and physiology 11th edition.

John Wiley & Sons, Hoboken NJ,USA. 2006, p. 716.

[3] Colucci WS and Braunwald E, Pathophysiology of heart failure. In: Zipes
DP, Libby P, Bonow RO, Braunwald E, editors. Braunwld’s heart disease 7th

8

edition. Elsevier Saunders, Philadelphia PA, USA 2005, p. 509–526.

[4] Zile MR and Brutsaert DL. New concepts in diastolic dysfunction and diastolic
heart failure: Part I: Diagnosis, Prognosis, and Measurements of Diastolic
Function. Circulation. 2002;105:1387-1393.

[5] Zile MR and Brutsaert DL. New concepts in diastolic dysfunction and diastolic
heart failure: Part II: causal mechanisms and treatment. Circulation 2002;
105(12):1503–1508.)

[6] Hunter PJ, Pullen AJ and Smaill BH, Modeling total heart function, Annu Rev

Biomed Eng 2003; 5:147–177.

[7] Taylor TW, Okino H and Yamaguchi T, Three-Dimensional Analysis of Left
Ventricular Ejection Using Computational Fluid Dynamics, ASME J Biomech
Eng 1994; 116:127-130.

[8] Schoephoerster RT, Silva CL and Ray G, Evaluation of Left Ventricular
Function Based on Simulated Systolic Flow Dynamics Computed From Regional
Wall Motion, J Biomech 1994; 27:125-136.

[9] Peskin, CS and McQueen DM, Fluid Dynamics of the Heart and Its Valves. in:
Case Studies in Mathematical Modeling: Ecology, Physiology, and Cell Biology,
Othmer, Adler et al., eds., Prentice-Hall Inc., New Jersey 1996, pp. 309-337.

[10] Ingels N, Daughters G, Stinson E and Alderman E, Measurement of midwall
myocardial dynamics in intact man by radiography of surgically implanted
markers. Circulation 1975; 52:859-867.

[11] Doss JK, Hillis LD, Curry G, Lewis SE, Dehmer GJ, Parkey RW, Mitchell JH
and Willerson JT, A new model for the assessment of regional LV wall motion.
Radiology 1982; 143:763-770.

[12] Meier D, Ziskin MC, Santamore WP and Bove AA, Kinematics of the beating

heart. IEEE Transactions on Biomedical Eng 1980; 27:319-329.

[13] Katarina Kindberg, Regional Kinematics of the Heart: Investigation with
Marker Tracking and with Phase Contrast Magnetic Resonance Imaging,
Thesis, Linkopings universitet, Linkoping, Sweden 2003.

[14] Saber NR, Wood NB, Gosman AD, Merriﬁeld RD, Yang GZ, Charrier
CL, Gatehouse PD and Firmin DN, Progress Towards Patient-Speciﬁc
Computational Flow Modeling of the Left Heart via Combination of Magnetic
Resonance Imaging with Computational Fluid Dynamics. Ann Biomed Eng
2003; 31:42–52.

[15] Hunt SA, Baker DW, Chin MH, Cinquegrani MP, Feldman AM, Francis
GS, Ganiats TG, Goldstein S, Gregoratos G, Jessup ML, Noble RJ, Packer
M, Silver MA, Stevenson LW. ACC/AHA guidelines for the evaluation and
management of chronic heart failure in the adult: executive summary: a report
of the American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association Task Force
on Practice Guidelines (Committee to Revise the 1995 Guidelines for the

9

Evaluation and Management of Heart Failure). J Am Coll Cardiol 2001;38:2101–
13.

[16] Senni M and Redﬁeld MM, Heart failure with preserved systolic function. A

diﬀerent natural history? , J Am Coll Cardiol 2001; 38:1277–1282.

[17] Vasan RS and Levy D, Deﬁning diastolic heart failure: a call for standardized

diagnostic criteria, Circulation 2000; 101:2118–2121.

[18] Vasan RS, Larson MG, Benjamin EJ, Evans JC, Reiss CK and Levy D,
Congestive heart failure in subjects with normal versus reduced left ventricular
ejection fraction: prevalence and mortality in a population-based cohort, J Am
Coll Cardiol 1999; 33:1948–1955.

[19] Tsutsui M, Tsuchihashi M and Takeshita A, Mortality and re-admission
of hospitalized patients with congestive heart failure and preserved versus
depressed systolic function, Am J Cardiol 2001:88;530–533.

[20] Borbely A, van der Velden J, Papp Z, Bronzwaer JGF, Istvan Edes I, Stienen
GJM, and Paulus WJ, Cardiomyocyte Stiﬀness in Diastolic Heart Failure
Circulation, Feb 2005; 111: 774–781.

[21] Kass DA, Bronzwaer JGF, and Paulus WJ, What Mechanisms Underlie
Diastolic Dysfunction in Heart Failure? Circ. Res., Jun 2004; 94: 1533–1542.

[22] Sweitzer NK and Stevenson LW, Diastolic heart failure: miles to go before we

sleep, Am J Med 2000; 109(8):683–685.

[23] Brutsaert DL, Sys SU and Gillebert TC, Diastolic failure: pathophysiology and

therapeutic implications, J Am Coll Cardiol 1993; 22:318–325.

[24] Grossman W, Diastolic dysfunction and congestive heart failure, Circulation

1990;81:III1–III7.

[25] Zile MR, Brutsaert DL. New concepts in diastolic dysfunction and diastolic
heart failure: Part II: causal mechanisms and treatment. Circulation 2002;
105(12):1503–1508.

[26] Fukuda N, Sasaki D, Ishiwata S, Kurihara S. Length dependence of tension
generation in rat skinned cardiac muscle: role of titin in the Frank-Starling
mechanism of the heart. Circulation 2001; 104(14):1639–1645.

[27] Yamamoto K, Masuyama T, Sakata Y, Nishikawa N, Mano T, Yoshida J
et al. Myocardial stiﬀness is determined by ventricular ﬁbrosis, but not by
compensatory or excessive hypertrophy in hypertensive heart. Cardiovasc Res
2002; 55(1):76–82.

[28] Zile MR, Brutsaert DL. New concepts in diastolic dysfunction and diastolic
heart failure: Part II: causal mechanisms and treatment. Circulation 2002;
105(12):1503–1508.

10

[29] Kitzman DW, Higginbotham MB, Cobb FR, Sheikh KH, and Sullivan MJ,
Exercise intolerance in patients with heart failure and preserved left ventricular
systolic function: failure of the Frank-Starling mechanism. J Am Coll Cardiol
1991; 17:1065–1072.

[30] Little WC, Wesley-Farrington DJ, Hoyle J, Brucks S, Robertson S, Kitzman
DW and Cheng CP, Eﬀect of Candesartan and Verapamil on Exercise Tolerance
in Diastolic Dysfunction. J Cardiovasc Pharmacol 2004; 43(2):288–293 .

[31] Little WC, Hypertensive pulmonary oedema is due to diastolic dysfunction Eur

Heart J 2001; 22: 1961–1964.

[32] Zile MR, Baicu CF, and Gaasch WH, Diastolic Heart Failure Abnormalities in

Active Relaxation, N Engl J Med 2004; 350(19):1953–1955.

[33] Lemmon JD and Yoganathan AP, Computational Modeling of Left Heart
Diastolic Function: Examination of Ventricular Dysfunction. ASME J Biomech
Eng 2000; 122:297–303.

[34] Donald M. Bers, Cardiac excitation - contraction coupling. Nature 2001;

415:198–205.

[35] Kitzman DW, Little WC, Brubaker PH, Anderson RT, Hundley WG,
Marburger CT et al. Pathophysiological characterization of isolated diastolic
heart failure in comparison to systolic heart failure. JAMA 2002; 288(17):2144-
2150.

[36] Zile MR, Baicu CF, and Bonnema DD, Diastolic Heart Failure: Deﬁnitions and
Terminology. Progress in Cardiovascular Diseases, Vol. 47, No. 5 (March/April),
2005: 47;307-313.

11

