6
0
0
2
 
t
c
O
 
3
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
d
e
m

.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
5
8
1
0
1
6
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Framework and Bio-Mechanical Model for a
Per-Operative Image-Guided Neuronavigator Including
‘Brain-Shift’ Compensation

Marek Bucki 1,2

Yohan Payan 1

1 TIMC Laboratory, UMR CNRS 5525, University J. Fourier, 38706 La Tronche, France
2 Centro de Modelamiento Matematico, Av. Blanco Encalada 2120, Santiago de Chile, Chile

mbucki@dim.uchile.cl

ABSTRACT

In this paper we present a methodology to adress the problem of brain tissue deformation referred to as ”brain-
shift”. This deformation occurs throughout a neurosurgery intervention and strongly alters the accuracy of the
neuronavigation systems used to date in clinical routine which rely solely on preoperative patient imaging to locate
the surgical target, such as a tumour or a functional area. After a general description of the framework of our
intraoperative image-guided system, we propose a biomechanical model of the brain which can take into account
interactively such deformations as well as surgical procedures that modify the brain structure, like tumour or tissue
resection.

Keywords: Neurosurgery, brain-shift, soft tissue modelling, IRM, echography

1 INTRODUCTION

Accurate localization of the target is essential to re-
duce the morbidity during a brain tumor removal in-
Image-guided neurosurgery is facing an
tervention.
important issue for large skull openings, with intraop-
erative changes that remain largely unsolved. In that
case, deformations of the brain tissues occur in the
course of surgery because of physical and physiologi-
cal phenomena. As a consequence of this brain-shift,
the preoperatively acquired images no longer corre-
spond to reality; the preoperative based neuronaviga-
tion is therefore strongly compromised by intraoper-
ative brain deformations. Some studies have tried to
measure this intra-operative brain-shift. Hastreiter et
al. [17] observed a great variability of the brain-shift
ranging up to 24 mm for cortical displacement and ex-
ceeding 3 mm for the deep tumor margin; the authors
claim for a non-correlation of the brain surface and
the deeper structures. Nabavi et al. [3] state that the
continuous dynamic brain-shift process evolves dif-
ferently in distinct brain regions, with a surface shift
that occurs throughout surgery (and that the authors
attribute to gravity) and with a subsurface shift that
mainly occurs during resection (that the authors at-
tribute to the collapse of the resection cavity and to the
intraparenchymal changes). In order to face this prob-
lem, authors have proposed to add to actual image-
guided neurosurgical systems a module to compen-
sate brain deformations by updating the preoperative

images and planning according to intraoperative brain
shape changes. The ﬁrst algorithms developed pro-
posed to deform the preoperatively acquired images
using image-based models. Different non-rigid regis-
tration methods were therefore provided to match in-
traoperative images (mainly MRI exams) with preop-
erative ones [13], [16], [21]. More recently, biome-
chanical models of the brain tissues were proposed
the models are
to constrain the image registration:
used to infer a volumetric deformation ﬁeld from cor-
respondences between contours [7], [2] and/or sur-
faces [10] in the images to register. Arguing against
the exorbitant cost of the intraoperative MRI imag-
ing devices, some authors have proposed to couple
the biomechanical model of the brain with low-cost
readily available intraoperative data [5] such as laser-
range scanner systems [1], [6] or intraoperative ultra-
sound [9]. This proposal seems appealing from a very
practical point of view, compared with the high cost
intraoperative MRI device. However, it gives to the
biomechanical model a crucial and very central posi-
tion. This means that a strong modelling effort has to
be carried out during the design of the brain biome-
chanical model as well as its validation through clini-
cal data.

In section 2 we present the framework we have cho-
sen to tackle the brain-shift problem. In section 3 we
present an overview of the implementation of the bio-
mechanical model. Then an example of 2D brain-shift
simulation is presented in section 4, followed by the

conclusion.

2 GENERAL FRAMEWORK

During a tumor resection the goal of the intervention is
to minimize the injury while maximizing resection. In
case of a large brain-shift, without a computerized as-
sistance and relying only on the vision of the operating
ﬁeld provided by preoperative imaging, it is a difﬁcult
task for the surgeon to preserve eloquent cortex areas
and white matter tracts which are subject to shift at
various stages of the procedure as shown by Coenen
et al. in [4]. In order to be applicable to a large spec-
trum of interventions, a neuronavigation system must
comprise a precise brain-shift compensation module.
The neuronavigation system we are currently work-
(1) A ﬁnite-
ing on relies on the following ideas.
element biomechanical model of the brain driven by
the position of anatomical landmarks is used to com-
pute the global tissue deformation. (2) The deforma-
tion is applied to operating room(OR)-registered pre-
operative patient data in order to predict the location
of the target. (3) The deformation occurs throughout
the intervention and needs to be monitored as often as
possible. (4) The deformation is due to multiple fac-
tors, some of which are hard to monitor like tissue in-
ﬂamation and CSF leakage. Others can be integrated
within the system like gravity effect, tissue resection,
cyst drainage and deep structures displacements. We
assume that the information provided by the latter is
sufﬁcient to account precisely for the global deforma-
tion

The goals of our system are to predict the initial
brain-shift that occurs right after the dura opening; to
follow the brain deformation throughout the surgery
using per-operative data; to account for tissue mod-
iﬁcation such as tumor resection with low computa-
tional delays; and to rely mainly on low-cost imaging
techniques such as localised 2.5D echography for deep
structures displacements while a solution such as the
one presented by Miga et al. in [6] could track cortical
displacements.

2.1 Biomechancial model

Miller has shown in his works [11] that brain tissue
has a visco-elastic, non-linear behaviour which yields
equations difﬁcult to integrate in real-time. A simpler
model is thus necessary, especially if tissue resection
needs to be modeled. Picinbono et al. proposed in [18]
a large-deformation mass-tensor approach but we are
not sure that large displacements are really observed
in the case of brain-shift. To our knowledge, Clatz et
al. mention 7% [14][15] deformations in the case of
Parkinson interventions with small apertures and we

didn’t ﬁnd any results showing higher order deforma-
tion (10 or 15%). We thus chose, as a ﬁrst approx-
imation, a mechanical linear and small deformations
model which will require validation against clinical
data. This hypothesis allows us to model in an inter-
active way, surgical interactions such as cyst drainage
and tissue resection, as will be described below.

We assume slow deformations of the parenchyma
and thus consider the static equilibrium equation
div(σ) + Fext = 0 and use the linear expression of
strain and stress tensor, respectively ǫ = 1
2 (∇U +
∇U t) and σ = Cǫ, where U is the displacement ﬁeld
and C the material matrix.

2.2 Behaviour hypothesis

We assume that initial brain bulging observed at the
time of dura opening is due to intracranial pressure
increase generated by the tumor growth. The tumor
compresses the brain structures such as ventricules,
falx cerebri and the contralateral hemisphere which
is clearly observable on the MRI - see Figure 3-A:
the dashed line is the interface between the two hemi-
spheres; the dotted line is the initial position of this in-
terface. When the dura is opened, the available space
creates a new equilibrium position within the brain,
generating the initial brain shift.

We predict the amplitude of this bulging my mod-
eling the contralateral hemisphere, computing the
stress generated by the compression and applying
this constraints on the hemisphere with tumor. The
limit conditions in the contralateral model are (1)
inter-hemispheric limit displacement applied to bor-
der nodes, and (2) non-friction sliding of the border
nodes in contact with the skull. The limit conditions
in the tumor model are (1) initial constraints at the
inter-hemispheric limit computed from contralateral
model deformation, (2) non-friction sliding of the bor-
der nodes in contact with the skulll, except near the
craniotomy, where the nodes can move freely.

The mecanical parameters mentionned in paragraph
2.1 can only be valid if the brain tissue compression in-
duced by tumor growth is fast and does not let the tis-
sue loose its elasticity by long exposition to permanent
strain. Fast evolving tumors such as gliomas might be
described by this model.

We assume that brain sagging is mainly due to grav-
ity associated to CSF leakage. The other factors in-
volved in brain sagging are tissue resection and tu-
moral cyst drainage. The modeling of these intraop-
erative changes will be described in section 3.

2.3 Preoperative process

The tumor is ﬁrst identiﬁed on the preoperative im-
ages by the radiologist on the MRI scan and the two

brain hemispheres are segmented separately. The sys-
tem uses this processed images to construct a 3D mesh
of the brain that will be used for ﬁnite elements mod-
eling. The mesh construction algorithm is currently
being developped and relies on the surface reconstruc-
tion algorithm presented by the authors in [8].

The surgeon then deﬁnes the approach route, local-
ising as well the craniotomy site. In the 2 meshes the
nodes are labelled as ‘pilot nodes’ i.e. nodes associ-
ated with reference structures and which displacement
can be updated using intraoperative imaging; ‘sliding
nodes’ i.e. nodes in contact with the skull which dis-
placement is constrained along the tangent line to the
skull in 2D, and tangent plane in 3D; ‘free nodes’ i.e.
nodes without any displacement constraint. The con-
tralateral deformation can then be computed and the
initial brain bulging estimated as described in 2.2.

2.4 Intraoperative process

First the data are rigidly registered to the OR patient
conﬁguration. Then, at regular time intervals echo-
graphic sparse data is segmented in order to update the
biomechanical brain model based on reference struc-
ture displacements. Once the tumor-brain interface has
been prepared, the tissue excision begins. During this
phase, the surgical tools are localised in space and tis-
sue volume resection is evaluated in order to apply the
topological changes induced in the brain mesh by the
resection or cyst drainage.

3 IMPLEMENTATION

The linear mechanics described in 2.1 lead to a linear
system KU = F where K is the stiffness matrix, U
the displacements at the nodes and F the forces ap-
plied on nodes. The general solution of this system
can be decomposed as a linear combination of elemen-
tal solutions computed for each ‘pilot node’ elemetal
displacement. During the intervention, once the ‘pilot
nodes’ positions are retrieved, the global tissue defor-
mation can be computed in real-time, as long as the
initial stiffness matrix K is not modiﬁed.

Cyst drainage and tissue resection are repercuted on
the stiffness matrix matrix by eliminating from K the
contributions of the elements modeling the cyst or the
tumor. Once the cyst drainage is complete, all the
cyst elements are removed from K and every time
a bit of tumoral tissue is resected, the element con-
taining the surgical tool is identiﬁed and its contri-
butions removed. Each such topological modiﬁcation
of the mesh requires a new general solution computa-
tion. The computational time of this operation is criti-
cal during the intervention.

The KU = F system is solved using the LLt de-
composition of the sparse symmetric positive-deﬁnite
matrix K. This decomposition is optimised using the
data structure dedicated to sparse matrices depicted in
Figure 1 as well as proper matrix conditioning. Fig-
ure 2 shows the impact of nodes ordering on the ‘ﬁll-
in’ within the inferior triangular matrix L. A sim-
ple node ordering groups all non-null elements in K
near the diagonal. As a result, the L matrix is much
emptier and the system solution much faster. Find-
ing the node ordering that minimises the ‘ﬁll-in’ of L
is a NP-complete problem. Algorithms such as Mini-
mum Degree Ordering or its simpler version proposed
in [20] strongly reduce the num-
by Amestoy et al.
ber of non-null elements in L. Finally, the modiﬁca-
tion of the J0 column in the K matrix only affects the
columns J ≥ J0 in the L matrix thus it is a natural
optimisation to put all the nodes forming part of ele-
ments likely to be resected at the ‘bottom-right’ of the
matrix by assigning them the highest indices.

Figure 1: Data structure for sparse matrix. Each row
and column is deﬁned as a linked list of pointers at the
matrix non-nul cells.

4 RESULTS

The upper hemisphere 2D mesh represented in Figure
3-D has 1000 elements (mostly quadrilaterals). The
deformation updates based on ‘pilot nodes’ positions
take about 3 miliseconds, while the resection updates
require about 150 miliseconds. Implementation in 3D
is still being carried out and in order to predict the
performances we used a 2D mesh with a computa-
tional size similar to that of a 3D hexahedral elements
with 5000 elements, among which 500 are dedicated
to model the tumor. The computation delays were
of about 400 miliseconds for deformation update and
about 2300 miliseconds for resection update.

Figure 2: Sparse symmetric matrix (A) and its LLt
triangular factor (B). The same initial sparse matrix
after nodes reordering (C) and its triangular factor with
reduced ﬁll-in (D).

Figure 3 depicts a 2D simulation of the initial brain-
shift at dura opening and subsequent brain sagging af-
ter cyst and tissue resection. In this case, intracranial
pressure excess creates an initial bulging, although this
behaviour is not systematically observed.

Figure 3-A: This preoperative T2 MRI scan shows
the conﬂict between the two hemispheres. The dashed
line shows the actual hemispheres interface while the
dotted line indicates the initial interface position i.e.
the middle of the skull.

Figure 3-B: Mesh of the contralateral hemisphere.
The red nodes are ‘pilot’ and the border blue nodes
are ‘sliding’.

Figure 3-C: Compression of the contralateral hemi-
sphere. The color code displays the stress within the
elements.

Figure 3-D: Mesh of the hemisphere with tumor.
Figure 3-E: Right after the dura opening, the stress
computed in step C is applied to the upper mesh, which
causes the brain to bulge.

Figure 3-F: Gravity, cyst drainage and tissue resec-

tion cause the brain to sag.

5 CONCLUSION

We proposed a general framework for a image-guided
model-updated neuronavigator for tumor resection.
This system is based upon ideas generally accepted by
the community. Computation optimisations as well as
use of appropriate data structures make it possible to
model global parenchyma deformation as well as cyst
drainage or tissue resection within time delays com-
patible with the intervention timing.

From the biomechanical point of view, although

Figure 3: 2D simulation of brain bulging and sagging.

some authors like Miller et al. in [12] propose complex
hyperelastic models, we think that given the small de-
formation measured within the brain tissues the linear
mechanical model may be acceptable. The small dis-
placements hypothesis might be unadapted but a large
displacement approximation based upon a series of el-
emental linear displacement can be the solution as sug-
gested by Platenik et al. in [19].

Finally the 3D ﬁnite elements code implementing
those features needs to be tested on phantom or patient
data. Many clinical issues remain unresolved, such as
the deﬁnition of the reference structures used to ‘pilot’
the model as well as their intraoperative identiﬁcation
within the echographic planes.

References

[1] Audette M A, Siddiqi K, Ferrie F P, , and Pe-
ters T M. An integrated range-sensing, segmen-
tation and registration framework for the charac-
terization of intra-surgical brain deformations in
image-guided surgery. Computer Vision and Im-
age Understanding, 89:226–251, 2003.

[2] Hagemann A, Rohr K, Stiel H S, Spetzger U, and
Gilsbach J M. Biomechanical modeling of the
human head for physically based non-rigid im-
age registration. IEEE Transactions on Medical
Imaging, 18(10):875–884, 1999.

[3] Nabavi A, Black P, Gering D, Westin C, Mehta
V, Pergolizzi R, Ferrant M, Warﬁeld S, Hata N,
Schwartz R, Wells III W, Kikinis R, and Jolesz F.
Serial intraoperative magnetic resonance imag-
ing of brain shift. Neurosurgery, 48(4):787–797,
2001.

[4] Volker A Coenen, Timo Krings, Jurgen Wei-
demann, Franz-Joseph Hans, Peter Reinacher,
Joachim M Gilsbach, and Veit Rohde. Sequen-
tial visualization of brain and ﬁber tract defor-
mation during intracranial surgery with three-
dimensional ultrasound: An approach to evaluate
the effect of brain shift. Operative Neurosurgery,
56(1):133–139, 2005.

[5] Miga M I, Sinha T K, and Cash D M. Tech-
niques to correct for soft tissue deformations dur-
ing image-guided brain surgery. Payan Y., edi-
tor. Biomechanics Applied to Computer Assisted
Surgery. Research Signpost Publisher, ISBN 81-
308-0031-4, pages 153–176, 2005.

[6] Miga M I, Sinha T K, Cash D M, Galloway R
L, and Weil R J. Cortical surface registration
for image-guided neurosurgery using laser-range
scanning. IEEE Transactions on Medical Imag-
ing, 22(8):973–985, 2003.

[7] Kyriacou S K, Davatzikos C, Zinreich S J, and
Bryan R N. Nonlinear elastic registration of brain
images with tumor pathology using a biome-
chanical model. IEEE Transactions on Medical
Imaging, 18(7):580–592, 1999.

[8] Bucki M. and Payan Y. Automatic ﬁnite el-
ements mesh generation from planar contours
of the brain: an image driven, ’blobby’ ap-
proach. Payan Y., editor. Biomechanics Applied
to Computer Assisted Surgery. Research Signpost
Publisher, ISBN 81-308-0031-4, pages 209–224,
2005.

[9] Comeau R M, Sadikot A F, Fenster A, and Pe-
ters T M. Intraoperative ultrasound for guidance
and tissue shift correction in image-guided neu-
rosurgery. Medical Physics, 27:787–800, 2000.

[10] Ferrant M, Nabavi A, Macq B, Black P M, Jolesz
F, Kikinis R, and Warﬁeld S. Serial registration
of intraoperative mr images of the brain. Medical
Image Analysis, 6:337–359, 2002.

[11] K Miller. Biomechanics of brain for computer
integrated surgery. Warsaw University of Tech-
nology Publishing House, 2002.

[12] K Miller, K Chinzei, G Orssengo, and P Bednarz.
Mechanical properties of brain tissue in-vivo: ex-
periment and computer simulation. Journal of
Biomechanics, 33:1369–1376, 2000.

[13] Hata N, Nabavi A, Wells III W, Warﬁeld S,
Kikinis R, Black P M, and Jolesz F. Three-
dimensional optical ﬂow method for measure-
ment of volumetric brain deformation from in-
traoperative mr images. Journal of Computer As-
sisted Tomography, 24:531–538, 2000.

[14] Clatz O, Delingette H, Talos I F, Golby A J, Kiki-
nis R, Jolesz F A, Ayache N, and Warﬁeld S
K. Robust non-rigid registration to capture brain
shift from intra-operative mri. Accepted for pub-
lication in IEEE TMI, 2005.

[15] Clatz O, Bondiau P, Delingette H, Sermesant M,
Warﬁeld S, Malandain G, and Ayache N. Brain
tumor growth simulation.
INRIA, Research re-
port 5187, 2004.

[16] Hastreiter P, Reszk-Salama C, Nimsky C, Lurig
C, Greiner G, and Ertl T. Registration techniques
for the analysis of the brain shift in neurosurgery.
Computers and Graphics, pages 385–389, 2000.

[17] Hastreiter P, Rezk-Salama C, Soza G, Bauer M,
Greiner G, Fahlbusch R, Ganslandt O, and Nim-
sky C. Strategies for brain shift evaluation. Med-
ical Image Analysis, 8:447–464, 2004.

[18] G Picinbono, H Delingette, and N Ayache. Mo-
dle dformable lastique non linaire pour la simu-
lation de chirurgie en temps rel. C. R. Biologies,
325:335344, 2002.

[19] L A Platenik, M I Miga, D W Roberts, K E Lunn,
F E Kennedy, A Hartov, and K D Paulsen. In vivo
quantiﬁcation of retraction deformation mod-
eling for updated image-guidance during neu-
rosurgery.
IEEE Transactions on Biomedical
Eengineering, 49(8):823–835, 2002.

[20] Amestoy P R, Davis T A, and Duff I S. An ap-
proximate minimum degree ordering algorithm.
SIAM Journal on Matrix Analysis and Applica-
tions, 17:886–905, 1996.

[21] Shattuck D W and Leahy R M. Brainsuite:
An automated cortical surface identiﬁcation tool.
Medical Image Analysis, 6:129–142, 2002.

