7
0
0
2
 
n
a
J
 
8
 
 
]
h
p
-
d
e
m

.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
4
8
0
1
0
7
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

A scalable system for microcalciﬁcation cluster automated detection in a
distributed mammographic database

Pasquale Delogu1,2, Maria Evelina Fantacci1,2, Alessandro Preite Martinez3, Alessandra Retico2,
Arnaldo Stefanini1,2 and Alessandro Tata2

2

1

3

Dipartimento di Fisica dell’Universit`a di Pisa, Italy

Istituto Nazionale di Fisica Nucleare, Sezione di Pisa, Italy

Centro Studi e Ricerche Enrico Fermi, Roma, Italy

Abstract

A computer-aided detection (CADe) system for microcalciﬁcation cluster identiﬁcation in mammograms has been
developed in the framework of the EU-founded MammoGrid project. The CADe software is mainly based on wavelet
transforms and artiﬁcial neural networks. It is able to identify microcalciﬁcations in diﬀerent datasets of mammograms
(i.e. acquired with diﬀerent machines and settings, digitized with diﬀerent pitch and bit depth or direct digital ones).
The CADe can be remotely run from GRID-connected acquisition and annotation stations, supporting clinicians
from geographically distant locations in the interpretation of mammographic data. We report and discuss the system
performances on diﬀerent datasets of mammograms and the status of the GRID-enabled CADe analysis.

Keywords: Computer-aided detection, mammography, wavelets, neural networks, GRID applications.

Introduction

1 Description of the CADe system

The EU-founded MammoGrid project [1] is currently col-
lecting an European-distributed database of mammograms
with the aim of applying the emerging GRID technolo-
gies [2] to support the early detection of breast cancer. A
GRID-based infrastructure would allow the resource shar-
ing and the co-working between radiologists throughout the
European Union. In this framework, epidemiological stud-
ies, tele-education of young health-care professionals, ad-
vanced image analysis and tele-diagnostic support (with
and without computer-aided detection) would be enabled.

In the image processing ﬁeld, we have developed and im-
plemented in a GRID-compliant acquisition and annotation
station a computer-aided detection (CADe) system able to
identify microcalciﬁcations in diﬀerent datasets of mammo-
grams (i.e. acquired with diﬀerent machines and settings,
digitized with diﬀerent pitch and bit depth or direct digital
ones).

This paper is structured as follows: the detection scheme
is illustrated in sec. 1, sec. 2 describes the database the
MammoGrid Collaboration has collected, whereas the tests
carried out on diﬀerent datasets of mammograms and the
preliminary results obtained on a set of MammoGrid images
are discussed in sec. 3.

The CADe procedure we realized is mainly based on wavelet
transforms and artiﬁcial neural networks. Our CADe sys-
tem indicates one or more suspicious areas of a mammo-
gram where microcalciﬁcation clusters are possibly located,
according to the following schema [3]:

• INPUT: digital or digitized mammogram;

• Pre-processing: a) identiﬁcation of the breast skin line
and segmentation of the breast region with respect to
the background; b) application of the wavelet-based
ﬁlter in order to enhance the microcalciﬁcations;

• Feature extraction: a) decomposition of the breast re-
gion in several N ×N pixel-wide partially-overlapping
sub-images to be processed each at a time; b) auto-
matic extraction of the features characterizing each
sub-image;

• Classiﬁcation: assigning each processed sub-images ei-
ther to the class of microcalciﬁcation clusters or to that
of normal tissue;

• OUTPUT: merging the contiguous or partially overlap-
ping sub-images and visualization of the ﬁnal output
by drawing the contours of the suspicious areas on the
original image.

1

1.1 Pre-processing of the mammograms

The pre-processing procedure aims to enhance the signals
revealing the presence of microcalciﬁcations, while sup-
pressing the complex and noisy non-pathological breast
tissue. A mammogram is usually dominated by the low-
frequency information, whereas the microcalciﬁcations ap-
pear as high-frequency contributions. Microcalciﬁcations
show some evident features at some speciﬁc scales, while
they are almost negligible at other scales. The use of the
wavelet transform [4–6] allows for a separation of the more
important high-resolution components of the mammogram
from the less important low-resolution ones.

Once the breast skin line is identiﬁed, the breast region is
processed by the wavelet-based ﬁlter, according to the fol-
lowing main steps: identiﬁcation of the family of wavelets
and the level up to which the decomposition has to be per-
formed in order to highlight the interesting details; ma-
nipulation of the wavelet coeﬃcients (i.e.
suppression of
the coeﬃcients encoding the low-frequency contributions
and enhancement of those encoding the contributions of
interesting details); inverse wavelet transform. By properly
thresholding the wavelet coeﬃcients at each level of the de-
composition, an enhancement of the microcalciﬁcation with
respect to surrounding normal tissue can be achieved in
the synthesized image. In order to achieve this result, the
wavelet basis, the level up to which the decomposition have
to be performed and the thresholding rules to be applied to
the wavelet coeﬃcients have to be accurately set. All these
choices and parameters are application dependent. The size
of the pixel pitch and the dynamical range of the gray level
intensities characterizing the mammograms are the most
important parameters to be taken into account.

1.2 Feature extraction

In order to extract from a mammogram the features to be
submitted to the classiﬁer, small regions of a mammogram
are analyzed each at a time. The choice of fragmenting the
mammogram in small sub-images is ﬁnalized both to reduce
the amount of data to be analyzed at the same time and to
facilitate the localization of the lesions possibly present on
a mammogram. The size of the sub-images has been cho-
sen according to the basic rule of considering the smallest
squared area matching the typical size of a small microcalci-
ﬁcation cluster. Being the size of a single microcalciﬁcation
rarely greater than 1 mm, and the mean distance between
two microcalciﬁcations belonging to the same cluster gen-
erally smaller than 5 mm, we assume a square with a 5
mm side to be large enough to accommodate a small clus-
ter. This sub-image size is appropriate to discriminate an
isolated microcalciﬁcation (which is not considered to be a
pathological sign) from a group of microcalciﬁcations close
together. The length of the square side in pixel units is ob-
viously determined by the pixel pitch of the digitizer or of
the direct digital device. Let us assume that our choice for
the length of the square side corresponds to N pixels. In
order to avoid the accidental missing of a microcalciﬁcation

cluster happening to be at the interface between two con-
tiguous sub-images, we use the technique of the partially
overlapping sub-images, i.e. we let the mask for selecting
the sub-image to be analyzed move through the mammo-
gram by half of the side length (N/2 pixels) at each horizon-
tal and vertical step. In this way each region of a mammo-
gram is analyzed more than once with respect to diﬀerent
neighboring regions.

Each N ×N pixel-wide sub-image extracted from the ﬁl-
tered mammogram is processed by an auto-associative neu-
ral network, used to perform an automatic extraction of
the relevant features of the sub-image. The implemen-
tation of an auto-associative neural network is a neural-
based method to perform an unsupervised feature extrac-
tion [7–10]. This step has been introduced in the CADe
scheme to reduce the dimensionality of the amount of data
(the gray level intensity values of the N ×N pixels of each
sub-image) to be classiﬁed by the system. The architecture
of the network we use is a bottle-neck one, consisting of
three layers of N 2 input, n hidden (where n ≪ N 2) and N 2
output neurons respectively. This neural network is trained
to reproduce in output the input values. The overall acti-
vation of the n nodes of the bottle-neck layer summarize
the relevant features of the examined sub-image. The more
the N ×N pixel-wide sub-image obtained as output is close
to the original sub-image provided as input, the more the
activation potentials of the n hidden neurons are supposed
to accommodate the information contained in the original
sub-image.

It is worth noticing that the implementation of an auto-
associative neural network at this stage of the CADe scheme
allows for a strong compression of the parameters represent-
ing each sub-image (N 2 → n) to be passed to the following
step of the analysis.

1.3 Classiﬁcation

We use the n features extracted by the auto-associative neu-
ral network to assign each sub-image to either the class
of sub-images containing microcalciﬁcation clusters or the
class of those consisting only of normal breast tissue. A
standard three-layer feed-forward neural network has been
chosen to perform the classiﬁcation of the n features ex-
tracted from each sub-image. The general architecture
characterizing this net consists in n inputs, h hidden and
two output neurons, and the supervised training phase is
based on the back-propagation algorithm.

The performances of the training algorithm were eval-
uated according to the 5×2 cross validation method [11].
It is the recommended test to be performed on algorithms
that can be executed 10 times because it can provide a reli-
able estimate of the variation of the algorithm performances
due to the choice of the training set. This method consists
in performing 5 replications of the 2-fold cross validation
method [12]. At each replication, the available data are
randomly partitioned into 2 sets (Ai and Bi for i = 1, . . . 5)
with an almost equal number of entries. The learning al-
gorithm is trained on each set and tested on the other one.

2

The system performances are given in terms of the sensi-
tivity and speciﬁcity values, where the sensitivity is deﬁned
as the true positive fraction (fraction of malignant masses
correctly classiﬁed by the system), whereas the speciﬁcity
as the true negative fraction (fraction of benign masses
correctly classiﬁed by the system).
In order to show the
trade oﬀ between the sensitivity and the speciﬁcity, a Re-
ceiver Operating Characteristic (ROC) analysis has been
performed [13, 14]. The ROC curve is obtained by plotting
the true positive fraction versus the false positive fraction
of the cases (1 - speciﬁcity), computed while the decision
threshold of the classiﬁer is varied. Each decision threshold
results in a corresponding operating point on the curve.

Figure 1: Examples of the wavelet-based ﬁlter performances
on tissues with diﬀerent densities (top/bottom:
origi-
nal/ﬁltered sub-images containing microcalciﬁcation clus-
ters).

2 The MammoGrid distributed

mammograms digitized with a pixel pitch of 85 µm and an
eﬀective dynamical range of 12 bit per pixel.

database

One of the main goals of the EU-founded MammoGrid
project is the realization of a GRID-enabled European
database of mammogram, with the aim of supporting the
collaboration among clinicians from diﬀerent locations in
the analysis of mammographic data. Mammograms in the
DICOM [15] format are collected through the MammoGrid
acquisition and annotation workstations installed in the
participating hospitals. Standardized images are stored into
the GRID-connected database. The image standardization
is realized by the Standard-Mammogram-Form (SMF) algo-
rithm [16] developed by the Mirada Solutions CompanyTM,
a partner of the MammoGrid project. The SMF provides
a normalized representation of the mammogram, i.e. inde-
pendent of the data source and of the acquisition technical
parameters (e.g. mAs, kVp and breast thickness).

The dataset of fully-annotated mammogram containing
microcalciﬁcation clusters available at present to CADe de-
velopers is constituted by 123 mammograms belonging to
57 patients: 46 of them have been collected and digitized
at the University Hospital of Udine (IT), whereas the re-
maining 11 were acquired by the full-ﬁeld digital mammog-
raphy system GE Senographe 2000D at the Torino Hospital
(IT); all have been stored in the MammoGrid database by
means of the MammoGrid workstation prototype installed
in Udine.

3 Tests and results

As the amount of mammograms collected at present in the
MammoGrid database is too small for properly training
the neural networks implemented in the characterization
and classiﬁcation procedures of our CADe, we used a larger
dataset of mammograms for developing the system. Once
the CADe has been trained and tested, we adapted it to
the MammoGrid images and we evaluated its performances
on the MammoGrid database. The dataset used for train-
ing and testing the CADe was extracted from the fully-
annotated MAGIC-5 database [17]. We used 375 mammo-
grams containing microcalciﬁcation clusters and 610 normal

3.1 Training and testing the CADe on the

MAGIC-5 database

To perform the multi-resolution analysis we considered the
Daubechies family of wavelet [4],
in particular the db5
mother wavelet. The decomposition is performed up to
the forth level. We found out that the resolution level
1 mainly shows the high-frequency noise included in the
mammogram, whereas the levels 2, 3 and 4 contain the
high-frequency components related to the presence of mi-
crocalciﬁcations. Levels greater than 4 exhibit a strong cor-
relation with larger structures possibly present in the nor-
mal breast tissue. In order to enhance microcalciﬁcations,
the approximation coeﬃcients at level 4 and the detail co-
eﬃcients at the ﬁrst level were neglected. By contrast, the
statistical analysis of the distributions of the remaining de-
tail coeﬃcients lead us to keep into account for the synthesis
procedure only those coeﬃcients whose values exceed 2σ,
where σ is the standard deviation of the coeﬃcient distri-
bution at that level. Some examples of the performance of
the ﬁlter on mammographic images containing microcalciﬁ-
cation clusters embedded in tissues with diﬀerent densities
are shown in ﬁg. 1.

The training and testing of the auto-associative neural
network has been performed on a dataset of 149 mammo-
grams containing microcalciﬁcation clusters and 299 normal
mammograms. The size N of the sub-images to be analyzed
by this neural network has been chosen as N = 60, thus
corresponding to a physical region of 5.1×5.1 mm2. The
number n of units in the hidden layer has been ﬁxed ac-
cording to the requirement of having the minimum number
of neurons allowing for a good generalization capability of
the system. Assigning too much neurons to the hidden layer
would facilitate the convergence of the learning phase, but
it could reduce the generalization capability of the network.
Moreover, a too populated hidden layer could set too strin-
gent limits on the minimum number of patterns needed for
training the neural classiﬁer implemented in the following
step of the analysis. By contrast, a too small hidden layer
would lead to the saturation of some of the hidden units and
thus negatively aﬀect the overall performance of the system.

3

Table 1: Evaluation of the performances of the standard
back-propagation learning algorithm for the neural classiﬁer
according to the 5×2 cross validation method.

Train Set Test Set

A1
B1
A2
B2
A3
B3
A4
B4
A5
B5

Sensitivity (%)
94.4
92.8
92.3
93.4
92.0
94.5
92.9
94.2
94.6
93.0

Speciﬁcity (%)
91.8
91.1
90.9
92.0
90.5
91.6
93.9
93.0
91.5
91.7

B1
A1
B2
A2
B3
A3
B4
A4
B5
A5

Figure 3: FROC curve obtained on a test set of 140 mam-
mograms (70 containing 89 microcalciﬁcations clusters and
70 normal views) extracted from the MAGIC-5 database.

universal scoring method currently in use for evaluating the
performances of a CAD system for microcalciﬁcation clus-
ter detection, we brieﬂy describe the detection criteria we
adopted:

• a true cluster is considered detected if the region indi-
cated by the system includes two or more microcalciﬁ-
cations located within the associated truth circle;

• all ﬁndings outside the truth circle are considered as

false positive (FP) detections.

The CADe performances were globally evaluated on a test
set of 140 images of the MAGIC-5 database (70 with micro-
calciﬁcation clusters and 70 normal images) in terms of the
free-response operating characteristic (FROC) analysis [20]
(see ﬁg. 3). The FROC curve is obtained by plotting the
sensitivity of the system versus the number of FP detec-
tion per image (FP/im), while the decision threshold of the
classiﬁer is varied. In particular, as shown in the ﬁgure, a
sensitivity value of 88% is obtained at a rate of 2.15 FP/im.

Figure 2: Mean squared errors on the train and test sets in
the learning phase of the auto-associative neural network:
the minimum error on the test set is reached between 80
and 90 epochs.

A good compromise between these two opposite trends has
been reached by assigning 80 units to the hidden layer. The
network architecture is thus ﬁxed to be: 3600 input, 80 hid-
den and 3600 output neurons. The algorithm used in the
training procedure is the standard back-propagation with
momentum and the activation function is a sigmoid. We
used a learning rate of 0.4 and a momentum of 0.2. The
behavior of the mean squared error computed during the
learning procedure at each epoch on the train set and every
ten epochs on the test set is shown in ﬁg. 2. The training
phase has been stopped once the error on the test set has
reached the minimum value (early stop). As shown in ﬁg. 2
it happens between epochs 80 and 90. The training phase
was thus forced to ﬁnish in 85 epochs.

The dataset used for the supervised training of the feed-
forward neural classiﬁer is constituted by 156 mammograms
with microcalciﬁcation clusters and 241 normal mammo-
grams. The standard back-propagation algorithm was im-
plemented and the best performance were achieved with 10
neurons in the hidden layer. The performances our learning
algorithm achieved according to the 5×2 cross-validation
method are reported in tab. 1 in terms of the sensitivity
and speciﬁcity values. As can be noticed, the performances
the neural classiﬁer achieves are robust, i.e. almost inde-
pendent of the partitioning of the available data into the
train and test sets. The average performances achieved in
the testing phase are 93.4% for the sensitivity and 91.8%
for the speciﬁcity.

Once each sub-image of a mammogram has been assigned
a degree of suspiciousness, the contiguous or partially-
overlapping suspicious sub-images have to be merged in
order to evaluate the system performances on the entire
mammographic images. A cluster detection criterion has
to be a priori deﬁned. The eﬀect the choice of the detec-
tion criteria in addition to the size of the annotated region
has on the CAD performance evaluation have been system-
atically examined in the literature [18, 19]. As there is no

4

The performances the rescaled CADe achieves on the im-
ages of the MammoGrid database are the following: a sen-
sitivity of 82.2% is obtained at a rate of 4.15 FP/im. If the
analysis is performed independently on the digitized and
on the direct digital images, the results are: a 82.1% sen-
sitivity at a rate of 4.8 FP/im in the ﬁrst case, whereas
a 83.3% sensitivity at a rate of 1.6 FP/im in the second
case. As can be noticed, the number of FP detection per
image in the case of digitized images is appreciably higher
with respect to the corresponding rate for the directly dig-
ital images. Despite the SMF algorithm performs a sort
of normalization of images acquired in diﬀerent conditions,
the digitized images are intrinsically noisier. A compari-
son with the FROC obtained on the MAGIC-5 database
reported in ﬁg. 3 points out that the overall CADe system
performances in the case of the MammoGrid database are
not as good as those obtained on the MAGIC-5 dataset.
One possible explanation for this decrease in sensitivity,
is that the MammoGrid database contains already a large
number of non-easily detectable cases. In this case an im-
provement of the CADe performances would be achieved
once the database is enlarged.

4 Conclusion

We developed a CADe system for microcalciﬁcation cluster
identiﬁcation suitable for diﬀerent sets of data (digitized
or direct digital, acquired with diﬀerent acquisition param-
eters, etc.). This CADe system has been developed and
tested on the MAGIC-5 database and then adapted to the
MammoGrid database of SMF mammograms by re-scaling
some of the wavelet-ﬁlter parameters. This choice is moti-
vated by two main reasons: the amount of fully-annotated
SMF images containing microcalciﬁcation clusters available
at present to the MammoGrid CADe developers is not large
enough to perform a new training of the neural networks im-
plemented in the characterization and classiﬁcation proce-
dures; moreover, the visual aspect of the ﬁltered sub-images
in the case both of MAGIC-5 images and SMF images is
actually very similar. This makes us conﬁdent that the gen-
eralization capability of the neural networks would account
for the diﬀerence in resolution of the two original datasets.
The scaling procedure we developed has two main advan-
tages: the wavelet ﬁlter is the only part of the analysis one
has to tune on the characteristics of a new dataset, whereas
the neural-based characterization and classiﬁcation proce-
dures do no need to be modiﬁed; this scalable system can
be tested even on very small databases not allowing for the
learning procedure of the neural networks to be properly
carried out.

The preliminary results obtained on MammoGrid
database are encouraging. Once the planned increase in the
population of the database is realized, a complete and more
robust test of the CADe performance on the pan-European
MammoGrid database would be carried out.

The CADe software is currently available on the GRID-
connected acquisition and annotation workstation proto-

Figure 4: Examples of the performances of the scaling pro-
cedure for the CADe ﬁlter.

3.2 Testing the CADe on the MammoGrid

database

The CADe system we developed and tested on the MAGIC-
5 database has been adapted to the MammoGrid SMF im-
ages by using the following procedure:

• the wavelet-based ﬁlter has been tuned on the SMF

mammograms;

• the remaining steps of the analysis, i.e.

the neural-
based characterization and classiﬁcation of the sub-
images have been directly imported from the MAGIC-5
CADe software.

According to the MammoGrid project work-ﬂow [1], the
CADe algorithm has to run on mammograms previously
processed by the SMF software [16]. The SMF mammo-
grams are characterized by a diﬀerent pixel pitch (100 µm
instead of 85 µm) and a diﬀerent eﬀective dynamical range
(16 bit per pixel instead of 12) with respect to the MAGIC-5
mammograms. A microcalciﬁcation digitized with a 85µm
pixel pitch scanner appears bigger (in pixel units) with re-
spect to the same object digitized with a 100µm pixel pitch.
Therefore, the ﬁlter to be applied to the MammoGrid mam-
mograms is required to be sensitive to smaller object. A
diﬀerent choice in the range of scales to be considered in
the analysis has proved to be comfortable for accommodat-
ing the diﬀerence in the pixel pitch. Once the matching
of the eﬀective dynamical ranges of the two databases has
been performed, the wavelet decomposition is performed up
to level 3 instead of 4, being the details at level 4 too big
to be correlated to microcalciﬁcations. Only the details at
levels 2 and 3 (exceeding 2σ of the experimental distribu-
tion) are kept into account for the synthesis. A test of this
scaling procedure has been performed on the mammograms
of 15 patients acquired both by the MAGIC-5 and by the
MammoGrid acquisition workstations. As shown in ﬁg. 4
the matching of the dynamical ranges and the scaling of
the wavelet-analysis parameters allows the CADe ﬁlter to
generate very similar processed images.

5

[12] M. Stone, Cross-validatory choice and assessment of
statistical predictions, J Royal Statistical Soc. B 36,
111–147, 1974.

[13] C.E. Metz, ROC methodology in radiologic imaging,

Invest. Radiol. 21(9), 720–733, 1986.

[14] J.A. Hanley and B.J. McNeil, The meaning and use
of the area under a receiver operating characteristic
(ROC) curve, Radiology 143(1), 29–36, 1982.

[15] Digital Imaging and Communications in Medicine (DI-

COM). See http://medical.nema.org/

[16] Standard

Mammogram

(SMF),
http://www.mirada-solutions.com/smf.htm.

Mirada

Form
SolutionsTM,

[17] R. Bellotti et al., The MAGIC-5 Project: Medical Ap-
plications on a Grid Infrastructure Connection, Proc
IEEE NSS Conf. Rec. 3, 1902–1906, 2004.

[18] G. te Brake and N. Karssemeijer, Detection Criteria for
Evaluation of the Computer Aided Diagnosis Systems,
18th Annual International Conference of the IEEE En-
gineering in Medicine and Biology Society 1996.

[19] Kallergi M, Carney GM and Gaviria J, Evaluating the
performance of detection algorithms in digital mam-
mography, Med Phys 1999 26(2) pp 267–75.

[20] D. Chakraborty, Free-response methodology: Alterna-
tive analysis and a new observer-performance experi-
ment, Radiology 174(3), 873–881, 1990.

types installed in the Hospitals of the MammoGrid Con-
sortium. The CADe can be remotely executed on the dis-
tributed database and the clinical evaluation of the CADe
as second reader of screening mammograms has already
started.

Acknowledgments

This work has been partially supported by the EU-founded
MammoGrid project and by the Istituto Nazionale di Fisica
Nucleare, Sezione di Pisa, Italy.

References

[1] The Information Societies Technology project: Mam-
moGrid - A European federated mammogram database
implemented on a GRID infrastructure, EU Contract
IST-2001-37614.

[2] I. Foster and C. Kesselman, The Grid: Blueprint for
a New Computing Infrastructure, Morgan Kaufmann
publishers, 1998. ISBN 1558604758.

[3] P. Delogu, M.E. Fantacci, A. Preite Martinez,
A. Retico, A. Stefanini and A. Tata, A scalable
Computer-Aided Detection system for microcalciﬁ-
cation cluster identiﬁcation in a pan-European dis-
tributed database of mammograms, accepted for pub-
lication on Nucl. Instrum. Meth. A (estimated publi-
cation month April 2006).

[4] I. Daubechies, Ten Lectures on Wavelets, SIAM

Philadelphia 1992.

[5] Y. Meyer, Wavelets: Algorithms and Applications,

SIAM Philadelphia 1993.

[6] S.G. Mallat, A theory for multi-resolution signal de-
composition, IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Machine In-
tell. 11, 674–693, 1989.

[7] M.A. Kramer, Non linear principal components anal-
ysis using auto-associative neural networks, AIChE J
37, 233–243, 1991.

[8] M.A. Kramer, Auto-associative neural networks, Com-

put. Chem. Eng. 16, 313–328, 1992.

[9] J.A. Leonard and M.A. Kramer, Diagnosing dynamic
faults using modular neural nets, IEEE Expert 8, 44–
53, 1993.

[10] D.R. Kuespert and T.J. McAvoy, Knowledge extrac-
tion in chemical process control, Chem. Eng. Comm.
130, 251–264, 1994.

[11] T.G. Dietterich, Approximate Statistical Test For
Comparing Supervised Classiﬁcation Learning Algo-
rithms, Neural Computation 10(7), 1895–1923, 1998.

6

