7
0
0
2
 
n
a
J
 
2
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
d
e
m

.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
5
4
2
1
0
7
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

LUNG NODULE DETECTION IN LOW-DOSE
AND HIGH-RESOLUTION CT SCANS

P. Delogu1,2, M.E. Fantacci1,2, I. Gori3,
A. Preite Martinez1, A. Retico2 and A. Tata2
1Dipartimento di Fisica dell’Universit`a di Pisa,
Largo Pontecorvo 3, 56127 Pisa, Italy
2Istituto Nazionale di Fisica Nucleare, Sezione di Pisa,
Largo Pontecorvo 3, 56127 Pisa, Italy
3Bracco Imaging S.p.A.,
Via E. Folli 50, 20134 Milano, Italy

Abstract

We are developing a computer-aided detection (CAD) system for the
identiﬁcation of small pulmonary nodules in screening CT scans. The
main modules of our system, i.e. a dot-enhancement ﬁlter for nodule can-
didate selection and a neural classiﬁer for false positive ﬁnding reduction,
are described. The preliminary results obtained on the so-far collected
database of lung CT are discussed.

1 Introduction

Lung cancer most commonly manifests as non-calciﬁed pulmonary nodules.
Computer Tomography (CT) has been shown to be the best imaging modality
for the detection of small pulmonary nodules [1], particularly since the introduc-
tion of the helical technology. The amount of images that need to be interpreted
in CT examinations can be very high, especially when multi-detector helical CT
and thin collimation are used, thus generating up to about 300 images per scan.
In order to support radiologists in the identiﬁcation of early-stage pathological
objects, researchers have recently begun to explore computer-aided detection
(CAD) methods in this area.

The First Italian Randomized Controlled Trial that aims to study the poten-
tial impact of screening on a high-risk population using low-dose helical CT has
started last year. In this framework we are developing a CAD system for small
pulmonary nodule identiﬁcation. The system is based on a dot-enhancement ﬁl-
ter and a neural-based module for the reduction of the amount of false-positive

1

Figure 1: Some examples of small pulmonary nodules.

(FP) ﬁndings per scan.

2 Description of the CAD system

An important and diﬃcult task in the automated nodule detection is the selec-
tion of the nodule candidates. Nodules may be characterized by very low CT
values and/or low contrast, may have CT values similar to those of blood vessels
and airway walls or may be strongly connected to them (see ﬁg. 1).

In order to identify the nodule candidates we modeled nodules with spher-
ical objects and we applied a dot-enhancement ﬁlter to the 3D matrix of voxel
data. This ﬁlter attempts to determine the local geometrical characteristics of
each voxel, by computing the eigenvalues of the Hessian matrix and evaluating a
likelihood function that was purposely built to discriminate between local mor-
phology of linear, planar and spherical objects, modeled as having 3D Gaussian
sections [2]. A simple peak-detection algorithm (i.e. a local maxima detector)
is then applied to the ﬁlter output to detect the ﬁltered-signal peaks.

Since most FP ﬁndings are provided by crossings between blood vessels,
we attempted to reduce the amount of FP/scan by applying the procedure we
called voxel-based approach (VBA). According to this method, each voxel of a
region of interest (ROI) is characterized by the grey level intensity values of its
neighborhood. The CT values of the voxels in a 3D neighborhood of each voxel
of a ROI are rolled down into vectors of features to be analyzed by a neural
classiﬁcation system. The feed-forward neural network implemented to this
purpose assigns each voxel either to the class of voxels belonging to a nodule,

2

or to that of normal voxels. We can evaluate a free response receiver operating
characteristic (FROC) curve for our CAD system, by varying the percentage
of voxels to be classiﬁed as belonging to a nodule in order to assign each ROI
either to the class of ROIs containing a nodule or normal ROIs.

3 Results

We tested the CAD system on a dataset of low-dose (screening setting: 120÷140
kV, 20÷80 mA) and high-resolution (reconstructed slice thickness: 1.25 mm) CT
scans collected and annotated by experienced radiologists in the framework of
the screening trial being conducted in Tuscany (Italy). The database available
at present for our tests consists of 20 scans, 8 of which contain 12 internal
nodules. Each scan is a sequence of about 300 slices stored in DICOM (Digital
Imaging and COmmunications in Medicine) format.

Our preliminary results show that the 3D dot-enhancement ﬁlter is charac-
terized by a high sensitivity. In particular, if we keep the ﬁrst 67 entries of the
list of interesting ROIs provided by the ﬁlter output for each scan, we achieve a
100% sensitivity to internal nodule detection. In other words, a 100% sensitivity
is obtained at a maximum number of 67 FP/scan.

Since the amount of data available for training the neural networks in the
VBA method is quite small, we ﬁrst partitioned our dataset into a train and
a test set, then we evaluated the performances of the trained neural network
both on the test set and on the whole dataset (train set + test set). The best
results achieved are the following: 87.0% sensitivity and 85.3% speciﬁcity on the
test set; 88.0% sensitivity and 84.9% speciﬁcity on the whole dataset. Once the
VBA approach has been applied to each ROI, the rate of FP ﬁndings per scan
has been reduced from 67 to 14 for a sensitivity of 100% (12 nodules detected
out of 12). If the sensitivity value is decreased to 91.7% (11 nodules detected
out of 12), a rate of 8.9 FP/scan is obtained.

4 Conclusions

The dot-enhancement pre-processing algorithm has shown a good sensitivity in
the identiﬁcation of nodule candidates, and the VBA was shown to be an eﬀec-
tive approach to the problem of false positives reduction. The results obtained
so far seem promising, albeit they are preliminary and need to be validated
against a larger database. Finally, we are convinced that the methods used are
eﬀective, and that there is margin for improvement.

3

5 Acknowledgments

We acknowledge Dr. L. Battolla, Dr. F. Falaschi and Dr. C. Spinelli of the U.O.
Radiodiagnostica 2 of the Azienda Universitaria Pisana, and Prof. D. Caramella
and Dr. T. Tarantino of the Diagnostic and Interventional Radiology Division
of the Dipartimento di Oncologia, Trapianti e Nuove Tecnologie in Medicina of
the Pisa University.

References

[1] S. Diederich et al, Detection of pulmonary nodules at spiral CT: comparison
of maximum intensity projection sliding slabs and single-image reporting,
Eur Radiol 11 1345 (2001).

[2] Q. Li, S. Sone and K. Doi, Selective enhancement ﬁlters for nodules, vessels,
and airway walls in two- and three-dimensional CT scans, Med. Phys. 30(8)
2040 (2003).

[3] P. Delogu et al, Preprocessing methods for nodule detection in lung CT,
Computer Assisted Radiology and Surgery, Proceedings of the 19th Inter-
national Congress and Exhibition, International Congress Series 1281 1099
(Berlin, Germany, 2005).

4

