7
0
0
2
 
n
a
J
 
2
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
d
e
m

.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
3
4
2
1
0
7
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

A MULTI-SCALE APPROACH TO THE
COMPUTER-AIDED DETECTION OF
MICROCALCIFICATION CLUSTERS IN
DIGITAL MAMMOGRAMS

P. Delogu, M.E. Fantacci, A. Retico, A. Stefanini and A. Tata
Dipartimento di Fisica dell’Universit`a e INFN di Pisa,
Largo Pontecorvo 3, 56127 Pisa, Italy

Abstract

A computer-aided detection (CADe) system for the identiﬁcation of
microcalciﬁcation clusters in digital mammograms has been developed. It
is mainly based on the application of wavelet transforms for image ﬁltering
and neural networks for both the feature extraction and the classiﬁcation
procedures. This CADe system is easily adaptable to diﬀerent databases.
We report and compare the FROC curves obtained on the private database
we used for developing the CADe system and on the publicly available
MIAS database. The results achieved on the two databases show the
same trend, thus demonstrating the good generalization capability of the
system.

1 Introduction

Microcalciﬁcations appear as small bright circular or slightly elongated spots
embedded in the complex normal breast tissue imaged in a mammogram. Espe-
cially when they are grouped in clusters, microcalciﬁcations can be an important
early indication of breast cancer. Computer-aided detection (CADe) systems
can improve the radiologists’ accuracy in the interpretation of mammograms by
alerting them to suspicious areas of the image containing possibly pathological
signs.

The main problem one has to deal with, in developing a CADe system for
mammography, is the strong dependence of the method, of the parameters and
of the performances of the system on the dataset used in the set-up and testing
procedures. The approach we adopted for our CADe system is mainly based
on the exploitation of the properties of the wavelet analysis and the artiﬁcial
neural networks. The use of wavelets in the pre-processing step, together with

1

the implementation of an automatic neural-based procedure for the feature ex-
traction, allows for a plan generalization of the analysis scheme to databases
characterized by diﬀerent acquisition and storing parameters.

2 CADe scheme

The CADe scheme can be summarized in the following main steps:

• INPUT: digitized mammogram;

• Pre-processing of the mammogram: identiﬁcation of the breast skin line
and segmentation of the breast region with respect to the background;
application of a wavelet-based ﬁlter in order to enhance the microcalciﬁ-
cation signal;

• Feature extraction: decomposition of the breast region in several N ×N
pixel-wide sub-images to be processed each at a time; automatic extraction
of the features from each sub-image;

• Classiﬁcation: clustering of the processed sub-images into two classes, i.e.

those containing microcalciﬁcation clusters and the normal tissue1;

• OUTPUT: merging of contiguous or partially overlapping sub-images and
visualization of the ﬁnal output by superimposing rectangles indicating
suspicious areas to the original image.

3 Tests and results

The CADe system was set up and tested on a private database of mammograms
collected in the framework of the INFN (Istituto Nazionale di Fisica Nucleare)-
founded CALMA (Computer-Assisted Library for MAmmography) project [1].
The digitized images are characterized by a 85µm pixel pitch and a 12-bit res-
olution, thus allowing up to 4096 gray levels. The dataset used for training
the CADe consists of 305 mammograms containing microcalciﬁcation clusters
and 540 normal mammograms. The system performances on a test set of 140
CALMA images (70 with microcalciﬁcation clusters and 70 normal images) have
been evaluated in terms of the FROC analysis [2] as shown in ﬁg. 1. In partic-
ular, as shown in the ﬁgure, a sensitivity value of 88% is obtained at a rate of
2.15 FP/im.

1In this paper the tissue not containing microcalciﬁcation clusters is referred as normal
breast tissue, i.e. in our notation this class of tissue can even accommodate regions of mam-
mograms aﬀected by the presence of diﬀerent pathologies, such as opacities, massive lesions,
etc.

2

Figure 1: FROC curve obtained on the CALMA dataset (140 mammograms)
and on the MIAS dataset (42 mammograms).

In order to test the generalization capability of the system, we evaluated
the CADe performances on the publicly available MIAS database [3]. Being
the MIAS mammograms characterized by a diﬀerent pixel pitch (50µm instead
of 85µm) and a less deep dynamical range (8 bit per pixel instead of 12) with
respect to the CALMA mammograms, we had to deﬁne a tuning procedure for
adapting the CADe system to the MIAS database characteristics. A scaling of
the wavelet analysis parameters allows the CADe ﬁlter to generate very similar
pre-processed images on both datasets. The remaining steps of the analysis,
i.e.
the characterization and the classiﬁcation of the sub-images, have been
directly imported from the CALMA CADe neural software. The performances
the rescaled CADe achieves on the images of the MIAS database have been
evaluated on a set of 42 mammograms (20 with microcalciﬁcation clusters and
22 normal) and are shown in ﬁg. 1. As can be noticed, a sensitivity value of
88% is obtained at a rate of 2.18 FP/im.

4 Conclusions

The implementation of the wavelet transform in the preprocessing step of the
analysis and the use of an auto-associative neural network for the automatic
feature extraction make our CADe system tunable to diﬀerent databases. The
main advantage of this procedure is that this scalable CADe system can be
tested even on very small databases, i.e. databases not allowing for the learning
procedure of the neural networks to be properly carried out. The strong sim-

3

ilarity in the trends of the FROC curves obtained on the CALMA and on the
MIAS databases provides a clear evidence that the CADe system we developed
can be applied to diﬀerent databases with no sensible decrease in the detection
performance.

References

[1] U. Bottigli et al, Search of microcalciﬁcation clusters with the CALMA
CAD station, The International Society for Optical Engineering (SPIE)
4684 1301 (2002).

[2] D. Chakraborty, Free-response methodology: Alternative analysis and a
new observer-performance experiment, Radiology 174(3) 873 (1990).

[3] J. Suckling et al, The mammographic images analysis society digital mam-
mogram database, Excerpta Medica, International Congress Series 1069
375 (1994).

4

