7
0
0
2
 
n
a
J
 
2
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
d
e
m

.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
4
4
2
1
0
7
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

AN AUTOMATIC SYSTEM TO
DISCRIMINATE MALIGNANT FROM
BENIGN MASSIVE LESIONS IN
MAMMOGRAMS

P. Delogu1,2, M.E. Fantacci1,2, P. Kasae3 and A. Retico2
1Dipartimento di Fisica dell’Universit`a di Pisa,
Largo Pontecorvo 3, 56127 Pisa, Italy
2Istituto Nazionale di Fisica Nucleare, Sezione di Pisa,
Largo Pontecorvo 3, 56127 Pisa, Italy
3The Abdus Salam International Center for Theoretical Physics,
Strada Costiera 11, P.O. Box 563, I-34100 Trieste, Italy

Abstract

Evaluating the degree of malignancy of a massive lesion on the basis
of the mere visual analysis of the mammogram is a non-trivial task. We
developed a semi-automated system for massive-lesion characterization
with the aim to support the radiological diagnosis. A dataset of 226
masses has been used in the present analysis. The system performances
have been evaluated in terms of the area under the ROC curve, obtaining
Az = 0.80 ± 0.04.

1 Introduction

Breast cancer is still one of the most common forms of cancer among women,
despite a signiﬁcant decrease has occurred in the breast cancer mortality in
the last few decades [1]. Mammography is widely recognized as the most re-
liable technique for early detection of this pathology. However, characterizing
the massive lesion malignancy by means exclusively of a visual analysis of the
mammogram is an extremely diﬃcult task and a high number of unnecessary
biopsies are actually performed in the routine clinical activity. Computerized
methods have recently shown a great potential in assisting radiologists in the
malignant vs. benign decision, by providing them with a second opinion about
the visual diagnosis of the lesion.

1

2 Method

The computer-aided diagnosis (CADi) system we present is based on a three-
stage algorithm: 1) a segmentation technique identiﬁes the contour of the mas-
sive lesion on the mammogram; 2) several features, based on size and shape
of the lesion, are computed; 3) a neural classiﬁer analyzes the features and
outputs a likelihood of malignancy for that lesion. The segmentation method
it is able to identify the mass boundaries inside a
is a gradient-based one:
physician-located region of interest (ROI) image. The algorithm is based on the
maximization of the local variance along several radial lines connecting the ap-
proximate mass center to the ROI boundary [2]. The critical points maximizing
the local variance on each radial line are interpolated, thus a rough mass shape is
identiﬁed. The procedure is iterated for each point inside the approximate mass,
resulting in a more accurate identiﬁcation of the mass boundary. The main ad-
vantage of this segmentation technique is that no free parameters have to be
ﬁtted on the dataset to be analyzed, thus it can in principle be directly applied
to datasets acquired in diﬀerent conditions without any ad-hoc modiﬁcation.
Sixteen features are computed for each segmented mass, some of them being
more sensitive to the shape and some to the texture of the lesion. They are:
area, perimeter, circularity, mean and standard deviation of the normalized ra-
dial length, radial distance entropy, zero crossing, maximum and minimum axes,
mean and standard deviation of the variation ratio, convexity; mean, standard
deviation, skewness and kurtosis of the grey-level distribution. The features
are analyzed by a multi-layered feed-forward neural network trained with the
error back-propagation algorithm. The classiﬁer performances are evaluated
according to the 5×2 cross validation method.

3 Results

In this work we present the results obtained on a dataset of 226 massive lesions
(109 malignant and 117 benign) extracted from a database of mammograms
collected in the framework of a collaboration between physicists from several
Italian Universities and INFN Sections, and radiologists from several Italian
Senological Centers [3]. Despite the boundaries of the masses are usually not
very sharp, our segmentation procedure leads to an accurate identiﬁcation of
the mass shapes both in malignant and benign cases, as shown in ﬁg. 1. The
performances of the neural network in classifying the features extracted from
each mass have been evaluated in terms of the sensitivity and the speciﬁcity on
the test sets: the average values obtained are 78.1% and 79.1% respectively. The

2

Figure 1: Examples of malignant (left) and benign (right) segmented masses.

discriminating capability of the system has been evaluated also in terms of the
receiver operating characteristic (ROC) analysis (see ﬁg. 2) [4]. The estimated
area under the ROC curve is Az = 0.80 ± 0.04.

4 Conclusions

Mass segmentation plays a key role in CADi systems to be used for supporting
radiologists in the malignant vs. benign decision. We developed a robust tech-
nique based on edge detection to segment mass lesions from the surrounding
normal tissue. The results so-far obtained in the classiﬁcation of malignant and
benign masses indicate that the segmentation procedure we developed provides
an accurate approximation of the mass shapes and that the features we took
into account for the classiﬁcation have a good discriminating power.

5 Acknowledgments

We are grateful to Dr M. Tonutti from Cattinara Hospital (Trieste, Italy) for
her essential contribution to the present analysis. We acknowledge Dr S. Franz
from ICTP (Trieste, Italy) for useful discussions.

References

[1] S.H. Landis et al, Cancer statistics, 1999. Ca-Cancer J Clin 49(1), 8 (1999).

3

Figure 2: ROC curve.

[2] D.R. Chen et al, Diagnosis of Breast Tumors with Sonographic Texture
Analysis using Wavelet Transform and Neural Networks, Ultrasound Med
Biol 28(10), 1301 (2002).

[3] R. Bellotti et al, The MAGIC-5 Project: Medical Applications on a Grid
Infrastructure Connection, IEEE NSS Conf Rec 3, 1902–1906 (2004).

[4] C.E. Metz, ROC methodology in radiologic imaging, Invest Radiol 21(9),

720 (1986).

4

