7
0
0
2
 
n
a
J
 
4
 
 
]
h
p
-
d
e
m

.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
6
4
0
1
0
7
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

A scalable Computer-Aided Detection system for microcalciﬁcation
cluster identiﬁcation in a pan-European distributed database of
mammograms
A. Reticoa∗, P. Deloguab, M.E. Fantacciab, A. Preite Martinezb, A. Stefaniniab and A. Tataa

aIstituto Nazionale di Fisica Nucleare, Largo Pontecorvo 3, 56127 Pisa, Italy

bDipartimento di Fisica dell’Universit`a di Pisa, Largo Pontecorvo 3, 56127 Pisa, Italy

A computer-aided detection (CADe) system for microcalciﬁcation cluster identiﬁcation in mammograms has
been developed in the framework of the EU-founded MammoGrid project. The CADe software is mainly based
on wavelet transforms and artiﬁcial neural networks. It is able to identify microcalciﬁcations in diﬀerent kinds of
mammograms (i.e. acquired with diﬀerent machines and settings, digitized with diﬀerent pitch and bit depth or
direct digital ones). The CADe can be remotely run from GRID-connected acquisition and annotation stations,
supporting clinicians from geographically distant locations in the interpretation of mammographic data. We
report the FROC analyses of the CADe system performances on three diﬀerent dataset of mammograms, i.e.
images of the CALMA INFN-founded database collected in the Italian National screening program, the MIAS
database and the so-far collected MammoGrid images. The sensitivity values of 88% at a rate of 2.15 false positive
ﬁndings per image (FP/im), 88% with 2.18 FP/im and 87% with 5.7 FP/im have been obtained on the CALMA,
MIAS and MammoGrid database respectively.

Keywords: Computer Aided Detection, Mammography, Wavelets, Neural Networks, GRID applications.

1. Introduction

The EU-founded MammoGrid project
[1]
is currently collecting an European-distributed
database of mammograms with the aim of apply-
ing the GRID technologies to support the early
detection of breast cancer. GRID is an emerg-
ing resource-sharing model that provides a dis-
tributed infrastructure of interconnected comput-
ing and storage elements [2]. A GRID-based
architecture would allow the resource sharing
and the co-working between radiologists through-
out the European Union.
In this framework,
epidemiological studies, tele-education of young
health-care professionals, advanced image analy-
sis and tele-diagnostic support (with and without
computer-aided detection) would be enabled.

In the image processing ﬁeld, we have de-

∗Corresponding author.
alessan-
dra.retico@df.unipi.it (A. Retico). Tel: +39 0502214459;
fax: +39 0502214317.

E-mail address:

veloped and implemented in a GRID-compliant
acquisition and annotation station a computer-
aided detection (CADe) system able to identify
microcalciﬁcations in diﬀerent kinds of mammo-
grams (i.e. acquired with diﬀerent machines and
settings, digitized with diﬀerent pitch and bit
depth or direct digital ones).

This paper is structured as follows: the detec-
tion scheme is illustrated in sec. 2, sec. 3 describes
the database the MammoGrid Collaboration is
collecting, whereas the tests carried out on diﬀer-
ent datasets of mammograms and the preliminary
results obtained on a set of MammoGrid images
are discussed in sec. 4.

2. Description of the CADe system

The CADe procedure we realized is mainly
based on wavelet transforms and artiﬁcial neu-
ral networks. Both these techniques have been
successfully used in similar image processing ap-

1

2

A. Retico

plications [3,4,5]. Our CADe system indicates
one or more suspicious areas of a mammogram
where microcalciﬁcation clusters are possibly lo-
cated, according to the following schema:

• INPUT: digital or digitized mammogram;

• Pre-processing:

a) identiﬁcation of the
breast skin line and segmentation of the
breast region with respect to the back-
ground; b) application of the wavelet-based
ﬁlter in order to enhance the microcalciﬁca-
tions;

• Feature extraction: a) decomposition of the
breast region in several N ×N pixel-wide
partially-overlapping sub-images to be pro-
cessed each at a time; b) automatic extrac-
tion of the features characterizing each sub-
image;

• Classiﬁcation:

assigning each processed
sub-image either to the class of microcalci-
ﬁcation clusters or to that of normal tissue;

• OUTPUT: merging the contiguous or par-
tially overlapping sub-images and visualiza-
tion of the ﬁnal output by drawing the con-
tours of the suspicious areas on the original
image.

2.1. Pre-processing of the mammograms

The pre-processing procedure aims to enhance
the signals revealing the presence of microcalciﬁ-
cations, while suppressing the complex and noisy
non-pathological breast tissue. A mammogram
is usually dominated by the low-frequency infor-
mation, whereas the microcalciﬁcations appear as
high-frequency contributions. A particular of a
mammographic image and its decomposition ac-
cording to the 2-D multi-resolution analysis are il-
lustrated in ﬁg. 1. It is worth noticing that micro-
calciﬁcations show some evident features at some
speciﬁc scales, while they are almost negligible at
other scales. The use of the wavelet transform al-
lows for a separation of the more important high-
resolution components of the mammogram from
the less important low-resolution ones.

Once the breast skin line is identiﬁed, the
breast region is processed by the wavelet-based

Figure 1. Wavelet decomposition of a digi-
tized mammogram (85µm pitch): a) original im-
age containing a microcalciﬁcation cluster; b) 4-
level decomposition using Daubechies 5 mother
wavelet.

ﬁlter, according to the following main steps: iden-
tiﬁcation of the family of wavelets and the level
up to which the decomposition has to be per-
formed in order to highlight the interesting de-
tails; manipulation of the wavelet coeﬃcients
(i.e. suppression of the coeﬃcients encoding the
low-frequency contributions and enhancement of
those encoding the contributions of interesting
details); inverse wavelet transform. By properly
thresholding the wavelet coeﬃcients at each level
of the decomposition, an enhancement of the mi-
crocalciﬁcation with respect to surrounding nor-
mal tissue can be achieved in the synthesized im-
age. In order to achieve this result, the wavelet
basis, the level up to which the decomposition
have to be performed and the thresholding rules
to be applied to the wavelet coeﬃcients have to
be accurately set. All these choices and param-
eters are application dependent. The size of the
pixel pitch and the dynamical range of the gray
level intensities characterizing the mammograms
are the most important parameters to be taken
into account.

2.2. Feature extraction

In order to extract from a mammogram the
features to be submitted to the classiﬁer, small
regions of a mammogram are analyzed each at a

CADe of microcalciﬁcation clusters in a pan-European database of mammograms

3

respectively. This neural network is trained to re-

time. The choice of fragmenting the mammogram
in small sub-images is ﬁnalized both to reduce the
amount of data to be analyzed at the same time
and to facilitate the localization of the lesions pos-
sibly present on a mammogram. The size of the
sub-images has been chosen according to the ba-
sic rule of considering the smallest squared area
matching the typical size of a small microcalciﬁ-
cation cluster. Being the size of a single microcal-
ciﬁcation rarely greater than 1 mm, and the mean
distance between two microcalciﬁcations belong-
ing to the same cluster generally smaller than 5
mm, we assume a square with a 5 mm side to
be large enough to accommodate a small clus-
ter. This sub-image size is appropriate to dis-
criminate an isolated microcalciﬁcation (which is
not considered to be a pathological sign) from a
group of microcalciﬁcations close together. The
length of the square side in pixel units is obvi-
ously determined by the pixel pitch of the digi-
tizer or of the direct digital device. Let us assume
that our choice for the length of the square side
corresponds to N pixels.
In order to avoid the
accidental missing of a microcalciﬁcation cluster
happening to be at the interface between two con-
tiguous sub-images, we use the technique of the
partially overlapping sub-images, i.e. we let the
mask for selecting the sub-image to be analyzed
move through the mammogram by half of the side
length (N/2 pixels) at each horizontal and verti-
cal step. In this way each region of a mammo-
gram is analyzed more than once with respect to
diﬀerent neighboring regions.

Each N ×N pixel-wide sub-image extracted
from the ﬁltered mammogram is processed by
an auto-associative neural network, used to per-
form an automatic extraction of the relevant
features of the sub-image.
Implementing an
auto-associative neural network is a neural-based
method for performing an unsupervised feature
extraction [6,7,8,9]. This step has been intro-
duced in the CAD scheme to reduce the dimen-
sionality of the amount of data (the gray level
intensity values of the N ×N pixels of each sub-
image) to be classiﬁed by the system. The archi-
tecture of the network we use is a bottle-neck one
(see ﬁg. 2), consisting of three layers of N 2 input,
n hidden (where n ≪ N 2) and N 2 output neurons

Figure 2. Architecture of the auto-associative
neural network.

produce in output the input values. The overall
activation of the n nodes of the bottle-neck layer
summarize the relevant features of the examined
sub-image. The more the N ×N pixel-wide sub-
image obtained as output is close to the original
sub-image provided as input, the more the acti-
vation potentials of the n hidden neurons are sup-
posed to accommodate the information contained
in the original sub-image.

It is worth noticing that the implementation of
an auto-associative neural network at this stage of
the CAD scheme allows for a strong compression
of the parameters representing each sub-image
(N 2 → n) to be passed to the following step of
the analysis.

2.3. Classiﬁcation

We use the n features extracted by the auto-
associative neural network to assign each sub-
image to either the class of sub-images containing
microcalciﬁcation clusters or the class of those
consisting only of normal breast tissue. A stan-
dard three-layer feed-forward neural network has
been chosen to perform the classiﬁcation of the n
features extracted from each sub-image. The gen-
eral architecture characterizing this net consists
in n inputs, h hidden and two output neurons,

4

A. Retico

and the supervised training phase is based on the
back-propagation algorithm.

3. The MammoGrid distributed database

One of the main goals of the EU-founded Mam-
moGrid project is the realization of a GRID-
enabled European database of mammogram, with
the aim of supporting the collaboration among
clinicians from diﬀerent locations in the analy-
sis of mammographic data. Mammograms in the
DICOM [10] format are collected through the
MammoGrid acquisition and annotation work-
stations installed in the participating hospitals.
Standardized images are stored into the GRID-
connected database. The image standardization
is realized by the Standard-Mammogram-Form
(SMF) algorithm [11] developed by the Mirada
Solutions CompanyTM, a partner of the Mammo-
Grid project. The SMF provides a normalized
representation of the mammogram, i.e. indepen-
dent of the data source and of the acquisition
technical parameters (as mAs, kVp and breast
thickness).

4. Tests and results

As the amount of mammograms collected at
present in the MammoGrid database is too small
for properly training the neural networks used
in the characterization and classiﬁcation proce-
dures of our CADe, we used a larger dataset of
mammograms for developing the system, then we
evaluated its performances on the MammoGrid
database.

The dataset used for training and testing the
CADe was extracted from the fully annotated
CALMA database [15,16] and it consists of 375
mammograms containing microcalciﬁcation clus-
ters and 610 normal mammograms, digitized with
a pixel pitch of 85 µm and a dynamical range of
12 bit per pixel.

To perform the multi-resolution analysis we
considered the Daubechies family of wavelet [12],
in particular we used the db5 mother wavelet. As
shown in ﬁg. 1, each sub-image is decomposed up
to the forth level. We found out that the res-
olution level 1 mainly shows the high-frequency

noise included in the mammogram, whereas the
levels 2, 3 and 4 contain the high-frequency com-
ponents related to the presence of microcalciﬁ-
cations. Levels greater than 4 exhibited a strong
correlation with larger structures possibly present
in the normal breast tissue constituting the back-
ground. In order to enhance microcalciﬁcations,
the approximation coeﬃcients at level 4 and the
detail coeﬃcients at the ﬁrst level were neglected.
By contrast, the statistical analysis of the distri-
butions of the remaining detail coeﬃcients lead
us to keep into account for the synthesis proce-
dure only those coeﬃcients whose values exceed
2σ, where σ is the standard deviation of the coef-
ﬁcient distribution at that level. Some examples
of the performance of the ﬁlter on mammographic
images containing microcalciﬁcation clusters are
shown in ﬁg. 3.

Figure 3. Examples of the wavelet-based ﬁlter
performances (top/bottom: original/ﬁltered sub-
images containing microcalciﬁcation clusters).

The training and testing of the auto-associative
neural network has been performed on a dataset
of 149 mammograms containing microcalciﬁca-
tion clusters and 299 normal mammograms. The
best performances were achieved with the follow-
ing network architecture: 3600 input, 80 hidden
and 3600 output neurons. It corresponds to ana-
lyzing 60×60 pixel-wide regions of mammograms
each at a time. This size of the analyzing win-
dow is large enough to distinguish clusters from
isolated microcalciﬁcations since it approximately
corresponds to a physical region of 5×5 mm2.

CADe of microcalciﬁcation clusters in a pan-European database of mammograms

5

The dataset used for the supervised training
of the feed-forward neural classiﬁer is consti-
tuted by 156 mammograms with microcalciﬁca-
tion clusters and 241 normal mammograms. The
standard back-propagation algorithm was imple-
mented and the best performance were achieved
with 10 neurons in the hidden layer.

The CADe performances were globally evalu-
ated on a test set of 140 images (70 with mi-
crocalciﬁcation clusters and 70 normal images)
in terms of the free-response operating charac-
teristic (FROC) analysis [13] (see ﬁg. 4). The
FROC curve is obtained by plotting the sensi-
tivity of the system versus the number of false-
positive detection per image (FP/im), while the
decision threshold of the classiﬁer is varied.
In
particular, as shown in the ﬁgure, a sensitivity
value of 88% is obtained at a rate of 2.15 FP/im.

Figure 4. FROC curve obtained on the CALMA
dataset (140 mammograms) and on the MIAS
dataset (42 mammograms).

In order to test the generalization capability of
the system, we evaluated the CADe performances
on the public available MIAS database [14]. Be-
ing the MIAS mammograms characterized by a
diﬀerent pixel pitch (50 µm instead of 85 µm)
and a less deep dynamical range (8 bit per pixel

instead of 12) with respect to the CALMA mam-
mograms, we had to deﬁne a tuning procedure
for adapting the CADe system to the database
we used for this test. A scaling of the wavelet-
analysis parameters (sum of four neighboring pix-
els, matching of the dynamical ranges, wavelet
decomposition up to the third level) allows the
CADe ﬁlter to generate very similar pre-processed
images. The remaining steps of the analysis,
i.e. the characterization and the classiﬁcation of
the sub-images, have been directly imported from
the CALMA CADe neural software. The perfor-
mances the rescaled CADe achieves on the images
of the MIAS database have been evaluated on a
set of 42 mammograms (20 with microcalciﬁca-
tion clusters and 22 normal) and shown in ﬁg. 4.
As can be noticed, a sensitivity value of 88% is
obtained at a rate of 2.18 FP/im. The strong sim-
ilarity in the trends of the FROC curves obtained
on the CALMA and on the MIAS databases
demonstrate the good generalization capability of
the CADe system we developed.

According to the MammoGrid project work-
ﬂow [1], the CADe algorithm has to run on mam-
mograms previously processed by the SMF soft-
ware [11]. The SMF mammograms are character-
ized by a diﬀerent pixel pitch (100 µm instead of
85 µm) and a diﬀerent eﬀective dynamical range
(16 bit per pixel instead of 12) with respect to
the CALMA mammograms. The wavelet-analysis
parameters have been rescaled to run the CADe
analysis on these images. A test has been per-
formed on a set of 130 mammograms with micro-
calciﬁcation clusters belonging to 57 patients: 46
of them have been collected and digitized at the
University Hospital of Udine (IT), whereas the re-
maining 11 were acquired by the full-ﬁeld digital
mammography system GE Senographe 2000D at
the Torino Hospital (IT); all have been stored in
the MammoGrid database by means of the Mam-
moGrid acquisition station installed at the Uni-
versity Hospital of Udine (IT). The preliminary
evaluation of the CADe performances in terms of
the FROC analysis is shown in ﬁg. 5. In this case
a sensitivity value of 87% is obtained at a rate of
5.7 FP/im.

6

A. Retico

Once the planned increase in the population of
the database is realized, a complete test of the
CADe performance on the pan-European Mam-
moGrid database would be carried out.

REFERENCES

1. The

Information

Societies Technology
project: MammoGrid - A European feder-
ated mammogram database implemented
on a GRID infrastructure. EU Contract
IST-2001-37614.
I. Foster and C. Kesselman, The Grid:
Blueprint for a New Computing Infrastruc-
ture. Morgan Kaufmann publishers, 1998.
ISBN 1558604758.

2.

3. W.B. Richardson, Applying wavelets to mam-
mograms, IEEE Eng. Med. Biol. Mag. 14
(1995) pp 551–560.

4. H. Yoshida, R.M. Nishikawa, M.L. Giger,
R.A. Schmidt, Acad. Radiol. 3(8) (1996) 621.
5. M.J. Lado, P.G. Tahoces, A.J. Mendez,
M.Souto, J.J. Vidal, Med. Phys. 26(7) (1999)
1294.

6. M.A. Kramer, AIChE J. 37 (1991) 233.
7. M.A. Kramer, Comput. Chem. Eng. 16 (1992)

313.

8 (1993) 44.

8. J.A. Leonard and M.A. Kramer, IEEE Expert

9. D.R. Kuespert and T.J. McAvoy, Chem. Eng.

Comm. 130 (1994) 251.

10. Digital
tions
http://medical.nema.org/

Imaging
in Medicine

and

Communica-
See

(DICOM).

Mammogram

Form
11. Standard
(SMF),
See
http://www.mirada-solutions.com/smf.htm.
12. I. Daubechies, Ten Lectures on Wavelets,

SolutionsTM.

Mirada

SIAM Philadelphia 1992.

13. D. Chakraborty, Radiology 174(3) (1990) 873.
14. J. Suckling, J. Parker, D. Dance, S. Astley,
I. Hutt, C. Boggis, I. Ricketts, E. Stamatakis,
N. Cerneaz, S. Kok, P. Taylor, D. Betal,
J. Savage, Excerpta Medica ICS 1069 (1994)
375 (mias@sv1.smb.man.ac.uk).

15. U. Bottigli, P. Delogu, M.E. Fantacci,
F. Fauci, B. Golosio, A. Lauria, R. Palmiero,
G. Raso, S. Stumbo, S. Tangaro, Proc. SPIE

Figure 5. FROC curve obtained on the Mammo-
Grid database (130 mammograms).

5. Conclusions

We reported in this paper the details of the
analysis and the results our CADe system for
microcalciﬁcation cluster detection achieves on
mammograms collected in diﬀerent hospitals and
acquired with diﬀerent methods.
In particular,
wavelet transforms have been implemented in the
pre-processing step, in order to enhance the mi-
crocalciﬁcations with respect to the complex and
noisy patterns provided by the non-pathological
breast tissue. This pre-processing method can
be tuned on databases characterized by diﬀer-
ent pixel pitch or diﬀerent dynamical range. The
features to be used in the classiﬁcation step are
automatically extracted by means of an auto-
associative neural network and then analyzed by
a feed-forward neural network.

The CADe system we developed and tested on
both the CALMA and the MIAS databases has
been adapted to the MammoGrid SMF images
by re-scaling the wavelet-ﬁlter parameters. The
main advantage the scaling procedure provides is
that the rescaled CADe can be run even on small
databases not allowing for a proper training of a
neural decision-making system to be carried out.
The preliminary results obtained on the so-far
collected MammoGrid database are encouraging.

CADe of microcalciﬁcation clusters in a pan-European database of mammograms

7

4684 (2002) 1301.

16. R. Bellotti, et al., Proc. IEEE Nucl. Science

Symp. (2004) N33-173.

