7
0
0
2
 
n
a
J
 
4
 
 
]
h
p
-
d
e
m

.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
3
5
0
1
0
7
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

An Automatic System to Discriminate Malignant from Benign Massive
Lesions on Mammograms
A. Reticoa∗, P. Deloguab, M.E. Fantacciab, P. Kasaec

aIstituto Nazionale di Fisica Nucleare, Largo Pontecorvo 3, 56127 Pisa, Italy

bDipartimento di Fisica dell’Universit`a di Pisa, Largo Pontecorvo 3, 56127 Pisa, Italy

cThe Abdus Salam International Center for Theoretical Physics, Strada Costiera 11, P.O. Box 563,
I-34100 Trieste, Italy

Mammography is widely recognized as the most reliable technique for early detection of breast cancers. Auto-
mated or semi-automated computerized classiﬁcation schemes can be very useful in assisting radiologists with a
second opinion about the visual diagnosis of breast lesions, thus leading to a reduction in the number of unneces-
sary biopsies. We present a computer-aided diagnosis (CADi) system for the characterization of massive lesions
in mammograms, whose aim is to distinguish malignant from benign masses. The CADi system we realized is
based on a three-stage algorithm: a) a segmentation technique extracts the contours of the massive lesion from
the image; b) sixteen features based on size and shape of the lesion are computed; c) a neural classiﬁer merges
the features into an estimated likelihood of malignancy. A dataset of 226 massive lesions (109 malignant and 117
benign) has been used in this study. The system performances have been evaluated terms of the receiver-operating
characteristic (ROC) analysis, obtaining Az = 0.80 ± 0.04 as the estimated area under the ROC curve.

Keywords: Computer-aided diagnosis, Breast cancer, Massive lesions, Segmentation, Neural networks.

Introduction

Breast cancer is still one of the main causes
of death among women, despite early detections
have recently contributed to a signiﬁcant decrease
in the breast-cancer mortality [1,2]. Mammogra-
phy is an eﬀective technique for detecting breast
cancer in its early stages [3]. Once a massive le-
sion is detected on a mammogram, the radiologist
recommends further investigations, depending on
the likelihood of malignancy he assigns to the le-
sion. However, the characterization of massive
lesions merely on the basis of a visual analysis of
the mammogram is a very diﬃcult task and a high
number of unnecessary biopsies are actually per-
formed in the routine clinical activity. The rate
of positive ﬁndings for cancers at biopsy ranges
from 15% to 30% [4], i.e. the speciﬁcity in diﬀe-

∗Corresponding author.
alessan-
dra.retico@df.unipi.it (A. Retico). Tel: +39 0502214459;
fax: +39 0502214317.

E-mail address:

rentiating malignant from benign lesions merely
on the basis of the radiologist’s interpretation of
mammograms is rather low. Methods to improve
mammographic speciﬁcity without missing can-
cer have to be developed. Computerized method
have recently shown a great potential in assisting
radiologists in the visual diagnosis of the lesions,
by providing them with a second opinion about
the degree of malignancy of a lesion [5,6,7].

The computerized system for the classiﬁcation
of benign and malignant massive lesions we de-
scribe in this paper is a semi-automated one,
i.e.
it provides a likelihood of malignancy for a
physician-selected region of a mammogram.

This paper is structured as follows: a techni-
cal description of the method is given in sec. 1;
section 2 illustrates the dataset of mammograms
we used for this study and sec. 3 reports on the
performances the CADi system achieved in diﬀe-
rentiating malignant from benign massive lesions.

1

2

A. Retico et al.

• The critical points determined for each ra-
dial
line are linearly interpolated and a
coarse boundary for the lesion is deter-
mined.

• The pixels inside this coarse region are
taken as new seed points for iterating the
procedure in order to end up with a more
accurate identiﬁcation of the shape of the
lesion.

• A set of candidates to represent the mass
boundary is thus obtained. Every identi-
ﬁed point is accepted and the area inside
the resulting thick border is ﬁlled. Once
the possibly present non-connected objects
are removed, the thick boundary and the
area inside it are accepted as the segmented
massive lesion.

1. Description of the CADi system

The system for characterizing massive lesions
we realized is based on a three-stage algorithm:
ﬁrst, a segmentation technique extracts the mas-
sive lesion from the image; then, several features
based on size, shape and texture of the lesion are
computed; ﬁnally, a neural classiﬁer merges the
features into a likelihood of malignancy for that
lesion.

1.1. Segmentation

Massive lesions are extremely variable in size,
shape and density; they can exhibit a very poor
image contrast or can be highly connected to the
surrounding parenchymal tissue. For these rea-
sons segmenting massive lesions from the nonuni-
form normal breast tissue is considered a non-
trivial task and much eﬀorts have already gone
through this issue [8,9,10,11].

The segmentation algorithm we developed is
an extension and a reﬁnement of the strategy
proposed in [12] for the mass segmentation in
the computerized analysis of breast tumors on
sonograms. A massive lesion is automatically
identiﬁed within a rectangular Region Of Inter-
est (ROI) interactively chosen by the radiologist.
The ROIs contain the lesions as well as a consid-
erable part of normal tissue. In our segmentation
procedure the non-tumor regions in a ROI are re-
moved by applying the following processing steps
(ﬁg. 1):

• The pixel characterized by the maximum-
intensity value in the central area of the
ROI is taken as the seed point for the seg-
mentation algorithm.

• A number of radial lines are depicted from
the seed point to the boundary of the ROI.

• For each pixel along each radial line the lo-
cal variance (i.e. the variance of the entries
of a n × n matrix containing the pixel and
its neighborhood) is computed. The pixel
maximizing the local variance is most likely
the one located on the boundary between
the mass and the surrounding tissue and it
is referred as critical point.

Figure 1. Basic schema of the segmentation pro-
cedure.

An Automatic System to Discriminate Malignant from Benign Massive Lesions on Mammograms

3

1.2. Feature extraction

Once the masses have been segmented out
of the surrounding normal tissue, a set of sui-
table features are computed in order to allow
a decision-making system to distinguish benign
from malignant lesions [13,14,15,16]. The degree
of malignancy of a lesion is generally correlated
to the appearance of arms and spiculations on
the mass boundary. The more irregular the mass
shape, the higher the degree of malignancy pos-
sibly associated to that lesion. Our CADi sys-
tem extracts 16 features from the segmented le-
sions: the mass area A; the mass perimeter P ;
the circularity C = 4πA/P 2; the mean and the
standard deviation of the normalized radial length
(i.e.
the Euclidean distance from the center of
mass of the segmented lesion to the ith pixel on
the perimeter and normalized to the maximum
distance for that mass); the radial
length en-
tropy (i.e. a probabilistic measure computed from
the histogram of the normalized radial length as
Nbins
E = − P
k=1 Pk log Pk, where Pk is the probabi-
lity that the normalized radial length is between
d(i) and d(i)+ 1/Nbins and Nbins is the number of
bins the normalized histogram has been divided
in); the zero crossing (i.e. a count of the number
of times the radial distance plot crosses the ave-
rage radial distance); the maximum and the mini-
mum axis of the lesion; the mean and the standard
deviation of the variation ratio (i.e. the modulus
of the variations of the radial lengths from their
mean value are computed and only those excee-
ding the value varmax/2, where varmax is the
maximum variation, are considered as dominant
variations and averaged); the convexity (i.e. the
ratio between the mass area and the area of the
smallest convex containing the mass); the mean,
the standard deviation, the skewness and the kur-
tosis of the mass grey-level intensity values.

The 16 features were chosen with the aim of
enlightening the spiculation characteristics of the
lesions. The ﬁrst 12 features in the above descrip-
tion are related to the mass shape and have some
evident correlations with the degree of spicula-
tion of the lesions. Nevertheless, the remaining
4 features derived from the grey-level intensity
distribution of the segmented area also aim at in-
vestigating the degree of mass spiculation: the

standard deviation, the skewness and the kurto-
sis carry out the information about irregularities
characterizing the mass, whereas the mean value
accounts for an oﬀset to be referred to these three
parameters.

1.3. Classiﬁcation

The 16 features extracted from each lesion
are classiﬁed by a standard three-layer feed-
forward neural network with n input, h hidden
and two output neurons. A supervised training
based on the back-propagation algorithm with
sigmoid activation functions both for the hid-
den and the output layer has been performed.
The performances of the training algorithm were
evaluated according to the 5×2 cross validation
method [17].
It is the recommended test to be
performed on algorithms that can be executed 10
times because it can provide a reliable estimate of
the variation of the algorithm performances due
to the choice of the training set. This method
consists in performing 5 replications of the 2-fold
cross validation method [18]. At each replication,
the available data are randomly partitioned into
2 sets (Ai and Bi for i = 1, . . . 5) with an almost
equal number of entries. The learning algorithm
is trained on each set and tested on the other
one. The system performances are given in terms
of the sensitivity and speciﬁcity values, where the
sensitivity is deﬁned as the true positive fraction
(fraction of malignant masses correctly classiﬁed
by the system), whereas the speciﬁcity as the
true negative fraction (fraction of benign masses
In order to
correctly classiﬁed by the system).
show the trade oﬀ between the sensitivity and
the speciﬁcity, a Receiver Operating Character-
istic (ROC) analysis has been performed [19,20].
The ROC curve is obtained by plotting the true
positive fraction versus the false positive fraction
of the cases (1 - speciﬁcity), computed while the
decision threshold of the classiﬁer is varied. Each
decision threshold results in a corresponding ope-
rating point on the curve.

2. Image dataset

The image dataset used for this study has been
extracted from the database of mammograms col-

4

A. Retico et al.

lected in the framework of a collaboration be-
tween physicists from several Italian Universities
and INFN (Istituto Nazionale di Fisica Nucle-
are) Sections, and radiologists from several Ital-
ian Hospitals [21,22]. The mammograms come
both from screening and from the routine work
carried out in the participating Hospitals. The
18 × 24 cm2 mammographic ﬁlms were digitized
by a CCD linear scanner (Linotype Hell, Saphir
X-ray), obtaining images characterized by a 85µm
pixel pitch and a 12-bit resolution. The patholo-
gical images are fully characterized by a consis-
tent description, including the radiological diag-
nosis, the histological data and the coordinates of
the center and the approximate radius (in pixel
units) of a circle drawn by the radiologists around
the lesion (truth circle). Mammograms with no
sign of pathology are stored as normal images
only after a follow up of at least three years.

A set of 226 massive lesions were used in this
study: 109 malignant and 117 benign masses
were extracted from single-view cranio-caudal or
lateral mammograms. The dataset we analyzed
can be considered as representative of the patient
population that is sent for biopsy under the cur-
rent clinical criteria.

3. Results

The 226 massive lesions were segmented by the
system and shown to an experienced radiologist,
whose assistance in accepting or rejecting the pro-
posed mass contours was essential for the eval-
uation of the segmentation algorithm eﬃciency.
Despite the borders of the massive lesions are
usually not very sharp in mammographic ima-
ges, the segmentation procedure we carried out
leads to a quite accurate identiﬁcation of the mass
shapes, as can be noticed in ﬁg. 2. The radiolo-
gist conﬁrmed only the segmented masses whose
contour was suﬃciently close to that she would
have drawn by hand on the image. The dataset
of 226 cases available for our analysis was reduced
to 200 successfully-segmented masses (95 malig-
nant and 105 benign masses), thus corresponding
to an eﬃciency ǫ = 88.5% for the segmentation
algorithm.

Once the 16 features were extracted from each

Figure 2. Examples of segmented masses: two
malignant masses (top) and two benign masses
(bottom).

well-segmented mass, 5 diﬀerent train and 5 diﬀe-
rent test sets for the 5×2 cross validation analysis
were prepared by randomly assigning each of the
200 vectors of features to the train or test set for
each of the 5 diﬀerent trials. The optimization
of the network performances was obtained in our
case by assigning 3 neurons to the hidden layer,
resulting in a ﬁnal architecture for the net of 16
input, 3 hidden and 2 output neurons.

The sensitivity and speciﬁcity our learning al-
gorithm realized on each dataset are shown in
tab. 1. As can be noticed, the performances the
neural classiﬁer achieves are robust, i.e. almost
independent of the partitioning of the available
data into the train and test sets. The average per-

An Automatic System to Discriminate Malignant from Benign Massive Lesions on Mammograms

5

Table 1
Evaluation of the performances of the standard
back-propagation learning algorithm for the neu-
ral classiﬁer according to the 5×2 cross validation
method.
Train Set Test Set

A1
B1
A2
B2
A3
B3
A4
B4
A5
B5

Sens. (%)
78.7
77.1
78.7
77.1
80.9
77.1
79.2
78.7
75.6
78.0

Spec. (%)
84.9
84.6
79.3
78.9
72.9
78.7
77.4
78.9
81.8
74.0

B1
A1
B2
A2
B3
A3
B4
A4
B5
A5

formances achieved in the testing phase are 78.1%
for the sensitivity and 79.1% for the speciﬁcity.
The ROC curve obtained in the classiﬁcation of
the test set B2, containing 100 patterns derived
from 47 malignant masses and 53 benign masses,
is reported in ﬁg. 3. To this curve belongs the ope-
rating point whose values of sensitivity (78.7%)
and speciﬁcity (79.3%) are closer to the average
values achieved on the test sets by the ten diﬀe-
rent neural networks, as shown in tab. 1. As the
classiﬁer performances are conveniently evaluated
in terms of the area Az under the ROC curve, we
have estimated this parameter for the curve plot-
ted in ﬁg. 3, obtaining Az = 0.80 ± 0.04, where
the standard error has been evaluated according
to the formula given by Hanley and McNeil [20].

4. Conclusions and discussion

The system for the classiﬁcation of mammo-
graphic massive lesions into malignant and benign
we realized aims at improving the radiologist’s vi-
sual diagnosis of the degree of the lesion malig-
nancy. The system is a semi-automated one, i.e.
it segments and analyzes lesions from physician-
located rectangular ROIs. As mass segmentation
plays a key role in such kind of systems, most
eﬀorts have been devoted to the realization of a
It is based on
robust segmentation technique.
edge detection and it works with a comparable

Figure 3. ROC curve obtained in the classiﬁca-
tion of the test set B2 (see tab. 1).

eﬃciency both on malignant and benign masses.
The segmentation eﬃciency ǫ = 88.5% has been
evaluated with the assistance of an experienced
radiologist who accepted or rejected each seg-
mented mass. With respect to a number of au-
tomated or semi-automated systems with a simi-
lar purpose and using a similar approach already
discussed in the literature [8,9,10,11], the system
we present is characterized by a robust segmen-
tation technique: it is based on an edge-detection
algorithm completely free from any application-
dependent parameter.

Sixteen features based on shape, size and inten-
sity have been extracted out of each segmented
area and merged by a neural decision-making
system. The neural network performances have
been evaluated in terms of the ROC analysis, ob-
taining an estimated area under the ROC curve
Az = 0.80 ± 0.04. It gives the indication that the
segmentation procedure we developed provides a
quite accurate approximation of the mass shapes
and that the features we took into account for the
classiﬁcation have a good discriminating power.

6

Acknowledgments

We are grateful to the professors and the
radiologists of
the collaborating Radiological
Departments for their medical support during
the database acquisition. We acknowledge Dr
S. Franz from ICTP (Trieste, Italy) for useful dis-
cussions. Special thanks to Dr M. Tonutti from
Cattinara Hospital (Trieste, Italy) for her essen-
tial contribution to the present analysis.

REFERENCES

1. R.T. Greenlee, M.B. Hill-Harmon, T. Murray,
M. Thun, Ca-Cancer J. Clin. 51(1) (2001) 15.
Err. in: Ca-Cancer J. Clin. 51(2) (2001) 144.
2. F. Levi, F. Lucchini, E. Negri, P. Boyle,
C. La Vecchia, Ann. Oncol. 14 (2003) 490.
3. H.C. Zuckerman, Breast cancer: diagnosis
and treatment, pp 152–72. I.M. Ariel and
J.B. Cleary eds, New York: McGraw-Hill,
1987.

4. D.D. Adler and M.A. Helvie, Curr. Opin. Ra-

diol. 4(5) (1992) 123.

5. Z. Huo, M.L. Giger, C.J. Vyborny,
D.E. Wolverton, R.A. Schmidt, K. Doi,
Acad. Radiol. 5(3) (1998) 155.

6. Z. Huo, M.L. Giger, C.J. Vyborny,
D.E. Wolverton, C.E. Metz, Acad. Ra-
diol. 7(12) (2000) 1077.

7. B.

Sahiner, H.P. Chan, N. Petrick,
M.A. Helvie, M.M. Goodsitt, Med. Phys.
25(4) (1998) 516.

8. M.A. Wirth and A. Stapinski, Proc. SPIE

5150 (2003) 1995.

A. Retico et al.

9. A. Amini, S. Tehrani, T. Weymouth, Proc.
Second Int. Conf. Computer Vision, Tarpon
Springs, FL (1988) 95.

10. B. Sahiner, N. Petrick, H.P. Chan, L.M. Had-
jiiski, C. Paramagul, M.A. Helvie, M.N. Gur-
can, IEEE Trans. Med. Im. 20(12) (2001)
1275.

11. M.A. Kupinski and M.L. Giger, IEEE Trans.

Med. Im. 17(4) (1998) 510.

12. D.R. Chen, R.F. Chang, W.P. Kuo,
M.C. Chen, Y.L. Huang, Ultrasound Med.
Biol. 28(10) (2002) 1301.

13. I. Christoyianni, A. Koutras, E. Dermatas,
G. Kokkinakis, Proc. IEEE ICECS 1 (1999)
117.

14. W. Qian, L. Li, L.P. Clarke, Med. Phys. 26

(1999) 402.

15. L. Hadjiiski, B. Sahiner, H.P. Chan, N. Pet-
rick, M.A. Helvie, M. Gurcan, Med. Phys.
28(11) (2001) 2309.

16. B.

Sahiner, H.P. Chan, N. Petrick,
M.A. Helvie, L.M. Hadjiiski, Med. Phys.
28(7) (2001) 1455.

17. T.G. Dietterich, Neural Computation 10(7)

(1998) 1895.

(1974) 111.

18. M. Stone, J. Royal Statistical Soc. B 36

19. C.E. Metz, Invest. Radiol. 21(9) (1986) 720.
20. J.A. Hanley and B.J. McNeil, Radiology

21. U. Bottigli, et al., Proc. SPIE 4684 (2002)

143(1) (1982) 29.

1301.

22. R. Bellotti, et al., Proc. IEEE Nucl. Science

Symp. (2004) N33-173.

