9
9
9
1
 
r
p
A
 
8
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
d
e
m

.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
1
6
0
4
0
9
9
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Assessing the risk from the depleted uranium weapons used in Operation

Allied Force.

Th.E.Liolios1
Department of Theoretical Physics,University of Thessaloniki,Thessaloniki 54006,Greece

Abstract
The conﬂict in Yugoslavia has been a source of great concern for the neighboring coun-
tries, about the radiological and toxic hazard posed by the alleged presence of depleted
uranium in NATO weapons. In the present study a worst-case scenario is assumed mainly
to assess the risk for Greece and other neighboring countries of Yugoslavia at similar dis-
tances . The risk of the weapons currently in use is proved to be negligible at distances
greater than 100 Km. For shorter distances classiﬁed data of weapons composition are
needed to obtain a reliable assessment.

1.Introduction
Operation Allied Force (OAF) has been going on for weeks in Yugoslavia with grave
environmental consequences in the neighboring countries. Unfortunately, the sophisticated
weapons that are being used carry the spectrum of radiological contamination. Over the
past decades there has been a tremendous eﬀort in weapons laboratories to use depleted ura-
nium (DU) in conventional weapons in order to enhance their penetrability or to strengthen
armor panels (tanks, artillery etc.). Depleted uranium is used in a number of armor-piercing
anti-tank munitions, such as those aboard American A-10 Warthog jets and Apache heli-
copters, and M-1 Abrams and Bradley tanks. US. and Allied forces ﬁred approximately
315 tons of depleted uranium[1] during the Persian Gulf War. Yugoslav state news media
have referred to ”radioactive bombs” being launched by NATO. There is a strong likeli-
hood that the weapons referred to are composed of depleted uranium (DU). Its ability to
self-sharpen as it penetrates armor is the main reason why tungsten, which tends to mush-
room upon impact, has been abandoned. Neverheless, the high temperatures caused by the
high explosives (HE) detonated in the weapon or the friction between the ammunition and
the target (armor, concrete....) lead to the generation of uranium oxides which along with
the tiny fragments of the weapon case pose a serious radiological hazard to living beings.
So far no measurement has shown any increase in the environmental radioactivity either
in Yugoslavia or in Greece. As for the ﬁrst claim one has to rely on the local scientiﬁc
community to detect and assess the contamination. However, as there has been severe cen-
sorship on every sort of information by the Serbs, and most likely by the NATO oﬃcials,
the scientiﬁc community should independently attempt to reliably verify and assess the
possible implications of DU that have allegedly been dropped in the Balkans. Until some
counter detects the contamination the only resort available are theoretical hazard prediction
through computer simulations . By applying a worst case scenario, an initial emergency
assessment , or safety analysis planning is possible. Although, precise data about the per-
formance and the composition of these weapons are classiﬁed, in a worst case scenario one
1THE PRESENT WORK IS TO BE DEFENDED IN THE FORTHCOMING HELLENIC

NUCLEAR PHYSICS SYMPOSIUM. ALL COMMENTS ARE WELCOME.

email:theoliol@physics.auth.gr

1

can use the available declassiﬁed data which can still yield the magnitude of the hazard
and trigger an appropriate emergency planning and response. In the present work a very
reliable computer code has been used which simulates explosions where nuclear material is
involved. The code is ”HOTSPOT”[2] produced in the well known US weapons laboratory:
Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory by S.G.Homann. It is a very eﬀective Gaussian
plume model suitable for radiation risk assessments. Throughout the present work basic
information is given about fundamental radiological properties or weapons characteristics.
This is imperative as the results presented here are expected to be of interest to non-experts,
as well.

2.NATO weapons overview in OAF.
A thorough analysis of the weapons used by NATO against Serbia[3] indicates that some
of them are specially designed to penetrate hard targets . Despite the fact that the precise
composition of those missiles is classiﬁed there are some very strong arguments that point
out to the use of DU in the missile casing.

a) Yugoslav state news media have referred to ”radioactive bombs” being launched by

NATO [4].

b) The Tomahawk currently in use is Tomahawk Block III with improved target pene-

tration [5]. The only material that can improve target penetration nowadays is DU.

c) No data exist whatsoever about the composition of the Tomahawk high density
penetrator which raises an eyebrow about the motives of this secrecy. For example the US
DoD has openly declared the DU as the main component of the penetrator of other weapons
such the rounds of the AN/GAU-8 30mm Avenger seven-barrel gatling gun, mounted (only)
on the A-10 attack jet.

Some very penetrating weapons used in the current war are [7]:
Tomahawk missile. An all-weather submarine or ship launched land-attack missile.
It is been used to attack a variety of hard ﬁxed targets , which explains why the missile
has to be extremely penetrating (which makes it a DU sucpect). During the war in the
Gulf, 288 missiles where ﬁred (II generation) while so far more than 1000 (III generation
and probably some experimental of the IV generation ) are believed to have struck targets
in Serbia and Kosovo. That highly sophisticated weapons carries a single conventional
warhead or submunitions of 500 Kg of high explosives (HE). The BGM-109 model weighs
1192 Kg, has a length of 5.56 m, and a diameter of 51.8 cm ( without the booster ). A rough
estimate of the typical weight of its airframe is 400 Kg [8]. Besides, in the same category
we have to include the Air Force’s Conventional Air Launched Cruise Missile CALCM .
CALCM used to carry nuclear warheads and has been converted to conventiona weapons.
It may have been fortiﬁed with DU to withstand the blast of anti-missile defences of the
FUSSR. In any case, in a worst-case scenario, it must be considered a DU carrier though
the US DoD is rather convincing when it speaks of a cylindrical Aluminum and Titanium
case. The positive aspect of that weapons is that sample fragments of its casing, scattered
in the vicinity of the explosion, may reveal its composition.

BLU-107 Durandal .The Durandal anti-runway bomb was developed by the French
company MATRA, designed solely for the purpose of destroying runways. Once the parachute-
retarded low-level drop bomb attains a nose-down attitude, it ﬁres a rocket booster that

2

penetrates the runway surface, and a delayed explosion buckles a portion of the runway. It
can penetrate up to 40 centimeters of concrete, creating a 200 square meter crater causing
damage more diﬃcult to repair than the crater of a general-purpose bomb.

BLU-109/B. The BLU-109/B (I-2000) is an improved 2,000-pound-class bomb de-
signed as a penetrator without a forward fuze well. Its conﬁguration is relatively slim, and
its skin is much harder than that of the standard MK-84 bomb. The skin is a single-piece,
Its usual tail fuze is a mechanical-
forged warhead casing of one-inch, high-grade steel.
electrical FMU- 143. The 1,925-pound bomb has a 550-pound tritonal high-explosive blast
warhead

Guided Bomb Unit-28 (GBU-28). The Guided Bomb Unit-28 (GBU-28) is a special
weapon developed for penetrating hardened command centers located deep underground.
The GBU-28 is a 5,000-pound laser-guided conventional munition that uses a 4,400-pound
penetrating warhead. The bombs are modiﬁed Army artillery tubes, weigh 4,637 pounds,
and contain 630 pounds of high explosives.

AGM-114 Hellﬁre II. Laser Hellﬁre presently is used as the main armament of the
U.S. Army’s AH-64 Apache and US. Marine Corps’s AH-1W Super Cobra helicopters. For
antiarmor roles, the AGM-114 missile has a conical shaped charge warhead with a copper
liner cone that forms the jet that provides armor penetration. This high explosive, antitank
warhead is eﬀective against various types of armor including appliqu´e and reactive. Actual
penetration performance is classiﬁed.

The PGU-14/B API ammunition. That Armor Piercing Incendiary round has a
lightweight body which contains a sub-calibre high density penetrator of Depleted Uranium
(DU). In addition to its penetrating capability DU is a natural pyrophoric material which
enhances the incendiary eﬀects. It is used by the AN/GAU-8 30mm Avenger ( a 30mm
seven-barrel gatling gun, mounted only on the A-10 attack jet, used primarily in the air to
ground role as a soft target killer and tank buster) and also by the M230 automatic gun
mounted on the Apache helicopter.

M256 120mm smoothbore cannon.

It is the main weapon of the M1A1 battle
tank. The primary armor-defeating ammunition of this weapon is the armor-piercing,
ﬁn-stabilized, discarding sabot (APDS-FS) round, which features a depleted uranium pen-
etrators. Battle tanks have not been used yet by the NATO forces, therefore that scenario
is not studied for the time being.

In our study we will focus our simulation on the Tomahawk missiles and the BLU-109
bomb as not only do they represent well our worst case scenario but also the available
declassiﬁed information suﬃces for our risk assessment approach. Note that the bomblet
dispersion version of Tomahawk is not expected to have an improved penetration capability
and therefore our models will focus on the single warhead version.

2. A short description of DU
Depleted uranium[9] is the metallic remnant of a series of processes the uranium ore
undergoes and it is roughly 60 percent as radioactive as naturally occurring uranium. On
the other hand, Uranium, a radioactive element, is a silver-white metal in its pure form.
It is a heavy metal nearly twice as dense as lead (cid:16)19 gr
cm3 (cid:17). On
average, each of us takes in 1.9 µg (0.65 × 10−6µCi) of uranium a day from food and water,

cm3 (cid:17) compared with (cid:16)11.4 gr

3

and inhales a very small fraction 7 × 10−3µg (2.3 × 10−9µCi) every day. In nature Uranium
is composed of three isotopes (each has its own unique decay process emitting some form
of ionizing radiation:alpha, beta, gamma radiation or a combination) in the following ratio:

NATURAL URANIUM COMPOSITION

92 U (0.0054%) ,235
234

92 U (0.7%) ,238

92 U (99.3%)

In the gaseous diﬀusion process two fractions are produced in the form of UF6 : one
enriched in 235U and the other depleted in 235U. The former is further processed to give
weapons-grade Uranium (WgU) whereas the latter is chemically transformed by weapons
manufacturers into Uranium metal and alloys, suitable for ammunition and armor panels.
In fact, DU has a low content of 234U, and 235U which have been removed in the depletion

process. Therefore the product and by-product of the enrichment are respectively [10]:

WEAPON-GRADE URANIUM COMPOSITION

92 U (1%) ,235
234

92 U (93.5%) ,238

92 U (5.5%)

DEPLETED URANIUM COMPOSITION

92 U (0, 2%) ,238
235

92 U (99, 8%)

After the enrichment process DU can used as a fusion tamper in the thermonuclear
weapons. The fusion tamper prevents the escape of thermal radiation from the thermonu-
clear fuel thus enhancing the burn eﬃciency. Moreover, fast neutrons ( 2.45MeV and
14.1MeV ) from the fusion processes ﬁssion the DU tamper. This extra boost accounts for
half the yield of a ﬁssion-fusion-ﬁssion nuclear bomb [11].

The most important constituent of DU is 238
92 U , an alpha emitter with a half-life of
4.5 × 109 years and a speciﬁc activity of 3.4 × 10−7 Ci
gr (while the isotope 235U has a speciﬁc
activity of 2.2 × 10−6 Ci
It has two short-lived daughters :(234T h, half-life of 24.1
gr )[12].
days) and (234P a, half-life of 1.17 minutes) which are beta and weak gamma emitters.
Because of this constant nuclear decay process, very small amounts of these ”daughters”
are always present in DU. On the other hand 235U (half-life 7 × 108 years) decays into
231P a (half-life 3.25 × 104 years), which is an alpha, beta, and gamma ray emitter. The
238U and 235U chains continue through a series of long-lived isotopes before terminating in
stable, non-radioactive lead isotopes 206P b and 207P b. Note that regardless of its size (large
fragments or small particles), once entering the body, DU is subject to various degrees of
solubilization-it dissolves in bodily ﬂuids, which act as a solvent. Its main toxic eﬀects are
cellular necrosis and renal failure. The American Conference of Governmental Industrial
Hygienists (ACGIH) has established a Threshold Limit Value (TLV ) [13]of 0.2 mg
m3 (for both
soluble and insoluble compounds). TLVs are based on the principle that there is a threshold
below which no adverse health eﬀects occur and are called time-weighted-average values
because they are averaged over an 8-hour workday, for a 40-hour workweek over a working

4

lifetime. Though TVLs were developed for the working environment , in the battleﬁeld or
in emergency planning they can still give a measure of the risk.

4. Simulation of Tomahawk attacks .
In the present work we will limit our discussion in the conventional use of DU as this is
currently employed in Yugoslavia. It is common sense that most of the attacks industrial
facilities , bridges and government buildings need weapons with enhanced penetrability.
That need spell the name of DU. Such is also the case for anti-tank munition, anti-radar
bombs or weapons which destroy the runways of airports. The most infamous weapon is
the Tomahawk missile used day after day by the NATO alliance.

Being consistent with our worst case scenario we assume that the whole frame of a
Tomahawk missile is made of DU which is very plausible otherwise the missile might not
withstand the blast of a nearby anti-missile explosion let alone the tremendous collision with
the hard target. We also assume that the weather conditions are such that the Gaussian
plume model can be applied.

As each Tomahawk missile is assumed to carry 400 Kg of DU , the presence of 235U
is negligible, we have an activity of 0.136 Ci per missile.. After the impact only a small
quantity will constitute the respirable fraction-deﬁned as the fraction of the released ma-
terial associated with an Activity Median Aerodynamic Diameter (AMAD) of 1µm. The
default ICRP-30[14] internal dosimetry conversion factors also assume an AMAD particle-
size distribution of 1µm. During the explosion a temperature of 5000 0C is reached (typical
of HE[15]) which exceeds the boiling point of Uranium (4700 0C). That temperature will
produce a large quantity of DU aerosols in the form of Uranium Oxides that may ﬁnd their
way into the respiratory tract.

The default respirable fraction of 20% , used in the HOTSPOT, is indeed a plausible
scenario. That being the case, one comes to the conclusion that each Tomahawk carries
a respirable radioactivity of 27 mCi
missile. To realize the magnitude of that activity, a typical
radioactive quantity injected into a patient in a thyroid function test is 10 µCi that is
approximately 2700 times less. On the other hand a typical amount of radioactivity released
in a large scale reactor accident is 108Ci, [18]that is approximately 109 more.

If we take into account that for 238U inhaled, the committed eﬀective dose equivalent
rem [19] we arrive at the following

Ci and also that we have 5 × 10−4 cancers

(CEDE ) is 1.2 × 108 rem
result

27 × 10−3 Ci

missile

× 1.2 × 108 rem
Ci

× 5 × 10−4 cancers
rem

= 1620

cancers
missile

That is the total lethality per missile assuming that all the respirable fraction is inhaled
by the population which of course is a not a realistic scenario but it only serves to show
the maximum potential of a Tomahawk (assumed to carry DU) to cause cancer. The non-
respirable fraction which consists of fragments scattered in the vicinity of the explosion,
and particles much larger than 1µm were not taken into account. They will be ignored
in the rest of this study though the are highly toxic and will deﬁnitely be localized and
contaminate the vicinity of the explosion. Nor will we discuss the aggravation of lethality
due to open wound or injuries during the rescue operations.

5

Of course during the explosion the distribution of the radioactive DU is governed by
such factors as wind speed, amount of explosives , deposition velocity and so on that will
further reduce the lethality of the missile.

In the model of this study we make the assumption that a single Tomahawk strike is
actually a 400 Kgr DU explosion which involves the detonation of 500 Kgr of HE. The
release fraction is 20% ( that is the percentage of the airframe that can be inhaled after the
explosion) and the wind speed is assumed to be 8 m
sec . The time of day is night (stability
class D) , while the deposition velocity is 1 cm
sec . Moreover the concentration is measured
on the ground for a sample time of 10 minutes. The ”HOTSPOT” calculations yield the
50-years CEDE (due to inhalation as the ground shine is negligible) and the concentration
of radioactivity on the ground at various distances. Note that the cloud eﬀective height
calculated in the present model agree well with the experimental data of detonations of a
similar yield[16]

Distance (Km)
50-CEDE (mrem)
Goncentration (cid:16)10−3 µCi
m2 (cid:17)

0.1
1.6
13

0.2
1.4
11

0.5
1.0
7.7

1
0.7
5.4

2
0.46
3.4

5
0.25
1.8

10
0.15
1.1

20
0.088
0.53

50
0.037
0.16

75
0.025
0.09

100
0.018
0.06

If we take into account that the current established protection standards are:[17]
a) 5 rems in a year for workers (to protect against cancer).
b) 50 rems in a year for workers to any organ (to protect against threshold eﬀects, such

as radiation burns, etc.).

c) 50 rems in a year to the skin or to any extremity.
d) 15 rems in a year to the lens of the eye (to protect against cataracts).
e) 0.1 rem in a year (70-year lifetime) for members of the public.
we come to the conclusion that people who are as close as 100m at the time of the
explosion are expected to receive sixty time less than the maximum allowed dose per year.
Needles to say, at distances larger than 20 Km the doses are negligible. Of course, at close
distances, the results of the blast wave will be devastating and will prevail over any other
eﬀect.

The ground deposition, on the other hand, reaches the concentration of 0.013 µCi

distance of 100m where we have to remember that a concentration of 2 µCi
land to be rendered unsuitable for cultivation, that is almost 150 times more.

m2 at a
m2 is needed for

To underline the impossibility of DU radiological contamination for countries such as
Greece we can assume that 1000 such attacks are made against targets in Pristina in
Northern Kosovo. That would cause a 50-CEDE of 0.018 rem at a distance of 100 Km.
Note that a CT exam administers a dose of 1.1rem (head and body). As Greece is at
least 100 Km away from the closest point in Kosovo, that worst case scenario proves that
there is no DU radiological hazard from the Tomahawk attacks in Yugoslavia at such large
distances even if we assume that the weapon is loaded with DU.

6. Simulation of BLU-109/B bomb attacks.
In that model , consistent with our worst case scenario, we also assume that the ”skin”
of the bomb is made entirely of DU though the US DoD speaks of a one-inch, high-grade
steel. In that case we have the explosion of 651 Kg of DU with 243 Kg of HE. Therefore

6

assuming the use of a quantity of 1000 BLU-109/B against targets in Pristina and the same
conditions as in the Tomahawk case we obtain a 50-CEDE of 0.032 rem at a distance of 100
Km. The combined dose is still very low 0.05rem (equal to 6 chest x-rays).

At distances of 150 Km (Greek borders) the doses are practically negligible, even in
those worst-case scenaria.
In fact, if such was the case then those attacks would have
dropped some 800 tons (160 respirable tons) of DU in Yugoslavia when according to the
Iraqi authorities the war in the Gulf left 315 tons of DU in Iraq.. Admittedly, the presence
of DU in the weapons used in the Gulf must have been very detrimental to the people of
Iraq, which justiﬁes the use of the worst-case scenaria for our assessment
7. DU of the PGU-14/B API and the APDS-FS rounds .
A typical combat load for the GAU-8 gun is 1,100 30 mm rounds. Each round con-
tains 330gr of DU , alloyed with 0.75 weight percent titanium. The projectile is encased
in 0.8 mm-thick aluminum shell as the ﬁnal DU round[20], preventing any escape of the
a−radiation emitted.. Consequently each round carries approximately 10−4Ci. That means
that, if it all becomes respirable, it can induce a dose of 104rem which amounts to 5 cancers
round .
Upon impact, the shell is subject to high temperatures due to friction with the armor panel.
Moreover, if the armored vehicle explodes or is set on ﬁre then a worst-case scenario should
include the respirable activity produced by the armor panel. For example, the Abrams bat-
tle tank’s thicker armor is reinforced at the turret and ﬂanks by DU panels inserted between
regular steel armor. Another source of DU is the primary armor-defeating ammunition of
the M256 120mm smoothbore cannon (main weapon of the M1A1 battle tank), which is an
armor-piercing, ﬁn-stabilized, discarding sabot round. It is imperative that battle tanks,
attacked by NATO forces in Yugoslavia, are closely examined for radioactive traces. Note
that the DU rounds always leave a distinctive radioactive trace on the entrance and exit
holes. Each time an Apache ﬁres its whole load, 66 Kg of respirable DU will be released in
the environment (worst-case scenario, 20% respirable DU). It would take 6000 such attacks
to produce the amount of respirable DU we used in the Tomahawk scenario. It is rather
unlikely that such a number of attacks has occured so far and even if that was the case
people at distances greater than 100 Km would not be endangered.

However,

it should be stressed that the danger for the people at close distances is
expected to be signiﬁcant, especially after ”battle tank ﬁres”. Hence, the ground operations
being contemplated at the moment are most likely to cause higher cancer mortality for
NATO and Serbian troops alike.

8. The Hellﬁre case. Due to its low yield and weight (warhead weighs less than 10
Kg) it is not expected to produce any radiological or chemical risk at the distances studied
here. If the classiﬁed composition of its armor-piercing structure is indeed DU , then it is
expected to pose a serious hazard to people at close distances, especially during ” battle
tank ﬁres”. Since no solid evidence exists and no use of the weapon in question has been
made yet, any further assumption might further complicate the current situation.

9. Chemical toxicity of DU.
A simple example of the toxic risk of DU can be known without knowing details of
the population over which it is dispersed and the meteorological conditions. Suppose that
16 tons of respirable DU ( one tenth of all the respirable quantity of our scenario) is dispersed

7

uniformly over Greece which has an area of 132.000 Km2 . We assume that all the aerosols
have been concentrated in a volume with 1Km height. This gives a concentration of
1.2 × 10−4 mg

m3 which is about 1600 times less than the threshold limit value.

A similar calculation yields an air concentration of 6.4 × 10−4 mg

m3 for FYROM which

should not cause much concern either.

The lifetime of the toxic cloud depends on the height and the rate at which the particles
fall out. A deposition velocity of 1 cm
sec is very plausible while particles larger than 1µm will
fall faster. Rain or moisture will increase that velocity. In that scenario, particles from the
top of the cloud will take 27 hours to reach the ground. It is very unlikely that the cloud
will remain over a city for that long. Even a light breeze (5 m
sec) will carry the cloud beyond
a city the size of Thessaloniki in a few hours. During that time, a person breathing at a
normal rate 1 m3
hr would take in 3.2µg of DU which is just the amounts one inhales in 1.2
years (natural background)

Of course an actual toxic cloud is not expected to have the above shape but the present
model gives solid evidence that the fear of toxic poisoning at large distances, due to DU
that is allegedly used in the present war, is groundless. Note that the amount of DU that
could be inhaled is independent of the height and the extend of the cloud as shown in a
similar study that disproved exaggerated allegations about Plutonium risks[21].

That absolutely worst-case scenaria show that there is no immediate hazard from the
radiological or chemical toxicity of DU for the neighboring countries of Yugoslavia. Ad-
mittedly, localized DU can enter the food chain and reach inhabitants of other countries
by means of exported goods or river streams. However, such aspects are regarded as less
harmful than actual inhalation of the DU plume.

10.Conclusions.
We have assumed a worst-case scenario mainly to assess the radiological and chemical
risk of the alleged use of DU in OAF, for Greece and other neighboring countries of Yu-
goslavia at similar distances. The risk is found to be negligible for the time being at large
distances. The use of the PGU-14/B API ammunition seems to be the most hazardous
weapon in the theater of operations. Its use so far has been limited to the Avenger gun of
the A-10 jet. If Apache helicopters move in, the eﬀects will escalate and need further in-
vestigation. The present model cannot be used to quantitatively assess the hazards for the
people of Yugoslavia, which is expected to be signiﬁcant if the use of the API ammunition
escalates . Accurate data about the composition of the weapons in question are needed in
order to predict the radiological and chemical contamination of DU. Such data could be
either obtained by the NATO authorities or by studying the fragments of the Tomahawk
missiles (and the BLU bombs) in the scene of the explosion. Once DU is detected, the
above simulation can be modiﬁed in order to perform a reliable risk assessment in the area.

DISCLAIMER
The author is a Doctor of Theoretical Nuclear Physics and an aﬃliated researcher of
the Dept. of Theoretical Physics at the University of Thessaloniki. He currently teaches at
the Hellenic War College. The views and opinions of the author expressed herein do not
necessarily state or reﬂect those of the above institutes.

8

References

[1] FAS, http://www.fas.org/man/dod-101/ops/docs99/ 990406-kosovo-du.htm

[2] S.Homann, ”HOTSPOT”, Health Physics Codes for the PC, Lawrence Livermore Na-

tional Laboratory, UCLR-MA-106315, (1994)

[3] FAS, http://www.fas.org/man/dod-101/ops/kosovo.htm

[4] Report broadcast on MSNBC, April 1

[5] GAO/NSIAD-95-116, ”Cruise Missiles”, Chapter Report, 04/20/95

[6] FAS, http://www.fas.org/man/dod-101/sys/smart/bgm-109.htm

[7] FAS, op.cit.

[8] K.Tsipis, Scientiﬁc American, 20 (236) 1977

[9] Environmental Exposure Report, US DoD, http://www.gulﬂink.osd.mil/du/

[10] S.Fetter, Science and Global Security, 225 (1) 1990

[11] K.Tsipis. ”Understandig weapons in the nuclear age”, (1983), ISBN 0-671-44073-X,

Simon & Schuster inc.

[12] S.Homann, op. cit.

[13] 1998 TLVs and BEIs, Threshold Limit Values for Chemical Substances and Physical
Agents, Biological Exposure Indices, American Conference of Governmental Industrial
Hygienists

[14] International Commission on Radiological Protection (1979), ICRP Publication 30,

Part1, Vol.2, No. 3/4, Pergamon Press, NY.

[15] E.J.Kansa,LLNL, UCRL-ID-128733

[16] E.J.Kansa, op.cit.

[17] Title 10, Code of Federal Regulations, Part 20, Standards for Protection Against Ra-
diation, Subpart C, 20.1201: Occupational Dose Limits for Adults; and Subpart D,
20.1301, Dose Limits for Individual Members of the Public

[18] S.Fetter, K.Tsipis, PSTIS , Report #5, 1980 , MIT.

[19] International Commission on Radiological Protection , ICRP Publication 60 (Perga-

mon Press, Oxfordm UK, 1991)

[20] FAS, op. cit.

[21] W.G.Sutcliﬀe at al, LLNL, UCRL-JC-118825

9

