Submitted to Studies in History and Philosophy of Modern Physics.

Fiber Bundle Gauge Theories and “Field’s Dilemma”

Yair Guttmann

Philosophy Department, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305, USA

Holger Lyre

Institut f¨ur Philosophie, Ruhr-Universit¨at Bochum,
D-44780 Bochum, Germany, e-mail: holger.lyre@ruhr-uni-bochum.de

May 2000

Abstract. We propose a distinction between the physical and the mathe-
matical parts of gauge ﬁeld theories. The main problem we face is to uphold a
strong and meaningful criterion of what is physical. We like to call it “Field’s
dilemma”, referring to Hartry Field’s nominalist proposal which we consider
to be inadaequate. The resolution to the dilemma, we believe, is implicitly
provided by the so-called ﬁber bundle formalism. We shall demonstrate, in de-
tail, that the bundle structure underlying modern quantum and gravitational
gauge ﬁeld theories allows for a genuine distinction between the physically
signiﬁcant and the merely mathematical parts of these theories.

0
0
0
2

 

y
a
M
9
1

 

 
 
]
h
p
-
t
s
i
h

.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 

1
v
1
5
0
5
0
0
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Fiber Bundle Gauge Theories and “Field’s Dilemma”

2

Contents

1 The emergence of “Field’s dilemma”

2 Fiber bundles

2.1 The direct product and its generalization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

2.2 The deﬁnition of ﬁber bundles . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

2.3 Diﬀerent types of ﬁber bundles . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

2.3.1

Sections and coordinate bundles

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

3

7

7

8

9

9

2.3.2 Principal bundles and associated vector bundles

. . . . . . . . 10

2.4 Connections on a principal ﬁber bundle

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12

3 Gauge ﬁeld theories

14

3.1 General conceptual and terminological issues

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14

3.2 Quantum gauge ﬁeld theories . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16

3.2.1 Dirac-Maxwell theory . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17

3.2.2 Yang-Mills theories . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18

3.3 Gravitational gauge ﬁeld theories . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20

3.3.1 The gravitational gauge principle . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20

3.3.2 Objects and principles in general relativity . . . . . . . . . . . 22

4 The resolution of “Field’s dilemma”

26

4.1 Five questions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26

4.2 Conclusion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31

Fiber Bundle Gauge Theories and “Field’s Dilemma”

3

1 The emergence of “Field’s dilemma”

In his book Science without Numbers Hartry Field (1980) raises an important ontological issue.
We believe in the existence of theoretical entities, Field claims, because they are indispensable.
We need them in order to explain phenomena which need to be explained. However, our scientiﬁc
theories in general and physical theories in particular are formulated using, also, a mathematical
vocabulary: functions, transformations, integrals, derivatives and, of course, real and complex
numbers appear in the formulation of every theory in physics. And, it seems that these math-
ematical entities, too, are needed in order to construct explanations. Does it not follow, then,
that we should be committed to the existence of these seemingly indispensable mathematical
entities for the same reason that makes us believe in the reality of theoretical entities? The
answer, says Field, is that the “purely mathematical” part of physics is not truly indispensable
for explanatory purposes. Let T be the physical part of a theory and let S be its mathematical
part. If A is a physical fact which needs explanation, says Field, and it can be explained in
terms of S + T , it can be explained in terms of T alone. The inclusion of S is merely a matter
of convention. Hence, we do not have to worry about the ontology of its objects.

On this level of abstraction Field’s question strikes us as a very important one and his general
strategy for answering it seems promising. Indeed, it seems that a signiﬁcant advancement in
our understanding of physics will be achieved if we could identify and characterize the part of
theoretical physics which stands for real physical processes and distinguish it from the merely
mathematical and, hence, the “contentless” part of physics to use Field’s own terminology. Our
next step, then, is to outline Field’s speciﬁc strategy. It is in this strategy that Field sees the
merit of his account.

Let T and S be, respectively, the “physical” and the “mathematical” parts of a theory.
Let A be a “nominalistically statable” assertion A (A is a statement whose quantiﬁers were
restricted to range only on non-mathematical objects). Field’s strategy for demonstrating that
S is dispensable is to prove that if A is a semantic consequence of S + T it is a consequence of
T alone. Such a demonstration establishes that S + T is a conservative extension of T , namely
that every model of S + T is also a model of T alone. Field claims that if T + S is proven to
be a conservative extension of T , S is thereby shown to be “contentless”; it does not place any
signiﬁcant constraints on the models of T +S that could distinguish them from models of T alone.
Indeed, writes Field, “...
it would be extremely surprising if it were discovered that standard
mathematics implied that there are 106 non-mathematical objects or that the Paris commune
was defeated; and were such discovery to be made all but unregenerate rationalists would take
this as showing that standard mathematics needed revision. Good mathematics is conservative.”
(Field, 1980, p. 13). Of course, says Field, we need to assume that standard mathematics is
consistent (otherwise S would not have any non-trivial models). This assumption, itself, cannot
be proven conclusively. However, we all believe that standard mathematics, being a very useful
theory, must be consistent. Once this assumption is made, says Field, it is relatively easy to
prove that standard mathematics is conservative: “Indeed, ...
the gap between the claim of
consistency and the full claim of conservativeness is, in the case of standard mathematics, a
very tiny one.” (Field, 1980, p. 13). This is certainly an interesting observation. Regarding
the issue of the truth of mathematics Field claims that it is a mute point. Mathematics can be
considered true if mathematical entities are assumed to exist. The main reason for believing in

Fiber Bundle Gauge Theories and “Field’s Dilemma”

4

the existence of mathematical objects, says Field, is that they are indispensable for explanatory
purposes. But since Field has supposedly shown that mathematical entities are not needed for
explaining physical facts he regards the issue of mathematical truth as being simply irrelevant.

A critique of Field’s argument necessitates a full discussion of his “nominalistic reconstruc-
tion” of various physical theories. This undertaking, however, is not necessary in the present
context; the critique of Field’s theory is not the main focus of this article. What we want to
present here is another way of answering Field’s question, namely, how to divide physics into
a “truly physical part” and a “merely mathematical” part and then demonstrate that the for-
mer should be regarded as representing real and objective phenomena while the latter is to
be regarded as dispensable “conceptual scaﬀolding”. The details of our analysis, though, are
signiﬁcantly diﬀerent. Firstly, the sense in which physical theories are divided into the physical
and the mathematical parts is completely diﬀerent from the one Field employed. Field uses
logical tools to aﬀect the decomposition; we, on the other hand, shall use the mathematics of
ﬁber bundles to formulate our constructions. Secondly, our characterization of what is physical
is quite diﬀerent from Field’s. For our purposes the physical part of the theory is the one with
experimental consequences. This is a much stricter criterion than the one which underlines
Field’s argument. Because of our criterion we are led to consider the local gauge covariance
principle as the paradigm of what is physical. We believe that this feature of our account brings
us much closer to the physicist’s way of thinking. Finally, the method of proving that various
mathematical constructions are dispensable vary signiﬁcantly from Field’s. First, we have noth-
ing that is analogous to the proof of conservative extension. We believe that what makes the
mathematical part of the theory diﬀerent from the physical part is not that we can do without
it. Instead, one should show that a diﬀerent choice of mathematical formulation would not have
led to a theory with diﬀerent experimental consequences.

Ultimately, our account should be judged on its own merit; it is not even absolutely clear
that it is an alternative to Field’s approach and not a complimentary set of observations. We
do, however, believe that Field’s account suﬀers from some serious problems. Consequently, we
feel the need to “save” Field’s general strategy from the speciﬁc interpretation he assignes to it.
In this sense, and only in this sense, we are engaged in a critique of Field’s account.

The problems in Field’s account to which we alluded are the following:

(i) The formulations which Field oﬀers to various physical theories do not have much to be
recommended for them, that is, apart from their value for the nominalist. Although
Field claims that his formulations yield “reasonably attractive” theories we believe that
physicists would ﬁnd them quite objectionable.

(ii) The notion of semantic consequence which Field uses is an abstract and non-constructive
notion. He does not show us how to actually derive any “nominalistically statable” asser-
tion from T alone. Hence, such assertions do not, stricly speaking, receive an explanation
from T alone.

(iii) Field’s idea of the physical is quite inﬂationary. For instance, he regards spacetime points
In this respect his attempt to “physicalize geometry” is in stark

as physical entities.
contrast to the general-relativistically motivated movement to “geometrize physics”.

Fiber Bundle Gauge Theories and “Field’s Dilemma”

5

(iv) More generally, the very logic of Field’s argument mandates that he uses a very loose
and weak notion of the physical so that the resulting theory T will be powerful enough
to entail the consequences of T + S. This way of thinking is, again, in opposition to
the line of thinking of the physicist. As we remarked earlier, we believe that the term
physical assertion should be reserved only for those aspects of physics which have empirical
consequences.

(v) Finally we do not believe, like Field does, that we can do without mathematical concepts
altogether nor do we think that this is what we need to prove in order to characterize the
ontological diﬀerence between mathematical and physical entities. It might turn out that
we cannot proceed without some mathematical structures and notations. What we need
to demonstrate, in order to account for the diﬀerence between the mathematical and the
physical, is that had we chosen another mathematical “convention” or construction, the
experimentally testable part of the theory would have remained essentially unaﬀected. It
is this type of invariance with respect to the choice of mathematical description that allows
us to conclude that there is no need to interpret the “merely mathematical” entities of the
theory as physically real.

All these problems are quite troublesome. There is, however, one issue that seems to us to
deserve special attention. In discussing what criterion to use for what is uniquely a physical phe-
nomenon many philosophers would tend to favor a relatively rigid criterion; in particular, there
is, clearly, much to recommend about the idea that when we assert that a physical phenomenon
occurs, we must show that the assertion has empirical consequences. On the other hand, in the
interest of aﬀecting a workable distinction between the “genuinely physical” and the “merely
mathematical”, some of the same philosophers might be susceptible to the pressure of employing
an inclusive criterion. In this context even a loose characterization of what is physical, if it yields
a distinction between mathematics and physics, seems preferable to no distinction at all. This
pressure is particularly strong for those who look for a proof that the merely mathematical part
of physics S is dispensible. By “smuggling” into the physical part T large portion of S + T one
obtains a relatively strong T and a relatively weak S, making it easier to prove that S + T is
a conservative extension of T . A similar motivation lurks behind much of what is attractive in
various forms of substantivalism. When one regards space-time points as physical entities one
leaves very little in the purely mathematical part of physics. This residue seems to play a merely
faciliatory role akin to that played by the logical connectives; therefore the inﬂationary criterion
for the physical leaves us with very little temptation to attach to it any ontological signiﬁcance.
The price, though, is in our opinion much too high. Therefore, we shall try to ﬁnd a way around
it.

To sum up, then, we are faced with a double pressure. On the one hand we would like to
employ a relatively restrictive criterion of what is physically signiﬁcant; but on the other we
are pressured in the opposite direction to aﬀect a distinction between the mathematical and the
physical parts. This is what we propose to call “Field’s dilemma”. A large portion of this
article is dedicated to show how to escape this dilemma, that is, how to uphold a restrictive
criterion of what is physical while making it possible to distinguish beween the mathematical
part of physics and its truly physical parts.

Fiber Bundle Gauge Theories and “Field’s Dilemma”

6

Let us now describe the contents of this paper. Our main purpose is to present a new
conception of the ontology of gauge ﬁeld theories (the most fundamental ﬁeld theoretic approach
of physics today). This conception, we believe, is implicit in the ﬁber bundle formalism. The
construction of ﬁber bundles makes it possible to distinguish the “merely mathematical” aspects
of physical theories from their “truly physical” parts. From this aspect stems the importance
of ﬁber bundles for the discussion of the ontology of physical theories, as we see it. The gauge
principle has a precise and uniform representation in ﬁber bundle theoretic terms. Therefore,
a careful study of these structures will allow us to better understand this principle and to
distinguish between gauge principle and “merely mathematical” covariance principles.

To those who are acquainted with the bundle formalism there is no need to exalt its virtue
at length. It is enough to mention that, at least in principle, every physical ﬁeld theory can be
given a speciﬁc formulation using the construction of the appropriate ﬁber bundle. Therefore,
one may think of the ﬁber bundle formalism as the lingua universalis of modern physics. The
basic ideas and deﬁnitions of bundle theory have been present in the mathematical literature for
well over ﬁfty years. These ideas are classiﬁed under the headings of diﬀerential geometry and
algebraic topology, two disciplines which gave rise to some of the most important mathematical
developments of the twentieth century. However, the application of these ideas to physics are
much more recent. Only in the last two or three decades did the power of these methods, as
they apply to mathematical physics, become evident. Mathematical physicists who used them
managed to derive impressive results which could not have been obtained in other ways. Since
then the study of ﬁber bundles has become part of the standard education of young physicists.
These developments lend some urgency to the project of properly understanding the ideas behind
the ﬁber bundle formalism. The investigation of these ideas and their applications to physics
will occupy the center part of this paper.

Fiber Bundle Gauge Theories and “Field’s Dilemma”

7

2 Fiber bundles

2.1 The direct product and its generalization

“graph” Gf , that is, with the set of all ordered pairs1 (x, y) such that f (x) = y (note that Gf is

In this chapter we try to give a brief and self-contained introduction to the mathematics of ﬁber
bundles. Our key motivation is the idea of generalizing the direct product and its set theoretic
background; in the later section of this chapter we shall show the connection of this presentation
with more physics-oriented presentations such as Drechsler and Mayer (1977) and Trautman
(1984).

Of the many contributions of set theory to the foundations of mathematics the set-theoretic
deﬁnition of mathematical functions which emerged early in the development of set theory
stands as a milestone. Until the end of the 19th century mathematicians thought of functions
as rules of correspondence. That is, if x ∈
f(x) was considered to be a procedure or a recipe to obtain y = f (x) from x. As a consequence,
in order to determine whether y = f (x) or not, one had to inquire into the meaning of the
instruction underlying f . Such inquiries, by deﬁnition, cannot be completely precise; therefore,
a need was felt for a more rigorous deﬁnition of the concept of a mathematical function.

X is a member of the domain of f , the expression
As the reader undoubtedly knows, in set theory the function f :X
Y is identiﬁed with its
a subset of the direct productX
Y). Hence, the question of whether y = f (x) can be answered
the relations betweenX,Y andX
Y. More precisely, we investigate
X
Y
X
The fundamental idea of the ﬁber bundle construction is to continue investigatingX,Y,
X
Y and πx but to give up πy, the projection intoY. What could be a reason for giving up
πy? The idea is thatY has an “additional layer of hidden structure” which is “indispensable”,

where πx(x, y) = x and πy(x, y) = y. πx and πy are called projections. In view of the founda-
tional signiﬁcance of the direct product construction it should be interesting for philosophers of
mathematics to ﬁnd out how it can be generalized. Indeed, this is the motivating idea behind
the ﬁber bundle formalism. As we shall see shortly, the generalization of the direct product can
be viewed as yet another conception of the nature of mathematical functions.

by simply checking that (x, y) ∈ Gf ; imprecise “instructions” and “rules of correspondence” are
banished from the ontology of mathematics. If f is a well deﬁned function, Gf is a well deﬁned
set and the question whether or not (x, y) ∈ Gf has an unambiguous answer.

As a result of the following considerations, rather than investigating f , we may investigate

×

πx ւ

ց πy

(1)

×

×

Y

→

×

that is, in order to determine the values of f this layer of structure has to be taken into account.
Therefore, an adequate representation of the situation should make the dependence on this layer
of structure explicit. Let us think of the above mentioned layer of structure as a group G which

1An ordered pair can be identiﬁed with a simple set using, for example, the convention (x, y) = {x, {y}}.

Fiber Bundle Gauge Theories and “Field’s Dilemma”

instead of (1). Now let x ∈

2.2 The deﬁnition of ﬁber bundles

8

(2)

Y

×

G ×

→

This somewhat imprecise description will allow us to give the reader a primary concept of ﬁber
bundles and an idea of the way they generalize the direct product. A ﬁber bundle is a structure
h

operates2 onY. We get
X
Y
πx ւX
Y
x (x) (Yx is called the ﬁber over x). Let us now
X and letYx = π−1
Y. If G is generated by a single element g all the elements of
deﬁne a family of mapsYx →
Y are in one equivalence class and each of the elements ofX is assigned withYx, an identical
copy ofY. If G is generated by more than one element for every generating element of G we
Y (in other words, the assignment ofYx, the ﬁber over x, is
shall have another mapYx →
“sensitive” to the operation of G onY).
E,B, π,F, Gi which includes
(i) The bundle space (or total space)E
(ii) The base spaceB
(iii) The ﬁber spaceF
(iv) A mapping π :E
B called projection
(v) A group G called structure group with a left action onF
As we remarkedFx = π−1(x) is called the ﬁber over x ∈
B.
of the garden variety of direct products, is whenever the “hidden structure” overY, which is
quotient space3Y/G and a function f ′ :X
Y/G which is to be investigated instead of f ?
2We can think of the operation of G as an equivalence relation ∼ which is deﬁned onY. If y = gy ′ with g ∈ G,
then y ∼g y ′. In general, this equivalence relation “decomposes”Y into equivalence classes, one for each of the
3The construction ofY/G can be described as a choice of the “representative element” from each of the
equivalent classes ofY induced by G.

Note that if we want to claim that behind the ﬁber bundle formalism there is a new conception
of mathematical functions there is some urgency to answer this question in a convincing way.
Is the fomalism we develop a genuinely new idea or is it merely a hyphaluted mathematical
notation?

There are two reasons for believing that we are engaged in a genuinely new body of ideas.
First, as we shall see shortly, not every ﬁber bundle is equivalent (in a precise mathematical
sense which we shall deﬁne soon) to a direct product. Secondly, the “hidden structure”, which

Let us turn now to the issue of the generalization of the direct product.

Is it, indeed, a
genuine generalization? If the point, where the deﬁnition of ﬁber bundles departs from that

represented by the action of the group G, is taken into account, why can’t we simply deﬁne the

elements which generate G. Each of the equivalence classes is the G-orbit of its members.

→

→

of G often represents highly non-trivial physical facts. Thus, we should be prepared to retain

Fiber Bundle Gauge Theories and “Field’s Dilemma”

9

2.3 Diﬀerent types of ﬁber bundles

2.3.1 Sections and coordinate bundles

For a direct product, i.e. a structure h
possible: let y0 ∈

×

ourselves of the “excess structure” too quickly we shall not be able to appreciate the diﬀerence
between this covariance with respect to G and other more trivial kinds of covariance without a
physical meaning. The full signiﬁcance of the last remarks will become clearer when we discuss
some physical examples.

is coded by the action of the group G, should not be ignored; but we should not give upY and
concentrate only onY/G either. As we shall see later the invariance with respect to the action
the “superﬂuous structure” ofY and think of G-covariance as a physical principle. If we rid
X,Y,X
Y, πx, πyi, the following construction is always
Xy0 = {(x, y) : πy(x, y) = y0} .
The setXy0 is always well deﬁned.Xy0 is called a global section ofX
Y. IfXy andXy′ are
Y, there is a natural isomorphism ϕy,y′ :Xy0 →
Xy0,
(x, y) → (x, y′). There is also a natural isomorphism ϕy :X
Xy betweenX andXy,
x → (x, y). Hence we may regard the variousXy as “copies” ofX attached to the various
Y.
X there
Y we can construct local sections.
Rn (n is called the dimension of f ). An atlas is a collection of
space. We use local charts to “import” into M the coordinate system ofRn; these coordinates

open set, onto an open subset V ⊂
charts whose domains cover M. M is an n-dimensional manifold if it admits an n-dimensional
atlas. Consider two charts f : U → V and f ′ : U ′ → V ′ on an n-dimensional manifold M. We
say that f and f ′ are C∞ compatible if the composit maps f ◦ f ′ −1 : f (U ∩ U ′) → (U ∩ U ′)
and f ′ ◦ f −1 : (U ∩ U ′) → (U ∩ U ′) are of class C∞ (that is, they have well deﬁned partial
derivatives of all orders.) An atlas is of class C∞ if all its charts are pairwise C∞ compatible.
The construction of a C∞ atlas shows how to introduce a coordinate system into a topological

Let us describe with some detail how to construct ﬁber bundles which satisfy the local
trivialization condition.
In such cases, each point of the base space is contained in an open
neighborhood U such that the portion of the bundle “above” U is isomorphic to a direct product.
Note that in order to deﬁne such a ﬁber bundle we must conﬁne our attention to those cases
where the notion of an open neighborhood is well deﬁned, that is, to diﬀerentiable manifolds or,
at least, to topological spaces.

In case we give up πy, we give up the possibility of always having global sections

y ∈
at our disposal. Instead we make a weaker requirement, namely, that for every x ∈
is a neighborhood Ux such that in the “sub-bundle” Ux ×
This requirement is called a local trivialization. As we shall see shortly the local trivialization
requirement is, indeed, a weaker condition which does not always guarantee the existence of
global sections.

Recall that a chart on a topological space M is a homeomorphism f : U → V of U ⊂ M , an

Y and

global sections corresponding to y, y′ ∈

(3)

×

→

enable us to assign the objects of M a location. The fact that the charts are C∞ compatible
guarantees a “smooth” transition from one coordinate patch to another.

10

Fiber Bundle Gauge Theories and “Field’s Dilemma”

Using an analogous procedure we can show how to construct a ﬁber bundle from local

patches. LetB be the base manifold and {Un} a collection of subsets ofB which coverB.
LetE be a ﬁber bundle withB as the base space,F the “typical ﬁber” and π :E
B a
projection. Observe that for all n, π−1(Un) is a subset ofE (clearly Sn π−1(Un) coversE). If
Fn where π−1(Un) is a subset ofE andFn is the ﬁber associated with
Fn.
Fm be the
Fm and let φmn : π−1(Um ∩ Un) → (Um ∩ Un) ×
Fm,
Fn → (Um ∩ Un) ×

we restrict our attention to locally trivial bundles we can assume that there is a diﬀeomorphism
φn : π−1(Un) → Un ×
some b ∈ Un. Now consider two patches Un and Um with a non empty intersection. Let φnm
be the restriction of φn to the π−1(Un ∩ Um), that is φnm : π−1(Un ∩ Um) → (Un ∩ Um) ×
Similarly let φm : π−1(Um) → Um ×
restriction of φm to π−1(Un ∩ Um). Let us now deﬁne the composit diﬀeomorphism ρnm

ρmn = φnm ◦ φ−1

mn : (Un ∩ Um) ×

→

(4)

which is called the transition function between the bundle charts φnm and φmn.

ρnm ◦ ρml = ρnl.

Let us now consider three open patches Un, Um and Ul and restrict our attention to the
intersection Un ∩ Um ∩ Ul. We need to know how to switch from one location to another. To this
end we will deﬁne the transition functions ρnm, ρml and ρnl which correspond to the transitions
Un → Um, Um → Ul and Un → Ul respectively. The transition from one coordinate patch to
another should not depend on the path. Hence we require that

This condition which is called the cocycle condition, makes it possible to deﬁne, for each transi-
tion, a unique inverse transition. As we shall see shortly the cocycle condition allows us to code
the various transition functions as elements of a structure group G. More precisely the condition
makes it possible to associate with each g ∈ G the inverse element g−1 such that gg−1 = id.

To sum up, suppose that we are given a manifoldB with an open cover {Un} and we assign
to each b ∈ Un the ﬁberFn. Suppose further that for each n, m we can deﬁne the transition
a case we can deﬁne a ﬁber bundleE by patching together the sets Un ×
Fn by means of the
transition functions ρnm. It can be shown thatE, thus obtained, is a metrizable separable and
locally compact space. In fact,E is, itself, a diﬀerentiable manifold; the domains of the charts
F. π :E
ofE are Un ×
B is deﬁned on each chart as a projection on the ﬁrst element of the

function ρnm and that the collection of such function satisﬁes the cocycle condition. In such

→

(5)

product.

2.3.2 Principal bundles and associated vector bundles

Our next step is to construct principal ﬁber bundles where the action of the structure group is
explicit. We shall do so by requiring that each of the ﬁbers can be identiﬁed with the group G.
In more pedestrian cases one must distinguish between G, taken as a set of operations which can
be composed with one another and the domain of objects on which the members of G operate.
However, in the present case we are considering mathematical objects with a dual character.
On the one hand we are dealing with a topological space, on the other hand each g ∈ G is an
operation. The composition G × G → G is deﬁned as (g1, g2) → g1g−1
2 . It is required to be
continuous with respect to the product topology on G × G. If G has, in addition, the structure

Fiber Bundle Gauge Theories and “Field’s Dilemma”

11

for every b ∈

of a diﬀerentiable manifold, then it is natural to require that the composition is smooth. When
this requirement is satisﬁed G is called a Lie group. Another requirement on G is that it acts
freely; that means that it does not have non-trivial ﬁxed points.

→
fulﬁl the local trivialization condition:
isomorphism f : U × G → π−1(U ) such that for every b ∈ U and g, g′ ∈ G we get π(f (b, g)) = b
and f (b, gg′) = f (b, g)g′. Note that a tight connection exists between the projection π and the

A principal bundle is a structure h
, G,B, πi where is a manifold on which the group
G acts freely. The projection π :
B is a C∞ function from ontoB. is assumed to
B there is an open set U ⊂
B and an
orbits of G. All the elements of which are projected onto the same b ∈ U are transformed into
one another by the elements of G. In other words, the ﬁbers of are the orbits of G and, at
conditions are rather intuitive. Recall that a section of is a diﬀeomorphism s :B
 such
that πs = id. Now, is isomorphic to the trivial bundle h
B
× G, G,B, πi if and only if it
admits a global section. Indeed, consider the map f :
B
B, g ∈ G. f is a C∞ bijection and, hence, an isomorphism. Note that, as far as
principal bundles are concerned, the base manifold can be considered as the quotient/G. This

As we remarked earlier the requirement of local trivialization is not suﬃcient to guarantee
that the ﬁber bundle is mathematically trivial. To clarify this point let us state necessary and
suﬃcient conditions for a ﬁber bundle to be trivial. In the case of principal ﬁber bundles these

the same time, the set of elements which are projected onto the same b ∈ U . This observation
motivates calling the action of the group “vertical” and the base manifold “horizontal”. We
shall explain this choice of terminology further shortly.

→

→

× G deﬁned by f −1(b, g) = s(b)g

for all b ∈

point of view is equivalent to the construction using coordinate patches. Historically, it was not
immediately evident that that the deﬁnition of principal ﬁber bundles in terms of coordinate
patches is equivalent to deﬁning them in terms of a quotient space.

To facillitate our understanding of the notion of mathematically trival ﬁber bundle let us
take two examples. The base space, in both cases, is a circle S1 with two coordinate patches U
and U ′ (in order to cover a circle we need, at least, two patches). The ﬁber is, in both examples,
the unit interval [0, 1]. In the ﬁrst example the structure group G has two generators e and r. e
is an inﬁntesimal translation and r is a rotation of the unit interval around its center. Because of
the action of r after a full circle the unit interval will be rotated by 180 degrees. Thus, the zero
point will be identiﬁed with the other pole 1 and, vice versa, 1 will be identiﬁed with 0. As a
consequence the construction will result in a M¨obius strip, a non-trivial ﬁber bundle which does
not admit a global section. In the second case the structure group G′ has only one generator: the
inﬁntesimal shift e. The result, in this case, is a cylindrical ﬁber bundle; the cylinder is a trivial
ﬁber bundle which admits sections (however, as we shall discuss later in greater detail, bundles
which are trivial mathematically might be far from trivial from a physical point of view).

Once we have deﬁned a principal ﬁber bundle we can make an extra step and construct ﬁber
bundles which are associated with the principal bundle. The general idea is to represent the
structure group in another structure (which is intended to be used as a “typical ﬁber”), and
assign copies of this structure to the points in the base space of the principal bundle. Because
the main focus of this paper is not purely mathematical, rather then deﬁning an associated ﬁber
bundle in the most general way we shall deﬁne the vector bundle associated with a principal
bundle. One example of an associated vector bundle is the tangent bundle. Vector bundles

Fiber Bundle Gauge Theories and “Field’s Dilemma”

appear frequently in physical applications. LetV be a vector space of dimension n, then, a
V
V,
(g, v) → v′ deﬁnes the action of G onV. Let
V)/G. Now we can deﬁne the
× GV = (

× GV, G,B, πi to be the vector bundleE associated with the principal bundle.
Tp is the tangent bundle
When we assign to each point p ∈ M its tangent spaceTp, the union S

representation of G in V is a mapping

T M over the base manifold M. We shall discuss the tangent bundle further shortly.

structure h

ρ : G ×

→

×

(6)

12

2.4 Connections on a principal ﬁber bundle

p′ can be expressed as an inﬁntesimal variation on the evolution from p).

(i) It should depend smoothly on p (that is, if p′ is inﬁntesimally near p the evolution from

that π(u) = p. We wish to transport a vector from its origin at p to neighboring points along
vectors emenating from p. Let v ∈
tangent to p ∈ M). We expect the law of transport to fulﬁl the following conditions:

Connections are needed in order to formulate a “law” which determines how various objects are
transported from one point of a manifold to another. Even when we know how objects evolve
along the base manifold (that is, if we know the spatiotemporal coordinates of the evolution),
we still need to determine the evolution along the bundle manifold. Hence, we need a method
or a principle telling us how to “lift” a curve from the base manifold to the ﬁber bundle. Such
a principle should enable us to deﬁne the notion of parallel transport. We shall discuss how to
formulate these notions for a vector bundle associated with a principal bundle. This formulation
is not the most general one but it contains most of the ideas one encounters in the physics of
ﬁber bundles.

Now, we shall think of as the bundle of linear frames LM. Let u ∈
 and p ∈ M such
TpM be such a vector (TpM is the collection of vectors
Formally, in order to establish a connection, a vector space u
Tu must be assigned to
 (Tu is the vector space of the tangents at u, that is,Tu
T). The conditions
(ii)* Let us deﬁne Θuπ : u
T
.
(iii)* The assignment should be invariant with respect to the action of G: if g ∈ G and Φg( u)
is the result of the action of g on the members of u then ΘuΦg( u) = ug.
TpM to a unique vector in
TpM we may deﬁne the lift λuv ∈
T. More precisely, if π(u) = p and v ∈
 u by setting

(ii) The law should allow us to deﬁne the parallel transport along any vector v ∈ TpM.
(iii) If v is transported from u to u′ then, if g ∈ G, ug should be transported to u′g.

Note that the isomorphism Θuπ allows us to “lift” any vector v ∈

every u ∈
(i)-(iii) can now be formulated more precisely.

π(u)M. We require that Θuπ is an isomorphism for every

(i)* The assignment must be smooth.

u ∈

⊂

∈

→

13

(7)

(8)

Fiber Bundle Gauge Theories and “Field’s Dilemma”

λuv = (Θuπ)−1(v). We may deﬁneVu = {v ∈
Tu
Tu(v) = 0}
as the space of all vectors tangent to the ﬁber of through u. This fact motivates the idea that
Vu is the “vertical” part ofTu. Hence, the direct sum decomposition
 u
Tu =Vu
together with the isomorphism between u andTpM justiﬁes calling u the “horizontal”
part ofTu. Now, a connection on allows for a unique separation of the vertical and the
horizontal part ofTu according to (8). Let g be the Lie algebra of G, then the connection is
deﬁned as a g-valued one-form projectingTu toVu ∼= g.
 of C satisﬁes: (i)
 with π(u) = C(0). A horizontal lift ¯C : [0, 1] →
¯C(0) = u, (ii) π( ¯C) = C, (iii) the tangent to ¯C at t ∈ [0, 1] is a member of  ¯C(t). As we remarked
earlier, the isomorphism between  ¯C(t) andTC(t)M justiﬁes calling ¯C a horizontal lift of C.

Finally, we can deﬁne the horizontal lift of a parametrized curve C : [0, 1] → M. Let

One may say that ¯C is obtained by a parallel transport of u along C. Generally, the fact that
C(0) = C(1), that is, that C is a closed loop does not guarantee that the horizontal lift ¯C is a
closed loop as well. It might be the case that ¯C is not a closed loop and ¯C(0) 6= ¯C(1). In general,
if C(0) = C(1) then ¯C(1) = ¯C(0) g, where g ∈ G. The set of all g ∈ G which can be obtained in
this manner forms a subgroup of G called the holonomy group of the connection at point C(0).

|

⊕

C(0) ∈ M and u ∈

We have now introduced the essential notions of ﬁber bundle mathematics and shall proceed

to their applications in gauge ﬁeld physics.

Fiber Bundle Gauge Theories and “Field’s Dilemma”

14

3 Gauge ﬁeld theories

The previous section of this paper was devoted to the general mathematical concept of ﬁber
bundles. In this section we will discuss the advantages of using ﬁber bundles in physics. Our
demonstration is set in the realm of modern gauge ﬁeld theories. It is in this area of physics,
perhaps the epitome of physics today, where our key assertion must be proven. We need to
show that the signiﬁcant quantities of gauge ﬁeld theories “live in bundle spaces” rather than
the spacetime base manifold.

3.1 General conceptual and terminological issues

Let us start with a list of the main concepts occuring in gauge ﬁeld theories. It will be useful
to clarify the terminology needed for later discussions.4

(i) Covariance and invariance. The notions of covariance and invariance, which are crucial
to our considerations, have been given diﬀerent deﬁnitions and interpretations throughout
the literature (in physics textbooks they are often used interchangeably). We shall use the
following terminology: covariance means form invariance of the equations of the theory
with respect to some group of transformations, the so-called covariance group. In gauge
ﬁeld theories, we better speak of gauge covariance instead of gauge invariance. We shall
therefore make a distinction between covariance and a looser notion of a group invariance
of certain objects of a given theory, which does not involve the form of the equations.

(ii) Noether’s theorem. In order to understand gauge theories we must study the connection
between global symmetries and conserved quantities. Such a connection is established by
Emmy Noether’s ﬁrst theorem:

Noether’s theorem: Let φi(x) be a ﬁeld variable (i is the index of
the
ﬁeld components),
the action functional S[φ] =
R L[φi(x), ∂µφi(x)] d4x under a k-dimensional Lie group implies the existence
of k conserved currents.

then the covariance of

(iii) Gauge postulate. The deﬁning feature of gauge ﬁeld theories is that they couple matter
ﬁelds and interaction ﬁelds dynamically. The beautiful idea of the gauge approach is
to start with a free theory, and then “derive” the structure of the coupling from the
assumption that the following postulate is satisﬁed:

Gauge postulate: The Lagrangian of a free matter ﬁeld φi(x) should remain
invariant under local gauge transformations φi(x) → φ′

i[φi(x), αs(x)].

i(x) = φ′

(iv) Gauge principle. The idea of gauging rests on postulating local gauge covariance instead
of the corresponding global Noether covariance. This idea5 is captured in the principle of
local covariance:

4We also address some terminological issues which were ﬁrst presented in Lyre (1999).

5The general idea in a compact manner was ﬁrst introduced by Hermann Weyl in his seminal paper from 1929;

cf. O’Raifeartaigh (1995) for historical remarks.

Fiber Bundle Gauge Theories and “Field’s Dilemma”

15

Gauge principle: The coupling of the Noether current corresponding to the global
gauge transformations of the Lagrangian of free matter ﬁelds can be introduced
as the replacement of the usual derivative by the covariant derivative ∂µ → Dµ
which corresponds to local gauge transformations.

(v) Gauge transformations. We must distinguish between global gauge transformations
(GTG) and local gauge transformations (GTL). Regarding GTL, we must further dis-
tinguish two subcategories6:

a) matter ﬁeld transformations, also called “gauge transformations of the ﬁrst kind”

(GTL1), and

b) gauge potential transformations, also called “gauge transformations of the second

kind” (GTL2).

(vi) Bundle structure of gauge ﬁeld theories. Modern gauge ﬁeld theories are geometri-

In quantum gauge ﬁeld theories, the matter ﬁelds of transformations GTL1 describe the
fundamental fermionic particles of the standard model, such as leptons and quarks7,
whereas in gravitational gauge theories the “matter ﬁelds” are tangent vector ﬁelds associ-
ated with reference frames (that is, a material system representing an observer, measuring
rods, and clocks).

cally characterized as principal ﬁber bundles, where the gauge ﬁelds “live”, and their
associated vector bundlesE, in which the matter ﬁelds “live”. Thus, in bundle theoretic
the distinction betweenE and. Gauge potentials are connections on, local sections
ofE represent matter ﬁelds. The gauge group G is the structure group of the bundle and
may be regarded as the automorphism group of. Finally, the bundle curvature is to be

terminology, the distinction between GTL1 and GTL2 (and their respective ﬁelds) reﬂects

its generators represent the gauge bosons. The group of local gauge transformations G

considered as the interaction ﬁeld strength. We may, hence, compose a brief dictionary
for the bundle terminology of gauge theories as shown in the table on page 16.

(vii) Gauge freedom. It is common practice to call classical electrodynamics, i.e. Maxwell’s
theory, already a “gauge theory”. The reason is that the Maxwell equations are covariant
under speciﬁc GTL2. But this is certainly a misleading terminology; we shall rather refer
to it as a gauge freedom of the theory, whereas only the Dirac-Maxwell theory, or quantum
electrodynamics (20), respectively, combines the matter ﬁeld and the gauge potential and,
hence, should be considered a true gauge ﬁeld theory.

(viii) Gauge ﬁeld theory. The characteristic feature of any gauge ﬁeld theory is that it de-
scribes the coupling of a pure matter ﬁeld theory to a pure interaction “ﬁeld” (or, rather,

6Unfortunately, the terminology in the literature is not uniform. Some textbook authors already call global
and local gauge transformations transformations of the ﬁrst and second kind (compare Ryder (1985, chap. 3.3), for
instance). But then they lack to distinguish between matter ﬁeld and gauge potential transformations. Therefore,
we prefer the above terminology originally introduced by Pauli (1941).

7A more precise term would be “energy-matter ﬁelds”, since there may exist fundamental particle ﬁelds with
mass zero such as, perhaps, neutrinos. Most precisely, since there are massive gauge particles, such as W bosons,
we should speak about “energy-matter ﬁelds which are no gauge ﬁelds”. The reader may read our term “matter
ﬁeld” as a shortform.

Fiber Bundle Gauge Theories and “Field’s Dilemma”

16

Fiber bundle framework

principal bundle
connections on
associated vector bundleE
local sections ofE
automorphisms of
vertical automorphisms of pure gauge transformations

Gauge ﬁeld theory
geometric arena of gauge potentials
gauge potentials
geometric arena of matter ﬁelds
matter ﬁelds
gauge group
gauge bosons
local gauge transformations GTL

structure group G
generators of G

covariant derivative
curvature

dynamical coupling
interaction ﬁeld strength

Table: Comparison of bundle theoretic and gauge theoretic terminology

gauge potential) theory. The structure of the coupling may be derived from the gauge
principle by imposing GTL covariance.8 The interaction potential, then, couples to the
matter ﬁeld Noether current which is constructed from the corresponding GTG covariance.
Any gauge theory represents the geometry of a principal ﬁber bundle (and the associated
vector bundle). The gauge group is given by the structure group of the bundle.

Gauge ﬁeld theory (for short: gauge theory): A theory which describes the cou-
pling of a matter ﬁeld and an interaction ﬁeld. It is based on a gauge principle
and uniquely determined by its underlying principal bundle structure.

3.2 Quantum gauge ﬁeld theories

At least three of the four known fundamental interactions undoubtedly ﬁt into the gauge the-
oretic framework. They are, moreover, suitably formulated as quantum ﬁeld theories. For our
purposes, however, the quantum ﬁeld theoretic aspect does not play any special role. The
argument for this is that the structure of the Lagrangian of a certain quantum ﬁeld theory,
quantum electrodynamics (QED) for instance, is the same in the quantum ﬁeld theoretic case
as in the case of its classical ﬁeld theoretic counterpart. Also, the bundle structure, which is
our main concern here, remains the same in both cases. Thus, for our purposes QED is already
captured in the Dirac-Maxwell theory.9
In the following two subsections we ﬁrst derive the

8 Recently, the physical content of the gauge principle has been questioned by several authors (Teller, 1997;
Redhead, 1998; Brown, 1999). In fact, the idea of imposing local gauge covariance leads, strictly speaking, to just
a special kind of bundle space coordinate transformation. At this point, the occurrence of a gauge connection
has no physical signiﬁcance. Therefore, it can be argued that the gauge principle is not suﬃcient to “derive” the
coupling of matter and gauge ﬁelds and that a further physical assumption is needed. As one of us has pointed
out, this assumption may perhaps be formulated in terms of a gauge theoretic generalization of the equivalence
principle (Lyre, 2000).

9We should mention, however, that in the quantization process of gauge theories certain technical problems
arise. This is because the considered interaction theory includes a gauge freedom (thus, these problems refer

Fiber Bundle Gauge Theories and “Field’s Dilemma”

17

Dirac-Maxwell theory from the gauge principle in order to demonstrate its practical realization.
Next, we shall describe the extension of the gauge approach to non-abelian gauge theories, the
so-called Yang-Mills theories.

3.2.1 Dirac-Maxwell theory

As a paradigm we consider the free Dirac ﬁeld ψ(x) with the Lagrange density

LD = ¯ψ(x) (iγµ∂µ − m) ψ(x).

The free Dirac Lagrangian is covariant under global gauge transformations

ψ(x) → ψ′(x) = eiqαψ(x),

¯ψ(x) → ¯ψ′(x) = e−iqα ¯ψ(x)

(9)

(10)

with some arbitrary constant phase parameter α and charge q. The Noether current correspond-
ing to the transformations (10) is given by

It satisﬁes the continuity equation,

µ = −q ¯ψ(x)γµψ(x).

∂µµ = 0,

(11)

(12)

which expresses the conservation of charge. Following the gauge principle we replace the GTG
in (10) by their corresponding GTL1

ψ(x) → ψ′(x) = eiqα(x)ψ(x),

¯ψ(x) → ¯ψ′(x) = e−iqα(x) ¯ψ(x)

(13)

with a local, i.e. spacetime dependent phase function α(x). This leads to the coupling to an
interaction potential

which itself satisﬁes GTL2

A′
µ(x) = −∂µα(x),

Aµ(x) → A′

µ(x) = Aµ(x) − ∂µα(x).

Applying (13), (14) and (15) to (9) yields to the covariant Dirac Lagrangian

with the coupling part

L′
D = LD + Lint

Lint = −µ(x)Aµ(x).

(14)

(15)

(16)

(17)

In accordance with the gauge principle, this can directly be seen from the introduction of a
covariant derivative

∂µ → Dµ = ∂µ − iqAµ(x).

(18)

Thus, applying (18) to (9) leads, again, to (16).

primarily to GTL2 instead of GTL1). But again, since these questions are not related to the bundle structure of
the theory we shall not be concerned with them.

Fiber Bundle Gauge Theories and “Field’s Dilemma”

18

The gauge theoretic framework necessitates an active interpretation of the local gauge trans-
formations GTL. Note that “active” has the manifest meaning of “physically signiﬁcant”. This
should not be confused with the distinction between point and coordinate transformations, which
is also sometimes referred to as a distinction between active and passive transformations. The
active character of GTL results from their changing the physical interaction-free situation (9)
into an interaction coupling (16). We will return to this issue in section 4.

Now, from the bundle theoretic point of view the vector ﬁeld Aµ represents the components
of the connection one-form of a U (1) principal bundle. From (15) we may as well construct the
corresponding curvature tensor

Interpreting Aµ and Fµν as potential and ﬁeld strength of the electromagnetic interaction, we
are motivated10 to complete the Lagrangian (16) to the full QED Lagrangian

Fµν (x) = ∂µAν(x) − ∂νAµ(x).

(19)

with the free Maxwell ﬁeld part

LQED = LD + Lint + LM

(20)

LM = −

1
4

Fµν (x)F µν (x).

(21)

The gauge theoretic feature of a dynamical coupling of two ﬁeld theories into one combined
framework is reﬂected in the existence of two sorts of equations: equations of motion for the
matter ﬁelds (such as the Dirac equation which stems from LD or, in gauge covariant manner,
from LD + Lint) as well as interaction ﬁeld equations (such as the Maxwell equations which
stem from LM or, in inhomogeneous form, from LM + Lint). In the combined framework we
call Aµ the gauge potential and Fµν the gauge ﬁeld strength. Quantum gauge ﬁeld theories are

usually formulated on a ﬂat spacetime manifold, i.e. Minkowski spacetimeR1,3. Therefore, the
principal ﬁber bundle structure of QED is(R1,3, U (1)), indicating that QED is a U (1) gauge

theory.

3.2.2 Yang-Mills theories

The gauge approach can be extended to non-abelian unitary gauge groups.11 In the standard
model case we use SU (2)L of weak isospin, (uniﬁed in the elektroweak model with hypercharge to
SU (2)L × U (1)Y ), and SU (3)C as the color group of quantum chromodynamics.12 Let us brieﬂy
indicate the analogous application of the gauge principle in the Yang-Mills case. Generally, in
order to construct an SU (n) gauge theory, we use the GTL1

Ψ(x) → Ψ′(x) = eignΛa(x)ˆta

Ψ(x) ≡ ˆU (x) Ψ(x)

(22)

10Of course, this “interpretation” is not enforced by the gauge principle; compare footnote 8.

11This was ﬁrst done by C. N. Yang and R. L. Mills for the strong isospin SU (2)F (Yang and Mills, 1954); cf.

Mills (1989), O’Raifeartaigh (1995) for historical remarks.

12Again, in Yang-Mills theories certain peculiarities arise, which will not be of our concern here. Take for
instance the Higgs mechanism in the electroweak theory. It allows for non-zero masses of the gauge bosons by
symmetry breaking (since the gauge principle itself only leads to massless gauge bosons). As yet, however, there
is no experimental evidence for Higgs bosons.

Fiber Bundle Gauge Theories and “Field’s Dilemma”

19

of the fundamental spinor representation Ψ = (..., ψi, ...)T , i = 1, 2...n analogous to (13). The
n2 − 1 operators ˆta generate the SU (n) group; each generator corresponds to a gauge potential
Ba
µ. We obtain the non-abelian generalization of (15), namely

B ′a

µ (x) ˆta = ˆU (x) Ba

µ(x) ˆta ˆU +(x) −

i
gn

ˆU (x) ∂µ ˆU +(x).

In this case the covariant derivative is given by

instead of (18) and the generalization of (19) yields

∂µ → Dµ = ∂µ + ign Ba

µ ˆta,

(23)

(24)

F a
µν

ˆta = (cid:16)∂µBa

ν(cid:17) ˆta = −

i
gn

[Dµ, Dν].

ν − ∂ν Ba

µ − gnf abcBb

µBc

µν measures, so to speak, the non-commutativity of the covariant deriva-

The bundle curvature F a
tives. In contrast to QED, the Yang-Mills Lagrangian

bosons carry charge themselves. The principal bundle structure is(R1,3, SU (2)L × U (1)Y ) for
the electroweak interaction, and(R1,3, SU (3)C ) for chromodynamics.

contains non-linear self-interaction terms of the kind “−gn∂BB2” and “g2

nB4”, that is, the gauge

F a
µν (x)F a µν(x).

LY M = −

1
4

(25)

(26)

µ. Recall, however, that ψ and Ba

We may now ask for the genuine objects of quantum gauge ﬁeld theories. To be sure,
the application of the gauge principle shows the central role of the matter ﬁeld ψ as well as
the gauge potentials Ba
µ. Without them the gauge argument is impossible, since local gauge
transformations GTL1 and GTL2 only take eﬀect on them. Moreover, in order to derive the
equations of motion and ﬁeld equations, the corresponding Lagrangians have to be varied with
respect to ψ and Ba
µ are no gauge invariant quantities and
are, therefore, not directly observable! By way of contrast, the gauge ﬁeld strength F a
µν is
gauge invariant – as well as quantities bilinear in ψ such as the Noether current. If we insist
on the central role played by ψ and Ba
µ, then this leads to the curious fact that, in gauge
theories, the genuine objects arising are themselves not directly observable. Thus, it seems that
we ourselves are faced with a dilemma – similar to Field’s one: the one horn being that if we
consider matter ﬁelds and gauge potentials as genuine objects of gauge ﬁeld theories (because
they are indispensible in deriving the theory from the Lagrangian or from the gauge principle)
we did not choose directly observable quantities, but rather mathematical entities with no direct
physical signiﬁcance.13 However, if we restrict ourselves to directly observable quantities only,
we must give up the whole idea of gauge theories, since per deﬁnition we can only apply the
gauge principle to non-gauge invariant quantities. This is the other horn of the dilemma.

13One crucial remark, however: in Yang-Mills theories the gauge potentials make a direct contribution to the

ﬁeld strength tensor as can be seen from (25). Moreover, in the Yang-Mills ﬁeld equations

(DµF µν)a(x) = ∂µF aµν(x) − gnf abc Bb

µ F cµν (x) = aν (x).

the Ba
µ occur in direct combination with F a
than for the Aµ potential in the abelian case.

µν . Therefore, in this case their physical signiﬁcance is clearly higher

Fiber Bundle Gauge Theories and “Field’s Dilemma”

20

We shall have to say more about this issue in the last section of this paper. For the time
being, we accept the ﬁrst horn, that is, we accept the occurence of objects in gauge theories
(seemingly even the primary ones!) which, on the one hand side, are not directly observable, on
which, however, on the other hand side, the whole idea of gauging is obviously based and which
are, insofar, truly indispensible.

3.3 Gravitational gauge ﬁeld theories

The fundamental quantum ﬁeld theories of the electroweak and strong interactions clearly ﬁt
into the gauge theoretic framework and possess a natural ﬁber bundle structure. No such clarity
can be found in the case of gravitational theories.14 Nevertheless, we will argue that even grav-
itational theories are best described in terms of gauge theories. As a consequence, we will show
that the underlying bundle structure allows to distinguish naturally the physically signiﬁcant
objects and constituents of these theories from the merely mathematical ones. Our position
is by no means universal. In fact, orthodox relativists are likely to claim that a ﬁber bundle
formulation of general relativity (GR) is superﬂuous.15 This diﬀerence of opinion cannot be
easily resolved. However, we will try to demonstrate that a bundle formulation of GR facilitates
a better understanding of some outstanding philosophical issues in gravitational theories.

3.3.1 The gravitational gauge principle

Minkowski spaceR1,3, that is the interaction-free case in which no gravitation exists. Hence,

Let us, ﬁrst, apply the gauge principle in the gravitational case. For the sake of simplicity
we restrict ourselves to GR, which we shall present as a gauge theory of the homogeneous
Lorentz group SO(1, 3). The generality of our conception will not be aﬀected because alternative
gravitational gauge theories may be founded on a gauge principle, too.16 We start with ﬂat

14By “gravitational theory” we henceforth mean any theory which is based on the equivalence principle. Besides
general relativity the class of gravitational theories includes unorthodox approaches of almost all imaginable gauge
groups of a four dimensional pseudo-Euclidean spacetime such as aﬃne, linear and orthogonal groups, as well as
their corresponding covering and supersymmetric groups and the diﬀeomorphism group – cf. Ne’eman (1980), Hehl
et al. (1995). The ﬁrst gauge theory of gravitation was presented by R. Utiyama (1956), using the homogeneous
Lorentz group SO(1, 3) as a structure group. Later on, F. W. Hehl and others considered the full Poincar´e group
ISO(1, 3) in a Riemann-Cartan spacetime with curvature and torsion (Hehl et al., 1976; Hehl et al., 1980). In
most of the cases the experimental testability of alternative theories of gravitation is beyond our current measuring
accuracy and, thus, the theoretical discussion is open for speculation.

15Compare, for instance, J. Ehlers: “ ... The formulation of the “ﬁeld kinematics” of GR in terms of principal
bundles and their associated bundles allows one to consider GR as a gauge theory ... As far as I can see such
gauge considerations have not led to a deeper understanding of GR as such ... I at least fail to see that the use of
aﬃne bundles with aﬃne (in Cartan’s sense) connections changes this fact, nor does it help me to appreciate it
more deeply. ... Of course these remarks are not intended to pass any judgement on theories other than Einstein’s,
with or without gauge.” (Ehlers, 1973).

16For diﬀerent types of gravitational gauge theories one basically has to plug in diﬀerent gauge groups. In fact,
a more rigorous approach, strictly following the gauge principle, leads to a gauge theory of translations, since
the gravitational ﬁeld couples to energy-matter, that is the corresponding Noether current associated with global
Poincar´e translation covariance.

Fiber Bundle Gauge Theories and “Field’s Dilemma”

we consider the free geodesic equation,

dθµ(τ )

dτ

= 0,

21

(27)

for a four vector θµ(τ ) = dxµ(τ )
system of three spacelike vectors θµ
derive gravity as a gauge theory of SO(1, 3), the GTL1 analogous to (13) have the form

, tangent to a timelike curve xµ(τ ). θµ ≡ θµ

i represents a tetrad θµ

0 together with a
3 ). Since we wish to

α = (θµ

0 , θµ

1 , θµ

2 , θµ

dτ

α(τ ) = ˆLβ
θµ

α(x) θµ

β (τ ) = e( ˆM a)β

αΛa(x) θµ

β (τ )

(28)

with a = 1...6 generators ˆM a of SO(1, 3) and spacetime-dependent transformation parameters
Λa(x) (we set x ≡ xµ(τ )). In analogy to the Yang-Mills case (22), the Latin index a “lives” in the
Lie algebra of the gauge group. Note further that we must distinguish external space-time indices
µ, ν . . . from internal tetrad indices α, β . . .. The former “live” in curved base space (holonomic
indices), whereas the latter “live” in local ﬂat Minkowski space (anholonomic indices), i.e. in the
ﬁbers of the tangent bundle of the SO(1, 3) principal bundle over spacetime. What is unique in
the case of gravitation is the existence of a natural mapping of the base space into the ﬁber space
(this mapping indices an isomporphism between the associated vector bundle and the tangent
bundle of the spacetime base manifold). The mapping allows us to distinguish between internal
and external indices. This phenomenon is sometimes referred to as the soldering of base space
and ﬁbers.

Next, the gauge postulate, when applied to local Lorentz rotations of the tetrads, leads to a

covariant derivative ∇τ ,
d
dτ

θµ
α(τ ) → ∇τ θµ

α(τ ) =

d
dτ

θµ
α(τ ) + Γβ
να

dxν (τ )

dτ

θµ
β (τ ).

(29)

Γµ denotes the so-called Levi-Civita connection with Christoﬀel symbols as components. As in
(15), Γµ satisﬁes the GTL2

να(x) = ˆLγ
Γγ

α(x) Γδ

νγ(x) ( ˆL−1)γ

δ (x) − ˆLδ

α(x) ∂ν ( ˆL−1)γ

δ (x).

Finally, (27) becomes the geodesic equation in curved spacetime

d
dτ

α(τ ) + Γβ
θµ
να

dxν (τ )

dτ

θµ
β (τ ) = 0.

(30)

(31)

Now we may compare GR with the quantum gauge theories discussed above. Obviously, in
the gravitational case, the gauge potentials are given by the Levi-Civita connection Γµ. From
this we may form the curvature tensor Rµ
αβν, the so-called Riemann tensor, which represents
the gravitational ﬁeld strength.17 A principal bundle with orthogonal structure group, such as
SO(1, 3), acting on tetradial frames, is called an orthonormal frame bundle (or tetrad bundle,
respectively). Note that tetrads are represented by tangent vector ﬁelds, i.e. sections in the
associated tangent vector bundle. Thus, in gravitational gauge theories, tetrads or reference
frames play a role analogous to the matter ﬁelds in quantum gauge theories.

17Per deﬁnition, the Christoﬀel symbols are symmetric in the lower indices Γµ

βα. Once we give up this
restriction we may also have torsion (besides curvature) as a gravitational ﬁeld strength in alternative gravitational
gauge theories.

αβ = Γµ

Fiber Bundle Gauge Theories and “Field’s Dilemma”

22

Observe that, from the gauge theoretic point of view, the metric tensor gµν is a derived
object which is built from the tetrads by means of gµν = ηαβθα
ν , with Minkowski metric
ηαβ = diag(−1, 1, 1, 1). Observe further that the Levi-Civita connection is not an independent
object of the theory either (we shall represent it in terms of derivatives of the tetrads). To say
that the connection is given in terms of the metric (which is given in terms of the tetrads) is
another way of expressing the soldering of the bundle space (where the connection lives) and
the base space (where the metric lives).

µ θβ

We may associate with any reference frame an observer in spacetime and, hence, a real
physical system of ponderable matter constituting measuring rods and clocks. Note that ob-
servers in spacetime theories are, usually, represented by mass points on timelike curves; cf.
Earman (1974). However, the gauge principle suggests that we represent observers by tetradial
frames, because the gravitational GTL1 act on tetrad indices. Moreover, this construction is
more general since it allows for a representation of fermionic matter.18

By deﬁnition, the gauge principle allows us to derive the gravitational equation of motion
(31). In GR, the ﬁeld equations are given by the Einstein ﬁeld equations which result from a
Lagrangian LGR = 1
gravitational gauge approach shall use a quadratic ﬁeld Lagrangian; cf. Hehl et al. (1980). The
variation with respect to tetrads and connections as genuine ﬁelds leads to the Cartan equations,
the true Yang-Mills equations of gravitation. Einstein’s GR, therefore, only mimics the gauge
theoretic framework without really ﬁtting in it.

2κ√−gR + LM atter linear in the ﬁeld strength. To be sure, a more general

3.3.2 Objects and principles in general relativity

The key idea of the paper is to point out that the ﬁber bundle formalism in gauge theories is
fruitful and that it clariﬁes the status of various theoretic objects. We claim that even when
gravitational gauge theories are concerned, the bundle language provides a natural distinction
between the physically signiﬁcant structures and the merely mathematical ones.

In general, G is a subgroup of the automorphism group Aut() of the gauge theory’s princi-
pal bundle. The subgroup Go of G of just the vertical automorphisms is called the group

Let us start with an important technical remark: as we mentioned earlier, the structure group
of the ﬁber bundle is considered to be the gauge group G. This terminology, though, can be seri-
ously misleading if we confuse the gauge group with the group G of local gauge transformations.
The latter one consists of spacetime-dependent group elements and is, thus, inﬁnite-dimensional.

of “pure gauge transformations”. Locally, G looks like a semidirect product of the covariance
group of the base manifold and the structure group. Thus, we ﬁnd G ∼= ISO(1, 3)×⊂SU (n) for
Yang-Mills theories in Minkowski space. In GR, however, Go is already a subgroup of Diﬀ(M),
the covariance group of the manifold, i.e. we have G ∼= Diﬀ(M)×⊂ISO(1, 3) ∼= Diﬀ(M). Andrzej
Trautman states this point as follows: “...
in the theory of gravitation, the group Go of ‘pure
gauge’ transformations reduces to the identity; all elements of G correspond to diﬀeomorphisms
of M.” (Trautman, 1980a; Trautman, 1980b, p. 306).

18The close connection between Dirac spinors and tetrads was already used in Weyl’s 1929 paper. From
the modern aspect of encountering a quantum gauge theory of gravitation, tetradial reference frames are also
important; cf. Rovelli (1991), Lyre (1998).

Fiber Bundle Gauge Theories and “Field’s Dilemma”

23

This is the reason why it is diﬃcult to distinguish between merely mathematical and truly
physical transformations and objects in GR. From our bundle point of view, however, we are
able to carry out this distinction quite naturally. We are faced with three diﬀerent groups:
ﬁrst, the covariance group of the spacetime manifold (Diﬀ(M), in general). Since it reﬂects a
mere symmetry of the base space, we may safely consider it as purely mathematical. Second, the
structure group G. It constitutes the ﬁbers and has signiﬁcance insofar as it reﬂects the geometric
arena of the connections. In 3.3.1 we chose G = SO(1, 3), but as we already mentioned, a more
rigorous gravitational gauge approach uses the Poincar´e translation group. It can be shown that
this group is isomorphic to the group of local diﬀeomorphisms (the reader may simply recall that
a local diﬀeomorphism is nothing but an inﬁnitesimal point shift, i.e. a local translation). Thus,
in this case, we even get G = Diﬀ(M). Third, there is the group of local gauge transformations
G. As we already emphasized, the GTL have physical signiﬁcance because of their role in the
gauge theoretic framework: they reﬂect the existence of an interaction ﬁeld coupled to the matter
ﬁeld and they have, thus, an active interpretation. The curiosity of gravitational theories is that
both the covariance group as well as G are isomorphic to Diﬀ(M) (and even G = Diﬀ(M) for
translational gauge theories). The orthodox “pure base manifold” approach of GR, however,
does not allow to distinguish between G and G.19 This distinction is one of the most important
conceptual advantages of the ﬁber bundle formalism in GR. Similar ideas regarding gravitation
have also been expressed by John Stachel (1986).

The problem of the meaning of covariance within orthodox GR is not a minor one. The
reader may recall that there is a longstanding question of whether Einstein’s so-called principle of
covariance has any physical content20 and, hence, whether a meaningful distinction can be made
between absolute and dynamical objects of GR. One fruitful way of dealing with these questions
has been James Anderson’s proposal (Anderson, 1967). Intuitively, an absolute object is one
which remains invariant or unchanged by the interactions of the theory under consideration.
However, it may itself change or inﬂuence other objects. Examples are given by the Galilei
metric in Newtonian spacetime (NS) and the Minkowski metric ηµν in special relativity (SR).
The pseudo-Riemannian metric gµν in GR, on the other hand, represents a dynamical object.
To be sure, from our point of view the distinction between absolute and dynamical objects is
already captured in the diﬀerence between base space and ﬁbers: dynamical objects “live” in
the ﬁbers, whereas the absolute objects belong to the base manifold.

Now, Anderson as well as Michael Friedman proposed to use the distinction between absolute
and dynamical geometric objects to characterize spacetime theories (Anderson, 1967; Friedman,
1983); see also Trautman (1973). According to Anderson-Friedman any spacetime theory is
associated with a certain symmetry group, which is “... deﬁned to be the largest subgroup of
the covariance group of this theory, which is simultaneously the symmetry group of its absolute
objects.
In particular, if the theory has no absolute object, then the symmetry group of the
physical system under consideration is just the covariance group of this theory.” (Anderson,

19Concerning the group of pure gauge transformations Go, however, we must restrict our statement of the
physical signiﬁcance of G: pure gauge transformations, surely, do not have a physical eﬀect – see our remarks in
section 4.

20The prelude was given by Kretschmann’s early objections 1917 – see Norton (1993) for a general historical

account.

Fiber Bundle Gauge Theories and “Field’s Dilemma”

24

1967, p. 87). This is the case in GR. Any of the above mentioned examples of spacetime
theories can be characterized by a symmetry group which preserves the absolute objects of the
theory. And conversely, any symmetry group accounts for a relativity principle, which in the
case of NS is the Galilei principle and in the case of SR the special relativity principle. For GR
the Anderson-Friedman approach has the advantage of showing that the principle of general
covariance has two diﬀerent possible meanings: Firstly, considered as a statement about the
coordinate covariance of spacetime theories, it is indeed physically vacuous, since any spacetime
theory which represents spacetime as a diﬀerentiable manifold – such as NS, SR, and GR – may
be written in a covariant manner, i.e. form invariant under Diﬀ(M). Secondly, Diﬀ(M) arises
not only as a covariance, but simultaneously as a symmetry group of GR. This, however, is a
highly non-trivial feature of GR; it only obtains because GR does not contain absolute objects.
Therefore, this symmetry feature may be understood as the principle of general relativity. This
principle has a clear physical signiﬁcance, unlike the principle of general covariance, which refers
to a merely mathematical (and not even characteristic) feature of GR. It is the advantage of the
Anderson-Friedman approach that it points out the crucial conceptual diﬀerence between these
two principles.21

From our bundle point of view, then, the confusion about the status of the “principle of
covariance” never arises. As a mere base space property, general covariance has no physical
signiﬁcance whatsoever.22 On the other hand, to allow for a local gauge covariance in GR, that
is, to allow any observer to perform a transformation of local reference frames with elements of
G, is only possible by introducing a gravitational ﬁeld to compensate for this local requirement.
This is the true physical content of the principle of GR which is, thus, best understood as a
gravitational gauge principle.23

To sum up: Gravitation can be understood as a gauge ﬁeld theory proper.

Its genuine

21Note, that the Anderson-Friedman approach is designed to classify spacetime theories in hierarchical order
according to their absolute objects (or their symmetry groups, respectively). However, “... as Robert Geroch
has observed, since any two timelike, nowhere-vanishing vector ﬁelds deﬁned on a relativistic space-time are d-
equivalent, it follows that any such vector ﬁeld counts as an absolute object...” (Friedman, 1983, footnote p. 59).
Clearly, this raises a problem for the issue of classifying theories. From our point of view, instead of using the
distinction between absolute and dynamical, we prefer to use the dichotomy between the merely mathematical
parts belonging to the base space and the truly physical parts belonging to the ﬁbers. Indeed, one might even
call these parts absolute and dynamical. However, our distinction is not primarily intended to classify spacetime
theories, but rather to indicate their physical content. With regard to timelike curves we clearly see that they do,
indeed, belong to the physical part of GR, since they are associated with tangent vector ﬁelds, i.e. sections in the
associated vector bundle. In fact, reference frames, which may be associated with timelike vectors, turn out to be
the genuine objects of gravitational gauge theories (see our remarks in section 3.3.1). Thus, the bundle language
shows that the only “absolute” entity left in gravitational theories is the spacetime manifold itself – and its sole
non-trivial property is that it admits a diﬀerentiable structure (including global topology and the signature of its
metric).

22Observe, though, that general covariance is sometimes understood to encode the universality of the gravita-
tional coupling. In the framework of bundle geometries this is more adaequately expressed in the soldering of
bundle and base space: the gravitational interaction (bundle connection) represents the geometry of the spacetime
base manifold itself, and, hence, every physical object in spacetime is aﬀected. Because of this feature, gravitation
is distinguished from other forces.

23However, as we already pointed out in footnote 8, the complete coupling structure of gauge theories is based

on the further assumption of an equivalence principle. This is a fortiori true in gravitational gauge theories.

Fiber Bundle Gauge Theories and “Field’s Dilemma”

25

objects are tetradial reference frames, the bundle structure is given by the principal bundle of
orthonormal frames. Bundles in gravitational theories, although they seem to be superﬂuous due
to the soldering of base space and ﬁbers, allow us to overcome conceptual problems concerning
the meaning of the various principles of relativity and covariance. At the same time they help
us to distinguish the truly physical parts of these kind of theories. In our opinion this proves
that even in the case of gravitation the ﬁber bundle formulation has clear advantages.

Fiber Bundle Gauge Theories and “Field’s Dilemma”

26

4 The resolution of “Field’s dilemma”

In this last section we would like to conclude with a focused attempt to answer various questions
which arise in connection with Field’s dilemma.

4.1 Five questions

Question 1: How does the ﬁber bundle approach aﬀect a distinction between the genuinely
physical and the merely mathematical parts of physics?

As we emphasized throughout the paper we believe that when gauge theories are formulated
in terms of ﬁber bundles the merely mathematical part should “live” in the base space while
the truly physical part is contained in the ﬁbers. The base space is, essentially, a system of
coordinates. The need for such a “coordinatization” is a deep one – it is required whenever
we wish to deﬁne a physical interaction. Such a setting is mandated by the very concept of
measurement or observation: we can only observe and measure an interaction if we can identify
the location where it takes place. The coordinate system, though, as useful as it is and as
unavoidable for the application of the theory, should not be considered, in and of itself, a
physical phenomenon or a collection of physical objects.

Another way of formulating the distinction between the mathematical and the physical is
the following. Given a mathematical space which represents a gauge theory in its entirety one
should identify, ﬁrst, the class of physical interactions which appear in the theory. The second
step is to ﬁnd out what the formal properties of each interaction are, that is, those properties
which remain the same irrespective of location. These formal features can usually be described
as the operation of a group which is called the structure group. Finally, once the group is
deﬁned, we construct the equivalence relation to which the group gives rise and describe the
total space as a principal bundle: the space is “quotientized” with respect to the structure
group. The base space is then presented as a way of “indexing” the various ﬁbers in a smooth
way, as Sunny Auyang has pointed out (Auyang, 1995). This indexing system does not need
to have a physical interpretation and it is perfectly consistent with a relational approach to the
spacetime base manifold. As we remarked earlier, the two points of view, “coordinatization”
and “quotientization”, are mathematically equivalent with respect to the construction of ﬁber
bundles.

As we have seen the vertical connections are what allows us to compare the interaction in
diﬀerent regions.
In and of themselves they do not have any physical signiﬁcance; they do,
however, allow us to see how does the interaction, which is schematically represented by the
operation of the structure group on the ﬁbers, propagate from one region to the next.

Question 2:
manifold structures, dispensable?

In what sense is the merely mathematical part, which we identiﬁed with the base

When we say that the base manifold is dispensable we do not mean that we can do physics
without a base manifold. We have had the occasion to see that whenever we wish to discuss
a local interaction we must use some coordinate system. Even mathematically, the very idea
of generalizing the direct product necessitates some way of covering the space with coordinate

Fiber Bundle Gauge Theories and “Field’s Dilemma”

27

patches. There are, however, many diﬀerent ways to coordinatize a space. These diﬀerent
methods must be, in some sense, equivalent (in mathematical terms the building blocks of
one method must be obtainable by a diﬀeomorphism from those of the other). This, however,
does not mean that the methods are identical and, hence, we should not get rid of this “layer
of hidden structure” too easily. First, there might be a way of distinguishing between two
diﬀeomorphic systems. Second, as we have seen, there are cases where the diﬀeomorphisms are
“active transformations”, that is, they have a signiﬁcant physical interpretation (this is the case,
for example, when gravity is construed as a gauge theory of local diﬀeomorphisms which are
mathematically isomorphic to local translations – see section 3.3). Only in those cases where the
diﬀeomorphisms do not have such an interpretation (for example, when they represent coordinate
transformations) are we free to say that the diﬀerence between diﬀeomorphic coordinate systems
can be ignored. It is precisely in this sense that a particular coordinate system is dispensable.
Any other diﬀeomorphic coordinate system would have served just as well giving rise to a theory
that is equivalent from a physical point of view.

Question 3: Are the ﬁber bundle formulations of physical theories “reasonably attractive”?

The question is whether our approach is aggressively revisionistic and philosophically motivated
or not. It is a rather important question with wide implications. To put it bluntly the question
is whether physics itself admits a natural distinction between the mathematical and the physical
or whether it takes a philosopher with a “hidden agenda” to accept the formulations we oﬀer
because they permit such a distinction.

The ﬁrst answer we would like to oﬀer is that the theories in the standard model (including
gravitation) admit a canonical ﬁber bundle formulation. Moreover, the gauge approach seems
to provide the only “link” between quantum ﬁeld interactions and gravitation.24 This aspect
of uniﬁcation is certainly one of the strongest arguments for the use of ﬁber bundles in con-
temporary physics. This point, though, does not settle the issue. There is a more fundamental
reservation, that is felt by many physicists, that the hyphaluted mathematics of ﬁber bundles is
superﬁcial, that layers of unnecessary mathematical structure are postulated, that ﬁber bundle
formulations are, simply, superﬂuous.

As we have seen before, one voice of dissent comes from the orthodox general relativity
theorists. This is not surprising. As the reader undoubtedly knows the founding fathers of
modern gravitational theories, headed by Einstein and Weyl, attempted to “geometrize” physics.
This ambition precludes any rough and ready distinction between the geometric (and hence, the
merely mathematical) and the physical. Indeed, as we remarked earlier even from a ﬁber bundle
theoretic point of view gravitation is a special case. In the case of theories of gravitation the
ﬁbers are “soldered” to the base manifold. This means that the extra degree of freedom which,
in most cases, allows for the introduction of the operation of a structure group on the ﬁbers
does not exist in the case of gravitation. Why, then, should we bother with the ﬁber bundle
formulation? Why not formulate gravitation in terms of manifolds with curvature (and torsion)
alone? An even more fundamental worry is that the ﬁber bundles which arise in gauge physics
are, in most cases, mathematically trivial, that is, they admit global sections and, therefore, they

24We do not consider approaches beyond the standard model such as supersymmetry, strings, etc.

Fiber Bundle Gauge Theories and “Field’s Dilemma”

28

is trivial. As we have mentioned earlier there are three types of ﬁber bundles:

We would like to oﬀer a more general response to the claim that the physics of ﬁber bundles

are isomorphic to direct products.25 Does all this not mean that the ﬁber bundle formulation is
superﬂuous?

absolute timeR – the bundle’s base space – and relative spaceR3 – the ﬁbers with struc-
ture group O(3). The bundle is globally isomorphic to the direct productR
R3 and

(i) Trivial bundles with ﬂat connections. In this case the connections are constant.
It has

Galileian spacetime, for example, can be viewed as a ﬁber bundle of that type.

therefore trivial. The ﬂatness of the connections indicates space as a non-dynamical, i.e.
purely mathematical object. Regarding type (i) we can safely say that the ﬁber bundle
formulation is completely superﬂuous.

×

(ii) Trivial bundles with non-ﬂat connections. In such cases the connections become dy-
namical quantities, but the bundle space is still isomorphic to a direct product. Both
quantum gauge theories and gravitation give rise to ﬁber bundles with non-ﬂat connec-
tions. We would like to suggest that the existence of non-ﬂat connections signiﬁes the
physical non-triviality (as opposed to their triviality in the mathematical sense) of the
ﬁber bundles involved. Consequently, we believe that in those cases involving bundles
with non-ﬂat connections the ﬁber bundle formulations are to be taken seriously. This
claim is, clearly, a contentious one; for the time being we have no conclusive proof that it
is defensible. Can we make do with an argument showing that in all the known cases the
existence of non-ﬂat connections has physical signiﬁcance? Certainly we cannot pretend
to have exhausted the issue in these pages.

(iii) Non-trivial bundles. Here, the bundle space is no longer isomorphic to a direct product.
In footnote 25 we used the opportunity to brieﬂy discuss these cases already. There is no
doubt that, in cases which fall under this category, the bundle formulation is important,
fruitful and, perhaps, indispensible. But, as we mentioned in the above footnote, there
may be some doubt about the fundamental role these cases play in physics.

25 Let us mention, ever so brieﬂy, that physical cases exist whose formulation in ﬁber bundle theoretic terms
is not trivial. Some of them are known in the literature under the terms geometrical or topological phases.
The best known case of this kind is the Aharonov-Bohm eﬀect: The quantum phase of a particle’s wavefunction
parallel transported along a closed loop around a trapped magnetic ﬁeld (such as a torroidal magnet, for instance)
shows a phase anholonomy which is experimentally tested via interference patterns (Aharonov and Bohm, 1959).
Anholonomy means that closed loops on the base manifold are lifted to open curves in the bundle. The presence
of an anholonomy prevents one from deﬁning global cross sections. Therefore, a ﬁber bundle arising in connection
with the Aharonov-Bohm eﬀect is non-trivial (a more general account of physical anholonomies is given by the
theory of Berry phases; cf. Shapere and Wilczek, 1989). Non-trivial bundles in quantum gauge theories may even
also indicate topological eﬀects such as monopoles and instantons. Most of them, however, are not vindicated
experimentally (at least from a foundational point of view). This is the reason why we do not want to draw
decisive arguments from them. Moreover, as we mentioned already, we do not consider approaches beyond the
standard model to settle our point; see, for example, T. Y. Cao on grand uniﬁed and supergravity theories (Cao,
1997, chap. 11.3). Sure enough, the fundamental existence of such topological eﬀects would make our arguments
concerning the signiﬁcance of ﬁber bundles even stronger, if not non-refutable!

Fiber Bundle Gauge Theories and “Field’s Dilemma”

29

Question 4: Do all the mathematical objects which are deﬁned on the ﬁber space stand for
measurable interactions or observable physical objects?

Our aim in this paper was to show that we can assume that physical phenomena have measurable
consequences while, at the same time, aﬀecting a distinction between the merely mathematical
and the truly physical. Our argument was an inductive one. We showed that our point of view
is consistent with current physics. Recall that the signiﬁcant structures, from a physical point of
view, are matter ﬁelds, gauge potentials, gauge ﬁeld strengths, and local gauge transformations.
Therefore, what we need to show is that all these cases involve only objects which live in the
ﬁbers.

We shall discuss them one after another.

Matter ﬁelds. They are constructed as local sections in the vector bundles which are associ-
ated with principal bundles and happen to be the basic physical constituents of the gauge
principle. In the standard model the matter ﬁelds are given by the fundamental elemen-
tary particle ﬁelds; in gravitational gauge theories they are tangent vector ﬁelds of the
base manifold which are associated with reference frames. The matter ﬁelds are not gauge
invariant themselves; only bilinear quantities as the Noether current are directly observ-
able. Nevertheless, there are two reasons why we cannot do physics without them: ﬁrst,
we may observe interference eﬀects which cannot be explained from the quantities bilinear
in the matter ﬁeld wave-functions. Second, they are indispensible for explaining the gauge
principle, since local gauge transformations GTL1 act on them. Therefore, matter ﬁelds
and the vector spaces in which they live (the ﬁbers of the associated vector bundles) have a
certain physical signiﬁcance. From their conceptual role in the gauge theoretic framework
we must even consider them the building blocks of gauge theories.

Gauge potentials. They are represented as coeﬃcients of the connection forms which split the
tangent space of a principal bundle into a horizontal and a vertical part. For physicists
this concept is rather known as “covariant derivative”. They give rise to the gauge bosons.
Potentials are, again, not directly measurable, but in the case of non-trivial bundles they
will have observational consequences in terms of topological eﬀects. They are, also, in-
dispensible for an understanding of the gauge principle, since local gauge transformations
GTL2 act on them.

Gauge ﬁeld strengths. They are represented by the bundle curvature. As gauge invariant
quantities they are directly measurable as forces. With respect to our three-fold dis-
tinction of bundle types above, they give rise to type (ii) bundles which we considered as
suﬃcient for explanatory purposes (since non-ﬂat connections are deﬁned by non-vanishing
curvature).

Local gauge transformations. These transformations give rise to the structure group G and,
hence, to the group of local gauge transformations G (recall our remarks in section 3.3.2).
The postulate of local gauge covariance, as it is used in the gauge principle, determines
the form of the interaction coupling of the Lagrangian (the GTL1 lead to the existence
of an interaction gauge potential with transformations GTL2; in other words, the GTL

Fiber Bundle Gauge Theories and “Field’s Dilemma”

30

determine the dynamics).26 In our opinion this constitutes a strong argument in favour of
an active interpretation of local gauge transformations.
On the other hand, the subgroup Go of G of the so-called pure gauge transformations has
no physical signiﬁcance, since these transformations merely transform ‘vertically’ within
an equivalence class of ﬁber points. In other words, pure gauge transformations preserve
the connections. It is, of course, unavoidable to have an element of redundancy within the
bundle framework, since the whole idea of the generalization of the direct product is rested
on the existence of a hidden layer of structure, namely the gauge group equivalence classes,
as we pointed out in section 2.1. When we speak about active local gauge transformations,
we mean that they have a vertical as well as a horizontal component (as encoded on
the covariant derivative). Note also, that our usage of “active” here essentially means
“physically eﬀective”, i.e. changing the physical situation. This, indeed, is the case when
local gauge transformations are concerned. Because of the gauge principle, the postulate
of local gauge covariance can be satisﬁed only by introducing an interaction gauge ﬁeld.
And this changes the physical situation.

In this respect we want to emphasize that the common view of interpreting point transforma-
tions as active transformations raises a diﬀerent issue. Those, who regard point transformations
as active, in the above-mentioned physical sense, are likely to regard points and spaces as en-
tities. This touches on the issue of relationalism/substantivalism which we will address in our
last question.

Question 5: Are we committed to substantivalism with respect to bundle spaces?

Substantivalism with respect to ﬁber bundle spaces is the doctrine that bundle spaces, their
constituents, bundle space points, and, hence, also the base space itself, are genuine individu-
able entities. This position raises many interesting philosophical questions. One has to admit
that, at a ﬁrst glance, the ﬁber bundle formalism can be utilized to justify this most extreme
substantivalist position. Our point, though, was a diﬀerent one. We wanted to aﬀect a distinc-
tion between the truly physical parts of ﬁber bundle gauge physics and those which are not; and
we identiﬁed the physical parts with the various ﬁelds and transformations arising in the ﬁbers
(as listed under the previous question). This point, however, does not commit us to substan-
tivalism. In fact, the distinction we make between the mathematical and the physical parts of
gauge ﬁeld theories does not commit us to any view about the ontological status of mathematical
entities (one may think of the spacetime metric in GR as a physical object without taking it
to be a substance). To be sure, questions concerning the status of ﬁber spaces are of a novel
kind and certainly very interesting.27 Observe, though, that this issue is not logically related
to our approach. We are not committed to the view that ﬁber spaces are themselves physically

26Again, as we remarked several times, the true “determination” of the gauge potential as being physical neces-
sitates a further assumption, which may be formulated in terms of a generalized equivalence principle (compare
footnote 8).

27It is possible to develop a bundle space hole argument to rule out bundle space substantivalism (Lyre, 1999)
in analogy to the well-known spacetime hole argument (Earman and Norton, 1987); compare Earman (1989,
chap. 8-9) also for comments on the hole argument and Field’s substantivalism.

Fiber Bundle Gauge Theories and “Field’s Dilemma”

31

signiﬁcant; we rather maintain that the functions living therein, and not the spaces, are genuine
physical objects.

4.2 Conclusion

We hope to have demonstrated that our approach is one way of resolving Field’s dilemma. Our
method was an inductive one. By looking carefully at a whole collection of gauge theories we
noticed that they all admit a natural distinction between the physical and the mathematical
parts. This does not strike us as an accidental fact, although, we have no way of proving
it conclusively. Therefore, on the basis of our observations, we conclude that we obtained a
general result: the physically signiﬁcant objects and quantities can be represented as functions
which are deﬁned on the ﬁbers (which does not mean that, conversely, all of the structures in the
ﬁbers are physically signiﬁcant). Our question of distinguishing between the mathematical and
the physical parts was originally motivated philosophically. But it seems plausible to assume
that the evolving degree of uniﬁcation in physics should entail a natural distinction between
these both parts in terms of the architecture of our fundamental theories itself. Fiber bundle
gauge theories, we believe, are a crucial step in this direction.

Fiber Bundle Gauge Theories and “Field’s Dilemma”

32

Acknowledgements

We would like to thank the people at the Center for Philosophy of Science of the University of
Pittsburgh for their kind hospitality and support during our common stay as Visiting Fellows
during the 1999 spring term. Special thanks to John Earman and John Norton (Pittsburgh) as
well as Tim Oliver Eynck (Amsterdam) for their questions and corrections. One of us (H.L.)
was partially supported by the Alexander von Humboldt-Foundation (Bonn).

References

Aharonov, Y. and Bohm, D. (1959). Signiﬁcance of electromagnetic potentials in the quantum

theory. Physical Review, 115(3):485–491.

Anderson, J. L. (1967). Principles of Relativity Physics. Academic Press, New York.

Auyang, S. Y. (1995). How is Quantum Field Theory Possible? Oxford University Press, New

York.

Brown, H. R. (1999). Aspects of objectivity in quantum mechanics.

In Butterﬁeld, J. and
Pagonis, C., editors, From Physics to Philosophy. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.

Cao, T. Y. (1997). Conceptual Developments of 20th Century Field Theories. Cambridge Uni-

versity Press, Cambridge.

Drechsler, W. and Mayer, M. E. (1977). Fiber Bundle Techniques in Gauge Theories. Lecture

Notes in Physics 67. Springer, Berlin.

Earman, J. (1974). Covariance, invariance, and the equivalence of frames. Foundations of

Physics, 4:267–289.

Earman, J. (1989). World Enough and Space-Time. MIT Press, Cambridge, Mass.

Earman, J. and Norton, J. (1987). What price spacetime substantivalism? The hole story. The

British Journal for the Philosophy Science, 83:515–525.

Ehlers, J. (1973). The nature and structure of spacetime. In Mehra (1973).

Field, H. (1980). Science without Numbers. Princeton University Press, Princeton.

Friedman, M. (1983). Foundations of Space-Time Theories. Princeton University Press, Prince-

ton.

Hehl, F. W., Heyde, P. v. d., Kerlick, G. D., and Nester, J. M. (1976). General relativity with

spin and torsion: Foundations and prospects. Reviews of Modern Physics, 48:393–416.

Hehl, F. W., McCrea, J. D., Mielke, E. W., and Ne’eman, Y. (1995). Metric-aﬃne gauge theory
of gravity: Field equations, Noether identities, world spinors, and breaking of dilation
invariance. Physics Reports, 258:1–171.

Fiber Bundle Gauge Theories and “Field’s Dilemma”

33

Hehl, F. W., Nitsch, J., and Heyde, P. v. d. (1980). Gravitation and the Poincar´e gauge ﬁeld

theory with quadratic Lagrangian. In Held (1980).

Held, A., editor (1980). General Relativity and Gravitation: One Hundred Years after the Birth

of Albert Einstein. Plenum Press, New York. 2 Volumes.

Kretschmann, E. (1917). ¨Uber den physikalischen Sinn der Relativit¨atspostulate, A. Einsteins

neue und seine urspr¨ungliche Relativit¨atstheorie. Annalen der Physik, 53:575–614.

Lyre, H. (1998). Quantum space-time and tetrads. International Journal of Theoretical Physics,

37(1):393–400. (E-print arXiv:quant-ph/9703028).

Lyre, H. (1999). Gauges, holes, and their ‘connections’. To appear in: D. Howard (ed.), Pro-
ceedings of the “Fifth International Conference on the History and Foundations of General
Relativity”, Notre Dame, Indiana. (E-print arXiv:gr-qc/9904036).

Lyre, H. (2000). A generalized equivalence principle. Submitted to the International Journal of

Modern Physics D (E-print arXiv:gr-qc/0004054).

Mehra, J., editor (1973). The Physicist’s Conception of Nature. Reidel, Dordrecht.

Mills, R. (1989). Gauge ﬁelds. American Journal of Physics, 57(6):493–507.

Ne’eman, Y. (1980). Gravity, groups, and gauges. In Held (1980).

Norton, J. D. (1993). General covariance and the foundations of general relativity: Eight decades

of dispute. Reports of Progress in Physics, 56:791–858.

O’Raifeartaigh, L. (1995). The Dawning of Gauge Theory. Princeton University Press, Prince-

ton.

Pauli, W. (1941). Relativistic ﬁeld theories of elementary particles. Reviews of Modern Physics,

13:203–232.

Redhead, M. (1998). Review: S. Y. Auyang, How is quantum ﬁeld theory possible? (New York,
Oxford University Press, 1995). The British Journal for the Philosophy Science, 49:499–507.

Rovelli, C. (1991). Quantum reference frames. Classical and Quantum Gravity, 8:317–331.

Ryder, L. H. (1985). Quantum Field Theory. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge. (Second

edition 1996).

Shapere, A. and Wilczek, F., editors (1989). Geometric Phases in Physics. World Scientiﬁc,

Singapore.

Stachel, J. (1986). What a physicist can learn from the discovery of general relativity. In Ruﬃni,
R., editor, Proceedings of the Fourth Marcel Grossmann Meeting on General Relativity.
Elsevier.

Teller, P. (1997). A metaphysics for contemporary ﬁeld theories – Essay review: S. Y. Auyang,
How is quantum ﬁeld theory possible? (New York, Oxford University Press, 1995). Studies
in History and Philosophy of Modern Physics, 28:507–522.

Fiber Bundle Gauge Theories and “Field’s Dilemma”

34

Trautman, A. (1973). Theory of gravitation. In Mehra (1973).

Trautman, A. (1980a). Fiber bundles, gauge ﬁelds, and gravitation. In Held (1980).

Trautman, A. (1980b). On groups of gauge transformations. In Harnad, J. H. and Shnider, S.,

editors, Geometrical and Topological Methods in Gauge Theories. Springer, Berlin.

Trautman, A. (1984). Diﬀerential Geometry for Physicists. Bibliopolis, Napoli.

Utiyama, R. (1956).

Invariant theoretical

interpretation of interaction. Physical Review,

101(5):1597–1607.

Weyl, H. (1929). Elektron und Gravitation. Zeitschrift f¨ur Physik, pages 330–352.

Yang, C. N. and Mills, R. L. (1954). Conservation of isotopic spin and isotopic gauge invariance.

Physical Review, 96(1):191–195.

