0
0
0
2

 

n
u
J
 

6
2

 
 
]
h
p
-
t
s
i
h

.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 

1
v
5
6
0
6
0
0
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Rhythmos, Diathige, Trope

Alejandro Rivero∗

February 17, 2014

Abstract

It is argued that properties of Democritus atoms parallel those of vol-
ume forms in diﬀerential geometry. This kind of atoms has not ”size” of
ﬁnite magnitude.

Aristotle, in Metaphysics I, 4, 985b [1, 67A6] comments Democritus’ char-
acterization of atoms, which consists in the three words above in the header
of this note. His translation is, respectively, skhema, taxis, thesis. Roughly,
Democritus wording could translate to structure, contact and direction, while
Aristotle translation stands for ﬁgure, order and position.

In any case, it should puzzle to commentators the absence of a property
standing for ”size”. It seems than most people, starting already in the antiquity,
ascribes to Aristotle ”ﬁgure” this property. And from here starts a centuries
wide debate about how can atoms be physically indivisible if they have a ﬁnite
extension and, then, they are mathematically divisible. I suggest that such ﬁnite
size was not present in the original theory, and the diﬃculties of commentators
to access (or to understand) the atomists books induced them to imagine such
property.

The mistake comes from other notices of Aristotle about atoms.

Indeed,
in Generation and Corruption I 8, 326a, and in On Heaven IV, 2, 309a (see [1,
68A60]) it is claimed that the weight of an atom is proportional to its magnitude
or size.

It is probable that even commentators in the Ancient Age had diﬃculties
to access a key text of this ”weight”: the letter of Archimedes to Erathostenes,
popularly known as ”The Method”, whose only (partly) extant copy was found
at the very end of the XIXth century. In ”The Method”, Archimedes explains
that some results on the volume of planar and solid ﬁgures can be obtained by
assigning a weight to the inﬁnitesimal slices which compose the ﬁgure, and then
adding the weights using some mechanical method, for instance counterweight-
ing every slice via lever rule. Archimedes rejects the mathematical validity of
proofs coming from this method, but he suggest it is a good hint to guess a
result that can be then proofed using acceptable methods, such as Eudoxus
exhaustion.

Moreover, Archimedes starts his letter giving us a reference that no other
author had preserved: that Eudoxo found the proof of the relationship between
volume of cone and cylinder, but that Democritus was the ﬁrst one enunciating
this formula, without an acceptable proof.

∗Dep. Economia, Univ Carlos III Madrid. Email: rivero@wigner.unizar.es

1

This notice is so recent that it is not contained in [1], I believe. On other
hand, [1, 68B155] gives us a later comment of Plutarch where Democritus studies
the surfaces got by slicing a cone with a plane parallel to the basis.
In the
quote, we are informed of that Democritus was unable to answer one of the
two alternatives there presented: either the surfaces were unequal, and the cone
was then a kind of ziggurat of microscopical steps, or both surfaces were equal,
and its addition should build a cylinder instead. The point of Democritus being
unable to decide for the ﬁrst option has been interpreted by commentators as
marking a deﬁnite diﬀerence between physical ﬁgures and mathematical ones,
the ﬁrst ones having ﬁnite size atoms, the later being continuously divisible.
This is not so clear under our interpretation.

The diﬀerence between slices in the cone could be one of the points considered
by Epicurus to claim [1, 68A43] that ”atoms can not have any magnitude...but
there is between them certain diﬀerences of magnitude”. In any case, Epicu-
rus comes after Platon and Aristotle1, so the confusion related to magnitude
(megethos) was already present.

Lastly, and jumping a bunch of centuries, we should remark the insight
of XVIIth century geometers, starting with Cavalieri group -and perhaps also
Viviani and Barrow2 should be named here-. On some unknown basis, they
decide to call the inﬁnitesimal components of a ﬁgure ”atoms”, and then they
proceed to build the modern integral calculus as a sum of atoms.

Independently of if Viviani or others got access to antiquity work, it can
be postulated that the name comes obvious if we think that every geometrical
object with magnitude can be divided. (Diﬀerential Geometric) atoms have not
extension in the usual sense, so the division postulate does not apply to them.
They have not got extension (size), so they are atomic.

To understand the properties of Democritean atoms, it is useful to try to
solve the decomposition of a cone in slices and its addition. Every planar slice
has the area of a circle, and it is to be put in a determinate ordering. This kind
of slice has not magnitude in the direction of the symmetry axis, but still has in
a ﬁnite area. But the same technique can be applied on the area, then on the
resulting lines. The resulting elements will have not magnitude, but in order to
be able to add them we need to preserve its ordering and spatial orientation, as
well as a weight.

Thus we have the three properties claimed.
Archimedes calculus, in the method, uses division into planar or linear slices,
driven by the symmetry of the problems he is focusing. So we have there explicit
examples of rhythmos and diathige, both needed to make the addition of the
slices. Ordering or diathige is also fundamental for the rigorous proof, as the
convergence of volume is proofed, from Eudoxus3 perhaps, by substracting two
ordered series of inscribed and circumscribed (for the cone problem) ﬁnite slices,

1In [2], it is made a good case to suggest that atomism is used politically by Epicurus,
to undermine the political thesis of Platon and his school. Involvement of atomists could be
earlier, as some biographic comments of Democritus point out [1, 68A14,68A2,68A16]. One
wonders if this confrontation could be real and to have some inﬂuence in the transmission of
atomism, as the popular legend [1, 68A1] says.

2The interested reader can ﬁnd some speculation about them in [3], where it is pointed
that Barrow actually traveled to the sites where the manuscript could be, and he states to be
looking for religious readings similar to the ones shared in the extant copy.

3For the area of each circle, an unrigorous exhaustion is ascribed to Antiphon. This sophist

could share with atomists the concept of weight, see [1, 87B42]

2

then taking the inﬁnite limit and getting the cancellation from the ordering in
the substraction.

So, do atoms have a size? By now, it should be clear that weight is related
to rhythmos, unrelated to size. Most classical arguments fall apart under this
observation.

As for mathematical atoms, if they are diﬀerent of physical ones, it can
surely be said that they have not size, as we know that they are the indivisible
slices reached in the limit process of integration. We can think of them either
as the inﬁnitesimal volume form or as the ordered product of diﬀerential one
forms which build that volume form.

The idea of one forms could be read into the old theory. In modern geometry,
covectors (one forms) have not size, even inﬁnitesimal. The ”size property” is
carried by the vector ﬁelds, and integration is done by acting a form over a
current.

In a similar manner, I should suggest that ”size” is not a property of the
atom, but of the vacuum where atoms are. If they are some diﬀerence between
mathematical atoms and physical ones, it is that in the ﬁrst ones the vacuum
is exhausted by inﬁnite planes, while in the second cases something, perhaps
related to the possibility of interaction, change or movement, obstructs the
possibility of completely ﬁlling the vacuum.

Which could be the origin of the obstruction is still unclear to me. From a
modern point of view, we known (with constructions as deformed calculus, or
tangent groupoids, to name two) that the way to get movement and to avoid
the limit at the same time is to introduce a quanta h giving us some control of
the ﬁlling but still driving to classical results (via Erhenfest theorem or classical
or semi-classical limits). Such arguments are far from the possibilities of the
ancients. On other hand, it is clear from the variation of areas in the cone that
movement, or change in length or position, can be deﬁned without recoursing to
the vacuum to cure Zeno’ objections. I could be driven to believe that vacuum
is needed to explain change as transformation of ”molecules” or to provide
playground for interaction -in atomic theory it is sometimes done via ”idols”
(eidolon), which should be a kind of photons if atoms were a kind of fermions-.
But I could also be driven to believe on some unexpected objection coming from
the development of the ones from Zeno.

As ﬁnal remark, let me notice that perhaps the funniest coincidence of all is
a notational one, which can serve as reminder note: We modernly use the same
letter, ω, as convention for ”diﬀerential form” and for ”frequency”.

References

[1] Diels and W. Kranz, Die Fragmente der Vorsokratiker, Berlin 1934-1937, 1956

[2] B. Farrington, Science and Politics in the Ancient World, London 1946.

[3] A. Rivero, Dream of a Christmas lecture, ﬁled in xxx.lanl.gov

3

