0
0
0
2

 
l
u
J
 

5

 
 
]
h
p
-
t
s
i
h

.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 

1
v
9
0
0
7
0
0
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

A Review Essay: “Lise Meitner and the Dawn

of the Nuclear Age”, by Patricia Rife

Gary R. Goldstein∗

Department of Physics

Tufts University

Medford, MA 02155 USA

February 2, 2008

Abstract

The recently published book, “Lise Meitner and the Dawn of the
Nuclear Age”, by Patricia Rife (Boston: Birkh¨auser, 1999) is reviewed
in an essay for the lay audience. Meitner was a leading nuclear physi-
cist at the time that the nucleus was the most exciting frontier of
science. To establish her career, she had to overcome daunting preju-
dices against women in science and academia. Being of Jewish origin
in Germany in the 1930’s, she narrowly escaped certain disaster. Meit-
ner was a crucial participant in the discovery of nuclear ﬁssion, yet
did not share in the Nobel Prize that her collaborator, Otto Hahn,
received in 1945. How these events came about, how they were inter-
twined with contemporary history and how they ﬁt into the evolution
of Meitner’s social conscience and her abhorrence of war are some of
the fascinating subjects discussed in the book and reviewed in this
essay.

∗To be published in Peace and Change: a Journal of Peace Research (2000). Submitted

13 March 2000.

1

Science has contributed immeasurably to the history and character of
the twentieth century. Advances in the fundamental understanding of na-
ture raced along at a mindboggling pace. The speedy applications of those
advances have led to everything from palm size computers and wireless tele-
phones to microwave ovens and nuclear weapons. Consequently, one of the
important extra-scientiﬁc questions for any scientist has become “To what
extent are you responsible for the applications of your work?” And con-
comitantly, to what extent should the scientist use his or her expertise and
reputation to inﬂuence the social uses of their science. We need only think
about the many innovations in military technology during the two World
Wars to realize how important these questions are. Even the most narrowly
focused practitioner of “pure research” can be faced with these questions.
Consider Albert Einstein, a paciﬁst, whose extraordinary insights into the
nature of space and time ultimately made possible the building of the A-
bomb, the most destructive single weapon ever used in war. He became an
outspoken critic of American nuclear policy after the war, and was labeled a
“fellow traveler” by some of the cold warriors.

Lise Meitner, a contemporary of Einstein’s, was a remarkable nuclear
physicist whose discovery of nuclear ﬁssion paved the way for the Manhattan
project, although she was unaware of the project itself. She did not share
in the credit for that discovery, in any case, having been passed up by the
Nobel Prize committee, while her collaborator, Otto Hahn, did receive the
prize in 1945. How these circumstances came about, and how they ﬁt into
the evolution of her social conscience and her abhorrence of war are some
of the fascinating subjects discussed in the biography by Patricia Rife, “Lise
Meitner and the Dawn of the Nuclear Age”, [1] here under review.

Lise Meitner’s name was hardly known in recent times, until an earlier
biography by Ruth Lewin Sime [2] appeared in 1996 that reminded readers
– interested scientists, primarily – of her importance. Yet, in the aftermath
of World War II, Meitner toured the US and was acclaimed “the Mother of
the A-bomb” in the popular press (a dubious honor that she shunned). As
that war and its memories have faded from public consciousness, so have
the names in a long list of scientists and engineers whose work contributed
to weapons research in general and the development of the nuclear ﬁssion
bomb in particular. Certainly, everyone recognizes Albert Einstein, whose
role in the dawn of the nuclear age was crucial, although he too had nothing
to do with the work of bomb project. He is now Time Magazine’s “Person

2

of the Century” and a logo for consumer products. Ironically, even among
the cognoscenti, contemporary scientists for whom Einstein’s work is part
of their life’s breath, Meitner’s essential role in nuclear research is hardly
known. Nor are the details of her extraordinary life. Her devotion to scientiﬁc
discovery was realized amidst an interminable struggle against misogyny,
anti-Semitism, economic hardship and indiﬀerence. Patricia Rife’s biography,
which was begun 11 years earlier, further contributes to the understanding
of the struggle and achievements of Lise Meitner.

Some of the important milestones discussed by Rife are summarized
herein. Lise Meitner was born in 1878 of a middle class Jewish family in
Vienna. Early on it was clear that she had special ability in science and
mathematics, although it was very diﬃcult for a young woman to obtain a
suitable education. She persisted, struggled against an unsympathetic system
and managed to be the ﬁrst woman ever admitted to the physics department
at the University of Vienna. Her subsequent career was exceptional. From
her twenties through her sixties she pursued the most vexing and interesting
puzzles in nuclear and quantum physics. And she unraveled many of those
puzzles in her research.

The times and places in which Meitner lived and worked coincided with
some of the century’s most important and terrifying events. She was among
the ﬁrst women in Austria and then Germany to be allowed participation in
higher education, both as a student, a researcher and ﬁnally as a professor.
At the time she completed her Ph.D. in Vienna, many of the new discoveries
in microscopic physics were being made and discussed. The nature of the
quantum world was beginning to be explored, and it was becoming clear
that the laws of physics were in need of radical change in order to account
for the new phenomena. In 1907, already involved in studies of radioactive
material, Lise decided to move to Berlin where Max Planck was leading a
group of young physicists and chemists in the ﬁrst forays into the quantum
world. Within a few years some of the leading proponents of the new physics
would be there - Einstein, von Baeyer, Franck, Hertz, Stern, von Laue. Lise
soon began to collaborate with a young chemist whose interests were similar
to hers, Otto Hahn, in a partnership that would last through most of her
career. But for many years she was an unpaid participant in the research
at the newly constituted Kaiser Wihelm Institute for Chemistry, women not
being allowed any oﬃcial status.

Science is not advanced in a vacuum of course, and Rife ﬁlls in the his-

3

torical context throughout. Although Meitner was incredibly focused on her
nuclear studies, she was forced to be aware of the powerful misogyny that
dogged her most pointedly in the early part of her career, but continued in
many forms throughout her life. The turmoil of war - World War I - and its
sweep of scientiﬁc talent into weapon making or soldiering amidst injuries
and death were a sobering experience. She eventually volunteered, seem-
ingly reluctantly, to aid the Austrian war eﬀort as a nurse on the frontlines.
She was asked to use her expertise in x-ray properties to aid the diagno-
sis of severe battleﬁeld injuries and to train others in the ﬂedgling medical
technology. She worked to exhaustion.

These war experiences did not turn her into an overt paciﬁst, however (in
a letter to Hahn she complained about Einstein’s paciﬁsm being out of touch
with the reality of the war engulﬁng Europe), but left her deeply skeptical
about political motives for committing lives to furthering grandiose national-
istic goals. She was very unhappy about her peers’ participation in research
on poison gas, which was led by the distinguished chemist Fritz Haber. Otto
Hahn even took part in one of the raids that used gas on the Allies’ troops,
for which Meitner chastised him. In the midst of all this turmoil she longed
for the peaceful pursuit of her research, and returned to Berlin hoping for the
insanity to “pass over”. It eventually did, but was replaced by the post-war
deprivations that made everyday life a struggle. Rife emphasizes the point
that Lise developed an expectation that in time political and economic chaos
would run their course. The best thing to do in the meantime was to focus on
her work. One of the people she admired most in Berlin, Max Planck, who
was also a friend and mentor, advocated the attitude of the scientiﬁc interna-
tionalists, that science transcends politics and nations. It should be pursued
for its own sake. Lise, following that philosophy, maintained the work of
the Kaiser Wilhelm Institute for Chemistry Radiological Studies group as
the war came to an end and she continued on as the director of the Physics
Section. Her achievements multiplied and her reputation grew among the
increasing number of scientists devoted to nuclear research.

Meitner ﬁnally had been given an appointment, the ﬁrst for a woman, in
the University of Berlin physics department (a separate and more interna-
tionally prestigious institution than the Kaiser Wilhelm Institute) in 1914,
but not with a salary commensurate with her status. For many years she had
been getting by with help from her family and a stipend for being Planck’s
assistant, while working at the Institute. Finally in 1916, at the age of 38,

4

she was given a salary nearly equal to Hahn’s, having been his equal in re-
sponsibilities for several years already. As the post-war years were succeeded
by the Weimar Republic period, her research progressed unhampered by the
forces of political change. But those forces became overwhelming with the
collapse of the liberal Weimar government.

The work on nuclear ﬁssion, for which Lise Meitner will be remembered
most, has a complicated history that is enmeshed with the horrendous policies
of Nazi Germany. Clearly presenting the history of the discovery and the
ensuing establishment of priority, within the tumultuous events of the times,
is a major achievement of the Rife biography. This slice of modern history
sharply illustrates how inescapable were the tentacles of fascism, even among
the most distinguished scientists. And the permanent dislocation of one
individual’s hitherto exemplary and productive life is a microcosm of the
disruptions of the time. What is fascinating from the perspective of the
history of science, is how inextricably connected are the demands of politics
and the military with the directions taken by scientiﬁc research. Once ﬁssion
was identiﬁed by Meitner and colleagues, an international race was underway
to exploit its military potential. To summarize the intertwined issues that
Rife disentangles is diﬃcult, but essential for appreciating the complexity of
the task Rife has undertaken.

To set the stage, in 1933 Meitner’s professorship at the university was
revoked by the Nazi directorship, to her great shock. Nevertheless, she man-
aged to remain at her beloved Kaiser Wilhelm Institute for Chemistry for ﬁve
more years during the continuing rise of the fascists and the imposition of
their anti-Jewish laws. At the same time as the revocation, Planck, Heisen-
berg and von Laue nominated Meitner and Hahn for the Nobel Prize for
their pioneering work in radiochemistry. These nominations were repeated
over many years. It was hoped that as a side beneﬁt, a Nobel Prize would
ease the plight of the non-Aryan Meitner and legitimize her remaining in her
research position at the Institute, but to no avail for her. Relying naively on
her experience during World War I, Lise tried to “hold center”, continuing
with her work, while political chaos and the deplorable attitudes of many
new colleagues (already by 1933 half of the institute staﬀ were Nazi party
members) began to engulf her and her colleagues. In protest to the dismissal
of Jews from the university, Hahn resigned his university position (but not
his institute position, which was more signiﬁcant as the university lapsed into
fascist polemics). However, Planck withdrew from the fray after an initial

5

protest to Hitler over the dismissal of Fritz Haber from the directorship of
the Kaiser Wilhelm Institute for Chemistry. Other scientists in Lise’s circle
advised avoiding direct confrontation with the Nazis. Rife emphasizes that
Otto Hahn’s choice of “compromise rather than righteous indignation”(p.124
in [1]) was symptomatic of many educated German’s unwillingness to con-
front the Nazi hierarchy.

Rife next carefully reconstructs the chronology of the nuclear research.
While getting the facts straight, Rife is quite terse with the important scien-
tiﬁc developments. A more readable and conventional account of the science,
without the detailed chronology of Meitner’s contribution, can be found in
the excellent book, “The Making of the Atomic Bomb”, by Rhodes [3]. The
essentials follow.

In 1934, in the midst of the very threatening political environment through-
out Europe, Enrico Fermi and his research group in Rome initiated a new
line of nuclear investigations in which neutrons were used to bombard a
variety of diﬀerent nuclei and the byproducts of the interactions were stud-
ied. The transmutation of the elements was underway. Lise and Otto Hahn
resumed their collaboration after a hiatus of 12 years in order to combine
their skills in pursuing this new and promising approach. Their “Berlin
Group”, which added Fritz Strassmann, was immediately a major contribu-
tor to the burgeoning research area, competing with Fermi’s group and the
“Paris Group” of Irene Curie and colleagues, along with several newly consti-
tuted US teams. The early results of the Berlin group suggested to Meitner
that “transuranic elements”, artiﬁcially created nuclei heavier than the nat-
urally occurring heaviest element uranium, were sometimes produced when
neutrons hit heavy nuclei. By observing the beta radiation from the radioac-
tive nuclear byproducts, Meitner was able to identify many of those nuclei.
Hahn and Strassmann, both chemists, did the chemical analyses of the same
byproducts. But there were some puzzling discrepancies with the results of
the Curie experiments. Thinking that they were observing transuranic nu-
clei, Meitner couldn’t accept that the French were ﬁnding a lighter element,
lanthanum, among the nuclei. Furthermore, issues of priority developed with
Curie’s group concerning the transuranics. These were very exciting times for
science. A new area of exploration, the physics of the nucleus, was yielding
new discoveries at a rapid rate and attracting considerable attention. Com-
petition was keen; major discoveries were imminent. There are few periods in
the history of modern physics and chemistry that were as heated. Hahn and

6

Meitner planned a series of experiments to probe further into the byproducts
that result when uranium is the bombarded nucleus. But these experiments
were slowed and interrupted by the events of 1938, as Rife describes.

The Anschluss, the German takeover of Austria in March 1938, put all
Austrians under the German laws and Lise Meitner was classiﬁed as a Jew.
Rife doesn’t note that Meitner had actually converted to Protestantism in
her 20’s (Sime discussed this in her book [2]), although this was irrelevant for
the “racial” distinctions that the Nazis made. It was clear to Meitner and
her friends, inside and outside of Germany, that she had to leave as soon as
possible; “holding center” was no longer viable. Hahn’s eﬀorts to allow her
to maintain her position at the Institute were half-hearted and ineﬀectual.
She was quite angry with him for not speaking out more forcefully on her
behalf.

The subsequent ﬁts and starts arranging Meitner’s escape constitute an
adventure story that Rife tells well. In brief, Lise managed, with no proper
exit visa, but with extraordinary help from the Dutch physicists Coster and
Fokker, to get to the Netherlands, where she remained a short time before go-
ing to Bohr’s institute in Copenhagen and then Stockholm, Sweden. Sweden
oﬀered her a modest position in a newly constituted institute for nuclear re-
search. Unfortunately the head, Nobel Laureate Manne Siegbahn, was never
very interested in Meitner’s work and allowed her only quite inadequate facil-
ities. The Sime book [2] is quite damning of Siegbahn’s possible motivation
for so ignoring Lise’s research needs, while Rife puts more emphasis on his
preoccupation with building big machines. In any case, Meitner’s research
in Sweden was hampered by inadequate equipment and lack of assistants.
She was quite frustrated and probably quite depressed, missing her beloved
physics research, the Berlin institute, colleagues, friends and even her native
German language.

So from July through September 1938 Meitner could do no research,
but Hahn and Strassmann continued the project in Berlin to determine the
byproducts from the bombardment of uranium by neutrons. Hahn frequently
wrote to Meitner about their progress and asked for her advice and interpre-
tation. On Dec. 16 Hahn and Strassmann, by careful measurements, had
convinced themselves that one of the byproducts was deﬁnitely barium, an
element of slightly more than half the mass of the uranium. Hahn wrote Lise
asking her to interpret this puzzling result, realizing that this could not be
the signature of one of the transuranics. Reluctant to give up the transuranic

7

idea, Lise ﬁrst tried to ﬁnd some loophole in the results. While letters were
being exchanged, Hahn wrote the article about the work without consulting
Strassmann and without Meitner’s name as a co-author. In the meantime
Lise spent the Christmas holiday period in western Sweden with friends and
her nephew, the young, recently emigrated physicist Otto Frisch. The two,
aunt and nephew, pondered the meaning of the barium results and, during
a walk in the forest, had a breakthrough in understanding. Frisch recalled
later that, in classic fashion, Lise sat down by a tree and started doing rough
calculations on a scrap of paper. They had realized that the barium was
appearing as a result of the uranium actually splitting into smaller nuclei
after being struck by a neutron. And the amount of energy released was just
what Einstein’s famous formula, E = mc2, predicted. Fission was discovered!
It is diﬃcult to imagine the emotional turmoil Meitner experienced in
that short time from the urgent arrangements being made for her escape from
Germany in April 1938 to the quiet Christmas holiday in western Sweden.
She had been engaged in some of the most exciting research of her career,
while trying to keep the terrifying external situation for non-Aryans away
from consciousness. Then in March she was forced to confront the fact that
her life was in grave danger. The time for legally obtaining an exit visa
had passed. The escape plans were fraught with dangerous uncertainty. She
survived the fearful anxiety of crossing the border to safety, only to encounter
further uncertainty about her livelihood in foreign lands. What distinguishes
these emotional upheavals from so many other refugees’ experiences is the
wrenching removal from her life’s work, work that was on a threshold of
momentous discovery. She then had to endure reading Hahn’s letters about
the continuation of that research, while she was unable to do any work herself
- she was experimentally mute. But then, when she and Frisch explained the
experimental results in terms of ﬁssion, a term they invented, she was at the
height of scientiﬁc creativity again. And at the age of 60, this creative insight
was quite remarkable. Nevertheless, Lise was again in the doldrums after the
holiday when she returned to the isolation of the primitive lab she had been
assembling in Stockholm. Surely she had to have been depressed, as Rife
surmises. A superhuman fortitude sustained her through the war years; she
managed to do some interesting research in spite of the obstacles.

After Lise wrote Hahn about the physical meaning of the experimental
results, she and Frisch composed an article whose submission and publication
were quite slow. Long before the article appeared in print a remarkable set

8

of circumstances, involving Niels Bohr, brought the news of ﬁssion to the US
and a race to study the ﬁssion process was underway. Meitner was out of the
loop from then until the end of World War II. Her experiments conducted
in that period were no longer at the cutting edge. The real developments of
nuclear ﬁssion became part of the secret rush to build a nuclear bomb by the
US, Germany and later, the Soviet Union.

There are many questions raised by this history of ﬁssion’s discovery.
Why was Meitner not included as a co-author on Hahn and Strassmann’s
paper? Rife doesn’t consider this point, but the fact that Meitner had been
an active partner in this particular research until her escape in July reason-
ably should have led to her inclusion on the paper. Sime’s book [2] speculated
that it might have been dangerous for Hahn to include this recently escaped
non-Aryan as a co-author. Most of the scientists involved in this line of re-
search knew that Meitner had been an equal partner in the work anyway.
Unfortunately, though, after the war Hahn continued to downplay Meitner’s
role in the research as Rife shows. During the war “He refused to take a
stand on the politics in and out of his institute: the Third Reich was blind-
ing Hahn and he began to discount Meitner’s insights and contributions he
had frantically sought out months earlier. We witness here appeasement,
professional cowardice, and worse.” (p.213). Perhaps Hahn’s initial lapse is
understandable given that the groundbreaking paper may have been rejected
by the editor or some other authorities for political reasons, although Hahn
knew the editor personally. More likely, he would have had to stand up to
the Nazi directorship of the Institute and the oﬃcial scientiﬁc establishment,
thereby jeopardizing his position. And when he ﬁnally received recognition
for the paper and the acclaim from his German colleagues that followed, he
was not about to share credit with Meitner. There is no question that his be-
havior was scurrilous. He must have constructed a torturous self-justiﬁcation
to assuage his guilt for deserting his decades long collaborator and friend. He
never adequately acknowledged her essential role in the discovery, even long
after he was awarded the Nobel Prize and was a leading ﬁgure in post-war
German science.

Another important element of the discovery of nuclear ﬁssion, for histo-
rians of science, is how Meitner and Hahn were able to accept the error in
their previous thinking about their transmutation research. Rife notes that
both shared an initial unwillingness to abandon their interpretation of their
previous neutron bombardment work. Here was an archetypal struggle at the

9

beginning of a paradigm shift [4] or creative leap. Hahn remained unsure of
his experimental results for a while, but once Meitner, with Frisch, realized
they had seen ﬁssion in the data, everything fell into place.

The war years were diﬃcult for Meitner for many reasons. The news
of horrendous destruction and turmoil was depressing. She helped friends
ﬂeeing Nazi persecution. She kept in touch with family and was able to com-
municate with some of her Berlin colleagues, but must have felt quite helpless
in the sweep of events. Her nephew Frisch had managed to get a position
in Birmingham, England and was continuing to experiment with ﬁssion. In
collaboration with another German-Jewish mmigrant, Rudolph Peierls, he
ﬁgured out how the ﬁssion of a rare isotope of uranium (U235) could be used
to initiate a “chain reaction” and create a “super bomb” of enormous power.
The secret Frisch-Peierls memorandum [5] became the impetus for the start
of the Manhattan Project. Unbeknownst to Lise, her nephew, Peierls and
other physicists working in Britain (including Klaus Fuchs) were sent oﬀ to
Los Alamos, New Mexico to contribute to the making of the bomb. Had she
been given the opportunity to participate in that war work, there is little
doubt that Meitner would have declined, as her previous history suggests.
In a separate discussion, Rife makes the interesting point that the scale of
scientiﬁc research would never be the same after the “big science” projects
became the rule with the infusion of large government budgets into scien-
tiﬁcally innovative weapons development. Siegbahn’s institute in Stockholm
had become an example of big science that left Meitner out in the cold (al-
though not directed toward weapons work).

When the war in Europe ended, Meitner was horriﬁed to learn about the
deaths and deprivations of the millions of victims of the Nazi concentration
camps. She could not forgive her German colleagues for their lack of active
opposition to the regime. Rife quotes a remarkable letter to Hahn (that he
never received) in which Meitner excoriates her old friend and research part-
ner: “All of you lost your standards of justice and fairness.
... All of you
also worked for Nazi Germany, and never even attempted passive resistance.
Of course, to save your troubled conscience, you occasionally helped an op-
pressed person; still, you let millions of innocent people be murdered, and
there was never a sound of protest.”(p.249). Later she singles out Heisenberg,
“They should force a man like Heisenberg, and millions of others with him,
to see these camps and the tortured people.”(p.250). Heisenberg had come
to Bohr’s institute in Copenhagen in 1941 and had delivered a lecture full of

10

propaganda for the regime that had infuriated Meitner. If there remain any
doubts about Heisenberg’s lack of scruples about his leading Nazi nuclear
bomb research, Lise would not have shared them.

Bohr’s eﬀorts to assure the establishment of Lise’s priority for the inter-
pretation of ﬁssion were not signiﬁcant enough to prevent the 1944 Nobel
Prize in Chemistry from being awarded (in 1945, after the War) to Otto
Hahn exclusively for the discovery of nuclear ﬁssion. “Lise Meitner keenly
felt the injustice of the situation, as did many of her colleagues”, Rife re-
counts (p.258). In his Nobel address to the Royal Academy of Sciences, with
Lise present, Hahn gives credit to Meitner and Frisch for interpreting his
and Strassmann’s results. Nevertheless, Hahn did not, in turn, nominate her
for the prize once he was on the nominating committee. He gave her part
of the monetary award, though, which she then sent on to an Emergency
Committee of Atomic Scientists chaired by Einstein in Princeton.

At war’s end Lise received unexpected attention from the press. She was
sought out after the atomic bombing of Japan. Called the “mother of the
A-bomb”, she quite forcefully tried to make it clear that she was completely
removed from any weapon research. Rife quotes a friend of hers who recalls
that when Lise ﬁrst heard about Hiroshima, there were “tears - shock - and
then silence”(p.252). With the attention came some welcome invitations for
her to visit the US. She was asked to give lectures at Catholic University in
Washington, DC, and was a guest of honor at the Women’s National Press
Club. She traveled to many universities giving lectures and being honored.
She spoke more and more about the importance of encouraging women to
enter higher education and scientiﬁc research. She also found herself among a
growing number of scientists who were profoundly worried about the nuclear
Pandora’s box that had been opened.

Just days after the bombing of Hiroshima, Lise Meitner took part in a
radio interview conducted by Eleanor Roosevelt in which she said: “Women
have a great responsibility and they are obliged to try, so far as they can,
to prevent another war. I hope that the construction of the atom bomb not
only will help to ﬁnish this awful war, but that we will be able to also use
this great energy that has been released for peaceful work.”(p.253). Here
she is expressing the attitudes that deﬁned the early post-war anti-nuclear
movement among the atomic scientists. It has to be said that history shows,
however, that it is doubtful that the atom bomb helped to ﬁnish the war or
made it less awful [3]. And the hope that atomic energy should be harnessed

11

for peaceful work has been quixotic, due to the enduring safety problems of
nuclear reactors. Nonetheless, her words were quite courageous at that time.
The plea to women is certainly heartfelt, given her own history. Lise felt
that even she had abdicated her moral responsibility by staying in Germany
as long as she had, in spite of the personal danger, because her work gave
legitimacy to the regime. She urged women and scientists to be more aware
of the moral consequences of events around them.

Meitner spent the post-war years traveling, giving lectures, advocating
arms control and the equal participation of women in science. She wanted to
share the lessons that she learned in a lifetime of struggle against the ravages
of war and the prejudices toward women and Jews. She lived an active and
dedicated life to the age of 89.

Although Rife gives us a thorough accounting of the facts of Meitner’s life,
and indicates the concerns she had for family and friends throughout, there
is a missing personal connection. For most of Lise’s years she lived alone,
but enjoyed the company of friends. Did she consciously decide to have no
intimate romantic relationships? Did the battle to be accepted in a man’s
world preclude forming such attachments? Or have the biographers missed
something? Did physics and her recreations - listening to music and walking
- ﬁll her time? We can only infer that she was depressed at particular times
when circumstances were quite diﬃcult. What is the core of her personality?
Lise was modest and very shy in public, yet unstoppably competitive and
tenacious in her work. She published papers at a high rate, even by today’s
standards (when the competition for jobs and advancement is unpleasantly
keen). Was this her strategy to overcome the prejudices against women in
science? Eventually, with all of her achievements, she was accepted by the
mostly male community of nuclear scientists. Though she was never given the
same level of recognition and reward as her collaborator Hahn, Lise Meitner’s
single-minded dedication to physics while faced with a myriad of obstacles
is proof of an extraordinary person. And with such extraordinary people we
want to know how they came to be. We are ultimately left to theorize for
ourselves, but Rife has given us much of the data we need in a well written,
thorough, readable and engrossing work. The book is clearly a paean to a
great woman scientist.

12

References

[1] Patricia Rife,“Lise Meitner and the Dawn of the Nuclear Age”,

Birkh¨auser, Boston 1999.

[2] Ruth Lewin Sime, “Lise Meitner: a Life in Physics”, University of Cal-

ifornia Press, Berkeley 1996.

[3] Richard Rhodes, “The Making of the Atomic Bomb”, Simon and Schus-

ter, New York 1995.

[4] Thomas S. Kuhn, “The Structure of Scientiﬁc Revolutions”, 3rd edition,

University of Chicago Press, Chicago 1996.

[5] Otto Robert Frisch and Rudolph Peierls, “The Frisch-Peierls Memoran-
dum”, in Robert C. Williams and Philip L. Cantelon, editors, “The
American Atom”, University of Pennsylvania Press, Philadelphia 1984.

13

