0
0
0
2

 

g
u
A
4

 

 
 
]
h
p
-
t
s
i
h

.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 

1
v
2
1
0
8
0
0
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

The interpretations by experimenters of

experiments on ‘time dilation’:

1940 - 1970 circa

Ilaria Bonizzoni and Giuseppe Giuliani

Dipartimento di Fisica ‘Volta’, Via Bassi 6, 27100 Pavia, Italy

E - mail: ilaria@ﬁsav.unipv.it
E - mail: giuliani@ﬁsav.unipv.it

Web site - http:\\matsci.unipv.it\percorsi\

Tempus item per se non est, sed rebus ab ip-
sis consequitur sensus, transactum quid sit
in aevo,
tum quae res instet, quid porro
deinde sequatur; nec per se quenquam tem-
pus sentire fatendumst semot ab rerum motu
placidaque quiete.a

Lucretius, De Rerum Natura, I, 459 - 463.

aEven time does not exists of itself; but sense
reads out of things what happened long ago, what
presses now, and what shall follow after: no man, we
must admit, feels time itself, disjoined from motion
and quiet repose of things.

Abstract. Experimental tests on ‘time dilation’ began in 1938 with Ives
and Stilwell’s work of the transverse Doppler eﬀect due to atoms in inertial
ﬂight. Rossi and Hall (1941) inaugurated the era of fast moving elementary
particles that dominated the scene until the discovery of the M¨ossbauer eﬀect
(1957). This discovery suggested the use of photons emitted without recoil
in crystalline solids for testing both time dilation and gravitational red shift.
Finally, around 1970, Hafele and Keating dealt again with time dilation by
sending macroscopic atomic clocks around the Earth. The interpretations of
these experiments by experimenters have been characterized by the use of
additional hypotheses not necessary for the formal development of the theo-
ries under test (the idea that all clocks measure proper time) or hypotheses
completely extraneous to the theories themselves (the idea that atoms are

clocks).
If these assumptions are dropped, it turns out that the only ex-
periments concerning time dilation are those performed with elementary
particles in inertial ﬂight. The historical and epistemological implications
are discussed.

Contents

1 Introduction

2 A point of view

3 The origins

3.1 Moving clocks run slow and twins age diﬀerently . . . . . . .
3.2 Moving atoms as moving clocks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3.3 Clocks on a rotating disc . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

4 Doppler eﬀect from a corpuscular point of view

2

3

7
8
10
12

14

5 The experiments and their interpretations by experimenters 15
16
21
21
23
24
26
27
31
36

5.1 Atoms in inertial ﬂight: a twist of fate . . . . . . . . . . . .
5.2 Particles in ﬂight . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5.2.1 Particles in inertial ﬂight in the atmosphere . . . . .
5.2.2 Particles in inertial ﬂight in vacuum . . . . . . . . . .
5.3 Particles in circular orbits in vacuum . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5.4 Photons emitted and absorbed by nuclei without recoil
. . .
5.4.1 An eﬀect due to the temperature . . . . . . . . . . .
5.4.2 Nuclei in crystals on rotating systems . . . . . . . . .
5.5 Atomic clocks around the Earth . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

6 Conclusions

7 Appendix

7.1 Atomic Cesium clocks
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7.2 The M¨ossbauer eﬀect . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7.3 The rotating disc . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7.4 The temperature eﬀect of Pound and Rebka . . . . . . . . .
7.5 Atomic clocks around the Earth . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

38

41
41
41
42
43
43

1 Introduction

In this paper we shall deal with the interpretations of ‘time dilation’ ex-
periments performed between 1940 and 1970 circa and explicitly grounded
on special relativity. The interpretations taken into account are only those

2

given by experimenters themselves. This limitation is suggested by the fact
that a wider choice, encompassing the whole literature and debate on the
issue, not only goes beyond our capacities but would require a size typical
of a book.

The ﬁrst part of the paper is dedicated to the exposition of a point of view
(our own). Its main purpose is that of allowing an analytical discussion of
the interpretations given by experimenters; as we shall see, this discussion
will bring to the surface interesting historical features and will focus the
epistemological aspects of the interpretations. In second place, the suggested
point of view might be a possible guide for the reader in going through the
matter.

Technical information about specialized topics and lengthy calculations

have been put in Appendix.

2 A point of view

The suggested point of view is based, essentially, on three points:

a) the relation between clocks and time;

b) the rejection of the idea that atoms (or nuclei) can be considered as

clocks;

c) the necessary use of the corpuscular description of electromagnetic
radiation when the radiation - matter interaction at the microscopic
level is a basic feature of the experiment.

These three assumptions do not interfere with the formal development of
either special or general relativity.

Every item of the suggested point of view can probably be found in liter-
ature; however, taken as a whole, it throws new light on the interpretations
of the experiments discussed.

1. Theories, measurements and their interpretation. The formal
results of a physical theory are, in general, expressed by mathematical
formulas. In order to relate these formulas with experiments, we must:

(a) Understand which physical quantities should be measured.

In
general, these physical quantities are suggested without ambigu-
ity by the theory itself.

(b) Choose available instruments for measuring these physical quan-
tities or make new ones. This step implies the use of theories
diﬀerent from the one under test: the theories of the instruments.

3

(c) Evaluate if the results of the experiments are in accordance with
the theory under test (the other theories used are considered as
acquired). In making this evaluation - besides the theory under
test and the theories of the instruments - we can use other theories
(or some their presuppositions) or other presuppositions: all of
them considered as established.

In this paper, the expression interpretation of the results of an exper-
iment refers to the evaluation procedure of point c above.

2. Time and clocks.

The main feature of a physical quantity is that it can be measured.
Generally speaking, a measurement is based on a physical interac-
tion - involving energy transfer - between something whose property is
measured and the apparatus which measures this property: the appa-
ratus measures the property of something distinct from it. Of course,
there are measurements - for instance the measurement of the length
of a rod with a unit rod - in which there is no energy transfer between
the measuring apparatus and the physical system whose property is
being measured. However, also in this case, it is true that the instru-
ment - the unit rod - measures a property of something distinct from
it.

We usually say that ‘time is measured by clocks’ as we say, for in-
stance, that ‘current is measured by ammeters’. The same syntactic
structure of these two propositions should not obscure a fundamental
diﬀerence: ammeters measure the property of something distinct from
them; clocks merely show their numbers or hands.

In theoretical descriptions of pre - relativistic Physics, time is a mathe-
matical variable, taken as increasing (and positive), used for describing
non - spatial variations of physical quantities or the variations of the
spatial coordinates of a point.

In pre - relativistic Physics clocks can be used for simulating
the
mathematical variable time without any problem. Problems of inter-
pretation arose, as it is well known, with the birth of relativity.

3. Time dilation. In relativistic Physics the variable “time” becomes a
coordinate in the sense that “time” is formally treated as the fourth
coordinate of a four - dimensional space. Lorentz’s transformations
read:

x′ =

y′ = y

q1 − V 2/c2

(x − V t)

(1)

(2)

1

4

z′ = z

t′ =

1

q1 − V 2/c2 (cid:18)t −

V

c2 x(cid:19)

(3)

(4)

if the K ′ reference frame is considered in motion with respect to K
along the positive direction of the common x ≡ x′ axis. The formal
meaning of Lorentz’s transformations is obvious: considered an event,
these equations give the primed coordinates assigned to this event in
terms of the unprimed ones. However, their operational and observa-
tional meaning is not so obvious. As a matter of fact, the diﬃculties
connected with the interpretation of Lorentz’s transformations have
generated many discussions since the appearance of special relativity.
From equation (4) it follows that:

∆t =

∆t′

q1 − V 2/c2

Equation (5) connects the durations of a phenomenon occurring at a
point P at rest in the frame K ′ as measured in the two reference frames.
While the measurement of ∆t′ presents no problem, the procedure for
the measurement of ∆t must be speciﬁed. Usually, it is speciﬁed as
follows. Arrange along the x axis a suﬃcient large number of clocks
and synchronize them; if the phenomenon begins when P meets clock
A and A reads tA; if the phenomenon ends when P meets clock B and
B reads tB; then ∆t = tB − tA. This procedure, though conceptually
sound, cannot be applied in practice. Only two other possibilities are
left:

a) Observer K ′ sends two (inﬁnitesimally short) light signals towards
K in coincidence with the beginning and the end of the phe-
nomenon: the separation of these two events is ∆t′. Observer K
will receive the two signals separated by ∆t, given by:

(5)

(6)

∆t = ∆t′

1 + V /c

q1 − V 2/c2

where V is positive if the two observers are moving away and
negative if they are approaching. From the measurement of V
and ∆t, observer K can calculate ∆t′.

b) If K is able to measure the length l covered by point P during
the duration of the phenomenon, then this duration will be given
by ∆t = l/V .

4. Proper time. Usually, it is assumed that ‘clocks measure proper time’
i.e. the quantity dτ = ds/c when the spatial distance between the two

5

events is zero: ds is the interval between two points of space - time
and c is the velocity of light. The discussion of the previous section
suggests that this assumption should be handled with care. In general
relativity, the assumption about clocks and proper time leads to the
conclusion that gravitation inﬂuences all clocks in the same way. We
suggest, instead, that we must look for clocks that are inﬂuenced by
gravitation as indicated by the well known equation:

dτ =

1
c

√−g00dx0

(7)

where x0 is the time coordinate. Atomic clocks do; and we know why
(see section 7.3). If one keeps on maintaining that in general relativity
‘clocks measure proper time’ one is faced with the following questions.
How clocks are sensitive to the metric? Why all clocks are sensitive
to the metric in the same way? Usually, we try to understand how
an instrument (in this case a clock) measures something or it can
be inﬂuenced by something: this methodological rule should not be
violated.

5. Electromagnetic radiation. We must choose a description for elec-
tromagnetic radiation. Since we shall discuss experiments in which
the radiation - matter interaction at the microscopic level plays a ba-
sic role, we shall adopt the corpuscular point of view. The reasons
are:

α) In experiments based on the M¨ossbauer eﬀect (section 7.2 of the
Appendix) the emission and the absorption of electromagnetic ra-
diation by nuclei are basic processes of the observed phenomenon.
The emitted and the absorbed energy may depend on the physical
state of emitting or absorbing nucleus. Therefore, the corpuscular
description outlined in section 4 must be used.

β) In the case of electromagnetic radiation emitted by atoms in iner-
tial motion the source and its physical state can be ignored in the
theoretical description of the experiment because the measured
quantity (the energy of the radiation) depends only on the rela-
tive velocity between the emitter (the atom) and the absorbing
apparatus (the spectrograph). Moreover, the spectrograph can be
treated as a macroscopic object, since the ultimate level of exper-
imental analysis is the shift of macroscopic spectral lines recorded
on a photographic plate. The fact that these lines are the prod-
uct of many microscopic events is irrelevant since the observed
results do not depend on microscopic parameters: the atoms of
the photographic plate can be changed without inﬂuencing the

6

experimental results. Therefore, in this case, electromagnetic ra-
diation could be treated as an undulatory phenomenon. However,
one can also adopt a corpuscular point of view. We shall adopt
the latter on the basis of the arguments developed in the following
point γ.

γ) In our study, we shall deal with the idea that individual atoms (or
nuclei) can be treated as clocks because they emit waves endowed
with a deﬁnite frequency. These assumptions ﬁnd their roots in
nineteenth century physics. In particular, the emission of periodic
waves by matter was explained in terms of periodic motions of
charged particles having the same frequency of the emitted waves.
However, ﬁrstly Bohr’s quantum condition has broken the link
between internal motions and emitted frequencies; then quantum
mechanics has rule out any possible link among them. All we
know about atoms and nuclei suggests that they emit and absorb
energy in discrete, directional processes. We do not know how
long these processes are; we can only guess that their duration
should be less than the time taken by light to travel through an
atom or a nucleus (≈ 10−19 s or ≈ 10−24 s, respectively). Then,
it appears as meaningless to speak of emission of something like
a wave with a period of say 10−15 s in a time interval which is
104 times shorter. Someone may object that the standard unit of
time is now based on atomic clocks and, therefore, that atoms are,
in some sense, clocks. However, in atomic clocks atoms behave
only as microscopic locking devices of the energy of the quanta
absorbed by atoms (see section 7.1 in the Appendix).

One may disagree, partially or wholly, on this point. However, ev-
eryone would probably acknowledge that fundamental conclusions
about time should not be drawn on the basis of a questionable
and superﬂuous idea like that of atoms considered as clocks.

3 The origins

The origins of the experiments on ‘time dilation’ are, of course, Einstein’s
writings on special and general relativity. These writings have been the sub-
ject of many historical reconstructions.1 The role of this section is merely

1 The literature on Einstein’s works and on their interpretation is enormous. See,
for instance the references contained in: A.I. Miller, Albert Einstein’s Special Theory of
Relativity - Emergence (1905) and early interpretations (1905 - 1911) (London, 1981);
A. Pais, The Science and the Life of Albert Einstein, (Oxford, 1982). The database of
the History of Science Society (http://weber.u.washington.edu/˜hssexec/index.html) is a
useful tool for searching historical treatments of the subject.

7

that of recalling relevant points for our discussion of the experiments per-
formed after about 1940:
in no way it should be considered a (sketchy)
historical reconstruction of Einstein’s ideas or and/or the ﬁrst development
of relativity issues. The points are:

i) the idea that the fundamental period of a clock in inertial motion

increases

ii) the ‘twin paradox’

iii) the idea of testing ‘time dilation’ by observing the radiation emitted

by moving atoms

iv) the idea of testing ‘time dilation’ by comparing two clocks placed at

diﬀerent distances from the center of a rotating disc

3.1 Moving clocks run slow and twins age diﬀerently

In Einstein’s 1905 paper we can ﬁnd matter for both points i) and ii) above.
In the paragraph entitled “The physical meaning of the equations obtained
concerning moving rigid body and moving clocks”, Einstein writes:

if at the points
This yields the following peculiar consequence:
A and B of K there are located clocks at rest which, observed
in a system at rest, are synchronized, and if the clock in A is
transported to B along the connecting line with velocity v, then,
upon arrival of this clock at B the two clocks will no longer be
synchronized; instead, the clock that has been transported from
A to B will lag (1/2)tv2/V 2 sec (up to quantities of the four and
higher orders) behind the clock that has been in B from the
outset, if t is the time needed by the clock to travel from A to
B.

We see at once that this result holds even when the clock moves
from A to B along any polygonal line, and even when the points
A and B coincide.

If we assume that the result proved for a polygonal line holds also
for a continuously curved line, then we arrive at the following
proposition: if there are two synchronous clocks in A, and one of
them is moved along a closed curve with constant velocity until
it has returned to A, which takes, say, t sec, then this clock will
lag on its arrival at A (1/2)tv2/V 2 sec behind the clock that has
not been moved. From this we conclude that a balance - wheel
clock that is located at the Earth’s equator must be very slightly

8

slower than an absolutely identical clock, subjected to otherwise
identical conditions, that is located at one of the Earth’s pole.2

In this passage we ﬁnd both the hint that clocks might be slowed down by
inertial motion and the core of what will become later the clock paradox
(the twin paradox, when applied to living beings).

As a matter of fact, none of the cases discussed by Einstein in this passage
refers to inertial motion. However, the ﬁrst one can be easily transformed
in an inertial motion case by introducing a third clock C in inertial motion
with respect to A and B, which are in relative rest and synchronized. Of
course, Einstein’s conclusion about the reading of clock A when it meets B
is based on the implicit assumption that clock B measures t and clock A,
when set in motion, measures t′.

In a lecture addressed to an audience of naturalists in January, 16th,
1911, after having described the journey of a clock, Einstein pointed out
that:

It should be added that whatever holds for this clock, which we
introduced as a simple representation of all physical phenomena,
holds for closed physical systems of any other constitution. Were
we, for example, to place a living organism in a box and make
it perform the same to - and - fro motion as the clock discussed
above, it would be possible to have this organism return to its
original starting point after an arbitrarily long ﬂight having un-
dergone an arbitrarily small change, while identically constituted
organisms that remained at rest at the point of origin have long
since given way to new generations. The long time spent on the
trip represented only an instant for the moving organism if the
motion occurred with approximately the velocity of light! This is
an inevitable consequence of our fundamental principles, imposed
on us by experience.3

And, in a response to a question:

The clock runs slower if it is in uniform motion, but if it under-
goes a change in direction as a result of a jolt, then the theory
of relativity does not tell us what happens. The sudden change
of direction might produce a sudden change in the position of
the hands of the clock. However, the longer the clock is moving

2 A. Einstein, ‘On the electrodynamics of moving bodies’, in A.J. Kox, Martin J. Klein
and R. Schulmann (eds), The collected papers of Albert Einstein, vol. 2, The Swiss years:
writings, 1900 - 1909, English translation, (Princeton, 1989), 140 - 171, on 153.

3A. Einstein, ‘The theory of relativity’ in A.J. Kox, Martin J. Klein and R. Schulmann
(eds), The collected papers of Albert Einstein, vol. 3, The Swiss years: writings, 1909 -
1911, English translation, (Princeton, 1989), 340 - 358, on 348 - 349; italics added.

9

rectilinearly and uniformly with a given speed of forward motion,
i.e., the larger the dimensions of the polygon, the smaller must
be the eﬀect of such a hypothetical sudden change.4

Einstein speaks of clocks running slow in uniform motion, points out that
“the theory does not tells us what happens” in the presence of acceleration,
but stresses that its hypothetical eﬀect may be reduced by increasing the
duration of the uniform journey of the clock.

Of course, in Einstein’s writings of those days we can ﬁnd also descrip-
tions of ‘time dilation’ that can be considered as ‘operational’. Here are two
examples:

• As I showed in an earlier paper, it follows from these principles that
a uniformly moving clock runs at a slower rate as judged from a “sta-
tionary” system than as judged by a co - moving observer.5

• Thus, observed from the system S [the ‘stationary’ one], the clock
completes ν = ν0q1 − v2/c2 periods per unit time; or: the rate of a
slower in the ratio 1 : q1 − v2/c2, as observed from this system, than

clock moving uniformly with velocity v relative to a reference system is

that of the same clock when at rest relative to that system.6

Miller has accounted for the ﬁrst debates on these issues in chapter seven of
his book.7

3.2 Moving atoms as moving clocks

In a 1907 paper, Einstein proposed to test ‘time dilation’ using moving atoms
as light sources:

In an important paper published last year, Mr. J. Stark (J. Stark,
Ann. d. Phys. 21 (1906), 401.) demonstrated that the moving
positive ions of canal rays emit line spectra by identifying the
Doppler eﬀect and following it quantitatively. He also undertook
experiments with the intention of detecting and measuring an
eﬀect of the second order (proportional to (v/V )2); however, the

4Ibid., 354; italics added.
5 A. Einstein, ‘On the possibility of a new test of the relativity principle’ in A.J. Kox,
Martin J. Klein and R. Schulmann (eds), The collected papers of Albert Einstein, vol. 2,
The Swiss years: writings, 1900 - 1909, English translation, (Princeton, 1989), 232 - 233,
on 232; italics added.

6 A. Einstein, ‘On the relativity principle and the conclusions drawn from it’ in A.J.
Kox, Martin J. Klein and R. Schulmann (eds), The collected papers of Albert Einstein,
vol. 2, The Swiss years: writings, 1900 - 1909, English translation, (Princeton, 1989),
252 - 311, on 262; italics added.

7Note 1, on 221 - 274.

10

experimental arrangement, which was not set up speciﬁcally for
this purpose, was not adequate for achieving reliable results.

I will show here brieﬂy that the principle of relativity in conjunc-
tion with the principle of the constancy of the velocity of light
makes it possible to predict the above eﬀect. As I showed in an
earlier paper, it follows from these principles that a uniformly
moving clock runs at a slower rate as judged from a “stationary”
system than as judged by a co - moving observer. If ν denotes
the number of the clock’s strokes per unit time for the observer
at rest, and ν0 the corresponding number for the co - moving
observer, then

ν
ν0

= s1 −(cid:20) v
V (cid:21)2

or to ﬁrst approximation

ν − ν0

ν0

= −

1

V (cid:21)2
2 (cid:20) v

(8)

(9)

The atom ion of the canal rays that emits and absorbs radiation
of certain frequencies is thus to be conceived as a fast - moving
clock, and the relation just indicated can therefore be applied to
it.8

Einstein speciﬁed his idea of the atom as a clock in a paper already quoted:

Since the oscillations process that corresponds to a spectral line
is to be considered as an intra - atomic process whose frequency
is determined by the ion alone, we may consider such an ion
as a clock of a certain frequency ν0, which can be determined,
for example, by investigating the light emitted by identically
constituted ions which are at rest relative to the observer. The
above consideration shows, then, that the eﬀect of motion on
the light frequency that is to be ascertained by the observer is
not completely given by the Doppler eﬀect. The motion also
reduces the (apparent) proper frequency of the emitting ions in
accordance with the relation given above.9

Notice that the idea of the atom as a clock is associated with ‘intra - atomic
oscillations’ whose frequency is the same as that of the spectral line observed.
This associaton has characterized the description of electromagnetic emission
by matter since the late years of nineteenth century.

8Note 5 on 232.
9Note 6 on 263.

11

3.3 Clocks on a rotating disc

In the paper on general relativity, Einstein used, among others, the following
argument for illustrating the necessity of general covariance of natural laws
(K is an inertial frame, K ′ a frame rotating with constant angular velocity
with respect to K):

. . . let us consider two identical clocks, one at the origin and the
other on the circumference [of the K ′ frame]; both of them are
observed from the “stationary” system K. As a consequence
of a well known result from special relativity theory, the clock
on the circumference, observed from K, goes slower than the
other, because the former is in motion and the latter is at rest.
An observer in the origin, capable of observing the clock on the
circumference through light signals, will ﬁnd it slower than the
one at the origin. Since this observer cannot think that light
speed depends explicitly on time along the path considered, he
will interpret his observations by concluding that the clock on the
circumference “really” goes slower than the clock at the origin.
Therefore, he will have to deﬁne time in such a way that the
angular velocity of a clock hands depends on the position of the
clock.10

This is the ﬁrst appearance of the idea of comparing, at least in a ‘gedanken
experiment’, the readings of two clocks placed on a rotating disc at diﬀerent
distances from its center. In the above passage, Einstein seems to consider
the slowing down of the clock on the circumference predicted by special rela-
tivity as apparent, because due to its motion with respect to the ‘stationary’
system (the laboratory); in contrast with its “real” slowing down claimed
by the rotating reference frame, who sees the clock on the circumference at
rest.

Some years later, in an appendix to his volume on special and general
relativity, this idea was further developed. Einstein considered two identical
clocks on a rotating disc, one at the center and the other at a distance r from
it. The rotating reference frame is named K ′ and the inertial (laboratory)
frame K:

A clock, at a distance r from the center of the disc, has a velocity
with respect to K given by

v = ωr

(10)

where ω is the angular velocity of the disc K ′ with respect to
K. If ν0 is the number of ticks of the clock per unit time (rate

10 A. Einstein, ‘Die Grundlagen der Allgemeinen Relativit¨atstheorie’, Annalen der

Physik 49 (1916), 769 - 822 on 775.

12

of the clock) with respect to K when the clock is at rest, then
the rate of the clock (ν) when it moves with respect to K with
velocity v, but at rest with respect to the disc, will be given by,
in agreement with paragraph . . . , the relation

or, with a good approximation by

ν = ν0q1 − v2/c2

ν = ν0 1 −

1
2

v2

c2!

This expression may be written in the form

ν = ν0 1 −

1
c2

ω2r2

2 !

(11)

(12)

(13)

If we denote by ϕ the potential diﬀerence of the centrifugal force
between the position of the clock and the center of the disc,
i.e.
the work, taken as negative, that must be done against
the centrifugal force on a unit mass for transporting it from the
position of the clock on the rotating disc to the center of the disc,
then we shall have:

Therefore From this relation we see at ﬁrst that two identical
clocks will have diﬀerent rates when at diﬀerent distances from
the center of the disc. This result is correct also from the point of
view of an observer rotating with the disc. Since, from the point
of view of the disc, a gravitational ﬁeld of potential ϕ appears, the
result we have obtained will be valid in general for gravitational
ﬁelds. Furthermore, we can consider an atom emitting spectral
lines as a clock; therefore the following statement will hold: the
frequency of the light absorbed or emitted by an atom depends on
the gravitational ﬁeld in which the atom ﬁnd itself.11

The distinction between ‘apparent’ and ‘real’ has gone. Einstein merely
states that the same expression for the frequency shift can be obtained by
special relativity (point of view of the stationary observer) or by general
relativity (point of view of the rotating observer).
In section 7.3 of the
Appendix a more general case is treated: it will be useful in the discussion
of the realization of the thought experiment devised by Einstein.

11A. Einstein, (1921) ¨Uber die spezielle und die allgemeine Relativit¨atstheorie (gemein-

verst¨andlich), (Braunschweig, 1921) on 88 - 89.

13

2

ϕ = −
ν = ν0(cid:18)1 +

ω2r2

ϕ

c2(cid:19)

(14)

(15)

4 Doppler eﬀect from a corpuscular point of

view

The experiment with atoms in inertial ﬂight, devised by Einstein in 1907,
received an elegant and rigorous theoretical treatment by Schr¨odinger in
1922.12 Schr¨odinger considered an atom in motion with respect to the mea-
suring apparatus and treated the radiation emitted by the atom as light
quanta with energy hν and linear momentum hν/c. Starting from the rela-
tivistic equations for energy and momentum conservation, Schr¨odinger got
the relation:

ν = ν ∗

1

qγ1 [1 − (v1/c) cos θ1] × γ2 [1 − (v2/c) cos θ2]

(16)

ν is the frequency measured by the spectrograph; v1, v2, θ1, θ2 are, respec-
tively, the velocities of the emitting atom and the angles that these velocities
form with the direction of observation of the emitted photon before (suﬃx
1) and after (suﬃx 2) the emission; all the quantities are measured in the
reference frame of the apparatus. The quantity ν ∗ is given by:

ν ∗ =

E 2
1 − E 2
2h√E1E2

2

(17)

where E1, E2 are the rest energy of the atom before and after the emission.
ν ∗ is, therefore, relativistically invariant. Strangely enough, Schr¨odinger did
stop at equation (16). As a matter of fact, few further passages lead to the
equation:

ν = ν0 q1 − v2

1/c2

where:

ν0 =

1 − (v1/c) cos θ1
∆E
2E1(cid:19)
h (cid:18)1 −

∆E

(18)

(19)

with ∆E = E1 − E2. Equation (18) has the same form of the standard
equation for the Doppler eﬀect but the treatment based on light quanta
predicts also, through equation (19), the energy loss of the photon due to
the atom recoil. The quantity ν0 has a precise operational meaning:
it is
the frequency measured when the emitting atom or nucleus is at rest (with
respect to the measuring apparatus) before the emission. Schr¨odinger rela-
tivistic treatment of the system atom+photon preceded that of Compton13

12E. Schr¨odinger, ‘Dopplerprinzip und Bohrsche Frequenzbedingung’, Physikalische
Zeitschrift 23 (1922), 301 - 303. A more detailed discussion of this work will be given in
a paper in progress.

13 A.H. Compton, ‘A quantum theory of the scattering of X - rays by light elements’,

Physical Review 21 (1923), 483 - 502.

14

and Debey14 applied to the system photon+electron. Compton and Debye do
not quote Schr¨odinger’s paper. It seems that Schr¨odinger’s paper has been
largely overlooked also in the following years. In a paper by Enrico Fermi
published in 1932, the Doppler eﬀect is handled within a general treatment
of the quantum theory of radiation. Before treating the argument within
this approach in a nonrelativistic approximation, Fermi makes a calculation
similar to that used by Schr¨odinger at the beginning of his paper; but he
does not quote Schr¨odinger.15

In spite of the fact that equation (19) is widely used today, the entire
treatment given by Schr¨odinger has been forgotten by physicists. To our
knowledge, it has never been applied in research papers; we have found
it only in textbooks.
In his book on relativity, Møller presents a com-
plete treatment of the shift of spectral lines emitted by atoms in motion
in terms of light quanta, including gravitation eﬀects; but he does not quote
Schr¨odinger’s paper.16 According to Møller the quantity ν0 of equation (19)

must be multiplied by a factor q1 + 2χ/c2 if the atom is in a point of grav-

itational potential χ and the gravitational ﬁeld is negligible at the position
of the spectrograph. Also French in his book on special relativity discusses
the Doppler eﬀect in terms of light quanta: he too, however, does not quote
Schr¨odinger.17

Schr¨odinger’s treatment can be easily applied also to the case of a photon
absorbed by an atom in ﬂight with respect to the laboratory reference frame.
The frequency associated with the photon absorbed by the atom is again
given by equation (18), where, in this case:

ν0 =

∆E

h (cid:18)1 +

∆E

2E1(cid:19)

(20)

is the frequency associated with the photon absorbed by an atom at rest,
in the laboratory frame, before the absorption and, of course, now ∆E =
E2 − E1.

5 The experiments and their interpretations

by experimenters

14P. Debye,

‘Zerstreung von R¨ontgenstahlen und Quantentheorie’, Physikalische

Zeitschrift 24 (1923), 161 - 166.

15E. Fermi, ‘Quantum Theory of Radiation’, Reviews of Modern Physics 4 (1932), 87 -

132 on 105 - 106.

16 C. Møller, The theory of relativity, Second Edition, (Oxford, 1972) on 401 - 407.
17A.P. French, Special Relativity, (London, 1968) on 197 - 199.

15

5.1 Atoms in inertial ﬂight: a twist of fate

In late thirties Ives and Stilwell set up an apparatus for the realization of
the experiment devised by Einstein in 1907 (section 3.2).18 The experiment
was fully ﬁnanced by the Bell Telephone Laboratories where Ives was then
working.19
It was a twist of fate that a test of relativity suggested by its
founder has been taken up, performed and interpreted by an anti - relativist.
Ives was a staunch opponent of relativity: he held a view characterized by the
assumption that the fundamental period of clocks and the length of rods in
motion with respect to the ether really increases and decreases, respectively.
(Here, really means that “the clock or the rod undergoes some physical
Ives presented his point of view in a series of papers written
changes”).
through about ﬁfteen years: they have been collected in a volume.20
Ives
and Stilwell write:

In previous papers in this series, various consequences of the al-
teration of the rate of a clock in motion, which is an essential el-
ement in the theory of Larmor and Lorentz, have been discussed.
In these papers, this change in clock rate has of necessity been
treated as an assumption, since, up to the present time it has
not been the subject of independent experimental veriﬁcation.
As was pointed out in these papers, the Michelson - Morley and
Kennedy - Thorndyke experiments do not give the necessary in-
formation to establish the existence of this change of rate. An
experimental search for this phenomenon is of particular inter-
est, because the alteration of clock rate should be manifested
as a positive eﬀect, instead of the null eﬀect characteristic of all

18H.E. Ives and G.R. Stilwell, (1938) ‘An Experimental Study of the Rate of a Moving

Atomic Clock’, Journal of the Optical Society of America 28 (1938), 215 - 226.

19 R. Hazalett and D. Turner,(eds) Einstein Myth and Ives Papers - A Counterrevolu-

tion in Physics, (Old Greenwich, 1979) on 40.

20Note 19. Ives’ theory is a very complicated one. It is based on two basic assumptions:
a) the existence of the ether; b) the relativity principle (Poincar´e’s, according to Ives).
Assumption a) forces to consider the possibility that there are three light speeds (the
same for all inertial observers, according to b)): one way out, one way back and two ways
(out - back). Therefore, the settings of clocks at rest in an arbitrarily chosen inertial
reference frame I cannot be performed by light signals:
it is necessary to use a clock
moving at a speed q from one clock to another. The speed q is given by d/∆t, where d is
the distance covered by the clock and ∆t the time interval read by the moving clock itself.
(As a matter of fact, Ives does not denote the quantity q as a ‘velocity’, but as a ‘rod -
to - clock quotient’: the term ‘velocity’ is reserved to ‘rod - to - clock quotients’ when
rods and clocks are at rest with respect to the ether). From a) and b), Ives derives: i) the
‘clock retardation’ and ‘length contraction’; ii) coordinates transformations much more
complicated than Lorentz’s. Ives’ transformations are approximated by Lorentz’s when
q ∼= 0, but never coincide with Lorentz’s: q cannot be zero, because without a moving
clock there cannot be any settings of clocks at rest in an arbitrarily chosen inertial frame
and, therefore, measurements.

16

other optical experiments.

The ﬁrst suggestion as to a means by which this positive eﬀect
might be observed experimentally came from Einstein and from
Ritz over thirty years ago, namely that the newly discovered
Doppler eﬀect in canal rays involved velocities of the moving
particles high enough to show the expected eﬀect. The experi-
ment, whose crucial nature has been repeatedly emphasized, has
been commonly imagined as performed by observing the canal
rays at right angles to their direction of motion, and for that
reason, has been referred to as “the transverse Doppler eﬀect.”21

After this introduction, Ives and Stilwell stress that

. . . it would be extremely diﬃcult to be sure that observation was
made exactly at right angles to the direction of the rays, and very
small deviations from this direction would introduce shifts of the
order of magnitude of the expected eﬀect.22

However, this diﬃculty

. . . can be avoided by observing not at right angles, but in two
directions, with and against the motion of the particles; the ob-
servation being made simultaneously by the use of a mirror in
the tube. Under these conditions the displaced Doppler lines are
observed corresponding to motion toward and away from the ob-
server, and the eﬀect to be observed is a shift of the center of
gravity of the displaced lines with respect to the undisplaced line.
As shown in an earlier paper of this series this shift of center of
gravity is expressed by the equation λ = λ0(1 − V 2/c2)1/2 where
V is the observed or measured velocity of the positive particles.23

The emitting atoms where hydrogen atoms produced by accelerating H +
2
or H +
3 molecular ions against stationary (on average) H2 molecules. The
observed line was the Hβ line.

For describing the experimental procedure, we shall use its clear descrip-
tion outlined by Mandelberg and Witten, who remade Ives and Stilwell’s
measurement in the sixties.24

1. One measures the wavelength λB of the light emitted by the incoming

atoms at a small angle θ to the beam direction:

1 − B cos θ
(1 − B2)1/2 ≈ λ0(cid:18)1 − B cos θ +

1
2

B2(cid:19)

(21)

λB = λ0

21Note 18 on 215.
22Ibid.
23Ibid. 216.
24 H.I. Mandelberg, and L. Witten,

Doppler Eﬀect’ Journal of the Optical Society of America 52 (1962), 529 - 536.

17

‘Experimental Veriﬁcation of the Relativistic

where λ0 is the natural wavelength, B = v/c ≪ 1 and v is the velocity
of the atoms.

2. One measures the wavelength λR of the light emitted by the receding

atoms at the angle (π − θ) to the beam direction:
(1 − B2)1/2 ≈ λ0(cid:18)1 + B cos θ +

1 + B cos θ

λR = λ0

3. The average of the two wavelengths is:

λQ =

1
2

(λB + λR) = λ0(cid:18)1 +

1
2

B2(cid:19)

1
2

B2(cid:19)

(22)

(23)

and equals the wavelength which would be observed at right angles to
the beam.

4. The diﬀerence between the two wavelengths is:

2λD = λR − λB = 2λ0B cos θ

(24)

where λD represents the ﬁrst order Doppler eﬀect.

Ives and Stilwell:

a) derived the experimental value of the atoms velocity v from (24)

b) predicted the value of the transverse Doppler shift by using this value of

the atoms velocity

c) compared the calculated value of the transverse Doppler shift with that

measured according to (23)

d) concluded by stating that the theoretical predictions agree with experi-

mental results within measurements precision

2 or H +

As a matter of fact, Ives and Stilwell used also an a’) step (instead of a)) in
which the velocity of the emitting atom was assumed to be the velocity of
the incoming H +
3 ion calculated through the relation eV = (1/2)Mv2,
where e is the charge of the ion, M its mass, v its velocity and V the acceler-
ating potential. Ives and Stilwell found that both procedures for calculating
the velocity of the emitting atoms resulted in a predicted transverse Doppler
shift (point b) above) in agreement with the measured one (point c) above).
Of course, in the conclusions, Ives and Stilwell interpret the experimental

results as a conﬁrmation of Lorentz’s view:

18

This experiment forms the necessary optical complement to the
Michelson - Morley experiment, and the more general form of
this experiment due to Kennedy and Thorndyke. The null result
of the latter experiment can be explained, on the assumption
of a ﬁxed luminiferous ether, by contractions of the apparatus
along and across the direction of motion which are in a deﬁnite
ratio to each other, namely (1 − V 2/c2)1/2 : 1 where V is the
velocity of the apparatus and c the velocity of light. From these
experiments the contractions are unﬁxed in absolute amount;
i.e., the contractions in the two directions could be 1 − V 2/c2
and (1 − V 2/c2)1/2, etc. For each absolute contraction, there is
demanded in general a change in the rate of the clock at the origin
of the light signals, and an independent experiment must furnish
this rate in order to completely solve the problem. The present
experiment establishes this rate as according to the relation

ν = ν0(1 − V 2/c2)1/2

(25)

where ν0 is the frequency of the clock when stationary in the
ether, ν its frequency when in motion. It follows then on com-
bining this result with the results of the Kennedy - Thorndyke
experiment that the dimensions of the moving apparatus are con-
tracted by the factor (1 − V 2/c2)1/2 in the direction of motion,
and are unaﬀected at right angles to that direction.

The Michelson - Morley experiment and Kennedy - Thorndyke
experiments, yielding null results, could, of themselves, be equally
well explained – and more simply – by assuming an ether en-
trained by the earth, or a ballistic character of light emission,
instead of assuming two concealed conspiring compensations -
contractions of dimensions and of clock rates. The present ex-
periment, giving a positive instead of a null result, may hence be
claimed to give more decisive evidence for the Larmor - Lorentz
theory than is given by the experiments which have yielded null
results.

The discussion of the consequences of this change in clock rate,
the reality of which may be taken as established by this exper-
iment, consists practically of the entire theory of the optics of
moving bodies as developed by Larmor and Lorentz.25

Ives’ standpoint, held about thirty years later Einstein’s 1905 paper, may
appear as a survivor. Ives was, obviously, conscious of that. Notwithstand-
ing, as shown by the following recollection, Ives sustained his point of view
with a spirit of deﬁance. On October 24, 1950, Ives wrote to H. Butterﬁeld:

25Ibid. 226; italics added.

19

What would really be exciting would be if the [American] Philo-
sophical Society should succeed in their eﬀort over the years to
get Einstein to come to Philadelphia and sign the Society’s roll
book. Giving this paper [“Revisions of the Lorentz Transforma-
tions”] with him in the front row would be something! I faced
that situation once before, in 1938, when I was asked to present
the atomic clock work before the Princeton Physics group.
I
gave the background entirely in terms of FitzGerald, Lorentz
and Larmor (I was then ignorant of Poincar´e). It was certainly
not diplomatic, and the Princeton lads won’t recognize me on
the street to this day. When I was in Europe in the summer
of ’38, I found they had written to their friends that my work
didn’t amount to anything (Pauli told me this).26

Ives’ interpretation is worth discussing a little more. Given his fundamental
assumptions, one may wonder why the formulas used by Ives contain the
velocity of the emitting atoms with respect to the spectrograph instead of
the velocities of the emitting atoms and of the spectrograph with respect to
the ether. In a previous paper, Ives has shown that - also in his theory - the
Doppler eﬀect depends only on the relative velocity between the source and
the spectrograph.27

A year later, R.C. Jones interpreted Ives and Stilwell results in a special
relativity approach, assuming, of course, that atoms can be treated as clocks.
Jones did not attack Ives’ standpoint; he wrote instead:

The conceptual background of these theories [Larmor’s and Lorentz’s]
is not the one which is most popular with physicists today, how-
ever, and for this reason it seemed worth while to obtain the
theoretical predictions from the point of view of the special the-
ory of relativity, particularly since the relativistic point of view
yields the results in so simple a manner. The theoretical predic-
tions we shall obtain here are identical with those obtained by
Ives from electron theory.28

Jones pointed out that Ives and Stilwell did not measure the ‘undisplaced’
Hβ line: this should have been done, since the supposed ‘stationary’ H2
molecules may, in eﬀect, not be ‘stationary’, thus introducing systematic
errors in the measurement. Ives and Stilwell acknowledged the soundness of
the criticism and in a subsequent paper showed that the eﬀect predicted by

26Note 19 on 90.
27H.E. Ives,‘The Doppler Eﬀect Considered in Relation to the Michelson - Morley ex-

periment’, Journal of the Optical Society of America 27 (1937), 389 - 392.

28R. Clark Jones, ‘On the Relativistic Doppler Eﬀect’, Journal of the Optical Society

of America 29, (1939) 337 - 339 on 337.

20

Jones is, in some cases, present; however, it does not invalidate the results
obtained previously.29

Some years later, a similar experiment with canal rays was carried out by
Gerhard Otting.30 The contrast with Ives and Stilwell’s paper could have
not been more striking. Otting does not comment either the formulas or
their interpretation: he is interested only in the correspondence between
formulas and experimental data.

As said above, the experiment was repeated again in the sixties by Man-
delberg and Witten. The basic experimental setup was the same as that of
the older experiments: only the precision was improved. The two authors
do not seem to be concerned directly with time dilation, but with a nonnull
experiment regarding special relativity. After having recalled mass variation
experiments, they write:

Another nonnull result of the theory [special relativity] which can
be measured is the frequency or Doppler shift of spectral lines
and its dependence on the square of the velocity (on β 2 = v2/c2)
together with the associated time - dilation prediction.31

Their explicit reference to the “associated time - dilation” indicates that
they adopt the standard hypothesis that atoms can be considered as clocks.
The experiments with atoms in inertial ﬂight have been conceived as
tests of time dilation and interpreted as a corroboration of special relativity
(Jones, Otting, Maldelberg and Witten) or of Lorentz’s ether theory (Ives
and Stilwell). All these interpretations are based on the assumption that
atoms emit light in form of periodic waves and can be considered as clocks.
In section 2, point 5 - γ, we have seen how this assumption appears unten-
able on the basis of the knowledge acquired before the end of the twenties.
If we drop this assumption and adopt, instead, Schr¨odinger’s corpuscular
treatment discussed in section 4, these experiments must be considered as a
corroboration of relativistic dynamics and, only indirectly, of Lorentz trans-
formations: clocks, and their behaviour, are out of the picture.

5.2 Particles in ﬂight

5.2.1 Particles in inertial ﬂight in the atmosphere

About 1940, Bruno Rossi and David Hall dealt with the decay of cosmic -
rays mesotrons. The measurements were taken at Denver (Colorado) and
at Echo Lake, about thirty miles west of Denver: the diﬀerence in altitude

29H.E. Ives, , G.R. Stilwell, (1938) ‘An Experimental Study of the Rate of a Moving

Atomic Clock. II’, Journal of the Optical Society of America 31 (1941), 369 - 374.

30G. Otting, ‘Der quadratische Dopplereﬀekt’, Physikalische Zeitschrift

40 (1939),

681 - 687.

31Note 24 on 529.

21

was 1624 m (the geomagnetic latitude was practicality the same for both
locations). The problem was that:

Recent experiments on the variation of cosmic - rays intensity
with altitude have shown that the rate of decrease of the mesotron
component with increasing atmosphere depth cannot be accounted
for completely by ordinary ionization losses.

[. . . ]

The anomalous absorption in air is interpreted on the hypothesis
that mesotrons disintegrate spontaneously with a proper lifetime
of the order of a few microseconds. According to this assumption,
a considerable fraction of the mesotrons beam will disappear by
disintegration while traveling in the atmosphere.

[. . . ]

A simple relativistic consideration shows that if the absorption
anomaly of mesotrons is due to the spontaneous decay it must be
more pronounced for mesotrons of high energy. In fact, let τ0 be
the “proper lifetime” of mesotrons; i.e. the lifetime measured in
a frame of reference in which the mesotron is at rest, and τ the
lifetime measured in a frame of reference in which the mesotron
is moving with a velocity β. Then

τ =

τ0

(1 − β 2)1/2

(26)

and the “average range before decay” L, i.e. the average distance
traveled by the mesotrons before disintegrating, becomes

L = βτ =

pτ0
µ

(27)

where µ is the mass and p = µβ/(1− β 2)1/2 is the momentum of
the mesotrons.

[. . . ]

The experiments described in the present paper were primar-
ily designed to test the dependence of disintegration probability
on momentum expressed by equation (27). The purpose was to
provide an additional check of the disintegration hypothesis and
simultaneously to verify the relativistic formula for time inter-
vals.32

In the discussion of the experimental results, Rossi and Hall write:

32 B. Rossi and D.B. Hall, ‘Variation of the Rate of Decay of Mesotron with Momentum’,

Physical Review 59 (1941), 223 - 228 on 223 - 224.

22

Thus, while a quantitative proof of equation (26) is still wanting,
its approximate validity may be considered as established.33

No comments are expressed on time dilation issues and no Einstein’s paper
is quoted. Rossi and Hall simply speak of ‘relativistic consideration’ or of
‘the theoretical predictions based on the relativity change in rate of a moving
clock’. However, one can read in the abstract :

The softer group of mesotrons was found to disintegrate at a
rate about three time faster than the more penetrating group, in
agreement with the theoretical predictions based on the relativity
change in rate of a moving clock.34

This passage suggests that the authors share the idea that the fundamental
period of clocks in motion increases.

The phenomenon studied by Rossi and Hall is complicated by the fact
that the momentum of mesotrons may be reduced by collisions with the
molecules of the atmosphere: these collisions are taken into account by the
use of a relativistic formula given by Bethe and Bloch. Therefore, Rossi
and Hall results must be considered in accordance with special relativity
and, therefore, also with Lorentz’s transformations: however, they cannot
be considered as a direct conﬁrmation of these transformations.35

5.2.2 Particles in inertial ﬂight in vacuum

Since the ﬁfties, many papers have been published on the lifetime of high
speed particles in inertial motion produced by accelerators. Their focus was
not on the relativistic behaviour of the particles:
it was considered as an
acquired result to be used in describing the experimental data or as a by -
product of the experiments. No comments on time dilation issues can be
found in these works. As an example, let us quote from the paper by Ayres
et al., who write in their conclusions:

The expected time dilation of the observed lifetime agrees with
the predicted values to 0.4% and provides the most precise veri-
ﬁcation of this aspect of special relativity.36

These works have veriﬁed equation (26) to various degree of precision in
accelerators where the particles were ﬂying in vacuum: the complications

33Ibid. 227.
34Ibid. 223; italics added.
35Miller (Note 1 on 266) has already stressed this point. Miller holds that Ives and
Stilwell experiment “is the only positive proof for Einstein’s prediction of time dilation”
(ibid.). Above, we have explained why we disagree.

36D.S. Ayres, et al.

‘Measurements of the Lifetime of Positive and negative Pions’,

Physical Review D 3 (1971), 1051 - 1063 on 1062.

23

introduced by the atmosphere in Rossi and Hall’s experiment were absent.
Experimental results of this type are compared in the paper of Bailey et al.37
As in the case of Rossi and Hall’s experiment, the lifetime τ of ﬂying
particles is calculated as the quotient between the measured average distance
λ covered by the particles before disintegrating and their measured velocity
v. It turns out that the lifetime of ﬂying particles measured as τ = λ/v in
the laboratory is related to their known lifetime at rest τL0 in the laboratory
frame by the formula

(28)

τ =

=

λ
v

τL0

q1 − v2/c2

If we take for granted that the lifetime τF 0 of a particle ﬂying in inertial
motion is, in its reference frame, the same as that of a particle at rest in the
laboratory frame - as required by the principle of relativity - then, we can
replace τL0 with τF 0 in equation (28):

τ =

λ
v

=

τF 0

q1 − v2/c2

(29)

The experimental procedure leading to equation (29) is exactly the procedure
outlined in point 3b of section 2.

It is worth stressing that measurements made on muons at rest in the lab-
oratory by an observer ﬂying with velocity v, with respect to the laboratory,
should yield the same results in accordance with the perfect equivalence of
two inertial observers. Of course, this consideration rule out the possibility
that the lifetime of muons in ﬂight is increased, i.e. that the fundamental
period of clocks in motion is increased.

5.3 Particles in circular orbits in vacuum

Bailey et al. studied the lifetime of both positive and negative muons in
circular orbits.38 Muons have a lifetime (at rest) of about 2.2 µs and decay
into electrons, neutrinos (ν) and antineutrinos (ν):

µ− → e− + νµ + ν e

(30)

Their disintegration is observed through the detection of the produced elec-
trons. Previous similar measurements have been performed some years be-
fore.39 However, the new measurements have been carried out with more
speedy particles and explicitly devised for testing time dilation. The muons

37 J. Bailey, et al. ‘Measurements of Relativistic Time dilation for Positive and Negative

Muons in a Circular Orbit’, Nature 268 (1977), 301 - 305 on 304.

38Note 37.
39 J. Bailey, et al.

‘Precise Measurement of the Anomalous Magnetic Moment of the

Muon’, Il Nuovo Cimento 9A (1972), 369 - 432.

24

were circulating in a uniform magnetic ﬁeld on orbits with a diameter of
14 m.

The authors write in the abstract:

The value for positive muons is in accordance with special relativ-
ity and the measured lifetime at rest: the Einstein time dilation
factor agrees with experiments with a fractional error of 2× 10−3
at 95% conﬁdence. Assuming special relativity, the mean proper
lifetime for µ− is found to be

τ0 = 2, 1948(10)µs

(31)

the most accurate value reported to date.40

The article begins with:

Measurement of the lifetime of a sample of radioactive material
which is moving with a known velocity is a means of testing
the so - called time dilation, or slowing down of moving clocks,
predicted by the special theory of relativity. If, in addition the
radioactive particles move in closed circular orbits then the con-
ditions simulate those of the outward and return journey of the
twin paradox in which, according to the theory, the journeying
twin ages more slowly then the one who stays at home. In this
situation it is also possible to search for any modiﬁcation of the
predictions of the theory due to acceleration.41

The lifetime, measured as λ/v, was of about 64 µs. The authors’ comments:

The µ+ measurement diﬀers in one important respect from the
other results quoted in table. . . The π±, K ± and K 0
S measure-
ments in ﬂight were performed in beams for which the decaying
particle, regarded as a clock, was in an inertial (unaccelerated)
frame. In the muon experiment, however, the particles are sub-
jected to a constant transverse acceleration of 1021 cm s−2. The
muons perform a round trip and so when compared with a muon
at rest in the laboratory, simulate closely the so - called twin
paradox which was already discussed in Einstein’s ﬁrst paper.
Other experiments42 have conﬁrmed the correctness of relativis-
tic time dilation for clocks in circular motion to ∼ 10% at low
velocities (a similar conclusion follows from the observations of
second - order (transverse) Doppler eﬀect, in the temperature

40Note 37 on 301.
41Ibid.; italics added.
42Note 52 and 63.

25

dependence of the M¨ossbauer eﬀect43 and of the hydrogen maser
frequency). The present experiment is unique in its use of an
ultra - relativistic clock (γ ≫ 1) and its much greater precision
∼ 0.1%. The possibility also exists that very large accelerations
may modify in some way the internal constitution of particles.
No such eﬀects, in so far as they aﬀect the particle lifetime,
are seen in this experiment where the transverse acceleration is
∼ 1018 g.44

The experiment shows that λ/v and τF 0 are related as in the case of muons
in inertial ﬂight: the acceleration does not aﬀect the lifetime of the ﬂying
muons. This result is of basic relevance, as stressed by the authors.
It
implies that the motion of the ﬂying muons can be considered as if it were
an inertial one.

The authors do not state explicitly that their experimental results cor-
roborate the hypothesis that ‘the journeying twin ages more slowly than the
one who stays at home’; but they leave the reader with the impression that
it is so. However, the authors do not conform, in their discussion, to the
basic conditions of the clock paradox. These conditions are:

CP1 a fraction of the journey of the ﬂying clock must be an inertial motion

CP2 at the end of the journey of the ﬂying clock, the two clocks must be

compared, one faced the other, in the same reference frame.

Condition CP1 is satisﬁed by the experiment under discussion.
In fact,
though the motion of the ﬂying clock was circular, the experiment shows
that, as far as ‘time dilation’ is concerned, it can be considered as ‘inertial’.
Condition CP2 was, of course, out of experimental reach: the experiment
corroborates equation (29) and the authors simply commented this corrob-
oration. As already discussed above, this equation relates the lifetime of the
ﬂying muon τF 0 in its reference frame, assumed to be equal to the lifetime
τL0 of a muon at rest in the laboratory frame, with the lifetime τ of the
ﬂying muon as measured in the laboratory frame by the ratio λ/v. A hypo-
thetical observer ﬂying with the particle would see a particle ‘at rest’ in the
laboratory ‘to live’ more than the ‘ﬂying’ one.

The authors quote Einstein’s 1905 paper for both slowing down of clocks
and clock paradox. They do not quote other theoretical papers, nor do they
touch upon the debate about these issues.

5.4 Photons emitted and absorbed by nuclei without

recoil

43Note 46.
44Ibid. 304.

26

5.4.1 An eﬀect due to the temperature

Around 1960, several groups began to test ‘time dilation’ and gravitational
red - shift by using M¨ossbauer eﬀect (see section 7.2 in the Appendix).
Among them, Robert Vivian Pound and Glen A. Rebka at Harvard and John
Paul Schiﬀer and his collaborators at Harwell (England). These two teams
were primarily concerned with the test of gravitational red - shift. A histor-
ical reconstruction of these researches has been made by Klaus Hentschel.45
Pound and Rebka realized that the emitter’s and absorber’s temperatures, if
diﬀerent, may overshadow the searched gravitational eﬀect. Therefore, they
made a careful study of the “variation with temperature of the energy of
recoil - free gamma rays from solids”.46 The emitting and absorbing nuclei
were in two crystals held at diﬀerent temperatures and the emitted or ab-
sorbed photons were recoil - free, owing to the M¨ossbauer eﬀect. Pound and
Rebka write:

That temperature should inﬂuence the frequency exactly as we
observe is very simply explained. Thermally excited vibrations
cause little broadening through ﬁrst order Doppler eﬀect under
the conditions obtained in solids because the value of any com-
ponent of the nuclear velocity averages very nearly to zero over
the nuclear lifetime. The precision of the γ ray of F e57 requires
the second order Doppler eﬀect also to be considered. A shift to
lower frequency with increased temperature results from this be-
cause the also well - deﬁned average of the square of the velocity
of the particle increases in direct proportion to the average ki-
netic energy. As a consequence one would expect a temperature
coeﬃcient of frequency in a homogeneous solid,

  ∂ν
∂T! = −ν

CL

2Mc2

(32)

where CL is the speciﬁc heat of the lattice and M is gram atomic
weight of iron.47

Pound and Rebka did not explain how they got equation (32). According
to Sherwin, this equation can be derived, in the high temperature approxi-
mation, in the following way:48

45 K. Hentschel, ‘Measurements of Gravitational Redshift between 1959 and 1971’,

Annals of Science 53 (1996), 269 - 295.
46 R.V. Pound, and G.A. Rebka, jr.

‘Variation with temperature of the energy of

recoil - free gamma rays from solids’, Physical Review Letters 4 (1960), 274 - 275.

47Ibid. 274.
48C.W. Sherwin, ‘Some Recent Experimental Tests of the Clock Paradox’, Physical

Review 120 (1960), 17 - 21.

27

1. replace v2 in the equation for the transverse Doppler eﬀect

ν = ν0s1 −

v2
c2

(33)

approximated for v ≪ c, with the expression of the mean square veloc-
ity of an atom in a crystal. ν0 is the frequency emitted by the nucleus
at rest. This calculation is performed for both emitter and absorber;

2. calculate the ratio between the diﬀerence of the Doppler frequencies so
obtained and the temperature diﬀerence between emitter and absorber;
the limit for ∆T → 0 yields equation (32), if we let ν0 ≈ νs (where νs
is the frequency associated with the source).

It is worth stressing that while equation (32) describes the experimental
results, the derivation given by Sherwin yields the equation used by Pound
and Rebka only with the assumption ν0 ≈ νs. Though legitimate from
the numerical point of view, this assumption is conceptually wrong: the
derivation is based on a comparison between the frequency νs emitted or
the frequency νa absorbed with the frequency ν0 emitted by a nucleus at
rest; while the experimental apparatus compare directly the frequencies νs
and νa. To illustrate the diﬀerence, let us consider the following situation.
The observers A and S are moving in opposite directions with velocity v
with respect to the laboratory. Then, if ν0 is the frequency of a periodic
phenomenon in the laboratory frame, its frequency seen by the two observers
A and S will be, in the low velocity approximation (v ≪ c):

νs = νa ≈ ν0 1 −

v2

2c2!

(34)

But the observer A will attribute the frequency νa to a periodic phenomenon
occurring with frequency νs in the reference frame S:

νa ≈ νs 1 −

2v2

c2 !

(35)

Similarly, the observer S will attribute the frequency νs to a periodic phe-
nomenon occurring with frequency νa in the reference frame A:

νs ≈ νa 1 −

2v2

c2 !

(36)

Pound and Rebka interpret equation (32) as due to the transverse Doppler
eﬀect predicted for electromagnetic waves. However, equation (32) is asym-
metric in the exchange between emitter and absorber, while electromagnetic
theory predicts a symmetric eﬀect. Furthermore, when emitter and absorber

28

are at the same temperature, the mean square value of the relative velocity
of two nuclei (one in the emitter and the other in the absorber) is given
rel > ≈ 2 < v2 > (v ≪ c), where < v2 > is the mean square
by < v2
velocity of a nucleus.
If the eﬀect under consideration is an undulatory
Doppler eﬀect, one should observe a frequency shift also when the emitter
and absorber are at the same temperature: but this is not the case. (As a
matter of fact, the emitter and the absorber at the same temperature are
equivalent to the situation described just above in which the source and the
observer are moving toward or away from each other with constant velocity

V = √< v2 > (< v2 >≪ c2), with respect to the laboratory). Therefore,

the origin of the observed asymmetric eﬀect must be looked for somewhere
else.

Josephson has shown that the observed frequency shift may be derived
from the conservation of mass - energy:49 the emission of a photon by a
nucleus in a crystal is accompanied by a decrease of its mass; this decrease, in
turn, implies an increase of the crystal vibrational energy. A straightforward
calculation, based on a simple model, shows that the energy transfer to the
lattice ∆Ev – and the corresponding decrease of the photon energy – is given,
in the high temperature limit, by:

∆Ev ≈

3
2

kT

∆Eγ
mc2

(37)

where ∆Eγ is the energy diﬀerence between the two nuclear energy levels
and m the atom mass. This equation is equivalent to (32).
In the case
of absorption, the energy ∆Ev is transferred by the lattice to the nucleus.
Therefore:

a) when emitter and absorber are at the same temperature the resonance

can occur and there is no frequency shift;

b) when the emitter and absorber are at diﬀerent temperatures, the ab-
sorber will see a red or a blue shift in case of higher or lower temper-
ature of the emitter.

In Josephson’s description, the asymmetry of the phenomenon is due to a
physical process involving an energy exchange between the nucleus and the
lattice: when the nucleus emits, the lattice gains energy; when the nucleus
absorbs, the lattice looses energy.

However, in spite of this result, Josephson writes:

Recent experiments by M¨ossbauer have shown that when low -
energy γ rays are emitted from nuclei in a solid a certain pro-
portion of them are unaﬀected by the Doppler eﬀect. It is the

49B.D. Josephson, ‘Temperature Dependent Shift of γ Rays Emitted by a Solid’, Phys-

ical Review Letters 4 (1960), 341 - 342.

29

purpose of this letter to show that they are nevertheless subject
to a temperature - dependent shift to lower energy which can be
attributed to the relativistic time dilation caused by the motion
of the nuclei.50

Josephson’s stand is particularly interesting: after having outlined a de-
scription in terms of energy exchanges which is intrinsically asymmetric, he
comes back to a special relativity interpretation based on time dilation (that
is intrinsically symmetric).

Pound and Rebka experiment concerns the emission of electromagnetic
radiation from a nucleus and its absorption by another nucleus. The physical
state of both emitter and absorber may inﬂuence the phenomenon. Then, we
must adopt the corpuscular point of view developed by Schr¨odinger (section
4). However, since the experiment is performed with photons emitted and
absorbed without recoil (M¨ossbauer eﬀect), the energy E1 of equation (19)
or equation (20) is the rest energy of the entire crystal and the velocity v1
of equation (18) is the null velocity of the same crystal before the emission
or the absorption of a photon. The velocity of the emitting or absorbing
nucleus does not enter the picture. However, the nucleus is accelerated, ow-
ing to the lattice vibrations of the crystal; since the measurement concerns
a statistically signiﬁcant number of photons, the eﬀective acceleration is the
average acceleration experienced by the emitting or absorbing nucleus. As
shown in section 7.4 of the Appendix, the equation used by Pound and Re-
bka can be deduced within general relativity (in the approximation of small
gravitational ﬁelds):51 the asymmetry of the experimental result arises from
the asymmetry in the average pseudogravitational potential of the emitting
and absorbing nuclei. (The acceleration enters the picture through its re-
lated pseudogravitational potential; a gravitational potential modiﬁes the
rest energy of a particle and, therefore, also the energy of the photons emit-
ted by it; see section 7.3, starting from equation 47) and section 7.4 in the
Appendix.

Pound and Rebka’s theoretical treatment appears untenable because
based on special relativity. Josephson’s treatment, based on an energy ex-
change between crystal lattice and emitting or absorbing nuclei, is intrin-
sically asymmetric and could, therefore, be taken into consideration as a
description of the experimental results. The formula derived by Josephson
is the same as that derived in section 7.3 of the Appendix, based on general
relativity, and applied to the case of small pseudogravitational potentials
(compare equation 37 with equation 54).

50Ibid. 341.
51All along this paper, general relativity calculations are always approximated for small
gravitational ﬁelds. This is due to the fact that all the discussed experiments fall into the
case of small gravitational or pseudogravitational ﬁelds.

30

5.4.2 Nuclei in crystals on rotating systems

In this kind of experiments, based on the M¨ossbauer eﬀect, emitter and
absorber are on a rotating system at diﬀerent distances from the center.
The ﬁrst paper on this subject - by Hay, Schiﬀer, Cranshaw and Egelstaﬀ -
appeared in 1960.52,53 The source was mounted on the external surface of a
0.8 cm diameter cylinder; the absorber on the internal surface of a 13.28 cm
diameter cylinder rigidly connected to the inner one. The γ rays passing
through the absorber were detected by a suitable counter at rest in the
laboratory: the function of the counter was that of ﬁnding the resonance
condition, i.e. the condition in which the γ rays emitted by the source are
absorbed by the absorber. The unit was rotated up to a maximum speed of
500 revolutions per second. The emitting and absorbing nucleus was F e57.

The article begins with:

In an adjoining paper an experiment is described in which the
change of frequency in a photon passing between two points of
diﬀerent gravitational potential has been measured. Einstein’s
principle of equivalence states that a gravitational ﬁeld is lo-
cally indistinguishable from an accelerated system. It therefore
seemed desirable to measure the shift in the energy of 14 kev
gamma rays from F e57 in an accelerated system. . .

The expected shift can be calculated in two ways. One can treat
the acceleration as an eﬀective gravitational ﬁeld and calculate
the diﬀerence in potential between the source and absorber, or
one can obtain the same answer using the time dilatation of
special relativity. The expected fractional shift in the energy of
the gamma ray is54

2)ω2

(R2

1 − R2
2c2

= 2.44 × 10−20ω2

(38)

The questions aroused by this paper have been taken up again by Champ-
eney and Moon.55 In their experiment, however, the source and the absorber
were placed at the opposite end of a rotor diameter.

52 H.J. Hay, J.P. Schiﬀer, T.E. Cranshaw and P.A. Egelstaﬀ, ‘Measurement of the red -
shift in an accelerated system using the M¨ossbauer eﬀect in F e57’, Physical Review Letters
4 (1960), 165.

53In 1953, W.G. Davey and P.B. Moon, used a rotor for studying the resonant scattering
of the 198Hg γ - rays from liquid mercury. According to the authors, ‘At high speeds
the Doppler eﬀect compensates for the energy lost to nuclear recoil and permits resonant
scattering. . . ’: W.G. Davey and P.B. Moon, ‘The Resonant scattering of 198Hg Gamma
Rays’, Proceedings of the Physical Society 66 (1953), 956 - 957.

54Ibid. 165.
55D.C. Champeney and P.B. Moon, ‘Absence of Doppler Shift for Gamma Ray Source
and Detector on Same Circular Orbit’, Proceedings of the Physical Society 77 (1961),
350 - 352.

31

Champeney and Moon write:

Reporting a test of the eﬀect of circular motion on the resonant
frequency of gamma - ray transition in 57F e, Hay, Schiﬀer, Cran-
shaw and Egelstaﬀ point out that one can treat the acceleration
as an eﬀective gravitational ﬁeld and calculate the frequency shift
from the diﬀerence of potential between source and absorber, or
one can obtain the same answer by using the time dilatation of
special relativity.

For their arrangement, with the source at the center and the
absorber at the periphery of the rotating system, the same result
also follows from the argument that since source and absorber
have relative velocity v (≪ c) in a direction perpendicular to the
line joining them, there exists a transverse Doppler eﬀect giving
a fractional frequency shift v2/2c2.

It is perhaps surprising that the na¨ıve use of this formula, without
any account been taken of acceleration, should give the correct
answer; an indication of the subtleties that may be involved is
obtained by considering source and absorber to move on the same
circle, e.g. at opposite points on the periphery. Their pseudo -
gravitational potentials are equal, so are their time - dilatation,
yet their relative velocity is 2v.

. . .

Since in this laboratory we were undertaking a ‘source at cen-
ter’ experiment similar to that of Hay et al., we decided also to
make an experimental test of the ‘peripherally opposite’ arrange-
ment.56

The experiment with emitter and absorber at the opposite ends of a diameter
shows that there is no frequency shift. Champeney and Moon stress “the
subtleties involved” in the rotor experiments; however, they do not take
position.

In a following paper, Champeney, Isaak and Khan reported more accu-
rate measurements taken with the source at the center and the absorber at
the tip of the rotor, as in the experiment by Hay et al. discussed above. They
reported also on an experiment with the source at the tip and the absorber
at the center that conﬁrmed the asymmetry of the phenomenon, due to the
interchange of the positions between source and absorber. They gave also
a theoretical treatment of the rotor experiment based on special relativity:
in spite of this approach, they obtained a formula for the frequency shift

56Ibid. 350.

32

which is asymmetrical in the exchange between emitter and absorber.57 At
the beginning of their paper, Champeney, Isaak and Khan write:

We describe here some measurements of the resonant absorption
of gamma rays in a M¨ossbauer system ﬁxed to a high speed rotor,
with the source at the center and the absorber at the tip of the
rotor and vice versa. The aim of the experiments is to measure
the eﬀects of time dilatation in such a system and compare them
with the expectations of relativity theory.

. . .

On the ground of relativity theory we expect the frequency of
the radiation arriving at the absorber (as measured by a clock
on the absorber) to vary with rotor speed according to:

ν1
ν0

= q1 − ω2r2
q1 − ω2r2

s/c2
a/c2 ≈ 1 +

ω2(r2

a − r2
s)
2c2

(39)

where ν1 is the frequency measured at rotor angular velocity ω,
ν0 is the frequency of the emitted radiation as measured by a
clock on the source, rs and ra are the radii of the source and
absorber orbits and c is the velocity of light.

. . .

Equation (39) is commonly derived from standard Doppler eﬀect
equations of special relativity.58

Let us see how an asymmetrical formula for the shift of the spectral lines is
obtained starting from a symmetrical one:

1. write the formula for the Doppler eﬀect in the case in which the ab-

sorber is considered at rest and the emitter in motion;

νa = νs q1 − v2

sa/c2

1 − (vsa/c) cos θa

θa is the angle between the propagation direction of the photon and
the xa axis and ~vsa is the velocity of the emitter, parallel to the xa axis;
both quantities are evaluated in the reference frame of the absorber;

2. write the same relation by considering the emitter at rest and the

absorber in motion:

(40)

(41)

νa = νs

1 − (vas/c) cos θs
q1 − v2

as/c2

57D.C. Champeney, , G.R. Isaak and A.M. Khan, ‘A time dilation experiment based

on the M¨ossbauer eﬀect’, Proceedings of the Physical Society 85 (1965), 583 - 593.

58Ibid. 583 - 584.

33

θs 6= θa is the angle between the propagation direction of the photon
and the xs ≡ xa axis, and ~vas = −~vsa is the velocity of the absorber
parallel to the xs axis; both quantities are evaluated in the reference
frame of the emitter.59

Equation (41) is obtained from (40) by putting ~vas = −~vsa and using the
relation

cos θa =

cos θs − vas/c
1 − (vas/c) cos θs

(42)

that connects the cosines of the angle between the propagation direction
of the photon and the xa/s axis as seen by the two reference frames. The
transverse Doppler eﬀect is obtained, by deﬁnition, when θa = π/2, i.e. when
the observer sees the source emitting towards him at right angle with respect
to its line of motion: all the quantities involved are referred to the reference
frame of the observer. The frequency shift is given by either equation (40) or
(41): the change of reference frame (absorber or emitter considered at rest)
does not change the physics. In the paper under discussion, the change of
reference frame is accompanied by a change in the deﬁnition of the transverse
Doppler eﬀect:
in fact, in passing from equation (40) to equation (41), θs
is put equal to π/2 in the last one. In this way, the desired asymmetry is
obtained.

Of course, we can also rewrite equation (41) as:

νs = νa q1 − v2

as/c2

1 − (vas/c) cos θs

(43)

If we now consider the source as absorber and the absorber as the source,
we can correctly put θs = π/2 and see again that there is perfect symmetry
between source and absorber.

At the end of the derivation Champeney, Isaak and Khan write:

These equations. . . are of course derived on the basis of systems in
uniform relative motion, and in applying them to our experiment
we are making tacit use of the hypothesis that, if an ideal clock
moves non - uniformly through an inertial frame, then accelera-
tion as such as no eﬀect on the rate of the clock. Experiments
such as our are therefore combined tests of special relativity and
of this hypothesis. In so far as this hypothesis may be justiﬁed
for nuclear clocks such as ours by the general theory, then to that
extent ours is an experiment in the general theory.60

59Ibid.
60Ibid. 584.

34

Similar experiments, with the source at the center and the absorber at the
tip, have been made by Walter K¨undig.61 His theoretical approach is similar
to that of the other experimenters:

When the experiment is analysed in the inertial frame of the
source, the result follows from the time dilatation in the special
theory of relativity.

[. . . ]

However, when the experiment is analysed in a reference frame
K attached to the accelerated absorber, the problem could be
treated by the principle of equivalence and the general theory of
relativity.62

None of these papers recalls that a rotating disc experiment is implicitly con-
tained in the introduction of the paper on general relativity and discussed
in detail by Einstein in the 1921 edition of his book on relativity (see section
3.3). In the description of the experiments within special relativity, all pa-
pers assume (implicitly or explicitly) that electromagnetic radiation can be
treated as an undulatory periodic phenomenon and that nuclei act as clocks.
In section 7.3 of the Appendix, the main steps of the calculation yielding
the observed asymmetrical result are reported. The calculation is based on
a general relativity approach. The experiments show that the energy of
photons emitted or absorbed by nuclei depends on the acceleration of the
emitter or absorber.

All experiments exploit the M¨ossbauer eﬀect, i.e. the emission and ab-
sorption of photons without recoil by nuclei embedded in crystalline solids.
In standard treatments, the M¨ossbauer eﬀect is described in terms of quan-
tum mechanics and involves, in principle, the nuclear and the vibrational
quantum states: the M¨ossbauer eﬀect corresponds to the emission or ab-
sorption of a γ photon without change of the phonon occupation number.
Therefore, the only physical quantity involved is the energy diﬀerence ∆E
between the two quantum nuclear states responsible for the emission or ab-
sorption of the photon. This theoretical background is shared by all authors.
On this background two assumptions are superimposed: the equivalence
principle (in its weak form) and the description of γ radiation as an un-
dulatory periodic phenomenon. The equivalence principle, however, is used
only for claiming that the same predictions can be derived from general and
special relativity. It is assumed that nuclei are clocks and that they emit pe-
riodic waves; the experiments are described within special relativity in spite
of the fact that the experimental results are asymmetrical in the exchange

61W. K¨undig, ‘Measurement of the Transverse Doppler Eﬀect in an Accelerated Sys-

tem’, Physical Review 129 (1963), 2371-2375.

62Ibid. 2371.

35

of the two observers (source and absorber). The corpuscular description of
electromagnetic radiation and the Schr¨odinger treatment discussed in sec-
tion 4 is completely ignored in spite of the fact that it leads naturally to the
asymmetrical results shown by experiments.

5.5 Atomic clocks around the Earth

An experiment of this kind has been performed by Hafele and Keating with
atomic clocks ﬂown on commercial jet ﬂights around the Earth.63 The the-
oretical treatment of the experiment has been given by Hafele.64,65 The ide-
alized experiment may be described as follows:

I two identical clocks O and O′ are initially in the same point P at the

equator

II the clock O′ is brought at height h and set in motion eastward or westward
at velocity v on a circle of radius R + h; R is the Earth radius and v is
the ground velocity of the clock (v is positive for eastward ﬂight and
negative for westward)

III after a circumnavigation at the height h, clock O′ is brought back to

point P

The climb and the descent of the clock O′ are neglected in the theoretical
description. Hafele’s treatment is based on a general relativity approach;
the metric used is that of a nonrotating reference system centered in a ho-
mogeneous gravitational sphere (the Earth); the prediction of the theory is
summarized by the equation (in the approximation of small velocities and
small gravitational ﬁelds:66

c2 h GM
h1 − 1

R+h + 1
c2 (cid:16) GM

2 [v + (R + h)Ω]2io
R + 1

2Ω2R2(cid:17)i

(44)

∆t(R + h)

∆t(R)

= n1 − 1

63 J.C. Hafele and R.E. Keating, ‘Around - the World - Atomic Clocks: Predicted
Relativistic Time Gains’, Science 177 (1972), 166 - 168; J.C. Hafele and R.E. Keating,
‘Around - the World - Atomic Clocks: Observed Relativistic Time Gains’, Science 177
(1972), 168 - 170.

64 J.C. Hafele, ‘Relativistic Time for Terrestrial Circumnavigations’, American Journal

of Physics 40 (1972), 81 - 85.

65F. Winterberg, in 1956, developed the theory of a possible experiment for comparing
the behaviour of an atomic clock on the Earth with that of an identical clock on a satellite:
the suggested experiment was considered as a test of general relativity. The theoretical
approach was the same as that used by Hafele. Before the discovery of the M¨ossbauer
eﬀect, the idea of experiments with satellites was considered as the most at hand. Also
Pound and Rebka begin their ﬁrst paper on the gravitational red - shift by referring to a
possible experiment with satellites (see note 72). Then they go on to consider the possible
use of the M¨ossbauer eﬀect.

66Note 64 on 83.

36

where, G is the gravitational constant, M the mass of the Earth and Ω its
angular velocity. In the experimental papers Hafele and Keating clarify their
position:

One of the most enduring scientiﬁc debates of this century is the
relativistic clock “paradox” or problem, which stemmed origi-
nally from an alleged inconsistency in predicted time diﬀerences
between traveling and reference clocks after a round trip. This
seemingly endless theoretical debate, which has ﬂared up recently
with renewed vigor, begs for a convincing empirical resolution
with macroscopic clocks.67

And:

In science, relevant experimental facts supersede theoretical ar-
guments.
In an attempt to throw some empirical light on the
question of whether macroscopic clocks record time in accordance
with the conventional interpretation of Einstein’s relativity the-
ory, we ﬂew four cesium beam atomic clocks around the world
on commercial jet ﬂights, ﬁrst eastward, then westward.68

The conclusion is:

In conclusion, we have shown that the eﬀects of travel on the time
recording behavior on macroscopic clocks are in reasonable ac-
cord with predictions of the conventional theory of relativity. . . 69

Hafele and Keating’s description is basically founded on the hypothesis ac-
cording to which “all macroscopic physical clocks, irrespective of design or
complexity, record proper time.”70

However, a complete diﬀerent description is possible. In atomic clocks
atoms act as microscopic locking devices of frequency of the microwave ab-
sorbed by atoms: the locking is assured by the matching between the energy
hν of the microwave and the energy diﬀerence ∆E between the two quan-
tum states of the transition. As shown by the experiments on gravitational
red - shift71,72 and by rotor experiments (section 5.4.2), the energy ∆E and,
therefore, the energy of the photons emitted or absorbed by nuclei or atoms
depends on the potential due to gravitation or acceleration. It follows that

67Note 63 on 166.
68Ibid. 168.
69Ibid. 170.
70Note 64 on 84.
71T.E. Cranshaw, J.P. Schiﬀer and A.B. Whitehead, ‘Measurement of the gravitational
red - shift using the M¨ossbauer eﬀect in F e57’, Physical Review Letters 4 (1960), 163 - 164.
‘Apparent weight of photons’, Physical Review

72 R.V. Pound and G.A. Rebka jr.

Letters 4 (1960), 337 - 341.

37

the fundamental period of atomic clocks depends on gravitational or pseudo-
gravitational potential as does the energy of photons absorbed by atoms or
nuclei. Therefore, an experiment like that performed by Hafele and Keating
shows that atomic clocks behave in accordance with the (theoretical and
experimental) acquired knowledge about the energy dependence of photons
absorbed by nuclei or atoms on gravitational or pseudogravitational poten-
tials. In fact, equation (44) can be written down directly using the equation

∆E = ∆E0s1 +

2χ
c2

(45)

that gives the energy diﬀerence ∆E between two quantum states of an atom
at rest in a gravitational potential χ as a function of the energy diﬀerence
∆E0 corresponding to a null potential (see section 7.5 in the Appendix,
starting from equation (55)).

Hafele and Keating’s experiment cannot be considered as a practical
realization of the clock paradox, because the clock paradox requires that at
least a fraction of the journey of the travelling clock be an inertial motion
or - as in the case of Bailey et al. experiment - an accelerated (circular)
motion during which, however, the acceleration does not inﬂuence the clock.
In the case of atomic clocks the experimental evidence discussed above shows
that their behaviour is inﬂuenced by acceleration just in the way predicted
by general relativity.

This remind us of the statement by Hafele and Keating that “In science,
relevant experimental facts supersede theoretical arguments”. This state-
ment - as it stands - can hardly be accepted. The discussion developed
above shows that it does not apply precisely to Hafele and Keating’s experi-
ment, because the “experimental facts” found by Hafele and Keating can be
described in two basically diﬀerent ways. The two alternative descriptions
should be comparatively evaluated on the basis of the criteria contained in
point 1.c of section 2 and possibly tested with other experiments. (For in-
stance, since the lifetime of muons does not depend on acceleration and,
therefore, from gravitational potential, it may be argued that two muons -
based clocks should read the same after a Hafele - Keating trip of one of
them).

6 Conclusions

The present study has dealt with cases of a crucial step in experimental
disciplines: the evaluation procedure that establishes if and how the predic-
tions of a theory are in conformity with experiment. In the case of ‘time
dilation’ experiments, this evaluation procedure has been characterized by
the use of additional hypotheses not necessary for the formal development of

38

the theories under test: the assumption that all clocks measure proper time;
the idea that atoms (or nuclei) emit periodic waves and, consequently, that
atoms (or nuclei) can be considered as clocks. The epistemological status of
these hypotheses is diﬀerent: while the one about proper time is a legitimate
(though bold) additional hypothesis, the other two seem untenable on the
basis of the acquired theoretical and experimental knowledge.

The hypotheses on clocks and proper time has been used by Hafele and
Keating in the conception and interpretation of their experiment with macro-
scopic clocks around the Earth. This assumption is necessary for considering
their experiment as a test on time dilation. In section 5.5 we have shown
that their experiment can be interpreted without this assumption: if we drop
it, Hafele and Keating experiment should be considered as a corroboration
of the predicted eﬀect of gravitational or pseudo - gravitational ﬁelds on the
energy of photons emitted or absorbed by atoms.

The two other assumptions about electromagnetic radiation and atoms
are necessary for considering the experiments performed with atoms in ﬂight
and with nuclei in crystals as tests of ‘time dilation’.
If we drop these
two assumptions, these experiments appear instead as tests of relativistic
dynamics (atoms in ﬂight) or of predictions of general relativity about how
gravitational or pseudo - gravitational ﬁelds inﬂuence the rest energy of an
atom or a nucleus and, consequently, the energy of an emitted or absorbed
photon (nuclei in crystals).

In conclusion, the only type of experiment that can be considered as a
direct test on ‘time dilation’, without using additional hypotheses, is the one
performed with particles in inertial ﬂight.

Though all cases have historical, methodological and epistemological rel-
evance, the most intriguing one is that associated with the use of the hypoth-
esis that atoms, taken as individual entities, emit periodic waves and can,
therefore, be considered as clocks. In fact, it turns out that an idea based
on nineteenth century’s background knowledge, has survived till our days
in spite of the lack of speciﬁc theoretical and experimental support. This
lasting survival is likely due to the fact that the undulatory description of
electromagnetic radiation has entered a shared image of the physical world in
late nineteenth century and has withstood the basic challenges of quantum
theoretical and experimental physics. The taking root of this image of the
physical world has occurred to such a profound degree that the undulatory
description has been used also when the corpuscular treatment was the most
suitable or the only one that could be applied:
in this respect, the fate of
the corpuscular treatment of the Doppler eﬀect is strikingly illuminating.

We believe that our study has presented an example of how a shared
image of the physical world can survive in spite of the fact that it has
become incompatible with the advancement of theoretical and experimental
knowledge. Since a (more or less) shared image of the physical world guides

39

the physicists in conceiving theories and devising experiments, it inﬂuences
also the interplay between theory and experiment. These historical processes
are not easily dealt with since they operate “under the surface” and cannot
be correlated with speciﬁc historical events. However, their role appears to
be more relevant than usually acknowledged.

40

7 Appendix

7.1 Atomic Cesium clocks

Atomic clocks are based on the following idea. Take a cell containing atoms
of an element in the gaseous state and consider two suitable quantum states
of these atoms separated by an energy gap ∆E. If we illuminate the gas
by an electromagnetic radiation whose hν equals ∆E, then this radiation
will be absorbed by the gas. A radiation detector D is put behind the gas
cell and is connected to the apparatus MW producing the electromagnetic
radiation through a feedback circuit. If the energy hν of the electromagnetic
radiation changes, the gas no longer absorbs, the radiation is revealed by
the detector D that informs the apparatus MW that the energy hν must
be adjusted. The atoms are used as locking devices for the energy hν of
the electromagnetic radiation. The actual standard unit of time is based
on a Cesium133 clock; the atomic transition used is the hyperﬁne transition
F = 3 ↔ F = 4; the electromagnetic radiation that can induce the transition
is a microwave of frequency ν = 9192631770. Hafele and Keating used
cesium clocks for their experiments (see section 5.5).73

7.2 The M¨ossbauer eﬀect

At the end of the ﬁfties, Rudolf M¨ossbauer found that nuclei in crystalline
solids can emit and absorb γ photons without energy loss due to the atom
recoil: more precisely, the recoil momentum is taken up by the crystal as a
whole instead of by the emitting nucleus, thereby reducing the energy loss of
the photon by a factor equal to the number of atoms in the crystal.74 As a
result, if A and B are two nuclei in relative rest and if A emits a photon, then
this photon can be absorbed by B if and only if the energy diﬀerence ∆E
between the two quantum states that take part in the transition is the same
for A and B. This resonant absorption is possible inasmuch as the uncer-
tainty in the energy of the emitted photon is much greater than the energy
given to the crystal in the recoil. If, for some reason, ∆Ea of the absorbing
nucleus is diﬀerent from ∆Es of the emitting one, then the absorption can-
not take place:
in order to absorb the photon the absorbing nucleus must
move toward or recede from the emitting one with the appropriate velocity.

73For a detailed treatment of Cesium clocks, see, for instance reference: C. Audoin,
‘Cesium Beam Frequency Standards: Classical and Optically Pumped’, Metrologia 29
(1992) , 113 - 134.

74On the M¨ossbauer eﬀect, see for instance: H. Frauenfelder, The M¨ossbauer eﬀect,
(New York, 1962)that includes also reprints of original papers; Gunter K Wertheim,
M¨ossbauer eﬀect: Principles and Applications, (New York, 1964), for an elementary treat-
ment of the various topics. See also the references quoted in reference 45.

41

This velocity is given by

v ≈ c

∆Es − ∆Ea

∆Es

(46)

If v > 0, then the absorbing nucleus must move toward the emitting one; if
v < 0, the absorbing nucleus must recede from the emitter. It is also possible
to detect changes in ∆E smaller than the uncertainty in the energy of the
emitted photons by modulating the absorption through a periodic motion of
absorber (or the emitter). M¨ossbauer worked with the 129 KeV transition
of Ir191) that allowed energy resolution of the order of 10−11; some years
later, with the 14.4 KeV transition of F e57, resolution in energy of the order
of 10−13 were attained.

It is clear why the M¨ossbauer eﬀect has been rapidly applied to the study
of relativistic eﬀects: it is possible to detect changes in energy of the order
of magnitude predicted by special and general relativity.

7.3 The rotating disc

Let us consider a disc rotating with constant angular velocity Ω: a source s
and an absorber a of photons are placed on the same radius of the disc at
diﬀerent distances from the center (Rs, Ra).

If we have a particle of mass M at rest in a gravitational ﬁeld whose

potential is χ, then its energy is given by:75

E = Mc2s1 +

2χ
c2

(47)

For an emitting nucleus in an excited state, the previous equation - in the
case of the rotor experiment - can be written as:

E = (mc2 + ∆E)s1 +

2χ

c2 = (mc2 + ∆E)s1 −

Ω2R2
s

c2

(48)

where m is the mass of the particle in its ground state, ∆E is the en-
ergy diﬀerence between the two quantum states and χ = −1/2(Ω2R2
s) is
the pseudo - gravitational potential due to acceleration. The energy of the
photon emitted by the source will then be given by:

εs = ∆Es1 −

Ω2R2
s

c2

(49)

and the energy of the photon that can be absorbed by the absorber by:

εa = ∆Es1 −

Ω2R2
a

c2

(50)

75See, for instance, note 16 p. 387.

42

Therefore:

εs
εa

= q1 − Ω2R2
q1 − Ω2R2

s/c2

a/c2

In the approximation of small velocities (ΩR ≪ c):
s − R2
a)

Ω2
c2 (R2

1
2

εa − εs

εs ≈

(51)

(52)

This equation describes the asymmetrical eﬀect observed in experiments.

7.4 The temperature eﬀect of Pound and Rebka

Equation (47) can be applied to the case of tridimensional harmonic oscil-
lators of mass m in thermal equilibrium.
In the case of suﬃciently high
temperatures, the average pseudogravitational potential χ is given by:

χ = −

3kT
2m

(53)

where we have neglected in the denominator the term ∆E/c2 with respect
to the mass m of the atom in its ground state. It follows:

εa − εs ≈ −∆E

3k
2mc2 (Ta − Ts)

(54)

that leads at once to equation (32) and correctly describes the experimental
results.

7.5 Atomic clocks around the Earth

Hafele and Keating have derived their equation within a space - time ap-
proach. We shall derive the same equation starting from the equation

∆E = ∆E0s1 +

2χ
c2

(55)

that gives the energy diﬀerence ∆E between two quantum states of an atom
at rest in a gravitational potential χ as a function of the energy diﬀerence
∆E0 corresponding to a null potential (see section 7.3 in this Appendix).
Since the fundamental period of an atomic clock in a null gravitational po-
tential is given by

T0 =

(56)

h

∆E0

we get from equation (55) for the fundamental period T (R) of a clock at
rest at the equator (for small gravitational potentials):

T (R) = T0(cid:26)1 −

1

c2 [ϕG(R) + ϕA(R)](cid:27)

(57)

43

where we are using the same symbols used in section 5.5 and where ϕG(R)
is the gravitational potential of the Earth at the equator and ϕA(R) is the
pseudogravitational potential at the equator due to the centripetal acceler-
ation. It follows that:

T (R) = T0(cid:20)1 +

1

c2 (cid:18)GM

R

+

1
2

Ω2R2(cid:19)(cid:21)

(58)

For the clock ﬂying on the equatorial circumference of radius R + h we get
instead:

T (R + h) = T0(cid:26)1 +

1

c2 (cid:20) GM

R + h

+

1
2

[v + (R + h)Ω]2(cid:21)(cid:27)

(59)

where v is the velocity of the ﬂying clock with respect to the ground:
it
is positive for eastward ﬂights and negative for westward ﬂights. Since the
intervals of time shown by a clock is inversely proportional to its fundamental
period, we get at once equation (44) by taking the ratio between the two
last equations.

44

