Birth and Early Development of Indian
Astronomy

Subhash Kak
Louisiana State University
Baton Rouge, LA 70803-5901, USA

In Astronomy Across Cultures: The History of Non-Western
Astronomy,
Helaine Selin (ed), Kluwer, 2000, pp. 303-340

1
0
0
2
 
n
a
J
 
5
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
t
s
i
h
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
3
6
0
1
0
1
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

1 Introduction

In the last decade or so our understanding of the origin and development
of Indian astronomy and its relevance for Indian religion and culture have
undergone a major shift. This shift has been caused by two factors: ﬁrst,
archaeological discoveries that reveal to us that the the Sarasvati river, the
great river of the R. gvedic times, dried up before 1900 BCE, suggesting that
this ancient text must be at least as old as that epoch; second, discovery of
an astronomy in the Vedic texts. The assignment of a date to the drying up
of the Sarasvati river has been a great aid to sorting the confusion regarding
the chronology of the Indian texts, but it could not have come before an
analysis of the excavations of the Harappan towns and settlements of the 3rd
millennium BCE. On the other hand, the neglect of the astronomy of the
Vedic texts was caused by the inability of the philologists and Sanskritists
who studied these texts during the last two centuries to appreciate their
scientiﬁc references.

Owing to the importance of the astronomy of the earliest period for un-
derstanding the entire scientiﬁc tradition in India, we will, in this essay, focus
primarily on the pre-Siddh¯antic period before ¯Aryabhat.a. The subsequent
history of Indian astronomy is well described by the Siddh¯antas themselves
and by the many reviews that have appeared in the published literature.

The fundamental idea pervading Indian thought from the most ancient
times is that of equivalence or connection (bandhu) amongst the adhidaiva
(devas or stars), adhibh¯uta (beings), and adhy¯atma (spirit). These connec-
tions, between the astronomical, the terrestrial, the physiological and the
psychological, represent the constant theme in the discourse of Indian texts.
These connections are usually stated in terms of vertical relationships, rep-
resenting a recursive system; but they are also described horizontally across
hierarchies where they represent metaphoric or structural parallels. Most of-
ten, the relationship is deﬁned in terms of numbers or other characteristics.
An example is the 360 bones of the infant—which later fuse into the 206
bones of the adult—and the 360 days of the year. Likewise, the tripartite
division of the cosmos into earth, space, and sky is reﬂected in the tripartite
psychological types.

Although the Vedic books speak often about astronomical phenomena,
it is only recently that the astronomical substratum of the Vedas has been
examined (Kak 1992-1999). One can see a plausible basis behind many con-

2

nections. Research has shown that all life comes with its inner clocks. Living
organisms have rhythms that are matched to the periods of the sun or the
moon. There are quite precise biological clocks of 24-hour (according to the
day), 24 hour 50 minutes (according to the lunar day since the moon rises
roughly 50 minutes later every day) or its half representing the tides, 29.5
days (the period from one new moon to the next), and the year. Monthly
rhythms, averaging 29.5 days, are reﬂected in the reproductive cycles of many
marine plants and those of animals. The menstrual period is a synodic month
and the average duration of pregnancy is nine synodic months. There are
other biological periodicities of longer durations. These connections need not
be merely numerical. In its most general form is the Upanis. adic equation be-
tween the self (¯atman) and the universe (brahman).

It is tempting to view jyotis. a, the science of light and astronomy, as the
fundamental paradigm for the Vedic system of knowledge. Jyotis.a is a term
that connotes not only the light of the outer world, but also the light of
the inner landscape. Astronomy is best described as naks.atra-vidy¯a of the
Ch¯andogya Upanis. ad, but because of its popularity we will also use jyotis.a
in its narrow meaning of astronomy. As deﬁning our place in the cosmos and
as a means to understand the nature of time, astronomy is obviously a most
basic science.

That astronomy reveals that the periods of the heavenly bodies are in-
commensurate might have led to the notion that true knowledge lies beyond
empirical apar¯a knowledge. On the other hand, it is equally likely that it was
a deep analysis of the nature of perception and the paradox of relationship of
the perceptor to the whole that was the basis of Vedic thought, and the in-
commensurability of the motions in the sky was a conﬁrmation of the insight
that knowledge is recursive. This Vedic view of knowledge seems to have
informed the earliest hymns so it does not appear to be feasible to answer
the question of which came ﬁrst. Neither can we now answer the question
whether jyotis.a as pure astronomy was a precursor to a jyotis.a that included
astrology.

Analysis of texts reveals that much of Vedic mythology is a symbolic
telling of astronomical knowledge. Astronomy was the royal science not
only because it was the basis for the order in nature, but also because the
inner space of man, viewed as a microcosm mirroring the universe, could be
fathomed through its insights.

3

1.1 Of Ceremonies, Festivals, Rites

The importance of jyotis.a for agriculture and other secular purposes are ob-
vious and so we begin with a brief account of rites and festivals. These cere-
monies and rituals reveal that there existed several traditions of astronomical
lore; these variations are marked by the diﬀerent books of ´Srautas¯utra. Such
variation is perfectly in accord with an age when astronomy was a living
science with diﬀerent scholars providing diﬀerent explanations. Since our
purpose is not to go into the details of the Vedic texts, we will describe
ceremonies and rites selectively.

Diﬀerent points in the turning year were marked by celebrations. The
year, beginning with the full moon in the month Ph¯alguna (or Caitra),
was divided into three four-monthly, c¯aturm¯asya, sacriﬁces. Another way
of marking the year is by a year-long d¯ıks.¯a. The year was closed with rites to
celebrate Indra ´Sun¯a´s¯ıra (Indra with the plough) to “obtain the thirteenth
month;” this thirteenth month was interposed twice in ﬁve years to bring the
lunar year in harmony with the solar year. This closing rite is to mark the
ﬁrst ploughing, in preparation for the next year. Symbolically, this closing
was taken to represent the regeneration of the year.

Year-long ceremonies for the king’s priest are described in the Atharvaveda
Pari´sis.t.a; these include those for the health of horses, the safety of vehicles,
and so on. There existed other royal rites such as r¯ajas¯uya, v¯ajapeya and
the a´svamedha, the so-called horse sacriﬁce, which actually represented the
transcendence by the king of time in its metaphorical representation as horse.
The primary meaning of a´sva as the sun is attested to in the R. gveda, Nirukta,
and ´Satapatha Br¯ahman. a.

The Gr. hyas¯utras describe rites that mark the passage of the day such as
the daily agnihotra. Three soma pressings, at sunrise, midday and sunset,
were a part of the daily ritual of agnis.t.oma. Then there were the full and
new moon ceremonies. Longer soma rites were done as sattras, sessions of
twelve days or more.

1.2 Altars

Altar ritual was an important part of Vedic life and we come across ﬁre
altars in the R. gvedic hymns. Study of Vedic ritual has shown that the altar,
adhiyaj˜na, was used to show the connections between the astronomical, the

4

physiological and the spiritual, symbolically. That the altars represented
astronomical knowledge is what interests us in this article. But the astronomy
of the altars was not systematically spelled out although there are pointed
references in many texts including the tenth chapter of ´Satapatha Br¯ahman. a,
entitled “Agnirahasya”. R. gveda itself is viewed as an altar of mantras in the
´Sulbas¯utras.

Altars were used in relation to two basic types of Vedic ritual: ´Srauta and
Gr.hya. This ritual marked speciﬁc points in the day or the year as in the soma
rituals of agnis.t.oma and agnicayana. The ´Satapatha Br¯ahman. a describes the
twelve-day agnicayana rite that takes place in a large trapezoidal area, called
the mah¯avedi, and in a smaller rectangular area to the west of it, which is
called the pr¯ac¯ınavam. ´sa or pr¯agvam. ´sa. The text says clearly that agnicayana
represents ritual as well as knowledge.

The mah¯avedi trapezium measures 30 prakrama on the west, 24 prakrama
on the east, and 36 prakrama lengthwise. The choice of these numbers is
related to the sum of these three equaling one fourth the year or 90 days.

The nominal year of 360 days was used to reconcile the discrepancies
between the lunar and solar calendars, both of which were used.
In the
mah¯avedi a brick altar is built to represent time in the form of a falcon
about to take wing (Figure 1), and in the pr¯ac¯ınavam. ´sa there are three
ﬁre altars in speciﬁed positions, the g¯arhapatya, ¯ahavan¯ıya, and daks.in. ¯agni.
The g¯arhapatya, which is round, is the householder’s ﬁre received from the
father and transmitted to the descendents. It is a perpetual ﬁre from which
the other ﬁres are lighted. The daks.in. ¯agni is half-moon shaped; it is also
called the anv¯ah¯aryapacana where cooking is done. The ¯ahavan¯ıya is square.
Between the ¯ahavan¯ıya and the g¯arhapatya a space of a rough hourglass is
dug out and strewn with grass; this is called the vedi and it is meant for the
gods to sit on.

During the agnicayana ritual the old ¯ahavan¯ıya serves the function of the
original g¯arhapatya. This is the reason why their areas are to be identical,
although one of them is round and the other square. In addition eight dhis.n. ya
hearths are built on an expanded ritual ground.

Agnicayana altars are supposed to symbolize the universe. G¯arhapatya
represents the earth, the dhis.n. ya hearths represent space, and the ¯ahavan¯ıya
altar represents sky. This last altar is made in ﬁve layers. The sky is taken to
represent the universe therefore it includes space and earth. The ﬁrst layer
represents the earth, the third the space, and the ﬁfth the sky. The second

5

layer represents the joining of the earth and space, whereas the fourth layer
represents the joining of space and sky.

Time is represented by the metaphor of a bird. The months of the year
were ordinarily divided into six seasons unless the metaphor of the bird for
the year was used when hemanta and ´si´sira were lumped together. The year
as a bird had the head as vasanta, the body as hemanta and ´si´sira, the two
wings as ´sarada and gr¯ıs.ma, and the tail as vars.¯a.

The Vedic sacriﬁce is meant to capture the magic of change, of time in
motion. Put diﬀerently, the altar ritual is meant to symbolize the paradoxes
of separation and unity, belonging and renunciation, and permanence and
death. The yajam¯ana, the patron at whose expense the ritual is performed,
symbolically represents the universe.

The ritual culminates in his ritual rebirth, which signiﬁed the regeneration
of his universe. In other words, the ritual is a play dealing with paradoxes
of life and death enacted for the yajam¯ana’s family and friends. In this play
symbolic deaths of animals and humans, including the yajam¯ana himself,
may be enacted.

1.3 Evolution of Vedic Thought

How did the use of altars for a symbolic representation of knowledge begin?
This development is described in the Pur¯an. as where it is claimed that the
three altars were ﬁrst devised by the king Pur¯uravas. The genealogical lists
of the Pur¯an. as and the epics provide a framework in which the composition
of the diﬀerent hymns can be seen. The ideas can then be checked against
social processes at work as revealed by textual and archaeological data.

As we will see later in this article, there existed an astronomical basis
to the organization of the R. gveda itself; this helps us see Vedic ritual in a
new light. That astronomy could be used for ﬁxing the chronology of certain
events in the Vedic books was shown more than a hundred years ago by Tilak
and Jacobi. This internal evidence compels the conclusion that the prehistory
of the Vedic people in India goes back to the fourth millennium and earlier.
On the other hand, new archaeological discoveries show a continuity in the
Indian tradition going as far back as 8000 BCE (Shaﬀer and Lichtenstein,
1995). These are some of the elements in accord with the view that the Vedic
texts and the archaeological ﬁnds relate to the same reality. One must also
note that the rock art tradition in India has been traced back to about 40000

6

BC (Wakankar, 1992). Whether this tradition gave birth to the Harappan
tradition is not clear at this time.

Recent archaeological discoveries establish that the Sarasvat¯ı river dried
up around 1900 BCE which led to the collapse of the Harappan civilization
that was principally located in the Sarasvat¯ı region. Francfort (1992) has even
argued that the Dr.s.advat¯ı was already dry before 2600 BCE. The region of
the Sarasvat¯ı and the Dr.s.advat¯ı rivers, called Brahm¯avarta, was especially
sanctiﬁed and Sarasvat¯ı was one of the mightiest rivers of the R. gvedic period.
On the other hand, Pa˜ncavim. ´sa Br¯ahman. a describes the disappearance of
Sarasvat¯ı in the sands at a distance of forty days on horseback from its
source. With the understanding of the drying up of Sarasvat¯ı it follows that
the R. gvedic hymns are generally anterior to 1900 BCE but if one accepts
Francfort’s interpretation of the data on the Dr.s.advat¯ı then the R. gvedic
period includes the period before 2600 BCE.

It is most signiﬁcant that the Pur¯an. ic king-lists speak of 1924 BCE as
the epoch of the Mah¯abh¯arata War, that marked the end of the Vedic age.
This ﬁgure of 1924 BCE emerges from the count of 1500 years for the reigns
prior to the Nandas (424 BCE), quoted at several places in the Pur¯an. as.
Since this epoch is virtually identical to the rough date of 1900 BCE for the
catastrophic drying up of the Sarasvati river, it suggests that the two might
have been linked if not being the same, and it increases our conﬁdence in the
use of the Indian texts as sources of historical record.

2 Naks.atras
The R. gveda describes the universe to be inﬁnite. Of the ﬁve planets it men-
tions Br.haspati (Jupiter) and Vena (Venus) by name The moon’s path was
divided into 27 equal parts, although the moon takes about 27 1/3 days to
complete it. Each of these parts was called a naks.atra. A traditional iconic
representation of the naks.atras is shown in Figure 2. Speciﬁc stars or aster-
isms were also termed naks.atras, and they are mentioned in the R. gveda and
Taittir¯ıya Sam. hit¯a, the latter speciﬁcally saying that they are linked to the
moon’s path. The R. gvedic reference to 34 lights apparently means the sun,
the moon, the ﬁve planets, and the 27 naks.atras. In later literature the list of
naks.atras was increased to 28. Constellations other than the naks.atras were
also known; these include the R. ks.as (the Bears), the two divine Dogs (Canis

7

Major and Canis Minor), and the Boat (Argo Navis). Aitareya Br¯ahman. a
speaks of Mr.ga (Orion) and Mr.gavy¯adha (Sirius). The moon is called s¯urya
ra´smi, one that shines by sunlight.

The constellations conjoined monthly with the circuit of the sun were
traditionally represented as in the outer circle of Figure 3. The inner circle
of this ﬁgure shows the ﬁve planets, the sun, the moon and its ascending and
descending nodes.

The ´Satapatha Br¯ahman. a provides an overview of the broad aspects of
Vedic astronomy. The sixth chapter of the book provides signiﬁcant clues.
Speaking of creation under the aegis of the Praj¯apati (reference either to a
star or to abstract time) mention is made of the emergence of A´sva, R¯asabha,
Aja and K¯urma before the emergence of the earth. It has been argued that
these refer to stars or constellations. Vi´svan¯atha Vidy¯ala ˙nk¯ara (1985) sug-
gests that these should be identiﬁed as the sun (A´sva), Gemini (R¯asabha),
Aja (Capricorn) and K¯urma or K¯a´syap¯ıya (Cassiopeia). This identiﬁcation
is supported by etymological considerations. RV 1.164.2 and Nirukta 4.4.27
deﬁne A´sva as the sun. R¯asabha which literally means the twin asses are
deﬁned in Nighant.u 1.15 as A´svinau which later usage suggests are Castor
and Pollux in Gemini. In Western astronomy the twin asses are to be found
in the next constellation of Cancer as Asellus Borealis and Asellus Australis.
Aja (goat) is deﬁned by Nighant.u 1.15 as a sun and owing to the continuity
that we see in the Vedic and later European names for constellations (as in
the case of the Great Bear) it is reasonable to identify it as the constellation
Capricorn (caper goat + cornu horn).

Vedic ritual was based on the times for the full and the new moons,
solstices and the equinoxes. The year was known to be somewhat more than
365 days and a bit less than 366 days. The solar year was marked variously
in the many diﬀerent astronomical traditions that marked the Vedic world.
In one tradition, an extra eleven days, marked by ek¯ada´sar¯atra or eleven-
day sacriﬁce, were added to the lunar year of 354 days. According to the
Taittir¯ıya Sam. hit¯a ﬁve more days are required over the nominal year of 360
days to complete the seasons, adding that four days are too short and six
days are too long. In other traditions, gav¯am ayana, ‘the walk of cows or
intercalary periods,’ varied from 36 days of the lunar sidereal year of 12
months of 27 days, to 9 days for the lunar sidereal year of 13 months of 27
days to bring the year in line with the ideal year of 360 days; additional days
were required to be in accord with the solar year.

8

The year was divided into two halves: uttar¯ayana, when the sun trav-
els north, and daks.in. ¯ayana, when the sun travels south. According to the
Kaus.¯ıtaki Br¯ahman. a, the year-long sacriﬁces began with the winter solstice,
noting the occurrence of the summer solstice, vis.uvant, after six months.

The twelve tropical months, and the six seasons, are named in the Ya-

jurveda:

Madhu, M¯adhava in vasanta (spring);
´Sukra, ´Suci in gr¯ıs.ma (summer);
Nabha, Nabhasya in vars.¯a (rains);
Is.a, ¯Urja in ´sarada (autumn);
Saha, Sahasya in hemanta (winter);
Tapa, Tapasya in ´si´sira (freeze).

The n¯aks.atra names of the months began with Caitra in spring, although
some lists begin with Ph¯alguna. Since the months shift with respect to
the twelve naks.atra about 2,000 years per naks.atra, this change in the lists
indicates a corresponding long period. The lists that begin with Caitra mark
the months thus:

Caitra, Vai´s¯akha,
Jyais.t.ha, ¯As.¯ad. ha,
´Sr¯avan. a, Bh¯adrapada,
¯A´svina, K¯arttika,
M¯arga´sira, Paus.ya,
M¯agha, Ph¯alguna.

The earliest lists of naks.atras in the Vedic books begin with Kr.ttik¯as, the
Pleiades; much later lists dating from sixth century CE begin with A´svin¯ı
when the vernal equinox occurred on the border of Revat¯ı and A´svin¯ı. As-
suming that the beginning of the list marked the same astronomical event, as
is supported by other evidence, the earliest lists should belong to the third
millennium BCE. The Taittir¯ıya Sam. hit¯a 4.4.10 and ´Satapatha Br¯ahman. a
10.5.4.5 each mention 27 naks.atras. But there was also a tradition of the
use of 28 naks.atras. The Atharvaveda 19.7 lists these 28 together with their
presiding deities; the additional naks.atra is Abhijit. The lists begins with
Kr.ttik¯a (Pleiades) where the spring equinox was situated at that time.

9

2.1 Naks.atras and chronology
Motivated by the then-current models of the movements of pre-historic peo-
ples, it became, by the end of the nineteenth century, fashionable in In-
dological circles to dismiss any early astronomical references in the Vedic
literature. But since the publication of Hamlet’s Mill: An essay on myth
and the frame of time by Georgio de Santillana and Hertha von Dechend in
1969 it has come to be generally recognized that ancient myths encode a vast
and complex body of astronomical knowledge. The cross-checks provided by
the dating of some of the Indian myths provide conﬁrmation to the explicit
astronomical evidence related to the naks.atras that is spelled out below.
Other conﬁrmation comes from the archaeological evidence summarized in
this article.

Due to the precession of the earth’s polar axis the direction of the north
pole with respect to the ﬁxed background stars keeps on changing. The
period of this precession is roughly 26,000. Polaris (α Ursae Minoris) is the
Pole star now but around 3000 BCE it was α Draconis which was followed
later by β Ursae Minoris; in CE 14000 it will be Vega. The equinoxes and
the solstices also shift with respect to the background stars. The equinoxes
move along the ecliptic in a direction opposite to the yearly course of the sun
(Taurus to Aries to Pisces rather than Pisces to Aries to Taurus and so on).
The vernal equinox marked an important day in the year. The sun’s
position among the constellations at the vernal equinox was an indication
of the state of the precessional cycle. This constellation was noted by its
heliacal rising. The equinoctial sun occupies each zodiacal constellation for
about 2200 years. Around 5000 BCE it was in Gemini; it has moved since
into Taurus, Aries, and is now in Pisces. The sun spends about 13 1/3 days
in each naks.atra, and the precession of the equinoxes takes them across each
naks.atra in about a 1000 years.

Thirteen and a half naks.atras ending with Vi´s¯akh¯a were situated in
the northern hemispheres; these were called devanaks.atras. The remaining
naks.atras ending with Bharan.¯ı that were in the southern hemisphere were
called yamanaks.atras (yama: twin, dual). This classiﬁcation in the Taittir¯ıya
Br¯ahman. a (1.5.2.7) corresponds to 2300 BCE.

As mentioned above, the list beginning with Kr.ttik¯a indicates that it
was drawn up in the third millennium BCE. The legend of the cutting oﬀ
of Praj¯apati’s head suggests a time when the year began with Mr.ga´s¯ırs.a in

10

the ﬁfth millennium BCE. Scholars have also argued that a subsequent list
began with Rohin.¯ı. This view is strengthened by the fact that there are two
Rohin.¯ıs, separated by fourteen naks.atras, indicating that the two marked the
beginning of the two half-years.

The ´Satapatha Br¯ahman. a speaks of a marriage between the Seven Sages,
the stars of the Ursa Major, and the Kr.ttik¯as; this is elaborated in the
Pur¯an. as where it is stated that the r.s.is remain for a hundred years in each
naks.atra. In other words, during the earliest times in India there existed a
centennial calendar with a cycle of 2,700 years. Called the Saptars.i calendar,
it is still in use in several parts of India. Its current beginning is taken to
be 3076 BCE. On the other hand, notices by the Greek historians Pliny and
Arrian suggest that, during the Mauryan times, the calendar used in India
began in 6676 BCE. It is very likely that this calendar was the Saptars.i
calendar with a beginning at 6676 BCE.

Around 500 CE, a major review of the Indian calendar was attempted
¯Aryabhat.a, Var¯ahamihira and others used the naks.atra
by astronomers.
references that the Saptars.i were in Magh¯a at the time of the Mah¯abh¯arata
war to determine its epoch. ¯Aryabhat.a declared the war to have occurred in
3137 BCE (the Kaliyuga era begins 35 years after the war), and Var¯ahamihira
assigned it 2449 BCE. It has been suggested that this discrepancy arose
because the change in the number of naks.atras from the earlier counts of 27
to the later 28 was diﬀerently computed by the two astronomers. It is quite
likely that the fame of the Kaliyuga era with its beginning assigned to 3102
BCE prompted a change in the beginning of the Saptars.i era to about the
same time, viz. to 3076 BCE.

The shifting of seasons through the year and the shifting of the north-
ern axis allow us to date several other statements in the books. Thus the
´Satapatha Br¯ahman. a (2.1.2.3) has a statement that points to an earlier epoch
where it is stated that Kr.ttik¯a never swerve from the east. This correspond
to 2950 BCE.

The Maitray¯an¯ıya Br¯ahman. a Upanis. ad (6.14) refers to the winter solstice
being at the mid-point of the ´Sravis.t.h¯a segment and the summer solstice at
the beginning of Magh¯a. This indicates 1660 BCE.

The Ved¯a ˙nga Jyotis. a (Yajur 6-8) mentions that winter solstice was at the
beginning of ´Sravis.t.h¯a and the summer solstice at the mid-point of A´sles.¯a.
This corresponds to about 1370 BCE (Sastry, 1985).

It should be noted that these dates can only be considered to be very ap-

11

proximate. Furthermore, these dates do not imply that the texts come from
the corresponding period; the text may recall an old tradition. A chronology
of the Vedic period by means of astronomical references was attempted by
the historian of science P.C. Sengupta. Amongst other evidence, Sengupta
uses the description of the solar eclipse in RV 5.40.5-9 to ﬁx a date for it.
Unfortunately, this work has not received the attention it deserves.

The changes in the beginning of the Naks.atra lists bring us down to the
Common Era; at the time of Var¯ahamihira (550 CE) the vernal equinox was
in A´svin´ı.

3 Ritual, geometry and astronomy

We have mentioned that the altars used in the ritual were based on astro-
nomical numbers related to the reconciliation of the lunar and solar years.
The ﬁre altars symbolized the universe and there were three types of altars
representing the earth, the space and the sky. The altar for the earth was
drawn as circular whereas the sky (or heaven) altar was drawn as square.
The geometric problems of circulature of a square and that of squaring a
circle are a result of equating the earth and the sky altars. As we know these
problems are among the earliest considered in ancient geometry.

The ﬁre altars were surrounded by 360 enclosing stones, of these 21 were
around the earth altar, 78 around the space altar and 261 around the sky
altar.
In other words, the earth, the space, and the sky are symbolically
assigned the numbers 21, 78, and 261. Considering the earth/cosmos di-
chotomy, the two numbers are 21 and 339 since cosmos includes the space
and the sky.

The main altar was built in ﬁve layers. The basic square shape was
modiﬁed to several forms, such as falcon and turtle. These altars were built
in ﬁve layers, of a thousand bricks of speciﬁed shapes. The construction of
these altars required the solution to several geometric and algebraic problems.
Two diﬀerent kinds of bricks were used: the special and the ordinary.
The total number of the special bricks used was 396, explained as 360 days
of the year and the additional 36 days of the intercalary month. By layers,
the ﬁrst has 98, the second has 41, the third has 71, the fourth has 47 and
the ﬁfth has 138. The sum of the bricks in the fourth and the ﬁfth layers
equals 186 tithis of the half-year. The number of bricks in the third and the

12

fourth layers equals the integer nearest to one third the number of days in
the lunar year, and the number of bricks in the third layer equals the integer
nearest to one ﬁfth of the number of days in the lunar year, and so on.

The number of ordinary bricks equals 10,800 which equals the number
of muh¯urtas in a year (1 day = 30 muh¯urtas), or equivalently the number
of days in 30 years. Of these 21 go into the g¯arhapatya, 78 into the eight
dhis.n. ya hearths, and the rest go into the ¯ahavan¯ıya altar.

3.1 Equivalence by area
The main altar was an area of 7 1
2 units. This area was taken to be equivalent
to the nominal year of 360 days. Now, each subsequent year, the shape was
to be reproduced with the area increased by one unit.

The ancient Indians spoke of two kinds of day counts: the solar day,
and tithi, whose mean value is the lunar year divided into 360 parts. They
also considered three diﬀerent years: (1) naks.atra, or a year of 324 days
(sometimes 324 tithis) obtained by considering 12 months of 27 days each,
where this 27 is the ideal number of days in a lunar month; (2) lunar, which
is a fraction more than 354 days (360 tithis); and (3) solar, which is in excess
of 365 days (between 371 and 372 tithis). A well-known altar ritual says that
altars should be constructed in a sequence of 95, with progressively increasing
areas. The increase in the area, by one unit yearly, in building progressively
larger ﬁre altars is 48 tithis which is about equal to the intercalation required
to make the naks.atra year in tithis equal to the solar year in tithis. But there
is a residual excess which in 95 years adds up to 89 tithis; it appears that after
this period such a correction was made. The 95 year cycle corresponds to the
tropical year being equal to 365.24675 days. The cycles needed to harmonize
various motions led to the concept of increasing periods and world ages.

3.2 The R. gvedic altar
The number of syllables in the R. gveda conﬁrms the textual references that the
book was to represent a symbolic altar. According to various early texts, the
number of syllables in the R. gveda is 432,000, which is the number of muh¯urtas
in forty years. In reality the syllable count is somewhat less because certain
syllables are supposed to be left unspoken.

13

The verse count of the R. gveda can be viewed as the number of sky days
in forty years or 261 × 40 = 10, 440, and the verse count of all the Vedas is
261 × 78 = 20, 358.

The R. gveda is divided into ten books with a total of 1,017 hymns which are
placed into 216 groups. Are these numbers accidental or is there a deliberate
plan behind the choice? One would expect that if the R. gveda is considered
akin to the ﬁve-layered altar described in the Br¯ahman. as then the ﬁrst two
books should correspond to the space intermediate to the earth and the sky.
Now the number that represents space is 78. When used with the multiplier
of 3 for the three worlds, this yields a total of 234 hymns which is indeed the
number of hymns in these two books. One may represent the R. gvedic books
as a ﬁve-layered altar of books as shown in Table 1.

Table 1: The altar of books

Book 10 Book 9
Book 7 Book 8
Book 5 Book 6
Book 3 Book 4
Book 2 Book 1

191
104
87
62
43

114
92
75
58
191

When the hymn numbers are used in this altar of books we obtain Table

2.

Table 2: Hymns in the altar of books

The choice of this arrangement is prompted by the considerable regularity
in the hymn counts. Thus the hymn count separations diagonally across the
two columns are 29 each for Book 4 to Book 5 and Book 6 to Book 7 and
they are 17 each for the second column for Book 4 to Book 6 and Book 6 to
Book 8. Books 5 and 7 in the ﬁrst column are also separated by 17; Books
5 and 7 also add up to the total for either Book 1 or Book 10. Another
regularity is that the middle three layers are indexed by order from left to
right whereas the bottom and the top layers are in the opposite sequence.

Furthermore, Books [4+6+8+9] = 339, and these books may be taken
to represent the spine of the altar. The underside of the altar now consists
of the Books [2+3+5+7] = 296, and the feet and the head Books [1+10] =

14

382. The numbers 296 and 382 are each 43 removed from the fundamental
R. gvedic number of 339.

The Br¯ahman. as and the ´Sulbas¯utra tell us about the altar of chandas and
meters, so we would expect that the total hymn count of 1017 and the group
count of 216 have particular signiﬁcance. Owing to the pervasive tripartite
ideology of the Vedic books we choose to view the hymn number as 339 × 3.
The tripartite ideology refers to the consideration of time in three divisions of
past, present, and future and the consideration of space in the three divisions
of the northern celestial hemisphere, the plane that is at right angle to the
earth’s axis, and the southern celestial hemisphere.

Consider the two numbers 1017 and 216. One can argue that another
parallel with the representation of the layered altar was at work in the group
total of 216. Since the R. gvedic altar of hymns was meant to symbolically take
one to the sky, the abode of gods, it appears that the number 216 represents
twice the basic distance of 108 taken to separate the earth from the sky. The
R. gvedic code then expresses a fundamental connection between the numbers
339 and 108.

Consider now the cosmic model used by the ancients. The earth is at
the center, and the sun and the moon orbit the earth at diﬀerent distances.
If the number 108 was taken to represent symbolically the distance between
the earth and the sky, the question arises as to why it was done. The answer
is apparent if one considers the actual distances of the sun and the moon.
The number 108 is roughly the average distance that the sun is in terms of
its own diameter from the earth; likewise, it is also the average distance that
the moon is in terms of its own diameter from the earth. It is owing to this
marvellous coincidence that the angular size of the sun and the moon, viewed
from the earth, is about identical.

It is easy to compute this number. The angular measurement of the sun
can be obtained quite easily during an eclipse. The angular measurement of
the moon can be made on any clear full moon night. A easy check on this
measurement would be to make a person hold a pole at a distance that is
exactly 108 times its length and conﬁrm that the angular measurement is the
same. Nevertheless, the computation of this number would require careful
observations. Note that 108 is an average and due to the ellipticity of the
orbits of the earth and the moon the distances vary with the seasons. It is
likely, therefore, that observations did not lead to the precise number 108,
but it was chosen as the true value of the distance since it is equal to 27 × 4,

15

because of the mapping of the sky into 27 naks.atras.

The second number 339 is simply the number of disks of the sun or the

moon to measure the path across the sky: π × 108 ≈ 339.

We return to a further examination of the numbers 296, 339, and 382
in the design of the R. gvedic altar. It has been suggested that 339 has an
obvious signiﬁcance as the number of sun-steps during the average day or
the equinox, and the other numbers are likely to have a similar signiﬁcance.
In other words, 296 is the number of sun-steps during the winter solstice and
382 is the number of sun-steps during the summer solstice (Kak, 1994).

There also exists compelling evidence, of a probabilistic sense, that the
periods of the planets had been obtained and used in the setting up of the
R. gvedic astronomical code.

4 The motions of the sun and the moon

The Ved¯a ˙nga Jyotis. a (VJ), due to Lagadha, is a text that describes some of
the astronomical knowledge of the times of altar ritual. It has an internal
date of c. 1350 BCE obtained from its assertion that the winter solstice
was at the asterism ´Sravis.t.h¯a (Delphini). Recent archaeological discoveries
support such an early date, and so this book assumes great importance in
the understanding of the earliest astronomy.

VJ describes the mean motions of the sun and the moon. This manual
is available in two recensions: the earlier R. gvedic VJ (RVJ) and the later
Yajurvedic VJ (YVJ). RVJ has 36 verses and YVJ has 43 verses. As the only
extant astronomical text from the Vedic period, we describe its contents in
some detail.

The measures of time used in VJ are as follows:

1 lunar year = 360 tithis
1 solar year = 366 solar days
1 day = 30 muh¯urtas
1 muh¯urta = 2 n¯ad. ik¯as
1 n¯ad. ik¯a = 10 1
20 kal¯as
1 day = 124 a ˙m´sas (parts)
1 day = 603 kal¯as

16

Furthermore, ﬁve years were taken to equal a yuga. A ordinary yuga
consisted of 1,830 days. An intercalary month was added at half the yuga
and another at the end of the yuga.

What are the reasons for the use of a time division of the day into 603
kal¯as? This is explained by the assertion that the moon travels through 1,809
naks.atras in a yuga. Thus the moon travels through one naks.atra in 1 7
sidereal days because

603

1, 809 × 1

= 1, 830.

7
603

Or the moon travels through one naks.atra in 610 kal¯as. Also note that
603 has 67, the number of sidereal months in a yuga, as a factor The further
division of a kal¯a into 124 k¯as.t.h¯as was in symmetry with the division of a
yuga into 62 synodic months or 124 fortnights (of 15 tithis), or parvans. A
parvan is the angular distance travelled by the sun from a full moon to a new
moon or vice versa.

The VJ system is a coordinate system for the sun and the moon in terms of
the 27 naks.atras. Several rules are given so that a speciﬁc tithi and naks.atra
can be readily computed.

The number of risings of the asterism ´Sravis.t.h¯a in the yuga is
the number of days plus ﬁve (1830+5 = 1835). The number of
risings of the moon is the days minus 62 (1830-62 = 1768). The
total of each of the moon’s 27 asterisms coming around 67 times
in the yuga equals the number of days minus 21 (1830-21 = 1809).

The moon is conjoined with each asterism 67 times during a yuga.
The sun stays in each asterism 13 5

9 days.

The explanations are straightforward. The sidereal risings equals the
1,830 days together with the ﬁve solar cycles. The lunar cycles equal the
62 synodic months plus the ﬁve solar cycles. The moon’s risings equal the
risings of ´Sravis.t.h¯a minus the moon’s cycles.

This indicates that the moon was taken to rise at a mean rate of
1,830
1,768 = 24 hours and 50.4864 minutes.

17

4.1 Computation of tithis, naks.atras, kal¯as
Although a mean tithi is obtained by considering the lunar year to equal 360
tithis, the determination of a tithi each day is by a calculation of a shift of
the moon by 12◦ with respect to the sun. In other words, in 30 tithis it will
cover the full circle of 360◦. But the shift of 12◦ is in an irregular manner and
the duration of the tithi can vary from day to day. As a practical method a
mean tithi is deﬁned by a formula. VJ takes it to be 122 parts of the day
divided into 124 parts.

Each yuga was taken to begin with the asterism ´Sravis.t.h¯a and the synodic
month of M¯agha, the solar month Tapas and the bright fortnight (parvan),
and the northward course of the sun and the moon. The intercalary months
were used in a yuga. But since the civil year was 366 days, or 372 tithis, it
was necessary to do further corrections. As shown in the earlier section, a
further correction was performed at 95 year, perhaps at multiples of 19 years.
The day of the lunar month corresponds to the tithi at sunrise. A tithi
can be lost whenever it begins and ends between one sunrise and the next.
Thus using such a mean system, the days of the month can vary in length.

4.2 Accuracy

There are other rules of a similar nature which are based on the use of
congruences. These include rules on hour angle of naks.atras, time of the day
at the end of a tithi, time at the beginning of a naks.atra, correction for the
sidereal day, and so on. But it is clear that the use of mean motions can lead
to discrepancies that need to be corrected at the end of the yuga.

The framework of VJ has approximations built into it such as considera-
tion of the civil year to be 366 days and the consideration of a tithi as being
equal to 122
124 of a day. The error between the modern value of tithi and its
VJ value is:

354.367
360

− 122
124

which is as small as 5 × 10−4. This leads to an error of less than a day in a
yuga of ﬁve years.

The constructions of the geometric altars as well as the Vedic books that
come centuries before VJ conﬁrm that the Vedic Indians knew that the year
was more than 365 days and less than 366 days. The ﬁve year period of

18

1,830 days, rather than the more accurate 1,826 days, was chosen because it
is divisible by 61. This choice deﬁnes a symmetry with the deﬁnition of the
tithi as 61
62 of the day. The VJ system was thus very accurate for the motions
of the moon but it could have only served as a framework for the motions of
the sun. It appears that there were other rules of missing days that brought
the calendar into consonance with the reality of the naks.atras at the end of
the ﬁve year yuga and at the end of the 95 year cycle of altar construction.
Mean motion astronomy can lead to signiﬁcant discrepancy between true
and computed values. The system of intercalary months introduced further
irregularity into the system. This means that the conjunction between the
sun and the moon that was assumed at the beginning of each yuga became
more and more out of joint until such time that the major extra-yuga cor-
rections were made.

Since the Vedic astronomers were evidently aware of the many corrections
that is required in the calendric system of the VJ, one might wonder about
the choice of its constants. It appears that the yuga of 1,830 days, rather
than the more accurate 1,826 days, was chosen because it is divisible by 61;
this choice simpliﬁes computations for a tithi deﬁned as 61

62 of the day.

5 The planets

Although it is certain that the planets had been studied by the R. gvedic
people, we do not ﬁnd a single place in the texts where the names are listed
together. The list below brings together some of the names, together with
the ascribed colours, used in a variety of places including the later Pur¯an. ic
literature.

MERCURY. Budha, Saumya, Rauhin. eya, Tu ˙nga (yellow)
VENUS. Vena, U´sanas, ´Sukra, Kavi, Bhr.gu (white )

MARS. A ˙ng¯araka, Bh¯umija, Lohit¯a ˙nga, Bhauma, Ma ˙ngala, Kum¯ara, Skanda

(red )

JUPITER. Br.haspati, Guru, ¯A ˙ngiras (yellow)
SATURN. ´Sanai´scara, Sauri, Manda, Pa ˙ngu, P¯ata ˙ngi (black )

19

Mercury is viewed as the son of the moon by T¯ar¯a, the wife of Jupiter, or
the naks.atra Rohin. i (Aldebaran), Venus as the son of Bhr.gu and the priest
of the demons, Mars as the son of the earth or ´Siva, Jupiter as the son of
A ˙ngiras and the priest of the gods, and Saturn is seen as being born to Revat¯i
and Balar¯ama or to Ch¯ay¯a and the sun. Saturn is described as the lord of the
planets, lord of seven lights or satellites, and the slow-goer. Since the Indian
calendar was reckoned according to the constellation at the vernal equinox,
one may assume the name son of Aldebaran implies that Mercury was ﬁrst
noted during the era of 3400-2210 BCE when the vernal equinox was in the
Pleiades.

The Jaiminigr. hyas¯utra gives the following equation between the planets
and the Vedic gods: the sun is ´Siva; the moon is Um¯a (´Siva’s wife); Mars is
Skanda, the son of ´Siva; Mercury is Vis.n. u; Jupiter is Brahman (symbolizing
the entire universe); Venus is Indra; and Saturn is Yama, the “dual” god
(death). The colors assigned to the planets are from the same source.

One may speculate that the equation of Saturn and Yama arises out of
the fact that the synodic period of Saturn is the “dual” to the lunar year;
378 days of Saturn and 354 days of the lunar year with the centre at the
366-day solar year.

5.1 On the identity of Mercury and Vis.n. u
Mercury’s identiﬁcation with the god Vis.n. u, an important ﬁgure in the
R. gveda, is of particular signiﬁcance. Vis.n. u is the youger brother of Indra
in the R. gvedic era; and Indra is sometimes identiﬁed with the sun. The most
essential feature of Vis.n. u are his three steps by which he measures out the
universe (e.g. RV 1.154). Two of these steps are visible to men, but the third
or highest step is beyond the ﬂight of birds or mortals (RV 1.155, 7.99). In
later mythology it is explained that Vis.n. u did this remarkable thing in the
incarnation as V¯amana, the pygmy. This agrees with the identiﬁcation as
the small Mercury.

Now what do these steps mean? According to late tradition, Vis.n. u is a
solar deity and so these three steps represent the sunrise, the highest ascent,
and the sunset. Another equally old interpretation is that the three steps
represent the course of the sun through the three divisions of the universe:
heavens, earth, and the netherworld.

But both of these interpretations appear unsatisfactory. Neither of these

20

interpretations squares with the special signiﬁcance attached to the third
step. Nor does not explain the putative identity of Mercury and Vis.n. u.

An explanation becomes obvious when we consider the Vedic altar ritual.
It appears likely that the three steps of Vis.n. u are nothing but the three
revolutions of Mercury in a cycle of 261 sky days. With this supposition the
period of Mercury will be 87 days. Furthermore, three synodic periods of
It
Mercury, at 118 days a period, equal the 354 lunar days or 360 tithis.
appears that this dual relationship led to the great importance being given
to the myth of the three steps of Vis.n. u. Of course, the ﬁgures for the periods
are only approximate but as expected at the ﬁrst determination of these
numbers an attempt was made to connect them to the basic numbers of 261
and 354.

The explicit name of Budha for Mercury appears in the Pa˜ncavim. ´sa
Br¯ahman. a (PB) which is dated deﬁnitely after 1900 BCE since it has an
account of a journey to the source of Sarasvat¯i from the place where it is lost
in the desert (PB 25.10). PB 24.18 speaks of Budha in connection with a 61
day rite. Three such rites imply a total of 183 days which equals the days
exclusively devoted to the heavens. This appears to be the analog, in the
ﬁeld of ritual, of the three steps of Vis.n. u covering the heavens.

We note that the understanding of the motions of the planets arose at
some time during the unfolding of the R. gvedic period. For example, Venus is
described in early Vedic mythology in terms of the twin A´svins, the morning
and evening stars just as Homer later describes it as the pair Hesperus and
Phosphorus. This commonality indicates early Indo-European basis to this
myth.

The main characters in the planetary myths are Jupiter and Venus as is to
be expected for the two brightest planets. Venus, in its earlier incarnation as
the A´svin twins, was seen as born to the sun. Mercury as Vis.n. u is Upendra,
the younger brother of the Indra, here a personiﬁcation of the sun. But
once Mercury ﬁtted into the planetary scheme, its association with Vis.n. u
was forgotten. Later acccounts describe the planets in relation to each other.
Our arguments showing that the period of Mercury was obtained in the third
millennium BCE imply that as the determination of the period of Mercury
is the hardest amongst the classical planets, the periods of the other planets
had been obtained.

The literature that followed the R. gvedic age was at ﬁrst concerned more
with the ritual related to the earlier astronomy of the Vedic age. Once the

21

planetary system fell into place, the gods became supernumeraries. Now the
focus shifted to their duals that inhabit the inner universe. Thus by the time
of the ´Satapatha Br¯ahman. a (second millennium BCE), the original stars of
the Ursa Major were identiﬁed with the cognitive centres in the brain as in
´SB 8.1 or in more detail in BU 2.2.4.

The R. gveda and the ´Satapatha Br¯ahman. a speak of the ﬁve planets as
gods. There is also a mention of the thirty-four lights, which appear to be
the twenty seven naks.atras, the ﬁve planets, the sun and the moon. The
moon is the fastest moving of the heavenly bodies, and so it is compared
to the male who activates or fertilizes the other heavenly bodies with which
it comes in contact. The R. gveda speaks of the ﬁve bulls of heaven, which
appear to be the ﬁve planets. Being faster than the ﬁxed stars, the planets
can, in turn, be compared to bulls.

The Taittir¯ıya Sam. hit¯a speaks of the 33 daughters of Praj¯apati, personi-
ﬁcation of time here, that are given in marriage to Soma, the moon, viewed
as king. These are the 27 naks.atras, the ﬁve planets, and the sun. The sun
as the bride, S¯ury¯a, is described in the R. gveda and the Atharvaveda.

Since the planets move through the naks.atras and Venus and Jupiter are
brighter than any of the stars, observation of the naks.atras presupposes a
notice of the planets. The Ved¯a ˙nga Jyotis. a does not mention the planets, but
that is so because its concern is only the motions of the sun and the moon
related to ﬁxing the calendar.

The rivalry between the families of A ˙ngirases and the Bhr.gus, mythical
ﬁgures in the R. gveda, represents the motions of Jupiter and Venus. This
is clear in later accounts where Br.haspati (Jupiter), the priest of the gods
because its motion is closest to the ecliptic, is an ¯A ˙ngiras and Kavi U´sanas
or ´Sukra (Venus), a Bh¯argava, is the priest of the Asuras.

The idea of eclipse was expressed by the notion of R¯ahu seizing the heav-
enly body. The fact that graha, ‘seize,’ is the name used for planets right
from the time of Atharvaveda suggests that the waxing and waning of the two
inferior planets, Mercury and Venus, as well as the change in the intensity of
the others was known.

Although there is mention of a week of six days, called a s.ad. aha, in the
early books, it does not follow that the tradition of a week of seven days is a
later one. The seven day week was in use during the time of Atharva Jyotis. a.
The sidereal periods suggested by the astronomical code in the organiza-

tion of the R. gveda are (Kak, 1994):

22

Mercury: 87 days
Venus: 225 days
Mars: 687 days
Jupiter: 4,340 or 4,350 days
Saturn: 10,816 days.

5.2 Soma

Soma, or the moon, is one of the most important deities of the R. gveda. It is
related to S¯urya the way purus.a is related to prakr.ti. Soma is almost always
the moon in the ninth book of the R. gveda. That very few Western scholars of
the nineteenth century recognized this fact can only be explained by recalling
the incorrect assumptions they labored under. Soma, as a drink, was meant
to celebrate the creative function of the moon as reﬂected in the tides, the
menstrual cycle and the growth of plants.

6 The Yuga concept

There are allusions to yugas, meant as an age, in the Vedas. In the Aitareya
Br¯ahman. a Kali, Dv¯apara, Tret¯a, and Kr.ta are compared to a man lying
down, moving, rising, and walking. The S. ad. vim. ´sa Br¯ahman. a mentions the
four ages Pus.ya, Dv¯apara, Kh¯arv¯a, and Kr.ta. In order from Kr.ta to Kali,
each yuga represents a decline in morality, piety, strength, knowledge, truth-
fulness, and happiness. The notion of a yuga appears to have a historical
basis. If we accept that a catastrophic tectonic event took place around 1900
BCE, leading eventually to a great shift in the population away from the
Sarasvat¯ı valleys, then Kaliyuga could be a memory of the beginning of that
dark age. Support for this view comes from the Mah¯abharata, according to
which all places were sacred in the Kr.tayuga; Pus.kara in the Sarasvat¯ı region
was the most sacred in Tret¯ayuga; Kuruks.etra in Dv¯apara; and Pray¯aga at
the junction of Ga ˙ng¯a and Yamuna in the Kaliyuga. This clearly marks the
shift in focus of the Vedic people.

The ﬁve years of the yuga of the Ved¯a ˙nga Jyotis. a are named variously;
one text calling them sam. vatsara, parivatsara, id¯avatsara, iduvatsara, and
vatsara. It has been suggested that the 33 gods mentioned at many places

23

refer to a cycle of 33 years but this cannot be accepted until corroborative
evidence is found. As mentioned before, a cycle of 95 years is described in the
´Satapatha Br¯ahman. a. The yuga of 60 years appears to have emerged out of
an attempt to harmonize the approximate sidereal periods of 12 and 30 years
for Jupiter and Saturn, respectively. Consideration of more accurate sidereal
values requires much larger periods that are seen in the later Siddh¯antic
astronomy of the Classical period.

The Pur¯an. as talk of a kalpa, a day of Brahm¯a which is taken to equal
12,000 thousands of divine years, each of which equals 360 human years,
for a total of 4,320 million human years. Kr.ta, Tret¯a, Dv¯apara, and Kali
are supposed to last 4,000, 3,000, 2,000, 1,000 divine years respectively. In
addition, there are sandhy¯as (twilights) of 800 (two twilights of 400 years),
600, 400, 200 on the yugas, in order, to give a total span of 12,000 divine
years. Brahm¯a, the creator of time, is a personiﬁcation of the beginning
of the sustaining principle, to be taken either as Vis.n. u or ´Siva. Each day
of Brahm¯a is followed by a night of the same duration. A year of Brahm¯a
equals such 360 day and nights, and the duration of the universe is the span
of 100 Brahm¯a years. The largest cycle is 311,040,000 million years. We are
supposed to be in the 55th year of the current Brahm¯a. The large cycle is
nested in still larger cycles. Within each kalpa are fourteen secondary cycles,
In each manvantara,
called manvantaras, each lasting 306,720,000 years.
humans begin with a new Manu. We are now in the seventh manvantara of
the kalpa, started by Manu Vaivasvata.

A kalpa equals a thousand mah¯ayugas, each of which has the four yugas
Kr.ta, Tret¯a, Dv¯apara, and Kali. Each manvantara may be divided into 71
mah¯ayugas. While the yugas, as deﬁned in the Pur¯an. ic literature of the ﬁrst
millennium CE have extremely large periods in multiples of the ‘years of the
gods,’ it is likely that the four yugas were originally 4,800, 3,600, 2,400, and
1,200 ordinary years, respectively.

7 Astronomy from Lagadha to the Siddh¯antas

In this section we review the development of astronomy between two spe-
ciﬁc dates, roughly from 1300 BCE to 500 CE. Although this development
is best understood by an examination of the Vedic and post-Vedic texts,
note that not all scientiﬁc knowledge of those early times were committed

24

to writing or, if written down, has survived. There are gaps in the sequence
of ideas and these were ﬁlled based on preconceived notions rather than a
sound approach. New evidence of the past two decades has contradicted the
old 19th-century model of the rise of the Indian civilization and the new,
emerging paradigm has signiﬁcant implications for the understanding of the
development of astronomy in India.

Let Rs represent the distance between the earth and the sun, Rm be the
distance between the earth and the moon, ds be the diameter of the sun, dm
be the diameter of the moon, and de be the diameter of the earth. According
to PB, Rs < 1000 de, and we take that Rs ≈ 500de.

It was further known that the moon and the sun are about 108 times their
respective diameters from the earth. This could have been easily determined
by taking a pole and removing it to a distance 108 times its height to conﬁrm
that its angular size was equal to that of the sun or the moon. Or, we can
say that Rs ≈ 108ds and Rm ≈ 108dm.

Considering a uniform speed of the sun and the moon and noting that
the sun completes a circuit in 365.24 days and the moon 12 circuits in 354.37
days, we ﬁnd that

Rm ≈ 354.37 × 500
365.24 × 12

de

or Rm ≈ 40de.

know that ds ≈ 4.63 × de.

By using the relationship on relative sizes that Rs ≈ 108ds ≈ 500de, we

Assuming that the diameter of the earth was at some time in the pre-
Siddh¯antic period estimated to be about 900 yojanas, the distance to the
moon was then about 36,000 yojanas and that to the sun about 450,000
yojanas. It also follows that the relative dimensions of the sun and the moon
were taken to be in the ratio of 12.5 : 1. Knowing that the angular size of the
sun and the moon is about 31.85 minutes, the size of the sun is then about
4,170 yojanas and that of the moon is about 334 yojanas.

A theory on the actual diameters of the sun, the moon, and the earth
indicates a knowledge of eclipses. The RV 5.40 speaks of a prediction of the
duration of a solar eclipse, so relative ﬁxing of the diameters of the earth,
the moon, and the sun should not come as a surprise.

Also note that the long periods of Jupiter and Saturn require that the
sun be much closer to the earth than the midpoint to the heavens, or push

25

the distance of the heavens beyond the 1000de of PB and perhaps also make
the distance of the sun somewhat less than 500de. We do see these diﬀerent
modiﬁcations in the models from later periods.

The idea that the sun is roughly 500 or so earth diameters away from us
is much more ancient than Ptolemy from where it had been assumed to have
been borrowed by the Indians. This greater antiquity is in accordance with
the ideas of van der Waerden, who ascribes a primitive epicycle theory to the
Pythagoreans. But it is more likely that the epicycle theory is itself much
older than the Pythagoreans and it is from this earlier source that the later
Greek and Indian modiﬁcations to this theory emerged which explains why
the Greek and the Indian models diﬀer in crucial details.

Did the idea that Rs ≈ 500de originate at about the time of PB, that
is from the second millennium BCE, or is it older? Since this notion is in
conﬂict with the data on the periods of the outer planets, it should predate
that knowledge.
If it is accepted that the planet periods were known by
the end of the third millennium BCE, then this knowledge must be assigned
an even earlier epoch. Its appearance in PB, a book dealing primarily with
ritual, must be explained as a remembrance of an old idea. We do know that
PB repeats, almost verbatim, the R. gvedic account of a total solar eclipse.

It is certain that the synodic periods were ﬁrst computed because the
longest period, the 780 days of Mars, is not too much larger than twice the
sun’s period. With Mars as the furthest body in a primitive model, the sun’s
distance will have to be reduced to about 0.47 of the furthest point. In order
to accommodate the stars, the sun will be brought even nearer. When the
sidereal orbits of the planets were understood, sometime in the Vedic period,
the space beyond the sun had to be taken to be vast enough to accommodate
the orbits of Jupiter and Saturn. The non-circular motions of the planets
would require further changes to the sizes of the orbits and these changes
represent the continuing development of this phase of Indian astronomy.

The theory that Rs ≈ 500de was so strongly entrenched that it became the
basis from which diﬀerent Greek and later Indian models emerged. Ptolemy
considers an Rs equal to 600de whereas ¯Aryabhat.a assumes it to be about
438de. Thus the Greek and the later Indian modiﬁcations to the basic idea
proceeded somewhat diﬀerently.

The ideas regarding the distance of the sun hardly changed until the
modern times. The contradictions in the assumption that the luminaries
move with uniform mean speed and the requirements imposed by the assumed

26

size of the solar system led to a gradual enlargement of the models of the
universe from about twice that of the distance of the sun in PB to one
4.32 × 106 times the distance of the sun by the time of ¯Aryabhat.a. This
inﬂationary model of the universe in AA makes a distinction between the
distance of the sky (edge of the planetary system) and that of the stars
which is taken to be a much smaller sixty times the distance of the sun.
“Beyond the visible universe illuminated by the sun and limited by the sky
is the inﬁnite invisible universe” this is stated in a commentary on AA by
Bh¯askara I writing in 629 CE (Shukla, 1976). The Pur¯an. ic literature, part
of which is contemporaneous with ¯Aryabhat.a, reconciles the ﬁnite estimates
of the visible universe with the old R. gvedic notion of an inﬁnite universe by
postulating the existence of an inﬁnite number of universes.

The sizes of the planets

The ideas on planet sizes can be seen to evolve from those in the Pur¯an. as to
the Siddh¯antas. The Pur¯an. as confusingly combine two diﬀerent theories, one
related to the departure from the ecliptic by the moon and the other on the
sidereal periods. The planets are listed in the correct sequence, supporting
the view that the planet periods were known. The order of the angular sizes
are correctly shown as Venus, Jupiter, Saturn, Mars, Mercury although the
fractions stated are not accurate. Venus and Jupiter are taken to be 1
16 th
and 1
20 and 1
64 th the size of the moon whereas the correct fractions are 1
40 .
Saturn and Mars were taken to be 1
4th smaller than Jupiter and Mercury still
smaller by the same fraction (VaP 53.66-67).

Table 3: The planet angular sizes in fractions of the size of the moon

Planet
Mercury
Venus
Mars
Jupiter
Saturn

correct size Pur¯an. a
1
1
112
120
1
1
16
20
1
1
84
100
1
1
64
40
1
1
84
80

¯Aryabhat.a

1
15
1
5
1
25
1
10
1
20

By the time of ¯Aryabhat.a the relative sizes of the planets were better

27

estimated (Table 3). But the angular sizes of the planets are too large by
a factor of 4 excepting Mercury which is too large by a factor of 8. Over-
all, the Pur¯ana ﬁgures are more accurate and it appears that ¯Aryabhat.a’s
overestimation by a factor of 4 may have been colored by his ideas on optics.

8 The two halves of the year

The Br¯ahman. as recognize that the speed of the sun varies with the seasons.
The year-long rites of the Br¯ahman. as were organized with the summer sol-
stice (vis. uvant) as the middle point. There were two years: the ritual one
started with the winter solstice (mah¯avrata day), and the civil one started
with the spring equinox (vis. uva). Vedic rites had a correspondence with the
diﬀerent stages of the year and, therefore, astronomy played a very signiﬁ-
cant role. These rites counted the days upto the solstice and in the latter
half of the year, and there is an asymmetry in the two counts. This is an
astronomical parameter, which had hitherto escaped notice, that allows us
to date the rites to no later than the second millennium BCE.

The Aitareya Br¯ahman. a 4.18 describes how the sun reaches the highest
point on the day called vis.uvant and how it stays still for a total of 21 days
with the vis.uvant being the middle day of this period. In the Pa˜ncavim. ´sa
Br¯ahman. a (Chapters 24 and 25), several year-long rites are described where
the vis.uvant day is preceded and followed by three-day periods. This suggests
that the sun was now taken to be more or less still in the heavens for a total
period of 7 days. So it was clearly understood that the shifting of the rising
and the setting directions had an irregular motion.

´SB 4.6.2 describes the rite of gav¯am ayana, the “sun’s walk” or the “cows’
walk.” This is a rite which follows the motion of the sun, with its middle of
the vis.uvant day.

The Yajurveda (38.20) says that the ¯ahavan¯ıya or the sky altar is four-
cornered since the sun is four-cornered, meaning thereby that the motion of
the sun is characterized by four cardinal points: the two solstices and the
two equinoxes.

The year-long rites list a total of 180 days before the solstice and another
180 days following the solstice. Since this is reckoning by solar days, it is not
clear stated how the remaining 4 or 5 days of the year were assigned. But
this can be easily inferred.

28

Note that the two basic days in this count are the vis.uvant (summer
solstice) and the mah¯avrata day (winter solstice) which precedes it by 181
days in the above counts. Therefore, even though the count of the latter
part of the year stops with an additional 180 days, it is clear that one needs
another 4 or 5 days to reach the mah¯avrata day in the winter. This establishes
that the division of the year was in the two halves of 181 and 184 or 185 days.
Corroboration of this is suggested by evidence related to an altar design
from the ´Satapatha Br¯ahman. a (´SB 8.6) which is shown in Figure 4. This
altar represents the path of the sun around the earth. The middle point,
which represents the earth and the atmosphere is at a slight oﬀset to the
centre. This fact, and the fact that the number of bricks in the outer ring
are not symmetrically placed, shows that the four quarters of the year were
not taken to be symmetric.

This inequality would have been easy to discover. The Indians used the
reﬂection of the noon-sun in the water of a deep well to determine the solstice
days.

If one assumes that the two halves of the year are directly in proportion
to the brick counts of 14 and 15 in the two halves of the ring of the sun,
this corresponds to day counts of 176 and 189. This division appears to have
been for the two halves of the year with respect to the equinoxes if we note
that the solstices divide the year into counts of 181 and 184.

The apparent motion of the sun is the greatest when the earth is at per-
ihelion and the least when the earth is at aphelion. Currently, this speed is
greatest in January. The interval between successive perihelia, the anomal-
istic year, is 365.25964 days which is 0.01845 days longer than the tropical
year on which our calendar is based.
In 2000 calendar years, the date of
the perihelion advances almost 35 days; in 1000 years, it advances almost a
half-year (175 days). This means that the perihelion movement has a cycle
of about 20000 years.

In the ﬁrst millennium BCE, the earth was at perihelion within the in-
terval prior to the winter solstice. Thus during this period the half of the
year from the summer solstice to the winter solstice would have been shorter
than the half from the winter solstice to the summer solstice. This is just
the opposite of what is described in the rites of the Br¯ahman. as.

It is interesting that the Greeks discovered the asymmetry in the quarters
of the year about 400 BCE. Modern calculations show that at this time the
four quarters of the year starting with the winter solstice were 90.4, 94.1,

29

92.3, and 88.6 days long. The period from the winter solstice to the summer
solstice was then 184.5 days and the perihelion occurred in mid- to late
October.

The count of about 181 days from the winter to the summer solstice
would be true when the perihelion occurs before the summer solstice. This
will require it to move earlier than mid- to late June and no earlier than
mid- to late December. In other words, compared to 400 BCE, the minimum
number of months prior to October is 4 and the maximum number of months
is 10. This deﬁnes periods which are from 6850 years to 17150 years prior to
400 BCE.

These periods appear too early to be considered plausible and this may
reﬂect the fact that the measurements in those times were not very accurate.
Nevertheless, it means that the ﬁrst millennium BCE for the rites of the
Br¯ahman. as is absolutely impossible.

Since the ´Satapatha Br¯ahman. a has lists of teachers that go through more
than ﬁfty generations, we know that the period of the Br¯ahman. as was a long
one, perhaps a thousand years. To be as conservative as possible, one may
consider the period 2000 - 1000 BCE as reasonable for these texts. The Vedic
Sam. hit¯as are then assigned to the earlier fourth and third millennia BCE.

9 The origins of the idea of epicycles

More than a hundred years ago, Burgess (1860) saw the Indians as the orig-
inators of many of the notions that led to the Greek astronomical ﬂowering.
This view slowly lost support and then it was believed that Indian astronomy
was essentially derivative and it owed all its basic ideas to the Babylonians
and the Greeks. It was even claimed that there was no tradition of reliable
observational astronomy in India.

Using statistical analysis of the parameters used in the many Siddh¯antas,
Billard showed that the Siddh¯antas were based on precise observations and so
the theory of no observational tradition in India was wrong. This conclusion
is reinforced by the fact that the Vedic books are according to an astronomical
plan.

Earlier, it was believed that the mah¯ayuga/kalpa ﬁgure of 4,320,000,
which occurs in the Siddh¯antas, was borrowed from the astronomy12 of the
Babylonian Berossos (c. 300 BCE). But it is more logical to see it derived

30

from the number 432,000 related to the number of syllables in the R. gveda
that is mentioned in the much earlier ´Satapatha Br¯ahman. a (´SB 10.4.2).

The Siddh¯antic astronomy has features which are unique to India and it

represents an independent tradition. In the words of Thurston (1994):

Not only did ¯Aryabhat.a believe that the earth rotates, but there
are glimmerings in his system (and other similar Indian systems)
of a possible underlying theory in which the earth (and the plan-
ets) orbits the sun, rather than the sun orbiting the earth... The
signiﬁcant evidence comes from the inner planets: the period of
the ´s¯ıghrocca is the time taken by the planet to orbit the sun.

A pure heliocentrism is to be found in the following statement in the

Vis. n. u Pur¯an. a 2.8:

The sun is stationed for all time, in the middle of the day... The
rising and the setting of the sun being perpetually opposite to
each other, people speak of the rising of the sun where they see
it; and, where the sun disappears, there, to them, is his setting.
Of the sun, which is always in one and the same place, there is
neither setting nor rising.

It is not certain that ¯Aryabhat.a was the originator of the idea of the
rotation of the earth. It appears that the rotation of the earth is inherent
in the notion that the sun never sets that we ﬁnd in the Aitareya Br¯ahman. a
2.7:

In that they think of him
The [sun] never really sets or rises.
“He is setting,” having reached the end of the day, he inverts
himself; thus he makes evening below, day above. Again in that
they think of him “He is rising in the morning,” having reached
the end of the night he inverts himself; thus he makes day below,
night above. He never sets; indeed he never sets.

One way to visualize it is to see the universe as the hollow of a sphere so
that the inversion of the sun now shines the light on the world above ours.
But this is impossible since the sun does move across the sky during the day

31

and if the sun doesn’t set or rise it doesn’t move either. Clearly, the idea of
“inversion” denotes nothing but a movement of the earth.

By examining early Vedic sources the stages of the development of the
earliest astronomy become apparent. After the R. gvedic stage comes the
period of the Br¯ahman. as in which we place Lagadha’s astronomy. The third
stage is early Siddh¯antic and early Pur¯an. ic astronomy.

These three stages are summarized below:

1. R. gvedic astronomy (c. 4000? - 2000 BCE) Motion of the sun and the
moon, naks.atras, planet periods. The start of this stage is a matter
of surmise but we have clues such as Vedic myths which have been
interpreted to indicate astronomical events of the fourth millennium
BCE.

2. Astronomy of the Br¯ahman. as (2000 - 1000 BCE) Astronomy repre-
sented by means of geometric altars; non-uniform motion of the sun
and the moon; intercalation for the lunar year; “strings of wind joined
to the sun.” The Ved¯a ˙nga Jyotis. a of Lagadha must be seen as belong-
ing to the latter part of this stage. The VJ text that has come down
to us appears to be of a later era. Being the standard manual for de-
termination of the Vedic rites, Lagadha’s work must have served as a
“living” text where the language got modiﬁed to a later form.

3. Early Siddh¯antic and early Pur¯an. ic (1000 BCE - 500 CE) Here our
main sources are the ´Sulbas¯utras, the Mah¯abh¯arata, the early Pur¯an. as,
the S¯urya Siddh¯anta and other texts. Further development of the
´s¯ıghrocca and mandocca cycles, the concepts of kalpa. According to tra-
dition, there existed 18 early Siddh¯antas composed by S¯urya, Pit¯amaha,
Vy¯asa, Vasis.t.ha, Atri, Par¯a´sara, Ka´syapa, N¯arada, Garga, Mar¯ıci,
Manu, A ˙ngiras, Loma´sa (Romaka), Pauli´sa, Cyavana, Yavana, Bhr.gu,
and ´Saunaka. Of these, summaries of ﬁve are now available in the book
Pa˜ncasiddh¯antik¯a by Var¯ahamihira, and the S¯uryasiddh¯anta has come
down in a later, modiﬁed form.

It is signiﬁcant that the ﬁrst two stages and the beginning part of the
third stage are well prior to the rise of mathematical astronomy in Babylonia
and in Greece. The concepts of the ´s¯ıghrocca and mandocca cycles indicate

32

that the motion of the planets was taken to be fundamentally around the
sun, which, in turn, was taken to go around the earth.

The mandocca, in the case of the sun and the moon, is the apogee where
the angular motion is the slowest and in the case of the other planets it is the
aphelion point of the orbit. For the superior planets, the ´s¯ıghrocca coincides
with the mean place of the sun, and in the case of an inferior planet, it is an
imaginary point moving around the earth with the same angular velocity as
the angular velocity of the planet round the sun; its direction from the earth
is always parallel to the line joining the sun and the inferior planet.

The mandocca point serves to slow down the motion from the apogee to
the perigee and speed up the motion from the perigee to the apogee. It is a
representation of the non-uniform motion of the body, and so it can be seen
as a direct development of the idea of the non-uniform motion of the sun and
the moon.

The ´s¯ıghrocca maps the motion of the planet around the sun to the cor-
responding set of points around the earth. The sun, with its winds that hold
the solar system together, is, in turn, taken to go around the earth.

The antecedents of this system can be seen in the earlier texts. ´SB 4.1.5.16
describes the sun as pus. karam¯adityo, “the lotus of the sky.” ´SB 8.7.3.10 says:
The sun strings these worlds [the earth, the planets, the atmo-
sphere] to himself on a thread. This thread is the same as the
wind...

This suggests a central role to the sun in deﬁning the motions of the
planets and ideas such as these must have ultimately led to the theory of the
´s¯ıghrocca and the mandocca cycles.

The theory that the sun was the “lotus” [the central point] of the sky and
that it kept the worlds together by its “strings of wind” may have given rise
to the heliocentric tradition in India. The oﬀset of the sun’s orbit evolved
into the notion of mandocca and the motions of the planets around the sun
were transferred to the earth’s frame through the device of the ´s¯ıghrocca.

The Br¯ahman. as consider non-circular motion of the sun and, by implica-
tion, of the moon and that the sun is taken to be about 500 earth diameters
away from the earth. Analysis of R. gvedic astronomy has shown that planet
periods had been determined. Logically, the next step would be to charac-
terize the details of the departure from the circular motion for the planets.
In VaP 53.71 it is stated that the planets move in retrograde (vakra) motion.

33

Although the extant S¯urya Siddh¯anta (SS) is a late book, it preserves old

pre-Siddh¯antic ideas on the motions of the planets:

Forms of time, of invisible shape, stationed in the zodiac (bhagan. a),
called the conjunction (´s¯ıghrocca), apsis (mandocca), and node (p-
ata), are causes of the motion of the planets.

The planets, attached to these beings by cords of air, are drawn
away by them, with the right and lift hand, forward and back-
ward, according to nearness, toward their own place.

A wind, called provector (pravaha) impels them toward their own
apices (ucca); being drawn away forward and backward, they pro-
ceed by a varying motion.

The so-called apex (ucca), when in the half-orbit in front of the
planet, draws the planet forward; in like manner, when in the
half-orbit behind the planet, it draws it backward.

When the planets, drawn away by their apices, move forward in
their orbits, the amount of the motion so caused is called their
excess (dhana); when they move backward, it is called their deﬁ-
ciency (r. n. a). (SS 2.1-5)

The idea of the sizes was directly related to the deviation from the ecliptic.

The motions were deﬁned to be of eight diﬀerent kinds:

Owing to the greatness of its orb, the sun is drawn away only
a very little; the moon, by reason of the smallness of its orb, is
drawn away much more;

Mars and the rest, on account of their small size, are, by the
points of focus, called conjunction and apsis, drawn away very
far, being caused to vacillate exceedingly.

Hence the excess and deﬁciency of these latter is very great, ac-
cording to their rate of motion. Thus do the planets, attracted
by those beings, move in the ﬁrmament, carried on by the wind.

The motion of the planets is of eight kinds: retrograde (vakra),
somewhat retrograde (anuvakra), transverse (kut.ila), slow (manda),

34

very slow (mandatara), even (sama), very swift (´s¯ıghratara), and
swift (´s¯ıghra).

Of these, the very swift, the swift, the slow, the very slow, and
the even are forms of the motion called direct (r. ju). (SS 2.9-13)

The Early Siddh¯antas

The development of astronomical ideas from the Ved¯a ˙nga Jyotis. a onwards can
also by studied from the information in the Jaina books, the Mah¯abh¯arata
and the astronomical references in the general literature. For example, the
Artha´s¯astra uses a rule for telling time that is very similar to that in VJ.

The Pa˜ncasiddh¯antik¯a of Var¯ahamihira summarizes ﬁve early schools of
Siddh¯antic astronomy, namely Pait¯amaha, V¯asis.t.ha, Romaka, Pauli´sa, and
Saura manly with regard to the calculation of eclipses.

Owing to the names Romaka and Pauli´sa, it was assumed that the PS
mostly represents Babylonian and Greek material. But such a supposition
has no ﬁrm evidence to support to it. There also exists the possibility that
an India-inspired astronomy could have travelled to the West before the
Siddh¯antic period.

The use of cycles was current during the time of the ´Satapatha Br¯ahman. a.
A modular arithmetic, fundamental to Siddh¯antic astronomy, was in use in
Ved¯a ˙nga Jyotis. a. The 2,850 year luni-solar yuga of the Romaka Siddh¯anta
(PS 1.15) is derived from the 95-year Y¯aj˜navalkya cycle of the ´Satapatha
Br¯ahman. a, as it is equal to 30 × 95.

Summarizing, the basic features of the Siddh¯antic astronomy such as non-
circular orbits of the sun and the moon and the speciﬁc notions of “ropes of
wind” for the the planetary system were already present in the Br¯ahman. as
and they appear in a more developed form in the primitive epicycle theory of
the S¯urya Siddh¯anta. As the retrograde motions were recognized, the orbit
sizes were adjusted and made smaller.

10 Pre-Siddh¯antic Cosmology

Early texts consider light to be like a wind. Was any thought given to its
speed? Given the nature of the analogy, one would expect that this speed
was considered ﬁnite. The Pur¯an. as speak of the moving jyoti´scakra, “the

35

circle of light.” This analogy or that of the swift arrow let loose from the
bow in these accounts leaves ambiguous whether the circle of light is the sun
or its speeding rays.

We get a speciﬁc number that could refer to the speed of light in a late
text by S¯ayan. a (c. 1315-1387), prime minister in the court of Emperors
Bukka I of the Vijayanagar Empire and Vedic scholar. In his commentary
on the fourth verse of the hymn 1.50 of the R. gveda on the sun, he says

tath¯a ca smaryate yojan¯an¯am. sahasre dve dve ´sate dve ca yojane
ekena nimis. ¯ardhena kramam¯an. a

Thus it is remembered: [O sun] you who traverse 2,202 yojanas
in half a nimes. a.

The same statement occurs in the commentary on the Taittir¯ıya Br¯ahman. a
by Bhat.t.a Bh¯askara (10th century?), where it is said to be an old Pur¯an. ic
tradition.

The ﬁgure could refer to the actual motion of the sun but, as we will see
shortly, that is impossible. By examining parallels in the Pur¯an. ic literature,
we see it as an old tradition related to the speed of [sun]light.

The units of yojana and nimes. a are well known. The usual meaning of
yojana is about 9.1 miles as in the Artha´s¯astra where it is deﬁned as being
equal to 8,000 dhanu or “bow,” where each dhanu is taken to be about 6
feet. ¯Aryabhat.a, Brahmagupta and other astronomers used smaller yojanas
but such exceptional usage was conﬁned to the astronomers; we will see
that the Pur¯an. as also use a non-standard measure of yojana. As a scholar
of the Vedas and a non-astronomer, S¯ayan. a would be expected to use the
“standard” Artha´s¯astra units.

The measures of time are thus deﬁned in the Pur¯an. as:

15 nimes.a = 1 k¯as.t.h¯a
30 k¯as.t.h¯a = 1 kal¯a
30 kal¯a = 1 muh¯urta

30 muh¯urta = 1 day-and-night

A nimes.a is therefore equal to 16

75 seconds.

36

When this statement is converted into modern units, it does come very

close to the correct ﬁgure of 186,000 miles per second!

Such an early knowledge of this number doesn’t sound credible because
the speed of light was determined only in 1675 by Roemer who looked at the
diﬀerence in the times that light from Io, one of the moons of Jupiter, takes
to reach the earth based on whether it is on the near side of Jupiter or the
far side. Until then light was taken to travel with inﬁnite velocity. There
is no record of any optical experiments that could have been performed in
India before the modern period to measure the speed of light.

Maybe S¯ayan. a’s ﬁgure refers to the speed of the sun in its supposed orbit
around the earth. But that places the orbit of the sun at a distance of over
2,550 million miles. The correct value is only 93 million miles and until the
time of Roemer the distance to the sun used to be taken to be less than 4
million miles. The Indian astronomical texts place the sun only about half
a million yojanas from the earth. We show that this ﬁgure is connected
to Pur¯an. ic cosmology and, therefore, it belongs, logically, to the period of
pre-Siddh¯antic astronomy.

Physical ideas in early literature

The philosophical schools of S¯am. khya and Vai´ses.ika tell us about the old
ideas on light. According to S¯am. khya, light is one of the ﬁve fundamental
“subtle” elements (tanm¯atra) out of which emerge the gross elements. The
atomicity of these elements is not speciﬁcally mentioned and it appears that
they were actually taken to be continuous.

On the other hand, Vai´ses.ika is an atomic theory of the physical world on
the nonatomic ground of ether, space and time. The basic atoms are those of
earth (pr. thiv¯ı), water (¯apas), ﬁre (tejas), and air (v¯ayu), that should not be
confused with the ordinary meaning of these terms. These atoms are taken to
form binary molecules that combine further to form larger molecules. Motion
is deﬁned in terms of the movement of the physical atoms and it appears that
it is taken to be non-instantaneous.

Light rays are taken to be a stream of high velocity of tejas atoms. The
particles of light can exhibit diﬀerent characteristics depending on the speed
and the arrangements of the tejas atoms.

Although there existed several traditions of astronomy in India, only
the mathematical astronomy of the Siddh¯antas has been properly examined.

37

Some of the information of the non-Siddh¯antic astronomical systems is pre-
served in the Pur¯an. as.

The Pur¯an. ic astronomy is cryptic, and since the Pur¯an. as are encyclopaedic
texts, with several layers of writing, presumably by diﬀerent authors, there
are inconsistencies in the material. Sometimes, speculative and the empirical
ideas are so intertwined that without care the material can appear meaning-
less. The Pur¯an. ic geography is quite fanciful and this ﬁnds parallels in its
astronomy as well.

We can begin the process of understanding Pur¯an. ic astronomy by consid-
ering its main features, such as the size of the solar system and the motion
of the sun. But before we do so, we will speak brieﬂy of the notions in the
Siddh¯antas.

¯Aryabhat.a in his ¯Aryabhat.¯ıya (AA) deals with the question of the size of
the universe. He deﬁnes a yojana to be 8,000 nr. , where a nr. is the height
of a man; this makes his yojana (ya) approximately 7.5 miles. Or ys ≈ 6
5ya,
where ys is the standard Artha´s¯astra yojana. AA 1.6 states that the orbit
of the sun is 2,887,666.8 yojanas and that of the sky is 12,474,720,576,000
yojanas.

There is no mention by ¯Aryabhat.a of a speed of light. But the range
of light particles is taken to be ﬁnite, so it must have been assumed that
the particles in the “observational universe” do not penetrate to the regions
beyond the “orbit of the sky.” This must have been seen in the analogy of
the gravitational pull of the matter just as other particles fall back on the
earth after reaching a certain height.

The orbit of the sky is 4.32 × 106 greater than the orbit of the sun. It is

clear that this enlargement was inspired by cosmological ideas.

The diameters of the earth, the sun, and the moon are taken to be 1,050,
4,410 and 315 yojanas, respectively. Furthermore, AA 1.6 implies the dis-
tance to the sun, Rs, to be 459,585 yojanas, and that to the moon, Rm,
as 34,377 yojanas. These distances are in the correct proportion related to
their assumed sizes given that the distances are approximately 108 times the
corresponding diameters.

Converted to the standard Artha´s¯astra units, the diameters of the earth
and the sun are about 875 and 3,675 yojanas, and the distance to the sun is
around 0.383 million yojanas.

38

Pur¯an. ic cosmology
The Pur¯an. ic material is closer to the knowledge of the Vedic times. Here
we speciﬁcally consider the V¯ayu Pur¯an. a (VaP), Vis. n. u Pur¯an. a (ViP), and
Matsya Pur¯an. a (MP). VaP and ViP are generally believed to be amongst
the earliest Pur¯an. as and at least 1,500 years old. Their astronomy is prior
to the Siddh¯antic astronomy of ¯Aryabhat.a and his successors.

The Pur¯an. as instruct through myths and this mythmaking can be seen in
their approach to astronomy also. For example, they speak of seven under-
ground worlds below the orbital plane of the planets and of seven “continents”
encircling the earth. One has to take care to separate this imagery, that par-
allels the conception of the seven centres of the human’s psycho-somatic body,
from the underlying cosmology of the Pur¯an. as that is their primary concern
in their jyotis. a chapters. The idea of seven regions of the universe is present
in the R. gveda 1.22.16-21 where the sun’s stride is described as saptadh¯aman,
or taking place in seven regions.

The diﬀerent Pur¯an. as appear to reproduce the same cosmological ma-
terial. There are some minor diﬀerences in ﬁgures that may be a result of
wrong copying by scribes who did not understand the material. Here we
mainly follow ViP.

ViP 2.8 describes the sun to be 9,000 yojanas in length and to be con-
nected by an axle that is 15.7×106 yojanas long to the M¯anasa mountain and
another axle 45,500 yojanas long connected to the pole star. The distance of
15.7 million yojanas between the earth and the sun is much greater than the
distance of 0.38 or 0.4375 million yojanas that we ﬁnd in the Siddh¯antas and
other early books. This greater distance is stated without a corresponding
change in the diameter of the sun.

Elsewhere, in VaP 50, it is stated that the sun covers 3.15 million yojanas
in a muh¯urta. This means that the distance covered in a day are 94.5 million
yojanas. MP 124 gives the same ﬁgure. This is in agreement with the view
that the sun is 15.7 million yojanas away from the earth. The speciﬁc speed
given here, translates to 116.67 yojanas per half-nimes.a.

The size of the universe is described in two diﬀerent ways, through the
“island-continents” and through heavenly bodies. The geography of the
Pur¯an. as describes a central continent, Jambu, surrounded by alternating
bands of ocean and land. The seven island-continents of Jambu, Plaks.a,
´S¯almala, Ku´sa, Kraunca, ´S¯aka, and Pus.kara are encompassed, successively,

39

by seven oceans; and each ocean and continent is, respectively, of twice the
extent of that which precedes it. The universe is seen as a sphere of size 500
million yojanas.

The continents are imaginary regions and they should not be confused
with the continents on the earth. Only certain part of the innermost planet,
Jambu, that deal with India have parallels with real geography.

The inner continent is taken to be 16,000 yojanas as the base of the
world axis. In opposition to the interpretation by earlier commentators, who
took the increase in dimension by a factor of two is only across the seven
“continents,” we take it to apply to the “oceans” as well. At the end of the
seven island-continents is a region that is twice the preceding region. Further
on, is the Lok¯aloka mountain, 10,000 yojanas in breadth, that marks the end
of our universe.

Assume that the size of the Jambu is J yojana, then the size of the

universe is:

Or,

U = J(1+2+22+23+24+25+26+27+28+29+210+211+212+213+214)+20, 000
(1)

U = 32, 767J + 20, 000 yojanas

(2)

If U is 500 million yojanas, then J should be about 15,260 yojanas. The
round ﬁgure of 16,000 is mentioned as the width of the base of the Meru,
the world axis, at the surface of the earth. This appears to support our
interpretation.

Note that the whole description of the Pur¯an. ic cosmology had been
thought to be inconsistent because an erroneous interpretation of the in-
crease in the sizes of the “continents” had been used.

When considered in juxtaposition with the preceding numbers, the geog-
raphy of concentric continents is a representation of the plane of the earth’s
rotation, with each new continent as the orbit of the next “planet”.

The planetary model in the Pur¯an. as is diﬀerent from that in the Siddh¯antas.

Here the moon as well as the planets are in orbits higher than the sun. Orig-
inally, this supposition for the moon may have represented the fact that it
goes higher than the sun in its orbit. Given that the moon’s inclination is 5◦
to the ecliptic, its declination can be 28.5◦ compared to the sun’s maximum

40

declination of ±23.5◦. This “higher” position must have been, at some stage,
represented literally by a higher orbit. To make sense with the observational
reality, it became necessary for the moon is taken to be twice as large as the
sun. That this is a jumbling up of two diﬀerent theories is clear from the
fact that the planets are listed in the correct sequence determined by their
sidereal periods.

The distances of the planetary orbits beyond the sun are as follows:

Table 4: From the earth to the Pole-star

Interval I
Earth to Sun
Sun to Moon
Moon to Asterisms
Asterisms to Mercury
Mercury to Venus
Venus to Mars
Mars to Jupiter
Jupiter to Saturn
Saturn to Ursa Major
Ursa Major to Pole-star
Sub-total

yojanas
15,700,000
100,000
100,000
200,000
200,000
200,000
200,000
200,000
100,000
100,000
17,100,000

Table 5: From Pole-star to Satyaloka

Interval II
Pole-star to Maharloka
Maharloka to Janaloka
Janaloka to Tapoloka
Tapoloka to Satyaloka
Grand Total

yojanas
10,000,000
20,000,000
40,000,000
120,000,000
207,100,000

Further spheres are postulated beyond the pole-star. These are the Ma-
harloka, the Janaloka, the Tapoloka, and the Satyaloka. Their distances are
as follows:

Since the last ﬁgure is the distance from the earth, the total diameter

41

of the universe is 414.2 million yojanas, not including the dimensions of the
various heavenly bodies and lokas. The inclusion of these may be expected to
bring this calculation in line with the ﬁgure of 500 million yojanas mentioned
earlier.

Beyond the universe lies the limitless pradh¯ana that has within it countless

other universes.

Pur¯an. ic cosmology views the universe as going through cycles of creation
and destruction of 8.64 billion years. The consideration of a universe of
enormous size must have been inspired by a supposition of enormous age.

Reconciling Pur¯an. ic and Standard Yojanas
It is clear that the Pur¯an. ic yojana (yp) are diﬀerent from the Artha´s¯astra
yojana (ys). To ﬁnd the conversion factor, we equate the distances to the
sun.

0.4375 × 106 ys = 15.7 × 106 yp

(3)

In other words,

1 ys ≈ 36 yp

(4)
The diameter of the earth should now be about 875 × 36 ≈ 31, 500 yp.
Perhaps, this was taken to be 32,000 yp, twice the size of Meru. This under-
standing is conﬁrmed by the statements in the Pur¯an. as. For example, MP
126 says that the size of Bh¯aratavars.a (India) is 9,000 yp, which is roughly
correct.

We conclude that the kernel of the Pur¯an. ic system is consistent with the
Siddh¯antas. The misunderstanding of it arose because attention was not paid
to their diﬀerent units of distance.

Speed of the sun

Now that we have a Pur¯an. ic context, the statement that the sun has the
speed of 4,404 yojanas per nimes.a can be examined.

We cannot be absolutely certain what yojanas did S¯ayan. a have in mind:
standard, or Pur¯an. ic. But either way it is clear from the summary of Pur¯an. ic
cosmology that this speed could not be the speed of the sun. At the distance

42

of 15.7 million yojanas, the sun’s speed is only 121.78 yojanas (yp) per half-
nimes.a. Or if we use the the ﬁgure from VaP, it is 116.67. Converted into
the standard yojanas, this number is only 3.24 ys per half-nimes.a.

S¯ayan. a’s speed is about 18 times greater than the supposed speed of the
sun in yp and 2 × 182 greater than the speed in ys. So either way, a larger
number with a deﬁnite relationship to the actual speed of the sun was chosen
for the speed of light.

The Pur¯an. ic size of the universe is 13 to 16 times greater than the orbit
of the sun, not counting the actual sizes of the various heavenly bodies.
Perhaps, the size was taken to be 18 times greater than the sun’s orbit. It
seems reasonable to assume, then, that if the radius of the universe was taken
to be about 282 million yojanas, a speed was postulated for light so that it
could circle the farthest path in the universe within one day. This was the
physical principle at the basis of the Pur¯an. ic cosmology.

We have seen that the astronomical numbers in the Pur¯an. as are much
more consistent amongst themselves, and with the generally accepted sizes
of the solar orbit, than has been hitherto assumed. The Pur¯an. ic geography
must not be taken literally.

We have also shown that the S¯ayan. a’s ﬁgure of 2,202 yojanas per half-
nimes.a is consistent with Pur¯an. ic cosmology where the size of “our universe”
is a function of the speed of light. This size represents the space that can be
spanned by light in one day.

It is quite certain that the ﬁgure for speed was obtained either by this
argument or it was obtained by taking the postulated speed of the sun in the
Pur¯an. as and multiplying that by 18, or by multiplying the speed in standard
yojanas by 2 × 182. We do know that 18 is a sacred number in the Pur¯an. as,
and the fact that multiplication with this special number gave a ﬁgure that
was in accord with the spanning of light in the universe in one day must have
given it a special signiﬁcance.

Is it possible that the number 2,202 arose because of a mistake of multi-
plication by 18 rather than a corresponding division (by 36) to reduce the sun
speed to standard yojanas? The answer to that must be “no” because such a
mistake is too egregious. Furthermore, S¯ayan. a’s own brother M¯adhava was a
distinguished astronomer and the incorrectness of this ﬁgure for the accepted
speed of the sun would have been obvious to him.

If S¯ayan. a’s ﬁgure was derived from a postulated size of the universe,
how was that huge size, so central to all Indian thought, arrived at? A

43

possible explanation is that the physical size of the universe was taken to
parallel the estimates of its age. These age-estimates were made larger and
larger to postulate a time when the periods of all the heavenly bodies were
synchronized. The great numbers in the Pur¯an. as suggest that the concepts of
mah¯ayuga and kalpa must have had an old pedigree and they can be viewed
as generalizations of the notion of yuga.

The speed of light was taken to be 2 × 182 greater than the speed of
the sun in standard yojanas so that light can travel the entire postulated
size of the universe in one day. It is a lucky chance that the ﬁnal number
turned out to be exactly equal to the true speed. This speed of light must be
considered the most astonishing “blind hit” in the history of science! But it
is consistent with Pur¯an. ic model of the cosmos and it is, in most likelihood,
a pre- ¯Aryabhat.a ﬁgure.

11 The Later Siddh¯antic Period

This period begins with ¯Aryabhat.a (born 476 CE) who established two sys-
tems by his works ¯Aryabhat.¯ıya and ¯Aryabhat.asiddh¯anta. Of these, the ﬁrst
has exercised great inﬂuence, especially in South India, while the second is
lost but elements of it are known through quotations in other texts and in
criticism. These two constitute the ¯Aryapaks. a and the ¯Ardhar¯atrikapaks. a,
respectively. The S¯uryasiddh¯anta, which has come down to us in a later
recension, is based primarily according to ¯Ardhar¯atrikapaks. a.

The Br¯ahma-sphut.a-siddh¯anta of Brahmagupta (born 598 CE) has been
extremely inﬂuential in north and west India and in the Arabic world, through
its translation called Sindhind. A rival to the ¯Aryabhat.a systems, this is also
called the Brahmapaks. a.

The later improvements to these Siddh¯antas required b¯ıja-corrections. A
later text by Lalla (8th-9th cent.) is based on the ¯Ardhar¯atrikapaks. a but it
also incorporates ideas from the Brahmapaks. a.

The Siddh¯anta-´Siroman. i of Bh¯askara II (c.1150) is the most comprehen-
sive of the Indian Siddh¯antas. It is based on the Brahmapaks.a. The epicyclic-
eccentric theories are further developed to account for the motions of the
planets.

N¯ılakant.ha Somay¯aji (1444-1550) corrects the ¯Aryapaks. a constants in his
In a recent review (Ramasubra-

Siddh¯anta-darpan. a and Tantrasam. graha.

44

manian et al, 1994), it has been argued that N¯ılakant.ha’s revision of the
planetary model for the interior planets Mercury and Venus led to a better
equation of the center for “these planets than was available either in the ear-
lier Indian works or in the Islamic or European traditions of astronomy till
the work of Kepler, which was to come more than a hundred years later.”

12 Concluding Remarks

This essay summarizes the essential points of the emerging new understand-
ing of the rise and development of Indian astronomy. We have traced the
gradual development of many ideas of astronomy in the pre-Siddh¯antic pe-
riod, but we are not in a position to completely discount all outside inﬂuences
especially because considerable interaction existed in the ancient world and
ideas must have travelled in several directions.

Further evidence in support of the ﬂow of ideas from India to the West
has recently become clear. Recent studies of Celtic material indicate that a
calendar similar to the 5-year yuga of VJ with two intercalary months was
current amongst the Druids (Ellis, 1994:230-231). The connections between
the Vedic and the Druidic material must predate the rise of the astronomy
in Mesopotamia, because otherwise the more direct Mesopotamian theories
would have won out against the complex Vedic system. The Druids also
appear to have counted in months of 27 days similar to the conjoining of
the moon with the naks.atras of Vedic astronomy. This supports the idea of
transmission from India into Europe. This idea is further supported by a
new analysis of a R. gvedic hymn on Vena (Kak, 1998c) which suggests that
the seed ideas of the Venus mythologies of the Mesopotamians, the Greeks,
and the later Pur¯an. ic period are all present in the Vedic texts.

A ﬁgure from the neolithic/chalcolithic period of Indian art (5000 BCE ?)
(Kak, 1998a) appears to be the prototype of the “Gilgamesh” or “hero” motif
with a god or goddess holding back two beasts on either side. The beasts
are without their front ends, so clearly the depiction is symbolic. David
Napier (1986) has argued for a transmission of Indian motifs into Greece in
the second millennium BCE. As another example consider the Gundestrup
cauldron, found in Denmark a hundred years ago. This silver bowl has been
dated to around the middle of the 2nd century BCE. The iconography is
strikingly Indic as clear from the elephant (totally out of context in Europe)

45

with the goddess and the yogic ﬁgure (Taylor, 1992). The unicorn ﬁgure of
European mythology appears to be based on the Indian conception of the
unicorn seen in the many ﬁne representations of it in Harappan art and also
its celebration in the Vedic and Pur¯an. ic texts as eka´sr. ˙nga.

According to Seidenberg’s analysis (Seidenberg, 1962, 1978) Indian ge-
ometry and mathematics predate Babylonian and Greek mathematics.
It
is likely that the cultural processes that were responsible for the spread of
Indian mathematics and art were also responsible for the spread of Indian
astronomy during the pre-Siddh¯antic period. Doubtless, there existed trans-
mission of Western (Babylonian and Greek) ideas to India as well.

The most important conclusion of the new ﬁndings is that there existed
a much greater traﬃc of ideas in all directions in the ancient world than has
hitherto been supposed.

46

Abbreviations

¯Apastamba ´Sulbas¯utra
Atharvaveda

Aitareya ¯Aran. yaka
AA
Aitareya Br¯ahman. a
AB
ABA ¯Aryabhat.¯ıya of ¯Aryabhat.a
ASS
AV
BSS Baudh¯ayana ´Sulbas¯utra
Br.had¯aran. yaka Upanis.ad
BU
CU
Ch¯andogya Upanis.ad
Kaus.¯ıtaki Brahman. a
KB
MP Matsya Pur¯an. a
PB
PS
RV
´SB
SS
´SU
TB
TS
VaP V¯ayu Pur¯an. a
Vis.n. u Pur¯an. a
ViP
Ved¯a ˙nga Jyotis.a
VJ

Pa˜ncavim. ´sa Brahman. a
Pa˜ncasiddh¯antik¯a
R. gveda
´Satapatha Br¯ahman. a
S¯urya Siddh¯anta
´Svet¯a´svatara Upanis.ad
Taittir¯ıya Br¯ahman. a
Taittir¯ıya Sam. hit¯a

Bibliography

Aaboe, A. Scientiﬁc astronomy in antiquity. Phil, Trans. Roy. Soc. Lond.

A 276: 21-42, 1974.

Ashfaque, S.M. “Primitive astronomy in the Indus civilization.’

In Old
Problems and New Perspectives in the Archaeology of South Asia, ed.
J.M. Kenoyer, 207-215, Madison, 1992.

Billard, Roger. L’astronomie Indienne. Paris: ’Ecole fran¸caise d’Extrˆeme-

Burgess, E. (tr.) The S¯urya Siddh¯anta. Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass, 1989

Orient, 1971.

(1860).

47

Ellis, Peter B. The Druids. London: Constable & Company, 1994.

Feuerstein, G., S. Kak and D. Frawley. In Search of the Cradle of Civiliza-

tion. Wheaton: Quest Books, 1995.

Francfort, H.-P. Evidence for Harappan irrigation system in Haryana and

Rajasthan. Eastern Anthropologist 45: 87-103, 1992.

Frawley, David. “Planets in the Vedic literature.” Indian Journal of History

of Science. 29: 495-506, 1994.

Issue devoted to history of Indian astronomy. Indian Journal of History of

Science, 20, 1985.

Kak, Subhash. “Astronomy in the Vedic altars and the R. gveda.” Mankind

Quarterly 33: 43-55, 1992.

Kak, Subhash, and David Frawley. “Further observations on the Rigvedic

code.” Mankind Quarterly 33: 163-170, 1992.

Kak, Subhash. “Astronomy in ´Satapatha Br¯ahman. a.” Indian Journal of

History of Science 28: 15-34, 1993.

Kak, Subhash. “Astronomy of the Vedic altars.” Vistas in Astronomy 36:

117-140, 1993.

Kak, Subhash. “The structure of the R. gveda.” Indian Journal of History

of Science 28: 71-79, 1993.

Kak, Subhash. “Planetary periods from the Rigvedic code.” Mankind

Quarterly 33: 433-442, 1993.

Kak, Subhash. “The Astronomical Code of the Rigveda.” Puratattva: Bul-

letin of the Indian Archaeological Society 25: 1-30, 1994/5.

Kak, Subhash. The Astronomical Code of the R. gveda. New Delhi: Aditya,

1994.

Kak, Subhash. “The astronomy of the age of geometric altars.” Quarterly

Journal of the Royal Astronomical Society 36: 385-396, 1995.

48

Kak, Subhash. “From Vedic science to Ved¯anta.” The Adyar Library Bul-

letin 59: 1-36, 1995.

Kak, Subhash. “Knowledge of planets in the third millennium B.C.” Quar-
terly Journal of the Royal Astronomical Society. 37: 709-715, 1996.

Kak, Subhash. “Archaeoastronomy and literature.” Current Science 73:

624-627, 1997.

Kak, Subhash. ‘Mind, immortality and art.’ Presented at the International
Seminar on Mind, Man and Mask, Indira Gandhi National Centre for
the Arts, New Delhi, Feb 24-28, 1998a.

Kak, Subhash. “Astronomy and its role in Vedic culture.” Chapter 23 in
Science and Civilization in India, Vol. 1, The Dawn of Indian Civi-
lization, Part 1, edited by G.C. Pande, Oxford University Press, Delhi,
1998b, pp. 507-524.

Kak, Subhash. “Vena, Veda, Venus.” Indian Journal of History of Science

33: 25-30, 1998c.

33: 31-36, 1998d.

Kak, Subhash. “S¯ayan. a’s astronomy.” Indian Journal of History of Science

Kak, Subhash. “Early theories on the distance to the sun.’Indian Journal

of History of Science 33: 93-100, 1998e.

Kak, Subhash. “The orbit of the sun in the Br¯ahman. as.” Indian Journal

of History of Science 33: 175-191, 1998f.

Lal, B.B. The Earliest Civilization of South Asia. New Delhi: Aryan Inter-

national, 1997.

Napier, A. David. Masks, Transformation, and Paradox. Berkeley: Univer-

sity of California Press, 1986.

Pandya, H., S. Dikshit, and M.N. Kansara, eds. Issues in Vedic Astronomy

and Astrology. New Delhi: Rashtriya Veda Vidya Pratishthan, 1992.

Pingree, David. “The recovery of early Greek astronomy from India.” Jour-

nal for the History of Astronomy 7: 109-123, 1976.

49

Pingree, David. “Two treatises on Indian astronomy.” Journal for the

History of Astronomy 11: 58-62, 1980.

Pingree, David. “History of mathematical astronomy in India.” In Dictio-
nary of Scientiﬁc Biography, C.S. Gillespie, ed., 533-633. New York:
Charles Scribner’s Sons, 1981.

Ramasubramanian, K., M.D. Srinivas, and M.S. Sriram. “Modiﬁcation of
the earlier Indian planetary theory by the Kerala astronomers (c. 1500
AD) and the implied heliocentric picture of planetary motion.” Current
Science 66: 784-790, 1994.

de Santillana, G. and von Dechend, H. Hamlet’s Mill: An Essay on Myth

and the Frame of Time. Gambit, Boston, 1969.

Sarma, K.V. A History of the Kerala School of Hindu Astronomy. Hoshiarpur:

Vishveshvaranand Institute, 1972.

Sarma, K.V. “A survey of source materials.” Indian Journal of History of

Science 20: 1-20, 1985.

Sastry, T.S. Kuppanna. Ved¯a ˙nga Jyotis. a of Lagadha. New Delhi: Indian

National Science Academy, 1985.

Seidenberg, A. “The origin of geometry.” Archive for History of Exact

Sciences. 1: 488-527, 1962.

Seidenberg, A. “The origin of mathematics.” Archive for History of Exact

Sciences. 18: 301-342, 1978.

Sengupta, P.C. Ancient Indian Chronology. Calcutta: University of Cal-

cutta Press, 1947.

Shaﬀer, J. and D.L. Lichtenstein. “The concept of cultural tradition and
paleoethnicity in South Asian archaeology.” In The Indo-Aryans of
South Asia, G. Erdosy. ed. Berlin: Walter de Gruyter, 1995.

Shukla, Kripa Shankar. ¯Aryabhat.a: Indian Mathematician and Astronomer.

New Delhi: Indian National Science Academy, 1976.

50

Taylor, Timothy. “The Gundestrup cauldron.” Scientiﬁc American 266 (3),

84-89, 1992.

garh, 1985.

Thurston, H., Early Astronomy. New York: Springer-Verlag, 1994.

Vidy¯ala ˙nk¯ara, V. ´Satapatha Br¯ahman. astha Agnicayana Sam¯ıks.¯a. Bahal-

van der Waerden, B.L. “The earliest form of the epicycle theory.” Journal

for the History of Astronomy 5: 175-185, 1974.

Wakankar, Vishnu S. “Rock painting in India.” In Rock Art in the Old

World, ed. M. Lorblanchet, 319-336. New Delhi, 1992.

51

12.1 Figure captions

Figure 1. The falcon altar which represented the days in the year
Figure 2. The traditional representation of the naks.atras
Figure 3. The Indian zodaic along with the signs for the sun, ﬁve planets,

the moon and its ascending and descending nodes

Figure 4. The asymmetric orbit of the sun around the earth

52

