1
0
0
2
 
n
a
J
 
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
t
s
i
h
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
0
1
0
1
0
1
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

A Natural Concept of Image in the Physics of
fr. Alonso de la Veracruz.

Armando Barra˜n´on. ∗

December 10, 2000

Abstract

Alonso de la Veracruz conducted a physical study of image, regarding
the activities of Soul in which image is produced, as organic operations.
This research was particularly important since, at that time, image was
systematically used to propagate the European culture in New Spain.
Besides, Alonso uses the visual radius to criticize the magical attitude
popular in Renaissance, denying the far sight and fascinations abilities
attributed to witches. Also, Alonso Guti´errez applies the Aristotelian
physics to deny the healing powers attributed to the kings of France and
England, secularizing this way the gallic monarchies, and several other
superstitions of that time. This way, the physics of image developed by
Alonso can be considered as close to the rationalism of Descartes inasmuch
as Guti´errez criticizes the magical view of Renaissance and introduces
geometrical elements to elucidate physical problems.

1 Introduction

The Studium Generale at Tiripit´ıo was founded in New Spain by the Augus-
tinian order in 1540, as a school devoted to the Scholastic instruction of the
monastic neophytes. In this academic institution fray Alonso, who received the
sacred orders in Veracruz, served as Lecturer on Major Sciences and Theol-
ogy, teaching the future Philosophy instructors of New Spain. At the convent
of Tac´ambaro, where Guti´errez was named Provincial in 1545, Alonso taught
Minor and Major Sciences to novices. His treatises on Dialectic and P hysics
were written in the period of time comprised between 1554 and 1557 [1]. Alonso
belongs to the group of rigid scholastics lead by his mentor Vitoria, inﬂuenced
by the Renaissance and his works were written as draft notes for his lectures
just as Aristotle did for the ﬁrst time. Although Alonso shares with the rest of
these Scholastic philosophers an abusive use of the magister dixit and a poor
mastery of argument, Guti´errez introduces a Nature’s conception related to his
∗Departamento de Ciencias B´asicas, Universidad Aut´onoma Metropolitana-A, M´exico,

D.F. 02000

1

Natural Concept of Image in the Physics of fr. Alonso de la Veracruz.

2

vibrant experience of the New World and important adaptations to comprise
the Mesoamerican rationality.

There were two general kinds of approach to knowledge for the Renaissance
men. The ﬁrst named pathetic, sought personal fusion with the Universe or God
just like the mystic Cusano and the hermetic Ficino did. And the other was the
distant movement which concentrated on the diﬀerences and eﬀects between the
subject and the object, having Leonardo and Valla as conspicuous exponents
[7]. In this categorization, Alonso belongs to the distant attitude in as much as
he ﬁnds a natural explanation for every event and only in very extreme cases
considers the inﬂuence of God.

In this framework, Alonso wrote his P hysica Speculatio, dealing with the
native system of beliefs and the magical conception peculiar to the Renaissance
Age. As long as Guti´errez introduces physical and geometrical elements to
enlighten several superstitions, his contribution can be considered as a step
forward into the Rationalism trend that lead to Modern Science. Moreover,
this critical attitude to the royal magical power can be explained as a remnant
of the Gregorian movement that secularized the European monarchies in the
last stage of the Middle Ages.

2 Physics and Soul in the Scholastic system.

In the Scholastic system the problems related to change, movement and
transformation of living things were considered as part of Physics [2] since it was
devoted to obtain the forms or principles behind the activities of the living things
and corporeal substances. In this sense, the activities of Soul were regarded as
a physical subject, as long as they are related to organic operations [3]: “ tamen
de intellectu, seu de anima intellectiva, in quantum forma est corporis, non
creatur, nisi in corpore, et cum corpore, constituit rem naturalem: physici est
consideratio”.

Aristotle considers soul as the actuality of the body and an important ele-
ment for living beings, rejecting the dualist approach of Plato and leaving the
question of separability of soul and body as an open question (De Anima II
1, 412a17; II 2, 414a1-2). Aristotle regards perception as a deﬁnitional faculty
for animal beings, ﬁtted for sensible qualities instead of intelligible forms and
therefore distinguished from mind (De Anima II 4, 415a20-21). This way Aris-
totle’s hylomorphism, where perception is related to accidental forms and soul
is an essential form, leads to the consideration of soul as a physical problem (De
Sensu 1, 436b10-12).

This is clearly stated by Averroes, who tried to purify Aristotle’s physics
of any neoplatonic inﬂuence, in his De Anima, 17th Commentary, where Soul
is considered as a natural being: “ quia anima humana est de numero entium
naturalium” [4] . Averroes regards the agent and material intellects as immortal
and one for every men. Introduces a new corruptible “ passive intellect”
(imagination) that acts on images (phantasmata) in order to obtain universal
concepts and to impress them in the separated possible intellect.

Natural Concept of Image in the Physics of fr. Alonso de la Veracruz.

3

However, for the Aristotelian neoplatonic philosopher Temistius, named by
his colleagues eloquentiae rex, Aristotle’s De Anima is a mathematical pro-
duction lying between the natural Philosophy and Metaphysics: “ quod liber
de anima est medius inter naturalem, & metaphysicam scientiam: et sic mathe-
maticus” [5]. Temistius considers that, whereas separable from soul, agent and
passive intellects belong to each person’s soul, a perspective shared by Aquinas
even when it contradicts the Aristotleian principle of passive mind corruptibil-
ity. The scholastic system considers active intellect ( intellectus agens or nous
poiˆetikos ) as the source of the representations of all things since it imprints
their intelligible impressions on the potential intelect ( intellectus possibilis or
nous dunatos ). Temistius calls this action of the agent intellect on possible
intellect as “ speculative intellect ”, since at this moment a concept is formed
in the human thought.

And Alexander of Afrodisias, perhaps the most authoritative proselyte of
Aristotle, considers the study of Soul as a part of Natural Philosophy. In his
view, Soul is corruptible since it is the form of the body. The material intellect,
considered by him a passive intellectual faculty, resides in the soul and dies
with the body although the agent intellect lies outside of it. There is a material
intellect for each person and only one divine agent intellect that is used by every
one.

Following Alonso de la Veracruz, Metaphysics is devoted to the study of
isolated, immaterial, self sstaining and incorporeal substances. Since the Soul
does not ﬁt into this class of substances, Alonso considers that it will not be
studied by Metaphysics. For rational Soul attached to a body forms a natural
body and is the ﬁrst organic potential act received by life, namely of a man
composed of natural elements, Alonso concludes that knowledge of Soul belongs
to Natural Philosophy [6]: “ in quantum forma est corporis physici organici, ad
naturalem philosophia pertinet directe.”

3 Image and Soul physics.

In the Sixteenth century, images ( phantasmata ) are considered as a product of
human Soul and, in regard to their relation with reality, as a physical problem.
Image was also used by the Spaniards to solve the communicational problem
involved in evangelizing. The Aristotelian conception on the rational control
of the images produced by the brain was used by the Spaniards to explain
the European cosmology. In New Spain this was made by the tlacuilos of the
Painting School at Tlatelolco, nearby the Colegio de Santiago, where Indians
were instructed in reading, writing, music, latin, rethoric, logic, philosophy and
native medicine [8].

Malinalco convent frescos seem to be a product of this tlacuilos [9] since they
trained the authors of these painting and supervised these productions [10] as
written by chronicler Grijalva [11]. They clearly show the fundamental symbols
of solar Aztec religion and use them to translate the European paradise concept
in terms of the shaman cultural complex [13].

Natural Concept of Image in the Physics of fr. Alonso de la Veracruz.

4

In the ﬁrst stages mimic was used by friars until they attained a good knowl-
edge of native languages. These theatre was substituted by the use of lienzos,
namely pieces of fabric with drawings of the most important evangelic themes
that were explained with the help of native translators [14] .

This way the so called “war of images”, characteristic to the spiritual con-
quer of Mexico, was conducted on the basis of a cerebral function understood
as organic and therefore subject to control of human action [15]. These ideo-
logical diﬀusion techniques were condensed in the important treatise Rethorica
christiana written by fray Diego Valad´es, son of a Spaniard conqueror possi-
bly married with a tlaxcalteca woman [16]. Even when Christendom always
used images as an ideology diﬀusion instrument both in Byzantine and roman
versions, friar Diego Valades claimed Franciscan authorship in the use of these
mnemonic lienzos for indigenous instruction:

“ Though many others have made similar paintings (since it is not diﬃcult
to widen what once was invented) we are not looking for vulgar admiration as
long as we never wrote such thing.”

European image assimilation by tlacuilos is notorious in the graphical
interpretations of the European engravings. Native and European symbols
are mixed creating new imaginary entities, just as happened with the infer-
nal tameme found in Valad´es Rethorica cristiana. This image portrays an
Indian lifter together with other demons in the engraving T ormentos a los
P ecadores (Sinners Torment) and was used to persuade neophytes of remaining
in Christian purity.

4 Physical causes and the wonderful things.

In his P hysicae Speculatione, fray Alonso considers natural events with a Re-
naissance approach, excelling the medieval conception where world was
separated in supralunar and sublunar, artiﬁcial and natural, natural and vio-
lent. Aristotelian natural conception considered instead the equation : f orm =
f inality, and gave an integral explanation of every phenomena as part of an
integral world that Renaissance men considered as subject to modiﬁcations by
human will [17]. Fray Alonso regards natural movement of heavens ignoring any
intrinsic heaven Soul [18] :

“ In third place, considering whether the movement of heavens is natural
or violent, and in Aristotle’s words if heavens are not propelled therefore their
movement is not natural. This follows in ﬁrst place from the fact that every
movement needs an intrinsic principle and in heaven the moving intelligence is
not such a principle. In the second place, natural movement is neither regular
nor uniform since it is faster in the ﬁnal stage than in the beginning. And
the contrary happens with violent movement. Some others say that natural
movement is still, such as every one sees that occur in the celestial movements.
But the celestial movement is natural, therefore it’s unnecessary to consider an
intrinsic Soul in Heaven”.

Nevertheless, when the Aristotelian apparatus was incapable of explaining

Natural Concept of Image in the Physics of fr. Alonso de la Veracruz.

5

a wondrous event, Alonso admitted the miracle and criticized the Renaissance
aﬀection to magic and animism. Renaissance men considered themselves as
magic rulers of universe, following Pico de la Mirandola’s human conception as
the most wonderful part of Creation and “ concurrence of stable eternity and
ﬂuent time” [19]. This hermetic doctrine is clearly evoked in Hermes Trismegis-
tus’s Asclepius [20]:

“ Hence, Asclepio, men are a magniﬁcent miracle and worth of reverence and
honors. Since men reach the Divine Nature as if they were Gods themselves,
they are familiar with the demons since they share the same origin. Therefore,
neglect in men the human side as long as they have recovered their hope in their
divine nature. ”

Even Copernicus, well known for his mathematical approach and deductions,
after showing his famous scheme that explains heliocentric theory, mentions the
Hermetic conception of solar majesty [21] :

“ Siquidem non inepte quidam lucernam mundi, alii mentem, alii rectorem

vocant. Trimegistus visibilum deum.”.

Inquisitorial processes, commonly known as witch-hunt could never have
happened without this kind of Rationalism that accepted the miracle or diabolic
inﬂuence when the Aristotelian system failed. This attitude lead to a permanent
hunt of native religions in the New Spain. Indian leaders, known as caciques
were considered diabolical and prosecuted by fray Juan de Zum´arraga , who
had already participated in Nueva Vizcaya, Spain, in a Witchcraft hunt and
was invited to New Spain in recognition of these activities. [22]

Fray Andr´es de Olmos also considered native culture as diabolic and wrote a
treatise on Demonology, explaining native rites, treating the encounters with the
Indian priests as diabolic. As we know Indian priests used a disguise with the
image of the very God they were revering [23]. And Mesoamerican codex rep-
resented these disguises, as Bodo Spranz has proved showing their fundamental
characteristics in the Borgia Group Codex [24]. This costumes produced panic
in Spaniards and Indians who faced the priests as dealing with supernatural
entities.

5 Veracrucian physics of image.

In the Aristotelian system, rational Soul understands the natural phenomena
by means of images (phantasmata) which are a cerebral function and there-
fore material “ sed anima rationalis est huius modis; tum quia intelligere eius
est per phanstamata” [25]. And just because the vegetative and sensitive souls
are corruptible forms, they must be of a material nature that must be studied
by physics instead of mathematics or Metaphysics [12]: “ cum tam vegetativa,
quam sensitiva, sunt materiales formae, & corruptibiles & per se non possunt
stare, & educantur de potentia materiae” . Just because everything in the intel-
lect comes from the senses, therefore intellect must use phantasmata, namely
the organic-cerebral function in order to achieve thinking: “ quia nihil est in
intellectu, quin prius fuerit in sensu: & necesse est intelligentem phantasmata

Natural Concept of Image in the Physics of fr. Alonso de la Veracruz.

6

speculari: tamen intellecti vere perﬁcitur, & consumatur sine aliquo organo
corporis” [26].

Since the sensible object is introduced in the senses as an image or

representation, agent understanding uses phantasmata to apprehend the being
and everything circumventing him as an object: “ quod cum accidens commune
sit in phantasia, intellectus agens abstrahit a phantasmate speciem intelligibilem
entis” [27]. This way agent understanding knows the substance through proper
accident since it manifests substance, as stated in Cayeto Teniense’s De Anima:
“ quibus intellectus possibilis praeparatur ad recipiendam speciem illius
substantiae, cuius sunt accidentia propria” [28]. And the existence of the ﬁrst
engine is concluded from its regular and continuous movement for operation
follows the being. Hence, separated substance is concluded from its accidental
manifestation. In conclusion, accident is the principle of the knowledge of sub-
stance but not a principle of the substance being: “ Accidentia communia non
sunt propia alicuius speciei, neque propria alicuius individui, ut constat: ergo
non possunt nos ducere in cognitionem distinctam alicuius substantiae” [29].

For Temistius sight depends on the eye organic conditions , the medium and
the distance between the object and the eye namely the visual radius [30]: “
quod radius visuales est species rei visibiles quae est corporalis pyramidis; cuius
pyramidis basis, est in re visa: & conus, in oculo vidente totum luminosum,
pyramidem sui luiminis in quolibet puncto medij terminat”. And the invisible
is this way limited to the inability of the senses to see the object just like a very
intense light, a diﬀuse image or a very weak light.

Guti´errez recalls several opinions on the nature of hallucination. For in-
stance Avicena considers hallucination as product of Soul imagination that can
strongly inﬂuence in many ways the organs and even the external objects: “ Quo
ad primum de fascinatione Avicenna 9. suae metaphysicae, & 6. naturalium
asserit esse, dicit supra corpus tantam habere virtutem, & dominium : ut possit
membra sola imaginatione diversi modi aﬃcere” [31]. And as told by the great
physician Gentilis de Fulgino, witches can inﬂict damage on children because
of their putrid humors “ quode vetuale ob humores putridos quos habent, &
corruptam complexionem, inﬁciunt teneros pueros” [32]. Also, Albertus Mag-
nus attributes hallucination to the astrological conﬁguration in which men are
born: “ ut fascinationem ex constellatione coeleste evenire dicat: ut in nato in
tali constellatione talis sunt fascinandi virtus” [33]. Nevertheless, Alonso thinks
that these ideas ignore God Will government on created and corruptible things
(Avicenna, De las Cosas N aturales, VI) and contradict the catholic religion.

Veracruz considers a mistake that Cornelius Agrippa, haereticus

pestilentissimus, denies witchcraft in his damnato book De Oculta P hilosophia.
In this book, Cornelius Agrippa mentions those magicians who, through
mathematical learning, imitated natural productions such as “ the wooden dove
of Architas, who did ﬂy,and the statue of Mercury which did speak ”. [34]

For in erotic love, as Guti´errez recollects, eyes can fascinate according to
Plato’s “ Phedro”. And claims that a bishop Hyeronimus talks about some
ﬂowers that desiccate the eyes of those who see them [37].

Veracruz concludes that bewitch is a product of Soul disposition and stars

Natural Concept of Image in the Physics of fr. Alonso de la Veracruz.

7

conﬁgurations, since many times people, trees or animals are bewitched and this
is undeniable. Also choleric and melancholic individuals are easily bewitched .
For some authors, wizards are fraudulent men with low ways and other consider
them as capable of wondrous facts after a diabolic pact or because of a natural
In the case of the medicine
virtue, product of an astrological conﬁguration.
men it is necessary to be careful until being sure of what kind of individual
they are : “ Quod si contingat ab eis aliquid mirandum ﬁeri, vel virtute divinae
tribuendum, vel (quod est magis verisimile) daemonis pacto sit” [38].

Guti´errez regards fabulous the bread baked to cure both rabies and the ef-
fects of the poison since this faculty can not be derived from the substance of
the bread or the constellations: “ Ex hoc sequitur fabulosum esse quod panis
salutatus a salutatore sanet morsum rabidi canis, vel sit contra aliud venenum,
quia haec virtus in pane non potest esse neque a complexione, neque a constel-
latione”. Hence if some one is healthy because of this breads it will be either
due to the diabolic participation or God’s Will [36].

Alonso considers the common belief on the healing powers of the kings of
France and England as a mistake, since only God knows His Will. For the french
kings this virtue was considered hereditary “circa sensum tactus, an regibus
Francorum haec virtus iure haereditario sit” and the royal ring in England was
attributed with curing inﬂuences “in regibus Angliae benedicendi annulum, quo
morbus contractionis nervorum (qui calambre dicitur) sanatur” [35].

The Capeto lineage claimed a hereditary royalty sprung from Clodovean
times just the same way as the English Normandy’s dynasty alleged its origin in
the Anglo-Saxon Ancestry. This was part of a gallic tendency aiming to reach
independence for the clergy and monarchy from Papal authority and leading to
a Christian conception of the sacred nature of royal power.

The Royal Touch consisted in tracing the cross signal with the hands on the
scrofula and afterwards washing the hands of the king. The water saved after
this procedure was drunk by those sick for nine days and was believed to heal
them. The fame of these kings attracted citizens from Spain, Italy and assured
the inclusion of the Royal Touch in the medical treatises of the XIV century
though until the XIV century this subject was fully considered in the medical
literature. The famous philosopher William of Ockham considers that divine
graces are transmitted in the royal unction which can be proved in the faculty
of the kings to heal scrofula’s patients.

Since the XI century the Gregorian reform tried to secularize the royal power,
exalting the spiritual faculties of the clergies to transubstantiate the wine and
exorcise demons. This way, the Royal Touch was a theme proscribed from the
ecclesiastical literature for about two centuries. The kings of Castilla were also
considered as owners of the healing faculties, as stated in the Speculum Regum
of ´Alvarez Pelayo, bishop of Portugal, where the King Sancho is told to have
practiced an exorcism on a “demoniaca” woman [39]. And Carlos of Viana,
infant of Arag´on and Navarra, was posthumously venerated in Poblet’s Abby
where his hand was used to heal the patients suﬀering of scrofula [40]. The
emperor Carlos V used these miracle-working powers to legitimate the royal
heredity in crisis after the Battle of Poitiers, invoking an apocryphal treatise at-

Natural Concept of Image in the Physics of fr. Alonso de la Veracruz.

8

tributed to Saint Thomas Aquinnas, where a fragment on the Royal Touch was
included by his disciple fray Tolomeon after the death of this philosopher [41].
Therefore, Alonso rejects, on the basis of scientiﬁc operations, the sacred con-
ception of the monarchy that arose as part of the gallic movement and adheres
to the Gregorian attitude that secularized the monarchic power.

Also, the oracular virtues attributed to some individual in certain days of
the month, are clearly false since they would have this natural ability the rest of
the month: “ Potest quidem esse, fateor, quod melius dispositus sit oculos uno
die quam alio, & noctu, quam diu tamen quod hoc sit in certis diebus solum,
non apparet” [42]. And the long distance sight is improbable only due to the
demons inﬂuence, and all this because of the discussed physical constitution of
sight. Though it’s possible that some eyes could be able to see farther than the
rest of the eyes: “ Quod possit esse talis dispositio in oculo alicuis hominis, qui
videat ad magnam distantiam, ad quam alterius oculos no attingit, non est qui
neget [43]. But the ability to see the corpses buried in the churches, as some
respectable fellows ascertain, shold be result of diabolic inﬂuences or some other
causes: “ Et similiter cum intrant templum, ubi corpora mortuorum iacent, si
submittant oculos, videant aperte viscera defunctorum [...] Possunt ista per
daemonum illusiones ﬁeri, tamen non damno” [44].

6 Conclusions.

In his P hysica Speculatio, dedicated to the Indians of the New Spain, Alonso de
la Veracruz criticises the mystic approach of the hermetic natural philosophers
and regards Soul as a physical subject, denying the existence of an intrinsic Soul
responsible of the movement in Heavens. This way images and the invisible are
considered as a physical problem that can be studied in terms of a geometric
criterion provided by the visual radius. Since images are used by Soul to ap-
prehend the being and everything circumventing him, they turn out to be an
organic function subject to the control of human will.

With this conceptual apparatus some superstitions, such as the healing pow-
ers of the kings related to the gallic movement that sought independence from
the Pope, the magical powers attributed to the sorcerers in some days of the
month, and the long distance sight, are easily discarded by Guti´errez. Nev-
ertheless, any event unexplained by Aristotle’s system, such as the continuous
rains in Tenochtitl´an (Mexico City), located in the subtorrida zone, and the
miraculous eﬀects of some healing breads, should be therefore considered as a
result of a miracle or a diabolic pact. This attitude supported the inquisitorial
actions taken against the Indian cultural system where hallucination
and fascination played important roles.

Alonso’s Physics of Image can be considered as a production that partially
abandons the magic Renaissance approach and introduces mathematical and
logical instruments to theorize the real experiences provided by the discovery
of the New World although accepting the possibility of miracle and diabolic
inﬂuence. This way, Alonso’s Physics of Image is closer to the epistemological

REFERENCES

9

rupture introduced by Descartes that lead to the modern science since it rejects
the magical approach and applies a methodological and rational approach to
study real events.

References

tomo I, p. 22.

[1] Men´endez Pelayo. Historia de la poes´ıa hispanoamericana, Madrid, 1911,

[2] Alphonso a Vera Cruce. Physicae Speculatione. Primi libri de Anima.
Salmanticae: Ioannes Baptista a T erranova. A˜no MDLXXIII. Quarta
Editio, p. 330.

[3] Alphonso a Vera Cruce. Physicae Speculatione. Primi libri de Anima.
Salmanticae: Ioannes Baptista a T erranova. A˜no MDLXXIII. Quarta
Editio, p. 331.

[4] Alphonso a Vera Cruce. Physicae Speculatione. Primi libri de Anima.
Salmanticae: Ioannes Baptista a T erranova. A˜no MDLXXIII. Quarta
Editio, p. 330.

[5] Alphonso a Vera Cruce. Physicae Speculatione. Primi libri de Anima.
Salmanticae: Ioannes Baptista a T erranova. A˜no MDLXXIII. Quarta
Editio, p. 330.

[6] “ Consideratio animae rationalis in quantum forma est coroporis physici
organici, ad naturalem philosophia pertinet directe.”, in: Alphonso a Vera
Cruce. Physicae Speculatione. Primi libri de Anima. Salmanticae: Ioannes
Baptista a T erranova. A˜no MDLXXIII. Quarta Editio, p. 330.

[7] Heller, Agnes. El hombre del renacimiento. Barcelona: Pen´ınsula, 1980, p.

[8] Ricard, Robert La conquista espiritual de M´exico. M´exico: FCE, 1986, p.

428.

336

[9] “ La ﬂora y fauna en los frescos de Malinalco: para´ıso convergente”,
Jeanette Favrot Peterson, in: Iconolog´ıa y Sociedad. Arte Colonial His-
panoamericano . M´exico: UNAM, 1987, p. 82.

[10] Basalenque, P. Diego. Historia de la Provincia de San Nicol´as de Tolentino

de Michoac´an . M´exico: Jus, 1963 p. 60

[11] Grijalva, Juan de. Cr´onica de la Orden de N.P.S. Agust´ın en las Provincias
de la Nueva Espa˜na . 2nd. ed. M´exico: Imprenta Victoria, 1924(1624) , p.
223.

[12] Alphonso a Vera Cruce. Primi

libri de Anima. Speculatio Prima.
Salmanticae: Ioannes Baptista a T erranova. A˜no MDLXXIII. Quarta
Editio, p. 330-331.

REFERENCES

10

[13] “ Simbolog´ıa solar de Malinalco”, Armando Barra˜n´on, in: Raz´on y Palabra,

No. 18, Mayo-Julio, (2000).

[14] “ Hac´ıan pintar en un lienzo los art´ıculos de la fe, y en otro los diez man-
damientos de Dios, y en otro los siete sacramentos y lo dem´as que quer´ıan
de la doctrina cristiana. Y cuando el predicador quer´ıa predicar los man-
damientos, colgaban el lienzo de los mandamientos junto a ´el, a un lado,
de manera que con una vara de las que traen los alguaciles pudiesen ir
se˜nalando la parte que quer´ıa”, in: Mendieta, fray Ger´onimo. Historia
Eclesi´astica Indiana . M´exico: FCE, 1993,p. 250.

[15] “ Outre les mobiles mat´eriels

religieux et politiques que nous
,
avons´evoqu´es, il est incontestable que le choix de visuel compensait les
al´eas d’une communication linguistique peu satisfaisante”, in: Gruzinski,
Serge. La guerre des images. Paris: Fayard, 1990, p. 81.

[16] Fray Diego de Valad´es, in Palomera, op. cit. , c. XIV, p. 227. cf. “ La
demonolog´ıa en la obra gr´aﬁca de fray Diego de Valad´es”, Elena Isabel
De Gerlero, in: Iconolog´ıa y Sociedad. Arte Colonial Hispanoamericano .
M´exico: UNAM, 1987, p. 82.

[17] Veracruz, Alonso de la. Physica Speculatio . Speculatio 7. De Caelo .
Salmanticae: Ioannes Baptista a T erranova. A˜no MDLXXIII. Quarta
Editio, p. 201.

[18] Ad tertium in quo tangitur diﬃcultas an motus coeli sit naturalis, vel
violentus: qua ex dictis Aristo videtur, quod si coelum animatum non
sit,motus non sit naturalis: primo quia naturalis motus est a principio in-
trinseco et in coelo intelligentia motrix, non est tale principium: secundo
quia motus naturalis, non est regularis, neque uniformis: sed velocior est in
ﬁne, quam in principio: e contra motus violentus: item quia motus naturalis
est ad quietem, quae omnia videntur de esse in motu coeli. Respondetur
quod est motus naturalis motus coelorum: neque ob id est necessarium
ponere animam intrinsece in caelo, quia illae adductae conditiones in motu
naturali ab Aristo sunt intelligendae de motu naturali, qui est ad medium,
ut est gravium.: vel a medio, qui est levium, et non de motu, qui circa
medium: motus est circularis qui est in coelis: qui continuus et perpetuus
esse potest et contrarium non habet

[19] De la Mirandola, Pico. De la dignidad del hombre. Madrid: Editora Na-

cional, 1984, p. 103.

[20] “ E cosi, o Asclepio, l’uomo `e un miraculum magnum, un essere degno di
reverenza e onore. Poich´e egli perviene alla natura divina come se fosse
egli stesso un dio; ha familiarit`a con la razza dei demoni, poich´e sa di
condividere con essi l’origine; disprezza quella parte della sua natura che `e
soltanto umana, perch´e ha riposto la sua speranza nella divinit`a dell’altra
parte di s´e”. Corpus Hermeticum , II, pp. 301-2 (Asclepius). Cit. in: Yates,

REFERENCES

11

Frances. Giordano Bruno e la tradizione Ermetica . Bari; Laterza, 1981, p.
129.

[21] “ In medio vero omnium residet sol. Quis enim in hoc pulcherrimo tem-
plo lampadem hanc in alio vel meliori loco poneret, quam unde totum
simul possit illuminare ? Siquidem non inepte quidam lucernam mundi, alii
mentem, alii rectorem vocant. Trimegistus visibilum deum.” in: Cop´ernico,
N. De revolutionibus orbium caelestium . Thorn 1873, pp. 15-17.

Frances Yates considers that Copernico did not refer to magic when he dis-
covered the heliocentric theory, but used mathematics. Nevertheless Coper-
nico considered his activities as contemplative and revealed by God : “ Il De
revolutionibus orbium caelestium di Nicola Copernico fu scritto fra il 1570
e il 1530, e pubblicato nel 1543. Non fu attraverso la magia che Copernico
arriv`o a formulare la sua storica ipotesi della revoluzione della terra at-
torno al sole, ma grazie a una grande conquista nel campo del puro calcolo
matematico . Egli presenta la sua scoperta al lettore come una sorta di
atto di contemplazione del mondo inteso come revelazione di Dio, o come
ci`o che molti ﬁlosoﬁ hanno chiamato il dio visibile. ”, in : Yates, Frances.
Giordano Bruno e la tradizione Ermetica . Bari; Laterza, 1981, p. 174.

[22] A.G.N. Proceso inquisitorial del cacique de Tezcoco , M´exico,A.G.N., 1910:
A.G.N. Procesos de Indios id´olatras y hechiceros , M´exico, A.G.N, 1912

[23] Olmos, Fray Andr´es. Tratado de hechicer´ıas y sortilegios . M´exico: UNAM,

1990, p. 43.

M´exico: FCE, 1993

[24] Spranz, Bodo. Los dioses en los c´odices mexicanos del grupo Borgia .

[25] Alphonso a Vera Cruce. Physicae Speculatione. Primi libri de Anima.
Salmanticae: Ioannes Baptista a T erranova. A˜no MDLXXIII. Quarta
Editio, p. 330.

[26] Alphonso a Vera Cruce. Physicae Speculatione. Primi libri de Anima.
Salmanticae: Ioannes Baptista a T erranova. A˜no MDLXXIII. Quarta
Editio, p. 338.

[27] Alphonso a Vera Cruce. Physicae Speculatione. Primi libri de Anima.
Salmanticae: Ioannes Baptista a T erranova. A˜no MDLXXIII. Quarta
Editio, p. 344.

[28] Alphonso a Vera Cruce. Physicae Speculatione. Primi libri de Anima.
Salmanticae: Ioannes Baptista a T erranova. A˜no MDLXXIII. Quarta
Editio, p. 344.

[29] Alphonso a Vera Cruce. Physicae Speculatione. Primi libri de Anima.
Salmanticae: Ioannes Baptista a T erranova. A˜no MDLXXIII. Quarta
Editio, p. 343.

REFERENCES

12

[30] Alphonso a Vera Cruce. Physicae Speculatione. Secundi libri de Anima . De
5. sensibus exterioribus. . Salmanticae: Ioannes Baptista a T erranova.
A˜no MDLXXIII. Quarta Editio, p. 352.

[31] Alphonso a Vera Cruce. Physicae Speculatione. Secundi

libri de An-
ima. Speculatio 2. De Fascinatione . Salmanticae: Ioannes Baptista a
T erranova. A˜no MDLXXIII. Quarta Editio, p. 364.

[32] Alphonso a Vera Cruce. Physicae Speculatione. Secundi libri de Anima
. De Fascinatione . Salmanticae: Ioannes Baptista a T erranova. A˜no
MDLXXIII. Quarta Editio, p. 364.

[33] Alphonso a Vera Cruce. Physicae Speculatione. Secundi libri de Anima
Ioannes Baptista a

. Speculatio 2. De Fascinatione . Salmanticae:
T erranova. A˜no MDLXXIII. Quarta Editio, p. 364.

[34] Agrippa of Nettesheim, Henry Cornelius. Three Books of Occult Philoso-

phy. St. Paul, MN : Llewellyn Pub., p. 692.

[35] Alphonso a Vera Cruce. Physicae Speculatione. Secundi libri de Anima
Ioannes Baptista a

. Speculatio 2. De Fascinatione . Salmanticae:
T erranova. A˜no MDLXXIII. Quarta Editio, p. 363-364.

[36] Alphonso a Vera Cruce. Physicae Speculatione. Secundi libri de Anima
Ioannes Baptista a

. Speculatio 2. De Fascinatione . Salmanticae:
T erranova. A˜no MDLXXIII. Quarta Editio, p. 365.

[37] Alphonso a Vera Cruce. Physicae Speculatione. Secundi libri de Anima
Ioannes Baptista a

. Speculatio 2. De Fascinatione . Salmanticae:
T erranova. A˜no MDLXXIII. Quarta Editio, p. 364.

[38] Alphonso a Vera Cruce. Physicae Speculatione. Secundi libri de Anima
Ioannes Baptista a

. Speculatio 2. De Fascinatione . Salmanticae:
T erranova. A˜no MDLXXIII. Quarta Editio, p. 365.

[39] ´Alvarez Pelayo. Speculum Regum. Ed. R. Scholz, Unbekannte kirchenpoli-

tische Streitscrhiften, II, p. 517.

[40] Batista y Roca. Notes and Queries, 1917, p. 481.

[41] Leopold Delisle. Recherches sur la librairie du Charles V, II. Inventaire
general des livres avant appartenu aux rois Charles V et Charles VI, n´ums.
227-233, 226 y 59. cf. Marc Bloch. Les rois thaumaturges . Publications de
la Facult´e des Lettres de Strasboug, 1924.

[42] Alphonso a Vera Cruce. Physicae Speculatione. Secundi libri de Anima
Ioannes Baptista a

. Speculatio 2. De Fascinatione . Salmanticae:
T erranova. A˜no MDLXXIII. Quarta Editio, p. 366.

REFERENCES

13

[43] Alphonso a Vera Cruce. Physicae Speculatione. Secundi libri de Anima
Ioannes Baptista a

. Speculatio 2. De Fascinatione . Salmanticae:
T erranova. A˜no MDLXXIII. Quarta Editio, p. 366.

[44] Alphonso a Vera Cruce. Physicae Speculatione. Secundi libri de Anima
Ioannes Baptista a

. Speculatio 2. De Fascinatione . Salmanticae:
T erranova. A˜no MDLXXIII. Quarta Editio, p. 366.

