1
0
0
2
 
n
a
J
 
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
t
s
i
h
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
2
1
0
1
0
1
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Y¯aj˜navalkya and the Origins of Pur¯an. ic
Cosmology

Subhash Kak
Department of Electrical & Computer Engineering
Louisiana State University
Baton Rouge, LA 70803-5901, USA
Email: kak@ee.lsu.edu

February 2, 2008

Abstract

This paper shows that characteristic features of Pur¯an. ic cosmology,
such as alternating cosmic “continents” and “oceans” of successively
doubling areas, can be traced to Vedic texts. The R. gveda speaks
of seven regions of the universe, and Y¯aj˜navalkya, in Br.had¯aran. yaka
Upanis.ad, presents a cosmology that has all the essential features of
the Pur¯an. ic system. This discovery solves the old puzzle of the origin
of Pur¯an. ic astronomy.

Keywords: Ancient Indian astronomy, Pur¯an. ic cosmology, Y¯aj˜navalkya

Introduction

The prehistory of Pur¯an. ic astronomy is not well understood. Although it is
known that the Pur¯an. as contain very old material, some modern historians
of astronomy have believed that the cosmology presented there has no Vedic
antecedents. In this paper, we show that this belief is wrong, and a system
similar to Pur¯an. ic cosmology is described in the Vedic tradition.

1

In the past few years a new understanding of the origins of Indian as-
tronomy has emerged. In various publications,1 we have sketched a history
of Indian astronomy from the earliest Vedic conceptions— as expressed in
the astronomy of geometric altars— to the classical Siddh¯antic astronomy.
Meanwhile, the use of modern computer packages has made it possible to
reexamine the astronomical references in the early texts.2 Although recent
work showed that Pur¯an. ic and Siddh¯antic astronomies have several common
points, the origins of Pur¯an. ic astronomy remained unclear.

Here we present Y¯aj˜navalkya’s cosmology from Br.had¯aran. yaka Upanis.ad
(BU) 3.3.2 which has hitherto escaped scholarly attention. We show that
this cosmology has all the basic features of the later Pur¯an. ic cosmology and
so it may be viewed as the original source.

The great Upanis.adic sage Y¯aj˜navalkya is a major ﬁgure in the earliest
Indian astronomy, that precedes Lagadha’s Ved¯a ˙nga Jyotis.a. Elsewhere, we
have noted that in the ´Satapatha Br¯ahman. a, Y¯aj˜navalkya speaks of a 95-year
intercalary cycle to harmonize the lunar and solar years,3 and he describes the
non-uniform motion of the Sun.4 We showed that these were signiﬁcant links
in the early development of Vedic astronomy. The 19th century European
Indologists tended to assign him to around 800 B.C., but a reexamination
of the evidence suggests that he should be assigned to around 1800 B.C.
However, the chronology of Y¯aj˜nvalkya is not our concern here, so will not
comment any further on it; this question is discussed at length elsewhere.5

Vedic and Pur¯an. ic Cosmological Ideas
In brief, the Vedas take the universe to be inﬁnite in size. The universe
is visualized in the image of the cosmic egg, Brahm¯an. d. a. Beyond our own
universe lie other universes.

The Pa˜ncavim. ´sa Br¯ahman. a 16.8.6 states that the heavens are 1000 earth
diameters away from the Earth. The Sun was taken to be halfway to the
heavens, so this suggests a distance to the Sun to be about 500 earth diam-
eters from the Earth.

Yajurveda, in the mystic hymn 17, dealing with the nature of the universe,
counts numbers in powers of ten upto 1012. It has been suggested that this
is an estimate of the size of the universe in yojanas.

The Pur¯an. as provide material which is believed to be close to the knowl-

2

edge of the Vedic times. Here we speciﬁcally consider V¯ayu Pur¯an. a (VaP),
Vis.n. u Pur¯an. a (ViP), and Matsya Pur¯an. a (MP).6 VaP and ViP are generally
believed to be amongst the earliest Pur¯an. as and at least 1,500 years old.

The Pur¯an. as instruct through myth and this mythmaking can be seen in
their approach to astronomy. For example, they speak of seven underground
worlds below the orbital plane of the planets and of seven “continents” encir-
cling the Earth. One has to take care to separate this imagery, that parallels
the conception of the seven centres of the human’s psycho-somatic body,
from the underlying cosmology of the physical universe of the Pur¯an. as, that
is their primary concern in their jyotis. a chapters. The idea of seven regions
of the universe is present in the R. gveda 1.22.16-21 where the Sun’s stride
is described as saptadh¯aman, or taking place in seven regions. The geogra-
phy of concentric continents is a representation of the plane of the Earth’s
rotation, with each new continent as the orbit of the next “planet”.7

The diﬀerent Pur¯an. as reproduce the same cosmological material. There
are some minor diﬀerences in ﬁgures that may be a result of wrong copying
by scribes who did not understand the material. In this paper, we mainly
follow ViP.

ViP 2.8 describes the Sun to be 9,000 yojanas in length and to be con-
nected by an axle that is 15.7×106 yojanas long to the M¯anasa mountain and
another axle 45,500 yojanas long connected to the pole star. The distance
of 15.7 million yojanas between the Earth and the Sun is much greater than
the distance of 0.46 million yojanas used by ¯Aryabhat.a in his Siddh¯anta.
(But note that the yojana of the Pur¯an. as is diﬀerent from the yojana of the
Siddh¯antas.) This greater distance is stated without a corresponding change
in the diameter of the Sun. The size of the universe is described as 500
million yojanas.

In VaP 50, it is stated that the Sun covers 3.15 million yojanas in a
muh¯urta. This means that the distance covered in a day are 94.5 million
yojanas. MP 124 gives the same ﬁgure. This is in agreement with the view
that the Sun is 15.7 million yojanas away from the Earth. The speciﬁc speed
given here, translates to 116.67 yojanas per half-nimes.a. We have argued
that the speed of 2,202 yojanas in half-nimes.a mentioned by S¯ayan. a,8 may
have emerged from the theory that light should travel at a speed that is able
to illuminate the entire universe in one day.

The size of the universe is described in two diﬀerent ways, through the

“island-continents” and through heavenly bodies.

3

The planetary model in the Pur¯an. as is diﬀerent from that in the Siddh¯antas.

Here the Moon as well as the planets are in orbits higher than the Sun. Orig-
inally, this supposition for the Moon may have represented the fact that it
goes higher than the Sun in its orbit. Given that the Moon’s inclination is 5◦
to the ecliptic, its declination can be 28.5◦ compared to the Sun’s maximum
declination of ±23.5◦. This “higher” position must have been, at some stage,
represented literally by a higher orbit. To make sense with the observational
reality, it became necessary for the Moon is taken to be twice as large as
the Sun. A point of note is that this model eﬀectively assumes that all the
heavenly bodies go around the Sun.

The distances of the planetary orbits beyond the Sun are as follows:

Table 1: From Earth to Pole-star

Interval I
Earth to Sun
Sun to Moon
Moon to Asterisms
Asterisms to Mercury
Mercury to Venus
Venus to Mars
Mars to Jupiter
Jupiter to Saturn
Saturn to Ursa Major
Ursa Major to Pole-star
Sub-total

yojanas
15,700,000
100,000
100,000
200,000
200,000
200,000
200,000
200,000
100,000
100,000
17,100,000

4

Further spheres are postulated beyond the pole-star. These are the Ma-
harloka, the Janaloka, the Tapoloka, and the Satyaloka. Their distances are
as follows:

Table 2: From Pole-star to Satyaloka

Interval II
Pole-star to Maharloka
Maharloka to Janaloka
Janaloka to Tapoloka
Tapoloka to Satyaloka
Grand Total

yojanas
10,000,000
20,000,000
40,000,000
120,000,000
207,100,000

Since the last ﬁgure is the distance from the Earth, the total diameter
of the universe is 414.2 million yojanas, not including the dimensions of the
various heavenly bodies and lokas. The inclusion of these may be expected to
bring this calculation in line with the ﬁgure of roughly 500 million yojanas.
Or, it is more likely, that the universe is taken to be egg-like in shape, as
suggested by the name of Brahm¯an. d. a, the world-egg.

Beyond the universe lies the limitless Pradh¯ana, that has within it count-
less other universes. These other universes were visualized to be independent
world-eggs.

The geography of the Pur¯an. as describes a central continent, Jambu, sur-
rounded by alternating bands of ocean and land. The seven island-continents
of Jambu, Plaks.a, ´S¯almala, Ku´sa, Kraunca, ´S¯aka, and Pus.kara are encom-
passed, successively, by seven oceans; and each ocean and continent is, re-
spectively, of twice the extent of that which precedes it.

It is important to realize that the continents are imaginary regions and
they should not be confused with the continents on the Earth. Only certain
part of the innermost continent, Jambu, that deal with India have parallels
with real geography.

Although, in earlier work9 we explored the non-orthodox interpretation
that the doubling of the dimensions applied to the “oceans” as well as “conti-
nents”, we return to the orthodox view here, where the increase in dimension
by a factor of two is only across the seven “continents.” At the end of the
seven island-continents is a region that is twice the preceding region. Further
on, is the Lok¯aloka mountain, 10,000 yojanas in breadth, that marks the end
of our universe. The Lok¯aloka mountain can be compared to the shell of the
world-egg.

Assume that the radius of Jambu is Jr yojana, then the radius of the

universe is:

5

Ur = Jr(1+1+2+2+22+22+23+23+24+24 +25+25+26+26)+10, 000 (1)

Or,

yojanas.

Ur = 254Jr + 10, 000 yojanas

(2)

If Ur is roughly 250 million yojanas, then Jr should be about 1,000,000

The Orbit of the Sun
Since the Sun’s axle is taken to have dimensions of 15.7 × 106 yojanas, let’s
see where exactly it will ﬁt into the island-continent scheme. This is clear
when we see that:

15.7 × 106 ≈ Jr(1 + 1 + 2 + 2 + 4 + 4)

(3)
In other words, the orbit of the Sun will be somewhat beyond the ´S¯almala
continent. Since the total radius of the Universe is roughly 254Jr, it means
that beyond the roughly 14Jr orbit of the Sun, there is present an approxi-
mately 16-fold expansion.

Y¯aj˜nvalkya in Br.had¯aran. yaka U.
Given the background of the Pur¯an. ic system, we are ready to examine the
statement by Y¯aj˜navalkya in Br.had¯aran. yaka Upanis.ad (BU) 3.3.2. He says:

dv¯atrim. ´satam vai devarath¯ahny¯anyayam lokastam. samantam pr. thiv¯ı
dvist¯avatparyeti t¯am. samantam pr. thiv¯ı dvist¯avatsamudrah. paryeti
Thirty-two times the space traversed by the Sun’s chariot in a
day makes this plane (loka); around it, covering twice the area,
is the world (pr.thiv¯ı); around the world, covering twice the area,
(4)
is the ocean.

This describes a system where beyond the Sun’s orbit there is an expan-
sion by a factor of 32; further beyond that there is doubling of the area in

6

the dimensions of the “Earth” and a further doubling in the dimensions of
the ocean beyond. In other words, there is a total expansion by a factor of
128 beyond the Sun’s circuit.

Notice that it is essentially the Pur¯an. ic system in a simpliﬁed form. Like
the Pur¯an. ic system, the land-mass and ocean alternate, increasing by a factor
of 2 for each land-mass, although there is explicit mention in this passage of
just one such region. A second region is the ocean just beyond the Earth and
other similar regions are suggested by the R. gvedic reference. Y¯aj˜nvalkya,
collapses several steps by considering 32 times the space traversed by the
Sun, multiplied by another factor of 4, to be the Earth’s plane. This system
retains the idea of alternating land and water.

Expansion by Factor of 32

Assuming that the seven continent-ocean scheme is meant by the saptadh¯aman
of the R. gveda, Y¯aj˜navalkya, must use it in deﬁning the plane that is 32 times
the space traversed by the Sun’s orbit. Since beyond this space lie just one
continent with the corresponding ocean (of double the area), the last conti-
nent must be Pus.kara. Since these two last regions have a combined size of
128Jr, this plane must be at a distance of 126Jr from the centre of Jambu.
Let the orbit of the Sun be at a distance of Sr from the centre of Jambu.
Since (4) does not make it absolutely clear whether the phrase “space tra-
versed ...
in a day” simply deﬁnes the circuit of the Sun, or whether one
should multiply this circuit by 2π, we consider both these possibilities sepa-
rately.

In the ﬁrst case, 32Sr = 126Jr, which means that Sr ≈ 4Jr. Or the circuit
of the Sun is just beyond the second continent Plaks.a. In the second case,
2π × 32Sr = 126Jr. Or Sr ≈ 0.627Jr. In this latter case, only a part of the
Jambu continent is the Earth, and most of it represents the atmosphere.

If one were to assume that Y¯aj˜navalkya knew that Jr was approximately
1,000,000 yojanas, the radius of the Sun’s orbit will then be 4,000,000 yojanas
or 626,000 yojanas, respectively. It is noteworthy, that the Siddh¯antas use a
ﬁgure which is not too diﬀerent from the latter one.

7

Conclusions

The model of the universe described by Y¯aj˜navalkya in Br.had¯aran. yaka Upanis.ad
(BU) 3.3.2 appears to be the prototype that led to the full-ﬂedged Pur¯an. ic
system. The two systems share essential features of area doubling and alter-
nating land and water masses.

There are some diﬀerence of details, however. The Pur¯an. ic system seems
an expansion of the Sun’s circuit by a factor of 16. On the other hand, in
Y¯aj˜navalkya’s system the expansion is by a combined ratio of 128.

If it is assumed that Y¯aj˜navalkya knew the dimensions of the continent
and ocean scheme, the size of the orbit, in one of the interpretations, comes
out to be 626,000 yojanas, which is only slightly larger than the number used
in the Siddh¯antas. This suggests that Y¯aj˜navalkya’s scheme was the model
from which both the mature Siddh¯antic and Pur¯an. ic systems emerged.

Even if Y¯aj˜navalkya did not use the same dimensions as the later Pur¯an. ic

astronomy, the structural similarity of the two systems is striking.

We ﬁnd that Y¯aj˜navalkya’s scheme moved the Sun closer to the Earth,
compared to the earliest Vedic scheme where the Sun was right at the centre
of the cosmos. It is interesting, nevertheless, that Y¯aj˜navalkya projects the
Sun’s circuit, through his multiplication factor of 32, to this middle point.
The mature Pur¯an. ic system involves an increase in the size of the Sun’s orbit,
compared to Y¯aj˜navalkya’s scheme.

Y¯aj˜navalkya’s description of the nature of the cosmos solves a long-
standing puzzle regarding the origin of the Pur¯an. ic system. We now know
that this latter system is deeply connected to early Vedic ideas.

Notes

1. This work may be found collectively in S. Kak, “Birth and early de-
velopment of Indian astronomy,” In Astronomy Across Cultures: The
History of Non-Western Astronomy. H. Selin (ed.). Kluwer Academic,
Boston, 2000, pp. 303-340;
S. Kak, The Astronomical Code of the R. gveda. Munshiram Manoharlal,
Delhi, 2000.

2. B.N. Narahari Achar, “Enigma of the ﬁve-year yuga of Vedanga Jy-
otisa,” Indian Journal of History of Science, 33, 1998, pp. 101-109.

8

B.N. Narahari Achar, “On the astronomical basis of the date of Sata-
patha Brahmana,” Indian Journal of History of Science, 35, 2000, pp.
1-19.

3. S. Kak, “The astronomy of the ´Satapatha Br¯ahman. a,” Indian Journal

of History of Science, 28, 1993, pp. 15-34.
S. Kak, “The astronomical of the age of geometric altars,” Quarterly
Journal of the Royal Astronomical Society, 36, 1995, pp. 385-396.
S. Kak, “Knowledge of the planets in the third millennium BC,” Quar-
terly Journal of the Royal Astronomical Society, 37, 1996, pp. 709-715.

4. S. Kak, “The Sun’s orbit in the Br¯ahman. as,” Indian Journal of History

of Science, 33, 1998, pp. 175-191.

5. Note 1.

6. H.H. Wilson (tr.), The Vishnu Purana. Trubner & Co, London, 1865

(Garland Publishing, New York, 1981);
The Matsya Puranam. The Panini Oﬃce, Prayag, 1916 (AMS, New
York, 1974);
R.P. Tripathi (tr.), The V¯ayu Pur¯an. a. Hindi Sahitya Sammelan, Prayag,
1987.

7. G. de Santillana, and H. von Dechend, Hamlet’s Mill: An Essay on

Myth and the Frame of Time. Gambit, Boston, 1969.

8. See Note 1.

9. S. Kak, “Speed of light and Pur¯an. ic cosmology.” In Computing Sci-
ence in Ancient India, T.R.N. Rao and S. Kak (eds.). Munshiram
Manoharlal, Delhi, 2000.

9

