1
0
0
2
 
y
a
M
 
6
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
t
s
i
h
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
6
4
0
5
0
1
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

The Depth and Breadth of John Bell’s Physics

R. Jackiw

Center for Theoretical Physics

Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA 02139

A. Shimony

Department of Philosophy and Physics (Emeritus)

Boston University, Boston, MA 02215

MIT-CTP-3141 physics/0105046

1 A Brief Biography

John Stewart Bell (1928–90) was born in Belfast, Northern Ireland, son of John and Annie
Bell, whose families had lived in Northern Ireland for several generations. His middle name,
Stewart, was the Scottish family name of his mother, and until he went to university he was
called at home by that name. The family’s religion was Anglican (Church of Ireland), but
no religious bias prevented friendships with the Catholic community. The Bell family was of
the working class, not prosperous, but with a high evaluation of education. Although only
John attended school beyond age 14, each of his two younger brothers advanced socially,
largely by self-education, one to become a professor of electrical engineering in Canada and
the other a successful businessman.

By age 11 John, who read intensively at the public library, announced his intention
to become a scientist. He performed very well on his entrance examination for secondary
education, but the family could only aﬀord to send him to the Belfast Technical High School,
which – usefully for his later career – provided both academic and practical courses.

Finishing the Technical School in 1944 at age 16, Bell found a job as a junior technical
assistant in the Physics Department of the Queen’s University at Belfast, under the supervi-
sion of Prof. Karl Emeleus and Dr. Richard Sloane. They recognized his talent, loaned him
books, and allowed him to attend ﬁrst year lectures even though he was not enrolled as a

1

R. Jackiw and A. Shimony – The Depth and Breadth of John Bell’s Physics

2

student. After one year as a technician he became a student and was awarded modest schol-
arships, graduating in 1948 with a ﬁrst class Honours BSc in Experimental Physics. He then
stayed another year, receiving a ﬁrst class Honours BSc in Mathematical Physics in 1949.
Bell considered himself especially fortunate to have as his primary teacher in mathematical
physics Peter Paul Ewald, a refugee from Nazi Germany, who was one of the pioneers of X-
ray crystallography. Although Bell received good training in basic physics, he was not happy
with the explanations of quantum mechanics, for reasons that will given in some detail in
Sect. 2. In general, he was an extraordinarily able and assiduous student, showing inquisi-
tiveness, persistence, and independence of mind that foreshadowed the great investigations
of his later years.

From late 1949 until 1960 John Bell worked in England, mainly at the UK Atomic Energy
Research Establishment at Harwell, where he ﬁrst worked on reactor physics, but later, after
spending 1950 on accelerator design at Malvern, he returned to Harwell to continue this
work as well as research in nuclear physics. He was given a leave of absence during 1953 and
1954 to do graduate studies in the Physics Department at the University of Birmingham,
under the direction of Paul Matthews and Rudolf Peierls, completing his doctoral thesis
in 1956 after returning to Harwell. At Birmingham Bell quickly acquired a knowledge of
current theoretical physics, including quantum ﬁeld theory, and his doctoral thesis included
a proof of the PTC theorem, on which he lost priority because L¨uders published a proof
of the theorem before his own paper[1] appeared in the Proceedings of the Royal Society.
As a member of Tony Skyrme’s nuclear group at Harwell he made a number of powerful
applications of ﬁeld theory and theory of symmetries to nuclear problems [2, 3, 4].

At Malvern John Bell met his future wife Mary Ross, who had joined the accelerator
design group after taking her doctorate in mathematics and physics from the University
of Glasgow. They were married in 1954 and pursued careers together, often collaborating
in research, ﬁrst at Harwell and later at CERN until his death in 1990. There is a very
moving tribute to her in the last paragraph of the preface of Speakable and Unspeakable in
Quantum Mechanics [5], the collection of his papers on the foundations of that subject: “In
the individual papers I have thanked many colleagues for their help. But I here renew very
especially my warm thanks to Mary Bell. When I look through these papers again I see her
everywhere.”

In the late ﬁfties, John and Mary Bell were troubled that Harwell was becoming less
devoted to research in fundamental physics, and they began to look elsewhere for a locus
of work. In 1960 they resigned their tenured positions and took non-tenured positions at
CERN, he in the Theory Division and she in the Accelerator Research Group. They lived in

R. Jackiw and A. Shimony – The Depth and Breadth of John Bell’s Physics

3

the city of Geneva. Bell’s working hours at CERN were devoted almost entirely to theoretical
particle physics and to accelerator design. He facetiously listed his specialty in an oﬃcial
CERN document as “quantum engineering.” Some of his leisure time was devoted to the
foundations of quantum mechanics, which he called his “hobby”. A year of leave in 1963–4,
spent at the Stanford Linear Accelerator Center, the University of Wisconsin, and Brandeis
University, gave him time to write his two pioneering articles [6, 7] on the foundations
of quantum mechanics. Ref. [6] demonstrated a conﬂict concerning observable quantities
between the family of local hidden variables theories and quantum mechanics. This famous
result became known as “Bell’s Theorem” (see Sect. 2 below).

On his return to CERN, Bell continued his studies of the foundations of quantum me-
chanics privately, but his professional work was in particle physics, mostly in the framework
of the then popular scheme of current algebra. Within these current algebra investigations
Bell established his famous result on the anomalous non-conservation of the axial vector
current, based on the anomalous breaking of chiral symmetry [8] (see Sect. 3 below).

Recognition of John Bell as a great scientist came in several stages. In the early ﬁfties his
contributions at Malvern to accelerator design, based on his expertise in particle dynamics
and electromagnetic theory, were highly regarded; at age 25 he was a consultant when CERN
was being established. From the time of Bell’s graduate studies at Birmingham he acquired
a high reputation among particle theorists, which grew and spread worldwide after he joined
the Theory Group at CERN. There was, however, relatively little attention to his work on
the foundations of quantum mechanics until experiments (e.g., [10]–[15]) inspired by Bell’s
Theorem were reported. Most of the experimental results were conservative, in that they
strongly supported quantum mechanics and disconﬁrmed the implications of the local hidden
variables theories, but whatever the results might have been the experiments surprised the
physics community by showing that hypotheses about hidden variables and locality, generally
considered to be philosophical, since the famous Einstein-Bohr debate [16, 17], were amenable
to empirical investigation. “Bell’s Theorem” became a topic in the guide to authors of the
American Institute of Physics, and interest in the Theorem spread to philosophers and
(unfortunately with frequent exaggeration and distortion) to the general public.

Bell was honored fairly early by election to the Royal Society in 1972, proposed by Paul
Matthews and Rudolf Peierls. In the eighties many more honors came to him: the Real-
ity Foundation Prize (shared with J.F. Clauser, 1982), Honorary Fellow of the American
Academy of Arts and Sciences (1987), Dirac Medal of the Institute of Physics (1988), hon-
orary doctorates at the Queen’s University of Belfast (1988) and at Trinity College in Dublin
(1988), the Dannie Heineman Prize for Mathematical Physics (1989), and the Hughes Medal

R. Jackiw and A. Shimony – The Depth and Breadth of John Bell’s Physics

4

of the Royal Society (1989). His contributions to the foundations of quantum mechanics were
regularly cited along with his discoveries in main line physics. These honors were enhanced
by a universal recognition that John Bell was a man whose character equalled his intellect.
John Bell died suddenly of a stroke on October 1, 1990. He was still at the height of his
powers just before he was stricken, and the loss to science was undoubtedly very great. The
world also lost a man of exemplary dedication, integrity, courage, modesty, generosity, and
humanity.

2 Foundations of Quantum Mechanics

2.1 Early Thoughts

Even as an undergraduate Bell was seriously troubled by the foundations of quantum mechan-
ics and unconvinced of the dominant opinion at his University and in the physics profession
generally. Information about this period can be found in Quantum Proﬁles [18] of Jeremy
Bernstein, who interviewed Bell, and in biographical articles of Andrew Whitaker [19], who
obtained information from Lesley Kerr, a friend of Bell one year behind him in the Physics
Department at Queen’s. Quantum mechanics was taught in the context of Dr. Sloane’s course
on atomic spectra, with emphasis on practical applications rather than conceptual founda-
tions. Bell questioned Sloane skeptically and indeed aggressively, and was dissatisﬁed not
only with Sloane’s exposition but with what he learned generally of the Copenhagen point
of view. The argument with Sloane

. . . had convinced Bell of the central importance of the concept of measurement
in any meaningful discussion of quantum mechanics. It was necessary to identify
this as a central element, in order to be able to criticise the fact by pointing out
the illegitimacy of using the idea of measurement as a primary term . . . .

At the time the aspect of this that most concerned Bell was the divide or ‘Heisen-
berg cut’ between quantum and classical. He fully accepted Bohr’s acknowledg-
ment that the apparatus must be treated classically, but deﬁnitely did not ac-
cept his arguments about the relation between quantum and classical. Actually it
would be true to say that he did not recognise where Bohr’s actual argument was
supposed to be, though he knew that Bohr claimed to have solved the problem. If
possible Bell wished to eliminate the distinction between quantum and classical
altogether, and the most obvious way to do attempt to do that was by hidden
variables.

[20], Sect. 5

R. Jackiw and A. Shimony – The Depth and Breadth of John Bell’s Physics

5

2.2

Ideas on Measurement and Physical Reality: “Beables”

The discontent concerning the Copenhagen Interpretation – and of quantum mechanics it-
self, if it is taken to be a complete theory – expressed in these reconstructions of Bell’s
somewhat confused early ideas persisted throughout his career, but was sharpened, clariﬁed,
and linked to a variety of constructive programs. He felt that Bohr and Heisenberg were
profoundly wrong in giving observation a fundamental role in physics, thereby letting mind
and subjectivity permeate or even replace the stuﬀ of physics, however much they obscured
that they were doing this. Observation is indispensable to the process of obtaining knowledge
about the physical world, but Bell always maintained that what is there to be known has
an objective status independently of being observed. Here is a sample of statements to this
eﬀect from publications over a period of a quarter of a century:

1967: It is easy to imagine a state vector for the whole universe, quietly pursuing its linear
evolution throughout all of time and containing somehow all possible worlds.But the
usual interpretive axioms of quantum mechanics come into play only when the system
interacts with something else, is ‘observed’. For the universe there is nothing else, and
quantum mechanics in its traditional form has simply nothing else to say. It gives no
way of, indeed no meaning of, picking out from the wave of possibility the single unique
thread of history . . . . In any case it seems that the quantum mechanical description
will be superseded. In this it is like all theories made by man. But to an unusual extent
its ultimate fate is apparent in its internal structure. It carries in itself the seeds of its
own destruction.

[21]

1973: It is interesting to speculate on the possibility that a future theory will not be ambigu-
ous and approximate. Such a theory would not be fundamentally about ‘measurements’,
for that would again imply incompleteness of the system and unanalyzed interventions
from outside. Rather it should again be possible to say of a system not that such and
such may be observed to be so but that such and such be so.

[22]

1975: The theory of local beables. This is a pretentious name for a theory that hardly
exists otherwise, but which ought to exist . . . . The terminology, be-able as against
observ-able, is not designed to frighten with metaphysic those dedicated to realphysic.
It is chosen rather to help in making explicit some notions already implicit in, and
basic to, ordinary quantum theory . . . . ‘Observables’ must be made somehow, out of
beables. The theory of local beables should contain, and give precise physical meaning
to, the algebra of local observables.

[23]

R. Jackiw and A. Shimony – The Depth and Breadth of John Bell’s Physics

6

1981: Where is the ‘measurer’ to be found? . . . If the theory is to apply to anything but ide-
alized laboratory operations, are we not obliged to say that more or less ‘measurement-
([24],
like’ processes are going on more or less all the time more or less everywhere.
Sect. 1)

1990: Experiment is a tool. The aim remains to understand the world. To restrict quantum
mechanics to be about piddling laboratory operations is to betray the great enter-
prise.

[25]

2.3 Logical Investigations on Hidden Variables Theories

As noted above in the quotation from Whitaker’s memoir [20], Bell was already attracted
in his undergraduate years by the idea of a hidden variables theory supplementing the de-
scription of a physical system given by quantum mechanics. (He objected later to the term
“hidden variables”, which suggests inaccessibility to any experimental probing, and preferred
“beables”, as indicated in one of the quotations above.) Even without knowing what these
hidden variables are in detail, one might construct models of them, which would illumi-
nate some of the conceptual diﬃculties of quantum mechanics. For instance, ﬁxing hidden
variables might in principle determine the values of all the observable quantities recognized
by quantum mechanics, though the chaotic behavior of the physical world at the level of
the hidden variables – analogous to thermal chaos in kinetic theory of gases – would pre-
clude experimental control, thereby accounting for Heisenberg’s uncertainties. According to
Whitaker, however, Bell’s interest in hidden variables was dampened by reading Max Born’s
Natural Philosophy of Cause and Chance [26], which maintained in general terms the diﬃ-
culty of constructing a theory of this kind that would recover the known quantum statistics,
and in addition stated that von Neumann [27] had given a rigorous mathematical proof for
the impossibility of such a construction. Not knowing German, Bell could not assess the
validity of von Neumann’s proof, but was inclined for a while to believe Born.

We do not seem to have information about the incubation of Bell’s ideas on quantum
mechanics between from the time he left Queen’s University until 1952, but in that year
the developed them radically. In the Acknowledgments of Bell’s pioneering paper in Reviews
of Modern Physics, “On the Problem of Hidden Variables in Quantum Mechanics” [7] he
says, “The ﬁrst ideas of this paper were conceived in 1952. I warmly thank Dr. F. Mandl for
intensive discussion at that time.” Mandl was a refugee from Germany and was able to tell
him the content of von Neumann’s proof, as yet untranslated. Furthermore, David Bohm’s
“A Suggested Interpretation of the Quantum Theory in Terms of ‘Hidden’ Variables” [28]

R. Jackiw and A. Shimony – The Depth and Breadth of John Bell’s Physics

7

was published, providing an instance of just the sort of model that von Neumann’s theorem
allegedly showed to be impossible. From his reading and his discussions with Mandl it became
clear to Bell that von Neumann’s theorem, though mathematically correct, was physically
weak. One of von Neumann’s premisses concerned expectation values ε(A), ε(B), etc. of the
observables A, B, etc. recognized by quantum mechanics. He required that in any ensemble
of systems of the speciﬁed kind, even an ensemble determined by ﬁxing the hypothetical
hidden variables – which would be dispersion-free since each observable would be given a
deﬁnite value by the ﬁxed hidden variables – the expectation values would be additive:

ε(A + B) = ε(A) + ε(B)

(1)

where A and B are observables of the system quantum mechanically represented by self-
adjoint operators, not necessarily commuting. Bell’s analysis, not published until 1966, is
devastating:

The essential assumption can be criticized as follows. At ﬁrst sight the required
additivity of expectation values seems very reasonable, and it is rather the non-
additivity of allowed values (eigenvalues) which requires explanation. Of course
the explanation is well known: A measurement of a sum of noncommuting observ-
ables cannot be made by combining trivially the results of separate observations
on the two terms – it requires a quite diﬀerent experiment. For example the
measurement of σx for a magnetic particle might be made with a suitably ori-
ented Stern-Gerlach magnet. The measurement of σy would require a diﬀerent
orientation, and of (σx + σy) a third and diﬀerent orientation. But this expla-
nation of the nonadditivity of allowed values also established the nontriviality
of the additivity of expectation values. The latter is a quite peculiar property
of quantum mechanical states, not to be expected a priori. There is no reason
to demand it individually of the hypothetical dispersion free states, whose func-
tion it is to reproduce the measurable peculiarities of quantum mechanics when
averaged over.

[7], Sect. 3

In addition to criticizing von Neumann’s premise, Bell constructed a family of hidden
variables models for a spin-1/2 particle in each of which deﬁnite values are consistently as-
signed to every spin observable, and the additivity of expectation values holds for observables
represented by commuting operators. Each such model can be taken as a hidden variable
λ in a space Λ of hidden variables, λ(A) being the value assigned by this hidden variable
to the observable A. Bell showed, furthermore, that every quantum mechanical state φ of

R. Jackiw and A. Shimony – The Depth and Breadth of John Bell’s Physics

8

the spin-1/2 system can be constructed by averaging over Λ with an appropriate probability
measure ρ (independent of the observables):

hφ| A |φi =

A(λ) dρ .

ZΛ

(2)

Bell’s construction is quite simple, and it will be seen momentarily that the dimension
two of the Hilbert space associated with the spin-1/2 system is crucial. Bell notes that hidden
variables model diﬀers conceptually from Bohm’s by using only the algebraic structure of
the observables of the spin-1/2 system, without any consideration of the apparatus used for
measuring.

An important part of Ref. [7] was inspired by a theorem of Andrew Gleason [29], which
was not published until 1957 and not known by Bell until conversations with Josef Jauch
after moving to Geneva. Gleason did not directly address the question of hidden variables,
but considered which probability measures are deﬁnable on the lattice of projection opera-
tors (which is isomorphic to the lattice of closed linear subspaces) on a Hilbert space. The
conditions on a probability measure m are

1. m(Q) is a nonnegative real number for any projection operator Q on the Hilbert space;

2. m(I) = 1, where I is the identity operator;

3. If {Qi} is a ﬁnite or countably inﬁnite set of mutually orthogonal projection operators,

then m(

Qi) =

m(Qi).

P

P

Gleason’s theorem asserts that if the Hilbert space has dimension three or greater then a
probability measure must be determined either by a quantum mechanical pure state,

for some vector φ in the Hilbert space with norm unity, or else by a convex combination
of measures thus determined; equivalently, m must be determined in the standard quantum
mechanical manner,

m(Q) = hφ| Q |φi

m(Q) = Tr(QW )

(3)

(4)

where W is a statistical operator, i.e., a positive self-adjoint operator of trace unity.

One easily sees that Tr(QW ) cannot have values restricted to 0 or 1 for all projection
operators Q, from which in turn it follows that the state represented by W cannot be dis-
persion free for each observable, that is, each self-adjoint operator. Consequently, a corollary

R. Jackiw and A. Shimony – The Depth and Breadth of John Bell’s Physics

9

of Gleason’s theorem is that no system associated quantum mechanically with a Hilbert
space of dimension three or greater can admit a dispersion-free state; or in von Neumann’s
locution, there can be no dispersion-free ensemble of such systems. And of course, since the
set of dispersion-free states is empty, one cannot recover a quantum mechanical state φ by
averaging appropriately over them. Note that the hidden variables model constructed by
Bell earlier in Ref. [7] does not conﬂict with Gleason’s theorem and its corollary, since the
Hilbert space in that case has dimension two.

The proof given by Gleason of his theorem is intricate; Bell said (at a conference) that he
knew he had either to read Gleason’s proof or to construct his own proof of the corollary that
interested him, and the latter alternative was obviously easier. And this he did, elegantly
and simply, in Sect. 5 of Ref. [7]. An independent proof of the corollary was published the
following year by Simon Kochen and Ernest Specker [30].

After this accomplishment, the last Sect. of Bell’s Ref. [7] is a remarkable surprise. Hav-
ing exhibited that the hidden variables program, construed as it had been in the past, is
mathematically impossible except in the trivial case of dimension two, Bell resuscitated the
program by a well-motivated relaxation of conditions. He slyly remarked, “That so much
follows from such apparently innocent assumptions leads us to question their innocence.”
What is not innocent, he pointed out, is the tacit assumption that when the hidden variable
λ is speciﬁed, “the measurement of an observable must yield the same value independently
of what other measurements may be made simultaneously.” If observable A and B commute,
then quantum mechanics requires that in principle both can be measured simultaneously,
because there exists an observable C such that A can be expressed as a function A(C) and
B as a function B(C). But A can commute with two observables B and B′ that are noncom-
muting, and then a C of which A and B are functions necessarily diﬀers from a C ′ of which
both A and B′ are functions. Thus a diﬀerent procedure is required to measure A along with
B from the one used to measure A along with B′. This observation opens up a new family
of hidden variables theories, which have come to be called “contextual”, in which the value
of an observable A is a function not only of the hidden variable λ but also the context of
measurement. Bohm’s model [28] was an instance of this idea, but he did not present the
idea explicitly and generally. By a judo-like maneuver Bell elicits unwitting cooperation in
the resuscitation of the hidden variables program from Niels Bohr, a dedicated opponent of
it, by citing Bohr’s thesis of the “impossibility of any sharp distinction between the behavior
of atomic objects and the interaction with the measuring instruments which serve to deﬁne
the conditions under which the phenomena appear” [31].

R. Jackiw and A. Shimony – The Depth and Breadth of John Bell’s Physics

10

2.4 Bell’s Theorem

The most inﬂuential of Bell’s papers on the foundations of quantum mechanics was “On the
Einstein-Podolsky-Rosen Paradox” [6]. It was published in 1964, but its content presupposes
[7], which was published two years later. The explanation for this chronological peculiarity is
the misplacement of [7] in the oﬃces of Reviews of Modern Physics. Ref. [6] is the pioneering
presentation of what has come to be called “Bell’s Theorem,” which (roughly) asserts that
no hidden-variables theory that satisﬁes a certain locality condition can reproduce all the
predictions of quantum mechanics. The name “Bell’s Theorem” actually applies to a family
of theorems with the general character just stated, but we shall review only three variants
that Bell himself proved. In all of Bell’s variants a space of complete speciﬁcations – the hidden
variables – of the system is envisaged (not the case in other variants, notably the controversial
ones of Henry Stapp [32, 33] and other expositions), and the results are independent of
the detailed character of the hidden variables. What is important is (i) the way in which
observable quantities depend upon the hidden variables, and (ii) the fact that the space of
hidden variables admits probability distributions. In Ref. [6] the hidden variable is taken
to be a single continuous parameter, and the system studied for the purpose of proving the
Theorem consists of two well-separated particles 1 and 2. A family of quantities parameterized
by a is measurable on 1, each, for simplicity, assumed to have only two possible outcomes
+1 and −1; likewise, a family of quantities parameterized by b is measurable on 2, with the
same assumption regarding outcomes. The outcome of a measurement on 1 is a function

regardless of what quantity is measured on 2; and likewise the outcome of a measurement
on 2 is a function

A(a, λ) = ±1

B(b, λ) = ±1

(5a)

(5b)

regardless of what quantity is measured on 1. Since the outcomes are deﬁnite when the
quantity speciﬁed by a (respectively b) is given along with λ, the hidden variables theory is
deterministic. It may appear that Bell has neglected the possibility of contextuality, which he
introduced in Ref. [7] to resuscitate the hidden variables program, but that impression is due
to the notation. As a matter of fact, two diﬀerent parameters a and a′ for particle 1 could
refer to the same measurable quantity measured along with diﬀerent contexts concerning
particle 1, though with no reference to what is measured on 2; and likewise for b and b′.
Contextuality is tacitly allowed in this version of Bell’s theorem, but it is restricted by a
locality requirement, which is vital: the result A does not depend upon what is measured on 2,

R. Jackiw and A. Shimony – The Depth and Breadth of John Bell’s Physics

11

and the result B does not depend upon what is measured on 1. Bell justiﬁes this requirement
with a quotation from Einstein.

But on one supposition we should, in my opinion, hold absolutely fast: the real
factual situation of the system S2 is independent of what is done with the system
S1, which is spatially separated from the former.

[6], footnote 2

In Ref. [6] the well-separated particles 1 and 2 are assumed to have spin-1/2 and to be
in the quantum mechanical singlet state. If a and b are vectors in ordinary three-space,
then σ1a is the quantity parameterized by a, and σ2b is the quantity parameterized by
b. The anti-correlation of spins of particles in the singlet state guarantees that if a and b
are equal then the outcomes of the measurements of the corresponding quantities of 1 and
2 are opposite, or equivalently, the product of their measurement outcomes is -1. For the
hidden variables theory to agree with this quantum mechanical prediction there must be a
probability distribution ρ over the space of hidden variables (normalized to unity) such that

But this is possible only if

dλ ρ(λ)A(a, λ)B(a, λ) = −1.

Z

A(a, λ) = −B(a, λ)

for all but a set of measure zero in the space of hidden variables. All the concepts and
assumptions of the theorem in Ref. [6] have now been introduced, and the remainder of
Bell’s work is mathematics, which we shall condense. Using Eqs. (5), (6), and (7) he easily
proves the inequality

where

1 + P (b, c) ≥

P (a, b) − P (a, c)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)

(cid:12)
(cid:12)

P (a, b) =

dλ ρ(λ)A(a, λ)B(b, λ)

Z

(that is, the expectation value using the probability distribution ρ of the product of the
outcomes of measurement of the spin components parameterized by a and b). Inequality is
the prototype of a family of inequalities that are now collectively called “Bell’s Inequalities.”
It is a well-known consequence of the quantum mechanical singlet state that the expectation
value of the product of an arbitrary spin component of particle 1 and an arbitrary spin
component of particle 2 satisﬁes

(6)

(7)

(8)

(9)

R. Jackiw and A. Shimony – The Depth and Breadth of John Bell’s Physics

12

σ1a σ2b
(cid:11)

(cid:10)

= −a · b

(10)

The discrepancy between the hidden variables inequality (8) and the quantum mechanical

expectation value (10) is immediate, thus proving the theorem of Ref. [6].

There are a number of important additional points in this paper. The title, “On the
Einstein-Podolsky-Rosen [EPR] Paradox”, signals the importance of EPR’s paper [16] in fo-
cusing on a pair of well-separated particles that has been properly prepared to ensure strict
correlations between certain of their observable quantities. Bell recognizes in Sect. 2 that the
deterministic character of the hidden variables theory that EPR recommend is not an addi-
tional assumption, but is the consequence of EPR’s assumptions of locality, exact agreement
with the quantum mechanical predictions of strict correlation, and their well-known suﬃ-
cient condition for the existence of an element of physical reality (but his acknowledgment
of the third assumption is tacit rather than explicit). Next, in recognition of the inaccuracies
of actual measurement, Bell asks in Sect. 4 of Ref. [6] whether a deterministic local hidden
variables theory can agree approximately with the quantum mechanical predictions, and he
provides a negative answer by deriving a generalization of inequality (8). He also brieﬂy
mentions generalizations of his theorem to pairs of systems each associated with a Hilbert
space of dimension greater than two and having observables with more than two possible
values. Finally, and most remarkably, in Sect. 6 he mentions the possibility that quantum
mechanics is of limited validity, applying only when “the settings of the instruments are made
suﬃciently in advance to allow them to reach some mutual rapport by exchange of signals
with velocity less than or equal to that of light.” If so, the locality requirement assumed in
the theorem would not be physically justiﬁed and would not be a consequence of the locality
of special relativity theory. In order to check this conjecture, “experiments of the the type
proposed by Bohm and Aharonov . . . in which the settings are changed during the ﬂight of
the particles, are crucial” [34]. Thus, in this pioneering paper of 1964 Bell already suggests
the desirability of an experiment like that carried out by Aspect, Dalibard, and Roger in
1982 [15].

In 1971 Bell [35] published a new version of his Theorem, which is an improvement
over the ﬁrst in two respects. (a) It dispenses with reliance upon quantum mechanics, as in
Eq. (2) above, for the purpose of deriving a crucial inequality. In so doing it follows a paper
by Clauser et al. [36] of 1969. If the resulting inequality conﬂicts with experiments, one can
conclude not only the falsity of the conjunction of quantum mechanics with the assumptions
of the local hidden variables theory but the falsity of those assumptions themselves without

R. Jackiw and A. Shimony – The Depth and Breadth of John Bell’s Physics

13

conjoining quantum mechanics. (b) It weakens the assumption (5) that the hidden variable
deterministically governs the outcome of each observable quantity of particles 1 and 2, assert-
ing instead that λ ﬁxes the expectation value of the outcome of measuring the quantities of 1
parameterized by a, or equivalently the probability of each possible measurement outcome,
and likewise for the quantities of 2 parameterized by b. The locality requirement is that the
expectation value of the former is independent of b and conversely. In Sect. 4 Bell says that
the failure of deterministic equations like (5) above may be due to hidden variables of the
instruments, but in Footnote 10 he adds that this failure may be due to a more fundamental
indeterminism, persisting even when the hidden variables both of the particles and the in-
struments are speciﬁed. The character of the indeterminism does not aﬀect the mathematics
which leads to the inequality

P (a, b) − P (a, b′)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)

(cid:12)
(cid:12)

+

P (a′, b′) + P (a′, b)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)

(cid:12)
(cid:12)

≤ 2 .

(11)

It is easy to show the inconsistency of Inequality (11) with the ideal quantum prediction
expressed by Eq. (10) and – obviously valuable in experimental investigations – even with
approximations to the ideal prediction. In view of the assumptions upon which Inequality
(11) is based, its disconﬁrmation by experiment would throw doubt upon the entire family
of deterministic and nondeterministic local hidden variables theories.

Bell’s third variant of his Theorem appeared in a somewhat rough form in “The theory of
local beables” [23], but a better presentation, meeting some criticisms, appeared in “La Nou-
velle Cuisine” [37], written too late to be included in the collection Speakable and Unspeakable
in Quantum Mechanics. What is interesting about this variant is a greater explicitness about
the locality requirement than in its predecessors. He supposes that the measurements of the
quantities of quantities parameterized respectively by a and b are performed in regions 1
and 2 with space-like separation. (For the careful use of special relativity theory this de-
scription of the ideal experimental arrangement is clearly more precise than “well-separated
particles”.) Region 3 is bounded by two non-intersecting space-like surfaces, both cutting
through the backward lightcones of both 1 and 2 in such a way that the intersections of the
later surface with the two backward lightcones are non-overlapping, while the intersections
of the earlier surface with the two backward lightcones overlap. In region, let c stand for
any set of physical quantities describing the experimental arrangement and recognized by
quantum mechanics in that part of region 3 that blocks the two backward lightcones and
λ be all other variables needed in addition to c to describe completely this part of region
3. The probability of joint outcomes A and B of the two measurements reasonably depends
only upon a, b, c, and λ and hence can be written as
, which by standard

a, b, c, λ

A, B

(cid:8)

(cid:12)
(cid:12)

(cid:9)

R. Jackiw and A. Shimony – The Depth and Breadth of John Bell’s Physics

14

probability theory can be factorized into

A, B

a, b, c, λ

=

A

B, a, b, c, λ

B

a, b, c, λ

.

(12)

(cid:8)

(cid:12)
(cid:12)

(cid:9)

(cid:8)

(cid:12)
(cid:12)

(cid:9)(cid:8)

(cid:12)
(cid:12)

(cid:9)

Then, Bell reasons,

Invoking local causality, and the assumed completeness of c and λ in the relevant
parts of region 3, we declare redundant certain of the conditional variables in
the lst expression, because they are at space-like separation from the result in
question. Then we have

A, B

a, b, c, λ

=

A

a, c, λ

B

b, c, λ

.

(cid:8)

(cid:12)
(cid:12)

(cid:9)

(cid:8)

(cid:12)
(cid:12)

(cid:9)(cid:8)

(cid:12)
(cid:12)

(cid:9)

(13)

Bell remarks that Eq. (13) “exhibits A and B as having no dependence on one another, nor
on the settings of the remote polarizers (b and a respectively), but only on the local polarizers
(a and b respectively) and on the past causes, c and λ. Eq. (13) is essentially the locality
requirement used in Ref. [35], but here he does not take it as the starting point of his analysis
but rather as a consequence of two quite diﬀerent locality assumptions used in passing from
Eq. (12) to Eq. (13). (There is similar reasoning in Sects. 2 and 4 of Ref. [23] and in a paper
by J. Jarrett [38]. Once Eq. (13) is derived, and it is further reasoned that the probability
distribution for the hidden variable λ is independent of the freely chosen variables a and b
and therefore dependent only upon c, one obtains a factorizability condition for expectation
values:

E(a, b, c) =

AB

Aa, c, λ

Bb, c, λ

λ

Xλ XA,B

(cid:8)

(cid:9)(cid:8)

(cid:9)(cid:8)

c

.
(cid:9)

(cid:12)
(cid:12)

(14)

Inequality (11) can then be derived essentially as in Refs. [35] and [36], and Bell omits the
details.

2.5

Is There Nonlocality in Nature?

In Sect. 6.7 of [37] Bell oﬀers the following formulation of the principle of local causality:
“The direct causes (and eﬀects) of events are near by, and even the indirect causes (and
eﬀects) are no further away than permitted by the velocity of light.” He then reviews Bell’s
Theorem and the experiments which it inspired to investigate whether the principle of local
causality holds in quantum mechanics and in nature. He pays attention to attempts to give
a positive answer to this question, but concludes that these are desperate and unconvincing.

R. Jackiw and A. Shimony – The Depth and Breadth of John Bell’s Physics

15

Bell’s own negative answer led him to controversial but tentative proposals, which will be
presented below.

The ideal predictions of quantum mechanics in certain situations violate Inequality (11)
– for instance, when the linear polarization of photon 1 of a pair of photons is measured in
region 1 of Ref. [37] and the linear polarization of photon 2 of the pair is measured in region
2, the pair being prepared in the polarization state

Ψ = 1
√2

(cid:8)

|hi1 |hi2 + |vi1 |vi2

(cid:9)

(15)

(cid:12)
(cid:12)

(cid:12)
(cid:12)

(cid:12)
(cid:12)

(cid:12)
(cid:12)

(cid:9)

(cid:8)

(cid:9)

(cid:8)

(cid:9)

(cid:9)

(cid:8)

A

A

B

B

for

for

b, c, λ

a, c, λ

a, b, c, λ

B, a, b, c, λ

where |hi is a state of horizontal polarization and |vi a state of vertical polarization. Con-
sequently, quantum mechanics must deny one or both of the two omissions of variables in
the transition from Eq. (12) to Eq. (13). As a matter of fact, it is immediate, in view of
the correlations of Eq. (14), that quantum mechanics does not permit the substitution of
(where λ is simply the quantum state Ψ in quantum
(cid:8)
has often
mechanics). On the other hand, the substitution of
been shown to be valid in quantum mechanics; a sketch of an argument in the case of rela-
tivistic quantum mechanics – using the commutativity of Heisenberg operators at space-time
points that are space-like separated – is given by Bell in Secs. 6.5 and 6.11 of Ref. [37]. If
this substitution were not allowed, then a superluminal signal could be transmitted from
region 1 to region 2, since dependence of the probability of outcome B upon the freely cho-
sen variable a provides (probabilistically) some information about that choice. Alternatively,
the dependence – entailed by quantum mechanics – of the probability of the outcome A
in region 1 upon the outcome B in region 2 does not permit transmission of information
about a choice, because the outcome B is a chance event not chosen by the experimenter in
region 2. In other words, although quantum mechanics violates Inequality (11), which is a
consequence of any local hidden variables theory, deterministic or nondeterministic, it does
so in such a way that the violation cannot be used to provide superluminal communication.
Accordingly, some writers on the problem (included one of us, A.S.) have suggested that,
despite tension between quantum mechanics and special relativity theory, there is “peaceful
coexistence” between the two theories. Furthermore, if one accepts the auxiliary assumption
that the pairs of particles detected in an actual correlation experiment is a fair sample of the
pairs emerging from polarization analyzers, even though the detectors are quite ineﬃcient –
an assumption that Bell regards as very reasonable ([37], Sect. 6.12) – then in view of the
overwhelming favoring of quantum mechanics in correlation experiments there is a kind of
nonlocality in nature, but such as to coexist peacefully with relativistic locality.

Bell is scornful of this optimistic and conciliatory proposal. The reason is his unwillingness

R. Jackiw and A. Shimony – The Depth and Breadth of John Bell’s Physics

16

to admit that something complex, special, and anthropocentric can be a fundamental prin-
ciple of physics – the same reason that is pervasive in his polemic “Against ‘Measurement’ ”,
cited in Sect. 2a above.

Do we then have to fall back on ‘no signaling faster than light’ as the expression
of the fundamental causal structure of contemporary theoretical physics? That
is hard for me to accept. For one thing we have lost the idea that correlations
can be explained, or at least this idea awaits explanation. More importantly, the
‘no signaling . . . ’ notion rests on concepts that are desperately vague, or vaguely
applicable. The assertion that ‘we cannot signal faster than light’ immediately
provokes the question:

Who do we think we are?

We who can make ‘measurements’, we who can manipulate ‘external ﬁelds’, we
who can signal at all, even if not faster than light? Do we include chemists, or
only physicists, plants, or only animals, pocket calculators, or only mainframe
computers?

[37], Sect. 6.12

This polemic against the fundamental signiﬁcance of signaling implies that the failure ac-
cording to quantum mechanics of the reduction of
, in the
transition from Eq. (12) to Eq. (13) is as serious a violation of local causality as the failure
of the transition

(cid:12)
(cid:12)
would have been.

B, a, b, c, λ

a, b, c, λ

a, c, λ

b, c, λ

to

to

B

B

A

A

(cid:8)

(cid:9)

(cid:8)

(cid:9)

(cid:12)
(cid:12)

(cid:8)

(cid:12)
(cid:12)

Among the logical possibilities that Bell tentatively explores in order to escape from
this disagreeable conclusion is to envisage a theory in which the apparent free will of the
experimenters in choosing the variables a and b is an illusion. But he comments,

(cid:9)

(cid:8)

(cid:12)
(cid:12)

(cid:9)

Perhaps such a theory could be both locally causal and in agreement with quan-
tum mechanical predictions. However I do not expect to see a serious theory
of this kind. I would expect a serious theory to permit ‘deterministic chaos’, or
‘pseudorandomness’, for complicated subsystems (e.g., computers) which would
provide suﬃciently free variables for the purpose at hand. But I do not have a
theorem about that . . . .

[37], Sect. 6.10

Another logical possibility (mentioned in Ref. [37], Sect. 6.12) after a preliminary dis-
cussion of the concept of entropy) is that “causal structure emerges only in something like
a ‘thermodynamic’ approximation, where the notions ‘measurement’ and ‘external ﬁeld’ be-
come legitimate approximations.” But he cannot believe that this is the whole story, because
“local commutativity [which is invoked for the derivations of dispersion relations in quantum

R. Jackiw and A. Shimony – The Depth and Breadth of John Bell’s Physics

17

ﬁeld theory] does not for me have a thermodynamic air about it. It is a challenge now to
couple it with sharp internal concepts, rather than vague external ones. Perhaps there is
already a hint of this in ‘quantum mechanics with spontaneous wave function collapse.”’ In
Sect. 2f we shall discuss some of Bell’s conjectures on the quantum mechanical measurement
problem, for which spontaneous wave function collapse is a recent proposed solution. For the
present, we merely note Bell’s entertainment of the idea that there is an intimate connection
between the locality problem and the measurement problem.

(cid:12)
(cid:12)

(cid:9)

(cid:8)

A

B, a, b, c, λ

Another logical possibility considered by Bell is a reversion to the pre-Einsteinian rel-
ativity theory of Fitzgerald, Larmor, Lorentz, and Poincar´e, in which there is a preferred
reference system (an “aether”), but forces dependent upon velocity relative to the preferred
frame are responsible for Fitzgerald-Lorentz contraction, hence for the null result of the
Michelson-Morley experiment, hence for the cover-up that prevents the identiﬁcation of the
preferred frame. In this pre-Einsteinian theory there is no kinematical obstacle to superlu-
minal causal inﬂuences. Consequently, the transition above from Eq. (12) to Eq. (13) would
could indeed depend upon the variable b, and upon the
be blocked because
chance outcome of the experiment parameterized by b, even though that variable is freely
chosen in a region with space-like separation from the region where variable a is freely cho-
sen. Hence there would be a causal relation between outcomes A and B, even though no
light signal could connect the events. Whether A is the cause and B the eﬀect or conversely
depends upon the time order in the preferred reference system. Although this method of
permitting a causal connection between two regions with space-like separation sacriﬁces the
conceptual beauty of Einstein’s special theory of relativity, much and perhaps all of the
experimental consequences of that theory is recovered in a suﬃciently clever reversion to
the pre-Einsteinian theory, and Bell’s paper “How to Teach Special Relativity” [39] argues,
nonpolemically, that there are some pedagogical advantages in this reversion. But the main
motivation for going back to Fitzgerald et al., once the peculiarities of quantum mechanical
correlations have been established experimentally, is that we would have a space-time theory
that accommodates these peculiarities. Having entertained this solution to the problem of
quantum mechanical nonlocality, however, Bell cannot endorse it without serious reserva-
tions:

As with relativity before Einstein, there is then a preferred frame in the formu-
lation of the theory . . . but it is experimentally indistinguishable . . . . It seems an
eccentric way to make a world.

[40], last paragraph

We suspect that the passage in Bell’s writings that most accurately expresses his at-
titude towards the apparent nonlocality of quantum theory, which he more than any one

R. Jackiw and A. Shimony – The Depth and Breadth of John Bell’s Physics

18

else brought into sharp focus, is an unspeciﬁc and open conjecture about the physics of the
future: “It may be that a real synthesis of quantum and relativity theories requires not just
technical developments but radical conceptual renewal”.

([41], last sentence)

2.6 Unpromising and Promising Approaches to the Measurement

Problem

The quantum mechanical measurement problem is generated by the unitarity of the quantum
mechanical time-evolution operators together with the assumption that quantum mechanics
governs the entire physical world. As a consequence, when a physical apparatus interacting
with an object of interest physically indicates (e.g., by a “pointer reading” or some gener-
alization thereof) the eigenvalue of an observable quantity whenever the object is initially
in an eigenstate of that quantity with that eigenvalue, then in the more general case of
an initial object state which is a superposition of eigenstates with diﬀering eigenvalues the
“pointer” of the apparatus at the conclusion of the measurement has an indeﬁnite reading.
How then can there be deﬁnite outcomes of measurements, whose probabilities are supposed
to be predicted by the formalism of quantum mechanics? Bell comments in some detail on
four diﬀerent attempts to solve this problems, two of which he considers to be unsuccessful
and two at least promising.

(i) The Copenhagen Interpretation

The most unsuccessful, in Bell’s opinion, is historically the most widely accepted – the
Copenhagen interpretation of quantum mechanics in one version or another. “Against ‘Mea-
surement’ ” [25] is Bell’s polemic against this interpretation, represented by the versions of
L.D. Landau and E.M. Lifshitz [42], K. Gottfried [43], and N.G. van Kampen [44], which
he regards as suﬃciently strong and characteristic to represent adequately the entire school.
Each version makes, explicitly or implicitly, certain assumptions and approximations that are
good “for all practical purposes” – a phrase which he abbreviates with the biting acronym
“FAPP”. Landau and Lifshitz (LL) emphasize the macroscopic constitution of the apparatus
actually used in measurement, in virtue of which it behaves as a classical physical system.
But that is consistent with the quantum mechanics only if there is a spontaneous transition
of the state of the apparatus into an eigenstate of its “pointer reading”. But how in detail
is this transition – irreversible according to LL – compatible with the universal principles of
quantum mechanics? Bell concludes,

The LL formulation, with vaguely deﬁned wave function collapse, when used

R. Jackiw and A. Shimony – The Depth and Breadth of John Bell’s Physics

19

with good taste and discretion, is adequate FAPP. It remains that the theory is
ambiguous in principle, about exactly when and exactly how the collapse occurs,
about what is microscopic and what is macroscopic, what quantum and what
classical. We are allowed to ask: Is such ambiguity dictated by experimental
facts? Or could theoretical physicists do better if they tried harder?

An essential element in Gottfried’s solution to the measurement problem is ﬁrst to repre-
sent the ﬁnal state of the object and apparatus (neglecting the interaction of the apparatus
with the rest of the world) by a density matrix ρ in the pointer-reading basis, which will
in general contain oﬀ-diagonal terms, and then to retain only the diagonal elements of ρ,
yielding the density matrix

ρ′ =

cnn

ΨnΨ∗n .

2

(cid:12)
(cid:12)

Xn (cid:12)
(cid:12)

(16)

Bell is willing to allow the harmlessness FAPP of replacing of ρ by ρ′, because of the “practical
elusiveness, or even the absence FAPP of interference between macroscopically diﬀerent
states”. But he objects strenuously to Gottfried’s assertion that the right-hand side of Eq.
(15) endows the coeﬃcients |cnn|2 with an interpretation as probabilities.

I am quite puzzled by this. If one were not on the lookout for probabilities, I
think the obvious interpretation of even r’ would be that the system is in a state
in which the various Ψs somehow coexist . . . . This is not at all a probability
interpretation, in which the diﬀerent terms are seen not as coexisting, but as
alternatives . . . . The idea that the elimination of coherence, in one way or another,
implies the replacement of ‘and’ by ‘or’ is a very common one among solvers of
the ‘measurement problem’. It has always puzzled me.

Bell goes on to argue that in spite of Gottfried’s pretense at obtaining irreversibility out
of the reversible exact quantum dynamics by an approximation, he is modifying the rules
of quantum mechanics – surreptitiously and without precision. Van Kampen divides the
entire world W into “system” S, “apparatus” A, and the rest R′, so that W can be written
as S + A + R′ = S′ + R′, and he cleverly focuses on the S′/R′ interface. One treatment
of the interface is rigorously quantum mechanical. The other treatment takes into account
measurements that can actually be done, and these FAPP show no interference between
macroscopically diﬀerent states of S′. Bell attributes to van Kampen a conjunction of these
points of view with the consequence,

R. Jackiw and A. Shimony – The Depth and Breadth of John Bell’s Physics

20

It is as if the ‘and’ in the superposition had already, before any such measure-
ments, been replaced by ‘or’. So the ‘and’ has already been replaced by ‘or’. It
is as if it were so . . . so it is so.

Bell concludes that either by a quantum mechanical theorem or by a change of theory
van Kampen has reached a conclusion like that attributed to LL: that a superposition of
macroscopically diﬀerent states somehow decays into one of its members. But no theorem
is given, and Bell ﬁnds it unlikely that one could be given, because the only procedure of
calculation available for proving such a theorem would require a further shift of the slippery
split between system and the rest of the world, and the indeﬁniteness of the split precludes
precise calculation. This negative conclusion points, for Bell, in the direction of changes of
theory, samples of which will be sketched in (iii) and (iv) below.

(ii) H. Everett’s Interpretation

There appear to be two reasons why Bell discusses Everett’s interpretation at some length
in two papers [45, 24]. The ﬁrst is positive – that Bell appreciates Everett’s rejection of a
division of the world into a part treated quantum mechanically and a part treated classically
(which is Bell’s bete noir in the Copenhagen interpretation), for Everett simply postulates
a universal quantum mechanical wave function. Moreover, Everett eliminates the baﬄing
duality of temporal development, one continuous and unitary governed by the Schr¨odinger
equation, and the other discontinuous and stochastic occurring when a reduction of the
wave packet occurs, since he denies the occurrence of the latter. The second is that Bell
recognizes some kinship between the Everett interpretation and the hidden variables theory
of de Broglie and Bohm, as no one previously seems to have done, and the exploration of
this kinship allows him to highlight certain virtues of the latter. Everett’s uncompromising
adherence to quantum mechanics drives him to a radical account of the measuring process: If
are a complete set of eigenstates of an observable A of an object, and the object interacts
(cid:8)
with a measuring apparatus that is accurate in the sense of “recording” the eigenstate by
entering a corresponding state χk whenever the object is prepared in a deﬁnite φk, then
the ﬁnal state of object plus apparatus, when the object is prepared in the superposition
cnφnχn. For Everett the ﬁnal superposition is unequivocally interpreted as
P
“and”, not as “or”. He introduces the terminology “relative state” and says that relative to
the apparatus χk the object state is φk, but there is no selection from among those
(cid:9)
that occur with a non-zero coeﬃcient in the initial superposition. Each “branch” in the ﬁnal
state of object plus apparatus is as real as any other. Does branching occur only when there

cnφn, is

φn

φn

P

(cid:8)

(cid:9)

R. Jackiw and A. Shimony – The Depth and Breadth of John Bell’s Physics

21

is a measurement process, the branches being labeled by the eigenstates of the “pointer
reading” of the apparatus, or does it occur relative to an arbitrary basis in the Hilbert space
associated with the apparatus? Bell ﬁnds an ambiguity in Everett’s text on this matter, and
he raises objections to either possible answer. If the former, then

Everett is indeed following an old convention of abstract measurement theory –
that the world does fall neatly into such pieces – instruments and systems . . . .
I think that fundamental physical theory should be so formulated that such
artiﬁcial divisions are manifestly inessential. In my opinion Everett has not given
such a formulation – and de Broglie has.

[45]

If the latter answer is accepted, with relative states deﬁned for arbitrary bases, then “it
becomes obscure to me that any physical interpretation has either emerged from, or been
imposed on, the mathematics.” (Ref. [24], footnote 9). Returning to the ﬁrst answer regarding
branching, we note that Bell ﬁnds implicit in it a curious view of the past:

[I]n our interpretation of the Everett theory there is no association of the partic-
ular present with any particular past. And the essential claim is that this does
not matter at all. For we have no access to the past. We have only our ‘memories’
and our ‘records’. But these memories and records are in fact present phenom-
ena . . . . Everett’s replacement of the past by memories is a radical solipsism –
extending to the temporal dimension the replacement of everything outside my
head by my impressions, of ordinary solipsism or positivism. Solipsism cannot
be refuted. But if such a theory is taken seriously it would hardly be possible to
take anything else seriously. So much for the social implications.

[45]

(iii) The Hidden Variables Theory of de Broglie and Bohm

In 1927 Louis de Broglie [46] proposed a speciﬁc hidden variables interpretation that was
modiﬁed and ampliﬁed by David Bohm [28] in 1952. (We shall not analyze the similarities and
diﬀerences of the theories of the two men, but rather shall focus on what we shall call “BB”,
which is Bell’s own exposition of their combined work.) BB applies quantum mechanics to
the entire physical world, and hence admits a universal wave function. Their hidden variables
are the positions of all particles, all positions being objectively deﬁnite. The universal wave
function evolves under the Schr¨odinger equation, uninﬂuenced by the positions of particles.
If this wave function is expressed in the polar form

ψ(q, t) = R(q, t) exp[iS(q, t)/¯h]

(17)

R. Jackiw and A. Shimony – The Depth and Breadth of John Bell’s Physics

22

where q is position in conﬁguration space, R and S being real-valued functions, then BB
postulates that the generalized momentum conjugate to q is

p = gradq S .

(18)

ψ is often called “the guiding ﬁeld” and Eq. (18) “the guiding equation”. Although positions
are the only explicit hidden variables, BB is able to ascribe, with the following strategy, a def-
inite result to a physically described measurements of any quantity represented in quantum
mechanics by a self-adjoint operator: The quantity of interest is coupled with an apparatus
whose “pointer reading” is assumed to be a position (hence a component of q), in such a way
that an eigenstate of the quantity is strictly correlated with a value of this position at the
completion of the measurement. Deﬁniteness of q, which is postulated by the theory, entails
a deﬁnite inference regarding the value of the measured quantity. The statistical predictions
of BB are the same as those of standard quantum mechanics if one supposes that the Born
rule for probability density,

prob(q, t0) = |ψ(q, t0)|2

(19)

holds for some initial time t0, its holding for all other times being a consequence of the
dynamics.

Bell makes a number of complimentary remarks about BB. The theory does not take an
anthropocentric concept like observables as fundamental, but postulates an ontology consist-
ing of (i) a universal wave function, thought of as physically existing like the electromagnetic
ﬁeld, and (ii) the positions q, which are the “beables”. Indeed, these beables ought not be
thought of as hidden variables, because positions are manifest quantities, whereas the wave
function is shadowy and shows its existence only via its eﬀect upon the positions. There is
only one dynamical law governing the wave function and no mysterious “reduction of the
wave packet” to account for a result of measurement. There are deﬁnite measurement results,
but they are the values of certain components of q(t), whose temporal development depends
only on an initial value, the wave function, and the guiding equation. Although BB shares
with Everett’s interpretation the virtue of avoiding two diﬀerent laws for the evolution of the
wave function, it diﬀers – to its advantage – by attributing a deﬁnite conﬁguration to the
world instead of a multiplicity of branches with diﬀerent conﬁgurations. It is also a virtue
of BB that nonlocality enters in a natural way: When the wave function of the world – or
of a small number of systems in an idealizing approximation – is an entangled state, the
components of the generalized momentum p in the guiding Eq. (18) can be correlated even
though the corresponding components of q are far separated:

R. Jackiw and A. Shimony – The Depth and Breadth of John Bell’s Physics

23

That the guiding wave, in the general case, propagates not in ordinary three-
space but in a multidimensional-conﬁguration space is the origin of the notorious
‘nonlocality’ of quantum mechanics. It is the merit of the de Broglie-Bohm version
to bring this out so explicitly that it cannot be ignored.

[47], last paragraph

Finally, the essential idea of BB is more general than the detailed exposition by its
authors, for there is no reason in principle to restrict the beables to particle positions,
suspiciously reminiscent of classical mechanics. There are other possible choices of beables,
suggested by recent discoveries in elementary particle physics, which would be coupled with
the universal wave function by an appropriate guiding equation. In “Beables for Quantum
Field Theory” [40] – dedicated to Bohm – Bell suggests a version of BB that takes fermion
number density as the beables, since that “includes the positions of instruments, instrument
pointers, ink on paper . . . and much much more.” The resulting theory is BQFT (“de Broglie-
Bohm beable quantum ﬁeld theory”), which has to be compared with OQFT (“ ‘ordinary’
‘orthodox’ ‘observable’ quantum ﬁeld theory”). There is good agreement between BQFT and
two versions of OQFT that Bell presents. In spite of this empirical parity, at least FAPP, Bell
prefers BQFT conceptually, because it is designed to provide a detailed temporal account of
the measurement process.

After thus making his case for a suitably modiﬁed BB, Bell concludes with a strong

reservation.

BQFT agrees with OFQT on the result of the Michelson-Morley experiment,
and so on. But the formulation of BQFT relies heavily on a particular division
of space-time into space and time. Could this be avoided?

[40], Sect. 5

After a brief discussion of ways to achieve Lorentz invariance, Bell concludes skeptically:

I am unable to prove, or even formulate clearly, the proposition that a sharp
formulation of quantum ﬁeld theory, such as the one set out here, must disrespect
serious Lorentz invariance. But it seems to me that this probably so.

[ibid.]

(iv) Theories of Spontaneous Reduction of the Wave Packet

Bell was aware of a number of proposals to solve the measurement problem by modifying
the time-dependent Schro dinger equation, by the addition of small nonlinear terms or by
introducing stochasticity into the dynamics (see footnote 6 of Ref. [24]). The detailed pro-
posal of this kind that impressed him most was that of G.C. Ghirardi, A. Rimini, and T.
Weber (GRW) [48], which he discusses in detail in “Are There Quantum Jumps?” [49]. GRW

R. Jackiw and A. Shimony – The Depth and Breadth of John Bell’s Physics

24

postulate no hidden variables but consider the quantum state to be a complete description
of a physical system. The quantum state satisﬁes Bell’s criterion for a “beable” formulation
of quantum mechanics, because they describe the measurement process explicitly and clearly
in terms of the fundamental dynamical law; their paper is, in fact, entitled “Uniﬁed Dynam-
ics of Microscopic and Macroscopic Systems.” GRW’s innovation is a stochastic reduction
which may occur for any particle at random infrequent times (the mean waiting time for
reduction to occur being a new constant of nature τ , clearly large and postulated by GRW
to be 1015 s).The stochastic reduction is described in the position representation, and it can
occur even when the particle is part of a composite system described by an entangled state,

ψ(rn, x′, t) =

cni(t)φi(rn)Φi(x′)

(20)

Xi

where rn is the position of the nth particle, x′ is the conﬁguration of all particles except the
nth, and i is an index in a superposition of terms. When the stochastic reduction happens
for the nth particle, the result is to replace every φi(rn) by j(r − rn)φi(rn)/Rn(r), where
5 cm, and
j is a “jump factor”, Gaussian for convenience with width a of the order of 10−
Rn is a normalization factor. After a jump the nth particle will be well localized, since all
wave function φi with supports not close to r will be annihilated by the jump factor. One
virtue of this scheme is that for a single particle or a system of few particles, the stochastic
modiﬁcation of the Schrodinger equation causes such infrequent jumps that they will not be
experimentally noticeable. On the other hand, for a system with a large number of particles,
of the order of 1020, the mean waiting time for reduction of some particle or another of
5 s, and therefore – because of the algebra of
the system will be small, of the order of 10−
entanglement – the position of the center of mass will quickly be localized within a region of
5 cm. Thus a macroscopic system will not have a grossly unlocalized position
diameter 10−
more than a short time, and the pointer reading is quickly deﬁnite. Classical dynamics
is approximately recovered for macroscopic systems by an explicit calculation based upon
the dynamics of microscopic systems. Although GRW’s experimental disagreements with
standard quantum are small, they are non-zero and in principle testable (but so far no
feasible test has been devised).

The most troublesome feature of GRW, according to Bell, is the apparent action-at-a-
distance that occurs when one of the particles of a composite system in an entangled state
undergoes a spontaneous jump. A particle remote from the one undergoing the jump may
be constrained to be localized, without any locally describable causal process. To be sure, no
message can be transmitted by this correlation, but Bell’s reasons for thinking this fact is not
crucial were presented in Section 2.5 above. What concerns him is whether the theory can be

R. Jackiw and A. Shimony – The Depth and Breadth of John Bell’s Physics

25

modiﬁed so as to be Lorentz invariant in spite of spooky correlations. The question cannot
be directly investigated in GRW’s theory, which is nonrelativistic, but Bell does answer a
related question. He proves that if a diﬀerent time coordinate is used for each particle, a
relative time translation invariance holds in this theory. He therefore concludes tentatively,
but somewhat optimistically, concerning the prospects of further developments of GRW:

I see the GRW model as a very nice illustration of how quantum mechanics, to
become rational, requires only a change which is small (on some measures!). And
I am particularly struck by the fact that the model is as Lorentz invariant as it
could be in the nonrelativistic version. It takes away the ground of my fear that
any exact formulation of quantum mechanics must conﬂict with fundamental
Lorentz invariance.

[49], Sect. 5

It is regrettable that Bell did not live to develop further a program that he found so promising.

3 Field Theory and Elementary Particle Physics

John Bell’s public profession and employment from the mid-1950s was that of a theoretical
nuclear and later particle physicist, a progression that reﬂects the historical development
of the subject. The framework within which he worked was quantum ﬁeld theory. During
his time, two competing ideas were also popular among particle theorists: S-matrix/Regge
theory in the early years, string theory in later years. Apparently these did not appeal to
Bell who remained within ﬁeld theory for all his investigations. His ﬁrst paper in this area, in
1955, followed ﬁve active years of research in accelerator physics, which produced 21 publi-
cations. Drawn from his doctoral thesis at Birmingham University, it addresses an important
and classic issue. Bell entitled the work “Time reversal in ﬁeld theory” [1]. In fact he es-
tablished the PTC theorem, which states that any local, relativistically invariant quantum
ﬁeld theory is invariant against the simultaneous inversion of space-time coordinates and
reversal of all charges. Unknown to him this had already been shown the year before by
L¨uders using an argument markedly diﬀerent from Bell’s [50]. Yet Bell is hardly ever cred-
ited for his independent derivation, presumably because he was not in the circle of formal
ﬁeld theorists (Pauli, Wigner, Schwinger, Jost, etc.) who appropriated and dominated this
topic. Today Bell’s “elementary derivation” is more accessible than the formal ﬁeld theoretic
arguments. The subject of time reversal remained an important theme in his subsequent
research [51], especially when it became clear that time inversion (T) (unaccompanied by
space inversion and charge conjugation) is not a symmetry of Nature, and neither is space

R. Jackiw and A. Shimony – The Depth and Breadth of John Bell’s Physics

26

inversion conjoined with charge conjugation (PC) (unaccompanied by time inversion). To-
gether with his friend, the experimentalist Steinberger, he wrote an inﬂuential review on
the phenomenology of PC-violating experiments [52], and with Perring proposed a “simple
model” theory to explain that eﬀect [53]. They postulated the existence in the universe of
a hitherto unobserved long-range ﬁeld, which would catalyze the PC symmetry breaking.
Though speculative, the suggestion was truly physical, hence falsiﬁable, and it was soon
ruled out by further experiments. Nevertheless, it remains a bold and beautiful idea that
continues to intrigue theorists.

Bell’s immediate postdoctoral research concerned nuclear physics and he worked closely
with Skyrme on nuclear magnetic moments [2], though apparently not on Skyrme’s prescient
ideas on solitonic models for the nucleons. Bell contributed variously to the many-body theory
of nuclei [3], notably the derivation with Squires of an eﬀective one-body “optical” potential
for the scattering oﬀ a complex target [4]. The nuclear physics work, though not producing
any breakthrough in that ﬁeld, prepared him well for dealing with problems that he would
eventually encounter at CERN, involving nuclear and particle processes. Examples of this
later work are his nuclear optical model (again!) for pi-mesons
[54], and investigations of
neutrino reactions with nuclei [55], where the hypothesis of a “partially conserved axial vector
current” (PCAC) connects neutrino processes with pi-meson emission.

In 1960, Bell joined CERN and remained there to the end of his life. Although primarily
a center for particle physics accelerator experiments, CERN houses Europe’s preeminent
particle theory group, and Bell became active in that ﬁeld. Typically particle theorists are
divided into phenomenologists – people who pay close attention to experimental results, and
interact professionally with experimentalists – and formalists, who explore the mathematical
and other properties of theoretical models, propose new ideas for model building, and usually
are somewhat removed from the reality of the experiments. Although Bell’s time-reversal
paper [1] belongs forcefully in the formalist category, at CERN he was very much also a
particle physics phenomenologist, drawing on his previous experience with nuclear physics.
Indeed, with characteristic conscientiousness, Bell felt an obligation to work on subjects
related to the activities of the laboratory. But his readiness to discuss and study any topic
in physics ensured that he would pursue highly theoretical and speculative issues as well.

Theoretical understanding of particle physics at that time was hampered by two obstacles.
No single model had been identiﬁed as giving a correct account for the fundamental interac-
tions of elementary particles, with the exception of electromagnetic interactions, which were
adequately described by quantum electrodynamics. Moreover, competing models could not
be assessed because their extremely complicated dynamical equations could not be solved, so

R. Jackiw and A. Shimony – The Depth and Breadth of John Bell’s Physics

27

the predictions of the models were unknown and could not be compared with experiments.
To overcome this impasse, Gell-Mann advanced the idea of “current algebra”, with which
one could obtain explicit and testable results. Current algebra is a particle physics/quantum
ﬁeld theory reprise of an old technique used in quantum physics for atoms, namely, the
Thomas-Reiche-Kuhn sum rule, or the Bethe energy loss sum rule [56]. Here one identiﬁes
relevant operators whose matrix elements govern transitions between atomic levels, and the
total transition probability is a sum over all ﬁnal-state levels. In favorable circumstances,
the operators are manipulated by using the operator quantum commutation relations, which
are deduced from the fundamental canonical commutators, and the sum can be evaluated
using the completeness of states. All this can be achieved without determining individual
wave functions, which would involve the daunting task of solving completely the interacting
Schr¨odinger equation; indeed, even explicit knowledge of the potential function governing
the interactions is not needed.

In the particle physics analog, the relevant operators governing transitions are the rela-
tivistic 4-vector and axial 4-vector currents, generalizations of the electromagnetic 4-vector
current, but carrying internal symmetry group [SU(2) or SU(3)] labels. In an article in the
same volume of the now-defunct journal Physics in which Bell published his famous EPR
paper, Gell-Mann postulated a form for the commutators of current components using a
hypothesis about canonical structure and plausible ideas from group theory [57]. Also it was
necessary to know the covariant divergences of the 4-vector and axial 4-vector currents. One
took the vector current divergence to vanish, that is, that current is conserved just as is the
electromagnetic 4-vector current, while the axial 4-vector current was taken to be partially
conserved (PCAC) and related to pi-meson processes.

Gell-Mann’s proposal [57] successfully bypassed the two obstacles: ignorance about spe-
ciﬁc dynamics, and inability to unravel proposed dynamical equations. Testable results were
soon obtained by Adler, Fubini, Furlan, Weissberger, and others [58], and the predictions of
current algebra theory appeared to agree very well with experiment. Consequently almost
all particle physics theorists began researching the foundations, extensions, and applications
of Gell-Mann’s current algebra proposal. So also did Bell, and it is within this area that he
made his principal contributions to particle physics.

While the canonical formalism in a quantum ﬁeld theory provides one starting point
for deriving the current algebra, it suﬀers from the shortcoming that canonical commuta-
tion relations are postulated for the unrenormalized operators. But quantum ﬁeld theory is
notoriously polluted by various inﬁnities, which must be renormalized, and it is not clear
whether relations obtained by manipulating unrenormalized quantities accurately describe

R. Jackiw and A. Shimony – The Depth and Breadth of John Bell’s Physics

28

what the model entails. Bell illuminated these issues by studying the commutators in a
“trivial” completely solvable but unrealistic model, which nevertheless requires renormaliza-
tion (Lee model) [59]. He demonstrated that indeed canonical relations must be used with
caution, because in various circumstances they will lead to values for particle physics sum
rules (analogs of the atomic physics Thomas-Reiche-Kuhn or Bethe sum rules) that do not
agree with the explicit summation of the explicitly calculated amplitudes. Also, under the
inﬂuence of related work by his friend and colleague Veltman [60], Bell proposed a diﬀerent
basis for the current algebra. Rather than relying on canonical commutation relations for
unrenormalized operators, he showed that invoking the non-Abelian gauge principle, which
lies at the heart of Yang-Mills theory – a subject Veltman was intensely studying – will also
yield the desired current commutation relations [61].

After the successes of current algebra built on the SU(2) or SU(3) group, attempts were
made to employ other groups [U(4), U(6), SU(6), SL(6, C), U(6) × U(6), U(12), etc.]. The
extended theory had an initial success in predicting the ratio between neutron and proton
magnetic moments to be −2/3, which agrees well with experiment. But soon it became
evident that a consistent relativistic theory could not incorporate such groups as symmetry
groups, and Bell contributed to the critique [62].

When this generalization fell out of favor, most people left the subject, but Bell kept an
eye on the topic, owing to his longtime interest (since his time with Skyrme) in nuclear mag-
netic moments, and his belief that the good experimental agreement should not be accidental.
Thus when the subject reappeared years later in the guise of the “Melosh transformation”,
Bell researched and lectured on this new direction [63], but results remained inconclusive.

In addition to formal, theoretical investigations and critiques of current algebra, Bell de-
rived and reﬁned various useful relations relevant to experiment: beta-decay of pi-mesons [64],
low-energy Compton scattering [65], soft pi-meson emission [66]. But in these studies he also
encountered results that failed to agree with experiment, even though the derivations made
use of what appeared to be the most reliable aspects of the theory. First there was the
current algebra and PCAC analysis that seemed to forbid the decay of the eta-meson into
three pi-mesons, even though the process is seen experimentally [67]. This complemented the
result of Sutherland and Veltman [68] that a very direct application of current algebra and
PCAC prohibits the decay of the neutral pi-meson into two photons, again contradicting ex-
perimental observation. Although these were small defects of the generally successful current
algebra story, John Bell did not put them aside, since he would not abide imprecision and
incompleteness in physical theory.

The two streams of Bell’s current algebra research – investigations on the reliability of

R. Jackiw and A. Shimony – The Depth and Breadth of John Bell’s Physics

29

the postulated algebraic structures, and attention to apparent failures of the theory – came
together on what turned out to be his most far-reaching contribution to particle physics,
published in his most-quoted scientiﬁc paper. Responding to a request by Jackiw (who in
1967–8 was a visiting scientist at CERN) for a research problem, Bell suggested analyzing
current algebra’s failure in the pi-meson/two-photon process. This was a vexing puzzle,
because the theoretical argument prohibiting the decay seemed to be direct and elementary.
No new ideas were forthcoming, until a casual observation (over coﬀee in the CERN caf´e)
by Steinberger, Bell’s experimentalist collaborator on their PC review article [52], pointed
the way. Steinberger remarked that years earlier he had computed the amplitude in a once
popular model ﬁeld theory, and gotten a nonvanishing result, which moreover agreed well
with experiment [69]. Bell and Jackiw realized that Steinberger’s calculation would coincide
with what one would ﬁnd in the σ-model, a ﬁeld theory constructed by Gell-Mann and
L´evy to exhibit explicitly current algebra and PCAC [70]. So here was the test: On the
one hand, a direct calculation of the decay amplitude in the σ-model should reproduce
Steinberger’s nonvanishing result. On the other hand, an indirect calculation based on current
algebra/PCAC, which appear to be present in the σ-model, should give a vanishing result.
The resolution of this conﬂict would display what is happening, and is reported in their
paper, “A PCAC Puzzle: π0 → γγ in the σ-Model” [8].

The direct calculation involves the now famous fermion triangle graph

where the bottom two vertices denote electromagnetic vector currents to which the two
photons couple, while in the apex there is the axial vector current, which according to PCAC
governs the pi-meson coupling. The lines joining the vertices denote fermion propagators,
which in the Steinberger calculation were protons [69], while in contemporary theory they
are quarks.

The three-current amplitude is a three-index tensor, carrying a space-time index for each
of the three currents. Direct evaluation of the Feynman graph reproduces Steinberger’s non-
vanishing decay amplitude [69]. On the other hand, current algebra and PCAC demand
that with massless fermions propagating between the vertices, the three-index tensor should
be transverse in each of its indices. These transversality conditions are examples of Ward-
Takahashi identities satisﬁed by ﬁeld-theoretic amplitudes. Generically, the task of current
algebra and PCAC was to establish such identities, from which physically relevant conse-

R. Jackiw and A. Shimony – The Depth and Breadth of John Bell’s Physics

30

quences could be drawn. In the pi-meson/two photon application, the threefold transversal-
ity of the three-current amplitude implies that the pi-meson decay amplitude vanishes [68].
Since the explicit calculation provides a nonvanishing amplitude, the Ward-Takahashi iden-
tity must fail and indeed the explicit calculation of the triangle produces a nontransverse
result [8].

This observation put into evidence a previously unsuspected quantum ﬁeld theoretic
phenomenon: With massless fermions, the axial vector current appears to be conserved. (That
is why the three-current amplitude is expected to be transverse in the axial vector index, just
as it is in the vector indices, owing to the conservation of the vector electromagnetic current.)
Current conservation is evidence that a symmetry holds: conservation of the electromagnetic
current is correlated with gauge invariance. With massless fermions, a conserved axial vector
current would indicate that a further symmetry is present: the so-called chiral symmetry.
Chiral symmetry is understood in the following fashion. Massless spin- 1
2 fermions can be
viewed as consisting of two species, which do not mix. In one species the spin is aligned along
the direction of propagation; in the other, the spin points opposite to the propagation. Chiral
symmetry then is the ability of performing separate and independent gauge transformations
on each species. Noninteracting fermions, described by a massless Dirac equation, do indeed
exhibit this chiral symmetry. Superﬁcially, it appears that interaction with photons should
preserve the chiral symmetry. However, the triangle graph calculation demonstrates that
this is not so [8]. The technical reason for this unexpected violation of the symmetry is
that the integral that evaluates the triangle graph is singular (divergent) and a prescription
must be given how to handle the singularity to get a noninﬁnite result. It turns out that
no matter what prescription is given, chiral symmetry is lost. Therefore, if we accept that
quantum ﬁeld theoretic inﬁnities are a necessary consequence of the quantization procedure,
the Bell and Jackiw discovery established a novel method of symmetry breaking, called
anomalous or quantal symmetry breaking, which arises from the quantization procedure
itself: symmetries of an unquantized theory need not survive quantization. This new mode
of symmetry breaking supplements previously known possibilities: symmetry breaking by
nonsymmetric dynamics or symmetry breaking by energetic instabilities, as in spontaneous
symmetry breaking with the Higgs mechanism. Moreover, this quantal symmetry breaking
mechanism also violates the correspondence principle of quantum physics [71].

The situation can be summarized by the anomalous divergence equation. Rather than

being conserved, the axial vector current has a nonzero divergence, given by

On the left there is the divergence of the axial vector current J µ

A, on the right is the anomaly

∂µJ µ

A ∝ ∗F µνFµν .

(21)

R. Jackiw and A. Shimony – The Depth and Breadth of John Bell’s Physics

31

responsible for the quantum mechanical nonconservation. Here Fµν is the electromagnetic
Maxwell tensor, ∗F µν its dual equal to 1
2ǫµναβFαβ, and their product coincides with the
scalar product of the electric and magnetic ﬁelds with which the fermions interact. The
proportionality constant in the above anomalous divergence equation is determined by the
number and charges of the fermions and ﬁxes the strength of the pi-meson/two-photon
amplitude.

The implications of this symmetry breaking phenomenon are many, and they are widely

spread in physical theory. Here is a list.

1. Working independently, and slightly later, Adler found that the axial vector current in
quantum electrodynamics behaves similarly. When he learned of the Bell-Jackiw consid-
erations about the pi-meson/two-photon amplitude, he complemented their work, and
proved (with Bardeen) that no other graphs contribute to the anomaly [72]. Therefore,
a precise value for the pi-meson/two-photon amplitude can be predicted. Numerical
agreement with the experimental value requires that if the fermions propagating in
the legs of the triangle graph are quarks, carrying quark charges, there must be three
species – “colors”.

2. Current commutators reﬂect the underlying symmetry of the theory. If the symmetry
is broken quantum mechanically, there must be quantal correction to current algebra.
Such correction were found and they provide an alternative viewpoint why Ward-
Takahashi identities fail: anomalous divergences of currents and anomalous commuta-
tors are two sides of the same coin [73].

3. It soon became apparent that anomalous divergences can arise in other currents as
well. However, if gauge ﬁelds couple to currents, consistency of the gauge principle
requires that such gauge currents be anomaly free. This can be arranged, provided the
number and charges of participating fermions are such that their contributions to the
proportionality constant in the anomalous divergence of the gauge current sum to zero.
In the present day “Standard Model” of electroweak interactions this cancellation of
anomalies requires equal numbers of quarks and leptons, with charges taking precisely
the values of the Standard Model [74]. Moreover, anomalies also endanger consistency
of string theories, and the demand of anomaly cancellation strongly limits the possible
string theories. This limitation led to a revival of string theory research [75].

4. Polyakov and his collaborators realized that the quantity ∗F µνFµν and its non-Abelian
generalization are topological entities, whose four dimensional integral measures the

R. Jackiw and A. Shimony – The Depth and Breadth of John Bell’s Physics

32

topological twist in the underlying gauge ﬁelds. This is the Chern-Pontryagin number.
They identiﬁed ﬁelds with nonvanishing twist – the instantons – even though they
made no reference to the anomaly, which evidently was largely unappreciated at that
time in the Soviet Union [76].

5. ’t Hooft, a student of Bell’s friend Veltman, and well instructed by him about Bell’s
anomaly work, showed that in the Standard Model certain combinations of fermion
number currents do not couple to gauge ﬁelds and are aﬄicted by the anomaly. As a
consequence protons can decay, but with an exponentially vanishing small probability,
thus not endangering the stability of our world [77]. Related to this was the observation
that owing to the anomaly, there is the possibility of quantum mechanical tunneling
in the Standard Model ﬁeld theory. This creates a Bloch-like band structure, where
states are labeled by a hitherto unsuspected PC-violating parameter – the θ vacuum
angle [78]. How to ﬁx the magnitude of this θ-angle is still an open question.

6. Discussion of anomalies brought physicists into contact with mathematical entities,
like the previously mentioned Chern-Pontryagin term, and the Chern-Simons term [79]
(whose exterior derivative gives the Chern-Pontryagin entity). As it happened, math-
ematicians were studying precisely these same topics, at roughly the same time. Thus,
the anomaly seeded a remarkable physics/mathematics collaboration and cross-fertili-
zation, which is still ﬂourishing, especially in string theory research [80].

7. It was appreciated that another symmetry, which relies on masslessness, is beset by
anomalies. This is scale and conformal invariance, which would require the energy mo-
mentum tensor to be traceless. But in fact superﬁcially scale and conformally invariant
theories (like the Standard Model in the absence of its Higgs sector) acquire upon
quantization a nonvanishing trace – a trace anomaly – thereby breaking quantum
mechanically the scale and conformal symmetries [81]. This of course is very fortu-
nate, because Nature certainly is not scale invariant, and could not be described by a
scale-invariant theory. Moreover, it was appreciated that the proper way to deal with
anomalously broken scale and conformal symmetry in quantum theory is through the
Gell-Mann–Low renormalization group [82].

8. Beyond particle physics theory, in condensed matter theory and in gravity theory,
physicists have realized that a mathematical discussion of physical eﬀects can have a
topological component, which is related to structures ﬁrst seen in quantal anomalies.

R. Jackiw and A. Shimony – The Depth and Breadth of John Bell’s Physics

33

Examples are descriptions of fractional fermions by spectral ﬂow of the Dirac operator,
the theory of the quantum Hall eﬀect based on the Chern-Simons term.

The direct physical relevance of the axial vector anomaly in accounting for the decay of
the neutral pi-meson, and in explaining quark and lepton patterns that ensure absence of
anomalies in gauge currents, is evidence that not only theoretical/mathematical physicists
but also Nature knows and makes use of the anomaly mechanism. Moreover, the unexpected
connections that the anomaly makes within physics and with mathematics suggests that we
are dealing with an as yet not completely understood wrinkle in the mathematical description
of physical phenomena.

Once it was appreciated that the anomaly phenomenon is not merely an obscure pathol-
ogy of quantum ﬁeld theory, many people wrote many papers providing various and alterna-
tive derivations of the result. But not John Bell. It seems that he was satisﬁed with what he
stated in his only paper on this topic [8]. He did follow the subsequent developments and elab-
orations, but apparently he preferred the “simple” triangle-diagram calculation that started
the subject. One reason for this is that he felt that the diagrammatic approach, leading to a
singular integral, very explicitly exhibits the arbitrariness and ambiguity in the calculation,
which can only be resolved when some additional, external information is added. For exam-
ple, the three-current triangle graph cannot be transverse in all three vertices, but there is
no information in which vertex transversality fails since diﬀerent methods for handling the
singularity produce diﬀerent results. A unique value, ﬁxing the lack of transversality in the
axial vector vertex, emerges only after requiring the vector vertices be transverse, because
gauge particles – photons – couple to these vertices. On the other hand in the standard
electroweak model, with the same triangle graph, the vector vertex describes a nongauged
fermion number current, and in this context the anomaly can reside there, giving rise to
’t Hooft’s proton decay scenario [77].

After the anomaly paper, Bell returned to more immediately practical investigations
like the already-mentioned neutrino-nucleus work with Lewellyn-Smith [55], and the Melosh
reprise of “higher” symmetries [63].

This was also the period when non-Abelian gauge theories became accepted as the correct
ﬁeld theoretic description of fundamental processes in the Standard Model, with the Higgs
mechanism providing a mass for the carriers of the weak interaction forces. Although he was
an early proponent of non-Abelian gauge symmetry in current algebra [61], Bell did not work
extensively in this newly expanding ﬁeld, writing only on two topics. He showed that the
Higgs mechanism ensured good high-energy behavior in theories with massive vector ﬁelds
(such as those that carry the weak interaction forces) [83]. Then with Bertlmann and others

R. Jackiw and A. Shimony – The Depth and Breadth of John Bell’s Physics

34

he examined various ideas about bound states in quantum chromodynamics – the hadronic
sector of the Standard Model [84]. These were the last particle physics studies carried out
by Bell. The ﬁnal scientiﬁc papers that he wrote all deal with accelerator physics and with
his quantum physics “hobby”, which late in his life became widely appreciated. There were
many demands on him to explain and develop these ideas.

Two other investigations are noteworthy. As if anticipating the great excitement felt
these days about experimental/theoretical discrepancies in the anomalous magnetic moment
of the muon aµ = 1
2 (gµ − 2), Bell and de Rafael obtained an upper bound on the hadronic
6 [85]. This is certainly satisﬁed by today’s accepted value,
contribution: aµ
8. But a change in the accepted number consistent with the Bell-de Rafael
aµ
bound could very well aﬀect the experimental/theoretical discrepancy ∆ aµ ∼ 4 × 10−

hadronic < 10−
(cid:12)
(cid:12)

hadronic ∼ 7×10−
(cid:12)
(cid:12)

9.

A peculiar eﬀect seen in quantum ﬁeld theory, which challenges conventional ideas, and
has a realization in condensed matter physics attracted Bell’s interest. It was observed that
the measured value for the number operator of a fermion moving in the background of a
topological soliton, as for example created by a domain wall in a solid-state substance, would
be a fraction [86]. Moreover, it was alleged that this phenomenon is physically realized in
polyacetylene – a one-dimensional polymer [87]. One naturally wonders whether the observed
fraction is an expectation value, or an eigenvalue without ﬂuctuations. Only in the latter
case would this represent a truly novel and unexpected phenomenon.

On a visit to India, Bell’s host Rajaraman described to him this eﬀect, but Bell doubted
that the fraction could be a sharp observable. Nevertheless, he wanted to ﬁnd out and in
two papers they established that indeed the fractions were eigenvalues of a number operator,
“which is deﬁned with some sophistication” [88].

This last-mentioned work illustrates well John Bell’s attitude to his research on funda-
mental physical questions. Rather than advancing new theoretical models, his publications
are infused with a desire to know and explain existing structures, preferably in “simple
terms”, in a “simple model” – phrases that occur frequently in his papers. If physicists come
in two types, those who try to read the book of Nature and those who try to write it, Bell
belonged to the ﬁrst category. He was conservative when it came to speculative and uncon-
ventional suggestions; he would prefer that unexpected contradictions not arise, that ideas
ﬂow along clearly delineated channels. But this would not prevent him from establishing
what exactly is the case and accepting, albeit reluctantly, even puzzling results. This tension
is seen in the anomaly paper, where after describing the phenomenon in the ﬁrst part, a later
section is devoted to an attempt at removing the anomaly, saving the chiral symmetry [8].
(Years later it was understood that this attempt yields a construction with scalar ﬁelds of

R. Jackiw and A. Shimony – The Depth and Breadth of John Bell’s Physics

35

the Wess-Zumino anomalous eﬀective Lagrangian, which can be used to compensate for the
fermion-induced anomaly [89].) Even in his quantum mechanical investigations, Bell would
have preferred to side with the rational and clearly spoken Einstein rather than with the
murky pronouncements of Bohr. But once he convinced himself where the truth lies, he would
not allow his investigations be aﬀected by his inclinations, even if he remained disturbed by
their outcome. Such a commitment to “truth” – as he saw it – marked John Bell’s activity
in science and in life.

4 Accelerators

From the time that Bell came to Harwell in 1949 until his leave for graduate work at the Uni-
versity of Birmingham in 1953–4 his research almost entirely concerned accelerator design,
in a group directed by William Walkinshaw. The ﬁrst twenty-one items in his bibliography,
from 1950 to 1954, concerned aspects of accelerator design. Of these, only two were pub-
lished; the others are internal A.E.R.E. reports at Harwell, but these reports were considered
authoritative and were much consulted and cited. He continued to make contributions to ac-
celerator design during his entire career. Since neither of the authors of this essay is an expert
on accelerators, we shall do little more than the topics of Bell’s research. But this part of
his work must be kept in mind even by readers primarily interested in his contributions to
foundations of quantum mechanics and high energy physics, because it shows the practi-
cality and concreteness of his mind, which undoubtedly deeply inﬂuenced even his highly
theoretical and philosophical thinking.

In the Royal Society memorial essay on Bell by P.G. Burke and I.C. Percival [90], Walkin-

shaw is quoted concerning collaboration with him:

We in Malvern had ﬁnished our work on small electron machines, so had turned
our attention the situation to high-energy machines. The situation was ﬂuid and
we looked at all sorts of possibilities. One of these was a disc-loaded waveguide
for electron accelerators. This was the ﬁrst project that John worked on with
me [91] . . . another possibility was a high-energy linac, and we looked at variety
of waveguide structures . . . Here was a young man of high caliber who soon
showed his independence on choice of project, with a special liking for particle
dynamics. His mathematical talent was superb and elegant.

Mary Bell [92] pointed out that his mathematical skill enabled him to carry design prob-
lems to the point where the calculations required could be performed on the primitive desk

R. Jackiw and A. Shimony – The Depth and Breadth of John Bell’s Physics

36

calculators available at that time.

When the group began to consider the design of a proton synchrotron, Bell studied
the application of the strong focusing principle, which was the topic of his ﬁrst published
paper [93]. According to the memorial essay, [90] he “wrote a seminal report on the algebra of
strong focusing [94] . . . read by all accelerator designers of the day.” Other topics dealt with
in internal reports were “Linear Accelerator with Spiral Orbits”, the “Stability of Perturbed
Orbits in the Synchrotron,” and “Linear Accelerator Phase Oscillations.”

The collaboration between Mary and John Bell on accelerator problems, that had com-
menced at Harwell, continued at CERN although he was in the Theory Division and she was
in the Accelerator Research Group. They wrote several papers on electron cooling [95, 96]
when CERN’s Super Proton Synchrotron was being designed, and even though a less ex-
pensive stochastic cooling method was adopted for that accelerator, their cooling method
was later used for the LEAR ring. They also published several papers together [97, 98] on
bremsstrahlung, a practically important phenomenon because it contributes substantially
to energy loss in electron-positron linear colliders. Richard Hughes, a visitor at CERN who
collaborated with Bell, commented [99], “It was perhaps from his work in this ﬁeld that John
acquired his rigorous understanding of classical mechanics and special relativity” (though
we suspect an earlier acquisition of this expertise), and he cited published lectures by John
Bell on Hamiltonian mechanics at the CERN Accelerator School [100].

One of the most remarkable of Bell’s achievements was the result of combining consid-
erations from accelerator physics with quantum ﬁeld theory. In 1976 William Unruh [101]
published the derivation of a beautiful “eﬀect” (which became known as the “Unruh Ef-
fect”): An idealized detector uniformly accelerated through the electromagnetic vacuum will
experience radiation with the spectral distribution of black body radiation at a temperature
proportional to the acceleration; speciﬁcally

kTU = ¯ha/c .

(22)

Jon Leinaas, who was a fellow at CERN in the early eighties, discussed this eﬀect with Bell,
and asked whether elementary particles could be used as detectors of this eﬀective black
body radiation [102]. They showed that existing linear accelerators, which approximated the
conditions of the Unruh eﬀect, produce eﬀects too small to be seen experimentally. However,

As suggested by John Bell, one might ask whether the temperature eﬀect could be
related to a polarization eﬀect which was known to exist for electrons circulating
in a magnetic ﬁeld. It had already been established that electrons in a storage

R. Jackiw and A. Shimony – The Depth and Breadth of John Bell’s Physics

37

ring polarized spontaneously, but not completely . . . ; the maximum polarization
had been found to be P = 0.92.

[102]

They investigated this question and found a qualiﬁed positive answer. Circulating electrons
experience spin transitions due to quantum ﬂuctuations of the vacuum ﬁeld, just as transi-
tions are induced in linearly accelerated detectors. But there are complications in the case
of circular motion. The Thomas precession has to be taken into account. The excitation
spectrum is not universal as in the linear Unruh eﬀect but depends upon characteristics of
the detector. There is also a narrow resonance involving vertical ﬂuctuations and the spin
motion, with a peculiar inﬂuence on polarization: as a function of γ = (1 − β2)−
1/2 the
calculated polarization close to the point of resonance ﬁrst decreases strongly, then increases
to 0.99 before decreasing again approximately to the observed saturation polarization [103].
These ﬁne points enhance their extraordinary achievement of converting a highly theoretical
Gedanken experiment into a real experiment.

R. Jackiw and A. Shimony – The Depth and Breadth of John Bell’s Physics

38

References

[1] J.S. Bell, “Time Reversal in Field Theory”, Proc. Roy. Sci. A231, 479–95 (1955).

Note: In all of the following references, the author or co-author is John Bell, unless
another author is explicitly listed.

[2] (With T.H.R. Skyrme) “The Nuclear Spin-Orbit Coupling”, Phil. Mag. 1, 1055–68
(1956); (with R.J. Eden and T.H.R. Skyrme) “Magnetic Moments of Nuclei and the
Nuclear Many-Body Problem”, Nucl. Phys. 2, 586–92 (1956/7); (with T.H.R. Skyrme)
“The Anomalous Moments of Nucleons”, Proc. Roy. Sci. A242, 129–42 (1957); “Nu-
clear Magnetic Moments and the Many-Body Problem”, Nucl. Phys. 4, 295–312 (1957);
(with J.M. Soper) “Hard Core Correlations and Nuclear Moments”, Nucl. Phys. 13,
167–76 (1959).

[3] “Many Body Eﬀects in Beta-Decay”, Nucl. Phys. 5, 167–72 (1957); “Many Body Prob-
lem with One-Body Forces”, Proc. Phys. Soc. 73, 118–9 (1959); (with R.J. Blin-Stoyle)
“Mesonic Eﬀects in Beta Decay”, Nucl. Phys. 6, 87–99 (1958); “Particle-Hole Conjuga-
tion in the Shell Model”, Nucl. Phys. 12, 117–24 (1959); “The Many-Body Problem”,
Proc. Rutherford Jubilee Int. Conf. Manchester 1961, J.B. Birks, ed. (Heywood, London
1961); “Superﬂuidity in Nuclear Matter” and “Elimination of the Hard Core”, Lecture
Notes on the Many-Body Problem, First Bergen Int. School of Phys. 1961, C. Fronsdal,
ed. (Benjamin, New York 1962) (with E.J. Squires); “The Theory of Nuclear Matter”,
Adv. Phys. 10, 211–312. (1961).

[4] (With E.J. Squires) “A Formal Optical Model”, Phys. Rev. Lett. 3, 96–7 (1959); “Formal
Theory of the Optical Model”, Lectures on the Many Body Problem, 1959, E.R. Ca-
ianello, ed. (Academic Press, New York 1962).

[5] Speakable and Unspeakable in Quantum Mechanics (Cambridge University Press, Cam-

bridge, UK 1987).

[6] “On the Einstein-Podolsky-Rosen Paradox”, Physics 1, 195–200 (1964); reprinted in

[7] “On the Problem of Hidden Variables in Quantum Mechanics”, Rev. Mod. Phys. 38,

447–52 (1966); reprinted in Ref.[5].

[8] (With R. Jackiw) “A PCAC Puzzle: π0 → γγ in the σ-Model”, Nuovo Cim. 69, 47–61

Ref.[5].

(1969).

R. Jackiw and A. Shimony – The Depth and Breadth of John Bell’s Physics

39

[9] S.J. Freedman and J.F. Clauser, “Experimental Test of Local Hidden-Variable Theo-

ries”, Phys. Rev. Lett. 28, 938–41 (1972).

[10] G. Faraci, D. Gutkowski, S. Nottarigo, and A.R. Pennisi, “An Experimental Test of the

EPR Paradox”, Lett. Nuovo Cim. 9, 607–11 (1974).

[11] L.R. Kasday, J.D. Ullman, and C.S. Wu, “Angular Correlation of Compton Scattered
Annihilation Photons and Hidden Variables”, Nuovo Cim. 25B, 633–61 (1975).

[12] J.F. Clauser, “Experimental Investigation of a Polarization Correlation Anomaly”,

Phys. Rev. Lett. 6, 1223–6 (1976).

Phys. Rev. Lett. 37, 465–8 (1976).

[13] E.S. Fry and R.C. Thompson, “Experimental Test of Local Hidden-Variable Theories”,

[14] A. Aspect, P. Grangier, and G. Roger, “Experimental Realization of Einstein-Podolsky-
Rosen-Bohm Gedankenexperiment: A New Violation of Bell’s Inequalities”, Phys. Rev.
Lett. 49, 91–4 (1982).

[15] A. Aspect, J. Dalibard, and G. Roger, “Experimental Tests of Bell’s Inequalities Using

Time-varying Analyzers”, Phys. Rev. Lett. 49, 1804–7 (1982).

[16] A. Einstein, B. Podolsky, and N. Rosen, “Can Quantum-mechanical Description of

Physical Reality be Considered Complete?”, Phys. Rev. 47, 777–80 (1935).

[17] N. Bohr, “Can Quantum-mechanical Description of Physical Reality be Considered

Complete?”, Phys. Rev. 48, 696–702 (1935).

[18] J. Bernstein, Quantum Proﬁles (Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ 1991).

[19] A. Whitaker, “John Bell and the Most Profound Discovery of Science”, Phys. World

12, 29–34 (1998).

[20] A. Whitaker, “John Bell

in Quantum
(Un)speakables, eds. R.A. Bertlmann and A. Zeilinger (Springer Verlag, Heidelberg
2001).

in Belfast: Education and Early Years”,

[21] (With M. Nauenberg) “The Moral Aspect of Quantum Mechanics”,

in Preludes in
Theoretical Physics, eds. A. de Shalit, H. Feshbach, and L. van Hove (North Holland,
Amsterdam 1966) ; reprinted in Ref [5].

R. Jackiw and A. Shimony – The Depth and Breadth of John Bell’s Physics

40

[22] “Subject and Object”,

in The Physicist’s Concept of Nature, ed. J. Mehra, (D. Reidel,

Dordrecht 1973); reprinted in Ref. [5].

[23] “The Theory of Local Beables”, Epistem. Lett. 9, 11 et seq. (1976); reprinted in Dialec-
tica 39, 86–96 (1985) and in Ref. [5]. [Note that some readers, among them one of us
(A.S.), have objected that “observable” means “able to be observed”, and by analogy
“beable” should mean “able to be,” and hence for Bell’s purposes should be replaced
by some term like “existent” or “being”.]

[24] “Quantum Mechanics for Cosmologists”,

in Quantum Gravity 2, ed. C. Isham, R.

Penrose, and D. Sciama (Clarendon Press, Oxford 1981); reprinted in Ref. [5].

[25] “Against ‘Measurement’ ”, Phys.World 3, 33–40 (1990).

[26] M. Born, The Natural Philosophy of Cause and Chance (Clarendon Press, Oxford 1949).

[27] J. von Neumann, Mathematische Grundlagen der Quantenmechanik (Springer, Berlin
1932); English translation: Mathematical Foundations of Quantum Mechanics, (Prince-
ton University Press, Princeton 1955). [In the English translation the proof of the im-
possibility of a hidden variables interpretation is given on pp. 305–24.]

[28] D. Bohm, “A Suggested Interpretation of Quantum Theory in Terms of ‘Hidden’ Vari-

ables” I and II, Phys. Rev. 85 166–79 and 180–93 (1952).

[29] A. Gleason, “Measures on the Closed Subspaces of a Hilbert Space”, J. Math. and

Mech. 6, 885–93 (1957).

[30] S. Kochen and E. Specker, “The Problem of Hidden Variables in Quantum Mechanics”,

J. Math. and Mech. 17, 59–88 (1967).

[31] N. Bohr, in Albert Einstein: Philosopher-Scientist, ed. P.A. Schilpp (Library of Living

Philosophers, Evanston, IL 1949).

[32] H.P. Stapp, “Bell’s Teorem and World Process”, Nuovo Cim. 29, 270–6 (1975).

[33] H.P. Stapp, “Nonlocal character of quantum theory”, Am. J. Phys. 65, 300–4 (1997).

[34] D. Bohm and Y. Aharonov, “Discussion of the Experimental Proof of the Paradox of

Einstein, Rosen, and Podolsky” Phys. Rev. 108 1070–7 (1957).

R. Jackiw and A. Shimony – The Depth and Breadth of John Bell’s Physics

41

[35] “Introduction to the Hidden-Variable Question”,

in Foundations of Quantum Mechan-
ics: Proc. of Int. School of Physics ‘Enrico Fermi’, Course 49, ed. B. d’Espagnat (Aca-
demic Press, New York 1971); reprinted in Ref. [5].

[36] J.F. Clauser, M.A. Horne, A. Shimony, and R.A. Holt, “Proposed Experiment to Test

Local Hidden Variable Theories”, Phys. Rev. Lett. 23, 880–4 (1969).

[37] “La nouvelle cuisine”, in Between Science and Technology, ed. A.Sarlemijn and P.Kroes

[38] J. Jarrett, “On the Physical Signiﬁcance of the Locality Conditions in the Bell Argu-

(Elsevier, Amsterdam 1990).

ments”, Nous 18, 569–89 (1984).

reprinted in Ref. [5].

[39] “How to Teach Special Relativity”,

in Progress in Scientiﬁc Culture 1 (summer 1976);

[40] “Beables for quantum ﬁeld theory”, reprinted in Ref. [5].

[41] “Speakable and Uspeakable in Quantum Mechanics”, reprinted in Ref. [5].

[42] L.D. Landau and E.M. Lifshitz, Quantum Mechanics 3rd ed. (Pergamon, Oxford 1977).

[43] K. Gottfried, Quantum Mechanics (Benjamin, Reading, MA 1966).

[44] N.G. van Kampen, “Ten Theorems about Quantum Mechanical Measurements”, Phys-

ica A153, 97–113 (1988).

[45] “The Measurement Theory of Everett and de Broglie’s Pilot Wave”, Quantum Me-
chanics, Determinism, Causality, and Particles, ed. M. Flato et al. (Reidel, Dordrecht
1976); reprinted in Ref. [5].

[46] L. de Broglie, “Nouvelle Dynamique des Quanta”, Electrons et Photons, Rapports et

Discussions du Cinquieme Conseil de Physique (Gauthier-Villars, Paris 1928).

[47] “de Broglie-Bohm, Delayed Choice Double-slit Experiment, and Density Matrix”, Int.

J. of Quant. Chem. 14, 155–9 (1980); reprinted in Ref. [5].

[48] G.C. Ghirardi, A. Rimini, and T. Weber, “Uniﬁed Dynamics of Microscopic and Macro-

scopic Systems”, Phys. Rev. D 34, 470–91 (1986).

R. Jackiw and A. Shimony – The Depth and Breadth of John Bell’s Physics

42

[49] “Are There Quantum Jumps?”,

in Schr¨odinger: Centenary Celebration of a Polymath,
ed. C.W. Kilmishev (Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK 1987); reprinted in
Ref. [5].

[50] G. L¨uders, “On the Equivalence of Invariance Under Time Reversal and Under Particle-
Antiparticle Conjugation for Relativistic Field Theories”, Kgl. Danske Vid. Selsk. Mat.-
Fys. Medd. 5, 1–17 (1954).

[51] “Time Reversal in Beta-Decay”, Proc. Phys. Soc. A70, 552–3 (1957).

[52] (With J. Steinberger) “Weak Interactions of Kaons”,

in Proc. Oxford Int. Conf. Elem.

Part., 195–222 (1965).

[53] (With J.K. Perring) “2π Decay of the K 0

2 Meson”, Phys. Rev. Lett. 13, 348–9 (1964).

[54] “Nuclear Optical Model fo Virtual Pions”, Phys. Rev. Lett. 13, 57–9 (1964).

[55] (With S.M. Berman) “Pion and Strange Particle Production by 1 GeV Neutrinos”,
Nuovo Cim. 25, 404–15 (1962); “Neutrino Reactions”, The CERN Neutrino Exper-
iment, C. Franzinetti, ed. (CERN 63–7); (with J. Lovseth and M. Veltman) “CERN
Neutrino Experiments: Conclusions”, Proc. Sienna Int. Conf. on Elem. Part. 1963 ;
(with M. Veltman) “Intermediate Boson Production by Neutrinos”, Phys. Lett. 5, 94–
6 (1963); (with M. Veltman) “Polarization of Vector Bosons Produced by Neutrinos”,
Phys. Lett. 5, 151–2 (1963); (with C.H. Llewellyn-Smith) “Near-Forward Neutrino Re-
actions on Nuclear Targets”, Nucl. Phys. B24, 285–304 (1970); (with C.H. Llewellyn-
Smith) “Quasielastic Neutrino-Nucleus Interactions”, Nucl. Phys. B28, 317–40 (1971).

[56] For a review, see for example, H.A. Bethe and R. Jackiw, Intermediate Quantum Me-

chanics, 3rd ed. (Addison-Wesley, Reading, MA 1997).

[57] M. Gell-Mann, “The Symmetry Group of Vector and Axial-Vector Currents”, Physics

1, 63–75 (1964).

[58] For a review, see for example, S. Adler and R. Dashen, Current Algebras (Benjamin, New
York 1968); V. de Alfaro, S. Fubini, G. Furlan, and C. Rossetti, Currents in Hadron
Physics (North Holland, Amsterdam 1973); S. Treiman, R. Jackiw, B. Zumino, and
E. Witten, Current Algebra and Anomalies (Princeton University Press/World Scien-
tiﬁc, Princeton, NJ/Singapore 1985).

[59] “Equal-Time Commutator in a Solvable Model”, Nuovo Cim. 47, 616–25 (1967).

R. Jackiw and A. Shimony – The Depth and Breadth of John Bell’s Physics

43

[60] M. Veltman, “Divergence Conditions and Sum Rules”, Phys. Rev. Lett. 17, 553–6

(1966).

[61] “Current and Density Algebra and Gauge Invariance”, in Selected Topics in Particle
Physics; Int. School of Physics “Enrico Fermi” Course 41, J. Steinberger, ed. (Academic
Press, New York 1968); “Current Algebra and Gauge Variance”, Nuovo Cim. 50, 129–34
(1967).

[62] (With H. Ruegg) “U(12), its 143 Moments, its Little Group U6 × U6, and its Irregular
Couplings”, Nuovo Cim. 39, 1166–73 (1965); “Diﬃculties of Relativistic U(6)”,
in
Recent Developments in Particle Symmetries, A. Zichichi, ed. (Academic Press, New
York 1966).

[63] “The Melosh Transform and the Pryce-Tani-Foldy-Wouthuysen Transformation”, Acta
Phys. Austriaca, Suppl. XIII, 395–445. (1974); (with A.J. Hey) “A Theoretical Argu-
ment for Something Like the Second Melosh Transformation”, Phys. Lett. 51B, 365–6
(1974); “Null Plane Field Theory and Composite Models”, in Quarks and Hadronic
Structure, G. Morpurgo, ed. (Plenum, New York 1977); (with H. Ruegg) “Hydrogen
Atom on Null-Plane and Melosh Transformation”, Nucl. Phys. B93, 12–22 (1975); (with
H. Ruegg) “Positronium on Null-Plane and Melosh Transformation”, Nucl. Phys. B104,
245–52 (1976).

[64] (With M. Berman) “On Current Algebra and CVC in Pion Beta-Decay”, Nuovo Cim.

[65] “On Singh’s Lemma for Low-Energy Compton Scattering”, Nuovo Cim. 52A, 635–6

47, 807–10 (1967).

(1967).

[66] (With R. Van Royen) “On the Low-Burnett-Kroll Theorem for Soft Pion Emission”,

Nuovo Cim. 60A, 62–8 (1969).

[67] D.G. Sutherland, “Current Algebra and the Decay η → 3π”, Phys. Lett. 23, 384–
5 (1966); (with D.G. Sutherland) “Current Algebra and η → 3π”, Nucl. Phys. B4,
315–25 (1968).

[68] D.G. Sutherland, “Current Algebra and Some Non-Strong Mesonic Decays”, Nucl.
Phys. B2, 433–40 (1967); M. Veltman, “Theoretical Aspects of High Energy Neutrino
Interactions”, Proc. Roy. Sci. A301, 107–12 (1967).

R. Jackiw and A. Shimony – The Depth and Breadth of John Bell’s Physics

44

[69] J. Steinberger, “On the Use of Subtraction Fields and the Lifetimes of Some Types of

Meson Decay”, Phys. Rev. 76, 1180–6 (1949).

[70] M. Gell-Mann and M. L´evy, “The Axial Vector Current in Beta Decay”, Nuovo Cim.

[71] A pedagogical description is by B. Holstein, “Anomalies for Pedestrians”, Am. J. Phys.

16, 705–26 (1960).

61, 142–7 (1993).

[72] S.L. Adler, “Axial-Vector Vertex in Spinor Electrodynamics”, Phys. Rev. 177, 2426–38
(1969); S.L. Adler and W.A. Bardeen, “Absence of Higher-Order Corrections in the
Anomalous Axial Vector Divergence Equation”, Phys. Rev. 182, 1517–36 (1969).

[73] R. Jackiw and K. Johnson, “Anomalies of the Axial-Vector Current”, Phys. Rev. 182,
1459–69 (1969); L.D. Faddeev, “Operator Anomaly for the Gauss Law”, Phys. Lett.
145B, 81–4 (1984); J. Mickelsson, “Chiral Anomalies in Even and Odd Dimensions”,
Comm. Math. Phys. 97, 361–70 (1985).

[74] D. Gross and R. Jackiw, “Eﬀect of Anomalies on Quasi-Renormalizable Theories”,
Phys. Rev. D 6, 477–93 (1972); C. Bouchiat, J. Iliopoulos, and Ph. Meyer, “An Anomaly-
Free Version of Weinberg’s Model”, Phys. Lett. 38B, 519–23 (1972); G. ’t Hooft, “Nat-
uralness, Chiral Symmetry, and Spontaneous Chiral Symmetry Breaking”, in Recent
Developments in Gauge Theories, G. ’t Hooft et al., eds. (Plenum, New York 1980).

[75] For a summary, see for example J. Polchinski, String Theory (Cambridge University

Press, Cambridge, UK 1998).

[76] A. Belavin, A. Polyakov, A. Schwartz, and Ya. Tyupkin, “Pseudoparticle Solutions to

Yang-Mills Equations”, Phys. Lett. 59B, 85–7 (1975).

[77] G. ’t Hooft, “Symmetry Breaking through Bell-Jackiw Anomalies”, Phys. Rev. Lett.

37, 8–11 (1976).

[78] R. Jackiw and C. Rebbi, “Vacuum Periodicity in a Yang-Mills Quantum Theory”, Phys.
Rev. Lett. 37, 172–5 (1976); C. Callan, R. Dashen, and D. Gross, “The Structure of the
Gauge Theory Vacuum”, Phys. Lett. 63B, 334–40 (1976).

[79] S. Deser, R. Jackiw, and S. Templeton, “Topologically Massive Gauge Theories”, Ann.

Phys. (NY) 149, 372–411 (1982), (E) 185, 406 (1985).

R. Jackiw and A. Shimony – The Depth and Breadth of John Bell’s Physics

45

[80] For a summary see R.A. Bertlmann, Anomalies in Quantum Field Theory (Oxford

University Press, Oxford 2000) and Treiman et al., Ref.[58].

[81] S. Coleman and R. Jackiw, “Why Dilatation Generators Do Not Generate Dilatations”,

Ann. Phys. (NY) 67, 552–98 (1971).

[82] M. Gell-Mann and F.E. Low, “Quantum Electrodynamics at Small Distances”, Phys.

Rev. 95, 1300–12 (1954).

36 (1973).

[83] “High Energy Behaviour of Tree Diagrams in Gauge Theories”, Nucl. Phys. B60, 427–

[84] (With A.J. Hey) “Partons of a One-Dimensional Box”, Phys. Lett. 74B, 77–80 (1978);
(with A.C. Davis and J. Rafelski) “Partons of a Spherical Box”, Phys. Lett. 78B, 67–70
(1978); (with J. Pasupathy) “On Duality Between Resonances and the Quark-Antiquark
Pairs”, Phys. Lett. 83B, 389–91 (1979); (with J. Pasupathy) “JWKB Correction for
Radial Wave Functions and Bound-State/Free-State Duality”, Z. Physik C2, 183–
5 (1979); (with R.A. Bertlmann) “Testing Q2 Duality with Non-Relativistic Poten-
tials”, Z. Physik C4, 11–15 (1980); (with R.A. Bertlmann) “Magic Moments”, Nucl.
Phys. B177, 218–36 (1981); (with R.A. Bertlmann) “Shifman-Vainshtein-Zakharov
Moments and Quark-Antiquark Potentials”, Nucl. Phys. B187, 285–92 (1981); (with
R.A. Bertlmann) “Gluon Condensate Potentials”, Nucl. Phys. B227, 435–46 (1983);
(with R.A. Bertlmann) “SVZ Moments for Charmonium and Potential Model”, Phys.
Lett. 137B, 107–10 (1984);

[85] (With E. de Rafael) “Hadronic Vacuum Polarization and gµ − 2”, Nucl. Phys. B11,

[86] R. Jackiw and C. Rebbi, “Solitons with Fermion Number 1/2”, Phys. Rev. D 13,

611–20 (1969).

3398–409 (1976).

[87] W.-P. Su, J.R. Schrieﬀer, and A. Heeger, “Solitons in Polyacetylene”, Phys. Rev. Lett.
42, 1698–701 (1979); R. Jackiw and J.R. Schrieﬀer, “Solitons with Fermion Number
1/2 in Condensed Matter and Relativistic Field Theories”, Nucl. Phys. B190 [FS3],
253–65 (1981).

[88] (With R. Rajaraman) “On Solitons with Half-Integer Charge”, Phys. Lett. 116B, 151–
4 (1982); (with R. Rajaraman) “On States, on a Lattice, with Half-Integer Charge”,
Nucl. Phys. B220, 1–12 (1983). Similar results were established by S. Kivelson and

R. Jackiw and A. Shimony – The Depth and Breadth of John Bell’s Physics

46

J.R. Schrieﬀer, “Fractional Charge, a Sharp Quantum Observable”, Phys. Rev. B 25,
6447–51 (1982); R. Jackiw, A. Kerman, I. Klebanov, and G. Semenoﬀ, “Fluctuations of
Fractional Charge in Soliton–Anti-Soliton Systems”, Nucl. Phys. B225 [FS9], 233–46
(1983).

[89] J. Wess and B. Zumino, “Anomalous Ward Identities”, Phys. Lett. 37B, 95–7 (1971).

[90] P.G. Burke and I.C. Percival, “John Stewart Bell”, Biog. Mems. Fell. R. Soc. Lond. 45,

[91] (With W. Walkinshaw) “A Variational Approach to Disc Loaded Waveguides”, AER

1–17(1999).

G/R 680 (1950).

167–8 (1953).

(1981).

12 49–52 (1982).

1–10 (1988).

[92] M. Bell, “John Bell and Accelerator Physics,” Europhys. News 22, 72 (1991)

[93] “A New Focussing Principle Applied to the Proton Linear Accelerator,” Nature 171,

[94] “Basic Algebra of Strong Focussing Systems,” AERE T/R 1114 (1953).

[95] (With M. Bell), “Electron Cooling in Storage Rings,” Particle Accelerators 11 233–8

[96] (With M. Bell) “Capture of Cooling Electrons by Cool Protons,” Particle Accelerators

[97] (With M. Bell) “Quantum Bremsstrahlung,” Particle Accelerators 22 301–6 (1988).

[98] (With M. Bell) “End Eﬀects in Quantum Bremsstrahlung,” Particle Accelerators 24

[99] R.J. Hughes, “Later Contributions,” Europhys. News, 22, 57–9 (1991).

[100] “Hamiltonian Mechanics,” Proc. CERN Accelerator School: Advanced Accelerator

Physics 1, ed. S. Turner, 87–103 (1987).

[101] W.G. Unruh, “Notes on Black-Hole Evaporation”, Phys. Rev. D 14, 870–92 (1976).

[102] J.M. Leinaas, “Hawking Radiation, the Unruh Eﬀect and the Polarization of Elec-

trons,” Europhys. News 22, 78–80 (1991).

[103] (With J.M. Leinaas) “The Unruh Eﬀect and Quantum Fluctuations of Electrons in

Storage Rings,” Nucl. Phys. B284, 488–508 (1987).

