1
0
0
2
 
t
c
O
 
9
 
 
]
h
p
-
t
s
i
h
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
1
3
0
0
1
1
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Galileo’s Discovery of Scaling Laws

Mark A. Peterson
Physics Department
Mount Holyoke College, South Hadley MA 01075

February 21, 2014

Abstract

Galileo’s realization that nature is not scale invariant, motivating
his subsequent discovery of scaling laws, is traced to two lectures he
gave on the geography of Dante’s Inferno.

1 Introduction

Galileo’s last and crowning achievement was the Two New Sciences [1],
a dialogue in four days. The second half of this book, the third and fourth
days, describes his solution to the longstanding problem of projectile motion,
a result of obvious importance and the birth of physics as we know it. But
this was only the second of his two new sciences. What was the ﬁrst one?

Two New Sciences begins in the Venetian arsenal with a discussion of
the eﬀect of scaling up or scaling down in practical construction projects,
like shipbuilding. The conversation veers away into a dazzling variety of top-
ics, but on the second day, after that long digression, it returns to a serious
analysis of scaling, especially in the context of the strength of materials. Ac-
cording to the publisher’s foreword, it is this topic that should be understood
as the ﬁrst of the two new sciences [2]. Since it was the publisher and not
Galileo who gave the book its title, this must be what the title means. It
should be noted that Galileo was unhappy with the title, perhaps because it
seems irrelevant to much of the ingenious speculation of the ﬁrst day [3]. It
is clear, though, that Galileo did assign enormous importance to the problem

1

of the strength of materials, an importance that modern readers have found
more than a little puzzling.

I will show that the key to much of what is strange in Two New Sciences
is to be found in two early lectures given by Galileo on the shape, location,
and size of Dante’s Inferno [4]. The text of these lectures is readily available in
the standard 20-volume Opere of Galileo, but it has been almost completely
neglected.
It is grouped with other “literary” writings in Volume 9, and
subsequent scholarship has tended to regard it as a literary work and then
to ignore it. My reconstruction of its actual signiﬁcance is the subject of this
paper.

2 Scaling in the Two New Sciences

Two New Sciences begins with the subject of scaling. Galileo’s observa-
tions on scaling in general are ingenious and elegant, and entirely deserving
of the prominent place he gives them. These ideas are basic in physics, and
are introduced, in some fashion, in Chapter 1 of most introductory physics
texts under the heading of dimensional analysis. We could even say that
modern renormalization group methods are just our most recent way to en-
gage problems of scale, still recognizably in a tradition pioneered by Galileo.
It is true that Galileo didn’t have the algebraic notation to do dimensional
analysis the way we do, but his insights within a restricted arena are the
same as ours.

An example of such an insight is “the surface of a small solid is com-
paratively greater than that of a large one” [5] because the surface goes like
the square of a linear dimension, but the volume goes like the cube. Thus
as one scales down macroscopic objects, forces on their surfaces like viscous
drag become relatively more important, and bulk forces like weight become
relatively less important. Galileo uses this idea in the context of resistance
in free fall, as an explanation for why similar objects of diﬀerent weight do
not fall exactly together, but the lighter one lags behind.

Even though the idea is completely general, most of the discussion on
scaling is directed speciﬁcally to the strength of materials. That subject is
introduced immediately in Two New Sciences with the assertion that large
ships out of water risk breaking under their own weight, something that is
not a concern with small ships [6]. The same subject occupies most of the
second day, devoted to the strength of beams. The question is put in an

2

especially paradoxical way by Sagredo, who says “Now, since mechanics has
its foundation in geometry, where mere size cuts no ﬁgure, I do not see that
the properties of circles, triangles, cylinders, cones and other solid ﬁgures
will change with their size. If therefore a large machine be constructed in
such a way that its parts bear to one another the same ratio as in a smaller
one, and if the smaller is suﬃciently strong for the purpose for which it was
designed, I do not see why the larger also should not be [suﬃciently strong]
...” [6]. This is a remarkable argument. It combines (1) faith that physics
“is” geometry, and (2) the scale invariance of the theorems of geometry. For
the purpose of this paper we will call it Sagredo’s theory of scale invariance.
Two New Sciences modiﬁes Sagredo’s theory of scale invariance. Specif-
ically, Galileo adds material properties to (1) above, while still preserving the
essential “geometrical” nature of physics. As Salviati puts it much later, on
the second day, “... these forces, resistances, moments, ﬁgures, etc. may
be considered in the abstract, dissociated from matter, or in the concrete,
associated with matter. Hence the properties which belong to ﬁgures that
are merely geometrical and non-material must be modiﬁed when we ﬁll these
ﬁgures with matter and therefore give them weight.” [7] These modiﬁcations
break scale invariance, but they do not change the essence of the theory,
which is mathematical: “Since I assume matter to be unchangeable and al-
ways the same, it is clear that we are no less able to treat this constant and
invariable property in a rigid manner than if it belonged to simple and pure
mathematics.”[8]

A typical example of the new considerations that arise when “we ﬁll
these ﬁgures with matter” starts with the breaking of a wooden beam. If
the beam breaks, all its longitudinal ﬁbers break, and since their number is
proportional to the cross-sectional area of the beam, the beam’s strength in
withstanding a longitudinal pull should be proportional to its cross-sectional
area.
If a supported beam is subject to a transverse force, however, the
associated torque must be balanced by the ﬁrst moment of the stress in the
ﬁbers, which introduces an additional factor of the diameter of the beam
[9]. Thus the beam’s strength in withstanding a transverse force should be
proportional to its diameter cubed. If the beam is made longer, the torque
due to the same transverse force applied at a geometrically similar position is
proportionately greater and the beam is proportionately weaker, and so forth.
There follow Galileo’s very famous observations on why animals cannot be
simply scaled up, but rather their bones must become proportionately thicker
as they get larger [10].

3

All of this material is developed in a series of propositions with geometri-
cal proofs. It is clearly the geometrical framework which makes these scaling
laws a “science.”

A persistent oddity on the second day is a continuing preoccupation with
beams that break under their own weight, the same phenomenon that began
the whole discussion in the Venetian arsenal, except that there it was ships
that break under their own weight. It is also odd to notice the clumsy change
of subject on the ﬁrst day. The conversation, which has just barely gotten
underway, is about the strength of ropes, made of ﬁbers, but the question of
non-ﬁbrous materials is raised, such as metal or stone. Simplicio wants to
know what gives such materials their strength. Just before this, and perhaps
intended to motivate it, we had heard about a marble column that broke
under its own weight [11]. Although Salviati hesitates to take time over this,
Sagredo says “But if, by digressions, we can reach new truth, what harm is
there in making one now...?” [12] and the conversation goes oﬀ for the rest of
the day into speculations about the atomic theory of matter, cohesive forces
among atoms, and questions of the inﬁnitesimally small and inﬁnitely large,
among other things. The discussion is diﬀuse but occasionally brilliant, even
if nothing deﬁnitive can be said about what holds matter together. The
opening lines of the second day conﬁrm, however, that the central purpose of
all this was that the scaling theory should apply to all solid materials and not
just to ﬁbrous materials like wood. Taking everything together, there is an
odd hint of a problem in the background which motivates all the discussions
of the ﬁrst two days but which is never actually stated, some object of stone
or metal that breaks under its own weight when it is scaled up. This is what
the conversation seems to be circling around, without ever quite saying so.
We should recall how Two New Sciences came to be written. Galileo
was remarkably reticent about publishing: before the Starry Messenger of
1610, the year he turned 46, he had published hardly a thing. His astronom-
ical discoveries of that year brought him instant fame, and he parlayed this
into his appointment as Mathematician and Philosopher to the Grand Duke
of Tuscany. In the negotiations leading up to that appointment he had de-
scribed all the books he wanted leisure to write, based on the research he had
been quietly doing at Padua, but these books did not appear. His life at the
Tuscan court was fraught with controversy, and the books he actually wrote
were reactions to events and new discoveries, the Discourse on Bodies in
Water, and the Sunspot Letters. When the Holy Oﬃce declared the opin-
ion of Copernicus formally heretical in 1616, his fondest project was closed

4

oﬀ to him. He silenced himself for several years, and when he ﬁnally wrote
again (The Assayer), after much pressuring from his friends, it was part of
an unfortunate controversy that made him new enemies. The debacle over
his great Dialogue Concerning the Two Principal World Systems and
the disastrous trial of 1633 should have been the end of his career. And yet,
now over 70 years of age, under house arrest, going blind, and stricken by the
loss of his beloved daughter, he found the strength to write up the researches
of his youth in the book that became the Two New Sciences. He must
have known that he didn’t have much time. Indeed, projected ﬁfth and sixth
days were never ﬁnished. The choices he made could not have been made
lightly, and yet, with projectile motion still not treated, he started instead
with scaling and the strength of materials. Why? To understand this we
must go back to his earliest work.

3 The Lectures on Dante’s Inferno

Galileo enrolled at the University of Pisa to study medicine at the age of 17,
and dropped out at the age of 21. He spent the next several years studying
mathematics independently, especially Euclid and Archimedes, and he did
tutoring in mathematics. While living at home he assisted his father in
remarkable experiments on the pitch of plucked strings under known tension
[13]. Fifty years later he brieﬂy summarized their experimental results in
Two New Sciences, the ﬁrst day [14]. He proved some theorems on centers
of gravity, in the style of Archimedes, and he also included those in Two New
Sciences, as an appendix.
It is clear that Two New Sciences contains
some very early material.

The young Galileo hoped to make a reputation in mathematics with his
theorems, and he sent them to a number of Italian mathematicians. He was
fortunate to get a favorable reply from Guidobaldo del Monte, Inspector of
Fortiﬁcations to the Grand Duke of Tuscany, someone in a position to help
him [15]. They corresponded. When the chair of mathematics at Pisa became
open, someone, probably Guidobaldo but perhaps his even more illustrious
brother Francesco, who had just been made a cardinal [16], arranged for
Galileo to be invited to address the Florentine Academy to give two lectures
on mathematical topics [4]. It was in eﬀect a seminar talk and job interview.
Galileo’s lectures charmed his audience. Within a few months the young
dropout was Professor of Mathematics at Pisa.

5

Galileo’s audience at the Florentine Academy was not a mathematical
one. The Florentine Academy was a creation of the Medici dynasty (which
had ascended to the nobility only in the immediately previous generation),
and had as one of its chief functions the gloriﬁcation of the Medici in every
intellectual arena [17]. It was far more important for Galileo to play to this
predilection of his audience than to display mathematical erudition. In the
event he brilliantly combined a clear exposition of mathematics with a topic
Florence loved to hear, their great poet Dante, and in particular the geometry
of Dante’s Inferno, based on evidence from the poem. Although Galileo did
introduce certain original material in his lecture, he did not call too much
attention to this, and represented himself rather as describing two previous
rival attempts to determine the plan of Hell. One of these was by Antonio
Manetti, a member now deceased of the Florentine Academy itself. The
other, a later attempt, was by Alessandro Vellutello, not a Florentine. He
begins in a way that seems evenhanded, but as the second lecture proceeds, on
Vellutello’s plan, Galileo becomes more and more sarcastic until in the end he
seems to be defending the virtuous Florentine Manetti against the ridicule of
the stupid and thoughtless Vellutello, to the delight of his audience, no doubt.
This was how a Medici intellectual should defend the honor of Florence!

Only the large scale features of these plans need concern us here. Manetti’s
Inferno is a cone-shaped region in the earth, with its vertex at the center and
its base on the surface, centered on Jerusalem. But since Galileo is a master
of exposition, let him describe it: “...
imagine a straight line which comes
from the center of the earth (which is also the center of heaviness and of the
Universe) to Jerusalem, and an arc which extends from Jerusalem over the
surface of the water and the earth together to a twelfth part of its great-
est circumference: such an arc will terminate with one of its extremities on
Jerusalem; from the other let a second straight line be drawn to the center
of the earth, and we will have a sector of a circle, contained by the two lines
which come from the center and the said arc; let us imagine, then, that the
line which joins Jerusalem to the center staying ﬁxed, the other line and the
arc should be moved in a circle, and that in such motion it should go cutting
the earth, and move itself until it returns to where it started. There will be
cut from the earth a part like a cone; which, if we imagine it to be taken out
of the earth, there will remain, in the place where it was, a hole in the form of
a conical surface, and this is the Inferno.” As an aside to the mathematically
adept, Galileo gave the volume of this region, which he knew from his study
of Archimedes.

6

The various levels of Manetti’s Inferno are regularly spaced, for the most
part, with 1/8 the radius of the earth between each level and the next. In
particular the ﬁrst level, Limbo, is at a depth of 1/8 the radius of the earth
below the surface, and the shell of material down to this depth forms a cap
of this thickness over the whole of Hell. Vellutello’s Inferno, by contrast, is
much smaller, located near the center of the earth, and only about 1/10 the
radius of the earth in height, making it, as Galileo is quick to say, ridiculously
small, only 1/1000 the volume of Manetti’s.

Near the end of his presentation, Galileo says this: “Here one might
oppose that the Inferno cannot be so large as Manetti makes it, since, as
some have suspected, it doesn’t seem possible that the vault that covers the
Inferno could support itself and not fall into the hole, being so thin, as is
necessary if the Inferno comes up so high. And especially, beyond being no
thicker than the eighth part of the radius of the earth, which is 405 miles
more or less, some of it must be removed for the space of the Grotto of the
Uncommitted, and even more must be removed [on the top] for the very great
depth of the sea. To this one answers easily that such a thickness is more
than suﬃcient; for taking a little vault which will have an arch of 30 braccias,
it will need a thickness of about 4 braccias, which not only is enough, but
even if you used just 1 braccia to make an arch of 30 braccias, and perhaps
just 1/2, and not 4, it would be enough to support itself; and knowing that
the depth of the sea is a very few miles, or better, even less than one mile,
if we believe the most expert sailors, and assigning as many miles as seem
necessary for the Grotto of the Uncommitted, a determinate measure not
being given by the Poet, if this together with the depth of the sea comes to
100 miles, the said vault will still be very thick, and far more than is necessary
to hold itself up.” Since in Galileo’s units the earth’s radius is about 3200
miles, and 1/8 of that is 400 miles, it is clear that he is describing a scale
model of the roof of the Inferno, including a certain anteroom hollowed out
of it, at a scale of about 1 braccia to 100 miles. A normal man is 3 braccias
tall, so the model suggests a large domed roof, say the famous Brunelleschi
dome of the Florentine cathedral which, as Galileo says, is nowhere near 4
braccias thick and supports itself beautifully. This is a convincing argument
that Manetti’s model can support itself – but only until you realize that the
argument assumes scale invariance! Could you really scale it up by a factor
of 100,000? Absolutely not! The scaled up version is eﬀectively weaker by
that enormous factor and would immediately collapse of its own weight.

7

4 Discussion

When Galileo gave his lecture, it is clear that he believed his own argument
– after all, he was under no compulsion to address this particular point. It
was his own choice. Knowingly to give a fallacious argument in such a public
setting would have been the height of folly. When he did realize his mistake,
probably a short time later, it must have struck him like a lightning bolt.
This is just how Sagredo reacts, in fact, in strangely emotional language at
the beginning of Two New Sciences when Salviati asserts that nature is
not scale invariant: “My brain ... reels. My mind, like a cloud momentarily
illuminated by a lightning-ﬂash, is for an instant ﬁlled with an unusual light,
which now beckons to me and which now suddenly mingles and obscures
strange, crude ideas...” [18]

We need look no further to know why the problem of scaling and the
strength of materials had urgent meaning for Galileo. There is nothing hy-
pothetical about this. It is plain in the record, with no ambiguity at all. He
had made a gigantic blunder in the Inferno lectures, suﬃcient to turn his
whole argument on its head, and with it his claim to be an intellectual cham-
pion of his country and his sovereign, on whom his career depended. The
shock of realizing this must have been tremendous. How much greater, then,
the satisfaction, when he transformed this potential disaster into a beautiful
“science.” To his credit, when he ﬁnally published it, he did not at all deny
his earlier naivete. We have seen how Sagredo endorses scale invariance at
the beginning of Two New Sciences, but in fact all three participants do
this. On the second day, Simplicio, who is often comic in just this way, sud-
denly endorses scale invariance, as if he had just thought of it, and Sagredo
has to point out that he had said it the day before, and this is what they
have been talking about. At this point Salviati, who is Galileo’s spokesman,
says that he too had assumed scale invariance once, until various observa-
tions showed him the contrary [20].
In this way Galileo is commendably
frank, truthfully representing his own former opinion. On the other hand,
there was no reason to bring up the original problem of Manetti’s Inferno
speciﬁcally, which would be almost as embarrassing now as it would have
been ﬁfty years earlier. Quite possibly there was no one else alive who even
remembered this detail of the original lecture, and it had been just a game of
high-stakes intellectual one-upmanship anyway. No need to dig it up again.
Thus the motivating problem of Two New Sciences is never mentioned,
and another one, not particularly convincing, a ship that falls apart of its

8

own weight, is invented in its place.

The peculiar story of the Inferno lectures recalls the thesis of Mario Bi-
agioli [19] that to understand the beginnings of modern science one should
not ignore the dynamics of patronage. Galileo’s attention was directed to the
problem of scaling by the predicament of the Inferno lecture. The original
mistake was probably just a careless, unexamined assumption, of the sort
that anyone might make, but precisely the circumstances of patronage made
it impossible to ignore. He could not simply wait unprepared for someone
to challenge him on a point where, if he did nothing, he could lose every-
thing. Sagredo’s theory of scale invariance looks like a desperate, but truly
ingenious, attempt at least to justify the original assumption in terms of prin-
ciples. The ﬁnal scaling theory made him safe. Now if he were challenged
he could overwhelm his opponent with the arguments that we ﬁnd so many
years later in Two New Sciences, including the disarming “For a while,
Simplicio, I used to think as you do ...” [20]

In working out the scaling theory, he would have noticed another prob-
lem with the Inferno lectures. The dimensions of the lowest regions are
determined by comparison with certain giants who have been placed there,
embedded in ice.
In his lectures he assumed that these giants have the
same proportions as normal men, and his only hesitation on this point was
whether giants have the ideal human proportions favored by artists like Al-
brecht D¨urer, who wrote on the subject, or whether they have proportions
more like ordinary men. Manetti and Vellutello had diﬀered on this point,
and Galileo favored Manetti, of course. But it is a consequence of the scaling
theory that giants couldn’t have either of these proportions. If we look in
Two New Sciences in the section on scaling in animals [21], we ﬁnd that
in fact the animal of most concern is man: Galileo is concerned about giant
men. He even quotes a poet describing a giant, although it is Ariosto, not
Dante, and he suggests, although it is a rather farfetched interpretation of
the words, that Ariosto understands that giants would be misshapen. This
occurrence of poetic giants and their proportions in Two New Sciences
is entirely to be expected when one realizes that the context is the Inferno
lectures. Perhaps the Ariosto lines were part of his preparation for a debate
that never came: if someone threw Dante at him, he would reply with Ariosto
(his favorite author in any case) and knock his opponent oﬀ balance.

The many indications connecting Two New Sciences to the Inferno
lectures suggest that Galileo noticed his predicament and worked out the
scaling theory at Pisa, that is to say, immediately, and that his recollection

9

of it many years later still carries those original associations. By the time he
went to Padua the problem would have been less urgent, since three years
would have passed without incident, and since he was now employed by
Venice, not Florence. Also, the only application in Two New Sciences of
the scaling theory to some problem other than strength of materials is the
application to bodies in free fall, mentioned above. This association also
suggests he did the scaling theory at Pisa, where he is known to have worked
on free fall. He had certainly worked out the scaling theory by 1612, since
he uses it without fanfare in the Discourse on Bodies in Water.

The exposition in Two New Sciences suﬀers very much from having to
hide the motivating problem. The book itself was written under the greatest
hardship, of course, essentially in prison, and the pages had to be smuggled
abroad to be published. Galileo had little control over this process, and it is
no wonder if the organization of the book is a bit unruly, as even the char-
acters themselves acknowledge (“But, gentlemen, whither have we drifted
during these many hours, lured on by various problems and unexpected di-
gressions?”) [22] Still, there is a kind of inconsistency with the overall orga-
nization which makes the book hard to read. In the ﬁrst place, the problem
of a beam, or even a ship, that breaks under its own weight is just not very
compelling. Is this really such an important problem? The shipwrights al-
ready know how to brace their ships, and beams cannot be scaled up bigger
than the trees they are cut from, which are certainly strong enough. Second,
the example of the ship, made of wood, is somehow not the problem after
all, because the ﬁrst day goes oﬀ on a tangent seeking to understand other
materials, not wood. The setting in the Venetian arsenal seems to promise
practical science, and the scene is so eﬀective that it has functioned as a
credential for Galileo ever since, showing him to be a practical man of the
people, who would be right at home with the foreman on the shop ﬂoor,
never mind that these vivid surroundings evaporate within a few sentences
and are never mentioned again. One can’t help thinking that the setting was
just an expedient for mentioning the scaled-up ship. The result Galileo is
really interested in is entirely theoretical, and has no practical illustration,
namely that anything would break of its own weight if it were suﬃciently
scaled up, a kind of 17th century version of “the inevitability of gravitational
collapse.” This is the content of the culminating last two propositions in the
systematic development, Propositions VII and VIII on the second day. The
real illustration is Manetti’s Inferno, but he cannot say so.

It is ﬁnally worth noticing, as a kind of postscript, the audacity of Sagredo’s

10

theory of scale invariance. It is an attempt, even if it failed, and regardless
of what motivated it, to guess a deep symmetry of physical law, not unlike
the aesthetic that suggests things like conformal ﬁeld theories today. One
could dismiss this observation if Galileo had not actually succeeded in iden-
tifying another deep symmetry, Galilean relativity. Before this quality of his
thought, addressing physical law in astonishing generality, one must simply
stand in awe.

References

[1] Galileo Galilei, Two New Sciences, (tr. by Henry Crew and Alfonso de
Salvio, Dover Publications, New York, NY, 1954). Originally published
by Elzevir, 1638.

[2] Two New Sciences, op. cit., pp. xx-xxi.

[3] Two New Sciences, op. cit., p. xii. The full title is Discourses and
Mathematical Demonstrations concerning Two New Sciences
pertaining to Mechanics and Local Motions. Galileo complained
that the publishers had substituted “a low and common title for the
noble and digniﬁed one carried upon the title-page.” His preferred title
is unfortunately lost.

[4] Galileo, “Due Lezioni all’Accademia ﬁorentina circa la ﬁgura,
sito e grandezza del Inferno di Dante,” in Le Opere di Galileo
Galilei, ed. G. Barb`era, (Ristampa della Edizione Nazionale, Flo-
rence, 1933), Vol. 9, pp. 29-57. Translated by Mark A. Peterson,
http://www.mtholyoke.edu/∼mpeterso/classes/galileo/inferno.html
(2000).

[5] Two New Sciences, op. cit., p. 90.

[6] Two New Sciences, op. cit., p. 2.

[7] Two New Sciences, op.cit., p. 112.

[8] Two New Sciences, op.cit., p. 3.

[9] Archimedes’ law of the lever, the balance of torques, was second nature

to Galileo.

11

[10] All propositions in this paragraph are from the second day.

[13] Stillman Drake, Galileo at Work (Dover Publications Inc., Mineola,

[11] Two New Sciences, op. cit., p. 5.

[12] Two New Sciences, op. cit., p. 7.

NY, 1978), pp. 16-17.

[14] Two New Sciences, op. cit., p. 100.

[15] Galileo at Work, op. cit., p. 13.

[17] Galileo Courtier, op. cit., pp. 106-107.

[18] Two New Sciences, op. cit., p. 3.

[19] Galileo Courtier, op. cit., pp. 1-2.

[20] Two New Sciences, op. cit., p. 125.

[21] Two New Sciences, op. cit., pp. 130-131.

[22] Two New Sciences, op. cit., p. 151.

[16] Mario Biagioli, Galileo Courtier, (University of Chicago Press, Chicago,

1993), pp. 30-31.

12

