Marietta Blau’s Work After World War II
Arnold Perlmutter
Department of Physics
University of Miami
Coral Gables, Florida 33124

completed, October 27, 2000

This paper has been translated into German and will be included, in a somewhat altered
form, in a book Sterne der Zertrummerung, Marietta Blau, Wegbereiterin der Moderne
Teilchenphysik, Brigitte Strohmaier and Robert Rosner, eds., Boehlau Verlag, Wien.

1
0
0
2
 
t
c
O
 
8
 
 
]
h
p
-
t
s
i
h
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
8
2
0
0
1
1
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

1

A. Introduction

While it is clear that the seminal work of Dr. Marietta Blau was done in the 1920’s
and especially in the 1930’s, it is also evident that her separation from the great research
centers from 1938 to 1944 had a devastating eﬀect on her productivity. It was during this
period that Cecil F. Powell, at Bristol University, made use of Blau’s earlier tutelage on
the preparation and analysis of photographic emulsions. According to Blau’s conversations
with me (much later), she consulted with Ilford in the 1930’s to improve emulsion sensitivity
and uniformity, and presumably had also imparted crucial lore of the technique to Powell.
C.F. Powell, who had been a student of C.T.R. Wilson, had employed cloud chambers in
a wide variety of studies in vulcanology, mechanical engineering, and nuclear physics. In
1938 and 1939 Powell’s experimental eﬀorts turned to the use of photographic emulsions
to investigate neutron interactions, and then to nuclear reactions1. With the coming of
the war and then the British nuclear atomic bomb project, Powell established a formidable
laboratory and collaboration for the analysis of emulsions and for their improvement by
Ilford and Kodak. Thus it came about that Powell and his collaborators discovered the pion
in emulsions, exposed in 1947 at high altitudes in the Bolivian Andes and Pyrennes. Powell
then received the Nobel Prize for Physics in 1950“for his development of the photographic
method of studying nuclear processes and for the resulting discovery of the pion (pi-meson),
a heavy subatomic particle.”

It stretches one’s credibility that Blau should not have shared in the ﬁrst part of the
citation, if not for the prejudices or narrowmindedness of the Swedish Academy, demon-
strated on several other occasions (at least in the cases of Lise Meitner and C.S. Wu). The
great Erwin Schr¨odinger himself twice nominated Blau for a Nobel Prize 2. There certainly
may have been other nominations. Consider, for example, this quote from the classic text
on atomic physics by Max Born 3:

“Another great advance was made by two Viennese ladies, Misses Blau and Wambacher
(1937), who discovered a photographic method of recording tracks of particles. The grains
of emulsion are sensitive not only to light but also to fast particles; if a plate exposed
to a beam of particles is developed and ﬁxed the tracks are seen under the microscope
as chains of black spots. Their quality depends very much on the size of the grains, and
special emulsions with very small and dense grains have been developed (Ilford, Kodak).

“The photographic tracks are some thousand times shorter than corresponding tracks
in air, because of the higher stopping power of the solid material; they are of the order of

2

some microns. The advantages of this method are its extreme simplicity, the continuity of
sensitiveness, and the great number of events recorded on one plate. On the other hand,
high-quality tracks are observed and micro-photographed with oil-immersion objectives
which have a narrow depth of focus; hence only a restricted part of a track appears sharp,
and several photographs have to be taken with diﬀerent focus.”

My own knowledge of Marietta Blau’s post war research is based somewhat on my
personal contacts with her during 1956-1963 in Miami and Vienna (as well as with some
of her earlier colleagues), but mainly from reading her papers written after 1945, and from
several informative references. The incisive book by Peter Galison, Image and Logic, A
Material Culture of Microphysics1, and a subsequent article in Physics Today4 contain
much useful information on Blau’s life. Other sources include Leopold Halpern’s biograph-
ical sketch 5, the internet web-page by Nina Byers, 6 and the elaborate volume prepared
by C.F. Powell, P.H. Fowler and D.H. Perkins. 7

As I stated above, Blau’s six year residence in Mexico eﬀectively removed her from
serious research. Galison states that she had to teach 24 hours a week, and in addition suf-
fered the theft of materials that would have allowed her to establish a research laboratory.1
I do not know much about her years in Mexico, except for recalling that she worked hard
to support her inﬁrm mother, and that in the circle of European intellectuals that she
In that group was also an erratic
frequented was also the famous exile, Leon Trotsky.
young man who was later identiﬁed as Trotsky’s assassin. Marietta said that she and her
friends attempted to warn Trotsky of the man’s dangerousness, but that he dismissed their
entreaties, and was murdered in 1940. The prevalent view is that the assassin was a Stalin
agent, but I have no other information as to its veracity.

B. The First Scintillation Counter

I do not know of the circumstances that brought her to New York in 1944, when
she ﬁrst went to work for the International Rare Metals Reﬁnery and later the Canadian
Radium and Uranium Corporation. What is clear is that her frustration at being pent up
in scientiﬁcally remote Mexico led to an explosion of creative activity, in spite of the fact
that she at ﬁrst found herself at the periphery of the American research establishment.

Blau’s ﬁrst paper published after she came to the United States was in 1945, with
B. Dreyfus B46. As far as I can tell, it was the ﬁrst example to be published in the open
literature on the use of the photomultiplier tube in conjunction with scintillating target, a
ZnS screen to detect radioactive emissions. They actually measured the phototube current
as a function of distance between the α-particle source and the phototube, and observed a
clear inverse square-law dependence. The paper is striking in its straightforwardness and
simplicity.

According to the book by J.B. Birks8, the device was actually used as a dosimeter
but it can be regarded as the ﬁrst rudimentary scintillation counter, a great advance over

3

manual counting of light ﬂashes by human observers, as pioneered by Rutherford and
his collaborators. Actually, the ﬁrst application of the photomultiplier to scintillation
counting was done by Curran and Baker9. The work was described in a classiﬁed report
In 1947-1948,
issued in 1944, but was only published in the open literature in 1948.
Marshall, Coltman and collaborators published a series of papers 10 describing the design
and performance of a photomultiplier scintillation detector, with a well-designed optical
system for reﬂecting the scintillation emission onto the photocathode. They reported the
detection and counting of α-particles, protons, fast electrons, α-rays, γ-rays and neutrons.

At about the same time, in Germany, Hartmut Kallmann and his student I. Broser
published papers on measurements on scintillations produced by α-particles, β-rays and
γ-rays in ZnS, CaW O4, ZnSO4 and naphthalene 11. That large transparent blocks of
naphthalene, the ﬁrst organic scintillator and ﬁrst large volume scintillator, could produce
the photons from β-rays and γ-rays and subsequently be registered by the photomultiplier
In 1948, Bell showed that
tube, represented a major advance for the new technique.
crystalline anthracene is an even more suitable phosphor and that it gives scintillation
pulses about ﬁve times the amplitude of those from naphthalene. 12

Robert Hofstadter discovered that N aI crystals, activated with thallium, give higher
pulses than anthracene, and because of the high photoelectric absorption of the heavier
iodine constituent, such crystals can be used for γ-ray spectroscopy of very weak sources
13. Further developments, using liquid, plastic and crystal scintillators, soon made the
scintillation counter a pre-eminent detector in nuclear and particle physics. In recent years,
scintillation counting techniques have found a wide variety of important applications in
biology, chemistry, geology, medicine, atmospheric science, and industry.

Thus, one can trace the evolution of the modern scintillation counter, using photo-
multiplier tubes, from the very humble device produced by Marietta Blau to its ubiquitous
application in all science and technology.

As a personal footnote, it is interesting to note that the development of scintillation
counters by Robert Hofstadter were critical components of his experiments on the scatter-
ing of (then) high energy electrons (600 MeV) from protons and heavy nuclei during the
1950’s, for which he received a Nobel Prize for Physics in 1961. When I was a graduate
student under Hartmut Kallmann at New York University during 1951-1955, several of my
colleagues and postdocs were working on the properties of organic phosphors for count-
ing γ-rays and β-rays (I worked on the photoconductivity of ZnS and CdS phosphors).
During that period, I recall several visits by a shy, polite, young man, Robert Hofstadter,
who came from Princeton University to consult with Hartmut Kallmann on scintillation
counters. A bit later, Hofstadter moved to Stanford University, where he continued his
classic studies of nuclear structure using the high energy electrons.

It is a further somewhat remarkable conﬂuence of trajectories that Robert Hofstadter
and I became friends when he came frequently during the 1960’s, 1970’s and 1980’s to the

4

Center for Theoretical Studies at the University of Miami to visit my colleague, Behram
Kursunoglu and me, and also to participate in a number of the Coral Gables Conferences
on Symmetry Principles and High Energy Physics, and in several projects of the Center.

During my years in Kallmann’s laboratory, perhaps in 1953 and 1954, I recall that he
received two of those middle-of-the-night phone calls from journalists in Stockholm, with
the news that he was on a list of two or three ﬁnalists to receive the Nobel Prize for Physics.
Though he was recognized as one of the principal architects of the scintillation counter,
Kallmann shared the disappointment of not gaining this recognition with Marietta Blau,
although for perhaps quite diﬀerent reasons. Actually, no person received the Nobel Prize
for the scintillation counter, a formidable device.

It is unfortunate that Blau did not further pursue the development of the scintillation
counter. I would venture the explanation that because she was working for proﬁt-making
companies, she was not free to pursue her own inclinations, but had to follow the directives
of management. In his biographical sketch, Leopold Halpern relates a conversation with
Otto Frisch, who said that Blau’s method of using photomultipliers later became of great
importance 5.

C. Research on Radioactivity

During the following two years Marietta Blau carried out a number of projects in-
volving measurements on radioactivity. Given that at this time her employers were mining
companies, i.e., International Rare Metals Reﬁnery, Inc. and Canadian Radium and Ura-
nium Corporation, it is not surprising that her work involved the studies of devices and
procedures that make use of radioactive substances. This was certainly true of her work on
the scintillation counter described in the previous sectionB46. In that paper she suggested
the use of a radium preparation and the ZnS screen as a secondary standard in calibrating
the intensity of any light source. One needs to know only the spectral sensitivity of the
photomultiplier (expressed in amperes/lumen), and to ﬁnd the eﬃciency of the ﬂuorescent
screen, deﬁned as the ratio: energy of light emitted by the screen/energy of alpha parti-
cles absorbed by the screen. She concludes that article by suggesting that the device is
not limited to alpha-or-beta-measurements, but suggested its application to measurements
of strong neutron sources. However, this further work, which would surely have led to
advances in her scintillation counter, did not appear, corroborating my surmise that the
corporate leaders chose not to pursue this subject any further.

Her next publication, on “Radioactive Light Sources”, was co-authored with I. Feuer,
and appeared in the Journal of the Optical SocietyB47. In this paper Blau examined further
the use of radioactive preparations to produce light from ﬂuorescent screens. She notes
that ﬂuorescent screens mixed with radioactive material, such as those used as paint for
watch and instrument dials, change the luminescent emission because the continual bom-
bardment by alpha particles changes the crystal structure of the phosphor. But separation
of radioactive source from the ﬂuorescent screen allows irradiation of the screen during

5

relatively short intervals, when the light output is quite constant. Certain phenomena of
fatigue which occur after a somewhat longer or stronger irradiation are transitory, and the
initial eﬃciency is restored after a short rest.

The most convenient radioactive preparations – if absolute constancy is required – is
radium (half-life 1500 years) placed on a metal foil in such a manner that there is no escape
of emanation and a minimum absorption of the emitted alpha-particles. The constants
of these radium foils (number and energy of the alpha-particles emitted) can be tested
very accurately. The only inconvenience of these preparations is the penetrating gamma
radiation, which may be disturbing in case of radioactive light standards of great intensity
and luminous surface, making necessary the use of stronger radium preparations. She
suggests the use of polonium instead of radium. Polonium emits practically no penetrating
radiation, and although its half-life is only 140 days, the intensity of the light source can
be calculated exactly from the exponential decay law.

The paper goes on to discuss the experimental arrangements of radioactive sources
(both radium and polonium) and ﬂuorescent screens, showing the dependence of light
intensity on distance of the sources from the screens, and on the absorption by aluminum
foil.

Blau and Feuer now enumerate a number of applications and advantages of this ar-
rangement. The radioactive light standards could be very useful for colorimetric mea-
surements and similar purposes. They have the advantage of being easier to handle than
ordinary light standards as they do not involve electric currents which must be kept con-
stant. Besides, in the case of radioactive light standards, the light output can be varied
by varying the intensity of the radioactive preparation or the absorption of the radiation,
whereas in the case of light standards, an increase in current or absorption inﬂuences the
spectral distribution of the source.

They emphasize that the advantage of radioactive light standards is even greater
on cathode-ray screens (television, oscilloscopes or [now] computer) or of the luminous
compound used for such screens. They compare the eﬀects of α-particles and cathode
rays, and say that the radioactive source can be directly introduced into the cathode-ray
tube to control and measure the thickness of the screen. As this can be done before the
tube is closed and evacuated, it might save time and work.

They conclude the article with designs where the radioactive standard is used to
control and regulate the photoelectric section of an x-ray apparatus, and another where a
device is used to control the maintenance of the level of a bar, disk, or plate. These are
clearly industrial applications.

The next paper was co-authored during the same year (1946) with H. Sinason and
O. Baudisch, on “Radioactivation of Colloidal Gamma Ferric Oxide” in ScienceB48. This
work clearly addresses important issues in medicine and cancer therapy.

6

Apparently, the lattice structure of γ F e2O3 is incomplete, containing so-called “in-
terstitial spaces” (atomic holes) which in the more stable lattice of α F e2O3, are ﬁlled up
by ferric ions. Gamma ferric oxide in colloidal form may be injected directly into the blood
stream. It had been noted that colloidal γ F e2O3 has no toxic eﬀects on living cells; the
cells proliferate and, after some time, have eliminated and are entirely free of all the iron
particles.

It is early seen that the reticulo-endothelial cells in the body can be inﬂuenced and
their antibody actions stimulated if the colloidal γ F e2O3 particles are combined with
some therapeutically acting material, such as certain radioactive substances.

After rejecting the use of radium and polonium, they ﬁnally chose the active deposits
of radon –RaA, RaB, RaC– as activators. Because of their lifetimes, the injections would
decay with the lifetime of RaB (26.8 minutes). After considering various methods of
activation of metal disks, they adopted the method of Blau’s earlier mentor, H. Petterson14.
They conclude that there is no limit as to the charge of RaB − RaC that may be applied
with the γ F e2O3. They remark that it may be even more advantageous to use, instead
of RaB − RaC, the active deposit of thorium, Th B and Th C. Th B has a longer half-life
(10.6 hours), and Th C is the last radioactive element produced in this series, as Th D is
already a stable element.

Finally, they suggest that if we reduce by the radio therapeutic method the number
of circulating lymphocytes, there is some hope to reduce also the growth and occurrence
of tumors.

It is interesting to note that in this work, Blau made an apparently eﬀortless transition
from her early work on medical physics and polonium preparationsB15. I am not competent
to judge the importance of this work for later developments in medical physics, but I am
impressed by its motivation and erudition.

The next paper from this period was co-authored with J. Carlin, on “Ionization Cur-
rents from Extended Alpha-sources” in the Review of Scientiﬁc InstrumentsB49. The work
studies the ionization currents from extended two-dimensional radioactive alpha-particle
sources, with immediate application to a device for measuring surface areas.

They ﬁrst address the problem of the inﬂuence of the recombination of ions on the
ionization current produced by the radiation. They study carefully the inﬂuence of voltages
on the electrodes of the ionization chamber on the saturation ionization current. In general,
the problem of predicting the saturation current or voltage by theoretical computations is
a cumbersome and complex task, notably because of the constants involved, which have
not yet been precisely determined and are usually derived from partially limited theories.

By choosing one particular geometrical arrangement of the experimental apparatus,
however, the problems become considerably simpliﬁed and the relationships between satu-

7

ration current and voltage, if determined experimentally for one intensity, can be extended
by calculations to any other source intensity.

They describe in some detail the experiments on a large parallel-plate condenser as
the ionization chamber, contained in a cubic housing 30 cm on each side, with the plates of
the chamber each possessing a diameter of 20 cm. The insulated electrode which led to an
electrometer was protected by a guard-ring. The sensitivity of the instrument, a Compton
electrometer, was recorded and followed during the experiments by measurements with a
U3O8 standard.

The sources employed were circular brass or nickel disks uniformly plated with polo-
nium (3.83 cm alpha-particle range). Both the disk area and polonium density were varied.
The uniformity of plating on each disk was determined photographically and only the most
uniform preparations, within 5 percent, were studied. The intensities of the more active
disks were actually measured by the scintillation counter of Blau and DreyfusB46 described
in Part B of this paper. They go on to study in great detail how the saturation current
and saturation voltage are inﬂuenced by geometrical arrangements, and especially by the
area of the source.

They ﬁnally apply their studies to describe a measuring instrument for the deter-
mination of plane areas, which they call a “polonium integrator”, where unknown areas
interposed between the plates of the ionization chamber reduce the total ionization current
by an amount proportional to the area. They actually show a model of the instrument,
which can measure areas from 0 to 28 square inches (175 square cm) with an error not
exceeding one percent.

During the same year, Blau and Sinason published a short paper “Routine Analysis
of the Alpha Activity of Protactinium Samples” in Science.B50 The classical method of
measuring alpha activity of protactinium consists of the following procedure: Samples
containing protactinium are painted uniformly on metal disks, as thin as possible in order to
provide minimum absorption for the alpha-particles of protactinium. The current produced
by the alpha-particles is measured by an electrometer or electroscope and compared with
that of a uranium standard.

The current obtained by the protactinium sample, expressed in e.s.u., is used for the
determination of the number of alpha-particles emitted/sec, N, Jesu = N · e · n, where e
is the electric charge of the ion; and n is the number of ion pairs produced by an alpha
along its path through the ionization chamber. Knowing the half-life of protactinium, the
number of alpha-particles emitted by, for instance, 1 mg of protactinium can be calculated.
One mg of protactinium emits (in all directions) 1.85 × 106 alpha-particles/sec.

2N

The fraction

1.85×106 gives the amount of protactinium (in mg) which the sample
contains, provided that the absorption of the layer of foreign material can be neglected.
But this can never be realized, and the maximum value of the above ratio corresponding to

8

zero absorption has to be determined by extrapolation, measuring samples of decreasing
total weight. The ratio (current)/(sample weight) increases with decreasing layer thickness
and, plotting these values versus sample weights, gives a curve whose intersection with the
ordinate gives the actual value of the protactinium content per unit weight of the material.

It is evident that this method is time consuming and subject to various errors, espe-
cially if the sample is very dilute. Moreover, the method presents a great many diﬃculties
in plants where other radioactive products are present. Blau and Sinanson decided to apply
for routine measurements the method of measuring the samples in thick (alpha-saturated)
layers, especially since it aﬀords less handling of the material, which after suitable grinding,
is ﬁtted into special, strictly uncontaminated dishes. They proceeded by adding a known
quantity of polonium to ZrP2O7 samples of low protactinium content. They were then
able to calculate with considerable accuracy the fractional content of protactinium in their
sample.

They recommend the same procedure in the case of other alpha emitters of appreciable
half-life, e.g., plutonium and other transuranic elements, since the addition of polonium,
due to its high speciﬁc activity, does not alter the absorption in the sample.

Finally, in 1948, Blau and Carlin published a paper, “Industrial Applications of Ra-
dioactivity” in the journal Electronics.B51 If I am permitted a somewhat cynical comment,
this paper does not describe new results, but serves as a kind of announcement of new
radioactive devices to the engineering community. It makes use of the results of Blau and
her collaborators over the previous three years, and cites as references six patent applica-
tions of Blau and collaborators, as well as two other patent applications, presumably also
by other employees of her employers. Missing from the list of patents is the seminal work
of Blau and DreyfusB46 on the scintillation counter, which I described in Section B and
in the beginning of Section C. They give technical details of representative new devices
based on radioactive sources, serving as resistors, electrostatic voltmeters, light sources,
tube cathodes, area measurers, liquid level detectors, galvanometers, semimicrobalances,
leveling systems, and micrometers.

This paper could be looked upon as the swansong of Blau’s work for industrial com-

panies.

In the same year, Blau wrote a paper with J.E. Smith, still as a member of Canadian
and Radium Corp., on “Beta-ray Measurements and Units”, which transcended her papers
of the previous four years, although they made use of some of her earlier experimentsB53.
Here she attempted to establish a sensible unit to measure the ionizing power of beta-rays
in condensed materials.

The authors discuss the introduction of a new unit proposed especially for medical
research, “roentgen equivalent physical” or rep, by Evans15. This unit later came to be
[The modern SI unit for dose equivalent is
called “roentgen equivalent man” or rem.

9

“sievert” (Sv), where 1Sv = 100 rem]. Blau and Smith do not suggest the replacement of
the roentgen unit as far as x- and gamma radiation are concerned, but in the case of beta
radiation, it would appear that a more convenient unit is desirable.

They describe the diﬃculty of making deﬁnitive dosage measurements on beta rays.
While the rep unit indicates the ionization density in the aﬀected tissue, it does not take
into account the amount of tissue which is actually aﬀected, nor does it give any information
about the total energy administered.

They suggest that a more convenient unit would be a quantity proportional to the
total number of ions formed by the incident radiation. They propose a convenient and
practical measurement which can be used by persons not very familiar with radioactive
measurements. They propose the use of a photomultiplier tube and appropriate low per-
sistence ﬂuorescent screens, emitting light in the range of maximum sensitivity of the
photocell. This is a clear application of the ﬁrst scintillation counter developed by Blau
and Dreyfus.B46

They go on to describe experiments with beta rays and various thicknesses of lumi-
nescent screens and ﬁnd good agreement between theory and experiment. There is a quite
prescient statement where they propose that the method could be improved by the use
of organic phosphors such as naphthalene, which are more transparent to their ﬂuores-
cent light than inorganic phosphors. Here they quote Coltman and Marshall 10, among
others since they presumably have not yet seen the reports of Kallmann and Broser11 on
naphthalene.

Their method allows them to obtain one of the proposed units, either Q or Q/E or
Q/R, where Q is the total number of ions, E the energy and R the range of the radiation.

They then describe their apparatus, which is a rather diﬀerent upgrade of their ﬁrst
scintillation counterB46, and which permits them to examine ten ﬂuorescent screens with
a ﬂick of a dial, and thus record the photoelectric current, for various measurements.

This paper is quite remarkable both in that it addresses fundamental questions of
radioactive dosage, and proposes the use of a quite novel instrument to make radioac-
tivity measurements. It reinforces my earlier conjecture that Blau made a fundamental
contribution to the scintillation counter.

D. Marietta Blau at Columbia University

In 1948, the newly established Atomic Energy Commission set up Blau at Columbia
University as a research physicist, and then two years later moved her to Brookhaven
National Laboratory, which was just then turning to high energy research.1

Her subsequent research at Columbia and Brookhaven represents a sharp departure

10

from that of her previous three years for the mining companies. Although I have no direct
knowledge of the circumstances of this transition, it is clear from reviewing her papers of
the following period that she exclusively returned to her primary research interest, the use
of photographic emulsions, and their application, to study the phenomena of high energy
physics, with exceptional dedication and energy. While it is true that she demonstrated
enormous skill and loyalty in her studies of radioactivity for the mining companies during
1944-1947, she appears to have thrown herself totally into the emulsion work from which
she had been separated for ten years, while she was eﬀectively deprived of the recognition
she should have had. Her output during this time is prodigious, in spite of the fact that
she was eﬀectively an outsider in the American research establishment.

In 1948, M. Blau, then at Columbia University, and J.A. Felice, then at Brookhaven
National Laboratory, published a paper, “Development of Thick Emulsions by a Two-Bath
Method”B52. Their proposal is alternative to the method of the so-called temperature
development on Ilford, C2, 200 micron plates by Dilworth, Occhialini, and Payne16, and
is probably applicable to thicker emulsions.

They adapted a method used by Crabtree17 et al, which was used for the uniform
development of large quantities of motion picture ﬁlm. The developer is divided into
two baths. The ﬁrst part contains the developing agent part of the sodium sulﬁte and
potassium bromide, but no alkali. The second bath contains all the necessary constituents
of an ordinary developer plus an additional amount of alkali. They then give an explicit
recipe for the two baths.

Because the temperature is kept constant, the danger of reticulation is avoided. Pro-
ton tracks in the emulsion had their normal grain density while the background fog was
very low, and the plates appeared to be uniformly developed throughout the emulsion.
This method is discussed by Galison1, Rotblat18, and Powell et al7, and appears to be a
signiﬁcant contribution to the technique of emulsion development.

Thus, Blau’s ﬁrst foray into the emulsion ﬁeld, after ten years absence, led to an

important advance, characteristic of her insight and meticulousness.

Blau’s next papers B54,B55 came out in the following year, and were on “Grain Density
in Photographic Tracks of Heavy Particles”. Here she dealt with one of the three principal
parameters of particle track measurements in emulsion, the other two being the energy-
range relations and the scattering eﬀect, in determining the energy and mass of nuclear
particles. (It should be noted that grain density is the number of developed silver bromide
grains per length of particle track, and generally increases as the ionization probability
increases.
It plays a role similar to ionization energy in work with cloud chambers or
proportional counters.)

She refers ﬁrst to an empirical relation between grain density and range which was
established by workers in Powell’s laboratory and others 19,20,21,22. She then describes

11

the development of theoretical formulas for the dependence of grain density on range and
energy, based on the fundamental theory of Debye and H¨uckel23, who solved the problem of
highly ionized gaseous atmospheres or “strong electrolytes”, by assuming that the mobility
of ions depends on the ion concentration. Comparing her formulas with the empirical
results of the Bristol group19,20,21, she found very good agreement.

It is quite striking that in this paper, and in the previous one on emulsion development,
Blau methodically reeducated herself on the techniques of experimental emulsion work and
acquainted herself with the principal technical developments since 1938. In both papers
she made signiﬁcant contributions to the ﬁeld.

Blau’s following paper was done with M.M. Block and J.E. NafeB56, on “Heavy Parti-
cles in Cosmic Ray Stars”. This signalled the beginning of her particle studies at Columbia
University, where she was apparently brought in to instruct the researchers on the tech-
niques of using photographic emulsions at the Nevis cyclotron, which was then under con-
struction. Apparently, for practice, they exposed some emulsions in balloons, and came
upon a strange event in a cosmic ray star24. In those years, as the “elementary particle
In this case, the
zoo” was being assembled, each event was aﬀorded special attention.
event was interpreted as the capture of a τ -meson (now called a K-meson or kaon) by a
bromine or silver nucleus in the emulsion.

The next paper, by Blau, Ruderman, and Czechowski, on “Photographic Methods of
Measuring Slow Neutron Intensities” appeared in 1950B57. The relative slow neutron sen-
sitivities of β-sensitive emulsions, x-ray ﬁlm-indium foil combinations, and boron-loaded
plates were investigated. Since the detection eﬃciency depends upon the neutron en-
ergy, experiments were made with epithermal (0.3-10,000eV), thermal (.01 - 0.3eV) and
cold (< .01eV) neutrons. β-sensitive emulsions and x-ray-indium combinations are about
equally useful for the detection of epithermal neutrons. B10 loaded plates, which are best
for detection of thermal and cold neutrons, have the following advantages: very low neu-
tron intensities can be measured by counting of α-tracks, neutrons can be counted in the
presences of β- and γ-radiation, the number of α-tracks is independent of the development
conditions, and a wide range of intensities can be measured with a single plate.

Blau’s next publications, during the same year, were on a “Semi-Automatic Device
for Analyzing Events in Nuclear Emulsions” in the Physical Review , with S. Lindenbaum
and R. Rudin B59,B62. This was a landmark work that led not only to future advances in
analyzing emulsion tracks, but also portended much later developments in the analysis of
bubble chamber, spark chamber, and streamer chamber photographs. The contributions
of Marietta Blau to the Nevis Cyclotron experiments and to the semi-automatic device
described in this paper are discussed cogently by Sam Lindenbaum in Appendix II of this
paper25.
I must confess the sin of indolence in that I have not scoured the literature
for references to this work in later developments of automatic devices for scanning and
measuring visual tracks in detectors. (I am not a dedicated historian of science). When
one considers the rudimentary level of computers and optical devices four decades ago, the

12

capabilities of this device are remarkable, and deserving of admiration.

The instrument is built around a microscope with a motor-driven stage, moved by
selsyn motors in two dimensions. The accuracy of gears, feedscrews etc., is such that
dimensions can be measured to within 0.2 micron. These selsyn motors are fed from
identical selsyn generators which are driven from a steering unit so that the photographic
plate can be moved in any direction and with any desired speed up to 25 microns per
second. For convenience, the arrangement is controlled by a steering wheel and the speed
is controlled by a foot pedal. There is also a recording chart that moves at a speed of 2000
times that of the stage. The image of the plate is observed by the operator through the
eyepiece and at the same time is projected on a small slit before a photomultiplier tube.

The measurements are done quite rapidly and easily. For example, a conservative
estimate of the driving time for the grain density record of a 2000 micron track is about
10 minutes. The system is adaptable to the measurement of high Z tracks (3≤Z≤26),
especially by the measurements of δ-rays (electron tracks emanating from the main track).
They compare their measurements with those of Bradt and Peters on large Z nuclei and P.
Freier26, and ﬁnd good agreement. The paper is notable for its completeness and erudition.

A brief paper, “Dependence of High Altitude Star and Meson Production Rates on
Absorbers” written by Blau, Nafe and Bramson was given as an abstract in the Physical
Review in 1950B60. They studied the eﬀects of copper and lead absorbers on the rate of
star and meson production. Comparing star and meson production in the diﬀerent sets of
plates under varying thickness of absorbers, they observed distinct transition eﬀects.

E. Marietta Blau at Brookhaven National Laboratory

After her move to Brookhaven National Laboratory in 1950, Marietta Blau published
her ﬁrst paper, an abstract, “Stars Induced by High Energy Neutrons in the Light Elements
of the Photographic Emulsions” in the 1952 Physical Review B63, with A.R. Oliver. They
irradiated emulsions with the 300 MeV neutron beam of the Columbia cyclotron and
determined the ratio of stars induced in the light elements to those induced in the heavy
3 (where A
elements of the emulsion. Assuming the cross section is a linear function of A
is the atomic mass), the ratio N-light/N-heavy should be 0.27. Counting all stars with ≥ 2
prongs in both emulsion and gelatin layers, they obtain a value for this ratio of 0.179±.024.
Because of the uncertainty connected with the recognition of 2-prong stars only 2-prong
stars showing a distinct recoil fragment were considered. On the other hand, they accepted
all 2-prong gelatin stars assuming that in all cases an additional short prong may have been
lost in the gelatin. Even though these conditions favor a higher ratio N-light/N-heavy =
0.213±0.026 it is still lower than the calculated value, showing increased transparency of
If one takes into account the 0-, 1-, and 2-prong stars27, N-light/N-heavy
light nuclei.
would still be further decreased since for the light elements 3- and 4- prong stars are
probably favored.

2

13

In the following year, 1953, Blau, Oliver and Smith expanded on the previous abstract
with a longer paper on “Neutron and meson stars induced in the light elements of the
emulsion” in the Physical ReviewB65.

Again, they made use of G5 emulsions, laminated with gelatin layers of 5-8 microns.
They followed the ideas of Harding28, Menon, Muirhead and Rochat,29 and Hodgson30 of
introducing very thin layers of gelatin between photographic emulsion pellicles in order
to separate the light and heavy emulsion elements in experiments investigating the cross
section of disintegration processes of particles incident on the emulsion.

They expand somewhat on the results of the previous paper on 300 MeV neutrons,
ﬁnding that the mean prong number in stars from light nuclei is greater than in heavy
nuclei. The α/p ratio for light nuclei is approximately 0.75, and 25±5 percent of all stars
have a recoil with charge ≥ 3. From the angular distribution of black tracks in light element
stars, and the forward excess of black prongs in heavy elements, they conclude that, at
most, 70 percent of black prongs in heavy elements are due to nuclear evaporation.

The second part of the paper discusses the results of exposing the same conﬁguration
of emulsion pellicles and gelatin layers to the positive pion (π+-mesons) beams of 70-80
MeV and 60±5 MeV from the Columbia cyclotron. They conclude that 24-30 percent of
emulsion stars originate in the light nuclei of the emulsion, and ﬁnd a lower limit of the
opacity of light nuclei of 0.64.
In most cases, absorption of the incoming meson takes
place, and the absorption occurs mainly on nucleon pairs. Absorption by more than two
nucleons is less than 30 percent.

In an interesting Appendix to this article, the authors describe the absorption of x-
rays by the emulsions used in these experiments. They ﬁnally determined that the ratio
of light elements in emulsion to light elements in the gelatin layers is 2.95 ± 0.3.

In 1952, Blau and Salant published a letter in the Physical ReviewB64 on “T-tracks in
Nuclear Emulsions.” This paper presents evidence of so called “T-tracks”, which seemed
to be heavy particles produced in the cosmic radiation and stopping in the emulsion, with
the apparent release of other particles, including fast (minimum-ionizing) particles. The
eleven cases they observed seem to represent some kind of enigma. They cannot decide
whether the T-tracks and their products are coincidences of observation or not. Since I
have not seen any further reference to this phenomenon, I would have to conclude that the
observations were not valid. I do recollect that Blau was not fond of Salant, and that he
may have been a cause for her eventually leaving Brookhaven.

The next two papers were produced from work at Brookhaven National Laboratory
on the interactions of 500 MeV negative pions (π−-mesons) produced with emulsion nuclei.
The ﬁrst was a letter with M. Caulton and J.E. Smith in Physical Review in 1953B66 and
then a longer article with M. Caulton in the Physical Review in 1954B67. These papers
signalled the complete return of Blau to nuclear physics research with the technique she

14

had essentially invented, and in which she kept pace with the widening application of
photographic emulsions to high energy subnuclear phenomena. According to Galison1, she
was the ﬁrst to demonstrate that meson interactions with nuclei could produce additional
mesonsB66. Actually, in that letter, Blau, Caulton and Smith give credit to the Bristol
group31 for ﬁnding a meson production event in plates exposed to cosmic rays and one
event found in the 220 MeV negative pion beam of the Chicago cyclotron32. However,
since the authors identiﬁed six events in which two mesons leave an emulsion nucleus and
a seventh in which two mesons appear to emerge from a hydrogen nucleus (a proton), it
gives unequivocal evidence of meson production. In addition to the six events, eight more
are consistent with additional meson production, although the tracks are too short for
unmistakable identiﬁcation.

Hence, it may be stated with considerable justiﬁcation, that Blau’s was the ﬁrst
deﬁnitive report of additional meson production by high energy mesons, an important, if
not unexpected, observation.

They estimate that the number of two meson events reported in the paper constitute
at most 25 percent of all events in which a charged meson – observed or absorbed – is pro-
duced. The above ﬁgure would then represent 5.2 percent to 12 percent of all interactions.
From this experiment nothing can be learned about the production of neutral mesons (π0-
mesons) and therefore the actual cross section of meson-meson production at 500 MeV
meson energy cannot be compared with theoretical data. They quote, however, C.N. Yang
and E. Fermi (a private communication), who estimate that the fraction of events leading
to two charged mesons is 16 percent to 18 percent (the second number includes events with
two charged and one neutral meson). This ﬁgure is twice the value calculated by Blau,
Caulton and Smith from the experimental data, but considering the meager statistics and
the simpliﬁed assumptions, the disagreement is probably not too serious.

In this paper, I can recognize the total modesty, honesty, and commitment of Ma-
rietta Blau, who ventured no claims beyond the experimental evidence and conservative
conjecture.

The second, longer paper, “Inelastic Scattering of 500-MeV Negative Pions in Emul-
sion Nuclei”B67 was on an expansion of the results given in the shorter letter B66. It goes
into considerable detail on the exposure of the emulsions to two diﬀerent beams of the
Brookhaven Cosmotron, namely (1) the 500 MeV meson beam and (2) particles emitted
from the Cosmotron target (beryllium) at an angle of 32◦ with the 3 GeV proton beam
direction. They also describe the methods on the search for interactions in the pellicles,
and on the measurements made on incoming meson tracks and on outgoing particles.

They discuss, in succession and in some detail, the observations of stars with no
mesons, stars with one meson and events with two mesons, i.e., additional meson pro-
duction. They perform a careful analysis of meson interactions in nuclear matter, and
also some data on the production of neutral pions (π0-meson). They ﬁnally conclude that

15

the cross section for the production of charged mesons per nucleon is 3.5 millibarns or 14
percent of the total meson – nucleon cross section at 500 MeV. They believe that they
underestimate this cross section, and that it could be as high as 10 millibarns, probably
an overestimate. They note that C.N. Yang and E. Fermi (a private communication) ex-
pect the cross section for meson production by mesons to be 12 percent of the total cross
section, which is estimated by Lindenbaum and Yuan33 to be 610 millibarns.

They conclude the paper with a comparison of the results with those of cosmic ray
mesons, where the mean shower energy is 640 MeV34. There appears to be a considerable
discrepancy with the results between shower mesons and single artiﬁcial mesons, which
they are at a loss to explain.

Blau resumed her collaboration with A.R. Oliver and continued her studies of high
energy pion interactions, publishing a paper on “Interaction of 750-MeV π−-mesons with
Emulsion Nuclei” in the Physical ReviewB68 in 1956.

The pions were selected by an analyzing magnet from secondary particles emitted
from a beryllium target at 32◦ to the direction of the proton beam of the Brookhaven
Cosmotron. They scanned 132.8 meter of meson track under high magniﬁcation and found
322 interaction events. Subtracting from the path length (6.5 ± .02)% for probable muon
contamination, the mean free path in emulsion is (38.5 ± 2.2)cm, while the geometric mean
free path (for r0 = 1.38 × 10−13cm) is 27 cm. This is in fair agreement with a value
expected from the π− - p cross section of 42 millibarns and π− - n cross section of 17.5
millibarns found by Lindenbaum and Yuan33 in the same energy interval. Accepting these
cross sections and integrating over the emulsion nuclei (number of neutrons = 1.2×number
of protons) leads to a mean free path of 34.7 cm.

They then analyze the results according to the type of interaction. They ﬁnd 5 elastic
scattering events on free protons and 6 near elastic scatterings on protons near the edge
of nuclei. From the 5 events, they ﬁnd a mean free path for elastic π− + p interactions of
24.8 ± 11.4 meters, while the mean free path for all π− + p interactions (cross section 42
millibarns) is expected to be 7 meters; the elastic cross section without charge exchange is
12 ± 5.4 millibarns or about one third of the total cross section. If one assumes the relation

(π− + p −→ π− + p)/(π− + p −→ n + π0) =

(equal weight for states

and

),

5
4

3
2

1
2

then about 60 percent of all interactions should be elastic.

They then turn their attention to 15 events that can be called inelastic scattering by

free protons or protons at the periphery of the nucleus, according to the schemes

π− + p −→ π− + π+ + n or π− + p −→ π− + π0 + p.

They show the angular distributions (in the center of mass system), of emitted nucleons,
fast mesons and slow mesons. Nucleons in the backward direction is preferred (12:3), and

16

for fast mesons the forward direction is preferred. They calculate the Q-value for the
nucleon and the slower meson, assuming they form an “excited state,” and ﬁnd Q-values
spread over an interval of 30-170 MeV, and there is, at least within small statistics, no
indication of a maximum value.

In the study of charge-exchange scattering and a possible π− + p −→ π0 + π0 + n
reaction, they ﬁnd two events in which electron pairs (Dalitz pairs) give direct evidence for
π0 production. They ﬁnd 15 events where the meson stops in the emulsion and another
16 where there is a small recoil or blob. The number of stoppings observed (15), plus the
two cases with electron pairs, is unexpectedly high in comparison in the cases leading to
charged meson production, even within the meager statistics35.

Finally, they ﬁnd ﬁfteen events of meson scattering through angles ≥ 10 degrees
without visible nuclear interaction and 17 other cases where the meson scattering is ac-
companied by recoil or slow-electron emission. The ﬁrst 15 events could represent elastic
scattering on peripheral neutrons or scattering with π◦ production; but some of these
could be scattering on protons in nuclei where the emission of the slow proton has been
suppressed by the exclusion principle. There is one case observed of π−+n −→ p+π−+π−.

The total number of π− + p collisions is 41, taking 11 as the number of elastic scat-
terings observed. The mean free path in the emulsion is 3 ± 0.5 meter or about one-half
of the mean free path for π− collisions on free protons, calculated with a cross section of
42 millibarns. Therefore, one-half of all observed collisions must have occurred on bound
protons on the nuclear periphery.

The ﬁnd the ratio

π− + p −→ π− + p
(π− + p → π0 + π− + p) + (π− + p → π+ + π− + n)

=

11
13

.

Judging from this ratio and assuming again equal weights for the 3/2 and 1/2 state in
Fermi’s theory, 44% of all π− + p collisions are inelastic.

Finally, the ratio of π− + p to π− + n scattering (considering in both cases events
without evaporation tracks or recoils) is 41:16=2.6, while the ratio found in this energy
interval by Lindenbaum and Yuan36 is 42:17.5=2.4.

They then turn their attention to interactions of the π−-mesons with nuclei.
In
addition to 266 nuclear events (233 stars, 17 meson scatterings with recoils or electron
interactions), they found also 500 stars in area scanning. They ﬁnd (40 ± 4)% of all stars
have 1 emitted meson and only (3 ± 1)% have 2 emitted mesons, quite similar to the
results obtained for 500M eV π−-mesonsB67. They explain this by the higher interaction
cross-section of 750MeV mesons and by an increased meson production leading to mesons
in an energy interval of 100-300 MeV which have small mean free path in matter. They
also discuss the angular distribution of the mesons in the laboratory system.

17

Noting that if the π- meson is completely absorbed, the total excitation energy is
nearly 900 MeV; and in heavy elements (which are responsible for all stars), stars with 9-
15 prongs would be expected. On the other hand, it can be anticipated that stars with fast
forward-scattered mesons are small, consisting of a few short prongs in light elements and
1-2 prongs in heavy elements. As already mentioned, 60% all stars have no charged meson;
62% of these have no fast proton ≥ 60MeV, and a mean prong number of only 4 ± 0.4.
Only 2% have a prong number ≥ 9. This suggests that a great amount of energy is carried
away by fast neutral particles for which the nucleus is rather transparent. Finally, the
great number of observed π− stopping raises the question of a possibly greater proportion
of collisions leading to charge exchange than is calculated with the Fermi statistical theory.

They conclude the paper with a description of prong distribution in all types of stars,

and the appearance of stable fragments in π−- meson stars.

Blau’s last work published from research at Brookhaven National Laboratory was on
“Hyperfragments and Slow K-mesons in Stars Produced by 3-BeV Protons” in the Physical
ReviewB69. This work was done about a year after the ﬁrst example of a hyperfragment
(a Λ0 hyperon bound to an ordinary nucleus) was found by Danysz and Pniewsky37,
and then shortly after the ﬁrst systematic investigation of hyperfragments produced by
the 3 GeV proton beam at the Brookhaven Cosmotron by Fry, Schneps and Swami.37
A systematic search for hyperfragments in particle beams of well-deﬁned energy gives
information on data related to particle physics, Λ0-production cross section, particle nature
of the Λ0 (associated production, etc.), as well as to physics of the nucleus (formation of
the hyperfragment, binding energy, etc.).

The stack of emulsions was exposed to about 30,000 protons/cm2 and then the individ-
ual emulsions were scanned at fairly low (300X) magniﬁcation, since she was searching for
fairly prominent stars. She describes in some detail the measurement procedures followed
for the determination of mass, charge, and energy determination of the hyperfragments
themselves and of the outgoing decay particles or nuclear fragments.

Of the 14,480 stars investigated, she found 14 events which are believed to be sponta-
neous disintegrations of hyperfragments coming to rest in the emulsion, with the possible
exception of one event where decay in ﬂight is suspected. In addition, she found two stars
with double centers which may represent disintegration of slow and probably heavy hy-
perfragments. Both cases occurred in large stars and it was impossible to disentangle the
prongs belonging to each center.

Only a few of the events could be analyzed; however all of them, with one exception
are compatible with a Λ0 hyperon bound to the nucleus. All the observed hypernuclei,
with one exception, are isotopic spin singlets, I = 0 for nuclei with odd atomic number,
and doublets, I = 1
2 for nuclei with even atomic number. The exception could be explained
as a decay in ﬂight of a ΛLi8, the ﬁrst decay of a hypernucleus in a I=1 state.

18

She goes on to discuss the likely identity of the other hypernuclei, ΛBe8 and ΛBe9, a
ΛH 4, a ΛLi6, ΛB9 −Λ B10 or ΛC10 −Λ C13, ΛB9, or ΛC11 −Λ C12, a ΛO16 or higher atomic
number, ΛBe9, ΛH 4 or ΛH 3.

The number of hyperfragments per star is 14/14, 480 ≈ 1 × 10−3, in good agreement
with Fry’s results37, who found 21 hyperfragments in 20,000 stars. Since all hyperfragments
originate in heavy elements, which are responsible for only about 75% of all stars, the
frequency is actually somewhat higher, about 1.3 × 10−3.

Blau also has found four K ± mesons emitted from stars, all of them of low energy,
since the probability of ﬁnding particles of range ≥2.5 cm is small in a stack of the size
used in the experiment. She ﬁnds no examples of associated production of other unstable
particles.

In summary, from Blau’s work at Brookhaven National Laboratory, it is clear that
Marietta Blau stepped authoritatively into the main stream of particle research, in spite of
the fact that she was not in command of large research groups. In particular, she quantiﬁed
the interaction of (then) high energy pion interactions including ﬁnding the ﬁrst examples
of additional pion production. She also contributed signiﬁcantly to the observations of
hyperfragments at an early stage. Although the improvement of statistics came several
years later with the exploration of hydrogen, deuterium and helium bubble chambers, the
path of further research was made clear by the emulsion results.

F. Marietta Blau at the University of Miami (Coral Gables)

i) A Personal Memoir

To the best of my recollection, Marietta Blau came to Coral Gables as an Associate
Professor in Autumn, 1956. I had arrived in February, 1956 to take up the position of
Assistant Professor, and continued my interests in solid state physics by then investigating
the optical properties of the semiconductor GaAs.

Because I do not have a very good memory for detail, I cannot recount the speciﬁcs
of my meeting with Blau, but I do recall that we had a nearly instant rapport, and that
I responded without hesitation to her invitation to collaborate with her on photographic
emulsion research in high energy physics. She also recruited three other colleagues, includ-
ing Claude F. Carter. The other two did not remain with the group.

I feel that I must depart here, at least temporarily from simply summarizing her pa-
pers, and interject my own impressions and experiences.
It was not simply on a whim
that I answered her call, because in the previous few years, before and after my Ph.D. in
1955 in solid state physics, I had seriously attempted to independently study theoretical
physics, particularly nuclear physics, with some guidance from a former teacher at New
York University. Before I made any substantial progress on my own, the idea of an oppor-
tunity to do high energy experimental physics with such a distinguished mentor excited

19

my imagination.

Marietta Blau was a rather small person, perhaps 5 feet 2 inches tall (158 cm) and
quite slender, with a sweet kindly expression. Her head was barely visible over the steering
wheel of her little Plymouth coupe, and she was not a very skilled driver, yet she negotiated
the trip from New York to Miami several times, before the days of interstate roads. The
initial impression she made was that of a fragile person who could be blown over by a
I would say that she was quite good looking, but presented herself in a very
breeze.
modest, self-eﬀacing manner. She spoke deliberately, slowly, and softly, and her English,
if slightly accented, was polished. She was well-versed in the classics, literature, and
the arts. We attended many musical events together, especially visiting chamber music
groups. I recall that we once attended a presentation of Verdi’s “Requiem”, by the Miami
Symphony (then the University of Miami Symphony), and that we were so overwhelmed,
that we jointly sent a warm letter of appreciation to the conductor, John Bitter (a brother
of the well-known authority on high-ﬁeld magnets, Francis Bitter). It was my ﬁrst hearing
of the “Requiem”.

When she arrived in Miami, she found several former students and colleagues from
Vienna, namely Fritz Koczy and Elizabeth Rona, both of them at the Institute of Marine
Sciences at the University of Miami. Koczy later became Director of the Marine Institute,
and he and I became great friends until his untimely death, I believe in the 1970’s.

My oldest son, Bernard, was three years old when we arrived in Miami, and Joseph was
born in 1957, just after Marietta arrived. She became a close family member, showering the
children and my ﬁrst wife, Ruth, with gifts. My older son reminds me that she presented
them with a sleep-out Indian tent when he was about six years old. We often entertained
each other in our homes. She met my parents on their visits to Miami, and they all enjoyed
each other greatly. She grieved compassionately when my mother died in 1960, shortly
after Marietta’s return to Vienna.

I cannot recall the details of how she built up our laboratory, but she did have generous
funding from the Air Force Oﬃce of Scientiﬁc Research (AFOSR). Actually, Claude Carter
assisted her ably in ﬁscal and procurement aﬀairs, in which I played just a peripheral role.
We obtained about six or seven precision Leitz binocular microscopes with magniﬁcations
up to 2000X, for which we had designed enlarged movable stages, built for us by local
instrument makers.

Initially, we were housed in cramped quarters of the Physics Department, at that
time in wooden shacks which were used during World War II for the training of Air Force
pilots. The University of Miami then rented space for us on the ground ﬂoor of an old
apartment building in Coral Gables, about two miles away from the Main Campus. The
upper ﬂoor was occupied by the Institute for Molecular Evolution directed by Sidney W.
Fox, a distinguished biochemist from Florida State University. We had about eight or
ten rooms, mostly devoted to scanning microscopes, equipment room, and of course the

20

ubiquitous coﬀee lounge. One large room was reserved for a multiple scattering microscope,
whose large foundation and massive stage were designed by a master instrument maker,
Brouwer, from a town near Berkeley, California. Brouwer was famous for designing and
building these instruments for emulsion laboratories around the world, for the purpose
of measuring the momentum of fast, minimum ionizing tracks in the emulsion, and an
essential parameter in the determination of particle properties. I cannot recall the exact
speciﬁcations of this marvelous stage, but I seem to recall that it could measure deviations
of a micrometer in longitudinal movements of several centimeters (some tens of thousands
micrometers). It was the massive base of concrete blocks for this microscope that required
our laboratory to be placed on the ground ﬂoor of the building. An interesting dividend
of our needs (the microscopes and the fragile emulsions) was that the entire facility had to
be air conditioned (at that time by window coolers), an unusual luxury in those years in
Miami, which suﬀers sweltering temperatures for half of the year .

Marietta Blau was a most eﬀective teacher, giving courses in electromagnetism and
nuclear physics, among others, to advanced undergraduates and graduate students. At
that time, we did not have a Ph.D. program, but gave a Master of Science degree.
I
believe, that because of her slight stature and her gender, she was not aﬀorded the respect
to which she was entitled. She fought with the administration and the Chairman of the
Physics Department about the use of overhead from her federal grants. After one complaint
to another colleague, the theorist Behram Kursunoglu, I recall that the latter called the
chairman an idiot. She answered, in her soft plaintive voice, “Is that all he is?”.

I really cannot recall how I learned the emulsion craft, but I do know that Marietta
Blau was a wonderful teacher in the laboratory. We recruited housewives and students, in
the tradition of Cecil Powell, to be scanners of the emulsion pellicles, and in the cases of
the more gifted assistants, to allow them to make precision measurements. She of course
schooled me in the theory of ionization measurements, multiple scattering, and range-
energy relations, and I had to study these problems on my own, but after about three
years I emerged as fairly competent researcher. All of the faculty scanned, supervised
the scanners, and made precision measurements as needed. The tedium of emulsion work
cannot be overestimated. Constant checking of the eﬃciency and accuracy of observations
was necessary. It is not a simple matter to describe the amount of work that went into
the experiments discussed in Parts C and D of this memoir, nor that which is described
below.

As the bubble chamber, spark chamber, streamer chamber, and digitized chambers
evolved in the 1960’s and 1970’s, emulsion research regressed in importance in the accu-
mulation of statistics. One of the reasons is that the bubble chambers and spark chambers
could be composed of elemental substances, such as hydrogen, deuterium, helium, or other
interesting substances, and that the measurements could be automated to the extent that
In modern applications,
made the accumulation of data far more rapid and eﬃcient.
electronics, solid state detectors, and other devices further increase the eﬀectiveness of de-
tectors. However, emulsions remain an interesting detector in special situations, especially

21

where spatial resolution and continual exposure are needed.

(ii) Marietta Blau’s Research at Miami

Sometime during 1957, when the laboratory was established, we began to scan a small
stack of Ilford G5 emulsions which had been exposed by Gus Zorn to the negative pion
beam at the Brookhaven Cosmotron. The results were reported in Il Nuovo Cimento,
in 1959, by M. Blau, C.F. Carter and A. Perlmutter, “Negative Pion Interactions at 1.3
GeV/c”B69.

Since the energy of the incident pions was not precisely known, the momentum was
determined by multiple scattering measurements to be (1.3 ± 0.1)GeV /c, which was cor-
roborated by kinematic considerations of elastic scattering on protons. The plates were
scanned by following incident pions from the lead edge. The track length scanned was
380 meters, and the number of interactions found was 811. After correcting for scanning
eﬃciency and for the contamination of the beam by muons and electrons, the corrected
track length was 340 meters, giving a total cross section in agreement, within statistical
limits, with the results obtained by other investigators.

There are tables which summarize the interactions with free or nuclear edge nucleons.
There are 10 elastic collisions with free protons, π− + p → π− + p, and (7) with peripheral
protons (matched by Fermi momentum) (type I); 11 inelastic collisions with free protons,
π− + p → π− + p + π◦ and (15) with peripheral protons (type II); and 5 inelastic collisions,
π− + p → n + π+ + π−, and (1) with peripheral protons (type III). Other collisions with
peripheral protons which could not be analyzed total (38). As for collisions with peripheral
neutrons there are (8) quasi-elastic ones (π− + n → π− + n) (type VIII), another (29),
elastic or inelastic which could not be analyzed, and another handful of inelastic events.
A comparison of these events with those of Walker and Crussard35 at a somewhat higher
energy does not indicate any signiﬁcant disagreement.

It is of interest, in view of the results to be presented later, to substantiate that
the clean (π− + p) events of types I, II and III represent free proton interactions; this
supposition could be veriﬁed in part by calculating the total free proton cross section. But
to do so one needs to know the relative contributions of multiple pion production and
events of type VI with zero prongs (π− + p → n + π◦ or π− + p → n + π◦ + π◦) to the total
free proton cross section. Although these contributions could not be found directly from
this data, they could be estimated from the hydrogen cloud chamber results of Eisberg
et al38 and from the curves derived from bubble chamber experiments of the Wisconsin
group39. Both groups ﬁnd a total cross section of 34 millibarns.

The cloud chamber results38 seem to indicate that one should expect double produc-
tion events to amount to about 25% of those of types (II and III) and that the number
of zero prong stars should be about 15% of all visible proton events, including double
production. Applying these corrections to our data, we obtained a mean free path for

22

free proton collisions of 9.7 meters (30 millibarns). The contribution of zero prong stars
could also be estimated from the bubble chamber data39, yielding a charge exchange cross
section (elastic and inelastic) at 1.2 GeV of 30% of the visible proton interactions. This
leads to a mean free path of 8.7 meters (34 millibarns) for this emulsion data.

Although the size of this sample is small, if it is combined with the cloud chamber
data38 at a similar energy, some of the features seem to suggest a regularity which warrants
further investigations on much larger samples. The combined results (for types II and
III) are plotted as function of nucleon momentum in the center of mass system, with a
pronounced peak at about 550 MeV/c, in qualitative agreement with both the statistical40
and isobar models 41 of pion production, and as function of their angle in the center of mass
system, with the distribution strongly peaked in backward direction, in agreement with the
isobar model41. In both cases it is evident that events which require Fermi momentum to
be added to the target protons cause an apparent broadening of the distributions, as might
be expected. Further ﬁgures give momentum distribution in the center of mass system of
protons from reaction of type II plus similar data from the cloud chamber experiment38,
and the angular distribution of the same protons in the center of mass system. Similar
plots are given for the neutrons of reaction of type III. Further plots of the momentum
distribution and angular distribution in the center of mass system of both emergent pions
in reaction II, and nuclear interactions are given.

Finally, a histogram of the Q-values in the rest frame of the nucleon-pion isobar for
reactions II and III, is given. Although the sample is not large, the Q-value does show a
bunching near 150 MeV, while the range of values is from 0 to 300 MeV42.

The remainder of the paper discusses the nuclear interactions of the pions. the total
number of interactions with nuclei is 725 (not free proton collisions). In addition to 263
stars without emitted charged mesons, we ﬁnd 41% of all events have no emitted mesons.
The number of 1 meson: 2 meson: 3 meson stars is 317:94:14. In plotting the angular
distribution and energy distribution of emitted mesons, a comparison is made with the
Monte Carlo calculations in Los Alamos by the MANIAC43 and shows only fair agreement.

The paper concludes with a listing of events producing K mesons, hyperons and

hyperfragments, a total of ten events.

During Blau’s stay in Miami she vigorously attacked the problems of ionization in
nuclear emulsions, the results of which were given in an article in The Review of Scientiﬁc
Instruments in 1960B72. This was a problem which she had addressed earlier in articles
at Columbia UniversityB54,B55 and which justiﬁably obsessed her. During the course of
this investigation, in which measurements were made on known tracks for the purpose
of particle investigation, it was found that a single parameter, namely mean blob length,
could be related to the probability of ionization over the entire energy range.

23

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

We discussed ﬁrst the probability of development of any single crystal, p, where

p = 1 − exp(qxν),

where q is a parameter that depends only on development conditions, x is the path length
of the ionizing particle through the crystal, and ν is the number of ionization acts per unit
length. One could then write an expression relating the average probability of development
¯p taken over all crystals in the path under consideration, to the value of the ionization. By
deﬁnition, ¯p = ng/nt, where ng (the grain density) and nt are the number of developed
AgBr crystals per unit path length and the total number of AgBr crystals per unit path
length, respectively. If all the grains are assumed to be of equal diameter ¯x with their
centers aligned, then the average value of the probability is

¯p = 1 − exp(−y),

where y = q¯xν. If one then assumes with Demers44, that the AgBr crystals are of equal
diameter 3

2 ¯x, distributed at random about the particle, then

¯p = 1 −

y2

8
9

1 − (
(cid:20)

3y
2

+ 1)exp(−

3y
2

.

)

(cid:21)

A further reﬁnement of the crystal distribution consists of replacing the assumption of
equal grain size by the supposition that all values of crystal diameter between 0 and 2¯x
are equally probable.45 In this case, the mean probability becomes

¯p = 1 −

) + (1 +

)exp(−2y)

y2

3
2

(1 −
(cid:2)

1
y

1
y

.
(cid:3)

We plot the three curves in Fig. 1, and see that they are nearly linear for small values of
¯p, but diﬀer as ¯p → 1; which of the three curves best represents the ionization accurately
is not known as yet.

We then go on to discuss the blob density, B, or the number of AgBr single grains or
clusters per unit length of track, and introduce B∗ = B/B0, where B0 is the blob density
for minimum ionizing tracks, related to n∗
g = ng/n0 by applying appropriate corrections
46. Some authors 47 recommend the use of total gap length, LH, while others recommend
the use of mean gap length, λ47,48,49.

We go on to describe the experimental apparatus, which was inspired by the earlier
device of Blau, Rudin, and LindenbaumB62 and ﬁrst reported by S.C. Bloch50. Sylvan
Bloch was a graduate student at the University of Miami who designed the apparatus
to be used with a photomultiplier or phototransistor. His recollections of Marietta Blau
are given in Appendix III of this paper51. The remainder of the paper is devoted to
comparisons of experimental results of 1.3GeV /c pions and 680 MeV/c antiprotons, and
their reaction products, giving good agreement with the blob density parameter.

24

In July, 1957, we made an exposure of photographic plates to the 620 MeV/c K+−
meson beam at the Berkeley Bevatron. This exposure was unsuccessful because of the
fogging of the emulsions from unknown radiation. An exposure of a stack of emulsions
to the 670 MeV/c antiproton beam of the Berkeley Bevatron was made in January 1958.
The results of this study were reported in TN60-461. Unfortunately, I do not have a copy
of this report, and have not been able to obtain one. It was not published in the open
literature.

Finally, an exposure to the 450 MeV/c K−-meson beam at the Bevatron was made in
January, 1959. The interactions of the K−-mesons, brought to rest in the emulsion, were
observed and analyzed. This work was presented in a report submitted to the AFOSRB73
and later a part of this work was published in Nuovo CimentoB75. We had accumulated
a substantial number of stopping K− in emulsion, but because of the huge statistics accu-
mulated by the European K− Collaboration,52 we restricted ourselves only to describing
some unusual interactions of hyperons.

One event was the likely decay of a hyperfragment in an unusual mode, i.e., via
a π+-meson, rather than the customary π−-meson. The most likely interpretation is a
ΛH 3,4 → π+ + (3, 4)n. There had been two previous π+-decay events observed by Schneps
et al 53. We quote Deloﬀ et al 54 and Ferrari et al 55, who estimate that on the basis of
Λ0 → Σ+ exchange inside the hyperfragment, the branching ratio into the π+ mode is of
order 1% of the π− mode in the case of ΛH 3,4. We discuss also other possible mechanisms
for this phenomenon.

Another unusual event is the possible production and decay of a (Σ+p) hyperfragment.
The fast π+ meson (about 90MeV) emitted from the apparent hyperfragment indicates that
the short connecting track is probably a (Σ+p) → π+ + p + n, leading to a Q value not
incompatible with that expected for such a decay, and that the binding energy is less than
1 MeV. Previous observations56 of such a decay give no more conclusive results than this
one.

We also found several examples of stopping K− interactions with two nucleons, which
are generally diﬃcult to detect. We found one example of K− + (pn) → Σ− + n + π+ and
another example of K− + (nn) → Σ− + π− + p.

There was likely one, and three other possible examples, of the exotic decay Σ+ →
p + γ, compatible with a branching ratio of 1.4 × 10−4 to 2 × 10−2 to the normal decay
mode, Σ+ → p + π0, but by no means certain.

There are several apparent events in which the Σ− produced by the stopping K− seems
to release a large amount of visible energy, compatible with the decay of a hyperfragment
through the interaction Σ− + p → Λ0 + n.

There is an unusual apparent decay of a Σ−, but the kinematics strongly suggests the

25

parent particle, with the decay scheme (Σ−n) → π−+n+n, again an exotic hyperfragment.57

Finally, a sample of four scatterings by Σ− or Σ+ interactions in emulsion are added
to those found by other groups, giving a total of ten events. The total mean free path
in emulsion is then about 38 cm in the energy range from 0 to 200 MeV. The only sys-
tematic study of the scattering of Σ-hyperons in bubble chambers was that of Stannard58,
who found cross-sections of 38 mb and 10 mb for the elastic scattering of Σ+ and Σ−,
respectively, on protons.

Clearly, our work was a signiﬁcant contribution to the early knowledge of hyperon

interactions.

G. Other Writings by Marietta Blau

During her years in the United States, Marietta Blau published four more works, in

addition to the research articles I have described above.

The ﬁrst of these, “Bericht ¨uber die Entdeckung der durch kosmische Strahlung
‘Sterne’ in photographschen Emulsionen”, was written while she was at Columbia UniversityB58,
and published in Sitzungsber. 159, 53-57, (1950). Blau gives a brief history of her work
with photographic emulsions in the 1920’s, her collaboration with H.Wambacher, and
through the friendly support of V.R. Hess (the Nobel Laureate) and R. Steinmaurer, ex-
posure of plates at an altitude of 2300 m in 1936. She describes the cosmic ray stars found
in the emulsions, some with as many as twelve heavy prongs. They found that in about
10% of the cases, the primary energy was greater than 200MeV. They were encouraged by
these results, and obtained a grant from the Academy of Sciences through the eﬀorts of
Stefan Meyer for new high altitude exposure. In a classic bit of understatement, she says
that all this work was interrupted by the political conditions in Austria. She concludes the
article with a remark that seems somehow tinged with envy: “Meanwhile, this work was
carried out in England and America with improved methods, and the progress of recent
years in theoretical and experimental areas have not only nearly completely solved the
problem of “Stars”, but have led also to important knowledge in the ﬁelds of cosmic rays
and nuclear physics.”

In the same year, Blau published an article in an apparent festschrift in honor of Karl
Przibram’s 70th birthday, entitled, “M¨oglichkeiten und Grenzen der photographischen
Methode in Kernphysik und Kosmischer Strahlung,” in Acta Phys. Austriaca 3, 384-395
(1950)B61.

This paper, like the previous one but longer, is also a review of the evolution of
the photographic emulsion method in particle and nuclear physics. She discusses ﬁrst
the observation of protons in emulsion and then the observation of neutrons through the
recording of their knock-on protons up to 13MeV. She describes the work of M. Goldhaber,
who impregnated emulsions with various elements and observed nuclear reactions. Emul-

26

sions of lower sensitivity, impregnated with uranium salts or the salts of other radioactive
elements, are well suited for the study of decay processes, and certain important contri-
butions were made with the emulsion technique. In 1947, Demers and Wottan observed
alpha particle decay, and in the same year, using the methods of Green and Livesey and of
Tsien-Sam-Tsiang, found threefold and fourfold splitting of uranium atoms from neutron
bombardment. She goes on to credit ﬁrst Ilford Ltd., London and then a short time later
Eastman-Kodak, Rochester with providing a larger content of AgBr and relatively small
grains, in pellicle thickness up to 600 microns. The development methods were worked out
by Occhialini, Powell and Lattes, who also standardized the photographic material. (She
singles out also the eﬀorts of P.Demers, N.A. Perﬁlov, M.M. Shapiro, H. Yagoda and A.
Zhdanov among the other important contributors to the development of this process).

Blau goes on to discuss the importance of new methods and reﬁned measuring devices
in leading to new discoveries in physics generally, but especially in the area of nuclear
physics.
In the meanwhile, the predicted particle – meson – with about 200 times the
electron mass was conﬁrmed with the Wilson cloud chamber and Geiger-M¨uller counter.
Corresponding to the previously mentioned sensitivity of the new emulsions, it appeared
possible to obtain meson tracks up to about 1000 microns to their stopping point.

¿From this point on, it is only possible to describe the advances in the photographic
method in connection with the theory of mesons. Both developed with each other; the
new theoretical knowledge called for newly reﬁned measuring techniques and, furthermore,
emulsions of greater sensitivity.

In January 1947, Perkins exposed Ilford (B1)-emulsions for some hours in an aircraft at
an altitude of about 10km. He found in his plates a new, until then unfamiliar phenomenon
– multiple nuclear disruption by mesons: in one star, consisting of four prongs, one of the
tracks corresponded to the slowing down incoming particle with increasing grain density.
It was determined by measurements that the particle had a mass substantially less than
that of the proton. Further searches by Perkins and the physicists of the Bristol group
in the cosmic radiation conﬁrmed the ﬁrst example, slowing down charged particles of
small mass, present in the cosmic radiation, can disrupt atomic nuclei with the emission
of heavier particles.

Are these light particles identical to the mesons found in the Wilson chamber? To
decide this question, one must make grain density and scattering measurements, leading
to a mass of about 300 electron masses. She compliments the group of Perkins, Lattes,
Occhialini and Powell for pursuing, and ﬁnding in the cosmic rays the spontaneous decay
of a π-meson into a secondary µ-meson. From the fact that the µ-mesons had equal
lengths, one could determine the masses of the π- and µ-meson, the latter accompanied
by a neutrino. The ratio of masses of the π- and µ-meson was found to be mπ
= 1.32, in
mµ
agreement with the values found in California from magnetic measurements on artiﬁcial
mesons produced by their cyclotron.

27

She discusses the further increase of sensitivity of emulsions to fast β-particles obtained
by Eastman-Kodak at the end of 1948 and their exposure of the Bristol group in the Jung-
fraujoch. They found interesting cases of µ-meson to β-particle decays and showers of
β-particles accompanied by heavy particles.

But besides these discoveries, other researchers in cloud chambers demonstrated the
existence of a charged particle with a mass equal to half that of a proton.
In the new
emulsions the existence of this meson–τ -meson–with a mass of about 1000 electron masses
was established, and at the end of its track produces a star consisting of three prongs.
One track is a π-meson, while although the other two do not end in the emulsion, they
are also identiﬁed as π-mesons, and, furthermore, all three tracks were coplanar. Another
fortunate case was observed by Leprince-Ringuet, who observed a stopping τ -meson that
showed it produced in its decay, a mass of more than 700 electron masses.

Before closing the chapter on “Pioneering Work of the Photographic Method”, she
devotes several pages to the research of Bradt and Peters in Rochester, and Frier, Lofgren,
Ney, and Oppenheimer in Minnesota, who exposed plates in balloons at 30 km and found
extraordinarily thick and long tracks. Using new techniques for analyzing these tracks,
they found them to be the nuclei of various atoms:
iron, sodium, magnesium, silicon,
potassium, calcium. The energy of observed particles is extraordinarily large, often greater
than a GeV.

The paper concludes with a discussion of grain density and the range-energy relation.
This portion is clearly based on her paper on “Grain Density in Photographic Tracks of
Heavy Particles”B54, which was done at about the time she was preparing the present
article.

The third paper in this group was written by Marietta Blau in 1959 while she was at the
University of Miami, and is titled “Ionizationmessungen in photographischen Emulsionen”
and published in Acta Phys. AustriacaB70. Like the previous paper in this section, it was
for Karl Przibram’s festschrift, but this time for his 80th birthday. This paper is based
in part on our paper discussed above on “Studies of Ionization Parameters in Nuclear
Emulsions”B72 and probably on another series of articles she was writing at that time for
the volume edited by Luke C.L. Yuan and Chen-Shiung Wu, Methods of Experimental
Physics, Vols. 5A and 5B, Nuclear Physics, B74, which I will discuss below in the last part
of this section. Hence, I will not elaborate further on this publication, which is presumably
covered in references (B72) and (B74).

The contributions of Marietta Blau to the volumes of Yuan and Wu on Methods of
Experimental Physics, Nuclear PhysicsB74, Vols. (5A and 5B) are a masterful discussion
of the photographic emulsion technique in nuclear and particle physics by the person who
is most responsible for its discovery and for much of its evolution and application.

The contributions are in ﬁve parts. The ﬁrst in Vol. 5A, Section 1.7, is the longest,

28

and starts with a historical introduction (1.7.1), some of which was discussed earlier, and
which I will not repeat. As in reference (B61), she attributes the discovery of the π−-meson
to Perkins59 and the positive counterpart to Lattes et al60. The ﬁrst heavy meson was the
τ -meson discovered by Brown et al61 in nuclear emulsions. She notes that the method also
has been successfully applied in the ﬁeld of slow neutrons, photo-disintegrations, and in
problems connected with ﬁssion.

In the following sections she discusses questions that are clearly addressed to the
concerns of emulsion practitioners, namely (1.7.2) on Sensitivity of Nuclear Emulsions,
(1.7.3.1) on Processing Techniques of Nuclear Emulsions, with clear recipes for research
workers, (1.7.3.2) on Water Content of Emulsions, and (1.7.4) on Optical Equipment and
Microscopes.

In (1.7.5) Blau discusses in some detail the Range of Particles in Nuclear Emul-
sions, beginning with (1.7.5.1), Measurement of the Residual Range of Particles in Nuclear
Emulsions, and then (1.7.5.2), Range-Energy Relations in Nuclear Emulsions, where she
introduces the Bethe-Bloch equation, the fundamental relation describing the energy loss
of particles as function of velocity62. In (1.7.5.3) she discusses Range Straggling and in
(1.7.5.4) the Range-Energy Relations for Multiply Charged Particles, quoting the seminal
work by Barkas63. In (1.7.6) she discusses Ionization Measurement in Emulsions, basing
it on Sternheimer’s64 adaptation of the Bethe-Bloch equation to photographic emulsions.
This section and the following one (1.7.7), Ionization Parameters: Blob Density, Gap Den-
sity, Mean Gap Length and Total Gap Length, include many of the results of our 1960
paper on Ionization ParametersB72.

In section (2.1.1.3) Blau discusses the Charge Determination of Particles in Photo-
graphic Emulsions. There are two magnetic methods, namely the “sandwich method” and
the magnetic deﬂection in the emulsion itself. In the “sandwich method”, the measure-
ment is made of deﬂections of particles traversing the air gap between two parallel emulsion
sheets. The curvature of the trajectory of the particle in the magnetic ﬁeld existing in this
gap is determined by the angle between the particle’s exit and entrance directions in the
two adjacent emulsions. Although the accuracy of this method could be increased by using
wider gaps, the maximum separation is limited by the fact that it becomes increasingly
diﬃcult to follow a track. Distortion may also impede the usefulness by causing large
errors, especially for tracks with dip angles exceeding 10◦. However, the method can be
used to obtain at least the sign of the charge.

The other method of magnetic deﬂection requires distortion free emulsions. It yields
an accurate value of the charge only if the magnetic ﬁeld is large, the path in the ﬁeld
long, and the mean scattering angle ¯αsc is small compared to the magnetic deviation angle
αm, where αm = (t/ρ), where ρ is the radius of curvature of a trajectory which describes
a path of circular arc t in a region of ﬁeld H. Then αm = ( tHz
p ), where z is the charge of
the particle and p is its momentum. The authors in this ﬁeld have adopted, as a general
rule, that the sign of charge of particles in energy range 200-2000MeV can be determined

29

with 80% probability if the path length is 2 cm and the applied magnetic ﬁeld is 30,000
gauss. I tried myself to apply this method in 1960 with Derek Prowse at U.C.L.A., but we
were met by disappointing results.

¿From the previous discussions on ionization, it was seen that the grain density was
expressed by the relation g = f (z2β). Thus the grain density alone gives no information
on z or β separately. One must then supplement such observations with an independent
method, such as scattering, which is a measure of momentum and charge.

Another important parameter for the magnitude of charge determination is the pro-
duction of δ rays. These arise from collisions with atomic electrons in the emulsion when
the energy transfer is greater than the average energy given to grains forming the particle
trajectory. Thus, the atomic electrons acquire considerable velocities, and hence are able
to render several grains developable, thereby forming short trajectories which protrude
from the original trace. δ-ray measurements were ﬁrst used to discriminate among charges
of energetic heavy primaries which were discovered in the cosmic radiation by Bradt and
Peters, and by Freier et al26. Blau then gives an extensive discussion of the application of
the δ-ray technique.

In Section (2.2.1.1.5) Blau discusses Momentum Measurement in Nuclear Emulsions.
This portion of the paper, about twenty pages long, is about as deﬁnitive a treatment
as I have seen in the literature on the subject of multiple scattering of charged particles
through matter, giving an estimate of (pβ), where p is the momentum and β is the velocity.
She quotes all the important references in the literature, and also goes into experimental
details.

In (2.2.3.8) Blau discusses the Detection and Measurement of Gamma Rays in Pho-
tographic Emulsions. She points out that gamma radiation generally causes a general
blackening of the emulsions, similar to that of visible light, and is applied qualitatively to
biological problems. In physics it becomes more interesting for high energy radiation when
electron pair production sets in and electromagnetic cascades start to develop. The study
of these cascades, their multiplication, and the energy of individual electron pairs are used
for the determination, or at least, estimate of the primary photon energy causing these
phenomena. She discusses the opening angle of electron pairs, their energy measurement,
the ionization method, and ﬁnally the problem of π0-meson production and its short decay
time, about the limit that can be determined by visual measurements. It was an early
great achievement of the emulsion technique.

Finally, in (2.3.5), in volume 5B of the Yuan and Wu, Methods of Experimental
Physics, Blau discusses Determination of the Mass of Nucleons in Emulsions. She de-
scribes, in some detail, the application of the constant sagitta method, then the Lund
photometric method, the so-called mean track width method, and then the mass measure-
ment of particles which do not end in the emulsion.

30

Had Blau been in better health, it is clear that her last contribution in Yuan and
Wu’s book could have become a classic exposition of the emulsion technique in high energy
physics as a book of its own. As it stands, even with the passage of about forty years, it
remains an important contribution to the literature of experimental particle physics.

A Russian translation of Blau’s contributions was apparently issued in 1965.B75

H. Epilogue

In April 1960, Marietta left by train from Miami, to New York, and then on to Vienna.

My family and the Carters bade her an emotional farewell.

I continued to work on our K−-interactions results, and then obtained a grant from
the Research Corporation to expose a stack of Ilford K5 emulsion plates to the 800 MeV/c
K−-meson beam at the Bevatron in Berkeley. I left Miami in the Summer of 1961 for the
University of Trieste, where I had hoped to collaborate with Carlo Franzinetti. Unfortu-
nately, he had just left for the University of Pisa, so I was left to work on the emulsions
by myself, and to collaborate with the bubble chamber group at Trieste which was scan-
ning photographs of the antiproton beam at CERN. Since the scanning and measuring
devices for the bubble chamber photographs were still in development, I collaborated with
a young colleague at Trieste, Mario Ceschia, to perform phenomenological computations
on antiproton-proton interactions at laboratory energies from 30 to 180 MeV. We based
our analysis on a reﬁnement of the Ball and Chew model65 and on the adaptation of mod-
iﬁcations of the p − p potential to the ¯p − p potential, and found decent agreement with the
experimental results then available,66 also making predictions on diﬀerential cross sections
and polarization.

With the help of three scanners, I also found two heavy hyperfragment decays pro-
duced by the fast K−-beam67. My stay in Trieste was supported by I.N.F.N. (Istituto
Nazionale Fisica Nucleare).

In the Spring of 1962, my family and I traveled from Trieste to Vienna where we
met with Marietta Blau at her apartment. She was, of course, a gracious hostess, but the
main purpose was to ﬁnish our hyperon paperB75. She expressed great displeasure at her
treatment by the faculty at the Institut for Radiumforschung, and her inability to engage
in productive work. She was clearly not in the best of physical health.

I extended my leave from the University of Miami, by going to the Weizmann Institute
of Science in Rehovoth, Israel, in August 1962, with a grant from the Israel Atomic Energy
Commission. There I collaborated with a group that had been studying the interactions
of K−- mesons with emulsion nuclei with the production of (Σ± + π∓). We combined their
results with ours from Miami and carried out a detailed analysis of the results. We found
that the coulomb eﬀect on the energies of the charged Σ-hyperons and charged π-mesons

31

was observable, and had an eﬀect on the Λ(1405) resonance68.

In 1963 I returned to the University of Miami, where I collaborated with Joseph Cox
on a phenomenological treatment of particle scattering69. In the late 1960’s, I collaborated
with a group from Northwestern University on experiments using spark chambers designed
to measure the magnetic moment of the Σ+-hyperon at Argonne National Laboratory. In
the 1970’s and early 1980’s I collaborated with a group at the University of Michigan which
carried out experiments on high energy polarized proton-proton scattering at Argonne
National Laboratory and Brookhaven National Laboratory, where the particle detectors
were scintillation counters.

I mention these endeavors mainly to emphasize my debt to the inﬂuence and legacy
of Marietta Blau over the rest of my life. When I ﬁrst read the article by Peter Galison
in Physics Today in 19974, I was prompted to send a short letter to Physics Today in
199870. In it I wrote that my several years of working with Marietta had changed my life.
After rereading the present article, I can emphatically reaﬃrm that remark and express
gratitude for my association with that wonderful person. She led me into particle physics,
and even if I am dissatisﬁed with the quality of my achievements, I am grateful for being
a participant in interesting experiments, and in having established a world-wide circle of
friends and associates in this exciting ﬁeld.

Actually, these associations were greatly ampliﬁed after 1964, when my colleague at
the University of Miami, the theorist, Behram Kursunoglu, with my help, established the
Center for Theoretical Studies and the now-famous Coral Gables Conferences on Symmetry
Principles at High Energy, and which have persisted, with some name changes, to this day.
The Center was host to some of the great scientists of our time, including P.A.M. Dirac, R.
Feynman, Lars Onsager, J.R. Oppenheimer, E. Wigner, H. Bethe, F. Crick, E. Teller, R.
Hofstadter, M. Gell Mann, W. Lamb, J. Schwinger, A. Salam, S. Weinberg, V. Zworykin,
among others, and also to a number of gifted post doctoral fellows. After Kursunoglu’s
retirement in 1992, we have continued these activities under the auspices of the Global
Foundation, and I continue to collaborate with him on problems of uniﬁed ﬁeld theory and
astrophysics.

I return now to the subject that must have been the source of great pain and frustration
in Marietta Blau’s professional life, namely the oﬃcial neglect of her role in the discovery of
the pion that I mentioned at the beginning of this article. She was too proud and private
to reveal this disappointment to me openly, but I do recall that she had great disdain
for C.F. Powell. This is corroborated by reading her Acta Phys.Austriaca articleB61 and
her article in Yuan and Wu’s bookB74, where she actually attributed the discovery of the
π−-meson to Perkins59 and that of the π+-meson to Lattes, Occhialini and Powell60. I
now remember that she thought more highly of Perkins, Lattes and Occhialini than she
did of Powell, and felt that the latter was rewarded more for his public posture than for
his achievements or abilities.

32

I think that it is clear from some of the work described in this paper and the summary
in Appendix IV, that the pion was the central discovery in nuclear physics after the war.
It is interesting to recount brieﬂy the history leading up to this discovery.

In 1935, Hideki Yukawa, the great Japanese theorist, attributed the ﬁnite range (∼
10−15m) of nuclear forces between nucleons to the existence of a massive ﬁeld quantum or
carrier of integral spin71. This has turned out to be a fundamental concept in the theory
of ﬁelds, and has led to further application in weak interactions. The estimate of the mass
of this carrier was about 300 electron masses. There ensued then one of the great nasty
tricks that nature plays on the mortal explorers of its secrets. In 1937, C.D. Anderson72
observed what was called the µ-meson, or muon, in cloud chambers exposed to the cosmic
rays. Anderson, incidentally, had ﬁrst also observed the positron, or the antielectron,
several years earlier, after it had been postulated by P.A.M. Dirac73. The muon was found
to have a mass of about 206 electron masses, and furthermore it did not interact strongly
in nuclear matter as should the Yukawa particle. Hence, the nuclear physicists were faced
with the conundrum. The muon was actually also a lepton, or, a “heavy electron”. Thus it
was that in 1947,with the discovery of the pion by Perkins, Lattes, et al that the dilemma
It was suggested ﬁrst by Marshak and Bethe74 that two particles were
was resolved.
involved, and indeed the experiments showed that π+ → µ+ + νµ and π− → µ− + ¯νµ, and
that the pion has a mass of about 274 electron masses, as I have mentioned in Appendix
IV. Thus the pion was the “prize plum” that ushered in the great era of high energy physics
of the last half of the 20th century.

Marietta Blau’s contributions were central to this discovery, but as I said in the early
part of this paper, after the end of the war she was no longer in a position to forge new
roads, but still made contributions at a modest level. It is my fervent belief, that had Blau
been able to expose her photographic plates in 1938, in the high Alps, with Stefan Meyer’s
sponsorship, that she would have been able to detect a π-meson. This is a poignant example
of how social and political upheaval can thwart the purest quest for new knowledge.

As an aside, it is truly remarkable how quickly new devices and techniques are de-
veloped. As I mentioned earlier, emulsions were largely supplanted by bubble chambers
in the 1960’s, those in turn by spark chambers, then streamer chambers, and now whole
new classes of detectors. It is a further irony that at present, high energy physics is again
turning toward outer space, with the advent of new detectors in space and on earth. I feel
privileged to be a witness to these events.

33

Acknowledgements

I am grateful to my wife, Lynn Meyer, for her encouragement and for her skillful

criticism of this manuscript.

I would also like to thank Judy Mallery for her help in typing this manuscript.

34

Appendix I
Recollections of Marietta Blau
by Martin M. Block, Northwestern University
Evanston, IL 60208

Indeed, I did work with Marietta Blau at Columbia, in the late 40’s. I was a graduate
student and she was a Research Associate. As a graduate student, I was in charge of
the nuclear emulsions section. Of course, none of us knew anything about emulsions—
it took Blau to teach us the techniques of developing, scanning, etc.
In this, she was
indispensable...We were still building the Nevis Cyclotron (in those days, grad students
really built the equipment, tested it, etc., since we had no engineers or post-docs), and
for practice, exposed some nuclear emulsions in balloons. We came across a strange event,
which we published in ’49.
It took until 1999 for me to work again in cosmic rays—I
just published a paper in PRL on Dec. 13 (TODAY). I can’t tell you anything about her
Brookhaven work. I do know that she was treated rather shabbily at Columbia—but who
wasn’t during that era.

35

Appendix II
My Interactions with Marietta Blau
by S.J. Lindenbaum, Brookhaven National Laboratory
Upton, NY.

After the war I simultaneously was employed as a full time staﬀ member of the “Nevis
Cyclotron Laboratories” of Columbia University (1946-1951) and was pursuing my Ph.D.
in Physics at Columbia.

I was initially assisting Professor Rainwater (in eﬀect a Deputy Director) under Pro-
fessor Booth (the Director) in developing the Radio Frequency System for the Nevis ap-
proximately 400 MeV Cyclotron design and construction project. However, my duties
were soon broadened in this small scientiﬁc staﬀ to include most aspects of the Cyclotron
Project including planning elements of the future research program.

Marietta Blau was a senior staﬀ member brought in to prepare an emulsion program
for the Cyclotron, as she was the well known outstanding pioneer in the emulsion technique
and its application to studying Nuclear Stars.

I was asked to look into her program and help where I could. I found Marietta to be
almost unbelievably well versed in every aspect of the emulsion techniques even though
my expectations were high, considering her reputation as the outstanding pioneer that she
was.

She set up a very complete emulsion laboratory, with scanners that she trained her-
self. Marietta also taught me the emulsion technique at a sophisticated level which was
unattainable through reading the literature, which I did.

It was obvious to her that the high data rates an FM Cyclotron would generate in
a long program would overwhelm human scanners, and she felt that as much automation
as possible should be developed for the scanning and analysis programs, and this would
also eliminate most of the biases introduced by human scanning.
I totally shared her
conclusion, and since I guessed that the ﬁrst Nevis Cyclotron experiment would be most
rapidly done with emulsions, and I had a thesis topic in mind– namely to solve a great
uncertainty of the times– what was the process or processes which lead to Cosmic Ray
stars.

Thus I began to collaborate extensively with Marietta and an engineer R. Rudin, on
the development of a semi-automatic device for analyzing events in nuclear emulsions. This
program was successfully completed and published [Rudin, R., Blau, M., Lindenbaum, S.J.,
Semi-Automatic Device for Analyzing Events in Nuclear Emulsions. Rev. Sci Instr.21,978-
985 (1950), and Phys Rev. 78, 319A (1950)].

36

I believe if emphasis had not quickly shifted to the bubble chamber, and soon thereafter
to the electronic “bubble chambers”, which I later pioneered, that this semi-automatic
device would have become quite important.
In any event, it was the ﬁrst idea which
was successfully developed to automate visually observed events, and likely inﬂuenced
future developments. Marietta Blau, in addition to being an outstanding scientist, was
a warm and caring individual whose company was always very much enjoyed by myself,
and her colleagues, and although a quiet individual, she certainly stimulated me and other
colleagues greatly.

I went on to do my thesis–the ﬁrst Nevis experiment - by exposing minimum ionization
track sensitive emulsions to internal 350-400 MeV proton beam and demonstrated, that
contrary to the most popular belief at the time–that the Fermi Statistical Theory explained
the major mechanism of Nuclear Star Formation – that actually a cascade of individual
nucleons was the major element in Star production, and that the only role of the Fermi
Statistical theory was to cause a thermodynamic evaporation due to rearrangement of
the holes in the Fermi sea produced by the nucleonic cascade [Bernardini G. Booth E.T.
Lindenbaum S.J., Phys. Rev. 80, 905 (1950), Phys. Rev. 83, 669-671, (1951), Phys. Rev.
82, 307 (1951), Phys. Rev. 85, 826-834, (1952), Phys. Rev. 88, 1017-1026 (1952).

Although Marietta Blau did not participate in this extensive important program, it

was the laboratory she developed which was used for it.

37

Appendix III
“Recollections of Marietta Blau at Miami
by S.C. Bloch, Professor Emeritus
University of South Florida, Tampa, Florida

I was privileged to be one of Professor Blau’s graduate students – perhaps her last
one. Under her direction, I earned a Master’s degree while participating in her research
project at the University of Miami, funded by the Air Force Oﬃce of Scientiﬁc Research.
The research was based on the use of nuclear emulsions to study fundamental particle
interactions. This work resulted in one of my ﬁrst publications, which was one of Professor
Blau’s last publications:

“Studies of Ionization Parameters in Nuclear Emulsions” in Review of Scientiﬁc
Instruments 31, 289-297 (1960), M. Blau, S.C. Bloch, C.F. Carter, and A. Perl-
mutter.

I was also a student in Professor Blau’s course in nuclear physics. She was an excellent
teacher, very demanding, and respected by her students. As in her research, she had high
standards and expected the best from students.

Professor Blau was no less demanding from her colleagues. I was in her oﬃce one day
when she was berating another professor, saying, “You know nothing about fundamental
particles!”

38

Appendix IV

A Brief Tutorial on Units and Nomenclature in Particle Physics.

The masses and charges of elementary particles have been established by a variety of
methods over the course of the past century. For example, the mass of the electron is about
me = 9.11 × 10−31kg and its charge is qe = −e, where e = 1.60 × 10−19 coulomb. The
mass of the proton is mp = 1.67 × 10−27kg and its charge is qp = +e. As far as we know,
these are the only stable elementary particles, and are, along with the neutron, which has
no charge and a mass slightly larger than that of the proton, the principal constituents of
the atom. All other known particles have charges which are either neutral (q = 0) or are
positive or negative multiples of e, with the exception of quarks, which I will discuss later.

As for masses, it is much more convenient to make use of Einstein’s famous relation,
E0 = mc2, where E0 is called the rest energy, m is the mass of the particle in kg, and
c = 3.00 × 108m/s is the approximate speed of light. This allows one to introduce another
energy unit, the electron volt (eV), where 1eV = 1.60 × 10−19Joules. Then, the electron
has a rest energy of about Eoe = 0.511 × 106eV = 0.511MeV, and the proton a rest energy
of about Eop = 938.3MeV, or about 1840 times that of the former. The free neutron has
a rest energy of about Eon = 939.6MeV and decays (weakly) in about 14.8 minutes to a
proton, an electron and an anti-electron neutrino, i.e., n → p + e− + ¯νe. The neutron is
stable only when it is bound in an atomic nucleus.

The principal units utilized in giving energies or mass energies, are KeV (103eV ),
M eV (106eV ), GeV (109eV ) and T eV (1012eV ). Prior to the 1960’s BeV , was used for
109eV , but since the B stood for “billion” in the U.S.A., and “billion” in Britain meant
1012, it was decided to represent 109 by the preﬁx Giga, hence GeV.

The total energy of a particle is given by E = K + E0, where K is the kinetic energy.
0 , where p is the momentum, is very useful. Here, it is seen

The relation E =
that the unit for p is conveniently (eV /c) where c is the speed of light.

p2c2 + E2

p

The terminology used to identify various particles, radioactive nuclei and radiation has
undergone some changes over the years. But the early designation by E. Rutherford at the
beginning of the last century of the various radiations emanating from radioactive nuclei
as α, β, γ are still in use. α-radiation refers to the nuclei of helium atoms, with charge
+2e and a mass nearly four times that of a proton. Hence, α-particle is synonymous
with helium nucleus 4
2He. β-radiation refers to electrons, of charge (-e) and mass me
emitted from nuclei–identical with the electrons in the outer regions of the atom. Since
the discovery of the electron’s antiparticle, the positron, (e+) whose charge is +e and mass
me, the term β is generic for both e− and e+. The third kind of radiation, γ, refers to
gamma radiation, high energy photons, of no mass or charge, and with energies from a
few KeV up to many TeV. Actually, γ is a generic term for photon, which can also refer
to radio, microwave or visible light. In nuclear and particle physics, gamma rays emanate

39

from nuclei, as contrasted with x-rays, which are produced by transitions of closely bound
atomic electrons. Generally speaking, gamma rays are more energetic than x-rays.

Here, it might be useful to consider some of the principle elementary particles. The
π-meson, or pion, comes in a family of three, π+, π−, π0, where the rest energies are
about mπ± = 139.6MeV and mπ0 = 135.0MeV, and decays according to the schemes,
π+ → µ+ + νµ, and π− → µ− + ¯νµ, both in about 2.6 × 10−8 seconds, and π0 → γ + γ in
about 8.4 ×10−16 seconds (γ is the symbol for massless photon). The µ±-lepton (originally
called µ-meson, and now muon) is some times called the “heavy electron”, has a mass
of about 105.7MeV, and decays in about 2.2 × 10−6 seconds, according to the schemes
µ+ → e+ + νe + ¯νµ and µ− → e− + ¯νe + νµ, where νe and νµ stand for two kinds of
neutrinos, both of which were considered to be massless until the past few years, when
underground experiments at Kamiokande in Japan, and elsewhere, indicate that neutrinos
have a very small rest energy of about or less than 1eV, thus supplanting the electron as
the lightest particle (photons, of course, have zero rest energy, or at best < 3. × 10−27eV ).
There is another lepton, discovered only in the 1970’s, τ -lepton, with a rest energy of
about 1777.1 MeV and which decays via many modes, in about 2.96 × 10−13 seconds, all
involving a ντ or ¯ντ , to muons, and to various combinations of pions and kaons. It also
comes with positive or negative charge ±e.

The kaon (or K-meson) called a “strange” particle, discovered shortly after the pion in
1948, comes in several varieties, K +, K −, K 0, ¯K 0, and has rest energies of about E0K± =
493.7MeV and E0K 0 = 497.7MeV. The lifetime of K ± is about 1.24 × 10−8 seconds and
has many decay schemes, including K + → µ+ + νµ, K − → µ− + ¯νµ, and also K ± → (3π)
(originally called a τ ±-meson) and K ± → (2π) (originally called a θ-meson). The K 0
L(K 0-long), with lifetimes of about
comes in two principal varieties, K 0
s (K 0-short) and K 0
0.89 × 10−10 seconds and about 5.2 × 10−8 seconds. They oscillate between each other,
and are responsible for the observation of time reversal non-invariance.

The hyperons, which ﬁrst appeared in the late 1940’s, 1950’s and 1960’s, are also
called strange particles and all have rest energies larger than that of the proton. The
lightest of these is the Λ0(1115MeV), then a family called Σ comprised of Σ+(1189MeV),
Σ−(1197MeV), Σ0(1192MeV). The Σ+ and Σ− decay mainly into nucleon (n or p) and
pion (π+, π−, or π0) in a time less than 10−10 seconds, while the Σ0 decays in about 10−19
seconds into a Λ0-hyperon and a photon. The heaviest of these hyperons is the Ξ, which
appears in two charge states, the Ξ0(1315MeV) and Ξ−(1321MeV), and decay mainly into
Λ0 and π0 or π− in times of about 10−10 seconds. The six hyperons named here, and
the two nucleons, proton (p) and neutron (n) form an octet of particles in one of the
early classiﬁcation schemes established by M. Gell Mann in 1961. In the same spirit, the
mesons π+, π−, π0, η, K −, ¯K 0, K +, K 0, form the lowest octet in this scheme, where the η
is a neutral meson resonance of rest energy 547 MeV, decaying mainly into three pions or
two photons in about 3.4 × 10−18 seconds.

These classiﬁcation schemes were obtained by introduction of quarks, by M. Gell

40

Mann and G. Zweig75. They postulated that there are three quarks u(up), d(down), and
s(strange) of charges −1/3e, 2/3e, and −1/3e, respectively and their antiparticles, which
are the constituents of mesons (2 quarks) and baryons (3 quarks). In the 1970’s and 1980’s
and 1990’s there were postulated and conﬁrmed three more quarks, c(charm), b(bottom),
and t(top), which generated an explosion of information and theoretical progress. For the
purposes of this paper it is necessary only to mention that the ﬁrst decuplet of baryon
resonances, which we discussed in section EB69, could be understood as a grouping of u, d
and s quarks.

There is a related way of describing particle groupings that preceded these schemes,
introduced by W. Heisenberg76 to describe atomic nuclei, namely isospin (I). This quantity
can take on values I = 0 (singlets, such as Λ0, I = 1/2 (doublets, such as n and p), I=1
(triplets, such as (Σ+, Σ0, Σ−) and I = 3/2 (quartets, such as (∆−, ∆0, ∆+, ∆++), etc.

While quarks have not been seen in a free state, since they are conﬁned to elementary
particles by strong forces involving also gluons, they can be detected only indirectly, but
their utility in bringing an order to hundreds of particle states has been of inestimable
value.

Originally, mesons were so named because they had masses intermediate between
electron and proton. Now, with the discovery of heavier mesons arising from the heavier
quarks, c, b and t, mesons may be much heavier than protons. More fundamental is the
fact that because mesons are composed of two spin 1/2 quarks, they must have integer spin,
i.e., 0, 1, 2, 3... and they are designated as Bose-Einstein particles, or bosons. They obey
quite diﬀerent statistics from Fermi-Dirac particles, or fermions, which have half-integer
spin, i.e. 1
2 ,... Baryons, which are composed of three spin 1/2 quarks, are therefore
fermions, as are also electrons, muons, tauons, and neutrinos.

2 , 5

2 , 3

For the reader who wishes to go beyond the early results discussed in this paper, I
can recommend several of many good publications. One is the Physical Review, Review
of Particle Properties, D50, No. 3, (1 August 1994). This one is the more or less oﬃcial
compendium and probably contains more information than most people need. A new
update of this should appear shortly. A more accessible source is “Introduction to High
Energy Physics”, by Donald H. Perkins, 3rd Edition, Addison-Wesley Publishing Company,
Inc. 1987.

41

Footnotes
1 Peter Galison, Image and Logic: A Material Culture of Microphysics, University of

Chicago Press (Chicago and London) 1997.

2 Walter Moore, Schr¨odinger, life and thought (Cambridge University Press) 1989, pp.

479-480.

3 Max Born, Atomic Physics, Blackie and Son Ltd.,the (Glasgow) 1969, pp. 36-37.
4 Peter Galison, Physics Today 50, 42, Nov. 1997.
5 Leopold Halpern in Women in Chemistry and Physics; a Bibliographical Sourcebook
Edited by L.S. Grinstein, R.K. Rose, and M.H. Rafailovich, Greenwood Press (West-
port, Connecticut and London), 1993, pp. 50-56.

6 Nina Byers, Contributions of 20th Century Women to Physics

(http://www.physics.ucla.edu/∼cwp/phase 2/Blau Marietta@843727247.html).

7 C.F. Powell, P.H. Fowler and D. Perkins, The Study of Elementary Particles by the
Photographic Method, Pergamon Press (New York, London, Paris, Los Angeles) 1959.
8 J.B. Birks, The Theory and Practice of Scintillation Counting, The MacMillan Com-

pany in (New York) 1964.

9 S.C. Curran and W.R. Baker, U.S. Atomic Energy Report MDDC, 1296, 17th Nov

(1944); Rev. Sci. Instr. 19, 116 (1948).

10 J.W. Coltman and F.H. Marshall, Nucleonics 1, 358 (1947); F.H. Marshall and J.W.
Coltman, Phys. Rev. 72, 528 (1947); F.H. Marshall, J. Coltman and A.I. Bennett,
Rev. Sci. Instr. 19, 744 (1948); F.H. Marshall, J.W. Coltman and L.P. Hunter, Rev.
Sci. Instr. 18, 504 (1947).

11 I. Broser and H. Kallmann, Z. Naturforsch. 29, 439, 642 (1947); H. Kallmann, Natur

und Technik (July, 1947); Phys. Rev. 78, 621 (1950).

12 P.R. Bell, Phys. Rev. 73, 1405 (1948).
13 R. Hofstadter, Phys. Rev. 74, 100 (1948).
14 H. Petterson, BerIIa, Wien 132, 55 (1923).
15 R.D. Evans, Nucleonics 1, no. 2, 32 (1947).
16 C.C. Dilworth, G.P.S. Occhialini, and R.H. Payne, Nature 162, 102 (1948).
17 Crabtree, Parker, and Russel, Soc. Mot. Pic. ENO, VO RR 21, 21 (1933).
18 J. Rotblat “Photographic Emulsion Technique”, Prog. in Nucl. Phys., 1, 37-72 (1950).
19 C.M.G. Lattes, P.M. Fowler, and P. Cuer, Proc. Phys. Soc. London 59, 883 (1947).
20 C.M.G. Lattes, G.P.S. Occhialini, and C.F. Powell, Nature 160, 486 (1947).
21 J.H. Webb, Phys. Rev. 74, 511 (1948).
22 D.H. Perkins, Nature 159, 126 (1947).
23 P. Debye and E. H¨uckel, Physik. Zeits. 24, 185 (1923).
24 See Appendix I, “Recollections of Marietta M. Blau”, Martin M. Block (Dec. 13,

25 See Appendix II, “My Interactions with Marietta Blau”, S.J. Lindenbaum (Feb 21,

26 H.L. Bradt and B. Peters, Phys. Rev. 74, 1828 (1948); P. Frier et al, Phys, Rev. 74,

1999).

2000).

413 (1948).

27 S.J. Lindenbaum, Columbia University thesis 1951.
28 J.B. Harding, Nature 163, 440 (1949); Phil. Mag. 42, 63 (1951).

42

29 Menon, Muirhead and Rochat, Phil. Mag. 41, 583 (1950).
30 P.E. Hodgson, Phil. Mag. 42, 955 (1951).
31 Camerini, Davies, Franzinetti, Lock, Perkins, and Yekutieli, Phil.Mag. 42, 126 (1951).
32 W.F. Fry, Phys. Rev. 91, 1576 (1953).
33 S.J. Lindenbaum and L.C.L. Yuan, Phys. Rev. 92, 1578 (1953).
34 M. Sands, Phys. Rev. 77, 180 (1950); W.O. Lock and G. Yekutieli, Phil. Mag. 43,

231 (1952).

35 A high percentage of stoppings has been reported for 1.5 GeV negative pions by W.D.

Walker and J. Crussard, Phys. Rev. 98, 1416 (1955).

36 S.J. Lindenbaum and L.C.L. Yuan, Phys. Rev. 100, 306 (1955).
37 M. Danysz and T. Pniewski, Phil. Mag. 44, 348 (1953); W.F. Fry, J. Schneps, and

M.S. Swami, Phys. Rev. 99, 1561 (1955).

38 L.M. Eisberg, W.B. Fowler, R.M. Lea, W.D. Shepherd, R.P. Shutt, A.M. Thorndike

and W.L. Whittemore, Phys. Rev., 97, 797 (1955).

39 R.R. Crittenden, J.H. Scandrett, W. D. Shephard, W.D. Walker and J. Ballam, Phys.

Rev. Lett., 2, 121 (1959).

40 E. Fermi, Prog. Theor. Phys. (Japan), 5, 570 (1950); Phys. Rev., 92, 452 (1953).
41 R.M. Sternheimer and S.J. Lindenbaum, Phys. Rev. 109, 1723 (1958).
42 This leads to a nominal mass of the isobar state to be mp + mπ + Q = (940 + 140 +
150)M eV = 1230 MeV, remarkably close to the mass of the ∆ resonance of 1232
MeV. Remember that this was several years before the advent of the quark model and
the identiﬁcation of the lowest lying decuplet composed of an I = 3/2, ∆(1232); I =
1, Σ(1385); I = 1
2 , Ξ(1530); I = 0, Ω−(1672). The numbers in parentheses are the
approximate rest energies of the ∆ resonances in MeV. The width of the ∆ resonance
is 120 MeV, in agreement with the paper’s result. As far as I know, this was the ﬁrst
evidence for the ∆ resonance, in this case a ∆◦, allegedly composed of an up- and two
down- quarks. Hence, although we were disappointed not to match the predictions
of the isobar model, it is gratifying, in retrospect to give early evidence for the ∆
resonance.

43 N. Metropolis, R. Bivins, M. Storm, J.M. Millerr, G. Friedlander and A. Turkevich,

Phys. Rev., 110, 204 (1958).

44 P. Demers, Can. J. Research A25, 223 (1947).
45 P.H. Fowler and D.H. Perkins, Phil. Mag. 46, 587 (1955).
46 G. Alexander and R.H. W. Johnston, Nuovo Cimento 5, 363 (1957).
47 Castagnoli, Cortini, and Manfredini, Nuovo Cimento 2, 301 (1955).
48 C. O’Ceallaigh, Nuovo Cimento, Suppl. 12, 412 (1954).
49 M.G. Menon and C.O’Ceallaigh, Proc. Roy. Soc. (London) A221, 292 (1954).
50 S.C. Bloch, Rev. Sci. Instr. 29, 789 (1958).
51 See Appendix III, “Recollections of Marietta Blau at Miami”, S.C. Bloch, (April 3,

2000).

52 K− Collaboration, Nuovo Cimento 13, 690 (1959); 14, 315(1959); 15, 873 (1960).
53 J. Schneps, Phys. Rev. 112, 1335(1958); Y.W. Kang, N. Kwak, J. Schneps and P.A.

Smith, Nuovo Cimento 22, 1297 (1961).

43

54 A. Deloﬀ, J. Szymanski and J. Wrzeconko, Polish Academy of Sciences, Institute of

Nuclear Research, Report no. 95/VII, (June 1959).

55 F. Ferrari and L. Fonda, Nuovo Cimento 7, 320 (1958); N. Dallaporta and F. Ferrari,

Nuovo Cimento, 5, 111 (1957).

56 M. Baldo-Ceolin, W.F. Fry, W.D. B. Greening, H. Huzita and S. Limentani, Nuovo Ci-
mento 6, 144(1957); R.C. Kumar and F.R. Stannard, Nuovo Cimento 14, 250 (1959).

57 E. Gandolﬁ, J. Hengheboart and E. Quercigh, Nuovo Cimento 13, 864 (1959).
58 F.R. Stannard, Phys. Rev. 121, 1513 (1961)..
59 D.H. Perkins, Nature 159, 126 (1947).
60 C.M. G. Lattes, G.P.S. Occhialini and C.F. Powell, Nature 160, 486 (1947).
61 R.H. Brown, V. Camerini, P.H. Fowler, H. Muirhead, C.F. Powell and D.M. Ritson,

Nature, 163, 82 (1949).

62 F. Bloch, Z. Physik 81, 363 (1933).
63 W.H. Barkas, Phys.Rev. 89, 1019 (1953); W. H. Barkas, F.M. Smith and W. Birn-

baum, Phys. Rev. 98, 605 (1955).

64 R.M. Sternheimer, Phys.Rev. 88, 851 (1952); Phys.Rev. 91, 256 (1953).
65 J.S. Ball and G.F. Chew, Phys.Rev. 109, 1385 (1958); J.S. Ball and J.K. Fulco,

Phys.Rev. 113, 647 (1959).

66 M. Ceschia and A. Perlmutter, Nuovo Cimento 33, 578 (1964).
67 A. Perlmutter, Phys.Lett. 4, 336 (1963).
68 M. Friedmann, D. Kessler, A. Levy, A. Perlmutter, Nuovo Cimento 35, 355 (1965).
69 J. Cox and A. Perlmutter, Nuovo Cimento 37, 761 (1965).
70 A. Perlmutter, Physics Today, 49, 84, August 1998.
71 H. Yukawa, Proc.Phys. Math. Soc. Japan 17, 48 (1935).
72 C.D. Anderson and S. Neddermeyer, Phys.Rev. 51, 884 (1937); 54, 99 (1938).
73 P.A.M. Dirac, Proc. Roy. Soc. A117, 610 (1928).
74 R. Marshak and H. Bethe, Phys.Rev. 72, 506 (1947).
75 M. Gell Mann, Phy. Lett.8, 214 (1964); G. Zweig, CERN Report 8419/Th 412, 1964.
76 W. Heisenberg, Z. Physik 77, 1 (1932).

44

