Department of Physics and Astronomy, University of British Columbia

An Early History of Heavy Water

Chris Waltham

Vancouver B.C., Canada V6T 1Z1

waltham@physics.ubc.ca

August 1998; revised June 2002

Abstract

Since 1945 Canada has had a nuclear power industry based on reactor design which uses natural
uranium and heavy water. The tortuous and improbable sequence of events which led to this
situation is examined.

2
0
0
2
 
n
u
J
 
0
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
t
s
i
h
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
6
7
0
6
0
2
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

1

1

Introduction

Pure heavy water, D2O, is the oxide of the heavy stable isotope of hydrogen, deuterium, denoted
by the symbols 2H or D. It is physically and chemically almost identical to ordinary “light” water,
H2O, except in that its density is 10% higher, hence its name. The answer to the question everyone
asks is “Yes, you can drink it”; the Material Safety and Data Sheet states that dizziness and nausea
can occur if you ingest 10% of your body mass of heavy water, and LD50 is 30% of body mass.
Hence it is safer than ethanol.

Most of the deuterium (heavy hydrogen) was formed about 10 minutes after the Big Bang, along
with other very light isotopes presently found in the universe. More recently, 2.5 billion years ago,
most of the deuterium atoms on the earth were incorporated into water molecules. As a small
isotopic fraction of natural hydrogen (0.015%), deuterium existed then, as now, mostly in the form
of HDO molecules. And this is the way things remained until deuterium, and thus heavy water
was discovered in 1931. However, before we examine how deuterium was discovered, let us examine
the events which led to the manufacture of heavy water, for these seeds were sown before those of
discovery.

2 Birkeland and Norsk Hydro

At the turn of this century Professor Kristian Birkeland[1] of the University of Kristiania (soon to
be renamed Oslo) was experimenting with a device called the Terella. This was a laboratory model
of the earth, complete with magnetic ﬁeld, placed in an evacuated vessel into which ions could
be injected at high voltage. By observing the discharge glow, Birkeland was able to understand
the three-dimensional structure of the Aurora Borealis. However, the equipment was expensive
and money, then as now, was hard to come by. Kelvin suggested to Birkeland that research into
armaments might prove lucrative and allow him to continue with the Terella. This was not the
ﬁrst time this idea had occurred to a physicist, Birkeland with his expertise in electromagnetism,
set about producing an elektriske kanon, a rail-gun.

On Feb. 6th, 1902 Birkeland’s kanon short-circuited and exploded during a test, but the disap-
pointment he felt was muted by the observation of a disc-shaped arc, spread by the magnetic ﬁeld,
and the smell of nitrogen oxides. The reason this was intriguing was that the world was then
gripped by a fear greater even than that of the looming conﬂict in Central Europe - that of world
famine. Chilean nitrate deposits, on which the world depended as a fertilizer, were on the brink of
running out, and chemists were scurrying to ﬁnd an economical way of ﬁxing atmospheric nitrogen.
Clearly the acrid brown stench of nitrogen oxides was the smell of nitrogen being ﬁxed, as it was
a short hop skip and a jump to nitric acid and any nitrate you please.

Birkeland was not the ﬁrst to ﬁx nitrogen by electric arc - Crookes in Manchester already had
a pilot plant producing calcium nitrate by this means - but the disc-shaped arc promised a high
yield[2]. However, a week after the explosion he met a man who was already working on the means
which would make economical production possible. That man was Sam Eyde, a civil engineer who

2

was fascinated by the enormous potential of Norway’s mountains and rainfall for the production of
hydro-electricity. After that things moved with breath-taking speed. A week after meeting, Eyde
and Birkeland submitted a patent for artiﬁcial fertilizer. They obtained money from the Swedish
ﬁnanciers, the Wallenbergs, and a mere three years later a hydroelectric plant had been built out of
the wilderness at Notodden and a Birkeland-Eyde arc furnace was producing the ﬁrst Norgesalpeter
- Norwegian Saltpeter, i.e. calcium nitrate.

In the same year as the ﬁrst Norgesalpeter was produced, Fritz Haber discovered a much better
way of producing nitrates via ammonia made by what is now known as the Haber process. Indeed,
the Norwegians soon abandoned the arc furnaces and adopted Haber’s idea. However, Birkeland’s
discovery had started something irreversible: the large scale development of hydro-electric power
in Norway by the company he and Eyde had started: Norsk Hydro.

Now we will examine the other chain of events, that of discovery. First, however I should note the
strange and sad circumstances of Birkeland’s death in 1917 - too soon for him to know anything
about heavy water. He had been spending some time in Egypt, where it was hoped that the warm
weather would improve his health. He wished to return home to Norway, but found the direct route
barred by the First World War. During the ensuing tortuous detour, he died, in Tokyo.

3 Discovery

The path which led to the discovery of heavy hydrogen and heavy water was every bit as tortuous
as Birkeland’s attempt to get home from Egypt. In 1913 Arthur Lamb and Richard Lee at New
York University were trying to improve measurements of the density of water; this was a very
important quantity to know accurately because of its importance as a standard[3]. They were
attempting an accuracy of 200 ppb, but were not able to get agreement between samples taken
from diﬀerent geographical locations to better than 800ppb. They did not grasp the signiﬁcance of
this discrepancy - the abundance of deuterium varies due to rates of evaporation and condensation
- despite the fact that the concept of isotopes as developed by Frederick Soddy and Kasimir Fajans
was a signiﬁcant piece of scientiﬁc news that year.

In 1929 William Giauque and Herrick Johnston discovered 17O and 18O. Two years later Harold
Urey at Columbia constructed chart of missing and known isotopes and from gaps in the pattern
mused on the possible existence of 2H, 3H and 5He. In the same year Raymond T. Birge at Berkeley
and Donald H. Menzel at Lick noted[4] that all spectrograph measurements were based on 16O=16,
but chemical methods based on natural oxygen=16. However the chemical value for the mass of
hydrogen was 1.00777±0.00002 on this scale which compared very closely to Aston’s spectroscopic
value of 1.00778±0.00015. Hence, the existence of heavy isotopes of oxygen must be balanced by
one or more heavy isotopes of hydrogen; if this was all 2H, then its abundance compared to 1H
must be around 1:4500.

Urey and Murphy set about looking for 2H in the spectrum of natural hydrogen; the expected
shift was very small, me/2mp, or 1.8 Angstr¨oms on 6565 Angstr¨om Balmer alpha line. Seeing only

3

tantalizing hints of a second line in natural hydrogen they proceeded to distill liquid hydrogen,
hoping to leave the heavy isotope preferentially behind. Victor LaMer, a Columbia electrochemist
had argued that electrolysis of water would have no eﬀect on the isotopic fraction; it never occurred
to them that the huge fractional mass diﬀerence between H and D would make electrolysis and
excellent separator! In fact it was worse than that because Brickwedde from NBS who prepared
the samples chose nice and pure but deuterium-depleted electrolytic hydrogen for the distillation
process. Eventually the deuterium concentration in the electrolyte increased with use and the line
appeared. After the errors were discovered an isotopic ratio of 1 in 6500 was obtained, very close
to the 1 in 7000 value accepted today. Soon afterwards Edward Washburn and Urey[5] used the
electrolytic method to prepare the ﬁrst isotopically enriched sample of heavy water.

Urey had trouble getting travel funds to present his work at December 1931 APS meeting in Tulane;
an appeal had to made to the President of Columbia to provide his travel costs. Two years later
he was awarded the Nobel Prize for Chemistry.

As a footnote to Urey’s discovery, in 1935 Aston found error in his measurement of the mass of
hydrogen[6]. Now he got 1.00813 on physical scale or 1.0078 on chemical scale which implied if
anything a lighter isotope of hydrogen. In fact the existence or otherwise of rare hydrogen isotopes
was well buried in the experimental errors. But it was too late: deuterium had been discovered.

4 Production

The ﬁrst concentration of deuterium in water was achieved by using electrolysis; the light isotope
of hydrogen was preferentially evolved, leaving behind water enriched in deuterium (see appendix).
Separation factors of about six can easily be obtained and double this is possible. The economics
are not great, however. It is necessary to electrolyze 2700 litres of natural water to obtain one litre
of water enriched in deuterium by 10process of electrolysis, pure heavy water can be produced; this
is a conceptually simple method but it is enormously expensive.

Scientiﬁc interest in heavy water started to emerge soon after its ﬁrst production by Lewis and
MacDonald[7] as its analytical potential in chemistry and biology, and its possibilities in cancer
therapy, as well as more direct application in nuclear physics, became apparent. Small amounts
(grams) for scientiﬁc use were available in the United States by 1933.

5 Norsk Hydro Enters the Field

Jomar Brun, the Head of Hydrogen Research at Norsk Hydro, and Leif Tronstad, a physicist from
Trondheim realized that the conditions for large-scale production (kg) of heavy water existed at
Norsk Hydro’s plant in Rjukan, where large amounts of water were already being electrolyzed as
part of the Haber-Bosch process for producing ammonia for nitrogen fertilizer. They drew up a
plan, with some involvement from Karl-Friedrich Bonh¨oﬀer, a German physical chemist at Leipzig,

4

for the industrial production of heavy water.
It was in many ways an astonishing venture as a
large amount of equipment had to be built - hundreds of combined electrolysis, combustion and
condensation cells - and the market must have been uncertain. However, Norsk Hydro went ahead,
and built a plant by the generator building at Vemork, just outside Rjukan (ﬁg.1).

A glance at the ﬁrst order book (ﬁg.3) shows impressive and rapid progress. The ﬁrst order of one
litre of 0.43% heavy water was shipped to Birkbeck College, London, on August 9th, 1934, and by
mid-November 95% was achieved (and sent, not unreasonably, to Tronstad’s lab in Trondheim).
By January 1935, the ﬁrst production of more than 99% pure heavy water was available at 10Kr
(about 50 cents) per gram, a tenth of the American price. Tronstad and Brun themselves did
important standards work on deuterium and heavy water[8].

About this time, the idea of producing heavy water at Trail, British Columbia, was ﬁrst discussed
in correspondence between the Canadian National Research Council and the owners of the Trail
hydroelectric plant, Cominco[9]. This plant was the largest producer of electrolytic hydrogen in
North America; it was used, as was Norsk Hydro’s, for making ammonia for the fertilizer and
explosives industry.

6 Loss of Innocence

For a few years life with deuterium and heavy water was pleasant and productive. As a target for
nuclear physicists to play with deuterium provided an excellent source of neutrons, then a primary
tool in fundamental subatomic physics. Paul Harteck (whom we shall meet again), a young German
working with Rutherford and Marc Oliphant at the Cavendish Laboratory used it as a stepping
stone to discover an even heavier hydrogen isotope, tritium[10]. And although heavy water never
panned out as a cure for cancer (it was not possible to utilize the diﬀerent cell growth rates in heavy
and “light” water to this eﬀect), biologists made hay with the material; for example George Hevesy
in a classic set of experiments used it to establish the fraction of water in mammalian biology[11].

In 1937, Hans von Halban and Otto Frisch, working at Bohr’s Copenhagen laboratory, noticed
that heavy water had very low neutron absorption compared to light water. Protons and neutrons
like to be paired oﬀ; the cross section for neutron capture on a proton to produce a deuteron is
much greater than that for neutron capture on the already paired deuteron. This latter event does
occasionally happen, producing 3He, and this in turn loves to capture neutrons to produce the
doubly-paired 4He.

Around Christmas of 1938 the world changed when Otto Hahn and Fritz Strassman at the Kaiser
Wilhelm Institute in Berlin discovered that low energy (thermal) neutrons could split uranium
nuclei, releasing an enormous amount of energy. Using the liquid-drop model, Hahn’s erstwhile
colleague Lise Meitner and her nephew Otto Frisch were able to understand the basics of this
ﬁssion process and deduced the energy release to be about 200 MeV, or about 10 million times larger
than the energy change in a typical chemical reaction[12]. In January 1939 Hahn and Strassman[13]
suggested that thermal neutron-induced ﬁssion of uranium could release secondary neutrons. These

5

could go on to produce a chain reaction provided they were slowed down (moderated) to thermal
energies to increase their chance of causing further ﬁssion (see Appendix).

By April, Fred´er´eric Joliot and his colleagues Hans von Halban and Lew Kowarski from the Coll`ege
de France in Paris had observed these secondary neutrons, and they measured the number pro-
duced in each ﬁssion[14]. By August they found that blocks of uranium oxide showed increased
ﬁssion activity when immersed in ordinary water[15]. However, absorption of neutrons on hydrogen
prevented a self-sustaining chain reaction.

Across the Atlantic, Fermi and Szilard at Columbia University examined alternative moderators
and quickly decided on ultra-pure graphite. Work on carbon was also begun by George Laurence at
the Canadian National Research Council in Ottawa (later joined by Bern W. Sargent from Queen’s
University)[16]. Szilard started to persuade all physicists working on ﬁssion to cease publishing; he
sent a cable to Joliot on April 6th requesting a delay in further publications “in view of possible
misuse in Europe”[17].

Sometime in early summer, the Paris team alighted on the idea of using heavy water[15] as a
moderator. Deuterium was known to have a much lower absorption cross section for neutrons
than ordinary hydrogen[18] and its low mass makes it an almost ideal moderator. Use of heavy
water would thus make a self-sustaining chain reaction more accessible. Halban and Kowarski did
some simple modelling of neutron moderation and this was enough to suggest D2O as the best
candidate[15]. The putative moderating qualities of deuterium were then widely appreciated; as
early as the beginning of February 1939 Oppenheimer had a crude drawing on his blackboard of
an atomic bomb made of uranium deuteride[19].

At the end of October Halban, Joliot and Kowarski deposited a sealed envelope with the Academy
of Science. This was opened in 1949 and the paper inside “Sur la possibilit´e de produire dans un
milieu uranif`ere des r´eactions nucl´eaires en chaine illimit´ee” was published in Comptes Rendus[20].
The paper shows the group had a very ﬁrm theoretical grasp of reactor physics and includes what
we now know as the Fermi four-factor formula. When much later Patrick Blackett wrote Joliot’s
obituary he said “There is little doubt that, had the war not intervened, the world’s ﬁrst self-
sustaining chain reaction would have been achieved in France”[21].

We now know a natural uranium reactor is possible with only three practical moderators: heavy
water, ultra-pure graphite, and beryllium. Heavy water is by far the best, but in 1939 it was not
available in very large quantities. Graphite was more convenient, being very common, but it had
to be extremely pure. The purity of a graphite moderator is crucial as natural impurities tend to
be highly eﬃcient neutron absorbers. Early measurements of absorption cross-sections made by
Joliot and independently by Walter Bothe and Peter Jensen[22] in Heidelberg were much too large
for this reason. Thus carbon was rejected in Europe and this precipitated a ﬁght for the Norwegian
heavy water.

After moving to Chicago, Enrico Fermi used 40 tons of uranium and uranium oxide and 385 tons
of ultra-pure graphite to achieve the ﬁrst self-sustaining chain reaction, on 2nd December 1942.

6

7 La Bataille de L’Eau Lourde[23]

As the commercial and military potential of heavy water sank in, French military intelligence
(the Deuxi`eme Bureau) learned that there was considerable German interest in not only obtaining
existing Norwegian stocks, but in a contract for large and regular supplies[24, 25]. In March 1940,
Lieutenant Allier of the Deuxi`eme Bureau left Paris for Oslo to negotiate with Norsk Hydro. The
resulting agreement ensured that France was to have not only the 185kg of heavy water then at
Rjukan, immediately, but also a priority claim to the plant’s entire output. Allier suspected he was
a target for German agents, and took the precaution of double-booking himself and his cargo on
both a ﬂight to Scotland, and on one to Amsterdam. It seems his fears were justiﬁed, as Luftwaﬀe
aircraft forced the Amsterdam ﬂight to land in Hamburg, where it was thoroughly examined. Allier
and his 26 cans of heavy water landed safely in Scotland; then he travelled to the French Military
Mission in London, and eventually across the Channel. The heavy water was installed in a special
air raid shelter in the Coll`ege de France.

In the summer of 1940, as France faced defeat, Dautry, the French Armaments Minister, ordered
Joliot to ensure that his cans of heavy water did not fall into enemy hands. Hans von Halban,
his colleague, ﬁrst took the cargo to Mont-Dore, the spa in central France. He put his wife and
one-year-old daughter in the front of the car, one gram of Marie Curie’s radium in the back, and,
to minimize any possible danger from radiation, the cans of heavy water in between. Upon arrival,
Halban was allowed to lodge the cans in the safety of the town’s women’s prison. The following
morning, after they had been moved for safety to the condemned cell of the prison in nearby Riom,
Halban began to set up a new laboratory in a small villa. Shortly afterwards, the evacuation order
came. A number of prisoners serving life sentences were ordered to move the world’s total stock of
heavy water from the condemned cell to a waiting vehicle.

The evacuation was to be through the port of Bordeaux. Here Halban found the it Broompark, a
British coaler (ﬁg.4). They were met by the Earl of Suﬀolk, liaison oﬃcer in France for the British
Department of Scientiﬁc and Industrial Research, who was charged with rescuing rare machine
tools, $10M worth of industrial diamonds, ﬁfty French scientists, and the heavy water. The cargo
was strapped to pallets on deck which would ﬂoat free in the event of the ship being sunk, and thus
make rescue a possibility. Joliot chose to remain in France and began a diﬃcult period in charge of
the Coll`ege de France cyclotron. This was the only one available to German Scientists in Occupied
Europe, for although there was one in occupied Copenhagen, Neils Bohr simply forbade its use by
Axis personnel; an act which only Bohr could conceivably have gotten away with[26]. Later in the
war Joliot went underground and became a leader of the Resistance.

Meanwhile in Bordeaux, the harbour was bombed, and the Broompark sailed down the Gironde
(When questioned about the
estuary amid chaos. The ship next to her was sunk by a mine.
heavy water, Joliot said it was on this ship). Eventually the heavy water reached London, where
it was deposited in Wormwood Scrubs prison. It was later moved to the Cavendish Laboratory in
Cambridge, where the Coll`ege de France team were setting up to continue their experiments.

7

8 World War II: The Western Allies

A team coalesced in Cambridge around Hans von Halban and Lew Kowarski. By 1941 their
experiments with uranium oxide and the 185kg of heavy water had shown suﬃcient increase in
neutron and ﬁssion activity to predict that with 3-6 tons of heavy water, a self-sustaining chain
reaction could be achieved[27]. A plan for industrial production of heavy water in Britain by I.C.I.
was shelved in favour of an approach to the United States for supplies. However, once the United
States joined hostilities and the centre of gravity of ﬁssion research moved inexorably westwards,
it was decided that the Cambridge team should move across the Atlantic. Chicago was the ﬁrst
choice as that was the site of Compton’s group, but this was not possible due to American concerns
about citizenship (some of the Cambridge team were citizens of Axis nations) and ties with I.C.I.
(a rival chemical conglomerate to Du Pont, chief industrial partner to the American eﬀort)15.

Canada was a workable alternative and had the advantage that some ﬁssion work had already
been initiated there by Laurence and Sargent. Montreal was chosen and in early 1943, the team,
families, equipment, uranium and heavy water made the journey while the Battle of the Atlantic
was raging. Once in Montreal, they were to interact freely, at least in theory, with Met Lab team
in Chicago. Detailed theoretical work on a prototype heavy water/uranium reactor was to have
begun immediately, following the work of Fermi and Wigner on a carbon moderated reactor[28],
but was delayed by worsening relations with the Americans. When it was ﬁnally started, after a
series of visits to Chicago by George Volkoﬀ and George Placek in January 1944, the American
design eﬀort was well underway.

The Americans had noted the British request for a heavy water supply in 1941, and Urey and Hugh
Taylor of Princeton had suggested the Consolidated Mining and Smelting Company of Trail as a
likely source9. The U.S. National Defense Research Committee oﬀered the company $10 a pound
for high grade heavy water; at the time the American product cost $1,130 a pound[27].

In July 1942 it was clear the cost of Project No.9, as it was known, was going to be enormous,
but the U.S. government agreed to pay for it, with the acquiescence of C. D. Howe, the Canadian
Minister for Munitions and Supply. The Canadian Government only oﬃcially learnt of the project
in August 1942 [16]. The ﬁnal cost was $2.8M, and the annual operating costs about $700K. The
company produced the heavy water for the American nuclear eﬀort at cost, and did so from 1944
until 1956 when the plant became uneconomical compared to the large U.S. plants which were by
then in production[29].

Cominco had produced electrolytic hydrogen since 1930 in a $10M plant consisting of 3,215 cells
consuming 75MW of hydro-electric power. In addition a tower was built for initial concentration
(0.015% to 2.3%) by D/H exchange on a catalyst; Hugh Taylor developed a platinum on carbon
catalyst for the ﬁrst three stages and Urey developed a nickel-chromia one for the fourth stage
tower. The “P-9 Tower” building housing this plant still stands (ﬁgs.5,6). To the electrolysis plant
were added secondary electrolysis cells used to increase the deuterium concentration in the water
from the exchange process from 2.3% to 99.8% (ﬁg.7, see appendix).

Development work had been done at Columbia and Princeton in 1941. It was found that a catalyst

8

was necessary and Hugh Taylor established nickel as a likely candidate[30]. The ﬂow chart is
shown in ﬁg.11 Many stages of enrichment can be achieved before the necessity of power-consuming
electrolysis[31], and thus the Trail operation was as eﬃcient as was possible with the techniques of
the day.

In November 1942, C. J. Mackenzie of the NRC requested that the Montreal group receive the
ﬁrst year’s output from Trail, about 6 tons. Then followed the rift between the two groups, and
in the late summer of 1943, the Chicago group were given permission to build their own heavy
water pile at Argonne. Trail heavy water production started in January 1944 and was suﬃcient
for the Argonne pile - the ﬁrst heavy water/natural uranium reactor - to go critical on 15 May of
that year. The project was directed by Walter Zinn, a native of Kitchener, Ontario. In fact, the
Americans had decided on a full- scale program to produce plutonium with a heavy water reactor,
and DuPont eventually built three additional plants on their own soil, in West Virginia, Indiana
and Alabama. These used the fractional distillation technique; this method is very simple but very
heavy on power (see Appendix).

In April 1944 the rift between the Montreal group and the Americans was patched up. American
assistance, partly in the form of Trail heavy water, was assured for the construction of a Canadian
pile. The chosen site was Chalk River. The ﬁrst director of the new laboratory was to be John
Cockroft, although he was replaced before the ﬁrst pile went critical by W. B. Lewis, who went
on to dominate the Canadian nuclear scene for decades. Both men had a pre-war background of
nuclear physics and wartime experience of radar research and development in Britain. The pilot
pile was known as the NRX, and the 10 MW design was completed in July 1944. However, it
was not to be the ﬁrst Canadian reactor. Cockroft proposed building a smaller zero-energy pile
making use of American experience at Argonne[17].Thus, ZEEP (Zero-energy experimental pile)
was built, by Section 6 of Chalk River’s Nuclear Physics Division; Kowarski was Section Head and
B. W. Sargent was Acting Division Head [16].Criticality was achieved in September 1945. NRX
was completed and went critical in July 1947.

In France in September 1945 Allier obtained a promise from Norway that France would receive the
ﬁrst ﬁve tons of heavy water produced once the Norsk Hydro plant got started again. The original
185kg, on loan since 1940 and still in use in Canada, was ﬁnally paid for. After ZEEP, Kowarski
returned to France and built that country’s ﬁrst pile, ZOE (Zero Oxide Eau Lourde) in the old
prison at Chˆatillon. Criticality was achieved on 15th December 1948[32].

As a footnote to history of the 185kg of heavy water, the Norsk Industriarbeidermuseum in Vemork
would like to track down one Joliot’s original containers for its exhibition. However, after extensive
enquiries, it seems likely that these were disposed of when the Montreal lab closed and was moved
to Chalk River in 1947.

9

9 World War II: Germany

In contrast to the Allied eﬀort, heavy water was central to Heisenberg’s rather ambiguous ﬁssion
program in Germany[33]. A large-scale industrial eﬀort like that mounted in the United States for
isotope separation was impossible, and the entire program centred on a small amount of unenriched
uranium and Norwegian heavy water.

In February 1940 Werner Heisenberg, in Berlin, reviewed the published literature, particularly the
work of Bohr and Wheeler which pointed out that it was the likely the rare isotope of uranium
235U which was being ﬁssioned. He decided that to build a reactor from natural uranium required
good moderator - D2O or carbon. If H2O was to be used as a moderator, then the uranium would
have to be enriched in 235U [34]. By summer Walter Bothe, in Heidelberg, had tried the purest
form of carbon he could obtain - electrographite from Siemens - but found the absorption too
high for natural uranium. They recognized that this was probably due to residual impurities, and
worked out further reﬁning steps, but Army Ordnance, their paymasters, ruled out trials due to
cost. Robert D¨opel in Leipzig had shown experimentally that D2O was a good moderator; indeed
it looked like the only possibility.

There was much experience with D2O in Germany; Paul Harteck, now at Hamburg, had studied
it with Rutherford, Munich physical chemist Klaus Clusius had worked with it, and Bonh¨oﬀer had
worked with Norsk Hydro from the start.
In a discussion as to the best method of producing
the material, Bonh¨oﬀer favoured electrolysis, while Harteck thought catalysis more cost eﬀective.
They contacted the chemical conglomerate I. G. Farben whom they hoped could handle production.
External events took a hand in April 1940, when German forces invaded Norway. After the situation
was stabilized - the Telemark region was the last part of Norway to be subdued - I. G. Farben was
given control of Norsk Hydro. Soon production with the existing plant was increased from 20 litres
per year to 1 ton per year.

As experimental work in Leipzig progressed ever more accurate estimates were made of the amount
of heavy water required by an uranbrenner (uranium burner, i.e. reactor). This was 4-5 tons, and
Harteck and Suess developed a catalytic exchange method (dual temperature H/H2O, essentially
the “Trail Method”) for raising production to this level in one reactor charge per year. In 1941
the Norwegians were forced to install catalytic plant at their own cost, as their contribution to the
Axis war eﬀort. At the end of 1941, possibly in anticipation of the trouble to come, Harteck and
Clusius proposed a new plant in Germany. He surveyed the possibilities: the two used in Rjukan,
and repeated distillation of hydrogen. However, Army Ordnance preferred Norway as the cheapest
option.

Meanwhile, experimental and theoretical work on reactor design was proceeding apace. An alter-
nating layer design was produced by Heisenberg and Weizs¨acker’s graduate students Karl-Heinz
H¨ocker and Paul M¨uller. In addition to D¨opel working with uranium metal and heavy water in
Leipzig, Karl Wirtz at Berlin-Dahlem did experiments with uranium oxide and paraﬃn. It looked
increasingly like D2O would work. In addition, Weizs¨acker started exploring the explosive possibil-
ities of element 94, which would inevitably be produced in the uranbrenner. Despite this, in early
1942, Army Ordnance decided ﬁssion was irrelevant for the war eﬀort and proposed suspending

10

research.

By the end of 1942, the picture was mixed. The ﬁrst neutron increase (13%) in a heavy wa-
ter/uranium pile, the L-IV, had been observed by Dpel and Heisenberg in Leipzig. However, the
catalytic plant in Rjukan was still under construction so heavy water was still in short supply. In
addition there had been an attempted commando raid on Rjukan; it had been a disastrous failure
and the fate of the commandos makes unpleasant reading[35], but it was a sign of things to come.

In a second commando operation, on 28th February 1943, Norwegian saboteurs guided by Tronstad
(in London) and Brun (locally) destroyed the Rjukan electrolysis plant, with the loss of 500kg of
heavy water. This highly economical and clinical operation has long been celebrated in Norway,
particularly in the Rjukan area, where residents retrace each year on July 1 (note not in February!)
the steps of the commandos down from the Hardanger Plateau where they gathered prior to the
attack. In a war that killed maybe 50 million people, this courageous action, which resulted in no
injuries and, mercifully, no reprisals, is well worth remembering.

The plant was, however, quickly repaired and General Groves, fulminating against British control
of Norwegian special operations, ordered the job to be done properly, by massive air bombardment.
This followed in 16th November 1943 and resulted in considerable loss of civilian life and minimal
damage the electrolysis building. Clearly the Allies thought nuclear ﬁssion worth pursuing, even if
the German Army didn’t. It was decided to ship all the heavy water and its production to Germany,
mostly because of the fear that further raids might endanger explosives production at Vemork. On
20th February 1944, the last shipment of heavy water from Rjukan to Germany was lost when the
ferry carrying it across Lake Tinnsj was also sabotaged. This was the last time Rjukan people died
in what Abraham Esau described as the “Norwegian National Sport” of destroying heavy water
plant. Norsk Hydro received no payment for the hevay water produced, and had suﬀered 16 million
kroner of damage to the plant.

The eﬀort to build a plant in Germany dragged on for the next year, mired in bitter price and
patent disputes with I. G. Farben. The end of heavy water production caused severe diﬃculties for
the experimental groups, and air dilution was downgrading existing stocks. Attempts were made to
build a polishing plant using equipment looted from Norway. Air attacks on Hamburg and Berlin
forced the evacuation of research labs to the countryside.

Heisenberg and his team moved to Haigerloch, near the Swiss Border, where they hoped they
could work in relative peace. The laboratory was constructed in the side of a cliﬀ beneath an old
church. They were still trying to achieve criticality with the B-VIII reactor when ﬁrst contact was
made with American forces: the fact-ﬁnding “Alsos” group[36]. With lingering worries about the
German nuclear threat, and always mindful of post-war commercial competition and the fact that
Haigerloch was to be in the French zone, an American army team dynamited the laboratory before
handing the region over to their allies, who were just then entering in the town.

Why did they fail? There are many reasons as the reader will have gathered, but perhaps the most
pivotal is that there were never more than 70 scientists involved, and only 40 worked more than
half time on the uranbrenner. (This is in stark contrast with the $2 billion Manhattan Project).
Only a handful of these scientists were of the ﬁrst rank; Germany had lost its best to emigration,

11

and of those that remained the most brilliant worked in aerodynamics and rocketry.

Although never used in Germany, Karl-Hermann Geib in Leuna in 1943 developed what we now
regard as the most cost-eﬀective process for producing heavy water: the dual temperature exchange
sulphide process (see appendix and ﬁg. 10). Contemporaneously, the process was also developed
by J. S. Spevack at Columbia University[37], and his process became the basis of the post-war
North American plants under the name of the Girdler Process, named after the company which
ﬁrst exploited it. North American scientists were not aware of Geib’s work for many years after
the war; Maloney et al. in their book “The Production of Heavy Water” (1955)[38] complain that
relevant German wartime work was still classiﬁed.

Unfortunately Geib was not able to beneﬁt from his work; in 1945 he was taken to the USSR, along
with many others, who were given a 10-year contract to work on ﬁssion and aerodynamics. Many
German scientists found this very congenial and some even went as far as to describe these 10 years
as the time of their lives. However, Geib was not so happy and he made the mistake of applying
for asylum in Canada, giving the name of Professor E. W. R. Steacie as a reference. Oﬃcials at
the Canadian Embassy in Moscow did not know what to do with him and told him to come back
the next day and that was the last time he was seen. His wife in Germany received his eﬀects in
the mail[33].

10 World War II: The Soviet Union

In October 1939 Zel’dovich and Khariton reviewed Joliot’s and Fermi’s results, and concluded,
correctly, that heavy water and carbon were the only feasible moderators for a natural uranium
reactor[39].

In August of 1940 Kurchatov, Khariton, Flerov and Rusinov submitted a plan to the academy
“On the utilization of the energy from U ﬁssion in a chain reaction”. Khariton calculated 2.5t of
uranium oxide and 15t of heavy water were needed for a reactor. The shortage of uranium was
the main problem for experimenters; ironically the Soviet Union, in spite of its huge size, had no
uranium mines. Kurchatov sent young colleagues to Leningrad photographic shops to buy uranium
nitrate.

In 1941, German forces invaded the Soviet Union, and Flerov found himself in the Red Air Force
near Voronezh. The previous year he and Petzhak had discovered the spontaneous ﬁssion of uranium
and he was interested to see if there had been any reaction to this event from his colleagues abroad.
Looking in the local university library he found that all the scientists he knew to be working on
ﬁssion had disappeared from the literature.This was the ﬁrst clue Soviet scientists had of what was
going on in the west. Flerov sent a letter to Stalin, warning him. Soon a concerted Soviet ﬁssion
eﬀort was initiated, with Kurchatov in charge.

By March 1943 Kurchatov was receiving Fuchs’ reports and was abreast of work in the West. At
this time there was only 2-3kg of heavy water in country, and partly because of this, and because

12

General Groves had restricted heavy water exports from the United States, they chose graphite for
their ﬁrst reactor. More uranium was needed than with heavy water but electrolytic graphite was
available in the country. A heavy water plant had been planned before the war at a nitrogen plant
in Chirchik, Tajikistan, but it had not been completed. Alikhanov was given the more distant task
of building a heavy water pile, as he would not work under Kurchatov and this was a convenient
way of removing him from the main group. Construction began after the war.

In late 1943 the Soviet purchasing commission in the U.S. obtained 1kg of heavy water a further
100 g in February 1945. Given the muniﬁcence of these gifts, it seems as if the early decision to
concentrate on graphite was a good one! On December 25th, 1946 the graphite reactor F-1 went
critical.

Work on the Chirchik Nitrogen Combine plant started in 1944; the Institute of Physical Chemistry
in Moscow started research on the physical chemistry of electrolytic cells at the same time. After
hostilities ceased in Europe, the NKVD assembled German heavy water experts at the Leuna
works in Merseberg, where they designed a new heavy water plant. In October 1946 they moved
to Institute of Physical Chemistry in Moscow. The plant producing large quantities by 1948.
Alikhanov’s reactor at the Thermotechnical Institute in Moscow went critical in April 1949.

11 Postscript

Since World War II only Canada amongst the industrialized nations has pursued the commercial
possibilities of heavy water/natural uranium reactors. A large number of CANDU (Canadian-
Deuterium-Uranium) reactors are now operating in Eastern Canada, and the reactor and heavy
water technology has been exported to several other countries. A downturn in the nuclear industry
in the 1980s led to one thousand tonnes of heavy water being made available for use as a neutrino
detector in the Sudbury Neutrino Observatory, which is now operational in Northern Ontario. I
am a member of this eﬀort, which is how I became interested in the subject of this paper.

Acknowledgments

The author would like to thank the Cominco personnel Richard Fish and Brent Cross for their
assistance regarding the history of Project 9 and a fascinating tour of the derelict Trail heavy
water tower in 1995. One of the photographs is reproduced with permission from the Cominco
Magazine. I thank Norsk Hydro chemist and historian Per Pynten for a marvellous day at Vemork
and Rjukan in 1996.
I am indebted to Professor Maurice Pryce for pointing me toward several
valuable references, and to the late George Volkoﬀ for reading an early version of this manuscript.

Many thanks to Don Cody of California, Captain Paulsen’s grandson, for information about, and
the photograph of, the Broompark.

13

This article was written between 1992 and 1998. In 1999 Per Dahl’s book “Heavy Water and the
Wartime Race for Nuclear Energy” was published. Dahl covers many aspects of this story in great
detail and the book is highly recommended to interested readers.

Afterword

Appendix

Separation of Deuterium and Heavy Water

There are four basic methods of producing heavy water, they have diﬀerent economics depending
on the initial and ﬁnal concentrations, and so they tend to used in combination.

1. Distillation of water or hydrogen. Heavy water boils at 101.4C, only slightly higher than light
water, so the process requires many stages and a large amount of thermal energy. The separation
eﬀect is bigger for liquid hydrogen, but this is less convenient to work with than water.

2. Electrolysis of water. H+ ions are evolved preferentially over D+. As above, multi-stage and
heavy on electrical energy, now used as ﬁnal “polish”.

3. Hydrogen/water catalytic exchange, the “Trail Method”, depends on the fact that, when isotopic
equilibrium is established between hydrogen gas and water, the water contains 3 or 4 times as much
deuterium as does the gas. See ﬁgure 11.

H2O + HD → HDO + H2

This method can also be used in dual-temperature mode (see point 4 below)

4. The Dual-Temperature Sulphide Process relies on the following reaction:

H2O(liquid) + HDS(gas) → HDO(liquid) + H2S(gas)

(1)

(2)

Deuterium enrichment in the water increases as the temperature decreases. This method has two
big advantages over the Trail method. The use of hydrogen sulphide eliminates the need for a
catalyst, and the dual temperature aspect means that the hydrogen sulphide is maintained in a
closed loop (see ﬁgure 10) and no electrolytic regeneration of hydrogen is required.

Modern Practice (Bruce Plant, Ontario)

* Three-stage dual temperature sulphide process (0.015% - 25%)

14

* Distillation with waste reactor heat (25% - 99.85% reactor grade)

Neutron-Induced Fission

A slow neutron is absorbed by a 235U nucleus, which splits into two medium-mass nuclei, emitting
200 MeV of energy and, on average, 2.5 fast neutrons. For example:

n +235

92 U →235

92 ** +235

92 ** + 2n

To promote a chain reaction, the outgoing fast neutrons have to be slowed by collision with nuclei
in a moderator, without absorption.

The best moderator would be hydrogen, whose nucleus has a mass equal that of the neutron; all
the neutron’s energy can be lost in one collision. However, hydrogen absorbs neutrons, producing
a deuterium nucleus (D; or 2H ) and a gamma-ray:

Moderators

n + p → D + γ

In reality the best moderator is deuterium, which cannot easily absorb a second neutron. The most
convenient form of deuterium is Heavy Water (D2O).

Carbon also makes a good moderator, but tends to have neutron-absorbing impurities; it therefore
has to be very pure (Electrolytic Graphite).

(3)

(4)

15

Figures

Fig 1: Author at hydro-electric generator building at Vemork, just outside Rjukan, now the Norsk
Industriarbeidermuseum (Industrial Workers Museum). The heavy water plant was in a (rather
unattractive) building, now demolished, in front of this one. (Author photo).

Fig 2: Part of the electrolysis plant from Rjukan, now reassembled in the Resistance Museum, Oslo.
The longer steel cylinders are for electrolysis and the shorter ones are the combustion chambers.
The brown tubes above are condensers. (Author photo).

Fig 3: Norsk Hydro heavy water order book, pages 1 and 3. (Per Pynten).

Fig 4: The Broompark sailing out of Le Verdon Roads in 1940 with the supply of heavy water,
under the command of Captain Olaf Paulsen. The Broompark was built in 1939 and torpedoed
and sunk in 1942. The Denholm Shipping Lines oﬃce in Glasgow have a glass-encased six-foot
model of her. (Don Cody)

Fig 5: The Trail Heavy Water tower in the 1940s. (B.C. Archives and Records Service Cat. No.
NW669 C733 V.30-32/1).

Fig 6: The Trail Heavy Water tower in 1995. (Author photo).

Fig 7: A few of the secondary electrolytic cells at the Trail Plant (B.C. Archives and Records
Service Cat. No. NW669 C733 V.30-32/1).

Fig 8: One of the containers used for shipping Trail heavy water, now in the museum at Rossland,
B.C. (Author photo).

Fig 9: Trail method for D2O enrichment.

Fig 10: Sulphide method for D2O enrichment.

16

References

[1] “Med Norge i Vekst”, Norsk Hydro 1980, and displays at the Norsk Teknisk Museet in Oslo.

[2] J. R. Partington, “Text-Book of Inorganic Chemistry”, Macmillan (London) 1939.

[3] A. B. Lamb and R E. Lee, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 35 (1913) 1666; F. G. Brickwedde, “Harold

Urey and the Discovery of Deuterium”, Physics Today, September 1982.

[4] R. T. Birge and D. H. Menzel, Phys. Rev. 37 (1931) 1669

[5] E. W. Washburn and H. C. Urey, Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 18 (1932) 496.

[6] F. W. Aston, Nature 135 (1935) 541.

[7] G. N. Lewis and R. T. MacDonald, J. Amer. Chem. Soc. 55 (1933) 1297

[8] L. Tronstad, J. Nordhagen and J. Brun, Nature 136 (1935) 515.

[9] Craig D. Andrews, “How Cominco Served the Manhatten Project”, Cominco Magazine, May

1970, p.14.

[10] Oliphant, Harteck and Rutherford 1937

[11] G. Hevesy, “Radioactive Indicators”, Interscience (New York) 1948

[12] L. Meitner and O. R. Frisch, Nature 143 (1939) 239

[13] O. Hahn and F. Strassman, Naturwissenschaften, 27 (1939) 89

[14] H. von Halban, F. Joliot and L. Kowarski, Nature 143 (1939) 470 and 680.

[15] S. Weart, “Scientists in Power”, Harvard U.P., 1979

[16] Wilfrid Eggleston, “Canada’s Nuclear Story”, Clarke Irwin, 1965, pp 21ﬀ

[17] Spencer Weart and Gertrud Weiss Szilard, “Leo Szilard, His Version of the Facts”, MIT press,

1978, p.58

[18] J. R. Dunning, G. B. Pegram, G. A. Fink and D. P. Mitchell, Phys. Rev. 48 (1935) 265.

[19] R. Rhodes, “The Making of the Atomic Bomb”, Simon and Schuster, 1986.

[20] H. von Halban, F. Joliot and L. Kowarski, Comptes Rendus 229 (1949) 909.

[21] P. M. S. Blackett, Biographical memoirs of the Royal Society 6 (1960) 86.

[22] W. Bothe and P. Jensen, “Die Absorption thermischer Neutronen in Kohlenstoﬀ”, Z. Phys.
122 (1944) 749. This paper, which was not published until 1944, was followed in Z. Phys. by
an article by Jensen alone and D2O, with no reference to ﬁssion. This journal appears to have
been available in North America at the time.

[23] Name of a French ﬁlm describing the aﬀair, made in 1949 with the scientists playing themselves.

17

[24] M. Goldsmith, “F. Joliot-Curie”, Lawrence and Wishart (London) 1976.

[25] Ronald Clark, “The Greatest Power on Earth”, Sidgwick & Jackson, (London) 1980.

[26] D. C. Cassidy, “Uncertainty: The Life and Science of Werner Heisenberg”, Freeman, 1992.

[27] Margaret Gowing, “Britain and Atomic Energy 1939-1945”, Macmillan (London) 1964.

[28] B. W. Sargent in “The Science and Engineering of Nuclear Power”, Vol.2, ed. C. Goodman,

Addison Wesley (Reading, Mass.), 1949.

[29] “Postscript to Project 9”, Cominco Magazine, November 1956, p.4.

[30] H. D. Smyth, “Atomic Energy for Military Purposes” (The ”Smyth Report”), Princeton U.P.,

1946.

[31] K. Cohen, “The Theory of Isotope Separation”, McGraw Hill (New York) 1951.

[32] B. Goldschmidt, “Atomic Rivals”, Rutgers U.P., 1990.

[33] David Irving, “The Virus House”, William Kimber, 1967.

[34] Marc Walker, “German National Socialism and the quest for nuclear power 1939-49” Cam-

bridge UP (New York), 1989

[35] Dan Kurzman, “Blood and Water: Sabotaging Hitler’s Bomb”, Henry Holt, 1997

[36] S. Goudsmit, “Alsos”, Henry Schuman, 1947

[37] H. K. Rae, “Canada’s Heavy Water Story”, from “Chemical Engineering in Canada, an His-
torical Perspective”, ed. L. W. Shemilt, Canadian Society for Chemical Engineering, 1991.

[38] J. O. Maloney et al., “Production of Heavy Water” McGraw-Hill, New York, 1955.

[39] D. Holloway, “Stalin and the Bomb”, Yale UP 1994; A. Kramish ”Atomic Energy in the Soviet

Union”, Stanford UP, 1959.

18

Figure 1: Hydro-electric generator building at Vemork, just outside Rjukan, now the Norsk In-
dustriarbeidermuseum (Industrial Workers Museum). The heavy water plant was in a (rather
unattractive) building, now demolished, in front of this one. (Author photo)

19

Figure 2: Part of the electrolysis plant from Rjukan, now reassembled in the Resistance Museum,
Oslo. The longer steel cylinders are for electrolysis and the shorter ones are the combustion cham-
bers. The brown tubes above are condensers. (Author photo).

20

21

Figure 4: The Broompark sailing out of Le Verdon Roads in 1940 with the supply of heavy water,
under the command of Captain Olaf Paulsen. The Broompark was built in 1939 and torpedoed
and sunk in 1942. The Denholm Shipping Lines oﬃce in Glasgow have a glass-encased six-foot
model of her. (Don Cody)

22

Figure 5: The Trail Heavy Water tower in the late 1940s (B.C. Archives and Records Service Cat.
No. NW669 C733 V.30-32/1)

23

Figure 6: The Trail Heavy Water tower in 1995 (author photo)

24

Figure 7: A few of the secondary electrolytic cells at the Trail Plant (B.C. Archives and Records
Service Cat. No. NW669 C733 V.30-32/1)

25

Figure 8: One of the containers used for shipping Trail heavy water, now in the museum at Rossland,
B.C. (Author photo)

26

Liquid

Gas

Ni Cat alyst

Enrichment

Depletion

Ni Cat alyst

Ni Cat alyst

27

H O/HDO

2

H  /HD

2

Figure 9: Trail method for D2O enrichment

Depleted

HDO

Hot

HDS

HDO

Enriched

Cold

Figure 10: Sulphide method for D2O enrichment

28

