2
0
0
2
 
l
u
J
 
6
 
 
]
h
p
-
t
s
i
h
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
6
2
0
7
0
2
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

The Cyclic Universe: Some Historical Notes

Subhash Kak
Louisiana State University
Baton Rouge, LA 70803-5901

September 26, 2013

Abstract

The cyclic model of the universe has an old history in India. It
has long held the pre¨eminent position regarding the origins of the
universe, and it has been described in astronomical texts, mythology,
and philosophical literature. Within the current cycle, which is sup-
posed to have begun several billion years ago, are smaller cycles of
pole changes and extinctions on earth. Salient features of the cyclic
universe model are presented here.

Introduction

With the renewed interest in the cyclic[14] and the quasi-steady state cosmo-
logical[3, 11] models, it seems appropriate to look at the early history of such
ideas.
In this paper, we look at the conception of cyclic universes in the
Indic tradition. The development of this conception in India owes to three
fundamental notions that we come across in the earliest texts: (i), time is
endless and space has inﬁnite extension; (ii), earth is not the center of the
universe; and (iii), laws govern all development, including the creation and
destruction of the universe.

Astronomy was a very highly valued science in India[6, 7].

It was be-
lieved that there were connections between the physical and the psycho-
logical worlds, and an equivalence between the outer cosmos and the inner
cosmos of the individual. This is expressed in the famous sentence; yat pind. e
tad brahm¯an. d. e, “as in the cell so in the universe”. This belief may have

contributed to a generalization from the cyclic nature of human life into a
corresponding theory about the cosmos.

Since thought and speculation have played a large role in the development
of Indic ideas, the cyclic model may be taken to provide the philosopher’s
conception of the universe, complementing the other ten conceptions that
Fred Hoyle spoke about in his popular book, Ten Faces of the Universe[2].

The Indian cyclic model also assumes the existence of countless island
universes, which go through their own periods of development and destruc-
tion. This conception is recursive.

For an early exposition of Indic astronomical and cosmological ideas, one
may like to read al-B¯ır¯un¯ı’s classic history of Indian science, composed in
1030 A.D.[12], keeping in mind that al-B¯ır¯un¯ı did not correctly understand
all Indian material; for an even earlier, popular, view of Indian ideas, see
the Yoga V¯asis.t.ha[15, 5]; for a review of the birth and development of early
Indian astronomy, see[6, 7]; for a broad overview, see[8].

1 Cycle periods. The aspect of the Indian cyclic model that astrophysicists
are most familiar with is a cycle called the kalpa, the “day” of Brahm¯a,
which is 4.32 billion years long. There is an equally long “night”, and 360
such “days” and “nights” constitute a year of Brahm¯a. The life of Brahm¯a
is 100 such years, which is thus 311,040 billion years long.

Then there exist longer periods in an endless process. Al-Biruni[12] lists
longer periods going to 10, 782, 449, 978, 758, 523, 781, 120×1027 kalpas, which
is called trut.i.

2 Sub-periods. Within the kalpa are fourteen cycles of local creation and
destruction, called manvantaras, each lasting 306.720 million years. Each of
these periods is to be taken to be a period of local destruction (extinction)
and subsequent regeneration on the earth. Within each manvantara are 71
smaller cycles, called mah¯ayugas.

These periods are described by ¯Aryabhat.a, the great astronomoer born in
476 A.D., in his ¯Aryabhat.¯ıya[13]. As is well known, ¯Aryabhat.a presented the
rotation information of the outer planets with respect to the sun, meaning
that his system was partially heliocentric; furthermore, he considered the
earth to be rotating on its own axis.

In another version, each kalpa has 1,000 smaller ages.

2

Yoga V¯asis.t.ha 6.1.22[15] says that directions depend on the position of
the poles, the movements of the stars, the sun, and the moon, and that the
directions change from one sub-period to another.

3 Ideas related to time. Al-B¯ir¯un¯ı says this about India ideas on time[12]:

The Hindus have divided duration into two periods, a period of
motion, which has been determined as time, and a period of rest,
which can only be determined in an imaginary way according to
the analogy of that which has ﬁrst been determined, the period
of motion. The Hindus hold the eternity of the Creator to be
determinable, not measurable, since it is inﬁnite.

They do not, by the word creation, understand a formation of
something out of nothing. They mean by creation only the work-
ing with a piece of clay, working out various combinations and
ﬁgures in it, and making such arrangements with it as will lead
to certain ends and aims which are potentially in it (page 321,
vol. 1).

4 Island-universes. The universe is split up into many island-universes, as
described in the Yoga Vasisththa 6.2.59[15]:

I saw countless creations though they did not know of one an-
other’s existence. Some were coming into being, others were per-
ishing, all of them had diﬀerent shielding atmospheres (from ﬁve
to thirty-six atmospheres). There were diﬀerent elements in each,
they were inhabited by diﬀerent types of beings in diﬀerent stages
of evolution.. [In] some there was apparent natural order in oth-
ers there was utter disorder, in some there was no light and hence
no time-sense.

5 Evolution. The idea of evolution is basic to all Indian thought. The In-
dian theory of evolution, which is supposed to apply both to the individual
and the cosmos, is called S¯am. khya. In it, the basic entities are pure con-
sciousness and materiality (nature). Nature has three constituent qualities
(gun. as) called sattva, rajas, and tamas, and as the balance between these
three changes the universe evolves.

3

Out of the interplay of the ﬁve basic elements arise other principles
(tattva): ﬁve subtle elements, ﬁve action senses, ﬁve senses of perception,
mind, egoity, and intellect. The evolutionary sequence goes through many
levels. The tattvas help in the the emergence of life out of inert matter. The
gun. as are not to be taken as abstract principles alone. Indian thought be-
lieves that structure in nature is recursive, and the gun. as show up in various
forms at diﬀerent levels of expression.

The texts imply that ingredients for the growth of life are available
throughout the universe. Inﬁnite number of universes are conceived, so each
new one is created like a bubble in an ocean of bubbles. Indian evolution the-
ory is like the neutral theory. If the gene function is seen through the agency
of the three gunas, then evolution has a net genetic drift. The tattvas are not
discrete and their varying expression creates the diversity of life in and across
leading diﬀerent species. Each sensory and motor tattva is mapped into a
corresponding organ. Indian thought conceives of 8.4 million species, which
number is impressive, considering that modern authorities (such as Graur
and Li in their “Fundamentals of Molecular Evolution”, page 436) estimate
the number of extant species to be 4.5 - 10 million.

Schr¨odinger thought[10] that the S¯am. khyan tattvas were the most plau-

sible model for the evolution of the sensory organs.

A quote on evolution on earth from the Yoga Vasishtha (6.1.21)[15]:

I remember that once upon a time there was nothing on this
Earth, neither trees and plants, nor even mountains. For a period
of eleven thousand years (4 million Earth years) the Earth was
under lava... [Later] apart from the polar region, the rest of the
Earth was covered by water. And then forests enveloped the
Earth, and great asuras (demons) ruled.

Then there arose great mountains, but without any human in-
habitants. For a period of ten thousand years (almost 4 million
Earth years) the Earth was covered with the corpses of the asuras
(daityas).”

Indicating the presence of other animals while the giant asuras were on
Earth, YV suggests that man arose later. YV also speaks of minor ages of
destruction on Earth that correspond to the yugas.

4

6 Size of island-universe. It appears that the size of each island universe
was taken to be equal to the distance that light would travel in twenty-four
hours. The speed of light is taken in Indian texts is said to be 4,404 yojanas
per nimes.a, which is almost exactly 186,000 miles per second[4]! The earliest
mention of this is in texts that are more than six hundred years old.

To have chanced upon the correct number for speed of light, before it
could have possibly been measured, is the most amazing coincidence in all
of science. This coincidence is much more striking than the general correct-
ness of the age of life on earth in the Indic view, and much more than the
coincidences that are a part of the process of scientiﬁc discovery[1].

7 Evolution of life. The Indians believed that all life can be divided into
three classes (Ch¯andogya Upanis.ad 6.3.1): “In truth, beings have here three
kinds of seeds, born from the egg, born alive, and born from the germ.”
Given that it is also aﬃrmed that life on other planets exists and that there
was a gradual rise of life on the earth, it would appear that this implied a
belief in a panspermia theory.

8 Inner cosmos. In Indian mythology, the continents are in concentric cir-
cles. Wrongly applied to the outer cosmos, this Pur¯an. ic cosmology represents
the inner cosmos of the individual on a scale that equals the size of the uni-
verse. It, therefore, brings in outer astronomy only in an incidental fashion.
The earth of the Pur¯an. as is the individual pictured as the plane that touches
the navel. Below the navel are the underworlds; above the navel are the sun
and the moon in the head, and beyond them the planets and the stars. The
perceived dimensions of the sun and the moon in this conception relate to
the inner cosmos.

9 Another cyclic model. I have developed a cosmological model inspired by
S¯am. khyan ideas[9]. Here two phases collide, where one collapses the quantum
state of the other.

Conclusions

This brief note is an introduction to Indic cosmological ideas on a cyclic
universe.

5

References

[1] J.D. Barrow and F.J. Tipler, The Anthropic Cosmological Principle.

(Oxford University Press, New York, 1986).

[2] F. Hoyle, Ten Faces of the Universe. W.H. Freeman, San Francisco.

[3] F. Hoyle, G. Burbidge, and J.V. Narlikar, A Diﬀerent Approach to Cos-

mology. Cambridge University Press, 2000.

[4] S. Kak, “The Speed of Light and Puranic Cosmology,” Annals of the
Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute, vol. 80, 1999, pp. 113-123.
LANL preprint physics/9804020.

[5] S. Kak, “Concepts of Space, Time, and Consciousness in Ancient India.”

LANL preprint physics/9903010.

[6] S. Kak, “Birth and Early Development of Indian Astronomy.” In Astron-
omy Across Cultures: The History of Non-Western Astronomy, Helaine
Selin (ed), Kluwer, 2000, pp. 303-340. LANL preprint physics/0101063.

[7] S. Kak, The Astronomical Code of the R. gveda. Munshiram Manoharlal,

New Delhi, 2000.

[8] S. Kak, The Wishing Tree. Munshiram Manoharlal, New Delhi, 2001.

[9] S. Kak, “Collapse, exapansion, and a variable speed of light.” LANL

preprint astro-ph/0101455.

[10] W. Moore, Schr¨odinger: Life and Thought. Cambridge University Press,

Cambridge, 1989.

[11] J.V. Narlikar, R.G. Vishwakarma, and G. Burbidge, “Interpretations of

the accelerating universe.” LANL Archive astro-ph/0205064.

[12] E.C. Sachau, Alberuni’s India. Delhi, 1989 [1910].
[13] K.S. Shukla and K.V. Sarma, ¯Aryabhat.¯ıya of ¯Aryabhat.a. Indian National

Science Academy, New Delhi, 1976.

[14] P.J. Steinhardt and N. Turok, “The cyclic universe: an informal intro-

duction.” LANL Archive astro-ph/0204479.

6

[15] S. Venkatesananda, (tr.), V¯asis. t.ha’s Yoga. State University of New York
Press, Albany, 1993. For the Sanskrit text, see Yoga V¯asis. t.ha, 1981.
Munshiram Manoharlal, Delhi.

7

