The dangerous misconceptions of Sir Karl Raimund Popper

Institut f¨ur Theoretische Physik, University of Technology Vienna,

Wiedner Hauptstraße 8-10/136, A-1040 Vienna, Austria

Karl Svozil∗

Abstract

Insofar as Sir Karl Raimund Popper’s writings deal with political statements, they are evident;

yet insofar as they deal with scientiﬁc issues, they are incorrect and misleading. If applied to the

concrete implementation of science, such as distribution of research funds and (peer) review, they

would seriously hamper progress.

PACS numbers: 01.60.+q,01.70.+w,01.65.+g

Keywords: Biographies, tributes, personal notes, and obituaries;Philosophy of science;History of science

2
0
0
2
 
l
u
J
 
9
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
t
s
i
h
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
5
1
1
7
0
2
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

∗Electronic address: svozil@tuwien.ac.at; URL: http://tph.tuwien.ac.at/~svozil

1

There is no doubt that Sir Karl Raimund Popper is one of the most prominent ﬁgures

in the philosophy of science of the past century. Many people, from politicians to scientists,

pay lip service to his theses, and numerous television shows, conferences and books have

been organized in his honor. But while Sir Karl Raimund Popper has emphasized a lot of

things which are undoubtedly important, his thoughts about the induction problem [1], his

criterion of demarcation between science and “pseudo-science,” at least if taken naively and

at face value, may be an impediment to scientiﬁc research programs, thereby resulting in a

waste of eﬀorts and money.

Let me start with very brief remarks on his views on politics and his criticism of psycho-

analysis. The main subject of this article is a polemical review of Sir Karl Raimund Popper’s

“solutions to the problems of induction.” Concrete implementations of these “solutions” may

severely hamper the scientiﬁc progress, imposing too heavy and detrimental criteria on sci-

ence proper. Finally, I shall try to discuss the question of why Sir Karl Raimund Popper is

so highly honored in certain circles; mainly in politics and in the natural sciences.

Most of what I say here has already been expressed many times by philosophers of science

such as, for example, Imre Lakatos [2] or Paul Feyerabend [3, 4]. But many of these critical

issues are not mentioned in the almost frenetic, uncritical praisals and reviews of the work

of Sir Karl Raimund Popper which accompany the 100 anniversary of his birthday here in

Vienna and elsewhere. Hence there is a need of more critical reviews, even if they repeat

previous arguments, mostly to prevent the dangers to the scientiﬁc pursuit from erroneous

Sir Karl Raimund Popper’s thinking was deeply rooted in the spiritual life of post-war

Vienna in many ways. He ﬁrst felt attracted by some major schools of thought which

ﬂourished in or even originated from this city, but afterwards became one of their strongest

advises.

opponents.

Having been a marxist, he disguised marxism as a metaphysical, nonscientiﬁc ideology

which brings misery to the masses. Indeed, this fact must have appeared rather obvious,

in particular at the end of the World War II, given the developments in the Bolshevik

dominated Soviet block under Stalin. The same holds true for a criticism of Nazism and

its various totaltarian conservative oﬀsprings, also in Austria before the German invasion.

Undemocratic ideologies had just rampaged through Europe and the Paciﬁc. (I personally

think that, in view of the atrocities and inhumanities commited, a lack of falsiﬁability is one

2

of the less malign deﬁciencies of these kinds of totalitarianism.)

Back in his old Vienna days, Sir Karl Raimund Popper also became fascinated by the

psychoanalytic theories of Freud and Adler, under whose aegis he engaged brieﬂy in social

work with children. He later on denounced the psychoanalytic theory as nonscientiﬁc and

useless, mainly because it appeared to him to be diﬃcult to falsify (or if falsiﬁable, had

been falsiﬁed). This shock struck the psychoanalytic community, in particular its academic

sections, hard. I still remember joint sessions of the two main Vienna psychoanalytic societies

a couple of years ago, which tried to cope with this criticism, which at that time had been

mainly put forward by Adolf Gr¨unbaum [5].

It is not too unjustiﬁed to claim that Sir

Karl Raimund Popper managed to academically discredit psychoanalysis up to this date,

at least what its inﬂuence in the academic world is concerned.

In academic psychology,

phenomenologically oriented and “falsifyable” theories such as behaviorism ﬂourished; which

were “scientiﬁcally sound” and reasonable according to Sir Karl Raimund Popper’s criterion

of demarcation. I have strong doubts if this was beneﬁcial for practical clinical psychology.

On the contrary, my feeling is that this development has hampered or even stopped in-

depth, sustainable, treatments and cures of mental illnesses of epidemic proportions such as

depression and neurosis.

Sir Karl Raimund Popper’s main contribution to the philosophy of science has been his

“solutions to the problems of induction.” This was conceived against another Viennese

invention: against the “veriﬁcation principle” of the Vienna Circle (which included Moritz

Schlick, Rudolf Carnap, Otto Neurath, Viktor Kraft, Hans Hahn, and Herbert Feigl). He

turned the veriﬁcation principle upside down and introduced a “falsiﬁcation principle” as a

demarcation criterion between science proper or “quasi-science,” or, as he sarcastically used

to called it, “blablabla.”

While it is quite obvious that no operational veriﬁcation can ever prove a scientiﬁc theory

to be “true,” it is not totally clear why a necessary criterion for any thought to be consid-

ered scientiﬁc should be its falsiﬁability. Indeed, Imre Lakatos repeatedly pointed out [2]

that such a demarcation criterion assumes that there are critical tests, which are able to

conclusively falsify a theory. But history tells us that many operational test of a theory

could be interpreted in one way or the other—either as corroboration of a theory or as a

falsiﬁcation.

Moreover, a theory or research program in statu nascendi is almost always handicapped

3

by a badly developed formalism and most of the time lacks the experimental credentials of its

soon-to-become predecessors. A historical example which is often mentioned is the Coper-

nican system, putting the earth in rotation around the sun, which was at ﬁrst competing

against the older Ptolemean system.

Sir Karl Raimund Popper himself has conceded these and other problems with the demar-

cation criterion. And he seemed to have constantly revised and adapted the demarcation

criterion to cope with the historic facts.

One may quite justiﬁable ask if some principles of scientiﬁc conduct which claim to be

able to diﬀerentiate and decide between what is reasonable science and “blablabla,” itself

should not also satisfy the very principles it requires from proper science. In other words:

is Sir Karl Raimund Popper’s theory of induction a scientiﬁcally sound theory by its own

standards, or mere “blablabla?”

While I shall let the Reader decide the case, I would only like to mention my impres-

sion that Sir Karl Raimund Popper seemed to have applied the same kind of “immunizing

strategies” which he blamed other “quasi-scientiﬁc” constructions to his own theories. In

short, the demarcation criterion may just be an ideology according to its own judgements,

after all!

physics.

It is interesting to note that Sir Karl Raimund Popper’s very few and almost forgotten

papers in physics (e.g., Refs.[6, 7, 8]) avoid concrete predictions and statements which could

be falsiﬁed. Should they therefore considered be as “blablabla?” I think not; they contain

highly original speculations about the consequences of G¨odel’s incompleteness theorems for

If the demarcation criterion is an ideology, then the old Roman dictum “cui bono?”

applies; i.e., who are the losers and the winners? First of all, one should mention that in

practical terms not too many researchers care about it in their everyday professional lifes.

The following anecdote may serve as an example. A department head once stated boldly,

‘if a student comes to me with a new idea, I ﬁrst ask the student if the idea is falsiﬁable, at

least in principle.’ If not, the professor concluded, this idea can be dismissed immediately.

(Fortunately, he does not react in that way. Otherwise, he would have had to dismiss more

than one half of the ongoing research at his own institution.)

In more practical terms, almost every decision has a ﬁnancial component associated with

it. To put it pointedly: if one omits the scientiﬁc meaning of a decision for the time being,

4

then a decision often boils down to money. If a wrong or a misguided ideology is taken as

a guideline for decision making such as funding policies, then this boils down to a waste of

(mostly taxpayer’s) money. Hence, Sir Karl Raimund Popper’s claim to be able to draw

a demarcation line between proper scientiﬁc research and pseudo-science not only may be

detrimental to the growth of knowledge, but may also be very costly.

However, as mentioned already, most of the practicing scientists, although paying lip ser-

vice to the principle of falsiﬁcation, do not really care about it in their everyday operations.

In this respect, “peer review,” with its assumed benevolent censorship, or the formation of

interests clusters and pressure groups (“gangs”) eﬀectively might do more harm and might

be responsible for a bigger waste of (mostly taxpayer’s) money than the demarcation crite-

rion. This could be the topic of another article. Here, I would only like to mention that I

believe it is not totally unreasonable to try to utilize other forms of evaluation of research

than just “peer review,” in particular an implementation of the grand jury system as it

is already practiced in the courtrooms. This has been proposed by Paul Feyerabend, yet

another philosopher of science originating from Vienna. But I would also like to propose to

distribute a certain amount of money to research programs by a random selection, such as

a lottery throwing dices; with a post mortem evaluation of all three funding groups (peer

review/jury selected/randomly selected; maybe distributed by 70:20:10).

My impression is that any kind of generally applicable demarcation criterion between

proper science and “pseudo-science” eventually will turn out to be a red herring. In the

same category are attempts to implement Occams razor as a criterion (c.f. the criticism by

Daniel Greenberger [9]), or the radical operationalism of the Percy Bridgman [10].

The question remains open why the thoughts of Sir Karl Raimund Popper have been

so highly appreciated? In my opinion, as far as politics is concerned, this esteem comes

from the fact that he ﬁtted nicely into the scheme of liberal democracy at a time when

western policy makers demanded someone who would ﬁrmly stand against communism and

for western liberal democratic values, while at the same time had not the faintest touch of

Nazism (such as, for instance, Heidegger and Adorno). This may explain some of the fame

of Sir Karl Raimund Popper in political circles. But this cannot explain the high reputation

among scientists, although he himself claimed not to have been taken too seriously by his

fellow colleagues in philosophy departments, contrary to researchers in physics, medicine,

biology and other natural sciences. (Maybe the former were too sophisticated to agree and

5

also suspicious what might remain of their own research after Sir Karl Raimund Popper’s

demarcation criterion had been applied to their subjects?)

I would tend to view much

of these ideas as having a high marketing value:

it was good to agree oﬃcially to these

almost undeniable, self-evident statements, while at the same time pursuing many other

diﬀerent goals, both politically and scientiﬁcally. Yet, I have to confess not having found any

convincing answer so far. The high appreciation Ludwig Wittgenstein (yet another Viennese

philosopher) enjoyed in Cambridge is comparable, although this might be explained by the

“Nostradamus-like” style of his writings and expressions, which leaves open the doors for

many, even contradicting, interpretations, and which sometimes appears to be extremely

attractive to philosophers. If one considers Niels Bohr’s philosophical emanations on the

interpretation of quantum mechanics (and his discussions with Einstein and others on these

issues), one is almost inclined to enlarge this group to physicists as well.

I would have been willing to write a more forgiving review (or none at all) of Sir Karl

Raimund Popper’s theses if he would have been more forgiving to his rivals and to the

theories he considered to be “pseudo-science” or simply “blablabla.” Unfortunately, this

was not the case. Let me conclude this very brief and necessarily incomplete appraisal of

the works of Sir Karl Raimund Popper with his statement, “all theories are hypotheses; all

may be overthrown,” which serves as an almost tautologic motto to an exhibition advertised

by the University of Vienna in connection with its recent Karl Popper 2002 Centenary

Congress. Or should one better recall Ludwig Wittgenstein’s dictum, “Wovon man nicht

sprechen kann, dar¨uber muß man schweigen” (“What we cannot speak about we must pass

over in silence”)?

[1] K. R. Popper, Logik der Forschung (Springer, Vienna, 1934), englisch translation in [11].

[2] I. Lakatos, Philosophical Papers. 1. The Methodology of Scientiﬁc Research Programmes

(Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 1978).

[3] P. K. Feyerabend, Against Method (New Left Books, London, 1974).

[4] P. K. Feyerabend, Science in a Free Society (London, 1970).

[5] A. Gr¨unbaum, The foundations of psychoanalysis: A philosophical critique. (University of

California Press, Berkeley, 1984).

6

[6] K. R. Popper, Naturwissenschaften 22, 807 (1934).

[7] K. R. Popper, The British Journal for the Philosophy of Science 1, 117 (1950).

[8] K. R. Popper, The British Journal for the Philosophy of Science 1, 173 (1950).

[9] D. M. Greenberger, Occam’s Razor. A critical review.

[10] P. W. Bridgman, The Nature of Physical Theory (Princeton, 1936).

[11] K. R. Popper, The Logic of Scientiﬁc Discovery (Basic Books, New York, 1959).

7

