2
0
0
2
 
p
e
S
 
7
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
t
s
i
h
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
3
6
0
9
0
2
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

A Ciencia Cierta 2(12)
The Bimestral Publication of the Potosinian Commettee of Science & Technology
San Luis Potos´ı
August 2002

ARISTOTLE: THE FIRST ENCYCLOPEDIST

Enlarged version in English
September 2002

Haret C. Rosu1

Abstract. Aristotle was the ﬁrst to declare himself in the class of natural philosophers (physiologoi)

and he was the ﬁrst physicist because he spelled out the ﬁrst deﬁnitions of some basic physical concepts.

Moreover, he was the ﬁrst encyclopedist of the world and perhaps the greatest.

In the January 2002 issue of the IOP magazine Physics World, M. Rowan-
Robinson published the paper “Was Aristotle the ﬁrst physicist ?” [1]. This
paper generated several reactions [2] and stimulated me to learn more about
one of the greatest thinkers of all times. I believe the answer to the question of
Rowan-Robinson is positive, ﬁrst of all because the ﬁrst known physics books
that have been conserved through the centuries belong to Aristotle. But
Aristotle was much much more. He was the ﬁrst encyclopedist of mankind.
Because of his extremely imaginative mind he left behind him a multitude of
systematic studies on almost all of the cultural ﬁelds of his epoch, including
cosmology. He is the founder of Logics, where he developed the syllogism as
a basic argument of the theory of deduction. The syllogism starts from two
diﬀerent premises that lead to a unique conclusion. Aristotle revised many of
Plato’s ideas insisting on methods based on observation and experiment (he
was practically a very acute observer of nature whereas his ‘experiments’ were
mainly dissections). Aristotle argued that mankind, though a component of
nature, was diﬀerent from the rest of the known world due to his capacity for
thinking and reasoning. In his opinion, human beings are rational animals
and despite the fact they do not act always according to reason, they have
always the choice of exerting this superior quality. To be happy, human

1e-mail: hcr@ipicyt.edu.mx; IPICyT, San Luis Potos´ı, Mexico

1

beings have the ethical duty to live in the realm of reason. Concerning
politics, he believed that a monarchy with a clever king could be an ideal
social structure, but he agreed that a limited democracy may be one of the
best compromises. The arts have been interpreted by Aristotle as a form
of intelectual pleasure. His analyses of the Greek tragedies have been used
as models of literary critical commentaries. Moreover, he asserted that the
observed material objects as well as the persons examining them are under
continuous transformations. But since knowledge should be associated only
with the universal unchangeable elements Aristotle claimed that knowledge
and perception are fundamentally diﬀerent, one from the other. As for the
basic blocks of the material world, Aristotle believed that in addition to the
four elements of Empedocles - ﬁre, air, earth, and water - there was a ﬁfth one
that he called ether ﬁlling the whole universe and being actually the unique
element in the composition of any body ‘beyond the Moon’. The reason to
introduce the ether was Aristotle’s dogma that nature abhors empty space
(vacuum).

It is worth mentioning that the lecture notes of most of his courses in
the Lyceum were discovered by chance by Roman soldiers about two cen-
turies after the death of Aristotle in a pit on the west coast of Asia Minor.
The peripathetic philosopher Andronicus provided a Latin translation and
tried without much success to publish a ﬁrst edition of Aristotle’s works; the
project remained merely at the level of collection. The publication at a larger
scale was achieved by the Arabs much later.

The works of Aristotle became known in the early medieval Europe of the
XIth-XIIth centuries by translation from the arabic and rapidly became rec-
ognized textbooks by the Christian Church despite their laical origin. Having
this religious support, Aristotle’s doctrines dominated scientiﬁcly oriented
people until the Renascence.

As far as Physics is concerned, the ﬁrst drawback came with Galilei,
when his theory of free fall was ﬁrst questioned from the experimental point
of view2. With respect to the nature of time, Aristotle was the proponent
of a uniform and continuous ﬂux of time, an idea supported later by New-
ton. Finally, the ether paradigm was a powerful concept for centuries till
the beginning of the XXth century when Einstein formulated the theory of

2It is to be noted that within nonrelativistic quantum mechanics free fall could be still

considered in a certain sense to be aristotelian, i.e., mass-dependent.

2

special relativity. However, one should say that the surprizes of technological
progress do not forbid the resurgence of diﬀerent forms of ether-like concepts
at least as a convenient explicative necessity3. Aristotle was an antiatomist.
He believed that matter was continuous and could be devided in ever smaller
pieces forever! On the other hand, Aristotle was the ﬁrst to provide def-
initions of basic mechanical concepts, such as energy (energeia - activity)
and dynamics (dynamis - capacity for action). He also ﬁrst deﬁned physics
(physis -nature) as the science of the forms of motion.

Biographical Sketch of Aristotle

• Period of life: 384 - 322 BC (62 years).

• Place of birth: Stagira in the ancient Macedon region4, now in the prefec-
ture of Khalkidhiki in the northeastern part of Greece). Aristotle was born
as the son of Nicomachus, chief physician at the court of Amyntas III. Stagira
was a port in the three-ﬁngered hand-like peninsula Calcidia and is now a
village of only 500 people.

• At the age of 17 years he went to Athens to study in the Academy, the
famous educational institution of Plato (now equivalent to a department of
philosophy). For the next 19 years he remained in Plato’s Academy where
he reached the mature status of professor and independent research philoso-
pher. Although many of his ideas were opposed to those of Plato, he was
considered as one of the possible successors by Plato himself.

• In 347 BC, when Plato died, Aristotle could not stay as head of the
Academy since Plato’s last will was that his own nephiew, the much more
obscure Speusippus, be in charge of it, but probably also because of the op-
position of the other philosophers and his Macedonian origin. Together with

3As a matter of fact, vacuum quantum ﬂuctuations can be considered as a form of
quantum ether. In addition, the so-called quintessence, which is in vogue in the cosmology
produced by the high redshifted supernovae data and also some of the modern cosmological
scalar ﬁelds can be viewed as ethereal ﬁelds.

4Ancient Macedon region and people should not be confused with present Macedonia.

3

Xenocrates, who later became the third head of Plato’s Academy, Aristotle
abandoned Athens spending the following 12 years in various cities of the
isles and along the coasts of the Aegean Sea where for a while he engaged
in his remarkable studies in biology. Fortunately, during this quite unstable
period of his life (although he got married to Pythias, the niece of ruler Her-
mias) he was asked by Philip II of Macedonia to come back to Stagira as a
private mentor of his thirteen-year old son Alexander (later, Alexander the
Great).

• In 335 BC Philip conquered Athens. Aristotle returned to the most impor-
tant city of that epoch in a position allowing him to found his own school
(known as the “peripatetic school” because of Aristotle’s habit of walking
during his lectures). The place he chose for his school was known as the
Lyceum named so after the nearby temple of Apollo Lyceus (Lykaios), i.e.,
Apollo “the Wolf-God”. Aristotle’s school location was discovered only in
1997 by E. Ligouri. It is a quadratic place with a diagonal of about 50 meters.
It is considered by many historians as the ﬁrst university of the planet5. Aris-
totle taught in the Lyceum during the next 12 years of his life. His courses
(2000 pages published in ‘Complete Works’ representing only between a ﬁfth
and a quarter of his total cultural output) cover knowledge ranging from
Ethics to Biology, Physics and Metaphysics.

On the personal side, it is known that during his second Athenian period
his wife Pythias died and subsequently he lived unmarried with Herpyllis, a
woman from Stagira. Also, in 327 BC, his nephiew Callisthenes who went
with Alexander in his famous military campaign was executed at the order
of Alexander !

• In 323 BC, at the death of Alexander, Aristotle prudently abandoned
Athens and died a year later in Calchis, hometown of his mother in Euboea
island.

5I think this is true if one takes into account the encyclopedic range of Aristotle’s courses

and the extended library that was accumulated there through the eﬀorts of Aristotle.

4

Extant Aristotelian Treatises

Presented is the list as given by Turner [3] with the titles in Latin as assigned
by Andronicus.

Logical Treatises (also known as Organon)

1. Categoriae
2. De Interpretatione
3. Analytica Priora
4. Analytica Posteriora
5. Topica
6. De Sophisticis Elenchis

Physical Treatises

8. De Cœlo

9. Meteorologica

Metaphysical Treatises
10. Metaphysica6

7. Physica (or Physica Auscultatio)

Biological and Zoological Treatises

11. Historiae Animalium

12. De Generatione et Corruptione

13. De Generazione Animalium

14. De Partibus Animalium

Psychological and Anthropological Treatises

15. De Anima

16. De Sensu et Sensibili

6Title given by Andronicus, who placed this treatise after the physical treatises in his

collection; Aristotle entitled it ‘First Philosophy’ (Prote Philosophia).

5

17. De Memoria et Reminiscentia

18. De Vita et Morte

19. De Longitudine et Brevitate Vitae

Ethical and Political Treatises

20. Ethica Nicomachea

21. Politica

Poetical and Rhetorical Treatises

22. De Poetica

23. De Rhetorica

References

[1] M. Rowan-Robinson, “Was Aristotle the ﬁrst physicist ?”, Physics

World 15, 15-16 (January 2002), http://physicsweb.org

[2] Y. Ne’eman, “Aristotle: top man”, Physics World 15, 18-19 (May 2002);

D. Sathe, untitled, ibidem, p. 19

[3] W. Turner, “Aristotle”, in The Catholic Encyclopedia, Volume 1 (R.

Appleton Company, 1907)

Figure Caption: Map showing the location of Stagira among other ancient
Greek cities.

6

This figure "GRCITIES.gif" is available in "gif"(cid:10) format from:

http://arXiv.org/ps/physics/0209063v1

