Lochlainn O’Raifeartaigh,
Fluids, and Noncommuting Fields

R. Jackiw

Center for Theoretical Physics

Massachusetts Institute of Technology

Cambridge, MA 02139-4307

Abstract

Lochlainn O’Raifeartaigh and his work are recalled; the connection between ﬂuid
mechanics – his last research topic – and noncommuting gauge ﬁelds is explained.

2
0
0
2
 
p
e
S
 
0
3
 
 
]
h
p
-
t
s
i
h
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
8
0
1
9
0
2
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

O’Raifeartaigh Memorial Meeting, Dublin, Ireland, September 2002

Lochlainn O’Raifeartaigh, Fluids, and Noncommuting Fields

3

Lochlainn O’Raifeartaigh was an eminent theoretical/mathematical physicist, the
most recent member of a cohort of outstanding Irish physicists that includes
Hamilton, Stokes, Father Callan (the inventor of the induction coil), Fitzgerald,
Walton, Synge, and others. I came to know him in the 1970s during his visits to my
colleague the mathematician Irving Segal. Of course, I already knew his famous work
from the 1960s, wherein he put a stop to a search for a group-theoretical combination
of internal and kinematical relativistic symmetries. At that time, particle physicists
were impressed by Wigner’s successful combination of spin SU(2) and isospin SU(2)
into an SU(4) of nuclear physics, and they tried to ﬁnd something similar for the
quark model. The obvious choice was an SU(6) built from spin and Gell-Mann’s
ﬂavor SU(3), but this was a nonrelativistic construction and the search was on for a
relativistic version. Various authors pointed out various diﬃculties with the idea, but
the deﬁnitive paper was Lochlainn’s Physical Review Letter 1 in which he proved that
unacceptable mass degeneracies follow when the putative invariance group contains
internal symmetries and Poincar´e symmetries, mixed in a nontrivial way. This story is
documented in Dyson’s collection Symmetry Groups in Nuclear and Particle Physics.2
Although more deﬁnitive no-go theorems were later constructed,3 serious research

on “relativistic SU(6)” stopped with the publication of “O’Raifeartaigh’s theorem”.
But the desire of physicists to combine Poincar´e and internal symmetries did not stop,
and this is an interesting example of how the force of physics, which derives from
Nature, overcomes mathematical obstacles, which are put up by human ingenuity! Of
course, I am referring to supersymmetry, which evades all no-go theorems and does
combine internal with space-time symmetries through the simple expedient of mixing
bosons and fermions – something that does not happen for transformations belonging
to ordinary symmetry groups. Again, Lochlainn contributed decisively to this newly
evolved idea. Supersymmetry still entails unacceptable mass degeneracies, between
bosons and fermions. In his most-cited paper on the “O’Raifeartaigh mechanism”, he
constructed simple examples in which supersymmetry is spontaneously broken, and
the unwanted mass-degeneracies are removed.4

In later years Lochlainn wrote extensively on historical and pedagogical topics,
centered on gauge theories. I recommend especially his two books: Group Structure
of Gauge Theories 5 and The Dawning of Gauge Theory,6 and two articles: “Gauge
Theory: The Gentle Revolution”7 and “Gauge Theory: Historical Origins and Some
Modern Developments”,8 the last with Straumann. These works reﬂect his life-long
desire to teach, clarify, and explain physics intricacies, and this is also seen from the
vast number of schools, symposia, and meetings to which he contributed – I counted
twenty-ﬁve in the last decade. Both the research and the teaching were ﬁttingly
recognized by the Wigner medal, which he received just before he died.

Lochlainn and I never collaborated on actual research, but our interests paralleled

each other to a signiﬁcant degree. Both he and I explored anomalies; we both wrote

4

R. Jackiw

on eﬀective potentials; he worked extensively on monopoles, and I determined the
quantum-mechanical implications of these and other classical solutions. His last
published paper with Sreedhar9 concerns ﬂuid mechanics, and I too have recently
been studying this topic because of its unexpected connections to extended objects in
ﬁeld theory and to noncommutative gauge theories.10 Lochlainn did not have the
opportunity to work on noncommuting gauge theories, but I suspect that he would
have liked to, because that subject ﬁts so well with everything that he did before. So
I shall conclude my talk by informing you about the relevance of ﬂuids to
noncommuting gauge ﬁelds.

The suggestion that conﬁguration-space coordinates may not commute

[xi, xj] = iθij

(1)

where θij is a constant, anti-symmetric two-index object, has arisen recently from
string theory, but in fact it has a longer history. Like many interesting
quantum-mechanical ideas, it was ﬁrst suggested by Heisenberg, in the late 1930s,
who reasoned that coordinate noncommutativity would entail a coordinate
uncertainty and would ameliorate short-distance singularities, which beset quantum
ﬁelds. He told his idea to Peierls, who eventually made use of it when analyzing
electronic systems in an external magnetic ﬁeld, so strong that projection to the
lowest Landau level is justiﬁed. After this projection, the coordinates fail to commute
(since the state space has been truncated).11 But this phenomenological realization of
Heisenberg’s idea did not address issues in fundamental science, so Peierls told Pauli
about it, who in turn told Oppenheimer, who asked his student Snyder to work it out
and this led to the ﬁrst published paper on the subject.12 Today’s string-theory
origins of noncommutativity are very similar to Peierls’s application – both rely on
the presence of a strong background ﬁeld.

When confronting the noncommutativity postulate (1), it is natural to ask which

(inﬁnitesimal) coordinate transformations

leave (1) unchanged. The answer is that the (inﬁnitesimal) transformation vector
function f i(x) must be determined by a scalar through the expression13

δxi = −f i(x)

f i(x) = θij∂jf (x) .

(2)

(3)

Since ∂if i(x) = 0, these are recognized as volume-preserving transformations. (They
do not exhaust all volume preserving transformations, except in two dimensions. In
dimensions greater two, (3) deﬁnes a subgroup of volume-preserving transforms that
also leave θij invariant.)

The volume-preserving transformations form the link between noncommuting
coordinates and ﬂuid mechanics. Since the theory of ﬂuid mechanics is not widely

Lochlainn O’Raifeartaigh, Fluids, and Noncommuting Fields

5

known outside the circle of ﬂuid mechanicians, let me put down some relevant facts.
There are two, physically equivalent descriptions of ﬂuid motion: One is the Lagrange
formulation, wherein the ﬂuid elements are labeled, ﬁrst by a discreet index n: X n(t)
is the position as a function of time of the nth ﬂuid element. Then one passes to a
continuous labeling variable n → x : X(t, x), and x may be taken to be the position
of the ﬂuid element at initial time X(0, x) = x. This is a comoving description.
Because labels can be arbitrarily rearranged, without aﬀecting physical content, the
continuum description is invariant against volume-preserving transformations of x,
and in particular, it is invariant against the speciﬁc volume-preserving
transformations (3), provided the ﬂuid coordinate X transforms as a scalar:

δf X = f i(x)

∂
∂xi X = θij∂iX∂jf .

The common invariance of Lagrange ﬂuids and of noncommuting coordinates is a

strong hint of a connection between the two.

Formula (4) will take a very suggestive form when we rewrite it in terms of a

bracket deﬁned for functions of x by

O1(x), O2(x)
(cid:9)

(cid:8)

= θij∂iO1(x)∂jO2(x) .

Note that with this bracket we have

xi, xj

= θij .

(cid:8)

(cid:9)

So we can think of bracket relations as classical precursors of commutators for a
noncommutative ﬁeld theory – the latter obtained from the former by replacing
brackets by −i times commutators, `a la Dirac. More speciﬁcally, the noncommuting
ﬁeld theory that emerges from the Lagrange ﬂuid is a noncommuting U(1) gauge
theory.

This happens when the following steps are taken. We deﬁne the evolving portion

of X by

X i(t, x) = xi + θij ˆAj(t, x) .

(It is assumed that θij has an inverse.) Then (4) is equivalent to the suggestive
expression

δf ˆAi = ∂if +

ˆAi, f

.

(cid:8)

(cid:9)

When the bracket is replaced by (−i) times the commutator, this is precisely the
gauge transformation for a noncommuting U(1) gauge potential ˆAi. Moreover, the
gauge ﬁeld ˆFij emerges from the bracket of two Lagrange coordinates

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

(9)

(10)

X i, X j
(cid:8)

(cid:9)
ˆFmn = ∂m ˆAn − ∂n ˆAm +

= θij + θimθjn ˆFmn
ˆAm, ˆAn

(cid:8)

.

(cid:9)

6

R. Jackiw

Again (10) is recognized from the analogous formula in noncommuting gauge theory.
What can one learn from the parallelism of the formalism for a Lagrange ﬂuid and

a noncommuting gauge ﬁeld? One result that has been obtained addresses the
question of what is a gauge ﬁeld’s covariant response to a coordinate transformation.
This question can be put already for commuting, non-Abelian gauge ﬁelds, where
conventionally the response is given in terms of a Lie derivative Lf :

δf xµ = −f µ(x)
δf Aµ = Lf Aµ ≡ f α∂αAµ + ∂µf αAα .

But this implies

δf Fµν = Lf Fµν ≡ f α∂αFµν + ∂µf αFαν + ∂νf αFµα

which is not covariant since the derivative in the ﬁrst term on the right is not the
covariant one. The cure in this, commuting, situation has been given some time
ago:14 Observe that (12) may be equivalently presented as

δf Aµ = Lf Aµ = f α

∂αAµ − ∂µAα − i[Aα, Aµ]
(cid:1)

(cid:0)
+ f α∂µAα − i[Aµ, f αAα] + ∂µf αAα

= f αFαµ + Dµ(f αAα) .

Thus, if the coordinate transformation generated by f α is supplemented by a gauge
transformation generated by −f αAα, the result is a gauge covariant coordinate
transformation

′
f Aµ = f αFαµ
δ

and the modiﬁed response of Fµν involves the gauge-covariant Lie derivative L′
f :

′
f Fµν = L
δ

′
f Fµν ≡ f αDαFµν + ∂µf αFαν + ∂ν f αFµα .

In the noncommuting situation, loss of covariance in the ordinary Lie derivative is

even greater, because in general the coordinate transformation functions f α do not
commute with the ﬁelds Aµ, Fµν ; moreover, multiplication of x-dependent quantities
is not a covariant operation. All these issues can be addressed and resolved by
considering them in the ﬂuid mechanical context, at least, for volume-preserving
diﬀeomorphisms. The analysis is technical and I refer you to the published
papers.13,15

Instead, I shall discuss the Seiberg-Witten map,16 which can be made very

transparent by the ﬂuid analogy. The Seiberg-Witten map replaces the
noncommuting vector potential ˆAµ by a nonlocal function of a commuting potential
aµ and of θ; i.e., the former is viewed as a function of the latter. The relationship
between the two follows from the requirement of stability against gauge
transformations: a noncommuting gauge transformation of the noncommuting gauge

(11)

(12)

(13)

(14)

(15)

(16)

Lochlainn O’Raifeartaigh, Fluids, and Noncommuting Fields

7

potential should be equivalent to a commuting gauge transformation on the
commuting vector potential on which the noncommuting potential depends.
Moreover, when the action and the equations of motion of the noncommuting theory
are transformed into commuting variables, the dynamical content is preserved: the
physics described by noncommuting variables is equivalently described by the
commuting variables, albeit in a complicated, nonlocal fashion.

The Seiberg-Witten map is intrinsically interesting in the unexpected equivalence

that it establishes. Moreover, it is practically useful for the following reason. It is
diﬃcult to extract gauge invariant content from a noncommuting gauge theory
because quantities constructed locally from ˆFµν are not gauge invariant; to achieve
gauge invariance, one must integrate over space-time. Yet for physical analysis one
wants local quantities: proﬁles of propagating waves, etc. Such local quantities can be
extracted in a gauge invariant manner from the physically equivalent, Seiberg-Witten
mapped commutative gauge theory.17

Let me now use the ﬂuid analogy to obtain an explicit formula for the
Seiberg-Witten map; actually, we shall present the inverse map, expressing
commuting ﬁelds in terms of noncommuting ones. For our development we must refer
to a second, alternative formulation of ﬂuid mechanics, the so-called Euler
formulation. This is not a comoving description, rather the experimenter observes the
ﬂuid density ρ and velocity v at given point in space-time (t, r). The current is ρv
and satisﬁes with ρ a continuity equation

∂
∂t

ρ + ∇ · (ρv) = 0 .

The theory is completed by positing an “Euler equation” for ∂v/∂t, but we shall not
need this here.

Of interest to us is the relation between the Lagrange description and the Euler

description. This is given by the formulas

ρ(t, r)v(t, r) ≡ j(t, r) =

ρ(t, r) =

dx δ

X(t, x) − r

Z

(cid:0)
dx

∂
∂t

Z

(cid:1)
X(t, x) − r

.

(cid:1)

X(t, x)δ

(cid:0)

(The integration and the δ-function carry the dimensionality of space.) Observe that
the continuity equation (17) follows from the deﬁnitions (18), which can be
summarized by

jµ(t, r) =

X µδ(X − r)

Z

dr

∂
∂t
X 0 = t
∂µjµ = 0 .

(17)

(18a)

(18b)

(19)

(20)

8

R. Jackiw

The (inverse) Seiberg-Witten map, for the case of two spatial dimensions, can be

extracted from (19), (20).13 (The argument can be generalized to arbitrary
dimensions, but there it is more complicated.13) Observe that the right side of (19)
depends on ˆA through X [see (7)]. It is easy to check that the integral (19) is
invariant under the transformations (4); equivalently viewed as a function of ˆA, it is
gauge invariant [see (8)]. Owing to the conservation of jµ [see (20)], its dual εαβµjµ
satisﬁes a conventional, commuting Bianchi identity, and therefore can be written as
the curl of an Abelian vector potential aα, apart from proportionality and additive
constants:

∂αaβ − ∂βaα + constant ∝ εαβµ Z
∂iaj − ∂jai + constant ∝ εij Z
This is the (inverse) Seiberg-Witten map, relating the a to ˆA.

dx

dx δ(X − r) = εijρ .

∂
∂t

X µδ(X − r)

(21)

Thus far operator noncommutativity has not been taken into account. To do so,

we must provide an ordering for the δ-function depending on the operator
X i = xi + θij ˆAj. This we do with the Weyl prescription by Fourier transforming. The
ﬁnal operator version of equation (21), restricted to the two-dimensional spatial
components, reads

dr eik·r

(∂iaj − ∂jai) = −εij

Z

dx eik·X − (2π)2δ(k)
i

.

hZ

(22)

Here the additive and proportionality constants are determined by requiring
agreement for weak noncommuting ﬁelds, and the integral on the right is interpreted
as a trace over the operators.

Formula (22) has previously appeared in a direct analysis of the Seiberg-Witten
relation.18 Here we recognize it as the (quantized) expression relating Lagrange and
Euler formulations for ﬂuid mechanics.

I think Lochlainn would have liked this.

References

Rev. Lett. 14, 575 (1965).

York, NY 1966).

Rev. 159, 1251 (1967).

[1] L. O’Raifeartaigh, “Mass Diﬀerences and Lie Algebras of Finite Order”, Phys.

[2] F. Dyson, Symmetry Groups in Nuclear and Particle Physics (Benjamin, New

[3] S. Coleman and J. Mandula, “All Possible Symmetries of the S Matrix”, Phys.

[4] L. O’Raifeartaigh, “Spontaneous Symmetry Breaking for Chiral Scalar

Superﬁelds”, Nucl. Phys. B96, 331 (1975).

Lochlainn O’Raifeartaigh, Fluids, and Noncommuting Fields

9

[5] L. O’Raifeartaigh, Group Structure of Gauge Theories (Cambridge University

[6] L. O’Raifeartaigh, The Dawning of Gauge Theory (Princeton University Press,

Press, Cambridge, UK 1985).

Princeton, NJ 1997).

[7] L. O’Raifeartaigh, “Gauge Theory: The Gentle Revolution”, in Mathematical
Physics 2000, A. Fokas, A. Grigoryan, T. Kibble, and B. Zegarlinski, eds.
(Imperial College Press, London, UK 2000).

[8] L. O’Raifeartaigh and N. Straumann, “Gauge Theory: Historical Origins and

Some Modern Developments”, Rev. Mod. Phys. 72, 1 (2000).

[9] L. O’Raifeartaigh and V. Sreedhar, “The Maximal Invariance Group of Fluid

Mechanics and Explosion-Implosion Duality”, Ann. Phys. (NY) 293, 215 (2001).

[10] R. Jackiw, Lectures on Fluid Mechanics (Springer, Berlin, Germany 2002).

[11] A modern account of this is in G. Dunne, R. Jackiw, and L. Trugenberger,
“Topological (Chern-Simons) Quantum Mechanics”, Phys. Rev. D 41, 661
(1990); G. Dunne and R. Jackiw, “ ‘Peierls Substitution’ and Chern-Simons
Quantum Mechanics”, Nucl. Phys. B (Proc. Suppl.) 33C, 114 (1993).

[12] H. Snyder, “Quantized Space-Time”, Phys. Rev. 71, 38 (1947). This story has

been told and documented by J. Wess, private communication.

[13] R. Jackiw, S.-Y. Pi, and A. Polychronakos, “Noncommuting Gauge Fields as a

Lagrange Fluid”, Ann. Phys. (NY) 301, 157 (2002).

[14] R. Jackiw, “Gauge Covariant Conformal Transformations”, Phys. Rev. Lett. 41,
1635 (1978); “Invariance, Symmetry, and Periodicity in Gauge Theories”, Acta
Phys. Austr. Suppl. XXII , 383 (1980), reprinted in R. Jackiw, Diverse Topics in
Theoretical and Mathematical Physics (World Scientiﬁc, Singapore 1995).

[15] R. Jackiw and S.-Y. Pi, “Covariant Coordinate Transformations on
Noncommutative Space”, Phys. Rev. Lett. 88, 1116031 (2002).

[16] N. Seiberg and E. Witten, “String Theory and Noncommutative Geometry”,

JHEP 9909, 032 (1999).

[17] For example, one may ask how plane waves of the commuting Maxwell theory

become distorted in noncommutating electrodynamics. The deduced answer
makes use of the Seiberg-Witten commutative equivalent to noncommuting
electrodynamics. Z. Guralnik, R. Jackiw, S.-Y. Pi, and A. Polychronakos,
“Testing Noncommutative QED, Constructing Noncommutative QCD”, Phys.
Lett. B517, 450 (2001); R.-G. Cai, “Superluminal Noncommutative Photons”,
Phys. Lett. B517, 457 (2001).

[18] Y. Okawa and H. Ooguri, “Exact Solution to the Seiberg-Witten Equation of

Noncommutative Gauge Theory”, Phys. Rev. D 64, 040009 (2001).

