2
0
0
2
 
c
e
D
 
3
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
t
s
i
h
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
0
9
0
2
1
2
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Rejection of the Light Quantum: The Dark
Side of Niels Bohr ∗

Luis J. Boya †
Departamento de F´ısica Te´orica. Facultad de Ciencias.
Universidad de Zaragoza. 50009-Zaragoza, Spain

February 2, 2008

Abstract

Evidence is recalled of the strong opposition of Niels Bohr, at the
time of the Old Quantum Theory 1.913 − 25, to the Lichtquanten hy-
pothesis of Einstein. Some episodes with H.A. Kramers, J.C. Slater
and W. Heisenberg are recollected; Bohr’s changing point of view is
traced back to some philosophical antecedents and to his endeavour
to deduce quantum results from the Correspondence Principle. Some
consequences for the future interpretation of Quantum Mechanics, spe-
cially to the Complementarity Principle, are considered.

∗ Open Lecture presented at the 4th Workshop on Rigged Hilbert Space and Reso-

nances. Jaca,HU, Spain, June 2.001

†luisjo@posta.unizar.es

1

1 BOHR AND THE LIGHT QUANTUM.

In the Trilogy [1], the famous 1.913 paper ”On the Constitution of Atoms
and Molecules” in three parts by Niels BOHR (1.885 −1.962), there are quite
a few mentions to the Light Quantum Hypothesis [2]. For instance [1], p. 6
”...the energy radiation from an atomic system does not take place in
the continuous way assumed in the ordinary electrodynamics but..., on the
contrary, takes place in distinctly separated emissions...”

Later in the same Trilogy Bohr describes the radiation emitted by the

atom as [ I, p. 172]

”...emission of one of several quanta”

which later turned to be mainly only one. Bohr, however does not use

Einsteins word Lichquanten but Plancks energy quanta.

So at the very begining Bohr embraced both the failure of classical electro-
dynamics to acount for the atoms stability, and also the emission by discrete
quanta. But very soon he changed the perspective: classical electrodynamics
was to be mantained, indeed used as a guide, quantization limited to matter,
and all references to discrete emission of (energy) quanta discarded. What
brought about this change? We can trace back precisely the moment: when
Bohr discovers, and tells Rutherford at once in a letter [3], that for large
quantum numbers the frequency of the emitted radiation coincides with the
frequency of the revolution electron, as the clasical theory would predict;
Bohr had discovered (letter to Rutherford, 21 − III − 1.913)

”...the most beautiful analogi [sic] between the old electrodynamics and

the considerations used in my paper”

This was crucial for Bohr future view of quantum physics, and through
Bohrs overwhelming inﬂuence to the whole of the physics community: the
Correspondence Principle had germinated; indeed, it was criptically expresed
already in p. 13 − 14 of the Trilogy. Henceforth Bohr takes it as the guiding
principle to discoveries in the old quantum theory. Indeed, the original quan-
tum conditions of Planck on oscillators, in which Bohr’s ﬁrst atom paper is
based, are rejected. Heilbron and Kuhn [4] already realized the contradictions
between the July, 1.913 trilogy, and the December-1.913 Copenhagen commu-
nication [5]. In the latter, Bohr considers misleading the original derivation
of the quantum rules (kinetic energy T = νh/2, the original quantum rule
that Bohr borrows from Planck): the correspondence criterion is elevated to
the correspondence principle.

2

In his writings 1.913 − 1.920 Bohr steadily gets farther and farther away
from the photon concept, and relying more and more on the classical radia-
tion theory. A few quotations will suﬃce [6]:

”...the theory of spectra must be considered in a certain sense as the

rational generalization of the ideas of the usual radiation theory” [1.918]

”...On the other hand radiation had to be described by the classical elec-

tromagnetic theory” [1.921]

”[interference phenomena] cannot possibly be understood on the basis of
a theory such as Newtons. In fact, the picture provided by Einstein cannot
more than give any sort of explanation of the interference phenomenon [1.918]
There is no point in keeping quoting Bohr: all the authors agree on that
Bohr rejected the corpuscular nature of light. Particularly detailed studies
are in Pais [7] and Murdoch [8]. Timidly, Pais points out the true reason: the
correspondence principle clashes head-on with the light quantum concept!

There is some irony in Bohr’s writings of the epoch; let us look at two
cases. Sommerfeld in M¨unchen was developing a quasi-consistent quantiza-
tion system of rules for atomic systems, and was not happy with the cor-
respondence principle, as ”...etwas Fremdartigen” to the theory, a ”magic
wand, which operates only in Kobenhavm”. Bohr, of course, disliked Som-
merfeld approach:

”...in every ﬁne point that came up Sommerfeld was wrong” [9].
The irony was, of course, that the diﬃcult Sommerfeld Feinstrucktur-
formel was one of big successes of the Old Quantum Theory, an issue in
which him, Bohr, failed (he did apply relativity to the circular orbits only).
Sommerfeld never got the Nobel prize, to the surprise of many (including A.
Pais, an admirer of Bohr). Actually, Bohr never recommended Sommerfeld
to the Swedish Academy, whereas most of his recommendees did get the Prize
(for a full list see [10]; [11]).

In a comment on Einsteins Lichquantum, Bohr (1.920) had this to say
”...the Light Quantum hypothesis is so formal, that even Einstein him-
self shrouded it of mysticism, talking about the Gespensterfeld to guide the
”photons”

The irony here is double: ﬁrst, Bohr himself, in the ill-fated BKS paper
(which we shall comment later) introduced the ”guiding ﬁeld” in terms of
virtual oscillators, altough he borrows the idea from Slater; and secondly,
Einsteins 1.920 (unpublished, see [7], p. 287) idea was later, in the hands
of Schr¨odinger, instrumental in founding the wave mechanics, which Bohr

3

(see also later) because after all it came to the rescue of his
embraced!
theory. The Gespensterfeld, in the hands of Max
beloved classical e.m.
Born, became the basis for the probability interpretation, today universally
accepted, also by Bohr, as part of his complementarity point of view. Of
course, complementarity and the Born interpretation are at odds which each
other. It had to be a philosopher (Karl Popper, [12]), coming from outside,
who pointed out the contradiction.

2 KRAMERS vs. KRAMERS.

It will be prophilactic to describe now the episodes in which Bohr clashed
with people on the ”photon” issue. The ﬁrst victim was (Hans) A. Kramers
(1.894 − 1.952), Bohr’s ﬁrst collaborator, and a ”yes man” for Bohr, as
Slater later put it. Now the historian-physicists A.Pais and M. Dresden talk
( I resume from [13] and [14]):

In Spring, 1.921 ”The indications are that Kramers had obtained the con-
servation law description of the Compton eﬀect, using the photon description
explicitely...Bohr would object violently to the publication of these results.
He and Kramers engaged inmediately in a series of daily ”no holds barred”
1 arguments about the photon...In these discussions...Kramers...was simply
grounded down by Bohr... After these discussions, which left Kramers ex-
hausted, depressed, and let down, [he] got sick and spent some time in the
hospital. During his stay in the hospital, Kramers gave up the photon no-
tion...altogether. Instead, he soon became violently opposed to the photon
notions, and never let an opportunity pass by to criticize or even ridicule the
concept. He disposed of most of his early calculations, but inadvertedly left
a few, early rough notes [which are extant, fortunately, in Kramers’s family’s
hands. LJB]

The Bohr-Kramers discussions are in spring, 1.921. That year Bohr was
overworked with the building a new institute, and had to renounce to par-
ticipate in the Solvay meeting. But a glance of the spiritual turmoil is felt, I
think, in the following revealing letter to Ehrenfest [15]

”You have no idea how much your friendship means to me. Especially at
a time when I almost feel as a criminal in relation to all kinds of people here
and elsewhere”

1The spanish sentence a calz´on quitado is more vivid.

4

As the incident with Kramers is an important one, let us recall that

already in his 1.967 book, ter Haar said [16]

”Debye (1.923) developed the theory of the Compton eﬀect as did Kramers,

who was persuaded by Bohr not to publish...”

Further evidence comes from Jost, Pauli, O. Klein, Hugenholtz, Casimir,
and others. It is interesting to read Kramers abjuration, which reminds me
very much of the self-indicted declarations of the comunists, in Russia or
China:

”The theory of Light Quanta might be compared with a medicine which
will cause the disease to vanish, but kills the patient. The fact must be
emphasized that this theory in no way has sprung from Bohr theory, to say
nothing of its being a necessary consequence of it”2

Were it not because that title belongs to Leon Rosenfeld, one would call
Kramers ”Plus royalist que le Roi” 3 with respect to Bohr. One should also
feel sorry for Kramers; the fact that he was a man with poor health alleviates
the burden. His argument to reject the photon was, it seems, that it was not
invented by God (alias Niels Bohr). The irony is that precisely it is in the
Bohr atom that the photon concepts enters in the most natural way. Many
modern books describing the Bohr atom mention expressly the emission of a
photon, when a valence electron makes a transition, as if it was part of the
original hypothesis of Bohr!

Kramers left Bohr in 1.926 to a distinguished career in his native Holland.

3 J. C. SLATER.

The next victim is the brilliant american physicist John Clark Slater (1.900−
I show here some evidence gathered from [18], Pais again [7], and
1976).
Slater Recollections [19]. Slater conceived around November 1.923 in England
a theory to reconcile the apparent wavelike properties of light (interference
and diﬀraction) with the corpuscular photon of Einstein. Slater had the
excited atom to ”communicate”with other atoms by virtue of some ”virtual
ﬁeld”before emitting a photon:

”As soon as the atom reaches a stationary state the [virtual] ﬁeld is set
up... containing all the frecuencies the atom can radiate. These ﬁelds deter-

2Kramers-Holst book, (1.923) [17]
3Again, the spanish expression M´as papista que el Papa is better.

5

mine the probabily of emission of a quantum...Finally a quantum of someone
of the frequencies will be emitted, [and] the radiation will cease. Meanwhile
the quantum is travelling...until it is absorbed...

As soon as I discussed [this] with Bohr and Kramers [Dec-1.923] I found...to
my consternation that they completely refused to admit the real existence of
the photons 4. It had never ocurred to me that they would object to what
seemed like so obvious a deduction from many types of experiments...They
grudgingly allowed me to send a Note to Nature indicating that my original
idea had included the real existence of the photons, but that I had given that
up at their instigation”[Slaters abjuration, see soon below. LJB]

In a letter to van der W¨arden [18] Slater has this to say (1.964)
”...Bohr and Kramers opposed this view [of the photon] so vigorously that
I saw the only way to keep peace and get the main part of the suggestion
[the virtual oscillators] published was to go along with them...”

Before relating Slaters abjuration, let us comment brieﬂy the ill-fated
1.924 Bohr-Kramers-Slater paper. It was written entirely by Bohr and Kramers,
while Slater was kept locked up in another room. The paper has 18 pages
with a single formula, E = hν. Bohr gave up conservation of energy lest the
photon survive. Einstein, Heisenberg and Pauli opposed strongly; of course,
energy conservation was vindicated in both sides of the Atlantic pretty soon
[20]. Did then Bohr accepted the photon ? No! But let us ﬁrst listen to
Slater confession:

”...it seems possible to build up a more adequate picture of optical phe-
nomena than has previously existed, by associating the essentially contin-
uous radiation ﬁeld with the continuous existence of stationary states, and
the discontinuous changes of energy and momentum with the discontinuous
transitions from one state to another” [my italics. LJB] 5

In other words, Slater renounces to the photon...Some scattered comments

convey more the spirit of the abdication:

”I have ﬁnally become convinced that the way they [Bohr and Kramers]
want things, without the little lump carried along the waves...is better...I am
going to have a chance at least to suggest changes”[21]

Eventually Slater received an apology from Bohr: ”I had bad conscience
4Slater wrote this much later, when already the Lichtquantum of Einstein was univer-

sally called the photon, name due to G.N. Lewis, (1.926).

5Letter sent to Nature, 28 − I − 1.924

6

about you when in Copenhagen...” J. C. Slater went on to another distin-
guished career in physics in the East Cost, being instrumental in buiding the
theoretical physics in the U.S., as the transition person from the meteoric
start of W. Gibbs to the preeminence with J. R. Oppenheimer, etc.

After the Compton-Simon and Bothe-Geiger experiments [20] (spring
1.925), Bohr renounced to statistical-only conservation of energy and mo-
mentum, but he does not embrace the photon. Heisenberg says he believed
around early 1.925 Bohr was the only notorious physicist unbeliever about
photons. Bohr’s conclusion instead was: one should renounce to a space-
time description of physical atomic phenomena; he took cold confort in an-
other enigma at the time, the discovery of the (Townsend-) Ramsauer eﬀect
(anomalous low energy scattering of electrons by noble gases), to delve in
(meta-)physical thoughts about non space-time descriptibility of microscopic
phenomena; the irrationality so apparent in many of Bohr’s statements in
1.927 − 30, somewhat attenuated afterwards, take their roots here.

4 SCHR ¨ODINGER and HEISENBERG.

In September, 1.926 E. Schr¨odinger (1.887 − 1.961) joined W. Heisenberg
(1.901 − 1.976) and N. Bohr in Copenhagen. We shall learn more of the way
Bohr dealt with opponents. The report is by Heisenberg [22]:

”The discussions between Bohr and Schr¨odinger began already at the
train station and were continued each day from early morning til late at
night...And Bohr...now appeared to me almost as an unrelentic fanatic, who
was not prepared to make a single concession to his discussion partner...So
the discussion continued for many hours throughout day and night without
a consensus being reached. After a couple of days, Schr¨odinger fell ill ...He
had to stay in bed with a feverish cold. Mrs. Bohr nursed him and brought
tea and cakes, but Niels Bohr sat on the bedside and spoke earnestly to
Schr¨odinger...”

At issue was the wave-like interpretation of the wave mechanics, no so
much the photon; but I bring this incident to sharpen the readers ideas on
Bohr. Schr¨odinger later reported to a friend how was he [S.] astonished by
Bohrs happy coexistence with contradictions bordering the irrational; also

”...There will hardly again be a man who...in his sphere of work is honored
almost like a demigod by the whole world and who yet remains...rather shy

7

and diﬃdent like a theology student...

[Bohr] talks often for minutes almost in a dreamlike, visionary and really

quite unclear manner...”[23]

We are approaching the climax now. When Schr¨odinger left, the two
men, Bohr and Heisenberg, embarked, through a socratic dialogue, to set up
the conceptual foundations of quantum mechanics, what soon will become
the Copenhagen interpretation; but the starting points of them were very
diﬀerent: Bohr took the correspondence principle as a guide, and had already
extracted the (unwarranted ?) conclusion that

”Every description of natural processes must be based on ideas which
have been introduced and deﬁned by the classical theory” (1.923; [7], p. 300)
Bohr would take this phrase almost literally to hold also in the new in-

terpretation (see later, Como conference report). As for Heisenberg,

”I dislike this [Bohrs] approach.

I want to start from the fact that
quantum mechanics [H. here means the G¨ottingen matrix theory as started
by him, elaborated by Dirac and in the Dreim¨annerarbeit, and sharpened
in the transformation theory of Jordan and Dirac; he is more explicit in
[24]]...already imposed a unique physical interpretation...so...we no longer
had any freedom with...interpretation”[7], p. 303).

In correspondence of H. with Pauli, which I shall not reproduce here,
it is clear the main ﬁghting point: Bohr wanted to include waves, and to
make a blend of Schr¨odinger wave mechanics, but of course not his [S.] inter-
pretation, whereas H. insisted in the particle point of view, with Max Borns
probability interpretation for the matrix elements, in particular, for the wave
function itself; (von Neumann (1.929) would deﬁnitely clarify this, showing
that Heisenberg was using a energy representation, Schr¨odinger a coordinate
representation, equally valid, and equivalent mathematically). That much is
perfectly clear in Heisenbergs original writing of the Umbestimmheit paper
(March, 1.927). When Bohr came back of his skiing holiday in Norway, he
corrected rightly a small mistake in the paper of Heisenberg (he had made a
similar error in his oral examination for the Ph. D., which nearly costed him
the degree: Wien was reluctant, but Sommerfeld came to his rescue); then
the ﬁght between the two men was very acute, as witnessed by Oscar Klein;
as described by Heisenberg,

”Bohr tried to explain [my paper] was not right and I shouldn’t publish
the paper.
I...ended by my breaking out in tears because I just couldn’t
stand this pressure from Bohr...So it was very disagreable [for] a short period

8

of perhaps ten days or so in which we really disagreed rather strongly...[but
after] we agreed that the paper could be published if it was improved on
these points...” [ A. Pais, [7], p. 308]

The published version of the uncertainty paper contains, as a Nachtrag,

Heisenbergs abdication:

”After submission of this work,...Bohr has pointed out that I have over-
looked essential features...The uncertainty in an observation depends not
only on the ocurrrence of discontinuities, but also directly on the require-
ment that...measurements are to be made...as in particle theory or...as in
wave theory...For permission to mention his new research...I was privileged
to learn...at his genesis, I owe my heartfelt thanks to Professor Bohr [25]”
(my italics. LJB)

The abdication of Heisenberg was a full volte face, same as Kramers had
experienced six years before. The phrase ”Kopenhagener Geist der Quan-
tentheorie” is Heisenberg’s own [26].

To fully analyze how Bohr passed from Correspondence to Complemen-
tarity is beyond our purpose. In a nutshell, Bohr kept from the old principle
about the survival of classical radiation theory (instead of, as I think it should
be, deduce the classical wave behaviour as statistical averaging of the indi-
vidual quantum particles; but I shall not argue on this), the coexistence of
particles and waves. Of course, an element of irrationality creeps in, but
Bohr was happy with it [27], as already Schr¨odinger noticed; see this other
testimony, by Bohr:

”...our endeavor is, by means of a suitably limited use of mechanical and
electromagnetic concepts, to obtain a statistical description of the atomic
phenomena that appears as a rational generalization of the classical physical
theories, in spite of the fact that the quantum of action from their point of
view must be considered as an irrationality” (1.933 [28].

Interpretation: Bohr invites us to study the quanta as a rational general-
ization of the classical theory, inspite of the fact that the quantum, from the
very clasical point of view, is seen as an irrationality. If this is intelligible,
que venga Dios y lo vea.

I ﬁnd this hard to swallow, to say the least, and I think Einstein, Schr¨odinger,

Planck, and others, who opposed to the Copenhagen interpretation, did that
because they were unable to digest this. Einstein is very explicit: ”I never
understood what Bohr means by the complementarity principle, inspite of a
careful study of it”. If the ﬁrst intelligence of the XX Century is unable to

9

grasp the meaning of complementarity, the odds are...is un-understable; and
perhaps this is what Bohr really had in mind. ”We must understand, that
there is nothing to be understood”. Einstein did not accept the probability
interpretation, but did not understand complementarity; there is a world of
diﬀerence...

There some other episodes of rudeness of Bohr, with Landau and with
Brioullin, for example, which would end to delineate the dark side of Bohr
I’m showing; I just refer to the cartoon by G. Gamow with respect to Bohrs
reaction to a paper by Landau and Peierls (1.931) [29]

5 CONCLUSIONS.

1. Bohr started using Planck’s and Einstein’s hypothesis to explain the

atom and its radiation.

2. Very soon, before the ﬁrst part of the Trilogy is published, he discov-
ers that for large quantum number n the radiation and the rotation
frequencies coincide; it acts like a revelation for him.

3. He next substitutes the quantum conditions by the ”correspondence
principle”, if dressed with the adiabatic principle of Ehrenfest (this is
very clear in the ”Tetralogy” [30])

4. As a consequence, the classical radiation theory is set up as a referent
for the new discoveries; the little original love for the energy quan-
tum dissapears completely. Later Bohr was the staunchest enemy of
Einsteins photon concept, to the point of ridicule.

5. Part of the classical heritage is the necessity of speaking of all the
concepts, even the quantum ones, with a classical lenguage; at some
point Bohr even said. ”There is NO quantum world”.

6. There is strong competition between the M¨unchen school of Sommerfeld

and Bohr’s in Copenhagen; each spurns the other.

7. After the Compton eﬀect, he still is antiphoton, but starts to develop an
irrational attitude towards the quantum, because coexistence of clas-
sical pictures, which he wants to mantain at any cost, and the hard
reality of genuine quantum processes.

10

8. The advent of quantum mechanics (in matrix form; Heisenberg, July
1.925) caught Bohr oﬀ guard; he always tought of making himself a
contribution to its discovery.

9. He became a great fan of Heisenberg, to whom he considered as a kind

of Messiah.

10. There is no evidence Bohr ever went through the intricacies of ma-
trix mechanics; but he salutates the wave mechanics of Schr¨odinger
(January, 1.926), and after the fall-26 discussions with Schr. and Hei.,
embarks himself in a crusade for THE right interpretation of Quantum
Mechanics. He thinks he achieves this in the snow in Norway (February,
1.927).

11. He brainswashed Heisenberg, as had done with Kramers and Slater,
forcing him to modify his paper; H. became thoroughly convinced.

12. His climax occurs at the time of the Como conference (Volta Death Cen-
tenary, 16 September 1.927). I cannot refrain repeating some phrases,
which reﬂect Bohr’s ﬁdelity to his concepts:
[31] ”...nuestra inter-
pretaci´on de los datos experimentales se apoya de manera fundamental
en los conceptos cl´asicos”(p. 98).

”Este postulado [the postulate Bohr calls quantum [32]] atribuye una...individualidad
a todo proceso at´omico e implica la renuncia a una coordinaci´on causal
de los procesos at´omicos en el espacio y en tiempo”(p.99).

”Por lo que se reﬁere a la luz, su propagaci´on en el espacio y en el tiempo
queda descrita de manera satisfactoria por la teor´ıa electromagn´etica
the propagation
[read: Bohr does still not accept in the fall 1.927!
of photons]...para llegar a una expresi´on exacta de la conservaci´on de
la energ´ıa...es preciso recurrir a la idea del fot´on de Einstein [ notice
how reluctantly introduces Bohr the photon]...Esta situaci´on muestra
con claridad la imposibilidad de mantener una descripci´on causal y
espacio-temporal de los fen´omenos luminosos....” ( p. 101).

13. The overwhelming personality of Bohr’s wins everybody in the young
generation (Pauli, Dirac, Landau, even Max Born) to his point of view.
Heisenberg will be the new prophet:

11

”Since the conclusive studies of Bohr in 1.927 there have been no
essential changes in these [fundamental quantum] principles” [26, Pref.]

14. Nevertheless, practitioners of Q. M. just ignore complementarity. Wigner

was not impressed at all in Como; the books by Dirac and Landau do
not mention it.

The degree of brainwashing by Bohr in all of us is remarkable (I learned
the expression from Murray Gell-Mann). For example,
in the ”Welches
Weg?”experiments, either the two slit screens or Mach-Zehnder interferom-
eter, people say (excuse me for not quoting!) that there is complementarity
between waves or particles bzw. according the photon runs through both
paths (that is, we mantain coherence) or only by one (incoherence, meaning
we know which path). But this is as saying that interferences are ondulatory,
but diﬀraction is corpuscular!! The photon, a particle, is quantic, so his path
does not exist if it is not observed. The Feynmans path integral formalism
is just perfect to explain the ”propension”of the particle (photon or Mach
truck !) to explore all paths.

Acknowledgements

I thanks listeners in several places for patience and questions.

References

[1] N. BOHR: On the Constitution of Atoms and Molecules, Phil. Mag. 26,
1-15; 476-502; 857-875 (1.913). CW ( Collected Works) Vol. II. Called
The Trilogy .

[2] A. EINSTEIN: ¨Uber einen der Erzeugung und Verwandlung des Lichtes
betreﬀenden heuristischen Gesichtspunkt. Ann. Phys. 17, pp. 133, 143
(1.905)

[3] N.B., letter to E. Rutherford, 21-III-1.913. CW Vol. II

[4] J. L. HEILBRON and T. S. KUHN: The Genesis of Bohr Atom Hist.

Stud. Phys. Scien. 1, 211-290 (1.969)

12

[5] N. BOHR: Fys. Tyd. 12, 97, 1.914 (in danish). CW II, p.303

[6] CW Vol. II and III, p. 229, 234.

[7] A. PAIS: ”Niels Bohr Times”. Oxford U.P. 1.991, p. 230

[8] D. MURDOCH: ”Niels Bohrs Philosophy of Physics”. Cambridge U.P.

1.987, pp. 19ss.

[9] See [7], pp. 178, 217

[10] See [7], p. 210. Most of Bohr’s proposed people eventually got the Prize.
The case of Sommefeld is ﬂagrant. A. Pais again: ”I belong to those
who regret...that Sommerfelds work was never suﬃciently recognized by
the Nobel Committee. He was nominated every year but one from 1.917
until (at least) 1.937”. [7], p. 214

[11] Bohr also opposed to the modern Quantum Electrodynamics (I do not
know why), with the result that Tomonaga, Schwinger and Feynman
received the Nobel Price (1.965) after Bohr died. Y. NEEMAN and
Y. KIRSH: The Particle Hunters. Cambridge U.P., 1.986, p. 78 of the
Spanish Ed., Gedisa 1.988: ”En 1.965 Feynman, Schwinger y Tomonaga
compartieron el Premio Nobel de F´ısica. Podr´ıan haberlo recibido varios
a˜nos antes, pero tambi´en Niels Bohr ve´ıa con recelo la nueva teor´ıa y
su actitud negativa disuadi´o al Comit´e Nobel de reconocer la obra de
aquellos cient´ıﬁcos. La decisi´on de otorgar el Premio Nobel a los autores
de la Q.E.D. fue adoptada s´olo despu´es de la muerte de Bohr (1.962)”

[12] K. POPPER: ”Quantum Theory and the Schism in Physics”: Post Scrip-
tum III to ”Logik der Forschung”, Spanish Ed., Tecnos 1.992, p. 33: La
conexi´on que hizo Bohr del ¡¡principio de complementariedad¿¿ con el
¡¡dualismo de part´ıculas y ondas¿¿ se vino abajo cuando se acept´o la
interpretaci´on de Born del cuadrado de la amplitud de onda como una
probabilidad para hallar la part´ıcula. Porque esto signiﬁcaba, en reali-
dad, la aceptaci´on que la interpretaci´on corpuscular era la b´asica.

It was this very clear point of Popper which launched me into this his-
torical revision [LJB].

13

[13] See [7] and also A. PAIS. ”The Genius of Science”. Oxford U.P. (2.000);

On Bohr (p. 6) and on Kramers (p. 148)

[14] M. DRESDEN.- ”H. A. Kramers”, Springer, N.Y. 1.987, Ch. 14

[15] N. B. letter to P. Ehrenfest, 10-VII-21. C.W. Vol 3

[16] D. ter HAAR.- ”The Old Quantum Theory”. Pergamon Press 1.967, p.

68, footnote

[17] H.A. KRAMERS and H. HOLST.- ”The Atom and the Bohr Theory of
its Structure”, p. 175.- Gyldendal, Copenhagen 1.923; orig. in danish,
english traslation.

[18] B. L. van der W ¨ARDEN, ”Sources of Quantum Mechanics”, North-

Holland 1.967, pp. 11ﬀ of the Dover (1.968) ed.

[19] J. C. SLATER.- ”Recollections”, J. Wiley 1.975

[20] A.H. COMPTON and A.W. SIMON, Phys. Rev. 26, 289, 1.925. W.

BOTHE and H. GEIGER, Naturw. 13, 440, 1.925

[21] J. C. SLATER, letter to his mother, 18-I-1.924; quoted in [7]

[22] W. HEISENBERG, ”Der Teil und das Ganze”, p. 73. Eng. Trasl. CW,

Vol 6, pp. 11, 12.

[23] E. SCHR ¨ODINGER, letter to W.Wien, 21-X-26. See [7], p. 299

[24] W. HEISENBERG, The Development of the interpretation of the quan-
tum theory, in ”Niels Bohr and the development of physics”, W. Pauli
ed., Pergamon 1.955, pp.12ﬀ.

[25] See the english traslation, in part, but with the Nachtrag, in ”Hundred
Years of Plancks Quantum”, I. Duck and E. C. G. Sudarshan, World
Scientiﬁc 2000, p. 361.

[26] W. HEISENBERG, ”The Physical Principles of the Quantum Theory”

( the famed Chicago Lectures). Dover, (1.930).

14

[27] There is a philosophical point involved here, in Bohr’s insistence in using
only classical concepts to describe phenomena. Since a child, Bohr was
very much worried about using the right words to express himself; this is
very well documented; in his insistence in limiting ourselves to classical
concepts, he probably traded concepts by words: it is obvious, that for
describing whatever new phenomenon, we have to use known words. See
the spanish introduction to [31] by M. Ferrero, and A. Peterman [33].

[28] N. BOHR, Light and Life, Nature 131, 421 (1.933).

[29] Related by L. Rosenfeld in [24]; the paper is L. D. Landau and R.
E. Peierls, Erweiterung des Umbestimmheitprinzip f¨ur Relativistische
Quantentheorie, Zeit.f.Phys. 69, 59-69 (1.931)

[30] I refer here to four promised Bohr papers, but only three published,

1.918-22. See the ﬁrst reproduced in [18], p. 95

[31] The Como lecture is reproduced in ”Atomtheorie und Naturbeschrei-

bung”; I’m using the spanish. trasl., Alianza Universidad 1.988

[32] Bohr enunciated many ”Principles” during his life, consequent to his
somewhat dogmatic approach to science, and the ”Quantum Postu-
late”here is just another one. First it was the Correspondence Prin-
ciple, implicit already in the Trilogy (1.913), as noted, but explicit in
this ”Tetratology”, (1.918-). Then he extolled the Adiabatic Principle of
Ehrenfest (since 1.918). Then came the Aufbauprinzip (1.921) in Atomic
Physics, to be followed by the ”Quantum Postulate” in his Como lec-
ture, to culminate in the Complementarity Principle, divulgated after
his Brussels Solvay Lecture (October 1.927), but published in 1.928 af-
ter many drafts, in which Pauli colaborated: Nature 121 (Supl.), 580
(1.928)

[33] Aage Peterman in ”Niels Bohr”, Centenary Volume ed. by A. P. French

and P. J. Kennedy. Harvard U.P., 1.985, p. 299.

15

