3
0
0
2
 
n
a
J
 
1
3
 
 
]
h
p
-
t
s
i
h
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
8
7
0
1
0
3
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Babylonian and Indian Astronomy: Early
Connections

Subhash Kak∗

January 21, 2014

Introduction

Did the Indian and Babylonian astronomy evolve in isolation, was there
mutual inﬂuence, or was one dependent on the other? Scholars have debated
these questions for more than two centuries, and opinion has swung one way
or the other with time. The similarities between the two systems that have
been investigated are: the use of 30 divisions of the lunar month; the 360
divisions of the civil year; the length of the year; and the solar zodiac. Some
have wondered if the Babylonian planetary tables might have played a role
in the theories of the siddh¯antas.

I shall in this essay go over the essentials of the early Indian and Babylo-
nian astronomy and summarize the latest views on the relationship between
them. I shall show that the key ideas found in the Babylonian astronomy
of 700 BC are already present in the Vedic texts, which even by the most
conservative reckoning are older than that period. I shall also show that the
solar zodiac (r¯a´sis) was used in Vedic India and I shall present a plausible
derivation of the symbols of the solar zodiac from the deities of the segments.
In view of the attested presence of the Indic people in the Mesopotamian
region prior to 700 BC, it is likely that if at all the two astronomies inﬂuenced
each other, the dependence is of the Babylonian on the Indian. It is of course

∗Department of Electrical & Computer Engineering, Louisiana State University, Baton

Rouge, LA 70803-5901, USA, Email: kak@ece.lsu.edu

1

2

Subhash Kak

quite possible that the Babylonian innovations emerged independent of the
earlier Indic methods.

The Indic presence in West Asia goes back to the second millennium BC
in the ruling elites of the Hittites and the Mitanni in Turkey and Syria, and
the Kassites in Mesopotamia. The Mitanni were joined in marriage to the
Egyptian pharaohs during the second half of the second millennium and they
appear to have inﬂuenced that region as well.1 The Ugaritic list 33 gods, just
like the count of Vedic gods.

Although the Kassites vanished from the scene by the close of the mil-
lennium, Indic groups remained in the general area for centuries, sustaining
their culture by links through trade. Thus Sargon defeats one Bagdatti of
Uiˇsdiˇs in 716 BC. The name Bagdatti (Skt. Bhagadatta) is Indic2 and it
cannot be Iranian because of the double ‘t’.

The Indo-Aryan presence in West Asia persisted until the time of the
It is attested by the famous daiva
Persian Kings like Darius and Xerxes.
inscription in which Xerxes (ruled 486-465 BC) proclaims his suppression of
the rebellion by the daiva worshipers of West Iran.

These Indic groups most likely served as intermediaries for the transmis-
sion of ideas of Vedic astronomy to the Babylonians and other groups in West
Asia. Since we can clearly see a gap of several centuries in the adoption of
certain ideas, one can determine the direction of transmission. The starting
point of astronomical studies is the conception of the wheel of time of 360
parts. It permeates Vedic writing and belongs to the 2nd millennium BC
or earlier, and we see it used in Babylon only in the second part of ﬁrst
millennium BC.

Western Histories of Indian Astronomy

The early Western studies of Indian texts duly noted the astronomical refer-
ences to early epochs going back to three or four thousand BC. As the Indian
astronomical texts were studied it was discovered that the Indian methods
were diﬀerent from those used in other civilizations. The French astronomer
M. Jean Sylvain Bailly in his classic Trait´e de l’Astronomie Indienne et Ori-
entale (1787) described the methods of the S¯urya Siddh¯anta and other texts
and expressed his view that Indian astronomy was very ancient. Struck by
the elegance and simplicity of its rules and its archaic features, Bailly be-

Babylonian and Indian Astronomy

3

lieved that astronomy had originated in India and it was later transmitted
to the Chaldeans in Babylon and to the Greeks.

As against this, John Bentley in 1799 in a study in the Asiatick Researches
suggested that the parameters of the S¯urya Siddh¯anta were correct for 1091
AD. But Bentley was criticized for failing to notice that the S¯urya Siddh¯anta
had been revised using b¯ıja corrections,3 and therefore his arguments did not
negate the central thesis of Bailly.

Meanwhile, in the next several decades Indian astronomy became a con-
tested subject. Part of the diﬃculty arose from a misunderstanding of the
Indian system due to the unfamiliar structure of its luni-solar system. Later,
it became a hostage to the ideas that the Vedic people had come as invaders
to India around 1500 BC,4 and that Indians were otherworldly and unin-
terested in science and they lacked the tradition of observational astronomy
until the medieval times.5 The inconvenient astronomical dates were brushed
aside as untrustworthy.
It was argued that astronomical references in the
texts either belonged to recent undatable layers or were late interpolations.6
As against this, Ebenezer Burgess, the translator of the S¯urya Siddh¯anta,
writing in 1860, maintained that the evidence, although not conclusive,
pointed to the Indians being the original inventors or discoverers of:7 (i) the
lunar and solar divisions of the zodiac, (ii) the primitive theory of epicycles,
(iii) astrology, and (iv) names of the planets after gods.8

With the decipherment of the Babylonian astronomical tablets, it was
thought that early Indian astronomy may represent lost Babylonian or Greek
inspired systems.9 But this leads to many diﬃculties, anticipated more than
a hundred years earlier by Burgess, including the incongruity of the epochs
involved. This only thing that one can do is to lump all the Indian texts
that are prior to 500 BC together into a mass of uniform material, as has
been proposed by Pingree.10 But such a theory is considered absurd by Vedic
scholars.

The internal date of Ved¯a ˙nga Jyotis.a, a late Vedic text, is about 1300
BC. Although ´Sa ˙nkara B¯alaks.n. a D¯ıks.ita’s Bh¯arat¯ıya Jyotis. a,11 published in
the closing years of the 19th century, contained enough arguments against
looking for any foreign basis to the Ved¯a ˙nga Jyotis.a, the issue was reopened
in the 1960s.12 The basis behind rearticulation of an already disproven theory
was the idea that “the origin of mathematical astronomy in India [is] just one
element in a general transmission of Mesopotamian-Iranian cultural forms to
northern India during the two centuries that antedated Alexander’s conquest

4

Subhash Kak

of the Achaemenid empire.”13

Overwhelming evidence has since been furnished that disproves this theory,14

but many people remain confused about the relationship between the two as-
tronomy traditions. The idea that India did not have a tradition of observa-
tional astronomy was refuted convincingly by Roger Billard more than thirty
years ago. In his book on Indian astronomy,15 he showed that the parameters
used in the various siddh¯antas actually belonged to the period at which they
were created giving lie to the notion that they were based on some old ta-
bles transmitted from Mesopotamia or Greece. The distinguished historian
of astronomy B.L. van der Waerden reviewed the ensuing controversy in a
1980 paper titled Two treatises on Indian astronomy where he evaluated the
views of Billard and his opponent Pingree. He ruled thus:16

Billard’s methods are sound, and his results shed new light on
the chronology of Indian astronomical treatises and the accu-
racy of the underlying observations. We have also seen that Pin-
gree’s chronology is wrong in several cases. In one case, his error
amounts to 500 years.

For the pre-Siddh¯antic period, the discovery of the astronomy of the
R. gveda17 establishes that the Indians were making careful observations in
the Vedic period as well.

One might ask why should one even bother to revisit Pingree’s thesis if
it stands discredited. The reason to do so is that it provides a good context
to compare Babylonian and Indian astronomy and examine their similarities
and diﬀerences.
It also provides a lesson in how bad method will lead to
incongruous conclusions.

It is not my intention to replace Babylon by India as the source of as-
tronomical knowledge. I believe that the idea of development in isolation is
simplistic; there existed much interaction between the ancient civilizations.
I also believe that the borrowings in the ancient world were at best of the
general notions and the details of the astronomical system that arose had
features which made each system unique. Rather than assign innovation to
any speciﬁc group, we can at best speak of speciﬁc geographical areas in
which, due to a variety of social, economic, and cultural reasons, some new
ways of looking at the universe arose. Regarding the problem of astronomy,
we cannot ignore the pre-Babylonian Indian literature just as we must not ig-

Babylonian and Indian Astronomy

5

nore the fact that in the mid-ﬁrst millennium BC the Babylonians embarked
on a notable period of careful astronomical records.18

The next section will introduce pre-Ved¯a ˙nga Jyotis.a Indian astronomy
which will be followed by an account of Babylonian astronomy so that the
question of the relationship between Ved¯a ˙nga Jyotis.a and Babylonian astron-
omy can be investigated properly. Since the pre-Ved¯a ˙nga material belongs
mainly to the Sam. hit¯as that are squarely in the second millennium BC or
earlier epochs, it could not have been inﬂuenced by Babylonian astronomy.
We will also use the evidence from the Br¯ahman. as which also antedate the
Babylonian material in the most conservative chronology.

Once we have understood the nature of this earlier astronomy, we will

relate it to the Ved¯a ˙nga Jyotis.a and the Babylonian astronomies.

Pre-Ved¯a ˙nga Jyotis.a Astronomy
Pre-Ved¯a ˙nga Jyotis.a astronomy was described at some length in my essay
titled “Astronomy and its role in Vedic culture” in volume 1 of the book19
where the ritual basis of this science were sketched. It was shown that the
organization of the Vedic texts and the altar ritual coded certain astronomi-
cal facts about the lunar and solar years. This established that observational
astronomy was a part of the tradition during the Vedic period itself. But we
will not invoke this knowledge here and restrict ourselves to explicit state-
ments from the Sam. hit¯as and the Br¯ahman. a literature.

The facts that emerge from the pre-Ved¯a ˙nga material include: knowledge
of the duration of the year, concept of tithi, naming of ecliptic segments after
gods, knowledge of solstices for ritual, the 27- and 12- segment divisions of
the ecliptic, and the motions of the sun and the moon.

There were several traditions within the Vedic system. For example, the
month was reckoned in one with the new moon, in another with the full
moon.

Naks.atras
Naks.atras stand for stars, asterisms or segments of the ecliptic. The moon
is conjoined with the 27 naks.atras on successive nights in its passage around
the earth; the actual cycle is of 27 1
3 days. Because of this extra one-third

6

Subhash Kak

day, there is drift in the conjunctions that get corrected in three circuits.
Also, the fact that the lunar year is shorter than the solar year by 11+ days
implies a further drift through the naks.atras that is corrected by the use of
intercalary months.

The earliest lists of naks.atras in the Vedic books begin with Kr.ttik¯as, the
Pleiades; much later lists dating from sixth century AD begin with A´svin¯ı
when the vernal equinox occurred on the border of Revat¯ı and A´svin¯ı. As-
suming that the beginning of the list marked the same astronomical event, as
is supported by other evidence, the earliest lists should belong to the third
millennium BC or earlier. Each naks.atra has a presiding deity (Taittir¯ıya
Sam. hit¯a 4.4.10).
In the Ved¯a ˙nga Jyotis.a, the names of the naks.atra and
the deity are used interchangeably. It seems reasonable to assume that such
usage had sanction of the tradition.

Table 1 provides a list of the naks.atras, the presiding deities, and the
approximate epoch for the winter and summer solstice for a few selected
naks.atras that are relevant to this paper. It is noteworthy that the earli-
est Vedic texts provide us statements that recognize the movement of the
solstices into new naks.atras. This provides us a means to ﬁnd approximate
dates for these texts.

The naks.atras in the Ved¯a ˙nga Jyotis.a represent 27 equal parts of the
ecliptic. This appears to have been an old tradition since the Sam. hit¯as
(K¯at.haka and Taittir¯ıya) mention explicitly that Soma is wedded to all the
naks.atras and spends equal time with each. The stars of the naks.atras are
thus just a guide to determine the division of the ecliptic into equal parts.
Each naks.atra corresponds to 13 1
3 degrees.

The following is a list of the naks.atras and their locations:

1. Kr.ttik¯a, from the root kr. t, ‘to cut.’ These are the Pleiades. Deity:

Agni

2. Rohin.¯ı, ‘ruddy,’ is α Tauri, Aldebaran. Deity: Praj¯apati

3. Mr.ga´s¯ırs.a, ‘Deer’s head.’ Deity: Soma
4. ¯Ardr¯a,
Rudra

‘moist,’

is the brilliant star Betelgeuse, α Orionis. Deity:

5. Punarvas¯u, ‘the two that give wealth again,’ are the stars Castor and

Pollux, or α and β Geminorum. Deity: Aditi

Babylonian and Indian Astronomy

7

6. Tis.ya, ‘pleased,’ or Pus.ya, ‘ﬂowered,’ refers to the age when these

stars, α, β, γ, δ Cancri. Deity: Br.haspati

7. ¯A´sres.¯a or ¯A´sles.¯a, ‘embracer,’ represents δ, ǫ, ζ Hydrae. Deity: Sarp¯ah.

8. Magh¯a, ‘the bounties,’ is the group of stars near Regulus, namely

α, η, γ, ζ, µ, ǫ Leonis. Deity: Pitarah.

9. P¯urv¯a Ph¯algun¯ı, ‘bright,’ δ and θ Leonis. Deity: Aryaman (Bhaga)

10. Uttar¯a Ph¯algun¯ı, ‘bright,’ β and 93 Leonis. Deity: Bhaga (Aryaman)

11. Hasta, ‘hand.’ The stars δ, γ, ǫ, α, β in Corvus. Deity: Savitar

12. Citr¯a, ‘bright.’ This is Spica or α Virginis. Deity: Indra (Tvas.t.r.)

13. Sv¯at¯ı, ‘self-bound,’ or Nis.t.y¯a, is the Arctutus or α Bootis. Deity:

V¯ayu

14. Vi´s¯akh¯a, ‘without branches.’ The stars α, β, σ Librae. Deity: Indr¯agni

15. Anur¯adh¯a, ‘propitious,’ ‘what follows R¯adh¯a.’ These are the β, δ, π

Scorpii. Deity: Mitra

ity: Indra (Varun. a)

16. Rohin.¯ı, ‘ruddy’, or Jyes.t.h¯a, ‘eldest.’ This is Antares, α Scorpii. De-

17. Vicr.tau, ‘the two releasers,’ or M¯ula, ‘root.’ These are the stars from

ǫ to λ, ν Scorpii. Deity: Pitarah. (Nirr.ti)

18. P¯urv¯a ¯As.¯ad. h¯a, ‘unconquered,’ δ, ǫ Sagittarii. Deity: ¯Apah.
19. Uttar¯a ¯As.¯ad. h¯a, ‘unconquered,’ σ, ζ Sagittarii. Deity: Vi´sve devah.

Abhijit, ‘reaching victory.’ The name refers to a satisfactory comple-
tion of the system of naks.atras. The star is Vega, the brilliant α Lyrae.
This is the star that does not occur in the lists which have only 27
naks.atras on it. Deity: Brahm¯a

20. ´Sron. ¯a, ‘lame,’ or ´Sravan. a, ‘ear.’ This represents Altair, α Aquillae,

with β below it and γ above it. Deity: Vis.n. u

8

Subhash Kak

21. ´Sravis.t.h¯a, ‘most famous.’ It is the diamond-shaped group α, β, δ, γ
Delphini. It was later called Dhanis.t.h¯a, ‘most wealthy.’ Deity: Vasavah.
22. ´Satabhis.aj, ‘having a hundred physicians’ is λ Aquarii and the stars

around it. Deity: Indra (Varun. a)

23. Pros.t.hapad¯a, ‘feet of stool,’ are the α, β Pegasi. Deity: Aja Ekap¯ad

24. Uttare Pros.t.hapad¯a, ‘feet of stool,’ and later Bhadrapad¯a, ‘aus-
picious feet.’ These are γ Pegasi and α Andromedae. Deity: Ahir-
budhnya

25. Revat¯ı, ‘wealthy,’ η, α Piscium. Deity: P¯us.an

26. A´svayujau, ‘the two horse-harnessers,’ are the stars β and α Arietis.

A´svin¯ı is a later name. Deity: A´svinau

27. Apabharan.¯ı, ‘the bearers,’ are the 35, 39, 41 Arietis. Deity: Yama

The antiquity of the naks.atra system becomes clear when it is recognized
that all the deity names occur in RV 5.51 (this insight is due to Narahari
Achar20). This hymn by Svasty¯atreya ¯Atreya lists the deity names as:

A´svin, Bhaga, Aditi, P¯us.an, V¯ayu, Soma, Br.haspati, SARVAGAN. AH. ,
Vi´sve Devah. , Agni, Rudra, Mitra, Varun. a, Indr¯agni.

The sarvagan. ah. are the gan. ah. (groups) such as the Vasavah. , Pitarah. ,
Sarpah. (including Ahi and Aja), ¯Apah. , and the ¯Adityagan. ah. (Daks.a Praj¯apati,
Aryaman, Vis.n. u, Yama, Indra) complete the list. There is no doubt that the
ecliptic is meant because the last verse of the hymn refers explicitly to the
ﬁdelity with which the sun and the moon move on their path, the ecliptic.

The division of the circle into 360 parts or 720 parts was also viewed
from the point of view the naks.atras by assigning 27 upanaks.atras to each
naks.atra (´Satapatha Br. 10.5.4.5). This constituted an excellent approxima-
tion because 27 × 27 = 729. In other words, imagining each naks.atra to be
further divided into 27 equal parts made it possible to conceptualize half a
degree when examining the sky.

Babylonian and Indian Astronomy

9

Table 1: Naks.atras with their Deity names and the approximate epoch of
winter solstice and spring equinox at the midpoint of each segment

Deity
Agni
Praj¯apati
Soma
Rudra
Aditi
Br.haspati
Sarp¯ah.
Pitarah.
Aryaman
Bhaga
Savitar
Indra
V¯ayu
Indr¯agni
Mitra
Indra
Pitarah.
¯Apah.
Vi´sve devah.
Brahm¯a
Vis.n. u

Num Naks. atra
1 Kr.ttik¯a
2 Rohin.¯ı
3 Mr.ga´s¯ırs.a
¯Ardr¯a
4
5 Punarvas¯u
6 Tis.ya or Pus.ya
¯A´sres.¯a or ¯A´sles.¯a
7
8 Magh¯a
9 P¯urv¯a Ph¯algun¯ı
10 Uttar¯a Ph¯algun¯ı
11 Hasta
12 Citr¯a
13 Sv¯at¯ı or Nis.t.y¯a
14 Vi´s¯akh¯a
15 Anur¯adh¯a
16 Rohin.¯ı
17 Vicr.tau or M¯ula
18 P¯urv¯a ¯As.¯ad. h¯a
19 Uttar¯a ¯As.¯ad. h¯a
* Abhijit
´Sron. ¯a or ´Sravan. a
20
´Sravis.t.h¯a or Dhanis.t.h¯a Vasavah.
21
´Satabhis.aj
22
23 Pros.t.hapad¯a
24 Uttare Pros.t.hapad¯a
25 Revat¯ı
26 A´svayujau
27 Apabharan.¯ı

Indra
Aja Ekap¯ad
Ahirbudhnya
P¯us.an
A´svinau
Yama

W. Solstice S. Equinox

2000 BC
3000 BC
4000 BC
5000 BC
6000 BC

2000 AD
1000 AD
0 AD

1000 BC
2000 BC
3000 BC
4000 BC
5000 BC
6000 BC
7000 BC

2000 AD
1000 AD
0 AD
1000 BC

10

Subhash Kak

Abhijit, which comes between the nineteenth and the twentieth in the
above list, does not occur in the list of the 27 in Taittir¯ıya Sam. hit¯a or in
Ved¯a ˙nga Jyotis.a. Maitr¯ay¯an.¯ı and K¯at.haka Sam. hit¯as and Atharvaveda con-
tain lists with the 28 naks.atras.

When the asterisms Kr.ttik¯a and Vi´s¯akh¯a deﬁned the spring and the au-
tumn equinoxes, the asterisms Magh¯a and ´Sravis.t.h¯a deﬁned the summer and
the winter solstices.

The Year and Solstices

There were two kinds of year in use. In one, the year was measured from
one winter solstice to another; in the other, it was measured from one vernal
equinox to another. Obviously, these years were solar and related to the
seasons (tropical).

The wheel of time was deﬁned to have a period of 360 parts. This number
seems to have been chosen as the average of 354 days of the lunar year and
the 366 days for the solar year.

In TS 6.5.3, it is said that the sun travels moves northward for six months
and southward for six months. The Br¯ahman. as speak of ritual that follows
the course of the year starting with the winter solstice. For example, the
Pa˜ncavim. ´sa Br¯ahman. a describes sattras of periods of several days, as well
as one year (PB 25.1), 12 years, 1000 days, and 100 years. In these types of
ritual the number of days were recorded, providing a means of determining
an accurate size of the solar year. The sattra of 100 years appears to refer
to the centennial system of the Saptars.i calendar.

The solstice day was probably determined by the noon-shadow of a ver-
tical pole. The Aitareya Brahmana speaks of the sun remaining stationary
for about 21 days at its furthest point in the north (summer solstice) and
likewise for its furthest point in the south (winter solstice). This indicates
that the motion of the sun was not taken to be uniform all the time.

Months

The year was divided into 12 months which were deﬁned with respect to the
naks.atras, and with respect to the movements of the moon.

The Taittir¯ıya Sam. hit¯a (TS) (4.4.11) gives a list of solar months:

Babylonian and Indian Astronomy

11

Madhu, M¯adhava (Vasanta, Spring), ´Sukra, ´Suci (Gr¯ıs.ma, Sum-
mer), Nabha, Nabhasya (Vars.¯a, Rains), Is.a and ¯Urja (´Sarad, au-
tumn), Sahas and Sahasya (Hemanta, Winter), and Tapa and
Tapasya (´Si´sir, Deep Winter).

The listing of months by the season implies that parts of the ecliptic were
associated with these 12 months. These months are also known by their
¯Aditya names (Table 2). These names vary from text to text, therefore, we
are speaking of more than one tradition. It should be noted that diﬀerent
lists of names need not mean usage at diﬀerent times.

Table 2: The twelve months with the naks.atra named after and ¯Adityas
names (from Vis.n. u Pur¯an. a)

¯Aditya
Vis.n. u
Aryaman
Vivasvant
Am. ´su
Parjanya

Month
Naks. atra
Caitra
Citr¯a
Vai´s¯akha
Vi´s¯akh¯a
Jyais.t.ha
Jyes.t.h¯a
¯A´s¯ad. ha
¯A´s¯ad. h¯as
´Sron. a
´Sr¯avan. a
Bh¯adrapada Pros.t.hapadas Varun. a
¯A´svayuja
A´svin¯ı
Kr.ttik¯a
K¯artika
M¯arga´s¯ırs.a Mr.ga´siras
Paus.a
M¯agha
Ph¯alguna

Indra
Dh¯atr.
Mitra
P¯us.an
Bhaga
Tvas.t.¯a

Tis.ya
Magh¯a
Ph¯algun¯i

Now we investigate if the r¯a´si names associated with the segments were
a part of the Vedic tradition or if they were adopted later. In any adoption
from Babylonia or Greece, one would not expect a fundamental continuity
with the naks.atra system. Taking the clue from the Ved¯a ˙nga Jyotis.a, where
the names of the naks.atras and the deities are used interchangeably, we will
investigate if the r¯a´si names are associated with the segment deities.

The naks.atra names of the months each cover 30o of the arc, as against
of the lunar naks.atra segment. Therefore, the extension of each

the 13 1
3

o

12

Subhash Kak

month may stretch over upto three naks.atras with corresponding deities.
This will be seen in Figure 1 or in the list below. The choice made in Figure
1, where Vai´s¯akha begins with the the sun in the ending segment of A´svin¯ı
and the moon at the mid-point of Sv¯at¯ı is the most likely assignment as
it bunches the ¯A´s¯ad. h¯as and the Ph¯algun¯ıs in the right months, with the
Pros.t.hapad¯as three-fourths correct and ´Sron. ¯a half-correct. The full-moon
day of the lunar month will thus fall into the correct naks.atra. Since the
solar and the lunar months are not in synchrony, the mapping would tend to
slip upto two naks.atra signs until it is corrected by the use of the intercalary
month. At worst, we get a sequence of r¯a´sis which is out of step by one.

Vai´s¯akha = Sv¯at¯ı to Anur¯adh¯a = V¯ayu, Indr¯agni, Mitra
= Vr.s.a, Bull for Indra, e.g. RV 8.33; also V¯ayu is sometimes
identiﬁed with Indra and the two together called Indrav¯ay¯u, and
V¯ayu is also associated with cow (RV 1.134)

Jyais.t.ha = Anur¯adh¯a to M¯ula = Mitra, Varun. a, Pitarah.
= Mithuna, Gemini, from the cosmic embrace of Mitra and Varun. a

¯A´s¯ad. ha = P¯urva ¯A´s¯ad. h¯a to ´Sron. a = ¯Apah. , Vi´sve Devah. , Vis.n. u
= Karka, circle or Cancer, the sign of Vis.n. u’s cakra (e.g. RV
1.155.6)

´Sr¯avan. a = ´Sron. a to ´Satabhis.aj = Vis.n. u, Vasavah. , Indra
= Sim. ha, Lion, after Indra as in RV 4.16.14

Bh¯adrapada = ´Satabhis.aj to U. Pros.t.hapada = Indra, Aja Ekap¯ada,
Ahirbudhnya
= Kany¯a, Virgin, apparently from Aryaman in the opposite side
of the zodiac who is the wooer of maidens, kany¯a (RV 5.3.2)

¯A´svina = U. Pros.t.hapada to A´svayujau = Ahirbudhnya, P¯us.an,
A´svayujau
= Tul¯a, Libra, from the ¯A´svins who denote balance of pairs (e.g.

Babylonian and Indian Astronomy

13

Krttika

Rohini

2

3

Apabh

Asvini

1

27

Revati

26

Vaisakha

Caitra

U. Prosth.
25

Prosthap.
24

I

XII

Phalguna

XI

X

IX

Satabhisaj
23

Magha

Sravishtha
22

Srona
21

U. Asadh

20

Pausa

P. Asadh
19

Mrga
4

Ardra
5

Jyaistha

Punarvasu

6

Asadha

Pusya

7

Asresa
8

Sravana

Magha

9

III

IV

II

V

P. Phal
10

Bhadrapada

U. Phal
11

Hasta

12

VI

VII

Margasirsa

VIII

Mula
18

Asvayuja

Kartika

Citra
13

Svati

14

Visakha

15

Rohini
17

Anuradha
16

Figure 1: The 27-fold and 12-fold division of the ecliptic. The ﬁrst r¯a´si is
Vr.s.a with the corresponding month of Vai´s¯akha

14

Subhash Kak

RV 2.39, 5.78, 8.35)

K¯artika = Apabharan.¯ı to Rohin.¯ı = Yama, Agni, Praj¯apati
= Ali (Vr.´scika), Scorpion, from Kr.ttika, to cut

M¯arga´s¯ırs.a = Rohin.¯ı to ¯Ardr¯a = Praj¯apati, Soma, Rudra
= Dhanus., Archer, from the cosmic archer Rudra (RV 2.33, 5.42,
10.125)

Paus.a = ¯Ardr¯a to Pus.ya = Rudra, Aditi, Br.haspati
= Makara, Goat, Rudra placing goat-head on Praj¯apati, and goat
is the main animal sacriﬁced at the ritual of which Br.haspati is
the priest

M¯agha = Pus.ya to Magh¯a = Br.haspati, Sarpah. , Pitarah.
= Kumbha, Water-bearer, from the water-pot oﬀerings to the
pitarah.

Ph¯alguna = Ph¯algun¯ıs to Hast¯a = Aryaman, Bhaga, Savitar
= M¯ına, Fish, representing Bhaga (alluded to in RV 10.68)

Caitra = Hast¯a to Sv¯at¯ı = Savitar, Indra, V¯ayu
= Mes.a, Ram, from Indra, see, e.g., RV 1.51

We observe that for most solar zodiac segments a plausible name emerges
from the name of the deity. The choice of the symbols was also governed by
another constraint. The Br¯ahman. a texts call the year as the sacriﬁce and
associate diﬀerent animals with it.21 In the short sequence, these animals
are goat, sheep, bull, horse, and man. Beginning with the goat-dragon at
number 9 in the sequence starting with Vai´s¯akha, we have sheep at 12, bull
at 1, horse (also another name for the sun in India) as the sun-disk at 3, and
man as archer at 8.

Babylonian and Indian Astronomy

15

Intercalation

A system of intercalation of months (adhikam¯asa) was used to bring the lunar
year in synchrony with the solar year over a period of ﬁve years.

The use of the intercalary month (adhikam¯asa) goes back to the R. gveda

itself:

vedam¯aso dhr. tavrato dv¯ada´sa praj¯avatah.
ved¯a ya upaj¯ayate (RV 1.25.8)

Dhr.tavrata (Varun. a) knew the twelve productive months; he also
knew about the thirteenth additional month.

In the Atharvaveda (13.3.8), it is said:

ahor¯atraivimitam.
trayodas. am. m¯asam. yo nirmim¯ıte (AV 13.3.8)

trim. ´sada ˙ngam.

He who forms the thirteenth month containing thirty days and
nights.

The names of the two intercalary months are given as sam. sarpa and

am. haspati in the Taittir¯ıya Sam. hit¯a 1.4.14.

There are several other similar references in the Sam. hit¯a literature to the
various intercalary schems that were used to reconcile the lunar and solar
years.

The concept of yuga

The R. gveda mentions yuga in what is most likely a ﬁve-year sense in RV
1.158.6. The names of two of these ﬁve years, sam. vatsara and it parivatsara
are to be found in RV 7.103.7. The V¯ajasaneyi Sam. hit¯a (27.45 and 30.16) and
the Taittir¯ıya Sam. hit¯a (5.5.7.1-3) give the names of all the ﬁve years. These
names are: sam. vatsara, parivatsara, id¯avatvara, iduvatsara, and vatsara.

The number ﬁve is fundamental to Vedic imagination. Thus there are
ﬁve-layers of the altar, ﬁve breaths within man, ﬁve seasons, and ﬁve kinds
of sacriﬁces. It was natural then to conceive of a ﬁve-year yuga as a basic
period since larger yugas were known.

16

Subhash Kak

The use of the ﬁve year yuga is natural to do a basic synchronization of
the lunar and the solar years. Longer periods are required for a more precise
synchronization rules.

Circle of 360o

In R. gveda 1.164.11, mention is made of the 720 paired sons of the wheel of
time which has twelve spokes. These 720 pairs are the 720 days and nights
of the civil year. In RV 1.164.48 we are explicitly told of the 360 parts of the
wheel of time.

dv¯ada´sa pradhaya´s cakram ekam.
tr¯ın. i nabhy¯ani ka utacciketa
tasmin s¯akam.
arpit¯ah. s. as. t.irna cal¯acal¯asah. (RV 1.164.48)

tri´sat¯a na ´sa ˙nkavo

Twelve spokes, one wheel, three navels, who can comprehend
this? In this there are 360 spokes put in like pegs which do not
get loosened.

This means that the ecliptic, which is the wheel of time, is divided into
360 parts. Each of these parts is what is now known as a degree. The three
navels appear to be the three diﬀerent kinds of divisions of it: solar and lunar
segments and days.

The division of the circle into four quadrants of 90 degrees each is de-

scribed in another hymn:

caturbhih. s¯akm. navatim. ca n¯amabhi´s cakram. na vr. ttam. vyat¯id. r
av¯ıvipat (RV 1.155.6)

He, like a rounded wheel, hath in swift motion set his ninety
racing steeds together with the four.

The division of the wheel of time into 360 parts occurs elsewhere as well.
In ´Satapatha Br. 10.5.4.4, it is stated that “360 regions encircle the sun on
all sides.”

The division into half a degree is very easy to identify in the sky. The
radial size of the sun or moon is slightly more than this angular size, being
exactly 60/113 degrees.22

Babylonian and Indian Astronomy

17

Various Divisions of the Ecliptic

One may argue that because the original list of 27 naks.atras contains only
24 distinct names, these represent the 24 half months of the year. Later, to
incorporate lunar conjunctions, the segments were expanded to describe the
motions of the moon.

In the R. gveda (2.27), six ¯Adityas are listed which appear to be segments
corresponding to the six seasons. The names given are: Mitra, Aryaman,
Bhaga, Varun. a, Daks.a, Am. ´sa.

This notion is supported by the fact that the ecliptic is also described
in terms of the twelve ¯Adityas as in Table 3. In the ´Satapatha Br¯ahman. a
(6.1.2.8), Praj¯apati is said to have “created the twelve ¯Adityas, and placed
them in the sky.” In ´Satapatha Br. (11.6.3.8), it is stated that the ¯Adityas
are the twelve months (dv¯ada´sa m¯asah. ). This means clearly a twelve part
division of the circuit of the sun.

The correspondence between the 27-fold division and the 12-fold division

of the ecliptic may be seen in Figure 1.

Further division of the ecliptic is seen in the subdivision of each of the

r¯a´sis into 2, 3, 4, 7, 9, 10, 12, 16, 20, 24, 27, 30, 40, 45, 45, and 60 parts.

Naks.atras and chronology
The list beginning with Kr.ttik¯a at the vernal equinox indicates that it was
drawn up in the third millennium BC. The legend of the decapitation of
Praj¯apati indicates a time when the year began with Mr.ga´s¯ırs.a in the ﬁfth
millennium BC (Table 1). Scholars have also argued that a subsequent list
began with Rohin.¯ı. This reasoning is supported by the fact that there are
two Rohin.¯ıs, separated by fourteen naks.atras, indicating that the two marked
the beginning of the two half-years.

In addition to the chronological implications of the changes in the begin-
ning of the Naks.atra lists, there are other references which indicate epochs
that bring us down to the Common Era.

The moon rises at the time of sunset on p¯urn. im¯a, the full moon day.
It rises about 50 minutes every night and at the end of the ´Sivar¯atri of
the month, about two days before am¯avasy¯a, it rises about an hour before
sunrise. The crescent moon appears ﬁrst above the horizon, followed by the
rising sun. This looks like the sun as ´Siva with the crescent moon adorning

18

Subhash Kak

his head. This is the last appearance of the moon in the month before its
reappearance on ´sukla dvit¯ıya. These two days were likely used to determine
the day of am¯av¯asya.

Mah¯a´sivar¯atri is the longest night of the year at the winter solstice. At
present, this occurs on February 26 ± 15 days (this uncertainty arises from
the manner in which the intercalary month operates), and when it was in-
troduced (assuming a calendar similar to the present one), the epoch would
have been December 22 ± 15 days. The diﬀerence of 66 days gives an epoch
of 2600 BC ± 1100 years for the establishment of this festival.23

The Kaus.¯ıtaki Br. (19.3) mentions the occurrence of the winter solstice
in the new moon of M¯agha (m¯aghasy¯am¯av¯asy¯ay¯am). This corresponds to
a range of 1800—900 BC based on the uncertainty related to the precise
identiﬁcation of the Magh¯a naks.atra at that time.

The ´Satapatha Br¯ahman. a (2.1.2.3) has a statement that points to an
earlier epoch where it is stated that Kr.ttik¯a never swerve from the east.
This correspond to 2950 BC. The Maitray¯an¯ıya Br¯ahman. a Upanis.ad (6.14)
refers to the winter solstice being at the mid-point of the ´Sravis.t.h¯a segment
and the summer solstice at the beginning of Magh¯a. This indicates 1660 BC.
The Ved¯a ˙nga Jyotis.a (Yajur 6-8) mentions that winter solstice was at the
beginning of ´Sravis.t.h¯a and the summer solstice at the mid-point of A´sles.¯a.
This corresponds to about 1350 BC.24

In TS 7.4.8 it is stated that the year begins with the full moon of Ph¯algun¯ı.
In the Ved¯a ˙nga Jyotis.a, it begins with the full moon in Magh¯a, providing
further evidence forming a consistent whole.

The ´Satapatha Br¯ahman. a story of the marriage between the Seven Sages,
the stars of the Ursa Major, and the Kr.ttik¯as is elaborated in the Pur¯an. as
where it is stated that the r.s.is remain for a hundred years in each naks.atra.
In other words, during the earliest times in India there existed a centennial
calendar with a cycle of 2,700 years. Called the Saptars.i calendar, it is still
in use in several parts of India. Its current beginning is taken to be 3076
BC, but the notices by the Greek historians Pliny and Arrian suggest that,
during the Mauryan times, this calendar was taken to begin in 6676 BC.

Babylonian and Indian Astronomy

19

Babylonian Astronomy

Our knowledge of Babylonian astronomy comes from three kinds of texts. In
the ﬁrst class are: (i) astronomical omens in the style of En¯uma Anu Enlil
(“when the gods Anu and Enlil”) that go back to the second millennium BC
in a series of 70 tablets; (ii) the two younger Mul Apin tablets which is more
astronomical; (iii) royal reports on omens from 700 BC onwards.

The second class has astronomical diaries with excellent observations over
the period 750 BC to AD 75. The third class has texts from the archives
in Babylon and Uruk from the period of the last four or ﬁve centuries BC
which deal with mathematical astronomy.

In late texts the ecliptic is divided into 12 zodiacal signs, each of length
precisely 30 degrees. Aaboe has proposed25 that the replacement of constel-
lations by 30o segments took place in the ﬁfth century BC.

Babylonian mathematics is sexagesimal, that is, it uses a place-value sys-
tem of base 60. This is considered one of the characteristic features of the
Babylonian mathematical tradition.

The Babylonian year began with or after vernal equinox. The calendar
is lunar with a new month beginning on the evening when the crescent of
the new moon becomes visible for the ﬁrst time. A month contains either 29
days (hollow) or 30 days (full). Since 12 lunar months add up to only 354
days, an intercalary month was occasionally introduced. Starting mid-ﬁfth
century, the intercalations followed the Metonic cycle where every group of
19 years contained seven years with intercalary months.

In the late texts the ecliptic is divided into 12 zodiacal signs, each of
length precisely 30 degrees (uˇs). The ﬁrst list of stars which used the signs
of the zodiac is dated to about 410 BC.

The zodiacal signs have much overlap with the Indian ones, but they
appear from nowhere. We cannot, for example, understand the basis of goat-
ﬁsh, whereas the goad-headed Praj¯apati is one of the key stories in Vedic
lore. These signs do not belong to the same type. They include furrow, hired
hand, and star. They could not have served as the model for the Indian
zodiacal names or the Greek ones because of their haphazard nature. On the
other hand, they could represent memory of an imperfectly communicated
Indian tradition which was adapted into the Babylonian system.

20

Subhash Kak

Table 3: The Zodiac signs

Greek
Krios (ram)
Tauros (bull)

Latin
Aries
Taurus
Gemini
Cancer
Leo
Virgo
Libra
Scorpio
Sagittarius
Capricornus m´aˇs (goat-ﬁsh)
Aquarius
Pisces

Babylonian
hun, lu (hired hand)
m´ul (star)
mash, mash-mash (twins) Didymoi (twins)
Karkinos (crab)
allax, kuˇsu (?)
Leon (lion)
a (lion)
Parthenos (virgin)
absin (furrow)
r´in (balance)
Khelai (claws)
g´ir (scorpion)
Skorpios (scorpion)
Toxotes (archer)
pa (name of a god)
Aigokeros (goat-horned)
Hydrokhoos (water-pourer)
Ikhthyes (ﬁshes)

gu (?)
zib, zib-me (tails)

The Babylonians had two systems to place the signs on the ecliptic. In
one, the summer solstice was at 8o in kuˇsu (and the winter solstice in 8o
in m´aˇs); in another system, the solstices were at 10o of their signs. They
measured the moon and the planets from the ecliptic using a measure called
she, equal to 1/72 of a degree.

They appear to have used two models for the sun’s motion. In one, the
sun’s velocity changes suddenly; in another, it goes through a zig-sag change.

As far as planets are concerned, they calculated the dates of the instants
the planet starts and ends its retrogression, the ﬁrst visible heliacal rising, the
last visible heliacal rising, and opposion. They also computed the position
of the planet on the ecliptic at these instants. In the planetary theory, the
synodic month is divided into 30 parts, which we now call tithi from its Indian
usage.

In the Babylonian planetary models the concern is to compute the time
and place of ﬁrst stationary points. Two diﬀerent theories to do this were
proposed which have been reconstructed in recent decades.26

Babylonian and Indian Astronomy

21

Babylonian Astronomy and the Ved¯a ˙nga Jyotis.a
The thesis that Babylonian astronomy may have led to Vedic astronomy was
summarized in the following manner by David Pingree:27

Babylonian astronomers were capable of devising intercalation-
cycles in the seventh, sixth, and ﬁfth centuries B.C., and there
is evidence both in the Greek and in the cuneiform sources that
they actually did so; and by the early fourth century B.C. they
had certainly adopted the quite-accurate nineteen-year cycle. It
is my suggestion that some knowledge of these attempts reached
India, along with the speciﬁc astronomical material in the ﬁfth
or fourth century B.C. through Iranian intermediaries, whose in-
ﬂuence is probably discernible in the year-length selected by La-
gadha for the Jyotis. aved¯a ˙nga. But the actual length of the yuga,
ﬁve years, was presumably accepted by Lagadha because of its
identity with a Vedic lustrum. Not having access to a series of
extensive observations such as were available to the Babylonians,
he probably was not completely aware of the crudeness of his sys-
tem. And the acceptance of this cycle by Indians for a period of
six or seven centuries or even more demonstrates among other
things that they were not interested in performing the simplest
acts of observational astronomy.

The speciﬁc items from Babylonian astronomy that Pingree believes were

incorporated into the “later” Vedic astronomy are :

1. The ratio of 3:2 for the longest to the shortest day used after 700 BC.

2. The use of a linear function to determine the length of daylight in

intermediate months.

3. The use of the water-clock.

4. The concept of the tithi as the thirtieth part of the lunar month.

5. The use of two intercalary months in a period of 5 years.

6. The concept of a ﬁve-year yuga.

22

Subhash Kak

Each of these points has been answered by several historians.

In par-
ticular, T.S. Kuppanna Sastry wrote a much-acclaimed text on the Ved¯a ˙nga
Jyotis.a showing how the supports its dating of around 1300-1200 BC. In fact,
in his classic Bh¯arat¯ıya Jyotis. a (1896), S.B. D¯ıks.ita had already documented
the Vedic roots of Vedic astronomy. More recently, Achar28 has dealt with
these questions at length in his paper on the Vedic origin of ancient mathe-
matical astronomy in India.

Length of the Day

The proportion of 3:2 for the longest to the shortest day is correct for north-
west India. On the other hand, the Babylonians until 700 BC or so used
the incorrect proportion of 2:1.
It is clear then that the Babylonians for
a long time used a parameter which was completely incorrect. They must
have, therefore, revised this parameter under the impulse of some outside
inﬂuence.

In any event, the 3:2 proportion proves nothing because it is correct both
Its late usage in Babylonia points to the

for parts of India and Babylon.
limitations of Babylonian observational astronomy before 700 BC.

The Use of a Linear Function for Length of Day

The interpolation formula in the R. gjyotis.a, verse 7, is:

d(x) = 12 + 2x/61

where d is the duration of day time in muh¯urtas and x is the number of days
that have elapsed since the winter solstice.

The use of this equation is natural when one considers the fact that the
number of muh¯urtas required for the winter solstice for the 3:2 proportion to
hold is 12. This ensures that the length of day and night will be equal to 15
muh¯urtas each at the equinox.

The Taittir¯ıya Sam. hit¯a 6.5.3.4 speaks clearly of the northern and southern

movements of the sun: ¯adityah. s. an. m¯aso daks. in. enaiti s. ad. uttaren. a.

The Br¯ahman. as count days starting from the winter solstice and the
period assumed between the two solstices is 183 days. It is natural to adopt
the equation given above with these conditions which are part of the old Vedic
astronomical tradition. Use of it in either region does not imply borrowing
because it is the most obvious function to use.

Babylonian and Indian Astronomy

23

The Use of the Water Clock

The use of the water-clock occurs in the Atharvaveda 19.53.3 in the expression:29
p¯urn. ah. kumbho’dhi k¯ala ¯ahitah. : A full vessel is placed upon k¯ala (time).
The objective of this mantra is to exhort that “a full vessel be set [up]

with reference to the [measurement of] time.”

Since the Atharvaveda is prior to the period of Babylonian astronomy by
any account, it shows that India used water-clocks. Babylonia may have had
its own independent tradition of the use of water-clocks.

The Concept of tithi

The division of year into equal parts of 30 portions is to be found in several
places in the Vedas and the subsequent ancillary texts.

In (RV 10.85.5), it is stated that the moon shapes the year.

In Tait-
tir¯ıya Br¯ahman. a the correct technical sense of tithi is given at many places.
For example, in 1.5.10, it is said that candram¯a vai pa˜ncada´sah. . es. a hi
pa˜ncada´sy¯amapaks.¯ıyate. pa˜ncada´sy¯am¯ap¯uryate, “the moon wanes in ﬁfteen,
and waxes in ﬁfteen [days].” In 3.10, the ﬁfteen tithis of the waxing moon
and ﬁfteen tithis of the waning moon are named.

The idea of a tithi is abstract. There are only 27 moonrises in a month
of 29.5 days. To divide it into 30 parts means that a tithi is smaller than a
day. The reason it arose in India was due to its connection to Soma ritual.
The number 360 is fundamental to Vedic thought. It represents the equiv-
alence between time and the subject. In ¯Ayurvda, the number of bones of
the developing fetus are taken to be 360.

Since all the six concepts were already in use in the Sam. hit¯as, in an
epoch earlier than 1000 BC in the least, they could not have been learnt by
the Indians from the Babylonians who came to use these concepts after 700
BC.

Babylonian Observations and Siddh¯antic As-
tronomy

Another issue related to the possible connection between Babylonian and In-
dian astronomy is whether the excellent observational tradition of the Baby-

24

Subhash Kak

lonians was useful to the Indians. Were ideas at the basis of ¯Aryabhat.a’s
astronomy were borrowed from outside or were part of India’s own tradition.
A few years ago,30 Abhyankar argues that “ ¯Aryabhat.a’s values of bhagan. as
were probably derived from the Babylonian planetary data.” But Abhyankar
makes contradictory assertions in the paper, suggesting at one place that
¯Aryabhat.a had his own observations and at another place that he copied
numbers without understanding, making a huge mistake in the process.

In support of his theory, Abhyankar claims that ¯Aryabhat.a used the Baby-
lonian value of 44528 synodic months in 3600 years as his starting point. But
this value is already a part of the ´Satapatha altar astronomy reconciling lu-
nar and solar years in a 95-year yuga. In this ritual, an altar is built to an
area that is taken to represent the naks.atra or the lunar year in tithis and
the next design is the same shape but to a larger area (solar year in tithis),
but since this second design is too large, the altar construction continues in
a sequence of 95 years. It appears that satisfactory reconciliation by adding
intercalary months to the lunar year of 360 tithis amounted to subtracting
a certain number of tithis from the 372 tithis of the solar year, whose most
likely value was 89 tithis in 95 years.31

The areas of the altars increase from 7 1

2 in the 95 long sequence
in increments of one. The average size of the altar is therefore 54 1
2, implying
that the average diﬀerence between the lunar and the solar year is taken to
be one unit with 54 1
2 which is about 6.60 tithis for the lunar year of 360
tithis. This is approximately correct.

2 to 101 1

Considering a correction of 89 tithis in 95 years, the corrected length of
the year is 372 − 89/95 = 371.06316 tithis. Since each lunation occurs in 30
tithis, the number of lunations in 3600 years is 44527.579. In a Mah¯ayuga,
this amounts to 53,433,095. In fact, the number chosen by ¯Aryabhat.a (row
1 in Table 4) is closer to this number rather than the Babylonian number
of 53,433,600. One may imagine that ¯Aryabhat.a was creating a system that
was an improvement on the earlier altar astronomy.

Table 4 presents the Babylonian numbers given by Abhyankar together
with the ¯Aryabhat.a constants related to the synodic lunar months and the
revolutions of the lunar node, the lunar apogee, and that of the planets. It
should be noted that the so-called Babylonian numbers are not actually from
any Babylonian text but were computed by Abhyankar using the rule of three
on various Babylonian constants.

Babylonian and Indian Astronomy

25

Table 4: Reconstructed Babylonian and ¯Aryabhat.a parameters

Synodic lunar months
Lunar node
Lunar apogee
Mercury
Venus
Mars
Jupiter
Saturn

Type Babylonian
53,433,600
-232,616
486,216
17,937,000
7,022,344
2,296,900
364,216
146,716

¯Arybhat.a
52,433,336
-232,352
488,219
17,937,020
7,022,388
2,296,824
364,224
146,564

We see that no numbers match. How does one then make the case that
¯Aryabhat.a obtained his numbers from a Babylonian text? Abhyankar says
that these numbers are diﬀerent because of his ( ¯Aryabhat.a’s) own observa-
tions “which are more accurate.” But if ¯Aryabhat.a had his own observations,
why did he have to “copy” Babylonian constants, and end up not using them,
anyway?

Certain numbers have great discrepancy, such as those of the lunar apogee,
which Abhyankar suggests was due to a “wrong reading of 6 by 8” implying–
in opposition to his earlier view in the same paper that ¯Aryabhat.a also had
his own observations– that ¯Aryabhat.a did not possess his own data and that
he simply copied numbers from some manual brought from Babylon!

The ¯Aryabhat.a numbers are also more accurate that Western numbers as
in the work of Ptolemy.32 Given all this, there is no credible case to accept
the theory of borrowing of these numbers from Babylon.

Abhyankar further suggests that ¯Aryabhat.a may have borrowed from
Babylon the two central features of his system: (i) the concept of the Mah¯ayuga,
and (ii) mean superconjunction of all planets at some remote epoch in time.
In fact, Abhyankar repeats here an old theory of Pingree33 and van der
Waerden34 about a transmission from Babylon of these two central ideas.
Here we show that these ideas were already present in the pre-Siddh¯antic
astronomy and, therefore, a contrived connection with Babylonian tables is
unnecessary.

In the altar ritual of the Br¯ahman. as,35 equivalences by number connected
the altar area to the length of the year. The 5-year yuga is described in the

26

Subhash Kak

Ved¯a ˙nga Jyotis.a, where only the motions of the sun and the moon are con-
sidered. The ´Satapatha Br¯ahman. a describes the 95-year cycle to harmonize
the solar and the lunar years. The ´Satapatha Br¯ahman. a also describes an
asymmetric circuit for the sun36, which the Greeks speak about only around
400 BC.

Speciﬁcally, we ﬁnd mention of the nominal year of 372 tithis, the naks.atra
year of 324 tithis, and a solar year of 371 tithis. The fact that a further correc-
tion was required in 95 years indicates that these ﬁgures were in themselves
considered to be approximate.

In the altar ritual, the primal person is made to an area of 7 1

2 purus.as,
when a purus.a is also equated with 360 years leading to another cycle of 2700
years. This is the Saptars.i cycle which was taken to start and end with a
superconjunction.

The ´Satapatha Br¯ahman. a 10.4.2.23-24 describes that the R. gveda has
432,000 syllables, the Yajurveda has 288,000 and the S¯amaveda has 144,000
syllables. This indicates that larger yugas in proportion of 3:2:1 were known
at the time of the conceptualization of the Sam. hit¯as.

Since the nominal size of the R. gveda was considered to be 432,000 syl-
lables (SB 10.4.2.23) we are led to the theory of a much larger yuga of that
extent in years since the R. gveda represented the universe symbolically.

Van der Waerden37 has speculated that a primitive epicycle theory was
known to the Greeks by the time of Plato. He suggested such a theory
might have been known in the wider Indo-European world by early ﬁrst
millennium BC. With new ideas about the pre-history of the Indo-European
world emerging, it is possible to push this to an earlier millennium. An old
theory may be the source which led to the development of very diﬀerent
epicycle models in Greece and India.

The existence of an independent tradition of observation of planets and
a theory thereof as suggested by our analysis of the ´Satapatha Br¯ahman. a
helps explain the puzzle why the classical Indian astronomy of the Siddh¯anta
period uses many constants that are diﬀerent from those of the Greeks.

More on the Great Year

Since the yuga in the Vedic and the Br¯ahman. a periods is so clearly obtained
from an attempt to harmonize the solar and the lunar years, it appears that

Babylonian and Indian Astronomy

27

the consideration of the periods of the planets was the basis of the creation
of an even longer yuga.

There is no reason to assume that the periods of the ﬁve planets were
unknown during the Br¯ahman. a age.
I have argued that the astronomical
numbers in the organization of the R. gveda indicate with high probability
the knowledge of these periods in the R. gvedic era itself.38

Given these periods, and the various yugas related to the reconciliation
of the lunar and the solar years, we can see how the least common multiple
of these periods will deﬁne a still larger yuga.

The Mah¯abh¯arata and the Pur¯an. as speak of the kalpa, the day of Brahm¯a,
which is 4,320 million years long. The night is of equal length, and 360 such
days and nights constitute a “year” of Brahm¯a, and his life is 100 such years
long. The largest cycle is 311,040,000 million years long at the end of which
the world is absorbed within Brahman, until another cycle of creation. A
return to the initial conditions (implying a superconjunction) is inherent in
such a conception. Since the Indians and the Persians were in continuing
cultural contact, it is plausible that this was how this old tradition became a
part of the heritage of the Persians. It is not surprising then to come across
the idea of the World-Year of 360,000 years in the work of Ab¯u Ma’shar, who
also mentioned a planetary conjunction in February 3102 BC.

The theory of the transmission of the Great Year of 432,000 years, devised
by Berossos, a priest in a Babylonian temple, to India in about 300 BC, has
also been advanced. But we see this number being used in relation to the
Great Year in the ´Satapatha Br¯ahman. a, a long time before Berossos.

The idea of superconjunction seems to be at the basis of the cyclic cal-
endar systems in India. The ´Satapatha Br¯ahman. a speaks of a marriage
between the Seven Sages, the stars of the Ursa Major, and the Kr.ttik¯as; this
is elaborated in the Pur¯an. as where it is stated that the r.s.is remain for a
hundred years in each naks.atra. In other words, during the earliest times in
India there existed a centennial calendar with a cycle of 2,700 years. Called
the Saptars.i calendar, it is still in use in several parts of India. Its current
beginning is taken to be 3076 BC.

The usage of this calendar more than 2000 years ago is conﬁrmed by the
notices of the Greek historians Pliny and Arrian who suggest that, during
the Mauryan times, the Indian calendar began in 6676 BC. It seems quite
certain that this was the Saptars.i calendar with a beginning which starts
3600 years earlier than the current Saptars.i calendar.

28

Subhash Kak

The existence of a real cyclic calendar shows that the idea of supercon-
junction was a part of the Indic tradition much before the time of Berossos.
This idea was used elsewhere as well but, given the paucity of sources, it is
not possible to trace a deﬁnite place of origin for it.

On Observations in Indian Astronomy

The use of the lunar zodiac creates complicating factors for observation which
were not appreciated by early historians of Indian astronomy. Roger Billard’s
demonstration39 of the falsity of the 19th century notion that India did not
have observational astronomy has devastating consequences for the school-
book histories of early astronomy. His analysis of the Siddh¯antic and the
practical karan. a texts demonstrated that these texts provide a set of elements
from which the planetary positions for future times can be computed. The
ﬁrst step in these computations is the determination of the mean longitudes
which are assumed to be linear functions of time. Three more functions, the
vernal equinox, the lunar node and the lunar apogee are also deﬁned.

Billard investigated these linear functions for the ﬁve planets, two for
the sun (including the vernal equinox) and three for the moon. He checked
these calculations against the values derived from modern theory and he
found that the texts provide very accurate values for the epochs when they
were written. Since the Siddh¯anta and the karan. a models are not accurate,
beyond these epochs deviations build up. In other words, Billard refuted the
theory that there was no tradition of observational astronomy in India. But
Billard’s book is not easily available in India, which is why the earlier theory
has continued to do rounds in Indian literature.

¯Aryabhat.a’s constants are more accurate than the one’s available in the
West at that time. He took old Indic notions of the Great Yuga and of
cyclic time (implying superconjunction) and created a very original and novel
siddh¯anta. He presented the rotation information of the outer planets with re-
spect to the sun – as was done by the ´s¯ıghroccas of Mercury and Venus for the
inferior planets – which means that his system was partially heliocentric.40
Furthermore, he considered the earth to be rotating on its own axis. Since
we don’t see such an advanced system amongst the Babylonians prior to the
time of ¯Aryabhat.a, it is not reasonable to look outside of the Indic tradition
or ¯Aryabhat.a himself for the data on which these ideas were based.

Babylonian and Indian Astronomy

29

The observational protocols used in Indian astronomy has become an

interesting question to be investigated further.

Conclusions

The debate on the relationship between the astronomical sciences of India
and Babylon became vitiated by the theories of 19th century Indologists
motivated by reasons of empire and race rather than scholarship. Further-
more, their analysis was done using simplistic ideas about cultural interac-
tion. They took knowledge to ﬂow from one direction to another without
recognizing that the reality was likely to have been complex and interac-
tion bidirectional. Considering that a time range of several centuries was
involved and interaction through intermediaries constituted a complex pro-
cess, the answer to any question of borrowings and inﬂuence can only be
complicated.

Our review of Indian astronomy shows that in the period of the early
Vedic texts, that are deﬁnitely prior to 1000 BC, the following facts were
known:

• Vedic astronomy tracked the motion of the sun and the moon against
the backdrop of the naks.atras. The sky was divided into 12 segments
( ¯Adityas) and 27 segments (lunar naks.atras) where the naks.atra and
deity names were used interchangeably.

• Although the names of the solar zodiacal signs (r¯a´sis) are seen ﬁrst in
the siddh¯antic texts, we see they can be derived from the deity names
of the lunar naks.atra segments. Given that the naks.atra names are to
be found in the Sm. hit¯as and the r¯a´si names are not in the Vedic books,
one may conclude that the speciﬁc names were chosen sometime in the
ﬁrst millennium BC, replacing the earlier ¯Aditya names. But the solar
signs were a very early component of Vedic astronomy, acknowledged
in the R. gvedic hymn itself which speaks of the twelve division of the
360-part wheel of time.

• Astrology (Jyots.a) is a part of the earliest Vedic texts. Vedic ritual
is associated with the time of the day, the naks.atras, and the posi-
tion of the moon. The year is divided into the deva naks.atras and

30

Subhash Kak

yama naks.atras and this division is carried down to smaller scales, im-
plying that certain time durations are more auspicious than others.
The meanings of the naks.atras (such as Anur¯adh¯a, “propitious,” and
Punarvas¯u, “giving wealth”) provide us evidence that they had an as-
trological basis. Vedic naks.atras are assigned diﬀerent qualities and
in the marriage ritual the astrologer recommended an auspicious time.
Taittir¯ıya Br¯ahman. a 3.1.4 lists the eﬀects of propitiating the diﬀerent
naks.atras.
The fundamental notion in Vedic thought is the equivalence or con-
nection (bandhu) amongst the adhidaiva (devas or stars), adhibh¯uta
(beings), and adhy¯atma (spirit). These connections, between the astro-
nomical, the terrestrial, the physiological and the psychological, repre-
sent the subtext without which the Vedas cannot be understood. These
connections are usually stated in terms of vertical relationships, rep-
resenting a recursive system; but they are also described horizontally
across hierarchies where they represent metaphoric or structural paral-
lels. Most often, the relationship is deﬁned in terms of numbers or other
characteristics. An example is the 360 bones of the infant—which later
fuse into the 206 bones of the adult—and the 360 days of the year.
Likewise, the tripartite division of the cosmos into earth, space, and
sky is reﬂected in the tripartite psychological types.41
The bandhu are the rationale for astrology. Indeed, they inform us that
astrology central to the world-view of the Indians.

• The use of the tithi system, the division of the lunar month into 30
parts, is closely connected to Soma worship, a uniquely Indian ritual.
There is no such ritual connection with the tithis that we know of in
the Babylonian context.

The evidence suggests that the Indian ideas of sacriﬁce, 12 divisions of the
solar year, and the 30 divisions of the lunar month, and the zodiac reached
Babylonia around the middle of the ﬁrst millennium BC. These new ideas,
including the Indian ratio of 3:2 for the longest to shortest day of the year,
triggered a new phase of careful observations in Babylonia which were to
inﬂuence astronomy in a fundamental way.

But it is also possible that the Babylonian ﬂowering was quite indepen-
dent based on the presence of general ideas which were present in the lands

Babylonian and Indian Astronomy

31

across India to Greece. In any event, the borrowing was of the most general
ideas, the detailed methods reﬂected the local genius. This is the reason that
the details that we ﬁnd in the astronomical systems of India and Babylon
(and also Greece) have unique features.

Astrology was a part of the ancient world everywhere including Mesopotamia.

But it appears that the solar zodiacal signs as we know them originated in
India, where they have a relationship with the deities of the naks.atras, and
were later adopted in Babylonia in the middle of the ﬁrst millennium BC and
subsequently in Greece. But this does not mean that the detailed practice
of Vedic astrology was adopted by the Babylonians.

Subsequent to the establishment of the Indo-Greek states on the borders
of India after Alexander, the interaction between Indian and Western astrol-
ogy and astronomy entered a new phase the details of which are not well
Increased political and trade interaction made it possible for
understood.
texts to be exchanged.

Acknowledgement

I am grateful to my friend David Frawley for his advice and criticism.

32

Subhash Kak

Notes and References

1. S. Kak, Akhenaten, Surya, and the R. gveda, Louisiana State University,

2003.
http://www.ece.lsu.edu/kak/akhena.pdf

2. T. Burrow, “The proto-Indoaryans.” J. of the Royal Asiatic Society,
vol. 2, pages 123-140, 1973. Burrow’s idea of proto-Indoaryans is not
supported by current evidence.

3. S.N. Sen, “Surveys of Studies in European Languages.” Indian Journal

of History of Science, vol 20, 49-121, 1985.

4. E. Leach, “Aryan invasions over four millennia.” In Culture through
Time, Anthropological Approaches, E. Ohnuki-Tierney (ed.), Stanford,
1990, pp. 227-245. In this Leach, a distinguished anthropologist, sug-
gests that racism was behind the idea of the Aryan invasion theory:

Why do serious scholars persist in believing in the Aryan in-
vasions?... Why is this sort of thing attractive? Who ﬁnds it
attractive? Why has the development of early Sanskrit come
to be so dogmatically associated with an Aryan invasion?...
Where the Indo-European philologists are concerned, the in-
vasion argument is tied in with their assumption that if a
particular language is identiﬁed as having been used in a
particular locality at a particular time, no attention need be
paid to what was there before; the slate is wiped clean. Ob-
viously, the easiest way to imagine this happening in real life
is to have a military conquest that obliterates the previously
existing population!
The details of the theory ﬁt in with this racist framework...
Because of their commitment to a unilineal segmentary his-
tory of language development that needed to be mapped onto
the ground, the philologists took it for granted that proto-
Indo-Iranian was a language that had originated outside ei-
ther India or Iran. Hence it followed that the text of the
Rig Veda was in a language that was actually spoken by

Babylonian and Indian Astronomy

33

those who introduced this earliest form of Sanskrit into In-
dia. From this we derived the myth of the Aryan invasions.
QED.

Leach’s cry is in the face of the stubborn manner in which some schol-
ars have persisted with the invasion model although it ﬂies against
archaeological, skeletal, and cultural evidence. See Shaﬀer, J. and D.L.
Lichtenstein. “The concept of cultural tradition and paleoethnicity in
South Asian archaeology.” In The Indo-Aryans of South Asia, G. Er-
dosy. ed. Berlin: Walter de Gruyter, 1995. For an overview of this
general evidence, see G. Feuerstein, S. Kak, D. Frawley, In Search of
the Cradle of Civilization. Quest Books, Wheaton, 2001; S. Kak, The
Wishing Tree. Munshiram Manoharlal, New Delhi, 2001.

5. D. Pingree, “History of mathematical astronomy in India.” In Dictio-
nary of Scientiﬁc Biography, C.S. Gillespie, ed., 533-633. New York:
Charles Scribner’s Sons, 1981. For a critique of such as approach to In-
dia, see N. Dirks, Castes of Mind. Princeton University Press, Prince-
ton, 2001. Says Dirks: “Orientalist generalizations to articulate the
justiﬁcations for permanent colonial rule ... [using] the racialized lan-
guage systems and conceits of late nineteenth century imperial world
systems” led to a major revision in the Western narratives on Indian
science and society. He adds: “Colonialism was made possible, and
then sustained and strengthened, as much by cultural technologies of
rule as it was by the more obvious and brutal modes of conquest....
Colonialism was itself a cultural project of control. Colonial knowledge
both enabled conquest and was produced by it; in certain important
ways, knowledge was what colonialism was all about.”

6. Pingree suggests indirectly that the R. gvedic hymns with the 360 di-
visions of the year must be more recent than 500 BC because this
knowledge arose in Babylonia! See, Pingree, “Astronomy in India,” In
C. Walker, Astronomy Before the Telescope. St. Martin’s Press, New
York, 1996, page 124. The reason why this is wrong is because we do
have material from the Indian textual tradition that has no interpola-
tions, such as P¯an. ini’s grammar and the s¯uktas of the Sam. hit¯as.

7. E. Burgess, (tr.) The S¯urya Siddh¯anta. Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass,

34

Subhash Kak

1989 (1860). For knowledge of planets in India in the 3rd millennium
BC.

8. S. Kak, “Knowledge of planets in the third millennium B.C.” Quarterly
Journal of the Royal Astronomical Society, vol. 37, 709-715, 1996.

9. D. Pingree, “The Mesopotamian origin of early Indian mathematical
astronomy.” Journal of the History of Astronomy, vol. 4, 1-12, 1973.
D. Pingree, “The recovery of early Greek astronomy from India.” Jour-
nal for the History of Astronomy, vol 7, 109-123, 1976.

10. D. Pingree, In Dictionary of Scientiﬁc Biography, op cit. This goes
against linguistic, historical, and geographical evidence in the Vedic
texts and would be rejected by any scholar of Indian literature. For
details of the chronology of Indian texts, see M. Winternitz, History
of Indian Literature. Orient Books Reprint, New Delhi, 1972 (1927).
Winternitz believes that the beginning of the texts could not be pushed
later than 2500 BC (see page 310 of volume 1).

11. S.B. D¯ıks.ita, Bh¯arat¯ıya Jyoti´s´s¯astra. Hindi Samiti, Lakhanau, 1963

12. D. Pingree, “Astronomy and astrology in India and Iran,” Isis, vol 54,

(1896).

229-246, 1963.

13. D. Pingree, “The Mesopotamian origin of early Indian mathematical

astronomy,” 1973, op cit, page 10.

14. See, for example, N. Achar, “On the Vedic origin of the ancient mathe-
matical astronomy of India.” Journal of Studies on Ancient India, vol
1, 95-108, 1998.

15. Roger Billard, L’astronomie Indienne. Paris: Publications de l’ecole

francaise d’extreme-orient, 1971.

16. B.L. van der Waerden, “Two treatises on Indian astronomy.” Journal

for History of Astronomy vol 11: 50-58, 1980.

17. S. Kak, The Astronomical Code of the R. gveda. New Delhi: Munshiram

Manoharlal, 2000;

Babylonian and Indian Astronomy

35

S. Kak, “Birth and early development of Indian astronomy.” In As-
tronomy Across Cultures: The History of Non-Western Astronomy, H.
Selin (ed.), pp. 303-340. Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic Publishers,
2000.

18. O. Neugebauer, A History of Ancient Mathematical Astronomy. Springer-
Verlag, New York, 1975; A. Aaboe, Episodes from the Early History of
Astronomy. Springer, New York, 2001.

19. G.C. Pande (ed.), The Dawn of Indian Civilization. Centre for Studies

in Civilizations, New Delhi, 2000.

20. N. Achar, “Searching for naks.atra in R. gveda,” Research paper, 1998.

21. S. Kak, The A´svamedha: The Rite and Its Logic. Motilal Banarsidass,

Delhi, 2002.

22. See Kak, The Astronomical Code, op cit.

23. K.D. Abhyankar, “Uttar¯ayan. a.” In Scientiﬁc Heritage of India, B.V.
Subbarayappa and S.R.N. Murthy (eds.). The Mythic Society, Banga-
lore, 1988.

24. T.S. Kuppanna Sastry, Ved¯a ˙nga Jyotis. a of Lagadha. New Delhi: Indian

National Science Academy, 1985.

25. Aaboe, op cit.

26. O. Neugebauer, op cit.

27. Pingree, 1973, op cit, page 9.

28. B.N. Achar, 1998, op cit.

29. B.N. Achar, op cit.

30. K.D. Abhyankar, “Babylonian source of ¯Aryabhat.a’s planetary con-
stants.” Indian Journal of History of Science, vol 35, 185-188, 2000.

31. S. Kak, The Astronomical Code of the R. gveda, page 87.

36

Subhash Kak

32. K.S. Shukla and K.V. Sarma, ¯Aryabhat.¯ıya of ¯Aryabhat.a. New Delhi:

Indian National Science Academy, 1976.

33. D. Pingree, 1963, op cit.

34. B.L. van der Waerden, “The great year in Greek, Persian and Hindu
astronomy.” Archive for History of Exact Sciences, vol 18, 359-384,
1978.

35. S. Kak, The Astronomical Code of the R. gveda, or S. Kak, “Birth and

early development of Indian astronomy,” op cit.

36. S. Kak, “The sun’s orbit in the Br¯ahman. as.” Indian Journal of History

of Science, vol 33, 175-191, 1998.

37. B.L. van der Waerden, “The earliest form of the epicycle theory.” Jour-

nal for the History of Astronomy vol 5, 175-185, 1974.

38. S. Kak, The Astronomical Code of the R. gveda, op cit.

39. Roger Billard, op cit.

40. H. Thurston, Early Astronomy. New York: Springer-Verlag, 1994, page

41. See Kak, Astronomical Code, op cit, or S. Kak, The Wishing Tree, op

188.

cit.

c(cid:13)Subhash Kak

