3
0
0
2
 
b
e
F
 
8
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
t
s
i
h
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
1
0
0
3
0
3
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Greek and Indian Cosmology: Review of Early
History

Subhash Kak∗

February 2, 2008

1 Introduction

Greek and Indian traditions have profoundly inﬂuenced modern science. Ge-
ometry, physics, and biology of the Greeks; arithmetic, algebra, and grammar
of the Indians; and astronomy, philosophy, and medicine of both have played
a key role in the creation of knowledge. The interaction between the Indi-
ans and the Greeks after the time of Alexander is well documented, but can
we trace this interaction to periods much before Alexander’s time so as to
untangle the earliest connections between the two, especially as it concerns
scientiﬁc ideas?

Since science is only one kind of cultural expression, our search must
encompass other items in the larger matrix of cultural forms so as to obtain
a context to study the relationships. There are some intriguing parallels
between the two but there are also important diﬀerences.
In the ancient
world there existed much interaction through trade and evidence for this
interaction has been traced back to the third millennium BC, therefore there
was sure to have been a ﬂow of ideas in diﬀerent directions.

The evidence of interaction comes from the trade routes between India
and the West that were active during the Harappan era. Exchange of goods
was doubtlessly accompanied by an exchange of ideas. Furthermore, some
∗Louisiana State University, Baton Rouge, LA 70803-5901, USA, Email:

kak@ece.lsu.edu

1

communities migrated to places away from their homeland. For example,
an Indian settlement has been traced in Memphis in Egypt based on the
Indic themes of its art.1 The Indic element had a signiﬁcant presence in West
Asia during the second millennium BC and later.2 Likewise, Greek histori-
ans accompanying Alexander reported the presence of Greek communities in
Afghanistan.3

In view of these facts, the earlier view of the rise in a vacuum of Greek
science cannot be maintained.4 Indian science must have also beneﬁted from
outside inﬂuences.

The indebtedness of the Greeks to the Babylonians and the Egyptians
is now acknowledged, thanks to the decipherment of the Babylonian tablets
of the second millennium BC. The ﬁrst ﬂowering of Greek philosophy took
place in Miletus, a trading centre of the Ionian Greeks on the Asiatic coast,
where Greek and Asiatic cultures mingled. In addition to the Babylonians
antecedents of Greek science there existed Indian antecedents.

In the desire amongst Eurocentric historians to trace science and philos-
ophy to Greece alone so that somehow it would then appear as something
uniquely “Western,” the question of the Asiatic basis to Greek science and
philosophy the Asian prehistory of Western science is ignored. More recently
there is grudging acknowledgement that the Babylonians and the Egyptians
may have contributed to the ideas.5

It is instructive to begin with the similarities in the Greek and Indian
sciences of the late ﬁrst millennium BC. Speciﬁcally, I shall consider the
similarities in geometry, astronomy, and medicine.

In geometry, it is striking that the same type of constructions are used
in the ´Sulbas¯utras and by Euclid to prove the Theorem of Pythagoras.6 In
astronomy, the size assumed for the solar system is very similar and the
planetary orbits are explained based on retrograde motions.7 In medicine,
Plato speaks of three humours with a central role to the idea of breath
(pneuma), when a similar three-do´sa system around breath (pr¯an. a) is already
a feature of the much older Vedic thought.8

These commonalities have led to four diﬀerent kind of theories:

1. Viewing the Indian evidence as being later than the earliest occurrence
in Greece. This notion was used by some 19th century European schol-
ars to date Indian texts.9

2

2. Showing a common earlier origin for the two sciences outside of India
and Greece, perhaps as the common heritage of the Indo-Europeans.
More recently, this common source has been seen in Central Asia.10

3. Showing that evidence exists for the priority of Indian sciences over the

corresponding Greek sciences.11

4. A theory of essential independent origin for the sciences in India and
Greece although some general ideas may have been carried through
trade caravans from one region to another.12

I shall now take each one of these views separately. Before I proceed I
would like to emphasize that the objective of this essay is not to show the
priority of Indian science. In fact, my own position favours the fourth theory
in the list above.

Scientiﬁc developments occur as a consequence of certain social and ma-
terial conditions. It is because of India’s early urbanization that many Indian
scientiﬁc innovations occurred at a time that predates the early Greek sci-
entiﬁc age. But it does not follow that the Indian innovations were directly
linked to the corresponding innovations in Greece.

I shall begin by providing the essentials of the Indic world-view which
highlights its points of diﬀerence with the Greek world-view. This is im-
portant to deﬁne the context in which a relationships between the two may
be examined.
I shall, in particular, make the comparisons both in regard
to abstract theory as in mathematics and astronomy and in experiment and
observation as in medicine. My selection of topics is not exhaustive since
my objective is to point to issues of diﬀerence (as in astronomy) and that of
similarity (medicine).

2 Indian science and its cosmology

Indian archaeology and literature provides us with considerable layered evi-
dence related to the development of science. The chronological time frame for
this history is provided by the archaeological record which has been traced
in an unbroken tradition to about 8000 BC. Prior to this we have records
of rock paintings that are believed to be considerably older. The earliest
textual source is the Rig Veda which is a compilation of very early material.

3

There are astronomical references in this and the other Vedic books which
recall events in the third or the fourth millennium BC and earlier. The dis-
covery that Sarasvati, the preeminent river of the Rig Vedic times, went dry
around 1900 BC due to tectonic upheavels supports the view that the Rig
Veda hymns recall events dated prior to this epoch. According to traditional
history, Rig Veda is prior to 3100 BC. The astronomical evidence related to
winter solstices shows a layered chronology of early Indian texts from the
third to the ﬁrst millennia BC.13

Indian writing (the so-called Indus script) goes back to the beginning
of the third millennium BC but it has not yet been deciphered. However,
statistical analysis shows that Br¯ahm¯ı (of which earliest records have been
traced to 550 BC in Sri Lanka) evolved out of this writing. The invention of
the symbol for zero appears to have been made around 50 BC to 50 AD.14

Vedic cosmology

Brieﬂy, the Vedic texts present a tripartite and recursive world view. The
universe is viewed as three regions of earth, space, and sky which in the
human being are mirrored in the physical body, the breath (pr¯an. a), and
mind. The processes in the sky, on earth, and within the mind are taken to
be connected. The universe is also connected to the human mind, leading to
the idea that introspection can yield knowledge. The universe goes through
cycles of life and death.

The Vedic seers were aware that all descriptions of the universe lead to
logical paradox. The one category transcending all oppositions is Brahman.
Understanding the nature of consciousness was of paramount importance in
this view but this did not mean that other sciences were ignored. Vedic
ritual was a symbolic retelling of this conception. The notable features of
this world view are:

1. An Extremely Old and Large Cyclic Universe: The Vedas speak of an
inﬁnite universe, and the Br¯ahman. as (e.g. Pa˜ncavim. ´sa) mention very
large yugas. The recursive Vedic world-view requires that the universe
itself go through cycles of creation and destruction. This view became
a part of the astronomical framework and ultimately very long cycles
of billions of years were assumed. The Pur¯an. as speak of the universe
going through cycles of creation and destruction of 8.64 billion years,
although there are longer cycles as well.

4

2. An Atomic World and the Subject/Object Dichotomy: According to
the atomic doctrine of Kan. ¯ada, there are nine classes of substances:
ether, space, and time that are continuous; four elementary substances
(or particles) called earth, air, water, and ﬁre that are atomic; and two
kinds of mind, one omnipresent and another which is the individual. As
in the systems of S¯am. khya and Ved¯anta, a subject/object dichotomy is
postulated. The conscious subject is separate from the material reality
but he is, nevertheless, able to direct its evolution. The atomic doctrine
of Kan. ¯ada is much more interesting than that of Democritus.

3. Relativity of Time and Space: That space and time need not ﬂow at
the same rate for diﬀerent observers is encountered in the Br¯ahman. a
and Pur¯an. a stories and in the Yoga V¯asis.t.ha. Obviously, we are not
speaking here of the mathematical theory of relativity regarding an
upper limit to the speed of light, yet the consideration of time acting
diﬀerent to diﬀerent observers is quite remarkable.
Here’s a passage on anomalous ﬂow of time from the Bh¯agavata Pur¯an. a:15
“Taking his own daughter, Revati, Kakudmi went to Brahm¯a in Brah-
maloka, and inquired about a husband for her. When Kakudmi ar-
rived there, Brahm¯a was engaged in hearing musical performances by
the Gandharvas and had not a moment to talk with him. Therefore
Kakudmi waited, and at the end of the performance he saluted Brahm¯a
and made his desire known. After hearing his words, Brahm¯a laughed
loudly and said to Kakudmi, ‘O King, all those whom you may have
decided within the core of your heart to accept as your son-in-law have
passed away in the course of time. Twenty-seven caturyugas have al-
ready passed Those upon whom you may have decided are now gone,
and so are their sons, grandsons. and other descendants. You cannot
even hear about their names.’”

4. Evolution of Life: The Mah¯abh¯arata (pre-400 BC) and the Pur¯an. as
have a chapter on creation and the rise of mankind. It is said that man
arose at the end of a chain where the beginning was with plants and
various kind of animals. Here’s the quote from the Yoga V¯asis.t.ha:16
”I remember that once upon a time there was nothing on this earth,
neither trees and plants, nor even mountains. For a period of eleven
thousand years (four million earth years) the earth was covered by

5

lava. Then demons (asuras) ruled the earth; they were deluded and
powerful. The earth was their playground. And then for a very long
time the whole earth was covered with forests, except the polar region.
Then there arose great mountains, but without any human inhabitants.
For a period of ten thousand years (4 million earth years) the earth was
covered with the corpses of the asuras.”

Vedic evolution is not like Darwinian evolution; it has a diﬀerent focus.
The urge to evolve into higher forms is taken to be inherent in nature.
A system of an evolution from inanimate to progressively higher life
is taken to be a consequence of the diﬀerent proportions of the three
basic attributes of sattva, rajas, and tamas.

The doctrine of the three constituent qualities plays a very important
role in the S¯am. khya physics and metaphysics. In its undeveloped state,
cosmic matter has these qualities in equilibrium. As the world evolves,
one or the other of these become preponderant in diﬀerent objects or
beings, giving speciﬁc character to each.

5. A Science of Mind, Yoga:

Inner science, described in the Vedic books
and systematized by Pata˜njali in his Yoga-s¯utras is a very sophisti-
cated description of the nature of the human mind and its capacity.
It makes a distinction between memory, states of awareness, and the
fundamental entity of consciousness. It puts the analytical searchlight
on mind processes, and it does so with such clarity and originality that
it continues to inﬂuence people all over the world.

Several kinds of yoga are described. They provide a means of master-
ing the body-mind connection.
Indian music and dance also has an
underlying yogic basis.

6. Binary Numbers, Inﬁnity:

A binary number system was used by
Pi ˙ngala17 (450 BC, if we accept the tradition that he was P¯an. ini’s
brother) to represent Vedic metres. The structure of this number sys-
tem may have helped in the invention of the sign for zero. Without
this sign, mathematics would have languished. It is of course true that
the binary number system was independently invented by Leibnitz in
1678, but the fact that the rediscovery had to wait almost 2,000 years
only emphasizes the originality of Pi ˙ngala’s idea.

6

The idea of inﬁnity is found in the Vedas itself. It was correctly under-
stood as one where addition and subtraction of inﬁnity from it leaves
it unchanged.

7. A Complete Grammar, Limitation of Language: The As.t.¯adhy¯ay¯ı, the
grammar of the Sanskrit language by P¯an. ini (450 BC), describes the
entire language in 4,000 algebraic rules. The structure of this grammar
contains a meta-language, meta-rules, and other technical devices that
make this system eﬀectively equivalent to the most powerful comput-
ing machine.18 No grammar of similar power has yet been constructed
for any other language. The famous American scholar Leonard Bloom-
ﬁeld called P¯an. ini’s achievement as ”one of the greatest monuments of
human intelligence.”

The other side to the discovery of this grammar is the idea that lan-
guage (as a formal system) cannot describe reality completely. This
limitation of language is why reality can only be experienced and never
described fully.

Many aspects of the Indian scientiﬁc system have parallels in modern sci-
ence. Indian ideas have found special resonance amongst theoretical physi-
cists and psychologists.

Knowledge was classiﬁed in two ways: the lower or dual; and the higher
or uniﬁed. The seemingly irreconciliable worlds of the material and the
conscious were taken as aspects of the same transcendental reality.

The idea of complementarity was at the basis of the systematization
of Indian philosophic traditions as well, so that complementary approaches
were paired together. This led to the groups of: logic (Ny¯aya) and physics
(Vai´ses.ika), cosmology (S¯am. khya) and psychology (Yoga), and language (M¯ımam. s¯a)
and reality (Ved¯anta). Although these philosophical schools were formalized
in the post-Vedic age, we ﬁnd the basis of these ideas in the Vedic texts.

The S¯am. khya and the Yoga systems take the mind as consisting of ﬁve
components: manas, aham. k¯ara, citta, buddhi, and ¯atman. Manas is the
lower mind which collects sense impressions. Aham. k¯ara is the sense of I-ness
that associates some perceptions to a subjective and personal experience.
Once sensory impressions have been related to I-ness by aham. k¯ara, their
evaluation and resulting decisions are arrived at by buddhi, the intellect.

7

Citta is the memory bank of the mind. These memories constitute the foun-
dation on which the rest of the mind operates. But citta is not merely a
passive instrument. The organization of the new impressions throws up in-
stinctual or primitive urges which creates diﬀerent emotional states. This
mental complex surrounding the innermost aspect of consciousness is the
¯atman, the self, or brahman.

Logic

The objective of the Ny¯aya is anv¯ıks.ik¯ı, or critical inquiry. The beginnings of
it go into the Vedic period, but its ﬁrst systematic elucidation is due to Gau-
tama in his Ny¯aya S¯utra dated to 3rd century BC. The text begins with the
nature of doubt and the means of proof. Next it considers self, body, senses
and their objects, cognition and mind. It describes the cognizing human in
terms of volition, sorrow, suﬀering and liberation. The most important early
commentary on this text is the Ny¯aya Bh¯as.ya of V¯atsy¯ayana.

The Ny¯aya is also called pram¯an. a ´s¯astra or the science of correct knowl-
edge. Knowing is based on four conditions: 1) The subject or the pram¯atr.;
2) The object or the prameya to which the process of cognition is directed;
3) The cognition or the pramiti; and 4) the nature of knowledge, or the
pram¯an. a.

The Ny¯aya system supposes that we are so constituted so as to seek truth.
Our minds are not empty slates; the very constitution of our mind provides
some knowledge of the nature of the world. The four pram¯an. as through which
correct knowledge is acquired are: pratyaks.a or direct perception, anum¯ana
or inference, upam¯ana or analogy, and ´sabda or verbal testimony.

The function of deﬁnition in the Ny¯aya is to state essential nature (svar¯upa)

that distinguishes the object from others. Three fallacies of deﬁnition are de-
scribed: ativy¯apti, or the deﬁnition being too broad as in deﬁning a cow as
a horned animal; avy¯apti, or too narrow; and asambhava, or impossible.

Gautama mentions that four factors are involved in direct perception:
the senses (indriyas) , their objects (artha), the contact of the senses and the
objects (sannikars.a), and the cognition produced by this contact (j˜n¯ana).
The ﬁve sense organs, eye, ear, nose, tongue, and skin have the ﬁve elements
light, ether, earth, water, and air as their ﬁeld, with corresponding qualities
of colour, sound, smell, taste and touch.

Manas or mind mediates between the self and the senses. When the

8

manas is in contact with one sense-organ, it cannot be so with another. It is
therefore said to be atomic in dimension. It is because of the nature of the
mind that our experiences are essentially linear although quick succession of
impressions may give the appearance of simultaneity.

Objects have qualities which do not have existence of their own. The
color and class associated with an object are secondary to the substance.
According to Gautama, direct perception is inexpressible. Things are not
perceived as bearing a name. The conception of an object on hearing a name
is not direct perception but verbal cognition.

Dharmak¯ırti, a later Ny¯aya philosopher, recognizes four kinds of percep-
tion: sense-perception, mental perception (manovij˜n¯ana), self-consciousness,
and yogic perception. Self-consciousness is a perception of the self through
its states of pleasure and pain. In yogic perception, one is able to comprehend
the universe in fullness and harmony.

Not all perceptions are valid. Normal perception is subject to the exis-
tence of 1) the object of perception, 2) the external medium such as light in
the case of seeing, 3) the sense-organ, 4) the mind, without which the sense-
organs cannot come in conjunction with their objects, and 5) the self. If any
of these should function improperly, the perception would be erroneous. The
causes of illusion may be dos.a (defect in the sense-organ), sam. prayoga (pre-
sentation of only part of an object), or sam. sk¯ara (habit based on irrelevant
recollection).

Anum¯ana (inference) is knowledge from the perceived about the unper-
ceived. The relation between the two may be of three kind: the element to
be inferred may be the cause or the eﬀect of the element perceived, or the
two may be the joint eﬀects of something else.

The Ny¯aya syllogism is expressed in ﬁve parts: 1) pratij˜n¯a, or the propo-
sition: the house is on ﬁre; 2) hetu, or the reason: the smoke; 3) ud¯aharan. a,
the example: ﬁre is accompanied by smoke, as in the kitchen; 4) upanaya,
the application: as in kitchen so for the house; 5) nigamana, the conclusion:
therefore, the house is on ﬁre. This recognizes that the inference derives
from the knowledge of the universal relation (vy¯apti) and its application to
the speciﬁc case (paks.adharmat¯a). There can be no inference unless there is
expectation (¯ak¯a ˙nks.¯a) about the hypothesis which is expressed in terms of
the proposition.

The minor premise (paks.adharmat¯a) is a consequence of perception, whereas

the major premise (vy¯apti) results from induction. But the universal propo-

9

sition cannot be arrived at by reasoning alone. Frequency of the observation
increases the probability of the universal, but does not make it certain.

The Ny¯aya system lays stress on antecedence in its view of causality. But
both cause and eﬀect are viewed as passing events. Cause has no meaning
apart from change; when analyzed, it leads to a chain that continues without
end. Causality is useful within the limits of experience, but it cannot be
regarded as of absolute validity. Causality is only a form of experience. The
advancement of knowledge is from upam¯ana, or comparison, with something
else already well known. The leads us back to induction through alaukika
pratyaks.a at the basis of the understanding.

´Sabda, or verbal testimony, is a chief source of knowledge. The meaning
of words is by convention. The word might mean an individual, a form, or
a type, or all three. A sentence, as a collection of words, is cognized from
the trace (sam. sk¯ara) left at the end of the sentence. Knowledge is divided
into cognitions which are not reproductions of former states of consciousness
(anubhava) and those which are (smr.ti). Memory is said to arise from a
contact of the ¯atman with the manas and the trace left by the previous ex-
perience. The impression is the immediate cause of the recollection, whereas
recognition of identity requires an inductive leap.

The Ny¯aya speaks of errors and fallacies arising by interfering with the
process of correct reasoning. The Ny¯aya attacks the Buddhist idea that no
knowledge is certain by pointing out that this statement itself contradicts the
claim by its certainty. Whether cognitions apply to reality must be checked
by determining if they lead to successful action. Pram¯a, or valid knowledge,
leads to successful action unlike erroneous knowledge (viparyaya).

The Ny¯aya accepts the metaphysics of the Vai´ses.ika. It is asserted that
the universe has certain elements that are not corporeal. The subjective
cognitions and feelings which are part of the individual’s consciousness are
transitory and, therefore, they cannot be associated with substances. They
are viewed as qualities associated with the ¯atman.

Physics and chemistry

In the Vai´ses.ika system atoms combine to form diﬀerent kinds of molecules
which break up under the inﬂuence of heat. The molecules come to have
diﬀerent properties based on the inﬂuence of various potentials (tanm¯atras).
Heat and light rays are taken to consist of very small particles of high

10

velocity. Being particles, their velocity is ﬁnite. The gravitational force is
perceived as a wind. The other forces are likewise mediated by atoms of one
kind or the other.

Indian chemistry developed many diﬀerent alkalis, acids and metallic salts
by processes of calcination and distillation, often motivated by the need to
formulate medicines. Metallurgists developed eﬃcient techniques of extrac-
tion of metals from ore.

Geometry and mathematics

Indian geometry began very early in the Vedic period in altar problems as in
the one where the circular altar (earth) is to be made equal in area to a square
altar (heavens). Two aspects of the “Pythagoras” theorem are described in
the ´Sulbas¯utra texts by Baudhayana and others. The geometric problems
are often presented with their algebraic counterparts. The solution to the
planetary problems also led to the development of algebraic methods.

Astronomy

Using hitherto neglected texts, an astronomy of the third millennium BC has
been discovered recently. Y¯aj˜navalkya (1800 BCE ?) knew of a 95-year cycle
to harmonize the motions of the sun and the moon and he also knew that
the sun’s circuit was asymmetric.

Astronomical numbers played a central role in Vedic ritual.19 Part of the
ritual was to devise geometrical schemes related to the lengths of the solar
and the lunar years. The organization of the Vedic books was also according
to an astronomical code. To give just one example, the total number of verses
in all the Vedas is 20,358 which equals 261 × 78, a product of the sky and
atmosphere numbers of Vedic ritual!

The second millennium text Ved¯a ˙nga Jyotis.a of Lagadha went beyond
the earlier calendrical astronomy to develop a theory for the mean motions
of the sun and the moon. This marked the beginnings of the application of
mathematics to the motions of the heavenly bodies. An epicycle theory was
used to explain planetary motions. Later theories consider the motion of the
planets with respect to the sun, which in turn is seen to go around the earth.
The cosmological descriptions of the Pur¯an. as are somewhat confusing.
Their objective is to describe the inner cosmos of the individual in a manner

11

that parallels the outer cosmos. With the earth taken to be at the level of the
navel with concentric continents around the central axis (spine), the sun and
the moon are at the north in the head and the planets are viewed somewhat
beyond. In this conception of the inner cosmos, the earth is taken to be 500
million yojanas (to be equated to the size of the human body) and the sun,
as a center within the brain is a tiny 9,000 yojanas in length. The earth (the
human body) is taken to rest on a turtle (the planet earth).

Medicine

¯Ayurveda, the Vedic system of medicine, views health as harmony between
body, mind and soul. It deals not only with the body, but also with psycho-
logical and spiritual health. Its two most famous texts belong to the schools
of Caraka and Su´sruta. According to Caraka, health and disease are not
predetermined and life may be prolonged by human eﬀort. Su´sruta deﬁnes
the purpose of medicine to cure the diseases of the sick, protect the healthy,
and to prolong life.

The beginnings of medicine may be traced to the R. gveda, since it speaks
of the bhis.aj, or physician, in connection with setting a broken bone. From
other references the bhis.aj or vaidya emerges as a healer of disease and expert
in herbs. The twin gods ¯A´svins are particularly associated with healing of
blindness, lameness, and leprosy. They give an artiﬁcial leg to a hero who
has lost a leg in battle. They are also associated with rejuvenation. Soma
is another healing deity. In many contexts, Indra, Agni, and Soma represent
the three dh¯atus of air, ﬁre and water. The Garbha Upanis.ad describes
the body as consisting of ﬁve elements (with further groups of ﬁve as in
S¯am. khya), supported on six (the sweet, sour, salt, bitter, acid and harsh
juices of food), endowed with six qualities, made up of seven tissues, three
dos.as, and twice-begotten (through father and mother). It further adds that
the head has four skull-bones, with sixteen sockets on each side. It says that
the body has 107 joints, 180 sutures, 900 sinews, 700 veins, 500 muscles, 360
bones, and 45 million hairs.

According to the Pra´sna Upanis.ad, the number of veins is 727,210,201.
There are 101 chief veins, each with 100 branch veins, to each of which are
72,000 yet smaller tributary veins. In Ch¯andogya Upanis.ad, organisms are
divided into three classes based on their origin: born alive (from a womb),
born from an egg, and born from a germ.

12

According to the tradition, there existed six schools of medicine, founded
by the disciples of the sage Punarvasu ¯Atreya. Each of these disciples
Agnive´sa, Bhela, Jat¯ukarn. a, Par¯a´sara, H¯ar¯ıta, and Ks.¯arap¯an. i composed a
Sam. hit¯a. Of these, the one composed by Agnive´sa was supposed to be the
best. The Agnive´sa Sam. hit¯a was later revised by Caraka and it came to
be known as Caraka Sam. hit¯a. ¯Ayurveda is traditionally divided into eight
branches which, in Caraka’s scheme are: 1. S¯utrasth¯ana, general princi-
ples; 2. Nid¯anasth¯ana, cause of disease; 3. Vim¯anasth¯ana, diagnostics;
4. ´Sar¯ırasth¯ana, anatomy and embryology; 5.
Indriyasth¯ana, prognosis;
6. Cikits¯asth¯ana, therapeutics; 7. Kalpasth¯ana, pharmaceutics; and 8. Sid-
dhisth¯ana, successful treatment.

In the Caraka school, the ﬁrst teacher was Bharadv¯aja, whereas in the
Su´sruta school, the ﬁrst person to expound ¯Ayurvedic knowledge was Dhan-
vantari in the form of the king Divod¯asa. The Caraka and Su´sruta Sam. hit¯a
are compendiums of two traditions rather than texts composed by single au-
thors. The beginnings of these traditions must go to the second millennium
BC if not earlier because of the parallel information obtained in the Vedic
Sam. hit¯a and the description in the Mah¯abh¯arata. There is much that is
common in the two texts, except that the Su´sruta Sam. hit¯a is richer in the
ﬁeld of surgery. Part of the original Caraka Sam. hit¯a is lost, and the current
version has several chapters by the Kashmiri scholar Dr.d. habala.

An attempt to reconcile the texts of Caraka and Su´sruta was made by
V¯agbhat.a the Elder in second century BC in his As.t¯a ˙nga Sa ˙ngraha. The
works of Caraka, Su´sruta, and the Elder V¯agbhat.a are considered canonical
and reverentially called the Vr.ddha Tray¯ı, ”the triad of ancients.” Later,
V¯agbhat.a the Younger wrote the As.t.¯a ˙nga Hr.daya Sam. hit¯a which is a lucid
presentation of the ¯Ayurveda giving due place to the surgical techniques
of Su´sruta. In the eighth century, M¯adhava wrote his Nid¯ana, which soon
assumed a position of authority.

Health in ¯Ayurveda is considered to be a balance of the three dos.as or
primary forces of pr¯an. a or v¯ata (air), agni or pitta (ﬁre) and soma or kapha
(water and earth). The ﬁve elements of the S¯am. khya enumeration, that is
earth, water, ﬁre, air, and ether, in diﬀerent combinations constitute the
three body dos.as: v¯ata (air and ether), pitta (ﬁre) and kapha (earth and
water).

The tridos.a or tridh¯atu theory of ¯Ayurveda has sometimes been misun-
derstood to imply that v¯ata, pitta, and kapha literally mean air, bile, and

13

phlegm, which are the ordinary physiological meanings of the terms. In re-
ality, v¯ata stands for the principle of motion, cell development in general,
and the functions of the central nervous system in particular. Pitta signiﬁes
the function of metabolism, including digestion and formation of blood, var-
ious secretions and excretions which are either the means or the end product
of tissue combustion. Kapha represents functions of cooling, preservation
and heat regulation. The imbalance of these elements leads to illness. The
predominance of one or the other represents diﬀerent psychological types.

Each of the dos.as is recognized to be of ﬁve kinds. V¯ata appears as pr¯an. a
(governing respiration), ud¯ana (for uttering sounds and speaking), sam¯ana
(for separating the digested juice), vy¯ana (carrying ﬂuids including blood to
all parts of the body), and ap¯ana (expelling waste products). Pitta appears
as p¯acaka (for digestion and imparting heat), ra˜njaka (imparting redness to
the chyle and blood), s¯adhaka (increasing the power of the brain), ¯alocaka
(strengthen vision), and bhr¯ajaka (improve complexion). Kapha has kledaka
(moists food), avalambaka (imparts energy and strength), bodhaka (enables
tasting), tarpaka (governs the eye and other sensory organs), and ´sles.maka
(acts as lubrication).

Every substance (animal, vegetable or mineral) is a dravya with properties
in diﬀerent proportions: rasa, gun. a, v¯ırya, vip¯aka, and prabh¯ava. The gun. as
are qualities such as heat, cold, heaviness, lightness and so on in a total of
twenty types. Of the twenty gun. as, heat (us.n. a) and cold (´s¯ıta) are the most
prominent. V¯ırya is generative energy that may also be hot or cold.

Vip¯aka may be understood as the biochemical transformations of food
whereas prabh¯ava is the subtle eﬀect on the body of the substance. Food
is converted into rasa by the digestive action of j¯at.har¯agni, the ﬁre in the
stomach. Rasas are six in number: madhura, ¯amla, lavan. a, tikta, kat.u,
and kas.¯aya. Each rasa is a result of the predominance of two elements and
each is recognized by the taste. The knowledge of the rasas is important in
therapeutics. Madhura, ¯amla and lavan. a work well against v¯ata; madhura,
tikta, and kas.¯aya against pitta; and kat.u and kas.¯aya against kapha.

The ﬁve elements in various proportions are said to form seven kinds
of tissue (dh¯atu). These are: rasa (plasma), rakta (blood), m¯am. sa (ﬂesh),
medas (fat), asthi (bone), majj¯a (marrow), and ´sukra (semen). The activity
of the dh¯atu is represented by ojas (vitality) or bala (strength). Ojas is
mediated through an oily, while ﬂuid that permeates the whole body. The
functions of the vital organs like the heart, brain, spleen, and liver relate

14

to the ﬂow and exchange of tissues. The heart is the chief receptacle of the
three chief ﬂuids of the body: rasa, rakta, and ojas.

The Bhela Sam. hit¯a, ancient like the Caraka and Su´sruta Sam. hit¯a but
available only in fragments, considers the brain to be the center of the mind.
It distinguishes between manas (mind) with its seat in the brain and the
citta, consciousness, with its seat in the heart.

Training a Vaidya

The ¯Ayurvedic vaidya must master eight branches: k¯ay¯acikits¯a (internal
medicine), ´salyacikits¯a (surgery including anatomy), ´s¯al¯akyacikits¯a (eye, ear,
nose, and throat diseases), kaumarabhr.tya (pediatrics), bh¯utavidy¯a (psychi-
atry, or demonology), and agada tantra (toxicology), ras¯ayana (science of
rejuvenation), and v¯ajikaran. a (the science of fertility).

In addition, the vaidya was expected to know ten arts that were consid-
ered indispensable in the preparation and application of medicines: distilla-
tion, operative skills, cooking, horticulture, metallurgy, sugar manufacture,
pharmacy, analysis and separation of minerals, compounding of metals, and
preparation of alkalis. The teaching of anatomy, physiology, pathology, mi-
crobiology, and pharmacology was done during the instruction of relevant
clinical subjects. For example, teaching of anatomy was a part of the teach-
ing of surgery, embryology was a part of training in pediatrics and obstetrics,
and the knowledge of physiology and pathology was interwoven in the teach-
ing of all the clinical disciplines.

The initiation ceremony of the physician was called upanayana and it
involved the teacher leading the student three times around the sacred ﬁre.
This ceremony made the student thrice-born (trija), distinguished from the
twice-born (dvija) non-physicians.

At the closing of the initiation, the guru gave a solemn address to the
students where the guru directed the students to a life of chastity, honesty,
and vegetarianism. The student was to strive with all his being for the health
of the sick. He was not to betray patients for his own advantage. He was
to dress modestly and avoid strong drink. He was to be collected and self-
controlled, measured in speech at all times. He was to constantly improve
his knowledge and technical skill. In the home of the patient he was to be
courteous and modest, directing all attention to the patient’s welfare. He
was not to divulge any knowledge about the patient and his family. If the

15

patient was incurable, he was to keep this to himself if it was likely to harm
the patient or others.

Su´sruta speaks of a similar address to the initiates.

In addition, the
student was told to wear an ochre robe. The teacher also took an oath: “If
you behave well and I fail to take care of you, that will be my sin and my
learning will be of no avail.”

The normal length of the student’s training appears to have been seven
years. Before graduation, the student was to pass a test. But the physician
was to continue to learn through texts, direct observation (pratyaks.a), and
In addition, the vaidyas attended meetings
through inference (anum¯ana).
where knowledge was exchanged. The doctors were also enjoined to gain
knowledge of unusual remedies from hillsmen, herdsmen, and forest-dwellers.
The qualiﬁed vaidya on his rounds from house to house was attended by
an assistant who carried his bag of instruments and herbs. He was clad in
white, shod in sandals, with a staﬀ in hand, he had a servant follow him with
a parasol. He would also see patients at his own house where he also had a
storeroom with drugs and instruments. He compounded many of the drugs
himself from herbs with the help of his assistant.

The vaidya was assisted by nurses (paric¯araka). Su´sruta lists the following
qualities of the nurse: devotion and friendliness, watchfulness, not inclined
to disgust, and knowledgeable to follow the instructions of the doctor.

There existed governmental control of the medical profession. Su´sruta
hints of this when he mentions that a quack kills people out of greed, because
of the fault of the king. There is reference to free hospitals in ancient India.

Dissection and Surgery

Su´sruta laid great emphasis on direct observation and learning through dis-
section (avaghars.ana).
In preparation of dissection the excrements of the
selected dead body were cleaned. The body was now covered with a sheath
of grass and left to decompose in the still waters of a pool. After seven days,
the student was instructed to scrape oﬀ the skin and carefully observe the
internal organs of the body.

Su´sruta classiﬁed surgical operations into eight categories: incision (chedya),

excision (bhedya), scariﬁcation (lekhya), puncturing (vedhya), probing (esya),
extraction (¯ah¯arya), evacuation and drainage (vi´sr¯avya), and suturing (s¯ıvya).
Su´sruta lists 101 blunt and 20 sharp instruments that were used in surgery,

16

instructing that these should be made of steel and kept in a portable case
with a separate compartment for each instrument. Fourteen types of ban-
dages were described. Surgical operations on all parts of the body were
described. These include laparotomy, craniotomy, caesarian section, plastic
repair of the torn ear lobule, cheiloplasty, rhinoplasty, excision of cataract,
tonsillectomy, excision of laryngeal polyps, excision of anal ﬁstule, repair of
hernias and prolapse of rectum, lithotomy, amputation of bones, and many
neurosurgical procduces.

Medications were used for pre-operative preparation and medicated oils
were used for dressing of wounds. Ice, caustics and cautery were used for
haemostasis. Medicated wines were used before and after surgery to assuage
pain. A drug called sammohini was used to make the patient unconscious
before a major operation and another drug, sa˜nj¯ıvini, was employed to re-
suscitate the patient after operation or shock.

Diagnosis

It was enjoined that diagnosis be done using all ﬁve senses together with
interrogation. The diagnosis was based on: 1. cause (nid¯ana); 2.premonitory
indications (purvar¯upa); 3. symptoms (r¯upa); 4. therapeutic tests (upa´saya);
and 5. the natural course of development of the disease (sampr¯apti). Su´sruta
declares that the physician (bhis.aj), the drug (dravya), the nurse (paric¯araka),
and the patient (rog¯ı) are the four pillars on which rest the success of the
treatment.

Diﬀerent methods of treatment, based on the diagnosis of the patient,
were outlined. The drugs were classiﬁed into 75 types according to their
therapeutic eﬀect. For successful treatment, the following ten factors were
to be kept in mind: 1) the organism (´sar¯ıra); 2) its maintenance (vr.tti); 3)
cause of disease (hetu); 4) nature of disease (vy¯adhi); 5) action or treatment
(karma); 6) eﬀects or results (k¯arya); 7) time (k¯ala); 8) agent or the physician
(kart¯a); 9) the means and instruments (karan. a); and 10) the decision on the
line of treatment (vidhi vini´scaya).

Su´sruta considers the head as the centre of the senses and describes cranial
nerves associated with speciﬁc sensory function. Based on the derangement
of the dos.as, he classiﬁes a total of 1120 diseases. Caraka, on the other
hand, considers the diseases to be innumerable. The dos.a-type diseases are
called nija, whereas those with an external basis are called ¯agantuka. The

17

microbial origin of disease and the infective nature of diseases such as fevers,
leprosy, smallpox, and tuberculosis was known. According to Su´sruta, all
forms of leprosy, some other skin conditions, tuberculosis, opthalmic and
epidemic diseases are born by air and water and may be transmitted from
one person to another. These diseases are not only due to the derangement
of v¯ayu, pitta, and kapha, but also of parasitic origin. He adds: “There are
ﬁne organisms that circulate in the blood and are invisible to the naked eye
which give rise to many diseases.” Parasites were classiﬁed into ﬁve types:
sahaja (symbiotic parasites), par¯ıs.aja (derived from faeces), kaphaja (derived
from mucus), ´son. itaja (derived from the blood stream), and malaja (derived
from the waste products of the body).

Another classiﬁcation, based on etiological factors, divided disease into
seven categories: 1) hereditary conditions based on the diseased germ cells
(¯adibala); 2) congenital disease (janmabala); 3) diseases due to the distur-
bance of the humours (dos.abala); 4) injuries and traumas (sangh¯atabala); 5)
sasonal diseases (k¯alabala); 6) random diseases (daivabala); and 7) natural
conditions such as aging (svabh¯avabala).

The diseases of the head and the nervous system were given in detail.
Amongst the nervous disorders described are convulsions, apoplectic ﬁts,
hysteric ﬁts, tetanus, dorsal bending, hemiplegia, total paralysis, facial paral-
ysis, lockjaw, stiﬀ neck, paralysis of the tongue, sciatica, St. Vitus’ dance,
paralysis agitans, and fainting. Four kinds of epilepsy was described. It was
instructed that once the attack is over, the patient should not be rebuked
and he should be cheered with friendly talk.

Su´sruta devoted one complete chapter to interpretation of dreams, be-
lieving that dreams of the patient, together with other omens can be an
indication to the outcome of the treatment.

¯Ayurveda was also applied to animal welfare. Texts on veterinary science
describe the application of the science to diﬀerent animals. Refuges and
homes for sick and aged animals and birds were endowed. An ¯ayurveda for
plants and trees was also practised.

To summarize, Indian science was multifaceted, with abstract theories
on the one hand and strict protocols for experiments on the other, as in
medicine. Mathematics was used not only in astronomy and music but also
in humanistic subjects such as language.

18

3 Cosmology of Greek science

The Greek tradition, like the Indian, is pluralistic. Amongst the cosmologies
described are: (i) a structure ordered by a supreme principle (Plato); (ii)
cosmos as a balance of equal but opposed forces (e.g. Anaximander, Par-
menides, and Empedocles); (iii) a cosmos where war and strife are universal
(Homer).

The idea that the universe is a machine under the guidance of a ratio-
nal intelligence became prominent at a point. Plato and Aristotle supported
this view, though with diﬀerent emphasis. For Plato the Craftsman is tran-
scendent, whereas for Aristotle it is an immanent force and nature itself is
purposeful. Later philosophers denied the idea that the universe is a product
of design. The atomists and the Epicureans believed that the world was a
product not of design, but necessity out of the mechanical interactions of
atoms.

There were multiple views about the creation of the universe. Plato (427-
347 BC) appeared to support the view that the universe is one and created;
for Aristotle, it was one and eternal; for Empedocles, it goes through cycles
of creation and destruction. But these speculations were not associated with
speciﬁc numbers as in the great cycles of Indian cosmology.

The early Greeks came into contact with older civilizations and learned
their mathematics and cosmologies. Thales of Miletus (born about 624 BC),
listed later as the ﬁrst philosopher, went to Egypt where he learned geometry
which he introduced to Greece. He believed that the earth ﬂoats on water.
His student Anaximander believed the earth to be surrounded by a series of
spheres made of mist and surrounded by a big ﬁre. In a diﬀerent version of
his cosmology he imagined the earth to be a cylinder ﬂoating in space.

Empedocles believed the cosmos to be egg-shaped and governed by alter-
nating reigns of love and hate. He took all matter to be composed of four
elements: earth, water, ﬁre, air. These four elements arise from the working
of the two properties of hotness (and its contrary coldness) and dryness (and
its contrary wetness) upon an original unqualiﬁed or primitive matter. The
possible combinations of these two properties of primitive matter give rise to
the four elements or elemental forms. In another theory, Anaximines claimed
that everything was made of air. Earth was some sort of condensation of air,
while ﬁre was some sort of emission form air. When earth condenses out of
air, ﬁre is created in the process.

19

Pythagoras (560-480 BC) was born on the isle of Samos oﬀ the coast
of Asia Minor. He travelled widely and studied with priests and healers
in several foreign lands, collecting their writings and manuscripts. Between
the age of 30 and 40 he he went into exile from Samos because he did not
want to live under the rule of Polycrates, the tyrant. He settled down in the
Greek colony in southern Italy called Croton, where he ﬁnally established the
Pythagorean School. The Pythagoreans believed in reincarnation and they
were vegetarians.

The Pythagoreans symbolized the elements as geometric forms as part
of the belief that numbers were the language of physics and psychology.
The ether element (the sphere of the whole) is represented by neutrality,
spaciousness, and invisibility and its qualities were symbolized by the twelve
faced dodecahedron. The air element is cold, light, quick and it is symbolized
by a small blue eight faced octahedron. The symbol of the ﬁre element is
a very small hot, red, active, four faced tetrahedron, and that of water is a
larger, moist, white 20 faced, white icosahedron. The earth is symbolized by
a large, dry, yellow, six faced hexahedron. The ﬁre is the smallest and most
active, the air is slightly larger than ﬁre and very light, the water is slightly
larger and heavier, and the earth is the largest and most dense. Later, in the
Timaeus, Plato proposed that the geometric solids constituted the elemental
shapes of the physical atoms of matter and he based his theory of physics on
the qualities of their sizes and shapes.

The Greek naturalists called the dynamic vital force the ﬁery pneuma,
which is the primordial energy that pervades all phenomena. The expansions
and contractions of this pneuma produces a space that includes hot and cold
areas, as well as light and heavy areas of concentration. These universal
elements manifest as the ﬁve archytypal elements ether, air, ﬁre, water, earth.
The constant ebb and ﬂow of these primordial ﬁve elements created the
interchange of mass and energy which manifested the galaxies, solar systems
and planets. The ﬂux of these elements produces the phenomena of nature
we observe as the day and night, the waxing and waning of the moon, the
passing of the four seasons and the processes of biological life itself.

But ordinary matter was constituted of only four elements, the ﬁfth rep-

resented the heavens.

20

Medicine

The Pythagoreans believed that just as the universe has its central ﬁre, the
human body has its essence in heat; the heat of the seed and of the uterus
are the origin of all life; the body attracts to itself the external air on account
of its desire that heat should be tempered by cold and thus resolves itself in
respiration.

Empedocles, who proposed the four-element theory, was the founder of
the Italian school of medicine. He also noted that the blood and the respi-
ration of air were linked and noted that the pores of the skin also breathed.
Parmenides (450 BC) also wrote works on physiology and psychology. He
believed that the mental and emotional state of a person was determined by
the proportion of heat and cold in the human body.

The exchange of the cooling external air and the ﬁrey internal heat is the
cause of both respiration and circulation which stimulates the absorption and
elimination of liquid and solid nourishment. The synergistic combination of
the ﬁve elements and the pneumatic vital force produces the four humoural
constituents from air, food and water. These four humours are the cold and
dry bile, the hot and moist blood, the moist and cold phlegm, and the dry
and hot choler.

In Greek medicine, any excess or deﬁciency of the four elements and four
humours, disruptions of the three energies, wind (breath), heat (bile) and
cold (phlegm) produce the state of disease. These factors show that the
Pythagorean’s theory of medicine has much in common with the ¯Ayurveda
which uses the ﬁve elements, together with the tridh¯atu (the three forces)
and tridos.a (the three faults).

The most famous person in Greek medicine is Hippocrates, a contempo-
rary of Plato, known now for the oath that the doctors had to take. Many
texts attributed to Hippocrates shed light upon the Hippocratic method of
medicine. None of these texts may be identiﬁed as Hippocrates’ own work,
however. These works are called the Corpus Hippocraticum and number
upwards of sixty. Galen, practicing medicine at Rome in the latter half of
the Second Century AD, was certain, that Hippocrates himself wrote Epi-
demics I and III. Scholars have suggested that the texts may have been part
of a library collection, originally from Cos, that was subsequently moved to
Alexandria and then added upon, building the collection of medical texts
we have today. While not primary sources, these works were written by

21

Hippocrates’ students and practitioners of his medical theory.

The Hippocratic physician’s ﬁrst option was to suggest a regimen to his
patient. This treatment consisted of advice regarding what the patient should
eat and drink, and the amount of sleep and exercise he needed; it amounted
to a cautious “let nature take its course” approach. The purpose of the
regimen was to void the body of the imbalanced humour through a diet and
exercise program. The physician would tailor such a regimen to the time
of the year and to speciﬁc patient characteristics, and would wait until his
patient’s condition noticeably improved or worsened. The Hippocratic text
Aphorisms outlined the order that the treatments were to follow: “What
drugs will not cure, the knife will; what the knife will not cure, the cautery
will; what the cautery will not cure must be considered incurable.”

The choice of drugs to be administered was predicated upon the perceived
humoural imbalance the physician sought to correct. The drug of choice was
hellebore, popular because it induced both vomiting and diarrhea, tangible
side eﬀects the physician would interpret as the voiding of the humor. Helle-
bore, an extremely poisonous plant sometimes killed the patient; those lucky
enough to quickly void themselves of its poison managed to survive. The
physician could justify such drastic treatment because he believed that the
purged material indicated he had successfully balanced the oﬀending humor
and thus treated his patient.

Not surprisingly, this treatment also left the patient in worse health, so the
physician adopted even more aggressive methods to cure him. The physician
resorted to the knife and blood-letting as a solution to the illness. Venesection
was practiced ostensibly because it allowed the imbalanced humor a means
of directly escaping the body, thereby restoring the humoral balance and the
person’s health. The physician would cut furthest away from the point that
hurt, drawing the humours away from that painful spot. He would choose the
amount of blood he wanted to spurt out by placing a cup over the bleeding
incision; once the cup had ﬁlled, the physician was satisﬁed that he had
completed treatment.

The physician’s last-ditch eﬀort was cauterization. Assuming that the
patient had not yet died from either the disease or the previous treatments,
cauterization involved burning the skin in one last attempt to “consume”
the excess humor. Then the physician would allow the resulting wound to
ulcerate, which he would then irritate with caustic drugs, like mustard-seed
paste, to allow the humours to slowly drain out of the body. The area chosen

22

for cauterization was to be located as far as possible from the actual wound,
again to draw the excess humours from the painful spot.

In common with other intellectuals in the Greek city-states, Hippocrat-
ics were interested in far-away places and peoples, in epidemic diseases and
plagues, in the origins of man and embryology, and in dietetics. Hippocratics
were quick to criticize causes and remedies that they considered irrational.
The writer of “Diseases of Young Girls” censures women who follow com-
mands from Artemis’ priests to dedicate costly garments to the goddess in
the eﬀort to cure madness in the premenarchic young girl. The author of
“Sacred Disease” criticizes “witch-doctors, faith-healers, quacks and charla-
tans,” whose etiology for epilepsy and sudden seizures invokes attacks from
the gods and whose therapies consist of puriﬁcations, incantations, prohi-
bition of baths, lying on goat-skins and eating goats’ ﬂesh (Sacred Disease
1-2).

The etiology for the disease in such examples is taken to be the blockage
of inner vessels by a bodily humour. Treatment was to require the evacuation
of the noxious ﬂuid from vital areas of the body: the epileptic is to take a
medicine to move excess phlegm gradually from his head so that its sudden
descent into his body doesn’t overwhelm his senses, and the young girl is to
sleep with a man as soon as possible to remove the impediment at the mouth
of her uterus, while pregnancy will bring her long-lasting cure by opening up
her body so that her excess ﬂuids can move about freely.

Although one may criticize these methods, there was a basis of process
that was invoked to explain a disease. This then qualiﬁed the system as
being scientiﬁc. The Hippocratic system was to remain extremely inﬂuential
in the West until the advent of modern medicine.

Elements and the solar system

We have already mentioned Plato’s mathematical construction of the ele-
ments (earth, ﬁre, air, and water), in which the cube, tetrahedron, octahe-
dron, and icosahedron are given as the shapes of the atoms of earth, ﬁre, air,
and water. The ﬁfth Platonic solid, the dodecahedron, is Plato’s model for
the whole universe.

Plato’s beliefs as regards the universe were that the stars, planets, the
sun and the moon move round the earth in crystalline spheres. The sphere of
the moon was closest to the earth, then the sphere of the sun, then Mercury,

23

Venus, Mars, Jupiter, Saturn and furthest away was the sphere of the stars.
He believed that the moon shines by reﬂected sunlight.

Elements had a natural tendency to separate in space; ﬁre moved out-
wards, away from the earth, and earth moved inwards, with air and water
being intermediate. Thus, each of these elements occupied a unique place
in the heavens (earth elements were heavy and, therefore, low; ﬁre elements
were light and located up high).

There were only seven objects visible to the ancients, the sun and the
moon, plus the ﬁve planets, Mercury, Venus, Mars, Jupiter and Saturn. It
was obvious that the planets were not on the celestial sphere since the moon
clearly passes in front of the sun and planets, plus Mercury and Venus can
be seen to transit the sun.

Slightly later, Aristarchus (270 B.C.) proposed an alternative model of
the Solar System placing the sun at the center with the earth and the planets
in circular orbit around it. The moon orbits around the earth. This model
became known as the heliocentric theory Aristarchus’ model was ruled out
by the philosophers at the time for the reason that there was no feeling on
earth of its motion. It is interesting that although Aristarchus was the most
prominent astronomer of his time, he assumed a ﬁgure of two degrees for the
angular diameter of the moon, when the correct value is about one-half of a
degree. Since the correct size is very easily ascertained, the criticism has been
made that the Greeks did not have a tradition of observational astronomy.

Ptolemaic system

Ptolemy (200 A.D.) was the author of the Almagest, a treatise on the celestial
sphere and the motion of the planets. The book is divided into 13 books,
each of which deals with certain astronomical concepts pertaining to stars
and to objects in the solar system. It was, no doubt, the encyclopedic nature
of the work that made the Almagest so useful to later astronomers and that
gave the views contained in it so profound an inﬂuence. In essence, it is a
synthesis of the results obtained by Greek astronomy; it is also the major
source of knowledge about the work of Hipparchus.

In the ﬁrst book of the Almagest, Ptolemy describes his geocentric system
and gives various arguments to prove that, in its position at the center of the
universe, the earth must be immovable. Not least, he showed that if the earth
moved, as some earlier philosophers had suggested, then certain phenomena

24

should in consequence be observed. In particular, Ptolemy argued that since
all bodies fall to the center of the universe, the earth must be ﬁxed there at
the center, otherwise falling objects would not be seen to drop toward the
center of the earth. Again, if the earth rotated once every 24 hours, a body
thrown vertically upward should not fall back to the same place, as it was
seen to do. Ptolemy was able to demonstrate, however, that no contrary
observations had ever been obtained.

Ptolemy accepted the following order for celestial objects in the solar
system: earth (center), Moon, Mercury, Venus, Sun, Mars, Jupiter, and
In particular, the sun appears to describe a yearly circular path
Saturn.
called the ecliptic over the background of stars. However, when the detailed
observations of the planets in the skies is examined, the planets undergo
motion which is impossible to explain in the geocentric model, a backward
track for the outer planets. This behavior is called retrograde motion.

He realized, as had Hipparchus, that the inequalities in the motions of
these heavenly bodies necessitated either a system of deferents and epicycles
or one of movable eccentrics (both systems devised by Apollonius of Perga,
the Greek geometer of the 3rd century BC) in order to account for their
movements in terms of uniform circular motion. In the Ptolemaic system,
deferents were large circles centered on the earth, and epicycles were small
circles whose centers moved around the circumferences of the deferents. The
sun, moon, and planets moved around the circumference of their own epicy-
cles. In the movable eccentric, there was one circle; this was centered on a
point displaced from the earth, with the planet moving around the circum-
ference. These were mathematically equivalent schemes.

Even with these, all observed planetary phenomena still could not be fully
taken into account. Ptolemy now supposed that the earth was located a short
distance from the center of the deferent for each planet and that the center
of the planet’s deferent and the epicycle described uniform circular motion
around what he called the equant, which was an imaginary point that he
placed on the diameter of the deferent but at a position opposite to that of
the earth from the center of the deferent (i.e., the center of the deferent was
between the earth and the equant). He further supposed that the distance
from the earth to the center of the deferent was equal to the distance from
the center of the deferent to the equant. With this hypothesis, Ptolemy could
better account for many observed planetary phenomena.

25

Crystalline spheres

Although Ptolemy realized that the planets were much closer to the earth
than the “ﬁxed” stars, he believed in the physical existence of Plato’s crys-
talline spheres, to which the heavenly bodies were said to be attached. Out-
side the sphere of the ﬁxed stars, Ptolemy proposed other spheres, ending
with the primum mobile (“prime mover”), which provided the motive power
for the remaining spheres that constituted his conception of the universe.

This model, while complicated, was a complete description of the Solar
System that explained, and predicted, the apparent motions of all the planets.
This, however was not universally accepted. The most notable detractor was
Democritus who postulated the existence of indestructible atoms (from the
Greek a-tome: that which cannot be cut) of an inﬁnite variety of shapes and
sizes. He imagined an inﬁnite universe containing an inﬁnite number of such
atoms, in between the atoms there is an absolute void.

Aristotle’s cosmology

Aristotle’s cosmological work On The Heavens presents the mainstream view
of Greek cosmology. Aristotle believed in just four elements: earth, water, air
and ﬁre. These elements naturally move up or down, ﬁre being the lightest
and earth the heaviest. A composite object will have the features of the
element which dominates.

The idea that all bodies, by their very nature, have a natural way of
moving is central to Aristotelian cosmology. Movement is not, he states, the
result of the inﬂuence of one body on another Some bodies naturally move
in straight lines, others naturally stay put. But there is yet another natural
movement: the circular motion. Since to each motion there must correspond
a substance, there ought to be some things that naturally move in circles.
Aristotle then states that such things are the heavenly bodies which are made
of a more exalted and perfect substance than all earthly objects.

Since the stars and planets are made of this exalted substance and then
move in circles, it is also natural, according to Aristotle, for these objects to
be spheres. The cosmos is then made of a central earth (which he accepted
as spherical) surrounded by the moon, sun and stars all moving in circles
around it. This conglomerate he called “the world”. Although celestial
bodies are perfect, they must circle the imperfect earth. The initial motion

26

of these spheres was caused by the action of a “prime mover” which acts on
the outermost sphere of the ﬁxed stars; the motion then trickles down to the
other spheres through a dragging force.

Aristotle also addresses the question whether this world is unique or not;
he argues that it is unique. The argument goes as follows: earth (the sub-
stance) moves naturally to the center, if the world is not unique there ought
to be at least two centers, but then, how can earth know to which of the
two centers to go? But since “earthy” objects have no trouble deciding how
to move, he concludes that there can only be one center (the earth) circled
endlessly by all heavenly bodies.

It is interesting to note that Aristotle asserts that the world did not come
into being at one point, but that it has existed, unchanged, for all eternity
(it had to be that way since it was “perfect”); the universe is in a kind of
“steady state scenario”. Still, since he believed that the sphere was the most
perfect of the geometrical shapes, the universe did have a center (the earth)
and its “material” part had an edge, which was “gradual” starting in the
lunar and ending in the ﬁxed star sphere. Beyond the sphere of the stars the
universe continued into the spiritual realm where material things cannot be.
On the speciﬁc description of the heavens, Aristotle created a complex
system containing 55 spheres. One of the fundamental propositions of Aris-
totelian philosophy is that there is no eﬀect without a cause. Applied to
moving bodies, this proposition dictates that there is no motion without
a force. Speed, then is proportional to force and inversely proportional to
resistance.

Qualitatively this implies that a body will traverse a thinner medium in a
shorter time than a thicker medium (of the same length): things will go faster
through air than through water. A natural (though erroneous) conclusion
is that there could be no vacuum in Nature, for if the resistance became
vanishingly small, a tiny force would produce a very large “motion”; in the
limit where there is no resistance any force on any body would produce an
inﬁnite speed. This conclusion put him in direct contradiction with the ideas
of the atomists such as Democritus. Aristotle concluded the atomists were
wrong, stating that matter is in fact continuous and inﬁnitely divisible.

For falling bodies, the force is the weight pulling down a body and the
resistance is that of the medium (air, water, etc.). Aristotle noted that a
falling object gains speed, which he then attributed to a gain in weight.
If weight determines the speed of fall, then when two diﬀerent weights are

27

dropped from a high place the heavier will fall faster and the lighter slower,
in proportion to the two weights. A ten pound weight would reach the earth
by the time a one-pound weight had fallen one-tenth as far.

Zeno’s paradoxes

An excellent example of the Greek application of logic in understanding mo-
tion is captured by the paradoxes of Zeno (ﬁfth century BC). These para-
doxes, which are variations on a single theme, emerge because of the consid-
eration of space and time as discrete.

1. Dichotomy paradox: Before a moving object can travel a certain dis-
tance, it must travel half that distance. Before it can travel half the dis-
tance it must travel one-fourth the distance, and so on. This sequence
goes on forever, therefore, the original distance cannot be traveled, and
motion is impossible.

2. Achilles and the tortoise paradox: Achilles gives the tortoise a head
start in a race. Before he can overtake the tortoise, he must run to the
place where the tortoise began but the tortoise has moved on to some
other point. From there, before he can overtake the tortoise, he must
run to the place where the tortoise had moved to. This goes on forever,
and Achilles can never pass the tortoise.

3. Arrow paradox: If you look at an arrow in ﬂight, at an instant in time,
it appears the same as a motionless arrow. Then how does it move?

Archimedes and physics

Archimedes (3rd century BC) contributed many new results to mathematics,
including successfully computing areas and volumes of two and three dimen-
sional ﬁgures and a geometrical argument for an approximation of π. His
major contributions to physics are his principle of buoyancy, and his analysis
of the lever. He also invented many ingenious technological devices, many
for war, but also the Archimedean screw, a pumping device for irrigation
systems.

According to the Roman historian Vitruvius, Hiero, after gaining the
royal power in Syracuse, resolved, as a consequence of his successful exploits,

28

to place in a certain temple a golden crown which he had vowed to the
immortal gods. He contracted for its making at a ﬁxed price and weighed out
a precise amount of gold to the contractor. At the appointed time the latter
delivered to the king’s satisfaction an exquisitely ﬁnished piece of handiwork,
and it appeared that in weight the crown corresponded precisely to what
the gold had weighed. But afterwards a charge was made that gold had
been abstracted and an equivalent weight of silver had been added in the
manufacture of the crown. Hiero asked his friend Archimedes to investigate
the matter. While in a tub for his bath, Archimedes discovered the principle
of buoyancy (hydrostatics or the Archimedes Law), according to which the
water displaced equals the mass of the body. Without a moments delay and
transported with joy, he jumped out of the tub and rushed home naked,
crying in a loud voice “Eureka, Eureka.”

Archimedes’ Principle states that the buoyancy support force is exactly
equal to the weight of the water displaced by the immersed object, that is, it
is equal to the weight of a volume of water equal to the volume of the object.
Although leverage has been used to move heavy objects since prehistoric
times, it appears that Archimedes was the ﬁrst person to appreciate just how
much weight could be shifted by one person using appropriate leverage. It is
believed that he also invented a screw for pumping water upwards.

4 Comparing Indian and Greek sciences

We ﬁrst note that when we speak of a formal science, more than a list of of
general ideas it is the elaboration of a system. Using this deﬁnition, medicine
is the best examples of a full-ﬂedged science from the ancient world. The
Greek and Indian medical sciences have some points of commonality, but they
also have distinct diﬀerences. The Greek system emphasizes the mechanical
aspects of humours, whereas the Indian system considers connections with
the mind as well. The Indian system has many recursive levels, it has a
psychosomatic concept of disease, and it is a more comprehensive medical
system. My personal judgment is that ¯Ayurveda is superior to the Hippo-
cratic system which is why it is still practiced in India and the West.

In other ﬁelds, the level of knowledge varied. Considering the work of
Archimedes, it is clear that Greek knowledge of hydrostatics was more ad-
vanced. On the other hand, Indian inner sciences (psychology) were more

29

sophisticated and the Indians had greater success in grammar and in the
conception of the physical universe.

The diﬀerences between the two traditions arose from their respective
cosmologies, which is why they did not attempt to learn from each other.
The Indian cosmos was inﬁnite with a postulated connection between the
inner and the outer. The Greek cosmos was a ﬁnite system.

Greek priority

This view ﬂies against great mass of evidence. For example, the references to
the three humours in the Atharvaveda are prior to Plato by any reckoning.
Likewise, the Baudh¯ayana ´Sulbas¯utra is prior to Greek geometry.
Indian
astronomy is also earlier as evidenced by its description in the ´Satapatha
Br¯ahman. a and the Ved¯a ˙nga Jyotis.a.

For some time the ´Sulbas¯utras themselves were considered to be very
late, after Euclid, in spite of the powerful linguistic arguments against this
view. But when it was discovered the same geometry was present in the
´Satapatha Br¯ahman. a, which is dated prior to 600 BC in the most conservative
chronologies, the circular logic of such chronology became evident.20 Similar
misguided logic was used to assign the date of 500 BC to the Ved¯a ˙nga Jyotis.a,
which has an inner date of roughly 1300 BC, to make its astronomy dependent
on Greek and Babylonian sources.

Common prior origin

This theory comes in two main forms. In the ﬁrst one, which is a variant
of the standard Eurocentric view, it is conceded that the Greek culture was
indebted to the Mesopotamians and the Egyptians, and these taken together
form the basis of Western science.

The second version includes Indian evidence. The ´Sulbas¯utra geometry is
diﬀerent from the Mesopotamian one in that it is constructive and not purely
algebraic and it shares features with Greek geometry. Therefore, if there is
common origin that must be in the shared Indo-European heritage. In other
words, this geometric knowledge must have been a part of the itinerant Indo-
European tribes as they moved through Central Asia, ending up later as the
Vedic Indians and the Greeks.21

But the Greek tradition doesn’t know archaic aspects of Vedic science

30

which are more central to the knowledge system than geometrical knowledge.
Therefore the idea of common prior origin must be discounted.

Indian priority

There are elements of the Greek system which were clearly borrowed from
outside. Thales and Pythagoras travelled out of the country and introduced
new ideas. The Pythagorean ideas on ﬁve elements, vegetarianism and rein-
carnation appear to have an Indian origin. The Pythagoras theorem of geom-
etry may have had an Indian origin since it is described in the ´Sulba S¯utras.
However, such broad concepts do not make a system. It is the ampliﬁcation
of these ideas which reﬂects the national genius.

The history of Greek science is well understood.

It is clear that while
it may have been inspired initially by foreign impulses, it adopted a unique
trajectory and there is no evidence that it was in any way dependent on
Indian science later. In astronomy, for example, there is no evidence of the
use of Indian methods. Greek medicine is likewise diﬀerent from Indian
medicine in crucial details.

Independent development

The physics, philosophy, and medicine of the Greeks was undoubtedly a
result of the characteristic elaboration within Greece. Even the idea of ﬁve
elements did not become the mainstream view and the Hippocratics and
Aristotle spoke only of four elements.

The Indian system of ﬁve elements is connected to the ﬁve-fold recursive
division of reality in S¯am. khya. On the other hand, the emergence of a ﬁfth
element in Greek thought was a gradual process. In the common conception
of the universe shared by most religious and philosophical thinkers in the
centuries before Plato, the cosmos, a sphere bounded by the sky, contains
the conﬂicting ”opposites” (the hot/the cold, the wet/the dry) which became
(via Empedocles) the four root substances earth, water, air and ﬁre.

The astronomies of India and Greece are quite diﬀerent. The elaboration
of logic is also distinctively diﬀerent. In view of all of this, the developments
of Greek and Indian science must be considered independent.22

31

5 Zodiacal signs and Greek astronomy in In-

dia

The argument for a Greek origin of the later Indian astronomy was articu-
lated most vehemently by W.D. Whitney in the closing decades of the 19th
century. He suggested that the transmission of Greek ideas took place some-
time before Ptolemy because the Indian methods do not mention the tech-
niques introduced by him. He also suggested that this transmission must
have occurred in consequence of the “lively commerce between Alexandria
as the port and mart of Europe and the western coast of India [during the
ﬁrst centuries of our era].”23 He was certain that India could not have been
the place of the origin of Indian astronomy because he believed that Indian
history did not go further back than 2000 BC.

Whitney’s theory hinges around the use of the words lipt¯a, hor¯a, and
kendra for minute, hour, and the mean anomaly, which are supposed to be
of Greek origin. Furthermore, he believed that there is scant mention of
the planets in early texts, the names of the days after the planets, and the
division of the circle into signs, degrees, minutes, and seconds is fashioned
after Greek usage.

E. Burgess countered Whitney with arguments related to the lunar and
solar divisions of the zodiac, the epicycle theories, astrology, and the names
of the ﬁve planets.24 I summarize below these arguments strengthened with
the new insights that have been obtained by recent research:25

1. Lunar zodiac. The demonstration that the R. gveda itself contains the
list of the 27 naks.atras in terms of their presiding deities26 establishes
that the lunar zodiac has a greater antiquity in India as compared to
the Chinese and the Arabs. Furthermore, the beginnings of the Indian
tradition are now believed to be several thousand years earlier than
thought by Whitney.

2. Solar zodiac. I have recently shown27 that the solar zodiac arose in India
since the names and symbols of the signs are intimately related to the
deities of the corresponding naks.atras, whereas they appear out of con-
text in Babylonia and Greece. Burgess anticipated this when he stated
that this twelve-part “division was known to the Hindus centuries be-
fore any trace can be found in existence among any other people.”

32

3. The theory of epicycles.

I concur with Burgess’s judgment that “the
diﬀerence of this theory in the Greek and Hindu systems of astron-
omy precludes the diea that one of these people derived more than a
hint respecting it from the other. And so far as this point alone is con-
cerned, we have as much reason to suppose the Greeks to have been the
borrowers as the contrary; but other considerations seem to favor the
supposition that the Hindus were the original inventors of this thory.”

4. Coincidence in the systems of astrology. According to Burgess, “The
coincidence that exist between the Hindu and Greek systems are too
remarkable to admit of the supposition of an independent origin for
them. But the honor of original invention, such as it is, lies, I think,
between the Hindus and the Chaldeans. The evidence of priority of
invention and culture seems, on the whole, to be in favor of the former;
the existence of three or four Arabic and Greek terms in the Hindu
system being accounted for on the supposition that they were intro-
duced at a comparatively recent period. In reference to the word hor¯a
it may not be inappropriate to introduce the testimony of Herodotus:
‘The sun-dial and the gnomon, with the division of the day into twelve
parts, were received by the Greeks from the Babylonians.’ There is
abundant testimony to the fact that the division of the day into twenty-
four hours existed in the East, if not actually in India, before it did in
Greece. In reference to the so-called Greek words found in Hindu as-
tronomical treatises, I would remark that we may with entire propriety
refer them to the numerous class of words common to the Greek and
Sanskrit languages, which either come to both from a common source,
or passed from the Sanskrit to the Greek at a period of high antiquity;
for no one maintains, so far as I am aware, that the Greek is the parent
of Sanskrit.”
An examination of the Vedic texts completely settles this question.28
We have overwhelming evidence supporting the view that the twelve
part division of the circle goes back to the R. gvedic period itself. The In-
dians derive the word hor¯a from ahor¯atra (day-night) which is attested
in the Vedic texts.

5. Names of planets. Burgess argued that the application of the names of
the planets to the days of the week was unknown to the Greeks and

33

not adopted by the Romans until a late period. He concurred with
H.H. Wilson, who said: “It is commonly ascribed to the Egyptians and
Babylonians, but upon no very suﬃcient authority, and the Hindus
appear to have at least as good a title to the invention as any other
people.”
The planets are actually mentioned in the Vedic texts.29

Burgess emphasized that the Arabs were thoroughly imbued with the
knowledge of the Hindu astronomy before they became acquainted with that
of the Greeks. This is established by the Arab translations of Ptolemy’s
Syntaxis (Almagest). In the Latin translations of this book, the ascending
node is called nodus capitis, “the node of the head,” and the descending
node nodus caudae, “the node of the tail (ketu),” which are pure Hindu
appellations.

Burgess concluded by speaking of the detailed methods: “In the amount
of the annual precession of the equinoxes, the relative size of the sun and
moon as compated with the earth, the greatest equation of the centre for the
sun – the Hindus are more nearly correct than the Greeks, and in regard to
the times of the revolutions of the planets they are very nearly correct in four
itmes, and Ptolemy in six. There has evidently been very little astronomical
borrowing between the Hindus and the Greeks. And in regard to points that
prove a communication from one people to the other, I am inclined to think
that the course of derivation was from east to west rather than from west to
east.”

The opinions of Burgess are strengthened by our improved knowledge of
the astronomy of the Ved¯a ˙nga Jyotis.a and the discovery of the astronomy
of the Vedic ﬁre altars.30 Neither should we forget that the cosmological
basis of the Indian sciences was much more subtle and comprehensive than
that of Greek science. The achievements of Indian sciences in the ﬁelds of
mathematics, grammar, and the comprehensiveness of its medical science also
show that the Indian sciences were more advanced that the corresponding
Greek sciences during the glory days of Greek civilization.

The thesis that Indian siddh¯antas were based on Greek and Babylonian
measurements has been fully refuted by Billard and van der Waerden and
so it will not be discussed here.31 It is noteworthy that the framework of
the siddh¯antas was very diﬀerent from that of Greek models. For example,
¯Aryabhat.a’s astronomy considers the earth to rotate on its axis and the

34

planets to go around the sun, which, in turn, is taken to go around the earth.
This model was more advanced than contemporaneous models in the ancient
world.32

6 Conclusions

We have indirect evidence that there was a period of interaction between
Indian and Greek science before the ﬂowering of Greek philosophy. This
was the time when the Greeks borrowed from many sources that apparently
included the Indian. But the importance of this borrowing must not be
exaggerated since it merely consisted of general ideas such as ﬁve elements
of reality or the 360-part division of the circle.

The Greeks were fully aware of the Asiatic origin of their ideas. For
example, Strabo informs us33 that music “from the triple point of view of
melody, rhythm and instruments” came to them originally from Thrace and
Asia. Further, “the poets, who make the whole of Asia, including India, the
land or sacred territory of Dionysos, claim that the origin of music is almost
entirely Asiatic.” Study of music and mathematics go hand in hand, showing
the Greek awareness of the Eastern connection with their own traditions.

Subsequent to that, Greek and Indian sciences appear to have developed
independently although after the time of Alexander they were consciously
aware of each other. The focus and style of the two sciences was diﬀerent
owing to their diﬀerent cosmologies. Perhaps the only science which worked
more or less the same way in the two civilizations was medicine. But even
here there were important diﬀerences.

The reason why the two sciences went their own way in spite of the
knowledge of the other was because their worldviews were diﬀerent. Indian
astronomers, for example, never paid any attention to Ptolemy’s model as
its crystalline sphere basis looked very primitive compared to the vastness of
their own conception. On the other hand, the use of enormous time scales of
Indian astronomy must have appeared unnecessary to the Greeks.

There was no speciﬁc technology that arose at this early date that might
have caused India or Greece to question its own system and become recep-
tive to new ways of doing things. The power and inﬂuence of the Greek
ideas arose out of the narrative and style of its philosophers and scientists.
Its inﬂuence was primarily through its literature and philosophy. Likewise,

35

Indian inﬂuence all over Asia was through its philosophy, medicine, and the
arts and its narrative texts. Science could take its next steps only after the
development of new technology which opened up new worlds of the small and
the large.

Notes and References

1. S. Kak, “Indic ideas in the Graeco-Roman world.” Indian Historical

Review, 1999.

2. S. Kak, Akhenaten, S¯urya, and the R. gveda. LSU, 2003.

3. Arrian, The Campaigns of Alexander. Viking, New York, 1976.

4. See, for example, G.J. Joseph, The Crest of the Peacock: Non-European

Roots of Mathematics. Princeton University Press, 2000.

5. Joseph, op cit.

6. A. Seidenberg, The origin of mathematics. Archive for History of Exact

Sciences. 18: 301-342, 1978.

7. S. Kak, The Astronomical Code of the R. gveda. New Delhi: Munshiram

Manoharlal, 2000.

8. J. Filliozat, “The expansion of Indian medicine abroad.” In Lokesh
Chandra (ed.) India’s Contributions to World Thought and Culture.
Madras: Vivekananda Memorial Committee. 67-70, 1970.

9. W.D. Whitney, Notes at the end of the S¯urya Siddh¯anta, translated by

E. Burgess.

27: 105-127, 1999.

10. F. Staal, “Greek and Vedic geometry,” Journal of Indian Philosophy,

11. D.P. Singhal, India and World Civilization. Michigan University Press,
1969. This book does not argue for priority of Indian science; rather,
it presents much evidence for Indian inﬂuence in a variety of ﬁelds on
world civilization. It also summarizes the evidence for possible early
links between India and the New World.

36

12. E. Burgess (tr.), S¯urya Siddh¯anta.

13. P.C. Sengupta, Indian Chronology. University of Calcutta, 1947; S.

Kak, Astronomical Code.., op cit.

14. S. Kak, “The evolution of writing in India.” Indian Journal of History

of Science, 28: 375-388, 1994.
That the ten most common symbols of Indus are structurally similar
to the ten most common symbols of Br¯ahm¯ı indicates a genetic rela-
tionship.

15. Bh¯agavata Pu. 9.3.28-32.

16. S. Venkatesananda (ed.), V¯asis. t.ha’s Yoga. State University of New
York Press, Albany, 1993. For the Sankrit text, see Yoga V¯asis. t.ha,
1981. Munshiram Manoharlal, Delhi.

17. B. van Nooten, “Binary numbers in Indian antiquity”, Journal of In-
dian Philosophy, 21, 31-50, 1993; reprinted in T.R. N. Rao and Kak, S.
(eds.), Computing Science in Ancient India. Munshiram Manoharlal,
New Delhi, 2000.

18. See the articles in T.R.N. Rao and S. Kak (eds.), Computing Science

in Ancient India. Munshiram Manoharlal, New Delhi, 2000.

19. S. Kak, The Astronomical Code.. op cit.

20. Seidenberg, op cit. S. Kak, “Babylonian and Indian astronomy: early

connections.” Los Alamos Archive, January 2003.

21. Staal, op cit.

22. Burgess, op cit.

23. Whitney, op cit.

24. Burgess, op cit.

25. N. Achar, “On the Vedic origin of the ancient mathematical astronomy
of India.” Journal of Studies on Ancient India, 1: 95-108, 1998. Kak,
“Babylonian and Indian astronomy: early connections.” op cit.

37

27. Kak, “Babylonian and Indian astronomy,” op cit.

26. Achar, op cit.

28. Kak, op cit.

29. S. Kak, “Knowledge of the planets in the third millennium BC,” Quar-
terly Journal of the Royal Astronomical Society, 37, 1996, pp. 709-715.

30. This work may be found collectively in S. Kak, “Birth and early de-
velopment of Indian astronomy,” In Astronomy Across Cultures: The
History of Non-Western Astronomy. H. Selin (ed.). Kluwer Academic,
Boston, 2000, pp. 303-340;
S. Kak, The Astronomical Code of the R. gveda. Munshiram Manoharlal,
Delhi, 2000.

31. R. Billard, L’astronomie Indienne. Paris: Publications de l’ecole fran-
caise d’extreme-orient, 1971. See also B.L. van der Waerden, “Two
treatises on Indian astronomy.” Journal for History of Astronomy 11:
50-58, 1980, which concludes that Billard’s critics are wrong and that
the siddh¯antas were based on measurements made within India.

32. H. Thurston, Early Astronomy. New York: Springer-Verlag, 1994, page
188. Note that Aristarchus’ heliocentric model was only a speculative
suggestion and not part of a fully elaborated sytem.

33. Strabo, Geography, 10,11,17.

38

