3
0
0
2
 
p
e
S
 
5
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
t
s
i
h
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
4
0
1
9
0
3
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Democritus as Taoist

Alejandro Rivero∗

February 2, 2008

Abstract

They identify the full or solid with ”what is,” and the void or rare
with ”what is not” (hence they hold that ”what is not” is no less real
than ”what is”) [Arist. Metaphys. A 4 985b4]

J. Needham joined explicitly with Berthelot in remarking the atomism does
not appear anywhere in the alchemical treatises, neither in the East nor in the
West. Which was puzzling, especially because western alchemists claimed to
follow Democritus. In general it was noticed that other Western philosophical
schools can be mirrored in the East, but atomism seems to be absent.

Perhaps it is time to note that atomism, i.e.

the theory of atoms and
molecules in ﬁnite size and multiple integer proportions1, does not appear in
Democritus himself. Thus it is not so surprising if the followers did not use it
after all.

On the contrary, the people who labels themselves as ”Democritians” relies
heavily in the use of principles of duality, as the one quoted above in the abstract.
The ancients thought that atomism was a fusioned theory, were Leucippus was
a disciple of Zeno while Democritus was disciple of the (mid-)eastern Ostanes.
They probably felt this conclusion was supported in the fact that theological
dualism was also an eastern product, from Zoroaster.

The dual scheme of Democritus appears more clearly in the greek word-
ing. For the ﬁrst phrase in the abstract above we can transliterate plˆeres kai
stereon to on, to de kenon to mˆe on. In this language ”void” is expressed
with the word kenon, in a cunning play to stress the equivalence with ”not
being”, mˆe on. Aristotle repeats this sentence when doing a fast review in
[Physics I 5, 188a], so we are pretty sure it is a basic piece of atomism. As sure
the Hellenistic alchemists were; they understood the duality of cinnabar as other
instance of the same kind of reasonment. Meanwhile, in the East, alchemists
had a much better explicit option: Yin/Yang2.

Was there a window of opportunity for mutual inﬂuence? The answer seems
aﬃrmative to me. Since the conquest of Bactria by the disciple of Aristotle,
Alexander, there was open a direct line of contact between Chinese and Greek
philosophy. Before this, the Persian empire interposed, the way was only an
indirect one, but here we can rely again on the suggestions of Persian inﬂuences
on Democritus, in the age of Xerxes.

∗Zaragoza University at Teruel. arivero@unizar.es
1We should call ”neoatomism” to the one culminating in John Dalton, but the damage is

already done

2The TTC itself, being an early book, uses Ying and Yang only once, chapter 42

1

From a broad chronology, the composition of the Tao Te Ching (DaoDe Jing)
is contemporary to the development of atomic theory. According the ”Warring
States Project”[2], the chapters of the TTC we have interested on are to be
considered in the most primitive core, Ch 14-15 being approx 340. Of course
Guodian text gives us an upper limit circa 300 bce. On the contrary side, David
H. Li3 dates the TTC almost one century before Democritus. Someones even
are eager to accept the date of Lao Zi quitting westwards, 484bce. This is right
in the centre of target: Xerxes became king in 486, and atacked Greece in 4804.
Continuing with [Metaphys A 4 985], while writing [4] I asked a friend,
versed on presocratic greeks, to try to get the ”holographic” text that Aris-
totle is suspected to be copying into these paragraphs. With great eﬀort, my
friend followed the analysis of the three properties distinctive of atoms and she
concluded that Aristotle was weaving a (linguistic or logic) map from some
unmapped description, according the following table:

(WITHOUT MAP)
Where they look at, or turn towards
How they sound or how they are measured = Arist. how they rest, shape, role
Whom they touch to, or contact with

(WITH MAP)

= Arist. point of view, placement, position, situation

= Arist. relation in a ordered series, order, place, site

Then, after some time, we found the unmapped terrain accurately enunciated

in the TTC, chapter 14:

”We look for it, but we do not see it: we name it the Equable.
We listen for it, but we do not hear it: we name it the Rareﬁed.
We feel for it, but we do not get hold of it: we name it the Subtle
These three we cannot examine. Thus they are One, indistin-

guishable”.

That the body or substrate is One and Same, it is told to us by Aristotle in
a posterior remark, [Metaphys VIII 2, 1042b]: ”Democritus apparently assumes
three diﬀerences in substance; for he says that the underlying body is one and
the same in material, but diﬀers in ﬁgure, i.e. shape; or inclination, i.e. position;
or intercontact, i.e. arrangement” 5.

To my mind, it is very subtle to decide if the order in the greek is ”listen,
look, feel” or ”look, listen, feel”. It should be said that my friend aﬃrms she
had never seen this quote, nor any other piece of the Lao Tze book. But even
if there was an inconsciently forgotten inﬂuence, it is remarkable.

Now on this light, one could immerse in modern taoist writings and ﬁnd out

pieces of some atomic ﬂavour (e.g. from the USENET):

The space between things waxes and wanes, depending upon the
things. Does the space itself actually change? Does emptiness really
exist, on its own? ”two diﬀerent names for one and the same...”

3who informed us that he refers to Democritus in the introduction to a bilingual DDJ he

translated recently

4One wonders if the 484 date for Lao Zi could be indeed based on the Persian events
5to men gar hupokeimenon sˆoma, tˆen hulˆen, hen kai tauton, diapherein de ˆe
rhusmˆoi, ho esti schˆema, ˆe tropˆei, ho esti thesis, ˆe diathigˆei, ho esti taxis. Online,
see perseus.org or directly [4] for the greek texts

2

but we will refrain here. This is no news at all, if we notice that even the
attribute of indivisibility is sometimes used when discussing the Tao. Huang
Yuan-Chi (XIXth century) has been translated as saying ”Emptiness and the
Tao are indivisible (...) but formless emptiness is of no use to those who cultivate
the Tao”. This sentence is not in the line of the theory of atoms, but it is close.
Even the word inﬁnitesimal comes easily in this state of mind, so lets turn face
towards it and some other relationships coming from mathematics.

Here we should notice in advance that modern scholars have given no use
to the new evidence about Democritus brought alive by Heiberg from the
Archimedes Palimpsest: Democritus did a non rigorous calculus for the vol-
ume of cone and pyramid. This is surely the work which Crysippos objects to,
in a preserved quote of the stoics.

Lets conjecture that the non rigorous mathematical entities that Democritus
used for this calculus were his a/tomes. It is not a far fetched conjecture; before
us Cavalieri, without knowing Archimedes attribution, did it... and he called to
his non-rigorous entities in/dividua.

We know that the problem of the volume of the pyramid was solved in China
by members of the taoist school. The analysis in [3] shows that the proof of Liu
Hui uses a taoist vocabulary of the technical points about evanescent quantities.
For instance, Liu Hui argues:

”The smaller they are halved, the ﬁner [xi] are the remaining
[dimensions]. The extreme of ﬁneness is called subtle [wei]. That
which is subtle is without form [xing]. When it is explained in this
way, why concern oneself with the remainder? [Jiuzhang, 168]

And the Heshang Gong, Chap. 14, underscores ”That which is without form
[xing] is called subtle [wei]”, and then it elaborates his commentary on TTC 14
using a very similar vocabulary.

A clue of the use of atoms in the context of a calculation of area can be got

from TTC 11:

”Thirty spokes will converge In the hub of a wheel;
But the use of the cart Will depend on the part
Of the hub that is void”

Here Lao Tse uses explicitly the expression ”not-being” for the void space
between radius!. Be can safely assume that these radius correspond to ”being”.
A calculation of the weight of a wheel could be done by understanding that
radius are always in relationship with the area between.
In Democritus, the
”being” holds some properties (rhismos, diathige, trope), and we could conjec-
ture the ”non-being” holds others, perhaps spatial separation or distances. The
whole setup should be very close to modern duality between diﬀerential forms
and vector ﬁelds.

In geometry the atomists surely felt themselves authorised to keep this du-
ality all the way to inﬁnite atoms/inﬁnitesimal areas. But in physical evolution,
with time as an independent variable, Zeno paradoxes refrained them... A di-
gression here: Newton bypassed this issue by mapping Time to a preserved area
(prop. 1 in the Principia) and then taking its limit to zero. Amazingly this
mathematically correct procedure showed to be, three centuries later, physi-
cally false. It is still an open question if the existence of Plank constant and

3

four elementary fermions relates to some logical obstruction in the build up of
the limit.

And this is all until now. For the moment we have not gathered more
clues nor solid evidence. Anecdotically, I wonder if it could be possible to
locate actual crossed quotes, assuming some kind of name translation. But, if
Leucippus and Democritus were to be quoted in Chinese, which names should
we expect? If Lao Dan were quoted in Greek, which letters should we expect?
Worse, should the translation cross via a Persian script or dialect? One is afraid
that some regrettable coincidences in initials could happen, adding to confusion:
even Aristotle shortens sometimes to ”L. & D.” when referring to the atomist
forefathers.

As for other possible lines of parallelism, Chinese versions of Zeno paradoxes
are named from time to time6 but its relationship with taoism is uncertain, to
me. Also, bosonic ﬁelds appear in Democritus, eidola, but I have not heard of
them in Chinese texts (They are a requisite for interaction if you want to keep
always a vacuum between atoms).

Finally, the reader could object that Taoism has been read into a lot of re-
ligions and philosophical systems, due both to underlying ideas and to simple
technical coincidences, because the word Tao can also be translated as greek ”lo-
gos”.. Against this we can argue the chronological parallels, the parallels in the
posterior development (alchemy and mathematics) and the textual parallelism.

References

[1] Chang Chung-Yuan, Creativity and Taoism

[2] Warring States Project, http://www.umass.edu/wsp/

[3] Donald B. Wagner, An early Chinese... Hist. Math., 6:164-188 (1979). Also
http://www.staff.hum.ku.dk/dbwagner/Pyramid/Pyramid-5.html

[4] A. Rivero Rhismos,.... Llull, boletin de la SEHC. Vol. 23, no. 48 (2000).

Also http://arxiv.org/html/physics/0006065

6Zhou (Miller Jew) was kind to forward me towards [1, pg. 72 and 32-33], where the arrow
paradox is discussed -but context remains undetermined-, as well as some variants of Achilles.
In general I must thank the people of alt.philosophy.taoism for some pointers during a
discussion Jan-Feb 2002, esp Zhou and Kamerm

4

