3
0
0
2
 
p
e
S
 
0
3
 
 
]
h
p
-
t
s
i
h
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
1
0
0
0
1
3
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Indian Physics: Outline of Early History

Subhash Kak

February 2, 2008

1

Introduction

Historians of science are generally unaware of the contributions of Indians to
physics. The main reason for this is that very little research has been done
on the subject since Seal’s The Positive Sciences of the Hindus appeared in
1915, a consequence of the fact that there are few history of science depart-
ments in Indian universities. Work relevant to the history of Indian physics
has been done in philosophy departments but this is generally inaccessible
to historians of physics. Some other work concerning history of ideas in
physics has been published by historians of astronomy.

The objective of this paper is to present a preliminary outline of early
history of physics in India. The focus here are the schools of Vai´ses.ika
and S¯am. khya that were interested in general principles of atomic theory
and cosmology. Physical ideas in these and other schools were applied to
technology as we can see for a much later period in Dharampal’s book [4].
This paper should be read in conjunction with the papers on history
of early Indian science and astronomy by the author [14-18, 22, 23], where
the relevant Vedic ideas on cosmology are presented. To summarize this
background context, the Vedic texts present a tripartite and recursive world
view. The universe is viewed as three regions of earth, space, and sky which
in the human being are mirrored in the physical body, the breath, and
mind. The processes in the sky, on earth, and within the mind are taken to
be connected. The universe is mirrored in the cognitive system, leading to
the idea that introspection can yield knowledge.

2 On classﬁciation

The Vedic seers speak of r.ta, the laws underlying the univerese. They also
assert that all descriptions are limited, and outside their normal context
they lead to logical paradox. The notable features of this world view are:

• An inﬁnitely old, cyclic universe

• An atomic world and the subject/object dichotomy

• Relativity of time and space

• Evolution of life

• A science of mind

• Computable laws

• Language theory

As one would expect, these conceptions of evolution of life, relativity of
space and time, and science of mind are not quite on the same lines as that
of contemporary science. But that is precisely what makes Indian science
especially interesting to the historian.

The ﬁrst step in the development of any science is the naming of objects
and categories. Then come the questions of change and transformation and
the recognition that a certain essence of reality is unaﬀected by change.
Having named objects and events, one turns to the relationships between
them. The enumeration of categories in groups and their relationship with
other such groups comes later. The question of the nature of the cognitive
process by which the knowledge of the universe is obtained also comes at
the end.

During the R. gvedic period itself, it had come to be recognized that
although nature follows laws, a certain freedom characterizes human be-
haviour. The fundamental unity of reality is thus split into two distinct
categories related to innate nature and cognition. The universe not only
exists outside of ourselves, but a copy of it, howsoever imperfect, exists
within each one of us. The enumeration of categories as they arise in the
space of the mind is the concern of S¯am. khya. The stated objective is to
obtain discriminative knowledge of the manifest (vyakta), the unmanifest
(avyakta) and the knower (purus. a).1On the other hand, Vai´ses.ika deals with

2

the goal attributed to Kan. ¯ada, the mythical founder of the system, yad iha
bh¯avar¯upam, tat sarvam. may¯aupasam. khy¯atavyam, “I shall enumerate every-
thing [in this world] that has the character of being.”

The two systems have diﬀering focus. S¯am. khya addresses evolution at
the cosmic and the psychological levels; Vai´ses.ika delves deeper into the na-
ture of substances and its scope includes both physics as well as metaphysics.
The emphasis in Indian thought on knowing the outside through an
analysis of cognitive categories was far in advance of the concepts used by
historians of science until the rise of modern physics. As a result, the six
dar´sanas were often misrepresented in the commentaries that were written
with the rise of Indian studies in the nineteenth century. These mistakes
have been repeated in more recent works because this commentatorial tradi-
tion still operates within the framework of reductionist physics and analysis.
With the rise of relativity and quantum mechanics, the subject has become
central in the understanding of the physical universe. The outer world ex-
ists because there is someone to perceive it; likewise the mind is character-
ized by the associations between various objects and processes of the outer
world.2An examination of the physical world in terms of categories of the
mind or of “being” constitutes a perfectly legitimate way of approaching the
outer world, albeit it is diﬀerent from the manner in which Western science
developed.

S¯am. khya and Vai´ses.ika are generally paired with Yoga and Ny¯aya, re-
spectively. The reason behind such a pairing is that the paired system
provides the student with the ability to make further progress in his un-
derstanding. The focus in S¯am. khya is the inner world and, therefore, an
experiential or meditative attitude complements it. The insights of Yoga
validate the categories of S¯am. khya, indeed the two could proceed in a com-
plementary fashion, which is why the two are considered the same system
sometimes. In Vai´ses.ika, the focus is more on an enumeration of the cate-
gories of being, perceived apart from oneself. Since the categories are very
many, the use of formal logic is essential to draw inferences, and in this
respect Ny¯aya is its sister system.

Actually, Ny¯aya (logic) provides the analytical basis for all Indian sci-
ences. Naiy¯ayikas say astitva j˜neyatva abhidheyatva, “whatever exists, is
knowable and nameable.” But it is also stated that speech has four forms,
of which one kind, the par¯a, is unmanifest.3So all description and analysis
is ultimately limited by paradox.

The categories of S¯am. khya and Vai´ses.ika describe the physical and the
psychological worlds. A comprehensive theory, integrating the insentient

3

and the sentient, is oﬀered.

We ﬁrst provide a brief review of the the S¯am. khya and the Vai´ses.ika
categories and then examine the signiﬁcance of their physical concepts. The
beginnings of these concepts can be traced back to the Vedic literature.

3 Overview and early development

We ﬁrst begin with a few remarks on the chronology of the Indian texts. New
results in archaeology have shown that the Indian tradition can be traced
back in a series of unbroken phases to at least 8000 B.C.E. Archaeologists
and geologists also believe that the Sarasvat¯ı, the preeminent river of the
R. gvedic age, dried up around 1900 B.C.E., leading to the collapse of the
towns of the Harappan era that were primarily distributed in the Sarasvat¯ı
region. There is increasing acceptance of the view that the R. gveda should
be earlier than 1900 B.C.E. The early Br¯ahman. as and the Upanis.ads then
belong to the second millennium B.C.E.4

The Vedic hymns speak of ideas that are later described at greater length
in the dar´sanas. Nature has an order that is expressed as r. ta.5This order
is behind the regularity in the movements of the planets, the seasons, and
cycles on earth. R. ta deﬁnes an inﬂexible law of harmony which oﬀers a
basis for its comprehension through the mind. The principle of order is
sometimes represented by the pillar (skambha) as in the Atharvaveda6and
anthropomorphized as Brahman. aspati.7

The R. gvedic hymn 10.129 describes how prior to a separation between
the subject and the object neither space or time existed. It goes on to say:

In the beginning desire arose, born of the mind, it was the pri-
mal seed. The seers who have searched their hearts with wisdom
know the connection (bandhu) between being and non-being.

A cord stretched across them; what was above, and what was
below? Seminal powers made mighty forces, below was strength
and above was impulse.8

The connections (bandhu) between the outer and the inner are aﬃrmed.
Next, there is mention of the dichotomy between purus.a and prkr.ti, the
impulse and the strength.

In R. gveda 10.90, purus.a, is the cosmic person out of whose dismembered
body the living and the inanimate worlds emerge. Here too a dichotomy,

4

expressed through the symbols of male and female, marks the paradoxical
beginning of empirical existence. Purus.a is born out of vir¯aj, “the shining
one,” and she out of him. This marks a distinction between purus.a as tran-
scendent reality and its manifestation in terms of individual consciousness.
Further on in the same hymn, several categories related to existence,
such as space, sky, earth, directions, wind, metres and so on are created.
Such an enumeration is described at greater length in the dialogue in the
Br.had¯aran. yaka Upanis.ad between Y¯aj˜navalkya and Maitrey¯ı where seven-
teen of the twenty-three categories of classical S¯am. khya are noted:

As all waters ﬁnd their goal in the sea, so all touches in the skin,
all smells in the nose, all taste in the tongue, all forms in the eye,
all sounds in the ear, all deliberations in the mind, all knowledge
in the intellect, all actions in the hands, all enjoyment in sex,
all elimination in the excretory organs, all movement in the feet,
and all the Vedas in speech.

As a mass of salt has neither inside nor outside, but is altogether
a mass of taste, thus indeed has that Self neither inside nor
outside, but is altogether a mass of knowledge; and having risen
from these elements, vanishes again in them.9

These include the ﬁve material elements, the ﬁve organs of sense, the ﬁve
organs of action, the buddhi, in the form of vij˜n¯ana, aham. k¯ara,10and mind.
The only categories of the late S¯am. khya which are not explicitly mentioned
in the Br.had¯aran. yaka Upanis.ad are the tanm¯atras, but the bandhu between
the gross and the subtle, which is emphasized again and again in the R. gveda,
indicates the implicit recognition of the corresponding subtle tanm¯atra for
the ﬁve gross elements. This subtle representation of the outer in terms of
m¯atr¯a is described explicitly in the Kaus.¯ıtaki Br¯ahman. a Upanis.ad where
the speciﬁc abstract correspondences for certain outer functions, such as
speech, breath, order, and so on, are listed in terms of bh¯utam¯atr¯a.11The
word m¯atr¯a here refers to the essence in the same manner as in the notion
of tanm¯atra. Aham. k¯ara is described in the Chandogya Upanis.ad as the one
who sees the universe.12

In other words, all the elements of S¯am. khya seem to be in place in the
Vedic literature. We also have a proper scientiﬁc system with its cosmic
order and corresponding laws (r.ta), entities and relationships. Even the
workings of the human mind are subjected to logical analysis.

5

Ether

  Sound

Bliss

   Sky

 Visve Devah

  Air

Touch

Intellect

Space

Indra

 Fire

   Form

 Mind

Earth

Agni

  Water

Taste

 Prana

Earth

Smell

 Body

Figure 1: Five-layered universe

The Vedic system is a tripartite and recursive world view. At the most
basic level, the universe is viewed as three regions of earth, space, and sky
with the corresponding entities of Agni, Indra, and Vi´sve Devah. (all gods).
These three regions are represented in the Vedic ritual as three diﬀerent
altars. There is a mapping of these regions within the human body as well.
The Ch¯andogya Upanis.ad speaks of a tripartite manifestation of reality, ex-
pressed as ﬁre (red), water (white), and food (black) correlated with speech,
breath, and mind.13´Svet¯a´svatara Upanis.ad also describes the red, white, and
black aspects of the One.14In ¯Ayurveda, the three dos. as (humours), v¯ata,
pitta, and kapha, likewise deﬁne a tripartite model.

Counting separately the joining regions leads to a total of ﬁve categories
where, as we see in Figure 1, water separates earth and ﬁre, and air separates
ﬁre and ether.15This counting in groups of ﬁve is seen in a variety of contexts
as in the ﬁve directions, ﬁve senses, ﬁve seasons, ﬁve metres, ﬁve chants, ﬁve
peoples, ﬁve breaths, and so on.

Although the processes in the sky, on earth, and within the mind are
connected, all descriptions of the universe lead to logical paradox. The one
category transcending all oppositions is brahman. Vedic ritual is a symbolic
representation of this world view.

6

The complementarity between the mind and the outer world is of funda-
mental signiﬁcance. Knowledge is classiﬁed in two ways: the lower (apar¯a)
or dual; and the higher (par¯a) or uniﬁed. Knowledge is superﬁcially dual
and paradoxical but at a deeper level it has a unity. The material and the
conscious are aspects of the same transcendental reality.

In the Ch¯andogya Upanis.ad, Udd¯alaka ¯Arun. i describes the unity behind
the apparent duality as sadvidy¯a. Being (sat) provides both the origin and
the unity:

In the beginning, my dear, this world was just Being, one only,
without a second. Others say: “In the beginning this world
was just Nonbeing (asat), one only, without a second; from that
Nonbeing Being was produced.” But, my dear, how could this
be? How from Nonbeing could Being be produced? No, my dear,
in the beginning this world was just Being, one only, without a
second.16

In the Taittir¯ıya Upanis.ad, the individual is represented in terms of ﬁve
diﬀerent sheaths or levels that enclose the individual’s self.17This represents
another instance of expanded tripartite model. These levels, shown in an
ascending order, are:

• The physical body (annamaya ko´sa)

• The energy sheath (pr¯an. amaya ko´sa)
• The mental sheath (manomaya ko´sa)

• The intellect sheath (vij˜n¯anamaya ko´sa)

• The bliss sheath (¯anandamaya ko´sa)

These sheaths are deﬁned at increasingly ﬁner levels. At the highest
level, above the bliss sheath, is the self.
Intellect is placed below bliss,
which is a recognition of the fact that eventually meaning is communicated
not by associations, but rather by a synthesizing vision expressed by the
notion of bliss.

Pr¯an. a is the energy coursing through the physical and mental processes.
If one looked at the individual in the three fundamental levels, then at
the lowest level is the physical body, at the next higher level is the energy
systems at work, and at the next higher level are the thoughts. Since the

7

three levels are interrelated, the energy situation may be changed by inputs
either at the physical level or at the mental level.

The key notion is that each higher level represents characteristics that
are emergent on the ground of the previous level. In this theory mind is an
emergent entity, but this emergence requires the presence of the self.

The mind may be viewed in a ﬁve-fold way: manas, aham. k¯ara, citta,

buddhi, and ¯atman. Again these categories parallel those of Figure 1.

The notions of enumeration and indivisibility are so pervasive in Vedic
thought that it is impossible to put a date on the rise of S¯am. khya and
Vai´ses.ika. But there developed speciﬁc schools where a particular manner
of deﬁning the attributes was taken; these schools trace their lineage to
speciﬁc individuals, often starting with a mythical r.s.i.

Classical S¯am. khya
The notions of S¯am. khya form a part of the earliest Vedic texts. As a sys-
tem called by its formal name, it is described in the Moks.adharma and the
Bhagavad G¯ıt¯a as well as in the Upanis.ads. Its legendary founder was the
sage Kapila who used to be dated to around 7th century B.C.E., but in light
of the new ﬁndings related to Indian antiquity, is likely to have lived much
earlier than that. The texts speak of at least twenty-six teachers including
¯Asuri, Pa˜nca´sikha, Vindhyav¯asa, V¯ars.agan. ya, Jaig¯ıs.avya, and ¯I´svarakr.s.n. a.
By “classical S¯am. khya” we mean the S¯am. khya-K¯arik¯a (SK) of ¯I´svarakr.s.n. a.
The S¯am. khya-K¯arik¯a claims to be the summary of an earlier, more compre-
hensive treatise, the S. as. t.itantra.

According to S¯am. khya, reality is composed of a number of basic princi-
ples (tattva), which are taken to be twenty-ﬁve in the classical system. But
since the heart of the system is its hierarchical framework, the exact num-
ber of the principles varies, especially in the earliest writings. But such a
variation is of no fundamental importance.

In the classical system, the ﬁrst principle is (1) prakr. ti, which is taken to
be the cause of evolution. From prakr.ti develops (2) intelligence (buddhi, also
called mahat), and thereafter (3) self-consciousness (aham. k¯ara). From self-
consciousness emerge the ﬁve subtle elements (tanm¯atra): (4) ether (¯ak¯a´sa),
(5) air, (6) light, (7) water, and (8) earth. From the subtle elements emerge
the ﬁve (9-13) material elements (mah¯abh¯uta). Next emerge the ﬁve or-
gans of sense (j˜n¯anendriya): (14) hearing, (15) touch, (16) sight, (17) taste,
and (18) smell, and ﬁve organs of action (karmendriya): (19) speech, (20)
grasping, (21) walking, (22) evacuation, and (23) procreation.

8

purusa

       manas

senses

9

ahamkara

buddhi

            tanmatra,  mahabhuta

Figure 2: The cognitive system

Finally, self-consciousness produces the twenty-fourth of the basic ele-
ments: (24) mind (manas), which, as a sixth sense, mediates between the
ten organs and the outside world. The last, twenty-ﬁfth, tattva is (25)
purus. a.

The emergence from prakr.ti of intelligence and, later, of subtle and gross
elements, mind and consciousness, appears to mirror the stages through
which a newly-conceived individual will pass. Here intelligence, as the second
tattva, is what endows the newly fertilized cell the ability to organize and
grow; self-consciousness represents the stage which allows the organism to
sense the environment, and so on. The thesis that the world is connected,
allows one to see the same process at the cosmic and the psychological levels.
The doctrine of the three constituent qualities (gun. a): sattva, rajas, and
tamas, plays a very important role in the S¯am. khya physics and metaphysics.
These gun. as are described in the Upanis.ads. In its undeveloped state, cosmic

matter has these gun. as in equilibrium. As the world evolves, one or the
other of these become preponderant in diﬀerent objects or beings, giving
speciﬁc character to each. The quality of sattva, which stands for virtue
or transparence, inheres in all things tending to truth, wisdom, beauty or
goodness; the quality of rajas, or activity, energy or passion, is present in
all that is ﬁerce, forceful or active; the quality of tamas, which stands for
inertia, is to be found in all that is stupid or dull. The gun. as can be viewed
as the three constituent strands of materiality.

S¯am. khya can also be seen as having three basic dimensions:

1. The constitutive (tattva) dimension, dealing with form (r¯upa), the

principle or the essential core (li ˙nga);

2. The projective (bh¯ava) dimension, concerning the projective or the in-

tentional (pravr. tti), the predispositional, or cause-eﬀect (naimittanaimit-
tika); and

3. The consequent (phala) dimension, dealing with what has come to pass

(bh¯uta) or the phenomenal creation (pratyayasarga).

They gun. as can also be viewed as the threads that tie together the three

realms of the tattvas, the bh¯avas, and the bh¯utas.

Vai´ses.ika
This school of “individual characteristics” is supposed to have been founded
by Kan. ¯ada, the son of Ul¯uka. Other important sages associated with this tra-
dition include Candramati, Pra´sastap¯ada, Vyoma´siva and Udayana. Kan. ¯ada’s
Vai´ses.ika S¯utras (VS) describe a system of physics and metaphysics.
Its
physics is an atomic theory of nature, where the atoms are distinct from
the soul, of which they are the instruments. Each element has individual
characteristics (vi´ses. as), which distinguish it from the other non-atomic sub-
stances (dravyas): time, space, soul, and mind. The atoms are considered
to be eternal.

There are six fundamental categories (pad¯artha) associated with reality:
substance (dravya), quality (gun. a), motion (karman), universal (s¯am¯anya),
particularity (vi´ses. a), and inherence (samav¯aya). The ﬁrst three of these
have a real objective existence and the last three are products of intellectual
discrimination. Each of these categories is further subdivided as follows.

10

                         padartha                            samanya                                             visesa

dravya                            guna                            karman

samavaya

manas

atman

  earth                      air                                fire                      water

dravya

 akasa                            space                               time

Figure 3: The categories of Vaisesika

There are nine classes of substances (dravya), some of which are nonatomic,

some atomic, and others all-pervasive. The nonatomic ground is provided
by the three substances ether (¯ak¯a´sa), space (di´s), and time (k¯ala), which are
unitary and indestructible; a further four, earth (pr. thiv¯ı), water (¯apas), ﬁre
(tejas), and air (v¯ayu) are atomic composed of indivisible, and indestructible
atoms (an. u, param¯an. u); self (¯atman), which is the eighth, is omnipresent
and eternal; and, lastly, the ninth, is the mind (manas), which is also eternal
but of atomic dimensions, that is, inﬁnitely small.

There are seventeen qualities (gun. a), listed in no particular order as
colour or form (r¯upa), taste (rasa), smell (gandha), and touch (spar´sa);
number (sam. khy¯a), size or dimension (parim¯an. a), separateness (pr. thaktva),
conjunction (sam. yoga), and disjunction (vibh¯aga); remoteness (paratva) and
nearness (aparatva); judgment (buddhi), pleasure (sukha), pain (duh. kha),
desire (icch¯a), aversion (dves.a), and eﬀort (prayatna). These qualities are
either physical or psychological. Remoteness and nearness are interpreted
in two diﬀerent ways: temporally or spatially. This list is not taken to be

11

comprehensive because later sound is also described as a quality. But there
is a fundamental diﬀerence between sound and light. Sound is carried by the
non-atomic ¯ak¯a´sa, whereas light, implied by r¯upa, is carried by tejas atoms.
But even sound is sometimes seen as a speciﬁc characteristic of atoms.

There are ﬁve diﬀerent types of motion (karman) that are associated with
material particles or the organs of the mind: ejection, falling (attraction),
contraction, expansion, and composite motion.

Universals (s¯am¯anya) are recurrent generic properties in substances,
qualities, and motions. Particularities (vi´ses. a) reside exclusively in the eter-
nal, non-composite substances, that is, in the individual atoms, souls, and
minds, and in the unitary substances ether, space, and time.

Inherence (samav¯aya) is the relationship between entities that occur at
the same time. This provides the binding that we see in the various cate-
gories so that we are able to synthesize our experience.

The Vai´ses.ika atomic structure characterizes four of the ﬁve S¯am. khyan
mah¯abh¯utas; the ﬁfth, ether, is non-atomic and all-pervasive. Some of the
Vai´ses.ika gun. as correspond to the S¯am. khyan tanm¯atras. In S¯am. khya the
tanm¯atras come ﬁrst, in Vai´ses.ika atoms are primary.

Each of the two schools has had a very long history.18This included
many variations to the classical formulation given above. There has also
been considerable diﬀerence in interpretation. In the sections that follow,
I present an eclectic summary from this mass of material to communicate
their main physical ideas.

4 Physical concepts

The Vai´ses.ika categories appear to provide a convenient starting point to
examine the physical concepts inherent in these two systems.

The ground layer consists of indivisible, invisible and indestructible atoms
(an. u, param¯an. u). It is the aggregation of these atoms that give rise to diﬀer-
ent destructible compound substances. These atoms are ideals, representing
unities of fundamental attributes. In this sense, they are quite similar to the
concept of such elementary particles of modern physics which are proposed
on theoretical grounds.

It is useful to consider the modern atomic doctrine for the sake of refer-
ence. Here the elementary particles are characterized by various attributes,
each of which has a numerical value. These attributes include mass, charge,
angular momentum, energy, and so on. The properties of bulk matter is, in

12

principle, obtainable from those of its constituents, but at each higher level
of aggregation of atoms, new properties emerge.

Philosophically, there are two main approaches, positivism and realism,
for the understanding of physics. According to the positivist, the only scien-
tiﬁc knowledge is the one that can be expressed in logical statements. Since
our logic and our language is a result of the observations of the world, this
presupposes that the observer is central to this knowledge. This is essen-
tially the same as the Ny¯aya position. The realist believes that there exists
an independent reality which is probed through observation and experiment.
Put diﬀerently, the positivists believe that knowledge is subjective, whereas
realists believe that it is objective.

A positivist accepts that there are elements of an empirical reality which
science uncovers, but points out that the realist view involves a logical con-
tradiction, since there is no way of observing an observer-independent reality
and hence we cannot verify that such a reality exists.

A weaker form of objectivity is sometimes identiﬁed with the positivist
position. Here we speak of an empirical reality which is not independent
of the observer, but is the same for all observers. Such weak objectivity
characterizes relativity theory.

Atoms and their combinations

According to the Vai´ses.ika S¯utras, “Earth possesses colour, taste, smell, and
touch. Waters possess colour, taste, and touch, and are ﬂuid and viscid.
Fire possesses colour and touch. Air possesses touch. These (preceding
characteristics) are not in ether.”19This indicates how the qualities are seen
as being built out of elementary entities. Such a unitary picture is even more
clearly spelt out for the atoms and the tanm¯atras. As mentioned before,
S¯am. khya provides a slightly diﬀerent focus, where the abstract tanm¯atras
are considered to be the building blocks for the gross atoms.

The Vai´ses.ika atomic substances are deﬁned in a matrix of four non-
atomic substances (dravyas)—time, space, soul and mind. In other words,
the physical universe has an objective existence and mind and soul do not
simply emerge from the material ground and disappear when the material
structure disintegrates.

The objective elements of the physical world are characterized by dravya,
gun. a, and karman, or substance, quality, and action. There is a further
characterization in terms of non-reactive and reactive properties.

Two atoms combine to form a binary molecule (dvyan. uka). Two, three,

13

four or more dvyan. ukas combine into grosser molecules of tryan. uka, caturan. uka,
and so on. The other view is that atoms form dyads and triads directly to
form molecules fo diﬀerent substances. Atoms possess an incessant vibratory
motion. The activity of the atoms and their combinations are not arbitrary
but according to laws that are expressed as the adr.s.t.a.

Molecules can also break up under the inﬂuence of heat (p¯akajotpatti).
In this doctrine of p¯ılup¯aka (heating of atoms), the impact of heat particles
decomposes a molecule.

Heat and light rays are taken to consist of very small particles of high
velocity. Being particles, their velocity is ﬁnite. This is also apparent from
the fact that motion is contingent upon time as one of the dravyas. The
particles of heat and light can be endowed with diﬀerent characteristics and
so heat and light can be of diﬀerent kinds.

Elsewhere it is said that there is no diﬀerence between the atom of a
barley seed and paddy seed, since these are but atoms of earth. Under the
impact of heat particles, atoms can exhibit new characteristics.

A bh¯uta-atom evolves out of integration from the corresponding tanm¯atra.
This indicates a primacy of the abstract over the material. On the other
hand, the atoms may be taken to be unitary objects and their combi-
nations seen as generating various tanm¯atras. One may further assume
that rudiment-matter (bh¯ut¯adi) leads to its more speciﬁc forms. Brajen-
dranath Seal summarizes some views on the relationship between atoms
and tanm¯atras as follows:

The rudiment-matter (bh¯ut¯adi) acted on by rajas (energy) pro-
duces the sound-potential (vibration-potential).

The vibration-potential, as a radicle, with accretion of atoms,
condensing and collocating, generates the touch-potential which
is impingent as well as vibratory.

The impact-potential, as a radicle, with a similar accretion of
atoms generates the heat-and-light-potential which radiates light
and heat in addition to being impingent as well as vibratory.

The light-and-heat-potential, as a radicle, with further accretion
of atoms generates the taste-potential.

14

The taste-potential, as a radicle, with further accretion of atoms,
generates the smell-potential.20

The order of the formation of the bh¯uta-param¯an. u is seen according to

the following hierarchical scheme:

1. The sound-potential, subtile matter, with accretion of rudiment-matter

2. The touch-potential combines with vibratory particles (sound-potential)

generates the ¯ak¯a´sa atom.

to generate the v¯ayu atom.

to produce the tejas atom.

¯apas atom.

earth atom.21

3. The light-and-hear-potentials combine with touch and sound-potentials

4. The taste-potential combines with the foregoing three to produce the

5. The smell-potential combines with the foregoing four to generate the

In summary, all these views see matter as being of a unitary nature
which when excited to diﬀerent states produces potential of diﬀerent kinds
that correspond to the tanm¯atras and then constitutes diﬀerent elements.

The Pad¯arthadharmasam. graha of Pra´sastap¯ada deals with the question
of ultimate substances. Earth, ﬁre, water, and earth are here taken to be
the basic material substances. But their existence is taken to be contin-
gent on the presence of someone who knows of them, namely Brahman.
Pra´sastap¯ada’s commentary and exposition of the relevant s¯utras of VS,
with s¯utra numbers shown in parentheses, is as follows:

¯Ak¯a´sa (ether), time and space have no lower constituents. (VS
2.1.27, 29-31)
Of ¯ak¯a´sa the qualities are—sound, number, dimension, separate-
ness, conjunction and disjunction. (VS 7.1.22)
Thus, then, being endowed with qualities, and not being located
in anything else, it is regarded as a substance. And in as much
as it has no cause, either homogeneous or heterogeneous, it is
eternal. (VS 2.1.18)
Time is the cause of the [relative] notions of “priority,” “poste-
riority,” or “simultaneity” and “succession,” and of “late” and

15

“soon.” In as much as there is no other cause or basis for these
notions, as appearing with regard to these objects,—notions
which diﬀer in character from all notions described before,—we
conclude “time” to be the basis of these. (VS 2.2.6)
Time is the cause or basis of the production, persistence and
destruction (or cessation) of all produced things; as all these are
spoken of in terms of time... (VS 2.2.9)
Though from the uniformity of the distinguishing character of
time, time is directly by itself, one only, yet, it is indirectly, or
ﬁguratively, spoken of as manifold, on account of the diversity
among the conditions aﬀorded by the production, persistence
and cessation of all produced things...

Space is the cause of the notions of east, west, below and above,
and so on, with regard to one material object considered with
reference to another material object as the starting point or limit.
Specially so, as there is no other cause for these notions. (VS
.2.12; 2.1.31; 7.1.24; 7.2.22)22

The nature of sound

The underlying physical ideas of our systems are presented well in the dis-
cussion of sound. According to Pra´sastap¯ada:

Sound is the quality of ¯ak¯a´sa, perceptible by the auditory organ.
It is momentary. It can be produced by contact, by disjunction,
or by another sound. There are two kinds of sound: varn. a (syl-
lables) and dhvani. The production of the syllables is a result
of the contact of the internal organ and self when inﬂuenced by
memory. First, one desires to produce the sound and then makes
an eﬀort. The moving air strikes the throat, producing a contact
with the ¯ak¯a´sa, and resulting in the sound. Sounds are always
produced in a series, like a series of ripples in water and when
these waves reach the ear we hear them.23

Sound energy is viewed as a wave. The waves impinge on the hearing
organ and are recognized through associations. Pra´sastap¯ada’s dhvani is
considered to be noise. But it appears that its role is similar to the dhvani
deﬁned by ¯Anandavardhana and Abhinavagupta as the power of suggestion
in its purest form that plays a signiﬁcant part in the recall of the conscious
and unconscious associations.

16

Evolution

With the background of the bandhu between the outer and the inner in
mind, it is clear that the evolution of the tattvas can also be viewed as an
evolution of the universe. Buddhi or mahat arises before space and matter.
This presumes that with buddhi also emerges the cognition of time. And
further, that space and matter, which constitute the physical universe, are
contingent on the existence of intelligence. The working of the nature’s
intelligence is seen as soon as the notions of prior and posterior, related to
the change associated with a physical process, become real.

The S¯am. khya system also presupposes a universe which comes into be-
ing and then is absorbed back in the ground-stuﬀ of reality. This is what
we see in the Pur¯an. ic cyclic universe also. Within each cycle, a gradual
development of intelligent life is assumed. It is postulated that the plants
arose ﬁrst, followed by animals of various kinds, and lastly by man. Such a
creation and destruction may be viewed to be taking place at various levels,
including the psychological level related to the creation and destruction of
thoughts.

5 Analysis, causality

The choice of the basic categories in both S¯am. khya and Vai´ses.ika is dic-
tated by considerations of economy. This parallels a similar emphasis on
economy in the Indian grammatical tradition. The fundamental bandhu be-
tween language, thought and empirical reality make it possible to analyze
the processes of nature.

The S¯am. khya K¯arik¯as present the question of pram¯an. a, the method of

validation, thus:

Perception, inference, and reliable authority are considered the
three means for this purpose. Perception is the selective ascer-
tainment of particular sense-objects. Inference, which is of three
kinds, depends upon a characteristic mark and that which bears
that mark (association). Reliable authority is trustworthy ver-
bal testimony. The understanding of things beyond the senses is
inferred by analogy.24

The Vai´ses.ika S¯utras also clearly present the principle of cause (k¯aran. a)
and eﬀect (k¯arya).25Pra´sastap¯ada describes time and space as nimittak¯aran. a,

17

eﬃcient cause, for all phenomena. This indicates position in space and
change in time are fundamental to all reality.

Causality is expressed in S¯am. khya as satk¯arya, “the doctrine of the ex-

istence of the eﬀect (in the cause).”

The eﬀect exists due to: (a) the non-productivity of non-being;
(b) the need for an appropriate material cause; (c) impossibility
of all things coming from all things; (d) things producing only
according to their nature; (e) the nature of the cause.26

There is no ex nihilo creation in the S¯am. khya but only a progressive

manifestation.

The gun. as provide the necessary ingredient for the universe (be it physi-
cal or psychological) to evolve. They make it possible to distinguish between
the prior and the posterior. The action of gun. as is essential to the deﬁnition
of time and to the workings of causality.

But gun. as are really not objective constituents of nature. Rather, they
represent a relative property. This is explained most clearly in Gaud. ap¯adabh¯as. ya
in the relativity inherent in “the beautiful and virtuous woman who is a
source of delight but cause of pain to her co-wives and of delusion in the
passionate.”27In physical terms, one may speak of a separation between two
extremes by activity in the middle. Or, the gun. as may be viewed as the po-
tential whose gradients set up the process of ceaseless change. The activity
in the middle, characterized by rajas, separates the two poles of purus.a and
undiﬀerentiated prakr.ti, or those of sattva and tamas.

6 How does the mind make sense?

The observer has become a part of physics since the advent of relativity and
quantum mechanics; the observer also plays a central role in Indian philo-
sophical systems. The question of observation in S¯am. khya and Vai´ses.ika
is considered at two levels: at the level of the mind, which is seen as an
instrument; and at the level of the awareness ground-stuﬀ, purus.a.

The S¯am. khya model of the mind was shown in Figure 2. In it intellect
(buddhi), self-consciousness (aha ˙mk¯ara) and mind (manas) are the three
inner instruments that process the sense impressions.

Since the buddhi together with the other internal organs (aha ˙mk¯ara
and manas) comprehends every object; therefore, the three-fold

18

instrument is the doorkeeper and the remaining (ten) are the
doors.28

Memory is seen to arise due to associations and the traces let by past
cognitions; this involves a contact between the self and the internal organ.
The traces are stored by repetitions and by selective interest in the objects
of the past cognitions. A recalled memory may become the cause of recol-
lection of a part of the previous cognition, desire or aversion, and of further
association of ideas.29

Ordinary language is limited in its capacity to describe all nature, like-
wise memories are inadequate in their remembrance of the past. But ¯atman,
by virtue of its linkages with brahman, does have access to the hidden mem-
ories. This means that a part of the mind is unconscious, inaccessible to the
empirical self.

Pra´sastap¯ada calls memory as a form of true knowledge (vidy¯a) but does
not count it as a pram¯an. a. The objection to memory being considered as
true knowledge is that it is just a trace. A memory does not represent an
object completely; it leaves out some of the properties previously present
and adds others that were not initially there. In other words, memories are
reconstructions of reality.

Cognition cannot be taken to arise out of the sense-organs.

These (organs, namely, aha ˙mk¯ara, manas and the ten senses)
which are diﬀerent from one another and which are distinct spec-
iﬁcations of the gun. as, present the whole to the buddhi, illumi-
nating it for the purus.a like a lamp.30

The question of the seat of intelligence is analyzed::

In the cognitions of sound, etc, we infer a “cognizer.” This char-
acter cannot belong to the body, or to the sense-organs, or to the
mind; because all these are unintelligent or unconscious. Con-
sciousness cannot belong to the body, as it is a material product,
like the jar; and also as no consciousness is found in dead bodies.

Nor can consciousness belong to the sense-organs; because these
are mere instruments, and also because we have remembrances
of objects even after the sense-organ has been destroyed, and
even when the object is not in contact with the organ.

19

Nor can it belong to the mind; because if the mind be regarded
as functioning independently of the sense organs, then we would
have perception and remembrance simultaneously presenting them-
selves; and because the mind itself is a mere instrument.

And thus the only thing to which consciousness could belong is
the self, which thus is cognized by this consciousness.

As from the motion of the chariot we infer the existence of an
intelligent guiding agent in the shape of the charioteer, so also we
infer an intelligent guiding agent for the body, from the activity
appearing in the body, which have the capacity of acquiring the
desirable and avoiding the undesirable.31

Coming to the question of purus.a, it is stated na prakr. tir na vikr. tih.
purus. ah. , that it is neither prakr. ti (creative) not vikr. ti (created).32Purus.a
transcends vyakta and avyakta, it is discriminating, subjective, speciﬁc, con-
scious and non-productive.33Purus.a is a witness, free, indiﬀerent, watchful,
and inactive.34

The purus.a, in this characterization, does not interfere with prakr.ti and

its manifestations. It is transcendent and completely free (kaivalya).

What are the reasons that purus.a must exist?

sam. gh¯atapar¯arthatv¯at
trigun. ¯adiviparyay¯ad adhis. t.h¯an¯at,
purus.o’sti bhoktr. bh¯av¯at
kaivaly¯artham. pravr. tte´s ca.

The purus.a exists because aggregations exist for another; be-
cause there must be the opposite to the three gun. as; because
there must be superintending power; because there must be an
enjoyer; because there is activity for the sake of freedom.35

We see that this conception of the “enjoyer” or “observer” parallels the
manner in which the observer enters the picture in modern physics.36The
physical laws are immutable; nevertheless, the universe appears to require
that observers be present.

There is also the paradox that while corresponding to prakr.ti there exists
a single purus.a, or a single root consciousness, in reality there are many
observers.

20

jananamaran. akaran. ¯an¯am.
pratiniyam¯ad ayugapatpravr. tte´s ca,
purus.abahutvam. siddham.
traigun. yaviparyay¯ac cai’va.

The plurality of purus.as arises from:
the diversity of births,
deaths, and faculties; actions or functions at diﬀerent times; dif-
ference in the proportion of gun. as in diﬀerent individuals.37

The proximity between prakr.ti and purus.a makes it appear that the

unconscious is endowed with awareness.38

In other words, the language of the k¯arik¯as does acknowledge with great
clarity, and in a manner perfectly consistent with modern insights, that the
question of consciousness represents a paradox. The mind is taken to operate
in a causal fashion, just as the physical world does. The sensory input is
transformed by the associations of diﬀerent kinds that lie in the memory
and the predispositions (as determined by the gun. as) to reach judgments.

7 Qualities, motions, universals

Kan. ¯ada lists seventeen qualities and says there are more. Candramati, in
Da´sapad¯artha´s¯astra, adds the following seven to this list: mass (gurutva), ﬂu-
idity (dravatva), viscidity (sneha), disposition (sam. sk¯ara), merit (dharma),
demerit (adharma), and sound (´sabda).

Mass inheres in earth and water and causes a substances to fall down.
Fluidity inheres in earth, water and ﬁre and causes the ﬂowing of a sub-
stance. Viscidity inheres in water and causes coherence with a substance
such as earth. Disposition can either be physical, in relation to a motion,
or mental. Merit and demerit are psychological qualities related to plea-
sure and pain. Merit is of two kinds, viz., activity (pravr. tti) and inactivity
(nivr. tti).

In physical terms, four states of matter are described: ¯ak¯a´sa or ether,
which is non-atomic and, therefore, by itself represents vacuum; gas, as
in tejas; liquid, as in water; and solid, as in earth. Since the aggregate
substances have size, the question of the manner in which their qualities
inhere arises.

A distinction was made between qualities which pervade their loci and

those which do not. Candramati lists the following as locus-pervading:

21

taste

color
touch
separateness
contact
viscosity

smell
number dimension
nearness
farness
ﬂuidity
disjunction
velocity
weight
These are the ones of signiﬁcance for physical objects. Sometimes, a few

additional qualities are said to be locus-pervading.

Pra´sastap¯ada describes qualities related to objects somewhat diﬀerently
than Candramati. He oﬀers weight, ﬂuidity, viscidity and sam. sk¯ara (dispo-
sition); this last quality is further subdivided into inertia (vega), elasticity
(sthitisth¯apaka), and trace (bh¯avan¯a).39

Fluidity is of two varieties: natural and instrumental.

It is a natural
quality of water and an instrumental quality of earth and ﬁre. When water
freezes into ice, the natural ﬂuidity of water is seen to be counteracted by
the ﬁre of the sky, so that the atoms combine to form a solid. Water, earth,
and ﬁre all have ﬂuidity. However, water’s ﬂuidity is held to be primary,
while that of the other two substances is secondary. Viscidity is responsible
for cohesion and smoothness.

Kan. ¯ada deﬁnes motion into ﬁve varieties: ejection (utks. epan. a), attrac-
tion (avaks. epan. a), contraction (¯aku˜ncana), expansion (prasaran. a), and com-
posite movement (gamana).40In the case of gamana there is contact with
points of space in various directions, or there are many loci.41Motion by
gravity is discussed. “Weight causes falling; it is imperceptible and known
by inference.”42Motion is produced by mass, which is the same as a motion
due to gravitational attraction.43

Inertia is the quality of a moving object which is responsible for its
continuing in its motion. The Vai´ses.ika position is that inertia is countered
by other forces, leading to energy loss, which is why the moving object slowly
loses its speed.

That motion cannot take place instantaneously, was well understood.
Vyoma´siva in his Vyomavat¯ı speaks of how a motion has several parts that
will take increments of time. Likewise, motions produced in cooking will
take time to produce the new quality associated with the process, where
time, in this context, is equivalent to energy. This is a statement of the
empirical fact that a minimum energy needs to be expended before a state
change occurs. With water the temperature must reach the boiling point
before steam will be obtained. This observation expresses an understanding
of the quantum eﬀect in daily processes.

It is stated that there are two kinds of universals: higher and lower.44The

22

higher universal here is Being, which encompasses everything. Lower uni-
versals exclude as well as include. This means that the universals could be
deﬁned in a hierarchical fashion. The higher universal is akin to a super-
position of all possibilities and so it anticipates the essence of the quantum
theory.

8 Cosmology, astronomy

We now consider how the ideas of S¯am. khya and Vai´ses.ika are intertwined
with the development of Indian science. Since S¯am. khya, in one of its many
forms, has been a part of Indian thinking going back to the remotest times,
one may be certain that it played an important role. This is most easy to
see for astronomy for which the extant texts provide enough information in
terms of layers of material, and thereby allow us to see a gradual development
of various ideas. This evolution of astronomy may be taken to be a prototype
for the development of other sciences.

Ideal forms play a role in Vai´ses.ika. For example, sphericity (p¯ariman. d. alya)

is considered a basic shape. Candramati speaks of two kinds of sphericity:
when it is minute, it resides in an atom, and when it is absolutely large
(inﬁnite), it resides in ¯ak¯a´sa, time, place, and self.
In between the very
large (cosmos) and the very small (atom) are the objects of the observable
universe which will not conform to the ideal shape. So in astronomy, which
represents this middle ground, one must consider deviations from spherical
or circular shapes and orbits.

Since only the cosmos as a whole may be considered to be perfect, space
as a dravya will not have any absolute properties. This reasoning sets Indian
physical science apart from the tradition of Greek science which took space
to be absolute and the observer on the earth to have a privileged position.
In Indian physics, space and time are considered to be relative.

Considering Indian astronomy, it should be noted that its understand-
ing is undergoing a major shift. More than a hundred years ago, it was
believed45that the Indians were the originators of many of the notions that
led to the Greek astronomical ﬂowering. This view slowly lost support and
then it was believed that Indian astronomy was essentially derivative and
it owed all its basic ideas to the Babylonians and the Greeks. It was even
claimed that there was no tradition of reliable observational astronomy in
India.

Billard,46using statistical analysis of the parameters used in the many

23

Siddh¯antas, showed that these texts were based on precise observations and
so the theory that there was no observational tradition in India was wrong.
Seidenberg showed that the altars of the Br¯ahman. as already knew consid-
erable geometry. He saw the development of the mathematical ideas going
through the sequence of equivalence by number followed by an equivalence
by area.47Further work showed that these altars represented astronomical
knowledge. Since then it has been found that the Vedic books are according
to an astronomical plan.48The texts themselves mimic the tripartite connec-
tions of nature!

On the non-uniform motion in the sky

We ﬁrst consider the sun. With respect to an observer on the earth, the sun
has two motions. First, is the daily motion across the sky. Second, is the
shifting of the rising and setting directions. It is this second motion which
deﬁnes the seasons. Its two extreme points are the solstices, and the points
where the sun’s orbit crosses the equator or when the nights equal the days
are the equinoxes.

The Aitareya Br¯ahman. a describes how the sun reaches the highest point
on the day called vis.uvant and how it stays still for a total of 21 days with
the vis.uvant being the middle day of this period. In the Pa˜ncavim. ´sa Br.
several year-long rites are described where the vis.uvant day is preceded and
followed by three-day periods called svaras¯aman days. This suggests that
the sun was now taken to be more or less still in the heavens for a total
period of 7 days. So it was clearly understood that the shifting of the rising
and the setting directions had an irregular motion.

The year-long rites list a total of 180 days before the solstice and another
180 days following the solstice. Since this is reckoning by solar days, it is
not clear stated how the remaining 4 or 5 days of the year were assigned.
But this can be easily inferred.

The two basic days in this count are the vis.uvant (summer solstice) and
the mah¯avrata day (winter solstice) which precedes it by 181 days in the
above counts. Therefore, even though the count of the latter part of the
year stops with an additional 180 days, it is clear that one needs another 4
or 5 days to reach the mah¯avrata day in the winter. This establishes that
the division of the year was in the two halves of 181 and 184 or 185 days.
Corroboration of this is suggested by evidence related to an altar design
from ´Satapatha Br¯ahman. a as shown in Fig 4. This ﬁgure shows that the
four quarters of the year were not taken to be equal.49

24

W

 V

E

Figure 4: The non-uniform circuit of the Sun

N

S

25

Likewise, the motions of the planets were known to be non-uniform. The
ideal orbits were considered to be circular. But the actual motion deviated
from the ideal, represented in terms of the struggle betweeen the devas and
the asuras of the Vedic mythology.50

By the time of the Siddh¯antas, the planet orbits were represented with
respect to the sun. Not only did ¯Aryabhat.a (c. 500 C.E.) believe that the
earth rotates, but there are glimmerings in his system (and other similar
Indian systems) of a possible underlying theory in which the earth (and the
planets) orbits the sun, rather than the sun orbiting the earth. The evidence
is that the period provided is the ´s¯ıghrocca, which is the time taken by the
planet to orbit the sun relative to the sun. For the outer planets this is not
signiﬁcant: both earth and sun are inside their orbits and so the time taken
to go round the earth and the time taken to go round the sun are the same.
But this becomes signiﬁcant for the inner planets.

The motion of the earth

Only an ideal body will be at complete rest in the Vai´ses.ika system. So it
is not surprising to see ¯Aryabhat.a take the earth to rotate on its axis. It
appears that the rotation of the earth is inherent in the notion that the sun
never sets that we ﬁnd in the Aitareya Br¯ahman. a:

The [sun] never really sets or rises. In that they think of him
“He is setting,” having reached the end of the day, he inverts
himself; thus he makes evening below, day above. Again in that
they think of him “He is rising in the morning,” having reached
the end of the night he inverts himself; thus he makes day below,
night above. He never sets; indeed he never sets.51

One way to visualize it is to see the universe as the hollow of a sphere so
that the inversion of the sun now shines the light on the world above ours.
But this is impossible since the sun does move across the sky during the day
and if the sun doesn’t set or rise it doesn’t move either. Clearly, the idea of
“inversion” denotes nothing but a movement of the earth.

By our study of the early Vedic sources, we are are now able to under-
stand the stages of the development of the earliest astronomy. After the
R. gvedic stage comes the period of the Br¯ahman. as. This is followed by La-
gadha’s astronomy. The last stage is early Siddh¯antic and early Pur¯an. ic
astronomy.

26

Ancient Indian astronomy may be described in terms of three broad
stages which mirror the development of the corresponding philosophical
ideas.

• Stage 1. This is primarily R. gvedic astronomy. Here we speak of the
motion of the sun and the moon, naks.atras, and the planets and their
orbits are not according to the ideal cyclic motions. We are not certain
when this period began but we have many references of astronomical
events in the mythology, like the destruction of the sacriﬁce of Daks.a
by ´Siva, which indicates the era of the fourth millennium B.C.E.,52but
note that this story belongs to a later stratum of the Vedic myths.
The ritual of this period was done according to the Ved¯a ˙nga Jyotis.a
of Lagadha (c. 1300 B.C.E.). Being the standard manual for deter-
mination of the Vedic rites, Lagadha’s work must have served as a
“living” book which is why the language of the extant text shows later
linguistic usage. The objective of the Ved¯a ˙nga Jyotis.a is to do the as-
tronomical calculations for the daily rites. The calculations use forms
that may be unrelated to observational processes as in the case of the
mean positions of the sun and the moon. The day is deﬁned with
respect to the risings of the sun, the stars, and the moon. This indi-
cates that the idea of relativity with respect to time processes was well
understood. The orbits of the sun and the moon are considered with
respect to their mean positions, suggesting the non-uniform nature of
their motions was well known.

• Stage 2. This is the astronomy of the Br¯ahman. as associated with
names like those of Y¯aj˜navalkya and ´S¯an. d. ilya. Although the rites of
the Br¯ahman. as appear to be very ancient, the texts appear to belong
to the second millennium B.C.E. Their astronomy is represented by
means of geometric altars and deals with the non-uniform motion of
the sun and the moon and intercalation for the lunar year. There is
also the beginnings of an understanding of universal attraction in terms
of “strings of wind joined to the sun.” This astronomy corresponds to
the S¯am. khya of the Br.had¯aran. yaka Upanis.ad.

• Stage 3. This concerns mainly with the early Siddh¯antic and Pur¯an. ic
periods. Here our main sources are the ´Sulbas¯utras, the Mah¯abh¯arata,
the early Pur¯an. as, S¯uryasiddha.nta and other texts. This stage saw the
development of the ´s¯ıghrocca and mandocca cycles and the concept of
the kalpa, the large period associated with creation at the cosmic level.

27

At the end of these stages stands the classical Siddh¯antic period inau-
gurated by ¯Aryabhat.a. The concepts of the ´s¯ıghrocca and mandocca cy-
cles indicate that the motion of the planets was taken to be fundamentally
around the sun, which, in turn, was taken to go around the earth. We can
see the development of these ideas as an explication of the notion of a non-
ideal motion in terms of several stages of underlying ideal motions. This is
analogous to how the ideal shapes of the atoms, when combined, lead to the
non-ideal shapes of the gross elements.

S¯urya Siddh¯anta describes a “mechanistic” model for the planetary mo-

tions which is like the mechanistic physical models of the Vai´ses.ika:

Forms of time, of invisible shape, stationed in the zodaic, called
the ´s¯ıghrocca, mandocca, and node (p¯ata), are causes of the
motion of the planets. The planets, attached to these points by
cords of air, are drawn away by them, with the right and left
hand, forward or backward, according to nearness, toward their
own place. A wind, called pravaha, impels them toward their
own uccas, being drawn away forward and backward.53

The antecedents of this system can be seen in the earlier texts. R. gveda
speaks of the stars of the Ursa Major (the Seven Sages) having ropes of wind,
(munayo v¯ata ra´san¯ah. ).54´Satapatha Br. describes the sun as pus.karam¯adityo,
“the lotus of the sky.” It also says:

tadas¯av¯aditya im¯am. lok¯ants¯utre sam¯avayate, tadyattats¯utram. v¯ayuh. ..
The sun strings these worlds [the earth, the planets, the atmo-
sphere] to himself on a thread. This thread is the same as the
wind...55

This suggests a central role to the sun in deﬁning the motions of the
planets and ideas such as these must have ultimately led to the theory of
the ´s¯ıghrocca and the mandocca cycles.

The sun’s central role implies that the basic functioning of gravitation
was understood. This action was visualized in terms of “ropes of wind,”
which, in modern terminology, would be called a ﬁeld.

Relativity of time and space

To summarize, the ﬁrst descriptions were non-uniform motions of “mean”
objects. Later models shift the centre from the earth, ﬁrst by considering

28

that earth spins on its axis, and then representing the non-circular motion
of the planets with respect to the sun.

The parallel speculative thought in the Pur¯an. as takes space and time to
be relative in a variety of ways. Time can ﬂow at diﬀerent rates for diﬀerent
observers. Time and space are not absolute. There exist countless universes
with their own Brahm¯a, Vis.n. u, and Mahes.a.

To appreciate the background for this thought, consider that in Vai´ses.ika
the universal is taken to be timeless and ubiquitous. Whatever can be
deﬁned with respect to space and time cannot be a universal. The processes
that mark the passage of time on an object would thus be relative.
It is
only the universals which are of the highest form, i.e. true for all time and
space, that are absolute. And the only such universal is the Being.

These ideas are elaborated in the Pur¯an. as, the ¯Agamic and the T¯antric

literature, and in books like the Yoga-V¯asis.t.ha.

9 Concluding remarks

We have shown that the physical concepts underlying S¯am. khya and Vai´ses.ika
represent a sophisticated materialist framework for the laws of nature. This
physics was based on general observations on the various physical processes.
Since an element of the two philosophical systems was metaphysical, the
reasoning was often validated based on psychological arguments. Both sys-
tems emphasized causality and so were capable of elucidating nature’s laws.
The basic categories are ideals and the modiﬁcations of these ideas provide
endless structure.

There is also a complementarity between S¯am. khya and Vai´ses.ika. By
considering the evolution of tattvas, S¯am. khya emphasizes genesis both at
the cosmic as well as the psychological levels. More details related to the
constitution of the physical world are provided by Vai´ses.ika. These struc-
tures are paralleled in Indian grammatical philosophy with production based
on a small set of axioms.

There is also a recognition that new enumerative categories are needed in
the characterization of empirical world. It is recognized that the description
of the physical world requires categories that go beyond the basic 25 of the
S¯am. khya system. Some of them are described in Vais.es.ika, but there the
emphasis is on atoms and their mutual relationships. For example, new
categories are necessary to characterize the motion of planets. Driven by
the requirement of reconciling the cyclic ideal motions of the planets to the

29

actual ones, more complex orbits were introduced. This complexity was seen
as being engendered by the workings of gravity-like forces.

Speaking of one of these philosophies, the historian of thought Karl Pot-

ter says:

Ny¯aya-Vai´ses. ika oﬀers one of the most vigorous eﬀorts at the con-
struction of a substantialist, realist ontology that the world has
ever seen. It provides an extended critique of event-ontologies
and idealist metaphysics. It starts from a unique basis for ontol-
ogy that incorporates several of the most recent Western insights
into the question of how to defend realism most successfully.
This ontology is “Platonistic” (it admits repeatable properties
as Plato’s did), realistic (it builds the world from “timeless” in-
dividuals as well as spatio-temporal points or events), but neither
exclusively physicalistic nor phenomenalistic (it admits as basic
individuals entities both directly known and inferred from sci-
entiﬁc investigations). Though the system has many quaint and
archaic features from a modern point of view, as a philosophi-
cal base for accommodating scientiﬁc insights it has advantages:
its authors developed an atomic theory, came to treat numbers
very much in the spirit of modern mathematics, argued for a
wave theory of sound transmission, and adapted an empiricist
view of causality to their own uses.56

In reality, the scope of S¯am. khya and Vai´ses.ika is even greater than this,
because they reconcile the observer to the frame of a materialist physics,
leading to subtle insights that have been validated by modern physics. Con-
sider, for example, the notion that one may take the tanm¯atras to be com-
posed of bh¯ut¯adi or the other way round. The tanm¯atras are an abstract
potential whereas bh¯ut¯adi are the elementary atoms which is somewhat like
the quantum wavefunction and material particles. S¯am. khya, where the ob-
server is central, considers tanm¯atras to emerge ﬁrst. On the other hand,
Vai´ses.ika. with its focus on atoms and their combinations, does not speak
of tanm¯atras although some of the gun. as are like the tanm¯atras. In other
words, we have something akin to the concept of wave-particle duality of
quantum physics.

The assumption that all observed world emerges out of prakr.ti implies
that the material substratum of all substances is the same. The qualities
of Vai´ses.ika emerge as material atoms combine in diﬀerent ways. These

30

emergent properties are not limited to inanimate matter but also to the
instruments of cognition where actual cognition requires the self to be the
activating agent.

This paper presents only two of the many currents of the Indian physical
thought. One needs also to consider texts on architecture, astronomy as well
as the traditions related to crafts and military science for additional insight.

Abbreviations

Aitareya Br¯ahman. a
AB
Atharvaveda
AV
Br.had¯aran. yaka Upanis.ad
BU
CU
Ch¯andogya Upanis.ad
KBU Kaus.¯ıtaki Br¯ahman. a Upanis.ad
PP
RV
´SB
SK
´SU
TU
VS

Pad¯arthadharmasam. graha of Pra´sastap¯ada
R. gveda
´Satapatha Br¯ahman. a
S¯am. khya K¯arik¯a
´Svet¯a´svatara Upanis.ad
Taittir¯ıya Upanis.ad
Vai´ses.ika S¯utra

Notes

1. SK 2.

2. Heisenberg [5], Kak [9,14,16-18,21].

3. RV 1.164.45.

4. See, for example, Kak [7,8,10-15,20].

5. RV 4.23; 10.85; 10.190.

6. AV 10.

7. RV 2.25; 10.121.

8. RV 10.129.4-5.

9. BU 4.5.12-13.

31

18. See, for example, Dasgupta [3], Matilal [28], Potter [29], Hulin [6],

Larson [26], Larson and Bhattacharya [27].

19. VS 2.1

20. Seal [31], pages 37-38.

21. Seal [31], pages 38-39.

10. BU 1.4.1.

11. KBU 3.5.

12. CU 7.25.1.

13. CU 6.2-5.

14. ´SU 4.5.

15. TU 2.1.

16. CU 6.2.1-2.

17. TU 3.2-6.

22. PP 5.41-3.

23. PP 137.

24. SK 4-7.

25. SK 7.

26. SK 9.

28. SK 35.

29. PP 121.

30. SK 36.

32. SK 3.

27. Gaud. ap¯adabh¯as.ya 9.

31. PP 5.44s; see also VS 3.1.19.

32

36. Heisenberg [5], Kak [9].

33. SK 11.

34. SK 19.

35. SK 17.

37. SK 18.

38. SK 20.

39. PP 129-133.

40. VS 10.

41. PP 143.

42. PP 129.

43. PP 149.

44. PP 154.

45. Burgess [2].

46. Billard [1].

47. Seidenberg [32].

48. Kak [15-20,22-25].

49. The ﬁgure is from ´SB 8.5; see also Kak [15].

50. Kak [15].

51. AB 4.18.

52. Kramrisch [25], pages 42-43.

53. S¯urya Siddh¯anta 2.1-5.

54. RV 10.136.2.

55. ´SB 8.7.3.10.

56. Potter [29], page 1.

33

Bibliography

Paris, 1971.

1 R. Billard, L’Astronomie Indienne. Ecole Francaise d’Extreme Orient,

2 E. Burgess, The S¯urya Siddh¯anta. Motilal Banarsidass, Delhi, 1989 (1860).

3 S. Dasgupta, A History of Indian Philosophy. Cambridge University

4 Dharampal, Indian Science and Technology in the Eighteenth Century.

Press, Cambridge, 1932.

Impex India, Delhi, 1971.

5 W. Heisenberg, Physics and Philosophy. Penguin, London, 1989.

6 M. Hulin, S¯am. khya Literature. Otto Harrassowitz, Wiesbaden, 1978.
7 S. Kak, “The astronomy of the age of geometric altars,” Quarterly Journal

Royal Astronomical Society, 36, 385-396, 1995.

8 S. Kak, “Knowledge of planets in the third millennium BC,” Quarterly

Journal Royal Astronomical Society, 37, 709-715, 1996.

9 S. Kak, “On the science of consciousness in ancient India,” Indian Journal

of the History of Science, 32, 105-120, 1997a.

10 S. Kak, “Archaeoastronomy and literature,” Current Science, 73, 624-

627, 1997b.

11 S. Kak, “Speed of light and Puranic cosmology.” ArXiv: physics/9804020.

12 S.Kak, “Early theories on the distance to the sun.” Indian Journal of
History of Science, vol. 33, 1998, pp. 93-100. ArXiv: physics/9804021.

13 S. Kak, “The solar numbers in Angkor Wat.” Indian Journal of History
of Science, vol. 34, 1999, pp. 117-126. ArXiv: physics/9811040.

14 S. Kak, “Concepts of space, time, and consciousness in ancient India.”

ArXiv: physics/9903010.

15 S. Kak, The Astronomical Code of the R. gveda. Munshiram Manoharlal,

New Delhi, 2000.

34

16 S. Kak, “Birth and early development of Indian astronomy.” In a book
on Astronomy Across Cultures: The History of Non-Western Astron-
omy, Helaine Selin (editor), Kluwer Academic, Boston, 2000, pp. 303-
340. ArXiv: physics/0101063.

17 S. Kak, ‘Astronomy and its role in Vedic culture.” In Science and Civ-
ilization in India, Vol. 1: The Dawn of Indian Civilization, Part 1,
edited by G.C. Pande, ICPR/Centre for Studies in Civilizations, New
Delhi, 2000, pp. 507-524.

18 S. Kak, “Physical concepts in Samkhya and Vaisesika.” In Science and
Civilization in India, Vol. 1, Part 2, Life, Thought and Culture in In-
dia (from c 600 BC to c AD 300), edited by G.C. Pande, ICPR/Centre
for Studies in Civilizations, New Delhi, 2001, pp. 413-437.

19 S. Kak, On Aryabhata’s planetary constants. ArXiv: physics/0110029.

20 S. Kak, The Wishing Tree. Munshiram Manoharlal, New Delhi, 2001.

21 S. Kak, “The cyclic universe: some historical notes.” ArXiv: physics/0207026

22 S. Kak, “Greek and Indian cosmology: review of early history.” ArXiv:

23 S. Kak, “Babylonian and Indian astronomy: early connections.” ArXiv:

physics/0303001.

physics/0301078.

24 S. Kak, “Yajnavalkya and the origins of puranic cosmology.” Adyar Li-

brary Bulletin, vol 65, pp. 145-156, 2001. Also in ArXiv: physics/0101012.

25 S. Kramrisch, The Presence of ´Siva. Princeton University Press, Prince-

ton (1981), pages 42-43.

26 G.J. Larson, Classical S¯am. khya. Motilal Banarsidass, Delhi, 1979.
27 G.J. Larson and R.S. Bhattacharya (ed.). S¯am. khya: A Dualist Tradition

in Indian PhilosophY. Princeton University Press, Princeton, 1987.

28 B.K. Matilal, Ny¯aya-Vai´ses. ika. Otto Harrassowitz, Wiesbaden, 1977.
29 K.H. Potter (ed.).

Indian Metaphysics and Epistemology. Princeton

University Press, Princeton, 1977.

35

30 T.R.N. Rao and S. Kak (eds.). Computing Science in Ancient India.

Munshiram Manoharlal, New Delhi, 2000.

31 B. Seal, The Positive Sciences of the Hindus. Motilal Banarsidass, Delhi,

1985 (1915)

32 A. Seidenberg, “The origin of mathematics,” Archive for History of Ex-

act Sciences, 18, 301-342, 1978.

36

