BRX TH-529

“String Theory:

a theory in search of an experiment”

Howard J. Schnitzer1
Martin A. Fisher School of Physics
Brandeis University
Waltham, MA 02454

This essay was presented at a celebration for
Professor S.S. Schweber on October 8, 2003
at the Dibner Institute, MIT

Abstract

It is argued that string theory may pose new conceptual issues for the history and philosophy
of science.

3
0
0
2
 
v
o
N
 
0
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
t
s
i
h
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
7
4
0
1
1
3
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

1email: schnitzr@brandeis.edu. Supported in part by the DOE under grant DR-FG02-92ER40706.

1

I’ve been in particle physics since 1954, so I’ve had the good fortune to witness the emergence
of that subject from nuclear physics, and have participated in its development, right through its
present incarnation. I came to Brandeis University in 1961, so that for almost my entire career in
particle theory, I’ve had the privilege to discuss and debate a wide variety of issues relating to the
development of particle physics, and their interpretation in a historical context with Sam. In that
spirit, I oﬀer this discussion of string theory to the celebration of Sam’s accomplishments.

I have been a practicing string theorist since the mid 1980’s, so my perspective is as one immersed
in the subject. In my opinion string theory raises new issues for the history of physics which need
be considered and clariﬁed. Others are more competent than I am to comment on deeper historical
and philosophical implications relevant to the subject, so I leave interpretations to them. My role
will be to point out issues that I believe need further analysis. As yet, string theory’s place in the
history of physics is uncertain; at best it is history in the making. If it succeeds in providing a
description of nature it will be one more example of a “top down” theory, i.e., one which is driven
by theoretical issues, and not by experiment, at least not in its formative stages. That is, it draws
the attention of workers to the ﬁeld because of the elegance and consistency of its formulation and
not as a response to experiments which call out for explanation [1]. There are well recognized
“top-down” theories in our subject; 1) general relativity; 2) the Dirac theory of the electron; and
3) the non-abelian gauge theories, (i.e., Yang-Mills theory) are prime examples. Each of these were
also theories in search of experiments, and they are with us today because eventual conﬁrming
experimental results became available.

In each of these three examples, crucial experiments followed within a reasonable period of time after
the presentation of the theory. General relativity was formulated by Einstein so as to respect general
covariance and the equivalence principle as underlying features. The residual precesion of the
perihelion of Mercury and the deﬂection of light of stars seen during solar eclipses convinced many
soon after that general relativity had something to say about nature. Applications to cosmology
and astrophysics are now standard.

The theory of the electron was formulated by Dirac in order to combine special relativity with
quantum mechanics. The discovery of the positron, and an understanding of the magnetic moment
of the electron provided conﬁrmation of the Dirac equation, and made it a recognized tool of the
theorist. The program of string theory to make general relativity compatible with quantum ﬁeld
theory, is in some sense a logical descendant of the Einstein and Dirac theories. By contrast, string
theory is still in the process of development, without as yet any experimental conﬁrmation of the
underlying ideas, let alone detailed experimental predictions. Nevertheless, the issues addressed by
string theory are very compelling, given the antecedents of Einstein and Dirac.

Of course there have been a large number of “bottom-up” theories in particle physics as well. These
developed from an experiment or series of experimental results which require explanation. A prime
example in particle physics is provided by the proliferation of “elementary” particles in the 1960’s.
This prompted several competing theories of the strong interaction symmetries, with Gell-Mann’s
SU(3), i.e., the eight-fold way, being the winner of the competition. The crucial experiment in this
program was the discovery of the Ω− baryon, which provided convincing evidence for the Gell-Mann
scheme. The desire for a more fundamental description of the SU(3) of strong-interactions gave rise
to the Gell-Mann/Zweig quark model, which in this context should also be considered a bottom-up
theory.

2

Those of us who are active in string theory hope that it will be one more example of a successful
top-down theory, but we are not there yet. We are still hoping for any experiment or a series of
experiments to support the underlying ideas of this class of theories. (More about this later.) Why
do many of us consider string theory so appealing? The short answer is that it is the only known
consistent theory which combines quantum mechanics and gravity. But there is more. Perhaps it
will be a theory that subsumes the standard model of particle physics, and leads us to explanation
of new phenomena? Hopefully time will tell.

A brief historical perspective about string theory [1] and major changes of direction motivated
by crucial calculations or new theoretical insights may place the discussion in perspective. Order
emerged in the study of the strong-interactions with Gell-Mann’s SU(3) organizing hadron mul-
tiplets into representations of the symmetry group SU(3). The Gell-Mann-Okubo formula gave a
precise prediction for the symmetry breaking patterns, which were indeed observed. Other regu-
larities were also observed. Resonances could be organized into a (Chew-Frautchi) plot of angular
(mass)2, i.e., J vs. m2, for particles and resonances. Remarkably these are a
momentum vs.
It was observed that scattering of
series of parallel straight lines, so-called Regge trajectories.
hadrons at high energies could be described in terms of the exchange of Regge trajectories between
the colliding particles, equivalent to the exchange of particles of arbitrary high spin and corre-
lated mass between the scatterers. This is a remarkable extension of the Yukawa idea of meson
exchange between protons. In fact in a two-body scattering process, schematically written 1+2
→ 3+4 (s-channel) there are two other associated processes 1+¯4 → ¯2+4 (t-channel) and 1+¯4 →
¯2+3 (u-channel). The observation was that all three processes were related, and the high-energy
cross-section for the set of three-processes was given by a single amplitude. That is, the three
processes were related by so-called “crossing symmetry”. The empirical result was that this single
master amplitude could be described by Regge exchange in just one of the three scattering chan-
nels, contrary to what is expected from Feynman diagrams. This feature of high-energy scattering
processes was termed “hadron duality”, where the Regge-exchange description of the scattering
processes need be considered in only one of s, t, or u channels. Not all three. The ﬁrst attempt
at explanation was provided by an ad hoc formula due to Veneziano [2]. Subsequently Nambu [3]
and Goto independently noted that the results of the Veneziano model and its generalization to
multiparticle processes (the dual-resonance model) could be described by a theory of relativistic
vibrating strings.

This string theory of strong interactions was soon set aside for a variety of reasons. For example
it disagreed with scattering at high energies and large momentum transfers. [The original motiva-
tion for hadron duality involved small momentum transfers.] The data indicated that these large
momentum transfer processes were much harder than the soft cross-sections predicted by the dual
resonance models. That is, cross-sections decreased as a power-law in the large momentum trans-
fer, measured at ﬁxed energy, rather than the predicted exponential fall-oﬀ. Further, deep-inelastic
scattering gave evidence for quarks, which did not ﬁt into the dual resonance model in a natural
way.

These results indicated that the dual resonance model, or the equivalent string model, was not
a viable theory of the strong interactions.
In addition, the dual resonance model predicted the
existence of a massless state with spin J=2, which had no role in the strong interactions. Joel
Scherk and John Schwarz [4] turned this latter diﬃculty into an advantage, proposing that the
massless, spin 2 state was the graviton, and that the Nambu-Goto string theory was in fact a

3

theory of gravitational interactions. The modern theory of strings was launched.

Thus, the Nambu-Goto string theory was reinterpreted as a fundamental string, with the Planck
mass replacing the hadron mass-scale of (1Gev).
In the new understanding, the slope of Regge
trajectories was α′ = (∆J=1)/(Planck mass)2, and not (∆J=1)/(1 Gev)2. So what had begun as
a phenomenological theory of hadrons, reemerged as a theory of gravity, coupled to particle states.
Various quantum ﬁeld theories coupled to gravity could be obtained in well-controlled low-energy
limits. To restate the situation, what was originally an attempt at a bottom-up theory of hadrons,
had a new incarnation as a top- down theory entirely motivated by theoretical concerns. It was not
yet clear whether this theory was internally consistent, let alone a description of nature. Various
versions of string theory were found, but there were consistency issues. In order to be consistent
with Lorentz invariance and unitarity (conservation of probability) bosonic strings (fermions absent)
had to be formulated in 26-dimensions, with 22 of these compact if contact with our 4-dimensional
world was to be achieved. It is presumed that the compact dimensions are much too small to be
observed.
[Planck size.] However, this theory had an unpleasant feature. It contains a tachyon
state, i.e., one with m2 < 0, which ruled it out for serious consideration, except as a possible practice
ﬁeld. In order to have a completely consistent string theory, one had to add in the formulation
supersymmetry, a symmetry which exchanges bosons ↔ fermions. Then, in order to have Lorentz
invariance, unitarity, and absence of tachyons, one was restricted to D=10, of which 6 of these are
extremely small, and compact, if contact with our D=4 world was to be made [1].

However, other theoretical diﬃculties remained. A number of string theories exhibited “anomalies”.
Anomalies are good symmetries of the classical theory, which are broken by the quantum theory,
in a way that rendered the theories inconsistent. In string theory, the diﬃculties occurred with
gravitational anomalies. In the 1984 string revolution Michael Green and John Schwarz [5] found 3
distinct consistent string theories in D=10, all of which were supersymmetric. [Subsequently 2 more
(heterotic) strings were found by Gross, et al. [6], to establish the 5 only consistent string theories
in 10-D.] The crucial calculations of Green and Schwarz were so tight in their logic and compelling
in their conclusions that they convinced a number of workers (including me) that this theory was
extremely deep and possibly had something to do with nature. It was certainly the ﬁrst and only
theory which consistently combined general relativity with quantum ﬁeld theory. As a bonus, each
of the consistent string theories are ultraviolet ﬁnite, in that the ultraviolet divergences which
infest the usual quantum ﬁeld theories are absent. No renormalization is needed. In the euphoria
of the moment, several workers proclaimed that one was on the road to a theory of everything.
This overselling of the beautiful achievement of combining general relativity with quantum theory
certainly created antagonism to the program, much of which seems to have dissipated.

An ongoing diﬃculty with any supersymmetric theory is that supersymmetry is at best a broken
symmetry. We have yet to ﬁnd bose ↔ fermi partners for the known particles. If found, the partners
would not have the same masses, as the symmetry will be a broken one, with characteristic mass
diﬀerences of at least 1 Tev.
It turns out that breaking supersymmetry in string theory seems
inevitably to lead to a cosmological constant in the gravitation sector. Workers (e.g., T. Banks [7])
are presently trying to turn this feature into an advantage, given the observed cosmological constant
found from analyses of cosmic microwave background radiation. The attempt to correlate the
observed cosmological constant with a prediction of the mass-scale characterizing supersymmetry
breaking is work in progress.

A deep insight; that of a chain of string dualities was discovered by Chris Hull, Paul Townsend,

4

Edward Witten [8] and others. This provided a demonstration that the 5 consistent string theories
in 10-D were in fact diﬀerent manifestations of a single theory. These 5 theories are linked by
dualities to a 6th theory in 11-D, whose low-energy realization is 11-D supergravity. [Supergravity
was an initial attempt to combine supersymmetry and quantum ﬁeld theory with gravity, but it
was shown early on at Brandeis that it too was nonrenormalizable [9], with an inﬁnite number
of undetermined constants. Supergravity is now considered to be the low-energy limit of string
theories.] A puzzle had been that there were 6 natural supergravity theories in D≥10 [5 in 10-D
and 1 in 11-D], but there were only ﬁve 10-D string theories. It has been proposed that there is an
11-D master theory, M-theory [10], which subsumes all 6 incarnations, and which links these 6 by
dualities, but M-theory still lacks a complete formulation.

Let me sketch some aspects of the chain of string dualities that links these string theories, to give
a ﬂavor of the idea. Consider a particular string theory in 10-D, before any of the dimensions have
been compactiﬁed to reach D=4. Then let the 10th dimension be compactiﬁed on a circle of radius
R. Call this theory IIA. There is another theory compactiﬁed on a radius 1/R. [I use dimensionless
units in units of Planck length.] Call this theory IIB. It turns out that the IIA theory compactiﬁed
on radius R is identical to IIB theory compactiﬁed at radius 1/R.
[Parenthetically, this leads to
a string uncertainty principle. A new conceptual idea. One cannot probe distances shorter than
the Planck length in a scattering process, as a duality R → 1/R maps this to a distance scale
larger than the Planck length.] There is another duality, S-duality, which relates one theory with
string coupling constant gs to another string theory with coupling constant 1/gs. This is the string
analogue of the electromagnetic duality of Maxwell’s theory under which E → B and B → −E.
This gives a glimpse of the chain of dualities, which links all 5 string theories, as well as the 11-D
supergravity. Hence, the idea that there is just one master theory in 11-D, M-theory, which however
is still not completely characterized.

Recall that to make any possible contact with the real world, we must compactify 6 of the 10-
dimensions, leaving 4-D Minkowski space, in the low-energy limit. There are a large number of
ways of carrying out this compactiﬁcation, each leading to potentially diﬀerent predictions of 4-
dimensional physics. With abuse of language, we call these diﬀerent compactiﬁcations diﬀerent
theories.

A recent deep insight was the principle of holography (’t Hooft; Susskind; Maldacena) [11]. It was
proposed, supported by many concrete examples that veriﬁed the idea, that a consistent quantum
theory of gravity in (D+1) compact bulk dimensions [string theory is the only known example] is
dual to a quantum ﬁeld theory without gravity living on the D-dimensional boundary. This duality
in detail implies that correlators of the bulk and boundary theories are related. The principle also
states that there is at most (one degree of freedom)/Planck area on the boundary. This point of view
has led to a description of black-hole thermodynamics in terms of string microstates, for certain well-
chosen examples [12]. Thus, string-theory seems to provide the statistical mechanics which underlie
black-hole thermodynamics. Optimists hope that further developments in this direction will solve
the black hole information paradox. Loosely speaking, throw the encyclopedia into a black-hole,
and out comes uncorrelated thermal Hawking radiation. Where has the information gone? But
more needs to be done to see if the paradox can be resolved. Holography has also provided many
new insights into the strong-interactions of quantum ﬁeld theories. This too remains an active area
of investigation.

All these beautiful developments are dominated by theoretical considerations, but not by choice.

5

What about prospects for a crucial experiment? In the next generation of experiments, which will
be carried out at the LHC (CERN) now under construction, there will be dedicated searches for
(broken) bose-fermi symmetry, i.e., supersymmetry.
If found, this will be good news for string
theories, as supersymmetry seems to be a necessary, but not suﬃcient, ingredient to conﬁrm string
theory.

Another issue being actively explored is the possibility that not all of the 6 hidden dimensions are
small (i.e., of Planck size). Some might be considerably larger (mm?) [13]. Considerable eﬀort is
[Extra dimensions is a
going into formulating experiments to test for large compact dimensions.
natural descendent of the top-down model of Kaluza-Klein.] Their experimental discovery would
be suﬃcient to conﬁrm this essential idea of string theory, without pointing to any speciﬁc version
of the theory. So, discovery of large extra dimensions is suﬃcient to support one of the fundamental
features of string theory, but is not necessary. It could be that all hidden dimensions are of Planck
size.

So supersymmetry and/or large extra dimensions would give support to the general ideas of string
theory, but would not provide the crucial experiments in the historical sense. Can we foresee a
crucial experiment? Not at the present time. String theorists are presently making excursions into
cosmology, so perhaps there will be a distinctive signature in that application of the theory. Perhaps
there is a particularly attractive compactiﬁcation of 10 → 4 dimensions which agrees very well with
the standard model, ﬁxing some or all of the free parameters, and makes distinctive predictions for
future experiments. But this seems to be a very distant prospect.

There is another unpleasant possibility that is presently being discussed. Suppose that there are a
large number of diﬀerent string theory compactiﬁcations (1000 say, to as many as 10100 claimed by
Douglas [14]), which make predictions that closely resemble those of the standard model and its
extensions within experimental error. [It should be emphasized that there are no known examples,
since we don’t have a single example of this class!] Instead, what is studied are the statistics of
the number of string theories which make low-energy predictions close to each other. Perhaps
these overlapping theories may be distinguished by cosmology. If not we are faced with a deep and
disturbing problem. We would have a large number of theories which agree with any conceivable
experiment, but lack a crucial experiment to distinguish them. Simplicity does not seem to favor
any particular theory of this class, so this is apparently not a decisive criterion. How is one to
assess such a class of theories? This is certainly science and not mathematics, since they would
correctly predict all possible accessible experiments, all within experimental accuracy. If indeed
this is what lies in the future of string theory, in my opinion it opens new issues in the history of
physics, ripe for new interpretations.

Perhaps this point of view is too pessimistic, and represents a “pendulum-like” swing away from
the early euphoria that claimed that string theory was a theory of everything. The reaction seems
to have swung too far in the opposite direction, as not a single concrete example exists to illustrate
the concerns of the pessimists. They are certainly considering logical possibilities, but we just don’t
know how the story will evolve.

In any case, string theory is still work in progress, with ﬁnal judgment as to its role in physics still
to be decided, and there may be further string revolutions before the ultimate form of the theory
takes shape. As I’ve attempted to indicate, this particular “top-down” theory raises a number of
problems in the assessment of the status of a theory, and its conﬁrmation by experiment. Hopefully

6

we will see theoretical and conceptual clariﬁcation in the future.

References

[1] No attempt will be made to provide a comprehensive set of references for the topics discussed.
Only certain key citations will be presented. A very useful references for string theory is the
“Resource Letter” by D. Marolf, hep-th/0311044, which cites popular and historical exposi-
tions, as well as texts and technical reviews.

[2] G. Veneziano, Nuovo Cimento 57A (1968) 100.

[3] Y. Nambu, pg. 269 in Proc. of the Int’l. Conference on Symmetries and Quark Models, Wayne

State University (1970).

[4] J. Scherk and J. Schwarz, Phys. Lett. B52 (1974) 347; Nucl. Phys. B81 (1974) 118.

[5] M. Green and J. Schwarz, Phys. Lett. 149B (1984) 117.

[6] D. Gross, J. Harvey, E. Martinec and R. Rohm, Phy. Rev. Lett. 54 (1985) 502.

[7] T. Banks, hep-th/0305206.

[8] C. Hull and P. Townsend, Nucl. Phys. B438 (1995) 109, hep-th/9410167; E. Witten, Nucl.

Phys. B443 (1995) 85, hep-th/9503124.

[9] For review see S. Deser, Annalen Phys. 9 (2000) 299, gr-qc/9911073.

[10] P. Townsend, Phys. Lett. B350 (1995) 184, hep-th/9501068; E. Witten, Nucl. Phys. B443

(1995) 85, hep-th/9503124.

[11] G. ’t Hooft, gr-qc/9310026; L. Susskind, J. Math. Phys. 36 (1995) 6377, hep-th/9409089; J.
Maldacena, Adv. Theor. Math. Phys. 2 (1998) 231, hep-th/9711200; S. Gubser, I. Klebanov,
and A. Polyakov, Phys. Lett. B428 (1998) 105, hep-th/9802109; E. Witten, Adv. Theor. Math.
Phys. 2 (1998) 253, hep-th/9802150.

[12] A. Strominger and C. Vafa, Phys. Lett. B379 (1996) 99, hep-th/9601025.

[13] N. Arkani-Hamed, S. Dimopoulous, and G. Dvali, Phys. Lett. B429 (1998) 263, hep-
th/9803315; I. Antoniadis, N. Arkani-Hamed, S. Dimopoulous, and G. Dvali, Phys. Lett.
B436 (1998) 257, hep-th/9804398; L. Randall and R. Sundrum, Phys. Rev. Lett. 83 (1999)
3370, hep-ph/9905221; Phys. Rev. Lett. 83 (1999) 4690, hep-th/9906064.

[14] M. Douglas, JHEP 05 (2003) 046, hep-th/0303149

7

