3
0
0
2
 
v
o
N
 
4
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
t
s
i
h
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
4
1
1
1
1
3
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Astronomy and the Fall of Babylon

V.G.Gurzadyan

Yerevan Physics Institute, Armenia and
ICRA, University of Rome “La Sapienza”, Italy

(Published in Sky & Telescope, v.100, No.1 (July), pp. 40-45, 2000; design
credit:Sky & Telescope. )

1

Figure 1: One key for establishing dates in the ancient world is the chang-
ing shapes of pottery. These vessels are typical for the years just before
Babylon’s fall to the Hittites. The tall ones are probably mugs for beer, a
favorite Babylonian beverage.

1

Introduction

It’s not often when sophisticated techniques developed for astronomy can an-
swer an earthly mystery that has persisted for thousands of years. Yet there
is a direct link joining the Cosmic Background Explorer (COBE) spacecraft
and lunar laser-ranging to the precise dating of a celebrated historical event
- the fall of Babylon to the Hittites in the second millennium B.C.

One of the most famous cities in the ancient world, Babylon was strate-
gically located on the Euphrates River. There it wielded political power
and controlled trade throughout a large region of Mesopotamia (modern-day
Iraq). Yet we remember it today as a fount for our scientiﬁc heritage. Baby-
lonian astronomy is directly echoed in the Almagest of Claudius Ptolemy
(about A.D. 140), which epitomized this science until the time of Copernicus
14 centuries later. Even nowadays our culture is bound to such inventions
as the sexagesimal system and the zodiac.

My involvement with Babylonian astronomy started in 1995, when I met
Hermann Gasche, a leading European archaeologist, coordinator of excava-
tions in various areas of Mesopotamia, and author and editor of many books
on the archaeology of the region. Our association seemed preordained. Sev-
eral years earlier, while visiting Armenia, Gasche became aware of unpub-
lished works prepared in the 1920s and ’30s by the archaeologist Ashkharbek
Kalantar, my grandfather, and he arranged for their publication.

As we sat in his Paris studio full of pictures of pottery, Gasche excit-

2

edly told me about a problem he had been working on with two American
researchers, archaeologist James Armstrong and Assyriologist Steven Cole.
The vessel shapes he had studied at various archaeological sites couldn’t be
accommodated within the time frame of the so-called Middle Chronology
(see box) of Mesopotamia, which was the most commonly accepted scheme
but also the most criticized. (Archaeologists frequently use pottery evidence
to help date ancient cultures.) To reconcile what Gasche and his colleagues
had found required shortening the Middle Chronology by about a century.
Part of the reason behind Gasche’s excitement was a group of tablets
recently unearthed at a site in a Baghdad suburb called Tell Muhammad.
Among these tablets were two bearing references to a lunar eclipse that
occurred 38 years after Babylon was resettled. He wanted to see whether I
could use that eclipse and other astronomical sources to establish an absolute
chronology for around the time Babylon fell and perhaps simultaneously
resolve the pottery enigma. Such a chronology can only be established
through astronomical records like those on the eclipse tablet. Indeed, the
standard Near Eastern chronology from about 1400 B.C. to 700 B.C. - based
on the so-called Assyrian Kinglist - is anchored by records of the solar eclipse
of June 15, 763, B.C.

My ﬁrst step was to carefully examine the existing literature and the
methodology of ancient Babylonian astronomers and mathematicians.
It
soon became evident that chronologies for eras earlier than 1400 B.C. -
based on the so-called Venus Tablet from the reign of King Ammisaduqa of
Babylon - were ﬂawed. The reason is trivial: although the tablet contains
sightings of the planet that could conceivably be dated, its 20 identiﬁed
fragments are actually corrupted copies made about a thousand years after
the events took place.

The Venus Tablet is one (Number 63) of a series of some 70 tablets
collectively known as Enuma Anu Enlil. Two others (Numbers 20 and 21)
record a pair of lunar eclipses connected with the Third Dynasty of Ur,
which dominated Babylonia around 4,000 years ago.

2 Unscrambling the Evidence

I started with a reexamination of the Venus Tablet. This remarkable text,
identiﬁed in the 1910s by the Jesuit Franz Kugler, contains data on ﬁrst and
last visibilities of Venus during a 21-year period that is believed to involve
the reign of King Ammisaduqa, who governed a little over a century after
the famous Babylonian king Hammurabi.

3

Figure 2: Copying cuneiform texts isn’t always easy! In 1926 Ashkharbek
Kalantar, the author’s grandfather (in helmet), supervised the work involv-
ing a Urartian rock inscription at lake Sevan, the largest in Armenia. Today
the water level is 20 meters lower.

Following an orbit inside Earth’s, Venus becomes temporarily invisible
when it aligns itself either between the Earth and Sun (inferior conjunc-
tion) or beyond the Sun (superior conjunction). These passages mark when
Venus switches from being a Morning Star to an Evening Star or vice versa.
Very important to the Babylonian astronomers, as documented in the Venus
Tablet, is that these morning/evening visibility cycles repeat almost pre-
cisely in the sky every 8 years. (Five of Venus’s conjunction-to-conjunction
periods of 584 days equal 8 years within a couple of days.)

Almost from the time of its discovery it became evident that the Venus
Tablet contains errors made by the original scribe as well as later copyists.
Also, parts of it are obscured and unreadable. So it’s not surprising that

4

Figure 3: Ancient sites mentioned in the text are included on this map,
which also shows modern Baghdad.

scholars have disagreed on its usefulness for dating events in the ancient
Babylonian world. Erica Reiner and David Pingree, for example, claimed it
was impossible to extract reliable chronological information from the tablet.
Nevertheless, researchers have continued to rely on the Venus Tablet to
generate chronologies for the centuries preceding the fall of Babylon.

In modern jargon, we can say the tablet has ”noisy” data, and that’s
where my experience with COBE proved useful.
In 1996 I worked with
COBE team member Sergio Torres on ways to pluck real signals from
COBE’s complete data set. This was no easy task because of pervasive
contamination by noise from the cosmos, the Earth’s atmosphere, and the
detectors themselves. We were analyzing the distortion of ”hot” and ”cold”
spots in sky maps of the cosmic microwave background, and we ﬁnally de-
tected a tiny signal that matched a theoretical prediction to suggest the
universe might have negative curvature and expand forever. (We published
the result in Astronomy and Astrophysics, Vol. 321, page 19, 1997.)

When I applied the same kind of sifting to the Venus Tablet, I came up
empty-handed. The Monte Carlo technique of random sampling, as well as
other statistical schemes, revealed noise but no signiﬁcant signal except for
that of the 8-year Venus cycle.

5

Figure 4: Hammurabi is the most recognizable name pertaining to ancient
Babylon. The bas-relief at the top of this stele depicts the king (left) re-
ceiving his famous code of laws from the Sun-god Shamash. Hammurabi
ruled in the 17th century B.C. according to the new chronology described in
this article. This stele, a copy of one in the British Museum, is at Harvard
University’s Semitic Museum.

Another lesson from COBE is that the nature of the noise itself can
be studied - in other words, some corruptions might be identiﬁed because
they have a systematic character. The opportunity to apply such modern
analytical techniques to archaeology is new and might lead to important
insights about ancient texts.

Then I turned to dating the two lunar eclipses recorded during the Third
Dynasty of Ur, which occurred more than 400 years before Babylon’s fall.
The problem was to accurately match up modern predictions of what should
have been seen with what was actually observed. At ﬁrst glance this seems to
be a simple task. Indeed, there is plenty of software for home computers that
can do the calculations, and there are lists that tell where eclipses occurred
thousands of years ago and give such circumstances as their beginning and
ending times to an accuracy of minutes.

However, before utilizing such resources one has to clearly understand the
approximations inherent in both the input data and in the algorithms for the
calculation. A program can work well over short time spans but not over long
ones, because planetary motions are essentially nonlinear and initial errors
propagate exponentially. Therefore, for an orbit to be precisely deﬁned
over a given span of time, the input data have to be suﬃciently accurate

6

Figure 5: This tablet with its cuneiform text is believed to record 16th-
century B.C. visibilities of the planet Venus and was long regarded as pro-
viding a key to dating events in ancient Babylon. However, the author has
shown that its data are corrupted and unusable. The so-called Venus Tablet,
which has confounded many Babylonian scholars, was ﬁrst recognized as con-
taining chronological information by the Jesuit priest Franz Xaver Kugler
in the 1910s. Credit: Archivum Monacense SJ, Munich.

and all planetary perturbations have to be properly taken into account.
The perturbations, particularly, are responsible for many unforeseen eﬀects,
including chaos and other unpredictables.

Archaeologists are basically interested in two consequences of such cal-
culations. One is the determination of the moment the Moon arrives at a
point in its orbit opposite the Sun, when it can pass through the Earth’s
shadow and be eclipsed. The second is to ﬁnd the local time an observer’s
clock would show for the event. The physical interrelated eﬀects that con-
tribute to uncertainty include tidally and nontidally induced variations in
the Earth’s rotation rate and the gradually increasing distance of the Moon
from Earth. With events that happened 4,000 years ago, like the Ur eclipses,
these eﬀects can result in prediction errors of up to two hours, not merely

7

Figure 6: The principal phases of the June 27, 1954, B.C. total lunar eclipse
are depicted here together with their Universal Times.

minutes, despite using the most accurate data available.1

My search was constrained by the textual evidence in Tablets 20 and 21
of the Enuma Anu Enlil. The two eclipses described there had been linked
1My work owes a debt to visionaries at the dawn of space ﬂight. Historically, lunar
occultations of stars provided information about the Moon’s position. But a dramatic
improvement in the accuracy of the data occurred after Apollo astronauts placed laser
reﬂectors on the Moon. Kenneth Nordtvedt, the initiator of the project, told me how
he once deliberately took the same plane as physicist Robert Dicke, then chairman of
NASA’s Physical Science Committee, so he could convince him to include the laser-ranging
reﬂectors on forthcoming Apollo missions. As a result, we now have much better knowledge
of the parameters that deﬁne the Moon’s orbit, its principal perturbations by the Sun,
Venus, and Jupiter, and other factors.

8

Figure 7: At the left of this Babylonian sales contract are sealings that serve
as signatures of witnesses. Seals found at the ancient Syrian city of Terqa
can be made self-consistent in time only through the chronology described
here.

by ancient astrologers with decisive events in Babylonian history: the death
of the greatest of the kings of Ur, Sulgi, and the destruction of Ur at the
hands of the Elamites. The ancient scribes preserved important descriptive
information about these eclipses that is crucial for dating them correctly:
the time of day that each began and where the Moon was in the sky. We also
know that the eclipses had to occur 41 to 44 years apart because we know
the relative dates of the two historical events to which they were connected.
My colleagues and I agreed that I should attempt to identify the two
eclipses by scanning a 300-year interval centered on date of the fall of Ur
(2005 or 2004 B.C., according to the Middle Chronology). As it turned
out, across these three centuries only the eclipses of June 27, 1954, B.C.
and March 16, 1912, B.C. ﬁt the ancient descriptions of the eclipses within
possible inaccuracies of interpretation.

3 Assembling the Case

Now we could ﬁx a date for the fall of Babylon. We had the date of the
fall of Ur, and the ancient records were detailed enough for us to establish,
within only a few years, the length of time that separated Ur’s collapse

9

Figure 8: Chronology of Some of the Principal Dynasties of Mesopotamia

from events that took place in Babylon several centuries later. Next, the
Venus Tablet allowed us to link the reign of Ammisaduqa and the 8-year
cycle of Venus. Only simple arithmetic was needed to identify the possible
Venus-derived dates for the fall of Babylon. When those were compared with
the information from the lunar eclipses, the date of Babylon’s fall could be
ﬁxed as 1499 B.C. This date, some 96 years more recent than the Middle
Chronology date of 1595 B.C., ﬁts well with the pottery evidence that led
Gasche to ask me to look at the ancient astronomical records in the ﬁrst
place.

Having established this date, I could now look at the information about
the eclipse as recorded on the tablets from Tell Muhammad and determine
when Babylon was resettled. However, in contrast with the Enuma Anu Enlil
record, I was not dealing with eclipse descriptions. The Tell Muhammad
tablets simply mention the eclipse in a so-called year-name that can be
translated as ”The year that the Moon was eclipsed.” The two tablets also
bear a second date formula as well: ”Year 38 that Babylon was resettled.”

10

Figure 9: Vahe G. Gurzadyan, author of articles and books on stellar
dynamics and mathematical methods in cosmology, works at the Yerevan
Physics Institute and Garni Space Astronomy Institute in Armenia as well
as at the International Center of Relativistic Astrophysics, University of
Rome ”La Sapienza,” Italy. The technical details of the study reported
here are in the book Dating the Fall of Babylon (Mesopotamian History and
Environment), Series II, Memoirs IV, University of Ghent and the Oriental
Institute of the University of Chicago, 1998.

It is unusual for texts to be dated according to two diﬀerent systems.
What is probably going on with these and other Tell Muhammad tablets is
that an old, local year-name dating system was being gradually replaced by
a new, Babylon-oriented one, and during the changeover the scribes used
both kinds of dates.
In any case, this redundancy allows us to date the
resettlement of Babylon after its fall to the Hittites. Based on the avail-
able evidence, the Tell Muhammad eclipse most likely occurred on May 16,
1459, B.C., so Babylon was resettled in 1496 B.C., only three years after its
collapse.2

2In Babylon, each year was named for something noteworthy that occurred, such as a
military victory or building project. However, this name was applied to the year following
the memorable event. Thus, the so-called name-year, ”the year of the eclipse,” referring
to the May 16, 1459, B.C. eclipse, is 1458 B.C.

11

4 Epilogue

Our absolute chronology follows work by generations of scholars. This quest
has been important because any change in the Babylonian chronology af-
fects dates of events in other ancient kingdoms of the Near East. Elamite
dynasties, the Old Hittite Kingdom, the Levant in the Middle Bronze Age,
and the Second Intermediate Period in Egypt must now be ﬁtted into this
new scheme.

Subsequent to our study, my colleagues and I learned of independent in-
vestigations that strongly support our new chronology. In particular, Guido
Gualandi, who has studied the seals from the ancient city of Terqa in east-
ern Syria, reports that only by using a ”low” chronology like ours can he
make sense of the similarities among seals of the city’s diﬀerent kings. These
similarities are simply too great to be easily explained if the rulers involved
are separated from one another by spans of time as long as those necessi-
tated by the traditional Middle or High Chronologies. Furthermore, studies
of records in Egyptian papyruses from around 1800 and 1500 B.C. by Rolf
Krauss also support our results rather than the Middle Chronology, which
Krauss says nobody ever really believed! This prominent scholar confessed
to me that he had been almost certain that the absolute chronology of the
Near East would not be determined during his lifetime.

Best of all, the morning after we had established the date of the fall
of Babylon, I visited the British Museum with my daughter, Diana. The
Babylonian kings there were smiling at us!

5 Babylonian Chronologies

Comments by James A. Armstrong

Using ancient records, historians can reconstruct the Babylonian chronol-
ogy very precisely back to 500+ years before Babylon’s defeat at the hands
of the Hittite king Mursili I. However, providing absolute dates over this
half-millennium span has proved to be very diﬃcult, particularly because
it is separated from the earliest reliable Mesopotamian dates, which cluster
around 1400 B.C., by an intervening period of unknown length.

Since simply ”counting back” from 1400 B.C. is not possible, researchers
have turned to the Venus Tablet for help (see text above). They identiﬁed
observational cycles of 56 and 64 years that seemed to underlie the data
recorded on the tablet and, as a result, were able to propose a series of

12

Figure 10: James Armstrong

alternative chronologies. The three most frequently cited, commonly re-
ferred to as ”High,” ”Middle,” and ”Low,” place the fall of Babylon in 1651,
1595, and 1531 B.C., respectively. Even though the reliability of the Venus
data has been seriously questioned, Mesopotamian scholars have generally
utilized one or another of these chronologies.

Vahe Gurzadyan has now shown that the 56- and 64-year cycles, which
had the practical eﬀect of limiting the number of viable chronologies, cannot
be extrapolated from the Venus Tablet data. Instead, there is only an 8-year
cycle, which, theoretically at least, permits many alternative chronologies for
the 5 centuries leading up to Babylon’s fall. However, because Gurzadyan
has also been able to identify and date a pair of lunar eclipses from the early
part of this half-millennium span, the fall of Babylon can be conﬁdently
pegged at 1499 B.C.

13

