4
0
0
2
 
b
e
F
 
9
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
t
s
i
h
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
5
0
1
2
0
4
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

BRX-TH 532

The Many Dimensions of Dimension

S. Deser
Department of Physics, Brandeis University,
Waltham, MA 02454, USA
(September 7, 2013)

Some aspects of the history and impact of the dimension revolution are brieﬂy surveyed,

starting with Nordstr¨om’s D=5 scalar gravity-electromagnetism uniﬁcation.

Abstract

1

Introduction

Calling into question the very dimensionality of spacetime was both immensely revolutionary and
far-reaching, perhaps one of the great concepts of the 20th Century. That it was ﬁrst made just
nine decades ago seems equally surprising in our time, so rooted has this concept become. In this
lecture I propose to survey – necessarily very brieﬂy and unsystematically – some of the stops on this
evolving journey, as one might explain them to the pioneers come back to life. Consequently, I can
hardly cover any of the more recent ﬂood of related ideas, let alone their mounting phenomenological
relevance. That belongs to a diﬀerent lecture altogether. The story here is primarily devoted to
the period ending with the early impact of strings and supergravity on the subject. But neither
is this a historical lecture: priority and citation issues can be found elsewhere than in the present
impressionistic excursion through our dimensional heritage.

[Most conveniently, many of the older original papers can be found – and translated into
English – in [1]. The ﬁrst book covers Nordstr¨om’s and many later works as well; the second is
devoted to Oskar Klein’s contributions. A very recent survey of higher D, especially in particle
physics phenomenology is in [2].]

2 History: Dimension from formal uniﬁcation

It is particularly appropriate to begin this brief voyage through other dimensions with the pre-
general relativity attempt, by Nordstr¨om [3], at formal uniﬁcation of scalar gravity and electro-
magnetism. Although the gravity model was unrealistic, its key insight – dimension as uniﬁer –
has become a standard tool in all later attempts at ﬁnding “theories of everything”.

After 1905, it was clear that action-at-a-distance Newtonian gravity was inconsistent with

special relativity. At the very least it had to be covariantized, schematically:

⇒
That the source of the wave equation is the trace of the matter stress tensor is pretty well forced,
since it must be a 4-scalar that reduces to mass density in the nonrelativistic limit. The only other

∇

2φ = ρ

✷φ = T µ
µ .

(1)

known force, electromagnetism, was represented by a four-vector potential Aµ. Nordstr¨om’s insight
was to invent (1) and to unify1 the two forces into a single 5-vector

(2)

(3)

(4)

in a D=5 space. As a result, the combined vector-scalar action of D=4 simply emerges from pure
Maxwell in D=5, at least if one omits all x5 dependence (∂/∂x5 = 0) ab initio.2 That is,

(Aµ, φ)

BM , M = (0, 1, 2, 3, 5) ,

→

1
4 F 2

−

M N → −

1
4 F 2

µν −

1
2 (∂µφ∂µφ)g55

Note the 55-signature here; its spacelike sign is absolutely essential, but must be put in by hand,
to keeping (scalar) gravity ghost-free3 and – consequently – attractive! There is also an attendant
(rather unnatural) source “uniﬁcation”, with the 5-current jM deﬁned as (jµ, T α
α ). Allowing some
– say periodic – dependence on x5 in this precursor model, would have similar eﬀects to those
familiar from the Kaluza–Klein (KK) [4] uniﬁcations to which I now turn.

The Nordstr¨om lesson was rediscovered (independently) by K and K in the correct, Einstein

gravity, context where the Maxwell vector potential was leapfrogged by the metric tensor:

(Aµ, gαβ)

gM N = (gαβ, gµ5, g55) .

→

Here dominance by the highest spin now costs us an extra, scalar, ﬁeld beyond the desired tensor-
vector doublet. At linearized approximation gM N = ηM N + hM N , the action decomposes into the
sum,

IKK =

Z

d5x √

−

→

g R(gM N )

Is=2(hαβ ) + Is=1(hα5) + Is=0(h55) .

(5)

All this is still in the ∂/∂x5 = 0 context and there remains some unnaturalness about the source
T M N , e.g., how to identify T 55.

Why did the pioneers stop at D=5? The answer is Occam’s razor: there were only two known
forces, so not only did D=5 suﬃce but even it gave the (now superﬂuous) g55 ﬁeld, which however
preﬁgured later scalar-tensor gravity models. Indeed, as we shall see, even now we are not sure we
know what is the right D, if that is even a correct question: the notion of dimension may dissolve
below Planck scales.

3 Taking extra dimensions (really) seriously; D from groups?

As was especially emphasized by Klein’s innovations, one should not constrain higher D models to
be x5-independent, or else the extension – however elegant – is just a formal one. Indeed, Klein
was able to exploit x5-dependence in quite “modern” ways, especially his derivation of electric
charge quantization as a result of assumed periodicity in x5. Furthermore, he was driven (albeit
implicitly) to his now-famous “almost”-derivation (translated in [1]) of Yang–Mills (YM) theory
Ironically, it was only much later that a detailed “KK” inclusion
by extension of these ideas.
1Of course, Aµ was subject to local gauge changes ∂µΛ(x), and φ only to constant additions, but Nordstr¨om

emphasized the ﬁeld strengths (Fµν, Fµ5 = ∂µφ).

2It was fortunately only discovered much later that “brutal” reductions to D=4 in which unwanted ﬁelds and

“x5”-dependence are simply dropped is not always consistent!

3The long range common to both forces was his driving element, even though the attraction-repulsion diﬀerence
between them was not discussed. That little problem goes back – at least – to Maxwell, but the alternation of
attraction/repulsion for even/odd spin intermediary ﬁelds was not properly understood until QFT times!

2

(in suitably higher D) of YM was formulated – as a mere problem in deWitt’s 1963 Les Houches
lectures [5]. This notion has been generalized to more abstract “internal” groups that can mimic
real dimension through what can aptly be characterized as “dimensional transmutation”. This
mixing of geometry and “internal” symmetries is clearly something to watch.

For us, then, dependence on ever higher dimensions, of whatever origins, has become the
norm – we have much less respect for D=4 as the “true” underlying kinematics, especially in
supergravity and superstrings (see below).

4 Compactify: a lot/a little?

We may not have much respect left for D=4, but we are still constrained to live and observe there.
The direct presence of extra dimensions must be sweepable under some (macroscopic) rug. One
way is making them very small and compactifying, as Klein originally did for x5. [This is the usual
“garden hose” picture of extra dimension in the popular science sections.] More recently (see [2])
there have been explorations of models with relatively large – almost macroscopic – extra D, that
surprisingly cannot be excluded via observed gravitational bounds. These remarks already point to
the more general problem of too much freedom: what is the vacuum state and how is it ﬁxed – why
is compactiﬁcation in general (let alone narrowing down to any speciﬁc one) the most attractive
state? Perhaps this is another badly posed question – are there many vacua, all of which are of
equal merit? In string theory, the plethora of Calabi-Yau spaces allowed within a given D=10 is
currently a similar dilemma (see below). Indeed, we don’t even know in general why 4 big/d small
is “better” than say 3 big/d+1 small, or all D big! There is clearly a lot of unknown territory at
every step!

5 The quantum input: dimension as anomaly-killer

Finding principles that actually ﬁx the dimensionality of space-time (and perhaps even its signature)
is an old and as yet unachieved goal. However, one mechanism stands out in this quest, because it
is simultaneously (1) a clear application of quantum ﬁeld theory requirements, (2) leads to a unique
dimensionality, and (3) forms the basis of superstring theory. The trick lies in ﬁrst transmuting
D into an index that counts the number of excitations – here scalar and spinor – living in a lower
– here D=2 – spacetime. As we all know, a (bosonic) string is a set of one-dimensional objects
evolving in time; very roughly,

Is

∼ Z Z

dσ dτ ∂µφa ∂µφb gab √g , a, b = 1 . . . D .

(6)

The index a represents the φ ﬁelds as the coordinates in a “target space” with metric gab and
of dimension D, where we live, while µ ranges over the 2 dimensions (τ, σ) of the world sheet
on which each φa and the intrinsic 2-metric depend. Now in QFT, classical symmetries, such
as the conformal invariance of a scalar ﬁeld in two dimensions, best exhibited by writing it in a
gravitational background,

I =

1
2

−

R

−

d2x √

g gµν ∂µφ∂ν φ ,

δI = 0,

gµν

S(x)gµν ,

(7)

→

can be, and usually are, broken (hence “anomalies”) by the necessity of introducing a regularization
scale or cutoﬀ to make sense of the closed loops. This generation of anomalies is a very deep,

3

nonperturbative, phenomenon that has direct – and observed – physical consequences. A physical
theory must be anomaly-free; for the above bosonic string model, the coeﬃcients of the conformal
anomaly add up to (D–26); bosonic strings have other problems (such as tachyonic modes) however,
that are absent in their supersymmetric incarnations. These latter scalar (φa) plus spinor (ψa),
systems yield coeﬃcients that add up to (D–10). Since we live in the target spaces, ours is a
D=10 world. Even if this number is slightly oﬀ our observed D=4, it is one of superstring theory’s
impressive predictions: a unique and not outlandish value of D, in addition to its other wonderful
(we hope!) attributes.4

6 Embedding/Braneworlds

Dealing with this enormous highly current topic can only be too brief or too long, so I opt for
the former (and refer to [2] for more): once we are committed to a truly D > 4 world, then our
observed D=4 “ﬂatland” can have links to itself through those other, D–4, dimensions: we live in
4), space. Modern exploitations
a submanifold rather than in a simple direct product, 4
of this go under the rubric of braneworlds, subspaces with considerably richer structure than D=4
alone would allow. For example, we would observe the usual power laws
1/r for gravitational or
electric potentials, while signiﬁcant deviations from them could be present “nearby”. Normally, in
D-spacetime, the Coulomb potential is r−(D−3), yet there are various ways, besides a simple direct
product, to feel just 1/r in our particular corner.

(D

−

∼

⊗

7 “Dynamical” Compactiﬁcation

−

The big questions we have already encountered in our survey is how and why there are (at least
at the present time) precisely D=4 macroscopic dimensions where our laws apply, and if one is
+ ++). We have also noted that these questions are still not only
greedy, why our signature is (
open, but possibly ill-posed! Here is one possible way to distinguish D=4. Consider the popular
value of D, the context of supergravity (SUGRA), namely D=11, which will be separately treated
below. This value is the only competitor to D=10; indeed one of the current active areas is the
relation of the string D=10 and the SUGRA D=11, evoking the (mysterious) M -theory I will not
mention further. Although 11 is not a priori more amenable than 10 to compactiﬁcation notions,
there is one possible mechanism here [6], that illustrates possible attacks on the problem. We want
to understand why there is a 4+7 breakup, rather than say 7+4 (or any other) with 4 big(ger)
dimensions. Now one component of D=11 SUGRA is a 3-form potential AM N P and its attendant
4-form ﬁeld strength BM N P Q = ∂[QAM N P ]. A caricature of the idea is that some sort of symmetric
vacuum breaking is caused by this totally antisymmetric B-form, which thereby separates D=4
ǫµναβ. That is, the content of the system has built-in symmetry
from the rest, i.e., < BM N P Q >
breaking potential (just as Higgs actions do, in another story). This suggestion has the merit of
showing how dynamics alone could dictate its own “optimal” D, and perhaps the breakup is even
epoch-dependent and we just happen to live in the 4+7 phase?

∼

4String theory is even better served by anomaly-freedom than this: dangers from diﬀerent would-be anomalies
reduce the number of possible strings to just ﬁve, which in turn are linked by dualities into an essentially unique
model.

4

8 SUGRA: Upper Bounds on D

→ ∞

Having gone from D=4 to ever higher dimensions, one begins to wonder why there should be any
upper bound to D at all (we will mention the limit D
below), except in the superstring case,
where we encountered a precise value, D=10, rather than merely a bound. We now consider the
very important related area – supersymmetry (SUSY) and SUGRA – in which a whole spectrum
of dimensions is possible, but in which an upper bound is in fact set by physical considerations of
a down-to-earth kind. We recall that SUSY is the study of Bose–Fermi matter systems, including
spins (0, 1
2 ,1) while SUGRA deals with spin 3/2 and its spin 2 gravitational partner, possibly
including lower spins as well. In SUSY the symmetry is under constant (fermionic) transformations,
while SUGRA adds to general coordinate invariance a sort of “Dirac square-root” local fermionic
parameter. One of the key requirements for a system to obey a supersymmetry algebra is one-to-
one matching of bosonic and fermionic degrees of freedom (DoF). This is what limits D, simply
because the number of tensors and of spinors grow very diﬀerently with dimension. Roughly, the
2D. Consider ﬁrst the original [7], and
former grow as a power,
simplest (“N =1”) SUGRA, in D=4. Here the system5 is the sum of Einstein and massless spin
3/2 ﬁelds. The graviton and fermion are separated by a 1/2 unit of spin and rotate into each other;
schematically the transformation

D2, the latter exponentially

∼

∼

δgµν = α(x)(γµψν + γνψµ), δψµ = Dµα(x) ,

2

±

Instead, ψµ is a (vector-)spinor and shares the

where α(x) is a fermionic parameter, leaves the action invariant. In D=4 all massless particles have
s only, i.e., they all (except scalars) have 2 DoF, so the numbers match. However, as
helicities
D grows, the number of Einstein graviton DoF goes as D(D−3)
, the number of transverse-traceless
2D
components of the spatial (D–1) metric.
(times the vector) growth of spinors. The only way to keep bose/fermi DoF parity is to introduce
more lower spin ﬁelds as part of the supergravity multiplet, something that can also be done at
D=4, but as an option rather than necessity. One can tabulate [9] all ﬁelds’ DoF at any D, so it is
easy to count the options in general. From this point of view, D=11 is [10] the highest dimension
where the balance is kept without making appeal either to spin > 2 or to more than one graviton
or both. Now from the dynamical point of view, both of those latter choices are forbidden: the
coupling of gauge ﬁelds with s > 2 to gravity is inconsistent, and more than one gravity, i.e., a sum
of two separate Einstein metric actions is – as might be expected – not physical. Hence it is simply
“ordinary” dynamics, rather than the impossibility of a kinematical spin matching in D > 11 that
forbids SUGRA there, a very appealing outcome. Also, at D=11, there is but one way to balance
the 44 gravitons in the bosonic sector to the 128 ψµ components, namely to add 84 3-form ﬁelds
Aµνα. This uniqueness is one the model’s lasting attractions.6

∼

9 D → ∞?

This is our shortest section. One cannot avoid wondering what sort of world would exist for D
.
→ ∞
There are only two references to my knowledge, at least in the context of Einstein gravity [12], with
5There is also a version incorporating a necessarily negative (Anti-deSitter) cosmological term along with an

(apparent) fermion mass term [8].

6So unique is this theory, in fact, that it is the one SUGRA, and indeed the one known physical model, that does

not even permit a cosmological extension at all [11]. It also forbids supermatter sources.

5

no very speciﬁc indication or conclusion as yet; this may be a sign from heaven, to stick to ﬁnite
D, or perhaps we don’t yet know how to extract the right questions here either.

10 D and Anthropic Principles

The trend of our survey so far has been that there is not really compelling theory of D (except
perhaps strings), nor of the D=4+(D–4) breakup for a given D, nor of the signature of spacetime. It
is therefore worth mentioning a currently fashionable idea, loosely styled anthropic: Let a thousand
vacua bloom; in the ensemble of all these possible cosmologies, we’re in the (only?) one that allows
us. In this view, there is not point seeking some single string vacuum among the immense multitude
present in various Calabi–Yau spaces with various, ﬂuxes, brane choices, etc., as long of course as
one of them is ours! This statistical surrender to the counsel of despair may yet be necessary, but
it should perhaps not (yet) be welcomed. The most recent, if hardly ﬁnal, salvo in this battle is
[13].

11 D < 4: Laboratories of Real Physics

We have, so far, explored D > 4 worlds; what about dimensionally challenged spacetimes with
D < 4? Even D=1, while cramped, is big enough for ordinary quantum mechanics: I = 1
(t)
2
describes a D=1 base manifold with a D=3 target space (or D=4 spacetime), while we have seen
that D=2 contains nothing less than string theory.

dt ˙xi2

R

This leaves D=3, a dimension that contains real condensed matter physics, as described by

planar QED, enhanced by an extremely rich novel term, the Chern–Simons (CS) invariant,7

ICS =

Z

d3x ǫµναAµ∂νAα =

d3x Aµ

∗
F µ

Z

(8)

where ∗F µ is the (vector) dual of Fνα.
Its nonabelian counterpart is even more topologically
endowed; they are of particular interest also in the ﬁnite temperature context, a rich and mathe-
matically complex area.

While D=3 Einstein gravity (and SUGRA) are devoid of dynamics as they stand, because
Ricci ﬂatness means Riemann ﬂatness at D=3, where Ricci and Riemann tensors are just each
other’s (double) duals, yet here too (gravitational) CS terms, (called Cotton tensors) exist and
provide true DoF when added to the Einstein action. In both vector and tensor settings cases,
novel eﬀects such as coexistence of non-zero mass with gauge invariance, abound [14]. So D=3 can,
in some ways, be regarded as the residue of a “KK” D=4 manifolds, with the CS terms descending
∗F µν , but that is a whole other story. One lesson for us, in
from topological invariants like
any case, is the D=dependence of interesting possible invariants: Not only do conventional actions
exist in various dimensions, but some do so in only one particular D, others (like Gauss–Bonnet
invariants) do so only above a given D.

d4x Fµν

R

7Historically, the ﬁrst appearance of a CS term was in the SUGRA context, via the 3-form of D=11. There,

however it is trilinear, rather than quadratic, in the ﬁelds.

6

In the preceding episodes, I have tried to sample, in a very nonsystematic way, some of the
legacy and promise of the great concept that the D of physical theories need not be the same as that
of the strictly D=4 world we seem to inhabit. This generalization ﬁts the lesson of eﬀective actions
in physics: the more encompassing a new level of physical law, the less its concepts need resemble
those of its limiting approximations. Indeed, one could argue that the freeing of dimensionality
may be one of the most permanent new “top-down” ideas created in the past century: We are
deeply indebted to its pioneers, Nordstr¨om, Kaluza and Klein.

This work was supported by the National Science Foundation under grant PHY99-73935.

Conclusion

References

[1] Modern Kaluza–Klein Theories, T. Appelquist, A. Chodos and P.G.O. Freund, eds. (Addison
Wesley, 1987);Oskar Klein Memorial Lectures, v1, G. Ekspong, ed. (World Scientiﬁc, 1991).

[2] F. Feruglio “Extra Dimensions in Particles Physics,” hep-th/040133.

[3] G. Nordstr¨om, Phys. Z. 15 (1914) 504.

[4] Th. Kaluza, Verh. Preuss Ak. der Wiss (1921) 966; O. Klein Z. Phys. 37 (1926) 895; Nature

118 (1926) 516.

p. 139.

339.

[5] B.S. deWitt in Dynamical Theories of Groups and Fields (Gordon and Breach, NY (1965))

[6] P.G.O. Freund and M.A. Rubin, Phys. Lett. 97B (1980) 233; F. Englert, ibid, 119B (1982)

[7] S. Deser and B. Zumino, Phys. Lett. 62B (1976) 335; S. Ferrara, D.Z. Freedman and P. van

Nieuwenhuizen, Phys. Rev. D13 (1976) 3214.

[8] P.K. Townsend, Phys. Rev. D15 (1977) 2802; S. Deser and B. Zumino, Phys. Rev. Lett. 39

(1977) 1433.

[9] W. Nahm, Nucl. Phys. B135 (1978) 149.

[10] E. Cremmer, B. Julia and J. Scherk, Phys. Lett. 76B (1978) 409.

[11] K. Bautier, S. Deser, M. Henneaux and D. Seminara, Phys. Lett. 406B (1997) 49; S. Deser,

L. Griguolo and D. Seminara, in preparation.

[12] A. Strominger, Phys. Rev. D24 (1981) 3082; N.E.J. Bjerrum–Bohr, hep-th/0305062.

[13] M. Dine, hep-th/0402101.

[14] S. Deser, R. Jackiw and S. Templeton, Ann. Phys. 140 (1982) 372.

7

