4
0
0
2
 
b
e
F
 
2
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
t
s
i
h
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
4
6
0
2
0
4
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

The Thermal Radiation Formula of Planck
(1900)

Luis J. Boya
Departamento de F´ısica Te´orica, Facultad de Ciencias

Universidad de Zaragoza.— 50009 Zaragoza, Spain

luisjo@unizar.es

This so-called normal energy distribution
represents something absolute, and
since the reseach for absolutes
has always appeared to me
to be the highest form
of research, I applied
myself vigorously
to its solution.

Max PLANCK

Abstract

We review the derivation of Planck’s Radiation Formula on the
light of recent studies in its centenary. We discuss specially the is-
sue of discreteness, Planck’s own opinion on his discovery, and the
critical analysis on the contribution by Ehrenfest, Einstein, Lorentz,
etc. We address also the views of T.S. Kuhn, which conﬂict with the
conventional interpretation that the discontinuity was already found
by Planck.

1.– In the year 2000 we celebrated the 100th anniversary of Planck’s
radiation formula, which opened the scientiﬁc world to the quantum. With

1

this opportunity many papers have appeared, dealing with diﬀerent aspects
of the formula, its derivation, the meaning for Planck and for other physicists,
the historical context, etc. In this communication we want to recall the origin
of the formula on the light of these contributions, and address some questions,
old and the new, on the meaning of Planck’s achievement.

The fundamental lesson is that the quantum postulate introduces dis-
creteness and therefore justiﬁes atomicity. Namely the old hypothesis of
atoms, started with the greeks in the Vth century b.C., reinforced through
the work on chemistry in the ﬁrst part of the XIX century (Proust, Dalton,
Prout, Avogadro), utilized heuristically to explain the properties of gases in
the second part (Clausius, Maxwell, Boltzmann), became a certainty with the
discovery of cathode rays (Pl¨ucker), X-rays (R¨ongten), radioactivity (Bec-
querel, the Curies), the electron (Thomson) and the nuclear atom (Ruther-
ford), the later already well within the XX century; in a typical paradox
of science, the same experiments which proved the existence of atoms also
showed, antietymologically, that the atoms were divisible. Now the theory
of quanta has determined the structure of atoms, showing why they do exist
in the ﬁrst place.

The historical development of the radiation formula is uncontroversial,
and we shall review it here quickly, referring to the many sources which con-
vey a detailed information (see the detailed Bibliography at the end). Next
we study the contributions by Planck up to early 1900, when Wien’s formula
dominated the scene. The two outstanding communications of Planck to
the Berlin Academy (19-X-1900, guess of the radiation formula, and 14-XII-
1900, statistical justiﬁcation by introduction of the discrete energy elements)
will then ocupy us. The reception of Planck’s discovery was cold, not much
being published or commented until 1905, and we consider why. We refer
then to the papers of Ehrenfest and Einstein, the ﬁrst to fully realize the
big break that Planck’s theory supposes; some contributions by Haas, Som-
merfeld and Poincar´e, and others are brieﬂy referred. Diﬀerences between
Planck’s energy quanta and Einstein’s Lichtquanta are stresssed, in relation
to the indistinguishability issue. We end the historical part by describing
what Planck did when he came back to the black body radiation problem in
1910–12, the so-called second theories of Planck.

We endeavour then to comment brieﬂy on some well-known analysis of
Planck’s achievements by Rosenfeld, Klein, Kuhn and Jost. Several cente-
nary contributions are discussed next, as well as further contributions on the

2

light of open problems and controversial issues. Our paper ends with a ﬁnal
look at the ﬁgure of Max Planck.

2.– That a heated body shines is an elementary observation; to
understand the dependence of the emitted light (radiation) on the nature and
shape of the body, and on the wavelength and the temperature, is the problem
of the heat radiation formula. Experimentally the temperature ranges were
up to 2000 ◦K, and the vavelength from the near UV up the medium IR.

The question was ﬁrst addressed by Gustav R. KIRCHHOFF in 1859.
He discovered the universal character of the radiation law, solving therefore
the problem of the dependence of the emitted light on the nature, size and
shape of the body; namely for a ordinary body under illumination there
are coeﬃcients of absorption a, and reﬂection r, as well as emission e, but
the quotient e/a = K, the intensity, Kirchhoﬀ found, is independent of the
body, if equilibrium is to be achieved. It depends only on wavelength and
temperature; Kirchhoﬀ hoped the function K(ν, T ) to have a simple form,
as is the case for functions which do not depend on individual properties
of bodies. To study the radiation, one approaches a “black” body in which
the absorption is maximal by deﬁnition (a = 1), and studies the radiated
intensity as function of wavelength and temperature. Empirically it was
clear the warmer the body the greater the total emitted radiation is, and the
brightest “colour” shifts to the blue. To realize a black body, one fabricates
a hollow cavity (Hohlraum) with the walls blackened by lampblack (negro de
humo), practices a small aperture, heates it up, and analyzes the outgoing
radiation with bolometers (measure of intensity) and prisms and gratings
(measures of wavelength).

Since 1865 it was accepted that light was electromagnetic radiation (Maxwell),

and hence the distribution law should be studied by the thermodynamics of
the electromagnetic processes. From the rough experiments performed in the
1870s it was apparent that the total amount radiated grows like the fourth
power of the absolute temperature, as ﬁrst stated by J. STEFAN (1879); if
udν = u(ν, T )dν is the diﬀerential density of energy of radiation in the hollow
cavity at frequency ν and temperature T ,

u(ν, T )dν = σT 4.

(1)

Here the density is u = 4πK/c, with K the previous intensity. The above
law (1) was easy to deduce theoretically (L. BOLTZMANN, 1884). In modern

∞

0
Z

3

terms, it follows at once from dimensional analysis with zero photon mass.
Next, it was determined that the wavelength at maximum radiation was
inverse with the temperature ( λmaxT = constant, W. WIEN displacement
law, 1893); this is the ﬁrst example of an adiabatic invariant (Boltzmann),
and combined with the Stefan-Boltzmann’s result it yielded the law

u(ν, T ) = ν3f (ν/T ),

(2)

(3)

reducing the dependence on frequency and temperature to a single universal
formula on ν/T ; notice (2) requires two constants, from dimensional analy-
sis. One cannot go any further with pure thermodynamics and the electro-
magnetic theory. But by analogy with the velocity distribution formula of
Maxwell for gas molecules, Wien suggested the concrete form

u(ν, T ) = aν3 exp(−bν/T )

which became known as Wien radiation formula (1896). The law (3) is
very natural, and indeed for several years it was thought to ﬁt well with
experiments: namely, a power increase (scale invariance) at low ν followed
by an exponential damping (a cutoﬀ), typical of many physical processes.
The constants a and b should have an universal character, and will play an
important role in Planck’s interpretation, see later; they were expected, as
we said.

However, Wien’s law (3) implies that for very high T the density goes
to constant with T , which is not very physical: one should expect the en-
ergy density to grow without limit with increasing temperature; this problem
does not arise in the case of Maxwell distribution, which refers to velocities,
not density. Indeed, the reﬁned experiments carried out in Berlin since 1900
mainly by Rubens and Kurlbaum proved that the density, for very low fre-
quency (equivalent to large T ), is proportional to T .

For simple derivations of formulas in this paragraph see the Appendix.
Best secondary sources for this period are [Born 46], [Jammer 66], [Kuhn 78]
and [Sanchez-Ron 01].

3.– Now enters Max PLANCK (*Kiel 1858; †G¨ottingen 1947). He
was an expert on thermodynamics, very much impressed by the absolute
things, like the (ﬁrst) law of conservation of energy, stated along 1840-50
by Joule, Kelvin, Helmholtz and others, and also by the second law, the in-
crease of entropy, discovered by his admired R. Clausius ﬁrst in 1850, later

4

by Kelvin (1853). At the time, the mechanical theory of heat was accepted,
that is, heat is just another form of energy, not an entelechia, the ﬂogiston;
the idea of reducing physics to mechanics dominated. For Planck, mechan-
ics represented the best way to understand physics (and chemistry), and he
sought a mechanical explanation of the second law, understood as an ex-
act law of nature, on the same footing as the energy conservation law. By
“mechanical”, Planck did not mean the atomistic point of view, but contin-
uum mechanics; in fact, for a long time he considered the atomic hypothesis
something irrelevant (if not nocive) for the second principle, because in the
kinetic theory of gases the second law is not absolute (Maxwell demon). He
stands between Boltzmann, in an extreme, who always put atomicity ﬁrst,
and the energeticists (Ostwald, etc.), who negated atoms (as Mach did), pre-
tending to reduce all phenomena to diﬀerent forms of energy, on the other.
The mechanical model he had in mind was rather close to the continuum
aether of electromagnetism, and Planck sought to prove the second law from
continuum mechanics, in particular the irreversible approach to equilibrium.

This is the route which took him to the W¨armestrahlung: he thought
the radiant energy of a heated body to be an ideal system to prove the
entropy increase as consequence of conservative laws. He also hoped, in the
process, to ﬁnd “Kirchhoﬀ function”, that is, the radiation formula. The
heroic struggle of Planck, and his ﬁnal defeat, is a paradigmatic example of
how an investigation doomed to fail could lead, if pursued intelligently and
with honesty, to a fundamental, but completely unexpected discovery; by
failure it is meant here that the second law in Planck’s form ∆S ≥ 0 for
t > 0 (with S the entropy) could not be proven from the blackbody radiation
theory alone any more that it could not be proven in the kinetic theory of
gases without the Stosszahlansatz (molecular disorder) of Boltzmann.

In ﬁve papers, 1897-1899 Planck tried to explain the origin of irreversibil-
ity in the physics of thermal radiation. As the material in the cavity is irrele-
vant (Kirchhoﬀ), he considers an oscillator, imitating the resonators used by
Hertz, constituted by a vibrating dipole qr in presence of an electromagnetic
ﬁeld E; the dipole radiates energy at the rate

P = −dE/dt = 2q2/3c3 k¨rk2

and the diﬀerential equation for the dipole amplitude r is

(4)

(5)

m¨r + kr − γ ¨v = qE

5

where m is the mass, k the oscillator constant, q the electric charge, E = E(t)
the external electric ﬁeld, and the cubic term is due to the radiation damping,
with γ = 2q2/3c3. The damping is conservative, because energy is not lost to
the whole system, it is just transformed into radiant energy (in contrast to
damping by friction, in which case is transformed into heat). The damping
is small, however, hence in zeroth order ¨r = −(k/m)r and Eq. (5) is

Kf + (2K/3Lc3) ˙f + L¨f = E

(6)

where f = qr is the dipole moment, K = k/q2 and L = m/q2. Neither
(5) nor (6) by themselves are invariant under time reversal (because the odd
derivative terms change under t → −t), and this is why and where Planck
hoped to reach irreversibility. Eq. (6) is easy to solve for a given ﬁeld E,
giving a transient plus a sustained wave (see Appendix).

However, the via towards irreversibility is really closed, as Boltzmann
pointed out inmediately: the whole system of equations for the resonator
plus the e.m. ﬁeld is time-reversal invariant, and the transformation of the
incoming e.m. plane wave contained in E into the scattered (radiated) out-
going spherical wave does not represent an irreversible change: the theory
allows perfectly well an incoming spherical wave “scattered” into the outgo-
ing plane wave: grudgingly, Planck had to admit that irreversibility, in the
W¨armestrahlung as in the kinetic theory only obtains by explicit exclusion
of some improbable situations: the molecular disorder of Boltzmann has here
as counterpart the “natural radiation hypothesis” of Planck, imitating the
former. The natural radiation is the one for which there is no correlation be-
tween the phases of the diﬀerent Fourier components of E. This is the defeat
of Planck: irreversibility does not come from conservative mechanics unless
extra hypothesis; Planck admitted this around early 1898: the validity of the
second law for the thermal radiation will be, like in Boltzmann’s H-theorem,
not absolute.

However, the route to obtain the universal Kirchhoﬀ formula remains
open: the situation at equilibrium is easier to describe that the approach to
it. The next important result of Planck is to admit equilibrium between the
resonator (by now called oscillator) and the bathing radiation, and then to
relate the radiated power (energy per unit time) that is, the loss of oscillator
energy, to energy absorption from the ﬁeld. At the end, there is a simple
relation between the radiation energy density u = u(ν, T ) and the elementary

6

oscillator energy U; it is

u =

8πν2
c3 U,

a fundamental result in Planck’s research. The simplest way to understand
(7) is by dimensional analysis, as U is an energy, but u is an energy density:
(ν/c)2d(ν/c) is a diﬀerential inverse volume; 2 × 4π comes from polarization
and angular integration.

To solve for the radiation formula, Planck needs to know the mean oscil-
lator energy U in a thermal bath at T . To ﬁnd it, Planck takes an indirect
route, retorts to thermodynamics. Instead of guessing U = U(ν, T ), he did
guess the entropy dependence on U, and his Ansatz (obtained by working
backwards from (3)) was a relation between the oscillator entropy S and U:

R ≡ −(∂2S/∂U 2)−1 = αU

as the simplest (and, he ﬁrst thought, unique) possibility. For α > 0, this en-
sures entropy should increase with time (we do not show here the arguments,
but see later), in agreement with the second law. Together with dS = dU/T ,
(8) leads easily to the form

(7)

(8)

(9)

u(ν, T ) = aν3 exp(−bν/T ).

That is, the law of Wien! We are already in early 1900. Because the
universal character of the Kirchhoﬀ function, the actual formula (9) is uni-
versal, and so are the constants a and b; but at the time, two other universal
constants were known, the velocity of light c and G, Newton’s constant.
So, we have a perfectly natural system of units, deﬁned by natural primary
phenomena, not anthropomorphically: Planck is exultant and claims that
extraterrestian people would have the same constants, too; for a conserva-
tive man like Planck was, this is an astonishing aﬃrmation! Later Planck
realized that only a is really new (see later; b should be related to a and
to the constant of gases R and ultimately to Boltzmann’s constant k), and
this is better: centimeter, gram and second, deﬁned humanely, are traded by
G, c and a (eventually proportional to h). It is remarkable that the univer-
sal feature of the Planck’s constant h was realized before h was connected
with discontinuity (!), a point insuﬃciently emphasized by cognoscenti; even
[Kuhn 78] to whom we follow in part, does not attach too much signiﬁcance
to it. The point is, already in the Wien displacement law λmaxT = constant,

7

there is a new universal constant. To complicate matters more, at the time
it was not known that b embodies also Boltzmann constant, never written as
such by Boltzmann, by the way.

4.– That was nice, as Wien’s formula was thought to be correct
at the time. In fact too nice: as mentioned, the experiments carried out
along 1900 at the longest infrared waves available, up to 60 µ, showed in-
equivocally that u is linear in T for T large, as it was physically reasonable
(see above). It is astonishing what a simple modiﬁcation of (8) brings the ex-
periment data in order: Planck admits simultaneously that (8) is not unique,
and realizes that in the limit u ∝ T one should have (Cfr. (8)) R ∝ U 2, so
the simplest interpolation formula (with both α, β > 0)

R = αU + βU 2

(10)

leads, by the same steps as before, to the formula

u(ν, T ) =

aν3/c3
exp(bν/T ) − 1

(Planck, 19-X-1900)

(11)

in perfect agreement then and always with the reﬁned experiments, with
similar two constants as before: this is why we insist that h (or rather b), by
itself, is introduced already at the Wien’s formula level. To see the accuracy
of (11) we just recall that the ever-pervading cosmic microwave background
radiation ﬁts to the formula (11) for T = 2.726 ◦K at nearly the millionth
level precision (COBE device, 1993; WMAP, 2003).

“Never in the history of physics was there such an inconspicuous mathe-
matical interpolation with such far-reaching physical and philosophical con-
sequences” [Jammer 66, p.18].

As Pais has remarked [Pais 82, 19a], had Planck stopped with (11), he
would have always be remembered as the man who found the radiation for-
mula, and would have a place among the greats. The fact that he went on,
to supply a theoretical support for (11) is a measure of his greatness.
It
represented for him the biggest eﬀort in his life. He had to yield to Boltz-
mann again (“an act of desesperation”), this time, against his most intimate
convictions, that is, to the statistical considerations which have had enabled
Boltmann to prove the H-theorem. The reason, or rather the lack of it, is

8

that statistical considerations were the only ones, known around 1900, to cal-
culate entropies, by the probabilistic formula chiseled in Boltzmann’s tomb
in Vienna S = k log W , with W probability (Wahrsheinlichkeit).

Planck follows a combinatorial method traced from Boltzmann, including
the apparently innocent discretization of energy, E = ε, 2ε, 3ε, . . ., but the
crucial point is that to obtain the expected result (11), contrary to Boltz-
mann, he cannot take ε → 0, because then only the u ∝ T limit obtains (this
again follows today from the zero mass of the photon). The combinatorics is
simple and the ﬁnal result is

u(ν, T ) =

8πν2
c3

hν
exp(hν/kT ) − 1

(Planck, 14-XII-1900)

(12)

with the necessary identiﬁcation ε = hν to satisfy the displacement law.
We have restored to today’s accepted constants k and h; it turns out that
k = R/L, the ratio of the gas constant to Avogadro-Loschmidt number.
Planck christened k as Boltzmann’s constant; he also referred to his discrete
ε, 2ε, . . ., as energy quanta. Planck wrote h for Hilfsgr¨osse; this is what he
ﬁrst though of it (I owe this remark to M. F. Ra˜nada (Zaragoza)).

This is how the quantum entered ﬁrst time in physics, to remain for
ever, altough it is true that Planck did not pay, at the time, too much
importance to it. By nearly universal consent, the date December 14, 1900 is
considered the birthday of quantum theory, and a century later it has been
duly celebrated throughout the world.

5.– Historically it is very clear that Planck had introduced the
ﬁnite energy elements ε as Boltzmann did, to calculate entropies from
denumerable entities: he already saw that, contrary to Boltzmann, the size
of the energy element cannot be taken to be zero, and to this he attributed
his discovery. Hence he did realize he had found something important, and
because of this our point of view is closer to that of Mehra-Rechenberg [Mehra
82] than to [Kuhn 78], that he indeed realized the new discovery, although
did not perceived, yet, that he had discovered the discontinuity, and in this
point we think Kuhn is right. He also saw that h had dimensions of action,
and the identiﬁcation of k allowed him to compute Avogadro’s number L and
the elementary charge e, by taking R, the gas constant, and F , the Faraday,
as known at the time, and computing k and h from the black-body ﬁt. With
the scale molar vs molecular settled (i.e., L known) and also the elementary

9

electric charge, Planck was to be henceforth a devoted atomist [Heilbron 86,
p. 23]. Only E. Mach, among the notable, remained antiatomist until his
very death in 1916.

The reception of Planck’s formula and theory was cold. Out of stressing
the beautiful experimental ﬁt, people were not very keen with the obscure
reasonings of Planck, and the black body physics was a pretty isolated corner
of the general physical research (much centered, at the time, in radioactiv-
ity, the photoeﬀect and X-rays). One should add that the sheer number of
researchers in physics in the world was then perhaps a hundredth of today’s.
Still, Planck’s formula was quoted in several german and british sources at
the time [Kuhn 78].

Rayleigh had pointed out in June, 1900, that classical theory would pre-
dict U = kT for the oscillator energy (for it hEkini = hEpoti, each with kT /2),
from the equipartition theorem, and by 1905 he, Einstein and Jeans were ﬁrm
that the exact prediction of classical physics for the Kirchhoﬀ function had
to be

u(ν, T ) = 8π(ν2/c3)kT,

(13)

absurd, as no maximum in ν implied divergence for the total radiation at any
temperature, the (later) UV catastrophe of Ehrenfest. Formula (13) became
to be known as the Rayleigh-Jeans law (R-J). Notice the two former constants
conspire to leave only one, k: classical physics was absolutely unable to
produce the maximum of the radiation formula, because this requires two
disentangled constants! The same conclusion (13) was reached by Lorentz
in 1908 (Rome lecture), when the electrons, by then secure componentes of
elementary matter, took the place of the imaginary oscillators.
It is not
suﬃciently emphasized that turn-of-century theoretical physics was not only
getting away from experientia (speciﬁc heats, black body radiation, motion of
the aether: the “clouds” of Kelvin), but just becoming inconsistent; another
paradox was discovered by J. W. Gibbs, with mixtures of nearly, but not
quite, equal molecular species.

By 1912 irrefutable proofs of the need for “quantization” were provided
by Einstein (1905), Lorentz (Wolfskehl G¨otttingen lectures, 1910), Poincar´e
(1912 paper, [Prentis 95]), etc., see [Hermann 69]. As for Planck, he remained
in an uneasy position; for a long time he tried to ﬁnd room for h in the
framework of classical physics. He even thought the burden will be buried in
the atomic particles (electrons etc.) which started to proliferate around 1900.

10

Then he abandoned, and around 1910-12 he developed the so-called second
radiation theory. Planck was very german and conservative: he wanted the
quantum to carry the less possible damage to classical physics; also he was
42 in 1900. One important point, though, appeared in the ﬁrst edition of his
Vorlesungen (1906) [Planck 06]. Introducing phase space, an idea he seems
to borrow from Gibbs, he concluded on the expression ε = hν not from
“correspondence” with the displacement law, but from equal-area ellipses of
the oscillator. This opened Planck’s eyes to the meaning of h more than
anything else, and he henceforth refers to h as “the elementary quantum of
action” (elementares Wirkungsquantum). More on that later.

Paul EHRENFEST was a singular ﬁgure in physics in the ﬁrst third of the
XX century; he was to be a critical mind for the quantum theory, and enjoyed
particular friendship with both Einstein and Bohr. He realized also, around
1905/6, that Planck had tacitly quantized the ellipses, and that that was the
real novelty. Ehrenfest also studied carefully the approach to equilibrium
(randomization) of the natural radiation, see the long discussion in [Kuhn
78, pp. 152-169]; the treatment in [Mehra 82, Vol I, pt. 1], is much shorter.
He also worried about the counting of states, and the diﬀerence, for light
quanta (see next), between Planck’s formula and the Wien limit. See also
[Navarro 03].

The article of Albert EINSTEIN in 1905 dealing with the light quantum
hypothesis is so well known that we shall be brief. As regards the black body
radiation, the main point is that the Wien limit of the Planck’s formula
is recovered supposing that radiation is composed of corpuscular grains of
energy ε = hν, because the computable entropy function coincides with
that obtained by Planck to justify, in early 1900, Wien’s formula. Of course,
there are more reasons to introduce the Lichtquanta, as Einstein called them;
the photoelectric eﬀect is the best known, but the original (and best, we
think) reason is to cure the asymmetry between matter and radiation if the
later is continuous (Einstein points here clearly to the UV catastrophe); this
magistral idea of Einstein, of denouncing unphysical asymetries in classical
physics was already used, equally succesfully, in the starting paragraphs of
the special relativity paper, also in his Annus Mirabilis of 1905: the coil vs.
magnet motion Irrlehre, as pre-relativity theory predicted diﬀerent results
according which is moving.

So Einstein’s light quanta reproduce the low-density (Wien) limit of
Planck’s formula; otherwise Einstein was very careful not to endow the (fu-

11

ture) photons with too much ontology; in particular, until 1917 no momen-
tum was asigned (p = hν/c), although momentum ﬂuctuations did appear in
a 1909 paper. Question arises (today), if light is really corpuscular, why he
(E.) did not obtain the correct (Planck) formula? There is some discussion
for this in the literature, old and modern; we feel that Eistein was unable to
do it: he could not, in early 1905, obtain the correct radiation formula from
the bare “photon” hypothesis, so he published just the Wien “approxima-
tion” 1. We shall use the term photons (G.N. Lewis, 1.926) as a commodity
for light quanta.

There are two diﬀerent arguments, given today, for that oddity: ﬁrst, the
“duality” wave-particle. Namely Einstein himself proved in 1909, that the
ﬂuctuation formula for the energy

applied to Planck’s formula produces straightforwardly

D

E

∆E2 ≡

(E − hEi)2

∆E2 = hνhEi +

c3
8πν2 hEi2

(14)

(15)

(per unit volume and frequency range), where hEi = U is the mean oscillator
energy.

This is a very remarkable formula. The split in it is identical as the split
R = αU + βU 2, the starting point of Planck’s phenomenological deduction
(10) above. This has been noticed already, see e.g.
of his formula, Cfr.
[Hermann 69, p. 59]. Therefore, the linear part in (15) corresponds to the
Wien (corpuscular!) limit, the quadratic part to the R–J (wavelike!?) limit.

Einstein himself adopted that interpretation, and this is one of the rea-
sons, we reckon, for the widespread propagation of the idea of the particle-
wave duality; Einstein stated explicitely that in view of this, he expected
“the next development in theoretical physics will provide a theory of light to
be interpreted as a kind of fusion of the wave and emission [corpuscular] the-
ories” [Pais 82, 21a]. We believe this is a misleading idea, and shall comment
upon it later.

The second argument contradicts the former.

the correct
Planck’s formula can be obtained, from the purely corpuscular point of view,

It is this:

1I thank L. Navarro (Barcelona) for a discussion of this point

12

taking in account the photon indistinguishability. This was done by Einstein
in 1906, by Debye in 1910 and by Bose in 1924, without mentioning, none
of the three, indistinguishability! The eﬀect is dissimulated by a diﬀerent,
peculiar counting. For example, taking the light as composed of “molecules”
of energy nhν as separated entities, one arrives easily (see Appendix) to the
correct radiation formula; this is the Einstein derivation; in this (correct!)
approach, the split in (15) has to be interpreted just contrary to usual: for
low densities, the correlation efect, which is quantal, as it comes from iden-
tical particles, does not show up; so the Wien limit of the radiation formula
is “classical”, for corpuscles, as uncorrelated massless particles, whereas the
R-J limit is the pure quantum part!! Please notice this is counterintuitive:
one expects quantum eﬀects to be noticeable for low T, contrary to our case
here; this is again an eﬀect of zero mass of the photons. As for Debye’s
calculation, it is formally the same as Einsteins’s, but the prefactor 8πν2/c3
is taken as the number of resonance modes in the cavity, plus the Planck
energy quantization: so Debye gets rid of the oscillator altogether; for the
derivation see [Born 46, VII-1]. The derivation by Bose (1924) also disposes
of the ﬁctitious oscillators.

The identity of particles provides a nonclassical interdependence of pho-
tons which mimics the ondulatory properties. But this was never understood
by Planck, Einstein Debye or Bose (although Plancks gets close to justify a
good counting with identical particles; see [Rosenfeld 36]); when Einstein in-
troduced the Bose-Einstein statistics in 1925 he notes the interdependence,
but just says it is mysterious. The thing only became clear as a corollary of
Heisenberg’s and Dirac’s ﬁrst treatment of identity of particles in the new
quantum mechanics, in 1926; it is a beautiful example of the power of the
healthy positivistic attitude in science:
interchange of identical particles is
unobservable, therefore the theory should abide by it; in fact, Leibnitz al-
ready thought along these lines.

It follows that the wave-particle duality interpretation must be false! In-
deed, this much is stated in [Bach 89]. He claims that Einstein made a
mistake in his “dual” (1909) interpretation of (15). Bach concludes that two
terms contributing independently to the ﬂuctuation formula is the wrong in-
ference from probability theory, and that Einstein interpretation is false; but
it will take us too afar to delve in this, to which we want to come back in the
future. So we content ourselves here to add some comments on the attempts
to understand the Einstein-Wien (independent) photons vs. the Einstein-

13

Planck (interdependent) photons in the old quantum theory. This point
was considered by Ehrenfest, Natanson, Wolfke, Krutkow and de Broglie, in
1910-23; in particular the latter aimed to a particle description of interfer-
ence, a seemingly impossible task, but understood today through Feynman’s
path integral formulation of quantum mechanics. A thorough study has been
published recently [Perez-Canals 02] and we refer to it. The historical con-
troversy is well told in [Jammer 66, pp. 50-52], in [Mehra 82, I-2 p. 559] and
in [Whittaker 10, pp. 102-104]; the later is one of the few sources, as far as
we are aware, to emphasize explicitely that a purely corpuscular theory of
light can produce Planck’s formula. This is with hindsight, of course!

Among the other contributors to quantum theory up to 1912, we just
mention two. A. Haas was the ﬁrst (1910) on thinking of a conection between
the quantum, and atomic discreteness: he wanted to explain the quantum
of action in terms of the atoms; he found a relation between the radius of
the Thomson atom and the quantum of action; for a delightful exposition
see [Hermann 69, pp. 91 ﬀ.]; Haas’ theory is a direct antecedent of Bohr’s
atom, see [Heilbron 69]. A. SOMMERFELD rightly pointed out [Hermann
Ch. 6], in the Karlsruhe and Solvay 1911 conferences, that it was the other
way around:
it is the existence, stability and excitation of atoms which
should be understood in terms of Planck’s constant. Other important point
was realized by several people (Planck, Einstein, . . . ): the dimensions of the
quantum of action h is the same as that of e2/c; so some attemps were made
to relate the quantum of action h to the “quantum” of electricity e. Today,
the mystery of the value of the ﬁne-structure constant α = e2/hc ≈ (137)−1
is still with us . . . .

6.– A quick look at Planck’s second theory 1910-1912 is in time
now, and appropiate.
It seems that Planck hit upon it after reading
Lorentz’s G¨ottingen lecture, accepting the quanta (quoted in [Klein 66]).
Planck has accepted discontinuity, but wants to put it where it makes less
harm, another conﬁrmation of his conservative character. He prefers to quan-
tize the oscillator, and leave the radiation, as in the wave theory, continuous;
he cannot be blamed for the later: except Einstein and Stark, nobody ac-
cepted the Lichtquanta yet. Quantization takes place in phase space now,
and as such this is a forerunner of the subsequent quantization rules of the
Bohr–Sommerfeld atom. In fact, the formula that Planck writes (1911)

dp dq = nh

Z Z

14

(16)

has a deep invariant meaning, as we know today, through the symplectic
approach to mechanics, because dp ∧ dq is just the symplectic 2–form. More
important still was the “average” over the oscillator energies, from which
Planck concludes that

E = (En + En+1)/2 = (n + 1/2)hν

(17)

and the half-quantum makes his ﬁrst appearance in physics, not to be redis-
covered until 1925 . . . .

This second theory of Planck is not very interesting today; for an original
interpretation (based in putting discontinuity at the start) see [Kuhn 78, pt.
3].

For lack of space we refrain to gloss over the important role Planck and
Einstein played in the development of the third principle of thermodynamics
(Nerst) and in the zero-point energy issue.

7.– The mood was not very inclined towards historical studies
of the quanta until 1960, and here only a few papers are examined. Some
contributions of L. Rosenfeld, a close collaborator of Bohr, (and, according to
Pauli, der Chorknabe des Papstes) are worth commenting. In his [Rosenfeld
36] paper he recounts carefully Planck’s achievement. One nice point he em-
phasizes is the transition of the variables density u and entropy s, pertaining
to the radiation, to the corresponding U and S belonging to the oscillator;
in particular, from ∂s/∂u = ∂S/∂U, and the s(u) relation from Wien’s law,
Planck concludes the form (8) for S(U), which then uses to justify (9). Is
the formula unique? Rosenfeld recalls the important relation

for the time variation of the total entropy Σ; as (dU/dt) ∆U is negative,
increasing entropy means that

(18)

(19)

which is satisﬁed by R = αU, α > 0, but by many others as well.

Wien’s law is not unique. Rosenfeld, probably rightly, says that Planck
stumbled in the form R = αU + βU 2 not only because the second term

dΣ
dt

=

3
5

d2S
dU 2

dU
dt

∆U

R ≡ −

d2S
dU 2 !

 

≥ 0

15

would reproduce the experimental ﬁnding u ∝ T at hight T (low ν) that
Rubens reported to Planck, but also because it still gives the “logarithmic”
aspect to the function S = S(U) that pleased Planck because similarity with
Boltzmann’s formulas. Other quantum papers by Rosenfeld in the book
referred in [Rosenfeld 36] are worth reading.

M. J. Klein wrote an important paper in 1961 [Klein 61; see also Klein
66]; in fact, one can consider Klein the forerunner of the critical historians of
the quantum theory, anteceding Kuhn and Jammer. Here, however, we shall
give him just a cursory examination. He deals with two speciﬁc points. (i)
Did Planck know in October 1900, about the Rayleigh-Jeans formula, that
Rayleigh had published in June, 1900? Answer: probably yes, but he did
not pay attention; Klein gives plausible reasons for both statements; we tend
to agree. By the way, the polemic about previous knowledge of a clearly
antecedent paper repeats itself in Einstein with respect to the Michelson-
Morley experiment, and with Bohr and the Balmer formula. (ii) In what
ways did Planck depart from Boltzmann’s methods in his statistical calcula-
tion? Klein signals a few; Planck calculated the complexions (microstates)
of a single macrostate, whereas Boltzmann compared the relative weights of
diﬀerent states, looking for maximalization.
In fact, it seems that Planck
also in his 14-XII-1900 derivation was again working backwards (because he
knew the correct answer), a suggesion from [Rosenfeld 36] that Klein ac-
cepts. And also the peculiar counting method of Planck is at odds with the
distinguishable entities Boltzmann had considered, a point that Ehrenfest
forcefully expressed in 1911 and later (compare our comments above).

As his ﬁnal point, Klein comments on the little interest in Planck’s the-
ory up to 1905, and adds an extra reason to the exposed above: many con-
tinental theorists, up to 1910, were recalcitrant antiatomists, defending the
“energeticism” point of view; among them Ostwald, Mach and Duhem; the
battle Boltzmann fought against them (and that perhaps costed him his life)
is well documented.

The history of photon statistics is told in [ter Haar 69]. The paper makes
good historical points (such as the diverse names attached to k, the role of
Ehrenfest, etc.), but the discussion of the photon statistics issue is poor (e.g.,
ignores the Natanson vs. Krutkow controversy, and also the issue of identity
vs. indistinguishability, etc.).

The contribution of Rest Jost in the Einstein Centenary [Jost 79] is the

16

best source for the atomic controversy between Boltzmann and Planck, with
Mach as inspiration and Einstein as spectator; the paper is nearly philosoph-
ical, and there is no substitute for reading it. Planck started to reject atoms
because with them, the proof of the second law was not absolute, and ended
in just the opposite: irreversibility leads to the atoms!

Stephen G. Brush is a recognized science historian; in his paper [Brush
02] on cautious revolutionaries, he, of course, looks at Planck. He reminds
us of Planck’s principle: the new scientiﬁc ideas triumph on the long run,
because its opponents die, not because they became convinced. Brush also
takes part with Kuhn’s points of view, and provides powerful arguments (not
wholly convincing, we think; for example, Brush insists in Planck’s rejection
of the photons; but, as we argued, everybody did . . . ).

8.– In referring to the papers appearing for the centenary, the
one by G. Parisi [Parisi 01] is interesting; he remarks about lack of
simple proof of Wien’s displacement formula (2); we hope our deduction in
the Appendix is simple. Also, he notices that Planck had introduced transi-
tion probabilities in this second theory, anteceding Einstein for ﬁve years; he
also points out the “mistake” made by Bose in his derivation. The best part,
we think, is in the ﬁnal: we learn that Jeans was nearly correct in supposing
that thermodynamical equilibrium had not been obtained (it requires a very
long time), and also that the correct behaviour of the equilibrium time for
small coupling is not known (even today!).

[Rechenberg 00] repeats his plea [Mehra 82] against Kuhn on what dis-
contuity did Planck ﬁnd; we commented this point above; we disagree that
classical physics was not completed until 1905, if only because special rel-
ativity meant such a enormous conceptual break (e.g., relative time); it is
nice, though, that Rechenberg remind us that Planck saw the action is a
relativistic invariant.

[Studart 01] is correct and fairly complete. The combinatorial deduction
of the radiation formula is very detailed; it is interesting the suggestion of
Planck as a “sonambule” of science in the sense of A. Koestler.

[Sanchez-Ron 00] comments Planck’s achievement on the conmemorative
issue of the “Revista Espa˜nola de F´ısica”. He reproduces a long part of the
letter of Planck to Wood (1931), the best testimony we have on Planck’s
march towards his quantum. Another spanish author [Zamora 01] is worth

17

looking at for his short but accurate historical presentation. The November
2001 issue of the Bulletin of the Mexican Physical Society is also fully devoted
to the celebration [Mex 01].

The triumph (radiation formula) and failure (second law) of Planck is

beautifully told in [Straumann 00].

9.– We would like to ﬁnish by launching a last look to Planck and
his oeuvre. For the dilemmas an upright man like him faced, see [Heilbron
86]. A centennary volume with some partial reprints is [Duck 00]. Planck
represents the best of western tradition in science, an archetype which tends
to dissapear: the turgid, respected and serious german professor, coming
from an academic tradition, like Bohr, Pauli and Heisenberg; Planck was not
a genius, and he knew that. His long life represents the zenith and the fall
of the german science as no other man does; his personal tragedies would
caused doom in anyone else with less stamina. His honesty and bonhommie
were legendary. With Planck’s death in 1947 the 25–centuries domination
of European science comes to an end, and the leadership crosses the oceans.
Let us hope it will be for good; the new style is already diﬀerent . . . .

Three ﬁnal testimonies for our man seem appropiated:

“Very few will remain in the shrine of science, if we eliminate those moved by
ambition, calculation, of whatever personal motivations; one of them will be
Max Planck”.

A. Einstein in [Planck 81]

“The wish to preceive . . . the prestablished harmony is the source of the in-
exhaustible pacience and tenacity that we see in Planck as he strugles with
scientiﬁc problems, without deviation to simpler and even proﬁtable objetives.
Colleagues attribute this attitude to an exceptional strong will and discipline.
I believe this is a complete mistake. The emotion provided by these achieve-
ments is analogous to the religious experience or to falling in love; the daily
eﬀort does not come from design or program, but from a sheer and direct
need”.

A. Einstein in [Pais 82, 2a]

18

“ The profound purity of his creation, the clarity, depth and and deceptive
simplicity of his thinking, and the lifelong nobility of his character and his
uncompromised principles are his everlasting monument”.

E. C. G. Sudarshan in [Duck 00]

19

APPENDIX

A. Relation between intensity K and density u:

In general current is density times velocity, j = uv; but here intensity K

is current ﬂux through the unit sphere, and v = c; hence

u(ν, T ) = 4πK(ν, T )/c.

B. The derivation of the Stefan-Boltzmann law:

If heat δQ is added to the cavity, the increase has a part due to the
internal energy δU and a part due to the work performed by expansion p δV ;
this is the ﬁrst principle:

δQ = δU + pδV.

Now U = uV , where u is the density of energy, function only of T , the
absolute temperature; for electromagnetic waves, the radiation pressure is
p = u/3, as deduced by Boltzmann from Maxwell equations (but not checked
experimentally until 1902 (Lebedev)). Now δQ/T = dS, where S, the en-
tropy, is a local function (hence dS is an exact form); therefore, S = S(T, V )
and

dS =

dT +

dV.

V
T

∂u
∂T

4
3

u
T

Exactness implies

or

∂((V /T )u′(T ))
∂V

=

∂((4/3)(u/T ))
∂T

=

u′
T

,

u′
T

=

4
3  

u′
T

−

u
T 2 !

,

or u(T ) = σT 4,

which is the Stefan-Boltzmann law.

C. Derivation of the Wien’s displacement law

The usual derivation of the displacement law (Wien) is cumbersome:
[Parisi 01] complaints. The simplest is the following: for adiabatic changes
δQ = 0, hence

(4/3)udV + V du = 0,

20

or

V u3/4 = const.

or V T 3 = const.,
because the increase in V 1/3 is linear with the increase in λ (Doppler eﬀect).
This is strictly speaking, Wien’s displacement law; hence T enters in u(ν, T )
only in the form T /ν.

or λT = const.,

Now from the Stefan-Boltzmann result,

∞

0
Z

u(ν, ν/T )dν = σT 4 = T

u(xT, x)dx,

∞

0
Z

which implies, for u positive,

∂4
∂y4 u (y ≡ xT = ν, x) = 0,

or u(y, x) = y3φ(x) neglecting lower powers from the S-B result. So

u(y, x) = u(ν, ν/T ) = ν3φ(ν/T ),

which is the usual form of Wien’s law.

D. The forced damped oscillator.

The equation (6) in the x-axis for a single mode Ω of the e.m. ﬁeld is

m¨x + γ ˙x + kx = eE cos(Ωt);

written in the operator form (D − a)(D − b)x = (eE/m) cos(Ωt), where a and
b are roots of y2 + (γ/m)y + ω2 = 0, and D = d/dx, the equation admits as
solution, as D − a = exp(at) D exp(−at) etc.,

x = transient + C cos(Ωt − θ)

where C and θ can be calculated at once; the transient decays with the
time constant γ/m. Now the instantaneous oscillator energy E = E(ω, Ω) is
kx2

max/2, xmax = C, and hence

Notice how the damping avoids the blow-up for ω → Ω.

E =

(e2E 2/2m)
(Ω − ω)2 + (γ/m)2 .

21

Now the energy density for the e.m. ﬁeld u = u(Ω) is (E 2 +H2)/8π, and it
is supposed isotropic, i.e. u = 6E 2/8π; the equilibrium oscillator energy U(ω)
is obtained by integration on Ω. Only the resonance frequency contributes,
as γ is very small. The ﬁnal result is the relation (restoring ν = ω/2π)

u(ν, T ) = 8πν2/c3 U(ν, T ),

(where T is there just for the ride) written in (7).

E. Planck’s Derivation of Wien’s and Planck’s formula.

From

we get

hence,

or

R ≡ −

= αU

−1

∂2S
∂U 2 !

 

∂S
∂U

1
α

= −

log U + b,

dS =

− log U
α

 

+ b

dU ≡

!

dU
T

,

U = K exp(−α/T ),

Wien’s law in T.

Now from

R ≡ −

−1

∂2S
∂U 2 !

 

= αU + βU 2,

identical calculation gives (the integration constant is ﬁxed)

U = K/[exp(+α/T ) − 1],

Planck’s law.

Wien’s form =⇒ K, a ∝ ν.

actual equation

The full entropy obtains after another integration; write ﬁrst the full

U(ν, T ) = hν/[exp(hν/kT ) − 1]

Pl.

and another integration (no constant) gives

S(U) = k[log(1 + U/hν)1+U/hν − log(U/hν)U/hν],

22

which is of the form A = k log W , and gave to Planck the idea of a combina-
torial approach.

F. Einstein’s derivation of Planck’s formula.

If the oscillator is quantized, E(n) = nhν, the mean energy is

with

so Z(β) = (1 − x)−1, and

Z = T r exp(−βH) =

xn,

and

x = exp(−βhν);

hEi = U =

∂ log Z
∂β

,

∞

0
X

U =

hν
exp(hν/kT ) − 1

.

23

BIBLIOGRAPHICAL NOTES

The literature on the black body radiation is overwhelming. There is no
question here of quoting the earliest primary sources, as they are diﬃcult to
consult, and are called for in most good modern treatises; so here we cite the
most important secondary sources.

The early history of the radiation formula is best told in [Kangro 76].
A detailed information on the experimental situation is well described in
[Sanchez-Ron 01]. The contribution of Planck is told in many sources; the
best simplest is perhaps [Hermann 69], Ch. 1; the encyclopedic work of
Mehra and Rechenberg [Mehra 82] deals with Planck in Vol 1, Part 1. The
monography by [Kuhn 78] is unsurpassed on the work of Planck and its an-
tecedents; Kuhn’s interpretation is however somewhat controversial, see our
main text. A centenary book with some reprints is [Duck 00]. The deriva-
tions we give on the Appendix are shorter that those given in many places;
the most quoted ones are in [Born 46], App. 27. The remark that Wien
law leads to the inconsistency u const for T large is in the undergraduate
textbook [Cabrera 50], Cap. 34. The famous Vorlesungen of Planck are com-
mented, reproduced and translated in [Planck 06]; there are some changes in
the (later) english translation. The biography of Einstein by Pais [Pais 82],
VI, 18 & 19 is worth looking at in respect to Planck’s work and antecedents.

There are two old masterly expositions of the Old Quantum Theory with
chapters on W¨armestrahlung, by [Pauli 26] and by [Rubinowicz 33]; the ﬁrst
follows an unconventional order, Planck’s formula is discussed in Sect. 14,
but is worth reading (Pauli is a master of exposition); the second is more
encyclopedic, as beﬁts to a Sommerfeld’s student. There are of course some
well known books related to historical studies on the development of quan-
[ter Haar 67] devotes a large chapter to Planck and includes
tum theory:
an english version of Planck’s October and December (1900) fundamental
communications. [Whittaker 10] is as meticulous as always, and in his study
[Hund 67] is remarkable for his emphasis on in-
of Planck uncontroversial.
distinguishability and statistics, and he rightly stresses the contribution of
Natanson and others. There is the monumental japanese work [Taketani 01],
with brief and accurate calculations (Vol. II), although the style is peculiar
at times. But the best source is perhaps [Jammer 66], both in accuracy and
extension and in critical analysis.

Planck’s own recollections are given in his Nobel Lecture [Nobel 18] and

24

his Autobiography [Planck 43]. Previous to the centenary there are few ar-
ticles on Planck’s discovery. We have consulted [Rosenfeld 36], [Klein 61],
[Klein 66], [ter Haar 69] (on photon statistics). The perils of philosophers
dwelling on sheer physical issues are well illustrated in [Agassi 67]. The op-
posing views of Boltzmann and (young) Planck as regards Atomism are very
well expressed in [Jost 79]. Poincar´e last contribution (1912) is devoted to
a proof of quantum discontinuity, and is glossed in [Prentis 95]; his impor-
tance, however, is played down by Kuhn (op. cit.) To know more about
Planck directly one should consult the very accesible Autobiography and his
Lectures on Thermodynamics [97].

Finally we come to the recent works on ocassion of the centenary. As
they are commented upon on the main text, we just select some brieﬂy here:
[Sanchez-Ron 00], [Parisi 01], [Mex 01], and [Studart 01]. A late addition is
[Campos 04].

25

References

[1] Agassi 67.- “The Kirchhoﬀ-Planck Radiation Law”. J. Agassi, Science,

156, 30-37 (7-IV-1967)

[2] Bach 89.- “Eine Fehlinterpretation mit Folgen: Albert Einstein und der
Welle-Teilchen Dualismus”. A. Bach, Arch. Hist. Ex. Sci., 40(1989), 173-
206

[3] Born 46.- Atomic Physics. Max Born, Blackie, Edinburgh 1946. sp. transl.

Espasa-Calpe, Buenos Aires 1952.

[4] Brush 02.- “Cautious revolucionaries: Maxwell, Planck, Hubble” Stephen

G. Brush, Am. J. Phys. 70(2), 119-127 (2002)

[5] Cabrera 50.- F´ısica Te´orica I, Mec´anica y Termolog´ıa. Juan Cabrera.

Librer´ıa General, Zaragoza 1950, Caps. 34 and 35.

[6] Campos

04.-
1925”.arXiv/physics/0312087.

“Still

Shrouded

in Mystery:The

Photon

in

[7] Duck 00 .- 100 Years of Planck’s Quantum. Ian Duck and E.C.G. Sudar-

shan. World Scientiﬁc, Singapore 2000

[8] Fidel Castro 00.- “El principio de Acci´on M´ınima en el centenario del
Quantum”. Fidel Castro y H. P´erez-Rojas. Llull, Rev. Soc. Esp. Hist.
Cien-T´ec., 23, 37-68 (2000)

[9] ter Haar 67.- The Old Quantum Theory. D. ter Haar. Pergamon, Oxford

1967

[10] ter Haar 69.- “On the History of Photon Statistic”. D. ter Haar Quantum

Optics, Varenna course 42 (1969), ed. R. Glauber

[11] Heilbron 69.- “The genesis of the Bohr Atom”, J. L. Heilbron and

Thomas S. Kuhn, Hist. St. Phys. Sc., 1, 211-290 (1969), Princeton.

[12] Heilbron 86.- The Dilemmas of an Upright Man. J. L. Heilbron Univ.

Calif., 1986, 1996; With an “Afterward”, year 2000.

[13] Hermann 69.- The Genesis of Quantum Theory 1899-1913. Armin Her-

mann, M. I. T. Press 1.971. (or. ger. ed. 1969).

26

[14] Hund 67.- Gesichte der Quantenteorie. F. Hund Mannhein 1967. Eng.

transl. Harrap, London 1974, Ch. 2 and 3.

[15] Jammer 66.- The Conceptual Development of Quantum Mechanics. Max

Jammer. Mc Graw-Hill, New York 1966, Ch. 1

[16] Jost 79.- “Boltzmann und Planck: Die Krise des Atomismus um die
Jahrhundertwende und ihre ¨Uberwindung durch Einstein”. R. Jost in Ein-
stein Symposium Berlin, Lect. Not. Phys. 100, 128-145 , Springer, Berlin
1979

[17] Kangro 76.- Early story of Planck’s Radiation Law. H. Kangro; Taylor

& Francis, London 1976 (or. ger. ed. 1970)

[18] Klein 61.- “Max Planck and the Beginnings of the Quantum Theory”

M. J. Kein, Arch. Hist. Exact. Sci, 1, 459-479 (1961).

[19] Klein 66.- “Thermodynamica and Quanta in Planck’s Work”. Martin J.

Klein, Physics ToDay, Nov. 1966, 23-32

[20] Kuhn 78.- Black Body Theory and the Quantum Discontinuity. Thomas
S. Kuhn, Oxford U.P. 1978. Span. Transl. Alianza Edit., Madrid 1980

[21] Mehra 82.- J. Mehra and H. Rechenberg. The Historical Development

of Quantum Theory, 6 Vols., 1982-2000

[22] Mex 01.- Bolet´ın de la Sociedad Mexicana de F´ısica, Nov. 2001 See
specially (i) Luis de la Pe˜na: Planck, Einstein y el fot´on (ii) Juan M.
Lozano: Max Planck, su generaci´on y su tr´agico destino. (iii) Jos´e L. del
R´ıo: Los trabajos originales de Planck

[23] Navarro 03.- “Paul Ehrenfest on the Necessity of Quanta (1911): Dis-
continuity, Quantization, Corpuscularity and Adiabatic Invariance”, L.
Navarro and E. P´erez, Arch. Hist. Ex. Sci.,58, 97-141, 2003.

[24] Nobel 18.- Nobel Lectures. Physics, Vol. 1, 1901-1921. Elsevier, Ams-

terdam 1967

Ariel, Barcelona 1984

[25] Pais 82.- Subtle is the Lord. Abraham Pais Oxford U.P. 1982. sp. transl.

27

[26] Parisi 01.- “Planck’s Legacy to Statistical Mechanics” G. Parisi,
arXiv:cond-mat/0101293 (18-I-01). We thank Prof. Parisi for discussions
on his paper.

[27] Pauli 26.- Handbuch der Physik, Bd. 23. J. Springer, Berlin 1.926 “Quan-

tentheorie”, 1-278.

[28] Planck 06.- The Theory of Heat Radiation. Vol. 11 of “The History Of
Modern Physics”, Am. Ins. Phys. 1988. German edition, 1906 and english
trasl. (Masius) of 1913. Max Planck

[29] Planck 15.- Eight Lectures on Theoretical Physics. Dover ed., 1998 Max

Planck

[30] Planck 43.- Wissenshaftliche Selbstbiographie. Barth, Leipzig 1943. Trad.

Esp. N´ıvola 2000, pr´ologo por A. Galindo.

[31] Planck 81.- Where is Science going? (Several essays by Max Planck).

Dover, N.Y. 1981

[32] Planck 97.- Treatise on Thermodynamics.- Dover ed. 1945. German edi-

tions 1897, 1921, etc. Max Planck

[33] Perez-Canal 02.- “Combinatoria y Teor´ıa Cu´antica”, 1910-1914. E.

P´erez-Canals, Llull, 25, 55-83 (2002).

[34] Prentis 95.- “Poincar´e’s proof of the quantum discontinuity of Nature”.

Jephreys J. Prentis Am. J. Phys. 63(Apr), 339-350 (1995)

[35] Rechenber 00.- “The History of Planck’s 1900 Paper” H. Rechenberg,

MPI-Werner Heisenberg Ins. Preprint 2000

[36] Rosenfeld 36.- Selected Papers of L´eon Rosenfeld. Reidel, Dordrecht
1979: art. 16 (Osiris, 1936) and 17 (M. Planck Festschrift, 1958), both
orig. in French.

[37] Rubinowicz 33.- Handbuch del Physik, 2nd ed., Bd 24/1. J. Springer,
Berlin 1933, “Ursprung und Entwicklung der ¨alteren Quantentheorie”, by
A. Rubinowicz

[38] Sanchez-Ron 00.- “La cuantizaci´on de la F´ısica (1900-1927)” J. M.

S´anchez-Ron. Rev. Esp. F´ıs. 14, 6-9 (2000).

28

[39] Sanchez-Ron 01.- Historia de la F´ısica Cu´antica. I. El per´ıodo funda-
cional (1860-1926). J. M. S´anchez-Ron Cr´ıtica (Drakontos) Barcelona 2001

[40] Studart 01.- “A Inven¸cao do Conceito de Quantum de Energia segundo

Planck”. N. Studart, arXiv:physics/0106037

[41] Straumann 00.-“ “. . . ich dachte mir nicht dabei. . . ” Plancks unger-
ader Weg zur Strahlungformel” D. Giulini und N. Straumann, Universit¨at
Z¨urich Preprint, Oktober, 2000

[42] Taketani 01.- The Formation and Logic of Quantum Mechanics, Vols. I,
II and III. World Scientiﬁc 2001 (orig. Japanese ed. in 1948, 1990, 2002).-
M. Taketani and M. Nagasaki

[43] Whittaker 10.- A History of the Theories of Aether and Electricity. Ed-
mund T. Whittaker, Vol II, Ch. 3, 78-105 (Am. Inst Phys. Vol.7 Edition);
original started in 1910.

[44] Zamora 01.- “La forja de la ley de Planck”. Manuel Zamora. Rev. Esp.

F´ıs. 15, 23-28 (2001)

29

