4
0
0
2
 
r
a

M
 
4
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
t
s
i
h
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
5
1
1
3
0
4
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

From “Not Wrong” to (Maybe) Right∗

Frank Wilczek
Center for Theoretical Physics
Department of Physics
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Cambridge, MA 02139-4307
MIT-CTP-3485

Abstract

This is a short, light spirited account of how some possibly important science actually hap-
It very much conﬂicts with Popper’s contention that the key to scientiﬁc progress is

pened.
falsiﬁcation.

Savas Dimopoulos is always enthusiastic about something, and in the spring of 1981 it was super-
symmetry. He was visiting the new Institute for Theoretical Physics in Santa Barbara, which I had
recently joined. We hit it oﬀ immediately – he was bursting with wild ideas, and I liked to stretch
my mind by trying to take them seriously.

Supersymmetry was (and is) a beautiful mathematical idea. It extends the symmetry of special
relativity. Special relativity postulates the invariance of physical law under motion with a constant
velocity. It thereby allows us to transform between objects with diﬀerent speeds and to predict
the properties of moving particles from those of stationary ones. Supersymmetry postulates the
invariance of physical law under certain kinds of motion in a quantum-mechanical extension of
space-time, superspace. Superspace has four extra quantum-mechanical dimensions, quite diﬀerent
from the familiar four dimensions of space and time. When a particle “moves” in the extra quantum
dimensions it just acquires a tiny amount of angular momentum, or spin. So you wouldn’t want to
live in the new suburbs of superspace: it’s very cramped, and makes you dizzy. But the mathematics
of supersymmetry promised (and still promises) to help us unify fundamental physics: it allows us
to transform between objects of diﬀerent spin. Several diﬀerent kinds of particles, diﬀering in their
spin, could be manifestations of a single entity moving at diﬀerent speeds through superspace.

The problem with applying supersymmetry is that it’s too good for this world. We simply don’t
ﬁnd particles of the sort it predicts. We don’t, for example, see particles with the same charge and
mass as electrons, but a diﬀerent amount of spin.

∗This is, in essence, a solicited “Turning Points” feature written for Nature. It appeared, in a slightly abbreviated

form, in the March 18 issue.

1

Symmetry principles that might help to unify fundamental physics are hard to come by, however,
so theoretical physicists won’t give up on them easily. Based on previous experience with other
forms of symmetry, we’ve developed a fallback strategy, called spontaneous symmetry breaking. In
this approach we postulate that the fundamental equations of physics have the symmetry, but the
stable solutions of these equations do not. The classic example of this phenomenon occurs in an
ordinary magnet: in the basic equations that describe the physics of a lump of iron any direction
is equivalent to any other, but the lump becomes a magnet with some deﬁnite north-seeking pole.

While straight supersymmetry is a (wrong) statement about the properties of the world, sponta-
neously broken supersymmetry is a research program. For it is a statement about equations that
describe the world, and only indirectly about the world itself. Carrying forward this research pro-
gram involves model building – the creative activity of proposing candidate equations and analyzing
their consequences.

Building models with spontaneously broken supersymmetry that are consistent with everything
else we know about physics is a diﬃcult business. Even if you manage to get the symmetry to
break, the extra particles are still there (just heavier) and cause various mischief. I brieﬂy tried
my hand at model-building when supersymmetry was ﬁrst developed, mainly by Julius Wess and
Bruno Zumino [1] in the mid-1970s, but after some simple attempts failed miserably I gave up.

Savas was a much more naturally gifted model-builder, in two crucial respects: he didn’t insist on
simplicity, and he didn’t give up. When I identiﬁed some diﬃculty (let’s call it A) that was not
addressed in his model, he would say “It’s not a real problem, I’m sure I can solve it” and the
next afternoon he would come in with a more elaborate model that solved diﬃculty A. But then
we’d discuss diﬃculty B, and he’d solve that one with a completely diﬀerent complicated model.
Now to solve both A and B, you had to join the two models, and so on to diﬃculty C, and soon
things got incredibly complicated. Working through the details, we’d ﬁnd some ﬂaw. Then the
next day Savas would come in, very excited and happy, with an even more complicated model that
ﬁxed yesterday’s ﬂaw. Eventually we eliminated all ﬂaws, using the method of proof by exhaustion:
anyone, including us, who tried to analyze the model would get exhausted before they understood
it well enough to ﬁnd the ﬂaws.

When I tried to write up what we’d done for publication, there was a certain feeling of unreality
and embarrassment about the complexity and arbitrariness of what we’d come up with. I couldn’t
help but compare our mess to some truly elegant ideas about uniﬁcation, which involved more
conventional kinds of gauge symmetry, not supersymmetry [2, 3]. Those ideas were genuinely
fruitful, in that they explained some things we already knew (the relative values of the strong,
electromagnetic, and weak coupling constants) [4].

Savas was undaunted. He maintained that those ideas weren’t really so elegant, if you tried to be
completely realistic and work them out in detail. He’d been talking to another colleague, Stuart
Raby, about trying to improve those models by adding supersymmetry! I was extremely skeptical
about this “improvement”, because I was certain that the added complexity of supersymmetry
would spoil the existing success of gauge symmetry in explaining the couplings. The three of us
decided to do the calculation, to see how bad the situation was. To get oriented and make a deﬁnite
calculation, we started by doing the crudest thing, that is to ignore the whole problem of breaking
supersymmetry, which allowed us to use very simple (but manifestly unrealistic) models.

2

The result was amazing, at least to me. The supersymmetric versions of the gauge symmetry
models, although they were vastly diﬀerent from the originals, gave very nearly the same answer
for the couplings.

That was the turning point. We put aside the “not wrong” complicated models with spontaneous
supersymmetry breaking, and wrote a short paper [5] that, taken literally (with unbroken super-
symmetry), was wrong. But it presented a result that was so straightforward and successful that it
made the idea of putting gauge symmetry and supersymmetry uniﬁcation together seem (maybe)
right. We put oﬀ the problem of how supersymmetry gets broken. And while there are some good
ideas about it, there is still no generally accepted solution.

Subsequently, more precise measurements of the couplings made it possible to distinguish between
the predictions of models with and without supersymmetry [6]. The models with supersymmetry
work much better. We all eagerly await operation of the Large Hadron Collider (LHC) at CERN,
where, if these ideas are correct, the new particles of supersymmetry – or, you might say, the new
dimensions of superspace – must make their appearance.

This little episode, it seems to me, is 179 degrees or so out of phase from Popper’s idea that we
make progress by falsifying theories. Rather in many cases, including some of the most important,
we suddenly decide our theories might be true, by realizing that we should strategically ignore
glaring problems. It was a similar turning point when David Gross and I decided to propose QCD
based on asymptotic freedom, putting oﬀ the problem of quark conﬁnement. But that’s another
story ...

References

[1] J. Wess and B. Zumino, Nucl. Phys. B70 39-50 (1974).

[2] J. Pati and A. Salam, Phys. Rev. D8 1240-1251 (1973).

[3] H. Georgi and S. Glashow, Phys. Rev. Lett. 32 438-441 (1973).

[4] H. Georgi, H. Quinn and S. Weinberg, Phys. Rev. Lett. 33 451-454 (1974).

[5] S. Dimopoulos, S. Raby and F. Wilczek, Phys. Rev. D24 1681-1683 (1981).

[6] U. Amaldi, W. de Boer, H. Furstenau, Phys. Lett. B260 447-455 (1991).

3

