4
0
0
2
 
r
a

M
 
3
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
t
s
i
h
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
9
0
1
3
0
4
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Fifty Years of Yang-Mills Theory

and my Contribution to it.

R. Jackiw ∗

Center for Theoretical Physics

Massachusetts Institute of Technology

Cambridge, MA 02139-4307

MIT-CTP-3484

Abstract

On the ﬁftieth anniversary of Yang-Mills theory, I review the contribution to its un-

derstanding by my collaborators and me.

Contents: 1.Gauge Theories and Quantum Anomalies; 2.Mathematical Connections;

3. Gauge Field Dynamics other than Yang-Mills; 4. Gauge Formalism for General

Relativity Variables; A. Christoﬀel connection as a gauge potential, B. Gravitational

Chern-Simons term from gauge theory Chern-Simons term, C. Coordinate transforma-

tions in general relativity and gauge theory, (i) Response to changes in coordinates

(ii) Invariant ﬁelds and constants of motion. References.

To be published by World Scientiﬁc.

∗Email: jackiw@lns.mit.edu

Following some precursors (Klein, Pauli, Shaw), Yang and Mills invented non-Abelian gauge

theory half a century ago [1]. Governed by the Yang-Mills Lagrange density

LY M =

1
2

< F µνFµν >,

where Fµν is the Lie algebra/matrix valued gauge ﬁeld strength constructed from a gauge

potential Aµ

Fµν = ∂µAν −

∂νAµ + [Aµ, Aν],

the model generalizes in a natural and elegant fashion Maxwell electrodynamics, to which it

also reduces in the Abelian case. (Brackets <> denote matrix trace.)

Twenty years passed before physicists learned how to quantize, renormalize and put the the-

ory to phenomenological use describing the dynamics of fundamental elementary particles – a

length of time comparable to the interval between the invention of quantum physics by Planck

and its ﬁnal formulation by Heisenberg and Schr¨odinger. In the early seventies, the work of

our editor ‘tHooft [2] and his teacher Veltman [2] made it possible to perform calculations

for strong, weak and electromagnetic interactions, based on well-deﬁned, non-Abelian gauge

theory models, which became subsumed in the “standard model” for elementary particles.

While important investigations unraveled the novel dynamics (conﬁnement, renormaliza-

tion group and asymptotic freedom, large-N limit), my collaborative research focused on the

kinematical properties of non-Abelian gauge ﬁelds; properties that become visible when close

attention is paid to the gauge theory’s mathematical (geometrical, topological) structures,

which nevertheless aﬀect physical content. In this celebratory review, I shall ﬁrst summarize

some of our work, and then present remarks on gauge theoretic aspects of gravity theory.

1 Gauge Theory and Quantum Anomalies

A precursor to much mathematical analysis of gauge theories is the chiral anomaly, dis-

cussed by Bell and me [3] (also Adler and, earlier, others [4]) before non-Abelian theories

entered center-stage. We showed that a chiral symmetry of classical dynamics does not in

3

general survive quantization: In the presence of fermions, the continuity equation for the
classically conserved, but quantum mechanically non-conserved chiral current, J µ

A, becomes

proportional to the “anomaly” after quantization.

∂µJ µ

A ∝

< ∗F µνFµν >

(1.1)

(∗F µν is the dual of Fµν : ∗F µν

2εµναβFαβ.) Physicists later recognized the quantity
on the right as the Chern-Pontryagin topological density. The anomaly allowed evading a

≡

1

chiral symmetry-based, model-independent no-go theorem prohibiting the neutral pion from

decaying into two photons – a process seen in Nature. Evidently quantum eﬀects destroy

the apparent (classical) chiral symmetry and negate the physically unacceptable prohibition.

This was very much appreciated by Bell’s good friend Veltman, who (with Sutherland)

established the no-go result [5]. His pupil ‘tHooft later made important connections between

the chiral anomaly and properties of the standard model (see below).

The ﬁrst application of the chiral anomaly to the standard model came with the observation

by Gross and me [6] (also Bouchiat, Iliopoulos and Meyer [7]) that the ‘tHooft-Veltman

argument for renormalizability of gauge theories remains valid only if fermion content is

arranged so that gauge ﬁelds couple to currents that are free of anomalies, in which case the

Yang-Mills equation with sources J µ is self-consistent.

∂µF µν + [Aµ, F µν]
DνJ ν
DνDµF µν =

0 =

≡ DµF µν = J ν

This requirement together with the strength of the anomaly, ﬁxed experimentally by the

π0

→

2γ decay amplitude, provides up to now one of the few principles for determining the

color and family structure of elementary fermions (quarks, leptons) in Nature.

Nevertheless, the subject lay fallow until instantons were found by Belavin, Polyakov, Schwartz

and Tyupkin [8] (who called them “pseudoparticles”). Instantons are classical gauge ﬁeld

conﬁgurations in imaginary time (Euclidean space-time) that are self-dual or anti self-dual.

(1.2)

(1.3)

∗F µν =

F µν

±

4

Therefore, they satisfy the classical, imaginary-time, sourceless Yang-Mills equation,

by virtue of the Bianchi identity for the dual ﬁeld strength.

DµF µν = 0,

∗F µν = 0

Dµ

(1.4)

(1.5)

Moreover, the 4-dimensional integral of the Chern-Pontryagin density evaluated on instanton

conﬁgurations takes values ﬁxed by an integer that labels the homotopy class to which the

gauge ﬁeld belongs. The non-vanishing value for this integral came as a surprise, because

the Chern-Pontryagin density is itself a total divergence, so its integral is a surface term

frequently ignored by physicists.

1
4
K µ

< ∗F µνFµν >= ∂µK µ
1
2

εµαβγ <

Aα∂βAγ +

≡

1
3

AαAβAγ >

(1.6)

K µ is called the Chern-Simons or anomaly current, whose time component K 0 contains only

spatial quantities. K 0 is also called the Chern-Simons density, about which I shall have more

to say later.

CS(A)

K 0 = εijk <

Ai∂jAk +

AiAjAk >

(1.7)

≡

1
2

1
3

The surprising relevance of all this to quantum physics in Minkowski space-time comes about

for the following reasons. Since the baryon number current in the standard model does not

couple to a gauge ﬁeld, it can remain anomalous, even though it is a vector quantity with no

chiral component. This possibility was appreciated already in the original paper with Bell

[3], but no physical consequence was drawn, because the total accumulated change of the

anomalous charge, QA =

d3xJ 0

A, is a surface term of no apparent importance before the

advent of instantons.

R

∞

QA ≡ Z

△

−∞

dt

d
dt Z

d3xJ 0

A ∝

1
4 Z

dtd3x < ∗F µνFµν >=

dtd3x∂µK µ

(1.8)

Z

However, ‘tHooft realized that this reasoning is inadequate [9]. He observed that instantons

can be used to evaluate approximately the Yang-Mills functional integral continued to imag-

inary time. Since also the instanton-dominated integral of the Chern-Pontryagin density

5

is non-vanishing, ‘tHooft concluded that baryon number is not conserved in the standard

model. By evaluating the Euclidean functional integral in a Gaussian approximation around

the instanton solution of Belavin et al., he calculated the baryon lifetime. Fortunately it is

exponentially small, but diamonds in principle are not forever.

There remained much to be done in extending ‘tHooft’s results. One wished to identify

the physical mechanism in Minkowski space-time behind the approximate evaluation of an

Euclidean functional integral. Also ‘tHooft found that his answer depends on an angle θ,

which is not seen in gauge ﬁeld dynamics; again a physical explanation was needed.

By recalling known procedures in condensed matter physics and quantum chemistry Rebbi

and I [10] (also Callan, Dashen and Gross [11]) explained that classical paths in imaginary

time signal quantum tunneling, whose probability amplitude in the semi-classical approxi-

mations is given by the Euclidean functional integral in Gaussian approximation around the

imaginary time path. But where does the tunneling take place? To answer this, and also

to understand the θ-angle, we examined the gauge theory in the Schr¨odinger representation,

where quantum states are described by wave functionals Ψ(A) deﬁned on conﬁguration space

variables – here the spatial vector potentials A. (Although the reality of a space of gauge

ﬁeld variables is obscure, it is no more obscure than the 3 N-dimensional space on which

N-body, N > 1, quantum mechanical wave functions are deﬁned.)

We then drew the following qualitative but exact picture of the quantum ﬁeld theory [10].

The Gauss law and conventional gauge ﬁxing (of the kind described by Faddeev in this vol-

ume) ensure that Ψ(A) is unchanged when A undergoes a gauge transformation that is de-

formable to the identity; so called a “small” gauge transformation. However, in non-Abelian

groups there are gauge transformations that are homotopically non-trivial and cannot be

connected to the identity. For these “large” transformations, labeled by an integer n that

indexes the homotopy class to which the gauge transformation belongs, Ψ(A) changes by a

phase. This phase is the θ-angle encountered by ‘tHooft in his calculation.

In the classical ground state, the magnetic ﬁeld Bi

∗F i0 vanishes. This is achieved not only

≡

6

with vanishing A, but also with pure-gauge vector potentials. Since large gauge functions fall

into classes labeled by the integers, the potential energy proﬁle takes on a periodic structure,

reminiscent of a Bloch crystal and depicted in the Figure below.

The zero-energy troughs correspond to pure gauge vector potentials constructed from gauge

functions belonging to the nth homotopy class. Thus the classical ground state is (inﬁnitely)

degenerate. Quantum mechanical tunneling lifts this degeneracy and creates energy bands.

Usually in quantum ﬁeld theory tunneling is suppressed by inﬁnite energy barriers between

degenerate vacua – this leads to spontaneous symmetry breaking. However, in Yang-Mills

theory there are imaginary time paths in ﬁeld space, which avoid inﬁnite barriers and inter-

polate between the vacua. Semi-classically these are the instantons., as can be veriﬁed by

examining their large (imaginary) time asymptotes. The ﬁnal picture is portrayed schemat-

ically in the above Figure.

To go beyond qualitative considerations we constructed an explicit functional of A, which

is invariant against small gauge transformations but not large ones.

[10] This is just the

spatial integral of the Chern-Simons density, introduced in (1.7). One readily checks that

the Chern-Simons term

W (A) =

d3xCS(A) =

d3xεijk <

Ai ∂jAk +

Ai Aj Ak >,

(1.9)

1
4π2 Z

1
2

1
3

1
4π2 Z

satisﬁes the Gauss law by virtue of

δW (A) =

1
4π2 Z

d3xδA

B,

·
B = 0.

D ·

7

(1.10a)

(1.10b)

(1.11)

(1.12)

(1.13)

(1.14)

But when A is gauge transformed by a large gauge function in the nth homotopy class, W (A)

shifts by the “winding” number n.

W (Ag) = W (A)

d3xεijk < g−1∂ig g−1 ∂jg g−1∂kg >

1
24π2 Z

−
g−1Ai g + g−1∂i g

Ag

i ≡

The last term in (1.11) evaluates the winding number of g (for well-behaved g).

Every Yang-Mills wave functional can be presented as

Ψ(A) = eiθW (A)Ψinv(A),

where Ψinv(A), is invariant against all gauge transformations, small and large, while the

non-invariance of Ψ(A) is contained in the universal phase involving W (A).

Ψ(A)

einθΨ(A)

→

But in quantum theory a universal phase of wave functions may be removed at the expense of

adding the time derivative of the phase to the theory’s Lagrangian. When this procedure is

carried out with the help of (1.6) and (1.7) for the problem at hand, the Yang-Mills quantum

theory becomes equivalently described by completely gauge invariant states, Ψinv(A), while
d3x∗F µνFµν, which does not contribute

the Yang-Mills Lagrangian acquires the addition θ

to equations of motion because it is a total time derivative. This shows that the θ-angle

R

is associated with Lorentz invariant but CP (or T) violating phenomena, which through

our analysis are understood in exact terms, while instantons provide a semi-classical de-

scription. We are left with a puzzle: What ﬁxes the magnitude of θ, whose experimental

consequences (e.g. neutron electric dipole moment) have never been seen? (An analogy with

the cosmological constant puzzle is apparent.)

2 Mathematical Connections

The anomaly-based instanton investigation of the standard model did not produce any useful

numbers for experimentalists to measure. But it aﬀected deeply our understanding of the

8

theory. Also it suggested a wealth of interesting mathematical problems to which Rebbi and

I found solutions by methods drawn from analysis, geometry and topology.

We proved that the Belavin et al. instanton preserves an SO(5) symmetry subgroup of the

SO(5, 1) conformal invariance group for Euclidean Yang-Mills theory [12]. This allows a

group theoretical classiﬁcation of motions in the presence of the instanton. Furthermore, use

of SO(5) covariant coordinates yields simple and elegant formulas, so that evaluating the

functional integral in a Gaussian approximation around the instanton becomes transparent.

We [13] (also Schwartz, as well as Atiyah, Hitchin and Singer [14]) showed that the most

d4x < ∗F µνFµν >)

n

∝

≡

R

general instanton conﬁguration with Chern-Pontryagin index (

can be viewed as a non-linear superposition of

individual instantons, which depends on

n
|

|

positions in 4-dimensional space,

instanton

8

n
|

parameters for the SU(2) group: 4
|

n
|

|
sizes, and (k2

1)
|

n
|

−

group variables of SU(2). Also following a suggestion by ‘tHooft, we

exhibited the most general, explicit multi-instanton formula.

[15] Our expression is closed

under conformal transformations and maximizes the parameter count for

= 1 and 2.

(For

n
|

|

> 2, no explicit formula for the general solution is known, but a procedure for

constructing it at given

has been found by Atiyah, Drinfeld, Hitchin and Manin. [16])

n
|

|

n
|

|

n
|

|

Much of this analysis involves zero eigenvalue solutions to 4-dimensional elliptic diﬀerential

equations in the presence of instantons. The number of these zero modes is determined by

the Chern-Pontryagin index of the background gauge ﬁeld. This is the statement of the

celebrated Atiyah-Singer index theorem which appeared in physics for the ﬁrst time because

of these considerations.

[17] Indeed the anomaly equation (1.1) may be viewed as a local

version of the theorem.

The zero modes arise not only with 4-dimensional instantons, but also in the presence of

extended, topologically interesting ﬁeld conﬁgurations in other dimensions. For example,

‘tHooft and Polyakov [18] found that magnetic monopole conﬁgurations are present as clas-

sical static solutions to some gauge theories based on semi-simple groups, like SU(2). Rebbi

and I [19] (also Hansenfratz and ‘tHooft [20]) then showed that spinless boson ﬁelds, carrying

half-integer isospin, bind to the monopole with zero energy and form a spin 1

2 excitation in

9

the quantum theory, even though all “constituents” carry integer spin. While it is uncertain

whether magnetic monopoles and the associated spin fractionization have a physical pres-

ence in Nature (they are not features of the standard model) analogous eﬀects can arise in

condensed matter systems that are available in a laboratory. For example, 1-dimensional

topological kinks form domain walls in lineal polymers like polyactelene. Electrons propa-

gating across these kinks experience fractionization of their quantum numbers – an eﬀect

that has been observed experimentally. [21]

The zero modes associated with monopoles and kinks arise in elliptic diﬀerential equations

in odd dimensions, where the Atiyah-Singer index cannot be used because it is restricted to

even dimensions. Callias, a student at that time, provided the necessary extension, and the

“Callias index” is now used for counting zero modes in odd-dimensional spaces. [22]

The mathematical activity surrounding instantons and other extended objects, like monopoles,

vortices and kinks, seeded an interaction between physics and mathematics, which is still

ﬂourishing. At an American Physical Society meeting, where I summarized the above results

[23], Singer declaimed a poetic pean to physics – mathematics collaboration:

In this day and age

Mathematicians so blind

But gauges have ﬂaws

The physicist sage

Follow slowly behind

God hems and haws

Writes page after page

With their clever minds

As the curtain He draws

On the current rage

A theorem they’ll ﬁnd

O’er His physical laws

The gauge

Only written and signed

It may be a lost cause

I. Singer

The interaction with mathematics became fueled anew when physicists called attention to

further gauge theoretic invariants.

10

3 Gauge Field Dynamics other than Yang-Mills

Exploration of Yang-Mills theory brought physicists’ attention to gauge theoretic invariants,
other than the Yang-Mills Lagrange density 1
2 < F µνFµν >. I have already discussed the
anomaly-determined Chern-Pontryagin density < ∗F µνFµν > (1.1). It does not contribute to

equations of motion because it is a total derivative, but it controls the θ-angle. Further there

is the Chern-Simons current K µ (1.6) and density K 0

CS(A) (1.7) – “anti-derivatives”

≡

of the Chern-Pontryagin density. Deﬁned on 3-space, CS(A) is not gauge invariant. But its

properly normalized integral over 3-space – the Chern-Simons term W (A) (1.9) – responds

only to large gauge transformatives by the integer winding number of the gauge function.

W (A) ﬁrst entered physics as the phase of Yang-Mills quantum states, (1.13), where it is

responsible for the θ-angle.

Another remarkable but futile role for W (A) is that e± 4π2W (A) solves the Yang-Mills func-
tional Schr¨odinger equation with zero eigenvalue by virtue of (1.10a): HY M ( 1
i

δA , A) e±4π2 W (A) =

δ

0, where HY M is the Yang-Mills Hamiltonian.

It is astonishing that such a non-linear,

integro-diﬀerential, functional equation possesses a simple and explicit solution. Unfortu-
nately, e±4π2W (A) cannot describe a physical state because

is not gauge invariant

e±4π2W (A)

|

|

against large gauge transformations, and grows exponentially for large (functional) argu-

ment.

[This “solution” is a great gauge theory teaser, but in fact it possesses a quantum

mechanical analog: The zero-eigenvalue Schr¨odinger equation for a 2-dimensional, (x, y),
isotropic harmonic oscillator (unit frequency) is solved by e±xy, which diverges for large x or

y, and has no place in the quantal Hilbert space for this system.]

The integer valued gauge non-invariance of W (A) does not prevent using that 3-dimensional

quantity in the action for a gauge theory on a (2+1)-dimensional space-time. Because its

variation (1.10a) is gauge covariant, W (A) contributes a gauge covariant quantity to the

equation of motion. Also in a quantum theory only the phase exponential of the action

need be gauge invariant. With this in mind, Deser and I [24] (together with students and

postdoctoral fellows) proposed that mW (A) be included in the action for a novel (2+1)-

11

dimensional gauge theory, where m is strength of the new term.

[Here Aµ is a (2 + 1)-

dimensional space-time covariant vector potential, not a 3-dimensional spatial vector A.]

In order to preserve gauge invariance of the phase exponential of the action for a non-

Abelian theory, m must be quantitized to be an integral multiple of 2π. Then eimW (A)

remains invariant even against large gauge transformations, which shift W (A) by an integer.

This coupling constant quantization is the precise ﬁeld theoretic analog of Dirac’s celebrated

monopole strength quantization. Of course in an Abelian theory, there are no large gauge

transformations; W (A) is gauge invariant; quantization of the interaction strength is not

The modiﬁed but gauge covariant equation of motion, with a covariantly conserved source,

needed.

reads

(3.1)

(3.2)

(3.3)

m
8π2
∗F β +

DµF µν +
εναβ
Dα

−

εναβFαβ = J ν,
m
4π2

∗F ν = J ν.

The non Yang-Mills term on the left comes from varying mW (A), see (1.10a). Eq. (3.2)
exhibits the dual ﬁeld (∗F µ
2 εµαβFαβ), which in 3 dimensions is a vector, obeying the

1

≡

Bianchi identity.

Note that (3.2) is consistent with (3.3).

∗F µ = 0

Dµ

The dimension of m is mass (in units of the gauge coupling constant) and one sees either

from the linear portion of (3.1) or from the linear Abelian case that gauge excitations in this

theory are massive, while retaining gauge invariance! This provides yet another example

where gauge invariance does not enforce masslessness for gauge ﬁeld excitations. Note that

P and T are violated by the mass term.

Because the mass term in (3.1) has one fewer derivative than the usual Yang-Mills kinetic

term, it dominates at low energies and large distances.

In the absence of the Yang-Mills

12

(3.4)

(3.5a)

(3.5b)

(3.6)

m
8π2

εναβFαβ = J ν

B =

4π2
m

ρ,

Ei =

εijJ j.

−
8π2
m

N =

4π2
m

−

Q,

term, equation (3.1) reduces to a ﬁeld-current identity.

This is especially interesting in the Abelian case – planar electrodynamics – where the

components of (3.4) read

Here Ei is a planar electric ﬁeld; B, a magnetic ﬁeld perpendicular to the plane; ρ is a charge

density and J i a planar current. A further consequence of (3.5a), which also follows from

the time component of (3.1) or (3.2), is the integrated statement

where N is the magnetic ﬂux through the plane and Q is the charge.

Relations like (3.5a)-(3.6) arise in descriptions of the quantum Hall regime, and the Chern-

Simons term has been widely used to model this planar eﬀect. More recently high temper-

ature superconductivity gave impetus to applications of Chern-Simons structures in specu-

lative descriptions of that phenomenon. Also physics returned the Chern-Simons term to

mathematics when Witten used it in a functional integral formula for knot invariants.

My investigations of Chern-Simons based gauge theories mostly concern the truncated equa-

tions (3.4) with source currents constructed from speciﬁc ﬁeld theoretic or point particle

variables. The dynamics of the sources is also self consistently included.

For sources made from relativistic scalar ﬁelds with precisely tuned self interactions, E.

Weinberg and I [25] (also Hong, Kim and Pac [26]) found static vortex solutions, similar

to Ginsburg-Landau (Nielsen-Olesen) vortices at the boundary between type I and type II

superconductors. Although equations are only partially integrable, we showed that in the

Abelian case both topological and non-topological vortices are present. Furthermore, Pi and

I [27] considered non-relativistic scalar ﬁeld dynamics, more speciﬁcally the non-relativistic

13

limit of the above mentioned model. In that case the static equations are completely inte-

grable, providing explicit proﬁles for the vortices.

It is known that conventional vortex models, without the Chern-Simons term, support only

charge-neutral vortices. On the other hand, the Chern-Simons vortices are charged, by virtue

of (3.6). Also generically, they carry arbitrary, unquantized angular momentum. This is a

consequence of planar dynamics where rotations are Abelian and angular momentum need

not be quantized. [28]

It is important that the Chern-Simons term is not merely an ad hoc P and T violating ad-

dition to planar gauge theories, which could be included or omitted at will. Even when it is

absent in a bare Lagrangian containing fermions, it arises from radiative corrections. Massless

fermions in (2 + 1)-dimensional space-time preserve planar parity invariance. Nevertheless

they induce a parity violating Chern-Simons term. This is the so called “parity anomaly”,

discovered by Redlich [29], a student during that research period. It is the odd-dimensional

analog of the even-dimensional chiral anomaly. (The fermion determinant, which is respon-

sible for this eﬀect, can also be evaluated in a heat bath environment at ﬁnite temperature;

there its response to large gauge transformations is especially intricate.)

Both chiral and parity anomalies enforce quantum mechanical symmetry breaking in the-

ories that before quantization possess symmetries associated with masslessness. One more

instance of this phenomenon is known: anomalous quantum mechanical breaking of scale and

conformal invariance. Generically these do not survive in non-trivial quantum ﬁeld theories,

not even in quantum mechanics.

[30] Although not necessarily conﬁned to gauge theories,

nor possessing any signiﬁcant topological aspects, the scale/conformal anomalies share with

the previous two the property of destroying an enhancement of symmetry that masslessness

would entail. This common feature prepared Coleman and me to understand and explain

why the relevant currents are not conserved, with anomalous divergences governed by the

anomalously non-vanishing trace of the energy-momentum tensor. [31] It appears that Na-

ture abhors masslessness, but we do not know why.

14

Finally we note that the Chern-Simons term mW (A), viewed as a quantity deﬁned on three

spatial dimensions, can be inserted into the action for a Lorentz invariant theory in (3 + 1)

dimensional space-time. Due to the dimensional mismatch, this acts as a source of Lorentz

and CTP violation. The idea has been developed for electrodynamics by Carroll, Field and

me.

[32] There it produces a modiﬁcation of the Maxwell equations only in Amp`eres law,

which in the Lorentz violating theory reads

∂E
∂t

−

+ ∇

B = J +

×

m
4π2

B.

(3.7)

(A source current containing a contribution from a magnetic ﬁeld is familiar in magnetohy-

drodynamics.) The physical consequence of (3.7) is that the vacuum becomes birefringent,

and propagating light waves undergo a Faraday-like rotation. Light from distant galaxies

provides an experimental measure of this eﬀect. Available observational data indicates that

it does not occur in Nature; m = 0.

4 Gauge Formalism for General Relativity Variables

General relativity with its diﬀeomorphism invariance embodies the symmetry of local trans-

lations. Therefore, one should try presenting the theory in a formalism similar to that of a

gauge theory. This has been achieved in lower dimensions.

For 3-dimensional Einstein theory in the Dreibein/spin connection formulation, ﬁeld variables

are gauge potentials for the local Poincar´e or deSitter groups: local translations are gauged

by Dreibeine, local Lorentz rotations, by spin connections. Dynamics is not of the Yang-Mills

form; rather the Lagrange density is a Chern-Simons term based on the Poincar´e or deSitter

groups. Einstein theory does not exist in two dimensions, but various “dilaton” gravities

can be formulated as gauge theories based on SO (2.1) or (extended) Poincar´e groups, with

dynamics governed by a “BF” Lagrange density. In neither dimensionality do these models

support propagating, dynamical degrees of freedom.

The above successes do not extend to four dimensions, where no complete gauge theoretic

15

formulation has been found for Einstein’s theory. The closest we have again uses Vier-

beine/spin connections, with the latter gauging the local Lorentz group, while the Vierbeine

remain as covariant, additional variables.

However, if we put aside the issue of gravitational dynamics and focus only on the grav-

itational ﬁeld variables, we can ﬁnd many (notational) analogies to gauge ﬁelds. These

analogies are useful for motivating and constructing gravitational counterparts to gauge the-

oretic entities. Correspondingly, aspects of general relativity can inform topics in gauge

theory.

formulas.

Here I shall provide a dictionary between gauge theoretic and general relativistic variables,

and then use the relationship between them for further constructions both in general rel-

ativity and gauge theory.

It is likely that the gravity-gauge theory connection described

here is familiar to some (for example Bardeen and Zumino [33]) but I know of no text book

discussion. Thus I hope that my presentation will lead to wider appreciation of these useful

A. Christoﬀel connection as a gauge potential

Consider the Christoﬀel connection Γµ

αν (in any dimension d) and view it as the (µ, ν) com-

ponent of a gauge potential matrix.

Γµ

αν = (

Aα)µ

ν

All quantities are functions of the d-dimensional coordinate xµ. Next consider a new coordi-

nate system ¯xµ(x). The conventional formula relating the connection in the new coordinate
system, ¯Γµ

αν, to that in the original coordinates is of course familiar. [34] For our purposes,

observe that the transformation formula can be presented with the deﬁnition (4.A.1) as

( ¯
Aα(¯x))µ

ν =

(
(cid:26)

U

−1)µ

ρ(

Aβ(x))ρ
σ(

U

)σ

ν + (

−1)µ
σ

U

∂
∂xβ (

U

)σ

ν(cid:27)

∂xβ
∂ ¯xα

where

(4.A.1)

(4.A.2)

(4.A.3)

)µ

ν =

(

U

∂xµ
∂ ¯xν

−1)ν

µ =

,

(

U

∂ ¯xν
∂xµ

16

Thus we see that the matrix ﬁeld

undergoes a gauge transformation by the gauge function

Aβ(x) transforms by ∂xβ
U

∂ ¯xα in its vector index, and also
in its matrix indices. In matrix

notation

¯
Aα(¯x) =
were arbitrary, we would conclude from (4.A.4) that

∂xβ U(cid:27)
Aα is a connection for the GL(d, R)
group. But the requirement that Christoﬀel connections be symmetric in their lower indices

Aβ(x)

(4.A.4)

(cid:26)U

+

If

U

U

U

−1

−1 ∂

∂xβ
∂ ¯xα

(no torsion) is met only for

in the form (4.A.3). (Here and below gauge equivalents to

U

geometrical objects are denoted by scripted letters. Coordinate covariant derivatives acting

on geometrical quantities are denoted by D; in corresponding formulas where the derivative

acts on gauge theory variables we use as before

.)

D

The Christoﬀel connection’s notational analogy to a gauge potential continues for covariant

derivatives. A contravariant vector behaves as a left-transforming group object.

DαV µ = ∂αV µ + Γµ

ανV ν = ∂αV µ + (

Aα)µ

νV ν

∼ DαVL

(4.A.5a)

while a covariant vector is right-transforming.

DαVµ = ∂αVµ −

Γν
αµ Vν = ∂αVµ −

Vν(

Aα)ν

µ ∼ DαVR

(4.A.5b)

Thus a mixed, second rank tensor is a matrix transforming in the adjoint representation.

DαV µ

ν = ∂αV µ

ν + Γµ

ανV ν
Γσ

σ

ασV σ
Aα)µ
Aα,

V

ν −
σV σ

ADJ]

V µ

σ(

Aα)σ

ν

ν −

∼ DαV

ADJ

= ∂αV µ

ν + (

ADJ + [

∂αV

∼

(4.A.5c)

The conventional formula in terms of Christoﬀel connections for the Riemann curvature

tensor translates to the gauge ﬁeld strength.

Rµ

ν αβ (Γ) = (

Fαβ)µ

ν = ∂α(

Aβ)µ

ν −

∂β(

Aα)µ

ν + [

Aα,

Aβ]µ

ν

(4.A.6)

The Bianchi identity for the curvature and commutators of covariant derivatives also trans-

late freely.

17

Another useful formula relates the above to the Vielbeine ea

µ and spin connections ωa

αb.

Beginning with

we contract with the Vielbein inverse eσ

µ −
a to ﬁnd

Dα ea

µ = ∂αea

αµ ea
Γν

ν + ωa

αb eb

µ = 0,

(4.A.7a)

Γσ
αµ = eσ

a ωa

αbeb

µ + eσ

a∂αea
µ.

(4.A.7b)

Thus upon deﬁning a matrix

with indices (a, µ)

E

and viewing ωa

αb as a matrix gauge potential with indices (a, b)

Eq. (4.A.7) reads, in matrix notation,

)a

µ = ea
µ,

(

E

(

E

−1)σ

a = eσ
a,

αb = (Aα)a
ωa
b,

Aα =

−1 Aα E

E

+

−1∂α E

.

E

(4.A.8)

(4.A.9)

(4.A.10)

We see that the spin connection and the Christoﬀel connection are gauge equivalent, with

the Vielbein taking the role of the gauge transformation function. This has the consequence

that (gauge) covariant quantities (like the Riemann tensor) can be constructed either with

Christoﬀel or spin connections, and the two expressions are related by the covariant gauge

transformation (

) built from the Vielbein. Thus for example,

−1...

E

E

Rµ

ναβ(Γ) = eµ

a Ra

bαβ (ω)eb
ν

(4.A.11)

bαβ (ω) is the Riemann curvature constructed in a familiar way from the spin con-

where Ra

nection.

I have not been able to extend the gauge analogy any further. Quantities arising in gravita-

tional dynamics – the Ricci tensor and scalar – involve contracting “space-time” indices with

“gauge” indices. This requires using the metric tensor or the Vielbeine (recall gαβ = ea

α eb

β ηab).

But the former is not present in the gauge formalism, while the latter plays the role of “gauge”

transformation functions, see (4.A.8)-(4.A.11). Nevertheless, even the limited analogy can

be put to good use.

18

B. Gravitational Chern-Simons term from gauge theory Chern-

Simons term

We know how to construct a gauge theoretic Chern-Simons term in three dimensions. Using

the gravity-gauge theory dictionary, speciﬁcally (1.9) and (4.A.1), leads immediately to the

formula for the gravitational Chern-Simons term appropriate either to (2+1)-dimensional

space-time or to 3-dimensional space. [24]

W (Γ) =

d3x εαβγ

αν∂β Γν
Γµ

γµ +

ανΓν
Γµ

βωΓω

(4.B.1)

1
4π2 Z

1
2

(cid:18)

1
3

γµ(cid:19)

) transforms according to (4.A.2)/(4.A.4). There-

Under coordinate transformations, Γ(

∼ A
fore from (1.11) and (1.12) it follows that

W (¯Γ) = W (Γ)

1
24π2 Z

−

d3x εαβγ <

−1∂α U U

−1∂β U U

−1 ∂γU

U

>,

(4.B.2)

where

is the coordinate transformation matrix (4.A.3) and the last term in (4.B.2) is its

U

winding number. We can restrict these transformations to be suﬃciently well-behaved so

that there is no winding. Then W (Γ) is a coordinate invariant.

The Christoﬀel connection is constructed from the metric tensor gµν. An interesting geo-

metrical quantity emerges when W (Γ) is varied with respect to gµν. This is carried out in

two steps: ﬁrst vary (4.B.1) with respect to Γ, and use (1.10a) (in tensor rotation) as well

as the dictionary (4.A.1) and (4.A.6). Then vary Γ according to

δΓµ

αν =

gµσ
2 (cid:18)

Dαδgσν + Dνδgσα −

.
Dσδgαν(cid:19)

Partial integration and the Bianchi identity leave

δW (Γ)

1
4π2 Z

≡ −

d3xδgµν √g C µν,

where C µν, called the Cotton tensor, reads

C µν is like a covariant curl of the Ricci tensor Rν

β one can equivalently

write in (4.B.5) the Einstein tensor Gν

C µν =

1
2√g

(εµαβDαRν

β + εναβDαRµ

β).

β = Rµν
µβ. [Instead of Rν
2 δν
β Rµ
µ.]

1

Rν

β −

β ≡

19

(4.B.3)

(4.B.4)

(4.B.5)

C µν is obviously symmetric and traceless. Because it arises from the variation of the invariant

W (Γ), C µν is also covariantly conserved, as can be veriﬁed explicitly.

The role of C µν in 3-dimensional geometry is the following. In four or more dimensions there

exists the Weyl tensor, which functions in two ways. It is the non-Ricci part of the Riemann

tensor; also it serves as a template for conformal ﬂatness: vanishing if and only if the space

is conformally ﬂat. In three dimensions the Riemann tensor only has a Ricci part; the Weyl

tensor is absent. [That is why in 3-dimensional Einstein theory there is no curvature external

to matter sources, and there are no propagating excitations.]

In the absence of the 3-dimensional Weyl tensor, C µν replaces it as the conformal template,

vanishing if and only if space-time is conformally ﬂat. While these geometric properties

of C µν are ancient knowledge, the fact that it arises from varying the gravitational Chern-

Simons term was a new discovery, made possible by the gauge theory-gravity connection.

[24]

The gauge theory Chern-Simons term can be added to a 3-dimensional Yang-Mills theory,

giving rise to massive but gauge invariant excitations. So also the gravitational Chern-

Simons term can supplement 3-dimensional Einstein theory, where it has even more profound

consequences. It converts a theory with no propagating excitations into one with a massive

propagating mode, all the time maintaining diﬀeomorphism invariance! The equation of

motion with an energy-momentum tensor source reads

Gµν +

C µν =

8π GT µν.

−

1
4π2m

(4.B.6)

Since C µν is of one higher derivative order than Gµν, the strength parameter m has dimension

of mass, and m is also the mass of the propagating degree of freedom in the linearized theory.

Thus in the Einstein limit, cooresponding to m

, the massive excitation decouples

→ ∞

leaving non-propagating degrees of freedom. The quantum theory is well behaved, in spite

of the higher derivatives in C µν. Unlike in the gauge theory, coupling constant quantization is

not needed, because the gravitational Chern-Simons term is invariant against (well behaved)

coordinate transformations.

20

The gravitational Chern-Simons term W (Γ) may also be presented in terms of the spin

connection W (ω). From (1.11), (4.A.7b)/(4.A.10) and (4.B.1) follows

W (Γ) = W (ω)

1

−

24π2 Z

d3xεαβγ <

−1 ∂α E E

−1 ∂β E E

−1∂γ E

E

> .

(4.B.7)

Although the second term, being the winding number of

, does not contribute to the equa-

E

tions of motion, it should not be dropped; otherwise confusion arises: W (ω) in Minkowski

space is a Chern-Simons term based on the local Lorentz group SO(2.1), which does not

support gauge transformations with non-zero winding; W (ω) is SO(2.1) invariant. However,

it is usually belived that ﬁeld theory may be analytically continued to Euclidean space.

In that case W (ω) is the Chern-Simons term for SO(3) and this does possess non-trivial

windings. So it is diﬃcult to understand how W (ω) could function in a quantum theory:

with Lorentzian signature its coeﬃcent can be arbitrary, with Euclidean signature it must

be quantized! Which should it be?

Fortunately we need not answer this question, because W (ω) does not stand alone: It is

supplemented by the last term in (4.B.7) whose response to Euclidean rotations must cancel

any non-invariance of W (ω), because together they equal W (Γ), which does not feel local

rotations.

Similarly to the work by Carroll et al. on Chern-Simons extended electromagnetism, Pi

and I added the gravitational Chern-Simons term to 4-dimensional Einstein relativity. [35]

Linearized analysis indicates that, contrary to the electromagnetic case, wave propagation

is not aﬀected. Another noteworthy feature is that vacuum space-times, which satisfy the

1

modiﬁed equations, necessarily possess vanishing gravitational Chern-Pontryagin density,
2 εαβγδRµ
but Kerr space-time becomes modiﬁed.

µγδ = 0. Correspondingly, the Schwarzschild space-time remains a solution,

ναβRν

21

C. Coordinate transformations in general relativity and

gauge theory

(i) Response to changes in coordinates

In general, ﬁelds respond to an inﬁnitesimal coordinate transformation, generated by the

vector f , through the Lie derivative Lf with respect to f .

δf xµ =

f µ(x)

−

δf (ﬁeld) = Lf (ﬁeld)

(4.C.1)

(4.C.2)

Lf involves ordinary derivatives; for example for a covariant vector the action of Lf is

δf Vα = Lf Vα = f µ ∂µ Vα + ∂α f µ Vµ

(4.C.3a)

while a contravariant vector responds by

δf V α = Lf V α = f µ ∂µ V α

∂µ f α V µ

−

(4.C.3b)

Moreover, when the space possesses a metric structure Lie derivatives of covariant objects

(scalars, vectors, tensors etc.) remain covariant; i.e replacing ordinary derivatives by coor-

dinate covariant derivatives produces no change in the formulas.

This is not true in gauge theories. For example the Lie derivative of the ﬁeld strength

Lf Fαβ = f µ∂µ Fαβ + ∂α f µ Fµβ + ∂β f µ Fαµ

(4.C.4)

is not gauge covariant because the derivative acting on Fαβ is not gauge covariant. Similarly,

the Lie derivative of a vector potential, which follows formulas (4.C.3) (V

A) is not gauge

→

covariant. Consequently coordinate transformations in a gauge theory, implemented by Lie

derivatives, loose gauge covariance.

We now ask: Is it possible to modify the implementation of coordinate transformations in

gauge theories so that gauge covariance is preserved? The positive answer that I gave [36]

draws on notational analogies between gauge and gravity ﬁelds.

22

Let us record the gravity formulas. Under (4.C.1) and (4.C.2) the metric tensor transforms

as

δf gµν = Lf gµν = f α ∂α gµν + ∂µ f α gαν + ∂ν f αgµα = Dµfν + Dνfµ

(4.C.5)

The last equality follows from the previous when ordinary derivatives are replaced by covari-

ant derivatives, which also annihilate gµν. With (4.C.5) we ﬁnd the response of the Christoﬀel

connection from (4.B.3),

and furthermore

δf Γµ

αν = f β Rµ

νβα + Dα(Dν f µ)

δf Rµ

ναβ = Dαδ Γµ

Dβδ Γµ

αν = Lf Rµ

ναβ.

βν −

Both (4.C.6) and (4) exhibit a coordinate covariant response.

When we consider the gauge theoretic analog to (4.C.6), we expect to ﬁnd that the coordinate

transformation of the covariant vector potential, i.e. its Lie derivative, can be presented

analogously to (4.C.6) as the sum of two terms: a projection on the ﬁeld strength and a

total derivative. This is indeed the case, as is readily established by adding and subtracting
suitable terms in (4.C.3a) (Vα →

Aα).

δf Aα = f µ(∂µ Aα −
+ f µ(∂α Aµ −
= f µ Fµα +

∂α Aµ + [Aµ, Aα])

[Aµ, Aα]) + ∂α f µ Aµ

Dα(f µ Aµ)

(4.C.6)

(4.C.7)

(4.C.8)

It is the last term in (4.C.8) that spoils gauge covariance. We recognize it as an inﬁnitesimal

gauge transformation with gauge function of f µ Aµ. But in a gauge theory, gauge transfor-

mations can be performed at will. We use this freedom to redeﬁne the response of gauge

variables by supplementing the Lie derivatives with the gauge transformation that removes

the last term in (4.C.8). Thus the modiﬁed, but gauge equivalent response reads

¯δf Aα = f βFβα

(4.C.9)

and (4.C.9) has the consequence that

¯δf Fαβ =

Dα ¯δf Aβ − Dβ ¯δf Aα

= f µ

Dµ Fαβ + ∂α f µ Fµβ + ∂βf µFαµ

(4.C.10)

23

This is gauge covariant and diﬀers from the usual formula (4.C.4) by a gauge transformation

of Fαβ generated by f µAµ. We may view (4.C.10) as deﬁning a gauge covariant Lie derivative.

We thus achieve the goal of describing coordinate transformation of gauge ﬁelds in a gauge

covariant manner, with a gauge covariant Lie derivative. But there is a price to pay: The

gauge covariant Lie derivatives follow a closure rule that diﬀers from conventional Lie deriva-

tives. The commutator of two gauge covariant Lie derivatives, with respect to two vectors,

f and g, closes on the gauge covariant Lie derivative with respect to the Lie bracket of f

and g plus a gauge transformation generated by f α gβFαβ.

(ii) Invariant ﬁelds and constants of motion

To determine whether a generic ﬁeld is invariant against a coordinate transformation gener-

ated by f , we check whether its Lie derivative annihilates φ.

Lf φ = 0

(invariant ﬁeld φ)

⇒

(4.C.11)

For the metric tensor this is the statement of the Killing equation, see (4.C.5).

δf gµν = Lf gµν = Dµ fν + Dν fµ = 0

(4.C.12)

From (4.C.6) and (4.C.7) immediately follow well known conditions on Killing vectors. [37]

f β Rµ

νβα =

Dα(Dνf µ)

−
Lf Rµ

ναβ = 0

(4.C.13)

(4.C.14)

But in a gauge theory a condition weaker than (4.C.11) is appropriate: A coordinate invariant

conﬁguration in a gauge theory need not be annihilated by the Lie derivative, rather a gauge

transformation may survive.

In other words, a gauge ﬁeld conﬁguration should still be

considered as invariant, if any non invariance can be compensated by a gauge transformation.

Applying this condition to the gauge covariant transformation law (4.C.9), there emerges a

gauge covariant criterion for an invariant gauge ﬁeld conﬁgurations.

f βFβα =

DαΦf ⇒

invariant gauge ﬁeld Fαβ

(4.C.15)

24

Here Φf is an unspeciﬁed quantity, linear in f . This is the gauge theoretic analog to (4.C.13),

except that in the gravity formula the quantity corresponding to Φf is speciﬁed explicitly as

Dν f µ.

−

Manton and I showed that Φf generates the gauge transformation needed to compensate any

coordinate asymmetry in an invariant gauge ﬁeld conﬁguration. Therefore Φf also contributes

to the conserved constant of motion, which characterizes motion in the presence of such an

invariant gauge ﬁeld. [38]

This is the origin of the celebrated addition to the angular momentum in the ﬁeld of a

Dirac magnetic monopole: The conserved angular momentum comprises the kinematical

angular momentum supplemented by the radial unit vector, which is also present in (4.C.15),

when Fβα is the magnetic monopole ﬁeld and f generates spatial rotations around the axis

a : f µ = (0, r

a), then Φf = ˆr

a Similarly, the ‘tHooft-Polyakov magnetic monopole

×

·

is spherically symmetric up to an isospin gauge transformation. The angular momentum

constant of motion therefore acquires an isospin component T in addition to the kinematical

angular momentum L.

J = L + T

(4.C.16)

This is the origin of the previously mentioned conversion of isospin to spin.

References

[1] C.-N. Yang and R.L. Mills, “Conservation of Isotopic Spin and Isotopic Gauge

Invariance” Phys. Rev. 96, 191 (1954).

[2] G. ‘tHooft, “ The Renomalization Procedure for Yang-Mills Fields”, Ph.D Thesis,

Utrecht University (1972); G. ‘tHooft and M. Veltman, “Regularization and

Renormalization of Gauge Fields” Nucl Phys. B44, 189 (1972).

[3] J.S. Bell and R. Jackiw, “A PCAC Puzzle: π0

2γ in the σ-model” Nuovo Cim.

A60, 47 (1969).

→

25

[4] H. Fukuda and Y Miyamoto, “On the γ-Decay of Neutral Meson” Prog. Theoret.

Phys. 4, 347 (1949); J. Steinberger, “On the Use of Subtraction Fields and the

Lifetimes of some Types of Meson Decay” Phys. Rev. 76, 1180 (1949); J. Schwinger,

“Gauge Invariance and Vacuum Polarization” Phys. Rev. 82, 664 (1951); S. Adler,

“Axial Vector Vertex in Spinor Electrodynamics” Phys. Rev. 177, 2426 (1969).

[5] D. Sutherland, “Current Algebra and some Nonstrong Mesonic Decays” Nucl. Phys.

B2, 433 (1967); M. Veltman, “Theoretical Aspects of High Energy Neutrino

Interactions” Proc. Roy. Soc. London A 301, 107 (1967).

[6] D. Gross and R. Jackiw, “Eﬀect of Anomalies on Quasirenormalizable Theories” Phys.

Rev. D 6, 477 (1972).

[7] C. Bouchiat, J. Iliopoulos and P. Meyer, “An Anomaly free Version of Weinberg’s

Model” Phys. Lett. B38, 519 (1972).

[8] A. Belavin, A. Polyakov, A. Schwartz and Y. Tyupkin, “Pseudoparticle Solutions of

the Yang-Mills Equations” Phys. Lett. B59, 85 (1975).

[9] G. ‘tHooft, “Symmetry Breaking Through Bell-Jackiw Anomalies” Phys. Rev. Lett.

37, 8 (1976).

Phys. Rev. Lett. 37, 172 (1976).

Phys. Lett. B63, 334 (1976).

Rev D 14, 517 (1976).

67, 189 (1977).

[10] R. Jackiw and C. Rebbi, “Vacuum Periodicity in a Yang-Mills Quantum Theory”

[11] C. Callan, R. Dashen and D. Gross, “The Structure of the Gauge Theory Vacuum”

[12] R. Jackiw and C. Rebbi, “Conformal Properties of a Yang-Mills Pseudoparticle” Phys.

[13] R. Jackiw and C. Rebbi, “Degrees of Freedom in Pseudoparticle Systems” Phys. Lett.

26

[14] A. Schwartz, “On Regular Solutions of Euclidean Yang-Mills Equations” Phys. Lett.

67B, 172 (1977); M. Atiyah, N.Hitchin and I. Singer, “Deformations of Instantons”

Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 74, 2662 (1977).

[15] R. Jackiw, C. Nohl and C. Rebbi, “Conformal Properties of Pseudoparticle

Conﬁgurations” Phys. Rev. D 15, 1642 (1977).

[16] M. Aityah, N. Hitchen, V. Drinfeld and Y. Manin, “Construction of Instantons” Phys.

Lett. A65, 185 (1978).

[17] R. Jackiw and C. Rebbi, “Spinor Analysis of Yang-Mills Theory” Phys. Rev. D 16,

1052 (1977).

(1974)].

1116 (1976).

[18] G. ‘tHooft, “Magnetic Monopoles in Uniﬁed Gauge Theories” Nucl. Phys. 79, 276

(1974); A. Polyakov, “Particle Spectrum in the Quantum Field Theory” Zh. Eksp.

Teor. Fiz. Pis’ ma Red. 20, 430 (1974) [English translation: JETP Lett. 20, 430

[19] R. Jackiw and C. Rebbi, “Spin from Isospin in a Gauge Theory” Phys. Rev. Lett. 36,

[20] P. Hasenfratz and G. ‘tHooft, “A Fermion-Boson Puzzle in a Gauge Theory” Phys.

Rev. Lett. 36, 1119 (1976).

[21] R. Jackiw and C. Rebbi, “Solitons with Fermion Number 1

2 ” Phys. Rev. D 13, 3398

(1976); R. Jackiw and J. R. Schrieﬀer, “Solitons with Fermion Number 1

2 in

Condensed Matter and Relativistic Field Theories” Nucl. Phys. B190, 253 (1981).

[22] C. Callias, “Index Theorems on Open Spaces” Commun. Math. Phys. 62, 213 (1978);

R. Bott and R. Seeley, “Some Remarks on the Paper of Callias” Commun. Math.

Phys. 62, 245 (1978).

[23] R. Jackiw, “The Yang-Mills Vacuum as a Bloch Wave” APS Spring Meeting,

Washington D.C. (1977); reprinted in R. Jackiw, Diverse Topics in Theoretical and

Mathematical Physics (World Scientiﬁc, Singapore, 1995).

27

[24] S. Deser, R. Jackiw and S. Templeton, “ Three Dimensional Massive Gauge Theories”

Phys. Rev. Lett. 48, 975 (1982); “Topologically Massive Gauge Theories” Ann. Phys.

140, 372 (1982), (E) 185, 406 (1988).

[25] R. Jackiw and E Weinberg, “Self-Dual Chern-Simons Vortices” Phys. Rev. Lett. 64,

2234 (1990).

[26] J. Hong, Y. Kim and P.-Y. Pac, “Multivortex Solitons of the Abelian

Chern-Simons-Higgs Theory” Phys. Rev. Lett. 64 2330 (1990).

[27] R. Jackiw and S.-Y. Pi, “Soliton Solutions to the Gauged Nonlinear Schr¨odinger

Equation on the Plane” Phys. Rev. Lett. 64, 2969 (1990).

[28] For reviews see R. Jackiw and S.-Y. Pi, “Self-Dual Chern-Simons Solitons” Prog.

Theor. Phys. (Kyoto) Suppl. 107, 1 (1992); G. Dunne “Self-Dual Chern-Simons

Theories” Lecture Notes in Physics m36 (Springer, Berlin, 1995).

[29] N. Redlich, “Gauge Noninvariance and Parity Violation of Three-Dimensional

Fermions” Phys. Rev. Lett. 52, 18 (1984).

[30] B. Holstein, “Anomalies for Pedestrians” Am. J. Phys. 61, 142 (1993).

[31] S. Coleman and R. Jackiw, “Why Dilatation Generators do not Generate

Dilatations?” Ann. Phys. 67, 552 (1971).

[32] S. Carroll, G. Field and R. Jackiw, “Limits on a Lorentz and Parity Violating

Modiﬁcation of Electrodynamics” Phys. Rev. D 41, 1231 (1990); S. Carroll and G.

Field, “Is there Evidence for Cosmic Anisotropy in the Polarization of Distant

Galaxies?” Phys. Rev. Lett. 79, 2394 (1997).

[33] W. Bardeen and B. Zumino, “Consistent and Covariant Anomalies in Gauge and

Gravitational Theories” Nucl. Phys. B244, 421 (1984).

[34] Our deﬁnitions and conventions for geometrical entities follow S. Weinberg,

Gravitation and Cosmology (Wiley, New York NY, 1972), except that our Riemann

tensor is the negative of his, as is our Lorentzian metric tensor.

28

[35] R. Jackiw and S.-Y. Pi, “Chern-Simons Modiﬁcation of Gravity” Phys. Rev. D 68,

104012 (2003).

[36] R. Jackiw, “Gauge Covariant Conformal Transformations” Phys. Rev. Lett. 41, 1635

(1978); “Invariance, Symmetry and Periodicity in Gauge Theories” Acta Phys. Austr.

Suppl. XXII, 383 (1980), reprinted in R. Jackiw, Diverse Topics in Theoretical and

Mathematical Physics (World Scientiﬁc, Singapore 1995).

[37] Formula (4.C.14) is equivalent to the inchoate (13.1.12) in Weinberg [34].

[38] R. Jackiw and N. Manton, “Symmetries and Conservation Laws in Gauge Theories”

Ann. Phys. 127, 257 (1980).

29

