4
0
0
2
 
y
a
M
 
6
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
t
s
i
h
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
2
4
1
5
0
4
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Field equations in teleparallel spacetime:
Einstein’s Fernparallelismus approach towards
uniﬁed ﬁeld theory.

Tilman Sauer

Einstein Papers Project
California Institute of Technology 20-7
Pasadena, CA 91125, USA

Abstract

A historical account of Einstein’s Fernparallelismus approach towards a uniﬁed
ﬁeld theory of gravitation and electromagnetism is given. In this theory, a space-
time characterized by a curvature-free connection in conjunction with a metric ten-
sor ﬁeld, both deﬁned in terms of a dynamical tetrad ﬁeld, is investigated. The
approach was pursued by Einstein in a number of publications that appeared in
the period from summer 1928 until spring 1931. In the historical analysis special
attention is given to the question of how Einstein tried to ﬁnd ﬁeld equations for the
tetrads. We claim that it was the failure to ﬁnd and justify a uniquely determined
set of acceptable ﬁeld equations which eventually led to Einstein’s abandoning of
this approach. We comment on some historical and systematic similarities between
the Fernparallelismus episode and the Entwurf theory, i.e. the precursor theory of
general relativity pursued by Einstein in the years 1912–1915.

Key words:
uniﬁed ﬁeld theory, teleparallelism, history of general relativity
0.1.65.+g, 04.50.+h, 12.10.-g

1 Introduction

Einstein’s attempt to base a uniﬁed theory of the gravitational and electro-
magnetical ﬁelds on the mathematical structure of distant parallelism, also
referred to as absolute or teleparallelism, 1 is an episode that lasted for three

Email address: tilman@einstein.caltech.edu (Tilman Sauer).

1 In this paper, these terms will be used interchangeably.

years, from summer 1928 until spring 1931. The crucial new concept, for Ein-
stein, that initiated the approach was the introduction of the tetrad ﬁeld, i.e.
a ﬁeld of orthonormal bases of the tangent spaces at each point of the four-
dimensional manifold. The tetrad ﬁeld was introduced to allow the distant
comparison of the direction of tangent vectors at diﬀerent points of the man-
ifold, hence the name distant parallelism. From the point of view of a uniﬁed
theory, the speciﬁcation of the four tetrad vectors at each point involves the
speciﬁcation of sixteen components instead of only ten for the symmetric met-
ric tensor. The idea then was to exploit the additional degrees of freedom to
accommodate the electromagnetic ﬁeld. Mathematically, the tetrad ﬁeld easily
allows the conceptualization of more general linear aﬃne connections, in par-
ticular, non-symmetric connections of vanishing curvature but non-vanishing
torsion. Since, however, Einstein wanted to combine a curvature-free connec-
tion with a non-trivial metric the resulting structure actually involves two
diﬀerent connections and a certain ambiguity was inherent in their interpre-
tation.

The published record of the distant parallelism episode comprises eight pa-
pers in the Sitzungsberichte of the Prussian Academy, at the time Einstein’s
major forum for publication of scientiﬁc results. A review paper on the the-
ory appeared in the Mathematische Annalen, a leading mathematics journal
in an issue together with a historical essay on the subject matter by Elie
Cartan. The theory of distant parallelism is also touched upon in popular ar-
ticles by Einstein for the New York and London Times. Attempts to place his
new attempt into a larger tradition of ﬁeld theoretic attempts in the history
of physics are made in a contribution to a Festschrift for Aurel Stodola and
in three popular papers on the Raum-, Feld-, und ¨Ather-Problem in physics.
Two of the papers, including the very last one, were coauthored with Walter
Mayer, Einstein’s mathematical collaborator. The episode is, of course, also
reﬂected in Einstein’s contemporary correspondence, notably with Herman
M¨untz, Roland Weitzenb¨ock, Cornelius Lanczos, Elie Cartan, and Walther
Mayer. For most of the published papers manuscript versions are extant in
the Einstein Archives and there are also a number of unidentiﬁed and undated
research calculations that are related to the distant parallelism approach. 2

As far as Einstein was involved in it, the Fernparallelismus approach has a dis-
tinct beginning, a period of intense investigation, and a somewhat less distinct
but deﬁnite end. The mathematical structure in question had been developed
before by others, notably by Elie Cartan and Roland Weitzenboeck, in other,
purely mathematical contexts. 3 Einstein’s pursuit of the approach also trig-

2 See especially the documents with archive numbers 62-001ﬀ. A thorough investi-
gation of the unpublished correspondence and scientiﬁc manuscripts remains to be
done. In this paper, I will largely rely on the published record of the episode.
3 I would like to emphasize that I will refrain from any claims regarding questions of
mathematical priority with respect to the concepts of diﬀerential geometry relevant

2

gered a more general discussion that involved quite a few other contemporary
physicists and mathematicians, 4 and it continued to be investigated by others
even when Einstein no longer took active part in these discussions. Even today,
teleparallelism is occasionally discussed, e.g. as a rather special case in a more
general conceptual framework of a metric-aﬃne gauge theory of gravity. 5

In this paper, a historical account of the Fernparallelismus approach is given
as an episode in Einstein’s intellectual life. 6 The account will largely be orga-
nized chronologically and give the relevant biographical data, as it were, of the
life cycle of this approach, as far as Einstein is concerned. The infancy of the
approach, sec. 2, is given by Einstein’s ﬁrst two notes on distant parallelism
which lay out the mathematical structure and give a ﬁrst derivation of a set of
ﬁeld equations. I will give a brief characterization of the approach in modern
terms in sec. 2.1 and discuss Einstein’s ﬁrst notes in sec. 2.2. In its early child-
hood, Einstein entered into interaction with mathematicians and learnt about
earlier pertinent developments in mathematics , sec. 3. I will brieﬂy comment
on his correspondence with Herman M¨untz, sec. 3.1, and Roland Weitzenb¨ock,
sec. 3.2, as well as on his collaboration with Jakob Grommer and Cornelius
Lanczos, sec. 3.3. The period of adolescence is primarily concerned with the
problem of ﬁnding ﬁeld equations, sec. 4. I ﬁrst discuss the publication context
of Einstein’s next papers in sec. 4.1 and then focus on his attempts to ﬁnd
and justify a set of ﬁeld equations in sec. 4.2. Einstein here wavered between
a variational approach, sec. 4.2.1, and an approach where ﬁeld equations were
determined utilizing algebraic identities for an overdetermination of the equa-
tions, sec. 4.3. The mature stage is reached when Einstein settled on a set of
ﬁeld equations and wrote an overview of the theory published in the Mathema-
tische Annalen, sec. 5. I will ﬁrst give an account of the publication history of
this paper which is intimately linked with Einstein’s correspondence with Elie
Cartan, sec. 5.1, and then discuss the derivation of the ﬁeld equations, sec. 5.2.
In its old age, sec. 6, Einstein improved on the compatibility proof, sec. 6.1,
promoted the theory in public and defended it against criticism, sec. 6.2, and
explored its consequences, sec. 6.3. The last sign of life is a paper that system-
atically investigated compatible ﬁeld equations in a teleparallel space-time,
sec. 6.4.

for the episode.
4 See [Goldstein and Ritter 2003, pp. 120ﬀ.].
5 See, e.g. [Gronwald 1997], esp. pp. 295ﬀ; see also [Hehl et al. 1980] which list a
number of references that have taken up the distant parallelism approach over time
on p. 341.
6 For earlier historical discussions of
see
[Treder1971, pp. 60–67], [Pais 1982, pp. 344–347], [Biezunski 1989], [Vizgin 1994,
pp. 234–257], [Goldstein and Ritter 2003, pp. 120–133], [van Dongen 2002, pp. 57–
58], [Goenner forthcoming, sec. 4.3.3]. See also [Goenner 2004, sec. 6.4.], which was
published after submission of this paper.

the Fernparallelismus approach,

3

The life cycle of the distant parallelism approach bears a number of striking
similarities to the life cycle of the Entwurf theory, i.e. the precursor theory of
general relativity advanced and pursued by Einstein between 1912 and 1915
and presented ﬁrst in an Outline (“Entwurf”) of a Generalized Theory of Rel-
ativity and a Theory of Gravitation in 1913 [Einstein and Grossmann 1913].
Some of these similarities between the history of the Fernparallelismus ap-
proach and the Entwurf theory will be pointed out along the way. They are, I
believe, no coincidence. I will oﬀer some reﬂections on the systematic reason
for this similarity in the concluding remarks in sec. 7.

2 Einstein’s distant parallelism as a mathematical structure

Before entering into the discussion of the historical material, the mathematical
framework of Einstein’s distant parallelism shall here roughly be characterized
in modern terms. I will then discuss Einstein’s ﬁrst two notes on the subject.

2.1 Modern characterization

The basic ingredients are a bare diﬀerentiable manifold, a curvature-free con-
nection that allows to deﬁne a frame ﬁeld on the tangent bundle, and the
demand of global SO(n − 1, 1)-symmetry that allows to deﬁne a metric ten-
sor ﬁeld in a meaningful way. Naturally, a coordinate-free characterization
raises issues of global existence and similar concerns which, however, I will
not discuss here.

Step 0. The starting point is an n-dimensional real, diﬀerentiable, C ∞-
manifold M just as in any modern account of the mathematical structure
of general relativity, i.e. if needed one might specify it as paracompact, Hauss-
dorﬀ, etc.

Step 1. Let ϑa be frame ﬁeld on M, i.e. a set of n linearly independent,
diﬀerentiable vector ﬁelds or, in other words, a cross section of the frame
bundle. Such a frame ﬁeld may not exist globally. If that is the case, we restrict
ourselves to a parallelizable subset of M. At this point, ϑa is not speciﬁed. It
will be obtained later as a solution to some set of ﬁeld equations.

We now introduce a a connection, i.e. a gl(R, n)-valued one-form ωa
b on the
tangent bundle T M that is compatible with ϑa, in the sense that the associated

4

parallel transport is realized by the ﬁeld ϑa, i.e. the covariant derivative of the
frame vectors vanishes.

This condition determines the connection uniquely. By patching together in-
formation from diﬀerent coordinate charts, it can also be deﬁned globally,
even if a global frame ﬁeld does not exist. Without historical prejudice, we
shall call the connection the Weitzenb¨ock connection. The curvature form
Oa
b + ωa
for this connection vanishes Oa
b ≡ 0. Its torsion two-
form Ωa = dϑa − ϑm ∧ ωm
a , however, does not vanish in general. Conversely, a
Weitzenb¨ock connection ωa
b does not uniquely determine a frame ﬁeld ϑa. The
frame ﬁeld is only determined up to a global GL(R, n)-transformation.

b = dωa

m ∧ ωm
b

The global GL(R, n)-symmetry can also be seen like this. Given a Weitzenb¨ock
connection over M and a local frame at a single point p ∈ M, we can parallel
transport the frame over the tangent bundle and construct a frame ﬁeld ϑa.
Obviously, we could start with any linearly independent set of vectors in TpM
and would obtain diﬀerent frame ﬁelds for each such frame in TpM which are
equivalent up to global Lorentz rotations.

Step 2. Given the frame ﬁeld, we can now deﬁne a metric by conceiving
of the frame ﬁeld as an orthonormal vector ﬁeld. To be speciﬁc, we will now
assume the manifold to be of dimension n = 4. We would then obtain a metric
tensor ﬁeld by

g = oabϑaϑb.

(1)

where

oab = diag(−1, −1, −1, +1).
(2)
The deﬁnition of the metric reduces the global GL(R, 4)-symmetry to a global
SO(3, 1)-symmetry. This symmetry requirement deﬁnes Einstein’s version of
distant parallelism. Any frame ﬁeld ϑa uniquely deﬁnes a metric tensor ﬁeld.
The converse is not true, since a metric tensor ﬁeld is determined by n(n+1)/2
components, whereas a set of n linear independent vectors is deﬁned by n2
components. In n = 4 dimensions, the metric tensor determines 10 of the 16
components leaving 6 components undetermined. This is just the amount of
freedom needed to accommodate the electromagnetic ﬁeld in the theory.

The existence of a metric tensor ﬁeld on M allows the deﬁnition of a second,
uniquely deﬁned, metric compatible connection, i.e. the usual Levi-Civita con-
nection. Its torsion two-form vanishes while its curvature two-form in general
does not vanish. The curvature associated with the Levi-Civita connection
vanishes if and only if the Weitzenb¨ock torsion vanishes. 7

7 This relativizes Pais’s observation, that the distant parallelism approach was un-
usual for Einstein because “the most essential feature of the ‘old’ theory is lost
from the very outset: the existence of a nonvanishing curvature tensor.” [Pais 1982,

5

These then are the basic ingredients of Einstein’s distant parallelism: A cur-
vature free Weitzenb¨ock connection and the demand of global SO(n − 1, 1)-
symmetry. The Weitzenb¨ock connection deﬁnes a frame ﬁeld, and the global
rotation symmetry assures that the frame ﬁeld can determine a metric tensor
ﬁeld in a meaningful way. But since a given metric ﬁeld would not uniquely
determine a frame ﬁeld, Einstein had introduced a surplus structure which
he hoped to be able to exploit for setting up a uniﬁed ﬁeld theory of the
gravitational and electromagnetic ﬁelds.

In 1912, it was the metric tensor that opened up new possibilities for exploring
a generalized theory of relativity and a ﬁeld theory of gravitation. Similarly
new vistas had been opened by taking the concept of a (symmetric) connection
as the new basic mathematical ingredient. Now it was the introduction of a
tetrad ﬁeld that provided new possibilities as well as new constraints.

Since two distinct connections are involved in the structure, a certain ambigu-
ity is involved as to which connection is the physically meaningful one. But this
ambiguity may not become explicit in a uniﬁed theory, since no external mat-
ter ﬁelds are assumed for which one would have to decide which connection
should determine covariant diﬀerentiation. Also it has not been determined
how the electromagnetic ﬁeld is to be deﬁned in terms of the frame ﬁeld. Fi-
nally, in order to set up a physically meaningful structure the frame ﬁeld needs
to be determined by some set of ﬁeld equations.

2.2 Einstein’s ﬁrst two notes

The episode of Fernparallelismus, as far as Einstein is concerned, begins with
two rather short notes, 5 and 4 pages each, published within a week’s in-
terval in the Sitzungsberichte of the Prussian Academy. The ﬁrst note is en-
titled Riemannian geometry, maintaining the concept of distant parallelism
[Einstein 1928a] and was presented to the Academy on June 7, 1928.

Einstein at the time suﬀered from a serious illness of his heart. 8 He had
experienced a circulatory collapse in Switzerland in March. An enlargement
of the heart was diagnosed and, back in Berlin, he was ordered strict bed rest
as well as a salt-free diet and diuretics. At the end of May, he wrote to his
friend Zangger: “In the tranquility of my sickness, I have laid a wonderful egg
in the area of general relativity. Whether the bird that will hatch from it will
be vital and long-lived only the Gods know. So far I am blessing my sickness

p. 344]. This remark ignores the fact that more than one connection plays a role in
this theory.
8 For the following biographical information, see [F¨olsing 1997, pp. 600–607].

6

that has endowed me with it.” 9 Since he was feeling too weak to attend the
Academy meetings, his note was presented to the Academy by Max Planck.

The paper explains the notion of a tetrad ﬁeld (“n-Bein”-ﬁeld) and of distant
parallelism (“Fernparallelismus”) for a manifold of n-dimensions. The tetrad
ν of its vectors with respect to the
ﬁeld is introduced in terms of components hs
ν denotes the ν-component of the
naturally induced coordinate basis. Hence hs
vector s with respect to the local coordinate chart. Einstein uses greek letters
to denote the coordinate indices (“Koordinaten-Indizes”) and latin letters to
denote the tetrad indices (“Bein-Indizes”). In modern literature, these indices
are also referred to as holonomic resp. anholonomic. We have the relations

haµhaν = δν
µ,
µ = δab,
haµhb

(3)
(4)

(5)

where a summation over repeated indices is always implied. 10

Einstein emphasized that the tetrads deﬁne both the metric and the distant
parallelism simultaneously:

By means of the introduction of the n-Bein ﬁeld both the existence of a
Riemann-metric and the existence of the distant parallelism is expressed. 11

The components of the metric tensor gµν are given as

gµν = ha

µhaν.

By virtue of (5) coordinate indices are raised and lowered using the metric
gµν, whereas by (4) tetrad indices are raised and lowered using δab.

Parallel transport is deﬁned through the tetrads, in the sense that a vector
with components Aa at one point shall be parallel to a vector A′
a at another
point if the components with respect to the respective tetrads are the same.
The law of parallel transport is hence given by the condition

0 = dAa = d(haµAµ) = haµ,σAµdxσ + haµdAµ.

(6)

9 “Ich habe in der Ruhe der Krankheit ein wundervolles Ei gelegt auf dem Gebiete
der allgemeinen Relativit¨at. Ob der daraus schl¨upfende Vogel vital und langlebig
sein wird, liegt noch im Schosse der G¨otter. Einstweilen segne ich die Krankheit, die
mich so begnadet hat.” Einstein to Zangger, end of May 1928, Einstein Archives,
The Hebrew University of Jerusalem (EA), call no. 40-069.
10 Einstein’s original notation did not distinguish between tetrad vectors and the
canonical dual covectors, i.e. he did not use superscripted tetrad indices. In general,
I will not adhere strictly to Einstein’s original notation. In particular, I will denote
partial coordinate derivatives by comma-delimited subscripts.
11 “Durch die Setzung des n-Bein-Feldes wird gleichzeitig die Existenz der Riemann-
Metrik und des Fernparallelismus zum Ausdruck gebracht.” [Einstein 1928a, p. 218].

7

Multiplication with haν turns this into

dAν = −∆ν

µσAµdxσ,

(7)

where the connection

µσ = haνhaµ,σ
(8)
is introduced. 12 As Einstein noted it is “rotation invariant” and asymmetric
in its lower indices. Parallel transport along a closed line reproduces the same
vector, i.e. the Riemann curvature,

∆ν

Rι

κ,λµ = −∆ι

κλ,µ + ∆ι

κµ,λ + ∆ι

αλ∆α

κµ − ∆ι

αµ∆α

κλ ≡ 0,

(9)

vanishes identically.

Einstein observed that the metric (5) gives rise to another, non-integrable
law of parallel transport, that is determined by the symmetric Levi-Civita
connection,

Γν

µσ =

gνα (gµα,σ + gσα,µ − gµσ,α) .

1
2

He also introduced the contorsion tensor Γν

αβ − ∆ν

αβ, and the torsion tensor,

although he does not use those names for these quantities.

The possibility of obtaining ﬁeld equations from a variational principle,

Λν

αβ =

∆ν

αβ − ∆ν
βα

(cid:16)
haν (haα,β − haβ,α) ,

(cid:17)

=

1
2
1
2

Z

δ

{Hdτ } = 0,

is brieﬂy indicated. The variation would have to be done with respect to the
the sixteen quantities haµ and the Lagrangian H would have to be a linear
function of the two invariants gµνΛα
µβΛβ
στ , multiplied
with the determinant h = |haµ| since hdτ is an invariant volume element.

να and gµνgασgβτ Λµ

αβΛν

The second note is entitled “New possibility for a uniﬁed ﬁeld theory of grav-
itation and electricity” [Einstein 1928b] and was presented to the Academy
only a week after the ﬁrst paper, on 14 June 1928. In the introduction, Ein-
stein wrote that it had occurred to him in the meantime that the structure
of distant parallelism allows the identiﬁcation of the gravitational and elec-
tromagnetic ﬁeld equations in a most natural manner. He specialized to the

12 As pointed out already by [Reichenbach 1929, p. 687] Einstein’s origi-
nal paper contained several typographical errors in these equations, see also
[Goldstein and Ritter 2003, pp. 121].

8

(10)

(11)

(12)

(13)

case of four dimensions and identiﬁed the electromagnetic potential with the
quantity

φµ ≡ Λα

µα =

haν (haµ,ν − haν,µ) .

(14)

1
2

More precisely, he stated that φµ = 0 would be the mathematical expression
for the absence of any electromagnetic ﬁeld. But he added in a footnote that
the same could be expressed by the condition φ(µ,ν) = 0 and observed that
this fact would result in a “certain indeterminateness of the interpretation”
(“gewisse Unbestimmtheit der Deutung.”).

The ﬁeld equations are now given by specifying the Lagrangian H as

H = hgµνΛα
1
4

hha

=

µβΛβ
να
µhaνhbα (hbµ,β − hbβ,µ) hcβ (hcν,α − hcα,ν) .

In linear approximation, haµ = δaµ + ˜haµ, |˜haµ|, |∂˜haµ| ≪ 1, Einstein obtained
the ﬁeld equations explicitly as

˜hβα,µµ − ˜hµα,µβ + ˜hαµ,µβ − ˜hβµ,µα = 0.

Introducing the metric ﬁeld in ﬁrst approximation as

and the electromagnetic four-potential ˜φa as

˜gαβ = δµν + ˜hαβ + ˜hβα,

˜φa =

1
2

α,µ − ˜hµ
˜hµ
(cid:16)

µ,α

(cid:17)

,

the linearized ﬁeld equations (17) turn into

1
2

(−˜gβα,µµ − ˜gµα,µβ + ˜gαµ,µβ − ˜gβµ,µα) = ˜φα,β − ˜φβ,α.

(20)

Since the absence of any electromagnetic ﬁeld was expressed by φµ ≡ 0, (20)
then turns into the linear approximation of the Ricci tensor Rαβ, given in
terms of the metric, just as in standard general relativity.

The vacuum Maxwell equations are recovered in this approximation by taking
the divergence of ˜φα which vanishes on account of (20) contracted over α and
β, which gives

˜φα,α = 0,

and by

˜φα,ββ = 0,
(22)
which follows from the fact that the left hand side Lαβ of (20) satisﬁes the
identity

(15)

(16)

(17)

(18)

(19)

(21)

(23)

Lαβ −

δαβLσσ

= 0.

(cid:18)

(cid:19),β

1
2

9

Eqs. (21) and (22) together imply the vanishing of the divergence of the elec-
tromagnetic ﬁeld φµ,ν − φν,µ which is just the inhomogeneous set of Maxwell
equations in the absence of an external current. The homogeneous Maxwell
equations are, of course, trivially fulﬁlled if an electromagnetic potential exists.

In a note added at proof stage, he observed that quite similar results could be
obtained for the Lagrangian

H = hgµνgασgβτ Λµ

αβΛν

στ

(24)

and concluded that there is an ambiguity in the choice of H.

3 Interaction with others

Einstein’s ﬁrst two notes on teleparallelism appear to be conceived and com-
posed without any interaction with other mathematicians or physicists. This
is conﬁrmed by Einstein explicitly.

After twelve years of searching with many disappointments I now discovered
a metric continuum structure that lies between the Riemannian and the
Euclidean structures and the elaboration of which leads to a truly uniﬁed
ﬁeld theory. 13

Nor does Einstein acknowledge any relevant literature in those ﬁrst two notes.
The only reference to existing work in the ﬁeld that he did give concerned
a — problematic — comparison of the Fernparallelismus approach with the
standard Riemannian geometry and with Weyl’s Nahegeometrie. Pointing out
that in Weyl’s Inﬁnitesimalgeometrie parallel transport would preserve nei-
ther lengths nor directions of vectors he puts his own theory in parallel to
Riemannian geometry. The latter allowed the comparison of lengths over ﬁ-
nite distances, but not directions, while the former allowed parallel transport
of directions but not of lengths. The comparison is problematic because from a
modern point of view, it would seem more natural to parallelize the Fernparal-
lelismus to Weyl’s theory as two diﬀerent ways of generalizing the underlying
connection. 14 In any case, the reference is too vague to be counted as a real
citation.

13 “Nach zw¨olf Jahren entt¨auschungsreichen Suchens entdeckte ich nun eine
metrische Kontinuumstruktur, welche zwischen der Riemannschen und der Euk-
lidischen liegt, und deren Ausarbeitung zu einer wirklich einheitlichen Feldtheorie
f¨uhrt.” [Einstein 1929a, p. 130].
14 See [Reichenbach 1929] and [Goldstein and Ritter 2003, p. 121], for further dis-
cussion of this point.

10

Soon after the publication of Einstein’s ﬁrst two notes this situation changed.
Einstein entered into intense interaction with several other mathematicians
and scientists. He began a collaboration with the mathematician Herman
M¨untz on special solutions of the theory. He was alerted to earlier pertinent
work in the mathematics literature by Roland Weitzenb¨ock. And later in the
year, Cornelius Lanczos joined Einstein in Berlin on a year of absence from
Frankfurt. He also acknowledged contributions by Jakob Grommer who had
been working with him in Berlin all the time. Interactions with Elie Cartan
and Walther Mayer were also important but will be discussed later on since
they began much later.

3.1 The correspondence with Herman M¨untz

Chaim Herman M¨untz (1884–1956) had studied mathematics in Berlin and
had obtained his Ph.D. in 1910 with a thesis on the partial diﬀerential equa-
tions of the minimal surface. 15 The existing correspondence between Einstein
and M¨untz in the Einstein Archives suggest that M¨untz and Einstein had con-
tact already before summer 1928. M¨untz was living in Berlin at the time, and
according to Pinkus and Ortiz [Ortiz and Pinkus, forthcoming] he may have
been working as Einstein’s scientiﬁc collaborator as early as summer 1927.

Their extensive correspondence about teleparallelism then appears to have
been triggered by a letter from M¨untz in which he pointed out that the
ﬁeld equations in ﬁrst approximations are fully integrable. 16 In the sequel,
M¨untz was concerned with the task of computing the special case of spatial
spherical symmetry. The correspondence shows that Einstein kept M¨untz in-
formed about his considerations regarding the proper ﬁeld equations, asking
him about explicit calculations for each new version of them. These calcu-
lations are acknowledged in [Einstein 1929a, p. 132] and in [Einstein 1929b,
p. 7]. M¨untz was also credited with pointing out the problem of compatibility
of the ﬁeld equations derived in [Einstein 1929b], see [Einstein 1929c, p. 156].
In fact, in a letter, dated 18 March 1929 (EA 18-355), M¨untz suggested rewrit-
ing an earlier version of the introduction of [Einstein 1929c]. Their collabo-
ration ended some time in 1929 when M¨untz accepted a call as professor of
mathematics at the university of Leningrad.

information on M¨untz,

15 For biographical
[Ortiz and Pinkus, forthcoming].
16 “Es handelt sich darum, dass man die ersten N¨aherungsgleichungen [...]
vollst¨andig integrieren kann.” Einstein to M¨untz, 26 July 1928, EA 18-328.

[Pais 1982, pp. 491f] and

see

11

3.2 The correspondence with Roland Weitzenb¨ock

A few days after Einstein had learnt from M¨untz about the possibility to ﬁnd
explicit solutions for his equations in ﬁrst approximation, he received further
correspondence regarding his new theory. On August 1, 1929, Einstein received
a letter saying:

The connection components that you denote [...] by ∆ν
µσ were published
ﬁrst (1921) in my encyclopedia article III E 1 in note 59 with No 18; more
explicitly in my invariant theory (1923) (Groningen: Noordhoﬀ), p. 317ﬀ. 17

The author was Roland Weitzenb¨ock (1885–1955), who had been appointed
professor of mathematics at the University of Amsterdam in 1921 at the initia-
tive of Brouwer [van Dalen 1999, sec. 9.4]. The references are to [Weitzenb¨ock 1921]
and [Weitzenb¨ock 1923].

Weitzenb¨ock also listed some later papers by G. Vitali, G.F.C. Gries, M. Euwe,
E. Bortolotti and L.P. Eisenhart 18 that would deal with the issue of parallel
transport and diﬀerential invariants in manifolds endowed with an n-Bein-
ﬁeld.

More speciﬁcally, Weitzenb¨ock stated a formal result relevant for Einstein’s
attempts to derive the ﬁeld equations on the basis of a variational formulation.
He claimed that any Lagrangian, i.e. any function that is invariant under both
general coordinate transformations and rotations of the tetrads, can be built
up from h = |haν|, gµν, gµν, Λν
αβ and its covariant derivatives with respect to
the connection ∆ν
αβ. Moreover, he stated the proposition that h is the only
such function of order zero, 19 no function of ﬁrst order exist that is linear
in Λν
αβ is built up of
the three invariants (see eqs. (26)-(28) below). Incidentally, these quantities
are sometimes referred to as Weitzenb¨ock invariants in modern literature. He
announced that he was going to write a short communication about these
results and asked whether Einstein would be willing to present such a note to
the Prussian Academy for publication in its proceedings.

αβ, and any function of ﬁrst order that is quadratic in Λν

17 “Die von Ihnen [...] ∆ν
µσ genannten Zusammenhangskomponenten ﬁnden sich
zuerst (1921) in meinem Enzyklop¨adie-Artikel III E 1 in Anmerkung 59 bei No
18; ausf¨uhrlicher in meiner Invariantentheorie (1923) (Groningen: Noordhoof),
p. 317ﬀ.” Weitzenb¨ock to Einstein, 1 August, 1929, EA 23-367.
18 All references given in the letter are included in the more complete list given in
[Weitzenb¨ock 1928, p. 466].
19 The order of the function is deﬁned to be the highest order of diﬀerentiation in
its arguments, see [Weitzenb¨ock 1928, p. 470].

12

Einstein was quick to respond on 3 August, two days later, that he had written
the ﬁrst two notes while lying in bed with a “severe heart problem” and that he
had asked Planck to inquire from the mathematicians in the Academy whether
such notions are in fact known to the mathematicians. However, Planck had
told him that a publication would be justiﬁed already from the physics point
of view and hence he, Einstein, had given in. Of course, he would be all in
favour of publishing a note by Weitzenb¨ock.

Einstein added that he had in the meantime lost some conﬁdence in the the-
ory. While the quantities φµ = Λα
µα would satisfy Maxwell’s equations, one
would not, conversely, have a corresponding tetrad ﬁeld for any solution of
the Maxwell equations. In particular, a spherically symmetric electric ﬁeld
seemed not to exist in the new theory.

Weitzenb¨ock sent his note without further delay on August 8. In his letter,
he also asked a couple of questions about Einstein’s second note. One point
concerned the Einstein’s approximation procedure and was clariﬁed to be due
to the fact that in setting haµ = δaµ + ˜haµ Einstein had also, but only tacitly
assumed that the derivatives ∂˜haµ would be of ﬁrst order as well. The second
point concerned the question as to how to recover the vacuum ﬁeld equation
of the old theory of general relativity from the Weitzenb¨ock invariants.

In his response, Einstein explained his approximation procedure. 20 He did
not respond to Weitzenb¨ock’s second point of recovering the old gravitational
equations 21 but he reiterated his new doubts with respect to the viability of
the theory since it did not readily allow for the existence of electrically charged
particle-like solutions. But he added:

But one has to be careful with a deﬁnite judgement since the limits of
validity of the Maxwellian equations is an unsolved problem. 22

He continued with an interesting heuristic comment indicating that he would
be prepared to call into question other aspects of his heuristics if this should
be necessary.

In any case, the combination of an integrable parallel transport with a

20 Einstein somewhat missed, however, Weitzenb¨ock’s point: “Ich kann nicht be-
greifen, was Sie an meiner diesbez¨uglichen einfachen Rechnung auszusetzen haben.”
It was Weitzenb¨ock himself who gave the answer to his own question in his response
letter.
21 That point was addressed later in a letter by Lanczos, see the discussion below.
22 “Man muss aber mit einem endg¨ultigen Urteil vorsichtig sein, da die Grenze der
G¨ultigkeit der Maxwell’schen Gleichungen ein ungekl¨artes Problem ist.” Einstein
to Weitzenb¨ock, 16 August 1928, Centre for Mathematics and Computer Science
(Amsterdam), library.

13

metric seems to me very natural since already the assumption of a metric
in a single point of the continuum overdetermines the metric if the law of
parallel transport is given. But the metric need not be deﬁned by a quadratic
function. However, this is made probable by the principle of the constancy
of the velocity of light. 23

Einstein promised to present Weitzenb¨ock’s note to the Academy on the very
next occasion. Due to the summer break, the next meeting, however, took place
only in October and Weitzenb¨ock’s note was indeed presented on October 18,
and its published version was issued on 28 November 1928.

Einstein mentioned Weitzenb¨ock in three of his next papers and temporarily
adopted his notation for the n-Beins. But their correspondence seems to have
ended at this point.

3.3 The cooperation with Jakob Grommer and Cornelius Lanczos

The epistolary exchange with the mathematicians M¨untz and Weitzenb¨ock
had been triggered by the publication of Einstein’s ﬁrst two notes. Two other
scientists were important for Einstein at this time, his long-standing assistent
Jakob Grommer and the theoretical physicist Cornelius Lanczos.

Jakob Grommer (1879–1933) had been working with Einstein for several years. 24
In fact, in 1925 Einstein wrote that Grommer “had faithfully assisted me in
recent years with all caclulations in the area of general relativity theory.” 25
Their collaboration resulted in a number of joint publications. As to Grom-
mer’s role in the Fernparallelismus project, there is only few correspondence
since most of their interaction was in person. Grommer had voiced doubts
about the equivalence of the electromagnetic equations obtained in linear ap-
proximation with Maxwell’s equations in Einstein’s ﬁrst version of ﬁeld equa-
tions. 26 Einstein acknowledged Grommer’s assistance in [Einstein 1929b] but
did not specify his contribution.

Some time in 1929, Grommer seems to have gone to Minsk to accept a teach-

23 “Jedenfalls erscheint mir die Kombination einer integrablen Parallelverschiebung
mit einer Metrik sehr nat¨urlich, da schon die Annahme der Metrik in einem Punkte
des Kontinuums die Metrik ¨uberbestimmt, wenn das Verschiebungsgesetz gegeben
ist. Allerdings brauchte die Metrik nicht durch eine quadratische Funktion deﬁniert
zu sein, aber daf¨ur spricht das Prinzip von der Konstanz der Lichtgeschwindigkeit.”
ibid.
24 For biographical information on Grommer, see [Pais 1982, pp. 487f].
25 Quoted ibid.
26 See Einstein to M¨untz, end of July 1928, EA 18-311.

14

ing position at the university. Possibly in an attempt to ﬁnd a successor for
Grommer, Einstein was eager to arrange for Cornelius Lanczos (1893–1974)
to come to Berlin for a year. Lanczos was Privatdozent at the university of
Frankfurt and took a year of leave of absence in order to be able to work
with Einstein in Berlin. 27 Lanczos started to work with Einstein in Berlin on
November 1, 1928. The stay was supported by a grant from the Notgemein-
schaft Deutscher Wissenschaft. Einstein thanked Lanczos in the introduction
of [Einstein 1929c] for pointing out a problem with the compatibility of the
ﬁeld equations in that note. Lanczos also found out that the Lagrangian ad-
vanced in [Einstein 1929c] is equivalent to the usual Riemann scalar (see the
discussion below in sec. 5.1). Lanczos himself also published a little semi-
popular note on the Fernparallelismus theory [Lanczos 1929] in July 1929 and
a more extended but also non-technical account in 1931 [Lanczos 1931].

4 Searching for ﬁeld equations

4.1 Einstein’s next papers

Further progress and the interaction with the aforementioned mathematicians
is reﬂected in a semi-popular overview of the present state of ﬁeld theory,
two further notes on the subject in the Sitzungsberichte and two newspaper
articles.

Soon after Weitzenb¨ock’s note appeared in late November, Einstein had a
chance to react to it in print. In early November 1928, he had been asked
to contribute to a Festschrift on the occasion of the seventieth birthday of
Aurel Stodola, professor of mechanical engineering at Zurich’s polytechnic.
That birthday would take place on May 10, 1929, but the Festschrift was
to be completed ahead of time. Einstein agreed to contribute a semi-popular
review article “On the Present State of Field Theory” [Einstein 1929a]. The
manuscript for this paper was submitted on 10 December 1928. 28

At the end of this more general survey of the history of ﬁeld theory, Einstein
brieﬂy sketched his new approach, commenting also on the derivation of ﬁeld
equations. He mentioned calculations of the equations of motion for chargeless
particles, undertaken together with M¨untz. With reference to Weitzenb¨ock,
Einstein introduced a change of notation: algebra indices are now written to
the left (see the Appendix).

27 For more biographical information on Lanczos and an account of his interactions
with Einstein, see [Stachel 1994].
28 See marginal notes on EA 22-261 and EA 22-262.

15

In what appears to be a note added in proof to this paper, Einstein remarked
that he had in the meantime convinced himself that ﬁeld equations for the
theory are not obtained by a variational principle but by other considerations.

The following paper again appeared in the Academy’s Sitzungberichte and was
presented to the Academy for publication on January 10. It indeed advanced
a new derivation of ﬁeld equations that did not make use of a Hamiltonian
principle. In the paper Einstein also introduced a few new notational conven-
tions. 29

The reception of this paper in the public should remind us that nothing Ein-
stein did at the time took place in an ivory tower. F¨olsing gives a vivid account
of the immense public interest in Einstein’s new theory. 30 The January pa-
per itself was printed and reprinted several times by the Prussian Academy
with a record number of copies. The public interest in Einstein’s new ﬁeld
theory is exempliﬁed by the following quote from a letter by Eddington who
was acknowledging receipt of copies of Einstein’s recent papers, among them
[Einstein 1929b]:

You may be amused to hear that one of our great Department Stores (Sel-
fridges) has pasted up in its window your paper (the six pages pasted up
side by side) so that passers by can read it all through. Large crowds gather
round to read it! 31

The craze apparently had begun with an article in the New York Times of 4
November 1928 under the title “Einstein on Verge of Great Discovery; resents
Intrusion.” The author of this article, Paul D. Miller, gave an account of how
he had succeeded to visit Einstein in his Berlin home. It is a striking example
of grooming the myth of this mysteriously creative genius. The sick Einstein
supposedly “sat on a sunny beach and appeased his desire to work by playing
his violin to the waves” but then came up with a new theory that “will startle
the world far more than relativity did.” The article, in any case, seems to have
triggered the interest of numerous other journalists in Einstein’s new work.

The journalists, thus alerted of those great events in science, may have been all
too glad to learn that, in early January, another publication on this new theory
appeared and warranted press coverage. In any case, on January 12, two days
after the submission of [Einstein 1929b] to the Academy, the front page of the
New York Times again informed their readers that “Einstein Extends Relativ-
ity Theory.” The subtitle: “‘Book’, Consisting of Only Five Pages, Took Berlin
Scientist Ten Years to Prepare” may help to explain why the management of

29 The notational idiosyncrasies associated with Einstein’s Fernparallelismus ap-
proach are summarized in the Appendix.
30 [F¨olsing 1997, pp. 604ﬀ]; see also [Pais 1982, p. 346].
31 Eddington to Einstein, 11 February, 1929, EA 9-292.

16

Selfridges came up with the idea of attracting the curiosity of possible clients
by putting up a copy of this marvel in their window. An English translation
of the note, including all formulas, appeared on the title page of the New York
Herald Tribune on February 1. And in response to the overwhelming public
interest in his new theory, Einstein published two popular and non-technical
accounts of the latest developments in the New York Times on February 3
[Einstein 1929c] and in the London Times of February 4 [Einstein 1929d].

The essays are a tour-de-force through the history of ﬁeld theory. At its very
end, Einstein gave a characterization of distant parallelism by illustrating the
eﬀect of torsion. He has the reader consider two parallel lines E1L1 and E2L2
and on each a point P1, resp. P2. On the ﬁrst line, E1L1, one now chooses
another point Q1. Torsion is then expressed by the fact that parallelograms
do not close.

If we now draw through Q1 a straight line Q1 −R parallel to the straight line
P1, P2, then in Euclidean geometry this will cut the straight line E2L2; in
the geometry now used the line Q1 − R and the line E2L2 do not in general
cut one another. [Einstein 1929c]

Einstein added

To this extent the geometry now used is not only a specialization of the
Riemannian but also a generalization of the Euclidean geometry. (ibid.)

In the ﬁnal paragraph he then stated the expectation that the solution to
the mathematical problem of the correct ﬁeld laws would be given by “the
simplest and most natural conditions to which a continuum of this kind can
be subjected.” Einstein concluded that

the answer to this question which I have attempted to give in a new paper
yields unitary ﬁeld laws for gravitation and electromagnetism. (ibid.)

The unspeciﬁc title of the January paper in the Sitzungsberichte (“On the
Uniﬁed Field Theory”) may have helped to deceive the public about the real
content of this rather speciﬁc and technical communication. The title of the
next paper on the Fernparallelismus approach would surely have been less
attractive for a general public. It is entitled “Uniﬁed Field Theory and Hamil-
tonian Principle” [Einstein 1929e]. It addressed an objection raised by Lanczos
and M¨untz. They had objected that the compatibility of the ﬁeld equations of
the previous note was not established by the failure to identify four identical
relations between them. Einstein now returned to the variational approach
and gave a Hamiltonian formulation of the ﬁeld equation which thus would
also guarantee their compatibility.

17

4.2 The ﬁeld equations

Let us know take a closer look at the problem of ﬁnding and justifying ﬁeld
equations within the teleparallel framework. The tetrad ﬁeld hsµ deﬁnes both
the metric tensor ﬁeld gµν, see eq. (5), and the electromagnetic vector potential
φµ, see eq. (14). Its sixteen components are the dynamical variables of the
theory. The fundamental question therefore arises as to the ﬁeld equations
that determine the tetrad ﬁeld. Einstein had ﬁrst discussed this question in
his second note of June 14, 1928, but doubts were raised in the sequel about
the correct ﬁeld equations and their derivation. These doubts remained alive
with Einstein until the very end of the Fernparallelismus episode and are also
the major reason for eventually giving up the teleparallel approach.

We will here review the early attempts at ﬁnding ﬁeld equations and their
derivations as put forward by Einstein in the course of elaborating the im-
plications of distant parallelism. A closer analysis of the chronology reveals
that Einstein wavered between two distinct approaches to ﬁnd, derive, and
justify ﬁeld equations. Along one approach, he was starting from a variational
principle and was looking for the correct Lagrangian. Along another approach
he was trying to ﬁnd a set of overdetermined ﬁeld equations plus a number of
mathematical identities.

The existence of two distinct approaches is strongly reminiscent of the heuris-
tics followed for the Entwurf theory, see sec. 7 below. And as was the case with
the reconstruction of the genesis and demise of the Entwurf, the dynamics of
going from one approach to the other, it seems to me, can only be recon-
structed with some conﬁdence on the basis of more information taken from
contemporary correspondence and research manuscripts. The following sketch
will therefore necessarily have a preliminary character.

4.2.1 The variational approach

The ﬁeld equations advanced in Einstein’s second note on the distant par-
allelism approach were deﬁned by demanding that the variation of a scalar
Hdτ with respect to the com-
and globally Lorentz-invariant action integral
ponents of the tetrad ﬁeld haµ vanish, see eq. (13) above. The Lagrangian H
entering the action integral had been given in terms of the invariant gµνΛα
µβΛβ
να
as in eq. (15).

R

Einstein did not give any motivation for this kind of Lagrangian. But it would
be a natural ansatz for him to try. The torsion tensor Λα
µν was the crucial new
quantity of the theory and the invariant was the simplest combination that
was invariant both for general coordinate transformations and for rotation of
the tetrads. But the torsion tensor allows for diﬀerent ways to form a scalar

18

expression. Let us recall then that in a little note added in proof, Einstein
already observed that “similar results are obtained” on the basis of the La-
grangian H = hgµνgασgβτ Λµ
στ , see (24) above. Einstein commented that
“for the time being” there was an uncertainty regarding the choice of H. It is
unclear whether there was an external trigger for this realization.

αβΛν

But things got worse. In his contribution to the Stodola-Festschrift Einstein
brieﬂy sketched his new approach. With respect to the derivation of ﬁeld
equations, Einstein now considered a generic Lagrangian

where

H = h(AJ1 + BJ2 + CJ3)

J1 = gµνΛα
να,
J2 = gµνΛα
νβ,
J3 = gµσgντ gλρΛλ

µβΛβ
µαΛβ

µνΛρ

στ .

(25)

(26)

(27)

(28)

Although Einstein does not explicitly refer to Weitzenb¨ock’s paper [Weitzenb¨ock 1928]
in the Stodola-Festschrift, it should be pointed out that the three terms Ji are
explicitly listed in that paper (p. 470) as the only invariants (under both gen-
eral coordinate transformations and rotations of the tetrads) of second degree
in Λν

αβ.

Einstein remarked that

The elaboration and physical interpretation of the theory is made diﬃcult
by the lack of an apriori constraint for choosing the ratio of the constants
A, B, C. 32

Obviously, his ﬁrst ansatz eq. (15) of the June 14 note is contained in the
generic Lagrangian (25) by specifying to A = 1, B = C = 0. The alternative
Lagrangian (24) advanced in the note added in proof to that note would
be given by specifying to the case of C = 1, A = B = 0. In the Stodola-
Festschrift, Einstein then speciﬁed to the case B = −A, C = 0, which would
read explicitly

H = h

gµνΛα

µαΛβ

νβ − gµνΛα

µβΛβ
να

 

.

!

(29)

He observed, however, that the specialization B = −A, C = 0 should be taken
only at the level of the ﬁeld equations, not on the level of the variational prin-
ciple. Otherwise, the electromagnetic ﬁeld equations would not be obtained.
This arcane remark is not further explained by explicit calculations.

32 “Die Ausarbeitung und physikalische Interpretation der Theorie wird dadurch
erschwert, dass f¨ur die Wahl des Verh¨altnisses der Konstanten A, B, C ap priori
keine Bindung vorhanden ist.” [Einstein 1929a, p. 132].

19

in what appears to be a note added in proof to the Stodola-
Moreover,
Festschrift, Einstein remarked that he had in the meantime convinced himself
that the “most natural” ans¨atze for the ﬁeld equations are not obtained on
the basis of a Hamiltonian principle. 33 For a diﬀerent approach, he referred
to his new paper “On the Uniﬁed Field Theory” in the Prussian Academy
proceedings [Einstein 1929b].

However, that alternative approach of January 10, which will be discussed
below, was shortlived. Already some two months later, on 21 March 1929,
Einstein returned to the variational approach for deriving the ﬁeld equations.

Since Einstein had introduced in the January 10 paper a number of new con-
ventions, the notation used in the March note is slightly diﬀerent from the
notation used in the Stodola-Festschrift. Thus, he had dropped a factor of
1/2 in the deﬁnition of the torsion and he had introduced an idiosyncratic
convention of indicating raising and lowering indices by underlining them. He
also used a slightly diﬀerent notation for the terms deﬁned in eqs. (26), (27),
(28) using J = hJ, and he renumbered two terms, i.e. he has J2 ≡ hJ3 resp.
J3 ≡ hJ2. If we keep with the notation of the Stodola-Festschrift (25,26-28)),
Einstein now advanced the following Lagrangian (up to an overall constant)

H = h

J1 − J2 +

1
2

 

1
4

J3

.

!

(30)

This Lagrangian is explicitly justiﬁed by the following two postulates. H must
be a function of second degree in the torsion tensor Λα
µν which makes it a
linear combination of the three terms J1, J2, J3. 34 Second, the resulting ﬁeld
equation must be symmetric in the free indices, and Einstein claimed that this
postulate uniquely ﬁxes the speciﬁc linear combination (30).

More speciﬁcally, Einstein claimed that the combination (30) produces only
one part of the ﬁeld equations, i.e. the part that reduces to the gravitational
ﬁeld equation in linear approximation. In order to obtain the electromagnetic
ﬁeld equations, he proposed to consider a slightly distorted Lagrangian

¯H = H + hǫ1

J1 −

J2

− hǫ2J3

1
2

(cid:18)

1
4

(cid:19)

where the existence of electric charges demands taking the limit ǫ2/ǫ1 → 0. In
that limit, the relation

(31)

(32)

33 “Inzwischen hat mich eine tiefere Analyse der allgemeinen Eigenschaften der
Strukturen der oben entwickelten Art zu der ¨Uberzeugung gef¨uhrt, dass die
nat¨urlichsten Ans¨atze f¨ur die Feldgleichungen nicht aus einem Hamilton-Prinzip,
sondern auf anderem Wege zu gewinnen sind. [Einstein 1929a, p. 132].
34 This fact is stated in [Weitzenb¨ock 1928, p. 470].

Sα

µν = 0

20

is obtained where the quantity Sα
metrized torsion

µν was deﬁned as the completely antisym-

µν = Λα
Sα

µν + Λν
using Einstein’s temporary convention to indicate a raising resp. lowering of an
index by underlining, see (67) below. Einstein claimed that the relation (32)
implies that the combination (30) is equivalent to the earlier combination
J1 − J2 of [Einstein 1929a].

αµ + Λ

(33)

µ
να,

The procedure of varying a slightly distorted Lagrangian in order to obtain the
electromagnetic ﬁeld equation had been developed partly within the overde-
termination approach. The details were not, however, spelled out explicitly in
the published papers on the Fernparallelismus approach.

In summary, Einstein had advanced four diﬀerent ﬁeld equations in three
papers which are given by the generic Lagrangian (25) and the coeﬃcients

Paper

[Einstein 1928b]

[Einstein 1929a]

[Einstein 1929b]

Date

14 Jun 28

10 Dec 28

A

1

0

1

B

0

0

- 1

C

0

1

0

21 Mar 29

1/2 −1

1/4

[Einstein 1928b, note added]

after 14 Jun 28

We shall now turn to the second approach of deriving ﬁeld equations for the
teleparallel theory.

4.3 The overdetermination approach

Already by the end of 1928, around the time when he had submitted his pa-
per for the Stodola-Festschrift, Einstein may have become dissatisﬁed with
the variational approach. This may have been due mainly to the fact that he
did not succeed in ﬁnding a convincing way of getting unique ﬁeld equations.
But there were also other diﬃculties associated with the demands that the
electromagnetic ﬁeld equations should be obtained in the linearized approxi-
mation and that non-singular, spherically symmetric and stationary, charged
or massive solutions to the ﬁeld equations should exist.

In any case, a few days after sending oﬀ his manuscript for the Stodola
Festschrift, he wrote to Hermann M¨untz

I have had a simple, cheeky idea which throws the Hamiltonian principle
overboard. The cart shall now be put before the horse: I choose the ﬁeld

21

equations in such a way that I am sure that they imply the Maxwellian
equations. 35

The idea was to use an identity which implies the validity of the Maxwell
equations and construct ﬁeld equations by the demand that this identity was
automatically satisﬁed. But again Einstein encountered technical diﬃculties
showing him that the simple idea was not feasible.

The derivation of the ﬁeld equations by means of the identity is a task that
is more subtle than I originally thought. 36

However, he did pursue the general approach further and soon came up with
another derivation of the ﬁeld equations.

The next paper then was the January note that would attract so much public
interest [Einstein 1929b]. It presented a diﬀerent approach to a derivation of
ﬁeld equation since that derivation on the basis of a Hamiltonian principle
had not “led to a simple and completely unique path.” 37

Einstein now argued like this. He ﬁrst derived two sets of identities for the
torsion tensor Λα
µν. The ﬁrst identity was obtained by starting from the van-
ishing of the Riemann curvature (9) for the Weitzenb¨ock connection (8). If (9)
is cyclically permuted in the lower indices and added it produces the identity

0 ≡ Λι

κλ,µ + Λι

λµ,κ + Λι

µκ,λ + ∆ι

σκΛσ

λµ + ∆ι

σλΛσ

µκ + ∆ι

σµΛσ

κλ,

(34)

which can be rewritten using covariant derivatives (with respect to the con-
nection ∆ι

σκ),

Λι

κλ;µ = Λι

κλ;µ + Λσ

κλ∆ι

σµ − Λι

σλ∆σ

κµ,

(35)

as

0 ≡ Λι

κλ;µ + Λι
Contraction of (36) and using φµ ≡ Λα
as

λµ;κ + Λι

µκ;λ + Λι

καΛα

λµ + Λι

µκ + Λι
µα, see (14), the identity can be written

λαΛα

µαΛα

(36)

κλ.

0 ≡ Λα

kl;α + φl;k − φk;l − φαΛα
kl,

(37)

35 “Ich habe eine einfache, freche Idee gehabt, die das Hamilton’sche Prinzip ¨uber
Bord wirft. Das Pferd soll nun vom Schwanze aus aufgez¨aumt werden: ich w¨ahle die
Feldgleichungen so, dass ich sicher bin, dass sie die Maxwellschen Gleichungen zur
Folge haben.” Einstein to M¨untz, 13 December 1928, EA 18-317.
36 “Die Aufstellung der Feldgleichungen mit Hilfe der Identit¨at ist eine subtilere
Aufgabe, als ich urspr¨unglich dachte.” Einstein to M¨untz, 15 December 1928, EA 18-
318.
37 “[...] f¨uhrte die Ableitung der Feldgleichung aus dem Hamiltonschen Prinzip auf
keinen einfachen und v¨ollig eindeutigen Weg. Diese Schwierigkeiten verdichteten
sich bei genauerer ¨Uberlegung.” [Einstein 1929b, p. 2].

22

(38)

(39)

(40)

(41)

(42)

(43)

(44)

and, introducing the tensor density

(37) can further be rewritten as

Bα

κλ = h (Λα

κλ + φλδα

κ − φκδα

λ ) ,

Bα

κλ;α − Bσ

κλΛα

σα ≡ Bα

κλ/α ≡ 0,

i.e. as the vanishing of some special divergence denoted by . . ./α. This notation
shall be temporarily used here, too, in order to have a chance to see Einstein’s
heuristics in his line of argument.

The second identity was derived by considering the commutator of the covari-
ant derivatives for an arbitrary tensor T ...
... ,

Inserting Bσ
(39), Einstein obtained the second identity as

κλ for T ...

... , rewriting in terms of . . ./α, and using the ﬁrst identity

...;ι;κ − T ...
T ...

...;κ;ι = −T ...

...;σΛσ
ικ.

Bα

κλ/λ − Bσ

κτ Λα
στ

= 0.

/α

(cid:17)

(cid:16)

Bα

κλ/λ = 0,

Bα

κλ/λ/α = Bα

κλ/α/λ.

Field equations are now derived as follows. Identity (39) motivated Einstein
to consider the vanishing of “the other divergence,” i.e.

as the ﬁeld equation. In linear approximation, he obtained indeed the gravita-
tional equations but could not get the electromagnetic equations, a diﬃculty
that he traced back to the identity

The trick to get also the electromagnetic equations was to look at the quantity

Bα

κλ = Bα

κλ + ǫh (φλδα

κ − φκδα
λ )

and take as ﬁeld equation

κλ/λ = 0.
(45)
Maxwell’s equations would then be obtained by taking the divergence with
respect to the index α. The gravitational equations would still be obtained by
taking the limit of ǫ → 0.

Bα

Going beyond the linear approximation, Einstein now started from the identity
(41), and postulated the ﬁeld equations

Bα

κ λ/λ − Bσ

κ τ Λα

στ = 0,

(46)

23

where again the electromagnetic equations are obtained by considering the
divergence with respect to the index α and the gravitational equations by
taking the limit ǫ → 0. Consequently, the ﬁnal ﬁeld equations are

and

Bα

κ λ/λ − Bσ

k τ Λα

στ ,

[h

φk;α − φα;k
(cid:16)

]/α = 0.
(cid:17)

(47)

(48)

These are 20 equations for the sixteen quantities haµ. The compact notation
involves the idiosyncratic notation of the divergence . . ./α introduced in (39),
the convention of raising indices by underlining them according to (67), and
the introduction of the quantities Bα
µν in (12), and φα in (14).
Einstein argued that there were 8 identities between these 20 equation. But
he had explicitly given only four of them, i.e. (41). The problem here was
that Einstein had erroneously assumed the existence of a set of identities
compatible with the ﬁeld equations, as pointed out to him soon by Lanczos
and M¨untz.

κλ in (38), Λα

5 The Mathematische Annalen paper

The overdetermination approach had produced ﬁeld equations (47) and (48)
and the variational approach had produced Lagrangian (31). It is unclear to me
to what extent Einstein reﬂected on the compatibility of the two approaches,
i.e. to what extent he tried to produce the same set of ﬁeld equations along the
two approaches, or speciﬁcally how the Lagrangian (31) published in March
relates to the ﬁeld equations (47) and (48) of January. In any case, it should
have become clear that all explicit calculations in terms of the fundamental
tetrad variables haµ involved an appreciable amount of algebraic complexity,
and it seems that many implications were only realized on the level of the
linear approximation.

The theory of distant parallelism reached its mature stage in the summer
of 1930 with Einstein’s major publication concerning the Fernparallelismus
approach: a review paper that was published in the Mathematische Annalen
[Einstein 1930a]. The publication history of this paper is a little involved and
reﬂects an issue of priority that arose between Einstein and Elie Cartan. The
paper also gave a new derivation of the ﬁnal ﬁeld equations along the overde-
termination approach.

24

5.1 The publication history

The prehistory of this paper seems to begin with a letter by Elie Cartan that
was sent to Einstein on 8 May 1929 and that triggered an extensive corre-
spondence between the two scientists. 38 In this ﬁrst letter, Cartan pointed
out to Einstein that the mathematical framework of Einstein’s Fernparallelis-
mus was, indeed, a special case of a generalization of Riemannian geometry
advanced by him in previous years

Now, the notion of Riemannian space endowed with a Fernparallelismus
is a special case of a more general notion, that of space with a Euclidean
connection, which I outlined brieﬂy in 1922 in an article in the Comptes
Rendues [...] 39

The reference is to [Cartan 1922] and what Cartan here calls a Euclidean con-
nection is a non-symmetric linear connection on a real, diﬀerentiable manifold,
thus allowing for both Riemannian curvature and torsion. 40 Moreover, Car-
tan pointed out that he had even spoken to Einstein about this generalized
geometry when they had met, in 1922, at Hadamard’s home. He even remem-
bered that he had tried to illustrate the case of teleparallelism in his theory
to Einstein on this occasion.

On receiving this letter, Einstein seems to have been quick to react. Apparently
he sent oﬀ a review article of his theory to the Zeitschrift der Physik on the
next day. This review article never appeared. In fact, it may have been sent
oﬀ at the time prematurely only because Einstein, in his response to Cartan,
another day later, wanted to mention this work of his. What he wrote to
Cartan essentially was an acknowledgment that Cartan was right:

I see, indeed, that the manifolds used by me are a special case studied by
you. 41

By way of excuse, he pointed out that Weitzenb¨ock had already written a
review article on the mathematical foundations of teleparallelism with a sup-

38 This correspondence was published in [Debever 1979].
39 “Or la notion d’espace riemannien dou´e d’un Fernparallelismus est un cas par-
ticulier d’une notion plus g´en´erale, celle d’espace ´a connexion euclidienne, que j’ai
indiqu´ee succinctement en 1922 dans une note des Comptes rendus.” Cartan to
Einstein, 8 May 1929, [Debever 1979, Doc. I].
40 See [Akivis and Rosenfeld 1993, ch. 7] for an account of Cartan’s work on gener-
alized spaces.
41 “Ich sehe in der That ein, dass die von mir benutzten Mannigfaltigkeiten in den
von Ihnen studierten als Spezialfall enthalten sind.” Einstein to Cartan, 10 May
1929, [Debever 1979, Doc. II].

25

posedly complete bibliography but had failed to cite Cartan’s work. And in
his own review article of the previous day, he himself, so he wrote, had not
mentioned any literature at all, not even his own papers.

But Einstein acknowledged Cartan’s claim of priority and suggested that Car-
tan write a brief historical account, “a short analysis of the mathematical
background,” to be appended to his own paper but under Cartan’s name. 42

Cartan agreed in a letter of 15 May and, indeed, sent a manuscript to Einstein
a little more than a week later, i.e. on May 24th.

One would think that Einstein, on receiving Cartan’s manuscript would have
forwarded it to the Zeitschrift f¨ur Physik as he had suggested to Cartan. It
seems, however, that Einstein did not do so. What might have changed matters
was perhaps a letter by Lanczos that Einstein may have received on the very
same day, since the latter had written it the day before. In his correspondence,
Lanczos communicated to Einstein his insight that in Weitzenb¨ock’s theory
the scalar Riemannian curvature R is essentially equivalent to “the invariant
preferred by you,” 43 1
4 J2 − J3, plus a divergence. From this result, it
clearly follows that the variational principle would not allow to derive the
electromagnetic equations.

2 J1 + 1

In a letter to M¨untz, written a few days later, Einstein wrote:

Regarding the whole problem Lanczos’ discovery changes the situation pro-
foundly. 44

No paper by Einstein or Cartan appeared in the Zeitschrift f¨ur Physik. Never-
theless, the next paper on teleparallelism by Einstein was a review paper and
its aim was to present the theory in a self-contained way without reference to
earlier publications. This work appeared in the Mathematische Annalen with
a historical review paper on the subject by Cartan appended to it in the very

42 “Schreiben sie ¨uber diese mathematische Vorgeschichte eine kurze Charakteristik,
die wir meiner neuen zusammenfassenden Arbeit anheften, nat¨urlich unter Ihrem
Namen, aber mit meiner Arbeit zu einem Ganzen vereinigt.” ibid. One cannot help
to be reminded of Einstein’s and Grossmann’s earlier Outline of a Generalized The-
ory of Relativity and of a Theory of Gravitation. But in that case, Einstein and
Grossmann had actually collaborated to obtain the results presented in their paper.
43 “die von Ihnen bevorzugte Invariante,” Lanczos to Einstein, 23 May 1929, EA 15-
230.
44 “Was das ganze Problem anlangt, so ¨andert Lanczos Entdeckung die Situation
grundlegend.” Einstein to M¨untz, 27 May 1929, EA 18-323. In other words, what
Lanczos had seen was that distant parallelism is essentially equivalent to classical
general relativity, a fact that was fully realized only much later.

26

same issue of this journal. 45

Einstein had been co-editor of the Mathematische Annalen from 1919 until
1928. 46 However, during that time he had published only a single paper in
this journal himself [Einstein 1927]. The paper on teleparallelism would be his
only other paper published in the Mathematische Annalen.

Einstein’s paper in the Annalen is entitled “ Uniﬁed ﬁeld theory based on the
Riemann metric and on distant parallelism” [Einstein 1930a]. According to
the published version it was received by the Annalen on 19 August 1929. But
in a letter to the managing editor Otto Blumenthal, dated 19 August 1929,
Einstein only announced submission of “an already completed summarizing
work on the mathematical apparatus of the general ﬁeld theory” 47 to the
Annalen. In the letter, Einstein required whether “a treatise in the French
language (ca. 12 pages long) on the prehistory of the problem” 48 composed
by Cartan could be appended to his paper. He also enquired how long it would
take until the paper would be printed.

A week later Einstein informed Cartan of the change regarding his publication
plans and apologized for the long silence which was

caused by many doubts as to the correctness of the course I have adopted.
But now I have come to the point that I am persuaded I have found the
simplest legitimate characterization of a Riemannian metric with distant
parallelism that can occur in physics. 49

Einstein added that he now wanted to publish in the Annalen since “for the
time being only the mathematical implications are explored and not their

45 This is another similarity to the Einstein-Grossmann collaboration. Both papers
that were coauthored by Einstein and Grossmann appeared in the more mathemat-
ically oriented Zeitschrift f¨ur Mathematik und Physik, whereas Einstein published
most of his other notes at the time in the Annalen der Physik.
46 For a historical account of the changes in the editorial board of the Mathematis-
chen Annalen in this period, see [van Dalen 1990].
47 “eine bereits fertiggestellte zusammenfassende Arbeit ¨uber den mathematischen
Apparat der allgemeinen Feldtheorie,” Einstein to Blumenthal, 19 August 1929,
EA 9-005.
48 “eine franz¨osisch geschriebene Abhandlung (etwa 12 Seiten L¨ange) ¨uber die
Vorgeschichte des Problems” ibid.
49 “verursacht durch viele Zweifel an der Richtigkeit des eingeschlagenen Weges. Nun
aber bin ich soweit gekommen, dass ich die einfachste gesetzliche Charakterisierung
einer Riemann-Metrik mit Fernparallelismus, welche f¨ur die Physik in Betracht kom-
men kann, gefunden zu haben ¨uberzeugt bin.” Einstein to Cartan, 25 August 1929,
[Debever 1979, Doc. V].

27

application to physics.” 50

Blumenthal only responded on September 9 to Einstein’s enquiry, agreeing to
the proposal and informing Einstein that the publication will be delayed by
approximately six months. A few days later, on 13 September, Einstein ﬁnally
sends both manuscripts, his own and Cartan’s, to Blumenthal for publication
in the Annalen. In the covering letter, he expressed his understanding for the
delay in publication but added

However, it is a pity because it delays the collaboration of the colleagues on
this problem which is fundamental and, after the most recent results, really
promising. Physics after all has a diﬀerent rhythm than mathematics. 51

Proofs of the paper were probably received by late November. 52 According
to the title page of the pertinent issue of the Annalen, it was “completed”
(“abgeschlossen”) on 18 December 1929.

5.2 The derivation of the ﬁeld equations

Einstein’s Annalen paper has ﬁve paragraphs. It begins with an exposition of
the mathematical structure of Fernparallelismus in the ﬁrst three paragraphs.
Here he reverted to the original notation of writing both indices of the tetrads
to the right, using latin character for algebra, greek character for coordinate
indices. He also explicitly commented that he would no longer use the new
divergence operation. In paragraphs four and ﬁve, he then discussed the ﬁeld
equations and their ﬁrst approximation.

As pointed our explicitly in the introductory paragraph of the paper, the most
important and in any case new part of the paper concerns the “derivation of the
simplest ﬁeld laws to which a Riemannian manifold with teleparallelism may
be subjected.” 53 Here, however, he no longer proceeded along a variational
approach but argued like follows.

50 “einstweilen nur die mathematischen Zusammenh¨ange untersucht werden, nicht
aber deren Anwendung auf die Physik.” ibid.
51 “Es ist aber schade, weil die Mitarbeit der Kollegen an diesem fundamtentalen und
nach den letzten Ergebnissen wirklich aussichtsreichem Problem dadurch verz¨ogert
wird. Die Physik hat eben einen anderen Rhytmus als die Mathematik.” Einstein
to Blumenthal, 13 September 1929, EA 9-009.
52 In a letter to Einstein, dated 3 December, Cartan informed him that he had
already returned the proofs which he had received “a few days ago.” [Debever 1979,
Doc. VII].
53 “die Auﬃndung der einfachsten Feldgesetze, welchen eine Riemannsche Man-
nigfaltigkeit mit Fern-Parallelismus unterworfen werden kann.” [Einstein 1930a,
p. 685].

28

Einstein observed that the simplest ﬁeld equations that one is looking for
would be conditions on the torsion tensor Λ µ
α ν expressed in terms of the
Weitzenb¨ock connection ∆ µ
α ν resp. in terms of the the tetrad ﬁelds haµ as
in (12). Although, he does not say so explicitly in the paper, the rationale for
this argument would be that for vanishing torsion one also has vanishing Rie-
mannian curvature for the Levi-Civita connection and hence no gravitational
ﬁeld.

He now argues for a heuristics of ﬁnding ﬁeld equations along the overdeter-
mination approach. Since the tetrad ﬁeld has n2 components of which n need
be undeﬁned due to general covariance, one needs n2 − n independent ﬁeld
equations. The heuristic principle of overdetermination is then stated like this:

On the other hand it is clear that a theory is all the more satisfying the more
it restricts the possibilities (without getting into conﬂict with experience).
The number Z of ﬁeld equations hence shall be as large as possible. If Z
is the number of identities between them, then Z − Z must be equal to
n2 − n. 54

The identity that Einstein now put at the center of his derivation of ﬁeld
equations is related to identity (41) since it is similarly obtained using the
commutation law (40) for covariant diﬀerentiation. But now he no longer used
the quantity Bα
κλ nor the new divergence notation . . ./α but rather looked at the
commutation of the covariant derivatives for the torsion tensor Λ µ
α ν directly.
This produced the identity

Λ α

µ ν;να − Λ α

µ ν;αν − Λ σ

µ τ ;αΛ α

σ τ ≡ 0,

where again the raising or lowering indices is indicated by underlining. Intro-
ducing the quantities

µ ν;ν − Λ σ

µ τ Λ ασ τ ,

Gµα ≡ Λ α
F µν ≡ Λ α

µ ν;α

the identity (49) can be rewritten as

Gµα

;α − F µν

;ν + Λ σ

µ τ Fστ = 0.

(49)

(50)

(51)

(52)

54 “Andererseits ist klar, daß eine Theorie desto befriedigender ist, je mehr sie die
M¨oglichkeiten einschr¨ankt (ohne mit Erfahrungen in Widerspruch zu treten). Die
Zahl Z der Feldgleichungen soll also m´oglichst groß sein. Ist Z die Zahl der zwischen
diesen bestehenden Identit¨aten, so muß Z − Z gleich n2 − n sein.” [Einstein 1930a,
p. 692].

29

The ﬁeld equations are now introduced as

Gµα = 0,
F µα = 0.

As it stands the system of ﬁeld equations does not satisfy Einstein’s heuristic
of overdetermination. Since F µν is antisymmetric, equations (53, 54) represent
n2 + n(n − 1)/2 ﬁeld equation which obey only n identities (49). In order to
balance the number of equations and identities Einstein proceeded to introduce
an equivalent system of n2 + n ﬁeld equations. Rewriting identity (37) as

he observed that (54) implies that φα may be obtained from a scalar potential
ψ. Hence, (54) together with (55) is equivalent to

Λα

κλ;α ≡ φκ,λ − φλ,κ,

φα =

∂ lg ψ
∂xα ,

(53)
(54)

(55)

(56)

which increases the number of variables to n2 + 1 but reduces the number
of ﬁeld equations to n2 − n. Einstein still needed another identity which he
derived by looking at the antisymmetric part Gµα of Gµα. He obtained a set
of n identities,

hψ

2Gµα − F µα + Sσ

µα(φσ − (lg ψ),σ)

≡ 0,

(57)

h

(cid:16)

α

(cid:17)i

where Sσ
µα is the completely antisymmetrized torsion (33). Of the n equations
(57) only n − 1 are independent since the antisymmetry of [. . . ] with respect
to α and µ implied [. . . ],αµ = 0, irrespective of any speciﬁc choice for Gµα or
F µα. Computing again the balance of the number of ﬁeld equations (n2 + n)
minus the number of (independent) identities (n + n − 1) compared to the
number of ﬁeld variables (n2 + 1) minus the number of space-time dimensions
to allow for general covariance n, these numbers now added up correctly as

(n2 + n) − (n + n − 1) = (n2 + 1) − n.

(58)

This essentially completed the derivation of the ﬁeld equations (53, 54) as given
in the Annalen paper. Actually Einstein was a bit more precise by arguing for
the compatibility of the ﬁeld equations on a hypersurface xn = a and the
possibility of a smooth continuation of all relations oﬀ the hypersurface. A
variational principle is no longer mentioned. In the ﬁnal paragraph, Einstein
looked at the ﬁrst approximation of the ﬁeld equations and derived relations
that correspond to the Poisson equation and to the vacuum Maxwell equations,
respectively. 55

55 This part of the Annalen paper is the subject of a later correspondence that
took place in the late thirties between Einstein and Herbert E. Salzer who wrote a

30

6 The ﬁnal fate of the approach

The theory had now reached a stage where Einstein essentially stopped look-
ing for other acceptable ﬁeld equations, just as in the case of the prehistory of
general relativity with publication of the Entwurf. And just as with the En-
twurf, the Annalen paper represents the culmination of the distant parallelism
approach. At this point Einstein, accepted the equations that he had come up
with and proceeded to look at their physical and mathematical consequences.
This latter endeavour involved the elaboration of implications of physical sig-
niﬁcance such as the existence of particle-like solutions and their equations
of motion. It also involved, again in perfect similarity with the Entwurf, the
attempt to rederive the ﬁeld equations from a variational principle and the
investigation of their compatibility.

The ﬁnal fate of the approach is documented by a French version of the An-
nalen article, three popular accounts of the present state of ﬁeld theory that
mention distant parallelism as a promising recent progress, as well as four
further notes in the Sitzungsberichte, two of them co-authored with Walther
Mayer.

6.1 Improving the derivation of the ﬁeld equations

When the manuscripts for their Annalen papers were still sitting with the pub-
lisher, Cartan and Einstein had occasion for a personal encounter. In Novem-
ber 1929, Einstein travelled to Paris. He was awarded an honorary doctorate
and also gave two lectures at the Institut Henri Poincar´e. 56 Einstein’s lec-
tures at the Institut Henri Poincar´e were subsequently published in French
in the institute’s Annales [Einstein 1930b]. This French account of the the-
ory closely parallels the version in the Mathematische Annalen, being slightly
more explicit in the mathematical details.

The personal encounter between Einstein and Cartan also seemed to have
resulted in some further work of the latter on the theory. This is witnessed
by a few extensive and technical manuscripts that have been published in the
Einstein-Cartan correspondence [Debever 1979]. One such manuscript [Debever 1979,

master’s thesis on “analytic, geometric and physical aspects of distant parallelism”.
In this correspondence, Einstein admitted an error in the last section of his Annalen
paper. But at that time, he had abandoned the approach long ago anyway. See
[Salzer 1974] for a detailed discussion.
56 The lectures were given on 8 and 12 November, and the awarding of the honorary
doctorates took place at the ceremony of the annual reopening of the Paris university
at the Sorbonne on 9 November, see [Debever 1979, pp. 21f.] for details.

31

pp. 32–55] by Cartan immediately led Einstein to publish an improved version
of the compatibility proof in his Annalen paper, even before that paper was
available in print. 57 On December 12, 1929, Einstein submitted a communi-
cation to the Prussian Academy on the “Compatibility of the Field equations
in the Uniﬁed Field Theory” [Einstein 1930f]. In this short note, Einstein ﬁrst
gave a few critical remarks on his earlier papers. These concerned the diver-
gence operation introduced in [Einstein 1929b] which Einstein now considered
inappropriate because it does not vanish when applied to the fundamental ten-
sor. Einstein also mentioned that the compatibility proof given in that paper
was untenable because it erroneously assumed the existence of a set of iden-
tities for the ﬁeld equations. Finally, Einstein pointed out that his discussion
of the magnetic ﬁeld equation in [Einstein 1929e] was based on an unjustiﬁed
assumption.

The major part of the note, however, was devoted to a brief survey of the
mathematical apparatus of the theory (which Einstein probably gave because
the long review paper had not yet come out) and a discussion of the compat-
ibility issue. The main point was that Einstein had learnt from Cartan that
the compatibility proof could be improved. 58 The point was that the strange
identity (57) could, in fact, be substituted by the simple identity

Gµα

;µ + Λα

στ Gστ ≡ 0.

(59)

The compatibility proof was now given by Einstein for the ﬁeld equations (53)
and (54) on the basis of the identities (52), (55), and (59).

The issue of proving compatibility was taken up again in a very brief note

57 In a postscript to a letter to Cartan, dated 10 January, Einstein complains: “It
is remarkable that the Mathematische Annalen has such terrible constipation that
after, so many months, it has not been able to excrete what it has absorbed.”
[Debever 1979, p.121]. The correspondence between Einstein and Cartan at the
end of 1929 was intense and it was Cartan who took the lead by working on the
mathematical side of the problem. “I am very fortunate that I have acquired you as
a coworker (Mit-Strebenden). For you have exactly that which I lack: an enviable
facility in mathematics.” (18 December 1929). The correspondence with Cartan on
teleparallelism reminds of a similar correspondence with Einstein and Levi-Civita
on mathematical details of the derivation of the Entwurf equations. Einstein seems
to have had comparable feelings of appreciation for Levi-Civita to whom he wrote
in 1917: “It must be nice to ride these ﬁelds on the cob of mathematics proper,
while the likes of us must trudge along on foot.”(“Ich bewundere die Eleganz Ihrer
Rechnungsweise. Es muss h¨ubsch sein, auf dem Gaul der eigentlichen Mathematik
durch diese Geﬁlde zu reiten, w¨ahrend unsereiner sich zu Fuss durchhelfen muss.”)
Einstein to Levi-Civita, 2 August 1917, [Einstein 1998, Doc. 368].
58 “Der Kompatibilit¨atsbeweis ist auf Grund einer brieﬂichen Mitteilung, welche ich
Hrn. Cartan verdanke [...], gegen¨uber der in den Mathematischen Annalen gegebe-
nen Darstellung etwas vereinfacht.” [Einstein 1930f, p. 18].

32

from July 1930 [Einstein 1930g] where Einstein again introduced a divergence
operation . . ./α and showed that it may be used to prove the compatibility of
certain equations that are similar to his ﬁeld equations. He did not, however,
discuss the consequences for his system of equations (53) and (54) explicitly.

6.2 Promoting and defending the theory

In October 1929, Einstein was asked to substitute for the late secretary of
state Leipart to give a lecture to some 800 invited members of the Kaiser-
Wilhelm society and other representatives of scientiﬁc and cultural institu-
tions and ministries. Einstein agreed and gave a talk on the Problem of Space,
Field, and Ether in Physics on December 11, 1929. 59 Essentially the same
talk was delivered to a large audience on the opening day of the Second
World Power Conference which took place in Berlin from 16–25 June, 1930. 60
The text of this lecture was then published in the conference’s Transactions
[Einstein 1930d]. 61 Just as in the articles of the New York and London Times,
this lecture gave a historical account of our concepts of space, starting with
our prescientiﬁc notion, discussing Euclidean geometry, Cartesian analytic ge-
ometry, Newtonian absolute space, the ether concept of 19th-century electro-
dynamics, special relativity, and Riemannian geometry of general relativity. In
the ﬁnal paragraphs, Einstein hinted again at the latest progress of a “unitary
ﬁeld theory” based on a mathematical structure of space which is “a natural
supplementation of the structure of space according to the Riemannian met-
ric.” He explained again the meaning of distant parallelism and wrote, a little
less self-conﬁdent than in the Times

For the mathematical expression of the ﬁeld-laws we require the simplest
mathematical conditions to which such a structure of space can conform.
Such laws seem actually to have been discovered and they agree with the
empirically known laws of gravitation and electricity in ﬁrst approximation.
Whether these ﬁeld-laws will also yield a usable theory of material particles
and of motions must be determined by deeper mathematical investigations.
[Einstein 1930c, p. 184]

59 Harnack to Einstein, 18 October 1929, EA 1-084.
60 K¨ortgen to Einstein, 22 February 1930, EA 1-085.
61 A similar popular account of Space, Ether and the Field in Physics was pub-
lished in Forum Philosophicum [Einstein 1930c] together with an English trans-
lation. Indeed, the text of the two penultimate paragraphs of this version and
[Einstein 1930d] that characterize the distant parallelism are identical. A two-page
abbreviated version of [Einstein 1930c] also mentions the distant parallelism ap-
proach [Einstein 1930e].

33

Einstein also defended his new theory in private correspondence. A succinct
example is a rebuttal of a saucy criticism by Wolfgang Pauli. With respect
to the theory as presented in the Annalen, Pauli wrote that he no longer
believed that the quantum theory might be an argument for the distant par-
allelism after Weyl and Fock had shown that Dirac’s electron theory could be
incorporated into a relativistic gravitation theory in a way that is not globally
but locally Lorentz covariant. Pauli also wrote that he did not ﬁnd the deriva-
tion of the ﬁeld equations convincing, complained that the Maxwell equations
would be obtained only in diﬀerentiated form, and expressed doubts whether
an energy-momentum tensor of the ﬁeld could be found. He ﬁnally missed
the validity of the classical tests of general relativity, perihelion motion and
gravitational light bending. Pauli concluded

I would take any bet with you that you will have given up the whole distant
parallelism at the latest within a year from now, just as you had given up
previously the aﬃne theory. And I do not want to rouse you to contradiction
by continuing this letter, so as not to delay the approach of the natural
decease of the distant parallelism theory. 62

Einstein found Pauli’s critique “amusing but a little superﬁcial.” Without
going into details, he argued that neither Pauli was in a position to “view
the unity of the forces in nature from the correct stand point” and one may
not discard his theory before its mathematical consequences were thoroughly
thought through. He claimed

that with a deeper look at it you would certainly understand that the sys-
tem of equations advanced by me is forced by the underlying structure of
space, particularly since the compatibility proof of the equations could be
simpliﬁed in the meantime. Forget what you have said and engross yourself
in the problem with such an attitude as though you had just come down
from the moon and would yet need to form a fresh opinion. And then don’t
utter an opinion before at least a quarter of a year has passed. 63

62 “[...] ich w¨urde jede Wette mit Ihnen eingehen, dass Sie sp¨atestens nach einem
Jahr den ganzen Fernparallelismus aufgegeben haben werden, so wie Sie fr¨uher
die Aﬃntheorie aufgegeben haben. Und ich will Sie nicht durch Fortsetzung dieses
Briefes noch weiter zum Widerspruch reizen, um das Herannahen dieses nat¨urlichen
Endes der Fernparallelismustheorie nicht zu verz¨ogern.” Pauli to Einstein, 19 De-
cember 1929, [Pauli 1979, Doc. 239].
63 “Dass das von mir aufgestellte Gleichungssystem zu der zugrunde gelegten Raum-
struktur in einer zwangl¨auﬁgen Beziehung steht, w¨urden Sie bei tieferem Studium
bestimmt einsehen, zumal der Kompatibilit¨atsbeweis der Gleichungen sich unter-
dessen noch hat vereinfachen lassen. Vergessen Sie, was Sie gesagt haben und
vertiefen Sie sich einmal mit solcher Einstellung in das Problem, wie wenn Sie
soeben vom Mond heruntergekommen w¨aren und sich erst frisch eine Meinung bilden
m¨ussten. Und dann sagen Sie erst etwas dar¨uber, wenn mindestens ein Vierteljahr

34

6.3 Elaboration of consequences

Both the long review paper in the Annalen (as well as its French counter part
[Einstein 1930b]) and this short note end with the expression of the next step
along the teleparallel approach:

The most important question that is now tied to the (rigorous) ﬁeld equa-
tions is the question of the existence of singularity-free solutions which can
represent electrons and protons. 64

This problem was indeed attacked by Einstein in his pursuit of the telepar-
allel program. It was a problem where he found help by a collaborator. With
Grommer and M¨untz leaving for Minsk resp. Leningrad, Einstein may have
found himself in need of new collaborators. After contacting Richard von Mises
about suitable candidates, he was recommended Walther Mayer (1887–1948),
then Privatdozent for mathematics in Vienna. 65 Mayer was an expert in in-
variant theory and diﬀerential geometry. Einstein was interested and technical
arrangements were quickly agreed upon. Mayer arrived in Berlin some time in
January 1930 but apparently began to work on problems associated with the
teleparallelism approach before his arrival. 66

The collaboration with Mayer proved to be of immediate success. Already
on 20 February 1930, they presented a ﬁrst joint paper for publication in
the Academy proceedings [Einstein and Mayer 1930]. In it they discussed two
special solutions for the teleparallel ﬁeld equations, i.e. those presented and
derived in the Annalen paper [Einstein 1930a], the case of spatially spherical
symmetry, and the static case of an arbitrary number of non-moving, non-
charged mass points.

Assuming spatial rotation symmetry as well as reﬂection symmetry, their so-
lution explicitly read

hs

α =

h4

α =

α

δs
1 − e2
r4

e
1 − e2
r4

,

,

q

4

4

q

α, s = 1, 2, 3,

hs

4 = 0,

α = 1, 2, 3,

h4

4 = 1 + m

4

s

1 −

e2
r4

dr
r2

Z

(60)

vergangen ist.” Einstein to Pauli, 24 December 1929, [Pauli 1979, Doc. 240].
64 “Die wichtigste an die (strengen) Feldgleichungen sich kn¨upfende Frage ist die
nach der Existenz singularit¨atsfreier L¨osungen, welche die Elektronen und Protonen
darstellen k¨onnen.” [Einstein 1930f, p. 23].
65 Richard von Mises to Einstein, 17 December 1929, EA 18-225. For biographical
information on Mayer, see [Pais 1982, pp. 492–494].
66 See Einstein to Mayer, 1 January 1930, EA 18-065.

35

where r2 =
constants to be identiﬁed with the charge and mass of the particle.

3
a=1 xaxa is the spatial distance from the origin, and e and m two

P

For vanishing charge e, the solution reduces to

hs

α = δs

α

s = 1, 2, 3,

h4

α = δα

1 +

4 

mj = konst. (61)

,

mj
rj 


Xj



Einstein and Mayer interpreted (61) to the eﬀect that two or more uncharged
massive particles could stay at rest with arbitrary distance from each other.
They emphasized, however, that the solution was singular and that the theory
would not allow to derive equations of motion for such singular solutions.
On the contrary, it must be demanded that only non-singular solutions are
interpreted as representing elementary particles.

6.4 The demise of the Fernparallelismus approach

Roughly a decade later, Einstein summarized his reasons for abandoning the
distant parallelism approach

Today, I am ﬁrmly convinced that the distant parallelism does not lead us
to an acceptable representation of the physical ﬁeld. From the reasons for
this I will only give two:

1) One cannot ﬁnd a tensor-like representation of the electromagnetic

2) The theory leaves too large a freedom for the choice of the ﬁeld equa-

ﬁeld.

tions. 67

I will not comment here on the ﬁrst point mentioned by Einstein. But the
second point is, I believe, well illustrated by Einstein’s last paper on this
approach. It is again a paper coauthored with Mayer, and it is concerned
with a “systematic investigation of compatible ﬁeld equations that can be set
in a Riemannian space with distant parallelism” [Einstein and Mayer 1931].
The paper is remarkable in two respects. For one, it was presented to the
Academy on 23 April, 1931, and hence appeared some nine months later than
the last two-page note from July 1930. All other papers on the approach were

67 “Ich bin heute fest davon ¨uberzeugt, daß der Fern-Parallelismus zu keiner brauch-
baren Darstellung des physikalischen Feldes f¨uhrt. Von den Gr¨unden will ich nur
zwei anf¨uhren.
1) Man gelangt nicht zu einer tensor-artigen Darstellung des elektromagnetischen
Feldes
2) Die Theorie l¨aßt eine zu große Freiheit f¨ur die Wahl der Feldgleichungen” Einstein
to Salzer, 29 August 1938 [Salzer 1974, p. 90].

36

published within at most six months in between. Even in the pure chronology,
the paper thus appears as a belated and ﬁnal word on the fate of the approach.
Second, this paper, as we will see, is a quite unusual paper for Einstein in its
technicality.

To discuss the admissible ﬁeld equations, Einstein and Mayer demand that
these be linear in the second derivatives of the ﬁeld variables hsν and at most
quadratic in the ﬁrst derivatives. They also argue that the identities which
the left sides of the ﬁeld equations satisfy should contain these variables only
linearly and in ﬁrst order, and they also should contain the torsion tensor Λα
µν
explicitly only linearly. Using the notation of the previous papers, Einstein
and Mayer now make the following ansatz for the ﬁeld equations of the theory

0 = Gµα = pΛα

µν;ν + qΛµ

αν;ν + a1φµ;α + a2φα;µ + a3gµαφν;ν + Rµα

(62)

where p, q, a1, . . . a3 are arbitrary real coeﬃcients, and Rµα denotes an as yet
unspeciﬁed term that is quadratic in the Λ’s.

They also write the divergence identity that is to be satisﬁed in the following
general form

0 ≡ Gµα

;µ + AGµα

;µ + Gστ

c1Λa

στ + c2Λτ

σa + c3Λσ
τ a

(cid:16)

+ c4Gασφσ + c5Gσαφσ
+ c6Gσσφa + BGσσ
;a ,

(cid:17)

(63)

where again A, c1, . . . c6, and B are unspeciﬁed coeﬃcients.

Einstein and Mayer explicitly admit the possibility of other terms not con-
tained in this ansatz, especially for n = 4 dimensions. Nevertheless they claim
that the neglected terms would be rather unnatural ones and that the general
ansatz of eqs. (62), (63) is, in fact, the most general one that is consistent with
the restrictive conditions of the problem.

Accepting the generality of the ansatz, the problem of ﬁnding the manifold of
admissible ﬁeld equations then reduces to the algebraic problem of determining
the unspeciﬁed constants p, q, a1, . . . a3, A, c1, . . . c6, and B, as well as the
constants implicitly contained in the generic term Rµα. This algebraic problem
is straightforward but formidable. One may well image that it took Einstein
and Mayer a while to ﬁnd their way through the resulting explicit equations. 68
The result is the subject of this ﬁnal note on the Fernparallelismus approach.
Introducing a few simpliﬁcations, they nevertheless end up with a system of
20 algebraic equations for 11 coeﬃcients which they list and discuss. Using
a tree-like graphical representation, they classify possible types of solutions
which they subsequently try to associate with known cases and solutions.

68 A number of apparently related but otherwise unidentiﬁed manuscript pages are
extant in the Einstein Archives, see, e.g., EA 62-003ﬀ, EA 62-054ﬀ, EA 62-132ﬀ.

37

The ﬁnal upshot of their investigation is summarized in the ﬁnal paragraph
of their paper.

The result of the whole investigation is the following: In a space with
Riemann-metric and Fernparallelismus of the character deﬁned by (1), (2)
[i.e. our eqs. (62), (63)—TS] there are all in all four (nontrivial) diﬀerent
types of (compatible) ﬁeld equations. Two of these are (non-trivial) general-
izations of the original ﬁeld equations of gravitation, one of which is already
known as resulting from a Hamiltonian principle [cp. (10) and (11)]. The
remaining two types are denoted in the paper by (13) and Π221221.

These are Einstein’s ﬁnal words in print on the Fernparallelismus approach.
The equations (10), (11), (13) of their paper that they refer to and the ex-
pression Π221221 indicate various ﬁeld equations given in more or less explicit
form.

7 Concluding remarks

As indicated in the introduction and at various points along the paper, the life
cycle of the Fernparallelismus approach shows a number of similarities with
the life cycle of the Entwurf theory of the years 1912–1915. For the sake of
the present account, I would like to recall the following features of the fate of
the Entwurf theory, the genesis, life, and demise of which is well understood
by recent historical research. 69

The theoretical framework of this theory crucially depended upon the insight
that the metric tensor ﬁeld is the mathematical ingredient needed to set up
a generalized theory of relativity and a theory of gravitation. This insight
was made by Einstein some time in the summer of 1912 but the mathematics
associated with the metric tensor ﬁeld was not fully understood by Einstein
in the beginning. Somewhat fortuitously he was able to enter into an intense
collaboration with a befriended mathematician, Marcel Grossmann, then his
colleague at the Polytechnic in Zurich. The subsequent development, as docu-
mented mainly by unpublished manuscripts and correspondence, consisted in
an intense search for a gravitational ﬁeld equation that would satisfy a number
of heuristic requirements. An analysis of Einstein’s research notes of that pe-
riod showed that he pursued a dual strategy for ﬁnding ﬁeld equations. At one
point, Einstein was content with a set of ﬁeld equations that was not generally
covariant but seemed to square best with most of his other heuristic require-

69 For a historical account of the prehistory of general relativity along the lines given
here, see [Renn and Sauer 1999]. See also [Norton 1984], [Stachel 2002, ch. V], and
[Renn et al. forthcoming] as well as further references cited in these works.

38

ments. Einstein and Grossmann published their theory in their joint Entwurf.
The further development of this theory involved both the elaboration of empir-
ically relevant consequences, notably the planetary perihelion anomaly, and
the further mathematical justiﬁcation of its ﬁeld equations, with particular
emphasis on the question of their uniqueness. By mid-1915 several diﬃculties
of the theory had become evident to Einstein, and it was then abandoned in
November 1915 and superseded by new, generally covariant ﬁeld equations,
viz. the Einstein equations of today’s general relativity.

Reﬂecting on the “biographical” similarities between the Entwurf theory and
the Fernparallelismus theory, it seems that there is a systematic reason for
this similarity. 70 It resides in the roles that the mathematical representation
in terms of the metric tensor ﬁeld, resp. of the tetrad ﬁeld and the search for
ﬁeld equations for these quantities played in each theory.

In both cases, the mathematics associated with the new concept was badly
understood by Einstein in the beginning. In both cases, the mathematics had
been worked out before in purely mathematical contexts. In both cases, it
was through the mediation of more mathematically trained colleagues that
Einstein learnt about the earlier relevant mathematical developments. More
speciﬁcally, we observe that after a relatively brief period where the mathe-
matical concepts of metric resp. tetrad were accepted as the key elements, the
further research program focussed on ﬁnding ﬁeld equations for these quanti-
ties. In the attempts to ﬁnd, derive, and justify those ﬁeld equations, heuristic
convictions become visible that had been conceived in previous work.

In the case of the Entwurf theory, the relevant heuristic assumptions could
be identiﬁed as the equivalence hypothesis, postulates of general covariance,
energy-momentum conservation, and of correspondence, i.e. the admissibility
of the Newtonian limit [Renn and Sauer 1999].

In the case of the Fernparallelismus approach, the corresponding heuristic
convictions still need to be identiﬁed more precisely through the study of
unpublished correspondence and notes. It appears, however, that one may
similarly identify a number of postulates that play a similar role. Two such
postulates are the demands of distant parallelism and general covariance. We
also have a postulate that the known cases of the relativistic gravitational
ﬁeld equation for vacuum and the Maxwell equations shall be identiﬁable in
some weak ﬁeld limit. Third, we have seen that Einstein postulated that non-
singular, spatially symmetric, stationary solutions can be found that can be

70 I agree with the general thesis of [van Dongen 2002] who identiﬁed methodolog-
ical convictions for Einstein’s work on semi-vectors and on ﬁve-dimensional ﬁeld
theory that had originated during the Entwurf period. In contrast to van Dongen I
would only emphasize the constraints and inherent possibilities of the mathematical
representation over the role of explicit methodological reﬂections.

39

interpreted as elementary particles. Finally, he was postulating that equations
of motion should be derivable for those particle-like solutions.

In the case of the Entwurf theory, the heuristic postulates were mutually in-
compatible in Einstein’s original understanding. The incompatibility showed
itself in Einstein’s diﬃculty to ﬁnd ﬁeld equations that would satisfy all four of
his postulates at the same time. As a consequence, Einstein developed a double
strategy of ﬁnding ﬁeld equations that we have called the mathematical resp.
the physical strategy [Renn and Sauer 1999]. One strategy started from the
postulates of general covariance and tried to modify equations constructed
on the basis of the Riemann tensor in order to justify the more physically
motivated postulates of energy-momentum conservation and of obtaining the
Newtonian limit. The complementary strategy started from expressions that
guaranteed the Newtonian limit from the beginning and tried to enlarge the
covariance group so as to generalize the relativity principle.

In the Fernparallelimus approach something similar seems to be observable.
Here again, we may distinguish two distinct approaches to the problem of
ﬁnding ﬁeld equations. A mathematical, variational approach started from a
mathematically well-deﬁned ansatz but the problem was to obtain the gravi-
tational and electromagnetic ﬁeld equations in ﬁrst approximation. The com-
plementary physical strategy, the overdetermination approach, on the other
hand, started from identities that guaranteed the validity of the gravitational
and electromagnetic equations from the outset. The drawback here was the
mathematical problem of proving the compatibility of the ﬁeld equations. In
both cases, at the mature stage, Einstein settled for the more physical ap-
proach.

Can we also compare the demise of the two theories? From the more global per-
spective of Einstein’s heuristics, the result of the ﬁnal paper [Einstein and Mayer 1931]
may be phrased as follows. The overdetermination approach to ﬁnding ﬁeld
equations within the distant parallelism framework had provided a manifold
of diﬀerent admissible equations. These were not only diﬃcult to ﬁnd and han-
dle in their algebraic complexity. The approach also seemed to encompass the
equations produced by the alternative variational approach and to produce
even more admissible ﬁeld equations than that method.

In the case of the Entwurf theory of gravitation, several diﬃculties accumu-
lated before its demise. But what sealed the fate of the Entwurf in the end
was the success of its alternative, the generally covariant Einstein equations
[Renn and Sauer 1999, pp. 115ﬀ]. These equations gave the correct value for
the anomaly of the perihelion motion for Mercury and they solved the energy-
momentum problem by virtue of the contracted Bianchi identities.

More than one reason was presumably responsible for Einstein’s loss of faith

40

in the distant parallelism approach. The mere algebraic complexity can hardly
have been the decisive reason for giving it up, certainly not from a logical point
of view. But it may have motivated Einstein to explore alternatives. More
problematic must have been the apparent impossibility to justify a set of ﬁeld
equations uniquely. But here again it is hard to see how this diﬃculty could
be turned into a logically compelling argument for giving up the approach.
After all one could always add new heuristic requirements, or justify particular
equations post hoc as it were by their subsequent success. But just as in the
case of the Entwurf, the ﬁnal demise may have been eﬀected by the success of
a diﬀerent theory.

Indeed, only a few months later Einstein and Mayer presented a new ap-
proach towards a uniﬁed theory [Einstein and Mayer 1931a] that may have
seemed more promising to them at the time. In this approach, the introduc-
tion of an independent orthonormal basis ﬁeld in some vector spaces associated
with each point of the manifold is again the crucial mathematical ingredient.
But now the frame ﬁelds and hence the vector spaces were no longer as-
sumed to be of the same dimension as the underlying manifold and hence
they were no longer to be identiﬁed with the tangent bundle. They were now
taken to be ﬁve-dimensional. The introduction of a ﬁve-dimensional frame
bundle pointed to a reconsideration of the Kaluza-Klein approach. Since the
underlying space-time manifold was still assumed to be four-dimensional, the
new approach was also suﬃciently diﬀerent from earlier consideration of the
ﬁve-dimensional ﬁeld theory that earlier arguments against the Kaluza-Klein
approach were no longer valid. Indeed, the ﬁve-dimensional vector spaces may
have seemed promising enough to justify the abandoning of the Fernparallelis-
mus approach for the time being. In contrast to other approaches in his quest
for a uniﬁed theory, it seemed to have been a ﬁnal demise, too. Einstein appar-
ently did not return to an exploration of the conceptual framework of distant
parallelism in his subsequent quest for a uniﬁed ﬁeld theory of gravitation and
electromagnetism.

Acknowledgments

A preliminary version of this paper was presented at a conference on the his-
tory of modern mathematics, held at the Open University, Milton Keynes, in
September 2002. I wish to thank Jeremy Gray for the invitation to this meet-
ing. I am also grateful to Walter Hunziker and the Institute for Theoretical
Physics at the ETH Zurich for its hospitality during the summer 2002. I wish
to thank Jeroen van Dongen, Friedrich-Wilhelm Hehl, and Erhard Scholz for
some helpful comments on an earlier draft of this paper. Unpublished corre-
spondence by Einstein is quoted by kind permission of the Albert Einstein
Archives, The Hebrew University of Jerusalem.

41

Appendix: A note on notation

During the elaboration of the teleparallelism approach Einstein introduced—
and dropped—a few notational idiosyncrasies. For a systematic reconstruction
of the theory, these notational changes are awkward to deal with. However,
for a historical reconstruction they provide very useful information. They help
to identify and date calculational manuscripts and they may provide clues as
to Einstein’s reception of literature as well as to his heuristics.

I will summarize here the three notational pecularities associated with the
Fernparallelismus approach. They concern a) the notation of the anholonomic
indices of the tetrads, b) a “new” divergence operation, and c) a peculiar way
of indicating raising and lowering of indices.

Einstein rather consistently denotes the anholonomic indices (Bein-Indizes) of
the tetrads by latin indices and the holonomic indices (Koordinaten-Indizes)
by greek indices. As discussed above in sec. 3.2, Weitzenb¨ock had written to
Einstein shortly after the publication of Einstein’s ﬁrst two notes on teleparal-
lelism pointing out his priority with respect to the Weitzenb¨ock connection. In
Einstein’s next publications, in the Stodola-Festschrift [Einstein 1929a] and in
[Einstein 1929b] he already used Weitzenboeck’s notation of putting the an-
holonomic index to the left of the tetrad symbol: shµ with explicit reference
to Weitzenb¨ock’s paper. The notation is used again, but for the last time in
March 1929 in [Einstein 1929e]. The Annalen paper of summer 1929 reverts
to the previous right hand side notation. The left hand side notation therefore
should give a fairly accurate hint to material dating between summer 1928
and summer 1929.

In his note from January 1929 [Einstein 1929b], Einstein introduced what he
called a “divergence” of a tensor density A ≡ hA, h ≡ det(hsµ) by the following
deﬁnition:

Aσ··i
τ ··/i = Aσ··i

τ ··,i + Aα··i

τ ·· ∆σ

αi + · · · − Aσ··i

α·· ∆α

τ i − · · · .

(64)

Here a subscript comma denotes ordinary coordinate diﬀerentiation and the
dots indicate further contravariant and covariant indices. The new “diver-
gence” coincides with the usual covariant divergence A··σ
··;σ formed using the
covariant derivative associated with the Weitzenb¨ock connection ∆, see (8),
for the case of vanishing torsion:

··;σ ≡ A··σ
A··σ

··/σ + A··σ

·· Λσ

ασ.

(65)

Heuristically, it was introduced in the context of introducing the overdetermi-
nation approach because the relevant identities take on a compact form using
this notation. Einstein used this notation again in his note from March 1929 in

42

which he goes back to the Hamilton approach. However, in the Annalen paper,
he explicitly wrote that he no longer recognized a speciﬁc physical meaning of
that divergence operation. 71

Strangely enough, Einstein did revert to this non-standard divergence another
time. In his short, two-page note [Einstein 1930g] he reintroduced the diver-
gence symbol for an arbitrary tensor Aν

Aν

/ν = Aν

;ν − Aνϕν,

(66)

where ϕν ≡ Λα
in [Einstein and Mayer 1931].

σα. It is also used, albeit rather inconspicuously, in two equations

The third notational idiosyncrasy was also introduced in the January 1929
note and was used in all subsequent papers on Fernparallelismus.

Sometimes I will indicate the raising resp. lowering of an index by under-
lining the corresponding index. 72

An explicit example is (cp. [Einstein 1930a, p. 693])

Λ α
Λ α

µ ν ≡ Λ αβ γgµβgνγ,
µ ν ≡ Λ β
µ νgαβ.

(67)

References

[Akivis and Rosenfeld 1993] Akivis, M.A. and Rosenfeld, B.A. Elie Cartan (1869–

1951), Providence, RI: American Mathematical Society, 1993.

[Biezunski 1989] Biezunski, Michel. “Inside the Coconut: The Einstein-Cartan
Discussion on Distant Parallelism.” in: Stachel, John and Don Howard (eds.),
Einstein and the History of General Relativity (Einstein Studies I), Boston, et
al.: Birkh¨auser, 1989, pp. 315–324.

[Cartan 1922] Cartan, Elie. “Sur une g´en´eralisation de la notion de courbure de
Riemann et les espaces ´a torsion.” Comptes Rendues Acad. Sc. (Paris), t. 174
(1922) 593–595.

[Cartan 1930] Cartan, Elie. “Notice historique sur la notion de parall´elisme absolu.”

Mathematische Annalen 102 (1930) 698–706.

71 “In fr¨uheren Arbeiten habe ich noch andere Divergenzoperatoren eingef¨uhrt,
jenen Operatoren eine besondere Bedeutung
bin aber davon abgekommen,
zuzuschreiben.” [Einstein 1930a, p. 689].
72 “Ich will manchmal das Heraufziehen bzw. Hinunterziehen eines Index dadurch
andeuten, daß ich den betreﬀenden Index unterstreiche.” [Einstein 1929b, p. 3].

43

[Debever 1979] Debever, Robert (ed.). Elie Cartan - Albert Einstein. Letters on
Absolute Parallelism 1929–1932. Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1979.

[Einstein 1927] Einstein, Albert. “ ¨Uber die formale Beziehung des Riemannschen
Kr¨ummungstensors zu den Feldgleichungen der Gravitation.” Mathematische
Annalen 97 (1927) 99–103.

[Einstein 1928a] Einstein, Albert. “Riemann-Geometrie mit Aufrechterhaltung des
Begriﬀes des Fernparallelismus.” Preussische Akademie der Wissenschaften,
Phys.-math. Klasse, Sitzungsberichte 1928, 217–221.

[Einstein 1928b] Einstein, Albert.

einheitliche
Feldtheorie von Gravitation und Elektrizit¨at.” Preussische Akademie der
Wissenschaften, Phys.-math. Klasse, Sitzungsberichte 1928, 224–227.

“Neue M¨oglichkeit

eine

f¨ur

[Einstein 1929a] Einstein, Albert. “ ¨Uber den gegenw¨artigen Stand der Feld-
Theorie.” in: Festschrift zum 70. Geburtstag von Prof. Dr. A. Stodola. Z¨urich:
Orell F¨ussli Verlag, 1929, pp. 126–132.

[Einstein 1929b] Einstein, Albert. “Zur

einheitlichen Feldtheorie.”Preussische
Akademie der Wissenschaften, Phys.-math. Klasse, Sitzungsberichte 1928, 2–
7.

[Einstein 1929c] Einstein, Albert. “Einstein explains his new discoveries.” New York

Times, 3 February 1929.

4 February 1929

[Einstein 1929d] Einstein, Albert. “The New Field Theory.” London Times,

[Einstein 1929e] Einstein, Albert. “Einheitliche Feldtheorie und Hamiltonsches
Prinzip.” Preussische Akademie der Wissenschaften, Phys.-math. Klasse,
Sitzungsberichte 1929, 156–159.

[Einstein 1930a] Einstein, Albert. “Auf die Riemann-Metrik und den Fern-
Parallelismus gegr¨undete einheitliche Feldtheorie.” Mathematische Annalen 102
(1930) 685–697.

[Einstein 1930b] Einstein, Albert. “The´eorie unitaire du champ physique.” Institut

H. Poincar´e, Annales I (1930) 1–24.

[Einstein 1930c] Einstein, Albert. “Raum, ¨Ather und Feld in der Physik.” Forum

Philosophicum I (1930) 173–180; English translation 180–184.

[Einstein 1930d] Einstein, Albert. “Das Raum-, Feld- und ¨Ather-Problem in der
Physik.” in Second world Power Conference (Berlin 1930) Transactions XIX,
1–5.

[Einstein 1930e] Einstein, Albert. “Das Raum-, Feld- und ¨Ather-Problem in der

Physik.” Koralle V (1930) 486–487.

[Einstein 1930f] Einstein, Albert. “Die Kompatibilit¨at der Feldgleichungen in der
einheitlichen Feldtheorie.” Preussische Akademie der Wissenschaften, Phys.-
math. Klasse, Sitzungsberichte 1930, 18–23.

44

[Einstein 1930g] Einstein, Albert. “Zur Theorie der R¨aume mit Riemannmetrik und
Fernparallelismus.” Preussische Akademie der Wissenschaften, Phys.-math.
Klasse, Sitzungsberichte 1930, 401–402.

[Einstein 1998] Schulmann, R. et al. (eds.) 1998. The Collected Papers of Albert
Einstein. Vol. 8. The Berlin Years: Correspondence, 1914–1918. Princeton:
Princeton University Press.

[Einstein and Grossmann 1913] Einstein, Albert, and Grossmann, Marcel. Entwurf
einer verallgemeinerten Relativit¨atstheorie und einer Theorie der Gravitation,
Leipzig: Teubner, 1913.

[Einstein and Mayer 1930] Einstein,

Albert
and Mayer, Walther. “Zwei strenge statische L¨osungen der Feldgleichungen der
einheitlichen Feldtheorie.” Preussische Akademie der Wissenschaften, Phys.-
math. Klasse, Sitzungsberichte 1930, 110–120.

[Einstein and Mayer 1931] Einstein, Albert and Mayer, Walther. “Systematische
Untersuchung ¨uber kompatible Feldgleichungen, welche in einem Riemannschen
Raume mit Fernparallelismus gesetzt werden k¨onnen.” Preussische Akademie
der Wissenschaften, Phys.-math. Klasse, Sitzungsberichte 1931, 257–265.

[Einstein and Mayer 1931a] Einstein, Albert and Mayer, Walther. “Einheitliche
Theorie von Gravitation und Elektrizit¨at.” Preussische Akademie der
Wissenschaften, Phys.-math. Klasse, Sitzungsberichte 1931, 541–547.

[F¨olsing 1997] F¨olsing, Albrecht. Albert Einstein. A Biography Penguin 1997.

[Goenner forthcoming] Goenner, Hubert. “Unifed Field Theory: Early history and
interplay between mathematics and physics.” University of G¨ottingen preprint
2002 (Contribution to Amsterdam proceedings of HGR conference, Einstein
Studies).

[Goenner 2004] Goenner, Hubert. “On the History of Uniﬁed Field Theories.” Living
Reviews in Relativity 7 (2004), No. 2: http://www.livingreviews.org/lrr-2004-2.

[Goldstein and Ritter 2003] Goldstein, Catherine and Ritter, Jim. The Varieties
of Unity: Sounding Uniﬁed Theories 1920–1030. in: A. Ashtekar et al. (eds.)
Revisiting the Foundations of Relativistic Physics, Dordrecht, Boston, London:
Kluwer, 2003, pp. 93–149. (Berlin: Max Planck Institute for the History of
Science. Preprint 149 (2000)).

[Gronwald 1997] Gronwald, Frank.

gravity.
I. Fundamental structure and ﬁeld equations.” International Journal of Modern
Physics D 6 (1997) 263–303.

“Metric-aﬃne

theory of

gauge

[Hehl et al. 1980] Hehl, Friedrich W., Nitsch, J¨urgen, and Van der Heyde,
Paul. “Gravitation and the Poincar´e Gauge Field Theory with Quadratic
Lagrangian.” in: Held, Alan (ed.), General Relativity and Gravitation. One
Hundred Years After the Birth of Albert Einstein, New York and London:
Plenum, 1980, Vol. 1, pp. 329–355.

45

[Lanczos 1929] Lanczos, Cornel. “Einsteins neue Feldtheorie.” Forschungen und

Fortschritte 5 (1929) 220–222.

[Lanczos 1931] Lanczos, Cornel. “Die neue Feldtheorie Einsteins.” Ergebnisse der

exakten Naturwissenschaften 10 (1931) 97–132.

[Norton 1984] Norton, J. 1984. ‘How Einstein Found His Field Equations’. Historical

Studies in the Physical Sciences 14(1984), 253–316

[Pais 1982] Pais, Abraham, ‘Subtle is the Lord...’ The Science and Life of Albert

Einstein. Oxford et al.: Oxford University Press, 1982.

[Pauli 1979] Pauli, Wolfgang, Scienitiﬁc Correspondence with Bohr, Einstein,
I: 1919–1929. A. Hermann, K.v. Meyenn,

Heisenberg, a.o. Volume
V.F. Weisskopf (eds.), New York, Heidelberg, Berlin: Springer, 1979.

[Ortiz and Pinkus, forthcoming] Ortiz, Eduardo L. and Pinkus, Allen, “Herman
M¨untz: A Mathematician’s Odyssey.” Imperial College London, Mathematics
Department, Preprint 2003.

[Reichenbach 1929] Reichenbach, Hans. “Zur Einordnung des neuen Einsteinschen
Ansatzes ¨uber Gravitation und Elektrizit¨at.” Zeitschrift f¨ur Physik 53 (1929)
683–689.

[Renn and Sauer 1999] “Heuristics and Mathematical Representation in Einstein’s
Search for a Gravitational Field Equation.” in: ⁀The Expandin Worlds of General
Relativity, ed. H. Goenner et al., Birkh¨auser: Boston, 1999, pp. 87–125.

[Renn et al. forthcoming] Renn, J¨urgen, Sauer, Tilman, Janssen, Michel, Norton,
John and Stachel, John. The Genesis of General Relativity (2 vols.), Dordrecht,
Boston, London: Kluwer, forthcoming.

[Salzer 1974] Salzer, Herbert E. “Two Letters From Einstein Concerning his Distant
Parallelism Field Theory.” Archive for History of Exact Sciences 12 (1974) 88–
96.

[Stachel 1994] Stachel, John. “Lanczos’s Early Contributions to Relativity and His
Relationship with Einstein.” in: Brown, J. David et al. (eds.) Proceedings of the
Cornelius Lanczos International Centenary Conference SIAM 1994, pp. 201–
221 (reprinted in Stachel, John. Einstein from ‘B’ to ‘Z’, Birkh¨auser 2002,
pp. 499–518.

[Stachel 2002] Stachel, John. Einstein from ‘B’ to ‘Z’. Boston, Basel, Berlin:

Birkh¨auser, 2002.

[van Dalen 1990] van Dalen, Dirk. “The War of the Frogs and the Mice, or the Crisis

of the Mathematische Annalen.” Mathematical Intelligencer 12 (1990) 17–31.

[van Dalen 1999] van Dalen, Drik. Mystic, Geometer, and Intuitionist. The Life of

L.E.J. Brouwer. Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1999.

[van Dongen 2002] van Dongen, Jeroen. Einstein’s Uniﬁcation: General Relativity
and the Quest for Mathematical Naturalness. Ph.D. Thesis. University of
Amsterdam, 2002.

46

[Treder1971] Treder, Hans-J¨urgen (ed.). Gravitationstheorie und ¨Aquivalenzprinzip.

Berlin: Akademie-Verlag, 1971.

[Vizgin 1994] Vladimir P. Vizgin, Uniﬁed Field Theories in the ﬁrst third of the 20th

century, Basel, Boston, Berlin: Birkh¨auser, 1994.

[Weitzenb¨ock 1921]

Weitzenb¨ock, Roland. “Neuere Arbeiten der algebraischen Invariantentheorie.
Diﬀerentialinvarianten.” in: Encyclop¨adie der mathematischen Wissenschaften
mit Einschluss ihrer Anwendungen III.E.1. Leipzig: Teubner, 1921.

[Weitzenb¨ock 1923] Weitzenb¨ock,

Roland.

Invariantentheorie,

Groningen:

Noordhoﬀ, 1923.

[Weitzenb¨ock 1928] Weitzenb¨ock,

in
Roland.
der Einsteinschen Theorie des Fernparallelismus.” Preussische Akademie der
Wissenschaften, Phys.-math. Klasse, Sitzungsberichte 1928, 466–474.

“Diﬀerentialinvarianten

47

