4
0
0
2
 
y
a
M
 
3
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
t
s
i
h
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
6
6
0
5
0
4
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Albert Einstein’s 1916 Review Article on
General Relativity1

Tilman Sauer

Einstein Papers Project
California Institute of Technology 20-7
Pasadena, CA 91125, USA

Email: tilman@einstein.caltech.edu

Abstract

The ﬁrst comprehensive overview of the ﬁnal version of the general theory of
relativity was published by Einstein in 1916 after several expositions of prelim-
inary versions and latest revisions of the theory in November 1915. A historical
account of this review paper is given, of its prehistory, including a discussion of
Einstein’s collaboration with Marcel Grossmann, and of its immediate reception.

First publication. Annalen der Physik, 49, 769–822; also published separately
as Leipzig: Barth, 1916.

Later editions. Various reprints of the separately printed version, 5th unaltered
reprint in 1929; included in the 3rd and later editions of the anthology Lorentz,
H.A., Einstein, A., Minkowski, H., Das Relativit¨atsprinzip, Leipzig: Teubner,
19193; in the 1960 Readex Microprint edition of the Published Writings of Albert
Einstein as item 78; in the anthology K.v. Meyenn (ed.), Albert Einstein’s Rela-
tivit¨atstheorie. Die grundlegenden Arbeiten, Braunschweig: Vieweg, 1990; ﬁrst
edition reprinted with annotation as Doc. 30 in Vol. 6 of the Collected Papers of
Albert Einstein, Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1996, pp. 283–339; the
German and English reprints of the Collected Papers are also available online
at http://www.alberteinstein.info (2003).

English translations. 1920 by S. N. Bose, in: The Principle of Relativity. Orig-
inal Papers by A. Einstein and H. Minkowski, Calcutta: University of Calcutta
Press, pp. 90–163; 1923 by W. Perrett and G. B. Jeﬀery (without the ﬁrst page),
1To appear in: Landmark Writings in Western Mathematics, 1640–1940, Ivor Grattan-

Guiness (ed.), Elsevier 2004.

1

in English edition of Lorentz, H. A. et al., The Principle of Relativity, London:
Methuen 1923 (Dover reprint 1952), pp. 111–164.

French translations. 1933 by M. Solovine, in: Albert Einstein. Les Fondements
de la Th´eorie de la Relativit´e G´en´erale. Th´eorie unitaire de la Gravitation et
de l’Electricit´e. Sur la Structure Cosmologique de l’Espace. Paris: Hermann,
pp. 7–71; 1993 by F. Balibar et al., in Albert Einstein. Oeuvres choisies, tome
2, Paris: ´Editions du Seuil, ´Editions du CNRS, pp. 179–227.

Russian translation. 1935, in Albert Einstein. Sobranie naychnykh trudov,
vol. 1, Moscow: Izdatel’stvo ‘Nauka’, 1965, pp. 452–504.

Spanish translation. 1950 by F. Alsina Fuertes and D. Canals Frau, in Albert
Einstein. La relatividad (Memorias originales), Buenos Aires: Emec´e editores,
pp. 115–223.

Manuscripts. A manuscript of 46 pages is in the Schwadron collection at the
Hebrew University Jerusalem, available online at http://www.alberteinstein.info
under Call Nr. 120-788.

1. The special theory of relativity

Some ten years before the ﬁrst review of the general theory of relativity,
Einstein published his famous paper On the Electrodynamics of Moving Bodies
(Einstein 1905). That paper introduced what later became to be called the
special theory of relativity. It presented a conceptual analysis of the notions of
space and time, with a critical reassessment of the meaning of simultaneity at
its core. Length contraction and time dilation in a system that is in uniform
relative motion to an observer with a speed comparable to that of light are its
most salient features.

The 1905 paper was not a very sophisticated paper on the mathematical
side. Its author had obtained a diploma as secondary school teacher for math-
ematics and physics at the Polytechnic Zurich in 1900 (Pais 1982), (F¨olsing
1998). His science education had been excellent with laboratory work in the
most up-to-date facilities and ﬁrst-rate mathematics teachers, like Adolf Hur-
witz (1859–1919), Carl Friedrich Geiser (1843–1934), and Hermann Minkowski
(1864–1909).
If more recent advances in theoretical physics were somewhat
neglected by his physics teacher Heinrich Friedrich Weber (1843–1912), the
young Einstein made up for it in extensive autodidactic studies. Fascinated

2

by laboratory experience, Einstein seems to have skipped more than one of his
mathematics lectures, though, and obtained his knowledge when preparing for
examinations with the help of lecture notes that had been carefully worked out
by his more mathematically inclined friend Marcel Grossmann (1878–1936).

After initial attempts to start a traditional academic career had failed, Ein-
stein composed his theory of special relativity in the evening hours after oﬃce
work as a technical expert, especially for electrotechnology, at the Patent oﬃce
in Bern. Mathematically, the breakthrough of special relativity came in a rep-
resentation using only standard techniques of elementary calculus. Maxwell’s
electromagnetic equations were written component-wise, notwithstanding the
fact, that compact vector notation had already been well developed, if not stan-
dardized, in electrodynamics and hydrodynamics by the end of the nineteenth
century.

The subsequent generalization of the special theory of relativity to a gen-
erally covariant theory of gravitation proceeded in three major steps (Norton
1984), (Stachel 1995), (Renn and Sauer 1999), (Stachel 2002, sec. V), (Renn
et al.
forthcoming). For further references, see the literature cited in these
works, and, on speciﬁc aspects, see also volumes 1 (Howard and Stachel 1989),
3 (Eisenstaedt and Kox 1992), 5 (Earman, Janssen and Norton 1995), and 7
(Goenner et al. 1999) of the Einstein Studies series. These steps are:

•

•

•

the formulation of the equivalence hypothesis in 1907,

the introduction of the metric tensor as the crucial mathematical concept
for a generally relativistic theory of gravitation in 1912,

and the discovery of the generally covariant ﬁeld equations of gravitation
in 1915.

2. The equivalence hypothesis

In 1907, Einstein saw himself confronted with the task of reﬂecting on the
consequences of the relativity principle for the whole realm of physics. He was
asked to write a review article On the Relativity Principle and the Conclusions
Drawn from It (Einstein 1907). The reinterpretation of the concept of simul-
taneity in special relativity was hinging on the ﬁniteness of the speed of light for
signal transmission. It was therefore clear that the Newtonian theory of grav-
In Newtonian mechanics, the gravitational
itation posed an embarrassment.
force is an action-at-a-distance force and thus contradicts the fundamental as-
sumption of special relativity that no physical eﬀects can propagate with a speed

3

superseding a ﬁnite value. In reﬂection on this diﬃculty, Einstein took a decisive
turn. He linked the problem of the instantaneous propagation of the gravita-
tional force in Newtonian physics to the problem of generalizing the principle
of (special) relativity to non-uniform relative motion. In a reinterpretation of
Galileo’s law of free fall, according to which all bodies in a gravitational ﬁeld
undergo the same acceleration regardless of their weight, Einstein formulated
the so-called equivalence hypothesis. According to this hypothesis, there is no
conceivable experiment that could distinguish between processes taking place
in a static and homogeneous gravitational ﬁeld and those that are only viewed
from a frame of reference that is uniformly and rectilinearly accelerated in a
gravitation free space. The value of this hypothesis was a heuristic one. It en-
abled Einstein to investigate the eﬀects of gravitation in a relativistic theory by
analyzing the corresponding processes if interpreted from an accelerated frame
of reference.

Already in 1907, Einstein drew three important consequences from the equiv-
alence hypothesis. He concluded that the time and hence also the speed of light
must depend on the gravitational potential. Consequently, the frequency of
light emitted from the sun should be shifted towards the red, and light rays
passing through a gravitational ﬁeld would be bent. He also concluded that
every energy should have not only inertial but also gravitational mass.

Incidentally, this is also the time when Einstein began to use the term ‘rel-
ativity theory’ (Relativit¨atstheorie) in print, e.g. (Einstein 1907, p. 439). The
term had ﬁrst been used in print in the same year by Paul Ehrenfest (1880–1933),
after Max Planck (1858–1947) had earlier introduced the term Relativtheorie.
A suggestion by Felix Klein (1849–1925) in 1910, to use the perhaps more ap-
propriate term ‘invariant theory’ (Invariantentheorie) was not taken up (The
Collected Papers of Albert Einstein (CPAE), Vol. 2, p. 254).

While the equivalence hypothesis of 1907 provided a point of departure for a
generalization of the theory of relativity and for a new ﬁeld theory of gravitation,
Einstein did not present a solution to the problem of instantaneous propagation
of the gravitational force. While Einstein remained rather silent on the topic of
the relativity principle for some years, these questions were taken up by others.
Hermann Minkowski and Henri Poincar´e, e.g., proposed Lorentz-covariant gen-
eralizations of Newton’s law of gravitation. More importantly, Minkowski also
gave the theory of relativity a more sophisticated mathematical representation.
Reﬂecting on the symmetry of the Lorentz transformations, Minkowski used
elements from Cayley’s matrix calculus to give the equations a four-dimensional
representation and to interpret the Lorentz transformations as rotations in a

4

four-dimensional vector space (Minkowski 1908). In a report of his work to the
80th general assembly of physicians and scientists in Cologne, he illustrated this
interpretation by the often-quoted words:

From this hour on, space by itself, and time by itself, shall be doomed
to fade away in the shadows, and only a kind of union of the two
shall preserve an independent reality. (Minkowski 1909, 105)

Minkowski’s four-dimensional representation was taken up by Arnold Sommer-
feld (1868–1951) who developed a four-dimensional vector algebra and vector
calculus and by Max Laue (1879–1960) who focused upon the tensorial repre-
sentation of the stress-energy-momentum complex.

3. The metric tensor

Einstein resumed work on the subject again in 1911. By then he had been
appointed ordinary professor of physics at the German university in Prague.
In a series of papers, he developed a theory of the static gravitational ﬁeld,
following the heuristics of the equivalence assumption of static homogeneous
gravitational ﬁelds to systems in uniform and rectilinear acceleration (Einstein
1911), (1912a), (1912b). His work was boosted by a competition with Max
Abraham (1875–1922) who had picked up on Einstein’s idea of a variable speed
of light and had suggested a dynamic theory of gravitation. Abraham had
proposed a ﬁeld equation where the d’Alembertian acting on the speed of light c
was proportional to the scalar mass density. In the course of the debate it quickly
became clear that with variable c Abraham’s equation was Lorentz covariant
at best in some ill-deﬁned inﬁnitesimal sense and could hardly be interpreted
consistently. But Abraham had demonstrated to Einstein the technical power
of a four-dimensional representation, and had prepared him to take the second
big step of introducing the metric tensor.

The second indication of where to go next in the course of generalizing the
relativity principle came from the analysis of rotating frames of reference. The
heuristic assumption of the equivalence hypothesis implied that also centrifugal
and Coriolis forces should be interpreted as gravitational forces. Looking at
the invariant c2dt2
(dx2 + dy2 + dz2) in rotating frames of reference would
produce terms of the form 2ωdx′dt′ where the angular velocity ω would have
to be interpreted as a gravitational potential, just as in the theory of static
gravitation the speed of light c = c(x, y, z) had assumed the role of a variable
gravitational potential. Since moreover the measuring rods for determining the
circumference, but not the diameter, of a rotating disk are Lorentz contracted,

−

5

the analysis of a rotating disk already pointed to a breakdown of Euclidean
geometry.

4. Einstein’s collaboration with Marcel Grossmann

At some point around this time, Einstein remembered Geiser’s lectures on
Gaussian surface theory which he had studied through his friend’s Grossmann’s
notes. It occurred to him that the invariant line element of diﬀerential geom-
etry might be the key to ﬁnding a proper mathematical representation for his
problem. Fortunately, Einstein had just accepted a call to the Zurich Poly-
technic where Grossmann had become professor of geometry in 1907. Einstein
asked Grossmann for help in studying the mathematical literature, and the two
embarked on an intense collaboration. About this collaboration, he wrote in
October 1912:

I am now working exclusively on the gravitation problem and believe
that I can overcome all diﬃculties with the help of a mathematician
friend of mine here. But one thing is certain: never before in my
life have I troubled myself over anything so much, and I have gained
enormous respect for mathematics, whose more subtle parts I con-
sidered until now, in my ignorance, as pure luxury. (CPAE, Vol. 5,
Doc. 421).

The question that Einstein put to Grossmann was to identify the mathematics
connected with the invariance of a four-dimensional inﬁnitesimal line element
with metric tensor gµν

ds2 =

gµνdxµdxν .

(1)

A research notebook with calculations from that time documents Einstein’s and
Grossmann’s cooperation (Norton 1984), (Renn and Sauer 1999), (Renn et al.
forthcoming). It is in this so-called ‘Zurich notebook’, that we ﬁnd the ﬁrst writ-
ten instance of the metric tensor for (3+1)-dimensional space-time (Renn and
Sauer 1999, 96), see also Call No. 3-006, image 39, on http://www.alberteinstein.info
(2003) for a facsimile. Realizing that the vector calculus for Euclidean space in
curvilinear coordinates is formally equivalent to the calculus of a general mani-
fold equipped with an invariant inﬁnitesimal line element, Grossmann saw that
the task was to generalize the four-dimensional vector calculus developed by
Minkowski, Sommerfeld, Laue, and others using methods of an altogether co-
ordinate independent calculus. Scanning the literature, Grossmann soon found

4

µν=1
X

6

the necessary mathematical concepts in (Riemann 1892) on n-dimensional man-
ifolds, in (Christoﬀel 1869) on quadratic diﬀerential forms, and in (Ricci and
Levi-Civita 1901) on their so-called absolute diﬀerential calculus.

It seems that Einstein and Grossmann quickly saw how to formulate, in
outline, a generally covariant theory with the metric tensor gµν representing
the gravito-inertial ﬁeld.
In the following discussion, I will give all formulas
in a notation that is both slightly modernized and made consistent over the
various texts discussed. In particular, I will abbreviate coordinate derivatives
by subscript commas, use the Einstein summation convention of summing over
repeated indices, and denote functional derivatives by δ rather than ∂. In their
joint publications, Einstein and Grossmann also used Greek letters to denote
contravariant vectors and tensors rather than superscript indices.

Einstein and Grossmann found generally covariant equations of motion of a
material point of invariant mass m for a given metric ﬁeld gµν in the absence of
non-gravitational forces as

δ

Ldt

= δ

m

ds

= 0,

(cid:26)Z

(cid:27)

−

(cid:26)

Z

(cid:27)

with a particle Lagrangian L =
mds/dt. In a generalization to a continuous
distribution of matter characterized by an energy-momentum tensor for pres-
sureless ﬂow of dust with rest mass density ρ0,

−

T µν = ρ0

dxµ
ds

dxν
ds

,

the equation of motion turned into (g = det(gµν))

ggσµT µν

√

−

(cid:0)

1
2

√

−

,ν −
(cid:1)

ggµν,σT µν = 0.

−

gT ν

The latter equation is an explicit expression for the vanishing of the covariant
σ . It is as such closely related to
divergence of the mixed tensor density √
the conservation of energy-momentum as can be seen by integrating T µν over
a closed 3-surface and invoking Gauss’s theorem. In Einstein’s interpretation,
the ﬁrst term of (4) gave the conservation law for special relativity for constant
gµν, and the second part consequently represented the energy-momentum ﬂow
due to the gravitational ﬁeld. This interpretation led Einstein to believe that
the gravitational force components are given by gµν,σ. The task remained to
ﬁnd a ﬁeld equation for the metric tensor ﬁeld, i.e. a tensorial generalization of
the Poisson equation.

5. Coming close to the solution, or so it seems

(2)

(3)

(4)

7

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

From Riemann’s and Christoﬀel’s investigations, Grossmann and Einstein
learned that the crucial mathematical concept was the Riemann curvature tensor
given in terms of the Christoﬀel symbols of the second kind (given in
ik, lm
{
the old-fashioned notation),

}

µ ν
τ )

(

= gτ λ (gµλ,ν + gνλ,µ

gµν,λ) ,

−

as

ικ, λµ
}
{

=

ι λ
κ ),µ

(

ι µ
κ ),λ

− (

+

ι λ
ρ ) (

ρ µ
κ ) − (

ι µ
ρ ) (

ρ λ
κ )

,

(

(see Figure 1). Since the right-hand side of the ﬁeld equation would be given
by the stress-energy tensor of matter, a tensor of second rank, the left-hand
side of the ﬁeld equation also had to to be a two-index object. But the obvious
candidate, the Ricci tensor

would not produce a ﬁeld equation that was acceptable to Einstein and Gross-
mann at the time. Although a ﬁeld equation,

Rµν =

µκ, κν

,

{

}

Rµν + κTµν = 0,

with some constant κ was considered as a candidate, they dismissed it because
they were unable to recover familiar Newtonian physics in the weak ﬁeld limit
gµν = ηµν + hµν with ηµν = diag(1, 1, 1, -1),

1, and

1.

hµν
|

| ≪

hµν,ρ
|

| ≪

The dismissal of the candidate (8) has been a major puzzle for historians for
a long time. Since in the vacuum case, Tµν
0, (8) is equivalent to the ﬁnal
ﬁeld equations of general relativity (see (22) below), Einstein and Grossmann
had come by a hair’s breadth to arriving at general relativity already at this
point, or so it seems. However, a closer analysis of the Zurich notebook revealed
that Einstein had to overcome more conceptual diﬃculties before he was ready
to accept a generally covariant theory (Renn and Sauer 1999), (Renn et al.
forthcoming).

≡

6. The Entwurf theory

After giving up the attempt to base a ﬁeld equation on the Riemann cur-
vature tensor, Einstein and Grossmann constructed a ﬁeld equation that was
closer to their heuristic requirements of energy conservation and recovery of the

8

Figure 1: Top portion of p. 14L of the ‘Zurich Notebook’ (Einstein Archives
Call.No. 3-006). Next to Grossmann’s name Einstein writes down the Christof-
fel symbols of the ﬁrst kind, and the fully covariant Riemann tensor (ik, lm)
which he calls a “tensor of fourth manifold” (Tensor vierter Mannigfaltigkeit).
Einstein then begins to investigate the Ricci tensor by contracting with the con-
travariant metric γkl. c
The Hebrew University of Jerusalem, Albert Einstein
(cid:13)
Archives. Reproduced with permission.

,α

(cid:17)

Poisson equation in the Newtonian limit. The idea was to take the expression
gαβgµν
which would clearly reduce to the d’Alembertian and Laplacian op-
,β
erators in the weak ﬁeld and static limits and substitute it for T µν in the second
(cid:16)
term of (4). If additional terms of higher order could be identiﬁed such that this
expression could be transformed into a total divergence, energy-momentum con-
servation in the form of (4) would automatically be satisﬁed. The ﬁeld equations
they found read

1
√

g

−

(cid:16)

ggαβgµν
,β

√

−

,α −
1
2

(cid:17)
+

gαβgτ ρgµτ

α gνρ

β +

gαµgβνgτ ρ,αgτ ρ

gµν gαβgτ ρ,αgτ ρ

,β =

κT µν.

(9)

−

1
4

,β −

In early summer 1913, Einstein and Grossmann proceeded to publish their
ﬁndings in a little booklet under the title Outline [Entwurf] of a Generalized
Theory of Relativity and of a Theory of Gravitation (Einstein and Grossmann
1913). As the title page indicated, it was divided into two parts, a physical
part for which Einstein signed responsible, and a mathematical part for which
Grossmann signed as author.

The Entwurf theory, as it is frequently called in modern historical literature,
was a hybrid theory, if viewed from our modern understanding of general rel-
ativity. It presented a mathematical apparatus of tensor calculus that allowed

9

to formulate a theory in a generally covariant manner, and it gave generally
covariant equations of motion. Just as in the ﬁnal theory of general relativity,
the crucial concept was the metric tensor which was interpreted as representing
a gravito-inertial ﬁeld. All these elements were later to be found in the ﬁnal
version of general relativity. The only thing that was missing were generally
covariant ﬁeld equations.

The hybrid character of the Entwurf theory is reﬂected in a certain am-
bivalence that Einstein showed with respect to their achievement. Initially and
also again and again over the following two years he expressed himself rather
pleased with the theory. He had settled on the Entwurf equations as acceptable
equations and began to elaborate their consequences. From an unpublished
manuscript we know that together with his friend Michele Besso (1873–1955)
he calculated the advance of the planetary perihelia. For Mercury, it was well
known that the observed perihelion advance was in discrepancy with the value
calculated on the basis of Newtonian mechanics, and this anomaly was the most
prominent quantitative failure of classical gravitation theory. Not surprisingly,
they found a value for Mercury that was signiﬁcantly oﬀ the observed value:
theirs even came with the wrong sign (Earman and Janssen 1993).

Notwithstanding Einstein’s acceptance of the Entwurf equations, he also in-
dicated that the restricted covariance of these equations was a ‘black spot’ of
the theory. His initial heuristics clearly did not imply any reason for a restricted
covariance of the theory. In further reﬂection, Einstein convinced himself, how-
ever, that this restricted covariance was, in fact, to be expected. He devised an
argument to the eﬀect that indeed no generally covariant ﬁeld equations were
physically admissable. The argument was ﬁrst published in an addendum to a
reprint of the Entwurf in the Zeitschrift f¨ur Mathematik und Physik.

≡

He considered a hole in four-dimensional space-time, i.e. a ﬁnite region with
vanishing stress-energy Tµν
0. Let G(x) denote a solution gµν(x1, x2, x3, x4)
of the ﬁeld equations, and perform a coordinate transformation within the hole,
i.e. consider a coordinate system x′ that coincides smoothly with the original
coordinate system x at the boundary of the hole. In the primed coordinates
the transformed ﬁeld G′(x′) is the solution to the transformed ﬁeld equations.
But if the ﬁeld equations are generally covariant, then G′(x) is also a solution
to the original ﬁeld equations. We hence arrive at two distinct solutions in
the same coordinate system x for the same distribution of matter Tµν. Einstein
concluded that generally covariant ﬁeld equations cannot uniquely determine the
physical processes in a gravitational ﬁeld. Consequently, one had to restrict the
admissible coordinate systems to what he began to call ‘adapted coordinates’.

10

Already in their Entwurf, Einstein and Grossmann had stated that the most
urgent unsolved problem of their theory was the identiﬁcation of the covariance
group of their ﬁeld equations. The solution to this question was made possible
by a variational reformulation of the theory. It was the topic of Einstein’s and
Grossmann’s second joint publication (Einstein and Grossmann 1914).

As acknowledged in a footnote, the hint of trying a variational approach
came from Paul Bernays (1888–1977), a student of David Hilbert (1862–1943)
in G¨ottingen. The idea was that a variational formulation might help to iden-
tify the group of ‘adapted coordinates’ since it would be easier to identify the
invariance group of the scalar action integral than the covariance group of the
explicit tensorial ﬁeld equations. Einstein and Grossmann indeed succeeded to
cast the Entwurf theory in a variational formulation,

(10)

(11)

(12)

δ

Ld4x

= 0,

(cid:26)Z

(cid:27)

with a Lagrangian

L = √

g

−

gαβgτ ρ,αgτ ρ

κL(mat)

,

β −

1
4

(cid:19)
where the matter part L(mat) was not included explicitly.

(cid:18)

Considering variations adapted to the hole consideration, they were now
able to identify the condition for ‘adapted coordinates’ governing the covariance
group of the Entwurf as

Bσ =

√

ggαβgσµgµν
,β

= 0.

−

(cid:16)

,να

(cid:17)

With their second joint paper, the collaboration between Einstein and Gross-
mann came to an end. In spring 1914, Einstein moved to Berlin taking up a
position as member of the Prussian Academy of Sciences in Berlin, a move which
relieved him of his teaching load as professor at the Zurich polytechnic.

7. The 1914 review article on the Entwurf theory

In summer 1914, Einstein felt that the new theory should be presented in a
comprehensive review. He also felt that a mathematical derivation of the ﬁeld
equations that would determine them uniquely was still missing.

Both tasks are addressed in a long paper, presented in October 1914 to the
Prussian Academy for publication in its Sitzungsberichte (Einstein 1914). It is
entitled The Formal Foundation of the General Theory of Relativity and Einstein
thus, for the ﬁrst time, gave the new theory of relativity the epithet ‘general’ in
lieu of the more cautious ‘generalized’ that he had used for the Entwurf.

11

The paper is divided into ﬁve sections, and thus anticipates the structure of
the ﬁnal 1916 review. An introductory section on the basic ideas of the theory
is followed by a section on the theory of covariants. This section replaced Gross-
mann’s mathematical part of the joint Entwurf paper and gives an account of
the elements of tensor calculus employed in the theory. A third section discusses
the theory for a given metric ﬁeld. It introduced the stress-energy-momentum
tensor and discussed the conservation laws associated with the vanishing of its
divergence, as well as the equations of motions and the electromagnetic ﬁeld
equations.

The fourth section gave a new derivation of the Entwurf equations. Einstein
here tried to give a derivation that supposedly rendered them unique. He reiter-
ated the hole consideration and introduced adapted coordinates. The variation
is now done in a generic manner for the gravitational part H of the Lagrangian
L. In order to ﬁx the Lagrangian, Einstein assumes H to be a homogeneous
function of second degree in the coordinate derivatives gµν
,σ of the metric, and
picks from the allowed combinations the one that conforms to the adapted co-
ordinate condition.

In a ﬁnal, short section Einstein discussed approximations of the theory,
recovered the Newtonian limit and predicted both gravitational light bending
and red shift.

8. The demise of the Entwurf and the breakthrough to general
covariance

Einstein had known that the Entwurf equations produced the wrong peri-
helion advance for Mercury since 1913. A second set-back that undermined his
conﬁdence in the theory came in spring 1915 when Levi-Civita carefully studied
Einstein’s long Academy paper and found fault with its derivation of the ﬁeld
equations. After an intense epistolary exchange in March and April 1915, Ein-
stein had to admit that his proof of the tensorial character of the left hand side
of the ﬁeld equations for admissible coordinate transformations was incomplete
(CPAE, Vol. 8, Doc. 80).

In September 1915, Einstein realized that the Minkowski metric in rotat-
ing Cartesian coordinates is not a solution to the Entwurf equations. Earlier
checks of this condition appear to have been ﬂawed by trivial algebraic mistakes
that conspired to convince Einstein of the validity of this heuristic requirement
(Janssen 1999).

The ﬁnal blow came quickly afterwards when Einstein discovered that the
alleged uniqueness of the ﬁeld equations in his derivation of the Academy paper

12

did not hold up.

At this point, Einstein began to reconsider alternatives for the gravitational
ﬁeld equations. He reﬂected on considerations that he had done previously in his
search for the Entwurf equations. A closer analysis of the Zurich notebook in-
deed revealed that in the fall of 1915, Einstein reconsidered the same candidates
for ﬁeld equations as he had done in 1912 (Norton 1984), (Renn and Sauer 1999),
(Renn et al. forthcoming). The return to general covariance is documented in
four communications to the Prussian Academy, presented on November 4, 11,
18, and 25, and each published a week later in the Sitzungsberichte.

In the ﬁrst communication, Einstein announced that he had lost his faith in

the Entwurf equations and wrote

In this pursuit I arrived at the demand of general covariance, a
demand from which I parted, though with a heavy heart, three years
ago when I worked together with my friend Grossmann. As a matter
of fact, we were then quite close to that solution of the problem,
which will be given in the following. (Einstein 1915a, 778)

Einstein now split the Ricci tensor into two parts,

where

and

Rµν =

µκ, κν

= Nµν + Mµν,

{

}

Nµν =

µ ν
κ ),κ

+

µ κ
ρ ) (

ρ ν
κ )

,

(

− (

Mµν =

µ κ
κ ),ν

+

µ ν
ρ ) (

ρ κ
κ )

.

(

− (

(13)

(14)

(15)

Since

= (ln √

g),µ is a vector for all transformations that leave g in-

µ κ
κ )

(

−

variant (unimodular substitutions), Mµν is a covariant derivative of a vector,
and hence all quantities in (13) are tensors under such substitutions.

The ﬁeld equations of the ﬁrst November communication were now given as

Nµν =

κTµν.

(16)

−
Even though Einstein explicitly reverted to the general covariance of the Riemann-
Christoﬀel tensor, the ﬁeld equations of the ﬁrst November communication are
not generally covariant but only covariant under unimodular coordinate trans-
formations.

13

The restricted covariance is immediately obvious also from the variational

formulation that Einstein provided. Looking again at the geodesic equation,

d2xτ
ds2 +

µ ν
τ )

(

dxµ
ds

dxν
ds

= 0,

(17)

(18)

(19)

as the equation of motion for a point particle in a given gravitational ﬁeld, Ein-

stein now conceived of the negative Christoﬀelsymbols Γσ

µν =

µ ν
σ )

− (

as the

components of the gravitational force rather than the simple coordinate deriva-
tives of the metric gµν,σ. These quantities now entered into the gravitational
part of the Lagrangian as

L = gστ Γα

σβΓβ

κL(mat).

τ α −

(cp. (11). He observed that weak ﬁelds now allow to go to the Newtonian limit,
and that the transition to rotating frames of reference is admissible since the
corresponding coordinate transformations have unit determinant.

Not only was the covariance of the theory restricted to unimodular transfor-
mations, Einstein also showed that energy-momentum conservation demanded
that a coordinate restriction,

gαβ

ln √

g

=

κT,

−

−

,β

,α

(cid:17)

(cid:16)

−

≡

(cid:3)
had to be satisﬁed. Since, in general, the trace of the energy-momentum tensor
T = gµνTµν does not vanish, (19) implies that coordinates cannot be chosen
arbitrarily. In particular, (19) implies that one cannot set √

1.

g

(cid:2)

At this point, it needs to be mentioned that Einstein’s return to general
covariance in November 1915 was done in a hasty competition with Hilbert
(Sauer 1999). Einstein had given a series of lectures on the Entwurf theory in
G¨ottingen earlier in the summer, and Hilbert had then closely studied Einstein’s
theory over the fall. Apparently, Hilbert had found fault with Einstein’s deriva-
tion of the ﬁeld equations, too, and Einstein had heard about Hilbert’s criti-
cism through Sommerfeld (CPAE, Vol. 8, Doc. 136). When he received proofs
of his ﬁrst November communication, he forwarded them to G¨ottingen, and it
seems that Hilbert responded immediately with a report about his own progress.
Hilbert, at the time, believed in an electromagnetic world-view and had been
working on combining Einstein’s gravitational theory with a generalized version
of Maxwellian electrodynamics suggested by Gustav Mie (1868–1957). Mie had
proposed a theory of matter where non-linear, but Lorentz-covariant general-
izations of Maxwell’s equations should allow for particle-like solutions in the

14

microscopic realm. It seems likely that Hilbert had informed Einstein about the
basic characteristics of his approach which aimed at a uniﬁcation of Einstein’s
and Mie’s theories.

The second of Einstein’s four famous November communications, in any case,
discussed the possibility of a purely electromagnetic origin of matter (Einstein
1915b). Since in classical electromagnetism, the stress-energy-momentum tensor
T µν is given in terms of the electromagnetic ﬁeld tensor Fµν as

T µν =

1
4π

F µαF ν

α −

1
4

(cid:18)

gµνF αβFαβ

,

(cid:19)

it is readily seen that its trace T vanishes identically. Einstein now entertained
the possibility that on a microscopic level all matter might be of electromagnetic
origin. In this case, the right hand side of the coordinate condition (19) would
vanish and hence coordinates with constant g would be admissible. In this case,
Einstein argued, one could take the fully covariant equations

(20)

(21)

Rµν =

κTµν,

−

≡

which he had already considered earlier, see (8), and reduce them to the ﬁeld
equations (16) by choosing coordinates for which g

1.

The ﬁeld equations (21) still diﬀer from the ﬁnal ﬁeld equations but for the
vacuum case, Tµν = 0, they are already equivalent. Einstein therefore was able
to compute on the basis of (21) the correct unaccounted perihelion advance by
looking at the ﬁeld of a point mass in second approximation. The calculation
produced the correct value of 43′′ per century without any arbitrary or ad hoc
assumptions. In the computation Einstein could take advantage of his having
calculated the advance before for the Entwurf theory. The new ﬁeld equations, in
fact, only involved a modiﬁcation of his earlier calculations (Earman and Janssen
1993). Einstein published these results in his third November communication
(Einstein 1915c).

With the success of the perihelion calculation, the return to general covari-
ance was deﬁnite. The ﬁnal step (Einstein 1915d) was to add a trace term to
the matter tensor to obtain ﬁeld equations of the form

Rµν =

κ

Tµν

gµνT

.

1
2

−

(cid:19)

−

(cid:18)

(22)

With the trace term added, the postulate of energy-momentum conservation no
longer produced a coordinate restriction since it was now automatically satisﬁed
by (22).

15

Equations (22) are the ﬁnal ﬁeld equations of the generally relativistic theory
of gravitation, as we know them today. They are frequently referred to as the
‘Einstein equations’ of general relativity.

With the exception of the ﬁrst November communication, where he had given
the Lagrangian (18) for the ﬁeld equations (16), Einstein had not discussed the
subsequent ﬁeld equations in a variational approach. The closure of providing
a variational formulation was contributed by Hilbert in his own approach to
a generally covariant theory of gravitation and electromagnetism. Since he
was being kept informed by Einstein about the latter’s progress, he rushed
ahead and presented an account of his own version to the G¨ottingen Academy
for publication in its Nachrichten on November 20. Page proofs of Hilbert’s
original paper show that the version submitted for publication on November 20
still diﬀered from the version that was eventually published. But it did already
suggest to base the theory on a variational principle and emphasized that the
Lagrangian must be a scalar function for general coordinate transformations.

In the printed version of Hilbert’s paper, the Riemann curvature scalar R is
taken to be the gravitational part of the Lagrangian and it is stated, albeit not
derived by explicit calculation, that a variation of the action

=

√

g

R

−

−

A

Z

(cid:16)

κL(mat)

d4τ,

(cid:17)

with respect to the metric tensor components gµν would produce the gravita-
tional ﬁeld equations

Rµν

gµνR =

1
2

−

κ

−

1
√

g

−

δL(mat)
δgµν

,

which is an equivalent version of Einstein’s ﬁeld equation (22). (24) may be
transformed to (22) by looking at the trace of (22) and substituting R =
κT
−
into (24). The equivalence then follows from the non-trivial identiﬁcation of

(23)

(24)

(25)

δL(mat)
δgµν = Tµν.

1
√

g

−

In the latter step, Hilbert and Einstein diﬀered considerably since Hilbert ax-
iomatically took L(mat) to be a function exclusively of the electromagnetic po-
tential Aµ, the electromagnetic ﬁeld Fµν = Aµ,ν
Aν,µ, and the metric tensor
components gµν,

−

L(mat) = L(mat)(Aµ, Fµν , gµν),

(26)

in accordance with his electromagnetic world view. Einstein, however, had
entertained the hypothesis of an electromagnetic origin of matter only for a few

16

days. With his fourth November communication at the latest, Einstein had
given up that hypothesis again and was allowing for an unspeciﬁed Tµν in his
ﬁnal version of the theory.

9. The 1916 review paper

Ever since Levi-Civita had found a gap in Einstein’s covariance proof of the
Entwurf equations, Einstein had meant to update or rewrite his 1914 Academy
article on the general theory of relativity. With the return to general covariance,
the success of explaining the perihelion advance of Mercury, and the new ﬁeld
equations (22) of the fourth November communication, Einstein decided to write
an altogether new account of the general theory of relativity.

The new review was received by the Annalen der Physik on 20 March 1916,
Its structure is not much
It is again divided into ﬁve

some four months after the last November paper.
diﬀerent from the earlier 1914 Academy article.
sections:

A. Fundamental Considerations on the Postulate of Relativity,

B. Mathematical Aids to the Formulation of Generally Covariant Equations,

C. Theory of the Gravitational Field,

D. Material Phenomena,

E. [Newtonian Limit and Observable Consequences].

In an introductory paragraph Einstein called the theory to be expounded in the
review ‘conceivably the farthest-reaching generalization’ of the special theory of
relativity. While the latter is assumed to be known to the reader, he sets out
to develop especially all the necessary mathematical tools

—and I tried to do it in as simple and transparent a manner as
possible, so that a special study of the mathematical literature is
not required for the understanding of the present paper. (Einstein
1916, 769)

Nevertheless, in this ﬁrst paragraph Einstein did mention Minkowski’s formal
equivalence of the spatial and time coordinates, the investigations on non-
Euclidean manifolds by Gauss, Riemann, and Christoﬀel, and the absolute dif-
ferential calculus of Ricci and Levi-Civita. Echoing a theme of Felix Klein’s
but also of later commentators, he wrote that especially the absolute diﬀeren-
tial calculus had provided mathematical means which simply had to be taken

17

up—as if he had not struggled hard for years to apply them in a physically
meaningful way. He also acknowledged Grossmann’s help again in studying the
mathematical literature and in searching for the gravitational ﬁeld equations.

The ﬁrst section then introduces the postulate of general covariance, arguing
to a large extent from purely epistemological considerations. Einstein denounces
the existence of an absolute space by considering two massive bodies far away
both from other masses and from each other and in relative rotation along their
If one body were observed to be of spherical shape and
line of connection.
the other to be an ellipsoid, Newtonian mechanics would have to attribute the
cause for the diﬀerent shapes in a rotation relative to absolute space. But this
is unsatisfactory because a causal agent is introduced which itself can never be
an object of causal eﬀect nor of observation. Hence, one is forced to attribute
the cause for this change of shape to the distant masses of the ﬁxed stars, an
argument that follows Mach’s critique of classical mechanics.

The second argument is the equivalence hypothesis based on Galileo’s em-
pirical law of free fall. Next, Einstein discusses the rotating disk to argue for the
fact that in general relativity coordinates no longer have an immediate metric
meaning. A fourth argument in this section was new and replaced the earlier
hole consideration. The hole argument had supposedly proven that no generally
covariant ﬁeld equations could be given a physical meaning in accordance with
our notions of causality and the demand that the ﬁeld equations are determined
uniquely by the energy-matter distribution. Einstein did not explicitly retract
the argument but gave a new consideration, known as the point coincidence
argument. He argued that what we observe in physical experiments are always
only spatio-temporal coincidences. If all physical processes would consist in the
motion of material points, we could only observe those events where two or
more of their worldlines coincide. Then the coordinates of the four-dimensional
space-time manifold are merely labels for those coincidences, and no coordinate
system must be preferred over any other. The implicit objection to the hole
argument that invalidates its conclusion is that the diﬀerent metric ﬁelds G(x)
and G′(x) obtained by dragging the metric tensor over the hole, do not, in fact,
represent diﬀerent physical situations since they agree on all point coincidences.
In the second, mathematical section, Einstein summarily develops the ele-
ments of tensor algebra and tensor calculus. He introduces contravariant and
covariant vectors and general tensors which are deﬁned by the transformation
laws of their components. He introduces the algebraic operations of external
multiplication and contraction, and of raising and lowering of indices. Among
the properties of the metric tensors, he discusses the invariance of the volume

18

−

gd4x. He repeats the derivation of the geodesic equation, introduces
element √
Christoﬀel’s symbols and discusses covariant diﬀerentiation by considering in-
variance along the geodesic line. He mentions the fact that the covariant deriva-
tive of the metric vanishes and derives a number of explicit formulas for the dif-
ferentiation of contravariant, covariant and mixed tensors. The last paragraph
introduces the Riemann-Christoﬀel curvature tensor and discusses its splitting
into two parts, as in (13). Perhaps the most noteworthy point of the section,
compared to earlier expositions of the mathematical foundations of general rel-
ativity, is what came to be called the ‘Einstein summation convention’. It is in
this section that Einstein for the ﬁrst time in print introduced the convention
that in any tensor expression a summation over two repeated indices is implied
with out writing down the summation sign.

The third section derives the gravitational ﬁeld equations. They are given

here as

Γα
µν,α + Γα

µβΓβ

να =

κ

−

(cid:18)

Tµν

gµνT

,

1
2

−

(cid:19)

√

g = 1.

−

(27)

(28)

Somewhat surprisingly, from a modern point of view, Einstein did not give the
ﬁeld equations in a generally covariant form. Instead he ﬁxed the coordinates
by condition (28) in all equations that he gave in the section. He emphasized,
though, that this is a mere speciﬁcation of the coordinates introduced for con-
venience. The introduction of the ﬁeld equations, in fact, proceeded by arguing
that the vanishing of the Ricci tensor Rµν is the unique equation that determines
the metric ﬁeld in the absence of masses if we demand that the expression de-
pends only on gµν and its ﬁrst and second derivatives and depends on the latter
only linearly. The possibility of adding a term proportional to gimR, equivalent
in the vacuum case, (but not of adding a cosmological term proportional to gim)
is mentioned in a footnote.

The Lagrangian for the variational form of the ﬁeld equations in vacuum is

given as

L = gµνΓα

µβΓβ

να,

together with the explicit stipulation of condition (28). The introduction of the
matter term proceeds by deﬁning the stress-energy complex of the gravitational
ﬁeld as

κtα

σ =

σ gµνΓα
δα

µβΓβ

gµνΓα

µβΓβ

νσ,

να −

1
2

an expression which is not a tensor under general coordinate transformation
in accordance with the fact that the ﬁeld energy associated with the gravito-

(29)

(30)

19

(31)

(32)

inertial ﬁeld is not a localizable quantity. Using tα
equation (27) as

σ , Einstein rewrote the ﬁeld

gσβΓα
µβ

(cid:0)

,α =
(cid:1)

κ

−

(cid:18)

tσ
µ −

1
2

δσ
µt

,

(cid:19)

and demanded that the non-gravitational energy-momentum tensor T σ
in the equation on the same footing as tσ
to demanding that a divergence equation,

µ enters
µ. The latter requirement is equivalent

(cid:1)
holds for the total energy of the system.

(cid:0)

tσ
µ + T σ
µ

,σ = 0,

While the derivation of the ﬁeld equations diﬀers considerably from earlier
accounts, the fourth and ﬁfth sections take up material from earlier expositions.
In these sections, Einstein discussed Euler’s hydrodynamic equation with an
energy-momentum tensor

T αβ =

gαβp + ρuαuβ, uα = dxα/ds,

(33)

−

for non-dissipative, adiabatic liquids, characterized by the two scalars of pres-
sure p and density ρ. Electrodynamics is governed by Maxwell’s equations in
generally covariant form, and, in the last section, Einstein discussed the New-
tonian approximation of weak ﬁelds, Minkowski ﬂat boundary conditions, and
slow motion of the particles. In the consideration of the Newtonian limit the
constant κ may be related to the gravitational constant G by comparison with
Poisson’s equation as κ = 8πG/c2. Einstein explains a subtlety of the Newto-
nian limit that had played a role in his earlier dismissal of generally covariant
equations. In ﬁrst Newtonian approximation only the g44 components enter into
g = 1 demands that
the equations of motion, even though the postulate of √
the other diagonal components are non-trivial of the same order. The ﬁrst-order
diagonal components, however, do enter into the geodesic equation for a light
ray passing in a centrally symmetric gravitational ﬁeld. For this reason, the
predicted expression for the light bending of a light ray grazing the edge of the
sun, came out with a factor of 2, compared to earlier considerations that were
based on the equivalence hypothesis alone. The slowing of clocks in a gravita-
tional ﬁeld and the gravitational red shift of spectral lines is discussed explicitly
but the calculation of the perihelion shift for Mercury obtained in second ap-
proximation of a spherically symmetric ﬁeld is only mentioned with reference
to the pertinent November communication.

−

10. Early reception of the ﬁnal version of general relativity

20

The ﬁrst exact solution to the ﬁeld equations—and to date the most impor-
tant one—was found almost simultaneously with Einstein’s 1916 review by the
astronomer Karl Schwarzschild (1873–1916). He computed the static, spheri-
cally symmetric ﬁeld outside a spherically symmetric mass distribution of total
mass m. His solution allowed to compute the light bending of light rays and
the planetary perihelion motion without approximation. The solution is regu-
lar everywhere except at the origin but at a radius rS = 2Gm/c2, now called
the Schwarzschild radius, the time coordinate changes its sign relative to the
spatial coordinates. This coordinate singularity is responsible for what came
to be known as the black hole horizon and its interpretation presented a major
diﬃculty for many years.

While more exact solutions were found over the following years, approxi-
mation schemes played an equally important role for an interpretation of the
theory. An approximate solution was discussed by Einstein in the summer of
1916 in a ﬁrst paper on gravitational waves. The existence of gravitational waves
was expected in a ﬁeld theory of gravitation by analogy to the electromagnetic
case. Einstein’s ﬁrst paper on this topic was marred by a mistake which made
him conclude that waves should exist that do not transport energy. The error
was corrected in a second paper of 1918. Until now, the topic of gravitational
waves is an active ﬁeld of research and their existence has been shown indi-
rectly only in 1974 through the energy loss of binary pulsars (Nobel prize 1993).
Experimental eﬀorts to observe gravitational waves directly are still underway.
The question of energy transport in gravitational waves is connected to the
question of identifying an expression for the gravitational ﬁeld energy and a
corresponding conservation law. The question was debated in the years 1916–
1919 by a number of mathematicians, most importantly by Felix Klein. The ﬁnal
solution came with Noether’s theorems on the connection of conservation laws
and symmetries of the variational formulation. These theorems were anticipated
for a special case in Hilbert’s 1915 paper and published in its general form in
1918 by Emmy Noether (1882–1935).

Einstein tried to encourage experimental eﬀorts aimed at testing the two
main predictions of the theory. A conﬁrmation of the gravitational red shift
was diﬃcult to determine due to the many competing eﬀects that result in a
shifting or broadening of solar or stellar spectral lines. An unequivocal conﬁr-
mation of the gravitational red shift only came in 1960 in a controlled terrestrial
experiment making use of the M¨ossbauer eﬀect.

But the results of a British expedition led by Arthur Eddington (1882–1944)
to test the predicted gravitational light bending during a solar eclipse on 29

21

May 1919 in Sobral, Brazil, and on the island of Principe in the gulf of Guinea,
were established and reached Europe later in the fall of that year. The results
conﬁrmed Einstein’s prediction, and within weeks, Einstein turned into a world
celebrity and the theory of relativity into a household term.

A popular, non-technical account of both the special and general theories of
relativity that Einstein had written in 1917 (Einstein 1917) became a best-seller.
A fourth edition in 1919 was reprinted in a ﬁfth through tenth edition in 1920
and saw a fourteenth edition in 1922. It was also translated into many languages.
The increased interest in Einstein’s theory is also witnessed by an uncountable
number of more or less popular accounts and other books and articles dealing
with relativity. A bibliography of relativity from 1924 lists close to 4000 entries
(Lecat 1924).

The consequences of both special and general relativity began to be discussed
in many circles. Early interpretations of general relativity from a philosophi-
cal point of view had been published by Moritz Schlick (1882–1936) and Hans
Reichenbach (1891–1953). In the early 1920’s philosophical interpretations of
relativity came to abound, the analysis in (Hentschel 1990) carries a bibliogra-
phy of over 3000 items. The public interest in Einstein’s new theory was not
always untainted by political partisanry. Antisemitic attacks against Einstein
focussed not only on Einstein’s person or on his political and paciﬁst stance but
targeted his theory as well. As early as 1920, antisemitically motivated objec-
tions against the theories of relativity were expressed in a public meeting at the
Berlin philharmonic in summer 1920 and again at the ﬁrst post-war meeting of
the Society of German Scientists and Physicians in Bad Nauheim in September
1920. On the other hand, Einstein began to be recognized worldwide as a lead-
ing physicist. He received international invitations and honors, and began to
travel extensively giving talks about his theory at a time when post-war German
science was still boycotted by many scholars and scientiﬁc institutions.

11. Going on and beyond general relativity

For Einstein, the victory of the breakthrough to general covariance in Novem-
ber 1915 was not to be regarded as establishing a ﬁnal theory that would not
be subject to further revisions. Already in 1917, he modiﬁed the gravitational
ﬁeld equations by adding a term proportional to λgµν to (22). The modiﬁcation
was motivated in the context of a cosmological consideration. Einstein wanted
to avoid the stipulation of boundary conditions at inﬁnity in order not to have
to account for inertial eﬀects that might not have been caused by masses, in
accordance with what he called Mach’s principle. He suggested to consider the

22

cosmological model of a spatially closed and static universe but had to mod-
ify the ﬁeld equations by introducing the cosmological constant λ in order to
allow for the possibility of such a solution. An alternate vacuum solution to
the modiﬁed ﬁeld equations advanced by Willem de Sitter (1872–1934) soon
showed, however, that the new ﬁeld equations did not automatically satisfy
Mach’s principle as had been Einstein’s hope.

In 1919, Einstein entertained the possibility of a gravitational ﬁeld equation
where the trace term in (22) would be added with a factor of 1/4 instead of
1/2. The modiﬁcation was motivated by considerations concerning the consti-
tution of matter and implies that it is no longer the covariant divergence of Tµν
that is automatically vanishing but rather its trace. Other modiﬁcations of the
ﬁeld equations or generalizations of the underlying Riemannian geometry were
investigated by Einstein and others in the following decades in attempts to ﬁnd
a geometrized uniﬁcation of the gravitational and electromagnetic ﬁelds.

In fact, a geometric interpretation of the general theory of relativity, if con-
sidered at all, originally pertained only to the geodesic equation. Until 1916,
the Riemann and Ricci tensors were only interpreted as algebraic invariants. A
geometric interpretation in terms of parallel transport of tangent vectors was
elaborated in the following years mainly through the work of Tullio Levi-Civita
and Hermann Weyl (1885–1955).

In the course of elaborating the geometric meaning of general relativity,
it was Hermann Weyl, who took the ﬁrst steps to go beyond a purely (semi-
)Riemannian framework for general relativity and, at the same time, ﬁrst pro-
posed a truly geometrized uniﬁcation of the gravitational and electromagnetic
ﬁelds. First published in 1918, it was later incorporated into the third edition
of his widely read exposition of general relativity (Weyl 1918), (Scholz 2001).
In accordance with more general philosophical concerns about the foundations
of mathematics, Weyl’s point of departure was the observation that in Rie-
mannian geometry, no integrable, or path-independent comparison of vector
directions at diﬀerent points of the manifold is possible, whereas the length
of a vector remains unaﬀected during parallel transport. In order to realize a
true ‘inﬁnitesimal geometry’ (Nahegeometrie), Weyl in 1918 introduced an ad-
ditional geometric structure, a length connection, i.e. a linear diﬀerential form
dϕ = ϕidxi that governed the transport of vector lengths l by the deﬁnition
δl
0. At the same time, the Riemannian metric gµν
had to be replaced by the class of conformally equivalent metrics [g] where two
representatives of a class are connected through ˜gµν = λgµν with a scalar func-
tion λ. For consistency, the length connection ϕ has to be transformed, too, as

(∂l/∂xi)dxi + lϕidxi

≡

≡

23

˜ϕidxi = ϕidxi
‘gauge transformations.’

−

d log λ. For these transformations, Weyl introduced the term

The (semi-)Riemannian manifold with metric tensor ﬁeld gµν was hence
generalized to a manifold with conformally equivalent classes [g], [ϕ] of (semi-
)Riemannian metrics and length connections. The geometric meaning of this
generalization was realized by investigating the aﬃne connection, governing the
parallel transport of vectors. It turned out that the curvature associated with
the length connection, i.e. the exterior derivative of f = dϕ, in coordinates,
fij = ϕi,j
ϕj,i, could be interpreted as the representation of the electromagnetic
ﬁeld tensor (Scholz 2001, esp. pp. 63–69).

−

Einstein’s reaction to Weyl’s theory was highly ambivalent. Fascinated by
the mathematical analysis, he quickly pointed out that the theory was inaccept-
able from a physics point of view since it implied, e.g., that the wavelength of
light emitted by radiating atoms should depend on the prehistory of the atom,
contrary to experience. Despite this argument, Weyl’s theory proved extremely
inﬂuential as the ﬁrst (more or less) successful attempt to achieve a geometric
uniﬁcation of the gravitational and electromagnetic ﬁelds. During the twenties,
many attempts were tried to achieve a uniﬁcation of gravitation and electromag-
netism by generalizing Riemann geometry. These investigations both stimulated
and proﬁted from parallel developments in diﬀerential geometry.

With the advent of quantum mechanics in 1926, the discovery of the weak
and strong interactions and the proliferation of elementary particles in nuclear
and subnuclear physics, the parameters for a uniﬁcation program changed dras-
tically. Many aspects of the original uniﬁed ﬁeld theory program have conse-
quently fallen into oblivion but the history of modern diﬀerential geometry can
hardly be understood without taking into account this context of searching for
generalizations of Riemannian geometry.

In essence, Einstein’s general theory of relativity of 1916 remains today’s
accepted theory of the gravitational ﬁeld, and notwithstanding the expectation
that a generally relativistic theory of gravitation should also be quantized—an
unsolved problem until today—, classical general relativity, in the sense of an
exploration of the solutions and implicit consequences of its gravitational ﬁeld
equations, has been an active ﬁeld of research ever since.

CPAE. The Collected Papers of Albert Einstein. Princeton: Princeton Univer-
sity Press, 1987ﬀ.

Bibliography

24

Christoﬀel, E.B. 1869. ‘Ueber die Transformation der homogenen Diﬀerential-
ausdr¨ucke zweiten Grades’. Journal f¨ur die reine und angewandte Mathematik,
70, 46–70.

Earman, J. and Janssen, M. 1993.
Mercury’s Perihelion’. in: (Earman, Janssen and Norton 1995, 129–172).

‘Einstein’s Explanation of the Motion of

Earman, J., Janssen, M. and Norton J. (eds.) 1993. The Attraction of Gravita-
tion: New Studies in the History of General Relativity. Boston, Basel, Berlin:
Birkh¨auser [Einstein Studies 5].

Einstein, A. 1905. ‘Zur Elektrodynamik bewegter K¨orper’. Annalen der Physik,
17, 891–921 [CPAE 2, 275–310.].

‘ ¨Uber das Relativit¨atsprinzip und die aus demselben gezogenen Fol-
— 1907.
gerungen’. Jahrbuch der Radioaktivit¨at und Elektronik, 4, 411–462 [CPAE 2,
432–488.].

‘ ¨Uber den Einﬂuß der Schwerkraft auf die Ausbreitung des Lichtes’.

— 1911.
Annalen der Physik, 35, 898–908 [CPAE 3, 485–497.].

‘Lichtgeschwindigkeit und Statik des Gravitationsfeldes’.

ibid., 38,

— 1912a.
355–369 [CPAE 4, 129–145.].

— 1912b.
[CPAE 4, 146–164].

‘Zur Theorie des statischen Gravitationsfeldes’.

ibid., 38, 443–458

— 1914. ‘Die formale Grundlage der allgemeinen Relativit¨atstheorie’. K¨oniglich
Preußische Akademie der Wissenschaften (Berlin). Sitzungsberichte, 1030–1085
[CPAE 6, 72–130.].

— 1915a. ‘Zur allgemeinen Relativit¨atstheorie’. ibid., 778–786 [CPAE 6, 214–
224].

— 1915b.
[CPAE 6, 225–229.].

‘Zur allgemeinen Relativit¨atstheorie (Nachtrag)’.

ibid., 799–801

— 1915c.
Relativit¨atstheorie’. ibid., 831–839 [CPAE 6, 233–243.].

‘Erkl¨arung der Perihelbewegung des Merkur aus der allgemeinen

— 1915d. ‘Die Feldgleichungen der Gravitation’. ibid., 844–847 [CPAE 6, 244–
249.].

— 1916.
‘Die Grundlage der allgemeinen Relativit¨atstheorie’. Annalen der
Physik, 49, 769–822 (also published separately as Leipzig: Teubner) [CPAE 6,
283–339.].

25

¨Uber die spezielle und die allgemeine Relativit¨atstheorie. Braun-

— 1917.
schweig: Vieweg [CPAE 6, 420–539.].

Einstein, A. and Grossmann, M. 1913. Entwurf einer verallgemeinerten Rela-
tivit¨atstheorie und einer Theorie der Gravitation. Leipzig: Teubner [reprinted
with an addendum in Zeitschrift f¨ur Mathematik und Physik, 62 225–244; CPAE 4,
302–343, 579–582.].

— 1914 ‘Kovarianzeigenschaften der Feldgleichungen der auf die verallgemein-
erte Relativit¨atstheorie gegr¨undeten Gravitationstheorie’. Zeitschrift f¨ur Math-
ematik und Physik, 63, 215–225 [CPAE 6, 6–18.].

Eisenstaedt, J. and Kox, A.J. (eds.) 1992. Studies in the History of General
Relativity, Boston, Basel, Berlin: Birkh¨auser [Einstein Studies 3].

F¨olsing, A. 1998. Albert Einstein. A Biography. Pinguin paperback.

Goenner, H., Renn, J., Ritter, J., and Sauer, T. (eds.) 1999. The Expand-
ing Worlds of General Relativity, Boston, Basel, Berlin: Birkh¨auser [Einstein
Studies 7].

Interpretationen und Fehlinterpretationen der speziellen
Hentschel, K. 1990.
und der allgemeinen Relativit¨atstheorie durch Zeitgenossen Albert Einsteins.
Basel, Boston, Berlin: Birkh¨auser.

Hilbert, D. 1915 ‘Die Grundlagen der Physik. (Erste Mitteilung.)’ K¨onigliche
Gesellschaft der Wissenschaften zu G¨ottingen. Mathematisch-physikalische Klasse.
Nachrichten, 395–407.

Howard, D. and Stachel, J. (eds.) 1989. Einstein and the History of General
Relativity, Boston, Basel, Berlin: Birkh¨auser [Einstein Studies 1].

Janssen, M. 1999. ‘Rotation as the Nemesis of Einstein’s Entwurf Theory’. in:
(Goenner et al. 1999, 127–157).

Lecat, M. 1924. Bibliographie de la Relativit´e, Bruxelles: Lamertin.

Minkowski, Hermann. 1908. ‘Die Grundgleichungen f¨ur die elektromagnetischen
Vorg¨ange in bewegten K¨orpern’. K¨onigliche Gesellschaft der Wissenschaften zu
G¨ottingen. Mathematisch-physikalische Klasse. Nachrichten, 53–111.

Minkowski, H. 1909. ‘Raum und Zeit’. Physikalische Zeitschrift, 10, 104–111.

Norton, J. 1984. ‘How Einstein Found His Field Equations’. Historical Studies
in the Physical Sciences 14(1984), 253–316 [reprinted in (Howard and Stachel
1989, 101–159)].

26

Pais, A. 1982. ‘Subtle is the Lord...’ The Science and the Life of Albert Einstein,
Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Ricci, G., and Levi-Civita, T. 1901. ‘M´ethodes de calcul diﬀ´erentiel absolu et
leurs applications’. Mathematische Annalen, 54, 125–201.

Riemann, B. 1892. Gesammelte mathematische Werke und wissenschaftlicher
Nachlass. 2nd ed., Weber, H. (ed.) Leipzig: Teubner.

Renn, J., Sauer, T., Janssen, M., Norton, J. and Stachel, J. forthcoming. The
Genesis of General Relativity (2 vols.), Dordrecht, Boston, London: Kluwer.

Renn, J. and Sauer, T. 1999. ‘Heuristics and Mathematical Representation in
Einstein’s Search for a Gravitational Field Equation.’ in: (Goenner et al. 1999,
87–125).

Sauer, T. 1999. ‘The Relativity of Discovery. Hilbert’s First Note on the Foun-
dations of Physics’. Archive for History of Exact Sciences, 53, 529–575.

Scholz, E. (ed.) 2001. Hermann Weyl’s Raum–Zeit–Materie and a General
Introduction to His Scientiﬁc Work. Basel, Boston, Berlin: Birkh¨auser.

Stachel, J. 1995. ‘History of Relativity’, in: Brown, L.M., Pais, A., and Pippard,
B. (eds.) Twentieth Century Physics, Philadelphia: Institute of Physics, Vol. I,
249–356.

— 2002. Einstein from ‘B’ to ‘Z’. Boston, Basel, Berlin: Birkh¨auser.

Weyl, H. 1918. Raum
Berlin: Springer [essential revisions in each of the later editions: 19193, 19214,
19235].

Materie. Vorlesungen ¨uber allgemeine Relativit¨atstheorie.
·

Zeit
·

27

