4
0
0
2
 
n
u
J
 
7
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
t
s
i
h
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
7
3
1
6
0
4
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

The (absence of a) relationship between
thermodynamic and logical reversibility

O J E Maroney
Imperial College London
Physics Department
The Blackett Laboratory
Prince Consort Road
London
SW7 2BW

February 2, 2008

Abstract

Landauer erasure seems to provide a powerful link between thermodynam-
ics and information processing (logical computation). The only logical opera-
tions that require a generation of heat are logically irreversible ones, with the
minimum heat generation being kT ln 2 per bit of information lost. Never-
theless, it will be shown logical reversibility neither implies, nor is implied by
thermodynamic reversibility. By examining thermodynamically reversible op-
erations which are logically irreversible, it is possible to show that information
and entropy, while having the same form, are conceptually diﬀerent.

1 Introduction

In a recent article on the information theoretic exorcism of Maxwell’s demon, Ben-
nett writes:

Landauer’s principle, often regarded as the basic principle of the thermo-
dynamics of information processing, holds that any logically irreversible
manipulation of data . . . must be accompanied by a corresponding en-
tropy increase in non-information bearing degrees of freedom of the in-
formation processing apparatus or its environment. Conversely, it is
generally accepted any logically reversible transformation of information
can in principle be accomplished by an appropriate physical mechanism
operating in a thermodynamically reversible fashion.(Bennett, 2003)

1

In Bennett’s, and in other papers (see Leﬀ and Rex, 1990,2003; Zurek 1990)
it appears that a strong claim is being made linking thermodynamic entropy to
information processing in computers. In particular, it has been argued that the res-
olution of the Szilard Engine(Szilard, 1929) requires an understanding of principles
of information processing.

In this paper it will be argued that, while Landauer erasure (Landauer, 1961) is
essentially correct (contrary, for example, to the arguments of Earman and Norton
(1998, 1999)) it has been generalised incorrectly in its popularisation as ”Landauer’s
Principle”. When properly understood, it will be shown that information process-
ing is unnecessary for resolving Maxwell’s demon and that the strong connection
between information and thermodynamic entropy is broken.

Two widespread generalisations of Landauer’s paper, that may be concluded

from Bennett’s quote above, can be stated as:

• All logically irreversible operations require a generation of heat of kT ln 2 en-

ergy per bit of information lost.

• While all logically reversible operations may be accomplished as a thermody-
namically reversible process, some logically irreversible operations cannot.

We will be argue that neither generalisation is correct:

• Some logically irreversible operations can be implemented without generating

heat.

• Any logically irreversible transformation of information can in principle be
accomplished by an appropriate physical mechanism operating in a thermo-
dynamically reversible fashion.

In Section 3 the implications of this for the thermodynamics of computation are
considered, and then in Sections 4 and 5 this is applied to Shannon signalling and
the Szilard Engine, respectively. The conclusion is that, while Shannon informa-
tion and Gibbs entropy share the same measure, they are not equivalent, and that
principles of information processing are not necessary to ‘save’ the second law of
thermodynamics.

2 Landauer Erasure

Landauer Erasure (LE) is a process by which a single information bearing degree
of freedom, in one of two possible logical states, is restored to the logical value zero
regardless of which state it initially occupies (Figure 1).

1. The logical state may be represented by an ‘atom in a box’, with the box
divided in two by a moveable barrier. The atom on the left represents logical
state zero and on the right, logical state one. The box is in contact with a
heat bath at some temperature T .

2

Figure 1: Landauer Erasure

2. The barrier is removed from the box and the atom is allowed to thermalise.

3. The barrier is inserted in the far right hand end of the box.

4. The barrier is isothermally moved to the centre of the box. This acts as the
compression of an ideal gas so the work required is NkT ln 2, where N = 1.
The work done on compressing the one atom gas is expelled into the heat
bath1.

There are two features of this process that should immediately be recognised:
1For justiﬁcation that the ideal gas laws are valid for a single atom gas, see Leﬀ (1995); Bender,

Brody and Meister (2000) and Maroney (2002)

3

• The compression stage (which requires the generation of heat) is not the same
as the erasure stage (which actually destroys the information). It is noticeable
that in their exposition of LE, Leﬀ and Rex (1990 p.22-25) refer to ”era-
sure/resetting”. Stage 2 is the erasure, while Stage 4 is the resetting. A
conclusion of our analysis will be that ”erasure” must be understood as a
separate operation to ”resetting”.

• The compression stage, Step 4 of the process, is an isothermal compression,
and is thermodynamically reversible. The heat generation is not a thermody-
namically irreversible process.

2.1 Reversing Landauer Erasure

Let us now consider the eﬀect of reversing these Stages, in a ”Reverse Landauer
Erasure” (RLE).

1. The barrier is moved isothermally, reversibly to the far right of the box. Pres-
sure from the expansion of the one atom gas can be used to extract kT ln 2
energy from the heat bath and used as work.

2. The barrier is removed from the right hand end of the box.

3. After a thermalisation period, the barrier is inserted in the centre of the box.

4. The atom has an equal probability of being found on either side of the barrier.

It is apparent that if the logical states of the atom were initially uniformly distributed
(ie. had probability 1
2 of being on either side of the barrier) then the statistical state
of the system is now exactly the same as it was before LE. The work used to reset
the bit in Stage 4 of LE is recovered in Stage 1 of RLE and the entire process has
taken place in a thermodynamically reversible manner.

While this point might be accepted by advocates of the information-entropy link,
it is sometimes claimed that this is only true if the initial state of the system has
uniform probability distribution:

memory erasure and resetting is always logically irreversible but it is
thermodynamically reversible only when the initial memory ensemble is
distributed uniformly among [0] and [1] states (Leﬀ and Rex 1990)

If the initial statistical state of the bit is non-uniform, the RLE process will not
leave the ﬁnal statistical state in the initial distribution - the ﬁnal state will still be
probability half of being in either statistical state. As any non-uniform distribution
will have lower entropy, the result is an uncompensated increase in Gibbs entropy
and so is thermodynamically irreversible.

4

2.2 Non-uniform probabilities

We will now show that the resetting of non-uniform probability distributions can
also take place as a thermodynamically reversible process.

The key element here is to notice that the amount of information one wishes to

reset is less for a non-uniform probability:

H = − X p log2 p

This is 1 bit if the probabilities are equal, but less than 1 bit if the probabilities are
non-uniform. As Landauer’s principle states only that kT ln 2 energy must be dissi-
pated per bit of information, we should expect that with non-uniform probabilities
the erasure and resetting may take place with a lower generation of heat.

Figure 2: Landauer Erasure of Non-Uniform Probabilities

To achieve this lower generation it is necessary only to insert an additional Stage

(Figure 2) between Stages 1 and 2 of the normal LE:

• Isothermally, reversibly move the barrier to the position x = p (where x = 0

represents the barrier on the far left and x = 1 the far right of the box).

If the atom is initially located to the left of the piston, with probability p, this
requires a work expenditure of

while if it is initially to the right, the work expenditure is

EL = −kT ln [2p]

ER = −kT ln [2 [1 − p]]

The mean expenditure of energy (over an ensemble of such operations) is

E = pEL + (1 − p)ER = (H − 1)kT ln 2

When combined with the work in Stage 4 of LE, the total work required is

W = HkT ln 2

in complete agreement with Landauer’s principle 2

Let us call this process LE(p) to emphasise that the erasure and resetting oper-

ation is dependant upon the amount of information one wishes to erase.

If we now reverse LE(p) we ﬁnd that the operation RLE(p) modiﬁes RLE as

follows:

2See Shizume (1995), Piechocinska (2000) for proof that this is the least work required.

5

• When the barrier is re-inserted (Stage 3) it is inserted at the location x = p
in the box. There is correspondingly the probability p that the atom is found
to the left, and 1 − p that the atom is round to the right, of the barrier.

• The barrier is then isothermally, reversibly moved to the centre of the box,

requiring a mean work expenditure of

E′

= (1 − H)kT ln 2

Now the ﬁnal statistical state of the one-atom gas after RLE(p) is identical to the
statistical state before LE(p). The net work required for LE(p) exactly matches
the net work extracted by RLE(p) and the entire process has been achieved in a
thermodynamically reversible manner.

It is important to note that the LE(p) operation is not conditional upon the
location of the atom. A measurement of, or correlation to, the logical state of
It is only tailored to the value of p, to the amount of
the atom is not required.
information that is being reset. If the value of p = 0 or p = 1 the net work required
for LE(p) or RLE(p) is zero. These correspond to the cases where the bit is known
to be in a particular state, so the Shannon information is zero. In these cases, it is
well known that operations exist (”Do nothing” and ”NOT”, for example) that can
reset the bit to zero non-dissipatively.

The tailoring of the LE(p) operation to the speciﬁc amount of information being
reset makes it diﬃcult to use this in practice. It is unlikely that an engineer designing
a computer will be able to determine the statistical probabilities of the inputs to the
logical operations the computer will perform. Simply assuming a uniform probability
in all cases will not work. If, for example, the input to one operation was itself the
output of an AND operation, then one or the other operation must have non-uniform
probabilities for its input states.

Nevertheless, the key conclusion remains:

in principle it is always possible to
perform a logically irreversible operation in a thermodynamically reversible man-
ner. Clearly we have not explicitly shown that all logically irreversible operations
can be implemented as thermodynamically reversible processes, but provided that
the thermodynamic process is tailored to the amount of information that is being
manipulated, we see no reason that this cannot be done for any logically irreversible
operation.

Perhaps the correct generalisation of Landauer’s principle should be:

A logical operation needs to generate heat equal to at least3 kT ln 2
times the change in the total quantity of Shannon information over the
operation.

Neither logical reversibility nor erasure of information appears in this formula-
tion. Any operation may, in principle, be implemented as a physical process which
reaches the limit and so can be made thermodynamically reversible.

3If the change in Shannon information is negative, then this gives the maximum amount of

heat energy that can be extracted as work during the process.

6

LE
IN OUT
0
1

0
0

RLE
IN OUT
0
0

0
1

RAND
IN OUT
0
0
1
1

0
1
0
1

Table 1: Logical Operations

3 Logical Computation

In the previous Section we considered the thermodynamic reversal of LE and its
generalisation to non-uniform probability distributions. We found that this could
always be made thermodynamically reversible. We will now consider these as logical
operations (for simplicity we will use p = 1
2 from now on, although the conclusions
can easily be generalised to the non-uniform case).

Logical reversibility is deﬁned by Landauer (1961):

We shall call a device logically irreversible if the output of a device does
not uniquely deﬁne the inputs.

It is clear from the truth tables (Table 1) that the operation LE is logically irre-
versible. RLE, on the other hand, is logically reversible, if rather trivially so (given
the output one can deﬁne what the input must have been - it must have been zero!)
If we now combine the two operations (RLE)(LE) we get a new logical oper-
ation RAND. This is also logically irreversible. The logical state of the bit after
the computation cannot be used to deduce the logical state of the bit before the
computation. Whatever information was originally represented by the bit has been
lost. An ‘erasure’ of information has taken place (it must have taken place as Lan-
dauer Erasure is the ﬁrst part of the process. Information that is ‘erased’ cannot be
recovered!).

However, during (LE) kT ln 2 heat is generated, while during (RLE) kT ln 2 is
extracted from the environment. The ﬁnal thermodynamic state is identical to the
initial thermodynamic state4. So no net generation of heat has taken place. Never-
theless, a logically irreversible operation, involving the loss of 1 bit of information,
has clearly taken place.

This directly contradicts the most common manner in which the generalisation

of Landauer’s principle is stated:

To erase a bit of information in an environment at temperature T re-
quires dissipation of energy ≥ kT ln 2. (Caves 1990, 1993)

in erasing one bit . . . of information one dissipates, on average, at least
kBT ln (2) of energy into the environment. (Piechocinska, 2000)

4It is accepted by both Bennett (2003) and Leﬀ and Rex (1990) that LE( 1

2 ) is thermodynami-

cally reversible. We have here simply reversed the thermodynamic process.

7

a logically irreversible operation must be implemented by a physically
irreversible device, which dissipates heat into the environment (Bub,
2002)

We have shown that logically irreversible operations do not always imply a dissipa-
tion of energy into the environment.

In case it is argued that there is still some heat generation - during the LE
operation - but that we have just recovered this at a later stage, we should note that
the combined operation RAND can be achieved without any work being required
at any stage:

• Remove the barrier from the centre of the box.

• Wait for a time larger than the thermal relaxation time of the atom.

• Insert the barrier back into the centre of the box.

Now we have created exactly the same truth table as (RLE)(LE) - so the original
bit of information must again be considered lost or erased - and the statistical state
remains the same at the end as at the beginning of the operation. The operation
is logically irreversible, but is thermodynamically reversible and undergoes no heat
exchange with the environment.

What we are seeing here is the consequences of one of the two facts we noted
about Landauer Erasure above: the erasure stage of the operation is not the heat
generation stage.
It is the resetting operation (which compresses the probability
distribution) which generates heat. The erasure stage, in which the logical irre-
versibility actually takes place and the original information is lost, does not require
an exchange of energy with the environment.

3.1 Non-deterministic operations

The operations RLE and RAND have unusual ”truth tables”. They certainly do
not appear in most works on computational logic! The reason for this is that they
logical non-determinism5.
display the converse property to logical irreversibility:
We will deﬁne this as follows:

We shall call a device logically non-deterministic if the input of a device
does not uniquely deﬁne the outputs.

This should not be taken as requiring some kind of fundamental physical process
that is non-deterministic (such as quantum wavefunction collapse) any more than
logical irreversibility requires a fundamental physical process that is irreversible. In
both cases an interaction with an uncorrelated environment (such as a heat bath)
is all that is required.

5It is noticeable that in Bennett (2003), he refers throughout to deterministic computation.

8

3.2 Computational Paths

Let us consider the computational paths that can be constructed from the addition
of non-deterministic logical operations (Figure 3).

3.2.1 Irreversible, Deterministic

Type 1 computational paths are the most commonly encountered. In this we con-
sider two possible input states (which for convenience we will assume are equiprob-
able) and at some point a merging of the computational paths takes place (such as
by LE). This requires a minimum amount of work to be performed on the system,
which is expelled as heat.

3.2.2 Reversible, Deterministic

Type 2 paths are, in some respects, an improvement. Using reversible logic gates,
such as the Fredkin-Toﬀoli gate, the output from the logical operation will contain
additional bits which can be used to reconstruct the input states. Logical irre-
versibility is eliminated and no heat need be generated. All Type 1 computations
may also be performed by Type 2 computational paths, as shown by Bennett (1973).
Type 1 and 2 computational paths are deterministic. If one restricts ones con-
sideration to deterministic logical operations, then logical irreversibility implies heat
generation. With the addition of non-deterministic logical operations, we ﬁnd new
computational paths are possible, whose thermodynamic properties are diﬀerent.

Should we conﬁne ourselves to deterministic logical operations? It seems unnec-
essarily restrictive to do so. Aside from the simple fact that such operations exist
(and may even have computational value) there is the fact that the non-deterministic
operation RLE is just the thermodynamic reverse of LE. Leﬀ and Rex (1990) and
Bennett (2003) accept that LE is thermodynamically reversible. For this to be
meaningful, one must accept the reverse thermodynamic process as a legitimate
operation. This reverse process is RLE and is non-deterministic.

3.2.3 Reversible, Non-deterministic

Type 3 paths are logically reversible but non-deterministic. An example of such a
process is the reverse Landauer Erasure, RLE(p). It is interesting to note that this
operation can extract heat from the environment and store it in a work reservoir.
It cools a computer down, in contrast to Type 1 operations which heat computers
up. Type 3 paths are generally the reverse of Type 1 paths (and vice versa).

This produces an interesting result. In Bennett (1973) a general procedure is
devised for simulating Type 1 computations by Type 2 computations and so avoiding
the generation of heat. This involves copying the output of the initial simulation6,
then reversing all the logical steps, leaving only the input state and the copy of the
desired output.

6This applies only to classical computation, see Maroney (2001,2004).

9

It can now be seen that there is an equivalent way of running a computer at a
minimal thermodynamic cost, but without the restriction to using logically reversible
computation. Perform the Type 1 computation, using irreversible logical operations
and expelling heat into the environment. Then copy the output as before and
perform the Type 3 computation that is the exact reverse of the original Type 1
computation. Now all the heat generated during the Type 1 computation can be
extracted to perform work during the Type 3 computation!

This diﬀers from the reversible simulation using Type 2 paths in two ways:

• For reversible simulation, the ﬁnal state is the desired output and the original
input state. With the non-deterministic reversal, the ﬁnal state is the desired
output plus a random choice of one of the possible input states that could
produce the given output state, with a probability given by the statistical
distribution of the input states.

• To achieve the minimal thermodynamic cost, it is necessary for the imple-
mentation of the separate irreversible and non-deterministic operations to be
tailored to the statistical distribution of the input states. This would be very
hard to achieve in practice.

Bennett’s procedure for simulating Type 1 computations by Type 2 computations
is therefore a far superior method of eliminating the conversion of work into heat
than using a Type 3 computation to extract the generated heat back again.

3.2.4 Irreversible, Non-deterministic

Type 4 computational paths are irreversible and non-deterministic. Such computa-
tions may sometimes require a generation of heat, may sometimes be able to extract
energy from the environment and may sometimes be implemented with no exchange
of energy, depending upon the exact nature of the manipulation of the information.
In the case of the RAND operation, no exchange of energy is required.

There is a curious asymmetry between irreversibility and non-determinism. Type
1 calculations can be performed by Type 2 operations. Type 3 and 4 operations,
however, cannot be performed by Type 1 or 2 operations. This is because the non-
deterministic operation can eﬀectively operate as a random number generator7. A
Type 3 or 4 operation can increase the algorithmic complexity of an input bit string.
This is not possible for Type 1 or 2 operations.

This is especially curious when we consider that a Type 3 operation is just the
reverse of a Type 1 operation, but if we reverse the simulation of a Type 1 operation
by a Type 2 operation, we do not get a Type 3 operation!

All these computational paths can be accomplished in a thermodynamically re-
versible manner. However, one cannot tell directly from the truth table alone what
7Let it be clear the source of the random number is not necessarily through a non-determinism in
the fundamental laws of physics. It is a computational non-determinism whose source is sampling
the uncorrelated degrees of freedom of the environment.

10

the reversible thermodynamic implementation will be - that requires the statisti-
cal distribution of the input states. The exception to this is Type 2 computations,
which require neither generation nor extraction of energy, regardless of the statistical
distribution.

4 Shannon Information

We will now brieﬂy consider how the diﬀerence between Type 2 and Type 4 relates
to the processing of Shannon information.

Start with the usual source and signal states occurring with probability p. Now
suppose that this is arranged so that the energy of the states happens to be E0 +
kT ln p where T is the temperature of the environment and E0 is some constant. Now
further suppose that the communication channel is very noisy. In fact over the course
of the signal propagation, any individual state becomes completely thermalised.

The statistical state at the end of the transmission will be identical to the sta-
tistical state at the start of the transmission. However, one cannot say that the
receiver is actually gaining any information about the signal transmitted. For in-
formation transmission, the individual state needs to be made stable against noise.
Otherwise, it is not a signal at all.

For the thermodynamic state, there is no change. The thermodynamic entropy
is the same at the start as at the end. Such thermalisation through contact with the
environment is often an essential part of thermodynamic processes (such as isother-
mal compression and expansion of a gas). The individual state has no signiﬁcance.
Of course, it remains the case that the receivers ignorance as to which state will
be decoded remains − P p ln p. What has changed is the signiﬁcance, if any, the
receiver may attach to the signal.

Consider a Type 2 computational paths and a Type 4 computational paths,
where they diﬀer only in the existence of a single RAND operation in the Type 4
path. Both before and after the RAND operation the statistical state of the Type
4 path is the same as the statistical state of the Type 2 path.

The quantity of Shannon information has not been changed by the RAND op-
eration. This cannot be taken to mean that Type 2 and Type 4 paths are infor-
mationally equivalent! From the point of view of information processing, they are
fundamentally very diﬀerent types of operation. From the point of view of thermo-
dynamics, however, the RAND operation has had no eﬀect.

5 The Szilard Engine

Now let us turn to the Szilard Engine, and the use of Landauer’s principle in the
exorcism of Maxwell’s demon (Figure 4). A single atom is contained within a box,
with a moveable barrier (or piston) inserted in the centre of the box. There is a
probability 1
2 of the atom being on either side of the barrier. The demon has a single
memory register, which is initially in logical state 0.

11

The normal presentation of this, in terms of information, might go as follows:

1. The Demon performs a measurement upon the box to determine the location
of the atom. The measurement generates no heat. The state of the Demon’s
memory now represents the location of the atom. As information has been
gained about the location of the atom, its entropy has been reduced.

2. Having determined the location of the atom, the piston is moved to one side
or the other, and the isothermal expansion used to lift a weight. This extracts
kT ln 2 energy, corresponding to the reduction in entropy of the atom during
the measurement.

3. At ﬁrst it seems that the 2nd Law has been violated. However, there is still the
information about the location of the atom recorded in the Demon’s memory.
To complete the cycle and return to its initial state, this record must be erased.
According to Landauer’s principle this requires the conversion of kT ln 2 work
into heat, exactly compensating for the work extracted.

Now let us consider how this is aﬀected by the arguments of previous sections.
As we have seen, the Demon’s one-bit memory can itself be physically realised
by an atom in a box with a moveable barrier.
Instead of resetting the Demon’s
memory, by an LE operation, let us perform the RAND operation upon the De-
mon’s memory, by pulling out and reinserting the barrier in the Demon’s memory
register. The result is a complete randomisation of the state of the Demon (Figure
5).

This operation is thermodynamically reversible and leaves the statistical state
unchanged. Indeed, from the point of view of thermodynamics, nothing has hap-
pened. If there was a problem for thermodynamics, requiring resolution, before the
RAND operation, that problem still exists after the RAND operation.

However, it causes problems for the information erasure story. There is no corre-
lation between the state of the Demon’s memory after the RAND and the state of
the memory (or the initial location of the atom) before RAND. The one-bit ”mem-
ory” in the demon no longer represents the location of the atom. In fact it no longer
represents information about anything. The RAND operation has already ‘erased’
the record of the Demon’s measurement, it has ‘erased’ the information about the
location of the atom, but has not generated any heat.

Is this a problem for thermodynamics? Hardly. The energy kT ln 2 has been
extracted, it is true. What is required, to ‘save’ the second law, is that there be
a compensating increase of entropy of k ln 2, and this has already happened. At
the start of the process the Demon’s ‘memory’ was in the logical state 0. At the
end of the process it may be in either logical state with equal probability.
Its
entropy has increased by k ln 2. This is precisely what is needed. As the Szilard Box
itself is now back in its initial state, the entire process could simply be regarded as
convoluted procedure for extracting kT ln 2 energy from the isothermal expansion
of the Demon’s state, by an operation such as RLE!

12

If it is not necessary to refer to Landauer Erasure after the RAND operation,
then it was not necessary to refer to it beforehand. Why then has Landauer Era-
sure been promoted so strongly as the necessary principle to resolve the Szilard
Engine? Historically, it was suggested by Brillouin (1951) and Gabor (1964) that
the act of information acquisition (or performing a measurement) by the Demon
must dissipate kT ln 2 energy into the environment. It was Landauer’s 1961 paper
that demonstrated the falsity of this argument - they had wrongly generalised from
certain measurement processes, which were dissipative, to assume all measurement
processes must generate heat.

Having eliminated the generation of heat during the measurement process, it
is natural to look for a diﬀerent source of heat generation, and in the same paper
Landauer appears to provide the answer: resetting is a heat generating operation,
and requires the conversion of exactly the right amount of work into heat.

The essential irreversible act, which prevents the demon from violating
the second law, is not the measurement itself but rather the subsequent
restoration of the measuring apparatus to a standard state (Bennett,
1982)

information processing and acquisition have no intrinsic, irreducible ther-
modynamic cost, whereas the seemingly humble act of information de-
struction does have a cost, exactly suﬃcient to save the Second Law
from the Demon. (Bennett, 2003)

This misses the point that it is not actually necessary to generate heat (or per-
form an irreversible act) to ‘save the Second Law’, it is only necessary to have a
compensating entropy increase somewhere. The compensating increase in entropy
has already taken place, and has taken place in the Demon itself.

If the increased entropy of the Demon is suﬃcient to save the second law after the
RAND operation, when the memory register no longer represents information about
the atom, then the fact that the memory register happens to represent information
about the atom before the RAND operation is irrelevant to the resolution of the
problem. The appeal to information acquisition, memory and erasure obscures the
real reason why the second law is not violated. The movement of the barrier has to be
correlated to the location of the atom. To do this requires an auxiliary system. This
auxiliary ends up in a higher entropy state. This is not a principle of computation
or of logic - it is a consequence of the physics of Hamiltonian dynamics.
It is
immaterial whether one considers the auxiliary to be a ‘memory cell’ or whether
it can be regarded as representing ‘information’ about the state of the atom, or
anything else.

6 Conclusion

Logically reversible operations may always be physically implemented as a thermo-
dynamically reversible process. They may also, by being sub-optimally designed, be
physically implemented as thermodynamically irreversible processes.

13

We have shown the same holds true for logically irreversible operations. Any
given quantity of information can be reset to zero in a thermodynamically reversible
manner. For the limit of kT ln 2 heat generation per bit to be reached, the thermo-
dynamic process must be reversible.

In practice, logical operations are implemented by sub-optimal physical pro-
cesses and so are thermodynamically irreversible. However, this irreversibility is not
caused by the nature of the logical operation, it is by way of the operation being
implemented by a thermodynamically sub-optimal physical process. This is as true
for logically irreversible operations as it is for logically reversible operations.

This does not contradict Landauer (1961) in the least. All that Landauer can be
said to have shown was that a resetting operation required a generation of heat in the
environment. However, a confusion then appears to arise through the incorrect use of
the term ‘dissipation’. In Landauer (1961) and in much of the surrounding literature
‘dissipation’ is used more or less interchangeably with ‘heat generation’. Strictly,
dissipation should be used only when the conversion of work to heat arises through
dissipative forces (such as those involving friction) which are thermodynamically
irreversible. Forces which are thermodynamically reversible are non-dissipative8.

As an example, consider the isothermal compression of an N-atom ideal gas to
half it’s volume. If this takes place suﬃciently slowly then work equal to NkT ln 2
must be performed upon the gas. The internal energy of the gas remains constant
at 3N
2 kT throughout and the work done is converted to heat in the heat bath. All
this heat generation is thermodynamically reversible as the free energy of the gas
increases by NkT ln 2 and the net change in entropy of the gas and heat bath is
zero. In this case it would be incorrect to refer to the conversion of NkT ln 2 work
into heat as ‘dissipation’, as the force is frictionless, thermodynamically reversible,
and so ‘non-dissipative’.

In the case where N = 1 we have exactly the isothermal compression of a one-
atom gas that is used in Landauer Erasure.
It should be clear, therefore, that
when Landauer’s minimum limit of kT ln 2 heat generation is reached this is non-
dissipative. This can make statements such as

To erase a bit of information in an environment at temperature T re-
quires dissipation of energy ≥ kT ln 2 (Caves 1990,1993)

hard to understand when the equality is reached (and all the literature agrees that
the equality can, in principle, be reached).

This confusion over the use of the term ‘dissipation’ seems to be the basis of
Shenker’s (2000) criticism of Landauer Erasure (which Shenker refers to as the
‘Landauer Dissipation Thesis’), as Landauer Erasure can always be made ‘non-
dissipative’. In contrast in this paper we have avoided the use of the term ‘dissipa-
tion’ where possible, and used instead ‘heat generation’. Where ‘dissipation’ is used
in the literature, we have assumed that ‘heat generation’ is all that was intended.
Certainly Landauer (1961) can consistently be understood this way.

Nevertheless, the use of this term seems to have created a faulty link from ‘heat

generating’ to ‘thermodynamically irreversible’:

8The author would like to thank John Hannay for discussions on this point.

14

The existence of logically reversible automata suggests that physical
computers might be made thermodynamically reversible, and hence ca-
pable of dissipating an arbitrarily small amount of energy (Bennett,
1973)

a logically irreversible operation must be implemented by a physically
irreversible device, which dissipates heat into the environment (Bub,
2002)

We have clearly shown in this paper that logically irreversible devices are as
capable of being made thermodynamically reversible (and hence non-dissipative) as
logically reversible devices.

There is then a second confusion regarding whether logically irreversible op-
erations must all be heat generating. What Landauer (1961) argues is that all
unavoidably heat generating operations are logically irreversible. This is quite cor-
rect, but this does not mean that all logically irreversible operations are unavoidably
heat generating. As we have seen, some logically irreversible operations need not
generate heat. Some may even absorb heat and convert it to useful work!

We have seen that these operations remove any need to consider Landauer era-
sure or concepts of information processing, when resolving the ‘problem’ of the
Szilard Engine. We would also argue that this demonstrates a conceptual diﬀerence
between information and entropy.

The measure of the Shannon information clearly has the same mathematical
form as the measure of the Gibbs entropy. Sharing the same mathematical form,
however, does not make two things the same. An electrical circuit composed of a
capacitor and an inductor can be described by the same mathematical equations as
a mass on a spring, but this does not make mass the same thing as inductance.

The logically irreversible, non-deterministic RAND operation has a profound
aﬀect upon the informational state of a system, while leaving its thermodynamic
state unaﬀected. The fact that the quantity of the Shannon information is the
same before and after RAND should not lead us to think nothing has happened:
Type 4 computational paths are profoundly diﬀerent from Type 2 computational
paths, as information processing systems. For thermodynamics, however, there is no
diﬀerence. So there is more to a concept than its measure: information and entropy
are not the same thing.

References

[1] C M Bender, D C Brody, and B K Meister. (2000) Quantum-mechanical

Carnot engine. arXiv:quant-ph/0007002.

[2] C H Bennett. (1973) The logical reversibility of computation. IBM J Res

Develop, 17:525–532.

[3] C H Bennett. (1982) The thermodynamics of computation - a review. Int

J Theor Phys, 21:905–940. Reprinted in Leﬀ and Rex (1990).

15

[4] C H Bennett. (2003) Notes on Landauer’s principle, reversible computa-

tion, and Maxwell’s demon. arXiv:physics/0210005.

[5] L Brillouin. (1951) Maxwell’s demon cannot operate: Information and
entropy I. J Appl Phys, 22:334–337. Reprinted in Leﬀ and Rex (1990).

[6] J Bub. (2002) Maxwell’s demon and the thermodynamics of computation.

arXiv:quant-ph/0203017.

[7] C M Caves. (1990) Quantitative limits on the ability of a Maxwell demon

to extract work from heat. Phys Rev Lett, 64(18):2111–2114.

[8] C M Caves. (1993) Information and entropy. Phys Rev E, 47(6):4010–

4017.

[9] J Earman and J D Norton. (1998) Exorcist XIV: The Wrath of Maxwell’s
Demon. Part I: From Maxwell to Szilard. Stud Hist Phil Mod Phys, pages
435–471.

[10] J Earman and J D Norton. (1999) Exorcist XIV: The Wrath of Maxwell’s
Demon. Part II: From Szilard to Landauer and beyond. Stud Hist Phil
Mod Phys, 30:1–40.

[11] D Gabor. (1964) Light and information. Progress in Optics, 1:111–153.
Based on lectures delivered in 1951. Reprinted in Leﬀ and Rex (1990).

[12] R Landauer. (1961) Irreversibility and heat generation in the computing

process. IBM J Res Dev, 5:183–191. Reprinted in Leﬀ and Rex (1990).

[13] H S Leﬀ. (1995) Thermodynamic insights from a one-atom gas. Am J

Phys, 63(10):895–905.

[14] H S Leﬀ and A F Rex, editors. (1990) Maxwell’s Demon. Entropy, Infor-

mation, Computing. Adam Hilger. ISBN 0-7503-0057-4.

[15] H S Leﬀ and A F Rex, editors. (2003) Maxwell’s Demon 2: Entropy,
classical and quantum information, computing. IoP. ISBN 0 7503 0759 5.

[16] O J E Maroney. (2001) Sameness and oppositeness in quantum informa-
tion. In Proceedings 21st ANPA Conference. ISBN 0 9526215 6 8.

[17] O J E Maroney.

Information and Entropy in Quan-
tum Theory. PhD thesis, Birkbeck College, University of London.
www.bbk.ac.uk/tpru/OwenMaroney/thesis/thesis.html.

(2002)

[18] O J E Maroney.

(2004)

Are all

reversible computations

tidy?

arXiv:quant-ph/0403079.

[19] B Piechocinska. (2000) Information erasure. Phys Rev A, 61:062314, 1–9.

16

[20] O

R

Shenker.

en-
archive.
of
tropy.
http://philsci-archive.pitt.edu/documents/dis0/00/00/01/15/index.html.

Philosophy

Science

e-print

(2000)

Logic

and

[21] K Shizume. (1995) Heat generation required by erasure. Phys Rev E,

52:3495–3499.

[22] L Szilard. (1929) On the decrease of entropy in a thermodynamic system
by the intervention of intelligent beings. Z Physik, 53:840. Reprinted in
Leﬀ and Rex (1990).

[23] W H Zurek, editor. (1990) Complexity and the Physics of Information.

Addison Wesley. ISBN 0-201-51509-1.

17

Figure 3: Computational Paths

18

Figure 4: Landauer Erasure and the Szilard Engine

Figure 5: Randomisation of Demons ”Memory”

19

