4
0
0
2
 
l
u
J
 
4
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
t
s
i
h
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
8
7
0
7
0
4
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Chapter 1

Mach’s Principle

Herbert Lichtenegger
Institut f¨ur Weltraumforschung
¨Osterreichische Akademie der Wissenschaften
A-8042 Graz, Austria

Bahram Mashhoon
Department of Physics and Astronomy
University of Missouri-Columbia
Columbia, Missouri 65211, USA

Abstract. We brieﬂy review the history of Mach’s principle and discuss its signiﬁ-
cance in the light of modern physics.

1.1

Introduction

Whether space is an independent entity of its own, a number of relations between
material objects or a mere subjective notion superimposed on the world is a question
of long tradition and is probably rooted in our common impression of the distinct
diﬀerence between the objects and the empty space between them. Two diﬀerent
views thus emerged from the broad range of opinions in western thinking about
the nature of space and time, considering them either as absolute or relative. The
absolute view identiﬁes space with a container holding all material objects in which
the bodies can move but which exists independently of its content while the relative
view considers space merely as a conceptual abstraction of the storage of the bodies
and is thus based on the existence of bodies, losing its meaning without them.

Although the question about the very nature of space seems to be at ﬁrst glance
a purely philosophical problem, it is of eminent physical signiﬁcance concerning the
foundation of physics since it is closely related with the question of what consti-
tutes the method of physics and what should be the elements of a physical theory.

1

2

CHAPTER 1. MACH’S PRINCIPLE

Newton’s concepts of absolute space and time, though having proved to be highly
successful, were not accepted by all scientists and the call for a reformulation of
mechanics in terms of purely relational quantities never fell silent. Although Mach
was not the ﬁrst who insisted on such a reformulation, he was without doubt the
most inﬂuential one and his critique of the Newtonian concepts of absolute space
and time published in his “Mechanics” was later loosely termed “Mach’s principle”
by Einstein1 [1]. However, since Mach made only tentative proposals, there are a
great number of interpretations and diﬀerent formulations of this principle [3].

In the following section we present a brief historical review concerning the prob-
lem of absolute/relative motion. Since Mach is well known and mostly cited among
physicists within this context, we also give credit to a number of other authors
who contributed with equally interesting thoughts to the subject. For an excellent
comprehensive overview regarding various topics of Mach’s principle we refer to the
book edited by Barbour and Pﬁster [3].

1.2 Absolute Versus Relative

The origin of the two divergent concepts of space mentioned above can be traced
back to ancient times: Democritos, who believed in the existence of both atoms
and empty space and to some extent Platon, whose world of ideas also includes
space as an ideal object, can be regarded as representing an absolute view of space
while Aristotle with his opinion that space only epitomizes the place of the objects
comes close to a relational concept of space. During the age of Enlightenment the
discussion about the status of space reached a new peak with Descartes, Leibniz,
Newton, Huygens, Berkeley and others. For Descartes [4] the central characteristic
of bodies is their extension which he identiﬁes with space itself, i.e. they are not
in space but constitute space by themselves, there is no space devoid of bodies.
Therefore, there are no external objects lending space its metric properties, hence
these properties must be given intrinsically. These characteristics are independent of
the bodies and thus represent an absolute feature. Leibniz [5], however, claimed that
the relative position between the bodies is suﬃcient for the deﬁnition of space and
tried to support his view with the principle of suﬃcient reason (principium rationis
suﬃcientis): no location or orientation of objects in space is distinguished from any
other location or orientation, there is no reason for it. Hence all places are alike and
it makes no sense to talk about a certain location of bodies. In addition, Leibniz
based his rejection of absolute space on another philosophical principle, the identity
of indiscernibles (principium identitatis indiscernibilium): when all objects in space
are displaced by the same amount, then this new situation cannot be discerned from
the initial one and these two absolute locations have no separable meaning. However,
while Leibniz’ relational point of view may be justiﬁed in kinematical respects, it

1Indeed the terms “Machian principle” and “Machian postulate” can already be found prior to

Einstein in Schlick [2].

1.2. ABSOLUTE VERSUS RELATIVE

3

fails to defeat the dynamical arguments in favor of an absolute space brought up
by Newton by means of his famous bucket experiment. Based on the observational
fact that a vessel at rest ﬁlled with water and a similar vessel in rotation diﬀer in
their shapes of the surface of the water, Newton was led to the notion of absolute
motion:
it is the rotation with respect to absolute space which is responsible for
the diﬀerence2. Therefore, though Newton clearly recognized that absolute space
cannot be directly observed, he rejected the possibility of basing physics on purely
relational quantities.

For L. Euler the principles of mechanics which include the ideas of absolute time
and absolute space are beyond any doubt, since all consequences drawn from these
principles are in perfect agreement with observation [6]. One is therefore led to
consider these entities as real things rather than as imaginary and devoid of any
reality. Moreover, it would be absurd to maintain that pure imagination can serve
as a foundation of the real principles of mechanics. Also, depending on the absolute
or relational view of space, the law of inertia would lead to diﬀerent predictions for
the behavior of a body. To see this, imagine a body ﬂoating in water such that
both the water and the body are at rest. As long as there is no motion, the body
remains in the same place in absolute space as well as with regard to the water,
which is in accordance with both views. However, when the water begins to ﬂow,
the body should still remain at the same place in absolute space, while, according
to the relational view, the body should perfectly follow the movement of the water
in order to preserve the neighborhood of the same particles of the water as before.
Although experience informs us that the body will be set in motion as soon as the
water begins to ﬂow, this motion is caused by the particles hitting the body and
it is thus an external force which puts the body into motion. Without this force,
the body will remain at rest both in the still and in the ﬂowing water; therefore,
in preserving its state of motion, the body does not depend on the immediately
surrounding matter and the idea of space as nothing but a relation between bodies
is thus untenable.

Further, Euler pointed out that the relational standpoint, i.e.

regarding the
heaven of ﬁxed stars rather than absolute space as the reference frame in which the
laws of inertia are valid, would imply that the stars control the bodies in their inertia.
However, Euler considered this consequence as metaphysical and unacceptable.

In the transcendental philosophy of Kant [7], space and time are necessary pre-
requisites, i.e. a priori conditions for establishing any kind of experience, since we
cannot perceive objects without being able to represent them spatially and tempo-
rally. Hence, space and time are absolute in the sense that they are pure forms of
intuition and cannot be modiﬁed by experience. This absolute space has to be dis-
tinguished from the empirical space which is the epitome of all objects of experience

2Since the relative motion between the water and the sides of the vessel is the same at the
beginning of the experiment (vessel and water at rest) and at the end (vessel and water in rotation),
the relative velocity cannot account for the diﬀerent shapes of the surface.

4

CHAPTER 1. MACH’S PRINCIPLE

and itself a matter of perception. Kant further notes that the mobility of objects, i.e.
the variation of the external proportions with respect to a given location cannot be
recognized without recourse to experience and that motion must thus be classiﬁed
as an empirical term rather than as a notion of pure reason. Whether a body is at
rest or in uniform motion is not a disjunctive but an alternative decision3 and the
state of motion is therefore inherently indeterminate and a mere potential quality.
In contrast, the circular (or any curvilinear) motion of a body is a true attribute
since it shows the existence of an external agitating force which prohibits the body
from moving along a straight line. The reverse, namely the motion of the empirical
space and the body at rest is merely kinematical and possesses no agitating force;
hence in this case the decision whether the body or the space is in motion is dis-
junctive. It is therefore not a matter of attitude whether the earth is rotating with
the stars ﬁxed or the other way round; although this motion appears relative, the
rotation of the earth is the true motion since it can be demonstrated through the
presence of inertial forces even in empty space [8].

In his eﬀort to demonstrate the need of the idea of absolute space, Kant refers
to the existence of incongruent objects [9]. These objects (e.g. a right and a left
hand) agree in all metric properties and are thus equal with respect to all internal
relations, yet they can be distinguished from each other. Therefore, the reason for
this discrimination can only be due to external causes, i.e. to the proportion of
the locations to space itself. According to Kant, this inexplicability of the exis-
tence of incongruent objects on the basis of a relational view of space warrants the
introduction of absolute elements as agents of explanation.

Concerning the methodical analysis of the principles of dynamics, Lange [10]
considered the necessity of a new and modern formulation of Newton’s law of inertia
as the ultimate ambition, since Newton’s absolute space, which is constituted by a
series of unrecognizable absolute ﬁxed points and which serves as a reference for the
real locations and motions of the physical bodies, can never establish the basis for
an exact science. Therefore, it is essential to ﬁnd an appropriate substitute for the
notion of absolute space. According to Lange, for absolute time this replacement
has already been managed: since there is no given motion in the world which can act
as a suitable basis for chronometry, the dynamical time is deﬁned via the motion of
a free body: two segments of time are considered equal when the distances in space
covered by a freely moving point are equal. In a similar way, because no material
object in the universe is adequate to serve in due form as a reference object for
the law of inertia, Lange introduced a fundamental coordinate system for dynamics
which he called an inertial system and which is deﬁned by means of three freely
moving points. Lange points to the fact that for up to three arbitrarily moving
points one can always ﬁnd a coordinate system with respect to which these points

3The ﬁrst refers to two objectively opposite predicates which are mutually exclusive, whereas
the second applies to two in fact objectively similar, yet subjectively opposite though not exclusive
attributes.

1.2. ABSOLUTE VERSUS RELATIVE

5

move along straight lines. In general, however, this is no longer true for more than
three points. Hence, while the law of the constant direction of motion relies on a
mere convention for three points which are left to themselves, it is remarkable that it
also holds for any number of points: the physical condition of being unaﬀected thus
results in the kinematic fact that there is a coordinate system in which an arbitrary
number of points are in uniform motion. The realization of such an inertial system
can be accomplished by three material bodies departing from a common origin and
moving freely, i.e. without being exposed to a force; any reference frame in which
these masses move along straight lines then deﬁnes an inertial system. The law of
inertia thus becomes equivalent with the proposition that any other freely moving
point mass likewise exhibits rectilinear motion within such a system.

In a
The most famous critique of Newtonian absolute space is due to Mach.
critical and historical review4 [11] he argued against the Newtonian interpretation
of the bucket experiment by emphasizing that Newton’s conclusions were only true
in a hypothetically empty universe and under the assumption that a physical system
carries its essential properties even if it is isolated in empty space. However, in the
real universe ﬁlled with matter there is an observable diﬀerence between the two
states of the vessel: in the case of the plane surface the vessel is at rest with respect
to the heaven of the ﬁxed stars while in the case of a curved surface the bucket
is rotating relative to the stars. Therefore, this diﬀerence must be ascribed to the
diﬀerent states of motion with respect to the masses of the universe rather than to
absolute space. In other words, an abandonment of the rest of the world, as Newton
did, is not possible, and we always have to keep track of the whole world.

Mach was probably the ﬁrst to point at dragging eﬀects in the vicinity of rotating
masses when he noted that the bucket experiment only implies that the rotation of
the water relative to the vessel does not induce any noticeable centrifugal forces.
However, such forces may be induced by rotation relative to the mass of the earth
and the other celestial bodies.

Mach insists that absolute motion and absolute space, i.e. motion and space in
themselves, reside only in our minds and cannot be revealed by experience, hence
they are meaningless idle metaphysical concepts5 and must not be used in a scientiﬁc
context. All our principles of mechanics are based on our experience about relative
locations and relative motions and we are not authorized to extend these principles
beyond these limits.

Along the lines of Mach, B. and I. Friedlaender deny any diﬀerence between
the mathematical and physical space, i.e. between the space given by our intellec-
tual power and that of perceptible phenomena and doubt the reality of absolute
motion [12]. There is but relative motion and inertia should be explicable without

4The ﬁrst edition of the Mechanik appeared in 1883.
5Mach was an advocate of the so-called empiriocritcism, a philosophical school which only re-
garded “experience” as the source and last resort of all cognition. This sensualism requires every
proposition to be veriﬁable by reduction to sensations; all statements which do not cope with this
demand are considered as meaningless and thus condemned as metaphysical speculations.

6

CHAPTER 1. MACH’S PRINCIPLE

recourse to absolute elements. However, to avoid empty statements, it would either
be necessary to ﬁnd an improved form of the law of inertia, or to demonstrate the
inadequacy of the current conception of absolute motion experimentally. In partic-
ular the phenomenon of centrifugal motion appears appropriate for an experimental
solution of the problem:
if the centrifugal force occurring in a ﬂywheel rotating
against the earth is due to relative motion, then a similar force should arise when
the ﬂywheel is at rest and the earth rotates with the same angular velocity in the
opposite direction. Accordingly, a centrifugal force eﬀect, though much smaller,
should be expected in ﬁxed bodies close to rotating massive ﬂywheels. Thus a cor-
responding experiment using a torsion balance was proposed in order to resolve the
question about the reality of absolute motion. However, the practical realization of
this experiment in a rolling mill failed due to uncontrollable disturbing inﬂuences.

Concerning the problem of the relativity of inertia, B. Friedlaender further notes
that inertia, i.e. the resistance to changes in the velocity, is not an internal property
of a single body but rather a consequence of the inﬂuence of all the other bodies of
the universe. The law of inertia should thus be expressed in the following way: all
masses tend to maintain their state of motion of velocity and direction with respect
to each other. However, the correct form of the law of inertia has to await a unifying
treatment of both inertia and gravitation, since both are eﬀects of masses on each
other. The Friedlaenders have also pointed at a similarity between their concept of
relative inertia and induction eﬀects in electromagnetism: just as a change in the
magnitude of the current (or distance) will generate induction eﬀects, only changes
in velocity will generate attractive (or repulsive) eﬀects.

Machian ideas are also held by F¨oppl, the author of a well-known German intro-
duction to Maxwell’s theory of electricity, who conjectures that the inertial systems
are determined by the motions of all bodies of the universe. He was inspired by
Mach’s observations on the physical signiﬁcance of the law of inertia and on the
concept of absolute motion related with it. Proceeding from Mach’s view, F¨oppl
tried to add further considerations to the problem of absolute and relative mo-
tion [13]. Upon pointing out that the coincidence of the inertial frames—which are
characterized by the absence of Coriolis forces—with the heaven of the ﬁxed stars
cannot be regarded as fortuitous, he ascribes this distinction to the inﬂuence of the
masses of the stars. Thus one could ask about the law which determines the orien-
tation of the inertial system when the instantaneous positions and relative velocities
of the whole system are known. In case all bodies were at rest relative to each other,
it is obvious from our experience that a test mass would, when no forces act on it,
describe a straight line with respect to the frame rigidly ﬁxed with the masses.

Now F¨oppl suggests to consider the case in which the bodies of the universe are
divided into a large and a small group with ﬁxed distances within the bodies of
each group. Any relative motion of the groups will alter the inertial system and will
induce a small motion of this system relative to the larger group due to the inﬂuence
of the smaller group, although it will still be almost at rest with respect to the large

1.2. ABSOLUTE VERSUS RELATIVE

7

group. Therefore, one can ﬁx the reference frame with respect to the ﬁrst group and
take the inﬂuence of the smaller group into account by applying weak additional
forces of the relative motion, which the chosen system executes relative to the true
inertial system. Once such a decision is made, the Coriolis forces no longer appear as
mere computational quantities arising from a coordinate transformation, but rather
as physically existing forces that are exerted by the masses of the smaller group and
being due to the motion of these masses with regard to the chosen reference frame.
One could start with the case that the second group consists only of a single
mass and try to ﬁnd the magnitude and direction of the force at any point. This
force will depend on the velocity of the single mass with respect to the reference
frame determined by the remaining bodies as well as on the distance to the single
mass. When this problem has been solved for a single body, the inﬂuence of a whole
group of moving bodies can be obtained by the principle of superposition.

For a realistic case, F¨oppl suggests to consider a reference frame determined by
three suitably chosen stars. This frame closely coincides with an inertial system since
the constellation of the stars changes little within a time span of several centuries.
The small deviation from the true inertial frame can then be accounted for by
applying Coriolis forces which depend on the velocity of the masses of the universe
relative to the chosen system.

F¨oppl holds the view that he has thus found a causal explanation for the existence
of inertial frames: at any point they are those frames in which all velocity-dependent
forces arising from the masses of the universe balance each other. With this, F¨oppl
believes that he has obtained an adequate basis for the elaboration of the concept of
absolute motion and constructed absolute space which appears in the law of inertia
without abandoning the idea that all motion is ultimately relative.

In F¨oppl’s opinion the problems related with the law of inertia can only be
solved upon assuming forces between the bodies of the universe which depend on
their velocities with respect to the inertial frames. Therefore, he proposes to look for
possible phenomena which allow to deduce the laws governing the velocity-dependent
forces. However, when based on astronomical observations, for F¨oppl this task does
not seem promising because these forces, though distinct from gravitational ones,
might produce eﬀects quite similar to them and it would be rather diﬃcult to single
out those parts which are due to the velocity-dependent forces. Thus it appears
more advisable to search for terrestrial phenomena involving motions which might
be inﬂuenced by the rotation of the earth. F¨oppl conducted a number of gyroscope
experiments by himself in order to detect phenomena which exhibit some deviating
behavior of gyros from standard theory and which might be induced by velocity-
dependent forces; however, his attempts were without success.

A public demonstration of Foucault’s pendulum experiment in Vienna caused
Hofmann [14] to discuss critically the meaning of true and apparent motion and
its connection with the notion of inertia. Hofmann deﬁnes motion as any change
in the location of a material body with respect to a sensually perceivable reference

8

CHAPTER 1. MACH’S PRINCIPLE

frame; therefore, all motion is true and relative6 and there is no way to distinguish
between true and apparent motion. Hence, contrary to common belief, Foucault’s
experiment does not imply that the daily rotation of the earth is true while the
observed motion of the sun about the earth is only apparent—the two views are not
in conﬂict with each other, they are but diﬀerent yet equal modes of perception of an
existing fact—it implies something about the yet imperfectly realized law of inertia.
Hofmann considers the content of this law—that a free body persists in its state of
rectilinear and uniform motion—as incomplete since it gives no indication about the
reference system in which the motion is rectilinear. But this is essential, because
a body can only be at rest or at constant velocity with respect to another body.
According to Hofmann, inertia must be deﬁned such that every body with regard to
all other existing bodies is subject to the law of the conservation of the mutual state
of motion and that its actual behavior is the resultant of all individual inﬂuences.
How this behavior depends on the mutual separations, masses and positions can only
be explored by experience and is not a matter of speculation. Further, if inertia is
relative, i.e. a relation between the masses, then the idea of a rectilinear inertial
motion must be abandoned and replaced in general by curvilinear motion. Another
consequence of the relativity of inertia consists of the fact that for the determination
of inertia the simultaneous exertion of all other masses must be taken into account,
in contrast to the determination of the relative motion which has to be related to
an arbitrary but single reference system.

Hofmann does not pretend to have developed a new theory of inertia, rather his
intention is to pinpoint the deﬁciencies of the actual law of inertia and to stimulate
a reformulation of this law on a relational basis. In particular he suggests a mod-
iﬁcation of the formulation of the kinetic energy (vis viva), based on the following
argument: consider two unequal masses M and m (with M > m) approaching each
other with velocity v. Since the masses are diﬀerent, their kinetic energies are diﬀer-
ent as well and depend on whether M or m is chosen as the reference frame. Now,
upon an inelastic collision let a measuring device determine the kinetic energy of
the masses, e.g. by converting it into the energy of a compressed spring, this latter
energy will be the same, irrespective of whether M or m has been considered at
rest. Thus we arrive at the following: for two masses M and m in relative motion,
the vis viva of M with respect to m is the same as that of m with respect to M .
This conclusion, however, appears to be incompatible with the standard formulation
of the kinetic energy, which includes either M or m (but not both) and should be
rewritten in the form E = kmM f (r)v2 in order to take both masses into account,
where k is a constant and f (r) allows for a possible inﬂuence of the separation of
the bodies.

6Absolute motion of a body could be stated irrespective of the existence of a second body.
However, since motion can only be ascertained by virtue of sensual perception and thus relies on
the existence of observable objects of comparison, absolute motion is impossible due to the absence
of a reference object: it is only subjectively conceivable but not objectively perceivable.

1.3. MACH’S PRINCIPLE AND GENERAL RELATIVITY

9

Finally, Hofmann draws several interesting conclusions from the principle of the
relativity of inertia. The centrifugal forces which appear for a body K in rotation
must be interpreted as an inertial relation between K and all external masses not
participating in the rotation. A mass point of the rotating body K tries to keep its
position relative to K unchanged, while its inertia manifests itself in a continuation
of its motion with respect to the remaining bodies; both tendencies result in what
we call centrifugal forces. Consequently, the same forces must also appear when
K is conceived as ﬁxed while all other masses are rotating about it; therefore, in
this latter case, the external masses should exhibit centrifugal phenomena as well.
However, while the individual mass points of these bodies obey the same two kinds
of inertia as the mass points of K, i.e. they exhibit a centrifugal force with respect to
K and hold their motion with respect to each other, their resultant state of motion
will turn out in favor of the overwhelming masses and hence will not show any
measurable centrifugal phenomena. This explains Newton’s observations: although
the tiny mass of the vessel will induce some centrifugal forces in the water, the
immutability of the position of the liquid elements is mainly due to the action of
inertia with regard to the much larger remaining masses. Hence this experiment
does in no way demonstrate that relative motion cannot produce centrifugal forces.
Hofmann seems to be the ﬁrst who clearly stated that in a relational theory
of inertia the kinetic energy should be the sum over products of all pairs of masses
rather than the sum of the contributions of individual masses. It is also interesting to
note that the work of Hofmann, though mentioned by Mach and Einstein, remained
virtually unknown even to the specialists who worked on the development of a new
theory of inertia7.

1.3 Mach’s Principle and General Relativity

It is well known that Mach’s ideas about the relativity of inertia played an important
role in the development of general relativity. Einstein aimed at an explanation
of inertia which would eliminate the privileged role of the class of inertial frames
in classical mechanics, and which was based on the premise that the results of
measurements should not depend on the choice of coordinates assigned to events
Ironically, though general relativity was intended to be based on relational
[16].
concepts, contrary to its name it still contains absolute elements and does not resolve
the problem of the origin of inertia. This is already expressed in the calculations of
the advance of Mercury’s argument of perihelion, which is referred to a coordinate
system in which the gravitational potentials assume certain boundary conditions
at inﬁnity. Empirically, this system coincides with the average system of the ﬁxed
stars, however, this correspondence appears incidentally, since the presence of the

7Ten years after the publication of Hofmann’s booklet, in a paper by Reissner [15] many of the
ideas anticipated by Hofmann appeared and were believed to be new; although Reissner presumably
knew of Hofmann’s existence, he was obviously not aware of his work.

10

CHAPTER 1. MACH’S PRINCIPLE

distant masses did in no way enter the calculations [17].

Further, it has been shown that the relativity of all motion, i.e. the relativity of
inertial accelerations, cannot be maintained in general relativity. Starting from the
assumption that inertial forces are of gravitational origin, neither translational nor
rotational acceleration is compatible with the relativistic theory of gravitation, since
the latter is based upon local Lorentz invariance and thus the notion of absolute
motion cannot be avoided [18].

Moreover, the anti-Machian character of the ﬁeld equations also shows up in
solutions which allow for a curved spacetime even in the absence of any matter [19]
as well as in solutions that exhibit an intrinsic rotation of the matter with respect
to the local inertial system [20].

These examples of the ontologically autonomous structure of space which com-
pletely determines the inertial properties of test masses show the logical indepen-
dence of Mach’s principle from general relativity. Hence the idea that the metric
ﬁeld is entirely governed by matter must be abandoned and Mach’s principle can
serve at best as a selection principle for admissible cosmological solutions. In that
case, however, an independent justiﬁcation for the validity of such a principle is
required.

Mach’s statement, given in the course of his analysis of Newton’s bucket exper-
iment, that the rotation of the water with respect to the sides of the vessel does
not induce noticeable centrifugal forces, but that such forces may be induced by its
rotation relative to the mass of the earth and other celestial bodies seems to be the
ﬁrst clear hint of possible dragging eﬀects near rotating bodies.

The calculation of dragging eﬀects within the framework of general relativity was
initiated by Thirring [21] and Lense and Thirring [22] who studied, based on the
weak-ﬁeld approximation, the dragging of inertial frames inside a slowly rotating
mass shell and outside a slowly rotating solid sphere, respectively. Later, upon
investigating this eﬀect for arbitrarily large masses rotating slowly, it was shown
that for compact masses, whose Schwarzschild radius approaches the shell radius,
the induced rotation approaches the rotation of the shell [23]. This result could
explain the fact that local inertial frames do not rotate with respect to the distant
matter. It is thus commonly believed that dragging phenomena predicted by general
relativity constitute the most direct manifestation of Machian ideas in Einstein’s
It must be noted, however, that dragging phenomena also
theory of gravitation.
exhibit more or less counterintuitive or anti-Machian features, depending on how
one interprets Mach’s writings [3, 24, 25, 26].

1.4 Gravitomagnetism

In an attempt to unify electrostatics with electrodynamics, i.e. Coulomb’s law,
Ampere’s law and the laws of induction, Weber derived an expression for the force
between two charges in an arbitrary state of motion, depending on the relative ve-

1.4. GRAVITOMAGNETISM

11

locity and acceleration as well as on the propagation velocity of the electromagnetic
action [27, 28]. However, this remarkable law of force, which can be derived from a
velocity-dependent potential and which refers only to relative motion8 and thereby
complies with the principle of action and reaction, is little known today mainly due
to the work of Helmholtz who showed that a force depending on distance and veloc-
ity does not conserve enery and thus erroneously claimed to have disproved Weber.
Although it became clear later that Helmholtz’ proof does not apply to Weber’s law,
since the latter also contains the relative acceleration of the particles, it neverthe-
less fell into oblivion in the twentieth century. Anyway, Weber’s electrodynamics
was important concerning the ﬁrst eﬀorts to subsume the phenomena of gravitation
under electrodynamics. Upon extending Hamilton’s method to velocity-dependent
potentials, Holzm¨uller [29] was among the ﬁrst who studied the motion of a test par-
ticle that is attracted by a ﬁxed center according to Weber’s electrodynamic law.
He found that the trajectory is no longer closed but can be described by a slowly
precessing ellipse. In a similar way, upon assuming that the planetary motion is gov-
erned by Weber’s or Gauss’ force law9 rather than by Newtonian attraction alone,
Tisserand [30] showed that the excess advance of Mercury’s longitude of perihelion
(after subtraction of all Newtonian perturbations of the solar system bodies) could
be explained by assuming that gravity propagates with a velocity of 6/7 of that of
light10.

At the end of his book on electromagnetic theory, Heaviside [31] also speculated
about a gravitational and electromagnetic analogy and worked out what could be
considered in some sense as a low-velocity and weak-ﬁeld approximation to general
relativity. Based on the similarity of Newton’s law with Coulomb’s law and with
Maxwell’s theory in mind, Heaviside constructed a set of ﬁeld equations analogous
to those of electrodynamics, thereby stating a ﬁnite propagation speed of gravity
and the existence of a gravitomagnetic ﬁeld. He also noted that the analogy with
electrodynamics serves to emphasize the non-necessity of the assumption of an in-
stantaneous action of matter upon matter and that gravitational waves propagating
through the ether may well move with the speed of light. Heaviside concluded that
the gravitational ﬁeld of the sun, when moving with constant velocity u through
the ether will be modiﬁed by terms of order u2/c2 and that there will be a slight
weakening of the force in the line of motion and a slight strengthening equatorially.
Upon including a gravitomagnetic force, Heaviside noticed that the perturbations
on the orbit of the earth about the sun are too small as yet to be observed and are
therefore not in disagreement with the assumption that the speed of gravity may be
the same as that of light.

Einstein’s general relativity provided an elegant solution to the problem of the

8This is distinctly diﬀerent from the Lorentz force law which only holds with respect to an

inertial frame.

9These two laws slightly diﬀer from each other.
10This is based on Gauss’ force law.

12

CHAPTER 1. MACH’S PRINCIPLE

perihelion of Mercury that involved a small gravitoelectric correction to the New-
tonian attraction of the sun [32]. Soon after Einstein’s work, it was shown that the
rotation of the sun generates a gravitomagnetic ﬁeld within general relativity due
to mass current that also leads to the precession of planetary orbits [21, 22, 33].
The eﬀect turns out to be very small and in the opposite sense of Mercury’s excess
precession. The origin of inertia and Mach’s principle provided the motivation for
Thirring to investigate the gravitational ﬁeld inside a rotating hollow shell [21, 34].
If the rotation of astronomical bodies is relative to the distant masses in the uni-
verse, then one might expect to recover inertial forces inside a rotating hollow shell.
Thirring showed the existence of a Coriolis-type force that has been qualitatively
interpreted as a Machian dragging eﬀect. Moreover, Lense and Thirring [22] gave
a general treatment of orbital precession due to the proper rotation of a central
source. The Lense-Thirring precession of planetary orbits due to the rotation of the
sun is too small to be detectable at present; however, the eﬀect may be measurable
for satellite orbits about the earth [35].

The gravitomagnetic precession of a gyroscope due to a rotating source has been
qualitatively interpreted in terms of the dragging of the local inertial frames [36].
One of the main goals of the GP-B experiment, launched on April 20, 2004, and
involving four superconducting spherical gyroscopes on board a drag-free satellite
in polar orbit about the earth, is the detection of the gravitomagnetic precession of
the gyroscopes due to the rotation of the earth [37].

Taking Mach’s principle seriously either in terms of relativity of rotation [18]
or the existence of inductive eﬀects of dragging [25, 26, 38], one can demonstrate
quantitatively that the gravitomagnetic gyroscope precession within general relativ-
ity is in conﬂict with Mach’s principle. The conﬂict between general relativity and
Machian dragging can be clearly seen in the gravitomagnetic clock eﬀect. Consider
a circular equatorial geodesic orbit about a central rotating mass and imagine two
free test clocks on this orbit moving in opposite directions. According to general
relativity, the clock in prograde motion moves slower and takes longer than the clock
in retrograde motion to complete the orbit [39, 40, 41, 42].

Observations of the cosmic microwave background radiation have led to an ex-
tremely small upper limit on the frequency of rotation of the universe. The presumed
absence of rotation of the local inertial frame with respect to the frame of the distant
matter in the universe is often mentioned as evidence in favor of Mach’s principle.
However, this lack of rotation is likely due to the circumstance that the universe is
rather old and the rotational perturbations of standard cosmological models decrease
very rapidly with the expansion of the universe.

1.5 Tact of the Natural Investigator

In discussing Newton’s views on time, space and motion in his great book on the sci-
ence of mechanics [11], Mach devoted a subsection (subsection 6, section VI, Chapter

1.5. TACT OF THE NATURAL INVESTIGATOR

13

II of [11]) to the elaboration of Newton’s ﬁfth corollary following the laws of motion
in the Principia. In this corollary, Newton states the principle of relativity, which
is satisﬁed by his laws of motion based on absolute time and space. Commenting
on Newton’s conclusion that absolute time and space are subject to the relativity
principle, Mach remarks:

“. . . In spite of his metaphysical liking for the absolute, Newton was
correctly led by the tact of the natural investigator. . . .”

In view of the developments in theoretical physics in the past century, it is
interesting to return to Mach’s outstanding critique of Newtonian mechanics and
recognize the tact of the natural investigator in his own work. In the penultimate
subsection of the same section (subsection 11, section VI, Chapter II of [11]), Mach
makes the following observation:

“. . . We measure time by the angle of rotation of the earth, but could
measure it just as well by the angle of rotation of any other planet. But,
on that account, we would not believe that the temporal course of all
physical phenomena would have to be disturbed if the earth or the dis-
tant planet referred to should suddenly experience an abrupt variation
of angular velocity. We consider the dependence as not immediate, and
consequently the temporal orientation as external. Nobody would be-
lieve that the chance disturbance—say by an impact—of one body in
a system of uninﬂuenced bodies which are left to themselves and move
uniformly in a straight line, where all the bodies combine to ﬁx the sys-
tem of co¨ordinates, will immediately cause a disturbance of the others
as a consequence. The orientation is external here also. Although we
must be very thankful for this, especially when it is puriﬁed from mean-
inglessness, still the natural investigator must feel the need of further
insight—of knowledge of the immediate connections, say, of the masses
of the universe. . . .”

In this way, Mach arrives at the root of the epistemological diﬃculty in Newto-
nian mechanics: the internal state of a Newtonian particle—namely, its mass—has
no a priori connection with its external state in space and time—namely, its po-
sition and velocity. Space and time are basically diﬀerent from their operational
deﬁnitions by means of masses [43]. That is, masses are simply “placed” in absolute
space and time in Newtonian mechanics, but have no organic connection with space
and time.

As is well known, Mach’s own resolution of this epistemological problem is to
concentrate on the motion of masses relative to each other. However, his basic
analysis paves the way for other possible resolutions based on the development of
physics.

14

CHAPTER 1. MACH’S PRINCIPLE

1.6 Quantum Theory and Inertia

Mach’s analysis of the problem of motion was solely based on classical mechanics
although the principles of electrodynamics were already well established during the
years of the later editions of his critique. In an attempt to extend Mach’s arguments
to the motion of electromagnetic waves, Mashhoon [44] has pointed out that the
two kinds of motion, relative and absolute, are associated with particle and wave
propagation, respectively. On the one hand, we consider the velocity of a classical
particle as relative, since a reference frame is needed to specify the motion;
in
particular, there always exists a system in which the particle is at rest. On the
other hand, due to Lorentz invariance, an electromagnetic wave cannot be at rest
with respect to any inertial observer; therefore, we do not need to specify a reference
system for the propagation of light, i.e. its movement is completely independent of
the motion of inertial observers and it can thus be considered as absolute. Therefore,
classical mechanics and classical electrodynamics are concerned with two types of
motion, local particle and nonlocal wave motion, respectively. These are brought
together in geometric optics, where the waves are replaced by rays that can be
treated in a similar way as classical point particles.

Concerning the motion of particles, as recognized by Mach [11], there is no im-
mediate connection between the particle’s intrinsic and extrinsic states, i.e. between
its mass on the one hand and its position and velocity on the other hand and the
potentiality of relative motion can be viewed as the result of this independence. In
contrast, regarding the motion of electromagnetic waves, the state of the wave is
directly related to its intrinsic properties like period, wavelength and polarization,
since they cannot be separated from the extrinsic wave function and the impos-
its absolute motion, may be
sibility of an observer comoving with the wave, i.e.
attributed to this coupling of the intrinsic and extrinsic states [18]. This further
suggests the hypothesis that an electromagnetic radiation ﬁeld cannot be at rest
with respect to any observer [18, 44].

Upon extending these considerations to quantum physics, it is expected that
the propagation of matter waves is also independent of the motion of the observer.
Indeed, in order to stay at rest with respect to a given system, a particle is required
to occupy a deﬁnite position in space and simultaneously exhibit zero momentum.
Due to its wave nature these requirements cannot be met by a quantum particle,
thus its motion is absolute and it is impossible for an inertial observer to be comov-
ing with a matter wave; this is feasible only in the classical limit (m → ∞). Hence
the uncertainty principle via the basic quantum condition in the Heisenberg pic-
ture, [xj, vk] = i~δjk/m, constitutes through Planck’s constant a direct connection
between the position x and the velocity v of a particle and its inertial mass m and
this relation, just as in the electrodynamic case, eventually entails absolute motion.
With increasing mass, the wave aspect becomes negligible and in the limit m → ∞
the classical behavior of the particle is recovered. Thus, due to the wave nature of

1.7. DISCUSSION

15

a quantum particle, its motion might be considered in terms of the complementary
notions of absolute and relative movements in correspondence with the duality of
waves and particles [18, 44].

Based on the assumption that the above considerations also hold for accelerated
observers, it may be concluded that electromagnetic and quantum phenomena can
be used to determine the absolute state of motion since they establish an absolute
frame of reference subject to Lorentz invariance. In particular, the detection of the
earth’s rotation using superﬂuid helium [45] could be interpreted in terms of the fact
that once the ﬂuid acquires its coherence the wave nature becomes dominant and
thus exhibits absolute motion [44]. The inertia of a quantum particle is determined
by its inertial mass as well as spin, since these characterize the particle’s wave
function.

1.7 Discussion

Mach’s profound critique of the foundations of Newtonian mechanics played a key
role in Einstein’s development of general relativity. Mach’s principle has also guided
other developments in gravitation theory such as the scalar-tensor theories [46, 47].
It has inspired interesting experiments, such as the Hughes-Drever experiment on
the local isotropy of space [48, 49, 50] and continues to be of current interest [51, 52].
Mach identiﬁed the essential epistemological shortcoming of the Newtonian foun-
dations of physics, namely, that the intrinsic state of a particle in Newtonian me-
chanics, i.e. its mass, has no immediate connection with its extrinsic state in space
and time, i.e.
its position and velocity. Mach’s observation can be re-stated in
terms of the a priori independence of position (x) and momentum (p) of a particle
in Newtonian mechanics. Let us note that this deﬁciency has been overcome in the
quantum theory by the fundamental quantum condition [xj, pk] = i~δjk.

In quantum mechanics, mass and spin are both measures of inertia. Therefore,
there are inertial eﬀects proportional to Planck’s constant, such as the spin-rotation
coupling, that are due to the inertia of intrinsic spin [53].

16

CHAPTER 1. MACH’S PRINCIPLE

Acknowledgments

BM is grateful to Friedrich Hehl for helpful discussions and correspondence. HL is
indebted to B. Besser for his help in obtaining some of the original papers.

References

[1] A. Einstein, Ann. Phys. (Leipzig) 55, 240 (1918).

[2] M. Schlick, Zeitschrift f¨ur Philosophie und Philosophische Kritik 159, 164

(1915).

[3] J. Barbour and H. Pﬁster (Eds.), Mach’s Principle: From Newton’s Bucket
to Quantum Gravity, Einstein Studies Vol. 6, Birkh¨auser, Boston (1995).

[4] R. Descartes, Die Prinzipien der Philosophie, Ed. A. Buchenau,

Philosophische Bibliothek, Vol. 28, F. Meiner, Hamburg (1992).

[5] H. Erlichson, Am. J. Phys. 35, 89 (1967).

[6] L. Euler, R´eﬂexions sur l’espace et le temps, Memoir de l’academie des

sciences de Berlin 4, 324 (1748).

[7] I. Kant, Kritik der reinen Vernunft, Werkausgabe Band III+IV, Ed. W.

Weischedel, Suhrkamp, Frankfurt (1968).

[8] I. Kant, Metaphysische Anfangsgr¨unde der Naturwissenschaft, Schriften zur
Naturphilosophie, Werkausgabe Band IX, Ed. W. Weischedel, Suhrkamp,
Frankfurt (1968).

[9] I. Kant, Von dem ersten Grunde des Unterschiedes der Gegenden im
Raume, Vorkritische Schriften bis 1768, Werkausgabe Band II, Ed. W.
Weischedel, Suhrkamp, Frankfurt (1968).

[10] L. Lange, Ber. kgl. s¨achs. Ges. Wiss., math.-phys. Kl. 37, 333 (1885).

[11] E. Mach, The Science of Mechanics, Open Court, La Salle (1960).

[12] B. and I. Friedlaender, Absolute oder relative Bewegung?, Verlag von L.

Simion, Berlin (1896).

[13] A. F¨oppl, Bayr. Akad. Wiss., Sitzber. 35, 383 (1904).

[14] W. Hofmann, Bewegung und Tr¨agheit, Verlag von M. Kuppitsch Wwe.,

Wien (1904).

17

18

REFERENCES

[15] H. Reissner, Phys. Z. 15, 371 (1914).

[16] A. Einstein, The Meaning of Relativity, Princeton University Press, Prince-

ton (1955).

[17] E. Schr¨odinger, Ann. Phys. (Leipzig) 77, 325 (1925).

[18] B. Mashhoon, Phys. Lett. A 126, 393 (1988); in: Directions in General
Relativity: Papers in Honor of Dieter Brill, B.L. Hu and T.A. Jacobson
(eds.), Cambridge University Press, Cambridge (1993) pp. 182-194; Nuovo
Cimento B 109, 187 (1994).

[19] A.H. Taub, Ann. Math. 53, 472 (1951).

[20] K. G¨odel, Rev. Mod. Phys. 21, 447 (1949).

[21] H. Thirring, Phys. Z. 19, 33 (1918); 22, 29 (1921).

[22] J. Lense and H. Thirring, Phys. Z. 19, 156 (1918).

[23] D.R. Brill and J.M. Cohen, Phys. Rev. 143, 1011 (1966).

[24] J. Ehlers and W. Rindler, Phys. Rev. D 4, 3543 (1971); H. Bondi and J.

Samuel, Phys. Lett. A 228, 121 (1997).

[25] W. Rindler, Phys. Lett. A 187, 236 (1994).

[26] W. Rindler, Phys. Lett. A 233, 25 (1997).

[27] W. Weber, Ann. Phys. Chem. (Leipzig) 73, 193 (1848); W. Weber and
R. Kohlrausch, Ann. Phys. Chem. (Leipzig) 99, 10 (1856); A.K. Assis, in:
Mach’s Principle: From Newton’s Bucket to Quantum Gravity, J. Barbour
and H. Pﬁster (eds.), Einstein Studies Vol. 6, Birkh¨auser, Boston (1995)
pp. 159-170.

[28] J. C. Maxwell, A Treatise on Electricity and Magnetism, Dover Publica-

tions, New York (1954).

[29] G. Holzm¨uller, Z. Math. Phys. 15, 69 (1870).

[30] M.F. Tisserand, Compt. Rend. 75, 760 (1872); 110, 313 (1890).

[31] O. Heaviside, Electromagnetic Theory, The Electrician Printing and Pub-

lishing Co., London (1894).

[32] A. Einstein, Preuss. Akad. Wiss. Berlin, Sitzber. 47, 831 (1915).

[33] W. de Sitter, Mon. Not. Roy. Astron. Soc. 76, 699 (1916).

REFERENCES

19

[34] B. Mashhoon, F.W. Hehl and D.S. Theiss, Gen. Rel. Grav. 16, 711 (1984).

[35] I. Ciufolini et al., Science 279, 2100 (1998); L. Iorio et al., Class. Quantum

Grav. 21, 2139 (2004).

[36] L.I. Schiﬀ, Phys. Rev. Lett. 4, 215 (1960).

[37] C.W.F. Everitt et al., in: Gyros, Clocks, Interferometers . . . : Testing Rel-
ativistic Gravity in Space, C. L¨ammerzahl, C.W.F. Everitt and F.W. Hehl
(eds.), Springer-Verlag, Berlin (2001) pp. 52-82.

[38] W. Rindler, Relativity: Special, General and Cosmological, Oxford Univer-

sity Press, Oxford (2001).

[39] B. Mashhoon, F. Gronwald and H.I.M. Lichtenegger, in: Gyros, Clocks,
Interferometers. . . : Testing Relativistic Gravity in Space, C. L¨ammerzahl,
C.W.F. Everitt and F.W. Hehl (eds.), Springer-Verlag, Berlin (2001) pp.
83-108.

[40] L. Iorio, H.I.M. Lichtenegger and B. Mashhoon, Class. Quantum Grav. 19,

39 (2002).

(2004).

(1955).

[41] B. Mashhoon, L. Iorio and H. Lichtenegger, Phys. Lett. A 292, 49 (2001).

[42] H.I.M. Lichtenegger, L. Iorio and B. Mashhoon, Adv. Space Res., in press

[43] H. Liu and B. Mashhoon, Ann. Phys. (Leipzig) 4, 565 (1995).

[44] B. Mashhoon, Found. Phys. Lett. 6, 545 (1993).

[45] K. Schwab, N. Bruckner and R.E. Packard, Nature 386, 585 (1997).

[46] P. Jordan, Schwerkraft und Weltall, Vieweg und Sohn, Braunschweig

[47] C.H. Brans and R.H. Dicke, Phys. Rev. 124, 925 (1961).

[48] G. Cocconi and E.E. Salpeter, Phys. Rev. Lett. 4, 176 (1960); R.H. Dicke,

Phys. Rev. Lett. 7, 359 (1961).

[49] V.W. Hughes, H.G. Robinson and V. Beltran-Lopez, Phys. Rev. Lett. 4,

342 (1960).

[50] R.W.P. Drever, Phil. Mag. 6, 683 (1961).

[51] H.I. Hartman and C. Nissim-Sabat, Am. J. Phys. 71, 1163 (2003).

[52] J. Fukai and A.K.T. Assis, Can. J. Phys. 81, 1239 (2003).

20

REFERENCES

[53] B. Mashhoon, Found. Phys. 16, 619 (1986); Phys. Rev. Lett. 61, 2639

(1988); Phys. Lett. A 198, 9 (1995).

