4
0
0
2
 
v
o
N
 
7
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
t
s
i
h
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
0
4
2
1
1
4
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Copernican Cosmography in the First Mexican
Physics Treatise

Armando Barra˜n´on Cedillo ∗

23rd, Nov, 2004.

Abstract

Copernican Cosmography was used to discover the path linking Cebu
islands and Acapulco via Kuro-Shivo Stream, as registered in P hysica
Speculatio, ﬁrst physics book written in New Spain. Teaching and prac-
tice of Copernican theory were an outcome of both Spanish expansion
into the Paciﬁc Ocean and native elite instruction devised by Augustinian
friars. Copernican cosmography was explained in P hysica Speculatio’s
ﬁrst edition in addition to the reference given by Alonso de la Veracruz
about the use of Copernican theory to detect Paciﬁc Islands in P hysica
Speculatio’s Fourth edition. Also, Veracroce standpoint about the diﬀer-
ences between physics and mathematics is discussed in terms of its relation
to the rejection of the Copernican Theory as a Natural Theory.

1

Introduction

In his P hysica Speculatio, Alonso a Veracroce considered solar inﬂuence
as the cause of several natural events in New Spain, namely the abundant
and continuous rainfalls at the recently conquered Tenochtitlan as well as
the eclipses observed in restricted regions of the World. Veracroce also
explains heliocentric theory and the Tychonian system in this production
(B. Navarro, 1992:13-24). Also, Alonso mentions in the fourth edition
of his P hysica Speculatio, the use of the Copernican cosmography in the
detection of new islands located at the Paciﬁc Ocean. As stated by Alonso
de la Veracruz, friar Andrea Urdaneta used Copernican cosmography to
discover the route linking Cebu islands and Acapulco, establishing this
way the path followed by the so called Manila Nao (Barra˜n´on, 2004).
Therefore, we may say nowadays that heliocentric theory was thought
and used in New Spain at the XVIth century.

The article is organized in the following way. The second section deals
with the difussion of Copernican theory in Europe and explains the role
played by Copernican cosmography in the integration of the Old and
New Worlds, connected by the new commercial route crossing the At-
lantic and Paciﬁc Oceans. The third section describes the foundation of

∗Dept.

of Basic Sciences, Universidad Aut´onoma Metropolitana.

capotzalco. Av. San Pablo 180, Col. Reynosa-Tamaulipas, Mexico City, 02200.
bca@correo.azc.uam.mx

Unidad Az-
email:

1

the Higher Studies at Tiripet´ıo, place where Viceroy Mendoza signed the
Treaty that arranged the transpaciﬁc expedition led by Villalobos. This
very section also deals with the teaching of Astronomy and Exact Sci-
ences at Tac´ambaro as part of the Augustinian project devoted to native
elite education. The fourth section analyzes diﬀerences between physics
and mathematics, as stated in the P hysica Speculatio, which are simi-
lar to those argued years later in order to declare heliocentric theory as
erroneous. Finally, the ﬁfht section establishes several conclusions.

2 Copernican cosmography and the Unity
of the World

As Veracroce explains in his P hysica Speculatio, there is only one world,
embodying the newly discovered Spanish territories (Alonso de la Ve-
racruz, 1573:223). Veracroce describes several Spanish settlements in
America, including their geographic location and makes mention of the
mastership of the Augustinian friars who were selected as ship pilots for
the detection of the Paciﬁc Ocean Islands. As explained by Veracroce
in the fourth edition of his P hysica Speculatio, the Spanish king had
chosen Urdaneta to be ship pilot in the exploration of the Paciﬁc Ocean.
In order to comply with this royal command, Urdaneta used Alphonsine
and Copernican Tables to delineate the path linking Cebu Islands and
Acapulco. As long as these islands belonged to Portugal, as signed in
Tordesillas Treaty, their cosmographic location as well as the discovery
of this new route were considered of utmost strategic importance for the
Spanish crown (Alonso de la Veracruz, 1573:223).

It is easy to understand that Copernican Cosmography was taught in
New Spain in the XVIth century as long as Copernicus distributed a short
version of his master work, De revolutionibus, ever since the beginnings
of that century. This Commentariolus, arrived to Cracow by 1514, as
a theory book aﬃrming that the Sun is at rest while the Earth moves
around the Sun (Noel Swerdlow,1973: 423-512). Besides, it is well known
that Alphonsine T ables were part of the Copernican personal library that
included also the T abulae directionem and the In iudiciis astrorum by
ar-Rijal (Swerdlow y Neugebauer: 3-11). Therefore, when Veracroce wrote
his P hysica Speculatio, the Copernican theory was well knwon in Europe
and perhaps Veracroce knew about it while he was studying and teaching
at Salamanca University or in his epistolar exchange with Urdaneta.

The detection of the Manila Nao tornaviaje (return route )demanded
the acquaintance with the weather and geographical proﬁle of the Pa-
ciﬁc Ocean, in order to apply the same formula used by the Spaniards to
ﬁnd the return route in the Atlantic Ocean, following a northern route.
This was the contribution of the Augustinian monk Andrea Urdaneta,
who beneﬁted from the experience gained from previous California ex-
plorations and succeeded in discovering the tornaviaje of the Spanish
route to the Philippines. Friar Andrea Urdaneta kept a copy of the De
revolutionibus and held epistolar exchange with Alonso de la Veracruz.
Urdaneta received Augustinian orders in 1553 once he declined the in-
vitation to be general of the Navy destined to discover the Western Is-
lands. By 1564 Urdaneta was ship pilot of Legaspi expedition to Cebu
Islands, departing from Barra de Navidad. When Urdaneta came back
from Cebu, he found the return route to New Spain, reaching Acapulco
in 1565. During this travesy, Urdaneta proﬁted from Kuro-Shivo Stream,

2

heading northeast until he reached latitude 39 N though later Urdaneta
turned to latitude 32 N, just to make sure that latitude was under control.
This way Urdaneta succeeded, after ﬁve failures by others, in the detec-
tion of the return route that provided vast richnesses to Spain ever since
the new found lands were extremely rich in gold, wax and other luxurious
merchandises (Lothar Knauth, 1972).

As long as the king of Spain had signed Tordesillas Treaty leaving
Philippines in hands of the Portuguese, he tried to control these islands
taking advantage of the fact that Philippines were not inhabited by Por-
tugueses at that time. With this purpose, in 1542 the Spanish crown orga-
nized a military expedition to these islands, baptising them as Philippines
Islands. Urdaneta had lived nine years in Moluccas Islands, that were
recovered from the Portugueses in 1535, as demanded by the Spaniards
inhabiting them since Portuguese crown had paid 35000 ducados for these
islands in 1529 as part of the Zaragoza Treaty.

Notwithstanding in 1536 Portugueses stripped Urdaneta of his records
and maps relative to the journeys of Loaysa and Saavedra, friar Andrea
was able to provide an oral version of his travel through the Paciﬁc Ocean
while he stayed at Valladolid in 1537. After that unfortunate event, con-
quistador Pedro de Alvarado asked Urdaneta to help him in some expe-
ditions to New Spain’s Paciﬁc coast that Alvarado had in mind. With
this purpose, Urdaneta embarked in a ship to New Spain in 1538, though
Alvarado’s death delayed his participation in this kind of navigations un-
til he joined Pensacola exploration in 1539. The main motivation for the
Spanish king to arrange Legaspi’s expedition, selecting Urdaneta as ship
pilot due to his mastering of the Paciﬁc Ocean navigation, was the en-
forcement of Spaniard dominion over the Philippines. This proved to be
a convenient strategy when in the XVIIth century Portugal forced Spain
to accept the border lines in Uruguay, arguing that in order to comply
with Tordesillas Treaty, Philippines and Moluccas should be restored to
the Portuguese crown.

Once the return route linking Cebu and Acapulco was discovered by
Urdaneta, an intense galleon traﬃc was established between Philippines
and New Spain. Manila Nao sailed from Acapulco at a date between the
end of Autumn and the beggining of Spring. Galleons headed to Cebu
once they left Guam, though later they did it to Manila Bay. This was
a strategic consequence of the use of the Copernican cosmography in the
delineation of this new commercial route that transformed the Spanish
king into a Universal Monarch.

As long as Philippine Nao transported works of art used for sump-
tuary Arts, Mexico city inhabitants celebrated the arrival of the Manila
Nao ringing the cathedral bells. Galleons transported oriental merchan-
dises such as porcelain, regarded at that time as white gold, in volumes
simmilar to those carried by dutch cargos, which turned New Spain into
a commercial emporium (Curiel, 1992).

The beneﬁts of this Manila Nao’s return route impeled the exploration
of the Alta California by 1570, searching for a safe harbor for the Chinese
Nao. Viceroy archbishop Moya y Contreras arranged the search for the
Armenian islands, probably the Hawaiian Archipelago, with the intention
to use them as a intermidiate port for the Philippine Fleet.

3

3 Augustinian teaching of cosmography
in Michoac´an

Fray Alonso de la Veracruz instituted the Colegio Mayor at Tiripet´ıo in
1540, when missions departed from Tiripet´ıo and Tac´ambaro expanding
Augustinian territories into the Tierra Caliente at the state of Michoac´an.
At the Colegio of Tiripet´ıo, students were so well trained that material
culture improved in such a way that it was possible to build new con-
vents and cities in the surrounding areas though their demand deserted
the Colegio Mayor. Philosophy and theology were taught for the ﬁrst time
in America at Tiripet´ıo, place where Viceroy Mendoza signed a Treaty to
explore the Paciﬁc Ocean. Besides, in Tac´ambaro, Alonso de la Veracruz
created an astronomical observatory and taught therein astronomy and
exact sciences (Mauricio Beuchot,16-17). Grijalva wrote that the library
brought to existence by Veracroce included of maps, celestial and ter-
restrial globes, astrolabes, horologes, ballestillas used to measure angles,
planispheres and every instrument employed by Liberal Arts.

This library was formed with the huge collection brought by Alonso
from Spain in 1573 (Juan de Grijalva, fols. 153v y 154r). In this Atlantic
journey, Alonso was accompanied by nineteen friars to New Spain, as
part of his appointment as Visitador of the Augustine Congregation in
New Spain, Peru and Philippines. In this position he was consulted by
friar Domingo de Salazar, bishop of Manila, to solve the controversies
between clerics and regulars (E.J. Burrus, 1968-1976,:63-103).

By all these contributions to the organization of the scientiﬁc studies,
Veracroce was considered eclesiastic master in New Spain (Sergio M´endez,
1952:36). As stated by Sergio M´endez Arceo, Augustinian Congregation
was leader in the establishment of Major Studies in New Spain, excelling
other eclessiastical orders that arrived earlier, namely dominicans and
franciscans. Colegio of Tiripit´ıo received donations from Spaniards and
natives, founding ﬁve haciendas which linked to other plantations formed a
passageway connecting the Augustinian province. As reported elsewhere,
Valladolid’s Augustinian convent operated as a bank whose inﬂuence ex-
tended over Zacatula, Zinap´ecuaro, Guanajuato, Tiripet´ıo, Jacona and
Ixtl´an (AHMC, Negocios Diversos, leg. 1 1555-1159).

Don Antonio Huitzim´engari, son of Michoacan’s king, studied and
taught at the Colegio Mayor de Tiripet´ıo, as part of the Augustinian
project devoted to the education of native elite. Huitzim´engari, who was
formerly educated at the franciscan convent of Tzintzuntzan, came to
Tiripet´ıo in 1540 when Veracroce was principal of the Colegio Mayor,
where Huitzim´engari studied sciences, philosophy, theology and languages.
In 1543, Colegio Mayor moved to Tac´ambaro while the students mis-
sioned into the Tierra Caliente twice or thrice a year. And in 1540, Vasco
de Quiroga founded the Colegio de San Nicol´as, to educate clerics pro-
ﬁcient in native languages. When Alonso de la Veracruz governed once
again this province, from 1548 up to 1551, the considerable amount of
graduates from the Higher Studies helped to institute convents at Guayan-
gareo, Cuitzeo, Yuririhap´undaro, Huango and Charo. Therefore, the Au-
gustinian Congregation had already organized the study of cosmography
in New Spain when Jesuits ﬁrst arrived to New Spain and were comis-
sioned to administer the Colegio de San Nicol´as in 1574. The arrival of
four Jesuits in New Spain had been frustrated by illness in 1553 (Juan
Moreno, 1965:80). Jesuits received a donation in 1576-77, given by the
Ayuntamiento of Guayangareo-Valladolid, establishing therein a Colegio.

4

This Colegio instructed Grammar to only four locals in 1580-1581 and
was supported by the generosity of the franciscan an augustinian congre-
gations.

4 Heliocentrism as a Natural Theory

Heliocentrism adheres to Aristotleian cosmology inasmuch as Copernicus
assumes a natural motion of Earth and planets, considers that Sun remains
still, includes celestial spheres and regards a stationary higher sphere at
the universe’s border. Copernicus is unique in terms of his abbility to
reach an agreement among Neoplatonics, Phytagoreans and Cabbalists.
In spite of the reputation earned for his mathematicial resources, when
Copernicus places the Sun in the center of the planetary motions where
the Sun should be best placed to enlighten the planets, Copernicus recol-
lects Hermes Trimegistus who called the Sun a visible God ( N. Cop´ernico,
1873: 15-17). In regards to solar inﬂuence, Veracroce follows a natural
perspective to deal with the eclipses and local time delays between Amer-
ica and Europe. For example, Alonso a Veracroce uses the circular shape
of the Earth to explain what we call today time zones as well as the fact
that eclipses are only visible in some regions of the planet. Veracruz uses
this geometrical scheme to explain local time delays between Mexico City
and Toledo (Alonso de la Veracruz, 1573:223).

Alonso recognizes the failure of Aristotle’s M eteorology Treatise,
whose Second Book predicts that excesive sunlight should avoid the pres-
ence of water, snow and abundant vegetation in the torrid zone. Instead
of, Alonso reports copious and continous rainfalls as well as snow produc-
tion nearby Mexico City (Alonso de la Veracruz, 1573:281).

In agreement with this natural perspective, Alonso denies any astro-
logical inﬂuence on terrestrial events, but accepts solar lightening as a nat-
ural cause, rejecting all grounds to the T reatise Disputationes adversus
astrologiam divinatricem written by Pico de la Mir´andola (Alonso de la
Veracruz, 1573:281).

Alonso explains heliocentric theory in Chapter XVII of the T reatise
on Sphere written by Campano, telling that some people consider that
Earth is always orbiting and ﬁxed Stars stand still (Bernab´e Navarro,
1992:13-24), namely a theoretical postulate of the Commentariolus (Al-
fred Romer,1999: 157-183). Veracroce’s explanation of heliocentrism is
supplemented by his expounding of the T ychonian system in P hysica
Speculatio’s Chapter 52 (Bernab´e Navarro, 1992:13-24).

Copernicus used mathematical arguments to ground a System of the
World, in spite of the hierarchy of disciplines accepted at that time, where
physics occupied a higher place than mathematics. That’s why Giovanni
Maria Tolossani criticized De Revolutionibus, since Tolossani disregarded
Copernicus as expert in physics and Holy Scripture (E. Garin, 1976:288).
In a simmilar fashion, Cardinal Bellarmino considered physical hy-
pothesis as mere computational premises, establishing an important an-
tecedent to the rejection of heliocentrism as a theory of Nature (A.
Koestler, 1986:I 125). These were the premises assumed to classify he-
liocentrism as erroneous in 1616, besides the authenticity declaration of
the Vulgata Latina at the Tridentine Council.

Alonso Guti´errez considers substantial diﬀerences between physics and
mathematics, as stated in his P hysica Speculatio. They are diﬀerent in
regards to the object of study as well as to the level of abstraction. This

5

way, Veracroce adheres to the standpoint held by Roman College, that
sustained the incapability of mathematics to provide a thorough image of
the World.

5 Conclusions.

As declared by Alonso de la Veracruz, Copernican cosmography was used
to discover the path linking Cebu islands and Acapulco via the Kuro-Shivo
Stream. Also, Copernican cosmography was explained in the P hysica
Speculatio, ﬁrst physics book written in New Spain. Teaching and prac-
tice of Copernican theory were a byproduct of the overseas Spanish expan-
sion as well as of the native elite instruction devised by the Augustinian
friars. Notwithstanding P hysica Speculatio is devoted to Aristotelian
and Ptolomeian cosmography, Copernican theory is already explained in
P hysica Speculatio ﬁrst edition and the practical use of Copernican the-
ory to detect the tornaviaje is mentioned in its Fourth edition. Never-
theless, Veracroce accepts that physics and mathematics employ diﬀerent
abstraction levels and are dedicated to distinct objects of study. This way,
Veracroce implicitly supports the standpoint of the Roman College, that
ﬁnally declared Copernican theory as erroneous inasmuch as a mathemat-
ics was considered unable at that ime to provide a natural theory.

6 Acknowledgments

Author acknowledges hospitality from the Mexican National Library at
UNAM (Fondo Reservado) and ﬁnancial support from UAM -Azcapotzalco.

6

References

[1] AHMCR, Negocios Diversos,

leg. 1, a˜nos 1555-1559. Libro de las
escrituras y rentas y cargos de este convento de Nuestra Se˜nora de
Gracia del pueblo de Guayangareo.

[2] Armando Barra˜n´on, 2004. Cop´ernico en la F´ısica de Fr. Alonso de

la Veracruz, Raz´on y Palabra, 40, Ago-Sept.

[3] Mauricio Beuchot and Bernab´e Navarro (comps.), 1992, Dos home-
najes: Alonso de la Veracruz y Francisco Xavier Clavigero. M´exico,
IIF, UNAM, (Cuadernos, 57).

[4] E.J. Burrus, 1968-1976. The Writings of Alonso de la Vera Cruz, 5

vols., Roma-St. Louis Mo.-Tucson, Ariz.

[5] N. Copernicus, 1873. De revolutionibus orbium caelestium. Thorvni,

svmptibvs Societatis copernicanae.

[6] Gustavo Curiel. ”Tr´ansito de obras suntuarias a la Nueva Espaa.
Reﬂexiones sobre el comercio art´ıstico transmar´ıtimo ”, in: S. Gold-
smith y R. Lozano, coords. Espa˜na y Nueva Espa˜na: sus acciones
transmar´ıtimas. M´exico: U. Iberoamericana, 1991.

[7] E. Garin, 1976. Rinascite e Rivoluzione. Movimenti Culturali dal XIV

al XVII. Biblioteca di Cultura Moderna. Lateza, Roma.

[8] Juan de Grijalva, 1624. Cr´onica de la Orden de N.P.S. Agust´ın en las
provincias de la Nueva Espa˜na. En quatro edades desde el ao 1533
hasta el de 1592, M´exico.

[9] L. Knauth, 1972. Confrontaci´on transpac´ıﬁca. M´exico: UNAM.

[10] A. Koestler, 1986. Los son´ambulos. Barcelona: Salvat, vol. I.

[11] Sergio M´endez Arceo, 1952. La real y pontiﬁcia Universidad de

M´exico, M´exico, Consejo de Humanidades, 1952.

[12] Juan Joseph Moreno, 1965. Don Vasco de Quiroga. Primer obispo de
Michoac´an. Fragmentos de la vida y virtudes de... Morelia, Talleres
gr´aﬁcos del Gobierno del Estado.

[13] Bernab´e Navarro, 1992. ”La Physica Speculatio de fray Alonso de la
Veracruz y la ﬁlosof´ıa de la naturaleza o Cosmovisi´on Aristot´elica en
el Nuevo Mundo”, in: Mauricio Beuchot y Bernab´e Navarro (comps.),
1992, Dos homenajes: Alonso de la Veracruz y Francisco Xavier
Clavigero. M´exico, IIF, UNAM, (Cuadernos, 57).

[14] Alfred Romer, 1999. ”The Welcoming of Copernicus’s De Revolu-
tionibus: The Commentariolus and its Reception”, Phys. Perspect. I
157-183.

[15] Noel Swerdlow, 1973. ”The derivation and ﬁrst draft of Copernicus
planetary theory: a translaci´on of the Commentarioulus with com-
mentary”, Proc. Amer. Phil. Soc., 117, 423-512.

[16] N. Swerdlow and O. Neugebauer. Mathematical astronomy in Coper-

nicus’s De revolutionibus . New York : Springer-Verlag.

[17] Alonso de la Veracruz, 1573. Physica Speculatio, Salmanticae:

Ioannes Baptista a Terranova, Quarta Editio.

7

