4
0
0
2
 
v
o
N
 
4
 
 
]
h
p
-
t
s
i
h
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
2
4
0
1
1
4
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

THE PARTICLE PROBLEM IN CLASSICAL GRAVITY
A HISTORICAL NOTE ON 1941

MARIANO GALVAGNO AND GAST ´ON GIRIBET

Abstract. This historical note is mainly based on a relatively unknown paper published
by Albert Einstein in Revista de la Universidad Nacional de Tucum´an in 1941. Taking the
ideas of this work as a leitmotiv, we review the discussions about the particle problem in the
theory of gravitation within the historical context by means of the study of seminal works on
the subject. The revision shows how the digressions regarding the structure of matter and
the concise problem of ﬁnding regular solutions of the pure ﬁeld equations turned out to be
intrinsically uniﬁed in the beginning of the programme towards a ﬁnal theory of ﬁelds.

The mentioned paper (Einstein 1941a) represents the basis of the one written by the same au-
thor in collaboration with Wolfgang Pauli in 1943, in which, following analogous lines, the proof
of the non-existence of regular particle-type solutions was generalized to the case of cilyndrical
geometries in Kaluza-Klein theory (Einstein & Pauli, 1943). Besides, other generalizations were
subsequently presented.

The (non)-existence of such solutions in classical uniﬁed ﬁeld theory was undoubtedly an
important criterion leading Einstein’s investigations. This aspect was gathered with expertness
by Jeroen van Dongen in a recent work, though restricting the scope to the particular case of
the investigations on Kaluza-Klein theory (van Dongen, 2002). Here, we discuss the particle
problem within a more general context, presenting in this way a complement to Dongen’s study.

1. Introduction: publishing affairs

In 1941, Guido Fubini interceded in asking Albert Einstein for submitting a contribution to
the Argentinian journal Revista de la Universidad Nacional de Tucum´an, which in the earlies
40’s was being founded by the italian mathematician Alessandro Terracini (Terracini 1941;
1944). Einstein kindly agreed in submitting an article in which a novel demonstration of the
non-existence of regular static spherically symmetric solution in the general relativity was given.
Einstein’s proof, which was described in the italian translation of (Einstein, 1941b) as “una
graziosa dimostrazione”, represents an ingenious way to show that no such a solution is ad-
mitted in the theory of gravitation Rµν = 0. The original title of the Einstein’s handwritten
German draft reads Beweis der Nichtexistenz von Singularitaetsfreien Gravitationsfeldern mit
nicht Verschwindender Gesamtmasse1 and it is in possession of the Biblioteca Mathematica of
the University of Turin.

This work acquires particular relevance, not due to its particular application to the general
theory of relativity itself, but because of its property of being suitable of generalizations to
other theories of gravitation. Works of this sort were the one written by Einstein and Pauli in
1943, in which the Kaluza-Klein theory was studied (Einstein & Pauli, 1943), and Papapetrou’s
article of 1948, treating the case of the non-symmetric uniﬁed ﬁeld theory (Papapetrou, 1948b)
(see also (Lichnerowicz, 1955)).

1literal translation of the titles of (Einsein, 1941a; 1941d).

1

2

MARIANO GALVAGNO AND GAST ´ON GIRIBET

The work (Einstein, 1941a), which is certainly hardly known, is cited2 in (F¨olsing, 1993)
and in other few articles devoted to the study of the historical context (see for instance (van
Dongen, 2002; Earman & Eisenstaedt, 1999)).

A. Taub was who reviewed Einstein’s paper for the Mathematical Review (Taub, 1942) and
the translation of the article (from the original in german) was supervised by Terracini who,
in a letter addressed to Einstein (Terracini, 1941), wrote “Ihrem Wunsch nach, anstatt des
deutschen Textes Ihres Aufsatzes, werden wir nebst der spanischen eine englische ¨Ubersetzung
ver¨oﬀentlichen3.” The spanish translation (Einstein, 1941d) and the english version (Einstein,
1941a) were published, as we refer in the bibliography, in the series A (devoted to mathematics
and physics) of the Revista. In the subsequent editions, the journal continued publishing articles
related to (uniﬁed) ﬁeld theories (see for instance (Santal´o, 1954; 1959)).

The original aim of our study was the question about what were the motivations that Einstein
might have had to publish his Beweis in the Argentinian journal in 1941. Thus, after this brief
introduction, we describe in the following section the historical context in which Einstein’s paper
appeared. This concerns to the search for non-singular particle-like solutions in gravitational
ﬁeld theory. In the third section we comment on Einstein’s paper speciﬁcally. We conclude in
section 5 with remarks on the subsequent investigations on the topic.

2. The historical context

Having undertaken the task of studying the developement of Einstein’s ideas on the theory of
gravitation in the second third of the 20th century, one inevitably arrives to the conclusion that
the particle problem4 in general relativity is, indeed, inseparably related to other two problems
in the theory of the continuum, namely the problem of motion and that of the uniﬁcation of
the ﬁelds.

The pioneer’s conviction about the idea that these aspects should be entailed, is particularly
illustrated by an assertion belonging to the introduction of a quoted work (Einstein & Rosen,
1935) written by A. Einstein and N. Rosen in 1935 in which, among the arguments sketching
ideas which later would become a solid statement, it is claimed that “[o]n the basis of the de-
scription of a particle without singularity one has the possibility of a logically more satisfactory
treatement of the combined problem: the problem of the ﬁeld and that of the motion coincide”.
In fact, the quest for regular solutions in classical uniﬁed ﬁeld theory played a crucial role as a
criterion leading Einstein’s investigations.

The particle problem, within the context of Einstein’s investigations between 1919 and 1955,
comrised two basic degrees of speculation: ﬁrst, the representation of particles as regular so-
lutions of a pure ﬁeld theory (i.e. free of sources); secondly, the pious attempt to derive the
atomistic nature5 of matter as a property encoded in the non-linearity of the theory of ﬁeld.
Let us review some aspects of these.

2though with an erroneous year of publication, since 1942 is refered instead 1941.
3manifesting that both english and spanish translations were going to be prepared.
4refering to the question about how to describe a particle in the framework of the theory of gravitation in

terms of the pure ﬁeld theory representation (i.e. free of sources).

5even in what is refered to the quantum behavior of matter; based this aim on the idea that the non-linearity
of the gravitational (or uniﬁed) ﬁeld theory would lead to mimic the conditions yielding to the quantum behavior
of atoms. Clearly, the second stadium of the programme results more ambitious and seems to be more unlikely
than the ﬁrst one.

THE PARTICLE PROBLEM IN CLASSICAL GRAVITY

A HISTORICAL NOTE ON 1941

3

The period 1919-1935. Talking about earlier periods, and by attempting to answer what was
the inﬂuence of Einstein’s conviction about the fact that particles should be represented as
non-singular solutions of the gravitational (uniﬁed) ﬁeld, we can refer to preliminary stages
of the uniﬁcation programme where, instead, “Einstein had considered the possibility of in-
terpreting the elementary electric and light quanta as certain singular points of generalized
ﬁeld equations”6 (Vizgin, 1994). On the other hand, if one analyzes the “principles” which are
presents as starting points in the subsequent literature (cf. (Einstein & Rosen, 1935)), it turns
out to be evident that such a picture of the reality resulted to be abandoned (substantially
overcomed) in the ulterior periods of his digressions about the structure of matter.

It was pointed out by V. Vizgin in (Vizgin, 1994) (refering speciﬁcally to the research activi-
ties by 1923) that “Einstein did not associate the problem of explaining the quantum behavior
of [...] the electron with the maximum problem in the ﬁrst stage of its solution, which consisted
merely of proving that the ﬁeld equations had nonsingular static centrally summetric solution
that could be interpreted as the electron.”

Moreover, independently of how strongly were Einstein’s researches focused on this aspect
by the beginning of the decade of 1920, the question about the existence of regular solutions
of ﬁeld equations representing particle-like objects was not avoided at all by the community
during that epoch. For instance, we can observe this from the fact that “[i]t had become clear
by the end of 1923 that none of the uniﬁed theories proposed since 1918 had such nonsingular
solutions” (Vizgin, 1994). Certainly, after 1921, Einstein did dedicated attention to the problem
of particle-like solutions in uniﬁed ﬁeld theories. In particular, in a paper published in 1923
in collaboration with J. Grommer, he proved the non-existence of regular static spherically
symmetric solutions in Kaluza’s theory (Einstein & Grommer, 1923). According to the author
of (Vizgin, 1994), “they tested the [Kaluza’s theory] for the existence of centrally symmetric
everywhere-regular solutions and concluded that they did not exist, this being, in Einstein’s
eyes, one indication of a merely formal nature of the uniﬁcation”. Despite his emphatic remarks
on the failure of the theory on describing regular particle-like solutions, it results clear that
Einstein’s enthusiasm about Kaluza-Klein theory did not disappear immediately and, moreover,
survived up to middle of 30’s to conclude in 1943 with his paper (Einstein & Pauli, 1943). Pauli
and Einstein, in early periods of work, had discussed the validity of Weyl’s theory based on
the (non)-existence of static solutions in it7. From this, we can infer how the existence of
solutions suitable to be considered as representing particles became in a criterion for suggesting
the abandonment of a temptative road, even when promissory in the beginning.

In these terms, the particle problem in gravitational ﬁeld theory turned out to play an impor-
tant role after 1919, and this continued through the 20’s, though with oscillating protagonism.
Then, the following question arises: what was Einstein’s point of view after 1930, if a con-
cise one can be recognized, regarding the description of particles as singular solutions of ﬁeld
equations? And even more speciﬁcally, what concerns the importance that such aspect had
in guiding the search for a uniﬁed ﬁeld theory in that period? These questions ﬁnd concise
answers when one considers the following assertion8: “Every ﬁeld theory, in our opinion, must

6Vizgin refers here to the epoch of the ﬁrst attemps of ﬁnding a “nongeometrized” uniﬁed ﬁeld theory.
7see, for instance, the letters addressed to Michele Besso, dated on December 12, 1919 (Einstein & Besso,

1994); se also (Pauli, 1994).

8Notice the raising to the range of “principle”.

4

MARIANO GALVAGNO AND GAST ´ON GIRIBET

therefore adhere to the fundamental principle that singularities of the ﬁeld are to be excluded”,
as it can be read9 in (Einstein & Rosen, 1935).

The period 1935-1945. Furthermore, even in those papers written in collaboration with L.
Infeld and B. Hoﬀmann in 1938 and 1939 about the problem of motion in general relativity (we
always refer to the ﬁeld equations free of sources, i.e. Tµν = 0), where “matter is represented
as point singularities of the ﬁeld”, Einstein had stated that “this may be due to our simplifying
assumption that matter is represented by singularities, and it is possible that it would not be the
case if we could represent matter in terms of a [uniﬁed] ﬁeld theory from which singularities were
excluded” (Einstein, Infeld & Hoﬀmann, 1938; Einstein & Infeld, 1939). A point that deserves
to be mentioned is that the treatment of the problem of motion proposed by Einstein, Infeld
and Hoﬀmann is often refered as an example of “dualistic theory” (see for instance (Sen, 1968))
because of its property of considering particles and ﬁelds as separated entities. Rigorously
speaking, it is indeed the case, but the conviction of the authors10 about the fact that this
would correspond just to a “provisional” description is frecuently omited in the revisions.

Related to that conviction, even more emphasis is noted in the fact of admiting that the
objection about the appearence of singular solutions in general relativity would be valid only if
we consider this theory as a ﬁnal theory of the whole ﬁeld. Instead11, the ﬁeld corresponding to
a particle should be considered not as a pure gravitational ﬁeld, but as a solution of a uniﬁed
In these terms, a necessary requirement to eventually consider a ﬁeld theory
ﬁeld theory.
satisfactory should be its property of representing the particles as solutions free of singularities
in the whole space. This is, in fact, the principal link existing between the problem of the
description of the matter and the problem of ﬁnding a uniﬁed ﬁeld theory; this is the case, at
least, in what respect to the Princeton years.

Certainly, Einstein preferred to admit explicitly the temporary inability to understand the
structure of matter rather than to consider the image of particles as singularities of the grav-
itational ﬁeld, which, according to his point of view, represented just an apparent solution to
the problem of describing the matter (Einstein, 1953a).

In 1941 Einstein published (Einstein, 1941a) proving the non-existence of static spherically
symmetric solutions in general relativity. With Pauli, in 1943, he published a paper in which
the proof was extended to the case of Kaluza-Klein ﬁve-dimensional cilyndrical extension of
four-dimensional spherically symmetric geometries. Previously, through the 30’s, Einstein had
been searching for such solutions in Kaluza-Klein theory with the intention to ﬁnd a geometry
suitable to be interpreted as the unﬁed ﬁeld of a particle-like object. These investigations were
mainly done in collaboration with Bergmann and Bargmann. Besides, the quest for particles
continued beyond the moment when his enthusiasm about Kaluza’s theory vanished; in fact,
by 1949, when his investigations on uniﬁed ﬁeld theories were focused on the non-symmetric
theories, he persisted in the search for the coveted non-singular solutions.

As a corollary, regarding the question about whether the appearence of singularities should be
admited, we can state: it was Einstein’s opinion “that singularities must be excluded in a ﬁnal

9Einstein commented this work (entitled “the particle problem in the general theory of relativity”) in a letter
addressed to Michel Besso, dated on February 16 of 1936, (Einstein & Besso, 1994). In this letter, Einstein
mentioned his hope of having achieved a ﬁrst step towards a satisfactoty theory of matter.

10See also the letter to Michele Besso, dated on August 16 of 1949, (Einstein & Besso, 1994).
11according to Einstein’s point of view reﬂected in his autobiographical notes (Einstein, 1949a).

THE PARTICLE PROBLEM IN CLASSICAL GRAVITY

A HISTORICAL NOTE ON 1941

5

theory of ﬁelds. It [did] not seem reasonable [to the author of general relativity] to introduce into
a continuum theory points (or lines, etc12) for which the ﬁeld equations do not hold. Moreover,
the introduction of singularities is equivalent to postulating boundary conditions (which are
arbitrary from the point of view of the ﬁeld equations13) on surfaces which closely surround the
singularities” (Einstein, 1953a).

In (Tonnelat, 1955), M.A. Tonnelat mentions among the motivations for generalizing the
general relativity the fact that this theory “separates quite radically the gravitational ﬁeld
from [...] the sources of ﬁeld which conserves a phenomenological interpretation even when one
talks about uncharged particles”. It is a remarkable fact that such objection is mentioned in
equal footing as the objection about the separation of gravity from the electromagnetic ﬁeld
(Tonnelat, 1955).

An example which particularly shows what was the degree of compromise that the search
for singular solutions had within the framework of the quest for a satisfactory ﬁeld theory is
the Einstein’s study on Kaluza-Klein theory during 1937-1943. This is reviewed in detail in
reference (van Dongen, 2002) and, then, we do not treat this extensively here in order to avoid
redumdances. Instead, we simply cite an eloquent paragraph belonging to reference (Einstein &
Bergmann, 1938) in which Einstein and Bergmann presented their “generalization of Kaluza’s
theory”; namely: “Many fruitless eﬀorts to ﬁnd a ﬁeld representation of matter free from
singularities based on this theory have convinced us, however, that such a solution does not
exist”. This manifestly shows the relevance of the regular particle-like solutions within the
research. Furthermore, if one does not understand the problem of ﬁnding such solutions as a
crucial criterion in the line of investigation, then the paragraph cited above (located at the end
of section 2 of (Einstein & Bergmann, 1938)) seems to be completely diconnected from the line
of arguments of the work to which it belongs. Moreover, the explicit reference to “lines [...] for
which the ﬁeld equations do not hold” in (Einstein, 1953a) is consequent with the consideration
of cilyndrical ﬁve-dimensional extension of four-dimensional particle-like objects that Einstein,
Bergmann and Bargmann have studied in the context of Kaluza-Klein theory.

Before concluding this section, we have to mention that, besides, a crucial role in the uniﬁ-
cation programme was also played by the attemps for presenting a description of the quantum
behavior of nature by means of the classical ﬁeld theory. This project, taking several forms
during diﬀerent periods of investingation, basically relayed on the Einstein’s conviction about
that the non-linearity of the ﬁeld equations corresponding to the ﬁnal theory should lead to
additional conditions on the exact solutions which, by means of the “overdetermination of the
system of equations”, would result to be such that mathematical restrictions on the “manifold
of solutions” would eventually coincide with the quantization conditions.

To understand Einstein’s position about the feasibility of conceiving the atomic (and quan-
tum) structure of matter in terms of a classical ﬁeld theory, we cite: “I believe that at the
present time nobody knows anything reliable about. This is because we cannot judge in what
manner and how stringly the exclusion of singularities reduces the manifold of solutions. We

12clearly refering to his investigations on the existence of regular solutions with axial symmetry in ﬁve-

dimensional Kaluza-Klein theory.

13the emphasis on the arbitrarness is recurrent. He refers to a private communication with L. Silberstein

where this aspect was explicitely pointed out and a particular example presented (Einstein & Rosen, 1935).

6

MARIANO GALVAGNO AND GAST ´ON GIRIBET

do not posses any method at all to derive systematically solutions that are free of singulari-
ties. Approximation methods [refering to the aproximations employed in (Einstein, Infeld &
Hoﬀmann, 1938)] are of no avail since one never knows whether or not there exists to a par-
ticular approximate solution an exact solution free of singularities” (Einstein, 1953a). Pauli
emphasized the fact that Einstein had kept the faith in such a programme until his death in
1955, (Pauli, 1994). Einstein’s position about this aspect by 1950 is particularly reﬂected in
(Einstein, 1953b) and, though in a more indirect way, in (Einstein & Strauss, 1945; Einstein &
Straus, 1946a) as well.

It is not the aim of this brief note to discuss the details of this particular point; the overde-
termination in the system of ﬁeld equations as a hope of describing the quantum behavior of
nature and, in a more general context, its relation with the whole programme of uniﬁcation is
extensively developed with erudition in (Vizgin, 1994).
Then, let us review the Einstein’s paper in 1941.

3. Einstein’s paper in 1941

Einstein’s article, which we brieﬂy describe below, begins with the proof of a theorem which
can be called Einstein’s “theorem of inﬁnitely close solutions”. This follows from the simple
observation that if an arbitrary everywhere regular metric gµν and its inﬁnitesimal deﬀormation
gµν + δgµν are considered, then the associate deﬀormation in the Ricci tensor (denoted by δRµν)
satisﬁes

(1)
σν −
Then, by assuming the symmetry of the aﬃn connection, Γρ

δRµν =

µν +

−∇ρδΓρ

∇νδΓρ

µρ + (Γρ

Γρ
νσ)δΓσ
µρ
σν = Γρ

νσ, and deﬁning

one ﬁnds, with Einstein, that the following identity holds

U ρ

µν =

δΓρ

µν +

(δΓσ

µσδρ

ν + δΓσ

νσδρ
µ)

−

1
2

√

ggµνδRµν = ∂ρ(√

ggµνU ρ

µν)

−

−

This implies that, for the cases where both the original and the varied metric satisfy the Einstein
equation, we get δRµν = 0, i.e.
√

νσδρ
µ)
−
Then, we can expand arround Minkowski spacetime as follows

µν + δΓσ

ν + δΓσ

ggµν(

µσδρ

2δΓρ

= 0

(4)

∂ρ

−

(cid:1)

(cid:0)

and consider that the Newtonian conditions are to be imposed at the inﬁnity, which are realized
by means of

gµν = ηµν + hµν

,

hµν =

2m
r

−

δµ
ν

.

Hence, we ﬁnd that

√

ggµν(

2δΓρ

µν + δΓσ

µσδρ

ν + δΓσ

νσδρ
µ)

=

4δm∂ρ

−

(cid:0)

−

−

(cid:1)

These equations “hold for the inﬁnitely close asymptotic equations. But equations (4) hold
rigorously in the whole domain”, where we do not consider singularities. By integrating out
R, where the factor R
the above equations over a domain deﬁned by an hyper-surface V

−1

r
(cid:0)

(cid:1)

×

(2)

(3)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

(9)

and then

(10)

THE PARTICLE PROBLEM IN CLASSICAL GRAVITY

A HISTORICAL NOTE ON 1941

7

corresponds to the time direction and V is a three-volume bounded by an sphere S2 = ∂V , we
ﬁnd that the Gauss theorem implies

∂ρ

√

−

ZV ×R

ggµνU ρ

µνd4x = 2δm

ZV ×R ∇

2r−1d4x = 0

since the surface integral must vanish according to (4). Here, we can consider an sphere S3
large enough in such a way that the Newtonian limit (6) results adequate. Hence, we get

√

ggµνδRµνd4x = 8πδm

dt = 0

ZR

ZV ×R

−

δm = 0

This implies that, under the assumption that the solutions of the ﬁeld equations are regular
everywhere, one is allowed to conclude that “two inﬁnitely close solutions without singularities
have necessarily the same total mass m”.

Besides, such a result (10) confronts with the simple observation of the fact that if the
metric gµν(xρ) satisﬁes the ﬁeld equations Rµν = 0, then the same system is satisﬁed by the
R. Then, by identifying λ = m/δm in the spherically
conﬁguration gµν(λxρ) for any λ
symmetric solution we get a contradiction; contradiction which, of course, “disappears if we
abandon the hypotesis on the non-existence of singularities.”

∈

In this way, Einstein demonstrated the non-existence of gravitational ﬁelds with a non-
vanishing total mass free from singularities in the general theory of relativity (Einstein, 1941a).
This proof was generalized by Einstein and Pauli (Einstein & Pauli, 1943) and by Papapetrou
(Papapetrou, 1948b) to the cases of other (uniﬁed) ﬁeld theories.

Let us make a remark here: as it was signaled in (van Dongen, 2002), Einstein’s assertion
about the scaling map xρ
λxρ as an application closed among an space of non-singular
solutions is not general enough. Actually, this is the key point for explaining the existence
of Kaluza-Klein non-singular particles despite the Einstein-Pauli generalization of Einstein’s
proof, which again follows from this class of scaling arguments.

→

On the other hand, few years after the publication of (Einstein, 1941a), Papapetrou (Pa-
papetrou, 1948b) presented an alternative proof of Einstein’s theorem which, while simpler,
permits to be generalized without major diﬃculty to the case of the non-symmetric version of
the gravitational theory.

Papapetrou’s proof follows from Tolman’s energy theorem (see for instance (Tolman, 1987))
which states that the energy concentrated in a three-volume V of a given static space-time is
given by the formula

(11)

=

U

ZV

d3x√

g(T 1

1 + T 2

2 + T 3

T 0
0 )

4 −

−

where T µ
ν is the stress-tensor. Then, this allows for reobtain Einstein’s conclusion in a rather
simple way by noticing that the vanishing of Tµν in the interior of V implies that the mass m
of the asymptotically ﬂat spherically symmetric solution also vanishes.

This observation leads to extend the Einstein’s non-existence theorem to the case of Einstein-
ν , naturally

ν turns out to be replaced by an analogue ∗T µ

Straus theory, in which the tensor T µ

8

deﬁned by

MARIANO GALVAGNO AND GAST ´ON GIRIBET

1
8π (cid:18)

1
2

(12)

∗Tµν =

gµνgργ ∗Rργ(cid:19)

∗Rµν −
where ∗Rµν is the well known Einstein-Straus non-symmetric generalization of the Ricci tensor
(Schr¨odinger, 1950). Then, by imposing the condition of vanishing divergence for the anti-
gνµ), he is able to show that, in the weak-ﬁeld approximation,
symmetric tensor √
the symmetric part of the metric tensor gµν satisﬁes the same equations that in the case of
general relativity. Then, it is claimed that, even in the non-symmetric case, Einstein’s proof
holds straightforwardly.

g(gµν

−

−

Through his deduction, Papapetrou discussed the ambiguity concerning the deﬁnition of the
“correct conservation laws”, arguing that in the static case such arbitrairness results diluted.
He makes use of certain results due to Schr¨odinger, with whom he has had conversations on
these aspects.

4. Subsequent investigations

Having discussed the importance that the particle problem have had within the framework
of the general relativity and the essays towards its generalization, we ﬁnd interesting to review
here the further investigations on the existence of regular spherically symmetric static solutions
in classical ﬁeld theories developed since 1935.

The demonstration described in the previous section relies in basic assumptions (the non-
existence of singularities and scaling properties) and in general aspects of classical ﬁeld theory.
Thus, it turns this result into an strong argument which can be, for instance, generalized to
other theories. Hence, the question arises about how could one to avoid this generality by
ﬁnding a theory for which such a proof does not turn out to be a conclusive one.

For simplicity, as it results eviden form Papapetrou’s proof, the ﬁrst attempt would be to
consider a non-uniﬁed ﬁeld theory such that the variational principle in Einstein’s argument
would involve an additional term. Of course, as it is well known, coupling gravity with other ﬁeld
(source) does not mean that singularities are necessarily excluded; however, one could wonder
whether an appropriate electromagnetic part would lead to regular geometries representing
particles. Let us begin with a case of particular importance.

A non-uniﬁed ﬁeld theory: the Hoﬀmann-Infeld particle and the Born-Infeld electrodynamics.
Since the formulation of Born-Infeld electrodynamics in 1934 (Born & Infeld, 1933; 1934),
the prospects of ﬁnding non-singular solutions representing particles in the ﬁeld theory free of
sources have been renewed. The cellebrated property of Born-Infeld theory of leading to static
spherically symmetric electric ﬁeld well deﬁned in the whole space motivated, then, the question
about whether such a quality would be inherited when gravitating sources were considered. It
was B. Hoﬀmann who gave the answer by presenting in 1935 an spherically symmetric solution
of Einstein theory14 coupled to Born-Infeld particle-like charged source (Hoﬀmann, 1935). In
this case, as well as in the case of the search for solutions of the pure gravitational ﬁeld theory,
the conviction about that “gravitational potentials that contain inﬁnities are to be rejected”
turned out to be one of the principal motivations.

14We refer in this case to the general theory of relativity.

THE PARTICLE PROBLEM IN CLASSICAL GRAVITY

A HISTORICAL NOTE ON 1941

9

Indeed, Hoﬀmann showed, “[b]y postulating that inﬁnite relativistic gravitational potential
are to be rejected in the Born-Infeld theory”, that “diﬃculties in the usual relativistic treatment
of gravitational mass are avoided”. His solution, in terms of the Schwarzschild-like ansatz

takes the following form15

(13)

(14)

ds2 =

eψ(r)dt2 + e−φ(r)dr2 + r2dΩ2
S2

−

eψ(r) = eφ(r) = 1

2m
r −

8π
r Z
0

−

r

dr

(r4 + e2)1/2
(cid:0)

r2

−

(cid:1)

where m and e are integration constants. This solution, as it can be veriﬁed, allows to ﬁnd the
Reissner-Nordstr¨om solution in certain limit.

Besides, solution (14) is regular at r = 0 in the case m = 0. Then, the Newtonian contribution
r−1 in the large radius
to the graviational potential is simply given by the term of the order
expansion of the integral in (14). As it was pointed out by Hoﬀmann, the inﬁnity at the
origin is then avoided by setting m = 0, “not because such an inﬁnity does not exist in the
most general mathematical solution, but simply because one decides that such an inﬁnity is
objectionable on physical grounds”. This leads to an identiﬁcation between “gravitating” and
“electromagnetic” charges and no uncharged particle would exist. By the end of his paper,
Hoﬀmann also manifests the conviction about the fact that the vacuum ﬁeld equations (i.e.
free of sources) are to be prefered as a ﬁnal description.

∼

Einstein and Rosen16 “kindly” pointed out that Hoﬀmann solution, even when representing
a ﬁnite gravitational ﬁeld at the origin, is still singular because a conical singularity does exist
there. Subsequently, a modiﬁcation of Born-Infeld theory was presented by Hoﬀmann and
Infeld in reference (Hoﬀmann & Infeld, 1937). Being conscious about the diﬃculties that the
consideration of a conical singularity would imply, they were able to ﬁnd a particle-like solution
of the new version of Born-Infeld electrodynamics which presents the following form

r

(15)

eψ(r) = eφ(r) = 1

8π
r Z
0
This solution satisﬁes that limr→0 eψ(r) = 1 and, then, no conical singularity does exist. How-
ever, the curvature is still divergent at r = 0.

2m
r −

log(1 + r4)

log r4

drr2

−

−

(cid:1)

(cid:0)

These results teach us that the non-linearity of Born-Infeld electrodynamics, even though it
does not represent a suﬃcient condition for a ﬁeld theory to admit regular solutions, turns out to
play a crucial role in their existence. Then, one feels tempted to ask whether an enhancement of
the non-linearity of ﬁeld equations could lead to overcome diﬃculties towards a novel solution to
the particle problem. For instance, we can ask: could such an enhancement of the non-linearity
allow one to healt the pathology of the conical singularity of Hoﬀmann’s solution as well as
mitigate the divergences of former geommetries? We will return to this point in brief when
discussing the higher order curvature corrections to general relativity. But, ﬁrst, we devote
few words on another quoted proposal for uniﬁed ﬁeld theories. The reason for this is that,

15Here, the fundamental constants c, G and b are all taken as unity as in the original paper.
16Hoﬀmann and Infeld mention Einstein-Rosen observation about the conical singularity of Hoﬀmann solution
in (Hoﬀmann & Infeld, 1937). As far as we know, such objection was due to a private communication and it
does not correspond to a written contribution. For our purpose here, we can consider this comment on conical
singularity as a Fuld Hall conversation.

10

MARIANO GALVAGNO AND GAST ´ON GIRIBET

with Einstein, the consideration of non-uniﬁed ﬁeld theories (as Born-Infeld model coupled to
gravity) does not seem to represent a fully satisfactory formulation.

Papapetrou’s particle and the non-symmetric uniﬁed ﬁeld theory. The advent of the uniﬁed
ﬁeld theories based on the non-symmetric version of Riemannian geometry gave rise to a dif-
ferent proposal about from where the solution to the particle problem could come. One of the
most cellebrated non-symmetric uniﬁed ﬁeld theories is the one proposed by Einstein in 1945
(Einstein, 1945), which was presented in a more precise way in the article (Einstein & Straus,
1946b), written in collaboration with E. Straus (see also (Einstein & Kaufman, 1953; 1954;
1955)). This theory, often called Einstein-Straus theory, is described with expertness bt E.
Schr¨odinger in his book (Schr¨odinger, 1950). Within this context, A. Papapetrou (Papapetrou,
1948a) and M. Wyman (Wyman, 1950) have studied the static spherically symmetric solutions
representing the analogous to the Reissner-Nordstrom geometry.

Papapetrou’s solution represents a charged17 particle, whose gravitational ﬁeld takes the form

(13) with

(16)

eψ(r) = 1

2m
r

+

e2
4πr4 −

me2
2πr5

−

, eφ(r) = 1

2m
r

.

−

This solution is singular at the origin as well as in the case of general relativity and, then, it
does not share the prosperity of Hoﬀmann geometry. We already mentioned that Papapetrou
generalized the proof of the non-existence of regular solutions to the case of Einstein-Straus
theory and he concluded that the Einstein’s theorem of the inﬁnitely close solutions “is also valid
in the generalized theory of gravitation”. Besides, it is remarkable that Einstein expressed his
failure in ﬁnding a solution free of singularities in the non-symmetric ﬁeld theory. The reference
to this is contained in a letter addressed to Michele Besso18 in 1949. It does not seem obvious
that Einstein did not know about Papapetrou’s generalization of his Beweis even though it is
rather unlikely that Einstein and Papapetrou exchanged letters between 1946 and 1955.

On the other hand, a Born-Infeld inspired version of Einstein-Straus model can be formulated
from the Schr¨odinger version of the non-symmetric uniﬁed ﬁeld theory, which combines the
Eddington-Einstein pure aﬃne theory and non-symmetric structure (Schr¨odinger, 1943; 1948;
1950). In fact, it was discussed whether a formulation can lead to ﬁeld equations which certainly
admit regular solutions of the form (14), see (Sen, 1968; Hlavaty, 1957; Tonnelat, 1955) and
references therein for details.

Another criticism to the Einstein-Straus theory, besides the singularity of Papapetrou’s ge-
ometry, is the ambiguity in the formulation, which is such that when trying to identify a metric
tensor representing gravity among the whole bestiary of symmetric tensors, one still ﬁnds the
freedom to redeﬁne the ﬁelds in order to turn the solution (16) into an exact Schwarzschild
metric (Vastone, 1962). Thus, the theory, such as it was originally formulated, is not completely
determined.

Einstein-Pauli theorem and Kaluza-Klein solitons. For completeness, let us review the observa-
tion presented by van Dongen (van Dongen, 2002), which relies in pointing out a soﬁsm existing
in Einstein’s observation of scaling invariance we refered in section 3 (see (Einstein, 1941a) and

17in the sense of being charged under the antisymmetric tensor gµν

gνµ, playing the role of electromagnetic

strenght tensor.

18dated on August 16 of 1949, (Einstein & Besso, 1994).

−

THE PARTICLE PROBLEM IN CLASSICAL GRAVITY

A HISTORICAL NOTE ON 1941

11

(Einstein & Pauli, 1943)). Basically, the argumentation about that a regular solution gµν(λxρ)
is obtained (for generic λ) from a given solution with λ = 1 does not hold in general. This is
the case of the geometries discussed in (van Dongen, 2002). Indeed, the Kaluza-Klein solitons
constructed from four-dimensional gravitational instantons, e.g.

(17)

ds2 =

dt2 + e−φ(r)dr2 + r2dΩ2

S2 + eφ(r)dw2 ,

eφ(r) =

−

1

(cid:18)

−

2m
r (cid:19)

,

with w being a periodic space-likr direction, represent examples of this class of geometries.
Einstein-Pauli generalization of Einstein’s proof does not apply for them since no general di-
latation xµ
λxµ is permitted among non-singular solutions; this is due to the periodicity
conditions for excluding conical deﬁciency in the instantonic part of Kaluza-Klein instantons.
This states that these solitons represent counterexamples which violate the “non-existence the-
orems”.

→

More recently. It deserves to be mentioned that, currently, the idea of dimensional extensions
of spherically symmetric solutions in four dimensions acquires a renewed value in terms of
the brane-world scenarios (Randall & Sundrum, 1999) and the description of black holes in
this framework (Chamblin, Hawking & Reall, 2000). The discussion of singularities in this
new context turns out to be an extremly interesting subject. For instance, it can be shown
that, under certain conditions, divergences in the Kretschmann scalar of some four-dimensional
spherical solutions are avoided.However, this exceeds the scope of this note.

Boulware-Deser-Wiltshire particle and higher order gravitational theories. Now, let us return to
the enhancement of the non-linearity of ﬁeld equations as an alternative solution to the particle
problem. However, in contrast with the modiﬁcations alla Born-Infeld where a non-linear ﬁeld
theory is proposed as source of general relativity, we will refer here to the enhancement of the
non-linearity understood as higher order modiﬁcations of the gravitational part itself. It can
be veriﬁed that, actually, such a type of ﬁeld theory can yield regular metrics even for the
case of uncharged particle-like objects. As an example, let us consider a model which allows to
manifestly show this property: the Gauss-Bonnet extended gravity. This extended gravity, while
correcting Einstein’s theory by means of additional higher order terms, represents a relatively
natural extension of general relativity (Lanczos, 1938).

Talking about pure gravitational particles, the proposal for a way of violating Einstein’s
“non-existence theorem” is to elevate the order of gravitational action. A concise example of
this kind of theories of gravitation is the Lovelock gravity, which is obtained by dropping the
requirement that the ﬁeld equations have to be linear in the second derivative of the metric
tensor. Lovelock (Lovelock, 1971) has constructed the most general entity (non-linear analogue
to the Einstein tensor) satisfying to be a symmetric and conserved tensor depending on the
metric and its derivatives up to the second order but without more restrictions. The tensor
obtained in this procedure is non linear in the Riemann tensor and diﬀers from the Einstein
tensor only if the space-time has more than 4 dimensions. Besides, second order corrections in
the curvature can be also considered in the four-dimensional case.

Gauss-Bonnet gravity can be thought as the gravitational analogue of Born-Infeld electro-
dynamics and corresponds to short-distance eﬀects correcting the Einstein’s theory of gravity
at scales comparable with certain lenght scale lL, which would be a fundamental constant of
the new gravitational theory. This theory has been tested for admiting static solutions with

12

MARIANO GALVAGNO AND GAST ´ON GIRIBET

spherical symmetry and, actually, those have been found during the last decades. For instance,
we can mention here the Wiltshire geometry (Wiltshire, 1986), which represents a particle-like
solution of Lovelock theory coupled to Born-Infeld electrodynamics. The interesting aspect of
such a geometry is that, even for the case of uncharged particles, the solution remains ﬁnite
at the origin, representing a regular metric for a pure gravitational theory. Written in the
Schwarzschild-type ansatz (13), the solution results

(18)

eψ(r) = eφ(r) = 1 +

r2
4l2
L −

r2
4l2
L (cid:18)

1 +

16ml2
L

r3 +

8l2

LΛ
3 (cid:19)

1/2

This solution was originally obtained by D. Boulware and S. Deser (Boulware & Deser, 1986)
for the uncharged case. As in the case of Born-Infeld theory, the solution developes a conical
singularity at the origin; however, it was shown in (Aiello, Ferraro & Giribet, 2004) that this
can be expunged by means of an appropriate choice of the parameters. Besides, the solution
turns out to be geodesically incomplete and its curvature diverges at r = 0.
Consequently, as it can be easily veriﬁed, for very large scales (e.g.

large black holes) the
behavior is well approximated by the de Sitter-Schwarzschild black hole solution while the short
distance corrections start to dominate at the scale lL, where the physics substantially changes.
Diﬀerent limits of the Wiltshire’s solution were discussed in the literature. These limits were
studied in terms of the fundamental scale lL and the Born-Infeld coupling constant b. It can be
consistently proven that these limits correspond to the expected geometries. Hence, Wiltshire’s
solution presents a regular metric generalizing the quoted Hoﬀmann metric for Einstein-Born-
Infeld theory we discussed above and, besides, remains ﬁnite even for the uncharged case. This
is well explained by the fact that the non-linear corrections involved in this case refer to the
gravitational part instead to the electrodynamic part.

We have reviewed here how the principal representants of the catallogues of non-singular

particle-like solutions were appearing in the ulterior investigations.

5. Concluding remarks

The aim of this note was to show that the search for static non-singular spherically symmetric
solutions suitable to be interpreted as describing particles in the framework of classical ﬁeld
theories of gravitation, represented a guide in all stages of the uniﬁcation programme; having
played a central role in Einstein’s investigations after 1923.

J. van Dongen pointed out how this aspect appeared within the context of Einstein’s re-
searches on Kaluza-Klein theory. Here, we emphasize that this actually was a general issue
which was present during the whole period of research during the uniﬁcation programme.

Regarding the attempts for ﬁnding a satisfactory ﬁnal description of the structure of matter
in terms of the classical uniﬁed ﬁeld theories, it became clear by the middle of the past century
that such a programme had to be dissmissed. Even those, who continued actively working on
generalizations of Einstein’s theory by 1950, considered that the picture of reality in terms of
classical (ﬁeld) concepts had no chance to lead to a fruitful description. Schr¨odinger cristalizes
this idea when concluding his book (Schr¨odinger, 1950) with a brief discussion on his point of
view about the importance of the existence of particle-like solutions in uniﬁed non-symmetric
ﬁeld theory; showing, on the other hand, that this was still an open question by 1950.

THE PARTICLE PROBLEM IN CLASSICAL GRAVITY

A HISTORICAL NOTE ON 1941

13

The Einstein’s paper in 1941 sketches the lines which were guiding the investigations of
those who were serching a satisfactory theory of the classical ﬁelds in the ﬁrst half of the 20th
century. It is possible to argue, based on the correspondence that documents the publishing
aﬀair of (Einstein, 1941a; 1941d), that the publication of the paper in 1941 was due to a Fubini’s
request, compeling Einstein to present such a contribution to the Revista. In fact, as we already
mentioned, the Beweis in 1941 acquires relevance, not as a result for general relativity itself,
but because of its property of being suitable of generalizations to the cases of certain uniﬁed
ﬁeld theories, as in (Einstein & Pauli, 1943) and (Papapetrou, 1948b). Einstein himself caliﬁed
his demonstration in 1941 as “ein h¨ubscher Beweis station¨arer Gravitationsfelder” (Einstein,
1941c).

Acknowledgments. This work was supported by Universidad de Buenos Aires.

We are grateful to the following colleagues for advices and help with the bibliography: Ari
Pakman from Hebrew University of Jerusalem, Gabriela Simonelli from Universidad Nacional
de Tucum´an, Marc Thibeault and Marco Farinati from Universidad de Buenos Aires and Rafael
Ferraro from Instituto de Astronom´ıa y F´ısica del Espacio. We thank Ana Dogliotti and Claudio
Simeone for reading the manuscript. We specially thank The Albert Einstein Archives, The
Hebrew University of Jerusalem, Israel. G. Giribet thanks the Institute for Advanced Study.
M. Galvagno thanks B.S. Portaro.

The writers are inﬁnitely grateful to Mr. Mauricio Leston for unvaluable conversations.

References

[1] Aiello M., Ferraro R. and Giribet G., Exact Solutions of Lovelock-Born-Infeld Black Holes, to appear in

Phys. Rev. D (2004).

[2] Born M. and Infeld L., Nature 132 (1933), 1004.
[3] Born M. and Infeld L., Proc. Roy. Soc. (London) 144 (1934), 425.
[4] Boulware D.G. and Deser S., Phys. Rev. Lett. 55 (1986), 2656.
[5] Chamblin A., Hawking S. and Reall H., Brane-World Black Holes, Phys. Rev. D61 (2000), 065007.
[6] van Dongen J., Einstein and Kaluza-Klein particle, to appear in Stud. Hist. Phil. Mod. Phys. 33, 2 (2002),

[7] Earman J. and Eisenstaedt J., Einstein and singularities, Stud. Hist. Mod. Phys. 30, 2 (1999), 185.
[8] Einstein A. and Grommer J., Beweis der nichtexistenz eines ¨uberall regul¨aren zentrisch symmetrischen
Felds nach der Feld-Theorie von Th. Kaluza, Scripta Universitatis atque Bibliothecae Hierosolymitanarum,
Mathematica et Physica (Jerusalem), 7, 1 (1923).

[9] Einstein A. and Rosen N., The particle problem in the general theory of relativity, Phys. Rev. 48 (1935),

[10] Einstein A. and Bergmann P., On a generalization of Kaluza’s theory of electricity, Ann. of Math. 39, 3

185.

73.

(1938), 683.

[11] Einstein A., Infeld L. and Hoﬀmann B., The gravitational equations and the problem of motion, Ann. of

[12] Einstein A., On a stationary system with spherical symmetry consisting of many gravitating masses, Ann.

[13] Einstein A. and Infeld L., The gravitational equations and the problem of motion. II, Ann. of Math. 41, 2

Math. 39, 1 (1938) 65.

of Math. 40, 2 (1939), 922.

(1939), 455.

[14] Einstein A., Demonstration of the non-existence of gravitational ﬁelds with a non-vanishing total mass free

of singularities, Revista de la Universidad Nacional de Tucum´an, A2, (1941), 11.

[15] Einstein A., letter to G. Fubini, dated on August 5 of 1941. Italian translation of the letter addressed to

G. Fubini, dated on August 5 of 1941. See: http://matematica.uni-bocconi.it/fubini/lettere.htm

14

MARIANO GALVAGNO AND GAST ´ON GIRIBET

[16] Einstein A., letter to G. Fubini, dated on August 5 of 1941; in German. Copy at The Albert Einstein

Archives, The Hebrew University of Jerusalem, Israel.

[17] Einstein A., Demostraci´on de la no existencia de campos gravitacionales sin singularidades de masa total

no nula, Revista de la Universidad Nacional de Tucum´an, A2, (1941), 5.

[18] Einstein A. and Pauli W., On the non-existence of regular stationary solutions of relativistic ﬁeld equations,

Ann. of Math. 44, 2 (1943), 131.

[19] Einstein A. and Straus E., The inﬂuence of the expansion of space on the gravitation ﬁelds surrounding the

individual stars, Rev. of Mod. Phys. 17, 2 (1945), 120.

[20] Einstein A., A generalization of the relativistic theory of gravitation, Ann. of Math. 46, 4 (1945), 578.
[21] Einstein A. and Straus E., Corrections and additional remarks to our paper: The inﬂuence of the expansion

of space on the gravitation ﬁelds surrounding the individual stars, Rev. of Mod. Phys. 18, 1 (1946), 148.

[22] Einstein A. and Straus E., A generalization of the relativistic theory of gravitation. II, Ann. of Math. 47,

4 (1946), 731.

[23] Einstein A., Autobiographical Notes, Open Court Publishing Company, La Salle, Illinois (1949).
[24] Einstein A. and Kaufman B., Volume in honor to Louis de Broglie, Paris, (1952), 321.
[25] Einstein A., The meaning of relativity, Princeton University Press, 1953.
[26] Einstein A., A comment on a criticism of uniﬁed ﬁeld theory, Letters to the Editor, in Phys. Rev. 89

(1953), 321.

ﬁeld, Ann. of Math. 59, 2 (1954).

[27] Einstein A. and Kaufman B., Algebraic properties of the ﬁeld in the relativistic theory of the asymmetric

[28] Einstein A. and Kaufman B., A new form of the general relativistic ﬁeld equations, Ann. of Math. 52, 1

[29] Einstein A., ¨Uber die spezielle und die allgemeine Relativist¨atsheorie, Vieweg, 1969.
[30] Einstein A. and Besso M., Correspondance (1903-1955), Spanish translation, Tusquets Editores, Barcelona,

[31] F¨olsing A., Albert Einstein, Biographie, Suhrkamp Taschenbuch 3087, Suhrkamp Verlag Frankfurt am

Main, Ffm 1993A (1993).

[32] Hlavaty V., Geometry of Einstein’s uniﬁed ﬁeld theory, P. Noordhoﬀ-Gromingen-Holland, 1957.
[33] Hoﬀmann B., Gravitational and electromagnetic mass in the Born-Infeld electrodynamics, Phys. Rev. 47,

[34] Hoﬀmann B. and Infeld L., On the choice of the action functional in the new ﬁeld theory, Phys. Rev. 51

[35] Lanczos C., Z. Phys. 73, 147 (1932). C. Lanczos C., Ann. Math. 39, 842 (1938).
[36] Lichnerowicz A., Th´eories relativistes de la gravitation et de l’electromagn´etisme, Masson, 1955.
[37] Lovelock D., J. Math. Phys. 12, 498 (1971).
[38] Pauli W., Zur Theorie der Gravitation und der Elektrizit¨at von Hermann Weyl, Physikalische Zeitschrift,

[39] Pauli W., Writtings on Physics and Phylosophy, Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg, 1994.
[40] Papapetrou A., Static spherically symmetric solutions in uniﬁed ﬁeld theory, Proc. R. Ir. Acad. 52A, 69

[41] Papapetrou A., The question of non-singular solutions in the generalized theory of gravitation, Phys. Rev.

[42] Randall L. and Sundrum R., An alternative to compactiﬁcation, Phys. Rev. Lett. 83 (1999), 4690.
[43] Santal´o L.A., Revista de la Universidad Nacional de Tucum´an A1 10 (1954), 19.
[44] Santal´o L.A., Revista de la Universidad Nacional de Tucum´an A1 XII (1959), 31.
[45] Schr¨odinger E., Proc. R. Ir. Acad. 49A, 43 (1943), 225.
[46] Schr¨odinger E., Proc. R. Ir. Acad. 52A (1948), 1.
[47] Schr¨odinger E., Space-Time Structure, Cambridge University Press, 1950.
[48] Sen D.K., Particles and/or ﬁelds, Academic Press Inc. (London), 1968.
[49] Taub A.H., Review of Demonstration of the non-existence of gravitational ﬁelds with a non-vanishing total
mass free of singularities by A. Einstein; Mathematical Review on the Web, American Mathematical Society
2004, MR0006877.

20 (1919), 10.

(1948).

73, 9 (1948), 1105.

(1955).

1994.

(1935), 877.

(1937), 765.

THE PARTICLE PROBLEM IN CLASSICAL GRAVITY

A HISTORICAL NOTE ON 1941

15

[50] Terracini A., letter to A. Einstein, dated on October 21 of 1941; in German. The Albert Einstein Archives,

[51] Terracini A., letter to A. Einstein, dated on August 6 of 1944; in Spanish. The Albert Einstein Archives,

The Hebrew University of Jerusalem, Israel.

The Hebrew University of Jerusalem, Israel.

[52] Tolman R.C., Relativity, Thermodynamics and Cosmology, Dover Publication, Ney York, 1987.
[53] Tonnelat M.A., La Th´eorie du champ uniﬁ´e d’ Einstein et quelques-uns de ses d´eveloppements, Gauthier-

[54] Vanstone J., Can. J. Math. 14 (1962), 568.
[55] Vizgin V.P., Uniﬁed ﬁeld theory in the ﬁrst third of the 20th century, Historical Studies, Birkh¨auser Verlag

Villars, 1955.

(1994).

[56] Weyl H., Space-Time-Matter, Dover Publications, 1950.
[57] Wiltshire D., Black holes in string-generated gravity models, Phys. Rev. D38, 8 (1988), 2445. D. Wiltshire,

Phys. Lett. B169, 36 (1986).

[58] Wyman M., Uniﬁed ﬁeld theory, Can. J. Math. 2, 427 (1950).

Universidad de Buenos Aires.

