4
0
0
2
 
c
e
D
 
2
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
t
s
i
h
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
2
4
1
2
1
4
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

The Challenge of Editing
Einstein’s Scientiﬁc Manuscripts

Tilman Sauer∗

February 2, 2008

Abstract

Einstein’s research manuscripts provide important insights into his ex-
ceptional creativity. At the same time, they can present diﬃculties for a
publication in the documentary edition of the Collected Papers of Albert
Einstein (CPAE). The problems are illustrated by discussing how some
important examples of Einstein’s research manuscripts have been included
in previous volumes of the CPAE series: his Scratch Notebook from the
years 1910–1914, his so-called Zurich Notebook from 1912, document-
ing his early search for a generally covariant theory of gravitation, and
the Einstein-Besso manuscript from 1913, containing calculations of Mer-
cury’s perihelion advance on the basis of the Einstein-Grossmann equa-
tions. Another category of research notes are small and disconnected
“back-of-an-envelope” calculations. A major challenge for future vol-
umes of the CPAE series are Einstein’s Berlin and Princeton research
manuscripts on a uniﬁed ﬁeld theory. This batch of some 1700 undated
manuscript pages presents a formidable challenge also for historians of sci-
ence. Although the web provides new possibilities for the editorial task,
such as the publication of facsimiles on the Einstein Archives Online web-
site, it is argued that a satisfactory solution of the editorial problems
posed by these manuscripts depends on scholarly eﬀorts to reconstruct
and understand the content of Einstein’s manuscripts.

1 The Einstein Papers Project

The Einstein Papers Project is a long-term editorial project devoted to pub-
lishing the Collected Papers of Albert Einstein (CPAE).1 The ﬁrst volume was
published by Princeton University Press in 1987 [CPAE1], followed by eight
∗Paper presented at the 25th Anniversary Annual Meeting of the Association for Documen-
tary Editing, Chicago, November 14–16, 2003; to appear in Documentary Editing. Facsimiles
of Einstein’s manuscripts are reproduced by kind permission of the Albert Einstein Archives,
Jerusalem.

1For general information about the Einstein Papers Project, see the “Publisher’s Foreword”
and the “General Introduction” in Volume 1 of the series [CPAE1], as well as [Bailey 1989,
Stachel 1987, Buchwald 2004]. The project’s website is at www.einstein.caltech.edu.

1

more volumes to date [CPAE2]–[CPAE9]. To complete the series, some twenty
more volumes are anticipated during the next 30–40 years. The documentary
edition of the CPAE is supplemented by an English translation series. In addi-
tion to these publications in book format, the project has launched a website
jointly with the Albert Einstein Archives of the Hebrew University of Jerusalem.
Known as Einstein Archives Online (www.alberteinstein.info), the site presently
provides over 3,000 high-quality facsimiles from Einstein’s autograph writings,
a ﬁnding-aid to the Albert Einstein Archives, and an itemized database of some
43,000 records.

The editorial project draws on the collection of the Albert Einstein Archives.
The core of the archives was put together in Princeton after Einstein’s death
by his long-time secretary Helen Dukas who acted as archivist in a devoted
eﬀort until her death in 1982. The “Dukas collection” comprises some 43,000
documents. The collection was microﬁlmed into 61 reels during the seventies,2
and a hardcopy duplicate archive was produced from the microﬁlm and col-
lated with the originals for editorial purposes. Following Einstein’s will which
bequeathed his literary estate to the Hebrew University of Jerusalem, the collec-
tion was shipped to Jerusalem after Helen Dukas’s death, and has been housed
since then at the Jewish National and University Library. Since 1982 some
20,000 additional documents have been collected both by curators of the Albert
Einstein Archives and by editors of the CPAE. These documents, mostly hard-
copies from archives all over the world, were added to the original collection in
a supplementary archive.

The documentary edition of the CPAE publishes all of Einstein’s scientiﬁc
writings, both published and unpublished, as well as drafts, notebooks, scientiﬁc
and personal correspondence, in chronological order. With the exception of the
ﬁrst volume, covering the early years 1879–1902, the published volumes have
been divided into a Writings series [CPAE2, CPAE3, CPAE4, CPAE6, CPAE7]
and a Correspondence series [CPAE5, CPAE8, CPAE9]. The editorial method
follows rigid standards of documentary editing. In the Writings volumes, pub-
lished items are reproduced in facsimile; comparisons to drafts or versions are
examined and detailed in the footnotes. Unpublished materials are transcribed,
maintaining substantial faithfulness to the original text. No silent corrections
of typographical or other errors are applied, and punctuation and style are re-
produced, while errors of fact or calculation are explained in the annotation.3
Speciﬁc references to persons, places, literature, scientiﬁc developments, orga-
nizations, and events are identiﬁed. Details of the annotation follow the general
aim of “bridging the gap” of knowledge familiar to the author or intended au-
dience and that of contemporary readers. An introduction to each volume and
various editorial headnotes analyze major themes in Einstein’s life and work.

2Hence archival call numbers for items of the Einstein Archives are of a two-number format,
e.g. 3-006, where the ﬁrst number indicates the reel and the second number the sequentially
numbered document in that reel.

3A detailed account of the editorial method is given in toto in [CPAE1] with volume-speciﬁc
supplements in subsequent volumes. Beginning with [CPAE8] the full editorial method is
reproduced in each volume.

2

The website Einstein Archives Online presently publishes high-quality fac-
similes of all of Einstein’s autograph writings extant in the original Dukas col-
lection. Presently, no correspondence is included, nor does the website present
typescripts or third-party documents. Eight important autographs whose fac-
similes are provided on the site but that are not part of the AEA belong to
the Schwadron and Yahuda Collections held at the Jewish National and Uni-
versity Library. The website also presents PDF versions of those 39 documents
in the published volumes of the CPAE for which autographs are also presented
in facsimile.

In addition to the original documents, the website provides a ﬁnding-aid to
the original Einstein Archives. The ﬁnding-aid provided on the website is an
HTML transform using XSL style sheets from an XML ﬁle incorporating the
Encoded Archival Description (EAD) markup.4

The itemized archival database that is made accessible on the website is
a subset of a master archival database that is jointly maintained by both the
Albert Einstein Archives and the Einstein Papers Project.
It provides basic
information on author, receiver, dating, title, language, location, and physical
description of a document. If applicable, the database also provides publication
information in the CPAE. The archival database covers all items of the original
Dukas collection plus those items of the “supplementary archives” that have
already been published in the CPAE series (634 records). The archival database
information displayed on the website is intended to facilitate general access to
the holdings of the Einstein Archives. In contrast to the editorial apparatus
in the documentary edition, where every eﬀort is made to check the accuracy
of any information against the original sources, no guarantuee is given as to
the accuracy, consistency, or completeness of the information displayed in the
database records. In fact, the database records are continuously revised and
periodically updated as additional research is carried out at both the Albert
Einstein Archives and the Einstein Papers Project.

Neither the Collected Papers of Albert Einstein nor the Einstein Archives
Online is concerned with non-textual material in the strict sense. The Einstein
Papers Project does not edit any audio material unless as transcripts, nor does
it include pictures or images, other than select images for illustrative purposes.
There are no concerns about material witnesses like experimental setups, astro-
graphical plates, or the like. There is, however, a category of textual material
that is of central importance for the edition and that deﬁes to some extent stan-
dard procedures of documentary editing, i.e. Einstein’s research manuscripts.

4The EAD Document Type Deﬁnition (DTD) is a standard for encoding archival ﬁnding
aids using the Standard Generalized Markup Language (SGML) and is maintained in the
Network Development and MARC Standards Oﬃce of the Library of Congress, in partnership
with the Society of American Archivists.

3

2 Einstein’s Scientiﬁc Manuscripts

Albert Einstein (1879–1955) is a household name, a synonym for scientiﬁc cre-
ativity and responsibility. He was honored as “person of the 20th century” by
TIME magazine. In 2005, all over the world numerous conferences, lectures, ex-
hibitions, and other events are being planned for the centennial anniversary of
his “miracle year.” It was in 1905 when Einstein, an unknown technical expert
at the Swiss Federal patent oﬃce in Bern, published, within a few months, a
series of ﬁve papers, each of which had a profound and lasting impact on the
development of twentieth century physics.5 The papers deal with the deter-
mination of molecular dimensions, give an explanation of the phenomenon of
Brownian motion, expound what we now call the Special Theory of Relativity,
including the equivalence of mass and energy captured in the famous equation
E = mc2, and present an explanation of the photoelectric eﬀect by putting for-
ward the light quantum hypothesis. The latter contribution alone later earned
Einstein the Nobel Prize for 1921.

Ten years later, Einstein had risen up through the ranks of academic hi-
erarchy as Privatdozent in Bern, Extraordinary and Full Professor in Zurich
and Prague, and in 1914 had accepted a position without teaching obligations
as member of the Prussian Academy of Science in Berlin.
It was then that
Einstein crowned his earlier scientiﬁc contributions with another conceptual
breakthrough that came after years of strenuous eﬀorts to generalize the special
theory of relativity to include gravitation. The General Theory of Relativity
was completed with the publication of generally covariant ﬁeld equations of
gravitation in late 1915.
It is these equations that even today are the basis
for extensive research, both theoretical and experimental, e.g. with respect to
ﬁnding evidence for gravitational waves.

In addition to his major contributions of 1905 and 1915, Einstein published
numerous papers of signiﬁcant importance in various ﬁelds of physics. These
papers include theoretical investigations into the foundations of kinetic the-
ory, statistical physics and radiation theory, work on the law of photochemical
equivalence, on the speciﬁc heat of solids at low temperatures, on the phe-
nomenon of opalescence, on the so-called Einstein-De Haas experiment to de-
termine the relationship between magnetic moments and moments of inertia, a
number of critical investigations into the foundations of quantum physics, and
some ground-breaking investigations into the consequences of general relativity,
such as gravitational waves, cosmological consequences, equations of motion,
and gravitational lensing. During his later years, Einstein worked intensely
on the problem of ﬁnding a uniﬁed ﬁeld theory of gravitation and electromag-
netism that would also account for the structure of matter and the quantum
phenomena.

Given Einstein’s exceptional signiﬁcance as a highly creative, successful, and
prodcutive scientist, a natural and signiﬁcant interest for an edition of his works
5The papers are reprinted as facsimiles with extensive editorial annotation as Docs. 14,
15, 16, 23, and 24 in [CPAE2]. As an oﬀ-shoot of the editorial project the papers are also
available, in English translation, as [Stachel 1998].

4

arises from the wish to better understand the working and circumstances of
his productivity. His burst of creativity in his miracle year still provides a
major challenge for a historical reconstruction that would in some sense explain
his creativity of this year. Unfortunately any such attempts are hampered by
the scarcity of documentary evidence even after publication of the respective
volumes of the CPAE series [CPAE1, CPAE2, CPAE5]. The situation is much
better for Einstein’s search for a General Theory of Relativity where much more
pertinent documents have survived and are now available. It is in the context of
the attempt to come to a better historical understanding of Einstein’s thinking
that his research manuscripts acquire a special importance.

The term “research manuscript” here refers to a document that was written
in the creative process of thinking about a scientiﬁc problem, mainly for the
purpose of developing one’s own thoughts and of realizing implicit consequences
inherent in a mathematical formalism. The manuscripts are written without
any potential audience or readership in mind, other than the author himself. If
the creative work involves two individuals that are collaborating, the manuscript
may serve for communication between the researchers. A common characteristic
of research manuscripts in Einstein’s case is an abundance of mathematical
formulae without, or with only very few, explicit words.
In most cases, the
manuscripts are not dated, neither explicitly nor indirectly. In many cases, the
calculations are on single sheets of paper but in a few cases they are contained
in bound notebooks.

Research manuscripts are the most immediate written evidence of a creative
process since they are produced without further reﬂection during that process.6
Later stages of writing about a scientiﬁc topic tend to be more organized or
organized diﬀerently, and to the extent that the composer of the manuscript is
aware of his addressing a potential audience, he begins to explicate the tokens
of the abstract formalism and tries to convey the meaning of the mathematical
expressions by linking it with words of natural or scientiﬁc language.

Given the signiﬁcance of the creative process in Einstein’s case, his research
manuscripts carry a unique value for historians of science. At the same time,
they often pose a problem for the explicit rules of editorial procedure laid out
in the editorial method. These problems pertain most importantly to the un-
certainty of dating and to the uncertainty of the coherence and sequence of
calculations.

In the following I will discuss four examples of research manuscripts that
have already been published in the Collected Papers of Albert Einstein and one
example of a batch of research manuscripts that poses a formidable problem for
future volumes of the series.

2.1 Einstein’s Scratch Notebook, 1910–1914?

The ﬁrst Writings volume of the CPAE series covers the years 1902–1909 [CPAE2].
It thus contains his very ﬁrst published papers, all of his famous publications
6For a general perspective on the signiﬁcance of research notes and notebooks for the

history of science, see [Holmes et al. 2003].

5

from his annus mirabilis 1905, as well as all later publications that he wrote
while working at the Patent Oﬃce in Bern. Sadly, no manuscripts from this
period are extant and all documents of this volume are reprinted facsimiles of
his publications.

This situation changes with Volume 3 [CPAE3] which covers the years 1909–
1911 when Einstein accepted his ﬁrst call as an Extraordinary Professor at the
University of Zurich and, a little later, another call as Full Professor at the
German University of Prague. This volume reprints some twenty published
documents but also publishes seven manuscripts. Most of these posed no prob-
lem for the editorial method. Three items are lecture notes that Einstein wrote
in preparation of academic courses which he had to give as a professor in Zurich
and Prague or for a lecture that he gave in Zurich in 1911. Two items are short
manuscripts: one was a written response to a paper by Planck, another one was
a statement written in response to a request by the Berlin autograph collector
Darmstaedter. Another item are handwritten discussion remarks following lec-
tures delivered at the ﬁrst Solvay Congress in late 1911. These manuscripts, in
each case, are perfectly coherent and datable documents.

The one research manuscript included in Volume 3 that did pose a problem
to the editors was eventually printed in the appendix. The editors preface this
appendix by the following comments:

This notebook was probably purchased by Einstein in 1909 when
he began his appointment at the University of Zurich. It bears a
sticker of the Zurich stationer Landolt and Arbenz. The last en-
tries suggest that Einstein did not use the notebook after taking
up a position in Berlin in 1914. The disparate nature and disconti-
nuity of entries (e.g., diagrams, equations, notes on appointments,
references to scientiﬁc literature, and addresses), as well as their
disjointed chronological sequence, argue for preserving unity in the
presentation of this notebook. It is printed here in its entirety in fac-
simile, with accompanying pages of transcription to make it readily
accessible.[CPAE3, p. 563]

The notebook is then presented with facing pages in such a way that the top
half of each page of the volume presents the facsimile of two facing pages of
the Scratch Notebook. Below the facsimile, on the bottom half of each page,
a conformal transcription of the page is given. Following the notebook, the
editors provide a descriptive note and a list of the literature referenced in the
notebook, in the order of appearance.

The context of a few signiﬁcant pages of this scratch notebook that clearly
contain research calculations was identiﬁed some time after its publication in
the CPAE [Renn et al. 1997, Renn and Sauer 2003a]. It was shown that eight
pages of the Scratch Notebook contain calculations that are fully equivalent
to calculations that were only published by Einstein in 1936—some 24 years
later—in a paper on what is now known as gravitational lensing (see Fig. 1).

The diﬀerences amount to mere diﬀerences of mathematical notation, and
the pages could be dated, by reference to neighboring pages and historical con-

6

Figure 1: Einstein’s Scratch Notebook, 1910–1914?, was reproduced as facsim-
ile with accompanying conformal transcription in [CPAE3, App. A]. This page
[CPAE3, p. 585] shows Einstein’s earliest calculations about gravitational lens-
ing. For a high-quality facsimile, see Doc. 3-013, images 23 and 24, of Ein-
stein Archives Online at www.alberteinstein.info. c(cid:13) The Hebrew University of
Jerusalem, Albert Einstein Archives.

7

text, to a week in April 1912. The reconstruction also conﬁrmed a feature that
was evident to readers of the documentary edition only through the descriptive
note. One page of the notebook was a loose page inserted within the bound pages
and was facsimilized together with the pages where it was physically found. It
nevertheless contained a part of the calculation that was independent from the
ﬂow of the calculation in the bound part of the notebook. The phenomenon
of gravitational lensing was ﬁrst observationally conﬁrmed in 1979 and today
presents a highly active ﬁeld of modern astrophysical research.

2.2 Research Notes on a Generalized Theory of Relativity

Volume 4 of the CPAE series covers the writings of the years 1912–1914, up
until Einstein’s move to Berlin in April 1914 [CPAE4]. It is a period in which
Einstein is deeply involved in a search for a generalized theory of relativity and a
theory of gravitation. This search produced two research manuscripts that posed
new problems for the editorial method. One is a bound notebook with research
notes by Einstein, dealing mainly with the theory of gravitation. It is commonly
referred to as the “Zurich Notebook” because it dates from Einstein’s time as a
professor at the ETH Zurich. It documents Einstein’s search for a gravitational
ﬁeld equation from the ﬁrst insight into the signiﬁcance of the metric tensor
in summer 1912 until he settled on a preliminary theory of gravitation that
he published together with his friend and colleague Marcel Grossmann in an
Entwurf, i.e. “Outline” of the theory of spring 1913 (see [CPAE4, Doc. 13]).
The other one is a research manuscript consisting of loose sheets, written partly
by Einstein, partly by his friend and collaborator, Michele Besso, and deals with
the problem of calculating the motion of the perihelion of Mercury on the basis
of the preliminary Entwurf theory of gravitation.

The signiﬁcance of the Zurich Notebook for a detailed understanding of
Einstein’s path towards a general theory of relativity was ﬁrst realized by John
Stachel in the course of preparing the editorial project of the CPAE. It was
then studied by John Norton who based some decisive arguments in his ground-
breaking 1984 account of Einstein’s search for his gravitational ﬁeld equations
on a reconstruction of some pages of this document [Norton 1984]. While the
content of a major portion of this notebook was thus clearly identiﬁed as dealing
with the problem of gravitation and could be related on the basis of content and
idiosyncratic notation quite unambiguously to Einstein’s publications between
summer 1912 and spring 1913, many problems remained. Norton had based his
1984 account only on a reconstruction of a few individual pages of the notebook,
and although some pages in the later part of the notebook could be reconstructed
as coherent calculations that extended over several pages, the majority of the
entries were still unidentiﬁed. Two other problems arose. First, entries were
made in the bound notebook starting at two ends, with one page showing entries
from both sides where the ﬂows of entries met. This fact as well as indications
of later corrections made a determination of the sequence of entries ambiguous
despite the fact that the pages have a natural sequence in the bound notebook.
Second, about a third of the entries in the notebook were apparently not dealing

8

with gravitation but with other problems of statistical physics and radiation
theory. Despite eﬀorts by the editors to reconstruct the meaning of these parts
of the notebook, they remained unidentiﬁed.

The editors of Volume 4 of the series decided to publish only that portion
of the “Zurich Notebook” that deals with gravitation, and only mentioned and
brieﬂy described the other part of the notebook in the descriptive note [CPAE4,
Doc. 10]. The part that deals with gravitation theory was presented in confor-
mal transcription. In order to facilitate access to the manuscript, the document
was prefaced by an editorial note that elaborates on the context and content
of the research notes. In a slight deviation of the general rules of presentation,
explanatory notes to the text were printed as footnotes rather than endnotes.
The annotation is sparce but does provide some information pertaining to a re-
construction of the calculations, reﬂecting the degree of understanding obtained
by the editors at that time.

The signiﬁcance of the Zurich Notebook for the history of science lies in the
fact that it allows for unique insights into a crucial period of Einstein’s path
towards a general theory of relativity [Renn and Sauer 2003b]. The attention
that the notebook received in the course of preparing the pertinent volume of
the Collected Papers triggered a research eﬀort of ﬁve historians of science, all
of them past or present editors of the project.7 The group embarked on a line-
by-line reconstruction of the gravitational parts of the notebook. They found
that it documents Einstein’s growing familiarity with an unknown formalism of
tensor calculus following his insight that the metric tensor would have to play
a crucial role in the formulation of the general theory of relativity. The notes,
in fact, document Einstein’s search for a gravitational ﬁeld equation with the
investigation of a sequence of candidate equations that are being tested against
heuristic requirements. Among other things, it turned out that Einstein in-
vestigated the correct ﬁeld equations of gravitation already in 1912, if only in
linear approximation, but at that time discarded them as unacceptable from a
physical point of view (see Fig. 2). The very same equations were nevertheless
published as the ﬁnal ﬁeld equations of gravitation in November 1915 [CPAE6,
Doc. 25], and this publication marks the breakthrough to the ﬁnal theory of
general relativity, as we still accept it today. The reconstruction of this partic-
ular research notebook thus oﬀers unparalleled insights into the considerations
of a creative scientiﬁc mind that were eventually crowned with remarkable suc-
cess. A two-volume monograph on the genesis of general relativity that gives an
account of Einstein’s search based on a meticulous reconstruction of these notes
is currently being prepared for publication [Renn et al. forthcoming]. It will in-
clude a line-by-line commentary together with a facsimile and transcription of
the complete notebook.

In contrast to Einstein’s early scientiﬁc achievements and especially his spe-
cial theory of relativity, his later path towards a general theory of relativity
is rather well documented by publications, correspondence, as well as research
7See [Renn et al. forthcoming] and, for a preliminary account of results of this research

eﬀort, [Renn and Sauer 1999].

9

Figure 2: Einstein’s so-called “Zurich Notebook” contains research notes on
a relativistic theory of gravitation from the period of ca. August 1912 to
spring 1913. This page shows “gravitational equations” (“Gravitationsgleichun-
gen”) that are equivalent to the linearized form of the gravitational ﬁeld equa-
tions of general relativity published by Einstein in late 1915. For a facsim-
ile of this page, see Doc. 3-006, image 20, on Einstein Archives Online at
http://www.alberteinstein.info; for an annotated transcription, see [CPAE4,
Doc. 10, esp. pp. 247f.] c(cid:13) The Hebrew University of Jerusalem, Albert Einstein
Archives.

10

notes. Among these documents the Zurich Notebook is perhaps the most eluci-
dating but there are more research notes pertinent to this period. Another set
of research manuscript pages that bears testimony to Einstein’s eﬀorts of this
period presented another editorial challenge to the editors of Volume 4 of the
series. It is a document that consists of 51 manuscript pages plus additional text
and calculations that were noted on a letter that Einstein received. This set of
research notes deals with the problem of calculating the perihelion advance of
Mercury on the basis of the Einstein-Grossmann Entwurf-theory of gravitation
of summer 1913.

An anomalous secular advance of Mercury’s perihelion had been well estab-
lished around the turn of the century, and since it could not easily be explained
in the framework of Newtonian gravitation theory, this anomaly presented a
touchstone for any alternative theory of gravitation. After settling on the ﬁeld
equations of his preliminary Entwurf-theory, Einstein set out to compute this
problem together with his friend Michele Besso. The manuscript documents
their collaboration. About half of the pages are written in Einstein’s hand, the
other half in Besso’s hand. The manuscript consists of loose sheets and a de-
termination of the proper sequence of the sheets presented a major problem of
the editorial work. But the coherence of the notes made an almost complete re-
construction of the calculations possible and on the basis of this reconstruction
a likely original sequence of the notes could well be established.

The full manuscript was presented in conformal transcription in Volume 4
[CPAE4, Doc. 14]. As in the case of the Zurich Notebook, the document was
prefaced by an editorial note elaborating speciﬁcally on its context and content,
and the pages were also annotated with footnotes rather than endnotes.
In
contrast to the Zurich Notebook the editors decided to complement the edition
by a full facsimile of the manuscript in an appendix.

Again, this particular research manuscript was subject of intensive historical
research. Its analysis helped explain why Einstein was very quick in computing
the correct value of the perihelion precession two years later on the basis of his
ﬁnal ﬁeld equations [Earman and Janssen 1993]. This question is an important
aspect of the history of general relativity, since the successful explanation of the
Mercury perihelion anomaly sealed Einstein’s breakthrough to general relativ-
ity in November 1915 and played an important role in convincing the physics
community to accept the general theory of relativity.

No serious editorial challenges of this caliber were encountered for the other
two Writings volumes that have already been published. Both volumes 6 and
7 also diﬀer from earlier Writings volumes in that they present unpublished
manuscripts by Einstein that are of a non-scientiﬁc nature, e.g. political state-
ments. In addition to Einstein’s published papers, both volumes contain lecture
notes, draft manuscripts intended for publications, and expert opinions. Volume
7 presents some small research manuscripts in an appendix [CPAE7, App. A]
and [CPAE7, App. B]. Here ﬁve pages of calculations and graphical integration
are reproduced in facsimile without further commentary, since they are clearly
related to a published paper that is reprinted in the volume (Doc. 56). The
ﬁve pages are identiﬁed as coming from diﬀerent sources and are presented as

11

Figure 3: Calculations on the verso of a letter by Anton Lampa to Einstein,
1 February 1920 [CPAE9, Doc. 291]. Due to their disparate and disconnected
nature these notes were only described in the descriptive note to the edited
document. c(cid:13) The Hebrew University of Jerusalem, Albert Einstein Archives.

one document on the basis of their contentual relation to the published pa-
per. The other manuscript appendix is a transcription of the ﬁrst part of an
autograph manuscript by Einstein’s collaborator Wander J. de Haas that de
Haas attributes to Einstein as author together with a transcription of a page of
calculations for this part in Einstein’s hand.

2.3 “Back-of-the-Envelope calculations”

Another category of research manuscripts that are encountered frequently in the
Einstein Papers are small pieces of calculations or notes scribbled on the verso
of letters, on the back of envelopes, etc. To the extent that these notes can be
identiﬁed as being related to the main document they are either included in the
edited text or transcribed, described, or discussed at the appropriate places in
the annotation. In many cases, however, the notes defy a clear identiﬁcation
other than that they do not show any apparent relation to the main document.
These research notes pose a problem particularly for the Correspondence vol-
umes.

An example is given in Fig. 3. The calculations are found on the verso of

12

a letter by Anton Lampa, formerly a colleague of Einstein’s as professor at the
German University of Prague, who had recently accepted a position as Director
of Public Education at the School Department in Vienna. The letter discusses
a matter of appointment policy for a vacant chair in Vienna. The calculations
on the back are only mentioned in the descriptive note which reads:

On the verso of the document, Einstein calculated expressions in-
volving quantum numbers n1 = n and n2 = n + 1 for a few values
of n, possibly related to Bjerrum’s explanation of rotational spectra
(see Doc. 335 and its note 9). [CPAE9, p. 397].

The calculations are too short to be identiﬁed unambiguously and they are
too short to be published separately either as a document of its own or in an
appendix. But the cross reference to another document in the volume indicates
that the editors saw a possible connection to a scientiﬁc problem that plays a
role elsewhere in Einstein’s correspondence. Clearly such description of material
that is omitted from the edition represents a compromise between the wish to
present as complete an edition as possible and to present only documents that
have been identiﬁed with respect to content and dating. It remains a judgment
call for the editors to decide on the level of detail to use in describing this
material.

2.4 The Berlin and Princeton Manuscripts on Uniﬁed Field

Theory

Presumably, many research manuscripts extant in the Einstein Archives will
pose no signiﬁcant new problems from an editorial point of view, exciting and
illuminating as they might be for their content. There is, however, a signiﬁ-
cant amount of material that does represent a challenge for the editors of future
volumes of the CPAE series: a batch of some 1750 manuscript pages with cal-
culations dealing mostly with Einstein’s search for a uniﬁed theory. Einstein
began thinking about the problem of a uniﬁed ﬁeld theory of gravitation and
electromagnetism soon after the completion of the general theory of relativity,
and his ﬁrst publications on this topic date from 1919. The problem remained
on his mind through the next three-and-a-half decades until his death in 1955
[Sauer 2004]. Some ﬁfty publications from this period attest to his sustained
interest in this problem.

The manuscript pages are not part of the original Dukas collection. Ac-
cording to anecdotal information, the batch of manuscript pages, surprisingly,
turned up behind a ﬁling cabinet when the archival oﬃces used by the late
Helen Dukas at the Institute for Advanced Study in Princeton were cleared up
in preparation of sending the Einstein Estate to Jerusalem. The batch was
then added to the Einstein Archives and, after shipping to Jerusalem, it was
microﬁlmed into reels 62 and 63 and accordingly accessioned under archival call
numbers 62-001 through 63-416.

The manuscripts are undated pages, for the most part single sheets; see
Fig. 4 for an example. From the later years (reel 63), the paper of these sheets

13

appear to have been taken from loosely bound typewriter paper tablets, many
of them of the same kind. Some of the sheets were bound together by means
of paper clips.
In some rare cases, the versos of letters or other paper was
used. The manuscripts almost exclusively contain research calculations. They
were made for Einstein’s own use, i.e. they very rarely contain explanatory
remarks about the context or meaning of the calculations. In some rare cases,
more elaborate parts of drafts of manuscripts are found in the set. Some pages
contain calculations and comments that are not in Einstein’s hand.

The material poses a problem for the editorial project speciﬁcally in all of
the aspects discussed so far, i.e. dating, coherence, and chronological as well
as logical sequence of the pages. Two aspects of the material add to its being
an editorial challenge. For one, the sheer amount of the material precludes
any detailed or in-depth analysis without some global assessment of what is
to be expected. Second, in contrast to Einstein’s manuscripts from his earlier
years, these manuscript do not document a productive creativity that eventually
led to a successful theory. Hence, to this date historical interest in Einstein’s
investigations into a uniﬁed ﬁeld theory has been rather limited, some important
exceptions notwithstanding.8

With respect to dating, a superﬁcial survey of the material showed at least
one example where calculations were found on an envelope that carries a post-
stamp of 1919 (Call Nos. 62-052 and 62-053). Since this implies a terminus a
quo that would perhaps render some of the material relevant for volumes of the
CPAE series that are presently under preparation, a more detailed investigation
of the whole set of pages was called for.

In order to better be able to deal with the material, copies extant in the
duplicate Archives at the Einstein Papers Project were scanned in as images of
low-resolution black-and-white quality. The pages were then looked at individ-
ually using the scanned version, and a multipurpose database application was
used to establish a page-by-page catalog of the manuscript pages. The informa-
tion recorded in this database pertained primarily to any legible word or phrase
that could be deciphered on the page. In the example of the page reproduced
in Fig. 4, the only legible phrase in this sense is in the fourth line and reads:
“nur von $x 1$ abh.” The mathematical formulae and variables were generally
completely ignored. In some cases, where it seemed useful to also enter a mathe-
matical expression or formula, that expression or formula was transcribed using
standard LaTeX-markup.9 Any obvious pecularities of the manuscript pages,
such as speciﬁcs of the paper or ink, or entries in a diﬀerent hand, etc. were
also added to the records. Most importantly, any information that is relevant
for dating a particular page was noted. Such information comes from the use
of dated sheets of paper, e.g. verso of letters or draft of letters or use of hotel
8For references to secondary literature on the history of uniﬁed ﬁeld theory,

see

[Goenner 2004] and [Sauer 2004].

9The LaTeX-transcription provides a representational description not a contentual one.
It also does not allow, in general, to search for speciﬁc mathematical expressions since the
same mathematical expression can be represented in several ways using LaTeX-markup. As
a simple example, the LaTeX-markups $x 1$ and $x {1}$ are representationally equivalent.

14

Figure 4: A page of Einstein’s research notes on uniﬁed ﬁeld theory (Call Nr. 62-
007). This particular page can be identiﬁed as being related to a publication
from 1929. There are more than 1700 undated pages of this kind in the Einstein
Archives. This batch of research manuscripts presents a major challenge for
future volumes of the Collected Papers of Albert Einstein.
c(cid:13) The Hebrew
University of Jerusalem, Albert Einstein Archives.

15

stationery; from an unambiguous identiﬁcation of content of the material; from
the appearance of a diﬀerent handwriting or the mention of a collaborator of
Einstein’s; from the mention of identiﬁcation of speciﬁc literature; and similar
hints.

The descriptive database of the set of manuscript pages in conjunction with
scanned images of the manuscript pages represents a working tool for further
analysis of the manuscripts. Thus, unidentiﬁed copies of certain manuscript
pages extant in the supplementary archives could in part be identiﬁed with
known ones by searching for the legible word or phrase content. Also, generic
concordance tools of computational linguistics are applicable to create word
indices for the manuscript pages. Despite the preliminary character of the
database, some facts about the manuscript pages could already be established.
Putting together a survey of all dated or datable pages, it appears highly
likely that none of the material dates any earlier than 1928. This is probably
also true for the single instance of Call No 62-052 which remains undated but
may well be much later than the post stamp of 1919. A very strong indication
for taking 1928 as the earliest date for the whole manuscript set is given by
the fact that, in general, independent hints for dating of diﬀerent pages tend to
corroborate each other for pages that are close in the sequence of sheets, and
all those hints point to dates later than 1928. It also seems that the sequence
of sheets in which they are preserved roughly reﬂects a chronological order,
although exceptions are very well posible and in some cases even likely. Hence,
the manuscript pages are removed from the immediate concerns of the editors
of the CPAE series. Nevertheless, they continue to represent a major editorial
challenge for future volumes.

3 Concluding Remarks

In order to be published as an individual document in a Writings volumes
of the CPAE series, research manuscripts need to meet at least two criteria.
They need to be dated with suﬃcient accuracy and they need to be suﬃciently
coherent so as to be identiﬁed as one document.
In the case of the Scratch
Notebook, 1910–1914?, the coherence was primarily suggested by the fact that
the notes were entered in a physically bound notebook. But neither could the
notes be dated accurately, nor could a unity of content be established. Hence,
the notebook was reproduced in its entirety in an appendix.
In the case of
the Zurich Notebook, only a part of the entries in the bound notebook could be
identiﬁed as a suﬃciently coherent and datable set of research notes, and that set
of pages was included as an edited document. The Einstein-Besso manuscript
could be dated and identiﬁed as a coherent set of notes through a reconstruction
of its content. Many small “back-of-the-envelope” calculations cannot be edited
as texts because their meaning and signﬁcance cannot be identiﬁed. Since they
are part of another document, they are in many instances at least described in
the descriptive note of the respective document.

With our present understanding of Einstein’s Berlin and Princeton research

16

manuscripts on uniﬁed ﬁeld theory, a considerable amount of scientiﬁc manuscripts
left by Einstein deﬁes the procedures of the documentary edition of the CPAE.
Neither can we already date the material with suﬃcient accuracy, nor do we
have a suﬃcient understanding of their coherence and of their chronological or
logical sequence.

Does the launch of the Einstein Archives Online website change the situa-
tion by providing other ways of publishing important documents? High-quality
images of both the Scratch Notebook as well as of the full Zurich Notebook are,
in fact, now available online. The Einstein-Besso manuscript, however, is not
included on the present website, since the original is not part of the holdings of
the Albert Einstein Archives.10 And none of the small “back-of-an-envelope”
calculations are presently available on the site since it does not include any
correspondence. It would indeed be a natural expansion of the present website
to include at least facsimiles of those letters that are not included in the re-
spective Correspondence volumes. It is also conceivable that facsimile images of
Einstein’s Berlin and Princeton manuscripts might be added to the document
content of the Einstein Archives Online website before it is published in the
documentary series.

Nevertheless, a mere publication of the manuscript images online does not
represent a proper documentary editing of this important manuscript material.
The database content that goes with the facsimiles of the documents on the
website is far less explicative and not as reliable as the carefully established
information in the documentary edition. More importantly, no transcription,
no translation, and none of the editorial apparatus of the documentary edition
is included. I hope to have shown that a successful response to the editorial
challenge posed by Einstein’s research material goes hand in hand with a schol-
arly investigation into its content and context. Only by trying to understand
the content and context of the manuscript will we be able to satisfactorily edit
those manuscripts, be it in conventional large book format or electronically. We
may also hope to get further exciting insights into the workings of a highly
creative mind.

References

[Bailey 1989] Bailey, Herbert Smith, Jr. “On the Collected Papers of Albert
Einstein: The Development of the Project.” Proceedings of the American
Philosophical Society, 133 (1989), 348–359.

[Buchwald 2004] Buchwald, Diana. “A Half-Century of the Albert Einstein Pa-

pers Project.” Annotation 32.1 (March 2004), pp. 14–15.

[CPAE1] The Collected Papers of Albert Einstein. Vol. 1: The Early Years,
1879–1902. Stachel, John, Cassidy, David C., and Schulmann, Robert
(eds.), Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1987.

10The manuscript is in private possession. It was auctioned through Christies in October

2002.

17

[CPAE2] The Collected Papers of Albert Einstein. Vol. 2: The Swiss Years:
Writings, 1900–1909. Stachel, John, Cassidy, David C., and Schulmann,
Robert (eds.), Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1989.

[CPAE3] The Collected Papers of Albert Einstein. Vol. 3: The Swiss Years:
Writings, 1909–1911. Klein, Martin J., Kox, A.J., Renn, J¨urgen, and Schul-
mann, Robert (eds.), Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1993.

[CPAE4] The Collected Papers of Albert Einstein. Vol. 4: The Swiss Years:
Writings, 1912–1914. Klein, Martin J., Kox, A.J., Renn, J¨urgen, and Schul-
mann, Robert (eds.), Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1995.

[CPAE5] The Collected Papers of Albert Einstein. Vol. 5: The Swiss Years:
Correspondence, 1902–1914. Klein, Martin J., Kox, A.J., and Schulmann,
Robert (eds.), Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1993.

[CPAE6] The Collected Papers of Albert Einstein. Vol. 6: The Berlin Years:
Writings, 1914–1917. Klein, Martin J., Kox, A.J., and Schulmann, Robert
(eds.), Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1996.

[CPAE7] The Collected Papers of Albert Einstein. Vol. 7: The Berlin Years:
Writings, 1918–1921. ‘ Janssen, Michel, Schulmann, Robert, Illy, J´oszef,
Lehner, Christoph, Buchwald, Diana Kormos (eds.), Princeton: Princeton
University Press, 1998.

[CPAE8] The Collected Papers of Albert Einstein. Vol. 8: The Berlin Years:
Correspondence, 1914–1918. Schulmann, Robert, Kox, A.J., Janssen,
Michel, Illy, J´oszef(eds.), Princeton: Princeton University Press, 2002.

[CPAE9] The Collected Papers of Albert Einstein. Vol. 9: The Berlin Years:
Correspondence, January 1919–April 1920. Buchwald, Diana Kormos,
Schulmann, Robert, Illy, J´oszef, Kenneﬁck, Daniel J., and Sauer, Tilman
(eds.), Princeton: Princeton University Press, 2004.

[Earman and Janssen 1993] Earman, John, and Janssen, Michel. “Einstein’s
Explanation of the Motion of Mercury’s Perihelion.” In: The Attraction
of Gravitation: New Studies in the History of General Relativity, Earman,
John, Janssen, Michel, and Norton, John D. (eds.), Boston, Basel, Berlin:
Birkh¨auser, 1993 (Einstein Studies 5), pp. 129–172.

[Goenner 2004] Goenner, Hubert. “On the History of Uniﬁed Field Theories.”
Living Reviews in Relativity 7(2004), no. 2. [Online article]: cited 13 Febru-
ary 2004, http://www.livingreviews.org/lrr-2004-2.

[Holmes et al. 2003] Holmes, Frederic L., Renn, J¨urgen, Rheinberger, Hans-
J¨org (eds.), Reworking the Bench. Research Notebooks in the History of
Science, Dordrecht, Boston, London: Kluwer 2003 (Archimedes, Vol. 7).

[Norton 1984] Norton, John D. “How Einstein Found His Field Equations,
1912–1915.” Historical Studies in the Physical Sciences 14(1984), 253–316.

18

[Renn et al. 1997] Renn, J¨urgen, Sauer, Tilman, and Stachel, John. “The Ori-
gin of Gravitational Lensing. A Postscript to Einstein’s 1936 Science pa-
per.” Science 275 (1997), 184–186.

[Renn et al. forthcoming] Renn, J¨urgen, Sauer, Tilman, Janssen, Michel, Nor-
ton, John, Stachel, John. The Genesis of General Relativity Dordrecht,
Boston, London: Kluwer, forthcoming.

[Renn and Sauer 1999] Renn, J¨urgen, and Sauer, Tilman. “Heuristics and
Mathematical Representation in Einstein’s Search for a Gravitational Field
Equation.” In: The Expanding Worlds of General Relativity, Goenner, Hu-
bert, Renn, J¨urgen, Ritter, Jim, and Sauer, tilman (eds.), Boston, Basel,
Berlin: Birkh¨auser, 1999 (Einstein Studies 7), pp. 87–125.

[Renn and Sauer 2003a] Renn, J¨urgen, and Sauer, Tilman. “Eclipses of the
Stars. Mandl, Einstein, and the Early History of Gravitational Lensing.”
In: Revisiting the Foudations of Relativistic Physics. Festschrift in Honor
of John Stachel, Ashtekar, Abhay, et al. (eds.), Dordrecht, Boston, London:
Kluwer, 2003, (Boston Studies in the Philosophy of Science 234), pp.69–92.

[Renn and Sauer 2003b] Renn, J¨urgen, and Sauer, Tilman. “Errors and In-
sights: Reconstructing the Genesis of General Relativity from Einstein’s
Zurich Notebook.” In: [Holmes et al. 2003, pp. 253–268].

[Sauer 2004] Sauer, Tilman. “Einstein’s Uniﬁed Field Theory Program.” To
appear in: The Cambridge Companion to Einstein, Janssen, M. and Lehner,
C. (eds.), Cambridge, Cambridge University Press, forthcoming.

[Stachel 1987] Stachel, John. “ ‘A Man of My Type’—Editing the Einstein Pa-
pers.” British Journal for the History of Science 20(1987), 57–66, revised
version reprinted in: Stachel, John. Einstein from ‘B’ to ‘Z’, Boston, Basel,
Berlin: Birkh¨auser, 2002, 97–111.

[Stachel 1998] Stachel John (ed.). Einstein’s Miraculous Year. Five Papers that
Changed the Face of Physics. Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1998.

19

