Arago (1810): the ﬁrst experimental result against the ether

Rafael Ferraro∗

Instituto de Astronom´ıa y F´ısica del Espacio,

Casilla de Correo 67, Sucursal 28, 1428 Buenos Aires, Argentina

and Departamento de F´ısica, Facultad de Ciencias Exactas y Naturales,

Universidad de Buenos Aires, Ciudad Universitaria,

Pabell´on I, 1428 Buenos Aires, Argentina

Daniel M. Sforza†

Laboratory of Neuro Imaging, Department of Neurology,

David Geﬀen School of Medicine, UCLA,

710 Westwood Plaza, Los Angeles, CA 90095-1769, USA

95 years before Special Relativity was born, Arago attempted to detect the abso-

lute motion of the Earth by measuring the deﬂection of starlight passing through a

prism ﬁxed to the Earth. The null result of this experiment gave rise to the Fresnel’s

hypothesis of an ether partly dragged by a moving substance.

In the context of

Einstein’s Relativity, the sole frame which is privileged in Arago’s experiment is the

proper frame of the prism, and the null result only says that Snell’s law is valid in

that frame. We revisit the history of this premature ﬁrst evidence against the ether

theory and calculate the Fresnel’s dragging coeﬃcient by applying the Huygens’ con-

struction in the frame of the prism. We expose the dissimilar treatment received by

the ray and the wave front as an unavoidable consequence of the classical notions of

space and time.

4
0
0
2
 
c
e
D
 
9
 
 
]
h
p
-
t
s
i
h
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
5
5
0
2
1
4
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

I.

INTRODUCTION

Einstein once declared that the Fizeau measurements on the speed of light in moving

water “were enough” for experimentally supporting the relativistic notions of space and

time.1 To understand the meaning of this statement, it should be remembered that before

2

Einstein’s work the lumiferous ether was the supposed material substrate where the luminous

perturbation propagates. At ﬁrst, scientists believed that the ether was not modiﬁed by a

moving body, but it pervaded all the bodies remaining itself immutable. This property,

together with its universality, lent the ether the status of absolute frame (in the newtonian

sense). However, in 1818, Augustin Jean Fresnel (1788-1827)2 stated that the ether inside

a substance is partly dragged when the substance moves with respect to the (exterior)

universal ether. For a transparent substance moving with “absolute” velocity V , the ether

in the substance moves with “absolute” velocity (1 − n−2) V , where n is the refraction index

of the substance. The dragging was “measured” in moving water by Fizeau (1851)3 and

Michelson and Morley (1886).4,5 Special Relativity abolished the concept of ether in 1905,

and these speed measurements are no longer explained as the result of partial dragging but

as a relativistic composition of velocities. This is the reason for Einstein’s assertion.

The partial dragging of ether is mentioned in the textbooks in connection with the ex-

periments performed by Hoek (1868)6 and Airy (1871)7. These experiments integrate the

series of attempts to detect the absolute motion of the Earth, which culminated with the

crucial Michelson-Morley experiment of 18878 and its repetitions9. Diﬀering from Michelson-

Morley’s array, Hoek and Airy forced the light to pass by water to succeed in getting a device

which was sensible to the ﬁrst order in V /c. Since Hoek and Airy did not detect any mo-

tion, the pre-relativistic Physics justiﬁed the null result by resorting to the Fresnel partial

dragging of ether. In fact, when the dragging enters into the scene, the eﬀects of ﬁrst order

in V /c cancel out and the expected results turn out to be of a larger order. Thus the abso-

lute motion of the Earth could be undetectable due to the inaccuracy of the experimental

devices. This argument helped to keep ether theories sustainable for a time.

It would be completely remarkable that a property of the ether conceived by Fresnel in

1818 could play, 50 years later, a so important role in supporting the ether theory. However

it should be said that, far from being visionary, Fresnel’s hypothesis was formulated to

explain an already existent null result obtained by Arago in 181010 (for a historical analysis

of Fresnel’s ether dragging theory see Ref. 11). Dominique Fran¸cois Jean Arago (1786-1853)

was a pioneer of the experiments that searched for diﬀerences in the speed of light. Arago

considered that light coming from diﬀerent sources would have diﬀerent velocities. In the

framework of the corpuscular model, on which Arago based his arguments and experiments,

these diﬀerences could be due to diverse reasons: the velocity of the source could inﬂuence

3

the speed of the emitted light (emission theories), the speed of starlight could be aﬀected

by the gravitational ﬁeld of the star, etc. Arago remarked that Bradley aberration12 was

not adequate to detect diﬀerences of speed in starlight (a diﬀerence of 1/20 would produce

a change of 1” in the aberration angle, which was inaccessible to the instruments of that

time).

Instead, Arago noted that such diﬀerences could be registered by measuring the

deﬂection of starlight by a prism: “...by remembering that the deviation experienced by

the luminous rays when they obliquely penetrate the diaphanous bodies is a determined

function of their original velocity, it can be understood that the observation of the total

deviation to which they are subjected when they go through a prism, provides a natural

measure of their velocities”.13 Arago did not succeed in detecting diﬀerent speeds of light,

but he soon realized that the method could be applied to make evident the motion of the

Earth: “...when the refractive bodies are in motion, the refraction experienced by a ray

should not be calculated with its absolute velocity, but with this same velocity increased or

diminished by the one of the body, i.e. with the relative velocity of the ray.

... I devoted

myself, in my experiments, to become evident the diﬀerences that have to result from the

orbital motion of the Earth...”.13 The absolute motion referred to by Arago in the former

sentences is the motion in the newtonian absolute space; Arago does not mention the ether

in his work because it has no place in the corpuscular model.

Arago’s experiment was unable to exhibit the motion of the Earth, and Fresnel elaborated

an hypothesis to explain this null result in the context of the wave theory of light with an

elastic ether. Given the historic importance of Arago’s experiment as the ﬁrst attempt to

detect the absolute motion of the Earth and the trigger for the Fresnel hypothesis, the lack

of references to Arago’s work in the textbooks is intriguing , where only tangential mentions

can be found.14 To repair this appreciable oblivion, we describe Arago’s experiment and its

results in Section II. Section III is devoted to revisit the Fresnel hypothesis. In Section IV,

we show how the Fresnel partial dragging of ether can explain the null result of Arago’s

experiment. We do not follow here the demonstration given by Fresnel, who analyzes the

deviation in the frame of the universal ether by computing the time of traveling of the rays.

Instead we propose to study the envelope of the (anisotropic) secondary wave fronts in the

frame of the prism. In this way, we expose the unacceptable dissimilar treatment received

by the ray and the wave front, otherwise hidden in Fresnel’s original deduction.

II. ARAGO’S EXPERIMENT

4

As was already mentioned, Arago thought that the refraction of a light ray by a prism

depended on the velocity of the prism. Speciﬁcally, Arago stated that only the velocity of

light relative to the prism should enter the refraction law. Thus, since the prism moves

together with the Earth, a starlight ray would suﬀer diﬀerent deviations depending on the

direction of the ray with respect to the motion of the Earth. These diﬀerences would turn out

to be maximal between rays traveling in the same direction as the Earth and rays traveling

in the opposite direction.

Arago mounted an achromatic prism on the objective lens of a telescope, and he observed

several stars through the prism. By comparing this apparent position with the real position

of each star, Arago determined how the prism deviated the light rays coming from each star.

He expected diﬀerent angles of deviation for diﬀerent stars. However, Arago declared: “the

rays of all stars are subjected to the same deviations; the slight diﬀerences found do not

follow any law”.13

Arago made the measurements in two diﬀerent times of the year. On March 19 and March

27, he utilized a prism of 24◦ and a mural telescope to measure the distances from the stars

up to the zenith. On October 8, Arago used a larger prism to cover a half of the objective

lens of an improved telescope (namely a repeating circle), which permitted more precise

measurements. In this way, the telescope could receive the starlight directly from the star or

previously deviated by the prism (the angle between these two diﬀerent directions, corrected

by the time elapsed between both measurements, was the deviation angle). The results are

reproduced in Tables I, II and III (the measurements are displayed in the way Arago did

it; besides we added the approximated times when the stars passed by the Paris meridian

to help in locating the stars in the sky, as Fig. 1 shows). The motion of the earth around

the Sun (30 km/s) was enough to generate meaningful diﬀerences in the deviation angle of

stars passing the meridian at 6.00 a.m. and stars passing it at 6.00 p.m. In the ﬁrst case,

the starlight is opposite to the motion of the Earth; in the second one, the starlight goes in

the same direction than the Earth. For these two extreme cases, Arago expected diﬀerences

of 12” with the prism of 24◦ used in March, and 28” in the measurements performed in

October. However, there were no traces of any composition of motion entering Snell’s law

in the results obtained by Arago.

5

Arago convinced himself that the only possible interpretation of his null result, in the

context of the corpuscular model, was that the sources emit light with all sort of velocities.

But our eyes are only sensitive to a narrow band of them. Thus, we are always detecting

the same kind of corpuscles, and no diﬀerences can be found in their refraction. Concerning

the wave theory of light, Arago said that “the explanation for the refraction in this theory

is based on a simple hypothesis that is very diﬃcult to submit to calculation. Therefore,

I cannot determine in a precise way whether the velocity of the refractive body has some

inﬂuence on the refraction...”13

III. FRESNEL’S HYPOTHESIS

In 1818, Fresnel published a letter addressed to Arago,2 where he discusses the interaction

between the ether and the bodies. To begin with, Fresnel mentions that Arago’s null result

could be easily understood in the context of the wave theory of light by accepting that the

Earth imparts its motion to the surrounding ether.

In that case, the prism would be at

rest in the local ether, and no diﬀerences of velocities would appear (the speed of light is a

property of the ether). However, in spite of its simplicity, this hypothesis would hinder the

understanding of the starlight aberration: “So far I could not conceive this phenomenon [the

starlight aberration], apart from supposing that the ether freely passes through the globe,

and that the velocity imparted to this subtle ﬂuid is nothing but a small part of the one

of the Earth, which does not exceed the hundredth for example.”15,16 Although the Earth

should be pervaded by an ether ﬂow, Fresnel says that light, which is an ether vibration,

does not propagate inside the Earth due to an interference of secondary waves. Concerning

the transparent media, Fresnel says: “it is evident that the placing of water among the

particles, which favors the propagation of luminous vibrations, must be a little obstacle

to the establishment of an ether ﬂow.”15 So, Fresnel thought that the way the ether ﬂows

through a body depends on the properties of the body.

In contrast to the corpuscular model, Snell’s law implies for the wave theory of light that,

the bigger the refractive index of a transparent substance, the slower the light propagates in

its interior.19 Fresnel considered the ether as an elastic material. It is well known that the

velocity of waves propagating in an elastic material is proportional to ρ−1/2, where ρ is the

density of the material (the ether, in our case). This means that the density of the ether

6

should be bigger in water or glass than in air. At this point, Fresnel’s hypothesis about the

dragging of ether enters the scene: “only a part of this medium [the interior ether] is dragged

by our globe, those constituting the excess of its density with respect to the environmental

ether.” “... when only a part of the medium moves, the velocity of propagation of the waves

should be increased just by the velocity of the center of gravity of the system.”15 Since the

Earth does not appreciably drag the ether, there is not excess of ether inside the globe.

Instead, the ether is in excess inside the prism, as revealed by the lower speed of light in the

substance. The excess of ether in the prism is completely dragged when the prism moves.

Only the velocity of the center of gravity of the system “environmental ether - excess of

ether” is imparted to the speed of light in the prism. Let ρ′ be the density of ether inside

the prism, and ρ the density of the environmental ether. Thus the excess of ether is ρ′ − ρ.

If V is the velocity of the prism relative to the environmental ether (absolute velocity of the

prism), then the speed of the center of gravity of the system “environmental ether - excess of

ether” is (ρ′ − ρ) V /ρ′ (the excess of ether is completely dragged). This motion is imparted

to the light traveling inside the prism:

vdrag =

1 −

(cid:18)

ρ
ρ′ (cid:19)

V =

1 − n−2

V,

(cid:0)

(cid:1)

(1)

the last member being a consequence of the relation between density of the elastic ether and

velocity of propagation of the waves. The coeﬃcient 1 − n−2, where n is the refractive index

of the transparent substance, is the so called Fresnel dragging coeﬃcient.

IV. RECOVERING SNELL’S LAW IN THE FRAME OF THE PRISM

Independently on the way of conceiving the partial dragging of ether, the only tangible

eﬀect of the dragging is the restoration of Snell’s law in the proper frame of the prism. In

this Section, we will show how the restoration works. Our treatment will diﬀer from the one

followed by Fresnel. Whereas Fresnel studied ray paths in the frame of the environmental

ether (where the prism moves), we instead will use the Huygens’ construction in the proper

frame of the prism. Although the calculation will follow the precepts of classical Physics, for

later discussions we want to control rays and wave fronts in the sole frame that is regarded

as privileged in Special Relativity. Like Fresnel, we will concentrate on the simplest case

where the incident wave normally strikes the face of the prism and the velocity of the prism

V is parallel to this incident direction. In this way the ﬁrst face does not play any role.

If the ether were not dragged by the prism, the speed of light inside the prism would be

c/n in the frame of the ether and c/n − V in the frame of the prism (Galilean composition

of velocities). However if the prism partly drags the ether, then the respective velocities

change to c/n + f V and c/n − V + f V, where f < 1 is a coeﬃcient that quantiﬁes the

magnitude of the dragging. According to the Huygens’ construction, when the plane wave

front traveling inside the prism reaches the second face, each point of this face becomes a

secondary emitter. The emerging front wave is given by the envelope of the secondary wave

fronts, and the rays go from the secondary emitters to the points where the envelope touch

the secondary wave fronts (see Fig. 2). Like Fresnel, we will demand the restoration of

Snell’s law at the lowest order in V /c. For this, we must choose f in such a way that the

ray direction does not depend on V at that order. We expect to ﬁnd f = 1 − n−2.

In order to compute the envelope, we should pay attention to the fact that secondary

wave fronts are not spheres in the frame of the prism. This is due to the ether wind that

generates an anisotropy in the wave propagation. Concretely, if k · r − ω t is the invariant

phase of a wave in the frame of the ether, then, by Galileo transforming the coordinates to

a frame moving with velocity V, we obtain:

k · r − ω t = |k| (ˆn · r − c t) = |k| (ˆn · (r′ + Vt) − c t) = |k| (ˆn · r′ − (c − ˆn · V)t) , (2)

where ˆn is the direction of propagation. So the phase velocity in a frame moving with

velocity V relative to the ether is

This means that a wave front emitted by a point-like source at the coordinate origin is

not a sphere in a frame which moves with (absolute) velocity V, but is described by the

parametric equations (see Fig. 2)

v′

phase = c − ˆn · V .

x(δ) = cos δ (c − V cos δ) t

y(δ) = sin δ (c − V cos δ) t

7

(3)

(4)

where V = V ˆx, and ˆn = cos δ ˆx + sin δ ˆy.

Fig. 2 shows plane wave fronts traveling through the transparent substance with velocity

c/n − (1 − f ) V . When a plane front arrives at O, this point becomes an emitter of a

8

(7)

(8)

secondary wave front. After a lapse t, the same plane front arrives at E; in the meantime,

the secondary wave front emitted at O has evolved according to Eq. (4). The envelope ER

is not orthogonal to the ray OR. Actually the emerging rays are orthogonal to the envelope

only in the frame of the ether. Instead, in a moving frame the rays suﬀer aberration. The

deviation angle δ is the value of the parameter of Eq.(4) such that the straight line passing

by E touches one and only one point of each secondary wave front. In general a straight line

passing by E satisﬁes the equation

y = m (x − d) + L = m x + d (

− m)

(5)

1
tan γ

where m is some slope for the straight line. By replacing d = (c/n − (1 − f ) V ) t and x,

y by the values given in Eq. (4), one obtains an equation for δ(m) telling the values of the

parameter δ for which the straight line passing by E intersects the secondary wave front

emitted from O. This equation is

sin δ (c − V cos δ) = m cos δ (c − V cos δ) + (

− (1 − f ) V ) (

− m)

(6)

c
n

1
tan γ

Since the envelope is tangent to the wave front, we will look for the maximum value of m

which makes sense in the Eq. (6). By regarding m as a function of δ, the solution is δ

such that dm/dδ = 0. Thus, once Eq. (6) was derivated with respect to δ, one replaces

dm/dδ = 0 to get

c cos δ − V cos2 δ + V sin2 δ = −m c sin δ + 2 m V sin δ cos δ

By keeping only terms which are linear in V /c, the slope of the envelope turns out to be

m ≃ −

(cos δ +

1
sin δ

V
c

)

where now δ is the direction of the light ray OR. The so obtained value of m can be replaced

in Eq. (6) to calculate the direction δ as a function of the absolute velocity of the substance

V and the dragging coeﬃcient f . Again we will keep only the terms that are linear in V /c.

After a bit of algebra, the direction δ of the emerging light ray results

1
sin δ

1
n

(1 −

cos δ) −

1
n tan γ

≃

1
n sin δ

(cid:20)

− (1 − f )

1
tan γ

(cid:18)

+

cos δ
sin δ (cid:19)(cid:21)

V
c

(9)

Therefore the direction of the emerging ray is not sensitive to the ﬁrst order in V /c –the

requirement to explain the null result of the Arago’s experiment– when

1
n sin δ

− (1 − f )

1
tan γ

(cid:18)

+

cos δ
sin δ (cid:19)

= 0

(10)

In this case, the direction of the emerging ray fulﬁlls

1
sin δ

1
n

(1 −

cos δ) −

1
n tan γ

≃ 0

i.e., sin(γ + δ) = n sin γ, as it is easily obtained from Snell’s law. From the last two

equations, we get the Fresnel’s dragging coeﬃcient f = 1 − n−2.

9

(11)

V. CONCLUSIONS

Fresnel’s success in explaining Arago’s null results had very important consequences.

In the ﬁrst place, the dominant corpuscular light theory suﬀered a setback. Arago’s null

results could not be reasonably understood in the context of the corpuscular model. Thus,

the less accepted wave theory of light promoted by Fresnel acquired relevance. The ether

dragging theory was an important step to impose the new framework, which became even

more accepted after Fresnel’s mathematical description of diﬀraction a few years later (these

facts made Arago himself to start supporting the wave theory of light). However the ether

theory was not free of problems (for instance, since the refraction indexes of the substances

vary with frequency, Fresnel’s model would require a diﬀerent ether for each frequency, which

seems implausible), which were eventually solved with its abolition by Special Relativity.

Second, the predominance of the wave theory of light put the relationship of ether-absolute

motion on the center of the scene.

In Fresnel’s wave theory, there is a privileged reference frame (the ether) where light

propagates with velocity c in any direction. When a transparent substance is at rest in the

ether, Snell’s law of refraction is satisﬁed in the substance. In the case where the substance

is moving in the environmental ether, there exists a subtle balance between aberration and

partial dragging of the ether whose net result is to hide the absolute motion, because Snell’s

law remains valid in the frame of the substance in ﬁrst order in V /c. Thus, the ether partial

dragging diminishes the privileged status of the ether as the universal frame to which all

movements can be referred to.

The partial dragging of ether renders valid Snell’s law in the frame of the moving substance

in ﬁrst order in V /c, because the ray deviates the same angle in a substance at rest in the

ether. However an annoying asymmetry between ray and wave front is left, even in ﬁrst

order in V /c: while the emerging ray is perpendicular to the wave front in the frame of

10

the ether, this is not true in the frame of the prism, as a consequence of the anisotropic

character of the secondary wave fronts in that frame. In other words, the envelope does

not accomplish Snell’s law in the frame of the prism, which highlights the incompatibility

of Galilean transformations and light theory.

In contrast, Special Relativity states that the only privileged frame in diﬀraction phenom-

ena is the frame of the refracting substance, and that Snell’s law holds exactly true in that

reference frame. In addition, the emerging ray (just like any ray propagating in vacuum)

is perpendicular to the wave front in any inertial reference system thanks to the relativistic

notions of space and time. Thus, the ray and the envelope receive the same treatment.

Remarkably, Special Relativity is comfortable with both the corpuscular and wave models

of light. From the corpuscular point of view, the aberration of light is a composition of

motions. In the context of the wave model, the aberration of light is the change of orienta-

tion of the wave front associated with the relativity of the simultaneity of secondary wave

emissions.

Acknowledgments

R.F. was supported by Universidad de Buenos Aires (UBACYT X103) and Consejo Na-

cional de Investigaciones Cient´ıﬁcas y T´ecnicas (Argentina). We would like to thank Nathan

Hageman for reading and commenting on the manuscript.

11

∗ Member of Carrera del Investigador Cient´ıﬁco (CONICET, Argentina); Electronic mail:

ferraro@iafe.uba.ar

† Electronic mail: sforza@ucla.edu

1 R. S. Shankland, “Conversations with Albert Einstein,” Am. J. Phys. 31, 47–57 (1963).

2 A. J. Fresnel, “Lettre de M. Fresnel `a M. Arago, sur l’inﬂuence du mouvement terrestre dans

quelques ph´enom`enes d’optique,” Annales de Chimie et de Physique 9, 57–66 (1818).

3 H. Fizeau, “Sur les hypoth`eses relatives `a l’´ether lumineux, et sur une exp´erience qui parait

d´emontrer que le mouvement des corps change la vitesse avec laquelle la lumi`ere se propage

dans leur int´erieur,” Comptes Rendus de l’Acad´emie des Sciences de Paris XXXIII (15), 349–

355 (1851); “Sur les hypoth`eses relatives `a l’´ether lumineux. Et sur une exp´erience qui parait

d´emontrer que le mouvement des corps change la vitesse avec laquelle la lumi`ere se propage

dans leur int´erieur,” Annales de Chimie et de Physique LVII (3a s´erie), 385–404 (1859).

4 A. A. Michelson and E. W. Morley, “Inﬂuence of motion of the medium on the velocity of light,”

Am. J. Sci. 31, 377–386 (1886).

5 Fizeau also established that the dragging in moving air was not detectable.

6 M. Hoek, “Determination de la vitesse avec laquelle est entrain´ee une onde lumineuse traversant

un milieu en mouvement,” Arch. N´eerl. Sci. 3, 180–185 (1868).

7 G. B. Airy, “On a supposed alteration in the amount of astronomical aberration of light, pro-

duced by the passage of the light through a considerable thickness of refracting medium,” Proc.

Roy. Soc. (London) 20, 35–39 (1871).

8 A. A. Michelson and E. W. Morley, “On the Relative Motion of the Earth and the Luminiferous

Ether,” Am. J. Sci. 34, 333–345 (1887); ibid., “On the Relative Motion of the Earth and the

Luminiferous Æther,” Philos. Mag. 24, 449–463, (1887).

9 L. S. Swenson, “The Michelson-Morley-Miller experiments before and after 1905,” Journal for

the History of Astronomy 1, 56–78 (1970).

10 D. F. J. Arago, “M´emoire sur la vitesse de la lumi`ere, lu `a la premi`ere Classe de l’Institut, le 10

d´ecembre 1810,” Comptes Rendus de l’Acad´emie des Sciences XXXVI, 38–49 (1853); “Vitesse

de la lumi`ere (1810),” Œuvres Compl`etes (7), p. 557 (Gide, Paris, 1858).

11 K. M. Pedersen, “Water-ﬁlled telescopes and the pre-history of Fresnel’s ether dragging,” Arch.

12

Hist. Exact Sci. 54, 499–564 (2000).

12 “Bradley aberration” or “starlight aberration” is the phenomenon caused by the composition

of the (ﬁnite) speed of light with the observer motion, which changes the line of sight to the

star (observers in relative motion see the same star in diﬀerent directions). In particular, due

to the orbital motion of the Earth, the stars annually trace small ellipses in the sky. J. Bradley,

“Account of a new discovered motion of the ﬁxed stars,” Phil. Trans. R. Soc. (London) 35,

637–661 (1728).

13 D. F. J. Arago, ibid. (translated by the authors).

14 M. Born, Einstein’s Theory of Relativity (Dover, NY, 1962).

15 A. J. Fresnel, ibid. (translated by the authors).

16 Since the rays are perpendicular to the wave front in the ether frame, the starlight aberration

should be understood as a complicated process where the wave fronts change their orientation

when passing from the universal ether to the local terrestrial ether. A model of this kind was

built by Stokes (Ref. 17), but Lorentz found it mechanically inconsistent (Ref. 18).

17 G. G. Stokes, “On the aberration of light,” Phil. Mag. (3) 27, 9–15 (1845).

18 H. A. Lorentz, “Over den invloed, dien de beweging der aarde op de lichtverschijnselen uitoe-

fent,” Koninklijke Akademie van Wetenschappen (Amsterdam). Afdeeling Natuurkunde. Versla-

gen en Mededeelingen 2, 297–372 (1885–86). Translated in: “De l’inﬂuence du mouvement de la

terre sur les ph´enom`enes lumineux,” Archives N´eerlandaises des Sciences Exactes et Naturelles

21, 103–176 (1887).

19 The speed of light in water was only measured by Foucault in 1850 (Ref. 20), conﬁrming the

value c/n (n is the refractive index) of the wave theory.

20 J. Foucault, “M´ethode g´en´erale pour mesurer la vitesse de la lumi`ere dans l’air et les milieux

transparents. Vitesses relatives de la lumi`ere dans l’air et dans l’eau. Projet d’exp´erience sur la

vitesse de propagation du calorique rayonnant,” Comptes Rendus de l’Acad´emie des Sciences

de Paris XXX, 551–560 (1850).

13

TABLE I: Deviations on March 19, 1810

Star Name

Measured Deviation

10◦ 4’ 24”, 1 6

Time

18:10

18:50

20:28

20:35

20:38

22:23

23:02

02:19

04:38

05:22

05:30

Rigel

α Orion

Castor

Procyon

Pollux

α Hydra

Regulus

Spica

α Serpens

Antares

ζ Ophiuchus

04:30

α Corona Borealis

...25”,

...24”,

...24”,

...29”,

...22”,

...25”,

...21”,

...22”,

...22”,

...22”,

...24”,

5

6

9

3

6

2

4

8

3

5

0

14

TABLE II: Deviations on March 27, 1810

Star Name

Measured Deviation

10◦ 4’ 33”, 28

03:58

α Corona Borealis

Time

18:18

19:55

20:02

20:06

21:51

00:12

01:47

02:39

04:49

04:58

01:04

01:18

01:24

23:37

Time

19:26

21:24

21:40

02:35

04:08

04:48

05:28

06:19

α Orion

Castor

Procyon

Pollux

α Hydra

β Leo

Spica

Arcturus

Antares

ζ Ophiuchus

γ Virgo

δ Virgo

ǫ Virgo

δ Leo

α Aquila

Moon crater

α Aquarius

α Cetus

Aldebaran

Rigel

α Orion

Sirius

...27”, 93

...32”, 31

...32”, 78

...28”, 32

...30”, 21

...26”, 29

...28”, 05

...31”, 39

...28”, 19

...29”, 64

...27”, 80

...27”, 34

...31”, 42

...34”, 02

22◦ 25’ 09”

...25’ 09”

...25’ 02”

...25’ 03”

...25’ 00”

...24’ 59”

...25’ 02”

...25’ 08”

TABLE III: Deviations on October 8, 1810

Star Name

Measured Deviation

15

α 

Orion

Rigel

Castor

18:00

6:00

Aldebaran

α 

3:00

Cetus

α 

Hydra

21:00

0:00

β 

Leo

δ 

Virgo

Arcturus

3:00

EARTH

EARTH

SUN

6:00

18:00

Antares

MARCH

OCTOBER

0:00

α 

Aquarius

21:00

α 

Aquila

FIG. 1: This diagram shows the light from diﬀerent stars and the Earth’s orbital motion when

Arago’s measurements were made on March 27 and October 8, 1810. Wavy lines represent light

from stars (projected on Earth’s orbital plane), and the hollow arrows correspond to the Earth’s

orbital velocity. The diﬀerent Galilean compositions of motions were expected to result in diﬀerent

starlight deviations by the prism.

16

FIG. 2: Huygens’ construction in the frame of the prism.

