4
0
0
2
 
c
e
D
 
4
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
t
s
i
h
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
8
7
0
2
1
4
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

ROMA 1 - 1394/04
December 2004

Why does the meter beat the second?

P. Agnoli1 and G. D’Agostini2

1 ELECOM s.c.r.l, R&D Department, Rome, Italy
(paolo.agnoli@fastwebnet.it)
2 Universit`a “La Sapienza” and INFN, Rome, Italy
(giulio.dagostini@roma1.infn.it, www.roma1.infn.it/˜dagos)

Abstract

The French Academy units of time and length — the second and the meter
— are traditionally considered independent from each other. However, it is a
matter of fact that a meter simple pendulum beats virtually the second in each
semi oscillation, a ‘surprising’ coincidence that has no physical reason. We shortly
review the steps that led to the choice of the meter as the ten millionth part of
the quadrant of the meridian, and rise the suspicion that, indeed, the length of the
seconds pendulum was in fact the starting point in establishing the actual length
of the meter.

1

Introduction

Presently, the unit of length in the International System (SI) [1] is a derived unit,
related to the unit of time via the speed of light, assumed to be constant and of exact
value c = 299 792 458 m/s.1 The unit of time is related to the period of a well deﬁned
electromagnetic wave.2 The proportionality factors that relate conventional meter and
second units to more fundamental and reproducible quantities were chosen to make the
units back compatible to the original units of the Metric System. In that system the
second was deﬁned as 1/86400 of the average solar day and the meter standard was
related to the Earth meridian (namely 1/10 000 000 of the distance between the pole
and the equator on the Earth’s surface). Therefore, meter and second were initially
not formally related to each other.

It is then curious to discover — we say ‘discover’ because this simple observation
has surprised us, as well as many colleagues and friends — that a simple pendulum
of one meter in length ‘beats’ the second, in the sense that each oscillation, i.e. half
period, takes approximately one second.

1A meter is the distance covered by light in vacuum in 1/299 792 458 of a second.
2A second is equal to the duration of 9 192 631 770 periods of the radiation corresponding to the
transition between two hyperﬁne levels (F=4, M=0 and F=3, M=0 of the fundamental status 2S1/2)
of the atom Cesium 133.

1

A simple exercise (see Appendix A) shows that there is no deep physical connection
between the two quantities. Other explanations are a mere, indeed remarkable numer-
ical coincidence, or the fact that the ‘ﬁrst meter’ was already somehow a derived unit
— although never explicitly stated in oﬃcial documents — in the sense that particular
fraction of that particular geometrical parameter of Earth was chosen to approximately
match the length of the pendulum that beats the second.

In order to understand how believable the guess of an initially derived meter is, we
went through the steps that led to the several proposals of a unit of length taken from
nature. We learned an interesting circular story of a unit of length that begins and
ends with the second. At the beginning the unit of length was bound to the second
by gravitational acceleration, taken at a reference point on the Earth’s surface. Now
the meter is bound to the second by the speed of light. In between (and somewhat in
parallel at the very beginning) there have been the several attempts to deﬁne “a unit
of length that does not depend on any other quantity” 3 [2]:
initially from the size of
Earth; then from a conventional platinum bar; ﬁnally from the wavelength of a well
deﬁned electromagnetic radiation.

The recent relationship between the meter and the second is quite well known.
Much less known is the fact that, just before the French Academy deﬁnition of the
meter as a fraction of the Earth meridian, most scientists had considered the length
of the pendulum that beats the second to be the most suitable unit of length. That
consensus had steadily increased during the 18th century. However, in spring 1791 there
was a metrological revolution inside the French Revolution. The result was a unit of
length equal to a quadrant of the Earth’s meridian (with practical unit a convenient
decimal sub-multiple, namely 1/10 000 000).

Our interdisciplinary work wants to reason the plausibility of a meter initially bound

to the second.

2 From anthropomorphic units to units taken from nature

It is universally accepted that the ﬁrst important stage in the development of metro-
logical concepts related to measures of length is the anthropomorphic one, in which the
main units of measurement are the parts of the human body [3, 5]. As the sociologist
and historian of metrology Witold Kula puts it, “man measures the world with him-
self ” [5] — a variation of Protagoras’ “man is the measure of all things”. It is a very
ancient and primitive approach. Certainly, even the ﬁrst people who adopted such units
must have been aware that the length of their own feet or ﬁngers was diﬀerent from
their neighbor’s ones. But initially such personal diﬀerences did not seem important,
given the low degree of accuracy required in measurements in that social context.

Later the anthropomorphic approach reached a ﬁrst level of abstraction, charac-
terized by “the shift from concrete representations to abstract ones, from ‘my or your
ﬁnger’ to ‘ﬁnger in general’ ” 4 [5]. Nevertheless, even when the stage was reached of
conceiving measurement units as abstract concepts, diﬀerences in establishing the value
of these units remained, depending on region or time [6, 7, 8, 9].

Only in the eighteenth century, with the consolidation of the experimental method
on one hand, and the drive towards international co-operation and trading on the other,

3All English quotes not referring to English bibliography are translation by the authors.
4The earliest measurement standard we have evidence of is the Egyptian cubit, the length of the
forearm from elbow to ﬁngers, realized around 2500 B.C. in a piece of marble of about 50 centimeters [4].

2

strong emphasis was placed for the ﬁrst time on the need for standardized units. In
fact, the plethora of units in use in the various countries, and even in diﬀerent towns
and regions of the same country, made it diﬃcult for researchers at diﬀerent places,
observing the same physical phenomenon, to quantitatively compare their results. In
addition, the coveted improvement in international commerce was in this situation
strongly hampered.

Changing a system of weights and measures (and currency) in a country encounters
notoriously much resistance, due to reasons of several natures: practical, like having
to renew all instruments of measurement and converting values between old and new
systems in order to be back compatible with all the information (measurements, book
keeping and contracts) acquired in the old system; sociological, due to human tendency
to make proﬁt of somebody else’s ignorance or good faith (the recent switch from
national European currencies to Euro is a good example of it, especially in the authors’
country); psychological, that, apart from a general inertia to changes of a large fraction
of people, is objectively due to the fact that adults have diﬃculty in modifying their
mental representations (and, taking again the Euro introduction as an example, we
authors still use to roughly convert Euro values into ‘thousand Lire’ — the practical unit
of currency in Italy before the Euro — multiplying the Euro value by two). National
laws can help to impose the new system,5 but the process of changing can take decades
and sometimes it can simply result into a ﬁasco.6

The problem becomes even more diﬃcult to solve when one aims to reach an inter-
national standardization of units. To the above mentioned problems, we have to add
national pride that refuses to accept foreign rules, no matter how reasonable they might
be. Indeed, a similar regional pride existed in the eighteenth century also among towns
and regions of the same country. Any attempt of standardization would have then
been perceived as an imposition of the most powerful town or region over the others.7
5With this respect, changes of currencies are easily ruled by central banks, especially in modern

times in which banknotes and coins have no intrinsic value.

6In history there are plenty of examples of this kind, like the diﬃculty of France to establish the
decimal metric system or the failed Carolingian and Renaissance reforms [9]. Just to make a recent and
practical example, Italy has adopted the International System (SI) since the mid seventies, and other
units were banned by law. Nevertheless, after thirty years, though the SI unit of power is the Watt, car
power is quoted in HP (yes, oﬃcial documents do have kW, but drivers, sellers and media only speak of
HP), centralized home heating power in kCal/h, (but small electric heaters are given in Watt) and air
conditioning cooling power in Btu/h. What is bad is that, contrary to centimeters and inches, where
people know that the units measure the same thing but citizens of diﬀerent countries have a mental
representation in either unit, the average Italian does not even know that all the above units measure
the same thing and practically none has a mental representation of a Btu/h, arrived to us in mass with
air conditioners in the last few years. Therefore, people don’t even know that it is possible to convert
Btu/h to Watt to have a better perception of what 7000 Btu/h might mean (a cooling power of about
2 kW).

7For example, this was one of the possibilities envisaged in France before the metric system: to
extend to all France the system used in Paris. This was still the proposal of Joseph-J´erˆome Lalande
in April 1789. And he strenuously defended it later against the meter. Though his ﬁgure is often
presented as conservative, for his opposition to the meter, we have to admit that Lalande was quite
right in proposing to base the unit of length on a physical standard, like the Paris toise, rather than on
the size of Earth. This is exactly what happened one century later, when in 1889, having metrologists
realized that a practical unit based on Earth is not accurately reproducible as required for precision
measurements, the deﬁnition of the unit of length was solely based upon the platinum standard, with
no reference to Earth any more. Perhaps what Lalande underestimated was the psychological driving
force of standards taken from nature that, with all the problems he correctly spotted (see Ref. [10]),
was crucial to reach, soon or later, some national and international agreement.

3

This is the reason that led several scientists and thinkers to seek for units that were
not just as arbitrary as any materialization of the parts of the human body. Standards
‘taken from nature’ (“pris dans la nature” [2]) were then seen as a possible chance to
achieve a reform of units of measurements acceptable to all citizens of the country and
possibly to all nations. Besides these sociological aspects, well chosen units based on
nature have advantage of being constant with time and reproducible in the case that
the practical standards are corrupted or destroyed.8

The problem of having a universal system of units of measurement was ﬁrst tackled
seriously about at the same time in France, Great Britain and United States at the
end of the 18th century, though the only program eventually accomplished was that
launched by the French National Academy at the time of the French Revolution.

The French program started at the beginning of 1790 when the Academy was en-
trusted for the reform by the National Assembly. As the historian Alder puts it [10],
one of the aims of the French scientist was to facilitate communications among scien-
tists, engineers, and administrators: their “grander ambition was to transform France -
and ultimately, the all world - into a free market for the open exchange of goods and in-
formation”. (For some ‘external’ inﬂuences — economical, philosophical, political and
cultural — on the works of the French Academy see e.g. Refs. [9, 12, 13].) However,
for the French legislator the issue had primarily a sociological priority, as can be per-
ceived in the project of the 1793 decree [14] in which citoyen Louis Arbogast requires
the attention of the National Assembly on a “subject of universal beneﬁcence, [having
been] the uniformity of weights and measures for a long time one of the philanthropist
wishes; claimed at once by the sciences and the arts, by commerce and by the useful
man who lives of the work of his hands and who, the most exposed to frauds, is the less
capable of bearing their eﬀects.”

The success of the French attempt to create a universal system of units of measure-
ment was due to several reasons that, besides the driving illuministic spirit, certainly
include the political determination to support the project with education and imposi-
tion, even when the revolution had ended. But perhaps the main reason that forced
rulers to be so determined was the special chaotic situation of units of measurement
there at that time [15], where about 800 diﬀerent names for measures have been es-
timated, whose units varied in diﬀerent towns, for a total of about 250000 diﬀerently
sized units [16]. “It is quite evident that the diversity of weights and measures of dif-
ferent countries, and frequently in the same province, are a source of embarrassment in
commerce, in the study of physics, in history, and even in politics itself; the unknown
names of foreign measures, the laziness or diﬃculty in relating them to our own give
rise to confusion in our ideas and leave us in ignorance of facts which could be useful
to us”, complains Charles de La Condamine [17].

Sometimes order outsprings from chaos. That was just the case with metrology in

France.

Remarkably, the American, British and French attempts of reform were originally
based on the length of a pendulum that takes one second per swing. However, as
it is well known, the French metric system was ﬁnally based on the size of Earth.
But the decision to switch from the pendulum to the meridian was so sudden and
hurried, especially when analyzed after two centuries, that it looks like a coup de main.
8It is a matter of fact that ancient standards are lost forever and the interpretation of data taken with
those units can only be guessed somehow. A relative recent episode of an important set of standards
lost by accident is the ﬁre in the British Houses of Parliament in 1834 (see e.g. [11]).

4

Therefore, before describing the steps that led to the deﬁnition of the meter based
on the Earth meridian, let us shortly review the several proposals of relating units of
length to the period of the pendulum.

3 The seconds pendulum

The idea of basing units of length on nature had been advocated far before it reached
deﬁnitive success with the advent of the French Revolution. Though there were also
proposals to relate the unit of length to the size of Earth (see Section 4), the unit that
came out quite naturally 9 — or at least this was the proposal that had most consensus
— was the length of a pendulum oscillating with a given, well deﬁned period.

This is not surprising. After the ﬁrst intuitions and pioneer studies of Galileo
Galilei at the end of the 16th century and the systematic experimental and theoreti-
cal researches of several scientists throughout the 17th century, the properties of the
pendulum were known rather well. The practical importance of the principle of the
pendulum was immediately recognized, and the ﬁrst pendulum clock was realized in
1657 by Christian Huygens. In particular, it was known that the period of ‘small os-
cillations’ of a simple pendulum at a given place depends practically only on its length
(see Appendix A). In other words, the pendulum was seen as an object capable to
relate space to time [18, 19]. Therefore, discovering the possibility of grounding the
unit of length, imperfect and arbitrary since ever, to something regular and constant,
as the alternation of days and nights, must have been seen with enthusiasm by many
scientists.

At that time there was little doubt about what the unit of time should be. The
rotation of Earth had since ancient times provided a reference for units of time, such as
seconds or hours. The latter stem from the subdivision of the day in 24 stages (12 during
the daylight and 12 during the night) made ﬁrst by the ancient Egyptians [6, 9], and
that has its roots in the culture of the ancient Babylonians. The subdivision of hours
in 60 minutes of 60 seconds had become of common use after medieval astronomers
introduced it in the middle of 1200, in analogy to the ancient subdivisions of the degree
in 60 minutes of 60 seconds (the name second derives from the Latin secundus and
refers to the fact that the second is the ‘second’ subdivision of ‘something’, either the
degree or the hour).

It had been experimentally observed that one of customary subdivisions of the
day — and indeed the closest to the human biological scale10 — was obtained by a
pendulum having the length in the human scale and easy to measure (about 25 or
100 centimeters, depending on whether the period or half the period was considered).
Therefore it seemed quite ‘natural’ to use such a length as a unit. In particular, there
was quite unanimous agreement in associating the second to a single swing of the
pendulum, thus selecting the about 100 cm solution.11 That pendulum was called
seconds pendulum (also second pendulum, or one-second pendulum).

9The adjective ‘natural’ has been quite misused in the context of choosing the fundamental unit of

length, calling natural what seems absolutely arbitrary to others, as we shall see in the sequel.

10It is not by chance that the smallest historical unit of time with proper name is approximately of

the order of magnitude of the heart pace.

11This choice is not surprising. Try to build yourself a 25 cm and a 100 cm pendula with a piece of
string and a little weight, and you do not need to be an great experimenter to realize that, if you want
to use either of them to deﬁne a unit length, you would prefer to work with the longer one.

5

Table 1: Old French units [20]. The metric conversion is ﬁxed by the French law of 10 December
1799, that established the meter to be equal to 3 pied and 11.296 lignes, i.e. 443.296 lignes (we
give only the ﬁrst six signiﬁcant digits).

Name
ligne [line]
pouce [inch]
pied (de Roy) [(Royal) foot]
toise [fathom]
leiue postale [postal league]

System equivalent Metric equivalent

12 lignes
12 pouces
6 pieds = 864 lignes
2000 toises

2.25583 mm
27.0699 mm
32.4839 cm
194.904 cm
3898.07 m

The ﬁrst oﬃcial proposal of basing the unit of length on the pendulum was advanced
by the Royal Society in 1660, after a suggestion by Huygens and Ole Rømer (based
also on a study of Marin Mersenne published in Paris in 1644 [18]). The proposal was
followed by an analogous suggestion by Jean Picard in 1668. A (perhaps) independent
proposal was raised by Tito Livio Burattini in 1675, who called the proposed unit
‘meter’ and related diﬀerent units in a complete system (see Appendix B).

In April 1790, one year before the work of the commission that ﬁnally decided to
base a unit of length on the dimension of Earth, a project based on a unit of length
determined by the seconds pendulum at the reference latitude of 45o was presented to
the National Assembly by Charles Maurice de Talleyrand [21], upon a suggestion by
Antoine-Nicolas Caritat de Condorcet.

Just a few months later a Plan for establishing uniformity in the Coinage, Weights,
and Measures of the United States [22] was presented at the other side of the Atlantic
to the House of Representatives by USA Secretary of State Thomas Jeﬀerson12 (he
became later the third president of the United States of America). Again, the unit of
length was based on the regular oscillation of a pendulum, though the technical solution
of an oscillating rod rather than a simple pendulum was preferred.13

An analogous reform of the system of weights and measures was discussed in the
same years in the British Parliament. There too the seconds pendulum was proposed,
obviously with London latitude as reference, advocated by Sir John Riggs Miller14 [10,
23]. The seconds pendulum was also supported by German scientists [10].

As a matter of fact, at the time the French Academy of Science had to choose the
unit of length, the seconds pendulum seemed the most mature candidate for the unit
of length. Moreover, with some diplomatic work concerning the choice of the reference
parallel — and Talleyrand was the right person for the job —, there were good chances
to reach an agreement among France, Great Britain and United States.15

12Jeﬀerson states to have read the Talleyrand’s report to the National Academy of France when
his report was practically ready. Yet the “proposition made by the Bishop of Autun” — this way
Talleyrand was known — convinced him to change the reference latitude of the pendulum from 38o,
“medium latitude of the United States”, to 45o [22].

13A homogeneous rod of length l oscillating from one end behaves as a simple pendulum of length

2/3 l. Therefore Jeﬀerson’s second bar was 3/2 the seconds pendulum, i.e. about 150 cm.

14Indeed, there were contacts between Talleyrand and Miller to collaborate towards a common so-
lution. But due to technical and political events, the most relevant among them being certainly the
French choice of the meridian, the projects based on the pendula were put aside in France, Great
Britain and United States between 1790 and 1791.

15Jeﬀerson had already accepted the French proposal of the 45th parallel, because “middle term

6

As far as the length of the seconds pendulum is concerned, during the 18th century
its value was known with sub-millimeter accuracy in several places in France and around
the world, often related to work of rather famous people like Isaac Newton, Mersenne,
Giovan Battista Riccioli, Picard, Jean Richer, Gabriel Mouton, Huygens, Jean Cassini,
Nicolas Louis de Lacaille, Cassini de Thury and La Condamine. For example, in 1740
Lacaille and Cassini de Thury had measured the length of the seconds pendulum in
Paris (48o 50′ latitude), obtaining a value of 440.5597 lignes (see conversion Table 1),
corresponding to 99.383 cm. Newton himself had estimated the length of the seconds
pendulum at several latitudes between 30 and 45 degrees (see Ref. [22]): his value at
45 degrees was 440.428 lignes, i.e. 99.353 cm. A measurement at the equator, made by
La Condamine during the Peru expedition [24], gave 439.15 lignes (99.065 cm).

4 The Earth based units of length and the birth of the

metric system

In the middle of 1790 there was quite an international convergence towards a unit
of length based on the pendulum. Nevertheless, at the beginning of spring of the
following year a diﬀerent unit of length was chosen by the French Academy of Science,
thus signing the end of the seconds pendulum as length standard and causing a setback
of the international cooperation on units of measurements.

According to revolution style, the pace was very rapid (see central frame of Table 2).
In August 1790 the French National Assembly entrusted the reform to the Academy
of Science. The Academy nominated a preliminary commission,16 which adopted a
decimal scale17 for all measures, weights and coins. The commission presented its
report on 27 October 1790. A second commission18 was charged with choosing the unit
of length. The commission was set up on 16 February 1791 and reported to the Academy
of the Sciences on 19 March 1791. On 26 March 1791 the National Assembly accepted
the Academy’s proposals of the decimal system and of a quarter of the meridian as the
basis for the new system and the adoption of the consequent immediate unit.

The guiding ideas of the French scientists are well expressed in the introduction to

the document presented to the Academy:

The idea to refer all measures to a unit of length taken from nature has appeared
to the mathematicians since they learned the existence of such a unit as well as
the possibility to establish it: they realized it was the only way to exclude any
arbitrariness from the system of measures and to be sure to preserve it unchanged
for ever, without any event, except a revolution in the world order, could cast some
doubts in it; they felt that such a system did not belong to a single nation and no
country could ﬂatter itself by seeing it adopted by all the others.

Actually, if a unit of measure which has already been in use in a country were

between the equator and both poles, and a term which consequently might unite the nations of both
hemispheres, appeared to me well chosen, and so just that I did not hesitate a moment to prefer it to
that of 380” [22].

16The Commission was made up of Jean Charles Borda, Condorcet, Joseph Louis Lagrange, Pierre

Simon de Laplace and Mathieu Tillet.

17Historians generally agree that Mouton attempted the ﬁrst metric system in 1670 when he proposed

that all distances should be measured by means of a decimal system of units [25].

18This commission was made up of Borda, Lagrange, Laplace, Gaspar Monge and Condorcet. They

worked in close contact with Antoine Laurent Lavoisier [26].

7

Table 2: Chronology of units of length based on nature:
fraction of) the light second.

from the seconds pendulum to (a

1790, October 27 A ﬁrst commission recommends a decimal scale for all measures,

1644
1660

1668

1670

1675

1720

1774

1790, April

1790, July

1790, August

1791, March 19

1791, March 26
1791, April

1792, June
1793, May 29

1793, August 1
1795, April 7

1798,
1799, March
1799, June 22
1812

[1832
1837
1840
1889

1960

1983

Mersenne writes about basing the unit of length upon a pendulum length.
The length of the seconds pendulum is proposed for unit of length
by the Royal Society, upon a suggestion of Huygens and Rømer.
Picard proposes the universal foot, equal to 1/3 of the length
of the seconds pendulum.
Mouton proposes a unit of length equal to one minute of Earth’s arc
along a meridian (equal to present nautical mile).
The catholic (i.e. universal) meter, equal to the length of a seconds
pendulum, is proposed by Burattini, together with a a complete
system of inter-related units based on the second.
J. Cassini proposes the radius of Earth as unit of length (whose
practical unit would be its ten millionth part).
La Condamine proposes a unit of length equal to the length
of the seconds pendulum at the equator (439.15 lignes).
Talleyrand proposes to the National Assembly a unit of length equal
to the seconds pendulum at 45◦ latitude (440.4 lignes).
Jeﬀerson proposes to the U.S.A. House of Representative a unit of
length equal to a second rod at 45◦ latitude.
Talleyrand’s proposal is recommended to king Louis XVI by the
Committee on Agriculture and Commerce. As a result, the Academy of
Science is entrusted of the reform of measures and weights.

weights and coins.
A second commission, set up on February 16, chooses the quarter of
meridian as natural unit of length, and its 1/10 000 000 as practical unit.
The National Assembly accepts the recommendations of the commissions.
Academy of Science initially conﬁdes the new measurement of the
meridian to M´echain, Legendre and J.-D. Cassini (the latter two resigned).
Led by Delambre and M´echain, the meridian expedition ﬁnally begins
A third commission provides a provisional length of the meter as 443.44
lignes (based on the 1740 measurements by Lacaille and Cassini de Thury).
The provisional meter is adopted by decree.
The Decimal Metric System (also including including units of weight,
surface and volume — but not the unit of time) is established by law.
The meridian expedition ends.
An international commission ﬁxes the length of the meter in 443.296 lignes.
The meter standard, a platinum bar, is oﬃcially presented in Paris.
A hybrid system of measurements is decreed by Napoleon, in which
old names can be used for non-decimal multiples and sub-multiples
of the meter (e.g. 1 toise for ‘2 meter’, etc.).
The second is adopted in the Metric System, breaking the decimal scheme.]
The 1812 decree is repealed, banning old names in France.
Non metric system units become penal oﬀence in France.
The meter is redeﬁned as the length of the 1799 platinum bar, with
no longer reference to the Earth meridian.
The meter is redeﬁned as 1 650 763.73 wavelengths of the
radiation corresponding to the 2p10-5d5 transition of Krypton 86.
The meter is redeﬁned as the distance traveled in vacuum by
electromagnetic waves in 1/299 792 458 of a second.

8

adopted, it would be diﬃcult to explain to the others the reasons for preference
that were able to balance that spirit of repugnance, if not philosophical at least very
natural, that peoples always feel towards an imitation looking like the admission
of a sort of inferiority. As a consequence, there would be as many measures as
nations. (Ref. [2], pp. 1-2)

Three were the candidates considered by the commission:

the seconds pendulum;

a quarter of the meridian;

a quarter of the equator.

•

•

•

The latter two units are based on the dimension of Earth. Indeed, Earth related units
had had also quite a long history, though they were not as popular as the seconds
pendulum, probably because their intrinsic diﬃculty to be determined.19 Mouton had
suggested in 1670 [25] the unit that we still use in navigation and call now nautical mile:
the length of one minute of the Earth’s arc along a meridian, equal to 1852 m.20 In 1720
the astronomer Jean Cassini had proposed the radius of Earth [27], a ‘natural’ unit for
a spherical object (he had also indicated the one ten-millionth part of the radius as the
best practical unit). However, neither of these old, French proposals are mentioned in
the report of the commission.21

The quarter of the equator was rejected, mainly because considered hard to mea-

sure22 and somehow ‘not democratic’.23

So, we believe we are bound to decide to assume this kind of unit of measure
and also to prefer the quarter of the meridian to the quarter of the equator. The
operations that are necessary to establish the latter could be carried out only in
countries that are too far from ours and, as a consequence, we should have to
undertake expenditures as well as to overcome diﬃculties that would be superior
to the advantages that seem to be promised. The inspections, in case somebody
19Any person can easily determine the length of a seconds pendulum within the percent level. Sur-

veying the Earth is a problem more diﬃcult by orders of magnitude.

20The unit of speed consistent with it is the knot, corresponding to 1 nautical mile per hour. It is
particularly suited in navigation (and hence the name). For example, a ship that sails at 30 nodes
along a meridian travels one degree in latitude in two hours.

21The Mouton’s minute of meridian is just one of the possible subdivision of the meridian, namely
the 324000-th part of the quarter of the meridian: we understand that the subdivision of the right
angle in 90 degrees and each degree in 60 minutes and 60 seconds was judged ‘unnatural’ by the
acad´emiciens because not decimal. We might guess that the radius of Earth was not considered for
the ‘obvious diﬃculty’ to make an immediate measurement from the center of Earth to its surface.
However, it should be similarly obvious that it was also impossible to measure all other quantities
(diameter, meridian, equator) in an immediate way. We shall come back to this point in section 7.

22The diﬃculty in measuring arcs of the equator is not only related to perform measurements in cen-
tral Africa or South America. It would have required precise measurements of diﬀerences in longitude
along the equator, and measurements of longitudes are intrinsically much more diﬃcult than measure-
ments of latitude, because the former rely on absolute synchronizations of clocks in diﬀerent places,
and that was not an easy task at that time. (For a novelized account of those diﬃculties, see Dava
Sobel’s Longitude [28]. A classical novel in which practical ways to measure latitude and longitudes are
well described is Jules Vernes’s Mysterious Island.)

23Several of the claims and the slogans of the acad´emiciens show a certain degree of na¨ıveness
(frankly a bit too much for such extraordinary clever people they were: the suspicion that they had
hidden purposes in mind is almost unavoidable). We shall come back to this point in section 7.

9

would like to carry them out, would be more diﬃcult to be accomplished by any
nation, at least until the progress of the civilization reaches the peoples living by
the equator, a time that still seems to be unfortunately far away. The regularity
of this circle is not more assured than the similarity or regularity of the meridians.
The size of the celestial arc, that corresponds to the space that would be measured,
is less susceptible to be determined with precision; ﬁnally it is possible to state that
all peoples belong to one of Earth’s meridians, while only a group of peoples live
along the equator. (Ref [2], pp. 4-5 )

The pendulum was rejected after a long discussion (two pages over a total of eleven of
the document — the quarter of equator is instead ruled out in less than half a page).
As a matter of fact, the commission acknowledges that

the length of the pendulum has appeared in general to deserve preference; it has
the advantage of being the easiest to be determined, and as a consequence to be
veriﬁed. (Ref [2], p. 2)

Then the report speciﬁes that the pendulum should be a simple pendulum at the ref-
erence latitude of 45o, because “the law followed by the lengths of simple pendula oscil-
lating with the same time between the equator and the poles is such that the length
of the pendulum at the forty-ﬁfth parallel is precisely the mean values of all these
lengths”.24 (Ref. [2], p. 3)

There was still the problem of the reference time of the pendulum, since the second
was considered an “arbitrary subdivision of this natural unit [the day]” [2]. But a
possible way out was envisaged:

In reality, we could avoid the last inconvenience taking as unit the hypothetical
pendulum that made just one oscillation in one day; its length, divided by ten
billion parts, would give a practical unit of measurement of about twenty seven
pouces [27 pouces
73 cm]; and this unit would correspond to the pendulum that
makes one hundred thousand oscillations in one day.25 (Ref. [2], p. 4)

≈

Essentially, the report of the commission does not provide any speciﬁc weakness of the
pendulum26 and, ﬁnally, the choice of the quarter of the meridian is justiﬁed only in
terms of ‘naturalness’, as it was perceived by Borda and colleagues:

24Actually, such a length is not ‘precisely’ the average over the lengths at all parallels, but only a
very good approximation. In fact, the net gravitation acceleration g does not vary linearly with the
latitude, but follows the following law [24]:

2
g/(m/s

) = 9.7803185(1 + 0.005258895 sin

φ

0.000023462 sin

φ) ,

4

2

−

where φ is the latitude (the theoretical formula is valid at the ellipsoid surface and, as is customary in
geodesy, g is the sum of the eﬀects of gravitation and centrifugal forces).

25Ten billion is the square of one hundred thousand (the length of the pendulum is proportional
to the square of its period). Seen with modern eyes, it looks a bit bizarre that this ‘hypothetical
pendulum’, sized almost twenty times the distance Earth-Moon, would have been natural, while the
second wouldn’t. (By the way, for those who like to understand all digits: 73 cm comes from rounding
to the pouce a length that, directly rounded to the centimeter, would be 74 cm.)

26It should be noted that a unit of length based on the pendulum has intrinsic problems, like the
dependence of its period on temperature, latitude and above sea level, plus other more technical issues,
considered also in Jeﬀerson’s document [22]. But, in the part of the report in which the seconds
pendulum is discussed and rejected as unit of length, the French commission does not seem concerned
at all with this kind of physical questions. Only later (p. 9), when they propose the pendulum as
ancillary reference of length, they specify that the pendulum should beat “at the sea level, on vacuum
and at the temperature of melting ice.’’ [2]

10

[. . . ] one would still have to include an heterogeneous element, time, or what is
here the same thing, the intensity of the gravitational force at the Earth’s surface.
Now, if it is possible to have a unit of length that does not depend on any other
quantity, it seems natural to prefer it.27
[. . . ]
Actually, it is much more natural to refer the distance between two places to a
quarter of one of the terrestrial circles than to refer it to the length of the pendulum.
[. . . ]
The quarter of the Earth meridian would become then the real unit of length; and
the ten million-th part of this length would be its practical unit. (Ref [2], pp. 4-5)

It must be stressed that, however, there was still a strong resistance from those scientists
who preferred the pendulum [10, 29].

The new unit was oﬃcially called ‘meter’28 only two years later (see section 5.2),
in the occasion of a report of a new commission, in which also for the ﬁrst time an
estimate of its length was made public by Borda, Lagrange and Monge [32, 14].

5 Establishing the length of the meter

Reading the Rapport sur le choix d’une unit´e de mesure [2] we have been surprised
not to ﬁnd the expected value for the new unit of length. All looks as its length was
unknown and it had to be determined by the campaign of measurements outlined in
the document. The seconds pendulum has the same omission. But we imagine that the
members of the National Assembly, to which the document had to be read, were curious
to know the rough length of the unit they were going to decree. Instead, the commission
provides only an estimate of the size of the unit that would result from the ideal, 7.4
million kilometer long pendulum that beats the day. Therefore, it seems reasonable
to believe that the length of the seconds pendulum and of the fourth-millionth part of
the meridian were already known rather well, and that there was no need to specify
their value. This was our ﬁrst guess. Actually, the question looks a bit more subtle
at a closer look: though those values were well known to scientists, the acad´emiciens
kept them ‘secret’ or, at least, they were reluctant to provide an oﬃcial best estimate
of the new unit of length to the politicians [10]. It seems to us that the reason of this
reserve is closely related to the preference of the meridian over the pendulum. But let
us proceed with order.

The seconds pendulum has been reviewed in section 3. Comparing Cassini’s and
Newton’s value, we can safely take an approximated value of the seconds pendulum at
45o of 440.4 lignes (99.35 cm). Let us now see how well the ‘meter’ was known at the
time of the March 1791 report [2]. We shall then go through the recommendations of
27Our note: to be precise, that is not right “the same thing.” The pendulum relates space and time
via the net gravitational acceleration g. Therefore the included heterogeneous elements are two: time
and acceleration. A similar situation happens now, where the meter is related to the second via the
speed of light.

28The name ‘meter’ comes from Greek metron, meaning ‘measure’. The ﬁrst who proposed the name
meter in the context of the French Academy work is acknowledged to be the mathematician Leblond in
1790 [30, 31]; still, some historians (see e.g. Ref. [29]) maintain the idea has to be originally attributed
to Borda. However, the name meter for a unit of length (that practically coincides with the French
Academy meter) was proposed more than one century earlier by Burattini (see Appendix B).

11

the commission for a more accurate determination of the unit of length and through
the resulting meridian expedition.

5.1 Measurements of the Earth meridian before 1791

≈

Measuring the size of Earth had been a challenging problem for ages, since it was ﬁrst
realized that Earth is spherical, i.e. at least by the sixth century B.C. [24]. The most
famous ancient estimate is that due to Eratosthenes (276–195 B.C.), who reported a
40 000 kilometers, if we take 159 m per stadium.29
value of 250 000 stadia, i.e. about
The principles of measurement of the Earth parameters, exposed at an introductory
level, as well as milestones of these achievements, can be found in Ref. [24]. The basic
if one is able to measure, or estimate somehow, the length of
idea is rather simple:
an arc of meridian (s) and its angular opening (α), the length of the meridian can be
determined as 360o
for a
spherical Earth). The angle α can be determined from astronomical observations. The
measurement of s is bound to the technology of the epoch and varies from counting
the number of steps in the early days to modern triangulation techniques [24]. Indeed,
the rather accurate measurements between the 16th and 18th centuries provided the
results in terms of s/α, expressed e.g. in toises/degree (see Table 3).

s/α, if a circular shape for the meridian is assumed (i.e.

×

×

90/10 000 000

As we can see in Table 3, not exhaustive of all the eﬀorts to pin down the Earth
dimensions, there was quite a convergence on the length of the unitary meridian arc in
Europe, as well as a general consistency with older measurements. For example, taking
the Lacaille and Cassini de Thury result, based on the about 950 km arc of the Paris
meridian30 across all France, it is possible to calculate a value of 443.44 lignes for the
new unit of measurements, assuming a spherical Earth (57027
864 =
443.44). Even a conservative estimate would give a value of 443.4 lignes, with an
uncertainty on the last digit — a diﬀerence of three lignes (about 6 mm) with respect to
the length of the second pendulum. That was deﬁnitely known to Borda and colleagues.
However, apart from experimental errors in the determination of the 57027 toise/de-
gree, the value of 443.44 was still aﬀected by uncertainties due to the shape of Earth.
At that time the scientists were rather conﬁdent on an elliptical shape of the meridians,
resulting from the Earth ﬂattening at the poles. In fact, centrifugal acceleration due to
rotation is responsible for the bulge of the Earth at the equator. The resulting Earth
shape is such that the total force (gravitational plus centrifugal) acting on a body at
the Earth surface is always orthogonal to the ‘average’ surface of the Earth. If that
were not the case, there would be tangential forces that tended to push ﬂoating masses
towards the equator, as eloquently stated by Newton: “. . . if our Earth were not a little
higher around the equator than at the poles, the seas would subside at the poles and,
by ascending in the region of the equator, would ﬂood everything there.”
(Cited in
Ref. [33].) Newton had estimated an Earth ellipticity of 1/229 [34].

×

of Earth ﬂattening.

Several measurements had been done during the 18th century to determine the value
In particular, there had been an enormous eﬀort of the French
29Due to uncertainties in the conversion factor stadium-meter, approximations and errors in eval-
uating distances and diﬀerences in latitude, the usually quoted value of 40 000 kilometers obtained
by Eratosthenes has to be considered fortuitous, being the uncertainty on that number of the order
of 10% [24]. Anyway, not bad for that time (in frontier physics a completely new measurement that
provides a result with 10% uncertainty is considered a good achievement).
′′
14

East, had been the oldest zero longitude, until in 1884 it was

′
30The Paris meridian, now 2020

replaced by the Greenwich meridian (but France and Ireland adopted the new zero only in 1911).

12

Table 3: Some milestones in measuring the Earth meridian.
lm stands for the length of the
meter calculated as the 40 000 000th part of the meridian (for some important cases, lm is also
given in lignes — see Table 1 for conversion). In the results expressed in the form ‘xxxxx
360’
xxxxx stands for the length of one degree meridian arc (s/α in the text). Ancient estimates
have to be taken with large uncertainty (see e.g. Ref.[24]).

×

Author(s)

Year

Value

Unit

km value

Eratosthenes

(III B.C.)

250000

stadiuma

40000

≈

Caliph Al-Mamun

820

56 2/3 Arab mileb

39986

Fernel
Snellius
Norwood
Picard
J. Cassini
Lacaille and
Cassini de Thury

1525
1617
1635
1670
1718
1740

[ Lapland expedition
[ Peru expedition

1736
1745

Delambre and
M´echain

1799

56746
55100
57300
57060
57097
57027

360
360
360
360
360
360

×
×
×
×
×
×

57438
56748

360
360

×
×
20522960

toise
toise
toise
toise
toise
toise

toise
toise

39816
38661
40204
40036
40062
40013

40302
39817

toise

40000

1

[ 57019

360

toise

40008

×

lm (m)
lignes
1.0

{
≈

}

0.9997

0.9954
0.9665
1.0051
1.0009
1.0016
1.00033
443.44

{
}
1.0075 ] c
0.9954 ] c

443.296
{
}
1.00019 ] d
443.38
}

{

443.3975
}

{

present value

40009152

m

40009.152

1.000229

a) Stadium estimated to be 159 m.
b) Arab mile estimated to be 1960 m [24].
c) Values obtained at extreme latitudes, very sensitive to Earth ellipticity.
d) The entries of this line assume a spherical model for Earth, as for older estimates.

The value of 57019 toises is obtained dividing the 551 584.74 toises of the meridian arc
between Dunkerque-Barcelona by their diﬀerence in latitude, 9o 40′ 25.40′′ [35] .

Academy of Sciences, that supported measurements in France as well as expeditions at
extreme latitudes, up to the arctic circle and down to the equator.31

The latter measurements were essential in order to gain sensitivity on the ﬂattening
eﬀect. In fact, the unitary arc length s/α gives the local curvature along the meridian
360o/2π is equal to
around the region of the measurements. As a consequence, ρ = s/α
the radius of the circle that approximates locally the meridian ellipse. As it can be easily
understood from ﬁgure 1, the curvature decreases with the latitude: the radius of the
‘local circle’ is minimum at the equator and maximum at the pole. The measurements
of arcs of meridian at several latitudes (two distant latitudes are in principle suﬃcient)
can yield the ellipse parameters. Comparing the result of Lacaille-Cassini from Table 3
31The Lapland expedition measured an arc of 57′ crossing the north polar circle, at an average
S

′
N. The Peru expedition measured an arc of 30 7

′
at an average latitude of 10 31

′
latitude of 60o 19
(see [36] for a nice web site dedicated to the expeditions).

×

13

b

a

14

Figure 1: An exaggerated representation of the ellipsoidal Earth shape, showing local circles
at the equator and at the pole (the ellipse is characterized by the semi-axes a and b). The
ellipse of the ﬁgure has a ﬂattening of about 1/2, i.e. an eccentricity of 0.87. (A ﬂattening of
1/298, corresponding to the Earth one, i.e. a minor axis being 0.3% smaller than the major
axis, is imperceptible to the human eye.) Note how the equatorial local circle underestimates
the ellipse circumference, while the polar one overestimates it.

with the results of the Lapland and the Peru expeditions from the same table, we see
that s/α is indeed increasing with the latitude (note these measurements were quite
accurate — for a very interesting account of the Peru expedition see Ref. [37]). The
combination of these and other measurements gave values of the Earth ﬂattening in the
range 1/280–1/310 [37], with a best estimate around 1/300, very close to the present
value of 1/298 (see Table 4). However, given such a tiny value of the ﬂattening (imagine
a soccer ball squeezed by 0.7 mm), its eﬀect on the circumference of the ellipse is very
small, of the order of a few parts in 10 000.

To summarize this subsection, we can safely state that the length of the meridian,
and hence of any of its subdivisions, was known with a relatively high accuracy decades
before the report that recommended the unit of length equal to 1/10 000 000 part of
the quarter of meridian was produced. In particular, for what this paper is concerned,
it was well known that the new standard was equal to the length of the one seconds
pendulum within about half percent.

5.2 The 1793 provisional meter

The ﬁrst public ﬁgures for the new standard, together with the name meter, were
provided by the acad´emiciens in a report by Borda, Lagrange and Monge in spring
1793 [32]. A project of decree for a general system of weights and measures, also
containing the cited report, was presented to the National Assembly in July of the same
year [14]. The length of the meter was obtained from the Lacaille-Cassini measurements,
with the simple calculation shown in the previous subsection.

Its approximated value is 3 pieds 11 lignes 44/100 present Paris measure [443.44
lignes], and this approximation is such that its error does not exceed one tenth of

Table 4: Earth data [38]. The geometrical data refer to the WGS84 ellipsoid [37]. Note that
the generic ‘radius of Earth’ R refers usually to the equatorial radius, but sometimes also to
the ‘average’ equivolume radius. In literature the name ‘ellipticity’ is often associated to what
is called ‘geometric ﬂattening’ in this table, and even to the diﬀerence of equatorial and polar
radii divided by their average, i.e. (a
b)/((a + b)/2). Anyway, the three diﬀerent ‘ellipticities’
give with good approximation the same number, about 1/298, because of the little deviation
of our planet from a perfect sphere. Note also that sometimes the ﬂattening is even confused
with the ellipse eccentricity, that diﬀers quite a lot from ﬂattening and ellipticity.

−

b)/a

equatorial radius, a
Polar radius, b
Equivolume sphere radius
Geometric ﬂattening, f = (a
−
Ellipticity, (a2
b2)/(a2 + b2)
−
Eccentricity, e =
(for f
≪
Mass, M
Mean density
Normal gravity at equator
Normal gravity at poles
G M (where G is the gravitational constant)

b2/a2
1
1, e is about √2 f )
p

−

6 378 137 m
6 356 752 m
6 371 000 m
1/298.26
1/297.75
0.08182 = 1/12.2

1024 kg
5.97369
×
103 kg m−3
5.5148
×
9.7803267 m s−2
9.832186 m s−2
3.986005

1014 m3 s−2

×

ligne [0.2 mm], that is suﬃcient for the ordinary use in the society. This unit will
take the name meter.

([14], p. 5)

The so called provisional meter, with all the resulting units of volume, weights and
surfaces [14, 32], was adopted by decree the 1st August 1793.

5.3 The 1792-1798 meridian mission

The Rapport sur le choix d’une unit´e de mesure [2] outlined a plan to realize the new
system of measures. One of the items of the plan was to re-measure the Lacaille-
Cassini arc of the Paris meridian from Dunkerque to Perpignan,32 also extending the
measurements down to Barcelona (a total of almost ten degrees in longitude, for a length
of 1075 km — see the map in Ref. [39] to get an idea of “cette belle entreprise”[14]).

The motivation of the Academy in support of the enterprise was to improve the
knowledge of the meridian length. The conﬁdence on a possible improvement relied on
several factors:

the ability of the astronomers presently involved in this job, the perfection that the
mathematical tools and instruments have acquired in the last times, the magnitude
of the measured circle, that is extended by more than nine degrees and one half,
the advantage of being this [the meridian arc] cut in the middle by the forty ﬁfth
parallel, all that guarantees us the exact and perfect execution of this beautiful
enterprise, the greatest of this kind. (Ref. [14], pp. 3-4)

32More precisely, the lowest latitude was about Collioure, a small town close to the Spanish border.

15

The campaign of measurements started immediately, apart from delays of practical
nature, after the Academy’s proposal was accepted. A quote is in order to report
the driving spirit of the commission, that also shows the yearning for an ‘egalit´e of
measures’, one of the political and ideological requirements of the new r´egime that
can’t be set aside any longer.

There is no need, in our judgment, to await the concurrence of other nations either
Indeed, we have
to choose a unit of measurement or to begin our operations.
eliminated all arbitrariness from this determination and rely only on information
equally accessible to all nations. (Ref. [2], p. 11)

Two astronomers were nominated responsible of the mission: Jean Baptiste Joseph
Delambre, in charge of the northern part of the arc, up to Dunkerque, a French town
on the North Sea, close to the Belgian border; Pierre Fran¸cois Andr´e M´echain, in charge
of the southern part.

In principle, the task was simpler than that accomplished by Lacaille and Cassini
ﬁfty years earlier, because it seemed initially possible to use much of their work (like
the triangulation stations). However, things were much more diﬃcult, complicated by
Revolution and wars (see Refs. [40, 10] for a dramatic account of the enterprise). It was
almost a miracle that Delambre and M´echain could meet again in Paris in November
1798 alive and with the logbooks of their measurements.

The unexpected long duration of the mission was the reason the acad´emiciens were
urged to provide the provisional length of the meter in 1793. In fact, “the interests of
the Republic and of the commerce, the operations initiated on the money and on the
cadastre of France, require that the adoption of the new system of weight and measures
is not delayed any longer” [14]. The Decimal Metric System was later established by
law on April 7, 1795, well before the meridian mission was accomplished.

After the end of the meridian mission an international commission was convened
to review the Delambre-M´echain data and to establish the length of the meter.
In
March 1799 the meter was determined in 443.296 lignes, also taking into account Earth
ﬂattening.33 The new standard diﬀered by 0.114 lignes (0.32 mm) from the provisional
unit. Compared with our present value (see Table 3) one can see that the new result
slightly worsened the knowledge of the meridian.34

33The Dunkerque-Barcelona arc is suﬃciently large to allow to an estimate of the meridian curvatures
in several sub-arcs and to make an independent estimate of Earth ﬂattening. That came out to be
about one half of that based on many data sets from equator to Lapland. The ﬂattening based on the
latter information was ﬁnally preferred, As Alder puts it “. . . 1/150 oﬀered the best description of the
arc as it passed through France, but they knew that the older data oﬀered a more plausible picture of
the overall curve of the Earth. They could choose consistency or plausibility. And after some heated
discussion, they chose plausibility and the old data.” Actually, the discrepancy between the values of
ﬂattening in diﬀerent sub-arcs was a ﬁrst indication that Earth has a more complicate shape than just
a rotational ellipsoid, giving rise to the concept of Geoid (see e.g. [24]).

34We would like to point out that the two results would come to a better agreement if they were
treated in the same way. In fact, correction for ﬂattening was not applied to the Lacaille-Cassini result.
In Table 3 we have done the exercise of calculating the length of the meridian from s/α of Delambre-
M´echain, equal to 57019 toises/degree. We obtain a resulting meter of 443.379 lines. Since the Lacaille-
Cassini arc was roughly similar to the Delambre-M´echain one, we can use the ratio 443.296/443.379
as an approximate correction factor to take into account Earth ﬂattening in the Lacaille-Cassini data.
After the correction the meridian length becomes 40006 km and the corrected provisional meter would
be 443.36 lignes (and lm = 1.00014 m), i.e. a diﬀerence of only 0.064 lignes (1.4 mm) with respect to
the 1799 ﬁnal meter. Anyway, though the two results get closer, the one based on the Lacaille-Cassini
measurements gets also slightly closer to the present value of the meridian length.

16

The manufacture of the deﬁnitive model, based on the results on those measure-
ments, was completed in June 1799. On 22 June, the prototype of the meter was
solemnly presented to the Council of Elders and of the Five Hundred.

6

Interplay of pendulum and the meridian based standard

As we have remarked several times, oﬃcially it seems that the meter was invented ‘out
of nothing’, apparently only stemming from the slogan “ten million meters from the
pole to the equator” [41]. A pendulum had been considered as a possible candidate as
unit of length, but it had been rejected to avoid a unit of length depending on a unit
of time. However, in listing the necessary operations in order to realize the reform of
measures, a unitary pendulum is taken into account, as a kind of secondary standard
to reproduce the meter:

The operations that are necessary to carry out this work are the following: . . .
4th To make some observations in latitude forty-ﬁfth degree to verify the number
of oscillations that a simple pendulum, which corresponds to the ten millionth
part of the arc of a meridian, would accomplish within a day, in the vacuum, at
sea level, at freezing point, so that, after having learned that number, this measure
could be found again through the observations of the pendulum. In this way the
advantages of the system that we have chosen are joined to the advantages that
would be obtained by taking the length of the pendulum as a unit. It is possible
to accomplish these observations before learning this ten millionth part. Actually,
if the number of the oscillations of a pendulum having a determined length are
known, it will be suﬃcient to learn the relation between this length and the ten
millionth part to infer undoubtedly the investigated number.35

(Ref. [2], p. 9)

Therefore, while in the ﬁrst part of the report the one-second pendulum was ruled out,
a one-meter pendulum36 appears in the second part.

The fact that the meter pendulum had to be considered an important tool to carry
out the entire project can be easily inferred from the response of the President of the
National Assembly to a memory of Borda [42] on the metric system of weights and
measures in 1792:

You took your theory from the nature: among all the determined lengths you chose
the two unique lengths whose combined result was the most absolute, the measure
of the pendulum and above all the measure of the meridian; and by so relating
the ﬁrst to the second with as much zeal as sagacity, the double comparison of
time and Earth through a mutual conﬁrmation, you will have the honor to have
discovered this permanent unit for all the world, this beneﬁcent truth that is going
to become a new advantage to the nations and one of the most useful conquest of
the equality.

(Ref. [42], p. 9)

And, again, in the July 1793 proposal of decree, it is stated that

the academy has judged that its works were quite well advanced, and that the
arc of meridian, as well as the length of the seconds pendulum, the weights of
35The task speciﬁed in the 4th point was later committed to Borda and Charles Augustin de Coulomb.
36This name is not appropriate for the pendulum mentioned in the 1791 document, as the name

’meter’ had still to be made oﬃcial. Nevertheless, let us call it so hereafter.

17

a cubic pied of distilled water, were known at this moment, both from previous
observations as well as from those on which the members of the commission have
been working, with the accuracy suﬃcient to the ordinary usages of the society
and the commerce (Ref. [14], p. 4)

Therefore, while in the ﬁrst quote of this section (Ref. [2], p. 9) the commission
generically speaks of a “a pendulum of a determined length”, it is here clear that the
referred pendulum was the seconds pendulum, and not a pendulum based on a previous
unit of length, like a one-toise pendulum. We see clearly the advantage of that choice.
Since the seconds pendulum was quite well known, including the dependence of its
period with latitude, once the oscillation time of the meter tm was known, the unitary
length would have been easily determined as um = lsp t2
m, where lsp indicates the length
of the seconds pendulum and tm is expressed in seconds. However, it was never stated
that the seconds pendulum and one-meter pendulum are very close in length, though
their closeness makes easier the intercalibration procedure.

7 Conclusions and discussion

The initial aim of this paper was to rise the question that gives the title, why the
semi-period of a meter simple pendulum is approximately equal to one second. In fact,
it seems to us that this question has never been raised in literature, not even at a level
of a curiosity (for some references on the subject, see e.g. [29, 35, 40, 10, 43]).

We were fully aware that mere coincidences are possible and such speculations can
easily drift to the non-scientiﬁc domain of numerology, especially in the ﬁeld of units
of measures, where the large number of units through the ages and around the world
cover almost with continuity the range of lengths in the human scale. Therefore, we
were searching if there were reasonable explanations for the close coincidence pointed
out in our question.

A physical reason is ruled out. A unit of length deﬁned as a fraction of a planet
meridian makes the period of a unitary pendulum only depending on the planet density.
But this period has no connection with the planet rotation period, and then with its
86400th part.

The suspicion remains — deﬁnitely strengthened — that, among the possible choices
of Earth related units, the choice favored the one that approximated a pendulum that
beats the second.

7.1 About the choice of the meridian

As we have remarked in Section 4, the Rapport sur le choix d’une unit´e de mesure [2]
shows a certain degree of na¨ıveness. For example, let us take the preference of the
meridian over the equator, justiﬁed in terms of ease of measurement and of universality
with respect to all nations of Earth.

Let us start from the latter point, that we called ‘democratic’. The sentence “it is
possible to state that every people belongs to one of the Earth’s meridian, while only
a group of people live along the equator” is not more than a slogan. It is self-evident
that every point on the Earth surface belongs to a meridian. A diﬀerent question is
to measure it in order to reproduce the meter with the accuracy required to exchange
the results of precise measurements in diﬀerent places of the globe. Even assuming

18

that every people has the proper technology to perform the measurements, the country
should be extended enough along the longitude in order the required measurements to
be performed. Moreover, since Earth is ﬂattened at the poles, at least two measure-
ments of arc of meridian at two distant latitudes are needed, in order to infer the Earth
ellipticity. Therefore, also the sentence “The operations that are necessary to establish
the latter could be carried out only in countries that are too far from ours”, referred to
the equator, applies also to the meridian, with even a complication for the latter: while
the determination of the equator requires only one campaign of triangulation, because
(apart from small mass dishomogeneity) the circularity of the equator comes from sym-
metry arguments, determining the meridian needs necessarily, as it had already been
done in the middle of the 18th century, several campaigns at diﬀerent latitudes.

Frankly, we ﬁnd that na¨ıveness acquires an unintentional humorous vein at page 8
of the document [2], when, after having claimed a few pages earlier that the choice of
the meridian is ‘democratic’, the Paris meridian going from Dunkerque to Barcelona is
presented as almost unique to perform the proposed measurement:37

One cannot ﬁnd neither in Europe nor in any other part of the world, unless to
measure a much wider angle, a portion of meridian that satisﬁes at the same time
the condition to have the extreme points at sea level, and that of crossing the
forty-ﬁfth parallel, if one does not take the line that we propose, or as well another
more western meridian from the French coast, until the Spanish one. (Ref. [14], p.
4)

(Their precise Swiss neighbors would have no chance to reproduce the meter standard
in their country!) As a matter of fact, the choice of the meridian appeared to other
countries, especially Great Britain and USA, as a imposition of the Paris meridian.
All previous attempts of cooperation towards an international standard of length were
frustrated, and still now we suﬀer of communication problems.38

Let us come now to the concept of ‘naturalness’, about which we have already
expressed some caveat above. Once chosen Earth as reference object upon which the
scale of lengths has to be based, which of its parameters is the most natural? For
simplicity, let us consider a sphere. To a mathematician or a physicist the natural
parameter of the sphere is the radius (that was basically the reason of Cassini’s proposal
mentioned in section 4). However, for a engineer the natural parameter is the diameter,
because that is what he directly measures with a gauge in the workshop. The diameter
is also the convenient parameter for a sphere seen from very far (as it could be a planet).
But if we take a soccer ball, neither of the above two parameters is ‘natural’. It is not
by chance that the FIFA laws establish the ball size by its circumference [“of not more
than 70 cm (28 inches) and not less than 68 cm (27 inches)” [45]], for it can be easily
checked with a tape-measure.

37That could be the reason why the world best selling encyclopedia erroneously reports that the
meter “was originally deﬁned as one ten-millionth of the distance from the equator to the North Pole
on a line running through Paris.”[44] This could be a just a minor ﬂaw due to superﬁciality, but it
could also be a heritage of the anglo-saxon reaction to what was perceived as a French imposition.

38As a side remark, we would like to point out that even the very interesting Alder’s book The
Measure of All Things, that has been very useful to us in this research, is a proof the dreams of the
acad´emiciens are still far from coming true. In fact all units of lengths are given in feet and inches,
certainly convenient to USA and British readers, but hard for the others, especially when, in translation,
unavoidable mistakes happen, as the 25 feet of page 188, that becomes 672 meters at page 289 of the
Italian edition. Nothing compared to the Mars Climate Orbiter disaster, but this is symptomatic of
the troubles that disuniformity of units of measures still causes, made worse by globalization.

19

The situation is a bit more complicated for a sphere as large as the Earth, and on
which we live. It is a matter of fact that at that time it was practically impossible to
make immediate measurements of any of the lengths related to the dimensions of Earth.
One could only perform local measurements and extend the results to the quantity of
interest, assuming a geometrical model of Earth. However, once a geometrical model
is deﬁned, it becomes of practical irrelevance which parameter is considered as unit,
that could be the meridian, the equator or the distance between poles and center of
Earth.39

7.2 About the choice of the quarter of the meridian

It is clear that, once the acad´emiciens were bound to the decimal system, decided by
the ﬁrst commission, and the unit of length had to be related to Earth dimensions,
the unit of length of practical use had to be a small decimal sub-multiple of an Earth
dimension. But why the quarter of the meridian, instead of the meridian itself? The
Rapport [2] does not give any justiﬁcation of the choice, as if all other possibilities
were out of question. And this is a bit strange. The meridian as unit of length had
no tradition at all, and there had been no discussion about which submultiple to use.
Evidence against the naturalness of the the quarter of meridian seems to us provided
by the fact that the vulgarization of the deﬁnition of the meter, as it is often taught at
school and as it is memorized by most people, is the forty millionth part of ‘something’,
where this ‘something’ is most times remembered as the ‘equator’ or the ‘maximum
circle’.

It could be that we have nowadays a diﬀerent sensitivity to the subject (we have
made a little poll among friends and colleagues, and our impression has been unani-
mously conﬁrmed), but we ﬁnd it hard to be rationally convinced by the arguments of
the following kind:

Once it has been chosen as base, will either the whole meridian or a sensible part
of it be taken as a unit? The wholeness? Out of question! The half, that stretches
from one pole to the other, may not be easily conceived by our mind because of
the part which is located “below”, in the other hemisphere. This is not the case
of the quarter of the meridian that, on the contrary, can be easily imagined:
it
In the future it will be said: France
stretches from “one pole to the equator”.
opened the divider and pointed it on one pole and the equator, a sentence that will
be greatly successful. There is another reason, that is really scientiﬁc and supports
the meridian:
its quarter is the arc intersected by the right angle. That’s right:
however, why should it be considered as a further advantage? Simply because the
right angle is considered as the natural angle, the angle of the vertical and the
39This remains true also if an elliptic, rather than spherical model, is considered, though two pa-
rameters have to be taken into account, instead then just one. One might argue that the meridian
has the advantage that it is bound only to the assumed rotational symmetry of Earth, and not to its
particular shape (sphere, ellipse, or even something more complicate). But, apart from the fact the
second commission report [2] speaks explicitly of measuring an arc of meridian, this possibility would
imply to envisage a campaign of triangulation from the pole to the equator, that would have been
infeasible at that time. (Remember that before 1909 the north pole was just an hypothetical place
never reached by human beings.) As a matter of fact, the preferred parameters of modern geodesy
to characterize the Earth ellipsoid (also called ‘spheroid’) are the equatorial radius and the ﬂattening.
In particular, the latter is the best determined Earth parameter, given with 12 signiﬁcant digits (the
value of table 4 has been rounded): 1/f = 298.257 223 563 (WGS84) [24, 46].

20

Table 5: Some possible choices of units of length based on the dimensions of Earth, assumed
to be spherical, together with a reasonable decimal sub-multiple as practical unit and the half
period of the simple pendulum of such practical unit. (Analogous quantities can be deﬁned
assuming an ellipsoid).

unit

radius
diameter
meridian
1/2 meridian (pole-pole)
1/4 meridian (pole-equator)
45th parallel
one radiant along the meridian
(same as radius)
1 degree of Earth’s arc
1 minute of Earth’s arc(∗)
1 second of Earth’s arc
(∗) Equal to 1 nautical mile, that is 1852 m.

decimal
sub-multiple
1/10 000 000
1/10 000 000
1/100 000 000
1/10 000 000
1/10 000 000
1/100 000 000
1/10 000 000

practical unit
(cm)
64
128
40
200
100
28
64

1/100000
1/1000
1/100

111
185
31

T /2
(s)
0.803
1.135
0.635
1.419
1.004
0.534
0.803

1.057
1.367
0.558

gravity. It is the unit-angle, the degree is nothing but its subdivision.
p. 55 of the Italian translation)

(Ref. [35],

What would be the alternatives? As an exercise, we show in table 5 some possible
‘natural’ choices of units of length based on the dimensions of Earth, together with
a reasonable decimal sub-multiple as practical unit. Sub-multiples of the length of
the meridian, e.g. one part over 10 000 000 or one part over 100 000 000, had led to a
‘meter’ of 400 or 40 of ‘our’ centimeters. The former is certainly too large, but the
latter is quite appropriate for daily use, and, indeed, it falls in a range of length that
is better perceived by people (one of the criticisms to the meter is its unnaturality,
at least compared for example to the foot or even to the ﬁrst standardized unit, the
cubit). Even the pole-to-pole arc would have yield a better practical unit, very close
to the toise.

We see from table 5 that the 10 000 000 part of the quarter of meridian is the closest
to the length of the seconds pendulum. So, when the French scientists proposed the new
unit of length, we think it is possible, among the many ‘defensible natural units’, they
chose the closest to the seconds pendulum. The reason could be a compromise with the
strenuous defenders of the seconds pendulum. Or it could have happened that, since
they had in mind some ‘cooperation’ between the new unit and “a pendulum having
a determined length” [2], choosing a unit close to the well studied seconds pendulum
would have simpliﬁed the intercalibrations.

7.3 About the naturalness of a system of units

The main reason to reject the seconds pendulum was “to have a unit of length that does
not depend on any other quantity” [2]. Now we think exactly the other way around, and
prefer a system with a minimal numbers units connected by physical laws, as it was

21

suggested ﬁrst by Burattini in 1675 (see Appendix B). Besides cultural aspects, that
make change ‘what is perceived as natural’ with time,40 we ﬁnd a certain contradiction
in the use of the naturalness concept expressed in the Rapport [2]. Why not to extend
it also to the weight unit, instead of binding this unit to the unit of length and to the
density of water?

A similar comment applies to the right angle as the “natural angle” to justify the
quarter of meridian (see Guedj’s quote in subsection 7.2): the right angle is certainly
the natural one for a square or a rectangle, but why should it be natural for a circle,
where there are no angles? (At most, if there were an angle to be considered natural,
that would be the radiant, as all those who use trigonometric functions of computer
scientiﬁc libraries know).

7.4 About the reticence concerning the value of the new unit of length

As we have stated in section 5, we have been surprised not to ﬁnd an estimate of the
length of the unit proposed in the second commission report [2]. Perhaps they were
really afraid that, if the members of the National Assembly had known that length
was determined within a few parts in ten thousand, then the new meridian mission
would have not been ﬁnanced [10]. In fact, when two years later they had to ﬁnally
release an oﬃcial number, some acad´emiciens saw in the provisional meter the end of
the meridian mission.41

There is another point, contained in the documents that led to the provisional
meter [32, 14], that has puzzled us. Why did they not provide their ‘best value’, that
included the best understanding of Earth ﬂattening? As we have seen in footnote 34,
the ﬂattening correction to the meter is about two parts in ten thousand. If applied,
it would have changed the provisional meter from 443.44 lignes to about 443.36 lignes.
A little diﬀerence, but still relevant, if compared with the signiﬁcant digits with which
the provisional meter was given. We are not arguing on the base of after-wit arguments
(the present best value of the 1/10 000 000 of the quarter of meridian is 443.3975 toises,
right in the middle between the two values). Our question is only why they did not
report the ‘best value’ — and they knew that 443.44 lignes was not the best value
deriving from their status of knowledge, because that value assumed a spherical Earth,
an hypothesis already ruled out by theoretical considerations and experimental results.
The simplest reason could be they considered that value good enough for practical
applications and, since the provisional meter had to be most likely revised, it was
not worth applying the little correction that was of the same size of the expected
error. But then, why to state that “its error does not exceed one tenth of ligne”, if
the error due to the omitted correction counted already by about 0.08 lignes? (We
understand that statements concerning errors have always to be taken cum grano salis,
but the expression “does not exceed” is quite committing). Frankly, we do not see any
other plausible and consistent explanation, apart the somehow malicious guess, to be
40With this respect, a suggestion put forward in 1889 by Max Planck has been particularly inﬂuen-
tial. He proposed that systems of units should be based on values assigned conventionally to certain
fundamental physical constants. The ﬁrst (partial) realization of Planck’s idea took place in 1983
when the constancy of the speed of light in diﬀerent inertial frames, adopted by Albert Einstein as the
grounding principle of special relativity, was ﬁnally used to relate the unit of length to the unit of time.
41“The new measures are being adopted for the commerce independent of the new measure of the
earth; so there is little need for you to push yourself too hard to bring your result now”, wrote Lalande
to Delambre (cited in Ref. [10]).

22

taken with the beneﬁt of inventory, that they wanted to have some room to modify
the provisional meter after the end of the new measurements, in the case the new
result would come very close to the old one. That would have justiﬁed the expensive
enterprise.

7.5 About hidden motivations of the meridian mission

The suspicion that the choice of the meridian based unit of length was just a veil for
other reasons of the acad´emiciens is not a new one. Many arguments are given for
example in the captivating Alder’s The measure of all things [10]. We are inclined to
believe in the most noble cause advanced in this book, i.e. the acad´emiciens were mainly
interested in making a decided step in the understanding of the shape of our planet.
Borda’s interest to see his repeating circle protagonist of a great enterprise seems also
a good reason, but we see it at a second level. (It seems to us the anonymous’ quote
“Sometimes to serve the people one must resolve to deceive them”, reported in Ref.[10],
is quite appropriate to the case.)

However, and that was the irony of fate, the improved knowledge of the Earth
decreed that the basic premise on which the meridian mission started was wrong: all
meridians are diﬀerent from each other, and the diﬀerent arcs of the same meridian are
unique.42 The deﬁnition of the meter had then an intrinsic uncertainty, such that it
would have become soon or later unsuitable for a standard of length.43

A ﬁnal reﬂection

We have reasoned the plausibility of an original meter bound to the second through
the swing of the pendulum. If our guess is true, then, despite the search for standards
taken from nature has been the motivation for so many, long scientiﬁc and philosophical
researches, at the bases of the system virtually used all over the world there are the
throbs of our hearts. May be an original support to the well known statement by
Jean Jacques Rousseau “Nothing is less in our power than the heart, and far from
commanding we are forced to obey it.”

Acknowledgements

It is a pleasure to thank Dino Esposito and Paolo Quintili for several discussions on the
subject and for the careful reading of the manuscript. We also thank Giuseppe Barbagli,
Roberto Carlin, Giovanni Iorio Giannoli and Daniela Monaldi for useful comments.

42Even not taking into account asperities of the ground, hills and mountains, the concept of spheroid
(or solenoid), is just a ﬁrst approximation of the Earth shape (the ’zero-th order’ approximation is
the sphere). The equipotential surface of Earth has a complicate shape called Geoid, of which the
spheroid is a kind of best ﬁtting curve (see e.g. Ref. [46] for an introduction, that also contains a visual
representation of the Geoid).

43That is due neither to “le diﬃcolt`a ad applicare tale deﬁnizione, causate dalla forma sferica della
terra” (the diﬃculties to apply such a deﬁnition, caused by the spherical shape of the Earth) [47], nor
because “later it was discovered that the Earth is not a perfect sphere”[44].

23

Appendix A: The local ‘meter’ and ‘second’ in the planets
of the solar system

The well known small angle formula that gives the period T of the simple pendulum
(i.e. the elementary text book pendulum) as a function of its length l is

T = 2 π

l
g

,

s

where g is the gravitational acceleration, approximately equal to 9.80 m/s2 on Earth.
For l = 1 m we get T = 2.007 s. Therefore, each swing takes 1.0035 s, that diﬀers from
a round second only by a few parts per thousand. Varying g by
0.3% (i.e. from 9.77
to 9.83 m/s2), the period changes only by

0.15%.

±

In order to understand if there is any physical reason behind this numerical coinci-
dence let us try to understand the property of Earth that mainly inﬂuences the period
of the pendulum, and if there is any simpliﬁcation due to the fact that the length of
the pendulum is about 1/40 000 000 of the meridian.44 The gross value of g depends
on mass and radius45 R of the Earth with local eﬀects due to not exact sphericity
(see Table 4), mass dishomogeneity and above sea level height. Moreover, there is a
centrifugal term, null at the pole and maximum at the equator, due to Earth rota-
tion.46 In the approximation of a perfect sphere, the gravitational acceleration g, i.e.
the gravitational force FG divided by the mass of the pendulum, is given by

±

g =

FG
m

=

1
m

G M m

R2 =

G M
R2 ,

44One might also think of a simpliﬁcation due to the fact the length of the pendulum is unitary. To
readers with little physics background we would like to make clear that what matters for the pendulum
period is the length, and not the unit in which the length is expressed. The value of a generic quantity
the numerical value, e.g.
Q is given by Q =
l = 1.38 m.
and [Q] change,
preserving Q invariant:

If we change unit of measurement from system A to system B ,

[Q], where [Q] is the unit of measurement and

} ·

Q

Q

Q

{

}

}

{

{

The two numerical values are then related by

Q =

Q

{

A

}

·

[Q]A =

Q

[Q]B .

{

B

}

·

(1)

(2)

Q

B =
}

{

{

Q

A

}

·

[Q]A
[Q]B

.

If we call M a diﬀerent unit of length, such that 1 M = α m, we get m/M = 1/α. Therefore, a length
l = n m will be expressed as l = N M = n/α M in the new unit (but the length is the same: you will
not grow up, if your height is expressed in centimeters or millimeters rather than in meters). As far
as Eq. (1) is concerned, the numerical value of g will be transformed in the same way as l, namely
g = (9.8/α) M/s2. As a consequence, the conversion factor α simpliﬁes in Eq. (1) and the period will
remain the same, as it must be.
On the other hand, if we consider a diﬀerent length, that has unitary numerical value in the new unit
1 M/(9.8/α) M/s2 = √α T . (For
M, we get a diﬀerent period of the pendulum, namely T
example, if the new unit of length is twice the meter, the half period of a simple pendulum of unitary
length will be 1.419 s).

45The generic ‘radius of Earth’ R refers usually to the equatorial radius and it implies that Earth is

= 2 π

p

′

considered suﬃciently spherical for the purpose of the calculations.

46At the equator, the negative centrifugal acceleration gives a contribution to g equal to ∆gc =
0.034 m/s2 (Trot = 86400 s stands for the rotation period). Note that,
v2/R =
−
however, in geodesy ‘gravitational acceleration’ g indicates the overall free fall acceleration experienced
by a body and takes into account the genuine gravitational force and the centrifugal one.

4 π2 R/T 2

rot =

−

−

24

Table 6: Some physical data about the planets of the solar system, together with the ‘planet
10−7 R), the half period of a ‘planet meter’ pendulum [T (lm, g)/2] and
meter’ (lm = π/2
the ‘planet second’ [Trot/86400]. Note that Eqs. (2)–(4) have been evaluated assuming perfect
spherical and homogeneous planets, while the ‘radius’ is just one half of the equatorial diameter,
and the half period T (lm, g)/2 is directly evaluated from nominal value of g given in this
table [48]. The minus sign in the period indicates retrograde rotation.

×

Planet

Physical data [48]

Mass
(kg)
3.30 1023
4.87 1024
5.98 1024
6.42 1023
1.90 1027
5.68 1026
8.68 1025
1.02 1026
1.27 1022

Radius
(km)
2440
6052
6378
3397
71492
60268
25559
24766
1137

ρ
(g/cm3)
5.43
5.24
5.52
3.93
1.33
0.69
1.32
1.64
2.06

g
(m/s2)
3.70
8.89
9.80
3.69
23.17
8.98
8.71
11.03
0.66

Mercury
Venus
Earth
Mars
Jupiter
Saturn
Uranus
Neptune
Pluto

One ‘meter’ pendulum
and its period
T (lm,g)
2
(s)
1.01
1.03
1.00
1.19
2.19
3.23
2.13
1.87
1.64

Trot
86400
(s)
58.6
243
1.00
1.03
0.41
0.45
0.72
0.67
6.39

lm
(m)
0.38
0.95
1.00
0.53
11.23
9.47
4.01
3.89
0.19

−

−

−2 is
where M = 5.98 1024 kg is the mass of Earth and G = 6.67 10−11N
the gravitational constant. Expressing the mass in terms of density ρ and volume
V = 4/3 π R3, we get

m2

kg

·

·

g =

4/3 π ρ G R3
R2

4
3

=

π ρ G R .

(3)

(4)

The gravitational acceleration g is then proportional to the planet size and density.
Let us now calculate the period of a pendulum whose length is 1/40 000 000 part of a
10−7
meridian of a spherical planet, i.e. lm = α R, where α = 2π/40 000 000 = π/2
is the ﬁxed ratio between this ‘meter’ and the planet radius. The period of such a
‘planetary meter’ pendulum is

×

T (lm) = 2π

αR
4/3 π ρ G R

=

s

2/3

107 ρ G

,

π

×

p

and depends only on planet density, and not on planet mass and size separately. In
particular, in the inner planets and Earth, for which the density is approximately 5.5
g/cm3, such a ‘planetary meter’ pendulum would beat approximately the second (see
Tab. 6).

However, the half period of this pendulum is approximately equal to the 1/86400
part of the planet rotation only for Earth and Mars, which have approximately equal
‘days’. For all other planets, the local day can be very diﬀerent with respect to the
Earth one. In fact, the rotation speed is related to the initial angular momentum when
the planet was formed and there is no reason why it should come out to be the same in
diﬀerent planets (Venus and Pluto are indeed retrograde, i.e. they rotate East-West).

25

Appendix B: Tito Livio Burattini’s catholic meter

Among the several scientists that advocated the seconds pendulum as unit of length
it is worth to emphasize the ﬁgure of Tito Livio Burattini, an unusual and interesting
personality of the 17th century,47 and his Misura Universale, published in 1675 [49].
Apart from issues of priority on the proposal of the seconds pendulum as unit of length,
to which we are not interested, the historical relevance of Burattini’s work resides mainly
in the several modern concepts and nomenclature that appeared for the ﬁrst time in
his book. The most relevant of them is the idea of relating diﬀerent units via physical
quantities in order to set up a complete system starting from the unit of time. The
sub-title in the front page of his document accounts for his ambitious proposal:

Treatise in which it is shown how in every Place of the World it is possible to
ﬁnd a UNIVERSAL MEASURE & WEIGHT having no relation with any other
MEASURE and any other WEIGHT & anyway in every place they will be the
same, and unchangeable and everlasting until the end of the WORLD.” 48

Here the word universal is used for the ﬁrst time for a unit of measurement. In the 9th
page of his document (pages are unnumbered) he makes the suggestion to call metro
cattolico (catholic meter — ‘catholic’ in the sense of universal) a standard realized by
the pendulum:

So, Pendula will be the basis of my work, and from them I shall ﬁrst originate
my Catholic Meter, that is the universal measure, as I think I have to name it in
Greek, and then I shall originate a Catholic Weight from it.” 49

Here is ﬁnally, in the 20th page, his deﬁnition of the meter:

The Catholic Meter is nothing but the length of a Pendulum, whose oscillations
are 3600 in a hour [...] as I refer to a free Pendulum, and not to those which hang
from Clocks. 50

We think he would be very pleased to learn that the unit of length of the International
System diﬀers from his meter by only about half centimeter!

47Tito Livio Burattini (born 1617 in Agordo, Belluno, Italy and died 1681 in Krakow, Poland)
was an Italian Egyptologist, inventor, architect, scientist, instrument-maker, and traveler. He was an
extremely versatile person (he even designed “ﬂying machines”!), with interests in mathematics, physics,
astronomy, geodesy and economics. He spent a few years in Egypt, where he prepared a triangulation
map of this country (he was also an excellent cartographer), made measurements of many pyramids
and obelisks, copied monuments and tried to classify them. After some stay in Germany, he ﬁnally
settled in Krakow, where he served as the King’s architect. There he performed optical experiments
and contributed to the discovery of irregularities on the surface of Venus, in collaboration with the
astronomers Stanislaw Pudlowsky, a former student of Galileo, and Girolamo Pinocci. He became also
a highly regarded maker of microscope and telescope lenses, sending some of them as gifts to Cardinal
Leopold de’ Medici. In 1645, he published Bilancia Sincera, where he proposed an improvement to the
hydrostatic balance described by Galileo in his Bilancetta.

48“Trattato nel qual si mostra come in tutti li Luoghi del Mondo si pu`o trovare una MISURA, & un
PESO UNIVERSALE senza che habbiano relazione con niun’altra MISURA, e niun altro PESO, & ad
ogni modo in tutti li luoghi saranno li medesimi, e saranno inalterabili, e perpetui sin tanto che durer`a
il MONDO.” (These original quotes are for the pleasure of Italian readers.)

49“Dunque li Pendoli saranno la base dell’opera mia, e da quelli cavar`o prima il mio Metro Cattolico,
cio`e misura universale, che cos`ı mi pare di nominarla in lingua Greca, e poi da questa cavar`o un Peso
Cattolico.”

50“Il Metro Cattolico non `e altro che la lunghezza di un Pendolo, le di cui vibrazioni siano 3600 in

un hora [. . . ] ch’io intendo d’un Pendolo libero, e non di quelli che sono attaccati agli Horologi.”

26

References

[1] See e.g. NIST site at http://physics.nist.gov/cuu/Units/index.html .

[2] J.C. Borda, J.L. Lagrange, P.S. Laplace, C. Monge and J.A.N. Condorcet, Rap-
port sur le choix d’une unit´e de mesure, lu `a l’Acad´emie des Sciences, le 19 mars
1791. Imprim´e par ordre de l’Assembl´ee Nationale. (19 mars 1791), Paris, Impr.
Nat., 1791.

[3] A.E. Berriman, Historical metrology, New York, Greenwood, 1957.

[4] O.A.W. Dilke, Mathematics and measurement. Reading the past, London,

British Museum Press, 1993.

[5] W. Kula, Miary i ludzie, 1970; (English trasl., Measures and Men, Princeton,

Princeton University Press, 1986).

[6] W. Hallock and H.T. Wade, Outlines of the evolution of weights and measures

and the metric system, New York, MacMillan, 1906.

[7] C.F. Petrie, Ancient weights and measures, London, University College, 1926.

[8] W.F. Richardson, Numbering and measuring in the classic world, London, Duck-

worth Publishing, 1992.

[9] P. Agnoli, Il senso della misura. La codiﬁca della realt`a tra ﬁlosoﬁa, scienza ed

esistenza umana, Roma, Armando Editore, 2004.

[10] A. Alder, The Measure of all things, New York, The Free Press, 2002.

[11] http://www.ukmetrication.com/history.htm .

[12] R. Hahn, The anatomy of a scientiﬁc institution: The Paris Academy of Sci-

ences, 1666-1803, Berkeley, University of California Press, 1971.

[13] E. Rothschild, Economic sentiments: Adam Smith, Condorcet and the Enlight-

ment, Cambridge, Cambridge University Press, 2001.

[14] L. Arbogast, J.C. Borda, J.L. Lagrange, C. Monge, Sur l’uniformit´e et le
syst`eme g´en´eral des poids et mesures : rapport et projet de d´ecret pr´esent´es `e la
Convention nationale, au nom du comit´e d’instruction publique par le citoyen
Arbogast. Rapport fait `a l’acad´emie des sciences par les citoyens Borda, La-
grange et Monge, Paris, Impr. Nat. 1793.

[15] R.E. Zupko, French weights and measures before the Revolution: A dictionary
of provincial and local units, Bloomington, Indiana University Press, 1978.

[16] http://www-gap.dcs.st-and.ac.uk/˜history/HistTopics/Measurement.html.

[17] C. de La Condamine, Nouveau project d’une mesure invariable, propre `a servir
de mesure commune `a toutes les nations, in Histoire et m´emoires de l’Acad´emie
royale des Sciences par 1774, Paris, 1747, pp 489-514.

[18] M. Mersenne, Cogitata physica: mathematica, Paris, De Waart et Beaulieu,

1644.

27

[19] C. Huygens, Horologium oscillatorum, sive de motu pendulorum ad horolo-
gia adaptato demostrationes geometricae, Paris, Regis et Illustrissimi Typogra-
phum, 1673.

[20] J.J. Proot, The Metric System, http://users.aol.com/jackproot/met/.

[21] C. H. Talleyrand, Proposition faite `a l’Assembl´ee Nationale, sur les poids et

mesures, par M. l’Eveque d’Autun, Paris, Impr. Nat., 1790.

[22] T. Jeﬀerson, Plan for establishing uniformity in the Coinage, Weights, and
Measures of the United States, communicated to the House of the Represen-
tatives, July 13, 1790, in The complete Jeﬀerson, New York, Padover, 1943,
pp. 974-995 (electronic version at http://ourworld.compuserve.com/homepages/
Gene Nygaard/t jeﬀ.htm).

[23] http://www.nesacs.org/nucleus/0101nuc/metricsystem.htm .

[24] J.R. Smith, Introduction to geodesy. The history and concepts of modern

geodesy, New York, John Wiley & Sons, 1997.

[25] G. Mouton, Observationes diametrorum solis et lunae apparentium, Lyon, Ex

Typograﬁa Matthei Liberal, 1670.

[26] E. Grimaux, Lavoisier et la commission des poids et mesures, Comptes rendus

de l’Acad´emie des sciences, Paris, 1886.

[27] J. Cassini, De la grandeur et de la ﬁgure de la Terre, Paris, Impr. Royale, 1720.

[28] D. Sobel, Longitude: The true story of a lone genius who solved the greatest
scientiﬁc problem of his time, New York, Walker Publishing Company Inc.,
1995.

[29] R.E. Zupko, Revolution in measurement. Western European weights and mea-
sures since the age of science, Philadelphia, The American Philosophical Society,
1990.

[30] A.S. Leblond, Sur la ﬁxation d’une mesure et d’un poids, lu `a l’Acad´emie des

Sciences, le 12 mai 1790, Paris, Demonville, 1790.

[31] A.S. Leblond, Sur la nomenclature des poids et mesures. Nouvelles r´eﬂexions

pr´esent´ees `a l’Istitut national, Paris, Demonville, 1790.

[32] J.C. Borda, J.L. Lagrange, C. Monge, Rapport fait a l’Acad´emie des sciences,
Sur le Syst`eme G´eneral des Poids et Mesures, Envoy´e au Comit´e d’Instruction
publique, le 29 mai 1793, l’an II de la Republique, Paris, Impr. Nat., 1793.

[33] http://www.mathpages.com/home/kmath182.htm .

[34] J. Greenberg, The Problem of the earth’s shape from Newton to Clairaut: The
rise of mathematical science in eighteenth-century Paris and the fall of ”normal”
science, Cambridge, Cambridge University Press, 1995.

[35] D. Guedj, Le m`etre du mond, 2000; (Italian trasl., Il metro del mondo, Milano,

Longanesi, 2004).

28

[36] http://sio.midco.net/mapstamps/arc.htm .

[37] J.R. Smith, The meridian arc measurement in Peru 1735 – 1745, FIG XXII
International Congress, Washington, D.C. USA, April 19-26 2002 (electronic
version at http://www.ﬁg.net/pub/ﬁg 2002/Hs4/HS4 smith.pdf).

[38] D.A. Anderson, Theory of

cations, 1989 (electronic version of table available:
brary.caltech.edu/archive/00000014/18/TOE17.pdf).

the earth, Boston, Blackwell Scientiﬁc Publi-
http://caltechbook.li

[39] http://www.bnm.fr/version anglaise/pages/measurement/meridian.htm .

[40] D. Guedj, La M´eridienne, 1997 ; (English trasl., The Measure of the world,

Chicago, The University of Chicago Press, 2001).

[41] J.B.J. Delambre, Rapport historique sur les progr`es des sciences math´ematique

depuis 1789, Paris, Imprimerie Imp´er., 1810.

[42] J.C. Borda, M´emoire pr´esent´e `a la Convention Nationale; au nom de l’Acad´emie
des Sciences, le 25 novembre 1792, l’an premier de la R´epublique. Suivi De la
Response du President, Paris, Impr. Nat., 1792.

[43] J.J. Roche, The mathematics of measurement. A critical history, London, The

Athlone Press, 1998.

[44] http://encarta.msn.com/encyclopedia 761561345/Metric System.html .

[45] http://www.ﬁfa.com/en/development/pitchsection/0,1245,4,00.html .

[46] X. Li and H.-J. G¨otze, Tutorial — Ellipsoid, geoid, gravity, and geo-
physics, Geophysics 66 (2001) 1660 (http://www.lct.com/technical-pages/pdf/
Li G Tut.pdf).

[47] Entry metro, Microsoft Encarta Enciclopedia Plus (Italian edition), 2002.

[48] http://chandra.astro.indiana.edu/astronomy/nineplanets/nineplanets.html .

[49] T.L. Burattini, Misura universale, in Vilna, Stamperia dei Padri Francescani,

1675.

29

