5
0
0
2
 
r
a

M
 
0
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
t
s
i
h
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
4
8
0
3
0
5
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

DSF−6/2005

ETTORE MAJORANA’S COURSE ON THEORETICAL PHYSICS:
A RECENT DISCOVERY

A. DRAGO AND S. ESPOSITO

Abstract. We analyze in some detail the course of Theoretical Physics held
by Ettore Majorana at the University of Naples in 1938, just before his myste-
rious disappearance. In particular we present the recently discovered ”Moreno
Paper”, where all the lecture notes are reported. Six of these lectures are not
present in the collection of the original manuscripts conserved at the Domus
Galilaeana in Pisa, consisting of only ten lectures.

1. Introduction

Probably, the highest appraisal received by the work of Ettore Majorana was ex-
pressed by Enrico Fermi writing to another physicist, Giuseppe Cocconi. Just after
the mysterious disappearance of Majorana in the March of 1938, in order to explain
to Cocconi what this loss did really mean for the physicists’ community, Fermi ex-
pressed himself as follows: “... but then there are geniuses like Galileo and Newton.
Well, Ettore was one of them. Majorana had what no one in the world has...” [1].
Similar opinions were expressed by Fermi in several other, more formal in nature,
situations as, for instance, in formalizing the judgement given by the board of the
1937 competition for a full professorship in Theoretical Physics (a position which
was obtained by Majorana independently from the common competition rules) or
in a letter to the Italian Prime Minister, Mussolini, where Fermi urged him for per-
forming accurate searches about Majorana disappearance [2]. Such opinions could
appear as overstatements or unjustiﬁed (especially because they are expressed by a
great physicist as Fermi), when compared with the spare (known) Majorana’s sci-
entiﬁc production, just 9 published papers; however, today the name of Majorana
is largely known to the nuclear and subnuclear physicist’s community (Majorana
neutrino, Majorana-Heisenberg exchange forces, and so on).
Some light on the peculiar abilities of Majorana is brought to us by his wide un-
published scientiﬁc papers, almost all deposited at the Domus Galilaeana in Pisa;
those known, in Italian, as “Volumetti” has been recently collected and translated
in a book [3].
In this paper we focus our attention on Majorana as professor of Theoretical Physics
rather than as researcher, and found our analysis mainly on the remembrances of his
former students, as well as on the lecture notes for the course given at the Univer-
sity of Naples. We refer especially to the important recent discovery of handwritten
lecture notes containing, in particular, six previously unknown lectures beyond the
ten ones whose original manuscripts are conserved in Pisa. Apart from the scientiﬁc
content of these documents, the historical relevance of such discovery is given by
the detailed chronological registration of the development of the course and even
1

2

A. DRAGO AND S. ESPOSITO

of the last days of Majorana in Naples before his disappearance, which will be es-
tablished here by making use also of some other evidences, more or less known,
collected on Majorana as a teacher. For a better and easier understanding, before
such an analysis we quickly review the main events which led Majorana to teach at
the University of excellent biographies [2], [4].

2. The national professor competition and the arrival in Naples

In 1937 the University of Palermo (Sicily), upon request of Emilio Segr´e, called
for a novel competition for a full professorship in Theoretical Physics. In addition
to Majorana (which was urged to take part to the competition by his friends and
Fermi), the competitors were Leo Pincherle, Giulio Racah, Gleb Wataghin, Gian
Carlo Wick and Giovanni Gentile (the son of the homonymous philosopher and
former Ministry of Education). The chairman of the competition board, installed
in Rome, was Fermi himself, while the other members were Antonio Carrelli (sec-
retary), Orazio Lazzarino, Enrico Persico and Giovanni Polvani.
The oﬃcial documents certify that the competition board suggested to the Ministry
of Education G. Bottai (which then accepted the proposal) “to appoint Majorana
as full professor of Theoretical Physics in a University of the Italian kingdom, for
high and well-deserved repute, independently of the competition rules” [5]. Once
the chair was attributed to Majorana “out of competition”, the board then declared
the three winning competitors according to the following order: 1) G.C. Wick, 2)
G. Racah, 3) G. Gentile. Notice that one member of the competition board, A.
Carrelli, at that time was the Director of the Institute of Physics at the Univer-
sity of Naples, and probably he played some role in suggesting this place as the
aﬃliation for Majorana’s chair. In fact, Carrelli (mainly an experimentalist) was
well aware of the fact that the Institute of Physics in Naples was lacking, at that
time, of theoreticians working on frontier physics topics; moreover, from a letter
from Majorana to Gentile [6] we learn that Majorana was “in correspondence with
Carrelli, which is really a very good person” 1.
Majorana was informed of his designation as full professor by the Minister Bottai
on November 2, 1937. However, his appointment oﬃcially started on the 10th of the
same month, but he went to Naples not before the beginnings of the following year
(probably January 10). Here Majorana realized very soon that very few physicists
worked at the Institute of Naples: “...Practically, the Institute is composed only
by Carrelli, his old-dated ﬁrst assistant [aiuto] Maione and of the young assistant
Cennamo. There is also a professor in Earth Physics, which is, however, diﬃcult
to be founded...” 2 [7]. Also some students of his course [8], [9] testify the fact that
Majorana was initially puzzled by the situation found in Naples (even the number
of students in Physics was very low, just ﬁve as we will see below), but later he
probably changed of mind and, in a letter to Gentile [10], he stated to be “pleased
by my students, some of which appear to have taken Physics seriously”.

1
It is also relevant that, before his appointment as Director of the Institute of Physics in Naples,

Carrelli directed for some time the Institute of Physics in Catania, the hometown of Majorana.

2
Alfredo Maione obtained his Degree in Physics in 1933 with Carrelli as advisor; he was
appointed as assistant in the same year and became ﬁrst assistant in 1937. Francesco Cennamo,
instead, was assistant to Carrelli from 1934-5 to 1940-1 (he became ﬁrst assistant in 1940 when
Maione resigned from his position). The “elusive” professor in Earth Physics was probably the
Director of the Institute of Earth Physics at the University of Naples, Giuseppe Imb´o, which
however did not belong to the Institute directed by Carrelli.

ETTORE MAJORANA’S COURSE ON THEORETICAL PHYSICS: A RECENT DISCOVERY 3

3. The course on Theoretical Physics

Before the arrival of Majorana in Naples, the course on Theoretical Physics (a
third- and fourth-year course) was usually delivered by the Director Carrelli, and
the topics covered in it did not concern at all the modern developments of Quantum
Physics. Just as an example, Sebastiano Sciuti recalls ironically that one of the most
advanced argument treated in the course by Carrelli was the brownian motion... [8].

3.1. The opening lecture. Majorana announced the opening of his course to be
held in January 13 (Thursday) at 9 a.m., but he agreed with the academic dean “to
avoid any oﬃcial character at the opening of the course” [7]. An indirect track of
this fact is the absence of such a piece of news on the city newspapers (such as, for
example, “Il Mattino”), diﬀerently from what occurred for others (certainly most
crowded) academic courses.
According to his student Gilda Senatore [9], the students could not take part to the
opening lecture, commonly considered as a “lectio magistralis”, due to an explicit
request by the Director of the Institute or, maybe, to other practical reasons (as,
for example, the concomitance of other courses). Majorana himself, in fact, wrote
that “it has been not possible to check that no overlap [with other courses] occurs,
so that it is possible that the students do not come and the opening lecture will
be postponed” [7]. As a matter of fact, the opening lecture was given on January
13, as scheduled, in the great semi-cyclical classroom in the building in Via Tari 3
(where the course of Experimental Physics was usually delivered), without students
and with the presence of about ten people, according to what Sciuti remembers [8].
The exclusion of the students from the opening lecture by Carrelli (or some other
people) may be convincingly explained by an ancient custom of the University of
Naples, according to which the novel teacher should “demonstrate” to the professors
of the Neapolitan athenaeum to be deserving of the assigned chair [11]. However,
Majorana’s quote “to avoid any oﬃcial character” reported above and the presence
at the opening lecture of some Majorana’s relatives [2], would force to think at this
interpretation of the exclusion of the students as only one possible guess.
The following lecture, the real start of the course, was given on January 15 (Satur-
day), and the course continued until March, in the even days of the week (Tuesday,
Thursday and Saturday), in a small room put in front of that used for the opening
lecture [8].

3.2. The students of the course. The “Physics” students who took part to the
Majorana course were ﬁve: Filomena Altieri, Laura Mercogliano, Nada Minghetti,
Gilda Senatore and Sebastiano Sciuti. All the women were “internal students” (al-
lievi interni), so that while attending the academic courses, they performed also
some research activities (mainly in Classical Physics) in parallel with; at this time
they were fourth-year students [9], probably out-of-course 3 [8]. Sciuti, an experi-
mentalist himself, was preparing his Degree in Physics, and he already had attended
a course on Theoretical Physics given by Carrelli. His purpose was to establish some
contact with the group of Rome directed by Fermi (he entered in Physics when he
was 17th years old, just accepting the general invitation by Orso Mario Corbino

3
Note that in the 1930’s, the course on Theoretical Physics consisted of two parts (as well as
some other courses), delivered at the third and fourth year in Physics, respectively. With the
exception of G. Senatore, which defended her Master Thesis one year later, the remaining four
students graduated in Physics in December 1938.

4

A. DRAGO AND S. ESPOSITO

and Fermi to study Physics): to attend a course given by a member of the group
of Rome appeared to him as a ﬁrst step in pursuing his aim. In their research ac-
tivities, all the students were working mainly in the ﬁeld of Experimental Physics
4; for example Senatore, although willing to study Theoretical Physics, attended
some studies on Molecular Physics being Maione (and, after the disappearance of
Majorana, Cennamo) as supervisor [9].
In addition to the ﬁve Physics students mentioned above, at the Majorana course we
ﬁnd also some non-examination students: Mario Cutolo [9], [8] and Father Savino
Coronato [9]. According to Senatore, Cutolo probably came to this course mainly
because of the presence of a girl (Minghetti). Coronato was a student in Mathe-
matics (he graduated at the end of 1938 with Renato Caccioppoli as supervisor)
and became the right hand of Caccioppoli at the Institute of Calculus; likely, he
was invited by Caccioppoli himself (who was presumably present at the opening
lecture) to attend Majorana’s lessons.
In addition to the above information, already known, we have recently realized
[12] that one more non-examination student probably participated at the Majo-
rana course: Eugenio Moreno. Such a presence was, until now, neither suspected
nor supported by documents, since the living witnesses of the course (mainly Sciuti
and Senatore) did not mention him. The new information has, instead, recently
emerged due to the son Cesare of E. Moreno (dead in 2000) [12], and is apparently
proved by the exhibition of the lecture notes handwritten by E. Moreno after the
original manuscripts by Majorana.
E. Moreno was born in Naples on February 16, 1910 and entered in Mathematics in
the academic year 1929-1930. Due to some military employments, he obtained his
Degree in Mathematics relatively late, only on the June 17, 1940. Soon after De-
cember 30, 1937, Moreno came back from his call-up service and probably matured
the intention to attend Majorana’s course on Theoretical Physics which, diﬀerently
from other courses of the Faculty of Sciences whose openings were usually held on
the starting week of the academic year in November, began just in the next January
1938.

3.3. Majorana’s personal style. Majorana, “dressed in blue” [8], had always a
“sad and perplexed” look so that his friends of the Fermi’s group in Rome since
long time attributed to him the nickname “Great Inquisitor” [4], [2]. This fact,
in addition to the hard subjects covered in his course 5, certainly embarrassed the
young students. Outside the “oﬃcial” framework of the course, Majorana conﬁrmed
as well his typical behavior: sometimes “bashful smiled; we guessed that he should
be a very good and kind man, but never was aﬀectionate and inviting; he was always
extremely shy” [13]. Still: “in that long and dark corridor at the ground ﬂoor... he
walked always very near the wall, noiseless and alone, moving as a shadow” [13].
When he arrived in Naples, certainly the Director Carrelli talked with Majorana
about the students and their research activities, so that Majorana probably soon

4
The speciﬁc topics of their activities can be deduced from the titles of their Master Theses: On
the spectral emission at ultrared frequencies of some phosphates and silicates (Altieri), Infrared
absorption bands due to the presence of the OH group (Mercogliano), Total metal emission below
and above the melting point (Minghetti), Absorption and ﬂuorescence of quinine salts (Senatore),
Preliminary researches at ultrared frequencies (Sciuti).

5
Senatore remembers that the Mathematics used by Majorana was not at all introduced in the

other academic courses given at that time.

ETTORE MAJORANA’S COURSE ON THEORETICAL PHYSICS: A RECENT DISCOVERY 5

realized of his quite peculiar task to teach the modern Theoretical Physics to such
a low number of low-level students [9]. Nevertheless, he was ﬁrm in pursuing his
task in a very responsible way [13].
When teaching, “he was very clear in treating the argument proposed by him at
the beginning of the lesson and he carried out it by means of a lot of examples,
always emphasizing the physical content rather than the mathematical formalism;
but when he turned around the blackboard and succeeded to write, he performed
calculations whose meaning were not immediately easy to follow” [13]. The peculiar
character of Majorana, then, certainly did not invite the mild student to stop him
for asking some more words of explanation. Few times, some questions were posed
by Sciuti only [8], who also asked Majorana a textbook in order to follow his
lectures in an easier way. To this request, Majorana answered that he would have
distributed some notes and, in any case, he was following Persico’s textbook [14]
(“a very ﬁne book, in Italian”), although adding some “formal simpliﬁcations” [8].
However, on the basis of the lecture notes came to us (see the next section), we see
that such “simpliﬁcations” were not at all occasional and of a minor role, so that
the setting-out given by Majorana to his course was completely distinct from that
used by Persico [15]. Another book “suggested” to Sciuti was Heisenberg’s [16],
but similar considerations apply to it too 6 Apparently, then, Majorana suggested
an introductory book to a subject which he dealt with in an advanced way.
Thus, when a given topic resulted too hard to be understood, the students could not
have recourse to a textbook, and Senatore recalls that “our notes only, taken during
the lessons and compared one with another after the course, allowed us to relate the
theoretical part, illustrated in an excellent way, with the mathematics representing
it” [13].
In fact, the students of the course (probably “Physics” students only)
usually met together in the day after a given lesson in order to “compare” the
notes taken during the lesson and study the corresponding arguments. Sometimes
during a lessons, Majorana noticed (by stopping himself and turning back) that the
students had diﬃculties to understand what he was expounding; then he stopped
himself and explained again the same argument [9]. “Exactly during one of that
unpleasant and hard lessons, where the topic was essentially some mathematical
tool to be applied to the study of given physical phenomena, Majorana forgot what
a high level scientist he was since, when he stayed at the blackboard and wrote on
it, suddenly stopped, then turned back, looked us for a while, smiled and presented
again the explanation, but by making some eﬀort in relating the concept already
exposed with the formulae ﬁlling the blackboard” [13].

4. The University lectures

As seen above, according to what Sciuti remembers [8], Majorana prepared some
lecture notes to be given to his students in order to facilitate their understanding of
the arguments developed in the course. Probably (see below) this took place after
January 22, 1938, i.e. after his ﬁfth lesson, since all the documents currently known
are lacking just of the ﬁrst ﬁve lectures (or, more precisely, the opening one and
the following four lectures). The story of how such notes, which are particularly

6
We point out that both the texts cited above belonged to the little (just about 15 books)
personal library of Majorana; in particular, the Heisenberg’s text was owned in its original German
version of 1930 [17]. Moreover, the reference to the text by Persico seems to appear on the back
cover of the Moreno Paper, although partially erased (it was pencilled).

6

A. DRAGO AND S. ESPOSITO

important in order to understand the innovative work of Majorana as a teacher,
have reached us is rather intriguing, so that it could be worth-while to analyze it
with the help of all documents in our hands.

4.1. The discovery of Moreno Paper. On September 2004, the present authors
have gathered the valuable report of the Eugenio Moreno’s son Cesare, according to
which his father would have been one of the most diligent non-examination students
of the Majorana course. In this occasion he showed to us an important document
(for the sake of brevity, we will call it Moreno Paper) where E. Moreno faithfully
copied Majorana’s lecture notes.
Without this document, the interested people had, at their own disposal, only few
handwritten manuscripts by Majorana, deposited at the Domus Galilaeana in Pisa
(Italy), and published some years ago [18]. An analysis of such manuscripts led
to the conclusion that, except at most for one or two lectures, these notes were
believed to cover substantially the whole Majorana’s course on Theoretical Physics
[19]. Some doubts (mainly based on too far reminds) were risen just by a girl-
student of the course, G. Senatore, who always declared that “some chapters of the
lectures are lacking; their text (completed by the notes of the lecture the professor
would have delivered in the day subsequent his disappearance) was given to me.
Few other sheets lacks yet, who were written in original and in a neat way as the
other ones, but they did not correspond to the lectures already given” [13].
The relevant importance of the Moreno Paper is twofold: on one hand, it is ar-
rived to us through a completely diﬀerent path from that followed by the original
manuscripts (see below); on the other hand, in the Moreno Paper all the lectures of
the course are numbered and dated, diﬀerently from Pisa manuscripts (where some
lectures (the ﬁrst ones) are dated, while the others (from that corresponding to the
number 15 on) are numbered). Then, this allows a detailed and univocal recon-
struction of the evolution of the whole course in Theoretical Physics and, perhaps,
it could be useful even for a further investigation on the last days of Majorana in
Naples before his disappearance.
Moreover, by analyzing even superﬁcially the text contained in the Moreno Paper
and by comparing it with that present in the Pisa manuscripts [18], it immedi-
ately comes out two important peculiarities: 1) the lectures contained both in the
Moreno Paper and in the Pisa manuscripts are completely identical in the text, so
that the copy performed by Moreno has to be considered as a faithful one; 2) the
Moreno Paper contains six lectures not included in the documents of the Domus
Galilaeana. For what concerns the scientiﬁc content and its style of presentation,
this former conclusion is corroborated by a comprehensive analysis of the six previ-
ously unknown lectures based on the comparison with other writings by Majorana,
mainly the ﬁve notebooks (“Volumetti”) [3] and the eighteen unpublished booklets
(“Quaderni”) conserved in Pisa.

4.2. From 1938 to now. The lecture notes by Majorana have reached us by
following diﬀerent and not easily recognizable paths, so that some obscure points
still remain.
On Friday March 25 (the day before, Majorana held his 21st lesson), no lesson on
Theoretical Physics was scheduled but, according to Senatore, “contrarily to what
he usually did, Majorana came to the Institute and remained there for few minutes”
[13]. It is likely that Majorana was aware of the habit of the students to convene to

ETTORE MAJORANA’S COURSE ON THEORETICAL PHYSICS: A RECENT DISCOVERY 7

Figure 1. One page of the Moreno Paper, where we ﬁnd the be-
ginning of the lecture N.7, the ﬁrst previously unknown lecture by
Majorana (the ﬁrst part of the page appearing in it is, instead,
present in the original manuscripts conserved in Pisa [18]). Note
the presence of the correction of a ﬁrst writing of the lecture num-
bering and, for example, the addition of a marginal note below on
the left.

8

A. DRAGO AND S. ESPOSITO

the Institute in order to study the topics treated at lesson the day before, so that he
deliberately came there, that day of March, for providing his notes to the students
[9]. “From the corridor leading to the small room where I was writing, he called
me by name: ‘Miss Senatore...’; he didn’t entering in the room but remained in the
corridor; I reached him and he gave me a closed folder telling: ‘that’s some papers,
some notes, take them... we will talk about later’; afterward he went away and,
turned back, said again ‘we will talk about later’ ” [13]. After that Friday March
25, Senatore did not go to the Institute of Physics (from a town near Salerno where
she lived) for about 15 days due to health reasons, and the papers were conserved
at her own home for a long time [9]. Senatore did not say anything on this aﬀair for
many months, but from another girl-student of the course (Minghetti) we now know
that few days after the disappearance of Majorana, Carrelli asked the students for
the notes of the course taken during the lessons [20]. Maybe, Carrelli referred to
the notes copied by the students from the originals, or even the notes taken directly
from the students during the course; in any case it is remarkable the interest in such
notes just few days after the disappearance of Majorana.
When at the end of 1938 Senatore had close relations with Cennamo, the assistant
to the Director Carrelli, the young girl-student showed the Majorana papers to
Cennamo who, after some time and without saying anything to Senatore, brought
them to Carrelli, probably for discussing some speciﬁc topic [9]. Carrelli, being
the oﬃcial depository of all Majorana assets in Naples, deemed appropriate to not
return the papers to Cennamo.
The subsequent story of the Majorana notes is quite obscure. From a letter dated
February 2, 1964 from Gilberto Bernardini to Edoardo Amaldi (who asked him for
some news about the notes) we learn as follows: “These are the pages of the lecture
notes by Majorana that I retrived, at long last, on my leaving from Geneva. They
account for only a part. It seems to me that the remaining part was owned by
Giovannino Gentile or, probably, was never wrote; more precisely, the confusing
lines of a too far memory induce me to believe that Giovannino gave me this part
for helping me in the understanding of the Dirac’s textbook” [21]. Then, since
1965 Majorana’s notes are owned by Amaldi who, in the following years, deposited
them at the Domus Galilaeana together with some other manuscripts. No known
document attesting the passage from Carrelli to Bernardini (or from Carrelli to
Amaldi, assuming that Amaldi had the notes in his hands before Bernardini) exists.
Nevertheless, it seems certain [9] that Senatore became acquainted again with the
existence of the lecture notes by Majorana only after the death of her husband
Cennamo, when Elio Tartaglione (one more former assistant to Carrelli), upon
request of Cennamo still living, revealed to her how the notes passed on to Carrelli
(as we reported above) and gave to her the just edited book with the lecture notes
by Majorana [18]. Thus, we can only make speculations on the passage of the
Majorana papers from “Naples” to “Rome” which, however, will be not taken into
account here. In any case, it should be noted that, if it is true that Bernardini
received these notes from Gentile [21], they should be arrived at the Physics group
in Rome before 1942, year of the premature death of Gentile (who was a sincere
friend of Majorana, as well as the son of the famous Senator of the Italian Kingdom,
well known to Carrelli).
The path of the Moreno Paper is, in contrast, much more linear: the copy of the
Majorana notes has been always kept by Moreno at home, and recently retrieved

ETTORE MAJORANA’S COURSE ON THEORETICAL PHYSICS: A RECENT DISCOVERY 9

[12].
A subsequent detailed comparison between the two documents now available could
perhaps put new light even on the missing part of the original manuscripts.

4.3. Some features of the lectures in the Moreno Paper. Moreno Paper’s
numbering and dating of each lecture held by Majorana in Naples between Jan-
uary and March of 1938, allow a suﬃciently faithful reconstruction of the course
on Theoretical Physics delivered by the great scientist. However, it should not be
forgotten that only one source is available for many pieces of information, so that
the discussion presented in the following could not be completely free from possible
interpretational diﬃculties. In Table 1 we have reconstructed a table of contents
of the Majorana lectures: number, date and argument of each lecture are reported
as they appear in the Moreno Paper (except for the last row, corresponding to
some material which is present only at the Domus Galilaeana). It is interesting to
observe that Moreno made initially a mistake in the numbering of the lectures up
to lesson N.16: a given written number was subsequently deleted and replaced with
the following one. This can be easily explained by noting that Majorana numbered
his lectures starting from the lesson following the opening one (i.e., the ﬁrst lecture
attended by the students), while in a ﬁrst time Moreno considered the opening
lecture as the ﬁrst eﬀective one. Such a “mistake” is no longer present from the lec-
ture N.17 on: by keeping in mind that the original manuscripts by Majorana report
an explicit numbering only starting from the lecture N.15 (and, in this case, the
Moreno Paper reports twice the numbering), we can conclude that the manuscripts
corresponding to the lectures N.15 and N.16 (and, possibly, even the previous ones)
came in the hands of Moreno not before the break in the academic year due to the
Carnival holidays (see below), that is after March 8. In any case, it seems likely
that Moreno did not acquire the whole set of lecture notes in only one occasion.
As mentioned, the opening lecture was given on January 13, but the corresponding
text is absent in both the Moreno Paper and Pisa manuscripts:
it was found by
Erasmo Recami in 1972 among the papers conserved by the Majorana family [2].
In the Moreno Paper the note “Introduction: topics to be covered in the course”
appears, probably denoting the fact that Moreno was present to the opening lec-
ture.
The notes corresponding to the subsequent four lessons, held from Saturday January
15 to Saturday January 22, are not present in any known document. In correspon-
dence to these lectures, the Moreno Paper has 3 blank pages, probably foreseeing
to receive later the corresponding text. Their topics are unknown but, following
Cabibbo [19], we could reasonably assume that Majorana introduced the most rel-
evant phenomenology of Atomic Physics, which then continued to be illustrated in
the immediately following lectures. This ﬁrst part of the course extended up to the
break for the Carnival holidays, i.e. up to the lesson N.15 given on February 17.
The text of the lectures ranging from N.6 to N.21 is entirely covered by the Moreno
Paper; we address the interested reader to the discussion in [19] for an analysis of
the content of the lectures which are present also in Pisa manuscripts.
The lecture N.7 is the ﬁrst one reported in the Moreno Paper: it is missing at the
Domus Galilaeana. In this lecture Majorana studied the angular momentum quan-
tization and introduced the concept of spin, which was the starting point for the
following lectures on the periodic table of the elements and on the atomic spectra.
The existence of such a lecture, not even suspected before the appearance of the

10

A. DRAGO AND S. ESPOSITO

Moreno Paper, conﬁrms the attitude of Majorana to introduce in a very detailed
and exhaustive way the novel concepts not yet studied by the students.
The lesson scheduled for Tuesday February 1 was not held, probably for the con-
comitant 15th anniversary of the foundation of the Fascist Militia .
The lecture N.10 held on February 5 is the second one whose notes are not present
in Pisa manuscripts but are reported in the Moreno Paper. Cabibbo already specu-
lated on the existence of such a lecture (or, at least, on the ﬁrst part of it) [19], since
the preceding one (N.9) was evidently incomplete. In this lecture Majorana carried
on the classical theory of radiation (a topic often considered by Majorana’s personal
studies [3]); in particular he discussed a peculiar (and simple) physical phenomenon
- solar light scattering by Earth atmosphere - which hardly (and strangely) entered
in a Theoretical Physics course.
The following four lessons, held from Tuesday February 8 to Tuesday February 15,
again again are absent in the Domus Galilaeana collection; their existence was not
suspected at all, since they cover an unexpected topic: the Theory of Special Rela-
tivity. This very important argument for Teoretical Physics still found some spare
opposition in 1938 in Italy (just as an example, we point out the very critical atti-
tude of a renowned physicist as Quirino Majorana, uncle of Ettore Majorana), and
was not usually treated in Physics courses. From Moreno paper we thus learn that
Majorana was the ﬁrst University professor that introduced Relativity in a Physics
course at the University of Naples 7. In these four lectures, he treated it according
to his custom, by starting from simple phenomenology and later introducing the
corresponding mathematical formalism.
In the ﬁrst Relativity lecture, Majorana ﬁrst discussed Galilean Relativity, then
through a discussion of Michelson & Morley experiment passed to the question of
the existence of aether, and at last introduced Lorentz transformations, with appli-
cation to the electromagnetic ﬁeld case. In the following lecture he then considered
the formal developments of Einstein Relativity, and again came back to the elec-
tromagnetic ﬁeld case, but now focusing on potentials rather than ﬁelds. Starting
from the Fresnel formula for the Fizeau experiment on the measurement of the
light speed, the problem of the relativistic sum of velocities is instead treated in
the third lecture of the series, where the relativistic invariance of the electric charge
is considered as well. Ranging from the end of the third Relativity lecture to the
beginning of the fourth one, Majorana then passed to study (in a very detailed
way) the relativistic dynamics of the electron, the starting point being a variational
principle (see also [3]). The lectures missing in Pisa archive thus end with the dis-
cussion of both the photoelectric eﬀect (and the Einstein interpretation of it) and of
Thomson scattering. Just looking at this two last topics and at the following one in
the subsequent lecture (the Compton eﬀect), we can then suppose that Majorana
introduced the Theory of Special Relativity in his course in order to give to the
students a detailed and clear discussion of those mentioned topics that, although
they belongs to Quantum Physics (the foremost argument of modern Theoretical
Physics courses), did require an underlying use of the Special Relativity for a cor-
rect interpretation of them.
The course break oﬀ on Thursday February 17 and restarted on Tuesday March 8

7
Note, however, that especially the General Relativity was covered in Mathematics courses as,
for example, was done by the well known mathematician Roberto Marcolongo at the Institute of
Mathematics of the University of Naples.

ETTORE MAJORANA’S COURSE ON THEORETICAL PHYSICS: A RECENT DISCOVERY11

with the introduction of the mathematical formalism of Quantum Mechanics. Such
a long break was partially due to the Carnival holidays (the corresponding academic
holidays ranged from February 24 to March 2); the remaining days of vacation were,
instead, probably related (at least in part) to some concomitant political and social
(fascist) events, such as the visit in Naples of Bruno Mussolini (February 22) and
the death of the famous poet Gabriele D’Annunzio (March 2).
The text of the notes, corresponding to the lectures from N.15 to the last one
N.21 and reported in the Moreno Paper, is identical to that of the original Pisa
manuscripts; it has been already considered in [19] and here we do not indulge
further on it. We only note, from an historical point of view, the postponement of
the lesson scheduled for Tuesday March 15 “for the visit of His Majesty the King”
(as reported in the Moreno paper) 8 and that scheduled for Saturday March 19,
cancelled for the celebrations of the “St. Joseph day”.
The papers corresponding to Majorana lecture notes, conserved at the Domus
Galilaeana, end with an unnumbered and undated (long) note, which is substan-
tially diﬀerent from the preceding ones (many deletions are present) and appear as
a preliminary copy [18]; it is not present in the Moreno paper. The course student
Senatore interpreted it as the text prepared for the lecture scheduled for the day
after his disappearance (see [13] as well as [19]). Such an hypothesis, although
likely, is diﬃcult to explain by looking at the topics studied extensively in this
note (practically, Majorana dealt with some applications of Atomic and Molecular
Physics), which seem unrelated to that considered in the previous lecture N.21.

5. Conclusions

The discovery of the Moreno Paper, along with some memories allows a very de-
tailed historical reconstruction of the Theoretical Physics course given by Ettore
Majorana at the University of Naples.
The relevance of such a recovering lies, ﬁrst of all, in the fact that the 53 pages
handwritten by Eugenio Moreno report, without doubt, the text of the lecture notes
prepared by Majorana for his students. This conclusion clearly emerges from mul-
tiple comparisons of the Moreno Paper with the original manuscripts conserved at
the Domus Galilaeana in Pisa, as well as with many other (some of them publicly
available) works written by Majorana (mainly the ﬁve “Volumetti” and the eigh-
teen “Quaderni”). From a strictly scientiﬁc point of view, the present discovery has
led to the discovery of six previously unknown lectures, four of which deals with
the Theory of Special Relativity, a completely unexpected topic for the Majorana
Theoretical Physics course.
In addition to the text copied from the original manuscripts, Moreno Paper shows
also some remarkable notes, not present there and not arguable from other sources
(if not in a partial and approximate way). They consist mainly 9 in the numbering
and dating of each lecture, which has allowed to follow directly the development of
the course, along with its own temporal deadlines, probably important even for a

8
In this day the king Vittorio Emanuele III and the Ministry of Education Bottai inaugurated

in Naples a renowned picture exhibition.

9
Also some marginal notes appear in the present document, written by Moreno in order to point
out some improper notation or equation numbering, or even some apparently incomprehensible
word written by Majorana. Such marginal notes are especially relevant for a detailed analysis of
the text and contents of the Moreno Paper that, however, is not the aim of the present paper.

12

A. DRAGO AND S. ESPOSITO

Figure 2. Another page of the Moreno Paper, where Majorana
ends the lecture N.14 (the last of the six lectures missing in the Pisa
archive) with the application of the Theory of Special Relativity
to the photoelectric eﬀect. The following lecture N.15, which is
also present in the Pisa original manuscripts [18], will continue
with the study of the quantum eﬀects whose explanation requires
Special Relativity such as, for example, the Compton eﬀect.

ETTORE MAJORANA’S COURSE ON THEORETICAL PHYSICS: A RECENT DISCOVERY13

reconstruction of the last days of Majorana in Naples before his mysterious disap-
pearance.
The following steps will be mainly oriented to the detailed study of the scientiﬁc
content of the six previously unknown lectures that, even at a preliminary analysis,
appears as particularly interesting and promising.

Acknowledgments

The tracking of the Moreno Paper has been possible through the agency of Cesare
Moreno, to which our sincere gratitude is here addressed. We are also very grateful
to E. Recami for his impressive photographic and documentary material made
available to us, and to A. De Gregorio, F. Guerra, G. Longo, F. Lizzi, E. Majorana
jr, G. Mangano, G. Miele, O. Pisanti and B. Preziosi for their kind collaboration.

References

[1] Letter from G. Cocconi to E. Amaldi dated 18/7/1965, reported in [2] .
[2] E. Recami, Il caso Majorana (Oscar Mondadori, Milano, 1991, 2nd edition); idem (Di Renzo,
Roma, 2002, 4th revised and enlarged edition). See also E. Recami, Ettore Majorana: L’opera
scientiﬁca edita ed inedita, Il Nuovo Saggiatore 3-4 (1999) 14; Ricordo di Ettore Majorana a
sessant’anni dalla sua scomparsa Quad. Storia Fis. 5 (1999) 19, physics/9810023.

[3] S. Esposito, E. Majorana jr, A. van der Merwe and E. Recami, Ettore Majorana: Notes on

Theoretical Physics (Kluwer, New York, 2003).

[4] E. Amaldi, La Vita e l’Opera di E. Majorana (Accad. Naz. dei Lincei, Roma, 1966); Ettore
Majorana: Man and scientist in Strong and Weak Interactions, edited by A. Zichichi (New
York, 1966).

[5] Letter from the competition board to the Minister Giuseppe Bottai dated 25/10/1937, re-

ported in [2].

[6] Letter from E. Majorana to G. Gentile dated 21/11/1937, reported in [2].
[7] Letter from E. Majorana to his family dated 11/1/1938, reported in [2].
[8] Testimony of Sebastiano Sciuti taken by L. Bonolis with C. Bernardini in July 2001. We

kindly thank L. Bonolis for having made available to us the text of this interview.

[9] Testimony of Gilda Senatore Cennamo taken by S. Esposito in February 2004.

[10] Letter from E. Majorana to G. Gentile dated 2/3/1938, reported in [2].
[11] B. Preziosi,

talk given at the XXIV Congresso Nazionale di Storia della Fisica e

dell’Astronomia, Naples, 3/6/2004.

[12] Testimony of Cesare Moreno taken by A. Drago and S. Esposito on 16/9/2004.
[13] G. Senatore, talk given at the Department of Physical Sciences of the University of Naples

“Federico II” in March 1998.

[14] E. Persico, Fondamenti della meccanica atomica (Zanichelli, Bologna, 1936).
[15] A. Drago and S. Esposito, Following Weyl on Quantum Mechanics: the contribution of Ettore

Majorana, Found. Phys. 34 (2004) 871.

[16] W. Heisenberg, Die Physikalischen Prinzipien der Quantentheorie (Hirzel, Lipsia, 1930).
[17] E. Majorana jr., private communication.
[18] E. Majorana, Lezioni all’Universit`a di Napoli (edited by B. Preziosi) (Bibliopolis, Napoli,

1987).

[19] N. Cabibbo, Le lezioni di Majorana in [18].
[20] B. Russo, Ettore Majorana: Un giorno di marzo, (Flaccovio, Palermo, 1997).
[21] Letter from G. Bernardini to E. Amaldi dated 2/12/1964, reported in [18].

14

A. DRAGO AND S. ESPOSITO

N. Date

M. P.

D. G.

Argument

missing missing

Opening lecture.
Introduction: topics to be covered in
the course.

Thursday
13-1-38

Saturday
15-1-38

Tuesday
18-1-38

Thursday
20-1-38

Saturday
22-1-38

1.

2.

3.

4.

5.

6.

missing missing

missing missing

missing missing

missing missing

Tuesday
25-1-38

present present

7.

Thursday
27-1-38

present missing

8.

Saturday
29-1-38

present present

- Fine structure formula.
Experimental veriﬁcation and its valid-
ity.
Nucleus dragging.

- Spatial quantization and magnetic
properties of atoms.
- Generalities on the alkali metal spec-
tra and the spinning electron hypothe-
sis.

- Pauli or exclusion principle and the in-
terpretation of the periodic table of the
elements.
- Sommerfeld conditions for the com-
putation of the energy levels of alkali
metals.

9.

Thursday
3-2-38

present present

- The spectrum of atoms with two va-
lence electrons.
- Classical theory of radiation.

10.

Saturday
5-2-38

present missing

- Integration of the Maxwell equations
with applications to the radiation of
an oscillating system with small dimen-
sions compared with the emitted wave-
length.
- Solar light scattering by the atmo-
sphere.

Table 1. Reconstruction of a table of contents of the lectures
given by Majorana at the University of Naples, as emerges from
the Moreno Paper. In the ﬁrst two columns the numbering and
the date of a given lecture is reported, while in the subsequent
two columns the presence of the text of that lecture in the Moreno
Paper (M.P.) and/or in the manuscripts of the Domus Galilaeana
(D.G.) is indicated. A line under the text points out the lectures
which are non present in both the archives. Finally, in the last

ETTORE MAJORANA’S COURSE ON THEORETICAL PHYSICS: A RECENT DISCOVERY15

N. Date

M. P.

D. G.

Argument

11.

Tuesday
8-2-38

present missing

12.

Thursday
10-2-38

present missing

13.

Saturday
12-2-38

present missing

14.

Tuesday
15-2-38

present missing

- The relativity principle in Classical
Mechanics.
- Michelson and Morley experiment.
- Lorentz transformations.

- The relativity principle according to
Einstein.
- Transformation laws for the electro-
magnetic potentials.

- Fresnel formula and Fizeau experi-
ment.
- Electric charge invariance.
- Minkowski space.
- Equations of motion for an electron in
an arbitrary electromagnetic ﬁeld.

- Relativistic dynamics of an electron.
- Photoelectric eﬀect.
- Relationship between the potential
and the wave-length.

- Free electron scattering (Thomson

formula).

15.

Thursday
17-2-38

present present

- Compton eﬀect.
- Franck and Hertz experiment.

16.

Tuesday
8-3-38

present present

Notions on matrix algebra:
- Vector space in n dimensions.
- Matrices and linear operators.

17.

Thursday
10-3-38

present present

- Unitary systems.
- Hermitian operators.
forms.

Hermitian

18.

Saturday
12-3-38

present present

- Simultaneous diagonalization of com-
muting operators.
- Inﬁnite matrices.

Table 1. Continuation.

16

A. DRAGO AND S. ESPOSITO

N. Date

M. P.

D. G.

Argument

19.

Thursday
17-3-38

present present

- Fourier integrals.
Wave Mechanics.
- De Broglie waves.

20.

Tuesday
22-3-38

present present

- Phase and group velocity.
- Non relativistic wave equation. Sta-
tistical interpretation of wave-packets.

21.

Thursday
24-3-38

present present

- First generalization of the statisti-
cal interpretation and uncertainty rela-
tions.

?

?

missing present

- On the meaning of quantum state.
- Symmetry properties of a system in
Classical and Quantum Mechanics.
- Resonance
forces between non-
symmetrized states for small perturba-
tions. Non combinable symmetry char-
acters.
- Spectroscopic eﬀects in atoms with
Resonance between
two electrons.
equal potential wells and the theory
of homeopolar valence according to the
method of the binding electrons.
symmetrized states
- Properties of
which cannot be obtained from non
symmetrized ones by means of a small
perturbation. Alternating bands, hy-
drogen, ... .

Table 1. Continuation.

A. Drago: Gruppo di Storia della Fisica, Dipartimento di Scienze Fisiche, Universit`a
di Napoli “Federico II”, Complesso Universitario di M. S. Angelo, Via Cinthia, 80126
Napoli

S. Esposito: Dipartimento di Scienze Fisiche, Universit`a di Napoli “Federico II” &
I.N.F.N. Sezione di Napoli, Complesso Universitario di M. S. Angelo, Via Cinthia, 80126
Napoli (Salvatore.Esposito@na.infn.it)

