5
0
0
2
 
r
p
A
 
7
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
t
s
i
h
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
1
0
2
4
0
5
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

On Einstein’s Doctoral Thesis ∗

Norbert Straumann
Institute for Theoretical Physics University of Zurich,
CH–8057 Zurich, Switzerland

February 2, 2008

Abstract

Einstein’s thesis “A New Determination of Molecular Dimensions”
was the second of his ﬁve celebrated papers in 1905. Although it is –
thanks to its widespread practical applications – the most quoted of
his papers, it is less known than the other four. The main aim of the
talk is to show what exactly Einstein did in his dissertation. As an
important application of the theoretical results for the viscosity and
diﬀusion of solutions, he got (after eliminating a calculational error) an
excellent value for the Avogadro number from data for sugar dissolved
in water. This was in agreement with the value he and Planck had
obtained from the black-body radiation. Two weeks after he ﬁnished
the ‘Doktorarbeit’, Einstein submitted his paper on Brownian motion,
in which the diﬀusion formula of his thesis plays a crucial role.

1 Introduction

When Einstein’s great papers of 1905 appeared in print, he was not a new-
comer in the Annalen der Physik, where he published most of his early work.
Of crucial importance for his further research were three papers on the foun-
dations of statistical mechanics, in which he tried to ﬁll what he considered
to be a gap in the mechanical foundations of thermodynamics. At the time
when Einstein wrote his three papers he was not familiar with the work of
Gibbs and only partially with that of Boltzmann. Einstein’s papers form
a bridge, parallel to the Elementary Principles of Statistical Mechanics by
∗Talk given at the joint colloquium of ETH and the University of Z¨urich, 27 April

(2005).

1

Gibbs in 1902, between Boltzmann’s work and the modern approach to sta-
tistical mechanics. In particular, Einstein independently formulated the dis-
tinction between the microcanonical and canonical ensembles and derived the
equilibrium distribution for the canonical ensemble from the microcanonical
distribution. Of special importance for his later research was the derivation
of the energy ﬂuctuation formula for the canonical ensemble.

Einstein’s profound insight into the nature and size of ﬂuctuations played
a decisive role for his most revolutionary contribution to physics: the light-
quantum hypothesis.
In this ﬁrst paper of 1905 he extracted the light-
quantum postulate from a statistical mechanical analogy between radiation
in the Wien regime and a classical ideal gas of material particles. In this con-
sideration Boltzmann’s principle, relating entropy and probability of macro-
scopic states, played a key role. Later Einstein extended these considerations
to an analysis of ﬂuctuations in the energy and momentum of the radia-
tion ﬁeld. For the latter he was also drawing on ideas and methods he had
developed in the course of his work on Brownian motion, another beauti-
ful application of ﬂuctuation theory. This deﬁnitely established the reality
of atoms and molecules, and, more generally, gave strong support for the
molecular-kinetic theory of thermodynamics.

Einstein’s Doctoral thesis “A New Determination of Molecular Dimen-
sions” was the second of his celebrated ﬁve papers in 1905. Unfortunately, it
is not suﬃciently well known. The main body of the paper is devoted to the
hydrodynamic derivation of a relation between the coeﬃcients of viscosity
of a liquid with and without suspended particles. In addition, Einstein de-
rived a novel formula for the diﬀusion constant D of suspended microscopic
particles. This was obtained on the basis of thermal and dynamical equi-
librium conditions, making use of van’t Hoﬀ’s law for the osmotic pressure
and Stokes’ law for the mobility of a particle. Einstein then applied these
two relations to sugar dissolved in water. Using empirical data he got (after
eliminating a calculational error) an excellent value of the Avogadro number
and an estimate of the size of sugar molecules. Einstein’s thesis is the most
quoted among his papers.

Soon afterwards Einstein’s diﬀusion formula became also important in his
work on Brownian motion. In this celebrated paper he ﬁrst gave a statistical
mechanical foundation of the osmotic pressure, and then repeated his earlier
derivation in the thesis.

2

2 Biographical remarks

Einstein devoted his thesis to his friend Marcel Grossmann. Before I come
to a technical discussion of the paper, I would like to give some biographical
and other background.

Until 1909 the ETH was not authorized to grant doctoral degrees. For
this reason a special arrangement enabled ETH students to obtain doctorates
from the University. At the time most dissertations in physics by ETH
students were carried out under the supervision of H.F. Weber, Einstein’s
former teacher at the ‘Polytechnikum’ as it was then called. The University
of Z¨urich had only one physics chair, held by Alfred Kleiner. His main
research was focused on measuring instruments, but he had an interest in
the foundations of physics. From letters to Mileva one can see that Einstein
often had discussions with Kleiner on a wide range of topics. Einstein also
showed him his ﬁrst dissertation in November 1901. This dissertation has not
survived, and it is not really clear what it contained. At any rate, Einstein
withdrew his dissertation in February 1902. One year later he was giving up
his plan to obtain a doctorate. To Besso he wrote: “the whole comedy has
become tiresome for me”.

By March 1903 he seems to have changed his mind. Indeed, a letter to
Besso contains some of the central ideas of the 1905 dissertation, especially
in the second part of the following quote:

“Have you already calculated the absolute magnitude of ions on
the assumption that they are spheres and so large that the hy-
drodynamical equations for viscous ﬂuids are applicable? With
our knowledge of the absolute magnitude of the electron [charge]
this would be a simple matter indeed. I would have done it my-
self but lack the reference material and the time; you could also
bring in diﬀusion in order to obtain information about neutral
salt molecules in solution.”

Kleiner was, of course, one of the two faculty reviewers of the dissertation,
submitted by Einstein to the University on 20 July, 1905. His judgement
was very positive: “the arguments and calculations to be carried out are
among the most diﬃcult in hydrodynamics”. The other reviewer, Heinrich
Burkhardt, Professor for Mathematics at the University, added: “the mode
of treatment demonstrates fundamental mastery of the relevant mathematical
methods.”

In his biography of Einstein, Carl Seelig reports: “Einstein later laugh-
ingly recounted that his dissertation was ﬁrst returned by Kleiner with the

3

comment that it was too short. After he had added a single sentence, it was
accepted without further comment.”

The physical reality of atoms was not yet universally accepted by the
end of the nineteenth century. Fervent opponents were Wilhelm Ostwald
and Georg Helm (who called themselves “energeticists”), and Ernst Mach
admitted only that atomism may have a heuristic or didactic utility.

In his ﬁrst three papers of 1905, Einstein found three diﬀerent methods
of determining the Avogadro number. (A few years later he found another
one in his study of critical opalescence.) For him this was not only important
for establishing the existence of atoms. He later wrote to Perrin:

“A precise determination of the size of molecules seems to me of
the highest importance because Planck’s radiation formula can be
tested more precisely through such a determination than through
measurements on radiation.”

3 Einstein’s dissertation

By 1905 several methods for determining molecular sizes were developed.
The most reliable ones were based on kinetic theory of gases. An important
early example is Loschmidt’s work from 1865.1 The following introductory
remarks in Einstein’s dissertation indicate what he adds to this.

“The earliest determinations of real sizes of molecules were possi-
ble by the kinetic theory of gases, whereas the physical phenomena
observed in liquids have thus far not served for the determination
of molecular sizes. This is no doubt due to the fact that it has
not yet been possible to overcome the obstacles that impede the
development of a detailed molecular-kinetic theory of liquids. It
will be shown in this paper that the size of molecules of substances
dissolved in an undissociated dilute solution can be obtained from
the internal friction of the solution and the pure solvent, and from
the diﬀusion of the dissolved substance within the solvent. (...).”

Beside originality and intuition, great scientists usually also dispose of a
fair amount of technical abilities. That Einstein was not an exception in this
respect, should become clear if we now go into the technical details of his
dissertation.

1J. Loschmidt, Wiener Ber. 52, 395 (1866). See also J.C. Maxwell, Collected Works,

Vol. 2, p. 361.

4

3.1 Basic equations of hydrodynamics

Let me ﬁrst recall some general facts of hydrodynamics, that we shall need.
I will use notation that has become standard, and not the one that was
common at the time when Einstein did his work.

For stationary incompressible ﬂows of homogeneous ﬂuids, the Navier-

Stokes equation is

1
ρ
We consider only situations with small Reynold numbers.Then one can ne-
glect the left-hand side, and the basic equations become

(v · ∇)v = −

∇p +

△v.

η
ρ

∇p = −η△v, ∇ · v = 0.

These imply that the pressure is harmonic: △p = 0. The same holds for the
vorticity curl v. We also recall the expression for the stress tensor

σij = −pδij + η(∂ivj + ∂jvi).

According to (1) this is divergence-free: ∂jσij = 0. Later we shall also need
the following expression for the rate W at which the stresses do work on the
surface ∂Ω bounding a region Ω:

Here, n is the outward pointing unit vector.

W =

viσijnj dA.

Z∂Ω

3.2 Einstein’s strategy

With Einstein we now consider an incompressible ﬂuid of viscosity η0, in
which a large number of identical, rigid, spherical particles is inserted. This
suspension can be described in two ways: (1) On large scales, in comparison
to the average separation of neighboring solute particles, as a homogeneous
medium with an eﬀective viscosity η. (2) By the stationary ﬂow of the ﬂuid
(solvent) that is modiﬁed by the suspended particles.

For both descriptions Einstein computes according to (3) the rate of work
for a big region Ω and obtains by equating the two results the important
formula

η = η0 (cid:18)

1 +

,

ϕ

(cid:19)

5
2

where ϕ denotes the fraction of the volume occupied by the suspended parti-
cles. This is assumed to be small (dilute suspension). (Due to a calculational
error, Einstein originally lost the factor 5/2; we shall come back to this amus-
ing story.)

5

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

3.3 Velocity ﬁeld for a single suspended particle

We ﬁrst adopt the second description. As a preparing task we have to deter-
mine the modiﬁcation of a ﬂow with constant velocity gradient, say, caused
by a single little ball. Mathematically, we have to solve a boundary value
problem for the elliptic system (1).

So let the unperturbed velocity ﬁeld be

v(0)
i = eijxj,

where eij is a constant, symmetric, traceless tensor. The last property reﬂects
the incompressibility. eij is the deformation tensor (we are not interested in
ﬂows with non-vanishing vorticity). The unperturbed pressure is denoted by
p(0). The stress tensor for the background ﬂow is

We decompose the modiﬁed velocity ﬁeld v according to

σ(0)
ij = −p(0)δij + 2η0eij.

v = v(0) + v(1)

into an unperturbed part plus a perturbation v(1). The boundary conditions
are: v = 0 on the ball with radius a and v = v(0) at inﬁnity. Analogous
decompositions are used for the pressure and the stresses:

p = p(0) + p(1),

σij = σ(0)

ij + σ(1)
ij ,

where

σ(1)
ij = −p(1)δij + η0(∂iv(1)

j + ∂jv(1)

i ).

For W we then have the decomposition (|Ω|= volume of Ω)

W = 2η0eijeij|Ω| + eik

σ(1)
ij xknj dA +

v(1)
i σ(0)

ij nj dA.

(10)

Z∂Ω

Z∂Ω

The rigid ball is taken as the origin of a cartesian coordinate system.
Einstein determines the perturbations v(1)
and p(1) with the help of a method
which is described in Kirchhoﬀ’s “Vorlesungen ¨uber Mechanik”2, which he
had studied during his student years. This involves the following two steps:
a) Determine a function V , which satisﬁes the equation

i

1
η0
2G. Kirchhoﬀ, Vorlesungen ¨uber mathematische Physik, Vol. 1, Mechanik, Teubner

△V =

p(1),

(11)

(1897).

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

(9)

6

and set

i = ∂iV + v′
v(1)
i,
i has to satisfy the following equations

where v′

△v′

i = 0,

∂iv′

i = −

p(1).

1
η0

Remark on a). As a consequence of (11)-(13) the basic equations for v(1)
p(1) are satisﬁed:

i

and

η0△v(1)

i = η0∂i△V = ∂ip(1), ∂iv(1)

i = △V + ∂iv′

i = 0.

b) Use the following decaying harmonic ansatz for p(1)

p(1)
η0

= Aeij∂i∂j (cid:18)

1
r (cid:19)

with a constants A, and try for v′

i the harmonic expression

v′
i = − ˜Aeik∂k (cid:18)

1
r (cid:19)

+ B∂iejk∂j∂k (cid:18)

1
r (cid:19)

.

This fulﬁlls both equations (13) for ˜A = A, because we then have

∂iv′

i = −Aeik∂i∂k (cid:18)

1
r (cid:19)

= −

p(1)
η0

.

As a result of △r = 2/r, equation (11) is satisﬁed for

V =

Aeij∂i∂jr.

1
2

Performing the diﬀerentiations in (15) and (16), we obtain

v(1)
i =

Aejk

3
2

xixjxk

r5 + B

(cid:18)

6eik

xk
r5 − 15ejk

xixjxk

.

r7 (cid:19)

The boundary condition v(1)

i = −eijxj for r = a requires

A = −

a3, B = −

5
3

a5
6

.

We thus obtain for the perturbation of the velocity ﬁeld (ni := xi/r)

v(1)
i = −

a3ejk

5
2

1
r2 ninjnk −

a5
6 (cid:18)

6eik

xk
r5 − 15ejk

xixjxk

.

r7 (cid:19)

7

(12)

(13)

(14)

(15)

(16)

(17)

(18)

(19)

According to (12) and (15) for ˜A = A we can represent v(1)

also as follows

i

v(1)
i = −

a3ejk∂i∂j∂k(r) +

5
6

5
3

a3eik∂k (cid:18)

1
r (cid:19)

−

1
6

a5∂iejk∂j∂k (cid:18)

1
r (cid:19)

.

Equation (14) gives for the pressure

(20)

(21)

p = p(0) − 5η0a3eij

ninj
r3 .

Einstein claims that it can be demonstrated that his solution of the
boundary value problem is unique, but he gives only some indications of
what he thinks is a proof. Apparently, he did not know that an elegant
uniqueness proof for such problems was already given in 1868 by Helmholtz.3
Consider for two solutions of the basic equations, for given velocity ﬁelds on
the boundaries, the non-negative quantity (θ′
ij − θij)(θ′
ij, θij
It is easy to show
are the deformation tensors of the two velocity ﬁelds.
that the integral of this function over the region outside the bodies must
vanish. (Use partial integrations and the basic equations (1).) Therefore,
ij = θij. In other words, the deformation tensor for the diﬀerence v′
θ′
i − vi
of the two velocity ﬁelds vanishes. This diﬀerence is thus a combination of
a rigid translation and a rigid rotation. Because of the imposed boundary
conditions, the two velocity ﬁelds must agree. The pressures for the two
solutions are, therefore, also the same, up to an additive constant.

ij − θij), where θ′

3.4 Two expressions for the rate W

In (10) we now choose for Ω a large ball KR with radius R. In leading order
only the ﬁrst term of (19) contributes, and a routine calculation leads to the
following expression for W in terms of the spherical moments

ninjnknl :=

ninjnknl dΩ =

(δijδkl + δikδjl + δilδlk),

1
4π ZS2

1
15

W = 2η0eijeij|Ω| + 20πa3η0eik{3ersninknrns − eisnsnk}

= 2η0eijeij (cid:26)

|Ω| +

1
2

4π
3

a3

.

(cid:27)

This holds for a single ball. As long as the suspension is dilute, we obtain
Einstein’s (corrected) result

W = 2η0eijeij|Ω|

1 +

(cid:18)

1
2

.

ϕ

(cid:19)

(22)

3H. Helmholtz, “Theorie der station¨aren Str¨ome in reibenden Fl¨ussigkeiten”, Wiss.

Abh., Bd. I, S. 223.

8

(25)

1
3

r2

.

(cid:19)
(26)

(27)

Following Einstein, we now calculate the same quantity by adopting the
ﬁrst description of the suspension. For this we write the result (20) in the
form

vi = eijxj + (eik△ − ejk∂i∂j)∂kf,

(23)

1
2
(A and B have the earlier meaning (18)). When the contributions of all the
suspended balls, with number density n, inside the ball KR are summed, we
obtain for the velocity ﬁeld in KR

f = −

Ar −

B
r

(24)

vi = eijxj + (eik△ − ejk∂i∂j)∂kF,

with

where

F (|x|) = n

f (|x − x′|) d3x′ =

nA

ZKR

π
3

1
10

(cid:18)

r4 − r2R2

− 2πnB

R2 −

(cid:19)

(cid:18)

From this one easily ﬁnds

vi = eijxj(1 − ϕ).

Einstein obtained this result slightly diﬀerently. We can use it to obtain a
second expression for W :

W = 2ηeijeij|Ω|(1 − 2ϕ).

(28)

Comparing (22) and (28) leads to the announced formula (4) due to Einstein.

3.5 Two relations between the Avogadro number

and the molecular radius.

If the rigid balls are molecules, for instance sugar, then

ϕ =

4π
3

a3 NAρs
ms

,

(29)

where ρs is the mass density of the solute and ms its molecular weight which
were known to Einstein. In addition, there existed measurements of η/η0 for
dilute sugar solutions. Hence, Einstein obtained from (4) a relation between
NA and a.

Using available data, Einstein states the following.4 “One gram of sugar
dissolved in water has the same eﬀect on the coeﬃcient of viscosity as do small

4I give here the later numbers from 1911.

9

suspended rigid spheres of a total volume of 0.98 cm3.” On the other hand,
the density of an aqueous sugar solution behaves experimentally as a mixture
of water and sugar in dissolved form with a speciﬁc volume of 0.61 cm3. (The
latter is also the volume of one gram of solid sugar.) Einstein interprets the
diﬀerence of the two numbers as due to an attachment of water molecules to
each sugar molecule. The radius a in (29) is thus a “hydrodynamically eﬀec-
tive radius” of the molecule, which takes the enlargement due to hydration
into account.

Diﬀusion

In order to be able to determine the two quantities individually, Einstein
searched for a second connection, and thereby found his famous diﬀusion
formula. Its derivation is quite short, but “extremely ingenious” (A. Pais).
It rests on thermal and mechanical equilibrium considerations.

Assume that a constant external force f acts on the the suspended parti-
cles. This causes a particle current of magnitude nv, where n is the number
density and v = the velocity of the particle current.
In equilibrium this
is balanced by the diﬀusion current −D∇n, D = diﬀusion constant. The
velocity of the particle current is proportional to f,

v = bf,

b : mobility.

These considerations give us the (dynamical) equilibrium condition

In thermal equilibrium, the external force is balanced by the gradient of

the osmotic pressure. According to the law of van’t Hoﬀ5 this means

Inserting this into the last relation leads to the simple formula

For the mobility Einstein uses Stokes’ relation

1
6πη0a
5According to this, the osmotic pressure p exerted by the suspended particles is exactly
In equilibrium we thus have

(34)

b =

the same as if they alone were present as an ideal gas.
nf = ∇p = kT ∇n.

D∇n = nbf.

f =

∇n.

kT
n

D = kT b.

10

(30)

(31)

(32)

(33)

and obtains in this way his famous formula

D =

, k =

kT
6πη0a

R
NA

(35)

(R = gas constant).

land.

This was almost simultaneously discovered in Australia by William Suther-

A beauty of the argument is that the exterior force drops out. Similar
equilibrium considerations between systematic and ﬂuctuating forces were
repeatedly made by Einstein.

3.6 Silence, a calculational error, late attention

By 1909 Perrin’s careful measurements of Brownian motion led to a new value
for Avogadro’s number that was signiﬁcantly diﬀerent from the value Einstein
had obtained from his thesis work, and also somewhat diﬀerent from what
he and Planck had deduced from black-body radiation. Einstein then drew
Perrin’s attention to his hydrodynamical method, and suggested its applica-
tion to the suspensions studied by Perrin. Then Jacques Bancelin, a Pupil
of Jean Perrin, checked Einstein’s viscosity formula η = η0(1 + ϕ). Bancelin
conﬁrmed that there was an increase of the viscosity that was independent
of the size of the suspended particles, and only depends on the total volume
they occupy. However, he got a stronger increase. Initially, this increase was
too steep; in the publication Bancelin gives the result η = η0(1 + 2.9ϕ).

On 27 December, 1910 Einstein wrote from Z¨urich to his former student
and collaborator Ludwig Hopf about the puzzling situation, and then adds:

“I have checked my previous calculations and arguments and found
no error in them. You would be doing a great service in this mat-
ter if you would carefully recheck my investigation. Either there
is an error in the work, or the volume of Perrin’s suspended sub-
stance in the suspended state is greater than Perrin believes.”

Hopf indeed found an error in some diﬀerentiation process, and got the
formula (4). Einstein communicated the result to Perrin, and published in
(1911) a correction of his thesis in the Annalen. (By the way, this correction
is the second most quoted paper of Einstein.) New experimental data for
sugar solutions now gave the excellent value

NA = 6.56 × 1023

(36)

for the Avogadro number, in good agreement with the results of other meth-
ods, in particular with Perrin’s determination from the Brownian motion, for

11

which he got the Nobel price in 1926. Both results were discussed by Perrin
in his extensive report at the famous Solvay conference in 1911.

4 Final remarks

In his ‘Autobiographical Notes’ of 1949, what he called his ‘necrology’, Ein-
stein only brieﬂy describes his applications of classical statistical mechanics.
The thesis is not mentioned at all. About the law of Brownian motion he
says:

“The agreements of these considerations with experience together
with Planck’s determination of the true molecular size from the
law of radiation (for high temperatures) convinced the sceptics,
who were quite numerous at the time (Ostwald, Mach) of the re-
ality of atoms. The antipathy of these scholars toward atomic the-
ory can indubitably be traced back to their positivistic philosophi-
cal attitude. This is an interesting example of the fact that even
scholars of audacious spirit and ﬁne instinct can be obstructed in
the interpretation of facts by philosophical prejudices.”

Perrin’s famous book “Les Atomes” of 1913, a classic of twentieth century

physics6, ends with the words:

“The atomic theory has triumphed. Until recently still numerous,
its adversaries, at last overcome, now renounce one after another
their misgivings, which were, for so long, both legitimate and un-
deniably useful.”

Einstein’s very decent value (36) is not quoted in Perrin’s book. This
indicates that Einstein’s thesis was not widely appreciated in the early years.
For this reason Einstein published in 1920 a brief note, drawing attention to
his erratum from 1911, “which till now seems to have escaped the attention
of all who work in this ﬁeld”.

Since Einstein was so fond of applying physics to practical situations, he
would certainly have enjoyed hearing that his doctoral thesis found so many
applications.

6A new edition of the original text has appeared in Flammarion (1991), ISBN 2-08-

081225-4; for an English translation, see: J. Perrin, Atoms, Van Nostrand (1916).

12

