Translation by W. De Baere of the paper:

M. Renninger, “Zum Wellen–Korpuskel–Dualismus”, Zeitschrift f¨ur Physik 136,
251-261 (1953).

Translator’s note:

In the original, german, version of the paper, the numbering of footnotes and
references starts with 1 on each page. Because the text in the original paper and
in the translation, does not start and end with the same sentence on each page,
we have chosen a consecutive numbering of the footnotes and the references.

It is the purpose of this translation, to bring Renninger’s important work available
to a broader audience in the ﬁeld of the foundations of quantum mechanics,
in particular to those concerned with, and interested in, the signiﬁcance and
interpretation of the quantummechanical wave function.

Acknowledgment

We acknowledge the Editor of the former Zeitschrift f¨ur Physik, Springer Verlag,
for giving us the permission to publish this english translation of Renninger’s
original paper.

5
0
0
2
 
r
p
A
 
6
 
 
]
h
p
-
t
s
i
h
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
3
4
0
4
0
5
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

1

On Wave–Particle Duality∗

M. Renninger
(Translated by W. De Baere,

Laboratory for Theoretical Physics
Unit for Subatomic and Radiation Physics
Proeftuinstraat 86, B–9000 Ghent, Belgium
E–mail: willy.debaere@UGent.be)

With 2 ﬁgures in text
(Received 5 june 1953.)†

By means of a thought–experiment, consisting of an interference experi-
ment with two interfering beams, it is shown that it can be demonstrated
experimentally that with one single particle a wave can be associated which
propagates in space and time as a physical reality, i.e. that it should not
merely be considered as a distribution of probabilities. The notion “phys-
ical reality” should be understood such that, when this physical reality is
considered in a particular space at a particular time, it should be experi-
mentally possible to inﬂuence this reality in such a way that future results
of experiments show unambiguously that this reality has been causally
inﬂuenced by the experimental act in this space and at that time.

In modern physics it has become more and more the custom, to discuss the
last questions about quantum theory, especially the wave–particle dualism, only
by means of purely mathematical considerations, and to consider the visualiza-
It is,
tion, or even the mere desire for it, as rudimentary and naive modesty.
however, the purpose of the following discussion, to point to some very precise
conclusions, which follow merely from purely experimental physical aspects, with-
out any previous knowledge of the mathematical quantum formalism, which to
my knowledge have never been obtained in this way before. At the same time
the aim is to warn that in considering such issues, the visualization should not
be given up too early, but should be kept on as long as possible. Clearly there

∗This paper has been accepted for publication, after the correspondence of the author with
leading quantum physicists has convinced the Editors of the fundamental importance of the
subject.

†The manuscript was submitted already on 10.4.53 to “Naturwissenschaften”, but was ac-

cepted for publication only later.

2

is a limit in so doing, but this limit should not be artiﬁcially set so as to ex-
clude interesting possible developments. It is precisely the purpose of this work
to present such a development.

In general one speaks of the two diﬀerent “pictures” or “aspects”, the “wave”–
and “particle–aspect”. Detailed studies report the availability of a series of ex-
periments evidencing the wave–like nature, and another series evidencing the
particle–like nature of light and matter.
But it has always been stressed, that
there exists no experiment in which at the same time both wave–like and particle–
like properties are observed, and in which the wave–like behaviour of one single
photon or electron can be shown. According to P. Jordan1 this were “logically
and mathematically nonsense”. “It is impossible, that one single indivisible ex-
perimental act shows up as well the one as the other appearance of light”. Or as
stated by W. Heisenberg2 “Particle– and wave–picture are two diﬀerent appear-
ances of one and the same physical reality”. “Now it is clear, that matter cannot
consist simultaneously of waves and particles . . . ” “The seeming double nature
has its origin in the inadequacy of our language”. “Atomic processes don’t have a
visual representation. Fortunately for the mathematical description of these pro-
cesses such a visualization is not necessary altogether; a mathematical formalism
of quantum theory is at our disposal, which accounts for all experiments . . . ”

In contrast with these statements I propose the following 3 propositions, the
proof of which will be given thereafter; they are ﬁrst formulated for light in the
visual range, but they are also valid, in appropriately modiﬁed form, for radiation
of other wavelength and for matter radiation:

1. It is possible to demonstrate experimentally, that the energy of each photon
moves across space and time on a single continuous path, and concentrated in the
form of a particle, i.e. at each instant it occupies a connected region in space3.

2. It can also be demonstrated experimentally, that with each single photon
there may be associated a guiding wave (without energy but “causally” inﬂuen-
cable), which obeys precisely the rules for the propagation of an electromagnetic
wave (spatial extension, absorption, diﬀraction, interference, splitting by reﬂec-
tion, refraction, double refraction etc., except energy), hence has unambiguously
a wave nature which propagates likewise in space and time, i.e. as long as the
photon is on its way it occupies at each instant a speciﬁc region of space which
is not necessarily single connected.

1Jordan, P.: Anschauliche Quantentheorie, p. 115. Berlin 1936.
2Heisenberg, W.: Die physikalischen Prinzipien der Quantentheorie, 2nd Ed., p. 7, 107.

3No speciﬁcation is given about the form and extension of this region of space, i.e. the

Leipzig 1941.

“particle”.

3

3. The connection in space of the particle of energy and of the wave ﬁeld is
such, that the former can be found in a region where the intensity of the wave is
diﬀerent from zero, with a probability which is proportional to this intensity. Its
propagation speed is equal to the group velocity of the wave within the limits set
by Heisenberg’s uncertainty relations.

Summarized brieﬂy and drastically: Each quantum consists of a particle of

energy, “carried” or “guided” by an energy free wave.

This image is not new.

It was already formulated by de Broglie in 19274
in terms of the by him introduced notion of “pilot wave”, but abandoned again
because of “des objections tr`es graves”5. According to a citation from N. Bohr6,
also Einstein once speaks of “ghost ﬁelds, guiding photons”.

On the other hand the 3 preceding propositions are, however, neither intended
as an explanation, nor as a mere visualization. Instead, both the energy particle
and the guiding ﬁeld associated with the single photon are considered simply as
experimental facts. Attempts for explanation should follow after observation of
the facts!

These statements will be proved by means of a thought experiment, consisting
of an elementary interference set–up. In my opinion the usual thought experi-
ments for the analysis of the wave–particle duality (mostly refraction at a single
or double slit) fail to penetrate to the deepest possible level, and are not able to
reveal the most basic characteristics. Mostly they concern refraction set–ups with
a continuous intensity distribution. The main characteristics of our set–up will
be: two interfering rays, detection in two possible places, two discrete intensities
(probability distributions) which may be chosen as either 1 or 0. This set–up is
shown in Fig. 1. (In an Appendix a more detailed description of the set–up is
given in order to prove its essential realizability.)

In the proposal it is assumed that two facts are experimentally proven:
1. The outcome of the interference experiment is the same whether many
4Broglie, L. de: Rapport au V. Congres Solvay 1927, p. 105.
5Broglie, L. de: Ondes et Corpuscules, p. 34. Paris 1930 and Introdudions `a l’Etude de la
M´ecanique Ondulation, p. 132. Paris 1930.– Remark during the correction. Only after sub-
mission of the present manuscript, the Editor became aware of the fact that de Broglie took
up again these former pictures since one year, in connection with relativistic considerations,
together with J.-P. Vigier. In an article entitled: “La Physique Quantique restera–t–elle Inde-
terministe?” containing all his publications about this issue so far, he reports in an impressive
way about his motivation, which lead him to abandon 25 years ago his former concepts and to
take up it again presently. – In the same way the Editor was not aware of the work by D. Bohm
[Phys. Rev. 85, 166, 180(1952)], in which de Broglie’s concept of “pilot–wave” is developed
theoretically, and which was the ﬁrst main reason for de Broglie to develop further his former
picture.

6Schilpp, P.A.: Albert Einstein, Philosopher–Scientist, p. 206. Evanston, Illinois 1949.

4

photons contribute in a short time or in a long time: each photon interferes only
with itself (see e.g. Dirac, Principles of Quantum Mechanics, p. 9).

(1)

(3)

S

(6)

(2)

(7)

A

SA

B

SB

(8)

(9)

(4)

(5)

Fig. 1. Interference set–
up, schematic

2. Several coherent subrays of a light source remain co-
herent, i.e. are able to interfere with each other after
having traveled arbitrary long distances along separated
paths. This has been veriﬁed experimentally up to dis-
tances of 2 km by Michelson and Gale7.

A parallel ray (1) is split by (2) in 2 rays A and
B which move, in separate spaces, through a system of
pipes towards (3). There they interfere with each other,
e.g. after transmission through and reﬂexion by a beam-
splitter S, and arrive in places (4) and (5) where they
can be detected.

The path diﬀerence between A and B can be set up (e.g. by displacing one of the
mirrors SA or SB) such that it is either + or −λ/4, resulting either in brightness
in (4) and darkness in (5), or the other way round (the ray which is reﬂected by
the beam splitter S gets a phase shift of π/2, the phase of the transmitted ray
remains unchanged).

The light source should:
1. Allow the transition to such weak intensities, that never (i.e. with a proba-
bility tending to zero), more than one photon at the same time is present between
(2) and (3).

2. Each time inform the observer by means of a signal the instant – taken each
time as t = 0 –, when a photon has passed the point (2), within an uncertainty
±∆t, which is small compared with the time of passage between (2) and (3)8.

The perfection of the optical set–up [parallelism of the ray, reﬂection and
precision of the mirrors, perfection of the detectors in (4) and (5) etc.] should
be such that each photon that passes (2) will be observed either in (4) or in (5)
(e.g. by means of scintillation or phototube) with a probability very close to 1
(i.e. almost with certainty). Thus if the path diﬀerence between A and B is set
up such that brightness will be observed in (4), darkness in (5), then each photon
entering (1) will be observed in (4).

At diﬀerent places, such as (6), (7), (8) and (9) it should be possible, to insert
in the paths A and B a slide, either an opaque screen with detector, which – as
in (4) and (5) – registrates each photon which is absorbed by the screen, or a λ/2
plate. The paths A and B should be long enough (say some light–minutes), in

7Michelson and Gale: Nature, Lond. 115, 556 (1925).
8With respect to this point, see the Appendix for the essential possibility of such a signal.

5

order to allow the insertion of such slides on diﬀerent instants while a photon is
moving between (2) and (3)9.

With this set–up we make then the following observations [Reduced intensity
as mentioned above, path lengths adjusted so that brightness is observed in (4),
darkness in (5)]:

a) As long as nothing is inserted in the places (6), (7), (8) and (9), each photon

passing (1) will be observed in (4), nothing in (5).

b) If in (6) a slide is inserted within the interval between t6 − ∆t and t6 + ∆t,
where t6 is the time the photon needs to move from (2) to (6), t6 = l6/c [l6=
distance between (2) and (6)], then for the observation there are two possibilities,
each of which is realized with probability 50%:

α) The photon is detected in (6). It is then absorbed and has disappeared,
and no further experimental intervention can result in a further observation, e.g.
revealing the existence in path B of a further existing physical reality.

β) The photon is not detected in (6). Then it can be experimentally veriﬁed
that with certainty it can be detected e.g. either in (9) at the time t9 = l9/c, or,
when this is not the case, to detect it either in (4) or in (5), with probability 1
2.
Blocking path A has, when the quantum is not observed in it, yet a deﬁnite phys-
ical eﬀect, namely that there, where in the case of both open paths no quantum
may be observed, now a quarter of all entering quanta will be detected; and it is
indiﬀerent, whether path A or path B is closed.

c) Insert now in (6) a fully transparent λ/2 plate instead of an obsorbing slide,
again within the time interval t ± ∆t. The result is: All photons are now detected
in (4) instead of in (5). The same result is obtained when the plate is inserted
in (7) instead of in (6). This means, that it is possible, by this experimental
intervention, to send the photon from (4) to (5), at will from within each of the
paths A and B, i.e. to inﬂuence it causally. Yes, it is possible, to “cancel” an
already decided “bending”, by inserting at corresponding later times t8 resp. t9 a
further – or also the same – λ/2 plate.

With these results the 3 abovementioned propositions are proven:
Proposition 1 by experiment b. The photon can always be absorbed, i.e.
detected, only in one of the paths A and B, never in both together, and further
each time at a speciﬁc instant, determined by the propagation speed. The fact,
that the certainty, to “ﬁnd” the photon in one of both paths – and when it is not
found in one path, the certainty to ﬁnd it then on a corresponding later instant in
the other one – moves with speed c, leads to the compelling conclusion, that the
9This does not require large signal speeds, because the paths A and B can be deﬂected as
many times as necessary, so that the positions (2) to (9) are at the same time separated in
space and in the immediate neighbourhood of the observer.

6

photon itself (i.e. its total energy) moves inside a conﬁned self contained region
on a continuous path through space and time. The conclusion of the localization
of a system in a region, from the certainty to detect that system in that region,
is undoubtedly allowed, and even required by the most elementary logic.

The validity of Proposition 2 follows from observation b, β and especially from
c. By the intervention of inserting the phase plate in one of both paths, whatever
one, the single photon can be steered at will between both possible detection
places. This proves, that with each single photon there is associated a physical
reality which simultaneously moves on both paths. Additional observations, which
will not be discussed further, show, that the evolution of this “physical reality”
obeys in all points the laws for the propagation of an electromagnetic wave, except
the fact, proven by observation b, that it does not contain energy (the total energy
moves on one of both paths; because the wave moves on both paths, it does not
contain energy).

Proposition 3, which basically should be considered as a supplementary one,
is proven by the combination of all observations, but in particular by the fact,
that the experimental interventions of inserting slides or phase plates has the
described result, when they happen within the mentioned time interval, which
must be the same in each path, independent whether it is an intervention on the
energy particle (by means of slides) or an intervention on the wave (by means of
phase plates).

Are now, after all these considerations, the wave–“picture” and particle–
“picture” really but “two forms of appearance of one and the same physical
reality”? Is it not, on the contrary, the case that wave and particle are two sepa-
rate physical realities associated with single photons? Did the observation c above
not “reveal in one single indivisible experimental intervention both the one and
the other picture of the nature of light”? (The result of inserting the phase plate
proves the wave nature, the observation in one single point proves the particle
nature of one and the same photon).

Of course one is free, to speak of the wave as a pure “probability”–wave. But
one should be aware of the fact, that this probability wave propagates in space
and time in a continuous way, and in a way that she can be inﬂuenced in a ﬁnite
region of space – and only there! – and also at that time! –, with an unambiguous
observable physical eﬀect!

I am not sure, whether the facts and conclusions discussed in this work have
some connection with the doubts of A. Einstein about the completeness of the
description of elementary processes by quantum mechanics10. It is obvious, that

10Summarized in: P.A. Schilpp, Albert Einstein, see footnote 6 page 4.

7

precisely the proven reality of the wave associated with the single particle, which
quantum mechanics, as it is stated explicitly, is unable to account for, may be con-
sidered precisely as an expression of the incompleteness maintained by Einstein11.
In any case was our deﬁnition of “physical reality” inspired by the deﬁnition of
Einstein, Podolsky and Rosen12 of the same notion.

In the same way I cannot say, whether there is a connection with the new
work by W. Weizel13, in which it is tried to refute von Neumann’s proof of the
impossibility of a causal model for quantumtheoretical processes.

For sure, the picture of a particle guided by a wave devoid of energy, which
is intended to be more than a “picture”, namely “reality”, nowhere contradicts
quantum mechanics, and may moreover be a valuable aid for the visual com-
prehension of elementary processes and for making exact prognoses about the
outcome of experiments.

Heisenberg’s uncertainty relation, as far as it has something to do with the
motion of a particle as treated here, may be given also a visual signiﬁcance:
it
states, that after emission of the particle it is impossible to know where, i.e. at
which point in the wave the particle, the knot is situated [as well transversally, i.e.
in which direction, as longitudinally, i.e. the distance within the coherence length
∆x determined by the uncertainty relation (the expression of the uncertainty
relation for light is: ∆x · ∆1/λ ≥ 1). Yet, this relation says nothing about our
additional statement, which restricts the uncertainty, that within the space made
available by the uncertainty relation, the particles follow a continuous path in
space and time, and that once a certain direction is taken, it keeps moving in this
direction. The “coordinates” of the particle within the guiding wave should be
considered as “hidden parameters” in v. Neumann’s sense.

It is clear that the concept of a “wave devoid of energy” is disturbing. How-
ever, in attempting to avoid this one should realize that the experimental results
would allow only much less attractive alternatives: because the existence of the
wave can be experimentally veriﬁed during the entire motion of the photon, and
the existence of the energy only in two points, the emission and the absorption
point, the assumption of the existence of a normal electromagnetic wave con-
11Remark during the correction. As the articles which the Editor became aware of since
the submission of the manuscript (see footnote 5 p. 4) show, and in accordance with a kind
personal anouncement by Mr. Einstein this is indeed the case. In this respect also the work
by L. J´anossy [Ann. Phys. 11, 323 (1953)] should be mentioned, which attempts to give an
alternative deterministic account of quantummechanical processes, although there is a violation
of the assumption of the coherence of separated rays over arbitrary distances, the validity of
which we accepted in our work (see page 4).

12Einstein, A., B. Podolsky and N. Rosen: Phys. Rev. 47, 777 (1935).
13Weizel, W.: Z. Physik 134, 264 (1953).

8

taining energy would have the unavoidable consequence, that at the moment
of absorption the wave would contract with superluminal speed, and moreover
through closed walls. Such assumption would be completely unacceptable.

The author is fully aware of the fact, that the uneasiness of the idea of a wave
devoid of energy still increases, when the consequences are considered, of the es-
tablishment that the laws of propagation of this wave are in every respect those of
an electromagnetic wave. For instance there is refraction (which in the Maxwell–
Lorentz theory has its origin in energy exchanges with dipole oscillations of the
electrons), double refraction, polarization, scattering etc.; this are all manifesta-
tions which come about through interactions with matter. Could this uneasiness
be relaxed by the consideration, that also matter must have guiding waves, and
that these are the “spooky” entities, to use Einstein’s expression, similar with
“matter waves”? That the guiding waves “devoid of energy” associated with en-
ergy radiation should correspond with guiding waves devoid of matter associated
with matter radiation? And that the interactions between these spooky entities
should co–determine the events resultant from the energy interactions between
the lumps of energy, resp. matter? A directly unobservable world behind the
observable one, guided by the former? But, to stress it again, a world the reality
of which can in time and (three dimensional) space be experimentally followed
up, and which does not exist only in the form of abstract probabilities14.

What happens to the wave devoid of energy of a photon after its absorption?
When it is absorbed for example in (6), and when in addition the detectors in
(4) and (5) are removed, what happens then with the wave in B? Does she move
further towards inﬁnity, or does she disappear at the moment of absorption?
Of course this question cannot be answered principally. The former assumption
appears to be the more natural one, because it avoids the conclusion to the
existence of inﬂuences which propagate with inﬁnite speed also through closed
walls, a conclusion which within the physical world is inconceivable. In any case
were such inﬂuences not associated with transport of energy.

It is still possible to consider the following issue: what happens to the particle
when the wave is splitted by reﬂection at a refracting surface, or at a partially
transparent mirror, or by double refraction, i.e. each time a wave is splitted in
more component waves with diﬀerent propagation vector and mostly also diﬀerent
polarization state? All these cases can be understood without contradiction with
the help of the plausible assumption, that each time the particle follows one of
the component waves, with a probability which is proportional to the intensity of
this component wave, in the same way as a particle in a splitting ﬂuid current.

14See footnote 15, page 11.

9

It is not necessary to associate with the particle properties, such as polarization.
These should be associated only with the guiding wave.

Appendix.

In order to anticipate objections against the principal (not the practical) feasibility
of the described experiments, more precise technical details will be given which
support their realizability. The set–up should have the characteristics as shown
in Fig. 2:

An almost pointlike monochromatic light source L is situated at the cen-
ter of a small half spherical convex mirror S1, which itself is large as com-
pared to L. Furthermore L is in the focus of a parabolic mirror S2 which
again is large with respect to S1.
In this way the spherical wave originat-
ing in L is transformed in a parallel bundle (1), which contains the photons.

S2

LL

S1S1

(1)

(2)

a

AA

BB

S2 L+S1

(1)

(2)

A

B

(6)

(8)

(7)

(9)

O4

O5

Z4

Z5

(3)

b

(1)

(2)

A

B

(6)

(8)

(7)

(9)

(3)

c

(4)

(5)

Fig. 2a–c. Technical details of the set–up. a Light source with reﬂecting mirrors; b
Complete set–up; c Bringing together paths A and B through multiple bending.

This ray (1) is split at (2) in 2 separated rays A and B by means of 2 mirrors
which are inclined by 45°. In order to remove the negative eﬀects of the angular
divergence of the parallel rays (due to the ﬁnite dimension of L) the parabolic
mirror may have a large section, i.e. the focus and diameter can be chosen ar-
bitrary large. The following choices may be made: diameter of the light source:
10−6 (100 ˚A), S1: 1 cm, S2: 106 cm (10 km), total light distance between (2)
and (3): 1012 cm (30 light–seconds). As already mentioned, for performing ex-
periments b and c it is required that the places (2) to (9) are close to each other.
Therefore, the separated paths must come repeatedly in the neighbourhood of
the observer, which is illustrated in Fig. 2c. In (6), (7), (8) and (9) the section

10

of the rays may be decreased by optical arrangements, in order to facilitate the
insertion of slides and phase plates. – Both lenses O4 and O5 focus the outgoing
rays (4) and (5) on the ingoing gates of two photomultiplicators. The detectors
to be inserted in (6), (7), (8) and (9) equally consist of such aggregates (lenses
and counters).

An indication is still needed how the observer may get information of the time
of emission of a photon within an uncertainty interval which is small compared
to the time needed by the photon for moving between (2) and (3). This could be
resolved as follows: The light source L consists of a small hollow sphere, which
contains a small amount of gas the atoms of which have for simplicity only one
excitation level above the ground level. A beam of electrons with known velocity
is sent through this sphere containing the gas, and with such an intensity that
only one atom is excited in a time interval which is large compared with the time
needed for a photon to move between (2) and (3), in our example of the order
of hours. A supplementary arrangement measures the energy of the transmitted
electrons and informs the observer as soon as an electron is detected which has
lost an energy corresponding to the excitation energy of the atoms. This signal
warns the observer, that one of the atoms is excited and a photon will be emitted
in the apparatus within the time needed to return to the ground state (of the
order of 10−8 sec).

The ﬁrst compositions of the above ideas date already from 20 years ago. The
ﬁnal explanation of the present formulation beneﬁted in a substantial way from
a series of very exciting discussions with Dr. S.N. Bagghi and R. Hosemann15,
Fritz Haber–Institute, Berlin–Dahlem, in the course of the last half year.
Marburg a.d. Lahn, Crystallographic Institute of the University.

15Remark during the correction. In a work in preparation these authors investigate the present
issue in terms of their newly introduced “Algebra physikalisch beobachtbarer Funktionen mittels
Faltungsoperationen”, Part I. [Z. Physik 135, 50 (1953)], and come, following a kind personal
announcement, to a conﬁrmation of the guiding wave picture, in which the amplitude of the
guiding wave has the dimension of energy. In fact, the average in time and in space of the
energy density of such a wave should be zero at any time and in each point. How far the related
assumption of “negative energy densities” of, resp. the necessity to atribute a kind of “level of
energy density” to, empty space can be carried through, will not be discussed here.

11

