EINSTEIN AND HILBERT:
THE CREATION OF GENERAL RELATIVITY ∗

Ivan T. Todorov

Institut f¨ur Theoretische Physik, Universit¨at G¨ottingen, Friedrich-Hund-Platz 1
D-37077 G¨ottingen, Germany; e-mail: itodorov@theorie.physik.uni-goe.de
and
Institute for Nuclear Research and Nuclear Energy, Bulgarian Academy of Sciences
Tsarigradsko Chaussee 72, BG-1784 Soﬁa, Bulgaria;∗∗e-mail: todorov@inrne.bas.bg

ABSTRACT

It took eight years after Einstein announced the basic physical ideas behind the
relativistic gravity theory before the proper mathematical formulation of general relativity
was mastered. The eﬀorts of the greatest physicist and of the greatest mathematician of
the time were involved and reached a breathtaking concentration during the last month of
the work.

Recent controversy, raised by a much publicized 1997 reading of Hilbert’s proof-

sheets of his article of November 1915, is also discussed.

5
0
0
2
 
r
p
A
 
5
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
t
s
i
h
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
9
7
1
4
0
5
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

∗ Expanded version of a Colloquium lecture held at the International Centre for Theoretical
Physics, Trieste, 9 December 1992 and (updated) at the International University Bremen,
15 March 2005.
∗∗ Permanent address.

Introduction

Since the supergravity fashion and especially since the birth of superstrings a
new science emerged which may be called “high energy mathematical physics”. One fad
changes the other each going further away from accessible experiments and into mathe-
matical models, ending up, at best, with the solution of an interesting problem in pure
mathematics. The realization of the grand original design seems to be, decades later,
nowhere in sight. For quite some time, though, the temptation for mathematical physi-
cists (including leading mathematicians) was hard to resist. Yuri Manin characterized the
situation as “an extreme romanticism of the theoretical high energy physics of the last
quarter of our century”.

There does exist, on the other hand, a true example of a happy competition
between mathematics and physics which has led to the most accomplished among the
three claimed revolutions in our science in the ﬁrst quarter of the twentieth century: the
creation of the general theory of relativity. It illustrates how diﬃcult it has been - even
for the founding fathers of the theory - to fully understand and adopt such basic notions
as reparametrization invariance, Bianchi identities, the concept of energy, which nowadays
enter a student curriculum. The presence of a controversy - if not so much among the
participants in the events, at least among the historians of science nearly a century later
- could serve one good purpose: to attract a wider audience to this remarkable story.

1. Prologue: Einstein (and Grossmann): 1907–1915

Einstein seemed never happy with what he had achieved. He was not satisﬁed by
the special principle of relativity because it did not incorporate accelerated motion. Since
his student years he had absorbed with sympathy Ernst Mach criticism of the “monstrous
(It was his lifelong friend Michele Besso who
[Newtonian] notion of absolute space”.
induced the 18 year old Einstein – back in 1897 – to read Mach’s “History of Mechanics”.)

In his recently reprinted address to the 1904 International Congress of Arts and
Science St. Louis, ∗) as well as in his fundamental paper “Sur la dynamique de l’´electron”
which appeared in 1906, Poincar´e already states the problem of modifying Newton’s grav-
ity theory in order to make it consistent with relativity. The problems of gravity and
of relativity of accelerated motion are combined in what Einstein will call 13 years later
“the happiest thought in my life” (Pais 82, Chap.9, pp.178–179). Then, in 1907, while
working on the review article “ ¨Uber das Relativit¨atsprinzip und die aus demselben gezo-
genen Folgerungen” (“On the principle of relativity and its consequences”), Jahrbuch der

∗) H. Poincar´e, L’ ´etat actuel et l’avenir de la physique math´ematique, Bulletin des Sciences
Math´ematiques 28 (1904) 302-324; reprinted as: The present and future of mathematical
physics, Bull. Amer. Math. Soc. 37 (2000) 25-38.

2

Radioaktivit¨at und Elektronik 4 (1907) 411–461 (written, ironically, on the request of Jo-
hannes Stark who appears as a bitter enemy of relativity during the Nazi period), he has
the idea that “for an observer falling freely from the roof of a house there exists – at least
in his immediate surroundings – no gravitational ﬁeld”.
In his Kyoto lecture (cited by
Pais) Einstein recalls: “I was sitting in a chair in the patent oﬃce at Bern when all of a
sudden a thought occurred to me: ‘If a person falls freely he will not feel his own weight’.
I was startled . . . ”

Thus the celebrated equivalence principle ﬁrst appears just two years after the
formulation of special relativity (although it was only so baptized by Einstein 5 years later).
The 1907 paper does not stop at that. It contains a derivation of the gravitational red
for the velocity of light along
shift. Einstein also deduces the formula c(φ) = c
the direction ξ of a constant gravitational ﬁeld (the mass in the gravitational potential φ
being identiﬁed with the unit of mass so that φ/c2 appears to be dimensionless). He infers
that ∗) “the light rays which do not run in the ξ direction are bent by the gravitational
ﬁeld”. As if all this was not enough for a ﬁrst probe into relativistic gravity, Einstein
wrote to his friend Konrad Habicht on Christmas 1907 (just 3 weeks after submitting the
paper): “I hope to clear up the so–far unexplained secular change of the perihelion length
of Mercury . . .” (Pais 82, p.182).

1 + φ
c2
(cid:16)

(cid:17)

All three observational implications of general relativity were in the mental view
of its creator already at this preliminary stage. Einstein’s genius is here manifest with all its
ﬂare as well as with its limitations. The limitations are most honestly described by Einstein
himself. In his “Autobiographische Skizze” completed in March 1955, a month before his
death, he deplors his attitudes towards advanced mathematics during his student years.
(Maurice Solovin, Einstein’s close friend during the period just after he graduated from
the ETH – the Z¨urich Polytechnic, remembers that “Einstein .
. often spoke against
abusive use of mathematics in physics. Physics, he would say, is essentially a concrete
and intuitive science.” “I do not believe in mathematics”, Einstein is reported to have
aﬃrmed before 1910 – see Pyenson 85, p.21, and references cited there.) Already in 1907
Einstein is striving for a generally covariant theory, but he is not aware that such a theory,
the Riemannian geometry, has been created in the 19th century. The (local) equivalence
principle purporting to generalize “the happiest thought” of 1907 to inhomogeneous ﬁelds is
instrumental in Einstein’s tracing the road to identifying gravity with space time geometry.
Yet, nowadays, a mathematically minded student of relativity feels embarrassed if he has
to explain what such an “equivalence principle” does actually mean. The presence of
a non–zero gravitational ﬁeld strength is manifested by a non–zero curvature tensor and

.

∗) In predicting the bending of light Einstein has a prominent predecessor.

In the ﬁrst
“Query” to his “Opticks” Isaac Newton writes: “Do not Bodies act upon Light at a
distance, and by their action bend its Rays; and is not this action strongest at the least
distance?”

3

cannot be eliminated – not even locally – by a coordinate transformation – no matter what
acceleration one chooses. (In order to make our point in a few words we are oversimplifying
matters. A detailed treatment of Einstein’s principle of equivalence is contained in (Norton
86).)

To summarize: by Christmas 1907 Einstein had all physical consequences of the
future gravity theory in his hands, yet, he had another eight years to go and to appeal for
mathematicians’ help before arriving at the proper mathematical formulation of general
relativity.

At ﬁrst, though, Einstein behaved much like Michael Atiyah’s physicist who “not
being able to solve a problem moves on to the next more diﬃcult one”. For three and a half
years, from 1908 to mid 1911, Einstein’s main preoccupation was quantum theory: light
quanta, blackbody radiation. (In 1910 he also completed a paper on critical opalescence,
his last major work on classical statistical physics.) Characteristically this was before the
early (1913) work of Niels Bohr after which quantum theory started becoming popular.
(Even later, in 1915, Robert Millikan, who spent 10 years to test Einstein’s prediction of
the photoeﬀect will write: “Einstein’s photoelectric equation .
. appears in every case
. Yet the semicorpuscular theory by which
to predict exactly the observed results .
Einstein arrived at his equation seems at present wholly untenable.” – see Pais 82, p.357.)
Einstein’s own appraisal of his 1909–1910 assault on the light quantum problem was not
complimentary either. (In today’s perspective, though, he appears as a true pioneer in the
quantum theory of those days - see, e.g., Sec.2 Einstein and the early quantum theory in
M.J. Klein’s lectures “The Beginning of Quantum Theory” in History of Twentieth Century
Physics, Proceedings of the International School of Physics “Enrico Fermi”, Course LVII,
ed. by C. Weiner, Academic Press, New York and London 1977, pp.19-39.)

.

.

By June 1911, after a four month stay in Prague, Einstein is again on the general
relativity track and on the bending of light. The next important breakthrough comes
a year later, in August 1912 when Einstein is back in Z¨urich and is literally crying for
help to his friend and fellow student from ETH: “Grossmann, you must help me or else
I’ll go crazy!” (Since 1907 Marcel Grossmann was a professor of geometry in ETH.) As
witnessed in Einstein’s correspondence (letter to L. Hopf of 16 August, 1912) at this time
the two of them understood that gravity should be described not by a single scalar ﬁeld
(which Einstein related in previous publications with the variation of the velocity of light),
but by the symmetric tensor metric ﬁeld gµν (x) which has 10 independent components.
Grossmann quickly realized that the generally covariant formalism Einstein was looking
for (equivalence of arbitrarily moving frames) was provided by Riemannian geometry. Yet,
this was only the beginning of the hard work. Einstein was absorbed to a point at which
he refused to talk about quantum theory anymore. On 29 October 1912 he wrote to
Sommerfeld: “I assure you that with respect to quantum I have nothing new to say . . .
I am now exclusively occupied with the problem of gravitation and I hope to master all

4

diﬃculties with the help of a friendly mathematician here. But one thing is certain: in all
my life I have labored not nearly as hard, and I have become imbued with great respect for
mathematics, the subtler part of which I had in my simple–mindedness regarded as pure
luxury until now. Compared with this problem the original relativity is a child’s play.”
(Mehra 73, p.93 and Pais 82, p.216).

It appears that in the subsequent months Einstein still trusts better his (un-
common!) physical intuition, rather than the mathematical wisdom. In their ﬁrst joint
paper with the glorious title: “Entwurf einer verallgemeinerten Relativit¨atstheorie und
einer Theorie der Gravitation. I. Physikalischer Teil von Albert Einstein. II. Mathema-
tischer Teil von Marcel Grossmann” (Leipzig und Berlin, B.G. Teubner 1913; reprinted
with added “Bemerkungen” in Zeitschrift f¨ur Mathematik und Physik 62 (1914) 225–261).
Grossmann notes in the mathematical part that the Ricci tensor Rµν may be used for
the formulation of a generally covariant gravity theory - an important step towards the
ultimate formulation of the basic equation of general relativity. (As stressed in (Win 04)
Grossmann deserves more credit for this achievement than usually given.) But the authors
reject this possibility, since it allegedly violates “the physical requirements”. The crucial
mistake comes from Einstein’s “causality requirement”: the metric tensor gµν should be
completely determined from the stress energy tensor. This is certainly not correct for the
true equations of general relativity,

Gµν = κ Tµν where Gµν := Rµν − 1
2

R gµν,

(1)

ﬁrst reported by Hilbert in his paper submitted (to Nach. Ges. Wiss. G¨ottingen), 20
November 1915. Indeed, Gµν satisﬁes the Bianchi identities (Gµν );ν = 0 in accord with
the (covariant) energy momentum conservation law. Hence, only six of its ten components
are independent, so that the gµν, far from being uniquely determined, depend on four
arbitrary functions. We now, sure, understand what it means. General covariance says
that the choice of coordinates is a matter of convention which should not aﬀect physics. The
metric tensor much like the electromagnetic potential is not an observable. To determine
it one needs (on top of Tµν ) four “coordinate conditions” corresponding to the gauge ﬁxing
in electrodynamics. It would be too easy to criticize Einstein on the ground of knowledge
acquired by physics decades later. (The notion of gauge invariance (Eichinvarianz) ﬁrst
appears six years later in Hermann Weyl’s “Gravitation und Elektrizit¨at” (Sitzungsber. d.
Preuss. Akad. d. Wiss. (1918) 465-478)∗) describing a hypothetical dilation symmetry -
in an early attempt to construct a uniﬁed ﬁeld theory. It made its way to where it really
belongs – Maxwell–Dirac electrodynamics – again thanks to Weyl after another 10 years.
In 1912–1915 Einstein was well ahead of his time exploring, in the words of Pais, a “no
man’s land”.)

∗) After over half a century Paul Dirac (Proc. Roy. Soc. A333 (1973) 403-418) still views

this paper of Weyl as “unrivalled by its simplicity and beauty”.

5

In short, in the “Entwurf” (“Outline”) Einstein and Grossmann back down from
general covariance and settle for a set of not quite geometric equations only invariant
under linear coordinate transformations. Einstein is not happy with it. In August 1913 he
writes to Lorentz: “The gravitational equations unfortunately do not have the property
of general covariance . . . However, the whole faith in the theory rests on the conviction
that acceleration of the reference system is equivalent to a gravitational ﬁeld. Thus, if not
. admit transformations other than linear ones, then the
all equations of the theory .
theory contradicts its own starting point . . . all is then up in the air” (Pais 82, p.228).

.

ν , T = T ν

In early 1914 Einstein and Adriaan Focker (who had just received his Ph.D un-
der Lorentz) restored general covariance but at a high price. They derived the scalar
equation R = −κ T (R = Rν
ν) assuming that the metric is conformally ﬂat,
gµν = ψ2ηµν , i.e., returning, essentially, to the scalar theory of gravity. In October 1914
Einstein completes a 56-page long paper “Die formale Grundlage der allgemeinen Rela-
tivit¨atstheorie” which goes back to the Einstein–Grossmann theory. (Einstein’s strength is
not in the mathematical formalism: his 1914 treatment of the covariance properties of the
ﬁeld equations, criticized by Levi-Civita, would hardly have impressed educated geometers
- see Sect. 4 and footnote 124 of (Sau 99); it does not please its author either.) In the
beginning of 1915 Einstein appears fed up (if not fully satisﬁed) with general relativity,
and he goes ahead to do some experimental work with the Dutch physicist Wander de
Haas (they discover a new eﬀect: the torque of a suspended iron cylinder as a consequence
of an abrupt magnetization).

2. Berlin – G¨ottingen (1915)∗)

On 29 November 1971 Eugene Wigner writes to Jagdish Mehra asking him one
of those questions, people, who have come to know Wigner, can easily imagine: “.
. I
was under the impression that, simultaneously with Einstein, Hilbert also found the now
accepted equations of general relativity. Is this correct? If so, is there a reason no one
seems to mention this now? I realize that the basic idea was due to Einstein but it is
interesting that, even after the promulgation of the basic idea, it took a rather long time
to ﬁnd the correct equations incorporating that idea – even though both Einstein and
Hilbert seem to have worked on it.” Mehra replies to Wigner within two weeks by a long
letter and later publishes an 87-page paper on the subject (Mehra 73). But the real answer
to Wigner’s question comes another ﬁve years later in an article by Earman and Glymour
who have digged into the Einstein Papers at Princeton University.

.

David Hilbert, whose 23 “Honors Class” problems (Yan 02) occupy mathemati-

∗) A well researched and lively account of Einstein’s Berlin years is provided in (Goen 05);
(Reid 96) is a standard source for Hilbert’s life (1862-1943), most of which (since 1895) is
spent in G¨ottingen.

6

cians throughout the 20th century, is, in his ﬁfties (after Poincar´e, 58, dies in 1912), the
uncontested leader of the world of mathematics. Having published a (by now, classic) book,
“Foundations of Geometry” Hilbert states his sixth problem (Paris, 1900): “To treat in
the same manner, by means of axioms, those physical sciences in which already today
mathematics plays an important part...”. His lifelong belief that every scientiﬁc problem
can - and will - be solved is reﬂected in the words engraved on his tombstone in G¨ottingen:
“Wir mussen wissen, wir werden wissen.” (“We must know, we shall know.”). Starting
with 1912, after completing his book on linear integral equations, Hilbert’s main preocu-
pation becomes mathematical physics: the realization of the program encoded in his sixth
problem. He thinks of unifying within the axiomatic approach the new electromagnetic
theory of the electron, put forward in 1912 by Gustav Mie (1869-1957), with the Einstein-
Grossmann theory (reported to the G¨ottingen Mathematical Society in 1913, shortly after
its publication - see (Sau 99), Sect. 2.1). Hilbert tries to have Einstein visiting G¨ottingen
(he invites him more than once - ﬁrst in 1912) and this time he succeeds.

In late June - early July 1915 Einstein spends a week in G¨ottingen where (as he
witnesses in a letter to Zangger of 7 July) he “gave six two–hour lectures there”. By all
accounts he seems happy with the outcome: “To my great joy, I succeeded in convincing
Hilbert and Klein completely” (E. to de Haas) “I am enthusiastic about Hilbert” (E. to
Sommerfeld). The feelings appear to be mutual. Hilbert recommends Einstein for the
third Bolyai Prize in 1915 for “the high mathematical spirit of his achievements” (the ﬁrst
and the second recipients of the Bolyai prize have been Poincar´e and Hilbert – see Mehra
73). Nevertheless, the G¨ottingen discussions seem to have reinforced Einstein’s uneasiness
about the lack of general covariance of his (and Grossmann’s) equations. He is reluctant
(he writes to Sommerfeld in July 1915) to include his papers on general relativity in a
new edition of “The Principle of Relativity”, “because none of the presentations to date
is complete”. After the November race Einstein will state more precisely (in letters to
friends) the grounds for his discontent with the old theory: (1) its restricted covariance
did not include uniform rotations; (2) the precession of the perihelion of Mercury came
out 18′′ instead of the observed 45′′ per century; (3) his proof of October 1914 of the
uniqueness of the gravitational Hamiltonian is not correct.

In the meantime Einstein receives a letter by Sommerfeld (perhaps in late October
1915 – the letter is lost) from which he learns that he is not the only one dissatisﬁed with
his 1914 theory. Hilbert also has objections to it and is working on his own on “Die
Grundlagen der Physik” originally conceived as “Die Grundgleichungen /basic equations/
der Physik” - see (Sau 99) footnotes 73 and 90). Will Einstein let someone else, be it
Hilbert himself, share with him the fruit of years of hard work and great inspiration? Not
he! At 36, he can still ﬁght. The Einstein papers reveal an unprecedented activity in
November 1915.

Einstein submits four communications to the “Preussische Akademie der Wis-

7

senschaften”: on 4, 11, 18 and 25 November – no Thursday is skipped! These are not
diﬀerent parts of a larger work. The ﬁrst, “Zur allgemeine Relativit¨atstheorie” rejects his
formulation of 1914 and proposes a new fundamental equation. The second, with the same
title, rejects the ﬁrst and starts anew. The fourth, “Die Feldgleichungen der Gravitation”
rejects the ﬁrst two and ﬁnally contains the right equations. It is like in a movie when
the ﬁlm is turned on a high speed. Nothing similar has happened either before or after in
Einstein’s life.

But this is not all. Einstein only answers (the lost) Sommerfeld’s letter on 28
November (three days after his last talk at the Academy). “Don’t be angry with me” he
writes “for only today answering your friendly and interesting letter. But last month I had
one of the most exciting, most strenuous times of my life, also one of the most rewarding.
I could not concentrate on writing”. Indeed, from late October to late November Einstein
stops writing to any of his habitual addressees: Besso, Ehrenfest, Lorentz, .
. But he
does write letters (or, rather, postcards). He only replaces all his regular correspondents
by a single new one – Hilbert. Four postcards are preserved from Einstein to Hilbert dated
7, 12, 15, 18 November and two of the four Hilbert answers.

.

On 7 November Einstein sends to Hilbert the proofs of his November-four paper
and in the accompanying card writes “I recognized four weeks ago that my earlier methods
of proof were deceptive”. He alludes to the above mentioned letter of Sommerfeld which
reports on Hilbert’s objections to the October 1914 paper; and closes by saying: “I am
curious whether you will be well disposed towards this solution”.

Hilbert would have hardly been well disposed towards the new equation, since
it assumes that the determinant of the metric tensor is a constant (-1) and is hence still
not generally covariant. Probably, after having Hilbert’s criticism (which has been lost)
Einstein opted on 11 November for the generally covariant equation

Rµν = κ Tµν

(2)

which Grossmann and he have rejected two years earlier. It only coincides, however, with
the correct equation (1) if Tµν (and hence also Rµν) is traceless. This is the case of Maxwell
electrodynamics and Einstein speculates that it may be more general.

The next day, 12 November, Einstein sends a second postcard to Hilbert announc-
ing that he had ﬁnally achieved generally covariant ﬁeld equations. He also thanks Hilbert
for his “kind letter” (which is lost). Hilbert replies on 14 November a long message on two
postcards. He is excited about his own “axiomatic solution of your grand problem”. In
a postscript Hilbert adds that his theory is “wholly distinct” from Einstein’s and invites
Einstein to come to G¨ottingen and hear his lecture on the subject. The tone is cordial:
Hilbert urges Einstein to come to G¨ottingen the day before the lecture and pass the night
at Hilbert’s home. The next day, Monday, 15 November, Einstein already answers Hilbert’s

8

cards. (One cannot fail to notice how accurately the mail service is working in Germany in
the midst of the European war.) “The indications on your postcards lead to the greatest
expectations”. He apologizes for his inability to attend the lecture, since he is overtired
and bothered by stomach pains. Asks for a copy of the proofs of Hilbert’s paper. Appar-
ently, he does receive the requested copy within three days, because on 18 November, the
day of his third talk at the Academy, Einstein writes his fourth postcard: “The system [of
equations] given by you agrees – as far as I can see – exactly with what I found in recent
weeks and submitted to the Academy”. Then Einstein remarks that he has known about
Eq.(2) “for three years” but that he and Grossmann have rejected it on the grounds that
in the Newtonian limit they are not compatible with “Newton’s law” (meaning Poisson’s
ﬁeld equation). Finally, Einstein informs Hilbert that he is ﬁnally explaining the advance
of the perihelion of Mercury from general relativity alone without the aid of any subsidiary
hypotheses.

Two remarks are in order.

First, it is not true that Hilbert’s Eq.(1) is equivalent to Einstein’s Eq.(2) of the
paper submitted to the Academy on 11 November. (It will be equivalent to the equation
Einstein is going to write a week later. It seems, however, that Einstein does have in mind
his Eq.(2) in this postcard since he is adding the priority claim that he knew it for three
years.) The two equations are only consistent with one another for T (= T ν
ν ) = 0, the case
Einstein has been mostly interested in at the time.

Second, Einstein does derive the correct value for the advance of the perihelion
of Mercury in his third communication “Erkl¨arung der Perihelbewegung des Merkur aus
der allgemeinen Relativit¨atstheorie” from his not exactly correct equation. This is possible
since he is actually solving the homogeneous equation (with Tµν = 0) in the post Newtonian
approximation (allowing for point singularities). - In seeing the physical implications of
the theory Einstein has no competitor.

The next day, Friday the 19th, Hilbert congratulates Einstein for having mastered
the perihelion problem and adds cheerfully: “If I could calculate as quickly as you, then
the electron would have to capitulate in the face of my equations and at the same time the
hydrogen atom would have to oﬀer its excuses for the fact that it does not radiate” (Pais
82, p.260).

On 20 November Hilbert presents to the Gesellschaft der Wissenschaften in
G¨ottingen his work. He derives the correct equations from the variational principle assum-
ing general covariance (we would say today reparametrization invariance) and a second
order equation for gµν. He gives full credit to Einstein’s ideas. On the ﬁrst page of his
article he writes: “Einstein .
. has brought forth profound thoughts and unique con-
. Following the
ceptions, and has invented ingeneous methods for dealing with them .
axiomatic method, in fact from two simple axioms, I would like to propose a new system

.

.

9

of the basic equations of physics. They are of ideal beauty and I believe they solve the
problems of Einstein and Mie at the same time”. In the published version Hilbert refers
to all Einstein November papers. About the one of 25 November, submitted after his talk,
he says: “It seems to me that [our] diﬀerential equations of gravitation are in agreement
with the noble theory of general relativity proposed by Einstein in his later memoire”.

On 25 November Einstein proposes without derivation the equation

Rµν = κ

Tµν − 1
2
(cid:18)

T gµν(cid:19)

(3)

which is exactly equivalent to Hilbert’s Eq.(1), since they both imply R + κ T = 0. He
chooses not to mention Hilbert’s name in the published paper. Later commentators have
a hard time to understand what was Einstein’s argument at the time to include the trace
term. Only Norton makes a well documented (59 pages long) case (including the study of
a Z¨urich notebook of Einstein) for an independent Einstein’s road to the correct equations.

2 R term (or equivalently, the − 1

Aside: Today’s student will easily ﬁnd the − 1
2 T term)
using the Bianchi identity. The trouble was, Einstein did not know them. We should not
be too hard on him on that account. Hilbert, too, does not know them: he derives four
identities among the ﬁelds in his theory - anticipating, three years in advance, a special
case of Noether’s theorem (Viz 94) (complemented with a stronger statement - see (Sau
99), Sect. 3.3 and footnote 120) but he conjectures erroneously that they will enable him
to express the electromagnetic potential in terms of the gravitational ﬁeld. He corrects his
error in a later version of the paper.

Felix Klein who (in 1918) reduces the vanishing of the covariant divergence,

Rµν − 1
2
(cid:18)

gµν R

= 0,

(cid:19);ν

to Noether’s theorem as well, does not realize that it is a consequence of the Bianchi
identities for the Riemann curvature tensor either. “Bianchi identities” are known before
Bianchi to Aurel Voss (1880) and to Ricci (1889); Luigi Bianchi (a pupil of Klein’s!)
rediscovers them in 1902.

3. Aftermath. Controversy among historians of science

In his speech on the occasion of Planck’s 60th birthdate (in 1918) Einstein talks
about diﬀerent categories of people that have devoted themselves to science. For some
science is a sport which allows them to satisfy their pride or vanity. If the angel chases
all such people from the temple of science, he continues, then the temple would remain
almost empty, but Planck will be among the precious few who will remain.

10

The chronicle of the last month of the creation of general relativity demonstrates
that the spirit of competition has not been alien to Einstein himself (as it was not to
Leibniz and Newton). It is to the credit of both Hilbert and Einstein that their November
1915 rivalry did not grow into a public argument. Yet the outcome of the November
events resulted in some uneasy feelings between the two men. On 20 December 1915,
Einstein writes to Hilbert: “I want to take the opportunity to say something to you which
is important to me. There has been a certain spell of coolness between us, the cause of
which do not want to analyze. I have, to be sure, struggled against any resentment, and
with complete success. I think of you once again with untroubled friendliness, and ask you
to try to think of me in the same way. It is really a shame when two such real fellows [zwei
wirkliche Kerle], whose work has taken them above the shaby world, give one another no
pleasure”. (EG 78, p.306; a slightly diﬀerent reading of the German original the reader
will ﬁnd in Pais 82, p.260.)

In his expository paper “Die Grundlage der allgemeinen Relativit¨atstheorie”, An-
nalen der Physik 49, 769-822 (received 20 March, 1916) Einstein already refers (albeit
superﬁcially) to Hilbert’s work. In May 1916 he gives a colloquium in Berlin on Hilbert’s
paper. On that occasion he again writes to Hilbert asking him to explain his work (and
complaining about its obscurity).

Hilbert’s appreciation of Einstein appears unequivocal. His biographer, (Reid
96), attributes to him the words: “Every boy in the streets of G¨ottingen understands more
about four–dimensional geometry than Einstein. Yet, . . . Einstein did the work and not
the mathematicians”.

The story does not end here, however: it is continued by the next generation of

Einstein biographers and students of science history.

In 1997 a noteworthy addition to existing Einstein’s biographies, (FL 97), ap-

peared in English, providing a nice complement to (Pais 82).

Summing up the decisive phase of his work on general relativity (Fl 97) quotes
Einstein’s letter to Heinrich Zangger (see also an earlier discussion of this letter in (Med
84)) which says: “Only one colleague truely understood it, and he now tries skillfully to
’nostrify’ it” [i.e. appropriate (’make it ours’)]. We already know that the colleague in
question was none other than David Hilbert. F¨olsing justly refutes the accusation on the
basis of available evidence.

Later the same year an article in the 14 November issue of Science, (CRS 97)
made the news. This paper has a direct bearing on our topic. It points out that a lately
discovered proof-sheet of Hilbert’s paper, with a publisher’s stamp of 6 December 1915,
i.e. after the publication of the fourth of Einstein’s communications, involves substantial
changes in the manuscript. The fact that Hilbert modiﬁed his paper after its submission

11

has been known before: as we noted he had cited all four Einstein’s November papers
and had commented on the last one (submitted after his) in the published version of his
November 20 article. The authors strive to attribute a great signiﬁcance to the fact that
the original text only involves the Hilbert action, while the ﬁeld equations, which are
derived from it, appear to be ﬁrst inserted at the stage of the proofreading. Their attempt
to support on this ground Einstein’s accusation of “nostriﬁcation” goes much too far. A
calm, non-confrontational reaction was soon provided by a thorough study (Sau 99) of
Hilbert’s route to the “Foundations of Physics” (see also the relatively even handed survey
(Viz 01)). A direct critical comment on the unfounded accusations in (CRS 97), (Win
04), originally rejected by the editors of Science, ∗) ﬁnally appears in a more specialized
journal (Win 04). ∗∗)

The polemics is getting rough. A new book, (Wuensch 05), is advertised with a
question mark: “Ein Kriminalfall in der Wissenschaftsgeschichte?” (“A criminal case in
the history of science?”). The author asserts - already in the abstract to the book - that a
missing fragment (also discussed in (Sau 99) and in (Win 04)) of the text on pages 7 and
8 of Hilbert’s proof-sheets, used in (CRS 97), contained “in all probability ... the explicit
form of the ﬁeld equations...” She further argues that “the passage ... was not excised
it must have been deliberately removed in more recent times in
originally but rather ...
order to falsify the historical truth.”

It is quite clear from the November correspondence (and from recently discovered
letters of Max Born to Hilbert of the fall of 1915 - see (Som 05)) - without appealing
to criminal proceedings - that Hilbert’s competitive inﬂuence was crucial for Einstein’s
acceptance of general covariance - in spite of his long time reservations and doubts. The
analysis of the new evidence, detailed in (Sau 99) and in (Viz 01), indicates, on the other
hand, that Hilbert appears to have been misled for a while, during the ﬁnal race, in the

∗) There seems to be a concerted eﬀort to present the view of (CRS 97) as a ﬁnal generally ac-
cepted “Decision”. In a little more than a 3-page long article on Hilbert (by J.J. O’Connor
and E.F. Robertson), available at http://www-groups.dcs.st-and.ac.uk∼history/Mathematicians/Hilbert.h
the authors have found it necessary to devote a paragraph citing the (CRS 97) accusation
of inappropriate behaviour against Hilbert, preceded by the words “the authors /of (CRS
97)/ show convincingly ...”. It is this type of overtly prejudiced attitude that provokes
uncommonly angry reactions as (LMP 04) and gives credibility to extremist publications
as (Bje 03).

∗∗) In their “Response” (CRS 04) to this comment the authors of (CRS 97) continue to assert
that taking the variational derivative of the Hilbert action (a routine 3-line exercise for an
average graduate student) is something Hilbert was not able to do by himself in 1915, and
even compare it with the calculation of “the one-billionth digit of π” (that would require
a supercomputer and the dedication of someone - like the Chudnovsky brothers (see R.
Preston, The Mountains of PI, New Yorker, March 2, 1992) - to program it).

12

opposite direction. After formulating the generally covariant action principle he appeals, in
his original text, to Einstein’s long-promoted “causality principle” and restricts the general
covariance by a (non-covariant formulation of) the energy momentum conservation law.
Only at the stage of proofreading does Hilbert suppress all extra conditions and recognize
the unqualiﬁed physical relevance of the covariant equation (1).

Einstein and Hilbert had the moral strength and wisdom - after a month of intense
competition, from which, in a ﬁnal account, everybody (including science itself) proﬁted
- to avoid a lifelong priority dispute (something in which Leibniz and Newton failed). It
would be a shame to subsequent generations of scientists and historians of science to try
to undo their achievement.

Acknowledgments

An early version of this Colloquium lecture was held at the International Centre
for Theoretical Physics (Miramare-Trieste) in December 1992. Its text (which appeared
as an ICTP internal report, IC/90/421) was prepared while the author was visiting at the
Laboratorio Interdisciplinare per le Scienze Naturali ed Umanistiche of the International
School for Advanced Studies (SISSA/ISAS) in Trieste. The present extended version of
the March 15, 2005 Colloquium talk, held at the Physics Department of the International
University Bremen, was written during the author’s visit as an Alexander von Humboldt
awardee at the Institut f¨ur Theoretische Physik, Universit¨at G¨ottingen. The author is
grateful to all these institutions for their hospitality and support. It is a pleasure to thank
Hubert Goenner for providing relevant recent references (including copies of unpublished
Born’s letters to Hilbert) and Karl-Henning Rehren for a critical reading of the manuscript.

13

REFERENCES

(Bje 03) C.J. Bjerkenes, Anticipations of Einstein in the General Theory of Relativity
(XTX Inc. Downers Grove, Illinois 2003).

(CRS 97) Leo Corry, J¨urgen Renn, John Stachel, Belated decision in the Einstein-Hilbert
priority dispute, Science 278 (1997) 1270-1273.

(CRS 04) Leo Corry, J¨urgen Renn, John Stachel, Response to F. Winterberg, “On ’Belated
decision in the Hilbert-Einstein priority dispute’ published by L. Corry, J. Renn, and
J. Stachel”, anounced in a “Retraction Notice”, Z. Naturforsch. 59a (2004) 1004 at
http:www.mpiwg-berlin.mpg.de/texts/Winterberg-Antwort.html.

(EG 78) John Earman, Clark Glymour, Einstein and Hilbert: Two months in the history
of general relativity, Arch. Hist. Exact Sci. 19 (1978) 291–308.

(Fl 97) A. F¨olsing, Albert Einstein: A Biography (Viking, N.Y. 1997).

(Goen 05) Hubert Goenner, Einstein in Berlin 1914-1933 (C.H. Beck, M¨unchen 2005).

(LMP 04) A.A. Logunov, M.A. Mestvirishvili, V.A. Petrov, How were the Hilbert-Einstein
equations discovered? Uspekhi Fizicheskikh Nauk 174 (2004) 663-621 (English translation:
Physics-Uspekhi 47 (2004) 607-621); arXiv: physics/0405075.

(Med 84) H.A. Medicus, A comment on the relations between Einstein and Hilbert, Am.
J. Phys. 52:3 (1984) 206-208.

(Mehra 73) Jagdish Mehra, Einstein, Hilbert and the theory of gravitation in: The Physi-
cist’s Conception of Nature, edited by Jagdish Mehra (D. Reidel Publ. Co., Dordrecht–
Holland, Boston, USA 1973) pp. 92–178.

(Norton 86) John Norton, What was Einstein’s principle of equivalence? pp. 5–47; How
Einstein found his ﬁeld equations, 1912–1915, pp. 101–159, in Einstein and the History of
General Relativity, Don Howard, John Stachel, eds., Einstein Studies, Vol.1 (Birkh¨auser,
Boston, Basel, Berlin 1989). Based on the Proceedings of the 1986 Osgood Hill Conference,
North Andover, Massachusetts.

(Pais 82) Abraham Pais, ‘Subtle is the Lord .
Einstein (Clarendon Press, Oxford 1982).

.

.’, The Science and the Life of Albert

(Pyenson 85) Lewis Pyenson, The Young Einstein, The advent of relativity (Adam Hilger
Ltd., Bristol and Boston 1985).

(Reid 96) Constance Reid, Hilbert (Springer, Berlin et al. 1996).

(Sau 99) Tilman Sauer, The relativity of discovery: Hilbert’s ﬁrst note on the Foundations
of Physics, Arch. Hist. Exact Sci. 53 (1999) 529-575; arXiv:physics/9811050.

14

(Som 05) Klaus P. Sommer “Nicht das Deutschland von Hindenburg und Ludendorﬀ”,
sondern das von Hilbert und Einstein. Der Fund von Briefen von Einstein, Planck, Born,
Debye, Nernst, Sommerfeld, Ehrenfest, Weyl, Courant und Althoﬀ an David Hilbert auf
einem G¨ottinger Dachboden, Berichte f¨ur Wissenschaftsgeschichte (to be published).

(Viz 01) V.P. Vizgin, On the discovery of the gravitational ﬁeld equations by Einstein
and Hilbert: new material, Uspekhi Fizicheskikh Nauk 171 (2001) 1347-1363 (English
translation: Physics-Uspekhi 44 (2001) 1283-1298).

(Viz 94) V.P. Vizgin, Uniﬁed Field Theories in the First Third of the 20th Century
(Birkh¨auser, Basel et al. 1994).

(Win 04) F. Winterberg, On “Belated decision in the Hilbert-Einstein priority dispute”
published by L. Corry, J. Renn, and J. Stachel, Z. Naturforsch. 59a (2004) 715-719.

(Wuensch 2005) Daniela Wuensch, “zwei wirkliche Kerle” Neues zur Entdeckung der Grav-
itationsgleichungen der Allgemeinen Relativit¨atstheorie durch Albert Einstein und David
Hilbert (Termessos Verlag, G¨ottingen 2005).

(Yan 02) Benjamin H. Yandell, The Honors Class: Hilbert’s Problems and Their Solvers
(A.K. Peters, Natik, MA 2002).

15

