5
0
0
2
 
r
p
A
 
3
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
t
s
i
h
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
3
9
0
4
0
5
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Hooke’s Memorandum on the development of
orbital dynamics

Abstract

I discuss a memorandum entitled ” A True state of the Case and
Controversy between Sir Isaak Newton & Dr Robert Hooke as the
Priority of that Noble Hypothesis of Motion of ye Planets about ye
Sun as their Centers”, where Robert Hooke summarized his seminal
contributions to the physics of orbital motion and to the theory of
universal gravitation.

In a brief handwritten but undated memorandum entitled ” A True state
of the Case and Controversy between Sr Isaak Newton & Dr Robert Hooke
as the Priority of that Noble Hypothesis of Motion of ye Planets about ye
Sun as their Centers” [1], Hooke recounted his hypothesis for the physics of
orbital motion and his theory of universal gravitation. Hooke’s memoran-
dum, which remained unpublished during his lifetime, is historically quite
accurate, contradicting numerous criticisms of his contemporaries and histo-
rians of science that Hooke always claimed for himself more credit than he
actually deserved. In fact, to support his ”priority” Hooke quoted verbatim
from several extant documents: the transcript of his lecture on Planetary
Movements as a Mechanical Problem given at the Royal Society on May 23,
1666 [2], his short (28 pages) monograph, An Attempt to prove the motion
of the Earth by Observations published in 1674 [3], and his lengthy corre-
spondence in the Fall of 1679 with Isaac Newton [4]. However, Hooke did
not mention his remarkable geometrical implementation of orbital motion for
central force motion, see Fig. 1, based on the application of his physical prin-
ciples, which was found only recently in a manuscript dated Sept. 1685 [6]
[7]. Unfortunately, Hooke did not publish this manuscript and related work
in spite of Edmond Halley’s urging him ”... that unless he produce another

1

diﬀering demonstration [from Newton’s], and let the world judge of it, neither
I nor any one else can believe it” [5]. It can be seen that Hooke’s geometical
construction is virtually the same as the one described by Newton, see Fig.
2, in connection with his proof of Kepler’s area law in De Motu, a short
draft that Newton sent to the Royal Society in 1684, which subsequently he
expanded into his monumental work, the Principia[8].

In his memorandum, Hooke recounts that already in 1666 he had sug-
gested that the motion of planets around the sun can be understood by
the ”inﬂection of a direct motion [inertial motion] into a curve by a super-
vening attractive principle” [1], the gravitational attraction of the sun. He
supported this novel physical insight by a mechanical analog, namely, the
motion of a conical pendulum, which he demonstrated experimentally by
hanging a weight from the ceiling of the room where he lectured to members
of the Royal Society. He also analyzed the pendulum motion mathematically,
showing that the component of the net force directed towards axis of the pen-
dulum increased linearly with the distance, recognizing that it “ seems to be
otherwise in the attraction of the sun...” [2]. In his 1674 monograph, which
contains his ﬁrst Cutlerian lecture at Gresham College given in 1670, Hooke
restated his physical principles for the origin of curved motion by the action
of an attractive force, and then enunciated his “supposition” for the law of
universal gravitation: that ” all celestiall bodys whatsoever have an attrac-
tion or a gravitating power towards their own Centers, whereby they attract
not only their own parts, & keep them from ﬂying from them, as we may
observed the Earth to do, but that they do also attract all the other Celes-
tiall Bodies which are within the sphere of their activity” [1] [3] As far as we
know, this statement is the ﬁrst published suggestion that the gravitational
force which attracts objects to the surface of the earth also acts between ce-
lestial bodies. Hooke elaborated this theory by supposing that ”... not only
the Sun and Moon have an inﬂuence upon the body and motion of the Earth
and the Earth upon them, but that Mercury, also Venus, Mars, Saturn and
Jupiter by their attractive powers, have considerable inﬂuence upon its mo-
tion as in the same manner the corresponding attractive power of the Earth
hath a considerable inﬂuence upon every one of their motions also ”. The
great novelty of this extension of terrestial gravity to celestial bodies is un-
derscored by the disbelief with which it was received by some of the greatest
scientiﬁc minds in Europe when it was proposed again, in similar form, about

2

Figure 1: The upper right hand part of Hooke’s Sept. 1685 diagram, with
some auxiliary lines deleted, showing his geometrical construction for a dis-
crete approximation to an elliptic orbit rotating clockwise under the action
of a sequence of radial impulses which vary linearly with the distance from
the center at O. For details, see ref. [7]

3

Figure 2: Diagram in De Motu associated with Newton’s proof of Kepler’s
area law, showing the construction of a discrete orbit rotating counterclock-
wise under the action of a sequence of radial impulses of unspeciﬁed magni-
tude with center at S.

4

13 years later by Newton in Book 3 of his Principia 1. After ﬁrst reading
the Principia, Christiaan Huygens admitted that it never occured to him ”to
extend the action of gravity to such great distances as those between the sun
and the planets or between the moon and the earth” [9], while Gotfried Leib-
niz declared that ”the introduction of gravitation of matter towards matter
is in eﬀect to return to occult qualities and, even worse, to inexplicable ones
[10]. Actually, an account of Hooke’s 1674 monograph introducing the idea
of universal gravitation had appeared in The Philosophical Transactiona, Vol
IX, 101, 12, (1674), and four issues later there appeared extracts of several
letters containing comments including one by Huygens. Evidently, after the
publication of the Principia in 1687, Hooke’s priority in proposing universal
gravitation had been forgotten.

In the ﬁrst edition of the Principia Hooke’s early proposal for universal
gravitation was not mentioned, while in the second edition (1713), Newton
left it to his editor, Roger Cotes, to admit in an editor’s preface, ” that the
force of gravity is in all bodies universally others have suspected or imagined,
but Newton was the ﬁrst and only one who was able to demonstrate it from
phenomena and to make it a solid foundation for his brilliant theories”. Even
this small concesion to ”others”, was left out in Newton’s third and ﬁnal
edition (1726) of the Principia. Apparently, after hearing of Hooke’s priority
complains, Newton eliminated many references to Hooke in earlier drafts of
his Principia. In a letter to Halley, Newton complained that ”... he [Hooke]
knew not how to go about it. Now is not this very ﬁne? Mathematicians
that ﬁnd out, settle & and do all the businness must content themselves with
being nothing but dry calculators & drudges & and another that does nothing
but pretend & grasp at all things must carry away all the invention as well as
those who were to follow him as of those that went before him ” [11]. Probably
prompted by Newton, Cotes added the remark that ”I can hear some people
disagreeing with this conclusion[about universal gravitation] and muttering
something or other about occult qualities. They are always prattling on and
on to the eﬀect that gravity is something occult, and that occult causes are
to be banished completely from philosophy.” [12]. But this remark applies
only to Huygens and Leibniz, and not to Hooke who nowhere in his writings
1This book is entitled The System of the World which are the words that Hooke used
to introduce his theory of universal gravitation in his 1674 tract An Attempt to prove the
Motion of the Earth by Observations

5

considered gravity to be an occult quantitiy.

In his memorandum , Hooke did not claim to know how the gravitational
force varies with distance, supposing only ” that these attractive powers are
so much the more powerful in operating, by how much the nearer the body
wrought upon is to their own Center”. Instead, Hooke proposed that this
dependence be determined experimentally, and predicted that it ”will might-
ily assist the Astronomer to reduce all Celestiall Motions to a certain rule,
which I doubt will never be done true without it” [3]. Finally, Hooke recalled
that he communicated his principles for orbital motion in a correspondence
with Newton. In a letter dated Nov. 24, 1679, he explicitly asked Newton
”as a great favour if you shall please to communicate your objections against
my Hypothesis or opinion of mine particularly if you will let me know your
thoughts of that compounding of celestiall motions of the planets of a direct
motion by the tangent & an attractive motion towards the centrall body”
[3] [4]. Hooke notes that ”in answer to this Newton pretends he knew not
Hooke’s Hypoth. ”2, referring to Newton’s response on Nov. 28, 1679 that
”...perhaps you will incline the more to believe me when I tell you that I did
not before the receipt of your last letter, so much as heare (that I remem-
ber) of your Hypothesis of compounding the celestial motions of the Planets,
of a direct motion by a tangent to the curve... ” [3] [4] But in the same
letter Newton also remarked that ” I am glad to heare that so considerable
a discovery you have made of the earth’s annual parallax is seconded by
Mr. Flamstead’s Observations”. Since Hooke had not mentioned his own
role in this supposed discovery, this remark indicates that Newton already
was familiar with Hooke’s 1674 monograph, where Hooke had published his
observations which he incorrectly had interpreted as due to the earth’s an-
nual parallax. But in this monograph Hooke also enunciated his principles
of orbital dynamics, which Newton ” pretended” not to have heard.

The question still remains what, if anything, did Newton learn from his
1679 correspondence with Hooke? Newton’s early notebook, the Waste book,
indicates that by 1664 he was already analysing uniform circular motion by
the action of a sequence of impulses on a moving body that are directed
towards the center of the circular orbit [13]. Therefore, it is incorrect to
assert, as several historians of science have done, that Newton had learned
this approach to orbital motion from Hooke [14]. But it is surprising that in
2this comment also appears as an insertion Hooke made in his copy of Newton’s letter.

6

his Nov. 28 letter to Hooke, Newton claimed that he was unaware that Hooke
had had similar views on orbital motion, because Newton had read Hooke’s
1674 monograph. In his memorandum, Hooke recalled that in his response
letter he had reminded Newton that “ I could add many other considerations
which are consonant with my Theory of Circular motions compounded by a
Direct motion and an attractive one to a center”[1], [15]. Later on, in his
1686 correspondence with Halley regarding what he had heard about Hooke’s
priority claims, Newton focused mainly on the discovery of the inverse square
dependence of the gravitational force, neglecting to mention Hooke’s earlier
formulation of the principles of orbital dynamics and the theory of universal
gravitation.

According to David Gregory, who visited Newton at Cambridge in 1694,
” I saw a manuscript [written] before 1669 ... where all the foundations of
his philosophy are laid down: namely the gravity of the Moon to the Earth,
and of the planets to the Sun. And in fact all these even then are subject to
calculation...” [16]. This manuscript, which is found among Newton’s still
exisiting papers, indicates that by 1669 Newton had gone further than Hooke,
having rediscovered the mathematical relation for the radial acceleration or
central force in the case of uniform circular motion that had been found ear-
lier by Huygens, but not published by him until 1673, when his Horologium
Oscillatorium ﬁrst appeared. Newton applied this relation to planetary mo-
tion, and by assuming that it satisﬁed Kepler’s harmonic law, he found that
” the endevaours of receding from the Sun will be reciprocally as the squares
of the distance from the Sun” [16]. Newton assumed that such a dependence
on distance applied also to the force attracting the moon to the earth, which
he attempted to identify with the gravitational force acting on bodies at the
surface of the earth. But due to an error in the value for the radius of the
earth which he used in his calculations, he was misled into thinking that an
inverse square dependence was not accurate for terrestial gravity. Actually,
it was not until after he discovered his error around 1685, by applying Pic-
card’s correct value for the earth’s radius to his earlier calculation, that he
proved, by a remarkable mathematical feat that this dependence is valid up
3 Without this proof, however, the
to the surface of any spherical body.
moon test for the universality of gravity is not possible, although usually
3In his book, Newton’s Principia for the Common reader, Chandrasehkar calls it one

of Newton’s ”superb theorems”.

7

this is forgotten. In his 1686 correspondence with Halley, in which he re-
jected accusations that he had learned about the inverse square dependence
from Hooke, Newton remarked that ” Mr. Hook without knowing what I
have found since his letters to me, can know no more than the proportion
was duplicate quam proxim´e [approximately] at great distances from the cen-
ter, & only guessed it to be so accurately, & guess amiss in extending that
proportion down to the very center...” . Newton repeatedly used the word
guess to indicate that Hooke had not provided any mathematical proof for
his supposition ”that the Attraction always is in a duplicate proportion to
the Distance fromt he Center Reciprocally” as Hooke had written to him
[17]. In a letter to Halley, Newton pointed out that in this ”Theory I am
plainly before Mr Hook. For he, about a year after [1673], in his Attempt
to prove the Motion of the Earth, declared expressely that the degrees by
which gravity decreased he had not then experimentally veriﬁed, that is he
knew not how to gather it from phenomena, & therefore he there recomends
it to the prosecution of others” [18]. Newton also asserted that Hooke had
extended the inverse square proportion to the interiour of the earth. But,
instead, Hooke had correctly pointed that inside the earth the gravitational
force varies linearly with the distance from the center, stating that ” I rather
Conceive that the more the body approaches the Center, the lesse will it be
Urged by the attraction- possibly somewhat like the Gravitation on a pen-
dulum or a body moved in a Concave Sphere where the power Continually
Decrease the neerer the body inclines to a horizontal motion...” [17].

On Dec. 13, 1679 Newton wrote a remarkable letter to Hooke [19], which
demonstrates that by that time Newton had gained a deep understanding of
the physics of central force motion, and provides evidence that he had devel-
oped a very good approximate mathematical method to calculate the orbits
for various central forces [20]. The letter includes a diagram, Fig. 3, which
shows the trajectory of a body moving under the action of a central force
which has a constant magnitude. Hooke promptly responded that ”Your Cal-
culation of the Curve by a body attracted by an equall power at all Distances
from the center Such as that of a ball Rouling in an inverted Concave Cone
is right and the two auges [farthest points from the center of force] will not
unite by about a third of a revolution” [21]. Hooke must have been astounded
that Newton could calculate a trajectory which previously he had observed in
one of his mechanical experiments to understand orbital motion. In Fig. 4 I
show a stroboscopic photograph of a steel ball rolling inside an inverted cone

8

9

Figure 3: Diagram in Newton’s Dec. 13, 1679 letter to Hooke, showing a
curve AF OGHIKL for the approximate orbit of a body moving under the
action of a constant central force.

which closely resembles the trajectory shown in Newton’s diagram, Fig. 3,
and attests to Hooke’s careful observation. In the text to his letter to Hooke,
Newton also discussed the changes in the orbit when the force increases with
decreasing distance to the center, or in his words, ” Thus I conceive it would
be if gravity where the same at all distances from the center. But if it be
supposed greater nearer the center the point O [nearest to the center C] may
fall in the line CD or in the angle DCE or in other angles that follow, or even
nowhere. For the increase of gravity in the descent may be supposed such
that the body shall by an inﬁnite number of spiral revolutions descend con-
tinually till it cross the center by motion transcendentally swift” Although in
his letter to Hooke, Newton did not identify the force law that would lead to
such an extraordinary orbit with ”an inﬁnite number of spiral revolutions”,
later in 1684 he ampliﬁed his description in a Scholium to an early draft of
the Principia [22], and he revealed that this force depends inversely as the
cube power of the radial distance. This Scholium, however, was not included
in the ﬁnal draft of the Principia, and it has been generally ignored in the
past. Thus, it is evident that by the time of his correspondence with Hooke,
Newton already had developed a fairly sophisticated method to calculate or-
bital motion for central forces. I have given arguments [20] that Newton’s
method was based on his observation that for central forces the component
of the force normal to the orbit determines its radius of curvature by the
Huygens-Newton relation for circular motion, provided that the velocity is
known. Newton indicated this connection in a cryptic remark in his 1664
notebook: ” If the body b moves in an Ellipsis, then its force in each point
(if its motion [velocity] be given) may be found by the tangent circle of equal
crookedness [curvature] with that point of the Ellipsis”[13]. But in this cur-
vature approach it is diﬃcult to see that Kepler’s area law [conservation of
angular momentum] is a consequence of the action of central forces [20]. New-
ton discovered this fundamental connection, which became a cornerstone of
his Principia as Proposition 1 in Book 1, only after his correspondence with
Hooke. To prove this theorem Newton ﬁrst had to discretize the continuous
central force by a series of impulses, and then apply to general orbital motion
the principles advocated for a long time by Hooke, which he had explained
to Newton in his 1679 correspondence as ” compounding the direct motion
with an inﬂection towards the center of force”. Although previously Newton
had applied such a decomposition to uniform circular motion, evidently the
impetus for considering it for general motion came from Hooke, yet Newton

10

Figure 4: Stroboscopic photograph reproducing Hooke’s observation of ” a
ball Roulling in an inverted Concave Cone”.

11

vehemently denied that he learned anything from him, admitting only that
” ...his correcting my Spiral occasioned my ﬁnding the Theorem by which
I afterward examined the Ellipsis; yet I am not beholden to him for any
light into that business but only for the diversion he gave me from my other
studies and for his domaticalness in writing as if he had found the motion
in the Ellipsis, which inclined me to try it after I saw by what method it
was to be done...” [18]. But without Hooke’s crucial intervention in 1679,
it is most likely that Newton would have continued with his ”other studies”
[alchemy and theology]. Then, when in the Fall of 1684 Halley was travelling
back to London after burying his father in Lincolnshire [23], and decided to
visit Newton in Cambridge, he would not have been prepared to respond ”
an ellipsis” to Halley’s famous question 4 ”what he thought the Curve would
be that would be described by the Planets supposing the attraction towards
the Sun to be reciprocal to the square of their distance from it”[24].

References

[1] This is an undated manuscript in Hooke’s collection at the Trinity Li-
brary which is reproduced in R.T. Gunther, Early Science in Oxford,
Vol. X (Oxford University, Oxford, 1930) pp. 57-60

[2] T. Birch, The History of the Royal Society of London (Royal Society,

London, 1756-57), pp. 91-912; Gunther, ref. [1], Vol. VI, p. 256.

[3] R. Hooke, An Attempt to Prove the Motion of the Earth from Observa-
tions, (London,1674), reproduced in Gunther, ref. 1, Vol VII, pp. 1-28.

[4] The Correspondence of Isaac Newton, Vol. II, 1676-1687, edited by H.W.

Turnbull (Cambridge University Press, 1960)

[5] Letter from Halley to Newton dated June 29, 1686, The Correspondence

of Isaac Newton ref. [4] p.442

[6] P.J. Pugliese, Robert Hooke and the Dynamics of Motion in a Curved
Path, in M. Hunter and S. Schaﬀer, ”Robert Hooke, New Studies” (Boy-
dell, Woodbridge, 1989) pp. 181-205

4according to Newton’s later recollection, as told by Abraham De Moivre

12

[7] M. Nauenberg, Hooke, Orbital Notion, and Newton’s Principia, Amer-
ican Journal of Physics 62 (1994) 331-350; M. Nauenberg, On Hooke’s
1685 Manuscript on Orbital Mechanics Letter to the editor, Historia
Mathematica 25 (1998), 89-93 M. Nauenberg, Robert Hooke’s Seminal
Contributions to Orbital Dynamics, Physics in Perspective, March 2005,
??

[8] I. Newton, Mathematical Principles of Natural Philosophy, A new trans-
lation by I.B. Cohen and Anne Whitmann, with a guide to Newton’s
Principa by I. B. Cohen (University of California Press, Berkeley 1999)

[9] Quoted in ref. [8], p. 155

[10] Quoted in ref. [8], p. 153

Isaac Newton ref. [4] p. 438

[12] I. Newton, Principia ref. [8]p.392

[11] Letter from Newton to Halley, June 20, 1686 The Correspondence of

[13] J. Herivel, The Backrground to Newton’s Principia ( Oxford at the

Clarendon Press, 1965) p. 130

[14] R.S. Westfall, Never at Rest: A Biography of Isaac Newton (Cambridge

University Press, Cambridge 1995) p. 383

[15] Letter from Hooke to Newton, Dec. 9, 1679 The Correspondence of Isaac

Newton ref. [4] p. 304

[16] J. Herivel, The Backrground to Newton’s Principia ref. [13] pp. 192-198

[17] Letter from Hooke to Newton, Jan. 6, 1680, The Correspondence of

Isaac Newton ref. [4] p. 309

Isaac Newton ref. [4] p. 446

[18] Letter from Newton to Halley, July 27, 1686, The Correspondence of

[19] The diagram in this letter has often been reproduced incorrectly. The

Correspondence of Isaac Newton ref. [4] p. 307

13

[20] M. Nauenberg, Newton’s Early Computational Method for Dynamics,

Archive for History of Exact Sciences, 46 (1994) 221-251

[21] Letter from Hooke to Newton, January 6, 1679/1680 The Correspon-

dence of Isaac Newton ref. [4] p. 309

[22] The Mathematical Papers of Isaac Newton vol. VI 1684-1691, ed. D.T.

Whiteside (Cambridge University Press, 1974) pp. 89-91

[23] D. T. Whiteside (private communication, 2005)

[24] Quoted in ref. [14] p. 403

14

