Remembering Sergio Fubini∗

R. Jackiw

Center for Theoretical Physics

Massachusetts Institute of Technology

Cambridge, MA 02139

MIT-CTP-3628

Abstract

The author recollects Sergio Fubini’s impact on ﬁeld theory

(radial quantization, merons, conformal quantum mechanics) and on MIT.

5
0
0
2
 
y
a
M
 
3
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
t
s
i
h
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
5
9
0
5
0
5
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

∗ Fubini Memorial, CERN, Geneva, May 2005

2

Sergio Fubini

1928-2005

3

Sergio Fubini was in Boston in 1967, delivering the Loeb lectures at Harvard. I was a postdoc

there and so I met him for the ﬁrst time. In the same period Steven Weinberg also visited and

lectured. It must have been clear that both were interested in staying in the area (at least for a

while) because Viki Weisskopf, the very astute chairman of MIT’s physics department, succeeded

in hiring them – a fortunate development that caused MIT to become the fountainhead of the

principal themes in fundamental physics for the remainder of the 20th century. This was a direct

consequence of the research that the two accomplished in their years at MIT: Weinberg reviving

quantum ﬁeld theory, unifying particle physics forces and discussing cosmology; Fubini developing

an operator formalism based on the Veneziano amplitude, going beyond ﬁeld-theoretic descriptions

of Nature and leading to today’s string theory.

Here we are commemorating Fubini, and Gabriele Veneziano already described their seminal

string theory work at MIT. I shall speak about our joint work on ﬁeld theory, and also about

related investigations that Sergio subsequently carried out.

Urged by Fubini and Weinberg, and wishing to be their colleague, I joined the MIT physics

department in 1969.

In my research I was ﬁnding new phenomena within current algebra and

symmetry behavior in quantum ﬁeld theory. These were subjects for which Fubini and his col-

laborators established fundamental results: approximate symmetries described by chiral currents;

procedures for deriving physically useful sum rules from equal-time current commutators; the in-

ﬁnite momentum frame. [1]

At that time, the ﬁndings by MIT-SLAC experimentalists of scaling in high energy (deep in-

elastic) electron scattering called attention to scale and conformal symmetries [2]. Moreover, the

observed scattering amplitudes become determined at high energies by the behavior of relevant

currents near the light cone [3]. These observations led to the technique of “light-cone” quantiza-

tion, ﬁrst discussed by Paul Dirac [4]. In this approach, which is equivalent to the usual equal-time

quantization, canonical commutation relations are posited on light-like surfaces, rather than at

equal times. My collaborators and I took these ideas to the further step of deriving and postulat-

ing light-cone commutators for currents [5]. This interested Sergio very much, because it turned

out that the light-cone technique gives an operator formulation for his inﬁnite momentum frame

and results in a more eﬃcient and accurate derivation of the sum rules, which he ﬁrst discussed on

the basis of equal-time current commutators.

I expect that this conﬂuence of our research streams led to our collaboration. We took an-

other quantization idea from Dirac, [4] and developed a canonical formalism for ﬁelds by positing

canonical commutation relations on surfaces of ﬁxed X µXµ, with dynamical evolution proceed-

4

ing in the direction normal to these surfaces [6]. This manifestly Lorentz invariant formulation

is especially convenient in Euclidean space, where ﬁxed X µXµ deﬁnes a sphere, and evolution

in the radial direction, normal to the sphere, is governed by the dilation generator D. Thus

scale and conformally invariant theories ﬁt very nicely into this approach, since there the dila-

tion generator D is a constant of motion (like the Hamiltonian H in usual equal-time quantiza-

tion of time-independent systems).

Initially our results appeared to be only of methodological,

rather than practical, interest. Because in radial Euclidean quantization the kinematical space

at ﬁxed radius is ﬁnite, we could give well-deﬁned formulas for the Virasoro generators as mo-

ments of the energy-momentum tensor in 2-dimensional, conformally invariant theories. More-

over, the important center in that algebra was identiﬁed with the anomalous Schwinger terms in

the “equal-radius” commutators of the energy-momentum tensor. In this way another bridge ap-

peared between our earlier researches: linking chiral anomalies on the one side with scale/conformal

anomalies on the other. Both symmetries rely on absence of mass terms for the ﬁelds. But

Nature’s evident abhorrence of masslessness is encoded in quantum ﬁeld theory by anomalies.

Years later, when string theory revived, our radial quantization procedure became generally

adopted as the preferred method for quantizing 2-dimensional, conformally symmetric models,

which are at the core of string theory [7].

After this joint work, Sergio left for CERN in 1973, and our direct collaboration ended. However,

I was fortunate that a virtual collaboration continued, with both of us pursuing further topics

of contemporaneous and mutual interest. The 1970’s were a time for exploring ﬁeld theoretic

classical solutions and establishing their quantum meaning. The most important of these for

physics was the Euclidean Yang-Mills instanton, found by a soviet of physicists [8]. The conformal

invariance of Yang-Mills theory enlarges its ISO(3,1) Poincar´e symmetry to an O(4,2) conformal

symmetry, which becomes O(5,1) for the Euclidean theory. Claudio Rebbi and I showed that the

instanton is O(5) invariant [9]. Fubini, with Vittorio de Alfaro and Giuseppe Furlan, considered the

Lorentzian theory and found regular solutions that preserve the O(4) × O(2) subgroup of O(4,2)

[10]. Thus both solutions are symmetric under the maximal compact group on their respective

spaces. Moreover, in the Euclidean version, the Fubini et al. solution acquires localized singularities

and in minimal form carries half of the instanton’s topological quantum number.

5

The result lay fallow until the Princeton group [11] suggested that the new solution should be

called a “meron” (after the Greek word for “portion” [of an instanton]) and that merons cause

color conﬁnement. This idea has not been universally accepted, although it continues generating

research to this day [12].

An alternative quantization in a conformally invariant model was put forward by Fubini within

particle quantum dynamics, which can be viewed as a “ﬁeld theory” in one time and zero space

dimensions. When the dynamics is also conformally invariant, its time translation “ISO(1,0)”

6

symmetry becomes enlarged to O(2,1), with three generators. Compact rotations are generated by

one of them, R: the time translation generator H summed with the conformal generator K, R ∝ H +

K. [The third generator is the dilation D.] In the quantum theory one may choose to diagonolize

R, which has a discrete spectrum. This choice replaces conventional diagonalization of H and/or

radial quantization with its diagonalization of D. With de Alfaro and Furlan, Fubini applied this
method to the quantum mechanics of the 1/r2 potential, known to be scale/conformal invariant

[2]. A very elegant group theoretical analysis ensued, and “conformal quantum mechanics” was

born [13].

But its utility at ﬁrst remained obscure. It was established that interactions with magnetic point

monopoles and vortices also preserve conformal symmetry and could ﬁt into conformal quantum

mechanics [14]. Moreover, it was shown that the higher O(2,1) symmetry of the time-dependent

Schr¨odinger equation allows separating variables in ways other than the conventional time/space

factorization. Thus conformal quantum mechanics arises from such an unconventional separation of

variables in the O(2,1) invariant, time dependent Schr¨odinger equation [14]. [A familiar analogous

situation arises with the 1/r potential, which in addition to rotational invariance, enjoys an O(4)

symmetry; correspondingly the Schr¨odinger equation can be separated in spherical and parabolic

coordinates.] Fubini also demonstrated that similar conformal quantization can be carried out for

conformally invariant ﬁeld theories on space-time, but space-translation invariance is lost, to be

replaced by a statistical conservation law for spatial momentum [15]. Although this mechanism

has not found favor, it anticipates contemporary interest in violations of space-time symmetries.

7

The full impact of conformal quantum mechanics came only after string theorist realized that

dynamics of a particle near a black hole may enjoy an O(2,1) symmetry, and the Fubini et al.

choice of R as the evolution operator corresponds to a redeﬁnition of the time variable near the

black hole [16].

Thus it turns out that no matter how far Sergio’s research strays from string theory, its ﬁnal

relevance reverts to string theory. Indeed an overview of his physics career shows that in early

days he approached fearlessly dynamics of elementary particles, even where fundamental laws

were unknown. This characterizes his work on the multiperipheral model, his sum rules and

superconvergence relations, and of course the dual resonance model. But it seems to me that

the mathematical depths that he plumbed in developing the latter into string theory awakened

in him an interest in mathematical formalism, for which he surely had a genetic predisposition

from his forbears. Nevertheless, Sergio’s physical intuition prevailed and his explorations of formal

mathematical physics, uniﬁed by the themes of conformal symmetry and alternative quantization

procedures, found unanticipated applications.

8

Fubini left MIT in 1973, but his impact on our physics department persisted, and continues to

this day. He raised the visibility of the particle physics group by centering at MIT initial string

theory research. Also one of the conditions of his employment was an agreement for an exchange

program with Turin University. This brought to MIT countless Italian students, post-docs and

senior visitors – not only from Turin – who were eagerly participating in the rich physics activity

generated for the nascent string theory by Fubini and Veneziano, and also turning to other areas of

fundamental physics. On the faculty level Fubini encouraged and supported his compatriots Rebbi

and Veneziano on term appointments and Bruno Coppi in a permanent position at MIT.

The ﬂow of people continued informally after he left, but later it was formalized by a new

INFN-MIT agreement, which established the “Bruno Rossi” exchange program, named after an

earlier Italian, who made his professional home at MIT and, like Sergio, did wonderful physics.

I last saw Sergio during a visit to CERN, where we met for lunch. During the meal, he became

ill, so I insisted on driving him home to St. Cergue. He was very moved by my oﬀer, and said

that I treat him like a brother. I realize that for many years he was like an older brother, advising

me professionally and encouraging me to enter new activities, like his Middle East peace initiative.

That eﬀort, similar to some of his physics researches, awaits success only in the future, even while

today it puts into vivid evidence his great talents in the service of humane pursuits.

[1] A guide to this research is V. de Alfaro, S. Fubini, G. Furlan and C. Rossetti, Currents in Hadron

Physics (North Holland, Amsterdam, 1973).

[2] R. Jackiw, “Introducing Scale Symmetry,” Physics Today, 25 (1), 23 (1972).
[3] R. Jackiw, R. Van Royen and G. B. West, “Measuring Light Cone Singularities,” Phys. Rev. D 2, 2473

(1970).

[4] P.A.M. Dirac, “Forms of Relativistic Dynamics,” Rev. Mod. Phys. 21, 392, (1949).
[5] J. M. Cornwall and R. Jackiw, “Canonical Light Cone Commutators,” Phys. Rev. D 4, 367 (1971);

D. A. Dicus, R. Jackiw and V. L. Teplitz, “Tests of Light Cone Commutators: Fixed Mass Sum Rules,”
Phys. Rev. D 4, 1733 (1971).

[6] S. Fubini, A. J. Hanson and R. Jackiw, “New Approach to Field Theory,” Phys. Rev. D 7, 1732 (1973).

[7] For a review, see P. Ginsparg, “Applied Conformal Field Theory,” in Les Houches Summer School

(1988), [hep-th/9108028].

[8] A. A. Belavin, A. M. Polyakov, A. S. Shvarts and Y. S. Tyupkin, “Pseudoparticle Solutions of the

Yang-Mills Equations,” Phys. Lett. B 59, 85 (1975).

[9] R. Jackiw and C. Rebbi, “Conformal Properties of a Yang-Mills Pseudoparticle,” Phys. Rev. D 14, 517

9

(1976).

[10] V. de Alfaro, S. Fubini and G. Furlan, “A New Classical Solution of the Yang-Mills Field Equations,”
Phys. Lett. B 65, 163 (1976); “Properties of O(4) x O(2) Symmetric Solutions of the Yang-Mills Field
Equations,” Phys. Lett. B 72, 203 (1977).

[11] C. G. Callan, R. F. Dashen and D. J. Gross, “A Mechanism for Quark Conﬁnement,” Phys. Lett. B

66, 375 (1977); “Toward a Theory of the Strong Interactions,” Phys. Rev. D 17, 2717 (1978).
[12] F. Lenz, J. Negele and M. Thies, “Conﬁnement form Merons,” Phys. Rev. D 69, 074009 (2004).

[13] V. de Alfaro, S. Fubini and G. Furlan, “Conformal Invariance in Quantum Mechanics,” Nuovo Cim. A

34, 569 (1976).

[14] R. Jackiw, “Dynamical Symmetry of the Magnetic Monopole,” Annals Phys. 129, 183 (1980); “Dy-

namical Symmetry of the Magnetic Vortex,” Annals Phys. 201, 83 (1990).

[15] S. Fubini, “A New Approach to Conformal Invariant Field Theories,” Nuovo Cim. A 34, 521 (1976).

[16] For a review, see R. Kallosh “Black Holes and Quantum Mechanics” in Novelties in String Theory, L.

Brink and R. Marnelius editors (World Scientiﬁc, Singapore, 1999).

