5
0
0
2
 
l
u
J
 
8
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
t
s
i
h
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
2
3
1
7
0
5
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Antimatter weapons (1946-1986):
From Fermi and Teller’s speculations to the
ﬁrst open scientiﬁc publications ∗

Andre Gsponer and Jean-Pierre Hurni
Independent Scientiﬁc Research Institute
Box 30, CH-1211 Geneva-12, Switzerland
e-mail: isri@vtx.ch

Version ISRI-86-10.1 February 21, 2014

Abstract

We recall the early theoretical speculations on the possible explosive uses
of antimatter, from 1946 to the ﬁrst production of antiprotons, at Berkeley in
1955, and until the ﬁrst capture of cold antiprotons, at CERN on July 17–18,
1986, as well as the circumstances of the ﬁrst presentation at a scientiﬁc
conference of the correct physical processes leading to the ignition of a
large scale thermonuclear explosion using less than a few micrograms of
antimatter as trigger, at Madrid on June 30th – July 4th, 1986.

Preliminary remark

This paper will be followed by by Antimatter weapons (1986-2006): From
the capture of the ﬁrst antiprotons to the production of cold antimatter, to
appear in 2006.

1

Introduction

At CERN (the European Laboratory for Particle Physics), on the evening of the
17 to the 18 of July 1986, antimatter was captured in an electromagnetic trap for
the ﬁrst time in history. Due to the relatively precarious conditions of this ﬁrst
∗Published in French in La Recherche 17 (Paris, 1986) 1440–1443; in English in The World
Scientist (New Delhi, India, 1987) 74–77, and in Bulletin of Peace Proposals 19 (Oslo,1988)
444–450; and in Finnish in Antimateria-aseet (Kanssainv¨alinen rauhantutkimuslaitos, Helsinki,
1990, ISBN 951-9193-22-7) 7–18.

1

successful attempt, it was only possible to conserve the antiprotons for about ten
minutes. This was, nevertheless, much longer than the Americans Bill Kells of
Fermilab and Gerald Gabrielse of the University of Washington had hoped for.

When these researchers return to CERN for another attempt, an improved
apparatus will permit them to literally ’bottle’ several tens or hundreds of antipro-
tons. Ultimately, the perfection of this technique will allow them to carry home
a substance inﬁnitely more rare and difﬁcult to obtain than a piece of the Moon.
They would thus be able to complete, in their own laboratory, a most important
experiment for the theory of the uniﬁcation of the fundamental physical forces,
that of comparing, with a precision greater than one part per billion, the masses of
the proton and antiproton.

Some other American Scientists, this time coming from the Los Alamos mil-
itary laboratory (where the atomic bomb was perfected during the Second World
War), are also at work in Geneva. In a few months time, using many more re-
sources and more sophisticated equipment, they also expect to capture and bottle
antiprotons, but in much greater quantities.

They will, as the group from the University of Washington, strive to divulge
the difference in mass between the proton and its antiparticle. But, they will also
attempt a number of complex manipulations such as, the production of antihydro-
gen, the injection of antiprotons into superﬂuid helium, the search for metastable
states in ordinary matter, etc. Various crucial experiments that should, in the near
future, help to determine whether or not antimatter could become a new source of
nuclear energy for civilian and military applications. For the more delicate exper-
iments, they could certainly bring their vintage 1987 or 1988 bottles of antimatter
to Los Alamos. There, up in the peaceful mountains of New Mexico, they could
perfect nuclear weapons free of radioactive fallout, beam weapons projecting ther-
monuclear plasma jets, gamma- or X-ray lasers, or other still more secret weapons,
all triggered by antimatter.

2 A concept more than 40 years old...

Paradoxically, as futuristic and revolutionary as these weapons may seem, the
military importance of antimatter [1], provided it can be produced, is as old as the
science-ﬁction that has been talking about it. For instance, it is quite possible that
Edward Teller, the father of the American H-bomb, already had ideas of eventual
military applications when he published in 1947, with Enrico Fermi, an article
treating the capture of negative particles heavier than electrons by matter [2]. It

2

is just as signiﬁcant to notice that since 1945, about half of Teller’s non-classiﬁed
publications and many articles published by Andrei Sakharov [3], the father of the
Soviet H-bomb, are concerned in one way or another with antimatter.

In fact, in 1950, two years before the explosion of the ﬁrst H-bomb, the ignition
by antimatter of a mixture of deuterium and tritium was already being studied.
However, as shown for example in an article by A.S. Wightman [4] (studying
speciﬁcally the problem of the capture of antiprotons by deuterium and tritium), or
in an article by J. Ashkin, T. Auerbach and R. Marschak [5] (trying to calculate the
result of the interaction between an antiproton and a nucleus of ordinary matter),
the major problem at that time was that there wasn’t any experimental data on which
one could make a precise prediction of what would happen, for example, when
a proton and antiproton met. Nevertheless, well founded theoretical arguments
already permitted a good understanding of the two essential characteristics of such
a so-called annihilation reaction, a reaction in which the masses of a particle and
its antiparticle are totally transformed into energy.

These two characteristics are still valid today and entirely justify the interest in
antimatter. The ﬁrst, is that the release of usable energy per unit mass is greater in
annihilation than in any other nuclear reaction. One proton-antiproton annihilation
releases 300 times more energy than a ﬁssion or fusion reaction. The second, is
that when antimatter is brought in the proximity of matter, annihilation starts by
itself, without the need of a critical mass as in ﬁssion, and without the ignition
energy needed in fusion.

In short, an ideal nuclear trigger, provided that methods to produce and ma-
nipulate sufﬁcient quantities of antimatter be found. But, at that time, the how and
when antimatter could be produced wasn’t known, and a number of fundamen-
tal questions about annihilation were still outstanding. Consequently, for several
years, applied research concentrated on more promising near term techniques,
though less elegant for the theoreticians. Thus the problem of igniting the H-bomb
was resolved by using an A-bomb as a trigger, and the existence of the antiproton
remained theoretical until 1955.

3 The production of the ﬁrst antiprotons

Historically, the ﬁrst antiparticle ever observed was the antielectron, also called
positron. It was discovered in 1932 by Carl David Anderson, who while observing
cosmic radiation, noticed a particle of the same mass as the electron, but of
opposite charge. Evidently many attempts were made to discover the antiproton,

3

using the same method, but without success. With the detectors available at that
time and knowing only its mass and electrical charge, it was practically impossible
to identify with any certitude the antiproton within the cosmic radiation. It had
to be artiﬁcially produced. For that an accelerator, much more powerful than
anything built up until that time, was needed. Brieﬂy, this is how antimatter is
produced: protons are accelerated close to the speed of light, and then projected at
a target. The ensuing collision is so violent, that part of the energy is transformed
into particle-antiparticle pairs. Once this accelerator was built in 1955 at Berkeley,
antiprotons were "seen" for the ﬁrst time.

By injecting them into a liquid hydrogen ﬁlled detector, the energy liberated
in the explosive encounter of an antiproton and a proton, was seen to rematerialize
into a scatter of other particles, essentially pions, shooting off in all directions, and
carrying away with them most of the annihilation energy.

But Edward Teller and his student Hans-Peter Duerr didn’t stop there [6].
In 1956, they forwarded a hypothesis: If instead of annihilating with a simple
hydrogen nucleus, the antiproton annihilated with a proton or neutron situated in
the heart of a complex atom, such as carbon or uranium, the nucleus in question
would literally explode. This would result in a very large local energy deposition,
thus bringing to light again, in theory, many civilian and military applications of
antimatter.

Thirty years passed by before the complex of machines necessary to accumulate
and slow down antiprotons was conceived. The only system of this type in the
world [7] is at CERN (Fig.1). Finally, it was possible to study, on a large scale, the
meeting of antiprotons with nuclei. As a result, it has been possible to demonstrate
that the energy deposition, although less than Teller (or others more recently [8])
had hoped for, is sufﬁcient to assure the feasibility of military applications of
antimatter. On the other hand, due to its very high cost and the enormous amount
of energy needed to produce it, it has also become clear that antimatter could never
become a usable source of energy for a power-plant.

Thanks to the results of CERN, we were able to publish in August 1985, an
estimation of the number of antiprotons needed to start thermonuclear reactions,
be it to ignite an H-bomb or to trigger the microexplosion of a thermonuclear fuel
pellet [9]. We thus discovered that it is possible to build a H-bomb, or a neutron
bomb, in which the three to ﬁve kg of plutonium are replaced by one microgram of
antihydrogen. The result would be a bomb so-called "clean" by the militaries, i.e.,
a weapon practically free of radioactive fallout, because of the absence of ﬁssile
materials (Fig.2).

4

Figure 1: Overview of the LEAR experimental area. The Low Energy Antiproton
Ring (LEAR) at CERN, is the only one of its kind in the world. It enables scientists
to study the details of antiproton interactions with the nucleus of atoms. In the
picture we can see the 80 meter in circumference ring that permits the storage and
slowing of antiprotons down to energies as low as 5 MeV. It’s the ﬁrst machine ever
built to decelerate, rather than accelerate, particles. (Photograph: CERN Bulletin
47/98, 16 November 1998.)

4 The revived military interest

For such a military use to be realistic, a technology capable of producing enough
antiprotons for at least one antimatter trigger per day is needed. This corresponds to
a minimum production rate of 1013 antiprotons per second, six orders of magnitude
higher than that at CERN today (107 antiprotons per second). But, in theory, there
exist numerous ways to increase this rate [9]. What we were unaware of, was that
since the summer of 1983, the RAND Corporation had been carrying out a study
for the U.S. Air Force, "examining the possibilities for exploiting the high energy
release from matter-antimatter annihilation" [10]. Similar concerns had equally
sprouted-up in the Soviet Union [11]. The RAND study was completed in 1984.
The version published in 1985 constitutes a serious evaluation of the development
possibilities of such an undertaking, in view of military applications.

According to this document, a deﬁnitive evaluation of the possibility to produce
and manipulate 1013 antiprotons per second, and the construction of transportable
antiproton reservoirs, should be realized within the next ﬁve to seven years; many
important technological problems being able to be studied with ordinary parti-
cles instead of antiprotons. This same report mentions four main categories of
applications: ’propulsion’ (fuel for ultra-fast anti-missile rockets), ’power gener-

5

Figure 2: It is possible to construct a thermonuclear weapon in which the three
to four kilograms of plutonium, necessary for the ignition, are replaced by one
microgram of antihydrogen. In this hypothetical bomb, the antimatter is in the
center in the form of a pellet a tenth of a mm in diameter. It is surrounded by, and
isolated from, the thermonuclear fuel (a 100 g hollow sphere of Li2DT ). After
compression by explosive lenses, the fuel comes into contact with the antihydro-
gen. Annihilation reactions start spontaneously, providing the energy to ignite the
thermonuclear fuel. If the chosen degree of compression is high, a bomb with
increased mechanical effects is obtained, and if it is low, a neutron bomb. In both
cases the electromagnetic pulse effect and the radioactive fallout are substantially
lower than that of a conventional A- or H-bomb of the same yield (1 kt).

6

ators’ (light and ultra-compact for military platforms in orbit), ’directed energy
weapons’ (antihydrogen beams or pumped lasers relying on very short duration
energy release) and ’"classiﬁed additional special weapons roles"’ (various bombs
triggered by antimatter).

In addition to the advantages related to its extremely high energy density and
ease of ignition, annihilation has two important characteristics:
the release of
energy in a matter-antimatter explosion is extremely fast (ten to a thousand times
shorter than a nuclear explosion), and most of the energy is emitted in the form of
very energetic light charged particles (the energy to mass ratio of the pions emitted
in annihilation is two thousand times higher than the corresponding ratio for the
ﬁssion or fusion reaction products). With the help of magnetic ﬁelds, very intense
pion beams can be created, to the order of 100 mega-amperes per microgram of
antiprotons. Such beams, if directed along the axis of an adequate device, can drive
a magneto-hydrodynamic generator, generate a beam of electromagnetic waves,
trigger a cylindrical thermonuclear explosion, or pump a powerful X-ray laser. In
the last case, for example, the pions’ energy could be used to transform in a very
uniform plasma, a long cylinder of a substance such as selenium, whose ionized
atoms have excited states favorable to the spontaneous emission and ampliﬁcation
of coherent X-rays. But this is only one of the many concepts that permit, thanks
to antimatter, to conceive X-ray lasers having efﬁciencies ten to a thousand times
higher than those pumped by any other known energy sources.

A certain number of experiments, that can only be carried-out with antimatter,
are necessary to perfect these applications. As long as antiprotons made in Europe
(on Swiss Territory), could be bottled and brought back to the United States, the
RAND Corporation concludes that a production/accumulation facility, such as the
one at CERN, although desirable, wouldn’t in the near future have to be built in
the United States [12].

5 Fundamental research or military research ?

In view of its considerable strategic potential (for instance, antimatter seems to
be a particularly interesting pump source for the Star War’s X-ray lasers), it’s not
at all surprising that Soviet and American Scientists interested by the eventual
applications of antimatter are eager to come to CERN, which at present has at
least a ﬁve year lead in antimatter technology. In this context, it also wouldn’t be
surprising if a blunder was made...

In effect, for the teams of American physicists coming from weapons laborato-

7

ries, the ofﬁcial justiﬁcation for their coming to CERN, is to carry-out fundamen-
tal research, pure scientiﬁc research. In the beginning of July 1986, these same
Americans were supposed to go to Madrid, where a full session of the Fourth In-
ternational Conference on Emerging Nuclear Systems was dedicated to antimatter
energy concepts. At this same conference we were to present the point of view that
the only realistic applications for annihilation energy were in the military domain
[13].

To everyone’s surprise, the Americans didn’t come. Ten days before the
conference, they announced their withdrawal without giving any convincing ex-
planations. The participants quickly realized that the American Authorities had
undoubtly reevaluated the military importance of antimatter, and had probably
prevented the Los Alamos Scientists from coming to Madrid [14]. Thus expos-
ing that scientists working at CERN, and coming from a non-European weapons
laboratory, had other than fundamental research interests, that were obviously
militarily sensitive.

6 Strategic and political consequences

Whether antimatter triggered thermonuclear weapons are realizable or not, or
whether other weapons using annihilation energy are feasible or not, the fact that
a relatively small quantity of antimatter can set off a very powerful thermonuclear
explosion creates serious problems for the future of the strategic balance. In fact,
the arms control treaties presently in force deal only with ﬁssion related devices and
materials [16]: atomic bombs, nuclear reactors and ﬁssile materials. By removing
the ﬁssion fuse from thermonuclear weapons, antimatter triggered H-bombs and
neutron bombs could be constructed freely by any country possessing the capacity,
and be placed anywhere, including outer-space.

Then again, even if technical obstacles prevented, for example, the actual con-
struction of battle-ﬁeld antimatter weapons, antimatter triggered microexplosions
would still allow small and middle sized thermonuclear explosions to be made
in the laboratory. This possibility would considerably reduce the need for under-
ground nuclear explosions, thus rendering ineffective any attempt to slow the arms
race by an eventual comprehensive nuclear test-ban treaty [16]. A nuclear test
laboratory of this type could be based around a large heavy-ion accelerator [16],
which would provide a means of massive antimatter production, as well as a driver
to study the compression and explosion of thermonuclear fuel pellets.

8

7 Appendix: Production and storage of antiprotons

Relativistic quantum theory predicts the existence of two types of elementary
particles appearing on an equal footing with respect to the fundamental equations.
Thus, for each particle there exists an antiparticle having the same mass and
spin but opposite electrical charge. Furthermore, particles and antiparticles can
appear or disappear in pairs, due to the transformation of energie into matter and
vice-versa.

Antiprotons and positrons are probably the only forms of antimatter that will be
able to be fabricated, in substantial quantities, in the near future. They are produced
by accelerating protons (or other particles) to energies such that, when they collide
with a target, a part of the energy is transformed into particle-antiparticle pairs. In
practice, when using a ﬁxed target, as a function of invested energy, the maximum
antiproton production yield occurs when the protons are accelerated to an energy
of about 120 GeV [9]. Since less than one collision out of thirty produces an
antiproton, and since the mass of an antiproton corresponds to only 0.94 GeV, the
energy efﬁciency is very poor. From this point of view, a better solution would be
to use a collider-ring in which the antiprotons would be produced by the head-on
collisions of protons turning in opposite directions [17]. In theory, an even higher
yield could be obtained if conditions similar to the original "Big Bang" could
be recreated in the laboratory, conditions in which proton-antiproton production
becomes spontaneous, a possibility that was ﬁrst discussed by Edward Teller et
al. [18]. Such conditions might be found in quark-gluon plasmas, which could be
produced in high-energy heavy-ion collisions, which are presently the subject of
intense research [19].

Once the antiprotons are created (with a whole spectrum of velocities and
directions), the following step consists of capturing them before they interact with
matter. This is a problem much more difﬁcult to resolve than that of production.
It took almost thirty years before a solution was found at CERN. This required
the invention of "stochastic cooling", a technique to decrease the width of the
antiproton velocity distribution [20]. It is then possible to concentrate the collected
antiprotons into a very small beam, to accumulate them in storage rings, and
ﬁnally slow them down to energies such that they can be brought to a standstill in
electromagnetic traps.

In a Penning trap, particles are radially conﬁned by a magnetic ﬁeld, and
axially by an electrostatic ﬁeld. A cylindrical trap of this type served as host
during the recent experiments at CERN in which antiprotons were bottled for the
ﬁrst time. It also trapped continuously a single electron for more than ten months
at the University of Washington [21]. To store antiprotons for years, one needs

9

Figure 3: Small antimatter trap. (Angels and Demons, Atria Books, 2005, ISBN
0-7432-7506-3, p. 71. Credit: CERN/ Photo Researcher, Inc.)

a vacuum better than 10−18 torr. This is obtainable only in enclosures that are
sealed (after ﬁlling) and cooled to the temperature of liquid helium. It is therefore
practically impossible to measure the vacuum level, so that doing the experiment
itself is the only way to verify the technique. If this method is successful, it will be
possible to make transportable bottles with a capacity of 10−12 to 1013 antiprotons
[22].

Then the decisive stage for the practical applications of antimatter will begin:
will it be possible to develop adequate simple and compact storage techniques?
For this, two major approaches are being considered. The ﬁrst consists of making
antihydrogen by combining antiprotons with positrons, and then trying to form
solid antihydrogen pellets which could be stored and manipulated with the help
of various electromagnetic and optical levitation techniques. Very high storage
densities would be obtained, but only in cryogenic enclosures and extremely good
vacuums.

The most appealing approach would be to store the antiprotons in ordinary
matter. In fact, if all antimatter particles have a tendency to spontaneously anni-
hilate when coming into contact with matter (be it the effects of electromagnetic
attraction in the case of positrons and antiprotons, or van der Waals forces for an-
tihydrogen), the existence of metastable states of antiprotons in condensed matter
can not be ruled out a priori [23]. For example, if a very low energy antihydrogen
atom is diffused into a solid, it moves about until its positron annihilates with an
electron. The antiproton may then take the place of this electron, and under some

10

conditions, remain conﬁned at certain points within the crystalline structure. At
present the kind of substance to be used isn’t known, but an enormous variety of
chemical compounds and crystal types are available for the search of an optimum
material.

Other less obvious solutions could still be discovered. For example, antiprotons
might, as electrons do when placed in liquid helium, form a bubble at the center
of which they could subsist indeﬁnitely [23]. Also, similar to the electron pairs
responsible for superconductivity, antiprotons might possibly form Cooper pairs
if placed in a metal, becoming thereby unable to lose kinetic energy by shock, and
thus to annihilate.

References

[1] J. Grinevald, A. Gsponer, L. Hanouz et P. Lehmann: La Quadrature du

CERN. Editions d’En Bas, CH-1017 Lausanne (1984).

[2] E. Fermi and E. Teller: The capture of negative mesotron in matter. Phys.

Rev. 72 (1947) 399–408.

[3] A. D. Sakharov: Collected Scientiﬁc work, Marcel Dekker Inc., New York

(1982).

[4] A. S. Wightman: Moderation of negative mesons in Hydrogen I: Moderation
from high energies to capture by an H2 molecule. Phys. Rev. 77 (1950) 521–
528. (Note: Part II has never been published.)

[5] J. Ashkin, T. Auerbach and R. Marschak: Note on a possible annihilation

process for negative protons. Phys. Rev. 79 (1950) 266–271.

[6] H.P. Duerr and E. Teller: Interaction of antiprotons with nuclear ﬁelds.

Phys. Rev. 101 (1956) 494–495.

[7] At the end of 1986 an antiproton production and cooling system will be put
into operation at Fermilab, near Chicago. However, there are no deﬁnitive
plans to construct a deceleration system such as LEAR (Fig. 1). As far as
the Soviet Union is concerned, few details are available on the status of
their projects with antimatter.

[8] M.R. Clover et al.: Low energy antiproton-nucleus interactions. Phys. Rev.

C26 (1982) 2138–2151.

11

[9] A. Gsponer and J.-P. Hurni: Antimatter induced fusion and thermonuclear
explosions. Atomkernenergie · Kerntechnik (Independent Journal on Energy
Systems and Radiation) 49 (1987) 198–203. e-print arXiv:physics/0507125
available in PDF format at
http://arXiv.org/pdf/physics/0507125

[10] B.W. Augenstein: Concepts, problems, and opportunities for use of an-
nihilation energy. Prepared for the United States Air Force, RAND Note
N–2302–AF/RC, June (1985) 61 pp.

[11] Yu. D. Prokoshkin: Particles of antimatter. Die Naturwissenschaften 59

(1972) 282–284.

N.A. Vlasov: Annihilation as an energy process. Sov. At. Energy 44 (1978)
40–45.

[12] Reference 10, page 43.

[13] A. Gsponer and J.-P. Hurni: The physics of antimatter induced fusion and
thermonuclear explosions. In G. Velarde and E. Minguez, eds., Proceedings
of the 4th International Conference on Emerging Nuclear Energy Systems,
Madrid, June 30/July 4, 1986 (World Scientiﬁc, Singapore, 1987) 166–169.
e-print arXiv:physics/0507114 available in PDF format at
http://arXiv.org/pdf/physics/0507114

[14] The titles of the withdrawn communications were as follows:

• W. Saylor, S. Howe, D. Holtkamp, M. Hynes (invited paper): Antimatter
production factory - systems tradeoffs.
• M. H. Holzscheiter: Antiproton storage - A new concept for future energy
systems.
• L.J. Campbell: Antiproton storage in condensed matter - The promise,
the prospects.
• S. Howe (invited paper): Use of antimatter annihilation products to
produce usable power for space based applications.

N.B. Steve Howe, of the Los Alamos National Laboratory, who authored
two out of the four withdrawn communications, is the “physicist and follow
scribe” mentioned by Dan Brown in the acknowledgments of his book
Angels and Demons (Pocket Books, 2000); (Corgi Book, 2001, ISBN
0-552-15073-8) p. viii; (Atria Books, 2005, ISBN 0-7432-7506-3) p. 500.

12

[15] A. Gsponer, B. Jasani and S. Sahin: Emerging nuclear energy systems and
nuclear weapon proliferation. Atomkernenergie · Kerntechnik (Independent
Journal on Energy Systems and Radiation) 43 (1983) 169–174.

[16] C. Deutsch: Inertial conﬁnement fusion driven by intense ion beams. An-

nales de Physique 11 (February 1986) 1–111.

[17] G.F. Chapline and R. Moir: Some thoughts on the production of muons
for fusion catalysis. LLNL Report UCRL-93611 submitted to Journal of
Fusion Energy (January 15, 1986).

[18] G.F. Chapline, M.H. Johnson, E. Teller, and M.S. Weiss, Highly excited

nuclear matter, Phys. Rev. D8 (1973) 4302–4307.

[19] T.A. DeGrand: Are antibaryons a signal for a phase transition in ultrarel-

ativistic nucleus-nucleus collisions? Phys. Rev. D30 (1984) 2001–2004.

[20] D. Mohl, G. Petrucci, L. Thorndahl, S. van der Meer: Physics and technique

of stochastic cooling. Phys. Rep. 58 (1980) 73–119.

[21] G. Gabrielse, H. Dehmelt and W. Kells: Observation of cyclotron motion

of a single electron. Phys. Rev. Lett. 54 (1985) 537–539.

[22] W. Kells: Remote antiproton sources. IEEE Trans. Nucl. Sci. NS-32 (1985)

1770-1772.

[23] M.V. Hynes: Physics with low temperature antiprotons, in Physics in the
ACOL era with low-energy cooled antiprotons, Editions Fronti`eres, Gif-
sur-Yvette, France (1985) 657–664.

13

