5
0
0
2
 
l
u
J
 
4
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
t
s
i
h
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
7
0
1
7
0
5
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Einstein’s Impact on the Physics of the
Twentieth Century

Domenico Giulini
Institute of Physics
University of Freiburg, Germany

Norbert Straumann
Institute for Theoretical Physics
University of Z¨urich, Switzerland

July 11, 2005
Freiburg, THEP 05/07

Abstract

We review the enduring achievements of Einstein’s papers of 1905 and their im-
pact on present day developments in physics.

1

Contents

1 Introduction

2 Einstein and statistical physics

. . . . .

. . . . . .
2.1 A brief survey . . .
2.2 Foundations of statistical mechanics . .
2.3 Applications of the classical theory . . .
. . . . . .
2.4 Post-Einstein developments .

. . . . .
. . . . .
. . . . .
. . . . .

. . . . . .
. . . . . .
. . . . . .
. . . . . .

. . . . .
. . . . .
. . . . .
. . . . .

3 Einstein’s contributions to quantum theory
3.1 Einstein’s ﬁrst paper from 1905 . . . . .
. . . . . .
3.2 Energy and momentum ﬂuctuations of the radiation ﬁeld . .
. . . . . .
3.3 Derivation of the Planck distribution . .
3.4 Bose-Einstein statistics for degenerate material gases . . . .
3.5 Light quanta after 1925 . . .
. . . . . .
3.6 Einstein and the interpretation of quantum mechanics . . . .

. . . . . .

. . . . .

. . . . .

. . . . .

. . . . .
. . . . .
. . . . .
. . . . .
. . . . .
. . . . .

4 Special Relativity as a symmetry principle

. . . . .
4.1 Historical origin and conceptual meaning . . . .
. . . . .
. . . . . .
. . . . .
4.2 The Lorentz group . . . . .
. . . . .
. . . . .
4.3 Far reaching consequences .
. . . . . .
. . . . .
. . . . .
4.4 The current experimental status of SR .
4.5 Relativistic quantum ﬁeld theory . . . .
. . . . .
. . . . .
4.6 Group-theoretic background of relativisticquantum ﬁeld theory . . . .
. . . . .
. . . . . .
4.7 The rise of supersymmetry .
. . . . .
4.8 More on spin-statistics
. . . . . .
. . .
. . . . .
4.9 Existence of antimatter (CPT-theorem) .

. . . . . .
. . . . . .
. . . . . .
. . . . . .
. . . . . .

. . . . . .
. . . . . .
. . . . . .

. . . . .
. . . . .
. . . . .

5 On the journey to General Relativity

5.1 Early attempts . . .
. . . . . .
5.2 The Poincar´e invariant approach . . . .

. . . . .

. . . . .
. . . . .

. . . . . .
. . . . . .

. . . . .
. . . . .

6 Einstein’s theory of spacetime and gravity

. . . . .

. . . . . .

6.1 General Remarks .
. . . . .
6.2 Some current theoretical problems of GR . . . .
6.3 Some aspects of the current experimental situation
6.4 Early history of gauge and Kaluza-Klein theories
. . . . .
6.5 Relativistic astrophysics
. .
. . . . .
6.6 Relativistic cosmology . . .

. . . . . .
. . . . . .

. . . . . .
. . . . . .
. . . . .
. . . . . .
. . . . . .
. . . . . .

. . . . .
. . . . .
. . . . .
. . . . .
. . . . .
. . . . .

References

3

3
3
4
5
7

9
9
12
13
14
15
16

17
17
19
22
24
26
28
31
32
34

35
35
39

40
40
41
42
46
48
52

57

2

1 Introduction

The task we were given for this article is to describe the impact Einstein’s work had
on 20th century physics. This needs proper interpretation, since a sizable fraction of
20th century physics is Einstein’s work and most of the rest is more or less directly
connected to it. Hence Einstein’s impact deﬁnitely cannot be treated perturbatively. In
fact, it would have been much page-saving to write about those developments of 20th
century physics which were not connected the work of Einstein. But who would have
liked to read or write that ?

Einstein’s major, enduring contributions to physics were made during the ﬁrst quar-
ter of the 20th century. They can roughly be divided into four main branches: 1) sta-
tistical physics, 2) early quantum theory of light and matter, 3) Special Relativity, and
4) General Relativity (theory of spacetime and gravitation). Our article is structured
accordingly, in that we will write about each branch in turn. We regret to not being
able to include material on present-day attempts to reconcile General Relativity with
Quantum Field Theory, but that would have approximately added another 20 pages.

Some topics we write about seem (to us) mandatory, others are chosen according
to personal prejudices and/or likings. Sometimes much more could have been said,
whereas at other places less details would also have sufﬁced to give a ﬁrst impres-
sion. For several reasons we deliberately avoided to keep the discussions at a constant
technical level. Sometimes we put more emphasis on the historical context, at other
occasions we choose to display some technical details. Concerning the latter, we feel
that it is important to not just tell the greatness of Einstein’s thoughts, but also to put
on some ﬂesh in order to see this greatness taking on a deﬁnite shape. In any case, we
wanted to avoid letting the discussion degenerate into a sterile succession of “state-
ments of affairs”. Also, we hope to equally address physicists with interest in the
history and philosophy of their science, as well as historians and philosophers of sci-
ence with interest in physics proper. This necessitates making certain compromises.
We hope to have found a readable and enjoyable balance, being well aware of Ein-
stein’s dictum: “Wer es unternimmt, auf dem Gebiet der Wahrheit und der Erkenntnis
als Autorit¨at aufzutreten, scheitert am Gel¨achter der G¨otter.”1

2 Einstein and statistical physics

2.1 A brief survey

When Einstein’s great papers of 1905 appeared in print, he was not a newcomer in the
Annalen der Physik, in which he published most of his early work. Of crucial impor-
tance for his further research were three early papers on the foundations of statistical
mechanics, in which he tried to ﬁll what he considered to be a gap in the mechanical
foundations of thermodynamics. At the time when Einstein wrote his three papers he
was not familiar with the work of Gibbs and only partially with that of Boltzmann.
Einstein’s papers form a bridge, parallel to the Elementary Principles of Statistical
Mechanics by Gibbs in 1902, between Boltzmann’s work and the modern approach to

1He who endavours to present himself as an authority in matters of truth and cognition, will be

wrecked by the laughters of the gods.

3

statistical mechanics. In particular, Einstein independently formulated the distinction
between the microcanonical and canonical ensembles and derived the equilibrium dis-
tribution for the canonical ensemble from the microcanonical distribution. Of special
importance for his later research was the derivation of the energy-ﬂuctuation formula
for the canonical ensemble.

Einstein’s profound insight into the nature and size of ﬂuctuations played a decisive
role for his most revolutionary contribution to physics: the light-quantum hypothesis.
Indeed, Einstein extracted the light-quantum postulate from a statistical-mechanical
analogy between radiation in the Wien regime2 and a classical ideal gas of material
particles. In this consideration Boltzmann’s principle, relating entropy and probability
of macroscopic states, played a key role. Later Einstein extended these considerations
to an analysis of energy and momentum ﬂuctuations of the radiation ﬁeld. For the
latter he was also drawing on ideas and methods he had developed in the course of his
work on Brownian motion, another beautiful application of ﬂuctuation theory. This
deﬁnitely established the reality of atoms and molecules, and, more generally, gave
strong support for the molecular-kinetic theory of thermodynamics.

Fluctuations also played a prominent role in Einstein’s beautiful work on critical
opalescence. Many years later he applied this magic wand once more to gases of
identical particles, satisfying the Bose-Einstein statistics. With this work in 1924 he
extended the particle-wave duality for photons to massive particles. It is well-known
that Schr¨odinger was much stimulated by this profound insight.

2.2 Foundations of statistical mechanics

Already as a student Einstein was very interested in thermodynamics and kinetic the-
ory, and he studied intensively some of Boltzmann’s work. About this he wrote on
September 13th 1900 to Mileva (CPAE, Vol. 2, Doc. 75):

“The Boltzmann is absolutely magniﬁcent. I‘am almost ﬁnished with it.
He‘s a masterful writer. I am ﬁrmly convinced of the correctness of the
principles of the theory, i.e., I am convinced that in the case of gases, we
are really dealing with discrete mass points of deﬁnite ﬁnite size which
move according to certain conditions. Boltzmann quite correctly em-
phasizes that the hypothetical forces between molecules are not essential
components of the theory, as the whole energy is essentially kinetic in
character. This is a step forward in the dynamic explanation of physical
phenomena.”

For further details on this incubation period, we refer to CPAE, Vol. 2, Editorial, p. 41.
Einstein’s ﬁrst of his three papers on the foundations of statistical mechanics was
submitted to the Annalen in June 1902. One can only be astonished about the certainty
with which the 23 year old man approaches the fundamental problems. His aim is
clearly described in the opening section:

“Great as the achievements of the kinetic theory of heat have been in the
domain of gas theory, the science of mechanics has not yet been able to

2The ‘Wien regime’ corresponds to high frequency and/or low temperature, such that hν ≫ kT ,

where h and k are Planck’s and Boltzmann’s constants respectively.

4

produce an adequate foundation for the general theory of heat, for one
has not yet succeeded in deriving the laws of thermal equilibrium and
the second law of thermodynamics using only the equations of mechanics
and the probability calculus, though Maxwell’s and Boltzmann’s theories
came close to this goal. The purpose of the following considerations is to
close this gap. At the same time, they will yield an extension of the second
law that is of importance for the application of thermodynamics. They will
also yield the mathematical expression for entropy from the standpoint of
mechanics.”

This is not the place to describe the detailed content of the three papers (for this we re-
fer again to CPAE, Vol. 2, Editorial, p. 41). The third one provides ﬁrst a brief polished
summary of the two previous ones, including several improvements. Then Einstein
proceeds by discussing the “general signiﬁcance of the constant k”, by deriving the
energy ﬂuctuation formula in the canonical ensemble. This result is commented as
follows:

“Thus the absolute constant k determines the thermal stability of the sys-
tem. The relationship just found is interesting because it no longer con-
tains any quantity reminiscent of the assumption on which the theory is
based.”

In the ﬁnal section of the paper Einstein applies his ﬂuctuation formula to the black-
body radiation, a theme that would soon lead him to his light-quantum hypothesis.

2.3 Applications of the classical theory

In his thesis “A new Determination of molecular Dimensions”, the second of the ﬁve
papers of 1905, Einstein derived a novel formula for the diffusion constant D of sus-
pended microscopic particles.3 This was obtained on the basis of thermal and dynami-
cal equilibrium conditions, making use of van’t Hoff’s law for the osmotic pressure and
Stokes’ law for the mobility of a particle. The result—almost simultaneously obtained
by Sutherland—reads

D =

kT
6πηa

,

(1)

where η is the viscosity of the ﬂuid and a the radius of the particles (assumed to be
spherical).

Brownian motion

Soon after this formula became also important in Einstein’s work on Brownian motion.
In this celebrated paper he ﬁrst gives a statistical mechanical derivation of the osmotic

3The main body of the paper is devoted to the derivation of a relation between the coefﬁcients of
viscosity of a liquid with and without suspended particles. Einstein applied this relation, together with
the diffusion formula, to the case of sugar being dissolved in water. Using empirical data he got (after
eliminating a calculational error) an excellent value of the Avogadro number and an estimate of the size
of sugar molecules. For its wide range of applications this thesis was by far the most cited of all Einstein
papers at the time Pais’ Einstein biography appeared (Pais 1982), and probably still is. For a recent
detailed discussion of Einstein’s thesis, see Straumann (2005).

5

pressure, and then repeats his earlier derivation of (1). In the short novel part of the
paper he considers the diffusion alternatively as the result of a highly irregular random
motion, caused by the bombardment of an enormously large number of molecules. On
the basis of some idealizing assumptions, he shows that the random walks of the sus-
pended particles can be described by a Gaussian process, “which was to be expected”.
Moreover, the width of the probability distribution for the position of a particle is de-
termined by the diffusion constant. Therefore, the one-dimensional variance of the
position is given by the famous formula

(∆x)2

= 2Dt =

kT
3πη0a

t.

(cid:10)

(cid:11)

(2)

All this is so well-known that no further explanations are necessary. It may, how-
ever, be appropriate to recall the following sentences of the introductory part of Ein-
stein’s paper which clearly express what he considered to be important.

“If it is really possible to observe the motion to be discussed here, along
with the laws it is expected to obey, then classical thermodynamics can no
longer be viewed as strictly valid even for microscopically distinguishable
spaces, and an exact determination of the real size of atoms becomes pos-
sible. Conversely, if the prediction of this motion were to be proven wrong,
this fact would provide a weighty argument against the molecular-kinetic
conception of heat.”

Critical opalescence

A letter of Einstein to his collaborator Jacob Laub from August 27th 1910 (CPAE,
Vol. 5, Doc. 224) shows his enthusiasm concerning his current work on critical opales-
cence, yet another application of the theory of statistical ﬂuctuations. This was Ein-
stein’s last contribution to classical statistical mechanics, and the corresponding mea-
surements were soon carried out.

Since about 1874 it was known that the scattering and attenuation of light passing
through gas becomes very large near the critical point4. In 1908 Marian von Smolu-
chowski pointed out that this phenomenon is the result of density ﬂuctuations of the
medium, but he did not derive a quantitative formula for the scattering or extinction
coefﬁcient. It was Einstein who closed this gap.

Before he approaches this task, Einstein gives a lengthy introduction to the theory
of statistical ﬂuctuations, based on Boltzmann’s principle. He then applies the general
theory to density ﬂuctuations of ﬂuids and mixtures of ﬂuids. This opening section has
to be regarded as a major and inﬂuential contribution to statistical thermodynamics.

In the fourth section Einstein begins with the electrodynamic part of the problem
and derives the well-known formula for the scattering coefﬁcient, that since long is
considered to be standard text-book material. If the refraction index n is close to 1,
this reduces to

α(ω) =

1
6π

ω
c

4

(n2

1)2

kT
V (∂p/∂V )T

−
4The point where the partial derivative of the pressure with respect to the volume for constant temper-

−

(cid:17)

(cid:16)

(3)

ature vanishes, i.e. (∂p/∂V )T = 0.

6

(ω= angular frequency of the light). With this formula Einstein found a quantitative
relationship between Rayleigh scattering and critical opalescence.

At the critical point this expression diverges, because the correlation length for the
density ﬂuctuations diverges. As was ﬁrst pointed out by Ornstein and Zernicke, Ein-
stein’s implicit assumption of statistical independence in separated volume elements is
then no longer valid. In this sense, Einstein’s work on critical opalescence became the
starting point of several research directions of the twentieth-century.

2.4 Post-Einstein developments

Einstein did not have a dynamical theory of Brownian motion; he determined the na-
ture of the motion on the basis of some assumptions. Another derivation was later
given by Langevin, who separated the force on a suspended particle into ordered and
disordered parts. By this work he became the founder of the theory of stochastic dif-
ferential equations. His approach was the starting point of the work of Ornstein and
Uhlenbeck, which we shall brieﬂy discuss below. But before doing this, we want to
point out that Einstein’s heuristic considerations, that have been criticized by many
people (including Einstein himself), are tantamount to the assumption (iii) of the fol-
lowing

Theorem. Let Xt (0

) be a stochastic process, satisfying the properties:

t <
≤
(i) Independence: Each increment Xt+∆t −
(ii) Stationarity: The distribution of Xt+∆t −
(iii) Continuity: If P denotes the probability measure belonging to the stochastic

Xt is independent of
Xt does not depend on t.

Xτ , τ
{

.
}

∞

≤

t

process, then

lim
∆t↓0

P (

Xt+∆t −
{|
∆t

Xt| ≥

δ

)
}

= 0,

for all δ > 0 .

(iv)

Xt=0 = 0.

Then Xt has a normal distribution with
numerical constant.

Xti
h

= 0 and

X 2
t i
h

= σ2t, where σ is a

For a proof, see Chap. 12 in Breimann (1968); see also Theorem 5.5 in Nelson (1967).
The theory of Brownian motion of Einstein is highly idealized, since for example
the velocity of a particle is not deﬁned. Langevin’s approach, perfected by L.S. Orn-
stein and G.E. Uhlenbeck in 1930, is closer to Newtonian mechanics of particles and
is thus truly dynamical. In practice, for ‘ordinary’ Brownian motion, the predictions
of the two theories are, however, numerically indistinguishable.

In the Ornstein-Uhlenbeck theory the velocity process Vt is described in terms of

the stochastic differential equation (Langevin equation)

˙Vt =

−

αVt + σξt ,

where ξt denotes ‘white noise’. (The exact meaning of this equation is described in
every book on stochastic differential equations.)

Let us state a few important results which can be derived from the basic equation

(6).

(4)

(5)

(6)

7

(7)

(9)

(10)

(11)

a) The distribution of Vt converges for large t to a Gaussian distribution with mean
zero and variance σ2/2α. Because of the equipartition theorem of statistical
2 m σ2
mechanics it is, therefore, natural to set 1
2 kT (m= mass of the particle).
The dissipation α induces thus a ﬂuctuation

2α = 1

σ2 =

2α
m

kT.

b) The distributions of the positions Xt converge for large t to those of the Gaussian

process

˜Bt = X0 + √2DBt ,
where Bt is the Brownian (Wiener) process with variance 1, X0 the initial posi-
tion of the particle, and

(8)

σ2
2α
The distribution function of Xt is thus,

D =

=

kT
mα

.

and hence satisﬁes the diffusion equation

pt(x) =

1
√4πDt

e−x2/4Dt ,

∂tpt −

D∂2

xpt = 0.

Therefore, D is the diffusion constant. According to equation (9) it is given by
the Einstein value (1), if we also use Stokes’ law for α.

The theory of stochastic differential equations has expanded into a huge ﬁeld of
stochastic analysis, with rich applications in physics, engineering, and mathematical
ﬁnance. In quantum physics (generalized) stochastic processes have become very im-
portant through Feynman-Kac path integral representations. We brieﬂy recall a simple
example of such a formula.

Consider on L2(Rn) the Schr¨odinger operator

1
2 △
Under certain conditions for the potential V , the operator is self-adjoint and the fol-
lowing Feynman-Kac formula holds for each t > 0 and ψ

+ V .

H =

(12)

L2:

−

e−tH ψ

(x) =

exp

V (x + Bs) ds

ψ(x + Bt)

,

(13)

t

(cid:28)

−

(cid:18)

0

Z

∈

(cid:19)

(cid:29)

(cid:0)

(cid:1)

almost everywhere in x. The expectation value on the right-hand side is taken with the
probability measure belonging to the Brownian process Bt. Such representations have
many applications; see, e.g., B. Simon (1979).

In quantum ﬁeld theory, path (functional) integral representations play nowadays
a crucial role. For gauge theories they are even indispensable. A general remarkable
fact, ﬁrst pointed out by Feynman, is that the Euclidean formulation of quantum ﬁeld
theory in terms of functional integrals establishes a close connection with classical (!)
statistical mechanics (models of magnetism). All this has by now become standard
text-book material.

8

3 Einstein’s contributions to quantum theory

3.1 Einstein’s ﬁrst paper from 1905

We begin by brieﬂy reviewing the line of thought of the March paper (CPAE Vol. 2,
Doc. 14) “whose signiﬁcance and originality can hardly be overestimated” (Res Jost).
In a ﬁrst section Einstein emphasizes that classical physics inevitably leads to a non-
sensical energy distribution for black-body radiation, but that the spectral distribution,
ρ(T, ν), must approximately be correct for large wavelengths and radiation densities
(classical regime).5 Applying the equipartition theorem for a system of resonators
(harmonic oscillators) in thermal equilibrium, he found independently what is now
known as the Rayleigh-Jeans law: ρ(ν, T ) = (8πν2/c3)kT . Einstein stresses that this
law “not only fails to agree with experience (...), but is out of question” because it
implies a diverging total energy density (ultraviolet catastrophe). In a second section
he then states that the Planck formula “which has been sufﬁcient to account for all ob-
servations made so far” agrees with the classically derived formula in the mentioned
limiting domain for the following value of the Avogadro number

NA = 6.17

1023 .

×

(14)

This relation was already found by Planck, though not using a correspondence argu-
ment, but rather relying on the strict validity of his formula and the assumptions that
led to its derivation. Einstein’s correspondence argument now showed “that Planck’s
determination of the elementary quanta is to some extent independent of his theory of
black-body radiation.” Indeed, Einstein understood from ﬁrst principles exactly what
he did. A similar correspondence argument was used by him more than ten years
later in his famous derivation of Planck’s formula (more about this later). Einstein
concludes these considerations with the following words:

“The greater the energy density and the wavelength of the radiation, the
more useful the theoretical principles we have been using prove to be;
however, these principles fail completely in the case of small wavelengths
and small radiation densities.”

Einstein now begins to analyze what can be learned about the structure of radiation
from the empirical behavior in the Wien regime, i.e., from Wien’s radiation formula
for the spectral energy-density

Let EV (T, ν) be the energy of radiation contained in the volume V and within the
frequency interval [ν , ν + ∆ν] (∆ν small), that is,

ρ(T, ν) =

8πν2
c3 hνe−hν/kT .

EV (T, ν) = ρ(T, ν) V ∆ν .

and, correspondingly, SV (T, ν) = σ(T, ν) V ∆ν for the entropy. Thermodynamics
now implies

(15)

(16)

(17)

5This is, to our knowledge, the ﬁrst proposal of a ‘correspondence argument’, which is of great heuris-

tic power, as we will see.

∂σ
∂ρ

=

1
T

.

9

Solving (15) for 1/T and inserting this into (17) gives

∂σ
∂ρ

=

k
hν

−

ln

ρ
8πhν3/c3

(cid:20)

.

(cid:21)

Integration yields

(18)

(19)

(21)

(22)

(23)

(24)

SV =

EV
hν

k

−

EV
V ∆ν 8πhν3/c3

ln

(cid:26)

(cid:20)

.

1
(cid:27)

−

(cid:21)

In his ﬁrst paper on this subject, Einstein focused attention to the volume dependence
of radiation entropy, as displayed by this expression. Fixing the amount of energy,
E = EV , one obtains

E/hν

ln

E
hν

= k ln

SV0 = k

SV −

V
V0 (cid:19)
So far only thermodynamics has been used. Now Einstein brings into the game
what he called Boltzmann’s principle, which was already of central importance in his
papers on statistical mechanics. According to Boltzmann, the entropy S of a system
is connected with the number of possibilities W , by which a macroscopic state can
microscopically be realized, through the relation

V
V0 (cid:19)

(20)

(cid:18)

(cid:18)

.

S = k ln W .

W =

N

,

V
V0 (cid:19)

(cid:18)

In a separate section Einstein recalls this fundamental relation between entropy and
“statistical probability” (Einstein’s terminology), before applying it to an ideal gas of
N particles in volumes V and V0, respectively. For the relative probability of the two
situations one has

and hence for the entropies

For the relative entropies (20) of the radiation ﬁeld, Boltzmann’s principle (21) now
gives

S(V, T )

S(V0, T ) = kN ln

−

V
V0 (cid:19)

.

(cid:18)

W =

E/hν

.

V
V0 (cid:19)

(cid:18)

From the striking similarity of (22) to (24) Einstein ﬁnally concludes:

“Monochromatic radiation of low density (within the range of Wien’s ra-
diation formula) behaves thermodynamically as if it consisted of mutually
independent energy quanta of magnitude hν.”

So far no revolutionary statement has been made. The famous sentences just quoted
express the result of a statistical mechanical analysis.

10

Light quantum hypothesis

Einstein’s bold step consists in a statement about the quantum properties of the free
electromagnetic ﬁeld, that was not accepted for a long time by anybody else. He
formulates his heuristic principle as follows:

“If, with regard to the dependence of its entropy on volume, a monochro-
matic radiation (of sufﬁcient low density) behaves like a discontinuous
medium consisting of energy quanta of magnitude hν, then it seems rea-
sonable to investigate whether the laws of generation and conversion of
light are so constituted as if light consisted of such energy quanta.”

In the ﬁnal two sections, Einstein applies this hypothesis ﬁrst to an explanation
of Stokes’ rule for photoluminescence and then turns to the photoelectric effect. One
should be aware that in those days only some qualitative properties of this phenomenon
were known. Therefore, Einstein’s well-known linear relation between the maximum
kinetic energy of the photoelectrons (Emax) and the frequency of the incident radiation,

Emax = hν

P ,

−

(25)

was a true prediction. Here P is the work-function of the metal emitting the electrons,
which depends on the material in question but not on the frequency of the incident
light. It took almost ten years until this was experimentally conﬁrmed by Millikan,
who then used it to give a ﬁrst precision measurement of h (slope of the straight line
given by (25) in the ν-Emax plane) at the 0.5 percent level (Millikan 1916). Strange
though understandable, not even he6, who spent 10 years on the brilliant experimental
veriﬁcation of its consequence (25), could believe in the fundamental correctness of
Einstein’s hypothesis. In his comprehensive paper (Millikan 1916) on the determina-
tion of h, Millikan ﬁrst commented on the light-quantum hypothesis:

“This hypothesis may well be called reckless, ﬁrst because an electro-
magnetic disturbance which remains localized in space seems a violation
of the very conception of an electromagnetic disturbance, and second be-
cause it ﬂies in the face of the thoroughly established facts of interfer-
ence.”

And after reporting on his successful experimental veriﬁcation of Einstein’s equation
(25) and the associated determination of h, Millikan concludes:

“Despite then the apparently complete success of the Einstein equation,
the physical theory of which it was designed to be the symbolic expression
is found so untenable that Einstein himself, I believe, no longer holds to
it.”

6Others who strongly opposed Einstein’s idea, or at least openly stated disbelief, included Planck
(compare footnote 7)), Sommerfeld, von Laue, and Bohr. As late as 1922, in his Nobel Lecture, Bohr
stated that “In spite of its heuristic value, however, the hypothesis of light quanta, which is quite irrec-
oncilable with so-called interference phenomena, is not able to throw light on the nature of radiation.”
Bohr’s critical attitude culminated in his famous joint paper with Kramers and Slater of 1924; see e.g.
Section 11d in Pais (1991) for more background information of this fascinating episode.

11

It should be stressed that Einstein’s bold light quantum hypothesis was very far from
Planck’s conception. Planck neither envisaged a quantization of the free radiation ﬁeld,
nor did he, as it is often stated, quantize the energy of a material oszillator per se. What
he was actually doing in his decisive calculation of the entropy of a harmonic oscillator
was to assume that the total energy of a large number of oscillators is made up of ﬁnite
energy elements of equal magnitude hν. He did not propose that the energies of single
material oscillators are physically quantized.7 Rather, the energy elements hν were
introduced as a formal counting device that could at the end of the calculation not be
set to zero, for, otherwise, the entropy would diverge. It was Einstein in 1906 who
interpreted Planck’s result as follows (CPAE, Vol. 2, Doc. 34):

“Hence, we must view the following proposition as the basis underlying
Planck’s theory of radiation: The energy of an elementary resonator can
only assume values that are integral multiples of hν; by emission and ab-
sorption, the energy of a resonator changes by jumps of integral multiples
of hν.”

3.2 Energy and momentum ﬂuctuations of the radiation ﬁeld

In his paper “On the present status of the radiation problem” of 1909 (CPAE, Vol. 2,
Doc. 56), Einstein returned to the considerations discussed above, but extended his
statistical analysis to the entire Planck distribution. First, he considers the energy
ﬂuctuations, and re-derives the general ﬂuctuation formula he had already found in the
third of his statistical mechanics articles. This implies for the variance of EV in (16):

(EV − h

)2
EV i

= kT 2 ∂

EV i
h
∂T

= kT 2V ∆ν

∂ρ
∂T

.

(26)

(cid:10)
For the Planck distribution this gives

(cid:11)

(EV − h

)2
EV i

(cid:10)

(cid:18)

(cid:11)

c3
8πν2 ρ2

(cid:19)

=

hνρ +

V ∆ν .

(27)

Einstein shows that the second term in this most remarkable formula, which dominates
in the Rayleigh-Jeans regime, can be understood with the help of the classical wave
theory as due to the interferences between the partial waves. The ﬁrst term, dominating
in the Wien regime, is thus in obvious contradiction with classical electrodynamics. It
can, however, be interpreted by analogy to the ﬂuctuations of the number of molecules
in ideal gases, and thus represents a particle aspect of the radiation in the quantum
domain.

Einstein conﬁrms this particle-wave duality, at this time a genuine theoretical co-
nundrum, by considering also the momentum ﬂuctuations. For this he considers the
Brownian motion of a mirror which perfectly reﬂects radiation in a small frequency

7 In 1911 Planck even formulated a ‘new radiation hypothesis’, in which quantization only applies to
the process of light emission but not to that of light absorption (Planck 1911). Planck’s explicitly stated
motivation for this was to avoid an effective quantization of oscillator energies as a result of quantization
of all interaction energies. It is amusing to note that this new hypothesis led Planck to a modiﬁcation of
his radiation law, which consisted in the addition of the temperature-independent term hν/2 to the energy
of each oscillator, thus corresponding to the oscillator’s energy at zero temperature. This seems to be the
ﬁrst appearance of what soon became known as ‘zero-point energy’.

12

interval, but transmits for all other frequencies. The ﬁnal result he commented as fol-
lows:

“The close connection between this relation and the one derived in the
last section for the energy ﬂuctuation is immediately obvious, and exactly
analogous considerations can be applied to it. Again, according to the
current theory, the expression would be reduced to the second term (ﬂuc-
tuations due to interference). If the ﬁrst term alone were present, the ﬂuc-
tuations of the radiation pressure could be completely explained by the
assumption that the radiation consists of independently moving, not too
extended complexes of energy hν.”

Einstein discussed these issues also in his famous Salzburg lecture (CPAE Vol. 2,
Doc. 60) at the 81st Meeting of German Scientists and Physicians in 1909. Pauli (1949)
once said that this report can be regarded as a turning point in the development of theo-
retical physics. In this Einstein treated the theory of relativity and quantum theory and
pointed out important interconnections between his work on the quantum hypothesis,
on relativity, on Brownian motion, and statistical mechanics. Already in the introduc-
tory section he says prophetically:

“It is therefore my opinion that the next stage in the development of theo-
retical physics will bring us a theory of light that can be understood as a
kind of fusion of the wave and emission theories of light”.

We now know that it took almost twenty years until this was achieved by Dirac in his
quantum theory of radiation.

Speciﬁc heat of solids

In 1907 Einstein applied his understanding of the blackbody radiation to a theory for
the speciﬁc heat of solids (CPAE Vol. 2, Doc. 38). He starts by showing that Planck’s
radiation law can be derived within statistical mechanics by restricting the state sum of
the oscillators to quantized energies, and obtains for the average energy of an oscillator
the expression hν/(ehν/kT
1). An interesting methodological aspect of his ﬁrst paper
on this subject is that Einstein for the ﬁrst time works with the canonical ensemble. He
repeatedly came back to the subject, in particular at the Solvay Congress in 1911,
when measurements by Nernst were available. Shortly afterwards, Born and Karman
and independently Debye developed the theory that has become standard.

−

3.3 Derivation of the Planck distribution

A peak in Einstein’s endeavor to extract as much as possible about the nature of radia-
tion from the Planck distribution is his paper “On the Quantum Theory of Radiation”
of 1916 (CPAE, Vol. 6, Doc. 38). In the ﬁrst part he gives a derivation of Planck’s for-
mula which has become part of many textbooks on quantum theory. Einstein was very
pleased by this derivation, about which he wrote on August 11th 1916 to Besso: “An
amazingly simple derivation of Planck’s formula, I should like to say the derivation”.

13

For it he introduced the hitherto unknown process of induced emission8, next to the
familiar ones of spontaneous emission and induced absorption. For each pair of energy
levels he described the statistical laws for these processes by three coefﬁcients (the fa-
mous A- and B-coefﬁcients) and established two relations amongst these coefﬁcients
on the basis of his earlier correspondence argument in the classical Rayleigh-Jeans
limit and Wien’s displacement law. In addition, the latter also implies that the energy
εm between two internal energy states of the atoms in equilibrium
difference εn −
εm = hνnm.
with thermal radiation has to satisfy Bohr’s frequency condition: εn −
In Dirac’s 1927 radiation theory these results follow —without any correspondence
arguments—from ﬁrst principles.

In the second part of his fundamental paper, Einstein discusses the exchange of mo-
mentum between the atoms and the radiation by making use of the theory of Brownian
motion. Using a truly beautiful argument he shows that in every elementary process of
radiation, and in particular in spontaneous emission, an amount hν/c of momentum
is emitted in a random direction and that the atomic system suffers a corresponding
recoil in the opposite direction. This recoil was ﬁrst experimentally conﬁrmed in 1933
by showing that a long and narrow beam of excited sodium atoms widens up after
spontaneous emissions have taken place (R. Frisch 1933). Einstein’s paper ends with
the following remarkable statement concerning the role of “chance” in his description
of the radiation processes by statistical laws, to which Pauli (1948) drew particular
attention:

“The weakness of the theory lies, on the one hand, in the fact that it does
not bring us any closer to a merger with the undulatory theory, and, on
the other hand, in the fact that it leaves the time and direction of elemen-
tary processes to ‘chance’; in spite of this I harbor full conﬁdence in the
trustworthiness of the path entered upon.”

3.4 Bose-Einstein statistics for degenerate material gases

The last major contributions of Einstein to quantum theory were stimulated by
de Broglie’s suggestion that material particles have also a wave aspect, and Bose’s
derivation of Planck’s formula that made only use of the corpuscular picture of light,
though based upon statistical rules using their indistinguishability. Einstein applied
Bose’s statistics for photons to degenerate gases of identical massive particles. With
this ‘Bose-Einstein statistics’, he obtained a new law, to become known as the Bose-
Einstein distribution. As for radiation, Einstein considered again ﬂuctuations of these
gases and found both, particle-like and wave-like aspects. But this time the wave prop-
erty was the novel feature, that was recognized by Einstein to be necessary.

In the course of this work on quantum gases, Einstein discovered the condensation
of such gases at low temperatures. (Although Bose made no contributions to this, one
nowadays speaks of Bose-Einstein condensation.) Needless to say that this subject has
become enormously topical in recent years.

Schr¨odinger acknowledged in his papers on wave mechanics the inﬂuence of Ein-
stein’s gas theory, which from todays perspective appear to be his last great contribu-

8Einstein’s derivation shows that without assuming a non-zero probability for induced emission one

would necessarily arrive at Wien’s instead of Planck’s radiation law.

14

tion to physics. In the article in which Schr¨odinger (1926) establishes the connection
of matrix and wave mechanics, he remarks in a footnote: “My theory was inspired by
L. de Broglie and by brief but inﬁnitely far-seeing remarks of A. Einstein (Berl. Ber.
1925, p. 9ff)”.

It is well-known that Einstein considered the ‘new’ quantum mechanics less than
satisfactory until the end of his life. In his autobiographical notes he says, for example,

I believe, however, that this theory offers no useful point of departure for
future developments. This is the point at which my expectation departs
widely from that of contemporary physicists.”

3.5 Light quanta after 1925

It is quite remarkable that Pasqual Jordan realized already in his joint paper with Born,
in which the matrix formulation of quantum mechanics was outlined, that the quantum-
interpretation of physical observables had to include the electromagnetic ﬁeld. He
elaborated on this in the extended ﬁnal section of the Dreim¨annerarbeit by Born,
Heisenberg and Jordan. In particular, Jordan derived Einstein’s ﬂuctuation formula
(27) from a description of the cavity radiation as an inﬁnite set of uncoupled harmonic
oscillators, quantized according to the rules of matrix mechanics.9 With this and later
investigations, partly in collaboration with other authors (Klein, Wigner, Pauli), Jor-
dan is not only one of the creators of quantum mechanics, but also one of the most
important fathers of quantum ﬁeld theory. (For biographical notes we refer to Sect. 1.2
of Schweber (1994).)

Dirac was the ﬁrst after Jordan who addressed in the fall of 1926 the quantum-
theoretic description of the electromagnetic ﬁeld. In this seminal work he treated for
the ﬁrst time the quantized electromagnetic ﬁeld in interaction with atomic matter,
described by non-relativistic wave mechanics. Treating the coupled system in ﬁrst
order perturbation theory, he obtained directly—without the use of correspondence
arguments—Einstein’s rules for emission and absorption of light. About this Gregor
Wentzel (1960) wrote in an article on the early history of quantum ﬁeld theory, pub-
lished in the memorial volume to Wolfgang Pauli,

“Today, the novelty and boldness of Dirac’s approach to the radiation
problem may be hard to appreciate. During the preceding decade it had
become a tradition to think of Bohr’s correspondence principle as the
supreme guide in such questions, and, indeed, the efforts to formulate this
principle in a quantitative fashion had led to the essential ideas prepar-
ing the eventual discovery of matrix mechanics by Heisenberg. A new
aspect of the problem appeared when it became possible, by quantum me-
chanical perturbation theory to treat atomic transitions induced by given
external wave ﬁelds, e.g. the photoelectric effect. The transitions so cal-
culated could be interpreted as being caused by absorptive processes, but
the “reaction on the ﬁeld”, namely the disappearance of a photon, was
not described by the theory, nor was there any possibility, in this frame-
work, of understanding the process of spontaneous emission. Here, the

9This was inspired by earlier work of Ehrenfest (1906) and Debye (1910).

15

correspondence principle still seemed indispensable, a rather foreign el-
ement (a “magic wand” as Sommerfeld called it) in this otherwise very
coherent theory. At this point, Dirac’s explanation in terms of the q matrix
came as a revelation. Known results were re-derived, but in a completely
uniﬁed way. The new theory stimulated further thinking about application
of quantum mechanics to electromagnetic and other ﬁelds.”

In Dirac’s theory the dual particle/wave aspects of radiation are described in a co-
herent, logically consistent manner. The shortcomings of the theory were immediately
pointed out by Ehrenfest and others: Since the interaction terms contain the vector
potential at the position of the point-like electron, the theory had to lead to inﬁnities
in higher order perturbation theory. In particular, the self-energy of a free or bound
electron turned out to be inﬁnite. Because of these divergence difﬁculties most the-
orists working in those early days on quantum electrodynamics problems had little
faith in the theory. In Sect. 4.5 we shall take up this subject and sketch the further
developments of relativistic quantum ﬁeld theory.

3.6 Einstein and the interpretation of quantum mechanics

The new generation of young physicists that participated in the tumultuous three-year
period from January 1925 to January 1928 deplored Einstein’s negative judgement
of quantum mechanics. In his previously cited article on Einstein’s contributions to
quantum mechanics, Pauli (1949) expressed this with the following words:

“The writer belongs to those physicists who believe that the new episte-
mological situation underlying quantum mechanics is satisfactory, both
from the standpoint of physics and from the broader knowledge in gen-
eral. He regrets that Einstein seems to have a different opinion on this
situation (...).”

When the Einstein-Podolski-Rosen (EPR) paper (Einstein et al. 1935) appeared,
Pauli’s immediate reaction (see Pauli 1985-99, Vol. 2) in a letter to Heisenberg of June
15th was quite furious:

“Einstein once again has expressed himself publicly on quantum mechan-
ics, namely in the issue of Physical Review of May 15th (in cooperation
with Podolsky and Rosen – not a good company, by the way). As is well
known, this is a catastrophe each time when it happens.”

From a greater distance in time this judgement seems exaggerated, but it shows the
In fact, Pauli un-
attitude of the ‘younger generation’ towards Einstein’s concerns.
derstood (though not approved) Einstein’s point much better than many others, as his
intervention in the Born-Einstein debate on Quantum Mechanics shows (Born 2005,
letter by Pauli to Born of March 31st 1954). Whatever one’s attitude on this issue is,
it is certainly true that the EPR argumentation has engendered an uninterrupted dis-
cussion up to this day. The most inﬂuential of John Bell’s papers on the foundations
of quantum mechanics has the title “On the Einstein-Podolsky-Rosen paradox” (Bell
In this publication Bell presents what has come to be called “Bell’s Theo-
1964).
rem”, which (roughly) asserts that no hidden-variable theory that satisﬁes a certain

16

locality condition can produce all predictions of quantum mechanics. This signals the
importance of EPR’s paper in focusing on a pair of well-separated particles that have
been properly prepared to ensure strict correlations between certain of their observable
quantities. Bell’s analysis and later reﬁnements (1987) showed clearly that the behav-
ior of entangled states is only explainable in the language of quantum mechanics.

This point has also been the subject of the very interesting, but much less known
work of S. Kochen and E.P. Specker (1967), with the title “The Problem of Hidden
Variables in Quantum Mechanics”. Loosely speaking, Kochen and Specker show that
quantum mechanics cannot be embedded into a classical stochastic theory, provided
two very desirable conditions are assumed to be satisﬁed. The ﬁrst condition (KS1)
is that the quantum mechanical distributions are reproduced by the embedding of the
quantum description into a classical stochastic theory. (The precise deﬁnition of this
concept is given in the cited paper.) The authors ﬁrst show that hidden variables in
this sense can always be introduced if there are no other requirements. (This fact is not
difﬁcult to prove.) The second condition (KS2) imposed by Kochen and Specker states
that a function u(A) of a quantum mechanical observable A (self-adjoint operator) has
to be represented in the classical description by the very same function u of the image
fA of A, where f is the embedding that maps the operator A to the classical observable
fA on ‘phase space’. Formally, (KS2) states that for all A

fu(A) = u (fA) .

(28)

The main result of Kochen and Specker states that if the dimension of the Hilbert
space of quantum mechanical states is larger than 2, an embedding satisfying (KS1)
and (KS2) is ‘in general’ not possible.

There are many highly relevant examples—even of low dimensions with only a

ﬁnite number of states and observables—where this impossibility holds.

The original proof of Kochen and Specker is very ingenious, but quite difﬁcult. In
the meantime several authors have given much simpler proofs; e.g. Straumann (2002).
We ﬁnd the result of Kochen and Specker entirely satisfactory in the sense that
it clearly demonstrates that there is no way back to classical reality. Einstein’s view
that quantum mechanics is a kind of gloriﬁed statistical mechanics, that ignores some
hidden microscopic degrees of freedom, can thus not be maintained without giving up
locality or (KS2). It would be interesting to know his reaction to these developments
that have been triggered by the EPR paper.

Entanglement is not limited to questions of principle.

It has already been em-
ployed in quantum communication systems, and entanglement underlies all proposals
of quantum computation.

4 Special Relativity as a symmetry principle

4.1 Historical origin and conceptual meaning

The principle of relativity goes back at least to Galileo. In his “Dialogue Concerning
the Two Chief World Systems” of 1632 there is a often quoted passage where this prin-
ciple is beautifully expressed by Galileo’s spokesman Filipo Salviati. Salviati explains
that no experience made under deck of a moving ship can reveal its motion, given

17

that the sea is perfectly smooth. He mentions various simple experiments one can
do, involving ballistic ﬂights of solid objects or liquids, jumping with ones own body,
or ﬂying butterﬂies. Even though animals and humans are part of these Gedanken-
Experiments, the aspects discussed are purely mechanical in nature.

The idea that mechanical experiments cannot reveal an overall uniform and iner-
tial (rectilinear) motion became known as the ‘Galilean Principle of Relativity’. In
Newtonian mechanics it is analytically expressed by the invariance of its equations of
motion under the Galilei group. This mathematical statement has two interpretations,
whose physical connotations differ in a subtle way. The ﬁrst interpretation, called the
‘passive’ one, is that of a mere change of reference frames while keeping the system
under study untouched. In the second interpretation, called the ‘active’ one, one keeps
the reference system while changing the state of motion of the system under study. If
the physical world just consisted of these two objects, the reference system and the
system under study, these two interpretations would be equivalent, since both amount
to stating a relative change in the state of motion and there is nothing more to state.
However, this does not correspond to the usual situation encountered in physics. Here
one has a system S to be studied, a reference frame F (thought of as a physical system
in its own right), and the rest R of the physical universe, parts of which we may at
times choose to interact with S but neglect otherwise. In the passive interpretation we
just change the frame, that is, we change the relative state of motion between F and
the totality of other systems, here denoted by S + R. In the active interpretation we
merely act on S, hence the cut is now between S and F + R.

Even if dynamically silent, the presence of R is important for the interpretation of
symmetries. This is because a symmetry connects physically distinguishable states,
thereby mapping solutions of the equations of motion to other, distinguishable so-
lutions. In the language of Hamiltonian mechanics this means that the Hamiltonian
function that generates the motion is invariant under the symmetry operation, but other
observables need not be. This is precisely the difference between a physical symme-
try and a gauge transformation. Unfortunately this difference is sometimes blurred by
speaking of “gauge symmetries”.

After the establishment of the principle of relativity in mechanics, the natural ques-
tion to ask was whether non-mechanical phenomena could perhaps reveal preferred
states of inertial motion. Such a preference was strongly suggested by various ‘ether’
theories of light (as a transverse wave in ether) and other electromagnetic phenom-
ena during the 19th century. But here it should not be forgotten that already Newton
ﬁrmly expressed his belief in some sort of force-mediating ‘ether’. In a famous letter
to Robert Bentley, Newton wrote in 1692 (Newton, 1961 p. 254) :

“That gravity should be innate inherent & essential to matter so yt one
body may act upon another at a distance through a vacuum wthout the
mediation of any thing else by & through wch their action of force may
be conveyed from one to another is to me so great an absurdity that I
believe no man who has in philosophical matters any competent faculty of
thinking can ever fall into it.”

But all optical and electromagnetic experiments failed to show any trace of an
ether rest-frame. This also seemed irreconcilable with Maxwell’s equations, which
predicted an invariable speed c for electromagnetic waves in matter free space, and

18

which were therefore interpreted as referring to the ether’s rest frame only. The solu-
tion to this latter problem was ﬁrst given by Lorentz (1904) and, using a variational
principle, by Poincar´e (1906). They found that instead of being Galilei invariant10
Maxwell’s equations are invariant under the Lorentz group. Einstein independently
also derived this result in his 1905 paper on Special Relativity (henceforth abbreviated
SR), but in distinction to Lorentz and Poincar´e he gives a direct physical meaning to the
Lorentz transformations in terms of operational means for measuring lengths and times
(see Damour (2005) for a lucid recent account on Poincar´e’s contribution to SR). One
may say that Einstein established them on a kinematical rather than dynamical basis,
though one should add here that this distinction is only deﬁned relative to the assump-
tion, that the “rods” and “clocks” that enter the kinematical considerations eventually
obey dynamical laws which are compatible with Lorentz invariance. Granted this, the
FitzGerald-Lorentz contraction, for example, may be understood kinematically, that is,
as a result of a fundamental symmetry that is postulated to be realized by all fundamen-
tal matter-equations, rather than dynamically, that is, as consequence of a complicated
dynamical interaction between the measuring rod and the ether. Note that it is not
claimed here that these viewpoints are logically disjoint.11 But the shift in emphasis
establishes a symmetry principle with potentially far superior heuristic power.

In summary it seems fair to say that in 1905 SR seems palpably close after all
the preliminary work of various people. But apparently it needed an unprejudiced
newcomer to take the ﬁnal step.

4.2 The Lorentz group

The new understanding of the Lorentz transformations as fundamental symmetries
induced a very powerful selection principle for dynamical laws: All fundamental dy-
namical laws of Nature should be Lorentz invariant.12 By this we man that 1) there is
an action of the Lorentz group on state space, and 2) this action maps solution curves
to solution curves. (An alternative but equivalent deﬁnition uses observables rather
than states.) After Minkowski’s seminal work, as a result of which SR was gradually
put into its modern mathematical form, this task could be approached in a systematic
fashion.

Minkowski realized that the Lorentz group could be understood as the auto-
morphism group of a geometric structure on space-time, which is as follows: The
model for spacetime is a four-dimensional real afﬁne13 space whose underlying vector
space, R4, is endowed with a non-degenerate, symmetric bilinear form η of signature
10It does not seem to be widely appreciated that a precise statement of Galilei non-invariance needs to
invoke restrictive assumptions concerning the type of action, like e.g. locality. It is instructive and amus-
ing to note that there exists a non-local implementation of the Galilei group which makes it a symmetry
group of Maxwell’s equations; see e.g. Sect. 5.9 in Fushchich et al. (1993).

11In this respect Pauli wrote in his 1921 review article on Relativity: “The contraction of a measuring
rod is not an elementary but a very complicated process. It would not take place except for the covariance
with respect to the Lorentz group of the basic equations of electron theory, as well as those laws, as yet
unknown to us, which determine the cohesion of the electron itself.”

12The reader should be aware that there is some confusion in the literature as to the different meanings

of terms like ‘invariant’, ‘covariant’ etc.

13The afﬁne structure of spacetime is usually motivated by the law of inertia, by means of which one

identiﬁes inertial trajectories with (a subset of) the ‘straight lines’ of afﬁne geometry.

19

, +, +, +)14. In appropriate coordinates one has ηµν = diag(

1, 1, 1, 1). η is called
(
−
the Minkowski metric and the afﬁne space endowed with it is called Minkowski space.
The homogeneous Lorentz group is then characterized as the set of invertible linear
transformations that leave η invariant.

−

The Galilei group, too, can be characterized as the automorphism group of some
geometric structure on spacetime, which is again modelled on real four-dimensional
afﬁne space. The ‘geometry’ now includes an absolute simultaneity structure and a
ﬁxed euclidean metric on the simultaneity hypersurfaces.

In this section we brieﬂy wish to mention some of the major structural differences
between the Galilei and the Lorentz group. In doing this we also stress that, at least as
mechanics is concerned, the usual terminology ‘non-relativistic’ versus ‘relativistic’
is quite inappropriate. Newtonian mechanics is perfectly relativistic: the principle of
relativity being implemented by the Galilei group. What distinguishes Lorentz from
Galilei invariant mechanics is not the validity of the relativity principle, but rather the
structurally different implementations.

Let us, therefore, reﬂect a little on the structural difference of these two groups.
Choosing as reference an inertial frame in spacetime (i.e. a spatial inertial frame and
an inertial timescale) we can think of the relativity groups, which relate the chosen
inertial frame to all other inertial ones, as matrix groups. The so-called ‘homogeneous’
groups are subgroups G
4
matrices with real entries). The so-called ‘inhomogeneous’ groups are the obvious
semi-direct products R4 ⋊ G of those with the Abelian group of spacetime translations
R4:

GL(4,R) (the latter denoting the group of invertible 4

×

⊂

(a1 , g1)(a2 , g2) = (a1 + g1 ·

a2 , g1 ·

g2) .

The spacetime translations make up four parameters out of ten. The other ones being
the spatial rotations and the boost, which account for three parameters each. Both
3 matrices
homogeneous groups contain the group of spatial rotations as lower right 3
in the form

×

(29)

(30)

R(D) =

1 ~0t
~0 D

,

(cid:18)
where ~0 and ~0t stand for the 3-dimensional row and column vector respectively and
SO(3). The actual difference between the homogeneous groups lies in how they
D
represent boosts. In the Lorentz group, a boost with velocity ~v = v~n is given by an
expression B(~v) shown below, whereas in the Galilei group by its limit as c
(where γ = γ(v) =

v2/c2):

→ ∞

(cid:19)

∈

1

−

B(~v) =

p

γ
γ~v 1 + (γ

γ ~vt/c2
1)~n

~nt

c → ∞
−−−−−→

1 ~0t
~v 1

.

(31)

(cid:18)

⊗
The latter expression shows that in the Galilei group boosts form an Abelian subgroup,
in fact an invariant one, since taken together with spatial rotations (30) one imme-
diately sees that they form a semi-direct product. Hence the homogeneous Galilei

−

(cid:19)

(cid:19)

(cid:18)

14In the present context it is conventional whether one chooses (−, +, +, +) [‘mostly plus’] or
(+, −, −, −) [‘mostly minus’]. But in more exotic situations, like for non-orientable spacetimes, the
overall sign generally matters; see e.g. DeWitt-Morette & DeWitt (1990).

20

(32)

(33)

(34)

(35)

group is far from being semi-simple, whereas the homogeneous Lorentz group (with-
out space-time reﬂections) is even simple15. From a representation-theoretic point
of view, which becomes important in quantum-ﬁeld theory, this difference makes the
Lorentz group a much nicer object.

Every homogeneous Lorentz transformation (again we omit space-time reﬂec-
tions) is the unique product of a boost and a rotation (polar decomposition). This
allows to uniquely characterize a Lorentz transformation by a boost vector ~v and a
rotation matrix D:

L(~v, D) := B(~v)

R(D) .

·

This characterization is unique for the given oder of B and R. In the reversed order,
L = RB, the rotation D would be the same but the boost velocity would be D−1~v.
This follows from the covariance of boosts under rotations,

R(D)

B(~v) = B(D~v)

R(D) ,

·

·

·

and the uniqueness of polar decompositions.

The composition of the product of two non-collinear boosts can, according to (32),
be decomposed into a boost and a rotation, with composite velocity ~v1 ⋆ ~v2 and a
rotation (T [v1,v2]

SO(3) respectively:

∈

B(~v1)

B(~v2) = B(~v1 ⋆ ~v2)

R(T [~v1, ~v2]) .

·

Here ⋆ entails the special-relativistic law for the addition of velocities, given by

~v1 ⋆ ~v2 :=

~v1 + ~v2k + ~v2⊥/γ(v1)

.

~v2/c2

1 + ~v1 ·
where ~v2k and ~v2⊥ are the ~v2-components parallel and perpendicular to ~v1. T [~v1,~v2] is
the so-called ‘Thomas rotation’, which rotates counterclockwise in the ~v1-~v2 plane by
an amount which is a function of these two velocities (for explicit expressions see e.g.
Giulini (2005b)). The general law for composing Lorentz transformations can now be
written down explicitly:

L(~v1, D1)

L(~v2, D2) = L(~v1 ⋆ D1~v2 , T (~v1, D1~v2)

·

D1 ·

·

D2) .

(36)

In the limit c
that (36) turns into the semi-direct product of boosts and rotations.

the rotation T [

→ ∞

] tends to the unit matrix and ⋆ turns into +, so

−

−

,

The relativistic addition of velocities is neither commutative nor associative. In-

stead one has

~v1 ⋆ ~v2 = T [~v1, ~v2]
~v1 ⋆ (~v2 ⋆ ~v3) = (~v1 ⋆ ~v2) ⋆ T [~v1,~v2]

(~v2 ⋆ ~v1)

·

~v3

·

(37)

showing that the Thomas rotation obstructs both, commutativity and associativity. This
is more than just a mathematical curiosity. The Thomas rotation implies that the rela-
tion of ‘being relatively unrotated’ is not transitive among inertial reference frames. If
K ′ is boosted relative to K and K ′′ is boosted relative to K ′, then K ′′ is boosted as

15A group is called ‘simple’ if it does not contain a non-trivial invariant subgroup and semi-simple if

it does not contain a non-trivial Abelian invariant subgroup.

21

well as rotated relative to K, unless the boost velocities of K ′ and K ′′ are collinear.
This is just what (34) expresses. A well known early application of this fact, not
present in the Galilei group, was the downward correction by 50% of the spin-orbit
coupling and consequently of the ﬁne-structure intervals in atomic spectra, which was
ﬁrst pointed out by Thomas (1927).16 The same effect is even more pronounced in
nuclear physics, where the strong acceleration due to the nuclear force leads via the
‘Thomas correction’ to a much larger spin-orbit coupling than that due to the elec-
tromagnetic interaction, thereby giving rise to the so-called ‘inverted doublets’. The
non-transitivity of the relation ‘being-relatively-unrotated’ has more recently also en-
tered the discussion of large-scale astronomical reference frames; see e.g. Klioner &
Soffel (1998).

4.3 Far reaching consequences

Replacing the Galilei with the Lorentz group enforces a modiﬁcation of the dynamical
laws of mechanics, since now the latter is required to act by dynamical symmetries.
The ‘heuristic power’ associated with this requirement comes now to the fore (compare
end of Section 4.1) . Consider e.g. the simplest case of a free point-particle of mass
m0. Classically its dynamics is fully described by an action whose Lagrangian is just
its kinetic energy, 1
2 m0v2. A straightforward Lorentz invariant modiﬁcation, which
approaches the classical law in the limit c

, is given by the action

Sparticle =

m0c2

dτ =

m0c2

−

v2/c2 dt ,

1

−

(38)

where dτ =
particle—obviously a Lorentz-invariant quantity.

Z p
ηµν dzµdzν is the eigentime along the worldline zµ(t) of the
From the Lagrangian L =
v2/c2, the expressions for energy and momentum immediately follow

p

−

Z

1

m0c2

−
by standard Lagrangian methods (again we set γ(v) = 1/

−

v2/c2):

1

−

p

→ ∞

−

E : = ~v

~p : =

·

∂L
∂~v −
∂L
∂~v

p
L = γ(v) m0c2 ,

= γ(v) m0~v .

pµ L
−→

p′µ = Lµ

ν pν .

Together they form the momentum four-vector pµ = (E/c, ~p), which under a Lorentz
transformation, given by the matrix Lµ

ν , transforms like

Clearly, the Minkowski-square of the four-momentum is an invariant (we write p :=
):
~p
|
|

ηµν pµpν = p2

E2/c2 =

−

m2

0c2 ,

−

showing that the following relation between energy and momentum is a Lorentz co-
variant one:

E2 = c2 (p2 + m2

0c2) .

16A manifestly Lorentz invariant treatment using the Dirac equation automatically takes care of this

effect.

22

(39)

(40)

(41)

(42)

(43)

This equation replaces the familiar E = p2/2m0 of Newtonian mechanics and plays a
central role throughout special-relativistic quantum (ﬁeld) theory. One of its prominent
features is that E enters quadratically, in contrast to the classical equation.

It is instructive to remark that these somewhat formal derivations (no interactions
were discussed yet) may be complemented by analyzing elastic 2-particle scattering
processes and showing that (40) is the unique generalization of the classical equation
~p = m0~v that is compatible with momentum conservation and Lorentz invariance;
see e.g. (Giulini, 2005a) for a brief presentation of this argument, which goes back
to Lewis and Tolman in 1909. From (40) one may deduce the expression for the
kinetic energy, Ekin = m0c2(γ(v)
1), which is just (39), properly normalized so that
Ekin = 0 for v = 0.

−

The normalization of energy in (39) is not determined by general methods (which
always allow for additive constants). The last of Einstein’s ﬁve papers of 1905, just
about three pages long, shows that the normalization adopted in (39) is more than just a
convenient choice. More precisely, using 1) the principle of relativity, 2) conservation
of energy, 3) the existence of a Newtonian limit, and 4) the transformation law for the
energy of an electromagnetic wave, as derived from the Lorentz transformation proper-
ties of the electromagnetic ﬁeld, Einstein shows that any emission of electromagnetic
radiation with energy ∆E by a body must decrease its inertial rest mass m0 by ∆E/c2.
(See Stachel & Torretti (1982) for a careful account of Einstein’s argument, which also
saves it from an unwarranted but often repeated criticism.) He further argues that this
holds independently of the form the extracted energy of the body turns into. From this
he jumps to the conclusion that all of the inertial mass of a body is a measure of its
energy content; later this was expressed in the now most famous formula

E = mc2 .

(44)

The implications of this far reaching insight can hardly be overrated. It provided
the ﬁrst means to estimate the enormous magnitude of nuclear binding-energies. To-
day (44) is often taken as a symbolic expression for the ambivalent ‘nuclear age’. But
it should be stressed, that (44) only allows to ‘weigh’ binding energies. It neither ex-
plains them nor does it explain any of the nuclear processes, like ﬁssion or fusion,
which belong to the realm of nuclear physics proper. The weight of binding energies
becomes even dominant on sub-nuclear scales. For example, according to Quantum
Chromodynamics, the mass of a proton (made up of three light quarks, two ‘up’ and
one ‘down’, interacting via gluon exchange) is almost entirely due to interaction ener-
gies. The quark masses themselve contribute only about 2%.

On a more fundamental level (44) changed our concept of matter radically, in that
it opens up the possibility for different forms of matter to change into each other. To be
sure, the ‘channels’ along which these transmutations occur are constrained by various
conservation laws. But there can be no doubt that this puts an irreversible end to the
idea of naive atomism, since everlasting and unchanging elementary objects simply
cannot exist. Rather, modern high-energy particle physics speaks and thinks in terms
of creation and annihilation processes.

23

4.4 The current experimental status of SR

Modern particle physics would be unthinkable without SR. Leaving alone the con-
ceptual implications just mentioned, its kinematical consequences, too, go far beyond
of what could be called a “correction”. For example, proton antiproton collisions at
Fermilab’s Tevatron take place at energies of about 2 TeV, that is, 2000 times the rest
energy of the proton. In such machines there are clearly ample of opportunities where
any possible deviations from SR would manifest themselves. But since these experi-
ments are not primarily designed to test SR, the quantities observed in them will de-
pend in a very complicated manner on the fundamental assumptions of SR. This will
generally make it rather hard to infer good quantitative bounds concerning violations
of SR from such experiments, even if, energetically speaking, they take place in the
“ultrarelativistic regime”.

Experiments speciﬁcally designed to test the principle of relativity basically probe
for dynamical effects of preferred reference frames. A good candidate for such a
preferred frame is that in which the microwave background appears most isotropic
It is called the CMB-frame. Ever since COBE’s
(i.e. without dipole anisotropy).
observation of the dipole anisotropy we know that the barycentre of our solar system
moves relative to the CMB-frame at a speed of 370 km/s (Kogut et al. 1993).

Let us suppose that the CMB-frame, K, is such that in it the velocity of light is c =
1 (choice of units) in all directions. Note that this implies that clocks in K are Einstein-
synchronized. The transformation formulae between the CMB-frame K, which is
coordinatised by (~x, t), and an inertial frames K ′ moving with relative velocity ~v
~nv
~n = 1), which is coordinatised by (~x′, t′), are then of the general form (Mansouri
(~n
& Sexl, 1976)

≡

·

~x′ = d(v)~x + ~n(~n
t′ = a(v)t + ~ε(~v)

~x)
~x′ .
(cid:0)

·

·

b(v)

d(v)

b(v)~v t ,

−

−

(cid:1)

Here a, b, d are functions of v whose interpretation is easily inferred: a is the factor
of time dilation (for this reason we wrote t′ as function of ~x′ rather than ~x), and b and
d are the factors of longitudinal and transversal length contraction respectively. These
functions are to be determined experimentally. The values assigned to them by SR are

aSR(v) = 1/bSR(v) =

v2 ,

1

−

dSR(v) = 1 .

In contrast, the vector ~ε is determined by a, b, d once the convention for clock synchro-
p
nization in K ′ is chosen. For example, if Einstein-synchronization in K ′ is chosen, one
has

~ε(~v) = ~εE(~v) :=

~v

−
leading to the familiar expression ~εSR(~v) =
~v in case of Special Relativity. If we
agree to Einstein-synchronize clocks in K ′, the following expression can be derived
for the velocity of light in K ′ (Mansouri & Sexl 1976)17,

b(v)(1

−

−

a(v)

,

v2)

c′(θ, v) =

a(v)

p

b(v)(1
cos2 θ + b2(v)d−2(v)(1

−

v2)

,

v2) sin2 θ

−

17The relevant formula in this reference, (6.17), has a misprint: d2 in the denominator should be d

−2,

as shown in (48).

(45)

(46)

(47)

(48)

24

→

where θ is the angle between the light ray and ~v as measured in K ′. This reduces to
c′ = 1 for the values given by (46), but depends on θ in the general case. The invariance
under θ

θ + π reﬂects the fact that clocks in K ′ were Einstein-synchronized.
We also stress the following, conceptually very important point: The expression
for c′(θ, v) depends on the choice of clock synchronization in K ′. This means that if
one uses it to calculate light travel-times along open paths, i.e. which start and end
at different points in space, the result will also depend on that choice. However, the
calculated travel times will be independent of ones synchronization convention if the
light paths are closed in space, since then only a single clock is involved. This is the
case in the Michelson-Morley and Kennedy-Thorndike experiments discussed below.

In leading (quadratic) order in v we have for a, b, d:

≈

1

a(v)

1 + αv2 ,

b(v)

1 + βv2 ,

d(v)

1 + δv2 .

(49)

≈

≈

Experiments checking round travel times of light involve 1/c′, which in leading order
reads

c′(θ, v) ≈

1 + (β

δ

−

−

1

2 )v2 sin2 θ + (α

β + 1)v2 .

−

(50)

We again note that for SR one has α =
expressions in the brackets.

−

−

β =

1/2 and δ = 0, leading to vanishing

Experiments checking the θ dependence of c(θ, v) are commonly referred to as
“Michelson-Morley”, those checking the v2 dependence as “Kennedy-Thorndike” ex-
periments. The currently best upper bounds for the relative θ-variation of c′(θ, v) are
of the order of 10−15, and for the v-variation of the order 10−12. In order to translate
β + 1) one has
these results into a statement about the coefﬁcients (β + δ
to assume some value for v, that is, one has to make an assumption what our present
velocity relative to the potentially preferred frame is. Since the latter is presently unan-
imously stipulated to be the CMB-frame18, with respect to which we move at a speed
10−3. This leads
of 370 km/s, that is 1.23
to the currently best bounds on the one-σ level; see M¨uller et al. (2003) and Wolf et al.
(2003):

10−3 the speed of light, one sets v = 1.23

1
2 ) and (α

−

−

·

·

β
|
α
|

−

−

δ

1
2 |
−
β + 1
|

< 3.7

< 6.9

10−9
10−7

·

·

(MM–experiment) ,

(KT–experiment) .

(51)

(52)

To bound all three parameters an independent third experiment is done. One calls
“Ives-Stilwell” experiment those which separately determine the factor of time di-
lation.
In the most modern version this is done using so-called double Doppler-
spectroscopy (using Lasers) on 7Li+ ions, moving at a speed of 19 000 km/s. The
best bound today is (Saathoff 2003):

2α + 1
|
|

< 2.2

10−7

·

(IS–experiment) .

(53)

For more on the most recent experimental situation of SR, see (Ehlers & L¨ammerzahl,
2005)

18Though it is considered to be unlikely, it is not impossible that the gravitational-wave backgroundt—
once it is observed—‘moves’ relative to the CMB frame and therefore deﬁnes another potentially pre-
ferred frame.

25

Let us ﬁnally point out that, taken alone, the last test has some further conceptual
signiﬁcance. We mentioned that Einstein-synchronization in K ′ ﬁxes ~ε be the function
given in (47). Now, it was probably Eddington who ﬁrst alerted to the non-trivial fact
that in SR Einstein-synchronization is equivalent to synchronization by “slow clock-
transport” (Eddington 1924,
11). In the setting discussed here one may show that the
value of ~ε corresponding to slow clock-transport is given by (~n = ~v/v)

§

~ε(~v) = ~εT(~v) := ~n

a′(v)
b(v)

,

(54)

where a′ is the derivative of a. Hence both synchronizations agree if and only if the
expression in (47) and (54) agree, which is precisely the case if a(v) = aSR(v) (clearly
we require a(v) = 1 for v = 0). Hence the bound (53) is, in fact, also a bound on
possible deviations of Einstein synchronization from synchronization by slow clock-
transport.

4.5 Relativistic quantum ﬁeld theory

Lorentz invariance was from the very beginning a guiding principle in the develop-
ment of quantum theory. The black body radiation belongs above all to the quantum
theory of the electromagnetic ﬁeld which had to be relativistically invariant. In this
connection an important step by Jordan and Pauli (1928) should be mentioned. These
authors introduced for the charge-free Dirac radiation ﬁeld time-dependent ﬁeld op-
erators, and determined the commutators of two ﬁeld components, taken at different
spacetime points. For the ﬁeld operators Fµν (x) these commutators can be expressed
in a manifestly invariant form in terms of the now famous invariant Jordan-Pauli dis-
tribution. The physical meaning of these results in terms of basic uncertainty relations
in ﬁeld measurements was later analyzed by Bohr & Rosenfeld (1933).

It is known that Schr¨odinger considered before his time-dependent wave equation a
relativistically invariant equation, now known as the Klein-Gordon equation. Since this
implied a wrong ﬁne structure splitting, Schr¨odinger restricted himself in his founding
series of papers to the more modest goal of a non-relativistic wave mechanics. The next
decisive step was made by Dirac who succeeded in generalizing Pauli’s description
of spin- 1
2 particles to a relativistic wave equation. Initially, this was considered as a
single particle theory, but this interpretation was beset with great difﬁculties coming
from negative energy states. These states could not be consistently amputated and time
dependent external ﬁelds could cause transitions from positive to negative states.

Reinterpretation of Dirac’s single particle theory

Dirac’s way out of this serious trouble was his so-called ‘hole theory’. The ground state
then becomes stable because the negative energy states are thought of as all occupied
so transitions of positive energy electrons into negative energy states are forbidden by
the Pauli Exclusion Principle. Furthermore, the vast ‘sea’ of negative energy particles
is declared to be invisible. A ‘hole’ in this sea was interpreted by Dirac as a particle of
positive energy and positive charge. At ﬁrst, Dirac suggested to identify such particles
with the proton. It was, however, soon pointed out by Oppenheimer (1930) that this

26

was unacceptable because the hydrogen atom would then be very short-lived. Dirac
(1931) accepted this criticism and proposed the existence of anti-electrons:

“A hole, if there were one, would be a new kind of particle, unknown to
experimental physics, having the same mass and opposite charge to the
electron. We should not expect to ﬁnd any of them in nature, on account of
their rapid rate of recombination with electrons, but in high vacuum, they
would be quite stable and amenable to observations.”

Many of Dirac’s colleagues were thunderstruck at the audacity of his ideas. As an
example we recall here Pauli’s considered opinion, expressed in his famous article on
wave mechanics (1933) before the discovery of the positron. First he says that there
should then also exist antiprotons, but he discards this: “The factual absence of such
particles then is reduced to a special initial state, in which there is indeed only one kind
of particles. This appears to be unsatisfactory already because of the fact that the laws
of nature in this theory are symmetrical with respect to electrons and anti-electrons.”
The matter-antimatter asymmetry is still a major problem of cosmology, about which
we shall make some remarks in Sect. 4.9.

After Anderson’s discovery of the positron, it became clear that future work on
quantum electrodynamics (QED) of spin- 1
2 particles had to be based on hole theory,
or something closely related to this. By the work of Jordan and Wigner it became
quite obvious how to quantize the Dirac ﬁeld, by imposing anti-commutation relations.
With the resulting elegant formalism it was possible to write the theory of electrons
and positrons in a completely symmetric form under exchange of particle and antipar-
ticle. In this formulation, now developed in all textbooks on quantum ﬁeld theory, the
Dirac sea has no place “except as a poetic description for forming the electromagnetic
current” (A. Wightman).

Heisenberg and Pauli (1929,1930) were the ﬁrst to attempt a general formulation
of QED as a dynamical relativistic theory of quantized ﬁelds. With all these devel-
opments a revolution had taken place that was driven by the problem to reconcile
quantum mechanics with special relativity. All future developments are based on these
foundational pillars. Below we shall make a few remarks about the tortuous, still ongo-
ing history of quantum ﬁeld theory. An amazing fact is that, in spite of all its intrinsic
difﬁculties, this theory makes the most precise predictions in all of physics. What
exactly lies behind this success is still unclear.

Renormalization theory

In the early 1930s a number of processes, such as radiative pair creation and anni-
hilation, were successfully computed in the Born approximation. But in higher or-
ders the troublesome divergences remained. Weisskopf showed that compared to the
single electron theory the most divergent terms for the self-energy cancelled, but a
logarithmic divergence remained. It was only realized after world war two that this
remaining divergence would also disappear after a mass renormalization. An early
central problem was that of the vacuum polarization. This was studied by a number
of authors. Anticipating the idea of charge renormalization, ﬁnite observable effects,
In going
for instance in the energies of bound electrons, were correctly extracted.
to even higher orders in the ﬁne structure constant, a very fascinating phenomenon

27

showed up: Maxwell’s equations are corrected by very small non-linear terms in the
ﬁeld strengths and their derivatives, leading for instance to photon-photon scattering.
Heisenberg’s subtraction procedure lead to ﬁnite expressions, as was shown by Eu-
ler, Kockel and Heisenberg (Euler and Kockel, 1935; Heisenberg and Euler,1936)).
Shortly afterwards, Weisskopf (1936) not only simpliﬁed their calculations but also
gave a thorough discussion of the physics involved in charge renormalization. Weis-
skopf related the modiﬁcation of the Lagrangian of Maxwell’s theory to the change
of the energy of the Dirac sea as a function of slowly varying external electromag-
netic ﬁelds. (Avoiding the old fashioned Dirac sea, this effective Lagrangian is due to
the interaction of a classical electromagnetic ﬁeld with the vacuum ﬂuctuations of the
electron positron ﬁeld.) After a charge renormalization this change is ﬁnite and gives
rise to electric and magnetic polarization vectors of the vacuum. These investigations
showed that the quantum vacuum has very interesting properties, a subject we shall
take up in Sect. 6.6 in connection with the current Dark Energy problem.

In spite of these successes, most of the leading physicists were not happy with
the subtraction devices and repeatedly expressed their misgivings. In the late 1940s
renormalization theory was taken up in a systematic manner with the help of new,
manifestly Lorentz invariant techniques. The inﬁnities could then be sidestepped in an
unambiguous manner. The new powerful methods of Feynman, Schwinger, Tomonaga,
and Dyson allowed to perform higher order perturbation calculations for QED which
turned out to be in amazing agreement with experiment. With these developments
QED became one of the most brilliant successes in the history of physics.

Quantum ﬁeld theory provides answers to some of the most profound questions
about the nature of matter. It explains why there are two classes of particles—fermions
and bosons—and how their properties are related to their intrinsic spin (spin-statistics
theorem). The mysterious nature of indistinguishability in quantum mechanics is un-
derstood, because identical particles are created by the same underlying ﬁeld.

QED became a model for non-Abelian gauge theories and the development of
the highly successful Standard Model of particle physics. Since the early history of
gauge theories is strongly tied to General Relativity (henceforth abbreviated GR), we
postpone further discussion of this subject, as well as of more recent developments
which include the gravitational interaction, to Sect. 6.4.

4.6 Group-theoretic background of relativistic

quantum ﬁeld theory

Mathematically speaking, the content of SR is largely the requirement of Lorentz in-
variance (as opposed to, say, Galilei invariance, which would also count as implemen-
tation of the principle of relativity). Hence a characterization of the impact of SR onto
any branch of physics should also include some statements about the speciﬁc prop-
erties brought about by this requirement. This is particularly interesting in Quantum
Field Theory, where aspects of representation theory become important. The represen-
tation theory as such can, however, be discussed using classical (not second quantized)
ﬁelds.

For simplicity we ignore space and time reﬂections and consider the group R4 ⋊
SL(2, C), which is the double (and also universal) cover of the connected component
of the inhomogeneous Lorentz group. In what follows, we will simply refer to it as the

28

Poincar´e group.

The classical ﬁelds Ψ one considers are maps from spacetime (Minkowski space)
to some vector space V . The space V carries a ﬁnite dimensional irreducible represen-
tation D(p,q) of SL(2, C). (Here p and q are zero or integer multiples of 1/2. 2p and 2q
denote the numbers of undotted and dotted spinor indices respectively, carried by the
ﬁeld in question). With appropriate choice of an inner product, the inﬁnite-dimensional
linear space of such ﬁelds then carries a unitary representation of the Poincar´e group.
The free (i.e. linear) classical ﬁeld equations of Klein-Gordon, Weyl (Neutrino equa-
tion), Dirac, Maxwell, Proca, Rarita-Schwinger, Bargmann-Wigner and Pauli-Fierz
can then collectively be understood as projection conditions onto irreducible subspaces
(possibly including space and time reﬂections) therein.

Investigations into the representation theory of the Poincar´e group started with
Wigner’s seminal paper (Wigner 1939), which was one of the ﬁrst serious math-
ematical papers on the representation theory of non-compact Lie groups.19 Later
Mackey generalized Wigner’s method to what is now known as theory of induced
representations—or ‘Mackey Theory’—, which reduces to the present case if one spe-
cializes to semi-direct products with one Abelian factor (here the translations). A nice
account is e.g. given by Niederer & O’Raifeartaigh (1974).

Wigner’s construction of irreducible representations can be brieﬂy described as
follows: ﬁrst one considers instead of the ﬁeld Ψ(x) on spacetime its Fourier transform
˜Ψ(k) on momentum space. An element (a, A)

R4 ⋊ SL(2, C) acts on ˜Ψ(k) by

∈
eik·aD(p,q)(A) ˜Ψ(A−1k),

˜Ψ(k)

7→

which already shows that irreducible subspaces must consist of ﬁelds whose support
is conﬁned to a single group orbit in momentum space. These orbits decompose into
two families of inﬁnitely many orbits each, indexed by mass
the following types:
m2 + ~k2, the future and
m > 0 and given by the two-sheeted hyperbolas k0 =
past light cone, one inﬁnite family (indexed by µ > 0) of one-sheeted hyperbolas
~k
|

=
The condition of having support within a group orbit, say of the ﬁrst type, translates
to a differential equation for Ψ, which in case of orbits of the ﬁrst two types (m > 0)
is just the Klein-Gordon equation for each component of Ψ:

0, and ﬁnally the origin k = 0.

µ2 + k2

p

p

±

|

((cid:3)

m2)Ψ = 0.

−

Restricting to functions with support on one such orbit, say O, Wigner’s trick now
SL(2, C) for each k on O

consists of picking a reference point k∗ on O and a Ak ∈
such that Akk∗ = k. Using Ak he redeﬁnes the basic ﬁeld as follows:

˜ΨW (k) := D(p,q)(A−1

k ) ˜Ψ(k).

Now, ˜ΨW obeys a transformation law just like (55), the only difference being that
D(p,q)(A) gets replaced by

D(p,q)(W (k, A)) , where W (k, A) := A−1

AkAAk .

19Remarkably, before sending it to Annals of Mathematics, Wigner submitted his paper to the some-
what less prestigious American Journal of Mathematics, where it was rejected with the remark that “this
work is not interesting for mathematics”!; see Wigner (1993), Part A, Vol 1 p. 9.

(55)

(56)

(57)

(58)

29

⊂

What now looks like a complication is, in fact, a crucial simpliﬁcation, due to the
obvious fact that W (k, A)k∗ = k∗. One says that W (k, A) lies in the subgroup
SL(2, C) of elements that ﬁx (‘stabilize’) k∗. Hence one sees that an
Stab(k∗)
irreducible representations of the Poincar´e group is obtained by putting a simple pro-
jection condition on ˜ΨW , saying that it assumes values in a subspaces of V that is
irreducible under the group Stab(k∗). If translated back to the ﬁelds Ψ(x), such condi-
tions precisely become the wave equations which complement the condition like (56)
of having support on one orbit only. Regarding the groups Stab(k∗), one has

SU (2)
¯E(2)
SL(2, R)
SL(2, C)

for k∗ timelike (massive case)
for k∗ lightlike and
for k∗ spacelike (tachyonic case)
for k∗ = 0 .

= 0 (massless case)

(59)

Stab(k∗) =






The massive cases are hence classiﬁed according to the value for mass (picking
the orbit) and spin (classifying the unitary irreducible representation of the stabilizer
subgroup, here SU (2)). The massless cases are classiﬁed according to the unitary irre-
ducible representations of ¯E(2), the double cover of two-dimensional Euclidean mo-
tions. Here there are many more representations than seem physically relevant. Those
which represent the ‘translations’ in ¯E(2) non-trivially are all inﬁnite dimensional and
are usually discarded (inﬁnitely ‘internal’ degrees of freedom). The remaining repre-
sentations of the one-parameter subgroup of rotations are classiﬁed by a single number,
helicity, which is either zero or a positive-integer multiple of 1/2. The remaining cases
have so far not found applications with clear physical interpretation, though they do
appear in some versions of string theory in various guises. All non-trivial unitary irre-
ducible representations of SL(2, R) and SL(2, C) are necessarily inﬁnite dimensional
and where classiﬁed by Bargmann (1947). Hence one is left with the massive and
massless cases.

The irreducible representation-spaces are Hilbert spaces (of square integrable func-
tions on an orbit in momentum space), which in the physically relevant cases are de-
Hm,s (s = spin for m > 0 and s = helicity for m = 0). In relativistic
noted by
quantum ﬁeld theory they serve as deﬁnition of a ‘one-particle Hilbert space’, which
are used as elementary building blocks for the total Hilbert space. This is where the
dictum often attributed to Wigner comes from, that an ‘elementary particle’ is a unitary
irreducible representation of the Poincar´e group.

In relativistic quantum ﬁeld theories processes of pair creation and annihilation are
dynamically unavoidable. Hence it would be inconsistent to stick to just one-particle
spaces
Hm,s. Particles of type (m, s) should then be represented with their entire Fock
space
(60)

Mn∈N H
n either denotes the symmetrized (for 2s even) or antisymmetrized (for 2s
where
odd) n-fold tensor product. The total Hilbert space is then the tensor product over
all Fock spaces for all particle species considered. This is the arena where scattering
states in perturbative Quantum Field Theory live.20

Fm,s =

⊗n
m,s ,

⊗

20As a consequence of a theorem due to Rudolf Haag, it is known that Fock space cannot be the

30

6
4.7 The rise of supersymmetry

One issue that attracted much attention during the 1960s was, whether the observed
particle multiplets could be understood from an all embracing symmetry principle,
which would combine the Poincar´e group with the internal symmetry groups displayed
by the multiplet structures. This combination should be non-trivial, i.e. not a direct
product, for otherwise the internal symmetries would commute with the spacetime
symmetries and hence lead to multiplets which are degenerated in mass and spin; see
e.g. O’Raifeartaigh (1965). Successively a number of no-go theorems appeared, which
culminated in the now most famous theorem of Coleman & Mandula (1967). This
theorem states that those generators of symmetries of the S-matrix belonging to the
Poincar´e group necessarily commute with those belonging to internal symmetries. It
is based on a series of assumption21 involving the crucial technical condition that the
S-matrix depends analytically on standard scattering parameters. What is less visible
here is the fact that the structure of the Poincar´e group enters in a decisive way. For
our purpose here it is therefore important to remark that this result would not follow in
case of the Galilei group, as was explicitly remarked by Coleman & Mandula (1967).
One way to avoid the theorem of Coleman and Mandula is to generalize the notion
of symmetries. An early attempt was made by Golfand & Likhtman (1971), who
constructed what is now known as a Super-Lie algebra, which generalizes the concept
of Lie algebra (i.e. symmetry generators obeying certain commutation relations) to
one involving also anticommutators. In this way it became possible for the ﬁrst time
to link particles of integer and half-integer spin by a symmetry principle. It is true that
supersymmetry still maintains the degeneracy in masses and hence cannot account for
the mass differences in multiplets. But its most convincing property, the symmetry
between bosons and fermions, suggested a most elegant resolution of the notorious
ultraviolet divergences that beset Quantum Field Theory.

It is remarkable that the idea of a cancellation of bosonic and fermionic contri-
butions to the vacuum energy density occurred to Pauli. In his lectures on “Selected
Topics in Field Quantization”, delivered in 1950-51 and still in print, he posed the
question (Pauli 2000, Sect. 9):

“whether these zero-point energies [from Bosons and Fermions] can com-
pensate each other.”

He tried to answer this question by writing down the formal expression for the zero
point energy density of a quantum ﬁeld of spin j and mass mj > 0 (Pauli restricted
attention to spin 0 and spin 1/2, but the generalization is immediate):

4π2 Ej
V

−

= (

1)2j (2j + 1)

dk k2

k2 + m2 .

(61)

Z

p

representation space for the fundamental equal-time commutation relations in case of translation invariant
theories of interacting ﬁelds; see e.g. the later (reprint) edition of Streater & Wightman (1963). But it
plays a useful role for displaying scattering states and S-matrices.

21The assumptions are 1) There exists a non-trivial (i.e. 6= 1) S-matrix which depends analytically on
s (the squared center-of-mass energy) and t (the squared momentum transfer). 2) The mass spectrum of
one-particle states consists of (possibly inﬁnite) isolated points with only ﬁnite degeneracies. 3) The gen-
erators (Lie algebra) of symmetries of the S-matrix contains (as Lie-subalgebra) the Poincar´e generators.
4) Some technical assumptions concerning the possibility of writing the symmetry generators as integral
operators in momentum space.

31

Cancellation should take place for high values of k. So expanding

dk k2

k2 + m2 = K 4 + m2

j K 2

m4

j log(2K/mj ) + O(K −1)

(62)

shows that the quartic, quadratic, and logarithmic terms have to cancel in the sum over
j if the limit K

is to exist. This implies that for n = 0, 2, 4 one must have

j = 0 and

1)2j (2j + 1) log(mj) = 0 .

(63)

K

4

0

Z

p

→ ∞
1)2j (2j + 1)mn

(
−
Xj

−

(
−
Xj

Upon arriving at this result Pauli commented that

“These relations are so extensive that it is rather improbable that they are
satisﬁed in reality.”

The idea of supersymmetry is that precisely this happens, due to the one-to-one cor-
respondence between bosons and fermions. But the real world does not seem to be
as simple as that. Supersymmetry, if existent at all, must be strongly broken in the
phase we live in. So far no supersymmetric partner of any existing particle has been
detected, even though some of them (e.g.
the neutralino) are currently suggested to
be a viable candidate for the missing-mass problem in cosmology. The future ﬁndings
(or non-ﬁndings) at the LHC will probably have a decisive impact on the future of
the idea of supersymmetry, which—may it be realized in Nature or not—is certainly a
very attractive one.

4.8 More on spin-statistics

Pauli’s proof of the spin-statistics correlation is such an impressive example for the
force of abstract symmetry principles, that we wish to recall the basic lemmas on
which it rests. We start with the remark that in order to include half-integer spin ﬁelds,
we replaced the proper orthochronous Lorentz group by its double (= universal) cover
SL(2,C). We stress that everything that follows merely requires the invariance under
this group. No requirements concerning invariance under space- or time reversal are
needed.

Any ﬁnite-dimensional complex representation of SL(2,C) is labelled by an or-
dered tuple (p, q), where p and q may assume independently all non-negative integer
or half-integer values. (2p and 2q are the numbers of ‘undotted’ and ‘dotted’ spinor
indices respectively.) The tensor product of two such representations, decomposes as
follows

p+p′

q+q′

D(p,q)

D(p′,q′) =

⊗

D(r,s) ,

(64)

Mr=|p−p′|
where—and this is the important point in what follows—the sums proceed in integer
steps in r and s. To each Dp,q let us associate a ‘Pauli Index’, given by

Ms=|q−q′|

π : D(p,q)

((

1)2p , (

1)2q)

→

−

−

Z2 ×

Z2 .

∈

(65)

32

This association may be extended to sums of such D(p,q) proceeding in integer steps,
by just assigning to the whole sum the Pauli Index of its summands (which are all the
same). Then we have22

π(D(p,q)

D(p′,q′)) = π(D(p,q))

π(D(p′,q′)) .

⊗

·

(66)

According to their representations, we can associate a Pauli-Index to spinors and
tensors. For example, a tensor of odd/even degree has Pauli Index (
)/(+, +). The
partial derivative, ∂, counts as a tensor of degree one. Now consider the most gen-
eral linear (non interacting) ﬁeld equations for integer spin (here and in what follows

−

−

,

) simply stands for “sum of terms of the general form (

)”):

· · ·

(
· · ·

P

These are invariant under

∂(−,−)Ψ(+,+) =

Ψ(−,−) ,

∂(−,−)Ψ(−,−) =

X

Ψ(+,+) .

X

X

X

Θ :

Ψ(+,+)(x)
Ψ(−,−)(x)

(

Ψ(+,+)(
Ψ(−,−)(

x),
x) .

−
−

7→
7→ −

Next consider any current, that is a polynomial in the ﬁelds and their derivatives:

J(−,−) =

Ψ(−,−) + Ψ(+,+)Ψ(−,−) + ∂(−,−)Ψ(+,+)

X

+Ψ(+,+)∂(−,−)Ψ(+,+) + Ψ(−,−)∂(−,−)Ψ(−,−) +

· · ·

Then one has

(ΘJ)(x) =

J(

x) .

−

−

−

This shows: for any solution to the ﬁeld equations with charge Q for the conserved
current J (space integral over J 0) there is another solution (the Θ transformed) with
charge
Q. Hence charges of conserved currents cannot be sign-deﬁnite in any
SL(2,C) invariant theory of non-interacting integer spin ﬁelds. In the same fashion
one shows that conserved quantities, stemming from divergenceless symmetric ten-
sors of rank two, bilinear in ﬁelds, cannot be sign-deﬁnite in any SL(2, C) invariant
theory of non-interacting half-integer spin ﬁelds. In particular, the conserved quantity
in question could be energy!

An immediate but far reaching ﬁrst conclusion from these results is, that there
cannot exist a relativistic generalization of Schr¨odinger’s one- particle wave equation.
For example, for integer spin particles, one simply cannot construct a non-negative
spatial probability distributions deriving from conserved four-currents. Hence these
results for c-number ﬁelds give a very strong indication towards the necessity for sec-
ond quantization.

Upon second quantization the celebrated spin-statistics connection can now be de-
rived in a few lines.
It says that integer spin ﬁelds cannot be quantized using an-
ticommutators and half-integer spin ﬁeld cannot be quantized using commutators.

22This may be expressed by saying that the map π is a homomorphism of semigroups. One semigroup
being direct sums of irreducible representations proceeding in integer steps with operation ⊗, the other
being Z2 × Z2, which is even a group.

(67)

(68)

(69)

(70)

33

Here the already mentioned Jordan-Pauli distribution plays a crucial role23 in the
(anti)commutation relations, which ensures causality (observables localized in mu-
tually spacelike lying regions commute). Also, the crucial hypothesis of the existence
of an SL(2, C) invariant stable vacuum state is made. Pauli ends his paper by saying:

“In conclusion we wish to state, that according to our opinion the connec-
tion between spin and statistics is one of the most important applications
of the special relativity theory.”

It took almost 20 years before ﬁrst attempts were made to generalize this result to the
physically relevant case of interacting ﬁelds by L¨uders & Zumino (1958).

4.9 Existence of antimatter (CPT-theorem)

A remarkable general consequence of local relativistic quantum ﬁeld theory is the ex-
istence of antimatter, even if the theory is not invariant under charge conjugation (C).
The CPT-theorem states that the invariance with respect to the proper Lorentz group
implies the anti-unitary CPT symmetry. (P stands for space reﬂection and T for time
reﬂection.) In the framework of Lagrangian ﬁeld theory several authors (Schwinger,
L¨uders, ...) contributed to this important result, but the ﬁnal formulation was given
by Pauli (1955), assuming beside locality the normal spin-statistics connection. Soon
afterwards, R. Jost (1957) gave a general proof of the CPT-theorem in Wightman’s
framework of quantum ﬁeld theory (‘axiomatic quantum ﬁeld theory’).
In fact, he
proved a more precise result. Jost’s reﬁned form of the theorem states that the CPT
symmetry holds if and only if the following weak locality condition is satisﬁed: Con-
sider, for simplicity, a theory with a single neutral scalar ﬁeld ϕ(x), then the vacuum
expectation values of products of ﬁeld operators (Wightman distributions) satisfy

(71)

(Ω, ϕ(x1)ϕ(x2)

ϕ(xn)Ω) = (Ω, ϕ(xn)ϕ(xn−1)

ϕ(x1)Ω),

xj}
{

xj)2 > 0 for all i

· · ·
are pairwise spacelike: (xi −

· · ·
if the
= j. The elegant proof
of Jost (1957), which was the starting point for many applications, makes crucial
use of the elementary fact that the space-time reﬂection is contained in the identity-
component of the complex Lorentz group. (See also the classic books of Jost (1965),
and of Streater & Wightman (1963).) The CPT-theorem has become very important,
because the electro-weak interactions are not invariant under the separate operations
C, P and T . It has many applications, and so far no sign of an experimental violation
of the CPT-symmetry has been found. Because of this deeply rooted symmetry, the
observed matter-antimatter asymmetry in the Universe is a profound problem. In spite
of interesting attempts, no satisfactory quantitative explanation has been put forward;
for a recent review, see Dine & Kusenko (2004).

23The Jordan-Pauli distribution is (up to a constant factor) uniquely characterized by 1) being Lorentz
invariant, 2) vanishing for spacelike separations, and 3) satisfying the Klein-Gordon equation. The
(anti)commutators of the free ﬁelds must be proportional to it, or to ﬁnitely many derivatives of it of
either even or odd order exclusively.

34

6
5 On the journey to General Relativity

It is often said that whereas SR was kind of “in the air” at around 1905, GR would
be hardly conceivable without the penetrating thinking of Albert Einstein. His path to
GR meandered steeply, encountered confusing forks, and also included a big U-turn.
Einstein’s own words to describe the ambivalent feelings of the searching mind are
unforgettable (we made no attempts to translate those into English)24:

“Im Lichte bereits erlangter Erkenntnisse erscheint das gl¨ucklich Erre-
ichte fast wie selbstverst¨andlich, und jeder intelligente Student erfaßt es
ohne zu große M¨uhe. Aber das ahnungsvolle, Jahre w¨ahrende Suchen im
Dunkeln mit seiner gespannten Sehnsucht, seiner Abwechslung von Zu-
versicht und Ermattung und seinem endlichen Durchbrechen zur Klarheit,
das kennt nur, wer es selbst erlebt hat.”

As far as this review is concerned, there can clearly be no question of giving a
fair account of the complex history that led from SR to GR; see Renn et al. (2004)
for a detailed account. But what we can do here is to present some selected issues
from the physicists perspective. We start with some early attempts and then go over
to the question, how one could have discovered GR within the framework of Poincar´e
invariant ﬁeld theories.

5.1 Early attempts

Almost immediately after the formulation of SR Einstein started thinking about how
to ﬁt Newtonian gravity within that framework. There seem to be no notes left over
which would document the details of his early attempts, but his later recollections
make it quite easy to more or less guess the essential steps:

“The simplest thing was, of course, to retain the Laplacian scalar poten-
tial of gravity, and to complete the Poisson equation in an obvious way by
a term differentiated with respect to time in such a way, that compatibility
with special relativity was achieved.”

Now, Poisson’s equation reads

∆φ = 4πG ρ

(cid:3) = ∆

∂2
c2∂t2 ,

and Einstein obviously refers to the replacement ∆φ

(cid:3)φ, where

−→

−
which makes the left-hand side of Poisson’s equation a Lorentz-scalar. But then the
matter source term ρ on the right hand side of (72) should also be turned into a scalar,
which is neither true for the density of mass nor the density of rest-mass (rest-mass is
a scalar, but its density is not). Later von Laue pointed out to Einstein that the trace
T = T µ
µ of the energy-momentum tensor was a natural candidate (cf. Einstein &
Grossmann 1914,

7), thus leading to25

§

(cid:3)φ =

−

κT , where κ = 4πG
c2

.

24This and the following 3 translated quotations are taken from the german text (Einstein, 1933)
25 Recall that T 0

0 = −T00 is minus the energy density, due to our convention ηµν = diag(−, +, +, +).

(72)

(73)

(74)

35

The next step would be to ﬁnd the equations of motion for the world line z(τ ) of a test
particle (τ is the proper time and an overdot refers to differentiation with respect to τ ).
The obvious ﬁrst guess,

¨zµ =

∂µφ ,

−
is clearly impossible, since it implies the overly restrictive integrability condition
˙zµ∂µφ = 0. However, this can be readily cured by replacing the right hand side of
(75) with its projection orthogonal to ˙z:

¨zµ =

ηµν

˙zµ ˙zν/c2

∂νφ .

−

−

(cid:0)

(cid:1)

This results in three consistent equations of motion for the three spatial velocity com-
ponents (the fourth component is, as always, determined by ˙zµ ˙zµ =

c2).

It is instructive to relate the naive theory based on (74) and (76) to a more sys-
tematic treatment, based on modern methods using the action principle. Since the
physical system under consideration consists of the gravitational ﬁeld Φ (its relation to
the previously used φ will become clear soon) and matter. Hence we have three basic
contributions to the total action,

−

Stot = Sﬁeld + Smatter + Sint ,

where Sﬁeld is the action of the free gravitational ﬁeld and Sint that of the interaction
between the gravitational ﬁeld and matter. If we assume our Φ to satisfy equation (74),
their sum is given by26

1
Sﬁeld + Sint = −
κc3

d4x

1

2 ∂µΦ∂µΦ

κΦT

.

−

Z

(cid:0)

(cid:1)

Smatter is the action for the matter system which we only specify insofar, as we assume
that the matter consists of a point particle of rest-mass m0 and the ‘rest’ that remains
unspeciﬁed. Then Smatter = Sparticle + Sr.o.m (r.o.m = ‘rest of matter’) where

Sparticle =

m0c2

−

Z

dτ .

Here τ = 1
c
energy-momentum tensor of the particle is given by

−

ηµνdzµdzν is the eigentime along the wordline of the particle. The

p

T µν (x) = m0c

dτ ˙zµ(τ ) ˙zν (τ ) δ(4)(x

z(τ )) ,

−

Z

so that the particle’s contribution to the interaction term in (78) is

Sint-particle =

m0

dτ Φ(z(τ )) .

−

Z
26Note that Φ has the physical dimension of a squared velocity, κ that of length-over-mass. The
prefactor 1/κc3 gives (78) the physical dimension of an action. The overall signs are chosen according
to the general scheme for Lagrangians: kinetic minus potential energy (recall footnote 25).

(75)

(76)

(77)

(78)

(79)

(80)

(81)

36

Hence the total action can be written in the following form:

Stot =

m0c2

dτ

1 + Φ(z(τ ))/c2

−

Z

1
κc3
−
Z
+ Sr.o.m .

(cid:0)

(cid:0)

d4x

1

2 ∂µΦ∂µΦ

(cid:1)
κΦTr.o.m

−

(cid:1)

(82)

We can now relate this theory to the previous one. Recall that, by construction, the
ﬁeld equation for Φ that follows from (82) is just (74) with φ being replaced by Φ. But
the analogous statement is not true for the equation of motion for the point particle.
Indeed, varying (82) with respect to z(τ ) one gets (76), where

φ = c2 ln(1 + Φ/c2) .

(83)

~
∇

Because of (76) it is more natural to call φ the gravitational potential. For example,
φ is the force on a unit test-mass. Summing up we may then say that a systematic
−
treatment retains (76) but replaces (74) with the same equation in terms of Φ, whose
relation to φ is (83). In linear approximation φ = Φ and we do get back to the naive
theory.

Note that the action for the point particle with interaction may be interpreted in
m :=
by the interaction with the gravitational ﬁeld, thereby becoming spacetime

various ways. One is to say that the inertial mass is changed according to m0 →
m0 eφ/c2
dependent. This was in fact one of Einstein’s concerns:

“The law of motion of the mass point in a gravitational ﬁeld had also to
be adapted to the special theory of relativity. The path was not so unmis-
takably marked out here, since the inert mass of a body might depend on
the gravitational potential. In fact, this was to be expected on account of
the principle of the inertia of energy.”

Another interpretation is that the particle moves inertially, though not in the Minkowski
ηµν. This law, which is in-
metric but a conformally rescaled metric: ηµν →
dependent of the particle’s rest mass, gives a strong hint that “geometrization” is a
perfect scheme to achieve a universal coupling of gravity to matter, as discussed later
by Einstein & Fokker (1914).

e2φ/c2

However, this does not mean that such a theory implies the equivalence principle.
To see this, assume the gravitational ﬁeld is static in some frame. Then the particle’s
equation of motion is equivalent to the following 3-vector equation (an overdot now
signiﬁes the derivative with respect to coordinate time t)

¨~z =

1

˙~z
− |

2/c2
|

φ,

~
∇

−

(cid:0)

(cid:1)

(84)

which is almost like the Newtonian equation, were it not for the additional bracket-
term on the right hand side, which diminishes the vertical acceleration at high particle
energies. Although this is a quadratic effect in v/c, Einstein considered this to be a
very serious failure of the scalar theory of gravitation, which put him off that track. He
wrote:

37

“These investigations, however, led to a result which raised my strong
suspicion. According to classical mechanics, the vertical acceleration of
a body in the vertical gravitational ﬁeld is independent of the horizontal
component of its velocity. Hence in such a gravitational ﬁeld the vertical
acceleration of a mechanical system or of its center of gravity comes out
independently of its internal kinetic energy. But in the theory I advanced,
the acceleration of a falling body was not independent of its horizontal
velocity or the internal energy of the system. This did not ﬁt with the old
experimental fact that all bodies have the same acceleration in a gravita-
tional ﬁeld”

The dependence of the vertical acceleration upon the horizontal center-of-mass veloc-
ity is clearly expressed by (84). However, Einstein’s additional claim that there is also
a similar dependence upon the internal energy does not survive closer scrutiny. One
might think at ﬁrst that (84) also predicts that e.g. the gravitational acceleration of a
box ﬁlled with gas molecules accelerates less if heated up, due to the larger velocities
of the gas molecules. But this arguments neglects the box walls which gain in stress
due to the raising gas pressure, and according to (74) more stress means less weight.
In fact, a general argument due to von Laue shows that these effects precisely cancel.
There is a remarkable last paragraph in Einstein’s part of the famous “Entwurf”
paper, written jointly with M. Grossmann, entitled: “Can gravity be described by a
scalar?” (Einstein & Grossmann 1914,
7). Via an apparently simple Gedanken ex-
periment Einstein somewhat implicitly claims to show that any scalar theory of gravity,
in which the trace of the energy-momentum tensor acts as source, necessarily violates
energy conservation. For the modern ﬁeld theorist this is a surprising statement in-
deed, for any Poincar´e invariant theory has, in particular, a conserved Noether charge
connected with the symmetry of time-translations. Even though this general argument
was not available to Einstein (Noether’s seminal paper appeared in 1918), it neverthe-
less shows that Einstein’s argument cannot be taken at face value. Closer inspection
shows that in theories like that described by (82) the conserved energy contains a
contribution in which the local stresses within a body couple to the local gravitational
potential. It seems that Einstein’s argument does not consistently take this contribution
into account. More on this will appear elswhere (Giulini, 2005c).

§

In any case, arguments of various kinds seem to have triggered a conceptual phase
transition in Einstein’s thinking, who now adopted the strict equivalence principle
rather than Lorentz invariance as the major guiding principle. During his time in
Prague, this led him to consider non-linear modiﬁcations of (72), like the following:

∆φ = κφ

ρ +

 

(~
φ)2
∇
2κ φ2

,

!

(85)

where φ is now required to approach the value 1 rather than 0 at large distances from
the source. This equation may be derived from the requirement that the self-energy of
the gravitational ﬁeld, as predicted from the sought-for equation, fully acts as source
in addition to the matter energy density in a self consistent fashion (see Giulini 1997).
This equation can, in fact, be interpreted as 00-component of Einstein’s equation for
static metrics where only g00 assumes a non Minkowskian value. This relates to the

38

interpretation Einstein adopted for Φ when writing down (85) in 1912, namely as spa-
tially dependent velocity of light. This put him in opposition to other contemporary re-
searchers, like Max Abraham, Gustav Mie, and Gunnar Nordstrøm, who still searched
for a special relativistic theory of gravity.

5.2 The Poincar´e invariant approach

What theory of gravitation would have ﬁnally emerged from the attempts of Abraham,
Nordstrøm, and Mie? What would have happened if Einstein had left physics in, say,
1912? Would have GR never come into being?

We don’t think so, but presumably it would have been discovered much later in
a non-geometrical way that is often called the “ﬂat ﬁeld approach to gravitation”. In
1939 Fierz & Pauli discussed, as an example of their work on higher spin equations,
the ﬁeld equation for a free massless spin-2 ﬁeld. These authors were well aware of
the difﬁculties that arise when a spin-2 ﬁeld is coupled to matter. After this initial step,
the idea that GR can be formulated as a consistent, highly non-linear spin-2 theory in
ﬂat spacetime was repeatedly studied. The ﬁrst published work in this direction seems
to be that by S. Gupta (1954,1957) and R. Kraichnan (1955,1956). Fierz too had this
idea always in his mind, which much later led to the thesis work of W. Wyss (1965).
Other early attempts were made by W. Thirring, who was advocating this approach
with different emphasis in talks and some publications (e.g. Thirring 1961). Fortu-
nately, Feynman’s Caltech lectures on gravitation, also emphasizing the ﬁeld theoretic
approach, have become available in book form (Feynman 1995). S. Weinberg too had
related papers (Weinberg 1964a and 1964b) in which he made an attempt to develop a
quantum theory of a self-interacting spin-2 ﬁeld on ﬂat spacetime. (We now know that
such theories are unrenormalizable, also for supersymmetric extensions.) The theme
was taken up later by S. Deser (1970), R. Wald (1996), and others. Quite recently it
was shown that one cannot have several, mutually interacting spin-2 ﬁelds (Boulanger
et al. 2001). This is important for string theory, where one identiﬁes gravity with the
occurring massless spin-2 ﬁeld.

As already discussed, the simplest possibility of gravitational theory in ﬂat space-
time is that of a scalar ﬁeld. For example, the theory described by (82) was essen-
tially that of Nordstrøm’s (his “ﬁrst” theory). Since this theory predicts no global light
deﬂection (compare Ehlers & Rindler 1997), Einstein urged in 1913 astronomers to
measure the light deﬂection during the solar eclipse in the coming year in the Crimea.
Moreover, it predicts -1/6 the Einsteinian value for the perihelion advance, in contrast
to observation.

A spin-1 theory is also not viable. Such a theory would essentially be given by
Maxwell’s equations, with one appropriate sign change in order to make like charges
(masses) attract rather than repel. But this leads to a sign change in the expression
for the ﬁeld’s energy, which is now unbounded from below, thereby giving way to
potential instabilities. The perihelion advance it predicts is 1/6 the Einsteinian value,
again in contrast to observation.

One is thus led to a spin-2 theory. If one tries the simplest version by coupling a
spin-2 ﬁeld hµν linearly to the energy-momentum tensor of matter, the resulting ﬁeld
equation is unphysical: Because the free spin-2 theory has a gauge symmetry, the ﬁeld
equation implies that ∂ν T µν = 0, which is unacceptable. For instance, the motion of a

39

ﬂuid would then not be affected by the gravitational ﬁeld. Clearly, one has to include
back-reactions on matter by which the theory becomes non-linear. From the works
cited above it follows that there is only one consistent way to achieve this. Thereby
the gauge group of the linear theory is extended to the full diffeomorphism group,
and the ﬁeld equations become equivalent to Einstein’s equations for a Lorentz metric
determined by the spin-2 ﬁeld hµν .

At this point one can re-interpret the theory geometrically. Thereby the ﬂat metric
disappears completely and one arrives in a pedestrian way at GR (cf. Mittelstaedt 1970
In summary we can say this: The consequent development of the
and references).
theory shows that it is possible to eliminate the ﬂat Minkowski metric, leading to a
description in terms of a curved metric which has a direct physical meaning. The
originally postulated Lorentz invariance turns out to be physically meaningless and
plays no useful role. The ﬂat Minkowski spacetime becomes a kind of unobservable
ether. The conclusion is inevitable that spacetime is a Lorentzian manifold, whereby
the metric is a dynamical ﬁeld, subjected to the ﬁeld equations of Einstein.

6 Einstein’s theory of spacetime and gravity

6.1 General Remarks

After some detours, which we cannot describe here, Einstein arrived at the ﬁnal form
of GR in November 1915.
It is a geometric ﬁeld-theory par excellence. No non-
dynamical background structures exist, and its equations are invariant under the largest
group possible: the group of spacetime diffeomorphisms. However, elements of this
group do not play the rˆole of symmetries, as the Lorentz transformations did in SR,
but rather as gauge transformations. As stressed before, this means that any two ﬁeld
conﬁgurations connected by a diffeomorphism are physically indistinguishable and
hence physically identical.

The fundamental ﬁeld is a Lorentzian (pseudo Riemannian) metric gµν on a four-
dimensional manifold M , obeying a system of ten non-linear (but quasi-linear) differ-
ential equations (G is again Newton’s constant):

Gµν = 8πG

c4 Tµν .

(86)

Here we adopted the signature convention ‘mostly plus’, i.e. (
, +, +, +), and ne-
glected a possible cosmological term which we will introduce later. The ‘Einstein
Tensor’, Gµν , is a second order differential expression in the metric components gµν
and directly relates to its curvature27. Tµν is the stress-energy tensor of matter, which
generally also involves gµν .

−

Given a solution gµν , a spinless test particle moves on geodesics in that metric,
which is therefore best compared to the gravitational potential. The idea of a grav-
itational ﬁeld is then played by the connection Γλ
µν , which appears in the geodesic
equation:

¨xλ + Γλ

µν ˙xµ ˙xν = 0 ,

(87)

27Taking the trace of the Riemannian curvature Tensor Rα

µβν in αβ one gets the Ricci tensor Rµν .
Contracting the Ricci tensor with gµν one obtains the Ricci scalar R. The Einstein tensor is now deﬁned
by Gµν := Rµν − 1

2 gµν R.

40

and which is determined by gµν and its ﬁrst derivatives. The conceptual difference
to other ‘ﬁelds’ is that the connection is not a tensor ﬁeld on spacetime. This can be
seen as a consequence of the equivalence principle, according to which Γλ
µν vanishes
locally in a freely falling frame.

Another difference to other ﬁelds is that gravity is not a ‘force’ in the Newtonian
sense. In Newtonian physics, a force is the cause for deviations from inertial motion.
But (87) deﬁnes inertial motion and the ‘gravitational ﬁeld’, Γλ
µν is a structural pre-
requisite for such a deﬁnition. Again this is a consequence of unifying inertia and
gravity.

6.2 Some current theoretical problems of GR

The heart of GR are Einstein’s equations (86), and much research over the last 50 years
went into their mathematical analysis. For example, one of the main issues to be ad-
dressed was, whether Einstein’s equations admit a well posed initial-value formulation
(Cauchy Problem), as many physical questions are naturally addressed that way. This
turned out to be indeed the case, albeit in a slightly more complicated fashion due to
general diffeomorphism invariance. Roughly speaking, four of the ten components of
(86) are mere restrictions on the initial data, so-called “constraints”, and the remain-
ing six components are evolution equations. This means that given initial data for gµν
which satisfy the constraints, Einstein’s equations leave undetermined the evolution
of four out of the ten components of gµν . However, this does not reﬂect any lack of
physical predictability, but merely the existence of gauge redundancies corresponding
to arbitrary point transformations which just account for the four arbitrary functions.
Such a situation occurs in any gauge theory. A pedagogical outline is e.g. given in
(Giulini, 2003).

One of the most prominent features of Einstein’s equations lies in their non-
linearity. This means that solutions evolving from regular initial data may develop
singularities in ﬁnite time. Hence not much is known about global (in time) existence
of solutions. Given a singularity-free solution (spacetime) that is generated by some
initial data, it is natural to ask whether sufﬁciently nearby (in a suitable sense) data
still evolve without the formation of singularities28. In this case the original solution
is called stable.
Instabilities are well known from hydrodynamics, e.g. due to the
formation of shock waves. One may likewise expect gravitating systems to be generi-
cally unstable due to gravitational shock-waves and gravitational collapse. One might
therefore consider it a surprise (to be welcomed) that stability results do exist. Most
importantly, in a veritable tour de force Christodoulou & Klainerman (1993) were able
to prove the stability of Minkowski space. Before that, Friedrich (1986) had already
proven stability of de Sitter space (a solution to the matter-free Einstein equations with
positive cosmological constant). A few more, rather scattered stability results exist
concerning other cosmological models.

The formation of singularities is, to a certain extent, generic in GR. Singularities
might give rise to a true breakdown of predictability if the singularity is not causally
disconnected from the outside world (i.e. from observers not falling into the singu-
larity) by the formation of an event horizon. The “cosmic censorship hypothesis”

28One says that the evolution has no singularities, if, technically speaking, the maximal Cauchy devel-

opment is geodesically complete.

41

expresses the expectation that under certain reasonable conditions such a breakdown
of predictability does not occur, though this in not yet proven. Part of the problem is
that it is difﬁcult to formalize. Already the notion of singularity is by far not straight-
forward. Often the existence of singularities is proven by way of contradiction. This
does not give any insight into their formation and structure.

Analytical problems concerning the large-scale behaviour of gravitational ﬁelds
are currently much investigated; see e.g. Chru´sciel & Friedrich (2004). Speciﬁc results
on black-holes will be brieﬂy reviewed in Sect. 6.5.

Directly connected with the currently ongoing experimental search for gravita-
tional waves are the analytical problems concerning the theoretical understanding of
their generation. Good candidates for such generation processes are the close encoun-
ters and mergers of neutron stars or black holes. Analytically speaking the case of
black holes is simpler, for it can be described by the matter-free Einstein equations.
But it still is a genuine ﬁeld theoretic problem, as point objects do not exist in GR
(a feature that to some extent is mimicked by (85); see Giulini (2003)). There is no
known analytical solution to the two-body problem so that combining reﬁned analyt-
ical approximation schemes and numerical techniques becomes essential for evolving
initial data. But what are appropriate initial data for two close black holes, from which
we can reliably calculate (numerically) the outﬂux of gravitational waves produced in
the merging process? There are two problems here: First, numerical methods integrate
certain ﬁeld components in the near zone, whereas the mathematical identiﬁcation of
gravitational radiation is done in the far zone (on “future null-inﬁnity”, should it ex-
ist). No unambiguous analytical procedure relating the former to the latter (i.e. in form
of a ﬂux-theorem) has been given. But, strictly speaking, this would be necessary in
order to relate the integration in the near zone to an actual energy loss of the system.
Secondly, standard data for two black holes, even the most simple ones describing two
non-rotating holes momentarily at rest, seem to be already ﬁlled with gravitational ra-
diation up to spatial inﬁnity (Valiente-Kroon 2003). Hence it seems that one either
needs to distinguish between radiation already contained in the data and radiation pro-
duced by the merger, which seems elusive, or to modify data outside the two-hole re-
gion, so as to not contain radiation anymore. Only recently was it understood (Corvino
2000) that initial data can, in fact, be modiﬁed locally, which is not obvious.29 But so
far this existence result has not been backed up by sufﬁciently concrete methods that
could be employed to change initial data in a physically controllable way.

For other aspects of current activities in mathematical relativity, see Frauendiener

et al. (2005).

6.3 Some aspects of the current experimental situation

In the last years we have seen tremendous developments in experimental and obser-
vational gravity. These range from weak-ﬁeld test using planets or satellites in earth-
bound or solar-system orbits, to very impressive strong-ﬁeld tests on Galactic binary-
systems with compact objects, like neutron stars. We will have more to say about the

29It is not obvious because the data have to keep satisfying the constraints, which form an underdeter-
mined elliptic system of differential equations. Note that solutions to strictly elliptic systems generally
cannot be modiﬁed locally, since they are uniquely determined by the boundary conditions.

42

latter systems in Sec. 6.5. Here we make some comments on the classic weak ﬁeld
tests.

In Section 4.4 we roughly described how qualitative statements about a range of
aspects of a theory can be made by parameterizing possible deviations and extracting
upper bounds for their values from observations. There are various methods to do this
in GR, which have been developped to a high degree of sophistication. One of them is
the so-called “Parameterized Post-Newtonian” (PPN) formalism, where one considers
ﬁnite-parameter families of metrics, gµν , all of which are within a post Newtonian ap-
proximation scheme. Each of the parameters may be thought of as probing a speciﬁc
deviation from the prediction made by GR. Some correspond to so-called “preferred
frame” and “preferred location” effects, others parameterize possible violations of con-
servation of total momentum. Let us here discard all those. Then two parameters β
and γ remain (the so-called “Eddington-Robertson parameters”).

Let us consider the case of a static, spherically symmetric metric:

ds2 = g00(r) c2 dt2 + gab(r) dxa dxb .

Its parameterized form contains γ and β which measure spatial curvature and “non
linearity”30 respectively:

g00(r) =
gab(r) =

1

2(m/r) + 2β(m/r)2 + O([m/r]3)

,

−

−
1 + 2γ(m/r) + O([m/r]2)
(cid:2)

δab .

(cid:3)

(cid:2)

Here m = GM/c2, where M is the central mass, G Newton’s constant, and c the
In GR (without
velocity of light. The physical dimension of m is that of length.
cosmological constant), the unique static and spherically symmetric solution is that of
Schwarzschild’s, which corresponds to the values γ = β = 1.

(cid:3)

Typical experiments testing the value of γ involve the deﬂection of light’s direction

of travel. For (89) the deﬂection angle comes out to be

∆θ = 1

2 (1 + γ)

4m
d

,

·

GR value

where d is the impact parameter (distance of closest approach). Using the VLBI (very
long baseline interferometry) the measured deﬂections of various astronomical sources
led to a the bound

10−4.

< 2

|{z}

More accurate tests involve the delay in integrated time of propagation, when a
signal travels between two sites at distances r1 and r2 from the central body, with
closest approach d to the body (so-called Shapiro time delay). For a round trip (going
back and forth) the delay is given by:

γ
|

1
|

−

·

∆T = 1

2 (1 + γ)

4m
c ·

·

ln

4r1r2/d2

.

(cid:0)

GR value

(cid:1)

is directly observed is not

|
What
its variation in
observation-time t, as the line of sight (and hence d) comes closer to the central body

this one-way delay time, but

{z

}

30Being “non linear” depends on the coordinates used, i.e. is a gauge dependent statement.

43

(88)

(89)

(90)

(91)

(the sun). Today the best available data where obtained (in June-July 2002) using the
Cassini spacecraft on its ﬂight to Saturn. Stable and coherent two-way radio signals
were exchanged and fractional frequency shifts observed. This led to (Bertotti et al.
2003):

γ
|

1
|

−

< 4.4

10−5 .

·

A typical observable effect which is sensitive to the value of β is the “anomalous”
advance, or shift, of the periastron. The advance ∆ϕ per revolution, calculated for the
metric (89), is given by

(92)

(93)

∆ϕ = 1

3 (2γ

β + 2)

−

6πm

,

ε2)

·

a(1

−
GR value

|

{z

}

where a is the radius of the semi-major axis and ε the eccentricity. Applied to solar
system planets (in which case one speaks of perihelion), this shift is most pronounced
for the innermost planet, Mercury, and quite accurately known (corresponding to a
localization of Mercury up to 300 meters using radar reﬂection techniques). In order to
compare observations with (93) one has to take into account other effects contributing
to the perihelion shift. Those originating from perturbations of other planets31 have
It was Einstein’s very ﬁrst triumph regarding GR
been known in the 19th century.
to show that it accounts for precisely the difference (about 8 percent) that remained
between the observed value and that due to planetary perturbations.

However, Einstein did not take into account a possible contribution from the sun’s
quadrupole moment. Doing this shows that it may contribute signiﬁcantly if the
quadrupole moment, which is measured by a dimensionless number J2, was on the
upper end of the interval reckoned plausible for our sun, which is roughly given by
10−7 < J2 < 10−5. Ironically, this stirred up a considerable controversy during the
1960s and 70s, as to whether the perihelion shift should be considered as conﬁrmation,
or rather as refutation of GR! Essentially the problem in the traditional approach is that
estimations of J2 are done by relating the sun’s oblateness to its surface angular veloc-
ity, which is a sun-model dependent procedure. In particular, it involves assumptions
on its interior state of differential rotation. Here the modern results now converge to a
10−7 (e.g. Lydon & Soﬁa 1996). This is conﬁrmed by
‘small’ value of J2 of about 2
new methods that use normal modes of solar oscillations (helioseismology) in order to
get information about the internal structure of the sun (e.g. Roxburgh 2001). See also
Pireaux et al. (2003) for a comprehensive discussion and many references.

·

The latter (small) value for J2 implies that the contribution of the sun’s quadrupole
moment to the perihelion shift is less than 10−3 times the relativistic effect. Granted
, yield
this, the radar observations on Mercury, together with the bound (92) on
1
|
the following bound for the parameter β:

γ
|

−

β
|

1
|

−

< 3

10−3 .

·

(94)

Let us mention that if the orbiting mass is not a test body, but comparable in magnitude
to m, then (93) still applies if m is now taken to be the sum, m1 + m2, of the two
31To these perturbations, Venus, Jupiter, and Earth make the largest contributions with 52, 29, and 17

percent respectively.

44

masses.
below.

In this form (93) is used in case of the binary pulsar systems mentioned

Other modern tests are sensitive to the intrinsic angular momentum (spin) of the
central body. In that case the static metric (88) needs to be generalized to a stationary
one (for constant angular momentum), which differs from (88-89) by an off-diagonal
contribution. In the simpliﬁed version of the PPN formalism displayed here, it takes
the form

g0a(r) = 1

2 (1 + γ)

2 (~x

~s)a

,

×
r3

·

(95)

where ~s = ~SG/c3, ~S being the (constant) spin vector. The physical dimension of ~s is
that of length-squared. It is interesting to note that at this level of approximation and
under the simpliﬁcations assumed here, no new PPN parameter enters.32

A technologically very daring experiment currently running is Gravity-Probe B,
which consists of an earthbound satellite in a polar33 orbit approximately 640 km
above ground. The satellite contains four magnetically suspended gyros, whose pre-
cession (against a Quasar background) induced by the earth’s rotation is to be mea-
sured.

The term (95) causes local inertial frames (here realized by drag-free suspended
gyros) to rotate against the asymptotic ones at large radii (here realized by the quasar
background) at an angular frequency of (in leading order)

~Ωgyro(~x) = 1

2 (γ + 1)

~s

,

−

c

·

·

3~n(~n

~s)

·
r3
GR value

(96)

|

{z

}

where ~n = ~x/r. This is called the Lense-Thirring precession. In the present exam-
ple this amounts to approximately 10−10~ω, where ~ω is the earth’s angular velocity.
This amounts to the tiny amount of 47 milliarcseconds per year! The Gravity-Probe-B
experiment plans to verify this prediction of GR at the one-percent level.34 Its con-
ceptual importance lies in a direct veriﬁcation of the gravitational effects caused by
mass-currents, sometimes referred to as “dragging effects”. That part of the gravita-
tional ﬁeld which is generated by mass-currents is often called the “gravitomagnetic
ﬁeld”. It is needed for theoretical consistency, just like the magnetic ﬁeld is needed in
electrodynamics; this is lucidly discussed by Nordtvedt (1988).

Another dragging effect of spinning central bodies is the precession of orbital
planes around it. This has been recently veriﬁed on the earthbound system of two

32This is here due to the fact that we excluded preferred frame and preferred location effects, as well
as violations to total momentum conservation. Then the “electric” and “magnetic” parts of the linearized
gravitational ﬁeld are related by local Lorentz invariance. This is just like in electrodynamics, where
the magnetic ﬁeld produced by a moving charge can be obtained from the Coulomb ﬁeld of a charge at
rest by a Lorentz transformation. In particular, like in electrodynamics, the split between ‘electric’ and
‘magnetic’ parts of the gravitational ﬁeld is observer dependent.

33The orbit is chosen polar in order to avoid unwanted contributions to the measured effect from the

earth’s quadrupole moment.

34Another prediction of GR is the geodetic (or de Sitter-) precession, which is a consequence of spatial
curvature and hence directly sensitive to γ. In the present situation it is about 160 times larger than the
Lense-Thirring precession. If completed successfully, Gravity-Probe-B should therefore measure γ with
−5, thereby slightly improving on accuracy reached by Cassini.
an accuracy of 3 · 10

45

LAGEOS satellites (which primarily serve a different purpose), though only at the
10% level; see Ciufolini & Pavlis (2004).

More accurate though indirect measurements of dragging effects exist for neutron-
star binary systems. These are due to spin-orbit and, much more pronounced, orbit-
orbit couplings. A spinning companion gives a contribution to the periastron shift of
(we now drop the term 1

2 (1 + γ))

~Ωperiastron(~x) =

2c

·

−

~s)

3~n(~n
·
a3(1
−

~s
−
ε2)

.

(97)

Here a is the semi-major axis, ε the orbital eccentricity. This means that if spin and
orbital angular momentum include an acute angle, the periastron shift due to spin will
be directed oppositely to that coming from (93) (where m now corresponds to the sum
of masses). In case of binary pulsars spin-orbit effects where calculated by Damour &
Sch¨afer (1988).

In a binary system with comparable masses, both components also move with com-
parable velocities in the centre-of-mass frame. This results in gravitomagnetic ﬁelds
from each components, that contribute to their mutual periastron advance (orbit-orbit
coupling). This effect is generally much bigger than that due to spin. For example,
the Hulse-Taylor pulsar shows a total periastron advance of 4.2◦ per year, which is the
6◦ per year resulting
sum of about 10◦ per year from the gravitoelectric and about
from the dragging due to the orbital motion of each companion (in the centre-of-mass
frame); see Nordtvedt (1988).

−

6.4 Early history of gauge and Kaluza-Klein theories

The history of gauge theories begins with GR, which can be regarded as a non-Abelian
gauge theory of a special type. To a large extent the other gauge theories emerged,
in a slow and complicated process, gradually from GR. Their common geometrical
structure – best expressed in terms of connections of ﬁber bundles – is now widely
recognized.

Weyl’s papers on the gauge principle

It all began with H. Weyl (1918) who made the ﬁrst attempt to extend GR in order to
describe gravitation and electromagnetism within a unifying geometrical framework.
This brilliant proposal contains the germs of all mathematical aspects of non-Abelian
gauge theory. The word ‘gauge’ (german: ‘Eich-’) transformation appeared for the
ﬁrst time in this paper, but in the everyday meaning of change of length or change of
calibration.

Einstein admired Weyl’s theory as “a coup of genius of the ﬁrst rate”, but imme-
diately realized that it was physically untenable. After a long discussion Weyl ﬁnally
admitted that his attempt was a failure as a physical theory.
(For a discussion, see
Straumann 1987.) It paved, however, the way for the correct understanding of gauge
invariance. Weyl himself reinterpreted his original theory after the advent of quantum
theory in a grand paper (Weyl 1929). Weyl’s reinterpretation of his earlier specula-
tive proposal had actually been suggested before by London (1927). Fock (1926),

46

Klein (1926), and others arrived at the principle of gauge invariance in the frame-
work of wave mechanics along a completely different line. It was, however, Weyl who
emphasized the role of gauge invariance as a constructive principle from which elec-
tromagnetism can be derived. This point of view became very fruitful for our present
understanding of fundamental interactions.

Weyl’s papers have repeatedly been discussed in detail (see O’Raifeartaigh and
Straumann 2000). One of the main reasons for Weyl’s reinterpretation in 1928 is con-
nected to his incorporation of Dirac’s theory into GR, that was an important contri-
bution by itself. This had to do with Einstein’s recent uniﬁed theory, which invoked
a distant parallelism with torsion. Wigner (1929) and others had noticed a connec-
tion between this theory and the spin theory of the electron. Weyl did not like this and
wanted to dispense with teleparallelism. This he achieved with the help of local tetrads
(Vierbeine), a technique that had been much used by E. Cartan. With his general rela-
tivistic formulation of spinor theory as a preparation, the ﬁnal section of Weyl’s paper
begins with:

We come now to the critical part of the theory. In my opinion the origin
and necessity for the electromagnetic ﬁelds is the following. The compo-
nents ψ1, ψ2 [of the two-component spinor ﬁeld] are, in fact, not uniquely
determined by the tetrad but only to the extent that they can still be mul-
tiplied by an arbitrary “gauge factor” eiλ. The transformation of the ψ
induced by a rotation of the tetrad is determined only up to such a fac-
tor. In SR one must regard this gauge factor as a constant because we
have only a single point-independent tetrad. Not so in GR; every point
has its own tetrad and hence its own arbitrary gauge-factor; because by
the removal of the rigid connection between tetrads at different points the
gauge-factor becomes an arbitrary function of position.”

In this manner Weyl arrives at the gauge principle in its modern form and emphasizes
“from the arbitrariness of the gauge factor in ψ appears the necessity to introduce the
electromagnetic potential.”

The early work of Kaluza and Klein

Early in 1919 Einstein received a paper by Theodor Kaluza, a young mathematician
(Privatdozent) and consummate linguist in K¨onigsberg. Inspired by the work of Weyl
one year earlier, he proposed another geometrical uniﬁcation of gravitation and elec-
tromagnetism by extending spacetime to a ﬁve-dimensional pseudo-Riemannian man-
ifold. Einstein reacted very positively. On 21 April 1919 he writes (CPAE, Vol. 9,
Doc. 26): “The idea of achieving [a uniﬁed theory] by means of a ﬁve-dimensional
cylinder world never dawned on me (...). At ﬁrst glance I like your idea enormously.”
A few weeks later he adds (CPAE, Vol. 9, Doc. 30): “the formal unity of your theory
is startling.” From the fourth of the ﬁve letters of Einstein to Kaluza (CPAE, Vol. 9,
Doc. 40), it is understandable why Einstein delayed the publication of Kaluza’s work
for almost two years. This contains indeed a serious criticism. Einstein is very worried
about an apparently huge inﬂuence of the scalar ﬁeld on the electron in the dimen-
sional reduction of the ﬁve-dimensional geodesic equation, and expresses the hope that
Kaluza would ﬁnd a way out. But the “serious difﬁculty” (“ernsthafte Schwierigkeit”)

47

remained, and is mentioned in the published version (Kaluza,1921) as an unsolved
problem, having been pointed out by Einstein.

A few years later, shortly after the discovery of the Schr¨odinger equation, Oskar
Klein improved and extended Kaluza’s treatment, and revealed an interesting geo-
metrical interpretation of gauge transformations (Klein 1926a, 1926b). Applying the
formalism of quantum mechanics to the ﬁve-dimensional geodesic, and assuming pe-
riodicity in the extra dimension, he also suggested that “the atomicity of the electric
charge may be interpreted as a quantum law”. The extension of the extra dimension
turned out to be comparable to the Planck length. This is commented by Klein as
follows:

The small value of this length together with the periodicity of the ﬁfth di-
mension may perhaps be taken as a support of the theory of Kaluza in the
sense that they may explain the non-appearance of the ﬁfth dimension in
ordinary experiments as the result of averaging over the ﬁfth dimension.”

For further discussion of this early work on higher dimensional uniﬁcation, see e.g.
O’Raifeartaigh and Straumann (2000).

GR also played a crucial role in Pauli’s discovery of non-Abelian gauge theories.
(See Pauli’s letters to Pais and Yang in Pauli 1985-99, Vol. 4). He arrived at all basic
equations through dimensional reduction of a generalization of Kaluza-Klein theory, in
which the internal space becomes a two-sphere. (For a description in modern language,
see O’Raifeartaigh and Straumann 2000).

In contrast, in the work of Yang and Mills (1954) GR played no role. In an inter-

view Yang said on this in 1991:

“It happened that one semester [around 1970] I was teaching GR, and I
noticed that the formula in gauge theory for the ﬁeld strength and the for-
mula in Riemannian geometry for the Riemann tensor are not just similar
– they are, in fact, the same if one makes the right identiﬁcation of sym-
bols! It is hard to describe the thrill I felt at understanding this point.”

The developments after 1958 consisted in the gradual recognition that—contrary to
phenomenological appearances—Yang-Mills gauge theory could describe weak and
strong interactions. This important step was again very difﬁcult, with many hurdles to
overcome. Since this phase is described in numerous textbooks, there is no need for it
to be repeated.

6.5 Relativistic astrophysics

By 1915 it was known through the work of W. Adams on the binary system of Sir-
ius that Sirius B has an enormous average density of about 106 g/cm3. The exis-
tence of such compact stars constituted one of the major puzzles of astrophysics until
the quantum statistical theory of the electron gas was worked out. On August 26th,
Dirac’s paper (1926) containing the Fermi-Dirac distribution was communicated by
R.H. Fowler to the Royal Society. On November 3rd of the same year, Fowler pre-
sented his own work to the Royal Society, in which he systematically worked out the
quantum statistics of identical particles and in the process developed the well-known

48

Darwin-Fowler method. Shortly thereafter, on December 10th, Fowler (1926) com-
municated the Royal Astronomical Society a new paper with the title “Dense Matter”.
In this work he showed that the electron gas in Sirius B is almost completely degen-
erate in the sense of the new Fermi-Dirac statistics, realizing that “the black-dwarf is
best likened to a single gigantic molecule in its lowest quantum state”, and he devel-
oped the non-relativistic theory of white dwarfs. The Fowler theory of white dwarfs
is equivalent to the Thomas-Fermi theory, whereby the white dwarf is considered as a
big “atom” with about 1057 electrons. For white dwarfs the (semi-classical) Thomas-
Fermi approximation is perfectly justiﬁed.

In this context it is interesting to note the following close historical coincidence:
Thomas’ paper (1926) was presented at the Cambridge Philosophical Society on
November 6th, 1926. (Fermi’s work was independent, but about one year later.) On
the other hand, Fowler communicated his important paper on the non-relativistic the-
ory of white dwarfs about one month later. One might wonder who ﬁrst noticed the
close connection of the two approaches.

It is very remarkable that the quantum statistics of identical particles, satisfying
the Pauli principle, found its ﬁrst application in astrophysics. After the initial step
by Fowler it was recognized independently by several people (I. Frenkel, E. Stoner,
S. Chandrasekhar and L.D. Landau) that relativistic kinematics weakens the quantum
mechanical kinematic energy (zero-point pressure) to the extent that there is a limiting
mass for white dwarfs, given roughly by the ratio M 3
N . (Here MP l denotes the
Planck mass and mN the nucleon mass.) This is an immediate consequence of SR
and the Pauli principle. In 1934, Chandrasekhar derived the exact relation between
mass and radius for completely degenerated conﬁgurations (Chandrasekhar 1934). He
concluded his paper with the following statement:

P l/m2

“The life-history of a star of small mass must be essentially different from
the life-history of a star of large mass. For a star of small mass, the
natural white-dwarf stage is an initial step towards complete extinction.
A star of large mass cannot pass into the white-dwarf stage and one is left
speculating on other possibilities.”

The delayed acceptance of the discovery by the 19 year old Chandrasekhar, that quan-
tum theory plus SR imply the existence of a limiting mass for white dwarfs belongs
to the bizarre stories of astrophysics. The following reaction of Landau is particularly
astonishing:

“For M > 1.5M⊙ there exists in the whole quantum theory no cause pre-
venting the system from collapsing to a point. As in reality such masses
exist quietly as stars and do not show any such ridiculous tendencies, we
must conclude that all stars heavier than 1.5M⊙ certainly possess regions
in which the laws of quantum mechanics (and therefore of quantum statis-
tics) are violated.”

Under the impression of the quantum revolution a few years ago, some people expected
already a new one in the domain of relativistic quantum theory.

It is worthwhile mentioning that E. Lieb and H-T. Yau have shown that Chan-
drasekhar’s theory can be obtained as a limit of a quantum mechanical description in
terms of a semi-relativistic Hamiltonian (Lieb and Yau 1987).

49

Soon after the discovery of the neutron, W. Baade and F. Zwicky (1934) proposed
in a most remarkable paper the idea of neutron stars and made the prescient suggestion
that neutron stars would be formed in supernova explosions:

“With all reserve we suggest the view that supernovae represent the tran-
sitions from ordinary stars to neutron stars, which in their ﬁnal stages
consist of extremely closely packet neutrons.”

The ﬁrst model calculations for neutron stars in GR were performed by J.R. Oppen-
heimer and G. Volkoff (1939). In this pioneering work the equation of state of a com-
pletely degenerate ideal neutron gas was used. In those early days the effects of strong
interactions could not be estimated. Afterwards, theoretical interest in neutron stars
dwindled, since no relevant observations existed. For two decades, F. Zwicky was one
of the few who took seriously the probable role of neutron stars as ﬁnal states of mas-
sive stars. Interest in the subject we reawakened at the end of the 1950s and beginning
of the 1960s. When pulsars were discovered in 1967, especially when a pulsar with
a short period of 0.033 s was found in the Crab Nebula, it became clear that neutron
stars can be formed in type II supernova events through the collapse of the stellar core
to nuclear densities. Since then the physics and astronomy of neutron stars has become
one of the major ﬁelds of relativistic astrophysics.

Close systems containing two neutron stars (binary and double pulsars) have led
to the most remarkable tests of GR. One of them being the celebrated Hulse-Taylor
pulsar PSR 1913+16 that we already mentioned, which gave rise to the ﬁrst indirect
evidence of gravitational waves. The measured long-term decrease of its orbital period
perfectly matches the energy loss predicted by GR due to the radiation of gravitational
waves; see Fig. 1.

Another very interesting system is J0737-3039, which was recently (October 2003)
found to consists of two pulsars of pulse periods of about 23 milliseconds and 2.7
seconds respectively, an orbital period of 2.4 hours, and an extremely high periastron
advance of almost 17 degrees per year. This is about four times larger than that of
the Hulse-Taylor pulsar. A lucky fact is that the system’s orbital orientation relative to
our line of sight is very close to edge-on, which implies that measurements of Shapiro
time-delay of pulse periods of one component in the gravitational potential of the other
can be performed with high precision. Presently the measurements of Shapiro delay
verify GR predictions at the 0.1% level (Kramer et al. 2005). More results on this
exciting system are expected in the near future.

The theory of black holes belongs to the most beautiful applications of GR. For
stationary black holes their structure has been completely clariﬁed in a relatively short
period of time. When matter disappears behind a horizon, an exterior observer sees
almost nothing of its individual properties. One can no longer say, for example, how
many baryons formed the black hole. A huge amount of information seems thus lost.
The mass and angular momentum completely determine the external ﬁeld, which is
known analytically (Kerr solution). This led J.A. Wheeler to say “A black hole has no
hair”, and the previous statement is now known as the no-hair-theorem.

The proof of this fact is an outstanding contribution of mathematical physics, and
was completed only in the course of a number of years by various authors (W. Israel,
B. Carter, S. Hawking, and Robinson). A ﬁrst decisive step was made by W. Israel
(1967), who was able to show that a static black hole solution of Einstein’s vacuum

50

0

-10

-20

-30

]
s
[
 
e
m

i
t
 
n
o
r
t
s
a
i
r
e
p
 
f
o
 
t
f
i
h
s
 
e
v
i
t
a
u
m
u
C

l

GR prediction

1975 1980 1985 1990 1995 2000

Year

Figure 1: Cumulative shift of periastron time for the Hulse-Taylor pulsar according to obser-
vations (dots) and theory (solid line). The theoretical prediction takes into account the energy
loss due to the emission of gravitational radiation.

equation has to be spherically symmetric and, therefore, agree with the Schwarzschild
solution. In a second paper Israel extended this result to black hole solutions of the cou-
pled Einstein-Maxwell system. The Reissner-Nordstrøm 2-parameter family turned
out to exhaust all static electrovac black holes. It was then conjectured by Israel, Pen-
rose and Wheeler that in the stationary case the electrovac black holes should all be
given by the 3-parameter Kerr-Newman family. After a number of steps by various au-
thors this conjecture could ﬁnally be proven. See Heusler (1996) for a comprehensive
account of black-hole uniqueness results.

The evidence for black holes in some X-ray binary systems and for super-massive
black holes in galactic centers is still indirect, but has become overwhelming during
the past few years. However, there is so far little evidence that these collapsed objects
are described by the Kerr metric.

Until a few years ago the best one could say about the evidence of super-massive
black holes in the centers of some galaxies, was that it was compelling if dynamical
studies and observations of active galactic nuclei were taken together. In the meantime
the situation has improved radically. The beautiful work of R. Genzel and coworkers
106M⊙ near the center of the Milky
established a dark mass concentration of about 3
Way, whose extension is less than 17 light hours (see, e.g., Ott et al. 2003). If this
would be a cluster of low mass stars or neutron stars, its central density would exceed
1017M⊙/pc3 and would not survive for more than a few 105 years. The least exotic in-
terpretation of this enormous dark mass concentration is that it is a black hole. But this
is not the only possibility. Although alternative interpretations are highly implausible,
they illustrate the point that dynamical studies alone cannot give an incontrovertible

×

51

proof of the existence of black holes. Ideally, one would have to show that some black
hole candidate actually has an event horizon. There have been various attempts in this
direction, but presumably only gravitational wave astronomy will reveal the essential
properties of black holes.

Most astrophysicists do not worry about possible remaining doubts. The evidence
for (super-massive) black holes is now so overwhelming that we can pass the burden
of proof against them to the hard-core skeptics.

6.6 Relativistic cosmology

In 1917 Einstein applied GR for the ﬁrst time to cosmology, and found the ﬁrst cos-
mological solution of a consistent theory of gravity (Einstein 1917). In spite of its
drawbacks this bold step can be regarded as the beginning of modern cosmology. It
is still interesting to read this paper about which Einstein says: “I shall conduct the
reader over the road that I have myself travelled, rather a rough and winding road,
because otherwise I cannot hope that he will take much interest in the result at the
end of the journey.” In a letter to P. Ehrenfest on February 4th 1917 (CPAE 8, Doc.
294) Einstein wrote about his attempt: “I have again perpetrated something relating
to the theory of gravitation that might endanger me of being committed to a madhouse.
(Ich habe wieder etwas verbrochen in der Gravitationstheorie, was mich ein wenig in
Gefahr bringt, in ein Tollhaus interniert zu werden.)”.

In his attempt Einstein assumed—and this was completely novel—that space is
globally closed, because he then believed that this was the only way to satisfy what
he later (CPAE 7, Doc.4) named Mach’s principle, in the sense that the metric ﬁeld
should be determined uniquely by the energy-momentum tensor. In these years, and
for quite some time, Mach’s ideas on the origin of inertia played an important role
in Einstein’s thinking. This may even be the primary reason that he turned so soon
after the completion of GR to cosmology. Einstein was, in particular, convinced that
isolated masses cannot impose a structure on space at inﬁnity. His intention was to
eliminate all vestiges of absolute space. It is along these lines that he postulated a
universe that is spatially ﬁnite and closed, a universe in which no boundary conditions
are needed. Einstein was actually thinking about the problem regarding the choice of
boundary conditions at inﬁnity already in spring 1916. In a letter to Michele Besso
from May 14th 1916 (CPAE 8, Doc. 219) he also mentions the possibility of the world
being ﬁnite. A few month later he expanded on this in letters to Willem de Sitter.

In addition, Einstein assumed that the Universe was static. This was not unrea-
sonable at the time, because the relative velocities of the stars as observed were small.
(Recall that astronomers only learned later that spiral nebulae are independent star
systems outside the Milky Way. This was deﬁnitely established when in 1924 Hubble
found that there were Cepheid variables in Andromeda and also in other galaxies. Five
years later he announced the recession of galaxies.)

These two assumptions were, however, not compatible with Einstein’s origi-
nal ﬁeld equations. For this reason, Einstein added the famous Λ-term, which is
compatible with the principles of GR, in particular with the energy-momentum law
∇νT µν = 0 for matter. The modiﬁed ﬁeld equations are (compare (86))
Gµν = 8πG

Λgµν .

(98)

c4 Tµν −

52

The cosmological term is, in four dimensions, the only possible addition to the ﬁeld
equations if no higher than second order derivatives of the metric are allowed (Love-
lock theorem). This remarkable uniqueness is one of the most attractive features of
general relativity. (In higher dimensions additional terms satisfying this requirement
are allowed.)

For the static Einstein universe the ﬁeld equations imply the two relations

4πG
c2 ρ =

1
a2 = Λ ,

(99)

where ρ is the mass density of the dust ﬁlled universe (zero pressure) and a is the
radius of curvature. (In passing we remark that the Einstein universe is the only static
dust solution; one does not have to assume isotropy or homogeneity. Its instability
was demonstrated by Lemaˆıtre in 1927.) Einstein was very pleased by this direct
connection between the mass density and geometry, because he thought that this was
in accord with Mach’s philosophy.

Einstein concludes with the following sentences:

“In order to arrive at this consistent view, we admittedly had to introduce
an extension of the ﬁeld equations of gravitation which is not justiﬁed by
our actual knowledge of gravitation. It has to be emphasized, however,
that a positive curvature of space is given by our results, even if the sup-
plementary term is not introduced. That term is necessary only for the
purpose of making possible a quasi-static distribution of matter, as re-
quired by the fact of the small velocities of the stars.”

To de Sitter Einstein emphasized in a letter on March 12th 1917 (CPAE 8, Doc.
311), that his model was intended primarily to settle the question “whether the ba-
sic idea of relativity can be followed through its completion, or whether it leads to
contradictions”. And he adds whether the model corresponds to reality was another
matter.

Only later Einstein came to realize that Mach’s philosophy is predicated on an an-
tiquated ontology that seeks to reduce the metric ﬁeld to an epiphenomenon of matter.
It became increasingly clear to him that the metric ﬁeld has an independent existence
(corresponding to physical degrees of freedom), and his enthusiasm for what he called
Mach’s principle later decreased. In a letter to F. Pirani he wrote in 1954: “As a matter
of fact, one should no longer speak of Mach’s principle at all. (Von dem Machschen
Prinzip sollte man eigentlich ¨uberhaupt nicht mehr sprechen”.) (Pais 1982, Sect. 15e).
The absolute existence of the spacetime continuum, independent of any matter, is a
remnant in GR of Newton’s absolute space and time.

From static to expanding world models

Surprisingly to Einstein, de Sitter (1917) discovered in the same year a completely
different static cosmological model which also incorporated the cosmological constant,
but was anti-Machian in the sense that it contained no matter. For this reason, Einstein
tried to discard it on various grounds (more on this below). The original form of the
metric was:

(

r
R

1

−

g =

−

h

i

)2

c2dt2 +

dr2
R )2 + r2(dϑ2 + sin2 ϑdϕ2) .
( r

(100)

1

−

53

Here, the spatial metric is that of the round three-sphere of radius R, determined by
3
R2 . The model had one very interesting property: For light sources moving
Λ =:
along static world lines there is a gravitational redshift, which became known as the de
Sitter effect. This was thought to have some bearing on the redshift results obtained by
Slipher. Because the fundamental (static) worldlines in this model are not geodesic, a
freely- falling particle released by any static observer will be seen by him to acceler-
ate away, generating also local velocity (Doppler) redshifts corresponding to peculiar
70) writes about this:
velocities. In the second edition of his book, Eddington (1924,

§

“de Sitter’s theory gives a double explanation for this motion of reces-
sion; ﬁrst there is a general tendency to scatter (...); second there is a
general displacement of spectral lines to the red in distant objects owing
to the slowing down of atomic vibrations (...), which would erroneously
be interpreted as a motion of recession.”

We do not want to enter into all the confusion over the de Sitter universe. One source
of this was the apparent singularity at r = R = (3/Λ)1/2. This was at ﬁrst thoroughly
misunderstood even by Einstein and Weyl. ( “The Einstein-de Sitter-Weyl-Klein De-
bate” is now published in Vol. 8 of CPAE.) At the end, Einstein had to acknowledge
that de Sitter’s solution is fully regular and matter-free and thus indeed a counterex-
ample to Mach’s principle. But he still discarded the solution as physically irrelevant
because it is not globally static. This is clearly expressed in a letter from Weyl (1919)
to Klein, after he had discussed the issue during a visit of Einstein in Z¨urich. An im-
portant discussion of the redshift of galaxies in de Sitter’s model by H. Weyl in 1923
should be mentioned. Weyl introduced an expanding version of the de Sitter model
(Weyl 1923). For small distances his result reduced to what later became known as
the Hubble law.35.
Independently of Weyl, Cornelius Lanczos introduced in 1922
also a non-stationary interpretation of de Sitter’s solution in the form of a Friedmann
spacetime with a positive spatial curvature (Lanczos 1922). In a second paper he also
derived the redshift for the non-stationary interpretation (Lanczos 1923).

Until about 1930 almost everybody ‘knew’ that the Universe was static, in spite
of the two fundamental papers by Friedmann (1922,1924) and Lemaˆıtre’s independent
work (1927). These path breaking papers were in fact largely ignored. The history
of this early period has—as is often the case—been distorted by some widely read
documents. Einstein too accepted the idea of an expanding Universe only much later.
After the ﬁrst paper of Friedmann, he published a brief note claiming an error in Fried-
mann’s work; when it was pointed out to him that it was his error, Einstein published a
retraction of his comment, with a sentence that luckily was deleted before publication:
“[Friedmann’s paper] while mathematically correct is of no physical signiﬁcance”. In
comments to Lemaˆıtre during the Solvay meeting in 1927, Einstein again rejected the
expanding universe solutions as physically unacceptable. According to Lemaˆıtre, Ein-
stein was telling him: “Vos calculs sont corrects, mais votre physique est abominable”.
On the other hand, we found in the archive of the ETH many years ago a postcard of
Einstein to Weyl from 1923, related to Weyl’s reinterpretation of de Sitter’s solution,
with the following interesting sentence: “If there is no quasi-static world, then away

35We recall that the de Sitter model has many different interpretations, depending on the class of

fundamental observers that is singled out. This point was ﬁrst stressed by Lanczos (1922).

54

with the cosmological term”. This shows once more that history is not as simple as it
is often presented.

It also is not well-known that Hubble interpreted his famous results on the redshift
of the radiation emitted by distant ‘nebulae’ in the framework of the de Sitter model.
The general attitude is well illustrated by the following remark of Eddington at a Royal
Society meeting in January, 1930:

“One puzzling question is why there should be only two solutions. I sup-
pose the trouble is that people look for static solutions.”

Lemaˆıtre, who had been for a short time a post-doctoral student of Eddington’s,
read this remark in a report to the meeting published in Observatory, and wrote to Ed-
dington pointing out his 1927 paper. Eddington had seen that paper, but had completely
forgotten about it. But now he was greatly impressed and recommended Lemaˆıtre’s
work in a letter to Nature. He also arranged for a translation which appeared in MN-
RAS (Lemaˆıtre 1931).

Lemaˆıtre’s successful explanation of Hubble’s discovery ﬁnally changed the view-
point of the majority of workers in the ﬁeld. At this point Einstein (1931) rejected the
cosmological term as superﬂuous and no longer justiﬁed. At the end of the paper, in
which he published his new view, Einstein adds some remarks about the age problem
which was quite severe without the Λ-term, since Hubble’s value of the Hubble pa-
rameter was then about seven times too large. Einstein is, however, not very worried
and suggests two ways out. First he says that the matter distribution is in reality inho-
mogeneous and that the approximate treatment may be illusionary. Then he adds that
in astronomy one should be cautious with large extrapolations in time.

Einstein repeated his new viewpoint also much later (Einstein 1945), and this was
adopted by many other inﬂuential workers, e.g., by Pauli (1958). Whether Einstein
really considered the introduction of the Λ-term as “the biggest blunder of his life”
appears doubtful to us. In his published work and letters we never found such a strong
statement. Einstein discarded the cosmological term just for simplicity reasons. For a
minority of cosmologists this was not sufﬁcient reason. Paraphrasing Rabi, one could
ask: ‘who ordered it away’?

Einstein’s paper (1931) was his last one on cosmology. In looking back it appears
a bit strange that after having seen the ﬁrst paper by Friedmann he did not realize that
his own static model was unstable.

Vacuum energy and gravity

At this point we leave the classical discussion of the Λ-term, but we have to add a
few remarks about the quantum aspect of the Λ-problem, where it really becomes very
serious. Since quantum physicists had so many other problems, it is not astonishing
that in the early years they did not worry about this subject. An exception was Pauli,
who wondered in the early 1920s whether the zero-point energy of the radiation ﬁeld
could be gravitationally effective. He estimated the inﬂuence of the zero-point energy
of the electromagnetic radiation ﬁeld—cut off at the classical electron radius—on the
radius of the universe, and came to the conclusion that it “could not even reach to the
moon”. (For more on this, see Straumann 2003a). Pauli’s only published remark on
his considerations can be found in his Handbuch article (1933) on quantum mechanics,

55

in the section on the quantization of the radiation ﬁeld, where he says: “Also, as is
obvious from experience, the [zero-point energy] does not produce any gravitational
ﬁeld.”)

For decades nobody else seems to have worried about contributions of quantum
ﬂuctuations to the cosmological constant, although physicists learned after Dirac’s
hole theory that the vacuum state in quantum ﬁeld theory is not an empty medium,
but has interesting physical properties. As far as we know, the ﬁrst who came back
to possible contributions of the vacuum energy density to the cosmological constant
was Zel’dovich. He discussed this issue in two papers (1967,1968) during the third
renaissance period of the Λ-term, but before the advent of spontaneously broken gauge
theories. The following remark by him is particularly interesting. Even if one assumes
completely ad hoc that the zero-point contributions to the vacuum energy density are
exactly cancelled by a bare term, there still remain higher-order effects. In particular,
gravitational interactions between the particles in the vacuum ﬂuctuations are expected
on dimensional grounds to lead to a gravitational self-energy density of order Gµ6,
where µ is some cut-off scale. Even for µ as low as 1 GeV (for no good reason) this is
about 9 orders of magnitude larger than the observational bound.

This illustrates that there is something profound that we do not seem to under-
stand at all, certainly not in quantum ﬁeld theory (so far also not in string theory).
We are unable to calculate the vacuum energy density in quantum ﬁeld theories, like
the Standard Model of particle physics. But we can attempt to make what appear to
be reasonable order-of-magnitude estimates for the various contributions. All expec-
tations are in gigantic conﬂict with the facts (see, e.g., Straumann 2003b). Trying to
arrange the cosmological constant to be zero is unnatural in a technical sense. It is like
enforcing a particle to be massless, by ﬁne-tuning the parameters of the theory when
there is no symmetry principle which implies a vanishing mass. The vacuum energy
density is unprotected from large quantum corrections. This problem is particularly
severe in ﬁeld theories with spontaneous symmetry breaking. In such models there are
usually several possible vacuum states with different energy densities. Furthermore,
the energy density is determined by what is called the effective potential, and this is a
dynamical object. Nobody can see any reason why the vacuum of the Standard Model
we ended up as the Universe cooled, has—for particle physics standards— an almost
vanishing energy density. Most probably, we will only have a satisfactory answer once
we shall have a theory which successfully combines the concepts and laws of GR about
gravity and spacetime structure with those of quantum theory.

Since a number of years cosmology is going through a fruitful and exciting period.
Some of the developments are deﬁnitely of general interest, beyond the ﬁelds of astro-
physics and cosmology. Space does not allow us to even indicate the most important
issues of current interest.

Acknowledgements

We sincerely thank Thibault Damour for making valuable suggestions for improve-
ments on an earlier draft version and G¨unther Rasche for carefully reading the
manuscript.

56

References

[1] Baade, W., and Zwicky, F. (1934). On Supernovae; Cosmic Rays from Super-

novae. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci., 20, 254-263.

[2] Bargmann, V. (1947). Irreducible unitary representations of the Lorentz group.

Annals of Mathematics, 48, 568-640.

[3] Bell, J.S. (1964). On the Einstein-Podolsky-Rosen Paradox. Physics, 1, 195-200.

[4] Bell, J.S. (1987). Speakable and Unspeakable in Quantum Mechanics (Cam-

bridge Univ. Press, Cambridge).

[5] Bertotti, B., Iess, L., and Tortora, P. (2003). A test of general relativity using

radio links with the Cassini spacecraft. Nature, 425, 374-376.

[6] Breiman, L. (1968). Probability (Addison-Wesley Pub. Comp., Reading, Mas-

sachusetts).

[7] Bohr, N. and Rosenfeld, L. (1933). Zur Frage der Messbarkeit der elektromag-
netischen Feldgr¨ossen. Det Kgl. Danske Videnskabernes Selskab., Mathematisk-
fysiske Meddelelser, Xii,8, 1-65.

[8] Born, M. (2005). The Born-Einstein Letters 1916-1955 (Macmillan).

[9] Boulanger, N., Damour, T., Gualtieri, L, and Henneaux, M. (2001). Inconsis-
tency of interacting, multi-graviton theories. Nucl. Phys. B, 597, 127-171.

[10] Chandrasekhar, S. (1934). Stellar Conﬁgurations with Degenerate Cores. Obser-

vatory, 57,373-77.

[11] Christodoulou, D. and Klainerman, S. (1993). The Global Nonlinear Stability of

the Minkowski Space. (Princeton University Press, Princeton).

[12] Chru´sciel, P.T. and Friedrich, H. (editors) (2004). The Einstein Equations and

the Large Scale Behaviour of Gravitational Fields (Birkh¨auser Verlag, Basel).

[13] Ciufolini, I. and Pavlis, E.C. (2004). A conﬁrmation of the general relativistic

prediction of the Lense-Thirring effect. Nature, 431, 958-960.

[14] Coleman, S. and Mandula, J. (1967). All possible symmetries of the S matrix.

Phys. Rev., 159, 1251-159.

[15] Corvino, J. (2000). Scalar curvature deformation and a gluing construction for

the Einstein constraint equations. Commun. Math. Phys., 214, 137-189.

[16] CPAE, The Collected Papers of Albert Einstein, Vols. 1-9 (Princeton University

Press, 1987). See also: [http:www. einstein.caltech.edu/].

[17] Damour, T. and Sch¨afer, G. (1988). Higher-order relativistic periastron advances

and binary pulsars. Il Nouvo Cimento, 101B, 127-176.

57

[18] Damour, T.

(2005). Poincar´e, Relativity, Billiards

and Symmetry.

hep-th/0501168 at <http://xxx.lanl.gov>.

[19] Debye, P. (1910). Der Wahrscheinlichkeitsbegriff in der Theorie der Strahlung.

Ann. Phys. (Leipzig), 33, 1427-1434.

[20] Deser, S. (1970). Self-interaction and gauge invariance. Gen. Rel. Grav., 1, 9-18.

[21] DeWitt-Morette, C. and DeWitt, B. (1988). Pin groups in physics. Phys. Rev. D,

41, 1901-1907.

[22] Dine, M. and Kusenko, A. (2004). The origin of the matter-antimatter asymme-

try. Rev. Mod. Phys., 76, 1-30.

[23] Dirac, P.A.M. (1931). Quantized Singularities in the Electromagnetic Field.

Proc. Roy. Soc. London, A133, 357-400.

[24] Eddington, A.S. (1924). The Mathematical Theory of Relativity, third (unaltered)

edition (1975) (Chelsea Pub. Comp., New York).

[25] Ehlers, J. and L¨ammerzahl, C. (editors) (2005). Special Relativity: Will it survive
the next 100 years ? Springer Lecture Notes in Physics (Springer Verlag, Berlin),
to appear.

[26] Ehlers, J. and Rindler, W. (1997). Local and global light bending in Einstein’s

and other gravitational theories. Gen. Rel. Grav., 29, 519-529.

[27] Ehrenfest, P.

(1906). Zur Planck’schen Strahlungstheorie. Physikalische

Zeitschrift, 7, 528-532.

[28] Einstein, A. and Grossmann, M. (1914). Entwurf einer verallgemeinerten Rela-
tivit¨atstheorie und einer Theorie der Gravitation. Zeitschrift f¨ur Mathematik und
Physik, 62, 225-259.

[29] Einstein, A. and Fokker, A.D. (1914). Die Nordstr”omsche Gravitationstheo-
rie vom Standpunkt des absoluten Differentialkalk¨uls. Ann. Phys. (Leipzig), 44,
321-328.

[30] Einstein, A. (1917). Kosmologische Betrachtungen zur allgemeinen Rela-
tivit¨atstheorie. Sitzungsber. Preuss. Akad. Wiss. phys.-math. Klasse VI, 142. See
also: CPAE, Vol. 6, Doc. 43.

[31] Einstein, A. (1931). Zum kosmologischen Problem der allgemeinen Rela-

tivit¨atstheorie. Sitzungsber. Preuss. Akad. Wiss., 235.

[32] Einstein, A. (1933). Einiges ¨uber die Entstehung der Allgemeinen Rela-
tivit¨atstheorie. Reprinted in: A. Einstein Mein Weltbild, edited by Carl Seelig,
(Ullstein Verlag, Berlin).

[33] Einstein, A., Podolsky, B., and Rosen, N. (1935). Can quantum-mechanical de-

scription of physical reality be considered complete? Phys. Rev., 47, 777-780.

58

[34] Einstein, A. (1945). Appendix to the 2nd edn. of The Meaning of Relativity;

reprinted in all later editions.

[35] Euler, H., and Kockel, B. (1935). ¨Uber die Streuung von Licht an Licht nach der

Dirac’schen Theorie. Naturwissenschaften, 23, 246-247.

[36] Feynman, R. (1995). Lectures on Gravitation (Addison-Wesley Pub. Comp.,

Reading, Massachusetts).

[37] Fierz, M. (1939). ¨Uber die relativistische Theorie kr¨aftefreier Teilchen mit be-

liebigem Spin. Helv. Phys. Acta,12, 3-37

[38] Fierz, M. and Pauli, W. (1939). Relativistic wave equations for particles of arbi-
trary spin in an electromagnetic ﬁeld. Proc. Roy. Soc. (London) A, 173, 211-232.

[39] Fock, V. (1926). ¨Uber die invariante Form der Wellen- und der Bewegungsgle-
ichungen f¨ur einen geladenen Massenpunkt. Zeitschrift f¨ur Physik, 39, 226-232.

[40] Fowler, R.H. (1926). Dense Matter. Mon. Not. Roy. Astron. Soc., 23, 114-122.

[41] Friedmann, A. (1922). ¨Uber die Kr¨ummung des Raumes. Zeitschrift f¨ur Physik

10, 377-386.

[42] Friedmann, A. (1924). ¨Uber die M¨oglichkeit einer Welt mit konstanter negativer

Kr¨ummung des Raumes. Zeitschrift f¨ur Physik, 21, 326-332.

[43] Friedrich, H. (1986). Existence and structure of past asymptotically simple so-
lutions of Einstein’s ﬁeld equations with positive cosmological constant. Jour.
Geom. Phys., 3, 101-117.

[44] Frisch,

Experimenteller Nachweis
Strahlungsr¨uckstoßes. Zeitschrift f¨ur Physik, 86, 42-48.

(1933)

R.

des

Einsteinschen

[45] Frauendiener, J., Giulini, D., and Perlick, V. (editors) (2005). Mathematical
Relativity: New Ideas and Developments, Springer Lecture Notes in Physics
(Springer Verlag, Berlin); forthcoming.

[46] Fushchich, W. I. and Shtelen, W. M. and Serov, N.I. (1993). Symmetry Analysis
and Exact Solutions of Equations of Nonlinear Mathematical Physics (Kluwer
Academic Publishers, Dordrecht)

[47] Giulini, D. (1997) Consistently implementing the ﬁelds self-energy in Newto-
nian gravity. Phys. Lett. A, 232, 165-170. See also gr-qc/9605011, where the
relation to the 00-component of Einstein’s equation is pointed out.

[48] Giulini, D. (2003). Close encounters of black holes. In: The Galactic Black
Hole – Lectures on General Relativity and Astrophysics, edited by H. Falcke
and F. Hehl (Institute of Physics Publishing, Bristol). Also under gr-qc/0302111
at <http://xxx.lanl.gov>.

[49] Giulini, D. (2005a). Special Relativity—A First Encounter (Oxford University

Press, Oxford)

59

[50] Giulini, D. (2005b). Algebraic and geometric aspects of Special Relativity. In:
Special Relativity: Will it survive the next 100 years, edited by J. Ehlers and
C. L¨ammerzahl, Springer Lecture Notes in Physics (Springer Verlag, Berlin), to
appear.

[51] Giulini, D. (2005c). Once more general covariance. Contribution to the FESt-
workshop on Gravitation, Strings and Quantum Field Theory. To be published
(Springer, Berlin).

[52] Golfand, Y.A. and Likhtman, E.S. (1971). Extension of the algebra of the
Poincar´e group generators and violation of P invariance. JETP Lett., 13, 323-
326.

[53] Gupta, S. (1954). Gravitation and electromagnetism. Phys. Rev., 96, 1683-1685.

[54] Gupta, S. (1957). Einstein’s and other theories of gravitation. Rev. Mod. Phys.,

29, 334-336

[55] Heisenberg, W., and Pauli, W. (1929). Zur Quantenelektrodynamik der Wellen-

felder. I. Zeitschrift f¨ur Physik, 56, 1- 61.

[56] Heisenberg, W., and Pauli, W. (1930). Zur Quantenelektrodynamik der Wellen-

felder. II. Zeitschrift f¨ur Physik, 59, 168- 190.

[57] Heisenberg, W., and Euler, H. (1936). Folgerungen aus der Dirac’schen Theorie

des Positrons. Zeitschrift f¨ur Physik, 98, 714-732.

[58] Heusler, M. (1996). Black Hole Uniqueness Theorems. Cambridge Lecture

Notes in Physics, Vol. 6 (Cambridge University Press, Cambridge).

[59] Israel, W. (1967). Event horizons in static space-times. Phys. Rev., 164, 1776-

1779.

516.

[60] Jordan, P. and Pauli, W. (1928). Zur Quantenelektrodynamik ladungsfreier

Felder. Zeitschrift f¨ur Physik, 47, 151-173.

[61] Jost, R (1957). Eine Bemerkung zum CTP Theorem. Helv. Phys. Acta, 30, 409

[62] Jost, R. (1965). The General Theory of Quantized Fields (American Mathemat-

ical Society, Providence, Rhode Island)

[63] Kaluza, T. (1921). Zum Unit¨atsproblem in der Physik. Sitzungsber. Preuss. Akad.

Wiss., (1921), 966-972.

[64] Klein, O. (1926a). Quantentheorie und f¨unfdimensionale Relativit¨atstheorie.

Zeitschrift f¨ur Physik, 37, 895-906.

[65] Klein, O. (1926b). The Atomicity of electricity as a quantum law. Nature, 118,

[66] Klioner, S. and Soffel, M. (1998). Nonrotating astronomical relativistic reference

frames. Astronomy and Astrophysics, 334, 1123-1135.

60

[67] Kochen, S. and Specker, E. (1967). The Problem of Hidden Variables in Quan-

tum Mechanics. Journal of Mathematics and Mechanics, 17, 59-88.

[68] Kogut. A. et al. (1993). Dipole anisotropy in the COBE differential microwave

radiometers ﬁrst-year sky maps. The Astrophysical Journal, 419, 1-6.

[69] Kraichnan, R. (1955). Special relativistic derivation of generally covariant grav-

itation theory. Phys. Rev., 98, 1118-1122.

[70] Kraichnan, R. (1956). Possibility of unequal gravitational and inertial mass.

Phys. Rev., 101, 482-488.

[71] Kramer, M. et al. (2005). Testing GR with the double pulsar: recent results.

astro-ph/0503386 at <http://xxx.lanl.gov>.

[72] Lanczos, K.

(1922). Bemerkung zur de Sitterschen Welt. Physikalische

Zeitschrift , 23, 539-543.

[73] Lanczos, K. (1923).

¨Uber die Rotverschiebung in der de Sitterschen Welt.

Zeitschrift f¨ur Physik, 17, 168-189.

[74] Lemaˆıtre, G.E. (1927). Un Univers Homog`ene de Masse Constante et de
Rayon Croissant, Rendant Compte de la Vitesse Radiale de N´ebuleuses Extra-
galactiques. Ann. Soc. Sci. Brux., A47, 49.

[75] Lemaˆıtre, G.E. (1931). A Homogeneous Universe of Constant Mass and In-
creasing Radius Accounting for the Radial Velocity of Extra-galactic Nebulae.
Monthly Not. Roy. Astron. Soc., 91, 483-490.

[76] Lieb E.H. and Yau, H-T (1987). The Chandrasekhar Theory of Stellar Collapse
as the Limit of Quantum Mechanics. Comm. Math. Phys., 112, 147-174.

[77] London, F. (1927). Quantenmechanische Deutung der Theorie von Weyl.

Zeitschrift f¨ur Physik, 42, 375-389.

[78] Lorentz, H. A. (1904). Electromagnetic phenomena in a system moving with any

velocity less than that of light. Proc. Acad. Sci. Amst., 6, 809.

[79] Lydon, T.J. and Soﬁa, S. (1996). A measurement of the shape of the solar disc:
the solar quadrupole moment, the solar octopole moment, and the advance of
perihelion of the planet Mercury. Phys. Rev. Lett., 76, 177-179.

[80] L¨uders, G. and Zumino, B. (1958). Connection between spin and statsistics.

Phys. Rev., 110, 1450-1453.

[81] Mansouri, R. and Sexl, R. (1976). A test theory of Special Relativity I: simul-

taneity and clock synchronization. Gen. Rel. Grav., 8, 497-513.

[82] Millikan, R.A. (1916). A direct photoelectric determination of Planck’s ‘h’.

[83] Mittelstaedt, P. (1970). Lorentzinvariante Gravitationstheorie. (Westdeutscher

Phys. Rev., 7, 355-388.

Verlag, K¨oln und Opladen).

61

[84] M¨uller, H. et al. (2003). Modern Michelson-Morley experiment using cryogenic

optical resonators. Phys. Rev. Lett., 91, 020401.

[85] Nelson, E. (1967). Dynamic Theory of Brownian Motion (Princeton Univ. Press,

Princeton, N.J.).

[86] Newton, I. (1961). The Correspondence of Isaac Newton, Vol. III 1688-1694,

edited by H.W. Turnbull (Cambridge University Press, Cambridge).

[87] Niederer, U.H. and O’Raifeartaigh, L. (1974). Realizations of the unitary rep-
resentations of the inhomogeneous space-time groups I and II. Fortschritte der
Physik, 22, 111-129 and 131-157.

[88] Nordtvedt, K. (1988). Existence of the gravitomagnetic interaction. Int. J. of

Theor. Phys., 27, 1395-1404.

[89] Oppenheimer, J.R. (1930). On the Theory of Electrons and Protons. Phys. Rev.,

35, 562-563.

Rev., 55, 374-381.

[90] Oppenheimer, J.R. and Volkoff, G. (1939). On massive Neutron Cores. Phys.

[91] Ott, T., et al. (2003). Inward Bound: Studying the Galactic Center with

NAOS/CONICA. ESO Messenger, 111, 1-8.

[92] Pais, A. (1982). ‘Subtle is the Lord...’: The Science and the Life of Albert Einstein

(Oxford University Press, Oxford).

[93] Pais, A. (1991). Niels Bohr’s Times in Physics, Philosophy, and Polity (Oxford

University Press, Oxford).

[94] Pauli, W. (1933). Die allgemeinen Prinzipien der Wellenmechanik. Handbuch
der Physik, Vol. XXIV (1933). New edition by N. Straumann (Springer-Verlag
(1990)).

[95] Pauli, W. (1940). The connection between spin and statistics. Phys. Rev., 56,

716-722.

[96] Pauli, W. (1949). Einstein’s Contributions to Quantum Theory. In Albert Ein-
stein: Philosopher-Scientist, edited by P. A. Schilpp (Illinois: The Library of
Living Philosophers), p. 149.

[97] Pauli, W. (1955). Exclusion principle, Lorentz group and reﬂexion of space-time
and charge. In Niels Bohr and the Development of Physics, edited by W. Pauli
(Pergamon Press LTD, London).

[98] Pauli, W. (1958). Theory of Relativity (Pergamon Press); Supplementary Note

19. Reprinted 1981 (Dover Pub., Inc., New York).

[99] Pauli, W. (1985-99). Wissenschaftlicher Briefwechsel mit Bohr, Einstein, Heisen-
berg u.a. Vol. 1-4, edited by K. von Meyenn (Springer-Verlag, New York).

62

[100] Pauli, W. (2000). Selected Topics in Field Quantization; Pauli Lectures on

Physics, Vol. 6 (Dover Publ., Mineola, New York)

[101] Pireaux, S., Rozelot, J.-P., and Godier, S. (2003). Solar quadrupole moment
and purely relativistic gravitation contributions to Mercury’s perihelion advance.
Astrophys. Space Sci., 284, 1159-1194; see also: astro-ph/0109032.

[102] Planck, M.

(1911). Eine neue Strahlungshypothese. Verhandlungen der

Deutschen Physikalischen Gesellschaft, 13, 138-148.

[103] Poincar´e, H. (1906). Sur la dynamique de l’´electron. Rend. del Circ. Mat. di

Palermo, 21, 129-146 and 166-175.

[104] O‘Raifeartaigh, L., and Straumann, N. (2000). Gauge Theory: Historical Ori-

gins and Some Modern Developments. Reviews of Modern Physics, 72, 1-23.

[105] Renn, J., Janssen, M., Sauer, T., Norton, J., and Stachel, J. (2004). The Genesis
of General Relativity: Documents and Interpretation. Vol 1: General Relativ-
ity in the Making: Einstein’s Zurich Nootebook (Kluwer Academic Publishers,
Dordrecht).

[106] Roxburgh, I.W. (2001). Gravitational mutipole moments of the sun determined
from helioseismic evidence of the internal structure and rotation. Astronomy and
Astrophysics, 377, 688-690.

[107] Saathoff, G. et al. (2003). Improved test of time dilation in Special Relativity.

Phys. Rev. Lett., 91, 190403.

[108] Schr¨odinger, E. (1926). ¨Uber das Verh¨altnis der Heisenberg-Born-Jordan’schen

Quantenmechanik zu der meinen. Ann. Phys. (Leipzig), 79, 734-756.

[109] Schweber, S.S. (1994). QED and the Men Who Made It: Dyson, Feynman,

Schwinger, and Tomonaga (Princeton Univ. Press, Princeton, N.J.).

[110] Simon, B. (1979). Functional Integration and Quantum Physics (Academic

Press, Inc.).

[111] de Sitter, W. (1917). On the Relativity of Inertia. Remarks Concerning Ein-

stein’s Latest Hypothesis. Proc Akad. Wetensch. Amsterdam, 19, 1217-1225.

[112] Stachel, J. and Torretti, R. (1982). Einstein’s ﬁrst derivation of mass-energy

equivalence. Amer. J. of Physics, 50, 760-763.

[113] Straumann, N. (1987). Zum Ursprung der Eichtheorien bei Hermann Weyl.

Physikalische Bl¨atter, 43, 414-421.

[114] Straumann, N. (2002). Quantenmechanik (Springer Verlag, Berlin), Epilog,

pp. 371.

[115] Straumann, N. (2003a). The History of the Cosmological Constant Problem. In
On the Nature of Dark Energy, IAP Astrophysics Colloquium 2002, Frontier
Group, 2003, p.17; see also gr-qc/0208027.

63

[116] Straumann, N. (2003b). On the Cosmological Constant Problems and the Astro-
nomical Evidence for a Homogeneous Energy Density with Negative Pressure.
In Poincar´e Seminar 2002, Vacuum Energy – Renormalization, 7-51. B. Du-
plantier, and V. Rivasseau, eds.; (Birkh¨auser-Verlag); astro-ph/0203330.

[117] Straumann, N. (2005). http://arxiv.org/abs/physics/0504201.

[118] Streater, R.F., and Wightman, A.S. (1963). PCT, Spin & and Statistics, and
All That (W.A. Benjamin, Inc., New York Amsterdam); reprinted 1989 in: Ad-
vanced Book Classics (Addison-Wesley Pub. Co., Inc., Redwood City CA).

[119] Thirring, W. (1961). An alternative approach to the theory of gravitation. Ann.

Phys. (NY), 16, 96-117.

Soc.,23, 542-548.

[120] Thomas, L.H (1927). The calculations of atomic ﬁelds. Proc. Cambridge Phil.

[121] Thomas, L.T. (1927). The kinematics of an electron with an axis. Phil. Mag., 3,

[122] Valiente-Kroon, J. (2003). Early radiative properties of the developments of
time symmetric, conformally ﬂat initial data. Class. Quant. Grav., 20, L53-L60.

[123] Wald, R. (1986). Spin-two ﬁelds and general covariance. Phys. Rev. D, 33, 3613-

1-22.

3625

[124] Weinberg, S. (1964a). Derivation of gauge invariance and the equivalence prin-

ciple from Lorentz invariance of the S-matrix. Phys. Lett., 9, 357-359.

[125] Weinberg, S. (1964b). Photons and gravitons in S-matrix theory: derivation of
charge conservation and equality of gravitational and inertial mass. Phys. Rev.,
135, B1049-B1056.

[126] Weisskopf, V.S. (1936).

¨Uber die Elektrodynamik des Vakuums auf Grund
der Quantentheorie des Elektrons. Det Kgl. Danske Videnskabernes Selskab.
Mathematisk-fysiske Meddelelser, 14, 1-39.

[127] Wentzel, G. (1960). Quantum Theory of Fields (until 1947). In Theoretical
Physics in the Twentieth Century: A Memorial Volume to Wolfgang Pauli, edited
by M. Fierz and V.F. Weisskopf (Interscience, New York), 48-77.

[128] Weyl, H. (1918). Gravitation und Elektrizit¨at. K¨oniglich Preussische Akademie
der Wissenschaften (Berlin), Sitzungsberichte (1918), 465-478, 478-480.

[129] Weyl, H. (1919). Letter to Felix Klein, 7 February 1919, see also CPAE 8, Part

B, Doc. 567.

24, 230-232.

352.

[130] Weyl, H. (1923). Zur allgemeinen Relativit¨atstheorie. Physikalische Zeitschrift,

[131] Weyl, H. (1929). Elektron und Gravitation. I. Zeitschrift f¨ur Physik, 56, 330-

64

[132] Wigner, E. (1929). Eine Bemerkung zu Einsteins neuer Formulierung des allge-

meinen Relativit¨atsprinzips. Zeitschrift f¨ur Physik, 53, 592-596.

[133] Wigner, E (1939). On unitary representations of the inhomogeneous Lorentz

group Annals of Mathematics, 40, 149-204

[134] Wigner, E (1993). Collected Works. Edited by A. Wightman (Springer Verlag,

[135] Wolf, P. et al. (2003). Test of Lorentz invariance using a microwave resonator.

Berlin and New York)

Phys. Rev. Lett., 90, 060402.

469-480.

[136] Wyss, W. (1965). Zur Unizit¨at der Gravitationstheorie. Helv. Phys. Acta., 38,

[137] Zeldovich, Ya.B. (1967). Cosmological Constant and Elementary Particles.

Journal of Experimental and Theoretical Physics. Letters, 61, 316-317.

[138] Zeldovich, Ya.B. (1968). The Cosmological Constant and the Theory of Ele-

mentary Particles. Soviet Physics Uspekhi, 11, 381-393.

65

