5
0
0
2
 
g
u
A
 
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
t
s
i
h
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
2
0
0
8
0
5
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

The Tensor Analytical Relationships of
Dirac’s Equation∗

By Cornel Lanczos in Berlin
(Received on July 17, 1929)

Version ISRI-04-10.4 January 14, 2012

Abstract

Dirac’s equation of the electron will be discussed by using quaternions
as the basis of a new formalism which seems to be very well adapted to the
problem. The transformation properties of the equations as well as the in-
variant and covariant [bilinear] constructions of Dirac’s theory are developed
uniformly and systematically. A method of obtaining a covariant formulation
of the equations using customary tensor calculus also offers itself unequivo-
cally if we duplicate the Dirac equations. The resulting system consists of
two parts. The ﬁrst part corresponds to the coupling of an antisymmetric
tensor with a vector of the same structure as in the relationship between
electromagnetic ﬁeld strength and current vector in Maxwell’s equations.
The other part yields a “feedback” in the form of a reaction of the current
vector upon the ﬁeld strength of the same structure as in the case of the
well-known connection between the vector potential and the ﬁeld strength
for the electromagnetic ﬁeld.

1

Introduction

Dirac’s equation is based on two viewpoints. On the one hand, it should be a ﬁrst-
order linear differential equation and, on the other hand, the iterated application of
the equation (for the ﬁeld-free case) should yield the Schr¨odinger wave equation.1
∗Editorial note: Published in Zeits. f. Phys. 57 (1929) 447–473, reprinted and translated in [1].
This is Nb. 1 in a series of four papers on relativistic quantum-mechanics [1, 2, 3, 4] which
are extensively discussed in a commentary by Andre Gsponer and Jean-Pierre Hurni [5]. Initial
translation by J´osef Illy and Judith Konst´ag Mask´o. Final translation and editorial notes by Andre
Gsponer.

1Editorial Note: By Schr¨odinger wave equation Lanczos means the relativistic Schr¨odinger

wave equation which today is usually referred to as the Klein-Gordon equation.

1

The latter aspect in practice implies the invariance under Lorentz transformations
without stating that the transformations involved should necessarily have a com-
mon vector analytical meaning. The matrix calculus and the operator method
have the advantage that they are able to provide a solution to the problem without
being concerned with the requirements of normal tensor analysis. This advantage
is diminished by the uncomfortable fact that in a physical theory one has to work
with quantities which do not allow interpretation by the normal concepts of tensor
analysis — though these concepts have otherwise proved extremely useful in de-
scribing natural phenomena. On these grounds, several trials were made to avoid
the operator method and to bring the Dirac equation into a form which could be
interpreted in terms of normal vector analytical concepts. C. G. Darwin2 pointed
out an analogy with Maxwell’s equations in the special case when the mass term of
Dirac’s equation vanishes. On the other hand, Madelung3 worked out a system of
equations which can be considered to be a generalization of Maxwell’s equations
and which enables the Dirac equation to be obtained in a natural interpretation.
For this system, the invariance under Lorentz transformations remains a problem.4

In the present paper, the author discusses the problem from a somewhat differ-
ent point of view. Without heuristically trying to ﬁnd analogies with the classical
ﬁeld equations, he studies the transformation properties of the Dirac equation in
general by using a formalism which seems to be well-adapted to the problem and
is based upon the “quaternions” introduced by Hamilton. The quaternion calculus
has never really been adopted in physics. Uniting vector and scalar multiplication
into one operation proved to be insufﬁciently ﬂexible for the purposes of vector cal-
culation. And later, facing the magniﬁcent unifying and generalizing viewpoints of
tensor analysis, the operation with quantities based on special properties of three-
or four-dimensional space had to be withdrawn in favour of a purely component-
based representation. Nevertheless, there remains the fact that the quaternions
can offer considerable practical ease in treating the general transformations of the
Lorentz group, partly because they enable any given Lorentz transformation to be
described fairly simply, and partly because those constructions, which in terms of
tensor calculus are to be interpreted as invariant or covariant quantities, are also
characterized by special and easily describable properties in quaternion calculus.

The author arrived at the present research through the fact that in his doctoral
dissertation written 10 years ago5 he had dealt with the demonstration of the

2Proc. Roy. Soc. 120, 621, 1928; Nature 123, 203, 1929.
3Zeits. f. Phys. 54, 303, 1929.
4Remark during revision:

I was informed from a kind letter by Prof. Madelung that the
covariance does exist all the same. The given transformation is linear, but it is not of the usual
vector analytical nature and thus his system does not come under the viewpoint discussed here.

5“The Function Theoretical Relationships of the Maxwell Aether Equations,” Publishing House

2

connection between quaternions and Lorentz transformations, and he had pointed
out how these can be used to formulate the laws of the special relativity theory
formally in a very simple way, especially when applied to the electromagnetic
ﬁeld. Later, he no longer followed this line; however, an accidental observation
led him to extend these investigations. Initially they were performed with respect to
Maxwell’s equations — later to the Dirac equation by using the same mathematical
tools, and indeed this course has proven to be correct and natural. The observation
was that the formerly discussed equation system, which had been considered as a
generalization of Maxwell’s equations, is, interestingly, completely equivalent to
Dirac’s equation for the case where the mass term disappears. The inclusion of
this term does not present any problem. Not only does it permit a fairly simple
overview of the transformation properties of the functions, but it also offers new
prospects concerning the tensor analytic meaning of the Dirac equation and may
possibly lead to completely new viewpoints. Indeed, the following developments
are of such almost trivial simplicity, and the direction of the progression is traced
out so clearly, that one cannot help the feeling of having found a “via regia” to
penetrate into the essence of Dirac’s equation in a way that is more suitable than
that allowed by the general operator method which is possibly unsuitable for that
problem.

Before beginning to discuss our actual problem, we will brieﬂy summarize the
foundations of the less well-known quaternion calculus and give an outline of the
most important methods and results of the above-mentioned doctoral dissertation
(Sections 2,3,4).

2 The quaternions

By a quaternion Q we understand the combination of four quantities, “compo-
nents,” in the form:

Q = Xjx + Y jy + Zjz + T jl.
The quantities (jx, jy, jz, jl) are four “unit vectors.” For the fourth component6
we chose the notation l instead of t because we want to reserve t for the real time,

(1)

of Josef Nemeth, Budapest 1919. (Due to the difﬁculties of the post-war period, the essay was
published in 50 lithographed copies only.)
Inaugural dissertation at the University of Szeged,
Hungary. Editorial note: This dissertation is now available in paper [6] and electronic [7] forms,
together with two commentaries [8, 9].

6In the pre-relativistic period of Hamilton the fourth quaternion unit had, of course, no rela-
tionship to physical time and was added as a common scalar to the three spatial units. With regard
to the applications we are interested in, we have immediately introduced the fourth dimension as
a time dimension.

3

whereas:

l = ict.

Along with the self-understood operation of addition, multiplication is the
fundamental operation. This is deﬁned by the multiplication of the unit vectors.
We ﬁx the relations:

jxjy = jz,

jyjx = −jxjy,
y = j2

z = −j2

x = j2
j2

jxjl = jljx = jx,
l = −jl

(cid:27)

The remaining equations are obtained by cyclically interchanging x, y, z. The
fourth unit vector jl, in the direction of the imaginary “time axis,” behaves like the
ordinary unit. Thus one can also write jl = 1; in other words, jl can be ignored as
a factor.

The multiplication is associative but not commutative. Instead of the simple

commutative law, here we have the law:

or

GF = F G

GF = F G,

where the bar means the following: one goes over to the “conjugate” of the
quaternion, that is to say one gives the spatial components — the space part as we
shall call them — opposite sign:

F = −Xjx − Y jy − Zjz + T.

For an arbitrary number of factors, the conjugate of the product is obtained by
writing the sequence of factors in reverse order and taking the conjugate of each
factor.

It is easy to see that the quantity F F is simply a number (the spatial compo-

nents = 0).

3 Four-dimensional rotations and quaternions

Multiplication of quaternion F by quaternion p in the sense of

(2)

(3)

(4)

(4a)

(5)

(6)

F ′ = pF

4

can be conceived as a transformation of the line segment F if the quaternion
is represented as a vector in the four-dimensional space. The matrix of this
transformation reads:

p4 −p3
p1
p2
p4 −p1 p2
p3
−p2
p3
p4
p1
−p1 −p2 −p3 p4









.





pp = p2

1 + p2

2 + p2

3 + p2

4 = 1,

(Here the components of the quaternion p are denoted by numbers instead of
letters.) If we require that the norm of p have the form

then it is seen that the transformation is an orthogonal one. We shall denote
an orthogonal transformation of this kind brieﬂy as a “p-transformation.” From
the associative law of multiplication, it follows that the p-transformations form a
“group” which is contained in the general orthogonal transformations.

A second group will be obtained by post-multiplying with the quaternion

(instead of pre-multiplying):

F ′ = F q.

This “q-transformation”7 has the following matrix:

The two groups mutually complete each other by supplying in their composition the
most general group of orthogonal transformations. Thus an arbitrary orthogonal
transformation can be written in the form

given that:

q3 −q2
q4
−q3
q1
q4
q2 −q1
q4
−q1 −q2 −q3







q1
q2
q3
q4



.





F ′ = pF q,

pp = 1,

qq = 1.

(7)

(8)

(9)

(10)

(11)

(12)

An arbitrary four-dimensional rotation is characterized by six parameters. In
fact we have six quantities in the two quaternions since their lengths are normalized
to 1.

7In view of the completely different subject matter, this notation should not be confused with

the customary one used for the generalized coordinates and momenta.

5

A subsystem of the general transformations is formed by the purely spatial
rotations which do not change the time axis. Then obviously the same relationship
and F as holds between F ′ and F . Since a reversal of the factors
holds between F
in (11) yields:

′

we must have:

F ′ = qF p,

p = q,

q = p.

Accordingly, purely spatial rotations are characterized by the quaternion at the
back being equal to the conjugate of the quaternion at the front.

In the four-dimensional space of reality, one of the dimensions is imaginary.
Accordingly, an orthogonal transformation cannot contain real coefﬁcients exclu-
sively, and we should consider both characteristic quaternions to be complex quan-
tities. On the other hand, they cannot be arbitrary complex quantities. Namely,
only real Lorentz transformations can be allowed because only these transform
real (x, y, z, t) into real (x′, y′, z′, t′) again. This constraint can be characterized
as follows: Let us consider the “position vector:” R = (x, y, z, l). Let us change
over to the conjugate complex quantity which we will denote by an “asterisk” (∗).
As l is imaginary, only the time component of R will change its sign. Hence we
have

This peculiarity must remain valid in the primed system as well. Hence, if

then:

and so:

Accordingly, real Lorentz transformations are characterized by the quaternion at
the back being equal to the complex conjugate and “overbarred” value of the
quaternion at the front. This means that it is enough to give p, and this value
already determines q. So a real Lorentz transformation can be written in the form

In the case of spatial rotations the quaternion at the back must be equal to p and
therefore it is seen that spatial rotations always belong to real p.

R∗ = −R.

R′ = pRq,

p∗R∗q∗ = −qRp

p∗ = q,

q∗ = p.

F ′ = pF p∗.

6

(11a)

(13)

(14)

(15)

(16)

(17)

(18)

4 The Hamiltonian operator

Let us introduce the following differential operator (“gradient”):

∇ =

jx

∂
∂x

(cid:18)

+ jy

+ jz

+

∂
∂y

∂
∂z

∂
∂l

,

(cid:19)

(19)

which we will denote as “Hamiltonian operator.”8 Under coordinate transforma-
tions it behaves like a vector.

We shall apply this operation to a quaternion F in the following form:

∇F =

(cid:18)

− ∂
∂x

jx − ∂
∂y

jy − ∂
∂z

∂
∂l

(cid:19)

jz +

(Xjx + Y jy + Zjz + T ).

(20)

Let us put:

∇F = 0,

(21)

so we carry out to some extent the same process in four dimensions, as in the
complex function theory in two dimensions, if we write down the Cauchy-Riemann
differential equations by putting:

∂
∂x

+ i

∂
∂y

(cid:18)

(cid:19)

(u + iv) =

∂u
∂x

− ∂v
∂y

+ i

∂u
∂y

+

∂v
∂x

(cid:18)

(cid:19)

= 0.

It was this formal analogy which motivated me at the time to investigate equation
(21).

If we decompose the above into components, we have the following system:

(21a)

∂X
∂l
∂Y
∂l
∂Z
∂l
∂X
∂x

− ∂T
∂x
− ∂T
∂y
− ∂T
∂z
∂Y
∂y

+

+

+

+

+

∂Y
∂z
∂Z
∂x
∂X
∂y
∂Z
∂z

− ∂Z
∂y
− ∂X
∂z
− ∂Y
∂x
∂T
∂l

+

=0,

=0,

=0,

=0.






7

8In Hamilton’s works we can ﬁnd only the spatial part of this operator. Strictly taken we should,
therefore, speak of an “extended Hamiltonian operator.” For the sake of brevity, however, we forgo
this, especially since this extension is quite obvious for the relativistic application of quaternions.

These equations are closely connected with Maxwell’s equations for empty

space. There we have:

1
c
1
c

∂E
∂t
∂H
∂t

− rot H = 0,

− rot E = 0,

div E = 0,
div H = 0.






F = H + iE

div(H + iE) = 0.

(22)

(23)

(24)

(25)

(26)

(27)

Subtracting the second equation multiplied by i from the ﬁrst, we obtain the
complex equation:

1
c

∂(H + iE)
i∂t

− rot(H + iE) = 0,

in which only the combination:

occurs. In the same way, we can combine the last two equations in the form:

If we denote the components of F by X, Y, Z (which now also should be
considered as complex numbers) and write down the equations component by
component, it becomes clear that the system obtained is identical with equation
(21a) if we put T = 0 in the latter.

Therefore equation (21), which is also Lorentz invariant and also supplies
the wave equation for all components — just like Maxwell’s equations — can
be conceived as a natural formal extension of the latter. The wave equation is
obtained by a second application of the ∇-operation in the following form:

∇(∇F ) = (∇∇)F = 0.

Namely, the ∇∇ operator is evidently a scalar and identical with the Laplacian ∆
in four dimensions:

∇∇ = ∆ =

∂2
∂x2 +

∂2
∂y2 +

∂2
∂z2 +

∂2
∂l2 .

5 Dirac’s equation for the case of vanishing mass

If in (21a) we add the second equation multiplied by i to the ﬁrst, likewise the
fourth to the third equation, then we have two equations which contain only the

8

(28)





combinations X + iY and Z + iT :

∂(X + iY )
∂l
∂(Z + iT )
∂l

+ i

+ i

∂(Z + iT )
∂x
∂(X + iY )
∂x

− ∂(Z + iT )
∂y
∂(X + iY )
∂y

+

− i

+ i

∂(X + iY )
∂z
∂(Z + iT )
∂z

= 0,

= 0.

Of course, these two equations cannot replace the original four. The eight Maxwell
equations were halved to four by changing over from real to complex quantities.
Here, however, X, Y, Z, T themselves are already complex. However, we can
write two further equations by taking into account the system of equations for the
conjugate complex quantities and performing the same operations there as well.
Then obviously we should mark all components with an asterisk and also take into
account that the term with ∂/∂l changes its sign. Thus for the quantities marked
with an asterisk, we have the same equations but with an opposite sign in the ﬁrst
term.

Let us introduce the following assignments:

X + iY = ψ4,
Z + iT = ψ3,

X ∗ + iY ∗ = ψ2,
Z

+ iT

∗

∗

= ψ1,)

(29)

then it is seen immediately that we have Dirac’s equations in the same form as
they are explicitly written in Weyl’s textbook9 if we neglect the mass term. From
this we can see that the ∇ operator can substitute fully for the Dirac operator, and
this has the advantage that the Hamiltonian operator is in closer connection with
vector analytical quantities.

We note that the association of Dirac’s equations to those of Maxwell has been
performed by C. G. Darwin10 in a similar way except that we have to put T = 0 in
the Maxwellian case. Then the problem arises that ψ1 and ψ3 are not independent
of each other; rather, the one is determined by the other. Equation (21), on the
other hand, allows exactly as many degrees of freedom as the Dirac equations, and
they are in fact equivalent to them.

Before starting to discuss the full Dirac equations, we should like to point
out an important characteristic of equation (21) to which we will return later. The
equations obviousliy do not unequivocally prescribe the transformation of quantity
F under a Lorentz transformation. In fact, without any rotation of the axes, from

9Hermann Weyl, Group Theory and Quantum Mechanics (Publishing House of S. Hirzel,

Leipzig, 1928) p. 171.

10loc. cit.; see footnote 2.

9

the associative law of multiplication it already follows that a transformation of the
form:

(with k an arbitrary quaternion) is possible without any change of the system. In
the case of a Lorentz transformation:

generally one can only say of the transformation of F that:

must hold where k may still be an arbitrary quaternion.

In the special case of Maxwell’s equations, this ambiguity does not appear
because from the very beginning T = 0 and it has to be demanded that T ′ = 0
holds in the new system as well. Then the rotation imposed on F by transformation
(32) must also be a purely spatial one and we have:

We know that the electromagnetic ﬁeld strength transforms in the four-dimensional

formalism like an antisymmetric tensor (a six-vector). From this we can draw the
following conclusion: If we know that a complex quaternion is transformed as:

then the time component is an invariant of the transformation while the real and
imaginary parts of the spatial components can be considered as forming a six-
vector. Of course, we could also give a direct proof for this type of transformation
of an antisymmetric tensor, but here we shall dispense with this for the sake of
brevity.

6 Dirac’s equation in the case of imaginary mass

It is natural to try to introduce the mass term by introducing a term proportional
to F instead of setting the right-hand side of equation (21) equal to 0. However, it
should be taken into consideration that it is not the repetition of the ∇-operation but
the operation ∇∇ which gives the wave equation. On the other hand, we can make
use of the speciﬁc characteristic of the four-dimensional space-time continuum,
that:

′

F

= F k

∇′ = p∇p∗

F ′ = pF k

k = p.

pF p,

∇ = −∇∗.

10

(30)

(31)

(32)

(33)

(34)

(35)

We now make the assumption:

where α is any real number. With regard to rule (35) it follows from this equation
that:

and so, applying the operation ∇ to the ﬁrst equation, we have:

∇F = αiF ∗,

∇F ∗ = αiF,

∇∇F = −α2F.

Thus we really obtain the required Schr¨odinger equation, but with the opposite
sign of the mass term, which would only be possible in the case of imaginary
mass. Later we shall see that this change of sign is well-founded and cannot
be eliminated from the equation by introducing numerical factors. Although an
imaginary mass obviously has no real meaning, it is of heuristic value to discuss
equation (36) brieﬂy. Let us combine the equations in pairs again, exactly as in
equations (28), and let us introduce the quantities ψ in the sense of the assignment
(29). Then we obtain exactly the Dirac equation if we take the imaginary value:

In the case of a Lorentz transformation, the transformation law of quaternion

m = − h
2πc

αi

for the mass m.

F is easily found. Let us set:

then we have:

Hence it follows that:

′

F

= xF y,

′

∇

F ′ = p∗∇p xF y.

x∗ = p∗,

x = p,

y = y∗

must hold if equation (36) is to remain valid in the transformed system as well.
The second condition is equivalent to the ﬁrst. The third condition states that y
must be a real quaternion.

Accordingly, the law of the transformation of F reads:

with an arbitrary real r, whose length we assume to be normalized to 1.
It is
obvious that no invariant meaning can be assigned to a quantity which behaves

F ′ = pF r,

11

(36)

(37)

(38)

(39)

(40)

(41)

(42)

(43)

in this manner under a transformation. In the case of purely spatial rotations p is
real; thus we could put r = p and F would be a vector. In the case of a general
Lorentz transformation, however, such an assignment is impossible.

This is not remarkable. When writing down equation (36), we make essential
use of the characteristic of the space-time continuum that one of the dimensions
is imaginary. In a purely real four-dimensional manifold, an equation of the type
(36) would lose its meaning. However, the concepts of tensor analysis are formed
in such a way that they never utilize the reality of the quadratic fundamental form,
and they consider the peculiar values +3, −1 for the index of inertia of actual
space-time as a coincidence. Here, however, it is just these peculiarities that are
essentially utilized.

Even if F itself has no invariant meaning, it can be used to construct quantities

having such a meaning. First we have an invariant:
F ′F

= pF rrF p = p(F F )p = F F .

′

This appears as a complex quantity and is thus equivalent to two real invariants,
just the two invariants of the Dirac theory. Furthermore the quantity:

∗

F F

forms a vector. Indeed, the transformation law reads:
p∗ = p(F F
F ′F

′∗ = pF rr∗F

∗

∗

)p∗,

since r is real. This vector, the spatial part of which is purely imaginary and the
time part purely real, is identical with the “current vector of probability” of the
Dirac theory.

There exist no further covariant constructions unless a restriction is introduced

for r, which cannot be made without arbitrariness.

7 Dirac’s equation in the case of real mass

It is also possible to arrive at the Schr¨odinger equation in the following more
general way. Instead of supposing that ∇F is proportional to a quantity formed
from F , we introduce a new quantity G.

(44)

(45)

(46)

(47)

(48)

If we want:

∇F = αG.

∇G = βF,

12

then obviously we have:

∇∇F = −αβF.
Here the product αβ can be either positive or negative. By attaching a factor to
G, the constant on the right-band side can be made equal or the negative of each
other, whereby we have reduced the system to two normal forms namely either:

(49)

∇F = αG,
∇G = αF, )

∇F = αG,
∇G = −αF.)

(50)

(51)

(51a)

(52)

(53)

or

or

Let us ﬁrst consider the second case.

If we change over to the conjugate

complex quantity in the second equation then we can also replace (51) with:

∇F = αG,
∇G∗ = αF ∗.)
Now we can add these two equations and write:

∇(F + G∗) = α(F + G∗)∗

∇(F + iG

∗

) = iα(F + iG

∗

∗

)

,

and in this way we have arrived at our former equation combination (36) for the
combination H = F + iG∗.

However, in the ﬁrst case, corresponding just to a real mass, a uniﬁcation of
this type, which should lead to an equation for only one single quantity, is not
automatically possible.11 In the following we shall deal with this case.

It is useful to write our basic equation in the form:

∇F = αG∗,
∇G = −αF ∗.)
Now we can obtain the Dirac equation again if we write the combination (I +
i II, III + i IV) in both the ﬁrst and second system. Then we have to make the
assignment:

(54)

2X1 + iY1 = ψ4,
Z1 + iT1 = ψ3,

X ∗
2 + iY ∗
2 + iT ∗
Z ∗

2 = ψ2,
2 = ψ1,)

(55)

11Later we shall see, however, that there exist corresponding combinations here as well if

quaternions are introduced as factors.

13

and we have for the mass:

m = − h
2πc

α.

The indices 1 and 2 refer to quaternions F and G, respectively. However, the
system (54), consisting of eight equations, is still not exhausted. Now we can
exchange the roles of F and G and make the assignment:

2X2 + iY2 = σ4,
Z2 + iT2 = σ3,

1 + iY ∗
X ∗
1 + iT ∗
Z ∗

1 = σ2,
1 = σ1.)

A Dirac equation system holds also for the values of σ which are independent
of ψ. This equation system is completely identical with the ﬁrst one, except that
the signs are opposite in the mass term due to the change of sign in the second
equation (54). These two systems altogether are now equivalent to system (54).12

In the case of a Lorentz transformation (31), the transformation of F and G is

easily obtained in the following form. It reads:

(56)

(57)

(58)

F ′ = pF k,
G′ = pGk∗,)

where k may be an arbitrary quaternion.

Here, too, the transformation displays a peculiar uncertainty in ψ for which
no correspondence can be found in the Dirac theory because there the transfor-
mation of the quantities is unequivocal. This can be explained as follows: For
a transformation of (X1, ..., T1), (X2, ..., T2), after conversion to ψ and σ, the
latter quantities will generally be mixed. If, however, we presuppose only one
Dirac equation, e.g., that containing ψ, then only those transformations come into
consideration in which the quantities σ do not appear, i.e., those in which ψ are
transformed into each other. This means that here we distinguish a subsystem
in equation system (54) and require that this subsystem should be transformed
into itself. Thereby the transformation of the quantities ψ will be unequivocally
deﬁned (up to a common factor), but the so-distinguished subsystem will not get
an invariant meaning, whereas this can be expected of the whole system. In fact,
this will be conﬁrmed and we shall be able to ﬁnd a general covariant formulation
for the extended system. However, before coming to this, it is interesting to have
a closer look at the Dirac subsystem and its speciﬁc transformation characteristics
— in view of the importance of Dirac’s theory.

12A duplication of the Dirac equation can also be found with the Madelung model (loc. cit.)

where eight complex equations are written down.

14

8 Uniﬁed derivation of the covariants of Dirac’s the-

ory

In accordance with the above, we now presuppose the equation system for ψ alone
and allow only those transformations which convert ψ into themselves. We can
easily show that, under this condition, the indeﬁnite quaternion k of equation (58)
can practically be set equal to 1. We only have to consider that now X + iY and
Z + iT may only be transformed in this combination; otherwise, the quantities
X − iY and Z − iT which can be deduced from the quantities σ would also be
required. It is easy to show that this means the following for the transformation
matrix: we divide the square of the matrix into four small squares with a horizontal
and a vertical line across the center. Then in each of these squares the two terms
along the diagonal must be equal and the other two the negative of each other.
If we check the matrix (7) of a p-transformation for this characteristic, we shall
see that this condition is actually satisﬁed. In case of a q-transformation with a
matrix (10), however, this is true for two squares only and it does not hold for the
remaining two. Therefore, we have to set k1 and k2 = 0 for the post-multiplying
k-transformation and there remains only a multiplication of all ψ; with the same
complex number.

It is
This transformation is trivial because of the linearity of the equation.
natural to eliminate this by putting k = 1. Then a similarity transformation of
this kind, which is possible even without any rotation of the coordinate system,
is excluded and the transformation of F and G becomes unequivocal. However,
normalization does not go this far in quantum mechanics. There, only the absolute
value of each complex factor is normalized but not its phase. This is based
upon the fact that for quantum mechanics it is only the “hermitian operations”
which play a role — they are not inﬂuenced by this phase. Hence, if we put
k = 1, then we consider a more restricted group of transformations than those
allowed by quantum mechanics. In this way we surely obtain all covariants that
have a quantum mechanical meaning and possibly even more. We can proceed
as follows: We check all covariant constructions of the restricted transformation
group k = 1 and eliminate afterwards those which are not compatible with the
mentioned “phase transformation.”

Now let us consider unequivocally the following transformation:

F ′ = pF,
G′ = pG.)
We do not know the quantities F and G, only those combinations of their com-
ponents which occur in equations (55). Instead of these quantities we introduce a

(59)

15

single quaternion H which we assign to the quantities ψ in the following way:

X + iY = ψ4,
Z + iT = ψ3,

X ∗ + iY ∗ = ψ2,
Z ∗ + iT ∗ = ψ1.)

It is easy to calculate that H is composed of F and G as follows

Let us put:

then

2H = F + G + i(F − G)jz.

G + F = I, G − F = K,

2H = I − iKjz.

(60)

(61)

(62)

(61a)

We can easily deduce a differential equation for H. Namely, if we apply the
operation ∇ to (61a) — keeping in mind that equations (54) hold between I and
K just as for F and G — then we have:

2∇H = α(K ∗ + iI ∗jz) = α(−K ∗jz + iI ∗)jz

∗

∗

= αi(I

+ iK

jz)jz = 2αiH

jz,

∗

that is:

∇H = αiH ∗jz.
This equation is — as one can easily verify — equivalent13 to the Dirac equation
between the quantities ψ.14 If we had not had in mind an invariant formulation

(63)

13Of course, either jx or jy could occur instead of jz on the right-hand side, and then we would
only have to cyclically interchange X, Y and Z during the assignment of the components to ψ in
equations (60).

14Editorial note: This equation, to be called the Dirac-Lanczos equation is an important result
of this paper. In Dirac’s formulation the 4-complex-component electron ﬁeld is taken as a 4 × 1
column vector Ψ, and the linear operators are 4 × 4 complex matrices.

M2(C) ∼
nions, which are isomorphic to the algebra of 4 × 4 complex matrices M4(C) ∼

In Lanczos’s formulation the same 4-complex-component ﬁeld is a biquaternion H ∈ B ∼
=
∼
= Cℓ3,0. The linear operators are then linear biquaternions functions of biquater-
= Cℓ4,1.
In both formulations the operator space has 4 × 4 × 2 = 32 dimensions over the reals. The
difference is that in the Dirac formulation the ﬁeld is an abstract 4-component column vector,
while in the Lanczos formulation the ﬁeld is directly related to the algebraic structure of spacetime
because any biquaternion H = s + ~v is the direct sum of a scalar s and a 3-component vector ~v.

= M2(B) ∼

= Cℓ1,2

Lanczos’s formulation is therefore more suitable than Dirac’s for studying and demonstrating
the “classical” aspects of the electron ﬁeld, and for making comparisons with the Maxwell and
Proca ﬁelds which are usually expressed in terms of scalars and vectors.

Finally, in terms of Clifford algebras, the Dirac ﬁeld Ψ is a degenerate 8-real-component element
of the 32-dimensional Clifford algebra Cℓ4,1 (i.e., an element of an ideal of that algebra) while the

16

of the Dirac equation, then we could have started out with this equation from the
very beginning and it could have formed the basis of our investigation.

We can also write down for H the transformation:

and it can immediately be seen that:

is an invariant. If we separate the real and imaginary parts:

H ′ = pH,

′

H ′H

= pHHp = HH

HH = A + Bi,

then we obtain two invariants — these are just the two fundamental invariants of
the Dirac theory.

It is also easy to see that the quantity:

′∗

′

H

H

= p(HH)p

∗

forms a vector. This vector represents the “probability current” in the Dirac theory,
and its zero divergence was proved by Dirac.15

Remarkably, this vector is supplemented by three others which can be obtained

as follows: Let V be an arbitrary vector, and let us form the following product:

HV H ∗.

We shall prove that this is an invariant. In fact we have:

′

H

V ′H ′∗ = HppV p∗p∗H ∗ = HV H ∗.

Now let us write this product in the form:

4

∗

HV H

=

∗

(HjαH

)Vα,

α=1
X
Lanczos ﬁeld H is any 8-real-component element of the 8-dimensional Clifford algebra Cℓ1,2
which is therefore the smallest algebra in which Dirac’s electron theory can be fully expressed.

∼
= B,

For more details see Refs. [5, 10, 11, 12], where it is shown that the complex conjugation
operation appearing on the right-hand side of Eq. (63) is characteristic of the Fermionic character
of the Dirac ﬁeld.

15Proc. Roy. Soc. 118, 251, 1928.

17

(64)

(65)

(66)

(67)

(68)

(69)

(70)

where Vα denotes the components of V . However, if
BαVα is an invariant, then
the Bα necessarily represents the components of a vector. Consequently we obtain
a vector with the components:

P

Bα = HjαH ∗.

(71)

In actuality, not only one but four vectors are obtained in this way, since the invari-
ant (68) is a quaternion itself and is thus equivalent to four invariants because each
coefﬁcient of ji remains unchanged in itself. Let us write down the components
of the four quaternions each in a line, one under the other. In this way we obtain
a quadratic array containing the components of a vector in each column.

Now the scheme (71) can be realized in a very simple way. Namely, we can
consider it as an orthogonal transformation of jα. In fact, it is obviously a real
Lorentz transformation (since the quaternion at the back of this expression is the
conjugate complex and barred quantity of the one at the front). Accordingly,
we form ﬁrst a p-matrix from H, a q-matrix from H ∗ and multiply these two
matrices. Applying the resultant matrix to jα, we obtain an array in which only
the columns and rows are to be interchanged. The components of the individual
vectors are, however, each contained in columns. Thus the rows of the matrix
obtained immediately provide the four vectors. The fourth is identical with the
current vector obtained earlier.

The transformation matrix obtained is an orthogonal one. Thus we obtain four
vectors at each point which are perpendicular to each other. One of them is the
current vector. The length of all these vectors is the same.16

The square of the length is the same for all four:

= (HH)(H ∗H

) = A2 + B2.

∗

It is also easy to calculate the divergence of these vectors (which must be an
invariant). We should then form:17

∂Bα
∂xα

=

∂
∂xα

HjaH ∗

= (H∇)H ∗ + H(∇H ∗)

X

X (cid:18)

= (∇H)H ∗ − H(∇H)∗ = U − U

∗

,

(cid:19)

(72)

where we put:

∇H
16This geometrical result is methodologically very interesting, especially in view of the Einstein

U =

(73)

H

.

∗

theory of “Distant parallelism” which is just based on such “local n-frames.”

17Editorial note: In equations (72) and (73) the parentheses are meant to specify the range of

(cid:0)

(cid:1)

action of the differential operators ∂/∂xα and ∇.

18

(74)

(75)

(76)

(77)

(78)

Since the differential equation (63) holds for H, it follows that:

U = −αijzH

H ∗ = −αi(A − iB)jz,

∗

and we obtain:

∂Bα
∂xα

X

= −2αBjz.

This means that only the vector belonging to the third row of the matrix has a
divergence which differs from zero.

The remaining three orthogonal vectors — among them the current vector —

are divergence free.

We can also write the four vectors obtained in the form:

where ji is one of the four quaternion units. Only the third and fourth vectors are
not affected by the phase transformation. The fourth is the previously mentioned
Dirac current vector. The third,

B(i) = HjiH

∗

,

B(3) = HjzH

∗

,

is the one whose divergence differs from zero.

We can ﬁnd the tensors of the Dirac theory in a similarly systematic manner.

Let us form:

H ′jαH ′ = pHjαHp,

where jα should be one of the three spatial quaternion units.
(The fourth unit
supplies only the already known invariant.) We already know that a quantity
which behaves like this under transformation can be considered in its spatial part
as an antisymmetric tensor if we separate the real and imaginary parts (just as
we saw in tile case of the electromagnetic ﬁeld strength). The time part gives an
invariant. This time part, however, is zero for all three constructions and therefore
gives nothing.

The phase transformation is only compatible with the quantity formed with jz:

HjzH,

(79)

which is thus the only quantum mechanically allowed one. This antisymmetric
tensor was introduced by C. G. Darwin.18

18Proc. Roy. Soc. 120, 621, 1928.

19

There is another possible way to obtain a tensor. Using the vectors U and V

we form the invariant:

′

′

U ′V

H

H ′ = HppUp∗p∗V ppH = HUV H.

Let us write this in the following form:

(HjµjνH)UµVν,

µ,ν
X

then we have a bilinear form the coefﬁcients of which must be the components of
a tensor:

Tik = HjijkH.
Here, too, we obtain four tensors simultaneously since the components appear as
quaternions and a tensor component can be separated from each unit vector.

(82)

We could just as well have started from the invariant:

and, correspondingly, we would have arrived at the tensor:

∗

H

UV H ∗

∗

T ′
ik = H

jijkH ∗.

With this we have listed all those covariant constructions of zero, ﬁrst and second
degree for the restricted group k = 1, which are built quadratically from the
fundamental quantities.

The covariants of the Dirac theory have already been discussed in the litera-
ture.19 However, the uniform development outlined here may outdo the method-
ological persuasive power of other descriptions by its clarity and simplicity.

(80)

(81)

(83)

(84)

9 Failure of the current vector with respect to strict

covariance

Once again surveying our train of thought, we can state the following: We started
from a larger equation system and found that the transformation of the functions
is not unequivocally determined by the equations. However, we required that a
given subsystem of the system transforms into itself and this requirement enabled
us to eliminate the uncertainty of the transformation.

19See especially J. von Neumann, Zeits. f. Phys. 48, 868, 1928.

20

However, if we only wish to investigate the Dirac equation, we could just as
well have taken equation (63) as a basis from the very beginning. (We have derived
this equation from the larger system for a certain combination of F and G.) We
could have performed the assignment (60) and could have shown that equation
(63) is indeed equivalent to the Dirac system. If we now take this path and want
to calculate the transformation of the function H immediately from this system,
then we shall experience a peculiar discrepancy with our last results, and this is
probably not without signiﬁcance. Let us write the transformation of H in the
form:

then we obtain the following condition for quaternion k:

H ′ = pHk,

jzk = k

jz.

∗

This condition by no means represents a strict limitation on k that would allow, for
instance, only a trivial similarity transformation. Rather, condition (86) formulates
the requirement that the x and y parts of k must be purely imaginary and its z
and l parts purely real. Now if we also perform a natural length normalization,
which excludes just the trivial similarity transformation, then a very important
3-parameter group of transformations will still remain which certainly has nothing
to do with the “phase uncertainty” of the ψ. Rather, one can observe that in the
case of this transformation which is possible even without any rotation of the axes,
the new ψ can be expressed not only in terms of the previous ψ but also in terms of
their conjugates ψ∗. As ψ only plays the role of auxiliary quantities, no objective
reasons can be found for excluding these transformations, even more so because
these are absolutely normal transformations for the (X, Y, Z, T ) — without the
appearance of the conjugates. No reason can be found why we should not introduce
these quantities instead of ψ as fundamental quantities, though obviously the
Hamiltonian operator is more closely connected with tensor analytical quantities
than is the Dirac operator. If, however, we allow these transformations, then a
large part of the covariants set up will be lost. Only the invariant HH and a vector
will remain. However, this is not the current vector with zero divergence but vector
B(3) whose divergence proved to be different from zero. In fact, we obtain:

∗

H ′jzH

= pHkjzk

H

∗

∗

p∗ = pHjzH

∗

p∗,

because from (86) it follows that:

jz = k∗jzk = kjzk

∗

.

(85)

(86)

(87)

(88)

For the current vector, we cannot prove the invariance under this k-transformation,
Thus B(3) is the only vector which really seems to be strictly covariant. In the

21

case of the other constructions (especially with the current vector), the covariance
is the result of what is, after all, an arbitrary constraint.20

This circumstance seems to suggest that the Dirac equation should be consid-

ered as a component of a larger system, instead of a system closed in itself.

10 Covariant formulation of the doubled Dirac equa-

tion

Let us now consider system (54) as a whole and let us study its transformation
properties. As we have seen, the system is equivalent to two simultaneous Dirac
equations which contain two independent groups of quantities: ψ and σ. However,
from the standpoint of the whole system, such a decomposition would be rather
constrained and unnatural and of no advantage even as a mathematical aid, since
it would amount to separating out a subsystem which is not internally preferred.
We want to refrain from doing this and to be guided rather by the point of view
that a covariant meaning should be attributed to the quantities F and G contained
in the equations. This principle will lead us to remove the uncertainty of the
transformation which lies in the arbitrariness of the quaternion k, whereas until
now we attained this just by separating out a subsystem of equations which is not
covariant in itself.

Let us once again write down the transformation equations of our functions F

and G:

F ′ = pF k,
∗
= pGk
G

′

,)

(58)

where k may be arbitrary and is only subject to the always possible, but natural,
normalization kk = 1. Before we come to the determination of k on the basis
of the covariance principle, let us note that certain invariants and covariants are
possible even with k left arbitrary.

Namely, ﬁrst the two invariants:

F F , GG,

(89)

20Remark during revision: The author had not suspected that the transformation properties could
change due to the introduction of the vector potential. Actually, this is exactly the case; thus the
special group of transformations found here is lost with the extension of the system by the external
ﬁeld. The objection that was made against the customary transformation theory of the ψ functions
is thus invalid. For more details, see the paper “On the covariant formulation of Dirac’s equation”
to be published in the near future. (Editorial note: See Ref. [2].)

22

which are equivalent to four real invariants.

Then the two vectors can be formed:

∗
F G

, GF

∗

,

so that, for example,

′∗

′

F

G

= pF kk G

p

= p(F G

)p

∗

∗

.

∗

∗

(90)

(91)

The two vectors of (90) are, however, not independent of each other; rather, the
second is equal to the conjugate complex and overbarred quantity of the ﬁrst.
Consequently, it is enough to consider F G

alone.

∗

We might guess that this vector — i.e., its real and imaginary parts — should
∗
.
correspond to the current vector, as it represents the analog construction of HH
However, if we calculate its divergence using a method quite similar to that applied
in (72), we shall ﬁnd this is not conﬁrmed. Instead we shall have:

∗

div(F G

) = α[(F F ) + (GG)

].

∗

(92)

This ﬁnding could be used as a negative factor against the interpretation sug-
gested here. In fact, this objection would not be justiﬁed. This is because this
vector, distinguished by the fact that it remains covariant even under an unlimited
transformation of the equations, does not correspond at all to the current vector of
the Dirac equation but to vector (77), the divergence of which does not vanish even
there. However, the Dirac current vector cannot unequivocally be made to corre-
spond to a covariant formulation, as it is not characterized by invariant properties,
and its covariance is due rather to an unnecessary limitation of the transformations
— as was found in the last section.

In our formal introduction, we were able to ﬁnd a tensor analytical interpreta-
tion for two types of quantities. If k = p∗, then we have to deal with a vector. If
k = p, then we can consider the construction as a non symmetric tensor — with its
time component an invariant. Strangely enough, whichever choice we make both
constructions occur. The difference is only that F and G exchange their roles.
Now we want to choose:

k = p.

(93)

By this choice we put F as an antisymmetric tensor and G as a vector. Now only
covariant quantities occur in our equation. Also, both systems of equations are
already covariant in themselves, not just the whole system.

Let us examine now the ﬁrst system. This system seems to be closely related
to Maxwell’s equations of the electromagnetic ﬁeld. Here we are not thinking of

23

the vacuum equations but of the complete equations with the current vector on
their right-hand side. Namely, Maxwell’s equation containing a current vector can
be brought to the following form by the complex combination (24):

∇F = S∗,

(94)

where S means the current vector considered as a quaternion. This is, however,
just our ﬁrst equation which is thus given a very simple interpretation with the aid
of a classical analogy. Now we should only put F4 = 0 for Maxwell’s scheme
but the occurrence of this term means only that the gradient of a scalar appears on
the left-hand side. In addition, the complex character of our vector G should be
interpreted so that not only an electric but also a magnetic current must be taken
into consideration.

The emergence of the second equation is essentially new and unknown to the
classical theory. This equation means that there is a “feedback” between current
and ﬁeld intensity, a reaction of the ﬁeld to the current. The appearance of this
equation should be looked upon as the actual effect that led to the discovery of the
Schr¨odinger equation.

The second equation also has a simple covariant meaning. An equation of this
type is likewise well-known to us from electromagnetic ﬁeld theory. If, namely, we
write down the electromagnetic ﬁeld by means oft vector potential Φi, regarding
the Φi vector as a quaternion, then we obtain the equation:

∇Φ = −F

∗

,

(95)

which is just our second equation where we only have to consider that in our
case Φ is to be treated as a complex quaternion. This implies that in addition to
the customary “rotation construction,” the “dual” construction appears as well, in
accordance with the occurrence of a “magnetic vector potential.”

Thus we can convert our equation system into the common language of physics
either with the customary vectorial symbols or by using the terminology of tensor
analysis. For this we only have to apply the corresponding equations of the elec-
tromagnetic ﬁeld and substitute the corresponding quantities. The only difference
is that the continuity condition for the current cannot be inferred from the general
structure of the equations because of the occurrence of the redundant invariant
which is not contained in the theory of Maxwell. This invariant is responsible
for the fact that the disappearance of the divergence for the current vector is not
a necessary consequence of the equations and that the equation system does not
contain any internal correlations. (Absence of identities.)

For the sake of clarity, we shall write down the resulting equations explicitly,

in tensor analytical form. Then the following quantities appear:

24

An antisymmetric tensor: Fik = −Fki (“electromagnetic ﬁeld intensity”). Let

the “dual” tensor be denoted by

Fik.21

Two vectors: Si and Mi (“electric and magnetic current”).
e

Two invariants: S and M.

We obtain altogether 16 equations which can be divided into two groups
(A and B). Group (A) contains two vector equations; group (B) contains an
antisymmetric tensor equation (six equations) and two scalar equations.

With the customary symbolism of tensor calculus, the equations read as fol-

lows:

= αFik,

(96)

∂S
∂xi

+

∂Fiµ
∂xµ

= αSi,

(A)

∂Si
∂xk





− ∂Sk
∂xi

− ∂

∂M
∂xi

= αMi;

Fiµ
∂xµ
e
^
− ∂Mk

∂Mi
∂xk

∂xi (cid:19)

+

(cid:18)

∂Sµ
∂xµ

∂Mµ
∂xµ

= αS,

= αM.

α =

2πmc
h

.

(B)











Here the constant α is deﬁned as

(97)

The whole system, just like the Dirac equations, displays a strong symmetry.
However, it is questionable whether all quantities have a real meaning. So we
might guess that the two scalars S and M do not appear in reality. The ﬁrst
group of equations would then be fully equivalent to Maxwell’s equations. The
continuity condition for the current would be a consequence of the equations.
Despite this specialization, the previously mentioned difﬁculty experienced with

21The dual assignment should be performed according to the following scheme:

F12 = iF34, ...,

F14 = iF23, ...

(The dots indicate cyclic interchanging of 1, 2, 3.)
e

e

25

the assignment made by Darwin22 does not appear here. Namely, the two groups
of ψ-quantities (ψ and σ) are assigned not to the ﬁeld intensity alone but to the
combination of ﬁeld intensity and current vector simultaneously, and both types
of quantities appear in each group [as can be seen from equations (55) and (57)].
This is why now there is no algebraic relationship between the quantities ψ despite
the specialization.

Moreover, a further heuristic aspect can be derived from Maxwell’s equations,
namely, for the “magnetic current vector” Mi which vanishes there. We must,
however, take into consideration that here we can by no means dispose of quanti-
ties so freely as in common ﬁeld theory. Namely, due to the double coupling, there
are no dependent and independent quantities here and the number of equations
is just as large as the number of unknown quantities. It is just the characteris-
tic feature of quantum mechanics that it operates with homogeneous equations
(“eigenfunctions”), and the extraneous functions (energy, vector potential) appear
not as “right-hand sides” of equations but as factors.
If we put in our system
certain quantities equal to zero, this would lead to overdetermination: the number
of equations would be larger than that of unknown quantities. Then, accordingly,
such a zero assumption should be compensated for by the omission of equations to
avoid possible contradictions — unless there are a number of identities, whereby
the redundant equations would seem to be pure consequences of the others.

From a mathematics and aesthetics viewpoint, this redundancy would be of
considerable beneﬁt. It cannot be denied that the strong symmetry of Maxwell’s
equations with respect to duality between electric and magnetic ﬁeld intensities
exists only as long as the equations are written down with the symbols of three-
dimensional vector analysis. With respect to the four-dimensional tensor analytical
description, there is an internal difference between the two systems of Maxwell’s
equations. In reality, this difference manifests itself in the absence of magnetic
current. In one of the systems, a normal divergence appears, whereas the other
system contains the divergence of the “dual” ﬁeld intensity. The tensor analytical
formulation is faultless, yet it makes use of an accident in the four-dimensional
space: the fact that in the case of a second-rank tensor, the “dual” tensor will be
exactly of second-rank again. In principle, the emergence of this circumstance is
logically not really satisfying.

Now, if we put Mi = 0 for the magnetic current in our equations (96), then
we must simultaneously omit only the equations containing the divergence of
the dual tensor from group (A) which corresponds to Maxwell’s system. These
equations are then consequences of group (B) and no longer belong to the system
as determinative elements. Then the “dual” construction would no longer occur in

22loc. cit.; see footnote 2.

26

the system. We would have ten equations for ten quantities, on the one hand the
four Maxwell equations:

and, on the other, the six feedback equations:

∂Fiµ
∂xµ

= αSi,

∂Si
∂xk

− ∂Sk
∂xi

= αFik.

(98A)

(98B)

The divergence equation for charge is now a consequence of the equations as are
the missing four Maxwellian equations.23

However, this system has become so non-symmetric that its immediate con-
nection with the Dirac equations seems to be questionable, though it is also of
ﬁrst-order and the Schr¨odinger wave equation is obtained for each component
here as well. Indeed, we arrive at the Dirac equation again if we complete our
system by the second-order Maxwell equations and by the divergence equation
for current — which really hold as identities even if they do not add anything
new to the system. The eight Dirac equations for the quantities ψ again form a
subsystem of our whole system and contain somewhat less information than our
ten equations. However, here we already encounter a constraint in the ψ quantities.
For we can see from our assignment (55) that ψ1 = Sz − iSt becomes a purely
real quantity — since the G vector is now no longer complex but real in its space
component and imaginary in its time component. The remaining ψ quantities do
not show a similar specialization.

It is obvious that the question as to whether a real meaning can be attributed
to the above interpretation cannot be answered until the equations are completed
for the presence of an external ﬁeld. Our goal did not take us so far. We raised the
question as to whether the Dirac theory can be formulated by exclusively using
ﬁeld theoretically meaningful quantities. We have found a way which was almost
unequivocally compelling and indeed led to the expected results. It resulted in an
internally highly consistent covariant system which permits new prospects in some
respects. Also, a certain arbitrariness — which, as we have shown, is inherent in
the Dirac transformation theory and suggests an underlying reason — is eliminated
here, since here any uncertainty is avoided in the transformations.

Should this chosen way prove unsuccessful, it would most likely be hopeless
to expect a ﬁeld theoretical background for the Dirac theory. Our developments
reveal little doubt that this background can lie only in the direction found here, if
it exists at all.

23Editorial note: Eqs. (98A) and (98B) are the correct wave-equations for a massive spin 1

particle, to be rediscovered by Proca in 1936. For more details, see section 11 in [5].

27

In formal respects, one can consider it a gain that a method has been worked out
which enables the transformation properties of the Dirac quantities to be described
in a very uniﬁed and transparent way.

Berlin-Nikolassee, July 1929.

References

[1] C. Lanczos, Die tensoranalytischen Beziehungen der Diracschen Gleichung
(The tensor analytical relationships of Dirac’s equation), Zeits. f. Phys. 57
(1929) 447–473. Reprinted and translated in W.R. Davis et al., eds., Cor-
nelius Lanczos Collected Published Papers With Commentaries, III (North
Carolina State University, Raleigh, 1998) pages 2-1132 to 2-1185; e-print
arXiv:physics/050xxxx available at http://arXiv.org/abs/physics/050xxxx.

[2] C. Lanczos, Zur kovarianten Formulierung der Diracschen Gleichung (On
the covariant formulation of Dirac’s equation), Zeits. f. Phys. 57 (1929)
474–483. Reprinted and translated in W.R. Davis et al., eds., Cornelius
Lanczos Collected Published Papers With Commentaries, III (North Ca-
rolina State University, Raleigh, 1998) pages 2-1186 to 2-1205; e-print
arXiv:physics/050xxxx available at http://arXiv.org/abs/physics/050xxxx.

[3] C. Lanczos, Die Erhaltungssätze in der feldmässigen Darstellungen der
Diracschen Theorie (The conservation law in the ﬁeld theoretical represen-
tation of Dirac’s theory), Zeits. f. Phys. 57 (1929) 484–493. Reprinted and
translated in W.R. Davis et al., eds., Cornelius Lanczos Collected Published
Papers With Commentaries, III (North Carolina State University, Raleigh,
1998) pages 2-1206 to 2-1225; e-print arXiv:physics/050xxxx available at
http://arXiv.org/abs/physics/050xxxx.

[4] C. Lanczos, Dirac’s wellenmechanische Theorie des Elektrons und ihre
feldtheorische Ausgestaltung (Dirac’s wave mechanical
the
electron), Physikalische Zeits. 31 (1930) 120–130. Reprinted and trans-
lated i in W.R. Davis et al., eds., Cornelius Lanczos Collected Pub-
lished Papers With Commentaries, III (North Carolina State University,
Raleigh, 1998) 2-1226 to 2-1247; e-print arXiv:physics/050xxxx available
at http://arXiv.org/abs/physics/050xxxx.

theory of

[5] A. Gsponer and J.-P. Hurni, Lanczos-Einstein-Petiau: From Dirac’s equa-
tion to non-linear wave mechanics,
in W.R. Davis et al., eds., Cor-
nelius Lanczos Collected Published Papers With Commentaries, III (North

28

Carolina State University, Raleigh, 1998) 2-1248 to 2-1277; e-print
arXiv:physics/050xxxx available at http://arXiv.org/abs/physics/050xxxx.

[6] Kornel Lanczos, Die Funktionentheoretischen Beziehungen der Max-
wellschen Aethergleichungen — Ein Beitrag zur Relativit¨ats- und Elek-
(Verlagsbuchhandlung Josef N´emeth, Budapest, 1919)
tronentheorie,
80 pp. Reprinted in W.R. Davis et al., eds., Cornelius Lanczos Col-
lected Published Papers With Commentaries (North Carolina State Uni-
versity, Raleigh, 1998) Volume VI, pages A-1 to A-82. Web site
http://www.physics.ncsu.edu/lanczos

[7] Cornelius Lanczos, The relations of the homogeneous Maxwell’s equations
to the theory of functions — A contribution to the theory of relativity and
electrons (1919, Typeseted by Jean-Pierre Hurni with a preface by Andre
Gsponer, 2004) 58 pp; e-print arXiv:physics/0408079 available at
http://arXiv.org/abs/physics/0408079.

[8] A. Gsponer and J.-P. Hurni, Lanczos’s functional theory of electrodynamics
— A commentary on Lanczos’s PhD dissertation, in W.R. Davis et al.,
eds., Cornelius Lanczos Collected Published Papers With Commentaries,
I (North Carolina State University, Raleigh, 1998) 2-15 to 2-23; e-print
arXiv:math-ph/0402012 available at http://arXiv.org/abs/math-ph/0402012.

[9] A. Gsponer and J.-P. Hurni, Cornelius Lanczos’s derivation of

the
usual action integral of classical electrodynamics, Foundations of
Physics 35 (2005) 865–880.; e-print arXiv:math-ph/0408100 available at
http://arXiv.org/abs/math-ph/0408100.

[10] A. Gsponer and J.-P. Hurni, Lanczos’s equation to replace Dirac’s equa-
tion ?, in J.D. Brown et al., eds., Proc. of the Cornelius Lanczos Int.
Centenary Conf. (SIAM, Philadelphia, 1994) 509–512. There are a num-
ber of typographical errors in this paper; please refer to the e-print
arXiv:hep-ph/0112317 available at http://arXiv.org/abs/hep-ph/0112317.

[11] A. Gsponer and J.-P. Hurni, Comment on formulating and general-
izing Dirac’s, Proca’s, and Maxwell’s equations with biquaternions
or Clifford numbers, Found. Phys. Lett. 14 (2001) 77–85; e-print
arXiv:math-ph/0201049 available at http://arXiv.org/abs/math-ph/0201049.

[12] A. Gsponer, On the “equivalence” of the Maxwell and Dirac equations,
Int. J. Theor. Phys. 41 (2002) 689–694; e-print arXiv:math-ph/0201053
available at http://arXiv.org/abs/math-ph/0201053.

29

