5
0
0
2
 
g
u
A
 
4
 
 
]
h
p
-
t
s
i
h
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
6
3
0
8
0
5
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

LANCZOS - EINSTEIN - PETIAU:
From Dirac’s equation to
nonlinear wave mechanics∗

Andre Gsponer and Jean-Pierre Hurni
Independent Scientiﬁc Research Institute
Box 30, CH-1211 Geneva-12, Switzerland
e-mail: isri@vtx.ch

Version ISRI-94-03.7 February 20, 2014

Abstract

In 1929 Lanczos showed how to derive Dirac’s equation from a more
fundamental system that predicted that spin 1
2 particles should come in pairs.
Today, these pairs can unambiguously be interpreted as isospin doublets.
From the same fundamental equation Lanczos derived also the correct form
of the wave equation of massive spin 1 particles that would be rediscovered
by Proca in 1936.

Lanczos’s fundamental system was put in Lagrangian form and general-
ized by Einstein and Mayer in 1933. Although they not did study all possible
solutions, Einstein and Mayer showed that the doublets consisted of parti-
cles with different mass and charge. In fact, there are two main classes of
doublets: proton/neutron and electron/neutrino pairs.

In trying to use Proca’s equation for the electromagnetic ﬁeld of the
electron, Lanczos reached the conclusion that the mass term could not be a
constant, but had to be a function of space-time. On very general grounds
he then proposed that the elementary solutions of a fundamental nonlinear
ﬁeld theory should be eigensolutions.

In complete independence of Lanczos, G´erard Petiau discovered in 1957
a nonlinear generalization of quantum mechanics which is very close to
Lanczos ideas. In such a theory the Hamiltionian scales with the 4th power
of the proper frequency. Postulating a fundamental length equal to αre, with
re the classical radius of the electron, we ﬁnd that the Lanczos-Einstein-
Petiau model is applicable to the problem of the mass of the quarks and
electrons. The compatibility of the existence of this fundamental length with
quantum theory and special relativity limits the number of quarks to ﬁve and
the number of electrons to three.

∗Published in W.R. Davis, et al., Cornelius Lanczos Collected Published Papers With Com-

mentaries (North Carolina State University, Raleigh, 1998) Vol. III, p. 2-1248 to 2-1277.

1

Contents

1. Introduction.

2. Three problems.

3. Formulating and interpreting Dirac’s equation.

4. Biquaternions and the residual arbitrariness in the deﬁnition

of the quaternion product.

5. Special relativity and quaternions.

6. From Maxwell’s equation to Dirac-Lanczos’s equation.

7. Lanczos fundamental equation and the isospin doubling of

Dirac’s equation.

8. Minimum coupling. Two-component electron theory.

9. Einstein-Mayer-Lanczos: proton/neutron and electron/neutrino doublets

in the same Lagrangian.

interactions?

10. Einstein-Mayer-Lanczos: towards a uniﬁed picture of fundamental

11. Lanczos’s discovery of Proca’s equation.

12. Quaternionic derivation of spin 0 and spin 1 wave equations.

13. Maxwell’s equation and the absence of magnetic monopoles.

14. The energy-momentum tensor and the stability of matter.

15. The principles of a nonlinear ﬁeld theory of matter.

16. Petiau’s nonlinear wave mechanics and Barut’s mass formula.

17. The fundamental length and the elementary particle mass spectrum.

18. Conclusion: The advent of nonlinear quantum theory.

2

Preliminary remarks

This commentary was written in 1994 and published in 1998 in the Cornelius
Lanczos Collected Published Papers With Commentaries [58, Vol. III, p. 2-1248
to 2-1277]. The ﬁrst part, Secs. 1 to 15, is a comprehensive appreciation of the
papers Lanczos wrote in 1929 on Dirac’s equation and relativistic quantum me-
chanics [1, 2, 3, 4]; the second part, Secs. 15 to 17, is a short digression, inspired
by Lanczos, on the possible relevance of more recent contributions by P´etiau
[44, 45] and Barut [47, 49] to the problem of the mass spectrum of elementary
particles.

This corrected and updated version has been posted on arXiv.org on
August 4, 2005, as a tribute to Sir William Rowan Hamilton, on the occasion of
his 200th birthday.

1

Introduction

In 1929, Lanczos was with Einstein in Berlin. At last, he was working with the
great man to whom, ten years before, he dedicated his dissertation: a quaternionic
ﬁeld theory of classical electrodynamics. But Lanczos’s mind was not only on
Indeed, he was about to publish a series of three papers on
general relativity.
Dirac’s equation [1, 2, 3].

The year before, Dirac had discovered his relativistic wave-equation for the
electron. Because of its success in explaining both the electron spin and the
ﬁne structure of atomic energy levels, all physicists immediately recognized the
paramount importance of Dirac’s discovery. Moreover, the simplicity of the
arguments leading to its derivation was at once taken as the proof of its absolute
fundamental character, an opinion that still prevails today. Lanczos had a different
interpretation, for him Dirac’s equation was a derived one: he saw that Dirac’s
theory was a natural development of his quaternionic ﬁeld theory of 1919 [5].

With considerable assurance, and in his characteristic didactic style, Lanczos
passionately puts down his derivation of Dirac’s equation. He produces a very
modern article, which over sixty years later still contains a number of ideas which
remain at the forefront of fundamental theory. He displays his masterful command
of quaternionic algebraic techniques and, with a very careful choice of notations
and minimal use of redundant mathematical jargon, he ends up with a physics

* * *

3

paper so different in style from those of his time that one could think that he wrote
it for the future.

The exact reasons why these articles were ignored by the vast majority of his
contemporaries, and the reasons why Lanczos himself abandoned quaternions and
never returned to quaternionic ﬁeld theory for the rest of his life, could be the
subject of research for some historian of science. Already on October 25th, 1929,
at the lecture he gave at the Physical Society of Berlin, he did not pronounce the
word ‘quaternion’ [4]. Later [6], in his famous 1931 paper where he discusses the
fundamental issues raised by general relativity, quantum theory and the unsolved
‘problem of matter,’ he returned to his interpretation of matter as singularities
in an otherwise regular ﬁeld, and once again compare this idea with the concept
of eigensolutions which has proved to be so successful in quantum mechanics.
However, he will not quote any of the four papers he wrote in 1929.

Lanczos will brieﬂy refer to his three quaternion articles of 1929 only twice,
once in 1932, in his ﬁrst article in English [7], and in 1933 in his new derivation
of Dirac’s equation [8].
In this derivation, Dirac’s equation is found to be the
equivalent of Hamilton’s ﬁrst order equations in a problem where a second order
relativistic potential equation is in correspondence with the second order Euler-
Lagrange equations. Moreover, as in 1929, Dirac’s equation is not found in
isolation. There is a doubling in the number of solutions, which from four in
Dirac’s theory (two for spin and two for particle/antiparticle) increases to eight, a
feature that we can today interpret as isospin.1

The isospin partner of the proton — the neutron — was discovered in 1932,
at a time when the existence of the neutrino was already postulated. Thus, one
may wonder why nobody ever thought of using Lanczos’s doubling to explain the
existence of these particles. The fact is that history took a different course, and it
now remains for a historian of science to explain why.

Another mystery is that Lanczos discovered the correct equation for a massive
spin one particle, including its conserved current and energy-momentum tensor,
seven years before it was rediscovered by Proca in 1936. Moreover, the whole
series of Lanczos’s articles is a remarkable discussion of the fundamental problems
of matter, ﬁelds, and the origin of mass, most of which is still pertinent today. In
particular, his intuition lead him to foresee the possibility of a nonlinear theory,
exactly of the kind that Petiau will develop almost thirty years later, and which is
likely to give an answer to problem of the mass spectrum of elementary particles.

1However, in his second article of 1933 Lanczos ﬁnds no doubling of the Dirac equation. This
is due to the fact that the four-potential is taken as real. Allowing this potential to become complex,
two independent Dirac equations would be found again.

4

2 Three problems

Of course, as in any new development, there were problems in Lanczos quater-
nionic ﬁeld theory, and Lanczos himself was very much aware of this. The sad
thing is that essentially nobody, including some of the most inﬂuential physicists
of the time, tried to follow and possibly improve on Lanczos’s work. Among those
rare contemporary physicists who took interest in Lanczos’s approach, only two
seem to have found it worthwhile to refer to Lanczos’s quaternionic papers: Franz
Sauter in Germany, Gustave Juvet in Switzerland, and Alexander Proca in France.
We will come back to them later.

In short, with hindsight, we can easily ﬁnd the main problems in Lanczos

papers. These problems are of three types.

First, there are problems of physical interpretation because Lanczos’s equation
is much more general than Dirac’s. For instance, apart from the difﬁculties due
to the prediction of antiparticles, Dirac’s equation was very successful because it
perfectly suited electrons. The trouble with Lanczos fundamental system (from
which Dirac’s equation can be derived as a special case) is that it allows for spin 1
2
solutions (such as the electron), as well as for spin 0, 1 and 3
2.2 Obviously, just
like anybody at the time, Lanczos was completely unaware of the richness of the
elementary particles spectrum: he thought that his equation described electrons,
and that the ‘doubling’ was possibly related to the existence of protons.

The second problem has to do with spatial reversal. It seems that Lanczos was
not familiar with the idea that covariance with respect to spatial reversal had also
to be included in order to have full relativistic invariance. For this reason, a rather
substantial part of all articles is devoted to giving indirect arguments to justify the
suppression of unphysical terms (such as ‘magnetic currents’), or to discussing
complicated equations in which contributions of different parities are mixed.

The third problem is more technical and is connected with the previous one. It
has to do with the general question of how to write strictly covariant expressions
in terms of quaternions, including spatial reversal. Given that Lanczos knew a lot
about quaternions, in general, it follows that Lanczos would have appreciated the
solution to this problem if someone had solved it at the time. Unfortunately, he
had to do his best, going back and forth between quaternions and tensors, in order
to circumvent the difﬁculty, the precise nature of which he was not really aware
of.

2In this commentary we are not going to consider explicitly the spin 3

2 solutions. However, the
main point is that since a spinor is composed of 2S + 1 components, one biquaternion is enough
to describe a spin 3

2 spinor (S = 3

2 ). See [64].

5

Because of these problems, it is not easy to read and comment on Lanczos’s
papers in detail. We have therefore decided to write our commentary rather
independently of them, although we shall try to follow the order in which Lanczos
introduced the main concepts as much as possible. Since Lanczos’s papers are
very dense and detailed, we shall concentrate on the more fundamental parts.
Where required we shall also correct some of his formulas on the basis of our
hindsight. In effect, while some of his formulas or wording need updating, it is
remarkable that Lanczos always remained extremely close to the truth as we know
it today. Obviously, taking this approach we are at the risk of crediting Lanczos for
discoveries that in actual fact he did not consciously make. However, we believe
that this approach is better than the converse one.

3 Formulating and interpreting Dirac’s equation

In the introduction to his ﬁrst paper [1], Lanczos starts by recalling the two
conditions which lead Dirac to formulate his equation: it had to be a linear differ-
ential system of ﬁrst order, and the iterated equation had to give the ‘relativistic
Schr¨odinger wave-equation,’ i.e., what we today call the ‘Klein-Gordon equation.’
The ﬁrst condition is sufﬁcient for having a deterministic evolution equation, and
the second one insures the relativistic invariance of the result. Thus, with just two
axioms, Dirac had a solution to the problem of the relativistic electron, which,
as stressed by Lanczos, has the advantage to be amenable to general ‘operator
methods,’ for which one does not have to worry about the difﬁculties of normal
tensor analysis.

Today, Dirac’s equation is a corner stone of physics. Just like Schr¨odinger’s
equation in the non-relativistic domain, it is the focal point around which the highly
successful formalism of contemporary relativistic quantum electrodynamics is
built. Hence, despite the fact that many big problems are still unsolved (i.e., mass,
charge, inﬁnities, etc.), it is almost heretical to discuss the possibility that Dirac’s
equation it is not the most fundamental one. Moreover, it is futile to think that
by recasting Dirac’s theory in another formalism, one may get a serious hint for a
better theory of the electron and other fundamental particles.

In fact, Lanczos was not the ﬁrst to worry about the algebraic structure and
tensor-analytical relations of Dirac’s equation. He quotes Madelung3 [9] and Dar-
win [10] but today we could cite many authors because this question has become

3Erwin Madelung was the ﬁrst to show that Dirac’s equations are somehow equivalent to
Maxwell’s with feedback. Lanczos was Madelung’s assistant in Frankfurt from 1924 until Fall
1928 when he moved for one year to Berlin to become Einstein’s ﬁrst assistant.

6

the source of an endless stream of studies. In effect, while for the majority of
physicists the answer would seem to have been the invention of ‘spinor calcu-
lus’ by van der Waerden, Laporte, and Uhlenbeck [11], or simply the pragmatic
approach of using ‘Dirac matrices,’ for others the question is still open. In fact,
the contemporary trend would seem to be a return to Lanczos, i.e., to the refor-
mulation of Dirac’s equation in the framework of Clifford algebras [12] of which
quaternions are precisely the simplest non-trivial example.

It is therefore interesting to note that those few who quoted Lanczos’s work
in 1930, were Sauter who was part of a number of young German physicists
(mainly around Sommerfeld) using Clifford algebras to study Dirac’s theory [13],
and Juvet4 who was leading a group of Swiss physicists who attempted to phrase
special relativity, Maxwell’s and Dirac’s theories, also in the framework of Clifford
algebras [14]. But both efforts faded out, possibly because of the unfavorable times
in Germany, and the unfortunate death of Juvet in Switzerland. Similar work on
Dirac’s theory took place in France where, independently, Proca5 tried to introduce
without success the Clifford formalism [15]. The ‘gamma-matrices’ and spinor
formalisms became therefore the standard notations for formulating Dirac’s theory.

But Lanczos’s motivation was not to ﬁnd the ideal formulation of Dirac’s
equation. He wanted to understand Dirac’s theory in terms of ordinary tensor
calculus, and, even more, to show its connections with his own previous work on
Maxwell’s theory. Indeed, Lanczos’s starting point is the observation, traditionally
attributed to Hermann Weyl [16], that Dirac’s equation in the case of a vanishing
rest mass is identical to Maxwell’s equation in vacuum (provided Maxwell’s ﬁeld
is allowed to become a four-component complex ﬁeld). Since this equation has
a straightforward tensor interpretation, and is particularly simple when expressed
in the quaternion formalism, Lanczos immediately saw a new perspective for
understanding Dirac’s equation, and, in his own words, to discover a “via regia to
grasp the internal substance of Dirac’s equation” [1, p. 449].

4Gustave Juvet (1896-1936), translated in French (in collaboration with R. Leroy) Hermann
Weyl’s book “Space, Time, Matter” (A. Blanchard, Paris, 1922). Juvet’s PhD thesis, “Sur une
´equation aux d´eriv´ees fonctionnelles partielles et une g´en´eralisation du theor`eme de Jacobi” (Blan-
chard, Paris, 1926) will be used by Paul Weiss in 1938 (Proc. Roy. Soc. A169 page 104). For a
biography and bibliography, see Actes Soc. Helv. Sci. Nat. 117 (1936) 422–426.

5Albert Proca (1897-1955) translated in French (in collaboration with J. Ullmo) Dirac’s “Prin-
ciples of Quantum Mechanics”’ (Press Universitaire de France, 1931). For a biography and
bibliography of Proca, see G.A. Proca, “Alexandre Proca. Oeuvre scientiﬁque publi´ee” (G.A.
Proca, Paris, 1986).

7

4 Biquaternions and the residual arbitrariness in the

deﬁnition of the quaternion product

Quaternion formulations in physics can be seen as the most simple holistic four-
dimensional formalism, in which complicated physical variables are treated as
single entities that are not just abstract symbols, but hypercomplex numbers which
can be directly used for explicit calculations.
In general, the quadruplets will
consist of complex numbers, hence the name biquaternions.6 For example, a point
in Minkowski’s space-time can be represented by the biquaternion X = [it, ~x ].
There are three fundamental involutions: quaternion conjugation, represented by
a ‘bar,’ i.e., the operator ( ), which changes the sign of the vector part of the
biquaternion; imaginary conjugation denoted by a star ( )∗; and biconjugation
which is the combination of the two previous involutions: ( )+ = ( )

.

∗

With quaternions, physical formulas are generally very compact and there is
kind of a mystery, that we call Hamilton’s conjecture [17], as to why so many
fundamental laws of physics can be neatly expressed in quaternion form.7 But,
as with any formalism, there are a number of speciﬁc problems that have to be
carefully addressed in order to have a consistent set of working rules. This is
particularly the case with discrete operations, such as imaginary conjugation or,
as we have already mentioned, spatial reversal. To understand the origin of these
problems, it is useful to digress and to return to Sir William Rowan Hamilton’s
Elements of Quaternions, and more precisely to a note added by Charles Jasper
Joly in 1898, at the end of section ten [18, p. 162]. This will allow us to recall
some deﬁnitions and ﬁx our notation.

Starting from the set of quadruplets of real or complex numbers, the quaternion
algebra is obtained by requiring their product to be associative, and the division
to be feasible always, except possibly in some singular cases.8 Then, writing two
quadruplets A and B as [a,~a ] and [b,~b ], and using contemporary vector notations,
their product has the following explicit form

[a,~a ][b,~b ] = [ab + p ~a · ~b, a~b + ~ab + q ~a × ~b ].

The two constants p and q are related by the equation

(1)

(2)

6The algebras of real and complex quaternions are denoted by H and B, respectively.
7Ref. [17] can be useful as a concise introduction to quaternions and their use in physics.
8In H the division is always possible. In B, however, division by singular quaternions (also

called null quaternions), for which SS = 0, is not possible.

q2 + p3 = 0,

8

which shows that there is some residual arbitrariness when deﬁning the product of
two quadruplets. For instance, taking p = −1, q can be equal to either +1 or −1.
On the other hand, taking p = +1, q may be +i or −i.

Obviously, in the present context, the purpose of quaternions is to provide an
explicit representation of Minkowski’s space-time. Taking four real numbers as
our fundamental quadruplets let’s examine the consequences of speciﬁc choices
of p and q in this context.

The arbitrariness in the sign of p is connected with the signature of the metric.
In effect, since the square of the norm of a quaternion A is by deﬁnition its product
by its conjugated quaternion, we have |A|2 = AA = a2 + p~a2. Thus, as long as
imaginary conjugation is not given a physical interpretation, the sign of p is in
principle immaterial because one can always multiply the vector or scalar part of
all quaternions by i in order to get the desired signature.

The arbitrariness in the sign of q is due to the non-commutativity of the
quaternion product. Indeed, changing the order of the factors A and B is equivalent
to changing the sign of q. We call the involution associated with the changing of
this sign it ordinal conjugation9 and designate this operation by the symbol ( )∼.
Obviously, since q is the sign associated with the vector product, there is a close
connection between ordinal conjugation and space inversion. However, contrary
to the case of p, there appears to be no overall covariant criterion to decide for the
sign of q, or to compensate for an arbitrary choice. Therefore, in accord with the
principle of relativity, one has has to make sure that fundamental physical entities
are ‘ordinal covariant,’10 i.e., that they do not arbitrarily depend on the sign of
q. In particular, we will later show how to use ordinal conjugation to construct
quaternion tensors of deﬁnite parities.

If
This is the technical problem to which we were referring to in Sec. 2.
Lanczos had its solution, he would have much more easily discovered Proca’s
equation.

Returning to the choice of p, we see that p = +1 gives Hamilton’s algebra,
and p = −1 the Pauli algebra. As is well known, for real components, Hamiltons’
algebra is a closed 4-element algebra, while Pauli’s algebra is not. Since complex
numbers are to be used as components in the general case, it may seem that the
choice between Hamilton’s and Pauli’s algebra is without consequences. In fact,
while the tradition of quantum mechanics has historically developed from Pauli’s
choice not to use Hamilton’s quaternions for his non-relativistic theory of spin,

9Or order reversal, not to be confused with Clifford algebra ‘reversion.’
10Or ‘order covariant.’

9

but his own set of ‘matrices’ instead,11 it turns out that Lanczos’s choice to keep
following Hamilton was the good one. The reason is that, when working with
Hamilton’s biquaternions, i is always explicit and independent of the rules of the
algebra. In a global ﬁeld theory which encompasses classical and quantum theory,
complex numbers and imaginary conjugation can then always be given a deﬁnite
and consistent physical interpretation.

5 Special relativity and quaternions

In paragraphs 2, 3 and 4 of his ﬁrst paper [1], Lanczos recalls the main features of
the quaternion formulation of special relativity that he had already developed in his
dissertation [5]. In this formulation, contrary to tensor or spinor calculus, there are
no indices and all basic physical entities are represented by simple biquaternionic
expressions. The variance12 is then speciﬁed at the same time as each entity is
deﬁned. For example, the most basic tensor, the quadrivector, is deﬁned by the
following variance:13

where L is a biquaternion of norm unity, i.e.,

V ′ = LV L+

LL = L+L∗ = 1

The fundamental Minkowski invariant is then simply

V V = V ′V ′ = invariant scalar

(3)

(4)

(5)

which shows that L represents a general Lorentz transformation. Since any nor-
malized biquaternion can be resolved in a product L = RB, where R = R∗ is real
and B = B+ is bireal, the general Lorentz transformation consists of the product
of a rotation R by a boost B. Multiplying quadrivectors, and alternating their

11In fact, the ﬁrst correct treatment of non-relativistic spin is by P. Jordan, Zeits. f. Phys., 44
(1927) 473-480. In this paper Jordan uses quaternions explicitly. It was published a few weeks
before Pauli’s paper. To have a perspective on how somebody of the stature of Sommerfeld felt
about Pauli’s notation version quaternions, it is interesting to read his comment in A. Sommer-
feld, “Atombau und Spektrallinien - Wellenmechanischer Erg¨anzungsband” (F. Vieweg und Sohn,
Braunschweig, 1929) p. 317. See also Franz, Ref. [13].

12For brevity, we would like to characterize the transformation properties of a given geometric

object by the French term ‘variance’.

13In tensor calculus, this variance corresponds to the fundamental expression V ′
Vi where
Li
j could be represented by a 4 × 4 matrix. Just like in spinor formalism, quaternions allow this
matrix to be broken down into two pieces, which in quaternions correspond to a pre-multiplying
and a post-multiplying factors.

j = Li
j

10

variance by making use of quaternion conjugation, one obtains more complicated
tensors. For example, taking two quadrivectors V1 and V2, the tensor

F = V1V2

(6)

has a hexavector variance:

F ′ = L∗F L+
(7)
Because of (4), f = S[F ], the scalar part of the hexavector F is an invariant. On
the other hand, ~f = V[F ], the vector part of F , has an hexavector variance.

The interesting thing, which explains the power of the quaternionic tensor
calculus, is that any time some 4-dimensional quantity is introduced with a given
variance, the only possible different variance it may obtain is the result of operating
with one of the three fundamental quaternionic involutions: ( ), ( )∗, or ( )+.
This gives four possibilities that are analogous to the four basic variances of
tensor/spinor calculus: contra- or co-variant, dotted or undotted indices. Hence,
with quaternions, the conjugation symbols play the role of the position and type
of the index in tensor calculus. The use of these symbols has the effect of keeping
the variance of all quantities explicit, while at the same time keeping the notation
compact.

At this point, it becomes clear that the quadrivector or hexavector variances

are not the most simple one. For instance, one can have a spinor variance:

F ′ = LF, F ′ = LF

(8)

where L could be replaced by L, L∗ or L+, or act on the other side, giving a
total of eight possible spinor variances. It is immediately seen that the norm of
such spinors is again a relativistic invariant, and that nothing prevents us of using
spinors as fundamental physical quantities. Unfortunately, Lanczos did not fully
realize this possibility. All along his three papers he will insist on keeping only
‘quadrivector’ or ‘hexavector’ variances as fundamental ones.14

A special type of Lorentz transformation which was not considered by Lanczos
is that of spatial reversal. For this transformation, in the in case of tensors
constructed by multiplying quadrivectors, there is a simple connection with ordinal
invariance. For example,

V = ABC + CBA

(9)

where A, B and C are ordinal invariant quadrivectors, is invariant under ordinal
conjugation. This implies that V cannot depend on the sign of q (see Eq. (1)). V

14The same was already done in his doctoral dissertation, where in chapter 4 he already noted

the mathematical possibility of the spinor variance [59, Eq. (4.8)].

11

is thus a polar quadrivector (odd parity). On the other hand,

W = ABC − CBA

(10)

changes sign with ordinal conjugation. W is thus necessarily an axial quadrivector
(even parity). Hence, for relativistic covariant entities of this type, symmetry or
antisymmetry under ordinal conjugation is equivalent to being of odd or even
parity under an improper Lorentz transformation. In the case of spinors, similar
considerations can be made but the result is not a simple rule as with tensors
constructed by multiplying quadrivectors.

6 From Maxwell’s equation to Dirac-Lanczos’s equa-

tion

In quaternions, Weyl’s equation in vacuum is simply

∇F (X) = 0

(11)

Here, ∇ = [∂it, ∂~x] is the 4-gradient operator, assumed to transform as a quadrivec-
tor, and F the ﬁeld, a biquaternionic function of X, which reduces to a bivector
(i.e., a complex 3-vector) in the case of Maxwell’s equation.

In paragraph 5 of his ﬁrst paper [1], Lanczos compares equation (11) for
the cases in which it is interpreted as either Maxwell’s or Weyl’s equation. In the
Maxwell case, F is the electromagnetic ﬁeld bivector, ~E +i ~B. The variance is then
necessarily that of a hexavector because the components of the electromagnetic
bivector have to transform among themselves. In Weyl’s case, however, there is
In fact,
no such restriction:
Lanczos writes [1, Eq. (32) p. 456]

the variance is not fully determined by (7) alone.

F ′ = L∗F G

(12)

where G may be any biquaternion. In modern language, we would say that when
F has a spinor variance, equation (11) is invariant under a non-Abelian gauge
transformation consisting of a right-multiplication by a normed biquaternion G.
For Lanczos, however, this is seen as a defect, or at best as a peculiar property of
the wave function that has still to be explained.

Lanczos next step, in paragraph 6, is to consider the ﬁrst order linear wave
equation obtained by putting a mass term on the right-hand side of (11). Then,
writing

(13)

∇D = mD∗

12

one gets an equation that is very similar to Dirac’s, except for the imaginary
conjugation on the right hand side which is essential for covariance. In particular,
D being a biquaternion, it has four complex components, just like Dirac’s bispinor.
However, iterating the equation, since ∇∗ = −∇, Lanczos ﬁnds that the Klein-
Gordon equation, ∇∇D = −m2D, has the wrong sign. Thus, (13) corresponds
to a particle with an imaginary mass. Because of the imaginary conjugation, this
In fact, what is missing, is a
problem is not corrected by replacing m by im.
quaternion factor on the right-hand side of D∗. Taking for example i~e3 for such a
factor, it is a matter of elementary algebra to verify that the equation

∇D = mD∗i~e3

(14)

is indeed strictly equivalent to Dirac’s. This equation, to be called Dirac-Lanczos’s
equation [1, Eq. (63) p. 462], will later be rediscovered by a number of people,
in particular by Feza G¨ursey15 [19] and David Hestenes16 [20]. In fact, in one
form or another, it is the basic equation in any Clifford type formulation of Dirac’s
theory. In this equation, the usual arbitrariness in the choice of the ‘Dirac matrices’
corresponds to the freedom of taking any arbitrary unit vector as a factor on the
right hand side.

The Dirac-Lanczos equation (14) is a most important discovery of Lanczos.
In Dirac’s formulation the 4-complex-component electron ﬁeld is taken as a 4 × 1
column vector Ψ, and the linear operators are 4 × 4 complex matrices.

In Lanczos’s formulation the same 4-complex-component ﬁeld is a biquater-
nion D ∈ B ∼= M2(C) ∼= Cℓ1,2 ∼= Cℓ3,0. The linear operators are then linear
biquaternions functions of biquaternions, which are isomorphic to the algebra of
4 × 4 complex matrices M4(C) ∼= M2(B) ∼= Cℓ4,1.

In both formulations the operator space has 4 × 4 × 2 = 32 dimensions over
the reals. The difference is that in the Dirac formulation the ﬁeld is an abstract
4-component column vector, while in the Lanczos formulation the ﬁeld is directly
related to the algebraic structure of spacetime because any biquaternion D = s +~v
is the direct sum of a scalar s and a 3-component vector ~v.

15For a curriculum vitae of Feza G¨ursey (1921-1992), and for a list of publications until 1984,
see "Symmetries in Particle Physics", edited by I. Bars, A. Chodos and C.-H. Tse (Plenum Press,
New York, 1985).

16David Hestenes (1933-) has been successful in popularizing the use of Clifford algebras in
the context of special relativity, Maxwell, and Dirac theories. See, in particular, "Space-Time
Algebra" (Gordon and Breach, New York, 1966, 1987, 1992). David Hestenes’s father, Magnus
Hestenes, was one of Lanczos’s colleagues at the Institute of Numerical Analysis at the University
of California at Los Angeles in the early 1950’s. A photograph of David Hestenes’s mother in
company of Lanczos, circa 1951, is reproduced on page 3-463 of Ref. [58].

13

Lanczos’s formulation is therefore more suitable than Dirac’s for studying
and demonstrating the “classical” aspects of the electron ﬁeld, and for making
comparisons with the Maxwell and Proca ﬁelds which are usually expressed in
terms of scalars and vectors [63].

Finally, in terms of Clifford algebras, the Dirac ﬁeld Ψ is a degenerate 8-real-
component element of the 32-dimensional Clifford algebra Cℓ4,1 (i.e., an element
of an ideal of that algebra) while the Lanczos ﬁeld D is any 8-real-component
element of the 8-dimensional Clifford algebra Cℓ1,2 ∼= B, which is therefore the
smallest algebra in which Dirac’s electron theory can be fully expressed.

For more details see Refs. [17, 33, 62, 63], where it is shown that the complex
conjugation operation appearing on the right-hand side of Eq. (14) is characteristic
of the fermionic character of the Dirac ﬁeld, in contradistinction to the Maxwell
and Proca ﬁelds which are bosonic ﬁelds [63].

In the remaining part of paragraph 8, Lanczos calculates the bilinear covariants
of Dirac’s equation and some of their properties. In quaternion formalism, this is
very easily done. One ﬁnds,

1 complex invariant (scalar):

I = S[DD]

(15)

3 complex hexavectors (antisymmetric tensors):

~In = V[D~enD]

(16)

1 bireal quadrivector (current):

J = DD+

(17)

3 bireal pseudo-quadrivectors (axial currents):

Jn = Di~enD+

(18)

These bilinear tensors have a simple interpretation. For instance, the existence of
a magnetic moment associated with spin corresponds to the complex bivector ~I3.
This is the antisymmetric electromagnetic polarization-magnetization momentum
tensor. The four bireal quadrivectors form an orthogonal Frenet frame which
moves along with the particle [21], a property that Lanczos associates with Ein-
stein’s concept of ‘distant parallelism.’ From equation (14), i.e., Dirac-Lanczos’s
equation for an electron without an electromagnetic ﬁeld, it follows that the par-
ticle current J, as well as the axial currents J1 and J2, are conserved, while (in
general) the spin density axial current J3 is not conserved (it is conserved, e.g.,
for plane waves). According to G¨ursey [21], it seems that J1 and J2 will not be
noticed until de Broglie will rediscover them in 1940.

14

7 Lanczos’s fundamental equation and the isospin

doubling of Dirac’s equation

As we have already said, Lanczos’s main interest is not in reformulating Dirac’s
equation with quaternions, but in showing how to derive it from a more fundamental
equation. His idea is to consider a system of two coupled equations, in which case
the Klein-Gordon equation is automatically satisﬁed. This leads him in paragraph
7 and 8 to postulate and study the properties of his fundamental equation [1,
Eq. (54) p. 459], which we write

∇A = mB

∇B = mA

(19)

Obviously, compared with Dirac’s equation, this system has twice too many equa-
tions and variables. But, as shown by Lanczos, it is in fact equivalent to two
Dirac-type equations, independent from each other it provided A and B have a
spinor variance, i.e.,

A′ = LAGN

B′ = L∗BGN

(20)

and GN, an optional gauge transformation, is any element of a group which will
be determined below. To obtain this result, Lanczos uses a rather long argument,
that can be summarized and somewhat generalized as follows:

Given an arbitrary idempotent17 biquaternion σ, every biquaternion Z ∈ B can

be written as a linear combination

Z = Z1σ + Z2σ

(21)

where Z1 ∈ H and Z2 ∈ H are two real quaternions. In spinor language, this gen-
eral theorem simply means that if we interpret a biquaternion as a (4-component)-
bispinor, it can always be decomposed into a pair of independent (2-component)-
spinors. Hence, for Z equal to A or B, σ can be used as a projection operator
which enables one to deﬁne two independent linear superpositions, each of which
is a new bispinor:

and

D1 = Aσ + B∗σ

D2 = (Aσ − B∗σ)i~e1

(22)

(23)

These superpositions are Lorentz covariant because of (20), and the factor i~e1,
orthogonal to ~e3, has been introduced in order to agree with the modern isospin
17An idempotent σ = σ2 has the property that σσ = 0 . For deﬁnitiveness, we take σ =

1
2 (1 + i~e3) where ~e3 is the third quaternion unit.

15

interpretation. It is then easily veriﬁed that both D1 and D2 are solutions of Dirac-
Lanczos’s equation (14). The allowed gauge transformation GN are obviously
those transformation which leave the superpositions (22–23) invariant. Since
these transformations have also to leave the probability current J invariant, it
+ = 1.
follows from (17) and (20) that they have to be unitary, i.e., such that GNGN
Hence, the allowed gauge transformations are elements of the group UN(1, C)
which comprises all unitary quaternions that commute with σ. Consequently,
the only gauge invariant bilinear covariant are I, ~I3, J and J3, i.e., the bilinear
covariants of the standard Dirac theory.

The group UN(1, C), whose elements have the following explicit representa-

tion

GN = σ exp(−~e3α) + σ exp(−~e3β)
will be rediscovered by Nijishima [22] in 1957. He will show that this is the largest
group leaving the Dirac equation and the structure of quantum electrodynamics
invariant.

(24)

In the gamma-matrices formulation of Dirac’s theory, the interpretation of
Nishijima’s group is not obvious. But here it is trivial. Suppose we make the
spinor decomposition of A and B according to (21) and multiply from the right
by GN, the result is

AGN = A1 exp(−~e3α) + A2 exp(−~e3β)

(25’)

BGN = B1 exp(−~e3α) + B2 exp(−~e3β)
Comparing with (22–23), we immediately see that while A and B transform
with the same gauge GN, D1 and D2 transform with exp(−~e3α) and exp(+~e3β),
respectively.
In other words, if we interpret GN as a local gauge, D1 and D2
correspond to states with different couplings to the gauge ﬁeld.

(25”)

To get closer to the modern isospin interpretation we make the following gauge

transformation:

GN(N , γ) = σ exp(−~e3

γ) + σ exp(+~e3

N + 1
2

N − 1
2

γ)

= exp(i

γ) exp(−~e3

γ)

N
2

1
2

Hence, if γ is the electromagnetic gauge ﬁeld, and N the nucleon number, the
electric charges of D1 and D2 are respectively Q1 = N +1
. This
2
is nothing but Heisenberg’s formula which gives the electric charge in function of
the nucleon number and the projection of isospin:

and Q2 = N −1
2

(26)

(27)

Q =

+ t3

N
2

16

This formula was proposed soon after the discovery of the neutron, and later was
generalized to hypercharged particles by Gell-Mann and Nishijima. For N = 1,
D1 is the proton ( t3 = + 1
2 ) and D2 the neutron ( t3 = − 1
2).
The interpretation of D1 and D2 as an isotopic doublet was given for the ﬁrst
time by G¨ursey [23] in 1957. G¨ursey also showed that the isospin raising/lowering
operator is right multiplication of A and B by i~e1. This interpretation, and the fact
that the isospin raising/lowering is done by operating on A and B, conﬁrms that
the fundamental ﬁelds are Lanczos’s ﬁelds A and B, and that the Dirac ﬁelds D1
and D2 are derived ones.

Lanczos, of course, could not have given this interpretation. He published his
papers in volume 57 of Zeitschrift f¨ur Physik, while Weyl’s seminal paper on the
local gauge interpretation of electrodynamics had just appeared in the previous
volume [24]. Lanczos’s interpretation was that the ‘phase factor’ was without
consequence since it would disappear in what he called a “quantummechanical
hermitian operation.” In any case, Lanczos had the electron-proton doublet in
his mind. Nevertheless, he was right to be convinced that the decomposition
of his fundamental system (19) into two independent Dirac’s equations was of
fundamental physical importance.

8 Minimum coupling. Two-component electron the-

ory.

Now that we have found the correct interpretation of Lanczos’s doubling, it is
worthwhile to have a look at Lanczos’s second paper [2, p. 476] in which he
considers a particle in a non-vanishing electromagnetic ﬁeld. As he did not use the
local gauge invariance concept, Lanczos, used the minimum coupling substitution
instead, i.e., the replacement of ∇ by ∇ − eφ in (19), where φ is the potential of
the Maxwell ﬁeld. He then made the superposition (22), once with the idempotent
σ = 1
2(1 + i~e3), and a second time with the sign of i~e3 reversed. This gave the
following equations

∇D1 − eφD1i~e3 = +mD1

∗i~e3

∇D1

′ + eφD1

′i~e3 = −mD1

′∗i~e3

(28)

(29)

Hence, for these superpositions, the two Dirac ﬁelds have electrical couplings of
opposite signs, something that is explicitly remarked by Lanczos [2, p. 476]. But,
as the right hand sides show that the masses are equal, and of opposite signs,

17

we see that the electron/proton interpretation that Lanczos was looking for is not
consistent.

In fact, if instead of Lanczos second superposition leading to (29), we make the
proper orthogonal isospin superposition (23) — after having made the minimum
coupling substitution in (19) — we ﬁnd that both D1 and D2 satisfy the wave
equation (28) and therefore have the same electric charge. This shows that the
minimum coupling substitution is not sufﬁcient to get the correct isospin interpre-
tation of Lanczos’s fundamental system. For this interpretation, it is necessary to
make the gauge transformation (26) of the ﬁelds A and B.

In the same paper, Lanczos calculates the second order equation for his funda-

mental ﬁelds A and B. It comes

(30)

(31)

(32)

(∇∇ − m2 + e2φφ)A = e(φ∇ + ∇φ)A

(∇∇ − m2 + e2φφ)B = e(φ∇ + ∇φ)B

For comparison, let us include the result for Dirac-Lanczos’s ﬁeld (28) as well

(∇∇ − m2 + e2φφ)D = e(φ∇ + ∇φ)Di~e3

In this equation, the biquaternion D is equivalent to a 4-component Dirac spinor.
But, since a biquaternion can always be split in two parts according to the de-
composition (21), (32) can be replaced by a pair of equations of the form (30) in
which A is a singular quaternion, i.e., equivalent to a 2-component spinor [25].
In this case, each of these singular second order equations is equivalent to one
2-component spinor second order equation.

Hence, when A is singular, (30) is equivalent to the relativistic Pauli equation
(sometimes called the Kramer’s equation [26]) which will be reinvented by Feyn-
man and Gell-Mann [27] in 1958 in order to justify the 2-component theory of
weak interactions. In fact, with a proper interpretation, this second order equation
is totally equivalent to the ﬁrst order Dirac equation.18 It can therefore be used
to reformulated quantum electrodynamics in 2-component spinor formalism in-
stead of the usual 4-component one [28]. The same thing applies to the singular
quaternion version of (32) which leads to an elegant and compact quaternionic
formulation of quantum electrodynamics [29]. It is therefore a great compliment to
Lanczos, thirty years later, to read in Feynman and Gell-Mann’s paper [27, p. 194]:
“...
let us imagine that [Lanczos’s second order equation] had been discovered
ﬁrst, and [Dirac’s ﬁrst order equation] only deduced from the later.”

18Already in 1933, in his new derivation of Dirac’s equation [7], Lanczos showed that either a

ﬁrst order or second order formalism can be used to describe a spin 1

2 particle.

18

9 Einstein-Mayer-Lanczos: proton/neutron and elec-
tron/neutrino doublets in the same Lagrangian

When he wrote his 1929 papers on Dirac’s equation, Lanczos was with Einstein in
Berlin. It is very plausible that Lanczos had some discussions with Einstein on his
ideas about quaternions and Dirac’s equation. The fact is that Einstein with Walter
Mayer, his next collaborator after Lanczos’s departure to the United States, will
develop a new four-dimensional formalism: the semivectors [30]. This theory is
rather similar to quaternions, except that the metric is hyperbolic instead of elliptic.
Because they originated from Einstein they remained a parallel development to
spinor calculus for a few years.

Using semivectors, Einstein and Mayer in 1933 derived a spin 1

2 ﬁeld equation
(in fact, a generalized form of Lanczos’s equation) predicting that particles would
come in doublets of different masses [31]. Because of the similarity of semivectors
to biquaternions, we can easily translate this model into our notation. The idea
was that the most general Lagrangian for quaternionic ﬁelds, to be called the
Einstein-Mayer-Lanczos (EML) Lagrangian, should have the form:

L = A+ · ∇AC + B+ · ∇BC − (E+A+ · B + B+ · AE) + (...)+

(33)

where the C and E ﬁelds are invariant, except possibly for spatial reversal. The
ﬁeld equations are then

∇AC = BE+

∇BC = AE

(34)

which reduce to (19) when C = 1 and E = m. For the modern interpretation we
can put C = 1.19

Compared with Lanczos fundamental system (19), we see at once that (34) is
no more symmetric between A and B: parity invariance is lost. In effect, since
spatial reversal replaces ∇ by ∇ in Lanczos’s equation, the parity conjugate ﬁeld
of A is B, and vice versa (in spinor language, A and B are opposite ‘chirality’
ﬁelds that are interchanged in a spatial reversal). This interchange is no more
possible with the generalized system (34) when E+ 6= E.

Another major difference with Lanczos’s fundamental system is that the second
order equations for A and B are now eigenvalue equations for the mass. In effect,
assuming C = 1 for simplicity, and eliminating the A or B ﬁelds in (34), we ﬁnd
the generalized Klein-Gordon equations

(35)
19In the language of particle physics, E and/or C correspond to some pseudo-scalar or scalar

∇∇B = BE+E

∇∇A = AEE+

ﬁelds. For example, E can be interpreted as the Higgs ﬁeld when C = 1. See, e.g., [62].

19

where m2 has been replaced by EE+ or E+E. Assuming a plane wave solution
of the form A = Q exp i(~p · ~x − Et), we obtain the eigenvalue equation

m2Q = QEE+

(36)

and a similar equation for B. The important point is that although EE+ 6= E+E
in general, the two different values of m2 given by the eigenvalue equations are the
same for the A and B ﬁelds. It is therefore always possible to isolate the isospin
eigenstates by making the isospin superpositions (22–23). There are two main
classes of solutions.

The ﬁrst one is when E is real: E = E∗ = T . The ﬁeld equations become

∇A = BT

∇B = AT

(37)

In this case, spatial reversal invariance is restored if T is assumed to transform into
T , which implies that T can be interpreted as a pseudoscalar ﬁeld. Now, because
EE+ = T T = m2 is a scalar, there is no mass eigenvalue equation and the two
isospin states are degenerate in mass. Because of that Einstein and Mayer will
discard this case. This is very unfortunate, because if we make Lanczos’s isospin
decomposition (22–23), we ﬁnd that (37) corresponds to a doublet of equal mass
spin 1
2 particles, and that these particles interact by means of the pseudoscalar ﬁeld
T . This interpretation will be ﬁrst given by G¨ursey [32]. He will show, as far as we
know completely independently of Lanczos or Einstein-Mayer, that equation (37)
describes a nucleonic ﬁeld, non-locally coupled to a pseudoscalar eta-pion ﬁeld.
In other words, G¨ursey,’s interpretation implies that (37) explains to ﬁrst order the
whole of low-energy nuclear physics: protons, neutrons, charge independent pion
theory of nuclear forces, etc.

The second one is when E is bireal: E = E+. There is now an eigenvalue
equation because, in general, EE+ = E2 is not a scalar any more. Then, there
are always two solutions of different masses. Einstein and Mayer studied this case
in details because they were expecting to ﬁnd an explanation for the existence of
the electron and the proton. Of course, today, we know that we cannot expect to
ﬁnd these particles in the same multiplet because the electron is a lepton, while
the proton is made out of quarks. Nevertheless, it is interesting to note that when
C 6= 1 the Lagrangian (33) has solutions which correspond to pairs of particles
with different masses and electric charges of opposite signs.

In fact, it is possible to recover Einstein-Mayer’s result in the case C = 1,
provided one notices the existence of two basic conserved currents: the probability
current J, and the barycharge current K

J = AA+ + BB+

(38)

20

K = AEA+ + BEB+

(39)

While J has the usual interpretation, K divided by the mass corresponds to the
electromagnetic current as deﬁned by Einstein-Mayer. Then, when EE > 0 the
two solutions have equal signs for the charge, and when EE < 0 the signs are
opposite as in Einstein-Mayer’s case. However, for the modern interpretation, the
most interesting solutions are obtained in the singular case where EE = 0, i.e.,
when E is an idempotent. One solution is then massive (with K = J), and the
other one massless (with K = 0): an electron-neutrino doublet.

The proton-neutron and the electron-neutrino solutions have the common fea-
ture that in both cases the E ﬁeld is also a global gauge ﬁeld. This is very
important because it provides a clear cut distinction with the other solutions of the
EML Lagrangian. Hence, in summary, by simply writing down the most trivial
quaternionic generalization of the Lagrangian giving the Lanczos’s fundamental
equation (19), we obtain a theory which predicts the existence of the four most
important particles of matter: the proton, the neutron, the electron and the neutrino.

10 Einstein-Mayer-Lanczos: towards a uniﬁed pic-

ture of matter and fundamental interactions ?

In the contemporary theory of elementary particles a very fundamental concept is
the idea that all interactions are mediated by local gauge ﬁelds. In the Standard
Model, the gauge ﬁelds of the uniﬁed electro-weak interaction are operating in an
abstract space which corresponds to the transition-current algebra of perturbation
theory. Therefore, the SU(2) ⊗ U(1) symmetry of this model concerns a kind of
a superstructure which is built upon a ﬁeld theory in which the Dirac equation
is the most fundamental equation of matter.
In such a perspective there is no
explanation for the origin and nature of the gauge ﬁelds, or for the pairing of the
leptons and quarks into isospin doublets. The whole picture can be described as a
very successful and effective phenomenology.

If instead we assume that the most fundamental equation is not Dirac’s but
Lanczos’s equation (19), we start with a system that explains isospin in a natural
way. Moreover, if we include the generalization of Einstein and Mayer, we have
a possibility of understanding the origin and nature of the gauge ﬁelds [33]. In
effect, as we have already explained, and as was shown for the ﬁrst time by G¨ursey
in the case of pion-nucleon interactions [32], the ‘internal’ symmetries are explicit
and trivial in Lanczos equation, while only space-time symmetries are explicit in

21

Dirac’s equation. In other words, in this perspective, the Lanczos ﬁelds A and B,
and the gauge ﬁelds allowed by the generalized Lanczos’s equation, provide a kind
of infrastructure from which the physical ﬁelds and their interactions are derived.
If this picture is correct, there is no abstract ‘isospin space’ or ‘current-algebra
space,’ but a uniﬁed ﬁeld theory in which everything is deﬁned in space-time.

Consider ﬁrst the case of electromagnetic interactions. As shown in Sec. 7, the
electromagnetic gauge ﬁeld is combined with the nucleonic or leptonic number
gauge ﬁeld in the Nishijima group. This is the largest group compatible with the
Lanczos-G¨ursey isospin superpositions (22–23). From this group we understand
electromagnetic interactions, the (+1, 0) and (0, −1) charges of the nucleons and
neutrino/electron pairs, as well as the possibility of (+ 2
3 ) charges for the quark
states.

3, − 1

The second kind of interactions which concern both the nucleons and the
leptons are the weak interactions. These parity violating interactions correspond
to a non-Abelian gauge transformation which is made possible by the E ﬁeld in
the EML equation (34). In effect, in the absence of E, all gauge ﬁelds have to act
symmetrically on the A and B ﬁelds, and thus conserve parity. On the other hand,
when there is a E ﬁeld, gauge transformations such that A → AG, B → B and
E → G+E are feasible. The corresponding gauge ﬁeld has a SU(2) symmetry,
and the resulting phenomenology is equivalent to that of the Standard Model [34].

For the leptons, the weak interaction is the only operating non-Abelian ﬁeld.

This limitation is due to the fact that E is singular.

For the nucleons, E = E∗ = T is a regular quaternionic ﬁeld. One can thus
perform isotopic rotations on the A and B ﬁelds independently. The gauge symme-
try is thus the chiral SU(2) ⊗ SU(2) symmetry of low-energy strong interactions.
Therefore, as we have explained in Sec. 10, the T ﬁeld leads to the strong interac-
tions in the form of the well known charge-independent pion-nucleon theory. Of
course, as far as a general theory of strong interactions is concerned, this theory has
since long been superseded by ‘quantum chromodynamics.’ One could therefore
object that such a primitive formulation would be a come back to the 1960’s and
to the naive ‘sigma model’ of G¨ursey and Gell-Mann-Levy [32]. Indeed, that is
the case, and provided one takes into account all the subsequent progress that has
been made in the interpretation of this theory, there no contradiction with the high
energy limit where ‘quarks,’ ‘conﬁnement’ and ‘asymptotic freedom’ become the
key concepts. The contemporary problem is precisely to ﬁnd a new theory which
would encompass both of these low and high energy limits [35].

To conclude, it is interesting to remark that the Einstein-Mayer generalization
of Lanczos’s equation is obtained by the substitution Am → AE in the EML

22

Lagrangian. Since this substitution is not symmetrical between A and B, the lifting
of the mass degeneracy of Lanczos’s original equation (19), and the possibility of
weak interactions, are both linked to a maximally parity violating ﬁeld.

11 Lanczos’s discovery of Proca’s equation

In the last and longest section of his ﬁrst 1929 paper [1], Lanczos starts his struggle
in order to give a normal tensor interpretation to his fundamental equation. His
motivation is clearly that since he has been successful in deriving Dirac’s equation
from it, the fundamental equation itself — once properly interpreted — should say
something important about the nature of the electron and in particular the origin of
its mass. It is at this point that the difﬁculties we already mentioned (with physical
interpretation, spatial reversal, and ‘ordinal’ covariance) become crucial.

In the case of Lanczos’s fundamental equation (19), a proper covariant inter-
pretation requires the deﬁnition of a non-ambiguous variance for the A and B
ﬁelds, and (at least) the construction of a conserved and ordinal invariant particle
density probability current. For the ﬁrst requirement, Lanczos easily ﬁnds that
there is only one simple possibility (provided that space reﬂections are not taken
into account). One ﬁeld has to be a quadrivector, and the other a hexavector:

A′ = LAL+

B′ = L∗BL+

(40)

Under these conditions, (19) is no more symmetrical between A and B, and A can
be called the ‘potential’ and B the ‘ﬁeld’.

The particle current must be a bireal quadrivector, and Lanczos easily identiﬁes

a candidate expression, A+B + B+A, which, unfortunately, is not conserved:

∇ · (A+B + B+A) 6= 0

(41)

Lanczos then enters into a long discussion, which he will continue in the
following papers. He will get very close to the root of the problem and, mostly
following his intuition, he will discover what he was looking for: a fully covariant
relativistic equation with a traditional tensor interpretation.

Alexandre Proca will derive his equation in 1936 [36]. But, most extraordinary,
Proca’s equation (in tensor form) is already explicitly written down in Lanczos
ﬁrst paper [1, Eqs. (98A,B), p. 472] and will be repeated in the following ones [3,
p. 491] and [4, p. 124]. Believing that he had found a new equation for the electron,
Lanczos had in fact discovered Proca’s equation. Strangely enough, Proca will

23

make the same mistake: only in 1938, after taking the non-relativistic limit, he
will discover that his equation does not describe an electron, but a massive spin 1
particle [37].

To obtain this remarkable result, Lanczos starts by converting his quaternion
system (19) into tensor form. He then removes all the terms which are linked with
‘magnetic currents’ and ﬁnds that the resulting system has now a conserved current.
In this process, Lanczos uses twice his physical intuition of a fundamentally four-
dimensional world. First, he discards the scalar part of B, because Lorentz
invariants (such as mass or charge) should have a clear physical interpretation
(such an interpretation for S[B] is here not readily available). Second, he discards
the ‘magnetic current,’ because the magnetic/electric ‘duality’ is essentially a
three-dimensional concept. Finally, he uses one more heuristic guide, the idea that
the resulting system should have the same number of equations as of unknowns,
so that, just like Dirac’s equation, the retro-coupled system is homogeneous, and
therefore suitable for having ‘eigensolutions’ of the kind that are important in
quantum theory.

To conclude, it is of interest to compare Lanczos’s derivation of the ﬁeld
equation of a massive spin one particle with that of Proca [36]. In effect, it is
clear that Proca’s derivation, which is based on the Lagrangian formalism, is much
better than Lanczos’s intuitive and laborious one. But, apart from that, the main
characteristics of Proca’s equation, including its current and energy-momentum
tensor, are already contained in Lanczos’s papers of 1929. The interesting point,
which makes us wonder about the inﬂuence Lanczos’s work might have had on
Proca, is that Proca published in 1932 a paper [38] in which he refers to all three
of Lanczos’s articles of 1929, as well as to Lanczos’s dissertation of 1919. In this
article, Proca tries to explain the electron-proton mass difference by means of a
modiﬁed Maxwell’s equation (in fact, Weyl’s equation), and explicitly refers to it
under the name of “Lanczos’s equation.”

12 Quaternionic derivation of the spin 0 and spin 1

wave equations from Lanczos’s fundamental equa-
tion

The successful derivation of the spin 1
2 Dirac-Lanczos equation (14) came from the
implicit assumption that Lanczos’s double equation (19) was the fundamental one
and that the A and B ﬁelds had to be treated on an equal footing. This meant that A
and B were interpreted as components of a ‘bispinor’ and that the ‘Dirac ﬁeld’ was

24

obtained by making an appropriate covariant superposition. Hence, in the same
spirit, one should not try to give a physical interpretation to (19) directly as such,
but assume other possible meaningful relativistic variances, and then construct the
physical ﬁelds by making some suitable superpositions.

The derive Proca’s equation, the crucial point is that while Lanczos correctly
guessed that for a proper Lorentz transformation the variances assigned in (40)
were adequate, he did not realize that he had to make further assumptions in order
to deﬁne physical ﬁelds with a correct variance under spatial reversal as well.

For example, if we assume that A is ordinal symmetric, i.e., that A = A∼
is an odd parity quadrivector, A may indeed be a physically meaningful ﬁeld.
On the other hand, B = ∇A is neither ordinal symmetric or antisymmetric, and
therefore has no deﬁnite parity. Leaving this problem aside temporarily, we can
nevertheless use B as an intermediate ﬁeld in order to construct a fully covariant
equation for A. To do that, let us rewrite Lanczos’s equation (19) together with
its ordinal-conjugated one, and at the same substitute B for mB to agree with the
standard notation for integer spin ﬁelds:

∇A = B

∇B = m2A

(42)

A∼∇ = B∼

(43)
Then, since A = A∼, the superposition which leads to an ordinal symmetric
potential is obtained by adding the two equations on the right of (42) and (43). We
get the system

B∼∇ = m2A∼

∇A = B

∇B + B∼∇ = 2m2A

(44)

which is now a fully covariant equation for a polar quadrivector ﬁeld A. But it
is still not entierly correct. The reason, now that we have taken care of parity,
is that the ﬁelds in (44) are in fact mixtures of spin 0 and spin 1 states. This
is because the variance (40) is such that the scalar part of B is an invariant
while the vector part transforms as a hexavector. Hence, the ﬁeld B = [b,~b ]
can be covariantly decomposed into its scalar and vector parts. Introducing the
corresponding decomposition of the potential A = A0 + A1, the system (44) can
be split into a spin 0 and a spin 1 part.

For the spin zero part, because A = A∼ = A0, we see from (42–43) that
b = b∼. The system (44) reduces therefore to the following degenerate form of
Lanczos’s equation

∇ · A0 = b

∇b = m2A0

(45)

25

For the spin one part, the resulting equation is just (44) with the ﬁeld B
restricted to its vector part ~b. This is Proca’s equation [36] for a massive spin 1
particle:

∇ ∧ A1 = ~b

∇~b + ~b∼∇ = 2m2A1

With this equation it is trivial to verify that the correct conserved spin 1 particle
current is now

J = A1

+~b + ~b+A1 + (...)∼

(46)

(47)

The parenthesis means that the full expression is obtained by adding the ordinal
conjugated of the ﬁrst part, what has the effect of making the total ordinal invariant
and divergence-less, so that Lanczos’s non-zero result (41) is corrected.

The key assumption in going from Lanczos fundamental equation (19) to (45)
and (46), i.e., the ﬁeld equations for a massive ‘scalar’ or ‘vector’ particle, was
that A had to be an ordinal symmetric vector. If we had assumed the second fully
covariant possibility, i.e., that A is ordinal anti-symmetric, we would have got
the ﬁeld equations for a pseudo-scalar and respectively a pseudo-vector particle.
The only difference is that in the second equation of (46) the plus sign has to be
replaced by a minus sign. The fact that all equations for particles of spin 0 and 1
are degenerate cases of Lanczos’s equation has ﬁrst been shown by G¨ursey in his
PhD thesis [19, p. 162].

Before concluding, two comments are in order. First, to get equation (44) we
have added the two equations on the right of (42) and (43). But, to be complete,
we have also to take into account the equation obtained by subtracting them:

∇B − B∼∇ = 0

(48)

(49)

This equation corresponds to the requirement that there should be no magnetic
poles or currents. However, it can easily be veriﬁed that (48) is redundant and that
(46) is sufﬁcient to eliminate the magnetic contributions. The second comment
is that since we have Proca’ equation (46), we can now identify the quaternion
representation of the spin 1 ﬁeld anti-symmetric tensor. It is

2F ( ) = ( )~b + ~b∼( )

Contrary to the bivector ~b, this tensor is ordinal symmetric, and therefore deﬁnes
a physical ﬁeld of odd parity.

To summarize, we have found that, apart from its decomposition into a pair
of independent spin 1
2 ﬁelds, Lanczos fundamental equation also had two possible
decompositions into a spin 0 and a spin 1 ﬁeld, one for scalar and vector particles
and the other for pseudo-scalar and pseudo-vector particles.

26

13 Maxwell’s equation and the absence of magnetic

monopoles

As we have said in the introduction, Lanczos motivation for introducing his funda-
mental equation was the idea that it was in fact Maxwell’s with feedback. Now that
we have derived Proca’s equation (46), we can set m2 = 0 to get the quaternionic
ﬁeld equation of a mass-less particle of spin 1. Including a source term with a
current J we obtain:

∇ ∧ A = ~b

∇~b + ~b∼∇ = −8πJ

(50)

This is the correct form of Maxwell’s equation in quaternions. It explicitly implies
that the source current, and thus the potential, has to be ordinal symmetric and
shows that the electromagnetic ﬁeld is an antisymmetric tensor. The correct
quaternionic form of this tensor (49) was ﬁrst given by Kilmister in 1955 [39].

The usual form of Maxwell’s equation [40, 5] contains the electromagnetic

bivector ~b instead of the electromagnetic tensor (49):

∇ ∧ A = ~b

∇~b = −4πJ

(51)

This equation is formally incorrect because it is not covariant under spatial reversal.
However, because of (48), it is in practice equivalent to (50), provided that A and
J are postulated to be ordinal invariant.

Equations (50–51) are valid for charged as well as for neutral massless particles.
To identify the neutral ﬁelds, we observe that, in both Proca’s or Maxwell’s case,
whenever the potential is bireal the current (47) is zero. Electrical neutrality is
thus the condition A = A+, which in turns implies J = J +.

A very important consequence of our derivation of Maxwell’s equation from
Lanczos fundamental system (19) is that it implies, by (48), the non-existence
of magnetic monopoles for odd parity vector ﬁelds.20 This statement is valid
even though we have not required A or J to be bireal. Hence, the non-existence
of magnetic monopoles is independent of the so-called ‘Rainich-’ or ‘duality-
transformation’ [41], which is simply the statement that (50–51) are invariant in
a transformation which amounts to multiplying all terms by the same complex
number. In other words, for Maxwell’s ﬁeld, it is always possible to take A = A+
and J = J +.

20In recent years, the consequences of the null results in the search of magnetic monopoles,
and in particular the implications of an essentially asymmetric form of Maxwell’s equations, has
been most thoroughly analyzed by E.J. Post. See, for example, E.J. Post, Phys. Rev. D9 (1974)
3379–3386.

27

14 The energy-momentum tensor and the stability

of matter

There is a clear difference in style between Lanczos’s ﬁrst papers on Dirac’s
equation [1] and the whole series which followed and culminated in the last paper
he wrote in Europe before leaving for the United States [6].

The ﬁrst paper can be seen as a typical textbook like expos´e, perfectly orga-
nized in consecutive sections, were everything ﬁts together, except for the last
section in which the quaternionic formalism is abandoned and various heuristic
arguments are used to derive Proca’s equation. From there on, the style becomes
less didactic, and Lanczos starts presenting more and more speculative ideas about
the unsolved problems of matter. At the same time as he abandons the purely
deductive presentation of his ﬁrst paper, he becomes more self-assured, and goes
on to take real risks, such in the last sentences of his third quaternionic paper,
where he prophesies the “end of quantum theory as a self-contained discipline”,
and the emergence of an essentially nonlinear “theory of matter” [3, p. 493].

When reading the text of an invited paper he gave at the October 25, 1929,
meeting of the Physical Society of Berlin [4], it is not difﬁcult to imagine the
feelings of those listeners who primarily came to learn more about the relativistic
electron theory which ﬁnally succeeded in explaining the atom: Who is that man,
who not long after writing down Dirac’s equation, objects that, in comparison with
Maxwell’s theory, Dirac’s theory is not a true ﬁeld theory, and goes on spending
more then two third of his time presenting a very ambitious and highly speculative
nonlinear theory of matter?

Clearly, for such self-conﬁdence, the derivation from the same fundamental
system, of both Dirac’s and Proca’s equations, must not have been enough. Sim-
ilarly, the lack of interest shown by the leading quantum physicists of the time,
several of them between 5 to 10 years younger than him, cannot explain why Lanc-
zos took such a critical standpoint as to qualify quantum mechanics as a “more
rigorous and therefore more intolerant form of positivism” [6, p. 104]. Having
worked with Einstein, now on his way to the United States, why did Lanczos
feel the need of writing such a extraordinary testimony as his thirty ﬁve page
review paper of 1931 [6]? Indeed, this paper discussed the fundamental theories
of physics and their problems — and important related philosophical issues —
and it also discussed Einstein’s then new ﬁeld theory which included the concept
of ‘distant parallelism:’

In our opinion, Lanczos was driven by his genius. Exactly what he will later
say of Hamilton must have applied to him: “The genius is not free to act because

28

he is relentlessly driven by his ‘daimonion,’ as Socrates expressed it” [42, p. 140].

In Lanczos’s case, his demon was his conviction that the fundamental equations
of matter had to contain some kind of a feedback mechanism in order to insure
stability, that in their complete form these equations had to be nonlinear so that
everything is fully constrained, and that the singular central region had to be
explained by the same equations.

Let us consider the question of feedback. As we already know, Lanczos was
very impressed by his fundamental equation. It was Maxwell’s with feedback and
it had all the properties of a good ﬁeld equation. In particular, he found that it
had a conserved current and, moreover, a conserved energy-momentum tensor. In
quaternions, this tensor has the following simple form

8πT ( ) = ~b+( )~b + m2A+( )A + (...)∼

(52)

Here, as in the current (47), making the expression ordinal symmetric has the
effect of eliminating the ‘magnetic’ terms and making the corresponding tensor
symmetric. Hence, Lanczos had done more than just putting a mass term on the
right hand side of Maxwell’s equation: he had found essentially all the important
properties that Proca will rediscover in 1936.

To understand Lanczos interest in Proca’s equation and its energy-momentum
tensor we must remember that in his dissertation he proposed a ﬁeld theory of
matter in which electrons were singularities in the Maxwell ﬁeld [5]. The ﬁrst
term in (52) is nothing but the so-called Maxwell tensor, i.e., the energy-momentum
tensor of the Maxwell ﬁeld,21 so that the second term is the correction arising from
the feedback. Since this second term has the form of a pressure term, Lanczos’s
conclusion was that the vanishing of the divergence of (52) corresponds to the
stabilization of the electron’s ﬁeld energy-momentum distribution.

In effect, in a ﬁeld theory of matter like Lanczos’s electrodynamics, there is
a kind of a duality principle such that the physical properties of the electron can
be attributed either to the singularity (the particle aspect) or to the ﬁeld (the wave
aspect). Thus, although it is not explicitly stated in any of Lanczos’s papers, his
idea was that his new equation had to describe the electromagnetic ﬁeld of the
electron, while Dirac’s equation was only to describe the motion of the singularity.

Such an interpretation is perfectly sensible. We all know of the inﬁnities in
classical and quantum electrodynamics that, in both cases, are somehow due to the
unstable nature of the electron. In that respect, because of the coupling of Dirac’s

21The quaternionic form of Maxwell’s tensor was ﬁrst given by Silberstein, Phil. Mag. 25 (1913)
135–144. The remarkable thing is that if this tensor would have been adopted right away, many
problems due to the improper use of the non-covariant Poynting vector could have been avoided.

29

to Maxwell’s equations, the success of quantum electrodynamics can be seen as
the result of a cancellation between the non-zero divergence of Maxwell’ tensor
for the electromagnetic ﬁeld and Tetrode’s tensor for the Dirac ﬁeld:

8πT ( ) = [(cid:16)( ) · ∇(cid:17)D]i~e3D+ − Di~e3[D+

(cid:16)∇ · ( )(cid:17)] − e(cid:16)φ · ( )(cid:17)DD+

(53)

In fact, in a truly consistent theory, both tensors should be divergenceless. Of
course, starting with the introduction of stresses of an unknown nature by Poincar´e,
there have been many attempts to modify Maxwell’s tensor to produce stability. In
particular, the recent attempt by Schwinger [43] is not without resembling Lanczos
proposal to replace Maxwell’s tensor by Proca’s.

It is in his third paper that Lanczos expounds his idea: “Instead of the Dirac
current we have the energy-momentum tensor, instead of current conservation,
we have energy-momentum conservation” [3, p. 487]. However, when putting
numbers in, it turns out that if m in (46) and (52) is the mass of the electron,
everything comes out wrong: the mass of the photon is no more zero but equal to
m ! Hence, Lanczos makes his next bold step: m is in fact not the electron mass,
but a “ﬁeld function” [3, p. 492] which is everywhere practically zero, except in
the immediate neighborhood of the singularity. In this perspective, he suggests a
new interpretation of wave mechanics: “the de Broglie-Schr¨odinger wave equation
with constant m cannot characterize a single electron but only a large ‘swarm’ of
electrons” [3, p. 493].

More ideas and details will be given by Lanczos in his Berlin conference [4].
Summarizing his results and once again writing down Proca’s equation, he insists
that the mass term should in fact be a ﬁeld function in order that the equation
can be applied to the electron. To make this nonlinearity plausible, he rewrites
Proca’s equation in general tensor form and then, assuming a conformally invariant
geometry, he explicitly shows that the mass term indeed becomes a function of
space-time.

Needless to say that more than sixty years after Lanczos suggested these ideas,
we are still very far of a working nonlinear relativistic quantum theory. We may
even say that Lanczos’s ideas were just whishful thinking. But does it mean that
Lanczos’s general ideas about how to modify quantum theory were wrong? Not at
all. And, in our opinion, the reason is that if we believe that at some level the laws
of nature must be simple, there are only very few ways in which we can modify
the existing laws of relativistic quantum theory in order to reach a more complete
theory.

30

15 The principles of a nonlinear ﬁeld theory of mat-

ter

When Lanczos left Europe for the United States he was in his mid-thirties and
possibly was one of the few physicists of the time with a really wide perspective
over the whole of fundamental theoretical physics. He had worked in classical
electrodynamics, quantum theory, atomic physics and general relativity, and knew
as much about the successes as the problems of these theories.
In contrast to
Dirac, who in 1930 wrote and published “The Principles of Quantum Mechanics”
— which tend to imply that quantum theory is a theory essentially in its ﬁnal form
— Lanczos would summarize his doubts and certainties in part I of his long paper
dealing with fundamental theories and related philosophical issues [6].

According to Lanczos, what are the truly fundamental principles of a physical

theory of matter?

Lanczos starting point is a comparison of Einstein’s general relativity to clas-
In the former we have the prototype of a closed and
sical electrodynamics.
predictive theory were everything is determined by the ﬁeld equations: the geom-
etry of space-time, the conservation laws, the motion of the masses. In classical
electrodynamics, we have a satisfactory description of the electrical phenomena
in the macroscopic domain, but a theory which fails at the microscopic level as
soon as one meets with the problem of singularities.

As is well known from function theory, the behavior in the neighborhood of
the singularities deﬁnes the properties of the whole function everywhere.
It is
therefore very natural to consider the singularities as the ‘source’ of the function,
and thus to see the matter/ﬁeld duality as being the physical counterpart of the
mathematical duality of singular versus regular points of an analytic function.

However, at the same time as the function becomes singular at a given point,
it becomes undeﬁned and as a result one has an uncertainty: the solution is by
no means unique. In the most simple cases, such as in modern quantum electro-
dynamics, one can circumvent this difﬁculty by the process of ‘renormalization.’
But, universal properties such as the deﬁnite mass of electrons or protons, or the
uniqueness of their electrical charge, cannot be deﬁned by such type of solutions.

Fortunately, under favorable conditions, differential equations and systems may
have solutions which are everywhere regular, without being trivial. Such solutions
If
are called ‘eigensolutions’ and play a fundamental role in wave mechanics.
the equations are linear, a constant factor is left undetermined, but if they are
nonlinear everything is fully constrained. This is the case with general relativity,

31

and Lanczos suggests therefore that all fundamental properties of matter should
be determined by eigensolutions. The position of quantum mechanics relative to
fundamental ﬁeld theory is therefore similar to that of Maxwell’s theory relative to
the classical theory of the electron: “Wave mechanics does not solve the problem
of matter, it just gives averages over space or time” [6, p. 112].

In this perspective, Lanczos’s hope is that a future fundamental theory will
solve the problem of singularities at the same time as the problem of matter
and electricity. To succeed in such a task, he puts forward a two-step program:
“Generally covariant ﬁeld equations giving to space-time a deﬁnite geometrical
structure. Eigensolutions to these equations, giving on the one hand the electron,
on the other hand the proton” [6, p. 112].

Sixty years later, were do we stand? All attempts to incorporate electricity
into a generalized form of general relativity have failed. And the number of
‘elementary particles’ has vastly increased, from two in 1930, to several tens or
hundreds, depending on whether the excited states are counted along with the
fundamental ones.

A key element seems to be missing. Here again we may refer to Lanczos’s 1931
paper. Just after giving his ‘program,’ and before starting his analysis of Einstein’s
new theory of distant parallelism, he recalls the question of the universal constants:
Should the fundamental equation already contain the universal constants of nature
or not? Since the velocity of light allows the measurement of time in units
of length, and since general relativity has reduced gravitational interaction to a
question a curvature, what is the proper unit of length for a theory of elementary
particles? If we exclude the singular solutions in favor of the regular ones, the
eigensolutions, what are then the meanings, if any, of the Planck length and of the
classical electron radius?

The missing element is a fundamental length. If it is the Planck length, how can
we explain the gigantic difference of this length relative to the electron radius? If
it is the electron radius, which has about the correct size for a theory of elementary
particles, why not take a length obtained by multiplying it by a dimension-less
constant such as α = e2/~c ≃ 1/137 ? Moreover, what physical interpretation
are we going to give to this length ?

Using all our contemporary knowledge, let us try to resume Lanczos’s program.
Let us do it the framework of special relativity, for the present leaving aside the
question of properly dealing with gravitation. What we are looking for is some
fundamental equation which could give us an explanation for the nature and basic
properties, such as the mass, of elementary particles.

As a starting point we observe that Lanczos fundamental equation is extremely

32

successful because we can derive Dirac’s as well as Proca’s equation from it.
Moreover, Lanczos’s equation contains isospin, and thus an explanation of the
existence of doublets of particles which are either electrically charged or neutral.

As a second step, we consider Einstein-Mayer’s generalization as a convincing
hint that assuming the mass term in Lanczos’s equation to be a biquaternionic
parameter we can lift the mass degeneracy of Lanczos’s equation, and thus explain
the existence of electron and neutrinos, and at the same time explain the existence
of strongly interacting nucleon pairs.
In this last case, the E ﬁeld introduced
by Einstein and Mayer is not just a parameter but the pseudoscalar ﬁeld which
corresponds to the pions.

The third step is to systematically study the possible generalization of the
Lanczos-Einstein-Mayer system in order to discover other meaningful physical
interpretations. In doing this generalization it is worthwhile using, as Lanczos
did, two heuristic guides. First, Lanczos’s feedback idea, i.e., the concept that
fundamental equations should be closed systems. Second, also following Lanczos,
Hamilton’s conjecture, i.e., the idea that somehow biquaternions are an ideal
formalism for writing the fundamental equations of physics [17].

16 Petiau’s nonlinear wave mechanics and Barut’s

mass formula

In 1965, about the time when Gell-Mann and Zweig proposed the concept of
quarks, in complete independence from mainstream research and without knowing
that he was in the path of Lanczos, the French physicist G´erard Petiau22 started
studying systems of equations which may precisely give a solution to the problem
of the mass of leptons and quarks [44, 45]. In more then ﬁfteen papers, mostly
published between 1957 and 1969, Petiau analyzed many different aspects of
nonlinear wave mechanics, looked at regular as well as singular solutions, and
considered the problem of how to extend the canonical formalism, the question of
second quantization, etc. All of that he will do mostly following his instinct of a
physicist, with everything very neatly written down and explained starting form
ﬁrst principles, in the pure French tradition of mathematics.

22G´erard Petiau (1911-1990) was one of the ﬁrst students of Louis de Broglie. He published
many papers on waves equations of all possible spin. He is best known for his contribution to the
Kemmer-Dufﬁn-Petiau formalism of spin 1 particles. He worked out many of the mathematical
details of de Broglie’s ‘double solution’ theory of causal nonlinear quantum mechanics. His major
discovery is the elliptic function generalization of wave functions, which continuously interpolate
between de Broglie’s and solitonic waves.

33

Although Petiau was thinking in very general terms, considering complicated
couplings between particles of various intrinsic spin, it is easy with quaternions
to write his fundamental equation in the case of spin 1
2 particles. It essentially
amounts, in the spirit of Lanczos’s feedback idea, to adding a third equation to
Einstein’s system (34) in order to close it:

∇A = BE
∇B = AE

∇E = AB

(54)

Here A and B are the fundamental Lanczos ﬁelds, and E = E+ an additional
Einstein-Mayer ﬁeld of spin 0. In the most simple case, E is a real scalar function
of space-time and can be seen as replacing the mass in Lanczos fundamental
equation (19).23 As usual, to get the physical spin 1
2 eigenstates, we have just to
make the Lanczos-G¨ursey isospin superposition (22–23).

Because (54) is a closed nonlinear system, the solutions are much more con-
strained than with a usual linear type of wave equations. For instance, the single-
periodic de Broglie waves that quantum mechanics associates with a particle
become double-periodic Petiau waves [46]. Instead of being linear combinations
of sin(z) and cos(z) functions, these waves are superpositions of elliptic func-
tions sn(z, k), cn(z, k), etc. A very appealing feature of Petiau waves is that
their dependence on the modulus k interpolates between pure de Broglie waves
(for k = 0) and pure solitonic waves (for k = 1): a beautiful realization of the
wave/particle duality of quantum mechanics. Moreover, both the amplitudes and
the proper frequency (the µ factor appearing in the argument of sn[µ(Et−~p·~x), k],
for example) will be quantized. This is exactly the kind of behavior Lanczos was
expecting.

The most interesting thing, however, happens when, in order to quantize the
system, the Hamiltonian function is constructed. Taking, for example, A as the
fundamental ﬁeld, Petiau [44] showed that, in terms of the ﬁrst integrals, the
Hamiltonian will have a very simple form

H = H0k2µ4

(55)

where k is the modulus of the elliptic function, µ the proper frequency, and H0
some constant. The exciting thing is that the Hamiltonian, and thus the total energy
in the ﬁeld (i.e., for a single particle, the effective mass) scales with the fourth
power of µ.

23The function E2 corresponds to the ‘metric factor’ σ introduced by Lanczos in his general-

ization of the Proca equation for conformally ﬂat space-times [4, p. 127].

34

lepton masses
Barut’s
formula Data
u
0.511
0.511
105.66 d
105.55
s
1784.1
1786.1
c
?
10294.
b
?
37184.
t

N

e
0
1 µ
2
τ
3
4
5
6

quark masses

Barut’s
formula
0.068
14.1
239
1378
4978
13766
31989

Data
0 – 8
5 – 15
100 – 300
1300 – 1500
4700 – 5300
?
?

Table 1: Comparison of lepton and quark masses in MeV/c2 calculated with
Barut’s formula (56) to measured masses from Ref. [48]. The observation of a
sixth quark of mass in the range of 160’000 to 190’000 MeV/c2 has been reported
at the beginning of 1995 [57].

In effect, in 1979, Barut [47] discovered a very good empirical formula for
the mass of the leptons. Assuming that a quantized self-energy of magnitude
2 α−1meN 4, where N = 0, 1, 2..., is a new quantum number, be added to the
3
rest-mass of a electron to get the next heavy electron in the chain electron, muon,
tau,... , Barut got the following expression (where α ≃ 1/137):

m(N) = me(1 +

(56)

α−1

3
2

n=N

X
n=0

n4)

The agreement with the data of this rather simple formula is surprisingly good, the
discrepancy being of order 10−4 for the muon and 10−3 for the tau, respectively:
see Ref. [48] or Table 1. In order to get the masses of the quarks [49], it is enough
to take for the mass of the lightest quark mu = me/7.47 . Again, we see in Table 1
that the agreement between the theoretical quark masses and the ‘observed’ masses
is quite good, especially for the three heavy quarks [49].

Petiau’s Hamiltonian (55) shows that the energy density of the solutions to his
system (54) is a constant which depends only on the two parameters k and µ. If
we assume, just like Lanczos did in 1929 [5], that the singular part of the ﬁeld is
contained in a small region of ﬁnite extension, the ‘mass’ of the singularity will
have the same form as (55). Moreover, without going into the details of a speciﬁc
model [49], we can expect — from the general principles of quantum mechanics
— that if there is a spectrum of solutions, they will correspond to integer multiples
of the proper frequency µ. Hence, for ﬁxed k, the mass spectrum of elementary

35

particles will correspond to a sum of partial contributions of the form

m(n) = m0 n4

(57)

Comparing with (56), this expression establishes the link between Petiau’s non-
linear ﬁelds and Barut’s formula for the mass of quark and electrons. If this is
correct, what about the factor 7.47 ?

There are two non-trivial exceptional cases for elliptic functions: the harmonic
case, k = sin(π/4), and the equianharmonic case, k = sin(π/12).
It is very
plausible to associate the former with leptons, and the latter with quarks. Indeed,
in either case, the corresponding elliptic functions exhibit several unique symmetry
and scaling properties, which come from the fact that in the complex plane their
poles form a modular aggregate with π/2 or π/3 symmetries. Since according to
(55) the mass is proportional to k2, the electron to quark mass ratio is then equal
to about 7.47 .

A ﬁnal very interesting feature of Petiau’s nonlinear system (54) is that it has
two general classes of solutions to which correspond two plane waves limits [44].
In the ﬁrst class, the third equation decouples and we get the standard Lanczos
equation in which A and B are the two spinors of opposite chiralities which are
interchanged in a spatial reversal operation. The degenerate Petiau system is thus
equivalent to the Lanczos or Lanczos-Einstein-Mayer equations from which we
can derive two Dirac’s equation, one for each isospin states.

In the plane wave limit of the second class, one of the spinor ﬁelds A or B
decouples: We are left with a lone spinor coupled to the scalar ﬁeld E.
It is
then not possible to construct a parity covariant ﬁeld with just one degenerate
Petiau system. Hence, while the ﬁrst class clearly corresponds to leptons (or
more generally to particles such as the nucleons which have well deﬁned spin 1
2
asymptotic states) we can interpret the second class as quark states. ‘Conﬁnement’
is then explained by the above impossibility of the second class of solutions to
have Dirac-like asymptotic plane wave limits.

In order get hadrons, i.e., particles of deﬁnite parity made out of quarks, it is
then necessary to make covariant superpositions of two or three quark states. In
this picture, the quark states are deﬁned as Lanczos ﬁelds and thus do not have
a deﬁnite spin or parity. Hence, contrary to the Standard Model in which the
quarks are Dirac ﬁelds, there is no contradiction with Pauli’s exclusion principle.
However, as a conclusion to these ideas, we stress that the details of such a theory
of hadrons have not yet been worked out.

36

17 The fundamental length and the elementary par-

ticle mass spectrum

It is not difﬁcult to show that the N 4 power law dependence for the total energy
which we have found for the Lanczos-Petiau’s system (54) is a general property
of all Lagrangian ﬁeld theories in which there is a nonlinear term in the fourth
power of the ﬁeld amplitude. From a theoretical point of view, this is a very nice
Lagrangian because it has many good properties. In particular, it is conformally
invariant and renormalizable. From a phenomenological point of view, the N 4
In effect, such a strong power law
power law dependence is also very good.
dependence is essential in order to explain the very big difference in mass between
the lightest fundamental particle, the electron (mec2 = 0.5 MeV), and the ﬁfth
and sixth quarks (mc2 ≈ 5000 and ≈ 175’000 MeV). Hence, we see that Petiau’s
equation is more then just a generalization of Lanczos-Einstein’s system and that
there is a broad theoretical and empirical basis for it, although it may just be a ﬁrst
approximation to the complete theory.

If we now take a purely fundamental point of view, it is important to remark
that many different theories could in principle lead to a Lagrangian with a quartic
term, and that in this respect Petiau’s ideas are not necessarily the true ones.
In particular many nonlinear generalization of well established theories, such as
gravitation [50] or electrodynamics [51], quite naturally lead to such Lagrangians.
The problem with these generalizations is that the scale is then either the Planck
length (in which case the nonlinear effects are very small), some fraction of the
electron radius re, or, as in the present model, some unknown parameter.

Comparing expression (57) of the particle mass to the empirical formula (56),
we ﬁnd that (for the lepton spectrum) the constant m0 corresponds to the energy
2α−1mec2. This ﬁgure is
equivalent of the muon mass, i.e., about 105 MeV = 3
very interesting because the typical excitation energies of hadrons are precisely
of this order. Moreover, the mass of most elementary particles have values which
are very close to integer or half-integer multiples of α−1mec2 = 70 MeV [52].
If we assume that the universal coupling constant of all interactions (except the
gravitational one) of the elementary particles is deﬁned by the electric charge
quantum e, we derive from the formula r0 = e2/m0c2 the fundamental length

r0 = αre

(58)

where we have discarded the factor 3
only interested in order of magnitude considerations.

2 because in the present discussion we are

A fundamental length (or fundamental energy), expected to become the fourth

37

fundamental constant, has been advocated by a number of authors and in particular
by Heisenberg [53] and St¨uckelberg [54]. The problem, as we have already said, is
to ﬁnd its value and its correct interpretation. For Heisenberg and St¨uckelberg, the
fundamental length was estimated to be of the order of re. From the mass spectrum
of the electron and quarks, and the assumption that the relevant interaction constant
was the electric charge, we have derived (58). Let us give some further evidence
that this is indeed the fundamental that explains the mass spectrum of elementary
particles.

The ﬁrst quality of a fundamental length is that it must characterize the thresh-
old for some new physics. In this respect, one must remember that because e2 and
~c have the same dimensions (and thus a ratio α = e2/~c which is pure number)
one can always associate two different lengths to a given energy or mass. Hence,
since the larger of these is associated with the wave-aspect and the shorter one
with the particle-aspect of a massive object, each length has to be considered in the
proper context. The electron mass, for example, gives the electron radius which is
the distance from a point charge below which classical electrodynamics becomes
inconsistent; on the other hand, the Compton wave-length of the electron is the
threshold for electron-positron pair-creation, a typical phenomenon of relativistic
quantum electrodynamics (QED).

Since QED is by far the most precise and best understood part of elementary
particle theory, the threshold for ‘new physics’ in the context of QED is —as is well
known — the phenomenon of muon pair-production.24 This precisely corresponds
to the energy that led to the our fundamental length (58). Hence, QED sets an
upper limit to the fundamental length r0, which therefore has to be at most of the
order of r0 = αre so that pairs of particles other then electrons may be created.

In Sec. 16, in order to derive formula (57), we have assumed that a space-time
region of ﬁnite extension was associated with the particle. The size of this region,
a kind of a bag which contains the energy corresponding to its mass,25 is of course
our fundamental length r0. This concept can be used independently of nonlinear
wave mechanics and Petiau waves, and leads to nonlinear models that are typical
of those we referred to in the beginning of the present section (for an example, see
Ref. [53]). But, whatever the details of the model, the size of this bag has to be

24By ‘new physics’ we do not mean a break-down of QED, but phenomena such as the creation
of pair of particles heavier then the electron, the properties of which are not explained by QED.
For electromagnetic interactions, QED has been tested to extremely short distances, corresponding
to energies of the order of 106 MeV.

25It is important to stress that this quantum mechanical ‘bag’ does not have to correspond to
the extension of some directly measurable quantity, such as the electric charge or hadronic matter
distribution in the bag model of hadrons.
It is more like a volume of phase-space such as is
introduced in ﬁeld quantization.

38

consistent with quantum theory and with special relativity. This will give us two
lower limits to the fundamental length.

In quantum theory, a most fundamental principle is that a wave function has
to be associated to every particle. In the rest frame of the particle, it has the form
exp(imc2t/~). If a ﬁnite region of space-time is also associated with the particle,
compatibility requires that its size has to be smaller than the wave-length of the
wave function. This means that r0 < ~/mc, which correspond to an approximate
upper limit to the mass spectrum

mc2 <

= α−2mec2 ≃ 9.6 GeV

(59)

~c
r0

A second constraint on the mass of a particle of ﬁnite extension is given by the
minimum radius of a relativistic particle with spin. In effect, if we attribute an
intrinsic angular momentum to a relativistic particle, its center of mass cannot be
deﬁned more precisely than the ratio of the spin angular-momentum to the particle
mass [55]. Thus, to be compatible with this relativistic effect, i.e., in order that
our lepton or quark can still be considered as a spin 1
2 point particle, we need
r0 < ~2mc, which gives an upper limit of about 5 GeV, i.e., of the same order a/s
the above quantum criterion.

Looking at Table 1, we see that there is no lepton or quark with a masselarger
then α−2me = 9.6 GeV/c2. We therefore conclude that r0 = αre is really the
fundamental length we were looking for and that, as expected by Lanczos, it is
neither the electron radius or the Planck length.26

Finally, we notice that r0 is essentially the electron radius times α, the mys-
terious ﬁne structure constant of Schr¨odinger. This is one more hint that r0 is
indeed a fundamental length. In effect, while the electron radius can be seen as the
simplest combination of elementary quantities giving a scale with the dimension
of a length, the determination of alpha is now equivalent to deriving r0 from some
more fundamental theory, unless it is assumed that r0 is truly fundamental, in
which case alpha is nothing but the ratio of r0 to re.27

26We remark that these considerations, and thus the mass limit (59), applies only to quarks and
leptons, i.e., to particles of ‘matter,’ and not necessarily to bosons such the W and Z0, which are
quanta of effective interaction ﬁelds, and which have masses of 80 and 91 GeV , respectively.

27It should be mentioned that the fundamental signiﬁcance of αre is also suggested by classical
models of particles with spin. For example, in the model of E. Groschwitz, the charge of the
electron is supposed to be distributed over a sphere of radius αre. The motion of the electron is
then a complicated ‘Zitterbewegung’-like trajectory which has two interesting limiting cases: one
with an effective mass of the order of the electron mass, the other with an effective mass of the
order of the muon mass. See pages 357–361 in H. H¨oln, Ergebinisse d. exakten Naturwiss., Bd.
XXVI (1952) 291–382.

39

In the currently Standard Model of elementary particles, a sixth quark with
a very large mass is needed for theoretical and phenomenological reasons. This
discovery of this sixth quark could therefore be interpreted as an argument against
the existence of a fundamental length such as required by the present interpretation
of the Barut formula. The Standard Model, however, is basically a perturbative
theory of the interactions of quark and leptons, a theory that is logically independent
of our interpretation of mass quantization. In this perspective, the conjunction of
our theory of mass with one of interactions could explain the need for a very
massive sixth quark, as well as the existence of very light neutrinos, which are
also predicted by our model [49].

18 Conclusion: The advent of nonlinear quantum

theory

Lanczos’s idea of 1929 to derive Dirac’s equation from a more fundamental one
was a highly heretical concept. It implied a kind of Copernician revolution which
was clearly not acceptable to the ‘fathers of quantum mechanics.’ Moreover, the
essentially theoretical reasoning of Lanczos was too far from the experimental
situation of the time to be confronted with the data. The fate of Lanczos’s ideas
is therefore somewhat similar to those of de Broglie when he proposed in 1927
his double solution theory: nobody took serious interest in it before the concept
was revived in the 1950’s by the work of David Bohm on deterministic quantum
theory.

The philosophical lesson is that pure theoretical insight has much more difﬁ-
culties in getting acceptance than any kind of a more phenomenological approach.
Because of the brilliant success, following World War II, of the young ‘quantum
engineers’ with renormalizable quantum electrodynamics, the pragmatic approach
is possibly even more in favor now than in Lanczos days. The best example of this
is the Standard Model, a highly successful effective phenomenology, which gives
numerical agreement for a vast number of phenomena, but which nevertheless does
not answer most of the truly fundamental problems which are the real concern of
theoretical physics.

In the highly competitive context of contemporary research, it is very sad that
Lanczos never learned that he had discovered isospin in 1929. This is particularly
regrettable since the ﬁnal interpretation of his fundamental equation was given in
1957 by G¨ursey, who therefore deserves a lot of credit for it, although in the papers
who made him famous, G¨ursey did not quote Lanczos. Five years later, in 1962,

40

Lanczos will again rediscover Dirac’s equation, this time in the context of general
relativity [56], although without the mass term. Again he will refer to quaternions
and to his contention about their special role in physics:

“The spontaneous and quite unexpected appearance of quaternion
calculus and the Dirac equation (the fundamental building block of
electromagnetism and of quantum theory) in the ﬁeld equations of
general relativity can hardly be considered as mere accidents” [56,
p. 389].

Until the end, Lanczos continued the work on fundamental theory he had
started in 1919 with his dissertation and that reached a climax with his review
paper of 1931. He could never forget the theoretical insight he had gained with his
quaternionic derivation of Dirac’s equation, and the fact that this major contribution
was ignored.

But the contemptuous attitude of Lanczos’s contemporaries is not a proof of
the superiority of the dominant ideas of the time. Neither is the imperfection
of Lanczos’s formulation of 1929 a sufﬁcient reason for rejecting his ideas and
excluding him from the small circle of the leading physicists who were to put
the dogma of the new physics into ﬁnal shape. It is therefore easy to understand
the feelings of Lanczos when he criticized the intolerant positivist attitude of the
quantum physicists, or announced the end of quantum theory with the advent of a
more fundamental nonlinear one [6].

References

[1] C. Lanczos, Die tensoranalytischen Beziehungen der Diracschen Gleichung
(The tensor analytical relationships of Dirac’s equation), Zeits. f. Phys. 57
(1929) 447–473. Reprinted and translated in W.R. Davis et al., eds., Cor-
nelius Lanczos Collected Published Papers With Commentaries, III (North
Carolina State University, Raleigh, 1998) pages 2-1132 to 2-1185; e-print
arXiv:physics/0508002 available at http://arXiv.org/abs/physics/0508002.

[2] C. Lanczos, Zur kovarianten Formulierung der Diracschen Gleichung (On
the covariant formulation of Dirac’s equation), Zeits. f. Phys. 57 (1929)
474–483. Reprinted and translated in W.R. Davis et al., eds., Cornelius
Lanczos Collected Published Papers With Commentaries, III (North Ca-
rolina State University, Raleigh, 1998) pages 2-1186 to 2-1205; e-print
arXiv:physics/0508012 available at http://arXiv.org/abs/physics/0508012.

41

[3] C. Lanczos, Die Erhaltungssätze in der feldmässigen Darstellungen der
Diracschen Theorie (The conservation law in the ﬁeld theoretical represen-
tation of Dirac’s theory), Zeits. f. Phys. 57 (1929) 484–493. Reprinted and
translated in W.R. Davis et al., eds., Cornelius Lanczos Collected Published
Papers With Commentaries, III (North Carolina State University, Raleigh,
1998) pages 2-1206 to 2-1225; e-print arXiv:physics/0508013 available at
http://arXiv.org/abs/physics/0508013.

[4] C. Lanczos, Dirac’s wellenmechanische Theorie des Elektrons und ihre
feldtheorische Ausgestaltung (Dirac’s wave mechanical
the
electron), Physikalische Zeits. 31 (1930) 120–130. Reprinted and trans-
lated i in W.R. Davis et al., eds., Cornelius Lanczos Collected Pub-
lished Papers With Commentaries, III (North Carolina State University,
Raleigh, 1998) 2-1226 to 2-1247; e-print arXiv:physics/0508013 available
at http://arXiv.org/abs/physics/0508013.

theory of

[5] Kornel Lanczos, Die Funktionentheoretischen Beziehungen der Maxwell-
schen Aethergleichungen — Ein Beitrag zur Relativit¨ats- und Elektronenthe-
orie, (Verlagsbuchhandlung Josef N´emeth, Budapest, 1919) 80 pp. Hand-
written and lithographed in 50 copies. Reprinted in W.R. Davis et al., eds.,
Cornelius Lanczos Collected Published Papers With Commentaries (North
Carolina State University, Raleigh, 1998) Volume VI, pages A-1 to A-82.

For a typeseted version of Lanczos’s dissertation, see [59].

For a commentary on Lanczos’s dissertation, and further developments
related to it, see [60, 61].

[6] C. Lanczos, Die neue Feldtheorie Einsteins (The new ﬁeld theory of Ein-
stein), Ergeb. d. exakten Naturwiss. 10 (1931) 97–132. Reprinted and trans-
lated in [58, 2-1412 to 2-1483].

[7] C. Lanczos, Electricity as a natural property of Riemanian geometry, Phys.

Rev. 39 (1932) 716–736. Reprinted in [58, 2-682 to 2-702].

[8] C. Lanczos, Die Wellenmechanik als Hamiltonsche Dynamik des Funktion-
raumes. Eine neue Ableitung der Dirakschengleichung (Wave mechanics
as Hamiltonian dynamics of function space. A new deivation of Dirac’s
equation, Zeits. f. Phys. 81 (1933) 703–732. Reprinted and translated in
[58, 2-1294 to 2-1353].

C. Lanczos, Zur Hamiltonsche Dynamik des Funktionraumes (On the
Hamiltonian dynamics of the function space), Zeits. f. Phys 85 (1933)
107-127. Reprinted and translated in [58, 2-1354 to 2-1395].

42

Concerning these papers, see the commentary of R.O. Fulp and L.K. Norris,
The Lanczos derivation of the Dirac equation in [58, 2-1396 to 2-1406].

[9] E. Madelung, Eine ¨Ubertragung der Diracschen Theorie des Electrons in

gewohnte Formen, Z. f. Phys. 54 (1929) 303–306.

[10] C.G. Darwin, On the diffraction of the magnetic electron, Proc. Roy. Soc.

120 (1928) 631–642.

For an analysis Darwin’s ideas in relationship with modern ideas, see J.M.
Parra, in A. Micalli et al. (eds.), Clifford Algebras and their Applications in
Mathematical Physics, (Kluwer Academic Publ., 1992) 463–477.

[11] B.L. van der Waerden, Spinoranalyse, Nachr. Akad. Wiss. Gottingen, Math.-

Physik. Kl. (1929) 100–109.

O. Laporte and G.E. Uhlenbeck, Application of spinor analysis to the
Maxwell and Dirac equations, Phys. Rev. 37 (1931) 1380–1397.

For a review and references to allied formalisms see W.L. Bade and H.
Jehle, An introduction to spinors, Rev. Mod. Phys. 25 (1951) 714–728.

[12] M. Riesz, Clifford Numbers and Spinors, Lectures given in 1957–1959 with
a Historical Review by P. Lounesto, (Kluwer Academic Publishers, 1993)
245 pp.

P. Lounesto, Clifford Algebras and Spinors (Cambridge University Press,
1997) 306 pp.

[13] F. Sauter, L¨osung der Diracschen Gleichungen ohne Spezialisierung der

Diracschen Operatoren, Zeitschr. f. Phys. 63 (1930) 803–814.

F. Sauter, Zur L¨osung der Diracschen Gleichungen ohne Spezialisierung
der Diracschen Operatoren. II, Zeitschr. f. Phys. 64 (1930) 295–303.

W. Franz, Zur Methodik der Dirac-Gleichung, Sitzungsber. d. Bayrischen
Akad. d. Wiss. III (1935) 379–435.

[14] G. Juvet, Op´erateurs de Dirac et ´equations de Maxwell, Comm. Math. Helv.

2 (1930) 225–235.

G. Juvet and A. Schidlof, Sur les nombres hypercomplexes de Clifford et
leurs applications `a l’analyse vectorielle ordinaire, `a l’´electromagn´etisme
de Minkowski et `a la th´eorie de Dirac, Bull. Soc. Sci. nat. Neuchˆatel 57
(1932) 127–141.

A. Mercier, Expression des ´equations de l’´electromagnétisme au moyen des
nombres de Clifford, th`ese de l’Universit´e de Gen`eve No 953, Arch. Sci.
Phys. Nat. Gen`eve 17 (1935) 1–34.

43

[15] A. Proca, Sur l’équation de Dirac, J. Phys. Radium 1 (1930) 235–248.

A. Proca, Quelques observations concernant un article intitulé “Sur
l’équation de Dirac”, J. de. Phys. 7 (1932) 172–184.

[16] H. Weyl, Gruppentheorie und Quantenmechanik (S. Hirzel Verlag, 1928)

p. 171.

See also, Ref. [24].

[17] A. Gsponer and J.-P. Hurni, The physical heritage of Sir W.R. Hamilton,
presented at the conference: The Mathematical Heritage of Sir William
Rowan Hamilton commemorating the sesquicentennial of the invention
of quaternions, Trinity College, Dublin, 17th – 20th August, 1993; e-print
arXiv:math-ph/0201058 available at http://arXiv.org/abs/math-ph/0201058.

[18] W.R. Hamilton, Elements of Quaternions, Vol I et II (First edition 1866;
second edition edited and expanded by C.J. Joly 1899-1901; reprinted by
Chelsea Publishing, New York, 1969) 1185pp.

[19] F. Gürsey, Applications of quaternions to ﬁeld equations, PhD thesis (Uni-
versity of London, 1950) 204pp. It is of interest to note that two subsections
of G¨ursey’s dissertation speciﬁcally deal with and clarify the results of
Lanczos’s papers of 1929.

See also F. G¨ursey,On two-component wave equation, Phys. Rev. 77 (1950)
844–845.

[20] D. Hestenes, Real spinor ﬁelds, J. Math. Phys. 8 (1967) 798–808; Spin and

isospin, J. Math. Phys. 8 (1967) 809–812.

[21] F. G¨ursey, Connection between Dirac’s electron and a classical spinning

particle, Phys. Rev. 97 (1955) 1712–1713.

F. G¨ursey, Contribution to the quaternion formalism in special relativity,
Rev. Fac. Sci. Istanbul A20 (1956) 149–171.

F. G¨ursey, Correspondence between quaternions and four-spinors, Rev.
Fac. Sci. Istanbul A 21 (1956) 33–54.

[22] K. Nishijima, On the theory of leptons, Nuovo Cim. 5 (1957) 1349–1354.

[23] F. G¨ursey, Relation of charge independence and baryon conservation to

Pauli’s transformation, Nuovo Cim. 7 (1958) 411–415.

See also E.J. Schremp, Isotopic spin and the group space of the proper
Lorentz group, Phys. Rev. 99 (1955) 1603. In this paper Schremp is citing
Lanczos’s papers of 1929.

44

[24] H. Weyl, Elektron und Gravitation, Zeits. f. Phys. 56 (1929) 330–354.

[25] J. Blaton, Quaternionen, Semivektoren und Spinoren, Zeitschr. f. Phys. 95

(1935) 337–354.

by Franz, Ref. [13].

[26] H.A. Kramers, Zeeman-Festschrift (s’Gravenhage, 1935) page 403; cited

See also, H.A. Kramers, Quantum Mechanics (1938), translated by D. ter
Haar (North Holland, 1957) §64, p. 278–281.

[27] R.P. Feynman and M. Gell-Mann, Theory of the Fermi interaction, Phys.

Rev. 109 (1958) 193–198.

[28] L.M. Brown, Two-component fermion theory, Phys. Rev. 109 (1958) 957–

964.

[29] A. Gsponer, unpublished (1992).

[30] A. Einstein and W. Mayer, Semi-Vektoren und Spinoren, Sitzber. Preuss.

Akad. Wiss. Physik.-Math. Kl. (1932) 522–550.

[31] A. Einstein and W. Mayer, Die Diracgleichungen für Semivektoren, Proc.
Roy. Acad. Amsterdam 36 (1933) 497–516. A. Einstein and W. Mayer,
Spaltung der natürlichsten Feldgleichungen für Semi-Vektoren in Spinor-
Gleichungen vom Dirac’schen Typus, Proc. Roy. Acad. Amsterdam 36
(1933) 615–619.

In these papers, Einstein and Mayer consider the most general Lagrangian
including gravitation, the Maxwell ﬁeld, and the generalized Dirac-Lanczos
ﬁeld.

[32] F. G¨ursey, On the symmetries of strong and weak interactions, Nuovo Cim.

16 (1960) 230–240.

See also M. Gell-Mann and M. Levy, The axial current in beta decay, Nuovo
Cim. 16 (1960) 705–725.

[33] A. Gsponer and J.-P. Hurni, Lanczos’s equation to replace Dirac’s equa-
tion ?, in J.D. Brown et al., eds., Proc. of the Cornelius Lanczos Int.
Centenary Conf. (SIAM, Philadelphia, 1994) 509–512. There are a num-
ber of typographical errors in this paper; please refer to the e-print
arXiv:hep-ph/0112317 available at http://arXiv.org/abs/hep-ph/0112317.

[34] See, for example, J.D. Bjorken, Neutral-current results without gauge the-

ories, Phys. Rev. D 19 (1979) 335-346.

45

[35] See, for example, M. Rho, Cheshire cat hadrons, Phys. Rep. 240 (1994)

1–142.

See also, B.D. Serot and J.D. Walecka, Recent progress in quantum hadro-
dynamics, Int. J. Mod. Phys. E6 (1997) 515–631.

[36] A. Proca, Sur la th´eorie ondulatoire des ´electrons positifs et n´egatifs, J.

Phys. Radium 7 (1936) 347–353.

[37] A. Proca, Th´eorie non relativiste des particules `a spin entier, J. Phys. Ra-
dium 9 (1938) 61-66. In this paper, page 63, Proca qualiﬁes the quadrivector
variance L( )L+ as ‘quaternionic,’ and the spinor variance L( ) as ‘spinorial.’

[38] A. Proca, , J. de Physique 3 (1932) 83–101.

[39] C.W. Kilmister, The application of certain linear quaternion functions of
quaternions to tensor analysis, Proc. Roy. Irish Acad. A 57 (1955) 37–52.

[40] A.W. Conway, On the application of quaternions to some recent develop-

ments of electrical theory, Proc. Roy. Irish Acad. 29 (1911) 1–9.

[41] G.Y. Rainich, Electrodynamics in the general relativity theory, Trans. Am.

Math. Soc. 27 (1925) 106.

For an analysis of the ‘monopole question’ using 3-dimensional vector
analysis, see for example, J.D. Jackson, Classical Electrodynamics, (Wiley,
New York, 1975) 251–253. See also, J. Schwinger, Science 165 (1969)
757–761; and in quaternion formalism F. G¨ursey, Rev. Fac. Sci. Istanbul
A19 (1954) 154–160.

[42] C. Lanczos, William Rowan Hamilton, an appreciation, Am. Sci. 2 (1967)

129–143. Reprinted in [58, 2-1859 to 2-1873].

[43] J. Schwinger, Electromagentic mass revisited, Found Phys. 13 (1983) 373–

383.

[44] G. Petiau, Sur les th´eories quantiques des champs associ´es `a des mod`eles
simples d’´equations d’ondes non lin´eaires, Nuovo Cim. 40 (1965) 84–101.

[45] For a synthesis of Petiau’s work on this subject, see: G. Petiau, Sur la
repr´esentation par des syst`emes diff´erentiels non lin´eaires du premier ordre
de mod`eles corpusculaires d´eﬁnis par l’association de champs de types
microphysiques, ´electromagn´etiques et gravitationels, Ann. Inst. Henri
Poincar´e, 36 (1982) 89–125.

46

[46] G. Petiau, Sur une g´en´eralisation non lin´eaire de la m´ecanique ondulatoire
et les propri´et´es des fonctions d’ondes correspondantes, Nuovo Cim. 9
(1958) 542–568.

[47] A.O. Barut, Lepton mass formula, Phys. Rev. Lett. 42 (1979) 1251.

[48] Particle Data Group, "Review of Particle Properties", Phys. Rev., D45
(1992) II-4. According to this reference, page II-4, note [g], "the estimates
of d and u masses are not without controversy ... the u-quark could be
essentially massless". See also J. Gasser and Leutwyler, Phys. Rep., 87
(1982) 77–169.

[49] A. Gsponer, J.P. Hurni, Non-linear ﬁeld theory for lepton and quark masses,
Hadronic Journal 19 (1996) 367–373; e-print arXiv:hep-ph/0201193 avail-
able at http://arXiv.org/abs/hep-ph/0201193.

[50] See, for example, G.D. Kerlick, Cosmology and particle pair production via
gravitational spin-spin interaction in the Einstein-Cartan-Sciama-Kibble
theory of gravity, Phys. Rev. D12 (1975) 3004-3006.

[51] See, for example, F. Bisshop, A non-linear electromagnetic theory, Int. J.

Theor. Phys. 6 (1972) 225–247.

[52] Y. Nambu, An empirical mass spectrum of elementary particles, Progr.

Theor. Phys. 7 (1952) 595–596.

[53] W. Heisenberg, ¨Uber die in der Theorie der Elementarteilchen auftretende

universelle L¨ange, Ann. Phys. 32 (1938) 20–33.

[54] E.C.G. St¨uckelberg, Un principe qui relie la th´orie de la relativit´e et la

th´eorie des qunata, Helv. Phys. Acta. 16 (1943) 173–202.

[55] C. M¨oller, Ann. Inst. H. Poincare 11 (1949) 251–278.

E.C.G. St¨uckelberg, Minimum radius of a particle with spin, Helv. Phys.
Acta, 45 (1972) 616–618.

[56] C. Lanczos, The splitting of the Riemann tensor, Rev. Mod. Phys. 34 (1962)

379–389. Reprinted in [58, 2-1896 to 2-1906].

[57] F. Abe, et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 74 (1995) 2626–2631. S. Abachi, et al., Phys.

Rev. Lett. 74 (1995) 2632–2637.

47

Supplementary references

[58] W.R. Davis, M. Chu, P. Dolan, J. R. McConnell, L. K. Norris, E. Or-
tiz, R. J. Plemmons, D. Ridgeway, B. K. P. Scaife, W. J. Stewart, J. W.
York, Jr., W. O. Doggett, B. M. Gellai, A. A. Gsponer, C. A. Prioli, ed-
itors, Cornelius Lanczos Collected Published Papers with Commentaries
(North Carolina State University, Raleigh, 1998) 6 volumes, internet site:
http://www.physics.ncsu.edu/lanczos.

[59] Cornelius Lanczos, The relations of the homogeneous Maxwell’s equations
to the theory of functions — A contribution to the theory of relativity and
electrons (1919, Typeseted by Jean-Pierre Hurni with a preface by Andre
Gsponer, 2004) 58 pp; e-print arXiv:physics/0408079 available at
http://arXiv.org/abs/physics/0408079.

[60] A. Gsponer and J.-P. Hurni, Lanczos’s functional theory of electrodynam-
ics — A commentary on Lanczos’s PhD dissertation, in W.R. Davis et al.,
eds., Cornelius Lanczos Collected Published Papers With Commentaries, I
(North Carolina State University, Raleigh, 1998) 2-15 to 2-23; e-print
arXiv:math-ph/0402012 available at http://arXiv.org/abs/math-ph/0402012.

[61] A. Gsponer and J.-P. Hurni, Cornelius Lanczos’s derivation of

the
usual action integral of classical electrodynamics, Foundations of
Physics 35 (2005) 865–880.; e-print arXiv:math-ph/0408100 available at
http://arXiv.org/abs/math-ph/0408100.

[62] A. Gsponer and J.-P. Hurni, Comment on formulating and general-
izing Dirac’s, Proca’s, and Maxwell’s equations with biquaternions
or Clifford numbers, Found. Phys. Lett. 14 (2001) 77–85; e-print
arXiv:math-ph/0201049 available at http://arXiv.org/abs/math-ph/0201049.

[63] A. Gsponer, On the “equivalence” of the Maxwell and Dirac equations,
Int. J. Theor. Phys. 41 (2002) 689–694; e-print arXiv:math-ph/0201053
available at http://arXiv.org/abs/math-ph/0201053.

[64] Lanczos’s equation as a way out of the spin 3/2 crisis?, Hadronic Jour-
nal 26 (2003) 327–350; e-print arXiv:math-ph/00210055 available at
http://arXiv.org/abs/math-ph/0210055.

48

