5
0
0
2
 
g
u
A
 
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
t
s
i
h
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
3
1
0
8
0
5
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

The Conservation Laws in the Field
Theoretical Representation of Dirac’s
Theory∗

By Cornel Lanczos in Berlin
(Received on August 13, 1929)

Version ISRI-04-12.2 March 16, 2008

Abstract

We show that in the new description, Dirac’s “current vector” is not re-
lated to a vector but to a tensor: the “stress-energy tensor.” Corresponding
to Dirac’s conservation law, we have the conservation laws of momentum
and energy. The stress-energy tensor consists of two parts: an “electromag-
netic” part, which has the same structure as the stress-energy tensor of the
Maxwell theory, and a “mechanical” part, as suggested by hydrodynamics.
The connection between these two tensors, which appears organically here,
eliminates the well-known contradictions inherent in the dynamics of elec-
tron theory.
(Editorial note: In this paper Lanczos is actually discussing
his “doubled Dirac equation,” from which he consistently derives Proca’s
equation and its stress-energy tensor.)

In two previous papers,1 the author proposed a new way of describing Dirac’s
theory; namely, exclusively on the basis of the normal relativistic space-time
structure and operating with customary ﬁeld theoretical concepts only.
In one
respect, the new description displayed a peculiar deﬁciency: no vector could be
found that would correspond to the fundamental zero-divergence “current vector”
of Dirac’s theory. Namely, the vector which could be considered as a form
analogous to Dirac’s current vector [cf., expression (90) in the ﬁrst paper], is
not divergence free, whereas the formation which is really divergence free [cf.,
expression (13) in the second paper] does not represent a vector. This difﬁculty
∗Editorial note: Published in Zeits. f. Phys. 57 (1929) 484–493, reprinted and translated in [3].
This is Nb. 3 in a series of four papers on relativistic quantum-mechanics [1, 2, 3, 4] which
are extensively discussed in a commentary by Andre Gsponer and Jean-Pierre Hurni [5]. Initial
translation by J´osef Illy and Judith Konst´ag Mask´o. Final translation and editorial notes by Andre
Gsponer.

1Zeits. f. Phys. 57 (1929) 447 and 474, 1929. (Editorial note: Refs. [1] and [2].)

1

is solved — as the author realized in the meantime — by a fact which allows a
much larger perspective for the ﬁeld theoretical description and seems to conﬁrm
the inherent validity of the whole development to a great extent.

As we mentioned before, the two Dirac equations for H and H ′ [see equation
(8) in the second paper] are completely equivalent to our whole system of ﬁeld
equations. Hence, we can form the “current vector” for these two Dirac equations
(which is not complex and therefore actually represents only one vector) and in this
way we obtain two zero-divergence expressions. We should not call these “vectors”
because the vector character disappeared with our transformation properties of F
and G. However, the zero divergence follows simply from the ﬁeld equations and
is independent of the transformation properties.

Hence, we have two zero divergence quaternions:

HH

∗

, H ′H

′∗

and it is obvious that any arbitrary linear combination of them will be divergence-
free as well.

If we write for a moment:

A =

(F + G), B =

(F − G),

1
2

1
2

then:

H = A + iBjz,
H ′ = A − iBjz.)
The zero divergence property holds for the following two quaternions as well:

∗
AA

+ BB

=

(F F

+ GG

),

∗

∗

∗
BjzA

+ AjzB

=

(F jzF

∗ − GjzG

∗

).

∗

∗

1
2
1
2






It is obvious, however, that the quaternion unit jz cannot be distinguished from
the remaining spatial units. The choice of jz was only due to a special way of
writing down the Dirac equation, which thereby requires a special ordering of the
ψ-quantities. Accordingly, we may use either jx or jy instead of jz.

In this way, we obtain four divergence-free quaternions, which we can write

down in the following compact form:

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

∗

∗

F jαF

+ GjαG

,

2

where jα stands for one of the four quaternion units.

The fact that the Dirac divergence equation is quadrupled here suggests that
we have a vectorial divergence instead of a scalar one. If this is true, then the set
of the four quaternions (5) should be equivalent to a tensor. In actual fact, this is
the case.

By means of a vector V , one can namely form a vector again from an antisym-

metric tensor F by means of the following quaternion product:

F V F

∗

.

Indeed,

F ′V ′F

′∗ = pF ppV p∗p∗F

∗

p∗ = p(F V F

∗

)p∗.

However, for (6) we can write:

and the vector character of a quaternion Q can also be expressed by saying:

where the components of quaternions Q are denoted by Qµ and where U is a
vector. Hence we have:

∗

∗

F V F

= (F jνF

)Vν,

QµUµ = invariant,

∗

(F jνF

)µUµVν = invariant,

∗

(F jiF

)k,

and this means, according to the deﬁnition of a tensor, that the quantities:

are tensor components.
quaternion F jαF
together yield an array of 16 quantities which are tensor components.

if we write the components of each
one after the other each in a line, then the four lines taken

In other words:

∗

Something analogous can be done with the vector G. There we can form a

vector by means of the product GV G or even by means of:

∗

∗

GV G

= (GjνG

)Vν.

Then it holds that:

′

G

V

′∗

′

G

= pGp

∗

∗

p

∗

∗

V ppG

p

= p(GV G

∗

∗

,

)p

is valid. That is, the quantities:

(6)

(7)

(8)

(9)

(10)

(11)

(12)

(13)

(14)

∗

(GjiG

)k,

3

also form the components of a tensor. It is expedient to apply a factor of − 1
therefore we put:

2 and

Tik = −1
2

∗

(F jiF

)k,

and

Uik = −1
2
The zero divergence tensor, which we shall denote by Wik, is composed of these
two tensors:2

(GjiG

(16)

)k.

∗

Wik = Tik + Uik.

Thus, Dirac’s conservation law for the four quaternions (5) appears in the form

of a divergence equation for this tensor:

(15)

(17)

(18)

div(Wik) =

= 0,

∂Wiν
∂xν

which describes the conservation laws of momentum and energy.

In actual fact, the tensor Wik occurring here, whose divergence vanishes, can
really with good reason be called a “stress-energy tensor” and thus we arrive at
the following remarkable result:

In place of the Dirac current vector the stress-energy tensor occurs, and in

place of the Dirac conservation law the momentum-energy law occurs.

The Dirac current vector was an extension for those scalars ψψ∗ interpreted by
Schr¨odinger as “the density of electricity.” Here the same vector will be extended
by one more rank: to a tensor of second order.3 However, the larger manifold
of quantities may well be taken into account if we think of the fundamental
signiﬁcance the stress-energy tensor has for dynamics and of the fundamental
signiﬁcance of the Riemannian curvature tensor. Thereby, one can presume a
metrical background for the whole theory proposed here, as well as a hidden
connection with the most important and far-reaching branch of physics: with the
general theory of relativity.

Strangely, the stress-energy tensor given by (17) is not symmetric.

2The letter W should not remind one of probability (“Wahrscheinlichkeit”).

If the Dirac
vector could be interpreted as a “probability ﬂux” (“Wahrscheinlichkeitsﬂuss”), then an analog
interpretation for a tensor of second-order, here replacing the Dirac vector, would hardly have any
meaning. Therefore, I think that at this stage no compromise is any longer possible between the
“reactionary” viewpoint represented here (which aims at a complete ﬁeld theoretical description
based on the normal space-time structure) and the probability theoretical (statistical) approach.

3This procedure resembles the development of gravitation theory where Newton’s scalar po-

tential was extended to a tensor of second-order by Einstein.

4

Let us ﬁrst consider the tensor (15). It can be written in vector analytical terms

as follows:

Tik = SFik − M

(S2 + M 2)gik + (F ν

FµνF µνgik).

(15’)

Fik − 1
2

i Fkν − 1
4

The ﬁrst two terms are antisymmetric, the others are symmetric.

e

The other tensor (16) appears in the form:

Uik =

^

(MiSk − MkSi) + MiMk + SiSk − 1
2

(MνM ν + SνSν)gik.

(16’)

Here, too, an antisymmetric term is produced by the interaction between the two
vectors Si and Mi.

It is quite remarkable that the stress-energy tensor becomes symmetric when
all those quantities which are extraneous to the Maxwell theory drop out, that is, if
we set equal to zero the scalars S and M, as well as the magnetic vector Mi. In the
ﬁrst paper we indicated — without an external ﬁeld — that this constraint is really
possible, whereas in the second paper we saw that the same was not feasible after
introducing the vector potential. Here it is indicated again that the introduction of
the vector potential in the equations was not performed in the right way. In fact,
the fundamental meaning of the stress-energy tensor would be lost if we sacriﬁced
its symmetry — there is no doubt about that.

If we retain only the electromagnetic ﬁeld strength Fik and the electric current
vector Si as fundamental quantities, then the now symmetric stress-energy tensor
appears to be composed of two parts.

The ﬁrst “electromagnetic” part Tik is fully identical with the Maxwell stress-

energy tensor of the electromagnetic ﬁeld:

The second part Uik can also be given a certain meaning, in view of a similar

formulation in mechanics. It is:

This tensor can be regarded as a “mechanical” stress-energy tensor. In fact, the
symmetric tensor:

Tik = F ν

i Fkν − 1
4

FµνF µνgik.

Uik = SiSk − 1
2

SνSνgik.

µ0uiuk,

5

(19)

(20)

(21)

is introduced in the ﬁeld theoretical description of the mechanical momentum-
energy current as a “kinetic momentum-energy tensor” (Minkowski).4 Here µ0 is
the scalar mass density and ui is the velocity vector. The term SiSk is obviously
quite analogous, except that the current vector is replaced by the velocity. And
this analogy goes further if we take into consideration that, in a static spherically
symmetric solution, the average value of the spatial components of Si will neces-
sarily vanish and only a time part can remain. This means that the average value
of the vector Si points in the direction of the velocity indeed. (In a system at rest,
the latter has only one time component.)

The second term of (20) is also well-known from hydrodynamics. There,
an additional term pgik appears for the matter tensor if p means the hydrostatic
pressure (which is a scalar). The relation (20) indicates that the mechanical
mass density µ0 is accompanied by a hydrostatic pressure of the value µ0/2.
This pressure is extremely high if we consider that in the CGS system we have to
multiply by c2. For water we would obtain the enormous amount of 4.5×1014 atm!5
However, this pressure is not meant macroscopically for neutral materials. We
should consider it rather as the “cohesion pressure” required for the construction
of an electron, i.e., to compensate for the strong electric repulsive force.6

4Cf., e.g., W. Pauli, Theory of Relativity (Teubner, Leipzig and Berlin, 1921) p. 675; M. v.
Laue, The theory of Relativity, Part 1, 4th Edition (Friedr. Vieweg & Sohn, Braunsweig, 1921)
p. 207.

5This remarkable result resembles the well-known conclusion of the theory of relativity that
each mass m is connected with the enormous amount of energy mc2. Similarly to the kinetic
energy in mechanics representing a small difference contribution compared to the rest energy,
the common hydrostatic pressure of gravitational origin appears here as a second-order quantity
compared to the enormous “eigenpressure” of matter. This pressure proves to be positive indeed
— i.e., it is directed inwards, in spite of the seemingly opposite sign of the last tern in equation
(20). For the square of the length of the velocity vector uk = idxk/ds is not +1 but −1.

6Although the electron is, of course, “smeared,” an estimate of the dimensions may be of
interest for a comparison with electron theory. Let us consider a spherical shell of radius a with
evenly distributed charge and mass. Then the hydrostatic pressure connected with the mass density
M/4πα2 implied an inwards directed force of M c2/4πα3 per unit surface. The outwards directed
electric pulling force amounts to 1
. The balance between the two forces requires that:
2

e/4πα2

2

From this result, we obtain for the mechanical mass:

Just as large is the ﬁeld’s electrostatic energy divided by c2, i.e., the “electromagnetic mass”
calculated from electron theory.

(cid:0)

(cid:1)
M c2
4πa3 =

1
2

e
4πa2

2

,

(cid:16)

(cid:17)

M =

e2
8πc2a

,

6

If we consider that the divergence of the Maxwell tensor yields the Lorentz
force and the divergence of the mechanical tensor the inertia force, then we can
see on these grounds how the dynamics of the electron follows as a harmonious
closed whole, which has never been possible on the basis of classical ﬁeld theory.
Indeed, though one had probably guessed that electromagnetic quantities needed
to be completed by mechanical ones so that they can supply the “cohesion forces,”
i.e., prevent the electron from exploding into pieces and permit a differential
formulation of dynamics. However, there had been no basis for expecting an
organic merging of mechanics and electrodynamics.

The ﬁeld equations obtained here provide such an inherent connection on
account of the double coupling between ﬁeld strength and current vector, The
current vector ceases to be a “material” quantity forced from outside which does
not really belong to the ﬁeld and is only meant to avoid a singularity. Rather, here
it represents an actual ﬁeld quantity which is determined by the ﬁeld equations.
Similarly, the zero divergence of the matter tensor is no longer a heuristic principle
for obtaining the dynamics in addition to the ﬁeld equations, but these basic
dynamic equations appear as a necessary consequence of the ﬁeld equations.
Thus, the inner closure is of the same structure as in the theory of general relativity
where the divergence equation describes a mathematical identity of the curvature
tensor and the principle of geodesics is afﬁrmed already by the ﬁeld equations.7

Thus, the connection (17) of the two essentially different tensors (15) and (16)
is not an extraneous one but is unequivocally determined by the structure of the
theory. For neither the one (“electromagnetic”) nor the other (“mechanical”) part
has a vanishing divergence but only the given sum whereby no factor and no sign
remain free. Essential difﬁculties and inherent contradictions of electron theory are
thus eliminated and the relationship revealed here, unexpectedly, is so impressive
that it can hardly be doubted that this way leads us to deeper knowledge. Of course,
we are not yet able to solve the electron problem by this alone, for obviously there

7Though it seems plausible to place electron dynamics on this basis, our approach is not yet
sufﬁcient for this. Namely, the divergence equation as a mathematical consequence of the ﬁeld
equations does not contain anything which would go beyond this. However, the ﬁeld equations are
linear and permit, therefore, the superposition principle which a priori excludes a dynamic inﬂuence.
This discrepancy is most probably connected with the already often-mentioned difﬁculty: with the
incorporation of the vector potential into the equations. This was ﬁrst done on the basis of the
quantum mechanical rule but it led to obviously unsatisfactory results. Such an incorporation would
not at all be necessary since the ﬁeld quantities are obviously available already in a sufﬁcient choice
and especially the current vector already plays the role of the vector potential in the “feedback,” so
this should not be introduced separately as an extraneous element. The extension of the equations
by the vector potential appears in this approach only as a makeshift for a not yet known nonlinearity
of the system. Then the divergence equation could really contain the motion principle without
becoming incompatible with the superposition principle (which is then not valid any more).

7

are still essential features missing. On the one hand, this is not at all conceivable
on the basis of a linear system of equations and, on the other hand, these equations
(just like the classical ﬁeld equations) do not have regular “eigensolutions” of the
kind which would give stationary energy nodes — as would be expected for a
really satisfactory “theory of matter.”

However, the major objection which can be made to the conjecture, that quan-
tum theory in the end would lead to a correction of classical ﬁeld theory through
the here revealed connection between Dirac’s theory and the Maxwell equations,
is that it does not yield the classical theory of the electron even as a “ﬁrst approx-
imation.” To perform a comparison with electron theory, we should once more
write down the reduced equation system (98) of the ﬁrst paper which we obtained
as a ﬁnal result for the free electron if we omit all quantities which are extraneous
to the theory of the electron. As the only difference, we shall introduce another
ﬁeld quantity:

instead of the current vector Si. We shall call this quantity the “vector potential”
in accordance with the feedback equation.

Then we have the equations:

(22)

(23)

ϕi =

Si
α

,

∂Fiν
∂xν
− ∂ϕk
∂xi

= α2ϕi,

= Fik.

∂ϕi
∂xk





In the vacuum equations of the electron theory, the right-hand side term of the ﬁrst
equation is missing.8 Thus, we obtain the classical ﬁeld equations if we let the
constant α converge to 0. However, since the constant α = 2πmc/h contains the
Planck constant h in the numerator, this limiting process does not means h → 0
but h → ∞. The macroscopic behaviors of the electron will thus be characterized
by the unnatural transition h → ∞ instead of the expected transition h → 0. In
fact, one could consider the electron theory as a ﬁrst approximation only if the
constant of the theory was very small. In actual fact, this constant is very large:
α = 2.59 × 1010 cm−1. That is, even if the equation were already completed by
(still unknown) quadratic terms — which is required anyway (cf., footnote 7) —
this would not yet solve the problem that the macrocospic behavior of the electron
is certainly incorrectly described. Namely, at larger distances, where the quadratic

8Editorial note: Eq. (23) is the correct wave-equation for a massive spin 1 particle, and Eq. (17)
the corresponding stress-energy tensor, both to be rediscovered by Proca in 1936. For more details,
see section 11 in [5].

8

terms have already been reduced to zero and the linear approximation is justiﬁed,
one would not obtain potentials decreasing with 1/r, the potential behavior would
rather be characterized by e−αr/r. Here α is the strong attenuation constant which
deﬁnitely contradicts experience since it completely excludes the action of an
electron over a large distance.

If we consider it plausible that the quantum mechanical reaction of the single
electron (spin action, etc.) acts over very short distances, then we can also say
the following: At short distances the free electron behaves as if the constant α
were very large and at long distances as if the same constant were very small.
Unless we want to accept the highly unlikely dualism that there are also special
“quantum mechanical” processes in addition to the customary ﬁeld theoretical
ones, we necessarily arrive at the requirement that the constant α2 of our theory
should not be considered as an actual constant. It should be considered as a ﬁeld
function which depends on the fundamental ﬁeld quantities themselves in some
still unknown way.9

Then everything would fall into place. Then the term with α2 is no longer a
linear term but one of higher order. For the linear approximation, we would obtain
the vacuum equations of the classical electron theory. The α2 function would
practically decrease to zero in the peripheral range, whereas it would be expected
to have a practically smooth functional form of the given order of magnitude in the
central domain, i.e., in the immediate vicinity of the electron’s center. Then one
could understand why the de Broglie-Schr¨odinger wave equation with constant α
cannot characterize a single electron but only a large “swarm” of electrons. Then
statistical averages over multiple spatial neighborhoods of different electrons could
result in a functional form of α which is sufﬁciently constant for a larger domain,
whereas α decreases to zero very rapidly for a single electron.

In a comprehensive ﬁeld theory, it would hardly be conceivable to introduce
a quantity as a “universal constant” which contains the mass of the electron. It
would then be hopeless to understand the mass difference between electron and
proton.

Of course, this new hypothesis would also inﬂuence the matter tensor. In fact,
the constant α appears in the mechanical part of the matter tensor, and the vector
potential according to (22) is introduced instead of the current vector. Then we

9The supposition of a correlation with the scalar Riemannian curvature (which also has the
dimension cm−2) is hardly rejectable in view of Einstein’s theory of gravitation. Editorial note: A
nonlinear generalization of the present theory in which the constant α2 is replaced by α2σ where
σ is a ﬁeld function is considered in the last paper in this series, i.e., Ref. [4].

9

have:

Uik = α2(ϕiϕk − 1
2

ϕνϕνgik).

(24)

In the peripheral domain, where α has practically become zero, the mechanical
component drops out and only the customary electromagnetic stress-energy tensor
remains. However, in the central domain (just where it is demanded for the
construction of the electron!) the strong mechanical component and, especially,
the high cohesion pressure becomes active. Of course, the expression (24) and the
sum to be formed from it on the basis of (17) can be considered for the matter tensor
only in ﬁrst approximation, with slowly varying α, because the zero divergence of
this tensor was proven by assuming a constant α.

If the above anticipated possibilities should prove really viable, quantum me-
chanics would cease to be an independent theory. It would merge with a deeper
“theory of matter,” which relies on regular solutions of nonlinear differential equa-
tions — in the ﬁnal connection, it would be absorbed into the “world equations”
of the Universe. Then the “matter-ﬁeld” dualism would become just as obsolete
as the “particle-wave” dualism.

Berlin-Nikolassee, August 1929.

References

[1] C. Lanczos, Die tensoranalytischen Beziehungen der Diracschen Gleichung
(The tensor analytical relationships of Dirac’s equation), Zeits. f. Phys. 57
(1929) 447–473. Reprinted and translated in W.R. Davis et al., eds., Cor-
nelius Lanczos Collected Published Papers With Commentaries, III (North
Carolina State University, Raleigh, 1998) pages 2-1132 to 2-1185; e-print
arXiv:physics/050xxxx available at http://arXiv.org/abs/physics/050xxxx.

[2] C. Lanczos, Zur kovarianten Formulierung der Diracschen Gleichung (On
the covariant formulation of Dirac’s equation), Zeits. f. Phys. 57 (1929)
474–483. Reprinted and translated in W.R. Davis et al., eds., Cornelius
Lanczos Collected Published Papers With Commentaries, III (North Ca-
rolina State University, Raleigh, 1998) pages 2-1186 to 2-1205; e-print
arXiv:physics/050xxxx available at http://arXiv.org/abs/physics/050xxxx.

[3] C. Lanczos, Die Erhaltungssätze in der feldmässigen Darstellungen der
Diracschen Theorie (The conservation law in the ﬁeld theoretical represen-
tation of Dirac’s theory), Zeits. f. Phys. 57 (1929) 484–493. Reprinted and
translated in W.R. Davis et al., eds., Cornelius Lanczos Collected Published

10

Papers With Commentaries, III (North Carolina State University, Raleigh,
1998) pages 2-1206 to 2-1225; e-print arXiv:physics/050xxxx available at
http://arXiv.org/abs/physics/050xxxx.

[4] C. Lanczos, Dirac’s wellenmechanische Theorie des Elektrons und ihre
feldtheorische Ausgestaltung (Dirac’s wave mechanical
the
electron), Physikalische Zeits. 31 (1930) 120–130. Reprinted and trans-
lated i in W.R. Davis et al., eds., Cornelius Lanczos Collected Pub-
lished Papers With Commentaries, III (North Carolina State University,
Raleigh, 1998) 2-1226 to 2-1247; e-print arXiv:physics/050xxxx available
at http://arXiv.org/abs/physics/050xxxx.

theory of

[5] A. Gsponer and J.-P. Hurni, Lanczos-Einstein-Petiau: From Dirac’s equa-
tion to nonlinear wave mechanics,
in W.R. Davis et al., eds., Cor-
nelius Lanczos Collected Published Papers With Commentaries, III (North
Carolina State University, Raleigh, 1998) 2-1248 to 2-1277; e-print
arXiv:physics/050xxxx available at http://arXiv.org/abs/physics/050xxxx.

11

