5
0
0
2
 
t
c
O
 
3
 
 
]
h
p
-
t
s
i
h
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
5
1
0
0
1
5
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

On Essential Incompleteness of Hertz’s Experiments on Propagation

of Electromagnetic Interactions

R. Smirnov-Rueda

Applied Mathematics Department,
Faculty of Mathematics
Complutense University,
28040 Madrid, Spain

Abstract

The historical background of the 19th century electromagnetic theory is revisited
from the standpoint of the opposition between alternative approaches in respect to
the problem of interactions. The 19th century electrodynamics became the battle-
ﬁeld of a paramount importance to test existing conceptions of interactions. Hertz’s
experiments were designed to bring a solid experimental evidence in favor of one of
them. The modern scientiﬁc method applied to analyze Hertz’s experimental ap-
proach as well as the analysis of his laboratory notes, dairy and private letters show
that Hertz’s ”crucial ” experiments cannot be considered as conclusive at many
points as it is generally implied. We found that alternative Helmholtz’s electro-
dynamics did not contradict any of Hertz’s experimental observations of transverse
components as Maxwell’s theory predicted. Moreover, as we now know from recently
published Hertz’s dairy and private notes, his ﬁrst experimental results indicated
clearly on inﬁnite rate of propagation. Nevertheless, Hertz’s experiments provided
no further explicit information on non-local longitudinal components which were
such an essential feature of Helmholtz’s theory. Necessary and suﬃcient conditions
for a decisive choice on the adequate account of electromagnetic interactions are
discussed from the position of modern scientiﬁc method.

Key words: Hertz’s experiments, velocity of propagation of interactions, longitudinal

components, Helmholtz’s electrodynamics, non-locality, action-at-a-distance

1 Introduction

Throughout the history of science, one can trace the importance of the notion of in-
teraction in contrasting rival physical theories. Explanation of how remote particles
inﬂuence each other through the empty space, challenged inquisitive minds of nearly all
outstanding thinkers of earth civilization. In practice, we always observe one object act-
ing on another by contact or at a distance. Before Newton introduced his revolutionary
universal gravitation theory, the realist natural philosophy deriving from Aristotle con-
sidered only contact action. In its way to the practical knowledge the medieval science
were laying down a new scientiﬁc method, breaking old religious prejudices and relying
only on the simplest and clearest propositions. Postulation of undetectable, hidden or
invisible causes responsible for interaction between material objects was inconceivable.

1

The obvious break of that consensus came with the Newton’s discovery of universal
gravitation as an action-at-a-distance theory.
It won immediate acceptance in Eng-
land but not on the Continent, where the Cartesians regarded the notion of newtonian
gravitation as an occult immaterial inﬂuence. This controversy took place at the time
of the ﬁrst scientiﬁc revolution when new conceptions were arising and changing very
rapidly, hampered sometimes by confusions and prejudices. The arguments which lead
medieval scholars to accept one or another theory were not only empirical or theoretical
arguments. They also aroused partly out of the logical requirements of a particular
metaphysics. Matter cannot act where it is not deﬁned the cartesian metaphysical pro-
hibition against action-at-a-distance. Types of scientiﬁc explanation began dependent
upon the model of nature, i.e. could have been made precise only in the context of
analogies or presupposed models.

The obvious success of Newton’s theory in astronomy, similarity of electric and mag-
netic phenomena to gravitation conﬁrmed later by Coulomb and Amp`ere, and the grow-
ing inﬂuence of empiricism in natural philosophy helped to modify the general consen-
sus in favor of the direct action-at-a-distance. Mathematical models for hydrodynamics
made it possible to describe the mechanism of transmission of inﬂuences through the
continuous media. It was generally assumed that the gravitational attraction was trans-
mitted instantaneously and, hence, always acted along the line joining the simultaneous
position of two bodies. Bearing in mind the accuracy-limit of astronomical data at that
time, Laplace(1) in 1799 calculated that the velocity of propagation of gravitational in-
teraction must have been at least eight orders of magnitude greater than that of light
(modern discussion of this issue can be found in(2)). This respectable conclusion gave
major support to the validity of the instantaneous action-at-a-distance (IAAAD) con-
cept, leaving open the question of the physical cause of gravity. On this latter subject,
a conceptual arm-wrestle was initiated between supporters and detractors of IAAAD.
Newton himself had already thought that some physical mediator must exist.
It is
absurd, he said(3), to suppose that gravity is innate and acts without a medium, either
material or immaterial. Many eminent scientists like Laplace explained the phenomenon
as due to an impulsion of some immaterial ﬂuid, but did not ﬁnd it appropriate at the
time to search for a reliable physical explanation of the cause of interaction, and so
they bequeathed this task to future generations. There is no need at all, Laplace(4)
declared in 1796, to posit vague causes, impossible to submit to analysis, and which the
imagination modiﬁes to its liking in order to explain these phenomena.

At that stage, it is not surprising that for many of the adversaries of IAAAD these
suggestions of immateriality could not be dissociated from spiritual, religious and other
non-scientiﬁc notions. This path of reasoning led them to conclude that if the IAAAD
concept did not imply any material mediator, then it did not imply any physical medi-
ator at all. Thus, in their opinion IAAAD became inconceivable from the point of view
of common-sense logic. This prepared the ground for the reappearance of an alternative
and half-forgotten Aristotelian concept, namely, that of action by local contact (or con-
tact action)(5). In its modern form known as the local ﬁeld concept, it was reintroduced
by Faraday, giving apparently a more satisfactory physical description of the interaction
It was based on the causality of local interactions in terms of material
phenomena.

2

forces ﬁlling space. After the discovery of electromagnetic induction, Faraday became
convinced that electric and magnetic inﬂuences were propagated through a material
medium rather than at a distance through an empty space.

Thus, nearly one and a half century after Newton’s discovery of the action-at-a-
distance theory for gravitational attraction, the general consensus was broken again. It
resulted in polarizing views on both sides of the Channel: paradoxically, the majority of
English scholars were now on the side of Faraday’s ﬁeld conception, whereas the notion
of the direct action-at-a-distance still remained fundamental on the Continent. Thus,
the 19th century electrodynamics became the battle-ﬁeld of a paramount importance to
test existing conceptions of interaction. There is no doubt that Hertz’s contribution was
decisive in that historical choice. He was the ﬁrst physicist who observed electromagnetic
waves in air travelling with the velocity of light. Since then it is commonly believed
that on the classical level the question of the general meaning and understanding of
electromagnetic interactions and their mechanisms had been positively resolved.

In this work we will discuss that Hertz’s experimental approach on propagation of
electromagnetic interactions cannot be considered as conclusive at many points as it
is generally implied and, hence, the central battle of the 19th century physics cannot
been considered deﬁnitely won by one of the opposing sides. This conclusion depends
essentially upon the correct reconstruction of the historical retrospective of the 19th
century’s electromagnetic research.

2 Historical Retrospective of the 19TH Century’s Electro-

magnetism and its Conceptual Background

In order to appreciate the diﬃculty and the importance of the task undertaken by Hertz
in his experimental investigations, it is worth recalling the uncertain and highly contro-
versial state of electrodynamics of the 19th century. Hertz himself was trained in the
research tradition of the Berlin school headed by Helmholtz (6)−(7), who from the middle
of 1860’s, had sought to clarify existing principles in electromagnetic theory and to reach
a consensus between the two major directions in electromagnetic research of that time,
namely, Newton’s instantaneous action-at-a-distance concept as used by Weber, and
Faraday’s contact action concept as developed by Maxwell. By the time of Helmholtz’s
ﬁrst attempt at reconciliation (1870), the theoretical schemes of Weber and Maxwell
had successfully incorporated all previously well-established descriptions and empirical
facts, such as the electric potential theory (electrostatics), Amp`ere’s magnetostatics and
Faraday’s theory of induction.

Weber developed his theory (1848) in accordance with the Newtonian program, which
prescribed that all forces between pairs of particles should be radial, acting directly
through space (i.e. along the line joining particles) without any observable material
mediator. Restriction on this radial description of electromagnetic forces came from
Amp`ere, who understood that instantaneity meant no delay, hence no aberration. Any
aberration attending the ﬁnite propagational velocity of interactions would imply non-
radial forces. However, the existence of radial forces as a basic assumption of instanta-

3

neous action-at-a-distance (IAAAD) theories was conﬁrmed by Amp`ere experimentally
to the degree of accuracy available at that time. Thus, electric and magnetic interac-
tions were thought to be complete analogy to gravitational attractions which, according
to astronomical observations, always acted along the line joining simultaneous positions
of two bodies.

At ﬁrst time, Faraday’s material ﬁeld concept attracted many scholars seeking rather
for the physical explanation than for the purely mathematical description of gravitational
and electromagnetic phenomena. But later on, the perspective opened by Faraday
seemed to be so wide and novel that it challenged to explore it deeply many excellent
mathematicians of that time and among them Maxwell, who also tried to work out
his own comprehensive ﬁeld theory based on Faraday’s concept. However, Maxwell
himself was aware of the provisional status of this approximation and encountered some
conceptual diﬃculties, since he had incorporated all the basic IAAAD results such as
electrostatics and magnetostatics without any modiﬁcation. With regard to the lines
of force treated by Faraday as the representation of a material ﬁeld, Maxwell’s own
position was still undeﬁned, but he cautiously dealt with them as if they were lines of
ﬂow of an incompressible, imaginary ﬂuid. As Maxwell stated(8):

The substance here treated of must not be assumed to possess any of the
properties of ordinary ﬂuids except those of freedom of motion and resistance
to compression.
It is not even a hypothetical ﬂuid which is introduced to
explain actual phenomena. It is merely a collection of imaginary properties
which may be employed for establishing certain theorems in pure mathematics
in a way more intelligible to many minds and more applicable to physical
problems than that in which algebraic symbols alone are used.

Consequently, being in a static limit, mathematically equivalent to older IAAAD
theories, the status of contact ﬁeld theories could not have been considered free of
ambiguity (a fuller discussion of this can be found in M. Hesse work(9)). In other words,
in this static limit, electric and magnetic ﬁelds behaved very much as ﬂows of an ideal,
incompressible ﬂuid, in which case they were indistinguishable from IAAAD. These
uncertainties in Maxwell’s original theoretical scheme were later summarized clearly
and concisely by Hertz, who wrote(10):

Maxwell’s own representation does not indicate the highest attainable
goal; it frequently wavers between the conceptions which Maxwell found in
existence, and those at which he arrived. Maxwell starts with the assump-
tion of direct action-at-a-distance; he investigates the laws according to which
hypothetical polarizations of the dielectric ether vary under the inﬂuence of
such distance-forces; and he ends by asserting that these polarizations do re-
ally vary in this way, but without being actually caused to do so by distance-
forces. This procedure leaves behind it the unsatisfactory feeling that there
must be something wrong about either the ﬁnal result or the way which led
to it.

4

As an approach to clarifying these uncertainties, let us examine the essential distinc-
tion between the conceptual foundations of IAAAD and those of contact-ﬁeld doctrines.
At the beginning of the 19th century, the possibility of a ﬁnal explanation of the mecha-
nisms of IAAAD as the basis of gravitational and electric forces had not been completely
ruled out. Moreover, due to the rapid development of theoretical hydrodynamics, the
attitude towards IAAAD changed from the summary rejection of its unphysical status
to an awareness of a deep similarity between the potential function and the velocity-ﬁeld
of a ﬂuid. It had been realized that the main diﬀerence between IAAAD and Faraday’s
ﬁeld was the fact that in IAAAD a potential need not necessarily describe a material
property of anything, whereas for Faraday it was the property of a material substance
which could be observed in ways familiar to ordinary matter such as, for instance, liq-
uids and gases. Like any other material substance, therefore, Faraday’s f ield could be
regarded as something movable with positive kinetic energy and, therefore, detectable
empirically. This suggests that an important criterion, as Hesse puts it(11):

...

in deciding whether or not a ﬁeld is to be regarded as a physically
continuous medium rather than a mere mathematical device lies in its pos-
session of detectable properties other than the one property for which it was
introduced. A condition of this kind is often suggested as a of the physical ’re-
ality’ of a theoretical entity, and it led Faraday to express his dissatisfaction
with Newtonian gravitation. But independent detection was not the only
consideration which weighed with the nineteenth-century physicists. They
were prepared to regard a ﬁeld as a physically continuous medium on other
and less stringent terms, for example, if propagation was aﬀected by mate-
rial changes in the intervening space, if it took time, if a mechanical model
could be imagined for the action of a medium in producing the observed ef-
fect, or if energy could be located in the space between interacting bodies.
Any of these three conditions might be regarded as suﬃcient and no one of
them was individually necessary. Thus, gravitation remained an action at
a distance throughout the nineteenth century, in spite of its description by
a potential theory, because it did not satisfy any of these criteria, whereas
the electromagnetic ﬁeld theory began to take on the characteristics of con-
tinuous action because it satisﬁed all of them. It is sometimes suggested in
modern (post-relativity) works that a ﬁnite velocity of propagation is a nec-
essary as well as suﬃcient condition for continuous action, and that this is
why instantaneous gravitation could not be regarded as such an action, but
in classical physics there is instantaneous transmission of pressure and of
longitudinal waves in an incompressible medium, and this would certainly be
regarded as continuous action.

From this preliminary survey of the two opposite conceptual foundations, we may
conclude that the 19th century physicists considered as suﬃcient conditions for validity
of Faraday-Maxwell’s ﬁeld concept:

1) propagation of ﬁelds producing material changes in the surrounding space;

5

2) time-delay in propagation;
3) experimental observation of the energy transfer related to interactions;
Nevertheless, as it will be discussed later, the above-mentioned conditions should be
considered only as necessary, not suﬃcient for establishing the existence of Faraday-type
contact ﬁelds, since there might be a third alternative which would combine both IAAAD
and Faraday’s contact-ﬁeld features in a single scheme. Formally, such a scheme (with
superposition of material and immaterial substances) would satisfy all above mentioned
conditions but on theoretical foundations diﬀerent from those of purely material contact-
ﬁeld theory. In this respect, it will be shown when examining the historical background
of the 19th century electrodynamics, that such a third alternative did actually exist and
that this was the so-called compromise theory of Helmholtz. It means that the problem
of the completeness of Hertz’s crucial experiments should be again revisited but from
methodological and philosophical positions of modern science.

3 Status of Diﬀerent Electrodynamics Doctrines Before

Hertz’s Experiments

By the time Helmholtz became actively involved in resolving problems of electromag-
netism, in the middle of the 1860’s, Weber’s and Maxwell’s supporters had already been
locked in a lengthy and futile conﬂict. Helmholtz attempted to make a decisive choice
between them by constructing his own mathematical scheme and designing crucial ex-
periments to weigh in favor of either Weber’s or Maxwell’s theory.

Helmholtz(12) attempted to elaborate his compromise approach aimed at combining
the important elements of the two theories. When trying to arrive at results similar
to Maxwell’s without losing the elements of action-at-a-distance, Helmholtz assumed
that the electrostatic forces are constantly present as a ﬁeld in space and that the
change in the polarization or the displacement of the charges signalled the change in
the electrostatic ﬁeld. As discussed by Kudryavtzev(13) and by Buchwald(14), under
these assumptions, Helmholtz successfully derived generalized equations very similar
to those of Maxwell and found that in a limit case they yielded equations identical
to Maxwell’s equations for scalar and vector potentials. Solving these equations for
a homogeneous dielectric medium, he arrived at the wave equations for electric and
magnetic polarizations, respectively, with undetermined constant k (see(13)−(15)).

The conciliatory aspect of Helmholtz’s approach resulted in the following peculiarity.
To reach formally Maxwell’s scheme from Helmholtz’s approach required two limits: k=0
and inﬁnite ether susceptibility (for greater details see Appendix A). The former was
necessary to obtain Maxwell’s equations for potentials and the latter, to make the veloc-
ity of transverse waves in Helmholtz theory equal to the velocity of light c. In addition to
the ordinary transverse electromagnetic waves already conﬁrmed by Maxwell, Helmholtz
discovered the existence of longitudinal electric waves which turned out to be instanta-
neous at the Maxwellian limit. Interpretation of this conclusion and its consequences
became a hard nut to crack for all contemporary electrodynamicists. Maxwellian follow-
ers (Heaviside, FitzGerald, Lodge etc.) refused to accept Helmholtz’s theory because

6

they found his conceptions entirely foreign to Maxwell’s view of the transmission of in-
teraction. Helmholtz himself recognized conceptual diﬀerences between the two theories
but insisted on their remarkable similarity(16):

...It follows. ...from these investigations that the remarkable analogy be-
tween the motion of electricity in a dielectric and that of the light ether does
not depend on the particular form of Maxwell’s equations hypotheses, but
results also in a basically similar fashion if we maintain the older viewpoint
about electrical action at a distance.

Helmholtz’s attempt at a more consistent reformulation of the contemporary elec-
trodynamics theories could not, however, resolve the problem of which approach to
favor. His theory contained the undeﬁned constant k which could have any possible
non-negative value and still remain compatible with existent experimental data, since
most of it had been obtained for closed currents where the value of k is irrelevant. Even
for values of k close to unity in the case of open currents, an experimental eﬀort towards
obtaining reliable results would require an enormous boost in accuracy and would there-
fore require new kinds of measurement devices. Despite the diﬃculties in carrying out
any experimental task of this kind, Helmholtz, along with N. Schiller and H. Rowland,
his pupils and followers at the University of Berlin, performed in 1874-78 a series of
preliminary experiments on open currents. All results were in apparent agreement with
the law of electromagnetic induction described equally well by the Neumann, Maxwell
and Helmholtz theories. Therefore, the need for new decisive and reliable experimental
data was still urgent when Hertz became interested in electromagnetic research.

4 Hertz’s Contribution to Electromagnetic Research

In 1879 Helmholtz proposed a prize competition, ”To establish experimentally a relation
between electromagnetic action and the polarization of dielectrics” and urged his stu-
dent Hertz to take up the challenge. At ﬁrst, Hertz declined, discouraged by the poor
prospects of success at that time. Later on, he began investigating the problem for his
own interest. In 1886-88, at Karlsruhe, he attempted to establish the compatibility of
the theories of Helmholtz and Maxwell in a new series of experiments. He designed his
measurement-procedure, taking into account Helmholtz’s separation of the total elec-
tric force into the electrostatic and electrodynamic parts to which diﬀerent velocities of
propagation were ascribed. In Hertz’s words(17):

The total force may be split up into the electrostatic part and electrody-
namic part; there is no doubt that at short distances the former, at great
distances the latter, preponderates and settles the direction of the total force.

In spite of apparent diﬃculties, Hertz decided to carry out those measurements.
For his purpose he had to develop new devices providing electrical oscillations faster
than had been previously available. His eﬀorts were, however, rewarded and he quickly

7

demonstrated the existence of very rapidly varying currents with a strong inductive
action across the discharge gap(18). He also established a resonance-like relationship
between the primary and secondary circuits in the presence of regular oscillations. As
a result of these investigations, a solution to the Berlin Academy’s problem could be
considered possible.

The next important step was to modify and improve the detection apparatus (sec-
ondary circuit) in order to undertake interference experiments in which he used mutually
orthogonal wire and oscillator. Hertz’s idea was the following: the oscillator sends out
a given phase along the wire as well as a given phase of direct action through air (which
diﬀers from the wire phase by a quarter of a period). If both phases travel at the same
rate, their combined eﬀect (interference) will be the same along the wire. Otherwise,
the eﬀect will change at diﬀerent point.

At the end of 1887, On November 11, he ﬁnally undertook this task and observed the
existence of the interference between the oscillations propagated in air and wire. The
entry of his dairy notes for November 12 reads: ”Set up experiments on the velocity of
propagation of the electromagnetic eﬀect. Contrary to expectations, the result is inﬁnite
propagation”. In retrospective, Hertz gave account about these ﬁrst experiments in the
Introduction to his ”Electric Waves”:

...Dishearted, I gave up experimenting. Some weeks passed before I began
again. I reﬂected that it would be quite as important to ﬁnd out that electric
force was propagated with an inﬁnite velocity, and that Maxwell’s theory was
false, as it would be, on the other hand, to prove that this theory was correct,
provided only that the result arrived at should be deﬁnite and certain...

As we know from his dairy, he decided to write a detailed paper on negative results
but only after having checked and ensuring his previous results. Five weeks later, On
December 15-22, Hertz returned to his experiments and conﬁrmed apparently inﬁnite
propagation of direct action (On the sequence of Hertz’s ﬁrst experiments, see Appendix
B).

On December 26 Hertz began a new series of experiments using a new position of
the resonator. According to the measured interference phase shift, Hertz unexpectedly
found that the oscillator’s direct action propagated 1.5 times faster than the wire wave
(i.e. close to the velocity of light). Setting the resonator in diﬀerent positions Hertz
obtained interference marks which he put in the ﬁnal table. As we shall discuss below,
these results contained a singularity: an apparently inﬁnite rate of propagation in region
very close to oscillator (near zone).

After some doubts (see Appendix B) Hertz compiled all result of the last experiments
and published in a paper entitled ”On the Finite Velocity of Propagation of Electromag-
netic Action” (1888) which nowadays, according to the established historiography of
physics, is considered a classical reference in which the diﬃcult task of proving the ﬁnite
propagation velocity of electromagnetic interactions in air had been achieved (it should
be noted here that the title of this Hertz’s paper is perhaps misleading nowadays, because
conventional Maxwellian electrodynamics does not employ the Helmholtzian action ter-

8

minology, nor does it split the total electric force into electromagnetic and electrostatic
parts).

It is important to understand what Hertz had in mind when published this paper.
As we know from Hertz’s dairy and letters, he was eagerly looking for a positive result,
i.e completely novel eﬀects (see Appendix B). After the last series of experiments he
became strongly convinced the electrodynamic action had a ﬁnite rate of propagation.
However, he was not sure how to combine it with the previous experiments and found
In
it possible to question their viability in the new light of novel ”positive results”.
fact, he admitted that his ﬁrst experiments could not be considered reliable to conclude
something deﬁnitive about longitudinal components. Looking carefully through the
same paper, we ﬁnd Hertz declaring to support his claims(19):

From this it follows that the absolute value of the ﬁrst of these is of the
same order as the velocity of light. Nothing can as yet be decided as to the
propagation of electrostatic actions.

In later retrospective, writing the Introduction to his ”Electric Waves” Hertz argued
apparent implications of his ”negative” results by inaccuracy in observations (for more
details see Hertz’s Introduction to ”Electric Waves and also Appendix B).

Concerning the ﬁnal table of interference marks which he published in the paper
”On the Finite Velocity of Propagation of Electromagnetic Action” (1888), it should be
emphasized that some of Hertz’s measurements tended to manifest the instantaneous
nature of the electrostatic mode, but he was also not convinced of this instantaneity and
preferred to be cautious, since his method was unable to provide him with any reliable
quantitative results(20):

Since the interferences undoubtedly change sign after 2.8 meters in the
neighborhood of the primary oscillation, we might conclude that the electro-
static force which here predominates is propagated with inﬁnite velocity. But
this conclusion would in the main depend upon a single change of phase...
If the absolute velocity of the electrostatic force remains for the present un-
known, there may yet be adduced deﬁnite reasons for believing that the elec-
trostatic and electromagnetic forces possess diﬀerent velocities.

These circumstances of Hertz’s experiments were previously noted by some researchers
on history of physics such as Cazenobe(21) and Doncel(22). An excellent reconstruction
of Hertz’s ”crucial” experiments in great detail was undertaken by Buchwald(14) where
one can appreciate some of Hertz’s major doubts and hesitations (see Appendix B).

In spite of all diﬃculties and uncertainties of these ﬁrst measurements, Hertz was
fully aware of the need for additional experiments to cast some light of certainty on the
electrostatic part(19):

It is certainly remarkable that the proof of a ﬁnite rate of propagation
should have been ﬁrst brought forward in the case of a force which diminishes
in inverse proportion to the distance [electrodynamic part], and not to the

9

square of the distance [electrostatic part]. But it is worth while pointing out
that this proof must also aﬀect such forces as are inversely proportional to
the square of the distance. For we know that the ponderomotive attraction
between currents and their magnetic actions are connected by the principle of
the conservation of energy with their inductive actions in the strictest way,
the relation being apparently that of action and reaction. If this relation is
not merely a deceptive semblance, it is not easy to understand how the one
action can be propagated with a ﬁnite and the other with an inﬁnite velocity.

Hertz’s point seems to tell his growing insatisfaction with the complexity of Helmholtz’s

theoretical approach. In his opinion, two diﬀerent velocities ascribed in Helmholtz’s the-
ory to two diﬀerent parts of action made the whole task of test and analysis unreasonably
complicated. Hertz inclined towards justiﬁcation of Faraday-Maxwell’s ﬁeld approach as
a special limit of Helmholtz’s theoretical scheme and also as based on a simpler model.
Hertz’s conversion to Maxwellian ideas is well-discussed in some history and philos-
ophy of science texts(23). Nevertheless, it is interesting to follow brieﬂy the evolution
of Hertz’s theoretical ideas. He started with Helmholtz’s theory, and his conversion to
Maxwell’s viewpoint was an uneasy process, possibly never fully completed due to his
(Hertz’s) premature death (On January 1, 1894). He began analyzing the underlying
concepts in the Maxwellian limit of Helmholtz’s theory (see Appendix A) but his ﬁnal
interpretation became essentially diﬀerent in form from what had been commonly ac-
cepted by Helmholtz and his followers. More speciﬁcally, Hertz uncritically assumed that
in Maxwell’s limit the instantaneous longitudinal component should have been excluded
from consideration in Helmholtz’s original theory. All forces then became explicitly time
dependent, i.e. possessing the ﬁnite velocity of propagation.

This was a drastic departure from the Hertz mentor’s position on the nature of
electromagnetic interactions and, in general, from his philosophical foundations. In fact,
Helmholtz rejected time dependent forces (he admitted only implicit time dependence
upon space position or direct action-at-a-distance (IAAAD)) and was deeply convinced
that(24)

...nature could only be comprehended through invariable causes. Helmholtz
viewed electromagnetic interactions - indeed, all interactions, - as instanta-
neous and bipartite...

and, therefore, could attribute interactions only to longitudinal components (electro-
static action in Helmholtz’s classiﬁcation).

Let us see an aberration of Helmholtz’s ideas in Hertz’s own words(25):

...Helmholtz distinguishes between two forms of electrical force the elec-
tromagnetic and the electrostatic to which, until the contrary is proved by
experience, two diﬀerent velocities are attributed. An interpretation of the ex-
periments from this point of view could certainly not be incorrect, but it might
perhaps be unnecessarily complicated. In a special limiting case Helmholtz’s
theory becomes considerably simpliﬁed, and its equations in this case become

10

the same as those of Maxwell’s theory; only one form of the force remains,
and this is propagated with the velocity of light. I had to try whether the ex-
periments would not agree with these much simpler assumptions of Maxwell’s
theory. The attempt was successful. The result of the calculation are given
in the paper on ”The Forces of Electric Oscillations, treated according to
Maxwell’s Theory”.

This paper was published in 1889, one year after the discussion of Hertz’s ﬁrst results,
which apparently were not suﬃcient to conclude which of the two theoretical descriptions
was more adequate. Hertz evaded the wide analysis of the nature and mechanisms of
electromagnetic interactions, reducing it to the limited task of experimental veriﬁcation
In this comprehensive paper Hertz tried to
of some predictions of Maxwell’s theory.
show how the observed singularities in the propagation of the electric force could be
described by Maxwell’s theoretical scheme. As Hertz explained(26):

The results of the experiments on rapid electric oscillations which I have
carried out appear to me to confer upon Maxwell’s theory a position of
superiority to all others. Nevertheless, I based my ﬁrst interpretation of
these experiments upon the older views, seeking partly to explain phenomena
as resulting from co-operation of electrostatic and electromagnetic forces.
To Maxwell’s theory in its pure development such a distinction is foreign.
Hence I now wish to show that the phenomena can be explained in terms of
Maxwell’s theory without introducing this distinction. Should this attempt
succeed, it will at the same time settle any question as to a separate propa-
gation of electrostatic force, which is meaningless in Maxwell’s theory.

In this famous paper, Hertz wrote Maxwell’s equations in the form in which they are
known today (the Hertz-Heaviside form) and also derived the distribution of force lines
for the radiating oscillator (Hertz vibrator). In other words, this important contribution
to the Faraday-Maxwell ﬁeld theory consisted in the development of the general source-
ﬁeld relation previously unknown. (Today this method bears Hertz’s name and is based
on the straightforward Fourier analysis of dipole and multi-dipole radiation.) Using
these calculations, Hertz found an explanation (alternative to that based exclusively on
Helmholtz’s ideas) of the singularities he had observed in the distribution of radiation in
the near ﬁeld (the apparently instantaneous behavior of the electrostatic component).
In Hertz’s words(27):

Let us now investigate whether the present [Maxwell’s] theory leads to any
explanation of the phenomena... At great distances the phase is smaller by
the value π than it would have been if the waves had proceeded with constant
velocity from the origin; the waves, therefore, behave at great distances as if
they had travelled through the ﬁrst half wavelength with inﬁnite velocity.

Interestingly, this prediction of Maxwell’s theory concerning the inﬁnite phase-velocity
for the near-ﬁeld zone based on straightforward Fourier analysis (Hertz’s method) ap-
pears in modern texts(28). Surprisingly, however, that Hertz himself paid no attention to

11

this prediction beyond the fact that it gave him a new interpretation of his experimen-
tal results, diﬀerent from that provided previously only by the Helmholtzian approach.
It is possible that Hertz did not realize (or had no time to realize) all conceptual im-
plications of the new prediction, which has no clear meaning in the framework of the
Faraday-Maxwell contact-ﬁeld doctrine. The prediction would imply the existence of
a small, but macroscopic region where the notion of Faraday locality results invalid.
On the other hand, it reproduces above-discussed fuzziness in the relationship between
static and dynamic limits in Maxwell’s theory.

Bearing that ambiguity in mind, it would not have been surprising if Maxwell’s
theoretical predictions for static and quasistatic phenomena had been found to be similar
to the older IAAAD views. It is obvious that phenomena in the near ﬁeld zone (less
than half wavelength) should be regarded as quasi-static in the Hertzian analysis and
therefore, implicit time dependent that is not Maxwellian but Helmholtzian feature for
longitudinal components. This reasoning should have cast doubts on Hertz’s explanation
of the experimental results as not being completely in the spirit of the Faraday-Maxwell’s
conceptual foundations. It is surprising, then, that almost no-one seemed to have been
worried by this presence of non-Faraday’s elements in Maxwell’s approach. By the same
token, it is no less surprising that Hertz’s explanation was so unconditionally accepted
by Maxwell’s followers.

Although Hertz was satisﬁed that his calculations had accounted for the majority
of the observed phenomena, he stressed that he had not succeeded in removing all the
diﬃculties from his experimental veriﬁcation of Maxwell’s theory. He confessed that(29):

I have therefore repeated the experiments, making various alterations in
the position of the primary oscillator, and found that in certain positions the
results were in accordance with theory. Nevertheless, the results were not free
from ambiguity, for at great distances in places where the force was feeble,
the disturbance due to the environment of the space at my disposal were so
considerable that I could not arrive at a trustworthy decision.

This shows that some of Hertz’s measurements had been made to the limit of accu-
racy available at the time. In his ﬁnal experimental paper titled ”On Mechanical Action
of Electric Waves in Wires”, published in 1891 (after his departure from Karlsruhe),
Hertz attempted to observe the existence of magnetic waves accompanying the electric
waves in order to disprove any reference to action-at-a-distance. As far as the problem
of electromagnetic interaction is concerned, this last task was an important attempt on
a deﬁnite experimental demarcation of irreconcilable views. However, he was forced to
admit(30):

...I hoped to be able to devise some way of making observations on waves
in free air, that is to say, in such a manner that any disturbances which
might be observed could in no wise be referred to any action-at-a-distance.
This last hope was frustrated by the feebleness of the eﬀects produced under
the circumstances.

12

Additionally, there were no empirical indications of the energy transfer between
interacting electrically charged bodies at rest. The question remained open whether
Maxwell’s transverse waves of interaction were too feeble to be detected or, otherwise,
they had no right to exist according to Helmholtz’s views. Thus, Hertz himself recog-
nized that the fundamental question on the nature and mechanisms of interaction could
not have been deﬁnitively clariﬁed by experimental tools available at that time.

Although Hertz’s satisfaction with Maxwell’s theory was understandable, there were
still insuﬃcient number of arguments for making a truly decisive choice, bearing in mind
that Helmholtz’s approach remained in qualitative agreement with the observed singu-
larities. However, no further experiments or calculations for testing the quantitative
predictions of Helmholtz’s theory have been attempted.

...The problem Hertz encountered with Helmholtz’s theory was thus of a
very special sort. It does not consist in a contradiction between an empirical
observation and theory, nor does it consist in a contradiction among theoret-
ical statements. Instead it consists in a philosophical problem with theoretical
terms: what is their meaning, how do they acquire their meaning, how can
they be rendered consistent.(31)

In sum, we can conclude that no empirical indication of the inadequacy of Helmholtz’s
theory had ever been observed or declared by Hertz, so that from the position of modern
scientiﬁc method it is diﬃcult to conceive why Helmholtz’s theory had been ruled out as
a possible alternative. In a mathematical language, we would say that Hertz found only
necessary conditions to accept Maxwell’s theory. If those conditions were suﬃcient as
well, then Helmholtz’s theory would have been discarded on a solid logical basis. In the
next section, necessary and suﬃcient conditions for a decisive choice on the adequate
account of electromagnetic phenomena and interactions will be discussed.

5 Discussions

In modern retrospective of the above-stated reservations of Hertz, as well as of some
other thinkers of the time, the unconditional acceptance with which Hertz’s experiments
and their interpretations were received might seem somewhat unjustiﬁed. Hertz himself
did not expect such support and attributed it to the heavy philosophical burden of
the old and unresolved dilemma of the choice between the IAAAD and contact-action
doctrines(32):

The approval with which they have been received has far exceeded my
expectations. A considerable part of this approval was due to reasons of a
philosophic nature. The old question as to the possibility and nature of forces
acting at a distance was again raised. The preponderance of such forces in
theory has long been sanctioned by ordinary common sense; in the domain
of electricity these forces now appeared to be dethroned from their position
by simple and striking experiments... The details of the experiments further
prove that particular manner in which the electric force is propagated exhibits

13

the closest analogy with the propagation of light; indeed, that it corresponds
almost completely to it.

There is no doubt, then, that Hertz already considered the propagation of electric
interaction as a transverse wave, completely analogous to the light-propagation, due to
its being the only explicit indication of his experiments. Another detail which may also
have contributed to the unconditional approval of Hertz’s results among the scientiﬁc
community was, as already stated, the rather misleading title of his paper on the ﬁ-
nite propagation of electromagnetic actions, possibly due to unawareness of Helmholtz’s
classiﬁcation of forces.

However, in contrast to this general enthusiasm for Hertz’s results, there was also
some strong opposition from P. Duhem, an eminent French mathematician, physicist
and philosopher of science at the beginning of the 20th century. He was one of a small
but honest group of scientists who refused to accept Hertz’s experiments as conclusive.
Moreover, Duhem was the ﬁrst to raise doubts about the whole concept of crucial
experiments(33). A good mathematician and outspoken critic of the inconsistencies in
Maxwell’s theory, he became one of the principle advocates of Helmholtz’s approach(34):

...Physicists are caught in this dilemma: Abandon the traditional theory of
electric and magnetic distribution, or else give up the electromagnetic theory
of light. Can they not adopt a third solution? Can they not imagine a doc-
trine in which there would be a logical reconciliation of the old electrostatics,
of the old magnetism, and of the new doctrine that electric actions are propa-
gated in dielectrics? This doctrine exists; it is one of the ﬁnest achievements
of Helmholtz; the natural prolongation of the doctrines of Poisson, Amp´ere,
Weber and Neumann, it logically leads from the principles laid down at the
beginning of the nineteenth century to the most fascinating consequences of
Maxwell’s theories, from the laws of Coulomb to the electromagnetic theory
of light; without losing any of the recent conquests of electrical science, it
re-establishes the continuity of tradition.

However, it appears that this call of Duhem’s for a third solution fell mainly on deaf
ears. So, whilst appreciating the diﬃculties of Hertz’s pioneering investigations, and
taking into consideration his struggle through the uncertainties and controversies of the
electrodynamics of his time, the fact remains that his ﬁnal opting for Maxwell’s theory
was not based on strict scientiﬁc logic. What needs to be done, therefore, is clearly to
identify the criteria for acceptance and apply these to the existing alternative theories.
The detailed examination of how and why a certain theory is conﬁrmed or refuted by
experimental tests is, of course, a matter of the methodology and philosophy of science.
Hertz was apparently not fully aware of the need to test his choice from this systematic,
methodological and philosophical standpoint.

As did the majority of his contemporaries, Hertz intuitively applied a criterion of
empirical veriﬁcation, in the hypothetico-deductive manner prevailing in the 19th cen-
tury science. This method consisted of creating hypotheses in the form of postulates
and then making deductions from these which could be either conﬁrmed or rejected

14

by experiment. However, from the modern methodological standpoint, as is now well
recognized, empirical veriﬁcation is a condition that is necessary but not suﬃcient for
establishing the truth of a theory. The fact is that an empirical observation may verif y
any number of diﬀerent, yet equally valid theories sharing that same prediction. The
only reliable way, therefore, of deciding between theories is not to verif y any one of
them in particular, which might just as well verify any number of them but, if possible,
to eliminate all but one of the contenders. The only way of doing this is, of course, by the
method of refutation. This method may be carried out logically, by pure ratiocination
(as by pointing out some logical or mathematical contradiction) or by demonstrating
that empirical predictions made by some logically consistent theory are false. However,
even if a theory is logically sound, if it makes no falsiﬁable predictions, it cannot be
refuted. Such a theory, according to Popper, cannot qualify as a scientiﬁc theory. This
criterion, introduced by Popper in the late 1920s, thus provided a reliable criterion for
separating genuine scientiﬁc theories from pseudo-scientiﬁc or metaphysical theories by
which, Popper meant theories which make no predictions that can, even in principle, be
empirically falsiﬁed.

It may be of interest to consider how this modern criterion of falsiﬁability might
have been inﬂuenced on Hertz’s decision, had it been available at the time. Qualita-
tively, as we have seen, both Maxwell’s and Helmholtz’s theories ﬁt equally well all the
observations made by Hertz, namely:

1) material changes in the surrounding space;
2) ﬁnite propagation of transverse components with the velocity of light;
3) empirical observations of energy transfer etc.
The present-day scientiﬁc method suggests that the next step is to explore the dif-
ference between the experimental predictions of the two theories, beyond those that are
already known, and to separate-out the diﬀerent, non-compatible but empirically ver-
iﬁable predictions that is, to determine which of them, if any, are suﬃcient to explain
all known facts, as distinct from those that are merely necessary. Thus, in the case
of alternative electrodynamics theories, the core of the additional ’crucial’ experiment
should have been to test, experimentally, statements speciﬁcally describing the charac-
ter of the longitudinal electric components which distinguish the Helmholtzian from the
Maxwellian theory. A clear absence of any indications on longitudinal character of inter-
actions in all observable cases would immediately imply Maxwell’s theoretical approach
beyond any doubt. Since no decisive, unambiguous information of the kind necessary to
refute Helmholtz’s theory has yet been found in Hertz’s experimental results, and, hence
no suﬃcient criterion had been established to accept the Faraday-Maxwell ﬁeld inter-
pretation. Moreover, as we mentioned above, electrostatic interactions always act along
the line joining positions of two charges at rest, i.e. they are manifestly longitudinal.
Proper Maxwell’s equations give the same picture in electro- and magnetostatic limits.
The point is that longitudinality of interactions is an essential, irremovable feature in
many observable phenomena. There was undoubtedly a real diﬃculty here, realized by
Hertz himself after frustrated eﬀorts to dissociate any reference to IAAAD as far as to
interaction was concerned.

15

The criterion on empirical observations of energy transfer comes from Faraday. He
believed that any interaction should be accompanied by material changes in the sur-
rounding space, that its propagations should take time. According to this reasoning,
the alternative views would violate the conservation of energy because it would appear
in the body without passing the intervening space. Later on Poynting developed this
conception in deeper details, so that the energy could be seen in many respects similar
to a material ﬂuid satisfying equations of conservation and continuity. The ﬂux of inter-
action was since then up till now associated with the ﬂux of electromagnetic ﬁeld energy.
Nevertheless, it should be recognized that there are still various well-known diﬃculties
in modern electrodynamics in describing the energy ﬂow in some physical situation.

On the contrary, Helmholtz’s position diﬀerentiated both kinds of energy: potential
and kinetic as it was done in mechanics. The energy of transverse waves represented ma-
terial kinetic energy localized in space between radiating bodies whereas potential energy
had no material equivalent and did not show any property of its manifest accumulation
in the intervening space (non-local and non-material property). Thus, in Helmholtz’s
interpretation longitudinal components (responsible for interaction) did not take part in
any energy carrying through the space. Immaterial status of longitudinal instantaneous
forces enable them to avoid a possible conﬂict with the special relativity.
In fact, it
is well-known that Einstein’s theory does not limit phase velocities, if there is no local
energy transfer.

Before long physicists ceased to ask why no scientiﬁc device is able to detect any
observable energy ﬂow between two interacting bodies at rest. Recent photon teleporta-
tion experiments also questioned actual understanding of localization of electromagnetic
energy. These diﬃculties seem to arise in modern physics from the indispensability of
material nature of all kinds of electromagnetic and gravitational interactions. This comes
from Faraday and Maxwell who thought that if the IAAAD concept did not imply any
material mediator, then it did not imply any conceivable physical mediator at all. There-
fore, in respect to the energy, they thought it could have only material origin, being,
like matter, accumulated locally and transferred continuously in space. This path of
reasoning also explains the modern prejudice against immateriality, even though space
and time can hardly be classiﬁed among material objects and hence cannot possess only
material properties. Consideration of both kinds of electromagnetic energy following
Helmholtz (local along with non-local, i.e. material kinetic along with potential) helps to
overcome this fundamental methodological inconsistency but on theoretical foundations
diﬀerent from those of purely material Faraday-Maxwell’s ﬁeld theory.

On the other hand, as already mentioned, the criterion of falsiﬁability requires any
truly scientiﬁc alternative theory to be logically self-consistent. Logical inconsistencies
lead to bogus predictions. In this way it is interesting to remind that several aspects
of standard conventional electrodynamics are found to be unsatisfactory, despite all the
advances claimed by relativity and quantum mechanics. Conventional electrodynamics
is thus still not free from untractable inconsistencies, as in its implications regarding
self-interaction, inﬁnite contribution of self-energy, the concept of electromagnetic mass,
indeﬁniteness in the ﬂux of electromagnetic energy, etc. These internal diﬃculties ex-
plain why, from the beginning to the middle of the 20th century, there were unceasing

16

eﬀorts to modify either Maxwell’s equations or the underlying conceptual premises of
electromagnetism. The present status of classical electrodynamics can be expressed by
words of R. Feynman(35):

...this tremendous ediﬁce [classical electrodynamics], which is such a beau-
tiful success in explaining so many phenomena, ultimately falls on its face.
When you follow any of our physics too far, you ﬁnd that it always gets
into some kind of trouble. the failure of the classical electromagnetic theory.
...Classical mechanics is a mathematically consistent theory; it just doesn’t
agree with experience. It is interesting though, that the classical theory of
electromagnetism is an unsatisfactory theory all by itself. There are diﬃcul-
ties associated with the ideas of Maxwell’s theory which are not solved by and
not directly associated with quantum mechanics...

One of the latest systematic accounts of these diﬃculties has been made recently
in(36)−(37). In particular, the old problem of Maxwell’s electrodynamics, concerning the
uncertain relationship between static and dynamic limits, has been brought into greater
relief. Pure mathematical analysis(36) has shown that the conventional theory does not
ensure a continuous transition between static and dynamic limits, which is, surely, in
itself, strange to contemplate in the context of the Faraday-Maxwell continuous-ﬁeld
concept. Interestingly, it has also been found that if the condition of continuous tran-
sition between static and dynamic limits is imposed explicitly in mathematical terms,
then conventional boundary condition should be replaced by new generalized boundary
conditions. As a result, solutions of Maxwell’s equations have to be also modiﬁed to
include instantaneous longitudinal components.
It would be of interest to note that
the possible diﬃculty with conventional boundary conditions for ﬁeld equations in the
classical ﬁeld theory was realized by A. Einstein himself a few month before his death
in 1955. In the last edition of ”The Meaning of Relativity” he added the following(38):

A ﬁeld theory is not yet completely determined by the system of ﬁeld equa-
tions. Should one postulate boundary conditions? Without such a postulate,
the theory is much too vague. In my opinion the answer to the question is
that postulation of boundary condition is indispensable.

Thus, a diﬀerent choice of boundary conditions can result in essentially diﬀerent ap-
proach (Maxwellian or Helmholtzian), provided the same system of Maxwell’s equations
(a limit case of Helmholtz’s equations).

In summarizing this discussion it is interesting to note another possible attractive-
ness of Helmholtz’s conceptual foundations. As well as having these above-mentioned
diﬃculties, Maxwell’s theory also could not provide any reliable model of the atom. This
left a theoretical gap which had to be ﬁlled independently. This, of course, is what led
to the current quantum mechanical theory of the atom, with its implications of essential
non-locality. Thus was created the other serious dilemma of present-day physics: signif-
icant incommensurability between the classical relativistic theory with its basic concept

17

of local material ﬁeld, and quantum mechanics with its essential non-locality. This fun-
damental conﬂict is such that, for some people, the only way of resolving it seems to be
to combine or superimpose these incompatible requirements for locality and non-locality
in some purely expedient and compromising way. In view of these reasoning it also can
be suggested that any physical theory of interaction might not be pure ﬁeld theory (in
the sense of local ﬁeld) but be complemented by instantaneous longitudinal components
(in the sense of non-local potential ﬁeld).

6 Conclusions

Thus, as the relevant historical literature shows, Helmholtz’s theoretical foundations
never contradicted Hertz’s experimental observations. Hertz’s arguments in favor of
Maxwell’s theory had not been based on a solid scientiﬁc and logical grounds as it has
been shown from the position of modern science and from the analysis of very recently
published Hertz’s laboratory notes, dairy and private communications(22).

Nowadays, Helmholtz’s conceptual foundations promise an alternative consistent
solution to fundamental problems of modern physics at reconciling classical electrody-
namics and quantum mechanics in a less ad hoc and altogether more rational way than
has, up till now, seemed obligatory. Recent experimental conﬁrmations of the violation
of Bell’s inequalities in quantum mechanical measurements, entanglement and telepor-
tation in quantum optics shed some new light on possible alternative foundations of
classical electrodynamics.

The crisis which arose in classical physics at the very end of the 19th century ac-
counted to the limitations of classical explanation did not implied, however, radical
revision of all foundations and left unquestionable many previous results: among them
conceptual foundations of Maxwell’s theory and Hertz’s incomplete experimental ap-
proach. Many problems of classical electromagnetic research passed unnoticed in view
of novel and promising perspectives opened by special relativity and quantum mechanics.
Nevertheless, nowadays it is still unclear by what reasons the progress of science at the
beginning of the 20th century was so unconditionally left to be dependent on formally
incomplete experimental veriﬁcation of fundamental issues as far as to the propagation
of electromagnetic interactions is concerned.

Despite the intensive and undeniable progressive development of physics and tech-
nology since Hertz’s experiments, there is, however, an uneasy feeling that we may not
be on a very solid ground with respect to the nature of interactions. In fact, modern
explanation of interaction process as an interchange of real and virtual particles is still
incomplete, posing more fundamental questions than answers. In this respect, the stan-
dard model has very high expectation on observations of fundamental Higgs’s massive
particles in expensive CERN’s experiments (approximately in 2005). The failure would
mean a possible crash of the conventional approach. Why not to choose less expen-
sive but not less convincing way: using modern technological advantage over Hertz’s
experimental facilities, it would be relatively easy to complete Hertz’s empirical task
deﬁnitively and ﬁnd out whether the propagation of electromagnetic interactions is only

18

transverse (by means of massless photons), only longitudinal (Helmholtz’s non-locality)
or both by nature on the classical level. This latter task can also be considered as a
suﬃcient condition for veriﬁcation of Maxwell’s or Helmholtz’s foundations.

APPENDIX A. Foundations and Structure of Helmholtz’s Theory

The original Faraday-Maxwell form of electrodynamics which was predominant in
Britain, dispensed altogether with the objects like charge in their own right. The pri-
mary entity turned out to be the ﬁeld. The notion of a charge was very problematic
in Maxwell’s original theory that made the electromagnetic ﬁelds to be divorced from
their sources. In Buchwald’s words, ”in Maxwellian theory, charge is produced by the
electric ﬁeld...The Maxwellian goal was to create a theory of electromagnetism which
made no use whatsoever of the microstructure of matter ” (J. Buchwald, ”From Maxwell
to Microphysics”, The University of Chicago Press, 1985). In other words, in the orig-
inal ﬁeld theory the source was a secondary conception conceivable as a sort of ﬁeld
singularity. In modern notation, this approach leads to a particular form of continuity
equation with no open currents J: (i.e.
J = 0). (Later on the notion of a source in
Maxwell’s theory was changed by Lorentz and used in his microscopic electron theory of
electromagnetism accepted nowadays). The interaction between objects was reduced to
the change of state of the surrounding ﬁeld. Hence, no direct interaction was admitted
in Faraday-Maxwell’s electrodynamics as in any other possible ﬁeld theory, based on the
notion of local Faraday ﬁeld. This marked the main division between Maxwell’s and
Helmholtz’s conceptions.

∇ ·

Helmholtz created a theory that diﬀered radically from the Faraday-Maxwell scheme.
He did not see it appropriate to use additional theoretical ’artifact’, i.e. the Faraday no-
tion of local ﬁeld. On the contrary, Helmholtz accepted (following the main trend of the
continental electromagnetism) the underlying electric microstructure of matter as a pri-
mary hypothesis and, hence, used a continuity equation that linked charge and currents
accepted in our modern notations. On the other hand, he based his analytical approach
on a notion of potential functions. Besides the notion of a static potential (nowa-
days known as a scalar potential function) satisfying inhomogeneous Poisson’s equation,
Helmholtz postulated the existence of electrodynamic potential U (nowadays known as
a vector potential function) that generalized the conception of a potential so success-
fully used in magnetostatics. The source (charge or current) speciﬁed in Helmholtz’s
approach the nature of interaction (electric or magnetic). All objects interacted directly,
all forces among them could be deduced in terms of potential functions and hence there
was no intermediary local ﬁeld to interact with. Another essential point to grasp about
the fundamental structure of Helmholtz’s electrodynamics is that every system state
can be described by the energy of interaction based on both electrodynamic and static
potentials. It reﬂects Helmholtz’s conviction in the profound truth of the Principle of
Least Action. (Modern ﬁeld theory is also coupled to Hamilton’s principle).

Helmholtz considered the total current Ctot = Ccond + ∂P

∂t to be formed of conduc-
tion currents Ccond and of changing dielectric polarization P. The latter, according to
the Mossotti hypothesis (1846) would implicate currents in precisely the same way that

19

changing charge densities implicate conduction currents. Helmholtz linked electrody-
namic potential U to the total current Ctot:

U(r) =

Z

Ctot(r′)
rd

d3r′

+

1

k
−
r
2 ∇

[Ctot(r′

)

∇r′rd]d3r′

·

Z

where k is undeﬁned constant; r, r′ are positions of current diﬀerential elements and
r′ is the distance between them. This gives the expression for U to which
rd = r
Maxwell’s, Weber’s and Neumann’s theories lead by setting k equal, respectively, to 0,

−

1, and 1.

−

Dielectric polarization P in this approach can be created by electrodynamic potential
U (representing magnetic forces) as well as by static potential Φ (representing electric
forces):

P =

χ∇Φ

−

χA2 ∂U
∂t

−

where the quantity A depends on the medium susceptibility χ and, as it will be seen
later, deﬁnes the propagation speed of transverse electromagnetic waves. The term
∂U
∂t mathematically describes the interaction eﬀect of changing currents on charges.
Conversely, Helmholtz assumes that the spacial variation of the static potential Φ shows
the eﬀect of a charge in producing a current (Ohm’s law):

1
R
where R is the resistivity of a conductor.

Ccond =

(A2 ∂U

∂t −

∇Φ)

Helmholtz also considered continuity equation for total currents

∇

·

∂ρ
∂t

Ctot +

= 0

(Ctot = Ccond +

∂P
∂t

)

and Poisson’s equation for static potential

2Φ =

4πρ

−
All these equations (1)-(5) constitute the foundations of Helmholtz’s electrodynam-
ics. In this approach all forces can be deduced in terms of the potential functions U
and Φ. In other words it means that the underlying analytical structure of Helmholtz’s
electrodynamics can be reduced to the partial diﬀerential equations for both potentials:

∇

2U = (1

∇

−

k)∇ ∂Φ

4πCtot

∂t −

k

∂Φ
∂t

∇

U =

·
Using these equations Helmholtz obtained a general equation for propagation:

−

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

20

−

A
R
∇ ∂
1 + 4πχ
∂t
4πχ

∂2U
∂t2 +
(∇

·

−

U)

∇(∇
·
kR

χA2 ∂3U

−
∇

1
4π

(∇

×

∂t3 =
∂U
)
∂t

×

U) +

If one separates cases for which

Ut = 0 (the divergence vanishes for transverse
Ul = 0 (the curl vanishes for longitudinal components Ul),

∇ ·

components Ut) and
the general equation for U = Ut + Ul can be split in two:

∇ ×

χ

∂2Ut
∂t2 =

1
R

∂Ut
∂t

+

1
4πA2 ∇

2Ut

1
R
In non-conducting medium, the resistivity R is inﬁnite and Helmholtz’s equations for
propagation result considerably simpliﬁed:

1 + 4πχ
4πkA2 ∇

1
kR ∇

2 ∂Ul
∂t

∂3Ul
∂t3 =

∂2Ul
∂t2 +

2Ul

(10)

−

χ

∂2Ut
∂t2 =
∂2Ul
∂t2 =
Same wave equations can be derived for the scalar potential Φ = Φt + Φl.

1 + 4πχ
4πkχA2 ∇

1
4πχA2 ∇

2Ut

2Ul

Originally, Helmholtz’s theory was conceived only for polarizable material medium.
In order his equations for propagation to make sense in empty space, the notion of
ether should have been accepted and the ether itself should have been considered as
It was done in an attempt to understand Maxwell’s ﬁeld equations as
polarizable.
a limit case of Helmholtz’s theory. This assumption that the ether exists and has a
non-zero susceptibility χ0 introduces into Helmholtz’s scheme ﬁeldlike feature similar in
status to the conception of light ether in Maxwell’s approach.

Among researchers in the history of classical electrodynamics there is a full consen-
sus that to reach formally (i.e. not on a conceptual level) the Maxwell scheme from
Helmholtz’s theory requires two limits: k = 0 and inﬁnite ether susceptibility χ0. The
former is necessary to obtain Maxwell’s equations (rewritten for 4-potential) and the
latter, to make the velocity of transverse waves in Helmholtz’s theory equal to the ve-
locity of light c. Let us follow both limits, in order to analyze the limit behavior of
transverse and longitudinal waves in Helmholtz’s scheme. First, all basic constants in
both theories are to be made mutually related. The constant A depends on ether’s
susceptibility χ0 and can be reorganized into new quantity c−1 = A√1 + 4πχ0 which
is inversely proportional to the velocity of light c obtained in Maxwell’s theory. Hence,
the speed of propagation for transverse waves in Helmholtz’s theory is

(8)

(9)

(11)

(12)

(13)

vt = c

1 + 4πχ0
4πχ0

s

21

To reach eﬀectively Maxwell’s wave velocity c, the ether susceptibility χ0 must be
In the case of longitudinal components, the

inﬁnite in Helmholtz’s wave equations.
propagation rate with reorganized A constant is

vl = c

1 + 4πχ0
4πkχ0

(14)

Obviously, the longitudinal wave acquires inﬁnite velocity by setting χ0 to inﬁnity
p
independently of the value of k. In no way it means that the longitudinal component as a
mathematically valid solution of general Helmholtz’s equation for propagation, lacks any
sense or disappears as Hertz assumed in his analysis of the Maxwell limit of Helmholtz’s
scheme. The claim that the limit k = 0 is necessary to reach the inﬁnite velocity of
propagation came from Helmholtz himself. Perhaps, it was due to the erroneous ﬁnal
expression for vl = c
given by Helmholtz in his early work (1870), as commented
by Buchwald(14).

1+4πχ0
4πkχ0

q

In fact, original Maxwell’s theory did not predict any longitudinal waves because
basic wave equations were homogeneous (or sourceless), reﬂecting the form of conti-
nuity equation used by Maxwell (∇
Ctot = 0). Later on, in Lorentz’s discussion of
Maxwell’s theory (1892) a moving charge as a ﬁeld source had been incorporated. It
marked the main trend in modiﬁcation of underlying concepts in original Maxwell’s the-
ory. Primarily, this approach transformed the Maxwell continuity equation because the
conception of source resulted compatible with Helmholtz’s continuity equation. Thus,
original Maxwellian ﬁeld theory lacked many of the conceptions that many years later
formed part of a uniﬁed system known and accepted nowadays as Lorentz’s microscopic
theory of electromagnetism.

·

Lorentz’s modiﬁcation of Maxwell’s ﬁeld approach provided Lienard (1898) and
Wiechert (1901) with inhomogeneous wave equations which retarded solutions were
found under the well-known condition (which was thought to be just experimentally
veriﬁed by Hertz (1888)) that electromagnetic interactions propagate with the veloc-
ity of light. It gave a rise to the fact that longitudinal and transverse components in
Lienard-Wiechert solutions propagate at the same rate. Nevertheless, in many situations
Lienard-Wiechert’s longitudinal components can be eliminated by means of appropri-
ate gauge transformations that makes their status highly uncertain in the framework of
modern classical electrodynamics. On the contrary, Helmholtz’s scheme in Maxwellian
limit oﬀers a more consistent approach to longitudinal components: longitudinal forces
are always present and constitute bipartite, instantaneous mutual interaction (i.e., they
are irremovable). This scheme, contains electro- and magnetostatics as naturally valid
limit case whereas in the Faraday-Maxwell theory all static and quasistatic phenomena
are totally foreign to the notion of Faraday’s local ﬁeld.

Another point worth emphasizing here,

illustrates the similarity of Helmholtz’s
scheme with modern ﬁeld theories. Helmholtz based his approach on the notion of
electrodynamic and static potentials (vector and scalar potential function in modern
notation). Potential functions are essential features of all ﬁeld theories independently of
a particular model of the ﬁeld. Thus, the novel character of Helmholtz’s electrodynamics

22

consists in the combination of transverse (local) and longitudinal (non-local) parts of
those potential functions. In modern retrospective, it means that Helmholtz’s approach
is purely ﬁeld scheme, sharing elements of both local and non-local ﬁeld theories.

APPENDIX B. The Brief Sequence of Hertz’s ”Crucial” Experiments

From Hertz’s published papers we know that he was looking for the eﬀect of in-
terference of the action that propagated along the wire with the velocity close to the
velocity of light by the direct action of oscillator that might have very diﬀerent rate of
propagation. Hertz reasoned in the following way: (a) if both actions travel at the same
rate, the interference picture will be the same no matter where it is measured (no phase
shift observed); (b) if propagation speeds are not equal, then the phase diﬀerence will
depend on the measurement place. In the case, the direct action of the oscillator has an
inﬁnite rate of propagation, the interference picture should reﬂect only the periodicity
of the wire action (i.e. the interference will change sign at every half wave-length of the
waves in the wire).

At the end of 1887 Hertz ﬁnally undertook this task. Recently published laboratory
notes(22), dairy and letters to parents can get access to Hertz’s ﬁrst understanding of his
results in such form that did not appear in his printed papers. From laboratory notes we
know that on November 7 Hertz succeeded in using the resonator to detect the standing
electric waves in a wire connected to one of the oscillators plate. It meant he was now
prepared to undertake interference experiments. Notes dated November 11-12 record
Hertz’s intention to construct an experiment to detect a propagation of the ”direct
action” of the oscillator. In these ﬁrst series of experiments Hertz set the resonator’s
plane vertically. He could rotate the plane of the resonator about a vertical axis so that
the spark gap of the resonator could point parallel to the wire (position 1 in Hertz’s
terminology especially sensitive to wire action) or parallel to the oscillator gap (position
2 sensitive to direct action of the oscillator whether electrostatic or electrodynamic in
Helmholtz’s speciﬁcation).

In his published articles Hertz explained how, rotating the resonator’s plane, can
be observed diﬀerences in sparking for diﬀerent deviations in order to determine the
interference picture in diﬀerent positions from the oscillator (for greater details of these
experiments see, for instance, Buchwald(14)). On November 11 Hertz succeeded in pro-
ducing a detectable interference between the direct action of the oscillator and the wire
waves. The entry of his dairy notes for November 12 reads: ”Set up experiments on the
velocity of propagation of the electromagnetic eﬀect. Contrary to expectations, the result
is inﬁnite propagation”.

Discouraged by futile eﬀorts to detect novel eﬀects (ﬁnite rate of propagation), Hertz
put aside experimenting. Later on for the introduction to ”Electric Waves” he gave
account about the ﬁrst experiment:

”...Dishearted, I gave up experimenting. Some weeks passed before I began
again. I reﬂected that it would be quite as important to ﬁnd out that electric
force was propagated with an inﬁnite velocity, and that Maxwell’s theory was

23

false, as it would be, on the other hand, to prove that this theory was correct,
provided only that the result arrived at should be deﬁnite and certain.”

Five weeks later, On December 15, Hertz returned to his experiments again. As
it is seen from his dairy, he decided to write a detailed paper on negative results but
only after having checked and making secure of his previous results. After two days of
laboratory tests, Hertz became convinced that his device was a very reliable interference
detector. This conﬁdence allowed him to start a new series of experiments performed
from December 12 through 21. They were to ensure that the device was properly
constructed and calibrated before setting experiments about the propagation velocity.
After having ﬁnished calibrations of his device, Hertz turned his experimentation to the
main goal. On December 22, he started a next series of experiments for the resonator’s
position 1 and 2 (see previous description). Hertz concluded from his observations that
the interference remained in step with the wire wave. In other words, it conﬁrmed that
the direct action of the oscillator had immeasurably higher speed.

From the letter to his parents written next morning, we get Hertz’s ﬁrst perception

of this result(14):

”What is the unexpected and to me displeasing result of my endeavors?
The velocity [of the direct action] is not that of light, but certainly much
greater, perhaps inﬁnitely great, at all events not measurable. Even if it were
three times as great, it could still be measured... Now, there is no arguing
with nature; it must be as it is, but I should have certainly liked it better
to obtain a clear, positive result than this more negative one... Certainly,
caution is indicated here, but once again the experiments seem all too clear
to me.”

On this same day later, December 23, 1887 Hertz put a resonator in a diﬀerent
orientation. The resonator’s plane was now horizontal (position 3 in Hertz’s classiﬁca-
tion). After Christmas, On December 26 Hertz began a new series of experiments using
the position 3 with the resonator’s gap parallel to the wire. In Hertz’s mind, the res-
onator was governed entirely by the oscillator’s electrodynamic action (not electrostatic
in Helmholtz’s classiﬁcation). According to the measured interference phase shift along
the wire, Hertz unexpectedly found that the oscillator’s direct action propagated 1.5
times faster than the wire wave (i.e. close to the velocity of light). Having done these
promising measurements, Hertz sought a clear possibility to establish a relation between
the speeds of the two actions: the electrostatic and the electrodynamics in Helmholtz’s
classiﬁcation.

To adapt experiments for this aim Hertz used the position 3 but with the resonator’s
gap facing the oscillator.
In order to measure interference only between two actions,
Hertz for the ﬁrst time removed the wire used for previous interference experiments. In
this conﬁguration the resonator responds to both static and dynamic actions, though
the latter predominates. If the resonator gap faces the oscillator, the signed value of
the total driving force is a positive contribution of both parts of direct action. If the

24

gap faces in opposite direction (1800 rotation about the center of the resonator), the
contribution of the electrostatic action will change the sign. By setting the resonator
in diﬀerent positions Hertz obtained interference marks which he put in the ﬁnal table
(discussed in the main text concerning singularities in the near zone). These were Hertz’s
ﬁrst measures of the direct action propagation without the support of the wire wave of
known length. On December 30, Hertz undertook new observation up to 12 meters.

On January 1, on the ﬁrst day of 1888 Hertz wrote to his parents that he was
somewhat depressed, anticipating the distasteful risk of carrying on with additional ex-
periments, ”because one can only lose by them”. Some days later he began writing up the
article, troubled by doubts that the results might be ”ﬁgments of the imagination”(14).
Finally, Hertz calmed his doubts and by the end of January wrote the paper entitled,
”On the Finite Velocity of Propagation of Electromagnetic Action”.

The history of physics researchers seemed to show no interest to the fact that Hetrz’s
drastic change in attitude towards his previous ”negative” results was not supported
by additional reliable experimental measurements. The conﬁrmation of this change is
clearly seen in Hertz’s Introduction to ”Electric Waves” where he was forced to admit
many doubts on the reliability and accuracy of his ﬁrst negative experiments.

Nevertheless, in modern retrospective the second series of Hertz’s experiments and
the table obtained on December 22 (where he conﬁrmed his previous ”negative” results)
do not seem to support very strongly Hertz’s allegations on inaccuracy. This is also
Buchwald’s opinion in his own words(14):

...Neither the 3.4 we ﬁnd in Hertz’s undiscussed average not the 2.9 ob-
tained directly from his table easily sustains a positive argument for ﬁnite
propagation. On the contrary, the 2.9 result falls right between the 2.66 and
3.1 values for the wire wave’s half-length that he previously found, and the
3.4 result barely misses the ﬁrst, and includes the second, value if we al-
low the inaccuracy to be no larger than the standard deviation among the
measurements.
If, as Hertz would certainly have had to admit, the inac-
curacies are in fact somewhat larger than this, then his numbers cannot be
instrumentally distinguished from one another. These results, as they stand,
accordingly nicely sustain Hertz’s anticipated negative outcome. But because
Hertz later decided his experiments had positive results, in his published pa-
pers he had to argue the apparent implication of the table away, which he
did in two ways: ﬁrst, by saying that the alternation is not at all precise
(which might, however, speak just as well to the experiment’s accuracy as to
its implications) and, second, by capitalizing on what might otherwise appear
to be inaccuracy in observation, namely, the frequent appearance of four or
more zero points together at distances past 3 m ...

Thus, it is not still clear why Hertz did not overcome ”the distasteful risk of carrying
on with additional experiments” and did not repeat his ﬁrst experiments in order to
remove or conﬁrm his doubts in their inaccuracy. His published papers, laboratory
notes and dairy, unfortunately, provide little help here.

25

REFERENCES

1. S. Laplace, Mecanique Celeste, Book X, 22, (Paris, 1799)

2. T. Van Flandern and J.-P. Vigier, Foundations of Physics, 32(7), 1031-1068 (2002)

3. I. Newton, Third Letter to Bentley,

from Work of Richard Bentley, III, 211

4. S. Laplace, Exposition du System du Monde, Book IV (Paris, 1796)

5. P. Graneau and N. Graneau, Newton versus Einstein: How Matter Interacts with

Matter (Carlton Press, New York, 1993)

6. D. Hoﬀmann, ”Heinrich Hertz and the Berlin School of Physics”, in Heinrich
Hertz: Classical Physicist, Modern Philosopher , eds. D. Baird, R.I.G. Hughes
and A. Nordmann, (Kluwer Academic, Dordrecht, 1998), 1-8

7. M. Heidelberger, ”From Helmholtz’s Philosophy of Science to Hertz’s Picture-
Theory”, in Heinrich Hertz: Classical Physicist, Modern Philosopher , eds. D.
Baird, R.I.G. Hughes and A. Nordmann, (Kluwer Academic, Dordrecht, 1998),
9-24

8. J. Maxwell, On Faraday’s Line of Force, Scientiﬁc Papers, Vol.1, 160 (1864)

9. M. Hesse, ”Action at a Distance in Classical Physics” ISIS 46, 337-353 (1955)

10. H. Hertz, ”On the Fundamental Equations of Electromagnetics for Bodies at Rest”,
in Electric Waves, Collection of Scientiﬁc Papers (Dover, New York, 1962), 195

11. M. Hesse, Forces and Fields: The Concept of Action at a Distance in the History

of Physics (Thomas Nelson and Sons Ltd., London, 1961)

12. H. Helmholtz, Wissenschaftliche Abhandlungen, Vol. 1, (Barth, 1882), 611-628

13. P.S. Kudryavtzev, History of Physics, vol. 2, (Moscow University Press, Moscow,

1956), 206-213 (in Russian)

14. J. Buchwald, The Creation of Scientiﬁc Eﬀects: Heinrich Hertz and Electric Waves

(The University of Chicago Press, Chicago, 1994)

15. A.E. Woodruﬀ, ”The Contribution of Hermann von Helmholtz to Electrodynam-

ics” ISIS 59, 300-311 (1968)

16. H. Helmholtz, Wissenschaftliche Abhanlugen, vol.1 (Barth, 1882), 556

17. H. Hertz, ”On the Finite Velocity of Propagation of Electromagnetic Actions” in

Electric Waves, 110 (1888)

18. ibid., ”On Very Rapid Electrical Oscillations” in Electric Waves, 29-53 (1887)

26

19. ibid., ”On the Finite Velocity of Propagation of Electromagnetic Actions” in Elec-

tric Waves, 108 (1888)

20. ibid., 121

21. J. Cazenobe, Archives Internationale d’Histoire des Sciences, 32, 236-265 (1982)

22. M. Doncel, ”Heinrich Hertz’s Laboratory Notes of 1887” Archive for History of

Exact Sciences, 49, 197-270 (1995)

23. M. Doncel, ”On Hertz’s Conceptual Conversion: From Wire Waves to Air Waves”
in Heinrich Hertz: Classical Physicist, Modern Philosopher, eds. D. Baird, R.I.G.
Hughes and A. Nordmann (Kluwer Academic, Dordrecht, 1998), 73-87

24. J. Z. Buchwald, ”Electrodynamics in Context: Object States, Laboratory Prac-
tice and Anti-Romanticism” in Hermann von Helmholtz and the Foundations of
Nineteenth-Century Science, Edited by D. Caham (University of California Press,
Berkely, 1993), 345-368

25. H. Hertz, Electric Waves, Collection of Scientiﬁc Papers, (Dover, New York, 1962),

15

26. ibid., ”The Forces of Electric Oscillations, Treated According to Maxwell’s The-

ory” in Electric Waves, 137 (1889)

27. ibid., 151-152

28. W. Panofsky and M. Phillips, Classical Electrodynamics and Magnetism (Addison

Wesley P.C., Massachusetts, Second Edition, 1962), 259-260

29. H. Hertz, ”The Forces of Electric Oscillations, Treated According to Maxwell’s

Theory” in Electric Waves, 149 (1889)

30. ibid., ”On the Mechanical Action of Electric Waves in Wires” in Electric Waves,

187 (1891)

31. M. Heidelberger, ”From Helmholtz’s Philosophy of Science to Hertz’s Picture-
Theory” in Heinrich Hertz: Classical Physicist, Modern Philosopher , eds. D.
Baird, R.I.G. Hughes and A. Nordmann (Kluwer Academic, Dordrecht, 1998), 18

32. H. Hertz, Electric Waves, Introduction, 18-19

33. P. Duhem, The Aim and Structure of Physical Theory (Princeton University Press,

Princeton, 1954)

34. P. Duhem, Les Theories Electriques de J. Clerk Maxwell, Paris, 1902 (quoted from
A. O’Rahilly, Electromagnetic Theory: A Critical Examination of Fundamentals,
vol. 1 (Dover, New York, 1965), 161-180)

27

35. R.P. Feynman, Lectures on Physics: Mainly Electromagnetism and Matter (Addison-

Wesley, 1964)

(1997)

5th Edition, 1955)

36. A. Chubykalo and R. Smirnov-Rueda, Physical Review E, 53, 5373-5381 (1996)

37. A. Chubykalo and R. Smirnov-Rueda, Modern Physics Letters A, 12(1), 1-24

38. A. Einstein, The Meaning of Relativity, (Princeton University Press, Princeton,

28

