5
0
0
2
 
t
c
O
 
3
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
t
s
i
h
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
4
2
1
0
1
5
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

On the scientiﬁc method learned from Albert Einstein in 2005—the
World Year of Physics

Y. H. Yuan∗
(Dated: October 12, 2005)

We review the physics at the end of the nineteenth century and summarize the process of the
establishment of Special Relativity by Albert Einstein in brief. Following in the giant’s footsteps,
we outline the scientiﬁc method which helps to do research. We give some examples in illustration
of this method. We discuss the origin of quantum physics and string theory in its early years of
development. The discoveries of the neutrino and the correct model of solar system are also present.

I. HISTORICAL REVIEW AND A METHOD
DEDUCED

The year 2005 was declared the World Year of Physics
which is an international celebration of physics. It marks
the hundredth anniversary of the pioneering contribu-
tions of Albert Einstein, the greatest man in the twenti-
eth century as chosen by Time magazine.

In 1905, one hundred year ago, a Swiss patent em-
ployee, Albert Einstein, published a paper entitled “On
the Electrodynamics of Moving Bodies” [1] which de-
scribed what is now known as Special Relativity. It dras-
tically changed human fundamental concepts of motion,
space and time. The year 1905 was the miraculous year
for Einstein.
In the same year he also published three
other trailblazing papers. One [2] accounted for the pho-
toelectric phenomena and made up a part of the founda-
tion of quantum mechanics. He won the Nobel Prize in
physics due to the ideas of this paper in 1921. The second
one [3] was about the explanation of Brownian motion
and helped to establish the reality of the molecular na-
ture of matter and to present convincing evidence for the
physical existence of the atom. The third one [4] gave the
most famous and beautiful equation in special relativity,
E = mc2, which has received various experimental veriﬁ-
cations and has had wide application in modern physics.
These groundbreaking papers have shattered many cher-
ished scientiﬁc beliefs and greatly promoted the devel-
opment of modern physics. They won for Einstein the
greatest physicist as Newton in all human history. Next,
we will follow the process of the establishment of Special
Relativity and summarize some useful skills in research.
One of the most famous puzzles at the end of
19th century was the ether which was proposed as a
medium to support the electromagnetic wave propaga-
tion. Maxwell’s fundamental equations about the elec-
tromgnetic ﬁeld were published in 1862. It leads to the
electromagnetic wave equation in free space.
∇2φ − 1
c2
where φ is any component of ~E or ~B. Classical mechan-

∂2φ
∂t2 = 0

(1.1)

∗E-mail: henry@physics.wisc.edu

ics tells us that wave propagation needs a medium to
support it. For example, sound waves have to travel in
the air medium. For the propagation of electromagnetic
wave, physicists presumed an ether medium which was
entirely frictionless, pervaded all space, and was devoid
of any interaction with matter. Although many ingenious
physics papers during 1885-1905 were dedicated to ver-
ifying it, the ether refused to reveal its presence to the
pursuers.

In 1881, a 28-year-old American physicist, Albert
Michelson, realised the possibility of an experimental test
for the existence of ether by measuring the motion of
the earth through it. He performed the experiment in
Potsdam, Germany. Although he got negitive results in
detecting the relative motion of the earth and ether, his
measurement is not so accurate as to give an important
result. Six years later, Albert Michelson and Edward
Morley in Cleveland, Ohio carried out a high-precision
experiment to demonstrate the existence of ether with
an interferometer, which is now known as the Michelson
interferometer. This experiment is a high-precision rep-
etition of Michelson’s experiment in Potsdam. In their
experiment, a beam of light was split into two beams by
a half-silvered mirror. These two beams traveled at right
angles to each other. Then they were reﬂected by two
separate mirrors and recombined to form a fringe pattern.
The fringe pattern would shift if there was an eﬀect due
to the relative motion of the earth and the ether when
the apparatus was rotated. Therefore, by monitoring the
changes in the fringe pattern, they could tell the relative
motion of the earth and the ether. Even with the high-
precision apparatus, they did not ﬁnd any experimental
evidence for the existence of relative motion of the earth
and ether. These results indicated that either there is no
ether or the earth is in the ether rest frame all the time
during the experiment. Since the earth is always altering
its velocity when moving around the sun, the experimen-
tal result appeared to show that there was no existence
of ether. All the repetitions of their experiment in the
succeeding years were still unable to detect any relative
motion of the earth and the ether.

But ether died hard. Many physicists including
Michelson himself made great eﬀorts to retain the ether
yet explain the Michelson experiment. He attributed the
negative results to the earth dragging some of the ether
along with its motion. As a consequence the ether was

motionless with respect to the earth near its surface.

George FitzGerald put forward another possible expla-
nation in 1892 following the Lorentz-FitzGerald contrac-
tion equation, as we now know,

L = L0r1 −

v2
c2

(1.2)

where L0 is called the proper length of an object which
is measured in the rest frame of the object. To a mov-
ing observer of velocity v, any length along the direction
of motion undergoes a length contraction by a factor of
c2 . He proposed that the experimental appara-
q
tus would shorten in the direction parallel to the motion
through the ether. This shrinkage would compensate the
light paths and prevent a displacement of the fringes due
to the relative motion of the earth and the ether.

1 − v2

Hendrik Lorentz discovered the well-known Lorentz
transformation in 1904 under which the electromagnetic
theory expressed by the celebrated Maxwell equations are
in form invariant in all inertial frames.

t′
x′
y′
z′

= γ(t − v
c2 x)
= γ(x − vt)
= y
= z

(1.3)

(1.4)
(1.5)
(1.6)

1
1− v2
c2

q

where we assume coordinate system Σ moves relative to
another one Σ′ in the x-axes with uniform velocity v
and γ =
[5]. Although he laid the foundation for

the theory of relativity with his mathematical equations,
Lorentz still tried to ﬁt these remarkable equations into
the ether hypothesis and save the ether from the contra-
diction of the Michelson experiment.

All these eﬀorts failed to explain the Michelson exper-
iment while retaining the ether.
It was genius Albert
Einstein who abandoned the ether entirely. He wrote in
his celebrated paper on relativity in 1905[6]:

“The introduction of a ‘light ether’ will prove to be
superﬂuous, inasmuch as in accordance with the concept
to be developed here, no ‘space at absolute rest’ endowed
with special properties will be introduced, nor will a ve-
locity vector be assigned to a point of empty space at
which electromagnetic processes are taking place.”

Furthermore he developed the Special Relativity by

conjucturing two postulations:

1. The laws of nature are the same in all coordinate
systems moving with uniform motion relative to one an-
other.

2. The speed of light is independent of the motion of

its source.

Of which, the ﬁrst one is a natural generalization for
all kinds of physical experience since it is reasonable to

2

expect that the laws of nature are the same with respect
to diﬀerent inertial frames of reference. Whereas the sec-
ond one just represents a simple experimental fact. In
Michelson’s experiment, the speed of light was found to
be constant with respect to the earth. Put in other words,
the speed of light is the same for observers in diﬀerent in-
ertial frames of reference since an observer on the earth
at two diﬀerent times may be regarded as an observer
in two diﬀerent inertial frames of reference. It is only a
small jump to the postulate of Einstein’s Special Relativ-
ity that the speed of light is independent of the motion
of its source.

From the above condensed outline of the establishment
of special relativity, we learn that when proposing an
idea or theory with which we may account for some un-
explained phenomena, they should be based upon the
given facts of experiment or phenomena. Sometimes, the
ideas may contradict well-known theories which are not
experimentally proved, such as the ether.
If the prob-
lem is subtle and complicated, especially in physics, we
should make incisive analyses, see through the general
appearance and grasp the underlying nature. The above
method is of practical use in research which could be seen
from the following four examples.

II. FOUR EXAMPLES

A good example in illustration of the method is the
origin of quantum physics which now plays an important
role in various scientiﬁc areas. At the end of the nine-
teenth century, classical physics achieved great success.
But some experimental results were incompatible with
the classical physics such as the speciﬁc heat of a solid,
the photoelectric eﬀect and the thermal radiation of a
black body. Kirchhoﬀ initiated his theoretical research
on thermal radiation in the 1850s. By the end of the
nineteenth century two important empirical formulae on
black-body radiation had been derived based upon the
fundamental thermodynamics. Wien proposed a formula
for the energy density inside a black body in 1896,

ρ(ν, T ) = c1ν3e

c2ν
T

(2.1)

where T is the temperature of the wall of a black body,
ν is the radiation frequency and c1,c2 are two constants.
Rayleigh and Jeans derived a result from a diﬀerent ap-
proach in 1990,

ρ(ν, T ) =

8πν2
c3 kT

(2.2)

where k is the Boltzmann’s constant. The Rayleigh-Jeans
formula was in agreement with the experimental curve
at low frequencies whereas the Wien formula ﬁtted the
experimental curve well at high frequencies.
It was a
great discrepancy at the turn of twentieth century that

they failed to completely explain black-body radiation.
Seemingly there was no way out since these formulae were
based upon the fundamentals of classical physics.

Things changed on Dec. 14, 1900 when at a German
Physical Society meeting Max Planck presented his pa-
per entitled “On the theory of energy distribution law
of normal spectrum” which not only solved the puzzel of
black-body radiation but uncovered the quantum world.
It marks the birth of quantum physics. He assumed that
this energy could take on only a certain discrete set of
values such as 0, hν, 2hν, 3hν,..., where h is now known as
Planck’s constant. These values are equally spaced rather
than being continuous. This assumption apparently con-
tradicted the equipartition law and common sense. He
argued that the wall of a black body emitted radiation in
the form of quanta with energy of integer mutiple of hν.
Based on this bold assumption[7], Planck gave a formula
of the energy density at frequency ν,

ρ(ν, T ) =

8πν2
c3

hν
hν
kT − 1

e

(2.3)

which were in complete agreement with experimental
results on general grounds. His formula was an inge-
nious interpolation between the Wien formula and the
Rayleigh-Jeans formula. We now know that it gives the
correct explanation of the black body radiation spectrum.
This proposal established his status in science. As Ein-
stein said[8]:

“Very few will remain in the shrine of science, if we
eliminate those moved by ambition, calculation, of what-
ever personal motivations; one of them will be Max
Planck.”

Another example concerns the situation of string the-
ory in its early stage. We know that quantum ﬁeld theory
worked well in the uniﬁcation of quantum mechanics and
electromagnetism in the 1940s. That it could also de-
scribe the weak and strong interactions was understood
by the end of 1960s. It has played a signiﬁcant role in
our understanding of particle physics in many ways, from
the formulation of the four-fermion interaction theory to
the uniﬁcation of electromagnetic and weak interactions
[9][10][11]. But when we attempted to incorporate it with
gravity at high energy scale, severe problems appeared.
For example, when E > Mp, the interaction of gravita-
tion can not be negligible, where

Mp = (

)1/2c2 ≈ 1.2 × 1019Gev

(2.4)

~c
G

is Planck energy. The short-distance divergence prob-
lem of quantum gravity arouse. It is non-renormalizable
even though we have employed the usual renormaliza-
tion extracting the meaningful physical terms from the
divergences.

String theory solved this severe problem. According
to the postulates in string theory, all elementary par-
ticles, as well as the graviton were regarded as one di-
mensional strings rather than point-like particles which

3

were generlly accepted at the time. But the generally
accepted point-like particle concept was not experimen-
tally proved. Each string has a lot of diﬀerent harmon-
ics and the diﬀerent elementary particles were regarded
as diﬀerent harmonics in string theory. Therefore the
world-line of a particle was replaced by the world-sheet
of a string which could join the world-sheet of another
string smoothly. As a consequence, the vertex of an in-
teraction in a Feynman diagram was smeared out.
In
string theory the massless spin two particle in the string
spectrum was just right identiﬁed as the graviton which
mediates gravitation. At low energy scale the interaction
of massless spin two particle is the same as that required
by general relativity. From this simple string postulate,
string theory leads to a number of fruitful results.
It
is the only currently known consistent theory of quan-
tum gravity which does not have the above divergence
problem. One of the vibrational forms of the string pos-
sesses just the right property—spin two—to be a gravi-
ton whose couplings at long distance are those of general
relativity. It admits chiral gauge couplings which have
been the great diﬃculty for other unifying models.
In
addition, string theory predicts supersymmetry and gen-
erates Yang-mills gauge ﬁelds and it has found many ap-
plications to mathematics in the area of topology and ge-
ometry. Also in string theory there are no dimentionless
adjustable parameters which generally appear in quan-
2
e
tum ﬁeld theory, such as the ﬁne-structure constant
4π~c .
Nowadays, string theory (Detailed descriptions may be
found in Refs.[12]) has already become one of the most
active areas of research in physics. Thanks to the pos-
tulate of one dimensional string. It sheds light on and
promises new insights to some deepest unsolved problems
in physics, for example, what cause the cosmic inﬂation?
How does time begin? What is exactly a blackhole and
its construction? What constitutes the dark matter and
what is the so-called dark energy?

The third example is upon the process of the discovery
of the neutrino.
In 1896, radioactivity was discovered
by Henri Becquerel which marked the birth of modern
nuclear physics. Subsequently three types of particles
emitted by radioactive elements were established through
experiments. These rays emitted by the radioactive el-
ements were called alpha ray, beta ray and gamma ray
respectively. Becquerel identiﬁed that the beta rays were
high-speed electrons in 1990. Employing electric and
magnetic ﬁelds, he deﬂected beta rays and found that
they were negatively charged and that the ratio of charge
to mass of the beta particle was the same as that of an
electron. After more accurate measurements on beta de-
cays physicists found a serious problem. Unlike alpha
decay and gamma decay in which the emitted particles
carried away the well-deﬁned energy-equal to the total
energy diﬀerence of the initial and ﬁnal states, beta decay
emited electrons with a continuous energy spectrum. It
meant that a particular nucleus emitted a electron bear-
ing unpredictable energy in a particular transition. This
experimental result apparently violated the conservation

low of energy. In order to solve this serious problem and
to rescue the fundamental conservation laws of energy
and momentum that were seemingly being violated dur-
ing radioactive beta decay, Wolfgang Pauli proposed a
entirely new particle which is now know as neutrino. In
his open letter[13] to the group of radioactives at the
meeting of the regional society in Tubingen in December
4, 1930, he proposed the neutrino based on the given fact
of experiment:

“...This is the possibility that there might exist in the
nuclei electrically neutral particles, which I shall call neu-
trons, which have spin 1/2, obey the exclusion principle
and moreover diﬀer from light quanta in not travelling
with the velocity of light.”

“... I admit that my remedy may perhaps appear un-
likely from the start, since one probably would long ago
have seen the neutrons if they existed. But ‘nothing ven-
ture, nothing win’, and the gravity of the situation with
regard to the continuous beta spectrum is illuminated by
a pronouncement of my respected predecessor in oﬃce,
Herr Debye, who recently said to me in Brussels ‘Oh, it’s
best not to think about it at all-like the new taxes’. One
ought to discuss seriously every avenue of rescue.”

In his letter, Pauli refers to his new proposed particle-
the ”neutron” which is now called neutrino due to Enrico
Fermi. Pauli proposed this new speculative neutral par-
ticle might resolve the seemingly violation of energy and
momentum conservation laws and meant the proposal
should be taken seriously. If the proposed neutrino and
the electron were emitted simultaneously, the continuous
spectum of energy might be explained by the sharing of
energy and momentum of the emitted particles in beta
decay. It is worth mentioning that long before the neu-
trino was experimentally detected, Enrico Fermi[14] in-
corporated Pauli’s proposal in his brilliant model for the
beta decay process in the framework of quantum elec-
trodynamics in 1934. He showed clearly with his beta
decay theory that the neutron decays into a proton, an
electron and a neutrino simultaneously. The neutrino
was experimentally detected by Fred Reines and Clyde
Cowan, at the Los Alamos lab in 1956[15] using a liq-
uid scintillation device. This important discovery won
the 1995 Nobel prize in physics. A lot of famous phe-
nomena and problems solved and unsolved, related with
the neutrino were found. Parity violation takes place
whenever there is the neutrino taking part in a weak
interaction. When detecting the neutrino emitted from
the sun, fewer solar neutrino capture rate than the pre-
dicted capture rate of solar neutrino in chlorine from de-
tailed models of the solar interior were consistenly found
in 1968. This is the long-standing solar neutrino puzzel.
Later the same phenomena were also observed by other
groups using diﬀerent materials. As the most fascinat-
ing fundamental particle, the neutrino is so important
that neutrino physics become one of the most signiﬁcant
branches of modern physics. Thanks to the conjecture of
the neutrino by Pauli. Although his proposal of the en-
tirely new prticle contradicted the well-accepted knowl-

4

edge at the time on the beta decay process, his new beta
dacay process involving the neutrino was not completely
imposible experimentally. With this proposal we could
overcome the serious problem and rescue the fundamen-
tal conservation laws of energy and monment. The little
neutrino has found its application to a number of diﬀer-
ent research areas in physics, such as in particle physics,
nuclear physics, cosmology and astrophysics.

Finally we give an example in astronomy to show the
usefulness of our method deduced from the establish-
ment of special relativity. Before the sixteenth century,
that the sun, the moon and the planets all orbited about
the earth which is at the center of the universe was ex-
tensively accepted. In his famous book, Almagest, the
antient Greek astronomer Claudius Ptolemy proposed
the earth-centered model of the universe. He proved that
the earth was round and the gravity everywhere pointed
to the center of the earth. Every planet moved in an
epicycle whose center revolved around the earth just as
the sun and the moon revolving around the earth. He
postulated the epicycle to explain the looping motion
of a planet. The people on the earth would not see
the observed irregular motion of a planet if the planet
moved around the earth in a circular orbit, rather than
in a epicycle. The Ptolemy model of the universe was
the obvious and direct inference when people observed
the motion of the sun day after day and the motions of
the moon and the planets night after night. Therefore
Ptolemy’s theory was well-accepted and prevailed for a
long time. In about 1510, Nicholas Copernicus presented
the helio-centric model. In his celebrated book published
in 1543, De Revolutionibus orbium coelestium, he pos-
tulated that the planets including the earth all moved
around the sun[16]. The earth spin about its axis one ro-
tation per day and moved around the sun in the plane of
the ecliptic. He explained the apparent looping motions
of the planets in a simple way using his new helio-centric
model. They were the direct consequence of the relative
motion of the planets and the earth when people saw
from the earth.

He could not prove his radical helio-centric model at
the time. Although he simpliﬁed the cumbersome Ptole-
maic system, both the earth-centered model and the
helio-centric model could account for the observations
of motion of the celestial bodies. Copernicus’s theory
gives an alternative theory of Ptolemy. Even though the
problem was subtle and complicated, we should grasped
the hidden nature behind the phenomena. As Coper-
nicus pointed out that the extremely massive sun must
rule over the much smaller planet and the earth. He
therefore drew his conclusion that it was the earth that
moved around rather than the sun. It was Isaac Newton
who provided the correct explanation of Kepler’s laws
and convinced people that the earth and other planets
revolved around the massive sun due to the attractive

5

force with his ingenious universal law of gravitation[17].

F = G

M m
r2

(2.5)

where F is the universal gravitation force between the
two bodies with mass M and m respectively, G is called
the gravitational constant, and r is the distance between
the centers of mass of the two bodies. Galileo Galilei ﬁrst
observed the four satellites orbited around Jupiter which
exhibited undoubtedly that the earth were not the center
of all circular motions of the celestial bodies utilizing his
telescopes. He stated the four small bodies moved around
the larger planet-Jupiter like Venus and Mercury around
the sun. Also he observed the phases of Venus which was
the direct result of the planet moving around the sun.

around the turn of the twentieth century in our paper.
Moreover we have outlined the scientiﬁc method which
helps to do research. Some examples are presented in
order to illustrate the usefulness of the method. We have
discussed the origin of quantum physics and string the-
ory in its early years of development. The discoveries
of the neutrino and the correct model of solar system
have also been demonstrated. We have shown that the
method is of practical use in a wide range, from physics
to astronomy, from ancient science to modern ones. This
year is the unprecedented World Year of Physics which
acknowledges the contribution of physics to the world. It
marks the hundredth anniversary of the pioneering con-
tributions of Albert Einstein in 1905 as well as the ﬁftieth
anniversary of his death in 1955. We dedicate this paper
to Albert Einstein.

III. SUMMARY AND CONCLUSION

We have reviewed the process of the establishment
of Special Relativity against the background of physics

[1] A. Einstein, Annalen der Physik 17, 891 (1905)
[2] A. Einstein, Annalen der Physik 17, 132 (1905)
[3] A. Einstein, Annalen der Physik 17, 549 (1905)
[4] A. Einstein, Annalen der Physik 17, 639 (1905)
[5] J. D. Jackson, Classical Electrodynamics, 2nd edition,

John Wiley and Sons, New York, (1975)

[6] A. Beck and P. Havas, The collected papers of Albert Ein-
stein, English translation 2, Princeton University Press,
Princeton, USA(1987)

[7] Max Planck, Annalen der physik, 4, 553 (1901)
[8] Max Planck, Where is science going? (Several essays by
Max Planck. Prologue by Albert Einstein), Dover, New
York (1981)

[9] S. L. Glashow, Nucl. Phys. 22, 579 (1961).
[10] S. Weinberg, Phys. Rev. Lett. 19, 1264 (1967).
[11] A. Salam, in Elementary Particle Theory, Proc. of the

8th Nobel symposium, Aspenasgarden, 1968, ed. by N.
Svartholm, p.367

[12] M. B. Green, J. H. Schwarz and E. Witten, Superstring
theory, Vols. 1 and 2, Cambridge University Press, Cam-
bridge, UK(1987)

[13] Charles Enz, No time to be brief-A scientiﬁc biography
of Wolfgang Pauli, Oxford university press, (2002)

[14] E. Fermi, Z. fur Physik 88,161, (1934)
[15] F. Reines and C. Cowan, Science, 124 (1956) 10
[16] J. Adamczewski, Nicolaus Copernicus and his Epoch,

Copernicus Society of Americ

[17] Isaac Newton, Mathematical Principles of Natural Phi-
losophy and His System of the World, Univ. of Calif.
Press, Berkeley, CA (1962)

