5
0
0
2
 
t
c
O
 
7
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
t
s
i
h
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
1
5
2
0
1
5
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Theoretical remark on the superconductivity
of metals∗

A. Einstein
translated by Bjoern S. Schmekel (Cornell University)†

The theoretical oriented scientist cannot be envied, because nature, i.e.
the experiment, is a relentless and not very friendly judge of his work. In
the best case scenario it only says “maybe” to a theory, but never “yes”
and in most cases “no”. If an experiment agrees with theory it means “per-
haps” for the latter. If it does not agree it means “no”. Almost any theory
will experience a “no” at one point in time - most theories very soon after
they have been developed.
In this paper we want to focus on the fate of
theories concerning metallic conductivity and on the revolutionary inﬂuence
which the discovery of superconductivity must have on our ideas of metallic
conductivity.

After it had been recognized that negative electricity is caused by sub-
atomic carriers of particular mass and charge (electrons), there were good
reasons to believe that metallic conductivity rests on the motion of elec-
trons. Furthermore, the fact that heat is conducted much better by metals
than by non-metals as well as the Wiedemann-Franz law about the substance-
independence of the ratio of electric and thermal conductivity of pure metals
(at room temperature) led to attribute the thermal conductivity to electrons
as well. Under these circumstances there were reasons for an electron-based
theory of metals similar to the kinetic gas theory (Riecke, Drude, H. A.
In this theory free electron motion is assumed which resembles
Lorentz).
gas molecules with thermal mean kinetic energy 3/2 kT neglecting collisions

∗from “Gedenkenboek aangeb. aan H. Kamerlingh Onnes, eaz. Leiden, E. IJdo, 1922,
pp. 435” / translated with courtesy of the Kamerlingh Onnes Laboratory, Leiden - Insti-
tute of Physics, Leiden University

†new address eﬀective September 1, 2005: Department of Astronomy, University of

California, Berkeley, California 94720, e-mail: schmekel -at- berkeley.edu

1

with metal atoms. This theory was remarkably successful in the sense that
it could predict the coeﬃcient in the Wiedemann-Franz law from the ratio
of mechanical and electric mass of the electron with remarkable precision.
It also explained qualitatively the appearance of thermo-electricity, the Hall
eﬀect etc. No matter how the theory of electron conductivity may develop in
the future one main aspect of this theory may remain valid for good, namely
the hypothesis that electric conductivity is based on the motion of electrons.

The Drude formula for the speciﬁc resistance ω of metals is

(1)

(2)

ω =

2m
ǫ2

u
nl

3mu2 = kT ;

where m is the mass, ǫ the charge of the electron, u the average velocity, n the
volume density and l is the free path length of the electron. Unfortunately,
there are three unknown temperature functions u, n, l in the theory; one of
them (u) is related to the absolute temperature according to

n has to be small compared to the mean density of atoms ensuring that the
electrons do not contribute to the speciﬁc heat of the metal. To what extent
is Eq. (1) suitable to explain the dependence of the speciﬁc resistance on the
temperature? You will get into diﬃculties. According to Eq. (2) u should
be proportional to √T . One does not expect a signiﬁcant dependence of
the path length l on the temperature. One would have to expect a rapid
increase in the number n of electric dissociated atoms as the temperature
increases, because the dissociation of a weakly dissociated substance grows
rapidly with T . One ought to think that the resistance of a pure metal de-
creases as the temperature increases. However, this is not the case since it
is well known that the resistance is proportional to T at high temperatures.
Considering this characteristic fact due to Eq. (1) one would have to look
at the hypotheses: the number n of free electrons is independent of temper-
ature; the free path length of the electrons is inversely proportional to the
root of the energy content of the metal. With Eq. (1) having been modiﬁed
like this Kamerlingh Onnes was able to describe the properties of metals in
the non-superconducting state with amazing precision. The hypothesis of
the dependence of the path length on the thermal agitation is not too pe-
culiar; one could imagine that the electron in an agitation-free metal moves

2

as if in empty space, but inhomogeneities due to thermal excitations provide
electric ﬁelds which deﬂect the electrons. The hypothesis of the temperature-
independence of n is questionable, though. Also, it may be hard to account
for the relation between l and heat content in a quantitative manner.
In
any case the success of Kamerlingh Onnes’s thoughts prove that the thermal
agitation of metals (not of electrons) is mainly the resistance-provisory mo-
ment. Only this may explain why the resistance at high temperatures obeys
the law

and not the law1

ω = α(T

θ)

−

ω = αT

(3)

(4)

and why the resistance of non-superconducting metals becomes independent
of temperature at low temperatures. The curvature of the resistance curve at
low temperatures is thereby indirectly related to quantum theory. Actually,
according to this notion the resistance of non-superconducting metals should
approach zero as the temperature decreases, but it is found that the resis-
tance approaches a non-zero limit. Kamerlingh Onnes found that the actual
limit is inﬂuenced very strongly by small amounts of impurities. Further-
more, these impurities shift the whole resistance curve vertically, i.e. they
cause an “additive resistance” such that the resistance of the pure homoge-
neous metal could have zero resistance as the limit. It should be mentioned
that this remarkable fact is incompatible with the explanation provided by
Eq. (1) . It can be shown easily that in the presence of opportunities for
a collision a constant is added to 1/l. However, this constant does not al-
ter the resistance by a temperature-independent amount, but rather by an
amount proportional to u (or u/n, respectively); under no circumstances can
u assumed to be temperature-independent, because otherwise the only suc-
cess of the theory, i.e. the explanation of the Wiedemann-Franz law, would
have to be sacriﬁced. For the same reason it may be hard to ﬁnd a the-
oretical explanation of the constant resistance of metals with impurities at
low temperatures. This outline shows that the thermal electron theory fails
even for common conductivity - not to mention superconductivity. On the

1cf. e.g. Comm. No. 142a, Versl. Ak. Amsterdam, June 1914, Fig. 2 for Sn, Cu, Cd

and Suppl. No. 34b, Report third Int. Congr. Refr. Chicago, Fig. 5 for Hg

3

other hand it is conceivable that the Wiedemann-Franz law follows from a
diﬀerent theory which attributes electrical and thermal conductivity to an
electron-mechanism.

The breakdown of the theory became obvious after superconductivity
of metals had been discovered. Kamerlingh Onnes made a convincing case
that superconductivity cannot be based on electrons with thermal agitation
by showing that non-superconducting wires with a thin coating made of
a superconducting material become superconducting. The electrons in the
coating would have to penetrate into the non-superconductor and would lose
their preferred mean motion which causes the current. The system would
have to be non-superconducting.

If one wanted to explain superconductivity by [the presence of] free elec-
trons one would have to view them as agitation-free such that the negative
electricity in the current-carrying superconductor has no other motion besides
the motion that makes up the electric current. Such a view is implausible not
only because of the Rutherford-Bohr theory, in which strong electric ﬁelds
exist in the interior or a body, but also because of the fact that supercon-
ductivity is destroyed by moderate magnetic ﬁelds. Because the transverse
forces due to the Lorentz force (Hall force) would be compensated electro-
statically at the surface by charge accumulation in such a way that no eﬀect
of the magnetic ﬁeld on the electrons would be expected.

It seems that electric conductivity has to be attributed to the periph-
eral electrons of the atoms which move around the nucleus at high velocity.
Indeed, according to the Bohr theory it seems hardly conceivable that the
circulating peripheral high-energy electrons (e.g. the ones of mercury vapor)
lose a signiﬁcant part of their velocity at condensation which is comparatively
speaking not too constraining energetically. Given our present knowledge it
seems as if free electrons did not exist in metals. Then metallic conductivity
is caused by atoms exchanging their peripheral electrons. If an atom received
an electron from a neighbouring atom without giving an electron to another
neighbouring atom at the same time it would suﬀer from gigantic energetic
changes which cannot occur in conserved superconducting currents without
expenses in energy. It seems unavoidable that superconducting currents are
carried by closed chains of molecules (conduction chains) whose electrons en-
dure ongoing cyclic exchanges. Therefore, Kamerlingh Onnes compares the
closed currents in superconductors to Ampere’s molecular currents.

Given our ignorance of quantum mechanics of composite systems we are
far away from being able to convert these vague ideas into a theory. We

4

can only connect to some questions which can be decided on experimental
grounds. It may be seen unlikely that diﬀerent atoms form conduction chains
with each other. Perhaps the transition from a superconducting metal to
a diﬀerent one is never superconducting. Furthermore, it is reasonable to
assume for this reason that so far only those metals which have a relatively
low melting point turned out to be superconducting; because in such [metals]
impurities are not present in the state of a real solution, but rather in the
state of small complexes which are released in the ductile state of the metal.
Furtheremore, there is the possibility that conduction chains cannot carry
arbitrarily small currents but only currents with a certain ﬁnite value. This
would also be accessible to experimental veriﬁcation.

It is not too far stretched to assume that conduction chains can be de-
stroyed by magnetic ﬁelds - it is almost necessary! The same is true for
the temperature induced motion which can destroy conduction chains if it
is strong enough and if the hν energy quanta that are being created are
big enough. This may explain the transformation of superconductors into
ordinary conductors and maybe even the sharp temperature limit of super-
conductors by means of an increase in temperature. Electric conductivity at
ordinary temperature may be based on ongoing thermal creation and anni-
hilation of conduction chains.

Phantasizing can only be excused by the momentary quandary of the the-
ory. It is obvious that new ways of serving the facts of superconductivity jus-
tice have to be found. It seems probable but not certain that the conduction
at ordinary temperature is based on thermal motion of ongoing perturbed
superconductivity. This thought is plausible considering that the frequency
of the transition of the electrons to the neighbouring atom should be closely
related to the circulation frequency of electrons in an isolated atom. One
concludes that the elementary currents of the individual conduction chains
could be signiﬁcant.
If this idea of elementary currents caused by quanta
proves correct it will be evident that such chains can never contain diﬀerent
atoms.

P.S.
The last speculation (which by the way is not new2) is contradicted by
an important experiment which was conducted by Kamerlingh Onnes in the
last couple of months. He showed that at the interface between two super-
conductors (lead and tin) no measureable Ohm resistance appears.

2cf. e.g. F. Haber, Sitz.ber. Ak. Berlin, 1919, pp. 506

5

Acknowledgments by the translator
It is a pleasure to thank the Kamerlingh Onnes Laboratory of the Institute
of Physics at Leiden University for kind permission to translate this article.
Also, I would like to thank Patricia T. Viele from the Edna McConnell Clark
Physical Sciences Library at Cornell University in Ithaca, New York for her
support and Neil W. Ashcroft for interesting discussions at the lunch table.

6

