5
0
0
2
 
c
e
D
 
9
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
t
s
i
h
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
2
6
2
2
1
5
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Hot water can freeze faster than cold?!?

Monwhea Jeng∗
Physics Department, Box 1654, Southern Illinois University Edwardsville, Edwardsville, IL, 62025

We review the Mpemba eﬀect, where intially hot water freezes faster than initially cold water.
While the eﬀect appears impossible at ﬁrst sight, it has been seen in numerous experiments, was
reported on by Aristotle, Francis Bacon, and Descartes, and has been well-known as folklore around
the world.
It has a rich and fascinating history, which culminates in the dramatic story of the
secondary school student, Erasto Mpemba, who reintroduced the eﬀect to the twentieth century
scientiﬁc community. The phenomenon, while simple to describe, is deceptively complex, and illus-
trates numerous important issues about the scientiﬁc method: the role of skepticism in scientiﬁc
inquiry, the inﬂuence of theory on experiment and observation, the need for precision in the state-
ment of a scientiﬁc hypothesis, and the nature of falsiﬁability. We survey proposed theoretical
mechanisms for the Mpemba eﬀect, and the results of modern experiments on the phenomenon.
Studies of the observation that hot water pipes are more likely to burst than cold water pipes are
also described.

I.

INTRODUCTION

The Mpemba eﬀect occurs when two bodies of water,
identical in every way, except that one is at a higher tem-
perature than the other, are exposed to identical subzero
surroundings, and the initially hotter water freezes ﬁrst.
The eﬀect appears theoretically impossible at ﬁrst sight.
Nevertheless, it has been observed in numerous experi-
ments, and we will see that it is in fact possible.

Readers who are quite certain that the eﬀect is forbid-
den by the laws of thermodynamics should pause for a
moment to do two things. First, to try to explain, as pre-
cisely as possible, why it is impossible. And second, to
decide how to respond to a non-scientist who insists that
they have observed the Mpemba eﬀect in a home experi-
ment. Whether or not the eﬀect is real, careful consider-
ation of these tasks will bring up a wealth of important
issues about the scientiﬁc method, that can be under-
stood and discussed by students without any knowledge
of advanced physics.

In section II, we describe early observations and ex-
periments on this phenomenon. The eﬀect was discussed
by, among others, Aristotle, Roger Bacon, Francis Ba-
con, and Descartes. The eﬀect was repeatedly discussed
in support of an incorrect theory of heat, and appears
to have been forgotten once more modern conceptions
of heat, which it appears to contradict, were developed.
In fact, we will see that Kuhn incorrectly claimed that
modern experiments cannot replicate these early obser-
vations. In section III, we describe the reintroduction of
this phenomenon to the modern scientiﬁc community by
a secondary school student, Erasto Mpemba. Mpemba’s
dramatic story cautions against dismissing the observa-
tions of non-scientists, and raises questions about the
degree to which our theoretical understanding can and
should bias our acceptance and interpretation of experi-
ments.

In section IV, we see that that the Mpemba eﬀect also
provides a good illustration of the need to formulate a sci-
entiﬁc hypothesis carefully, and the need for theory in the
design of an experiment. We see that the Mpemba eﬀect

is much harder to study experimentally than it might ap-
pear at ﬁrst glance, and discuss some common problems
with lay experiments on the Mpemba eﬀect. Analysis of
the experiments naturally brings up Popper’s thesis that
a scientiﬁc hypothesis must be falsiﬁable.

The discussions in sections II-IV should be compre-
hensible regardless of why the Mpemba eﬀect occurs, and
indeed, regardless of whether it occurs. It is not until sec-
tion V that we discuss possible theoretical mechanisms
for the eﬀect, and readers uninterested in the history and
background can jump straight to this section. We explain
why a common proof that the Mpemba eﬀect is impos-
sible, is in fact ﬂawed. Multiple explanations have been
proposed for the eﬀect. Evaporative cooling is one of
the strongest explanations, but the eﬀects of convection,
dissolved gasses, and the surrounding environment, may
all also be important. We discuss the results of modern
experiments on the eﬀect, which are confusing, but for
interesting reasons.

It has sometimes been reported that hot water pipes
are more likely to burst from freezing than adjacent cold
water pipes. Experiments on this phenomenon, which
we discuss in section VI, have been more conclusive than
those on the Mpemba eﬀect, and target supercooling as
the cause. The experiments on pipes are closely related to
the Mpemba eﬀect, because they provide a clear situation
where the water can “remember” what has happened to
it. In section VII, we look at the possible importance of
supercooling in the Mpemba eﬀect, ultimately concluding
that its role is unclear. Finally, in section VIII we discuss
possibilities for future experiments that could be done by
students.

II. EXPERIMENTS BEFORE THE SCIENTIFIC
REVOLUTION

The Mpemba eﬀect has long been known in the West-
ern world (although not by this name until fairly re-
cently). Around 350 B.C., Aristotle wrote1

If water has been previously heated, this contributes

to the rapidity with which it freezes: for it cools more
quickly. (Thus so many people when they want to
cool water quickly ﬁrst stand it in the sun: and the
inhabitants of Pontus when they encamp on the ice
to ﬁsh. . . pour hot water on their rods because it
freezes quicker, using the ice like solder to ﬁx their
rods.) And water that condenses in the air in warm
districts and seasons gets hot quickly.

Aristotle used this observation in support of antiperista-
sis, which is the “sudden increase in the intensity of a
quality as a result of being surrounded by its contrary
quality, for instance, the sudden heating of a warm body
when surrounded by a cold.”2,3

While the idea of antiperistasis today sounds ridicu-
lous, with the hindsight of our modern understanding of
heat, energy, and temperature, it should be remembered
that Aristotle was working without these paradigms, and
indeed, without a thermometer. The fact that ice re-
quires cold, yet hail comes in the summer, rather than
the winter, requires an explanation—Aristotle’s explana-
tion was antiperistasis. Later, a number of medieval sci-
entists used antiperistasis to explain the (apparent) facts
that bodies of water are colder in the summer, and that
human bodies are hotter in the winter2. While we can
now explain these observations with our modern theory
of heat, the explanations are not obvious. The concept of
temperature, and the zeroth law of thermodynamics, are
quite counterintuitive to anyone who has touched metal
and wood, outside on a cold day.

In the 13th century, well before the Scientiﬁc Revolu-
tion, Roger Bacon wrote Opus Majus, in which he argued
repeatedly for the importance of experiments in science.
He wrote4

Moreover, it is generally believed that hot water
freezes more quickly than cold water in vessels, and
the argument in support of this is advanced that con-
trary is excited by contrary, just like enemies meet-
ing each other. But it is certain that cold water
freezes more quickly for any one who makes the ex-
periment. People attribute this to Aristotle in the
second book of Meteorologics; but he certainly does
not make this statement, but he does make one like
it, by which they have been deceived, namely, that if
cold water and hot water are poured on a cold place,
as upon ice, the hot water freezes more quickly, and
this is true. But if hot water and cold are placed in
two vessels, the cold will freeze more quickly. There-
fore all things must be veriﬁed by experience.
What is particularly interesting about this is that
Roger Bacon agrees that hot water can, under some cir-
cumstances, freeze faster than cold water, but argues that
speciﬁcation of the precise experimental conditions is im-
portant. We will see that this is a crucial observation,
equally important in discussions about modern experi-
ments on the Mpemba eﬀect.

In the Middle Ages, debates raged over whether ob-
jects could only be cooled by extrinsic sources, or whether
some objects might be able to cool themselves. In the

2

.

middle of this debate, around 1461, Giovanni Marliani
reported on experiments, described here by Clagett5:
. To support his contention that heated water
.
freezes more rapidly [than cold], Marliani ﬁrst points
to a passage in Aristotle’s Meteorologica aﬃrming it.
However, [Marliani] does not depend on Aristotle’s
statement alone. He claims that not only has he of-
ten tested its truth during a very cold winter night,
but that anyone may do so. You take four ounces
of boiling water and four ounces of non-heated wa-
ter and place them in similar containers. Then the
containers are exposed to the air on a cold winter’s
morning at the same time. The result is that the
boiling water will freeze the faster.
The belief in the Mpemba eﬀect continued strong into
the 17th century. Francis Bacon and Descartes both
wrote extensive works on the scientiﬁc method, and ex-
periments, and both wrote about the Mpemba eﬀect. In
the Novum Organum, Francis Bacon wrote6

. . . water a little warmed is more easily frozen than
that which is quite cold. . .

And in 1637, Descartes wrote about this phenomenon in
Les Meteores, a work which was published attached to his
more famous Discourse on Method7. He emphasized the
importance of experiment, described how to analyze the
density-dependence of water, and stated results about
the freezing times:

We can see this by experiment, if we ﬁll a beaker—
or some other such container having a long, straight
neck—with hot water, and expose it to freezing cold
air; for the water level will go down visibly, little
by little, until the water reaches a certain level of
coldness, after which it will gradually swell and rise,
until it is completely frozen. Thus the same cold
which will have condensed or shrunk it in the begin-
ning will rarefy it afterwards. And we can also see
by experiment that water which has been kept hot
for a long time freezes faster than any other sort,
because those of its parts which can least cease to
bend evaporate while it is being heated. (Emphasis
added.)
A modern writer on Descartes has commented on the
italicized statement: “This statement, which the sim-
plest of experiments could have refuted, was repeated
with elaborate details in a letter to Mersenne, and it em-
phasizes Descartes’ readiness to rely on `a priori conclu-
sions”8. But this modern writer’s position is contradicted
by the letter to Mersenne, in which Descartes makes clear
that he has, in fact, done this experiment. In this 1638
letter, Descrates wrote9,10:

I appreciate once again what you have written me
that my reputation is at stake in my response to Mr.
Fermat, in which I assure you that there is not one
.
single word that I would like to have changed.
I dare to assure you that there is nothing incorrect,
because I did these experiments myself, and particu-
larly the one which you commented on of the hot wa-

.

ter that freezes more quickly than cold; where I said
not hot and cold, but that water that one has held
for a long time over the ﬁre freezes more quickly than
the other; because in order to correctly do this ex-
periment, one must ﬁrst have boiled the water, then
let it cool oﬀ, until it has the same degree of cool-
ness as that in a fountain, and having tested it with
a thermometer, then draw water from that fountain,
and put the two waters in the same quantity in same
vases. But there are few people who are capable of
correctly doing these experiments, and often, in do-
ing them poorly, one ﬁnds the complete opposite of
what one should ﬁnd. (Emphasis in original)
As with Roger Bacon’s earlier experiment, we again see
that the details of the experiment are crucial. Descartes
is not measuring the time for the hot water to freeze, but
is saying that when water has been heated, it is some-
how changed so that it cools more easily, even after being
brought back to room temperature. While the observa-
tion described is diﬀerent than our modern statement
of the Mpemba eﬀect, it is similar in that some sort of
history-dependence (i.e. memory) of the water is implied
by the results. Descartes’s letter also indicates that both
he, and others, have done this experiment, and that the
results are contradictory, a problem that we will also see
in more modern experiments.

With the advent of the modern theory of heat, these
earlier observations were forgotten. Since these experi-
ments appear to contradict what we know about heat, it
is natural to dismiss them as mistakes.

.

.

Presentations in textbooks typically show the progress
of science as a simple, straight-line progression, with ex-
periments pointing in a straightforward and unambigu-
ous manner to new scientiﬁc theories. But, as Kuhn has
pointed out, the development of scientiﬁc theories is not
so simple11. Most of the time, scientists are engaged in
what Kuhn calls “normal science,” during which research
is a strenuous and devoted attempt to force na-
“.
ture into the conceptual boxes supplied by professional
education. . . .”12 When scientists are working under a
certain paradigm, results that cannot be forced into the
existing paradigm may be ignored, as attention is focused
on experiments that appear more promising for advanc-
ing knowledge. To give but one of Kuhn’s examples13:
In the eighteenth century, for example, little atten-
tion was paid to the experiments that measured elec-
trical attention with devices like the pan balance.
Because they yielded neither consistent nor simple
results, they could not be used to articulate the
paradigm from which they derived. Therefore, they
remained mere facts, unrelated and unrelatable to
the continuing progress of electrical research. Only
in retrospect, posessed of a subsequent paradigm,
can we see what characteristics of electrical phenom-
ena they display.

Whatever one’s opinion on Kuhn’s more controversial
theories, it is clear that scientists’ theoretical views in-
ﬂuence what experiments they choose to do, to trust and

3

to think about.

The Mpemba eﬀect illustrates the points raised by
Kuhn. In modern times, because the Mpemba eﬀect ap-
pears to contradict modern theories of heat, scientists are
much more skeptical, or even dismissive, of experiments
that observe the Mpemba eﬀect. Furthermore, like the
eighteenth century experiments with pan balances, ex-
periments on the Mpemba eﬀect, for reasons we will dis-
cuss, yield “neither consistent nor simple results.” Thus,
the Mpemba eﬀect, while interesting, is a factual curios-
ity, and not fundamental to our modern understanding
of heat.

In The Structure of Scientiﬁc Revolutions, Kuhn
brieﬂy mentions these experiments by Marliani and Ba-
con14:
. the natural histories often juxtapose [correct]
.
.
descriptions.
. with others, say, heating by an-
tiperistasis (or by cooling), that we are now quite
unable to conﬁrm.

.

Kuhn does not cite any experimental evidence that we
are unable to conﬁrm these older results, and one sus-
pects that he is simply assuming this point15. In fact, as
we will see, at the time that Kuhn wrote this, there were
multiple papers conﬁrming the existence of the Mpemba
eﬀect. Kuhn thus unintentionally, and ironically, demon-
strates how our theoretical expectations can color our
experimental beliefs.

III. ERASTO B. MPEMBA AND 20TH
CENTURY KNOWLEDGE

This strange phenomenon was reintroduced to the
modern scientiﬁc community by Erasto Mpemba, a sec-
ondary school student in Tanzania, in 1963. Mpemba
told his story in Physics Education16. Mpemba and his
fellow students were making ice cream, which used a mix-
ture that included boiled milk. Because excessively hot
objects could damage the refrigerator, they were sup-
posed to let their mixture cool before putting it in the re-
frigerator. However, space in the refrigerator was scarce,
and when another student put his mixture in without
boiling the milk, Mpemba decided to put his hot mix-
ture in, without waiting for it to cool. Later, Mpemba
found that his hot mixture froze ﬁrst.

Mpemba asked his teacher for an explanation, but
his teacher said Mpemba must have been confused.
When the teacher later covered Newton’s law of cool-
ing, Mpemba persisted in his questioning. The teacher
responded that “Well, all I can say is that is Mpemba
physics and not the universal physics,” and from then
on the teacher and the class would mock his mistakes
by saying “That is Mpemba’s mathematics,” or “That is
Mpemba’s physics.”

Mpemba ran more systematic experiments, both with
water and milk, and continued to get similar results.
When Dr. Osborne, a professor at a nearby university,
visited Mpemba’s school, Mpemba asked him why water

at 100OC froze faster than water at 35OC. Upon return-
ing to his university, Dr. Osborne asked a technician to
test Mpemba’s question. When Dr. Osborne later asked
for the results, “The technician reported that the wa-
ter that started hot did indeed freeze ﬁrst and added in
a moment of unscientiﬁc enthusiasm ‘But we’ll keep on
repeating the experiment until we get the right result’ ”
(emphasis added)17. But future experiments gave sim-
ilar results, and Mpemba and Osborne later published
their results16.
In the same year, Dr. Kell of Canada
independently reported the phenomenon, along with a
theoretical explanation that we will consider later18.

Subsequent discussions in journals showed that the ef-
fect was already known and believed by non-scientists
in diverse regions of the world. Kell stated that it was
widely believed in Canada, and that

Some will say that a car should not be washed with
hot water because the water will freeze on it more
quickly than cold water will, or that a skating rink
should be ﬂooded with hot water because it will
freeze more quickly.

Mpemba reported that after his initial experience, he
found that ice cream makers in Tanga City, Tanzania,
used hot liquids to make the ice cream faster. British
letters to the New Scientist reveal a wealth of lay ob-
servations. One writer stated that it was well-known
that in the winter, hot water pipes were more likely to
freeze than cold water pipes19 (an issue we consider in
section VI). Another stated that the phenomenon was
well-known in the food-freezing industry20. A number
of letters reported that their (non-scientist) friends and
family had known of this eﬀect even in the 1920’s21,22,23.
One writer was a science teacher, whose story closely par-
allels Mpemba’s. The teacher describes his experiences
with a student who asked him why hot water froze faster
than cold24

. . . I told him that it was most unlikely, but he
replied that he had seen it happen when his mother
threw out her washing water onto the path. I ex-
plained to him that the particles in the hot liquid
would be escaping more readily to the atmosphere
due to evaporation and that this would leave a thin-
ner layer of liquid to freeze than in the colder one
where the particles would be escaping more slowly.
He was not, however, convinced, and a few days later
he reported that he had placed two cans, one con-
taining hot water, and the other cold water, outside
and that the hot one was still the ﬁrst to freeze.
Finally, he challenged me to explain that one, if I
could. Still in no doubt I criticized his experiment
and suggested he attempt a more accurate one under
laboratory conditions.

He obtained two identical specimen jars and
placed hot water (approx 50O C) in one and colder
water (approx 20O C) in the other; both tops were
left oﬀ and they were placed in the freezing com-
partment of a refrigerator. To my disbelief, and his

4

delight, the hotter one was indeed the ﬁrst to form
a layer of ice on the surface.

He was, to say the least, no longer quite so im-

pressed by my capabilities as a Science Teacher.

The skepticism with which scientists react to the
Mpemba eﬀect is quite common.
In this author’s ex-
perience, scientists are much more likely to react with
disbelief than laypersons; this is not surprising, since sci-
entists know enough to “know that this is impossible.”

Mpemba’s story provides a dramatic parable against
dismissing the observations of non-scientists. But his
story is particularly interesting because it is more than
just a story of bad, close-minded, scientists. There is, of
course, no excuse for the Tanzanian teacher’s mockery of
Mpemba. But is it “unscientiﬁc” for scientists to, upon
hearing of the Mpemba eﬀect, immediately suspect er-
rors in the experiment? Kuhn emphasizes that with the
operation of “normal science,” scientists interpret exper-
iments in light of the reigning paradigm—i.e. with their
preexisting theoretical understanding11.

What is interesting about the Mpemba eﬀect is that
unlike the examples commonly given in science text-
books, where theory and experiment march hand-in-
hand, always leading to further progress, here theory
(rightly or wrongly) prevents acceptance of experiment.
We are certainly not arguing that the reaction of the sci-
entiﬁc community to surprising experimental results is
arbitrary, or necessarily hostile. Our point is simply that
the reaction to an experiment depends signiﬁcantly on
how well that experiment matches accepted theoretical
preconceptions. Because experimental claims can be in
error, scientists do not just accept all published claims.
While few scientists would ﬁnd this claim controversial,
it is quite diﬀerent than the impression one gets from sci-
ence textbooks, and from what appears in certain pos-
itivistic views of science. The Mpemba eﬀect provides
a lovely case for considering these issues, because while
it provokes skepticism, it has been observed in multiple
experiments; yet, in support of the skeptical position,
we will see that the experimental results are not entirely
consistent, and that the theoretical situation is still un-
settled.

IV. WHAT IS THE QUESTION, AND IS IT
SCIENTIFIC?

To analyze the Mpemba eﬀect, we ﬁrst need to pre-
cisely state what we are trying to test. At ﬁrst sight, the
question is quite simple: “Does hot water freeze faster
than cold?” However, a little thought shows that this
formulation is not adequate. Clearly, a small drop of hot
water can freeze faster than a cold ocean. Hot water in a
freezer will freeze faster than cold water on a warm day
(as the latter will not freeze at all). These examples are
silly, but illustrate the need to state the question clearly.
A better second attempt at stating the problem might
be “Given two bodies of water, which are identical in all

parameters (mass, shape, surroundings, etc. . .), except
that one is initially at a higher uniform temperature than
the other, the hotter water will freeze ﬁrst.” But further
thought shows that this cannot be correct. If the initially
hotter water is at 99.9999OC, and the initially colder
water is at 0.0001OC, then the initially cold water is just
seconds away from freezing, and it is clear that the hot
water cannot possibly overtake it. Furthermore, there is
clearly no reason to expect the Mpemba eﬀect to occur
for all possible initial parameters.

So a better phrasing might be “There exists a set of
initial parameters, and a pair of temperatures, such that
given two bodies of water identical in these parameters,
and diﬀering only in their initial uniform temperatures,
the hot one will freeze sooner.” This is a much better
statement of the question, although we will see later that
deﬁciencies remain.

Once the Mpemba eﬀect is properly stated, it is clear
that we are only looking for some set of parameters,
such that if we plot freezing time versus initial tempera-
ture, there is some range of the graph that is downwards
sloping—not that there exist initial parameters such that
the graph is downwards-sloping all the way from 0OC to
100OC, or that the graph has downwards-sloping parts
for any set of initial parameters. This is logically nec-
essary for the problem to be at all reasonable, but this
point is not always appreciated in popular discussions.
Consider the discussion of the Mpemba eﬀect in Ann
Landers’ column, as described in Myth-Informed25

[Does] warm water [freeze] faster than cold water. .
. The redoubtable Ann Landers got into an ongo-
ing row with readers in 1983 when she addressed
this question, as well as the related cosmic issue
of whether cold water boils faster than hot water.
She “went to the top” and consulted Dr. Jermore
Weisner, chancellor of the Massacusetts Institute of
Technology, who kicked the problem over to the MIT
dean of science, Dr. John W. Deutch. Landers never
recorded what Deutch thought of being given such a
problem by an advice column, but the eminent scien-
tist reported “Neither statement was true.” Where-
upon “Self-Reliant in Riverdale”. . . upbraided her
for using “argument by authority” rather than doing
her own experiment. “Self-reliant” said she reached
the same conclusion as Deutch by using a pan of hot
water, a thermometer, a stove, a refrigerator, and a
watch with a second hand.
In his popular column, The Straight Dope, Cecil Adams

also discussed the Mpemba eﬀect26:

.

. I carefully measured a whole passel of water
.
into the Straight Dope tea kettle and boiled it for
about ﬁve minutes. This was so I could compare the
freezing rate of boiled H2O with that of regular hot
water from the tap. (Somehow I had the idea that
water that had been boiled would freeze faster.)

Finally I put equal quantities of each type into
trays in the freezer, checked the temp (125 degrees
Fahrenheit all around), and sat back to wait, timing

5

the process with my brand new Swatch watch, whose
precision and smart styling have made it the number
one choice of scientists the world over.

I subsequently did the same with two trays of cold
water, which had been chilled down to a starting
temperature of 38 degrees.

The results? The cold water froze about 10 or
15 minutes faster than the hot water, and there was
no detectable diﬀerence between the boiled water
and the other kind. Another old wives’ tale thus
emphatically bites the dust. Science marches on.

These discussions fail to appreciate that a single test
cannot show that the eﬀect never occurs for any param-
eters and initial temperatures.

Further consideration of this point brings up another
issue. Logically, our statement about the Mpemba eﬀect
can never be proven false. Regardless of how many exper-
iments Cecil Adams runs, a true believer in the Mpemba
eﬀect can always claim that the eﬀect occurs for other
sets of initial parameters, that diﬀer slightly from the
ones that Cecil Adams used. Popper has famously ar-
gued that the hallmark of a scientiﬁc hypothesis is that
it be falsiﬁable27. That is, not that it can be proven
true, but that it can be proven false. Is our most recent
statement of the Mpemba eﬀect thus unscientiﬁc?

It is not unusual that a scientiﬁc phenomenon, strictly
speaking, cannot be proven impossible, because the pa-
rameter space in which it might occur is, in principle,
inﬁnite. However, if we search a “representative sam-
ple” of the parameter space over which the phenomenon
might be thought to occur, and the phenomenon is not
seen, that would be fairly convincing evidence against it.
We thus need a list of experimental parameters that
we might vary when studying the Mpemba eﬀect. The
list is rather long (inﬁnite). On a ﬁrst page, we might
list the mass of the water, the shape of the container, the
surrounding environment of the refrigerator, and the gas
content of the water. Note that several items on this list
are not single parameters—characterizing the shape of
the container requires multiple parameters. We may also
want to include boolean parameters, such as whether the
container has a lid. On a second page, we might list the
color of the container, the electrical conductivity of the
walls of the refrigerator, the gender of the experimenter,
etc.
. If we simply list all the parameters we might
think of, the list is inﬁnite, and we are at a complete
loss as to how to proceed with an experiment. Without
a theoretical framework in which to design and conduct
the experiment, we are reduced to randomly collecting
facts, such as the color of the container, and the situation
is impossible. However, we have strong theoretical rea-
sons for ignoring all the parameters on the second page,
and the experimenter can safely ignore the color of the
container, neither varying, nor recording, its color.

.

Unfortunately, as we will see in next section, all the
items of the ﬁrst page can plausibly be considered im-
portant for the Mpemba eﬀect. Furthermore, their ef-
fects are not independent of one another. But an exper-

imenter can hardly be expected to establish a vast mul-
tidimensional array of containers of diﬀerent dimensions
and shapes, independently varying masses, gas contents,
and refrigeration methods.

We are, of course, not claiming that scientiﬁc investi-
gation of the Mpemba eﬀect is impossible. But a com-
mon response, upon ﬁrst hearing of the Mpemba eﬀect,
is that it should be a straightforward matter to study
experimentally. But for even this (deceptively) simple
problem, productive experimental design requires at least
some theoretical understanding of why the eﬀect might
occur—otherwise we will not know whether we should be
paying attention to, for example, the gas content of the
water. We will see in the next section that because the
time to freezing is sensitive to all the “ﬁrst page” param-
eters, the experimental results become very confusing.

Our statement of the Mpemba eﬀect now reads “There
exists a set of initial parameters (water mass, gas con-
tent of water, container shape and type, and refrigeration
method), and a pair of temperatures, such that given two
bodies of water identical in these parameters, and diﬀer-
ing only in their temperatures, the hot one will freeze
sooner.” One ﬁnal diﬃculty that must be considered is
how to deﬁne the time of freezing—are we considering
it frozen when ice crystals ﬁrst appear, or only when
the entire body of water is frozen? Or, to simplify the
experiment, we might just measure the time until some
speciﬁed part of the water reaches 0O C. This might seem
like a minor issue, but we will see in section VII, on su-
percooling, that it is potentially crucial.

V. HOW COULD THE MPEMBA EFFECT
OCCUR?

We have deliberately avoided discussing the theoreti-
cal explanations for the Mpemba eﬀect until now. We
have done this both because the historical reaction to
the Mpemba eﬀect is only comprehensible in light of the
eﬀect’s apparent inconsistency with modern conceptions
of heat, and to emphasize the need for an experimen-
tal framework when designing experiments on the ef-
fect. Here, we discuss some proposed mechanisms for
the Mpemba eﬀect, but will not attempt to analyze their
relative plausibility in depth.

To see how the eﬀect might occur, it is useful to care-
fully think about why the eﬀect appears impossible. The
careful reader may already have come up with a proof of
impossibility that goes something like this:

Suppose that the initial temperatures for the hot
and cold water are 70OC and 30OC. Then the 70OC
must ﬁrst cool to 30OC, after which it must do ev-
erything the 30OC water must do. Since the 70OC
water has to do everything the 30OC water must do,
plus a little more, it must take longer to freeze.

6

The problem with this proof is that it implicitly as-
sumes that the water is completely characterized by a
single parameter—the temperature. We need to think of
a parameter that might change during the course of the
experiment; then, the 70OC water cooled to 30OC will
not be the same as the water initially at 30OC.

One possible parameter is the mass of the water. Both
bodies of water initially have the same mass. But if the
initially hotter water loses mass to evaporation, then the
70OC water cooled to 30OC will, having less mass, be
easier to freeze (i.e. less energy will need to be removed
to cool and freeze it). This is one of the strongest theo-
retical explanations for the Mpemba eﬀect. Kell numer-
ically integrated the heat loss equations, assuming that
the cooling was by evaporation alone, and that the mass
lost to evaporation never recondensed—-he found that
with these assumptions, there were initial temperatures
where the hot water would freeze faster than the cold wa-
ter18. But this does not prove that evaporative cooling
is the only factor behind the Mpemba eﬀect. A number
of experimenters have claimed that the amount of mass
they lost to evaporation was insuﬃcient to explain their
results28,29,30. And Wojciechowski et. al. observed the
Mpemba efect in a closed container, which further sug-
gests that evaporative cooling is not the sole cause of the
eﬀect31.

A more complex “parameter” is the temperature dis-
tribution of the water. As the water cools it will develop
convection currents, and the temperature will become
non-uniform. This also defeats the impossibility proof
above, since the water is no longer characterized by a
single number. Analysis of the situation is now quite
complex, since we are no longer considering a single pa-
rameter, but a scalar function, and computational ﬂuid
dynamics is notoriously diﬃcult. Nevertheless, at least
one general point can be made. For temperatures above
4OC, hot water is less dense than cold water, and will
thus rise to the top. So we can generally expect that when
the 70OC water has cooled to an average temperature of
30OC, the top of the water will be hotter than 30OC,
and the bottom of the water will be below 30OC. If the
water primarily cools at its surface, the non-uniform dis-
tribution with an average temperature of 30OC will thus
lose heat faster than uniformly 30OC water. Consistent
with this, Deeson found that gentle stirring substantially
raised to time to freezing32. Convection could work in
concert with other factors, such as evaporative cooling.
Convection currents are sensitive to the shape and di-
mensions of the container, so this explanation may play
very diﬀerent roles for diﬀerent container shapes.

This brings up the question of what “parameters”
should be associated with the surrounding air. Modeling
the cooling process should take into account the convec-
tion currents of the air, which will depend on the shape
of the refrigerator. Firth’s studies of the Mpemba eﬀect
found that this was an important factor33:

A good way of systematically analyzing the Mpemba ef-
fect is to think about why this proof is wrong.

What these experiments have shown, however, is
that it is not just the beaker or the initial tempera-

ture of its contents that are important, but that its
environment probably inﬂuences the cooling rates to
a greater extent than any aspect of the beaker itself.
On a related note, one letter writer to The New Scien-
tist suggested that the Mpemba eﬀect could be explained
if the containers of water were sitting on layers of frost.
He argued that the frost conducts heat poorly, and the
hot water causes the layer of frost to melt, establishing
better thermal conduct with the refrigerator ﬂoor34. This
may explain some everyday observations of the eﬀect, but
the experiments published in refereed journals generally
used containers on thermal insulators.

Another possibility is that the hot and cold water,
while they appear identical to the naked eye, diﬀer in
their gas content. Hot water can hold less dissolved gas
than cold water, and the gas content aﬀects the proper-
ties of the water. Mpemba and Osborne’s original exper-
iments were done with recently boiled water, to remove
dissolved air16, as were the experiments by Walker35.
These experiments suggest that dissolved gasses are not
necessary to the Mpemba eﬀect. (Although under typi-
cal conditions, the degassed water will slowly regain dis-
solved gasses from the atmosphere, confusing matters.)
On the other hand, Freeman only observed the Mpemba
eﬀect when carbon dioxide was dissolved in the water30.
Similarly, Wojciechowski et. al. only saw the eﬀect for
non-degassed water31. A number of explanations of have
been proposed for how the amount of dissolved gas could
aﬀect the properties of the water, and thus cause the
Mpemba eﬀect, although they remain largely specula-
tive. One of the few quantitative ﬁndings was by Woj-
ciechowski et. al., who reported that for water saturated
with carbon dioxide, the enthalpy of freezing was smaller
for the initially warmer water (but that preheating was
irrelevant to the enthalphy if dissolved gasses were ab-
sent)31. We will return to the eﬀects of dissolved gases,
and other impurities, when we discuss supercooling.

All the factors discussed are at least potentially im-
portant in explaining the Mpemba eﬀect. What makes
the situation particularly diﬃcult to analyze is that the
factors are not independent of each other—for example,
rates of evaporative cooling will depend on the shape of
the container. The experimental results described here
do not all point to a single, clear, conclusion, and the
reader who further inspects the original papers will ﬁnd
more facts, but will not ﬁnd the overall picture much
clearer16,30,31,32,33,35,41.

Because there are so many factors that can be varied,
and the results of the experiments can depend sensitively
on any of these factors, experimental results are varied
and diﬃcult to organize into a consistent picture. (Recall
Kuhn’s statement about 18th century pan balance exper-
iments, quoted in section II.) It is thus unclear which of
these explanations is the explanation, or indeed, whether
it is appropriate to look for a single explanatory factor,
isolated from the other factors. As Firth wrote33,

There is a wealth of experimental variation in the
problem so that any laboratory undertaking such in-

7

vestigations is guaranteed diﬀerent results from all
others.

In ﬁgure 1 we see experimental results by Walker,
showing the dependence of the time of freezing on the
initial temperature, under various initial conditions. We
see that some graphs show a strong Mpemba eﬀect, some
only show a weak one, and some show no Mpemba eﬀect
at all. This indicates that the cooling is indeed sensi-
tive to a number of parameters. Furthermore, Walker
reported that while his results were mostly repeatable,
he “still obtained strange large deviations on some of the
results.”35.

VI. SUPERCOOLING AND BURSTING WATER
PIPES

It has often been said that hot water pipes burst
from freezing more often than adjacent cold water
pipes19,36,37,38. This is diﬀerent from the Mpemba ef-
fect, but it is similar to it, in requiring the water to have
a “memory.” The mechanism behind the bursting water
pipes is better understood than that behind the Mpemba
eﬀect.

The water pipe claim was ﬁrst investigated by F. C.
Brown, in 191636. He conﬁrmed the claim by taking 100
glass test tubes, and ﬁlling 50 with tap water, and 50
with tap water that had been boiled. After allowing all
water to ﬁrst reach room temperature, he placed them
outside in subzero temperatures. He found that 44 of
the tubes with the boiled water burst, while only 4 of
the tubes with non-boiled water ﬁrst. Since all water
was at the same temperature when placed outside (as
with Descartes’s experiment), and he was looking at the
occurence of bursting, rather than the time until freezing,
these are not tests of the Mpemba eﬀect.

Freezing water will generally supercool. Supercooling
to −4OC to −6OC is common, and much greater super-
cooling can occur for small samples37,39. Once freezing
starts, the ice-water mixture must go to 0OC. So when
freezing begins, a ﬁnite fraction of the water must lose
energy, and turn to ice, transferring heat to the remain-
ing subzero water, whose temperature will rise to 0OC.
Thus, the more supercooling occurs (i.e. the lower the
temperature at which freezing begins), the larger the vol-
ume fraction of water that will freeze initially (i.e. the
larger the fraction of H2O molecules that will be in ice
structures). Also, a certain volume fraction of ice will not
always correspond to the same volume of region spanned
by the ice. The ice will form a dendritic structure, inter-
spersed with liquid. If more supercooling has occurred,
more of the water will have reached subzero tempera-
tures, and the dendritic structure will span a larger re-
gion, for a ﬁxed volume fraction of ice.

Brown observed that the water that had been boiled
ﬁrst, later supercooled, while the nonboiled water did
not, and argued that this diﬀerence was responsible for
the diﬀerence in bursting behavior36. He argued as fol-

8

FIG. 1: Dependence of time of freezing on initial temperature, for various experimental conditions: (a) 50 ml in small beaker
(b) 50 ml in large beaker (c) 50 ml in large beaker in frost-free freezer (d) 100 ml in large beaker, thermocouple near bottom
(e) 100 ml in large beaker, covered with plastic wrap, thermocouple near bottom (f) 100 ml in large beaker, thermocouple near
top. Graph produced from data obtained by Walker35.

lows: If water in a pipe freezes near 0OC, only a small
amount of ice will be formed initially. This ice will be
localized to the coldest regions, at the sides of the pipes,
leaving a hole in the center. With further cooling, the
hole will shrink, but until all the water has frozen, liquid
water will still be able to ﬂow through the hole. Further-
more, the water ﬂow can break away the ice on the sides,
relieving pressure. On the other hand, if the water su-
percools signiﬁcantly before freezing, a larger structure of
dendritic ice will form throughout the pipe—while only
a ﬁnite fraction of the water will be turned to ice, this
dendritic ice will span more of the pipe, possibly leaving
no hole, thus blocking the ﬂow of water, and resulting
in a burst pipe. Consistent with this explanation, Brown
found that the ice rose higher from expansion in the tubes
with nonboiled water, indicating the existence of a cen-
tral region in which the water was mobile, and the ice
able to push up.

In 1977, Gilpin performed quantitative experiments
that conﬁrmed Brown’s qualitative explanation38. Gilpin
exposed pipes to subzero temperatures, and measured
the pressure gradient necessary to induce the ﬂow of
water, at various times after the ice had formed. He

found that the more supercooling, the greater the pres-
sure gradient needed, for the same amount of total ice
formed (ﬁgure 2). He concluded, as Brown had, that
with more supercooling, the ice formed would be more
likely to form a dendritic structure, spanning the pipe,
and causing blockage. He also conﬁrmed this picture with
photographs of the cross-section of the pipe during the
freezing process.

These experiments convincingly demonstrated that
greater supercooling would lead to burst pipes, leading
to the question of why initially hot water would super-
cool more than initially cold water. Brown argued it
was because boiled water had less dissolved gas, and
that the dissolved gas prevented supercooling36. How-
ever, Dorsey, who carried out an extensive series of ex-
periments on the factors aﬀecting supercooling, over the
course of ten years, disputed this37,40. Dorsey found that
dissolved gasses were not a signiﬁcant barrier to super-
cooling; he also pointed out that, unlike boiled water,
the water in hot water pipes does contain signiﬁcant
amounts of dissolved gas. Dorsey agreed that heated wa-
ter supercooled more, and that this would result in burst
pipes, but argued that the greater supercooling occurred

Flows in pipes (from Gilpin)

120

100

80

60

40

20

)

m
/
a
P
k
(
 
t
n
e
i
d
a
r
g
 
e
r
u
s
s
e
r
P

0

0

0.05

0.1

0.15

0.2

Volume fraction of ice

<2.5 °C
2.9-3.3 °C

2.6-2.7 °C
4.0-5.0 °C

FIG. 2: Eﬀect of nucleation temperature on pressure gradient
required to start ﬂow through pipe. Each of the four sets of
data points are for diﬀerent amounts of supercooling. Graph
produced from data obtained by Gilpin38. Curves are power
law ﬁts, and are guides to the eye only (no theoretical justi-
ﬁcation.)

because heating served to deactivate or expel “motes”
(what we would today call nucleation sites)37. Both ex-
planations agree that some sorts of nucleation sites are
deactivated by heating the water. Gilpin not only con-
ﬁrmed that hot tap water supercooled more than cold tap
water, but that tap water left in an open container super-
cooled least of all—this can be explained by the fact that
water in an open container will absorb impurities from
the air, and these impurities can then act as nucleation
sites38.

Again, the phenomenon here is not the same as the
Mpemba eﬀect, but is related, in that it explains how
the water can remember its history. However, note that
the results here are in the wrong direction to explain the
Mpemba eﬀect.
If initially hot water supercools more,
then to freeze it has to reach an even lower temperature
than initially cold water, which will lengthen the time
that it takes to freeze.

VII. SUPERCOOLING AND THE MPEMBA
EFFECT

Consideration of supercooling greatly complicates the
Mpemba eﬀect, and it is not clear how, or whether, it
helps to explain it. We ﬁrst need to decide precisely how
we measure the “time to freezing.” If we wait until the
ﬁrst appearance of ice, then the experimental situation is

9

complicated by the randomness of supercooling, and mul-
tiple trials will be needed to get precise average times to
freezing. For simplicity, many experiments have studied
the time for some speciﬁed location in the water to reach
0O C30,33,35. Supercooling is irrelevant for these exper-
iments, if the speciﬁed location is at or near the place
that ﬁrst reaches 0O C.

Auerbach considered the relevance of supercooling to
the eﬀect41. He found that initially hot water would su-
percool less (measuring the time to the ﬁrst appearance
of ice crystals) than initially cold water. Auerbach did
not determine why this happened, but pointed out that
the initially hotter water should have greater tempera-
ture shear, and that this shear is known to trigger crys-
tallization42. However, Auerbach’s ﬁnding that heated
water supercools less than nonheated water is directly
opposite to the ﬁndings of Brown and Dorsey, described
in the previous section. Furthermore, Auerbach had a
relatively small number of trials, so the signiﬁcance of
his results is unclear.

While Auerbach’s result is in the correct direction to
explain the Mpemba eﬀect (since if the hot water su-
percools less, this will help it freeze sooner), he actually
found that the initially hot water actually took longer to
freeze on average (due to the greater time the hot water
took to reach 0OC)41.

Given this,

it is unclear whether Auerbach’s ex-
periments can be described as actually observing the
Mpemba eﬀect. Due to the random ﬂuctuations in the
times till freezing, Auerbach found that the hot water
might freeze ﬁrst by chance. He found that when the am-
bient temperature was −5OC > Ta > −8OC, the proba-
bility for a randomly chosen container of initially hotter
water to freeze before a randomly chosen container of ini-
tially colder water was 53%41. For ambient temperatures
of −8OC > Ta > −11OC, the probability was 24%. If
the hot water, on average, takes longer to freeze, but only
happens to freezes ﬁrst in some speciﬁc samples due to
random ﬂuctuations, it is not clear that this should be
called a Mpemba eﬀect. (Given Auerbach’s small num-
ber of samples, 53% is not signﬁcantly greater than 50%.)
While the experiments on pipes show that supercooling
can induce signiﬁcant memory eﬀects, the role of super-
cooling in the Mpemba eﬀect remains uncertain.

VIII. FUTURE PROSPECTS

It is clear that evaporative cooling can play an impor-
tant role in the Mpemba eﬀect, and that the history of the
water can aﬀect the amount of supercooling. But beyond
that, the experiments together paint a very muddled pic-
ture. More experiments are needed to solve this 2000+
year-old puzzle. Despite the theoretical complexity of the
Mpemba eﬀect, the experiments needed to probe it can
be done at the K-12 and undergraduate level.
Indeed,
simple experiments on the Mpemba eﬀect are a common
science fair project.

A fair amount of thought needs to go into the exper-
imental design before even the ﬁrst data point is taken.
Walker discusses the basic set-up, and while you can
come up with your own design, reading Walker’s article
is a good way to appreciate some of the hidden complexi-
ties in the experiment35. For example, Walker points out
that the container should be heated along with the water,
for if hot water is poured into a cold container, the sud-
den change in the water’s temperature causes problems.
To make sure that all samples of water have the same
mass, masses need to be measured after heating, rather
than before, as a fair amount of mass is lost during the
heating process. The precise environment surrounding
the container is important, and it can make a diﬀerence
whether the water is in a middle of an empty freezer,
or jammed between a frozen pizza and a frost-covered
bucket of ice cream. The temperature can be read with
a common mercury thermometer, but a device that can
more quickly and accurately register changes in temper-
ature is better, if available. The reader is directed to
Walker’s article for further discussion of potential prob-
lems and solutions35.

A series of trials will produce a graph of freezing time
vs.
initial temperature, of the sort shown in ﬁgure 1.
A single curve may or may not show a Mpemba eﬀect,
but is not, on its own, particularly useful for probing the
cause(s) of this phenomenon. To see how the Mpemba
eﬀect depends on the various parameters of interest (ini-
tial mass, gas content, container shape and type, etc. . .)
several curves need to be produced, under diﬀerent pa-
rameter settings. If you had inﬁnite resources and time,
you could vary all the initial parameters, producing a gi-
ant multidimensional matrix of freezing times. In prac-
tice, you will have to decide which factors you are most
interested in, and design your experiment accordingly.

You can decide on your own what to vary to produce
your series of curves. I give some suggestions below, but
the number of reasonable experimental designs is essen-
tially unlimited.

Kell claimed that because the Mpemba eﬀect relies
on surface cooling, it is more likely to be observed in
wooden pails than in metal ones, since in metal pails a
fair amount of heat is lost through the sides. This claim
can be tested by producing a series of curves of freezing
time vs. initial temperature, for containers with diﬀering
degrees of thermal insulation on the sides. This would
demonstrate how the Mpemba eﬀect is aﬀected as the
relative importance of evaporation to the cooling process
is varied. Alternatively, varying the height of the wa-
ter, while keeping the base ﬁxed, provides another way
of varying the importance of evaporation.

The importance of evaporation can be largely elim-
inated by putting the water in a closed container, or
by putting a layer of oil over the surface of the water.
Such experiments would be extremely useful in assessing
claims that evaporation is the cause of the Mpemba eﬀect.
As already discussed, several authors have claimed that
evaporation is insuﬃcient to explain their results. But I

10

know of only one published paper studying the Mpemba
eﬀect in a closed container31, and a single experiment
If you run a series of experi-
can always be in error.
ments in closed containers, and regularly fail to ﬁnd a
Mpemba eﬀect, that would provide good support for the
claims that evaporation is the primary cause of the eﬀect.
On the other hand, observations of the Mpemba eﬀect in
closed containers would show that it can occur without
evaporation.

Rather than looking at freezing time versus initial
temperature, you could investigate supercooling. Sim-
ply reproducing earlier experiments would be valuable
in resolving the discrepancy between the recent re-
sults of Auerbach, and the older results of Brown and
Dorsey36,37,41. The number of runs in Auerbach’s exper-
iment was too limited for ﬁrm conclusions to be drawn,
so a repetition of his experiment with a greater number of
runs would be useful. A modern repetition of Descartes’
experiment would also be interesting.

More systematic studies of how the history of the wa-
ter aﬀects its properties would be helpful. For example,
if you ﬁnd that pre-boiled tap water has diﬀerent prop-
erties than water straight out of the tap, you could in-
vestigate why it diﬀers (dissolved oxygen? impurities?),
by looking at how long it takes pre-boiled water’s prop-
erties to return to those of tap water’s, and under what
conditions.

You should try rerunning the experiments several times
with exactly the same parameters, to get an idea of how
big the error bars are. The size of the error bars is crucial,
since if a graph of freezing time vs.
initial temperature
shows only a weak local maximum, it will be unclear if
this is a true Mpemba eﬀect, or just the result of ﬂuctu-
ations. And, as with any experiment, you want to make
sure that your results are repeatable. This greatly in-
creases the time required for the experiment, and limits
the amount you can vary the parameters, but it’s bet-
ter to have a small amount of reliable data than a large
amount of unreliable data!

What will constitute experimental success? You do
not need to observe the Mpemba eﬀect for your experi-
ment to be a success. Finding that the Mpemba eﬀect
does not occur under certain conditions is still a good
experimental result. On the other hand, it is certainly
more dramatic and psychologically satisfying if you can
ﬁnd conditions under which the eﬀect occurs. And if
you ﬁnd conditions under which it occurs, you can then
study what changes destroy the eﬀect, which provides a
potentially valuable probe of the phenomenon. You may
want to do some preliminary testing to ﬁnd parameters
where the Mpemba eﬀect occurs, and then decide how to
proceed.

If you complete experiments on the Mpemba eﬀect,
I’d be interested in hearing the results—if you have a
chance, send me an e-mail telling me what you found. If
enough experiments are done, perhaps this 2000+ year-
old problem can be solved!

Finally, those who like the counterintuitive nature of

the Mpemba eﬀect might be interested in a similar phe-
nomenon: water drops will last longer on a skillet well
above 100OC, than on one only a little above 100OC.
This is easier to explain than the Mpemba eﬀect43.

Acknowledgments

We would like to thank Debra Waxman for providing

11

a preliminary translation of the letter from Descartes to
Mersenne, and Leigh Anne Eubanks for providing the
ﬁnal translation. We would like to thank Nancy Ruﬀ for
conﬁrming the correctness of Burke’s translation of Roger
Bacon, over another, incorrect, published translation. A
previous version of this article appeared on the sci.physics
FAQ web page44.

Electronic address: mjeng@siue.edu

∗
1 Aristotle, Meteorologica, trans. H. D. P. Lee (Harvard Uni-
versity Press, London, 1962), Book I, Chapter XII, p.85-7.
2 M. Clagett, Giovanni Marliani and the late medieval

physics, (AMS Press Inc., New York, 1967), p.79.

3 Antiperistasis, in a diﬀerent form, was also central to Aris-
totle’s explanation of how an arrow was able to continue in
motion when the initial force of the bow was removed. A.
Franklin, “Principle of inertia in the Middle Ages,” Am. J.
Phys. 44 (6), 529-545 (1976).

4 R. Bacon, The Opus Majus of Roger Bacon, trans. Robert
Belle Burke, vol. II (Russell and Russell Inc., New York,
1962), Part 6, p.584.
5 M. Clagett, Ibid., p.71-2.
6 F. Bacon, Novum Organum, in The Physical and Meta-
physical Works of Lord Francis Bacon, ed. J. Devey (G.
Bell and Sons, Ltd., London, 1911), Book II, Chapter L,
p.559.

7 R. Descartes, Discourse on Method, Optics, Geometry, and
Meteorology, trans. P. J. Olscamp (Bobb-Merrill Company,
Indianapolis, 1965), Meteorology, Ch. 1, p.268.

8 J. F. Scott, The Scientiﬁc Work of Ren´e Descartes (1596-
1650) (Taylor and Francis, London), p.67, citation omitted
from quotation.

9 R. Descartes, Œuvres Lettres de Descartes (Librarie Gal-

limeru, 1953), p.998.

10 Translation courtesy of Leigh Anne Eubanks. Preliminary

translation provided by Debra Waxman.

11 T. S. Kuhn, The Structure of Scientiﬁc Revolutions (The
University of Chicago Press, Chicago, 2nd ed., 1970).

12 T. S. Kuhn, Ibid., p.5.
13 T. S. Kuhn, Ibid., p.35.
14 T. S. Kuhn, Ibid., p.16.
15 The explanation of “heating by antiperistasis” is, of course,
no longer valid. But Kuhn is criticizing not just the expla-
nation, but the experimental results claimed by Marliani
and Bacon.

16 E. B. Mpemba and D. G. Osborne, “Cool?,” Phys. Educ.

4, 172-175 (1969).

17 E. B. Mpemba, ibid., p.174.
18 G. S. Kell, “The freezing of hot and cold water,” Am. J.

Phys. 37 (5), 564-565 (1969).

19 R. M. Robson, “Mpemba’s ice cream,” New Sci. 43, 89

20 M. B. F. Ranken, “Mpemba explained,” New Sci. 45, 225-

21 R. Jephson, “Mpemba’s ice cream,” New Sci. 42, 656

22 J. C. Dixon, “Mpemba’s ice cream,” New Sci. 42, 656

(1969).

226 (1970).

(1969).

(1969).

23 F. L. C. Blackwall, “Mpemba’s ice cream,” New Sci. 43,

24 S. M. Arkless, “Mpemba’s ice cream,” New Sci. 42, 655-

88-89 (1969).

656 (1969).

25 P. Dickson and J. C. Goulden, Myth-Informed: Legends,
Credos, and Wrong-headed ‘Facts’ We All Believe, (Peri-
gree Books, New York, 1993), p. 127.

26 “Straight Dope” archives, http://www.straightdope.com/

classics/a2 098b.html.

27 K. Popper, The Logic of Scientiﬁc Discovery (Harper and

Row, New York, 1968).

28 D. G. Osborne, “Mind on Ice,” Phys. Educ. 14, 414-417

29 D. G. Osborne, “Freezing of Water,” New. Sci. 44, 125-126

(1979).

(1970).

30 M. Freeman, “Cooler Still—An Answer?,” Phys. Educ. 14,

417-421 (1979).

31 B. Wojciechowski, I. Owczarek, and G. Bednarz, “Freez-
ing of Aqueous Solutions Containing Gases,” Cryst. Res.
Technol. 23 (7), 843-848 (1988).

32 E. Deeson, “Cooler-lower down,” Phys. Educ. 6, 42-44

(1971).

33 I. Firth, “Cooler?,” Phys. Educ. 6, 32-41 (1971).
34 A. Osborne, “Faster freezing,” New Sci. 43, 662 (1969).
35 J. Walker, “The Amateur Scientist: Hot water freezes
faster than cold water. Why does it do so?,” Sci. Am. 237
(3), 246-257 (1977).

36 F. C. Brown, “The frequent bursting of hot water pipes
in household plumbing systems,” Phys. Rev. 8, 500-503
(1916).

37 N. E. Dorsey, “The freezing of supercooled water,” Trans.

Am. Philos. Soc. 38, 246-328 (1948).

38 R. R. Gilpin, “The eﬀects of dendritic ice formation in
water pipes,” Int. J. Heat Mass Transfer 20 (6), 693-699
(1977).

39 C. A. Knight, The Freezing of Supercooled Liquids, D. Van

Nostrand, Princeton, New Jersey (1967).

40 C. A. Knight, “The Mpemba eﬀect: the freezing times of
hot and cold water,” Am. J. Phys. 64 (5), 524 (1996).
41 D. Auerbach, “Supercooling and the Mpemba eﬀect:
When hot water freezes quicker than cold,” Am. J. Phys.
63 (10), 882-885 (1995).

42 J. van der Elsken, J. Dings, and J. C. F. Michielsen, “The
freezing of supercooled water,” J. Mol. Structure 250, 245-
251 (1991).

43 J. Walker, “Boiling and the Leidenfrost Eﬀect,” in Funda-
mentals of Physics, by D. Halliday and R. Resnick (Wiley,
New York, 1988, 3rd ed.), p. E10-1-5.

44 Usenet Physics FAQ, http://math.ucr.edu/home/baez/

physics/General/hot water.html, 1998.

