6
0
0
2
 
n
a
J
 
1
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
t
s
i
h
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
7
6
1
1
0
6
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

THE HIGH ENERGY FRONTIER AND THE
COLLABORATION IN COLLIDER EXPERIMENTS

Physics Dept. of the University of Bologna and INFN, Sezione di Bologna,

G. GIACOMELLI

Viale Berti-Pichat 6/2, I-40127 Bologna, Italy

E-mail: giacomelli@bo.infn.it

Invited paper at the Italy-Japan Int. Symposium,

Nagoya University, 15/10/2001

In this note I shall review the Japan-Italy cooperative work in high energy collider
experiments, in particular OPAL at LEP, CDF at Fermilab, ZEUS at HERA and ATLAS
at the future LHC.

1

Introduction

The Standard Model (SM) of particle physics has been checked to an unprecedented
level of accuracy by the precision measurements at LEP, SLC, HERA and the Fermilab
colliders. For the Higgs boson there were some indications and limits at LEP: the search
for the Higgs boson is one of the main items to be studied at the Fermilab-2 pp collider
and at the future LHC pp collider. The SM has theoretical inconsistencies and too
many free parameters, and it could be a low energy approximation of a more complete
theory. Thus many physicists are looking for physics beyond the SM, for instance
supersymmetry, compositeness, etc. New particle searches is thus an other important
subject of research. Connected with these problems there is also a strong interest in
ﬁnding the deep structure of the proton at ever smaller distances.

Experimentation at higher energies forced the concetration of the experiments in
larger national and international laboratories, where high energy accelerators were avail-
able. From the 1960’s the experiments started to grow in size and complexity and started
to be performed by collaborations of few groups from diﬀerent Institutions: experiments
grew larger, with a tendency to go towards the use of all purpose detectors. The experi-
ments at LEP, SLC, Fermilab and HERA, required another step, with tens of groups and
hundreds of physicists and engineers, with interconnections at the national and regional
levels. The next experiments at the LHC require hundreds of groups and thousands of
physicists, with interconnections in a sort of world organization.

In this context many cooperative eﬀorts were made by Japanese and Italian groups.
Here I shall ﬁrst recall a personal experience in the United States at the end of the
1950’s, and then I shall discuss the cooperative eﬀorts by Japanese and Italian groups

1

in the experiments OPAL at LEP, CDF at Fermilab, ZEUS at HERA and ATLAS at
the future LHC collider.

It may be worth recalling that these collider experiments use 4π general purpose
detectors, with many subdetectors, some of which immersed in a magnetic ﬁeld. They
have several hundred thousand eletronic channels and very many microprocessors and
computers. The detectors have a cylindrical symmetry, with a ”barrel” and ”endcap”
structure; some subdetectors are further structured in diﬀerent ways. Starting with the
innermost detectors and proceeding outward one ﬁnds: a microvertex detector, a central
tracking detector with dE/dx and time-of-ﬂight capabilities; the momentum is measured
by track curvature in the magnetic ﬁeld. Then follow the electromagnetic and hadron
calorimeters, and, after the iron of the magnetic ﬁeld return yoke, the muon detector.

The collider luminosity was measured using forward detectors and precision ”lumi-

nometers”.

2 The ”old times”

In the 1950’s the standard high energy experiment was small and was performed by a
small group of physicists and graduate students from a single university.

At the University of Rochester, Rochester, N.Y., USA, a special situation was created
by the late Robert Marshak, who accepted many foreing students, mostly from Japan
and Italy. They attended graduate classes together, participated to seminars and collo-
quia and performed experiments together, in small groups. I like to recall some of the
Japanese and Italian colleagues: M. Koshiba, K. Miyake, S. Okubo, T. Yamanouchi and
others from Japan; from Italy: R. Cester, G. Maltoni, T. Regge, C. Schaerf and others.
This was probably one of the ﬁrst interactions between Japanese and Italian physicists.
In their diversity of culture they found many things in common, among which the fact
that both lost world war two!

The high energy accelerator of that time at Rochester was a syncrocyclotron of 240
MeV, which produced pions, below threshold. Some of the main ﬁelds of experimental
research concerned the measurement of the cross sections for pion-nucleon elastic and
charge exchange processes at lab. energies smaller than 100 MeV [1] and analyses of
nuclear emulsions mainly exposed to cosmic rays. There was also a very strong theory
group.

3 OPAL at LEP

OPAL (Omni Purpose Apparatus for Lep) was one of the four LEP deterctors [2]; it
used a conventional magnetic ﬁeld. The collaboration, which started in the early 1980’s,
consisted of about 300 physicists and graduate students from 34 diﬀerent Institutions
from many diﬀerent countries. About 20 Japanese physicists and graduate students,
mainly from the University of Tokyo, the International Center for Elementary Particle

2

Physics (ICEPP), and from the University of Kobe, participated in OPAL. Approxi-
mately the same number of physicists and students were from Italy, mainly from the
University of Bologna, the Bologna Section of INFN and CERN.

The Japanese collegues constructed and maintained the Barrel electromagnetic calorime-

ter, made of 9440 lead glass counters, all working after 11 years of operation! They also
provided a large computer (a mainframe), which was essential for oﬀ-line analyses at
the beginning of LEP operations.

It may be worth recalling that computer technology increased very fast, about a
factor of 1000 between LEP constuction in the 1980’s and the end of LEP operations in
November 2000. The tendency was towards clusters of PCs. Oﬀ-line analyses involved
oﬀ-line reconstruction of events, Monte Carlo simulations and physics analyses. During
this period of about 15 years the storage capacity went from megabytes to gigabytes, the
computer interconnectivity improved dramatically, and CERN made its most important
invention: WWW, the World Wide Web.

The Italians constructed and maintained the Iarocci limited streamer tubes for the
Hadron Calorimeter. The tubes were fabricated at the ”tubiﬁcio” in Frascati, and use
was made of the so called ”magic oil”, which was pressed in place with a sponge; this
improved the quality of the inner conducting surfaces of the tubes, which then worked
more reliably: the vast majority of the tubes was still working well at the end of the
experiment. Italy contributed also to the Luminometer and to the microvertex detector.
During the ﬁrst years of data taking, it became clear that several improvements
could be made. In particular: the available forward detectors allowed luminosity mea-
surements to few percent. In order to fully exploit the LEP accelerator and the detectors,
precisions ”Luminometers” were designed and built: they allowed measurements with
precisions of better than 0.1%. To reach these precisions it was also essential to compute
the radiative corrections of forward e+e− Bhabha elastic scattering to ever increasing
precisions: there was a healthy competition between theorists and experimentalists to
reach the desired goal. The ﬁnal measurements were made with impressive precisions,
much better than expected. The same ”silicon technology” was used for the new mi-
crovertex detectors.

Both Italians and Japanese physicists were very active in improving and analyzing

the luminosity measurements, and in many types of physics analyses.

4 CDF at Fermilab

The CDF (Collider Detector Facility) [3] is one of the two general purpose detectors
operating at the Fermilab pp collider. CDF started taking data in the 1990’s at a center
of mass energy of 1.8 TeV. In the second part of the 1990’s there was a long shutdown
of the collider: several improvements were made resulting in an energy increase from
1.8 to 2 TeV and to a considerable luminosity increase. Also the CDF detecor had
it is now called CDF2 and it started the so called run2. The
many improvements:
CDF collaboration consists of about 480 physicists and graduate students from ∼ 50

3

Institutions from all over the world. The Japanese physicists are about 50 from 5
Institutions (Hiroshima, KEK, Osaka, Tsukuba, Waseda), while the Italians are about
80 from 6 Institutions (Bologna, Frascati, Padova, Pisa, Roma 1, Trieste).

Also in this experiment the Japanese and Italian contributions were and are very
important: Japanese and Italians built diﬀerent crucial subdetectors; in particular they
contributed to the equipment made for the precision measurements and to the mi-
crovertex detectors; the Italian groups pioneered the silicon microstrip detectors and
constantly improved them.

CDF contributed to the precision electroweak measurements, discovered the top
quark, studied in detail quark-quark collisions yielding large pt events, studied mini-
mum bias events, b-physics and performed many new particle searches.

The EW precision measurements from LEP, SLC and Fermilab yielded the following

values [4]:

5 ZEUS at HERA

The HERA electron-proton collider is an asymmetric collider, with 30 GeV positrons
(or electrons) in one ring and 820 GeV protons in the other ring; the c.m. energy is
about 300 GeV. There was a recent upgrade which resulted in an increase of the HERA
luminosity.

The ZEUS detector is one of the two general purpose detectors at HERA [5]. The
ZEUS collaboration is formed by about 460 physicists, engineers and students from 52
Institutions from many countries.

4

The Japanese participation in HERA concerns about 20 physicists and students from
5 Institutions; there are about 55 italian physicists and students from 7 Institutions. The
Japanese concentrated in the electromagnetic calorimeter and in the problem of hadron-
electron separation. The italian contribution concerned the muon detection system, the
leading forward (proton) spectrometer and the silicon microvertex detectors. Italy also
contributed considerably to the construction of HERA.

There was a recent upgrade of the ZEUS detector (in particular of the silicon mi-

crovertex).

ZEUS results concern the study of the proton structure function, F2, from data on
deep inelastic scattering at very low values of the variable x and at very large values of
Q2, the study of the photon structure, of heavy ﬂavour production, of leading proton
physics, of hadronic ﬁnal states, of many searches for new particles and new phenomena,
etc.

6 ATLAS at LHC

The future LHC collider at CERN will accelerate protons to 7 TeV, thus the c.m. energy
will be 14 TeV. It will have a very high luminosity, about 1034 cm−2s−1. This will
correspond to about 20 collisions per bunch crossing, which will have to be unscrambled
by fast timing and fast triggers.

The ATLAS (A Toroidal LHC Apparatus) detector [6] is one of the general purpose
detectors at LHC; more than 1500 physicists and graduate students are building equip-
ment and perform Monte Carlo simulations of complicated events [each of which requires
a very large computing power]. The physicists are from 150 Institutions from 34 Nations
[plus CERN + Dubna] from the 5 continents. It is thus a world collaboration, and it
requires a complex organization.

There are about 50 physicists and students from 12 Japanese Intitutions in AT-
LAS; from Italy there are about 100 physicists and students from 12 Institutions. The
Japanese colleagues are involved in the superconducting solenoid, in the end-cap cham-
bers, in electronics, triggers and other items. The Italians are involved in the B0 and
toroid magnetic systems, in the RPC detectors for the barrel, in tracking detectors, and
in calorimeters.

A major common eﬀort of the LHC collaborations concerns the GRID computing
project for oﬀ line analyses and Monte Carlo production [7]; it also aims to improve the
eﬃciency, speed and connectivity of all computers systems.

The expected physics programs at LHC will ﬁrst concentrate on the search for the
Standard Model Higgs boson; other studies will concern the physics items already dis-
cussed in Sections 3-5, in particular on new particle searches of larger masses, especially
supersymmetric particles, using the anticipated very high luminosities. Other studies
will concern heavy quark physics, large and small pt physics, also heavy ion collisions,
etc.

5

7 Conclusions

It seems that most physicists who have been involved in one of the large collider ex-
periments consider their experience to have been exciting. This was more so when the
experiments were obtaining their most interesting physics results, like the 3 neutrino
families, the precision determination of the electroweak parameters and of the strong
interaction (QCD) parameters [3], the running of the strong and of the electromagnetic
coupling constants, precise measurements of the lifetimes of short lived particles, the
existence of the triple boson vertex, the discovery of the top quark, possible indications
and new limits on new particles [8] and new phenomena.

The contributions of Japanese and Italian collegues were always very important in

the planning, construction and physics analyses.

One should not neglect the very large number of Diploma, Laurea and PhD theses
with data from high energy collider experiments, and the strong impact on the public
understanding of science.

I thank many colleagues from the OPAL, CDF, ZEUS and ATLAS collaborations for
their cooperation, in particular G. Bellettini, H. Bilokon, P. Capiluppi, S. Zucchelli and
many others. I thank Drs. A. Casoni and G. Grandi for typing the manuscript.

References

[1] S. W. Barnes et al., Phys. Rev. 117(1960)226.

[2] The OPAL Collaboration, K. Ahmet et al., Nucl. Instrum. Methods A305(1991)275.

[3] The CDF Collaboration, F. Abe et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 74(1995)4623.

[4] The LEP Collaborations, the LEP EW Working Group, the SLD Heavy Flavour
and EW Groups, CERN-EP-2001-021 (2001); hep-ex/0212036; hep-ex/0312023.

[5] The ZEUS Collaboration, S. Chekanovet al., Eur. Phys. J. C21(2001)443.

[6] The ATLAS technical proposal, CERN/LHC/94-43 (1994).

[7] P. Capiluppi et al., (Computing at future accelerator and non accelerator large ex-
periments) Proceedings of the 6th School on Non Accelerator Astroparticle Physics,
Trieste 9-20 July 2001, World Scientiﬁc.

[8] R. Barate et al., Phy. Lett. B565(2003)61.

6

