Heisenberg and the Levels of Reality

Basarab Nicolescu

Theory Group, Laboratoire de Physique Nucl´eaire et des Hautes ´Energies (LPNHE)1,
CNRS and Universit´e Pierre et Marie Curie, Paris
e-mail: nicolesc@lpnhep.in2p3.fr

Abstract

We ﬁrst analyze the transdisciplinary model of Reality and its key-concept of ”Levels of
Reality”. We then compare this model with the one elaborated by Werner Heisenberg in
1942.

6
0
0
2
 
n
a
J
 
0
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
t
s
i
h
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
6
5
1
1
0
6
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

1Unit´e de Recherche des Universit´es Paris 6 et Paris 7, Associ´ee ou CNRS

1

1 Introduction

The idea of ’Levels of Reality’ came to me during a post-doctoral visit at Lawrence
Berkeley Laboratory, in 1976. I did not understand from where was coming the resistance
to the uniﬁcation between the relativity theory and the quantum mechanics. This was
the starting point of my reﬂection. At that time, I was working with Geoﬀrey Chew, the
founder of bootstrap theory. The discussions we had together and with other colleagues
from Berkeley, have stimulated me to formulate this idea. It is at Berkeley that I have
begun writing a book regarding the epistemological and philosophical extensions of the
quantum physics.

In 1981, I was intrigued by the notion of ’veiled Real’ by Bernard dEspagnat [1], that
did not seemed to me to be a satisfying solution to the problems I was dealing with and
I decided to make public my notion of ’Levels of Reality’. Therefore, I introduced this
notion into an article published in 1982 [2]. The form of this concept was resumed in the
ﬁrst edition of my book Us, the Particle and the World [3]. Afterwards, during the years,
I developed this idea in several books, articles and conferences.

In 1992, I was invited as an expert to the plenary session of the Pontiﬁcal Academy of
Sciences dedicated to the study of complexity in sciences. I spoke on Nature considered
from the quantum physics point of view and I presented my approach concerning the
Levels of Reality [4]. The Austrian physicist Walter Thirring, present at the congress at
Vatican, gave me a little article, unpublished yet, where I have discovered his important
considerations on the nature of physical laws, in the case of diﬀerent Levels of Reality [5]
.

But the big surprise came in 1998, when I discovered the work of Werner Heisenberg
Philosophy : The Manuscript of 1942 [6]. This text has provoked in me a veritable as-
tonishment because I found the same idea of Levels of Reality, obviously under a diﬀerent
form. Heisenbergs book had an amazing history: it was written in 1942, but it was pub-
lished in German only in 1984. It was translated in French in 1998. As far as I know,
there is no English translation of this work.

The opinion that I want to express in this paper is in total agreement with those of
the quantum mechanics founders: Werner Heisenberg, Wolfgang Pauli and Niels Bohr,
but due to space reasons, I will treat in the present study only the philosophical ideas
I shall start by exposing my own ideas, to continue by studying the
of Heisenberg.
correspondence that exists between them and those of Heisenberg.

2 Classical realism and quantum realism

The modern science is founded on the idea of a total separation between the observing-
subject and the Reality, assumed to be completely independent from the ﬁrst one. But,
at the same time, in the modern science are given three fundamental postulates, which

2

are extending at a supreme degree the research of laws and order:

• The existence of universal laws, with mathematic character.

• The discovery of these laws by the scientiﬁc experiment.

• The perfect reproducibility of the experimental data.

The extraordinary success of the classical physics, from Galileo, Kepler and Newton until
Einstein, have conﬁrmed the validity of these three postulates. At the same time, they
have contributed to the instauration of a simplicity paradigm, which became dominant
during the XIXth century.

The classical physics is founded on the idea of continuity, in agreement with the
evidence supplied by the sense organs: we cant pass from one point of the space and of
the time to another, without passing through all intermediary points.

The idea of continuity is intimately linked to a key concept of the classical physics: the
local causality. Every physical phenomenon could be understood by a continuous chain of
causes and eﬀects: to every cause at a certain point corresponds an eﬀect to an inﬁnitely
near point and to every eﬀect at a certain point corresponds a cause to an inﬁnitely near
point. There is no need of any direct action at distance.

The concept of determinism is central in the classical physics. The classical physics
equations are such that if one knows the positions and the velocities of the physical objects
at a certain moment, one can predict their positions and velocities at any other moment
of time. The laws of classical physics are deterministic laws. The physical states being
functions of position and velocity, it results that if the initial conditions are known (the
physical state at a given moment of time) one can completely predict the physical state
at any other moment of time.

The objectivity of the classical physics is fundamentally linked to the knowledge of
an object moving in the 1-dimensional time and the 3-dimensional space. The central
role of the space-time in four dimensions was not altered by the two relativity theories of
Einstein, restricted and general, that constitute the apogee of the classical physics.

The quantum mechanics is in a total conceptual rupture with the classical mechanics.

According to Planck’s discovery, the energy has a discontinuous, discrete structure.
The discontinuity means that between two points there is nothing, no objects, no atoms,
no molecules, no particles, just nothing. And even the word ’nothing’ is too much.

A physical quantity has, in quantum mechanics, several possible values associated with
given probabilities of occurrence. But in a physical measurement we get obviously just
one single result. This abolition, via the measurement process, of the plurality of possible
values of an observable quantity had an obscure meaning but it already clearly indicated
the existence of a new type of causality.

3

Seven decades after the quantum mechanics was born, the nature of this new type of
causality was clariﬁed thanks to a rigorous theoretical result, the Bell’s theorem, and also
to high precision experiments. A new concept made in this way its entrance in physics:
the non-separability. The quantum entities continue to interact, never mind the distance
between them. Therefore, a new type of causality appears - global causality - that concerns
the system of all physical entities, in their ensemble.

The quantum entities, the ’quantons’, are at the same time corpuscles and waves or,

more precisely, they are neither corpuscles nor waves.

The famous uncertainty relations of Heisenberg show without any ambiguity that is
impossible to localise a quanton into an exact point of the space and an exact point of
time. In other words, it is impossible to assign a well-determined trajectory to a quantum
particle. The indeterminism, reigning at the quantum scale, is a structural indeterminism,
fundamental and irreducible. It does not means neither hazard nor imprecision.

The so-called quantum paradoxes (as, for example, the famous paradox of ’Schroedinger’s

cat’) are false paradoxes, because they point out contradictions exclusively in correlation
with the natural, ordinary language, which is that of the classical realism: these end to
be paradoxes when the language appropriate to the quantum mechanics is used. Even if
they are instructive when one wants to show the incompatibility between the classical and
quantum realism, these paradoxes become useless in the context of the quantum ideas.

The true question is the incompatibility between the classical realism and the quantum

one.

The classical object is localised in space-time while the quantum object is not localised
It moves into an abstract mathematical space, ruled by the algebra of
in space-time.
operators and not by the algebra of numbers. In quantum physics, the abstraction is no
longer a simple tool to describe reality but a constitutive part of reality itself.

The classical object is subjected to the local causality, while the quantum object is
not submitted to this causality. It is impossible to predict an individual quantum event.
One can predict only the occurrence probabilities of the events. The key of understanding
this seemingly paradoxical and also irrational (from the point of view of classical realism)
situation is the quantum superposition principle: the superposition of two quantum states
is also a quantum state.

It is impossible to obtain the classical mechanics as a particular case of the quantum
mechanics because the h constant, characterising the quantum interactions, the famous
Planck constant, has a well-determined value. This value is diﬀerent from zero. The limit
h going to 0 has no rigorous meaning.

The radical break between the classical and quantum realism explain why one had not
succeed until now to unify the theories of relativity and of the quantum mechanics into a
single one, despite the fulminating evolution of the quantum ﬁeld theory resulting in the
superstrings theory.

4

It is even possible that such a unifying theory will never be found. Does this incom-
patibility mean that we have reached a limit in the physical description of reality, or that
a new characteristic of reality is to be discovered? It is this second possibility that I want
to explore now.

3 The Levels of Reality

I interpreted the incompatibility between the quantum mechanics and the classical me-
chanics as meaning the necessity of enlarging the domain of reality, by abandoning the
classical idea of existence of only one level of reality.

Let us give to the word ’reality’ its pragmatic and ontological meaning.

I understand by Reality, everything that resists to our experiences, representations,
descriptions, images or mathematical formalisms. In quantum physics, the mathematical
formalism is inseparable from experiment. It resists, in its manner, both by the care for
the internal selfconsistence and by the need to integrate the experimental data without
destroying this selfconsistence.

We also have to give an ontological dimension to the notion of Reality.

The Nature is an immense and inexhaustible source of the unknown, that justiﬁes the
very existence of science. Reality is not only a social construction, the consensus of a
community, an intersubjective agreement. It has also a trans-subjective dimension, to the
extent where a simple experimental fact could ruin the most beautiful scientiﬁc theory.

Of course, I make the distinction between Real and Reality. Real means what it is,
while Reality is connected to the resistance in our human experience. The real is, by
deﬁnition, veiled forever, while the Reality is accessible to our knowledge.

I deﬁne a Level of Reality as an ensemble of systems invariant to the action of a number
of general laws: for example, the quantum entities submitted to the quantum laws, which
are on radical break with the laws of the macrophysical world. This means that two levels
of Reality are diﬀerent if, passing from one to another, there is a break of the laws and
break of the fundamental concepts (as causality, for example).

The discontinuity present in the quantum world is also present in the structure of the
Levels of Reality, by the coexistence of macrophysical world and the microphysical world.

The Levels of Reality are radically diﬀerent from the organisation levels, as they were
deﬁned in the systemic approaches. The organisation levels do not suppose a rupture of
fundamental concepts: a certain number of organisation levels belong to only one and
the same Level of Reality. There is no discontinuity between the organisation levels be-
longing to a well-determined Reality level. The organisation levels correspond to diﬀerent
arrangements of the same fundamental laws, while the Levels of Reality are generated by
the coherent action of radically diﬀerent ensembles of laws.

5

The Levels of Reality and the organisation levels oﬀer the possibility of a new taxonomy
for the eight thousand academic disciplines existing now. Many disciplines could coexist
at an only and the same Level of Reality even if they correspond to diﬀerent organisation
levels. For example, the Marxist economy and the classical physics belong to the only
and same level of reality, while quantum physics and psychoanalysis belong to another
Level of Reality.

Due to the notion of Levels of Reality, the Reality acquires a multidimensional and
multireferential structure. The Levels of Reality also allow deﬁning useful notions as:
levels of language, levels of representation, levels of materiality or levels of complexity.

The Reality comports, according to my approach, a certain number of levels. In fact,
the previous considerations concerning two Levels of Reality could be easily generalised
to a larger number of levels. The following analysis does not depend on the fact that this
number is ﬁnite of inﬁnite. For the terminological clarity’s sake, I shall assume that this
number is inﬁnite.

Obviously, there is coherence between the diﬀerent levels of Reality, at least in the nat-
ural world. In fact, a vast selfconsistence seems to rule the evolution of the Universe, from
the inﬁnitely small to the inﬁnitely large, from the inﬁnitely short to the inﬁnitely long.
For example, a very small variation of the coupling constant of the strong interactions
between quantum particles would lead, at the inﬁnitely large scale (our Universe), either
to the conversion of all hydrogen in helium, or to the inexistence of complex atoms as the
carbon. Or a very small variation of the gravitational coupling constant would lead either
to ephemeral planets, or to the impossibility of their formation. Furthermore, according
to the actual cosmological theories, the Universe seems able to create itself without any
external intervention. An information ﬂux is transmitted in a coherent manner from a
Level of Reality to another level of Reality of our physical Universe.

Every Level of Reality has its own associated space-time. Thus, the classical Level
of Reality is associated to the four dimensional space-time, while the quantum Level of
Reality is associated with more than four dimensions. In the most sophisticated and the
most promising theory for the uniﬁcation of all physical interactions the M theory (’M’
from ’membrane’), the space-time must have eleven dimensions: one time-dimension and
ten space-dimensions.

The superstrings modify in an interesting manner our conception on the physical
reality. The superstring, fundamental entity of the new theory, is an object spread in
space. Consequently, it is logical impossible to deﬁne where and when are interacting the
superstrings. This characteristic is in the spirit of quantum mechanics. On the other hand,
their ﬁnite dimension implies that there is a limit of our possibility to explore reality. Our
anthropomorphic convention of distance is no longer applicable. Neither the Universe nor
any of its objects have any meaning over this limit. Finally, the space dimensions are of
two kinds:
large, vast, visible (as the three dimensions of what we consider as our own
space) and small, wrapped on themselves, invisible.

A new Relativity Principle emerges from our model of Reality: no Level of Reality

6

constitutes a privileged place from where one could understand all the other Levels of
Reality. A Level of Reality is what it is because all the other levels simultaneously exist.
In other words, our model is non-hierarchical. There is no fundamental level, but the
absence of fundaments does not mean an anarchical dynamics. The fundaments are
replaced by the uniﬁed and coherent dynamics of all Levels of Reality, which are already
discovered or will be discovered in the future.

Every Level of Reality is characterised by its incompleteness: the laws ruling this level
are just a part of the ensemble of laws ruling all the Levels of Reality. This property is
in agreement with the Goedel theorem, concerning the arithmetic and all mathematical
theory containing the arithmetic. The Goedel theorem tells that a rich enough axioms
system has either undecidable or contradictory results.

The dynamics of the Levels of Reality is made clear in a pertinent manner by three

thesis formulated by the physicist Walter Thirring [5]:

• The laws of any inferior level are not completely determined by the superior level
laws. Thus, well-anchored notions in the classical thinking, as ’fundamental’ and
’accidental’, must to be re-examined. What is considered fundamental at a certain
level may appear as accidental at a superior level and what is considered accidental
or incomprehensible at a certain level could appear as fundamental at a superior
level.

• The laws of an inferior level depend more of their emergency circumstances than
of the superior level laws. The laws of a certain level essentially depend of the local
conﬁguration that they are referred at. Therefore, there is a kind of local autonomy
for the respective level of Reality. But certain internal ambiguities concerning the
inferior level laws are solved by the consideration of superior order laws. The self
consistence of these laws reduces the laws ambiguity.

• The laws hierarchy advanced in the same time with the Universe itself. In other
words, we assist at the birth of laws as the Universe develops. These laws pre-existed
at the ’beginning’ of the Universe as possibilities. It is the evolution of the Universe
that actualises these laws and their hierarchy.

The zone between diﬀerent levels of Reality and the zone beyond all levels of Reality
is in fact a zone of non-resistance for our experiments, representations, descriptions,
images or mathematical formalisations. This transparency zone is due to our body and
sense organs limitations, no matter what measurement instruments are prolonging these
sense organs. Therefore, we have to deduce that the ’distance’ (understood as topological
distance) between the extreme levels of Reality is ﬁnite. But this ﬁnite distance does not
mean a ﬁnite knowledge. Exactly as a straight-line segment contains an inﬁnite number
of points, the ﬁnite topological distance could correspond to an inﬁnite number of Levels
of Reality.

The Object is deﬁned, in our model, by the ensemble of Levels of Reality and its

complementary non-resistance zone.

7

We see therefore, all the diﬀerence between my approach of Reality and that of Bernard
d’Espagnat. For d’Espagnat it is in fact only one level of reality, the empirical reality,
surrounded by a diﬀuse zone of non-resistance, which corresponds to the veiled Real. The
veiled Real, by deﬁnition, do not resist. Consequently, it does not have the characteristics
of a level of Reality.

Inspired by the phenomenology of Edmund Husserl [7], I assert that the diﬀerent
Levels of Reality are accessible to the human knowledge due to the existence of diﬀerent
levels of perception, which are in biunivoque correspondence with the Levels of Reality.
These levels of perception allow a more general, unifying, inclusive vision of the Reality,
without exhausting it. The coherence of the levels of perception assumes, as in the case
of Levels of Reality, a zone of non-resistance to the perception.

The ensemble of levels of perception and its complementary zone of non-resistance

constitute, in our approach, the Subject.

The two zones of non-resistance, of the Object and of the Subject, must to be identical
in order to have an information ﬂux able to circulate in a coherent manner between the
Object and the Subject. This zone of non-resistance corresponds to a third Interaction
term between the Subject and the Object, which could not be reduced neither to the
Object nor to the Subject.

Our ternary partition - Subject, Object, Interaction - is, of course, diﬀerent from the

binary partition - Subject, Object - of the classical realism.

4 Heisenberg’s model

Now, I want to analyse the correspondence between my ideas and those of Werner Heisen-
berg (1901-1976), expressed in his Manuscript of 1942.

As written in the excellent introduction to this book (Ref. 6, p. 17), the axe of the
philosophical thinking of Heisenberg is constituted by ”two directory principles: the ﬁrst
one is that of the division in Levels of Reality, corresponding to diﬀerent objectivity modes
depending on the incidence of the knowledge process, and the second one is that of the
progressive erasure of the role played by the ordinary concepts of space and time.” (Ref.
6, p. 240)

For Heisenberg, the reality is ”the continuous ﬂuctuation of the experience as gath-
ered by the conscience.
In this respect, it is never wholly identiﬁable to an isolated
system” (Ref. 6, p. 166). The reality could not be reduced to substance. For us, the
physicists of today, this is evident: the matter is the complexus substance-energy-space-
time-information.

As written by Catherine Chevalley, ”the semantic ﬁeld of the word reality included
for him everything given to us by the experience taken in its largest meaning, from
the experience of the world to that of the soul’s modiﬁcations or of the autonomous

8

signiﬁcation of the symbols.” (Ref. 6, p. 145)

Heisenberg does not speak in an explicit manner about ’resistance’ in relation with
reality, but its meaning is fully present: ”the reality we can talk about - writes Heisenberg
- is never the reality ’in itself’, but only a reality about which we may have knowledge,
in many cases a reality to which we have given form.” (Ref. 6, p. 277) The reality
being in constant ﬂuctuation, all we can do is to understand partial aspects thanks to
our thinking, extracting processes, phenomena, and laws.
In this context, it is clear
that one can not have completeness: ”We never can arrive at an exact and complete
portrait of reality” (Ref. 6, p. 258) - wrote Heisenberg. The incompleteness of physics
laws is hereby present at Heisenberg, even if he does not make any reference to Goedel’s
theorems. For him, the reality is given as ’textures of diﬀerent kind connections’, as
’inﬁnite abundance’, without any ultimate fundament. Heisenberg states ceaselessly, in
agreement with Husserl, Heidegger and Cassirer (whom he knew personally), that one
has to suppress any rigid distinction between Subject and Object. He also states that one
has to end with the privileged reference on the outer material world and that the only
approaching manner for the sense of reality is to accept its division in regions and levels.

The resemblance with my own deﬁnition of Reality is striking.

Heisenberg distinguishes ‘regions of reality’ (der Bereich der Wirklichkeit) from ‘levels

of reality’ (die Schicht der Wirklichkeit).

”We understand by ‘regions of reality’ - writes Heisenberg - [...] an ensemble of nomo-
logical connections. These regions are generated by groups of relations. They overlap,
adjust, cross, always respecting the principle of non-contradiction.” (Ref. 6, p. 257)

The regions of reality are, in fact, strictly equivalent to the levels of organization of

the systemic thinking.

Heisenberg is conscious that the simple consideration of the existence regions of reality
is not satisfactory because they will put on the same plan the classical and the quantum
mechanics. It is the essential reason that leads him to regrouping these reality regions in
diﬀerent Levels of Reality. His motivation is therefore identical with mine.

Heisenberg regroups the numerous regions of reality in three distinct levels.

”It is clear - writes Heisenberg - that the ordering of the regions has to substitute the
gross division of world into a subjective reality and an objective one and to stretch itself
between these poles of subject and object in such a manner that at its inferior limit are the
regions where we can completely objectify. In continuation, one has to join regions where
the states of things could not be completely separated from the knowledge process during
which we are identifying them. Finally, on the top, have to be the Levels of Reality where
the states of things are created only in connexion with the knowledge process.” (Ref. 6,
p. 372)

Heisenberg’s approach is compatible with the Relativity Principle present in my ap-
proach. Catherine Chevalley underlines that Heisenberg suppresses the rigid distinction
between ”exact sciences of the objective real world and the inexact sciences of the subjec-

9

tive world” and he refuses ”any hierarchy founded on the privilege of certain nomological
connexion forms, or on a region of the real considered more objective than the others”
(Ref. 6, p. 152).

The ﬁrst Level of Reality, in the Heisenberg model, corresponds to the states of things,
which are objectiﬁed independently of the knowledge process. He situates at this ﬁrst level
the classical mechanics, the electromagnetism and the two relativity theories of Einstein,
in other words the classical physics.

The second Level of Reality corresponds to the states of things inseparable from the
knowledge process. He situates here the quantum mechanics, the biology and the con-
sciousness sciences.

Finally, the third Level of Reality corresponds to the states of things created in con-
nexion with the knowledge process. He situates on this Level of Reality philosophy, art,
politics, ’God’ metaphors, religious experience and inspiration experience.

If the ﬁrst two Levels of Reality of Heisenberg entirely correspond to my own deﬁnition,
his third level seems to me to mix levels and non-levels (i.e. non-resistance zones). In fact,
philosophy, art and politics represent academic disciplines, which are conforming to the
intrinsic resistance of a Level of Reality. Even the ’God’ metaphors, if they are integrated
to a theology, could correspond to a Level of Reality: theology is, after all, a human
science as the other ones. But the religious experience and the inspiration experience
are diﬃcult to assimilate to a Level of Reality. They rather correspond to the passage
between diﬀerent Levels of Reality in the non-resistance zone.

Obviously, there is an important diﬀerence between the two deﬁnitions of the Level
of Reality notion. The absence of resistance and the absence of the discontinuity in the
Heisenbergs deﬁnition explain this diﬀerence.

”The concepts are, so to say, the privileged points where the diﬀerent Levels of Reality
are interweaving” wrote Heisenberg. He speciﬁes on: ”When one is questioning the
nomological connexions of reality, these last ones are found every time inserted into a
determined reality level; it could not at all be interpreted diﬀerently from the concept
of reality ’level’ (it is possible to speak about the eﬀect of a level onto another one only
by using very generally the ’eﬀect’ concept). On the other hand, the diﬀerent levels
are connected in the associated ideas and words and which, from the beginning, are
in simultaneous relation with the numerous connexions”. (Ref. 6, p. 257) This is vague
enough and necessarily introduces confusion between the organisation levels and the levels
of Reality. If the levels are ’interweaving’, one cant understand how is possible to introduce
a classiﬁcation of the levels of Reality. The nomological connexions characterise as well
the reality regions and the levels of Reality. Therefore, they are not suﬃcient in order to
distinguish ’region’ from ’level’.

In fact, Heisenberg does not explicitly impose the non-contradiction principle that
could lead him to the discovery of the Levels of Reality discontinuity. However, the
discontinuity is mentioned a few times in the Manuscript of 1942 but only in relation
with history: history of representations, history of the individual, history of humanity.

10

Heisenberg also insists on the role of the intuition : ”Only the intuitive thinking wrote
Heisenberg can pass over the abyss that exists between the concepts system already known
and the new concepts system; the formal deduction is helpless on throwing a bridge over
this abyss.” (Ref. 6, p. 261) But Heisenberg does not draw the logical conclusion that
is imposed by the helplessness of the formal thinking: only the non-resistance of our
experiences, representations, descriptions, images or mathematical formalisations could
bring a bridge over the abyss between two zones of resistance. The non-resistance is
the key of understanding the discontinuity between two immediately neighbour levels of
Reality.

But this important diﬀerence between the two deﬁnitions of the Levels of Reality,
that of Heisenberg and mine, do not erase the motivation of introducing these levels,
motivation which is identical in both cases.

In order to ﬁnish, I want to make a few brief considerations on the political and
intellectual context in which was written The Manuscript of 1942. During the Nazism,
the anti-Semitism included the attacks against the relativity theory and the quantum
mechanics, viewed as products of the Western decadence. The promoters of Deutsche
Physik presupposed that there is only one level of reality. It is strange to ﬁnd as leaders
of Deutsche Physik two remarkable physicists: Philipp Lenard (Nobel prize in 1905) and
Johannes Stark (Nobel prize in 1919). The anticonceptualism of the Deutsche Physik
holders, at war against ’the Jewish physics’, was virulent. The knowledge had to discover
the unique reality by a language near to the intuition. According to them, the experiment
was in front of the theory. Their black sheep was the abstract space of the quantum events,
while, for them, the only space-time could be that of our ordinary experience, with four
dimensions.

It is otherwise interesting to ﬁnd the attachment of totalitarian systems to the four
dimensional space-time. There is an astonishing passage in Materialism and empiriocrit-
icism (1909), where Lenin attacked the physical theories implying a multidimensional
space-time, proclaiming that one can make revolutions only in four dimensions. We may
also add here that the notion of Levels of Reality is also mining the fundaments of the
dialectical materialism.

Catherine Chevalley was right to write: ”the Manuscript of 1942 appeared as an
eﬀort to make philosophically impossible an ideological operation as that of Deutsche
Physik ” (Ref. 6, p. 94). The manuscript has circulated among the German physicists
and students. To speak about Levels of Reality in the context of the Deutsche Physik
ﬁght against ’Jewish physics’ was equivalent with a true act of resistance against the
national-socialism.

References

[1] B. d’Espagnat, A la Recherche du R´eel, Gauthier-Villars, Paris, 1981, 79-102.

[2] B. Nicolescu, 3e Mill´enaire, 1 (1982) 68.

11

[3] B. Nicolescu, Nous, la particule et le monde, Le Mail, Paris, 1985.

[4] B. Nicolescu, Levels of Complexity and Levels of Reality, in The Emergence of Com-
plexity in Mathematics, Physics, Chemistry and Biology, B. Pullman (ed.), Princeton
University Press, Princeton, 1996, 393.

[5] W. Thirring, Do the Laws of Nature Evolve?, in What is Life? - The Next Fifty
Years: Speculations on the Future of Biology, M.P. Murphy and L.A. O’Neil (eds.),
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 1995.

[6] W. Heisenberg, Philosophie - La manuscrit de 1942, translated from German and

introduction by C. Chevalley, Seuil, Paris, 1998.

[7] E. Husserl, M´editations cart´esiennes, translated from German by G. Peiﬀer and E.

Levinas, Vrin, Paris, 1966.

12

