6
0
0
2
 
b
e
F
 
7
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
t
s
i
h
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
5
8
1
2
0
6
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

MELENCOLIA I :
The physics of Albrecht D¨urer

David.Finkelstein ∗

February 15, 2014

Abstract

Besides its conspicuous early Renaissance scientiﬁc instruments and tools, D¨urer’s engraving ME-
LENCOLIA I also contains numerous apparently unreported concealments. Their decryption re-
veals heresies concealed in the work. The main one is encoded in the motto that has named the
piece: Natural Philosophy is superior to Mathematical Philosophy and Theological Philosophy as
a way to knowledge. Numerous secondary images demonstrate the relativity and ambiguity of
perception and indicate that D¨urer like Newton was a secret unitarian.

1 Background

Many details of the MELENCOLIA I (1514) of Albrecht D¨urer (1471-1528) seem to have been
overlooked in recent centuries, and the meaning is in the details [6]. I report some of them here.
My interpretations of some of these led to the discovery of others, giving me enough conﬁdence to
also make a stab at interpreting what I found. Mistakes in my interpretation undoubtedly exist
but need not cast doubt on the observations themselves, which I bullet for reference. A better
I have made an eﬀort not to project
interpretation ought still to take these data into account.
my own views across half a millennium onto D¨urer. The point is not what I see in the engraving
but what D¨urer expected his viewers to see. The philosophical views I read in the engraving and
present below are not necessarily my own. They are selected from or extend those expressed in
writing by D¨urer and his acquaintances.

Anyone can see the impressive angel sitting in the right foreground and the small winged serpent
ﬂying in the left background, like virtue and evil personiﬁed. A winged boy, or putto, a famil-
iar convention of Renaissance art, perches between them on an up-turned millstone and intently
inscribes a block. Paraphernalia of the arts and sciences clutter the scene in a signiﬁcant pattern.

The art historian Erwin Panofsky [19] saw the engraving as intensely autobiographical and read
its melancholy as D¨urer’s own frustration at the gap between artistic and divine creation. Frances
Yates, historian of the Hermetic tradition, took its melancholia to be one that inspired creativity,

∗School of Physics, Georgia Institute of Technology. df4@mail.gatech.edu

1

not mere depression, and read the engraving as a declaration of the harmony between microcosm
and macrocosm: as above, so below [24]. The art historian Patrick Doorly sees it as an illustration
for Plato’s Greater Hippias, a dialogue on beauty [4], with the angel melancholy because the artist
cannot deﬁne absolute beauty. They pass over more than a score of individual concealments and
paradoxes in the engraving: a key anagram, rebuses, Cabalistic gematria, puns, a Star of David,
over a dozen hidden faces, two Jews blowing the ram’s horn, the entire ﬁgure of a kneeling warrior in
Arab dress, and even the downfall of Babylon. There are references to Genesis, Revelation, Cabala,
the Nicean Creed, and the D¨urer family history. There are numerous demonstrations of the limits
to human perception, and capital crimes that explains much of the concealment. These illuminate
D¨urer’s views on art, science, philosophy, and religion, and support some of the interpretations of
others that I have just cited, but not all. The interpretations I cite do not mention the main point
of the engraving.

One element of this work is relativity in the broad sense, the study of how what we see depends on
our viewpoint. D¨urer uses perspective to construct several examples of relativity and ambiguity.
It is not anachronistic to attribute this idea to D¨urer, since he is one of the creators of descriptive
geometry, which is precisely a theory of how the same object looks from diﬀerent points of view,
and is probably the ﬁrst mathematical theory of relativity in the broad sense. He is signiﬁcant in
the history of the perspective technique, which the Romans and Greeks practiced and the Church
suppressed as deceptive. D¨urer carried “the secret of perspective,” as he called it, from Italy to
northern Europe, and some say that his book on the subject founded the mathematical theory of
descriptive or projective geometry, though this developed over centuries with growing rigor.

Perspective, special relativity, and general relativity all rest on an understanding of visual percep-
tion and light, and so there are family resemblances among them. The apparent foreshortening of
limbs in perspective and the apparent shortening of rulers and slowing of clocks in relative motion
or in gravitational valleys are all eﬀects of relativity in the broad sense. Where relativists today
speak of light-cones, Leonardo and D¨urer spoke of “pyramids of vision,” which are light-cones with
time omitted, being made of paths of light in space rather than trajectories in space-time. They
held that in perception one such pyramid diverges from the point observed, like a future light cone,
and another converges to the the observing eye, like a past light cone. The perspective transfor-
mations of the graphic plane that we carry out when we shift our viewpoint are special cases of the
transformations of space-time used later in modern relativity. Both are represented by matrices
or tables of two rows and columns, with real or complex number entries respectively. Projective
geometry is a playground for relativists and made D¨urer an eminent mathematician of his time.

That D¨urer’s art can be programmatic is indisputable, for he literally encoded messages into another
work of this period, leaving us message, code-book, and work. In 1514 — the year inscribed on
this engraving — he had just ﬁnished his Triumphal Arch of Maximilian I , an elaborate eulogy of
Maximilian assembled in several stages:

1. In the 2nd-4th century CE, a certain Horapollo wrote Hieroglyphica, a spurious rendering of
the Egyptian hieiroglyphic symbols into Greek, centuries before the Rosetta Stone made a proper
reading possible. This ﬁgures in MELENCOLAI I too.

2. In 1512/1513 Willibald Pirckheimer (1470-1530), D¨urer’s learned best friend, Humanist, state
councillor, and translator of Greek and Hebrew classics, translated the ﬁctional Hieroglyphica from
Greek into Latin.

3. D¨urer illustrated Pirckheimer’s Hieroglyphica.

2

4. Pirckheimer wrote out a eulogy of Maximilian I in plain Latin, still extant.

5. With the Hieroglyphica as his code-book D¨urer encoded Pirckheimer’s eulogy word by word into
an allegorical fantasy of dogs, goats, harpies, cocks, snakes, scepters and the like, making up the
centerpiece of the Triumphal Arch [19].

The code-book and the clear message were also published, so the Triumphal Arch was an attempt
to communicate, not conceal. Neither a plain text nor a code-book for MELENCOLIA I has been
passed down to us, however, and we must resort to a kind of cryptography to deduce them. One
might think that D¨urer had something to hide. The message I ﬁnd conﬁrms this suspicion.

MELENCOLIA I conceals more deeply than the Triumphal Arch. Some of its elements have been
interpreted as slips of the artist and so seen but not read. Some viewers have suggested that D¨urer
did not know how to spell, since he misspelled the motto MELENCOLIA I; or how to draw a cube
in perspective, since the polyhedron is not quite a truncated cube.

There are indeed well-known limits to D¨urer’s knowledge. Most famously, the astronomer Kepler
pointed out that in D¨urer’s work on measurement [6] he drew the ellipse produced by cutting a cone
with a plane as egg-shaped, with its small end near the tip of the cone. I found a striking error in
optics in this engraving. Nevertheless, to catch his meanings we must not underestimate his power
with the burin, his skill in perspective, his devotion to precise language, and his acute observations
of nature. We should remember that he was a humanist, knowledgable in mathematics, poetry,
and antiquity as well as art, and that he argued philosophy hotly and on equal terms with a famous
scholar like Pirckheimer and conversed with Erasmus. We should be aware of his impassioned
criticism of corrupt ecclesiastical practices and his support of the Reformation. I was aware of none
of these when I began this study, but they are indispensable for reading the engraving so I will
state them brieﬂy before we set out into the world of MELENCOLIA I .

Like Leonardo, D¨urer began his training under a goldsmith, namely his father, a Hungarian immi-
grant in Nuremberg. By the year on the engraving, he had made two historic visits to Venice, where
he studied perspective and human proportion and developed a passion for geometry. Eventually
he extended Leonardo’s work on beauty in a relativistic direction, using projective transformations
to allow for diﬀerent standards of beauty.

D¨urer brings us back to many beginnings. He did not have to please art critics to succeed because
they had not yet been invented. The ﬁrst published art criticism in history was actually the praise
of this very engraving by Joachim Camerarius (1500-1574), a young friend of D¨urer who watched
him at work, translated his book on human proportions from German into Latin, and at the end
wrote his eulogy, in which he declared that although D¨urer’s art was great, it was the least of his
accomplishments.

D¨urer was the ﬁrst to publish in German a mathematical proof or a book on pure mathematics.
He produced the ﬁrst printed star-chart and the ﬁrst printed map of the world as a sphere viewed
from outer space. He shaped the German scientiﬁc language much as Leonardo did the Italian: by
describing the processes of art and nature in ordinary language instead of ﬂowery Latin, painstak-
ingly picking out the prose ornaments and classical references that infested scholarly writing in his
time.

He was a brilliant and recognized originator in art too. He did the ﬁrst known self-portrait and the
ﬁrst known speciﬁc landscape. He invented etching and some perspective drawing machines. He
seems to have invented the modern artist, being the ﬁrst to charge for his special talent instead of

3

just billing for time and materials like Raphael or any house-painter of the time. His life mission
seems to have been to sanctify art above artisanry and even above philosophy; to elevate graphic
art to the status of music.

Number lifted the medieval quadrivium of arithmetic, geometry, astronomy, and music out of the
mundane and into the divine. So Leonardo, D¨urer, and others sought to found art and beauty too
on number. The concept of the Golden Rectangle, Leonardo’s famous drawing of a man inscribed
in a circle, and D¨urer’s books on descriptive geometry and body proportions are mementos of that
search.

2 Hidden faces

I had known MELENCOLIA I for many years when it caught my attention again in April 2004.
On the internet, an anonymous donor posted a copy with a thin black outline of a face drawn on
the polyhedron in the engraving sometimes called “D¨urer’s Solid.” I chanced on this once and have
never found it again. I went to my own copy and found at least the implication of a face that I had
overlooked for decades. If we step back several paces from a good print and look at the shading of
the front face of the Solid for a minute or so, we can see a woman’s face in proﬁle. Or perhaps we
construct it.

There are three faces in the Solid and which you see depends on how you hold your head relative
to the print. I will call these people A., B., and C. Solid.

A. Solid is a woman with her head erect.
B. Solid is a man with his head cocked 30◦ clockwise.

•

•

At the left edge of the face of B. Solid is a vee-shaped dimple in the stone that becomes the nose

•
of C. Solid when we turn the picture on its left edge.

I found C. Solid, smaller and more caricaturish than his two companions, some time after A. and
B., but not by some careful search. I predicted his existence as described in what follows, and then
found him at once. The existence of this triplet may have been known in the time of D¨urer, but I
do not ﬁnd them mentioned by any modern writer on D¨urer.

We have to scan these hidden faces with some persistence before they emerge. They are subtle
and draw much on our own perceptive process. We are not certain whether we see them or create
them.
I thought that the internet outline of A. Solid was an accidenal product of scanning or
digitization until I realized that most of the left edge of her face has almost no physical correlate
in the engraving. D¨urer compels us to see it, when we look for it, by supplying chin and forehead
lines and eye and nostril shadows, but we ourselves create the rest of the face as no point-by-point
scanning process could. Part of the art behind these hidden faces is that they are ambiguous,
deniable, and lie at the edge of perception. They are joint productions of the hand of the artist
and the mind of the viewer, demonstrating D¨urer’s mastery of both media. When we see one of
the faces in this triplet we do not see the other two, because of elements they share. For example,
A. and B. Solid share an eye-pit.

Ambiguous faces are frequently reproduced, but I have never seen a triply ambiguous one before
these, so these may not be well known today. They go beyond the familiar concept of relativity,
in that each face in turn appears and disappears as we merely rotate our heads about the line of

4

sight. They show that what we see depends on our reference frame more than we ordinarily realize.
Our innate face-detector is most sensitive by far to upright faces.

These three faces also hide in the way watermarks do. We apparently ﬁlter out distracting low-
contrast images within a high-contrast one unless we consciously search for them.

I have doubted the reality of some of these hidden faces but several circumstances reassure me:
D¨urer had extraordinary vision; what I see he saw more clearly. The anonymous donor saw one of
the faces before me, and who knows how many of the others. I cannot ﬁnd hidden faces in most
of D¨urer’s works but only in some. I verify the faces I see with other viewers. Ultimately I know
these faces are not accidental random patterns in much the same way that you know that the words
you are looking at now are not random selections of letters: They make more sense than random
patterns do.

On the other hand, in the end I cannot count the faces of MELENCOLIA I exactly. I have named
10 faces that are clearly intended, others are clearly unintended. nut there are a few intermediate
cases that cannot be settled. Any noise, such as that produced by digitization, distorts or eliminates
the intended faces and creates accidental ones. Our propensity to ﬁnd faces is so strong that now
I wonder why Schiaperelli saw canals on Mars and not a face as in the Moon.

Viewers of D¨urer’s time may have seen most of these faces at once, alerted by the many hidden
•
faces in earlier works of D¨urer. His watercolor View of Arco has a cliﬀ that clearly is also a famous
scowling face.

His drawing of Arco hides three such unhappy faces in the landscape.
•

His engraving Der Spaziergang, or The Lady and the Gentleman, or Young Couple Threatened by
•
Death (page 201 of [19]) has a remarkable secondary image of a male face formed of and looming
over both the lady and the gentleman in question. Their heads are his eyes, her arm is his mouth.
In this picture D¨urer does not use the watermark technique but a kind of sleight-of-hand. The lines
of the hidden face are all drawn in high contrast but other more expected forms divert us from the
covert one.

In the 1494 drawing Orfeus der erst Pusaner (Orpheus the First Pederast) or The Death of
•
Orpheus, a hidden face in the tree-top over Orpheus watches in astonishment as two Thracian
women club Orpheus to death and a boy ﬂees.

Others have pointed out a signiﬁcant hidden face in D¨urer’s engraving The Knight, Death, and the
Devil. D¨urer portrays the Knight as spectacularly oblivious to Death and the Devil, though in all
other such encounters in the work of D¨urer, the knight engages evil in mortal combat. It is one thing
to overlook an angel and a small demon as the Boy in MELENCOLIA I does; another to ignore
Death and the Devil themselves as this Knight does. The Knight is generally said to represent
the ideal Christian Soldier described by Erasmus (1466?-1536), who was a revered acquaintance of
D¨urer. So virtuous was the Christian Soldier that he was blind to the evil about him. On the other
hand, D¨urer wrote a fervent plea to Erasmus, still extant though perhaps never sent, to join with
him and Luther in battle against the “Cave of Hell” and die a martyr’s death. Erasmus remained
within the Catholic church and worked for reform instead of applying for martyrdom. For D¨urer
and his viewers, the unseeing Knight may also have represented Erasmus himself. In any case D¨urer
pays tribute to the Knight in a marvellous way that others have noted:

One sleeve of Death forms an agonized face smashed between the Knight’s two ﬁsts.

•

5

The Knight may seem blind to Death but still punishes him. Eventually, Pirckheimer tells us,
the high-minded D¨urer would lament that the behavior of the Protestant clerics made even the
Catholic clergy look respectable by comparison.

D¨urer’s 1526 portrait Erasmus of Rotterdam has a gleeful hidden face high on the left sleeve of

•
Erasmus.

These examples indicate that the hidden faces are not all just puzzles and games. Some advance
the story like a Greek chorus. When D¨urer’s hidden faces look on and express emotion, they tell us
how D¨urer felt about the subject. For example, I suppose that the cliﬀs of Arco scowled because,
as we now know, D¨urer disapproved of some aspect of the Arco cathedral. We will ﬁnd still more
surprising and informative hidden faces in MELENCOLIA I .

As for these three, the poses of A. and B. Solid are those of D¨urer’s last portraits of his mother and
father and so perhaps they ﬁt well into Panofsky’s theory that this engraving is autobiographical.
If so, then C. Solid might be D¨urer the son. In his last portrait of his mother, D¨urer shows her
divergent strabismus, a family trait that he inherited known as the D¨urereblick . The resolution of
D¨urer’s images may be too low for certainty but A. and C. Solid can be seen as strabismic.

3 Rebuses

There are two rebuses in the engraving, and two in the D¨urer coat-of-arms. These are clues to the
central mystery.

The famous D¨urer monogram AD appears under the date 1514 on the edge of the stone slab under
the angel. It seems to pun on Anno Domini. The capital A is also a rebus. To read it we need
some family background.

In 1455 Gutenberg printed his ﬁrst Bible, Mohammed II, founder of the Ottoman Empire and
conqueror of Constantinople, invaded Hungary, and a goldsmith named Albrecht, 23, left his village
of Ajts in Hungary to ﬁnally resettle in Nuremberg. Ajto is Hungarian for door, or Th¨ur in the
German of the time, so Albrecht of Ajts became Albrecht Th¨urer. Had he moved to England
he could have become Albert Gates. He soon simpliﬁed the spelling to D¨urer, a homonym in
one dialect. He married his master’s daughter, Barbara Holper, and she had eighteen children.
Three lived, inheriting his Hungarian nationality. One, Albrecht Junior, became the famous artist-
philosopher-mathematician. His family coat-of-arms tells us much about his self-conception and
opens the doors of this work.

The coat-of-arms is topped with conventional symbols found in any dictionary of heraldry. Eagle
wings mean fame and glory. A closed helmet in full proﬁle declares D¨urer an esquire, the lowest
estate. A blackamoor at the top stands for heroic action by an ancestor in the Crusades. Its racism
was common in the time and place, and recurs in MELENCOLIA I too. Below the cliches is a
shield that carries speciﬁc family symbols. I point out two that are obvious.

A gateway with open doors can be read as a rebus for both “D¨urer” and “Ajt´os,” the family

•
name and origin.

This sent me looking for other rebuses. I did not have to look far. The gateway stands on a cloud,
making it a gateway in the sky.

6

It is easy to read this too. Coats of arms usually show oﬀ the pride of the family. The cloud should
stand for some great personal accomplishment. To proclaim what he was most famous for, D¨urer
could simply have drawn his burin across the shield. But the burin is also a mere artisan’s tool,
and D¨urer’s life mission was to sanctify the artist above the artisan. He presumably knew that
caelum, the Latin for burin, is also an ordinary word for “the sky, ” “heaven,” and “the heavens,”
with the same root as our “celestial.” D¨urer seized this heaven-sent opportunity to sanctify himself
and his art.

The cloud in the D¨urer coat-of-arms is a rebus that puts his family gates “at Heaven” (caelo)

•
and at the same time says “I engrave” (caelo).

The dative case of the noun is the ﬁrst person present tense of the verb. The cloud is our second
rebus.

”Gate to Heaven,” another reading of the coat-of-arms, became a common metaphor for the Roman
Church itself. An educated person of the time might take this claim of divinity not as a sacrilegious
display of ego but as a pious reaﬃrmation that we are made in the image of God. We will meet
the D¨urer gateway in the sky again in MELENCOLIA I .

With D¨urer’s coat-of-arms in mind, one now sees the oddly-formed A in his monogram as a gateway
as well as a letter. The legs of the gateway are the uprights of the A, the lintel connects them at
the top, and the stiﬀener just beneath the lintel is the cross-bar of the A. The cross-bar of D¨urer’s
A is peculiarly high for an A but for proper for a gateway. The polymorphic A-gate is our third
rebus for the D¨urer family, the ﬁrst of several gates in the picture important for its interpretation.

4 Gematria

The matrix of numbers set into the masonry wall like a window lattice is a magic square, meaning
that it is made of consecutive numbers starting from 1 without omission or repetition, and every
row, every column, and both main diagonals add up to the same number. Here that number is 34.
This magic square is called a gnomon magic square because in addition its four quadrants, its four
corners, and its central tetrad add up to the same number. In addition, the sum of any pair of
numbers symmetric about the center is 17.

The idea of the magic square and much of the cosmology in this engraving may have come to D¨urer
from Heinrich Cornelius Agrippa von Nettesheim (1486-1535), a proliﬁc and controversial ﬁgure in
the Florentine Neo-Platonist school, the original of Dr. Faust. Agrippa wandered Europe seeking
royal support, never settling in one city as much as four years. He visited Nuremberg in 1510
with the manuscript of his De Occulta Philosophia, a compendium of astrology, alchemy, Cabala,
and absurd propositions of biology, physics, and medicine, for example, that diamond destroys the
magnetism of lodestone. He said that he studied the occult philosophy because it traced back to
a secret divine revelation given at the same time as the open revelation of the Torah of Moses. In
it Agrippa assigns a magic square to each of the seven “planets” then known, in both Arabic and
Hebrew numerals, in the ancient order Saturn, Jupiter, Mars, Sun, Venus, Mercury, and Moon.
This is the order of their periods, since the geocentric system gave to the Sun the heliocentric
period of the Earth. These magic squares have ninth century Arab sources [19] but may be older.

Agrippa omitted the 1-by-1 magic square [1] and there is no 2-by-2 magic square, so Saturn has
a 3-by-3 table, Jupiter a 4-by-4 table and so on to the 9-by-9 table of the Moon. The number of

7

Jupiter is then 1 + 2 + . . . + 16 = 136, as the number of the Sun is 1 + 2 + . . . + 36 = 666. Agrippa
warned that unshielded Saturn caused acute melancholia, a clinical mental illness, and prescribed
wearing Jupiter’s Table as shield. Agrippa proved the virtue of Jupiter’s Table by gematria, a
Hebrew numerology based on the fact that any letter of the Hebrew alphabet is also a number and
that therefore every Hebrew word has a number, the sum of its letters. He found reassuring words
in Jupiter’s Table by gematria. Some say D¨urer borrowed Jupiter’s Table from Agrippa [19, 24].

Here are the two magic squares:

•

6 12

5 10 11 12

4 14 15

9

16

7

2

5 11 10

1

8

16

9

3

6

2 13

7 12

1

3 13

Agrippa

4 15 14
D¨urer

They have no row or column in common and D¨rer’s table lacks Agrippa’s protective words.

D¨urer borrowed the idea of the Table, perhaps, but he performed non-trivial permutations —
not mere reﬂections of the whole table — that left it both magic and gnomon but changed the
bottom line to the date 1514 of the engraving ﬂanked by the Latin gematria for D A, matching the
monogram and date at the bottom of the engraving. D¨urer used the Table to perpetuate his name
and the date, not to ward oﬀ melancholia. That he saw and used this combinatorial possibility tells
us more about his vision and alerted me to other uses of the permutation principle and gematria
in MELENCOLIA I .

I found both. Pursuing the autobiography hypothesis, I computed the Latin gematria for “Albrecht
Durer,” ignoring the non-Latin umlaut. The sum is 135. Since there is no “u” in the Latin alphabet,
the spelling can be “Albrecht Dvrer, ” but this does not change the sum, since “v” would also replace
“u” as letter 21. The summation of the whole table is 136 and is not under D¨urer’s control. He
would have separated the 1 from the rest of the table to make the sum equal 135 or “Albrecht
Durer.” This prediction we can verify.

One wing of the angel has brushed the 1 and no other numeral in D¨urer’s Table, blessing it,
•
enlarging it, and raising it in a way that violates the conventions of realism.
I did not see the
enlarged 1 until I did the gematria and looked for it. The diﬀerence looks small to me, but D¨urer
had extraordinary vision for detail.

It is a possibility that this holy 1 represents the Holy One. It is the 1
1 magic square that Agrippa
left out. Its size further distinguishes D¨urer’s Table from Jupiter’s. The magic square thus carries
D¨urer signature twice, once in the bottom line and once in the total, next to the Holy One.

×

It is easier to credit D¨urer with such egotism after we see other instances. We have noticed one
self-deiﬁcation in his monogram and another in his coat-of-arms. For another example, see D¨urer’s
painting in the Alte Pinakothek of the Mourning over the Body of Jesus. The mourners form a
triangle. The base of the triangle is the body of Jesus, and the body of the triangle is made up of
mourners, looking down as symbolizes mournful melancholy. But the apex is D¨urer himself, looking
up.

One moral of the magic square is so obvious that it is important to point it out again: Things are
not what they seem in this engraving. What we see depends on our point of view.

8

5 Bat

The chimera with head of mouse, wings of bat, and tail of serpent ﬂies at us out of the engraving.
In earlier works D¨urer gives bat-wings and snake-tail to minions of the devil such as the dragon
of St. George, suggesting that this is a demon, but Agrippa assigns the color black, serpents, and
bats to the planet Saturn, so this could merely be a most Saturnian messenger, and the ambiguity
could well be intentional. There are so many Agrippan elements in the engraving that I adopt the
Saturnian interpretation and call this messenger the Bat. It carries the banner “MELENCOLIA I.”
This clearly refers to the ancient Greek humor of melancholia, and likely to Agrippa’s revision of
the teaching of the Florentine Neo-Platonist Marsilio Ficino (1433-1499). I summarize the language
of the Spheres and Humors that seems to be used in this engraving [19, 24], capitalizing terms used
[1]. For a millenium and more, the West divided the world into three
in a now archaic sense.
concentric Worlds of Spheres, the Terrestrial or Elemental, the Celestial, and the Supercelestial,
Intellectual, or Spiritual. They were studied in Natural, Mathematical, and Theological Philosophy
respectively [1].

Part of the Renaissance was the return to the subtler understanding of the Greeks, many of whom
knew that the Earth moved. In this time of transition, I will suppose, Da Vinci and D¨urer used a
more physical cosmology in their science, while in their art they still used the naive Neo-Platonic
cosmology of geocentric worlds because that was still the language that they shared with their
viewers.

The Terrestrial Sphere is our normal abode, angels and Platonic Ideas inhabit the Intellectual
Sphere, and between the two lies the Celestial Sphere, made up of one sphere for the stars and
many others to work the planets. Ptolemy used over 90 spheres in all, which are all lumped into
the Celestial Sphere. Neo-Platonists analogously divided the human psyche into three Mentalities
or Faculties specially suited to the corresponding Spheres [24]:

Mens imaginatio, the Imaginative Faculty, empowers the artisan, the artist, and the Natural
Philosopher to view arrangements of the four Elements in Space and Time, but nothing more.

Mens ratio, the Rational Faculty, allows astronomers and Mathematical Philosophers to know when
stars rise and set and thus through astrology it allows statesmen to know when kingdoms rise and
fall.

Mens contemplatrix , the Contemplative Faculty, enables Theological Philosophers to know angels
and Plato’s Forms or Ideas.

Their names vary considerably. Agrippa called them idolus, ratio, and mens respectively [18]. Ficino
and Agrippa also kept the ancient Greek psychology of the four humors, one for each Element: blood
for Air and the sanguinary temperament, yellow bile or choler for Fire and the bilious temperament,
phlegm for Water and the phlegmatic temperament, and black bile or melancholia for Earth and
acute depression. The black bile is a Greek myth invented to ﬁt the mental state of acute depression
into humor theory. There is no such stuﬀ. Some said that the appendix secreted it, others the
spleen; they secrete nothing. Astrologers associated Saturn, the slowest and darkest planet, with the
least favorable humor, the black bile or melancholia; the worst mental state, depression, therefore
called melancholia; the lowest Element, Earth; and the lowest people, understood to be those who
work with or in the earth.

Agrippa was a revolutionary astrologist while he practiced astrology and even after he rejected it

9

[18]. He promoted Saturn from the lowest status among the planets to the highest, empowering him
to inspire all three Faculties to their peak creativity, and transferred the demi-godlike geometers —
“earth measurers,” after all — to the Saturnians. According to Agrippa, the truly inspired artist
has a creative melancholia acting on the Imaginative Faculty [24]. D¨urer was a revolutionary artist,
aiming to promote art and artists from the lowest to the highest rank. Since artists are assigned
to the Terrestrial Sphere of Saturn, this must have created a natural alliance between Agrippa and
D¨urer.

Moreover both Agrippa and D¨urer were humanists and admired Erasmus . Agrippa was a Hebraist,
advocated simplicity and Bible-reading. These became part of both the Reformation and the
Unitarian movement, but Agrippa himself remained in the Catholic Church. In the last phase of
his life he hated astrology and was skeptical about all access to truth accept faith in the Bible. He
oﬀers us three increasingly reliable gateways to knowledge of God: the Book of Nature, the Book
of the Law, and the Book of the Gospel. In the Book of Nature we see merely the creatures of
God and use reason to deduce the existence and nature of God, but original sin clouds our souls
and makes our reason unreliable. Reason even led to the original sin when Eve reasoned with the
serpent. The Book of the Law and the Book of the Gospel, the two books of the Christian Bible,
are the result of revelation and require only faith. His pessimistic work on the uncertainty and
vanity of the sciences, and the superiority of faith in Scriptures and divine revelation to all the arts
and sciences, including astrology, was written after his optimistic Occult Philosophy but appeared
in print two years earlier. His self-contradiction is also built into MELENCOLIA I .

Panofsky and Yates saw many Saturnian melancholic elements in the engraving, taking its melan-
cholia in either the more depressive sense of Ficino or the more creative sense of Agrippa. They
take it that D¨urer accepted Agrippa’s philosophy at least for the purpose of this engraving. In-
deed, much in the engraving supports this view or is at least consistent with it. Nevertheless while
Erasmus, Agrippa and D¨urer all took the Christian Bible as divine revelation, they took signiﬁ-
cantly diﬀerent positions with respect to the Reformation. Erasmus remained loyal to the Church
and distanced himself from Agrippa when Agrippa’s protest against the corruption of the monks
who ran the Inquisition became radical [10]. D¨urer left the Church to follow Luther, but if I read
MELENCOLIA I correctly, it is more radical than anything we have from Agrippa or Luther.

Also D¨urer probably rejected astrology before Agrippa. In 1514 Copernicus (1473-1543) had not
yet published his heliocentric cosmology, but the cardinal, mathematician, and philosopher Nicolas
of Cusa (1401-1464) had quite demolished the Ptolemaic spheres. Leonardo had already written
that the Earth moves, not the Sun, and that “those who have chosen to worship men as gods – as
Jove, Saturn, Mars and the like – have fallen into the gravest error.” He had derided necromancers
and excluded every trace of astrology from his intensely rational works on astronomy. There is a
picture of the folly of Attention to the Stars in the Narrenschyﬀ (Ship of Fools) of Brant (1494) [3],
plausibly attributed to D¨urer. It shows the astrologer-fool immersed in a motley ﬂock of misshapen
fowl ﬂying in random directions, representing the products of the astrologer’s disordered mind.
Birds were a common metaphor for thoughts.

Martin Luther tacked his theses to a church door in 1517, and D¨urer became an ardent follower at
once. Luther speciﬁcally linked Agrippa’s Occult Philosophy with witchcraft, and Agrippa aroused
ire when he defended a woman accused of witchcraft from her corrupt accusers. Agrippa eventually
withdrew to a pious faith in God and the Bible.

In view of the motto, the darkness of the engraving can be taken to indicate Saturnian melancholia.
Some say that this motto names the angel diagonally opposite it. D¨urer labels things unambiguously

10

in his other works. He puts his labels on or near the things labeled. The label is on the Bat or
the whole scene, not the Angel. D¨urer ﬁlls his engraving with Agrippan elements. I supposed that
by giving the message “MELENCOLIA I, ” to the Bat D¨urer identiﬁed the messenger as Agrippa
delivering his theory of melancholy. Agrippa was such a charismatic ﬁgure that D¨urer’s audience
may have known at once who he meant by the Bat carrying Agrippa’s famous catch-word. Let us
see how far this takes us.

6 Anagram

It seemed strange to me that D¨urer would lower the tone of his classic Master Engraving with the
lugubrious ﬁgure of the Bat,. There is also something oﬀ-key about the motto on the banderole
of the Bat. Melancholia is transliterated Greek and also Latin for melancholy. The German is
Melancholie. In no language is it melencolia. The spelling of the time was variable and phonetic,
but this spelling is not quite phonetic either, for both the Greek and the German word have the
guttural ch, diﬀerent from any c sound. The encodings we have already found, the misspelling, and
the cryptic extra letter suggested the possibility of an anagram to me. The odd choice of letters
may have been constrained by a message that D¨urer wished both to record and conceal.

Agrippa could have put anagrams as well as gematria and magic squares into D¨urer’s mind. They
are all in his book on the occult philosophy. Anagrams, gematria, acrostics, and acronyms are
among the techniques used to extract messages from biblical texts in the Baraita of Thirty-Two
Rules of Rabbi Eliezer ben Jose the Galilean, who ﬂourished in the second half of the second century
C.E. and was cited importantly in later years. Such lore became more accessible to the Florentine
Neo-Platonists, including Agrippa, an active Hebraist, when some of the Jews expelled from Spain
in 1492 went to Florence.

In any case, by the 16th century letter-permutation was a standard way to protect intellectual
property. Writers of the time who solved an important problem could not guard their rights by
publishing or patenting. The Royal Society and the system of scientiﬁc archives were still over a
century in the future. Some protected their priority by permuting the letters of their solution and
publishing the result together with the problem. Earlier Roger Bacon had scrambled the formula for
gunpowder in this way in order to prevent the proliferation of this terrible weapon. Later Galileo
would scramble his discoveries of the phases of Venus and the rings of Saturn. Mathematicians
scrambled their theorems. The resulting meaningless jumble of letters declared on its face that it
was a cipher. Sometimes it was misconstrued by a false rearrangement.

In the next degree of concealment, the scrambled letters themselves spell a cover message, the
anagram. This can conceal even the existence of a hidden message. “MELENCOLIA I” has done
this well. Only the cover message has been read in recent centuries as far as I know. I decoded it
as follows.

Since so many D¨urer’s already populate the engraving, it is a reasonable ﬁrst guess that the motto
might hide another signature, so I ﬁrst went to D¨urer’s family coat-of-arms to see how he might
sign himself and found the caelo rebus already described by which D¨urer represented his heavenly
art. CAELO indeed ﬁts into MELENCOLIA. The leftover letters promptly spell out LIMEN,
commonly meaning gateway, a near-synonym for D¨urer, as well as doorway, threshold, lintel, walls,
house, home, boundary path, and limit, according to context.

MELENCOLIA is thus an anagram of LIMEN CAELO, literally “gateway at Heaven.”

•

11

The hidden motto thus combines the family name-rebus, D¨urer’s art, and the D¨urer coat-of-arms
itself. This veriﬁes the guess: The anagram is indeed another signature. Indirectly, it supports the
interpretations that D¨urer intended the clouds in the coat-of-arms as a symbol of Heaven, and did
not intend to demonize Agrippa. The hidden phrase also applies to the dim archway in the heavens
that frames the motto, and to other elements that we take up later. There are so many points of
contact with the anagram and the engraving that I am pretty sure I have read it correctly. The
overt message and image, both dark, cover a positive one. “Limen caelo” is as bright in spirit as
“Melencolia” is depressive. It seems to tell us that Agrippa is or has a new gateway to Heaven. We
must still ﬁgure out what that is.

Possibly D¨urer drew Agrippa with diabolical attributes to distance himself from Agrippa as Erasmus
did. There are four living things in the engraving and only three Faculties. Someone has to be left
out, and the Bat is the best candidate. I suppose that the role of the Bat is to carry the anagram
into the picture, provide a cover story for it, and as Agrippa, alert viewers to the many Agrippan
elements hidden in the engraving. It is not one of the Faculties.

7 Boy

The Boy — the root meaning of putto — is the central ﬁgure in several senses. The geometric central
axis of the engraving is the vertical deﬁned by the leftmost edge of the house. It passes almost
exactly through the nearest eye of the Boy, a common way to indicate centrality in Renaissance
art. The line of the comet, suitably extended, also strikes the Boy in the eye.

One way to incorporate the I in the anagram is “Caelo limine” which can mean “I engrave at the
edge” or “at the wall.” The Boy does all of these.

His instrument has a cross-bar at its top, and so is not a stylus as Panofsky said but a graver,

•
the celestial burin again. His block is not a slate but a copper sheet or a block of wood.

And he sits against a wall and on the edge of the stone disk as he engraves, as the anagram says.
This could be a multiple coincidence, but more likely D¨urer is making the Boy ﬁt the anagram so
we will know that the Boy is D¨urer too. This supports Panofsky’s conclusion that D¨urer meant this
work to show many aspects of himself, but not that the Boy is the generic starving artist scribbling
meaninglessly on a slate. It is the famous holy Engraver himself, at work with his heavenly Burin,
perhaps with the creative frenzy that melancholia can inspire in the artist, as Yates said. Panofsky
was misled by the paradoxical gloom of the work, which we must still understand.

Yates, on the other hand, suggested that the Boy is D¨urer engraving “MELENCOLIA I” itself, in
a self-referential way. This is not consistent with projective geometry. It ignores the line of sight
and the scale of the engraving. The Boy looks over his tablet directly at the Dog and his tablet is
too small for “MELENCOLIA I.” The Boy is clearly engraving the Dog on his tablet.

Since Angel had her fools, I returned to the Boy to look for his wise men and found the face I

•
call Mr. A. Boy in his blouse, between two straps.

12

8 Mystery

One mystery that faces us is why all the mystery. D¨urer could have explained his engraving for
us. Leonardo made up many riddles, but he wrote the solutions next to them, protected only by
his mirror-writing. D¨urer and Pirckheimer left the key to the Triumphal Arch for us; why not
the key to MELENCOLIA I ? In his essay on this picture, furthermore, Camerarius described the
magic square full of numbers as a spider-web full of dead ﬂies, ignored the many concealments, and
omitted the religious and the scientiﬁc contents [13]. Why was he disingenuous?

I hypothesized that D¨urer and his friends were less than frank in order to evade the stake. The
messages of the Triumphal Arch could be published in 1514, but the ideas in MELENCOLIA I
must have been more dangerous, this theory goes; and yet they must already have had a market.

In the times of this engraving, accusations of black magic and witchcraft beset magicians and natural
philosophers alike. Agrippa was linked with the devil by Martin Luther (1483-1546). Agrippa may
have inﬂuenced Servetus, who was burned in 1535, and D´avid, who was imprisoned and died in
1579 [10], both for the charge of “innovation” in religion. Eventually Agrippa renounced his major
opus and adopted an uncritical ﬁdeism. There was ample reason for D¨urer and his heirs to fear
execution and preserve silence.

This theory of a hidden heresy runs into a certain obstacle. In about 1498 D¨urer executed and
published a volume of fourteen woodblock prints of the Apocalypse. One of them, The Opening
of the Fifth and Sixth Seals,, shows the wicked hiding from the vengeance that God takes for the
blood of the saints. The wicked are the Pope, Cardinal, Bishop, Kaiser, and Kaiserin, the top of
the whole hierarchy of the Catholic Church and the Holy Roman Empire. In another, The Battle
of the Angels, he shows the imminent execution of the Pope by an avenging angel. So by the age
of 27, 16 years before the date of MELENCOLIA I, D¨urer — and his master Wohlgemut — had
already stood against the hierarchy of the Church and killed the Pope and the Emperor in eﬃgy.
The heresy of this engraving must be even more criminal since he had to hide it. It must also have
a market large enough to wear out the copper plate in making copies of this engraving. It must
be a crime that the Protestants too would punish, since D¨urer had already dismissed the Catholic
threat. What was the crime of Albrecht D¨urer?

The answer to this question dawned on me slowly over a period of months but I could accept it
only after answering easier ones.

9

Ladder

Any artist who put an endless ladder next to an angel, a house, and an up-turned stone in 1514
could be sure that the educated viewer of the time would see Jacob’s ladder, angel, house, and stone
of Genesis 28. The unseen end of the ladder is in heaven. Ladders as gates of heaven occurred
commonly in earlier art, including D¨urer’s own. The most relevant verses are

Genesis 28:12 And he dreamed, and behold a ladder set up on the earth, and the top
of it reached to heaven: and behold the angels of God ascending and descending on it.

Genesis 28:17 And he was afraid, and said, How dreadful is this place! this is none
other but the house of God, and this is the gate of heaven.

13

Genesis 28:18 And Jacob rose up early in the morning, and took the stone that he had
put for his pillows, and set it up for a pillar, and poured oil upon the top of it.

The house shows no door, so the ladder is the Gate of Heaven of the anagram and Genesis: another
signature. Beth El, the House of God, is also the legendary site of the ﬁrst house of worship of
the God of Israel. Early on, therefore, the porta caeli of the Vulgate also became a metaphor for
the Catholic church itself. We have found the limen caelo we were expecting, the predecessor of
the limen caelo I , yet another hidden gateway. It suggests that the limen caelo I is a successor to
the Church. This is at least consistent with the conversion of D¨urer to Lutheranism, and hints at
D¨urer’s dread heresy and new gateway to Heaven. But if we jump to conclusions we will fall short.

10 House

The house too is meaningfully polymorphic. From up close we see two blank walls supporting a
hodge-podge of instruments. The side wall does not seem much wider than the Boy leaning against
it. It seems about the right thickness for an out-house or a chimney, not a residence. Its front
wall extends indeﬁnitely to the right and holds a bell, D¨urer’s Table, an hour-glass, and a sun-dial.
Its side wall holds a chemical balance. The
Its left edge bisects the picture to the millimeter.
bell-rope trails oﬀ the edge to our right, probably to clear the magic square. Step back several
meters however and the picture changes.

Magic square and bell become a lattice window, the hour-glass a bay window, the scales a side

•
window, and the out-house a full-sized house showing us three of its windows.

Assembling familiar objects from unrelated parts in this way, for example, faces from fruits, or
demons from vermin, was an optical illusion often practiced by artists of the era. Here there is
allusion as well as illusion. If the house is what the sanctiﬁed instruments on its walls open into,
it is the humanly perceptible universe, the entire physical cosmos. The ladder and the Angel have
already told us that this is also the House of God, and the instrumental windows tell us that
measurement and mathematics are a way of seeing into it. This is the declaration of Leonardo that
all knowledge comes from experience, but D¨urer clearly accepts the truth of the Scriptures as well.

Then there is the curious matter of the door to the house. The curious matter, of course, is that
there is no door to the house. The house that we see as we step back has several windows. The bell
and the magic square become one window for arithmetic and music, an hourglass and a sundial
turn into another window for time, and the scales turn into a third for weight. The Angel blesses all
three windows with her wings. There is a distorted image in the hour-glass that by all the laws of
optics should be the reﬂection of D¨urer himself, standing before the Globe as he sketches: another
signature. But nowhere do we see a door. When Mr. Door draws the House of God without a door
he is likely making a statement. It is one of the major statements of the piece.

If the house is indeed Reality, its doorlessness would mean that we have no direct access to absolute
reality. This was a common idea by D¨urer’s time, for example, from writings of Nicholas of Cusa
and Erasmus already cited. D¨urer could expect some of his viewers to make out this message at
ﬁrst sight. It recurs in modern physics in the limits to perception imposed so far by light-speed c
and action-quantum ~, with more surely to come. Before D¨urer did this engraving he had already
written that the human mind cannot know absolute beauty, and in the picture he may be saying
the same about absolute truth in several ways. We must not assume that he separated truth and

14

beauty, or intellect and emotion, as cleanly as some people claim to do today, especially if he
expected a mathematical theory of both.

From the Terrestrial Sphere we can look at divine reality but we cannot touch it.
If it can be
entered by the ladder, that is for the angels, we have seen. But D¨urer makes no cut between the
truth that we glean from measurements and that which we read from Scriptures. They form a
seamless whole, except that the ladder reaches above the house.

11 Angel

The burin identiﬁes the Boy as D¨urer, but the Angel is probably D¨urer too, sitting on and touching
her name-tags, the D¨urer monogram engraved on the edge of her stony seat and echoed in the
magic square at her wing-tip. In the tripartite psychology of the times, the artist’s special Faculty
is the Imaginative one, so the Boy is probably the Imaginative Faculty.

Angel-wings indicate sanctity as eagle-wings represent fame. These sacred wings brush and bless the
holy One in D¨urer’s Table, the hour-glass, the scales, and nothing else in the picture. Apparently the
Angel blesses the scientiﬁc instruments above the workman’s tools that litter the ground. She holds
a sealed book and an idle pair of compasses. Most commentators also say that she is melancholy,
and is even the spirit Melancholia herself. The motto on the banderole, the shadow on the Angel’s
face, and the ﬁst on her cheek all are indeed consistent with melancholia. But the hidden motto
is not negative in mood but positive and in any case is attached to the Bat, not the Angel. Her
wreath of Water-cress and Water-ranculus protect her from Earthy melancholia by their Watery
nature [19]. The Angel’s expression is alert and focused, not soft and sad. Above all her gaze is
not downcast, as was absolutely mandatory for portraits of melancholia, but elevated.

Her pose more likely shows contemplation, as in Rodin’s Thinker, than melancholy. This and her
wings say rather clearly that she is the Contemplative Faculty proper to the Intellectual Sphere.

12 Compasses

The compasses of the Angel test my assignment of Spheres and Faculties. Whenever the quadrivia
are personiﬁed, Geometria is the one with the compasses. Since the Angel has the compasses, isn’t
she, not the Bat, the Faculty of mathematical reason? To be sure, in a D¨urer woodcut of 1504, The
Astronomer measures a globe with compasses under a full moon, so compasses are also allowed in
the Celestial Sphere, but this does not mean that the Contemplative Faculty can have them.

Some say the Angel has measured the stone Globe that lies before the dog. But the Astronomer
studies his globe intently while the Angel looks right past this globe, as she should if she is Contem-
plation and the globe is the the Terrestrial Sphere. Lines of sight matter in the work of a projective
geometer.

The Angel grasps only one arm of the compass and that near the point. She holds the compasses
in a way unsuitable for ordinary use, which requires control of both points. She has no drawing
board or table beneath it but seems to be sticking herself in the thigh. Since this is absurd we must
look deeper. And lower.

15

13 Arab and Jews

The angel’s right knee, bright in the moonlight, is also the top of a hood worn by a bearded man

•
whose head is cocked at about 30◦ counterclockwise, shown in proﬁle with only one eye visible.

Call him A. Angel. He has an aquiline nose and wears a black headband across his brow. Slowly we
connect his face to a powerful shoulder, almost a hump back, on which Angel rests her elbow and
compasses, and to his left arm, outstretched toward the saw-sword on the ground. The left foot
of Angel, where it extends beyond her robe, is also his left hand, her toes are his ﬁngers. In the
other direction his shoulder leads us to his torso, waist, and knees. He is kneeling as he reaches for
the sword blade. The Angel steps on the hilt with her right foot and pricks him with the point of
the compasses in her left hand. His right hand is reaching up past his face to fend oﬀ the compass
point that is evidently causing him discomfort. He kneels there covered from head to feet in an
Arab burnoose.

He too is one of a triplet, the ﬁrst that I found in the engraving, simply because it is the least
•
hidden. To see the other two hidden faces, ﬁnd a moonlit isosceles triangle next to the face of
A. Angel, a lighter patch in the shading of the skirt directly below the Angel’s right knee. If we
turn our head through 45◦ clockwise this time, we can see this lighter triangle as a spiral white
horn leading to the dark line of a mouth in the face of a man in a skull-cap blowing a shofar, a
ram’s horn, as is done on Rosh Hashonah, the Jewish New Year, in a full front view. I call him
B. Angel.

There is a second older and hairier face blowing the same horn, whom I call C. Angel, shown
•
in partial proﬁle looking to the left with a hooked nose, a nasty expression, and a skull-cap. C.
is looks like an anti-Semitic sterotype of a Jew. Young B. and old C. Angel share an eye. This
triplet has higher contrast than the triplet of the Solid. They are hidden by sleight-of-hand, not
the watermark technique. Their elements belong to a larger gestalt which compels us to give them
a totally diﬀerent interpretation. Again the people in the triplet can be seen only one at a time.

We already read the Angel as the Contemplative Faculty of the theologians. D¨urer seems to show
by this triplet that her entourage includes Jews and Muslims as well as Christians. The sword
for which the Muslim is reaching suggests that D¨urer associated Islam with militancy. This is not
palusible since Hungary was mauled by both Christian and Islamic combatants in the 15th century.
Muhammed II, founder of the Ottoman Empire, took Constantinople in 1453 and launched a
powerful counterattack on Hungary in 1455, the year in which Albert Senior left Ajt´os. The attack
was stopped by the forces of John Hunyadi, who became a Hungarian national hero. Since the
fall of Constantinople was so epochal for Christianity, the viewers of D¨urer’s day might have read
A. Angel as Muhammad II. But then we would have no clue to whom D¨urer might have meant by
B. and C. Angel.

The conﬁguration makes more sense if the triplet represents the founders of the three monotheistic
faiths of the time. This reading makes sense for the Faculty of the theologians and ﬁts the scriptural
reports that two of the founders were Jews of whom one lived to old age and one died young, and
that the third was Arabian and a great warrior. The probability that these agreements are chance
is not overwhelming so I pursue this possibility only.

When D¨urer unites these three ﬁgures in one triplet so that we can see only one at a time depending
on our point of view, he represents them to be close in many respects. Since Moses and Muhammad
were Prophets, D¨urer would seem to assume the same for Jesus. I considered this unthinkable on

16

the basis of D¨urer’s other works until I learned that Agrippa probably links D¨urer to two founders
of Unitarianism, Michael Servetus and Francis D´avid [10].

We have found the capital crime of Albrecht D¨urer:
innovation. Both Servetus and D´avid were
charged with innovation and were sent to their deaths for this crime by Reformation courts, not
the Roman Church. Being more explicit might have led D¨urer to the same fate.
If I read him
correctly on this point, then most likely the downfall he shows would represent the overthrow of
the hierarchy of the Roman Church, whom he had already slain in eﬃgy.

In any case, now we see what the Angel is doing with her compasses. She is sticking the Arab.

•
This violates realism, but D¨urer left realism behind when his Angel raised the painted One in the
magic square, so the violation has lost its shock value. I regret having to propose that D¨urer sat
her there with an innocent expression on her face as she pricks the Arab, but invisible attack is
prominent in D¨urer’s repertory. His Knight too seems oblivious to Death and the Devil but crushes
one of them between his ﬁsts without visible feeling. The sneering cliﬀs around the Arco cathedral
and much of MELENCOLIA I itself are acts of concealed aggression by D¨urer himself against his
targets. At least we can cast the Angel as the Contemplative Faculty with more conﬁdence, now
that we understand her anomalous compasses and her hidden faces.

14

Fools

This is a curiously domestic Angel. She is dressed as a housewife, complete with keys and purse
hanging from her belt which D¨urer says represent power and wealth, and she hides non-Christians
in her garment. Only a fool would worship her, the artist seems to say. And there the fool is, a crude
low-browed caricature hidden near her feet in the hem of her gown, next to D¨urer’s monogram.
Call him D. Angel.

We must turn the engraving about 60◦ counterclockwise to see D. best and then he looks to our

•
right. His nose forms part of the bottom edge of the Angel’s robe.

With no forehead, the caricature is so cruel that I suspected it was unintended. A powerful winged
housewife with a low-browed fool in her hem does not seem to be a standardized symbol.

Actually it is. In a wood-cut Von Buolschaﬀt (On Amours) attributed to D¨urer. in the Narren-
•
schyﬀ [3], the winged woman of On Amours is Venus, the goddess of the fools of love, the most
common variety of fool according to Brant. Her wings are those of an eagle signifying fame, not
those of an angel signifying divinity. We know she too is a housewife because Brant calls her sar-
castically “Frau Venus.” In MELENCOLIA I similarly we see Frau Angel, her housewife status
conveyed now not by words but by purse and keys, hanging from her waist to the ground. (The
Madonna by the Wall (D¨urer 1514) also wears keys and purse, on short leashes.) “Frau” is evidently
no term of respect for D¨urer or Brant. These fools-in-winged-wives’-hems are clearly not accidents
but part of D¨urer’s artistic language.

D¨urer seems to say that the philosopher/theologian of the Contemplative Faculty is foolish, like
one in love. This echoes and ampliﬁes doctrines already expressed by Nicholas of Cusa in his On
Learned Ignorance (1440) and Erasmus in his In Praise of Folly (1511), and later written down by
Agrippa in his De uncertitudine et vanitate scientiarum (1526-1530).

17

D¨urer’s goddesses Fortuna and Nemesis both stand on globes, liable to roll in any direction at the
least provocation, because Luck and Fate are unpredictable. Chance governs the Terrestrial Sphere,
mathematical law governs the Celestial Sphere, and God alone knows what governs the Intellectual
Sphere. Therefore D¨urer’s Globe seems to represent the Terrestrial Sphere. It is indeed the lowest
of the three stone objects in this picture, as if to conﬁrm that they are D¨urer’s version of the
tripartite cosmology. D¨urer, like Nicolas of Cusa and Leonardo, has replaced the naive tri-spherical
geocentric Neo-Platonist cosmology by a tri-partite philosophy with three Faculties and Spheres
that are no longer geocentric, concentric, or places at all.

15 Globe

16

Solid

D¨urer seems to put his Solid in a place of honor. The artist stands before it, the ghosts haunt it,
the motto might seem to name it, it balances the Angel in the composition. Yet it is bleak and
sterile against the Angel, and its shape is subtly ambiguous. One looks for a deeper signiﬁcance to
enrich it and justify it artistically, or at least to understand its shape.

A rhombus is a planar quadrilateral whose sides are all equal. A rhombohedron is a closed surface
formed of six congruent rhombuses. Most people see the Solid as a truncated rhombohedron with
its longer axis vertical [26]. If it represents any of the neo-Platonic Spheres, then its mathematical
nature and its altitude in the picture suggest that it represents the Intellectual Sphere, the third
realm, the abode of Platonic Ideas and angels. The ghosts in the Solid also support this conclusion,
for this puts them in a philosophical Heaven. I tentatively adopt this hypothesis in what follows.

If the two missing vertices were restored, they would seem to lie in a vertical line in space. The
compulsion to see the ﬁgure as a truncated rhombohedron is irresistible. Only when a model or
projection of such a solid is juxtaposed with the engraving does its untenability spring to the eye.

In principle, however, one cannot determine the form of a solid from one perspective view. One
can shift any surface point along the line of sight from the eye without changing its apparent
location in the perspective view. Therefore there are many solids all having the same perspective
view. The Reversing Staircase, the Necker Cube and the Cameo Intaglio exhibit this ambiguity.
Sometimes other cues to the interpretation are so strong and unconscious that we cannot help
inferring a particular solid. For example, it is hard not to see a perspective of a cube as a cube, or
a perspective of a person as a person, even though intellectually we know the picture is ambiguous.
The D¨urer Solid is deeper than the illusions I mentioned, in that they are not like anything we see
in nature, so it is not surprising that our visual system is not able to cope with them, while the
D¨urer Solid has two interpretations and looks real in both.

If one views the Solid with head erect, one sees the hidden face of the woman on a truncated
rhombohedron.

If one views the Solid with head cocked to the right, one sees the hidden face of the man, on a
nearly rectangular slab with two diagonally opposite corners trimmed, cocked and cantilevered back
toward the horizon.

I owe this second observation to Dr. Basimah Khulusi [15], who has constructed three-dimensional
models to show that the rhombohedron theories do not ﬁt in either view, and the truncated slab

18

does.

Some speak of measuring the angles of the Solid from the engraving. These angles depend on
secondary assumptions that are not forced on us by the engraving.

One apparently invalid interpretation currently presented on the Web declares the acute angle of
the rhombus to be a ﬁfth of a circle, 72◦. [26]. If one puts an actual model of the proposed solid, or
a perspective view of such a model, next to the engraving, the mismatch is clear. If one compresses
the engraving vertically by a factor of √ϕ, its outline becomes square, and the Solid looks like a
truncated cube, until one actually juxtaposes a true cube, or a perspective of one, for comparison.
Another apparently invalid interpretation sees the same angle as close to 80◦ [17]. This results from
measurements on the engraving assuming that certain lengths are show in true proportion. But
there is no way to tell for sure from the engraving if a given length is shown in true proportion. This
requires additional assumptions, usually made unconsciously and therefore irresistible. Moreover,
if one juxtaposes a model of such a rhomobohedron with the engraving, the discrepancy is clearly
visible.

Before the engraving D¨urer apparently made a rough sketch of the Solid that has survived, though
it has been recognized as that only recently [23]. The sketch shows an irregular pentahedron
.5◦. The agreement with one
inscribed in a circle. The apex angle in the drawing is indeed 79.5◦
interpretation of the engraving seems noteworthy.. The question remains: How did D¨urer arrive at
that angle?

±

One notices that the circle in the drawing put forward by Weitzel was divided by a compass into
seven equal arcs as if to inscribe a regular heptagon. There is no Euclidean construction for the
regular heptagon but D¨urer gives an excellent approximation to it in his course on measurement,
without telling us that it is approximate.

The vertices of the irregular pentagon seem to be ﬁve of the seven vertices of the heptagon. The
two long edges of the pentagon are chords of the heptagon that connect the apical vertex to its
next-nearest neighbors on each side, The remaining three edges of the pentagon are edges of the
heptagon joining the remaining vertices. This would lead to an apical angle of 77.2◦ theoretically.
The angle of 80◦ ﬁts the engraving better.

Leonardo had already undertaken a mathematical theory of beauty. That goal would occupy
much of D¨urer’s later years, and result in works on human proportions and on constructions of
projections and perspectives with compass and ruler. D¨urer’s study of human proportions is an
amazingly dry gallery of stark outline drawings of standing human nudes and tables of anatomical
dimensions to three decimal places. It may never have been of much use to artists, but it fulﬁlled
other functions for him. Human measurements were to be the foundation of a geometry of beauty,
as stellar measurements were the foundations of Ptolemy’s geometry of the heavens. Music was
already divine and part of the quadrivium because it was considered mathematical. By providing
a mathematical basis for art, D¨urer hoped to sanctify the graphic arts as well. Possibly this
belief in a mathematical art was only one aspect of a belief in a general mathematical wisdom, a
mathesis. Then the Solid does not simply show oﬀ D¨urer’s mathematical muscle, it represents the
mathematical nature of the Intellectual Sphere, the divinely inspired mathesis that many sought,
and its inaccessibility to human cognition. We will give it deeper meaning later.

I propose that D¨urer deliberately designed the Solid so that it was irresistibly misconstrued as a
truncated rhombohedron when seen from one orientation, and as a truncated slab from another.

19

The Solid is a puzzle that is in principle unsolvable without another view. I suspect that is why
the Angel is smiling.

17 Millstone

The most cryptic of the three stone things may be the wheel holding the Boy. Panofsky and Yates
call it a grindstone and Doorly calls it a millstone. Its perimeter is broken while its face is smooth
so it would make a passable millstone but a bone-rattling grindstone and likely Doorly is right.
This is also the only stone in the engraving that could serve Jacob both as pillow and pillar.

MORE Since we have argued that the stone Globe stands for the Terrestrial Sphere and the stone
Solid for the Intellectual Sphere, by elimination it seems that the Millstone stands for the Celestial
Sphere, the realm of Reason. Why D¨urer would show the Celestial Sphere as a millstone is the
next puzzle.

This turns out to be an easy one. For centuries cultures as diverse as Babylon, Greece, Arabia,
Scandinavia, and Rome had represented the Celestial Sphere by a millstone. The celestial millstone
caused the precession of the equinoxes when it ﬂew oﬀ its axis into the sea [20]. It makes a cameo
appearance in the Icelandic legend of Amleth, the original Hamlet, and so Santillana and von
Dechend called it Hamlet’s Millstone. In the Golden Age it ground out gold, in later, lesser times
it ground out cheaper stuﬀ such as sea salt and in our decadent age mere sand. The Scandinavian
Amleth is as melancholy as Shakespeare’s Dane and D¨urer’s Boy. I will point out an indication of
the melancholy celestial millstone in Scripture too.

The Boy-artist is the Imaginative Faculty and the Angel the Contemplative one, so by elimination
the Dog is the Rational Faculty proper to the Celestial Sphere.

Since a revolution is going on in this engraving, or perhaps two, some confusion in the seating is
understandable, but the Faculties are out of place. The seated Angel, the Contemplative Faculty,
is nominally of the Intellectual Sphere, the highest, but here she is grounded and lowest. The Boy,
the Imaginative Faculty, is traditionally of the Terrestrial Sphere, but he is here esconced on the
Celestial, fulﬁlling D¨urer’s life dream. Perhaps the Dog, the Rational Faculty, is in his proper place,
resting with open eyes between the two spheres, but he too is on the ground. D¨urer has clearly
promoted Natural Philosophy and demoted Theological Philosophy. We can read this as the Agrip-
pan revolution, but it is also the scientiﬁc revolution. The Natural Philosopher observes matter
in space and time, traditionally the lowest Sphere, yet thereby attains truth. The Experimental
Philosophy is in the seating plan.

Pace Yates, the balance between the Angel and the Boy, therefore, is not the Hermetic equality
between the worlds above and below. That related the Terrestrial Sphere to the Celestial, not to
the Intellectual Sphere represented by the Angel. “As above, so below” may well be Agrippa’s
credo but it presumably is not D¨urer’s. Like Da Vinci, D¨urer had already mocked the idea that
events in the sky foretold events on Earth. He had drawn and published maps of the stars above
and the planet below that showed no similarity or correspondence.

20

18

I

Some suggest that the “I” of the banerole refers to one third of the medieval tripartite universe,
and expect that MELENCOLIA II and III were engraved and lost, or were at least planned.
MELENCOLIA I is indeed one of three, but they all survive famously. They are the Master
Engravings (Meisterstiche) of D¨urer, all dated within a year of each other. The other two are The
Knight, Death, and the Devil, and St. Jerome in His Study. They make a plausible triptych of the
three Faculties, the artist, the statesman, and the contemplative. We know from D¨urer’s records
that when he made a present of MELENCOLIA I he often accompanied it with Jerome, never with
the Knight. But this does not explain why one engraving bore its own caption and not the other
two, and so does not explain the I .

Another reading is natural for a mathematician like D¨urer. Even in 1514, an “x primus” in a
mathematical writing more often referred back to an earlier x than ahead to a later x secundus or
x tertius. This would mean that D¨urer was superceding the old gateway to heaven with a new one,
limen caleo primus, and so was claiming innovation. I had to abandon this interpretation, which
I held at ﬁrst, not when I realized that innovation was a capital crime, but when I realized that
D¨urer and Agrippa did not consider themselves innovators but as renovators stripping away the
innovations made by the Church.

I propose that the ”I” indeed refers to a triple based on the three Neo-Platonic Spheres, namely
the three Agrippan gateways to God of Natural, Mathematical, and Theological Philosophy, but
we do not need to postulate lost engravings. This very engraving shows all three gateways and
shows D¨urer choosing gateway I, the Natural Philosophy that evolved into Physics. This is the I
of MELENCOLIA I.

19 Comet

The bright light in the sky is a comet, not a nova, though it lacks the curved tail of the most
traditional renderings. The NASA online collection of astronomical photographs shows comets
quite like it. A comet is straight when it heads for the sun and sunlight pushes its tail out out
behind it. It may be an illusion of perspective, but this comet seems to be pointing straight at the
Boy, and at his near eye.

The great comet 1471Y1 was ﬁrst seen on Christmas Day in D¨urer’s birth year, and D¨urer wrote of
seeing a comet himself in 1503. The physical natures of meteors and comets were not yet known in
1514. Galileo would still believe in the next century that comets and meteors were meteorological,
weather of the highest atmosphere.

Since the Bible has already explained many elements of the picture, let us search it for this one
too. The answer is immediate and unique. The only blinding light in the biblical sky is the original
light of the divine creation. Then the sky recalls the time in the Bible story after the creation of
light but before the creation of the stars. This is a joyous occasion: Happy birthday, universe! The
Light may represent Divinity itself, and divine revelation. Then the fact that the comet is heading
exactly for the Boy suggests that he, not the Angel, the Dog, or the Bat, is chosen by God. Yet
the tone is somber. The tension grows.

But so does the ambiguity. This is a realistic comet. Nothing in the picture compels us to see it as

21

It took me a long time to understand this engraving even with all these clues, because I could
not ﬁgure out whether D¨urer’s gateway to Heaven was mathematical or religious. This is a good
example of the kind of projection to avoid in such a study. D¨urer does not separate science and faith.
On the right they entwine in the building and ladder complex. On the left, there is an unnaturally
straight line from the comet or the light of God through the Intellectual Sphere of Mathematical
Philosophy to the heart of the Terrestrial Sphere of Natural Philosophy. The Celestial Sphere is
not in that line. It is old and damaged and out of service. The Dog is there instead.

divine.

20 Dog

The Dog is the last piece of the puzzle to fall into place. It had several possible interpretations.
D¨urer’s animals are among his ﬁnest works of art and science, and he had drawn at least three
dogs in the year before that are still with us. A similar hunting dog in another work of D¨urer is
equally gaunt, perhaps as part of the training of the breed. Dog and hourglass are the only two
components common to all three Master Engravings. Presumably hourglasses represent time and
mortality. To me, dogs represent ﬁdelity, to Agrippa love or ﬂattery. There must be a better ﬁt.

This Dog lies rather too close to the line of Comet, Solid, and Globe for accident. He curls up just
where the Celestial Sphere would lie in the old cosmology. The battered millstone has been lifted
up on one edge and leaned on the House, and the Dog is where it used to be. The people associated
with the Celestial Sphere were Mathematical Philosophers, astrologers, and kings. The connection
of the dog to the Celestial Sphere is no more obvious than that of the Millstone.

We know that when D¨urer illustrated the Hieroglyphica, he learned to represent the ruler by a
dog wearing the royal mantle on its naked body [14]. That is why in his Triumphal Arch D¨urer so
represented the Emperor Maximilian I. At the same time he also learned that the way to represent a
prophet — one whose Rational Faculty is excited by Saturn, in the theory of Ficino and Agrippa —
is by a dog. So the Dog — not the Bat, say — represents the Rational Faculty. This interpretation
of the Dog ﬁts all three Master Engravings at least loosely.

21 Moonbow

I have never seen a moonbow but again NASA provides the picture and the Bible provides the
caption. The only bow in the Bible sky is the “bow in the clouds” that Noah saw after the ﬂood,
a supreme example of divine revelation, direct communication with divinity. Genesis does not tell
us whether Noah saw a rainbow by day or a moonbow by night. God’s memorandum to himself
to send no more genocidal ﬂoods could have been either, but D¨urer had no choice, once he set the
scene in the dark of night. In Genesis, the light in the heavens and the bow in the clouds represent
two of the greatest gifts of God, so the picture should be joyous, and yet it is dark. And ambiguous.
Again.

The viewer of any moonbow or rainbow lies on the normal to the plain of the bow passing through
the bow center. D¨urer’s watching eye should lie directly before the point of the horizon beneath
the highest point of the moonbow. This is not exactly where he is located by the vanishing point
of the building lines, which is under the eye of the Bat, but it is only several centimeters oﬀ.

22

The moon must lie on the same line, behind the viewer. It is therefore well to the left of center,
like the viewer and the moonbow. But according to the shadows on the House and the face of the
Angel the moonlight comes from well to the right of center, over the viewer’s right shoulder. This
inconsistency in D¨urer’s optics is of no import for the content of the engraving but sets an upper
limit on D¨urer’s knowledge of light.

22 Babylon

My Bible-searches for ladders, sky lights, and sky bows all bore fruit so I looked for D¨urer’s Millstone
in the Bible too. I found 11 millstones in the Christian Bible. The ﬁrst ten serve as metaphors
for livelihood or industry, and refer to no other element of the engraving so I put them aside. The
eleventh and last is in Revelation. In the King James version:

And a mighty angel took up a stone like a great millstone, and cast it into the sea,
saying, Thus with violence shall that great city Babylon be thrown down, and shall be
found no more at all. (Revelation 18:21.)

At least three elements of the engraving appear here: the mighty angel, the millstone, and the sea.
The millstone of Revelation is therefore a provisional candidate for D¨urer’s millstone, the best in
the Bible. But it is itself a puzzle. Tossing an arbitrary millstone into the sea is an oddly lame
image for the downfall of Babylon, one of the great empires of Bible times. A bath would not harm
a millstone and might do it good. But if the millstone of Revelation is again the Celestial Sphere,
throwing it into the sea is the same astronomical catastrophe as Hamlet’s millstone rolling into the
sea. It ends one world age and begins a new one [20], a simile ﬁt for a a king even of Babylon. So
I looked for Babylon and its downfall in the engraving.

The engraving shows a city by the sea with ships in port. Over the left-most pan of the scales
in the engraving, through a small triangle framed by ladder, house, and pan, we see a massif of
ﬂow-lines pointing toward the city, well-resolved in a full-size print if not in [19]. How could I have
overloooked it?

There is a great wave looming high over the city, about to destroy it as prophesied in Revelation.

•
Or the massif could be far up the coast beyond the city. The ﬂow can be read in two ways due to
the intrinsic ambiguity of perspective, which we at last begin to realize is always deliberate, the
very point of the engraving, hammered home again and again until we could not miss it. The ﬂow
lines are then geological, not hydrodynamical. We cannot read the depth of the ﬂow in the picture
uniquely from one perspective view. The ladder hides connecting clues that might force one view
or the other upon us.

Now the engraving and the Biblical verse share Millstone, Angel, sea, Babylon, destruction, and
even melancholy, for the verse I quoted is imbedded in a score that lament the destruction to come.
If authors as far apart as those of Revelation and the Hamlet legend used the Millstone for the
Celestial Sphere, then this usage may have still been current in D¨urer’s time too. The connection
we sketched in lightly between D¨urer’s millstone and Hamlet’s is now less tenuous. Probably the
millstones of Revelation, MELENCOLIA I, and the original Hamlet, separated by centuries, are
one and all the Celestial Sphere, and this scene in the engraving probably refers to Revelation. The
Biblical verse would then refer to the end of the Age of Aries and the beginning of Pisces, the next

23

after the writing of Revelation. If D¨urer meant the metaphor seriously, he referred to the end of
the Age of Pisces, and his Babylon might be the hierarchy of the Roman Church that he already
so mistreated in his Apocalypse. In 1514 he was not yet disillusioned with the Reformation clergy
as well, but Pirckheimer attested that both clergies eventually disgusted him beyond his tolerance.

23 Hexagram

D¨urer was a descriptive geometer, practiced in constructing views of bodies from all sides and in
reconstructing a body from its views. I therefore looked at the Solid from all sides, as he likely did,
while I was searching for his meaning.

Viewed from the sky as a truncated rhombohedron, the ground plan of the Solid is a Shield of

•
David framed in a hexagon.

✔

❚

✔✔

❚

❚

✔

❚

✔

❚❚

✔
❚

✔

✔

❚

❚

✧
❜

✧

❜

❜
✧

❜
✧

✧
❜

❜
✧

✧
❜

✧
❜

❜

✧

❜
✧

❚

✔

❚
✔

❚

✔✔

❚

✔

✔

✔

❚❚

❚

✔

The top and bottom triangles of the Solid project into the two crossed triangles of the hexagram.
Perhaps D¨urer truncated the cube, rather than some other regular solid, in order to create this
hexagram. It would be anachronistic, however, to call this hexagram a Jewish star and to infer
a certain philo-Semitism. Centuries earlier the Khazars of the Crimea had adopted the hexagram
for their ﬂag when they adopted Judaism, but in 1514 Nuremberg the hexagram was still mainly
a magical device, an amulet, possibly referring to the Hebrews of the Bible but probably not to
contemporary Jews. D¨urer’s use was likely a Hebraism, not philo-Semitism. The Shield of David
was called that because it was supposed to shield its bearer from evil spirits. It was more often
found in churches than synagogues. A two-footed hexagram like D¨urer’s ground plan is seen on
a German altar of D¨urer’s time. Some said the hexagram was the Seal of Solomon, and others
the pentagram. Traditions ﬁrmed later that gave Solomon’s star ﬁve points to David’s six, and
stood Solomon’s on two points to David’s one. Not long after D¨urer’s death the Jewish community
of Prague was granted the privilege of a ﬂag and chose the hexagram, possibly because of its
association with the Khazars, and this continued its evolution from magic charm to Judaic symbol.

The Hebraism of both D¨urer and Agrippa is conspicuous in their work. D¨urer admired Jerome
above the other founding fathers for Jerome’s greater familiarity with the Hebrew Bible [19]. In
his several drawings of Jerome studying Latin, Greek, and Hebrew Bibles, D¨urer invariably placed
the Hebrew Bible above the others, and higher is holier. The Shield of David is a further Hebraism
concealed in the D¨urer Solid.

Because we are so practiced at ﬁnding right angles in the world about us, had D¨urer truncated a
true cube, we would have seen it as such in any view. Stretching the cube made the ﬁgure triply

24

ambiguous, and demonstrated our inability to reach truth through our senses. Circumcising it
Hebraicized it, connected the new gateway to heaven with the Hebrew Bible. His stereotypes of
the Jew and the Arab make it clear this hidden Shield of David is a Hebraism, not philo-Semitism,
and this again aligns him with Agrippa.

24

Space and time

D¨urer uses the vertical dimension on his plate in a traditional way. Higher is holier. Jacob’s angels
get to heaven by climbing a ladder. Angel and Boy have equal divinity because they have equal
altitude. The tools of artisans litter the ground, they are profane, while the instruments of science
and mathematics hang carefully on the wall nearer to the sky, they are more sacred.

The horizontal dimension is time. It is cut neatly in half by one edge of the House. The cut separates
the new and old gateways to Heaven, which use the Rational and Contemplative Faculties. Yet all
three Spheres of the cosmos and all four actors in the drama are to the left of the dividing wall of
the House, though perspective puts the Boy and the Angel on the right-hand half of the paper.

All the instruments of science are on the right-hand side. The crucible is no exception. If it were
an instrument of alchemical science, as I thought at ﬁrst, it would be elevated, but it is on the
stone ﬂoor. Only perspective puts it high on the paper, above all other tools; perspective and
ﬁlial feelings. This is further indication that Doorly read this correctly, This crucible is not an
instrument of science but a remembrance of D¨urer’s goldsamith father.

The near eye of the Boy lies just on the center line. D¨urer the artist-scientist withdraws from the
schism about him and does his inspired work.

Perhaps the vanishing points tell us how to hang all three Meisterstiche as a triptych on three walls
of one room: Jerome on the wall to our right, Knight on the wall before us, and MELENCOLIA on
the wall to our left. Then the horizontal axis can be time passing from right to left as in Hebrew
writing.

Perspective provides a third dimension of depth into the scene along the line of sight. D¨urer seems
to use this expressively too. On the right side our view is blocked by the House and on the left
there is an unlimited vista. It seems that perspective depth in the picture is the familiar metaphor
for depth of vision.

25 Melancholy

The light and the bow and even the destruction of the city of evil are good news, and yet the picture
is set in the gloom of night. D¨urer has even transformed the rainbow of the common understanding
into a moonbow. The comet illuminates nothing and hides the stars. Only the moon behind
us lights the scene and creates the shadows and the moonbow. What might have been a sunny
prophesy if Leonardo were speaking is dark as night.

While Leonardo and D¨urer were both mathematically ambitious, they diﬀered importantly in their
outlook. Leonardo wrote conﬁdently of “a complete knowledge of all the parts, which, when
combined, compose the totality of the thing which ought to be loved.” Leonardo was the rational
optimist. D¨urer on the contrary said shortly before this engraving, “But what absolute beauty is

25

I know not. Nobody knows it but God.” The darkness of the setting and the multiple ambiguities
of the Solid suggest that after all D¨urer did not expect humanity to attain the supreme mathesis
that optimists like Ramon Llull had expected and even claimed to have attained. He expressed
this pessimism in the engraving atmospherically, by omitting the door of the House of God, and
by numerous skillful demonstrations of ambiguity and relativity.

The most unambiguous aspect of this engraving is its ambiguity. D¨urer wants us to know clearly
that we cannot know. The Solid is a truncated rhombohedron with vertical axis or a slab tilted
toward the horizon. There are three faces hidden in the Solid or none. The city is to be destroyed
or not. The Angel is good or evil, the Bat too. The house has windows or not. The melancholy is
inspired by the inaccessibility of the absolute, or by the inﬂuence of Saturn, or because the Celestial
Sphere is oﬀ it axis. What we see depends on how we look at the scene and what we expect. Most
of the elements of this engraving that we have discussed here are intentionally ambiguous, either
in meaning or form.

If we cannot believe what we see, what can we believe? This questioning occurs famously in the
First Meditation of Descartes (1596-1650), who cites optical illusions as a reason for his method
of universal doubt. It seems that MELENCOLIA I anticipates Cartesian doubt. And its response
has a mathematical element that anticipates the Mathesis Universalis of Descartes. The ideal of
a complete mathematical theory of beauty lies on the same long line of distinguished fantasies
of mathematical wisdom as the number mysticism of Pythagoras and Plato, the Ars Magna of
Ramon Llull (whom Agrippa studied) and Giordano Bruno (who studied Llull and Agrippa), the
vision of Mathesis Universalis that Descartes and Leibniz shared, and the Ars Combinatorix of
Leibniz. D¨urer does not doubt the existence of absolute beauty but despairs of knowing it. The
Boy withdraws from both philosophy and astrology, ignores theory, and observes Nature.

Years after 1514, D¨urer like Agrippa explicitly abandoned the search for absolute truth and beauty
as futile and hopeless, crying out,

“The lie is in our understanding, and darkness is so ﬁrmly entrenched in our mind that
even our groping will fail” [Panofsky 1971].

In 1517 D¨urer was still optimistic enough to join with Luther. The engraving seems to come from
a later more despairing phase of D¨urer’s life. This suggests to me that the date on the engraving
is an afterthought, chosen to agree with the bottom line of the magic square and the death year
of his mother. One can also suspect the date because in 1514 Luther had not yet linked Agrippa
to witchcraft and the demon image might have been obscure. This reasoning is somewhat circular,
and only further historical data will break the circle.

The engraving should indeed be read as an illustration, as Doorly says, but of D¨urer’s own lament
and credo. Its night is our benighted ignorance. Its darkness is the darkness “ﬁrmly intrenched
in our mind.” The mystery of the Solid, crafted to be insoluble, is one of many metaphors in the
engraving for our inability to see the Absolute Truth from our limited perspective. In acknowledging
the limits of human knowledge, D¨urer went a step beyond the more optimistic Leonardo toward
modernity. As Panofsky and Doorly said, the melancholy is D¨urer’s over the limit of human art
and understanding. And as Yates said, it is also the Saturnian melancholy that inspires artistic
creation.

The posthumous publications of D¨urer on measurement and on human proportions show that he
never quit searching for a mathematical theory of beauty and truth based on measurement rather

26

than abstract speculation, but it became relativistic. He included a variable horizontal scale-factor
transformation in order to represent human beauty of the lean, average, and plump variety as the
reference frame of the artist requires.

26 Trinities

The triplets of the Angel and of the Solid, both in the theological realm, would likely be read by
viewers as references to the Doctrine of the Trinity. It is not clear at ﬁrst whether D¨urer means
triplication to imply divinity. The fool provides a useful indicator for this. If he is a triplet, D¨urer
does not intend triplets to be divine as opposed to human. Following this reasoning I returned to
the engraving and looked at the fool from another angle.

It was then easy to see faces E. and F. Angel superimposed on D. D. in proﬁle looks to our right,
•
E. in full face looks slightly to our left; and F. in proﬁle looks upward and to our left. I originally
found C. Solid in the same way.

I looked in vain for such triplets in the other ﬁgures of this engraving or in other works of D¨urer.
The fool of Frau Venus too is single, not three-faced. This supports two inferences at once. The
triplets refer to the Doctrine of the Trinity, and the Angel and Solid alone belong to the Spiritual
Sphere. It seems probable that Drer introduced these three relativistic triplets in order to reform
the Doctrine of the Trinity. He shows one individual with three aspects, not three entities and one
at the same time.

This puts D¨urer closer to Unitarianism than Trinitarianism. This is not completely absurd, it
seems, due to at least three circumstances.

First, since he agrees with Da Vinci that knowledge comes through the senses, and since the
Doctrine of the Trinity comes more from the Council of Nicea (325) and faith than from direct
observation, it would not be surprising if an independent thinker like D¨urer had doubts about the
Trinity by 1514.

Second, the Hebraism of Agrippa might also stimulate a revision of the Trinitarian doctrine. Gell´erd
proposes that Agrippa provided the Transylvanian Unitarian D´avid with some of his epistemology
[10]. Panofsky and Yates make it clear that Agrippa inﬂuenced D¨urer’s thinking. It seems possible
that the charismatic Agrippa inspired D¨urer too to express the unitarian tendencies we ﬁnd in
MELENCOLIA I.

Michael Servetus, traveling in Germany, published his historic unitarian treatise De trinitatis er-
roribus, perhaps the ﬁrst, in 1531 at Hagenau, only 100 km from Nuremberg. The publication and
this engraving close enough in space and time to suggest that unitarian thoughts were part of a
local Zeitgeist, perhaps inspired by Agrippa, though in 1531 he was publishing his occult philosophy
at last in Antwerp.

Once we look for unitarianism in the engraving, it is easy enough to ﬁnd. The Deity is shown here
as the single point of light that is also the comet. In his Landauer altarpiece, on the contrary, D¨urer
presents each member of the Trinity as a fully conceived independent entity in itself, represented
by a dove, an old man, and a young man on a cross, and indicates their unity by the convention
of arranging them in a vertical straight line. In Melencolia I instead he presents a relativistic kind
of trinity more natural to a descriptive geometer. Each of the members of such a triplet is not a

27

diﬀerent and separate individual but a diﬀerent aspect of one unity. This representation captures
the impossibility of seeing three separate things where there is only one in a way that the Landauer
altarpiece cannot.

D¨urer’s heresy is at least threefold if I see it correctly. First, he shows the same Contemplative
Faculty that serves Christian theologians as serving Jews and Muslims too. Secondly, as Boy he
declines the traditional ways to knowledge of the Contemplative and Rational Faculties for the way
of the Imaginative Faculty, the way of artists and artisans and natural philosophers. “All that is
in the mind comes through the senses.” Finally, he suggests that the three entities of the Trinity
are One seen from three viewpoints.

This engraving instantiates what Yates said about this transitional moment in the evolution of
science. No sharp line yet separated the cultures of the old magic, the new natural philosophy, and
religion. This is the brief era when the closest thing to physics was natural magic, the natural was
still emerging from the magic, and the Bible was more trusted than our senses.

D¨urer shows a single divinity connected to the human world through the realm of pure mathematics.
He demonstrates multiply that relativity keeps us from the absolute. He shows how this ﬁlls him
with melancholy, and how this melancholy inspires the frenzy of artistic creation and natural
philosophy that we see before us.

27 Disclaimer

The views expressed by this engraving are not necessarily mine.

D¨urer seems to ﬁnd that relativity is a melancholy science. Many poets, philosophers, artists,
and even some scientists, express sadness, pain, or nausea over losing the absolute, and many still
continue to seek it. I do not.

28 Acknowledgments

I thank an anonymous donor (
2) for starting me on this study. It would have been impossible
§
without the studies on MELENCOLIA I by Erwin Panofsky and by Francis Yates and works on
Agrippa by Judit Gell´erd and by Charles Nauert.
I have also drawn on the study of Hamlet’s
millstone by Giorgio de Santillana and Hertha von Dechend, on a study of MELENCOLIA I by
Patrick Doorly, on a study of Hamlet by Stephen Greenblatt.

The heraldry dictionary of Cecil Wade helped me to read D¨urer’s coat-of-arms. I beneﬁted from
gematria on the website of the Aiwaz Gallery, though our arithmetic and interpretation diﬀer. My
thanks go to Roy Skodnick for introducing me to the work of Yates; to Prof. Heinrich Saller for
the print of MELENCOLIA I that triggered this process; to Rabbi Mario Karpuj for reminding
me that Jacob’s ladder is the original gate of heaven; to Prof. Shalom Goldman for stimulating,
informative, and encouraging discussions, the reference to Yates on D¨urer, and the meaning of the
Magen David in the Renaissance; to Dr. Basimah Khulusi for generous helpful discussions, models
of the D¨urer Solid, the asymmetric interpretation of the Solid, and the reference to Von Buolschaﬀt;
to Danny Lunsford for reﬁning the Schreiber construction of D¨urer’s Solid and for the reference to
http://meteoros.de/halo/halo1.htm; to Carla Singer for her expertise in art history, including the

28

reference to Mantegna; and to Shlomit Ritz Finkelstein, for lively discussions, help with Torah and
Descartes, and useful expository suggestions. An earlier stage of this study was published in The
St. Ann’s Review, whose reviewer improved the paper.

References

[1] Agrippa von Nettesheim, Heinrich Cornelius: 1531. Of Occult Philosophy, digital edition, ed.
Joseph H. Peterson, http://www.esotericarchives.com/agrippa/agrippa1.html. Based on the
translation of ”J.F.”, printed by Moule, London (1651).

[2] Agrippa von Nettesheim, Heinrich Cornelius: 1530. De incertitudine & vanitate scientiarum
& artium atque excellentia verbi Dei declamatio. Antverpiae : Grapheus, 1530. OCLC:
22080834.

[3] Brant, Sebastian. Narrenschiﬀ (Ship of Fools). Illustrated by A. D¨urer. Basel, 1494 (ﬁrst
edition). Translation by Alexander Barclay: Ship of Fools, Pynson 1509. Rhyming trans-
lation by E. H. Zeydel: Ship of Fools. Columbia University Press, 1944, reprinted by
Dover Publishing Co., 1962. Espeically Chapter 13, On Amours. As of June 1, 2005, the
site http://www.loc.gov/exhibits/treasures/images/wb0013.1s.jpg shows the woodcut Von
Buolschaﬀt mentioned in

11.
§

[4] Doorly, Patrick. D¨urer’s Melencolia I : Plato’s Abandoned Search for the Beautiful. The Art

Bulletin88, 255 (2004)

[5] D¨urer, Albrecht. The works of D¨urer mentioned in this paper are reproduced in [19] and are
found online in internet galleries. Such presentations are good enough to verify the features
mentioned in this paper, but when we are verifying the secondary images, the beat between
the raster of the presentation and the shading of D¨urer combines with our propensity to
see faces and creates artifacts that should not be taken seriously. Commercially available art
prints create no such problems.

[6] D¨urer, Albrecht. Vnderweysung der Messung mit dem Zirckel un Richtscheyt in Linien, Ebnen
und Gantzen Corporen, Vol. 1-4. Nuremberg 1525. Republished with English translation of
Walter L. Strauss, revised, on compact disk. Editor, anonymous. Commentator, David Price.
Octavo Editions, Oakland CA, 2003.

[7] Erasmus, Desiderius, of Rotterdam. In Praise of Folly. Translated by John Wilson. Dover

Thrift Editions. 1991

[8] Finkelstein, David Ritz. Melencolia I: D¨urer Decoded, The St. Ann’s Review , 2004.

[9] Galileo Galilei, Dialogue on the Great World Systems. The Salisbury translation. Revised,
annnotated, and with an Introduction by G. de Santillana. University of Chicago Press (1953)

[10] Gell´erd, J. Francis D´avid’s Epistemological Borrowings from Henry Cornelius Agrippa of

Nettesheim. w3.enternet.hu/sandor64/cﬀr/papers/agrippa.htm

[11] Goldman, Shalom. God’s Sacred Tongue: Hebrew and The American Imagination; also

http://uncpress.unc.edu/booksT-6957.html. For the concept of Hebraicism.

29

[12] Greenblatt, Stephen. Will in the World: How Shakespeare Became Shakespeare. Norton

(2004). On Hamnet and Hamlet.

[13] Heckscher, William S. Melancholia (1541). An Essay in the Rhetoric of Description by Joachim
Camerarius. In: Frank Baron, ed., Joachim Camerarius (1500-1574). Beitrge zur Geschichte
des Humanismus im Zeitalter der Reformation. Essays on the History of Humanism During
the Reformation. Humanistische Bibliothek, Abhandlungen 24 (Munich, 1978): 32-103

[14] Horapollo Niliaci. The Hieroglyphics of Horapollo. Boas, George, translation and introduction.

Princeton University Press 1993.

[15] Khulusi, Basimah. Personal communication.

[16] Lunsford, Daniel. Personal communications concerning the D¨urer Solid and Ratio (2004).

[17] MacGillavry, C. The polyhedron in A. D¨urer’s engraving Melencolia I. Nederl. Akad. Weten-

schap. Proc. Series B 84, 287-232 (1981).

[18] Nauert, Jr., C. G. Agrippa and the Crisis of Renaissance Thought University of Illinois Press,

Urbana, 1965.

[19] Panofsky, Erwin. The Life and Art of Albrecht D¨urer . Princeton University Press, 1971. The

standard work. It reproduces the D¨urer works mentioned here.

[20] Santillana, Giorgio de, and Hertha von Dechend. Hamlet’s Mill: An Essay on Myth and the
Frame of Time. Gambit, 1969. Argumentation for the astronomical interpretation of all myth.

[21] Peter Schreiber. “A New Hypothesis on D¨urer’s Enigmatic Polyhedron in His Copper En-

graving Melancholia I.” Historia Mathematica 26, 369-377, 1999.

[22] W. Cecil Wade. The Symbolisms of Heraldry or A Treatise on the Meanings and Derivations

of Armorial Bearings. London: George Redway, 1898.

[23] Weitzel. H. A further hypothesis on the polyhedron of A. D¨urer’s engraving Melencolia I.

Historia Mathematica 31 (2004)

[24] Frances A. Yates. The Occult Philosophy in the Elizabethan Age. London ; Boston : Routledge

& K. Paul, 1979. Especially chapter 6.

[25] http://gallery.euroweb.hu/html/d/durer/ shows all the D¨urer works I mention.

[26] http://mathworld.wolfram.com/DuerersSolid.html describes and names the D¨urer Solid.

[27] http://meteoros.de/halo/halo1.htm is a remarkable gallery of portrayals of heavenly phenom-

ena like moonbows and moon halos, including several from D¨urer’s time.

30

