FROM ATOMS TO QUARKS AND BEYOND:A HISTORICAL
PANORAMA

1

G. Rajasekaran

Institute of Mathematical Sciences, Madras 600113.
e-mail: graj@imsc.ernet.in

Abstract : The inward bound path of discovery unravelling the mysteries of matter and
the forces that hold it together has culminated at the end of the twentieth century,in a
theory of the Fundamental Forces of Nature based on Nonabelian Gauge Fields, called the
Standard Model of High Energy Physics. In this article we trace the historical development
of the ideas and the experimental discoveries on which this theory is based. This involves
the following components: quantum ﬁeld theory and quantum electrodynamics, weak in-
teractions and parity violation, strong interactions and quarks, nonabelian gauge ﬁelds and
spontaneous symmetry breaking. We develop these diﬀerent strands of history and weave
them together. We also mark signiﬁcant Indian contributions wherever possible. Finally we
have a glimpse at future developments, in particular quantum gravity and string theory. An
Appendix on more Indian contributions is added at the end.

Plan of the article

1. Scope

3. Future of HEP

2. HEP before and after the Standard Model

4. Present Status in India and Suggestions for Future

5. Some Reﬂections on the Panorama of HEP

6. Appendix: More Indian contributions

6
0
0
2
 
b
e
F
 
0
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
t
s
i
h
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
1
3
1
2
0
6
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

2

From Atoms to Quarks and Beyond: A historical panorama

0.1 Scope

The earlier part of the 20th Century was marked by two revolutions that rocked the Foun-
dations of Physics.

1. Quantum Mechanics & 2. Relativity

Quantum Mechanics became the basis for understanding Atoms, and then, coupled with Spe-
cial Relativity, Quantum Mechanics provided the framework for understanding the Atomic
Nucleus and what lies inside.

INWARD BOUND

Atoms

10−8cm

Nuclei

Nucleons

Quarks

−→

−→

−→

?

−→

10−12cm

10−13cm

10−17cm

This inward bound path of discovery unraveling the mysteries of matter and the forces
holding it together – at deeper and ever deeper levels – has culminated, at the end of the
20th century, in the theory of Fundamental Forces based on Nonabelian Gauge Fields, for
which we have given a rather prosaic name :

THE STANDARD MODEL OF HIGH ENERGY PHYSICS

But, this is not the end of the road. More on that, later. Thus,what is called High energy
physics (HEP) is just the continuation of the era of discoveries that saw the discovery of
the electron, the discovery of radioactivity and X rays, the discovery of the nucleus and the
neutron and the discovery of cosmic rays and the positron.

These discoveries went hand in hand with the development of Quantum Mechanics, Rel-
ativity and Quantum Field Theory. For, without the conceptual advances made in these
theoretical developments, the above experimental discoveries could not have been assimi-
lated into the framework of Physics.

So, the present-day HEP must be regarded as the successor to Nuclear Physics, which

in turn was the successor to Atomic Physics :

Atomic Physics

Nuclear Physics

High Energy Physics

−→

−→

0.1. SCOPE

3

HEP is the front end or cutting edge of the human intellect advancing into the unknown
territory in its inward bound journey. This 100-year-long history must be viewed together,
to get a true picture of HEP. It is within this broad framework that we must place any
particular contribution or the totality of Indian contributions, for a proper perspective.
Viewed in this light, it is perfectly natural to include the great Indian contributions made
in the earlier part of the 20th century. If Bose, Raman & Saha were alive and young today,
they would be doing HEP. So, I start with their contributions . . .

1. M N Saha’s (1923) theory of thermal ionization played a crucial role in the elucida-
tion of stellar spectra and thus was of fundamental importance for the progress of
Astrophysics.
(Saha’s (1936) reinterpretation of Dirac’s quantization condition for
monopoles, in terms of angular momentum quantization, was very original and its
importance is now recognized.)

2. S N Bose (1924) discovered Quantum Statistics even before the discovery of Quantum
Mechanics by Heisenberg & Schr¨odinger one year later. Logically pursued, Bose’s dis-
covery by itself would have led to Quantum Mechanics. But, History went diﬀerently.
QM was discovered soon (in fact, too soon) and the ﬂood gates were open. This was
unfortunate for India. This may be called Missed Opportunity I.

3. C V Raman (1928) discovered the inelastic scattering of photon on bound electrons
and thus took the concept of photon one step higher. Raman eﬀect is a fundamental
experimental discovery that has not been surpassed or even equalled in its importance
and impact even after 70 years by any other experiment done in this country.

4. S.Chandrasekhar (1932) applied relativistic quantum mechanics to the interior of stars.
He calculated the degeneracy pressure (or Pauli pressure) of a relativistic electron gas
and thus initiated our understanding of the gravitational collapse of stars.

5. H.J. Bhabha’s (1935) calculation of e+e− scattering was one of the earliest nontrivial
applications of Dirac equation to a process in which Dirac’s hole theory played a crucial
role. This was done even before a full-ﬂedged Quantum Field Theory existed.

4

From Atoms to Quarks and Beyond: A historical panorama

0.2 HEP before and after the Standard Model

0.2.1 QED

L =

1
4 (∂µAν

∂νAµ)2

−

−

¯ψγµ(i∂µ

eAµ)ψ

m ¯ψψ

−

−

−

Planck (1900)

Einstein (1905)

Bose (1924)

Bose and Einstein
Fermi and Dirac

(1926)
(1926)

(cid:27)

Dirac (1927)

Jordan & Wigner (1928)

Compton
Raman

(1925)
(1928)

Dirac (1928)

(cid:27)

Anderson (1932)

Bhabha (1935)

: Quantization of radiation energy

: Photon

: Photons as identical particles

: Quantum Statistics

lays the foundations for QED by
introduction of a, a+ for photons
[a, a+] = 1 (bosons)

b, b+

{

}

= 1 (fermions)

photon scatters like particle

: Relativistic Eq. for electron

: Discovery of e+

e+e− scattering

:

:

:

:

Kramers (1947)

: The idea of renormalization

Lamb & Retherford (1947)
Bethe (1947)

: Exptl discovery of Lamb shift
: First calculation of Lamb shift

Feynman,
Schwinger,
Tomonoga,
Dyson





(1946

50)

:

−






using renormalization

Covariant Formalism,
Perturbation Series for S matrix,
Feynman Diagrams,
QED emerges as a
renormalizable QFT.

The development of Quantum Electrodynamics (QED) is concurrent with the develop-
ment of Quantum Field Theory (QFT),which has been the basic language of HEP, at least
so far.

QED is characterised by the Lagrangian density given in the box above and the various
milestones in its development are tabulated below that. We now describe them in more
detail.

0.2. HEP BEFORE AND AFTER THE STANDARD MODEL

5

The history of QED originates with the concept of the photon. Following Planck’s
epochal discovery in 1900 that the experimentally observed black-body radiation required
quantization of radiation energy, Einstein introduced the concept of photon in 1905. But
it took many years and the formulation of quantum mechanics itself in 1923-24 by Heisen-
berg and Schrodinger before Dirac could lay the foundation of QED and QFT in 1927, by
introducing the annihilation and creation operators a and a for photons satisfying commu-
tation relations. The work of Bose and Einstein as well as that of Fermi and Dirac led to
the recognition that there are are two fundamentally diﬀerent types of quantization and
correspondingly particles or quanta come in two varieties,namely bosons and fermions. It
was Dirac who clarifed the situation and thus uniﬁed both kinds of quantum statistics. All
this was in 1926. In 1928, Jordan and Wigner introduced the annihilation and creation op-
erators for fermions such as electrons satisfying anticommutation relations, thus completing
the picture.

Compton’s (1925) and Raman’s (1928) discoveries that photon scatters like a particle

both from free and bound electrons took the concept of the photon a step further.

The next milestones were Dirac’s discovery of the relativistic wave equation for the elec-
tron in 1928 and Carl Anderson’s discovery of the positron in 1932. The concept of the
antiparticle emerged as a law of nature that was a neccessary consequence of relativistic
quantum mechanics. Bhabha (1935) showed that the scattering of electron and positron
could be calculated correctly and systematically within the framework of Dirac equation.

Modern QED starts with renormalization. The idea of renormalization was due to
Kramers, but the breakthrough came from the experimental discovery of Lamb shift (1947)
which provided the impetus for the ﬁrst calculation of this eﬀect by Bethe (1947) using
the idea of renormalization. Through the seminal work of Feynman, Schwinger,Tomonoga
and Dyson, QED emerged as a covariant, local and renormalizable QFT, capable of precise
calculations within the perturbative framework. Precision experiments on Lamb shifts and
g-2 of electron and muon soon proved QED to be one of the most successful and precise
theories ever constructed.

Here one must refer to S N Gupta’s contribution (1950). It was Gupta who ﬁrst con-
structed a manifestly relativistic formulation of QED. Before him, QED was formulated in
Coulomb gauge which lacked manifest relativistic invariance. Gupta showed how to do QED
in the covariant Lorentz gauge in a consistent way by using indeﬁnite metric.

It may be worthwhile to pause and look back at the earlier decades before QED was
proved to be a correct theory. Both because of the intrinsic divergence disease of the theory
and of the supposed incapability of the theory to explain the higher energy phenomena in
the realm of cosmic rays, it was widely expected that QED will fail. Heitler’s well-known
book on ”Quantum Theory of Radiation” provides good evidence for this part of history.
Succeeding editions of the book estimated the demise of QED at higher and higher energies.
That demise never came. QED is still alive and kicking although incorporated in a bigger

6

From Atoms to Quarks and Beyond: A historical panorama

framework, namely the Standard Model of High Energy Physics. There is perhaps a moral
in this story–the widely prophesied demise of the Standard Model also might never come!

0.2.2 Weak Interactions

Becquerel (1896)

: Radioactivity (α, β, γ)

Pauli (1930)

:

”Neutrino”

Fermi (1934)

: Theory of β - decay : Lint =

¯pγµn ¯eγµν + h.c.

Lee, Yang, Wu
Sudarshan & Marshak

(1956)
(1957)

Parity Revolution
V-A Form

γµ

γµ(1

γ5)

→

−

Feynman & Gell-Mann (1957)

Universal current

current theory

:
:

:

GF
√2

(cid:27)

×

The story of weak interactions starts with Henri Becquerel’s discovery of radioactivity in
1896 and its subsequent classiﬁcation into alpha, beta and gamma decays of the nucleus.But
the real understanding of beta-decay in the sense we know it now came only after Enrico
Fermi invented a physical mechanism for the beta-decay process.

The basic ingredient for Fermi’s theory had been provided by Wolfgang Pauli.To solve
the puzzle of the continuous energy spectrum of the electrons emitted in the beta-decay of
the nuclei, Pauli had suggested that along with the electron, an almost massless particle
also was emitted. Fermi succeeded in incorporating Pauli’s suggestion and thus was born
the theory of weak interactions. Fermi also named Pauli’s particle as neutrino.

Drawing an analogy with QED where the basic interaction is the emission of a photon
by an electron, Fermi pictured the weak interaction responsible for the beta-decay of the
neutron as the emission of an electron-neutrino pair, the neutron converting itself into a
proton in the process.

This theory of weak interactions proposed by Fermi purely on an intuitive basis in 1934
stood the ground for almost 40 years until it was replaced by Standard Model. However
an important amendment to Fermi’s theory came in 1956. This was the discovery of parity
violation in weak interactions by Lee,Yang and Wu. But Fermi theory survived even this
fundamental revolution and the only modiﬁcation was to replace the vector interaction by an
equal mixture of vector(V) and axial vector (A) interaction.This is the V-A form proposed
by Sudarshan and Marshak and others.

During 1947-55, many new particles such as muons, pions, kaons and hyperons were
discovered and all of them were found to decay by weak interactions. In fact parity revo-
lution itself was triggered by the famous tau-theta puzzle in the decays of the kaons which
was the culmination of the masterly phase-space plot analysis of the three-pion decay mode

0.2. HEP BEFORE AND AFTER THE STANDARD MODEL

7

of the kaon by Dalitz. The ﬁeld of weak interactions thus got enriched by a multitude of
phenomena, of which nuclear beta-decay is just one. Weak interaction is indeed a universal
property of all fundamental particles.

Remarkably enough, all the weak phenomena, namely the weak decays of all the particles
could be incorporated in a straight-forward generalization of the original Fermi interaction.
This was achieved by Feynman and Gell-Mann (1957) in the form of the current x current
interaction:

Lint =

J +
µ =

J −
µ =

GF
2√2
1
2
1
2

(J +

µ J −

µ + J −

µ J +
µ )
1
2
1
2

¯uγµ(1

γ5)d +

¯νγµ(1

γ5)e + . . .

¯dγµ(1

γ5)u +

¯eγµ(1

r5)ν + . . .

−

−

−

−

A fundamental experimental discovery - the discovery of CP violation was made by Fitch
and Cronin in 1964, in the weak decays of neutral kaons. This asymmetry in the basic laws
of nature and its ramiﬁcations in Cosmology are current topics of research.

The story of weak interactions is not complete without due recognition of the neutrino,

especially because of more recent developments to be described later.

Pauli proposed the neutrino in 1930. Although because of the success of Fermi’s theory
based on neutrino emission in explaining quantitatively all the experimental data on nuclear
beta decays, there was hardly any doubt (at least in theorists’ minds) that neutrinos existed,
a direct detection of the neutrino came only in 1956. This achievement was due to Cowan
and Reines who succeeded in detecting the antineutrinos produced from ﬁssion fragments
in nuclear reactors.

Subsequently, it became possible to detect the neutrinos from the decays of pions and
kaons produced in high-energy accelerators. It is by using the accelerator-produced neutrinos
that the important experiment proving νµ not to be the same as νe was done.

Further, even neutrinos produced by cosmic rays were detected. The underground labo-
ratory (of TIFR) at the deep mines of the Kolar Gold Fields was one of the ﬁrst to detect
cosmic-ray produced neutrinos. This was in 1965.

8

From Atoms to Quarks and Beyond: A historical panorama

0.2.3 Strong Interactions

Yukawa (1934)

Heisenberg:, Isospin Symmetry

Powel, Occialini . . . : Discovery of π (1947)

resonance: Fermi (1952)

△
Chew-Low Theory : (1954)

Discovery of Strangeness: Gell-Mann & Nishijima (1955)

Resonances (1957-65)

S-matrix Theory (1957-62) : G.F.Chew

Sakata, Gell-Mann, Neeman (1961)

SU (3) :

(

Discovery of Ω− (1964)

Quarks: Gell-Mann, Zweig (1964)

Current algebra, PCAC, Chiral symmetry (1965-70)

Scaling in DIS and partons : Bjorken, Feynman (1967)

SLAC expts : Taylor, Friedman, Kendal (1967)

Discovery of Asymptotic Freedom of NAGT & Birth of QCD (1973)

Strong interactions proved a harder nut to crack.After the discovery of the neutron and
the recognition of the strong nuclear force of range 10 Fermi, Yukawa (1934) propounded
his famous theory of exchange of a meson of mass about 100 MeV as the mechanism of
this short-range strong interaction. Thus Dirac’s quantization of the electromagnetic ﬁeld
in 1927 which was the birth of QFT, inspired the creation of the QFT of weak interactions
by Fermi and strong interactions by Yukawa, within the space of another 7 years.

However there was a period of confusion. The disentanglement of the strongly interact-
ing pion (the Yukawa meson) from the weakly interacting muon took many years and it was
ﬁnally resolved only in 1947 when Powel and Occialini unambiguously discovered the pi-mu
decay chain. The discovery of muon is of great importance since the modern puzzle of the
”generations” starts from the muon.

The next important milestone was the invention of the notion of ”isospin” by Heisenberg
in 1935 (?), motivated by the equality of the pp, pn and nn forces. This is the forerunner
of all the internal symmetries that came later and that play such a fundamental role in
present-day Standard Model. Although Yukawa made a successful prediction of the pion
on the basis of a QFT for strong interaction, further progress was stalled because the in-
teraction was too strong to be treated by perturbative methods. The impetus provided
by the nucleon-pion resonance Delta (1238) (discovered by Fermi and Herbert Anderson in
1954) led to the partially successful Chew-Low theory that helped to understand the Delta

0.2. HEP BEFORE AND AFTER THE STANDARD MODEL

9

resonance. Historically this theory was important since it was the forerunner of the boot-
strap model for hadrons. The 60’s were the golden age of hadrons. Hundreds of them were
discovered and under the inﬂuence of this deluge of particles, QFT was declared dead and
an alternate philosophy called S-matrix theory was proposed, its chief proponent being G F
Chew. Many important ideas were developed under its banner: dispersion relations, Regge
poles, bootstrap, nuclear democracy etc. Ultimately this proved to be a dead end. And
a diﬀerent line of attack spearheaded by Gell-Mann proved more successful. Starting with
SU(3), this led to current algebra, and then to quarks, which ﬁnally led, via scaling in deep
inelastic lepton-hadron collisions and asymptotic freedom to Quantum Chromodynamics
(QCD). So, back to QFT even for strong interactions. However one must not conclude the
S-matrix approach was a complete failure. Although it was a failure for hadrons, it is this
approach that gave birth to String Theory! More about that later.

We now turn to a somewhat more detailed version of the tortuous history of the discov-

ery of quarks as the constituents of the hadron.

Let us start with Heisenberg’s isospin symmetry which is based on the SU(2) group.
The strange behaviour of the kaons and hyperons discovered in cosmic rays (strong produc-
tion rates and weak decay rates) in the 50’s led to the discovery of a new quantum number
strangeness by Gell-Mann and Nishijima in 1955. This is the ﬁrst new hadronic ”ﬂavour” to
be discovered– to use the modern parlance. Sakata and his collaborators invented the SU(3)
group symmetry underlying all the hadrons.This was a consequence of their speculation that
all the hadrons (strange as well as nonstrange) were composed of three basic hadrons p,n
and λ (the strange baryon). A more elegant and highly successful classiﬁcation of all the
hadrons under Sakata’s SU(3) was achieved by Gell-Mann and Neeman in 1961 when they
realised that p,n and λ together with 5 other baryons belonged to the octet representation
(The Eightfold Way) of SU(3) rather than the triplet as originally proposed in the Sakata
model. The discovery of Ω− in 1964 conﬁrmed the eightfold way and the SU(3) symmetry.

But then the following question arose. Eventhough p,n and λ were not a triplet, SU(3)
group has a triplet, which is the fundamental representation of SU(3).Where are they? Here
one must describe an event that occurred in Bangalore in August 1961. The ﬁrst TIFR
Summer School in Theoretical Particle Physics was held in the Indian Institute of Science
Campus at Bangalore. Dalitz and Gell-Mann were the lecturers.Apart from graduate stu-
dents, senior physicists like H J Bhabha, M G K Menon and S N Biswas were also in the
audience. Gell-Mann lectured on SU(3) and the Eightfold Way, fresh from the anvil, even
before they were published. During one of the lectures, Dalitz questioned him about the
triplets.Why is he ignoring them? Gell-Mann managed to evade it, inspite of Dalitz’s re-
peated questioning. If Gell-Mann had answered the question directly, quarks would have
been born in Bangalore in 1961 instead of having to wait for another three years. If any of
the other Indian participants had succeeded answering, we would have got the quarks and
this would have been a major Indian contribution. This is the Missed Opportunity II.

Gell-Mann and Zweig independantly proposed the idea of quarks in 1964, but it took
many years before quarks emerged as physical entities. Gell-Mann himself was tentative

10

From Atoms to Quarks and Beyond: A historical panorama

in his proposal; the title of his published paper was ”A schematic model for hadrons”. He
took the point of view that quarks are only mathematical. The three quarks u,d,s replaced
p,n,λ of Sakata as the fundamental triplet of SU(3) and all the hadrons are to be regarded
as composites made of quarks and antiquarks.

The chief reason for the reluctance to accept quarks as constituents of hadrons was
the prevalent S-matrix philosophy at that time. The idea of some strongly interacting par-
ticles being more elementary than others was repugnant to the whole scheme of nuclear
democracy. G F Chew in a lecture at The Tata Institute of Fundamental Research, Bom-
bay in 1967 (?) even claimed to be able to prove that because of relativity and quantum
mechanics no constituent more elementary than the nucleon and other hadrons was possible.

Inspite of this quark-phobia there were a few bold souls that took the idea of physical
quarks as constituents of hadrons seriously and worked out the consequences. One may
mention the names of A N Mitra, G Morpurgo and R H Dalitz among others. In particular
Dalitz who was the raporteur for the Berkeley conference in 1965 (?) (one of the famous
Rochester series which later became the the Biennial International Conference in High En-
ergy Physics), instead of reporting the spin-parity determination for the recently discovered
hadronic resonances, as he traditionally did with consummate skill and thoroughness, sur-
prised everybody by reporting how all the spin-parity as well as other quantum numbers of
the hadrons agreed beautifully with the quark model.

However, although hadronic spectroscopy did give strong evidence for the correctness of
the quark hypothesis and the constituent quark model, there was no clinching evidence for
its correctness.

Meanwhile, Gell-Mann’s current algebra programme of exploiting mathematical quarks
to abstract the properties of the weak and electromagnetic currents of the hadrons paid
dividends.Coupled with the notion of PCAC (Partially Conserved Axial Current),current
algebra supplied a temporary theoretical framework for the study of hadrons.

Quark model got a big boost when SU(6) symmetry was discovered by Gursey,Radicati,Sakita

and others. Since each of the three spin-1/2 quarks has two spin states, there are a total
of six states and SU(6) symmetry follows if one ignores spin-dependant forces between the
quarks. The success of SU(6) brought quarks nearer to physical reality.

But a very serious contradiction developed soon. This is the conﬂict of the apparent
total symmetry of the three-quark wave function in the baryonic ground state with the anti-
symmetry requirement of Fermi-Dirac statistics. As a simple example, consider the doubly
charged Delta(1238) which is a spin-3/2 baryon made of three u quarks. The wave function
of the three u quarks in the ground state contains a symmetric spatial part corresponding
to zero relative orbital angular momenta and a symmetric spin part corresponding to total
spin 3/2.

There was good phenomenological support for the assumption of symmetric spatial part.

0.2. HEP BEFORE AND AFTER THE STANDARD MODEL

11

SU(6) symmetry assigned both the spin-1/2 octet baryons and the spin-3/2 decimet baryons
to a single 56-dimensional representation. Hence Delta (1238) and the nucleon must have
the same spatial part of the quark wave function. If this spatial wave function were not
symmetric, it would have nodes corresponding to higher relative orbital angular momenta
for the quarks and such a node in the spatial wave function would have been seen in the
form factor of the proton. This argument developed by A N Mitra and R Majumdar ruled
out the nodes and hence favoured the symmetrical spatial wave function.

But then the total wave function of the three quarks is symmetric under the interchange
of space and spin variables, thus violating the antisymmetry requirement of the wave func-
tion of the three identical fermions (uuu). Antisymmetry was restored by the invention of
a new quantum number, called ”colour”, which is three-valued, and the assignment of an
antisymmetric colour wave function for the three bound quarks. For, the total wave function
is now a product of space, spin and colour parts and the total is antisymmetric. Greenberg
played an important role in the solution of this statistics problem, although his original
proposal was that quarks were parafermions of rank three. It was Nambu who suggested
the idea of a three-valued quantum number, which was later called colour by Gell-Mann.

Quarks became ”real” only after two important experimental discoveries that came
later–scaling in deep inelastic scattering (in late 60’s) and ψ, the bound state of charmed
quark c and antiquark ¯c in 1974. Most of the sceptics started believing in the reality of
quarks only after these developments.

The ultimate triumph of quarks has a parellel in the history of atoms. There were scep-
tics who did not believe in the reality of atoms–Mach, Ostwald and others. Boltzman waged
a heroic ﬁght against their conservative notions, but the battle was won only after Perrin
veriﬁed Einstein’s formula for Brownian motion based on the reality of atoms.

0.2.4 Summary of HEP before the Standard Model (before circa

1971)

Putting together the ideas of subsections (2.1)-(2.3), we have

L =

Fµν F µν + ¯e [iγµ(∂µ

ieAµ)

me] e + i¯νeγµ∂µνe

−

µ + i¯νµγλ∂λνµ

(cid:3)
mu

u + ¯d

iγµ(∂µ

(cid:20)

i
3

−

eAµ)

md

d

−

(cid:21)

1
4
−
+¯µ

(cid:2)

+¯u

+¯s

(cid:20)
GF
2√2

+

iγλ(∂λ

−
iγµ(∂µ +

(cid:20)
irµ(∂µ

−

−
ieAµ)

ieAλ)
2
3
1
3

ieAµ)

−
mµ

−

(cid:21)
s

(cid:21)

ms

−

J +
µ J −

µ + J −

µ J +

µ

(cid:0)

(cid:1)

12

From Atoms to Quarks and Beyond: A historical panorama

+ strong interactions among quarks whose nature was not known.

where,

and

J −
λ =

1
2

¯eγλ(1

γ5)νe +

¯µγλ(1

γ5)νµ +

( ¯d cos θc + ¯s sin θc)γλ(1

γ5)u

−

−

−

1
2

1
2

J +
λ = (J −

λ )†

sin θc

0.22.

≈
Here we have the Lagrangian density describing the electromagnetic and weak interactions
of the three quarks u, d, s and the four leptons e, µ, νe, νµ. The existence of these quarks as
the constituents of the hadrons had been inferred from hadron spectroscopy through a clever
guess. However nobody knew the form of the strong interaction among the quarks which is
responsible for binding them into hadrons. So, it is left unspeciﬁed. The weak current J −
λ
has been written in term of the Cabibbo-rotated quarks, in order to incorporate the weak
decays of the strange hadrons. CP violation was experimentally known, but not understood
theoretically.

0.2.5 Brief History of The Standard Model

Experiment

Theory

1954 Nonabelian gauge ﬁelds
1964 Higgs mechanism
1967 EW Theory

1971 Renormalizability of EW Theory
1973 Asymptotic freedom

QCD

→

1968

Scaling in DIS

1973 Neutral current
1974 Charm
τ -lepton
1975
1977 Beauty
polarized e d expt
1978
3 jets
1979
1983 W,Z Bosons
1994 Top
1998

ν mass

The major events which culminated in the construction of the Standard Model are shown
in this table in chronological order. Using nonabelian gauge theory with Higgs mechanism,
the Electroweak (EW) theory was already constructed in 1967, although it attracted the
attention of most theorists only after another 4 years, when it was shown to be renormal-
izable. The discovery of asymptotic freedom of nonabelian gauge theory and the birth of
QCD in 1973 were the ﬁnal inputs that led to the full standard model.

0.2. HEP BEFORE AND AFTER THE STANDARD MODEL

13

On the experimental side, the discovery of scaling in Deep Inelastic Scattering (DIS)
which led to the asymptotically free QCD and the discovery of the neutral current which
helped to conﬁrm the EW theory can be regarded as crucial experiments. To this list, one
may add the polarized electron deuteron experiment which showed that SU(2) x U(1) is
the correct group for EW theory, the discovery of gluonic jets in e+e− annihilation con-
ﬁrming QCD and the discovery of W and Z in 1983 that established the EW theory. The
experimental discoveries of charm, τ , beauty and top were also fundamental for the concrete
3-generation SM, with cancellation of anomalies and CP violation incorporated (although
the last feature was theoretically discovered by Kobayashi and Maskawa in 1974? itself).

However note the blank after 1973 on the theoretical side. Theoretical physicists have
been working even after 1973 and experiments also are being done. But the tragic fact
is that none of the bright ideas proposed by theorists in the past 30 years has received
any experimental support. On the other side, experiments have only been conﬁrming the
theoretical structure completed in 1973. None of the experiments done since 1975 has made
any independent discovery (except the discovery of neutrino mass).
If this continues for
long, it will be too bad for the future of HEP. I shall come back to this point later.

0.2.6 Brief Physics Behind the History

First about the electroweak sector. The idea of using the beautiful Yang-Mills nonabelian
gauge ﬁeld theory to construct weak interactions is a old one, but it was Glashow who
identiﬁed SU(2)xU(1) as the correct gauge group for an eletroweak theory. However the
stumbling block was the masslessness of the gauge quanta which would contradict the short
range of weak interactions. So the gauge symmetry had to be broken. Although the idea
of spontaneous breakdown of symmetry (SBS) was around, Goldstone’s theorem which pre-
dicted the existence of a massless scalar boson (the Nambu-Goldstone boson) as the conse-
quence of SBS prevented the application of SBS to construct any physically relevant model.
Thus,apparently one had to choose between the devil (massless gauge boson) and the deep
sea (massless scalar boson). It was Higgs who showed that this is not correct; there is no
Goldstone theorem if the symmetry that is spontaneously broken is a gauge symmetry. The
devil drinks up the deep sea and becomes a regular massive gauge boson. This is called
Higgs mechanism. By combining SU(2)xU(1) Yang-Mills gauge theory with Higgs mecha-
nism Weinberg and Salam independantly constructed the successful electroweak theory.

At this point one could ask why SBS ? Why not break the gauge symmetry explicitly?
The answer is renormalizability. Although the original Yang-Mills theory with massless
gauge ﬁelds is renormalizable, Yang-Mills theory with massive gauge bosons and with explicit
breaking of the symmetry is nonrenormalizable. Gerard t’Hooft and Veltman proved that
the renormalizability of the original Y-M theory is not lost if the gauge bosons acquire
masses through SBS.

There was one further problem - the problem of chiral anomalies originally discovered
by Adler, Bell and Jackiw before the advent of the standard model. These anomalies would
make the electroweak theory norenormalizable unless they are cancelled suitably. This is
what happens; the leptonic and the quark anomalies cancel each other.

Fermi’s theory of weak interactions was not renormalizable and construction of a renor-

14

From Atoms to Quarks and Beyond: A historical panorama

malizable theory of weak interactions had remained as one of the fundamental problems in
HEP. The SU(2)xU(1) gauge theory with SBS solved that problem.

The electroweak theory based on SU(2)xU(1) gauge group links weak and electromag-
netic interactions together. Here a remark on this uniﬁcation is in order. Apart from any
aesthetic or other considerations, there is an important physical reason for linking weak and
electromagnetic interactions. It is possible to construct a renormalizable theory of weak in-
teractions alone. But since such a theory would neccessarily contain charged vector bosons
(as a part of the gauge boson multiplet), one has to have a meaningful theory for these
electrically charged vector bosons. It has been known for a long time that the theory of the
charged vector bosons (spin 1 particles) is aﬄicted with many diseases. All these prblems are
neatly solved, once the charged vector bosons and the photon (along with another neutral
massive vector boson in the case of SU(2)xU(1)) are combined into the gauge multiplet. It
is the gauge symmetry that cures the diseases.

In electroweak theory, Maxwell’s laws of electromagnetism have been incorporated into
a more general system of laws which unify electrodynamics with weak interactions. The im-
plications of this fundamental uniﬁcation are yet to be fully understood or realized. There
is no doubt that the consequences of this uniﬁcation will be as profound and far-reaching as
Faraday’s uniﬁcation of electricity and magnetism and of Maxwell’s uniﬁcation of electro-
dynamics with optics.

Let us next go to QCD. Why QCD ? What is the reason for believing QCD to be the

theory of strong interactions?

As already mentioned in Sec 2.3, for a time physicists had given up QFT as a useful
approach for understanding strong interactions and taken to the S-matrix approach. So
what caused the resurgence of QFT in strong interaction physics and what is the reason for
going for this particular nonabelian gauge ﬁeld theory based on SU(3), which is QCD ?

The reason came from an experiment, the so-called deep inelastic scattering (DIS) of
electrons on the nucleon, in which the virtual photon of large momentum-transfer-squared
q2 emitted by the electron probes the structure of the nucleon.
It was found that, as
observed by the high q2 probe, the nucleon behaves as if it were composed of free, point-like
constituents (called partons by Feynman). The electron scatters oﬀ each parton, elastically
and incoherently. The incoherent sum of all parton crosssections gave a very good description
of the experimental results. It was a remarkable discovery that such a complicated process
in which many hadrons are produced in the ﬁnal state could be described in such a simple
fashion. This discovery was originally made at SLAC with electron scattering and later
similar results were found also for the DIS of neutrinos on nucleon at CERN.

This phenomenon has a rather close resemblance to Rutherford’s famous alpha particle
scattering experiments which led to the discovery of the nucleus inside the atom. Thomson’s
spread-out atomic model would lead to soft scattering (i.e.small scattering angles) only. Ex-
perimentally, Rutherford and collaborators found hard scattering (large scattering angles),
thus showing the presence of ”point-nucleus” inside the atom. In the same way, in DIS, even
for large q2 (i.e. large scattering angle), scattering was observed to take place, in contrast
to what would be expected for a spread-out nucleon. This led to the discovery of point-like
constituents deep inside the nucleon.

More detailed study of the experimental data revealed that these partons are in fact

quarks; they seemed to have the same spins and charges as expected for quarks.

0.2. HEP BEFORE AND AFTER THE STANDARD MODEL

15

Attention should now be turned to the adjective ’free’. In addition to being point-like,
the quark-partons behave as if they are free. If they were interacting, the free-parton model
for DIS would not have worked.

Now the quarks are bound by tremendous attractive forces to make up the nucleon.
So the interaction between quarks should really be superstrong. And yet, when observed
through high q2 probes, this superstrong interaction weakens to such an extent that the
quarks behave as free particles.

This was a mystery. On the other hand, this provided an important clue about the
nature of the strong interaction itself. One could now say that any candidate theory of
strong interactions should satisfy this property, namely it should tend to a free ﬁeld theory
at high q2. Is there any such theory?

In QFT, it is the renormalization group which provides the required technique to answer
this question. By using renormalization group one can deﬁne a momentum-dependent cou-
pling constant, also called running coupling constant. So what we need is a theory in which
this coupling constant goes to zero for large momenta. Such a theory is called asymptotically
free, i.e. it tends to a free ﬁeld theory for asymptotic momenta.

To cut the long story short, it was soon discovered that none of the conventional ﬁeld
theories such as φ4, Yukawa interaction ¯ψψφ or QED ¯ψγµψAµ is asymptotically free. Of
all the renormalizable quantum ﬁeld theories, only nonabelian gauge theory was found to
possess the unique distinction of being asymptotically free. The characterictic nonlinearity
of Y-M ﬁelds, in particular the cubic vertex is the essential ingredient that makes the theory
asymptotically free.

So, asymptotically free YM theory emerged as the only choice for a theory of strong
interactions. Since the colour degree of freedom with three colours was already there (see
Sec 2.3), the gauge group was taken as SU(3) acting on the 3 colours and QCD was born.
Let us next look at the matter sector. All the nucleons are made of u and d quarks.
With electrons to go around the nuclei, all the atoms can be made. Even the weak inter-
actions are included once the νe is given. Hence with the quartet made up of a doublet of
quarks and a doublet of leptons (u, d, νe, e), apparently the whole Universe can be made.
But if the Universe started as a ﬁreball as is claimed in the Big Bang model of cosmology,
it would have started with equal amount of matter and antimatter, whereas the present-day
Universe seems to be made entirely of matter. Sakharov speculated that this asymmetry
between matter and antimatter could have been created later during the evolution of the
Universe. One of the neccessary conditions for this is CP violation which certainly exists in
HEP. But does the SM have it? Yes, if the above matter quartet is repeated atleast twice
more. This was the theoretical discovery made by Kobayashi and Maskawa. CP violation
arises from the complex coupling constants, but often the phases can be absorbed into the
deﬁnition of the ﬁelds. All the phases cannot be absorbed, if there exist atleast three quar-
tets. That is why we have, in addition, (c, s, νµ, µ) and (t, b, ντ , τ ). Together these are now
called the three generations of fermions and all of them have been experimentally proved to
exist.

16

From Atoms to Quarks and Beyond: A historical panorama

0.2.7 The Standard Model of High Energy Physics

The complete Lagrangian of the Standard Model is given by

=

L

1
4
1
4

(∂µGi

ν −

(∂µW a

ν −

∂ν Gi

µ −
∂νW a

µ −

g3f ijkGj

µGk

ν )2

g2ǫabcW b

1
4

−

(∂µBν

∂νBµ)2

−

¯qnLγµ(∂µ + ig3

Gi

µ + ig2

W a

µ +

Bµ)qnL

ig1
6

ν )2
µW c
τ a
2

2
3

λi
2

λi
2

λi
2
τ a
2

¯unRγµ(∂µ + ig3

Gi

µ + i

g1Bµ)unR

¯dnRγµ(∂µ + ig3

¯lnLγµ(∂µ + ig2

Gi

µ −

W a

µ −

i

g1
3

i

g1
2

Bµ)dnR

Bµ)lnl

¯enRγµ(∂µ

ig1Bµ)enR

n
X
(∂µ + ig2
|

τ a
2

−

W a

i

g1
2

2
Bµ)φ
|

µ −
mn ¯qmLφcunR + Γd

−
−
mn ¯qmLφdnR + Γe

(Γu

mn

λ(φ+φ

v2)2

¯lmLφenR + h.c.)

−

−

−

−

−

−

−

+

−

n
X

n
X

n
X

n
X

m,n
X

The ﬁrst three terms describe the pure gauge ﬁeld part of the SU(3)xSU(2)xU(1) non-
abelian gauge theory. The next group of terms describes the fermions. The left-handed
SU(2) doublet quark of the nth generation (n=1,2,3) is denoted by qnL and the correspond-
ing right-handed singlets are denoted by unR and dnR. For the leptons, lnL is the doublet
while enR is the singlet.

The last group of terms describes the Higgs ﬁeld and its interactions with itself, with
the gauge bosons and with the fermions which are respectively responsible for spontaneous
symmetry breaking, generation of W and Z masses and generation of masses for the quarks
and leptons. The Γ’s are complex numbers and hence lead to CP violation.

Standard Model is the basis of all that is known in HEP. Although it is believed that
SM is only an eﬀective low energy description and it is to be replaced by something beyond,
so far SM has resisted all attempts at overthrowing it. All the precision tests performed so
far are in beautiful agreement with SM. All the experimental signals that seem to signal its
overthrow, disappear in about 6 months – 1 year, except one signal, namely the signal that
neutrino has mass. Neutrino is the only particle, a part of which, its right-hand part νR,
has zero quantum number and so it is not acted on by the SM group : SU (3)
U (1).
So, νR is banished from SM and as a consequence, the mass of neutrino within SM is zero.

SU (2)

×

×

0.2. HEP BEFORE AND AFTER THE STANDARD MODEL

17

That is why ν having a mass is regarded as a signal beyond SM.

×

Note the almost complete absence of Indian contribution. (Of course Salam’s name is
there, as a major contributor to the construction of the SU (2)
U (1) electroweak theory.
We shall eschew parochialism and include him since he is from the subcontinent.) Let me
give a little bit of my side of the story here. I was aware of the beauty of Yang-Mills (YM)
theory from the time of Sakurai’s famous Annals of Physics paper of 1960 and I realized the
importance of YM theory to weak interaction ever since I listened to Veltman in the Varenna
School in 1964 where he stressed the conservation of weak currents. When Weinberg’s paper
with the quaint title ”A model of Leptons” came out in Physical Review Letters in 1967, I
was immediately convinced that this was the correct theory for weak interactions and began
to work on it.
I still missed the boat completely because I was too muddle-headed and
stupid. Instead of trying to renormalize the divergences away (which we now know to be the
right thing, after t’Hooft showed it in 1971), I was trying to generate the strong interactions
from the divergences. I was too ambitious and missed the real thing.

Mine was a double failure. Since I was very familiar with partons, scaling and the quark-
model sum rules that the DIS structure functions were found to obey, I was fully aware of
the serious problem that was staring at everybody’s face, namely, how to reconcile the free-
quark behavior exhibited by the DIS structure functions with the superstrong interactions
of quarks inside the hadrons. The techniques that were subsequently used to eﬀect the
reconciliation were also known to me. In fact I was giving a series of lectures on Wilson’s
RG ideas and the Callan-Symanzik β function at TIFR, when the preprints of Politzer and
Gross-Wilczek proving asymptolic freedom in YM theory came out.

So, I failed on both fronts : on both the two most important QFT discoveries of the latter
part of the 20th century - namely renormalizability of YM theory with SSB and asymptotic
freedom of YM theory - both of which being the essential theoretical inputs in the construc-
tion of the SM of HEP. This is Missed Opportunity III.

Forgetting about myself, it was a collective failure of the Indian High Energy Physicists.
By that tme we had strong theory groups in the country and we should have made signiﬁcant
contributions in the construction of SM, but we did not. In my opinon, this is a glaring
failure and we cannot forgive ourselves for it.

The author apologises for the above intrusion of his personal story. There is no other
way of conveying the ﬂavour and excitement of the discoveries of the early 70’s and there
may be lessons to be learnt in this story of failures.

0.2.8 Discovery of Neutrino Mass

Neutrino mass was discovered in 1998 through neutrino oscillations by the SuperKamioka
group in Japan. This discovery was made in the study of cosmic-ray produced neutrinos,
called atmospheric neutrinos. Inspite of the fact that the Indian group was a pioneer in

18

From Atoms to Quarks and Beyond: A historical panorama

atmospheric neutrino physics being the ﬁrst to detect the atmospheric neutrinos in the
KGF mines in 1965, we lost the initiative and missed the chance to make this fundamental
discovery. This is Missed Opportunity IV.

Indications for neutrino oscillations and neutrino mass came ﬁrst as early as 1970 from
the pioneering solar neutrino experiments of Davis etal in USA which were later corraborated
by many other solar neutrino experiments. But the clinching evidence that solved the solar
neutrino problem in terms of neutrino oscillations had to wait until 2002 when the Sudbury
Neutrino Observatory could detect the solar neutrinos through both the neutral-current as
well as the charged-current modes.

Standard Model is not the end of the story. There are too many loopholes in it. First of all,
there are many interesting questions and unsolved problems within SM :

0.3 Future of HEP

Higgs and symmetry breaking

QCD and Conﬁnement

CP and its violation

•

•

•

Neutrinos and their masses and mixings

•
The celebrated Higgs mechanism that breaks the SU(2)xU(1) gauge symmetry and gives
masses to all the elementary particles according to our present understanding of the SM
comes with a price. A massive scalar boson called Higgs boson has to exist but it has not
been seen experimentally inspite of intensive search. Maybe it will be seen in the LHC
(Large Hadron Collider) that is being built at CERN. Until it is seen, our understanding of
the electroweak sector of the SM will remain incomplete.

In the QCD sector, colour conﬁnement has not yet been proved. Asymptotic freedom of
QCD and its implied weakness of the QCD coupling for large momenta led to the recognition
of QCD as the theory of strong interactions. But its complement, namely the strong QCD
coupling for small momenta neccessitates nonperturbative understanding of QCD. That is
a tall order, for our understanding of QFT has not progressed beyond perturbation theory.
Remember all the low energy hadronic physics falls into this regime of small momentum
transfer and hence strong coupling and QCD has contributed precious little to this physics.
Inspite of enormous work done (lattice QCD and fast computers) our understanding of the
fundamental mechanism of conﬁnement remains incomplete. One is tempted to repeat the
Churchillian remark: ”In no other ﬁeld has so much eﬀort been wasted towards so little
eﬀect.”

Although CP violation exists in the SM with 3 generations of fermions, its confrontation
with experiments is not complete. Such a confrontation is in progress through experiments in
the ”B factories”. There is a serious problem with QCD because of the strong CP violation
that it predicts. This problem is not yet solved.

As already mentioned, the discovery of neutrino mass requires us to go beyond SM,
but we do not know the precise direction to take. An attractive possibility is the ”see-saw”

0.3. FUTURE OF HEP

19

mechanism that naturally explains the smallness of the neutrino mass simultaneously linking
the tiny neutrino mass to superheavy mass scales and to physics beyond SM. Hence the name:
see-saw. This mechanism requires the neutrino to be a Majorana fermion for which particle
is the same as antiparticle (in contrast to a Dirac fermion). The only experimental test for
the Majorana nature of the neutrino is the observation of neutrinoless double beta decay for
which no deﬁnitive evidence has been established so far.

The solution of these problems sets the agenda of HEP for the immediate future.
However, the biggest loophole in SM is the omission of gravitation, the most important
force of nature. Hence, it is now recognized that quantum gravity (QG) is the next frontier
of HEP, and that the true fundamental scale of physics is the Planck energy 1019 Gev, which
is the scale of QG.

We are now probing the region with energy

103GeV . One can see the vastness of
the domain one has to cover before QG is incorporated into physics. In their attempts to
probe this domain of 103
1019 Gev, theoretical physicists have invented many ideas such
as supersymmetry and hidden dimensions and based on these ideas, they have constructed
many beautiful theories, the best among them being the string theory, which may turn out
to be the correct theory of QG.
String Theory

≤

−

String theory is the high-energy-physicist’s ﬁrst successful attempt to construct a rela-
tivistic quantum ﬁeld theory which is ﬁnite even after including gravitation. This was the
reason for all the exitement and fuss when it ﬁrst hit the headlines in 1984. For the ﬁrst
time in history we are glimpsing at a solution to an age-old problem, namely the problem of
constructing a quantum theory of gravity. So far, any attempted theory of gravity was af-
ﬂicted with the worst divergence diseases known in quantum ﬁeld theory - much worse than
the divergences in QED, QCD and electroweak dynamics all of which were renormalizable
divergences. Quantum gravity is not renormalizable. String theory solves the problem by a
nonlocal generalization of the usual local quantum ﬁeld theory based on point particles. A
point particle is replaced by a one-dimensional object known as a string (either a open or
closed string),with a length of the order of the Planck length (10−33 cm).

Here a brief history of string theory is in order. String theory was born in attempts to
construct the hadronic S-matrix. Starting with Veneziano’s discovery (1968)of a formula for
the hadronic scattering amplitude which had both Regge behaviour and crossing symmetry
the S-matrix approach reached its pinnacle in the construction of the dual model. However,
ironically enough, just at that juncture, Nambu (1969) identiﬁed the spectrum of the dual
model with the vibrations of a string and the S-matrix approach was soon abandoned in
favour of a canonical dynamical formalism for the string.

Remarkable discoveries followed soon: supersymmetry (in two dimensions) was discov-
ered in the attempt to include fermionic excitations in the string spectrum (Ramond 1971,
Neveu and Schwarz 1971). Goddard, Goldstone, Rebbi and Thorn discovered in 1973 that
a consistent relativistic quantum dynamics for the string required the number of space-time
dimensions to be 26 and Gliozzi, Scherk and Olive showed that the same for a supersym-
metric string required 10 dimensions. The point-particle limit of the open string theory
was found to yield Yang-Mills gauge theory while the same limit of the closed string theory
yielded gravitaion (Neveu and Scherk 1972, Yoneya 1974).

20

From Atoms to Quarks and Beyond: A historical panorama

In the hadronic context the above discoveries were regarded either as irrelevant or bizarre
(especially the unseen higher dimensions). Because of these ”troubles”, the popularity of the
strings waned after about 1974. An additional and important reason for the loss of interest
in strings as a description for hadrons was the discovery of QCD which emerged as the basic
theory of hadrons.

Meanwhile, motivated by the discovery of the connection of strings to gauge and grav-
itational ﬁelds in the point-particle limit, Scherk and Schwarz in 1974 proposed to liberate
string theory from its original restricted hadronic context and apply the theory to the whole
world and that liberated string theory from all the ”troubles”. All they had to do was to
change the string length from 10−13 to 10−33 cm.

In 1984 Green and Schwarz discovered that chiral and gravitational anomalies cancel in
the open superstring theory in 10 dimensions if the gauge group is SO(32) or E8XE8. The
discovery of this miraculous cancellation marked the start of the string revolution.

For local ﬁeld theories there already exists the beautiful Kaluza-Klein idea of uniﬁcation
in which both 4-dimensional gauge forces and 4-dimensional gravity are derived from higher
dimensional (d larger than 4) gravity. The string- analogue of this phenomenon is the
”heterotic string” discovered by Gross, Harvey, Martinec and Rohm in 1985, wherein open
strings with Yang-Mills internal indices as well as pure gravity type closed strings can both
be derived from pure gravity-type higher-dimensional closed strings. The construction of the
heterotic string is a high-point of the ingenuity of theoretical physicists. Whether Nature
utilizes them is yet to be seen.

Including the heterotic and the original open and closed strings there are now ﬁve string
theories that are anomaly-free and consistent. But all of them live in 10 dimensions. How
do we go from 10 to 4 dimensions? By compactiﬁcation of 6 of the dimensions. But there
are thousands of ways of doing this. Which is the correct way? Nobody knows for sure.

After the second string revolution of 94-96 initiated by Edward Witten, Ashoke Sen and
others that led to breakthroughs such as the discovery of duality linking all the consistent
string theories, string theory has become extraordinarily rich. It has metamorphosed into
M theory and it now includes in its domain not only strings, but also membranes and
mulidimensional branes.

But, Physics is not theory alone. Even beautiful theories have to be confronted with
experiments and either conﬁrmed or thrown out. Here we encounter a serious crisis facing
HEP. In the next 10-25 years, new accelerator facilities with higher energies such as the LHC
104 Gev) or the Linear Electron Collider will be built so that the prospects for HEP in
(
∼
the immediate future appear to be bright. Beyond that period, the accelerator route seems
to be closed because known acceleration methods cannot take us beyond about 105 GeV.
It is here that one turns to hints of new physics from Cosmology, Astroparticle Physics
and Nonaccelerator particle physics. However, these must be regarded as only our ﬁrst and
preliminary attack on the unknown frontier. These are only hints. Physicists cannot remain
satisﬁed with hints and indirect attacks on the superhigh energy frontier.
To sum up the situation : There are many interesting fundamental theories taking us to
the Planck scale and even beyond, but unless the experimental barrier is crossed, these will
remain only as Metaphysical Theories. It follows that,

either, new ideas of acceleration have to be discovered,

•

0.4.

STATUS OF HEP IN INDIA AND SUGGESTIONS FOR THE FUTURE

21

or, there will be an end to HEP by about 2020 AD.

•

Some of the ideas being pursued are laser beat-wave method, plasma wake ﬁeld accel-
erator, laser-driven grating linac, inverse free electron laser, inverse Cerenkov acceleration
etc. What we need, are a hundred crazy ideas. May be, one of them will work!

By an optimistic extrapolation of the growth of accelerator technology in the past 60
years, one can show that 1019 GeV can be reached before the end of the 21st century. (See
my Calcutta talks)1 But, this is possible only if newer methods and newer technologies are
continuously invented.

Another Way Out

In the past three years, another revolutionary idea is being-tried – namely to bring down
Planck scale from 1019 GeV to 103 GeV. This is the so called TeV scale gravity which uses
large (sub-mm) extra dimensions. (If we cannot go up to the mountain top why not ask the
mountain top to come down?) One version of this idea which is popular is due to Randall
and Sundrum.

This is a very interesting ﬁeld, with a bewildering variety of worlds that theorists can

construct, as a scan of recent hep-net will show.

Is Nature so kind and considerate to us, that it would have brought down the Planck

scale for our sake? Only Future can tell.

But, if this turns out to be correct, then Quantum Gravity and String Theory are not
105
some distant theories relevant at 1019 GeV, but they are immediately relevant at 103
GeV. So, it becomes even more urgent to understand String Theories and assimilate them
into Physics!
Preons

−

A brief look at the history of atoms, nucleons and then quarks would suggest that preons
must be the next natural step. There may exist in Nature a never-ending layered structure.
As we already mentioned, in the hey-days of S-matrix and bootstrap philosophy in
the early 60’s, it was even proposed that perhaps the end of the road was in sight and
that no more constituent structure beyond the hadrons was possible. But the subsequent
development of physics has shown this to be wrong. We now believe that hadrons are made
of quarks. Are quarks, in turn, made of preons?

Many preonic models have been proposed but none is as yet required by experimental
data. Down to a distance scale of 10−17 cm, quarks and leptons behave like point particles.
Nevertheless, Nature might have already chosen one preonic model and future experiments
might reveal it!

0.4

Status of HEP in India and Suggestions for the

Future

Theory : There is extensive activity in HEP theory in the country, spread over TIFR, PRL,
IMSc, SINP, IOP, HRI, IISc, Delhi University, Panjab University, BHU, NEHU, Gauhati
1Perspectives in High Energy Physics, Proceedings of the VIII HEP Symposium, Calcutta (1986), p 399;

The Future of HEP, Particle Phenomenology in the 90’s, World Scientiﬁc (1992), p1

22

From Atoms to Quarks and Beyond: A historical panorama

University, Hyderabad University, Cochin Univesity, Viswabharati, Calcutta University, Ja-
davpur University, Rajasthan University and a few other centres. Research is done in almost
all the areas in the ﬁeld (see Appendix). Theoretical HEP continues to attract the best stu-
dents and as a consequence its future in the country appears bright. However, it must be
mentioned that this important national resource is being underutilized. Well-trained HEP
theorists are ideally suited to teach any of the basic components of Physics such as QM, Rel-
ativity, QFT, Gravitation and Cosmology, Many Body Theory, Statistical Mechanics, and
Advanced Mathematical Physics since all these ingredients go to make up the present-day
HEP Theory. Right now, most of these bright young theoretical physicists are seeking place-
ment in the Research Institutions. Ways must be found so that a larger fraction of them can
be absorbed in the Universities. Even if just one of them joins each of the 200 Universities
in the country, there will be a qualitative improvement in physics teaching throughout the
country. But, this will not happen unless the young theoreticians gain a broad perspec-
tive and train themselves for teaching-cum research careers. Simultaneously, the electronic
communication facilities linking the Universities among themselves and with the Research
Institutions must improve. This will solve the frustrating isolation problem which all the
University Departments face.
Experiments:

Many Indian groups from National Laboratories as well as Universities (TIFR, VECC,
IOP, Delhi, Panjab, Jammu and Rajasthan Universities) have been participating in 3 major
international collaboration expts :

L3 expt on e+e− collisions at LEP (CERN)

D zero expt on ¯pp collisions at the Tevatron (Fermilab)

Heavy-ion collision expts at CERN and BNL

•

•

•

As a result of the above experience, the Indian groups are well poised to take advantage
of the next generation of colliders such as LHC and Linear Collider. Already the Indian
groups have joined the CMS and ALICE? international collaboration at LHC. It is also
appropriate to mention here that Indian engineers and physicists have contributed towards
the construction of LHC itself.

Thus, the only experimental program that is pursued sofar in the country is the partic-
ipation of Indian groups in international accelerator-based experiments. This is inevitable
at the present stage, because of the nature of present-day HEP experiments that involve
accelerators, detectors, experimental groups and ﬁnancial resources that are all gigantic in
magnitude.

While our participation in international collaborations must continue with full vigor, at
the same time, for a balanced growth of experimental HEP, we must have in-house activities
also. Construction of an accelerator in India, in a suitable energy range which may be
initially 10-20 GeV and its utilization for research as well as student-training will provide
this missing link.

In view of the importance of underground laboratories in ν physics, monopole search,
p decay etc, the closure of the deep mines at KGF is a serious loss. It is planned to revive
underground neutrino experiments in India. A multi-institutional neutrino collaboration

0.5.

SOME REFLECTIONS ON THE PANORAMA OF HEP

23

has been formed with the objective of creating the India-based Neutrino Observatory (INO)
at a suitable site.

Finally, as pointed out in the last section, known methods of acceleration cannot take
us beyond tens of TeV. Hence in order to ensure the continuing vigor of HEP in the 21st
century, it is absolutely essential to discover new principles of acceleration. Here lies an
opportunity that our country should not miss! I have been repeatedly emphasizing for the
past 20 years that we must form a small group of young people whose mission shall be to
discover new methods of acceleration.2

To sum up, a 4-way program for the future of experimental HEP in this country is

suggested.

1. A vigorous participation of Indian groups in international experiments, accelerator-

based as well as nonaccelerator-based.

2. Construction of an accelerator in this country.

3. Creation of an underground laboratory for nonaccelerator particle physics, especially

4. A programme for the search for new methods of acceleration that can take HEP beyond

neutrino physics.

the TeV energies.

0.5

Some Reﬂections on the Panorama of HEP

Twists and Turns of History

First we reﬂect on some of the interesting twists and turns through which HEP has

evolved over the years. There may be important lessons for the future in the past history.
One of the strange things in the history of HEP is what happened to internal symmetries
such as isospin, strangeness, SU(3), baryon number and lepton number all of which were
beloved quantum numbers of particle physicists. Since all these played major roles in the
early history of particle physics, one would have thought these would be the building blocks
on which the ediﬁce of HEP would be erected.

But this is not what happened. Once the SM was in place, all these old symmetries
lost their fundamental signiﬁcance. The empirical importance of isospin (SU(2)) and the
old ﬂavour SU(3) is now understood to be merely due to the smallness of the u,d,s quark
masses. The really fundamental internal symmetry forming the basis of all the HEP in-
teractions through the gauge principle is the symmetry SU(3)xSU(2)xU(1) acting on an
entirely diﬀerent space! While SU(3) acts on colour space which has nothing to do with
the old ﬂavour space, SU(2) still has some connection with the old isospin but acts on the
left handed parts of the quarks u and d and acts on heavy quarks as well as on leptons in
contrast to the old isospin.

It is this twist and turn that converted pre-SM particle physics into post-SM HEP.
Another related twist and turn is the story of the triplet: the original Sakata triplet

gave way to the quark triplet (u, d, s) and ﬁnally to the colour triplet (q1, q2, q3)!

2IPR is already initiating research in this area and CAT is training young scientists in accelerator tech-

nology through SERC Schools.

24

From Atoms to Quarks and Beyond: A historical panorama

The interplay between the history of weak and strong interactions is also full of twists
and turns. Yang-Mills theory was originally used by Sakurai to construct the theory of
strong interactions through the old isospin symmetry and the old hypercharge and baryon
number quantum numbers. But the more successful application of Y-M theory was in the
construction of the electroweak theory which lay in the future, for that required the under-
standing of spontaneous breaking of symmetry (SBS). And SBS itself was ﬁrst discovered
in the context of strong interactions, namely the broken chiral symmetry with pion as the
pseudo Nambu-Goldstone boson.

Chiral symmetry itself originates from the near-masslessness of the u and d quarks which

is the origin of the old isospin too, as was already mentioned above.

Finally the cycle was completed by constructing the Y-M theory of strong interactions

with colour SU(3) and without SBS!

Yet another twist and turn, followed by a fantastic jump, is the story of the string:
hadronic string (at 10−13 cm) gave rise to the fundamental string (at 10−33 cm), with a
jump by 20 orders of magnitude.

The story of baryon number B and lepton number L is even stranger. The conservation
of B that is so basic for the stability of all matter is not an essential part of SM at all!
Corresponding U(1) is not contained in the gauge group of SM. Conservation of B turns
out to be an accidental consequence of the particle content of the SM. For, with the usual
particle content of the SM (gauge bosons, quarks, leptons and the Higgs doublet) there is no
way of writing a B-violating or L-violating renormalizable interaction. That is the reason
why most of the attempts at going beyond the SM, such as GUT, SUSY or giving mass to
neutrinos, all of which involve adding new particles, end up violating B or L or both.
A meta-theorem on Higgs

Scalar bosons have become the theoretician’s tool in building models. Whether one
wants to build models going beyond SM or wants to explain some perceived discrepancy of
experimental data with SM, one creates a new scalar sector and invokes the Higgs mechanism
for SBS. Here is a theorem: One can construct a scalar sector to solve any problem in HEP!
Consequently, hundreds or thousands of models have been constructed in the last 25 years,
many with a similar number of scalar bosons. But not even a single one (even the original
one required in the electroweak theory) has been seen experimentally! It is a great irony
of Nature that, while QFT of the scalars is the simplest to teach and that is the way it is
usually taught, none has been observed. Is there a fundamental problem with elementary
scalars?
Is there a Balmer formula?

In the SM, all the 12 fermion masses are arbitrary parameters ﬁxed only by experiment.
Perhaps one has to extend SM to include a theory of generations for understanding the
pattern of the fermion masses. Enormous amount of theoretical work has been done to
attack this problem, but there is no memorable result.

However,in 1982, Yoshio Koide found a remarkable empirical relation:

me + mµ + mτ =

(√me + √mµ + √mτ )2

2
3

which is satisﬁed to an accuracy of 1 part in 105. There does not exist any other relation
of comparable accuracy in all of HEP (except of course the precision results calculated from

0.5.

SOME REFLECTIONS ON THE PANORAMA OF HEP

25

QED and Electroweak theory). But, to this day nobody has succeeded in deriving the Koide
relation from any theory. Is this the much-needed Balmer formula which can serve as the
guide post for discovering the correct theory of generations and thus going beyond the SM?
A critique of strings

String theory does not oﬀer solutions to any known problem in HEP, such as the genera-
tion puzzle, the CP problem, the Higgs problem etc, nor does it give any clue to the various
parameters of the standard model. This may require the correct choice of the six-dimensional
compact manifold. It may be that if we know the correct six-dimensional potato with all
its warts and holes, the theory will determine all the masses of the quarks and leptons and
all the parameters of the standard model. But this is a tall order! The discovery of the
correct 6-dim manifold may require more mathematics than what physicists know. It almost
amounts to saying that if you put in all of mathematics, all of physics will come out.

So we must grant strings have not done anything for HEP (atleast not sofar). Hence
the real motivation for strings at the present stage lies elsewhere - infact it lies in Quantum
Gravity. Gravity must be incorporated into the rest of physics. It is intolerable to have
one world where gravity is ignored and quantum mechanics reigns supreme and another
world where gravity cannot be ignored but use of quantum mechanics leads to meaningless
divergent results.

Strings are welcome even as a free invention of the human mind, since it broadens our
horizons and allows us to go beyond the shackles of point particles and local quantum ﬁeld
theories based on them.Now we know that string theory includes membranes and branes of
higher dimensions too. So one can imagine a relativistic quantum system consisting of a
mind-boggling variety of interacting extended objects living in nine space dimensions and
one time dimension. Many of these extended objects are analogous to the solitons in local
quantum ﬁeld theories.

Although M theory now links all the consistent string theories through duality, there is
still no unique string theory as was once claimed. In eﬀect, there exist an inﬁnite number of
theories since the number of vaccuum states in string theory or M theory is almost inﬁnite.
But this is not a catastrophe! For, the number of consistent local quantum ﬁeld theories is
also inﬁnite. For instance there is an inﬁnite number of consistent nonabelian gauge theories
based on the inﬁnite number of available Lie groups. That has not prevented progress in local
quantum ﬁeld theory and its application to HEP. Experiment and observation allowed us to
make a choice and that is how Standard Model was constructed. That is the way physics
has progressed sofar and there is no reason to expect anything diﬀerent in the future.
What about cosmology?

If current ideas in Cosmology and Astrophysics are correct, then early universe provides
us with a HEP laboratory where particle energies were not limited by any manmade restric-
tions. So it is believed by many that all our theories of HEP can be tested by appealing to
events in the early universe.

There is no doubt that the era of ”precision cosmology” has dawned with the measure-
ment of CMBR anisotropy whose accuracy is awe-inspiring. It is claimed that an accurate
determination of the parameters of the evolutionary model of the universe is possible. We
seem to have come a long way from Landau’s dictum: ”Astrophysicists are often wrong but
seldom in doubt.” However it is rather worrying that cosmologists are not able to balance
both sides of Einstein’s equation. The right-hand-side needs 25 times more energy and mat-

26

From Atoms to Quarks and Beyond: A historical panorama

ter than what we see! Such a huge chunk of mysterious ”dark energy and dark matter”
seems too much to swallow. If it stays, it will be one of the greatest discoveries.

In any case, we know of only one universe and the events presumably occured only
once, that too, quite a long time ago. Modern Science owes its existence to the advent of
repeatable experiments under controlled conditions whereas History provides only a single
sequence of events. History cannot be a substitute for Science. Cosmology cannot provide
crucial and deﬁnitive tests for fundamental theories of Physics. On the other hand, laws of
physics inferred from and tested in laboratory experiments can and must be applied to the
study of the history of the universe. In other words, the only healthy traﬃc between HEP
and cosmology is a one-way-traﬃc: HEP
New Technologies?

Cosmology

−→

All modern technology is based on electrodynamics. We now know that electrodynamics
does not stand alone; it is only part of the uniﬁed electroweak dynamics. What are the deeper
implications of the electroweak uniﬁcation? Will there be a technology based on electroweak
dynamics? Our understanding of QCD is at an even more primitive stage, because of colour
conﬁnement. But chromodynamics will be mastered and chromodynamic technology also
will come.

As compared to electrodynamics, our understanding of SM is at a very preliminary
stage, perhaps comparable to the study of electricity by rubbing amber on wool or glass on
cat’s fur! Electromagnetism is just one of the 12 forces contained in the SM which is based
on 12 gauge bosons. One can envisage a stage when all the forces of SM will be released
and put to work. That will be SM technology.
New Principles of Acceleration?

We have already stressed the importance of discovering new principles of acceleration.
There is no future for HEP without it. Supergravity, Higher Dimensions, String Theory and
M Theory are likely to fade away as Metaphysics if there is no direct experimental support.
Planck energy must be attained in the laboratory. After all, there is no Law of Nature (such
as the Second Law of Thermodynamics) that forbids this. If there is such a Law, one must
prove it.

All accelerators are based on electrodynamics. There will come a day when accelerators

would be based on SM technology.
Why do all this?

What is the aim of the Inward Bound Journey? Why should we delve into deeper regions

of space-time? Why should we push the frontier of HEP to higher and higher energies?

The real justiﬁcation is the expectation that we will reach the boundaries of validity
of our present view of the physical universe based on our present conceptual framework of
space-time (namely relativity) and our present understanding of dynamics (namely quantum
mechanics).

0.6. APPENDIX: MORE INDIAN CONTRIBUTIONS

27

0.6 Appendix: More Indian contributions

The following Appendix is presented with apologies for any omissions for which the author
takes the blame.

Seminal and well-known contributions by Indian physicists have already been mentioned
in the main story of the historical panorama.Many more contributions have been relegated
to this Appendix, chieﬂy because their inclusion there would have aﬀected the ﬂow and
ﬂavour of the main narrative. Also, attention must be drawn to the negative comments
in Sec 2.5 about HEP in the last 30 years which apply to all the world-wide work of the
relevant period including that by Indian physicists mentioned in this Appendix.

Before Standard Model:

The importance of Bhabha scattering (the scattering of positron on electron) in the
development of QED was mentioned in Secs 1 and 2. Bhabha’s formula is nowadays rou-
tinely used to calibrate the beams at the electron-positron colliders. Bhabha’s analysis of
cosmic rays and his identiﬁcation of the penetrating component as being due to a ”heavy
electron” with mass around 100 times that of the electron was a brilliant piece of cosmic ray
phenomenology. This is the particle which we now call the ”muon”.

Bhabha-Heitler theory of cosmic ray showers is well-known.Their theory of electromag-
netic shower development initiated by a high-energy electron or photon cascading through
bremstrahlung, pair production and pair annihilation has become standard text-book stuﬀ.
The discovery of the V-A form of weak interactions by Sudarshan and Marshak (see Sec

2.2) was a signiﬁcant milestone in the history of HEP.

Regge poles were mentioned in Sec 2.3. These are poles of the S matrix in the complex
angular momentum plane and played an important role in the S matrix theory of strong
interactions. B M Udgaonkar derived the basic formulae for the high-energy behaviour
of hadronic cross sections in the s-channel that is controled by the Regge poles in the t-
channel. V Singh studied the Regge poles in the exactly soluble case of Coulomb scattering.
Deser, Gilbert and Sudarshan wrote down a useful integral representation for the three-point
function. S M Roy derived the basic integral equations satisﬁed by pion-pion scattering from
analyticity, crossing symmetry and unitarity. These, known as Roy equations, are now used
in combination with chiral symmetry, to confront with experimental data.

In the days of ﬂavour SU(3) symmetry, the Gell-mann - Okubo mass formula based on
the octet property of SU(3) breaking was an important ingredient. Based on the same octet
assumption, V Gupta and V Singh produced a sum rule for the decay widths of the baryon
decuplet. When SU(3) got enlarged to SU(6) as discussed in Sec 2.3, M A ? Beg and V
Singh obtained the SU(6) mass formula. One must also mention the work of Mitra and Ross
who used Galilean invariance for understanding the ”enhanced” heavy meson modes (like
N-eta) of hadronic decays.

R H Dalitz and G Rajasekaran showed that a pole in the S matrix is in general followed
by a retinue of poles in the complex energy Riemann sheet. This discovery of ”shadow poles”
not only removed a serious obstacle to the application of broken symmetry to particle physics
but also leads to a reformulation of a basic tenet of the S matrix theory.

In the early days of the quark model the possibility of ”molecular hadrons” namely

28

From Atoms to Quarks and Beyond: A historical panorama

composites of the qqq and ¯qq states was envisaged by Rajasekaran who also formulated an
empirical test for their identiﬁcation. This topic has become important in the current con-
text of exitement over possible existence of pentaquarks, tetraquarks and other multiquark
hadronic states.

Then came current algebra (see Sec 2.3) and again there were many Indian contributions.
The soft pion relation for K form factor due to V S Mathur, S Okubo, L K Pandit and
others, the pi pi mass diﬀerence calculation due to Tapas Das, S Okubo and others, the
pi-N scattering length formula due to A P Balachandran and others and the discovery of a
ﬁxed pole in the virtual Compton scattering on proton due to S R Choudhury, V Gupta, R
Rajaraman and Rajasekaran are some of these. Early work of T Pradhan on what came to
be known later as Schwinger term in the current density algebra must be mentioned.

P K Kabir made substantial contributions to our understanding of CP violation. His

book ”The CP Puzzle” became a standard resource on this topic.

Towards Standard Model:

The conﬁnement of massless Yang-Mills quanta was conjectured by Rajasekaran even
before the advent of QCD. The very ﬁrst calculation showing the cancellation of divergences
in the radiative correction to muon decay in SU(2)xU(1) gauge theory also was done by him.
The ﬁrst model-independant analysis of the neutral current weak interaction data was
performed by Rajasekaran and K V L Sarma. Their equations,subsequently called ”Master
Equations” by J J Sakurai, played a crucial role in pinning down the coupling constants of
the interaction as was demonstrated by Sakurai and L K Sehgal.

Are quarks fractionally charged? The remarkable properties of broken-colour QCD with
integrally-charged quarks were discovered by Rajasekaran and P Roy as well as J C Pati
and Abdus Salam. Subsequently, S D Rindani, Rajasekaran and many others tested the
viability of this non-standard QCD in a variety of ”jet” experiments. These studies have
uncovered one loop-hole after another in the experimental tests usually cited in support of
the standard QCD with fractionally-charged quarks.

Within Standard Model:

V Soni discovered the existence of quasi-stable solitonic conﬁgurations in electroweak
theory, which came to be known as ”sphalerons” and play a crucial role in the electroweak
baryogenesis. A P Balachandran rediscovered the old ”Skyrmions” and brought it within
the context of the modern chiral Lagrangians and this led to Witten’s important work on
this subject. R Rajaraman wrote an excellent book on solitons.

Within QCD the problem of colour conﬁnement and the calculation of hadronic proper-
ties remain hard nuts to crack. R Anishetty and H Sharatchandra converted QCD into its
dual form which oﬀers fresh insights into the problem. Following a diﬀerent lead based on
Bethe-Salpeter formalism Anishetty has been able to make progress into the mesonic sector.
Harindranath etal have attacked the problem using light-cone approach.

In Sec 3 we had referred to the strong CP problem. In a critical reanalysis of the problem

H Banerjee, D Chatterjee and P Mitra have questioned whether such a problem exists.

QGP formation in high temperature QCD has been shown in the lattice version of QCD.
R Gavai and Sourendu Gupta have made substantial contribution to this study. Bikash Sinha

0.6. APPENDIX: MORE INDIAN CONTRIBUTIONS

29

made important proposals in the search for signals of QGP formation in heavy-ion collisions.
On the other hand C P Singh foresaw the many obstacles that interpretation of heavy-ion
experiments would face in revealing QGP.

Neutrino Physics:

A very signiﬁcant contribution to neutrino physics was made by R Cowsik in 1972 when
he along with McLelland obtained an upper bound on the sum of neutrino masses using the
early astrophysical data and the big bang model of cosmology. R N Mohapatra is one of
the originators of the idea of see-saw for the tiny mass of the neutrino. S Pakvasa is one
of the early physicists to recognize the importance of atmospheric neutrinos for the study
of oscillations. When neutrino oscillations were indicated by many experiments, one of the
complete analyses of both solar and atmospheric neutrinos within a realistic three-neutrino
framework was made by M V N Murthy, M Narayan, G Rajasekaran and S Uma Sankar.
This group was the ﬁrst to include the null results from the CHOOZ reactor within the three-
neutrino framework and thus obtain a bound on the important mixing angle theta13, and
also show that the solar and atmospheric neutrino problems were approximately decoupled.
This decoupling led to a considerable simpliﬁcation of all the subsequent phenomenological
analyses of the solar, atmospheric, reactor and accelerator neutrinos. A recent up-to-date
analysis is due to S Choubey, S Goswamy, D P Roy, and Amitava Raychoudhuri.

Beyond Standard Model:

What is the next step after the successful establishment of the Standard Model based
on SU(3)xSU(2)xU(1)? Grand Uniﬁed Theories (GUT) unifying quarks and leptons and
also unifying electroweak and QCD through a semisimple Lie group SU(5), SO(10) or E6
with a single uniﬁed coupling constant was considered as a possible next step. But the very
ﬁrst model unifying quarks and leptons (albeit not based on a semisimple group) was the
SU(4)x SU(2) x SU(2) model proposed by J C Pati and A Salam and extensively studied
by Pati and R N Mohapatra especially in the context of the left-right symmetric models.
The group-theoretic work of M L Mehta and Pramod Srivastava proved very useful in the
construction of anomaly-free gauge models.

An important consequence of GUT is baryon number violation and proton decay, al-
though this has not yet been observed experimentally. Here one must refer to the theoretical
work of A N Mitra and Ramanathan who showed that a correct normalization of the proton’s
Bethe-Salpeter amplitude increased its lifetime by a factor of 100! This normalization was
based on quadratic charge conservation a la DIS (which has a topological similarity to the
Feynman diagram of proton decay), instead of the more usual linear charge conservation.

The wide disparity between the scale of the electroweak symmetry breaking in the SM
and the scale of the GUT symmetry breaking, called the problem of hierarchy, can be solved
by invoking supersymmetry. This important discovery is due to R Kaul and P Majumdar.
N D Hari Dass etal proved a no-go theorem for the de Sitter compactiﬁcation of higher
dimensional theories.

Superstring theory could be the correct theory incorporating Quantum Gravity and the
Standard Model in one unifying framework.Ashoke Sen made an important contribution to
the second string revolution that involved the discovery of duality symmetries linking all the

30

From Atoms to Quarks and Beyond: A historical panorama

consistent string theories. The alternative nonperturbative approach to Quantum Gravity
called Loop Quantum Gravity was pioneered by Abhay Ashtekar.

A large number of Indian physicists have been involved in the construction of models
that go beyond the SM as well as in deriving the phenomenological consequences of such
models that could provide evidence for them in the upcoming colliders. Further, there is a
strong Indian group of String Theorists who have made a mark in the international scene
by their outstanding contributions. Both these classes of contributions, going respectively
by the names of phenomenology and formal theory, form a substantial part of present-day
HEP activity in India as well as internationally, but have to await future experiments for
their substantiation. (This is the blank space alluded to in Sec 2.5.)

General:

Following the footsteps of Dirac whose relativistic wave equation describes all the fermions
in the Standard Model, many high-spin equations were written down in the literature (in-
cluding some by Bhabha), but they were all aﬄicted by various kinds of diseases. We have
already mentioned the case of charged spin 1 particles whose problems were solved only
by including them into the Yang-Mills gauge multiplet. The problems of spin 3/2 particles
were solved by S D Rindani and M Sivakumar through Kaluza-Klein theory. Supergrav-
ity also can solve this problem. Thus the higher symmetries of Yang-Mills, Kaluza-Klein
or Supergravity are necessary for consistent higher-spin interactions. Nature loves higher
symmetries.

Inspite of the fact that parastatistics for quarks was abandoned with the advent of
QCD there exists the possibility of new forms of statistics for newer degrees of freedom that
may open up when deeper regions of space-time are probed with higher and higher energy
machines. For instance Strominger has speculated that quantum blackholes obey ”inﬁnite
statistics”. A K Mishra and G Rajasekaran discovered an elegant algebra describing a new
form of statistics called ”orthostatistics” that combines inﬁnite statistics with Fermi-Dirac
or Bose-Einstein statistics. S Chaturvedi solved the problem of calculating the partition
functions for parastatistics which remained an open problem for a long time.

Experiments:

In the early days of experimental particle physics M G K Menon along with others in
the Bristol Group discovered many of the decay modes of K mesons during their studies of
the interactions of cosmic rays in nuclear emulsion. Lokanathan and Steinberger determined
the branching ratio of pions decaying into electrons and neutrinos and this played a crucial
role in the formulation of V
A theory. The TIFR cosmic ray group pioneered many cosmic
ray experiments. As already pointed out in Sec 2, they were the ﬁrst to detect atmospheric
neutrinos in the deep mines of Kolar Gold Fields in 1965.

−

Other outstanding experiments of fundamental signiﬁcance are the search for proton
decay in the KGF experiment, the search for axion in the nuclear reactor experiment at
Trombay and the search for the ﬁfth force using torsion balance (by R Cowsik, N Krish-
nan and Unnikrishnan), although none of these searches going on world-wide have yielded
positive results so far.

Among the major international experiments in which the Indian groups have participated

0.6. APPENDIX: MORE INDIAN CONTRIBUTIONS

31

are the precision tests at LEP that established the standard model as a renormalizable QFT,
the discovery of the top quark at the Tevatron and the Heavy Ion Collision experiments at
CERN and Brookhaven searching for Quark Gluon Plasma.

The ﬁrst two-in-one experiment BOREX using Boron 12 to detect solar neutrinos via
charged current and neutral current modes simultaneously and thus establish neutrino os-
cillations if they exist was proposed by S Pakvasa and R Raghavan, but this experiment
did not materialise. Instead, a similar experiment using deuterium in heavy water proposed
by H Chen did materialize and this was the experiment of Sudbury Neutrino Observatory
which successfully solved the solar neutrino problem.

A unique low-energy solar neutrino experiment BOREXINO which will focus on the

monochromatic Be neutrino lines was proposed and led by R Raghavan.

Retrospect:

Inspite of the above Indian contributions one must admit the remarkable absence of
great Indian contributions in the recent history of HEP. Why have we come down? Where
are the equivalents of Bose and Raman in the present- day HEP? There may be sociological
reasons for this, but this is not the place to go into them.

Is it possible that India throws up great names only when Physics goes through revo-
lutionary development as in the beginning of the 20th century? If so, the next revolution
which may come in the 21st century must be eagerly watched! Remember that the solution
of the Quantum Gravity problem and/or the formulation of String Theory is still incom-
plete. They may usher in the next revolution in Physics and may involve great contributions
from India. There are already signs of this, in the quality of Indian contributions to String
Theory and Quantum Gravity. We shall close with this optimistic remark.

