6
0
0
2
 
b
e
F
 
1
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
t
s
i
h
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
6
4
1
2
0
6
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

DSF−07/2006

TEACHING THEORETICAL PHYSICS:
THE CASES OF ENRICO FERMI AND ETTORE MAJORANA

A. DE GREGORIO AND S. ESPOSITO

Abstract. We report on theoretical courses by Fermi and Majorana, giving
evidence of the ﬁrst appearance and further development of Quantum Me-
chanics teaching in Italy. On the basis of original documents, we make a
comparison between Fermi’s and Majorana’s approaches. A detailed analysis
is carried out of Fermi’s course on Theoretical Physics attended by Majo-
rana in 1927-28. Three (previously unknown) programs on advanced Physics
courses submitted by Majorana to the University of Rome between 1933 and
1936 and the course he held in Naples in 1938 complete our analysis: Fermi’s
phenomenological approach resounded in Majorana, who however combined it
with a deeper theoretical approach, closer to the modern way of presenting
Quantum Mechanics.

1. Introduction

The old-dated tradition going back to Galileo Galilei made the study of the Phys-
ical Sciences in Italy essentially meant as experimental still in the 1920s, though
the theoretical aspect was not thoroughly excluded from the scientiﬁc debate. In
this respect, the case is emblematic of Enrico Fermi, whose thesis for a degree in
Physics at the University of Pisa, “according to tradition, should be in Experi-
mental Physics;” [1]. Then, it is not surprising that, in Italy, no stable chair of
Theoretical Physics was yet established at that time nor that the scientiﬁc debate
on the emergent novel Quantum Mechanics was still languishing, all the more so if
one compares it with the fruitful discussions abroad.

This outline started changing with the ﬁrst competition for a stable chair of
Theoretical Physics in 1926: the young Enrico Fermi then got a position as a
professor in Rome and strove to introduce the novel concepts of Quantum Mechanics
into advanced academic courses. In the following years, a whole generation of novel-
minded physicists (both theoreticians and experimentalists) was formed by Fermi
and his coworkers. Their relevant contributions extended to several areas of Physics,
in Italy as well as in other countries. It is then of key importance to analyze Fermi’s
courses on Theoretical Physics. This analysis is made possible by some record books
reporting the content of Fermi’s lectures in Rome. Together with the textbooks on
Theoretical Physics Fermi wrote in those same years, these documents lead to a
clear and comprehensive picture of Fermi’s courses.

Most of the well versed experimentalists who worked in close collaboration with
Fermi in the 1930s had attended Fermi’s theoretical courses. On the other hand,
most of the well versed theoreticians who collaborated with Fermi’s group in the
Thirties, like Gian Carlo Wick and Giovannino Gentile, had not attended univer-
sity courses in Rome. One relevant exception was Ettore Majorana, who followed
1

2

A. DE GREGORIO AND S. ESPOSITO

Fermi’s course on Theoretical Physics together with Segr`e and Edoardo Amaldi in
1928.

Majorana contributed signiﬁcantly to some theoretical aspects underlying the
researches performed under the supervision of Fermi and in general by Fermi’s
associates. However, we will focus here on Majorana’s own progress concerning
the basics (and the applications) of Quantum Mechanics. Majorana’s lectures on
Theoretical Physics very eﬀectively give evidence of this progress. He delivered
them in 1938, when he obtained a position as a full professor in Naples (just before
he mysteriously disappeared): that was the ﬁrst chair of Theoretical Physics ever
established in Italy since the one Fermi obtained in 1927. A recent analysis [2]
showed that Majorana’s 1938 course was very innovative for that time.

Before then, Majorana submitted three programs concerning advanced Physics
courses he would have held at the Rome University between 1933 and 1937. Through
the recent retrieval of these programs, whose existence was unexpected, we shall
follow the evolution of Majorana’s approach to Quantum Mechanics teaching. Fur-
ther, we shall point out how Fermi’s and Majorana’s courses relate to each other,
showing conceptual diﬀerences as well as impressive similarities that denote partic-
ularly relevant teaching strategies.

In the following section, we give an account of Fermi’s lectures on Theoretical
Physics in Rome. In Sect. 3, we point out the main stages leading Majorana to
his professorship at the University of Naples and describe the relevant features of
his lectures. The progress of Majorana’s approach to Quantum Mechanics, from
Fermi’s lectures to his own lectures on Theoretical Physics, is dealt with in Sect.
4. In the subsequent section, the common traits of Fermi’s and Majorana’s courses
are discussed. In Sect. 6, we put forward some speculations on the missing notes
of the ﬁrst four lectures by Majorana, also discussing his teaching strategies in a
broader perspective. We give our conclusions in Sect. 7. The programs of the three
courses presented by Majorana at the University of Rome from 1933 to 1936 are
reported in the Appendix, together with a list of the topics Fermi lectured on in
his 1927-28 course in Theoretical Physics.

2. Fermi’s lectures on Theoretical Physics

2.1. Professor in Rome. On December 22, 1924 the Faculty of Sciences at the
University of Rome debated about the institution of a chair of Theoretical Physics,
tenaciously promoted by Orso M. Corbino, director of the Institute of Physics and
inﬂuential politician. The chair was formally claimed on April 27, 1925. The board
of examiners met in November 1926 and proclaimed winners Enrico Fermi, Enrico
Persico and Aldo Pontremoli, respectively. Fermi was formally appointed as a
professor of Theoretical Physics at the Royal Institute of Physics in Rome starting
from January 1, 1927. Persico and Pontremoli were appointed at the Universities
of Florence and Milan, respectively.

With the support of Corbino, Fermi had already taught at the University of
Rome, lecturing on Mathematics to chemists and naturalists in 1923-24; then he
spent two more academic years lecturing on Mathematical Physics in Florence. On

TEACHING THEORETICAL PHYSICS: THE CASES OF E. FERMI AND E. MAJORANA 3

January 20, 1927 he gave his ﬁrst lecture on Theoretical Physics in Rome1. No-
ticeably, his course was annotated by Carlo Dei and Leonardo Martinozzi and then
published [3]; the record book reporting the content of Fermi’s lectures is available
as well, kept at the Archives of the University of Rome “La Sapienza.” A strict
correspondence can be established between the topics reported in the handbook
and those that Fermi actually lectured on in 1927.

An even deeper insight into Fermi’s lectures on Theoretical Physics is provided by
the book he published in the following year [4]. The 1927-28 teacher’s record book
is now available as well, and we shall see below how strong the correspondence is
between the content of the lectures Fermi held in 1927-28 and the book he published
in 1928. For the moment, we only mention that Ettore Majorana together with
Edoardo Amaldi and Emilio Segr`e followed precisely this course. They switched
from Engineering to Physics just following the appeals by Corbino, who was striving
to build up a forefront school of Physics upon Fermi.

Amaldi moved to Physics on November 9, 1927, at least formally, followed by
Segr`e on February 8, 1928 2; both took their exams in Theoretical Physics in July
1928 like Majorana, though the latter was still a student in Engineering and ob-
tained permission to move to Physics only on the following November 19.3 Majorana
and Amaldi also enjoyed another course held by Fermi, who also lectured on Earth
Physics in 1928-29. They took the corresponding exam on June 27, 1929, just few
days before they graduated on July 6.

2.2. The 1927-28 course in Theoretical Physics. An outline of the main points
of the course in Theoretical Physics held by Fermi in 1927-28 can be easily drawn
from his teacher record book. Fermi gave sixty-ﬁve lectures (the last six ones aimed
at summarizing the whole course). He started with the Kinetic Theory of gases
in a ﬁrst set of lectures Fermi
and the basic elements of Statistical Mechanics:
expounded classical topics such as the dependence of pressure on the molecular
kinetic energy, mean free path, equipartition of the energy, the phase space, the
Boltzmann distribution law and the Maxwell velocity distribution. A second set
dealt with electromagnetism: electromagnetic perturbation, the Poynting vector,
the electronic theory of dispersion, radiation theory. Fermi then passed to introduce
the foundations of the atomic theory, lecturing on the electron, the radioactive
transmutation, Rutherford’s atomic model, light quanta, the Compton eﬀect, and
a short mention to Bohr’s atom and energy levels. Therefore the ‘core’ of Fermi’s
course took shape, taking twenty lectures on Bohr’s model of the atom. Energy
levels, the Rydberg constant, stationary states, the Sommerfeld conditions, the ﬁne
structure, the correspondence principle, selection rules, the Bohr magneton, spatial
quantization, the Zeeman and the Stark eﬀects are some of the topics dealt with in
lectures from n. 28 to n. 47.

1It should be noted that although Fermi’s chair was the ﬁrst one ever established in Italy, his
course was not the ﬁrst one ever given on Theoretical Physics. As an example, we only mention
the case of Antonio Carrelli, who regularly lectured on Theoretical Physics in Naples since 1924.
2This information comes from the Archives of the University of Rome “La Sapienza”, where
the reports of the Board of the Faculty of Science are kept. It is intriguing that, according to
Amaldi and Segr`e, they passed from Engineering to Physics just in the reverse order [5], [6].

3We point out that the only exam Majorana took in 1928 was that in Theoretical Physics,
according to his scholastic career report. His mark was expressed in hundredths, as accustomed
for engineers, while Amaldi and Segr`e’s in thirtieths [5], [6].

4

A. DE GREGORIO AND S. ESPOSITO

One striking feature emerges here: apart from a ﬂeeting mention of the “quan-
tum theory of the hydrogen atom” in lecture n.46, all these lectures rested on the
framework of Old Quantum Theory. The same holds for the remainder of Fermi’s
course, essentially devoted to the spectra of alkali metals, alkaline earth metals and
atoms with three valence electrons.

Another trait worth remarking is that relativity was not mentioned among the
issues of Fermi’s 1927-28 course. The same holds for his 1926-27 course where,
although the Compton eﬀect was explicitly reported, the relativistic kinematics
was not discussed. Therefore, one might even wonder how Fermi could lecture on
the Compton eﬀect at all. Remarkably, he carried out his calculations neglecting
terms of order greater than the ﬁrst in the diﬀerence ν − ν′ of the light frequency
and then speciﬁed:

The ﬁnal formula is strictly exact. That might appear a nonsense,
since we neglected such terms as (dλ)2. However, it should be noted
that we had already made another approximation when we ex-
1 − β2
pressed the momentum of the electron as mv instead of mv/
therefore neglecting relativity. Now, the curious aﬀair is that an op-
posite error creeps in this way, so that the formula above turns out
to be strictly exact instead of being an approximation (see Ref. [3],
pp. 81-82).

p

The strict correspondence between the topics reported in the 1927-28 record
[4] can be readily realized by
book and those explained in the 1928 book in Ref.
merely comparing the content of the ﬁrst nine lectures ranging from November 15
to December 3, 1927 with the titles of the sections in the ﬁrst chapter of Fermi’s
book. We give both in Table 1. The whole of the contents of Fermi’s second
course on Theoretical Physics is instead reported in the Appendix. Given such a
[4], we can group the
correspondence between the lectures and the book in Ref.
lectures into six sets: each relates to one of the ﬁrst six chapters of Ref.
[4] as
illustrated in Table 2. The correspondence is very strict in the case of the ﬁrst
two chapters, while slight diﬀerences come out starting from the third chapter:
sometimes the order of the topics of the course is altered in comparison with the
book, and in the latter several arguments might receive a somewhat more detailed
treatment.

3. Ettore Majorana: from Fermi’s courses to professorship

Ettore Majorana began to frequent the Institute of Physics at the University of
Rome at the end of 1927 or in the ﬁrst months of the following year [5], [6], [7],
[8]. It is very likely that the ﬁrst course he attended at the Institute of Physics was
precisely the one in Theoretical Physics given by Fermi and discussed in the previ-
ous section. Some indirect records of this can be traced in Majorana’s “Volumetti”
[9] (“Booklets”), which also contain several issues probably discussed by Fermi in
his course on Earth Physics. Since no lecture notes of Fermi’s courses followed
by Majorana are known, we can only compare what is reported in the Volumetti
with Fermi’s book [4]. In this respect, it is noteworthy that the approach to Quan-
tum Mechanics contained in the Volumetti substantially diﬀered from Fermi’s one.
That denotes an autonomous work by the student Majorana, who was particularly
impressed by the book on Group Theory and Quantum Mechanics [10] Hermann
Weyl published at the end of 1928 (see the analysis in Ref. [2]). Nevertheless, the

TEACHING THEORETICAL PHYSICS: THE CASES OF E. FERMI AND E. MAJORANA 5

I)

II)

V)
VI)

Fermi course (1927-28)
Interactions between molecules.
Solids and ﬂuids in the framework
of the kinetic theory.
Dependence of pressure upon
molecular kinetic energy.

III) Mean free path. Vapor rays.
IV)

Kinetic energy in general coordinates.
The theorem of equipartition
of energy (without proof).
Phase space.
Evaluation of the probability of
distribution.
The Boltzmann distribution law.

VII)
VIII) Proof of the principle of

equipartition of the energy.
The Maxwell law.

IX)

Fermi book (1928)
1. Molecular interactions.

2. Molecular mobility in solids

and ﬂuids.

3. Kinetic theory of ideal gases.

4. Mean free path.

5. Equipartition of energy.

6. Boltzmann statistical

distribution.

7. The Maxwell law.

Table 1. A comparison between the topics covered in the ﬁrst
nine lectures of Fermi’s 1927-28 course, and the sections in the
ﬁrst chapter of his book (Ref. [4]).

Sets of lectures

Chapters

n. 1 - n. 9: Nov. 15 - Dec. 3
n. 10 - n. 19: Dec. 6 - Jan. 14
Jan. 17 - Jan. 24
n. 20 - n. 23:
Jan. 26 - Feb. 2
n. 24 - n. 27:

n. 28 - n. 47: Feb. 4 - Mar. 31
n. 48 - n. 59: Apr. 17 - May 15
n. 60 - n. 65: May 19 - Jun. 2

(summary of the course)

Kinetic theory of gases
Electromagnetic theory of light

I
II
III Electric particles
IV Energy exchange between

light and matter

V Bohr’s atom
VI Spectral multiplicity

Table 2. Correspondence between the lectures of the course on
Theoretical Physics Fermi held in 1927-28 and the ﬁrst six chapters
of his book [4].

more phenomenological approach of Fermi was always latent and never abandoned
by Majorana, as we shall see later. In those years, Majorana aimed at a full under-
standing of the novel Mechanics, based on solid and general mathematical grounds
but without disregarding evidence coming from atomic and nuclear experiments.

3.1. Majorana’s involvement with Physics teaching. Besides Majorana’s Vol-
umetti, his “Quaderni” (“Notebooks”), whose analysis has just began, record re-
search studies up to approximately 1932 (see [9]). In those years, Majorana was
used to frequent the Fermi group in Rome, although without even seeking for a
stable position, which he would only obtain in Naples at the end of 1937. However,
Majorana succeeded in obtaining the professorship degree of libero docente (an aca-
demic title analogous to the German Privatdozent) in January 1933 and, due to

6

A. DE GREGORIO AND S. ESPOSITO

this position, he proposed some academic courses. The programs concerning three
courses he would have given between 1933 and 1937 have only recently been dis-
covered in the Archives of the University of Rome. This retrieval is very important
and surprising, since these original documents cover a period that has been referred
to as Majorana’s gloomy years by the testimonies of that epoch (see, for example,
[5], [6], [11]), during which he secluded himself from the life of the Institute.

The three programs are here translated in Appendixes B, C, D. Even at a ﬁrst
look, it is evident that Majorana was very careful in choosing the topics he would
have treated in his proposed courses, and this reveals his genuine interest in ad-
vanced physics teaching.

In 1933, Majorana beneﬁted from a C.N.R. visiting fellowship at the Institute
of Theoretical Physics in Leipzig directed by Heisenberg. He went back to Italy
for the Easter holidays between the end of April and the beginning of May, and
his ﬁrst program was submitted precisely at this time: the novel and stimulating
atmosphere found in Leipzig probably had spurred him. He reiterated his request
to give advanced Physics courses also in subsequent years, but he never delivered
any course in Rome. This is implicitly testiﬁed by his friends and colleagues and
explicitly conﬁrmed by Majorana himself, who in the three programs declared he
had not given any course before: a circumstance likely due to the lack of students.
The ﬁrst two programs correspond to the courses in Mathematical Methods of
Quantum Mechanics and Atomic Physics, respectively, and partially overlap. In
presenting Quantum Mechanics, Majorana aimed to use group-theoretic methods:
that was an unusual approach for the times, as already discussed [2], and will
again be adopted in Majorana’s lectures at the University of Naples in 1938. The
approach will become the standard one in the teaching of Quantum Mechanics only
many years after the Second World War.

The second program contains references to questions more phenomenological in
nature and the third one deals with Quantum Electrodynamics: that was again
an unusual topic for the Italian academic courses of the period, but had been
fascinating Majorana for a long time, as clearly emerges from the unpublished
research notes in his Quaderni.

3.2. Lecturing at the University of Naples. In 1937, the national competition
for a full professorship in Theoretical Physics at the University of Palermo provided
a good chance for entering advanced Physics teaching, for Majorana as well as for
other skilful young physicists such as Gentile, Wick, Leo Pincherle, Giulio Racah,
and Gleb Wataghin. Majorana was urged to take part in the competition by his
colleagues and friends [5], [11]. In particular, Fermi persuaded him to ﬁnally publish
an earlier work of his, on the symmetrical theory of electrons and positrons [12],
which will become famous for the appearance of the so-called ‘Majorana neutrino’
theory. Majorana had already faced (and solved) this problem long before, as
clearly appears in his Quaderni. An explicit mention of “the positive electron and
the symmetry of charges” was also recorded in the third program, which Majorana
had submitted on April 28, 1936.

Without going through the details of the 1937 competition (already discussed in
the literature [5], [6], [11]), we just recall that Majorana was eventually appointed
as a full professor of Theoretical Physics at the University of Naples “for high and

TEACHING THEORETICAL PHYSICS: THE CASES OF E. FERMI AND E. MAJORANA 7

well-deserved repute, independently of the competition rules.” He gave only twenty-
one lectures at the Institute od Physics in Naples, from January 13 to March 24,
before his mysterious disappearance on March 26, 1938 [13], [14].

Fortunately, some manuscripts of the lecture notes written by Majorana himself
for the students of his course on Theoretical Physics are available. He entrusted
them to one of his students, Ms. Gilda Senatore, before he disappeared. They are
deposited at the Domus Galilæana in Pisa and were reproduced in a book some
years ago [13]. However, a transcription comprising six lectures not included in the
Pisa collection has recently been discovered [14]. Therefore, in order to go through
Majorana’s teaching strategies, the analysis of his course should be updated (see
[15]) and embrace some previously unknown topics, mainly Relativity (an account
of this is in [2]).

Even if a comprehensive record of the course Majorana actually held in Naples
in 1938 is not available, some peculiar - historical and scientiﬁc - features can be
drawn from his very lecture notes.

In the prolusion, delivered on January 13, Majorana gave a broad outline of his
course, aimed at the study of Quantum Mechanics and its applications to Atomic
[13], [2] and [15]). He also stated his teaching method, which
Physics (see Refs.
would in fact consist of a combination of two: he mentioned the “mathematical
method”, through which “the quantum formalism is presented in its most general
and therefore its clearest propositions from the very beginning and only afterwards
are the criteria for applying it explained;” and he mentioned what he called the
“historical method,” which “explains how the ﬁrst idea of the formalism appeared.”
Majorana regarded them as two opposite methods, but he aimed at a fruitful syn-
ergy between them.

It is really intriguing to note how closely Majorana’s ideas resemble the preface
to Paul A.M. Dirac’s book on “The Principles of Quantum Mechanics.” As for the
mathematical presentation of quantum theory, Dirac wrote in 1930: ”The symbolic
method [...] deals directly in an abstract way with the quantities of fundamental
importance,” allowing the physical laws to be expressed “in a neat and concise
way;” as for the applications, they “follow strictly from the general assumptions.”
However, all this implied “a complete break from the historical line of development”
[16].

We do not have any written notes of Majorana’s lectures from the second to the

ﬁfth ones and we will speculate on their possible content in Section 5.

The remainder of the course is approximately divided into three parts:

- Old Quantum Mechanics (3+1/2 lectures);
- Electromagnetism, Relativity and their application to microscopic phenom-

ena (6+1/2 lectures);

- Mathematical foundations of Quantum Mechanics (6 lectures).

In the ﬁrst of these parts Majorana is probably expanding on topics introduced
in the ﬁrst four lectures. He deals with the relevant phenomenology of Atomic
Physics and its interpretation in the framework of the Old Quantum Theory of
Bohr and Sommerfeld.
In particular, starting from the available spectroscopic
data, he introduces the spin and the related Pauli exclusion principle, accounting
for the periodic table of the elements and the features of the spectra of one- and
two-electron atoms in the Sommerfeld theory.

8

A. DE GREGORIO AND S. ESPOSITO

The second part starts with the classical radiation theory, reporting explicit solu-
tions of the Maxwell equations for a given system; some applications (e.g. scattering
of light on the atmosphere) are discussed as well. Then Majorana deals with the
Theory of Relativity, starting from simple phenomenology and later introducing
the appropriate mathematical formalism. Lorentz transformations along with their
immediate consequences are introduced in a simple and original way, and appli-
cations to the electromagnetic ﬁeld are extensively deduced. Particular emphasis
is given to the relativistic dynamics of electrons, which Majorana obtains from a
variational principle.

The eﬀort gone into Electromagnetism and Relativity ends up with the discussion
of processes like the photoelectric eﬀect, Thomson scattering and the Compton
eﬀect. The Franck & Hertz experiment is also treated here, exhibiting the existence
of energy levels. All these phenomena are considered as the phenomenological bases
for Quantum Mechanics, and this appears quite ‘in contrast’ with the approach of
the ﬁrst part of the course, based on spectroscopic phenomenology.

The third set of lecture notes is more mathematical in nature. The (non-
relativistic) wave equation along with its statistical interpretation based on the
Heisenberg uncertainty principle are presented only after a detailed discussion of
some relevant topics on matrix and operator theory and Fourier transforms.

The original manuscripts collecting Majorana’s lecture notes include a last dis-
corsive part (see [13], [17], [15]). It has been primarily interpreted as the notes of
a lecture that Majorana would have held at the University of Naples if he did not
mysteriously disappear. However, as already noted in [17], an accurate analysis
of the content of this manuscript seems not to conﬁrm a similar conclusion.
In
fact, the topics are rather advanced and do not relate, to any extent, to the last
lecture (the 21st one) on the uncertainty principle. Moreover, the style of presen-
tation of the topics is completely diﬀerent from that used in the main body of the
Naples lectures. Rather, the expository form resembles the style he had used in his
prolusion.

4. The progress of Majorana’s approach to Theoretical Physics

Majorana’s approach to Theoretical Physics is well traced in his “Volumetti” [9].
Standard mathematical tools (diﬀerential equations, Fourier integrals and so on)
dominate approximately the ﬁrst half of these documents. They are used in order
to solve well-deﬁned physical problems, such as, for example, the heat propagation
in an isotropic and homogeneous medium or the equilibrium of a rotating ﬂuid
(Clairaut’s problem), or even to face contemporary problems such the scattering of
an α particle by a radioactive nucleus or the solution of the Thomas-Fermi equation
with the appropriate boundary conditions for atoms [18], [8].

Majorana’s approach, however, sensibly changes in the remainder of his “Vol-
umetti”, dating to the end of 1928 and largely devoted to Group Theory and sym-
metries, which topics underlie almost all his articles. In this respect, an illuminating
example is that of the inﬁnite-dimensional unitary representations of the Lorentz
group [2], whose study, reported in detail in the Volumetto V, forms the basis for
his important article of 1932 [19] on a relativistic theory of particles with arbitrary
spin.

An approach similar to the latter is also present in the three proposed programs,

but some comments are needed here.

TEACHING THEORETICAL PHYSICS: THE CASES OF E. FERMI AND E. MAJORANA 9

From what reported in Appendix B, it is evident that the program on Math-
ematical Methods of Quantum Mechanics submitted in 1933 is entirely based on
group-theoretic methods. Majorana mentions the elements of unitary geometry
and transformations, pointing at the modiﬁcations to classical kinematics and at
the invariance under transformation group. Then he goes through the rotation and
permutation groups. The ‘standard’ presentation of Quantum Mechanics (both in
the Schr¨odinger version and in the Heisenberg one) is completely removed from
this program. Even the applications (e.g. angular momenta, systems with identical
particles) are strictly related to the formalism of Group Theory. The same applies
to the Theory of Relativity, mentioned in the framework of the Lorentz group and
of spinor calculus.

Majorana’s attitude towards transformation theory resembles what Dirac wrote
in his preface about the formulation of the fundamental laws of Nature, which
“requires the use of the mathematics of transformations. The important things
in the world appear as the invariants [...] of these transformations.” Further,
almost all the topics mentioned in Majorana’s 1933-34 program were explicitly
treated by Weyl in his book: the item 1 in the program appears in the chapter 1
[10], entitled precisely “Unitary Geometry”; the items from 3 (partially)
of Ref.
to 7 of Majorana, mentioning representations and applications of Group Theory
to momenta, identical particles, and relativistic particles, are also dealt with in
chapters 3, 4 and 5 of the Weyl book. An exception seems to be the discussion of
the phase space and the introduction of the quantum of action in item 2, which
does not appear to correspond to any topic in Weyl’s book.

The proposed impressive use of Group Theory is certainly justiﬁed by Majorana’s
own attention to conciseness and generality, which is constantly present in his stud-
ies. We saw that Majorana himself explicitly stated this attention in the prolusion
to his course, where he also followed Dirac. The latter gave up the usual “method
of co-ordinates or representations” through his own preference for the “symbolic
method.” However, also the line of thinking followed by the Leipzig school and
experienced by Majorana in 1933 [5], [11], just when he oﬃcially submitted his ﬁrst
program, may have played some role on Majorana’s attitude to Group Theory.

Things are somewhat diﬀerent in the 1935-36 program on Mathematical Methods
of Atomic Physics (we recall no program is available relative to 1934-35). A more
phenomenological approach emerges, compared with that proposed in 1933-34. The
group-theoretic methods appear only marginal and subordinated to practical appli-
cations, like complex atomic spectra and hyperﬁne structures. It would seem quite
evident that the choice of the items for this course was inﬂuenced by the line of
thinking adopted by the Rome group headed by Fermi, who had been engaged in
spectroscopic researches before switching to nuclear physics [20]. Further, in the
program submitted by Majorana, the mention of the elements of Nuclear Physics
precisely follows that of hyperﬁne structures. This sequence is in agreement with
the course of events recalled by Segr`e [6] in giving account of the switching from
atomic to nuclear researches in Rome.4

On the contrary, the 1936-37 program of Quantum Electrodynamics appears
free from external inﬂuences, probably due to the absence of Majorana from the
Institute of Physics in those years [5]. The program is largely based on personal

4Note also that a contribution of Majorana is acknowledged in the paper by Fermi and Segr`e

on hyperﬁne structures [21].

10

A. DE GREGORIO AND S. ESPOSITO

studies which are easily recognizable in his handwritten notes (the “Quaderni” and
partially the “Volumetti”).

A further elaboration by Majorana of his own teaching approach comes out
when we compare the known lecture notes of the course he held in Naples with the
three programs submitted in Rome. The phenomenological part of Majorana’s 1938
course strictly resembles Fermi’s 1927-28 course. The mathematical part, instead,
has contact points with some items Majorana mentioned in his three programs.
In particular, the unitary geometry (only loosely borrowed from the Weyl book)
mentioned in the ﬁrst program is then discussed in lecture n.17 of the Naples
course; matrix calculus (second program) is then introduced in lecture n.16, and
the relativistic theory of the electron (second and third programs) is expounded
in lectures n.13 and n.14 [14]. This mathematical part appears as peculiar of
Majorana’s own teaching approach, and inspired by Weyl and the group-theoretic
methods as well as by Dirac. It is quite distant from other contemporary approaches
as, for example, those followed by E. Persico [22], whose book was all the same
recommended to Majorana’s students [14].

5. Common traits in Fermi’s and Majorana’s courses

As is well-known, Old Quantum Theory essentially superimposes few simple rules
on the conceptual scheme of Classical Mechanics. Its framework survived as a rele-
vant tool in Theoretical Physics courses for many years, an intuitive representation
It was only about the 1950s that
of physical phenomena being preserved by it.
Quantum Mechanics could thoroughly get in at the university courses, mainly with
its Wave-Mechanical version.

Fermi dealt with The New Quantum Mechanics in the ﬁnal chapter of his 1928
book. However, he did not lecture on Wave Mechanics at all before his 1928-29
course in Theoretical Physics. In the following academic year, 1929-30, Wave Me-
chanics took a total of twelve lectures out of ﬁfty-eight, comprising a brief mention
of Perturbation Theory (two lectures)5

The Bohr and Sommerfeld quantization rules underpin also the ﬁrst group of
Majorana’s lectures, up to February 3, 1938. Furthermore, Majorana went into
Matrix Mechanics in Naples since March 8, 1938 (and even before it in the three
programs he submitted in Rome); he also lectured on Wave Mechanics starting
from March 17 until he disappeared.

We are now going through Majorana’s way of treating atomic physics in the
framework of Old Quantum Theory. The legacy of Fermi’s course will be readily
disclosed in Majorana’s lectures by our analysis.

5.1. Phenomenological approach and theoretical analysis. At a ﬁrst sight,
Fermi and Majorana’s approaches appear not easily related to each other. In fact,
a detailed relativistic treatment of the ﬁne structure in the hydrogen spectrum is
reported in Majorana’s lectures, whereas Fermi only gave the ﬁnal formula along
with a few comments.

5Fermi’s record book of his 1928-29 course in Theoretical Physics is missing. However, we
can infer that he devoted some lectures to Wave Mechanics since he asked about the Schr¨odinger
equation of a candidate during an exam in October 1929 (Archives of the University of Rome ”La
Sapienza”). As for Fermi’s record book of his 1929-30 course, it should be noted that it is kept in
Pisa rather than in the Rome Archives [23].

TEACHING THEORETICAL PHYSICS: THE CASES OF E. FERMI AND E. MAJORANA 11

As for Fermi’s way to the ﬁne structure, he ﬁrstly wrote down the Newton
equations for one electron in the Coulomb ﬁeld of the nucleus and then put forward
the conditions to fulﬁll in order to ﬁt the spectroscopic terms. In other words, he
attained the Bohr-Sommerfeld conditions as a generalization of empirical rules. He
also dealt with the motion of the nucleus, recalling the slight diﬀerence between the
even lines of the Pickering series of He+ and the Balmer series of H. Fermi then
remarked that a relativistic correction to the Bohr formula should be taken into
account. Indeed, Old Quantum Theory predicted n diﬀerent values ranging from 1
to n for the azimuth k of an electron in the n orbit. The value k = 1 corresponded
to the highest eccentricity, while k = n to circular orbits. Now, higher eccentricity
meant a closer approach to the nucleus and higher velocities at the perihelion.
Therefore, the lower k the larger the correction according to Old Quantum Theory.
The ﬁnal formula was:

(1)

Wn,k = − 2π2mZ 2e4

h2n2

− π4mZ 4e8
c2h4n3

8

k +






1
2

− 6
n






Fermi stressed that, in the framework of Quantum Mechanics (where the azimuthal
quantum number k ranged from 0 to n − 1), the relativistic correction was diﬀerent
from the previous formula, but the additional spin correction made the old result
still hold (we ﬁnd here another case where two opposite corrections cancelled out
each other, besides the case already mentioned of the Compton eﬀect). Fermi
expounded these topics in some paragraphs of the ﬁfth chapter of his Introduzione.
Their titles are as follows:

- Motion of the electron in the hydrogen atom;
- Hydrogen spectrum;
- Hydrogen energy levels;
- Spectrum of the ionized helium;
- The Sommerfeld condition;
- Hydrogen elliptic orbits.

They correspond to the lectures from the 28th (February 4) to the 34th (February

28), and to the 37th (March 8, 1928).

Summing up, we can say that Fermi’s approach to atomic levels was ‘from be-
low’, relying on mere phenomenological (Balmer series) and intuitive (velocity of
the perihelion) arguments. In this respect, we may note that Fermi’s intuitive and
phenomenological approach appears as opposed to the more abstract approach the-
orized for example by Dirac, who wrote: ”A book on the new physics, if not purely
descriptive of experimental work, must be essentially mathematical.”

Diﬀerently from Fermi, a very general method was used by Majorana in his
known lectures to calculate the correction leading to the ﬁne structure formula.
Majorana wrote straight down the relativistic Hamiltonian and the Hamilton equa-
tions of motion for the electron in the hydrogen atom. Then he introduced the
Sommerfeld conditions, leading in the end to the same formula written down by
Fermi (just in a slightly diﬀerent form):

(2)

νn,ℓ = − Wn,ℓ
h

= Z 2 R

n2 + Z 4α2 R

n3 (cid:18)

1
ℓ

− 3

.

4n (cid:19)

12

A. DE GREGORIO AND S. ESPOSITO

There is no echo of Fermi’s intuitive and phenomenological approach. However,
the crucial point is that Majorana’s treatment of the relativistic corrections was
not the way Majorana introduced the quantized atom. In his notes there are sev-
eral references calling up various points that Majorana tackled in the four missing
lectures, held before January 25, 1938. For example: “As we remember,” the non
relativistic expression for the radial momentum is analogous to the relativistic one;
furthermore, “we already know” the value of the integral and the total quantum
n = nr is introduced “here as well.” Majorana also mentions the He+ spectrum,
in such a way that we may infer he had already dealt with it in the very ﬁrst part
of his course. In other words, it is very likely that Majorana introduced such topics
as the Balmer series, the Sommerfeld conditions, and the elliptic orbits in his ﬁrst
four lectures, whose notes are not available. As a consequence, there is no evidence
that his approach to the atom was substantially diﬀerent from Fermi’s one. All
we can say is that Majorana dealt with the relativistic corrections in more details
than Fermi, so conﬁrming his attitude towards generalization. Although he roughly
condensed the topics of the whole of Fermi’s course in about ten lectures, this cir-
cumstance did not hinder him from providing a deep insight into Old Quantum
Theory.

Once the relativistic correction was given, Majorana drew his attention to the
motion of the nucleus (and diﬀerently from Fermi he also provided the formula for
the reduced mass). He pointed out that the Rydberg constant could now agree
with the value “already given.” However, the empirical selection rules lacked of
an underlying theoretical account, which Majorana characterized as one of the
“diﬃculties” of the Sommerfeld theory of the atom; note that the selection principle
and the mean life of the quantum states are further topics which follow the ﬁne
structure one in Fermi’s book (Fermi also dealt with them in his 42th lecture on
March 20, 1928).

5.2. A clear legacy. The strong analogy with Fermi’s approach to the atom be-
comes more evident when Majorana deals with spatial quantization, alkali spectra,
and spin. He shows that the degeneracy of the orbits can be resolved by applying a
magnetic ﬁeld to the atomic system. He still moves within the framework of what
he himself called the “old theory,” and he again uses the “elementary theory” in
dealing with the Bohr magneton. The ﬁnal formula for the splitted lines is explicitly
reported:

(3)

ν =

W (n, ℓ, m) − W (n′, ℓ′, m′)
h

=

W (n, ℓ) − W (n′, ℓ′)
h

+ (m − m

′

)

µ0H
h

.

It is almost identical with the formula of the Zeeman eﬀect reported by Fermi (Eq.
(57) on page 179 of Ref. [4]). In fact, in the ﬁfth chapter of his book Fermi also went
into spatial quantization, Bohr magneton, the spinning electron and, in the end,
the Zeeman eﬀect and the Stark eﬀect - corresponding to lectures from the 43th
(March 22) to the 47th (March 31). Going back to Fermi’s attitude for intuitive
models, we also note that Fermi introduces the Lorentz theory of the Zeeman eﬀect
before the quantum treatment of the latter: although the early theory “has been
replaced by the quantum theory [...]
it accounts for many phenomena in a very
simple way.” Majorana instead does not mention the Lorentz theory nor the Stark
eﬀect, which one might ascribe perhaps to his already recalled need for brevity.

TEACHING THEORETICAL PHYSICS: THE CASES OF E. FERMI AND E. MAJORANA 13

Fermi’s preference for intuition and simplicity is clearly stated at the head of the
sixth chapter, devoted to spectral multiplicity: “We are going to exploit the Som-
merfeld method to attain a more simple and intuitive picture of the atom.” Fermi
puts forward the distance-dependent shielding eﬀect due to the inner electrons, and
provides an explicit expression for the eﬀective charge acting on the optical electron
closely resembling the one later reported by Majorana. Here again, the smaller the
azimuth, the closer the approach of the semiclassical orbit to the nucleus at the
perihelion, the stronger the attractive force on the optical electron. Fermi provides
some further details about the terms in a non Newtonian central ﬁeld, illustrating
the energy levels of sodium with a scheme. Now, the same scheme with the N a
spectrum and the same phenomenological arguments accounting for the splitting
of the lines are reported also by Majorana in his course.

Majorana’s lecture of January 29, 1938 deals with Pauli’s exclusion principle,
giving an account of the periodic table, and the alkali metal spectra. The same
topics were (more extensively) reported in the sixth chapter of Fermi’s book, in the
following paragraphs:

- Central motion in a non Newtonian central ﬁeld;
- The series of the spectral terms;
- The spectra of the alkali metals;
- The inner quantum;
- The counting of the quantum states;
- The exclusion principle and the electronic rings;
- Chemical and spectroscopic applications.

These paragraphs roughly correspond to Fermi’s lectures from the 48th (April 17)
to the 54th (May 3).

Majorana’s notes resemble the part of Fermi’s course just mentioned not only for
its general formulation, but also for many formal details. For example, they both
report many common formulae. Fermi puts forward the deep similarity between
the electronic conﬁgurations of alkali metals, and also of some analogous metals.
As for the latter, Fermi explicitly mentions only the case of Cu, Ag, and Au, as
also Majorana does. Furthermore, in dealing with the Stoner table, Fermi uses
the symbol Cp for Cassiopeium, which at the time was the German version of
the French-inspired name Lutetium for the element 71; Majorana, with the same
notation, reports the symbol Cp in his Stoner table.

The most humble but, at the same time, the most eloquent example of sim-
ilarity occurs with the exclusion principle: Fermi writes that “at most only one
electron” exists with the given four quantum numbers. In an early version Majo-
rana wrote that there is “only one electron” in one orbit, given the four quantum
numbers. However, he then corrects his sentence specifying that there is “at most
only one electron,” exactly the same expression Fermi used. One may regard this
as an emblem when describing the legacy of Fermi’s course in Majorana’s lectures.
However, it should be kept in mind that this legacy does not concern only formal
details but appears to involve also meaningful aspects such as the attention paid
to phenomenological descriptions.

Once such strong correspondence is established, it is straightforward to ﬁnd some
other examples of it in the ﬁrst part of Majorana’s lecture devoted to The spectra
of the atoms with two valence electrons (which concludes the ﬁrst set of lectures
we mentioned in the paragraph 3.2). It corresponds to Fermi’s paragraph which

14

A. DE GREGORIO AND S. ESPOSITO

follows the applications of Stoner’s table, and to Fermi’s lectures NN.55-56 (May
5-8, 1928). One more topic common to both Fermi and Majorana’s courses is the
scattering of light from the atmosphere.

On Thursday February 17, 1938 Majorana dealt with further issues in the frame-
work of Old Quantum Theory, lecturing on the Compton eﬀect and the Franck &
Hertz experiment. We will report on them soon.

5.3. Majorana’s ﬁrst four lectures. Neither Majorana’s personal notes nor their
transcription cover the ﬁrst lectures up to January 22, 1938. All the same, the very
analysis of those notes brings out what the four lectures from January 15 to 22
should be concerned with. Majorana himself explicitly recalled some of the topics
he had already dealt with in his ﬁrst lectures: we have already mentioned the
Balmer series, the Sommerfeld conditions, the elliptic orbits. The case can be
readily added of the nomenclature of the energy levels: the meaning of the s, p, d,
levels was taken for given when Majorana dealt with the alkali metals and
f , ...
their spectra.

But what about the points which Majorana might deal with before January
25 without explicitly mentioning them in his subsequent notes? To this purpose,
In other words, if we take for
we can exploit the analogy with Fermi’s course.
granted that Majorana’s course followed the main lines of Fermi’s lectures for what
concerned Old Quantum Theory, we can speculate about the points dealt with by
Majorana from January 15 to January 22, 1938 by merely looking at the topics of
the ﬁrst chapters of Fermi’s Introduzione.

Thus, some of the ﬁrst topics tackled by Majorana might well be the kinetic the-
ory of gases and statistical mechanics: they introduced Fermi’s course into atomic
models. Fermi also showed how the quantized levels of the harmonic oscillator
could lead to the Planck formula. Here we have two more topics Majorana should
deal with: a) As for the Planck theory, Majorana wrote down the Planck constant
in his formulae but never made a word of its meaning nor of its value in his notes
following January 22. b) As for the harmonic oscillator, it is worth noting that the
zero point energy had been repeatedly touched by Fermi in his papers preluding to
the quantum statistics [24]. In the ﬁrst chapter of his Introduzione, Fermi, in spite
of being in the framework of Old Quantum Theory, remarked that the zero point
energy provided a better agreement with the experiments [p. 129]. Now, it could
be likely that Fermi actually mentioned the zero point energy in his course as well,
and therefore that Majorana too touched that point, even if in dealing with Old
Quantum Theory.

The Bohr-Sommerfeld theory, the Zeeman and the Stark eﬀects, the selection
rules and the correspondence principle are some more topics which Majorana likely
borrowed from Fermi’s course in his ﬁrst four lectures.

6. A step ahead

6.1. About the missing notes. The question now arises: which were the fates of
the notes concerning the four lectures from January 15 to January 22? It appears
hard to answer, but a closer look reveals something more: maybe it is not a well
posed question. The point is intriguing.

We know that on January 22, 1938 Majorana wrote from Naples to his mother
in Rome: “I believe I will be there within a few days, but only for few hours, since
I have to take a book from Treves [it was the name of a publishing house] and some

TEACHING THEORETICAL PHYSICS: THE CASES OF E. FERMI AND E. MAJORANA 15

more from home” (the text of the letter is reported in Ref. [11]). We recall that the
notes we have begin with Majorana’s lecture of Tuesday, January 25, 1938, the ﬁrst
day available after Saturday 22. Which were the books Majorana urgently needed
to bring to Naples in those same days when he was giving his course? Is it by
chance that his notes start only after the journey he announced to his mother? We
suggest a possible outline: the course of 1938 was the ﬁrst one Majorana had ever
held. After a few lectures introducing Old Quantum Theory, he probably realized
that some notes would be useful for his student. Some textbooks on Theoretical
Physics would help him to write the notes down. Fermi’s book would ﬁt extremely
well for what concerned Old Quantum Theory, since Majorana was very familiar
with Fermi’s 1927-28 course. Thus, our tentative answer is that the notes on the
ﬁrst four lectures, from January 15 to 22, had no fate at all, simply because they
had never been written down by Majorana.

An indirect check of the outline we have just suggested is as follows. As already
mentioned, Majorana came back to the motion of the nucleus “in the framework
of non relativistic mechanics.” That sounds like a step backwards with respect to
the treatment of relativistic corrections he had just concluded. However, his choice
seems to ﬁt very well with our idea that Majorana had just taken Fermi’s book
from Rome: maybe he had just realized that an interesting topic was left out in his
previous lectures. 6

6.2. Overtaking old positions. We have just seen that Fermi’s phenomenological
approach resounded in Majorana; in particular, it is through the latter’s lectures
on Old Quantum Theory that Fermi’s legacy is revealed. However, the attention
paid to phenomenology by a theoretician such as Majorana should not be regarded
as obvious. For example, we have already mentioned that Dirac held that the
educational approach to the new physics should be “essentially mathematical.”

In fact, Dirac and Fermi can be regarded as two very diﬀerent personiﬁcations
of a theoretical physicist: more inclined to mathematical formalization the former,
to the use of intuitive arguments the latter. These diﬀerences became conspicuous
by Fermi’s well-known formulation of the quantum theory of radiation, which he
worked out between the end of 1920s and the beginning of 1930s since “the method
used by Dirac did not appeal to him” [25]. 7

The attention to a phenomenological and intuitive approach coexisted with a
more mathematical formulation of quantum aspects in Majorana’s courses, and his
teaching attitude may be regarded as synthesizing Fermi’s and Dirac’s positions.

6The latter is not the only episode. Take the Franck & Hertz experiment, which follows
the Compton eﬀect and precedes Matrix and Wave Mechanics in Majorana’s notes: though the
Compton eﬀect appears as a direct application of the electromagnetism and the quantum theory of
light, the experiment revealing the energy levels of mercury vapors appears rather out of context.
Before the new transcription of the notes was discovered, the Franck & Hertz experiment was
considered part of “a series of relevant physical phenomena” which Majorana tackled “in order
to put forward masses of physical facts and results in the simplest way [...] before he started the
hard journey towards the new mechanics” (see N. Cabibbo, in Ref.
[13] pp. 118-119). Now we
know six more lectures and we have to account for the fact that the Franck & Hertz experiment
immediately follows a whole set of lectures on electromagnetism and relativity.

7Some placid rivalry possibly existed between them, dating back to the formulation of the
Fermi-Dirac statistics [26]. E. Rutherford himself appears to make fun of that when, in congratu-
lating Fermi on his discovery of neutron-induced radioactivity, he added: “You may be interested
to hear that Professor Dirac also is doing some experiments. This seems to be a good augury for
the future of theoretical physics!” [27].

16

A. DE GREGORIO AND S. ESPOSITO

Dirac was aware that mathematics alone might hide the physical meaning of theo-
ries, but simply he was not scared of it: “One should learn to hold the physical ideas
in one’s mind without reference to the mathematical form.” On the other hand,
Majorana considered that as a serious drawback: “The mathematical method thor-
oughly frustrates one’s desire to intuit the physical meaning” of the formalism; not
to mention that, according to him, the pre-existing mathematical tools “had been
forced” by Quantum Mechanics to fulﬁll practical purposes.

Thus, an overtaking of Fermi’s and Dirac’s positions may be got through Majo-
rana’s teaching attitude and, more explicitly, through the prolusion to his course
of 1938: the phenomenological presentation of the Old Quantum Theory, borrowed
from Fermi’s intuitive approach, was supplemented by the deepening of forefront
mathematical aspects of Quantum Mechanics. At the same time, the limitations of
a purely mathematical presentation - that sort of presentation to which Dirac was
inclined - were put forward by Majorana, rising attention to more intuitive aspects
connected with quantum theories and their historical lines of development.

7. Conclusions

In the present paper, we suggested a comparison between Fermi’s and Majorana’s
attitudes towards the teaching of Theoretical Physics. Fermi’s 1927-28 course on
Theoretical Physics was crucial for our analysis. From Fermi’s record book relative
to his 1927-28 course, a strong correspondence emerges between the topics Fermi
delivered in his lectures and six chapters of his 1928 book on Atomic Physics.
This allowed a detailed reconstruction of the content of his lectures on Theoretical
Physics, despite no written note being available on those lectures.

The inﬂuence of Fermi’s lectures can be perceived in Majorana’s personal notes
dating back to the late 1920s. Further, Majorana’s personal notes and the programs
of three courses he submitted in Rome between 1933 and 1936 revealed his forefront
approach and his search for new routes in dealing with Quantum Mechanics.

We carried out a detailed comparison between Fermi’s 1927-28 course on The-
oretical Physics and the one Majorana gave in Naples ten years later. On the
basis of the available notes of Majorana’s course we showed that a number of Ma-
jorana’s lectures - those dealing with Old Quantum Theory - very closely reﬂect
Fermi’s 1927-28 course. That helped to conjecture about the content of some of
Majorana’s previous lectures, for which no written notes are available at all.

On the other hand, Fermi’s approach just represented the starting point for fur-
ther theoretical developments in the reminder of Majorana’s course, devoted to the
new Quantum Mechanics in both its wave mechanical and matrix forms. Majo-
rana’s mathematical approach, with the peculiar resort to Group Theory, proved
In fact, a thorough diﬀerence with Fermi’s lectures
his original teaching touch.
already emerged in the three programs submitted by Majorana at the University
of Rome. Majorana’s courses thus consisted in a fruitful mixture of an original
approach - very similar to that of the present courses in Quantum Mechanics - and
of some consolidated lines of development - which were the clear legacy of the lines
Fermi had adopted in his courses.

In conclusion, we have evidence of a deep inﬂuence of Fermi’s teaching approach
on Majorana’s one and, at the same time, a thorough autonomy between their
scientiﬁc personalities.

TEACHING THEORETICAL PHYSICS: THE CASES OF E. FERMI AND E. MAJORANA 17

Appendix A. Fermi’s 1927-28 course on Theoretical Physics

The topics treated by Fermi in his lectures (labelled by their order number and
date) are reported in the following for the course in Theoretical Physics at the
University of Rome in 1927-28.

N. Date
1

(15 Nov)

Topics
Interactions between molecules.
Solids and ﬂuids in the framework of the kinetic theory.
(17 Nov) Dependence of pressure upon molecular kinetic energy.
(19 Nov) Mean free path. Vapor rays.
(22 Nov) Kinetic energy in general coordinates.

The theorem of equipartition of the energy (without proof).

(24 Nov) Phase space.
(26 Nov) Computation of the probability of a distribution.
(29 Nov) The Boltzmann distribution law.
(1 Dec)
(3 Dec)
(6 Dec)
(10 Dec) Summary of the laws of electrology. Their diﬀerential form.
(13 Dec) Displacement currents. The Maxwell laws.
(15 Dec) Propagation of plane electromagnetic perturbations.

Proof of the theorem of equipartition of the energy.
The Maxwell law.
Principles of vector ﬁeld theory.

Their velocity.

(17 Dec) Polarized sinusoidal plane wave.
(20 Dec) Propagation of electromagnetic perturbations of arbitrary shape.
(22 Dec) Poynting vector.
(10 Jan) Electromagnetic moment and radiation pressure.
(12 Jan) Electronic theory of dispersion.
(14 Jan) Electromagnetic radiation theory.
(17 Jan) The electron.
(19 Jan) Positive nuclei and the Rutherford atomic model.
(21 Jan) α-, β-, and γ-rays.
(24 Jan) Radioactive transmutations.
(26 Jan) Light quanta.
(28 Jan) Compton eﬀect.
(31 Jan) Bohr’s hypothesis.
(2 Feb)
(4 Feb)
(7 Feb)

Energy levels.
Kepler motions.
Dependence of the energy and the period on the orbital
elements of motion.
Balmer series and the energy levels of hydrogen.

(9 Feb)
(11 Feb) Orbits of the stationary states.
(14 Feb) Determination of the Rydberg constant.
(25 Feb) The spectrum of He+ and the motion of the nucleus.
(28 Feb) Mechanical properties of the stationary orbits of hydrogen.
(1 Mar)
Sommerfeld conditions for multi-periodic systems.
(6 Mar) Application of the Sommerfeld conditions to the oscillator

and the rotator.

2
3
4

5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13

14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29

30
31
32
33
34
35
36

18

A. DE GREGORIO AND S. ESPOSITO

N. Date
37

(8 Mar)

Topics
Elliptic orbits of the hydrogen atom and hints on Sommerfeld’s
theory of the ﬁne structure.

(10 Mar) Proof of the relation dW/dJ = ν for a point moving on a line.
(13 Mar) The correspondence principle for systems with one

degree of freedom.

(15 Mar) Harmonics of the motion for multi-periodic systems.
(17 Mar) The correspondence principle for multi-periodic systems.
(20 Mar) Selection rules. Application to the azimuthal quantum.

Evaluation of the mean-life of the hydrogen states.

43

(22 Mar) The principle of the adiabatic invariants.

Relation between mechanical and magnetic moments.
Bohr magneton.

44
45

(24 Mar) Larmor theorem. Spatial quantization of the hydrogen orbits.
(27 Mar) The hypothesis of the spinning electron.

Motion of the electronic axis and its spatial orientation.

46

(29 Mar) Zeeman eﬀect. Lorentz theory.

Quantum theory of the hydrogen atom.

(31 Mar) Hints on the Stark eﬀect.
(17 Apr) The electronic shielding.
(19 Apr) Arc and spark spectrum.
(24 Apr) Terms in a central, non Newtonian ﬁeld.
(26 Apr) Consequences of the spinning electron.
(28 Apr) Determination of the weight of the orbits.

The exclusion principle.
Stoner table. Chemical applications.

(1 May)
(3 May) Applications to the alkali spectra.
(5 May) Metals with two valence electrons.
(8 May)
(10 May) Earth metals spectra.
(12 May) Hints on the anomalous Zeeman eﬀect.

Anomalous Zeeman eﬀect for the D lines.

Systems with singlets and triplets for the alkaline earths.

(15 May) Hints on the Stark eﬀect in heavy elements.
(19 May) Review on the theory of gases.
(22 May) Review on Boltzmann and Maxwell distribution laws.
(26 May) Review on Electrodynamics.
(29 May) Review on light quanta.
(31 May) Review on the principle of the adiabatic invariants.
Review on the correspondence principle.
(2 Jun)

38
39

40
41
42

47
48
49
50
51
52

53
54
55
56
57
58

59
60
61
62
63
64
65

TEACHING THEORETICAL PHYSICS: THE CASES OF E. FERMI AND E. MAJORANA 19

Appendix B. Program of Majorana’s first course

Title: Mathematical Methods of Quantum Mechanics
Academic Year: 1933-34

Topics to be covered:
1) Unitary geometry. Linear transformations. Hermitian operators. Unitary trans-
formations. Eigenvalues and eigenvectors.
2) Phase space and the quantum of action. Modiﬁcations to classical kinematics.
General framework of Quantum Mechanics.
3) Hamiltonians which are invariant under a transformation group. Transforma-
tions as complex quantities. Non compatible systems. Representations of ﬁnite or
continuous groups.
4) General elements on abstract groups. Representation theorems. The group of
spatial rotations. Symmetric groups of permutations and other ﬁnite groups.
5) Properties of the systems endowed with spherical symmetry. Orbital and intrin-
sic momenta. Theory of the rigid rotator.
6) Systems with identical particles. Fermi and Bose-Einstein statistics. Symmetries
of the eigenfunctions in the center-of-mass frames.
7) The Lorentz group and the spinor calculus. Applications to the relativistic the-
ory of the elementary particles.
Date of submission: May, 1933

Appendix C. Program of Majorana’s second course

Title: Mathematical methods of Atomic Physics
Academic Year: 1935-36

Topics to be covered:
Matrix calculus. Phase space and the correspondence principle. Minimal statistical
sets or elementary cells. Elements of the quantum dynamics.
Statistical theories. General deﬁnition of symmetry problems. Representations of
groups. Complex atomic spectra. Kinematics of the rigid body. Diatomic and
polyatomic molecules.
Relativistic theory of the electron and the foundations of electrodynamics.
Hyperﬁne structures and alternating bands. Elements of Nuclear Physics.
Date of submission: April 30, 1935

Appendix D. Program of Majorana’s third course

Title: Quantum electrodynamics
Academic Year: 1936-37

Topics to be covered:
Relativistic theory of the electron. Quantization procedures. Field quantities de-
ﬁned by commutability and anticommutability laws. Their kinematical equivalence
with sets with an undetermined number of objects obeying the Bose-Einstein or
Fermi statistics, respectively. Dynamical equivalence.
Quantization of the Maxwell-Dirac equations. Study of the relativistic invariance.
The positive electron and the symmetry of charges.

20

A. DE GREGORIO AND S. ESPOSITO

Several applications of the theory. Radiation and scattering processes. Creation
and annihilation of opposite charges. Collisions of fast electrons.
Date of submission: April 28, 1936

References

[1] E. Segr´e, Enrico Fermi, physicist, University of Chicago Press, Chicago, 1970.
[2] A. Drago and S. Esposito, “Following Weyl on Quantum Mechanics: the Contribution of

Ettore Majorana,” Found. Phys., 34 (2004), 871-887. [arXiv:physics/0503084].

[3] E. Fermi, Lezioni di Fisica teorica dettate dal Prof. E. Fermi, raccolte dai Dott. Dei e

Martinozzi, [s.n.], Roma, 1927.

[4] E. Fermi, Introduzione alla ﬁsica atomica, Zanichelli, Bologna, 1928.
[5] E. Amaldi, La Vita e l’Opera di E. Majorana, Accad. Naz. dei Lincei, Roma, 1966; Ettore
Majorana: Man and scientist, in Strong and Weak Interactions: present problems, edited by
A. Zichichi, New York and London, 1966.

[6] E. Segr´e, A mind always in motion. The Autobiography of Emilio Segr´e, University of Cali-

fornia Press, Berkeley and Los Angeles, 1993.

[7] F. Rasetti in: E. Fermi, Collected Papers (Note e Memorie), edited by E. Amaldi et al.,
University of Chicago Press - Accad. Naz. dei Lincei, Chicago - Roma, 1962-1965, 2 vols.,
Vol. I (1962), p. 277.

[8] E. Di Grezia and S. Esposito, “Fermi, Majorana and the Statistical Model of Atoms,” Found.

Phys., 34 (2004), 1431-1450. [arXiv:physics/0406030].

[9] S. Esposito, E. Majorana jr, A. van der Merwe and E. Recami (eds.) Ettore Majorana: Notes

on Theoretical Physics, Kluwer, New York, 2003.

[10] H. Weyl, Gruppentheorie und Quantenmechanik (ﬁrst edition), Hirzel, Leipzig, 1928. Eng-
lish translation from the second German edition in The Theory of Groups and Quantum
Mechanics, Dover, New York, 1931.

[11] E. Recami, Il caso Majorana, Oscar Mondadori, Milano, 1991, 2nd edition; idem, Di Renzo,
Roma, 2002, 4th revised and enlarged edition. See also E. Recami, “Ettore Majorana: l’opera
scientiﬁca edita e inedita,” Nuovo Sagg., 3-4 (1999), 14-29; “Ricordo di Ettore Majorana a
sessant’anni dalla sua scomparsa: l’opera edita e inedita”, Quad. Storia Fis., 5 (1999), 19-68
[arXiv:physics/9810023].

[12] E. Majorana, “Teoria simmetrica dell’elettrone e del positrone,” Nuovo Cim., 14 (1937),

[13] E. Majorana, Lezioni all’Universit`a di Napoli, Bibliopolis, Napoli, 1987.
[14] S. Esposito, “Il corso di Fisica teorica di Ettore Majorana:

il ritrovamento del documento
Moreno,” Nuovo Sagg., 21 (2005), 21-33; A. Drago and S. Esposito, “Ettore Majorana’s
course on Theoretical Physics: a recent discovery,” e-print arXiv:physics/0503084.

[15] E. Majorana, Lezioni di Fisica Teorica, edited by S. Esposito, Bibliopolis, Napoli, 2006 (in

[16] P.A.M. Dirac, The Principles of Quantum Mechanics, Clarendon Press, Oxford, 1930, p. viii.
[17] S. Esposito, “Una lezione particolare di Ettore Majorana,” Quad. Storia Fis., to be published

[arXiv:physics/0512174].

[18] S. Esposito, “Majorana solution of the Thomas-Fermi equation,” Am. J. Phys. 70 (2002)

[19] E. Majorana, “Teoria relativistica di particelle con momento intrinseco arbitrario,” Nuovo

Cim., 9 (1932), 335-344.

[20] Concerning the path towards nuclear researches in Rome, see for example A. De Gregorio,
“A Far-reaching project behind the discovery of neutron-induced radioactivity,” Studies Hist.
Phil. Mod. Phys., to be published.

[21] E. Fermi and E. Segr´e, “Zur Theorie der Hyperfeinstrukturen,” Zeit. Phys., 82 (1933), 729-
749; “Sulla teoria delle strutture iperﬁni,” Mem. Accad. d’Italia, 4 (1933), 131-158; repro-
duced in E. Fermi, Collected Papers, cit. in Ref. [7], Vol. I, pp. 514-537.
[22] E. Persico, Fondamenti della meccanica atomica, Zanichelli, Bologna, 1936.

171-184.

press).

852-856.

TEACHING THEORETICAL PHYSICS: THE CASES OF E. FERMI AND E. MAJORANA 21

[23] See M. Leone, N. Robotti, C.A. Segnini, “Fermi Archives at the Domus Galilaeana in Pisa”,

Physis, 27 (2000) 501-533

[24] L. Belloni, “On Fermi’s route to Fermi-Dirac statistics,” Eur. J. Phys., 15 (1994), 102-109; F.
Cordella and F. Sebastiani, “I due lavori che preludono alla statistica quantica,” Giornale di
Fisica, 41 (2000), 83-101; “Sul percorso di Fermi verso la statistica quantica,” Nuovo Sagg.,
16 (2000), 11-22.

[25] E. Amaldi in: E. Fermi, Collected Papers, cit. in Ref. [7], Vol. I, p. 305.
[26] See for example the letter Fermi wrote to Dirac in 1926; in H. Kragh, Dirac: a scientiﬁc

biography, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 1990, p. 36.

[27] See E. Fermi, Collected Papers, cit. in Ref. [7], Vol. I, p. 641.

A. De Gregorio: Dipartimento di Fisica, Universit`a degli Studi di Roma “La Sapienza”,

p.le Aldo Moro, 00185 Rome, Italy (Alberto.DeGregorio@roma1.infn.it)

S. Esposito: Dipartimento di Scienze Fisiche, Universit`a di Napoli “Federico II” &
I.N.F.N. Sezione di Napoli, Complesso Universitario di M. S. Angelo, Via Cinthia, 80126
Naples, Italy (Salvatore.Esposito@na.infn.it)

