6
0
0
2
 
r
a

M
 
3
 
 
]
h
p
-
t
s
i
h
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
6
1
0
3
0
6
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

The Diﬀerential Geometry and Physical Basis for the Applications of Feynman Diagrams

Samuel L. Marateck
Courant Institute of Mathematical Sciences
New York University
New York, N.Y. 10012
email: marateck@cs.nyu.edu

Abstract

This paper recalls the development of gauge theory culminating in Yang-Mills theory,
and the application of diﬀerential geometry including connections on ﬁber bundles to
ﬁeld theory. Finally, we see how the preceding is used to explain the Feynman diagrams
appearing on the Feynman postage stamp released last May.

1. Introduction

On May 11, the late Richard Feynman’s birthday, a stamp was dedicated to Feynman at the Post
Oﬃce in Far Rockaway, New York City, Feynman’s boyhood home. (At the same time, the United
States Postal Service issued three other stamps honoring the scientists Josiah Willard Gibbs and
Barbara McClintock, and the mathematician John von Neumann.)

The design of the stamp tells a wonderful story. The Feynman diagrams on it show how Feynman’s
work originally applicable to QED, for which he won the Nobel prize, was then later used to eluci-
date the electroweak force. The design is meaningful to both mathematicians and physicists. For
mathematicians, it demonstrates the application of diﬀerential geometry; for physicists, it depicts
the veriﬁcation of QED, the application of the Yang-Mills equations and the establishment and
experimental veriﬁcation of the electroweak force, the ﬁrst step in the creation of the standard
model. The physicists used gauge theory to achieve this and were for the most part unaware of
the developments in diﬀerential geometry. Similarly mathematicians developed ﬁber-bundle theory
without knowing that it could be applied to physics. We should, however, remember that in general
relativity, Einstein introduced geometry into physics. And as we will relate below, Weyl did so for
electromagnetism. General relativity sparked mathematicians interest in parallel transport, eventu-
ally leading to the development of ﬁber-bundles in diﬀerential geometry. After physicists achieved
success using gauge theory, mathematicians applied it to diﬀerential geometry. The story begins
with Maxwell’s equations. In this story the vector potential A goes from being a mathematical
construct used to facilitate problem solution in electromagnetism to taking center stage by causing
the shift in the interference pattern in the Aharonov-Bohm solenoid eﬀect. As the generalized
four-vector Aµ, it becomes the gauge ﬁeld that mediates the electromagnetic interaction, and the
electroweak and strong interactions in the standard model of physics – Aµ is understood as the
connection on ﬁber-bundles in diﬀerential geometry. The modern reader would be unaccustomed to
the form in which Maxwell equations ﬁrst appeared. They are easily recognizable when expressed
using vector analysis in the Heaviside-Gibbs formulation.

1

2. Maxwell’s Equations
The equations used to establish Maxwell’s equations in vacuo expressed in Heaviside-Lorentz ra-
tionalized units are:

(1) ∇ · ~E = ρ (Gauss’s law)
(2) ∇ · ~B = 0 (No magnetic monpoles)
(3) ∇ × ~B = ~J (Ampere’s law)
(4) ∇ × ~E = −∂ ~B/∂t ((Faraday’s and Lenz’s law)

where ~E and ~B are respectively the electric and magnetic ﬁelds; ρ and ~J are the charge density
and electric current. The continuity equation which dictates the conservation of charge:

indicates that Maxwell’s equations describe a local theory since you cannot destroy a charge locally
and recreate it at a distant point instantaneously. The concept that the theory should be local
is the corner-stone of the gauge theory used in quantum ﬁeld theory, resulting in the Yang-Mills
theory, the basis of the standard model.

(5) ∇ · ~J + ∂ρ/∂t = 0

Maxwell realized that since:

(6) ∇ · ∇ × ~B = 0

(3’) ∇ × ~B = ~J + ∂ ~E/∂t

equation (3) is inconsistent with (5), he altered (3) to read

Thus a local conservation law mandated the addition of the ∂ ~E/∂t term. Although equations (1),
(2), (3’) and (4) are collectively known as Maxwell’s equations, Maxwell himself was only respon-
sible for (3’).

Maxwell calculated the speed of a wave propagated by the ﬁnal set of equations, and found its
velocity very close to the speed of light. He thus hypothesized that light was an electromagnetic
wave. Since the curl of a vector cannot be calculated in two-dimensions, Maxwell’s equations indi-
cate that light, as we know it, cannot exist in a two-dimensional world. This is the ﬁrst clue that
electromagnetism, is bound up with geometry. In fact equation (6) is the vector analysis equivalent
of the diﬀerential geometry result stating that if β is a p-form, and dβ is its exterior derivative,
then d(dβ), or d2β = 0.

Unlike the laws of newtonian mechanics, Maxwell’s equations carry over to relativistic frames. The
non-homogeneous equations, (1) and (3’), become

(7) ∂µF µν = J ν

2

while the homogeneous equations, (2) and (4) become

(8) ǫαβγδ∂βFγδ = 0

where ǫαβγδ is the Levi-Civita symbol, F µν = ∂µAν − ∂ν Aµ, and A0 is the scalar potential and Ai’s
(i = 1, 2, 3) the components of the vector potential ~A. Note that both equations (7) and (8) are
manifestly covariant. Yang1 remarked that equation (8) is related to the geometrical theorem that
the boundary of a region has no boundary. In a later section, we will show that equation (8) is due
to the principle d2ω = 0, where ω is a p-form. Yang’s geometrical explanation can be understood
in diﬀerential geometry terms using the generalized Stoke’s theorem: RM dω = R∂M ω, where ω is
an n-form and M is an n + 1 dimension oriented manifold with boundary ∂M . For the purposes
of this article a manifold is simply a surface that is locally Euclidean. Because d2ω = 0, this leads
to RM d2ω = R∂M dω = R∂2M ω = 0, where ∂2M indicates the boundary of a boundary of a region.
If we assume that ω is non-vanishing, then ∂2M is ⊘. The M¨obius strip can be used as another
example of the theorem Yang cites.

3. Gauge Invariance
In a 1918 article, Hermann Weyl2 tried to combine electromagnetism and gravity by requiring the
theory to be invariant under a local scale change of the metric gµν → gµν eα(x), where x is a 4-vector.
This attempt was unsuccessful and was criticized by Einstein for being inconsistent with observed
physical results. It predicted that a vector parallel transported from point p to q would have a
length that was path dependent. Similarly, the time interval between ticks of a clock would also
depend on the path on which the clock was transported. The article did, however, introduce

• The term “gauge invariance”, his term was Eichinvarianz. It refers to invariance under his
scale change. The ﬁrst use of “gauge invariance” in English3 was in Weyl’s 1929 English
version4 of his famous 1929 paper.

• The geometric interpretation of electromagnetism,

• The beginnings of non-abelian gauge theory. The similarity of Weyl’s theory to non-abelian

gauge theory is more striking in his 1929 paper.

By 1929 Maxwell’s equations had been combined with quantum mechanics to produce the start of
quantum electrodynamics. Weyl in his 1929 article5 turned from trying to unify electromagnetism
and gravity to following a suggestion originally thought to have been made by Fritz London in his
1927 article6, and introduced as a phase factor an exponential in which the phase α is preceded by
the imaginary unit i, e.g., e+iqα(x), in the wave function for the wave equations (for instance, the

1Yang, C.N., (1980), Physics Today, 6 42
2Weyl, Hermann, (1919), Sitzwingsber. Preuss. Akad., Berlin, 465
3See Jackson, J. D. and Okun, L. B., (2001). Rev. Mod. Physics, 73, 663.
4Weyl, H. (1929). Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci., 15, 32.
5Weyl, Hermann, (1929). Zeit. f. Physic, 330 56.
6London, Fritz, (1927). Zeit. f. Physic, 42 375.

3

Dirac equation is (iγµ∂µ − m)ψ = 0). It is here that Weyl correctly formulated gauge theory as a
symmetry principle from which electromagnetism could be derived. It was to become the driving
force in the development of quantum ﬁeld theory. In their 2001 Rev. Mod. Phys. paper Jackson
and Okun point out that in a 1926 paper7 pre-dating London’s, Fock showed that for a quantum
theory of charged particles interacting with the electromagnetic ﬁeld, invariance under a gauge
transformation of the potentials required multiplication of the wave function by the now well-know
phase factor. Many subsequent authors incorrecty cited the date of Fock’s paper as 1927. Weyl’s
1929 article along with his 1918 one and Fock’s and London’s, and other key articles appear in
translation in a work by O’Raifeartaigh8 with his comments. Yang9 discusses Weyl’s gauge theory
results as reported by Pauli10, as a source for Yang-Mills gauge theory (although Yang didn’t ﬁnd
out until much later that these were Weyl’s results):

... I was very much impressed with the idea that charge conservation was related to the
invariance of the theory under phase changes and even more impressed with the fact
the gauge-invariance determined all the electromagnetic interactions...

For the wave equations to be gauge invariant, i.e., have the same form after the gauge transforma-
tion as before, the local phase transformation ψ(x) → ψ(x)e+iqα(x) has to be accompanied by the
local gauge transformation

(9) Aµ → Aµ − q−1∂µα(x)

(The phase and gauge transformations are local because α(x) is a function of x.) This dictates that
the ∂µ in the wave equations be replaced by ∂µ + iqAµ in order for the ∂µα(x) terms to cancel each
other. Thus gauge invariance determines the type of interaction – here, the inclusion of the vector
potential. This is called the gauge principle and Aµ is called the gauge ﬁeld or gauge potential.
Gauge invariance is also called gauge symmetry. In electromagnetism, A is the space-time vector
potential representing the photon ﬁeld, while in electroweak theory, A represents the intermediate
vector bosons W ± and Z 0 ﬁelds and in the strong interaction, A represents the colored gluon ﬁelds.
The fact that the q in ψ(x)e+iqα(x) must be the same as the q in ∂µ+iqAµ to insure gauge invariance,
means that the charge q must be conserved.11 Thus gauge invariance dictates charge conservation.
By Noether’s theorem, a conserved current is associated with a symmetry. Here the symmetry is
the non-physical rotation invariance in an internal space called a ﬁber. In electromagnetism the
rotations form the group U(1), the group of unitary 1-dimensional matrices. U(1) is an example of
a structure group and the ﬁber is S1, the circle.
A ﬁber bundle is determined by two manifolds and the structure group G which acts on the ﬁber:
the ﬁrst manifold, called the total space E consists of many copies of the ﬁber F, one for each point
in the second manifold, the base manifold M which for our discussion is the space-time manifold.
The ﬁbers are said to project down to the base manifold. A principal ﬁber bundle12 is a ﬁber

7Fock, V., (1926). Z. Phys, 39 226.
8O’Raifeartaigh L., (1997) The Dawning of Gauge Theory, Princeton University.
9Yang, C.N., (1980) in “Hermann Weyl’s contribution to Physics”, in Hermann Weyl, ed. Chandrasekharan, K.,

Springer-Verlag.

10Pauli, W., (1941). Rev. Mod. Physics, 13, 203.
11See section 4.6 of Aitchison, I.J.R., and Hey, A.J.G., (1989) Gauge Theories in Particle Physics, Adam Hilger.
12In giving these deﬁnitions, we restrict attention to the smooth manifolds which is adequate for our discussion.

4

bundle in which the structure group, G, is a Lie group that acts on the total space E in such a way
that each ﬁber is mapped onto itself and the action of an individual ﬁber looks like the action of
the structure group on itself by left-translation. In particular, the ﬁber F is diﬀeomorphic to the
structure group G.

The gauge principle shows how electromagnetism can be introduced into quantum mechanics. The
transformation ∂µ → ∂µ + iqAµ is also called the minimal principle and the operation ∂µ + iqAµ is
the covariant derivative of diﬀerential geometry, D = d + iqA, where A is the connection on a ﬁber
bundle. A connection on a ﬁber bundle allows one to identify ﬁbers over points bi ǫM via parallel
transport along a path γ from b1 to b2. In general, the particular identiﬁcation is path dependent.
It turns out that the parallel transport depends only on the homotopy class of the path if and only
if the curvature of the connection vanishes identically. Recall that two paths are homotopic if one
can be deformed continuously onto the other keeping the end points ﬁxed.

Weyl in his 1929 paper also includes an expression for the curvature Ω of the connection A,
namely Cartan’s second structural equation which in modern diﬀerential geometry notation is
Ω = dA + A ∧ A. It is the same form as the equation used by Yang and Mills which in modern
notation is Ω = dA + [A, A], where [] is the Lie bracket. Since the transformations in (9) form an
abelian group U(1), the space-time vector potential A commutes with itself. Thus in electromag-
netism the curvature of the connection A is just

(10) Ω = dA.

which, as we will see in the next section, is the ﬁeld strength F deﬁned as F = dA.

4. Diﬀerential Geometry

Diﬀerential geometry principly developed by Levi-Civita, Cartan, Poincar´e, de Rham, Whitney,
Hodge, Chern, Steenrod and Ehresmann led to the develpment of ﬁber-bundle theory which is used
in explaining the geometric content of Maxwell’s equations. It was later used to explain Yang-Mills
theory and to develop string theory. The successes of gauge theory in physics sparked mathemati-
cians interest in it. In the 1970’s Sir Michael Atiyah initiated the study of the mathematics of the
Yang-Mills equations and in 1983 his student Simon Donaldson using Yang-Mills theory discovered
a unique property of smooth manifolds13 in R4. Michael Freedman went on to prove that there
exists multiple exotic diﬀerential structures only on R4. It is known that in other dimensions, the
standard diﬀerential structure on Rn is unique.
In 1959 Aharonov and Bohm14 established the primacy of the vector potential by proposing an
electron diﬀraction experiment to demonstrate a quantum mechanical eﬀect: A long solenoid lies
behind a wall with two slits and is positioned between the slits and paralled to them. An electron
source in front of the wall emits electrons that follow two paths. One path through the upper slit
and the other path through the lower slit. The ﬁrst electron path ﬂows above the solenoid and the
other path ﬂows below it. The solenoid is small enough so that when no current ﬂows through it, the
solenoid doesn’t interfere with the electrons’ ﬂow. The two paths converge and form a diﬀraction
pattern on a screen behind the solenoid. When the current is turned on, there is no magnetic or
electric ﬁeld outside the solenoid so the electrons cannot be eﬀected by these ﬁelds; however there is

13Donaldson, S. K. (1983), Bull. Amer. Math. Soc. 8, 81.
14Y. Aharonov and D. Bohm, (1959) Phys. Rev. 115, 485.

5

′
s(x) A(y)ds

a vector potential ~A and it eﬀects the interference pattern on the screen. Thus Einstein’s objection
to Weyl’s 1918 paper can be understood as saying that there is no Aharonov−Bohm eﬀect for
gravity. Because of the necessary presence of the solenoid, the upper path cannot be continuously
deformed into the lower one. Therefore, the two-paths are not homotopically equivalent.
The solution of (1/2m)(−i~∇−qA/c)2ψ+qV ψ = Eψ, the time-independent Schr¨odinger’s equation
for a charged particle, is ψ0(x)e(iq/c~) R
(y) where ψ0(x) is the solution of the equation for
A equals zero and s(x) represents each of the two paths. Here c is the speed of light and ~ is
Plank’s constant divided by 2π. The interference term in the superposition of the solution for the
upper path and that for the lower path produces a diﬀerence in the phase of the electron’s wave
function called a phase shift. Here the phase shift is (q/c~) H A(x)dx. By Stoke’s theorem, the
phase shift is (q/c~)φ where φ is the magnetic ﬂux in the solenoid, R ~B · d~S. Mathematically, their
proposal corresponds to the fact that even if the curvature [the electromagnetic ﬁeld strength] of
the connection vanishes [as it does outside of the solenoid] parallel transport along non-homotopic
paths can still be path-dependent [producing a shift in the diﬀraction pattern].
Chambers15 performed an experiment to test the Aharonov and Bohm (AB) eﬀect. The experi-
ment, however, was criticized because of leakage from the solenoid. Tonomura16 et. al. performed
beautiful experiments that indeed veriﬁed the AB prediction. Wu and Yang17 analyzed the pre-
diction of Aharonov and Bohm and comment that diﬀerent phase shifts (q/c~)φ may describe the
same interference pattern, whereas the phase factor e(iq/c~)φ provides a unique description. The
equation e2πN i = 1, where N is an integer means that e(iq/c~)(φ+2πN c~/q) = e(iq/c~)φe2πN i = e(iq/c~)φ.
Thus ﬂux of φ, φ + 2πc~/q, φ + 4πc~/q... all describe the same interference pattern. Moreover, they
introduced a dictionary relating gauge theory terminology to bundle terminology. For instance, the
gauge theory phase factor corresponds to the bundle parallel transport; and as we shall see, the
Yang-Mills gauge potential corresponds to a connection on a principal ﬁber bundle.

Let’s see how using the primacy of the four-vector potential A, we can derive the homogeneous
Maxwell’s equations from diﬀerential geometry simply by using the gauge transformation. Then
we’ll get the non-homogeneous Maxwell’s equations for source-free (J = 0) electromagnetism using
the fact that our world is a four-dimensional (space-time) world.
We will also show that Maxwell’s equations are invariant under the transformations Aµ → Aµ +
∂µα(x), or expressed in diﬀerential geometry terms, A → A + dα(x). We want α(x) to vanish
when a function of A is assigned to the ~E and ~B ﬁelds. Taking the exterior derivative of A will do
this since d2α(x) = 0. Set A to the 1-form A = -A0dt + Axdx + Aydy + Azdz. Evaluating dA
and realizing that the wedge product dxi ∧ dxj = −dxj ∧ dxi and therefore dxj ∧ dxj = 0 where
dx0 is dt, dx1 is dx, dx2 is dy and dx3 is dz, produces the 2-form dA consisting of terms like
(∂xA0 + ∂tAx)dtdx and (∂xAy − ∂yAx)dxdy. When all the components are evaluated, these terms
become respectively ∇A0 + ∂ ~A/∂t and ∇ × ~A. The analysis up to now has been purely mathe-
matical. To give it physical signiﬁcance we associate these terms with the ﬁeld strengths ~B and
~E. In electromagnetic theory, two fundamental principles are ∇ · ~B = 0 (no magnetic monopoles)
and for time-independent ﬁelds ~E = −∇A0 (the electromagnetic ﬁeld is the gradient of the scalar
potential), so consistency dictates that in the time-dependent case, we assign the two terms to ~B
and ~E respectively:

15Chambers, R. G., (1960) Phys. Rev. Lett. 5, 3
16Tonomura, Akira, et. al., (1982) Phys. Rev. Lett. 48, 1443, and (1986) Phys. Rev. Lett. 56, 792
17Wu, T. T. and Yang, C. N., (1975) Phys. Rev. D, 12, 3845

6

(11) ~B = ∇ × ~A and ~E = −∇A0 − ∂t ~A

The gradient, curl and divergence are spatial operators – they envolve the diﬀerentials dx, dy and
dz. The exterior derivative of a scalar is the gradient, the exterior derivative of a spatial 1-form
is the curl, and the exterior derivative of a spatial two-form is the divergence. In the 1-form A,
the -A0dt is a spatial scalar and when the exterior derivative is applied gives rise to ∇A0. The
remaining terms in A are the coeﬃcients of dxi constituting a spatial 1-form and thus produce
∇ × ~A.
We deﬁne the ﬁeld strength, F as F = dA and from equation (10), we see that the ﬁeld strength
is the curvature of the connection A. Using the equations in (11) and the 2-form dA we get

(12) F = Exdxdt + Eydydt + Ezdzdt + Bxdydz + Bydzdx + Bzdxdy

where for example dxdt is the wedge product dx ∧ dt. Since d2A = 0

(13) dF = 0

Evaluating dF gives the homogeneous Maxwell’s equations. In equation (12) since the E part is
a spatial 1-form, when the exterior derivative is applied, it produces the ∇ × ~E part of Maxwell’s
homogenous equations. Since the B part of equation (12) is a spatial 2-form, it results in the ∇ · ~B
part. Since dF = 0, F is said to be a closed 2-form.

To get the expression for the non-homogeneous Maxwell’s equations, i.e., the equivalent of equation
(7), we use

(14) J = ρdt + Jxdx + Jydy + Jzdz

and calculate the Hodge dual using the Hodge star operator. The Hodge Duals are deﬁned18
by ∗Fαβ = 1/2ǫαβγδF γδ and ∗Jαβγ = ǫαβγδJ δ. The Hodge star19 operates on the diﬀerentials in
equation (12) and (14) using ∗(dxidt) = dxjdxk and ∗(dxjdxk) = −dxidt where i, j, and k refer to
x, y and z, and are taken in cyclic order. The metric used is (-+++). Thus the Hodge star takes
a spatial 1-form dxidt into a spatial 2-form and vice versa with a sign change.
The non-homogeneous Maxwell’s equations are then expressed by

(15) d*F = 0 (source-free)

(15’) d*F = *J (non-source-free)

where the 2-form *F and the 3-form *J are respectively the Hodge duals of F and J. *F and *J

18Misner, C. W., Thorne, K. S., and Wheeler, J. A., (1973) Gravitation. Freeman, San Francisco.
19Flanders, H., (1963). Diﬀerential Forms. Academic Press.

7

are deﬁned as

(16) *F = −Bxdxdt − Bydydt − Bzdzdt + Exdydz + Eydzdx + Ezdxdy

(17) *J = ρdxdydz − Jxdtdydz − Jydtdzdx − Jzdtdxdy

Thus the Hodge star reverses the rolls of ~E and ~B from what they were in F. In *F the coeﬃcient
of the spatial 1-form is now −~B which will produce the curl in the non-homogeneous Maxwell’s
equations, and the coeﬃcient of the spatial 2-form is ~E which will produce the divergence.
In
Rn, the Hodge star operation on a p-form produces an (n-p)-form. Thus the form of Maxwell’s
equations is dictated by the fact that we live in a four-dimensional world. When the 1-form A
undergoes the local gauge transformation A → A + dα(x), dA remains the same since d2α = 0.
Since ~B and ~E are unchanged, Maxwell’s theory is gauge invariant.
5. The Dirac and Electromagnetism Lagrangians

To prepare for the discussion of the Yang-Mills equations, let’s investigate the Dirac and Electro-
magnetism Lagrangians The Dirac equation is

where the speed of light, c, and Plank’s constant ~ are set to one. Its Lagrangian density is

The Euler-Lagrange equations minimize the action S where S = R Ldx. Using the Euler-Lagrange
equation where the diﬀerentiation is with respect to ¯ψ, i.e.,

(20) (iγµ∂µ − m)ψ = 0

(21) L = ¯ψ(iγµ∂µ − m)ψ

(22) ∂µ(

∂(∂µ ¯ψ) ) − ∂L
∂L

∂ ¯ψ = 0

yields equation (20).

The same gauge invariant argument used in the Gauge Invariance section applies here. In order for
the Lagrangian to be invariant under the phase transformation ψ(x) → ψ(x)e+iqα(x), this transfor-
mation has to be accompanied by the local gauge transformation Aµ → Aµ − q−1∂µα(x) and ∂µ
has to be replaced by ∂µ + ieAµ. The Lagrangian density becomes

(23) L = ¯ψ(iγµ∂µ − m)ψ − e ¯ψγµψAµ

The last term is the equivalent of the interaction energy with the electromagnetic ﬁeld, jµAµ. In
order for the Euler-Lagrangian equation diﬀerentiated with respect to Aµ to yield the inhomoge-
neous Maxwell equation (7) we must add −( 1

4 )(Fµν )2 getting

8

(24) L = ¯ψ(iγµ∂µ − m)ψ − e ¯ψγµψAµ − ( 1

4 )(Fµν )2

The Euler-Lagrange equation yields

(25) ∂µF µν = e ¯ψγνψ

which equals J ν. Note that the gauge ﬁeld Aµ does not carry a charge and there is no gauge ﬁeld
self-coupling which would be indicated by an [Aµ, Aν] term in (25). The Lagrangian density does
not yield the homogeneous Maxwell equations. They are satisﬁed trivially because the deﬁnition
of F µν satisﬁes the homogeneous equations automatically.20

From this it is apparent that the Lagrangian density for the electromagnetic ﬁeld alone

(26) L = −J µAµ − ( 1

4 )(Fµν )2

yields all of Maxwell’s equations.

(27) L = ( 1

2 F ∧ ∗F )

6. The Yang-Mills Theory

In diﬀerential geometry, if j = 0, this Lagrangian density becomes

The Yang-Mills theory incorporates isotopic spin symmetry introduced in 1932 by Heisenberg who
observed that the proton and neutron masses are almost the same (938.272 MeV versus 939.566 MeV
respectively). He hypothesized that if the electromagnetic ﬁeld was turned oﬀ, the masses would be
equal and the proton and neutron would react identically to the strong force, the force that binds
the nucleus together and is responsible for the formation of new particles and the rapid (typically
their lifetimes are about10−20 seconds) decay of others. In a non-physical space (also known as an
internal space) called isospin space, the proton would have isospin up, for instance, and the neutron,
isospin down; but other than that, they would be identical. The wave function for each particle
could be transformed to that for the other by a rotation using the spin matrices of the non-abelian
group SU(2). Because of charge independence, the strong interactions are invariant under rotations
in isospin space. Since the ratio of the electromagnetic to strong force is approximately α, where
α = e2/4π~c = 1/137, to a good approximation we can neglect the fact that the electromagnetic
forces break this symmetry. By Noether’s theorem, if there is a rotational symmetry in isospin
space, the total isotopic spin is conserved. This hypothesis enables us to estimate relative rates
of the strong interactions in which the ﬁnal state has a given isospin. The spin matrices turn out
to be the Pauli matrices σi. The theory just described is a global one, i.e., the isotopic spin is
independent of the space-time coordinate and thus no connection is used. We will see that Yang
and Mills21 elevated this global theory to a local one. In 1954 they proposed applying the isospin
matrices to electromagnetic theory in order to describe the strong interactions. Ultimately their

20Jackson, J. D., (1998). Classical Electrodynamics, 3rd Ed, p600. John Wiley and Sons.
21Yang, C. N. and Mills, R. L., (1954). Phys. Rev. 96, p91

9

3 e and down quark d which has a charge of - 1

theory was used to describe the interaction of quarks in the electroweak theory22 and the gluons
ﬁelds of the strong force. In the next section we will give an example using the up quark u which
has a charge of 2
We have seen that the ﬁeld strength (which is also the curvature of the connection on the ﬁber) is
given by F = dA + A ∧ A. In electromagnetism A is a 1-form with scalar coeﬃcients for dxi so
A ∧ A vanishes. If, however, the coeﬃcients are non-commuting matrices A ∧ A does not vanish
and provides for gauge ﬁeld self-coupling. Yang and Mills formulated the ﬁeld strength, using the
letter B instead if A, so we will follow suit. The ﬁeld is

3 e.

(28) Fµν = (∂µBν − ∂νBµ) + iǫ(BµBν − BνBµ)

or equivalently Fµν = (∂µBν − ∂ν Bµ) + iǫ[Bµ, Bν], where B is the connection on a principal ﬁber
bundle, i.e., the gauge potential. So as opposed to the electromagnetic ﬁeld strength which is linear,
their ﬁeld strength is non-linear. They proposed using a local phase.

(29) ψ(x) → ψ(x)e−iqαj (x)σj

~b · ~σ (where bi

where σj are the Pauli matrices and j goes from 1 to 3. Thus the exponent includes the dot product
(or inner product) in R3. The Pauli matrices do not commute, [ σi
µσi
or Bµ = 1
µ is called the isotopic spin vector gauge ﬁeld) the four-vectors Bµ and Bν
2
in (28) do not commute. The purpose of the Pauli spin matrices in the connection B is to rotate
the particles in isospin space so that they retain their identities at diﬀerent points in R4. Equation
(28) can be rewritten so that the curvature is deﬁned as F = dB + iǫ[B, B]. As opposed to the
Maxwell’s equations case, the exterior derivative of the curvature dF, does not equal zero because
of the commutator in the expression for the curvature. Thus the exterior derivative for the 2-form
F has to be altered to include the connection B.

2 . Since Bµ = 1

2 ] = iǫijk σk

2 , σj

2 bi

The Lagrangian

(30) L = ¯ψ(iγµ(Dµ − m)ψ − ( 1

4 )T r(Fµν F µν )

is invariant under the gauge transformation for the covariant derivative given as

(32) Dµ = ∂µ − iǫBµ
where ǫ is the coupling constant analagous to q in (9). The connection Bµ transforms as

(33) Bµ → Bµ − ǫ−1∂µα + [α, Bµ],

the ﬁber is the sphere, S2 and the structure group is SU(2).
Since there are three components of the vector gauge ﬁeld bi
µ, there are three vector gauge ﬁelds
representing three gauge particles having spin one. They were later identiﬁed as the intermediate

22The weak and electromagnetic forces are the two manifestations of the electroweak force

10

vector bosons W ± and Z 0 which mediate the electroweak interactions. The fact that there are
three gauge particles is dictated by the fact that the gauge ﬁeld is coupled with the three Pauli
spin matrices. Also, since the charges of the up quark and down quark diﬀer by one, the gauge
ﬁeld particles that are absorbed and emitted by them in quark-quark interactions can have charges
of ±1 or zero. It’s astonishing that Yang and Mills in their 1954 paper predicted the existence of
the three intermediate vector bosons.

The gauge particles predicted by the Lagrangian (30) have zero mass since any mass term added to
(30) would make the Lagrangian non-invariant under a gauge transformation. So the force associ-
ated with the particles would have inﬁnite range as the photons of the electromagnetic interaction
do. Of course the weak force (the force responsible for particle decaying slowly, typically their
lifetimes are about 10−10 seconds or much less) and strong nuclear force are short range. This
discrepency was corrected some years later by the introduction of spontaneous symmetry breaking
in the electroweak SU (2) × U (1) theory of Weinberg, Salam and Glashow (WSG) using the Higgs
mechanism. The WSG theory, which explains the electromagnetic and weak forces, predicts the
mass of the W ± (80.37 ±0.03 GeV) and Z 0 (92 ± 2 GeV) intermediate vector bosons, where GeV
represents a billion electron volts. The W ± was discovered23 in 1983 (its mass is now reported at
80.425 Gev ± 0.033 GeV) and later that year the Z 0 was discovered24 (its mass is now reported at
a mass of 91.187 ± 0.002 GeV).
The Euler-Lagrange equations for equation (30) give the Dirac equation

(34) γµ(∂µ − ieBµ)ψ + mψ = 0

and also the vector equation for the vector ﬁeld F, namely

(35) ∂µFµν − iǫ[Bµ, Fµν ] = − 1

2 ǫ ¯ψγν σψ = −Jν

which, if it weren’t for the commutator, is the same form as the non-homogeneous four-vector
Maxwell equation. The commutator causes the gauge particles to interact with themselves.
The eﬀect of these equation is explained by ’t Hooft 25 who with Veltman proved the renormaliz-
ability of Yang-Mills theories.

...The B quanta would be expected to be exchanged between any pair of particles
carrying isospin, generating not only a force much like the electro-magnetic force, but
also a force that rotates these particles in isospin space, which means that elementary
reactions envolving the transmutation of particles into their isospin partners will result.
A novelty in the Yang-Mills theory was that the B quanta are predicted to interact
directly with one another. These interactions originate from the commutator term in
the Fµν ﬁeld [equation (35)], but one can understand physically why such interactions
have to occur:
in contrast with ordinary photons, the Yang-Mills quanta also carry
isospin, so they will undergo isospin transitions themselves, and furthermore, some of

23Arnison, G. et. al., (1983). Phys. Lett. 122B, 103
24Arnison, G. et. al., (1983). Phys. Lett. 126B, 398
25’t Hooft, Gerardus, editor, (2005) 50 Years of Yang-Mills Theory, World Scientiﬁc.

11

them are charged, so the neutral components of the Yang-Mills ﬁelds cause Coloumb-like
interactions between these charged particles.

So the Yang-Mills equations indicate that for instance for the up quark down quark doublet, the
W − generates a force that rotates the d into the u in isospin space exhibited by the transition
d → u + W −. The commutator in equation (35) is responsible for interactions like W → W + Z
occurring26, and the W can radiate producing a photon in W → W + γ.
The Yang-Mills equations can be derived from the diﬀerential geometry Lagrangian density, where
k is a constant

(36) L = −kT r(F ∧ ∗F ).

The Euler-Lagrange equations produce dBF = 0 (the Bianchi identity) and in the absence of
currents, dB ∗ F = 0 where dB is the exterior covariant derivative. These are the Yang-Mills
equations in compact form.

7. The Feynman Stamp
In QED after Schwinger, Tomonaga and Feynman addressed the singularites produced by the
self-energy of the electron by renormalizing the theory, they were then exceedingly successful in
predicting phenomena such as the Lamb shift and anomalous magnetic moment of the electron.

Feynman introduced27 schematic diagrams, today called Feynman diagrams, to facilitate calcula-
tions of particle interaction parameters. External particles, represented by lines (edges) connected
to only one vertex are real, i.e., observable. They are said to be on the mass shell, meaning their
four-momentum squared equals their actual mass, i.e., m2 = E2 − p2. Internal particles are rep-
resented by lines that connect vertices and are therefore intermediate states – that’s why they are
said to mediate the interaction. They are virtual and are considered to be oﬀ the mass shell. This
means their four-momentum squared diﬀers from the value of their actual mass. This is done so
that four-momentum is conserved at each vertex. The rationale for this diﬀerence is the application
of the uncertainty principle ∆E · ∆t = ~. Since ∆t, the time spent between external states is very
small, for that short time period, ∆E and thus the diﬀerence between the actual and calculated
mass can be large. In the following Feynman diagrams, the time axis is vertical upwards.

The diagram on the upper-left of the stamp (Figure 1) is a vertex diagram, and as such rep-
It illustrates the creation of an electron-positron
resents a component of a Feynman diagram.
pair from a photon, γ; it’s called pair production. The γ is represented by a wavy line. The
Feynman-Stuckelberg interpretation of negative-energy solutions indicates that here the positron,
the electron’s antiparticle, which is propagating forward in time is in all ways equivalent to an
electron going backwards in time. If all the particles here were external, the process would not
conserve energy and momentum. To see this you must ﬁrst remember that since the photon has
zero mass – due to the gauge invariance of electromagnetic theory– its energy and momentum are
equal. Thus β which equals p
c so that the photon’s velocity is always
c, the speed of light. In the electron-positron center of mass frame (more aptly called the center
of momentum frame, since the net momentum of all the particles is zero there), the electron and

E has the value 1; but β = v

26This is indicated in Figure 1 of the Yang-Mills paper
27Feynman, R. P., (1949), Phys. Rev. 76, 769

12

positron momenta are equal and are in opposite directions. The photon travels at the speed of
light and therefore its momentum cannot be zero; but there is no particle to cancel its momentum,
so the interaction cannot occur (for it to occur requires a Coloumb ﬁeld from a nearby nucleus to
provide a virtual photon that transfers momentum producing a nuclear recoil). Therefore the γ in
the diagram is internal. Its mass is oﬀ the mass shell and cannot equal its normal value, i.e., zero.

The diagram on the lower-left of the stamp (Figure 2) is also a vertex diagram and represents an
electron-positron pair annihilation producing a γ. Again, if all the particles are external, conserva-
tion energy and momentum prohibits the reaction from occurring, So the γ must be virtual.

The diagram (Figure 3) on the bottom to the right of Feynman was meant to represent an electron-
electron scattering with a single photon exchange. This is called Møller scattering. (It can, however,
represent any number of interactions exchanging a photon.) The diagram represents the t-channel of
Møller scattering; there is another diagram not shown here representing the u-channel contribution
where u, t and another variable s are called the Mandelstam variables. They are used in general
to describe 2-body → 2-body interactions. If you rotate the diagram in Figure 3 by 90o you have
the s-channel diagram for electron-positron scattering called Bhabha scattering shown in Figure
4 but not on the stamp. Here an electron and positron annihilate producing a virtual photon
which in turn produces an electron-positron pair. There is also a t-channel contribution to Bhabha
scattering. The cross section for Bhabha scattering can be easilly obtained from the one for Møller
scattering by interchanging the s and u in the cross section expression in a process called crossing.
Small angle Bhabha scattering is used to test the luminosity in e+-e− colliding beam accelerators.
To the right of the Møller scattering diagram is a vertex correction to electron scattering shown in
Figure 5 where the extra photon forms a loop. It is used to calculate both the anomalous magnetic
moment of the electron and muon, also the anomalous magnetic moment contribution to the Lamb
shift28. The other two contributions to the Lamb shift are the vacuum polarization and the electron
and 2P 1
mass renormalization. The Lamb shift explains the splitting in the spectrum of the 2S 1
2
2
levels of hydrogen; whereas Dirac theory alone incorrectly predicted that these two levels should
be degenerate.

The low-order solution of the Dirac equation predicts a value of 2 for the g-factor used in the
expression for the magnetic moment of the electron. The vertex correction shown in Figure 5,
however, alters the g-factor producing an anomalous magnetic moment contribution written as
2 . When this and higher order contributions are included, the calculated value of g−2
g−2
for the
electron is 1159 652 460(127)(75) × 10−12 and the experimental value is 1159 652 193(10) ×
10−12 where the numbers in parenthesis are the errors. This seven-signiﬁcant ﬁgure agreement is a
spectacular triumph for QED. We need not emphasise that the calculations for all these diagrams
use the gauge principal for quantum electrodynamics.

2

The other diagrams on the stamp are all vertex diagrams and show how Feynman’s work originally
applicable to QED was then later used to elucidate the electroweak force. This is exempliﬁed
on the stamp by ﬂavor changing transitions, e.g., d → W − + u shown in Figure 6 and ﬂavor
conserving transitions, e.g., d → Z 0 + d of the electroweak force – the u and d quarks have diﬀerent
values of ﬂavor. The process in Figure 6 occurs for instance in β decay where a neutron (udd)
decays into a proton (udu) and electron and an anti-neutrino. What happens is that the transition
d → u + W − corresponds to a rotation in isospin space. This rotation is caused by the virtual W −
which mediates the decay. It in turn decays into an electron and an anti-neutrino. The calculations

28See for instance p156, Griﬃth, David, (1987) Introduction to Elementary Particles John Wiley and Sons.

13

for these transitions all use the Yang-Mills equations. Although the quarks are conﬁned in the
hadrons – particles that undergo strong interactions like the proton and neutron – they are free to
interact with the intermediate vector bosons.

8. Who Designed The Stamp?

Feynman’s daughter Michelle was sent a provisional version of the stamp by the United States
Postal Service and advised on the design of the stamp by among others, Ralph Leighton, coauthor
with Richard Feynman of two popular books; and Cal Tech’s Steven Frautschi and Kip Thorne.
Frautschi and Leighton edited the Feynman diagrams, and Frautschi rearranged them and composed
the ﬁnal design. The person who chose the original Feynman diagrams that form the basis for the
stamp remains a mystery.

Acknowledgements

The author thanks Jeﬀ Cheeger, Bob Ehrlich, J. D. Jackson and C. N. Yang, for their advice on
the article.

14

(cid:1)

Figure 1. A pair production vertex.

(cid:2)

Figure 2. A pair annihilation vertex.

(cid:3)

Figure 3. Electron-electron (Møller) scattering.

15

(cid:4)

Figure 4. Electron-positron (Bhabha) scattering.

(cid:5)

Figure 5. Radiative Correction.

(cid:6)

Figure 6. A ﬂavor non-conserving transition vertex.

16

