DSF−02/2006

6
0
0
2
 
r
a

M
 
7
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
t
s
i
h
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
0
4
1
3
0
6
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Majorana and the path-integral approach to Quantum Mechanics

S. Esposito
S. Esposito: Dipartimento di Scienze Fisiche, Universit`a di Napoli “Federico II” & I.N.F.N. Sezione di Napoli,
Complesso Universitario di M. S. Angelo, Via Cinthia, 80126 Napoli (Salvatore.Esposito@na.infn.it)

We give, for the ﬁrst time, the English translation of a manuscript by Ettore Majorana, which
probably corresponds to the text for a seminar delivered at the University of Naples in 1938, where
he lectured on Theoretical Physics. Some passages reveal a physical interpretation of the Quantum
Mechanics which anticipates of several years the Feynman approach in terms of path integrals,
independently of the underlying mathematical formulation.

I.

INTRODUCTION

The interest in the course on Theoretical Physics, deliv-
ered by Ettore Majorana at the University of Naples in
1938, has been recently revived by the discovery of the
Moreno Paper [1], which is a faithful transcription of the
lecture notes prepared by Majorana himself made by the
student Eugenio Moreno. Such a Paper, in fact, includes
some previously unknown lecture notes, whose original
manuscripts seem to be missing. The handwritten notes
by Majorana are now kept at the Domus Galilaeana in
Pisa, and were anastatically reproduced some years ago
[2] by including also some papers, initially interpreted as
the notes prepared for a forthcoming lecture that, how-
ever, Majorana never gave due to his mysterious disap-
pearance.

As recently shown [3], instead, such spare papers can-
not be considered as notes for academic lectures, even
for an advanced course as that delivered by Majorana,
but probably refer to a general conference given by him
at a restricted audience interested in Molecular Physics.
Although the main topic of that dissertation was the ap-
plication of Quantum Mechanics to the theory of molec-
ular bonding, the present scientiﬁc interest in it is more
centered on the interpretation given by Majorana about
some topics of the novel, for that time, Quantum Theory
(namely, the concept of quantum state) and the direct
application of this theory to a particular case (that is,
precisely, the molecular bonding). An accurate reading
of the manuscript, in fact, not only discloses a peculiar
cleverness of the author in treating a pivotal argument
of the novel Mechanics, but, keeping in mind that it was
written in 1938, also reveals a net advance of at least
ten years in the use made of that topic. The last point,
however, is quite common for Majorana, and as only one
example we refer here to the case of the Thomas-Fermi
atomic model [4] (see, however, also Ref. [5]).

This point was already noted some years ago by
[2]), who saw in the Majorana
N. Cabibbo (in Ref.
manuscript a vague and approximate anticipation of the
idea underlying the Feynman interpretation of Quantum
Mechanics in terms of path integrals. A more analytic

study, conducted on the critical edition of that paper [6]
which was not available at that time, but is here reported,
for the ﬁrst time, in translation, reveals instead some in-
triguing surprises, upon which we will here focus on. Al-
though the text considered is written in a very simple a
clear form (a feature which is very common in the Ma-
jorana works [5]), in the next section we give beforehand
a brief discussion of the main ideas of the path-integral
approach, followed by a simple presentation where the
crucial passages in the Majorana paper are pointed out.

II. QUANTUM MECHANICS IN THE
PATH-INTEGRAL APPROACH

The general postulate upon which Quantum Mechanics
is based tells that the “state” of a certain physical sys-
tem may be represented with a complex quantity ψ, con-
sidered as a (normalized) vector in a given Hilbert space
corresponding to the physical system, where all the infor-
mation on the system is contained [7]. The time evolution
of the state vector is ruled by the Schr¨odinger equation,
that may be written in the general form:

i¯h

dψ
dt

= H ψ,

(1)

where H is the hamiltonian operator of the considered
system. The initial state at time t0 is speciﬁed by its
choice among the possible eigenstates of a complete set of
commuting operators (including, for example, the hamil-
tonian), while the hamiltonian H itself determines the
state of the system at a subsequent time T through Eq.
(1). The dynamical evolution of the system is thus com-
pletely determined if we evaluate the transition ampli-
tude between the state at time t0 and that at time t.

Then, as we can easily see, the usual quantum-
mechanical description of a given system is strongly cen-
tered on the role played by the hamiltonian H and, as a
consequence, the time variable plays itself a key role in
this description. Such a dissymmetry between space and
time variables is, obviously, not satisfactory in the light
of the postulates of the Theory of Relativity. This was

ﬁrstly realized in 1932 by Dirac [8], who put forward the
idea of reformulating the whole Quantum Mechanics in
terms of lagrangians rather than hamiltonians[15]

The starting point in the Dirac thought is that of ex-
ploiting an analogy, holding at the quantum level, with
the Hamilton principal function in Classical Mechanics
[12]. From this, the transition amplitude from a state in
the spatial conﬁguration qa at time ta to a state in the
spatial conﬁguration qb at time tb is written as:

i
¯h

S

tb

i
¯h Z

ta

Ldt

hqb|qai ∼ e

= e

(2)

where L is the lagrangian of the system and S[q] the
action functional deﬁned on the paths from qa to qb. The
previous relationship, however, cannot be considered as
an equality as long as the time interval from ta to tb is
ﬁnite, since it would lead to incorrect results (and Dirac
himself was well aware of this; in his paper he introduced
several unjustiﬁed assumptions in order to overcome such
a diﬃculty). In fact, by splitting the integration ﬁeld in
(2) into N intervals, ta = t0 < t1 < t2 < . . . < tN −1 <
tN = tb, the transition amplitude could be written as a
product of terms,

hqb|qai = hqb|qN −1ihqN −1|qN −2i · · · hq2|q1ihq1|qai,

(3)

while it is well known that, by using the completeness re-
lations, the correct formula contains the integration over
the intermediate regions:

hqb|qai = hqb|

dqN −1 |qN −1ihqN −1| . . .

dq1 |q1ihq1|qai

Z

Z

=

dq1dq2 · · · dqN −1 hqb|qN −1i · · · hq2|q1ihq1|qai.

(4)

Z

About ten year after the appearance of the Dirac paper,
Feynman [13] guessed that the relation in (2) should hold
as an equality, up to a constant factor A, only for tran-
sitions between states spaced by an inﬁnitesimal time
interval. In this case, by employing the correct formula
in (4), we obtain the well-known Feynman expression for
the transition amplitude between two given states:

hqb|qai = lim

AN

dq1dq2 · · · dqN −1 eiS/¯h

N → ∞
tb − ta ﬁnito

Z

≡

Dq eiS/¯h.

Z

(5)

The meaning of the previous formula can be understand
In the integrations present in it, which we
as follows.

Z

have generically denoted with

Dq, the limits ta and tb

in the integration interval are kept ﬁxed, while we inte-
grate over the space speciﬁed by the intermediate points.
Since every spatial conﬁguration qi of these intermedi-
ate points corresponds to a given dynamical trajectory
joining the initial point ta with the ﬁnal one tb, the inte-
gration over all these conﬁgurations is equivalent to sum

2

over all the possible paths from the initial point to the
ﬁnal one. In other words the Feynman formula with the
path integrals points out that the transition amplitude
between an initial and a ﬁnal state can be expressed as a
sum of the factor eiS[q]/¯h over all the paths with ﬁxed end-
points. Such a result, on one hand, it is not surprising
if we consider that, in Quantum Mechanics, for a given
process taking place through diﬀerent ways, the transi-
tion amplitude is given by the sum of the partial am-
plitudes corresponding to all the possible ways through
which the process happens. This is particularly evident,
for example, in the classical experiment with an electron
beam impinging on a screen through a double slit. The
interference pattern observed on the screen at a given dis-
tance from the slit, should suggest that a single electron
has crossed through both slits. It can be, then, explained
by assuming that the probability that has one electron
to go from the source to the screen through the double
slit is obtained by summing over all the possible paths
covered by the electron. Thus the fundamental princi-
ples of Quantum Mechanics underlie the path-integral
approach. However, what is crucial but unexpected in
this approach is that the sum is made over the phase
factor eiS[q]/¯h, which is generated by the classical action
S[q].

One of the major merits of the Feynman approach to
Quantum Mechanics is the possibility to get in a very
clear manner the classical limit when ¯h → 0 (the other
merits being its versatile applicability to ﬁeld quantiza-
tion in abelian or non abelian gauge theories, with or
without spontaneous symmetry breaking).
In fact for
large values of S compared to ¯h, the phase factor in (5)
undergoes large ﬂuctuations and thus contributes with
terms which average to zero. From a mathematical point
of view, it is then clear that in the limit ¯h → 0 the dom-
inant contribution to Eq. (5) comes out when the phase
factor does not varies much or, in other words, when
the action S is stationary. This result is precisely what
emerges in Classical Mechanics, where the classical dy-
namical trajectories are obtained from the least action
principle. This occurrence was ﬁrstly noted by Dirac [8],
who realized the key role played by the action functional.
The intuitive interpretation of the classical limit is very
simple. Let us consider, in the q, t space, a given path
far away from the classical trajectory qcl(t); since ¯h is
very small, the phase S/¯h along this path will be quite
large. For each of such paths there is another one which
is inﬁnitely close to it, where the action S will change
only for a small quantity, but since this is multiplied by
a very large constant (1/¯h), the resulting phase will have
a correspondingly large value. On average these paths
will give a vanishing contribution in the sum in Eq. (5).
Instead, near the classical trajectory qcl(t) the action is
stationary, so that, passing by a path inﬁnitely close to
that classical to this last one, the action will not change
at all. Then the corresponding contributions in Eq. (5)
will sum coherently and, as a result, the dominant term is
obtained for ¯h → 0. Thus, in such approach, the classical

trajectory is picked out in the limit ¯h → 0 not because
it mainly contributes to the dynamical evolution of the
system, but rather because there are paths inﬁnitely close
to it that give contributions which sum coherently. The
integration region is, actually, very narrow for classical
systems, while it becomes wider for quantum ones. As
a consequence, the concept of orbit itself, that in the
classical case is well deﬁned, for quantum systems comes
to lose its meaning, as for example for an electron orbiting
around the atomic nucleus.

III. MAJORANA CONTRIBUTION

The discussion presented above of the path-integral ap-
proach to Quantum Mechanics has been deliberately cen-
tered on the mathematical aspect, rather than on the
physical one, since the historical process has precisely
followed this line, starting from the original Dirac idea
in 1932 and arriving at the Feynman formulation in the
forties (one can usefully consult the original papers in [8]
and [13]). On the other hand, just the development of the
mathematical formalism has later led to the impressive
physical interpretation mentioned previously.

Coming back to the Majorana paper here considered,
we immediately realize that it contains nothing of the
mathematical aspect of the peculiar approach to Quan-
tum Mechanics. Nevertheless an accurate reading re-
veals, as well, the presence of the physical foundations
of it.

The starting point in Majorana is to search for a mean-
ingful and clear formulation of the concept of quantum
state. And, obviously, in 1938 the dispute is opened with
the conceptions of the Old Quantum Theory.

According to the Heisenberg theory, a quan-
tum state corresponds not to a strangely priv-
ileged solution of the classical equations but
rather to a set of solutions which diﬀer for
the initial conditions and even for the energy,
i.e. what it is meant as precisely deﬁned en-
ergy for the quantum state corresponds to a
sort of average over the inﬁnite classical or-
bits belonging to that state. Thus the quan-
tum states come to be the minimal statisti-
cal sets of classical motions, slightly diﬀerent
from each other, accessible to the observa-
tions. These minimal statistical sets cannot
be further partitioned due to the uncertainty
principle, introduced by Heisenberg himself,
which forbids the precise simultaneous mea-
surement of the position and the velocity of a
particle, that is the determination of its orbit.

3

quantum state corresponds to a ﬁxed end time (tb). The
introduced issue of “slightly diﬀerent classical motions”
(the emphasis is given by Majorana himself), according
to what speciﬁed by the Heisenberg’s uncertainty prin-
ciple and mentioned just afterwards, is thus evidently
related to that of the suﬃciently wide integration region
in Eq. (5) for quantum systems. In this respect, such a
mathematical point is intimately related to a fundamen-
tal physical principle.

The crucial point in the Feynman formulation of Quan-
tum Mechanics is, as seen above, to consider not only the
paths corresponding to classical trajectories, but all the
possible paths joining the initial point with the end one.
In the Majorana manuscript, after a discussion on an in-
teresting example on the harmonic oscillator, the author
points out:

Obviously the correspondence between quan-
tum states and sets of classical solutions is
only approximate, since the equations de-
scribing the quantum dynamics are in gen-
eral independent of the corresponding classi-
cal equations, but denote a real modiﬁcation
of the mechanical laws, as well as a constraint
on the feasibility of a given observation; how-
ever it is better founded than the representa-
tion of the quantum states in terms of quan-
tized orbits, and can be usefully employed in
qualitative studies.

And, in a later passage, it is more explicitly stated that
the wave function “corresponds in Quantum Mechanics
to any possible state of the electron”. Such a reference,
that only superﬁcially could be interpreted, in the com-
mon acceptation, that all the information on the physical
systems is contained in the wave function, should instead
be considered in the meaning given by Feynman, accord-
ing to the comprehensive discussion made by Majorana
on the concept of state.

Finally we point out that, in the Majorana analysis,
a key role is played by the symmetry properties of the
physical system.

Under given assumptions, that are veriﬁed in
the very simple problems which we will con-
sider, we can say that every quantum state
possesses all the symmetry properties of the
constraints of the system.

The relationship with the path-integral formulation is
made as follows.
In discussing a given atomic system,
Majorana points out how from one quantum state S of
the system we can obtain another one S′ by means of a
symmetry operation.

Let us note that the “solutions which diﬀer for the ini-
tial conditions” correspond, in the Feynman language of
1948, precisely to the diﬀerent integration paths. In fact,
the diﬀerent initial conditions are, in any case, always re-
ferred to the same initial time (ta), while the determined

However, diﬀerently from what happens in
Classical Mechanics for the single solutions of
the dynamical equations, in general it is no
longer true that S′ will be distinct from S.
We can realize this easily by representing S′

with a set of classical solutions, as seen above;
it then suﬃces that S includes, for any given
solution, even the other one obtained from
that solution by applying a symmetry prop-
erty of the motions of the systems, in order
that S′ results to be identical to S.

This passage is particularly intriguing if we observe that
the issue of the redundant counting in the integration
measure in gauge theories, leading to inﬁnite expressions
for the transition amplitudes [14], was raised (and solved)
only after much time from the Feynman paper.

Summing up, it is without doubt that no trace can be
found of the formalism underlying the Feynman path-
integral approach to Quantum Mechanics in the Majo-
rana manuscript (on the contrary to what happens for
the Dirac paper of 1933, probably known to Majorana).
Nevertheless it is very interesting that the main physi-
cal items, about the novel way of interpreting the theory
of quanta, were realized well in advance by Majorana.
And this is particularly impressive if we take into account
that, in the known historical path, the interpretation of
the formalism has only followed the mathematical devel-
opment of the formalism itself.

Furthermore, in the Majorana paper, several interest-
ing applications to atomic and molecular systems are
present as well, where known results are deduced or re-
interpreted according to the novel point of view. The
search for such applications, however, will be left to the
reader, who will beneﬁt of the reading of the complete
text by Majorana reported in the following.

IV. THE TEXT BY MAJORANA

The original manuscript by Majorana, as it can be seen
from Ref.
[2], reports (at the beginning) a sort of table
of contents which, however, is only partially followed by
the author. For the sake of ease, we have preferred to
divide the whole text in some sections, according to the
reported table of contents.

1. On the meaning of quantum state

The internal energy of a closed system (atom, molecule,
etc.) can take, according to Quantum Mechanics, dis-
crete values belonging to a set E0, E1, E2, . . . composed
of the so-called energy ”eigenvalues”. To each given value
of the energy we can associate a “quantum state”, that is
a state where the system may remain indeﬁnitely without
external perturbations. As an example of these pertur-
bations, we can in general consider the coupling of the
system with the radiation ﬁeld, by means of which the
system may loose energy in form of electromagnetic ra-
diation, jumping from an energy level Ek to a lower one
Ei < Ek. Only when the internal energy takes the min-
imum value E0, it cannot be further decrease by means

4

of radiation; in this case the system is said to be in its
“ground state” from which it cannot be removed without
suﬃciently strong external inﬂuences, such as the scat-
tering with fast particles or with light quanta of large
frequency.
What is the corresponding concept of quantum state in
Classical Mechanics? An answer is primarily required to
such a question, in order to have a correct representation
of the results obtained in our ﬁeld by Quantum Mechan-
ics, without entering, however, in the complex computa-
tional methods adopted by this.
In Classical Mechanics the motion of a system composed
of N mass points is entirely determined when the coor-
dinates q1 . . . q3N of all the points are known as function
of time:

qi = qi(t)

(I)

Eqs. (I) give the dynamical equations where all the inter-
nal and external forces acting on the system are present,
and they can always be chosen in such a way that at
a given instant all the coordinates qi(0) and their time
derivatives ˙qi(0) take arbitrarily ﬁxed values. Thus the
general solution of the equations of motion must depend
2 · 3N arbitrary constants.
For system with atomic dimensions the classical represen-
tation no longer holds and two successive modiﬁcations
have been proposed. The ﬁrst one, due to Bohr and Som-
merfeld and that has provided very useful results, has
been afterwards completely abandoned with the emerg-
ing of the novel Quantum Mechanics, which has been the
only one to give an extremely general formalism, fully
conﬁrmed by the experiences on the study of the ele-
mentary processes. According to the old theory of Bohr-
Sommerfeld, Classical Mechanics still holds in describing
the atom, so that the motion of an electron, for example,
around the hydrogen nucleus is still described by a solu-
tion (I) of the equations of Classical Mechanics; however,
if we consider periodic motions, such as the revolution of
an electron around the nucleus, not all the solutions of
the classical equations are realized in Nature, but only
a discrete inﬁnity of those satisfying the so-called Som-
merfeld conditions, that is certain cabalistic-like integral
relations. For example in every periodic motion in one
dimension, the integral of the double of the kinetic energy
over the period τ :

τ
2T (t) dt = nh

Z

0

must be an integer multiple of the Planck constant (h =
6.55 · 10−27). The combination of Classical Mechanics
with a principle which is unrelated with it, such as that
of the quantized orbits, appears so hybrid that it should
be not surprising the complete failure of that theory oc-
curred in the last decade, irrespective of several favorable
experimental tests which was supposed to be conclusive.
The novel Quantum Mechanics, primarily due to Heisen-
berg, is substantially more closed to the classical con-
ceptions than the old one. According to the Heisenberg

theory, a quantum state corresponds not to a strangely
privileged solution of the classical equations but rather
to a set of solutions which diﬀer for the initial conditions
and even for the energy, i.e. what it is meant as pre-
cisely deﬁned energy for the quantum state corresponds
to a sort of average over the inﬁnite classical orbits be-
longing to that state. Thus the quantum states come
to be the minimal statistical sets of classical motions,
slightly diﬀerent from each other, accessible to the obser-
vations. These minimal statistical sets cannot be further
partitioned due to the uncertainty principle, introduced
by Heisenberg himself, which forbids the precise simulta-
neous measurement of the position and the velocity of a
particle, that is the determination of its orbit.
An harmonic oscillator with frequency ν can oscillate
classically with arbitrary amplitude and phase, its en-
ergy being given by

E = 2π2mν2A2
0

where m is its mass and A0 the maximum elongation.
According to Quantum Mechanics the possible values for

E are, as well known, E0 =

hν, E =

hν, . . . En =

1
2

3
2

hν . . . ; in this case we can say that the ground

n +

(cid:18)

1
2 (cid:19)

1
2

3
2

state with energy E0 =
hν corresponds roughly to all
the classical oscillations with energy between 0 and hν,

hν corresponds
the ﬁrst excited state with energy E0 =
to the classical solutions with energy between hν and
2 · hν, and so on. Obviously the correspondence between
quantum states and sets of classical solutions is only ap-
proximate, since the equations describing the quantum
dynamics are in general independent of the correspond-
ing classical equations, but denote a real modiﬁcation of
the mechanical laws, as well as a constraint on the feasi-
bility of a given observation; however it is better founded
than the representation of the quantum states in terms of
quantized orbits, and can be usefully employed in quali-
tative studies.

2. Symmetry properties of a system in Classical
and Quantum Mechanics

i = q′

Systems showing some symmetry property deserve a par-
ticular study. For these systems, due to symmetry con-
siderations alone, from one particular solution of the clas-
sical equations of motion qi = qi(t) we can deduce, in gen-
eral, some other diﬀerent ones q′
i(t). For example if
the system contains two or more electrons or, in general,
two or more identical particles, from one given solution
we can obtain another solution, which in general will be
diﬀerent from the previous one, just by changing the co-
ordinates of two particles. Analogously if we consider
an electron moving in the ﬁeld of two identical nuclei
or atoms (denoted with A and B in the ﬁgure), start-
ing from an allowed orbit qi = qi(t) described around A

5

with a given law of motion, we can deduce another orbit
q′
i = q′
i(t) described by the electron around the nucleus
or atom B by a reﬂection with respect to the center O of
the line AB.

The exchange operations between two identical par-
ticles, reﬂection with respect to one point or other
ones corresponding to any symmetry property, keep
their meaning in Quantum Mechanics.
Thus it is
possible to deduce from a state S another one S′,
corresponding to the same known value of the energy, if
in the two mentioned examples we exchange two iden-
tical particle between them and reﬂect the system with
respect to the point O. However, diﬀerently from what
happens in Classical Mechanics for the single solutions of
the dynamical equations, in general it is no longer true
that S′ will be distinct from S. We can realize this eas-
ily by representing S′ with a set of classical solutions, as
seen above; it then suﬃces that S includes, for any given
solution, even the other one obtained from that solution
by applying a symmetry property of the motions of the
systems, in order that S′ results to be identical to S.
In several cases, if the system satisﬁes suﬃciently com-
plex symmetry properties, it is instead possible to obtain,
by symmetry on a given quantum state, other diﬀerent
states but with the same energy.
In this case the sys-
tem is said to be degenerate, i.e it has many states with
the same energy, exactly due to its symmetry properties.
The study of degenerate systems and of the conditions
under which degeneration can take place will bring us too
far and, in any case, it is diﬃcult to made such a study
in terms of only classical analogies. Then we will leave
it completely aside and limit our attention to problems
without degeneration. This condition is always satisﬁed
if the symmetry of the mechanical system allows only a so
simple transformation that its square, that is the trans-
formation applied twice, reduces to the identity transfor-
mation. For example, by a double reﬂection of a system
of mass points with respect a plane, a line or a point, we
necessarily recover the same initial arrangement; analo-
gously, the system remains unaltered by changing twice
two identical particles. In all these cases we have only
to every possible value of
simple quantum states, i.e.
the energy it is associated only one quantum state.
It
follows that all the quantum states of system containing
two identical particles are symmetric with respect to the
two particles, remaining unaltered under their exchange.
Thus the states of an electron orbiting around two iden-
tical nuclei A and B are symmetric with respect to the
middle point O of AB, or remain unaltered by reﬂec-
tion in O, and analogously for other similar cases. Under
given assumptions, that are veriﬁed in the very simple
problems which we will consider, we can say that every

quantum state possesses all the symmetry properties of
the constraints of the system.

3. Resonance forces between states that cannot be
symmetrized for small perturbations and
spectroscopic consequences. Theory of homeopolar
valence according to the method of bounding
electrons. Properties of the symmetrized states that
are not obtained from non symmetrized ones with a
weak perturbation.

Let us consider an electron moving in the ﬁeld of two hy-
drogen nuclei or protons. The system composed by the
two protons and the electron has a net resulting charge of
+e and constitutes the simplest possible molecule, that is
the positively ionized hydrogen molecule. In such a sys-
tem the protons are able to move as well as the electron,
but due to the large mass diﬀerence between the ﬁrst ones
and the second one (mass ratio 1840:1) the mean velocity
of the protons is much lower than that of the electron,
and the motion of this can be studied with great accu-
racy by assuming that the protons are at rest at a given
mutual distance. This distance is determined, by stabil-
ity reasons, in such a way that the total energy of the
molecule, that at a ﬁrst approximation is given by the
sum of the mutual potential energy of the two protons
and the energy of the electron moving in the ﬁeld of the
ﬁrst ones, and is diﬀerent for diﬀerent electron quantum
states, is at a minimum.
The mutual potential energy of the protons is given by
e2
r
electron in its ground state is a negative function E(r) of
r that does not have a simple analytic expression, but it
can be obtained from Quantum Mechanics with an arbi-
trary large accuracy. The equilibrium distance r0 is then
determined by the condition that the total energy is at a
minimum:

if r is their distance, while the binding energy of the

W (r0) =

+ E(r0)

e2
r0

The curve W (r) has a behavior like that shown in the
ﬁgure, if we assume that zero energy corresponds to the
molecule which is dissociated into a neutral hydrogen
atom and a ionized atom at an inﬁnite distance. The
equilibrium distance

W

r0

r

6

has been theoretically evaluated by Burrau[16] ﬁnding
r0 = 1.05 · 10−8 cm and, for the corresponding energy,
W (r0) = −2.75 electron-volt. Both these results have
been fully conﬁrmed by observations on the spectrum
emitted by the neutral or ionized molecule, that indi-
rectly depends on them.

dW
dr

that tends
What is the origin of the force F = +
to get close the two hydrogen nuclei when they are at a
distance larger than r0? The answer given by Quantum
Mechanics to this question is surprising since it seems to
show that, beside certain polarization forces which can
be foreseen by Classical Mechanics, a predominant role is
played by a completely novel kind of forces, the so-called
resonance forces.
Let us suppose the distance r to be large with respect to
the radius of the neutral hydrogen atom (∼ 0.5·10−8cm).
Then the electron undergoes the action of one or the
other of the two protons, around each of them can classi-
cally describe closed orbits. The system composed by the
electron and the nucleus around which it orbits forms a
neutral hydrogen atom, so that our molecule results to be
essentially composed by one neutral atom and one proton
at a certain distance from the ﬁrst. The neutral hydro-
gen atom in its ground state has a charge distribution
with spherical symmetry, classically meaning that all the
orientations of the electronic orbit are equally possible,
and the negative charge density exponentially decreases
with the distance in such a way that the atomic radius
can practically be considered as ﬁnite;
it follows that
no electric ﬁeld is generated outside a neutral hydrogen
atom, and thus no action can be exerted on a proton at
a distance r which is large compared to the atomic di-
mensions. However the neutral atom can be polarized
under the action of the external proton and acquire an
electric moment along the proton-neutral atom direction,
and from the interaction of this electric moment with the
non uniform ﬁeld generated by the proton it comes out
an attractive force which tends to combine the atom and
the ion in a molecular system.
The polarization forces, which can be easily predicted
with classical arguments, can give origin alone to molecu-
lar compounds, that however are characterized by a pro-
nounced ﬂeetingness. More stable compounds can only
be obtained if other forces are considered in addition to
the polarization ones. In the polar molecules, composed
of two ions of diﬀerent sign charge, such forces are essen-
tially given by the electrostatic attraction between the
ions; for example the HCl molecule is kept together es-
sentially by the mutual attraction between the H + posi-
tive ion and the Cl− negative one. However in molecule
composed by two neutral atoms, or by a neutral atom and
a ionized one, as in the case of the molecular ion H +
2 , the
chemical aﬃnity is essentially driven by the phenomenon
of the resonance, according to the meaning assumed by
this word in the novel Mechanics, which has no parallel
in Classical Mechanics.
When we study, from the Quantum Mechanics point of

view, the motion of the electron in the ﬁeld of the two
protons, assumed to be ﬁxed at a very large mutual dis-
tance r, at a ﬁrst approximation we can determine the
energy levels by assuming that the electron should move
around the proton A (or B) and neglecting the inﬂuence
of the other proton in B (or A), which exerts a weak per-
turbative action due to its distance. For the lowest energy
eigenvalue E0 we thus obtain a state S corresponding to
the formation of a neutral atom in its ground state con-
sisting of the electron and the nucleus A, and a state S′
corresponding to a neutral atom composed by the elec-
tron and the nucleus B. Now if we take into account the
perturbation that in both cases is exerted on the neutral
atom by the positive ion, we again ﬁnd, as long as the
perturbation is small, not two eigenvalues equal to E0
but two eigenvalues E1 and E2 which are slightly diﬀer-
ent from E0 and both close to this value; however the
quantum states corresponding to them, let be T1 and T2,
are not separately close to S e S′, since, due to the fact
that the potential ﬁeld where the electron moves is sym-
metric with respect to the middle point of AB, the same
symmetry must be shown, for what said above, by the
eﬀective states T1 and T2 of the electron, while it is not
separately shown by S and S′.
According to the model representation of the quantum
states introduced above, S consists of a set of electronic
orbits around A, and analogously S′ of a set of orbits
around B, while the true quantum states of the system
T1 and T2 each correspond, at a ﬁrst approximation for
very large r, for one half to the orbits in S and for the
other half to those in S′. The computations prove, that
for suﬃciently large nuclear distances, the mean value of
the perturbed eigenvalue E1 and E2 coincides closely to
the single unperturbed value E0, while their diﬀerence
is not negligible and has a conclusive importance in the
present as well as in inﬁnite other analogous cases of the
study of the chemical reactions. We can thus suppose
that E1 < E0 but E2 > E0, and then T1 will be the
ground state of the electron, while T2 will correspond to
the excited state with a slightly higher energy.
The electron in the T1 state, as well as in the T2 state,
spends half of its time around the nucleus A and the
other half around the nucleus B. We can also estimate
the mean frequency of the periodic transit of the electron
from A to B and viceversa, or of the neutral or ionized
state exchange between the two atoms, thus ﬁnding

ν =

E2 − E1
h

where h is the Planck constant. For large values of r,
E2 − E1 decreases according to an exponential-like curve
and thus the exchange frequency rapidly tends to zero,
this meaning that the electron which was initially placed
around A remains here for an increasingly larger time, as
expected from a classical point of view.
If the electron is in the state T1, that is in its ground state,
its energy (E1) is lower than he would have without the
mentioned exchange eﬀect between nuclei A and B. This

7

occurrence gives origin to a novel kind of attractive forces
among the nuclei, in addition to the polarization forces
considered above, and are exactly the dominant cause of
the molecular bonding.
The resonance forces, as said, has no analogy in Classical
Mechanics. However, as long as the analogy leading to
the correspondence between a quantum state and a sta-
tistical set of classical motions can hold, the two states
T1 and T2, where the resonance forces have opposite sign
too, each one result composed identically by half of both
the original unperturbed states S and S′. This, however,
is true only at a certain approximation, that is exactly at
the approximation where we can neglect the resonance
forces. For an exact computation taking into account
the resonance forces we must necessarily use Quantum
Mechanics, and thus ﬁnd a qualitative diﬀerence in the
structure of the two quantum states that manifest it-
self mainly in the intermediate region between A and B
through which a periodic transit of the electron between
one atom and the other takes place, according to a mech-
anism that cannot be described by Classical Mechanics.
Such a qualitative diﬀerence is purely formal in nature
and we can deal with it only by introducing the wave
function ψ(x, y, z) that, as known, corresponds in Quan-
tum Mechanics to any possible state of the electron. The
modulus of the square of ψ, which can also be a com-
plex quantity, gives the probability that the electron lies
in the volume unit around a generic point x, y, z. The
wave function ψ must then satisfy to a linear diﬀerential
equation and thus we can always multiply ψ in any point
by a ﬁxed real or complex number of modulus 1, this
constraint being required by the normalization condition

|ψ2| dx dy dz = 1

Z

which is necessary for the mentioned physical interpre-
tation of |ψ2|. The multiplication of ψ by a constant of
modulus 1 leaves unaltered the spatial distribution of the
electronic charge, and has in general no physical meaning.
Now we will formally deﬁne the reﬂection of a quantum
state with respect to the middle point O between the
two nuclei A and B directly on the wave function ψ, by
setting

ψ(x, y, z) = ψ

(−x, −y, −z)

′

in a coordinate frame with origin in O. If ψ should repre-
sent a symmetric quantum states, and thus invariant by
reﬂection in O, the reﬂected wave function ψ′ must have
the same physical meaning of ψ and thus diﬀer from ψ,
for what said, for a real or complex constant factor of
modulus 1. Moreover such a constant factor has to be
±1, since its square must give the unity, due to the fact
that by a further reﬂection of ψ′ with respect to the point
O we again obtain the initial wave function ψ.
For all the states of the system we than must have:

ψ(x, y, z) = ±ψ(−x, −y, −z)

where the + sign holds for a part of them, and the − one
for the others. The formal diﬀerence between the T1 and
T2 states considered above consists precisely in the fact
that, in the previous equation, the upper sign holds for T1
while the lower one for T2. The symmetry with respect
to one point and, in general, any symmetry property,
determines a formal splitting of the state of the system
in two or more sectors, an important property of this
splitting being that no transition between diﬀerent sec-
tors can be induced by external perturbations respecting
the symmetries shown by the constraints of the system.
Thus in systems containing two electrons, we have two
kinds of not combinable states which are determined by
the fact that the wave function, which now depends on
the coordinates of both the electrons, remains unaltered
or changes its sign by exchanging the two identical par-
ticles. In the special case of the helium atom this gives
rise to the well known spectroscopic appearance of two
distinct elements: parahelium and orthohelium.
The theory of the chemical aﬃnity between the neutral
hydrogen atom and the ionized one, which we have con-
sidered until now, can be extended to the study of the
neutral hydrogen molecule and, more in general, of all
the molecules resulting from two equal neutral atoms.
Instead of only one electron moving around two ﬁxed
protons, for the neutral hydrogen molecule we should
consider two electrons moving in the same ﬁeld, neglect-
ing at a ﬁrst approximation their mutual repulsion. The
stability of the molecule can then be understood by as-
suming that each of the two electrons lies in the T1 state,
corresponding to attractive resonance forces. According
to F. Hund we can say that the hydrogen molecule is
kept together by two “bounding” electrons. However the
interaction between the two electrons is so large to leave
only a qualitative explanation for the schematic theory

8

by Hund, but in principle we could predict exactly all
the properties of the hydrogen molecule, by solving with
a suﬃcient precision the equations introduced by Quan-
tum Mechanics.
In this way, with appropriate mathe-
matical methods, we can eﬀectively determine the chem-
ical aﬃnity between two neutral hydrogen atoms with
only theoretical considerations, and the theoretical value
agrees with the experimental one, given the precision of
the computation imposed by practical reasons.
For molecules diﬀerent from the hydrogen one, the theory
of the chemical aﬃnity is considerably more complex, due
both to the larger number of electrons to be considered
and to the Pauli principle, forbidding the simultaneous
presence of more than two electrons in the same state;
however the diﬀerent theories of the chemical aﬃnity pro-
posed in the last years, each of which has an applicability
range more or less large, practically consist in the search
for approximated computation methods for a mathemat-
ical problem that is exactly determined in itself, and not
in the enunciation of novel physical principles.
Then it is possible to bring the theory of the valence
saturations back to more general principles of Physics.
Quantum Mechanics opens the road to the logic uniﬁca-
tion of all the sciences having the inorganic world as a
common object of study.

Acknowledgments

I am indebted with Dr. Alberto De Gregorio and Prof.
Erasmo Recami for fruitful discussions and suggestion
about the present work.

[1] S. Esposito, Il corso di ﬁsica teorica di Ettore Majorana:
il ritrovamento del documento Moreno, Il Nuovo Saggia-
tore 21 N.1-2 (2005) 21; A. Drago and S. Esposito, e-
print arXiv:physics/0503084.

Dover, New York, 1999.

[8] P. A. M. Dirac, The Lagrangian in Quantum Mechanics,

Phys. Zeits. Sowjetunion 3 (1933) 64.

[9] W. Heisenberg, Die Physikalischen Prinzipien der Quan-

[2] E. Majorana, Lezioni all’Universit`a di Napoli, Bibliopo-

tentheorie, Hirzel, Lipsia, 1930.

lis, Napoli, 1987.

[3] S. Esposito, Quaderni di Storia della Fisica, to be pub-

lished [arXiv:physics/0512174].

[4] E. Di Grezia e S. Esposito, Fermi, Majorana and the sta-
tistical model of atoms, Found. Phys. 34 (2004) 1431.
See also S. Esposito, Majorana solution of
the
Thomas-Fermi equation, Am. J. Phys. 70 (2002) 852;
S. Esposito, Again on Majorana and the Thomas-
Fermi model: a comment to physics/0511222, e-print
arXiv:physics/0512259

[5] S. Esposito, E. Majorana jr, A. van der Merwe and E.
Recami, Ettore Majorana: Notes on Theoretical Physics,
Kluwer, New York, 2003.

[6] E. Majorana, Lezioni di Fisica Teorica, edited by S. Es-

posito, Bibliopolis, Napoli, 2006 (in press).

[7] See,

for example, A. Messiah, Quantum Mechanics,

[10] E. Majorana, Teoria relativistica di particelle con mo-
mento intrinseco arbitrario, Il Nuovo Cimento 9 (1932)
335.

[11] E. Majorana, Teoria simmetrica dell’elettrone e del

positrone, Il Nuovo Cimento 14 (1937) 171.

[12] H. Goldstein, Classical Mechanics, Addison-Wesley,

Reading, 1980.

[13] R. P. Feynman, The Principle of Least Action in Quan-
tum Mechanics (Princeton University, Ann Arbor, 1942;
university Microﬁlms Publication No. 2948).
R. P. Feynman, Space-Time Approach to Non-Relativistic
Quantum Mechanics, Rev. Mod. Phys. 20 (1948). 367
[14] R. P. Feynman, The quantum theory of gravitation, Acta

Phys. Pol. 24 (1963) 697.
L. D. Faddeev e V. N. Popov, Feynman Diagrams for the
Yang-Mills Field, Phys. Lett. B25 (1967) 29.

[15] Note, however, that the Quantum Theory of wave ﬁelds
was already formulated in terms of a variational princi-
ple applied to a lagrangian function. As a reference, see
the classical book by Heisenberg [9], considered also by
Majorana for some works of him as, for example, the
development of a relativistic theory of particles with ar-
bitrary spin [10] or the symmetric theory of electron and

positron [11].

[16] Majorana refers here to the paper by Ø. Burrau,
Berechnung des Energiewertes des Wasserstoﬀmolekel-
Ions (H2+) im Normalzustand, Kgl. Danske Videnskab.
Selskab, Mat. Fys. Medd. 7 (1927) 14.

9

