The Landscape “avant la lettre”

NIKHEF/2006-004
physics/0604134

A.N. Schellekens 1

NIKHEF Theory Group
Kruislaan 409
1098 SJ Amsterdam
The Netherlands

and

IMAPP, Radboud University, Nijmegen

Abstract

This is a translation of an inaugural speech given originally in Dutch in 1998. The topic
of that speech, intended for a general audience, was what is now called “The Anthropic
Landscape of String Theory”.

6
0
0
2
 
r
p
A
 
8
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
t
s
i
h
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
4
3
1
4
0
6
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

1t58@nikhef.nl

1

1 Introduction

In 2003 L. Susskind published his paper entitled “The Anthropic Landscape of String
Theory” [1], which I read with great pleasure. The reason was that, many years before,
I had come to the conclusion that everything we knew about String Theory was pointing
towards an “anthropic landscape” of vacua. I had advocated this idea consistently during
many years, on the basis of far less evidence than we have today.
It seemed obvious
to me, but the response I got was frustrating. Therefore I was delighted that ﬁnally
someone was stating this point of view loud and clear. As Susskind correctly points out,
the idea that the standard model might not be the unique outcome of String Theory
seemed unacceptable to most people. In seminars he gave on the subject that statement
was phrased more strongly, and became something like “Until recently all string theorists
believed that the laws of our universe will follow uniquely from some selection principle
in string theory”. I am quoting from memory, but I am certain about the “all”. Although
I basically agree with that statement, the word “all” is an exaggeration.

Of course I understand that the expression “all string theorist” was used for theatrical
purposes, and that the author must have known that at least a few string theorists have
thought and talked about a possible non-uniqueness of the outcome, and about a possible
rˆole of the anthropic principle in relation to the string vacuum problem. For example,
there is a footnote in a review article by F. Quevedo [3] from 1996, which discusses the
anthropic outcome at least as an option that should be considered seriously. However it
does seem to be true that remarkably few people have ever put their thoughts on this
subject in print2. That is a pity, because there are many subtle distinctions between
various possible points of view, and it would have been interesting to know what other
people were really thinking at a particular moment.

The purpose of this paper is to publish a text which may well be one of the earliest
ones advocating the “Anthropic Landscape”, as it is now called, unequivocally. It is the
translation of a speech I gave in 1998 [2], in Dutch, on the occasion of my inauguration at
the University of Nijmegen. The Anthropic Landscape is not just described in this speech,
it is the main topic. I tried to argue that an Anthropic Landscape of ground states of
a consistent fundamental theory is not just the most likely but also the most desirable
outcome of the age-old quest towards understanding our universe.
In this respect, my
arguments went quite a bit further than any other texts from that period that I am aware
of.

I am not posting this text to claim any part of the fantastic discoveries made during
recent years (for example [4], [5]; see [6] for a review and a complete list of citations).
Indeed, the text says nothing about ﬂux compactiﬁcations or the cosmological constant.
I am posting it for a number of other reasons. I want to provide concrete evidence that
rather precisely formulated ideas of this kind existed, and in written form, well before
I also want to demonstrate that it was possible to arrive at this point of view
2003.
even before the recent discoveries were made. Furthermore I have been fascinated by the
2I do not even know any other early examples than the footnote in [3]. However, such statements are

hard to search for. I would be very much interested in learning about similar ones.

2

reaction to these ideas for many years now, and I think even today we are only in an
intermediate stage of a very slow shift of opinions regarding the objectives of our ﬁeld.
Although landscape ideas and even the anthropic principle are now at least discussed, it
seems to me that the importance of the landscape is still severely underrated. I have tried
to express my enthusiasm about the recent progress during seminars, but apparently with
little success. I think my feeling of excitement is a lot easier to understand if I back it up
with this text, which precedes all recent developments, and hence was not inﬂuenced by
them. If indeed the landscape gets the important place in science history that I expect,
historians of science may be very puzzled why it took string theorists so long to arrive at
this conclusion. I hope this text will help in answering that question.

My own thoughts in this direction started around 1987. The year before I had pub-
lished a paper with Wolfgang Lerche and Dieter L¨ust [7]. Like other authors at the time,
we found large numbers of four-dimensional chiral string theories, but much more than
others we made a point of strongly emphasizing the non-uniqueness of the result. In the
following year we began to understand that this was perhaps a bit premature. There were
moduli to be ﬁxed, and supersymmetry had to broken, and of course that could drastically
change the conclusion. But it seemed to me that it was wishful thinking to assume that
all these problems would be solvable for just one ground state, the one corresponding to
the standard model. In addition, the standard model did not look like a unique solution
to anything, and seemed ﬁne-tuned to our own existence. I came to the conclusion that
String Theory itself suggested the obvious way out of the dilemma of having at the same
time a unique theory and on the other hand something as special as the standard model:
a unique theory with a huge number of vacua. A rˆole for the anthropic principle was
inevitable in this scenario. A unique outcome of any argument not involving our own
existence would create a disastrous anthropic ﬁne tuning problem. Inexplicably, a math-
ematical computation would yield a point precisely in the presumably extremely small
region of parameter space allowing intelligent life.

It seemed obvious. As obvious as saying that not the earth but the sun was the centre
I expected that everyone would agree with me very quickly. But
of the solar system.
I was surprised by the reactions I got when I brought this up. I learned that the word
“anthropic” provoked strong and often irrational reactions. And that there was indeed,
as mentioned above, a strong hope or belief in an ultimate unique answer. In fact I say
so in the 1998 text.

I have considered many times writing a paper about my ideas, but I could not bring
myself to write something that seemed so obvious.
It would have been a paper with
many words an no formulas, and it was not at all clear where to publish it. There were no
blogs, no homepages, no “arxives”, and no obvious journal to send it to. And furthermore
the hard evidence was not available yet. One valid objection was that we did not know
enough about string theory yet to make any claim about the existence of a large number
of non-supersymmetric, stable vacua. Today that is still an often-heard objection. My
feeling about that was exactly what was written in [1], “if we ﬁnd one such vacuum we
are going to ﬁnd a huge number of them”. To me that was clearly the message String
Theory was sending us already in 1986, but most people preferred to ignore it, although

3

of course everyone agreed that the number of supersymmetric vacua was huge.

It is diﬃcult and dangerous to claim with the beneﬁt of hindsight that one arrived at
some conclusion at a particular time. After 1986 it took some time to understand that all
four-dimensional string vacua that were proliferating quickly had moduli, and that this
was an important problem. It took some time to appreciate that they were all related to
each other, and could be thought of as ground states of one theory, the Heterotic string.
And of course there were ﬁve string theories, not just one. The most common attitude
was to ignore the others and assume that one day we might know what was wrong with
them. This was also my point of view until 1994, but uniqueness of the underlying theory
was anyhow not the most crucial part of the argument. Apart from that issue, I was
already defending a point of view quite similar to the one expressed in the 1998 speech
during my time at CERN, which in any case means before 1992. I had discussions about
that with many people and encountered a lot of resistance, and I do not recall anyone
wholeheartedly agreeing with me. It is therefore somewhat strange that after 2003 some
people started telling me “this is what I have always been saying”.

I would be one of those people now if I had not been oﬀered a unique opportunity to
put my point of view on record. I was put under some gentle pressure to give a speech on
the occasion of my inauguration in Nijmegen. Usually such speeches describe the status
of the ﬁeld, with some emphasis on glorious achievements of theory and/or experiments,
and then give some outlook on the future, or some comments on a theme of particular
interest to the speaker. I was not particularly keen on giving such a speech until I realized
that this, at last, was a unique opportunity to publicly advocate the point of view I had
been talking about for so many years. Furthermore the simplicity of the main point was
only a bonus here. These talks are typically attended by members of the family, friends,
and colleagues from the same and other universities. This requires a diﬃcult balancing
act in order to explain something to an audience of outsiders of the ﬁeld, and also trying
to tell something worthwhile to your colleagues. The main point was simple to explain
and at the same time controversial enough to be of interest.

The text of these speeches is printed as a small booklet and distributed among staﬀ
members and libraries of the various institutes in the Netherlands. The Dutch text is
therefore authentic and unchangeable. It is included in this paper so that Dutch speaking
persons can verify that I did not use hindsight to attempt to make changes during the
translation, which was made in 2006.

There were in fact not many temptations to make changes. Reading the text again
after eight years, I was worried to encounter remarks about which I had changed my mind
in the meantime, but I was pleased to see that most things were written carefully, exactly
as I often state them today, and exactly as I remember stating them at CERN in the late
eighties. I was amused to discover that I even used the word “landscape” in the text,
or rather the Dutch word “landschap” from which the English word was derived in the
16th century. That word was used once, in a sense not very diﬀerent from the current
one, but the expression I really used for what would now be called the “landscape of
string vacua” was the Dutch word “gebergte”, which translates as “mountain range”. If
I had translated this text to English in 1998, I would certainly have tried to ﬁnd a more

4

attractive English term, and “landscape” would have suited my purpose very well. But
of course that’s just a name.

The Dutch title was “naar een waardig slot”, which means something like “towards
a worthy end”. I was trying to think of possible ways in which the story of high energy
physics might end in a way worthy of its wonderful history, and concluded that a unique
theory with a huge number of vacua and anthropic raison dˆetre of our universe was the
most attractive outcome, and that this was precisely what String Theory was suggesting.
When reading the text one should keep in mind that it was written for a general
audience. This required the usual shortcuts and simpliﬁcations. It also required me to
drop some important issues. It made no sense to try and explain the problems of moduli
stabilization or supersymmetry breaking in this context. The only place where I express
my worries about that is in the sentence “At this moment it is not clear what will be left
of this enormous number of ground states once we understand String Theory properly”.
The cosmological constant is another important topic that is not mentioned, partly for
the same reason, but mostly because at that time I was seriously confused about it. In
1987, when I started thinking along these lines, I assumed it was zero, and that we would
ﬁnd some mechanism to explain that. By 1998 evidence was coming in that it might not
be zero, and I had become aware of Weinberg’s “anthropic” argument [8]. It looked like
the cosmological constant was the anthropic variable par excellence, but this fact did not
seem to ﬁt in with the rest. I was convinced that a huge number of vacua was needed
to understand the anthropic ﬁne-tunings of the standard model, but to explain the 120
orders of magnitude ﬁne tuning of the cosmological constant seemed too absurd to even
consider. Nothing I knew suggested that there could be so many vacua.

Indeed, the most important point on which I was forced to change my mind since 1998
has been the size of the landscape. There is no clear statement about how large I expected
the landscape to be, but the text does give a hint about that. At that time I was convinced
that the current experimental data would be suﬃcient to pinpoint one particular vacuum
as the one corresponding to our universe and our standard model. Then, if we would just
ﬁnd that one, everything else could be predicted. According to recent rough estimates
by M. Douglas, that would be the case if there are less than about 1080 vacua (more or
less uniformly distributed over a bounded region of parameter space), and if one does not
take tuning of the cosmological constant into account. The amount of anthropic tuning
in the standard model parameters is essentially impossible to estimate at present with
any accuracy, because it requires computing all of cosmology, star evolution, chemistry,
nuclear physics and biology etc. for a diﬀerent choice of gauge group, representations and
It is a number between 10−80 and 1, and presumably far from either limit.
couplings.
If the result were smaller than 10−80 we could use the anthropic principle to improve
on the current experimental bounds on the standard model parameters, and this seems
ridiculous. If thlikelihoode result were 1 this would imply that any choice of gauge theory,
representations and parameters leads to something one could call “life”. If that notion
seems too ill-deﬁned for generic universes one could drop the “biology”, and talk about
complex chemistry instead. It seems unlikely that a randomly chosen theory would lead
to suﬃcient chemical complexity, but, as I say in the text, that is an assumption. It is

5

clear that the entire argument breaks down if the probability approaches 1. If indeed it
is much smaller than 1, this kind of argument would require the number of vacua to be
at least the inverse of that probability, and considerably larger to avoid any illusion of
ﬁne-tuning. In 1998 I was more worried that the number of string vacua that I knew was
too small, than that it would be far larger than this lower bound.

Note that in the 1998 text I did not advocate the idea that any particular standard
model parameter can be determined from anthropic arguments alone. An often stated
objection to the anthropic principle is that it is like giving up physics and just declaring
instead that “things are the way they are, since otherwise we would not exist”. However,
as I already explained in 1998, the proper use of this principle presupposes a precise
understanding of the landscape.
It may well be that the anthropic principle is of no
practical use for the determination of any standard model or cosmological parameter
with the possible exception of the cosmological constant, simply because the necessary
computations are too hard.

There will certainly exist functions on the landscape that aﬀect the vacuum selection,
It is
such as the local density of certain kinds of vacua [9] or cosmological likelihood.
important to compute such quantities, if possible, but I am convinced that they will not
uniquely select our universe, for exactly the same reasons I stated in 1998. In fact, neither
will the anthropic principle, which is just another function on the landscape (although
hard to deﬁne precisely), the likelihood that “intelligent” life emerges in a given point on
the landscape (an analogy with the “Drake equation” suggests itself here rather naturally).
It would be absurd if our universe were the only point in the landscape that is suﬃciently
anthropic, and nothing we know suggests that. Perhaps some sort of convolution of all
these functions will provide an answer close to the Standard Model.

Most people associate the Landscape with an anthropic solution to the cosmological
constant problem. For me that was not the crucial issue. Even if we came to the conclusion
that the cosmological constant was not anthropically tuned after all, I would still expect
an anthropic landscape for the structure and parameters of the standard model. String
Theory was the ﬁrst and so far only theory that made the question about uniqueness of the
standard model unavoidable. Most, if not all, other attempts to “derive” the structure
of the Standard Model involve a new layer of gauge theories, for example composite
models or GUTs. Then on inevitably runs once again into the same problem one tries
to solve, namely an essential non-uniqueness. The most promising candidate, SO(10)
Grand Uniﬁcation, requires an unexplained triplication of families and has a large number
of parameters, even if one takes this choice of gauge group for granted. The only hope
for uniqueness is a theory that itself has a chance of being unique, namely a theory of
gravity. Such a theory, String Theory, was explored during the past decades, and it gives
a very clear answer: there is no unique ground state, but a landscape of vacua. It is in
my opinion the only answer that makes sense, and the fact that this answer came out of
String Theory is a sign that we are on the right track. I see this as a fundamental result
that may even survive if String Theory turns out to be incorrect, or if String Theory is
just the tip of an iceberg.

I expect that the String Theory Landscape will acquire an important place in science

6

history. Of course its ultimate fate depends on the correctness of String Theory, and the
unexpectedly huge size of the landscape is making it a lot harder to convince ourselves
of that. But String Theory won’t be correct without the landscape being correct. And if
that is true, it would be one the most fundamental discoveries one can make. It implies
that we would know the answer to Einstein’s question if the creator of our Universe had
any choice:
indeed, we would know all the choices. This insight is probably the most
important one we have obtained from string theory so far. It should be remembered that
in 1984 this would have been completely unthinkable. Unlike the other main result we
hope to get out of String Theory, consistent Quantum Gravity, the landscape emerged
against everyone’s initial expectations and wishes. It is a revolution that is unfolding so
slowly that few people even recognize it as such. But nevertheless, discovering that our
standard model is just one entity in a huge landscape, and hence cannot be completely
derived from ﬁrst principles, is a paradigm shift for our ﬁeld.

I am tempted to continue with further remarks on the present state of aﬀairs, and
comment on some of the papers and other texts that have appeared in the last few years.
The fact that these issues are now being discussed is by itself an exciting development.
But many of those remarks I could make would just be a rephrasing of what I wrote in
1998, and I prefer to let that text speak for itself.

2 The English Translation of [2]

”High Energy Physics” has a special place within physics. This is already apparent from
its name. Most ﬁelds within physics are called after what they study. Solid state physics
studies properties of solids, atomic physics studies atoms, and nuclear physics nuclei. But
a high energy physicist does not study “high energy”. The name of the ﬁeld is derived
from the experimental techniques that are used. The essence of this ﬁeld is the study of
matter at ever shorter distance scales. To achieve this, bundles of particles of very high
energy are collided with each other. The higher the energy, the deeper one penetrates
into the matter. Our ﬁeld eﬀectively started with the invention of the microscope, but it
really started moving ahead in this century. We learned that matter consists of molecules,
which are built out of atoms. The atoms consist of a nucleus with a cloud of electrons
around it, and the nucleus consists of protons and neutrons. Every time you look deeper,
new phenomena seem to appear. Perhaps this is the reason our ﬁeld is not named after
its ﬁeld of study; after all, this changes all the time. Sometimes one calls it “elementary
particle physics”, but when that name was introduced one believed protons and neutrons
were believed to be elementary. Meanwhile we know that this is not true. The proton
and the neutron are not elementary, but consist out of other particles, the quarks.
If
it turned out that the quarks themselves consisted out of other particles, out attention
would automatically shift to those particles. There is, however, no evidence for this at
present.

One could say that the essential diﬀerence between High Energy Physics and all other
branches of physics is that the former investigates vertically, whereas all other investi-

7

gate horizontally. That deﬁnition essentially implies an end of the discipline. It seems
inevitable that one day we will run into a limit which makes it impossible to penetrate
deeper into matter. This would imply that nature at its deepest level will for ever be
beyond our observation. If what we cannot see is as complicated as what we have seen
already, there will be no chance to guess the answer. This seems the most likely end of
our ﬁeld.

It is less clear when that end would be reached. During the last 50 years the technolog-
ical limits have been shifted continuously, and more and more impressive machines were
built. One of these successes is for example LEP in Geneva, a circular particle accelerator
with a circumference of 27 kilometers, where electron and positron bundles are collided
with large energy and astonishing precision. Each time such a machine is commissioned,
the next one is already on the drawing board. Technologically the end may appear to
be in sight, but that is already true for twenty years, and there are still new accelerators
being planned or being built.

An unforeseeable technological revolution could postpone the end of this road sub-
stantially, but eventually we will encounter fundamental or practical limitations. This
becomes painfully clear if we consider the smallest distances that might be of interest
theoretically. In theories of Quantum Gravity interesting phenomena are happening at
distances the size of the Planck length, which is about 10−33 cm. This is so terribly small
that observing it with our most powerful particles accelerators is something like trying to
see protons on the moon with a telescope. With an accelerator like LEP we can penetrate
to about one hundredth of the size of a proton. A machine that can see structures the size
of the Planck length has to accelerate particles to a gigantic energy, the Planck energy.
To construct such an accelerator with current technology would require a machine with
at least the size of our entire galaxy. It is an interesting question if this can be done even
theoretically, but it can certainly not be done in practice.

Although the majority of experiments is done with particle accelerators, there are
other, less direct methods to learn something about the deeper structure of nature. But
no matter which method is used, one can always imagine phenomena which are beyond
our observation. We can imagine particles with so little interaction, or events that are so
improbable that we will never see them. It is diﬃcult to see why nature should always be
so friendly to us to let us see all its secrets.
I regard this as an unpleasant idea.

I see the development of fundamental physics
in this century as an exciting book, which is diﬃcult to put aside without having read
the last chapter. It is a beautiful story that deserves a worthy end. It would be very
disappointing if the last chapter turned out to be forever unreadable to us.

Then what is really our goal? Most of my colleagues will only formulate an answer to
this question with great hesitation, because it sounds on the one hand rather arrogant, and
on the other hand hopelessly naive. You could describe it as the “Theory of Everything”.
This term was used for the ﬁrst time a few years ago in a moment of euphoria about a
new breakthrough, and was generally met with derision. What do you mean, “Theory
of everything”? Does that theory have something to say about superconductivity? Can
you derive the human genetic code from it? Can you use it to predict the weather? The

8

list of questions humans struggle with is endless. A theory that answers all questions is
unthinkable.

If we nevertheless want to formulate a reachable and acceptable ﬁnal goal, we will
have to limit the questions to which we may expect an answer. This implies, among
other things, that the questions should not be too complicated. For example the DNA
molecule is so complicated, that it will never be derived directly from a fundamental
theory. Nevertheless we now already for decades what that fundamental theory is: it is
Quantum Electrodynamics. When we ask suﬃciently simple questions, this theory gives
extremely precise answers. In high energy physics most questions are ultimately reduced
to simple questions, such as: what exactly happens when two particles collide with a
given energy. When we have convinced ourselves that all questions of that type can be
answered one of the requirements of a Theory of Everything has been met, as far as I am
concerned.

In fact, we almost have such a theory at our disposal.

It has been given the not
very impressive name “Standard Model”. This theory describes three of the four funda-
mental forces we know. In the ﬁrst place this includes the already mentioned Quantum
Electrodynamics. This interaction manifests itself in many ways in the world around us:
light, electricity, magnetism, chemistry and most properties of materials are all controlled
by this theory. Then there is Quantum Chromodynamics, which among other things is
responsible for the fact that protons and neutrons are held together in nuclei. Finally
there is the weak force, which manifests itself for example in radioactivity. For all these
phenomena we have a very an extremely successful fundamental theory, that for already
twenty-ﬁve years passes all experimental tests convincingly. When people look back at
this century in the future, the Standard Model will undoubtedly be mentioned as one of
the great breakthroughs in physics, together with quantum mechanics and relativity.

Nevertheless no-one will be inclined to replace the unpretentious name “Standard
Model” by “Theory of Everything”. There are a few reasons for this. First of all one
of the four known interactions, gravity, is missing. At ﬁrst sight this does not look like
a really big problem. For gravity we also have an excellent theory, Einstein’s General
Relativity, one of the crown jewels of this century. Just like the Standard Model this
theory makes extremely precise predictions that agree with a large number of experiments.
Unfortunately this theory does not coexist very peacefully with quantum mechanics. This
implies concretely that we are unable to make predictions when particles collide with each
other with Planckian energies, or for extreme phenomena in the neighborhood of black
holes. It is extremely unlikely that we will ever be able to actually observe such processes,
but we expect a theory of everything to give an answer in these circumstances as well.

The Standard Model, on the other hand, has no problems with quantum mechanics.
It is formulated in terms of Quantum Field Theory, which is founded solidly on its two
pillars, quantum mechanics and special relativity. Nevertheless we are not at all certain
that the Standard Model is correct. The Standard Model contains 17 particles, 16 of
which have been found so far. One is sill missing, the so-called Higgs particle. This
particle is rather diﬀerent from the other 16, and is generally seen as the weakest link in
the Standard Model. The existence of this particle was postulated twenty-ﬁve years ago,

9

because it is essential for the consistency of the Standard Model. But on the other hand
it became clear fairly quickly that it introduces a new problem. I will not explain in detail
what the problem is. Essentially, the problem is that the weak force, despite its name, is
far stronger than one would reasonably expect.

There is more about that Standard Model that we don’t like. For example it has a lot
of parameters, namely at least 19 and probably more. A parameter is a number whose
value is not ﬁxed by the theory. For example the Standard Model does not tell us what the
quarks weigh. The masses of the six quarks can only be determined by measuring them.
Once all parameters have been measured, the theory is ﬁxed and every other quantity can
be computed. Although 19 parameters is not really very much, we might have preferred
fewer, for example none at all.

What worries us even more is the fact that some of these parameters have rather
special values. For example the ratio of the mass of the electron with that of the heaviest
quark, the top quark is very small, less than 10−5. Since the Standard Model does not say
anything about the masses, every number could have come out. When you observe then
that such a number is very small in nature, you get the feeling that you should be able
to understand that. The aforementioned problem with the Higgs boson is of a similar
nature, but more severe. It is like being in a room with a hundred people, and discovering
that they are all born on the same day. The likelihood that this happens by accident is
so small that you would immediately assume that there has to be an explanation. In the
physics of our universe we see a variety of such unlikely coincidences.

Something else many people don’t like about the Standard Model is that it is by no
means the only possibility. When Einstein wrote down the Theory of General Relativity
he basically did not have any choice. But the people who conceived the Standard Model
had lots of variations at their disposal. Thirty years of intense experimental research have
thrown most of these variations into the dustbin, but many people would really prefer to
do that on purely theoretical grounds. They would really prefer a unique theory.

Nevertheless it seems less certain that we should be able to answer this type of question.
Essentially we only have questions of this type left in the Standard Model. These are all
“why” questions. Why exactly this Standard Model, why do the parameters have the
observed values and why are certain values so small. It is inevitable that some questions
of this type remain in a theory. The fact that such questions are not answered is not a
reason to withhold the predicate “Theory of Everything”. We should deﬁnitely do that
if it was inconsistent or in disagreement with experiment.

What I have been trying to say in the foregoing is that the concept “Theory of Ev-
erything” is not necessarily a “castle in the sky” provided one does not have the wrong
expectations. The Standard Model is not only an excellent model for three of the four
forces of nature and all matter, but also for the very concept “Theory of Everything”.
Apart from a few issues, it is really precisely what we are looking for.

The Standard Model has another problem that is rarely mentioned as such, but that
for me is essential. It is in complete agreement with everything we can see, but it has
nothing to say about what we cannot see. If new experiments discover new particles or
interactions we will have to extend the Standard Model. Quantum Field Theory allows

10

lots of extensions. We may postulate that nature is described by the Standard Model plus
nothing else, but nothing guarantees that this is true. We will always depend on future
experiments. This seems such an obvious point that no-one calls it a problem.

So what are our chances of ever ﬁnding that acceptable theory? I have already said
that I am not optimistic about that. The Standard Model is not terribly complicated. If
you use the correct language you can write it down in two or three lines. Nevertheless
many experiments were needed to reach that point. Experiment and theory need each
other. Without experimental help we have little chance.

But there may be a small chance. At the moment a theory is being developed that
gives us some hope that perhaps we may accomplish this task. I am referring to something
we call “String Theory”, usually translated to Dutch as “Snaar Theory”, but I don’t like
the sound of that. The theory gets its name from the fact that all particles are realized
as vibrations of a kind of fundamental string. The lowest harmonics correspond to the
particles of the Standard Model, plus perhaps a few new particles. The higher harmonics
correspond to an inﬁnite series of particles that we can never observe, unless we can build
a Planck Energy accelerator. [....]3

Meanwhile it has become clear that the word “String” is much too limited and the
word “Theory” a bit premature. We have discovered that in addition to strings also
membranes play a role, and we have realized that what we called “String Theory” until
now is just a small piece of a continent that to a large extent still has to be mapped out.
For lack of a better name I will call that entire continent “String Theory” henceforth.

String Theory was discovered thirty years ago more or less accidentally in an attempt
to understand the strong interactions. It became clear rather rapidly that this theory had
magical properties, but soon a better alternative was found for the strong force, namely
Quantum Chromodynamics. During ten years the theory, together with a handful of loyal
followers, was essentially ignored, but in 1984 it made a triumphant return. In the mean
time it had become clear that the theory had promising features for the description of an
entirely diﬀerent force, namely gravity. A few enlightened persons had already understood
this in 1975, but they got little attention.

The 1984 revolution can be explained in particular by the fact that String Theory
oﬀered us a gift nobody had counted on. Apart from a possibly consistent theory of
Quantum Gravity, String Theory turned out to contain particles and forces that resembled
those of the Standard Model. This is a generic feature of good theories: bad theories
always lack something essential, whereas good theories give you lots of things you could
not reasonably count on.

If everything works out the way we hope this should, in the end, give us a theory that
is completely consistent and contains all known particles and forces. I remarked before
that we really would like a fundamental theory to give us also a complete description of
everything we can not (yet) observe. String Theory has a property that seems to realize
that. I am referring here to something that in special cases is described by the technical
term “Modular Invariance”, and whose precise general form is not completely clear yet. In
3This phrase was not translated because it discusses why I prefer the English name “String Theory”

over the Dutch name “Snaar Theory”, and this explanation make no sense in English.

11

any case everything seems to indicate that one cannot freely add particles to a given String
Theory, or remove them. Once we have found a String Theory that contains exactly the
Standard Model, we cannot add anything anymore. One cannot modify a string theory.
The theory may predict new particles, but if an experiment ﬁnds a particle that was not
expected, the entire structure collapses. Therefore String Theory can only yield a theory
of everything, whether we like that term or not: it is all or nothing.

The work “nothing” is a bit exaggerated. At the very least we have a breathtaking
piece of mathematics in our hands. String theory attracts theorists because it has mar-
velous features that are hard to explain to outsiders. It is a huge landscape through which
theorists move around with a kind of Alice-in-Wonderland feeling. Every stone that is
turned over turns out to hide new miracles, every path that one takes leads to fascinat-
It sometimes seems as if String Theory solves its own problems, and that
ing views.
we are just breathless spectators. Time after time new contradictions appear to emerge,
which however are always solved by a new “String Miracle”. It gives the theory an air of
untouchability, and sometimes makes you wonder how it could ever by falsiﬁed.

These magical properties have a downside as well. They are fascinating some theorists
to such an extent that the ultimate goal is sometimes forgotten. That goal now seems
further away than in 1984. Despite great promises, String Theory has not yet produced
any measurable result. We only see vague outlines of the Standard Model, and we are
unable to work out the details. Part of the reason is that we are still trying to determine
what String Theory really is.

Another reason is that we are faced with a huge number of possibilities. Perhaps one
would expect from a candidate “Theory of Everything” that it is unique, in other words,
that there is only one possible outcome for the laws of physics. At present, however, the
facts seem to point into a totally diﬀerent direction.

When String Theory was reborn in 1984, there was a lot of talk about “uniqueness”,
but that was clearly premature. In 1984 we did not know one, but ﬁve String theories.
Then things went out of control rapidly. The ﬁve theories existed in a world with nine
space and one time dimensions, ten dimensions in total. Our space also has one time, but
only three space dimensions, height, width en depth. In the years after 1984 it became
clear rapidly that it was much simpler to build String Theories in four dimensions than
in ten. Instead of ﬁve there turned out to be billions of possibilities, actually inﬁnitely
many.

I was involved in these developments in 1986, and in our paper we put special emphasis
on the large number of solutions. This was not regarded as good news. Many years later
I even met someone who claimed that our work had convinced him to abandon String
Theory and work on something else. Of course this was not our intention. I believe I was
one of the few people that regarded this large number of String Theories as a positive
development, and I will explain in a moment why.

Gradually after 1986 some order was created in the chaos, and it started becoming
clear that all these distinct String Theories were really part of a larger entity after all.
They could all be related in one way or another to one of the ﬁve String Theories in ten
dimensions. To go from ten to four dimensions, six of the ten dimensions are “rolled up”,

12

so that we can only observe four.

Usually we regard all these four-dimensional String Theories as so-called “ground
states” of one of the ten-dimensional ones. To understand the concept of a ground state
one may think of a mountain range with many valleys. In this picture the mountain range
represents the theory, and the valleys the distinct ground states. Inhabitants of each of
these valleys only see a small part of the entire mountain range. Nevertheless, everything
is ultimately connected.

This picture restores the lost uniqueness to some extent. There may be many ground
states, but there is just one theory. At least, that would be the ideal situation. But up to
now we still had ﬁve theories instead of one. That corresponds to ﬁve mountain ranges,
each with its own valleys. Four years ago this suddenly changed. The ﬁve mountain ranges
all turned out to be the same, but viewed from diﬀerent angles. Just as the Mont Blanc
looks totally diﬀerent from Italy or France, apparently totally diﬀerent String Theories
turned out to be diﬀerent ways of looking at the same theory. Unfortunately we have not
found an exact formulation of this overarching theory. Many people are looking for that
at the moment.

Everything seems to point in the direction that we are dealing with only one theory, but
that this theory has a huge number of ground states. Just like each mountain valley may
have its own laws and customs, every ground state has its own system of laws of physics.
Instead of electromagnetic, strong and weak forces there will be other interactions, instead
of quarks and leptons other particles.
If String Theory is correct, one of these many
possibilities is realized in our universe. One of the big challenges is to demonstrate that
our universe is indeed one of these possibilities.

We can only discuss other ground states purely theoretically. In contrast to an inhab-
itant of a mountain valley, who in principle could go and have a look at another valley,
we would not even be able to exist in another ground state. The quarks and leptons out
of which we are composed do not even exist there. Nevertheless it seems just a small
step to assume that other ground states might be realized in another universe. Such a
statement lies, however, beyond the boundaries of physics. By deﬁnition, physics cannot
make statements about things that cannot be observed. We can only speak in theoretical
terms about other possible universes. They are solutions to the same equations satisﬁed
by our own universe.

This line of thought ﬁts in very well with a series of insights that pointed out our
modest place in the cosmos. Our planet is not the center of the solar system, our sun
is just one of many stars and not even a very special one, and the same is true for our
galaxy. It seems natural to assume that also our universe, including the quarks, leptons
and interactions we observe is just one of many possibilities.

This way of thinking has important consequences. If indeed our universe, including
its laws of physics and the entire Standard Model is just one of many possibilities, this
implies that there are limits to what we can compute. The properties of the quarks and
leptons, their interactions and the parameters of the Standard Model (or at least part of
them) were ﬁxed at the birth of our universe, when a choice was made out of the many
possibilities. We will never be able to compute that choice, because it could just as well

13

have been diﬀerent.

I have the impression that many of my colleagues believe or hope that this will ulti-
mately not be the case. They hope to ﬁnd a kind of mathematical formula that has only
one solution. That single solution should then correspond to our four-dimensional world,
including all quarks, leptons and the four basic forces. Also the values of the nineteen (or
more) parameters, such as the masses of all particles, should then ultimately emerge as
the outcome of a mathematical computation.

It could indeed be like that. At this moment it is not clear what will be left of this
enormous number of ground states once we understand String Theory properly. At ﬁrst
sight it may seem attractive that only one should survive, but if you think about it for a
moment it becomes clear that this would really be an undesirable end to the story.

I will try to explain this, but ﬁrst I will make an instructive historical comparison.
Kepler, a great scientist whom we all know because of his theory of planetary orbits,
believed that the distances of the planets to the sun were fundamental parameters, that
should be computable. He invented an ingenious theory with embedded Platonic solids.
With our current knowledge Kepler’s attempt seems absurd. Kepler did not know about
the existence of the planets Uranus, Neptune and Pluto, and this fact alone already
destroys his theory. If he had known about the existence of other solar systems he would
not even have started. Nevertheless one cannot blame Kepler for trying. One should not
assume too soon that something can never be computed. Once you have gathered enough
insight it will become clear what can be computed and what cannot. It seems very well
possible to me that in some time we will arrive at the insight that other worlds with other
laws of physics are indeed possible. Attempts to compute the parameters of the Standard
Model will then look equally naive as what Kepler had in mind.

Although the choice of distinct ground states is arbitrary from a mathematical point of
view, it is not from a human point of view. Our existence is tightly linked to the Standard
Model and the precise values of a number of parameters. A well-known example are the
masses of the two quarks out of which the proton and the neutron consist. These quarks
are called “up” and “down”, and the latter is heavier than the former. This has the
pleasant consequence that the proton is stable, whereas a free neutron decays in about
ﬁfteen minutes into a proton and an electron. If we interchange the two quark masses
it is just the other way around. The proton would decay rapidly into a neutron and a
positron. The hydrogen atom would then be unstable, just as the water molecule. There
is a long list of examples of this type. Some are more impressive, but a bit harder to
explain.

Our entire existence depends on a series of subtle processes that occurred during
the evolution of the universe. These processes have ﬁnally led to a planet where, for
example, the crucial element Carbon occurs with suﬃcient abundance. Various steps
in this process depend critically on the parameters of the Standard Model, such as the
masses of particles and the strength of interactions. It seems often easy to demonstrate
that even small changes of certain parameters would obstruct the entire process.

From this point of view it would seem absurd that exactly those parameter values
would follow from a mathematical computation. We would be left with a much bigger

14

riddle than the one we are trying to solve. For this reason I was very satisﬁed when it
turned out that String Theory was highly non-unique. If our planet were the only one
in the Universe, it would be a mystery why precisely that single planet would allow life.
The fact that there are billions of planets makes the mystery considerably less severe.
Analogously, the fact that many kinds of universes are possible makes the existence of
conditions for intelligent life in our universe considerably less absurd than if there would
be just one possibility.

This kind of reasoning is often referred to as the “anthropic principle”. In reality this
is a collective name for a variety of ideas, some of which I ﬁnd quite nonsensical. The
anthropic principle states that the universe we observe is characterized by the fact that
we exist as observers. It is hard to disagree with this. One can, however, disagree with
the consequences that some people derive from it.

As far as I am concerned the anthropic principle only makes sense if our universe it
not the only possible one. Furthermore it only makes sense within a completely consistent
theory. Otherwise we do not know which changes of the parameters of our universe make
sense. For example, it could well be that we are not allowed to change the up/down quark
mass ratio at all. Although I would like to have many options for the laws of nature of our
universe, I would still prefer the fundamental theory to be unique. String theory seems
to accommodate these two demands that at ﬁrst sight seem contradictory: according to
our present insights there is just one theory, but many ground states are possible. This
is really the best outcome one could imagine.

The anthropic principle could be the explanation for certain coincidences that are hard
to understand from the point of view of the theory. It could explain why up quarks are
lighter than down quarks, but this mass diﬀerence is not really that astonishing. It gets
more interesting when we look at cases where parameter ratios are very small or very
large. Well-known examples are the electron mass, which is improbably small, or the
strength of the weak force. The value of both parameters is essential for the evolution of
our universe and our existence, but this is not suﬃcient to conclude that we understand
the values of those parameters.

What really matters is the question if for other parameter values some form of in-
telligent life is possible. If intelligent life would ultimately develop in every imaginable
universe, it would still be impossible to understand why nature would go into extremes
just to make our form of intelligent life possible.

This leads to a formulation of the anthropic principle that might fall within the bound-
aries of exact science. It requires ﬁrst of all a theory that we fully control, and of which
we know all possible ground states, and thereby all possible parameters and their allowed
values. Furthermore we need a deﬁnition of intelligent life that is not based on our own
quark-lepton world. For all the allowed ground states we should then compute if intel-
ligent life is possible. If this is only possible for certain extreme parameter values, this
would explain the values of those parameters.

Unfortunately given our current knowledge this programme is completely impossible
to execute. It is already impossible to say if life in our own universe is possible under
drastically changed conditions. It may seem reasonable to assume that the element Car-

15

bon is required, but on the other hand it is very hard to rule out other possibilities. I
consider the question if intelligent life is possible in other valleys of the String Mountain
range extremely interesting, but many times more diﬃcult.

Nevertheless, for me a worthy end of the story of High Energy Physics would already be
the simple observation that we live in one of the many valleys of the string mountain range.
This is a modest, but perhaps just achievable goal. If that is true, and if String Theory
meets our expectations we have a complete theory for everything that happens in our
universe, a theory that predicts precisely what we may expect from future experiments,
It would be even better if we could also
and that does not leave room for surprises.
understand why we live in precisely this universe, and not in another. Unfortunately at
this moment even the ﬁrst, modest goal is not more than a beautiful dream.

The foregoing was a sketch of a possible end of the story. It is the end that given the
current state of aﬀairs seems the most desirable to me, but in the end only hard results
matter. Nature will probably not care much about my wishes. Despite the word “end”
in the title it was not at all my intention to suggest that the end will be reached soon.
On the contrary, it will take many decades of work to produce a complete map of String
Theory. I am looking forward to an exciting continuation of this adventure.

3 The original Dutch text

De Hoge Energie fysica neemt een speciale plaats in binnen de natuurkunde. Dat blijkt
eigenlijk al uit de naam. De meeste vakgebieden binnen de natuurkunde zijn genoemd
naar wat zij bestuderen. De vaste stof fysica bestudeert eigenschappen van vaste stof-
fen, de atoom fysica bestudeert atomen en de kernfysica atoomkernen. Maar een Hoge
Energie Fysicus bestudeert geen Hoge Energie. De naam van het vak is ontleend aan de
experimentele technieken die gebruikt worden. Het wezen van het vak is het bestuderen
van de materie op steeds kleinere afstanden. Hiertoe worden bundels deeltjes met zeer
hoge energie op elkaar geschoten. Hoe hoger de energie, hoe verder men in de materie
doordringt. Ons vak begint eigenlijk bij de uitvinding van de microscoop, maar pas in
deze eeuw is het echt goed op gang gekomen. We hebben geleerd dat materie bestaat
uit moleculen, die weer zijn opgebouwd uit atomen. De atomen bestaan uit een kern
met daarom heen een wolk electronen, en de kern bestaat weer uit protonen en neutro-
nen. Steeds wanneer je nog dieper kijkt lijken zich nieuwe verschijnselen voor te doen.
Wellicht is dat ook de reden dat het vak niet genoemd is naar het onderwerp van studie;
dat verandert immers steeds. Men spreekt weliswaar ook wel van “Elementaire deeltjes
fysica”, maar toen die naam voor het eerst gebruikt werd dacht men nog dat protonen
en neutronen elementaire deeltjes waren. Intussen weten we wel beter. Het proton en
het neutron zijn niet elementair, maar bestaan zelf weer uit andere deeltjes, de quarks.
Wanneer zou blijken dat quarks zelf ook weer uit andere deeltjes zouden bestaan zou onze
aandacht vanzelf verschuiven naar nieuwe, nog diepere structuren. Voorlopig hebben we
daar overigens geen aanwijzigingen voor.

Je zou dus kunnen zeggen dat het wezenlijke verschil tussen de Hoge Energie Fysica en

16

alle andere takken van de natuurkunde is dat de eerste het zoekt in de diepte, terwijl alle
andere disciplines meer in de breedte werken. In die deﬁnitie van de Hoge Energie Fysica
zit eigenlijk ook al het einde van het vak opgesloten. Het lijkt onvermijdelijk dat we eens
tegen een grens zullen aanlopen die het ons onmogelijk maakt om nog dieper in de materie
door te dringen. Dit zou betekenen dat de natuur zich op het allerdiepste nivo voor altijd
aan onze waarneming onttrekt. Als wat we niet kunnen zien net zo gecompliceerd is als
wat we al gezien hebben, is er geen enkele kans dat we het antwoord zouden kunnen raden.
Dit lijkt mij het meest waarschijnlijke einde van dit vak.

Wanneer dat einde bereikt zal worden is minder duidelijk. De laatste 50 jaar zijn de
technologische grenzen steeds verder opgeschoven, en zijn er steeds indrukwekkender ma-
chines gebouwd. Een van die successen is bijvoorbeeld LEP in Gen`eve, een ringvormige
deeltjesversneller met een omtrek van 27 kilometer, waarin electron en positron bundels
met grote energie en verbijsterende precisie op elkaar geschoten worden. Steeds wanneer
een dergelijke machine opgeleverd wordt ligt de volgende alweer op de tekentafel. Tech-
nologisch gezien lijkt het einde misschien in zicht, maar eigenlijk is dat al minstens twintig
jaar het geval, en er zijn nu nog steeds nieuwe versnellers gepland of in aanbouw.

Een onvoorzienbare technologische revolutie zou het einde van deze weg fors kunnen
uitstellen, maar uiteindelijk zullen we tegen fundamentele of practische grenzen aanlopen.
Dat wordt pijnlijk duidelijk wanneer we kijken naar de kleinste afmetingen die volgens
theoretici interessant zouden kunnen zijn. In theorie¨en van Quantum Gravitatie spelen
zich interessante verschijnselen af op afstanden ter grootte van de Planck lengte, dat is
ongeveer 10−33 cm. Dit is zo vreselijk klein dat het waarnemen van dit soort structuren
met onze krachtigste deeltjes-versnellers net zo iets is als proberen protonen op de maan
te zien met behulp van een telescoop. Met een versneller als LEP kunnen we tot ongeveer
een-honderdste van de grootte van een proton doordringen. Een machine die structuren
ter grootte van de Planck lengte kan zien moet deeltjes versnellen tot een gigantische
Energie, de Planck Energie. Wanneer we met de huidige technologie een dergelijke ver-
sneller zouden willen construeren, dan blijkt dat die machine minstens de grootte van het
gehele melkwegstelsel zou moeten hebben. Het is een interessante vraag of dit zelfs puur
theoretisch mogelijk is, practisch mogelijk is het in ieder geval niet.

Hoewel de meerderheid van de experimenten met deeltjes-versnellers gedaan wordt
zijn er andere, wat minder directe methodes om iets over de diepere structuren van de
natuur te weten te komen. Maar welke methode ook gebruikt wordt, er zullen altijd
verschijnselen denkbaar zijn die zich aan onze waarneming onttrekken. We kunnen ons
deeltjes voorstellen die dermate weinig interactie met ons hebben, of gebeurtenissen die
zo onwaarschijnlijk zijn, dat we ze nooit zullen zien. Het is moeilijk in te zien waarom de
natuur ons altijd dermate vriendelijk gezind zou zijn dat we al haar geheimen uiteindelijk
kunnen waarnemen.

Dit vind ik een onplezierige gedachte.

Ik zie de ontwikkeling van de fundamentele
natuurkunde in deze eeuw als een spannend boek, dat je moeilijk neer kunt leggen zonder
het laatste hoofdstuk gelezen te hebben. Het is een prachtig verhaal dat een waardig
slot verdient. Het zou een enorme teleurstelling zijn als het laatste hoofdstuk voor ons
onleesbaar zou blijken.

17

Wat is eigenlijk ons doel? Het echte antwoord op die vraag wordt door de meeste van
mijn collega’s hoogstens met grote aarzeling geformuleerd, omdat het enerzijds vrij arro-
gant en anderzijds hopeloos naief klinkt. Je zou het kunnen omschrijven als de “Theorie
van Alles”. Deze term werd enige jaren geleden voor het eerst gebruikt in een vlaag van
euforie over een nieuwe doorbraak, en werd over het algemeen met hoongelach ontvangen.
Hoezo, Theorie van Alles? Vertelt die theorie ons iets nieuws over supergeleiding? Kun
je er de genetische code van de mens uit aﬂeiden? Kun je er dan misschien het weer mee
voorspellen? De lijst van vragen waarmee mensen worstelen is eindeloos. Een theorie die
al die vragen kan beantwoorden is ondenkbaar.

Als we toch een bereikbaar en aanvaarbaar einddoel willen formuleren zullen we de
vragen waarop we een antwoord mogen verwachten moeten beperken. Dit houdt onder
meer in dat de vragen niet te ingewikkeld mogen zijn. Het DNA molecuul bijvoorbeeld
is dermate ingewikkeld, dat het nooit direct uit een fundamentele theorie zal worden
afgeleid. Niettemin weten we al decennia wat die fundamentele theorie is: het is de
Quantum Electrodynamica. Wanneer we voldoende eenvoudige vragen stellen geeft deze
theorie uitermate precieze antwoorden. In de hoge energie fysica worden de meeste vragen
uiteindelijk gereduceerd tot simple vragen zoals: wat gebeurt er precies als twee deeltjes
met een bepaalde energie op elkaar botsen. Wanneer we ons ervan overtuigd hebben dat
we alle vragen van dat type kunnen beantwoorden is wat mij betreft aan een van de eisen
voor een Theorie van Alles voldaan.

Eigenlijk hebben we al bijna een dergelijke theorie tot onze beschikking. Deze wordt
aangeduid met de weinig indrukwekkende naam “Standaard Model”. Deze theorie beschri-
jft drie van de vier fundamentele krachten die we kennen. Op de eerste plaats is dat de al
genoemde Quantum Electrodynamica. Deze interactie manifesteert zich op vele manieren
in de wereld om ons heen:
licht, electriciteit, magnetisme, chemie, en de meeste eigen-
schappen van materialen vallen allemaal onder deze theorie. Dan is er de Quantum Chro-
modynamica, die er onder andere voor zorgt dat de protonen en neutronen in kernen bij
elkaar gehouden worden. Tenslotte is er de zwakke kracht, die zich bijvoorbeeld manifes-
teert in radioactiviteit. Voor al deze verschijnselen hebben we een uitermate succesvolle
fundamentele theorie, die al vijfentwintig jaar lang een indrukwekkende reeks experi-
mentele veriﬁcaties met verve heeft doorstaan. Wanneer men in de toekomst terugkijkt
op deze eeuw zal het Standaard Model ongetwijfeld genoemd worden als een van de grote
doorbraken in de fysica, samen met de quantum mechanica en de relativiteits theorie.

Toch zal niemand geneigd zijn de weinig pretentieuze naam “Standaard Model” te
vervangen door “Theorie van Alles”. Daar zijn een aantal redenen voor. Op de eerste
plaats ontbr´e´ekt een van de vier bekende interacties, namelijk de zwaartekracht. Dat lijkt
op het eerste gezicht geen al te groot probleem. Ook voor de zwaartekracht hebben we
een uitstekende theorie, Einstein’s algemene relativiteits theorie, een van de parels van
de natuurkunde van deze eeuw. Net als het Standaard Model geeft die theorie uiterst
nauwkeurige voorspellingen die in overeenstemming zijn met een groot aantal experi-
menten. Helaas leeft deze theorie echter op gespannen voet met de quantum mechanica.
Concreet betekent dit dat we geen voorspellingen kunnen doen wanneer deeltjes met
Planck energie op elkaar botsen, of voor extreme verschijnselen in de buurt van zwarte

18

gaten. Het is uitermate onwaarschijnlijk dat we dit soort processen ooit daadwerkelijk
kunnen waarnemen, maar van een Theorie van Alles verwachten we dat deze ook in
dergelijke extreme omstandigheden een antwoord geeft.

Het Standaard Model heeft daarentegen geen problemen met de quantum mechanica.
Het is geformuleerd in termen van Quantum Velden Theorie, en rust stevig op zijn twee
pijlers, de quantum mechanica en de relativiteits theorie. Toch zijn we er allerminst
gerust op dat het Standaard Model geheel in orde is. Het Standaard Model bevat 17
deeltjes, waarvan we er tot nu toe 16 gevonden hebben. Er ontbreekt er dus nog een,
het zogenaamde Higgs deeltje. Dit deeltje verschilt nogal van de andere 16, en het wordt
algemeen gezien als de zwakste plek in het Standaard Model. Het bestaan van dit deeltje
is al vijfentwintig jaar geleden gepostuleerd, omdat het essentieel is voor de consistentie
van het Standaard Model. Maar anderzijds werd al snel duidelijk dat het een nieuw
probleem introduceert. Wat dat probleem is zal ik hier niet in detail uitleggen. Het komt
er op neer dat de zwakke kracht, ondanks zijn naam, eigenlijk vele malen sterker is dan
je redelijkerwijs zou mogen verwachten.

Er is nog meer wat ons niet bevalt aan het Standaard Model. Zo heeft het bijvoorbeeld
wat veel parameters, namelijk minstens 19 en waarschijnlijk meer. Een parameter is een
getal waarvan de waarde niet door de theorie wordt vastgelegd. Zo vertelt het Standaard
Model ons bijvoorbeeld niet hoeveel de quarks wegen. De massa’s van de zes quarks
kunnen alleen bepaald worden door ze te meten. Wanneer alle parameters gemeten zijn
ligt de theorie vast en kan elke andere grootheid berekend worden. Hoewel 19 parameters
niet echt veel is hadden we er misschien liever wat minder, bijvoorbeeld geen enkele.

Wat ons echter nog meer zorgen baart is het feit dat sommige van die parameters nogal
speciale waarden hebben. Zo is bijvoorbeeld de verhouding van de electron massa met die
van de zwaarste quark, de top quark, heel erg klein, minder dan een honderdduizendste.
Aangezien het Standaard Model niets zegt over de massa’s, had er elk getal uit kunnen
komen. Als je dan constateert dat in de natuur zo’n getal heel erg klein is krijg je het
gevoel dat je dit zou moeten kunnen begrijpen. Het eerder genoemde probleem met het
Higgs boson is eigenlijk van dezelfde aard, maar nog wat erger. Het is net als wanneer
je je in een zaal met honderd mensen bevindt, en je ontdekt dat ze allemaal op dezelfde
dag jarig zijn. De kans dat dit toeval is, is dermate klein, dat je meteen aanneemt dat
er een verklaring voor moet zijn. In de natuurkunde van ons heelal zien we verscheidene
van dergelijke onwaarschijnlijke toevalligheden.

Iets anders wat velen niet bevalt is dat het Standaard Model bij lange na niet de
enige mogelijkheid is. Toen Einstein de Algemene Relativiteits theorie opschreef had hij
eigenlijk niet veel keus. Maar de bedenkers van het Standaard Model hadden talloze
variaties voorhanden. Dertig jaar intensief experimenteel werk hebben vrijwel al deze
variaties naar de prullenmand verwezen, maar eigenlijk zouden velen dat liever op puur
theoretische gronden willen kunnen doen. Men zou dus liever een theorie hebben die uniek
is.

Niettemin is dit een soort vragen waarvan het wat minder zeker lijkt dat ze beantwoord
moeten kunnen worden. Eigenlijk hebben we in het Standaard Model alleen nog vragen
over van dit type. Het zijn allemaal vragen die met “waarom” beginnen: waarom juist

19

dit Standaard Model, waarom hebben de parameters de waarden die we waarnemen, en
waarom zijn sommige waarden zo klein. Het is onvermijdelijk dat er in een theorie vragen
van dit type overblijven. Het feit dat dergelijke vragen niet beantwoord worden is dus
geen reden om aan een theorie het predicaat “Theorie van Alles” te onthouden. Dat
zouden we wel moeten doen als het inconsistent was of in strijd met experimenten.

Wat ik met het voorgaande heb willen zeggen is dat het begrip “Theorie van Alles”
niet noodzakelijk een luchtkasteel is, mits men er niet de verkeerde verwachtingen van
heeft. Het Standaard Model is niet alleen een uitstekend model voor drie van de vier
natuurkrachten en alle materie, maar ook voor het concept “Theorie van Alles”. Op een
paar punten na is het eigenlijk precies waar we naar op zoek zijn.

Het Standaard Model heeft een ander probleem dat zelden als zodaning genoemd
wordt, maar voor mij wel essentieel is. Het is weliswaar volledig in overeenstemming met
alles wat we kunnen waarnemen, maar het heeft niets te zeggen over wat we niet kunnen
zien. Wanneer nieuwe experimenten nieuwe deeltjes of nieuwe interacties ontdekken zullen
we het Standaard Model moeten uitbreiden. De Quantum Velden Theorie laat tal van
uitbreidingen toe. We kunnen wel postuleren dat de natuur beschreven wordt door het
Standaard Model zonder enige toevoeging, maar niets garandeert dat. We zijn dus altijd
afhankelijk van verdere experimenten. Dit lijkt zo vanzelfsprekend dat eigenlijk niemand
het ooit als probleem noemt.

Hoe staat het nu met de kansen om een aanvaardbare theorie ook werkelijk te vinden?
Ik heb al gezegd dat ik daar niet optimistisch over ben. Het Standaard Model is niet zo
vreselijk ingewikkeld. Als je de juiste taal spreekt kun je het in twee of drie regels opschri-
jven. Niettemin zijn er vele experimenten nodig geweest om zover te komen. Experiment
en Theorie gaan nu eenmaal hand in hand. Zonder experimentele hulp maken we weinig
kans.

Toch is er misschien nog een kleine kans. Er is op dit moment binnen de theorie een
ontwikkeling gaande die ons enige hoop geeft dat we onze taak misschien toch tot een
goed einde kunnen brengen. Ik doel hier op een iets wat we gewoonlijk “String Theorie”
noemen. In het Nederlands wordt dat gewoonlijk met “Snaar Theorie” vertaald, maar
ik vind dat niet prettig klinken. De theorie ontleent zijn naam uit het feit dat alle
deeltjes gerealizeerd zijn als trillingen van een soort fundamentele snaar. De grondtonen
corresponderen met de deeltjes van het Standaard Model, plus misschien een aantal nieuwe
deeltjes. De boventonen corresponderen met een oneindige reeks deeltjes die we nooit
zullen waarnemen, tenzij we een versneller met Planck energie zouden kunnen bouwen.
Mijn voorkeur voor het woord “String” in plaats van “Snaar” heeft vermoedelijk te maken
met de ruimere betekenis van het Engelse woord, wat immers ook koord of touwtje kan
betekenen. Die betekenis past beter bij het beeld wat ik gedachten heb dan een strak
gespannen viool snaar.

Overigens is intussen wel duidelijk geworden dat het woord “String” veel te beperkt
is en het woord “Theorie” een beetje voorbarig. We hebben ontdekt dat naast snaren
ook membranen een rol spelen, en we hebben ons ook gerealizeerd dat wat we tot nu
toe “String Theorie” noemden slechts een klein hoekje is van een werelddeel wat nog
grotendeels in kaart gebracht moet worden. Bij gebrek aan een betere naam zal ik dat

20

hele werelddeel voorlopig maar “String Theorie” noemen.

String Theorie werd dertig jaar geleden min of meer bij toeval ontdekt bij pogingen
om de sterke kracht te begrijpen. Al snel werd duidelijk dat deze theorie over magische
eigenschappen beschikte, maar voor de beschrijving van de sterke kracht werd al spoedig
een beter alternatief gevonden, de Quantum Chromodynamica. Tien jaar lang leidde de
theorie, samen met een handjevol trouwe volgelingen, een kwijnend bestaan, om in 1984
een triomphale terugkeer te beleven.
Inmiddels was duidelijk geworden dat de theorie
veelbelovende eigenschappen had voor de beschrijving van een heel andere kracht, de
zwaartekracht. Enige verlichte geesten hadden zich dat overigens in 1975 al gerealizeerd,
maar zij vonden toen weinig gehoor.

De revolutie van 1984 is vooral te verklaren uit het feit dat String Theorie ons iets
cadeau gaf waar eigenlijk niemand op gerekend had. Naast een mogelijk consistentie
theorie van quantum gravitatie bleek String Theorie ook deeltjes en krachten te bevatten
die leken op het Standaard Model. Dit is een algemeen kenmerk van goede theorie¨en:
slechte theorie¨en komen altijd wat te kort, maar goede theorie¨en geven je van alles cadeau
waar je redelijkerwijs niet op mocht rekenen.

Als alles uitkomt zoals we hopen zou dit uiteindelijk een theorie moeten opleveren die
geheel consistent is en alle bekende deeltjes en krachten bevat. Eerder heb ik al gezegd dat
ik eigenlijk ook zou willen dat een fundamentele theorie een volledige beschrijving geeft
van alles wat we (nog) niet kunnen waarnemen. String Theorie heeft een eigenschap die
dit lijkt te verwezenlijken. Ik doel hier op iets dat in speciale gevallen met de technische
term “Modulaire Invariantie” wordt aangeduid, en waarvan de precieze vorm in algemene
zin nog niet duidelijk is. In ieder geval wijst alles er op dat je aan een gegeven String
Theorie niet straﬀeloos deeltjes kunt toevoegen of deeltjes kunt weglaten. Als we dus
eenmaal een String Theorie hebben gevonden die exact het Standaard Model bevat, kun
je daar niets meer aan toevoegen. Aan een String Theorie kan niet gesleuteld worden.
Het is best mogelijk dat de theorie nieuwe deeltjes voorspelt, maar als een experiment een
niet verwacht deeltje vindt, dan stort daarmee het gehele bouwwerk in. String Theorie
kan dus eigenlijk alleen maar een Theorie van Alles opleveren, of we die term nu prettig
vinden of niet: Het is Alles of Niets.

Het woord “Niets” is een beetje overdreven. Op zijn minst hebben we een ademben-
emend stukje wiskunde in handen. String Theorie heeft een grote aantrekkingskracht
op theoretici doordat het over wonderbaarlijke eigenschappen beschikt die aan buiten-
staanders wat moeilijk zijn uit te leggen. Het is een reusachtig landschap waar theoretici
zich doorheen bewegen met een soort Alice-in-Wonderland gevoel. Elke steen die omge-
keerd wordt blijkt nieuwe wonderen te verbergen, elk pad dat ingeslagen wordt leidt tot
fascinerende vergezichten. Het lijkt soms of String Theorie zijn eigen problemen oplost,
waarbij wij slechts ademloze toeschouwers zijn. Keer op keer lijken zich interne tegen-
stellingen te openbaren, die echter steevast door een nieuw “String Wonder” opgelost
worden. Het geeft de theorie iets onaantastbaars, en je vraagt je soms af hoe String
Theorie nog gefalsiﬁceerd zou kunnen worden.

Die magische eigenschappen hebben ook een schaduwzijde. Ze fascineren sommige
theoretici zodanig dat het uiteindelijke doel soms uit het oog wordt verloren. Dat doel

21

lijkt nu verder weg dan in 1984. Ondanks de mooie beloftes heeft String Theorie nog geen
enkel meetbaar resultaat opgeleverd. Van het Standaard Model zien we hoogstens een
vage schim, de details kunnen we nog niet uitwerken. Dat komt voor een deel omdat we
nog steeds bezig zijn te ontdekken wat String Theorie eigenlijk is.

Een andere reden is dat we met vreselijk veel mogelijkheden te maken hebben. Men
zou misschien van een kandidaat Theorie van Alles verwachten dat deze eenduidig is, met
andere woorden, dat er maar ´e´en mogelijke uitkomst is voor de wetten van de natuur.
Voorlopig lijken de feiten echter een geheel andere richting uit te wijzen.

Toen String Theorie in 1984 herboren werd, werd veel over “uniciteit” gesproken,
maar dat was duidelijk voorbarig. Ik 1984 kenden we namelijk niet ´e´en, maar vijf String
Theorie¨en. Daarna liep het snel uit de hand. Die vijf String Theorie¨en bestonden namelijk
in een wereld met negen ruimte en ´e´en tijd dimensie, dus tien dimensies in totaal. Onze
eigen ruimte heeft ook ´e´en tijd, maar slechts drie ruimte dimensies, corresponderend met
hoogte, breedte en diepte. In de jaren na 1984 werd snel duidelijk dat het in vier dimensies
veel eenvoudiger was om String Theorie¨en te construeren dan in tien. In plaats van vijf
bleken er miljarden mogelijkheden te zijn, of eigenlijk oneindig veel.

Ik was in 1986 zelf bij die ontwikkelingen betrokken, en in ons artikel werd dat grote
aantal oplossingen met enige nadruk genoemd. Dat werd niet als goed nieuws beschouwd.
Vele jaren later heb ik zelfs iemand ontmoet die beweerde dat ons werk hem ervan had
overtuigd String Theorie te verlaten en iets anders te gaan doen. Dat was uiteraard
niet onze bedoeling. Zelf was ik, denk ik, een van de weinigen die dit grote aantal String
Theorie¨en w´el als een positieve ontwikkeling beschouwde, en ik zal later uitleggen waarom.
Geleidelijk kwam er na 1986 wat orde in de chaos, en het begon duidelijk te worden dat
al die verschillende String Theorie¨en eigenlijk toch deel uitmaakten van een groter geheel.
Ze konden allemaal op een of andere manier gerelateerd worden met een van de vijf String
Theorie¨en in tien dimensies. Om van tien naar vier dimensies te komen worden dan zes
van de tien dimensies als het ware opgerold, zodat wij er slechts vier kunnen waarnemen.
Gewoonlijk beschouwen we al die vier-dimensionale String Theorie¨en als zogenaamde
“grondtoestanden” van een van de vijf tien-dimensionale. Om het begrip grondtoestand te
begrijpen kan men denken aan een gebergte met vele dalen. In dit beeld correspondeert het
gebergte met de theorie, en de verschillende dalen met de verschillende grondtoestanden.
De bewoners van ieder van die dalen zien slechts een klein deel van het gehele gebergte.
Niettemin is uiteindelijk alles met elkaar verbonden.

Dit beeld herstelt de verloren eenduidigheid weer enigszins. Weliswaar zijn er vele
grondtoestanden, maar er is slechts ´e´en Theorie. Althans, dat zou het ideaal zijn. We
hadden echter nog steeds vijf theorie¨en in plaats van ´e´en. Dat correspondeert dus met vijf
gebergtes, ieder met zijn eigen dalen. Vier jaar geleden kwam hier plotseling verandering
in. De vijf gebergtes bleken in werkelijk allemaal hetzelfde, maar vanuit verschillende
hoek bekeken. Net zoals de Mont Blanc er vanuit Frankrijk gezien geheel anders uit ziet
dan vanuit Itali¨e, zo bleken ook op het oog totaal verschillende String Theorie¨en eigenlijk
verschillende benaderingen van dezelfde theorie te zijn. Helaas hebben we nog geen exacte
formulering van die overkoepelende theorie. Daar wordt op dit moment druk naar gezocht.
Alles lijkt er op dit moment op te wijzen dat we weliswaar te maken hebben met ´e´en

22

theorie, maar die theorie heeft een enorm aantal grondtoestanden. Net zoals elk bergdal
vaak zijn eigen wetten en gebruiken kent, zo behoort bij elke grondtoestand een ander
stelsel natuurwetten. In plaats van electromagnetische, sterke en zwakke krachten zullen
er andere interacties zijn, in plaats van quarks en leptonen andere deeltjes. Als String
Theory correct is, is in ons heelal ´e´en van die vele mogelijkheden gerealizeerd. Een van de
grote uitdagingen is aan te tonen dat ons heelal inderdaad tot de mogelijke oplossingen
behoort.

Over andere grondtoestanden kunnen we slechts puur theoretisch discussieren.
In
tegenstelling tot een bewoner van een bergdal, die in principe een ander dal zou kunnen
gaan bekijken, kunnen wij in een andere grondtoestand niet eens bestaan. De quarks
en electronen waar wij uit zijn opgebouwd bestaan daar immers niet eens. Toch lijkt
het slechts een kleine stap om nu aan te nemen dat andere grondtoestanden wellicht in
een ander heelal gerealizeerd zouden kunnen zijn. Een dergelijke bewering ligt echter
buiten de grenzen van de natuurkunde. Per deﬁnitie kan de natuurkunde geen uitspraken
doen over zaken die niet waargenomen kunnen worden. We kunnen over andere mogelijke
“heelallen” slechts theoretisch spreken. Het zijn oplossingen van dezelfde vergelijkingen
waar ook ons heelal aan voldoet.

Deze gedachtengang past goed in een reeks van inzichten die ons op onze beschei-
den plaats in de cosmos hebben gewezen. Onze planeet bleek niet het centrum van het
zonnestelsel, onze zon is slechts een van de vele sterren en niet eens een heel bijzondere, en
hetzelfde geld voor ons gehele melkwegstelsel. Het lijkt vrij natuurlijk om aan te nemen
dat ook ons heelal, inclusief de quarks, leptonen en interacties die we waarnemen slechts
een van vele mogelijke is.

Er zijn belangrijke consequenties verbonden aan deze manier van denken. Als het
inderdaad zo is dat ons heelal, inclusief zijn natuurwetten en het gehele Standaard Model
slechts een van vele mogelijkheden is, dan impliceert dit dat er grenzen zijn aan wat we
kunnen uitrekenen. De eigenschappen van de quarks en leptonen, hun interacties, en de
parameters van het Standaard Model (of althans een deel daarvan) zijn bij het ontstaan
van het heelal vastgelegd, waarbij een keuze gemaakt is uit de vele mogelijkheden. Die
keuze zullen we nooit kunnen uitrekenen, want die had immers ook anders kunnen zijn.
Ik heb de indruk dat vele van mijn collega’s geloven of hopen dat dit uiteindelijk
niet het geval zal zijn. Men hoopt een soort wiskundige formule te vinden die maar
´e´en uitkomst heeft. Die ene uitkomst zou dan moeten corresponderen met onze vier-
dimensionale wereld, inclusief alle quarks, leptonen en de vier basiskrachten. Ook de
waarden van de negentien (of meer) parameters, zoals de massa’s van alle deeltjes zouden
uiteindelijk als oplossing uit een wiskundige berekening moeten komen rollen.

Het zou inderdaad zo kunnen zijn. Op dit moment is niet duidelijk wat er van die
enorme aantallen grondtoestanden overblijft wanneer we String Theory echt goed begri-
jpen. Het lijkt op het eerste gezicht misschien aantrekkelijk dat er maar ´e´en overblijft,
maar als je er even over nadenkt wordt duidelijk dat dit eigenlijk een ongewenst einde
van het verhaal zou zijn.

Ik zal proberen dat duidelijk te maken, maar eerst wil ik een leerzame historische
vergelijking maken. Kepler, een groot geleerde die we allemaal kennen van zijn theorie

23

van de planetenbanen, dacht dat de afstanden van de planeten tot de zon fundamentele
parameters waren, die uitgerekend moesten kunnen worden. Hij bedacht er een ingenieuze
theorie voor met in elkaar ingebedde regelmatige veelvlakken. Met onze huidige kennis
van zaken lijkt Kepler’s poging absurd. Kepler wist niet van het bestaan van de planeten
Uranus, Neptunus en Pluto, en dit feit alleen al haalt zijn theorie onderuit. Als hij
geweten had van het bestaan van andere zonnestelsels was hij er niet eens aan begonnen.
Toch kun je Kepler niet verwijten dat hij het probeerde. Je moet niet te snel aannemen
dat iets nooit uitgerekend zal kunnen worden. Wanneer je voldoende inzicht verwerft zal
uiteindelijk vanzelf wel duidelijk worden wat je wel en niet kunt uitrekenen. Het lijkt
me heel goed mogelijk dat we over enige tijd tot het inzicht komen dat er inderdaad ook
andere werelden met andere natuurwetten mogelijk zijn. Pogingen om alle parameters
van het Standaard Model uit te rekenen zullen dan even naief overkomen als wat Kepler
beoogde.

Hoewel de keuze uit de verschillende grondtoestanden willekeurig is vanuit wiskundig
oogpunt, is dat niet zo vanuit menselijk oogpunt. Ons bestaan is zeer nauw verbonden
met het Standaard Model en de precieze waarden van een aantal parameters. Een bekend
voorbeeld zijn de massa’s van de twee quarks waaruit het proton en het neutron bestaan.
Die quarks worden “up” en “down” genoemd, en het tweede is zwaarder dan het eerste.
Dit heeft het plezierige gevolg dat het proton stabiel is, terwijl een vrij neutron in ongeveer
15 minuten uiteen valt in een proton en een elektron. Wisselen we de twee quark massa’s
om dan is het net andersom. Het proton zou dan zeer snel vervallen in een neutron en
een positron. Het waterstof atoom zou niet stabiel zijn, evenmin als het water molecuul.
Ons leven zou volstrekt onmogelijk worden, we zouden niet eens ontstaan zijn. Er bestaat
een lange lijst van voorbeelden van dit type. Een aantal daarvan is nog indrukwekkender,
maar wat lastiger uit te leggen.

Ons gehele bestaan hangt af van een subtiele reeks processen die zich gedurende de
ontwikkeling van ons heelal hebben afgespeeld. Die processen hebben uiteindelijk een
planeet opgeleverd waar bijvoorbeeld het cruciale element koolstof in voldoende mate
aanwezig is. Verscheidene stappen in dit process hangen op een kritieke manier af van
parameters in het Standaard Model, zoals de massa’s van deeltjes en de sterktes van
interacties. Het lijkt vaak eenvoudig aan te tonen dat zelfs een vrij kleine wijziging van
bepaalde parameters het proces volledig lam gelegd zou hebben.

Vanuit dit oogpunt lijkt het absurd dat precies die parameter waarden uit een wiskundige

berekening zouden volgen. We zouden dan met een veel groter raadsel blijven zitten dan
we proberen op te lossen. Om deze reden was ik ook zeer tevreden toen bleek dat String
Theorie in hoge mate niet uniek was. Wanneer onze planeet de enige in het heelal zou zijn,
zou het een raadsel zijn waarom juist die ene planeet leefbaar was. Het feit dat er miljar-
den planeten zijn maakt het raadsel aanzienlijk minder ernstig. Op analoge wijze maakt
het feit dat er vele soorten heelal mogelijk zijn, het bestaan van condities voor intelligent
leven in ´ons heelal aanzienlijk minder absurd dan wanneer er slechts ´e´en mogelijkheid zou
zijn.

Dit soort redeneringen wordt vaak aangeduid met de term “anthropisch principe”. Dit
is eigenlijk een verzamelnaam voor verscheidene idee¨en, waarvan ik er een aantal overigens

24

vrij onzinnig vind. Het anthropisch principe stelt dat het heelal dat wij waarnemen wordt
gekenmerkt door het feit dat wij er zijn om het waar te nemen. Hiermee kan eigenlijk
niemand het oneens zijn. Wel met de consequenties die sommigen hieraan verbinden.

Het anthropisch principe heeft wat mij betreft alleen zin als ons heelal niet het enig
mogelijke is. Het heeft bovendien alleen zin binnen een geheel consistente theorie. Anders
weten we namelijk niet welke veranderingen van de parameters van ons heelal zinvol zijn.
Het zou bijvoorbeeld best zo kunnen zijn dat we de up/down quark massaverhouding
helemaal niet kunnen veranderen. Hoewel ik graag vele mogelijkheden voor de natu-
urwetten van het heelal zou willen hebben, zou ik ook graag zien dat de fundamentele
theorie uniek was. String Theorie lijkt die twee op eerste gezicht tegenstrijdige eisen in
zich te verenigen: volgens onze huidige inzichten is er slechts ´e´en theorie, maar zijn er
vele grondtoestanden mogelijk. Dit is eigenlijk de best denkbare uitkomst.

Het anthropisch principe zou de verklaring kunnen geven voor bepaalde toevalligheden
die vanuit het oogpunt van de theorie moeilijk te begrijpen zijn. Het zou kunnen verklaren
waarom up quarks lichter zijn dan down quarks, maar echt verbazingwekkend is dit mas-
saverschil eigenlijk niet. Het wordt interessanter wanneer we kijken naar gevallen waar
parameter verhoudingen zeer klein of zeer groot zijn. Bekende voorbeelden zijn de elec-
tron massa, die onwaarschijnlijk klein is, of de sterkte van de zwakke kracht. De waarde
van beide parameters is essentieel voor de ontwikkeling van ons heelal en ons bestaan,
maar dit dit is niet voldoende om te concluderen dat we de waarden van die parameters
begrijpen.

Waar het werkelijk om gaat is de vraag of er voor andere parameter waarden enige
vorm van intelligent leven mogelijk is. Als intelligent leven zich in elk denkbaar heelal
uiteindelijk zou ontwikkelen is het nog altijd niet te begrijpen waarom de natuur zich in
extremen zou begeven om juiste onze vorm van intelligent leven mogelijk te maken.

Dit leidt tot een formulering van het anthropisch principe die wellicht binnen het
kader van de exacte wetenschap valt. Het vereist op de eerste plaats een theorie die we
geheel onder controle hebben en waarvan we in het bijzonder alle mogelijke grondtoes-
tanden kennen, en daarmee alle mogelijke parameters en hun toegestane waarden. Verder
hebben we een deﬁnitie van intelligent leven nodig die niet op onze eigen quark-lepton
wereld gebaseerd is. Voor elk van de toegestane grondtoestanden zouden we dan moeten
uitrekenen of intelligent leven mogelijk is. Als dit alleen mogelijk is voor bepaalde extreme
parameter waarden, zijn die waarden daarmee verklaard.

Helaas is dit programma met onze huidige kennis van zaken volstrekt onuitvoerbaar.
Het is al vrijwel onmogelijk om te zeggen of leven in ons eigen heelal mogelijk is onder
drastisch gewijzigde condities. Het lijkt bijvoorbeeld redelijk om aan te nemen dat hier-
voor het element koolstof vereist is, maar het is anderszijds bijzonder moeilijk om andere
mogelijkheden uit te sluiten. Of er in een van de andere dalen van het String gebergte
intelligent leven kan bestaan is een vraag die ik bijzonder interessant, maar vele malen
moeilijker vind.

Hoe het ook zij, een waardig slot van het verhaal van de Hoge Energie fysica zou
voor mij al de eenvoudige constatering zijn dat wij in een van die vele dalen van dat
String gebergte leven. Dit is een bescheiden, maar heel misschien haalbaar doel. Als

25

dat zo is, en als String Theory aan onze verwachtingen voldoet, hebben we een complete
theorie voor alles wat er in ons heelal gebeurt, een theorie die precies voorspelt wat we in
eventuele toekomstige experimenten nog mogen verwachten, en die geen ruimte laat voor
verrassingen. Het zou helemaal mooi zijn als we ook nog kunnen begrijpen waarom wij
juist in dit heelal leven en niet in een ander. Helaas is op dit moment zelfs het eerste,
bescheiden doel niet meer dan een mooie droom.

Het voorgaande was een schets van een mogelijke aﬂoop van het verhaal. Het is de
aﬂoop die mij gezien de huidige stand van zaken het meest wenselijk lijkt, maar uiteindelijk
tellen slechts de harde resultaten. De natuur zal zich van mijn wensen vermoedelijk weinig
aantrekken. Ondanks het woord “slot” in de titel was het bepaald niet mijn bedoeling
om te suggeren dat het einde al spoedig bereikt zal worden. Integendeel, het zal nog vele
decennia werk vergen om String Theorie volledig in kaart te brengen. Ik verheug me op
een boeiende voortzetting van dit avontuur.

Acknowledgements: I would like to thank Beatriz Gato-Rivera for carefully reading

the English part of the text.

26

References

[1] L. Susskind, “The anthropic landscape of string theory” arXiv:hep-th/0302219.

[2] Bert Schellekens, “Naar een waardig slot”, 16 September 1998, ISBN 90-9012073-4

[3] F. Quevedo, “Lectures on superstring phenomenology”, arXiv:hep-th/9603074.

[4] R. Bousso and J. Polchinski, JHEP 0006 (2000) 006 [arXiv:hep-th/0004134].

[5] S. Kachru, R. Kallosh, A. Linde and S. P. Trivedi, Phys. Rev. D 68 (2003) 046005

[6] J. Polchinski,

“The Cosmological Constant

and

the String Landscape”,

[7] W. Lerche, D. L¨ust and A. N. Schellekens, “Chiral Four-Dimensional Heterotic

Strings From Selfdual Lattices”, Nucl. Phys. B 287, 477 (1987).

[8] S. Weinberg, “Anthropic Bound On The Cosmological Constant”, Phys. Rev. Lett.

[9] F. Denef and M. R. Douglas, “Distributions of ﬂux vacua” JHEP 0405 (2004) 072

[arXiv:hep-th/0301240].

arXiv:hep-th/0603249.

59 (1987) 2607.

[arXiv:hep-th/0404116].

27

