6
0
0
2
 
r
p
A
 
5
 
 
]
h
p
-
t
s
i
h
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
7
2
0
4
0
6
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Einstein, Kant, and Taoism

Y. S. Kim
Department of Physics, University of Maryland,
College Park, Maryland, 20742, U.S.A.

Abstract

It is said that Einstein’s conceptual base for his theory of relativity was
the philosophy formulated by Immanuel Kant. Then, is it possible to see how
Kant’s philosophy played a role in Einstein’s thinking without reading Kant’s
books? This question arises because it is impossible for physicists to read
Kant’s writings. Yes, it is possible if we use the method of physics. It is known
also that Kant’s mode of thinking was profoundly aﬀected by the geography
of Koenigsberg where he spent eighty years of his entire life. We examine
what aspect of this geography led Kant to create his philosophy upon which
Einstein’s concept of relativity was based. It is pointed out that the Eastern
philosophy of Taoism is a product of the geographical environment similar to
that of Kant’s Koenigsberg, and therefore that it is easy to absorb Kantianism
with Taoist background.

1 Introduction

From the philosophical point of view, Einstein was a Kantianist [1, 2]. It is also known
that Kant’s philosophy was inﬂuenced by the culture of Koenigsberg where he spent
his entire life [3]. In this article, we examine how Einstein’s thinking was inﬂuenced
by the lifestyle of Kant’s birth place.

According to Eugene Wigner, philosophers do not dictate others how to think.
They only interpret how people think [4]. Then Immanuel Kant (1724-1804) formu-
lated his philosophy based on the people he met throughout his life. Kant was born
and spent his entire life in an East Prussian city called Koenigsberg. He was strictly
a local person. Therefore, his line of thinking was thoroughly conﬁgured by the citi-
zens of Koenigsberg during his time. In 1946, this city became a Russian city called
Kaliningrad. Therefore, if Kaliningrad has a feature distinct from other places, we
are interested.

According to Karl Marx, philosophers interpret this world in various ways. There
comes the question of changing the world [5]. Marx was wrong if regarded himself
as the philosopher and Vladimir Lenin as the person who would change the world.
On the other hand, Marx was right if Kant was the philosopher and Einstein was
the person who changed the world. Einstein was more than a philosopher. He was a

physicist. Thus, philosophers can help us, but we cannot solely depend on them for
providing answers to what Einstein means to us. We are interested in how Einstein
was able to formulate his physical ideas which changed the world.

In this paper, we are interested in the aspect of Kantianism that things depend on
how observations are made, namely on the observer’s status of mind and on his/her
environment. Modern physics is an observer-dependent science. In special relativity,
the same physics can appear diﬀerently to observers in diﬀerent Lorentz frames. The
kinetic energy of a particle in one Lorentz frame can be written as E = p2/2m when
the particle speed is much smaller than the speed of light, while it takes the form
E = pc when the observer’s frame moves with a speed close to c.

In quantum mechanics, we have a wave-particle duality. For observers who can
see only particles, a particle looks like a particle. On the other hand, it looks like a
wave for observers who can see only waves. Quantum mechanics is also an observer-
dependent science, within the framework of Kant’s philosophy.

If Kantianism is a product of the geography of Koenigsberg now called Kalin-
ingrad, the best way to study this geography is to go there and look at the place and
talk to the people who live there and those who used to live there. For this purpose,
I went there in June of 2005 and spent three days and two nights. Indeed, based on
my observations, I am now able to assert that Kantianism, at least the aspect which
aﬀected Einstein, was a product of the geography of the city which served as Kant’s
entire world.

Again, if we believe in Kantianism, the contents of this article depend heavily
on who the author is, and how his brain was conﬁgured by his environments. The
author of the present paper was born in Korea and came to the United States in 1954
after high school graduation. He received both undergraduate (Carnegie-Mellon) and
graduate (Princeton) degrees in the United States. In addition, he has been teaching
American students since 1962 after joining the faculty of the University of Maryland.
He is in a position to compare Kant-oriented Koreans with American scientists with
the Edisonian tradition.

In Sec. 2, I report what I observed and learned while visiting Kant’s city now
called Kaliningrad. In Sec. 3, based on the observation I made there, we trace the
history of Koenigsberg which led Kant to formulate his philosophy. We list in Sec. 4
various examples in our daily life which can be explained in terms of Kantianism. In
Sec. 5, it is noted that modern physics is an observer-dependent science. It is then
pointed out that the origin of this observer dependence can be traced to Immanuel
Kant who constructed his philosophy based on the lifestyle of Koenigsberg where
everything is observer-dependent.

In Sec. 6, we trace the history to see that Taoism originated in ancient China
is based on diﬀerent observers with two opposite viewpoints. I then venture to say
that its historical origin is the same of that of Kantianism. We note in Sec. 7 that

2

Einstein did not communicate well with American physicists. The reason could be
that Einstein was a Kantianist while the philosophy of America is yet to be deﬁned.
Let us tentatively call the American philosophy “Edisonism.” The distinction between
these two philosophies is spelled out.

I started a systematic research on Einstein’s Kantian connection in 1995 while
reading a book review by Marie Arana-Ward in the Washington Post, an inﬂuential
newspaper published in the capital city of the United States. She was reviewing
a book written about Kaliningrad by Anne Applebaum [3]. Her review was much
shorter than the book, and is to the point. With her permission I include her article
in the Appendix of the present paper.

2 Geography of Kaliningrad

Immanuel Kant was born in an East Prussian city of Koenigsberg in 1724 and lived
there until he died in 1804. He left the city once for a brief period to attend his
father’s funeral. If Kant’s style of thinking was conﬁgured by the society where he
grew up and worked, he had contacts only with the citizens of Koenigsberg. Then
what aspect of Koenigsberg was so distinct from the rest of the world?

We learn history in order to understand what is happening today. Likewise, one
way to understand history is to study what is happening now to construct a picture
of the past. With this point in mind, let us see what is going on in Koenigsberg these
days. Since Kant wrote his books in German, we are tempted to locate Koenigsberg
within the territory of Germany, but it does not exist there. Furthermore, the city is
now a Russian city called Kaliningrad, located at the Baltic wedge between Poland
and Lithuania. Since 1945, Kaliningrad had been an important submarine base for
the Soviet Union until recently. It still serves as a naval base for Russia.

The best way to study the geography of a city is to go there and look at the city
and its surrounding areas. Indeed, for this purpose, I went to Kaliningrad in June of
2005. Because, the city’s primary function used to be to serve as a sensitive military
base for the Soviet Union, it was impossible to go there during the Soviet era. The
city is still an isolated place.

Before going to Kaliningrad, I attempted to contact a physics professor at the
University of Kaliningrad, but could not ﬁnd anyone. Thus, I had to arrange my visa
and hotel accommodation through the Intourist, a Russian tourist company which
has been operating since Stalin’s Soviet era. This tells us how isolated this city is.
There are no railway connections from Poland, and I had to ﬂy from Warsaw on a
propeller-driven airplane, operated by a branch of the LOT Polish airline. Its ﬂight
schedule was erratic. It is possible for Russians there to go to Moscow by overnight
trains, but they need transit visas to Lithuania and Latvia. There are no civilian

3

airports to accommodate jet airlines. In short, it is not yet completely safe to travel
to Kaliningrad.

When I arrived at the airport, a German lady whom I met on the plane asked me
whether I am interested in going to the city with her Russian friend who came to the
airport to pick her up. I said yes, because the place was totally strange to me, and I
would save sixty dollars on taxi fare. Both of them spoke German. This was precisely
what I was expecting to see. Kaliningrad is now a Russian city, but its German root
still persists. I stayed at a hotel called “Kaliningrad” located at the center of the city.
Most of the hotel guests came from Germany. Many of them were born there before
1945, and I enjoyed talking with them. I am also one of those who had to ﬂee in 1946
from my Korean hometown to avoid Soviet troops.

Before 1945, Koenigsberg was an important outpost for Germany, especially for
those German politicians with a big ambition of expanding eastward. During World
War II, Germans built powerful radio transmitters there to preach those in Baltic
nations how great Germany is. While Soviet troops were advancing toward Berlin in
1945, Hitler ordered all the 400,000 inhabitants of the Koenigsberg region to move
to western provinces of Germany, but only one half of them were able to ﬂee and the
other half were trapped by Stalin’s Soviet army.

Those trapped Germans were all sent to post-war construction sites in the Soviet
Union, and the city became ﬁlled with Russians. The Lomonosov campus of Moscow
State University was built by German laborers. With an understanding of Churchill
and Truman at the Potsdam conference (July 1945), Stalin annexed Koenigsberg
and its surrounding areas to the Soviet Union, and changed the name of the city
to Kaliningrad.
It was a big prize for Stalin because it gave him a much needed
non-freezing harbor for his Baltic ﬂeet.

What happened to Immanuel Kant known to and respected by the entire world?
Germans of course are very proud of Kant, who wrote his books in the language they
speak. They were not allowed to visit Kant’s grave during the Soviet era. How about
Russians? Russian couples usually have their wedding ceremonies on Saturdays. After
the ceremony, they visit the grave of their hero they respect most. Kant’s grave site
becomes very crowded with newlywed couples on Saturdays. Indeed, Kant is one of
the Russian heros. How do I know this? I was at Kant’s grave site and saw them
when I was in Kaliningrad.

Kant’s grave is located outside an old church building located at the city center
of Kaliningrad. Many prominent persons from Koenigsberg were buried inside the
church. Kant was buried outside because he did not believe in Jesus. There is a
museum dedicated to Kant in one of the church turrets. Russians, even during the
Soviet era, did their best to preserve the historical items relating to Immanuel Kant.
We shall continue this story of Kant museum in Sec. 6.

After the collapse of the Soviet Union, the Russian government did not and still

4

does not have enough resources to impose a strong inﬂuence on the region, and
foreigners are allowed to visit the city of Kaliningrad. Naturally, many Germans
come and spend money there. Russians love German money but want to maintain
their ﬁrm control over the city and surrounding region. On the other hand, Germans
like to have something for their money. They want to have their city back.

Germans built a brewery there and produce beer trademarked “Koenigsberg,” and
I drank a bottle of Koenigsberg while I was in Kaliningrad. It was very good. Until
2005, their university was called “Kaliningrad State University,” but it was renamed
to “Kant State University.” It is very safe to assume that Germans contributed a
large sum of money to the university for this name change. German capitalists are
very busy in constructing resort facilities along the Baltic coast of the Kaliningrad
region.

For the same city, Germans and Russians have two diﬀerent views. It is unlikely
that there will be a violent armed struggle often seen in other parts of the world.
Then it would be interesting to see how these two diﬀerent views can be blended
into the destiny of Kaliningrad. One place with the same destiny with two diﬀerent
ways of looking at the same place! With this background, we can trace the history of
Kaliningrad or Koenigsberg.

3 History of Koenigsberg

In 2005, there was a celebration in Kaliningrad to commemorate the 750-th anniver-
sary of the founding of the city. President Vladimir Putin of Russia and Chancellor
Gerhardt Schroeder of Germany attended the ceremony marking this occasion. Ex-
actly 750 years before, a rich and strong man built a castle at the top of a mountain
there and proclaimed himself to be the king. This is the reason why the place was
called king’s mountain. However, the land and its people existed many years before
this Koenig. What did they do? What happened to them?

If we look at the map containing, Kaliningrad, Lithuania, Poland, Belarus, and
Ukraine, there are no natural barriers to isolate themselves from foreign invaders.
Thus, anyone with a strong army could march into the area and impose his own
management and his own cultural values. For this reason, the people there had
to develop skills to accommodate many diﬀerent ways of looking at themselves.
I
learned this from Applebaum’s book entitled Between East and West: Across the
Borderlands of Europe [3], and its comprehensive book review by Marie Arana-Ward
in the Washington Post (November 1994).

Then, what makes Kaliningrad diﬀerent from Poland or Ukraine? The key diﬀer-
ence is that this area has a large lagoon which can provide a harbor for the vessels
navigating in the Baltic Sea. Thus, the city served as a ﬁshing center for centuries.

5

Unlike Poland or Ukraine, this coastal area is blessed with generous rains. This allows
grasses to grow providing good food to cattles. Kaliningrad was a center for cattles
producing high-quality meats. While I was there, I enjoyed a steak of generous size.
Kaliningrad is also blessed with abundance of amber. There are many amber
mines along the Baltic coast. Katherine the Great of Russia built an amber room
in her palace from the ambers from this area. The original amber room was taken
away by German troops during World II when they surrounded the city of Leningrad
and occupied Katherine’s palace located at the place now called “Pushkin.” It is
believed that the amber room in its disassembled form is buried in Koenigsberg, but
its location is not known. A remake of this amber room is now in the Hermitage
Museum of Saint Petersburg.

Thus, before politicians started giving names to the place such as Koenigsberg or
Kaliningrad, this harbor city was a commercial center for the Baltic Sea, as Venice
was for the Mediterranean Ocean. The region became richer and stronger, while
accommodating many diﬀerent points of view from diﬀerent people from diﬀerent
places. The area surrounding the city became a small country called Prussia, with
Koenigsberg as its capital city.

Prussia became so rich that it was able to purchase a large chunk of land west
of Poland including the city now known as Berlin. Since this new area was close to
Western European countries going through industrial revolution, it developed very
rapidly, and Prussia’s center of gravity moved to Berlin. The original Prussia then
became absorbed into a new empire called Deutschland, and it became a province
called East Prussia. In Poland, this region is still called Prussia.

While there was a rich ﬂow of history, Koenigsberg had enough resources to con-
struct and maintain a top-class university, cultivating many outstanding scholars.
Depending on political climate of the city, this university went through diﬀerent
names. The present name is Kant State University. Until 1945, the university con-
stantly maintained its excellent academic tradition consistent with Immanuel Kant’s
creativity. The university went through a dark age when the city was closed during
the cold-war era. From 1945 to 2005, the university was called Kaliningrad State Uni-
versity. It served as a local institution providing collage education to young Russians
from the Kaliningrad region. These days, both Russians and Germans seem to agree
on the need for reconstruction of its academic tradition.

In physics, the University of Koenigsberg was the birth place of mathematical
physics. We know how to write down Coulomb’s law for two charged particles. The
same law can be written in terms of electric ﬁeld and Gauss’s law. Gauss’s law was
extended to cover all Maxwell’s equations. The integral form of Maxwell’s equations
was completed at the University of Koenigsberg, as Arnold Sommerfeld states clearly
in his book on electrodynamics [6]. Sommerfeld was a student there.

6

Table 1: Although Minkowski formally declared the Lorentz covariance of Maxwell’s
equations 1907, Einstein knew it before 1905 and was afraid of the physical world
in which Newton’s mechanics and electrodynamics have two diﬀerent transforma-
tion properties. To those who know only Maxwell’s electrodynamics, this world is
Lorentzian. To those who know only Newton’s mechanics, the same world is Galilean.
Einstein wanted to have one transformation law for both mechanics and electrody-
namics.

Space and Time

Maxwell

Newton

Lorentzian

YES

NO

Galilean

NO

YES

While those Koenigsbergers were busy in studying Maxwell’s equations, Hendrik
Lorentz of the Netherlands and Henri Poincar´e of France were working on the mathe-
matics known today as the Lorentz group. Hermann Minkowski from Lithuania was a
graduate student at the University of Koenigsberg at that time. He became interested
in whether Maxwell’s equations and their solutions are consistent with the Lorentzian
world. He continued working on this problem while he was a professor at the Uni-
versity of Munich, where Einstein was a student. Einstein was not a good student
to him (he was never a good student to anyone), but he sensed from Minkowski the
Lorentz covariance of electrodynamics, even though Minkowski did not publish his
work in 1907. Then, how about Newtonian mechanics? This is the question which
confronted Einstein, as is illustrated in Table 1.

As I emphasized in Sec. 2, this is the type of question the citizens of Koenigsberg
had to face throughout their history. This is precisely what Kant’s philosophy is
about. Indeed, Kantianism is a product of the lifestyle of Koenigsberg.

4 Illustrative Examples of Kantianism

In order to gain a concrete grasp of Kantianism, let us examine some examples in the
real world which can be explained within the framework of Kantianism. To physi-
cists, it is impossible to understand physical or philosophical theories without seeing
what happens in the real world. We shall discuss here limitation of observations,

7

observations with a ﬁxed frame of mind, diﬀerent manifestation of the same object,
and construction of the true world based on diﬀerent observations.

The Italian city of Trieste is known to physicists as the home of the International
Center for Theoretical Physics. The center is about ﬁve kilometers from the down-
town, and there is a bus connection along the beach where many beautiful girls swim
and relax. When I was on the bus with my friend, it was half full, and I could see
everybody including the driver. I told my friend everybody on this bus in woman.
He then told me it is so because my eyes can detect only women. My friend was
a physicist and knew how to speak the language of modern physics. I never found
out whether it was so because there were only women or because of measurement
problems with my eyes.

At a dinner time, I said that Trieste is an excellent place to stage a war. It has
sea, mountains, islands, and beautiful ladies. A perfect combination! Of course, my
comment outraged everybody, but military professionals would agree with me.
In
fact, many generals in the past chose this place to ﬁght. Then what do I have in
common with those military people? The answer is very simple.
I was born and
raised in Korea. When I was born, Korea was hosting Japanese troops. American
and Soviet troops after 1945. Then the Korean War (1950-53) before I came to the
United States 1954 after my high school graduation. This means that my body and
mind were conﬁgured in the war environment. When I weigh things, I still compare
them with the weight of the M-1 riﬂe of the U.S. army weighing ten pounds and its
bayonet weighing one pound.

About 4,500 years ago, there was a king named Yao in China. While he was
looking for a man who could serve as his prime minister, he heard from many people
that a person named Shiyu was widely respected and had a deep understanding of the
world. The king then sent his messengers to invite Shiyu to come to his palace and
run the country. After hearing the king’s message, Shiyu, without saying anything,
walked down to a creek in front of his house and started washing his ears. He thought
he heard the dirtiest story in his life.

Shiyu is still respected in the Eastern world as one of the wisest men in history. We
do not know whether this person existed or is a made-up personality. In either case,
we are led to look for a similar person in the Western world. In ancient Greece, each
city was run by its city council. As we experience even these days, people accomplish
very little in committee meetings. Thus, it is safe to assume that the city councils
in ancient Greece did not handle matters too eﬃciently. For this reason, there was
a well-respected wise man, like Shiyu, who never attended his city council meetings.
His name was Idiot. Idiot was a wise man, but he never contributed his wisdom to
his community. His fellow citizens labeled him as a totally useless person. This was
how the word idiot was developed in the Western world.

Idiot and Shiyu had the same personality if they were not the same person. How-

8

ever, Idiot is a useless person in state-centered societies like Sparta. The same person
is regarded as the ultimate wise man in a self-centered society like Korea. I cannot
say that I know everything about other Asian countries, but I have a deep knowledge
of Korea where I was born and raised. The same person looks quite diﬀerently to
observers in diﬀerent cultural frames. While living in the United States with my East-
ern background, I was frequently forced to ﬁnd a common ground for two seemingly
diﬀerent views.

As an example closer to physics, let us look at a Coca-Cola can. It appears like a
circle if we look at it from the top, while it looks like a rectangle from its side. The
real thing is a three-dimensional circular cylinder.

Immanuel Kant emphasized the importance of the observer’s subjective viewpoint
in his book entitled “Kritik der reinen Vernunft” whose ﬁrst and second editions were
published in 1781 and 1787 respectively. While Kant was interested in ﬁnding the
real thing from diﬀerent observations, he became to believe in absoluteness of the real
thing.

However, using his own logic, he ended up with a conclusion that there must be the
absolute inertial frame, and that we only see the frames dictated by our subjectivity.
He noted that there are many moving bodies in the universe. To him, the earth also
was a moving object, like all other planets or stars. He then became obsessed with the
absolute frame of reference. There are still many who believe in the absolute frame.
Here we cannot blame Kant too much for failing to come up with the principle of
relativity. He did not have the beneﬁt of Lorentz-covariant formulation of Maxwell’s
equations.

We all know how Einstein’s view is diﬀerent from the Kantian view of the universe.
However, without Kantian philosophical background, it could have been very diﬃcult
for Einstein to formulate his relativity. He introduced a Lorentzian dimension for the
time variable.

5 Kantian Inﬂuence on Modern Physics

Unlike classical physics, modern physics depends heavily on observer’s state of mind or
environment. The wave-particle duality is a product of Kantianism. If your detector
can measure only particle properties, particles behave like particles. On the other
hand, if your detector can detect only wave properties, particles behave like waves.
Heisenberg had come up with the uncertainty principle to reconcile these two diﬀerent
interpretations. This question is still being debated, and is a lively issue these days.
In special relativity, observers in diﬀerent Lorentz frames see the same physical
system diﬀerently. The energy-momentum relation for a massive particle is E =
p2/2m if it is at rest. However, an observer moving with a speed close to that of light

9

would insist that the same relation should be E = cp. It was Einstein who was able
to settle the quarrel between these two observers, as is illustrated in Table 2 [7]. This
is a manifestation of Kantianism.

Table 2: Further contents of Einstein’s E = mc2. Massive and massless particles have
diﬀerent energy-momentum relations. Einstein’s special relativity gives one relation
for both. Wigner’s little group uniﬁes the internal space-time symmetries for massive
and massless particles. The covariant harmonic oscillators can explain why the quark
model and the parton model are two diﬀerent manifestations of the same Lorentz-
covariant entity.
.

Massive, Slow

COVARIANCE

Massless, Fast

Energy-
Momentum

E = p2/2m

Einstein’s
E = q(cp)2 + (mc2)2

Internal
Space-time
Symmetry

S3

S1, S2

Wigner’s
Little Group

Gauge Trans.

Relativistic
Extended
Particles

Quark Model

Partons

Covariant Model
of
of Hadrons

E = cp

S3

Einstein, in 1905, formulated his special relativity for a point particle. It became
known that particles have internal space-time symmetries. Massive particles have
If they move fast or become
the spin degree of freedom when they are at rest.
massless, they preserve the spin along the direction of momentum, but the transverse
components become contracted into one gauge degree of freedom. Is it possible to
combine these into one Lorentz-covariant theory? This work was started in Wigner’s
1939 paper on representations of the Lorentz group [8], but was not completed until
1990 [9]. The second row of Table 2 illustrates this aspect of Kantianism.

The concept of spin comes from quantum mechanics. Thus, Wigner’s work con-
stitutes an important component of the task of combining quantum mechanics with

10

Einstein’s special relativity. The remaining problem is whether quantum mechan-
ics, with its probability interpretation, is consistent with Einstein’s relativity. Many
people believe that the present form of quantum ﬁeld theory is the answer to this
question. They are partially right.

In order to combine quantum mechanics with relativity, we should know how to
deal with its wave picture in a Lorentz-covariant manner. It is a trivial matter to
build plane waves covariantly starting from the Klein-Gordon equation. The present
form of quantum ﬁeld theory leading to the Lorentz-covariant S-matrix and Feynman
diagrams is based on those plane waves. However, because of this, ﬁeld theory cannot
explain standing waves in a Lorentz-covariant manner.

Let us look at the hydrogen atom. It looks like a localized probability entity if
the atom is on the table. How would it look to an observer on a bicycle? The correct
answer to this question is “We do not know.” This has been an agonizing question to
Paul A. M. Dirac. He examined the role of the c-number time energy relation, light-
cone coordinate system, and harmonic oscillators for representations of the Lorentz
group.
If we combine all of these ideas, it is possible to construct oscillator wave
functions which can be Lorentz-boosted [10]. It is then possible to work out the third
row of Table 2 by showing that the covariant oscillator produces three-dimensional
harmonic oscillators for the quark model for slow hadrons and the parton model for
fast-moving hadrons.

6 Kantianism and Taoism

During the years 1985 - 1991, I went to Princeton every two weeks to tell Professor
Eugene Wigner stories he wanted to hear. Of course I was telling him about physics.
In order to do this, I had to tune my mode of thinking to Wigner’s way of reasoning.
I once asked him whether he thinks like Immanuel Kant. He said Yes. I then asked
him whether Einstein was a Kantianist. Wigner said “Yes, Einstein was deﬁnitely
a Kantianist.” I then asked Wigner whether he studied Kant’s philosophy while he
was in college. He said No, and said that he realized he had been a Kantianist after
writing so many papers in physics. This conversation took place in 1989 [4].

He added that philosophers do not dictate others how to think, but their job is to
describe systematically how people think. Here, Wigner was talking about Immanuel
Kant who formulated his philosophy based on the thinking mode of the inhabitants
of Koenigsberg. Wigner then told me that I was the only person who asked him this
question, and asked me how I knew the Kantian way of reasoning was working in his
mind. I gave him the following answer.

I never had any formal education in oriental philosophy, but I know that my
frame of thinking is aﬀected by my Korean background. One important aspect is

11

that Immanuel Kant’s name is known to every high-school graduate in Korea, while
he is unknown to Americans. When I mention Kant’s name to American physicists,
they dismiss him as a philosopher having nothing to do with physics. The question
then is whether there is something common between Eastern culture and Kantian
philosophy.

I would like to answer this question in the following way. Koreans absorbed a
bulk of Chinese culture during the period of the Tang dynasty (618-907 AD). At that
time, China was the center of the world as the United States is today. This dynasty’s
intellectual life was based on Taoism which tells us, among others, that everything
in this universe has to be balanced between its plus (or bright) side and its minus
(or dark) side. This way of thinking forces us to look at things from two diﬀerent
or opposite directions. This aspect of Taoism could constitute a “natural frequency”
which can be tuned to the Kantian view of the world where things depend how they
are observed.

Later in 1180 AD, a Chinese philosopher named Chu Shi rewrote Confucian doc-
trines within the framework of Taoism. The entrance lobby of the main building
(commonly called Stalin Tower) of Moscow State University is decorated with a set
of plaques of the world’s greatest scholars, including Socrates, Plato, Aristotle, and
Marx. Chu Shi is also included in this set of wise people. His version of Confucianism,
commonly called neo-Confucianism, is a strong philosophy governing all aspects of
government and social order, based on Taoist understanding of the universe.

In 1393, Korea went through a revolution, and a new dynasty emerged with a
new governing philosophy, namely neo-Confucianism. It was two hundred years after
Chu Shi wrote his books in Fukien province (south-east) of China. This new Korean
dynasty lasted for more than 500 years until 1910. It is generally agreed that this
longevity is due to its ideology. Even though there are many Christian churches there,
Korea can still be regarded as a Confucian-Taoist country. Its national ﬂag came from
one of the Taoist drawings addressing the symmetry of our universe. It could also be
said that Korea’s recent progress in democracy and capitalism is largely due to its
academic tradition inherited from this neo-Confucianism.

The story is the same for Japan. Japan sent many students to China during the
Tang period, and Kyoto was initially copied from Tang’s capital city called Chang
An. When the Tokugawa family was in charge of Japan from 1603 to 1870, their
governing ideology was neo-Confucianism formulated by Chu Shi. While Japanese
disagree, Koreans say that Japan imported neo-Confucianism from Korea by kidnap-
ping Korean Chu-Shi scholars when Japan’s Toyotomi Hideyoshi invaded Korea in
1593.

Toyotomi Hideyoshi was the ﬁrst person to unify Japan, but he was not satisﬁed
with the Japanese islands. He fancied himself to be the ruler of the big land, namely
China. In order to crown himself as the emperor of China, he sent his troops to Korea

12

in order to make his way to China. His troops fought in Korea for seven years. Even
though his troops committed atrocities beyond human imagination to Koreans, he
remains as a very interesting person among Koreans.

Toyotomi is of course remembered by Japanese as a great man. The Osaka Castle
was originally built by him, but was burnt down by Tokugawa’s troops during the
power transition. The Tokugawa family then built a bigger castle to honor him. Since
he came from the lowest social class, there are many jokes about him. One of them
says that he looks like a human being if monkeys look at him, while he looks like
a monkey if humans look at him. This deﬁnitely is a Taoist-style joke. It is also a
Kantianist joke.

Taoism is not only a tool for politicians but also provides a basis for scientiﬁc
reasoning.
If there is one side, there must be the opposite side. Thus, there are
two walls in one-dimensional world, one on one side and one on the other side. Our
three-dimensional universe is therefore bounded by six walls. We use this concept of
box normalization in modern physics, especially in kinetic theory of gases as well in
quantization of ﬁelds.

Japan’s Yukawa Hediki was quite fond of Taoism and studied systematically the
books by Laotse and Chuangtse who were the founding fathers of Taoism [11]. Many
younger Japanese physicists used to complain that Yukawa was too philosophical,
and did not listen to him. It is not unusual for children not to listen to their parents.
While this was going on, I studied Yukawa’s papers very carefully.

During the later half of the 19th century, Japanese studied Western ideology
diligently. Fukuzawa Yukichi was quite interested in the constitutional monarchy
practiced in England. This is why Japan has a government similar to that of Britain.
Fukuzawa is also known as the founder of Keio University, and his portrait is on
the Japanese currency for 10,000 Yens (approximately 80 USD). During this period,
Japanese scholars translated many books from the West. One of them was “Das
Kapital” written by Karl Marx. While Chinese disagree, Japanese say that many
Chinese became communists by reading the Japanese version of Das Kapital.

Likewise, they translated books written by Immanuel Kant. In the case of Kant,
Japanese not only absorbed his philosophy, but also extended it to make their own
version of Kantianism. Japanese were able to do this because they already had their
own philosophical base similar to that of Kantianism, namely Taoist base. We shall
return to this story in Sec. 7.

During the period from 1910 to 1945, many Koreans went to Japan to study.
They studied Western ideologies including Marxism and Kantianism by reading books
written in Japanese. With the same Taoist base, Koreans were quick to appreciate
Kantianism.

Because Japan and Korea share the same philosophical base, it is very easy to
understand and appreciate papers written by traditional Japanese scholars such as

13

Yukawa. My publication record will indicate that I studied Yukawa’s papers before
becoming seriously interested in Wignerism. Indeed, I picked up a signal of possible
connection between Kantianism and Taoism while reading Yukawa’s papers carefully,
and this led to my bold venture to ask Wigner whether he was a Kantianist in 1989,
and to my recent venture to Kaliningrad.

I would like to stress that Taoism is not conﬁned to the ancient Chinese world.
It forms the philosophical base for Sun Tzu’s classic book on military arts [12]. Sun
Tzu is a very popular ﬁgure among young people in the United States these days.
My maternal grandfather was ﬂuent in the Chinese classic literature, and he was
particularly fond of Sun Tzu. He told me many stories from Sun Tzu’s books. This
presumably is how my Taoist background became stronger than those of other Asian
scientists.

Sun Tzu’s form of Taoism is practiced frequently in the United States. Let us look
at American football games. The oﬀensive strategy does not rely solely on brute force,
but is aimed at breaking the harmony of the defense. For instance, when the oﬀensive
team is near the end zone, the defense becomes very strong because it covers only
a small area. Then, it is not uncommon for the oﬀense to place four wide-receivers
instead of two. This will divide the defense into two sides while creating a hole in the
middle. Then the quarter-back can carry the ball to the end zone. The key word is
to destroy the balance of the defense.

There are two opposite views of everything in Taoism. Does this mean that we
should take only one view and discard the other? No! The truth is somewhere
between them. Finding the harmony between these two opposite views is the ideal
way to live in this world. We cannot always live like Shiyu, nor like Idiot, mentioned
in Sec 4. The key to happiness is to ﬁnd a harmony between the individual and the
society to which he/she belongs. The key word here seems to be “harmony,” and this
is what Taoism preaches us.

To Kantianists, however, it is quite natural for the same character to appear
diﬀerently in two diﬀerent environments, again as the case of Shiyu and Idiot. The
problem is to ﬁnd the absolute value from these two diﬀerent faces. Does this absolute
value exist? According to Kant, it exists. It exists if we ﬁnd something common to
both. This sounds very much like Taoism.

Finally, let us examine how Taoism was developed in ancient China. After the last
ice age, China was sparsely populated. On this vast land, there were many isolated
pockets of small tribes. Then they came to the banks of China’s great rivers, namely
the Yellow and Yangtze Rivers. There, they developed agriculture and commerce,
using the fertile lands on the river banks and transportation system provided by
the waterways. Then there came communication problems among diﬀerent groups
of people with diﬀerent languages. They started to draw pictures to communicate,
and sing songs to express their feelings toward others. It is well known that Chinese

14

It is also well known that Chinese, unlike other
characters came from drawings.
languages, has tones. Their spoken language has tones because of its musical origin.
In addition, those Chinese had to develop the skills of accommodating the views
of others. This became Taoism. Taoism was not dictated by a single philosopher or
group of philosophers.
It became a philosophy because philosophers attempted to
document the way how the people think. This aspect is strikingly similar to the way
in which Kantianism was developed from the lifestyle of Koenigsbergers.

7 Einstein and American Physicists

Einstein came from Germany to Princeton in 1933, and he lived there until 1955.
He liked America and became a American citizen in 1940. Yet, Einstein did not
communicate well with American physicists. People are wondering why?

In order to give my answer to this problem, I have to confess that I have been
having problems with Physical Review referees since 1970 when I started asserting my
own views in physics. I still have problems, but my important papers have already
been published in the appropriate sections of the Physical Review. For this reason, I
can entertain myself these days whenever I receive hostile reports from the referees.
Whenever I receive those reports, I assume Einstein had the same problem with
American physicists.

This does not mean that I do not respect American physicists and their tradition.
I learned about Thomas Edison before Einstein. Not many American physicists know,
but I know that Lee de Forest found out in 1906 that the grid in a vacuum tube can
regulate the ﬂow of current from the anode to cathode. De Forest never found out
that this has something to do with the traﬃc of electrons, but his discovery was
the starting point for electronic industry which changed the entire world. De Forest
was an excellent American physicist, but he would have had diﬃculty in talking to
Einstein.

In my opinion, Thomas Edison was the best American philosopher. Edisonism is
not restricted to experimentalists. Like all American physicists, I write papers when
I do not have ideas. I obtain new results while writing papers, and this is true even
for the present paper. While writing this paper, I got an idea that Taoism developed
in ancient China has the geographical origin similar to that of Kant’s Koenigsberg.

Then, is there a documented version of Edison’s philosophy? Yes, let us look at
the Gospel of Matthew in the New Testament. Go to Ch.7, vrs. 7 and 8. Ask, and
it shall be given you; seek ye shall ﬁnd; knock, and and it shall opened unto you. For
every one that asketh receiveth; and he that seeketh ﬁndeth; and to him that knocketh
it shall be opened. The New Testament is a very important philosophical document
if we insist on philosophy. The only problem with the Bible is that it is too easy to

15

read.

Since I have been in the United States since 1954 after my high school graduation,
since I have been teaching American students since 1962, and since I have an adequate
number papers published in the Physical Review, I am fully qualiﬁed to regard myself
as a bona-ﬁde American physicist. Yet, when I think and write, I am relying on my
Eastern tradition which I explained in Sec. 6.
I become excited when I ﬁnd an
explanation of fast-moving particles in terms of what happens to them when they are
rest. I usually get referee comments that I do not say anything new for particles at
rest when I talk about those at rest. They are not able to sense the other side of my
story, namely what happens to observers on bicycles.

More recently, I become excited when I ﬁnd out what happens in optics in terms
of what I know from particle physics. Thus, to American particle physicists, I look
like an optics man, not one of them. To optics people, I am not one of them, because
my papers start with what I learned in particle physics. I am in a situation similar to
Japan’s Toyotomi Hideyoshi mentioned in Sec. 6, who looks like a monkey to humans
while looking like a human being to monkeys.

I was of course aware of this problem and have been looking for a solution for
many years.
I am still continuing my eﬀort along this direction. Of course the
solution consists largely of understanding of the cause of the problem. My tentative
conclusion was that I am a Kantianist while Americans in general are not, but I was
eager to ﬁnd a convincing evidence to support my assertion.

This is precisely why I went to Kaliningrad last summer even though the trip was
inconvenient if not dangerous. I visited the Kant museum twice while staying there.
The museum dedicated one room for the books written about Kant’s philosophy.
There are many books written in German and many in Russian. This is not sur-
prising because Kant wrote his books in German, and the museum is under Russian
management. What is surprising is that there are many books written in Japanese.
There are also Japanese scrolls hanging on the wall. These scrolls contain quotations
from Kant’s books written in poetic Japanese.

Since many people in the world write books in English, one would expect some
Kant-related books written in English. I could not ﬁnd any. I was surprised, but
not surprised from my experience with English-speaking people in the United States.
This is a clear evidence that, while there is a resonance frequency in the Japanese
way of thinking tuned to Kantianism, there are none in the Anglo-Saxon culture. I
knew this before, but I was able to conﬁrm this in Kaliningrad. This was one of
the happiest moments in my life. As I said before, Japan and Korea share the same
philosophical base, and I am very proud to be a Kantianist.

I was happy also because I can now tell why Einstein was not able to communicate
with American physicists. Einstein was a Kantianist, while Americans are not. Amer-
icans are Edisonians, and they have their reason to be proud of themselves. I have

16

no complaints because I am also an American physicist in the Edisonian tradition,
and the United States has been very nice to me.

Concluding Remarks

In this paper, we attempted to understand Kantian inﬂuence on Einstein in terms of
the geography and history of Koenigsberg. It is possible to understand the problem
without reading Kant’s books if we use the method of physics, namely abstraction
from the things we observe in the real world and then apply the abstraction to predict
what would happen in other parts of the real world. Using the same method, we found
what happened in ancient China from what happened in Kant’s land of Koenigsberg.
Some of my younger Asian colleagues complain that they are handicapped to
do original research because of the East-West cultural diﬀerence. I disagree. This
diﬀerence could be the richest source of originality.

I decided to write this article because it is too diﬃcult to read Kant’s books. I
complained to one of my German friends that there are only two sentences on one
page of his books. My friend disagreed. He said Kant’s one sentence usually covers
two pages. Thus, the best way to understand his philosophy to write my own articles
about him, in the tradition of Thomas Edison.

Appendix

I started doing my research presented in this paper while I was reading a book review
written by by Marie Arana-Ward of the Washington Post in November of 1994. She
was talking about a book by Anne Applebaum entitled “Between East and West,
Across the Borderlands of Europe” (Pantheon, New York, 1994). Since this review
is much shorter than the book and explains the geographical origin of Kantianism, I
append her article to this paper with her permission.

THERE ARE FEW PLACES on earth as politically volatile as the lands that
lie between Russia and the rest of Europe. Both coveted and despised, this protean
corridor of unobstructed terrain has been a stomping ground for every grandiose
politician - East or West - whose imagination was ever kindled by dreams of conquest.
“For a thousand years, the geography of the borderlands dictated their destiny,”
writes Spectator deputy editor Anne Applebaum in her probing portrait of the terri-
tory that embraces eastern Germany, Lithuania. Belarus, Moldova, Eastern Poland
and the Ukraine. “Five centuries ago an army on horseback could march from a castle
on the Baltic to a fort on the Black Sea without meeting a physical obstacle greater
than a fast-running river or a wide forest. Even now, a spy running east from Warsaw
to Kiev would ﬁnd nothing natural to obstruct him.”

17

And so for centuries the people of these frontiers endured carnage and plunder,
slipping in and out of identities faster than a cartographer could record the changes:
Mongols invaded, and then Turks, Swedes, Muscovites, Moldovan princes, Cossacks,
Teutonic Knights, Polish kings, German emperors, Nazis, Soviet hordes - each raid
more catastrophic than the last. The Swedes destroyed the cities, the Cossacks set ﬁre
to the villages, the Teutonic Knights brought on a holocaust, wiping out all trace of
indigenous Prussians. ”But most of the time,” writes Applebaum, ”the Polonizations
and Prussiﬁcations and Russiﬁcations came to nothing. The borderlands were simply
too wide and too empty, it was too diﬃcult for any invading nation to maintain
permanent rule.”

Because of this failure to bring about long-term change there were, until recently,
no nation-states as we know them today. “For a thousand years the people of the
borderlands spoke their dialects and worshiped their gods, while the waves of invaders
washed over them, mingled, receded, and washed over them again.” Today a traveler
can encounter a native Pole, a person raised in the Soviet Union, a citizen of the new
Belarus - and they in fact may all be one man, an individual who has never set foot
outside his father’s village.

A borderland peasant asked his nationality in the 18th century probably would
have replied tutejszj - “a person from here.” That sense of the existential still persists.
A scene in Gunter Grass’s The Tin Drum captures the mindset: It is 1945, and as
Soviet soldiers pour into the borderlands, terrorizing the locals, the protagonist’s
grandmother refuses to ﬂee east or west, ”I am not German enough!” she cries.
“And I am not Polish enough, either!” She belongs to her potato ﬁeld; it is the only
allegiance she considers worthwhile.

After the war, it was Stalin’s plan to have the borderlands “disappear into Soviet
Russia: Call it ethnic cleansing, to use a phrase coined later in another context,
or call it cultural genocide. Either way, it was very successful.” The region was
transformed beyond recognition. Whole nations slid beyond memory, and we in the
West hardly took notice, Kiev became a Russian city, Lithuania a Russian province,
and the colorful, variegated cultures of the borderlands were relegated to the dusty
shelves of emigre bookshops.

Applebaum’s Between East and West is a heroic attempt to bring the region back
into our collective consciousness. Armed with 35 maps and a “forensic passion,” she
leads us into this forgotten land, holding a close mirror to its villains and heroes and
letting us see it warts and all.

She begins, ﬁttingly, in Kaliningrad - Koenigsberg - a district once famed as the
City of Enlightenment - Kant’s city - before it was purged of Prussians and reravaged
centuries later by Soviet troops.

“Sprechen Sie Deutsch?” someone asks her on the streets of the now hideous
city. The man is a Belarusian from Pinsk, a slave laborer in a German prison factory

18

during the war. It is the ﬁrst of a multitude of encounters that will lead Applebaum
- and us - to a clearer understanding of who these people are and how history has
transformed their lives.

In Lithuania and the Polish kresy - the outlying, disputed hinterland, Applebaum
encounters the core of hatred that has set neighbor against neighbor for 50 years.
Before the war, some Jews, encouraged by Soviet propaganda, had collaborated with
the communists; some Lithuanians, encouraged by the Nazi propaganda, had helped
send Jews to concentration camps. “Afterward,” writes Applebaum, ”no one remem-
bered that the Red Army had also murdered Jews, or hat the Nazis had also murdered
Lithuanians. ”The outcome had been too dire to parse history that ﬁnely: One in ten
Lithuanians was either dead or deported. Several million Poles were forcibly removed
from their homes in Lithuania, Belarus and the Ukraine, and sent West. ”When it
was over, the mixed multiethnic kresy had disappeared forever. Most of the Poles
were gone from the region, most of the Jews were dead.” But the bitterness remains.
Applebaum negotiates the region intrepidly, suﬀering the hardscrabble existence
of a traveler in these parts, looking up improbable witnesses, hitch-hiking with drink-
sodden peasants, arguing history with strangers on the street. Her insights are sharp,
her sympathies far-ranging. Always there is an unblinking eye on her subjects’ life
stories, a ﬁnger on history, and a well-tuned ear for subtle ironies and unexpected
poetry. Whether negotiating with a slick Maﬁa hotel manager in L’vov or bedding
down with a pestiferous anti-Semitic harridan in Nowogrodek, Applebaum reveals an
intelligence and sensibility that are rare in this brand of quick-sweep expeditionary
journalism.

But the book is not free of ﬂaws. As we progress from Kamenets Podolsky to
Kishinev to Odessa, we sense a progressive impatience in our host. When she wraps
up her trip and boards a boat for Istanbul and ”the West” with a distinct sense
of relief, we cannot help but recall her initial statement of purpose: that what she
had set out to ﬁnd was ”proof that diﬀerence and variety can outlast an imposed
homogeneity; testimony, in fact, that people can survive any attempt to uproot them.”
Applebaum’s rush to be done with her book ultimately leaves her reader hanging on
that question. We understand that history has made the people of the borderlands at
once indomitable and chameleonesque, but that is our conclusion; Applebaum never
tells us hers.

That said, Between East and West is an indispensable guide to a little-known
region that may prove as decisive in our future as it surely has been in our past.
As Churchill wrote when the various nations of the borderlands ﬁrst proclaimed their
independence, “When the war of the giants has ended, the war of the pygmies begins.”
We would do well to know the territory

19

References

See pages 255-268.

[1] Y. S. Kim, in Symmetries in Science VIII, edited by B. Gruber (Plenum, 1995).

[2] D. A. Howard, Physics Today 58, No. 12, 34 (2005).

[3] A. Applebaum, Between East and West, Across the Borderlands of Europe (Pan-
theon Books, New York, 1994). There was a comprehensive to-the-point review
of this book by Marie Arana-Ward in the review section of the Washington Post
(Sunday, November 20, 1994).

[4] E. P. Wigner, private communication (1989). See Sec. 6 of this article.

[5] Karl Marx, on the marble plate at the entrance of the main hall of Humboldt

University (Berlin, Germany).

[6] A. Sommerfeld, Electrodynamics (Academic Press, New York, 1952).

[7] Y. S. Kim, Phys. Rev. Lett. 63, 348 (1989).

[8] E. P. Wigner, Ann. Math. 40, 149 (1939).

[9] Y. S. Kim and E. P. Wigner, J. Math. Phys. 31, 55 (1990).

[10] Y. S. Kim and M. E. Noz, Theory and Applications of the Poincar´e Group (Rei-

del, Dordrecht, 1989).

[11] Y. Tanikawa, Hideki Yukawa: Scientiﬁc Works (Iwanami Shoten, Tokyo, 1979).

[12] Sun Tzu and Sun Pin (translated by R. D. Sawyer), The Complete Art of War

(Westview Press, Boulder, 1996).

20

