DSF−05/2006

Majorana and the investigation of infrared spectra of
ammonia.

E. Di Grezia1,2,a.

! Dipartimento di Scienze Fisiche, Universit`a di Napoli “Federico II”
Complesso Universitario di Monte S. Angelo, Via Cinthia, I-80126 Napoli, Italy
2 Istituto Nazionale di Fisica Nucleare, Sezione di Napoli, Complesso Universitario di
Monte S. Angelo, Via Cinthia, I-80126 Napoli, Italy
a e-mail address: Elisabetta.Digrezia@na.infn.it

Abstract

An account is given on the ﬁrst studies on the physics of ammonia, focusing on the in-
frared spectra of that molecule. Relevant contributions from several authors, in the
years until 1932, are pointed out, discussing also an unknown study by E.Majorana
on this topic.

6
0
0
2
 
r
p
A
 
1
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
t
s
i
h
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
8
7
1
4
0
6
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

1 Introduction

Because of the intensity and richness of its spectrum, ammonia has played a great role in
the development of microwave spectroscopy. It has provided a large number of observable
lines on which to try both experimental techniques and the theory. NH3 provides the
simplest and most thoroughly worked out example of a class of spectra which occupied
and puzzle microwave spectroscopists for many years.
In the paper of 1932 Fermi [1]
discusses the inﬂuence of the ammonia molecule’s rotation on the doubling of its levels.
This doubling originates -according Dennis and Hardy [2]- in the oscillation by which the
nitrogen atom crosses the plane determined by the three hydrogens, i.e., due to inversion
respect the plane of the three atoms of H inﬂuenced by the rotation of molecule and he
compared the theoretical results with the experimental results and he found accords (in-
version problem). This paper on NH3, together with other three articles on the accidental
degeneracy of the carbon dioxide molecule’s frequencies of oscillation on the Raman eﬀect
in crystals, constitutes a series of investigations from the period 1931-33 in which Fermi
attempted to explain various molecular phenomena. His interest in these studies is re-
ﬂected in the book ”Molecules and crystals” [3]. Fermi’s interest in this type of problem
was to give a quantitative explanation to experimental observation at the center of In-
stitutes by Rasetti, which in the period 1929-1930 studied the Raman eﬀect in diatomic
gas O2, N2. In particular the paper on the NH3 molecule is connected to experiments
conducted in Rome during the same period by E. Amaldi on the Raman Eﬀects with
theoretical contribute by G. Palczek [4], and theoretical research by G. Placzek and E.
Teller [5] on molecular spectra for CO2 and NH3.
In reality W.W. Coblentz [6] in 1905 investigated the positions and ﬁne structure of the
infrared bands of polyatomic molecules CO2, NH3. Coblentz observed two very intense
bands at λ = 10.7µ, 6.14µ, with a considerable weaker band at λ = 2.97µ.
Lately K. Schierklok [7] has re-examined the ammonia infra-red (IR) spectrum and in
addition to the bands found by Coblentz, he has found a band at λ = 2.22µ. Beyond this
he found two bands at λ = 1.94µ, 1.49µ whose intensity was about half that of the two
previous bands; so Schierklok observed six bands.

Historically the study of systems with several atoms, combining or not to form a
molecule, has interested chemists for many years through the rules of valence. But only
at the beginning of ”900 the physicists interpret these rules in the light of quantum
mechanics and the behavior of the constituents of atom with the spectral analysis of
radiation emitted by the atom. Heitler and London [8] connected the valence in the
formation of homopolar diatomic molecules with symmetry character of wave functions
of the outer electrons in each atom. The problem of the vibration groups of atoms
possessing geometric symmetry has been considered for the ﬁrst time by C. J. Brester [9].
A number of models representing particular molecules have been treated making use of
various assumptions to obtain the potential energy function. Historically the ﬁrst example
is that of CO2 [10]. Hund [12] and Kornfeld [13] examined the spectra of H2O, H2S, CO3
ion, NH3 [14]. Dennison [15] found the normal vibrations for models of NH3 and CH4
assuming the forces to be central and Nielsen made a like treatment of the CO3 ion. In all
these investigations, the molecule was assumed to have a certain geometry symmetry in
its equilibrium conﬁguration. So another more simple way to analyze these models is to
use the theory of vibrations [16]. In particular our interest will be on the NH3- molecule
In the present article we will investigate
which Coblentz in 1905 will start to study.

1

how the NH3- molecule, in particular, has been studied qualitatively by character of the
vibration of symmetrical polyatomic molecules through the theory of vibrations [12], [15],
approximatively using the Wentzel-Kramers-Brillouin method of approximation. And
a quantitative analysis with exact solution for a two-minima problem of the ammonia
molecule solving secular equation.
We will analyze the historical development of important works in studying molecular
spectra by means of the quantum theory, and in obtaining information about the structure
of the molecule through an examination of the positions and ﬁne structure of the IR bands.
Then we will present brieﬂy the experiments in observations of vibrational and rotational
transitions in the cases of gas NH3 and the comparison of theoretical and experimental
amounts of vibrational frequencies.

Diﬀerent activities of the Fermi group at the Physics Institute in Rome from 1930 to

1932 was devoted to this subject. In this contest is the contribute of Majorana.

2 Theoretical analysis of ammonia spectra.

2.1 A brief introduction to the Theory of Vibrations.

The classical theory of vibrations about an equilibrium conﬁguration has developed from
Galileo’s study of small oscillations of a pendulum.
In the ﬁrst half of the eighteenth
century Brook Taylor, D’Alambert, Euler, Daniel Bernoulli investigated the vibrations
of a stretched cord. In 1753 Bernoulli enunciated the principle of the resolution of all
compound types of vibration into independent modes. In 1762 − 1765 Lagrange gave the
general theory of the vibrations of a dynamical system with a ﬁnite number of degrees
of freedom. One considers a vibrating system deﬁned by its kinetic energy T and its
potential energy V and its position is speciﬁed by a set of coordinates (q1, q2, .., qn), giving
the displacements from equilibrium. The problem of vibrations around an equilibrium
conﬁguration is to solve Lagrangian equations of motion in which the kinetic T (a positive
deﬁnite form with |aij| 6= 0) and a potential energies V (Taylor expansion in powers of
q1, q2, ..., qn) are homogenous quadratic forms in velocities and coordinates respectively,
with constant coeﬃcients:

1 + ... a22 ˙q2

2 + · · · + ann ˙q2

n + 2a12 ˙q1 ˙q2 + 2a13 ˙q1 ˙q3 + + 2an−1 ˙qn−1 ˙qn

(1)

2 + ... + bnnq2

n + 2b12q1q2 + 2b13q1q3 + 2bn−1qn−1qn

(2)

T =

1
2

a11 ˙q2
(cid:16)

V =

1
2
The equation of motion are:

1 + b22q2

b11q2

(cid:16)

d
dt  

∂T
∂ ˙qr !

∂V
∂qr

= −

(r = 1, 2, · · · n)

If T and V has the form (1), (2) (following the method of Jordan [18]), it is always possible
to ﬁnd a

linear transformation of coordinates qi =

n
k=1 cikxk such that the kinetic and potential
energies, expressed in terms of the new coordinates, called normal (principal) coordinates,
P
have the form:

(cid:17)

(cid:17)

(3)

(4)

T =

1
2

1 + ... ˙x2
˙x2
(cid:16)

2 + · · · + ˙x2
n

(cid:17)

2

V =

λ1x2

1 + λ2x2

2 + ... + λnx2

n

1
2

(cid:16)

(cid:17)

where the constants λ1, · · · , λn, which occur as coeﬃcients of the squares of xk in V , are
the n distinct or multiple roots of the determinant det(aikλ − bik) = 0, and aik, bik are the
coeﬃcients in the original expressions of T and V energies. The Lagrangian equation of
motion is therefore:

¨xr + λrxr = 0 r = 1, 2, · · · , n.

Thus the classical theory of small oscillations shows that system will vibrate as an ag-
gregation of n independent mode of vibration of the system, provided the corresponding
constant λr is positive (stable equilibrium conﬁguration), with normal or characteris-
1/2
tic frequencies νi = λ
i /2π. Moreover every conceivable vibration of the system may
be regarded as the superposition of n independent normal vibrations according Daniel
Bernoulli’s principle [19]

(5)

(6)

2.2 Ammonia molecule analysis with Theory of Vibrations.

The vibration spectra of polyatomic molecules, in particular of NH3, has been investi-
gated in great details both theoretically and experimentally. For this system one has a
number s = 4 of atomic nuclei which one assumes to have a possible equilibrium posi-
tion. Dealing with the internal or vibrational degrees of freedom, the whole system has
n = 3s − 6 = 6 degrees of freedom. The ammonia molecule is like a one-dimensional
system of a particle moving in a potential ﬁeld consisting of two equal minima and was
ﬁrst treated qualitatively by Dennison and Hund [12], [15]. Dennison and Hund assumed
that the behavior of the nuclei in the neighborhood of their equilibrium positions may
be described by means of central forces acting between them in the case of a polyatomic
molecule with certain limitations in regard to the character of the equilibrium of the sys-
tem.
The assumption for a molecule of the type XY3 is that in the normal state of the molecule
the X−atom is equidistant from each of the Y −atoms which themselves lie at the cor-
ners of an equilateral triangle. It is further assumed that the X−atom does only four
frequencies, as indeed will any model which posses an axis of symmetry (Hund) and so
X is at the apex of a regular pyramid with an equilateral triangle as a base. Experimen-
tally four fundamental ν are found (without axial symmetry are found six fundamental
frequencies).
Then they assumed that the four independent active frequencies are four fundamental
absorption bands because of their ﬁne structure.

Their study of NH3 was motivated from IR spectroscopy measures and Raman spectra
for polyatomic molecules CO2, N2O, NH3, CH4, C2H4 during the period 1905−1935. Den-
nison and Hund, separately, showed, for molecules H2O, NH3, CH4, that the vibrational
levels which lie below the potential maximum occur in pairs. To ﬁnd the normal vibra-
tions they used the wave mechanical treatment of vibration spectrum of NH3-molecule
and to obtain their properties they investigated the geometric symmetry of NH3 in its
equilibrium conﬁguration. Let there be chosen a set of coordinates q1, .., q6 giving the
displacements from equilibrium. In considering the system either in classical mechanics
or in wave mechanics, the ﬁrst step is to ﬁnd the Hamiltonian. To the approximation in
which the motions of the atoms are small compared with the inter-atomic distances, the
system may absorb or emit radiation with a series of frequencies. These frequencies are

3

the so-called normal frequencies and may be computed with the classical theory of small
oscillations (theory of vibrations [16] we have summarized in the above section), for which
in ﬁrst approximation the kinetic and potential energies assume a simple form:

T =

a11 ˙q2

1 + ... + a66 ˙q2

V =

b11q2

1 + ... + b66q2

1
2

1
2

(cid:16)

(cid:16)

6 + 2a12 ˙q1 ˙q2 + ....
(cid:17)

6 + 2b12q1q2 + ....
(cid:17)

where the a′s and b′s are constants.
Then a linear transformation to normal-coordinates:

Xk=1
whereby T and V are diagonal. The λ’s are the n roots, distinct or multiple, of the
determinant:

n

q1 =

cikxk

det(aik − bik) = 0

H = H1 + ... + H6

Hi =

p2
i +

λjx2

i

1
2

1
2

The Hamiltonian may be then written:

where

(7)

(8)

(9)

(10)

(11)

(12)

So one has an aggregation of 6 independent simple harmonic oscillators, i.e., in the lan-
guage of wave mechanics, the wave function of the whole system is the product of the
wave function for the individual oscillators and characteristic value is the sum of the in-
dividual eigenvalues. This method is allowed because the system is separable in 6 normal
coordinates.

The properties of 6 normal fundamental vibrations frequencies related to λ can be

obtained following the Hund ’s analysis.
In the investigation, the molecule NH3 is assumed to have a certain geometric symmetry in
its equilibrium conﬁguration. In fact in considering the vibration spectrum of a tetratomic
molecule of the general type XY3 (i.e. NH3), the assumption is that in the normal state
of the molecule the X(N)-atom at

equilibrium position is equidistant, i.e., at the center of gravity, from each of Y (H)-
atoms which themselves lie at the corners of an equilateral triangle, not in the same plane
in which X-atom is. So a regular pyramid is the normal conﬁguration of NH3. The ap-
proximation is that the force ﬁelds between the X-atoms is strong and those connecting
the X and the Y atoms is weak. In this case the potential function energy is assumed
to have the same symmetry as the geometric conﬁguration of the molecule. Then will
be two frequencies ν1 and ν2 corresponding to the mutual vibrations of the Y3(H3) group
alone which have just the properties of triatomic molecule [17]. In ν1 the Y atoms remain
at the corners of an equilateral triangle throughout the motion. This oscillation is along
the symmetry axis so it is called a || vibration. While ν2 is a double frequency due to
an isotropic vibration of N-atom in a plane perpendicular to the symmetry axis, it is
a ⊥ vibration. The remaining normal vibrations of the system may be determined by
considering the motion of the Y3 group, taken as a rigid triangle, relative to the X atom.

4

The vibration will consist of two sorts, a vibration ν3 in which the triangle and the point
X oscillate with respect to each other, the triangle plane remaining always parallel to
itself. Then ν3 is a single and a || vibration. The last frequencies ν4 is represented by a
typing motion of the triangle relative to the X-point. It is a double ⊥ vibration frequency.
So there are four independent active frequencies, two || and two ⊥. Since the latter are
double, there are six degrees of internal freedom corresponding to the formula of internal
degrees of freedom for four atoms we have seen n = 3s − 6 where s is the number of
atomic nuclei which one assumes to have a possible equilibrium position.
So this qualitative discussion done by Dennison, Hund allowed them to predict the es-
sential features of IR spectrum of the XY3 molecule. There will be four fundamental
absorption bands. The intensity will be diﬀerent depending upon the force ﬁelds, i.e., the
conﬁguration of the molecule. The ﬁne structure of the band ν1 is similar to the ﬁne struc-
ture of the band ν3 since they both correspond to a vibration along the symmetry-axis.
The pair of bands ν2 and ν4 will have a similar ﬁne structure because ⊥ to the symmetry
axis and will be unlike to the pair ν1 and ν3. Questions with regard to ﬁne structure arise
when one discusses experimental spectra by spectrometer analysis.

2.3 Ammonia molecule analysis with Theory of Groups

The ammonia infrared spectrum is an example of the application of group theory [11]
to physics. Molecules absorb and emit electromagnetic radiation in wide areas of the
spectrum. If electrons change state, the radiation may be in the visible region. Molec-
ular ultraviolet spectra are rather rare, since molecules fall apart at these high energies.
Changes in vibrational states are associated with infrared wavelengths, and changes in
rotational states with the far infrared. There are even ﬁner energy diﬀerences that cause
spectra even in the radio-frequency region. All of these generally consist of a great number
of lines, sometimes not resolved individually, forming bands and such.

Infrared spectra are a valuable tool for determining the structure of molecules. An
infrared band is simpler than the band spectra in the visible, but still rather complex,
consisting of several series of lines corresponding to transitions between diﬀerent rotational
states. Two methods are generally used, absorption spectra that study the transitions
from the ground state to excited states, and Raman spectra that studies the changes in
wavelength in scattered radiation. Raman spectroscopy can be done in the visible region
with its more convenient experimental conditions, and with the powerful beams of lasers.
Quantum mechanics is necessary for the understanding of molecular spectra, which
it perfectly explains. Then there is a relation of group theory to quantum mechanics.
Symmetry is a powerful tool in the quantum mechanics of molecules, and the ammonia
molecule furnishes a good example. One can consider what infrared and Raman spectra
are to be expected if the molecule is a symmetrical pyramid, which is indeed the case
using the character analysis. The symmetrical pyramid has the symmetry group C3v,
whit its character table1:

1This table deﬁnes the abstract group Ci, which has many representations, or concrete realizations.
Let the symbol σ stands for the transformation x = -x. C is either of the rotations. In three dimensions,
this would be a reﬂection in the yz-plane. We can use σ as an operator: σf (x) = f (−x), E is the identity
operator, such that Ef (x) = f (x) for any f(x).One calls the elements E and Ai, that all obey the same
multiplication table.

5

C3v E 2C 3σ
A1
1
A2
1
E
0

1
-1
-1

1
1
2

basisf unctions
Tz, x2 + y2, z2
Rz
(Tx, Ty)(Rx, Ry)(x2 − y2, xy)(xz, yz)

T and R are the representations to which components of the translation and rotation
displacements belong; these are vectors and axial vectors, respectively. T also shows the
representations of the dipole moment operator which produces the infrared spectrum.
Then there are the quadratic functions which transform like the molecular polarizability,
the operator which produces the Raman spectrum.

We assign three displacement coordinates to each atom, 12 in all for the four atoms.
The ﬁrst thing to do is to ﬁnd the characters of this representation. The character for E
is 12, since the identity transforms each coordinate into itself. The rotations about the
axis leave only the displacements on the nitrogen in the same place, and the character is
the same as that of the three T components, or 1 - 1 = 0. Reﬂections in a vertical plane
leave the nitrogen and one hydrogen unmoved, and the character is easily seen to be 2
- 1 = 1 for each atom. Therefore, the characters of the reducible representation of the
displacements is 12, 0, 2. This must include the representations of the translation and
rotation of the molecule as a whole, A1 + A2 + 2E. Therefore, we subtract the characters
6, 0, 0 to ﬁnd the character of the vibrations, 6, 0, 2. By character analysis, we ﬁnd that
this gives 2A1 + 2E. Ammonia, therefore, should exhibit four fundamentals, all active in
both infrared and Raman spectra. This is exactly what is observed. The Raman spectra
of the E fundamentals ought to be faint, and they were not observed (or were not until
lasers came in). If the ammonia molecule were planar, two more fundamentals would be
expected, and they are not observed. Herzfeld gives the four modes as follows. There
is a very strong band at 1627.5cm−1 (infrared spectroscopists use the reciprocal of the
wavelength, since it is proportional to the frequency and the quantum energy), about
6.1µ, and is a so-called perpendicular band, which would be expected from the x and y
components of the dipole moment. This is one of the doubly-degenerate E fundamentals, a
symmetric bending of two of the hydrogens to or away from each other. The asymmetric
bending is of higher frequency, 3414cm−1, and diﬃcult to observe. These are the two
E modes. There is a strong parallel band at 931.58cm−1 and 968.08cm−1, about 10.6µ
corresponding to an A1 representation. This band is double, and the reason is curious.
The ammonia molecule can turn itself inside-out; that is, the nitrogen can pass through
the plane of the hydrogens. This isn’t easy, but the nitrogen can tunnel through, and
the doubling is the result. The states divide into those symmetrical with respect to this
inversion, and those that are antisymmetrical (change sign). The selection rules on the
rotational transitions make the band separations the sum of the inversion splitting in
the two cases. In the Raman spectrum, the separation is the diﬀerence of the splitting.
The Raman bands are observed at 934.0cm−1 and 964.3cm−1. Finally, there is a strong
band at 3335.9cm−1and 3337.5cm−1, and a Raman shift at 3334.2cm−1 (about 3.0µ)
corresponding to the other A1 fundamental.
In this mode, the bond lengths lengthen
and shorten symmetrically. The two A modes can be called bending and stretching,
respectively.

6

ND3, with the heavier deuterium substituted for the protons, gives somewhat diﬀerent
(lower) frequencies, and the shifts can be used to nail down the identiﬁcation of the vi-
brational frequencies, conﬁrming the conclusion that ammonia is a symmetrical pyramid.
The inversion doubling is a very interesting phenomenon. It turns out to be possible to
separate molecules in even and odd inversion states, and this led to the ammonia maser,
the ﬁrst of its kind. Although one can form a good picture of ammonia as if it were a
macroscopic object, try to picture it with the nitrogen partly on both sides of the hydro-
gens!
Using the group theory F. Hund (1925) [12] studies the equilibrium of the molecule of
ammonia, and he shows that, if the electronic conﬁguration around the nitrogen, origi-
nally central, is capable of a polarization induced by the hydrogen nuclei, the molecule in
the normal state have just the axial symmetrical form. So he assumed that the molecule
NH3 has a regular pyramid equilibrium conﬁguration. The nitrogen atom at equilib-
rium position is equidistant, i.e. at the center of gravity, from each of hydrogen atoms,
which lie at the corners of an equilateral triangle, not in the same plane of N−atom.
In considering the vibrations of such a molecule he erroneously states that there exist
only three active characteristic frequencies, whereas, unless the particles all lie in the
same plane, there must in general exist four, as shown by Dennison [15]. Hund gives a
table of harmonic and combinations bands of NH3 with three fundamental frequencies
ν1 = 970cm−1, ν2 = 1700cm−1, ν3 = 4500cm−1, that may be changed by allowing the band
at λ = 97µ i.e. ν ∼ 3300cm−1 to become the fourth fundamental band.

2.4 Approximate analysis of N H3 with WKB method.

Dennison and Uhlenbeck [20] compute the level separation of NH3, using the Wentzel-
Kramers-Brillouin (WKB) method of approximation for a one-dimensional system of a
particle moving in a potential ﬁeld, consisting of two equal minima. Then they make
an application of the results to the ammonia molecule to determine its form. The WKB
method yields an approximate solution of the wave equation whose form depends upon
whether the region considered lies within or without the region of classical motion, that is,
the region where the kinetic energy is positive. In the ﬁrst case the solution is oscillatory,
in the second or non-classical region the solution consists of a linear combination of an
increasing and a decreasing exponential. At each boundary or critical point are valid the
so-called Kramers connection formulae [21]. These formulae furnish a method by which
one may approximate to any solution of the wave equation.
They show that the infrared spectrum of the ammonia molecule exhibits features which
may be directly related to the one dimensional problem of two equal minima. The parallel
type vibration bands for example are observed to be composed of two nearly superimposed
bands, depending upon the fact that there are two equivalent positions of equilibrium for
the nitrogen nucleus. Symmetrical molecules of the NH3 type which are not coplanar
exhibit that all vibrational levels ar double, depending upon the fact that there are two
exactly equivalent positions of equilibrium for N atom, one above the plane of the H
atoms, and the other at an equal distance below. A quantum mechanical treatment
reveals that it causes the vibrational level become double. The doublet separation is small
compared with the spacing of vibrational levels (inversion problem related to rotational
spectrum).

The physical origin and theoretical description of this doubling is presented, followed

7

by a description of the experimental measurement. The inversion doubling of about 35
cm-1 represents an excellent coupling of a simple infrared measurement with a quantum
mechanical description involving many aspects of the wave nature of vibrations. The
normal modes of Ammonia are ν2 = 950cm−1,(symmetric bend), ν4a = 1627cm−1 (asym-
metric bend), ν4b = 1627cm−1 (asymmetric bend), ν1 = 3336cm−1 (symmetric stretch),
ν3a = 3414cm−1 (asymmetric stretch), ν3b = 3414cm−1 (asymmetric stretch); ν3a, ν3b are
degenerate modes, as are ν4a, ν4b. All six normal modes are IR active.

2.5 Exact analysis of N H3.

Rosen and Morse [22] give an analysis of the vibration of the nitrogen in the ammonia
molecule using an exact solution of the wave equation for a form of one-dimensional po-
tential energy. The potential energy for this molecule has two minima at distance 2xm
apart, separated by a ”hill” of height H.
They describe another solution, for a form of potential ﬁeld diﬀerent from that of Den-
nison [17] and they give an example of its application to the vibrational states of NH3.
Due to the symmetry of the molecule there are two equivalent positions of equilibrium for
the nitrogen, at equal distances above and below the plane of the three hydrogens. This
equivalence of the two minima makes every vibrational level a doublet, a result which is
found experimentally. To analyze the vibrational behavior one separates oﬀ the coordi-
nates of the center of the gravity of the molecule and the Euler angles ﬁxing its orientation
in space, and deal only with the coordinates ﬁxing the relative positions of the atoms.
One of these coordinates is x, the distance of the nitrogen (N) atom from the plane of
the hydrogen. The other ﬁve coordinates z1, z2, z3, z4, z5, can be chosen that the positions
of the two equilibrium conﬁgurations are at z1 = z2 = z3 = z4 = z5 = 0, x = ±xm. The
potential function V (x, z1, z2, z3, z4, z5) therefore has its two minima at these two points.
They justify the use of x as a ”normal” coordinate (i.e. splitting from the general six-
dimensional problem to a one-dimensional problem in x alone) by the following method.
From considerations of symmetry all the wave functions are symmetric or antisymmetric
about the nodal hypersurface x = 0. They give a two minima potential ﬁeld V (x) which
is amenable of exact solution. For each level of the one minimum problem there is a pair
of levels for the double minimum case. The separation between the levels in a pair is
small compared to the energy diﬀerence between diﬀerent pairs as long as the levels are
below the top of the intermediate hill.

Salant and Rosenthal in 1932 [23] derive expressions for the eﬀects of isotopy on the
normal frequencies, following Dennison’s [17] general, noncentral force treatment of the
normal modes of vibration of symmetrical triatomic and tetratomic molecules.
Sanderson and Silverman in 1933 [24], following the procedure of Dennison [17], calculate
the positions of the fundamental vibrations of molecule ND3.
Rosenthal [25] summarizes brieﬂy the general procedure for obtaining the normal vibra-
tion frequencies of a molecule of any type of symmetry, without the use of group theory.
He writes the expression for the kinetic energy T in terms of the displacements of the var-
ious atoms from their equilibrium positions. The potential energy, V , is written in terms
of the mutual displacements of the atoms as the most general quadratic form consistent
with geometrical symmetry. As the next step, linear combinations of the original displace-
ments are introduced and both T and V are transformed to them. The normal vibration
frequencies, ω, or rather λ = 4π2ω2 are then obtained as the roots of |λT − V | = 0. For n

8

degrees of internal freedom, the expansion of this nth order determinant will give rise to
an equation in λ of the nth degree. He gives a discussion of the vibration frequencies and
isotopic shifts of tetratomic molecules, with a discussion of various intramolecular forces
and the physical meaning of the results, for pyramidal and coplanar molecules.
Manning [26] chooses an expression for the potential energy of NH3(ND3) which has
the correct general characteristics of geometry symmetry of NH3 and which permits an
exact solution of the Schrodinger equation. Making substitutions they obtain the indicial
equation from Schrodinger equation and make quantitative calculations of the behavior
of the energy levels, those below the top of the center of the hill of V are double according
data (Wright, Randall [27]).

3 On the oscillations bands of ammonia by Majorana

Majorana studied the NH3 spectra [28] and obtained results in agree with the experi-
mental results, i.e., two simple vibrations and two double vibrations. He considered the
symmetry of the NH3. The three atoms H occupy the vertices of equilateral triangle; the
atom N is on the axes out of the plane. The independent displacements which contribute
to elastic forces are six and they obtain from the twelve displacements of the four atoms
with the condition that the resultant of applied vectors δPi at the rest points P ′
i is zero.
He deﬁnes the displacements q1 = 1, q2 = q3 = . . . = q6 = 0 as those in which the
atom H 1 moves in direction NH 1 of MN /(MN + MH) and the atom N in the opposite
direction of length MH /(MN + MH ). Similarly one deﬁnes the displacements qi = δi2 e
qi = δi3. Then we deﬁne as displacement qi = δi4 that in which the atom H 3 shifts of
1/2 in the direction H 2H 3 and the atom H 2 of 1/2 in the opposite direction; for circular
permutation he puts the displacements qi = δi5 e qi = δi6.
Indicating α the angle (in the equilibrium position)

NH 1H 2 and with β the angle

H 1NH 2 the kinetic energy is:

d

d

T =

1 + ˙q2
˙q2

2 + ˙q2

3 + 2 ˙q1 ˙q2 cos β + 2 ˙q2 ˙q3 cos β

1
2 "

M 2

HMN
(MN + MH)2

+ 2 ˙q3 ˙q1 cos β) +

+

+

MN MH
MN + MH
1
2

MH

(cid:18)

(cid:16)

M 2

N MH
(MN + MH )2

2 + ˙q2
3

1 + ˙q2
˙q2
(cid:16)

(cid:17)

cos α ( ˙q1 ˙q5 + ˙q1 ˙q6 + ˙q2 ˙q6 + ˙q2 ˙q4 + ˙q3 ˙q4 + ˙q3 ˙q5)

˙q4 + ˙q5 + ˙q6 +

˙q4 ˙q5 +

˙q5 ˙q6 +

˙q6 ˙q4

.

(13)

1
2

1
2

1
2

(cid:19)(cid:21)

then he deﬁnes the potential energy

V =

aik q1qk

1
2

Xik
and he performs a canonical transformation [28]. He obtains a new expression of the
kinetic energy in the new coordinates Qi, similarly for the potential. He obtains then two
simple vibrations relative to coordinates Q1 and Q2 and two double vibrations relative to
coordinates Q3 and Q4 with the square of angular velocity:

(14)

(15)

λ = 4π2 ν2

9

4 Brief experimental investigation until 1932

Now we will give a brief chronology of the experiments on NH3.
Fox studies (1928) the IR region of the spectrum of NH3 using the Prism spectrometer
[29]. Sir Robert Robertson and J.J. Fox in 1928 used a small infra red prism spectrom-
eter, ﬁlled of ammonia gas. They took a source of energy constant, for calibrating the
mechanism for reading wave lengths.
At ∆V = (100 ± 200)V and T ∼ 18C they used Nernst ﬁlaments as source of Radia-
tion, since those gave the most uniform supply having regard to the intensity at diﬀerent
regions of the spectrum. There are source radiation - tubes observation - spectrometer.
As the full radiation contains light of short wave length, it may aﬀect chemically the gas
NH3 under observation. The results is a measure of position of bands of NH3 and their
intensity. He made a preparation of Ammonia generated in the little ﬂask A by warming
a mixture of damp solid ammonia and 50% KOH solution was allowed to escape at the
two-way top x, until samples were completely absorbed by water.
He conﬁrmed that the view that the NH3 is a tetrahedron was acceptable.
Rasetti [30] et al. have photographed the Raman spectra in 1929 of gaseous CO2, NO2, NH3,
CH4, C2H4 using the line λ = 2536 of mercury as the exciting radiation. They have ob-
served vibrational transitions in all the gases, and rotational transitions in the NH3 and
CH4.
Berker in 1929 [31] analyzes the NH3 absorption band extending at 3.0µ and 1.9µ and
from 8µ to 24µ interpreting the double character of the 10µ band to be a consequence of
the close proximity of the two equilibrium positions for the N atom, one of either side of
the plane formed by the H atoms.
Dennison and Hardy in 1932 [2] make an experimental search for the doubling of the
3.0µ band using an IR spectrometer of high resolving power. The experimental results
furnishes a strong argument for the theory of the doubling of the ammonia bands. They
discuss the form of ammonia molecule with the theory . And then they prove that those
states of ammonia existing in nature have vibration-rotation-nuclear spin wave functions
which are antisymmetrical for an interchange of two of the hydrogen atoms.

5 Conclusions

In this paper we have depicted the genesis and the ﬁrst developments of the study of spec-
tra of NH3 analyzed for the ﬁrst time by Coblentz. Far from being complete, our account
has focused on the results achieved from 1905 to 1932, as given evidence by many arti-
cles published in widespread journals. We have also pointed out the practically unknown
contribution to spectral analysis Majorana, who was introduced to the subject by studies
and experiments in Rome. The result reached by Majorana as early as in the begin-
ning of 1930 is to ﬁnd the right number of fundamental frequencies of spectrum of NH3.
Wide room has been made to diﬀerent approaches to study the spectrum qualitatively
and quantitatively and experimentally too. A theoretical analysis of ammonia spectra
has been reported in Sect. 2, with a brief account of Theory of Vibrations and Theory of
Groups. In the same sections we have showed an approximate analysis of NH3 with WKB
method and an exact analysis with a particular form of potential. Particular attention

10

has been given to the approach of Majorana for the analysis of IR spectra of NH3 in Sect.
3. Early experiments of ammonia, essentially dealt with atomic spectroscopy, have been
discussed above in Sect.4. From what discussed here, it is then evident the interest to
study the ammonia spectra by Majorana and its contribute to ﬁnd the exact solution.

Acknowledgments

The author is indebted with S.Esposito for fruitful discussions.

References

[1] E. Fermi Nuovo Cimento, 9:277 1932.

[2] D.M. Dennison and J. D. Hardy, Physical Review, 15:938, 1932.

[3] E. Fermi Molecole e cristalli, Ed. Zanichelli, Bologna, 1934.

[4] E. Amaldi and G. Placzek, Naturwissenschaften, 20, 521, 1932; Zeitschrift fur Physik,

81:259 1932.

[5] G. Placzek and E. Teller, Zeitschrift fur Physik, 81:209, 1932.

[6] W.W. Coblentz,Investigations of Infra-red Spectra Part. I. Carnegie Institute of

Washington, D.C., 1905.

[7] K. Schierkolk, Zeitschrift fur Physik, 29:277, 1924.

[8] W. Heitler and F. London, Zeitschrift fur Physik 44:455, 1927.

[9] C. J. Brester, Kristallsymmetric und Reststrahlen, Ultrecht, 1923.

[10] N. Bjerrum, Verh. d. D., Phys. Ges. 16:737, 1914.

[11] E. P. Wigner, Group Theory and its Application to the Quantum Mechanics of Atomic

Spectra New York: Academic Press, 1959.

[12] F. Hund, Zeitschrift fur Physik, 31:81, 1925.

[13] H. Kornfeld, Zeitschrift fur Physik, 26:205, 1924.

[14] F. Hund Zeitschrift fur Physik, 43:805, 1927.

[15] D.M. Dennison, Philosophical Magazine, 1:195, 1926.

[16] E.T. Whittaker A treatise on the Analytical Dynamics of Particles and Rigid Bodies,

III Ed. Cambridge, University Press, 1927.

[17] D.M. Dennison, Review Modern Physics, 3:280, 1931.

11

[18] C. W. Jordan Comptes Rendus, 74:1395, 1872.

[19] C. W.Jordan Histoire de l’Academie de Berlin, pg. 147, 1753.

[20] D.M. Dennison and G. E. Uhlenbeck, Physical Review, 41:313, 1932.

[21] L.A. Young and G. Uhlenbeck Physical Review, 36:1154, 1930.

[22] N. Rosen and P. M. Morse Physical Review, 42:210, 1932.

[23] E. O. Salant and J. E.Rosenthal Physical Review, 42:812, 1932.

[24] S.Silverman and J. A. Sanderson Physical Review, 44:1032 1933.

[25] J. E.Rosenthal Physics Review, 47:235, 1935.

[26] M. F. Manning Journal of Chemical Physics, 3:136, 1935.

[27] Wright and Randall Physical Review, 44:391, 1933.

[28] S. Esposito, E. Majorana jr, A. van der Merwe and E. Recami (eds.), Ettore Majo-

rana: Notes on Theoretical Physics (Kluwer, New York, 2003).

[29] J. J. Fox et al., Proc. Roy. Soc. 1120:128, 1928.

[30] R. G. Dickinson, R. T. Dillon and F. Rasetti Physical Review, 34:582, 1929.

[31] G. A. Stinchcomb and E. F. Barker Physical Review, 33:305, 1929.

12

