6
0
0
2
 
r
p
A
 
3
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
t
s
i
h
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
6
8
1
4
0
6
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

A Lighthouse Falls

Naresh Dadhich
Inter-University Centre for Astronomy and Astrophysics,
Post Bag 4, Ganeshkhind, Pune 411 007, INDIA

Abstract

Professor A. K. Raychaudhuri suddenly passed away on 18th June
I have attempted to give a glimpse of his life and work, and
2005.
more speciﬁcally his role as a great teacher and inspiring force to
three generations of students of the Presidency College, Kolkata.

It was hard to take what the computer screen was showing, Amalbabu is
no more, on that fateful Saturday afternoon on 18th June 2005. It was more
so for me because I had returned from Kolkata that morning and had seen
him on the previous Monday, the 13th June. I am referring to the legend of
Amal Kumar Raychaudhuri, whom we all fondly call AKR and revere him
with great awe and aﬀection.

The ﬁrst message was from Somya Chakraborty which had come via Cal-
ifornia and then a spurt of others followed conﬁrming the inevitable. I am
referring to the legend of Amal Kumar Raychaudhuri, whom we all fondly
call AKR and revere him with great awe and aﬀection. In such situations, a
casual and innocent comment suddenly attains great meaning and revelation.
This time, he told me not to discuss any physics for he said that he made so
trivial mistakes in calculations that he could no longer trust himself. Mind
you, he was a perfectionist and would never make any error in calculations
as all his students would swear. This innocent statement now makes me to
reﬂect, was he telling that his innings was over, no reason to go on if he
coudn’t do physics in the manner he liked to do ?

IUCAA and Vigyan Prasar have jointly made a documentary ﬁlm on
him wherein he spoke his mind in his characteristic clarity and honesty.
Fortunately all the shooting of the ﬁlm was done a couple of weeks before
the ﬁnal event. This and the one on another legend, Professor P. C. Vaidya
will be released in a function at IUCAA on 16th Nov. 2005. We hope that

1

the ﬁlm would be able to transmit to the younger generation some bit of his
spirit of scholarship and dedication.

As a teacher, not only you do your work consciously, which is a bare
minimum, but set a benchmark for performance and a role model for students
to emulate. AKR was an apt personiﬁcation of this ideal, and hence without
question a legend. A good measure of a teacher is reﬂected in the heights
scaled by his students. Several of his students are the world class and well
recognised scientists. As a researcher, he made the indelible contribution
by his equation - the Raychaudhuri equation governing the gravitational
dynamics of a bunch of bodies including the whole Universe. This will stand
ﬁrm so long as Einstein’s theory of gravitation - general relativity (GR)
stands. I must say here that after the monumental contributions of Jagdish
Chandra Bose, C V Raman, S N Bose and Meghnad Saha, very few of the
Indian contributions make this grade.

AKR was born in Barisal, now in Bangladesh, on 14 September 1923.
His father was an M Sc with I class in Mathematics and taught in a school
in Kolkata. Right in school, he demonstrated his aptitude for Mathematics
when he showed that certain exercise he could do in a simpler way than what
the teacher had done. This was greatly appreciated by the Headmaster who
made a mention of it in the school magazine. After school, he joined the
Presidency College which was later to become his playground for his glorious
academic innings. He was interested in Maths and Physics with a slight tilt
towards the former, yet his father citing his own example advised him to
do the later. He did carry his mathematical bent and ﬂavour all through
his work by always attempting to prove theorems. The way he derived his
equation is a brilliant example of it.

He did his B.Sc. from the Presidency College in 1942 and M.Sc in 1944
from Calcutta University, and then started his arduous research journey.
He joined Indian Association of Cultivation of Science (IACS) in 1945 as
a research scholar and was asked to do experimental work which he was
not cut out for. This lasted for four years of sheer frustration and agony.
There couldn’t have been a worse start for a young man’s research career.
Undeterred he taught himself in complete isolation the abstract and diﬃcult
diﬀerential geometry and general relativity (GR). It is this drill of self learning
which formed the foundation for his later work.

Then he taught for a couple of years at the Asutosh College. The only
person who was interested in GR in Kolkata at that time was N R Sen but

2

the two did not click as their interests did not match. Once again AKR joins
IACS in 1952 as a Research Associate with a clear instruction to work on
the problems assigned by the Director and the head of the section. This was
indeed the most trying time of his research career. GR was not considered
worthy of attention of a young researcher and he was asked to work on
electronic energy bands in metals. He had to write two papers just to keep
his job at the institute. The path breaking equation was discovered in 1954
under such adverse and challenging circumstances. Any lesser being could
have buckled down under such hostility and would have happily carried on
studying metals and their properties but not AKR. This unﬂinching strength,
courage and commitment to his work is what makes AKR stand out not only
for his wonderful equation but for his sheer audacity and courage - truly a
legend.

The liberating event occurs in 1961 when he joins the Presidency College
as a Professor of theoretical Physics. Then a glorious and most rewarding
academic career unfolds for nearly three decades. In our enthusiasm to ad-
vance in scientiﬁc research and to catch with the western world, a focused
and concerted eﬀort was initiated by independent India by establishing au-
tonomous research institutes solely devoted to research outside the university
system. This had as we now realise a very disastrous eﬀect on the academic
life of universities. For all good and talented scientists were drawn to the
institutes because of the better lab and infrastructural facilities as well as
congenial research environment. It has given rise to a very anomalous sit-
uation, where there are pools of young talented students there are no good
scientists to teach and train them, and on the other hand where there are
good scientists there are no students.

Against this backdrop, people like AKR who are few and far between

served as lighthouse inspiring and exciting young minds.

Before discovering his beautiful equation, he wrote one of the very ﬁrst
papers on condensations in expanding universe giving rise to structures. Also
discussed in another paper the question of the Schwarzschild singularity
which was at that time generally believed, including Einstein himself, not
to be attainable. He constructed a non static collapsing solution and showed
that there was nothing to prevent such a happening and thereby challenging
the prevelant view. He was certainly right as we now know that there was
nothing singular about the Schwarzschild singularity. It was simply an arti-
fact of a bad coordinate choice. It however deﬁned the black hole horizon,

3

which had interesting physical property that nothing could come out of it.
These were also very important and interesting papers which were done while
he was working as a temprorary lecturer in Asutosh College, perhaps a feat
unparalleled in the history of that college or any college.

The Schwarzschild radius was non singular but there was a genuine physi-
cal singularity as the radius goes to zero where spacetime curvature diverges.
The Oppenheimer - Snyder solution of collapsing homogeneous dust ball, and
also his own solution of collapsing sphere, ultimately lead to this singular
state at the centre with density and curvatures diverging.
In the cosmol-
ogy too there was the big-bang singularity of the homogeneous isotropic and
expanding Friedman - Robertson - Walker model. As the universe is now ex-
panding which means it should have been very compact in the past. Judging
by the present rate of expansion it is clear that it should have had a singular
and explosive beginning in a big-bang about 13 billion years ago.

The natural question to ask was whether singularity of gravitational col-
lapse or of expanding universe is due to homogeneity and isotropy or generic
and inherent character of GR, Einstein’s theory of gravitation ? For instance,
could rotation which opposes gravity avert its occurrence. AKR was set on
this track by the Goedel’s static rotating model. He then addressed the fun-
damental question of singularity in the most general form with no reference
to any symmetry and any speciﬁc property of spacetime and energy distri-
bution. He considered evolution of a congruence of ordinary particles, which
are characterised by timelike velocity vector, under its own gravity. Taking
the timelike velocity as the eigenvector of the Ricci curvature and then by
using the Einstein equation, he obtained his celebrated equation - the Ray-
chaudhuri Equation. It related the rate of expansion of a congruence of freely
moving particles with the expansion (divergence), shear (distortion) and ro-
tation as well as with the energy density (including pressure) which pulls
particles together. Here shear works hand in hand with the energy density in
pulling things together while rotation opposes it. The most profound result
emanating from the equation was that singularity is a generic and inevitable
feature of GR. It was left to the mathematical prowess of Roger Penrose
and Stephen Hawking to prove in mid sixties the most general and powerful
theorems to establish this result rigorously. The Raychaudhuri equation was
the key to the most powerful and general result: under certain reasonable
assumptions on energy conditions and causality otherwise in all generality,
singularity is unavoidable in GR.

4

In 1990, J M M Senovilla shocked the relativity community by obtaining
a singularity free cosmological solution of the Einstein equation. How did
it happen, how did it bypass the all encompassing singularity theorems ?
The assumptions of the theorems looked quite obvious and natural except
for the one on existence of trapped surfaces (surface from which even light
can’t come out), which was always a suspect. It was particularly invoked in
the context of collapse to black hole and was quite alright for that situation.
Senovilla’s solution violated this assumption and hence the theorems became
ineﬀective but this violation entailed no unphysical feature. His early reaction
to singularity free models was of caution and hesitation but over the period he
came around and I coauthored a paper with him on a spherical cosmological
model (Senovilla’s was cylindrical) without big-bang singularity. He again
addressed the question in general terms and obtained the necessary condition
for singularity free models as the vanishing of space and time averages of
all physical and geometrical parameters. This result was published in the
Physical Review Letters. His last paper dealt with the singularity free perfect
ﬂuid models, and he was working to include rotation.

It is only in late ﬁfties when he learnt that his paper was much talked of in
the west and was referred by Jordan and Heckmann that he gained conﬁdence
to submit his thesis for D. Sc.
in 1959. The great GR guru, John Wheeler
was one of the examiners and recommended that if there was a provision
for a degree with Honours, then here was the one. First recognition came
from far, and yet it did not make much news at home until Jayant Narlikar’s
return to India in 1972. It is only then AKR surfaced on the Indian scene
and slowly Academies and other academic agencies started taking note of
him.

It is noteworthy that though he was an icon for his students yet not many
of his good students took to research in GR. This was perhaps because he
thought that there was greater excitement and action in other ﬁelds like high
energy and condensed matter physics. He was indeed a very honest and true
scholar of highest intellect and integrity. Scholarship was his sole driving
force through the hard times. Shobo Bhattacharya, TIFR Director told us
that AKR was only three sentences away for his students scattered all over
the globe. When one returned from a visit to Kolkata, the enquery would
proceed in this order, how did you ﬁnd Kolkata, did you go to the Coﬀee
House and how was AKR ?

AKR symbolised the spirit of scholarship, excellent teaching and research

5

in college/university, that shined like a lighthouse. A true and heartful trib-
ute to him would be not to let this spirit wane and fade. Finally, had
he met with encouragement and appreciation in his early research career,
things would have certainly been diﬀerent. Least of all Calcutta Univer-
sity won’t have remained oblivious of him. In ﬁfties, he would have been in
scientiﬁc currency internationally and on the top of the recognition ladder.
More importantly if he could have had the beneﬁt of a good mathematical
group equipped with the sophisticated techniques of diﬀerential geometry
and global analysis, it was quite possible that he could have before the ad-
vent of Penrose and Hawking on the scene, proved the famous singularity
theorems. That would have been really remarkable and could perhaps have
changed the course of gravitational and theoretical physics research in the
country. But then we won’t have had the legend of AKR.

6

