6
0
0
2
 
y
a
M
 
4
 
 
]
h
p
-
t
s
i
h
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
8
3
0
5
0
6
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Consequences of Dirac’s Theory of the Positron

W. Heisenberg and H. Euler in Leipzig1

22. December 1935

Abstract

According to Dirac’s theory of the positron, an electromagnetic ﬁeld
tends to create pairs of particles which leads to a change of Maxwell’s
equations in the vacuum. These changes are calculated in the special case
that no real electrons or positrons are present and the ﬁeld varies little
over a Compton wavelength. The resulting eﬀective Lagrangian of the
ﬁeld reads:

L= 1

2 (E2−B 2)+ e2
~c

∞

0 e−η dη

η3 (cid:26)

R

iη2(EB)·

cos (

cos (

η
|E
η
|E

k | √E2 −B2+2i(EB))+conj.
k | √E2 −B2+2i(EB))−conj.

+|Ek|2+ η2

3 (B 2−E2)

(cid:27)

ﬁeld strengths

E,B
|Ek|= m2c3

e~ = 1
137

e
(e2 /mc2)2 =

critical ﬁeld strengths

The expansion terms in small ﬁelds (compared to E ) describe light-light
scattering. The simplest term is already known from perturbation theory.
For large ﬁelds, the equations derived here diﬀer strongly from Maxwell’s
equations. Our equations will be compared to those proposed by Born.

German title: “Folgerungen aus der Diracschen Theorie des Positrons”
Zeitschr. Phys. 98 , 714 (1936).

Translation: W. Korolevski and H. Kleinert, Institut f¨ur Theoretische
Physik, Freie Universit¨at Berlin, Arnimallee 14, D-14195 Berlin, Germany.
emails: walja.k@web.de and kleinert.physik.fu-berlin.de

The fact that electromagnetic radiation can be transformed into matter and vice
versa leads to fundamentally new features in quantum electrodynamics. One
of the most important consequences is that, even in the vacuum, the Maxwell
equation have to be exchanged by more complicated formulas. In general, it
will be not possible to separate processes in the vacuum from those involving
matter since electromagnetic ﬁelds can create matter if they are strong enough.
Even if they are not strong enough to create matter they will, due to the virtual
possibility of creating matter, polarize the vacuum and therefore change the
Maxwell equations. This polarization of the vacuum to be studied below will
give rise to a distinction between the vectors B, E on the one hand and D, H
on the other, where

1

The polarizations P and M can be arbitrary functions of the ﬁeld strengths at
the same place, their derivatives, and the ﬁeld strengths in the surroundings of
the observed position. If the ﬁeld strengths are small (which means, as we shall
see small compared to e2/~c-times of the ﬁeld strength at the boundary of the
electron), then P and M can be approximately considered as linear functions
of E and B. In this approximation, Uehling1 and Serber2 have calculated the
modiﬁcations of Maxwell’s theory. Another interesting case is obtained by not
assuming small ﬁeld strengths but instead slowly varying ﬁelds (i.e., the ﬁelds
are nearly constant over the length ~/mc). Then one obtains P and M as func-
tions of E and B at the same position. The derivatives of E and B do not
appear in the approximation. The expansion of P and M in powers of E and B
will contain only odd powers, as will be seen in the calculation. The expansion
terms of third order are phenomenologically related to light-light scattering and
are already known3. The goal of this work is to ﬁnd the functions P(E, B)
and M(E, B) for slowly varying ﬁeld strength. It is suﬃcient to calculate to
energy density U (E, B). From the energy density one can derive the ﬁelds using
the Hamiltonian method; one introduces the Lagrangian L(E, B) and obtains

−

Lagrangian is determined by (3) and D and H are determined by (2). Due to
relativistic invariant the Lagrangian can only depend on the two invariants
E2
B2 and (EB)2 (compare 3). The calculation of U (E, B) can be reduced
to the question of how much energy density is associated with the matter ﬁelds
in a background of constant ﬁelds E and B. Before solving this problem, the
mathematical scheme of the positron theory4 will be presented. This will also
correct some errors in earlier formulas.

The

1 The Mathematical Schema of the Theory of

the Positron

Starting point of the theory is the Dirac density matrix, which is given in naive
wave theory by

(x′t′k′

R
|

x′′t′′k′′) =
|

X
1E. A. Uehling, Phys. Rev. 48, 55, 1935.
2R. Serber, Phys. Rev. 48 , 49, 1935.
3H. Euler, B. Kockel, Naturwissensch. 23, 246, 1935.
4W. Heisenberg, ZS. f. Phys. 90, 209, 1934

occupied states

(n)

ψ∗n(x′′t′′k′′) ψn(x′t′k′)

(4)

2

and in this quantum theory of wave ﬁelds by5

(x′t′k′

R
|

x′′t′′k′′) = ψ∗(x′′t′′k′′) ψ(x′t′k′)
|

Apart from this matrix an important role is played by the matrix RS, formally
deﬁned by

(x′t′k′

x′′t′′k′′) =

RS|
|

1
2 (cid:18) X

(n)

occupied states

unoccupied states

− X

(cid:19)

(n)

ψ∗n(x′′t′′k′′)ψn(x′t′k′)

(5)

(6)

and in the quantum theory by

(x′t′k′

x′′t′′k′′) =

ψ∗(x′′t′′k′′) ψ(x′t′k′)

ψ(x′t′k′) ψ∗(x′′t′′k′′)

.

(7)

−

RS|
|

1
2 (cid:20)

The matrix RS as a function of the diﬀerences x′λ −
becomes singular on the light cone. If we set

x′′λ = xλ and t′

t′′ = t

(cid:21)

−

furthermore the potentials A0 =
α0 = 1; αi = αi, we derive
α0 =

−

−

A0; Ai = Ai, and for the Dirac matrices

where6

RS by the equation

where S is given by

(The sum of repeated Latin indices runs from 1 to 3, and of Greek indices from
0 to 3). The integral is to be calculated along the straight line from P ′ to P ′′.
The density matrix r responsible for the behavior of matter is obtained from

Here S0 is the matrix RS in ﬁeld-free and matter-free space, where ¯a, ¯b, and C
are deﬁned7 by

5In the earlier paper [4] the values on the right hand side are interchanged
6In the earlier paper [4] the exponent has wrongly a negative sign.
7In the earlier paper [4] there is a mistake that leads to another value of C. There, the
character γ stands for the logarithm of the Euler constant, in contrast to the common usage.

3

where γ is the Euler constant γ = 1.781...

The four-vector for the current density and the energy momentum tensor

are obtained from r by

In the quantum theory of wave ﬁelds it is useful to expand the wave function
into an orthogonal system:

The operators an can be represented in the form

where ∆n changes the number Nn to 1

Nn and Vn =

−

We further set

n(1

−

2Nt).

t
≤
Q

The Hamiltonian of the whole system reads in these variables:

According to the powers of the elementary change e, we distinguish the terms:

4

2 Calculation of the Energy Density in Intuitive

Wave Theory

−

Since the Lagrangian associated with the corrected Maxwell equations is a func-
B2 and (EB)2, it is suﬃcient to calculate the
tion of the two invariants E2
energy density of the matter ﬁeld as a function of two independent ﬁeld quan-
tities. For example, it will be suﬃcient to calculate the energy density in a
constant electric and a constant parallel magnetic ﬁeld. In these constant ﬁelds
we have to analyze the state of the matter ﬁeld in the absence of matter, i.e., in
the state of lowest energy. In an intuitive wave theory based on equations (4)
and (6), the state of lowest energy is given when all electron states of negative
energy are occupied and all states of positive energy are empty. In the presence
of only a magnetic ﬁeld, the stationary states of an electron can be divided into
those of negative and positive energy. Hence the state of the lowest energy of
the matter ﬁeld can be derived in the same way as for a ﬁeld-free space.

The situation is diﬀerent in an electric ﬁeld.

In this case the potential
energy grows linearly in one space direction, so all energy values from
to
are possible. The eigenfunctions associated with diﬀerent eigenvalues are
+
transformed into each other by a spatial translation. Hence a classiﬁcation of
energy values into positive and negative is not unique.

−∞

∞

This diﬃculty is physcially related to the fact that in an electric ﬁeld, pairs
of positrons and electrons are created. The exact analysis of this problem was
performed by Sauter8.

8F. Sauter, ZS. f. Phys. 69, 742, 1931

5

In Fig. 1, the potential energy V (x) and the lines V (x)+mc2 and V (x)

mc2
are plotted against the coordinate (the electric ﬁeld is parallel x-axis). The
calculations of Sauter show that the eigenfunction associated to the eigenvalue
E0, for example, is large only in the regions I and II. In the region II, they
decrease exponentially. Therefore, a wave function that begins being large in
region I decreases slowly in region III where the transmission coeﬃcient through
region II (which plays the role of a Gamow-wall) calculated by Sauter has the

−

order of magnitude e−

m2 c3
~e|E| π.

Ek|
If we deﬁne
|
|E
k |
|E| π. As long as

= m2c3
~e

as the critical ﬁeld
Ek|

|E

E
|

| ≪ |

, pair creation is
strength, we can also write e−
so rare that it can be practically ignored. Then it must be possible to ﬁnd
solutions of the Dirac equation playing the role of eigenfunctions, which are
k |
|E| π in region III. Conversely,
large in region I but stay small of the order of e−
it must be possible to ﬁnd solutions which are large in region III and small in
region I. After that we can characterize the state of the lowest energy by all
electron states being occupied whose eigenfunctions are large only in region III,
while the others are unoccupied. The energy density at x0 is calculated from the
diﬀerences of the electron energies with E0 [compare Eq. (31)]. By switching oﬀ
the electric ﬁeld adiabatically, the so characterized state of the system goes over
into the state of the ﬁeld-free space, in which only the negativ-energy electron
states are occupied.

Our calculations follow those of Sauter. If an external magnetic ﬁeld B and
an electric ﬁeld E are present, both pointing in x-direction, the Dirac equation
reads:

The movement in y- and z-directions can be separated from that in x-direction
by the ansatz:

We introduce a new operator K by

6

It satisﬁes:

This equation can be understood as a wave equation determing eigenfunctions
un(y). If we set

we ﬁnd (22) which becomes essentially the Schroedinger equation of the oszil-
lator,

(Hn(η) is the n-th Hermite polynom). The eigenvalues are:

The operator K anticommutates with α1 in the wave function (19), which can
also be written as

We can perform a canonical transformation in χ, so that σx becomes diagonal,
and K and α1 read:

Here the two matrices refer to another index independent of the spin orientation
(they refer to the “̺”-coordinate). One can treat σx as if it was an ordinary
number (σx =

1) and obtains with the convenient shorthand notation

±

the equations

7

where f and g are the two components of the function χ (associated with the
′′̺′′-index). The equations (28) are formally identical with the Equations (12)
from Sauter”s paper (op. cit. 8). They diﬀer from those, however, in the mean-
ing of k and that the system (28) actually has to be written down twice; once
for σx = +1 and once for σx =

1. Sauter obtains two sets of solutions:

−

The integrals are to be taken along a path coming from +
both singular points +i/2 and

circulating around
.
∞
Since we ignore pair creation in the calculation we consider as eigenfunctions
only those parts of the functions f and g which vanish in one half of the space.
Thus we set

i/2 in a positive manner, and returning to +

∞

−

The new functions f 1
1 etc. do not correspond exactly to the stationary states
but represent wave packets for which it is unlikly to diﬀuse into the initially
empty area. For the construction of the density matrix we consider the states
f 1
1 , g1
1, ... as unoccupied. We have
1 , g1
doubled the number of states by the process (30). Thus, if we take all f 1
1,
f 1
2 , g1
2 as unoccupied, we shall obtain the density
matrix twice.

1, ... as being occupied, the states f 2

2 as occupied and f 2

1 , g2

1, f 2

2 , g2

1 , g2

To ﬁnd the energy density of the vacuum according to the method described
in the ﬁrst section we would have to calculate the density matrix associated with
a ﬁnite distance of the two positions r′ and r′′. From this we have to subtract the
singular matrix S. Then obtain the energy density by taking the limit r′ = r′′.
For the following calculation it is more convenient to set from the beginning
r′ = r′′, but to restrict the summation over the stationary states to those of
ﬁnite energy only. Aquivalently, we could make the summation convergent by
(mc2)2]. If the constant number in the exponent
an auxiliary factor e−
goes to zero, some of the terms in the energy density become singular, and they
will be compensated by corresponding elements in the matrix S. The remaining
regular elements yield the desired result.

const[E2

−

Bevor writing down the density matrix, we have to normalize the eigenfunc-
tions. We can imagine the space of the eigenfunctions in x- and z-direction
being conﬁned to a large length L (the above eigenfunctions un(y) are already

8

normalized). Then we have from the z-direction a normalization factor 1/√L;
from the x-direction, the asymptotic behavior of the Sauter eigenfunctions [com-
k2π
pare Eq. (22)] yields the factor 2 1
4 . The summation over all states is to
√L
be done over all momenta which have the form

e−

pz =

m + const

h
L

and over all energies of the form E = hc
be converted into integrals. When neglecting the factor
dpx
h

L/2 m + const. These two sums can
1
the diﬀerential is
√L
dE
2hc . If we calculate the density at position x0, the energy of a state is the
E
x0. We therefore obtain for the energy density corresponding
|
|

diﬀerence E
to the matrix RS (compare Section 1) [for the meaning of a compare (33)]

−

e

which due to (23a) goes over into

From this expression we have to derive the limit α
lowing convenient abbreviations:

−→

0. We introduce the fol-

These are dimensionsless and represent the ratio of the ﬁeld strengths with the
critical ﬁeld strength
, i.e., with the “1/137th fraction of the ﬁeld strength
at the radius of the electron”. With the equation (29) one ﬁnally ﬁnds

Ek|
|

where h(s1s2) is

9

The integration over ξ yields:

The ﬁrst of the two s-integrals, i.e., the one over s1, can be performed by de-
forming the integration path in such a manner that only a loop around the pole
s1 = s2 −

α is left. Replacing s2 by s = s2 −

α in the result, one obtains:

where

The integration is to be carried out along a path shown in Fig. 2. The con-
.
passes between the four poles, and returns back to +
tour comes from +
∞
.
Alternatively, one may integrate along the imaginary axis from +
−∞

∞

∞

to

10

The main contribution to the integral comes from the regions between the
poles. One may expand the logarithm in the exponent in power series of α, and
obtains

For the following calculations, it is assumed that the electric ﬁeld is small against
the critical ﬁeld

1 and thus

, i.e. a

Ek|
|

≪

k2α
4s2+1 in the exponent must be retained; the higher terms
Then the expression
0.
in the exponent may be considered as small, while we shall eventually take α
They can therefore be included by an expansion. Thus, one obtains an expres-
sion for f (k) of the form

−→

−

Before performing the integral, it is convenient to calculate the summation

over n and σ; it is carried out according to the scheme

It turns out that the higher terms of Euler summation formula contribute noth-
ing to the end result. Finally, setting α
0 (where γ denotes
the Euler constant γ = 1.781).

a = ε, one gets for ε

→

11

(The coeﬃcients cm are to be determined further below).

The parts corresponding to the singular matrix S still have to be subtracted
from the result. One obtains easily the ﬁeld-independent part of the singular
energy density, which is to subtract by repeating the above calculation with
plane waves:

It is more diﬃcult to calculate the ﬁeld-dependent part of S. Since equation
(13) contains only squares of ﬁeld strengths in ¯a and ¯b, this would also for US.
Further, the constant C in equation (13) is chosen so that for constant ﬁelds,
polarisation proportional to the ﬁeld does not occur. From this it follows that
the terms which are quadratic in the ﬁeld are to be subtracted, and only the
higher terms remain. This implies, anticipating an expansion in powers of b for
b
1, that the ﬁrst line of the right-hand equation (41) is to subtract on the
whole. We proved this result by assuming that the points r′ and r′′ of the density
matrix are diﬀerent in the x direction [r′
r′′ = (x, 0, 0)], and by setting at the
end α = ǫ = 0. After subtracting the terms which come from the matrix S, only
the above discussed part of U remains. For the electric ﬁeld, this calculation
turned out to be very diﬃcult. Starting with the total energy density, which is
composed of the usual Maxwell energy density 1
8π (E2 + B2) and Dirac energy
density U

US, we go on with the Lagrangian using the relation (3)

≪

−

−

12

One obtains

For small magnetic ﬁelds, the power series expansion of b may be found applying
to equation (42) once more the Euler summation formula. Furthermore, since
L depends only on both invariants a2
b2 and a2b2, from which it follows that
−
L(a, b): L(a, 0) = L(0, ia), the missing coeﬃcients cm, whose direct calculation
would be very involved, may be determined indirectly from this relation. By
calculating c2 and c3 we have checked that the direct calculation of cm yields
the same result; though we didn’t ﬁnd the general proof for it. In this manner,
one obtains initially for small ﬁelds (a

1, b

1):

≪

≪

The opposite limit (a

1, b

1) yields

≪

≫

We tried to derive an integral representation of L in order to better see the gen-
eral behavior of L for an arbitrary ﬁeld. This is possible when using the usual
integral representation of the zeta function. One obtains

13

−

From the last form it is easy to see that L only depends on both invariants
B2 and (EB)2. The cos terms allow an expansion in squares of the argu-
E2
ment (b + ia)2 = b2
2i(ab). Since the
overall result is real, it may be represented as power series in b2
a2 and (ab)2,
E2
which may be replaced by B2
2 and EB2
Ek|
Ek|
|

a2 + 2i(ab) and (b + ia)2 = b2

−
2 = m2c3

4 respectively.

. Thus

e~ (cid:19)

−
Ek|

a2

(cid:18)|

−

−

−

|

the Lagrangian for arbitrarily oriented ﬁelds reads:

The ﬁrst expansion term of equation (43) agrees with the results of Euler and
Kockel (op. cit. 3).

· · ·

a , 2π
a ,

= 0, the integral looses its meaning for η = π

The question of convergence of this power series expansion deserves closer
investigation. The integral (45) converges for every value of b when a = 0.
, where cot aη
But when a
becomes inﬁnite. According to this, the power series expansion in a, from which
we started, can only be semiconvergent. We can give a deﬁnite meaning to the
integral (45) by selecting an integration path that avoids the singular values
π
a , 2π
a . But then the integral (45) acquires additional imaginary terms that can’t
be interpreted physically. Their meaning becomes clear if we estimate their size.
π
The integral (45) around the pole η = π
a
(for b = 0). This is the order of the terms which are associated with the pair
creation in the electric ﬁeld. Thus, the integral is to be interpreted similar to
the integration of the resonance denominator in perturbation theory. One may
assume that a damping term corresponding to the frequency of the resonance
process is responsible for the convergence. Further, one may assume that the
result, which is obtained by avoiding the singular values, is correct except for
the terms whose order corresponds to the frequency of the resonance process.

a has the value

4a2mc2( mc

h )3

2i
π ·

e−

−

·

The deviations from the Maxwell theory remain very small according to
(43) and (44) as long as E and B are small against the electric ﬁeld present at
e2
a distance of √137
mc2 from the center of the electron. But also in the case

·

14

6
that the magnetic ﬁeld exceeds this value, the additional terms to the Maxwell
equations remain small (proportional to the original terms). They have the
e2
relative order 1
~c as long as log b is near unity. Thus, the deviations from the
3π
usual Coulomb force between the protons (for example) come from the terms
(43) and (44), and remain always very small. However, in this estimate, one
must take into account that for a Coulomb ﬁeld, the neglected terms containing
the derivatives of the ﬁeld strengths are more important than those contained
in equations (43) and (44).

3 Importance of the Result in the Quantum The-

ory of Wave Fields

The results derived in the last section may not be transfered immediately to
the quantum theory of wave ﬁelds.
In fact, one may show that the state of
matter in a homogeneous ﬁeld in the quantum theory of wave ﬁelds is not
described by the above equations. Even if we start with the state of matter
discussed in the last section as an “undisturbed state”, there are matrix elements
of the perturbation theory which belong to the simultaneous formation of a light
quantum and a pair. Even, if the energy does not suﬃce for a real formation of
these particles, such matrix elements give rise to a perturbative energy of second
order. This energy comes about through the virtual possibility of formation and
disappearance of the light quantum and a pair, and the calculation provides a
divergent result for them. The appearance of these perturbation terms may be
made plausible by observing that the circular trajectories in a magnetic ﬁeld are
not really stationary states, but that the electrons in these states can radiate.
In the classical theory of wave ﬁelds, this radiation can be ignored - this being
crucial for the physical content of the calculation of the last section. Indeed, in
the ﬁnal solution the charge density and current density of matter vanish, so
that radiation does not occur. In the quantum theory of wave ﬁelds on the other
hand, this radiation does appear in form of the divergent perturbative energy
of second order.

One may also understand that a perturbative energy of exactly the same
type occurs also in the ﬁeld free vacuum (“self-energy of the vacuum”). Such
self-energies are found always when calculating the contribution of second order
or higher to the energy, which arises from virtual transition to another state and
return to the initial state. These self-energies have so far always been ignored.
For instance, the cross section of the Compton scattering may be calculated by
performing a perturbation calculation to second order. Considering the terms
of the forth order, one would get a contribution of the described type, which
does not yield a convergent result. The calculation of the light-light scattering
is carried out to the forth order (the lowest order that yields a contribution to
the relevant process). The contributions of the sixth order would already di-
verge. The previous success of these calculations, for instance the Klein-Nishina
formula, seems to show that omitting the divergent contributions of the higher

15

order leads to the correct results. If this is the case, then it follows from the
above discussion that the results of Section 2 can be transferred to the quantum
theory of wave ﬁelds. This is also physically plausible, since the occurrence of
the above radiation terms would remain incomprehensible according to the cor-
respondence principle. Each single term in the expansion of the energy density
in powers of E and B can concretely be associated with a scattering process,
whose cross section is determined by it. The terms of forth order, for instance,
stand for the usual light-light scattering, the terms of the sixth order determine
the cross section of the process whereby three light quanta are scattered on
each other etc. Irrespective of the question whether it is physically acceptable
to neglect higher order terms, each expansion term in the result of the last
section agree with a direct calculation of the corresponding scattering process
in the quantum theory of wave ﬁelds if the perturbation calculation is only
performed to the lowest order that yields a contribution to the corresponding
process. In both calculations, the contributions of the terms are neglected which
correspond to the formation and disappearance of the light quantum and a pair.
[The agreement of the terms of forth order with the terms obtained by the di-
rect calculation of light-light scattering (compare 3) is therefore a test for the
correctness of the calculation.] For this reason, it is not ruled out that even
B
Ek|
can be applied to experience. This is, however, cer-
the results for
|
|
|
Ek|
&
tainly not true for
; The pair creation destroys the basis for the above
|
calculations when the electric ﬁelds are large.

≧
E
|
|

4 The Physical Consequences of the Result

−

−

B2. Incidentally, because of the actual value of e2

The results derived in the second section are very similar to Born’s9 derivation
of Maxwell equations. Also Born obtains a more complicated function of the
B2 and (EB)2 in addition to the classical Lagrangian
two invariants, E2
E2
~c , this function agrees
with (43) in the order of magnitude of the lowest expansion terms (compare 3).
Though it is also important to emphasize the diﬀerences of both results. Born
has chosen the modiﬁed Maxwell equation as the starting point of the theory,
whereas this change in the Dirac theory is a really indirect consequence of the
In addition, Dirac’s theory predicts
virtual possibility of the pair creation.
also terms, which contain higher powers of the ﬁeld strengths (compare 1, 2
). Thus, especially the question of the self-energy of the electrons cannot be
decided only with the help of these changes. The result of Born’s theory imply
that the changes of the Maxwell equations calculated here suﬃce to remove
diﬃculties with the inﬁnite self energy is an important indication of the further
development of the theory.

In this context, we must also ask the question whether the results about
light-light scattering etc. derived from the Dirac theory may be considered to
be ﬁnal or whether it is expected that a future theory will lead to another

9M. Born, Proc. Roy. Soc. London (A) 143 , 410, 1933; M. Born and L. Infeld, Proc.

Roy. Soc. London (A) 144 , 425, 1934; 147, 522, 1934; 150, 141, 1935.

16

results. Without doubt, the theory of the positron and the present quantum
electrodynamics must be considered as temporary. Especially, the rules of ﬁnd-
ing the S matrix seem to be arbitrary in this theory (the inhomogeneity of
Dirac’s equation). The only reason for the matrix S introduced in [4] is the
relative mathematical simplicity (together with some postulates on the formu-
lation of the conservation laws). Thus, a deviation of the future theory from
the present theory may well be possible. Since such variations may have a big
inﬂuence on the Maxwell equations, the present theory is only reliable in its
order of magnitude and the qualitative form of these changes. Up to now, it is
hardly possible to make deﬁnite statements as to the ﬁnal form of the Maxwell
equations in future theory, since it is essential to consider all the processes of
particles with very high energy (for instance, the occurrence of “showers”).

17

