6
0
0
2
 
y
a
M
 
9
 
 
]
h
p
-
t
s
i
h
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
8
7
0
5
0
6
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

The Issue of the Beginning in Quantum Gravity

Abhay Ashtekar1,2

Institute for Gravitational Physics and Geometry
Physics Department, Penn State, University Park, PA 16802-6300
2 Institute for Theoretical Physics, University of Utrecht,
Princetonplein 5, 3584 CC Utrecht, The Netherlands

I.

INTRODUCTION

Treatise on Time, the Beginning and the End date back at least twenty ﬁve centuries.
Does the ﬂow of time have an objective, universal meaning beyond human perception? Or,
it is fundamentally only a convenient, and perhaps merely psychological, notion? Are its
properties tied to the speciﬁcs of observers such as their location and state of motion? Did
the physical universe have a ﬁnite beginning or has it been evolving eternally? Leading
thinkers across cultures meditated on these issues and arrived at deﬁnite but strikingly
diﬀerent answers. For example, in the sixth century BCE, Gautama Buddha taught that ‘a
period of time’ is a purely conventional notion, time and space exist only in relation to our
experience and the universe is eternal. In the Christian thought, by contrast, the universe
had a ﬁnite beginning and there was debate whether time represents ‘movement’ of bodies
or if it ﬂows only in the soul. In the fourth century CE, St. Augustine held that time itself
started with the world.

Founding fathers of modern Science from Galileo to Newton accepted that God created
the universe but Newton posited an absolute time which is to run uniformly from the inﬁnite
past to the inﬁnite future. This paradigm became a dogma over centuries. Philosophers used
it to argue that the universe itself had to be eternal. For, otherwise one could ask “what
was there before?” General relativity toppled this paradigm in one fell swoop. Since the
gravitational ﬁeld is now encoded in space-time geometry, geometry itself now becomes
dynamical. The universe could have had a ﬁnite beginning —the big-bang— at which
not only matter but space-time itself is ‘born’. General relativity takes us back to St.
Augustine’s paradigm but in a detailed, speciﬁc and mathematically precise form. In semi-
popular articles and radio shows, relativists now like to emphasize that the question “what
was there before?” is rendered meaningless because the notions of ‘before’ and ‘after’ refer
to a space-time geometry. We now have a new paradigm, a new dogma: In the Beginning
there was the big bang.

But general relativity is incomplete. For, it ignores quantum eﬀects entirely. Over the
last century, we have learned that these eﬀects become important in the physics of the
small and should in fact dominate in parts of the universe where matter densities become
enormous. So, there is no reason to trust the predictions of general relativity near space-
time singularities. The classical physics of general relativity does come to a halt at the
big-bang. But applying general relativity near a singularities is an extrapolation which
has no justiﬁcation whatsoever. We need a theory that incorporates not only the dynamical

2

nature of geometry but also the ramiﬁcations of quantum physics. Does the ‘correct’ or ‘true’
physics stop at the big-bang also in quantum gravity? Or, is there yet another paradigm
shift waiting in the wings?

The goal of this article is to present an up to date summary of the status of these age-
old issues within loop quantum gravity (LQG). Detailed calculations in simple cosmological
models have shown that the quantum nature of geometry does dominate the physics near
the big bang, altering dynamics and drastically changing the paradigm provided by general
relativity. In particular, the quantum space-time may be much larger than what general
relativity has us believe, whence the big bang may not, after all, be the Beginning. Some of
the mathematics underlying the main results is subtle. However, I have made an attempt
to also include a descriptive summary of the viewpoint, ideas, constructions and physical
ramiﬁcations of the results.

II. LOOP QUANTUM GRAVITY

A. Conceptual Issues

Remarkably, the necessity of a quantum theory of gravity was pointed out by Einstein

already in 1916. In a paper in the Preussische Akademie Sitzungsberichte he wrote:

Nevertheless, due to the inneratomic movement of electrons, atoms would have
to radiate not only electromagnetic but also gravitational energy, if only in tiny
amounts. As this is hardly true in Nature, it appears that quantum theory would
have to modify not only Maxwellian electrodynamics but also the new theory of
gravitation.

Ninety years later, our understanding of the physical world is vastly richer but a fully
satisfactory uniﬁcation of general relativity with quantum physics still eludes us. Indeed,
the problem has now moved to the center-stage of fundamental physics. (For a brief historical
account of the evolution of ideas see, e.g., [1].)

A key reason why the issue is still open is the lack of experimental data with direct bearing
on quantum gravity. As a result, research is necessarily driven by theoretical insights on
what the key issues are and what will ‘take care of itself’ once this core is understood.
As a consequence, there are distinct starting points which seem natural. Such diversity
is not unique to this problem. However, for other fundamental forces we have had clear-
cut experiments to weed-out ideas which, in spite of their theoretical appeal, fail to be
realized in Nature. We do not have this luxury in quantum gravity. But then, in absence
of strong experimental constraints, one would expect a rich variety of internally consistent
theories. Why is it then that we do not have a single one? The reason, I believe, lies the
deep conceptual diﬀerence between the description of gravity in general relativity and that of
non-gravitational forces in other fundamental theories. In those theories, space-time is given
a priori, serving as an inert background, a stage on which the drama of evolution unfolds.
General relativity, on the other hand, is not only a theory of gravity, it is also a theory
of space-time structure. Indeed, as I remarked in section I, in general relativity gravity is

3

encoded in the very geometry of space-time. Therefore, a quantum theory of gravity has
to simultaneously bring together gravity, geometry and the quantum. This is a band new
adventure and our past experience with other forces can not serve as a reliable guide.

LQG is an approach that attempts to face this challenge squarely (for details, see, e.g.,
[2, 3, 4]). Recall that Riemannian geometry provides the appropriate mathematical language
to formulate the physical, kinematical notions as well as the ﬁnal dynamical equations of any
classical theory of relativistic gravity. This role is now assumed by quantum Riemannian
geometry. Thus, in LQG both matter and geometry are quantum mechanical ‘from birth’.
In the classical domain, general relativity stands out as the best available theory of grav-
ity. Therefore, it is natural to ask: Does quantum general relativity, coupled to suitable
matter (or supergravity, its supersymmetric generalization) exist as consistent theories non-
perturbatively? In particle physics circles the answer is often assumed to be in the negative,
not because there is concrete evidence which rules out this possibility, but because of the
analogy to the theory of weak interactions. There, one ﬁrst had a 4-point interaction model
due to Fermi which works quite well at low energies but which fails to be renormalizable.
Progress occurred not by looking for non-perturbative formulations of the Fermi model but
by replacing the model by the Glashow-Salam-Weinberg renormalizable theory of electro-
weak interactions, in which the 4-point interaction is replaced by W ± and Z propagators.
Therefore, it is often assumed that perturbative non-renormalizability of quantum general
relativity points in a similar direction. However this argument overlooks a crucial and
qualitatively new element of general relativity. Perturbative treatments pre-suppose that
space-time is a smooth continuum at all scales of interest to physics under consideration.
This assumption is safe for weak interactions. In the gravitational case, on the other hand,
the scale of interest is the Planck length and there is no physical basis to pre-suppose that
the continuum approximation should be valid down to that scale. The failure of the stan-
dard perturbative treatments may largely be due to this grossly incorrect assumption and
a non-perturbative treatment which correctly incorporates the physical micro-structure of
geometry may well be free of these inconsistencies.

Are there any situations, outside LQG, where such physical expectations are borne out by
detailed mathematics? The answer is in the aﬃrmative. There exist quantum ﬁeld theories
(such as the Gross-Neveu model in three dimensions) in which the standard perturbation
expansion is not renormalizable although the theory is exactly soluble! Failure of the stan-
dard perturbation expansion can occur because one insists on perturbing around the trivial,
Gaussian point rather than the more physical, non-trivial ﬁxed point of the renormalization
group ﬂow. Interestingly, thanks to the recent work by Lauscher, Reuter, Percacci, Perini
and others, there is now growing evidence that situation may be similar with general relativ-
ity (see [5] and references therein). Impressive calculations have shown that pure Einstein
theory may also admit a non-trivial ﬁxed point. Furthermore, the requirement that the ﬁxed
point should continue to exist in presence of matter constrains the couplings in physically
interesting ways [6].

Let me conclude this discussion with an important caveat. Suppose one manages to es-
tablish that non-perturbative quantum general relativity (or, supergravity) does exist as a
mathematically consistent theory. Still, there is no a priori reason to assume that the result
would be the ‘ﬁnal’ theory of all known physics. In particular, as is the case with classical

4

general relativity, while requirements of background independence and general covariance do
restrict the form of interactions between gravity and matter ﬁelds and among matter ﬁelds
themselves, the theory would not have a built-in principle which determines these interac-
tions. Put diﬀerently, such a theory would not be a satisfactory candidate for uniﬁcation of
all known forces. However, just as general relativity has had powerful implications in spite of
this limitation in the classical domain, quantum general relativity should have qualitatively
new predictions, pushing further the existing frontiers of physics. In section III we will see
an illustration of this possibility.

B. Salient features

Detailed as well as short and semi-qualitative reviews of LQG have recently appeared in
the literature (see, e.g., [2] and [1] respectively). Therefore, here I will only summarize the
key features of the theory that are used in section III.

The starting point of LQG is a Hamiltonian formulation of general relativity based on
spin connections [7]. Since all other basic forces of nature are also described by theories of
connections, this formulation naturally leads to an uniﬁcation of all four fundamental forces
at a kinematical level. Speciﬁcally, the phase space of general relativity is the same as that
of a Yang-Mills theory. The diﬀerence lies in dynamics: whereas in the standard Yang-Mills
theory the Minkowski metric features prominently in the deﬁnition of the Hamiltonian, there
are no background ﬁelds whatsoever once gravity is switched on.

a, P i

a), where Ai

Let us focus on the gravitational sector of the theory. Then, the phase space Γgrav
consists of canonically conjugate pairs (Ai
a is a connection on a 3-manifold
M and P i
a a vector density of weight one, both of which take values in the Lie-algebra su(2).
The connection A enables one to parallel transport chiral spinors (such as the left handed
fermions of the standard electro-weak model) along curves in M. Its curvature is directly
related to the electric and magnetic parts of the space-time Riemann tensor. P a
i plays a
double role. Being the momentum canonically conjugate to A, it is analogous to the Yang-
Mills electric ﬁeld. In addition, Ea
i , has the interpretation of an orthonormal
i
triad (with density weight 1) on M, where γ is the ‘Barbero-Immirzi parameter’ representing
a quantization ambiguity. Each triad Ea
i determines a positive deﬁnite ‘spatial’ 3-metric qab,
and hence the Riemannian geometry of M. This dual role of P is a reﬂection of the fact
that now SU(2) is the (double cover of the) group of rotations of the orthonormal spatial
triads on M itself rather than of rotations in an ‘internal’ space associated with M.

:= 8πGγP a

To pass to quantum theory, one ﬁrst constructs an algebra of ‘elementary’ functions
on Γgrav (analogous to the phase space functions x and p in the case of a particle) which
are to have unambiguous operator analogs.
In LQG, the conﬁguration variables are the
holonomies he built from Ai
a which enable us to parallel transport chiral spinors along
edges e and ﬂuxes ES,f of ‘electric ﬁelds’ or ‘triads’ (smeared with test ﬁelds f ) across 2-
surfaces S. These functions generate a certain algebra a (analogous to the algebra generated
by operators \exp iλx and ˆp in quantum mechanics). The ﬁrst principal task is to ﬁnd
representations of this algebra. In that representation, quantum Riemannian geometry can
be probed through the momentum operators ˆES,f , which stem from classical orthonormal

5

triads. Quite surprisingly the requirement of diﬀeomorphism covariance on M suﬃces to
single out a unique representation of a [8, 9]! This recent result is the quantum geometry
analog to the seminal results by Segal and others that characterized the Fock vacuum in
Minkowskian ﬁeld theories. However, while that result assumes not only Poincar´e invariance
but also speciﬁc (namely free) dynamics, it is striking that the present uniqueness theorems
make no such restriction on dynamics. The requirement of diﬀeomorphism invariance is
surprisingly strong and makes the ‘background independent’ quantum geometry framework
surprisingly tight.

H

= L2( ¯
A

, dµo), the space of square integrable functions on ¯
A

This unique representation was in fact introduced already in the mid-nineties [10, 11, 12,
13, 14] and has been extensively used in LQG since then. The underlying Hilbert space
is a certain
is
consisting of smooth connections on M
completion of the classical conﬁguration space
and µo is a diﬀeomorphism invariant, faithful, regular Borel measure on ¯
. The holonomy
A
(or conﬁguration) operators ˆhe act just by multiplication. The momentum operators ˆES,f act
as Lie-derivatives. In the classical theory, by taking suitable derivatives in M of holonomies
he along arbitrary edges e, one can recover the connection from which the holonomy is built.
However, in the quantum theory, the operators ˆhe are discontinuous and there is no operator
ˆA corresponding to the connection itself.

, where ¯
A

A

Key features of this representation which distinguish it from, say, the standard Fock
representation of the quantum Maxwell ﬁeld are the following. While the Fock representation
of photons makes a crucial use of the background Minkowski metric, the above construction
is manifestly ‘background independent’. Second, as remarked above, the connection itself
is not represented as an operator (valued distribution). Holonomy operators, on the other
hand, are well-deﬁned. Third, the ‘triads’ or ‘electric ﬁeld’ operators now have purely
discrete eigenvalues. Given a surface S and a region R one can express the area AS and
volume VR using the triads. Although they are non-polynomial functions of triads, the
operators ˆAS and ˆVR are well-deﬁned and also have discrete eigenvalues. By contrast, such
functions of electric ﬁelds can not be promoted to operators on the Fock space. Finally, and
and the associated holonomy and (smeared) triad
most importantly, the Hilbert space
operators only provide a kinematical framework —the quantum analog of the phase space.
Thus, while elements of the Fock space represent physical states of photons, elements of
H
are not the physical states of LQG. Rather, like the classical phase space, the kinematic
setup provides a home for formulating quantum dynamics.

H

In quantum theory, the Hilbert space

In the Hamiltonian framework, the dynamical content of any background independent
theory is contained in its constraints.
and the
holonomy and (smeared) triad operators thereon provide the necessary tools to write down
quantum constraint operators. The physical states are solutions to these quantum con-
straints. Thus, to complete the program, one has to:
i) obtain the expressions of the
quantum constraints; ii) solve the constraints; iii) construct the physical Hilbert space from
the solutions (e.g. by the group averaging procedure); and iv) extract physics from these
physical sector (e.g., by analyzing the expectation values, ﬂuctuations of and correlations
between Dirac observables). While strategies have been developed —particularly through
Thiemann’s ‘Master constraint program’ [15]— to complete these steps, important open
issues remain in the full theory. However, as section III illustrates, the program has been

H

6

completed in mini and midi superspace models, leading to surprising insights and answers
to some long-standing questions.

III. APPLICATION: HOMOGENEOUS ISOTROPIC COSMOLOGY

Long standing questions about the quantum nature of the big bang can be illustrated by

the following list:

How close to the Big Bang does a smooth space-time of general relativity make
•
sense? In particular, can one show from ﬁrst principles that this approximation
is valid at the onset of inﬂation?

Is the Big-Bang singularity naturally resolved by quantum gravity? Or, is
•
some external input such as a new principle or a boundary condition at the Big
Bang essential?

Is the quantum evolution across the ‘singularity’ deterministic? Since one needs
•
a fully non-perturbative framework to answer this question in the aﬃrmative, in
the Pre-Big-Bang [16] and Ekpyrotic/Cyclic [17, 18] scenarios, for example, so
far the answer is in the negative.

If the singularity is resolved, what is on the ‘other side’ ? Is there just a
•
‘quantum foam’, far removed from any classical space-time, or, is there another
large, classical universe?

For many years, these and related issues had been generally relegated to the ‘wish list’ of
what one would like the future, satisfactory quantum gravity theory to eventually address.
It seems likely that these issues can be met head-on only in a background independent,
non-perturbative approach. One such candidate is LQG. Indeed, starting with the seminal
work of Bojowald some ﬁve years ago [19], notable progress has been made in the context of
symmetry reduced, minisuperspaces. Earlier papers focussed only on singularity resolution.
However, to describe physics in detail, it is essential to construct the physical Hilbert space
and introduce interesting observables and semi-classical states by completing the program
outlined at the end of the last section. These steps have been completed recently. In this
section, I will summarize the state of the art, emphasizing these recent developments. (For
a comprehensive review of the older work see, e.g., [20].)

Consider the spatially homogeneous, isotropic, k=0 cosmologies with a massless scalar
ﬁeld. It is instructive to focus on this model because every of its classical solutions has a
singularity. There are two possibilities: In one the universe starts out at the big bang and
expands, and in the other it contracts into a big crunch. The question is if this unavoidable
classical singularity is naturally tamed by quantum eﬀects. This issue can be analyzed in
the geometrodynamical framework used in older quantum cosmology. Unfortunately, the
answer turns out to be in the negative. For example, if one begins with a semi-classical
state representing an expanding classical universe at late times and evolves it back via the
Wheeler DeWitt equation, one ﬁnds that it just follows the classical trajectory into the big
bang singularity [22, 23].

7

In LQC, the situation is very diﬀerent [21, 22, 23]. This may seem surprising at ﬁrst.
For, the system has only a ﬁnite number of degrees of freedom and von Neumann’s theorem
assures us that, under appropriate assumptions, the resulting quantum mechanics is unique.
The only remaining freedom is factor-ordering and this is generally insuﬃcient to lead to
qualitatively diﬀerent predictions. However, for reasons I will now explain, LQC does turn
out to be qualitatively diﬀerent from the Wheeler-DeWitt theory [24].

a. The SU(2) gravitational spin connection Ai

Because of spatial homogeneity and isotropy, one can ﬁx a ﬁducial (ﬂat) triad oea

i and its
dual co-triad oωi
a used in LQG has only one
component c which furthermore depends only on time; Ai
a. Similarly, the triad Ea
i
(of density weight 1) has a single component p; Ea
i . p is related to the scale
factor a via a2 =
p the metric
. However, p is not restricted to be positive; under p
remains unchanged but the spatial triad ﬂips the orientation. The pair (c, p) is ‘canonically
conjugate’ in the sense that the only non-zero Poisson bracket is given by:

a = c oωi
i = p (det oω) oea

→ −

p

|

|

c, p

=

{

}

8πGγ
3

,

(3.1)

where as before γ is the Barbero-Immirzi parameter.

Since a precise quantum mechanical framework was not available for full geometrody-
namics, in the Wheeler-DeWitt quantum cosmology one focused just on the reduced model,
without the beneﬁt of guidance from the full theory. A major diﬀerence in Loop quantum
cosmology (LQC) is that although the symmetry reduced theory has only a ﬁnite number
of degrees of freedom, quantization is carried out by closely mimicking the procedure used
in full LQG, outlined in section II. Key diﬀerences between LQC and the older Wheeler-
DeWitt theory can be traced back to this fact.

Recall that in full LQG diﬀeomorphism invariance leads one to a speciﬁc kinematical
framework in which there are operators ˆhe representing holonomies and ˆES,f representing
(smeared) momenta but there is no operator(-valued distribution) representing the con-
nection A itself [8, 9]. In the cosmological model now under consideration, it is suﬃcient
to evaluate holonomies along segments µ (oea
i ) of straight lines determined by the ﬁducial
triad oea
i . These holonomies turn out almost periodic functions of c, i.e. are of the form
N(µ) := exp iµ(c/2), where the word ‘almost’ refers to the fact that µ can be any real num-
ber. These functions were studied exhaustively by the mathematician Harold Bohr, Niels’
brother. In quantum geometry, the Nµ are the LQC analogs of the spin-network functions
of full LQG [13, 14].

In the quantum theory, then, we are led to a representation in which operators ˆN(µ) and
ˆp are well-deﬁned, but there is no operator corresponding to the connection component
c. This seems surprising because our experience with quantum mechanics suggests that
one should be able to obtain the operator analog of c by diﬀerentiating N(µ) with respect
to the parameter µ. However, in the representation of the basic quantum algebra that
descends to LQC from full LQG, although the ˆN(µ) provide a 1-parameter group of unitary
transformations, it fails to be weakly continuous in µ. Therefore one can not diﬀerentiate
and obtain the operator analog of c.
In quantum mechanics, this would be analogous
to having well-deﬁned (Weyl) operators corresponding to the classical functions exp iµx
but no operator ˆx corresponding to x itself. This violates one of the assumptions of the

8

von-Neumann uniqueness theorem. New representations then become available which are
inequivalent to the standard Schr¨odinger one. In quantum mechanics, these representations
are not of direct physical interest because we need the operator ˆx. In LQC, on the other hand,
full LQG naturally leads us to a new representation, i.e., to new quantum mechanics. This
theory is inequivalent to the Wheeler-DeWitt type theory already at a kinematical level. In
the Wheeler-Dewitt theory, the Hilbert space would be L2(R, dc), operators ˆc would act by
i~d/dc. In LQC the ‘quantum conﬁguration
multiplication and ˆp would be represented by
−
space’ is diﬀerent from the classical conﬁguration space: Just as we had to complete the
of smooth connections to the space ¯
space
of generalized connections in LQG, we are
A
now led to consider a completion —called the Bohr compactiﬁcation ¯RBohr— of the ‘c-axis’.
The gravitational part of the Hilbert space is now L2( ¯RBohr, dµBohr) [24] where dµBohr is the
LQC analog of the measure dµo selected by the uniqueness results [8, 9] in full LQG. The
operators ˆN(µ) act by multiplication and ˆp by diﬀerentiation. However, there is no operator
ˆc. In spite of these diﬀerences, in the semi-classical regime LQC is well approximated by the
Wheeler-DeWitt theory [22, 23, 24]. However, important diﬀerences manifest themselves at
the Planck scale. These are the hallmarks of quantum geometry [2, 20].

A

|

|

R

1Ea

i Eb

det E

d3x ǫijke−

1/2 and F k

The new representation also leads to a qualitative diﬀerence in the structure of the Hamil-
tonian constraint operator: the gravitational part of the constraint is a diﬀerence opera-
tor, rather than a diﬀerential operator as in the Wheeler-DeWitt theory. The derivation
[22, 23, 24] can be summarized brieﬂy as follows. In the classical theory, the gravitational
j Fab k where e =
ab the
part of the constraint is given by
curvature of the connection Ai
a. The part of this operator involving triads can be quantized
[19, 24] using a standard procedure introduced by Thiemann in the full theory [4]. However,
since there is no operator corresponding to the connection itself, one has to express F k
ab as a
limit of the holonomy around a loop divided by the area enclosed by the loop, as the area
shrinks to zero. Now, quantum geometry tells us that the area operator has a minimum
non-zero eigenvalue, ∆, and in the quantum theory it is natural to shrink the loop only till it
attains this minimum. There are two ways to implement this idea in detail (see [22, 23, 24]).
In both cases, it is the existence of the ‘area gap’ ∆ that leads one to a diﬀerence equation.
So far, most of the LQC literature has used the ﬁrst method [22, 24]. In the resulting theory,
the classical big-bang is replaced with a quantum bounce with a number of desirable fea-
tures. However, it also has one serious drawback: at the bounce, matter density can be low
even for physically reasonable choices of quantum states (for details, see [22]). The second
and more recently discovered method [23] cures this problem while retaining the physically
appealing features of the ﬁrst and, furthermore, has a more direct motivation. For brevity,
therefore, I will conﬁne myself only to the second method.

Let us represent states as functions Ψ(v, φ), where φ is the scalar ﬁeld and the dimen-
is the eigenvalue of the operator

sionless real number v represents geometry. Speciﬁcally,

v

|

|

9

(3.2)

(3.4)

ˆV representing volume1 (essentially the cube of the scale factor):

ˆV

v

|

i

= K (

8πγ
6

3
2

)

v

|

|

v

ℓ3
Pl |

i

where K =

3

3√3

p
2√2

Then, the LQC Hamiltonian constraint assumes the form:

∂2
φΨ(v, φ) = [B(v)]−
=:

(cid:0)
Θ Ψ(v, φ)

1

−

C +(v) Ψ(v + 4, φ) + C o(v) Ψ(v, φ) + C −(v) Ψ(v

4, φ)

−

(cid:1)

(3.3)

where the coeﬃcients C ±(v), C o(V ) and B(v) are given by:

C +(v) =

3πKG
8
C −(v) = C +(v
−
3
K

B(v) =

|

3
2(cid:19)

(cid:18)

v + 2

v + 1

|

| − |
|
4) and C o(v) =

(cid:12)
(cid:12)

v + 3

|
(cid:12)
C +(v)
(cid:12)
−
3
.

1/3

1

−

C −(v)

v + 1

1/3

v

|

− |

−

|

v

|

| (cid:12)
|
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)

(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)

Now, in each classical solution, φ is a globally monotonic function of time and can there-
fore be taken as the dynamical variable representing an internal clock. In quantum theory
there is no space-time metric, even on-shell. But since the quantum constraint (3.3) dictates
how Ψ(v, φ) ‘evolves’ as φ changes, it is convenient to regard the argument φ in Ψ(v, φ)
as emergent time and v as the physical degree of freedom. The ‘evolution’ now refers to
relational dynamics. A complete set of Dirac observables is then provided by the constant
of motion ˆpφ and operators ˆv

|φo determining the value of v at the ‘instant’ φ = φo.

Physical states are the (suitably regular) solutions to Eq (3.3). The map ˆΠ deﬁned by
ˆΠ Ψ(v, φ) = Ψ(
v, φ) corresponds just to the ﬂip of orientation of the spatial triad (under
which geometry remains unchanged); ˆΠ is thus a large gauge transformation on the space
of solutions to Eq. (3.3). One is therefore led to divide physical states into sectors, each
providing an irreducible, unitary representation of this symmetry. Physical considerations
[22, 23] imply that we should consider the symmetric sector, with eigenvalue +1 of ˆΠ.

−

To endow this space with the structure of a Hilbert space, one can proceed along one of
two paths. In the ﬁrst, one deﬁnes the action of the Dirac observables on the space of suitably
regular solutions to the constraints and selects the inner product by demanding that these
operators be self-adjoint [25]. A more systematic procedure is the ‘group averaging method’
[26]. The technical implementation [22, 23] of both these procedures is greatly simpliﬁed by
the fact that the diﬀerence operator Θ on the right side of (3.3) is independent of φ and can
be shown to be self-adjoint and positive deﬁnite on the Hilbert space L2( ¯RBohr, B(v)dµBohr).

1 In non-compact spatially homogeneous models, integrals of physical interest over the full spatial manifold
diverge. Therefore, to obtain a consistent Hamiltonian description, one has to introduce an elementary cell
already in the classical theory. This is necessary also in geometrodynamics.

and restrict all integrals to

V
ˆV is the volume operator associated with

V

.

V

∈

Hphy has sectors

The ﬁnal result can be summarized as follows. Since Θ is a diﬀerence operator, the
physical Hilbert space
⊕ǫHǫ with
ǫ
(0, 2). The overall predictions are insensitive to the choice of a speciﬁc sector (for
Hǫ are symmetric under the orientation inversion ˆΠ
details, see [22, 23]). States Ψ(v, φ) in
and have support on points v =
+ 4n where n is an integer. Wave functions Ψ(v, φ) in a
generic sector solve (3.3) and are of positive frequency with respect to the ‘internal time’ φ:
they satisfy the ‘positive frequency’ square root

Hǫ which are superselected;

Hphy =

ǫ
|

|

of Eq (3.3). (The square-root is a well-deﬁned (positive, self-adjoint) operator because Θ is
positive and self-adjoint.) The physical inner product is given by:

i∂φ Ψ = √Θ Ψ .

−

Ψ1 |

h

Ψ2i

=

Xv
ǫ
∈{|

|

+4n

}

B(v) ¯Ψ1(v, φo)Ψ2(v, φo)

and is ‘conserved’, i.e., is independent of the ‘instant’ φo chosen in its evaluation. On these
states, the Dirac observables act in the expected fashion:

i~∂φ Ψ

ˆpφΨ =
|φo Ψ(v, φ) = ei√Θ(φ
ˆv

−

φo) v Ψ(v, φo)

−

What is the relation of this LQC description with the Wheeler-DeWitt theory? It is
1, there is a precise sense in which the diﬀerence

straightforward to show [23] that, for v
operator Θ approaches the Wheeler DeWitt diﬀerential operator Θ, given by

≫

Thus, if one ignores the quantum geometry eﬀects, Eq (3.3) reduces to the Wheeler-DeWitt
equation

ΘΨ(v, φ) = 12πG v∂v

v∂vΨ(v, φ)

(cid:0)

(cid:1)

∂2
φΨ =

Θ Ψ.

−

Note that the operator Θ is positive deﬁnite and self-adjoint on the Hilbert space
s(R, B(v)dv) where the subscript s denotes the restriction to the symmetric eigenspace
L2
1 is the limiting form of B(v) for large v. Its eigenfunctions ek with
of Π and B(v) := Kv−
eigenvalue ω2(
0) are 2-fold degenerate on this Hilbert space. Therefore, they can be
labelled by a real number k:

≥

where k is related to ω via ω = √12πG
|
s(R, B(v)dv). A ‘general’ positive frequency solution to (3.9) can be written as
L2

. They form an orthonormal basis on

k

|

ek(v) :=

1
√2π

eik ln

|

v

|

Ψ(v, φ) =

dk ˜Ψ(k) ek(v)eiωφ

∞

Z

−∞

10

(3.5)

(3.6)

(3.7)

(3.8)

(3.9)

(3.10)

(3.11)

  1 . 6
  1 . 4
  1 . 2
  1
  0 . 8
  0 . 6
  0 . 4
  0 . 2
  0

- 1 . 2

- 0 . 8

- 1

φ

- 0 . 6

- 0 . 4

|
|

)
)

, φ
, φ

v
v

| Ψ (
| Ψ (
  1 . 5

  1

  0 . 5

  0

3

5 * 1 0

4

1 . 0 * 1 0

4

1 . 5 * 1 0

4

2 . 0 * 1 0

v

4

2 . 5 * 1 0

4

3 . 0 * 1 0

4

3 . 5 * 1 0

4

4 . 0 * 1 0

- 0 . 2

11

quantum
classical

 0

-0.2

-0.4

-0.6

φ

-0.8

-1

-1.2

0

1*104

2*104

v

3*104

4*104

5*104

FIG. 1: The ﬁgure on left shows the absolute value of the wave function Ψ as a function of φ
and v. Being a physical state, Ψ is symmetric under v
v. The ﬁgure on the right shows
|φ and their dispersions. They exhibit a quantum
the expectation values of Dirac observables ˆv
bounce which joins the contracting and expanding classical trajectories marked by fainter lines.
103√G~ and
In this simulation, the parameters in the initial data are: v⋆ = 5
104, p⋆
∆pφ/pφ = 0.0025.

φ = 5

→ −

×

×

for suitably regular ˜Ψ(k). This expression will enable us to show explicitly that the singu-
larity is not resolved in the Wheeler-DeWitt theory.

With the physical Hilbert space and a complete set of Dirac observables at hand, we can
now construct states which are semi-classical at late times —e.g., now— and evolve them
‘backward in time’ numerically. There are three natural constructions to implement this
idea in detail, reﬂecting the freedom in the notion of semi-classical states. In all cases, the
main results are the same [22, 23]. Here I will report on the results obtained using the
strategy that brings out the contrast with the Wheeler DeWitt theory most sharply.

φ (

As noted before, pφ is a constant of motion. For the semi-classical analysis, we are led
√G~). In the closed model, for example, this condition is
to choose a large value p⋆
necessary to ensure that the universe can expand out to a macroscopic size. Fix a point
(v⋆, φo) on the corresponding classical trajectory which starts out at the big bang and then
expands, choosing v⋆
φ) at a
‘late initial time’ φ = φo and follow its ‘evolution’ backward. At ‘time’ φ = φo, consider then
the function

1. We want to construct a state which is peaked at (v⋆, p⋆

≫

≫

Ψ(v, φo) =

dk ˜Ψ(k) ek(v) eiω(φo

φ⋆), where ˜Ψ(k) = e−

−

(k−k⋆
2σ2

)2

(3.12)

∞

Z

−∞

φ/√12πG~2 and φ⋆ =
p⋆
where k⋆ =
integral in the approximation
| ≫

k∗

−

|

1/12πG ln(v⋆) + φo. One can easily evaluate the
−
1 and calculate mean values of the Dirac observables

p

12

and their ﬂuctuations. One ﬁnds that, as required, the state is sharply peaked at values
v⋆, p⋆
φ. The above construction is closely related to that of coherent states in non-relativistic
quantum mechanics. The main diﬀerence is that the observables of interest are not v and
its conjugate momentum but rather v and pφ —the momentum conjugate to ‘time’, i.e.,
the analog of the Hamiltonian in non-relativistic quantum mechanics. Now, one can evolve
this state backwards using the Wheeler-DeWitt equation (3.9). It follows immediately from
the form (3.11) of the general solution to (3.9) and the fact that pφ is large that this state
would remain sharply peaked at the chosen classical trajectory and simply follow it into the
big-bang singularity.

In LQC, we can use the restriction of (3.12) to points v =

+ 4n as the initial data
and evolve it backwards numerically. Now the evolution is qualitatively diﬀerent (see Fig.1).
The state does remains sharply peaked at the classical trajectory till the matter density
reaches a critical value:

ǫ
|

|

ρcrit =

√3
16πγ3G2~ ,

(3.13)

which is about two and a half times the Planck density. However, then it bounces. Rather
than following the classical trajectory into the singularity as in the Wheeler-DeWitt theory,
the state ‘turns around’. What is perhaps most surprising is that it again becomes semi-
classical and follows the ‘past’ portion of a classical trajectory, again with pφ = p⋆
φ, which
was headed towards the big crunch. Let us we summarize the forward evolution of the full
quantum state. In the distant past, the state is peaked on a classical, contracting pre-big-
bang branch which closely follows the evolution dictated by Friedmann equations. But when
the matter density reaches the Planck regime, quantum geometry eﬀects become signiﬁcant.
Interestingly, they make gravity repulsive, not only halting the collapse but turning it around;
the quantum state is again peaked on the classical solution now representing the post-big-
bang, expanding universe. Since this behavior is so surprising, a very large number of
numerical simulations were performed to ensure that the results are robust and not an
artifact of the special choices of initial data or of the numerical methods used to obtain the
solution [22, 23].

For states which are semi-classical at late times, the numerical evolution in exact LQC

can be well-modelled by an eﬀective, modiﬁed Friedman equation :

˙a2
a2 =

8πG
3

ρ

1
h

ρ
ρcrit i

(3.14)

−
where, as usual, a is the scale factor. In the limit ~
0, ρcrit diverges and we recover the
standard Friedmann equation. Thus the second term is a genuine quantum correction. Eq.
(3.14) can also be obtained analytically from (3.3) by a systematic procedure [27]. But the
approximations involved are valid only well outside the Planck domain. It is therefore sur-
prising that the bounce predicted by the exact quantum equation (3.3) is well approximated
by a naive extrapolation of (3.14) across the Planck domain. While there is some under-
standing of this seemingly ‘unreasonable success’ of the eﬀective equation (3.14), further
work is needed to fully understand this issue.

→

Finally let us return to the questions posed in the beginning of this section. In the model,
LQC has been able to answer all of them. One can deduce from ﬁrst principles that classical

13

general relativity is an excellent approximation till very early times, including the onset
of inﬂation in standard scenarios. Yet quantum geometry eﬀects have a profound, global
eﬀect on evolution. In particular, the singularity is naturally resolved without any external
input and there is a classical space-time also in the pre-big-bang branch. LQC provides a
deterministic evolution which joins the two branches.

IV. DISCUSSION

Even though there are several open issues in the formulation of full quantum dynamics in
LQG, detailed calculations in simple models have provided hints about the general structure.
It appears that the most important non-perturbative eﬀects arise from the replacement of
the local curvature term F i
ab by non-local holonomies. This non-locality is likely to be a
central feature of the full LQG dynamics. In the cosmological model considered in section
III, it is this replacement of curvature by holonomies that is responsible for the subtle but
crucial diﬀerences between LQC and the Wheeler-DeWitt theory.2

By now a number of mini-superspaces and a few midi-superspaces have been studied
in varying degrees of detail. In all cases, the classical, space-like singularities are resolved
by quantum geometry provided one treats the problem non-perturbatively. For example,
in anisotropic mini-superspaces, there is a qualitative diﬀerence between perturbative and
non-perturbative treatments:
if anisotropies are treated as perturbations of a background
isotropic model, the big-bang singularity is not resolved while if one treats the whole problem
non-perturbatively, it is [28].

A qualitative picture that emerges is that the non-perturbative quantum geometry cor-
rections are ‘repulsive’. While they are negligible under normal conditions, they dominate
when curvature approaches the Planck scale and halt the collapse that would classically
have lead to a singularity. In this respect, there is a curious similarity with the situation in
the stellar collapse where a new repulsive force comes into play when the core approaches
a critical density, halting further collapse and leading to stable white dwarfs and neutron
stars. This force, with its origin in the Fermi-Dirac statistics, is associated with the quan-
tum nature of matter. However, if the total mass of the star is larger than, say, 5 solar
masses, classical gravity overwhelms this force. The suggestion from LQC is that a repul-
sive force associated with the quantum nature of geometry may come into play and could
be strong enough to counter the classical, gravitational attraction, preventing the formation
of singularities. Since this force is negligible until one enters the Planck regime, predic-
tions of classical relativity on the formation of trapped surfaces, dynamical and isolated
horizons would still hold. But assumptions of the standard singularity theorems would be

2 Because early presentations emphasized the diﬀerence between B(v) of LQC and B(v) = Kv−1 of the
Wheeler-DeWitt theory, there is a misconception in some circles that the diﬀerence in quantum dynamics
is primarily due to the non-trivial ‘inverse volume’ operator of LQC. This is not correct. In deed, in the
model considered here, qualitative features of quantum dynamics, including the bounce, remain unaﬀected
if one replaces by hand B(v) with B(v) in the LQC evolution equation (3.3).

14

violated. There would be no singularities, no abrupt end to space-time where physics stops.
Non-perturbative, background independent quantum physics would continue.

Returning to the issue of the Beginning, the big-bang appears to be an artifact of the
assumption that the continuum, classical space-time of general relativity should hold at
all scales. LQC strongly suggests that this approximation breaks down when the matter
reaches Planck density. One might have at ﬁrst thought that, since this is a tiny portion of
space-time, whatever quantum eﬀects, they would have negligible eﬀect on global properties
of space-time and hence almost no bearing on the issue of The Beginning. However, detailed
LQC calculations have shown that this intuition may be too naive. The ‘tiny portion’ may
actually be a quantum bridge to another large universe. The physical, quantum space-time
of could be signiﬁcantly larger than what general relativity had us believe. The outstanding
open issue is whether this scenario persists when inhomogeneities are adequately incorpo-
rated in the analysis. If it does, we would have a brand new answer to the age old question
of the Beginning.

Acknowledgments: I would like to thank Martin Bojowald, Jerzy Lewandowski, and
especially Tomasz Pawlowski and Parampreet Singh for collaboration and numerous discus-
sions. This work was supported in part by the NSF grants PHY-0354932 and PHY-0456913,
the Alexander von Humboldt Foundation, the Krammers Chair program of the University
of Utrecht and the Eberly research funds of Penn State.

[1] A. Ashtekar, Gravity and the Quantum, New J. Phys. 7 (2005) 198; arXiv:gr-qc/0410054.
[2] A. Ashtekar and J. Lewandowski, Background independent quantum gravity: A status report,

Class. Quant. Grav. 21, R53-R152 (2004), arXiv:gr-qc/0404018.

[3] C. Rovelli Quantum Gravity, (CUP, Cambridge, 2004).
[4] T. Thiemann, Introduction to Modern Canonical Quantum General Relativity (CUP, Cam-

[5] O. Luscher and M. Reuter, Asymptotic Safety in Quantum Einstein Gravity: nonperturbative

renormalizability and fractal spacetime structure, arXiv:hep-th/0511260.

[6] R. Percacci and D. Perini, Asymptotic Safety of Gravity Coupled to Matter, Phys. Rev. D68,

bridge, at press).

044018 (2003).

[7] A. Ashtekar, New variables for classical and quantum gravity Phys. Rev. Lett. 57 2244-2247

(1986)
New Hamiltonian formulation of general relativity Phys. Rev. D36, 1587-1602 (1987).

[8] J. Lewandowski, A. Okolow, H. Sahlmann and T. Thiemann, Uniqueness of diﬀeomorphism

invariant states on holonomy ﬂux algebras, arXiv:gr-qc/0504147.

[9] C. Fleishchack,

Representations

of

the Weyl

algebra

in quantum geometry,

arXiv:math-ph/0407006.

[10] A. Ashtekar and J. Lewandowski, Representation theory of analytic holonomy algebras, in

Knots and Quantum Gravity, ed J. Baez, (Oxford U. Press, Oxford, 1994)
Projective techniques and functional integration, Jour. Math. Phys. 36, 2170-2191 (1995)

15

A. Ashtekar and J. Lewandowski, Diﬀerential geometry on the space of connections using
projective techniques Jour. Geo. & Phys. 17, 191–230 (1995)

[11] J. C. Baez, Generalized measures in gauge theory, Lett. Math. Phys. 31, 213-223 (1994).
[12] D. Marolf and J. Mour˜ao, On the support of the Ashtekar-Lewandowski measure, Commun.

[13] C. Rovelli and L. Smolin, Spin networks and quantum gravity Phys. Rev. D52 5743–5759

Math. Phys. 170, 583-606 (1995).

(1995)

[14] J. C. Baez, Spin networks in non-perturbative quantum gravity, in The Interface of Knots and

Physics ed Kauﬀman L (American Mathematical Society, Providence) pp. 167–203 (1996).

[15] T. Thiemann, The phoenix project: Master constraint program for loop quantum gravity,

[16] M. Gasperini and G. Veneziano, The pre-big bang scenario in string cosmology, Phys. Rept.

arXiv:gr-qc/0305080.

373, 1 (2003) arXiv:hep-th/0207130.

[17] J. Khoury, B. A. Ovrut, P. J. Steinhardt, N. Turok, The Ekpyrotic Universe: Colliding Branes
and the Origin of the Hot Big Bang, Phys. Rev. D64 (2001) 123522 hep-th/0103239.
[18] J. Khoury, B. . Ovrut, N. Seiberg, P. J. Steinhardt, N. Turok, From Big Crunch to Big Bang,

Phys.Rev. D65 (2002) 086007 hep-th/0108187.

[19] M. Bojowlad, Absence of singularity in loop quantum cosmology, Phys. Rev. Lett. 86, 5227-
5230 (2001), arXiv:gr-qc/0102069, Isotropic loop quantum cosmology, Class. Quantum.
Grav. 19, 2717-2741 (2002), arXiv:gr-qc/0202077.

[20] M. Bojowald, Loop quantum cosmology, Liv. Rev. Rel. 8, 11 (2005), arXiv:gr-qc/0601085.
[21] A. Ashtekar, T. Pawlowski and P. Singh, Quantum Nature of the Big Bang, Phys. Rev. Lett.

96, 141301 (2006) arXiv:gr-qc/0602086.

[22] A. Ashtekar, T. Pawlowski and P. Singh, Quantum Nature of the Big Bang: An analytical

and numerical Investigation I, arXiv:gr-qc/0604013.

[23] A. Ashtekar, T. Pawlowski and P. Singh, Quantum Nature of the Big Bang: An analytical

and numerical Investigation II (IGPG Pre-print).

[24] A. Ashtekar, M. Bojowald, J. Lewandowski, Mathematical structure of loop quantum cosmol-

ogy, Adv. Theo. Math. Phys. 7, 233-268 (2003), gr-qc/0304074.

[25] A. Ashtekar, Lectures on non-perturbative canonical gravity, Notes prepared in collaboration

with R. S. Tate (World Scientiﬁc, Singapore, 1991), Chapter 10.

[26] D. Marolf, Reﬁned algebraic

quantization:

Systems with a

single

constraint

arXives:gr-qc/9508015;
Quantum observables and recollapsing dynamics, Class. Quant. Grav. 12 (1995) 1199-1220.

[27] J. Willis, On the low energy ramiﬁcations and a mathematical extension of loop quantum
gravity, Ph.D. Dissertation, The Pennsylvaina State University (2004); A. Ashtekar, M. Bo-
jowald and J. Willis, Corrections to Friedmann equations induced by quantum geometry,
IGPG preprint (2004).

[28] M. Bojowald, H. H. Hernandez and H. A. Morales-Tecotl, Perturbative degrees of free-
dom in loop quantum gravity: Anisotropies, Class. Quant. Grav., 18 L117–L127 (2001)
arXiv:gr-qc/0511058.

