6
0
0
2
 
y
a
M
 
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
t
s
i
h
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
2
1
0
5
0
6
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Interpreting Mathematics in
Physics: Charting the
Applications of SU(2) in 20th
Century Physics
Ronald Anderson1
Department of Philosophy, Boston College,
Chestnut Hill, MA 02467, U.S.A.

G. C. Joshi2
School of Physics
University of Melbourne,
Victoria 3010, Australia

April 28, 2006

Abstract

The role mathematics plays within physics has been of sustained
interest for physicists as well as for philosophers and historians of
science. We explore this topic by tracing the role the mathematical
structure associated with SU(2) has played in three key episodes in
20th century physics – intrinsic spin, isospin, and gauge theory and
electro-weak uniﬁcation. We also brieﬂy consider its role in loop quan-
tum gravity. Each episode has led to new physical notions of a space
other than the traditional ones of space and spacetime, and each has
had associated with it a complex and in places, contested history. The
episodes also reveal ways mathematical structures provide resources
for new physical theorizing and we propose our study as a contribu-
tion to a need Roger Penrose has identiﬁed to develop a “profoundly
sensitive aesthetic” sense for locating physically relevant mathematics.

1Email: ronald.anderson@bc.edu
2Email: joshi@physics.unimelb.edu.au

1

1 Introduction

Early in the 20th century Whitehead observed that as mathematics increas-
ingly entered into ever greater extremes of abstract thought it became at
the same time increasingly relevant for the analysis of particular concrete
facts ([53], p. 47). With a similar focus on the signiﬁcance of developments
in mathematics for physics, Dirac proposed in various publications that a
powerful method of advancing physics was one that drew on the resources
of pure mathematics by attempting “to perfect and generalize the mathe-
matical formalism that forms the existing basis of theoretical physics, and
after each success in this direction, to try to interpret the new mathematical
features in terms of physical entities . . . ” [14]. In addition, for Dirac, the
beauty of the mathematics also plays an important role in guiding search for
successful physical theories. Similar concerns to do with identifying features
of the mathematics most likely to be of use in mathematical physics have
been raised by Roger Penrose in his recent book The Road to Reality, A
Complete Guide to The Laws of The Universe [42]. For Penrose, the quality
at issue requires a certain aesthetic sensitivity:

. . . progress towards a deeper physical understanding, if it is not
able to be guided in details by experiment, must rely more and
more heavily on an ability to appreciate the physical relevance
and depth of the mathematics, and to ‘sniﬀ out’ the appropri-
ate ideas by use of a profoundly sensitive aesthetic mathematical
appreciation ([42], p. 1026).

Penrose’s book itself may be taken as an impressive contribution to such a
project. The general manner in which the role of mathematics in physics has
often been discussed, however, tends to obscure locating those features of the
mathematics most appropriate for advances in physics. The issue though is a
crucial one, not simply for understanding the nature of mathematical physics,
but also for the actual practice of physics given the increasing complexity of
the mathematical structures within physical theories.

By tracing closely particular episodes in the history of physics we propose
that new perspectives can emerge on this topic. This was the approach of an
earlier study by the authors, where the generalization implicit in the Division
Algebras, in the sequence from real to complex numbers and to quaternions,
was explored as an exempliﬁcation of Dirac’s thesis that generalizations of

2

mathematical structures currently successful in physical theorizing provide
resources for new physical theories [3]. Here we seek to explore the relation-
ship in another such focused manner by considering a number of episodes
where a particular basic mathematic structure, the two dimensional special
unitary group SU(2), has been used in physics. Three in particular – intrin-
sic electron spin, isotopic spin or isospin, and Yang-Mills gauge theory and
electroweak uniﬁcation – involved new degrees of freedom and generalized
notions of “spaces” and were accompanied by a complex history where new
ideas were contested and only stabilized gradually. That forms of space are at
issue touches topics of contemporary relevance given the way in which string
theories require more than three spatial dimensions. The fourth episode, loop
quantum gravity, forms a research program underway, one that also entails a
profound transformation of our traditional notions of space as the continuous
“background” in which events occur, one that rivals that of Einstein’s gen-
eral theory of relativity where spacetime was given a dynamical signiﬁcance.
The spirit of the points we wish to raise is in accord with El Naschie’s recent
article (also exploring an observation of Penrose on the place of mathematics
in physics) on the physical signiﬁcance of the mathematics of transﬁnite set
theory, computability and fractal geometry [16].

2 Intrinsic Spin

Our ﬁrst example where the mathematics associated with SU(2) emerged as
a crucial part of the description of a new physical phenomena is the quan-
tum mechanical description of the electron spin that emerged in the 1920s.
Accounts of this development have been given by Pais [36], [37], Tomonaga
[49], and van der Waerden [51], as well as in reﬂections by various of the
original participants: Pauli [40], Goudschmidt [20] [21], and Uhlenbeck [50].
The experimental phenomenon of concern at the basis of this development
was the anomalous Zeeman eﬀect where a splitting of the spectral lines took
place in the presence of a magnetic ﬁeld (for the original work of Stern and
Gerlach in 1922 on the splitting of spectral lines see Ref. [19]).

As Pauli later remarked in 1946, the unique type of splitting involved ap-
peared in the early 1920s as “hardly understandable” and “unapproachable”
(quoted in van der Waerden [51], p. 200). As a way to explain the eﬀect Pauli
invoked in 1924 a new quantum property for the electron that he referred to
as “two valuedness not describable classically.” Then in the following year

3

he proposed there existed a “fourth degree of freedom of the electron” and
an exclusion principle that there can never be more than two electrons in an
atom characterized by the same set of quantum numbers. Later in his Nobel
award address Pauli noted that one of the initial diﬃculties for physicists un-
derstanding the exclusion principle initially lay in the absence of a meaning
ascribed to this fourth degree of freedom [40].

R. de L. Kronig in January of 1925, aware of Pauli’s extra degree of
freedom [38], proposed the idea of an electron spinning about its axis as a
solution to characterizing the extra degrees of freedom of the electron. The
notion though met with resistance at the time by Pauli, Heisenberg, and
others with the result that Kronig did not publish it. Then independently of
Kronig, in October of 1925, although hesitantly, Uhlenbeck and Goudschmit
proposed in a short paper the idea of a spinning electron [22]. They presented
a fuller note in the journal Nature in February of 1926 with an added comment
by Bohr containing his endorsement of the idea [24] (see also Ref. [23]). A
letter later in the year by L. H. Thomas, also in Nature, showed how an
unresolved issue of a doublet splitting in the spectrum could be accounted
for by a more careful treatment of relativistic eﬀects of electron motion. This
converted Pauli to the notion of a spinning electron [48]. Pauli was to remark
later that subsequent work by Bohr showing that the electron spin was indeed
a non classical and essentially a quantum mechanical property of the electron
conﬁrmed his earlier sense of the necessity of a “non describable classically”
phenomena [40].

What is evident from the writings of the time, set against the backdrop
of the establishment of the new quantum mechanics, and from later remi-
niscences, is the struggle to make sense of the new property of matter that
spin represented. Miller in particular, has traced the complex transformation
of visualizability during this period, noting the essential non-visualizablity
of Pauli’s “fourth degree of freedom” ([31], p. 139). Schr¨odinger’s often
quoted remark in 1926 about being repelled by Heisenberg’s approach with
its “transcendental algebra” and lack of visualizability is a pointer to these
discussions. On this topic Pauli subsequently provided a striking account of
how understanding electron spin entailed accepting an abstract mathematical
representation instead of visualizability in quantum mechanics.

After a brief period of spiritual and human confusion, caused
by a provisional restriction to ‘Anschaulichkeit’ [visualizability],
a general agreement was reached following the substitution of

4

abstract mathematical symbols as for instance psi, for concrete
pictures. Especially the concrete picture of rotation has been
replaced by mathematical characteristics of the representations
of the group of rotations in three-dimensional space ([41], p. 30).

The relevant mathematical characterization was given by Pauli in 1927
[39] and shortly afterwards in the same year by Darwin. Pauli’s paper, en-
titled in English “Contribution to the Quantum Mechanics of the Magnetic
Electron,” introduced his famous three spin operators using Schr¨odinger’s
new 1926 “method of eigenfunctions.” The operators Pauli presented as
obeying the relations:

sxsy = −sysx = isz . . . , s2

x = s2

y = s2

z = 1

(1)

In a footnote Pauli mentioned how Jordan had alerted him to the sig-
niﬁcance of these relations and their connection to quaternions, and thereby
forging their association with a mathematical structure with a complex and
rich history since its discovery by Hamilton in 1843. Pauli also noted the
quantization of the spin variable in a speciﬁed direction and the contrast
with the classical situation.

in contrast to classical mechanics, the variable can,
However,
quite independently from any special nature of the external force
ﬁeld, only take on values 1/2 h/2π and −1/2h/2π. The appear-
ance of this new variable produces, therefore, in an electron sim-
ply a splitting of the eigenvalues into two local position Ψa and
Ψ − b and more generally in the case of N electrons of 2N func-
tions; these are to be viewed as “probability amplitudes” that in
a given stationary state of the system not only the position co-
ordinates of the electrons fall within given inﬁnitesimal intervals,
but that the components of their eigenmomenta in the deﬁned
direction have for Ψa the given value 1/2 h/2π and for Ψb value
−1/2h/2π.

Pauli also presented a matrix representation of the now familiar matrices

associated with his name:

sx =

0
1

(cid:18)

1
0 (cid:19)

sy =

0 −i
i

0 (cid:19)

(cid:18)

sx =

1
0
0 −1 (cid:19)

(cid:18)

(2)

5

Pauli realized that this new form of angular momentum was quite diﬀerent
from classical angular momentum deﬁned by position and momentum and
such that it could not be turned oﬀ as in the classical situation. The matrix
representation given by Pauli was particularly important to him as with this
representation he could relate his work to the quantum mechanics of Jordan
and Heisenberg.

In the same year Darwin published a short article in Nature [11] on the
“spinning electron” to be followed later in the year with a more detailed
mathematical analysis [12]. Darwin was writing in the light of having seen
the proofs to Pauli’s paper and his comments on Pauli form an interesting
insight into early discussions on the best formalism with which to express
spin. While using quaternions to represent the spin states, Darwin claimed
his mathematical analysis was similar to Pauli’s, remarking though that Pauli
was “disposed to regard the wave theory as a mathematical convenience and
less as a physical reality.” For Darwin, an essential point of Pauli’s analysis
was representing the electron with two separate functions. For Darwin the
two components can be further interpreted more physically to form a vector
wave function (later known as spinors) similar to the analysis of light. Yet on
this point he noted that his diﬀerences with Pauli were “lying rather deep in
the whole quantum theory” ([12], p. 244). Another feature of Darwin’s paper
is a strong statement that with the wave theory of electron spin visualization
is now “entirely lost” ([12], p. 230).

The signiﬁcant feature that emerges from this complex history is that
Pauli was able to present a mathematical formalism that could capture an
entirely new phenomenon and concept in physics, one that provided a fusion
of a relativistic explanation from Thomas and quantum mechanical notions.
Moreover, the years between the ﬁrst emergence of the idea of electron spin
and the mathematical analysis of Pauli and Darwin, from 1925 to 1927, were
extraordinary years in physics with the birth of the new quantum theory (for
an insightful comment on the controversies of this time see Ref.
[30]). At
that time the meaning of the notion of “electron spin” and the interpreta-
tion of the mathematical formalism used to capture the properties of spin,
together with the issue of its visualizability, were all contested issues. In his
biography of Pauli, Enz notes the disagreement among historians concerning
the introduction of spin, and the strangeness that “in the history of modern
physics the idea of spin has stirred up so much controversy” ([18], p. 119).

The group structure, SU(2), later associated with the Pauli matrices was
to make clear the remarkable property of electron spin that quantum me-

6

chanically it takes two rotations of 360 degrees to return to the original state.
Mathematically this is related to SU(2) being a double cover of SO(3), the
group of proper rotations in three dimensional space such that two elements
of SU(2) correspond to one of SO(3). Furthermore, while the Pauli matri-
ces of SU(2) do not form a division algebra as do quaternions, there is an
isomorphism between SU(2) and unit quaternions thereby tying together in
an intriguing manner rotations in three dimensional space, quaternions and
SU(2). The representations of SU(2) also form spinors, originally discovered
in a mathematical context by Cartan in 1913; objects with a fundamental
role, perhaps more central that SU(2), in 20th century physics. The classic
text on gravitation by Misner, Thorne, and Wheeler nicely brings this clus-
ter of ideas together [33]. Moreover, spin, as can be seen from the structure
of the Pauli matrices, is associated with the central role imaginary numbers
play in quantum theory [4], [27].

In the year following papers by Pauli and Darwin, Dirac developed a
quantum formalism for the electron consistent with relativity such to explain
naturally the “duplixity” of spin phenomena [13]. The set of 4x4 matrices
needed form a natural extension of the Pauli matrices and form a Cliﬀord
algebra. They too are spinors and here spinors are linked with the Lorentz
group. Dirac’s work stands as a striking example of how the mathematical
richness of a physical equation (in this case the extra solutions of a manifestly
covariant wave equation for the electron) provided resources for physical the-
orizing (for the prediction of an antiparticle).

3 Isospin

Heisenberg [26] ﬁrst introduced the Pauli matrices in 1932 in a three part
article on the structure of the nucleus, which he took to be composed of
protons and neutrons. The neutron had just been discovered and although
Heisenberg notes “the neutron will be taken as an independent fundamental
particle,” he also considered the neutron as a possible composite of a proton
and an electron, although an electron that needed to have zero spin that obeys
Bose statistics (see Ref. [6] for an account of the history of the introduction
of the neutron). Heisenberg used the Pauli matrices to write a Hamiltonian
function for the nucleus that included interactions between the neutron and
protons and their kinetic energies. Each particle in the nucleus was tagged by
a “ﬁfth number” that represented whether the particle is a proton or neutron,

7

speciﬁed as the eigenvalue of the 3rd Pauli matrix. The name Heisenberg
used was “ρ-spin”, where ρ represented the Pauli matrices. The move enabled
the mathematical structure of spin states to be transposed to nucleon states.
At the time Heisenberg noted that “of course” the space spanned by them
is “not the ordinary space” yet when asked in an interview in 1979 about
the meaning of “internal symmetries” such as isospin that do not appear as
operations in the world, Heisenberg remarked rather elliptically, “I suspect
that isospin is a symmetry similar to space and time. I cannot say that it is
related to them” [8].

Studies of the history of the concept of isospin such as those by L. M.
Brown [7] and H. Kemmer [29] have stressed that Heisenberg’s use of the
Pauli matrices was essentially a mathematical technique for keeping track of
two particle states. It is only with later developments that the group and
symmetry properties associated with the charge independence of the nucleon
interaction come to the foreground. Indeed, Kemmer remarks that the Pauli
matrix notation used by Heisenberg is largely a bookkeeping one in terms of
nucleon states and for this reason the use of “such an elaborate and somewhat
unusual formalism” probably had “little appeal” to contemporary readers
([29], p. 365). Thus like the complexity in the emergence of the concept of
electron spin, a similar complexity attends the origins of isospin. For Pais,
Heisenberg’s papers represent a breakthrough simply in their insistence that
the proton-neutron system within the nucleus be amenable to non-relativistic
treatment of forces ([36], p. 416). As Brown’s account makes clear, it was
a series of papers in 1936 arguing for a charge independence of the nucleon
interaction that solidiﬁed the notion of the spin description as Pauli had
invoked for electrons. In particular, a paper by Cassen and Condon starts
explicitly with an analysis in terms of spin matrices [9], and Wigner in 1937
elaborated such an analysis labeling such a degree of freedom as “isotopic
spin” [54].

Wigner introduced an operator to express the “isotopic number” for the
nucleus, noting that while “ . . . the mathematical apparatus of the isotopic
spin is, hence, somewhat redundant” at the same time it “will turn out that
it is very useful in spite of this” ([54], p. 107). In the same year, Kemmer
applied the isospin formalism to Fermi’s theory of the electron-neutrino ﬁeld
[28] noting that while the formalism could account for the symmetries of the
problem, the magnitude of the forces could not be explained this way.

Historically isospin is signiﬁcant in being the ﬁrst ascription of quantum
numbers to elementary particles of a sort with no association with space-

8

time properties. The concept of isospin was also signiﬁcant in leading to the
later SU(3) classiﬁcation of hadrons in the three quark model that formed
the “Eightfold Way” of Gell-Mann and Neeman. Such “ﬂavor” based clas-
siﬁcations based on quark states dominated physics in the 1960s and 70s,
contributing to a culture of group theory in particle physics of that time (for
an insight into this group-dominated period of particle physics see a reminis-
cence by Lipkin in Ref. [32]). The culture was such as to inspire higher order
group theoretical explorations such as four types of quarks, and multiquark
states of more than the standard three quarks states for baryons and two
quark meson states (for an example of both topics reﬂecting the culture of
the time, see a study by the authors in Ref. [2]). Moreover, the isospin sym-
metry is only an approximate symmetry, the ﬂavor symmetry even more so,
a notion that anticipates that of “broken symmetry” that dominates mod-
ern gauge ﬁeld theory. That the mathematics of SU(2) was one of the paths
that opened out to the rich mathematical machinery of group theory through
its generalization was of enormous signiﬁcance for 20th century physics and
illustrates another feature of the place of a mathematical structure in physics.

4 The Yang-Mills Gauge Invariance Paper and

Beyond

The central aspect of Yang and Mills’s famous paper of 1954 relevant to our
concern is their use of the notion of isotopic spin to develop a generaliza-
tion of the gauge invariance of electromagnetism [55]. Their article begins
by noting that the notion of isotopic spin had recently been much discussed
and gives a brief review of its history, from Heisenberg through to Wigner.
Yang and Mills present the conservation of isotopic spin as an invariance of
all interactions under rotation in an isotopic spin space. However, choosing
whether a nucleon is a proton or neutron at a point is an arbitrary process
and to allow that freedom independently at all spacetime points required
their (now familiar) move of introducing a new ﬁeld analogous to the elec-
tromagnetic ﬁeld with a property of gauge invariance. Yang and Mills go on
to construct a set of ﬁeld equations that satisfy gauge invariance.

Implicit in this signiﬁcant paper is a set of notions central in late 20th
century physics: that of a group space in which a gauge ﬁeld take values,
the idea of a gauge ﬁeld as mediating interactions, and the notion of lo-

9

cal invariance under “rotations” within the space of the gauge ﬁeld. As in
the earlier two episodes where the mathematics of SU(2) had been invoked,
problems arose about the physical relevance and signiﬁcance of the resultant
ﬁelds. The ﬁrst was immediately apparent – that the new ﬁelds introduced
are massless, a feature which Yang and Mills noted interfered with their in-
terpretation as mediating nucleon interactions. On this Yang was later to
observe: “If you read our article, you will see that we did not really know
how to connect it with reality. And the main problem was with the mass
of the gauge ﬁeld. We knew that there was no charged massless gauge ﬁeld.
And yet we did not know how to put mass into it” ([56], p. 1446). Also,
Yang, in his commentary on the paper notes that in a seminar the previous
year Pauli had pressed him on the issue of the mass of the gauge ﬁeld ([57],
p. 20).

It was later with the concept of spontaneous symmetry breaking, de-
veloped in the early 1960s, where the mathematical symmetry remains but
without a physical symmetry, and then in 1964, the realization by Higgs and
others of a mechanism whereby massless Goldstone bosons that result from
spontaneous symmetry breaking acquire mass, that the issue of mass was
resolved. The proof of the renormalizability of non-abelian gauge ﬁelds by
’t Hooft and Veltman in 1971 and 1972 completed the pieces that enabled
local gauge theories to be a resource for accounting for interactions.

Prior to the proof of renormalization, however, SU(2) emerged again,
this time as part of the SU(2) x U(1) uniﬁed theory of electroweak interac-
tions developed by Weinberg in 1967 and independently by Salam in 1968.
As a gauge theory, SU(2) generated three massless gauge bosons, and U(1)
one such boson. Through the Higgs mechanism the model generated three
massive bosons that mediated the weak force, with a massless boson to cor-
respond with the photon of electromagnetism. The standard model extended
this to include the SU(3) gauge group of massless gluons mediating the in-
teraction between quarks. The symmetry group is now transformed, from
SU(2) as representing quark states to a gauge symmetry. The story of the
rich developments of this period can be traced partly through the Nobel Prize
address of Salam [46] and Weinberg [52], and for a general history see Ref.
[35].

In this new context SU(2), as a symmetry of a gauge ﬁeld, has indirectly
become part of a long discussion in philosophy of science contexts on the
nature of gauge ﬁelds and how the mathematical structure of the gauge ﬁeld
maps to physical reality. The issue here continues the extended discussion on

10

the reality of potentials in classical electromagnetism, given a new dimension
by Aharonov and Bohm in 1959 pointing out the physical signiﬁcance of
loop integrals of the gauge ﬁeld in quantum contexts [1]. The property of
gauge invariance of potentials has often been taken as indicating they are
only part of the mathematical structure of the theory and not terms that
represent physical phenomena directly. The centrality of gauge ﬁelds within
current physical theories, however, makes such an argument hard to defend.
An introduction to these issues may be found in Refs. [5] and [25].

5 Loop Quantum Gravity

In our last example we brieﬂy mention the approach for uniting general rel-
ativity and quantum theory known as loop quantum gravity. The founders
of this approach include Abhay Ashtekar, Lee Smolin, and Carlo Rovelli.
The approach assumes Einstein’s theory can be quantized non-perturbatively.
The radical aspect of the approach lies in the transformation of conventional
notions of space and time as a continuous background in which events oc-
cur, as classically understood, to a notion of spacetime as formed by loop-
like states, which are essentially holonomies or structures formed by parallel
transport along closed paths. Holonomies have long featured in gauge ﬁeld
theories as gauge invariant quantities, representing curvature in the gauge
space. Within the approach of loop quantum gravity such holonomies be-
come quantum operators. The role SU(2) plays in loop quantity gravity is
as the gauge group of the ﬁeld of the holonomies. The choice by Rovelli and
Smolin in 1995 of “spin networks” that Penrose had developed in the 1970s
as a model of discrete quantum geometry (see: [44], [45] and [42]) was key
in establishing these ideas. While a spin basis network can be given for all
compact gauge groups, the one that is relevant to quantum gravity is SU(2),
in particular its spinor structure.

The discrete nature of space arises in this approach from spin networks
forming space directly. Representations of SU(2) label the edges of the spin
network in three dimensions, and in this way a mathematical description
of the kinematics of a quantum gravitational ﬁeld can be obtained in three
spatial dimensions. On its signiﬁcance Rovelli remarks of the nature of a spin
network: “a spin network state is not in space: it is space. It is not localized
with respect to something else: something else (matter) might be localized
with respect to it” [45]. The evolution of a spin network in time, needed for

11

a Feynman path integral formulation of the theory, generates a “spinfoam”
structure. For a clear introductory description of the group representations
usually invoked here see Ref. [34].

One of the consequences of this program (which still awaits completion)
and the manner in which it has forged a place in competition to string the-
ories, has been to raise deep conceptual questions about the nature of space
and time (on this point see the review by Rickles [43]).

6 Conclusions

The episodes sketched brieﬂy above in the history of physics serve to illustrate
the remarkable role the mathematical structure associated with SU(2) has
played in modern physics, in particular to represent quantum phenomena. In
the context of the project of the paper to identify qualities of mathematical
structures productive for the development of physics, we will draw three
lessons.

One central quality of such productive structures is illustrated by the
way SU(2) provided the resources to represent new forms of spaces to cap-
ture properties of particles and their interactions, and in the case of loop
quantum gravity, to be woven into the basic features out of which space
and spacetime is constructed. Minimally SU(2) provided the mathematical
structure to account for states with two degrees of freedom and to fully repre-
sent transformation between such states. More sophisticated structures that
have served such a role include Calabi-Yau manifolds, ﬁber bundles and the
general forms of phase and conﬁguration space representations of dynamical
systems. The notion of representing states of systems in this way is perva-
sive in contemporary physics. The quality is a very general one, perhaps too
general, but those mathematical structures that aﬀord such possibilities play
a crucial role in physics. The group structure of SU(2) was key here, and
in particular its spinor structure. Group structures can express properties
invariant in various spaces, another important quality for capturing physical
properties. The lesson here expresses one given by Dirac in 1939:

It would probably be a good thing also to give a preference to
those branches of mathematics that have an interesting group
of transformations underlying them, since transformations play
an important role in modern physical theory, both relativity and

12

quantum theory seeming to show that transformations are of more
fundamental importance than equations ([15], p. 125).

Moreover SU(2) is part of the remarkable story of the vital place of sym-
metries in 20th century physics. The fundamental role of group structures
in elementary particle physics has been one of the reasons some philosophers
of physics have proposed that the ultimate reality consists of structural re-
lations rather than the entities these relations are between (see, e.g., French
and Ladyman [17]).

Another feature the above history reveals, one associated with the group
structure in the case of SU(2), is the value for physics of a mathematical
structure that can be generalized in various ways. The extended group prod-
ucts in the case of nucleon isospin states is an example of this feature as
well as the ready generalization of SU(2) to higher unitary groups in terms
of gauge ﬁeld theories. The quality of a productive mathematical structure
is one of providing resources for the extension of physical theories and the
generation of new ones. Such qualities are “theoretical” virtues and here the
use of higher dimensional spaces in string theories provide another example.
Whatever emerges on their physical signiﬁcance they provide structures that
allow possible theories to be formed embodying virtues such as uniﬁcation.
A third feature, although one we propose tentatively and one somewhat
contrary to the previous virtue, is that some mathematical structures play
key roles in physical theories by their constraints matching the constraints
of nature. The success of SU(2) for capturing spin phenomena and the role
in loop quantum gravity is related to the three dimensional nature of space.
The quality here was perceptively identiﬁed by the 19th century physicist,
P. G. Tait, when commenting on quaternions. Tait (a fan of quaternions)
noted that while to pure mathematicians quaternions have “one grand and
fatal defect” that they cannot be applied to spaces of n-dimensions, from a
physical point of view this defect is their “greatest possible recommendation”
as they have the structure for the three dimensions in which we are “doomed
to dwell” [47].

The “sensitive aesthetic mathematical appreciation” that to Penrose iden-
tiﬁes physically relevant mathematics will by nature entail a set of skills and
qualities for the mathematical physicist that defy full articulation, yet atten-
tion to actual physical theories and their emergence and evolution, as our
intent has been here, provides a way to pursue the issue. The history we
have sought to chart here suggests that attention to structures that capture

13

the physical states of a system in a mathematically concise manner, that
possess features that allow extensions through mathematical generalizations,
and that possess constraints that match those of nature, are all qualities for
the mathematical physicist to keep particularly in mind.

We conclude with a proposal that the reverse direction to the one Pen-
rose has presented is worth considering. Namely, to suggest that exploring
the manner in which certain physical and empirical conditions in general are
conducive for advances in mathematics, is a project that awaits the math-
ematician and philosopher of mathematics. On this point physics has long
been a resource for the development of mathematics. Moreover, the highly
abstract and mathematical nature of contemporary physical theories suggests
that there is reason to consider a blurring of the realms of mathematics and
physics. And aﬃrming such a blurring Gregory Chaitin has recently main-
tained that the implications of G¨odel’s incompleteness theorems for mathe-
matics plus the use of computers to explore mathematics truths implies that
mathematics may have a “quasi-empirical” quality [10]. How then to develop
the sort of sensitive aesthetic appreciation of those features of physics, and
the particular contexts (such as the use of computers) in which contemporary
mathematics is practiced, that can identify those conducive for advances in
mathematics?

6.1 Acknowledgments

We are grateful to Zwi Barnea, Joy Christian, Maya Joshi, and Andy Martin
for assistance on matters related to the paper.

References

[1] Aharonov, Y. and Bohm, D. “Signiﬁcance of Electromagnetic Potentials

in the Quantum Theory,” Physical Review 115: 485-491 (1959).

[2] Anderson, Ronald and Joshi, G. C. “SU(4) Clebsh-Gordan Coeﬃcients
for the Formation of Baryonium and Exotic Baryons,” Journal of Math-
ematical Physics 20: 1015-1029 (1979).

[3] Anderson, Ronald and Joshi, G. C. “Quaternions and the Heuristic
Role of Mathematical Structures in Physics,” Physics Essays 6: 308-
319 (1993), arXiv:hep-ph/9208222.

14

[4] Baylis, W. E., Huschilt, J and Wei, Jiansu. “Why i?,” American Journal

of Physics 60: 788-797 (1992).

[5] Belot, Gordon. “Symmetry and gauge freedom,” Studies in History and

Philosophy of Modern Physics 34: 189-225 (2003).

[6] Bromberg, Joan. “The Impact of the Neutron: Bohr and Heisenberg,”

Historical Studies in the Physical Sciences 3: 307-341 (1971).

[7] Brown, L. M. “Remarks on the History of Isospin,” in Festi-Val:
festschrift for Val Telegdi: essays in physics in honour of his 65th birth-
day. V. Telegdi and K. Winter. Amsterdam, New York, North-Holland
Elsevier Science Pub. Co, (1988).

[8] Buckley, Paul and Peat, F. David. Glimpsing Reality: Ideas in Physics
and the Link to Biology. Toronto, Buﬀalo; University of Toronto Press
(1996).

[9] Cassen, B and Condon, E. U. “On Nuclear Forces,” Physical Review 50:

846-849 (1936).

74-81 March (2006).

(1927).

[10] Chaitin, Gregory. “The Limits of Reason,” Scientiﬁc American 294:

[11] Darwin, C. G. “The electron as a vector wave,” Nature 119: 282-284

[12] Darwin, C. G. “The electron as a vector wave,” Proceedings of the Royal

Society of London, Series A 116: 227-253 (1927).

[13] Dirac, P. A. M. “The Quantum Theory of the Electron,” Proceedings of

the Roayl Society of London, Series A 117: 610-624 (1928).

[14] Dirac, P. A. M. “Quantised Singularities in the Electromagnetic Field,”
Proceedings of the Royal Society of London A113: 60-70 (1931).

[15] Dirac, P. A. M. “The Relation between Mathematics and Physics,” Proc.

R. Soc. Edinb. 59: 122-9 (1939).

[16] El Naschie, M. S. “On Penrose view of transﬁnite sets and computability
and the fractal character of E-inﬁnity spacetime,” Chaos, Solitons and
Fractals 25: 531-533 (2005).

15

[17] French, Steven and Ladyman, James. “Remodelling Structural Realism:
Quantum Physics and the Metaphysics of Structure,” Synthese 136:
31-56 (2003).

[18] Enz, Charles P. No Time to be Brief: a Scientiﬁc Biography of Wolfgang

Pauli. Oxford and New York, Oxford University Press (2002).

[19] Gerlach, W and Stern, O. “Der experimentelle Nachweis der Rich-
tungsquantelung im Magnetfeld (Experimental test of the applicability
of the quantum theory to the magnetic ﬁeld),” Z. Physik 9: 349-352
(1922).

[20] Goudschmidt, S. A. (Ed.) “The Discovery of the electron Spin,” (1971)
in Foundations of Modern EPR, Singapore, World Scientiﬁc (1998).

[21] Goudschmidt, S. A. “Fifty Years of Spin: It might as well be Spin,”

Physics Today (June): 40-43 (1976).

[22] Goudschmidt, S. A. and Uhlenbeck, G. H. “Ersetzung der Hypothese
vom unmechanischen Zwang durch eine Forderung bezglich des in-
neren Verhaltens jedes einzelnen Elektrons,” Die Naturwissenschaften
13: 953-954 (1925).

[23] Goudschmidt, S. A. and Uhlenbeck, G. H. “Die Kopplungsm¨oglichkeiten

der Quantenvektoren im Atom,” Z. Physik. 35: 618-625 (1926).

[24] Goudschmidt, S. A. and Uhlenbeck, G. H. “Spinning Electrons and the

Structure of Spectra,” Nature 117: 264-265 (1926).

[25] Healey, Richard. “On the Reality of Gauge Potentials,” Philosophy of

Science 68: 432-455 (2001).

[26] Heisenberg, W. “ ¨Uber den Bau der Atomkerne. I,” Z. Physik 77: 111

(1932).

[27] Hestenes, David. “Oersted Medal Lecture 2002: Reforming the mathe-
matical language of physics,” American Journal of Physics 71: 104-121
(2003).

[28] Kemmer, N. “Field Theory of Nuclear Interaction,” Physical Review 52:

906-910 (1937).

16

[29] Kemmer, N. “Isospin,” Journal de Physique 43 (NC-8): 359-393

(1982).

[30] Kleppner, Daniel and Jackiw, Roman. “One Hundred Years of Quantum
Physics,” Science, 289, 893-898, (2000), arXiv:quant-ph/0008092.

[31] Miller, Arthur I. Imagery in Scientiﬁc Thought: Creating 20th-Century

Physics. Boston, Birkhuser (1984).

[32] Lipkin, H. J. “Response to the award of the Wigner Medal,” in Physical
and Mathematical Aspects of Symmetries: Proceedings of the 24th Inter-
national Colloquium on Group Theoretical Methods in Physics, Paris,
15-20 July 2002 ed. J.-P. Gazeau et. al. Taylor & Francis, 7-14 (2003).

[33] Misner, C. W., Thorne, K., S. and Wheeler, J. A. Gravitation. San

Francisco,, W. H. Freeman (1973).

[34] Nicolai, Hermann and Peeters, Kasper. “Loop and Spin Foam Quantum

Gravity: A Brief Guide for Beginners,” arXiv:hep-th/0601129 (2006).

[35] ORaifeartaigh, Lochlain and Straumann, Norbert. “Gauge Theory: His-
torical Origins and Some Modern Developments,” Reviews of Modern
Physics, 72: 1-23 (2000).

[36] Pais, Abraham. Inward bound: of matter and forces in the physical
world. Oxford, New York; Clarendon Press; Oxford University Press
(1986).

[37] Pais, Abraham. Niels Bohr’s Times: in Physics, Philosophy, and Polity.

Oxford, New York; Clarendon Press, Oxford University Press (1991).

[38] Pauli, W. “ ¨Uber den Zusammenhang des Abschlusses der Elektronen-
gruppen im Atom mit der Komplex Struktur der Spektren,” Z. Physik
31: 765-783 (1925).

[39] Pauli, W. “Zur Quantenmechanik des magnetischen Elektrons,” Z.

Physik 43: 601-623 (1927).

[40] Pauli, W. “Exclusion principle and quantum mechanics.” Nobel lec-
ture, delivered at Stockholm, December 13, 1946. Nobel Lectures,
Physics, 1942-1962 Amsterdam, Elsevier Publishing Company. On

17

http://nobelprize.org/physics/laureates/1945/pauli-lecture.html

line:
(1946).

[41] Pauli, W (editor). Niels Bohr and the Development of Physics; Essays
Dedicated to Niels Bohr on the Occasion of his Seventieth Birthday New
York,, McGraw-Hill (1955).

[42] Penrose, Roger. The Road to Reality: a Complete Guide to the Laws of

the Universe. New York, A.A. Knopf (2005).

[43] Rickles, Dean. “Interpreting quantum gravity, Review: C. Kiefer, Quan-
tum Gravity and C. Rovelli, Quantum Gravity,” Studies in the History
and Philosophy of Modern Physics 36: 619-715 (2005).

[44] Rovelli, Carlo, Lee Smolin, “Spin networks and quantum gravity,“ Phys.

Rev. D 52: 5743-5759 (1995), arXiv:gr-qc/9505006.

[45] Rovelli, Carlo. Quantum Gravity. Cambridge, UK; New York, Cam-

bridge University Press (2004).

[46] Salam, Abdus. “Gauge uniﬁcation of fundamental forces,” Rev. Mod.

Phys. 52: 525-538 (1980).

[47] Tait, Peter, G.“Address to Section A of the British Association,” British

Association Report, Edinburgh (1871).

[48] Thomas, L. H. “The motion of the spinning electron,” Nature 117: 514

(1926).

Chicago Press (1997).

[49] Tomonaga, Shin’ichiro. The Story of Spin. Chicago; University of

[50] Uhlenbeck, G. H. “Fifty Years of Spin: Personal Reminiscences,”

Physics Today (June): 43-48 (1976).

[51] van der Waerden, B. L. “Exclusion Principle and Spin,” in Theoretical
physics in the twentieth century; a memorial volume to Wolfgang Pauli.
M. Fierz and V. F. Weisskopf. New York,, Interscience Publishers: 199-
244 (1960).

[52] Weinberg, Steven. “Conceptual foundations of the uniﬁed theory of weak
and electromagnetic interactions,” Rev. Mod. Phys. 52: 515-523 (1980).

18

[53] Whitehead, A. N. Science and the Modern World. Cambridge, Cam-

bridge University Press (1926).

[54] Wigner, E. “On the Consequences of the Symmetry of the Nuclear
Hamiltonian on the Spectroscopy of Nuclei.” Phys. Rev. 51: 106-119
(1937).

[55] Yang, C. N. and Mills, R. L. “Conservation of Isotopic Spin and Isotopic

Gauge Invariance,” Phys. Rev. 96, 191-195 (1954).

[56] Yang, C. N. “Conceptual Beginnings of Various Symmetries in Twen-
tieth Century Physicist,” Chinese Journal of Physics 32: 1437-1446
(1994).

[57] Yang, C. N. Selected papers, 1945-1980, with Commentary. San Fran-

cisco, Calif.; W.H. Freeman (1983).

19

