6
0
0
2
 
n
u
J
 
6
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
t
s
i
h
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
3
5
1
6
0
6
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Julian Schwinger
(1918-1994)

K. A. Milton
Homer L. Dodge Department of Physics and Astronomy,
University of Oklahoma, Norman, OK 73019

February 2, 2008

Julian Schwinger’s inﬂuence on Twentieth Century science is profound
and pervasive. Of course, he is most famous for his renormalization theory of
quantum electrodynamics, for which he shared the Nobel Prize with Richard
Feynman and Sin-itiro Tomonaga. But although this triumph was undoubt-
edly his most heroic accomplishment, his legacy lives on chieﬂy through sub-
tle and elegant work in classical electrodynamics, quantum variational princi-
ples, proper-time methods, quantum anomalies, dynamical mass generation,
partial symmetry, and more. Starting as just a boy, he rapidly became the
pre-eminent nuclear physicist in the late 1930s, led the theoretical develop-
ment of radar technology at MIT during World War II, and then, soon after
the war, conquered quantum electrodynamics, and became the leading quan-
tum ﬁeld theorist for two decades, before taking a more iconoclastic route
during his last quarter century.

Given his commanding stature in theoretical physics for decades it may
seem puzzling why he is relatively unknown now to the educated public,
even to many younger physicists, while Feynman is a cult ﬁgure with his
photograph needing no more introduction than Einstein’s. This relative ob-
scurity is even more remarkable, in view of the enormous number of eminent
physicists, as well as other leaders in science and industry, who received their
Ph.D.’s under Schwinger’s direction, while Feynman had but few. In part, the
answer lies in Schwinger’s retiring nature and reserved demeanor. Science,
research and teaching, were his life, and he detested the limelight. Generally,
he was not close to his students, so few knew him well. He was a gracious

1

host and a good conversationalist, and had a broad knowledge of many sub-
jects, but he was never one to initiate a relationship or ﬂaunt his erudition.
His style of doing physics was also diﬃcult to penetrate. Oppenheimer once
said that most people gave talks to show others how to do the calculation,
while Schwinger gave talks to show that only he could do it. Although a
commonly shared view, this witticism is unkind and untrue. He was, in fact,
a superb teacher, and generations of physicists, students and faculty alike,
learned physics at his feet. On the one hand he was a formalist, inventing
formalisms so powerful that they could lead, at least in his hands, unerringly
to the correct answer. He did not, therefore, display the intuitive visualiza-
tions, for example, that Feynman commanded, which eventually took over
the popular and scientiﬁc culture. But, more profoundly, he was a phenome-
nologist. Ironically, even some of his own students criticized him in his later
years for his phenomenological orientation, not recognizing that he had, from
his earliest experiences in nuclear physics, insisted in grounding theoretical
physics in the phenomena and data of experiment. Isidor I. Rabi, who dis-
covered Schwinger and brought him to Columbia University, generally had a
poor opinion of theoretical physicists. But Rabi was always very impressed
with Schwinger because in nearly every paper, he ‘got the numbers out’ to
compare with experiment. Even in his most elaborate ﬁeld-theoretic papers
he was always concerned with making contact with the real world, be it
quantum electrodynamics, or strongly interacting hadrons.

His strong phenomenological bent eventually led him away from the main-
stream of physics. Although he had given the basis for what is now called
the Standard Model of elementary particles in 1957, he never could accept
the existence of quarks because they had no independent existence outside
of hadrons. He came to appreciate the notion of supersymmetry, but he
rejected notions of ‘Grand Uniﬁcation’ and of ‘Superstrings’ not because of
their structure but because he saw them as preposterous speculations, based
on the notion that nothing new remains to be found from 1 TeV to 1019
GeV. He was sure that totally new, unexpected phenomena were waiting
just around the corner. This seems a reasonable view, but it resulted in
a self-imposed isolation, in contrast, again, to Feynman, who contributed
mightly to the theory of partons and quantum chromodynamics up to the
end.

2

A Brief Life of Schwinger

A full biography of Julian Schwinger has been published [1], as well as a
selection of his most important papers [2]. Here we will sketch a brief outline
of Schwinger’s life and work, referring the interested reader to the biography
for more details. An excellent 100-page account of Schwinger’s career through
1950 may also be found in Schweber’s history of quantum electrodynamics
[3].

Julian Schwinger was born in Manhattan, New York City, on February
12, 1918, to rather well-oﬀ middle-class parents. His father was a well-known
designer of women’s clothes. He had a brother Harold seven years older than
himself, whom Julian idolized as child. Harold claimed that he taught Julian
physics until he was 13. Although Julian was recognized as intelligent in
school, everyone thought Harold was the bright one. (Harold in fact eventu-
ally became a well-known lawyer, and his mother always considered him as
the successful son, even after Julian received the Nobel Prize.) The Depres-
sion cost Julian’s father his business, but he was suﬃciently appreciated that
he was oﬀered employment by other designers; so the family survived, but
not so comfortably as before. It did mean that Julian would have to rely on
free education, which New York well-provided in those days: A year or two at
Townsend Harris High School, a public preparatory school feeding into City
College, where Julian matriculated in 1933. Julian had already discovered
physics, ﬁrst through Harold’s Encyclopedia Britannica at home, and then
through the remarkable institution of the New York Public Library. At City
College Julian was reading and digesting the latest papers from Europe, and
starting to write papers with instructors who were, at the same time, grad-
uate students at Columbia and NYU. He no longer had the time to spend in
the classroom attending lectures. In physics and mathematics he was able
to skim the texts and work out the problems from ﬁrst principles, frequently
leaving the professors baﬄed with his original, unorthodox solutions, but it
was not so simple in history, English, and German. City College had an
enormous number of required courses then in all subjects. His grades were
not good, and he would have ﬂunked out if the College had not also had a
rather forgiving policy toward grades.

Not only was Julian already reading the literature at City College, but he
quickly started to do original research. Thus before he left the City College,
Schwinger wrote a paper entitled ‘On the Interaction of Several Electrons,’
in which he introduced a procedure that he would later call the interaction

3

representation to describe the scattering of spin-1/2 Dirac particles, electron-
electron scattering or Møller scattering. This paper he wrote entirely on his
own, but showed it to no one, nor did he submit it to a journal. It was ‘a
little practice in writing,’ but it was a sign of great things to come.

It was Lloyd Motz, one the instructors at City College, who had heard
about Julian from Harold, and with whom Julian was writing papers, who in-
troduced him to Rabi. Then, in a conversation between Rabi and Motz over
the Einstein, Rosen, Podolsky paper [4], which had just appeared, Julian’s
voice appeared with the resolution of a diﬃculty through the completeness
principle, and Schwinger’s career was assured. Rabi, not without some dif-
ﬁculty, had Schwinger transferred to Columbia with a scholarship, and by
1937 he had 7 papers published, which constituted his Ph.D. thesis, even
though his bachelor’s degree had not yet been granted. The papers which
Julian wrote at Columbia were on both theoretical and experimental physics,
and Rabi prized Julian’s ability to obtain the numbers to compare with ex-
periment. The formal awarding of the Ph.D. had to wait till 1939 to satisfy a
University regulation. In the meantime, Schwinger was busy writing papers
(one, for example, laid the foundation for the theory of nuclear magnetic
resonance), and spent a somewhat lonely, but productive winter of 1937 in
Wisconsin, where he provided the groundwork for his prediction that the
deuteron had an electric quadrupole moment, independently conﬁrmed by
his experimental colleagues at Columbia a year later [5], both announced at
the Chicago meeting of the American Physical Society in November 1938.
Wisconsin conﬁrmed his predilection for working at night, so as not to be
‘overwhelmed’ by his hosts, Eugene Wigner and Gregory Breit.

By 1939, Rabi felt Schwinger had outgrown Columbia, so with a NRC
Fellowship, he was sent to J. Robert Oppenheimer in Berkeley. This exposed
him to new ﬁelds: quantum electrodynamics (although as we recall, he had
written an early, unpublished paper on the subject while just 16) and cosmic-
ray physics, but he mostly continued to work on nuclear physics. He had a
number of collaborations; the most remarkable was with William Rarita, who
was on sabbatical from Brooklyn College: Rarita was Schwinger’s ‘calculating
arm’ on a series of papers extending the notion of nuclear tensor forces which
he had conceived in Wisconsin over a year earlier. Rarita and Schwinger also
wrote the prescient paper on spin-3/2 particles, which was to be inﬂuential
decades later with the birth of supergravity.

The year of the NRC Fellowship was followed by a second year at Berkeley
as Oppenheimer’s assistant. They had already written an important paper

4

together which would prove crucial several years later: Although Oppen-
heimer was happy to imagine new interactions, Schwinger showed that an
anomaly in ﬂuorine decay could be explained by the existence of vacuum
polarization, that is, by the virtual creation of electron-positron pairs. This
gave Schwinger a head start over Feynman, who for years suspected that
vacuum polarization did not exist.

After two years at Berkeley, Oppenheimer and Rabi arranged a real job
for Schwinger: He became ﬁrst an instructor, then an Assistant Professor at
Purdue University, which had acquired a number of bright young physicists
under the leadership of Karl Lark-Horowitz. But the war was impinging on
everyone’s lives, and Schwinger was soon recruited into the work on radar.
The move to the MIT Radiation Laboratory took place in 1943. There
Schwinger rapidly became the theoretical leader, even though he was seldom
seen, going home in the morning just as others were arriving. He devel-
oped powerful variational methods for dealing with complicated microwave
circuits, expressing results in terms of quantities the engineers could under-
stand, such as impedance and admittance. These methods, and the discover-
ies he made there concerning the reality of the electromagnetic mass, would
be invaluable for his work on quantum electrodynamics a few years later.
As the war wound down, physicists started thinking about new accelerators,
since the pre-war cyclotrons had been defeated by relativity, and Schwinger
became a leader in this development: he proposed a microtron, a accelerator
based on acceleration through microwave cavities, developed the theory of
stability of synchrotron orbits, and most importantly, worked out in detail
the theory of synchrotron radiation, at a time when many thought that such
radiation would be negligible because of destructive interference.1

Although he never really published his considerations on self-reaction,
he viewed that understanding as the most important part of his work on
synchrotron radiation: ‘It was a useful thing for me for what was to come later
in electrodynamics, because the technique I used for calculating the electron’s
classical radiation was one of self-reaction, and I did it relativistically, and it
was a situation in which I had to take seriously the part of the self-reaction
which was radiation, so why not take seriously the part of the self-reaction
that is mass change? In other words, the ideas of mass renormalization and
relativistically handling them were already present at this classical level.’ [7]
At ﬁrst it may seem strange that Schwinger, by 1943 the leading nuclear
1Material based on his Radiation Lab work has now been published [6].

5

theorist, should not have gone to Los Alamos, where nearly all his colleagues
eventually settled for the duration. There seem to be at least three reasons
why Schwinger stayed at the Radiation Laboratory throughout the war.

• The reason he most often cited later in life was one of moral repugnance.
When he realized the destructive power of what was being constructed
at Los Alamos, he wanted no part of it.
In contrast, the radiation
lab was developing a primarily defensive technology, radar, which had
already saved Britain.

• He believed that the problems to solve at the Radiation Laboratory
were more interesting. Both laboratories were involved largely in engi-
neering, yet although Maxwell’s equations were certainly well known,
the process of applying them to waveguides required the development
of special techniques that would prove invaluable to Schwinger’s later
career.

• Another factor probably was Schwinger’s fear of being overwhelmed.
In Cambridge he could live his own life, working at night when no one
was around the lab. This privacy would have been much more diﬃcult
to maintain in the microworld of Los Alamos. Similarly, the working
conditions at the Rad Lab were much freer than those at Los Alamos.
Schwinger never was comfortable in a team setting, as witness his later
aversion to the atmosphere at the Institute for Advanced Study.

In 1945 Harvard oﬀered Schwinger an Associate Professorship, which he
promptly accepted, partly because in the meantime he had met his future wife
Clarice Carrol. Counteroﬀers quickly appeared, from Columbia, Berkeley,
and elsewhere, and Harvard shortly made Schwinger the youngest full pro-
fessor on the faculty to that date. There Schwinger quickly established a pat-
tern that was to persist for many years—he taught brilliant courses on clas-
sical electrodynamics, nuclear physics, and quantum mechanics, surrounded
himself with a devoted coterie of graduate students and post-doctoral as-
sistants, and conducted incisive research that set the tone for theoretical
physics throughout the world. Work on classical diﬀraction theory, begun at
the Radiation Lab, continued for several years largely due to the presence
of Harold Levine, whom Schwinger had brought along as an assistant. Vari-
ational methods, perfected in the electrodynamic waveguide context, were
rapidly applied to problems in nuclear physics. But these were old problems,
and it was quantum electrodynamics that was to deﬁne Schwinger’s career.

6

Quantum Electrodynamics

But it took new experimental data to catalyze this development. That data
was presented at the famous Shelter Island meeting held in June 1947, a
week before Schwinger’s wedding. There he, Feynman, Victor Weisskopf,
Hans Bethe, and the other participants learned the details of the new exper-
iments of Lamb and Retherford [8] that conﬁrmed the pre-war Pasternack
eﬀect, showing a splitting between the 2S1/2 and 2P1/2 states of hydrogen,
that should be degenerate according to Dirac’s theory. In fact, on the way
to the conference, Weisskopf and Schwinger speculated that quantum elec-
trodynamics could explain this eﬀect, and outlined the idea to Bethe there,
who worked out the details, non-relativistically, on his famous train ride to
Schenectady after the meeting [9]. But the other experiment announced
there was unexpected: This was the experiment by Rabi’s group and others
[10] of the hyperﬁne anomaly that would prove to mark the existence of an
anomalous magnetic moment of the electron,

µ = g

e
2m

S,

(1)

diﬀering from the value g = 2 again predicted by Dirac. Schwinger imme-
diately saw this as the crucial calculation to carry out ﬁrst, because it was
purely relativistic, and much cleaner to understand theoretically, not involv-
ing the complication of bound states. However, he was delayed three months
in beginning the calculation because of an extended honeymoon through the
West. He did return to it in October, and by December 1947 had obtained
the result g/2 = 1 + α/2π, completely consistent with experiment. He also
saw how to compute the relativistic Lamb shift (although he did not have
the details quite right), and found the error in the pre-war Dancoﬀ calcu-
lation of the radiative correction to electron scattering by a Coulomb ﬁeld
[11]. In eﬀect, he had solved all the fundamental problems that had plagued
quantum electrodynamics in the 1930s: The inﬁnities were entirely isolated
in quantities that renormalized the mass and charge of the electron. Further
progress, by himself and others, was thus a matter of technique.

Covariant Quantum Electrodynamics

During the next two years Schwinger developed two new approaches to quan-
tum electrodynamics. His original approach, which made use of successive

7

canonical transformations to isolate the inﬁnities, while suﬃcient for calcu-
lating the anomalous magnetic moment of the electron, was noncovariant,
and as such, led to inconsistent results. In particular, the magnetic moment
appeared also as part of the Lamb shift calculation, through the coupling
with the electric ﬁeld implied by relativistic covariance; but the noncovariant
scheme gave the wrong coeﬃcient. (If the coeﬃcient were modiﬁed by hand
to the right number, what turned out to be the correct relativistic value for
the Lamb shift emerged, but what that was was unknown in January 1948,
when Schwinger announced his results at the APS meeting in New York.)
So ﬁrst at the Pocono Conference in April 1948, then in the Michigan Sum-
mer School that year, and ﬁnally in a series of three monumental papers,
‘Quantum Electrodynamics I, II, and III,’ Schwinger set forth his covariant
approach to QED. At about the same time Feynman was formulating his
covariant path-integral approach; and although Feynman’s presentation at
Pocono was not well-received, Feynman and Schwinger compared notes and
realized that they had climbed the same mountain by diﬀerent routes. Feyn-
man’s systematic papers [12] were published only after Dyson [13] had proved
the equivalence of Schwinger’s and Feynman’s schemes.

It is worth remarking that Schwinger’s approach was conservative. He
took ﬁeld theory at face value, and followed the conventional path of Pauli,
Heisenberg, and Dirac [14]. His genius was to recognize that the well-known
divergences of the theory, which had stymied all pre-war progress, could be
consistently isolated in renormalization of charge and mass. This bore a
superﬁcial resemblance to the ideas of Kramers advocated as early as 1938
[15], but Kramers proceeded classically. He had insisted that ﬁrst the clas-
sical theory had to be rendered ﬁnite and then quantized. That idea was a
blind alley. Renormalization of quantum ﬁeld theory is unquestionably the
discovery of Schwinger. Feynman was more interested in ﬁnding an alterna-
tive to ﬁeld theory, eliminating entirely the photon ﬁeld in favor of action
at a distance. He was, by 1950, quite disappointed to realize that his ap-
proach was entirely equivalent to the conventional electrodynamics, in which
electron and photon ﬁelds are treated on the same footing.

As early as January 1948, when Schwinger was expounding his nonco-
variant QED to overﬂow crowds at the American Physical Society meeting
at Columbia University, he learned from Oppenheimer of the existence of
the work of Tomonaga carried out in Tokyo during the terrible conditions of
wartime [16]. Tomonaga had independently invented the ‘Interaction Rep-
resentation’ which Schwinger had used in his unpublished 1934 paper, and

8

had come up with a covariant version of the Schr¨odinger equation as had
Schwinger, which upon its Western rediscovery was dubbed by Oppenheimer
the Tomonaga-Schwinger equation. Both Schwinger and Tomonaga indepen-
dently wrote the same equation, a generalization of the Schr¨odinger equation
to an arbitrary spacelike surface σ, using nearly the same notation:

where H is the interaction Hamiltonian,

i¯hc

δΨ[σ]
δσ(x)

= H(x)Ψ[σ],

H(x) = −

jµ(x)Aµ(x),

1
c

(2)

(3)

jµ being the electric current density of the electrons, and Aµ the electromag-
netic vector potential. The formalism found by Tomonaga and his school was
essentially identical to that developed by Schwinger ﬁve years later; yet they
at the time calculated nothing, nor did they discover renormalization. That
was certainly no reﬂection on the ability of the Japanese; Schwinger could
not have carried the formalism to its logical conclusion without the impetus
of the postwar experiments, which overcame prewar paralysis by showing
that the quantum corrections ‘were neither inﬁnite nor zero, but ﬁnite and
small, and demanded understanding.’ [17]

However, at ﬁrst Schwinger’s covariant calculation of the Lamb shift con-
tained another error, the same as Feynman’s [18]. ‘By this time I had forgot-
ten the number I had gotten by just artiﬁcially changing the wrong spin-orbit
coupling. Because I was now thoroughly involved with the covariant calcula-
tion and it was the covariant calculation that betrayed me, because something
went wrong there as well. That was a human error of stupidity.’ [7] French
and Weisskopf [19] had gotten the right answer, ‘because they put in the cor-
rect value of the magnetic moment and used it all the way through. I, at an
earlier stage, had done that, in eﬀect, and also got the same answer.’ [7] But
now he and Feynman ‘fell into the same trap. We were connecting a relativis-
tic calculation of high energy eﬀects with a nonrelativistic calculation of low
energy eﬀects, a la Bethe.’ Based on the result Schwinger had presented at
the APS meeting in January 1948, Schwinger claimed priority for the Lamb
If you look at
‘I had the answer in December of 1947.
shift calculation:
those [other] papers you will ﬁnd that on the critical issue of the spin-orbit
coupling, they appeal to the magnetic moment. The deﬁciency in the calcu-
lation I did [in 1947] was [that it was] a non-covariant calculation. French

9

and Weisskopf were certainly doing a non-covariant calculation. Willis Lamb
[20] was doing a non-covariant calculation. They could not possibly have
avoided these same problems.’ The error Feynman and Schwinger made had
to do with the infrared problem that occurred in the relativistic calculation,
which was handled by giving the photon a ﬁctitious mass. ‘Nobody thought
that if you give the photon a ﬁnite mass it will also aﬀect the low energy
problem. There are no longer the two transverse degrees of freedom of a
massless photon, there’s also a longitudinal degree of freedom. I suddenly
realized this absolutely stupid error, that a photon of ﬁnite mass is a spin
one particle, not a helicity one particle.’ Feynman [12] was more forthright
and apologetic in acknowledging his error which substantially delayed the
publication of the French and Weisskopf paper, in part because he, unlike
Schwinger, had published his incorrect result [18].

Quantum Action Principle

Schwinger learned from his competitors, particularly Feynman and Dyson.
Just as Feynman had borrowed the idea from Schwinger that henceforward
would go by the name of Feynman parameters, Schwinger recognized that
the systematic approach of Dyson-Feynman was superior in higher orders.
So by 1949 he replaced the Tomonaga-Schwinger approach by a much more
powerful engine, the quantum action principle. This was a logical outgrowth
of the formulation of Dirac [21], as was Feynman’s path integrals; the latter
was an integral approach, Schwinger’s a diﬀerential. The formal solution
of Schwinger’s diﬀerential equations was Feynman’s functional integral; yet
while the latter was ill-deﬁned, the former could be given a precise meaning,
and for example, required the introduction of fermionic variables, which ini-
tially gave Feynman some diﬃculty. It may be fair to say, at the beginning
of the new millennium, that while the path integral formulation of quantum
ﬁeld theory receives all the press, the most precise exegesis of ﬁeld theory is
provided by the functional diﬀerential equations of Schwinger resulting from
his action principle.

He began in the ‘Theory of Quantized Fields I’ by introducing a complete
set of eigenvectors ‘speciﬁed by a spacelike surface σ and the eigenvalues ζ ′ of
a complete set of commuting operators constructed from ﬁeld quantities at-
tached to that surface.’ The question is how to compute the transformation
function from one spacelike surface to another, that is, (ζ ′
2 , σ2). Af-

1, σ1|ζ ′′

10

ter remarking that this development, time-evolution, must be described by
a unitary transformation, he assumed that any inﬁnitesimal change in the
transformation function must be given in terms of the inﬁnitesimal change
in a quantum action operator, W12, or of a quantum Lagrange function L.
This is the quantum dynamical principle:

δ(ζ ′

1, σ1|ζ ′′
i
¯h

(ζ ′

=

2 , σ2) =

1, σ1|δ

Z

σ2

(ζ ′

1, σ1|δW12|ζ ′′

i
¯h
σ1
(dx)L(x)|ζ ′′

2 , σ2).

2 , σ2)

(4)

(5)

(6)

Here, L is a relativistically invariant Hermitian function of the ﬁelds and
their derivatives,

L(x) = L(φa(x), ∂µφa(x)),

where a labels the diﬀerent ﬁeld operators of the system. If the parameters of
the system are not altered, the only changes arise from those of the initial and
ﬁnal states, which changes are eﬀected by inﬁnitesimal generating operators
F (σ1), F (σ2), expressed in terms of operators associated with the surfaces σ1
and σ2. In this way, Schwinger deduced the Principle of Stationary Action,

δW12 = F (σ1) − F (σ2),

from which the ﬁeld equations may be deduced. A series of six papers followed
with the same title, and the most important ‘Green’s Functions of Quantized
Fields,’ published in the Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences.
The paper ‘On Gauge Invariance and Vacuum Polarization,’ submitted by
Schwinger to the Physical Review near the end of December 1950, is nearly
universally acclaimed as his greatest publication. As his lectures have right-
fully been compared to the works of Mozart, so this might be compared to a
mighty construction of Beethoven, the 3rd Symphony, the Eroica, perhaps. It
is most remarkable because it stands in splendid isolation. It was written over
a year after the last of his series of papers on his second, covariant, formula-
tion of quantum electrodynamics was completed: ‘Quantum Electrodynamics
III. The Electromagnetic Properties of the Electron—Radiative Corrections
to Scattering’ was submitted in May 1949. And barely two months later,
in March 1951, Schwinger would submit the ﬁrst of the series on his third
reformulation of quantum ﬁeld theory, that based on the quantum action

11

principle, namely, ‘The Theory of Quantized Fields I.’ But ‘Gauge Invari-
ance and Vacuum Polarization’ stands on its own, and has endued the rapid
changes in tastes and developments in quantum ﬁeld theory, while the pa-
pers in the other series are mostly of historical interest now. Among many
other remarkable developments, Schwinger discovered here the axial-vector
anomaly, nearly twenty years before its rediscovery and naming by Adler,
Bell, and Jackiw [22]. As Lowell Brown [23] pointed out, ‘Gauge Invariance
and Vacuum Polarization’ still has over one hundred citations per year, and
is far and away Schwinger’s most cited paper.2

So it was no surprise that in the late 1940s and early 1950s Harvard was
the center of the world, as far as theoretical physics was concerned. Everyone,
students and professors alike, ﬂocked to Schwinger’s lectures. Everything
was revealed, long before publication; and not infrequently others received
the credit because of Schwinger’s reluctance to publish before the subject
was ripe. A case in point is the so-called Bethe-Salpeter equation [24], which
as Gell-Mann and Low noted [25], ﬁrst appeared in Schwinger’s lectures at
Harvard. At any one time, Schwinger had ten or twelve Ph.D. students,
who typically saw him but rarely. In part, this was because he was available
to see his large ﬂock but one afternoon a week, but most saw him only
when absolutely necessary, because they recognized that his time was too
valuable to be wasted on trivial matters. A student may have seen him only a
handful of times in his graduate career, but that was all the student required.
When admitted to his sanctum, students were never rushed, were listened
to with respect, treated with kindness, and given inspiration and practical
advice. One must remember that the student’s problems were typically quite
unrelated to what Schwinger himself was working on at the time; yet in a
few moments, he could come up with amazing insights that would keep the
student going for weeks, if not months. A few students got to know Schwinger
fairly well, and were invited to the Schwingers’ house occasionally; but most
saw Schwinger primarily as a virtuoso in the lecture hall, and now and then
in his oﬃce. A few faculty members were a bit more intimate, but essentially
Schwinger was a very private person.

2In 2005 the Science Citation Index lists 104 citations, out of a total of 458 citations
to all of Schwinger’s work. These numbers have remained remarkably constant over ten
years.

12

Field Theory

Feynman left the ﬁeld of quantum electrodynamics in 1950, regarding it as
essentially complete. Schwinger never did. During the next ﬁfteen years,
he continued to explore quantum ﬁeld theory, trying to make it reveal the
secrets of the weak and strong interactions. And he accomplished much.
In studying the relativistic structure of the theory, he recognized that all
the physically signiﬁcant representations of the Lorentz group were those
that could be derived from the ‘attached’ four-dimensional Euclidean group,
which is obtained by letting the time coordinate become imaginary. This idea
was originally ridiculed by Pauli, but it was to prove a most fruitful sugges-
tion. Related to this was the CPT theorem, ﬁrst given a proof for interacting
systems by Schwinger in his ‘Quantized Field’ papers of the early 1950s, and
elaborated later in the decade. By the end of the 1950s, Schwinger, with
his former student Paul Martin, was applying ﬁeld theory methods to many-
body systems, which led to a revolution in that ﬁeld, and independently de-
veloped techniques which opened up non-equilibrium statistical mechanics.
Along the way, in what he considered rather modest papers, he discovered
Schwinger terms, anomalies in the commutation relations between ﬁeld oper-
ators, and the Schwinger model, still the only known example of dynamical
mass generation. The beginning of a quantum ﬁeld theory for non-Abelian
ﬁelds was made; the original example of a non-Abelian ﬁeld being that of the
gravitational ﬁeld, he laid the groundwork for later canonical formulations
of gravity. (See also [26].) Fundamental here were his consistency conditions
for a relativistic quantum ﬁeld theory.

Measurement Algebra

In 1950 or so, as we mentioned, Schwinger developed his action principle,
which applies to any quantum system, including nonrelativistic quantum
mechanics. Two years later, he reformulated quantum kinematics, introduc-
ing symbols that abstracted the essential elements of realistic measurements.
This was measurement algebra, which yielded conventional Dirac quantum
mechanics. But although the result was as expected, Schwinger saw the ap-
proach as of great value pedagogically, and as providing a interpretation of
quantum mechanics that was self-consistent. He taught quantum mechan-
ics this way for many years, starting in 1952 at the Les Houches summer

13

school; but only in 1959 did he start writing a series of papers expounding
the method to the world. He always intended to write a deﬁnitive textbook
on the subject, but only an incomplete version based on the Les Houches
lectures ever appeared. (In the last few years, Englert brought his UCLA
quantum mechanics lectures to a wider audience [27].)

One cannot conclude a retrospective of Schwinger’s work without men-
tioning two other magniﬁcent achievements in the quantum mechanical do-
main. He presented in 1952 a deﬁnitive development of angular momentum
theory derived in terms of oscillator variables in ‘On Angular Momentum,’
which was never properly published; and he developed a ‘time-cycle’ method
of calculating matrix elements without having to ﬁnd all the wavefunctions
in his beautiful ‘Brownian Motion of a Quantum Oscillator’ (1961). We
should also mention the famous Lippmann-Schwinger paper (1950), which is
chieﬂy remembered for what Schwinger considered a standard exposition of
quantum scattering theory, not for the variational methods expounded there.

Electroweak Synthesis

In spite of his awesome ability to make formalism work for him, Schwinger
was at heart a phenomenologist. He was active in the search for higher
symmetry; while he came up with W3, Gell-Mann found the correct approx-
imate symmetry of hadronic states, SU(3). Schwinger’s greatest success in
this period was contained in his masterpiece, his 1957 paper ‘A Theory of
the Fundamental Interactions.’ Along with many other insights, such as the
existence of two neutrinos and the V − A structure of weak interactions,
Schwinger there laid the groundwork for the electroweak uniﬁcation. He
introduced two charged intermediate vector bosons as partners to the pho-
ton, which couple to charged weak currents. That coupling is exactly that
found in the standard model. A few years later, his former student, Sheldon
Glashow, as an outgrowth of his thesis, would introduce a neutral heavy bo-
son to close the system to the modern SU(2) × U(1) symmetry group [28];
Steven Weinberg [29] would complete the picture by generating the masses
for the heavy bosons by spontaneous symmetry breaking. Schwinger did not
have the details right in 1957, in particular because experiment seemed to
disfavor the V − A theory his approach implied, but there is no doubt that
Schwinger must be counted as the grandfather of the Standard Model on the
basis on this paper.

14

The Nobel Prize and Reaction

Recognition of Schwinger’s enormous contributions had come early. He re-
ceived the Charles L. Mayer Nature of Light Award in 1949 on the basis of
the partly completed manuscripts of his ‘Quantum Electrodynamics’ papers.
The ﬁrst Einstein prize was awarded to him, along with Kurt G¨odel, in 1951.
The National Medal of Science was presented to him by President Johnson
in 1964. The following year, Schwinger, Tomonaga, and Feynman received
the Nobel Prize in Physics from the King of Sweden.

But by this point his extraordinary command of the machinery of quan-
tum ﬁeld theory had convinced him that it was too elaborate to describe
the real world, at least directly.
In his Nobel Lecture, he appealed for a
phenomenological ﬁeld theory that would describe directly the particles ex-
periencing the strong interaction. Within a year, he developed such a theory,
Source Theory.

Source Theory and UCLA

It surely was the diﬃculty of incorporating strong interactions into ﬁeld the-
ory that led to ‘Particles and Sources,’ received by the Physical Review
barely six months after his Nobel lecture, in July 1966, based on lectures
Schwinger gave in Tokyo that summer. One must appreciate the milieu in
which Schwinger worked in 1966. For more than a decade he and his students
had been nearly the only exponents of ﬁeld theory, as the community sought
to understand weak and strong interactions, and the proliferation of ‘elemen-
tary particles,’ through dispersion relations, Regge poles, current algebra,
and the like, most ambitiously through the S-matrix bootstrap hypothesis of
Geoﬀrey Chew and Stanley Mandelstam [30, 31, 32, 33]. What work in ﬁeld
theory did exist then was largely axiomatic, an attempt to turn the structure
of the theory into a branch of mathematics, starting with Arthur Wightman
[34], and carried on by many others, including Arthur Jaﬀe at Harvard [35].
(The name changed from axiomatic ﬁeld theory to constructive ﬁeld theory
along the way.) Schwinger looked on all of this with considerable distaste;
not that he did not appreciate many of the contributions these techniques
oﬀered in speciﬁc contexts, but he could not see how they could form the
basis of a theory.

The new source theory was supposed to supersede ﬁeld theory, much as

15

Schwinger’s successive covariant formulations of quantum electrodynamics
had replaced his earlier schemes.
In fact, the revolution was to be more
profound, because there were no divergences, and no renormalization. ‘The
concept of renormalization is simply foreign to this phenomenological theory.
In source theory, we begin by hypothesis with the description of the actual
particles, while renormalization is a ﬁeld theory concept in which you begin
with the more fundamental operators, which are then modiﬁed by dynamics.
I emphasize that there never can be divergences in a phenomenological theory.
What one means by that is that one is recognizing that all further phenom-
ena are consequences of one phenomenological constant, namely the basic
charge unit, which describes the probability of emitting a photon relative to
the emission of an electron. When one says that there are no divergences
one means that it is not necessary to introduce any new phenomenological
constant. All further processes as computed in terms of this primitive inter-
action automatically emerge to be ﬁnite, and in agreement with those which
historically had evolved much earlier.’ [36]

Robert Finkelstein has oﬀered a perceptive discussion of Schwinger’s
source theory program: ‘In comparing operator ﬁeld theory with source the-
ory Julian revealed his political orientation when he described operator ﬁeld
theory as a trickle down theory (after a failed economic theory)—since it de-
scends from implicit assumptions about unknown phenomena at inaccessible
and very high energies to make predictions at lower energies. Source theory
on the other hand he described as anabatic (as in Xenophon’s Anabasis) by
which he meant that it began with solid knowledge about known phenom-
ena at accessible energies to make predictions about physical phenomena at
higher energies. Although source theory was new, it did not represent a com-
plete break with the past but rather was a natural evolution of Julian’s work
with operator Green’s functions. His trilogy on source theory is not only a
stunning display of Julian’s power as an analyst but it is also totally in the
spirit of the modest scientiﬁc goals he had set in his QED work and which
had guided him earlier as a nuclear phenomenologist.’ [37]

But the new approach was not well received. In part this was because
the times were changing; within a few years, ’t Hooft [38] would establish the
renormalizability of the Glashow-Weinberg-Salam SU(2) × U(1) electroweak
model, and ﬁeld theory was seen by all to be viable again. With the discovery
of asymptotic freedom in 1974 [39], a non-Abelian gauge theory of strong in-
teractions, quantum chromodynamics, which was proposed somewhat earlier
[40], was promptly accepted by nearly everyone. An alternative to conven-

16

tional ﬁeld theory did not seem to be required after all. Schwinger’s insis-
tence on a clean break with the past, and his rejection of ‘rules’ as opposed
to learning while serving as an ‘apprentice,’ did not encourage conversions.
Already before the source theory revolution, Schwinger felt a growing
sense of unease with his colleagues at Harvard. But the chief reason Schwinger
left Harvard for UCLA was health related. Formerly overweight and inac-
tive, he had become health conscious upon the premature death of Wolfgang
Pauli in 1958. He had been fond of tennis from his youth, had discovered
skiing in 1960, and now his doctor was recommending a daily swim for his
health. So he listened favorably to the entreaties of David Saxon, his closest
colleague at the Radiation Lab during the war, who for years had been try-
ing to induce him to come to UCLA. Very much against his wife’s wishes,
he made the move in 1971. He brought along his three senior students at
the time, Lester DeRaad, Jr., Wu-yang Tsai, and the present author, who
became long-term ‘assistants’ at UCLA. He and Saxon expected, as in the
early days at Harvard, that students would ﬂock to UCLA to work with him;
but they did not. Schwinger was no longer the center of theoretical physics.
This is not to say that his little group at UCLA did not make an heroic
attempt to establish a source-theory presence. Schwinger remained a gifted
innovator and an awesome calculator. He wrote 2-1/2 volumes of an ex-
haustive treatise on source theory, Particles, Sources, and Fields, devoted
primarily to the reconstruction of quantum electrodynamics in the new lan-
guage; unfortunately, he abandoned the project when it came time to deal
with strong interactions, in part because he became too busy writing papers
on an ‘anti-parton’ interpretation of the results of deep-inelastic scattering
experiments. He made some signiﬁcant contributions to the theory of mag-
netic charge; particularly noteworthy was his introduction of dyons. He
reinvigorated proper-time methods of calculating processes in strong-ﬁeld
electrodynamics; and he made some major contributions to the theory of
the Casimir eﬀect, which are still having repercussions. But it was clear
he was reacting, not leading, as witnessed by his quite pretty paper on the
‘Multispinor Basis of Fermi-Bose Transformation’ (1979), in which he kicked
himself for not discovering supersymmetry.

17

Conclusion

It is impossible to do justice in a few words to the impact of Julian Schwinger
on physical thought in the 20th Century. He revolutionized ﬁelds from nu-
clear physics to many body theory, ﬁrst successfully formulated renormalized
quantum electrodynamics, developed the most powerful functional formula-
tion of quantum ﬁeld theory, and proposed new ways of looking at quan-
tum mechanics, angular momentum theory, and quantum ﬂuctuations. His
legacy includes ‘theoretical tools’ such as the proper-time method, the quan-
tum action principle, and eﬀective action techniques. Not only is he re-
sponsible for formulations bearing his name: the Rarita-Schwinger equation,
the Lippmann-Schwinger equation, the Tomonaga-Schwinger equation, the
Schwinger-Dyson equations, the Schwinger mechanism, and so forth, but
some attributed to others, or known anonymously: Feynman parameters,
the Bethe-Salpeter equation, coherent states, Euclidean ﬁeld theory; the list
goes on and on. It is impossible to imagine what physics would be like in the
21st Century without the contributions of Julian Schwinger, a very private
yet wonderful human being. It is most gratifying that a dozen years after his
death, recognition of his manifold inﬂuences is growing, and research projects
he initiated are still underway.

Julian Schwinger lectured twice at the Erice International School on Sub-

nuclear Physics, in the years 1986 and 1988.

References

[1] Jagdish Mehra and Kimball A. Milton, Climbing the Mountain: The Sci-
entiﬁc Biography of Julian Schwinger (Oxford University Press, 2000).

[2] K. A. Milton, ed., A Quantum Legacy: Seminal Papers of Julian

Schwinger (World Scientiﬁc, Singapore, 2000).

[3] Silvan S. Schweber, QED and the Men Who Made It: Dyson, Feynman,

Schwinger, and Tomonaga (Princeton University Press, 1994).

[4] A. Einstein, B. Podolsky, and N. Rosen, Phys. Rev. 47, 777 (1935).

[5] J. M. B. Kellogg, I. I. Rabi, N. F. Ramsey, and J. R. Zacharias, Bull.
Am. Phys. Soc. 13, No. 7, Abs. 24 and 15 (1938); Phys. Rev. 55, 318
(1939).

18

[6] K. A. Milton and J. Schwinger, Electromagnetic Radiation: Variational

Methods, Waveguides, and Accelerators (Springer, Berlin, 2006).

[7] Interview with J. Schwinger by Jagdish Mehra, March 1988.

[8] W. E. Lamb, Jr., and R. C. Retherford, Phys. Rev. 72, 241 (1947).

[9] H. A. Bethe, Phys. Rev. 72, 339 (1947).

[10] J. E. Nafe, E. B. Nelson, and I. I. Rabi, Phys. Rev. 71, 914 (1947); P.

Kusch and H. M. Foley, Phys. Rev. 72, 1256 (1947).

[11] S. M. Dancoﬀ, Phys. Rev. 55, 959 (1939).

[12] R. P. Feynman, Phys. Rev. 76, 749, 769 (1949).

[13] F. J. Dyson, Phys. Rev. 75, 486, 1736 (1949).

[14] W. Heisenberg and W. Pauli, Zeit. f¨ur Phys. 56, 1 (1929); ibid. 59, 168
(1930); P. A. M. Dirac, Proc. Roy. Soc. London A136, 453 (1932); P.
A. M. Dirac, V. A. Fock, and B. Podolsky, Phys. Zeit. Sowjetunion 2,
468 (1932).

[15] H. A. Kramers, Rapports et discussions du 8e Conseil de Physique Solvay
1948 (Stoop, Bruxelles, 1950), p. 241; M. Dresden, H. A. Kramers:
Between Transition and Revolution (Springer-Verlag, New York, 1987),
p. 375; H. A. Kramers, Hand- und Jahrbuch der Chemischen Physik I,
Abschnitt 2 (Leipzig, 1938), p. 89; Nuovo Cim. 15, 108 (1938).

[16] S. Tomonaga, Prog. Theor. Phys. 1, 27 (1946); Phys. Rev. 74, 224

(1948).

[17] J. Schwinger. ‘Renormalization Theory of Quantum Electrodynamics:
An Individual View,’ in The Birth of Particle Physics, ed. L. M. Brown
and L. Hoddeson (Cambridge University Press, 1983), p. 329.

[18] R. P. Feynman, Phys. Rev. 74, 1430 (1948).

[19] J. B. French and V. F. Weisskopf, Phys. Rev. 75, 338 (1949).

[20] N. M. Kroll and W. E. Lamb, Jr., Phys. Rev. 75, 388 (1949).

[21] P. A. M. Dirac, Phys. Zeit. Sowjetunion 3, 64 (1933).

19

[22] J. S. Bell and R. Jackiw, Nuovo Cimento 60A, 47 (1969); S. L. Adler,
Phys. Rev. 177, 2426 (1969); R. Jackiw and K. Johnson, Phys. Rev. 82,
1459 (1969).

[23] Lowell S. Brown, ‘An Important Schwinger Legacy: Theoretical Tools,’
talk given at Schwinger Memorial Session at the April 1995 meeting
of the APS/AAPT. Published in Julian Schwinger: The Physicist, the
Teacher, the Man, ed. Y. Jack Ng (World Scientiﬁc, 1996), p. 131.

[24] E. Salpeter and H. Bethe, Phys. Rev. 84, 1232 (1951).

[25] M. Gell-Mann and F. Low, Phys. Rev. 84, 350 (1951).

[26] R. Arnowitt, S. Deser, and C. W. Misner, Phys. Rev. 117, 1595 (1960).

[27] J. Schwinger, Quantum Mechanics: Symbolism of Atomic Measurement,

ed. B.-G. Englert (Springer, Berlin, 2001).

[28] S. Glashow, Nucl. Phys. 22, 579 (1961).

[29] S. Weinberg, Phys. Rev. Lett. 19, 1264 (1967).

[30] For a contemporary account of S-matrix theory, see R. J. Eden, P. V.
Landshoﬀ, D. I. Olive, and J. C. Polkinghorne, The Analytic S-Matrix
(Cambridge University Press, 1966).

[31] For Regge poles, see S. C. Frautschi, Regge Poles and S-Matrix Theory

(Benjamin, New York, 1963).

[32] For current algebra, see S. L. Adler and R. F. Dashen, Current Algebras
and Applications to Particle Physics (Benjamin, New York, 1968).

[33] Bootstrap calculations were introduced in G. F. Chew and S. Mandel-
stam, Nuovo Cimento 19, 752 (1961). A survey of S-matrix theory just
before the bootstrap hypothesis may be found in G. F. Chew, S-Matrix
Theory of Strong Interactions (Benjamin, New York, 1961).

[34] An accessible early exposition of this approach is found in R. F. Streater
and A. S. Wightman, PCT, Spin and Statistics, and All That (Benjamin,
New York, 1964).

20

[35] For a modern exposition of some of these ideas, see J. Glimm and A.
Jaﬀe, Quantum Physics: A Functional Integral Point of View (Springer-
Verlag, New York, 1981).

[36] J. Schwinger, ‘Back to the Source’ in Proceedings of the 1967 Interna-
tional Conference on Particles and Fields, ed. C. R. Hagen, G. Guralnik,
and V. A. Mathur (Interscience, New York, 1967), p. 128.

[37] R. Finkelstein, ‘Julian Schwinger: The QED Period at Michigan and the
Source Theory Period at UCLA’ in Julian Schwinger: The Physicist, the
Teacher, and the Man, ed. Y. J. Ng (World Scientiﬁc, Singapore, 1996),
p. 105.

[38] G. ’t Hooft, Nucl. Phys. B33, 173 (1971); B35, 167 (1971).

[39] D. J. Gross and F. Wilczek, Phys. Rev. Lett. 30, 1343 (1973); H. D.
Politzer, Phys. Rev. Lett. 30, 1346 (1974); Phys. Rep. 14C, 130 (1974).

[40] M. Gell-Mann, Acta Phys. Austriaca Suppl. IV, 733 (1972); H. Fritzsch
and M. Gell-Mann, in Proc. XVI Int. Conf. on High Energy Physics,
ed. J. D. Jackson and A. Roberts (National Accelerator Laboratory,
Batavia, IL); W. A. Bardeen, H. Fritzsch, and M. Gell-Mann, in Scale
and Conformal Symmetry in Hadron Physics, ed. R. Gatto (Wiley, New
York, 1973), p. 139.

21

