Peter Bergmann and the invention of constrained Hamiltonian

Department of Physics, Austin College, Sherman, Texas 75090-4440, USA

dynamics

D. C. Salisbury

E-mail: dsalisbury@austincollege.edu

(Dated: July 23, 2006)

Abstract

Peter Bergmann was a co-inventor of the algorithm for converting singular Lagrangian models

into a constrained Hamiltonian dynamical formalism. This talk focuses on the work of Bergmann

and his collaborators in the period from 1949 to 1951.

6
0
0
2
 
g
u
A
 
7
 
 
]
h
p
-
t
s
i
h
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
7
6
0
8
0
6
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

1

INTRODUCTION

It has always been the practice of those of us associated with the Syracuse “school” to

identify the algorithm for constructing a canonical phase space description of singular La-

grangian systems as the Dirac-Bergmann procedure. I learned the procedure as a student

of Peter Bergmann - and I should point out that he never employed that terminology. Yet

it was clear from the published record at the time in the 1970’s that his contribution was

essential. Constrained Hamiltonian dynamics constitutes the route to canonical quantiza-

tion of all local gauge theories, including not only conventional general relativity, but also

grand uniﬁed theories of elementary particle interaction, superstrings and branes. Given

its importance and my suspicion that Bergmann has never received adequate recognition

from the wider community for his role in the development of the technique, I have long

intended to explore this history in depth. The following is merely a tentative ﬁrst step in

which I will focus principally on the work of Peter Bergmann and his collaborators in the

late 1940’s and early 1950’s, indicating where appropriate the relation of this work to later

developments. I begin with a brief survey of the prehistory of work on singular Lagrangians,

followed by some comments on the life of Peter Bergmann. These are included in part to

commemorate Peter in this ﬁrst History of General Relativity meeting following his death

in October, 2002. Then I will address what I perceive to be the principle innovations of his

early Syracuse career. Josh Goldberg covered some of this ground in his 2002 report,[1] but

I hope to contribute some new perspectives. I conclude with a partial list of historical issues

that remain to be explored.

SINGULAR LAGRANGIAN PREHISTORY

All attempts to invent a Hamiltonian version of singular Lagrangian models are based

either explicitly or implicitly on Emmy Noether’s remarkable second theorem of 1918.[2] I

state the theorem using the notation for variables employed by Bergmann in his ﬁrst treat-

ment of singular systems published in 1949.[3] Denote ﬁeld variables by yA (A = 1,

, N),

· · ·

where N is the number of algebraically independent components, and let x represent coor-

dinates. Noether assumes that n is the highest order of derivatives of yA appearing in the

Lagrangian, L(yA, yA,µ,

, yA,µ1···µn), but I will assume that n = 1. The extension of the

· · ·

2

theorem to higher derivatives is straightforward. Then for an arbitrary variation δyA(x) we

have after an integration by parts the usual identity

LAδyA ≡
where the Euler-Lagrange equations are

δL +

∂
∂xµ  

∂L
∂yA,µ

δyA

,

!

LA =:

∂L
∂yA −

∂
∂xµ  

∂L
∂yA,µ !

= 0.

Now suppose that the action is invariant under the inﬁnitesimal coordinate transformation
x′µ = xµ + ξµ(x). Invariance is deﬁned by Noether as follows:

L(y′

A, y′

A,µ)d4x′ =

L(yA, yA,µ)d4x.

R′

Z

R

Z

(The notion of invariance was extended later, as we shall see below, to in include a possible

surface integral). Crucial in this deﬁnition is the fact the Lagrangian is assumed not to

have changed its functional form, guaranteeing that this transformation does not change

the form of the equations of motion, i.e., it is a symmetry transformation. Noether writes
δyA(x) := y′

ξ) + δyA(x). She then deﬁnes

yA(x), and therefore y′

A(x) = yA(x

A(x′)

−

¯δyA(x) := y′

A(x)

yA(x) = δyA(x)

yA,µ(x)ξµ(x).

−

−

−

This ¯δ notation was appropriated by Bergmann in his 1949 paper, and retained throughout
ξµ, a terminology

his life. It is, of course, the Lie Derivative with respect to the vector ﬁeld

−

introduced by Sledbodzinski in 1931.[4] Returning to the elaboration of Noether’s theorem,

using this notation we may rewrite the invariance assumption (5) as

so that under a symmetry transformation the identity (1) becomes

¯δL

∂
∂xµ (Lξµ) ,

≡ −

LA¯δyA ≡

∂
∂xµ  

∂L
∂yA,µ −

Lξµ

.

!

Next, let us assume that ¯δ variations of yA are of the form

¯δyA = 0fAi(x, y,

)ξi(x) + 1f ν

Ai(x, y,

)ξi

,ν(x),

· · ·

· · ·

where we have admitted the possibility of additional non-coordinate gauge symmetry by

letting the index i range beyond 3. We are ﬁnally in position to state (and prove) Noether’s

3

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

second theorem: Perform an integration by parts on the left hand side of (6) using (20),

then it follows for functions ξµ that vanish on the integration boundary that

LA 1f ν
Aµ
(cid:16)
In vacuum general relativity these are the contracted Bianchi identities.The derivation from

LA 0fAµ −

(8)

≡

0.

(cid:17)

∂
∂xν

general coordinate symmetry had already been anticipated by Hilbert in 1915 in a uniﬁed

ﬁeld-theoretic context.[5] Weyl applied a similar symmetry argument in 1918.[6] He adapted

Noether’s theorem to a gravitational Lagrangian

W from which a total divergence has been

L

subtracted so that the highest order of derivatives appearing are gµν,α .

W is no longer a

L

scalar density, but the extra divergence term can easily be incorporated in its variation,

W = √

gR

L

−

−

(cid:16)

−

√

ggµνΓρ

µρ −

√

−

ggµρΓν
µρ

= √

ggµν

−

,ν

(cid:17)

ρσΓρ
Γσ
(cid:16)

µν −

µρΓρ
Γσ
νσ

.

(9)

(cid:17)

Bergmann and his collaborators will later work with this Lagrangian. It appears in his 1942

textbook.[7] Pauli in 1921 applied similar symmetry arguments, citing Hilbert and Weyl,

but curiously never mentioning Noether.[8] Pauli is an important link in this story. Leon

Rosenfeld writes in 1930 in his groundbreaking paper on constrained Hamiltonian dynamics

that it was Pauli who suggested to him a method for constructing a Hamiltonian procedure in

the presence of identities.[9] Rosenfeld did indeed make astounding progress in constructing

a gravitational Hamiltonian. Full details will be reported elsewhere,[10] but its relevance

speciﬁcally to the work of the Syracuse “school” will be addressed below.

A BRIEF BERGMANN BIOGRAPHY

Peter Bergmann was born in 1915 in Berlin Charlottenburg. His mother, Emmy (Grun-

wald) Bergmann was one of the ﬁrst female pediatricians in Germany. She was also the

founder in Freiburg in 1925, where she moved with her son and daughter in 1922, of the

second Montessori school in Germany. She had taken a course in Amsterdam in the winter

of 1923/24 with Maria Montessori. The chemist Max Bergmann, Peter’s father, was a stu-

dent and collaborator of the 1902 Nobel prize winner in chemistry, Emil Fischer. He was

appointed the ﬁrst Director in 1923 of the Kaiser Wilhelm Institut f¨ur Lederforschung in

Dresden. He was removed from this position by the new Hitler regime in 1933, despite the

personal intervention of the then president of the Kaiser Wilhelm Gesellschaft, Max Planck.

4

He then assumed a position at what was to become Rockefeller University in New York

City in 1936. Max Bergmann is recognized as one of the founders of modern biochemistry.

Peter’s aunt, Clara Grunwald, was the founder of the Montessori movement in Germany.

He had fond memories of visits with his mother’s eldest sister in Berlin.[11] He clearly had

beneﬁted from Montessori methods, as attested by his aunt in references to him in letters

written by her from what had become a forced labor camp near F¨urstenwald just outside of

Berlin.[12] Clara Grunwald perished with her students in Auschwitz in 1943.

After completing his doctorate in physics at Charles University in Prague in 1936 Peter

Bergmann was appointed an assistant to Albert Einstein at the Institute for Advanced Study

in Princeton. He worked with Einstein on uniﬁed ﬁeld theory until 1941. There followed

brief appointments at Black Mountain College, Lehigh University, Columbia University and

the Woods Hole Oceanographic Institute. In 1947 he joined Syracuse University where he

remained until his retirement in 1982. He remained active for many years with a research

appointment at New York University. Syracuse became the center for relativity research in

the United States in the 1950’s and early 1960’s, bringing virtually all the leading relativists

in the world for either brief or prolonged interaction with Bergmann and his collaborators.

Bergmann concentrated from the beginning on the conceptual and technical challenges of at-

tempts to quantize general relativity. Not unlike Einstein himself, his deep physical intuition

was founded on hands-on laboratory experience, in his case extending back to “enjoyable”

laboratory courses in physics and chemistry as an undergraduate in 1932 at the Techni-

cal University in Dresden.[13] Later on he expressed appreciation for the opportunity that

teaching at the graduate level had given him to explore domains outside of relativity. His

two-volume set of lectures on theoretical physics are magisterial lucid surveys of the ﬁeld[14],

and it is lamentable that they are now out of print. In fact, the pure mathematical aspect

of relativity was not for him especially appealing, and he tended not to work closely with

visitors in the 1960’s who approached the subject from this perspective.[15] For additional

biographical material see my short sketch[16], and a longer discussion by Halpern. [17]

1949 - 1951

Bergmann’s aim in his 1949 paper is to establish the general classical canonical framework

for dealing with a fairly narrow set of generally covariant dynamical systems, but a set

5

above. He
that includes as a special case general relativity described by the Lagrangian
assumes that under the inﬁnitesmal general coordinate transformation x′µ = xµ + ξµ(x) the
¯δ transformations are given by

G

¯δyA = FAµ

Bνξµ

yA,µξµ,

,ν −

(10)

where the FAµ

Bν are constants. Noether is not cited in this paper, surely because at this

time her theorem was common knowledge.[18] A principal concern from the start is with

the group structure of these symmetry transformations, and with the requirement that
canonically realized variations faithfully reproduce the ¯δ variations.

Due to the intended use of the Lagrangian

an additional term will appear on the right

G
hand side of the invariance assumption (5). This eventuality is accommodated by Bergmann
with the assumption that ¯δL
,µ. Rather than consider ξµ that vanish on the integration
boundaries, he equivalently requires the identical vanishing of that contribution to the duly

Qµ

≡

rewritten (6) that cannot be written as a total divergence. Thus he obtains the generalized

contracted Bianchi identity (8) that for the variations (10) takes the form

FAµ
(cid:16)

BνyBLA

+ yA,µLA

0.

≡

,ν

(cid:17)

It is at this stage that new information is mined from the invariance of the Lagrangian

(although without Bergmann’s knowledge Leon Rosenfeld had employed similar arguments

in 1930)[9]. Since the ξµ are arbitrary functions, the coeﬃcients of all distinct derivatives of
ξµ in (11) must vanish identically. In particular the coeﬃcient of ∂3ξµ

···
µ must be zero,
∂(x0)3 =: ξ

where

is the Legendre matrix. Thus the Legendre matrix possesses null vectors. This is the

signature of singular Lagrangians.

Bergmann deduces several interrelated consequences. Firstly, since by assumption the

Euler-Lagrange equations are linear in ¨yA, with the linear term of the form ΛAC ¨yC, the

following four linear combination of equations of motion do not contain accelerations:

FAµ

B0ΛACyB ≡

0,

ΛAC :=

∂2L
∂ ˙yA∂ ˙yB

,

−

yBFAµ

B0LA = 0.

6

(11)

(12)

(13)

(14)

Therefore the evolution from an initial time will not be uniquely ﬁxed through an initial

choice of yA and ˙yA. Secondly, it will not be possible to solve for velocities in terms of
canonical momenta πA := ∂L/∂ ˙yA since the matrix ΛAB cannot be inverted. Thirdly, since

yBFAµ

B0 ∂πA

∂ ˙yC ≡

∂
∂ ˙yC

(cid:16)

yBFAµ

B0πA

0,

≡

(cid:17)

(15)

straightforward integration yields a constraining relation amongst the momentum πA and

conﬁguration variables yB.

Although the central stated objective of this ﬁrst paper was to prepare the ground for a

full-scale quantization of the gravitational ﬁeld, Bergmann did note that the canonical phase

space approach oﬀered a potential new method for solving the classical particle equation of

motion problem.

Indeed, he expressed a hope shared by Einstein that through avoiding

singular ﬁeld sources, the locations of point particles, it might be possible to eliminate sin-

gularities in an eventual quantum gravitational ﬁeld theory. This hope led in the second

paper (BB49), co-authored with Brunings, to the introduction of a parameterized formal-

ism in which spacetime coordinates xµ themselves became dynamical variables.[19] For the

further development of the constrained dynamical formalism this was an unnecessary com-

putational complication. Yet several important results were obtained.

In the parameter

formalism the Lagrangian is homogeneous of degree one in the velocities. Consequently the

Hamiltonian density

vanishes identically. It was possible to ﬁnd immediately seven of the

functions of the ya and conjugate momenta πb whose vanishing follows from the Legendre
map πa(y, ˙y) := ∂L/∂ ˙ya. (The range of the index a has been expanded by four to accom-

H

modate the spacetime coordinates.) BB49 recognized that the pullback of the Hamiltonian

under the Legendre map yielded a null vector of the Legendre matrix,

∂
∂ ˙ya H

0

≡

(y, π(y, ˙y)) =

∂
H
∂yb

Λba.

(16)

But the homogeneity of the Lagrangian implies that the velocities are also components of

a null vector.

It follows that one may set ˙ya = ∂

/∂πa. Dirac would soon reach the

H

same conclusion in his parameterized ﬂat spacetime models.[20] Apparently unbeknownst

to any of the parties, Rosenfeld had already shown in 1930 that a relation of this form more

generally reﬂects the freedom to alter the velocities without aﬀecting the momenta, albeit

in models with Lagrangians quadratic in the velocities.[9] Next, considering variations of

H
independent variations at a ﬁxed time, and using the Euler -Lagrange equations, Bergmann

7

and Bruning obtain the “usual” additional Hamiltonian dynamical equations ˙πa =

∂H
∂ya
BB49 do note that there is considerable freedom in the choice of the vanishing Hamiltonian.

−

.

Given any

resulting from the homogeneity of the Lagrangian, one may multiply by an

H

arbitrary function of the spacetime coordinates, or add arbitrary linear combinations of

the remaining seven constraints without altering the canonical form of the Hamiltonian

equations. They do appear to claim, erroneously however, that the vanishing of all of

these possibilities is preserved under the evolution of a ﬁxed Hamiltonian. Unfortunately

this renders untenable the proposed Heisenberg picture quantization in which the quantum

states are annihilated by all of the constraints

.

G
In this paper we ﬁnd the ﬁrst statement of the requirement of projectability under the

Legendre transformation from conﬁguration-velocity to phase space. Only those functions

Ψ that are constant along the null directions ua of Λab have a unique counterpart in phase

space since

ua

∂
∂ ˙ya

Ψ(y, π (y, ˙y)) = ua

∂Ψ
∂pb Λba = 0.

(17)

This requirement remained a concern until it appeared to have been resolved in 1958 through

the elimination of lapse and shift variables, as described below. Only much later was the

relevance to the canonical symmetry group understood.[21, 22]

The explicit expression for the Hamiltonian was obtained by Bergmann, Penﬁeld, Shiller,

and Zatkis in following paper (BPSZ50).[23] Because of the complications ensuing in the pa-

rameterized formalism, the solution was a daunting task. The work focuses on an algorithm

for transforming the Legendre matrix into a so-called “bordered” form in which the ﬁnal

eight rows and columns are zero. We will not address the details here since much of the tech-

nology was rendered superﬂuous by the discovery by Penﬁeld, one of Bergmann’s students,

that the parameterization could be proﬁtably dispensed with. Josh Goldberg vividly recalls

the excitement, and it was he who communicated the news to their approving mentor.[26]

Penﬁeld worked with a quadratic Lagrangian of the form

so

L = ΛAρBσ(y)ya,ρyB,σ,

πA = 2ΛA0BayB,a + ΛAB ˙yB,

(18)

(19)

where ΛAB := 2ΛA0B0 is the Legendre matrix.[24] His task was to ﬁnd the appropriate linear

combination of the ˙yA such that ΛAB is transformed into a bordered matrix. In somewhat

8

more technical terms, he sought a linear transformation in the tangent space of the conﬁgu-

ration velocity space such that each null vector acquires a single non-vanishing component.

This procedure had already been undertaken by BPSZ50, but its implementation in this

context was much simpler.

Indeed, it is immediately clear from (19) that once a particular solution for H is found,

resulting in a ﬁxed ˙yA, any linear combination of the remaining constraints may be added

to H since, as also noted by BPSZ, the additional terms do not change πB. (Recall that the

gradients of constraints with respect to momenta are null vectors.)

As pointed out already by BB49, additional gauge symmetry can easily be incorpo-

rated into the formalism, resulting in as many new constraints as there are new gauge

functions. Thus both BB49 and BPSZ50 produced Hamiltonians for gravity coupled to

electromagetism.

At some time in 1950 the Syracuse group became aware of the pioneering work of Leon

Rosenfeld. Reference to Rosenfeld appears in a 1950 Proceedings abstract.[25] James An-

derson thinks it is possible that he brought the work to Bergmann’s attention[27], and

Bergmann showed the paper to Ralph Schiller. In fact, according to Schiller the paper in-

spired his doctoral thesis.[28] In any case, the culminating paper of this period by Bergmann

and Anderson (BA51) was written after the discovery, and it does appear that the authors

were motivated by it to broaden the ﬁnal scope of their published investigations of con-

strained Hamiltonian dynamics. In particular, in addition to abandoning the parametrized

theory, BA51 contemplated more general symmetry transformations, similar to those of

Rosenfeld,

¯δyA = 0fAi(x, y,

)ξi(x) +

· · ·

· · ·

+ Pf ν1···νP

Ai

(x, y,

)ξi

,ν1···νP (x).

· · ·

(20)

The BA51 collaboration was a watershed in which most of the basic elements of the for-

malism were completed. For the ﬁrst time in this paper the question was asked whether

coordinate-transformation-induced variations of the momenta are realizeable as canonical

transformations. BA51 assumed that the canonical generator density

of these symmetry

C

transformations could be written as

= 0Aiξi + 1Ai

C

∂ξi
∂t

+ PAi

+

· · ·

∂P ξi
(∂t)P ,

(21)

where the MAi are phase space functions. Thus it was necessary to show, as they did, that

the momenta variations did not depend on time derivatives of ξ of order higher that P;

9

1)P Pf ν1···νP

Bi

∂ξi

(∂t)P , but ΛAB Pf ν1···νP

Bi

vanishes

the potential oﬀending term in ¯δπA is 2ΛAB(
identically since it is the coeﬃcient of ∂P +1ξi

−

importantly, BA51 argued that since that commutator of transformations generated by
must be of the same form, the MA′
is must form a closed Poisson bracket algebra. Further-
more, they were able to show that the PAi are the constraints that follow from the momenta

C

(∂t)P +1 in the generalization of the identity (8). Most
′s

deﬁnitions. For these they introduced the term “primary constraint”. They showed that
in order for these constraints to be preserved under time evolution, all of the MA′
is were
required to vanish; again according to their terminology, P −1Ai is a secondary constraint,
P −2Ai tertiary, etc. The argument employed here is similar to the one used by Rosenfeld.

Up to this point Rosenfeld’s results are similar. He does not, however, take the next step in
which BA51 derive a partial set of Poisson relations among the MA′

is. All of these results

are displayed explicitly for gravity and a generic generally covariant model that includes

Einstein’s gravity as a special case.

PREVIEW OF SOME LATER DEVELOPMENTS

It is not possible to do justice to Bergmann’s complete oevre in constrained Hamiltonian

dynamics in this talk. I will just brieﬂy mention two important developments that will be

treated in detail elsewhere, and I will conclude with a teaser of contemporary importance.

Much eﬀort was expended in Syracuse in the 1950’s in constructing gravitational observables,

functions of canonical variables that are invariant under the full group of general coordinate

transformations.

In 1958 Paul Dirac published his simpliﬁed gravitational Hamiltonian,

achieved through a subtraction from the Lagrangian that resulted in the vanishing of four

momenta.[29] He argued that the corresponding conﬁguration variables, the lapse and shift

functions, could then simply be eliminated as canonical variables. There remained a puzzle

over the precise nature of the canonical general coordinate symmetry group. Bergmann and

Komar made considerable headway in describing this group in 1972.[30] They showed in

particular that the group must be understood as a transformation group on the metric ﬁeld.

This view was forced by the observation that the group involved a compulsory dependence

on the metric, and it was manifested in part by the appearance of metric components in the

group Poisson bracket algebra. There exists a close relation between these developments

and the so-called “problem of time” in general relativity. Are invariants under the action

10

of the group necessarily independent of time? The issue is addressed in an early exchange

between Bergmann and Dirac, with which I will close.[31] In a letter to Dirac dated October

9, 1959 Bergmann wrote “When I discussed your paper at a Stevens conference yesterday,

two more questions arose, which I should like to submit to you: To me it appeared that

because you use the Hamiltonian constraint HL to eliminate one of the non-substantive ﬁeld

variables K , in the ﬁnal formulation of the theory your Hamiltonian vanishes strongly, and

hence all the ﬁnal variables, i. e. ˜ers, ˜prs, are “frozen”, (constants of the motion). I should

not consider that as a source of embarrasment, but Jim Anderson says that in talking to you

he found that you now look at the situation a bit diﬀerently. Could you enlighten me? ”

Here is Dirac’s response, dated November 11, 1959: “If the conditions that you introduce to

ﬁx the surface are such that only one surface satisﬁes the condition, then the surface cannot

move at all, the Hamiltonian will vanish strongly and the dynamical variables will be frozen.

However, one may introduce conditions which allow an inﬁnity of roughly parallel surfaces.

The surface can then move with one degree of freedom and there must be one non-vanishing

Hamiltonian that generates this motion.

I believe my condition grsprs is of this second

type, or maybe it allows also a more general motion of the surface corresponding roughly

to Lorentz transformations. The non-vanishing Hamiltonian one would get by subtracting

a divergence from the density of the Hamiltonian.

Acknowledgements

I would like to thank the Instituto Orotava for its hospitality and the Max Planck Institute

f¨ur Wissenschaftsgeschichte for inviting me to contribute to this meeting. Thanks also to

Josh Goldberg for his critical reading of this paper and helpful comments.

[1] J. Goldberg, “Syracuse: 1949-1952”, in The Universe of General Relativity , A. J. Kox and J.

Eisenstaedt, eds. (Birkhuser, 2005)

[2] E. Noether, “Invariante Variationsprobleme”, Nachr. v. d. Ges. d. Wiss. zu G¨ottingen

1918, 235 - 257. The original article is available for download from the G¨ottingen

Digitalisierungs-Zentrum at http://gdz.sub.uni-goettingen.de/de/index.html. The original

11

German and an English translation by M. A. Tavel are also available online at

http://www.physics.ucla.edu

cwp/articles/noether.trans/german/emmy235.html.

∼

[3] P. G. Bergmann, “Non-linear ﬁeld theories”, Phys. Rev. 75, 680 - 685 (1949)

[4] W. Sledbodzinski, “Sur des equations de Hamilton”, Bulletin de l’Academie Royale de Belgique

5, 864 - 870 (1931)

[5] D. Hilbert, “Grundlagen der Physik”, Nachr. Ges. Wiss. G¨ottingen, 395 (1915). For a thor-

ough discussion see J. Renn and J. Stachel, “Hilbert’s foundation of physics: from a theory

of everything to a constituent of general relativity”, Max Planck Institut f¨ur Wissenschafts-

geschichte Preprint 118

[6] H. Weyl, Raum, Zeit, Materie, (Springer, Berlin, 1918)

[7] P. G. Bergmann, Introduction to the Theory of Relativity, (Printice-Hall, New Jersey, 1942)

[8] W. Pauli, Relativit¨atstheorie, in Enzyklop¨adie der Mathematischen Wissenschaften, volume

219, (Teubner, Leipzig und Berlin, 1921)

[9] L. Rosenfeld, “Zur Quantelung der Wellenfelder”, Ann. Phys. 5, 113-152, (1930). “Bei der

n¨aheren Untersuchung dieser Verh¨altnisse an Hand des besonders Lehrreichen Beispieles der

Gravitationstheorie, wurde ich nun von Prof. Pauli auf das Prinzip einer neuen Methode fre-

undlichst hingewiesen, die in durchaus einfacher und nat¨urlicher Weise gestattet, das Hamil-

tonsche Verfahren beim Vorhandensein von Identit¨aten auszubilden ...”

[10] L. Rosenfeld and D. C. Salisbury, “Leon Rosenfeld’s 1930 paper on constrained Hamiltonian

dynamics”, to appear. Includes an English translation and commentary

[12] C. Grunwald, “Und doch gef¨allt mir das Leben”: Die Briefe der Clara Grunwald 1941 - 1943

[11] personal communication

(Persona Verlag, 1985)

[13] Syracuse University Bergmann Archive

[14] P. G. Bergmann, Basic Theories of Physics: Mechanics and Electrodynamics (Prentice-Hall,

1949), (Dover, 1962) and Basic Theories of Physics: Heat and Quanta, (Prentice-Hall, 1951),

(Dover, 1962)

[15] personal communication with Engelbert Schucking

[16] D. C. Salisbury, ”Albert Einstein and Peter Bergmann”, in Albert Einstein: Engineer of the

Universe: One Hundred Authors for Einstein, J. Renn, ed. (Wiley-VCH, Weinheim, 2005)

[17] P. Halpern, “Peter Bergmann: the education of a physicist”, Phys. Perspect. 7, 390-403 (2005)

12

[18] As far as I can tell Bergmann’s ﬁrst explicit published reference to Noether’s theorem occurs

in his Handbuch der Physik article on general relativity: P. G. Bergmann, “The general theory

of relativity“, in Handbuch der Physik, Vol. 4, S. Fl¨ugge, ed. (Springer Verlag, Berlin, 1962)

[19] P. G. Bergmann and J. H. M. Brunings, “Non-linear ﬁeld theories II. Canonical equations and

quantization”, Rev. Mod. Phys. 21, 480 - 487 (1949)

[20] P.A. M. Dirac. “Generalized Hamiltonian dynamics”, Can. J. Math. 2, 129 - 148 (1950)

[21] J. Lee and R. M. Wald, J. Math. Phys. (N.Y.) 31, 725 (1990)

[22] J. M. Pons, D. C. Salisbury and L. C. Shepley, “Gauge transformations in the Lagrangian

and Hamiltonian formalisms of generally covariant theories,” Phys. Rev. D55, 658-668 (1997)

[gr-qc/9612037].

[23] P. G. Bergmann, R. Penﬁeld, R. Schiller, and H. Zatkis, “The Hamiltonian of the general

theory of relativity with electromagnetic ﬁeld”, Phys. Rev. 30, 81 - 88 (1950)

[24] R. Penﬁeld, “Hamiltonians without parametrization”, Phys. Rev. 34, 737 - 743 (1951)

[25] P. G. Bergmann, “Covariant quantization of nonlinear ﬁeld theories”, Proceedings of the Int.

Congress of Mathematicians, Vol. 1, 1950

[26] personal communication with J. Goldberg

[27] personal communication

[28] personal communication

[29] P. A. M. Dirac, “The theory of gravitation in Hamiltonian form”, Proc. Royal Soc. London

A246, 333 - 343 (1958). The same Hamiltonian was obtained independently at about the

same time by B. DeWitt and also by J. Anderson

[30] P. G. Bergmann and A. Komar, “The coordinate group symmetry of general relativity”, Int.

J. Theor. Phys. 5, 15 (1972)

[31] Syracuse University Bergmann Archives

13

