6
0
0
2
 
g
u
A
 
9
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
t
s
i
h
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
9
7
2
8
0
6
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

The Tenth Article of Ettore Majorana

Rosario Nunzio Mantegna1
1Dipartimento di Fisica e Tecnologie Relative, Universit`a di Palermo, Viale delle Scienze, I-90128 Palermo, Italy

This year is the centenary of the birth of Ettore Majorana, one of the major Italian physicists
of all times. In this note we brieﬂy sketch a few biographical details about Ettore Majorana and
introduce and discuss the main points of Majorana’s 10th article. In his article Majorana explicitly
considers quantum mechanics as an irreducible statistical theory because the theory is not able to
describe the time evolution of a single particle or atom in a precise environment at a deterministic
level. This lack of determinism at the level of an elementary physical system motivated him to
suggest a formal analogy between statistical laws observed in physics and in the social sciences. We
hope the occasion of the centenary of the birth of Ettore Majorana will be useful to remember and
to reconsider not only his exceptional achievements in theoretical physics but also his fresh and
original views on the role of statistical laws in physics and in other disciplines such as the social
sciences.

This year is the centenary of the birth of Ettore Majo-
rana, one of the major Italian physicists of all times. The
centenary has triggered a series of initiatives. Among
them there is the International Conference on ”Ettore
Majorana’s legacy and the Physics of the XXI century”
organized by the Dipartimento di Fisica e Astronomia of
University of Catania, Italy that will be held in Catania
on October 5-6. Another initiative of the Societ Italiana
di Fisica concerns the publication of a volume includ-
ing all Majorana’s articles both in the original language
(in most cases Italian) and in English. The volume will
also contain a brief descriptive note on each of the arti-
cles. Lastly, the International School on Complexity of
the ”Ettore Majorana Foundation and Centre for Scien-
tiﬁc Culture” of Erice, Italy co-directed by A. Zichichi,
G. Benedek, M. Gell-Mann, L. Pietronero and C. Tsal-
lis, has scheduled a Course on September 17-23 entitled
”Statistical Laws in Physics and Economics” directly in-
spired by one of Majorana’s articles, speciﬁcally his 10th
article. This article is probably the least known among
his articles.

In this note we brieﬂy sketch a few biographical details
about Ettore Majorana and introduce and discuss the
main points of Majorana’s 10th article. The biographical
notes are mainly based on information that can be found
in [1, 2]. The aim of this note is to invite the readership
of Europhysics News to consider the main message of
Majorana’s last contribution with its focus on the value
of statistical laws in physics and social sciences [3].

Ettore Majorana was born in Catania, Italy on Au-
gust 5th 1906 in a well known and inﬂuential family
of that city. His father was Fabio Massimo Majorana,
an engineer that was appointed to be General Inspec-
tor of the Italian Ministry of Communication in Rome in
1928. Fabio Massimo Majorana was the younger brother
of Quirino Majorana a renowned professor of experimen-
tal physics at Bologna University and a member of the
prestigious Accademia dei Lincei. Fabio Massimo Majo-
rana married Dorina Corso and they had two daughters
and three sons, speciﬁcally, Rosina, Salvatore, Luciano,
Ettore and Maria.

The family moved to Rome in 1921. Ettore Majorana

studied at the secondary schools ”Istituto Massimo” and
”Liceo Statale Torquato Tasso” where he obtained his
diploma. He then enrolled at the School of Engineering
of Rome University (at that time only ”La Sapienza”
University existed). At the School of Engineering he
started to interact with Emilio Segr. In 1926 Emilio Segr
moved from the School of Engineering to the Institute of
Physics where Enrico Fermi (at that time 26 years old)
was nominated to the position of full professor of Theo-
retical Physics. The same path was followed by other suc-
cessful Italian physicists such as, for example, Edoardo
Amaldi. In the new environment of physics, Emilio Segr
was often talking about the exceptional qualities of Et-
tore Majorana and meanwhile he attempted to convince
Ettore to join the group of physicists led by Enrico Fermi.
The passage of Ettore Majorana from the School of En-
gineering to the Institute of Physics did happen at the
beginning of 1928. At that time the involvement of Et-
tore Majorana as a student and then as a professional
physicist started.

Ettore Majorana was one of the greatest theoretical
physicists of the heroic period of the development of
quantum mechanics and nuclear physics in the ﬁrst half
of the last century. Ettore Majorana graduated in physics
in 1929 under the supervision of E. Fermi. During the
years from 1929 to 1933 he devoted all his energy to the-
oretical physics and produced most of his work in this
ﬁeld. In 1933 he visited Lipsia, where he positively inter-
act with W. Heisenberg, and brieﬂy Copenhagen where
he met Niels Bohr. After his return to Rome during
the fall of 1933 his involvement in theoretical physics
research declined until 1937 when he again showed an
active interest in theoretical physics by taking part in a
national examination to obtain a position of professor of
theoretical physics at Palermo University. The Commit-
tee composed of E. Fermi, O. Lazzarino, E. Persico, G.
Polvani and A. Carelli, unanimously considered his work
to be outstanding and above comparison with the work
of the other candidates and therefore proposed that the
Minister of Education should nominate E. Majorana as
a full professor for ”chiara fama”, namely outside the ex-
amination procedure. He therefore became professor of

theoretical physics at Naples University where he taught
a quantum mechanics course during the academic year
1937-38.

Ettore Majorana mysteriously disappeared in March
1938 during a trip on the ship connecting Palermo to
Naples. His body was never found although the search
for Majorana both by government oﬃcials and members
of the Majorana family continued for a long time. Enrico
Fermi had a very high estimation of him. In the letter
he wrote in 1938 to the Italian prime Minister of that
time, Benito Mussolini, asking the government to inten-
sify the support of Ettore’s research, Fermi stated ”I have
no hesitation to state to You, and I am not saying this as
an hyperbolic statement, that of all Italian and foreign
scholars that I have had the opportunity to meet, Majo-
rana is among all of them the one that has most struck
me for his deep sharpness” [2].

Majorana was not a proliﬁc author. He just pub-
lished 9 articles before his disappearance and a 10th arti-
cle, whose manuscript was found by Majorana’s brother
among his ﬁles, was published in 1942 after his disappear-
ance in the international Italian journal Scientia, through
the interest of his friend Giovanni Gentile Jr.. Nine of
these articles were written in Italian and one in German.
Italian is not a widespread language and this limitation
has prevented Majorana’s work becoming known and cor-
rectly evaluated by a vast community of scientists. I have
translated the 10th article of Majorana ”The value of sta-
tistical laws in physics and social sciences” to provide to
a broad audience of physicists the possibility of direct
access to the article. The translation was recently pub-
lished in Quantitative Finance 5, 133-140 (2005).

The article is a rather special article in several respects.
In the original presentation for Scientia, Giovanni Gen-
tile Jr. wrote that the article was originally written for a
sociology journal. This article was therefore intended to
present the point of view of a physicist about the value
of statistical laws in physics and social sciences to schol-
ars of a broad spectrum of diﬀerent disciplines such as
sociology and economics. In his article, Majorana con-
siders quantum mechanics as a fundamental and success-
ful theory able to describe the basic processes involving
single particles and atoms. He explicitly considers the
theory as a statistical theory because the theory is not
able to describe the time evolution of a single particle or
atom in a precise environment at a deterministic level.
As an example of the lack of determinism in the time
evolution of a single system he discusses the case of the
decay of a radioactive atom. This lack of determinism
at the level of an elementary physical system motivated
him to suggest a formal analogy between statistical laws
observed in physics and the social sciences. In his article,
he concludes that there is an ”essential analogy between
physics and the social sciences, between which an identity
of value and method has turned out”. These words seem
to pioneer the view that an investigation of complex sys-
tems (indeed this term is literally present in the article)
of economic or social origin might be conducted on the

2

same epistemological basis as the modeling of physical
systems.

His conclusion was considered as rather peculiar and
was accepted as a general belief by only a minority of
physicists for several years. For example in the book ”La
vita e l’opera di Ettore Majorana” [1], Edoardo Amaldi
just wrote a single sentence on this article in a biograph-
ical and scientiﬁc note of 49 pages. Even today, Ma-
jorana’s point of view might indeed still be rather un-
popular among mainstream physicists, in spite of more
than 70 years of quantum mechanics and after some ma-
jor breakthrough in the ﬁelds of critical phenomena and
chaos theory.

There is a pioneering nature of this article both from
the perspective of physics and economics. From the
physics point of view, Majorana took a clear position
about the key aspect that quantum mechanics forces sci-
entists to use a statistical description down to events in-
volving single entities. From the point of view of eco-
nomics and social sciences, there is an emphasis on the
observation that statistical laws have to be used in eco-
nomic and social modeling. It should be noted this posi-
tion was not that of the majority of scholars working in
the thirties of the last century in both the disciplines con-
sidered. In fact, during the thirties of the last century the
interaction between social sciences and natural scientists
was developed under the paradigm of celestial mechanics
(the only exception to this approach was the one pur-
sued by Louis Bachelier that at that time had no impact
on the academy [4]). This interaction goes back to the
development of general equilibrium theory pursued by
Walras, Pareto, Schlesinger and Wald. The emphasis of
Majorana on the intrinsic statistical nature of most of the
underlying processes describing natural phenomena sug-
gests that statistical laws should be incorporated into a
modeling approach to social phenomena. This approach
has eventually found its best achievement in ﬁnance with
the Black and Scholes modeling of option pricing [5].

The topic considered by Majorana in his article is
timely today for a series of reasons. First, it should
be noted that a cross-disciplinary consensus about the
epistemological value of statistical laws in diﬀerent dis-
ciplines is not easily found today. The major paradigm
of the validity of a scientiﬁc theory is still based on the
falsiﬁcation procedure of a law. It is undisputable that
this approach has been devised having in mind the most
characteristic laws in physical sciences, i.e. deterministic
laws or laws having a deterministic part (as is the case for
quantum mechanics when the time evolution of the wave
function is considered or for random walk theory when
one considers the statistical description of an ensemble of
walks). During the past years it has been progressively
realized that such an approach might not be the most
appropriate to other disciplines such as, for example, bi-
ology. For this important and successful discipline, the
nature of the laws (or sometimes theories) is often intrin-
sically related to the prevalence of indeterminacy owing
to the high frequency of stochastic processes unavoidably

3

involved and moreover a double causality (one related to
the external conditions and forces and one governed by
the amount of information inherited at the biological level
under consideration) is present in most cases [6]. Simi-
lar observations are most probably also valid for social
sciences.

Physics might certainly beneﬁt from a deeper under-
standing of the role, necessity and peculiarity of statis-
tical laws in physics. Some of the statistical laws are
eventually reinterpreted in terms of more fundamental
and deterministic laws. However there are cases when a
reduction seems to be impossible. One of these cases is
indeed quantum mechanics and other more recent exam-
ples concern the topics of chaos and critical phenomena
theory. By somewhat inverting the perspective of the re-
lations between physics, biology and the social sciences,
it might be worth discussing the possibility that physi-
cists should also start to consider as proper to their dis-
cipline the investigation of systems where the basic ele-
ments composing the system are in possession of a certain
level of internal information and are characterized by a
certain ability to react to external stimuli by properly
processing the available external information with inher-
ited or adaptive rules. Investigations of this kind have

been performed with tools of statistical physics properly
adapted or extended. For example, one of these models
is the minority game [7, 8] recently investigated within
the new research ﬁeld of econophysics [9].

In summary, the 10th article of Majorana raised the ne-
cessity of focusing the attention of several disciplines on
the value and nature of statistical laws. From physics, to
biology and to social sciences, all the scientiﬁc disciplines
present statistical laws and scholars of these disciplines
need to reﬂect about their role within each discipline.
Majorana noticed that quantum mechanics made clear
that a scientiﬁc description without statistical laws is im-
possible. Today there is still a need to assess the status of
statistical laws and to consider the validation procedures
that are most appropriate to these sorts of laws. Valida-
tion procedures probably need to be diﬀerent from those
originally devised having in mind deterministic laws.

I hope the occasion of the centenary of the birth of
Ettore Majorana will be useful to remember and to re-
consider not only his exceptional achievements in theo-
retical physics but also his fresh and original views on
the essential aspects, importance and role of statistical
laws in physics and in other disciplines such as the social
sciences.

[1] Edoardo Amaldi, La vita e l’opera di Ettore Majorana,

654 (1973).

Accademia Nazionale dei Lincei (Roma, 1966).

[2] Erasmo Recami, Il Caso Majorana, Di Renzo Editore

(Roma, 2002).

[3] Ettore Majorana, Il valore delle leggi statistiche nella ﬁsica
e nelle scienze sociali, Scientia, Quarta serie, Febbraio-
Marzo 1942 pp. 58-66. English translation in Ettore Ma-
jorana, The value of statistical laws in physics and social
sciences, Quantitative Finance 5, 133–140 (2005).

[4] Louis Bachelier, Thorie de la spculation, Ph.D. thesis in
mathematics, Annales Scientiﬁques de l’Ecole Normale
Suprieure, III-17, 21–86 (1900).

[5] Fisher Black and Myron S. Scholes, The Pricing of Op-
tions and Corporate Liabilities, J. Polit. Econ., 81, 637–

[6] Ernst Mayr, The autonomy of biology: The position of
biology among the sciences, The Quarterly Review of Bi-
ology, 71, 97-106 (1996).

[7] Damien Challet, Matteo Marsili, Yi-Cheng Zhang, Minor-
ity Games : Interacting Agents in Financial Markets, Ox-
ford University Press (2005).

[8] Anthony C.C. Coolen, The Mathematical Theory of
Minority Games : Statistical Mechanics of Interacting
Agents, Oxford University Press (2005).

[9] J. Doyne Farmer, Martin Shubik, and Eric Smith, Is Eco-
nomics the Next Physical Science?, Physics Today 58, 37-
42 (2005).

