6
0
0
2
 
g
u
A
 
0
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
t
s
i
h
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
8
0
1
8
0
6
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

The self-energy of the electron: a
quintessential problem in the development of
QED

Jo Bovy

Centre for Logic and Philosophy of Science, Ghent University, Belgium

Abstract

The development of Quantum Electrodynamics (QED) is sketched from it’s earli-
est beginnings until the formulations of 1949, using the example of the divergent
self-energy of the electron as a quintessential problem of the 1930’s-40’s. The lack
of progress towards solving this problem led researchers to believe that after the
conceptual revolution of quantum mechanics a new conceptual change was needed.
It took a war and a new generation of algorithmically inclined physicists to pursue
the conventional route of regularization and renormalization that led to the solution
in 1947-1949. Some remarks on contemporary high energy physics are made.

Key words: Scientiﬁc Discovery, Quantum Electrodynamics, Self-energy.

1 Introduction

The beginning of the twentieth century saw two conceptual revolutions in
physics that would dominate the theoretical physics of the entire century. The
ﬁrst was Einstein’s discovery of special and general relativity, that abruptly
shook our conceptions of space and time. The lesson of special relativity was
that we can no longer treat space and time as separate entities, but that they
are intermixed and that no treatment can be totally satisfactory if it does not
treat them on an equal footing. The second conceptual change was the de-
velopment of quantum mechanics, that replaced the deterministic framework
of classical physics by an essentially probabilistic one, that only allows us to
calculate the probability of an event. These two theories were developed in-
dependently from each other (though often by the same researchers). Special

Email address: jo.bovy@gmail.com (Jo Bovy).

Preprint submitted to Studies in History and Philosophy of Modern Physics16 July 2006

relativity was completed in 1905 by Einstein. This was followed by ten years of
labor on the general theory, which was presented by Einstein in 1916. Quantum
mechanics began in 1901 with the black-body radiation of Planck, but needed
more time to mature. The physicists that were concerned with it in those
early days of the ‘old quantum theory’, Bohr, Einstein, Planck, were com-
bining classical methods with new quantization principles and achieved some
level of success. But the true breakthrough in quantum mechanics would only
come when a new, younger generation of physicists stood up, who weren’t so
deeply rooted in classical physics any longer, but had grown up with the new,
revolutionary methods of quantum physics. These physicists like de Broglie,
Heisenberg, Dirac and Pauli formulated quantum mechanics in the modern
form in 1925-1927. Unlike Planck, Bohr and Einstein, who had used quanti-
zation methods in their calculations but had still arrived at exact predictions,
the new theory could only give the probability of the outcome of an experi-
ment. This conceptual change had remained out of reach for the old quantum
theory and Einstein especially has never come to terms with it.

But the problems haunting physics were certainly not all resolved by the de-
velopments of the ﬁrst decades of the twentieth century. The situation was
that there were two theories, one describing the very fast (special relativity)
and one pertaining to the very small (quantum mechanics). But electrons are
very small particles that sometimes travel at speeds near the speed of light,
and photons, the quanta of light that reappeared in quantum theory after hun-
dreds of years of a wave picture of light, always travel at the speed of light.
In these cases the two theories had to be applied both. As a consequence, the
interaction of particles with the electromagnetic ﬁeld was still poorly under-
stood. This all constituted a great need to unify the two theories in a consistent
framework. Immediately after the deﬁnite formulation of quantum theory, this
new exploration was embarked upon.

The problems were however hard to resolve. Firstly there were two possi-
ble ways to construct the new theory: quantization of the involved ﬁelds or
searching for a covariant theory of particles. The ﬁrst line of research was the
most popular and it started with de Broglie, and then moved on past the
wave mechanics of Schr¨odinger to the work of Jordan, Pauli and Heisenberg.
Their quantization methods for ﬁelds gave rise to new phenomena, such as the
creation and annihilation of particles, which was a new phenomenon, as the
number of particles is a conserved quantity in ordinary quantum mechanics.
Dirac, however, followed the path of the particles and gave a covariant equa-
tion for the behavior of the electron. One of the consequences thereof was the
existence of anti-particles. Much bigger than these early successes were the
problems of the theory. It was littered with divergences, all kinds of relevant
quantities came out inﬁnite in the theory.

The physicists that worked on quantum electrodynamics in the 1930’s were the

2

physicists that had accomplished the big conceptual breakthrough of quantum
mechanics in the 1920’s. When overwhelmed by the problems posed to them
by quantum electrodynamics, they quickly turned away from the methods
they were using and started looking for a new conceptual change. They were
very pessimistic about ﬁnding a solution to the problem of the divergences of
the theory in the existing framework and believed that new conceptual change
was needed to surpass the diﬃculties.

However, this was not what happened. The second world war started at the
end of the 1930’s, which paralyzed research and destroyed the research infras-
tructure in Europe. In the meantime a new generation of American physicists
was trained in the American research laboratories, for whom physics was all
about numbers. In these research facilities the line between experiment and
theory was a ﬁne one, especially when compared to European research cen-
ters. These physicists were all drafted to work in war laboratories, mostly the
Manhattan project and the development of the Radar, which gave them a
strong focus on their problem-solving and algorithmic capabilities. After the
war these young physicists quickly found the solution of the problems of quan-
tum electrodynamics. The methods they used were conventional rather than
revolutionary and the expected conceptual change did not take place. Their
solution consisted of regularization and renormalization and succeeded in dis-
carding the inﬁnities that had troubled the theory so much. The fact that it
took these physicists to ﬁnd the solution is found in their training during the
war. Both research paths (ﬁeld and particle) came to a theory (found respec-
tively by Julian Schwinger and Richard Feynman) and not long after, these
two approaches were shown to be equivalent (by Freeman Dyson).

In the following sections of this papers this whole evolution will be illustrated
by reconstructing the development of one of the quintessential problems of the
early quantum electrodynamics, that of the self-energy of the electron. This
is one of the numerous divergences that haunted the theory from the start
and was given much attention during the subsequent developments. When the
ﬁnal solution was falling into place both Schwinger and Feynman considered
this problem as one of the ﬁrst of their new theory (in their papers Schwinger,
1949, Feynman, 1949). We shall see how this problem showed up after the
development of quantum mechanics and what were the diﬀerent attempts at
solving it. Some attention will go to the attempts at conceptual change of the
1930’s. Then we will follow the younger physicists during the war and sketch
how they came to the ﬁnal solution.

In the ﬁnal section it will be argued that the situation of the development
of quantum electrodynamics is somewhat similar to the present situation in
theoretical high energy physics and this point will be elaborated upon a bit
more.

3

2 The global problem: a covariant quantum mechanics

As has been said before, the problem with quantum mechanics was that it
didn’t agree with the principle of relativity of Einstein’s theory, i.e. neither
Schr¨odinger’s wave mechanics nor Heisenberg’s matrix mechanics was covari-
ant. This is immediately clear when we consider the Schr¨odinger equation for
a mechanical particle without spin

i~ ∂
∂t

ψ = Hψ ; ψ

= L2(R3) ,

∈ H

here the Hamiltonian H is

H =

∆ + V (x) .

~2

−

2m

This gives a diﬀerential equation of ﬁrst order in the time derivative and of
second order in the place derivative, which can’t be Lorentzcovariant, as space
and time have to be treated equally in special relativity. A covariant version
of the Schr¨odinger equation had to be found.

2.1 The ﬁrst attempt: the Klein-Gordon equation

The ﬁrst covariant quantum mechanical equation was found by using the cor-
respondence principle of quantum mechanics together with the new insights
relativity had brought. The correspondence principle is a way to quantize clas-
sical equations, by changing space coordinates xk by multiplication operators
xkψ(x).
on the state space
The classical momenta pk, however, are replaced by diﬀerential operators:
∂
ψ(x)
ψ(x). The classical energy is substituted by the energy-diﬀerential
∂xk
→
operator i~ ∂
∂t. By making these changes, one becomes the Schr¨odinger equa-
tion out of the classical expression for the energy of a particle (E = p2
2m +V (x)),
as one can readily check.

= L2(R3). On a wave function this gives ψ(x)

→

H

~
i

In special relativity space and time coordinates are considered together and
they form covariant vectors (xµ) = (x0, x1, x2, x3) and (pµ) = (p0, p1, p2, p3)
(here x0 = ct and p0 = E/c). The correspondence principle connects these
two vectors

(1)

(2)

(3)

pµ = i~ ∂
∂xµ

4

which gives again

p0 =

pk =

E
c
~

i

= i~ ∂
c∂t
∂
∂xk

.

In special relativity the expression for the energy of a free particle is given by

This gives

E2 = m2

0c4 + p2c2 .

m2

0c2 =

E2
c2 −

p

·

p = pµpµ

(Einstein summation convention). By quantizing this equation we ﬁnd the
simplest covariant quantum mechanical equation, the Klein-Gordon equation
for a free particle with spin zero:

or by substitution

with the d’Alembertian given by

pµpµψ = m2

0c2ψ , ψ

∈ H

(cid:3) +
(cid:18)

m0c
2
~ (cid:17)

(cid:16)

(cid:19)

ψ = 0

(cid:3) = ∂µ∂µ =

∂2

3

∂2
∂x2
k

.

c2∂t2 −

Xk=1

So we see that as the Schr¨odinger equation is the quantization of the classical
expression for the energy of a particle, the Klein-Gordon equation is the quan-
tization of the relativistic expression for the energy. When we solve this Klein-
Gordon equation, we ﬁnd solutions with positive energies as well as solutions
with negative energies. This shouldn’t be surprising, because the relativistic
expression for the energy of a particle (6) has always positive and negative
solutions. In quantum mechanics these negative solutions give interpretation
diﬃculties (non-positiveness of the probability densities).

2.2 Staring into the ﬁreplace: the Dirac equation

One night Dirac was staring into a ﬁre when he suddenly thought he wanted
a relativistic wave equation that was linear in the space-time derivatives ∂µ ≡
∂
∂xµ . This equation had to have the form of ‘some linear combination of the
∂µ’s working on a ﬁeld ψ, that is equal to a constant times that ﬁeld’. When
we write this down, this becomes

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

(9)

(10)

(11)

(iγµ∂µ −

m)ψ = 0 .

5

If the γµ’s were numbers, the vector γµ would deﬁne a direction in space-time
and this would break the covariance of the theory. This is why the γµ’s can’t be
numbers. They were identiﬁed as matrices, subjected to the anti-commutation
relation

γµ, γν

= 2ηµν ,

(12)
}
with ηµν the Minkowski metric of special relativity. The wonderful thing about
this equation is that it describes the spin property of electrons, which is a
purely quantum mechanical eﬀect. This is the equation for the behavior of
spin-1/2 particles.

{

The Dirac equation, just like the Klein-Gordon equation, has negative energy
solutions that cause problems. Dirac then proposed to consider as the vacuum
state that state in which all negative energy states are ﬁlled. Then the Pauli
exclusion principle will force any extra electron to take a positive energy state.
This vacuum state is called the sea of electrons. When an electron is excited
from a negative energy state to a positive energy state, it leaves a hole in
the sea behind. Dirac proposed that this hole be considered a particle itself,
with a positive charge now. First he identiﬁed this particle with the proton,
but subsequent developments showed that this couldn’t be the case. He then
proposed that it was a new particle, identical to the electron but for its charge,
which was +e. He called it the positron. The positron was experimentally
observed in 1932 by Carl D. Anderson. This way of looking at the sea of
electrons allows us to view pair creation as an electron jumping from a negative
energy state to a positive energy state, leaving a hole, i.e. a positron, behind.
This theory became known as Dirac’s hole theory.

3 The problem: the divergence of the self-energy of the electron

The self-energy is the energy that an electron in free space, isolated from other
particles, ﬁelds, or lightquanta, possesses. In the classical theory it posed no
problem, but after the development of quantum theory, it became a critical
problem for theoretical physics. The problem was ﬁrst noted by Pauli and
Heisenberg in their papers Heisenberg & Pauli, 1929, Heisenberg & Pauli,
1930. In Weisskopf, 1939 Weisskopf gives a good review of the problem. The
self-energy of the electron is given by

W = T + (1/8π)

(E2 + H 2)dV ,

Z

(13)

with T the kinetic energy of the electron (which for a non-moving electron
is just equal to the rest-energy mc2) and E and H the electric and magnetic
ﬁeld strengths. dV is the volume-element.

In classical electromagnetism, the electric ﬁeld E of a free electron is equal to

6

e/r2, r is the distance to the electron. When we assume that the electron does
not have any spin, the magnetic ﬁeld H equals zero. The self-energy is then
given by

W

mc2 +

∼

e2
r4 dV

Z

mc2 +

Z

∼

e2
r2 dr .

(14)

If the radius of the electron were zero, this integral would run from zero to
inﬁnity and thus constitute a linear divergence 1 . When we assume that the
∞
a e2dr/r2 =
electron has a radius equal to a, the integral is calculated to be
e2/a. This is the reason why classically it was assumed that the electron has
R
a ﬁnite radius, and thus isn’t a point particle.

The development of quantum mechanics made the self-energy, however, into
a critical problem. We can discern three reasons for this:
(a) Quantum mechanics shows that the radius of the electron has to be zero,
i.e. that the electron is a point particle. This is because we can prove that the
product of the charge densities in two diﬀerent points equals a delta-function,
i.e. a function that peaks in one place and is equal to zero everywhere else. For
a free electron this means that the probability that we ﬁnd charge densities
in two diﬀerent places equals zero. Thus the charge has to be concentrated in
one point. Like we saw in the last paragraph this means that the contribution
of the electrostatic energy diverges. This divergence is linear.
(b) Relativistic quantum mechanics showed that the electron possesses an
intrinsic spin (which was ﬁrst experimentally observed by Stern and Gerlach).
Because of this intrinsic spin-property of the electron, the value of H will
not be equal to zero anymore, as the spin induces a magnetic ﬁeld and an
alternating electric ﬁeld. These contributions to the self-energy thus have to
be added to that of the electrostatic energy.
(c) Finally, quantum mechanics of the electromagnetic ﬁeld postulates the
existence of ﬁeld strength ﬂuctuations in free space. The divergence of the
self-energy as a consequence of these ﬂuctuations is bigger than that of the
e2h/mca2 for
electrostatic energy. The energy of the ﬂuctuations is Wﬂuct ∼
an electron of radius a. This constitutes a quadratic divergence.

1 Here it is said that the integral
speak of a linear divergence follows from the transformation r

∞
0 dr/r2 is linearly divergent. The reason we
1
R . We then have

R

→

which transforms the integral into

This is clearly linearly divergent.

dR/R2

dr
0

→ −
→ ∞
0

∞ →

0

Z

∞ −

dR
R2 R2 =

Z
0

∞

dR .

7

4 The self-energy in Dirac’s one-particle theory

The ﬁrst calculation of the self-energy of the electron was performed using
Dirac’s one-particle theory. This is the theory that uses the Dirac equation,
but doesn’t use the vacuum state with all negative energy states ﬁlled, as
does Dirac’s hole theory. The calculation uses standard quantum mechanical
perturbation theory to ﬁnd the e2-contribution to the self-energy. The whole
Hamiltonian of the system is split into the Hamiltonian of the unperturbed
system H0 (here the Hamiltonian of the free electron and the Hamiltonian
of the free electromagnetic ﬁeld) and the interaction Hamiltonian H ′ (here
the interaction of the electron with the electric ﬁeld). It is assumed that the
contribution of the interaction Hamiltonian is small compared to the contri-
butions of the unperturbed system. The Hamiltonian of Dirac’s one-particle
theory is given by

H = H0 + H ′
~kca∗

=

X
with the interaction term linear in A:

kǫakǫ + HCoulomb + βm + α

(p

eA)

·

−

with A the vector potential of electromagnetism and α satisfying

H ′ =

eα

A ,

−

·

αiαj + αjαi = δij .

The ﬁrst contribution to the self-energy of the electron is then given by

∆W =

|

X

2

0 >
|
En

H ′
< n
|
E0 −
n > are the unperturbed states of H0.

(19)

|

,

from standard perturbation theory.
We have

|

(20)
∓
which for large k goes like m. The matrix element from the numerator is for
large k

E0 −

En = m

k ,

−

√m2 + k2

∼
Since we can replace the sum by an integral

|

|

|

H ′

0 >

2

< n
|

e2
k

.

we ﬁnd

d3k

Xn → Z

∼ Z
0

∞

k2dk ,

∆W

∼ Z

kdk
m

,

8

(15)

(16)

(17)

(18)

(21)

(22)

(23)

Fig. 1. The self-energy of the electron to ﬁrst order. On the left the electron is at
rest. Then a virtual photon forms. On the right, the electron is at rest again.

which is a quadratic divergence. This situation is far worse than that in the
classical theory, where, as we saw, we only have a linear divergence of the
self-energy. Waller, 1930 was the ﬁrst to ﬁnd this result. Oppenheimer, 1930
and Rosenfeld, 1931 came to similar conclusions.

In ﬁgure 1 we see this situation graphically. On the left we see a free electron
at rest. A virtual photon appears, which forces the electron to have a mo-
k, because of the conservation of momentum. This photon
mentum equal to
disappears and the electron is at rest again.

−

5 Weisskopf’s calculation of the self-energy in Dirac’s hole theory

5.1 1934: calculation of the e2 contribution

Weisskopf, 1934b used Dirac’s hole theory to calculate the self-energy of the
electron to ﬁrst order . He divided the total self-energy in an electrostatic part
ES and an electrodynamic part ED. He was able to show that the contribu-
tion of the electrostatic part only constituted a logarithmic divergence, which
was better than what we just found using one-particle theory. For the electro-
dynamic part, however, he found, just as in one-particle theory, a quadratic
divergence.

Not much later he received a letter from Furry, who reported to him that he
had done the calculation of the self-energy in hole theory himself and had only
found a logarithmic divergence for the electrodynamic part. Weisskopf readily
admitted that he had made a mistake and published a correction Weisskopf,
1934a. Let’s recall the most important results found in this paper. One particle

9

theory led to

dk + ﬁnite terms

ES =

ED =

∞

c2
h Z
0
e2
h (cid:20)

m2c2
p(m2c2 + p2)1/2 log

(m2c2 + p2)1/2 + p
(m2c2 + p2)1/2

2

p −

(cid:21) Z
0

∞

dk

−

+

2e2
h(m2c2 + p2)1/2 Z
0

∞

kdk .

(24)

(25)

The divergence of the total self-energy is thus quadratic. In hole theory the
following expressions were found

e2

ES =

ED =

h(m2c2 + p2)1/2 (2m2c2 + p2)
p2)
h(m2c2 + p2)1/2 (m2c2

4
3

e2

−

Z

k0

∞

Z

k0

∞

dk
k
dk
k

+ ﬁnite terms

(26)

+ ﬁnite terms .

(27)

This is only a logarithmic divergence of the e2 term.

These results, however, could not be satisfactory. Heisenberg repeated the
calculation himself and found the same results, but in a letter to Weisskopf he
characterized this solution as “implausible and suspicious” (cited in Schweber,
1994). The reason for this was that because of relativistic invariance reasons,
one would expect an expression of the following form

ES + ED = constant

m2c2 + p2

(28)

e2
h q

dk
k

,

Z

as the expression m2c2 + p2 is relativistically invariant, whereas the sum of the
expressions in (26-27) is not. The lack of correct relativistic invariance was the
biggest problem in pre-war quantum electrodynamics.

5.2 1939: logarithmic divergence of the full self-energy

The most extensive treatment of the problem of the self-energy of the elec-
tron before the second world war was given in 1939 by Weisskopf. In Weis-
skopf, 1939 he argued that the self-energy is logarithmic divergent in every
order in hole theory. This was a major breakthrough. In 1936 Dirac, Heisen-
berg and Weisskopf had solved the problem of the vacuum polarization 2 by

2 The problem of the vacuum polarization was another problem that arose after
the development of quantum mechanics, much in the same way as the self-energy
of the electron. It is also hampered by divergences. The problem exists because vir-
tual particle/anti-particle pairs in the vacuum, when charged, constitute an electric
dipole. A electromagnetic ﬁeld orientates these dipoles.

10

using relativistically invariant subtraction principles and charge renormaliza-
tion. Kramers, Pauli and Fierz had, in addition, already given a procedure to
get rid of logarithmic divergences in 1937-1938. Weisskopf even went as far as
to claim that all divergence problems in quantum electrodynamics could be
solved by using these principles (Weisskopf, 1936).

But these new insights were never brought together to construct a diver-
gence-free hole theory, not even up to ﬁrst order. This was most probable
because the physics community in the thirties did not believe that this was
the right way to go and because serious questions were being asked about the
methods to get rid of the inﬁnities. As a reaction to a paper of Dirac, 1934 that
introduced methods to solve problems with inﬁnities, Peierls, 1934 questioned
the uniqueness of the methods to subtract inﬁnities, precisely because they
are inﬁnite. Pauli reacted shocked to a similar attempt by Heisenberg. Pauli
noted that he didn’t believe that these methods to get rid of inﬁnities could
lead to results that were not already known 3 .

The ﬁrst attempts to come to a renormalization procedure were thus not met
with a lot of enthusiasm by the European physics community. A uniﬁed theory
of radiation remained an open problem.

6 Looking for conceptual change

All the attempts in the 1930’s to solve the problem of the divergences failed.
This had much to do with the pessimism of the leading ﬁgures in physics. Bohr,
Pauli, Dirac and Heisenberg didn’t see how the problem could be solved in
the framework of quantum mechanics. They thought that the solution would
come from new concepts, in the same manner as the problems of the old
quantum theory were solved by introducing a whole new framework, i.e. the
probabilistic quantum mechanics. As early as 1930 in an article concerning the
self-energy of the electron, Heisenberg, 1930 remarked that the problem of the
divergence of the self-energy does not appear in a lattice-world, i.e. a discrete
model of space-time. He doesn’t elaborate on it any further there, because he
immediately sees the diﬃculties of this proposal, most notably that a lattice
breaks relativistic invariance.

In 1938 Heisenberg is still defending conceptual renewal. In Heisenberg, 1938
he claims that after the light speed c, that became a fundamental unit in
relativity theory, and after Planck’s constant, which rose to prominence in the
quantum mechanical revolution, the time has come for a new fundamental

3 See Miller, 1994 for a more extensive treatment of this substraction physics and
the reactions it led to.

11

constant, a fundamental length now, that would delineate the area of validity
for the classical theories, where the theory of ﬁelds and particles can be applied
without diﬃculties, and below which new phenomena will appear. He regards
the self-energy of the electron as one of the reasons for such a fundamental
length.

Many other alternative formalisms were developed at the end of the 1930’s.
Wheeler suggested that the formalism of state vectors and quantum ﬁelds
should be replaced by a formalism based on observables only, such as the S-
matrix he introduced in 1937. This S-matrix contains scattering amplitudes
(the S-matrix became a vital part of modern quantum mechanics later, and
Feynman gave easy rules to calculate its elements up to any desired order
in perturbation theory, see infra). Wheeler and Feynman also worked on a
formalism that sought to eliminate the electromagnetic ﬁeld, by deriving all
electromagnetic properties by an interaction at a distance. Dirac, radically,
suggested the use of states of negative probability.

This looking for conceptual change held the clear development of a renormal-
ization theory for divergences back, when all the ingredients to found it were
already available. When the second world war broke out, the research was
freezed and when it was ﬁnally over, the research climate had changed consid-
erably. The center of post-war physics was no longer situated in Europe, but
had moved to the United States, and the solution that hadn’t been possible
in pre-war Europe, was found by a new generation of physicists.

7 Physicists in the second world war

The second world war brought great changes with it. European research was
completely paralyzed and lots of European physicists emigrated to the United
States (viz. Einstein, Wigner). Many physicists were set to work in the war ef-
fort. This included projects like the Manhattan project and the development of
the Radar. Many of the developments in later quantum electrodynamics came
out of the eﬀorts of physicists that had worked in those war laboratories. The
head of the Manhattan project was Oppenheimer and leading the theoretical
division of the Los Alamos laboratory was Hans Bethe, who would play an
important part in the post-war developments. At the Los Alamos laboratory
we also ﬁnd a young Richard Feynman. He worked in the computation facil-
ities and he designed methods to do the great amounts of calculations that
were necessary for the development of the nuclear bomb.

At the radiation laboratory at MIT we ﬁnd Julian Schwinger during the war,
doing theoretical work concerning the radar. The insights he gained there
about radiation, he would apply to quantum mechanics after the war. Freeman

12

Fig. 2. The two slit experiment.

Dyson was working as an analyst for a British ﬁghter plane division.

We see that a lot of theoretical physicists were working on practical applica-
tions of their work during the war. This work was focussed on problem-solving
and very quantitative by nature. This way they developed crucial skills for
solving the problems of quantum electrodynamics. The problem-solving and
algorithmic nature of the work of Feynman at Los Alamos, would show in
his subsequent work on quantum electrodynamics. He would give a simple
algorithm to solve problems in it.

This emigration of prominent physicists to the United States and especially
the experience the young American physicists gained during the war, shifted
the center of scientiﬁc research after the world war to the United States.
Schwinger, Feynman and Dyson (and Tomonaga in Japan) would solve the
problems that had troubled physicists during the 1930’s in two diﬀerent ways,
which turned out to be equivalent. Thus they found the most accurate theory
known as yet.

8 1947-1950: Renormalization

During the years 1947-1950 Schwinger and Feynman both found a formal-
ism which transformed quantum electrodynamics into a sound, divergence-free
theory. The method of Schwinger was tedious and complicated, whereas Feyn-
man’s gave a simple method to solve problems concerning radiation. We shall
succinctly describe Feynman’s formalism and see how he uses it to work on
the self-energy of the electron. It all begins with a reformulation of quantum
mechanics.

13

Fig. 3. Various possibilities.

8.1 Feynman’s path-integral formulation of quantum mechanics

We can illustrate the reformulation that Feynman gave of the quantum me-
chanics of Schr¨odinger, Heisenberg and Dirac by way of a familiar example.
One of the most famous experiments in quantum mechanics is certainly the
double-slit experiment. This experiment was ﬁrst performed by Young for the
case of light waves. These were sent to a screen in which two slits were made,
and observed on a screen situated behind this ﬁrst screen (see ﬁgure 2 on the
page before). The observation Young made was that these two rays interfered
and this was thought to be a suﬃcient proof for the wave character of light. In
quantum mechanics, however, we have wave-particle duality, such that when
we sent particles to a screen with two slits, we will also ﬁnd an interference
pattern on the observation screen. This is because we have to add the am-
plitudes of the two electron paths and square them to get the probability (in
Born’s interpretation of the Schr¨odinger equation). So in ﬁgure 2 we have two
paths, we simply add the amplitudes of these two paths and square this sum.

We can now ask what happens when we drill an extra hole in the middle
screen. The solution is simple: we add the amplitude of the third path to the
sum of the ﬁrst two and square this expression to get the probability. We can
also ask what happens when we add another screen, with a couple of holes
drilled in it. This gives us the situation of ﬁgure 3. Now we have to add the
amplitudes of all the possible paths shown and square this whole expression.
This process can go on. When we add a fourth, a ﬁfth screen, when we drill
a fourth, a ﬁfth hole in each screen, we always have to consider all possible
paths and add amplitudes. When we add an inﬁnity of screens, the whole
space will be ﬁlled, when we drill an inﬁnity of holes in a screen, the screen
will disappear. This way we ﬁnally see that we have to add the amplitudes of
all possible paths between s and o that the particle can take (see ﬁgure 4 on the
next page). This is the possible-paths interpretation of quantum mechanics of

14

Fig. 4. All possible paths.

Feynman.

Of course, this has to be formalized, and when we do this we get an integral
over all possible paths, with the amplitude of a path given by eiS, with S the
classical action of the path, which is given by an integral over the kinetic energy
minus the potential energy of the particle (this last sum is the Lagrangian L).
We ﬁnd that the probability is given by the expression

Dq(t)ei

Z

T
0 dtL( ˙q,q)
R

(29)

8.2 The self-energy of the electron in Feynman’s QED

When we use this formulation and replace the classical action by a relativistic
invariant one for ﬁelds, we become a quantum ﬁeld theory. We can do this for
ﬁelds described by the Klein-Gordon equation as well as for ﬁelds described
by the Dirac equation. The problem then reduces to calculating the integral
(29). It is, however, not possible to calculate this integral exactly, so it has
to be calculated approximately, by expanding it in orders of the coupling
constants (for quantum electrodynamics this is the ﬁne-structure constant
α = e2
1/137). Feynman gave simple rules to construct the terms in this
expansion for a given problem. One simply draws the situation one would like
to calculate, for example the e2 contribution leads to the diagram 1 on page 9,
and then the Feynman rules tell us how to associate expressions with these
particles, lines and nodes. For the matrix-element of the e2 contribution to the

~c ≈

15

self-energy we get the following, complicated expression

1/2

d4k
(2π)4

4



m
p0

¯ur′
(p)
(2π)3/2 

ur(p)
(2π)3/2 




i2γµγν ·

i
(2π)4

·

1/2

,

m
p0





e2

Z

1
2π









but what is important is that this behaves as

/k + m

/p
−
k)2

(p

−

−

m2 + iε ·

igµν
−
k2 + iε

for large k.

d4k

/k
k4

Z

(30)

(31)

Thus it seems that we have a linear divergence. Because of the symmetry of
the integral, however, this contribution vanishes, which leads to a logarithmic
divergence.

Feynman, 1949 is able to show, using this formalism, that the ﬁrst order
correction to the self-energy of the electron is ﬁnite. He uses a modiﬁcation
of quantum electrodynamics, in which the Dirac-function that appears in his
expression, is replaced by a function of small width and great height (that thus
approximates a Dirac-function 4 ). This way he avoids the divergence coming
from this singularity.

As his solution is long and tedious, it is perhaps more instructive to give some
cursory remarks regarding the process of regularization and renormalization.
For example, we can solve a logarithmic divergence by this procedure as fol-
lows. Regularization states that one should not expect this theory to hold to
arbitrarily high energies, the theory only holds up to some value for the energy,
say Λ. This transforms the integral to

Λ

d4k

1
k4 .

Z

(32)

We can interpret this Λ as the value at which the expansion is not valid
anymore. At the value Λ the second term in the expansion becomes as large
as the ﬁrst term. Then one can not claim any longer that this expansion will
give accurate results. This drops the inﬁnities, but we do introduce a new,
unknown constant Λ.

Here comes renormalization into play. What we measure are of course physical
quantities. When we couple theory to experiment, we have to express the

4 A Dirac-function is not a function in the mathematical sense of the word. It is
actually a distribution, but is generally referred to by physicists as a function. The
Dirac-distribution can be approximated by a variety of mathematical functions.

16

theoretical results in terms of the physical couplings. When we do this we see
that the constant Λ vanishes from the expressions.

For instance, using the example of vacuum polarization, we see that this po-
larization eﬀects the charge density of the electron. That way, it changes the
charge of the electron, because the charge is the integral over the charge den-
sity. As a consequence, the charge of the electron will not longer equal e. When
we now want to express results of vacuum polarization, we shouldn’t use e,
which is the theoretical coupling, but the physical coupling, i.e. the changed
value of the charge. Expressing the theoretical results by using the physical
couplings rather than the theoretical ones, produces ﬁnite results (since the
inﬁnities cancel in the process of rewriting the expressions in terms of the
physical couplings).

9 Conclusion

We have seen how applying quantum mechanics to the interaction between
ﬁelds and particles led to problems that were apparently out of reach of the
quantum theory. The theory that was developed in the thirties of the previous
century, was haunted by a lot of divergences, that couldn’t be of a physical
nature. The European physicists had no trust in the methods used up to
then and thought that only a new conceptual change could lead to a solution
of these problems. It took a new generation of American physicists, trained
with a strong emphasis on the algorithmic and problem-solving aspects of
physics, to see that the solution could be found in a conventional manner,
by disposing of the divergences by renormalization. This way they developed
quantum electrodynamics, and more generally, quantum ﬁeld theory.

In the 1950’s and 1960’s quantum ﬁeld theory was developed further and ap-
plied to the other forces of nature. Using gauge theories a uniﬁcation of all
known forces except gravity was achieved. Weinberg, Salam and Glashow uni-
ﬁed the electromagnetic force with the weak nuclear force using quantum ﬁeld
theory. The strong nuclear force was described as a quantum ﬁeld theory in
quantum chromodynamics (QCD). This eventually led to the grand uniﬁcation
theories (GUT’s) that uniﬁed these three forces in one consistent framework.

The only remaining force that eluded the quantum mechanical framework was
gravity. A quantum ﬁeld theory for gravity can not be renormalizable. Empha-
sis in the last twenty years of the twentieth century in high-energy physics was
on the problem of ﬁnding this quantum description and unifying all forces in
one theory. Highest hopes in the theoretical physics community rest on string
theory. This theory is founded on the principles of quantum ﬁeld theory, but
the basic entities aren’t particles anymore, but one-dimensional strings. It

17

is hoped that this ﬁeld theory will give a consistent quantum description of
gravity. String theory has as virtues that it naturally contains a spin-2 par-
ticle, a particle that can function as the graviton, the messenger-particle of
gravity and that it provides a framework to unify all four forces of nature.
String theory, however, has still a lot of problems. For instance, it predicts
that space-time has ten dimensions, instead of the usual four. The search for
the solution of these problems already takes up a few decades.

In certain aspects, the situation we see today is similar to the situation that
confronted physicists in the 1930’s. The problem then was unifying the theory
of special relativity with the quantum theory, and the problem today is uni-
fying the theory of general relativity with the quantum theory. The problems
then, the divergences, seemed unsolvable, and the problems today again make
the physical interpretation of the theory diﬃcult, e.g. the extra dimensions.
The manner in which a solution is sought, however, is completely diﬀerent.
The leading physicists of the 1930’s had brought about the conceptual change
of quantum theory and believed that only a new conceptual change could lead
to satisfying results. We saw that this judgement was mistaken. The physicists
that started the research for a quantum mechanical description of gravity in
the second half of the twentieth century, were physicists who had accomplished
many successes with quantum ﬁeld theory. It was only natural for them to look
for a solution using the framework of quantum ﬁeld theory, which led them
to string theory. However, now that we see that this theory does not arrive at
a solution, we may ask whether it could not be that this time we do need a
conceptual change.

I would like to thank Prof. Joke Meheus of Ghent University for helpful com-
ments on a ﬁrst draft.

Acknowledgements

References

Dirac, P. A. M. (1934). Discussion of the inﬁnite distribution of electrons in
the theory of the positron. Proceedings of the Cambridge Philosophical
Society, 30, 150-163. (Reprinted in (Miller, 1994))

Feynman, R. P. (1949). Space-time approach to Quantum Electrodynamics.

Physical Review, 76, 769. (Reprinted in (Schwinger, 1958))

Heisenberg, W. (1930). Die Selbstenergie des Elektrons. Zeitschrift f¨ur Physik,

65, 4-13. (Reprinted in English translation in (Miller, 1994))

18

Heisenberg, W. (1938). ¨Uber die in der theorie der Elementarteilchen auftre-
tende universelle L¨ange. Annalen der Physik, 32, 20-33. (Reprinted in
English translation in (Miller, 1994))

Heisenberg, W., Pauli, W. (1929). Zur Quantendynamik der Wellenfelder.

Heisenberg, W., Pauli, W. (1930). Zur Quantentheorie der Wellenfelder. II.

Miller, A. I. (1994). Early Quantum Electrodynamics: A source book. Cam-

Zeitschrift f¨ur Physik, 56, 1-61.

Zeitschrift f¨ur Physik, 59, 168-190.

bridge University Press.

matter. Physical Review, 35, 461.

Oppenheimer, J. (1930). Note on the theory of the interaction of ﬁeld and

Peierls, R. (1934). The vacuum in Dirac’s theory of the positive electron.

Proceedings of the Royal Society (A), 146, 420-441.

Rosenfeld, L. (1931). Zur Kritik der Diracschen Strahlungstheorie. Zeitschrift

f¨ur Physik, 70, 454-462.

Schweber, S. S. (1994). QED and the men who made it: Dyson, Feynman,

Schwinger, and Tomonaga. Princeton University Press.

Schwinger, J. (1949). Quantum Electrodynamics. II. Vacuum polarization

and self-energy. Physical Review, 75, 651.

Schwinger, J. (Ed.). (1958). Selected papers on Quantum Electrodynamics.

Dover Publications, Inc.

Waller, J. (1930). Bemerkungen ¨uber die Rolle der Eigenenergie des Elektrons

in der Quantentheorie der Strahlung. Zeitschrift f¨ur Physik, 62, 673.

Weinberg, S.

(1995). The quantum theory of ﬁelds (Vol. 1). Cambridge

University Press.

Weisskopf, V.

(1934a). Berichtigung zu der Arbeit:¨uber die Selbstenergie
des Elektrons. Zeitschrift f¨ur Physik, 90, 817-18. (Reprinted in English
translation in (Miller, 1994))

Weisskopf, V. (1934b). ¨Uber die Selbstenergie des Elektrons. Zeitschrift f¨ur
Physik, 89, 27-39. (Correction (Weisskopf, 1934); Reprinted in English
translation in (Miller, 1994))

Weisskopf, V. (1936). ¨Uber die Eelektrodynamik des Vakuums auf Grund
der Quantentheorie des Elektrons. Kongelige Danske Videnskabernes
Selskab, Mathematisk-fysiske Meddelelser XIV (No. 6).
(Reprinted in
(Schwinger, 1958); Reprinted in English translation in (Miller, 1994))

Weisskopf, V. (1939). On the self-energy and the electromagnetic ﬁeld of the
electron. Physical Review, 56, 72. (Reprinted in (Schwinger, 1958))

Zee, A.

(2003). Quantum ﬁeld theory in a nutshell. Princeton University

Press.

19

