Ludwig Edward Boltzmann

S. Rajasekar

School of Physics, Bharathidasan University,
Tiruchirapalli – 620 024, Tamilnadu, India∗

Department of Physics, H.H. The Rajah’s College,

Pudukottai 622 001, Tamilnadu, India

N.Athavan

Abstract

In this manuscript we present a brief life history of Ludwig Edward Boltzmann and his achive-

ments. Particularly, we discuss his H-theorem, his work on entropy and statistical interpretation

of second-law of thermodynamics. We point out his some other contributions in physics, charac-

teristics of his work, his strong support on atomism, character of his personality and relationship

with his students and ﬁnal part of his life.

Keywords: Boltzmann; H-theorem; entroy; second-law of thermodynamics

6
0
0
2
 
p
e
S
 
7
 
 
]
h
p
-
t
s
i
h
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
7
4
0
9
0
6
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

∗Electronic address: rajasekar@physics.bdu.ac.in

1

I.

INTRODUCTION

Boltzmann was born on 20 February 1844 in Vienna, Austria. He was born during the

night between Shrove Tuesday and Ash Wednesday. Boltzmann used to say that this was

the reason for the violent swing of his mood from one of great happiness to one of deep

depression. His father Ludwig George Boltzmann was a taxation oﬃcer. His mother was

Katharina Pauernfeind. After his birth his parents moved to Wels and then to Linz. He

attended a high school at Linz. When he was ﬁfteen his father died while his mother died

in 1885. He studied physics at the University of Vienna. He was awarded a Ph.D. degree in

1866 for his work on the kinetic theory of gases supervised by Josef Stefan.

Like molecules, he never stayed very long in any place. He moved from one academic post

to another because the polar opposites of his personality gave him no peace. From 1866 to

1869, he worked as a lecturer in Vienna. In 1869 he was appointed as chair of theoretical

physics at the University of Graz. He visited Gustav Kirchhoﬀ and Helmholtz in 1871. He

accepted chair of mathematics at Vienna in 1873. Three years after he returned to Graz and

became chair of experimental physics. Here he met his wife Henriette von Aigentler. She

was the ﬁrst female student at the University. They had ﬁve children, three daughters and

FIG. 1: Ludwig Edward Boltzmann

2

two sons. In 1890 he joined as professor at the University of Vienna. In 1893 Stefan died and

Boltzmann succeeded him as professor of theoretical physics in his native Vienna. He went

to the University of Leipzig in 1900 but returned to Vienna in 1902 because of his dislike

of working with Ernst Mach. The Emperor Francis Joseph reappointed him in Leipzig on

condition that Boltzmann should not accept a position outside the Empire in future.

Inﬂuenced by the work of Stefan, Loschmidt, Clausius and Maxwell, Boltzmann began

to work on the kinetic theory of gases. He found the energy distribution for gases in 1866.

In the year 1871 he formulated the ergodic hypothesis, which formed a basis for the modern

version of statistical physics.

In the next year, he came up with the famous transport

equation. In the same year he derived the H-theorem which established a connection between

thermodynamics and mechanics. His inﬂuence was central to Max Planck’s work on black

body radiation, Gibbs’ 1902 formulation of statistical mechanics and Einstein’s work on the

light quantum and on Brownian motion. He explained in statistical terms the second-law

of thermodynamics. Boltzmann’s work received mixed reactions during his lifetime. For

years Boltzmann was forced to defend his work against the fairly widespread philosophy of

scientiﬁc positivism that denied the value of scientiﬁc theory and the reality of anything

that could be directly observed. Schr¨odinger regarded the Boltzmann line of thought as his

ﬁrst love in science. He said, No other has ever thus enraptured me or will ever so again.

II. H-THEOREM

In 1872 he published one of his most important papers containing H-theorem and Boltz-

mann transport equation. This theorem provided the ﬁrst probabilistic expression for the

entropy of an ideal gas. He introduced probability theory in the context of gas theory. The

number of particles in a gas is very enormous and their movements are so swift that one

can observe nothing but average values. The calculation of averages is the province of prob-

ability calculus. When pointing out what he means by probability he wrote: If one wants

to buildup an exact theory ... it is before all necessary to determine the probabilities of the

various states that one and the same molecule assumes in the course of a very long time

and that occur simultaneously for diﬀerent molecules. That is, one must calculate how the

number of those molecules whose states lie between certain limit relates to the total number

3

of molecules.

(1)

(2)

He modeled the gas molecules as hard spheres and represented the state of the gas by a
time-dependent distribution function of molecular velocities, f (−→v , t). This function repre-
sents at each time the relative number of molecules with velocity −→v . Then with some as-

sumptions ﬁnally he arrived at an equation now called Boltzmann transport equation which
determines the evolution of f (−→v , t):

∂f
∂t

∂f
∂x

+ v

+ F

=

∂f
∂v

,

collision

∂f
∂t (cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)

where F is a force. The right hand side of the above equation represents the eﬀect of collision.

The above equation completely describes the dynamics of an ensemble of gas particles, given

appropriate boundary conditions. He introduced a time-dependent function H as

H =

f ln f dv,

dv = dvxdvydvz.

Z

He arrived at the H-theorem which states that H can never evolve in an increasing direction.

The rate of change of H, dH/dt, is either negative or zero: dH/dt ≤ 0. Negative sign

implies that H is decreasing while dH/dt = 0 represents equilibrium. That is, H is a

negative function always decreasing until the system reaches the equilibrium and H follows

the irreversible evolution of a gaseous system. According to him entropy S is proportional

to −H.

Boltzmann’s argument appeared to be completely mechanical in nature. Loschmidt ar-

gued that the equations of mechanics do not change when t is reversed (replace t by −t)

implying that physical processes could go backward and forward with equal probability.

Boltzmann constructed his statistical theory by showing that the probability that a sys-
tem of molecules with total energy E is proportional to e−hE where h is a parameter function

of temperature only. This Boltzmann factor evolves in phase space. The probability dP for

a system to be in a state represented by points within an element dw is

dP = Ae−hEdw,

(3)

where A is a constant. e−hE indicates that the probability for occupying a given energy

state decreases exponentially with energy. The term h is obtained as 1/kT . The term kT

4

implies that for a high temperature, it is more probable that a given molecule can be found

with energy E. Since total probability is one we get

or

Then

entropy S is

1 =

dP = A

Z

Z

e−hEdw

A = 1

. Z

e−hEdw.

dP =

e−hEdw
e−hEdw

.

R

S =

Z

SdP = R
R

Se−hEdw
e−hEdw

.

Suppose S is an entropy value and the corresponding probability is dP . Then the average

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

III. ENTROPY AND STATISTICAL INTERPRETATION OF SECOND-LAW OF

THERMODYNAMICS

Boltzmann’s most outstanding contribution in physics was the development of classical

statistical mechanics to explain how the properties of atoms determine the macroscopic

properties and behaviour of the substances of which they were the building blocks. He

derived the second-law of thermodynamics from the principles of mechanics. He argued

that the only way to derive thermodynamics from mechanics was to visualize gas as made

of atoms. But many great physicists and chemists of his time strongly criticised the concept

of atoms.

Boltzmann published his statistical interpretation of the second-law of thermodynamics

in 1877. Boltzmann wrote this paper in response to objections from Loschmidt who said

that the H-theorem singled out the direction in time in which H-decreases, whereas the

underlying mechanics was the same whether time ﬂowed forwards or backwards.

In this

paper his famous equation S = k ln W , ﬁrst appeared. Max Planck based the derivation of

his black body radiation formula on this equation. This equation connects the entropy S to

the logarithm of the number of microstates, W , that a given macroscopic state of the system

can have, with k now being known as Boltzmann’s constant. According to him entropy must

5

in general increase for an isolated system and showed how such irreversible behaviour could

follow from the time-symmetric laws of mechanics.

Let us now illustrate Boltzmann’s notion of entropy. Consider a macroscopic system

such as a gas in a box characterized by a set of macroscopic variables M. These variables

may be volume, temperature and number of particles or molecules. The state of each

molecule could be represented by assigning three position components and three momentum

components. The state is represented in a six-dimensional phase space. We can alter the

positions and momentum of the particles (constituting microscopic states) in several ways

without modifying the macrostate M. Such alterations of microstates can occur constantly

in a gas, that is, without change in the macroscopically measurable properties. Suppose

we denote W as the number of microstates to the macrostate M. Boltzmann deﬁned the
entropy as S = k ln W , where k = 1.3806505 × 10−23JK −1 is the Boltzmann’s constant and

W = N!/

iNi! where i ranges over all possible molecular conditions and N is the number

Q
of identical particles.

The essential reason for introducing logarithm here is to make the entropy an additive

quantity, for independent systems. Thus, for two independent systems, the total entropy of

the combined system is the sum of the entropies of each separate system. This is because

if the two systems belong to volumes A and B, in their respective phase spaces, then the

phase space volume for the two together becomes AB since each possibility for one system

has to be separately counted with each possibility for the other giving the entropy of the

combined system as the sum of the entropies of the individual systems.

The second-law of thermodynamics states that the entropy of an isolated system not at

equilibrium will tend to increase over time approaching a maximum value. The mathematical

statement of the second-law is dS/dt ≥ 0 on average. Essentially, entropy of the universe

always increases in any naturally occurring physical process. The greatest achievement

of Boltzmann was his explanation for the above. Boltzmann thought that the increase

in entropy S of a system is an indication that the particles of the system are essentially

moving from a less probable to a more probable arrangement. The state of maximum

probability is the equilibrium state and in this state the entropy is a maximum. He assumed

that the probability is proportional to number of diﬀerent complexions, W of the particles,

6

for example, the number of ways in which a total energy E could be divided among N

molecules. One can divide the phase space into number of volume elements or cells with all

having the same volume. The number of distinct ways of performing an ordered selection

of one molecule from N molecules is simply N. But the number of distinct ways we can

choose two molecules out of N in a speciﬁc order is N(N − 1). Now selecting n molecules

in a speciﬁc order is N!/(N − n)!. The number of ways of choosing two molecules from N

without regard to order is N(N − 1) divided by the number of ways two molecules can be

ordered, which is 2!. Reasoning along this line the number of ways of choosing n molecules

from N molecules without regard to order is N!/(n!(N − n)!). If the cells are numbered as

1,2,. . . j, the number of ways of selecting N1 molecules from N molecules and placing them

in cell 1, then selecting N2 molecules from the remaining N − N1 molecules and placing

them in cell 2, . . . and selecting Nj molecules from the N − Nj molecules and placing them

in the cell j is

ωj =

=

.

N!
N!(N − N1)!
N!
N1!N2! . . . Nj!

.

(N − N2)!
N2!(N − N1 − N2)!

. . .

Nj!
Nj!0!

(8)

(9)

Then W , the total number of distribution is obtained by summing over all the particular

distributions ωj. One obtains

S = k ln

ωj = k ln

Xj

N!
N1!N2! . . . Nj!

.

Xj

Since the number of molecules in any macroscopic volume of gas is very large we can take
the largest term say w∗, in eq.(2) and neglect the others. Then we get S = k ln ω∗.

Loschmidt stated that Boltzmann’s molecular interpretation of the second-law was in

doubt. Boltzmann replied that his argument was not completely based on mechanics but

also on the laws of probability. He proposed that the probability for a certain physical state

of a system is proportional to a count of the number of ways the inside of the system can

be arranged so that from the outside it looks the same. When the energy quanta is allowed

to be inﬁnitesimally small he found ln W ∝ −H. Then S ∝ ln W .

Boltzmann’s theoretical argument may appear abstract and diﬃcult to understand but

his conclusion, namely, the entropy-disorder connection is easily to follow. We note that

7

order and disorder and hence entropy are parts of our everyday life. At a temperature

molecules in steam are more disorder than those in liquid water. Consequently the entropy

of steam is larger than the liquid water. On the other hand, water molecules in the liquid

are more disordered than those in ice. Hence, liquid water has more disorder than ice. An

ordered pack of cards has low entropy but if they got shuﬄed the result is the disorder and

higher entropy.

IV. SOME OTHER CONTRIBUTIONS IN PHYSICS

In 1879, Josef Stefan experimentally discovered the law which is now known as Stefan–

Boltzmann law . This law states that the total energy radiated per unit surface area of a

black body in unit time is directly proportional to the fourth power of its temperature. This

law was then theoretically derived by Boltzmann in 1884. Stefan used this law to determine

the temperature of the surface of sun. This law can be used to calculate the radius of a star

and occurred in the thermodynamics of black holes.

According to Boltzmann the viscosity of a gas must depend on the mean free path, that

is, the average distance a molecule moves between two successive collisions. For hydrogen,
its value is about 17 × 10−6 cm. The frequency of collision is of the order of 109 per second.

The very high value of the frequency is one reason for the slow diﬀusion of gases in spite of

the great velocity of the molecules.

He made a signiﬁcant contribution to the topic of kinetic theory of gases. He formulated

the general law for the distribution of energy in a system at a certain temperature. He

arrived at the Boltzmann distribution function for the fractional number of particle Ni/N

occupying a set of states i which each have energy Ei is

Ni/N =

exp[−Ei/kT ],

gi
Z(T )

(10)

where k is the Boltzmann constant, T is temperature, gi is the degeneracy or number

of states with energy Ei, N is

i Ni and Z is called the partition function given by
j gjexp[−Ej/KT ]. The distribution applies only to particles at a high temperature and
In a continuum limit, if there are

P
low density so that quantum eﬀects can be ignored.

P

g(E)dE states with energy E to E + dE, the Boltzmann distribution predicts a probability

8

distribution for the energy

g(E)e−E/kT dE
g(E′)e−E′/kT dE′ .

p(E)dE =

R

(11)

The theoretical interpretation of the Dulong Petit rule was given by Boltzmann based

on equipartition theorem of classical statistical mechanics. In 1871 Boltzmann showed that

the average kinetic energy equals the average potential energy for a system of particles each

one of which oscillates under the inﬂuence of external harmonic forces. In 1876 he applied

these results to a three dimensional lattice. He got the average energy as 3RT= 6 cal/mol.

Hence Cv the speciﬁc heat at constant volume equal 6 cal/mol. deg. His result was in good

agreement with experiment for all simple solids except for carbon, boron and silicon.

V. CHARACTERISTICS OF WORK

A characteristic of his work was that many of his papers were written in great detail.

Forbiddingly long with tedious calculations and lacked a clear coherent structure. His 1872

paper on H-theorem and the Boltzmann equation is about 87 pages long. In 1872 he wrote

to his mother that hardly anyone was able to follow him-apart from Helmholtz. In 1873,

Maxwell wrote to his colleague Peter Tait: By the study of Boltzmann I have been unable

to understand him. He could not understand me on account of my shortness and his length

was and is an equal stumbling block to me. Once Felix Klein of G¨ottingen asked Boltzmann

to contribute an article for the encyclopedia. He hesitated for a long time. Finally Klein

wrote to him if he did not do that, he would ask Zermelo to write the article. Zermelo was

one among the physicists who opposed the views of Boltzmann. Immediately Boltzmann

accepted the assignment.

He pursued many lines of thought. Jos Uﬃnk wrote: He would follow a particular train

of thought that seemed promising and fruitful, only to discard it in the next paper for another

one, and then pick it up again year later... it makes it hard to pin down Boltzmann on a

particular set of rock-bottom assumptions, that would bring his true colours in the modern

debate on the foundations of statistical physics.

9

VI. STRONG SUPPORTER OF ATOMISM

In his period any attempt at all to account macroscopic phenomena in terms of under-

lying microscopic process was regarded as suspicious. Some physicists and chemists began

in search of atomic explanations, while theologically oriented philosophers and positivists

dug into preserve their concepts of that atoms were not really real . Those advocating the

concept of atoms were labeled materialists by classical philosophers. By introducing and

obtaining the expression for the Boltzmann factor, Boltzmann became a strong supporter of

the reality of atoms. Opposition to his ideas was formidable. Many scientists misunderstood

Boltzmann’s ideas without grasping the nature of his reasoning. In his lectures on kinetic

theory of gases he told his students how much diﬃculty and opposition he had encountered

and how he had been attacked from the philosophical side.

He defended atomic view of matter which was disapproved by Ernst Mach and Ostwald.

Jacob Bronowskii wrote: Who could think that, only in 1900, peoples were battling, one

might say to the death, over the issue whether atoms are real or not. The great philoso-

pher Ernst Mach in Vienna said, ‘No’. The great chemist Wiehelm Ostwald said, ‘No’.

And yet one man, at the critical turn of the century, stood up for the reality of atoms on

fundamental grounds of theory. He was Ludwig Boltzmann .... However, Boltzmann and

Ostwald remained close friends and in fact in 1902 Ostwald took steps to appoint Boltz-

mann in his University in Leipzig. Mach’s objections to the atomic theory were of basically

a philosophical nature. He considered atoms as something like mathematical functions.

Ostwald thought that atoms were ﬁgments of the mathematics and the energy concept

could be useful to formulate grand scheme. George Helm also supported Ostwald’s belief.

Since no direct evidence for the existence of atoms and molecules is known at that time Ernst

Mach opposed Boltzmann’s ideas based on atoms. In a meeting in 1890, Ostwald attempted

to convince Boltzmann the superiority of his energetics theory over atomism. Boltzmann

boldly and suddenly replied that he saw no reason why energy should not be regarded

as divided atomicity. In 1895 at a meeting in L¨ubeck, W. Ostwald in his presentation of

a talk entitled The superseding of scientiﬁc materialism stated: The actual irreversibility

of natural phenomena thus proves the existence of processes that cannot be described by

mechanical equations and with this the verdict on scientiﬁc materialism is settled . Ostwald

10

believed that atoms could not be measured and even if Boltzmann had a mathematical

language to juggle pictures of matter, this picture of reality was not to be taken as truth.

He further argued that to relate realities, demonstrable and measurable quantities, to each

other so that when some are given, the others may be deduced, that is the task of science.

Ostwald did not want to accomplish this task by hypostatizing some hypothetical picture,

but only by proving relations of mutual interdependence between measurable quantities.

Sommerﬁeld who attended the L¨ubeck meeting said: ... The struggle between Boltzmann

and Ostwald resembled the battle of the bull against the ﬂexible matador. But this time, the

bull won the matador in spite of all his ﬁghting skill. Boltzmann’s arguments penetrated.

We, all the younger mathematicians, stood at Boltzmann’s side.

Loschmidt and Zermelo raised serious criticism on Boltzmann’s work. Loschmidt was

Boltzmann’s former teacher and later colleague at the University of Vienna and a good friend

to him. Loschmidt is famous for his estimation of size of atoms. His prime objection was

on the prediction of Boltzmann that a gas column in thermal equilibrium in a gravitational

ﬁeld has the same temperature at all heights.

In 1904, at the world’s fair in St.Louis, Boltzmann told: No physicist today believes atoms

are indivisible. But the work of Einstein and Perrin brought the end of the war against atoms

and molecules. Albert Einstein in 1905 and Jean Perrin in 1908 carried out detailed studies

of Brownian motion, the random movement of particles suspended in a liquid, visible under

the microscope. They related the movement of suspended particles to the number and

energy of the molecules in the liquid which were hitting them. They found a value for the

number of molecules in a mole that was consistent with experiments. The direct relationship

between the heat energy of atoms and the mechanical energy of Brownian particles provided

complete evidence to Boltzmann’s interpretation of thermodynamic laws. Einstein stated

that molecules of a certain kind could be seen, counted and followed. But Boltzmann was

unaware of the theory of Einstein. Finally, Ostwald accepted the concept of atom and in

1909 he wrote in his outlines of general chemistry: I am now convinced that we have recently

become possessed of experimental evidence of the discrete or grained nature of matter which

the atomic hypothesis sought in vain for hundreds and thousands of years.

11

VII. CHARACTER OF PERSONALITY AND RELATIONSHIP WITH STU-

DENTS

He was always very soft hearted but suﬀered from an alternation of depressed moods with

elevated, expansive or irritable moods. His physical appearance being short and stout with

curly hair seemed to ﬁt his personality. His ﬁancee called him her sweet fat darling. He was

a great lover of music and was a talented pianist. He was a great teacher and his lectures

were lively, clear and fascinating. He often used stimulating anecdotes. His students were at

liberty to ask questions and even to criticize him. He never played up his superiority. He was

against dogmatism and made every eﬀort to remove dogmatic views in both scientiﬁc and

philosophical thoughts. He was open and informal with his students, very sensitive to their

needs and aroused admiration and aﬀection on his students. When oﬀering his mechanics

course to students in 1902, he said: everything (of the course) I have. ... myself, my entire

way of this thinking and feeling ... strict attention, iron discipline, tireless strength of mind.

But forgive me if I ask you that which means most to me: for your trust, your aﬀection,

your love in a world, further most you have the power to give, yourself .

According to Lise Meitner, his relationship to students was very personal. He not only

saw their knowledge of physics but tried to understand their character. Formalities meant

nothing to him, and he had not reservations about expressing his feelings. The new students

who took part in the advanced seminar were invited to his house from time to time. There he

would play for the students–he was a very good pianist. He shared his personal experiences

with his students.

VIII. FINAL PART OF HIS LIFE

Towards the end of his life his health deteriorated. He had asthma, headaches, poor eye

sight, angina pains. His eyes became so weak that he had diﬃculty in reading and employed

an assistant to read scientiﬁc articles for him. His wife wrote his manuscript. During 1906

he announced lectures for the summer semester but canceled them because of his nervous

condition. With his wife and daughter he visited a place at the Bay of Duino near Trieste on

September 6, 1906. When his wife and daughter were enjoying swimming he hanged himself.

He had made an earlier suicide attempt when he was at Leipzig. Physicists everywhere were

12

devastated by the news that Boltzmann, in deep depression, had committed suicide.

His act was diﬃcult for many physicists to understand. His suicide seems to have been due

to factors in his personal life (depressions and decline of health) rather than to any academic

matters. Depressed and in bad health, he committed suicide just before experiment veriﬁed

his work.

In a tribute to Boltzmann, Ostwald described Boltzmann as a victim of the

immense sacriﬁces of health and strength demanded of those who struggle for scientiﬁc

truth. Some physicists ascribed Boltzmann suicide to mental instability. According to

Chandrasekar, he was greatly depressed by the violent attacks made on his ideas by Ostwald

and Mach. This made him to commit suicide.

Sometimes his suicide is attributed to the unrecognition of his ideas and works. But in

1888 he was oﬀered a most prestigious position in Berlin but he declined. Universities such

as Leipzig, Munich and Vienna shown interest to appoint him with the salaries of several

professorships. He was awarded various medals and honorary doctorates. Jos Uﬃnk wrote:

... his death occurred at the dawn of the deﬁnitive victory of the atomic view in the works of

Einstein, Smoluchowski, Perrin etal. adds a further touch of drama to this picture ... there

is no factual evidence for the claim.

There was no strong evidence that Boltzmann was ignored or suﬀered due to unrecog-

nition of his work by his contemporaries. On the occasion of his 60th birthday, 117 of the

world’s most prominent scientists from various countries contributed to the festschrift edited

by Stefan Meyer. His suicide seems to have been due to factors in his personal life (depres-

sions and decline of health) rather than to any academic matters. Depressed and in bad

health, he committed suicide just before experiment veriﬁed his work.

His celebrated formula S = k ln W has been engraved on his tombstone.

IX. QUOTATIONS

• O! immodest mortal! Your destiny is the joy of watching the evershifting battle!

• Available energy is the main object at stake in the struggle for existence and the

evolution of the world.

13

• Which is more remarkable fact about America: that millionaires are idealists or ide-

alists become millionaires.

• Bring forward what is true

Write it so that it is clear

Defend it to your last breath!

• I am conscious of being only an individual struggling weakly against the stream of

time. But it still remains in my power to contribute in such a way that, when the

theory of gases is again revived, not too much will have to be rediscovered.

• The most ordinary things are to philosophy a source of insoluble puzzles. With inﬁnite

ingenuity it constructs a concept of space or time and then ﬁnds it absolutely impossi-

ble that there be objects in this space or that processes occur during this time.... the

source of this kind of logic lies in excessive conﬁdence in the so-called laws of thought.

REFERENCES

Press, Oxford, 1998)

[1] C. Cercignani, Ludwig Boltzmann: The Man Who Trusted Atoms (Oxford University

[2] W.H.Cropper, Great Physicists (Oxford University Press, Oxford, 2001)

[3] R.L. Sime, Lise Meitner-A life in Physics (University of California Press, London,

1996)

[4] P. Rife, Lise Meitner and the Dawn of the Nuclear Age (Boston: Birkh¨auser, 1999)

[5] JJ

O’Connor

and

E.F.

Robertson,

Ludwig

Boltzmann:

http://www-groups.dcs.st-and.ac.uk∼history/Mathematicians/Boltzmann

[6] S. Mahanti, Dream 2047 August 2005

[7] S. Ramaswamy, Resonance Dec. 2005 176-178

[8] Jos Uﬃnk, Boltzmann’s Work in Statistical Physics in Stanford Encyclopedia of Phi-

losophy (2004)

14

[9] L. Boltzmann, Physics Today, January 1992 p.44 (Translated by B. Schwarzchild)

[10] http:// en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ludwig−Boltzmann

[11] http:// www.mrs.umn.edu/ sungurea/introdstat/history/w98/Boltzmann

[12] http:// www.corrosion-doctors.org/Biographies/BoltzmannBio.htm

15

