6
0
0
2
 
t
c
O
 
9
 
 
]
h
p
-
t
s
i
h
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
4
5
0
0
1
6
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Julian Schwinger: Nuclear Physics, the
Radiation Laboratory, Renormalized QED,
Source Theory, and Beyond

Kimball A. Milton∗
Homer L. Dodge Department of Physics and Astronomy
University of Oklahoma, Norman, OK 73019 USA

February 2, 2008

Abstract

Julian Schwinger’s inﬂuence on twentieth century science is pro-
found and pervasive. Of course, he is most famous for his renormal-
ization theory of quantum electrodynamics, for which he shared the
Nobel Prize with Richard Feynman and Sin-itiro Tomonaga. But al-
though this triumph was undoubtedly his most heroic work, his legacy
lives on chieﬂy through subtle and elegant work in classical electrody-
namics, quantum variational principles, proper-time methods, quan-
tum anomalies, dynamical mass generation, partial symmetry, and
more. Starting as just a boy, he rapidly became the pre-eminent nu-
clear physicist in the late 1930s, led the theoretical development of
radar technology at MIT during World War II, and then, soon after
the war, conquered quantum electrodynamics, and became the leading
quantum ﬁeld theorist for two decades, before taking a more icono-
clastic route during his last quarter century.

Keywords: Julian Schwinger, nuclear physics, waveguides, quan-
tum electrodynamics, renormalization, quantum action principle, source
theory, axial-vector anomaly

∗K.A. Milton is Professor of Physics at the University of Oklahoma. He was a Ph.D. stu-
dent of Julian Schwinger from 1968–71, and his postdoc at UCLA for the rest of the 1970s.
He has written a scientiﬁc biography of Schwinger, edited two volumes of Schwinger’s se-
lected works, and co-authored two textbooks based on Schwinger’s lectures.

1

1 Introduction

Given Julian Schwinger’s commanding stature in theoretical physics for half
a century, it may seem puzzling why he is relatively unknown now to the
educated public, even to many younger physicists, while Feynman is a cult
ﬁgure with his photograph needing no more introduction than Einstein’s.†
This relative obscurity is even more remarkable, in view of the enormous
number of eminent physicists, as well as other leaders in science and industry,
who received their Ph.D.’s under Schwinger’s direction, while Feynman had
practically none. In part, the answer lies in Schwinger’s retiring nature and
reserved demeanor. Science, research and teaching, were his life, and he
detested the limelight. Generally, he was not close to his students, so few
knew him well. He was a gracious host and a good conversationalist, and
had a broad knowledge of many subjects, but he was never one to initiate a
relationship or ﬂaunt his erudition.

His style of doing physics was also diﬃcult to penetrate. Oppenheimer
once said that others gave talks to show others how to do the calculation,
while Schwinger gave talks to show that only he could do it. Although a
commonly shared view, this witticism is unkind and untrue. He was, in fact,
a superb teacher, and generations of physicists, students and faculty alike,
learned physics at his feet. On the one hand he was a formalist, inventing
formalisms so powerful that they could lead, at least in his hands, unerringly
to the correct answer. He did not, therefore, display the intuitive visualiza-
tions, for example, that Feynman commanded, which eventually took over
the popular and scientiﬁc culture.

But, more profoundly, he was a phenomenologist. Ironically, even some
of his own students criticized him in his later years for his phenomenological
orientation, not recognizing that he had, from his earliest experiences in nu-
clear physics, insisted in grounding theoretical physics in the phenomena and
data of experiment. Isidor Rabi, who discovered Schwinger and brought him
to Columbia University, generally had a poor opinion of theoretical physi-
cists. But Rabi was always very impressed with Schwinger because in nearly
every paper, he “got the numbers out” to compare with experiment. Even in

†An example is the series of posters produced by the American Physical Society in which
the impression is given that Feynman was the chief innovator in quantum electrodynam-
ics. In contradiction to this, Norman Ramsey has stated that “it is my impression that
Schwinger overwhelmingly deserved the greatest credit for QED. I don’t think Feynman
had an explanation of the anomalous hyperﬁne structure before the [1948 APS] meeting.”1

2

his most elaborate ﬁeld-theoretic papers he was always concerned with mak-
ing contact with the real world, be it quantum electrodynamics, or strongly
interacting hadrons.

Although his ﬁrst, unpublished, paper, written at the age of 16, was on
the subject of the then poorly-understood quantum electrodynamics, Julian
Schwinger was almost exclusively a nuclear physicist until he joined the Radi-
ation Laboratory at MIT in 1943. There, faced with critical deadlines and the
diﬃculty of communicating with electrical engineers, he perfected variational
techniques for solving the classical electrodynamic problems of waveguides.
As the War wound down, he started thinking about radiation produced by
electrons in betatrons and synchrotrons, and in so doing recognized that the
reactive and resistive portions of the electromagnetic mass of the electron
are united in a invariant structure. Recruited by Harvard, he started teach-
ing there in 1946, and at ﬁrst continued research in nuclear physics and in
classical diﬀraction. The Shelter Island conference of 1947 changed all that.
He and Weisskopf suggested to Bethe that electrodynamic processes were
responsible for the Lamb shift, which had been known for some time as the
Pasternack eﬀect. Immediately, however, Schwinger saw that the most di-
rect consequence of quantum electrodynamics lay in the hyperﬁne anomaly
reported for the ﬁrst time at Shelter Island. He anticipated that the eﬀect
was due to an induced anomalous magnetic moment of the electron. The
actual calculation had to wait three months, while Schwinger took an ex-
tended honeymoon, but by December 1947 Schwinger had his famous result
for the gyromagnetic ratio.
In the process he invented renormalization of
mass and charge, only dimly preﬁgured by Kramers. This ﬁrst formulation
of QED was rather crude, being noncovariant; to obtain the correct Lamb
shift, a relativistic formulation was required, which followed the next year.
A comedy of errors ensued: Both Feynman and Schwinger made an incorrect
patch between hard and soft photon processes, and so obtained identical, but
incorrect, predictions for the Lamb shift, and the weight of their reputations
delayed the publication of the correct, if pedestrian, calculation by French
and Weisskopf.‡ By 1950 Schwinger had started his third reformulation of
quantum electrodynamics, in terms of the quantum action principle. At the
same time he wrote his remarkable paper, “On Gauge Invariance and Vac-
uum Polarization,” formulated in a completely gauge-covariant way, which

‡Schwinger later claimed that his ﬁrst noncovariant approach had yielded the correct

result, except that he had not trusted it.

3

anticipated many later developments, including the axial vector anomaly.

His strong phenomenological bent eventually led him away from the main-
stream of physics. Although he had given the basis for what is now called
the Standard Model of elementary particles in 1957, he never could accept
the existence of quarks because they had no independent existence outside of
hadrons. (A secondary consideration was that quarks were invented by Mur-
ray Gell-Mann, with whom a long-running feud had developed.) He came to
appreciate the notion of supersymmetry, but he rejected notions of “Grand
Uniﬁcation” and of “Superstrings” not because of their structure but because
he saw them as preposterous speculations, based on the notion that nothing
new remains to be found in the enormous energy range from 1 TeV to 1019
GeV. He was sure that totally new, unexpected phenomena were waiting just
around the corner. This seems a reasonable view, but it resulted in a self-
imposed isolation, in contrast, again, to Feynman, who contributed mightly
to the theory of partons and quantum chromodynamics up to the end.

A complete biography of Julian Schwinger was published six years ago.2
The present paper draws upon that book, as well as on later interviews and
research by the author. Quotations of Schwinger not otherwise attributed
are based on an extended interview conducted for that book by my co-author
Jagdish Mehra in 1988.

2 Early Years

Julian Schwinger was born in Manhattan, New York City, on February 12,
1918, to rather well-oﬀ middle-class parents. His father was a well-known
designer of women’s clothes. He had a brother Harold ten years older than
himself, whom Julian idolized as child. Harold claimed that he taught Julian
physics until he was 13. Although Julian was recognized as intelligent in
school, everyone thought Harold was the bright one. (Harold in fact eventu-
ally became a respected lawyer, and his mother always considered him as the
successful one, even after Julian received the Nobel Prize.) The Depression
cost Julian’s father his business, but he was suﬃciently appreciated that he
was oﬀered employment by other designers; so the family survived, but not
so comfortably as before.

The Depression did mean that Julian would have to rely on free education,
which New York well-provided in those days: A year or two at Townsend
Harris High School, a public preparatory school feeding into City College,

4

where Julian matriculated in 1933. Julian had already discovered physics,
ﬁrst through Harold’s Encyclopedia Britannica at home, and then through
the remarkable institution of the New York Public Library.

Larry Cranberg was a student at Townsend Harris at the same time as
Julian Schwinger.3 They had some classes together, and both graduated in
January 1933, with a diploma that stated that graduates were entitled to
automatic entry to CCNY. He recalled that Julian was “very, very quiet. He
never gave recitations. He sat in the last row, unsmiling and unspeaking,
and was a real loner. But the scuttlebutt was that he was our star. He very
early showed promise,” but Cranberg saw nothing overt. “Rumors were that
he was not very good outside math and physics, and that he was ﬂunking
German.”

Among the teachers at Townsend Harris, Cranberg particularly remem-
bers Alfred Bender,§ who was apparently not on the regular faculty. Eileen
Lebow, who recently wrote a history of Townsend Harris High School,4 does
not recall Bender’s name. Cranberg said that Bender “ﬁxed me on the course
to be a physicist. He was diligent, passionate, and meticulous in his recita-
tions. He was a great guy, one of the best teachers at Townsend Harris.” It
seems very likely that it was Bender to whom Schwinger referred to as an
anonymous inﬂuence:

I took my ﬁrst physics course in High School. That instruc-
tor showed unlimited patience in answering my endless questions
about atomic physics, after the class period was over. Although
I try, I cannot live up to that lofty standard.5

At City College Julian was reading and digesting the latest papers from
Europe, and starting to write papers with instructors who were, at the same
time, graduate students at Columbia and NYU. Joseph Weinberg, who went
on to become a well-known relativist, was his closest friend at City College.
Weinberg recalled his ﬁrst meeting with Julian.6 Because of his outstanding
laboratory reports, Weinberg had been granted the privilege of entering the
closed library stacks at City College. One day he was seeking a mathematics
book,7 which had been mentioned at the Math Club the day before, and while
he reached for it, another youngster was trying to get it. They had both heard
the talk, on functions which are continuous but nowhere diﬀerentiable, and

§Bender was the father of physicist Carl Bender. Carl’s uncle Abram Bader was the

physics teacher of Richard Feynman at Far Rockaway High School.

5

so they shared the book between them, balancing the heavy volume on one
knee each. The other fellow kept ﬁnishing the page before Weinberg, who was
a very fast reader. Of course, his impatient co-reader was Julian Schwinger.
Both were 15. Weinberg mentioned that he usually spent his time, not in the
mathematics section of the library, but in the physics section, which turned
out to be Julian’s base as well. Weinberg complained that Dirac’s book on
quantum mechanics8 was very interesting and exciting, but diﬃcult to follow.
Julian concurred, and said it was because it was polished too highly; he said
that Dirac’s original papers were much more accessible. Weinberg had never
conceived of consulting the original literature, so this opened a door for him.
This advice about over-reﬁnement Schwinger himself forgot to follow in later
life.

Julian no longer had the time to spend in the classroom attending lec-
tures. In physics and mathematics he was able to skim the texts and work out
the problems from ﬁrst principles, frequently leaving the professors baﬄed
with his original, unorthodox solutions, but it was not so simple in history,
English, and German. City College had an enormous number of required
courses then in all subjects. His marks were not good, and he would have
ﬂunked out if the College had not also had a rather forgiving policy toward
grades.

Joe Weinberg recalled another vivid incident. Among the required courses
were two years of gymnasium. One had to pass exams in hurdling, chinning,
parallel bars, and swimming. Because Weinberg and Julian had nearby lock-
ers, they often fell into physics conversations half dressed, and failed the class
for lack of attendance. Weinberg remembered seeing Julian’s hurdling exam.
Julian ran up to the bar, but came to a standstill when he was supposed to
jump over sideways. The instructor reprimanded him, at which point Julian
said, sotto voce, “there’s not enough time to solve the equations of motion.”
Edward Gerjuoy was another of Julian’s classmates at City College.9 “My
main claim to fame is that Julian and I took the same course in mechanics
together, taught by a man named Shea, and I got an A and Julian a B,”
because Julian did not do the work. “It took about a week before the people
in the class realized we were dealing with somebody of a diﬀerent order
of magnitude.” At a time when knowledge of a bit of vector algebra was
considered commendable, “Julian could make integrals vanish—he was very,
very impressive. The only person in the classroom who didn’t understand
this about Julian was the instructor himself.” “He was ﬂunking out of City
College in everything except math and physics. He was a phenomenon. He

6

didn’t lead the conventional life of a high school student before he came to
City College”—unlike Gerjuoy and Sidney Borowitz he was not on the math
team in high school so they had not known him earlier—“when he appeared
he was just a phenomenon.”

Morton Hamermesh recalled another disastrous course.10

We were in a class called Modern Geometry. It was taught by
an old dodderer named Fredrick B. Reynolds. He was head of
the math department. He really knew absolutely nothing.
It
was amazing. But he taught this course on Modern Geometry.
It was a course in projective geometry from a miserable book
by a man named Graustein from Princeton, and Julian was in
the class, but it was very strange because he obviously never
could get to class, at least not very often, and he didn’t own the
book. That was clear. And every once in a while, he’d grab me
before class and ask me to show him my copy of this book and
he would skim through it fast and see what was going on. And
this fellow Reynolds, although he was a dodderer, was a very
mean character.¶ He used to send people up to the board to do
a problem and he was always sending Julian to the board to do
problems because he knew he’d never seen the course and Julian
would get up at the board, and—of course, projective geometry
is a very strange subject. The problems are trivial if you think
about them pictorially, but Julian never would do them this way.
He would insist on doing them algebraically and so he’d get up at
the board at the beginning of the hour and he’d work through the
whole hour and he’d ﬁnish the thing and by that time the course
was over and anyway, Reynolds didn’t understand the proof, and
that would end it for the day.

Sidney Borowitz, another classmate of Julian’s, recalled that “we had the
pleasure of seeing Julian attack a problem de novo, and this used to drive
Reynolds crazy.”12

¶In addition, he was also apparently a notorious antisemite. He used to discourage
Jewish students from studying mathematics, which worked to the advantage of physics.11

7

3 Paper Number Zero

Not only was Julian already reading the literature at City College, he quickly
started to do original research. Julian had studied a paper by Christian
Møller13 in which he had calculated the two-electron scattering cross section
by using a retarded interaction potential. Of course, Schwinger read all of
Dirac’s papers on quantum ﬁeld theory, and was particularly impressed by the
one on “Relativistic Quantum Mechanics,”14 “in which Dirac went through
his attempt to recreate an electrodynamics in which the particles and light
were treated diﬀerently.” In a paper of Dirac, Fock, and Podolsky,15

it was recognized that this was simply a unitary transformation
of the Heisenberg-Pauli theory,16 in which the unitary transfor-
mation was applied to the electromagnetic ﬁeld. And I said to
myself, ‘Why don’t we apply a similar unitary transformation
to the second-quantized electron ﬁeld?’
I did that and worked
out the lowest approximation to the scattering amplitudes in un-
relativistic notation. It was a relativistic theory but it was not
covariant. That was in 1934, and I would use it later; [the no-
tion, called the interaction representation,] is always ascribed to
Tomonaga, but I had done it much earlier.

In deriving his result, Schwinger had to omit a term which “represents the
inﬁnite self-energy of the charges and must be discarded.” This he eventually
came to see as a mistake: “The last injunction merely parrots the wisdom
of my elders, to be later rejected, that the theory was fatally ﬂawed, as
witnessed by such inﬁnite terms, which at best, had to be discarded, or
subtracted. Thus, the ‘subtraction physics’ of the 1930s.”17

This paper was never submitted to a journal, but was recently published

in a selection of Schwinger’s works.18

4 Columbia University

It was Lloyd Motz, one the instructors at City College, who had learned about
Julian from Harold, and with whom Julian was writing two papers, who
introduced him to Isidor I. Rabi. Then, in a conversation between Rabi and
Motz over the famous Einstein, Podolsky, and Rosen paper,19 which had just
appeared, Julian’s voice appeared with the resolution of a diﬃculty through

8

the completeness principle, and Schwinger’s career was assured. Rabi, not
without some diﬃculty, had Schwinger transferred to Columbia, and by 1937
he had 7 papers published, mostly on nuclear physics, which constituted his
Ph.D. thesis, even though his bachelor’s degree had not yet been granted.

Schwinger still was derelict in attending classes, and ran into trouble in
a chemistry course taught by Victor LaMer. It was a dull course with a dull
exam. A question on the ﬁnal exam was “Prove that dǫ = dξ + dη,” where
none of the variables ǫ, ξ, or η were deﬁned. Rabi recalled,20

LaMer was, for a chemist, awfully good. A great part of his
lifework was testing the Debye-H¨uckel theory21 rather brilliantly.
But he was this rigid, reactionary type. He had this mean way
about him. He said, ‘You have this Schwinger? He didn’t pass
my ﬁnal exam.’ I said, ‘He didn’t? I’ll look into it.’ So I spoke to
a number of people who’d taken the same course. And they had
been greatly assisted in that subject by Julian. So I said, I’ll ﬁx
that guy. We’ll see what character he has. ‘Now Vicky, what sort
of guy are you anyway, what are your principles? What’re you
going to do about this?’ Well, he did ﬂunk Julian, and I think it’s
quite a badge of distinction for him, and I for one am not sorry at
this point, they have this black mark on Julian’s rather elevated
record. But he did get Phi Beta Kappa as an undergraduate,
something I never managed to do.

The papers which Julian wrote at Columbia were on both theoretical
and experimental physics, and Rabi prized Julian’s ability to “get the num-
bers out” to compare with experiment. The formal awarding of the Ph.D.
had to wait till 1939 to satisfy a University regulation.
In the meantime,
Schwinger was busy writing papers (one, for example, was fundamental for
the theory of nuclear magnetic resonance,22) and spent a somewhat lonely,
but productive winter (1937) in Wisconsin,k where he laid the groundwork
for his prediction that the deuteron had an electric quadrupole moment,23
independently established by his experimental colleagues at Columbia a year
later.24 Wisconsin conﬁrmed his predilection for working at night, so as not
to be “overwhelmed” by his hosts, Eugene Wigner and Gregory Breit.
Rabi later amusingly summarized Schwinger’s year in Wisconsin.20

kIt was a cold winter as well, for he failed to unpack the trunk in which his mother had

placed a warm winter coat.

9

I thought that he had about had everything in Columbia that we
could oﬀer—by we, as theoretical physics is concerned, [I mean]
me. So I got him this fellowship to go to Wisconsin, with the
general idea that there were Breit and Wigner and they could
carry on. It was a disastrous idea in one respect, because, before
then, Julian was a regular guy. Present in the daytime. So I’d
ask Julian (I’d see him from time to time) ‘How are you doing?’
‘Getting anything out of Breit and Wigner?’
‘Oh, ﬁne, ﬁne.’
‘Oh yes, they’re very good, very good.’
I asked them. They
said, ‘We never see him.’ And this is my own theory—I’ve never
checked it with Julian—that—there’s one thing about Julian you
all know—I think he’s an even more quiet man than Dirac. He is
not a ﬁghter in any way. And I imagine his ideas and Wigner’s
and Breit’s or their personalities did not agree. I don’t fault him
for this, but he’s such a gentle soul, he avoided the battle by
working at night. He got this idea of working nights—it’s pure
theory, it has nothing to do with the truth.

But the theory seems validated.

5 Two Years in Berkeley

By 1939, Rabi felt Schwinger had outgrown Columbia, so with a NRC Fel-
lowship, he was sent to J. Robert Oppenheimer in Berkeley. This exposed
him to new ﬁelds: quantum electrodynamics (although as we recall, he had
written an early, unpublished paper on the subject while just 16) and cosmic-
ray physics, but he mostly continued to work on nuclear physics. He had a
number of collaborations; the most remarkable was with William Rarita,
who was on sabbatical from Brooklyn College; Rarita was Schwinger’s “cal-
culating arm”∗∗ on a series of papers extending the notion of nuclear tensor
forces which he had conceived in Wisconsin over a year earlier. Rarita and
Schwinger also wrote the prescient paper on spin-3/2 particles,25 which was
to be inﬂuential decades later with the birth of supergravity.

Ed Gerjuoy, who had been an undergraduate with Schwinger at City Col-
lege in 1934, now was one of Oppenheimer’s graduate students. He recalled9

∗∗Left-leaning Joe Weinberg accused Julian of exploiting Rarita, but Julian responded

that these papers established Rarita’s reputation.

10

an amusing incident which happened one day while he, Schwinger, and Op-
penheimer were talking in Oppenheimer’s oﬃce in LeConte Hall. Two other
students, Chaim Richman and Bernard Peters, came in seeking a suggestion
for a research problem from Oppenheimer. Schwinger listened with interest
while Oppenheimer proposed calculating the cross section for the electron
disintegration of the deuteron. That midnight, when Gerjuoy came to pick
up Schwinger for the latter’s breakfast before their all-night work session, he
noted that Schwinger, while waiting for him in the lobby of the International
House, where Julian was living, had ﬁlled the backs of several telegram blanks
with calculations on this problem. Schwinger stuﬀed the sheets in his pocket
and they went to work. Six months later, again Gerjuoy and Schwinger
were in Oppenheimer’s oﬃce when Richman and Peters returned beaming.
They had solved the problem, and they covered the whole board with the
elaborate solution. Oppenheimer looked at it, said it looked reasonable, and
then asked, “Julie, didn’t you tell me you worked this cross section out?”
Schwinger pulled the yellowed, crumpled blanks from his pocket, stared at
them a moment, and then pronounced the students’ solution okay apart from
a factor of two. Oppenheimer told them to ﬁnd their error, and they shuﬄed
out, dispirited. Indeed, Schwinger was right, they found they had made a
mistake, and they published the paper,26 but they were suﬃciently crushed
that both switched to experimental physics.

At the time, Schwinger and Gerjuoy were collaborating on a paper27

following from Schwinger’s tensor theory of nuclear forces. The work

involved calculating about 200 fairly complicated spin sums, which
sums Julian and I performed independently and then compared.
To have the privilege of working with Julian meant I had to ac-
commodate myself to his working habits, as follows. Except on
days when Julian had to come into the university during conven-
tional hours to confer with Oppenheimer, I would meet him at
11:45 pm in the lobby of his residence, the Berkeley International
House. He would then drive us to some Berkeley all-night bistro
where he had breakfast, after which we drove to LeConte Hall,
the Berkeley physics building, where we worked until about 4:00
am, Julian’s lunchtime. After lunch it was back to LeConte Hall
until about 8:30 am, when Julian was ready to think about dinner
and poor TA me would meet my 9:00 am recitation class. Since
I had just gotten married, and still was young enough to badly

11

need my sleep, these months of working with Julian were trying,
to put it mildly.

What made it even more trying is the fact that when Julian
and I carefully worked out together the 20 or so spin sums where
our independent calculations disagreed, Julian proved to be right
every time! I accepted the fact that Julian was a much better
theorist than I, but I felt I was at least pretty good, and was
infuriated by his apparent constitutional inability to make a sin-
gle error in 200 complicated spin sum calculations. This inability
stood Schwinger well when he embarked on the calculations that
earned him the Nobel Prize. . . . [Al]though Julian certainly real-
ized how extraordinarily talented he was, he never gloated about
his error free calculations or in any other way put me down.28

The year of the NRC Fellowship was followed by a second year at Berkeley
as Oppenheimer’s assistant. They wrote an important paper together which
would prove crucial nearly a decade later: Although Oppenheimer was happy
to imagine new interactions, Schwinger showed that an anomaly in ﬂuorine
decay could be explained by the existence of vacuum polarization, that is, by
the virtual creation of electron-positron pairs.29 This gave Schwinger a head
start over Feynman, who for years suspected that vacuum polarization did
not exist.

6 The War and the Radiation Laboratory

After two years at Berkeley, Oppenheimer and Rabi arranged a real job for
Schwinger: He became ﬁrst an instructor, then an Assistant Professor at
Purdue University, which had acquired a number of bright young physicists
under the leadership of Karl Lark-Horowitz. But the war was impinging on
everyone’s lives, and Schwinger was soon recruited into the work on radar.
The move to the MIT Radiation Laboratory took place in 1943. There
Schwinger rapidly became the theoretical leader, even though he was seldom
seen, going home in the morning just as others were arriving. He devel-
oped powerful variational methods for dealing with complicated microwave
circuits, expressing results in terms of quantities the engineers could under-
stand, such as impedance and admittance.

At ﬁrst it seems strange that Schwinger, by 1943 the leading nuclear
theorist, should not have gone to Los Alamos, where nearly all his colleagues

12

eventually settled for the duration. There seem to be at least three reasons
why Schwinger stayed at the Radiation Laboratory throughout the war.

• The reason he most often cited later in life was one of moral repugnance.
When he realized the destructive power of what was being constructed
at Los Alamos, he wanted no part of it.
In contrast, the radiation
lab was developing a primarily defensive technology, radar, which had
already saved Britain.

• He believed that the problems to solve at the Radiation Laboratory
were more interesting. Both laboratories were involved largely in engi-
neering, yet although Maxwell’s equations were certainly well known,
the process of applying them to waveguides required the development
of special techniques that would prove invaluable to Schwinger’s later
career.

• Another factor probably was Schwinger’s fear of being overwhelmed.
In Cambridge he could live his own life, working at night when no one
was around the lab. This privacy would have been much more diﬃcult
to maintain in the microworld of Los Alamos. Similarly, the working
conditions at the Rad Lab were much freer than those at Los Alamos.
Schwinger never was comfortable in a team setting, as witness his later
aversion to the atmosphere at the Institute for Advanced Study.

The methods and the discoveries he made at the Rad Lab concerning
the reality of the electromagnetic mass would be invaluable for his work on
quantum electrodynamics a few years later. As the war wound down, physi-
cists started thinking about new accelerators, since the pre-war cyclotrons
had been defeated by relativity, and Schwinger became a leader in this de-
velopment: He proposed a microtron,†† an accelerator based on acceleration
through microwave cavities, developed the theory of stability of synchrotron
orbits, and most importantly, worked out in detail the theory of synchrotron
radiation,‡‡ at a time when many thought that such radiation would be neg-
ligible because of destructive interference. Schwinger never properly wrote
up the work he conducted in his one and one-half years at the Rad Lab, an
omission that has now be rectiﬁed in part by publication of a volume based

††The microtron is usually attributed to Veksler.
‡‡This was ﬁrst circulated as a preprint in 1945. The paper30 published in 1949 was

substantially diﬀerent.

13

on his lectures then and later, and including both published and unpublished
papers.31

Although he never really published his considerations on self-reaction,
he viewed that understanding as the most important part of his work on
synchrotron radiation:

It was a useful thing for me for what was to come later in elec-
trodynamics, because the technique I used for calculating the
electron’s classical radiation was one of self-reaction, and I did it
relativistically, and it was a situation in which I had to take seri-
ously the part of the self-reaction which was radiation, so why not
take seriously the part of the self-reaction that is mass change? In
other words, the ideas of mass renormalization and relativistically
handling them were already present at this classical level.

Just after the Trinity atomic bomb test, Schwinger traveled to Los Alamos
to speak about his work on waveguides, electromagnetic radiation, and his
ideas about future accelerators. There he met Richard Feynman for the ﬁrst
time. Feynman recalled that at the time Schwinger33

had already a great reputation because he had done so much
work . . . and I was very anxious to see what this man was like.
I’d always thought he was much older than I was [they were the
same age] because he had done so much more. At the time I
hadn’t done anything.

7 QED

In 1945 Harvard oﬀered Schwinger an Associate Professorship,∗ which he
promptly accepted, partly because in the meantime he had met his future wife
Clarice Carrol. Counteroﬀers quickly appeared, from Columbia, Berkeley,
and elsewhere, and Harvard shortly made Schwinger the youngest full pro-
fessor on the faculty to that date. There Schwinger quickly established a pat-
tern that was to persist for many years—he taught brilliant courses on clas-
sical electrodynamics, nuclear physics, and quantum mechanics, surrounded
himself with a devoted coterie of graduate students and post-doctoral assis-
tants, and conducted incisive research that set the tone for theoretical physics
throughout the world.

∗He beat out Hans Bethe for the job.

14

Work on classical diﬀraction theory, begun at the Radiation Lab, con-
tinued for several years largely due to the presence of Harold Levine, whom
Schwinger had brought along as an assistant. Variational methods, perfected
in the electrodynamic waveguide context, were rapidly applied to problems
in nuclear physics. But these were old problems, and it was quantum elec-
trodynamics that was to deﬁne Schwinger’s career.

But it took new experimental data to catalyze this development. That
data was presented at the famous Shelter Island meeting held in June 1947,
a week before Schwinger’s wedding. There he, Feynman, Victor Weisskopf,
Hans Bethe, and the other participants learned the details of the new ex-
periments of Lamb and Retherford32 that conﬁrmed the pre-war Pasternack
eﬀect, showing a splitting between the 2S1/2 and 2P1/2 states of hydrogen,
that should be degenerate according to Dirac’s theory. In fact, on the way
to the conference, Weisskopf and Schwinger speculated that quantum elec-
trodynamics could explain this eﬀect, and outlined the idea to Bethe there,
who worked out the details, nonrelativistically, on his famous train ride to
Schenectady after the meeting.34

But the other experiment announced there was unexpected: This was
the experiment by Rabi’s group and others35 of the hyperﬁne anomaly that
would prove to mark the existence of an anomalous magnetic moment of the
electron, expressing the coupling of the spin of the electron to an applied mag-
netic ﬁeld, deviating from the value again predicted by Dirac. Schwinger im-
mediately saw this as the crucial calculation to carry out ﬁrst, because it was
purely relativistic, and much cleaner to understand theoretically, not involv-
ing the complication of bound states. However, he was delayed three months
in beginning the calculation because of an extended honeymoon through the
West. He did return to it in October, and by December 1947 had obtained a
result36 completely consistent with experiment. He also saw how to compute
the relativistic Lamb shift (although he did not have the details quite right),
and found the error in the pre-war Dancoﬀ calculation of the radiative cor-
rection to electron scattering by a Coulomb ﬁeld.37 In eﬀect, he had solved
all the fundamental problems that had plagued quantum electrodynamics in
the 1930s: The inﬁnities were entirely isolated in quantities which renormal-
ized the mass and charge of the electron. Further progress, by himself and
others, was thus a matter of technique. Concerning Schwinger’s technique at
the time, Schweber writes38

The notes of Schwinger’s calculation [of the Lamb shift] are extant

15

[and] give proof of his awesome computational powers. . . . These
traces over photon polarizations and integrations over photon en-
ergies . . . were carried out fearlessly and seemingly eﬀortlessly.
. . . Often, involved steps were carried out mentally and the answer
was written down. And, most important, the lengthy calculations
are error free!

8 Covariant Quantum Electrodynamics

During the next two years Schwinger developed two new approaches to quan-
tum electrodynamics. His original approach, which made use of succes-
sive canonical transformations, while suﬃcient for calculating the anoma-
lous magnetic moment of the electron, was noncovariant, and as such, led
to inconsistent results. In particular, the magnetic moment appeared also
as part of the Lamb shift calculation, through the coupling with the electric
ﬁeld implied by relativistic covariance; but the noncovariant scheme gave
the wrong coeﬃcient. (If the coeﬃcient were modiﬁed by hand to the cor-
rect value, what turned out to be the correct relativistic value for the Lamb
shift emerged, but what that was was unknown in January 1948, when he
announced his results at the American Physical Society meeting.)

Norman Ramsey added an amusing footnote to the story about LaMer,
the chemist who ﬂunked Julian.39 In 1948 Schwinger had to repeat his bril-
liant lecture on quantum electrodynamics three times at the American Phys-
ical Society meeting at Columbia, in successively larger rooms.†

It was a superb lecture. We were impressed. And as we walked
back together—Rabi and I were sitting together during the lecture
—Rabi invited me to the Columbia Faculty Club for lunch. We
got in the elevator [in the Faculty Club] when who should happen
to walk in the elevator with us but LaMer. And as soon as Rabi
saw that, a mischievous gleam came into his eye and he began by
saying that was the most sensational thing that’s ever happened
in the American Physical Society. The ﬁrst time there’s been

†K. K. Darrow, secretary of the Physical Society, who apparently had little appreciation
of theory, always scheduled the theoretical sessions in the smallest room. Schwinger’s
second lecture was given in the largest lecture hall in Pupin Lab, and the third in the
largest theatre on campus.

16

this three repeats—it’s a marvelous revolution that’s been done—
LaMer got more and more interested and ﬁnally said, ‘Who did
this marvelous thing?’ And Rabi said, ‘Oh, you know him, you
gave him an F, Julian Schwinger.’

So ﬁrst at the Pocono Conference in April 1948, then in the Michigan
Summer School that year, and ﬁnally in a series of three monumental papers,
“Quantum Electrodynamics I, II, and III,”40 Julian set forth his covariant
approach to QED. At about the same time Feynman was formulating his co-
variant path-integral approach; and although his presentation at Pocono was
not well-received, Feynman and Schwinger compared notes and realized that
they had climbed the same mountain by diﬀerent routes. Feynman’s system-
atic papers41 were published only after Dyson had proved the equivalence of
Schwinger’s and Feynman’s schemes.42

It is worth remarking that Schwinger’s approach was conservative. He
took ﬁeld theory at face value, and followed the conventional path of Pauli,
Heisenberg, and Dirac. His genius was to recognize that the well-known di-
vergences of the theory, which had stymied all pre-war progress, could be
consistently isolated in renormalization of charge and mass. This bore a su-
perﬁcial resemblance to the ideas of Kramers advocated as early as 1938,43
but Kramers proceeded classically. He had insisted that ﬁrst the classical
theory had to be rendered ﬁnite and then quantized. That idea was a blind
alley. Renormalization of quantum ﬁeld theory is unquestionably the discov-
ery of Schwinger.

Feynman was more interested in ﬁnding an alternative to ﬁeld theory,
eliminating entirely the photon ﬁeld in favor of action at a distance. He
was, by 1950, quite disappointed to realize that his approach was entirely
equivalent to the conventional electrodynamics, in which electron and photon
ﬁelds are treated on the same footing.

As early as January 1948, when Schwinger was expounding his nonco-
variant QED to overﬂow crowds at the American Physical Society meeting
at Columbia University, he learned from Oppenheimer of the existence of
the work of Tomonaga carried out in Tokyo during the terrible conditions
of wartime. Tomonaga had independently invented the “Interaction Rep-
resentation” which Schwinger had used in his unpublished 1934 paper, and
had come up with a covariant version of the Schr¨odinger equation as had
Schwinger, which upon its Western rediscovery was dubbed the Tomonaga-
Schwinger equation.44 Both Schwinger and Tomonaga independently wrote

17

the same equation, a generalization of the Schr¨odinger equation to an arbi-
trary spacelike surface, using nearly the same notation. The formalism found
by Tomonaga and his school was essentially identical to that developed by
Schwinger ﬁve years later; yet they at the time calculated nothing, nor did
they discover renormalization. That was certainly no reﬂection on the ability
of the Japanese; Schwinger could not have carried the formalism to its logical
conclusion without the impetus of the postwar experiments, which overcame
prewar paralysis by showing that the quantum corrections “were neither in-
ﬁnite nor zero, but ﬁnite and small, and demanded understanding.”17

However, at ﬁrst Schwinger’s covariant calculation of the Lamb shift con-

tained another error, the same as Feynman’s.45

By this time I had forgotten the number I had gotten by just
artiﬁcially changing the wrong spin-orbit coupling. Because I was
now thoroughly involved with the covariant calculation and it was
the covariant calculation that betrayed me, because something
went wrong there as well. That was a human error of stupidity.

French and Weisskopf46 had gotten the right answer,

because they put in the correct value of the magnetic moment
and used it all the way through. I, at an earlier stage, had done
that, in eﬀect, and also got the same answer.

But now he and Feynman “fell into the same trap. We were connecting
a relativistic calculation of high energy eﬀects with a nonrelativistic calcula-
tion of low energy eﬀects, a la Bethe.” Based on the result Schwinger had
presented at the APS meeting in January 1948, Schwinger claimed priority
for the Lamb shift calculation:

I had the answer in December of 1947. If you look at those [other]
papers you will ﬁnd that on the critical issue of the spin-orbit
coupling, they appeal to the magnetic moment. The deﬁciency
in the calculation I did [in 1947] was [that it was] a non-covariant
calculation. French and Weisskopf were certainly doing a non-
covariant calculation. Willis Lamb47 was doing a non-covariant
calculation. They could not possibly have avoided these same
problems.

The error Feynman and Schwinger made had to do with the infrared
problem that occurred in the relativistic calculation, which was handled by
giving the photon a ﬁctitious mass.

18

Nobody thought that if you give the photon a ﬁnite mass it will
also aﬀect the low energy problem. There are no longer the two
transverse degrees of freedom of a massless photon, there’s also a
longitudinal degree of freedom. I suddenly realized this absolutely
stupid error, that a photon of ﬁnite mass is a spin one particle,
not a helicity one particle.

Feynman was more forthright and apologetic in acknowledging45 his error
which substantially delayed the publication of the French and Weisskopf pa-
per.

9 Quantum Action Principle

Schwinger learned from his competitors, particularly Feynman and Dyson.
Just as Feynman had borrowed the idea that henceforward would go by the
name of Feynman parameters from Schwinger, Schwinger recognized that the
systematic approach of Dyson and Feynman was superior in higher orders.
So by 1949 he replaced the Tomonaga-Schwinger approach by a much more
powerful engine, the quantum action principle. This was a logical outgrowth
of the formulation of Dirac,48 as was Feynman’s path integrals; the latter
was an integral approach, Schwinger’s a diﬀerential. The formal solution
of Schwinger’s diﬀerential equations was Feynman’s functional integral; yet
while the latter was ill-deﬁned, the former could be given a precise mean-
ing, and for example, required the introduction of fermionic variables, which
initially gave Feynman some diﬃculty.

It may be fair to say that while the path integral formulation to quantum
ﬁeld theory receives all the press, the most precise exegesis of ﬁeld theory is
provided by the functional diﬀerential equations of Schwinger resulting from
his action principle. He began in the “Theory of Quantized Fields I”49 by
introducing a complete set of eigenvectors “speciﬁed by a spacelike surface
. . . and the eigenvalues . . . of a complete set of commuting operators con-
structed from ﬁeld quantities attached to that surface.” The question is how
to compute the transformation function from one spacelike surface to another.
After remarking that this development, time-evolution, must be described by
a unitary transformation, he assumed that any inﬁnitesimal change in the
transformation function must be given in terms of the inﬁnitesimal change
in a quantum action operator, or of a quantum Lagrange function. This is
the quantum dynamical principle, a generalization of the principle of least

19

action, or of Hamilton’s principle in classical mechanics. If the parameters
of the system are not altered, the only changes arise from those of the initial
and ﬁnal states, from which Schwinger deduced the Principle of Stationary
Action, from which the ﬁeld equations may be derived. A series of six papers
followed with the same title, and the most important “Green’s Functions of
Quantized Fields” published in the Proceedings of the National Academy.50
Paul Martin presented an entertaining account of the prehistory of their

work together.51

During the late 1940s and early 1950s Harvard was the home
of a school of physics with a special outlook and a distinctive
set of rituals. Somewhat before noon three times each week,
the master would arrive in his blue chariot and, in forceful and
beautiful lectures, reveal profound truths to his Cantabridgian
followers, Harvard and M.I.T. students and faculty.‡ Cast in a
language more powerful and general than any of his listeners had
ever encountered, these ceremonial gatherings had some sacriﬁcial
overtones—interruptions were discouraged and since the sermons
usually lasted past the lunch hour, fasting was often required.
Following a mid-afternoon break, private audiences with the mas-
ter were permitted and, in uncertain anticipation, students would
gather in long lines to seek counsel.

During this period the religion had its own golden rule—the
action principle—and its own cryptic testament—‘On the Green’s
Functions of Quantized Fields.’50 Mastery of this paper conferred
on followers a high priest status.§ The testament was couched in
terms that could not be questioned, in a language whose elements

‡In a later recollection,52 Martin elaborated: “Speaking eloquently, without notes, and
writing with both hands, he expressed what was already known in new, uniﬁed ways,
incorporating original examples and results almost every day. Interrupting the ﬂow with
questions was like interrupting a theatrical performance. The lectures continued through
Harvard’s reading period and then the examination period. In one course we attended, he
presented the last lecture—a novel calculation of the Lamb Shift—during Commencement
Week. The audience continued coming and he continued lecturing.”

§Schwinger evidently was aware of the mystique. In a later letter recommending Martin
for a permanent appointment at Harvard he stated that Martin was “superior in intrinsic
ability and performance. Quantum ﬁeld theory is the new religion of physics, and Paul
C. Martin is one of its high priests.”5 However, as the last paragraph of the present essay
demonstrates, Schwinger throughout his life maintained a tension between an elitist and
a democratic view of science.

20

were the values of real physical observables and their correlations.
The language was enlightening, but the lectures were exciting be-
cause they were more than metaphysical. Along with structural
insights, succinct and implicit self-consistent methods for gener-
ating true statements were revealed.

Recently, a perceptive analysis of Schwinger’s Green’s functions papers

has been given by Schweber53. There he concludes that

Schwinger’s formulation of relativistic QFTs [quantum ﬁeld the-
ories] in terms of Green’s functions was a major advance in theo-
retical physics. It was a representation in terms of elements (the
Green’s functions) that were intimately related to real physical
observables and their correlation. It gave deep structural insights
into QFTs; in particular, it allowed the investigation of the struc-
ture of the Green’s functions when their variables are analytically
continued to complex values, thus establishing deep connections
to statistical mechanics.

10 “Gauge Invariance and Vacuum Polariza-

tion”

The paper “On Gauge Invariance and Vacuum Polarization”54, submitted by
Schwinger to the Physical Review near the end of December 1950, is nearly
universally acclaimed as his greatest publication. As his lectures have right-
fully been compared to the works of Mozart, so this might be compared to a
mighty construction of Beethoven, the 3rd Symphony, the Eroica, perhaps.
It is most remarkable because it stands in splendid isolation. It was written
over a year after the last of his series of papers on his second, covariant,
formulation of quantum electrodynamics was completed: “Quantum Elec-
trodynamics III. The Electromagnetic Properties of the Electron—Radiative
Corrections to Scattering”40 was submitted in May 1949. And barely two
months later, in March 1951, Schwinger would submit the ﬁrst of the se-
ries on his third reformulation of quantum ﬁeld theory, that based on the
quantum action principle, namely, “The Theory of Quantized Fields I.”49
But “Gauge Invariance and Vacuum Polarization” stands on its own, and
has endued the rapid changes in tastes and developments in quantum ﬁeld

21

theory, while the papers in the other series are mostly of historical interest
now. As Lowell Brown55 pointed out, “Gauge Invariance and Vacuum Po-
larization” still has over one hundred citations per year, and is far and away
Schwinger’s most cited paper.¶ Yet even such a masterpiece was not without
its critics. Abraham Klein, who was ﬁnishing his thesis at the time under
Schwinger’s direction, and would go on to be one of Schwinger’s second set
of “assistants” (with Robert Karplus), as, ﬁrst, an instructor, and then a
Junior Fellow, recalled that Schwinger (and, independently, he and Karplus)
ran afoul of a temporary editor at the Physical Review. That editor thought
Schwinger’s original paper repeated too many complicated expressions and
that symbols should be introduced to represent expressions that appeared
more than once. Schwinger complied, but had his assistants do the dirty
work. Harold Levine, who was still sharing Schwinger’s oﬃce, working on
the never-to-be-completed waveguide book, typed the revised manuscript,
while Klein wrote in the many equations. Klein recalled that he took much
more care in writing those equations than he did in his own papers.57

Schwinger recalled later that he viewed this paper, in part, as a reaction

to the “invariant regularization” of Pauli and Villars.58

It was this paper, with its mathematical manipulation, without
physical insight particularly about questions such as photon mass
and so forth, which was the direct inspiration for ‘Gauge Invari-
ance and Vacuum Polarization.’ The whole point is that if you
have a propagation function, it has a certain singularity when the
two points coincide. Suppose you pretend that there are several
particles of the same type with diﬀerent masses and with cou-
pling constants which can suddenly become negative instead of
positive. Then, of course, you can cancel them. It’s cancellation
again, subtraction physics, done in a more sophisticated way, but
still, things must be made to add up to zero. Who needs it?

In this paper, Schwinger obtained a closed form for the electron propaga-
tor in an external magnetic ﬁeld, by solving proper-time equations of motion,
opening a ﬁeld which would be fashionable nearly three decades later with the
discovery of pulsars; gave the deﬁnitive derivation of the Euler-Heisenberg

¶In the 2005 Science Citation Index, it had 105 citations, out of a total of 458 citations
to all of Schwinger’s work.56 These numbers have remained remarkably constant over the
years.

22

Lagrangian describing the scattering of light by light, a phenomenon still
not observed directly; and gave the precise connection between axial-vector
and pseudoscalar meson theories, what became known as the axial-vector
anomaly when it was rediscovered nearly two decades later by Adler, Bell,
and Jackiw.59 (We will discuss this the anomaly later in Sec. 17.) The paper
is not only a thing of great beauty, but a powerful storehouse of practical
technique for solving gauge-theory problems in a gauge-invariant way.

11 Harvard and Schwinger

So it was no surprise that in the late 1940s and early 1950s Harvard was the
center of the world, as far as theoretical physics was concerned. Everyone,
students and professors alike, ﬂocked to Schwinger’s lectures. Everything
was revealed, long before publication; and not infrequently others received
the credit because of Schwinger’s reluctance to publish before the subject
was ripe. A case in point is the so-called Bethe-Salpeter equation,60 which
as Gell-Mann and Low noted,61 “ﬁrst appeared in Schwinger’s lectures at
Harvard.” At any one time, Schwinger had ten or twelve Ph.D. students,
who typically saw him but rarely. In part, this was because he was available
to see his large ﬂock but one afternoon a week, but most saw him only
when absolutely necessary, because they recognized that his time was too
valuable to be wasted on trivial matters. A student may have seen him only a
handful of times in his graduate career, but that was all the student required.
When admitted to his sanctum, students were never rushed, were listened
to with respect, treated with kindness, and given inspiration and practical
advice. One must remember that the student’s problems were typically quite
unrelated to what Schwinger himself was working on at the time; yet in a
few moments, he could come up with amazing insights that would keep the
student going for weeks, if not months. A few students got to know Schwinger
fairly well, and were invited to the Schwingers’ house occasionally; but most
saw Schwinger primarily as a virtuoso in the lecture hall, and now and then
in his oﬃce. A few faculty members were a bit more intimate, but essentially
Schwinger was a very private person.

23

12 Custodian of Field Theory

Feynman left the ﬁeld of quantum electrodynamics in 1950, regarding it as
essentially complete. Schwinger never did. During the next ﬁfteen years,
he continued to explore quantum ﬁeld theory, trying to make it reveal the
secrets of the weak and strong interactions. And he accomplished much.
In studying the relativistic structure of the theory, he recognized that all
the physically signiﬁcant representations of the Lorentz group were those
that could be derived from the “attached” four-dimensional Euclidean group,
which is obtained by letting the time coordinate become imaginary.62 This
idea was originally ridiculed by Pauli, but it was to prove a most fruitful
suggestion. Related to this was the CPT theorem, ﬁrst given a proof for
interacting systems by Schwinger in his “Quantized Field” papers of the
early 1950s, and elaborated later in the decade.63

By the end of the 1950s, Schwinger, with his former student Paul Martin,
was applying ﬁeld theory methods of many-body systems, which led to a
revolution in that ﬁeld.64 Methods suitable for describing systems out of
equilibrium, usually associated with the name of Keldysh,65 were obtained
some four years earlier by Schwinger.66 Along the way, in what he considered
rather modest papers, he discovered Schwinger terms,67 anomalies in the
commutation relations between ﬁeld operators, and the Schwinger model,68
still the only known example of dynamical mass generation. The beginnings
of a quantum ﬁeld theory for non-Abelian ﬁelds was made;69 the original
example of a non-Abelian ﬁeld being that of the gravitational ﬁeld, he laid
the groundwork for later canonical formulations of gravity.70

13 Measurement Algebra

In 1950 or so, as we mentioned, Schwinger developed his action principle,
which applies to any quantum system, including nonrelativistic quantum
mechanics. Two years later, he reformulated quantum kinematics, introduc-
ing symbols that abstracted the essential elements of realistic measurements.
This was measurement algebra, which yielded conventional Dirac quantum
mechanics. But although the result was as expected, Schwinger saw the ap-
proach as of great value pedagogically, and as providing a interpretation of
quantum mechanics that was self-consistent. He taught quantum mechanics
this way for many years, starting in 1952 at the Les Houches summer school;

24

but only in 1959 did he start writing a series of papers expounding the method
to the world. He always intended to write a deﬁnitive textbook on the sub-
ject, but only an incomplete version based on the Les Houches lectures ever
appeared during his lifetime.71 Englert has now put his later undergraduate
UCLA lectures together in a lovely book published by Springer.72

One cannot conclude a retrospective of Schwinger’s work without men-
tioning two other magniﬁcent achievements in the quantum mechanical do-
main. He presented a deﬁnitive development of angular momentum theory
derived in terms of oscillator variables in “On Angular Momentum,” which
was never properly published;73 k and he developed a “time-cycle” method
of calculating matrix elements without having to ﬁnd all the wavefunctions
in his beautiful “Brownian Motion of a Quantum Oscillator,”66 which as we
mentioned above anticipated the work of Keldysh.65 We should also men-
tion the famous Lippman-Schwinger paper,75 which is chieﬂy remembered
for what Schwinger considered a standard exposition of quantum scattering
theory, not for the variational methods expounded there.

14 Electroweak Synthesis

In spite of his awesome ability to make formalism work for him, Schwinger
was at heart a phenomenologist. He was active in the search for higher sym-
metry; while he came up with W3, Gell-Mann found the correct approximate
symmetry of hadronic states, SU(3). Schwinger’s greatest success in this
period was contained in his masterpiece, his 1957 paper “A Theory of the
Fundamental Interactions”.76 Along with many other insights, such as the
existence of two neutrinos and the V − A structure of weak interactions,
Schwinger there laid the groundwork for the electroweak uniﬁcation. He in-
troduced two charged intermediate vector bosons as partners to the photon,
which couple to charged weak currents.

A few years later, his former student, Sheldon Glashow, as an outgrowth
of his thesis, would introduce a neutral heavy boson to close the system to the
modern SU(2) × U(1) symmetry group;77 Steven Weinberg78 would complete
the picture by generating the masses for the heavy bosons by spontaneous
symmetry breaking. Schwinger did not have the details right in 1957, in
particular because experiment then seemed to disfavor the V − A theory his

kThis and other of Schwinger’s most important papers were reprinted in two selections

of his work.18, 74

25

approach implied, but there is no doubt that Schwinger must be counted as
the grandfather of the Standard Model on the basis on this paper.

15 The Nobel Prize and Reaction

Recognition of Schwinger’s enormous contributions had come early. He re-
ceived the Charles L. Meyer Nature of Light Award in 1949 on the basis of
the partly completed manuscripts of his “Quantum Electrodynamics” papers.
The ﬁrst Einstein prize was awarded to him, along with Kurt G¨odel, in 1951.
The National Medal of Science was presented to him by President Johnson
in 1964, and, of course, the Nobel Prize was received by him, Tomonaga, and
Feynman from the King of Sweden in 1965.

But by that point his extraordinary command of the machinery of quan-
tum ﬁeld theory had convinced him that it was too elaborate to describe
the real world, at least directly.
In his Nobel Lecture, he appealed for a
phenomenological ﬁeld theory that would make immediate contact with the
particles experiencing the strong interaction. Within a year, he developed
such a theory, Source Theory.

16 Source Theory and UCLA

It surely was the diﬃculty of incorporating strong interactions into ﬁeld the-
ory that led to “Particles and Sources,” received by the Physical Review
barely six months after his Nobel lecture, in July 1966,79 based on lectures
Schwinger gave in Tokyo that summer. One must appreciate the milieu in
which Schwinger worked in 1966. For more than a decade he and his students
had been nearly the only exponents of ﬁeld theory, as the community sought
to understand weak and strong interactions, and the proliferation of “elemen-
tary particles,” through dispersion relations, Regge poles, current algebra,
and the like, most ambitiously through the S-matrix bootstrap hypothesis
of Geoﬀrey Chew and Stanley Mandelstam.80–83 What work in ﬁeld theory
did exist then was largely axiomatic, an attempt to turn the structure of the
theory into a branch of mathematics, starting with Arthur Wightman,84 and
carried on by many others, including Arthur Jaﬀe at Harvard.85 (The name
changed from axiomatic ﬁeld theory to constructive ﬁeld theory along the
way.) Schwinger looked on all of this with considerable distaste; not that

26

he did not appreciate many of the contributions these techniques oﬀered in
speciﬁc contexts, but he could not see how they could form the basis of a
theory.

The new source theory was supposed to supersede ﬁeld theory, much as
Schwinger’s successive covariant formulations of quantum electrodynamics
had replaced his earlier schemes.
In fact, the revolution was to be more
profound, because there were no divergences, and no renormalization.

The concept of renormalization is simply foreign to this phe-
nomenological theory. In source theory, we begin by hypothesis
with the description of the actual particles, while renormalization
is a ﬁeld theory concept in which you begin with the more fun-
damental operators, which are then modiﬁed by dynamics. I em-
phasize that there never can be divergences in a phenomenological
theory. What one means by that is that one is recognizing that
all further phenomena are consequences of one phenomenological
constant, namely the basic charge unit, which describes the prob-
ability of emitting a photon relative to the emission of an electron.
When one says that there are no divergences one means that it is
not necessary to introduce any new phenomenological constant.
All further processes as computed in terms of this primitive inter-
action automatically emerge to be ﬁnite, and in agreement with
those which historically had evolved much earlier.86

16.1 Engineering Approach to Particle Theory

In 1969 Schwinger gave the Stanley H. Klosk lecture to the New York Univer-
sity School of Engineering Science. Because that lecture captures his philoso-
phy underpinning source theory so well, at an early stage in the development
of that approach, I quote the transcription of it in full.87

It is a familiar situation in physics that when an experimen-
tal domain is to be codiﬁed, even though a fundamental theory
may be available, rarely is it brought directly to bear upon the
experimental material. The fundamental theory is too compli-
cated, generally too remote from the phenomena that you want
to describe.
Instead, there is always an intermediate theory, a
phenomenological theory, which is designed to deal directly with

27

the phenomena, and therefore makes use of the language of ob-
servation. On the other hand, it is a genuine theory, and employs
abstract concepts that can make contact with the fundamental
theory.

The true role of fundamental theory is not to confront the
raw data, but to explain the relatively few parameters of the
phenomenological theory in terms of which the great mass of raw
data has been organized.

I learned this lesson 25 years ago during World War II, when
I became interested in the problems of microwave systems, wave
guides in particular. Being very naive, I started out solving
Maxwell’s equations.
I soon learned better. Most of the in-
formation in Maxwell’s equations is really superﬂuous. As far
as any particular problem is concerned, one is only interested in
the propagation of just a few modes of the wave guide. A lim-
ited number of quantities that can be measured or calculated tell
you how these few modes behave and exactly what the system is
doing.

You are led directly to a phenomenological theory of the kind
engineers invariably use—a picture, say, in terms of equivalent
transmission lines. The only role of Maxwell’s equations is to
calculate the few parameters, the eﬀective lumped constants that
characterize the equivalent circuits.

The engineer’s intermediate phenomenological theory looks in
both directions. It can be connected to the fundamental theory at
one end, and at the other it is applied directly to the experimental
data. This is an example of the engineering attitude.
It is a
pragmatic approach that is designed speciﬁcally for use. It is a
nonspeculative procedure. Hypotheses that go beyond what is
relevant to the available data are avoided.

Now, when we come to realm of high-energy physics, we are
in a new situation. We do not know the underlying dynamics,
the underlying fundamental theory. That raises the question of
ﬁnding the best strategy. That is, what is the most eﬀective way
of confronting the data, of organizing it, of learning lessons from
results within a limited domain of experimental material?

I want to argue that we should adopt a pragmatic engineering
approach. What we should not do is try to begin with some

28

fundamental theory and calculate. As we saw, this is not the
best thing to do even when you have a fundamental theory, and
if you don’t have one, it’s certainly the wrong thing to do.

Historically, relativistic quantum mechanics had proved very
successful in explaining atomic and nuclear physics until we got
accelerators suﬃciently high in energy to create the strongly inter-
acting particles, which include particles that are highly unstable
and decay through very strong forces. The ordinary methods that
had evolved up to this point were simply powerless in the face of
this new situation. At the higher energies, particles can be—and
are—created and destroyed with high probability.

In other words, the immutability of the particle—a foundation

of ordinary physics—had disappeared.

If the immutable particle has ceased to exist as the fundamen-
tal concept in terms of which a situation can be described, what
do we replace it with? There have been two diﬀerent points of
view about how to construct a fundamental theory for the strong
interactions.

The ﬁrst—the point of view of conventional operator ﬁeld
theory—proposes to replace the particle with three-dimensional
In other words, you think of energy, momentum,
space itself.
electric charge, and other properties as distributed throughout
space, and of small volumes of three-dimensional space as the
things that replace particles. These volumes are the carriers of
energy, momentum, and so on.

People, including myself, have been actively developing the
ﬁeld idea for many years. I believe that this kind of theory may be
the ultimate answer, but please recognize that it is a speculation.
It assumes that one is indeed able to describe physical phenomena
down to arbitrarily small distance, and, of course, that goes far
beyond anything we know at the moment. All we are able to do
experimentally as we go to higher and higher energies is to plumb
to smaller and smaller distances, but never to zero distance.

The question is, should you, in discussing the phenomena that
are presently known, make use of a speculative hypothesis like op-
erator ﬁeld theory? Can we not discuss particle phenomenology
and handle the correlations and organization of data without be-
coming involved in a speculative theory? In operator ﬁeld theory

29

you cannot separate particle phenomena from speculations about
the structure of particles. The operators of quantum-mechanical
ﬁeld theory conceptually mix these together.

To be able to discuss anything from the operator-ﬁeld-theory
point of view, you must accept its fundamental hypothesis. You
have to accept a speculation about how particles are constructed
before you can begin to discuss how particles interact with each
other.

Historically, this has proved to be a very diﬃcult program to
apply, and people have, of course, been anxious to deal directly
with the experimental data, and so there has been a reaction. The
extreme reaction to operator ﬁeld theory is to insist that there is
nothing more fundamental than particles and that, when you have
a number of particles colliding with each other and the number
of particles ceases to be constant, all you can do is correlate what
comes into a collision with what goes out, and cease to describe
in detail what is happening during the course of the collision.

This point of view is called S-matrix theory. The quantita-
tive description is in terms of a scattering matrix that connects
the outgoing state with the incoming state. In this theory the
particles are basic and cannot be analyzed. Then, of course, the
question comes up: what distinguishes the particular set of par-
ticles that do exist from any other conceivable set?

The only answer that has been suggested is that the observed
particles exist as a consequence of self-consistency. Given a cer-
tain set of particles, other particles can be formed as aggregates
or composites of these. On the other hand, if particles are unan-
alyzable, then this should not be a new set of particles, but the
very particles themselves.

That is the second idea, but I beg you to appreciate that
it is also a speculation. We do not know for a fact that our
present inability to describe things in terms of something more
fundamental than particles reﬂects an intrinsic impossibility.

So these are the two polarized extremes in the search for a
fundamental theory—the operator-ﬁeld-theory point of view and
the S-matrix point of view. Now my reaction to all of this is to
ask again why we must speculate, since the probability of falling
on the right speculation is very small.

30

Can we not separate the theoretical problem of describing the
properties of these particles from speculations about their inner
structure? Can we not set aside the speculation of whether parti-
cles are made from operator ﬁelds or are made from nothing but
themselves, and ﬁnd an intermediate theory, a phenomenological
theory that directly confronts the data, but that is still a creative
theory?

This theory should be suﬃciently ﬂexible so that it can make
contact with a future, more fundamental theory of the structure
of particles, if indeed any more fundamental theory ever appears.
This is the line of reasoning that led me to consider the theoret-
ical problem for high-energy physics from an engineering point
of view. Clearly I have some ideas in mind about how to carry
out such a program, and I would like to give you an enormously
simpliﬁed account of them.

We want to eliminate speculation and take a pragmatic ap-
proach. We are not going to say that particles are made out of
ﬁelds, or that particles sustain each other. We are simply going
to say that particles are what the experimentalists say they are.
But we will construct a theory and not an experimenter’s manual
in that we will look at realistic experimental procedures and pick
out their essence through idealizations.

There is one characteristic that the high-energy particles have
in common—they must be created. Through the act of creation,
we can deﬁne what we mean by a particle. How, in fact, do you
create a particle? By a collision. The experimentalist arranges
for a beam of particles to fall on a target. In the center-of-mass
system, the target is just another beam, so two beams of parti-
cles are colliding. Out of the collision, the particle that we are
interested in may be produced.

We say that it is a particle rather than a random bump on
an excitation curve because its properties are reproducible. We
still recognize the same particle event though we vary a number
of experimental parameters, such as energy, angles, and the kind
of reaction. The properties of the particle in question remain the
same—it has the same mass, the same spin, the same charge.

These criteria can be applied to an object that may last for
only 10−24 sec—which decays even before it gets out of the nucleus

31

in which it was created. Nevertheless, it is still useful to call this
kind of object a particle because it possesses essentially all of the
characteristics that we associate with the particle concept.

What is signiﬁcant is that within a somewhat controllable
region of space and time, the properties characteristic of the par-
ticle have become transformed into the particle itself. The other
particles in the collision are there only to supply the net balance
of properties. They are idealized as the source of the particle.

This is our new theoretical construct. We introduce a quan-
titative description of the particle source in terms of a source
function, S(x), where x refers to the space and time coordinates.
This function indicates that, to some extent, we can control the
region the particle comes from.

But we do not have to claim that we can make the source ar-
bitrarily small as in operator ﬁeld theory. We leave this question
open, to be tested by future experiment.

A particular source may be more eﬀective in making parti-
cles that go in one direction rather than another, so there must
be another degree of control expressed by a source function of
momentum, S(p). But from quantum mechanics we know that
the dimension of the system and the degree of directionality are
closely related. The smaller the system, the less directional it
can be. And relativistic mechanics is incorporated from the very
beginning in that the energy and the momentum are related to
its mass in the usual relativistic way.

Now the experimenter’s job only begins with the production
of a beam. At the other end, he must detect the particles. What
is detection? Unstable particles eventually decay, and the decay
process is a detection device. More generally, any detection device
can be regarded as a kind of collision that annihilates the particle
and hands its properties on in a more usable form. Thus the
source concept can again be introduced as an abstraction of an
annihilation collision, with the source acting negatively, as a sink.
We now have a complete theoretical picture of any physical
situation, in which sources are used to create the initial particle
of interest from the vacuum state, and sources are used to detect
the ﬁnal particles resulting from some interaction, thus returning
to the vacuum state.

32

[Schwinger then wrote down an expression that describes the
probability amplitude that the vacuum state before sources act
remains the vacuum state after sources act, the vacuum persis-
tence amplitude.] The basic things that appear in this expression
are the source functions and space-time functions that represent
the state into which the particle is emitted and from which it
is absorbed, thus describing the intermediate propagation of the
particle.

This simple expression can be generalized to apply to particles
that have charge, spin, etc., and to situations where more than
one particle is present at a time. Interactions between particles
are described in terms containing more than two sources.

Our starting point accepts particles as fundamental—we use
sources to identify the particles and to incorporate a simpliﬁed
view of dynamics. From that we evolve a more complete dynam-
ical theory in which we combine simple source arrangements like
building blocks to produce descriptions of situations that can in
principle be as complex as we want.

A ﬁrst test of this approach would be to see if we can repro-
duce the results of some well-established theory such as quantum-
electrodynamics. What is the starting point in this attack on
electrodynamics? It is the photon, a particle that we know has
certain striking properties such as zero rest mass and helicity 1.
So we must include all these aspects of the photon in the pic-
In
ture, and describe how photons are emitted and absorbed.
consequence, the source must be a vector, and it must be diver-
genceless.

This approach leads us to something resembling a vector po-
tential, and when we ask what diﬀerential equations it satisﬁes
we ﬁnd they are Maxwell’s equations. We start with the concept
of the source as primary and are led to Maxwell’s diﬀerential
equations as derived concepts.

The description of interactions follows the tentative proce-
dures of life in the real world. The theory is not stated once
and for all. It begins with simple phenomena—for example, ac-
celerated charges radiate. It then extrapolates that information
outside its domain, predicts more complicated phenomena, and
awaits the test of experiment. We do not begin with a ﬁnal de-

33

scription of, say, electron scattering. We extrapolate to it from
more elementary situations, and this is still not the ﬁnal descrip-
tion.

As the theory develops and becomes more encompassing, we
go back to reﬁne the description of the scattering process and
obtain a more quantitative account of it. This is the concept
of an interaction skeleton. The process is there but it is not
ﬁnally described to start with, its existence is merely recognized.
This simpliﬁed reconstruction of electrodynamics is completely
successful.

To indicate the wide sweep of the new approach, I mention
that classical gravitation theory (Einstein) can be reconstructed
and simpliﬁed in a similar way by beginning with the quantum
relativistic properties of the basic particle, the graviton, although
here indirect evidence for its properties must be adduced.

But the real proving ground for source theory comes from the
domain for which it was invented, strong interactions. The start-
ing point is experimental information at low energies. The ten-
tative extrapolations are toward higher energies. The method is
quite elementary compared to other current techniques. The suc-
cessful correlations that have been obtained emphasize the com-
pletely phenomenological nature of our present knowledge about
particles and refute attempts to lend fundamental credence to
this or that particle model.

A more fundamental theory may come into being one day, but
it will be the outcome of continued experimental probing to higher
energies, and will doubtless involve theoretical concepts that are
now only dimly seen. But that day will be greatly speeded if the
ﬂood of experimental results is organized and analyzed with the
aid of a theory that does not have built into it a preconception
about the very question that is being attacked. This theory is
source theory.

16.2 The Impact of Source Theory

Robert Finkelstein has oﬀered a perceptive discussion of Schwinger’s source
theory program:

34

In comparing operator ﬁeld theory with source theory Julian re-
vealed his political orientation when he described operator ﬁeld
theory as a trickle down theory (after a failed economic theory)—
since it descends from implicit assumptions about unknown phe-
nomena at inaccessible and very high energies to make predictions
at lower energies. Source theory on the other hand he described
as anabatic (as in Xenophon’s Anabasis) by which he meant that
it began with solid knowledge about known phenomena at acces-
sible energies to make predictions about physical phenomena at
higher energies. Although source theory was new, it did not rep-
resent a complete break with the past but rather was a natural
evolution of Julian’s work with operator Green’s functions. His
trilogy on source theory is not only a stunning display of Julian’s
power as an analyst but it is also totally in the spirit of the mod-
est scientiﬁc goals he had set in his QED work and which had
guided him earlier as a nuclear phenomenologist.88

But the new approach was not well received. In part this was because
the times were changing; within a few years, ’t Hooft89 would establish the
renormalizability of the Glashow-Weinberg-Salam SU(2) × U(1) electroweak
model, and ﬁeld theory was seen by all to be viable again. With the discovery
of asymptotic freedom in 1974,90 a non-Abelian gauge theory of strong inter-
actions, quantum chromodynamics, which was proposed somewhat earlier,91
was promptly accepted by nearly everyone. An alternative to conventional
ﬁeld theory did not seem to be required after all. Schwinger’s insistence on a
clean break with the past, and his rejection of “rules” as opposed to learning
through serving as an “apprentice,” did not encourage conversions.

Already before the source theory revolution, Schwinger felt a growing
sense of unease with his colleagues at Harvard. But the chief reason Schwinger
left Harvard for UCLA was health related. Formerly overweight and inactive,
he had become health conscious upon the premature death of Wolfgang Pauli
in 1958. (Ironically, both died of pancreatic cancer.) He had been fond of
tennis from his youth, had discovered skiing in 1960, and now his doctor was
recommending a daily swim for his health. So he listened favorably to the
entreaties of David Saxon, his closest colleague at the Radiation Lab during
the war, who for years had been trying to induce him to come to UCLA.
Very much against his wife’s wishes, he made the move in 1971. He brought
along his three senior students at the time, Lester DeRaad, Jr., Wu-yang

35

Tsai, and the present author, who became long-term “assistants” at UCLA.
He and Saxon expected, as in the early days at Harvard, that students would
ﬂock to UCLA to work with him; but they did not. Schwinger was no longer
the center of theoretical physics.

This is not to say that his little group at UCLA did not make an heroic
attempt to establish a source-theory presence. Schwinger remained a gifted
innovator and an awesome calculator. He wrote 2-1/2 volumes of an ex-
haustive treatise on source theory, Particles, Sources, and Fields,92 devoted
primarily to the reconstruction of quantum electrodynamics in the new lan-
guage; unfortunately, he abandoned the project when it came time to deal
with strong interactions, in part because he became too busy writing papers
on an “anti-parton” interpretation of the results of deep-inelastic scattering
experiments.93 He made some signiﬁcant contributions to the theory of mag-
netic charge; particularly noteworthy was his introduction of dyons.94 He
reinvigorated proper-time methods of calculating processes in strong-ﬁeld
electrodynamics;95 and he made some major contributions to the theory of
the Casimir eﬀect, which are still having repercussions.96 But it was clear he
was reacting, not leading, as witnessed by his quite pretty paper on the “Mul-
tispinor Basis of Fermi-Bose Transformation,”97 in which he kicked himself
for not discovering supersymmetry, following a command private performance
by Stanley Deser on supergravity.

17 The Axial-Vector Anomaly and Schwinger’s

Departure from Particle Physics

In 1980 Schwinger gave a seminar at MIT that marked his last scientiﬁc visit
to the East Coast,∗∗ and caused him to abandon his attempt to inﬂuence
the development of high-energy theory with his source theory revolution.
The talk was on a subject that he largely started in his famous “Gauge
Invariance and Vacuum Polarization” paper,54 the triangle or axial-vector
anomaly. In its simplest and basic manifestation, this “anomaly” describes
how the neutral pion decays into two photons. The pion coupling could
be regarded as occurring either through a pseudoscalar or an axial vector

∗∗This does not count a talk he gave at MIT in 1991 in honor of birthdays of two of his
students, where he gave a “progress report” on his work on cold fusion and sonolumines-
cence, excerpts of which is given in Ref. [2].

36

coupling, which formally appeared be equivalent, but calculations in the
1940s gave discrepant answers. Schwinger resolved this issue in 1950 by
showing that the two theories were indeed equivalent provided that proper
care (gauge-invariance) was used, and that the formal result was modiﬁed
by an additional term. Problem solved, and it was then forgotten for the
next 18 years. In the late 1960s Adler, Bell, and Jackiw rediscovered this
solution,59 but the language was a bit diﬀerent. The extra term Schwinger
had found was now called an anomaly, but the form of the equations, and
the prediction for the decay of the pion, were identical. In fact, at ﬁrst it
is apparent that Adler, Bell, and Jackiw were unaware of Schwinger’s much
earlier result, and it was the addition of Ken Johnson (one of Schwinger’s
many brilliant students) into the collaboration that corrected the historical
record.98

Shortly thereafter, Adler and Bardeen proved the “nonrenormalization”
theorem,99 that the anomaly is exact, and is not corrected by higher-order
quantum eﬀects. This is in contrast to most physical phenomena, such as the
anomalous magnetic moment of the electron, which is subject to corrections
in all orders of perturbation theory in the strength of the electromagnetic
coupling, the ﬁne structure constant. This seemed surprising to Schwinger,
so he suggested to his postdocs at UCLA that they work this out indepen-
dently, and they did, publishing two papers in 1972,100 in which they showed,
using two independent methods, that there was indeed such a correction in
higher order. However, Adler, who was the reviewer of these papers forced
them to tone down their conclusion, and to point out that the result depends
on the physical point at which the renormalization is carried out. Nonrenor-
malization indeed can be achieved by renormalization at an unphysical point,
which may be acceptable for the use of the theorem in establishing renor-
malizability of gauge theories, its chief application, but it is nevertheless true
that physical processes such as the original process of pion decay receives
higher-order corrections.

As was typical, Schwinger apparently took no notice of this dispute at
the time. But toward the end of the 1970s, while he was writing the third
volume of Particles, Sources, and Fields, he looked at the questions of radia-
tive corrections to neutral pion decay and found the same result as DeRaad,
Milton, and Tsai. He wrote an explicitly confrontational paper on the sub-
ject, which was the basis for the above-mentioned talk at MIT. The paper
was apparently deﬁnitively rejected, and the talk was harshly criticized, and
on the basis of these closed-minded attacks, Schwinger left the ﬁeld. For-

37

tunately for the record, Schwinger’s paper exists as a chapter in the ﬁnally
published third volume of Particles, Sources, and Fields.

However, the controversy lives on. In 2004 Steve Adler wrote a histori-
cal perspective on his work on the axial-vector anomaly.101 He devotes ﬁve
pages of his retrospective to attack the work of Schwinger and his group. He
even denies that Schwinger was the ﬁrst to calculate the anomaly, in blatant
disregard of the historical record. Of course, physical understanding had in-
creased in the nearly two decades between Schwinger’s and Adler’s papers,
but to deny that Schwinger was the ﬁrst person to oﬀer the basis for the con-
nection between the axial-vector and pseudoscalar currents, and the origin
of the photonic decay of the neutral pion, is preposterous.

18 Thomas-Fermi Atom, Cold Fusion, and

Sonoluminescence

When the last of his Harvard postdocs left UCLA in 1979, and the ﬂap over
the axial-vector anomaly ensued, Schwinger abandoned high-energy physics
altogether.
In 1980, after teaching a quantum mechanics course (a not-
unusual sequence of events), Schwinger began a series of papers on the
Thomas-Fermi model of atoms.102 He soon hired Berthold-Georg Englert,
replacing Milton as a postdoc, to help with the elaborate calculations. This
endeavor lasted until 1985. It is interesting that this work not only is re-
garded as important in its own right by atomic physicists, but has led to
some signiﬁcant results in mathematics. A long series of substantial papers
by C. Feﬀerman and L. Seco103 has been devoted to proving his conjecture
about the atomic number dependence of the ground state energy of large
atoms. As Seth Putterman has remarked, it is likely that, of all the work
that Schwinger accomplished at UCLA, his work on the statistical atom will
prove the most important.104

Following the Thomas-Fermi work, Schwinger continued to collaborate
with Englert, and with Marlan Scully, on the question of spin coherence. If
an atomic beam is separated into sub-beams by a Stern-Gerlach apparatus, is
it possible to reunite the beams? Scully had argued that it might be possible,
but Julian was skeptical; the result was three joint papers, entitled “Is Spin
Coherence Like Humpty Dumpty?”, which bore out Julian’s intuition of the
impossibility of beating the eﬀects of quantum entanglement.105

38

In March 1989 began one of the most curious episodes in physical science
in the last century, one that initially attracted great interest among the
scientiﬁc as well as the lay community, but which rapidly appeared to be a
characteristic example of “pathological science.”†† The eﬀect to which we
refer was the announcement by B. S. Pons and M. Fleischmann107 of the
discovery of cold fusion. That is, they claimed that nuclear energy, in the
form of heat, was released in a table-top experiment, involving a palladium
cathode electrolyzing heavy water.

So it was a shock to most physicists‡‡ when Schwinger began speaking and
writing about cold fusion, suggesting that the experiments of Pons and Fleis-
chmann were valid, and that the palladium lattice played a crucial role. In
one of his later lectures on the subject in Salt Lake City, Schwinger recalled,
“Apart from a brief period of apostasy, when I echoed the conventional wis-
dom that atomic and nuclear energy scales are much too disparate, I have
retained my belief in the importance of the lattice.”5 His ﬁrst publication
on the subject was submitted to Physical Review Letters, but was roundly
rejected, in a manner that Schwinger considered deeply insulting. In protest,
he resigned as a member (he was, of course, a fellow) of the American Physi-
cal Society, of which Physical Review Letters is the most prestigious journal.
(At ﬁrst he intended merely to withdraw the paper from PRL, and his fellow-
ship, but then he felt compelled to respond to the referees’ comments: One
comment was something to the eﬀect that no nuclear physicist could believe
such an eﬀect, to which Julian angrily retorted, “I am a nuclear physicist!”5)
In this letter to the editor (G. Wells) in which he withdrew the paper and
resigned from the American Physical Society, he also called for the removal
of the source theory index category the APS journals used: “Incidentally,

††This term was coined in 1953 by Irving Langmuir, who gave a celebrated lecture at
General Electric’s Knolls Atomic Power Laboratory (transcribed from a disc recording
by Robert Hall) on the phenomenon wherein reputable scientists are led to believe that
an eﬀect, just at the edge of visibility, is real, even though, as precision increases, the
eﬀect remains marginal. The scientist becomes self-deluded, going to great lengths to
convince one and all that the remarkable eﬀect is there just on the margins of what can
be measured. Great accuracy is claimed nevertheless, and fantastic, ad hoc, theories are
invented to explain the eﬀect. Examples include N-rays, the Allison eﬀect, ﬂying saucers,
and ESP. It was not a coincidence that Physics Today published the article, without
comment, in the fall of 1989.106

‡‡However, a few other eminent physicists spoke favorably of the possibility of cold
fusion, notably Edward Teller and Willis Lamb, who published three articles in the Pro-
ceedings of the U.S. National Academy of Sciences on the subject.

39

the PACS entry (1987) 11.10.mn can be deleted. There will be no further
occasion to use it.’;5, 108 A rather striking act of hubris: If he couldn’t publish
source theory, neither could anybody else. But the Physical Review obliged.
(Unfortunately, Schwinger failed to realize that the PACS index system has
become the predominant system for physics journals worldwide, a reﬂection
of the premier status of the APS journals. So he largely spited his own
contributions.) Not wishing to use any other APS venue, he turned to his
friend and colleague, Berthold Englert, who arranged that “Cold Fusion: A
Hypothesis” be published in the Zeitschrift f¨ur Naturforschung, where it ap-
peared in October of that year.109 Schwinger then went on to write three
substantial papers, entitled “Nuclear Energy in an Atomic Lattice I, II, III,”
to ﬂesh out these ideas.5, 110 The ﬁrst was published in the Zeitschrift f¨ur
Physik D,111 where it was accepted in spite of negative reviews,5 but directly
preceded by an editorial note, disclaiming any responsibility for the the pa-
per on the part of the journal. They subsequently refused to publish the
remaining papers.

Schwinger’s last physics endeavor marked a return to the Casimir eﬀect,
of which he had been enamored nearly two decades earlier. It was sparked by
the remarkable discovery of single-bubble sonoluminescence, in which a small
bubble of air in water, driven by a strong acoustic standing wave, undergoes
a stable cycle of collapse and re-expansion; at minimum radius an intense
ﬂash of light, consisting of a million optical photons, is emitted. It was not
coincidental that the leading laboratory investigating this phenomenon was,
and is, at UCLA, led by erstwhile theorist Seth Putterman, long a friend
and conﬁdant. Putterman and Schwinger shared many interests in common,
including appreciation of ﬁne wines, and they shared a similar iconoclastic
view of the decline of physics. So, of course, Schwinger heard about this
remarkable phenomenon from the horse’s mouth, and was greatly intrigued.∗
Schwinger immediately had the idea that a dynamical version of the
Casimir eﬀect might play a key role. He saw parallels between cold fusion and
sonoluminescence in that both deal with seemingly incommensurate energy
scales, and both depend signiﬁcantly on nonlinear eﬀects. Since by the early
1990s, cold fusion was largely discredited, he put his eﬀorts to understand-
ing sonoluminescence, which undoubtedly does exist. Unfortunately neither
Schwinger, nor anyone subsequently, was able to get very far with dynam-

∗For a review of the phenomena, and a detailed evaluation of various theoretical expla-

nations, see Ref. [112].

40

ical zero-point phenomena; he largely contented himself with an adiabatic
approximation based on static Casimir energies; and was able to obtain suf-
ﬁcient energy only because he retained the “bulk energy,” which most now
believe is unobservable, being subsumed in a renormalization of bulk mate-
rial properties. His work on the subject appeared as a series of short papers
in the PNAS, the last appearing113 shortly after his death in June 1994.

19 Conclusion

It is impossible to do justice in a few words to the impact of Julian Schwinger
on physical thought in the 20th Century. He revolutionized ﬁelds from
nuclear physics to many body theory, ﬁrst successfully formulated renor-
malized quantum electrodynamics, developed the most powerful functional
formulation of quantum ﬁeld theory, and proposed new ways of looking at
quantum mechanics, angular momentum theory, and quantum ﬂuctuations.
His legacy includes “theoretical tools” such as the proper-time method, the
quantum action principle, and eﬀective action techniques. Not only is he
responsible for formulations bearing his name: the Rarita-Schwinger equa-
tion, the Lippmann-Schwinger equation, the Tomonaga-Schwinger equation,
the Dyson-Schwinger equation, the Schwinger mechanism, and so forth, but
some attributed to others, or known anonymously: Feynman parameters,
the Bethe-Salpeter equation, coherent states, Euclidean ﬁeld theory; the list
goes on and on. His legacy of nearly 80 Ph.D. students, including four Nobel
laureates, lives on. It is impossible to imagine what physics would be like
in the 21st century without the contributions of Julian Schwinger, a very
private yet wonderful human being. It is most gratifying that a dozen years
after his death, recognition of his manifold inﬂuences is growing, and research
projects he initiated are still underway.

It is ﬁtting to close this retrospective with Schwinger’s own words, deliv-
ered some six months before his ﬁnal illness, when he received an honorary
degree from the University of Nottingham.114†

The Degree Ceremony is a modern version of a medieval rite
that seemed to confer a kind of priesthood upon its recipients,
thereby excluding all others from its inner circle. But that will

†This brief acceptance speech was followed by a brilliant lecture on the inﬂuence of

George Green on Schwinger’s work.114

41

not do for today. Science, with its oﬀshoot of Technology, has
an overwhelming impact upon all of us. The recent events at
Wimbledon invite me to a somewhat outrageous analogy. Very
few of us, indeed, are qualiﬁed to step onto centre court. Yet
thousands of spectators gain great pleasure from watching these
talented specialists perform. Something similar should be, but
generally is not, true for the relationship between the practition-
ers of Science and the general public. This is much more serious
than not knowing the diﬀerence between 30 all and deuce. Sci-
ence, on a big scale, is inevitably intertwined with politics. And
politicians have little practice in distinguishing between, say com-
mon law and Newton’s law. It is a suitably educated public that
must step into the breach. This has been underlined lately by
Minister Waldegrave’s cry for someone to educate him about the
properties of the Higgs boson, to be rewarded with a bottle of
champagne. Any member of the educated public could have told
him that the cited particle is an artifact of a particular theoretical
speculation, and the real challenge is to enter uncharted waters
to see what is there. The failure to do this will inevitably put an
end to Science. A society that turn in on itself has sown the seeds
of its own demise. Early in the 16th century, powerful China had
sea-going vessels exploring to the west. Then a signal came from
new masters to return and destroy the ships. It was in those years
that Portuguese sailors entered the Indian Ocean. The outcome
was 400 years of dominance of the East by the West.

There are other threats to Science. A recent bestseller in Eng-
land, Understanding the present, has the subtitle Science and the
soul of Modern Man. I shall only touch on the writer’s views to-
ward quantum mechanics, surely the greatest intellectual discov-
ery of the 20th century. First, he complains that the new physics
of quantum mechanics tosses classical physics in the trash bin.
This I would dismiss as mere technical ignorance; the manner
in which classical and quantum mechanics blend into each other
has long been established. Second, the author is upset that its
theories can’t be understood by anyone not mathematically so-
phisticated and so must be accepted by most people on faith. He
is, in short, saying that there is a priesthood. Against this I pose
my own experience in presenting the basic concepts of quantum

42

mechanics to a class of American high school students. They
understood it; they loved it. And I used no more than a bit of
algebra, a bit of geometry. So: catch them young; educate them
It all comes
properly; and there are no mysteries, no priests.
down to a properly educated public.

Acknowledgements

I am greatful to many colleagues for the interviews and conversations granted
me in writing about Julian Schwinger. I am particularly grateful to Robert
Finkelstein and Edward Gerjuoy for conversations in the past few months.
Again I must thank Charlotte Brown, Curator of Special Collections at
UCLA, for making the Schwinger archives available to me on many occa-
sions. My research over the year, not primarily historical, has been funded
by grants from the US Department of Energy and the US National Science
Foundation. I dedicate this memoir to Julian’s widow, Clarice.

References

[1] Norman Ramsey, interview by K. A. Milton, June 8, 1999.

[2] Jagdish Mehra and Kimball A. Milton, Climbing the Mountain: The
Scientiﬁc Biography of Julian Schwinger, (Oxford: Oxford University
Press, 2000).

[3] Larry Cranberg, telephone interview by K. A. Milton, 2001.

[4] Eileen F. Lebow, The Bright Boys: A History of Townsend Harris High

School (Westport CT: Greenwood Press, 2000).

[5] Julian Schwinger Papers (Collection 371), Department of Special Col-
lections, University Research Library, University of California, Los An-
geles.

[6] Joseph Weinberg, telephone interview by K. A. Milton, July 12, 1999.

[7] E. J. Townsend, Functions of Real Variables (New York: Holt, 1928).

43

[8] P. A. M. Dirac, Principles of Quantum Mechanics (Oxford: Oxford

University Press, 1930).

[9] Edward Gerjuoy, telephone interview by K. A. Milton, June 25, 1999.

[10] M. Hamermesh, “Recollections” at Julian Schwinger’s 60th birthday

celebration, UCLA, 1978 (AIP Archive).

[11] Edward Gerjuoy, talk given at the University of Pittsburgh and at

Georgia Tech, 1994, private communication.

[12] Sidney Borowitz, telephone interview by K. A. Milton, June 25, 1999.

[13] C. Møller, “ ¨Uber den Stoß zweier Teilchen unter Ber¨ucksichtigung der

Retardation der Kr¨afte” Zeit. f¨ur Phys. 70 (1931), 786–795.

[14] P. A. M. Dirac, “Relativistic Quantum Mechanics,” Proc. Roy. Soc.

London A136 (1932), 453–464.

[15] P. A. M. Dirac, V. A. Fock, and B. Podolsky, “On Quantum Electro-

dynamics,” Phys. Zeit. Sowjetunion 2 (1932), 468–479.

[16] W. Heisenberg and W. Pauli, “Zur Quantendynamik der Wellenfelder,”
Zeit. f¨ur Phys. 56 (1929), 1–61; ibid. “Zur Quantentheorie der Wellen-
felder. II,” 59 (1930), 168–190.

[17] J. Schwinger, “Quantum Electrodynamics—An Individual View,” J.
Physique 43, Colloque C-8, supplement au no. 12 (1982), 409–421;
“Renormalization Theory of Quantum Electrodynamics: An Individual
View,” in The Birth of Particle Physics, eds. L. M. Brown and L.
Hoddeson (Cambridge University Press, 1983), p. 329–353.

[18] K. A. Milton, ed., A Quantum Legacy: Seminal Papers of Julian

Schwinger (Singapore: World Scientiﬁc, 2000).

[19] A. Einstein, B. Podolsky and N. Rosen, “Can Quantum-Mechanical
Description of Physical Reality Be Considered Complete?” Phys. Rev.
47 (1935), 777–780.

[20] I. I. Rabi, talk at J. Schwinger’s 60th Birthday Celebration, February

1978 (AIP Archive).

44

[21] P. Debye and E. H¨uckel, “Zum Theorie der Elektrolyte,” Phys. Z. 24
(1923), 185–206; P. Debye, “Kinetische Theorie der Gesetze des Os-
motischen Drucks bei starken Elektrolyten,” ibid. 24 (1923), 334–338;
P. Debye, “Osmotische Zustandsgleichung und Aktivit¨at verd¨unnter
starker Elektrolyte,” ibid. 25 (1924), 97–107.

[22] J. Schwinger, “On Nonadiabatic Processes in Inhomogeneous Fields,”

Phys. Rev. 51 (1937), 648–561.

[23] J. Schwinger, “On the Neutron-Proton Interaction,” Phys. Rev. 55

(1939), 235.

[24] J. M. B. Kellogg, I. I. Rabi, N. F. Ramsey, and J. R. Zacharias, “An
Electrical Quadrupole Moment of the Deuteron,” Phys. Rev. 55 (1939),
318–319.

[25] W. Rarita and J. Schwinger, “On a Theory of Particles with Half-

Integral Spin,” Phys. Rev. 60 (1941), 61.

[26] B. Peters and C. Richman, “Deuteron Disintegration by Electrons,”

Phys. Rev. 59 (1941), 804–807.

[27] E. Gerjuoy and J. Schwinger, “On Tensor Forces and the Theory of

Light Nuclei,” Phys. Rev. 61 (1942), 138–146.

[28] E. Gerjuoy, Newsletter of the Forum on the History of Physics,
http://www.aps.org/units/fhp/FHPnews/news-fall05.cfm.

[29] J. R. Oppenheimer and J. Schwinger, “On Pair Emission in the Proton

Bombardment in Fluorine,” Phys. Rev. 56 (1939), 1066–1067.

[30] J. Schwinger, “On the Classical Radiation of Accelerated Electrons,”

Phys. Rev. 75 (1949), 1912–1925.

[31] K. A. Milton and J. Schwinger, Electromagnetic Radiation: Variational
Principles, Waveguides, and Accelerators (Berlin: Springer, 2006).

[32] W. E. Lamb, Jr., and R. C. Retherford, “Fine Structure of the Hydro-
gen Atom by Microwave Method,” Phys. Rev. 72 (1947), 241–243.

45

[33] R. P. Feynman, talk given at Schwinger’s 60th birthday celebration,
printed in Themes in Contemporary Physics II, ed. S. Deser and R. J.
Finkelstein (Singapore: World Scientiﬁc, 1989), pp. 91–93.

[34] H. A. Bethe, “The Electromagnetic Shift of Energy Levels,” Phys. Rev.

72 (1947), 339–341.

[35] J. E. Nafe, E. B. Nelson, and I. I. Rabi, “The Hyperﬁne Structure of
Atomic Hydrogen and Deuterium,” Phys. Rev. 71 (1947), 914–915; P.
Kusch and H. M. Foley, “Precision Measurement of the Ratio of the
Atomic ‘g Values’ in the 2P3/2 and 2P1/2 States of Gallium,” Phys. Rev.
72 (1947), 1256–1257.

[36] J. Schwinger, “On Quantum-Electrodynamics and the Magnetic Mo-

ment of the Electron,” Phys. Rev. 73 (1948), 416–417.

[37] S. M. Dancoﬀ, “On Radiative Corrections for Electron Scattering,”

Phys. Rev. 55 (1939), 959–963.

[38] Silvan S. Schweber, QED and the Men Who Made it: Dyson, Feynman,
Schwinger, and Tomonaga (Princeton: Princeton University Press,
1994).

[39] Norman Ramsey, Reminiscences of the Thirties, videotaped at Bran-

deis University, March 29, 1984, in Ref. [5].

[40] J. Schwinger, “Quantum Electrodynamics I. A Covariant Formula-
tion,” Phys. Rev. 74 (1948), 1439–1461; “Quantum Electrodynamics
II. Vacuum Polarization and Self Energy,” Phys. Rev. 75 (1949), 651–
679; “Quantum Electrodynamics III. The Electromagnetic Properties
of the Electron—Radiative Corrections to Scattering,” Phys. Rev. 76
(1949), 790–817.

[41] R. P. Feynman, “The Theory of Positrons,” Phys. Rev. 76 (1949),
749–759; “Space-Time Approach to Quantum Electrodynamics,” ibid.,
769–789.

[42] F. J. Dyson, “The Radiation Theories of Tomonaga, Schwinger, and
Feynman,” Phys. Rev. 75 (1949), 486–502; “The S Matrix in Quantum
Electrodynamics,” ibid. 1736–1755.

46

[43] H. A. Kramers, “Nonrelativistic Quantum Electrodynamics and Cor-
respondence Principle,” Rapports et discussions du 8e Conseil de
Physique Solvay 1948 (Bruxelles: Stoop, 1950), p. 241; M. Dresden, H.
A. Kramers: Between Transition and Revolution (New York: Springer-
Verlag, 1987); H. A. Kramers, Die Grundlagen den Quantentheorie—
Quantentheorie des Elektrons und der Strahlung [Hand- und Jahrbuch
der Chemischen Physik I, Abschnitt 1–2] (Leipzig: Akademische
Verlagsgesellschaft, 1938); “Die Wechselwirkung zwischen geladenen
Teilchen und Strahlungsfeld,” Nuovo Cim. 15 (1938), 108–114.

[44] S. Tomonaga, “On the Relativistically Invariant Formulation of the
Quantum Theory of Wave Fields,” Prog. Theor. Phys. 1, 27–42 (1946);
“On Inﬁnite Field Reactions in Quantum Field Theory,” Phys. Rev. 74
(1948), 224–225.

[45] R. P. Feynman, “Relativistic Cut-Oﬀ for Quantum Electrodynamics,”

Phys. Rev. 74 (1948), 1430–1438.

[46] J. B. French and V. F. Weisskopf, “On the Electromagnetic Shift of
Energy Levels,” Phys. Rev. 75 (1949), 338; “The Electromagnetic Shift
of Energy Levels,” 75 (1949), 1240–1248.

[47] N. M. Kroll and W. E. Lamb, Jr., “On the Self-Energy of a Bound

Electron,” Phys. Rev. 75 (1949), 388–389.

[48] P. A. M. Dirac, “The Lagrangian in Quantum Mechanics,” Phys. Zeit.

Sowjetunion 3 (1933), 64–72.

[49] J. Schwinger, “The Theory of Quantized Fields. I,” Phys. Rev. 82

(1951), 914–927.

[50] J. Schwinger, “On the Green’s Functions of Quantized Fields. I, II,”

Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA, 37 (1951), 452–455, 455–459.

[51] P. C. Martin, “Schwinger and Statistical Physics: A Spin-Oﬀ Success
Story and Some Challenging Sequels,” in Themes in Contemporary
Physics, eds. S. Deser, H. Feshbach, R. J. Finkelstein, K. A. Johnson,
and P. C. Martin (Amsterdam: North-Holland, 1979) Physica 96A
(1979), 70–88.

47

[52] P. C. Martin, “Julian Schwinger—Personal Recollections,” in Julian
the Physicist, the Teacher, and the Man, ed. Y. J. Ng

Schwinger:
(Singapore: World Scientiﬁc, 1996), p. 83–89.

[53] S. S. Schweber, “The Sources of Schwinger’s Green’s Functions,” Proc.

Natl. Acad. Sci. USA, 102 (2005), 7783–7788.

[54] J. Schwinger, “On Gauge Invariance and Vacuum Polarization,” Phys.

Rev. 82 (1951), 664–679.

[55] Lowell S. Brown, “An Important Schwinger Legacy: Theoretical
Tools,” talk given at Schwinger Memorial Session at the April 1995
meeting of the APS/AAPT. Published in Julian Schwinger: The Physi-
cist, the Teacher, the Man, ed. Y. Jack Ng (Singapore: World Scientiﬁc,
1996), p. 131–154.

[56] Science Citation Index (Philadelphia: Institute for Scientiﬁc Informa-

tion, 2005) [ISI Web of Science].

[57] Abraham Klein, telephone interview by K. A. Milton, December 14,

1998.

[58] W. Pauli and F. Villars, “On the Invariant Regularization in Relativis-

tic Quantum Theory,” Rev. Mod. Phys. 21 (1949), 434–444.

[59] J. S. Bell and R. Jackiw, “A PCAC Puzzle: π0 → γγ in the σ-Model,”
Nuovo Cimento 60A, Series 10 (1969), 47–61; S. L. Adler, “Axial-
Vector Vertex in Spinor Electrodynamics,” Phys. Rev. 177 (1969),
2426–2438.

[60] E. Salpeter and H. Bethe, “A Relativistic Equation for Bound-State

Problems,” Phys. Rev. 84 (1951), 1232–1242.

[61] M. Gell-Mann and F. Low, “Bound States in Quantum Field Theory,”

Phys. Rev. 84 (1951), 350–354.

[62] J. Schwinger, “On the Euclidean Structure of Relativistic Field The-
ory,” Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 44 (1958), 956–965; “Euclidean Quan-
tum Electrodynamics,” Phys. Rev. 115 (1959), 721–731.

48

[63] J. Schwinger, “Spin, Statistics, and the TCP Theorem,” Proc. Natl.
Acad. Sci. USA 44 (1958), 223–228; “Addendum to Spin, Statistics,
and the TCP Theorem,” ibid. 44 (1958), 617–619.

[64] P. C. Martin and J. Schwinger, “Theory of Many-Particle Systems,”

Phys. Rev. 115 (1959), 1342–1373.

[65] L. V. Keldysh, “Diagram Technique for Nonequilibrium Processes,”
Soviet Physics JETP 20 (1965), 1018–1026 [Zh. Eksp. Teor. Fiz. 47
(1964), 1515–1527].

[66] J. Schwinger, “Brownian Motion of a Quantum Oscillator,” J. Math.

Phys. 2 (1961), 407–432.

[67] J. Schwinger, “Field Theory Commutators,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 3 (1959),

296–297.

[68] J. Schwinger, “Gauge Invariance and Mass,” Phys. Rev. 125 (1962),
397–398; “Gauge Invariance and Mass II,” ibid. 128 (1962), 2425-2429.

[69] J. Schwinger, “Non-Abelian Gauge Fields. Commutation Relations,”
Phys. Rev. 125 (1962), 1043–1048; “Non-Abelian Gauge Fields. Rel-
ativistic Invariance,” ibid. 127 (1962), 324–330; “Non-Abelian Gauge
Fields. Lorentz Gauge Formulation,” ibid. 130 (1963), 402–405.

[70] R. Arnowitt, S. Deser, and C. W. Misner, “Canonical Variables for

General Relativity,” Phys. Rev. 117 (1960), 1595–1602.

[71] J. Schwinger, Quantum Kinematics and Dynamics (New York: Ben-

jamin, 1970).

[72] J. Schwinger, Quantum Mechanics: Symbolism of Atomic Measure-

ment, ed. B. Englert (Berlin: Springer, 2001).

[73] J. Schwinger, “On Angular Momentum,” 1952,

later published in
Quantum Theory of Angular Momentum, eds. L. S. Biedenharn and
H. Van Dam (New York: Academic Press, 1965), p. 229–279.

[74] M. Flato, C. Fronsdal, and K. A. Milton, eds., Selected Papers (1937–

1976) of Julian Schwinger (Dordrecht: Reidel, 1979).

49

[75] B. Lippmann and J. Schwinger, “Variational Principles for Scattering

Processes. I” Phys. Rev. 79 (1950), 469–480.

[76] J. Schwinger, “A Theory of Fundamental Interactions,” Ann. Phys.

(N.Y.) 2 (1957), 407–434.

22 (1961), 579–588.

[77] S. Glashow, “Partial-Symmetries of Weak Interactions,” Nucl. Phys.

[78] S. Weinberg, “A Model of Leptons,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 19 (1967), 1264–

[79] J. Schwinger, “Particles and Sources,” Phys. Rev. 152 (1966), 1219–

1266.

1226.

[80] For a contemporary account of S-matrix theory, see R. J. Eden, P. V.
Landshoﬀ, D. I. Olive, and J. C. Polkinghorne, The Analytic S-Matrix
(Cambridge University Press, 1966).

[81] For Regge poles, see S. C. Frautschi, Regge Poles and S-Matrix Theory

(New York: Benjamin, 1963).

[82] For current algebra, see S. L. Adler and R. F. Dashen, Current Algebras
and Applications to Particle Physics (New York: Benjamin, 1968).

[83] Bootstrap calculations were introduced in G. F. Chew and S. Man-
delstam, “Theory of the Low-Energy Pion-Pion Interaction–II,” Nuovo
Cimento 19, Series 10 (1961), 752–776. A survey of S-matrix theory
just before the bootstrap hypothesis may be found in G. F. Chew,
S-Matrix Theory of Strong Interactions (New York: Benjamin, 1961).

[84] An accessible early exposition of this approach is found in R. F. Streater
and A. S. Wightman, PCT, Spin and Statistics, and All That (New
York: Benjamin, 1964).

[85] For a modern exposition of some of these ideas, see J. Glimm and A.
Jaﬀe, Quantum Physics: A Functional Integral Point of View (New
York: Springer-Verlag, 1981).

[86] J. Schwinger, “Back to the Source,” Proceedings of the 1967 Interna-
tional Conference on Particles and Fields, eds. C. R. Hagen, G. Gural-
nik, and V. A. Mathur (New York: Interscience, 1967), pp. 128–156.

50

[87] J. Schwinger, “Julian Schwinger’s Approach to Particle Theory,” Stan-
ley H. Klosk lecture at NYU School of Engineering Science, published
in Scientiﬁc Research, August 18, 1969, pp. 19–24.

[88] R. Finkelstein, “Julian Schwinger: The QED Period at Michigan and
the Source Theory Period at UCLA” in Julian Schwinger: The Physi-
cist, the Teacher, and the Man, ed. Y. J. Ng (Singapore: World Scien-
tiﬁc, 1996), p. 105–109.

[89] G. ’t Hooft, “Renormalization of Massless Yang-Mills Fields,” Nucl.
Phys. B33 (1971), 173–199; “Renormalizable Lagrangians for Massive
Yang-Mills Fields,”B35 (1971), 167–188.

[90] D. J. Gross and F. Wilczek, “Ultraviolet Behavior of Non-Abelian
Gauge Theories,”Phys. Rev. Lett. 30 (1973), 1343–1346; H. D. Politzer,
“Reliable Perturbative Results for Strong Interactions?” Phys. Rev.
Lett. 30 (1974), 1346–1349; “Asymptotic Freedom: An Approach to
Strong Interactions,” Phys. Rep. 14C (1974), 129-180.

[91] M. Gell-Mann, Acta Phys. Austriaca Suppl. IV (1972), 733; H. Fritzsch
and M. Gell-Mann, “Current Algebra: Quarks and What Else?” in
Proc. XVI Int. Conf. on High Energy Physics, ed. J. D. Jackson and A.
Roberts (Batavia, IL: National Accelerator Laboratory, 1972) pp. 135–
165; W. A. Bardeen, H. Fritzsch, and M. Gell-Mann, “Light-Cone,
Current Algebra, π0 Decay, and e+e− Annihilation,” in Scale and Con-
formal Symmetry in Hadron Physics, ed. R. Gatto (New York: Wiley,
1973), p. 139–151.

[92] J. Schwinger, Particles, Sources, and Fields, Vol. I–III (Reading MA:

Addison-Wesley, 1970, 1973, 1989).

[93] J. Schwinger, “Source Theory Viewpoints in Deep Inelastic Scattering,”
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 72 (1975), 1–5; “Deep Inelastic Scattering
of Leptons,” ibid. 73 (1976), 3351–3354; “Deep Inelastic Scattering of
Charged Leptons,” ibid. 73 (1976), 3816–3819; “Deep Inelastic Neu-
trino Scattering and Pion-Nucleon Cross Sections,” Phys. Lett. 67B
(1977), 89–90; “Adler’s Sum Rule in Source Theory,” Phys. Rev. D 15
(1977), 910–912; “Deep Inelastic Sum Rules in Source Theory,” Nucl.
Phys. B 123 (1977), 223–239.

51

[94] J. Schwinger, “Sources and Magnetic Charge,” Phys. Rev. 173 (1968),
1536–1544; “A Magnetic Model of Matter,” Science 165 (1969), 757–
767; “Magnetic Charge and the Charge Quantization Condition,” Phys.
Rev. D 12 (1975), 3105–3111; J. Schwinger, K. A. Milton, W.-Y. Tsai,
L. L. DeRaad, Jr., “Non-relativistic Dyon-Dyon Scattering,” Ann.
Phys. (N.Y.) 101 (1975), 451–495.

[95] J. Schwinger, “Classical Radiation of Accelerated Electrons II. A Quan-
tum Viewpoint,” Phys. Rev. D 7 (1973), 1696–1701; J. Schwinger,
W.-y. Tsai, and T. Erber, “Classical and Quantum Theory of Syn-
ergic Synchrotron- ˇCerenkov Radiation,” Ann. Phys. (N.Y.) 96 (1976),
303–331; J. Schwinger and W.-y. Tsai, “New Approach to Quantum
Correction in Synchrotron Radiation,” ibid. 110 (1978), 63–84.

[96] J. Schwinger, “Casimir Eﬀect in Source Theory,” Lett. Math. Phys.
1 (1975), 43–47; J. Schwinger, L. L. DeRaad, Jr., and K. A. Milton,
“Casimir Eﬀect in Dielectrics,” Ann. Phys. (N.Y.) 115 (1978), 1–23;
K. A. Milton, L. L. DeRaad, Jr., and J. Schwinger, “Casimir Self-Stress
on a Perfectly Conducting Spherical Shell,” ibid. 115 (1978), 388–403.

[97] J. Schwinger, “Multispinor Basis of Fermi-Bose Transformation,” Ann.

Phys. (N.Y.) 119 (1979), 192–237.

[98] R. Jackiw and K. Johnson, “Anomalies of the Axial-Vector Current,”

Phys. Rev. 182 (1969), 1459–1469.

[99] S. L. Adler and W. A. Bardeen, “Absence of Higher-Order Corrections
in the Anomalous Axial-Vector Divergence Equation,” Phys. Rev. 182
(1969), 1517–1536.

[100] L. L. DeRaad, Jr., K. A. Milton, and W.-y. Tsai, “Second-Order Ra-
diative Corrections to the Triangle Anomaly. I,” Phys. Rev. D 6 (1972),
1766–1780; K. A. Milton, W.-y. Tsai, and L. L. DeRaad, Jr., “Second-
Order Radiative Corrections to the Triangle Anomaly. II,” Phys. Rev.
D 6 (1972), 3491–3500.

[101] S. L. Adler, “Anomalies to All Orders,” in Fifty Years of Yang-Mills
Theory, ed. G. ’t Hooft (Singapore: World Scientiﬁc, 2005) pp. 187–228
[arXiv:hep-th/0405040]

52

[102] J. Schwinger, “Thomas-Fermi Model: The Leading Correction,” Phys.
Rev. A 22 (1980), 1827–1832; “Thomas-Fermi Model: The Second
Correction,” ibid. 24 (1982), 2353–2361; J. Schwinger and L. L. DeR-
aad, Jr., “New Thomas-Fermi Theory: A Test,” ibid. 25 (1982), 2399–
2401; B.-G. Englert and J. Schwinger, “Thomas-Fermi Revisited: The
Outer Regions of the Atom,” ibid. 26 (1982), 2322–2329; “Statisti-
cal Atom: Handling the Strongly Bound Electrons,” ibid. 29 (1984),
2331–2338; “Statistical Atom: Some Quantum Improvements,” ibid.
29 (1984), 2339–2352; “New Statistical Atom: A Numerical Study,”
ibid. 29 (1984), 2353–2363; “Semiclassical Atom,” ibid. 32 (1985), 26–
35; “Linear Degeneracy in the Semiclassical Atom,” ibid. 32 (1985),
36–46; “Atomic-Binding-Energy Oscillations,” ibid. 32 (1985), 47–63.

[103] C. Feﬀerman and L. Seco, “On the Energy of Large Atoms,” Bull.
Am. Math. Soc. 23 (1990), 525–530, continuing through “The Eigen-
value Sum for a Three-Dimensional Radial Potential,” Adv. Math. 119
(1996), 26–116. See also A. Cordoba, C. Feﬀerman, and L. Seco, “A
Number-Theoretic Estimate for the Thomas-Fermi Density,” Comm.
Part. Diﬀ. Eqn. 21 (1996), 1087–1102.

[104] Seth Putterman, conversation with K. Milton, in Los Angeles, July 28,

1997.

[105] B.-G. Englert, J. Schwinger, and M. O. Scully, “Is Spin Coherence Like
Humpty Dumpty? I. Simpliﬁed Treatment,” Found. Phys. 18 (1988),
1045–1056; “Is Spin Coherence Like Humpty Dumpty? II. General
Theory,” Z. Phys. D 10 (1988), 135–144; “Spin Coherence and Humpty
Dumpty. III. The Eﬀects of Observation,” Phys. Rev. A 40 (1989),
1775–1784.

[106] I. Langmuir, Physics Today, October 1989, p. 36.

[107] New York Times (National Edition), March 24, 1989, p. A16; M. Fleis-
chmann, S. Pons, and M. Hawkins, “Electrochemically Induced Nuclear
Fusion of Deuterium,” J. Electroanal. Chem. 261 (1989), 301–308; er-
rata: 263 (1989), 187–188.

[108] Berthold Englert, correspondence to K. Milton, February 8, 1998.

[109] J. Schwinger, “Cold Fusion: A Hypothesis,” Z. Naturforsch. A 45

(1990), 756.

53

[110] Berthold-Georg Englert, telephone interview by K. Milton, March 16,

[111] J. Schwinger, “Nuclear Energy in an Atomic Lattice,” Z. Phys. D, 15

1997.

(1990), 221–225.

[112] M. P. Brenner, S. Hilgenfeldt, and D. Lohse, “Single-bubble sonolumi-

nescence,” Rev. Mod. Phys. 74 (2002), 425–484.

[113] J. Schwinger, “Casimir Light: A Glimpse,” Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA
90 (1993), 958–959; “Casimir Light: The Source,” ibid. 90 (1993),
2105–2106; “Casimir Light: Photon Pairs,” ibid. 90 (1993), 4505–4507;
“Casimir Light: Pieces of the Action,” ibid. 90 (1993), 7285–7287;
“Casimir Light: Field Pressure,” ibid. 91 (1994), 6473–6475.

[114] “Schwinger’s Response to an Honorary Degree at Nottingham,” in Ju-
lian Schwinger: The Physicist, the Teacher, and the Man, ed. Y. J. Ng
(Singapore: World Scientiﬁc, 1996), p. 11–12.

54

