Granular Matter manuscript No.
(will be inserted by the editor)

Brian P. Tighe · Matthias Sperl

6
0
0
2
 
t
c
O
 
3
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
t
s
i
h
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
1
0
2
0
1
6
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Pressure and Motion of Dry Sand – Translation of Hagen’s Paper
from 1852

February 2, 2008

Abstract In a remarkable paper from 1852, Gotthilf Hein-
rich Ludwig Hagen measured and explained two fundamen-
tal aspects of granular matter: The ﬁrst effect is the satura-
tion of pressure with depth in a static granular system con-
ﬁned by silo walls – generally known as the Janssen effect.
The second part of his paper describes the dynamics ob-
served during the ﬂow out of the container – today often
called the Beverloo law – and forms the foundation of the
hourglass theory. The following is a translation of the origi-
nal German paper from 1852.

1 Introduction

Gotthilf Heinrich Ludwig Hagen is most renowned for his
contributions to the study on laminar ﬂow in pipes; his mea-
surements published in 1839 studied what is now well-known
as the (Hagen-)Poiseuille law [1, 2]. Less well-known is Ha-
gen’s work on granular systems. While Janssen, with his
1895 paper, typically receives credit for the saturation ef-
fect in granular silos [3, 4], it was Hagen in his paper ¨Uber
den Druck und die Bewegung des trocknen Sandes [5] who
measured this effect earlier – but also not for the ﬁrst time,
cf. [6] – and offered a ﬁrst model that provided a qualitative
understanding of the effect. Hagen proposes a quadratic law
(with some cutoff) for the pressure instead of the exponen-
tial form put forward by Janssen more than 40 years later
[4, 7].

In addition to the discussion of a static pile of sand, Ha-
gen examines in considerable detail the ﬂow through an open-
ing of the container, and discovers that the rate of discharge
is proportional to the diameter of the opening raised to the
power 5/2. This result is elegantly derived from dimensional
analysis [7, ch 10.2]; but it ﬁts the data best if instead of the
real diameter some effective diameter is used – the resulting
law is known as the Beverloo correlation [8]. Hagen ﬁnds
an effective opening diameter that is smaller by twice the

Duke University, Department of Physics, Box 90305,
Durham, NC 27708, USA,
E-mail: msperl@duke.edu

particle diameter, which is consistent with more recent mea-
surements.

Hagen’s work lays out the basis of the so-called hour-
glass theory where the ﬂow of granular material is found to
be independent of the ﬁlling height in the container, thus al-
lowing the measure of time with an hourglass [7, sec 10.4].
Later work both conﬁrms and extends Hagen’s early analy-
sis [9]. More recently, a lot of work has been devoted to un-
derstanding the fundamental differences between ﬂuid and
granular ﬂows [10]. While on the level of the individual
grains the probability of arching at the opening is a matter
of current investigations [11], Hagen provides a successful
route to a continuum description of the ﬂow by the rescaling
of the diameter of the opening.

2 Gotthilf Heinrich Ludwig Hagen, Pressure and Motion
of Dry Sand, 19th January 1852

Consider a container with a horizontal bottom that includes
a circular opening of radius r. In this opening is placed a
disk which is easily movable but seals tightly; on top of it
is an extended ﬁlling of sand up to a height h. As a result,
there is a pressure exerted on the disk created by the weight
of the cylinder of sand above it less the friction which is
experienced by that cylinder from the sand surrounding it.
The friction is proportional to the horizontal pressure, or the
square of the height. Let l denote a friction dependent con-
stant and g be the weight of a unit volume of sand, then the
pressure against the disk equals

r2p

g h − 2rp

lh2.

For a growing h, this expression will increase in the be-
ginning, reach a maximum, and subsequently decrease after-
wards; it will become not only zero but even negative. How-
ever, the sand cylinder is not rigidly connected throughout,
and therefore the axial pressure, which its lower part exerts
on the bottom disk, cannot be compensated by the strong
friction acting on the cylinder as a whole. Hence, the pres-
sure on the disk in fact remains unchanged for ﬁllings higher

g
2

than that height at which the pressure on the disk reaches its
maximum value.

For the case of pressures below the maximum, we seek to
represent that pressure by the weight of a free-standing body
of sand on the disk. The body is bounded by the surface of
the ﬁlling. It is a conoid that is formed by the rotation of a
parabola around its axis. Here the parameter of the parabola
is 4rl, while the height of the paraboloid is r/(4l). The latter
body joins the circumference of the opening.

To compare these results with the real phenomenon, I
created openings of radii of 0.3791 inch1 and 0.7271 inch,
respectively, in two brass plates used as the the bottom of the
sand-ﬁlled container; these openings were closed with suit-
able disks that were supported from underneath by hooks
that were connected to one arm of a balance, while the other
arm carried the counterweight. To reduce the counterweight
to the pressure on the disk slowly and without concussion,
sand was allowed to discharge through a small hole in the
bottom of the plate. The constant error of this method could
be found easily by measurement of the excess weight of the
disk and the hook compared to the plate both by the dis-
charge of sand and by direct weighing.

While repeating measurements of the pressure due to the
the sand against the disks multiple times, considerable de-
viations among the measurements were observed; this was
apparently due to different ways of settling. When the set-
tling was as loose as possible, the weight of a cubic inch of
the sand, a crude ferrous grit, was 2.9 Loth2. However, the
weight increased to 3 Loth when there was modest agitation
during ﬁlling and rose to 3.25 Loth as soon as a fairly com-
pact settling was generated by severe agitation or by push-
ing a wire into the container. In so doing, the friction in-
creased by even more than the speciﬁc weight. Hence, the
pressure against the disk became remarkably smaller for the
more compact settling.

With the larger disk the pressure maximum was reached
at a ﬁlling height of around 1 inch: for larger height the pres-
sure decreased somewhat, since despite great care the sand
settled in a slightly denser state. For the loosest ﬁllings I
found l = 0.154 to 0.175. In contrast, the deviations were
less when the sand was dropped from a height of several
inches in a narrow stream, and when the sand ﬂow was cone-
shaped: the value for l was limited to between 0.21 and 0.22.
The inﬂuence of different settling states was also clearly
noticeable as the sand discharged through the openings of
various radii. When the settled ﬁlling was somewhat denser,
there was less sand ﬂowing within a second. As the dis-
charge duration increased, the sand became agitated, par-
ticularly in the vicinity of the opening, resulting in an in-
creased sensitivity, which in turn led to a diminished ﬂow.
Incidentally, the height of the ﬁlling had no inﬂuence, as
was already recognized by Huber-Burnand some time ago

1 trans. note: The German Zoll is translated as inch; however, it
might deviate slightly from the value generally used today; most likely
1 Zoll = 26.15mm [12].

2 trans. note: The German Loth (or Lot) is a unit of mass, 1 Loth =

1/32 Handelspfund(Berlin) ≈ 14.6g [12].

[6]3. To reduce the mentioned irregularities as much as pos-
sible, I limited the duration of each observation to 30 to 200
seconds and, additionally, tried to make the ﬁllings rather
uniform. To this end, the container was placed in a metal-
sheet cylinder with a sieve-like bottom, ﬁlled with sand, and
lifted slowly thereafter; in this way the sand poured into the
container in several hundred thin streams, each from a very
small height.

The openings at the bottom of the container, with their
sharp edges always on the upper face, had the following
radii:

opening
opening
opening
opening
opening
opening

inch
inch
inch
inch
inch
inch
The amount of outﬂowing sand per second, averaged

0.1677
0.1203
0.0986
0.0807
0.0549
0.0377

1
2
3
4
5
6

over six observations each, was:

for the opening
for the opening
for the opening
for the opening
for the opening
for the opening

1
2
3
4
5
6

Loth
1.8995
Loth
0.7596
Loth
0.4330
0.2481
Loth
0.08242 Loth
0.02676 Loth

Comparing these weights with the radii of the openings,
the former seem to be approximately proportional to the
third power of the latter. An attempt to represent them in
the form

m = kr3,

however, did not produce a satisfactory result; the remaining
errors were rather signiﬁcant and very regular, so they could
not be interpreted as observational errors. In contrast, if the
radius of the opening was reduced by some length, a nearly
constant ratio was observed between the mass of sand and
the 2.5th power of the reduced radius. The reduction of the
radius is justiﬁed by noting that the granules that touch the
edge of the opening while falling lose their speed partially or
completely and even disturb the motion of the neighboring
granules when bouncing off. From repeated measurements it
was found that, on average, 9 granules of sand constitute the
length of a Rhineland line4 hence the diameter of a single
one equals 0.0093 inches.

Thus I compared the masses of the sand with the expres-

sion

m = k(r − x)

5
2

k = 189.07
x = 0.00968.

and found after introducing approximate values for x accord-
ing to the method of least squares from all six observations

3 trans. note: The reference was added for the translation. There are

no references given in the original.

4 trans. note: The German Rheinl¨andische Linie is a unit of length,

typically 1/12 of a Zoll, hence 1 line = 2.18mm [12].

3

Using these values to calculate m, the remaining errors are

If instead one introduces the value

The ﬁrst observation agrees the least with the ﬁtted val-
ues, but is also in itself less accurate than the other obser-
vations for two reasons: for one part, its duration was the
shortest, and for the other part, the sand was poured out
vehemently and became heavily agitated, and the container
was almost completely emptied. Therefore, I tried to deter-
mine the values of the two constants independently of the
ﬁrst observation, using only the last ﬁve. This gives

m = 181.57(r − 0.00893)

5

2 .

The deviations from the observed weights were thereupon

for
for
for
for
for
for

for
for
for
for
for
for

1
2
3
4
5
6

1
2
3
4
5
6

-0.0181
+0.0094
+0.0135
+0.0075
-0.00003
-0.00142

-0.0712
-0.0085
+0.0050
+0.0039
+0.00002
-0.00 078

The radius reduction x for the discharge opening is found
to be close to the diameter of a grain of sand. From the
constant k can be determined the average distance from the
opening at which the sand begins its free fall. Assuming that
the sand forms a compact mass until reaching the opening,
the amount of sand discharged per second is

where h designates the mentioned height of fall and r
the
effective opening. On the other hand, the observations yield

Equating both expressions and setting g
from the average loose packings, one ﬁnds

to 2.93 as obtained

If, in contrast, one assumes that for each unit of time
a layer of sand of the same vertical height separates from
the whole inner area of the paraboloid mentioned above in
a free fall, then one can easily ﬁnd the average velocity of
this layer while passing the opening, and from the latter the
average height of fall of the entire mass. This height is

m = 2r 2p

g pgh

m = 181.57 · r

5

2 .

h = 0.5185 · r .

But from the data for loose packings it was found that

h =

r
9l

.

l = 0.16

and hence

h = 0.6944 · r.

which is valid for packings where sand is ﬂowing sideways,
which really happens during the discharge, then

l = 0.225,

h = 0.4938 · r.

The result derived from the observations is in between the
two when r is interchanged with r
. This interchange is nec-
essary because the sand only hits the edge of the opening
when in motion; in contrast, when at rest all the sand grains
encountering the movable disk also load it. This conﬁrms the
assumption from above that the free fall of the sand starts on
the surface of the paraboloid; it also explains that the amount
of sand ﬂowing through the opening is proportional to the
power 5

2 of the effective radius of the opening.

Finally, some comments should be made about the mo-

tion of the sand during discharge.

In the four inch wide and ten inch tall container, above
the outlet, the entire surface of the sand packing subsided
uniformly in the beginning. Only gradually did a dip form
vertically above the outlet. The dip grew continually, and
above its sides sand fell down. Concurrently, at the rim of the
container a ring-shaped, almost horizontal surface remained.
This surface also subsided, but without the granules of sand
experiencing strong sideways motion. The ﬂat ring gradually
assumed a smaller width and disappeared completely when
the funnel-shaped dip reached the outlet. From this it follows
that the sand ﬂows not only vertically towards the outlet but
also along concentric inclined trajectories, and that the mo-
tion extends up to a slope, which a free surface of sand can
exhibit.

The motion in the inner part of the sand mass revealed
itself very explicitly when I ﬁlled sand in a container hav-
ing side walls made from a glass panel. Since this glass
panel touched the outlet, one could follow the motion of sin-
gle grains of sand down to the opening. The strongest ﬂow
formed vertically above the outlet; in fact the sand granules
approached it with increasing yet moderate speed until, di-
rectly above, they were accelerated in a way that they could
no longer be seen. Nevertheless, the sand also ﬂowed in-
wards from the side of the outlet, but this motion was inter-
rupted frequently and only occurred periodically, presum-
ably due to friction at the glass.

Underneath the opening, the stream of sand was not nearly
as sharply bounded as a water-jet; rather, it was surrounded
by single granules that from time to time departed as far as
several lines5. Because of this the streams ﬂowing from the
larger outlets showed a signiﬁcant reduction in their diam-
eters, extending about 2 inches deep. In addition, the mea-
surement showed that even immediately under the disk the
stream is already much weaker than at the outlet. The out-
let was 0.335 inch in diameter while the stream was only
0.29 inch at a distance of 1 1
2 lines, and contracted to 0.27 inch
at greater depth. The reason for this effect is not the effective

5 trans. note: Linien, plural as in Rheinl¨andische Linien.

4

reduction of the opening mentioned above, since this would
only explain the weakening of the stream by about 2% of an
inch; instead, the sand ﬂowing sideways continues its mo-
tion towards the axis even after having passed the outlet, and
the granules hitting the rim of the opening are also reﬂected
towards the axis.

The stream of sand hence experiences a contraction sim-
ilar to the stream of a liquid; and when one compares the
diameter of the opening with the smallest diameter of the
stream, the ratio appears as

or for the ratio of cross sections

1 : 0.806

1 : 0.650 .

This agrees closely with the known contraction ratios for
liquid streams leaving openings in thin walls.

Acknowledgements This work is supported by nsf-dmt0137119, DMS0244492,
and DFG SP 714/3-1.

References

1. G. H. L. Hagen, Poggendorffs Annalen der Physik und

Chemie 46, 423 (1839).

2. S. P. Sutera and R. Skalak, Annu. Rev. Fluid Mech. 25,

1 (1993).

3. H. A. Janssen, Zeitschr. d. Vereines deutscher Inge-

nieure 39, 1045 (1895).

4. M. Sperl, Granular Matter 8, 59 (2006).
5. G. H. L. Hagen, Bericht ¨uber die zur Bekanntmachung
geeigneten Verhandlungen der K¨oniglich Preussischen
Akademie der Wissenschaften zu Berlin. pp. 35–42
(1852).

6. Huber-Burnand, Ann. d. Phys. 92, 316 (1829).
7. R. M. Nedderman, Statics and kinematics of granular
materials (Cambr. Univ. Press, Cambridge, 1992).
8. W. A. Beverloo, H. A. Leniger, and J. van de Velde,

Chem. Eng. Sci. 15, 260 (1961).

9. K. Wieghardt, Annu. Rev. Fluid Mech. 7, 89 (1975).
10. J. Rajchenbach, Adv. Phys. 49, 229 (2000).
11. K. To, P.-Y. Lai, and H. K. Pak, Phys. Rev. Lett. 86, 71

(2001).

12. W. Trapp, Kleines Handbuch der Maße, Zahlen,
Gewichte und der Zeitrechnung (Reclam, Stuttgart,
1996).

