6
0
0
2
 
v
o
N
 
3
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
t
s
i
h
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
9
1
1
1
1
6
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

The discovery of superﬂuidity

S´ebastien Balibar∗

Laboratoire de Physique Statistique de l’Ecole Normale Sup´erieure
associ´e aux Universit´es Paris 6 et 7 et au CNRS
24 Rue Lhomond, 75231 Paris Cedex 05, France

Superﬂuidity is a remarkable manifestation of quantum mechanics at the
macroscopic level. This article describes the history of its discovery, which
took place at a particularly diﬃcult period of the twentieth century. A special
emphasis is given to the role of J.F. Allen, D. Misener, P. Kapitza, F.
London, L. Tisza and L.D. Landau. The nature and the importance of their
respective contributions are analyzed and compared. Of particular interest is
the controversy between Landau on one side, London and Tisza on the other,
concerning the relevance of Bose-Einstein condensation to the whole issue,
and also on the nature of thermal excitations in superﬂuid helium 4. In order
to aid my understanding of this period, I have collected several testimonies
which inform us about the work and attitude of these great scientists.

PACS numbers : 67.40.-w,01.65.+g

1.

Introduction

Scientiﬁc progress has become a collective process. No physicist can ever
pretend that he has achieved something, that he had had a personal idea
or made any original discovery independently of his colleagues. Recognizing
this situation does not mean that it is impossible to identify the authors of
scientiﬁc discoveries, but one should do it carefully. Instead, there is some
tendency to attribute discoveries to single persons, an attitude which is not
fair enough. Moreover, our prize tradition is certainly very nice, stimulating
and generous, but it has some drawbacks: one is tempted to forget those
among our colleagues who did not win. With these ideas in mind, I have
found particularly interesting to inquire about the history of the discovery
of superﬂuidity.

∗e-mail: balibar@lps.ens.fr

As we shall see, I am not saying that Kapitza in 1978 or Landau in 1962
were awarded the Nobel prize for the discovery of superﬂuidity, nor criticiz-
ing this choice.
In fact, for Kapitza it was “for his basic inventions and
discoveries in the area of low-temperature physics” and for Landau “for his
pioneering theories for condensed matter, especially liquid helium”. Further-
more, in the oﬃcial presentation speech of Kapitza’s prize, it was mentioned
that “The same discovery was made independently by Allen and Misener”.
However, since superﬂuidity occupies a large part in the oﬃcial presentation
of their prizes, and since nobody else was recognized at that level for the
discovery of superﬂuidity, there is a general tendency to forget that other
great scientists have achieved major contributions to this discovery. It is this
tendency which I wish to criticize. One example is the article Superﬂuidity
in the Encyclopaedia Britannica, which starts with the sentence: “Super-
ﬂuidity in helium-4 was discovered in 1938 by the Soviet physicist Pyotr
Leonidovich Kapitsa.” Another striking example is the presentation speech
of the 1996 Nobel prize to Lee, Osheroﬀ, and Richardson, where one reads:
“it was not until the end of the 1930s that Pjotr Kapitsa (Nobel Prize 1978)
discovered experimentally the phenomenon of superﬂuidity in helium-4” (no
mention of Allen and Misener this time). As we shall see below, Landau
also considered that superﬂuidity had been discovered by Kapitza only and
he must have had a strong inﬂuence on the opinion of his colleagues; for
example E.M. Lifshitz wrote:“I have been asked by the editors of Scientiﬁc
American to give a short survey of what has been learned about superﬂuid-
ity, ﬁrst discovered in 1937 by Peter L. Kapitza at the Institute for Physical
Problems in Moscow”.1 As for the attribution of the theoretical understand-
ing of superﬂuidity to Landau, the situation is more subtle, especially since
the discovery of superﬂuidity in alkali gases2,3 where the existence of Bose-
Einstein condensation is obvious, but it is somewhat similar. For example,
R. Donnelly wrote4 : “Finally, there was no great scientiﬁc leader active in
understanding liquid helium in the early days. When Kapitza and the great
theoretical physicist Landau, followed by physicists such as Fritz London,
Lars Onsager, Richard Feynman and other greats, came on board, there was
a tremendous surge of excitement, which lasted for many years and helped
I wish to explain
bring the subject to its present state of understanding”.
that the contributions by London and by Tisza, which were published three
years before Landau’s, were major breakthroughs in the understanding of
superﬂuidity. Fortunately, my opinion seems to be shared by several other
authors.5,6

Some aspects of this issue have already been considered by several au-
thors, especially by R. Donnelly in the article mentioned above4, by K.
Gavroglu in his biography of Fritz London7, by A. Griﬃn at a summer school

2

on Bose-Einstein condensation8 and in his study of “John C. McLennan and
his pioneering research on superﬂuid helium”9, and by J. Matricon and G.
Waysand in their book10. When trying to go deeper into it, I distinguished
three more precise questions :

1- Who made the experimental discovery ?
2- Who has initiated its theoretical understanding ?
3- How did all this happen in a period (the late 1930’s and early 1940’s)

where the world was torn apart by conﬂicts and wars ?

One usually considers that superﬂuidity was discovered in December
1937, the submission date of the two articles on the ﬂow of liquid helium
which appeared side by side in Nature on January 8, 1938. On page 74 was
the article by P. Kapitza11 and on page 75 the one by J.F. Allen and A.D.
Misener12. As we shall see, very important work was also done before, espe-
cially in Toronto and in Leiden, but it is really the publication of these two
articles which triggered the theoretical work of London, Tisza, and Landau.
The purpose of this article is to put everyone’s work back in its historical
and scientiﬁc context, so that the importance of each contribution could be
judged. It is also to analyze the very interesting controversy which opposed
Landau to London and Tisza about the role of Bose-Einstein condensation
(BEC) in superﬂuidity and about the nature of excitations in superﬂuid 4He.
In order to understand it I have recently inquired from Tisza himself, from
D. Shoenberg, and from A. Abrikosov whose testimonies are reproduced
here. I am also grateful to L. Pitaevskii, G. Volovik, A. Griﬃn, H. Meyer
and G. Gorelik for several fruitful discussions. I cannot pretend that I have
fully understood the role and the attitude of every actor in the discovery of
superﬂuidity but I hope that this article will stimulate further research on
this very important event in the history of twentieth century physics.

2. Experiments

The two articles published in Nature are respectively entitled: “Viscos-
ity of liquid helium below the lambda point” (page 74), received December
3, 1937, by P. Kapitza (Institute for Physical Problems, Moscow) and “Flow
of liquid Helium-II” (page 75), received on December 22, 1937, by J.F. Allen
and A.D. Misener (Royal Society Mond Laboratory, Cambridge, UK). Both
the expressions “lambda point” and “helium II” refer to the work of W.
H. Keesom and his group in Leiden. Tλ is the temperature now known as
2.17 K where Keesom, Wolfke and Clusius13,14 discovered an anomaly in
the properties of liquid 4He : the graph of the temperature variation of its
speciﬁc heat has a sharp maximum with the shape of the Greek letter λ.

3

Thanks to a series of experiments, Willem Keesom had realized that 4He
had two diﬀerent liquid states which he called “Helium I” above Tλ, and
“Helium II” below (for a review, see Keesom’s book15). It must have been
rather surprising to ﬁnd two diﬀerent liquid states for liquid helium which
is made of simple spherical atoms without chemical properties.

In 1937, Kapitza tried to understand why, a year earlier in Leiden, the
same Willem Keesom had found with his daughter Ania16 that the thermal
conductivity of helium II was anomalously large, a phenomenon which had
also been studied by B.V. Rollin in Oxford17 and by J.F. Allen, R. Peierls,
and M.Z. Uddin in Cambridge18. Kapitza thought that convection in this
liquid could be important if its viscosity was small and that it could be
responsible for the large apparent thermal conductivity. He thus tried to
measure this viscosity by ﬂowing liquid helium from a tube through a slit
about 0.5 micrometers thick, between two polished cylinders pressed against
each other. In his article11, Kapitza writes:

“The ﬂow of liquid above the λ-point could be only just detected over
several minutes, while below the λ-point the liquid helium ﬂowed quite easily,
and the level in the tube settled down in a few seconds. From the measure-
ments we can conclude that the viscosity of helium II is at least 1500 times
smaller than that of helium I at normal pressure.

The experiments also showed that in the case of helium II, the pressure
drop across the gap was proportional to the square of the velocity of ﬂow,
which means that the ﬂow must have been turbulent. If, however, we calculate
the viscosity assuming the ﬂow to have been laminar, we obtain a value
of order 10−9 cgs, which is evidently still only an upper limit to the true
value. Using this estimate, the Reynolds number, even with such a small
gap, comes out higher than 50,000, a value for which turbulence might indeed
be expected”.

These two paragraphs are a little diﬃcult to understand. Kapitza does
not give any value for the ﬂow velocity in the slit, nor for the height diﬀerence
which drove the ﬂow. Since the Reynolds number is R = U L/ν where U is
the velocity, L a typical length scale and ν the kinematic viscosity (ν = η/ρ
where η is the viscosity and ρ the density), I understand that, with η = 10−9
10−5 cm, he must have measured velocities
cgs, ρ = 0.15 g/cm3, and L = 5
U up to about 7 cm/s. As we shall see, this is comparable to what had been
measured by Allen and Misener and conﬁrmed by later work, although it
depends very much on the size of the ﬂow (see the review in the book by
Wilks19, p. 391). As far as I know, Kapitza’s square law for the pressure drop
has not been conﬁrmed by any later work, but since he does not give much
quantitative information on his measurements, it is diﬃcult to appreciate
the accuracy at which this square law could ﬁt his data. Given what is

×

4

known today, I suppose that he approximated the pressure dependence of
the velocity – which shows a threshold – with a square law. Anyhow, Kapitza
ﬁnally proposes that:

“by analogy with superconductors, . . . the helium below the λ-point enters

a special state which might be called superﬂuid”.

This is a famous sentence where Kapitza introduces the word “super-
ﬂuid” for the ﬁrst time. His intuition was quite remarkable because superﬂu-
ids and superconductors are indeed analogous states of matter, but Kapitza
wrote this sentence long before the BCS theory of superconductivity was
established, a fortiori before any demonstration of such an analogy.

As for the article by Allen and Misener, it starts with the sentence:
“A survey of the various properties of liquid helium II has prompted us to
investigate its viscosity more carefully. One of us[1] had previously deduced
an upper limit of 10−5 cgs units for the viscosity of helium II by measuring
the damping of an oscillating cylinder. We had reached the same conclusion
as Kapitza in the letter above; namely that, due to the high Reynolds number
involved, the measurements probably represent non-laminar ﬂow ”.

Before arguing on the question of priority between Moscow and Cam-
bridge, I wish to comment on the note [1]. It refers to the article by E.F.
Burton published in 1935 by Nature20.
In this short article, Burton ex-
plains that, by measuring the damping of an oscillating cylinder which was
suspended by a thin rod, it was possible to measure the viscosity of liquid
helium. This method was later improved by J.G. Dash and R.D. Taylor21
and again by F.L. Andronikashvili and by J.D. Reppy22,23,24 for extensive
studies of superﬂuidity. He further explains that, below Tλ, the viscosity
drops down by several orders of magnitude. He ﬁnishes with the sentence :

“This work was carried out by Messrs. Wilhelm, Misener and A.R.Clark.”
Burton was the head of the Toronto Physics Department where Misener
was a Master’s graduate student at that time, and Wilhelm and Clark were
two technicians in cryogenics. The details of this work were later published
by Wilhelm, Misener and Clark in the Proceedings of the Royal Society25
and I am rather surprised that, at that time, the head of a physics depart-
ment could publish work by members of his department without including
their names in the list of authors. Since the three real authors of the work
published without including Burton as a co-author, one could imagine that
there was a conﬂict between them but this is probably not true since, two
years later in his Nature article with Allen, Misener referred to Burton in-
stead of referring to his own article. . . I have to suppose that publication
policies have evolved a lot since that time. It remains clear that, as soon
as in 1935, the existence of an anomaly in the viscous dissipation in helium
II had already been demonstrated in Toronto. However, in 1935, no one

5

had realized that the hydrodynamics of helium II was so anomalous that its
viscosity could not be measured with classical methods.

At the beginning of his article, Burton also explains that liquid helium
stops boiling when cooled below Tλ. This phenomenon had been observed
by McLennan three years earlier in Toronto26 and it was later attributed
to its very large thermal conductivity. For all physicists working on liquid
helium, it remains the spectacular manifestation of quantum order taking
place in this remarkable liquid (see ﬁg. 1).

More important is the reference to Kapitza at the beginning of the ar-
ticle by Allen and Misener. We understand that they had read Kapitza’s
article before writing their own, or at least that they had heard of its con-
tent. Together with the 19 days diﬀerence in the submission date, this has
sometimes been taken as a proof that Kapitza had some priority on Allen
and Misener in the experimental discovery of superﬂuidity22. However, as
we shall see, I do not agree with such a statement.

The Cambridge article contains a detailed study of the ﬂow through two
diﬀerent capillaries with sections respectively equal to 6x 10−4 and 0.8 mm2.
Measurements are given at two diﬀerent temperatures (1.07 and 2.17 K)
and at series of ten diﬀerent pressures. Flow velocities range from 0.4 to
14 cm/s. Their main ﬁndings were that, contrary to Poiseuille’s law which
describes laminar situations, the velocity was nearly independent of pressure,
also independent of the capillary section. The measurements by Allen and
Misener could obviously not be done in 19 days. I cannot imagine that they
started their study after hearing of Kapitza’s article. If a proof is needed,
it is in their notebook which shows that Allen and Misener had obtained
results already on November 24, 1937.27

Let us now comment on Kapitza’s work. Kapitza had graduated as
an electrical engineer in Saint Petersburg under the supervision of F. Ioﬀe
(1918). In 1921, Ioﬀe suggested that Kapitza goes to Cambridge where he
could work with Rutherford. There, he proved to be a brilliant experimental
physicist. For example, he made the ﬁrst detection of the bending of alpha-
particle paths in a magnetic ﬁeld thanks to a cloud chamber. Then, he built
a pulsed magnetic ﬁeld installation and a hydrogen liqueﬁer with his student
John Cockcroft. He was quickly elected Fellow of Trinity College (1925) and
Fellow of the Royal Society (1929) “a rare distinction for a foreigner, espe-
cially for one who became a Corresponding Member of the Soviet Academy
of Sciences in the same year”, as explained by David Shoenberg28. Then,
Rutherford obtained from the Royal Society that part of the donation from
Ludwig Mond that was used to build the “Royal Society Mond Laboratory”
where Kapitza could develop his low temperature and high magnetic ﬁeld
studies. In this laboratory, he constructed a new type of helium liqueﬁer

6

Fig. 1. As shown by these two images from a ﬁlm by J.F. Allen and
J.M.G. Armitage, superﬂuid helium stops boiling below Tλ. This is due
to its large thermal conductivity. The top image is taken at 2.4 K as indi-
cated by the needle of the thermometer on the left. The bottom image is
taken just below the lambda transition.

7

which produced its ﬁrst drops of liquid helium on April 19, 1934, and made
such experiments much easier.29

In the summer of 1934, Kapitza went back to Leningrad. He had come
to see his mother and to participate in a symposium celebrating the cen-
tenary of Mendeleiev. However, on September 24, 1934, ﬁve months only
after the ﬁrst operation of his liqueﬁer in Cambridge, he was not allowed to
return to England from the Soviet Union29. The reasons for this are a little
unclear but, according to D. Shoenberg28, “he had sometimes been rather
boastful of his successes in England and gave the impression that his work
could be of immense technological importance if only he were given the right
support. The authorities, possibly Stalin himself, took him at his word and
told him that he must in the future work for them, although in fact none of his
work was secret and it was available to everyone”. Later, Stalin would need
Kapitza for his nuclear program and conﬂicts with Beria triggered Kapitza’s
disgrace. But in 1934, Kapitza started a ﬁght with Stalin and Molotov to
obtain support for his research. Two years later, the “Institute for Physical
Problems” was built for Kapitza in Moscow. Thanks to the help of Ruther-
ford, he could also arrange that part of his equipment be purchased from
Cambridge and transferred to Moscow, so that he could start his research
again.

At that stage, one major problem for Kapitza was that Cambridge had
kept his liqueﬁer. In 1935, liqueﬁers existed only in Leiden, Toronto, Cam-
bridge, Oxford, and Kharkov. But Kapitza also obtained the right to invite
his student David Shoenberg and two technicians, E.Ya. Laurmann and H.E.
Pearson, in order to build a new helium liqueﬁer in Moscow. They made a
better liqueﬁer which produced liquid helium on February 22, 1937.29 Mean-
while, Cambridge had used Kapitza’s rather high salary (800 pounds a year)
to hire two younger scientists, Rudolf Peierls and J.F. Allen who seemed
satisﬁed with 400 pounds a year each.30

John Franck (“Jack”) Allen was born in Winnipeg (Canada) and he had
obtained his PhD on superconductivity in Toronto (1933). Then, he tried to
join Kapitza in Cambridge but when he arrived in the fall of 1935, Kapitza
was already detained in USSR. In 1936, he attracted Donald Misener to
work towards a PhD degree in Cambridge with him. We thus realize that
Kapitza was competing with two Canadian physicists who were using his
former liqueﬁer in his former laboratory where he was still in close contact
with other people. Of course, this situation was very painful to him (“ . . . I
often see my laboratory in my dreams, and painfully want to work. . . ” as he
wrote to his wife29 in March 1935). Anyhow, when Kapitza sent his letter
to Nature, he wrote in the accompanying letter to the editor:

“Dear Gregory,

8

I am sending herewith a short note: ‘Viscosity of liquid helium below the
λ-point’, which I hope you will kindly publish in your ‘letters to the editor’.
I think this is an important note and I should be glad if you could arrange
it to be published as soon as possible, and with the day of dispatch. Please
do not bother to send the proofs to me here to Moscow, it takes too much
time. If necessary please send them either to Prof. P.A.M. Dirac, Dr. J.D.
Cockcroft, or to Dr. W.L. Webster ... All my good friends [are] suﬃciently
competent to make the necessary corrections. I hope you will kindly help me
in publishing this note very soon ... ”

As explained by Allen himself30 and by Shoenberg28, it was John Cockcroft31

who took care of the proof-reading. He was the new director of the Mond
Laboratory since Kapitza had left. In December 1937, he showed Kapitza’s
letter to Allen and Misener and asked them to write down their own results
as quickly as possible. He ﬁnally asked Nature to publish the two papers
side by side.

It is clear to me that the Cambridge work was independent of Kapitza’s
work in Moscow. My main reason is that, as an experimental physicist in
the same ﬁeld, I know that it is not possible to make all the measurements
which are presented by Allen and Misener in 19 days only.

Now, was Kapitza’s work independent of the Cambridge work? After
all, Kapitza’s insistence to be published with a mention of the date of receipt
indicates that he probably knew that his competitors were working on the
same subject. Furthermore, his letter presents qualitative ideas which could
have been written down quickly. One should also note that the ability of he-
lium II to ﬂow through narrow slits (the existence of “superleaks”) had been
discovered in 1930 by Willem Keesom.32 But one does not know if Kapitza
was aware of Keesom’s observation. Could Kapitza have written his letter
after hearing of the progress made by Allen and Misener in Cambridge? No-
body having ever mentioned such a possibility, I wish to consider it carefully.
When I asked David Shoenberg to tell me about this period, he answered:

“My memory of the events is not entirely reliable, though I do remember
that I helped translate the Russian version of Kapitza’s letter into English.
Kapitza’s letter was sent to Nature with a request that proofs should go to
Cockcroft rather than back to Kapitza in Moscow. Also W.L. Webster who
had been brieﬂy visiting Kapitza in Moscow took a copy to show to Cockcroft.
Cockcroft had not, I think, known of Kapitza’s work and showed the note to
Jack Allen who had obtained basically the same result (‘superﬂuidity’ below
the λ point) and suggested that he writes a brief note (with Misener) in which
he commented on Kapitza’s note. Cockcroft asked Nature to print the 2 notes
side by side but it is quite clear that Kapitza’s note had ‘oﬃcial’ priority (a)
because of the dates of receipt by Nature and (b) because evidently Allen had

9

seen Kapitza’s note before he wrote his own. It is a pity Allen never got
adequate recognition of his quite independent discovery of superﬂuidity – he
and Kapitza could well have shared a Nobel prize! I don’t think Allen and
Kapitza ever met till much later. I know that Kapitza was at ﬁrst rather cross
that his He liqueﬁer was used while he had to wait a long time before he had
liquid helium in Moscow (see one of his letters to his wife in 1934 or 5). I
don’t think Kapitza and Allen ever communicated directly by letter. I myself
know Kapitza was getting exciting new results while I was in Moscow (as a
guest visitor) and knew that Allen was continuing his work on He (fountain
eﬀect etc. was already published) but I have no memory of discussing the
work of either with the other. At that time it would have been dangerous
to write to anyone about work going on in Moscow. I was in Moscow from
September 1937 to September 1938. I did not travel out of the Soviet Union
at all during that time.”33

According to Shoenberg, the work in Moscow was thus independent from
the one in Cambridge because there were no contacts between Cambridge
and Kapitza, but I cannot believe this because letters have been published
by Rubinin29 which show the opposite. For example, Rutherford sent a letter
to Kapitza on October 9, 1937, where he wrote:

“My dear Kapitza,
. . . Bohr told me about his trip to you [in June 1937], and I am very in-
terested to hear of the work that you have been able to accomplish. No doubt
Pearson, when he returns, will be able to give us the latest information about
your big helium liqueﬁer. The Mond laboratory is very ﬂourishing, and a
large amount of work is in progress. . . Some interesting experiments are also
in progress on the extraordinary heat conductivity of helium at low temper-
atures. The conductivity is very large for small diﬀerences of temperature,
and falls rapidly with the quantity of heat transmitted. . . ”

This was ten days only before Rutherford died, and Kapitza must have
known this death rather quickly because he sent a letter to John Cockcroft
on the ﬁrst of November where he wrote:

“My dear John,
It is diﬃcult to believe that there is no more Rutherford. . . Things in the
lab are not going badly at all. We just started the new liqueﬁer and the ﬁrst
time it gave four liters per hour. Now it is quite certain that Pearson will be
free before the new year, I will not claim his services any more after that. . . ”
Obviously, there were regular contacts between Kapitza and his friends
in Cambridge. Furthermore, according to Rubinin,29 Webster had visited
Kapitza in Moscow in September 1937. As a consequence, it seems to me
that Kapitza might well have known something about Allen’s results. How-
ever, I am not saying that Allen and Misener have a priority on Kapitza, in

10

particular because of a letter from Kapitza to Niels Bohr, dated December
10, 1937, where he says:

“Dear Bohr,
I had your letter about the death of Rutherford, which apparently crossed
with mine. I had a number of letters from friends, and it is indeed wonderful
how much the people appreciated Rutherford. . . All this time I was very busy
working on the viscosity of helium below the λ-point. May be you remember
what I was telling you during your visit here about the idea of the work,
the experiments are in full progress, but the preliminary results are quite
interesting. It appears that really below the λ-point the viscosity of helium
drops more than a 1000 times. . . I made the experiments about 20 times
varying the conditions and looking for some possible errors, but could not
ﬁnd any. I am sending herewith a copy of my preliminary note to Nature, so
if you will be interested you could glance through it. . . Yours very sincerely,

P. Kapitza”
Since Bohr’s visit was in June 1937, this letter proves that Kapitza
was at least planning his experiments six months earlier. It also shows that
Kapitza did much more than a single experiment before sending his letter
to Nature. My conclusion on the priority issue is that there is no priority in
either way, the two works are independent.

Let us ﬁnally summarize the content of the four experimental contri-
butions to the problem of superﬂuidity. In 1930 Keesom had observed that
helium II was highly ﬂuid and in 1935 Wilhelm, Misener and Clark had mea-
sured in Toronto a sharp drop of the viscosity below the λ-point. Then, in
December 1937, Kapitza claimed that the ﬂow of liquid helium II was tur-
bulent and that its viscosity could not be larger than 10−9 cgs units. As for
Allen and Misener, they presented the results of a series of measurements,
from which they concluded :

“the observed type of ﬂow. . . in which the velocity becomes almost inde-
pendent of pressure, most certainly cannot be treated as laminar or even as
ordinary turbulent ﬂow. Consequently any known formula cannot, from our
data, give a value of the viscosity which would have much meaning”.

In my opinion, it is Allen and Misener who discovered that, below Tλ,
the hydrodynamics of helium required a totally new interpretation. At that
time, everyone else kept considering that liquid helium was a liquid with a
small viscosity. Here is the real experimental breakthrough.

It would be very interesting to understand how Kapitza had the intuition
that helium II had something in common with superconductors. The idea
that superconductors were quantum systems which had to be described by
a macroscopic wave function had been put forward by Fritz London and his
brother Heinz35 but, as we shall see now, London had not yet considered

11

that it could be the case for liquid helium also. Furthermore, and as we
shall see when considering Landau’s work, this was not the way how one
liked to think about liquid helium in Moscow.

London’s new ideas36 were triggered by the next article34 published by
Allen in the same volume 141 of Nature on February 5, 1938. Entitled “New
phenomena connected with heat ﬂow in helium II”, this new letter described
the discovery of what is now known as the fountain eﬀect: together with
Misener again for the experiments, but published with H. Jones, the new
young theorist who replaced Peierls in Cambridge, Allen discovered that,
when heat was applied to liquid helium II on one side of a porous plug, the
pressure increased proportionally to the heat current so that the level of the
free surface went up (it was later realized that the fountain pressure was in
fact proportional to the temperature diﬀerence between the two sides). A
liquid jet could even occur if the pressure was high enough. If the liquid had
been classical, the vapor pressure would have been higher on the warm side
so that, in order ot maintain hydrostatic equilibrium in the liquid, its level
would have had to go down. Allen and Jones explained that the opposite was
observed. For London, it was no longer possible to doubt that this liquid
had totally anomalous properties for which a radically new interpretation
was needed. In previous work37, Fritz London had proposed that helium II
was more ordered than helium I (its speciﬁc heat decreased sharply below
Tλ) and perhaps some kind of crystal with a diamond lattice. However,
on March 5, 1938, London sent a letter to Nature which was published on
April 9. There, he explained that liquid helium II was not crystalline before
proposing that it was undergoing some kind of Bose-Einstein condensation
at Tλ.36

3. London and Tisza

In the introduction of his ﬁrst book38, London, writes:
“In 1924, Einstein developed a very strange concept of a gas of identical
molecules, which were assumed to be indistinguishable. . . Einstein remarked
that this removal of the last vestige of individuality from the molecules of a
species would imply a statistical preference of the molecules for having the
same velocity, even if any interaction between them were disregarded, and
this preference would lead, at a well-deﬁned temperature to a kind of change
of state of aggregation; the molecules would ‘condense’ into the lowest quan-
tum state, the state of momentum zero. Einstein did not give a very detailed
proof, and his remark received little attention at the time. Most people con-
sidered it a kind of oddity which had, at best, an academic interest, for at the

12

extremely low temperatures or high pressures in question there are no gases,
all matter being frozen or at least condensed by virtue of the intermolecular
interaction forces. In addition, doubt was cast on the mathematical correct-
ness of Einstein’s remark, and hence the matter was disposed of as if there
were no ‘Bose-Einstein condensation’.”

On November 29, 1924, Einstein himself had sent a letter to his friend

Paul Ehrenfest in Leiden, where he wrote :

“From a certain temperature on, the molecules ‘condense’ without at-
tractive forces, that is, they accumulate at zero velocity. The theory is pretty,
but is there also some truth in it ? ”.39

By generalizing the calculation by the young Bengali physicist Satyendra
Nath Bose40 to massive particles, Einstein had found41 that, for an ideal gas
of Bose particles, a macroscopic fraction of these particles accumulates in
the ground state below the critical temperature

TBEC =

2π¯h2
1.897mkB !

 

n2/3

(1)

At that time, the theory of phase transitions was still in its infancy,
and, in his PhD work42, Uhlenbeck had argued against the BEC being a
true phase transition by saying that it would not occur in a ﬁnite size sys-
tem. Uhlenbeck was a graduate student of Paul Ehrenfest and, apparently,
his criticism was generally accepted, even by Einstein himself.8 In November
1937, a conference took place in Amsterdam in honor of van der Waals (Jo-
hannes Diderik van de Waals was born hundred years before, on November
23, 1837 in Leiden). Fritz London was there7 and he must have heard dis-
cussions including Ehrenfest and Kramers about the thermodynamic limit
in connection with phase transitions, also that Uhlenbeck had withdrawn
his argument against BEC (see his publication with Boris Kahn, his student
who was later killed by the Nazis43). This must be what triggered London’s
interest in Einstein’s forgotten paper on BEC.8

In a message which he sent me on the September 4th, 2001, Tisza made

the following comment on the discovery of superﬂuidity:

“The novelty of the eﬀect became strikingly apparent in the Allen and
Jones fountain eﬀect that started London and myself on our speculative
spree. . . ”

In his letter to Nature 36, Fritz London ﬁrst recalled that 4He atoms
were Bose particles, then that liquid 4He was a quantum liquid because the
quantum kinetic energy of the atoms was large, something he had explained
in a previous article37. This large “zero point energy” was responsible for
the absence of crystallization at low pressure, something which had been also
noticed by Franz Simon.44 Then London explained that, although BEC had

13

“rather got the reputation of having only a purely imaginary existence. . . it
actually represents a discontinuity in the temperature derivative of the spe-
ciﬁc heat”, meaning that it was a phase transition of third order (according
to the classiﬁcation by Ehrenfest). Then he calculated the transition tem-
perature TBEC at which an ideal Bose gas with the same density as liquid
4He would condense in Einstein’s sense and he found 3.1 K, a value close
to Tλ. He further noticed that the singularity in the speciﬁc heat of helium
resembled the cusp predicted for BEC. He then concluded that, “Though the
λ-point resembles rather a phase transition of second order, it seems diﬃ-
cult not to imagine a connexion with the condensation of the Bose-Einstein
statistics. The experimental values of the temperature of the λ-point and of
its entropy seem to be in favor of this conception.” Keeping this modest
attitude, he also estimated that his model, “ which is so far from reality that
it simpliﬁes liquid helium to an ideal gas”, was a rough approximation which
could not give quantitative agreement with experimental measurements. To
a modern eye, everything looks right in this letter to Nature. Shortly after-
wards, he expanded his letter into a longer article published the same year.45
London’s new ideas created considerable interest7,8, in particular from Laszlo
Tisza.

Fritz London was born in Breslau (now Wroclaw in Poland) in 1900
and he had started studies in philosophy before switching to physics.7 He
was educated at the universities of Bonn, Frankfurt, G¨ottingen and Munich
where he graduated in 1921. Together with Walter Heitler in Zurich, he had
devised the ﬁrst quantum mechanical treatment of the hydrogen molecule
in 1927. He then joined Schroedinger in Berlin but in 1933, when the Nazis
took power, he escaped to Oxford where Lindemann found support for him
till 1936. Then, he was quite happy to ﬁnd a position at the Institut Henri
Poincar´e in Paris where he was attracted by a group of intellectuals linked to
the “Front populaire” (the coalition of political parties from the French left),
namely Paul Langevin, Jean Perrin, Fr´ed´eric Joliot and Edmond Bauer.

Laszlo Tisza had arrived in Paris in 1937 for similar reasons. He was
born in 1907 and he had studied in Budapest before attending Max Born’s
course in G¨ottingen. Later, he worked in Leipzig under Heisenberg and
wrote his ﬁrst paper with Edward Teller, just before being arrested by the
Hungarian fascist government under the accusation of being a communist.46
In 1935, he was liberated and Teller strongly recommended him to his friend
Lev Landau in Kharkov. There, Tisza entered as number 5 the famous school
of theoretical physics which Landau had founded. But in March 1937, both
Landau and Tisza left Kharkov. At this time, Tisza must have tried to
protect himself from anti-Semitism, just like London. In September 1937,
Paul Langevin and Edmond Bauer oﬀered him a position at the Coll`ege de

14

France in Paris. This is where he met Fritz London; the Coll`ege de France
is about 300 meters from the Institut Henri Poincar´e.

Laszlo Tisza told me47 that they liked discussing physics together during
long walks. On one such occasion, London explained his ideas about BEC to
him and he had soon the intuition that, if BEC took place, there should be
two independent velocity ﬁelds in liquid helium. One part would have zero
viscosity and zero entropy; the other part would be viscous and would carry
entropy; the proportion of each ﬂuid would be related to temperature. He
sent this as a short note to Nature on April 16th, 1938, which introduced for
the ﬁrst time what is now known as the “two ﬂuid model”.48 He announced
there more detailed publications which were presented in French by Paul
Langevin at the Acad´emie des Sciences on November 14th, 1938, and indeed
published in its Comptes-Rendus.49

On the basis of his model, Tisza solved the apparent contradiction be-
tween diﬀerent types of measurement of the viscosity of helium II: in the
Toronto experiment (Wilhelm, Misener, and Clark, 1935), the damping of
the oscillations of the cylinder was related to the viscosity of the whole ﬂuid
while in a ﬂow through a thin capillary (Allen and Misener, 1937) or through
a thin slit (Kapitza, 1937) only the non-viscous component of the ﬂuid could
ﬂow. He further explained in this Nature note that the independent motion
of the two ﬂuids allowed one to understand the fountain eﬀect. He eventu-
ally predicted an inverse phenomenon, namely that “a temperature gradient
should arise during the ﬂow of helium II through a thin capillary”. The lat-
ter was to be named the “thermomechanical eﬀect” by Fritz London45 and
his brother Heinz50; evidence for its existence was found by Mendelssohn
and Daunt in Oxford51 and further studied by Kapitza52 in 1941. In the fol-
lowing articles to the Comptes-Rendus49, Tisza predicted that, in helium II,
heat should propagate as “temperature waves”, another revolutionary idea.
In July 1938, Tisza “presented this prediction at a small low temperature
meeting in London. . . and oﬀered it to make or break [his] theory”.53 His
temperature waves were later renamed “second sound” by Landau, discov-
ered by Peshkov in 1946 and were indeed taken as a crucial test of his theory
(see below).

At least qualitatively, the 1938 papers by London and Tisza could ex-
plain all the experimental observations which had been already made at that
time, namely the ﬂow and heat conduction experiments, the heat capacity
measurements, also the fast motion of ﬁlms adsorbed on a wall by Rollin54,
conﬁrmed by Daunt and Mendelssohn.55 But still, when London ﬁrst heard
about Tisza’s two ﬂuid model, he could not believe that, in a liquid which
was pure and simple, there could be two independent velocity ﬁelds;56 this
was indeed quite a revolutionary idea. Later, Tisza wrote a more elaborate

15

version of his theory, which he submitted as two articles57 to the Journal
de Physique et du Radium on October 23, 1939, but he could not see them
printed till the end of the war. In June 1940, part of Langevin’s laboratory
was evacuated to Toulouse, in the south part of France which was not yet
occupied by the Nazi army. In another e-mail (March 17, 2005), Laszlo Tisza
told me that :

“Jacqueline Hadamard, the daughter of the mathematician Jacques Hadamard,

was a member of the lab and she oﬀered to me and my wife a ride to Toulouse.
M. and Mme Hadamard traveled with their other daughter, but I had the
privilege to travel as a virtual member of the Hadamard family. Just before
leaving we had signed up for an American visa at the Budapest consulate
without any deﬁnite plans for using it. By a fortunate coincidence the Clip-
per connection between Lisbon and New York started in the summer 1940
and suddenly we received air mail letters from friends and relatives in Cam-
bridge in two days! We must have notiﬁed the Marseille consulate of our
address and sometimes in October we got a telegram that our visa was au-
thorized. After ﬁnishing all paper work we left Marseille early February 1941
for Madrid and Lisbon. Mid-March we sailed on a Portuguese boat to New
In a few months in
York and joined friends and relatives in Cambridge.
September I was appointed instructor at MIT, to become eventually profes-
sor. . . ”.

As for Fritz London, Frederic Joliot oﬀered him a position of “Directeur
de recherches” at the Institut Henri Poincar´e in November 1938. He was
strongly attached to France where his wife Edith had entered a group of
painters led by Andr´e Lhote.7 But he found it wiser to accept an oﬀer from
Paul Gross, the head of the Chemistry Department at Duke University. He
could escape just in time from France, in September 1939, on the boat “Ile de
France” to New York, fortunately not on the “New Amsterdam” which was
destroyed by a submarine on September 3, three days after the beginning of
the war.58 In October 1939, Fritz London was teaching at Duke as a professor
of theoretical chemistry. Nearly at the same time, Landau was coming out
of Stalin’s jails.

Lev Davidovitch Landau was born in Baku on January 22, 1908. He
graduated from the Physics Department of Leningrad in 1927, at the age of
19! He then traveled thanks to a Rockefeller fellowship to Germany, Switzer-
land, England and Copenhagen where he worked with Niels Bohr. From 1932
to 1937, he was the head of a theory group in Kharkov. There, Alexander S.

4. Landau

16

Kompaneets, Evgueny M. Lifshitz, Alexander I. Akhiezer, Isaak Ya. Pomer-
anchuk, and Laszlo Tisza formed the ﬁrst core of Landau’s famous school;
to enter it, they had to pass the “Teorminimum exam”. At the same time
Landau was also teaching in Moscow and Kapitza invited him to come in
his new Institute in 1937. However, in March 1938, Landau was arrested by
the NKVD (later called KGB).59,60 He had been accused of being one of the
authors of a leaﬂet criticizing the Soviet regime.60

Kapitza had already written some letters to Stalin in order to obtain the
scientiﬁc equipment he needed for his research in Moscow. After Landau’s
arrest, Kapitza started another ﬁght to liberate him and eventually sent a
letter to Molotov on April 6, 1939, where, as published in English by P.E.
Rubinin,29 he wrote :

“In my recent studies on liquid helium close to the absolute zero, I have
succeeded in discovering a number of new phenomena. . . I am planning to
publish part of this work. . . but to do this I need theoretical help. In the Soviet
Union it is Landau who has the most perfect command of the theoretical ﬁeld
I need, but unfortunately he has been in custody for a whole year. All this
time I have been hoping that he would be released because, frankly speaking,
I am unable to believe that he is a state criminal. . . It is true that he has
a very sharp tongue, the misuse of which together with his intelligence has
won him many enemies. . . but I have never noticed any sign of dishonest
behavior. . . the Soviet Union and worldwide has been deprived of Landau’s
brain for a whole year. Landau is in poor health and it will be a great shame
for the Soviet people if he is allowed to perish for nothing. . . ”

Three weeks later, Kapitza was summoned to the NKVD headquarters
where he tried to defend Landau as much as he could in a discussion where he
was asked “Do you understand for whom you are pleading? He’s a most dan-
gerous criminal, a spy who confessed to everything. . . ”.61 Around 4 o’clock
in the morning, it was said to him: “All right, Kapitza, if you pledge your
word for Landau, then give us a written guarantee. If anything happens, you
will be held responsible”. Kapitza wrote a letter to Beria on April 26, and
Landau returned to the Institute on April 28, 1939. The NKVD decision
said:

“Landau Lev Davydovitch, born in 1908 in Baku, prior to arrest pro-
fessor of physics, non-Party member, and citizen of the USSR, has been
convincingly exposed as a member of anti-soviet group, guilty of sabotage
and of attempt to publish and disseminate an anti-soviet leaﬂet. However,
taking into account that (1) Landau LD is a major specialist in the ﬁeld
of theoretical physics and may be useful in the future of the Soviet Science;
(2) Academician Kapitza PL has consented to pledge his word for Landau
LD; (3) acting on orders of the People’s Commissar. . . 1st rank Comrade

17

LP Beria to release Landau in the trust of Academician Kapitza; we hereby
order that detainee Landau LD be discharged from custody, the investiga-
tion discontinued, and case ﬁles sent to archive. . . captain of State security
Vizel”.29

This allowed Landau to survive and to come back to work. On June 23,
1941, Kapitza52 and Landau62 sent two letters together for publication in
the Physical Review. They were published next to each other and Landau’s
letter announced a more elaborate paper to be published in the Journal of
Physics of the USSR.63

The two 1941 articles by Landau start with nearly the same sentence: “It
is well known that liquid helium at temperatures below the λ-point possesses
a number of peculiar properties, the most important of which is superﬂuid-
ity discovered by P.L. Kapitza.”. For Landau, superﬂuidity had thus been
discovered by the man who had saved his life – P.L. Kapitza – and only by
him. Landau continues with :

“L. Tisza[2] suggested that helium II should be considered as a degen-
erate ideal Bose gas. . . This point of view, however, cannot be considered as
satisfactory. . . nothing would prevent atoms in a normal state from colliding
with excited atoms, i.e. when moving through the liquid they would experi-
ence a friction and there would be no superﬂuidity at all. In this way the
explanation advanced by Tisza not only has no foundation in his suggestions
but is in direct contradiction to them”.63

Landau never cited Fritz London. Here as everywhere he attributes to
Tisza instead of F. London the proposal that superﬂuidity is a consequence
of Bose-Einstein condensation. Why is it that Landau never believed in the
relevance of BEC ? This is a major and quite interesting question. Moreover,
why Landau needed to be so abrupt in his criticism of his former postdoc
Tisza? This is a related question which is no less interesting in my opinion.
After the above introduction, Landau’s article starts with a ﬁrst section
entitled “The quantization of the motion of liquids”. Everybody considers
what follows as a brilliant breakthrough in the theory of quantum liquids.
He quantizes the hydrodynamics of quantum liquids and arrives to the state-
ment “Every weakly excited state can be considered as an aggregate of single
‘elementary excitations’ ” which he divides in two diﬀerent categories: sound
quanta which he calls “phonons” and which have the linear dispersion rela-
tion

and elementary vortices which his friend I.E. Tamm suggested be called
“rotons” and for which he proposes the relation

(2)

(3)

ǫ = cp

ǫ = ∆ +

p2
2µ

18

In the above equations, ǫ is an energy, p a momentum, c the sound
velocity, µ an eﬀective mass and ∆ the minimum energy of rotons (later
called the “roton gap”).

Six years later,64 Landau modiﬁed the roton spectrum into

ǫ = ¯hω = ∆ +

(p

p0)2

−
2µ

,

(4)

and included them as part of the phonon spectrum. But already in 1941,
Landau could calculate the speciﬁc heat of liquid helium and obtained a
good ﬁt of experimental measurements by W.H. and A.P. Keesom65 if ∆
≈
7 to 8 times the mass of helium atoms. In his 1941 article,
8 to 9 K and µ
Landau then claims that, for a superﬂuid ﬂowing at a velocity V at zero
temperature, dissipation can only result from the emission of either phonons
or rotons, so that, from the conservation of energy and momentum in this
process, dissipation is only possible if

≈

V > Vcp = c (phonons) or V > Vcr =

(rotons) .

(5)

2∆
µ

s

Landau has thus introduced a possible explanation why helium II ﬂows
at a velocity which is is independent of pressure or capillary section: his
“critical velocity” Vc is a property of the helium itself. However, he also
notices that the value he predicts for Vc is much larger than observed in ex-
periments and “[left] aside the question as to whether superﬂuidity disappears
at smaller velocity for another reason”.

In the next section he calculates the properties of superﬂuid helium at
ﬁnite temperature. For this he introduces a two ﬂuid model : he distinguishes
a “normal component” with density ρn, which is made of phonons and rotons,
from a “superﬂuid component” with density ρs = ρ
ρn (ρ is the total density
of the liquid). The superﬂuid component carries no entropy and moves
without dissipation while the normal one is viscous and carries a non-zero
entropy. The ratio ρs/ρn depends on temperature since, at T = 0, ρs = ρ and
ρn = 0, while, at T = Tλ, ρn = ρ. Given the values for the phonon and roton
parameters which he had adjusted to ﬁt speciﬁc heat data, Landau calculates
an approximate value for Tλ (2.3 K) also in agreement with experiment.66
He ﬁnally explains the thermomechanical eﬀects – the fountain eﬀect and
the reverse phenomenon – and he predicts that heat should propagate as
“second sound” instead of diﬀusing as in classical ﬂuids.

−

Landau’s theory is a remarkable success, and it is still in use nowa-
days. Its main features are common to Tisza’s previous version but there
is one major diﬀerence. The common features are : the existence of two
independent velocity ﬁelds; the temperature variation of the two ﬂuid den-

19

sities; the non-dissipative ﬂow of the superﬂuid component (but Tisza could
not predict the existence of a critical velocity for this); the fact that all the
entropy is carried by the normal component and the propagation of heat
as a wave. When deriving the equations which describe thermomechanical
eﬀects, Landau writes : “The formulae 6.1 and 6.4 were deduced already by
H. London (Proceedings Royal Society 1939) starting from Tisza’s ideas”.
Let me remark that Landau cites Heinz London,67 Fritz London’s young
brother, and it is very hard to believe that Landau had not noticed the work
of Fritz London, whom he had met in 1932. The absence of reference to Fritz
London must be intentional. He had perhaps personal reasons for this, but
I have tried to understand why he never believed in the relevance of Bose
Einstein condensation in the theory of superﬂuidity. The above sentence
also means that Landau knew the existence of the two notes published in
the Comptes-Rendus by Tisza49 in 1938, which are cited by Heinz London.67
The major diﬀerence between Landau’s theory and Tisza’s is in the na-
ture of the normal component: according to Landau it is made of “quasipar-
ticles”, a new concept he introduces to quantize the elementary excitations
of quantum ﬂuids.
In contrast, Tisza thinks in terms of ideal gases and
proposes that the normal component is made of the non-condensed atoms.
Shortly after the war, Peshkov did experiments to discriminate between
the predictions by Landau and by Tisza.69 Indeed, in the limit where T
tends to zero and according to Landau, the second sound velocity c2 should
tend to c/√3 where c is the velocity of the ordinary sound, while Tisza
predicted that c2 should tend to zero. At the low temperature meeting which
Allen organized in Cambridge in 1946, a meeting which was called “LT0” by
Russell Donnelly 50 years later, Fritz London was asked to give the opening
talk.68 He explained that Peshkov’s preliminary results69 where not yet done
at low enough temperature to discriminate between Landau and Tisza, but
Peshkov’s experiments soon showed that Landau was right.70 In fact, Fritz
London was very critical about Landau’s theory: “an interesting attempt to
quantize hydrodynamics. . . based on the shaky grounds of imaginary rotons”.
London must have been rather upset by Landau’s attitude, in particular by
his rough rejection of Tisza’s model. Some authors consider that the two
ﬂuid model has been independently discovered by Tisza and by Landau, but
this is not true as we shall see now. In 1949, Landau wrote a brief report to
Physical Review71 which contains the following note:

“I am glad to use this occasion to pay tribute to L. Tisza for introducing,
as early as 1938, the conception of the macroscopical description of helium II
by dividing its density into two parts and introducing, correspondingly, two
velocity ﬁelds. This made it possible for him to predict two kinds of sound
waves in helium II. [Tisza’s detailed paper (J. de Phys. et Rad. 1, 165,

20

350 (1940) was not available in USSR until 1943 owing to war conditions,
and I regret having missed seeing his previous short letters (Comptes-Rendus
207, 1035 and 1186 (1938)).] However, his entire quantitative theory (mi-
croscopic as well as thermodynamic-hydrodynamic) is in my opinion entirely
incorrect.”

He thus keeps his very abrupt criticism and partly justiﬁes his former
attitude by saying that he was not aware of the details of Tisza’s two ﬂuid
model. But these two letters to the Comptes-rendus, which Landau pretends
that he “missed”, are those which H. London cited as his starting point when
he derived the “formulae 6.1 and 6.4” (see above)! Since Landau refers to
H. London’s formulae, he had read H. London’s paper and, consequently,
he knew the existence of Tisza’s letters to the Comptes-Rendus. Could it
be then that he had not read them because they were written in French? I
inquired about this possibility from A. Abrikosov who sent me the following
answer by mail, on January 15, 2001:

“ Dear Dr. Balibar,
Landau was very able to languages. He knew German, English, French
and Danish. Therefore he could read Tisza’s papers in French, the more so
that Lifshitz, whom he often ordered to read papers, instead of doing that
himself, didn’t know French. . .

Sincerely yours. Alex Abrikosov ”
Even if E. Lifshitz had perhaps not read these French papers, Landau
knew their existence and it is hard to believe that he had not read them.
Furthermore, Kapitza also refers to them in his 1941 article published just
before the one by Landau in the Physical Review. Kapitza measured the
thermomechanical eﬀect which is the inverse of the fountain eﬀect, namely
the temperature diﬀerence which appears when superﬂuid helium ﬂows in a
small slit where the normal component is blocked. Kapitza uses Landau’s
theory which is published as the next article in the same issue. In his ﬁgure,
he shows a ﬁt with a calculation by Landau. His article was sent the same day
(June 23, 1941) as Landau’s, which probably means in the same envelope.
It is clear that Kapitza and Landau had a very close collaboration on this
subject. I cannot believe that they did not share all information, or that
Landau had not read Kapitza’s article which contained his own calculation.
The reference by Kapitza to the two French articles by Tisza which Landau
had “missed” is further evidence that Landau cannot have “missed” them.
Even if Landau’s theory is more rigorous and more correct than Tisza’s, I
consider that these two works are not independent, and that Tisza has a
priority on the two ﬂuid model.

Landau’s absence of reference to Fritz London is a diﬀerent issue of
greater scientiﬁc interest. At this stage, we have to realize that Landau’s

21

In fact he derives
1941 work never mentions Bose nor Fermi statistics.
his quantization of hydrodynamics without making any diﬀerence between
Bose and Fermi ﬂuids. Today, of course, we know that degenerate Fermi
liquids such as liquid 3He are highly viscous while degenerate Bose ﬂuids
are superﬂuid. It means that there is a mistake or some misunderstanding
somewhere in Landau’s article. Where?

After discussing this issue with Grisha Volovik,72 I understand that
the weak point occurs when Landau claims that there is a gap between ir-
rotational states and states where the circulation of velocity is non-zero.
Landau does not justify this statement. As is now well known, it is the
work of Bogoliubov73 which showed in 1947 for the ﬁrst time that in a de-
generate Bose gas with weak interactions, there is BEC and there are no
individual excitations at low energy, only collective modes, that is phonons
with a non-zero velocity. Bogoliubov showed that if dissipation results from
the emission of elementary excitations, it can only occur beyond a certain
critical velocity, (the sound velocity in this case), and that the motion of
the condensate fraction is non-dissipative and irrotational below this critical
velocity. In 1951, BEC was generalized by Penrose74 as “oﬀ-diagonal long
range order” (ODLRO) in the formalism of the density matrix. This ap-
proach was further developed by Penrose and Onsager in 1956.75 It allows
the condensate fraction to be much smaller than one (the total mass) and
irrotational dissipationless motion to occur below a certain critical velocity.
One has also realized that in most macroscopic systems, the emission of
quantized vortices is another mechanism which is responsible for a critical
velocity smaller than Landau’s. In other words, the existence of superﬂuidity
is really linked to BEC, at least to the Bose statistics and the quantization
of vortices. One could argue, of course that superﬂuidity exists in 2D-Bose
ﬂuids, where, strictly speaking, there is no BEC. But there are long range
quantum correlations so that vortices are quantized, and dissipation cannot
occur in practice below a certain velocity. In summary, the superﬂuidity is
certainly linked to the Bose statistics, contrary to Landau’s statement.

As for Fermi liquids, it is in fact the hydrodynamics itself which breaks
down. As Landau was to realize later76, the excitations of a degenerate
Fermi liquid are Fermi quasiparticles which travel ballistically over a certain
distance and which are responsible for the divergence of the viscosity in the
low temperature limit. The existence of an energy gap between rotational
and irrotational states in quantum ﬂuids is simply not true in Fermi liquids.
This takes us back to the already mentioned question: how can it be that
Landau never referred to BEC nor mentioned Bose statistics in his theory
of superﬂuidity ?

Perhaps Landau could simply not believe that a theory of quantum

22

ideal gases (BEC) could apply to liquids with strong interactions between
atoms? This is the spirit of his criticism of Tisza’s approach (there should
be collisions between excited atoms and condensed atoms). Furthermore, as
would show up later from Bogoliubov’s work73, it is true that an ideal Bose
gas with no interactions at all would have a sound velocity equal to zero,
consequently a zero critical velocity: it would not be superﬂuid! Eventually,
we now know that there is no continuous path from a low density helium gas
to a higher density helium liquid: it has been predicted77 and experimentally
veriﬁed78 that there is a range of densities for which helium is unstable,
between two spinodal lines which respectively limit the range of possible
metastability of either liquid or gaseous helium. For all these reasons, the
most likely interpretation of Landau’s absence of reference to BEC is just
that he could not consider that a theory of quantum gases could apply to a
liquid.

However the absence of reference to the Bose statistics needs a further
explanation. In his 1992 article59 on Landau’s theory of superﬂuidity, Lev
Pitaevskii writes that “Landau was only one step from the very interesting
subject of macroscopic quantum phenomena. But he never made this step.
And there is no sense now to guess why. . . ” Coming back to this issue with
Landau, Lev Pitaevskii proposed to me another idea which is the following.
Kapitza and most probably Landau as well considered superﬂuidity as a
phenomenon analogous to superconductivity. This was long before the BCS
theory and of course superconductivity occurs in a Fermi system of electrons.
Since the same phenomenon occurred in both quantum ﬂuids (Bose and
Fermi), Landau could perhaps not admit that superﬂuidity was related to the
quantum statistics. Whatever Landau really thought, a possible comparison
of 3He and 4He progressively appeared as a crucial test. In his book, London
insisted on the importance of such a test.38 As soon as 3He was available
in large enough quantities, a test was made of the possible superﬂuidity of
3He, which was found to be non-superﬂuid down to 1 K, in strong support
to London’s and Tisza’s approach. This experiment was done by D.W.
Osborne, B. Weinstock and B.M. Abraham79 in 1949.

As an aside, let me mention that B. Abraham had joined the Manhattan
project during the war and owned a patent for the Lithium-Tritium com-
pound to be used in H-bombs. Let me mention further that Landau also
participated to the building of the H-bomb, but the Soviet one of course,
and despite the severe conﬂict which opposed Kapitza and Beria in this en-
terprise. Beria forced Kapitza to leave his scientiﬁc position and activity
at the Institute for Physical Problems because of their conﬂict. Landau
kept working for the bomb, apparently because this was a way for him to
be protected against any further problems with the Soviet regime.60 Later,

23

Beria was assassinated and Kapitza recovered his position at the Institute
for Physical Problems. When Stalin died, Landau left the Soviet H-bomb
program.60

Coming back to superconductivity and the superﬂuidity of 3He, we know
that the BCS theory considers the condensation of Cooper pairs which obey
the Bose statistics, and that superﬂuidity was also discovered in liquid 3He
at a temperature low enough (about 2.5 mK) that 3He atoms could form
pairs.80,81

As for rotons, their existence was proven by inelastic neutron scattering
experiments.82 It also happens that, for my PhD work, I studied quantum
evaporation and obtained the ﬁrst experimental evidence that, at low enough
temperature, a heat pulse decomposes into ballistic phonons and rotons, and
that individual rotons can evaporate atoms with a minimum kinetic energy
of 1.5 K.83 This phenomenon had been predicted by P.W. Anderson as an
analogue of the photoelectric eﬀect.84 A.F.G. Wyatt and his group have
performed a long quantitative study of it.85,86,87 Today, there is no doubt
that rotons exist, only controversies remain on their physical picture. Landau
had ﬁrst proposed that they were vortices of atomic size and later considered
them as part of the phonon spectrum. Surprisingly, Feynman insisted on
Landau’s ﬁrst picture by considering that a roton could be an elementary
vortex loop.88 In my opinion, rotons are phonons with a wavelength equal to
the interatomic distance. Their low energy is a signature of the local order
which had already been mentioned by London. As expressed by Nozi`eres,
rotons are “ghosts of a Bragg peak”89 (in fact, this idea was already present
in the work of other authors90,91). This is because Feynman showed that,
under certain approximations, the dispersion relation ω(q) for elementary
excitations is related to the static structure factor S(q) of liquid helium by
the simple relation

¯hω(q) =

¯h2q2
2mS(q)

.

(6)

As explained to me by G. Volovik72, this relation only requires that
the wavefunction describing the ﬂuid is symmetric as it has to be for a
Bose ﬂuid. The above equation shows that, if there is some short range
order in this liquid, that is a large probability to ﬁnd an atom at a distance
which is the average interatomic distance from another atom, in other words
a large peak in the structure factor S(q), then there has to be a roton
minimum in the relation ω(q). One should not associate superﬂuidity with
the existence of a roton minimum; Landau introduced rotons to calculate the
speciﬁc heat of liquid helium and then explained that their existence limits
the maximum value of the critical velocity. In reality rotons are precursors

24

of solidiﬁcation, and their existence works against superﬂuid order. In the
superﬂuid gases which have been discovered in 1995,2,3 there is superﬂuidity
and no rotons because the system has weak interactions. In the superﬂuid
liquid, an instability is predicted to occur if the roton minimum goes to zero
– if rotons become soft – in which case the dispersion relation resembles
that of a crystal in the extended zone scheme. The existence of such an
instability is under present investigation in my research group.92 Above the
lambda temperature, rotons still exist, they are no longer well deﬁned modes
with a long lifetime but this is also true for the rest of the dispersion curve.
Landau was right in a sense (rotons exist) but wrong concerning his
ﬁrst interpretation or physical picture (they are not elementary vortices, nor
essential for superﬂuidity).

5. Later developments

In my opinion, London and Tisza had found part of the truth and
Landau had found a complementary part of the truth. Unfortunately, neither
London nor Landau lived long enough to realize that a full theory should
combine their respective approaches. Fritz London died of a heart attack in
1954. Landau was severely injured in a car accident shortly before receiving
his 1962 Nobel prize. The car accident occurred on January 7, 1960, he was
in coma for a long time and suﬀered so much afterwards that he could never
work anymore till he died in 1968. Of course he could not go to Stockholm
and receive his Nobel prize in person. In my opinion, he would probably
have shared this prize with London if London had not died before. London
had been proposed for the Nobel prize by Einstein. A few years before
arriving to the famous BCS theory with Leon Cooper and Robert Schrieﬀer,
John Bardeen also recognized the great importance of London’s work on
superconductivity (the introduction of a macroscopic wave function) as the
basis of his work on the same subject; in a letter sent to London on December
9, 1950, he had written :
“Dear Prof. London
You may be interested in the enclosed manuscripts on superconductivity;

they are both based on your approach”.58

Bardeen’s admiration for London’s work must be the reason why, when
he received his second Nobel prize in 1972 (he shared this one with Cooper
and Schrieﬀer for the “BCS” theory of superconductivity but he had already
shared one with Schockley and Brattain in 1956 for the discovery of the tran-
sistor), he decided to donate his part of the Nobel Prize to Duke University.
The purpose was to create an endowment to enable funding a yearly lec-

25

ture at Duke University in the honor of Fritz London and also to ﬁnance
the Fritz London Prize for distinguished work in Low Temperature Physics.
This Prize, which has become very prestigious, was given for the ﬁrst time
to N. Kuerti in 1958 for his work on nuclear magnetism. I was surprised to
see that the second London Prize was given to Landau in 1960 (the third
one was given to John Bardeen in 1962). Of course, Landau’s exceptional
achievements in physics deserved more than the London prize, but it means
that the London prize jury totally ignored the controversies and personal
conﬂicts which opposed London and Landau. In an e-mail which he sent me
on January 21, 2001, Tisza wrote:

“I know that Landau had no high regard for London. I think he was
wrong and hurt his own science for yielding to his spite. London disliked
Landau, and I did what I could to temper his feelings when writing his “Su-
perﬂuids”. I suspect that they had an unpleasant interaction in 1932 when
Landau traveled in the West, but this will remain an unsolved mystery.”

I am pleased to see that science is sometimes more important than
personal conﬂicts. On June 17, 2005, I received another message from Laszlo
Tisza where he commented on the London prize:

“Dear Sebastien,

. . . Yesterday I was leaﬁng through old correspondence and I found a letter in
which I nominated Landau for the Prize. I am sure I was not alone. I was
actually at LT-7 in Toronto when the Prize was announced. It is actually
unconscionable of Landau not to have taken note of the remarkable Simon
I never heard a word of it
- London work on helium in Oxford 1934-35!
while at UFTI. All he said was that London was not a good physicist.
I
am looking forward to your book to straighten out matters. With warmest
regards, Laszlo”

Laszlo Tisza himself supported the nomination of Landau for the Lon-
don prize! He had recognized the superiority of Landau’s two ﬂuid model on
his early theory and he did not want to be upset by any personal criticism
which he considered as secondary. Fifty years later, he still thinks the same
way.

Kapitza was awarded the Nobel prize in 1978. This was 16 years after
Landau and 41 years after he had sent his historical letter to Nature. In his
speech, he noticed this surprising delay and talked about a diﬀerent subject
(nuclear fusion). I do not know if the Nobel prize jury ever considered the
possibility of dividing a Nobel prize on superﬂuidity between Kapitza and
Allen. Perhaps some physicists considered that Kapitza had some priority
on Allen and it was diﬃcult to ﬁnd agreement. I have already detailed my
opinion about this issue.

I wish to conclude with another quotation from Tisza. At the end of

26

his talk for the hundredth anniversary of the Hungarian physical society in
199156, he wrote:

“If history has a lesson, it is that the “winner takes all” attitude deprives
one of the pleasure of being the heir to the best of diﬀerent traditions, even
while avoiding their intolerance against each other.”

Tisza was squeezed between London and Landau whose approaches of
the theory of superﬂuidity were rather diﬀerent. In fact London considered
the ground state of liquid helium and Landau its excited states. It took quite
a long time to unify their respective points of view, even after Bogoliubov’s
work.73 As for Tisza, some of his theory was wrong but he had introduced
many of the fundamental ideas which were later developed by Landau. Fur-
In conclusion,
thermore, Landau’s theory was not entirely correct either.
one should certainly attribute the discovery of the theory of superﬂuidity
not only to London and Landau, but also to Tisza.

6. Acknowledgments

I wish to congratulate Frank Pobell for his remarkable achievements
in low temperature physics and for letting me take the opportunity of this
special issue of the Journal of Low Temperature Physics to recall the long
and rich history of the discovery of superﬂuidity. I am very grateful to many
colleagues for very fruitful discussions and many suggestions after careful
reading of preliminary versions of this article, especially to Laszlo Tisza,
Lev Pitaevskii, Grisha Volovik, Horst Meyer, Allan Griﬃn, David Edwards
and Roger Bowley.

REFERENCES

1. E.M. Lifshitz, Superﬂuidity, Scientiﬁc American 198, 30 (1958).
2. For a review, see the Nobel lecture: E.A. Cornell and C.E. Wieman, Rev. Mod.

Phys. 74, 875 (2002).

(2002).

3. For a review, see the Nobel lecture: W. Ketterle, Rev. Mod. Phys. 74, 1131-1151

4. R. Donnelly, Physics Today 48, 30 (1995).
5. A.J. Leggett, Rev. Mod. Phys. 71, S318 (1999).
6. P. Nozi`eres and D. Pines, The Theory of Quantum Liquids, Perseus Books, Cam-

bridge, Massachusetts (1999).

7. K. Gavroglu, Fritz London, Cambridge University Press (1995).
8. A. Griﬃn, “A brief history of our understanding of BEC: from Bose to Beliaev”,
Proc. of the Int. School of Physics Enrico Fermi, ed. by M. Inguscio, S. Stringari
and C.E. Wieman, p. 1 (IOS press 1999).

27

9. A. Griﬃn, Physics in Canada 61, 33 (2005).
10. J. Matricon and G. Waysand, “La Guerre du Froid” (Seuil, Paris 1994) and its
English translation: “The Cold Wars: A History of Superconductivity” (Rutgers
University Press, 2003)

11. P. Kapitza, Nature 141 74 (1938).
12. J.F. Allen and A.D. Misener, Nature 141, 75 (1938).
13. M. Wolfke and W.H. Keesom, Proc. Amsterdam 31, 81 (1927); W. H. Keesom

and M. Wolfke, Leiden. Comm. 190b, (1927).

14. W.H. Keesom and K. Clusius, Leiden Comm. 219e (1932); Proc. Sect. Sci. K.

Ned. Acad. Wet. 35, 307 (1932).

15. For a review on this work, see W.H. Keesom, Helium, Elsevier, Amsterdam

16. W.H. Keesom and A.P. Keesom, Physica 3, 359 (1936).
17. B.V. Rollin, Physica 2, 557 (1935).
18. J.F. Allen, R. Peierls and Z. Uddin, Nature 140, 62 (1937).
19. J. Wilks, “The properties of liquid and solid helium”, Clarendon Press, Oxford

(1942).

(1967).

20. E.F. Burton, Nature 135, 265 (1935).
21. J.G. Dash and R.D. Taylor, Phys. Rev. 105, 7 (1957) and 106, 398 (1957).
22. F.L. Andronikashvili, “Reﬂections on liquid helium”, American Institute of

23. L. Cao, D.F. Brewer, C. Girit, E.N. Smith, and J.D. Reppy, Phys. Rev. B 33,

Physics, New York, (1989).

106-117 (1986).

24. H. Meyer, Low Temperature Measurement in Measurement of the Transport
Properties of Fluids, IUPAC series on Experimental Thermodynamics, Vol. III.,
Eds. W.A. Wakeham, A. Nagashima and J.V. Sengers, Blackwell Scientiﬁc Pub-
lications, Oxford, 1991, p. 391.

25. J.O. Wilhelm, A.D. Misener and A.R. Clark, Proc. Roy. Soc. A 151, 342 (1935).
26. J.C. McLennan, H.D. Smith and J.O. Wilhelm, Phil. Mag. 14, 161 (1932).
27. A. Griﬃn, “Austin Donald Misener 1911-1996”, Proc. Roy. Soc. Can., sixth

series, vol. XII, p.227 (2001) and private communication to be published.

28. D. Shoenberg, Kapitza centenary symposium at the Cavendish laboratory, Cam-

bridge, 8 July 1994, Physics-Uspekhi 37, 1213 (1994).

29. P.E. Rubinin, The discovery of superﬂuidity, Physics-Uspekhi 40, 1249 (1997).
30. J.F. Allen, Physics World 1, 29 (1988).
31. In 1951, Sir John Douglas Cockcroft and Ernest Thomas Sinton Walton received
the Nobel prize “for their pioneer work on the transmutation of atomic nuclei
by artiﬁcially accelerated atomic particles”. The presentation speech mentioned
that “The analysis made by Cockcroft and Walton of the energy relations in a
transmutation is of particular interest, because a veriﬁcation was provided by
this analysis for Einstein’s law concerning the equivalence of mass and energy”.
By accelerating protons and analyzing their collisions with a lithium layer, they
observed the transmutation of Li into He atoms whose energy measurement
provided the ﬁrst experimental veriﬁcation of the famous relation E = mc2.
32. W.H. Keesom and J.N. van der Ende, Proc. Roy. Ac. Amsterdam, 33, 24 (1930).
33. D. Shoenberg, private letter, 22 Jan. 2001.
34. J.F. Allen and H. Jones, Nature 141, 243 (1938).

28

35. F. London and H. London, Physica 2, 341 (1935); F. London, Proc. Roy. A

152, 24 (1935).

36. F. London, Nature 141, 643 (1938).
37. F. London, Proc. Roy. Soc. A 153, 576 (1936).
38. F. London, “Superﬂuids I”, p.4, Wiley and Sons (1950).
39. A. Pa¨ıs, “Subtle is the Lord”, p.432, Clarendon Press, Oxford (1982).
40. S.N. Bose, Z. Phys. 26, 178 (1924).
41. A. Einstein, Ber. Berl. Akad. 261 (1924) and 3 (1925).
42. G.E. Uhlenbeck, Dissertation (Leiden, 1927).
43. B. Kahn and G.E. Uhlenbeck, Physica 5, 399 (1938).
44. F. Simon, Nature 133, 529 (1934).
45. F. London, Phys. Rev. 54, 947 (1938).
46. E. Teller, Science 280, 1200 (1998).
47. In June 2001 I invited Tisza to give a colloquium in our Department and we

had long discussions about his stay in France (1937-1941).

48. L. Tisza, Nature 141, 913 (1938).
49. L. Tisza, Comptes Rendus Acad. Sc. 207 1035 and 1186 (1938).
50. H. London, Nature 142, 612 (1938).
51. J.G. Daunt and K. Mendelssohn, Nature 143, 719 (1939).
52. P.L. Kapitza, Phys. Rev. 60, 354 (1941).
53. L. Tisza, e-mail to S. Balibar, September 12, 2000.
54. B.V. Rollin, Actes 7i`eme Cong. Int. du Froid, 1, 187 (1936); N. Kuerti, B.V.

Rollin, and F. Simon, Physica 3, 266 (1936).

55. J.G. Daunt and K. Mendelssohn, Nature 141, 911 (1938).
56. L. Tisza, “The History of the two-ﬂuid concept”, Centenary meeting of the
E¨otv¨os Society (Budapest, Hungary, Oct. 19, 1991). In his communication at
this meeting, L. Tisza wrote: “I had this idea one evening. . . When I presented
all this to London the next morning, he was unimpressed. . . I made the minor
prediction that the thermomechanical eﬀect ought to have an inverse. . . This was
readily veriﬁed. However, London persisted in his opposition to the idea that two
velocity ﬁelds could persist in a liquid. . . ”.

57. L. Tisza, J. Physique et le Radium 1, 164 (1940) and 1, 350 (1940).
58. H. Meyer, communication at the conference “Quantique. . . mais macroscopique,
Hommage `a Fritz London, physicien en exil”, Institut Henri Poincar´e, Paris, 11
mai 2005.

59. L. Pitaevskii, 50 years of Landau’s theory of superﬂuidity, J. Low Temp. Phys.

60. G.E. Gorelik, The top secret life of Lev Landau, Scientiﬁc American, August

87, 127 (1992).

1997, pp. 72-77.

61. Account of this visit recorded by I.A. Zolitov, quoted in ref. 29.
62. L.D. Landau, Phys. Rev. 60, 356 (1941).
63. L.D. Landau, J. Phys. USSR 5, 71 (1941).
64. L.D. Landau, J. Phys. USSR 11, 91 (1947).
65. W.H. Keesom and A.P. Keesom, Physica 2, 557 (1935).
66. However, note that when writing that “the temperature at which ρn/ρ equals
unity is the λ-point of helium”, Landau does not necessarily mean that there is
a real phase transition at this point, it could be just a crossover from a quantum

29

to a classical behavior.

67. H. London, Proc. Roy. Soc. A 171, 484 (1939).
68. F. London, Rep. of an Int. Conf. on Fund. Part. and Low Temp., Cavendish
Lab., Cambridge 22-27 July 1946, p. 1 (Taylor and Francis, London 1947)
reprinted by R. Donnelly, Dept. of Physics, University of Oregon (1993).

69. V.P. Peshkov, Rep. of an Int. Conf. on Fund. Part. and Low Temp., Cavendish
Lab., Cambridge 22-27 July 1946, p. 19 (Taylor and Francis, London 1947)
reprinted by R. Donnelly, Dept. of Physics, University of Oregon (1993).

70. V.P. Peshkov, Zh. Eksp. Teor. Fiz. 18, 951 (1948).
71. L. Landau, Phys. Rev. 75, 884 (1949).
72. G. Volovik, oral discussion at the ULTI meeting, Lammi (Finland), April 2006.
73. N.N. Bogoliubov, J. Phys. USSR 11, 23 (1947).
74. O. Penrose, Phil. Mag. 42, 1373 (1951).
75. O. Penrose and L. Onsager, Phys. Rev. 104, 576 (1956).
76. L. D. Landau, Sov. Phys. JETP 3, 920 (1956).
77. H.J. Maris, J. Low Temp. Phys. 94, 125 (1994) and 98, 403 (1995).
78. F. Caupin and S. Balibar, Phys. Rev. B 64, 064507 (2001).
79. D.W. Osborne, B. Weinstock, and B.M. Abraham, Phys. Rev. 75, 988 (1949).
80. D.D. Osheroﬀ, R.C. Richardson and D.M. Lee, Phys. Rev. Lett. 28, 885 (1972)

and Nobel Lecture, Rev. Mod. Phys. 69, 667 (1997).

81. A.J. Leggett, Phys. Rev. Lett. 29, 1227 (1972) and Nobel Lecture, Rev. Mod.

82. D.G. Henshaw and A.D.B. Woods, Phys. Rev. 121, 1266 (1961).
83. S. Balibar, J. Buechner, B. Castaing, C. Laroche and A. Libchaber, Phys. Rev.

Phys. 76, 999 (2004).

B 18, 3096 (1978).

84. P.W. Anderson, Phys. Lett. A 29, 563 (1969).
85. F.R. Hope, M.J. Baird, and A.F.G. Wyatt, Phys.Rev.Lett. 52, 1528 (1984).
86. M. Brown and A.F.G. Wyatt, J. Phys.: Condens. Matter 2, 5025 (1990).
87. M.A.H. Tucker and A.F.G. Wyatt, Science 283, 1150 (1999).
88. R.P. Feynman, Prog. in Low Temp. Phys. vol. 1, ed. by C.G. Gorter, North

Holland (1955).

89. P. Nozi`eres, J. Low Temp. Phys. 137, 45 (2004).
90. H. Horner, Phys. Rev. Lett. 29, 556 (1972).
91. Y. Pomeau and S. Rica, Phys. Rev. Lett. 72, 2426 (1994).
92. R. Ishiguro, F. Caupin, and S. Balibar, Europhys. Lett. 75, 91 (2006) and

references therein.

30

