6
0
0
2
 
v
o
N
 
0
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
t
s
i
h
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
6
0
1
1
1
6
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Remarks on the relation between
physics and faith

Horst R. Beyer
Louisiana State University (LSU)
Center for Computation and Technology (CCT)
330 Johnston Hall
Baton Rouge, LA 70803, USA
&
Max-Planck-Institute for Gravitational Physics
Albert Einstein Institute
Am M¨uhlenberg 1
D-14476 Golm, GERMANY

It is a quite common view among people, that are not aware of
the developments in modern physics, that it is part of human nature
to substitute religious faith in places where there is no knowledge.
Therefore, an increase in knowledge would lead to a decrease in the
necessity of faith. Further, it is argued that, ideally speaking, a full
knowledge of the laws of nature would make obsolete any sort of
religious faith and would ultimately allow a complete control of na-
ture by man. Since referring to nature, such views must be founded
in the natural sciences of which physics is the most fundamental.
Therefore, the question whether such views are compatible with the

Abstract

1

current state of natural sciences is ultimately decided in physics. In-
deed, it is likely that these simplistic views have their origin in the
world view generated by the successes of Newtonian physics from
the middle of the 17th century until the beginning of the 20th century
which viewed the physical world as a type of mechanical clock in
which the motion of the gears affect each other in a precise and pre-
dictable way. In particular, the paper points out that the above views
are no longer supported by current physics and that abstracted world
views cannot be considered as part of natural sciences, but only as
belief systems.

1 Introduction

It is a quite common view among people, that are not aware of the devel-
opments in modern physics, that it is part of human nature to substitute
religious faith in places where there is no knowledge. Therefore, an in-
crease in knowledge would lead to a decrease in the necessity of faith. A
classical example is the medieval belief that the sun, moon, and stars were
moved in their orbits by souls (‘anima’), who had to carry on this work until
the last day. This belief was made obsolete by Kepler’s laws of planetary
motion. Further, it is argued that, ideally speaking, a full knowledge of the
laws of nature would make obsolete any sort of religious faith and would
ultimately allow a complete control of nature by man.

Since referring to nature, such views must be founded in the natural sci-
ences of which physics is the most fundamental. Therefore, the question
whether such views are compatible with the current state of natural sci-
ences is ultimately decided in physics. Indeed, it is likely that the above
simplistic views have their origin in the classical world view generated by
the successes of Newtonian physics from the middle of the 17th century
until the beginning of the 20th century which viewed the physical world
as a type of mechanical clock in which the motion of the gears affect each
other in a precise and predictable way. It was assumed that with some more
effort all the connections between those gears would soon be found. It is

2

generally accepted that most physicists in the 19th century believed that all
the fundamental laws of nature were already known. In this world view
there is no space for a Christian God or religious faith.

The paper points out that the above views are no longer supported by cur-
rent physics and that abstracted world views cannot be considered as part
of natural sciences, but only as belief systems. For this, it sketches the me-
dieval world view as the starting point of the development of physics in the
17th century, describes and analyzes that development and states corner-
stones of Newtonian physics which have been assumed evident, but never-
theless have been destroyed by the Theory of Special Relativity, the Theory
of General Relativity, Quantum Mechanics, Quantum Electrodynamics and
the Standard Model of Particle Physics.

2 The medieval world view

At the beginning of the development of modern physics in the 17th century
by Johannes Kepler, Galileo Galilei and Issac Newton, the medieval world
picture derived from the Ptolemaic universe prevailed in Europe [22].

It consisted of a series of 10 concentric transparent spheres or ‘heavens’
with the earth at their center. Fixed to the ﬁrst 7 innermost spheres were
the ‘planets’, i.e., the moon, Mercury, Venus, the Sun, Mars, Jupiter and
Saturn. Fixed to the 8th sphere 1 were the stars. The 9th sphere was called
the ‘First Movable’ 2 that carries no luminous body and therefore is invis-
ible. Finally, the 10th sphere is ‘the very Heaven’ 3 and full of the God,
whose is considered immaterial and unaffected by time. Hence God is un-
movable, but the love for Him puts the the ‘First Movable’ into rotation
from east to west and transfers its to the other spheres. The lower spheres
are rotating more slowly from west to east and are forced back by the daily

1 The ‘Stellatum’.
2 The ‘Primum Mobile’.
3 The ‘Caelum ipsum’.

3

Fig. 1: Portraits of Kepler (1610), Galilei (ca. 1605-07) and Newton (1689).

impulse of the ‘First Movable’. All spheres are inhabited by ‘intelligences’.
The terrestrial domain of the universe inside the ﬁrst innermost sphere con-
tains bodies made out of the elements ﬁre, air, water and earth. The heav-
enly bodies above the moon are made of a more perfect ﬁfth element, the
‘Quintessence’ or ‘aether’.

3 The development of physics in the 17th cen-

tury

3.1 Description of the development

In the following, we have a brief look at some of the scientiﬁc achieve-
ments of Kepler, Galilei, Newton and their inﬂuences on the philosophic
and religious views in the last half of the 17th century.
Kepler (1571 − 1630) was a devout Christian. One of Kepler’s favorite
biblical passages is

• John 1:14 (KJV)

“And the Word was made ﬂesh, and dwelt among us, (and

4

we beheld his glory, the glory as of the only begotten of
the Father,) full of grace and truth.”

For him, this indicates that the divine archetypes were made visible as geo-
metric forms in nature. In particular, a sphere was a reﬂection of Christian
Trinity with God the Father as its center, Christ the Son as periphery and the
intervening space as Holy Spirit. He tried to explain the distances among
the six Copernican planets 1 by circumscribing and inscribing each orbit
with one of the ﬁve regular polyhedrons.2 In a letter from 1605, he views
the universe no longer as a divinely animated being, but as a clockwork
[18]

“Scopus meus hic est, ut Caelestem machinam dicam non esse
instar divinj animalis, sed instar horologij (· qui horologium
credit esse animatum, is gloriam artiﬁcis tribuit operj ·), . . .
.”

One of Kepler’s main scientiﬁc achievements are his three laws of planetary
motion (1609 − 1618). They are as follows:

1. All planets move around the Sun in elliptical orbits, with the Sun in

one of the foci.

2. A radius vector joining a planet with the Sun sweeps out equal areas

in equal lengths of time.

3. The square of the time required by a planet to complete one orbit is
directly proportional to the cube of its mean distance from the Sun.

Galilei (1564 − 1642) can be considered as the father of experimental sci-
ences by performing precise measurements on mechanical systems with a
subsequent mathematical analysis of the results. In particular, he studied
balls rolling on inclined planes. From the results, he concluded that bodies

1 Mercury, Venus, Mars, Saturn, Jupiter and Uranus.
2 The pyramid, cube, octahedron, dodecahedron, and icosahedron.

5

do not need a proximate cause to stay in motion which contradicts the Aris-
totelian view that any motion presupposes a mover. This result led, after
generalization by Rene Descartes (1596 − 1650) to motion on a straight
line, to Newton’s law of inertia. Timing the rate of the descent of balls,
he deduced that freely falling bodies 1 would be uniformly accelerated at
a rate independent of their mass. Moreover, he understood that the motion
of any projectile was the result of simultaneous and independent motion
in the horizontal direction and falling motion in the vertical direction. In
1638, Galilei wrote [14],

“It has been observed that missiles and projectiles describe a
curved path of some sort; however no one has pointed out the
fact that this path is a parabola. But this and other facts, not few
in number or less worth knowing, I have succeeded in proving;
...”

Finally, in the ‘Assayer’ from 1623, Galilei insisted that ‘the book of the
Universe’ is written in the language of mathematics [13]

“Philosophy is written in this grand book, the universe, which
stands continually open to our gaze. But the book cannot be
understood unless one ﬁrst learns to comprehend the language
and read the letters in which it is composed. It is written in
the language of mathematics, and its characters are triangles,
circles and other geometric ﬁgures without which it is humanly
impossible to understand a single word of it; without these, one
wanders about in a dark labyrinth.”

Inﬂuenced by the results of Kepler, Galilei and later Newton, the dominant
philosophy of the last half of the 17th century was that of Rene Descartes.
Mechanics is the basis of his physiology and medicine. Descartes believed

1 in particular, not subject to the resistance of air

6

Fig. 2: Portrait of Leibniz, date unknown.

that all material bodies, including the human body, are machines that oper-
ate by mechanical principles. It is known that Newton studied the works of
Descartes and other mechanical philosophers, who viewed physical reality
as composed entirely of particles of matter in motion and who held that all
the phenomena of nature result from their mechanical interaction.
In 1684, Newton (1643 − 1727) published his famous three laws of mo-
tion which provide the basis of mechanics to this day [23]. Together with
his and independently Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz’s (1646 − 1716) discov-
ery of differential and integral calculus, these laws transformed the ﬁeld
of mechanics into an exact science. In 1687, Newton formulated his law
of gravitation that have Kepler’s laws of planetary motion and the results
of Galilei’s experiments on motion on inclined planes as particular con-
sequences. Hence the laws of mechanics also uniﬁed the knowledge on
mechanical systems at that time.

After the groundbreaking work of Newton, the motion of the planets and
comets of the solar system was predictable to high accuracy and understood
on the basis of natural laws. The announcement by Le Verrier in 1859, that
there was an unexplained advance in the perihelion of Mercury, was not
regarded as a failure of Newtonian Mechanics, but due to unknown gravi-
tational sources. An explanation for this advance was given by Einstein’s
Theory of General Relativity in 1916 [11]. A ﬁrst indication for the break-
down of classical physics appeared at the end of 19th century in form of
the failure of the Rayleigh-Jeans law to describe the observed behaviour of

7

Fig. 3: Max Planck (1910).

black body radiation. In 1900, Max Planck 1 derived his radiation law that
gave a correct description, but a the cost of assuming that the oscillators
comprising the blackbody could absorb energy only in discrete amounts, in
quanta of energy. This led to the development of Quantum Mechanics.

Because of its highly accurate descriptions, mechanics became regarded as
the ultimate explanatory science. Phenomena of any kind, it was believed,
could and should be explained in terms of mechanical concepts. Newtonian
physics was used to support the deistic view, in particular represented by
Voltaire (1694−1778), that God had created the world as a perfect machine
that then required no further interference from Him, the Newtonian world
machine or Clockwork Universe.

The conﬁdence in the validity of these ideas is best described by the fol-
lowing statement [21] of Laplace (1749 − 1827) in 1814:

“We ought then to regard the present state of the universe as the
effect of its anterior state and as the cause of the one which is
to follow. Given for one instant an intelligence which could
comprehend all the forces by which nature is animated and
the respective situation of the beings who compose it – an in-

1 In 1918, Nobel prize winner in physics “in recognition of the services he rendered to

the advancement of Physics by his discovery of energy quanta”.

8

Fig. 4: From left to right: Portraits of Descartes (1649), Laplace and Voltaire (1718).

telligence sufﬁciently vast to submit these data to analysis –
it would embrace in the same formula the movements of the
greatest bodies of the universe and those of the lightest atom;
for it, nothing would be uncertain and the future, as the past,
would be present to its eyes.”

In the aftermath, the method of Newtonian Mechanics was applied success-
fully to a growing number of areas of nature. The marvelous development
of mechanics in the 18th century, thermal engineering and thermodynam-
ics in the beginning of the 19th century give evidence of the power of that
approach.

3.2 Analysis of the development

In the following, from a modern perspective, we analyze the important
changes in the approach to nature that have occurred in 17th century.

3.2.1 The method of natural sciences

First, the method of natural sciences had been established. This method
tries to separate nature into systems that are to a good approximation ‘iso-
lated’, in the sense that the inclusion of their interaction with the remaining

9

part of nature would introduce only small changes below the intended ac-
curacy of description. Note that such separation is non-trivial and involves
an assumption that itself cannot be veriﬁed. Such supposedly isolated sys-
tems are studied by precise experiments or observations. The correspond-
ing measurements are subjected to a mathematical analysis with the goal
of abstraction of a Natural Law or ‘Theory’. Predictions of the theory are
tested by additional experiments or observations. If the results are consis-
tent with those predictions within the accuracy of the measurements, the
theory is maintained. Otherwise, the theory is revised. In the last case, the
process is continued until consistency with known experiments and obser-
vations is reached.

Note that even if the initial assumption of isolation of the system is false,
this process can still lead to an accurate description by the theory if, for
some reason, it successfully ‘captures’ the inﬂuence of the surrounding.
The simplest way to achieve this is to include a larger number of constants
into the theory that can be adapted to measurements. To avoid the last, it
is generally demanded that a theory should be in some sense ‘simple’ or
‘aesthetic’.

Experiments and observations provide the basis of the method of natural
sciences in that their outcome decides on the ‘truth’ of a theory. If predicted
qualitatively and quantitatively correctly by a theory, a natural phenomenon
is considered to be ‘understood’ or ‘explained’ in terms of the theory.

Note that in the case of a false assumption of isolation of the system, a
‘true’ theory is still ‘false’ in the sense that it cannot be expected that it
describes correctly the ‘nature’ of the system. Note also that there are no
proofs in natural sciences, although Galilei uses this notion in the above
cited passage from 1638.1 Differently to mathematics, those are based on
experiment, not on logic. Ultimately, in natural sciences even logic is sub-
ject to experimental veriﬁcation.

1 This is not in conﬂict with the fact that theoretical physics describes physical systems
by mathematical means. In this way, physical problems are mapped onto mathematical
problems. Inevitably, the last need to be solved by pure mathematical methods, i.e., by
theorems and proofs.

10

3.2.2 Successes and abstracted world views

The focus on mechanical phenomena allowed the development of a highly
successful theory, i.e., Newtonian Mechanics, that was believed to be con-
sistent with experiments and observations of increasing accuracy until the
beginning of the 20th century.1 Under the impression of the successes of
this theory, there was abstracted a philosophical world view, the Clockwork
Universe where God is regarded as a creator of natural laws governing its
evolution and the agent that set the clock initially into motion. After that,
the evolution of the world is thought to be completely deterministic. It is
believed that a miracle, in the sense of a divine intervention into nature
which does contradict natural laws, does not occur.

3.2.3 Abstraction of world views from natural sciences

That abstraction of a philosophical world view, although tempting, provides
a classic example of the quite common mistake of the layman to identify a
theory with the part of nature it only describes. The method of natural
sciences deﬁnes the ‘truth’ of a theory as its consistency with known ex-
periments and observations within the accuracy of measurements. There
is no generally accepted method available to decide whether the theory is
true in some absolute sense. On the contrary, the history of physics showed
that ultimately every theory turned out to be ‘false’, in the sense that its
predictions were inconsistent with more precise experiments or observa-
tions which made its revision necessary. Such revisions led to new theo-
ries which explained the phenomena of the older theories qualitatively and
quantitatively and at the same a large number of additional natural phenom-
ena those older theories could not account for. But, as will be pointed out
later on, in every step in this sequence, concepts that were fundamental in
the formulation of the older theory were negated by its successor. From this

1 The announcement by Le Verrier in 1859 that there was an unexplained advance in the
perihelion of Mercury was not regarded as a failure of Newtonian Mechanics, but due
to unknown gravitational sources.

11

point of view, it can very well be said that fundamental aspects of the older
theories were false. There is no reason to believe that this will be different
for future theories. Here, it should also be taken into account that by the
rules of logic, a false statement can imply a true statement. For instance, a
compound statement falsely claiming a true statement and a false statement
at the same time leads to a true statement by omitting that false part of the
statement. The statement

‘Tigers are mammals and mice are reptiles’

is false, but it implies the true statement

‘Tigers are mammals’.

Hence, a false theory can very well lead to results consistent with experi-
ments or observations. For these reasons, the abstraction of philosophical a
world view from such theories is inherently ﬂawed.

Therefore, the abstraction of philosophical world views from natural sci-
ences leads to a belief system, only. In particular, differently from these
sciences, such views cannot claim exactness.

In addition, from a Christian point of view, it appears that the creation of
a philosophic world view, by abstraction from natural sciences or by theo-
logical reasoning from statements in the bible, violates commandments in
the bible:

• Exodus 20 (KJV)

“4 Thou shalt not make unto thee any graven image, or any
likeness of any thing that is in heaven above, or that is in
the earth beneath, or that is in the water under the earth. 5
Thou shalt not bow down thyself to them, nor serve them:
...”

12

• or in Deuteronomy 5 (KJV)

“8 Thou shalt not make thee any graven image, or any
likeness of any thing that is in heaven above, or that is
in the earth beneath, or that is in the waters beneath the
earth: 9 Thou shalt not bow down thyself unto them, nor
serve them: ...”

3.3 A general remark on Darwin’s theory of evolution

Since I am no biologist, I will make only some very general remarks on
the relation between physics and the natural sciences of biology and chem-
istry. These start from deﬁnitions of these ﬁelds given in the Encyclopedia
Britannica [2]:

“Biology is the study of living things and their vital processes.”

A large part of those processes have been recognized as chemical processes
which led to the creation and growing importance of the subﬁelds of Bio-
chemistry and Molecular Biology. Judging from the successes of those, it
does not seem to be too far fetched to say that biology will ultimately turn
out to be (at least in principle) a subdivision of chemistry.

[Chemistry is] “the science that deals with the properties, com-
position, and structure of substances (elements and compounds),
the reactions and transformations they undergo, and the energy
released or absorbed during those processes.”

The laws that govern those properties of substances have been recognized
as the laws of quantum mechanics. Hence, it can be said that chemistry is
(at least in principle) a subdivision of physics.

13

As a consequence, physics increasingly emerges as the root of the natural
sciences. Therefore, there is reason to view Darwin’s and other theories
of evolution from a physicist’s point of view. Presently, because of their
ad hoc nature and lack of quantitative statements, from this point of view,
those theories seem to be more working hypotheses than theories. Also for
this reason, they seem to be unsuitable for the abstraction of a world view.

4 The descent of the mechanical theory of na-

ture

In the following, we state the established physical theories subsequent to
Newtonian Mechanics in chronological order and give a short description
of fundamental changes they introduced.

4.1 Maxwell’s Theory of the electromagnetic ﬁeld

That descent of the mechanical theory of nature started with the analysis of
electrical and magnetic phenomena in the 19th century, in particular with
the discovery of radio waves propagating at the speed of light in vacuum.1
Such waves were predicted by the electromagnetic theory of James Clerk
Maxwell (1831−1879) from 1873 [25]. They were produced and measured
in the laboratory by Heinrich Hertz (1857 − 1894) in 1887.

It is worth noting that in attempting to illustrate Faraday’s law of induction
2, Maxwell constructed a mechanical model [25]. Also, it was assumed that
those waves had some sort of a material carrier, the so called ‘ether’, similar
to sound waves that are compression waves in matter. In 1881 and 1887, this
theory was shattered by the Michelson-Morley experiments, which were
designed speciﬁcally to detect the motion of the Earth through the ether

1 i.e., at the speed of 299, 792, 458 meters per second
2 that a changing magnetic ﬁeld gives rise to an induced electric ﬁeld

14

Fig. 5: From left to right: Maxwell and Hertz, dates unknown.

and which indicated that there was no such effect.

As a consequence, the existence of non-mechanical entities in addition to
matter was realized, i.e., force ﬁelds that are propagating through empty
space.

4.2 The Special Theory of Relativity

Maxwell’s electromagnetic equations require waves to move at the speed
of light in vacuum in every inertial system, that is in every reference frame
where free 1 matter moves with constant speeds and on a straight lines.
Two such reference frames move relative to each other at a constant speed.
Therefore, the propagation of electromagnetic waves contradicts common
experience 2 that suggests that the wave speed should appear to be different
as measured from different inertial systems.
In 1905, Albert Einstein (1879−1955) 3 made the constancy of the speed of
light and the requirement that the laws of physics should assume the same
form in every inertial system postulates of his Special Theory of Relativity

1 i.e., free from the action of external forces
2 of motion that is small compared to the speed of light in vacuum
3 In 1921, Nobel prize winner in physics “for his services to Theoretical Physics, and

especially for his discovery of the law of the photoelectric effect”.

15

Fig. 6: Albert Einstein, ca. 1905.

[9]. This led to radical changes of Newtonian Mechanics. The concept of
absolute time or rather of absolute simultaneity of events lost its meaning
and became dependent on the reference frame instead. As a consequence,
also the concept of rigid bodies had to be abandoned. All these notions are
central in Newtonian Mechanics.

4.3 The Theory of General Relativity

Newton’s law of gravitation is incompatible with the Theory of Special
Relativity and therefore needed a revision after the arrival of this theory.
This was achieved in 1915 by Albert Einstein’s Theory of General Relativ-
ity [10, 11] that absorbs the gravitational ﬁeld into the geometry of space-
time. In this, the theory generalizes the Special Theory of Relativity and
again radically alters Newtonian Mechanics on a fundamental level.
In
particular, it removes the gravitational ﬁeld from any energy momentum
balance of a physical system under the inﬂuence of such a ‘ﬁeld’. As a
consequence, in general there is no conserved total energy or momentum
associated to such a system.

16

Fig. 7: From left to right: Heisenberg (ca. 1924), Born and Jordan.

4.4 Quantum Mechanics

The Theory of Quantum Mechanics or more general Quantum Theory was
developed by Werner Heisenberg (1901−1976) 1, Max Born (1882−1970)
2 and Pascual Jordan (1902 − 1980) in 1925 because of the clear failure
of Newtonian Mechanics to describe the physical phenomena in the range
of atomic distances, i.e, 10−10 meter = 0.1 nanometer and below [16, 1,
3]. This theory shook the foundations of physics like no other before or
after because of its probabilistic character. That character allows statements
on individual systems only in the exceptional cases of the occurrence of
probabilities of value 1.

It denies the possibility of a deterministic description simultaneously of
the positions and the momenta of the members of a mechanical system.
It gives a deterministic description only for the probability distribution of
those quantities.

In this, it departs radically from the previous theories which were from then

1 In 1932, Nobel prize winner in physics “for the creation of quantum mechanics, the
application of which has, inter alia, led to the discovery of the allotropic forms of hy-
drogen”.

2 In 1954, shared with Walther Bothe, Nobel prize winner in physics “for his fundamental
research in quantum mechanics, especially for his statistical interpretation of the wave-
function”.

17

Fig. 8: From left to right: Pauli and Kronig.

on referred to as ‘classical’. The statistical nature of the theory was a major
shock for physicists and is the reason why a few physicists still consider it
to be an incomplete theory. Notably, Albert Einstein was among them.

The desperation of physicists, caused by the inapplicability of the ideas
from classical physics to atomic systems, is very well depicted in a letter
from 1925 of Wolfgang Pauli 1900 − 1958, later a Nobel Prize winner in
physics 1, to his assistant Ralph Kronig 1904 − 1995:

‘Currently, Physics is again very muddled. For me at least, it
is to complicated and I wished I would be a comic artist of the
screen or similar and would never have heard anything from
physics. But still I hope that Bohr will save us with a new
idea.’

4.5 Quantum Electrodynamics

Quantum Electrodynamics is the result of the attempt to develop a Quan-
tum Mechanics which is compatible with the Theory of Special Relativity.

1 in 1945, ”for the discovery of the Exclusion Principle, also called the Pauli Principle”.

18

It describes the interaction of charged matter. In this theory, matter and
the electrodynamic ﬁeld are treated on the same footing, namely as objects
that can act as particles or ﬁelds. In classical physics both properties are
incompatible. In addition, it leads on the existence of antimatter that in col-
lision with the corresponding matter annihilates to light. Also the opposite
process is possible. As a consequence, matter and light can be considered
as two manifestations of one ﬁeld. Some of the most precise tests of Quan-
tum Electrodynamics have been experiments dealing with the properties of
subatomic particles known as muons. The magnetic moment of this type of
particle has been shown to agree with the theory to nine signiﬁcant digits.
Agreement of such high accuracy makes Quantum Electrodynamics one of
the most successful physical theories so far devised.

4.6 The Standard Model of Particle Physics

The Standard Model of Particle Physics is a generalization of Quantum
Electrodynamics which also includes weak and strong nuclear forces that
are in particular responsible for radioactive decay and the stability of atomic
nuclei. It does not take into account the gravitational ﬁeld. Until recently,
it has proved highly successful in the description of experimental obser-
vations. However, experiments in 1998, (K2K-I) 2004 (K2K-II) and 2006
(MINOS) indicate that neutrinos have mass which is not taken into account
in the standard model.

Also, one of the basic assumptions of particle physics in general is the
ancient idea (Democritus, ca. 460 − 370 BC) of the existence of ‘atoms’ 1,
i.e., of particles that are ‘fundamental’ in the sense of not being composites
of others. The history of particle physics does not seem to support this idea.

1 The Greek word ‘atomiki’ means ‘indivisibles’.

19

5 Conclusions

I hope, it has been made clear that natural sciences pose no threat to faith
because of the inherent limitations of their approach. Abstracted world
views pose a potential threat, but leave the ﬁrm ground of natural sciences
and therefore constitute belief systems that cannot claim exactness.

That such abstractions are inherently ﬂawed can also be read off from the
development of the root of natural sciences, i.e., physics. Its development
led to a sequence of theories which give the impression of insights into na-
ture of increasing deepness and comprehensiveness. Still, each new theory
negated fundamental aspects of its predecessor. It is not to be expected
that this will change in future. This indicates that every physical theory
contains some fundamentally false aspects which would be inherited by an
abstracted world view.

In addition, it should also be taken into account that the majority of the
creators of modern physics, in particular,

Kepler, Galilei, Newton, Descartes, Laplace, Leibniz, Maxwell,
Planck, Heisenberg and Jordan

were Christians that did not see any contradiction between their work and
their faith. Finally, I see no better way to conclude this paper with the ﬁnal
words of Max Planck in his speech “Religion und Naturwissenschaft” [26]
( Religion and Natural Sciences) from 1937:

which translates to

Hin zu Gott!

Towards God!

20

References

34, 858-888.

[1] Born M, Jordan P 1925, Zur Quantenmechanik, Zeitschrift f¨ur Physik,

[2] Britannica Concise Encyclopedia 2006.

[3] Born M, Heisenberg W, Jordan P 1925, Zur Quantenmechanik II,

Zeitschrift f¨ur Physik, 35, 557-615.

[4] Borzeszkowski H-H, Wahsner R 1980, Newton und Voltaire, Berlin:

Akademie Verlag.

[5] Chojecka E 1967, Johann Kepler und die Kunst. Zum Verh¨altnis von
Kunst und Naturwissenschaften in der Sp¨atrenaissance, Zeitschrift f¨ur
Kunstgeschichte, 30, 55-72.

[6] Cohen I B 1983, The Newtonian revolution, Cambridge: University

Press.

[7] Copernicus N 1995, On the revolutions of heavenly spheres, New

York: Prometheus Books.

[8] Dijksterhuis E J 1985, The mechanization of the world picture, Prince-

ton: Princeton University Press.

[9] Einstein A 1905, Zur Elekrodynamik bewegter K¨orper, Annalen der

Physik, 17, 891-921.

[10] Einstein A 1915, Die Feldgleichungen der Gravitation, Sitzungs-
berichte der der Preussischen Akademie der Wissenschaften zu
Berlin, 844-847.

[11] Einstein A 1916, Die Grundlage der allgemeinen Relativit¨atstheorie,

Annalen der Physik, 49, 769-822.

[12] Einstein A 2005, Mein Weltbild, Z¨urich: Europa Verlag.

21

[13] Galilei G, Discoveries and Opinions of Galileo, Translated with an
introduction and notes by Stillman Drake, New York: Anchor Books.

[14] Galileo G 2002, Dialogues concerning two new sciences, Philadel-

phia: Running Press.

Verlag.

[15] Heisenberg W 1971, Schritte ¨uber Grenzen, M¨unchen: Piper & Co.

[16] Heisenberg W 1925, ¨Uber quantentheoretische Umdeutung kinema-
tischer und mechanischer Beziehungen, Zeitschrift f¨ur Physik, 33,
879-893.

[17] Jordan P 1963, Der Naturwissenschaftler vor der religi¨osen Frage,

Oldenburg: Gerald Stalling Verlag.

[18] Kepler J, Dyck W 1951, Gesammelte Werke, Vol. 15, p. 146. In a letter

to Herwart von Hohenburg from 10th of April 1605.

[19] Kepler J 2002, Harmonies of the world, London: Running Press.

[20] Koestler A 1968, The sleepwalkers, London: Penguin Books.

[21] Laplace P S 1995, A philosophical essay on probabilities, New York:

Dover Publications.

[22] Lewis C S 1994, The Discarded Image: An Introduction to Medieval
and Renaissance Literature, Reprint edition, Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.

[23] Newton I 1999, The Principia, Berkeley: University of California

[24] Margenau H, Varghese R A 1992, Cosmos, Bios, Theos, Chicago:

[25] Maxwell J C 1891, A Treatise on Electricity and Magnetism, London:

Press.

Open Court Publishing.

Clarendon Press.

22

[26] Planck M 1937, Religion und Naturwissenschaft, in: Planck M, Wege
zur physikalischen Erkenntnis, 4th ed., Leipzig: Hirzel Verlag.

[27] Enz C P, v. Meyenn K (eds.), Wolfgang Pauli - Wissenschaftlicher

Briefwechsel, Vol. 1, Letter 89, 215.

[28] Strong E W 1952, Newton and God, Journal of the History of Ideas,

13, 147-167.

[29] Voltaire 1978, Letters on England, London: Penguin Books.

23

