6
0
0
2
 
v
o
N
 
7
 
 
]
h
p
-
t
s
i
h
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
4
6
0
1
1
6
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Early Greek Thought and Perspectives for the Interpretation of
Quantum Mechanics: Preliminaries to an Ontological Approach.

Karin Verelst and Bob Coecke

CLEA-FUND, Free University of Brussels
Pleinlaan 2, B-1050, Brussels, Belgium
kverelst@vub.ac.be; bocoecke@vub.ac.be

Abstract

It will be shown in this article that an ontological approach for some problems related to the
interpretation of Quantum Mechanics (QM) could emerge from a re-evaluation of the main paradox of
early Greek thought: the paradox of Being and non-Being, and the solutions presented to it by Plato
and Aristotle. More well known are the derivative paradoxes of Zeno: the paradox of motion and the
paradox of the One and the Many. They stem from what was perceived by classical philosophy to be the
fundamental enigma for thinking about the world: the seemingly contradictory results that followed
from the co-incidence of being and non-being in the world of change and motion as we experience it,
and the experience of absolute existence here and now. The most clear expression of both stances can
be found, again following classical thought, in the thinking of Heraclitus of Ephesus and Parmenides
of Elea. The problem put forward by these paradoxes reduces for both Plato and Aristotle to the
possibility of the existence of stable objects as a necessary condition for knowledge. Hence the primarily
ontological nature of the solutions they proposed: Plato’s Theory of Forms and Aristotle’s metaphysics
and logic. Plato’s and Aristotle’s systems are argued here to do on the ontological level essentially
the same: to introduce stability in the world by introducing the notion of a separable, stable object,
for which a ‘principle of contradiction’ is valid: an object cannot be and not-be at the same place at
the same time. So it becomes possible to forbid contradiction on an epistemological level, and thus to
guarantee the certainty of knowledge that seemed to be threatened before. After leaving Aristotelian
metaphysics, early modern science had to cope with these problems: it did so by introducing “space”
as the seat of stability, and “time” as the theater of motion. But the ontological structure present in
this solution remained the same. Therefore the fundamental notion ‘separable system’, related to the
notions observation and measurement, themselves related to the modern concepts of space and time,
appears to be intrinsically problematic, because it is inextricably connected to classical logic on the
ontological level. We see therefore the problems dealt with by quantum logic not as merely formal,
and the problem of ‘non-locality’ as related to it, indicating the need to re-think the notions system,
entity, as well as the implications of the operation ‘measurement’, which is seen here as an application
of classical logic (including its ontological consequences) on the material world.

1

Introduction

At the origin of our approach lay two encounters between Greek thought and Quantum Mechanics, one of
them deliberately conceived by its author, the other being a meeting between new QM-concepts and one of
the oldest problems of human thinking about the world. The ﬁrst encounter has been presented in a short
lecture by C. Piron ([74], p. 169) in which he attempted to develop a realistic QM-interpretation based
on two concepts fundamental to Aristotelian metaphysics, viz. potentiality and actuality. The second one
is the doctoral dissertation of D. Aerts [3]. It both by content and title dealt with the problem of the One
and the Many, the central theme Plato inherited from ﬁfth century philosopher Parmenides of Elea. In
what follows we will attempt to make clear that these encounters are not of a purely coincidential nature.
We intend to develop in this paper an analysis and re-evaluation of these old questions and their solutions.
Our contention is that this analysis might amount into new perspectives on the interpretation of QM, since
the enigmas and paradoxes of early Greek thought, and the solutions presented to them in the “classical
period” are, more than we realize, bound to mark our way of looking at and reasoning about the world1.
The thought-instruments developed by Plato and Aristotle, in order to solve the riddles following out of so
called “pre-Socratic” thought, which are epitomized in the, according to both classical thinkers apparent,

1We ﬁnd support for the relevance of this position in Schr¨odinger’s ﬁne little book dedicated to the subject ([87], p. 3

sq, p. 159)

1

contradiction between the “worldviews” of Heraclitus of Ephesus and Parmenides of Elea, are in use up
to the present, be it in slightly modiﬁed forms2. Our position will be that this classical contradiction has
slipped through the ages unimpaired, but in diﬀerent forms, such as to make it hardly recognisable in
our present epistemological and ontological concepts, both in philosophy and in science. A revelation of
this implicit presence by reconstructing the outlines of its historical pathway then becomes the necessary
ﬁrst step towards an approach for the tackling of problems it eventually causes in to-day’s science. The
argument will lead us to the conclusion that the paradoxes appearing in QM represent such a problem. A
sketch of some possible strategies will complete this attempt at clariﬁcation. Methodologically therefore
the arguments in this paper will be based both on scientiﬁc and philosophical grounds; even more, it
can be considered our aim to show that, when it comes to a proper understanding of the signiﬁcance
and implications of basic “scientiﬁc” ﬁndings, both are inextricably intertwined, since science, seemingly
so diﬀerent, follows a path of deep conceptions laid down much earlier in the development of human
consciousness. We are tempted to see the origins of the QM-paradoxes as consequences of the ontological
“choices” of Plato and Aristotle. Their eﬀort concerned the stabilisation of the world of constant change,
thus saving the possibility of certain knowledge in order to escape the contradictions between stable and
unstable, knowable and unknowable that appear on the level of what happens in reality, as expressed
mainly by Heraclitus and Parmenides. This led to the conception of logic as a standardising rule for
thinking and, much later, experiment as a standardising rule for experiencing ([34], IV: 99, p. 381). Both
originated out of needs felt in the context of the macroworld, and reach now their limitations in the
study of the microworld. At the moment when the interactions between things become as important as
the things themselves, the separating intervention in reality, ﬁrst conceptualised by Plato and Aristotle,
seems to reveal itself as an illusion. For this reason in this paper no position will be taken in the debate
between rationalists and empiricists. From our point of view these philosophical stances come down to
the same on the level of the ontological question: all imply the metaphysical world-structure put forward
by Plato and Aristotle as a solution for the ontological paradoxes raised by pre-Socratic thought.

2 The historical context

Pre-Socratic philosophy ([70], Introduction) is the general name given to a rather diﬀerentiated group of
Greek thinkers, living from the 7th to the 5th century BC. The two main currents that are of concern
to us here are the Heraclitean and the Eleatic school of thought. The Heracliteans claimed to be the
followers of Heraclitus of Ephesus, of whose work only some fragments survived. Plato, followed by
Aristotle, assigned to him the ﬂux-theory, the doctrine of permanent motion and unstability in the world.
The consequences of this doctrine are, as both Plato and Aristotle stressed repeatedly, the impossibility
to develop stable, certain knowledge about the world, for an object, changing each instant, does not allow
for even to be named with certainty, let alone to be “known”, i.e., assigned ﬁxed, objective characteristics.
A fragment that might have inspired Plato ([45], Cratylus, 66, 402(a); Theaetetus, 72, 160 (d,e)) for this
interpretation is the famous riverfragment3 in which Heraclitus states that because of the ever ongoing
ﬂow of the waters, it is impossible to step into the same river twice. He stresses the ever ongoing change
or motion (both being aspects of the same process) that characterises this world and its phenomena.
This is so because Being, over a lapse of time, has no stability. Everything that it is at this moment
changes at the same time, therefore it is not. This coming together of Being and non-Being at one instant
is known as the principle of coincidence of opposites4.
It is crucial to see that this principle is
connected to the possibilty of motion, for being in motion implies to be and to be not at the same time at
a certain place on a certain moment. It further implies the unity of the world in the sense that there are
no separated objects5, its ontology is dynamic. However, this does not mean that Heraclitus meant to say
that there is absolutely no stability in things. The Heraclitean concept of harmony6, closely connected to
2“Two great warring traditions regarding consistency originated in the days of the Presocratics at the very dawn of
philosophy. The one, going back to Heraclitus, insists that the world is not a consistent system and that, accordingly,
coherent knowledge of it cannot be attained by man. (...) The second tradition, going back to Parmenides, holds that the
world is a consistent system and that knowledge of it must correspondingly be coherent as well, so that all contradictions
must be eschewed.” ([83], introduction.) A clearer contemporary formulation of the classical position can hardly be imagined!
′
µǫν. In dieselben Fl¨usse steigen wir
νoµǫ

′
νoµǫ
und steigen wir nicht, wir sind und wir sind nicht ([33], DK 49a, p. 161).

4The formula stems from Nicolaus Cusanus, a thinker on the edge of the Middle Ages and early Renaissance. But compare
e.g. Cusanus’s “circular theology” with the meaning of the “Ouroboros”, the circular snake of ancient alchemy. For Cusanus,
see ([34], p. 248 sq.); for the Ouroboros, see ([59], p. 367-368).

′
µǫν τ ǫ και

oυ’ κ ǫ’ µβαι

3πoτ αµoι

′
ν τ ǫ και

ς αυ’ τ oι

ς ǫ’ µβαι

oυ’ κ ǫι’′

a
ς τ oι

ν ǫι’′

a

a

′

′

5oυ’ κ ǫ’ µoυ

a

8

α’ λλα

a
τ oυ

′
λo

γoυ α’ κoυ

σαντ ας o‘ µoλoγǫι

a

′
ν σoφo

ν ǫ’′

στ ιν ǫ‘8

′
ν πα

ντ α ǫι’

′

ναι. Haben sie nicht mich, sondern

a

den Sinn vernommen, so ist es weise, dem Sinne gem¨aß zu sagen, alles sei eins. ([33], DK 50, p. 161).

6On the (ir)relevance of the ﬂux-theory for Heraclitus’s thought and possible interpretations of his concept of α‘ ρµoνι

α,

′

see ([56], introduction); also ([57], p. 193).

2

the principle of coincidence of opposites, rather points in the direction of a permanent and momentaneous
re-instantiation of things in the world in a web of totally interconnected events. Reality is One. This
does not imply the “unreality” of the things we experience, it states our absolute interconnectedness with
the world we experience. Tradition transmitted as its counterpart the Eleatic school, named after its
inspirator Parmenides of Elea. Of him more extant textfragments are known, although there remains
doubt about their true meaning. This perception of tradition started with Plato and Aristotle, who saw
him as the opponent of Heraclitus, learning the non-existence of motion and change in reality, reality
being absolutely One, and being absolutely Being7. This brings to mind the paradoxes of Zeno of Elea
([57], p. 263 sq.), according to tradition a disciple of Parmenides ([45], Parmenides, 204-206, 128(c-d)).
The most famous of them is the paradox of motion, a less famous one deals with the possibility of there
being separate things in the world: the paradox of the One and the Many. Zeno’s until now essentially
unresolved paradoxes8 were intended to show that motion and separated things cannot exist, precisely
because their existence demands the coming together of being and non-being at the same time on a
certain place at a certain moment in a world whose fundamental feature it is to exist. Non-Being is a
contradiction in itself ([93], p. 193). The atomists’ reaction to the Eleatic enigma ([57], pp. 407-408)
and to our experience of change was the introduction of non-Being in the form of the “void”. The void
is nothing else than non-Being, in which Being, in the form of a plurality of Eleatic Ones, moves about9.
They can stick together but not mingle with each other, because of their Eleatic nature10. Change thus
reduces to motion, but the origin of this motion, and the paradoxical acceptance of the being of non-
Being, remain riddles unsolved. Because - from the Eleatic point of view - in the real world everything is,
eternally and indivisibly, it is impossible to speak of something that is not in a way that makes sense. But,
as said before, the “contradiction” seen by classical philosophy between Heraclitus and Parmenides is not
necessarily a correct understanding of the earlier “philosophies”. One could as well infer that Heraclitus
and Parmenides do articulate the same world-experience, the former as the experience of reality over a
lapse of time, the latter as the experience of the absolute reality of this moment (to understand better
what this means, try to deny by yourself you are experiencing yourself as existing at this moment)11.
This has nothing to do with the intellectual question what it means to exist, or whether our existence is
“real” or not. These questions concern things “as such”, objects, and their identity in past and future.
But this type of interpretation - which is the interpretation of classical philosophy and of science, and
which entails a representation of reality outside of its actual and momentaneous experience doesn’t make
sense, because for Heraclitus no things “as such” do exist, and for Parmenides there is no motion, which
implies that there is no time. It is our conviction that, rather than revealing the contradiction between
the “thought-systems” of the two pre-Socratic “philosophers”, Plato’s interpretation reveals the diﬀerence
between their world-experience and what we think to be ours, constructed on the rational base laid down
by classical philosophy. The non-existence of metaphysical worldviews in the pre-Socratic period is then
due to a diﬀerent kind of awareness of one’s being-in-the-world that characterized the transition from
mythical awareness to rational self-consciousnes ([54], pp. 67. sq.). The hallmark of this awareness is
transparance for the stream of events that constitutes the world ([18], pp. 81 sq.); there is no such thing
as the separation between subject and object12. This separation precisely coincides with the coming-to-be
of rational self-consciousness. In philosophy, this change will be codiﬁed in the metaphysical systems of
Plato and Aristotle. The process found its completion only in the early modern period, when rationalised
self-consciousness developed the scientiﬁc way of observation and explanation of the world. The problem
of change (and motion as a special case of change) and the problem of the existence of separable objects
in the world appear as two sides of the same coin. It is at the origin of the principle of contradiction,

′

9τ o

′
κǫνo

8

8

ν ǫ’′

ǫ’ o

στ ι Being is. (actually it says: The Now-Being is). ([84], p. 45).

7τ o
8Dijksterhuis remarks sharply: “(...) we don’t know how gravity manages to give velocity to the body, and very often the
given explanation comes down to pretending to understand on the microlevel what should be explained on the macrolevel.
But we know since Zeno of Elea, that here lurks an essential diﬃculty of the conceptualisation of motion... ” ([34], p. 203,
our translation). See also the comments on modern attempts to explain Newton’s laws of gravitation by means of diﬀerent
kinds of bizarre particles, the latest one being the theory of the graviton, by C. Piron in the text of a conference given
November 8, 1996 for CLEA in Brussels ([78], p. 2).

ν “void” literally means non-being. That you can grant for the possibility of motion by the introduction of
the void was discovered Melissus, a follower of Parmenides, and of whom Leucippus, founder of atomism, was a disciple
according to tradition ([57], pp. 397-398). Furthermore α’′
, without cuts, unseparated in itself,
undivided. It is important to see that this originally meant that there are no “parts” in this Being (in this entity, again
literally the same word), between which there can be “parts” of non-Being, the non-Being having a diﬀerent character than
the all-pervading, homogeneous void or empty space of later times.
a
ρ τ oυ

a
10κινoυ
ντ αι τ ǫ συνǫχω
′
παρασκǫυα
en lui-mˆeme, produit cette eﬀet (...). ([29], in the ‘lettre `a H´erodote’, pp. 102-103)

τ oν
ζǫι Les atomes se meuvent continˆument durant l’´eternit´e (...) Car la nature du vide, qui s´epare chaque atome

′
τ oµoς, i.e., without τ oµη

στ ην αυ’ τ η

ζoυσα ǫ‘ κα

σις η‘ διoρι

να (...) η’′

8
τ oµoι τ o

ς αι‘ α’′

a
κǫνoυ

a
ν τ oυ

8
τ ǫ γα

ν αι’ ω

′
η φυ

a

a

′

′

8

11Mediaeval thought knew this experiencing of experience as the nunc stans, the “standing now”. ([10], p. 210)
12“it is still the primary function of the noos to be in direct touch with ultimate reality.” ([46], p. 52)

3

formulated by both Plato and Aristotle.

The contradicting conclusions deriving from pre-Socratic philosophy were of a major concern to Plato
and Aristotle, because they challenged the existence of truth and certainty about the world and therefore
about the actions of human beings in it. This uncertainty had given rise to a philosophical discipline,
Sophism, that simply denied any relation between reality and what we say about it ([45], Theaetetus,
42, 152(d,e)). Its subjectivism stems from a radical empiricism, which holds that things are for me as I
perceive them. But since reality as we perceive it is always in a process of permanent change this implies,
as Plato points out in the Theaetetus13, also the non-existence of stable, individual things in the world.
But then again this means that Sophism is nothing else but an instance of the ontology of permanent
change, already formulated by earlier thinkers like Heraclitus. This is what, according to Plato, follows
for knowledge out of the ontology of universal change, and “everything is equally true” reveals itself
as the epistemological formulation of the coincidence of opposites, which we met before as the
base of the universal change theory. On this soil the principle of contradiction rests, because if you allow
contradiction, you will be allowed to say whatever: ex falso quodlibet ([45], Theaetetus, 150, 182(e)-183(a)).
But how to conceal this prohibition with our experience of permanent change in the world? This will
only be possible by stabilising human world-experience in a world-picture, strong enough to survive the
paradoxical present into the past and the future14. Strong foundations must be laid to grant the possibility
to experience entities as objects outside of the stream of events, and therefore to speak about them in
an “objective” way. That is where, from our point of view, the true origin of philosophy and in a later
stadium science are to be situated. The main problem for Plato and Aristotle can be described therefore
as the construction of a world-picture that would 1) grant the ultimate stability of things, neccesary as a
solid base for certain knowledge, and at the same time 2) allow for non-being, necessary for the existence
of the change, motion, manifold etc., that we experience by our senses. The common feature of both
their solutions was the division of the world in two separated, though connected, layers: an
unchangeable, motionless ‘Parmenidean’ or ‘Eleatic’ one which grants certainty about both objects and
names, and a second ‘Heraclitean’ one, changeable and moving, which allows change and motion in the
world as presented to our senses. This feature of a two-layered world (a “world behind the world”), is what
makes their worldviews metaphysical ([10], One / Thinking, p. 23). In respect to this, we consider the
diﬀerences between the two as rather superﬁcial. The ways they choosed to achieve this are nevertheless
very diﬀerent. They will be treated in more detail below.

3 The solutions of Plato and Aristotle

Plato’s system displays an explicit two-world structure: the eternal world of Forms or Ideas, and the world
of changeable phenomena. The relation between the two consists in the participation of the phenomena
It is the hierarchy in the
in the Forms, the Forms granting them ultimate stability and knowability.
level of Being (in the level of reality) of the Forms and the participation of things in the Forms (the
participation theory) that allows for the possibility of an object to have contrary properties without
creating a contradiction between them that would arise out of the simultaneous presence of Being and
non-Being15 The reasoning runs as follows: if there be a Form “Being” and another Form “motion”, then
it is clear that “Being” must have a deeper, broader level of reality, because everything that moves exists,
but not everything that exists moves. Something can be “non-moving” in the sense that it is because
it participates in the Form “Being”, and is not in the sense that it participates in the Form “Rest” and
therefore doesn’t move. Because of the diﬀerent level of reality of the Forms “Being” and “Rest”, this
will not lead to the ontological impossibility of something not being on the level of Being itself. This
constitutes the ontological part of his system. On the level of knowledge this is reﬂected in the structure
of language. Plato is the ﬁrst to discriminate between the predicative and existential use of the verb ‘to
be’16. This is possible because classes of concepts do “mingle” the same way as classes of Forms ([45],
Sophist, 400, 253(b,c); id., 401, 253(d,e)). On the epistemological level, this discrimination plays exactly
the same role as the existence-hierarchy of the Forms does ontologically. It allows for the possibility to
speak about a thing having contrary properties without ending up in contradiction. Plato thus is the ﬁrst

13Plato explicitly refers to Protagoras’s “man is the measure of all things, existing and non-existing”. ([45], Theaetetus,

160(d,e))

14The necessary condition that made possible this construction of stabilising world-pictures or “worldviews”, was the
earlier coming-to-be of the “inner mind-space”, in which the non-present could be re-presented as present ([54], p. 54 sq.).
15Plato’s elaboration for the Forms Being, Motion and Rest in ([45], Sophist, 388, 250(b,c)). A more general ontological

formulation can be found e.g. ([45],id., 392, 251(d); 413, 256(d,e)).

16“Platonists who doubt that they are spectators of Being must settle for the knowledge that they are investigators of the

verb “to be”. ([72], p. 223)

4

to formulate the principle of contradiction17. However, since his epistemology remains fully embedded
in his ontology, the principle follows as a property of the way we can speak about the world directly out
of the participation theory. The principle of contradiction is the formulation on an epistemological
level of the participation theory18. Plato’s epistemology contains, because of this principle, and
therefore because of the existence of the Forms, an implicit logical structure[20]. The fundamental (and
unproven) axiom on which his system rests is the existence of the Forms proper. The stability of things
and their knowability is granted by an essence (the Forms) existing before and apart from them. The
problem of motion gets its solution by means of the degrees of reality that exist between the Forms
mutually. In this way he gives a foundation to the stability of the world and to its knowability, without
excluding properties like change and motion out of it. Thus he escapes the pre-Socratic enigma.

Aristotle solves the problem of stability and knowledge - of stability as a necessary condition for
knowledge - in an at ﬁrst glance totally diﬀerent manner. But he starts from the same premiss: that the
world, experienced as external, should be knowable as such, knowable objectively - i.e., in its quality as
a collection of objects - by a subject. As said before, this separation of the world and the knower causes
the falling apart of the world in the stable, knowable, Eleatic noumenon (essence), and the unstable
Heraclitean phenomenon, thus yielding a representation, a metaphysical “worldview” problematic
vis-`a-vis the changing reality open to experience. The reasons for the Stagiryte’s rejection of Plato’s
system are the diﬃculties that are raised - from his point of view - by the Form-ontology. The diﬃculties
are threefold: the Third Man, the unlimited number of Forms, and motion ([90], I, 990b(15)
- 991a(8); there also footnote c, and 991a(9 sq.)). Aristotle’s objections reduce to one major theme:
the rejection of the Forms as stabilising essentials existing separatedly from the things they instantiate.
How then does he guarantee the existence of stable things that can undergo change and motion without
allowing for the coincidence of opposites? And how does he save the possibility to speak about them as
being and non-being without falling into contradiction? With him, and contrary to Plato, the Eleatic and
Heraclitean layers coincide in one world. A thing (object of experience) is a essential form, a substance
which realizes itself in an undiﬀerentiated material receptacle19, which can be seen as a substratum for
existence, not as existence itself. Matter in itself has neither individuality, nor quality. A thing consists of
Form and matter at the same time. Things therefore are not reﬂections of idealised Forms in a separated
world, but instantiations of Form - termed substance20 - in matter. This instantiation or realisation is seen
as a process in a course of functional development that leads to a certain endpoint, and in this sense as the
“goal” to be achieved. How, then, does he explain and justify the nature of things in their coming-to-be
and being? This he does by introducing the theory of the four causes. These causes are not to be
interpreted in our strict causal sense; they represent the reasons that make that something is what it is
([90], I, 983a(24-34)). They are not causes but becauses21. The material cause is the undiﬀerentiated
substratum for existence, in which the essential nature of things will ﬁnd its expression. The formal
cause is exactly this essence, the thing’s substantial nature. But because this evolution - this motion
towards - takes place in and through the material substrate, it is a process that can never be completed.
The eﬃcient cause represents the inﬂuences from the outside world that cause the process of motion
towards realisation of its true nature. The ﬁnal cause is the endpoint of this realisation, the completion
of the transformation from potentiality to actuality. Why does Aristotle separate potential from
realised being? This is the core of his metaphysical system, because the transformation from potential to
actual is his way of understanding motion. An entity that has realised its substance doesn’t change or
move anymore. But this will never be the case for a particular thing in the world, for a thing can only be
in motion in reference to something else. And since an endless regression of causes of motion would be
absurd, he postulates the existence of the truly actualised and therefore motionless Form, the First and
motionless Mover, God. An even more important point is that the impossibility of the total actualisation
of the things in the world follows out of their being form and matter at the same time: the entity is not
completely its actualised self, it is only in reference to something else. The only truly actualised thing
- true Form - is God. Here we ﬁnd the ontological ground for the contradiction principle: an
entity cannot be in the potential and in the actual state in reference to one single other thing ([90], IV,
1009a(24-39)). This allows Aristotle to unite the Eleatic and Heraclitean ‘worlds’ of his metaphysical

17Already in the Phaedo: ([45], Phaedo, 348, 101(d,e)).
18Epistemological formulation: [45], Sophist, 414, 257(a,b,c); id. 418, 258(b,c).
19The υ‘ πoκǫιµǫ
20It will be noted that “substance” in the Aristotelian sense has nothing to do with the material connotation that seems
evident in our use of that concept. Aristotelian reality on the level of matter is a continuum; it is the Form or substance
that separates Being from non-Being.

νoν. See ([90], VII, 1028b(84)-1029a(34))

′

τ ιoς, cause, bears connotations diﬀerent from the modern concept of causality. Causal expressions in both the Platonic
and Aristotelian sense would include (apart from the ‘strictly causal’ ones): Why is this statue so heavy? Because it is
made of bronze. Why is he taking after-dinner walks? Because of his health. See ([92], p. 134).

21αι’′

5

system. We bring to mind that his system was constructed this way to obtain this result, to grant the
possibility to deal with the apparent paradoxical nature of ‘real’ reality: stability and motion should both
be accounted for. The world, thus stabilised ontologically, can now be made accessible to thinking. How
does he construct a framework for knowledge such that a relation to this stabilised, but divided reality
can be achieved? Here we enter the vast area of Aristotelian logic. The principle of contradiction,
based on the separation of being and non-being in the world, can now be established as the basic axiom
for correct thinking ([90], IV, 1005b(8-34)). Although Aristotle states explicitly its unprovability ([90], IV,
1005b(35)-1006a(16)), its introduction is justiﬁed in the framework of his metaphysics, where the danger
that it would cause the emergence of a static, Eleatic world-picture, incompatible with our experience,
had been neutralised. The three fundamental principles of classical (Aristotelian) logic: the existence of
objects of knowledge, the principle of contradiction and the principle of identity, all correspond to
a fundamental aspect of his ontology. This is exempliﬁed in the three possible usages of the verb “to be”:
existential, predicative, and identical. The Aristotelian syllogism always starts with the aﬃrmation of
existence: something is22. The principle of contradiction then concerns the way one can speak (predicate)
validly about this existing object, i.e. about the true and falsehood of its having properties, not about
its being in existence. The principle of identity states that the entity is identical to itself at any moment
(a=a), thus granting the stability necessary to name (identify) it. It will be clear that the principle of
contradiction and the principle of identity are closely interconnected. In any way, change and motion are
intrinsically not provided for in this framework; therefore the ontology underlying the logical system of
knowledge is essentially static, and requires the introduction of a First Mover with a proper ontological
status beyond the phenomena for whose change and motion he must account for.

These diﬀerent positions regarding the stable essence of things will cause the Fight of the Universals,
the question whether the substances precede (ante re) or coincide with (in re) the things they instantiate.
During the Middle Ages this debate will give rise to a third possible position: nominalism. It holds that
substances (Universals) do not exist except for our mental activity. But then the debate had already
shifted in a purely epistemological direction, while at its origin were mainly ontological questions. That
these questions even in the epistemological treatment of nominalism don’t dissappear, becomes clear when
one considers the diﬃculties each nominalist theory has to grant soundly for the possibility to use general
concepts, an indispensible tool for scientiﬁc theory ([19], p. 85).

4 Related conceptions in early modernity

It is well known that the transformation from medieval to modern science coincides with the abolition
of Aristotelian metaphysics as the foundation of knowledge. Not abondoned until the twentieth century
however was Aristotelian logic as a base for reasoning. Our aim until now can be summarised as showing
that the main principle of syllogistic logic, the principle of contradiction, contains itself an ontological
rule. The rule is that, contrary to our daily experiences, intellectual processes be standardised to remove
change (and as a special case: motion) out of the world to assure the possibility of naming and classifying
unambiguously entities as objects. But the change and motion we experience in the world do remain. In
the Stagiryte’s system, the possibility for change and motion was granted for exclusively on the ontological
level (the transformation of potentiality into actuality). Furthermore, although Aristotle separated the
disciplines of the theory of Being from the theory of Reasoning (i.e., ontology from epistemology), we
showed above that the latter’s basic rules and categories are ontological principles as well. Dropping Aris-
totelian metaphysics, while at the same time continuing to use Aristotelian logic as an empty “reasoning
apparatus” implies therefore loosing the possibility to account for change and motion in whatever descrip-
tion of the world that is based on it. The fact that Aristotelian logic transformed during the twentieth
century into diﬀerent formal, axiomatic logical systems used in today’s philosophy and science doesn’t
really matter, because the fundamental principle, and therefore the fundamental ontology, remained the
same ([40], p. xix). This “emptied”23 logic actually contains an Eleatic ontology, that allows
only for static descriptions of the world. From this point of view, the debate during the Renaissance
between the proponents of Aristotelian natural physics and the re-emerging corpuscular theories, can be
seen as a debate on how Aristotelian logic as the base of reasoning, given its inherent ontological nature,

22With Aristotle, negation always is a secondary step in the process of reasoning.
23This “emptiness” is diﬀerent from the ‘emptiness of twenthieth century formal logic. But the latter can be seen as a
natural consequence of the former, since it was developed to deal with logical problems that arise out of the ontological
nature of the rules of logic, as we hope to make clear further in this article. This applies e.g. to Russell’s “theory of types”
(and to all theories based on “meta-reasoning”), that can be read as modern (i. e., “purely epistemological”) theories of
categories in the Aristotelian sense.

6

can be brought into agreement with the changing world of our senses24. This viewpoint also implies that
the metaphysical structure fundamental to the older philosophical systems actually remains present in
science, be it in a diﬀerent and, in fact, less clear way.

Our aim is not to describe all subtle diﬀerences between the alternative conceptions of the “real world”
advanced at the verge of modern science; this has been done by others in a brilliant way ; e. g. in [34] and
[50]. Our concern now is to see whether it is possible to bring at the surface the essential characteristics
of a common line of reasoning which would allow to place science back into the philosophical development
scetched above, and to check whether this clariﬁcation of its its fundamental concepts sheds new light on
present-day questions related to the enigma of Quantum Mechanics. Our argument will lead us to the
conclusion that this is the case indeed: the ontological role of the Eleatic and Heraclitean layers in the
metaphysical reconstruction of reality is played in science by the increasingly absolute conceptions of space
and time, instead of but necessarily correlated to the development of modern conceptions of the nature of
“matter”. This becomes manifest in the “desubstantialisation” of space and in the increasing parallellism
between “space” and “time”. We will brieﬂy consider the role of “experimentation” as an observational
practice designed to apply the ontological rule present in the scientiﬁc way of reasoning on our world-
experience, by changing “perception” into “observation”. The formalisation of the empirical component
of the cognitive, “objectiﬁed” world-experience made it possible to bring perception into agreement with
the ontological structure of logical reasoning, not the other way around. Therefore the “epistemological”
revolution brought about by science can be described not as the abondoning of metaphysics, but as the
complete absorption of the metaphysical structure into the procedures of its formalised “operational”
components, cognitive and empirical, of this “objective” (i.e., objectiﬁed) world-experience. The obscured
relation in science between “act” and “perception” then allows for the conception of logical reasoning as
a representation of the ontological structure of reality and for the succesfull application of science to the
natural world: reality is adapted to the ontological structure of science, not vice versa25. The certain
base for knowledge is thus granted for in the most absolute sense, the circle is closed: ontology is not
a “problem” anymore. In this context the problem of the validity of knowledge takes on a new shape.
Epistemology, the critical commentary of the process of science, becomes more and more the philosophical
discipline, and can be considered as a discipline or theory of knowledge not separated from, but “without”
metaphysics: it nourishes itself ontologically on science. The apparently sole problematic point concerns
the relation of the “subject” with the objective world, - the debate between empiricists and idealists,
a “question” that for evident reasons never can be “solved” inside its framework: the relation between
knowledge and the real world that is implicitly supposed here is replaced in science by the relation between
knowledge and a reconstruction of the real world via an “empirical” procedure containing an ontological
rule that shapes the relation between the human “observer” and reality on a much deeper level. The
separation between subject and object has by now been completed. Let us now see how early modern
science solved the problem of “reﬁlling” logic with an ontology that allows for a world of change and
motion, and therefore for the description of the world of our sensual experience.

5 The Solutions of Early Modernity

At this point in our analysis our problem can be summarised as follows: In the course of a process governed
mainly by religious and societal conﬂicts, early modern natural philosophy emancipated itself from its
Aristotelian metaphysical foundation. Although indispensible for its correct understanding, these religious
and societal inﬂuences do not concern us here; we will conﬁne ourselves to an investigation of how this
emancipation was achieved, and by which intellectual means the problems that arose out of it were solved

24This of course is by no means to say that the debate was considered this way by those who where implied. A brilliant
exposure of the backgrounds of the debate between Galilei and the jesuit scientists can be found in [82]. On Newton’s
backgrounds, see ([35], p. 55 sq.). A more general discussion in [89].

25The Greeks, whose intuitions about the relation man-world seem to have been often more clear then ours, were sharply
aware of the nature of technical interference with the course of reality. One of the original meanings of the word mhxan, tool,
technical device, is ‘trick, deceit’. Whether this justiﬁes their distrustful attitude towards it is of course a diﬀerent matter.
This ancient clarity also holds for more fundamental concepts. A quotation from von Fritz is worthwile: “(...) the concepts
of the “obscure” Heraclitus are all perfectly clear and can be very exactly deﬁned. In contrast, the empiricist Sextus, whose
arguments seem so clear and easy to many readers, has no clearly identiﬁable concept of either logos (“reason”) or nous
(“mind”) at all. Nous with Sextus is either identiﬁed with logos or considered a manifestation of it. Logos, where Sextus
speaks in his own name, is most often “logical reasoning” or the capacity of logical reasoning (...). But where Sextus reports
the views of other philosophers, logos becomes just the alternative to aisthesis (“perception”), whatever this alternative
may be, and so loses all clearly identiﬁable meaning. Yet it is highly illustrative of the change which the concept
of nous had undergone between Heraclitus and Sextus that Sextus, in trying to explain Heraclitus’ concept, begins by
connecting it with a term the preponderant meaning of which is “reasoning” and ends by almost identifying it with “sensual
perception.” Heraclitus’ own concept of nous, as we have seen, was clearly distinguished from both but somewhat
more nearly related to the latter than to the former. ([46], pp. 42, 43.) Our boldtype and translation of Greek terms.

7

by its main executors. Therefore we will look into the altenatives that were formulated for the Aristotelian
conceptions that came under attack ﬁrst, viz. of matter and motion, and how the reconciliation with the
Eleatic ontology, present unimpaired at the core of Aristotelian logic, was granted for in a way that
remains commensurable with the phenomena of change and motion in the natural world. The ﬁrst step
was taken by Galilei in an attempt to explain at ﬁrst the behaviour of light, later on of all manifestations
of matter that are accesible to the senses ([82], chapter I), by re-introducing Democritian atomism as
theory of matter and of our perception of it. This implies a quantitative explanation of the qualitative
changes that we experience in the macroworld on the level of the basic structure of material bodies; change
reduces to motion. Following the same philosophical line, he established the description of the physical
behaviour of phenomena observed in standardised conditions by way of mathematical laws, allowing for
future veriﬁcation26.
It was indicated before that atomism requires the introduction of a concept of
non-Being or “void”, the precursor of “empty space”, and the indestructibility and incorruptibility of
the “a-tomoi” if it wants to remain logically consistent. Equipped this way it would provide the perfect
metaphysical stuﬃng for logic’s hidden ontology, if there would not remain some major deﬁciencies to
deal with, viz. the total lack of understanding of the origin of the motion that it makes logically possible,
or the question how the invisible atomoi constitute the sensible things in the world. Nevertheless, in
the context of our argument, Galilei’s atomism is of uttermost importance. Not only because it was
the true reason for his condemnation by the Church [82], but because the re-introduction of corpuscular
explanations for the nature and properties of material bodies and the enigma of change and motion was a
possible alternative to the Cartesian ontology of the identity of matter and space. This identity
followed from Descartes’s contention that extension and position are the essential attributes of matter
([80], pp. 46-50). For Descartes space is substantial: it is responsable for the fact that something is what
it is, exactly because of its position in it. He holds as well that the essential characteristic of material
bodies is their extension, and that is why in his system matter and space ultimately coincide. In this way,
Descartes remained consistent with the ontological restrictions of the Stagiryte’s logical framework. But
the impossibility to show that there can be things with these primary qualities alone, makes his system
untenable27. The attempt to develop the possibilities of atomism to a sound philosophical base for the
newly emerging science of nature was undertaken by Pierre Gassendi28. His primal concern was a
nominalist critique of the concepts of both Aristotle and Descartes, a critique which can be accomplished
succesfully only by replacing their logico-ontological categories by “physical” ones. Aristotle’s space was
to be rejected because it was conceived as an accidens29 to substantial form, expressed in the famous
formula that it is “the number of place”. Gassendi was convinced that atomism provided a tool strong
enough to overthrow once and for all the Peripatetic doctrine of substances and qualities, while avoiding
Cartesian “absurdities” ([16], p. 176) Hence he radically turned upside down the ontological hierarchy
grounded by Aristotle but was - as Descartes ([80], p. 48) - carefully aware of the necessity to remain
within the ontological constraints of its logical formulation30. That is why he did not content himself with
the reformulation of the “void” of classical atomism, as it leaves the fundamental question of the origin of
motion unanswered. The introduction of an atomistic explanation for the nature of material bodies and
their properties required a diﬀerent conception of space as well, for abolishing the categories “substance”
and “quality” causes the downfall of the ontology of “potentiality” and “actuality”, and therewith of

26Galilei’s famous dual method, composed of Metodo risolutivo (analytical method based on experimental data) and metodo
compositivo (synthetical method, generalises the principles found by the former and proves by prediction and veriﬁcation
that they hold for the phenomena under study). ([34], p. 259.)

27“A good reason for this is the fact that we cannot measure primary qualities at all unless we can perceive secondary
qualities. (...) This is the point of Berkeley’s argument that a material thing as conceived by Locke is an impossibility”, the
Lockean “primary qualities” of matter being nothing else than the speciﬁcation of Descartes’ concept of extension. ([80], p.
49.)

28The importance of whom for the development of key-ideas in early modern science is until today heavily underestimated.
It doesn’t surprise us much, however, that Schr¨odinger’s ﬁnetuned philosophical intuitions recognised this already decades
ago. See ([87], p. 75), also ([50], pp. 34, 92-94); ([16], p. 174).

29In the Peripatetic sense, a quality that cannot exist apart from the substance to which it belongs. We would say a

“property”, not from a chunk of matter, but from an essential Form.

30Gassendi’s work presents us with one of the rare instances that reveals, both by content and structure, explicitly
the metaphysical nature of the basic categories of modern natural science: “C’est l’id´ee qui nous paraˆıt ressortir de la
pr´esentation de la premi`ere partie de la Physique dans le Syntagma, le De Rebus Naturae Universe. Cette ‘Physique’ fait
imm´ediatement suite `a la ‘Logique’ par quoi commence l’ouvrage (...). Il ne s’y trouve pas en eﬀet de ’M´etaphysique’, et
Gassendi s’en explique d`es le d´ebut: ce n’est pas que la m´etaphysique soit sans objet, ou inaccesible, c’est qu’il n’y a pas
de distinction entre physique et m´etaphysique (...). Ce sont donc bien des cat´egories physiques qui prennent ici la
place de l’ontologie aristot´elicienne, en mˆeme temps qu’elles recoivent un contenu oppos´e `a celles de la physique d’Aristote.
L’atomisme sera la r´ealisation ad´equate d’un tel projet, mais l’on a vu que celui-ci apparaˆıt (...) `a partir de la
critique des ‘formes substantielles’, apporter une nouvelle conception du “mouvement naturel”, ressusciter ’l’espace des
Anciens’ contre le ‘lieu Aristot´elicien’, r´etablir le ‘vide’ dans la Nature, proposer une nouvelle notion du “Temps” etc.” ([16],
pp. 172-173). Our boldtype.

8

the possibility to grant for change and motion. Space, inﬁnite, divisible at inﬁnity and indiﬀerent to its
material content ([16], p. 179) is the seat of the stable individuality of things. Space constitutes the
true Eleactic layer in the metaphysical set-up of natural science: things take position in it while it
remains immobile and identical to itself. Space proceeds the material existence of things and is a necessary
condition for it, not vice versa; it fulﬁlls the same role as the substances with Aristotle. Atomism, Eleatic
by nature, provides a non-qualitative explanation of the composition and motion of material entities in it.
Gassendi’s real coup, however, is the establishment of the rigorous parallellism between “absolute space”
and “absolute time”. The conclusions arrived at concerning the ontological status of space will now be
applied to time. Time is not the “number of motion” as with Aristotle. It is motion that depends on
time, not vice versa. Time constitutes the true Heraclitean layer in the metaphysical set-up of
natural science. Gassendi thus reaches the completion of his quest for sound metaphysical foundations
for the new natural science: change is motion, while space is the modus of existence of things permanent,
exactly the same way as time is the modus of existence of things successive31. Here we ﬁnd another
fundamental reason for his rejection of the Cartesian substantiality of space: nobody would defend the
substantiality of time. The reality of space and time is extra-substantial and extra-accidential. They
have dimensions and/or properties, but, being incorporeal, no functions nor qualities ([16], pp. 177-
181). Therefore the dimensions of space can coincide with the dimensions of matter without causing any
interference. All this clears the road for the theoretical development of the mathematical description of
the behaviour of material objects in space and time in terms of their positions and velocities, as had
been initiated already by Galilei. The fundamental paradox however, although neutralised again, did not
completely disappear. The indivisibility of the atom and the inﬁnite divisibility of space somehow break
the strict mutual correspondence between their proper dimensionalities, a necessary condition for their
ontological complementarity. The inﬁnite divisibility of space and time32 implies (following Gassendi)
continuity. And continuity, that key-concept to classical mechanics, was the well of which the problems
that later led to QM sprang33. For Newton, Gassendi‘s picture provided the perfect ontology to solve
the problems inherent in the mechanical description of nature34. However, Newton realised very well
that the force he introduced35 to explain motion needed itself an explanation ([28], p. 40). Already
when writing the Principia he searched for the explanation of the phenomenon the eﬀects of which he
adequately described therein. For this explanation he turned, as so often, primarily to the Ancients. Not
without disappointment he notes that we do not know of any solution provided by them ([35], p. 57).
After various attempts to develop a sound worldview on the base of an “aether” that would allow his
“Force” to be transmitted mechanically ([35], p. 57-58), he was forced to admit its impossibility, because
the eﬀects of such an aether were not observed on planetary motion. Reluctantly36 but consequently, he
introduces “a most subtile Spirit pervading every-body”, accounting for both inertial force as the cause
of uniform straight-line motion and gravitation as actio in distans37. Force thus turns out to be a
by necessity immaterial instantiation of space. Not only is force a physical entity with a proper
ontological status ([32], p. 229), but to bridge the abyss between material and immaterial, between Being
and non-Being, this status has to go beyond the categories of existence of the phenomena it should grant
for([63], p. 125). It is crucial to realise that Newton needed the co-incidence of God and space to account

31“Il faut en eﬀet, comme il le dira plus loin dans le Syntagma `a propos du mouvement, faire une distinction radicale
entre le mode d’existence des ‘choses permanentes’ et celui des ‘choses successives’, distinction `a laquelle
correspondent respectivement l’espace et le temps. (...) Espace et temps sont inﬁnis, l’un selon les dimensions,
l’autre selon la succesion (...). Espace et temps ont des ’parties in´epuisables’, d’o`u la contingence de la situation du monde
hic et nunc. Espace et temps sont enﬁn inalt´erables et invariables quel qu’en soit le contenu: ... l’espace reste identique
et immobile, comme le temps s’´ecoule toujours de mˆeme mani`ere.” ([16], p.179 sq.), our boldtype.

32([69], p. 3). Although we totally agree that “extension” and “divisibility” are at the origin of the present-day QM-
problems, we think it established and not without relevance for eventual remedies that these notions are themselves not
primitive in this respect, because they follow from past attempts to come to terms with the paradox.

33“Our helplessness vis-`a-vis the continuum, reﬂected in the present diﬃculties of quantum theory, is not a late arrival, it

stood godmother to the birth of science”([87], p.161).

34He uses almost the same wording as Gassendi: “I. Tempus Absolutum, verum, & mathematicum, in se & natura sua,
sine relatione ad externum quodvis, aequalibiter ﬂuit, alioque nomine dicitur Duratio (...) II. Spatium Absolutum,
natura sua sine relatione ad externum quodvis, semper manet similare & immobile (...)” in ([71], p. 6 (Scholium
to the Deﬁnitions)). Our boldtype. Reference to this also in ([78], p. 2). “Tempus Relativum” and “Spatium Relativum”
are the tools that allow us to measure and describe motion in concreto, thence they are easely confused with ‘real’ - i. e.
absolute - space and time.

35“What he proposed was an addition to the ontology of Nature.” Westfall, R. S., cited in ([28], p. 51). Also ([50], p.

101).

36In a letter to Bentley, 25 Feb. 1693, Cited in ([28], footnote 42, p. 52.)
37In the second edition of the Principia, which dates 1713: “Adjicere jam liceret nonulla de Spiritu quodam subtillissimo
corpora crassa pervadente, & in iisdem latente; cujus vi & actionibus particulae corporum ad minimas distantias se
mutuo attrahunt, & continguae factae cohaerent; (...) Sed haec paucis exponi non possunt; neque adest suﬃciens copia
Experimentorum, quibus leges actionum hujus Spiritus accurate determinari & montrari debent. ([71], p. 173-174). Our
boldtype.

9

for gravity, in exactly the same way Aristotle needed the First Mover to account for motion38. Post-
Newtonian classical physics however, after being puriﬁed by eighteenth century enlightement of all such
“superﬂuous” hypotheses, disguised by equating force and accelaration the “causal paradox” that is the
consequence of its metaphysical circularity ([32], p. 228). The persistent problem is the impossibility to
prove the existence of an absolute “frame of reference” because the immaterial parameters of space and
time escape, at least in principle, experimentally controllable observation. It is exactly this ontological
status beyond that makes “similar and immobile” space to the only warrant for the repeatability of
experimental observations ([50], p. 84), which is another way to highlight its Eleactic character, and its
enigma as well. The essentially Leibnitzian approach of what was called later “analytical mechanics”
seemed to deliver an acceptable - because mechanical - alternative, while allowing at the same time for
the treatment of similar classes of physical problems as “Newtonian” or “vectorial” mechanics ([58], p.
xxi). The principle of least action presents a description of mechanical systems by minimizing a quantity
that measures the “action” of the system under consideration as if it were a single particle moving in a
plenum, the particles of this plenum remaining mutually seperated, but being always in direct contact
with each other. The mathematical “conﬁguration space‘” represents space as if force were the ‘real’
manifestation of its n-dimensional geometry ([58], p. 13). But this at ﬁrst glance purely formal approach
hides the Cartesian-Leibnizian ontology of the unreality of space, with Descartes because space coincides
completely with matter as pure extension; with Leibniz because space is nothing but the relations between
the objects ‘in’ it. That the basic quantity describing with Leibniz the dynamical behaviour of the system,
the vis viva or living force39, is represented by a scalar is clearly of more than merely formal importance,
it is a consequence of his ontological position. This annihilation of non-Being - the vacuum, empty space
- from physics opens the possibility to treat space as a merely “relativistic” phenomenon, a position fully
supported later by Einstein in the context of his Special Relativity40. But the problem of the initial origin
of forces or motions remains equally unsolved. Even worse, analytical mechanics lacks a ‘natural’ way
to provide for the stabilising frame of reference for experimental observation as is present in the explicit
ontology of the Newtonian treatment. Appearances are saved by stating that the universe presents the
same aspect from every point (apart from “local irregularities”) ([50], p. 84), but in the ontological
setting of the logical framework - i.e., the framework of the separation between Being and non-Being,
between system and environment, between cause and eﬀect - this can be uphold only by an act of Divine
creation, as is the case with Leibniz, but of course not with his followers in the later school of analytical
mechanics. Saying that the notion of absolute space is redundant because the natural laws are invariant
under coordinate transformations ([48], p. 1) is turning upside down the chain of justiﬁcations. As we
hope to have made clear by now, the whole metaphysical set-up of natural science is such that they should
be so. The fact that the role of “causal black box” played by space is now fulﬁlled by the “environment”41,
doesn’t change anything to the fundamental circularity of the reasoning.

6 The Re-emergence of the Paradox: Late Modernity

The dept of the problem has been brought again to the fore by the results obtained both theoretically
and experimentally by QM. For not only does the theory incorporate states for quantum entities that
imply non-local behaviour [8], but such eﬀects have by now been established incontrovertibly in various
experimental settings, thus shortcutting for once and for good eventual attempts to explain them away
statistically42. Furthermore it was proved to be impossible to describe soundly two or more separated
38“(...) it is possible to see Newton’s ideas as the “fruition of a long tradition” extending from Aristotle through Newton, a
tradition in which Aristotle’s ﬁnite plenum was slowly and by painful steps converted into the void, inﬁnite, three-dimensional
framework of the physical world required by classical physics. Newton’s God-ﬁlled space was the penultimate development
in the process by which concepts of space were developed by attributing to space properties derived from the Deity; after
Newton’s time, the properties remained with the space while the Deity disappeared from consideration.”
([35], p. 60.) Our boldtype.

39Almost identical with our kinetic energy. Together with the “work of the force” or potential energy the two fundamental

scalar quantities on which the study of equilibrium and motion of analytical mechanics rests ([58], p. xxi).

40“The introduction of a “luminiferous ether” will prove to be superﬂuous inasmuch as the view here to be developed will
not require an “absolutely stationary space” provided with special properties, nor assign a velocity-vector to a point of the
empty space in which electromagnetic processes take place.” ([37], p. 38).

41“What is system, for instance, is described by phases or states; environment is not, and cannot, be represented in such
terms. Rather, environment is the seat of “external” forces (...). This apparently necessary and innocent partition of
the world into system and environment, (...) has the most profound consequences for the notion of causality. For according
to it, the notion of causality becomes bound irrevocably to what happens in system alone, (...)
is the state-transition
sequence. (...) what happens in environment has thus been put beyond the reach of causality. Environment
has become acausal.” ([85], p. 19). Our Boldtype.

42C. Piron in [76]: “... the orthodox QM (the ‘new testament’ as Pauli named it) with its credo and its principles is dead
and deﬁnitively dead.” A lot of acrobatic attempts where made to rescue the modernist picture, by extending the quantum

10

systems within the present formalism [3]. As is suﬃciently known, the state of a physical system in
QM is described within mathematical Hilbert space. For every physical entity the collection of all its
properties constitutes its state in Hilbert space. Exactly in the same way as the state of a classical entity
is represented in phase space, the Hilbert space contains all possible states the system can possibly have.
In this sense, both phase space and the Hilbert space represent the environment in which the dynamical
transition of one state to another of the entity will take place. To avoid that the individual state be
blurred in the statistical ensemble proper to the ‘orthodox’ interpretation, C. Piron introduces a new
notion of physical state based on the concept of property as related to experimental projects with well-
deﬁned certain results ([75], p. 398). These results are called yes-results, while any other outcome is
considered to be a no-result. To this end, a test that could eventually be performed is associated to a
property of the system under consideration, in such a way that, once you are certain in advance to obtain
the desired result, you can assign to the system an element of reality ([74], p. 170) as conceived by
Einstein ([38], p. 137). Introducing Aristotle’s dynamical terminology, a property is called “actual” when
the result of the test is certain; when uncertain it is said to be “potential” ([74], p. 171). A property
conceived this way is always potential or actual. It is however possible that the property tested by an
experimental project, and the one tested by the experimental project obtained by exchanging the “yes”
and the “no” results of the former, are both potential. Whenever this situation appears we are dealing
with quantum-like entities, contrary to classical ones where this can never be the case. But it is not a
priori obvious how to deﬁne a particular entity and thus how to assign properties to it. All comes down to
account for the set of tests which matches the collection of its properties and thus the entity itself. This
presupposes the possibility to separate the phenomenon under consideration from the rest of the universe
[31]. But, although it is stated explicitly that the certainty of the experimental project is an objective
feature of the system without reference to our knowledge or beliefs ([69], p. 5), we are supposed to know
in advance what to do with the system to get this certain result. Indeed, the system should be prepared
in a precise way that is related to our existing knowledge of its properties. This presents no problem when
we are dealing with phenomena that are accessible to our daily experience, like with the breaking of a
piece of chalk ([76], p. 208.). The necessary assumptions about its properties are then given by our daily
experience. This enables us to drop the preparation procedure that is essential to ‘true’ experimental
observation. Experimental observation is indeed more than the “contemplation of the astronomer” ([69],
p. 8), it is an intervention that prepares the system in such a way that we obtain an entity - separated
from its environment - together with a set of properties determined by the possible yes-no experiments.
Again, it is the preparation of the system that moulds the ‘real thing’ so as to ﬁt in a deﬁnite metaphysical
set-up, primarily by separating “the system” out of its “environment”. Whatever be the structure of
the set of possible answers, the modelisation of the set of possible yes-no experiments imposes on the set
of possible properties the mathematical structure of a complete lattice ([53], p. 844). This means, as
indicated before, that the “real thing” is forced to ﬁt into the scheme of an intrinsically Eleatic
ontology. The preparation procedure is a ‘black box’ generating that ontology. This does
not imply that it is senseless to perform experimental projects. Natural laws are veriﬁed by experimental
observation, and experiments are performed in reality, so there must be some kind of agreement with what
happens in reality. But it is precisely the kind of relationship that exists between reality and experimental
observation that should be rendered more clear; which implies that the consequences of the fact that
each experimental project is an intervention in reality should be itself subject of investigation. By making
explicit the structures underlying the sets of possible yes-no questions and of possible answers, the Geneva
School approach realises an important progress in this respect, though until now the ontological aspect
of the problem has been left untouched. Embarking on an analysis of this aspect could nevertheless shed
some light not only on the relation between the “entity” and the “real-world phenomenon”, but also on the
status of our conceptions of space and time, which form, as has been argued, the ontological foundation for
the metaphysical set-up present in scientiﬁc theory. This provides the background against which Piron’s
attempts to get hold of a “realistic” conception of space are to be seen. The inevitable re-appearance
of ontological circularity to which also these attempts are subject can be clariﬁed on a more theoretical

picture with an underlying modernist kind of world (for example D. Bohm [17]), or by rejecting it (for example A. Einstein
[36] and J. Bell [13]). But at the same time, every advance on an experimental level (in particular A. Aspect [11] and H.
Rauch [81]) conﬁrmed that these attempts were bound to fail. The general community of physicists reacted to this by a
kind of ontological ignorance attitude which evolved towards a pragmatic quasi botanic empiricism, or by some new age
like mystiﬁcation tendencies (see for example ‘The Tao of Physics’ by F. Capra). Alternatively, a not unimportant group
of people saw the inadequate arsenal of mathematical (and in particular logical) tools as the origin of all these problems
(especially J. Von Neumann & G. Birkhoﬀ [15], J Jauch [52], C. Piron [73], H. Neumann & G. Ludwig [60, 61] and D. Foulis &
C. Randall [42]). This gave rise to an enormous development of mathematical attributes and structures, of which quantum
logic is the most known among philosophers of science (see for example [14] and in particular [65]). Unfortunately, the
mathematical expertise required made the development and study of quantum logic an essentially mathematical occupation
such that the conceptual development stagnated (a conﬁrmation of this fact can be found in [66] and [77]).

11

level43. The tacit assumption underlying the position that a thing coincides with a collection of properties
is that “being” in the sense of “existence” is but a property amongst the others. We discussed before at
length why this assumption is untenable in the context of an - implicit or explicit - Eleatic ontology as
the one present in the cognitive and empirical procedures of science. The notions “object” or “entity”
necessitate the introduction of Being in some form, ontologically beyond the object’s predicable properties,
so as to grant for its required stability and separability, as well as for an origin for the dynamics governing
the processes of change and motion to which it is exposed. In this ontological setting to be is not a
property. It follows that existence is not a predicate ([80], p. 36) and existence itself is not within reach
of experimental preparation, nor observation ([50], p. 84). Regarding the paradoxical results attained by
QM, we are led then to the conclusion that only the development of an explicit and properly ontological
foundation for basic categories as ‘entity’, ‘motion’ as well as for the intervention represented by their
experimental observation remains open as a fruitful strategy. A sketch of a possible further elaboration
of the results attained thus far by the Geneva School with regard to the foregoing analysis is presented in
the last section of this paper. Alternatively, leaving behind the principle of contradiction as constituting
ontology at the core of scientiﬁc procedure both empirical and cognitive, could be taken into consideration.
Interesting steps to come to terms with problems related to this approach have been made in the recent
past. From attempts to develop logical systems that escape the rigorous consistency demanded by the
principle of contradiction sprang relevant considerations, but these remain trapped within the framework
of the ontological core common to all logical systems44. Another approach recognises the ontological
nature of the problem, but limits itself to the construction of ontologies for “possible worlds” that ﬁt “a”
logic in which the principle of contradiction has been “neutralised” somehow [83]. Since all logics still
do partake in the same fundamental principle, these “possible worlds” necessarily remain Eleatic. Our
position would be that the origin of the problem resides within the ontological nature of reality itself. This
viewpoint might clarify the incurable presence of paradoxes in logical systems of all kinds. Paradoxes
then would appear because of an ontological incompatibility between logic and “real” reality. Therefore
our approach would be to take paradox itself as the starting point for the construction of an ontological
framework. We see the work of Spencer Brown [88], and, more recently, Kaufman45 as supportive in this
respect. That this strategy might open relevant perspectives for QM is indicated by the recent discovery
of Aerts et al [7]. The principle underlying such ontology has been adequately formulated in the past.
It is the already mentioned principle of coincidence of opposites, to be found in the work of ﬁfteenth
century philosopher Nicolaus Cusanus. It provides an excellent example to show that abandoning the
principle of contradiction implies the loss of neither the capacity to reason soundly, nor the possibility
to use mathematics ([30], viz. Capitula XII to XVII). It does imply, however, the necessity to abandon
on a conscious level the artiﬁcial separation between “subject” and “object”, the distance between things
being a mere aspect of their instantiation. As an indication for its operational viability we suspect the
possibility to consider circularity and self-reﬂexivity as tools rather than as problems. Another interesting
possibility might be the development of a sound conception of “physical space”, homogeneous from all
points, because circumference and center coincide in all points, and without the need to introduce a
force-like “First Mover”, since distance and interaction reveal themselves as the same thing. This again
might add to opening up interesting perspectives on the “non-locality” of elementary physical phenomena
manifest at the core of QM.

43A speciﬁc discussion of this problem with respect to Piron’s approach of space and time will be the subject of a future
publication. Equally problematic but outside our scope would be an analysis of the concept of ‘ﬁeld’, arising out of General
Relativity. Be it suﬃcient to refer to Schrdinger, who explains: “at any rate the very foundation of the theory, viz. the
basic principle of equivalence of acceleration and a gravitational ﬁeld, clearly means that there is no room for
any kind of ‘force’ to produce accelaration save gravitation, which however is not to be regarded as a force
but resides on the geometry of space-time.” ([86], p. 1). This ‘making real’ of the geometry of space as the ‘force’
behind dynamical processes in four-dimensional space-time reveals more clearly the underlying ontology and links General
Relativity ﬁrmly to the ‘Leibnizian’ tradition within physics. But this continuum, in which gravity manifests itself, is itself
the source of a host of ontological problems. Regarding this, Piron cites in his lecture Einstein saying “that according to
general relativity space is endowed with physical qualities and in this sense an ether exists (...) but this ether
must not be thought of as endowed with the properties of ponderable media (...) nor may any concept of
motion be applied to it.” ([79], p. 1, 2). Our boldtype. By trying to explain his own concept, Einstein reveals how close
Newton and Leibniz actually stand.

44“Every logician in the end divides propositions into those which are acceptable and those which are not.” ([40], intro-

duction)

45Oral communication; see also [55].

12

7 Contemporary physics as products of early Greek thought:

Post-Modernity and beyond?

Let us now concentrate on one of the words in the title which might seem rather innocent and obvious,
namely ‘products’. In a ﬁrst reading of this title one could think that it might easily be replaced by ‘result’
or ‘onsequence’. We nevertheless attach a very deﬁnite meaning to this word ’product’ which is deﬁnitely
not covered by ‘result’ nor ‘consequence’. In contemporary mathematics, which deals with the study of
families of well-deﬁned formal structures (or, in a more advanced language, ‘categories of mathematical
objects’46), products of two structures that belong to the same family (i.e., two mathematical objects
that belong to the same category) are usually deﬁned as a third structure in this same family which has
the two given structures as ‘faithful’ substructures (in categorical language this means that there exist
structure preserving maps, called ‘morphisms’, from the two given objects into the product object). In
fact, this means that the product is larger than the given structures, but essentially not diﬀerent. This
way of deﬁning products is an obvious consequence of the speciﬁc ‘scientiﬁc method’ in the context of
which mathematics is used: one only wants to deal with objects that are well deﬁned. Once one has
deﬁned such a well-deﬁned collection of objects, one sticks with it and studies it. Even more, an object
has only a meaning as an element of this well-deﬁned collection. As a consequence, if one wants to
introduce operations on the objects in this collection in order to study and characterize it, one remains
faithful to this collection, i.e., one does not leave it47. This situation in mathematics had a major
inﬂuence on the way how people tend to describe compound systems in physics: for a given description
(i.e., structural characterization) of individual physical entities one is still attached to the idea that the
compound system should be described within the same family of structural characterizations. Within the
context of Newtonian mechanics, this does not pose a problem. Within the context of QM however, one
is able to produce a description procedure for the joint system, but looses completely the mathematical
consistency48 required for a ‘good theory’. Unfortunately, by yielding the conclusion that the ‘Hilbert
space structure’, the structure in which QM-entities are described, is not ‘the good universal structure’
for their description, these results have only fostered the search for ‘bigger’ and ‘bigger’ structures in
which one could hope to ﬁnd ‘consistent products’ for the description of the compound system. Never
the a priori idea of universality has been put into question. According to our previous sections, we
think that this speciﬁc attachment to universality of a description points the ﬁnger at the real problem
at the source of this malaise concerning the description of compound entities in physics. The presence
of a second entity in a compound system deﬁnitely changes the context of the ﬁrst one, and as such, a
description that incorporates a contextual ingredient should take this presence into account in an explicit
way49. Unfortunately, for the QM formalism, this is not the case50. Solving this problem comes down to
starting from correct collections of primitive notions in order to reconstruct the proper formalization for
the concept under consideration, in this case the concept of compoundness51. With the goal to aim to an
as reduced as possible reformulation of the formalism that arises when one starts from as few as possible
primitive notions, Moore started a categorization program52 for the foundations of physics (see
[67, 68, 69]). Within this scheme, other primitive notions have been incorporated (see [9, 23, 24, 25, 27]),
yielding a categorical description of the concept of compoundness (see [27]). Without falling into the trap
of empirical fragmentation53, it seems to be possible for this concept to skip the universality principle
which has always been the a priori for theoretical physics. One could wonder whether other physical
concepts could be treated in the same way? A conclusive question? When dealing with ’questions’

46For an outline of the mathematical theory of categories introduced by Eilenberg and Mac Lane [39] we refer to [12, 62, 64].
In fact, some approaches and authors on category theory see a possibility of introducing ‘aspects of undeﬁnedness’ within
this formalism, and consider this aspect as the main argument to apply category theory as a foundation for mathematics.

47We have to remark that quite recently, since the development of the mathematical theory of categories, one became very
interested in ‘relating’ the diﬀerent well-deﬁned collections of mathematical objects. However, one is still attached to the
same kind of scientiﬁc method, but now on a meta-level.

48This inconsistency is encountered as well on a purely structural level, in the sense that there exist two unequivallent
procedures for obtaining a so called tensor product (see [2]), both when one starts from an operational or empiricist point
of view (see [3], [77] and [91]).

49For the reasons stated before, this could considerably enhance the coherence of the theory.
50An explicit construction in which one of the present authors tries to take the context into account for a situation of
‘the many’ (see [22, 27]), based on ideas developed by Aerts, Gisin and Piron in [4, 5] and [47], and yielding the framework
of [5] and [21], shows that in the traditional Q.M. description, aspects like the order in which one performs consecutive
measurements on diﬀerent individual pseudo-entities within the compound system are even not a part of the context, but
an ingredient of the formal representation of the entity itself.

51A more detailed discussion on this matter can be found in [69].
52This program, when consistently developed in the total framework of the theory, could amount in an explicit Aristotelian

ontological set-up, exactly in the sense Piron [74] intended.

53Which occurs as wel on a theoretical as on a operational level.

13

we are confronted again with the problem of deﬁnedness. Old and endless debates on the yes or no
necessity of explicit representations of ’states’ of reality could deﬁnitely be omitted by allowing aspects
of undeﬁnedness within the explicitation of a concept such as states and experimental projects; quoting
Moore on the later in [69] p.3: ”I shall take a particular physical system to be some part of the ostensively
external phenomenal world, supposed separated from its surroundings in the sense that its interactions
with the environment can either be ignored or eﬀectively modeled in a simple way. The restriction to a
reasonably circumscribed aspect of a phenomenon is crucial: physics is, ﬁrst and foremost, the study of
detailed models of speciﬁc situations ... I shall take a deﬁnite experimental project relative to a physical
system to be a real experimental procedure where we have deﬁned in advance what would be the positive
response should we perform the experiment ... Of course the speciﬁcation of a precisely delimited positive
response is also an idealization: in general terms, all that we require from an assignment rule is that it be
suﬃciently clear in each case whether or not one should assign the response ’yes’, this within subjectively
reasonable limits with respect to borderline cases”; where he motivates the necessity of consecutive and
complementary ’idealizations’ by: ”... the problem of linguistic demarcation in the face of vagueness or
contextuality.” As it is very reasonable to consider human creation as an ability to ’invent’ new objects
outside an a priori given class {x|φ(x)} with a characterizing predicate form φ, the collection of possible
designable experimental projects cannot be a class and in particular, cannot be a set. To quote Moore
(private communication, 27-09-97): ”... this boils down to a kind of object-subject dichotomy: states and
properties are about the exterior world and deﬁnite experimental projects are about the internal world.
Building physical theories is a fallible attempt to relate one to the other ...” Still, any operational theory
attempts to remain unaware, by formal ignorance, of these possible creative acts consisting of designing
deﬁnite experimental projects. This ignorance could be motivated by the ever ruling set theoretical basis
for mathematics. In order to understand the problems that arise, one could consider entities like my past
or the entity’s past, also studied in [25]. It is obviously impossible to deﬁne a predicate φ that characterizes
all my possible pasts that I can have on a next instance of time, since this would require Laplace’s supreme
intelligence: having all knowledge on possible events that might be imposed by the context between now
and the considered next instance of time. Contrary to the existence of a set of states as a criterion for
the reality of an entity, the existence of properties as reference to the elements of reality in the Geneva
approach [3, 67, 69] can be the starting point for a more ﬂexible setup: the entity ’my past’ for example
can be described by consecutive creations of properties, themselves not being part of a predeﬁned set. This
idea has been generalized and taken as a starting point of of a formal scheme refered to as the Induction54
formalism, which takes in an a priori (and not only in an explanatory) way ’creation’ into account, as
well ’human’ creation (choice/invention) as ’material’ creation (mutual Induction as interaction), and of
which a complete technical development can be found in [9, 25, 26, 27]. This approach succeeds in avoiding
the aspects of isolation in the deﬁnition of an entity: the ’particular physical system’ fuzzyness to which
Moore referes is explicitely not present. As such, this strategy aims at the elaboration of the results of
the Geneva school in the direction of a formalism that is explicitly compatible with the results of the
foregoing ontological analysis. Formally as well as conceptually, such a theory of creation, by constituting
the description of the emerging properties of the entities as possible parts of compound systems, treats
[4, 5, 21, 23])” and
“interaction with the context of an entity as a part of a measurement process (cfr.
“entanglement of individual entities (cfr. [22, 27])” on the same level, i.e., in terms of mutual Induction
of properties (cfr. [9, 25, 27]). We ﬁnally want to remark that the idea of going beyond deﬁnedness, going
beyond set-large collections of states, seems to be most conveniently expressed through the use of so-called
quasi-categories (cfr. [1] p.31), a generalization of the above mentioned mathematical categories, of which
the undeniable necessity thus emerges from both physical and metaphysical considerations. To quote
Hersh in [49] p.22-23: ”... We can try to describe mathematics, not as our inherited prejudices imagine
it to be, but as our actual experience tells us it is.
... What are the main properties of mathematical
knowledge, as known to all of us from daily experience? (1) Mathematical objects are invented or created
by humans. (2) They are created, not arbitrarily, but arise from activity with already existing mathematical
objects, and from needs of science and daily life ...”

8 Acknowledgments.

We thank Sonja Smets, Hubert Dethier, Wilfried Van Rengen and Rudolf De Smet for discussing the
content of this paper. We thank David Moore for the indication of problems and references connected to
the subject of this paper. We thank D. Durlinger for technical help while implementing the ancient Greek
font. Bob Coecke is Post-Doctoral Researcher at Flanders’ Fund for Scientiﬁc Research.

54Here, ’induction’ does not refer to any of its usual philosophical signiﬁcances, but rather refers to physical theories like

electro-magnetism.

14

References

[1] J. Ad´amek, H. Herrlich and G.E. Strecker, Abstract and Concrete Categories, J. Wiley & Sons (1990).

[2] D. Aerts and I. Daubechies, Helv. Phys. Acta 51, 661 (1978).

[3] D. Aerts, The One and the Many, PhD-thesis, Free University of Brussels (1981); Found. Phys. 12,

1131 (1982).

[4] D. Aerts, J. Math. Phys. 27, 202 (1986).

[5] D. Aerts, Found. Phys. 24, 1227 (1994).

[6] D. Aerts, B. Coecke and S. Smets, ’On the Origin of Probabilities in Quantum Mechanics: Creative
and Contextual Aspects’, in G. Cornelis and J.P. Van Bendeghem, eds., Einstein Meets Magritte:
Metadebates, Kluwer Academic Publishers (1998).

[7] D. Aerts, J. Broeckaert, S. Smets, ’A Quantum Mechanical Description of the Liar Paradox’, sub-

mitted for the proceedings of the 20th Int. conf. on Philosophy, Boston (1998).

[8] D. Aerts, ’The Entity in Modern Physics: the Creation-Discovery-View of Reality’, in E. Peruzzi,

ed., Identity and Individuality of Physical Objects, Springer Verlag, Berlin (1998).

[9] H. Amira, B. Coecke and I. Stubbe, ’How Quantales Emerge by Introducing Indiction in Operational

Theories’, Preprint, FUND-DWIS, Free University of Brussels (1998).

[10] H. Arendt, The life of the mind. One / Thinking, one-volume edition, Harcourt Brace Jovanovich

Publishers, London (1978).

[11] A. Aspect et. al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 49, 1804 (1982).

[12] M. Barr and C. Wells, Toposes, Triples and Theories, Springer (1995).

[13] J. Bell, Physics 1, 195 (1965).

[14] E.G. Beltrametti and B.C. van Fraassen, eds., Current Issues in Quantum Logic, Plenum (1981).

[15] G. Birkhoﬀ and J. von Neumann, Ann. Math. 37, 823 (1936).

[16] O.R. Bloch, La philosophie de Gassendi. Nominalisme, Mat´erialisme et M´etaphysique, Martinus Ni-

jhoﬀ, La Haye (1971).

[17] D. Bohm, Phys. Rev. 85, 166 (1952).

[18] J. Campbell, The Masks of God, volume I, Primitive Mythology, Arkana, Penguin Books, N.Y. (1991).

[19] R. Carnap, Empiricism, Semantics, and Ontology, in R. Boyd, P. Gasper and J.D. Trout, eds., The

Philosophy of Science, MIT press, Massachusetts (1992).

[20] H.N. Castaneda, Plato’s theory of relations, in M. Bunge, ed., Exact Philosophy, D. Reidel Publishing

Company, Dordrecht (1973).

[21] B. Coecke, Hidden Measurement Systems, Doctoral Dissertation, Free University of Brussels (1995);

Helv. Phys. Acta 70, 442 (1997); Helv. Phys. Acta 70, 462 (1997).

[22] B. Coecke, ’A Representation for Compound Quantum Systems as Individual Entities: Hard Acts
of Creation and Hidden Correlations’ and ’A Representation for Spin-S Quantum Entities as 2S
Individual Spin-1/2 Quantum Entities’, Found. Phys., to appear (1998).

[23] B. Coecke and F. Valckenborgh, Int. J. Theor. Phys. 37, 311 (1998).

[24] B. Coecke and D.J. Moore, ’Decompositions of Probability Measures on Complete Ortholattices in

Join Preserving Maps’, Preprint, FUND-DWIS, Free University of Brussels (1998).

[25] B. Coecke and I. Stubbe, ’On a Creation-Based Extension of Operational Theories’, submitted for

the proceedings of the 20th Int. conf. on Philosophy, Boston (1998).

[26] B. Coecke and I. Stubbe, ’Quantum Mechanics as a Theory of Induction’, Preprint, FUND-DWIS,

Free University of Brussels (1998).

15

[27] B. Coecke, ’Compoundness as Diagrams in Quasi-Categories’, notes of a lecture given at IQSA-
Atlanta, August 1997; B. Coecke and I. Stubbe, ’The Category of Mutual Inductions for Entities
Described by Pseudo States’, In preparation (1998).

[28] B.I. Cohen, ’Newton’s third law and universal gravity’, in P.B. Scheurer and G. Debrock, eds.,

Newton’s scientiﬁc and philosophical legacy, Kluwer academic publishers, Dordrecht (1988).

[29] M. Conch´e, ’Epicure. Lettres et maximes’, texte ´etabli par Marcel Conch´e, PUF, Paris (1987).

[30] De Cusa, N., De Docta Ignorantia, in E. Hoﬀmann and R. Klibansky, eds., Lipsiae, In Aedibus Felicis

Meiner (1932).

[31] W. Daniel, Bohr, Einstein and Realism, Dialectica 43 (1989).

[32] E. Dellian, ’Inertia, the innate force of matter’, in P.B. Scheurer and G. Debrock, eds., Newton’s

scientiﬁc and philosophical legacy, Kluwer academic publishers, Dordrecht (1988).

[33] H. Diels and W. Kranz, Fragmente der Vorsokratiker, erster Band, Weidmann, Dublin, Z¨urich, 1971.

[34] E.J. Dijksterhuis, De mechanisering van het wereldbeeld, 7th ed., Meulenhof, Amsterdam (1950-1996).

[35] B.J.T. Dobbs, ’Newton’s alchemy and his ‘active principle’ of gravitation’, in P.B. Scheurer and G.
Debrock, eds., Newton’s scientiﬁc and philosophical legacy, Kluwer academic publishers, Dordrecht
(1988).

[36] A. Einstein, E. Podolski and N. Rosen, Phys. Rev. 47, 777 (1935).

[37] A. Einstein, ’On the electrodynamics of moving bodies’, in The principle of relativity. A collection
of original papers on the special and general theory of relativity. Notes by A. Sommerfeld., Dover
publicatons, New York (1952).

[38] A. Einstein, ’Can quantum-mechanical description of physical reality be considered complete?’, in
J.A. Wheeler and H.Z. Wojciech, eds., Quantum Theory and Measurement, Princeton University
Press, Princeton (1983).

[39] S. Eilenberg and S. Mac Lane, Trans. Am. Math. Soc. 58, 231 (1945).

[40] R.L. Epstein, The semantic foundations of Logic, Vol. I, Kluwer academic publishers, Dordrecht

(1990).

[41] B. d’Espagnat, Conceptual Foundations of Quantum Mechanics, W.A. Benjamin (1976).

[42] D.J. Foulis and C.H. Randall, ’Manuals, Morphisms and Quantum Mechanics’, in H. Marlow, ed.,

Mathematical Foundations of Quantum Theory, Accademic Press. (1978).

[43] D.J. Foulis, C. Piron and C.H. Randall, Found. Phys. 13, 813 (1983).

[44] D.J. Foulis and C.H. Randall, Found. phys. 13, 843 (1983).

[45] H.N. Fowler, Plato in twelve volumes, Loeb Classical Library, Heinemann, London (1967).

[46] K. Von Fritz, ’Nous, noein, and their derivatives in pre-Socratic philosophy’, in A.P.D. Mourelatos,
ed., The Pre-Socratics, a colletion of critical essays, Princeton University Press, Princeton (1974-
1993).

[47] N. Gisin and C. Piron, Lett. Math. Phys. 5, 379 (1981).

[48] R. Harr´e, ’The redundancy of Spacetime: Relativity from Cusa to Einstein’, in D. Aerts, ed., Einstein

Meets Magritte: White Book, Kluwer Academic Publishers (1998).

[49] R. Hersh, in T. Tymoczko, ed., New Directions in the Philosophy of Mathematics p.9, Birkh¨auser

[50] M. Jammer, Concepts of Space. The history of theories of space in physics, 3th ed., Dover Publica-

(1986).

tions, N.Y. (1954-1993).

[51] J.M. Jauch and C. Piron, Helv. Phys. Acta 36, 827 (1963).

16

[52] J.M. Jauch, Foundations of Quantum Mechanics, Addison-Wesley (1968).

[53] J.M. Jauch and C. Piron, ’On the structure of quantal proposition systems’, Helv. Phys. Acta bf 42

[54] J. Jaynes, The origin of consciousness in the breakdown of the bicameral mind, Houghton Miﬄin

Company, Boston (1976).

[55] L. Kaufman, ’Virtual Logic’, in D. Aerts, ed., Einstein Meets Magritte, Kluwer Academic Publishers

(1969).

(1998).

[56] G.S. Kirk, Heraclitus. The Cosmic Fragments, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge (1975).

[57] G.S. Kirk, J.E. Raven and M. Schoﬁeld, The Presocratic Philosophers. A critical history with a

selection of texts, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge (1983).

[58] C. Lanczos, The variational principles of mechanics, fourth ed., Dover publications, New York (1970).

[59] G. Luck, Arcana Mundi. Magic and the Occult in the Greek and Roman Worlds. A collection of

Ancient Texts, The Johns Hopkins University Press, Baltimore and London (1985).

[60] G. Ludwig, ’An Axiomatic Basis of Quantum Mechanics’, in H. Neumann, ed., Interpretations and

Foundations of Quantum theory, B.I.-Wissenschaftsverlag (1981).

[61] G. Ludwig and H. Neumann, ’Connections between Diﬀerent Approaches to the Foundations of
Quantum Mechanics’, in H. Neumann, ed., Interpretations and Foundations of Quantum theory,
B.I.-Wissenschaftsverlag (1981).

[62] S. Mac Lane, Categories for the working Mathematician, Springer (1971).

[63] J.E. McGuire and P.M. Rattansi, ’Newton and the ‘Pipes of Pan”, Notes and records of the Royal

Society of London 21 (1966).

[64] C. McLarty, Elementary Categories, Elementary Toposes, Oxford Sci. Publ. (1995).

[65] P. Mittelstaedt, ’Classiﬁcation of Diﬀerent Areas of Work Aﬀerent to Quantum Logic’, in E.G.

Beltrametti and B.C. van Fraassen, eds., Current Issues in Quantum Logic, Plenum (1981).

[66] D. Moore, Helv. Phys. Acta 66, 471 (1993).

[67] D. Moore, Helv. Phys. Acta 68, 658 (1995).

[68] D. Moore, ’Closure Categories’, Int. J. Theor. Phys., to appear (1997).

[69] D. Moore, ’On State Spaces and Property Lattices’, British J. Phil. Sc., to appear (1998).

[70] A.P.D. Mourelatos, The Pre-Socratics, a collection of critical essays, Princeton University Press,

Princeton (1974-1993).

[71] Newton, I., Isaaci Newtoni, Opera quae extant omnia, Commentariis illustrabat Samuel Horsley,

Londini: exc. Joannes Nichols (1889).

[72] G.E.L. Owen, ’Plato on Non-Being’, in G. Vlastos, ed., Plato: a collection of Critical Essays, vol I,

Doubleday (1971).

[73] C. Piron, Foundations of Quantum Physics, W.A. Benjamin (1976).

[74] C. Piron, ’Le r´ealisme en physique quantique: une approche selon Aristote’, in The concept of physical
reality. Proceedings of a conference organized by the Interdisciplinary Research Group, University of
Athens (1983).

[75] C. Piron, Erkenntnis 16, 398 (1981).

[76] C. Piron, ’Quantum Mechanics Fifty Years After’, in P. Lahti and P. Mittelstaedt, eds., Symposium

on the Foundations of Modern physics, World scientiﬁc (1985).

[77] C. Piron, M´ecanique Quantique Bases et Applications, Presses Polytechniques et Universitaires Ro-

mandes, Lausanes (1990).

17

[78] C. Piron, ’Un nouveau regard sur le monde physique’, preprint, Universit´e de Gen`eve (1996).

[79] C. Piron, ’Quantum Mechanics and Relativity: two failed revolutions’, in D. Aerts, ed., Einstein

Meets Magritte: White Book, Kluwer Academic Publishers (1998).

[80] A. Quinton, The Nature of Things, Routledge & Kegan Paul, London and Boston (1973).

[81] H. Rauch, Helv. Phys. Acta 61, 589 (1988).

[82] P. Redondi, Galilei, eretico, Einaudi, Turino (1983).

[83] N. Rescher and R. Brandom, The logic of inconsistency. A study in Non-Standard Possible-World

Semantics and Ontology, Basil Blackwell, Oxford (1980).

[84] K. Riezler, Parmenides, Text, ¨Ubersetzung, Einf¨uhrung und Interpretation, Vittorio Klostermann,

Frankfurt a. M. (1970).

[85] R. Rosen, ’The Roles of Necessity in Biology’, in Newton to Aristotle. Toward a Theory of Models

for Living Systems, Birkh¨auser, Boston, Basel and Berlin (1989).

[86] E. Schr¨odinger, Space-Time Structure, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge (1950-1985).

[87] E. Schr¨odinger, Nature and the Greeks and Science and Humanism, Canto, Cambridge University

Press (1954-1996).

[88] G. Spencer Brown, Laws of Form, George Allen and Unwin, ltd., London (1969).

[89] S. Toulmin, Cosmopolis, the hidden agenda of modernity, University of Chicago Press, Chicago (1984).

[90] H. Tredennick, Aristotle. Metaphysics, books I-IX, Loeb XVII, Loeb Classical Library, Harvard Uni-

versity Press, Cambridge, Massachusetts (1996).

[91] B.C. van Fraassen, Quantum Mechanics, Clarendon Press, Oxford (1991).

[92] G. Vlastos, ’Reasons and causes in th Phaedo’, in G. Vlastos, ed., Plato: a collection of Critical

Essays, vol I, Doubleday (1971).

[93] G. Vlastos, Studies in Greek Philosophy, volume I: The Presocratics, Princeton University Press,

[94] J. von Neumann, The Mathematical Foundations of Quantum Mechanics, Princeton University Press

Princeton (1993).

(1955).

18

