ROSENFELD, BERGMANN, DIRAC AND THE INVENTION

OF CONSTRAINED HAMILTONIAN DYNAMICS

DEPARTMENT OF PHYSICS, AUSTIN COLLEGE, Sherman, TX 75090, USA

D. C. SALISBURY

E-mail: dsalisbury@austincollege.edu

Abstract

In a paper appearing in Annalen der Physik in 1930 Leon Rosenfeld invented the ﬁrst procedure

for producing Hamiltonian constraints. He displayed and correctly distinguished the vanishing

Hamiltonian generator of time evolution, and the vanishing generator of gauge transformations

for general relativity with Dirac electron and electrodynamic ﬁeld sources. Though he did not do

so, had he chosen one of his tetrad ﬁelds to be normal to his spacetime foliation, he would have

anticipated by almost thirty years the general relativisitic Hamiltonian ﬁrst published by Paul

Dirac.

7
0
0
2
 
n
a
J
 
5
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
t
s
i
h
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
9
9
2
1
0
7
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

1

INTRODUCTION AND OBSTACLES TO QUANTIZING ELECTRODYNAMICS

Leon Rosenfeld produced his groundbreaking constrained Hamiltonian dynamics formal-

ism, published in Annalen der Physik in 1930 under the title On the Quantization of Wave

Fields[1], in those heady times shortly after Dirac had achieved his relativistic quantum

theory of the electron. Heisenberg and Pauli were quantizing the electromagnetic ﬁeld while

Weyl and Fock had shown how to couple Dirac’s electron ﬁeld to gravity. A fundamen-

tal uniﬁcation seemed imminent. The conﬁdent young Rosenfeld, inspired by his mentor

Wolfgang Pauli, proposed precisely a quantum ﬁeld theoretic uniﬁcation of gravity and elec-

tromagnetism. And he came surprisingly close! Sadly it appears that neither he nor Peter

Bergmann or Paul Dirac, both of whom began nearly twenty years later to address the prob-

lem of converting singular Lagrangian systems into Hamiltonian models, fully appreciated

the enormous progress he made in his 1930 paper. I will sketch in this short article only

some aspects of Rosenfeld’s analysis, with an eﬀort to highlight contributions that were inde-

pendently reinvented decades later. A full translation of Rosenfeld’s work with commentary

will appear elsewhere.

Emmy Noether showed in 1918 that if a dynamical model possesses a symmetry under a

transformations involving arbitrary functions then a speciﬁc linear combination of equations

of motions must vanish identically [2]. Thus, for example, the Bianchi identity in general

relativity is a reﬂection and consequence of the general covariance of Einstein’s equations.

Similarly, since classical electrodynamics is covariant under the gauge transformation of
the electromagnetic four-potential Aµ, where the transformed potential is A′
µ = Aµ + ∂µΛ
and Λ is an arbitrary spacetime function, then Noether’s theorem shows that F µν
,µν must
vanish identically, where F µν is the electromagnetic ﬁeld tensor. Related to this symmetry

is the vanishing of the momentum associated with the naught component of the potential.

This posed a problem for researchers attempting to quantize the electromagnetic ﬁeld in

the late 1920’s. Heisenberg and Pauli had proposed two not entirely satisfactory methods

for dealing with this embarrassment. These procedures destroyed either manifest gauge or

manifest Lorentz symmetry. Pauli is quoted having said “Ich warne Neugierige”,“I forewarn

the curious”. Rosenfeld was in 1929 collaborating with Pauli in Zurich, and it was Pauli who

encouraged him to construct a general manifestly symmetric formalism. Rosenfeld writes

in the 1930 article (my translation) “As I was investigating these relations in the especially

2

instructive example of gravitation theory, Professor Pauli helpfully indicated to me the

principles of a simpler and more natural manner of applying the Hamiltionian procedure in

the presence of identities”.

Setting equal to zero coeﬃcients of the highest time derivatives of the arbitrary gauge

functions in Noether’s identities, Rosenfeld discovered three interrelated consequences:

• There are as many primary constraints, i.e., identically vanishing functions of conﬁg-

uration variables and momenta (conceived as functions of conﬁguration and velocity),

as there are arbitrary gauge functions.

• The Legendre matrix, consisting of second partial derivatives of the Lagrangian with

respect to velocities, is singular.

• Rosenfeld considered only Lagrangians quadratic in velocities. Consequently all mo-

menta involved contractions of the singular Legendre matrix with velocities. Therefore

it was possible to add arbitrary linear combinations of null vectors to velocities without

altering the momenta. These linear combinations reﬂect the arbitrariness in evolution

in time of initial data.

All of these results were obtained independently by Bergmann in 1949.[3]

Rosenfeld then supposed that solutions had been found for all velocities in terms of mo-

menta, including admissible arbitrary functions, and he constructed a Hamiltonian with the

canonical expression augmented by additional linear combinations of primary constraints.

Bergmann and Brunings obtained a similar formal result in 1949.[4] Bergmann, Schiller, and

Zatkis in 1950 invented an algorithm for solving for the velocities in terms of the momenta.[5]

Rosenfeld never addressed this general question. In 1949 Dirac approached the construction

of the Hamiltonian for singular systems from an entirely diﬀerent perspective.[6] His work

was ﬁrst published in 1950. He was motivated by a desire to choose arbitrary time folia-

tions in ﬂat spacetime. Dirac never concerned himself with the faithful reproduction in the

canonical Hamiltonian framework of Lagrangian symmetries. This was a principle focus of

both Rosenfeld and Bergmann.

Indeed, Rosenfeld found the correct form for canonical generators of gauge symmetries,

expressed as a sum of geometric part (determined by the tensorial nature of the variables

undergoing variations, and a transport term (reﬂecting the fact that active variations were

3

contemplated at a ﬁxed coordinate location). He proved that his generator produced the

correct variation not only of conﬁguration but also of momentum variables. And in a cul-

minating tour de force he proved that while the symmetry generator contained the primary

constraints multiplying the highest time derivatives of the gauge functions, the preservation

in time of the entire generator implied that the coeﬃcients of all lower time derivatives of the

gauge functions must themselves be constraints. In other words, Rosenfeld was the original

inventor of the what is now referred to as the ”Dirac-Bergmann” algorithmn! Indeed, the

Rosenfeld analysis yielded all constraints in a single step, a perspective that conﬂicts with

the terms “primary”, “secondary”, etc. ﬁrst introduced in 1951 by Anderson and Bergmann

to characterize constraints.[7]

THE HAMILTONIAN FORMULATION OF GENERAL RELATIVITY

Rosenfeld came surprisingly close to the breakthrough published by Dirac in 1958[8],

and discovered independently at about the same time by B. DeWitt (unpublished) and

Anderson[9]. Dirac showed that through subtraction of an appropriate total derivative

from the Weyl gravitational Lagrangian that time derivatives of the naught components of

the metric could be eliminated, resulting in trivially vanishing conjugate momenta. Weyl

removed second derivatives of the metric by eliminating derivatives of the Christofel tensor

through the subtraction of an appropriate total divergence.[10] Rosenfeld considered a tetrad

form of gravity. Similarly to Weyl, he eliminated second derivatives of the tetrad ﬁelds by

removing derivatives of the Ricci rotation coeﬃcients through the subtraction from the

Hilbert action of an appropriate total divergence. It turns out that if he had simply adapted

his tetrad to his spacetime foliation by taking one of the orthonormal tetrad vectors to

point perpendicular to the ﬁxed time hypersurfaces while the remaining triads were tangent

to the foliation, he would have obtained a Lagrangian in which no time derivatives of the

orthonormal tetrad components appear. Thus he would have anticipated Dirac, Anderson,

and DeWitt by almost three decades. Had he expressed this orthonormal tetrad in terms

of the lapse and shift functions introduced by Arnowitt, Deser and Misner he would have

obtained the triad form of their ADM Hamiltonian.[11]

4

[1] L. Rosenfeld, Ann. Phys. 5, 113-152, (1930).

[2] E. Noether, Nachr. v. d. Ges. d. Wiss. zu G¨ottingen 1918, 235 - 257.

[3] P. G. Bergmann, Phys. Rev. 75, 680 - 685 (1949)

[4] P. G. Bergmann and J. H. M. Brunings, Rev. Mod. Phys. 21, 480 - 487 (1949)

[5] P. G. Bergmann, R. Penﬁeld, R. Schiller, and H. Zatkis, Phys. Rev. 30, 81 - 88 (1950)

[6] P.A. M. Dirac, Can. J. Math. 2, 129 - 148 (1950)

[7] J. L. Anderson and P. G. Bergmann, Phys. Rev. 83, 1018 (1951)

[8] P. A. M. Dirac, Proc. Royal Soc. London A246, 333 - 343 (1958).

[9] J. L. Anderson, Phys. Rev. 111, 965 (1958)

[10] H. Weyl, Raum, Zeit, Materie, (Springer, Berlin, 1918)

[11] R. Arnowitt, S. Deser, and C. Misner, in Gravitation: an introduction to current research, L.

Witten, ed. (Wiley, New York, 1962)

5

