7
0
0
2
 
r
a

M
 
4
 
 
]
h
p
-
t
s
i
h
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
7
3
0
3
0
7
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Irving Kaplansky and Supersymmetry1

Peter G.O. Freund2
Enrico Fermi Institute and Department of Physics
University of Chicago, Chicago, IL 60637

Abstract

Remarks at the Irving Kaplansky Memorial about a collaboration during
the early period of the renewal of contacts between mathematicians and
theoretical physicists.

I arrived in Chicago some two decades after Irving Kaplansky, and I met
Kap, as we all called him, shortly after my arrival here. We became friends
later, in 1975, while collaborating on a paper on supersymmetry.

Lie superalgebras, graded counterparts of ordinary Lie algebras, play a
central role in string theory and other uniﬁed theories. A classiﬁcation of the
simple ones was of essence. I took some initial steps, but the real work started
when Yitz Herstein put me in touch with Kap. At ﬁrst, communication was
not easy. We couldn’t quite make out each other’s reasoning, much as we
agreed on results. It didn’t take long however, to get used to the other’s way
of looking at things. Mathematicians and physicists think in similar ways
after all, all that was needed was a dictionary.

This was during the early phase of the rapprochement between mathe-
matics and theoretical physics. After the glorious ﬁrst half of the twentieth
century — when the likes of Poincar´e, Hilbert, Weyl, von Neumann, ´Elie Car-
tan, Emmy Noether, and others made major contributions to the then new
physical theories of general relativity and quantum mechanics, while physi-
cists like Jordan, Dirac, Casimir and Feynman made major contributions to

1Based on remarks at the Irving Kaplansky Memorial at MSRI, Berkeley, Ca, February

23, 2007

2freund@theory.uchicago.edu

1

mathematics — physics entered a period best described as phenomenologi-
cal. During this period, some advanced complex function theory aside, very
little modern mathematics was drawn on. To give you an idea, when in his
celebrated ”Eightfold Way” paper, Murray Gell-Mann wrote down a basis
of the three-dimensional representation of the su(3 ) Lie algebra, this was
heralded by physicists as a great mathematical feat. ”Imagine, he found a
3 × 3 generalization of the famous 2 × 2 Pauli matrices,” is what most people
said. To get there, Murray had consulted with Block and Serre!

It was in the ﬁelds of supersymmetry and gauge theory that the initial
steps in modern mathematical physics were taken. This convergence of the
paths of mathematics and of theoretical physics is typical of times when
major new physical theories — gauge theory and string theory in this case —
are being born. The earliest example of such a convergence is the creation of
calculus at the birth of Newton’s mechanics and of his theory of gravitation.
Weyl’s spectacular work on group theory under the impact of the newborn
quantum mechanics is another such example.

A few words about our joint paper [1] are in order here. In it we found
all the inﬁnite families of simple Lie superalgebras, as well as 17-, 31- and
40-dimensional exceptional ones. We also discussed real forms, and explained
why supersymmetry can act on 4-dimensional anti-de Sitter but not on de
Sitter space, a result essential for understanding why the remarkable dual-
ity discovered by Maldacena [2] in the nineties, is of the AdS/CFT and not
of the dS/CFT type. We were convinced that we had found all simple Lie
superalgebras (as we actually had), but we lacked a proof of this fact. The
proof came from the powerful independent work of Victor Kac [3]. Amus-
ingly, in his beautiful proof, Kac somehow overlooked one of the exceptional
superalgebras, namely the 31-dimensional superalgebra G(3), whose Bose
(even) sector consists of the ordinary Lie algebra g2 + sl (2 ), the only simple
Lie superalgebra to have an exceptional ordinary Lie algebra as one of the
two constituents of its Bose sector.
I said ”amusingly” above because, as
I learned from Kap, in the classiﬁcation of ordinary simple Lie algebras, in
his extremely important early work, Killing had found almost all of them,
but he ”somehow overlooked one,” namely the exceptional 52-dimensional
simple Lie algebra F4, which remained to be discovered later by ´Elie Cartan.
Apparently, G(3) is the exceptional Lie superalgebra which carries on that
curse of the ordinary exceptional Lie algebra F4.

I mentioned the almost total lack of contact between theoretical physi-

2

cists and mathematicians, when this work got going. It went so deep that in
1975 most physicists, if asked to name a great modern mathematician, would
come up with Hermann Weyl, or John von Neumann, both long dead. Math-
ematicians had it a bit easier, for if they read the newspapers, they could
at least keep track of the Nobel Prizes, whereas newspaper editors rarely
treated Fields medal awards as ”news ﬁt to print.”

I recall that while standing by the state-of-the-art Xerox machine to pro-
duce some ten copies of our paper in about ... half an hour’s time, I asked
Kap, ”Who would you say, is the greatest mathematician alive?” He immedi-
ately took me to task: my question was ill-deﬁned, did I mean algebraist, or
topologist, or number-theorist, or geometer, or diﬀerential geometer, or alge-
braic geometer, etc... I replied that I did not ask for a rigorous answer, but
just a ”gut-feeling” kind of answer. ”Oh, in that case the answer is simple:
Andr´e Weil,” he replied, without the slightest hesitation, a reply that should
not surprise anyone, who has heard today’s talks. ”You see,” Kap went on,
”We all taught courses on Lie algebras or Jordan algebras, or whatever. By
contrast, Weil called all the courses he ever taught simply ’mathematics’ and
he lived up to this title.”

Kap went on to tell me about Weil’s legendary ﬁrst colloquium talk in
Chicago. This was the ﬁrst time I heard that very funny story. Weil had
been recruited for the Chicago Mathematics Department by its chairman,
Marshall Stone. With Stone sitting in the ﬁrst row, Weil began his ﬁrst
Chicago colloquium talk with the observation, ”There are three types of
department chairmen. A bad chairman will only recruit faculty worse than
himself, thus leading to the gradual degeneration of his department. A better
chairman will settle for faculty roughly of the same caliber as himself, leading
to a preservation of the quality of the department. Finally, a good chairman
will only hire people better than himself, leading to a constant improvement
of his department.
I am very pleased to be at Chicago, which has a very
good chairman.” Stone laughed it oﬀ; he did not take oﬀense.

This lack of communication between mathematicians and physicists was
to end soon. By 1977, we all knew about Atiyah and Singer, and then the
ﬂoodgates came down fast, to the point that an extremely close collaboration
between mathematicians and physicists got started and, under the leadership
of Ed Witten and others, is ongoing and bearing beautiful fruit to this day.
By the way, on Kap’s desk I noticed some work of his on Hopf algebras. I
asked him about Hopf algebras, and got the reply, ”They are of no relevance

3

whatsoever for physics.” I took his word on this, was I ever gullible.

In the wake of our joint work, Kap and I became good friends. This
friendship was fueled also by our shared love of music, he was a ﬁne pianist,
and I used to sing. For me, the most marvelous part of my collaboration and
friendship with Kap was that for the ﬁrst time I got to see up-close how a
great mathematician thinks.

References

[1] P.G.O. Freund and I. Kaplansky, Simple Supersymmetries, J. Math.
Phys., 17, 228-31 (1976); I. Kaplansky, Superalgebras, Paciﬁc J. Math.,
86, 93-8 (1980).

[2] J.M. Maldacena, The Large N Limit of Superconformal Theories
and Supergravity, Adv. Theor. Math. Phys. 2, 231-52 (1998); archive
hepth/9711200.

[3] V.G. Kac, Classiﬁcation of Simple Superalgebras, Funct. Anal. (En-
glish), 9, 263-5 (1975); ibid. 10, 163 (1976); A Sketch of Lie Superalge-
bra Theory, Comm. Math. Phys., 53, 31-64 (1977).

4

