7
0
0
2
 
r
a

M
 
8
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
t
s
i
h
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
0
6
2
3
0
7
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Plasma: the genesis of the word

Mario J. Pinheiro
Department of Physics and Center for Plasma Physics,
& Instituto Superior T´ecnico, Av. Rovisco Pais, & 1049-001 Lisboa, Portugal∗
(Dated: February 2, 2008)

The historical roots of the word plasma are recalled. It is suggested that possibly at the beginning
of the researches in low-pressure gas discharges the driving motivation was related to the psychic
phenomena investigated by Sir William Crookes.

PACS numbers: 01.65.+g, 50.00.00, 01.70.+w,01.75.+m
Keywords: History of science; PHYSICS OF GASES, PLASMAS, AND ELECTRIC DISCHARGES; Phi-
losophy of science; Science and society

Michel Foucault wrote that objects and words intercross deeply, and Nature only oﬀer herself to our understanding
through words; without the right words, Nature will subsume in a fading light [1]. This reasoning pushed us to recall
how the ”fourth state of matter” was denominated. We believe that understanding the genealogy of the word will
throw some light to its roots, the content and philosophy of this science.

In fact, the word plasma comes from the Greek (πλασµα) and means ”to mold”, ”to shape”. Jan Evangelista
Purkynˇe (1787-1869), a notable Czech medical scientist (best known for his discovery of Purkinje cells), used for the
ﬁrst time this word to designate the reminescent translucid liquid that remains after completely removing the blood
from all the corpuscules (he also introduced the word protoplasm for the substance inside the cell).

Faraday pointed out that matter can be classiﬁed in four states: solid, liquid, gas, and radiant (in his own words).
The research on this new form of matter was initiated by Heinrich Geiβler (1814-1879), a glassblower, who invented
the sealed glass tube (now called Geiβler tube). Julius Pl¨ucker (1801-1868), while professor at Bonn, published his
results about the action of the magnet on the electric discharge in rareﬁed gases. With his pupil Johann Wilhelm
Hittorf (1824-1914) he made many important discoveries in the spectroscopy of gases [2, 3].

Later on Sir William Crookes took again the term ”radiant matter” coined by Faraday, to designate this new ”form”

of matter. In his own words:

So distinct are these phenomena from anything which occurs in air or gas at ordinary tension, that we are
led to assume that we are here brought face to face with matter in a fourth state or condition, a condition
as far removed from the state of gas as a gas is from a liquid. [4].

The invention of the radiometer by Crookes lead him to the study of rareﬁed gases and, in particular, to study electric
discharges in rareﬁed gases. This new line of research was open by the discovery of cathode rays by Wilhelm Hittorf
in 1869. According to Crookes cathode rays were a kind of matter in the ultra-gaseous state, emitted by the cathode
and had the dimensions of molecules. They were invisible but could be turned perceptible by the phosphorescence
that they induce on the walls of the glass tube or by the shadows left behind by objects placed along their paths.

The researches done by Pl¨ucker, Hittorf and Crookes constitute the ﬁrst fundamental observations of new phenomena
that led to the new discipline of glow discharge plasma, dedicated to the study of a very complex non-equilibrium
plasma. A voltage were applied across two electrodes placed inside in an optically transparent vacuum envelope (with
a pressure of the order of a few torr), usually made of pyrex glass or quartz. The region near the cathode was later
on called the Hittorf-Crookes dark space; dark because the electrons density is not enough to ionize the gas.

But experiments done in 1881 by J. J. Thomson have shown later that this ”radiant matter” were in fact constituted
by electriﬁed corpuscules that were later named electrons (a term coined by Johnstone Stoney [5]), the separate units
of electricity, and that theory was abandoned.

It is quite interesting to notice that some esoteric notions used by Crookes were possibly at the historical root of
the word plasma. The same pre-logical formulations were present at the genesis of Newton’s mechanics, endowing the
gravitic force with esoteric properties:

This most beautiful system of the sun, planets, and comets, could only proceed from the counsel and
dominion of an intelligent and power Being.” [6].

But the word plasma may possibly had a previous meaning related to phantoms, ghosts and others interests pursued
on by Sir William Crookes, and that ultimately led some people to denounce him as a not honest, or lucid, scientist.
Let’s cite just a small paragraph of his 1883 Bakerian Lecture given to the Royal Society of London:

∗Electronic address: mpinheiro@ist.utl.pt

2

No Will-o’-the-Wisp ever led the unwary traveller into so many pitfalls and sloughs of despond as the hunt
for this phantom band had entrapped me.” [7]

Of course, we know that his open-mindedness lead him to investigate psychic phenomena with several famous
spiritual mediums. But this fact does not undermine the great achievements done by this great man of science,
that ultimately made the ﬁrst experimental observations of new phenomena and build the grounds of this new area of
scientiﬁc research, known as plasma science. Among his achievements we can refer the invention of the spinthariscope,
a remarkable particle’s detector using a zinc sulﬁde screen to detect alpha particles, and the study of radioactive
materials. And the nowadays wonderful toy, the Crookes radiometer, which ultimately gave one of the ﬁrst evidence
of the existence of atoms and supported the kinetic theory of gases.

Francis Chen in his renowned book on plasma science advances with a meaning which contains some weird sugges-

tion:

”The word ’plasma’ seems to be a misnomer. It comes from the Greek πλασµα, -ατ oς, τ ´o, which means
something molded or fabricated. Because of collective behavior, it often behaves as if it had a mind of its
own” [8].

However, the use of this term to describe an ionized gas in a written paper is due to the Nobel prize winning
American chemist Irving Langmuir (1881-1957) in 1928 [9]. It seems that Langmuir was reminded of the way blood
plasma carries red and white corpuscles in a way that somehow similar to an electriﬁed ﬂuid carrying electrons and
ions [10].

This short note intended to recall the origin of the word and the pre-logical epistemological viewpoint sustaining

at its beginning the actual branch of plasmas science.

[1] Michel Foucault, Les Mots et les Choses sec. VII, (Gallimard, Paris, 1966)
[2] J. Pl¨ucker and J. W. Hittorf, On the Spectra of Ignited Gases and Vapors, with especial regard to the diﬀerent Spectra of

the same elementary gaseous substance, Phil. Trans. Roy. Soc. of London 155 S.1-30 (1865)
[3] R. Tomaschek, Grimsehls Lehrbuch der physik, vol. II, p. 302-333 (Teubner, Leipzig, 1932)
[4] William Crookes, ”Experiments on the Dark Space in Vacuum tubes”, Proc. Roy. Soc. London 79 (528) 98-117 (1907)
[5] George Johnstone Stoney, 1812-1911. Proc. Roy. Soc. (London) 86, xx-xxxv. (1911/12)
[6] Isaac Newton, Philosophiae naturalis Principia Mathematica, in General Scholium, p. 1157 Ed. by Stephen Hawking

(Penguin Books, London, 2002)

[7] William Crookes, ”The Bakerian Lecture-On Radiant Matter Spectroscopy: The Detection and wide Distribution of

Yttrium”, Phil. Trans. Roc. Soc. London 174 891-918 (1883)

[8] Francis F. Chen, Introduction to Plasma Physics and Controlled Fusion (Plenum Press, NY, 1984)
[9] Irwing Langmuir, ”Oscillations in ionized gases”, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 14, 628 (1928)
[10] Lewi Tonks, Am. J. Phys., 35 857 (1967)

