7
9
9
1
 
r
a

M
 
4
 
 
]
h
p
-
t
s
i
h
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
5
0
0
3
0
7
9
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

The Quantum Field Theory of Physics and of Mathematics1

BRX TH–392

Howard J. Schnitzer2

Department of Physics

Brandeis University

Waltham, MA 02254

One recognizes that there has been, and continues to be, a great deal of common ground

between statistical mechanics and quantum ﬁeld theory (QFT). Many of the eﬀects and methods

of statistical physics ﬁnd parallels in QFT, particularly in the application of the latter to particle

physics. One encounters spontaneous symmetry breaking, renormalization group, solitons, eﬀective

ﬁeld theories, fractional charge, and many other shared phenomena.

Professor Fisher [1] has given us a wonderful overview of the discovery and role of the renor-

malization group (RG) in statistical physics. He also touched on some of the similarities and

diﬀerences in the foundations of the RG in condensed matter and high energy physics, which

was ampliﬁed in the discussion.

In the latter subject, in addition to the formulation requiring

cutoﬀ-independence, we have the very fruitful Callan–Symanzik equations. That is, in the process

of renormalizing the divergences of QFT, arbitrary, ﬁnite mass-scales appear in the renormalized

amplitudes. The Callan–Symanzik equations are the consequence of the requirement that the

renormalized amplitudes in fact be independent of these arbitrary masses. This point of view is

particularly useful in particle physics, although it does make its appearance in condensed matter

physics as well.

1Invited talk at “Foundations of Quantum Field Theory,” Boston University, Boston, MA, March 1–3, 1996.

2Supported in part by the DOE under grant DE-FG02-92ER40706

1

The very beautiful subject of conformal ﬁeld theory spans all three topics we are considering:

critical phenomena, quantum ﬁeld theory, and mathematics. The relationship between conformal

ﬁeld theory and two-dimensional critical phenomena has become particularly fruitful in recent years.

Conformal ﬁeld theory in its own right, as well as being an aspect of string theory, has also played

an important role in the recent vigorous interchanges between physics and mathematics. A wide

variety of mathematical techniques have become commonplace tools to physicists working in these

areas. Similarly, questions raised by conformal ﬁeld theorists, topological ﬁeld theorists, and string

theorists have presented many new directions and opportunities for mathematics, particularly in

geometry and topology. The relationship has been rich and symbiotic.

By contrast, it is my view that the more traditional mathematical physics of constructive

and axiomatic ﬁeld theory, and related endeavors, have not come any closer to the physicists’ view

of QFT. In fact, with the increased appreciation and understanding of eﬀective ﬁeld theories, the

gap between the two communities might even be widening, if I understand correctly. It is this issue

that I wish to address.

It should be clear that the quantum ﬁeld theory of mathematics is very diﬀerent from that

of physics.

In fact, I have long had the opinion that these may not even be the same theories

at all. That is, there are (at least) two classes of quantum ﬁeld theories, which for historical

reasons go by the same name, despite being very diﬀerent. The quantum ﬁeld theory considered

by the mathematics community is built on an axiomatic structure, and requires that the inﬁnite

volume system be consistent at all distance scales, infrared as well as ultraviolet. By contrast what

physicists mean by a ﬁeld theory is, in contemporary language, an eﬀective ﬁeld theory, which is

applicable within a well-deﬁned domain of validity, usually below some energy scale. Consistency

is not required at short-distances, i.e., at energies above a speciﬁed energy scale.

2

Does any four dimensional QFT exist, in the mathematical sense? The status of this topic

was reviewed by Jaﬀe [2]. As yet, no four-dimensional QFT has been demonstrated to meet all the

necessary requirements, although it is believed that pure Yang–Mills theory will eventually attain

the status of a consistent theory. What about the standard model? There are two possibilities.

Either it is just a matter of time for the necessary ingredients to be assembled to produce a

mathematically consistent four-dimensional QFT describing the standard model, or no such theory

exists. Suppose a given candidate ﬁeld theory of interest is shown in fact not to be consistent.

One possible response is to embed the candidate theory in a larger system with more degrees of

freedom, i.e., additional ﬁelds, and reexamine the consistency of the enlarged system. The hope is

that eventually this sequence stops, and there is a consistent QFT. However to repeat, the logical

possibility exists that this procedure does not lead to a consistent four-dimensional local QFT.

If no such consistent local QFT exists this would not have grave consequences for physical

theory as we know it. From the physicists’ point of view, the nesting of a sequence of theories

is a familiar strategy carrying a physical description to higher energies. Embedding QED in the

standard model, and then into possible grand uniﬁed QFT, extends the description of fundamental

interactions to at least 100 Gev, and hopefully to still higher energies. However, the last ﬁeld theory

in this sequence may not be consistent at the shortest distance scales in the mathematical sense. In

any case, eventually in this regression to shorter-distances, quantum eﬀects of gravity are encoun-

tered. The question of consistency then must change. Then it becomes plausible that to proceed to

even shorter distances, something other than local QFT or local quantum gravity will be required.

String theory provides one possibility for an extension to distances where quantum gravity is rel-

evant. The standard model is then just an eﬀective low-energy representation of string theory. It

has even been speculated, on the basis of string strong-weak duality, that string theory itself may

3

only be an eﬀective theory of some other theory (for example the as yet unknown M-theory) [3].

Therefore, the physicist does not (need to) care if there is any completely consistent local QFT,

valid at the shortest distances. The appropriate theories to be considered are eﬀective theories;

usually, but not always eﬀective ﬁeld theories.

Jackiw [4] argues elegantly and persuasively for physical information carried by certain in-

ﬁnities of QFT; making their presence known in anomalies and spontaneous symmetry breaking.

In QFT, the ultraviolet divergences should not just be regarded as awkward ﬂaws, but rather a

feature which can lead to physical consequences. However it should not be concluded from his

analysis that a theory without ultraviolet inﬁnities cannot describe the physical phenomena appro-

priate to anomalies and spontaneous symmetry breaking. Such phenomena can be accommodated

without ultraviolet divergences; string theory again providing one example, although the language

to describe the phenomena will diﬀer. Though ultraviolet divergences are an essential feature of

local QFT, or eﬀective ﬁeld theory, they are not necessary for a description of the physics. Jackiw

asks whether the string theory program has illuminated any physical questions. I should like to

respond brieﬂy in the aﬃrmative. String theory has provided us with ﬁnite, well deﬁned examples

of quantum gravity; the only class of such theories presently known, with an essential aspect being

non-locality. It had long been conjectured that one could not construct a non-local theory which

was Lorentz invariant, positive deﬁnite, causal and unitary. One wondered whether there was any

ﬁnite quantum gravity. Certainly string theory sets these earlier prejudices aside and allows us

to consider a much broader class of theories in confronting the physical world. One should ac-

knowledge that these are issues that have long been on the physicists’ agenda, and are not solely of

mathematical interest. In this evolution of our understanding one still retains the basic assumptions

of quantum mechanics, even though locality is no longer a sacred physical principle.

4

Mathematicians speak of ﬁeld theories such as quantum electrodynamics (QED) as heuristic

ﬁeld theories, or even as models, since no proof of mathematical consistency, at all distances,

exists in the sense mentioned earlier.

I feel that this description of QED is pejorative, albeit

unintended. In fact QED is the most precise physical theory ever constructed, with well-deﬁned

calculational rules for a very broad range of physical phenomena, and extraordinary experimental

veriﬁcation. There is even a plausible explanation of why the ﬁne-structure constant is small, based

on a renormalization group extrapolation in grand uniﬁed theories. Of course, we understand that

QED is an eﬀective ﬁeld theory, but is a well-deﬁned theory in the sense of physical science. We

know that to extend its domain of validity one may embed it in the so-called standard model (itself

an eﬀective ﬁeld theory), the electro-weak sector of which has been tested over an enormous energy

range (ev to 100 Gev; 11 decades), although not with the precision of QED. Thus both QED and

the standard model are full-ﬂedged theories of physical phenomena in every sense of the word!

The investigation of the mathematical consistency of four-dimensional local QFT is an in-

teresting question in its own right. No matter what the outcome, we will gain important insights

into the structure of QFT. However, the answers to such questions are not likely to change the way

we do particle physics. Then how can mathematical physics make contact with issues of concern

to particle physics? What are the right questions? Some suggestions immediately come to mind.

What is a mathematically consistent eﬀective ﬁeld theory? Is this even a well-posed problem? If

so, what restrictions does it place on eﬀective theories? Can any candidates be discarded? To begin

with, one should not expect that eﬀective ﬁeld theories are local ﬁeld theories, as they involve inﬁ-

nite polynomials in ﬁelds and their derivatives. Nor do they have to be consistent at the shortest

distances. An approach to some of these issues has been made by Gomis and Weinberg [5] “Are

Non-renormalizable Gauge Theories Renormalizable in the Modern Sense?” They require that the

5

inﬁnities from loop graphs be constrained by the symmetries of the bare action, such that there

is a counterterm available to absorb every inﬁnity. This is a necessary requirement for a theory

to make sense perturbatively. Their criteria are automatically satisﬁed if the bare action arises

from global, linearly realized symmetries. However, this becomes a non-trivial requirement if either

there are non-linearly realized symmetries or gauge symmetries in the bare action. In constructive

ﬁeld theory one encounters a cutoﬀ version of the local ﬁeld theory being studied at intermediate

stages of the analysis. These can be regarded as eﬀective ﬁeld theories, but to be relevant they

must be Lorentz invariant. However, one needs to consider a wider class of eﬀective theories than

presently considered by constructive ﬁeld theorists if the work is to have an impact on the concerns

of particle physicists. In any case, there is certainly a great deal more to do in making eﬀective

ﬁeld theories more precise.

In summary, I have argued that the QFT of mathematicians and of physicists are quite

diﬀerent, although both go by the name of QFT. To bridge the gap, one recognizes that there

are many important mathematical problems posed by eﬀective ﬁeld theories, but these have not

received the attention they deserve. Further, the existence of consistent string theories challenges

the idea that locality is essential in the description of particle physics at the shortest distances.

References

ference.

[1] Michael E. Fisher, “Renormalization Group Theory: Its Basis and Formulation in Statistical

Physics,” presented at this conference.

[2] Arthur Jaﬀe, “How Quantum Field Theory Fits into the Big Picture,” presented at this con-

[3] Edward Witten, Loeb Lectures, Harvard University, Fall 1995.

6

[4] Roman Jackiw, “The Unreasonable Eﬀectiveness of Quantum Field Theory,” MIT–CTP–2500,

hep-th/9602122, presented at this conference.

[5] Joaquim Gomis and Steven Weinberg, “Are Nonrenormalizable Gauge Theories Renormaliz-

able in the Modern Sense?” RIMS–1036, UTTG–18–95, hep-th/9510087.

7

