7
9
9
1
 
r
a

M
 
9
 
 
]
h
p
-
t
s
i
h
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
7
1
0
3
0
7
9
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

From the preface of the Proceedings of the 4th International Wigner Symposium, edited by
N. M. Atakishiyev, T. H. Seligman, and K. B. Wolf (World Scientiﬁc, Singapore, 1996).

Wigner’s Sisters

Y. S. Kim1
Department of Physics, University of Maryland,
College Park, Maryland 20742, U.S.A.

Abstract

Paul A. M. Dirac was a great physicist. Wigner used to call him my famous
brother-in-law. How did they become brothers-in-law? Did these two great
physicists have the same view toward physics?

I have been asked by the organizers of this Symposium to write about Eugene
Wigner’s life. Yes, he was a great physicist and was a great human being. I have
been fortunate enough to have been associated with him especially in his late years.
However, it will require years of full-time research to write his biography if anyone
decides to do so. In the meantime, there is a an excellent book about him entitled
Recollections of Eugene P. Wigner as told by Andrew Szanton [1].

At this time, I would like to deﬁne the scope of my knowledge about Wigner by
quoting a paragraph from what others are saying about me. In his review of the book
entitled Theory and Applications of the Poincar´e Group which I wrote with Marilyn
Noz [2], Mariano del Omo has the following paragraph [3].

E. P. Wigner’s noteworthy paper [Ann. Math. 40, 149-204 (1939)] was
the source of inspiration for the authors when writing this book. There is
also a remarkable trace of some of Dirac’s papers in the book.

According to this review, I am in a position to say something about Wigner and
his brother-in-law whose name was Paul Adrien Maurice Dirac. When I was visiting
Wigner frequently during the period 1985–90, he had two sisters living in the United

1email: kim@umdhep.umd.edu

States. They were all born in Hungary in a well-to-do family. His elder sister was
in Binghamton (New York), and his younger sister was and still is in Tallahassee
(Florida). The elder sister’s health was deteriorating, and Wigner was always con-
cerned about her and talking about her. The younger sister’s name is Margit Dirac
or Mrs. Paul A. M. Dirac. She is known as Manci in the physics community. One
day when I was in Wigner’s oﬃce at Princeton, he made a telephone call to Manci
in order to say “Happy Birthday” to her. After a brief talk in Hungarian, Wigner
laughed and told me Manci was complaining that his call disrupted her shopping trip.
He then told me how she became Mrs. Dirac.

Manci was married to a very wealthy man in Hungary. However, at that time in
Hungary or perhaps in other parts of the world, it was not uncommon for a wealthy
man to have several wives. Manci’s ﬁrst husband was a very handsome person in
addition to being rich. He was very popular among women. This was certainly
not acceptable to her, and she separated herself from him after having two children.
In 1934, Manci visited her brother at Princeton. He took her out for a dinner at a
restaurant called “Annex”near the campus [4]. While they were enjoying their dinner,
Manci spotted a lonely-looking man sitting at next table, and asked her brother who
the man was. Wigner then looked at him, and he happened to be Paul A. M. Dirac.
They then invited Dirac to join their table. This is how Dirac became Wigner’s
brother-in-law.

I met Mrs. Manci Dirac 1978 in Miami (Florida) while attending one of the Coral
Gables conferences. I had a burning question to her husband, and I abruptly joined
the their “husband-wife” conversation in the lobby of the hotel where the conference
participants were staying. After I ﬁnished the conversation with Paul Dirac, Manci
asked me where I came from originally. I told her I came from Korea in 1954 right
after high-school graduation. She then told me that I must have been there during
the Korean Conﬂict (1950–53). After I said Yes to her, she asked me how I felt about
the result of the inconclusive war which left the country divided. It was quite clear to
me that she was extending to a man from Korea her sympathy toward Hungary which
is also prone to invasion and dominance by foreign powers, and I gave my appropriate
answer to her. While she was talking, I also watched her husband who was a great
physicist. He looked amused but did not show any emotion.

I met Mrs. Dirac again in the fall oﬀ 1988 while I was visiting Professor Wigner
at Princeton. He invited me to join a family dinner consisting of his wife Eileen, his
sister Manci, and himself. We all went to one of the “Big Boy” family restaurants in
Trenton. Assuming that Manci knew about England because she lived there, I asked
her a few questions about the British prime ministers, particularly about Anthony

2

Eden who succeeded Winston Churchill but had to resign after the Suez crisis in
1956. Not many people talk about him these days. She explained to me the events
during the Suez crisis like a history teacher, and she had her own opinion about what
happened and what did not happen at that time. I do not know her exact age, but she
must have been about eighty years old at that time. She sounded like a professional
lady of my age.

Eugene Wigner also used to make his views known, and it is well known that not
everybody agreed with him on the issues having to do with the communist world.
Yet, I have to point out that he told me many many times Mikhail Gorbachev is a
great man. Wigner always wanted to live peacefully with the people on the other side
of the Iron Curtain. He had a distaste for the communist regime in Hungary, but his
passion for his native country was so strong that I had to contact the science attache
of the Hungarian Embassy in Washington. As a result, the Hungarian Ambassador
invited Wigner to his residence during the spring meeting of the American Physical
Society (April 1988) held in Baltimore. The Ambassador, presumably a member
of the Hungarian Communist Party, was kind enough to send his own limousine to
Baltimore’s convention center where the APS meeting was held. He later arranged
Wigner’s membership in the Hungarian Academy of Sciences. The Ambassador’s
name was Vencel Hazi. He did what he had to do, but I am still grateful to him.
Indeed, he was a very good communist.

Let us go back to Manci. I told her that I was invited to the memorial service
held at Florida State University (Tallahassee) for Paul A. M. Dirac in November of
1984 and I went there. But I was not able to spot her. I asked her where she was
at that time. Her answer was that she was so sad that she did not want to show her
depressed face to others. Indeed, she was talking like Queen Elizabeth or Margaret
Thatcher. It is quite fortunate for the physics community that Manci took good care
of our respected Paul A. M. Dirac. Dirac published eleven papers during the period
1939–46. It is not clear whether he knew Europe went through World War II. In
either case, Dirac was able to maintain his normal research productivity only because
Manci was in charge of everything else.

On the other hand, we were not fortunate enough to have Manci as a physicist.
This is particularly so because there is a gap between Dirac’s approach and Wigner’s
approach to physics even though they had the same ultimate goal in physics. Manci
could have ﬁlled this gap if she had been born as a physicist. What was then their
common goal? Dirac and Wigner both had a distaste for renormalization procedure,
and therefore they did not accept the present form of quantum ﬁeld theory as the
ultimate theory. Yet, both of them believed that the uncertainty principle should

3

someday be made consistent with special relativity if not general relativity [5].

During the period 1985–90, Wigner was keenly interested in approaching this
problem by constructing representations of the Poincar´e group using quantum phase-
space distribution functions which are widely known as Wigner functions. Dirac, on
the other hand, believed that fundamental laws in physics should appear as beautiful
mathematics. His publication list indicates clearly that he was quite fond of building
relativistic models using harmonic oscillators [6, 7, 8]. I was indeed fortunate to be
able to explains to Wigner what Dirac did, and he used to enjoy listening to me.

Dirac wrote a number of papers on the Lorentz group. His best known paper on
this subject is entitled Forms of Relativistic Dynamics and is in the special issue of
the Reviews of Modern Physics dedicated to Einstein’s 70th birthday in 1949 [9]. In
this paper, Dirac writes down the commutation relations, which he calls the Poisson
brackets, for the generators of the Poincar´e group, and states that the problem of
ﬁnding a new dynamical system reduces to the problem of ﬁnding a new solutions
of these equations. This is exactly what Wigner proposed in his 1939 paper on
the Inhomogneous Lorentz Group [10]. Dirac’s instant form and front form can be
connected to Wigner’s O(3)-like and E(2)-like little groups for massive and massless
particles respectively [2]. As I said earlier in this report, I had a “burning question”
to Dirac in 1978 simply because I wanted to understand Dirac’s 1949 paper [9] in
terms of Wigner’s representation theory. Dirac of course gave me his clear answers
in terms of what he said in his own papers, but he was not familiar with the papers
written on the same subject by his famous brother-in-law.

It is somewhat frustrating to note that these two great brothers-in-law did not
have much communication with each other in physics. On the other hand, I was able
to ﬁnd many homework problems from this gap, and this is why I was able to write
my ﬁrst book. This will explain why Del Olmo made a remark about Dirac’s inﬂuence
on my book with Noz [2, 3]. But this story is not restricted to me or to my book.
The communication gap between these two great physicists oﬀers a great challenge
to many young physicists. Try to establish a bridge between Dirac and Wigner. It
may become a very proﬁtable enterprise.

References

[1] A. Szanton, The Recollection of Eugene P. Wigner (Plenum, New York, 1992).

[2] Y. S. Kim and M. E. Noz, Theory and Applications of the Poincar´e Group (Rei-

del, Dordrecht, 1986).

4

[3] M. A. del Omo, Mathematical Review 88a, 160 (1988).

[4] The Annex restaurant is located on Nassau Street across from the Firestone

Library of Princeton University.

[5] M. E. Noz and Y. S. Kim, Special Relativity and Quantum Theory, Edited Volume
consisting of Wigner’s papers, Dirac’s papers, and others (Kluwer, Dordrecht,
1988).

[6] P. A. M. Dirac, Quantum Electrodynamics, Comm. Dublin Inst. Adv. Stud. ser.

A, No. 1 (1943).

[7] P. A. M. Dirac, Proc. Roy. Soc. (London) A183, 284 (1945).

[8] P. A. M. Dirac, J. Math. Phys. 4, 901 (1963).

[9] P. A. M. Dirac, Rev. Mod. Phys. 21, 392 (1949).

[10] E. P. Wigner, Ann. Math. 40, 149 (1939).

5

