UWThPh-1997-32
2. Februar 2008

Ludwig Boltzmann – A Pioneer of Modern Physics 1

Dieter Flamm

Institut f¨ur Theoretische Physik der Universit¨at Wien,
Boltzmanngasse 5, 1090 Vienna, Austria
Email: Flamm@Pap.UniVie.AC.AT

In two respects Ludwig Boltzmann was a pioneer of quantum mechanics. First because
in his statistical interpretation of the second law of thermodynamics he introduced
the theory of probability into a fundamental law of physics and thus broke with the
classical prejudice, that fundamental laws have to be strictly deterministic. Even Max
Planck had not been ready to accept Boltzmann’s statistical methods until 1900. With
Boltzmann’s pioneering work the probabilistic interpretation of quantum mechanics had
already a precedent. In fact in a paper in 1897 Boltzmann had already suggested to
Planck to use his statistical methods for the treatment of black body radiation.
The second pioneering step towards quantum mechanics was Boltzmann’s introduction
of discrete energy levels. Boltzmann used this method already in his 1872 paper on
the H-theorem. One may ask whether Boltzmann considered this procedure only as
a mathematical device or whether he attributed physical signiﬁcance to it. In this
connection Ostwald reports that when he and Planck tried to convince Boltzmann of
the superiority of purely thermodynamic methods over atomism at the Halle Conference
in 1891 Boltzmann suddenly said: “I see no reason why energy shouldn’t also be regarded
as divided atomically.”
Finally I would like to mention, that Boltzmann in his lectures on Natural Philosophy in
1903 already anticipated the equal treatment of space coordinates and time introduced
in the theory of special relativity. Furthermore in the lectures by Boltzmann and his
successor Fritz Hasen¨ohrl in Vienna the students learned already about noneuclidean
geometry, so that they could immediately start to work when Einstein’s general theory
of relativity had been formulated.

7
9
9
1
 
t
c
O
 
7
 
 
]
h
p
-
t
s
i
h
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
7
0
0
0
1
7
9
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

1Paper presented at the XXth International Congress of History of Science, on July 25, 1997, in

Li`ege, Belgium.

1

Before 1900 classical Newtonian mechanics was the prototype of a successful
physical theory. As a consequence all physical laws had to be strictly deterministic
and universally valid. For most physicists – among them Max Planck – these rules
applied also to thermodynamics. They believed that the second law of thermodynamics
was a basic axiom handed down from God, which one had to accept as the starting
point of any thermodynamic consideration. In contrast to this view was Boltzmann’s
statistical interpretation of the second law of thermodynamics which he ﬁrst formulated
in 1877, nearly 50 years before the statistical interpretation of quantum mechanics.
Ludwig Boltzmann was born in Vienna in 1844 and died in Duino near Trieste in 1906.
He studied mathematics and physics at the University of Vienna from 1863 to 1866,
where Josef Stefan was his main advisor. He discussed a lot with his senior friend Josef
Loschmidt.

Boltzmann for the ﬁrst time introduced the theory of probability into a fundamental
law of physics and thus broke with the classical prejudice, that fundamental laws of
physics have to be strictly deterministic. Because of this prejudice it is no wonder
that in the last decades of the 19th century Boltzmann’s statistical interpretation
of thermodynamics was not accepted by the physics community but met with
violent objections coming from physicists and mathematicians. These objections were
formulated in the form of paradoxes. The most prominent objections were the
reversibility paradox by Boltzmann’s friend Josef Loschmidt2 in 1876 and the recurrence
paradox by E. Zermelo3 in 1896. Boltzmann met these objections by statistical
arguments. This struggle for Boltzmann’s ideas, however, helped to pave the way for
the statistical interpretation of quantum mechanics in 1926 by Max Born. Boltzmann’s
expression for the entropy formulated in his paper of 1877 entitled ”On the relation
between the second law of the mechanical theory of heat and the probability calculus
with respect to the theorems on thermal equilibrium”4, is a probabilistic expression. He
found that for a closed system the entropy S of the system is proportional to the phase
space volume Ω occupied by the macrostate of the system S ∝ log Ω. Furthermore
Boltzmann already introduced ﬁnite cells in phase space. Using such cells to count
the number of microstates this formula is now usually written in the notation of Max
Planck S = k log W . It implies that the entropy S is proportional to the logarithm
of the so called thermodynamic probability W of the macrostate. W is actually the
number of microstates by which the macrostate of the system can be realized. A
macrostate is determined by a rather small number of macroscopic variables of the
system such as volume, pressure and temperature. The latter two correspond to averages
over microscopic variables of the system. A microstate, on the other hand, is speciﬁed by
the coordinates and momenta of all molecules of the system. Due to the large number of
molecules there is a very large number of diﬀerent choices for the individual coordinates
and momenta which lead to the same macrostate. For a closed system every microstate
2J. Loschmidt: “Uber den Zustand des W¨armegleichgewichtes eines Systems von K¨orpern mit
R¨ucksicht auf die Schwerkraft, 1. Teil, Sitzungsber. Kais. Akad. Wiss. Wien Math. Naturwiss. Classe
73 (1876) 128–142.

3E. Zermelo: “Uber einen Satz der Dynamik und die mechanische W¨armetheorie, Ann. Physik 57

(1896) 485–494.

4 L. Boltzmann: ¨Uber die Beziehung zwischen dem Zweiten Hauptsatze der mechanischen
W¨armetheorie und der Wahrscheinlichkeitsrechnung resp. den S¨atzen ¨uber das W¨armegleichgewicht,
Sitzungsber. Kais. Akad. Wiss. Wien Math. Naturwiss. Classe 76 (1877) 373–435.

2

has the same a priori probability. If one divides W by the total number of microstates
accessible to the system including those of all other possible macrostates one obtains
the normalized probability to ﬁnd a closed system just in this macrostate. It turns
out, that the largest number of microstates corresponds to the state of thermodynamic
equilibrium which thus is the state of maximal entropy just as required by the second
law of thermodynamics.

Futhermore Boltzmann could show that for a very large system, by far the largest
number of all microstates corresponds to equilibrium– and quasi–equilibrium–states.
The latter are states which diﬀer very little from the equilibrium state with maximum
entropy and cannot be distinguished macroscopically from the equilibrium state. As
an example let us create a nonequilibrium state by pouring, for instance, a dye into
a liquid. At ﬁrst the dye will only be in a limited region, which corresponds to a
nonequilibrium state, but it will gradually spread through the whole liquid. This
behaviour is typical whenever you make such an experiment. It is easy to tell the
sequence in which snapshots of a spreading dye were taken, even after their original
order has been deranged. How does this unidirectional behaviour in time come about?
In our example of a liquid containing a dye the equilibrium– and quasi–equilibrium–
states correspond to a practically uniform distribution of the dye through the whole
liquid with very small intensity ﬂuctuations of the dye. With increasing size of the
system, the preponderance of the equilibrium- and quasi-equilibrium-states becomes
even more overwhelming. If for every possible microstate of a large system we put a
marked sphere into an urn and afterwards drew spheres from the urn indiscriminately,
we would practically always draw an equilibrium– or quasi–equilibrium–state. The
transition from nonequilibrium to equilibrium thus corresponds to a transition from
exceptionally unprobable nonequilibrium-states to the extremely probable equilibrium–
state. This is Boltzmann’s statistical interpretation of the second law. The appearance
of so–called statistical ﬂuctuations in small subsystems was predicted by Boltzmann
and he recognized Brownian motion as such a phenomenon. The theory of Brownian
motion has been worked out independently by Albert Einstein in 1905 and by Marian
Smoluchowski. The experimental veriﬁcation of these theoretical results by Jean
Baptiste Perrin was important evidence for the existence of molecules.

The second pioneering step which Boltzmann made towards quantum mechanics
was the introduction of discrete energy levels for molecules contained in a ﬁnite volume.
Boltzmann used this method already in his paper of 1872 on the H–theorem5 and he
needed it in the above mentioned paper of 1877 to be able to enumerate the number of
microstates. Boltzmann actually introduced cells of ﬁnite size in phase–space spanned
by the coordinates and momenta of all molecules. In quantum mechanics Heisenberg’s
uncertainty principle ﬁxes the minimal size of such cells. Max Planck was certainly
inﬂuenced by these ideas of Boltzmann.

In 1897 Boltzmann had a dispute with Planck on the irreversibility of radiation
phenomena which may have stimulated Planck’s discovery of quantum mechanics in
1900. At this time Planck thought that he could derive irreversible behaviour for
5L. Boltzmann: Weitere Studien ¨uber das W¨armegleichgewicht unter Gasmolek¨ulen, Sitzungsber.

Kais. Akad. Wiss. Wien Math. Naturwiss. Classe 66 (1872) 275–370.

3

radiative processes without any assumptions on the initial states. Boltzmann could,
however, show that this was not true and at the beginning of his second paper answering
Planck6 he made the following suggestion to Planck:

“It is certainly possible and would be gratifying to derive for radiation phenomena a
theorem analogously to the entropy theorem from the general laws for these phenomena
using the same principles as in gas theory. Thus I would be pleased, if the work of Dr.
Planck on the scattering of electrical plane waves by very small resonators would become
useful in this respect, which by the way are very simple calculations whose correctness
I have never put in doubt.

Only if Dr. Planck in his second communication claims again that no other process
in nature is known, in which conservative forces lead to irreversible changes, I can not
agree.”

Indeed Planck followed Boltzmann’s recommendation and used Boltzmann’s
statistical methods for the derivation of his celebrated law for the black body radiation.
Planck used thereby the additional assumption that classical oscillators absorb and
emit energy only in integer multiples of the product of Planck’s constant h with the
frequency ν of the radiation which gave rise to the birth of quantum mechanics. In
fact, in the framework of Boltzmann’s statistical approach it was quite common to
introduce discrete energy levels to obtain a denumerable set of states. Boltzmann used
this method already in his 1872 paper on the H-theorem7. One may ask whether
Boltzmann considered this procedure only as a mathematical device or whether he
attributed physical signiﬁcance to it. In this connection Ostwald reports that when he
and Planck tried to convince Boltzmann of the superiority of purely thermodynamic
methods over atomism at the Halle Conference in 1891 Boltzmann suddenly said:

“I see no reason why energy shouldn’t also be regarded as divided atomically.”8

At this time Planck was still an opponent of the atomistic theory. In 1900, however,
he was converted from “Saulus” to “Paulus” when he had to use Boltzmann’s statistical
methods to explain his law of radiation and he became the most important proponent
of Boltzmann’s ideas. After Boltzmann’s death in 1906 it was the authority of Max
Planck and Albert Einstein which brought general recognition of Boltzmann’s ideas. In
the years 1909 and 1910, for instance, Planck had a vivid dispute with Ernst Mach
on the existence of atoms. Without the concept of atoms it is very unlikely that
quantum theory would have developed. The existence of atoms is one of the basic
assumptions of Boltzmann’s statistical mechanics for which he fought vigorously. In
fact the deviations from the classical equipartition theorem for the energy observed for
black body radiation and for the speciﬁc heat of solids were important evidence for
quantum theory. Especially Erwin Schrdinger, the founder of wave mechanics, studied
the applications of Boltzmann’s statistical methods in great detail. A manifestation
of Boltzmann’s inﬂuence on Schr¨odinger is Schr¨odinger’s enthusiastic quotation of
Boltzmann’s line of thought:

6L. Boltzmann: ¨Uber irreversible Strahlungsvorg¨ange II., Berliner Ber. (1897) 1016–1018.
7L. Boltzmann: Weitere Studien ¨uber das W¨armegleichgewicht unter Gasmolek¨ulen, Sitzungsber.

Kais. Akad. Wiss. Wien Math. Naturwiss. Classe 66 (1872) 275–370.

8W. Ostwald: Lebenslinien – Eine Selbstbiographie, Klasing, Berlin 1927, vol. 2 p. 187 and 188.

4

“His line of thought may be called my ﬁrst love in science. No other has ever thus

enruptured me or will ever do so again.”9

Finally I would like to mention that Boltzmann in his lectures on Natural Philosophy
in 1903 at the University of Vienna as well as in the second volume of his textbook on
classical mechanics already anticipated the equal treatment of space coordinates and
time which is introduced in the special theory of relativity. Furthermore in the lectures
of Boltzmann and of his successor Fritz Hasenhrl in Vienna the students learned already
about noneuclidean geometry, so that they could immediately start to work in this ﬁeld
when Einstein’s general theory of relativity had been formulated. A result of this work
was, for instance, the paper by Hans Thirring and Josef Lense10 on the eﬀects of the
rotation of the earth on the moon and on satellites.

9E. Schr¨odinger, S.B. Preuss. Akad. Wiss. Berlin (1929), pp. C–CII; reprinted in E. Schrdinger,

Science Theory and Man, (New York: Dover 1957), p. XII.

10H. Thirring and J. Lense: ¨Uber den Einﬂuß der Eigenrotation der Zentralk¨orperauf die Bewegung
der Planeten und Monde nach der Einsteinschen Gravitationstheorie, Phys. Zeitschrift, Leipzig Jg.19
(1918), No. 8, p. 204–205.

