8
9
9
1
 
n
a
J
 
0
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
t
s
i
h
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
5
2
0
1
0
8
9
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

V.N. Gribov
1930–1997

This is not an obituary1.
This note is intended to make the physics world aware of the loss it
suﬀered on August 13 when professor Vladimir Gribov passed away, all of a
sudden, in Budapest where he was steadily recovering after a mild stroke.

Vladimir Naumovich for youngsters, Volodya for friends, BH (his Russian

initials taken as Latin letters) for colleagues world-wide.

His devotion to physics was so intense, his knowledge, shared with anyone
willing and prepared to listen, was so deep, that I feel one can still seek his
advice, discuss problems with him, trying to probe new ideas against the
incredible physical intuition of this man, to match them with his “picture”.
I am sure that many physicists, from St.Petersburg, Moscow and Novosibirsk,
as well as those western theorists who knew him well, share this feeling.

Gribov graduated from Leningrad University in 1952 when for a young
man with Jewish blood there was not a slightest chance to get a decent job.
After Stalin was gone, the paranoid antisemitic wave receded. With the help
of Ilya Shmushkevich and Karen Ter-Martirosyan, Gribov, having served his
term as a teacher at an evening school for adults, was able to start his sci-
entiﬁc career in Russia’s ﬁrst research institution — the Physico-Technical
Institute (later, Ioﬀe PTI) in Leningrad. Soon he was recognised as an in-
formal leader of the theory group created and cherished by Shmushkevich.
This group, under Gribov’s lead, was to become one of the centres where the
world-class physics of the 60’s-70’s was being developed, later to be known
as the “Leningrad school”. In 1971 the theory group became a part of a new
Nuclear Physics Institute (LNPI) in Gatchina, near Leningrad.

In the late 50’s Gribov was brought to Moscow and introduced to Lev
Landau.
It did not take long for Dau to form a high opinion of Gribov.
A special fund was created to allow a young physicist to commute from
Leningrad (400 miles one way) to participate in the weekly Moscow Landau
seminars.

There Volodya was to meet Isaak Pomeranchuk who became his close
friend and collaborator and made a great impact on Gribov the physicist.
Gribov always referred to Pomeranchuk as his true Teacher. He admired
Chuk’s intuition, style of doing research and his attitude to life and to physics.
1A shortened version of this text has been published in the January 1998 issue of

“Physics World”.

1

BH belonged to a generation of physicists, now almost extinct, for whom
physics, in all its variety and complexity, was still felt as a single subject,
who “had a picture”, in his words. “He has a picture”, was Gribov’s highest
compliment, a universal formula ranging from appreciation to admiration.

Gribov was always open to discussion. He never refused, as far as I know,
to discuss a physical problem, be it of nuclear physics or elementary particle
physics, cosmology or radiophysics, solid state physics or atomic physics. Not
only did he know quantum physics as deeply as one can know it, he felt quan-
tum mechanics, he thought quantum-mechanically. FSU physicists remember
Yakov Zeldovich saying at the plenary session of the annual Academy meet-
ing: “What a fool I was not to listen to what Volodya Gribov was telling me,
long before Steven Hawking’s work, on why and how black holes should ra-
diate via quantum tunneling”. Gribov was the ﬁrst to interpret an instanton
— a classical solution of non-linear Yang-Mills equations, found by Polyakov
and collaborators — as an under-the-barrier trajectory linking vacua with
diﬀerent topology of the non-abelian ﬁeld. This interpretation has become a
common wisdom. He also came to the conclusion that classical ﬁelds (instan-
tons, monopoles, etc.) are of little relevance for the long-standing problem
of QCD colour conﬁnement (which wisdom still awaits acceptance by the
community).

“I am not smarter”, BH used to say, “I just think more”...

For decades he was not allowed to travel abroad: a free-minded person
was not the KGB’s idea of a loyal citizen. One can only guess how much
harm Gribov’s isolation has done to theoretical physics. Given an ever-red
traﬃc-light on the road from LNPI to the West, many western physicists
visited Leningrad in the 60’s-70’s to discuss new ideas with BH and his
colleagues, to learn, and to go through the beneﬁcial ordeal of a notorious
“Gribov seminar”.

This was a legendary seminar.

It had no time limit and would go on
as long as was necessary to establish the truth. Some visitors hated it and
would never repeat that most dreadful experience of their life; others loved
it: ﬁnding the truth of the matter was at stake and the speaker would be the
ﬁrst to beneﬁt.

* * *

2

For a speaker it was a test of self-conﬁdence, of the depth of his or her
knowledge of the subject. Equally was it a challenge for the audience: to
participate during seminars (“to work on seminars”) was one of the two
unquestionable duties of the members of the Gribov theory department. (The
second one being: “never refuse help to an experimentalist”.)

To understand the spirit of the seminar you have to accept the notion
of “aggressive friendliness”. No merits counted, no excuses were given: a
newcomer and a renouned academician were treated equally, that is equally
amicably and aggressively. After 5 minutes of a smooth introduction BH
would jump to the blackboard and make his three points: what this guy
is trying to tell us, why it is “all wrong”, and how the problem had to be
approached. This would trigger a hot discussion involving all the audience
(including the speaker; though, markedly, there were historical exceptions
when a speaker would leave the seminar room).

BH as a speaker would be given the same friendly treatment. That is,
the story goes, how Lev Lipatov, now a world-known theoretician and an
academician, became a co-author of the famous Gribov & Lipatov work of
1970-71 which laid the basis of a ﬁeld-theoretical description of deep inelastic
scattering and e+e−-annihilation. Gribov was presenting his work, and the
young man made a couple of “killing” comments. Gribov got stuck trying
to answer Lipatov’s questions: “Lev, you are a co-author already, help me”,
was the solution.

Many a diﬃcult problem was cracked in this fashion, at the blackboard,
in the noisy (and, in early days, smoky) atmosphere of PTI/LNPI seminars.

Gribov was never an icon, and a rosy picture of this character would be
unphysical and therefore false. He had a strong personality, strong both in
its rights and wrongs.

It was not easy, to say the least, to argue with BH. In spite of his mind
being fast, ﬂexible and receptive, a prejudice of his could be stone solid. You
would not dare to start arguing with him before making absolutely clear for
yourself that the man was wrong. Such a dispute could eventually rise to a
ﬁght, sometimes reaching heights which any socium with a minimal awareness
of good manners would classify as absolutely unacceptable. To shout at your

* * *

3

boss, though, was pretty safe: Gribov and his Leningrad colleagues always
remembered the heritage of Ilya Shmushkevich: “a scientiﬁc argument cannot
lead to administrative conclusions” (sounds much better in the original Soviet
newspeak).

Neither was Gribov always right in his vision. It took a good 10 years
for him to accept quarks as the true basis of hadron physics. He encouraged,
though, his young students to play with a new hypothesis and discussed
with them applications of the quark picture to hadron scattering. Hence,
the famous Frankfurt-Levin ratio of the pion-proton and proton-proton cross
sections of the early days of the quark model.

“When I was young I was happy to see the pieces of a lengthy calculation
cancel and produce a zero result. This told me that I had been smart and had
not make a mistake. Only later did I recognise that this was stupid: a good
physicist should know a priori that the answer will be zero.” This recollection
of Gribov’s can tell you much about his research style, a very special way
of attacking a diﬃcult theoretical problem that he developed and used with
brilliance. He had a profound knowledge and skill in using mathematical
methods in physics. However, describing his results Gribov would not stress
the mathematical diﬃculty, not even the mathematical beauty, of the solution
he found. What mattered most was, once again, “a picture”. He would
approach the problem from diﬀerent angles, abstracting its essential features
and illustrating them with the help of simpliﬁed models and analogues from
diﬀerent branches of physics, solid state physics being his favourite source of
inspiration.

You were led to see that the answer is correct because there is a clear
physical picture behind its structure and its properties, not merely because
it has emerged as a result of a derivation following the mathematical de-
duction rules. People unfamiliar with this style were often confused. After
Gribov’s talk some felt they were being cheated: a couple of chalk drawings,
a strain of hand-waving arguments, and — here you are: that’s the answer?
Such listeners were not aware that they fell victim of the speaker’s generos-
ity: for Gribov it went without saying that the receiving party is capable of
reproducing the necessary mathematical calculations and analysis, this being

* * *

4

a default professional quality. He was talking physics. Even when a mathe-
matical framework to envelope a foreseen physical answer was not developed,
and thus the problem not solved, this would not stop him from sharing his
ideas and arguments with anyone willing to listen. Physics was given top
priority, ambitions put aside. “Physics goes ﬁrst” was the motto.

One inside story to illustrate the point. A project BH was pursuing
with his student had run at some point into a rather diﬃcult mathematical
problem. The student was given a page of notes where the basic idea of
how to approach the problem was brieﬂy explained, followed by few lines of
calculations. He was shocked to ﬁnd out that the very ﬁrst equation that the
maˆıtre had written was wrong. Having done the job and having noticed that
the other nine equations that followed were dead wrong as well, the student
arrived at the answer. He compared it with what was written on the bottom
of the Gribov note, and the answer there was the correct one. Weird though
it might seem, it was neither a miracle nor an accident. According to Alexei
Anselm, for many years Gribov’s collaborator and friend, — “Working with
BH you had a strange feeling that numbers were his personal friends: all
those factors of 2 and π simply knew their place in Gribov’s formulae”.

Gribov left Leningrad in 1980, on the eve of turning 50. It was a hard
blow for the LNPI theory laboratory — the Gribov laboratory. It remained
a group of top-class theorists but was never again the unique team that it
had been. The loss for BH proved to be comparable, if not stronger. Having
moved to Moscow for personal reasons, he found himself pretty much in
isolation. The Landau Institute for Theoretical Physics in Chernogolovka,
with which he formally became aﬃliated, had its established orderly way
of things. It goes without saying that everyone respected Gribov, a “ring-
bearer” of the Landau tradition. At the same time, the community as a
whole was not ready to accommodate such a disturbing and virulent force:
he did not ﬁt into the style of Chernogolovka seminars.

Later he lived permanently in Budapest with his new family and, in a
wider world, was being warmly received in the US and Sweden, France and
Italy. Recently Gribov, as a Humboldt awardee, enjoyed the hospitality of
the Nuclear Physics Institute in Bonn. However, no place was to be found

* * *

5

in the West for a man about to turn 60, where he could start a new school
and work in a team — a natural Gribov environment.

Many a year went under the strain of personal tragedy. Lenya Gribov,
the son of Volodya and his ﬁrst wife Lilya Dubinskaya, perished in a moun-
taineering accident a few months after defending his Ph.D. in theoretical
physics. Volodya kept cursing himself for having infected Lenya with his
passion for mountains. Neither time nor the loving attention of wife Julia
and step-son Palik could help to heal the wound.

When asked by Julia what physics meant for him, Volodya said that he
had realised quite early that if he made an eﬀort he could ﬁnd the truth.
And therefore, he had decided, he must. He kept working, working on the
most challenging problem, working with unmatched persistence and intensity
which has only doubled after the loss of his son.

Being a perfectionist, BH would not write a paper before he had the ﬁ-
nal solution of the entire problem that he had set for himself. August 13,
1997 caught Volodya Gribov in the process of writing up the work conclud-
ing his 20-year-long study of the problem of quark conﬁnement in quantum
chromodynamics.

Gribov’s contribution to physics deserves a special study. It suﬃces to
say that his name is attached to many a key notion of modern theoretical
physics: Gribov-Froissart projection and the Gribov vacuum pole (Pomeron),
factorisation, Reggeon calculus, Gribov diﬀusion, the AGK cutting rules, the
Gribov bremsstrahlung theorem, Gribov-Lipatov evolution equations, and
many more.

Gribov’s impact on modern physics is deeper than it is known to be.
One of his jewels “Interaction of photons and electrons with nuclei at
high energies” where the space-time picture of particle interactions at high
energies was established, found its way through the iron curtain. The key
elements of this work were incorporated into the famous Feynman book which
laid the foundation of the parton model. The Feynman-Gribov parton model,
that is.

Gribov with Alexander Migdal developed an ingenious technique for ana-
lysing dynamical systems with long-range ﬂuctuations, which triggered a

* * *

6

breakthrough in solid state physics. The physics of solids near the critical
temperature proved to be similar to that of the so-called strong-coupling
regime of high-energy hadron-hadron interactions. The subsequent works
of the “two Sashas” — Polyakov and Migdal — and a contemporary more
general treatment suggested by L. Kadanoﬀ and K. Wilson have established
the scaling solution of the problem of the second order phase transitions.

Gribov’s QCD studies produced a brilliant physical explanation of asymp-
totic freedom, based on an early observation of the anti-screening phenomenon
made by Julij Khriplovich in a pre-historic 1969.
In 1977 Gribov demon-
strated the inconsistency of the standard ﬁeld-theoretical treatment of gluon
ﬁelds (Gribov copies, the Gribov horizon). Later he suggested the quark
conﬁnement scenario based on super-critical binding of light quarks by a
quasi-Coulomb colour interaction.

His last works remain to be discovered, understood and developed.

* * *

Vladimir Gribov believed in the Truth in physics. Not that he was a
na¨ıve man, but he could not (or rather did not want to) understand how
some people calling themselves physicists would politely listen to and applaud
“nonsense”. He thought that everyone shares his “physics goes ﬁrst” belief
and is ready to put aside any political, mercantile considerations when a
physical issue is at stake. In our pragmatic world such a scenario does not
look very realistic. However, since his commitment to physics was close to
religious, we can consider it as Gribov’s prophecy for the physics world of
the future.

Yuri Dokshitzer

7

