8
9
9
1
 
r
p
A
 
8
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
t
s
i
h
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
0
2
0
4
0
8
9
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

The Speed of Light and Pur¯an. ic Cosmology

Subhash Kak
Department of Electrical & Computer Engineering
Louisiana State University
Baton Rouge, LA 70803-5901, USA
FAX: 504.388.5200; Email: kak@ee.lsu.edu

October 31, 2012

Abstract

We survey early Indian ideas on the speed of light and the size of
the universe. A context is provided for S¯ayan. a’s statement (14th cen-
tury) that the speed is 2,202 yojanas per half nimes.a (186,000 miles
per second!). It is shown how this statement may have emerged from
early Pur¯an. ic notions regarding the size of the universe. Although
this value can only be considered to be an amazing coincidence, the
Pur¯an. ic cosmology at the basis of this assertion illuminates many an-
cient ideas of space and time.

Keywords: Speed of light, Ancient Indian astronomy, Pur¯an. ic cos-

mology

Indian texts consider light to be like a wind. Was any thought given to
its speed? Given the nature of the analogy, one would expect that this speed
was considered ﬁnite. The Pur¯an. as speak of the moving jyoti´scakra, “the
circle of light.” This analogy or that of the swift arrow let loose from the
bow in these accounts leaves ambiguous whether the circle of light is the Sun
or its speeding rays.

We get a speciﬁc number that could refer to the speed of light in a me-
dieval text by S¯ayan. a (c. 1315-1387), minister in the court of King Bukka
I of the Vijayanagar Empire and Vedic scholar. In his commentary on the
fourth verse of the hymn 1.50 of the R. gveda on the Sun, he says1

1

tath¯a ca smaryate yojan¯an¯am. sahasre dve dve ´sate dve ca yojane
ekena nimis. ¯ardhena kramam¯an. a

Thus it is remembered: [O Sun] you who traverse 2,202 yojanas
in half a nimes. a.

The ﬁgure could refer to the actual motion of the Sun but, as we will
see shortly, that is impossible. Is it an old tradition related to the speed of
[sun]light that S¯ayan. a appears to suggest? We would like to know if that
supposition is true by examining parallels in the Pur¯an. ic literature.

The units of yojana and nimes. a are well known. The usual meaning of
yojana is about 9 miles as in the Artha´s¯astra where it is deﬁned as being
equal to 8,000 dhanu or “bow,” where each dhanu is taken to be about 6
feet. ¯Aryabhat.a, Brahmagupta and other astronomers used smaller yojanas
but such exceptional usage was conﬁned to the astronomers; we will show
that the Pur¯an. as also use a non-standard measure of yojana. As a scholar
of the Vedas and a non-astronomer, S¯ayan. a would be expected to use the
“standard” Artha´s¯astra units.

The measures of time are thus deﬁned in the Pur¯an. as:

15 nimes.a = 1 k¯as.t.h¯a
30 k¯as.t.h¯a = 1 kal¯a
30 kal¯a = 1 muh¯urta

30 muh¯urta = 1 day-and-night

A nimes.a is therefore equal to 16
75 seconds.
De and Vartak have in recent books2 argued that this statement refers to
the speed of light. Converted into modern units, it does come very close to
the correct ﬁgure of 186,000 miles per second!

Such an early knowledge of this number doesn’t sound credible because
the speed of light was determined only in 1675 by Roemer who looked at the
diﬀerence in the times that light from Io, one of the moons of Jupiter, takes
to reach Earth based on whether it is on the near side of Jupiter or the far
side. Until then light was taken to travel with inﬁnite velocity. There is no
record of any optical experiments that could have been performed in India
before the modern period to measure the speed of light.

2

Maybe S¯ayan. a’s ﬁgure refers to the speed of the Sun in its supposed orbit
around the Earth. But that places the orbit of the Sun at a distance of over
2,550 million miles. The correct value is only 93 million miles and until the
time of Roemer the distance to the Sun used to be taken to be less than 4
million miles. This interpretation takes us nowhere. The Indian astronomical
texts place the Sun only about half a million yojanas from the Earth.

What about the possibility of fraud? S¯ayan. a’s statement was printed in
1890 in the famous edition of R. gveda edited by Max M¨uller, the German
Sanskritist. He claimed to have used several three or four hundred year
old manuscripts of S¯ayan. a’s commentary, written much before the time of
Roemer.

Is it possible that M¨uller was duped by an Indian correspondent who
slipped in the line about the speed? Unlikely, because S¯ayan. a’s commentary
is so well known that an interpolation would have been long discovered. And
soon after M¨uller’s “Rigveda” was published, someone would have claimed
that it contained this particular “secret” knowledge.

One can dismiss S¯ayan. a’s number as a meaningless coincidence. But that
would be a mistake if there exists a framework of ideas—an old physics—in
which this number makes sense. We explore the prehistory of this number
by considering early textual references. We will show that these references
in the Pur¯an. as and other texts indicate that S¯ayan. a’s speed is connected,
numerically, to very ancient ideas. This helps us understand the framework
of ideas regarding the universe that led to this ﬁgure.

Physical ideas in the Indian literature

T The Vedas take the universe to be inﬁnite in size. The universe was
visualized in the image of the cosmic egg, Brahm¯an. d. a. Beyond our own
universe lie other universes.

The Pa˜ncavim. ´sa Br¯ahman. a 16.8.6 states that the heavens are 1000 earth
diameters away from the Earth. The Sun was taken to be halfway to the
heavens, so this suggests a distance to the Sun to be about 500 earth diam-
eters from the Earth.

Yajurveda, in the mystic hymn 17, dealing with the nature of the universe,
counts numbers in powers of ten upto 1012. It has been suggested that this
is an estimate of the size of the universe in yojanas.

3

The philosophical schools of S¯am. khya and Vai´ses.ika tell us about the old
ideas on light.3 According to S¯am. khya, light is one of the ﬁve fundamental
“subtle” elements (tanm¯atra) out of which emerge the gross elements. The
atomicity of these elements is not speciﬁcally mentioned and it appears that
they were actually taken to be continuous.

On the other hand, Vai´ses.ika is an atomic theory of the physical world on
the nonatomic ground of ether, space and time. The basic atoms are those of
earth (pr. thiv¯ı), water (¯apas), ﬁre (tejas), and air (v¯ayu), that should not be
confused with the ordinary meaning of these terms. These atoms are taken
to form binary molecules that combine further to form larger molecules.4
Motion is deﬁned in terms of the movement of the physical atoms and it
appears that it is taken to be non-instantaneous.

Light rays are taken to be a stream of high velocity of tejas atoms. The
particles of light can exhibit diﬀerent characteristics depending on the speed
and the arrangements of the tejas atoms.

Although there existed several traditions of astronomy in India,5 only
the mathematical astronomy of the Siddh¯antas has been properly examined.
Some of the information of the non-Siddh¯antic astronomical systems is pre-
served in the Pur¯an. as.

The Pur¯an. ic astronomy is cryptic, and since the Pur¯an. as are encyclopaedic
texts, with several layers of writing, presumably by diﬀerent authors, there
are inconsistencies in the material. Sometimes, speculative and the empirical
are so intertwined that without care the material can appear meaningless.
The Pur¯an. ic geography is quite fanciful and this ﬁnds parallels in its astron-
omy as well.

We can begin the process of understanding Pur¯an. ic astronomy by consid-
ering its main features, such as the size of the solar system and the motion
of the Sun. But before we do so, we will speak brieﬂy of the notions in the
Siddh¯antas.

Size of the universe in the ¯Aryabhat.¯ıya
¯Aryabhat.a in his ¯Aryabhat.¯ıya (AA) deals with the question of the size of
the universe. He deﬁnes a yojana to be 8,000 nr. , where a nr. is the height
of a man; this makes his yojana (ya) approximately 7.5 miles.6 Or ys ≈ 6
5ya,
where ys is the standard Artha´s¯astra yojana. AA 1.6 states that the orbit

4

of the Sun is 2,887,666.8 yojanas and that of the sky is 12,474,720,576,000
yojanas.

Commenting on this, Bhaskara I (c. 629) says:

y¯avantam¯ak¯a´saprade´sam ravermay¯ukh¯ah. samant¯at dyotayanti t¯av¯an
prade´sah. khagolasya paridhih. khakaks. y¯a. anyath¯a hyaparimitatv¯at
¯ak¯a´sasya parim¯an. ¯akhy¯anam nopapadyate.

That much of the sky as the Sun’s rays illumine on all sides is
called the orbit of the sky. Otherwise, the sky is beyond limit; it
is impossible to state its measure.7

This implies that while the universe is inﬁnite, the solar system extends

as far as the rays of the Sun can reach.

There is no mention by ¯Aryabhat.a of a speed of light. But the range
of light particles is taken to be ﬁnite, so it must have been assumed that
the particles in the “observational universe” do not penetrate to the regions
beyond the “orbit of the sky.” This must have been seen in the analogy of
the gravitational pull of the matter just as other particles fall back on Earth
after reaching a certain height.

The orbit of the sky is 4.32 × 106 greater than the orbit of the Sun. It is

clear that this enlargement was inspired by cosmological ideas.

The diameters of the Earth, the Sun, and the Moon are taken to be
1,050, 4,410 and 315 yojanas, respectively. Furthermore, AA 1.6 implies the
distance to the Sun, Rs, to be 459,585 yojanas, and that to the Moon, Rm,
as 34,377 yojanas. These distances are in the correct proportion related to
their assumed sizes given that the distances are approximately 108 times the
corresponding diameters.8

Converted to the standard Artha´s¯astra units, the diameters of the Earth
and the Sun are about 875 and 3,675 yojanas, and the distance to the Sun
is around 0.383 million yojanas.

¯Aryabhat.a considers the orbits, with respect to the Earth, in the correct
order Moon, Mercury, Venus, Sun, Mars, Jupiter, and Saturn, based on their
periods.

5

Pur¯an. ic cosmology
The Pur¯an. as provide material which is believed to be closer to the knowl-
edge of the Vedic times.9 Here we speciﬁcally consider V¯ayu Pur¯an. a (VaP),
Vis.n. u Pur¯an. a (ViP), and Matsya Pur¯an. a (MP). VaP and ViP are generally
believed to be amongst the earliest Pur¯an. as and at least 1,500 years old.
Their astronomy is prior to the Siddh¯antic astronomy of ¯Aryabhat.a and his
successors.

The Pur¯an. as instruct through myths and this mythmaking can be seen
in their approach to astronomy also. For example, they speak of seven un-
derground worlds below the orbital plane of the planets and of seven “conti-
nents” encircling the Earth. One has to take care to separate this imagery,
that parallels the conception of the seven centres of the human’s psycho-
somatic body, from the underlying cosmology of the Pur¯an. as that is their
primary concern in their jyotis. a chapters.

It should be noted that the idea of seven regions of the universe is present
in the R. gveda 1.22.16-21 where the Sun’s stride is described as saptadh¯aman,
or taking place in seven regions.

The diﬀerent Pur¯an. as appear to reproduce the same cosmological ma-
terial. There are some minor diﬀerences in ﬁgures that may be a result of
wrong copying by scribes who did not understand the material. In this paper,
we mainly follow ViP.

ViP 2.8 describes the Sun to be 9,000 yojanas in length and to be con-
nected by an axle that is 15.7×106 yojanas long to the M¯anasa mountain and
another axle 45,500 yojanas long connected to the pole star. The distance of
15.7 million yojanas between the Earth and the Sun is much greater than the
distance of 0.38 million yojanas that we ﬁnd in the Siddh¯antas. This greater
distance is stated without a corresponding change in the diameter of the Sun.
It is interesting that this distance is less than one and a half times the correct
value; the value of the Siddh¯antas is one-thirtieth the correct value.

Elsewhere, in VaP 50, it is stated that the Sun covers 3.15 million yojanas
in a muh¯urta. This means that the distance covered in a day are 94.5 million
yojanas. MP 124 gives the same ﬁgure. This is in agreement with the view
that the Sun is 15.7 million yojanas away from the Earth. The speciﬁc speed
given here, translates to 116.67 yojanas per half-nimes.a.

The size of the universe is described in two diﬀerent ways, through the

“island-continents” and through heavenly bodies.

6

The geography of the Pur¯an. as describes a central continent, Jambu, sur-
rounded by alternating bands of ocean and land. The seven island-continents
of Jambu, Plaks.a, ´S¯almala, Ku´sa, Kraunca, ´S¯aka, and Pus.kara are encom-
passed, successively, by seven oceans; and each ocean and continent is, re-
spectively, of twice the extent of that which precedes it. The universe is seen
as a sphere of size 500 million yojanas.

It is important to realize that the continents are imaginary regions and
they should not be confused with the continents on the Earth. Only certain
part of the innermost planet, Jambu, that deal with India have parallels with
real geography.

The inner continent is taken to be 16,000 yojanas as the base of the
world axis. In opposition to the interpretation by earlier commentators, who
took the increase in dimension by a factor of two is only across the seven
“continents,” we take it to apply to the “oceans” as well. At the end of the
seven island-continents is a region that is twice the preceding region. Further
on, is the Lok¯aloka mountain, 10,000 yojanas in breadth, that marks the end
of our universe.

Assume that the size of the Jambu is J yojana, then the size of the

universe is:

Or,

U = J(1+2+22+23+24+25+26+27+28+29+210+211+212+213+214)+10, 000
(1)

U = 32, 767J + 10, 000 yojanas

(2)

If U is 500 million miles, then J should be about 15,260 yojanas. The
round ﬁgure of 16,000 is mentioned as the width of the base of the Meru,
the world axis, at the surface of the Earth. This appears to support our
interpretation.

Note that the whole description of the Pur¯an. ic cosmology had been
thought to be inconsistent because an erroneous interpretation of the in-
crease in the sizes of the “continents” had been used.

When considered in juxtaposition with the preceding numbers, the geog-
raphy of concentric continents is a representation of the plane of the Earth’s
rotation, with each new continent as the orbit of the next “planet”.10

7

The planetary model in the Pur¯an. as is diﬀerent from that in the Siddh¯antas.

Here the Moon as well as the planets are in orbits higher than the Sun. Orig-
inally, this supposition for the Moon may have represented the fact that it
goes higher than the Sun in its orbit. Given that the Moon’s inclination is 5◦
to the ecliptic, its declination can be 28.5◦ compared to the Sun’s maximum
declination of ±23.5◦. This “higher” position must have been, at some stage,
represented literally by a higher orbit. To make sense with the observational
reality, it became necessary for the Moon is taken to be twice as large as the
Sun.

The distances of the planetary orbits beyond the Sun are as follows:

Table 1: From Earth to Pole-star

Interval I
Earth to Sun
Sun to Moon
Moon to Asterisms
Asterisms to Mercury
Mercury to Venus
Venus to Mars
Mars to Jupiter
Jupiter to Saturn
Saturn to Ursa Major
Ursa Major to Pole-star
Sub-total

yojanas
15,700,000
100,000
100,000
200,000
200,000
200,000
200,000
200,000
100,000
100,000
17,100,000

8

Further spheres are postulated beyond the pole-star. These are the Ma-
harloka, the Janaloka, the Tapoloka, and the Satyaloka. Their distances are
as follows:

Table 2: From Pole-star to Satyaloka

Interval II
Pole-star to Maharloka
Maharloka to Janaloka
Janaloka to Tapoloka
Tapoloka to Satyaloka
Grand Total

yojanas
10,000,000
20,000,000
40,000,000
120,000,000
207,100,000

Since the last ﬁgure is the distance from the Earth, the total diameter
of the universe is 414.2 million yojanas, not including the dimensions of the
various heavenly bodies and lokas. The inclusion of these may be expected to
bring this calculation in line with the ﬁgure of 500 million yojanas mentioned
earlier.

Beyond the universe lies the limitless Pradh¯ana, that has within it count-

less other universes.

Pur¯an. ic cosmology views the universe as going through cycles of creation
and destruction of 8.64 billion years. The consideration of a universe of
enormous size must have been inspired by a supposition of enormous age.

Reconciling Pur¯an. ic and Standard Yojanas
It is clear that the Pur¯an. ic yojana (yp) are diﬀerent from the Artha´s¯astra
yojana (yp). To ﬁnd the conversion factor, we equate the distances to the
Sun.

0.4375 × 106 ys = 15.7 × 106 yp

(3)

In other words,

1 ys ≈ 36 yp

(4)
The diameter of the Earth should now be about 875 × 36 ≈ 31, 500 yp.
Perhaps, this was taken to be 32,000 yp, twice the size of Meru. This under-
standing is conﬁrmed by the statements in the Pur¯an. as. For example, MP
126 says that the size of Bh¯aratavars.a (India) is 9,000 yp, which is roughly
correct.

We conclude that the kernel of the Pur¯an. ic system is consistent with the
Siddh¯antas. The misunderstanding of it arose because attention was not paid
to their diﬀerent units of distance.

9

Speed of the Sun

Now that we have a Pur¯an. ic context, S¯ayan. a’s statement on the speed of
2,202 yojanas per half-nimes.a can be examined.

We cannot be absolutely certain what yojanas did he have in mind: stan-
dard, or Pur¯an. ic. But either way it is clear from the summary of Pur¯an. ic
cosmology that this speed could not be the speed of the Sun. At the dis-
tance of 15.7 million yojanas, Sun’s speed is only 121.78 yojanas (yp) per
half-nimes.a. Or if we use the the ﬁgure from VaP, it is 116.67. Converted
into the standard yojanas, this number is only 3.24 ys per half-nimes.a.

S¯ayan. a’s speed is about 18 times greater than the supposed speed of the
Sun in yp and 2 × 182 greater than the speed in ys. So either way, a larger
number with a deﬁnite relationship to the actual speed of the Sun was chosen
for the speed of light.

The Pur¯an. ic size of the universe is 13 to 16 times greater than the orbit
of the Sun, not counting the actual sizes of the various heavenly bodies.
Perhaps, the size was taken to be 18 times greater than the Sun’s orbit. It
seems reasonable to assume, then, that if the radius of the universe was taken
to be about 282 million yojanas, a speed was postulated for light so that it
could circle the farthest path in the universe within one day. This was the
physical principle at the basis of the Pur¯an. ic cosmology.

Concluding Remarks

We have seen that the astronomical numbers in the Pur¯an. as are much more
consistent amongst themselves, and with the generally accepted sizes of the
solar orbit, than has been hitherto assumed. The Pur¯an. ic geography must
not be taken literally.

We have also shown that the S¯ayan. a’s ﬁgure of 2,202 yojanas per half-
nimes.a is consistent with Pur¯an. ic cosmology where the size of “our universe”
is a function of the speed of light. This size represents the space that can be
spanned by light in one day.

It is quite certain that the ﬁgure for speed was obtained either by this
argument or it was obtained by taking the postulated speed of the Sun in the
Pur¯an. as and multiplying that by 18, or by multiplying the speed in standard
yojanas by 2 × 182. We do know that 18 is a sacred number in the Pur¯an. as,

10

and the fact that multiplication with this special number gave a ﬁgure that
was in accord with the spanning of light in the universe in one day must have
given it a special signiﬁcance.

Is it possible that the number 2,202 arose because of a mistake of multipli-
cation by 18 rather than a corresponding division (by 36) to reduce the Sun
speed to standard yojanas? The answer to that must be “no” because such a
mistake is too egregious. Furthermore, S¯ayan. a’s own brother M¯adhava was a
distinguished astronomer and the incorrectness of this ﬁgure for the accepted
speed of the Sun would have been obvious to him.

If S¯ayan. a’s ﬁgure was derived from a postulated size of the universe,
how was that huge size, so central to all Indian thought, arrived at? A
possible explanation is that the physical size of the universe was taken to
parallel the estimates of its age. These age-estimates were made larger and
larger to postulate a time when the periods of all the heavenly bodies were
synchronized.11

The great numbers of the Pur¯an. as suggest that the concepts of mah¯ayuga
and kalpa, sometimes credit to the astronomers of the Siddh¯antic period,
must have had an old pedigree. This is in consonance with the new under-
standing that considerable astronomy was in place in the second and the
third millennia BC.12

We have provided a context in which S¯ayan. a’s speed can be understood.
In this understanding, the speed of light was taken to be 2 × 182 greater than
the speed of the Sun in standard yojanas so that light can travel the entire
postulated size of the universe in one day. It is a lucky chance that the ﬁnal
number turned out to be exactly equal to the true speed. S¯ayan. a’s value
as speed of light must be considered the most astonishing “blind hit” in the
history of science!

Notes

1. M¨uller, Max (ed.), Rig-Veda-Samhita together with the Commentary of

S¯ayan. a. Oxford University Press, London, 1890.

2. De, S.S., In Issues in Vedic Astronomy and Astrology, Pandya, H, Dik-
shit, S., Kansara, M.N. (eds.). Motilal Banarsidass, Delhi, 1992, pages
234-5;

11

Vartak, P.V., Scientiﬁc Knowledge in the Vedas. Nag Publishers, Delhi,
1995.

3. Larson, G.J. and Bhattacharya, R.S. (ed.), S¯am. khya: A Dualist Tra-
dition in Indian PhilosophY, Princeton University Press, Princeton,
1987;
Matilal, B.K., Ny¯aya-Vai´ses. ika, Otto Harrassowitz, Wiesbaden, 1977,
Potter, K.H. (ed.), Indian Metaphysics and Epistemology, Princeton
University Press, Princeton, 1977.

4. Seal, B., The Positive Sciences of the Hindus. Motilal Banarsidass,

Delhi, 1985 (1915)

5. Kak, S.C., 1998. Indian Journal of History of Science, 33, in press.
6. Shukla, K.S. and Sarma, K.V., ¯Aryabhat.¯ıya of ¯Aryabhat.a. Indian Na-

tional Science Academy, New Delhi, 1976.

7. Shukla, K.S., ¯Aryabhat.¯ıya of ¯Aryabhat.a with the Commentary of Bh¯askara
I and Some´svara. Indian National Science Academy, New Delhi, 1976.

8. Kak, S.C., The Astronomical Code of the R. gveda. Aditya, New Delhi,

1994.

9. Rocher, L., The Pur¯an. as. Otto Harrassowitz, Wiesbaden, 1986;

Wilson, H.H. (tr.), The Vishnu Purana. Trubner & Co, London, 1865
(Garland Publishing, New York, 1981);
The Matsya Puranam. The Panini Oﬃce, Prayag, 1916 (AMS, New
York, 1974);
Tripathi, R.P. (tr.), The Vayu Purana. Hindi Sahitya Sammelan, Prayag,
1987.

10. de Santillana, G. and von Dechend, H., Hamlet’s Mill: An Essay on

Myth and the Frame of Time. Gambit, Boston, 1969.

11. Kak, S.C., Vistas in Astronomy, 36, 117-140, 1993.

12. Kak, S.C., Quarterly Journal of the Royal Astronomical Society, 36,
385-396, 1995; Kak, S.C., Quarterly Journal of the Royal Astronomical
Society, 37, 709-715, 1996.

12

