8
9
9
1
 
r
p
A
 
0
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
t
s
i
h
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
1
2
0
4
0
8
9
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Early Theories on the Distance to the Sun

Subhash C. Kak
Department of Electrical & Computer Engineering
Louisiana State University
Baton Rouge, LA 70803-5901, USA
FAX: 504.388.5200; Email: kak@ee.lsu.edu

February 2, 2008

Abstract

Pa˜ncavim. ´sa Br¯ahman. a states that the heavens are 1000 earth di-
ameters, de, away from the earth. The sun was also taken to be
halfway to the heavens, so this suggests a distance of the sun, Rs,
about 500 earth diameters from the earth. The conﬁrmation for this
supposition comes from the later theories (c. 500 AD) from the same
region and from Greek ideas that speak of roughly the same distance.
We suggest that the original conception was Rs ≈ 500de from which
the later Indian and Greek theories diverged in diﬀerent ways to deal
with contradictory data related to outer planet periods.

Keywords: The solar system, distance to the sun, Vedic astronomy

1 Introduction

In astronomy the story of the gradual development of the knowledge of the
size of the solar system is a fascinating chapter. The standard view, as
presented in the well-known history of ancient mathematical astronomy by
Neugebauer,1 is that Ptolemy in second century AD, using a method devel-
oped by Hipparchus, came to the conclusion that the sun is about 600 earth
diameters distant from the earth. This is the estimate which held sway dur-
ing the whole of the Middle Ages until the time of Copernicus and Brahe.

1

Kepler argued for a distance three times this value but it was not before the
end of the seventeenth century that it was found that Ptolemy’s estimate
was wrong by a factor of about seventeen.

In this paper we sketch the early history of the knowledge of the distance
of the sun from the Indian sources, sources that Neugebauer was not familiar
with. We now know that the knowledge of the constellations and the planet
periods can be traced at least to the third millennium BC and the motions of
the sun and the moon to the second millennium BC.2,3 Such knowledge must
have been placed in the context of a theory about the size of the universe.
This suggests that theories on the relative dimensions of the solar system
must be very ancient. How did the understanding of the relative distances
of the sun and the moon emerge? And how did it evolve?

The earliest Indian evidence comes from the Rigveda where there was
recognition that the universe was inﬁnite in extent (e.g. RV 1.52.13). Num-
bers as large as 1012 are described in other Vedic texts. Rigveda 1.35.7-9
suggests that the sun is at the centre of the universe as the rays of the sun
are supposed to range from the earth to the heavens. More practical evidence
is to be found in texts called the Br¯ahman. as that came to be written as the
earliest commentaries on the Vedic texts. For example, ´Satapatha Br¯ahman. a
(´SB) 6.1.10 to 6.2.4 gives us a brief account of the creation of the universe
where several elements related to the physical and the psychological worlds
are intertwined. Within this account the description of the physical world
is quite clear. It begins with the image of a cosmic egg, whose shell is the
earth (6.1.11). From another cosmic egg arises the sun and the shell of this
second egg is the sky (6.2.3). The point of this story is to suggest that the
universe was perceived at this point in the shape of an egg with the earth as
the centre and the sun going around it below the heavens.

The stars were seen to lie at varying distances with the polestar as the

furthest.

Atharvaveda 10.7 presents an image of the frame of the universe as a
cosmic pillar (skambha). In this the earth is taken to correspond to the base
(10.7.32), the space to the middle parts, and the heavens to the head. The
sun, in particular, is compared to the eye (10.7.33). But there is no evidence
that this analogy is to be taken in a literal fashion. One can be certain that
in the Vedic period, the sun was taken to be less distant than the heavens.

It was also a common supposition in the ancient world to take the motions
of all the heavenly bodies to be uniform. For example, such a system of

2

circular motions is considered in Ved¯a ˙nga Jyotis. a of 1350 BC.4

The relative distance of a body from the earth was, therefore, determined

by its period. This set up the following arrangement for the luminaries:

Moon, Mercury, Venus, Sun, Mars, Jupiter, Saturn
Since the sun was halfway in this arrangement, it is reasonable to assume
that the distance to the sun was taken to be half of the distance to the
heavens. The notion of the halfway distance must date from a period when
the actual periods were not precisely known or when all the implications
of the period values for the size of the universe were not understood. It is
not clear that a purely geocentric model was visualized. It appears that the
planets were taken to go around the sun which, in turn, went around the
earth. One evidence is the order of the planets in the days of the week where
one sees an interleaving of the planets based on the distance from the sun
and the earth, respectively; this suggests that two points of focus, the earth
and the sun, were used in the scheme. Further evidence comes from the fact
that the planet periods are given with respect to the sun in later texts such
as the one by ¯Aryabhat.a. It appears that the purely geocentric model may
have been a later innovation.

2 The Pa˜ncavim. ´sa Br¯ahman. a (PB)
The Pa˜ncavim. ´sa Br¯ahman. a (PB) (The Br¯ahman. a of Twenty-ﬁve Chapters)
25.10 has an account of a journey to the source of the river Sarasvat¯ı from
the point it gets lost in the desert. The drying up of Sarasvat¯ı is believed
to have taken place in around 1900 BC so the text is deﬁnitely later than
that epoch. Internal astronomical evidence of the Br¯ahman. as indicates that
these texts date from diﬀerent times in the second millennium BC. Further
evidence for this dating comes from the fact that the Br¯ahman. as describe
rites where the interval from the winter solstice to the summer solstice is
exactly 180 days.5 This makes it impossible for the rites described in these
texts to be later than the second millennium B.C.

PB is essentially a book that deals with various rites of diﬀerent durations
and so the astronomy given in it is very incidental. The rites themselves
appear to have an astronomical intent as given by their durations: 1 through
40 days (excepting 12), 49, 61, 100, and 1000 days; 1, 3, 12, 36, 100, and
1000 years. The rites provide a plan for marking diﬀerent portions of the

3

year and also suggest longer periods of unknown meaning.

In PB 16.8.6 we have a statement about the distance of the sun from the

earth:

y¯avad vai sahasram. g¯ava uttar¯adhar¯a ity ¯ahus t¯avad asm¯at lok¯at
svargo lokah.
The world of heaven is as far removed from this world, they say,
as a thousand earths stacked one above the other.

It should be pointed out that Caland6 translates this as “...as a thousand
cows standing the one above the other.” Presumably, this is because the
Sanskrit word gauh. has several meanings including the primary meanings of
“earth” and “cow” but considering the context the translation by Caland is
deﬁnitely wrong. Looking at the earliest Indian book on etymology, Y¯aska’s
Nirukta which is prior to 500 BC,7 the meaning of gauh. , of which g¯avah. is
plural, is given as: “[It] is a synonym of ‘earth’ because it is extended very
far, or because people go over it... It is also a synonym of an animal (cow)
from the same root.” (Nirukta 2.5)

Now the question arises where was the sun conceived to be in relation to
the heavens. ´Satapatha, whose astronomy has been described elsewhere,8,9
calls the sun the lotus of the heavens in ´SB 4.1.5.17.

Let Rs represent the distance between the earth and the sun, Rm be the
distance between the earth and the moon, ds be the diameter of the sun, dm
be the diameter of the moon, and de be the diameter of the earth.

According to PB, Rs < 1000 de, and we take that

Elsewhere,10 we have discussed the evidence that the ancients were aware

of the relationship:

and

This could have been easily determined by taking a pole and removing it
to a distance 108 times its height to conﬁrm that its angular size was equal

Rs ≈ 500de

Rs ≈ 108ds

Rm ≈ 108dm

4

to that of the sun or the moon. This also implies that the heavens were taken
to be 216 solar diameters from the earth.

Considering a uniform speed of the sun and the moon and noting that
the sun completes a circuit in 365.24 days and the moon 12 circuits in 354.37
days, we ﬁnd that

or

Also we have a relationship on relative sizes because

Rm ≈ 354.37 × 500
365.24 × 12

de

Rm ≈ 40de

Rs ≈ 108ds ≈ 500de

This means that ds ≈ 4.63 × de.
A theory on the actual diameters of the sun, the moon, and the earth
indicates a knowledge of eclipses. The much older Rigveda (5.40) speaks of a
prediction of the duration of a solar eclipse, so relative ﬁxing of the diameters
of the earth, the moon, and the sun should not come as a surprise.

Also note that the long periods of Jupiter and Saturn require that the
sun be much closer to the earth than the midpoint to the heavens, or push
the distance of the heavens beyond the 1000de of PB and perhaps also make
the distance of the sun somewhat less than 500de. We do see these diﬀerent
modiﬁcations in the models from later periods.

PB 25.10.16 also states the duration from the earth to heaven is as long
as a journey of 44 days and this is equated, symbolically, to the travel,
on horseback, between the point where Sarasvat¯ı is lost in the desert and
its source in the mountains. But we are not certain of the astronomical
signiﬁcance of this duration of 44 days.

There is an interesting altar design in the ´Satapatha Br¯ahman. a (8.5)
which represents the orbit of the sun around the earth (Figure 1). Note that
the number of bricks in the four quarters of the year are not identical. This
suggests a recognition of the fact that the orbit of the sun was asymmetric.

5

W

E

Figure 1: The earth’s asymmetric orbit shown in an ancient 2nd millennium
altar

N

S

6

3 Planet Sizes in ¯Aryabhat.a’s Astronomy

By way of comparison, we provide the values for various sizes and distances
in a later text from India, namely ¯Aryabhat.¯ıya (AA) of ¯Aryabhat.a11 that
dates to c. 500 AD. ¯Aryabhat.a explains the motion of the stars as a result
of the rotation of the earth and the motions of the planets are explained in
terms of epicycles that, in contrast to the Greek theory, expand and contract
rhythmically. Furthermore, he gives the planetary periods relative to the sun
which appears to be based on an “underlying theory in which the earth (and
the planets) orbits the sun”.12

The basic measure in this text is to take 8,000 nr. to be equal to a yojana,
where a nr. is the height of a man; this makes a yojana approximately 7.5
miles.13 AA 1.7 gives the following measures for the diameters (all in yojanas):

Furthermore, AA 1.6 gives the distance of the sun, Rs, to be 459,585

yojanas, and that of the moon, Rm, as 34,377 yojanas.

It follows then that in AA,

Earth (de)
Sun (ds)
Moon (dm)
Mars
Mercury
Jupiter
Venus
Saturn

1,050.00
4,410.00
315.00
12.60
21.00
31.50
63.00
15.75

and

Also,

and

Rs = 437.7de

Rm = 32.74de

Rs ≈ 104.21ds

7

Rm ≈ 109.13dm

Comparing the earlier ﬁgures of the PB era it is clear that the Rm had
to be reduced to account for the extra time spent in the epicyclic motions of
AA.

4 Concluding Remarks

We ﬁrst note that the idea that the sun is roughly 500 or so earth diameters
away from us is much more ancient that Ptolemy. So Neugebauer was wrong
on two counts: ﬁrst, he did not know of any Indian connections although
he admitted13 that the “study of Hindu astronomy is still at its beginning”;
second, he did not recognize that the tradition regarding the distance of
the sun might be much older in Greece itself. This greater antiquity is in
accordance with the ideas of van der Waerden,14 who ascribes a primitive
epicycle theory to the Pythagoreans. But it is more likely that the epicycle
theory is itself much older than the Pythagoreans and it is from this earlier
source that the later Greek and Indian modiﬁcations to this theory emerged
which explains why the Greek and the Indian models diﬀer in crucial details.15
Did the idea that Rs ≈ 500de originate at about the time of PB, that is
from the second millennium BC, or is it older? Since this notion is in conﬂict
with the data on the periods of the outer planets, it should predate that
knowledge. If it is accepted that the planet periods were known by the end
of the third millennium BC, then this knowledge must be assigned an even
earlier epoch. Its appearance in PB, a book dealing primarily with ritual,
must be explained as a remembrance of an old idea. We do know that PB
repeats, almost verbatim, the Rigvedic account of a total solar eclipse.

Once the conﬂict between the planet period information and the suppo-
sition that the heavens were 1000 earth diameters away became clear, this
supposition was dropped. Presumably, the theory that Rs ≈ 500de was too
entrenched by this time and it became the basis from which diﬀerent Greek
and later Indian models emerged. As mentioned before, Ptolemy considers an
Rs equal to 600de, whereas ¯Aryabhat.a assumes it to be about 438de. Thus
the Greek and the later Indian modiﬁcations to the basic idea proceeded
somewhat diﬀerently.

8

The ideas regarding the distance of the sun hardly changed until the
modern times. The contradictions in the assumption that the luminaries
move with uniform mean speed and the requirements imposed by the assumed
size of the solar system led to a gradual enlargement of the models of the
universe from about twice that of the distance of the sun in PB to one
4.32 × 106 times the distance of the sun by the time of ¯Aryabhat.a. This
inﬂationary model of the universe in AA makes a distinction between the
distance of the sky (edge of the universe) and that of the stars which is taken
to be a much smaller sixty times the distance of the sun. “Beyond the visible
universe illuminated by the sun and limited by the sky is the inﬁnite invisible
universe” this is stated in a commentary on AA by Bh¯askara I writing in 629
AD.16 The Pur¯an. ic literature from India, part of which is contemporaneous
with ¯Aryabhat.a, reconciles the ﬁnite estimates of the visible universe with
the old Rigvedic notion of an inﬁnite universe by postulating the existence
of an inﬁnite number of universes.

It is possible that the original notion that the heavens are 1000de away
from the earth arose as a metaphor for the large extent of the universe, given
that a thousand represents a very great size in Indo-European languages.
But it is more likely that some measurements and a theory were at the basis
of this supposition.

Notes

1. Neugebauer, O., A History of Ancient Mathematical Astronomy. Springer-

Verlag, Berlin, 1975.

2. Kak, S.C., ”The astronomical of the age of geometric altars”, Quarterly

Journal of the Royal Astronomical Society, 36, 385-396, 1995.

3. Kak, S.C., ”Knowledge of the planets in the third millennium BC”,
Quarterly Journal of the Royal Astronomical Society, 37, 709-715, 1996.

4. Sastry, T.S.K., Ved¯a ˙nga Jyotis. a of Lagadha. Indian National Science
Academy, New Delhi, 1985; that the orbits are considered circular is
implied by the modular arithmetic that is used to predict the positions
(see Note 2).

9

5. Kak, S.C., “The sun’s orbit in the Br¯ahman. as,” Indian Journal of

History of Science, in press;

see also Sengupta, P.C., Ancient Indian Chronology. University of Cal-
cutta, Calcutta, 1947.

6. Caland, W., Pa˜ncavim. ´sa Br¯ahman. a. The Asiatic Society, Calcutta,

7. Sarup, L., The Nighan. t.u and the Nirukta. Motilal Banarsidass, Delhi,

1982, page 440.

1984.

8. Kak, S.C., ”Astronomy of the Vedic Altars”, Vistas in Astronomy, 36,

117-140, 1993.
Kak, S.C., “The astronomy of the ´Satapatha Br¯ahman. a,” Indian Jour-
nal of History of Science, 28, 15-34, 1993.

9. Kak, S.C., The Astronomical Code of the R. gveda. Aditya, New Delhi,

1994.

10. See above.

11. Shukla, K.S., ¯Aryabhat.¯ıya of ¯Aryabhat.a. Indian National Science Academy,

New Delhi, 1976.

12. Thurston, H., Early Astronomy. Springer-Verlag, New York, 1994,

13. Neugebauer, 1975, page 7.

page 188.

1974.

(1860), pages 389-390.

16. Shukla, 1976, page 14.

14. van der Waerden, B.L., J. for the History of Astronomy, 5, 175-185,

15. Burgess, E., The S¯urya Siddh¯anta. Motilal Banarsidass, Delhi, 1989

10

