Dogmatism and Theoretical Pluralism in Modern
Cosmology

Marcelo B. Ribeiro†1 and Antonio A. P. Videira† §

† Observat´orio Nacional–CNPq, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil
§ Department of Philosophy, State University of Rio de Janeiro, Rua
S˜ao Francisco Xavier 524, Rio de Janeiro, RJ 20550-013, Brazil;

e-mail: guto@on.br

SUMMARY

This work discusses the presence of a dogmatic tendency within modern cosmology,

and some ideas capable of neutralizing its negative inﬂuence. It is veriﬁed that warnings

about the dangers of dogmatic thinking in cosmology can be found as early as the

1930’s, and we discuss the modern appearance of “scientiﬁc dogmatism”. The solution

proposed to counteract such an inﬂuence, which is capable of neutralizing this dogmatic

tendency, has its origins in the philosophical thinking of the Austrian physicist Ludwig

Boltzmann (1844-1906).

In particular we use his two main epistemological theses,

scientiﬁc theories as representations of nature and theoretical pluralism, to show that

once they are embodied in the research practice of modern cosmology, there is no longer

any reason for dogmatic behaviours.

8
9
9
1
 
n
u
J
 
8
 
 
]
h
p
-
t
s
i
h
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
1
1
0
6
0
8
9
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

1 Present address: Department of Mathematical Physics, Institute of Physics, Federal University of

Rio de Janeiro, C.P. 68528, Ilha do Fund˜ao, Rio de Janeiro, RJ 21945-970, Brazil; e-mail: mbr@if.ufrj.br

1

“In cosmological studies, then, a knowledge of the history and

philosophy of science is not a superﬂuity, it is a necessity.”

H. Dingle [1]

1 INTRODUCTION

In a recently published article, Matravers, Ellis and Stoeger [2] stressed that the develop-

ment of cosmology as a scientiﬁc discipline requires that cosmological models other than the

standard Friedmann-Lemaˆıtre-Robertson-Walker (FLRW) models be considered as eﬀective

alternatives to the standard cosmological scenario. They stated the thesis that the intrin-

sic power of those alternative models lies in the fact that, by approaching the cosmological

problem from a more descriptive and observationally oriented perspective, as opposed to the

standard view which starts from broad explanatory premises, one could observationally jus-

tify the latter. In this way those phenomenologically oriented cosmologies allow the possible

empirical conﬁrmation, or denial, of the basis of the FLRW models.

Matravers et al. are aware of the fact that, so far, those complementary approaches,

including the one they speciﬁcally propose in the article, still lack the comprehensive ex-

planatory power achieved by the standard model, and, therefore, considerable work still

needs to be done in order to ﬁll the gap between these two views, or even to implement some

of the steps outlined by the alternative approach to cosmology. Hence, they do not regard

the standard model as outdated. On the contrary, they wish to keep it in a healthy contact

with observational issues and to develop a more self-critical and less doctrinaire cosmology

where the two complementary approaches to cosmology can interact in a mutually beneﬁcial

way [2, p. 31].

However, it is from within the community favorable only to the standard FLRW model

that Matravers et al. indicate the existence of a strong resistance in recognizing and allowing

that the theoretical work is vulnerable to observational falsiﬁcation, pointing out that such a

resistance is especially prevalent among the researchers favorable to the inﬂationary scenario

[2, p. 35]. Their paper can, therefore, be seen as an attempt to counteract what can only be

described as a latent dogmatic tendency coming from within the cosmological community.

For this reason, they also stress the need for a more self-critical attitude from researchers of

the ﬁeld in general. In their words:

In fact, a rather serious and disturbing situation has developed within modern cosmology, in

which some workers promote certain cosmological theories as correct and well-established

without seeming to regard the adequacy of their observational or experimental justiﬁcation

as of any importance. At the same time they tend to dismiss more observationally-based

approaches – for example the kind of larger justiﬁcatory investigation we have just pro-

posed – as being unnecessary or even ‘unscientiﬁc’, simply because such approaches do

2

not unquestioningly incorporate the standard view. This attitude is itself dangerously close

to being unscientiﬁc, for it elevates theory above observation and relies on simpliﬁed geo-

metrical models (certainly of considerable explanatory power) without subjecting them to

adequate observational testing – or even denying that they should be tested [2, p. 31].

We agree with Matravers et al. that a rather dogmatic and dangerously unscientiﬁc

attitude has developed in modern cosmology [2, p. 35]. Other authors like Tolman [3], Mac-

Callum [4], Wesson [5], Rothman and Ellis [6], Krasi´nski [7] and, especially, de Vaucouleurs

[8], have also expressed similar views. They all warned of the danger of strongly believing

in ideas not conﬁrmed by observations, pointing out that without this conﬁrmation we lose

the only way we can distinguish science from metaphysics. For instance, de Vaucouleurs was

very clear about this point:

Unfortunately, a study of the history of modern cosmology (. . . ) reveals disturbing par-

allelisms between modern cosmology and medieval scholasticism. (. . . ) Above all I am

concerned by an apparent loss of contact with empirical evidence and observational facts,

and, worse, by a deliberate refusal on the part of some theorists to accept such results

when they appear to be in conﬂict with some of the present oversimpliﬁed and therefore

intellectually appealing theories of the universe. (. . . ) [That concern] is due to a more

basic distrust of doctrines that frequently seem to be more concerned with the ﬁctitious

properties of ideal (and therefore nonexistent) universes than with the actual world revealed

by observations [8].

The few quotations and references above do not indicate a widespread presence of dog-

matism among cosmologists, but simply its presence among at least some of them. However,

the fact that at diﬀerent times, diﬀerent people possessing diﬀerent theoretical and obser-

vational perspectives and motivations, not only acknowledged the presence of dogmatism in

cosmological research, but were also worried about its inﬂuence, is enough to show that such

an inﬂuence is not negligible and should be investigated. Therefore, it is reasonable to say

that dogmatic tendencies have been felt in the ﬁeld since at least the 1930’s.

Nevertheless, it is clear that those dogmatic tendencies within modern cosmology have

little to do with the FLRW model itself, whose achievements so far can only be described

as impressive. They result from the attitude of not accepting that some key features derived

from those models can be checked, let alone questioned, by observations. When a feature of a

model is ascertained through imposition rather than by experimental or observational check

it is unscientiﬁc because it is only based on personal choices. In other words, a certainty

achieved that way becomes a dogma.

Here we shall discuss the issue of dogmatism in modern cosmology. We accept the quo-

tations and references above as suﬃciently enough evidence of its presence in modern cos-

mology, and we will propose a way capable of neutralizing its inﬂuence. In our opinion, that

3

can be achieved if researchers in the ﬁeld embody the epistemological principles advanced

by Ludwig Boltzmann (1844-1906) from the end of the 19th century until his death.

2 DOGMATISM IN MODERN PHYSICS

It is generally accepted that scientiﬁc truth is achieved when theory is directly confronted

with observations (or experiments). Since the time of Galileo Galilei (1564-1642), observa-

tion and/or experimentation has been used to conﬁrm or to falsify a theory, and without

such crucial tests no theory can be considered scientiﬁc. To accept a theory without this

experimental/observational validation is to accept it as a dogma.

However, things are not so simple when such a validation is not clear cut and free from

ambiguities, which in practice is the case most of the time when doing real science. In such

situations dogmatic tendencies can thrive. Those tendencies appear in the history of physics

more frequently than one may imagine. An example particularly important to the subject

discussed in this article was the debate between Boltzmann and Wilhelm Ostwald (1853-

1932) at the end of last century concerning the atomic view of the world. At stake was the

deﬁnition of a scientiﬁc theory, what should be its aims and methods, and the deﬁnition of

scientiﬁc truth.

2.1 Boltzmann and the dogmatism in Physics at the end of the last century

By the end of the last century, Boltzmann was engaged in a passionate defense of the

atomic concept which, at the time, was facing a growing number of powerful opponents,

like Ostwald and Georg Helm (1851-1923), who considered the atomic picture of the world

outdated [9, 10, 11, 12, 13], [14, p. 42-61]. They then advocated its replacement by the view

that the physical world could only be correctly described by means of the concept of energy

conservation and its derivatives, which implied the denial of the atomic idea [13, 15].

Boltzmann feared that such a purely energetic representation would lead physics to be-

come dogmatic, a fact that would inevitably also lead to its stagnation. He then wrote many

epistemological texts about the development of physics in general, whose conclusions led him

to advance what is now considered his two main epistemological theses [14, 15]. The ﬁrst

one stated that a physical theory is nothing more than a representation of Nature, and the

second thesis stated that Nature can be represented by many diﬀerent theories, which can

even be opposed to each other. Nowadays this last thesis is known as theoretical pluralism.

Among the physicists of the last one hundred and ﬁfty years, Boltzmann was one of

the few, if not the only one from within the scientiﬁc community and, therefore, from the

perspective of an active and eminent physicist, to discuss dogmatism in an epistemological

context. His epistemological thinking covers issues like what a scientiﬁc theory is and how it

develops. For those reasons, we believe that his ideas give us the appropriate epistemological

4

framework which allows us to identify and counteract what can inhibits the development of

scientiﬁc theories, namely dogmatism.

Nevertheless, one may ask the question: how is it possible that dogmatic tendencies can

thrive even when the scientiﬁc community openly accepts that the ultimate test of a theory

is experimentation? We shall discuss this point next.

2.2 What is “scientiﬁc” dogmatism?

It is generally accepted nowadays that in science nothing is in principle unquestionable, but,

inasmuch as the validation of new theories and models usually takes time, a certain degree of

conservatism towards new theories and models, and skepticism towards new observations, is,

nevertheless, necessary since it is not possible to build a sound conceptual and experimental

scientiﬁc body when there is a continual change in the fundamental scientiﬁc concepts. Such

skepticism is also evidence of the existence of critique in science, which is one of the most

important ingredients of modern scientiﬁc reasoning and practice. Therefore, orthodoxy

plays the healthy role of preserving the scientiﬁc knowledge obtained on solid bases until

new theories prove to have suﬃcient internal consistency and experimental validation.

However, when strong conservatism and orthodoxy becomes deep rooted in the scientiﬁc

community, a situation may arise that, if not eﬀectively and successfully challenged, may

lead the community to avoid altogether any kind of change of the established ideas. Such

a rejection to change may easily turn to aggression towards the proposers of new ideas. In

such an environment the established theories crystallize, becoming dogmatic, and scientiﬁc

debate ceases to exist.

Such strong conservatism and orthodoxy very frequently come about when researchers

mistakenly take their theories to be the researched objects themselves, believing that the

former coincide with the latter. By doing this, they identify theory with object, and in this

identiﬁcation it is implicitly or explicitly assumed that the role of a scientiﬁc theory is to

bring to our knowledge Nature itself. Therefore, for those researchers scientiﬁc truth means

exactly such identiﬁcation.

This behaviour can be detected when scientists become unreasonably over-conﬁdent that

their theories are true, in the sense that, in their opinion, Nature does follow them. Besides,

those who are prone to this kind of behaviour frequently do not accept any challenge to their

way of thinking. That makes matters even worse, since they may reinforce the conservatism

present at some particular moment by helping to turn a healthy skepticism towards new

observations that challenge established ideas into an out of hand rejection of them.

When a situation like that takes place, it creates an environment where, in the view

of those described above, the theory considered as the best “realization” of the researched

object assumes the role of the supreme and only truth, never to be questioned.

In these

days, however, science has become very dynamic and the theory elected to be the true

5

representation of Nature in some particular area, and at some particular time, can be quickly

toppled from its position due to the unexpected arrival and imposing character of new data

or new discoveries. Then, if the dogmatic attitude remains, what happens next is the urgent

search and eventual replacement of the toppled theory by a new “supreme theoretical truth”

which then becomes the dogma of the day.

The conservatism in the process described above can throw the scientiﬁc community

into deep confusion because, if the community is large enough, opinions may be diﬀerent

among the diﬀerent research groups in the search for the new dogma. Then one may expect

a disagreement about the choice of “the best” theory, with the diﬀerent groups choosing

diﬀerent theories. So, we end up having a conﬂict of dogma within the community rather

than a scientiﬁc debate, which in practice becomes marginalized or may even cease to exist.

One may therefore deﬁne scientiﬁc dogmatism as being the unreasonably and unjustiﬁed

over-conﬁdence in certain theory, over-conﬁdence which stems from the misleading, and often

unconscious, identiﬁcation of the researched object with its correspondent theory. Such

identiﬁcation implicitly or explicitly assumes that the role of a scientiﬁc theory is to reveal

Nature itself to us. Such dogmatism causes over-conﬁdent researchers to deliberately refuse

as scientiﬁcally valid any theoretical pictures diﬀerent from theirs since, in their view, those

diﬀerent theoretical pictures would “contradict Nature itself”. As we shall see, Boltzmann’s

epistemological theses are particularly useful in clarifying this question. While they preserve

the freedom of personal choice in the creative theoretical work, they also deny the notion

that we can ever achieve an ultimate knowledge of any scientiﬁc question, that is, they deny

that we can reach Nature itself, since in Boltzmann’s view any theory is nothing more than

a representation (image) of Nature [16, 17].

3 SCIENTIFIC THEORIES AS REPRESENTATIONS OF NATURE

As stated above, at the end of the last century Boltzmann was engaged in a passionate

defense of his viewpoints, where he sought to show that all scientiﬁc theories are nothing

more than representations of the natural phenomena. By being a representation, a scientiﬁc

theory cannot aim to know Nature itself, knowledge which would explain why the natural

phenomena show themselves to us the way we observe them, since such ultimate knowledge is,

and will ever be, unknowable. As a consequence, a scientiﬁc theory will never be complete

or deﬁnitively true. This viewpoint actually redeﬁnes the concept of scientiﬁc truth by

advancing the notion that it is impossible to identify theory with the researched objects
since scientiﬁc theories are nothing more than images of Nature (see §3.2 below). In other
words, a scientiﬁc theory can, one day, be replaced by another. It is the possibility of the

replacement of one theory by another that deﬁnes and constitutes the scientiﬁc progress,

and that is diametrically opposed to dogmatism [11, 12].

Boltzmann’s ideas about scientiﬁc models as representations are clearly stated in the

6

passage below, quoted from the entry model of the 1902 edition of the Encyclopedia Bri-
tannica:

Models in the mathematical, physical and mechanical sciences are of the greatest impor-

tance. Long ago philosophy perceived the essence of our process of thought to lie in the

fact that we attach to the various real objects around us particular physical attributes – our

concepts – and by means of these try to represent the objects to our minds. Such views

were formerly regarded by mathematicians and physicists as nothing more than unfertile

speculations, but in more recent times they have been brought by J. C. Maxwell, H. v.

Helmholtz, E. Mach, H. Hertz and many others into intimate relation with the whole body

of mathematical and physical theory. On this view our thoughts stand to things in the

same relation as models to the objects they represent. The essence of the process is the

attachment of one concept having a deﬁnite content to each thing, but without implying

complete similarity between thing and thought; for naturally we can know but little of the

resemblance of our thoughts to the things to which we attach them. What resemblance

there is lies principally in the nature of the connexion, the correlation being analogous to

that which obtains between thought and language, language and writing. (. . . ) Here, of

course, the symbolization of the thing is the important point, though, where feasible, the

utmost possible correspondence is sought between the two (. . . ) we are simply extending

and continuing the principle by means of which we comprehend objects in thought and

represent them in language or writing [18, p. 213].

It should be noted that the idea that scientiﬁc theories are representations is still being

echoed today, and an example of a recent discussion can be found in [19].

3.1 Theoretical Pluralism

The most important epistemological conclusion which was reached by Boltzmann from his

debate against Ostwald’s energeticism, and which constitutes the core of his philosophical

thinking, is usually called theoretical pluralism. This is a consequence of the thesis that

all scientiﬁc theories are representations of Nature. By being a representation, a scientiﬁc

theory is, therefore, initially a free creation of the scientist who can formulate it from a purely

personal perspective, where metaphysical presuppositions, theoretical options, preferences

for a certain type of mathematical language, and even the dismissal of some observational

data, can enter into its formulation. All that in the period where the theory is formulated.

However, in order to make this theory eligible to become part of science, it is necessary for
it to be confronted by the experience [20, §16, p. 286], [21, p. 107]. If it is not approved in
this crucial test, the theory must be reformulated, or even put aside [20, p. 286], [21, p. 225-

226]. Boltzmann also emphasized that, since all scientiﬁc theories are, to some extent, free

creations of scientists, scientiﬁc work is impossible without the use of theoretical concepts,

which originates from the fact that it is impossible the formulation of any scientiﬁc theory

7

simply from the mere observation of natural phenomena.

The theoretical pluralism also states that the same natural phenomenon can be explained

through diﬀerent theories. Still according to Boltzmann, this possibility has its origins in

the fact that, as seen above, any theory is a representation, a construction, an image of the

natural world. And nothing more. One cannot do science in any other way. Either it is a

construction, a representation, or the theory is not scientiﬁc [14, p. 173-176], [22, p. 216],

[23, p. 91]. In Boltzmann’s words,

(. . . ) Hertz makes physicists properly aware of something philosophers had no doubt long

since stated, namely that no theory can be objective, actually coinciding with nature, but

rather that each theory is only a mental picture of phenomena, related to them as sign is

to designatum.

From this it follows that it cannot be our task to ﬁnd an absolutely correct theory but

rather a picture that is, as simple as possible and that represents phenomena as accurately

as possible. One might even conceive of two quite diﬀerent theories both equally simple

and equally congruent with phenomena, which therefore in spite of their diﬀerence are

equally correct. The assertion that a given theory is the only correct one can only express

our subjective conviction that there could not be another equally simple and ﬁtting image

[23, p. 90].

In summary, theoretical pluralism synthesizes the fact that, since knowledge of Na-

ture itself is impossible, a theory can only be better than another, not truer in the non-
Boltzmannian sense (see §3.2 below). It is the necessary mechanism which prevents science
from running the risk of stagnation. Within this perspective, truth can only be provisional,

and is in fact an approximation achieved by diﬀerent means, that is, by diﬀerent theoretical
images [20, p. 273, §3], [21, p. 115-116].

When Boltzmann advanced theoretical pluralism, he also had another goal: to establish

a clear and unreachable limit for dogmatism, that is, a limit which it could not surpass.

Boltzmann believed that once theoretical pluralism were accepted and embodied in research

practice, it would not allow that, once proposed, a theory could be excluded from the scien-

tiﬁc scenario.

Boltzmann also pointed out that the thesis that a scientiﬁc theory is a representation was

not new. Kant, in the 18th century, and Maxwell, one of the most important inﬂuences upon

him in the middle of the last century, had both defended similar theses. Other contemporary

physicists, like Hertz and Helmholtz, shared similar views [22, p. 206], [23, p. 83]. By

remembering that others like Kant and Maxwell had already expressed similar propositions,

Boltzmann wished to make sure that any theory or model would be continuously perfected,

without being excluded by any other “tribunal” than the experience [14, chap. 4]. But,

before we go into the relationship between Boltzmann’s theoretical pluralism and modern

cosmology, we need to discuss in more detail Boltzmann’s notion of scientiﬁc truth.

8

3.2 Boltzmann’s Concept of Truth

One of the main features of modern science is that since the beginning of the modern scien-

tiﬁc revolution with Galileo, scientists began to deﬁne truth as the correspondence between

models and observations. Nevertheless, since Boltzmann’s theses state that all scientiﬁc

theories are representations of natural phenomena, that is, they are not capable of deter-

mining what really constitutes Nature, the concept of truth in modern science should no

longer be one which seeks to determine Nature itself. Therefore, within the context of Boltz-

mann’s epistemological thinking, this concept of correspondence as scientiﬁc truth becomes

outdated as Boltzmann’s views are based upon the principle of theoretical pluralism. As a

consequence, since more than one model, or theory, may well represent the same group of

natural phenomena and/or experimental data, how it is possible that scientists can choose

one model among the possible ones?

At this moment Boltzmann advances another deﬁnition of scientiﬁc truth: the adequacy.

According to him, theory A is more adequate than theory B if the former is capable of

explaining more rationally, more intelligibly, a certain set of natural phenomena, than the

latter. In his own words,

(. . . ) let me choose as goal of the present talk not just kinetic molecular theory but a largely

specialized branch of it. Far from wishing to deny that this contains hypothetical elements,

I must declare that branch to be a picture that boldly transcends pure facts of observation,

and yet I regard it as not unworthy of discussion at this point; a measure of my conﬁdence

in the utility of the hypotheses as soon as they throw new light on certain peculiar features

of the observed facts, representing their interrelation with a clarity unattainable by other

means. Of course we shall always have to remember that we are dealing with hypotheses

capable and needful of constant further development and to be abandoned only when all

the relations they represent can be understood even more clearly in some other way [24, p.

163].

(. . . ) We must not aspire to derive nature from our concepts, but must adapt the latter to

the former. We must not think that everything can be arranged according to our categories

or that there is such a thing as a most perfect arrangement: it will only ever be a variable

one, merely adapted to current needs [24, p. 166].

He also noted that since theories are images of Nature, all have some explanatory power,

and that a good theory is achieved by being carefully crafted by scientists, in a process

similar to Darwin’s Natural Selection:

Mach himself has ingeniously discussed the fact that no theory is absolutely true, and equally

hardly any absolutely false either, but each must gradually be perfected, as organisms must

according to Darwin’s theory. By being strongly attacked, a theory can gradually shed

inappropriate elements while the appropriate residue remains [25, p. 153].

9

Once more, one should note that these ideas are still being echoed today (for instance,

see [19, p. 214]).

3.3 The Search for a Good Theory

It is important to stress that although theories are representations, and, as we saw above,

personal theoretical options can enter in their formulation, they are not entirely arbitrary.

The basic aim of any theory is to represent something that is going on in Nature, and a

successful theory does achieve this to a considerable extent. Therefore, such a theory can

use some symbols, or a speciﬁc mathematical language, just as conventions. However, since

Nature itself must be represented in it, conventions will always be limited to only those

aspects of the model, of the representation, which are not perceived, in that theory, as

being directly dictated by Nature. Thus, under Boltzmann’s perspective, one cannot say

that theories are just conventions, because after being carefully crafted by the scientists as

representations of unique, non-arbitrary, natural phenomena, they become attached to them,

and end up saying something unique about what is going on in Nature.

Finally, besides being a good representation, there is still another criterion capable of

conducting the preference of scientists towards one particular model: its predictive ability.

This is important because once a certain theoretical prediction is conﬁrmed, the scientiﬁc

knowledge about Nature increases quantitatively. A correct prediction is also important

because it is formulated within the context of a speciﬁc theoretical picture. So, by being

capable of predicting unknown phenomena, a model shows all its explanatory power since

it is not only capable of announcing the already known “pieces”, but it is also able to go

even further, showing the existence of other still missing pieces which are necessary for a

deeper and more organized understanding of Nature. One cannot forget that one of the most

important aims of science is to increase and organize our knowledge about Nature, and thus,

a certain theory is richer than others if it is able to better contribute to such an increase and

organization. Such a preference for the richer theories makes them more likely to be used,

and developed, than the poorer ones, and after a while the distance between them may be

so great that it may no longer be worth for researchers to keep on working with the poorer

representations, which are then put aside and, usually, forgotten.

4 COSMOLOGICAL MODELS AS IMAGES OF THE UNIVERSE

In order to relate the previous discussion to issues in cosmology we need, ﬁrst of all, to

distinguish Nature from its representations, that is, from our theoretical images. Therefore,

we shall adopt the following diﬀerence between the terms ‘Universe’ and ‘universe’. The

ﬁrst term, with capital ‘U’, will refer to the aspects of Nature from which the diﬀerent

theoretical models are built, while the second one, with small ‘u’, will refer to the models

10

themselves. By means of this distinction, and bearing in mind Boltzmann’s theses, we can

state that the diﬀerent theoretical models of the Universe are then “universe models”, that

is, “cosmological models”, or simply “cosmologies” or “universes”. Cosmology is then the
science that attempts to create working representations of the Universe.2 As a consequence,
theoretical pluralism tells us that there may be many diﬀerent cosmologies, where each one

adopts diﬀerent images of the Universe, although its true nature is, and will always be,

unknowable.

From the perspective described in the previous sections we can see how damaging dog-

matic thinking can be, since in its most basic sense it denies the cosmological community the

option of thinking diﬀerently than the current accepted view. That inhibits the appearance

of diﬀerent theoretical representations, which, according to the thesis of theoretical plural-

ism, are fundamental for the development of modern cosmology. In other words, dogmatism
goes against theoretical pluralism. Therefore, bearing in mind what we discussed in §1, it
is not only desirable, but essential that diﬀerent theoretical pictures, i.e., theoretical repre-

sentations other than the FLRW model emerge, be considered and developed in cosmology

nowadays. The present day dominance of the standard model, due to its impressive achieve-

ments, should not be used as argument against the emergence of models which may challenge

the standard FLRW picture. And if in the end those diﬀerent representations are wrong or

produce worse models than the standard, cosmology will gain in the process, especially the

FLRW cosmologies.

One must stress that the theoretical pluralism does not necessarily imply competition

among the diﬀerent theories, but often means complementarity. This is exactly what Ma-

travers, Ellis and Stoeger [2] seek when they argue in favour of a more phenomenological

approach to cosmology. Inasmuch as, according to Boltzmann’s theses, all theories have some

explanatory power, all cosmologies end up saying something about the physical process that

are going on in the Universe, because not all cosmologies use the same set of ideas and phe-

nomena which they seek to explain. Therefore, the emergence of diﬀerent cosmologies, far

from being a problem for our better understanding of the Universe, is essential for it. And if

those diﬀerent cosmologies have elements which contradict each other, observations provide

the ﬁrst mechanism, but not the only one, which allows us to discard the inappropriate

elements of the emergent cosmologies.

The diﬀerent cosmologies should either be in competition among themselves or comple-

ment each other, but as none can be confused with the Universe, no cosmology produces

ultimate knowledge of it. One cosmological model can only be provisionally better than an-

other. It is our observational interaction with the Universe that produces the empirical basis
2 The terms Universe, universe, cosmologies, etc, are found in the literature as usually having meanings
close to the ones given in this article. Therefore, what is being done here is only to state precisely their
meanings in this context.

11

upon which cosmologies are created, and inasmuch as this interaction is basically technologi-

cal, this empirical basis will be changed by technological and theoretical progress which itself

creates the conditions for the partial or complete transformation of the cosmological models.

By the same token, the diversity of technological means produces diﬀerent interactions and,

therefore, diﬀerent empirical basis that lead to possible diﬀerent cosmologies.

5 CONCLUSION

From what we have seen in the previous sections, we can conclude that dogmatism works

against scientiﬁc progress and, to avoid it, a change of attitude should be adopted by cos-

mologists. This change is realized by the adoption of the theoretical pluralism as a better

epistemological framework for research in cosmology. By means of this thesis it is possible

to avoid the deep rooted and unjustiﬁed belief in ideas which are nothing more than just

personal beliefs. As seen above, those ideas are necessary, and perhaps indispensable, for the

formulation of the diﬀerent representations of Nature, as such formulation is also a result of

the free creation of the scientists. However, those personal beliefs will always be restricted

to the theoretical models and, at best, they can only generate better, or worse, representa-

tions of Nature. Moreover, they should never be confused with the “true” Universe since its

ultimate reality is unknowable.

Inasmuch as no cosmological model can ever be capable of holding ultimate knowledge

about the Universe, then it follows that no cosmology can hold eternal truths. Then, the

larger the number of cosmologies available to cosmologists, the higher the chances of we

obtaining better representations of the Universe.

Scientiﬁc knowledge is best characterized by the continuous search for better, but never

deﬁnitive, representations of natural phenomena. The replacement of a theory by another,

the main feature of modern science, can only happen if it is assured that no scientiﬁc theory

can reach the stage of deﬁnitive truth. In other words, a scientiﬁc theory can only be better

than another one, and nothing more. Therefore, since any cosmological model can only aim

to be a temporary explanation of what one chooses or is able to observe and experiment in

the Universe, when it is formulated it is already doomed to disappear. The irony always

present is that no one can tell with precision when that will happen, unless one takes a

dogmatic posture.

In conclusion, we believe that it would be essential that cosmologists in general recognize

that their theories and models about the Universe are nothing more than representations.

This explicit distinction is very important as it would create the proper environment where

diﬀerent theories and models can live together without the danger of dogmatism.

12

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

We would like to express our thanks to M. A. H. MacCallum, D. R. Matravers, S.

F. Rutz, W. R. Stoeger and A. L. L. Videira for reading the preliminary manuscript and

for useful discussions, suggestions and remarks. The ﬁnancial support from CNPq is also

acknowledged.

References

[1] Dingle, H., 1953. M. N. R. astr. Soc., 113, 393; quotation at page 394.

[2] Matravers, D.R., Ellis, G.F.R. & Stoeger, W.R., 1995. Q. J. R. astr. Soc., 36, 29.

[3] Tolman, R.C., 1934. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. (Wash.), 20, 169; see page 176.

[4] MacCallum, M.A.H., 1987. In Theory and Observational Limits in Cosmology, Proc.

Vatican Obs. Conf., p. 121, ed Stoeger, W.R., Specola Vaticana, Vatican; see pages

121-127.

[5] Wesson, P.S., 1987. In Theory and Observational Limits in Cosmology, Proc. Vatican

Obs. Conf., p. 559, ed Stoeger, W.R., Specola Vaticana, Vatican; see page 561.

[6] Rothman, T. & Ellis, G.F.R., 1987. Astronomy, 15, No. 2, 6; see page 22.

[7] Krasi´nski, A., 1997. Inhomogeneous Cosmological Models, Cambridge University Press;

see part IX, Afterthoughts.

[8] de Vaucouleurs, G., 1970. Science, 167, 1203; see pages 1203-1205.

[9] Boltzmann, L., 1905. Popul¨are Schriften, J.A. Barth, Leipzig; English translations in

[10].

texts of [9].

41-53.

Co., Leipzig.

in [9], pp. 141-157.

[10] Boltzmann, L., 1974. Theoretical Physics and Philosophical Problems: Selected Writ-

ings, ed McGuinness, B., Reidel, Dordretcht; it contains the English translation of many

[11] Boltzmann, L., 1897. ¨Uber die Unentbehrlichkeit der Atomistik in der Naturwissenschaft,

[12] Boltzmann, L., 1897. On the Indispensability of Atomism in Natural Science, [10], pp.

[13] Ostwald, W., 1904. Die Ueberwindung des wissenschaftlichen Materialismus, in In Ab-

handlungen und Vortraege, Allgemeines Inhaltes (1887-1903), pp. 220-240, Veit. and

13

[14] Videira, A.A.P., 1992. Atomisme Epist´emologique et Pluralisme Th´eorique dans la

Pens´ee de Boltzmann, PhD thesis, Equipe Rehseis (CNRS), University of Paris VII.

[15] Videira, A.A.P., 1995. Atomism and Energetics at the End of the 19th Century: the

Luebeck Meeting of 1895, preprint CBPF-CS-003/95.

[16] Boltzmann, L., 1890. ¨Uber die Bedeutung von Theorien, in [9], pp. 76-80.

[17] Boltzmann, L., 1890. On the Signiﬁcance of Theories, in [10], pp. 33-36.

[18] Boltzmann, L., 1902. Model, in [10], pp. 213-220.

[19] Stoeger, W.R., 1993. Contemporary Physics and Ontological Status of the Laws of Na-

ture, in Quantum Cosmology and the Laws of Nature, pp. 209-234, eds Russel, R.J.,

Murphy, N., and Isham, C.J., Specola Vaticana.

[20] Boltzmann, L., 1899. Die Grundprinzipien und Grundgleichungen der Mechanik, zweite

Vorlesung, in [9], pp. 270-289.

[10], pp. 101-128.

neuerer Zeit, in [9], pp. 198-227.

Recent Times, in [10], pp. 77-100.

[21] Boltzmann, L., 1899. On the Fundamental Principles and Equations of Mechanics, in

[22] Boltzmann, L., 1899. Ueber die Entwicklung der Methoden der theoretischen Physik in

[23] Boltzmann, L., 1899. On the Development of the Methods of Theoretical Physics in

[24] Boltzmann, L., 1904. On Statistical Mechanics, in [10], pp. 159-172.

[25] Boltzmann, L., 1903. An Inaugural Lecture on Natural Philosophy, in [10], pp. 153-158.

14

