8
9
9
1
 
l
u
J
 
3
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
t
s
i
h
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
4
4
0
7
0
8
9
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

UCLA/98/TEP/20; hep-th/98......

E. Noether’s Discovery of the Deep Connection Between

Symmetries and Conservation Laws∗

Physics Department, UCLA, Los Angeles, CA 90024

Nina Byers

(July 16, 1998)

Abstract

Emmy Noether proved two deep theorems, and their converses, on the con-

nection between symmetries and conservation laws. Because these theorems

are not in the mainstream of her scholarly work, which was the development

of modern abstract algebra, it is of some historical interest to examine how she

came to make these discoveries. The present paper is an historical account of

the circumstances in which she discovered and proved these theorems which

physicists refer to collectively as Noether’s Theorem. The work was done

soon after Hilbert’s discovery of the variational principle which gives the ﬁeld

equations of general relativity. The failure of local energy conservation in

the general theory was a problem that concerned people at that time, among

them David Hilbert, Felix Klein, and Albert Einstein. Noether’s theorems

solved this problem. With her characteristically deep insight and thorough

analysis, in solving that problem she discovered very general theorems that

have profoundly inﬂuenced modern physics.

∗To be published in the Proceedings of a Symposium on the Heritage of Emmy Noether which

was held in Bar-Ilan University, Isreal Dec. 2-4, 1996.

1

I. INTRODUCTION

Emmy Noether’s paper “Invariante Variationsprobleme” [1], hereafter referred to as I.V.,

profoundly inﬂuenced 20th century physics. It was presented to the July 16, 1918 meeting of

the K¨onigliche Gesellschaft der Wissenschaften zu G¨ottingen by Felix Klein and published in

its Nachrichten [Proceedings]. It was presented by Felix Klein presumably because Noether

was not a member of this Royal Society. 1 One wonders if she was even present when the

paper was read. The paper proved two theorems and their converses which revealed the gen-

eral connection between symmetries and conservation laws in physics. They led to a deeper

understanding of laws such as the principles of conservation of energy, angular momentum,

etc., and also were instrumental in the great discoveries of gauge ﬁeld symmetries of the

20th century. [2]

Remarkably these theorems are something of a departure from the main line of Noether’s

mathematical research, which was the development of modern abstract algebra. An exam-

ination of the historical circumstances in which she made these discoveries sheds light on

how she came to do this work. The work followed upon David Hilbert’s discovery of the

variational principle from which he derived the ﬁeld equations of general relativity. At this

time David Hilbert, Felix Klein and others in G¨ottingen were intensely interested in the

recently completed general theory of relativity. There were unresolved issues regarding the

question of energy conservation in the theory. Published correspondence [3] between Hilbert

and Klein regarding this indicates that Noether’s help was requested by Hilbert to clarify

these issues, and that she then did the work whose results are published a few years later in

I.V.. The discussion and proofs of the two theorems in I.V. clariﬁed and resolved the issues

regarding energy conservation, as Hilbert acknowledged in his 1924 Grundlagen der Physik

article [4]. From her Collected Works [5], it would seem that after this and some additional

1The Royal Society of London, founded in 1662, elected its ﬁrst female member in 1945; the

Acad´emie des Sciences, Paris, was founded in 1666 and elected its ﬁrst female member in 1962.

2

work on diﬀerential invariants in general relativity [6], Noether returned to the main line of

her mathematical research.

Here I will present ﬁrst a chronology of events leading up to Noether’s publication of the

I.V. paper; then a discussion of some rather diﬃcult issues regarding energy conservation

in general relativity which her work resolved; and ﬁnally a description and discussion of the

two theorems in the I.V. paper.

II. CHRONOLOGY OF EVENTS LEADING TO THE DISCOVERY

In 1915, Emmy Noether was invited to join the team of mathematicians assembled in

G¨ottingen by David Hilbert. Hermann Weyl reports [7]: “To both Hilbert and Klein, Emmy

was welcome as she was able to help them with invariant-theoretic knowledge.” She was

thirty-three at that time, having received a doctorate in mathematics from the University of

Erlangen seven years earlier, and written the eleven papers listed in Appendix A. The ﬁrst in

the list is her thesis which was done under the supervision of Paul Gordan. For her thesis she

calculated all the 331 invariants of ternary bi-quadratic forms! Shortly thereafter she took

the abstract approach to algebra following Hilbert’s 1888 basis theory paper. She worked

unpaid in Erlangen supervising students and sometimes lecturing for her ailing father. After

her father died, she joined Hilbert and his team in G¨ottingen. [8]

In June-July 1915, shortly after Noether arrived, Albert Einstein gave six lectures in

G¨ottingen on the general theory of relativity. At that time the theory was not yet ﬁnished;

he had not yet found the complete ﬁeld equations. However, the basic ideas were clear and

his audience found them compelling. After giving the lectures, Einstein said [9]: “To my

great joy, I completely succeeded in convincing Hilbert and Klein.” He had been working

to generalize the special theory of relativity to include gravity since 1905.

In 1907 he

discovered the importance of the equality of gravitational and inertial mass and formulated

the equivalence principle, but it took another eight years to complete the theory. Finally

in November 1915, having found the complete ﬁeld equations, he submitted the famous

3

paper [10]

that gives the theory in its ﬁnal form. Remarkably, in the same month, Hilbert

submitted a manuscript [11]

in which the same ﬁeld equations are obtained as the solution

to a variational problem. Hilbert and Einstein had independently found the ﬁeld equations at

about the same time [9]. In November 1915, Emmy Noether wrote to Ernst Fischer: “Hilbert

plans to lecture next week about his ideas on Einstein’s diﬀerential invariants, and so ..[we]

had better be ready” [8]. It would seem, therefore, that she began to study relativity theory

then. Out of that study came two papers which Hermann Weyl characterized as giving “the

genuine and universal mathematical formulation of two of the most signiﬁcant aspects of

general relativity theory: ﬁrst, the reduction of the problem of diﬀerential invariants to a

purely algebraic one by use of normal coordinates; and second, the identities between the

left sides of Euler’s equations of a problem of variation ...” [7]. Regarding the ﬁrst paper

referred to by Weyl [6], Einstein wrote to Hilbert: “Yesterday I received from Miss Noether

a very interesting paper on invariant forms. I am impressed that one can comprehend these

matters from so general a viewpoint. It would not have done the old guard at G¨ottingen

any harm had they picked up a thing or two from her. ...” [12]. The second paper referred

to by Weyl is the I.V. paper we will discuss at length.

Hilbert had been interested in the fundamental laws of physics for many years [13]. The

paper in which he published his derivation of the ﬁeld equations for general relativity is

entitled Grundlagen der Physik [11]. It was an early eﬀort to formulate a uniﬁed ﬁeld theory

of gravity, electromagnetism, and matter. In this it was unsuccessful, and Hilbert omitted

this paper from his collected works [4]. However, when specialized to gravity, Hilbert’s

derivation of the ﬁeld equations is an original and important contribution to the general

theory. The Lagrangian he introduced is known as the Hilbert-Einstein Lagrangian, and his

formulation of the theory is in widespread use today. Pais writes:“Hilbert was not the ﬁrst

to apply the principle to gravitation. Lorentz had done so before him. So had Einstein,

a few weeks earlier. Hilbert was the ﬁrst, however, to state this principle correctly.” As

regards Hilbert’s 1915 paper, Hermann Weyl [13] wrote: “Einstein’s more sober procedure

...[has] proved the more fertile. Hilbert’s endeavors must be looked upon as a forerunner of

4

a uniﬁed ﬁeld theory of gravitation and electromagnetism. However, there was still much

too much arbitrariness involved in Hilbert’s Hamiltonian function; subsequent attempts (by

Weyl, Eddington, Einstein himself, and others) aimed to reduce it. ... But the problem of

a uniﬁed ﬁeld theory stands to this day as an unsolved problem.”

Though the general theory of relativity was completed in 1915, there remained unresolved

problems. In particular, the principle of local energy conservation was a vexing issue. In the

general theory, energy is not conserved locally as it is in classical ﬁeld theories - Newtonian

gravity, electromagnetism, hydrodynamics, etc.. Energy conservation in the general theory

has been perplexing many people for decades. In the early days, Hilbert wrote about this

problem as ‘the failure of the energy theorem ’.

In a correspondence with Klein [3], he

asserted that this ‘failure’ is a characteristic feature of the general theory, and that instead

of ‘proper energy theorems’ one had ‘improper energy theorems’ in such a theory. This

conjecture was clariﬁed, quantiﬁed and proved correct by Emmy Noether. In the note to

Klein he reports that had requested that Emmy Noether help clarify the matter. In the

next section this problem will be described in more detail and an explanation given of how

Noether clariﬁed, quantiﬁed, and proved Hilbert’s assertion. One might say it is a lemma

of her Theorem II.

Klein was working on this problem of energy conservation, or as he termed it Hilbert’s

energy vector, in 1916. He wrote in this correspondence with Hilbert that “Frl. Noether

advised me continually throughout my work, and it was really only through her that I was

led to the material presented in this letter. When I spoke recently with Frl. Noether about

my result concerning your energy vector, she told me that she had derived the same thing

from your Note2 a year ago and written it up in a manuscript ( which I examined ).” Klein

presented a paper with his results on Hilbert’s energy vector to the July 19 meeting of

the Gesellschaft. In this paper [14], he acknowledges helpful contributions from Noether.

2 Ref. [11]

5

However, in the annotation to this paper in his collected works he makes it clear that his

result is a special case of her ‘far-reaching’ theorem. He reports that he presented her paper

to the Gesellschaft the following week, and says that she also proved and generalized some of

Hilbert’s ideas. An English translation of that interesting annotation is given in Appendix

B.

In his famous 1924 Grundlagen der Physik paper3, David Hilbert credits Emmy Noether

with having solved the problem of an energy theorem in the general theory, and refers to I.V..

In the concluding section of her paper, she refers to Hilbert’s having said that ‘the failure

of the energy theorem’ is a characteristic feature of the general theory. The last section is

entitled “A HILBERTIAN ASSERTION”, and says in part [16]: “From the foregoing ...[we]

obtain the proof of an assertion of Hilbert concerning the connection between the failure

of proper energy conservation laws and general relativity, and indeed in a general group-

theoretic setting.” It seems to me this remark is a notable understatement. Her powerful

results are deep and general; far more than simply a veriﬁcation of Hilbert’s assertion.

In 1919, Noether chose I.V. for her Habilitation thesis and presented it to the University of

G¨ottingen along with the twelve previously published papers and two additional manuscripts,

one of which [17] contained a number of important ideas which had a signiﬁcant impact on

the development of modern abstract algebra. Years before she had been refused Habilitation

( the right to lecture under University auspices). Hermann Weyl records [7] “during the war

Hilbert tried to push through Emmy Noether’s Habilitation in the Philosophical Faculty in

G¨ottingen. He failed due to the resistance of the philologists and historians. It is a well-

known anecdote that Hilbert ... [declared] at the faculty meeting; ‘I do not see that the sex

of a candidate is an argument against her admission as Privatdocent. After all, we are a

university not a bathing establishment.’ ” It was only after the liberalization of Germany

3 This is included in his Collected Works [4]. It has the same title as the 1915 paper which was

omitted from the Collected Works.

6

in the post-WWI period that Habilitation was granted, and she was ﬁnally able to lecture

oﬃcially at the University. She had given lectures in the preceeding years, but the posted

notices stated that they were oﬀered by Herr Professor David Hilbert, given by Frl. E.

Noether, with no tuition required. These lectures were becoming famous and drawing the

attendance of mathematicians from all over Europe. Without Habilitation she was working

unpaid.

It is quite clear from the application papers written for Habilitation that Noether knew

the scope and importance of her results for physics. She wrote about the I.V. paper [8] “...

The general results contain, as special cases, theorems on ﬁrst integrals [conservation laws]

... in mechanics; furthermore, conservation theorems and interdependences among the ﬁeld

equations in the theory of relativity... ” She remarks that this work was “an outgrowth of

my assistance to Klein and Hilbert in their work on Einstein’s general theory of relativity.”

III. ‘PROPER’ AND ‘IMPROPER’ CONSERVATION LAWS

In contemporary terminology the general theory of relativity is a gauge theory. The

symmetry group of the theory, is a gauge group. It is the group of all continuous coordinate

transformations with continuous derivatives, often called the group of general coordinate

transformations. It is a Lie group that has a continuously inﬁnite number of independent

inﬁnitesimal generators.

In Noether’s terminology such a group is an inﬁnite continuous

group. The symmetry group of special relativity, the Poincar´e group4, is a Lie subgroup of

the group of general coordinate transformations. It has a ﬁnite number (7) of independent

inﬁnitesimal generators. Noether refers to such a group as a ﬁnite continuous group. This

distinction between a Lie group with a ﬁnite ( or countably inﬁnite ) number of independent

inﬁnitesimal generators and an inﬁnite continuous group is what distinguishes Noether’s

theorem I and theorem II in I.V.. Theorem I applies when one has a ﬁnite continuous group

4 The group of Lorentz transformations and spacetime translations.

7

of symmetries, and theorem II when there is an inﬁnite continuous group of symmetries.

Field theories with a ﬁnite continuous symmetry group have what Hilbert called ‘proper

energy theorems’. Physically in such theories one has a localized, conserved energy density;

and one can prove that in any arbitrary volume the net outﬂow of energy across the boundary

is equal to the time rate of decrease of energy within the volume. As will be shown below,

this follows from the fact that the energy-momentum tensor of the theory is divergence

free.

In general relativity, on the other hand, it has no meaning to speak of a deﬁnite

localization of energy. One may deﬁne a quantity which is divergence free analogous to the

energy-momentum density tensor of special relativity , but it is gauge dependent:

i.e., it

is not covariant under general coordinate transformations. Consequently the fact that it is

divergence free does not yield a meaningful law of local energy conservation. Thus one has,

as Hilbert saw it, in such theories ‘improper energy theorems’.

A key feature for physics of Noether’s I.V. paper is the clarity her theorems brought

to our understanding of the principle of energy conservation. As Feza Gursey wrote [18]:

“Before Noether’s Theorem the principle of conservation of energy was shrouded in mys-

tery, leading to the obscure physical systems of Mach and Ostwald. Noether’s simple and

profound mathematical formulation did much to demystify physics.” Noether showed in her

theorem I that the principle of energy conservation follows from symmetry under time trans-

lations. This applies to theories having a ﬁnite continuous symmetry group; theories that are

Galilean or Poincar`e invariant, for example. In general relativity, on the other hand, energy

conservation takes a diﬀerent form as will be shown below. Noether’s theorem II applies in

the case of general relativity and one sees that she has proved Hilbert’s assertion that in

this case one has ‘improper energy theorems’, and that this is a characteristic feature of the

theory. It is owing to the fact that the theory is a gauge theory; i.e., that it has an inﬁnite

continuous group of symmetries of which time translations are a subgroup. Indeed generally

she deﬁnes as “improper” divergence relationships, which vanish when the ﬁeld equations are

satisﬁed, which correspond to a ﬁnite continuous subgroup of an inﬁnite continuous group.

Generally they do not have the required invariance or covariance properties under the larger

8

group. For example, in general relativity a divergence free energy-momentum (pseudo) ten-

sor can be constructed but it is gauge dependent (see below). Because it is not covariant

under general coordinate transformations, it is more properly called a pseudotensor. Such

pseudotensors are covariant with respect to the linear transformations of the Poincar`e group

and may be used in asymptotic spacetime regions far from gravitating sources to derive a

principle of energy conservation. [19]

To illucidate these matters further, we discuss in some detail ﬁeld theories of matter,

gravity, electromagnetism, etc.

in both special and general relativity. In special relativity

these theories have a ‘proper energy theorem’ in the sense of Hilbert and we will show

how ‘proper energy theorems’ give a principle of local energy conservation.

In general

relativity, on the other hand, the proper energy theorem becomes improper in that the

energy-momentum tensor for which the theorem holds is gauge dependent. As will be

shown below, there is transfer of energy to and from the gravitational ﬁeld and it has no

meaning to speak of a deﬁnite localization of the energy of the gravitational ﬁeld in space.5

Consequently we do not have a principle of local energy conservation in spacetime regions

in which there exist gravitational ﬁelds.

The theories we discuss here are ﬁeld theories which may be formulated in terms of a

variational principle; i.e., their ﬁeld equations may be obtained from Hamilton’s principle.

This was Hilbert’s great contribution to the general theory of relativity. He showed the

correct ﬁeld equations can be derived from Hamilton’s principle, and Noether’s work followed

upon this. In this formulation, the theory is deﬁned by a Lagrangian

. The ﬁeld equations

L

are derived from Hamilton’s principle that the action

I =

dx

Z

L

(1)

is an extremum. The Lagrangian depends on the ﬁeld quantities and their derivatives.

Symbolically let φ represent the ﬁeld quantities and, for simplicity, assume

depends only

L

5A clear exposition regarding gravitational ﬁeld energy is given by Landau and Lifshitz [20].

9

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

on φ and its ﬁrst derivatives. Then Hamilton’s Principle gives the ﬁeld equations: viz.,

δ
L
δφ −

∂
∂xν

δ

L

δ∂φ/∂xν = 0 .

Here we discuss in some detail laws of energy conservation in special and general relativity

where Noether’s theorem I applies in the ﬁrst case and theorem II in the second. 6 When

the action is invariant with respect to transformations of the Poincar´e group, Noether’s

theorem I gives a divergence-free energy-momentum tensor T µν(x) which, symbolically in

the notation of (2), is given by 7

More generally one may write the energy-momentum tensor as 8

T µν =

∂νφ + gµν

δ
L
δ∂µφ

.

L

T µν =

δ
L
δgµν

2
−

+ gµν

.

L

∂νT µν = 0 .

Theorem I shows invariance of the action under spacetime translations implies that the

divergence of T µν is proportional to the left side of (2)9. Consequently when the ﬁeld

equations are satiﬁed, the divergence vanishes and we have 10

This implies local energy conservation. The energy density at the spacetime point x is given

by the T 00(x) and the T i0 components give the energy crossing a unit area per unit time in

6 In the next section, Noether’s theorems will be described more generally.

7 We use Minkowski notation for the components of the spacetime point x; viz., xµ with µ =

0, 1, 2, 3 with x0 = t and xi for three orthogonal space directions (i = 1, 2, 3) and gµν is the

Minkowski metric tensor whose components are 0 or

1. We also use the notation ∂µ

±

∂/∂xµ .

≡

8This form is useful later when we generalize to general relativity.

9This is called by Noether a Lagrange function.

10Repeated indices are summed. Relativists’ notation for this divergence is T µν

,ν = 0.

10

the direction of the normal i. The time-like equation (5), i.e., ∂νT 0ν = 0, follows from the

invariance of the theory under time translations. To show that ∂νT 0ν = 0 gives local energy

conservation, it is convenient to use the 3-vector ~
F

for the T 0i components; then (5) reads

∂T 00/∂t = div ~
F

.

−

Integration of (6) over any spatial volume V shows, by Gauss’s theorem, that the rate of

change of energy in V equals the net energy ﬂow across the bounding surface per unit time.

This holds for arbitrary and, therefore, arbitrarily small volumes. Thus (5) gives, in the

language of contemporary physicists, local energy conservation. This is a ‘proper energy

theorem’ in the sense of Hilbert.

In general relativity, on the other hand, the components of the metric tensor gµν are the

gravitational ﬁeld variables and generally spacetime dependent. They are included as ﬁeld

variables in the Lagrangian of the theory with the addition of the Hilbert-Einstein term R;

has in it, as before, the electromagnetic, matter, etc. ﬁeld variables. The action is

L

I =

Z

d4x√

g (

−

L

+ χ−1R)

where g is the determinant of gµν, χ is a coupling constant and R is the Riemannian curvature

scalar. Following Hilbert, one may derive the ﬁeld equations of general relativity from the

condition that (7) is an extremum with respect to variations of gµν. One obtains

(6)

(7)

(8)

Rµν

1

2Rgµν = χ T µν

−

where Rµν is the Ricci tensor constructed by contraction from the Riemann curvature ten-

sor, and R

gµνRµν is the Ricci or curvature scalar. The Riemann curvature tensor is

≡

constructed from the metric tensor gµν and its ﬁrst and second derivatives. The source term

on the right side of (8)is the energy-momentum tensor T µν given by (4). [19]

It contains

contributions from the electromagnetic ﬁelds, matter ﬁelds, etc. but not from gravitational

ﬁelds. Since gravitational ﬁelds carry energy and momentum, T 00 is not the total energy

density. As will be shown below, T µν is not divergence-free. It cannot and does not play

11

the same role as regards energy-momentum conservation as in special relativity. This surely

was immediately clear to Hilbert in 1915. What was apparently not clear to Hilbert and

Klein in the early days was how the principle of conservation of energy is satisﬁed in this

theory. This will be discussed below.

For theories whose symmetry group is an inﬁnite continuous group, the main results of

theorem II are that there are certain identities, or ‘dependencies’ as she called them [1],

between Lagrange functions of the theory and their derivatives. This is quite diﬀerent from

the results of theorem I that for each inﬁnitesimal generator of the ﬁnite continuous group

there is a quantity whose divergence vanishes when the the Lagrange functions vanish (ﬁeld

equations are satisﬁed). In general relativity, the ‘dependencies’ give the Bianchi identities

for components of the curvature tensor. These results are covariant under the full group. In

particular, one has the contracted Bianchi identity

(Rµν

1

2Rgµν);µ = 0

−

This equation states that the covariant divergence of the left side of (8) vanishes. The

covariant divergence diﬀers substantially from the ordinary divergence which we have been

discussing up to now. For a second rank tensor, e.g. T µν, the covariant divergence is given

by

T µν

;ν = Γµ

σνT σν + (√

gT µν) ,ν/√

−

g
−

where Γµ

σν are Christoﬀel symbols which depend upon gµν and its derivatives and are non-

vanishing when the Riemann curvature is diﬀerent from zero. The covariant divergence is

an invariant; i.e., the covariant divergence of a second rank tensor gives a ﬁrst rank tensor.

Thus (9) implies

(9)

(10)

(11)

This is often referred to as the energy-momentum conservation law for general relativity.

The presence of the metric tensor and its derivatives in (10) shows the energy-momentum

transfer contained in (11) between the gravitational ﬁelds and the source ﬁelds in T µν.

T µν

;ν = 0

12

From (10) it is clear the the ordinary divergence T µν

,µ is in general diﬀerent from zero

in spacetime regions with gravitational ﬁelds.

It is interesting to note, however, that at

any given spacetime point one may choose a set of coordinates for which the gravitational

ﬁelds vanish (gµν reduces to the ﬂat spacetime Minkowski metric and the Christoﬀel symbols

vanish). This is guaranteed by the equivalence principle which states that one can always

choose a coordinate system such that spacetime in the neighborhood of a given point is

Minkowski (ﬂat). Thus one may see why it is not meaningful to speak of a localized energy

density for gravitational ﬁelds.

The physics of these relations is somewhat complicated. In regions of spacetime near

gravitating sources, where the Riemann curvature is non-vanishing, there is failure of a

principle of local energy conservation. The energy balance locally cannot be discussed in-

dependently of the coordinates one uses to calculate it, and consequently diﬀerent results

are obtained in various diﬀerent coordinate frames - some being artifacts of the calculation

itself. An amusing example of this is the case of an accelerating mass. For simplicity, let

us take the mass and acceleration small, so that the deviations from Newtonian physics are

small and may be treated perturbatively - the so-called post-Newtonian approximation. In

this approximation the theory is similar to electromagnetic theory. In electromagnetic the-

ory, an accelerating charge radiates and there is the radiation reaction force which tends to

deccelerate it; there is energy loss to the radiation ﬁeld. In Einstein gravity, the accelerating

mass is a source of gravitational radiation and one may calculate the radiation reaction

force as one does in electromagnetic theory. A naive calculation along these lines yields a

radiation reaction force term ( ˙a term in the equation of motion with a the acceleration)that

has the opposite sign to the electromagnetic case; the particle appears to speed up gaining

energy as it radiates! This is an unphysical radiation reaction force. The calculation is not

gauge invariant and depends on the choice of coordinates used to describe the motion of the

particle.

However, though local energy conservation fails, there is a large scale principle of energy-

momentum conservation in the general theory. The problem in principle was solved by

13

Noether. As she pointed out in I.V., it is possible to construct a divergence-free quantity

generally referred to as the a pseudotensor T µν

ef f . Jackiw et al. [21] have recently constructed

such a pseudotensor using her theorem II. Other constructions have been made by Weinberg

[22] and Landau and Lifshitz [20]. Such pseudotensors have the form

and satisfy

T µν
ef f = T µν + tµν .

T µν
ef f ,µ = 0

(12)

(13)

The tµν are not unique, and they are gauge dependent. Owing to this gauge dependence,

T µν
ef f is called a pseudotensor because it does not transform as a second rank tensor under the

full group of general coordinate transformations. However, these constructions are covariant

under the linear transformations of the Poincar´e group and may be used to calculate energy

and momentum in gravitationally ﬁeld free regions and asymptotically ﬁeld free regions.

Using such the pseudotensor T µν

ef f , one can formulate a principle of energy conservation by

integrating over a large, asymptotically ﬂat spacelike hypersurface. 11 In so doing one ob-

tains a total energy-momentum four-vector P α which is constant in time and includes the

energy and momentum carried by gravitational radiation. The tµν contributions take gravi-

tational radiation into account, and the calculations are done over distances large compared

to the wavelength of the radiation. This total energy-momentum vector behaves as a special

relativisic four-vector for any transformation which is a Lorentz transformation far from

sources and the vector is independent of the choice of coordinates used in the calculation.

[19] Such a calculation is applied to the observed decrease of the orbital period of the binary

pulsar PSR 1913+1916, and used to estimate the associated ﬂux of gravitational radiation.12

11 This is done in Refs. [19] and ( [20].

12 A detailed discussion of this and references to the literature can be found in Ref. [19].

14

IV. THE THEOREMS

The main results of I.V. are two theorems which are proved along with their converses.

They will be described here. Felix Klein’s statements [16] of the theorems are given in

Appendix B.

Though they apply more generally, we shall describe the theorems as they apply to ﬁeld

theories. Consider an integral I over independent variables x of a functional

L
on functions (ﬁeld variables) of these x variables φ(x) and their derivatives; viz.,

depending

I =

Z

L

dx

(φ, ∂φ/∂x, ∂2φ/∂x2, ....) .

The functional

may also depend directly on the x. The integral I in physics is the action

L

in the sense of Hamilton’s Principle, and the functional

is the Langrangian of the theory.

L

The theorems apply to systems for which I is an invariant of a Lie group of transformations

which transform x

y, φ

χ, ...

; i.e., when one has

→

→

I =

Z

L

dx

(x, φ, ∂φ/∂x, ∂2φ/∂x2, ....)

(14)

(15)

dy

(y, χ, ∂χ/∂y, ∂2χ/∂y2, ....)

= Z

L

integrated over an arbitrary region of x-space and the corresponding y-space.

The two cases of a ﬁnite and an inﬁnite Lie group are separately considered. In Noether’s

notation, a ﬁnite Lie group is denoted by

Gρ; it is a continuous group of transformations
whose most general transformation depends analytically on a ﬁnite (or countably inﬁnite)

number ρ of independent parameters. An inﬁnite Lie group, on the other hand, is denoted by

∞ρ. It is a continuous group whose most general transformation depends on ρ independent,

G
arbitrary functions and their derivatives. The results of theorem I apply when the action I

is an invariant of a ﬁnite Lie group, and the results of theorem II when it is an invariant of

an inﬁnite Lie group. The results are diﬀerent in the two cases.

Theorem I for

Gρ gives the result that there is a divergence for each of the ρ independent
generators of the group which is proportional to a Lagrange function. In her terminology

15

the Lagrange functions of the theory are the left hand side of equations of motion (ﬁeld

equations) of which the right hand side vanishes. Thus when the equations of motion are

satisﬁed, the divergences vanish. For the spacetime displacements of the Poincar´e group, the

four divergences are four tensor component divergences. The vanishing of these divergences

give energy-momentum conservation. The U(1) Lie group of global gauge transformations

in electrodynamics is another example. Corresponding to the generator of this group, one

has a divergence free current and from this one proves charge conservation. 13

Theorem II applies when the action is an invariant of an inﬁnite Lie group

∞ρ. The

G

statement of the theorem for this case is very general and, aside from its application to

general relativity, it applies in a wide variety of other cases. For example, quantum chromo-

dynamics and other gauge ﬁeld theories are theories to which it applies. From theorem II,

one has identities between Lagrange functions and their derivatives. See Appendix B. These

identities Noether calls ‘dependencies’. Generally they are covariant with respect to the

group. For example, the Bianchi identities in the general theory of relativity are examples

of such ‘dependencies’.

It is important to point out that in I.V. proofs are given for the converses of theorems

I and II as well. For example, theorem I states that if the action I is an invariant of a

ﬁnite Lie group

Gρ , there are ρ divergences which vanish when the equations of motion are
satisﬁed. The converse also is proved in I.V.; namely that the ρ vanishing divergences imply

that the action is an invariant of

Gρ. This result was important in the history of discovery

of symmetries in elementary particle physics. [2]

13If, on the other hand, the action is invariant with respect to local gauge transformations, the

symmetry is of an inﬁnite Lie group corresponding to the possibility of independently transforming

the gauge at every spacetime point. Theorem II applies in this case. As in theorem I case, one

gets electric current conservation from theorem II. However, if non-Abelian gauge transformations

are considered, the result is more complicated.

16

I conclude this talk with a quotation from I.V. where Noether says that Theorem II

is “proof of a Hilbertian assertion about the connection of the failure of proper laws of

conservation of energy with general relativity ...

in a generalized group theory version.”

One of the reasons why her theorems have been very important for 20th century physics is

because they are in ‘a generalized group theory version’.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

I would like to thank Mina Teicher and her colleagues for organizing this very interesting

and rewarding Symposium; and my colleague Basil Gordon for the help he aﬀorded me in

understanding and appreciating the workings of the minds of these great mathematicians,

and for his English translations of their papers, and for his close reading of this manuscript

in its various drafts.

I would also like to thank my colleague Aaron Grant for a critical

reading of the ﬁnal draft.

17

APPENDIX A

1. ¨Uber die Bildung des Formensystems der tern¨aren biquadratischen Form. Sitz. Ber.

d. Physikal.-mediz. Soziet¨at in Erlangen 39 (1907), pp. 176-179.

2. ¨Uber die Bildung des Formensystems der tern¨aren biquadratischen Form. Journal f.

d. reine u. angew. Math. 134 (1908), pp. 23-90.

3. Zur Invariantentheorie der Formen von n Variabeln. J. Ber. d. DMV 19 (1910), pp.

101-104.

Math. 139 (1911), pp. 118-154.

4. Zur Invariantentheorie der Formen von n Variabeln. Journal f. d. reine u. Angew.

5. Rationale Funktionenk¨orper. J. Ber. d. DMV 22 (1913). pp. 316-319.

6. K¨orper und Systeme rationaler Funktionen. Math. Ann. 76 (1915), pp. 161-196.

7. Der Endlichkeitssatz der Invarianten endlicher Gruppen. Math. Ann. 77 (1916), pp.

8. ¨Uber ganze rationale Darstellung der Invarianten eines Systems von beliebig vielen

Grundformen. Math. Ann. 77 (1916), pp. 93-102.

9. Die allgemeinsten Bereiche aus ganzen transzendenten Zahlen. Math. Ann. 77 (1916),

10. Die Funktionalgleichungen der isomorphen Abbildung. Math. Ann. 77 (1916), pp.

11. Gleichungen mit vorgeschriebener Gruppe. Math. Ann 78 (1918), pp. 221-229.

89-92.

pp. 103-128.

536-545.

18

annotating.

Frl. Noether:

vergences.

to Frl. Noether:

APPENDIX B

The following quotation is from Felix Klein’s annotation to his paper “ ¨Uber die Diﬀeren-

tialgesetze f¨ur die Erhaltung von Impuls und Energie in die Einsteinschen Gravitationstheo-

ries” [14] which can be found in his annotataed collected works Gesammelte mathematische

Abhandlungen, Julius Springer, Berlin 1921; Ch. XXXI (erster band, p. 559).

In this

quotation “The main theorem given in section 2 above” refers to his paper which he is

“I presented the main theorems of Frl. Noether at the July 26 meeting ... The main

theorem given in section 2 above is a special case of the following far-reaching theorem of

If an integral I is invariant under a continuous group Gρ with ρ parameters,

then ρ linearly independent combinations of the Lagrangian expressions are di-

Concerning in particular the claim made by Hilbert [that the failure of ‘proper’ energy

theorems was characteristic of the theory], the following is an exact formulation according

If an integral I is invariant under the translation group, the energy relations are

improper if and only if I is invariant under an inﬁnite-dimensional group which

contains the translation group as a subgroup.

Incidentally, the theorem of Hilbert that there are four relations between the ﬁeld equations

[Bianchi identities] also ﬁnds its generalization in Frl. Noether’s work. Her theorem is as

follows:

If an integral I is invariant under a group with ρ arbitrary functions in it with

their derivatives up to the σ’th order, then there are ρ identities between the Lagrangian

expressions and their derivatives of order up to σ.”

English translation courtesy of Basil Gordon.

19

REFERENCES

[1] E. Noether, “ Invariante Variationsprobleme”, Nachr. d. K¨onig. Gesellsch. d. Wiss.

zu G¨ottingen, Math-phys. Klasse (1918), 235-257; English translation M. A. Travel,

Transport Theory and Statistical Physics 1(3) 1971,183-207.

[2] Nina Byers, History of Original Ideas and Basics Discoveries in Particle Physics, H. B.

Newman and T. Ypsilantis ed., Plenum Press, New York (1996).

[3] Correspondence between D. Hilbert and F. Klein published by F. Klein in Nachr. d.

K¨onig. Gesellsch. d. Wiss. zu G¨ottingen, Math.-phys. Klasse (1918) as Zu Hilberts erster

Note ¨uber die Grundlagen der Physik; included in his annotated collected works Ref.

[15]; see Ch. XXXI (erster band, p. 560). English translation courtesy of Basil Gordon.

[4] D.Hilbert, Gesammelte Abhandlungen, Springer-Verlag, New York, 1970.

[5] Emmy Noether, Collected Papers, Springer-Verlag 1983.

[6] E. Noether, “ Invarianten beliebiger Diﬀerentialausdr¨ucke,”, Nachr. d. K¨onig. Gesellsch.

d. Wiss. zu G¨ottingen, Math-phys. Klasse (1918) 37 - 44.

[7] H. Weyl, Scripta Mathematica III. 3 (1935) 201-220; an English translation of this

memorial lecture is given in Ref.

[8].

[8] Auguste Dick, Emmy Noether (1882 -1935), Birkhauser 1981; English translation by H.

I. Blocher.

[9] A. Pais, Subtle is the Lord, Oxford University Press 1982.

[10] A. Einstein, Sitzungsberichte, Preussische Akademie der Wissenschaften, 1915, p. 844.

[11] D. Hilbert, “Die Grundlagen der Physik,” G¨ottinger Nachrichten, Math.-phys. Klasse

(1915), S. 395-407.

[12] Clark Kimberling in Emmy Noether, A Tribute to Her Life and Work; James W. Brewer

and Martha K. Smith, ed.; Marcel Dekker, Inc.

[13] Constance Reid, Hilbert, Springer-Verlag, New York (1970).

[14] F. Klein, ” ¨Uber die Diﬀerentialgesetze f¨ur die Erhaltung von Impuls und Energie in die

Einsteinschen Gravitationstheories.”, Nachr. d. K¨onig. Gesellsch. d. Wiss. zu G¨ottingen,

20

Math-phys. Klasse (1918).

[15] Felix Klein, Gesammelte Mathematische Abhandlungen, Julius Springer, Berlin 1921.

[16] English translation courtesy of Basil Gordon.

[17] E. Noether and W. Schmeidler,” Moduln in nichtkommutativen Bereichen, insbesondere

aus Diﬀerential- und Diﬀeren-zenaus-dr¨ucken”, Math. Zs. 8 (1920), pp. 1-35.

[18] Feza Gursey as quoted by Nathan Jacobson in his lengthy Introduction to Emmy

Noether, Collected Works, Ref. [5].

[19] See, e.g., Ignazio Ciufolini and John Archibald Wheeler, Gravitation and Inertia, Prince-

ton University Press, Princeton, N.J. 1995.

[20] L. Landau and E. Lifshitz, The Classical Theory of Fields, English translation by M.

Hamermesh, Addison-Wesley Publishing Co., Inc., Reading, MA 1951.

[21] D. Bak, D. Cangemi, and R. Jackiw, Phys. Rev.D 49: 5173 (1994).

[22] Steven Weinberg, Gravitation and Cosmology, John Wiley & Sons, Inc., New York 1971.

21

