8
9
9
1
 
v
o
N
 
9
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
t
s
i
h
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
0
4
0
1
1
8
9
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

The Solar Equation in Angkor Wat

Subhash Kak
Department of Electrical & Computer Engineering
Louisiana State University
Baton Rouge, LA 70803-5901, USA
FAX: 225.388.5200; Email: kak@ee.lsu.edu

February 17, 2014

Abstract

The great Vis.n. u temple at Angkor Wat in north-central Kam-
puchea (Cambodia) is known to have been built according to an astro-
nomical plan. In this note we show that the little-understood solar for-
mula of the temple is identical to the one in the ´Satapatha Br¯ahman. a.
We propose that the Angkor Wat formula was an expression of the
´Satapatha astronomy.

Keywords: Vedic astronomy, Angkor Wat, archaeoastronomy.

The great Vis.n. u temple of Angkor Wat was built by the Khmer Emperor
S¯uryavarman II, who reigned during AD 1113-50. This temple was one of
the many temples built from AD 879 - 1191, when the Khmer civilization
was at the height of its power. The Vis.n. u temple has been called one of
humankind’s most impressive and enduring architectural achievements.

More than 20 years ago Science carried a comprehensive analysis by Sten-
cel, Giﬀord and Mor´on (SGM) of the astronomy and cosmology underlying
the design of this temple.1 The authors concluded that it served as a practi-
cal observatory where the rising sun was aligned on the equinox and solstice
days with the western entrance of the temple, and they identiﬁed 22 sighting
lines for seasonally observing the risings of the sun and the moon. Using a
survey by Naﬁlyan2 and converting the ﬁgures to the Cambodian cubit or

1

hat (0.435 m), SGM demonstrated that certain measurements of the temple
record calendric and cosmological time cycles.

In addition, SGM showed that the west-east axis represents the periods
of the yugas. The width of the moat is 439.78 hat; the distance from the
ﬁrst step of the western entrance gateway to balustrade wall at the end
of causeway is 867.03 hat; the distance from the ﬁrst step of the western
entrance gateway to the ﬁrst step of the central tower is 1,296.07 hat; and the
distance from the ﬁrst step of bridge to the geographic center of the temple is
1,734.41 hat. These correspond to the periods of 432,000; 864,000; 1,296,000;
1,728,000 years for the Kali, Dv¯apara, Tret¯a, and Kr.ta yuga, respectively.
SGM suggest that the very slight discrepancy in the equations might be due
to human error or erosion or sinking of the structure.

In the central tower, the topmost elevation has external axial dimensions
of 189.00 hat east-west, and 176.37 hat north-south, with the sum of 365.37.
In the words of SGM, this is “perhaps the most outstanding number” in the
complex, “almost the exact length of the solar year.” But SGM were not
able to explain the inequality of the two halves; which is the problem that
we take up in this paper. We will show that these numbers are old ´Satapatha
Br¯ahman. a numbers for the asymmetric motion of the sun.

The Historical Background of Angkor Wat

The kings of the Khmer empire ruled over a vast domain that reached from
what is now southern Vietnam to Yunan, China and from Vietnam westward
to the Bay of Bengal. The structures one sees at Angkor today, more than
100 temples in all, are the surviving religious remains of a grand social and
administrative metropolis whose other buildings - palaces, public buildings,
and houses - were all built of wood and are long since decayed and gone. As
in most parts of India where wood was plentiful, only the gods had the right
to live in houses of stone or brick; the sovereigns and the common folk lived
in pavilions and houses of wood.

Over the half-millenia of Khmer occupation, the city of Angkor became
a great pilgrimage destination because of the notion of Devar¯aja, the ‘god-
king’. From the era of Jayavarman II (802-850) onwards, Khmer kings not
only ruled by divine consent, but actually came to be worshipped as gods
themselves. The increasingly larger temples built by the Khmer kings func-

2

tioned as the locus of the devotion to the Devar¯aja, and were at the same
time earthly and symbolic representations of mythical Mt. Meru, the cos-
mological home of the Hindu gods and the axis of the world-system. The
symbol of the king’s divine authority was the sign (linga) of ´Siva within the
temple’s inner sanctuary, which represented both the axes of physical and
the psychological worlds. The worship of ´Siva and Vis.n. u separately, and to-
gether as Harihara, had been popular for considerable time in southeast Asia;
Jayavarman’s chief innovation was to identify the king with ´Siva, involving
an elevation to divine status of the earthly ruler during his lifetime. Upon
his death, the temple became the Devar¯aja’s mausoleum and a pilgrimage
shrine. While the cult of the Devar¯aja continued unabated throughout the
Khmer empire, other kings identiﬁed themselves with the Hindu god Vis.n. nu
(such as S¯uryavarman II, the builder of Angkor Wat) or the bodhisattva
Avalokite´svara (such as Jayavarman VII, the builder of the Bayon).

Angkor Wat is the supreme masterpiece of Khmer art. The descriptions
of the temple fall far short of communicating the great size, the perfect pro-
portions, and the astoundingly beautiful sculpture that everywhere presents
itself to the viewer.

As an aside, it should be mentioned that some European scholars tended
to date Angkor Wat as being after the 14th century. The principal reason
was that some decorative motifs at Angkor Wat show a striking resemblance
to certain motifs of the Italian Renaissance. This argument, which is similar
to the one used in dating Indian mathematical texts vis-a-vis Greek texts,
In the words of Cœd`es,3 “If there is some
has been proven to be wrong.
connexion between the twelfth-century art of the Khmers, the direct heirs
to the previous centuries, and the art of the Renaissance, it must have been
due to a reverse process, that is to the importation of oriental objects into
Europe.”

3

Astronomy of Altars and Temples

To understand the astronomical aspects of Angkor Wat it is necessary to
begin with the Indian traditions of altar and temple design on which it is
based.

In a series of publications I have shown that the Vedic altars had an
astronomical basis.4 In the basic scheme, the circle represented the earth and
the square represented the heavens or the deity. But the altar or the temple,
as a representation of the dynamism of the universe, required a breaking of
the symmetry of the square. As seen clearly in the agnicayana and other
altar constructions, this was done in a variety of ways. Although the main
altar might be square or its derivative, the overall sacred area was taken to
be a departure from this shape. In particular, the temples to the goddess
were drawn on a rectangular plan. In the introduction to the ´Silpa Prak¯a´sa,
a 9th-12th century Orissan temple architecture text, Alice Boner writes,5
“[the Dev¯ı temples] represent the creative expanding forces, and therefore
could not be logically be represented by a square, which is an eminently
static form. While the immanent supreme principle is represented by the
number ONE, the ﬁrst stir of creation initiates duality, which is the number
TWO, and is the producer of THREE and FOUR and all subsequent numbers
upto the inﬁnite.” The dynamism is expressed by a doubling of the square
to a rectangle or the ratio 1:2, where the garbhagr.ha is now built in the
geometrical centre. For a three-dimensional structure, the basic symmetry-
breaking ratio is 1:2:4, which can be continued further to another doubling.6
The constructions of the Harappan period (2600-1900 BC) appear to be
according to the same principles. The dynamic ratio of 1:2:4 is the most
commonly encountered size of rooms of houses, in the overall plan of houses
and the construction of large public buildings. This ratio is also reﬂected in
the overall plan of the large walled sector at Mohenjo-Daro called the citadel
mound. It is even the most commonly encountered brick size.7

There is evidence of temple structures in the Harappan period in addi-
tion to iconography that recalls the goddess. Structures dating to 2000 BC,
built in the design of yantras, have been unearthed in northern Afghanistan.8
There is ample evidence for a continuity in the religious and artistic tradition
of India from the Harappan times, if not earlier. These ideas and the astro-
nomical basis continued in the architecture of the temples of the classical age.
Kramrisch has argued that the number 25,920, the number of years in the

4

precessional period of the earth, is also reﬂected in the plan of the temple.9

According to the art-historian Alice Boner,10

[T]he temple must, in its space-directions, be established in re-
lation to the motion of the heavenly bodies. But in asmuch as
it incorporates in a single synthesis the unequal courses of the
sun, the moon and the planets, it also symbolizes all recurrent
time sequences: the day, the month, the year and the wider cycles
marked by the recurrence of a complete cycle of eclipses, when
the sun and the moon are readjusted in their original positions,
anew cycle of creation begins.

It is clear then that the Hindu temple is a conception of the astronomical
frame of the universe. In this conception it serves the same purpose as the
Vedic altar, which served to express the motions of the sun and the moon.
The progressive complexity of the classical temple was inevitable given an
attempt to bring in the cycles of the planets and other ideas of the yugas
into the scheme.

A text like the ´Silpa Prak¯a´sa would be expected to express the principles
of temple construction of the times that led to the Angkor Wat temple. Given
the prominence to the yuga periods in Angkor Wat and a variety of other
evidence it is clear that there is a continuity between the Vedic and Pur¯an. ic
astronomy and cosmology and the design of Angkor Wat.

Solar and lunar measurements

Some of the solar and lunar numbers that show up in the design of the Angkor
Wat temple are the number of naks.atras, the number of months in the year,
the days in the lunar month, the days of the solar month, and so so.11 Lunar
observations appear to have been made from the causeway. SGM list 22
alignments in their paper, these could have been used to track not just the
solar and lunar motions but also planetary motions.

The division of the year into the two halves: 189 and 176.37 has puz-
zled SGM. But precisely the same division is described in the ´Satapatha
Br¯ahman. a. In layer 5 of the altar described in the ´Satapatha, a division of
the year into the two halves in the proportion 15:14 is given.12 This propor-

5

tion corresponds to the numbers 189 and 176.4 which are just the numbers
used at Angkor Wat.

To see the physics behind the asymmetry in the sun’s orbit, the period
from the autumnal equinox to the vernal equinox is smaller than the opposite
circuit. The interval between successive perihelia, the anomalistic year, is
365.25964 days which is 0.01845 days longer than the tropical year on which
In 1000 calendar years, the date of the perihelion
our calendar is based.
advances about 18 days so the situation was substantially the same during
the time of the construction of Angkor Wat as well as during the early 2nd
millennium BC, the most likely period of the composition of the ´Satapatha
Br¯ahman. a. The period from the fall equinox to the spring equinox is about
176 days whereas the reverse circuit of about 189 days. On the other hand,
the asymmetry in the counts from the winter solstice to the summer solstice
is much less pronounced.

Why not assume that there was no more to these numbers than a division
into the proportions 15:14 derived from some numerological considerations?
First, we have the evidence from the ´Satapatha Br¯ahman. a. that expressly
informs us that the count of days from the winter to the summer solstice
was diﬀerent, and shorter, than the count in the reverse order. Second, the
altar design is explicitly about the sun’s circuit around the earth and so the
proportion of 15:14 must be converted into the appropriate count with respect
to the length of the year. Furthermore, the many astronomical alignments
of the Angkor Wat impress on us the fairly elaborate system of naked-eye
observations that were the basis of the temple astronomy.

But since precisely the same numbers were used in Angkor Wat as were
mentioned much earlier in the ´Satapatha Br¯ahman. a, one would presume that
these numbers were used as a part of ancient sacred lore. Considering the
shifted ellipse of the circuit of the sun, we can see why the counts between
the solstices has been changing much faster than the counts between the
equinoxes. Because of its relative constancy, the count between the equinoxes
became one of the primary ‘constants’ of Vedic/Pur¯an. ic astronomy.

Is it possible that the equinoctial half-years were determined to the preci-
sion represented by the numbers 189 and 176.4 (or 176.37)? Since the length
of the year was known to considerable precision there is no reason to assume
that these counts were not possible. But as it was known that the solar year
was about 365.25 days, the old proportion of 15:14 would give the distri-
bution 188.92 and 176.33, and that is very much the Angkor Wat numbers

6

of 189 and 176.37 within human error. In other words, the choice of these
‘constants’ may have been partially determined by the use of the ancient
proportion of 15:14.

Conclusions

It has long been known that the Angkor Wat temple astronomy is derived
from Pur¯an. ic and Siddh¯antic ideas. Here we present evidence that takes us
to the Vedic roots for the division of the solar year in Angkor Wat into two
unequal halves. This division is across the equinoxes and that number has
not changed very much during the passage of time from the Br¯ahman. as to
the construction of the Angkor Wat temple, so it is not surprising that it
ﬁgures so prominently in the astronomy.

The astronomy of Angkor Wat has the lesson that the medieval and an-
cient Indian temple complexes, which were also built with basic astronomical
observations in mind, should be examined for their astronomical bases.

References

1. Stencel, R., Giﬀord, F., Mor´on, E., “Astronomy and cosmology at

Angkor Wat”, Science, 193, (1976), 281-287.

2. Naﬁlyan, G. Angkor Vat, Description, Graphique du Temple. Ecole

Francaise d’Extreme-Orient, Paris. 1969.

3. Cœd`es, G.. Angkor: An Introduction. Oxford University Press, Lon-

don, 1963, page 17.

4. Kak, S., “Astronomy of the Vedic altars and the Rigveda”, Mankind

Quarterly, 33, (1992), 43-55.
Kak, S., “Astronomy in the ´Satapatha Br¯ahman. a,” Indian Journal of
History of Science, 28 (1993), 15-34.

Kak, S., “Astronomy of the Vedic Altars,” Vistas in Astronomy, 36
(1993), 117-140.
Kak, S., The Astronomical Code of the R. gveda. Aditya, New Delhi
(1994).

7

Kak, S., “The astronomy of the age of geometric altars,” Quarterly
Journal of the Royal Astronomical Society, 36 (1995) 385-396.
Kak, S., “The sun’s orbit in the Br¯ahman. as,” Indian Journal of History
of Science, 33 (1998), 175-191.

5. Boner, A., “Introduction” In Kaul¯ac¯ara, R., ´Silpa Prak¯a´sa, Boner, A.

and Rath ´Sarm¯a, S. (eds.). E.J. Brill, Leiden, 1966, pp. xxxiii.

6. Kramrisch, S., The Hindu Temple. The University of Calcutta, Cal-

cutta, 1946; Motilal Banarsidass, Delhi, 1991, page 228.

7. Kenoyer, J.M., Ancient Cities of the Indus Valley Civilization. Oxford

University Press, Oxford, 1998, page 57.

8. See Kak, The Astronomical Code .., pages 44-46.

9. Kramrisch, S., The Hindu Temple, page 51.

10. Boner, A., “Introduction” In Kaul¯ac¯ara, R., ´Silpa Prak¯a´sa, Boner, A.

and Rath ´Sarm¯a, S. (eds.). E.J. Brill, Leiden, 1966, pp. xxxiii.

11. SGM, page 284.

12. Kak, S., “The sun’s orbit in the Br¯ahman. as,” cited above. This altar is
described in detail. Note that a printing error caused the last sentence
on the 4th paragraph on page 187 of this paper to become mangled.
This paragraph should read: “If one assumes that the two halves of
the year are directly in proportional to the brick counts of 14 and 15
in the two halves of the ring of the sun, this corresponds to day counts
of 176 and 189. This division appears to have been for the two halves
of the year with respect to the equinoxes if we note that the solstices
divide the year into counts of 181 and 184.”

8

