9
9
9
1
 
n
a
J
 
2
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
t
s
i
h
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
7
3
0
1
0
9
9
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

SLAC–PUB–8010
January 1999

Certainty and Uncertainty in the Practice of
Science: Electrons, Muons, and Taus

M. L. Perl
Stanford Linear Accelerator Center, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94309

Abstract

During the past one hundred years three related elementary particles–
the electron, the muon, and the tau–were discovered by very diﬀerent
scientiﬁc techniques. The author, who received the Wolf Prize and
the Nobel Prize for the discovery of the tau, uses this history to
discuss certainty and uncertainty in the practice of science. While
the emphasis is on the practice of scientiﬁc research, the paper also
explains for the non-physicist some basic ideas in elementary particle
science.

To be published in Science at the Turn of the Millennium

Stanford Linear Accelerator Center, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94309
Work supported by Department of Energy contract DE–AC03–76SF00515.

Certainty and uncertainty in the practice of science.

While science is several thousand years old, it is in the last hundred years that the
practice of science has become tremendously important in our lives: in the economy,
in the technology of war, in the state of the natural environment, in the condition of
our health and in all the material aspects of our lives. Many of our thoughts about the
next millennium, our hopes and our fears, have to do with what the ﬁndings of science
will do for us and what the ﬁndings of science will do to us. We try to predict what
these ﬁndings of science might be; we want to reassure ourselves that we can control
science and that we can direct the practice of science to desirable goals. There are
many goals: some hope for major improvements in material comforts, others hope for
the salvation of the natural environment, still others hope for lives without illness and
with increased longevity. These hopes are based on assumptions that the directions of
science can be controlled or planned, that there is coherence in the practice of science,
that scientists know where their research is going, that any puzzle or problem in the
natural world can be solved by enough scientiﬁc eﬀort.

I have been a working scientist, an experimenter in physics, for almost ﬁfty years
[1], and I am uncomfortable with these assumptions because the practice of science is
an uncertain human activity. Is this a fruitful research direction? Can this problem be
solved? Are we smart enough or lucky enough to solve the problem? Do we have the
required research technology and if not, can we develop it? What are our motivations
for doing this research? Will the results of this research have applications? Will these
applications be beneﬁcial or harmful?

It is best to replace these abstractions by giving the history of one ﬁeld of science.
I choose the ﬁeld I know best, the science of elementary particles and in particular,
the science of the lepton family of particles. As I will explain, leptons are, or at
least seem to be, very simple elementary particles; thus research on leptons is easy to
describe and to use as an example.

The history of lepton physics is also an apt example because this physics is about
100 years old. In the middle 1890’s Thomson elucidated the nature of the electron
[2, 3], the ﬁrst identiﬁed elementary particle and the ﬁrst lepton. Since then two
heavier electron-like particles were discovered, the muon about mid-century, and the
tau, discovered by my colleagues and myself about twenty years ago [4]. Thus the
twentieth century is spanned by the scientiﬁc work on the electron, muon, and tau,
plus the work on closely associated elementary particles called neutrinos.

As a former United States president was fond of saying, I want to make one thing
perfectly clear. The uncertainties in the practice of science do not necessarily lead
to uncertainties in the ﬁndings of science. If experimental results or observations on
a phenomenon are veriﬁed by other experimenters, if there is logical understanding
of the results or observations, then in my philosophy we have learned something real
about the natural world. I am an engineer turned physicist and I have no interest
in those philosophies of science that are concerned with whether we do or can know

2

reality. Similarly I do not believe that the uncertainties in the practice of science will
lead to the “end of science” [5]. I am not of that school.

A note on elementary particles for non-physicists.

The following are some paragraphs about elementary particles [6]. Figure 1 shows the
hierarchy of matter with the largest kinds of matter, the molecules, at the top. At the
bottom of Figure 1 are the elementary particles, the smallest pieces of matter that we
have been able to ﬁnd, smaller than an atom, smaller than a nucleus, less than 10−17
centimeters in extent; perhaps having no detectable size. The number 10−17 means
1/100,000,000,000,000,000 with 17 zeros in the denominator. This notation for large
numbers is a great convenience and I explain it in the Appendix.

Returning to Figure 1, the materials of everyday life such as water and wood and
plastics and plant tissue are composed of molecules; and as you know from chemistry
and biology, molecules are composed of atoms. Other materials such as iron and
silicon are directly composed of atoms. But atoms are not simple entities, they
themselves are complex, consisting of electrons moving around a nucleus.

Continuing to move downward in Figure 1, the electron, as far as we know, is not
composed of anything else; we cannot break up the electron or ﬁnd anything inside
of it. The electron is the most prevalent example of an elementary particle.

On the other hand a nucleus is not simple and is not elementary; a nucleus is
made up of protons and neutrons. At one time neutrons and protons were thought
to be elementary particles, but we now know that they are made up of quarks. As
far as we know, quarks like electrons are not composed of anything else; we cannot
break up quarks or ﬁnd anything inside of them. Thus we have arrived at the bottom
of Figure 1 and to the simplest particles that compose everyday matter.

Of course these elementary particles, quarks and electrons, may not be so simple;
with new ideas and new experimental technology, we may ﬁnd a deeper structure
in these particles. In the practice of science present understanding may be replaced
by a deeper future understanding; but until that replacement occurs we require that
present understanding ﬁt existing data. A popular and well-advertised speculative
theory holds that elementary particles are manifestations of diﬀerent vibrations of
extremely small strings [7]. But there is no experimental proof of the validity of the
string theory hypothesis.

A bit of terminology. Every particle inside the atom or smaller than the atom is
called subatomic. Nuclei, the neutrons and protons that make up the nucleus, the
quarks that make up the neutrons and protons, and the electron are all subatomic
particles. The name elementary is reserved for those subatomic particles that we
think are the simplest, those that we think are not made of anything else. Figure 2
is my attempt to sort out these distinctions for the reader.

Electrons and quarks are the elementary particles that exist in everyday matter,
but they are not the only elementary particles. Other elementary particles exist in

3

Large(cid:13)
molecule

Atoms

Atom

About 1/10,000,000 cm

Nucleus

About 1/100,000,000 cm

Electrons moving(cid:13)
around nucleus

Subatomic particles below this line(cid:13)

Nucleus

Neutron

Proton

About 1/1,000,000,000,000 cm

Proton(cid:13)

Neutron(cid:13)

About 1/10,000,000,000,000 cm

Elementary particles below this line(cid:13)

Quarks(cid:13)
Much smaller than proton,(cid:13)
may have no size at all!(cid:13)

    Electron(cid:13)
Much smaller than proton,(cid:13)
it may have no size at all!(cid:13)

11–98(cid:13)
8459A1

Figure 1: Hierarchy of matter. At the top are the molecules and atoms that compose
the materials of everyday life. At the bottom are the smallest particles of matter that
we have so far found, the quark and electron elementary particles.

4

(cid:13)
(cid:13)
(cid:13)
(cid:13)
(cid:13)
(cid:13)
a. Some subatomic but not elementary particles:

have internal structure
have measureable size (about 10–13 cm)

Proton

Neutron

Pion

Contains 3(cid:13)
quarks

Contains 3(cid:13)
quarks

Contains 2(cid:13)
quarks

b. Some subatomic and elementary particles:

no internal structure found
no measureable size  (less than 10–17 cm)

Quarks
Six types of (cid:13)
quarks are(cid:13)
known.

Leptons
Includes electron, muon,(cid:13)
tau, and three types of(cid:13)
neutrinos.

11–98(cid:13)
8459A2

Figure 2: Two types of subatomic particles: (a) those that are not elementary such
as the proton, neutron, and pion; and (b) those that are elementary such as the
quarks and leptons.

nature, for example muons and neutrinos exist in the atmosphere and in outer space.
Other elementary particles such as the tau and other quarks can be artiﬁcially created.
But this is getting ahead of this history.

Elementary particles are not just isolated pieces of matter that have nothing to
do with each other. They pull and push on each other and interact with each other,
sometimes changing into other kinds of particles. These interactions occur through
four diﬀerent forces: electromagnetic, weak, gravitational, and strong. Only two of
these forces are of immediate concern. The electromagnetic force is just the electric
and magnetic force that is manifest around us; it is the force involved in electric
motors, in electronics, in the behavior of static electricity, in the behavior of lightning.
If an elementary particle has electric charge it is acted upon by the electromagnetic
force.

The strong force is the force that holds the quarks inside the protons and neutrons,
and it also holds the nucleus itself together. The strong force is the basis for the
production of energy in our sun, in the stars, and in nuclear reactors. Unfortunately

5

Table 1: Deﬁnition of leptons and the diﬀerences between leptons and quarks. For
a fuller discussion of leptons and quarks see [6].

Property
Acted upon by the strong
force?
Can be isolated as a sin-
gle particle?
Acted upon by the elec-
tromagnetic force?
Electric charge in units of
1.6 × 10−19 coulombs

Lepton
No

Yes

Yes, if charged

+1, −1, or 0

Quark
Yes

Never observed, therefore
taken as no
Yes

+2/3, −2/3, +1/3,
or −1/3

it is also the basis for the devastating release of energy and radioactivity by atom and
hydrogen bombs.

The elementary particles are classiﬁed into three families. Two of these families,
the leptons and the quarks, are delineated in Table 1. Leptons do not interact through
the strong force, and this decisively separates them from the quarks. The strong force
between quarks compels them to be buried in complicated particles such as protons
and neutrons and pions, Figure 2. We have never succeeded in making or ﬁnding a
single quark isolated by itself. It is diﬃcult to study the properties of quarks and
even more diﬃcult to explain their properties and behavior in simple terms.

Conversely leptons, free of the strong force, can be isolated and studied individ-
ually. It is also easy to explain their properties in simple terms. This is why I have
devoted much of my research to leptons and why the history of their discovery has
pleasing simplicity.

There is a third class of elementary particles that will not concern us: the particles
that carry the basic forces. (The idea of a force being carried by a particle is a quantum
mechanical concept.) For the sake of completeness these particles are the gluon that
carries the strong force; the photon that carries the electromagnetic force; and the W
and Z particles that carry the weak force, a force I have not discussed. If quantum
mechanics can be applied to the gravitational force in the same way that it is applied
to the other forces, then there is another particle called the graviton that carries the
gravitational force.

I will keep my particle physics discussions simple, and to do this I will ignore
distinctions that are irrelevant to the matter at hand. For example there is no need
in this paper to distinguish between particles and antiparticles [6], and so neutrinos
and antineutrinos are simply called neutrinos, quarks and antiquarks are simply called
quarks.

6

Classic science: cathode rays and the discovery of the electron.

The discovery of the electron is a classic example of scientiﬁc discovery [2, 3]. Classic in
how the eﬀort to understand the phenomenon called cathode rays led to the electron’s
discovery; classic in how so much was explained once the electron’s properties were
measured; and classic in how the applications of basic research on the electron has
led to radio, television, transistors, computers, and who knows what next.

It was already known in the eighteenth century that an electrical voltage applied
between metal plates in a partially evacuated glass tube could produce light. Inside
the tube the gas glowed; the size, shape, and color of the glowing region depended
on the voltage, gas pressure, and shape of the tube. This phenomenon was called a
cathode ray because the light seemed to be caused by rays coming from one of the
metal plates inside the tube, speciﬁcally from the plate having negative charge, the
cathode, Figure 3. We see the same phenomenon today in neon lights. Television
picture tubes and computer monitors are also cathode ray tubes, although in these
devices the gas pressure is very small.

Many physicists of the late nineteenth century studied the cathode ray phe-
nomenon, including famous names such as Crookes, Hertz, and Thomson. Gradually
more and more was learned experimentally about cathode rays. For example it was
learned that the rays are bent by a magnetic ﬁeld and that the rays either carry,
or cause the transfer of, negative electric charge. Still until the middle 1890’s there
was dispute about the nature of cathode rays. Some physicists took the rays to be
made up of negatively charged matter, the particles we now call electrons. Others
believed the rays to be a kind of electromagnetic wave. There were several objections
to the particle explanation. The most substantial objection was that the rays should
bend in an electric ﬁeld if they are charged particles, but this bending had not been
observed.

The dilemma was resolved in 1895 by Thomson using an improved vacuum pump.
Thomson demonstrated that in a cathode ray tube with a suﬃciently good vacuum,
the cathode rays were bent in an electric ﬁeld [2, 3]. A good vacuum is one in which
just about all the gas in the tube has been removed. Describing his experiment with
the tube shown in Figure 3b he wrote, “At high exhaustion the rays were deﬂected
when the two aluminum plates were connected with the terminals of a battery of small
storage cells... The deﬂection was proportional to the diﬀerence of potential between
the plates.... It was only when the vacuum was a good one that the deﬂection took
place.”

Earlier attempts to deﬂect cathode rays in an electric ﬁeld had failed because there
was still gas in the tube and there was electrical conduction in the partial vacuum. Gas
ions collected on the electrical plates, canceling the charges on the plates and therefore
canceling the electric ﬁeld. Thus the discovery of the electron depended on the gradual
improvement of late nineteenth century instrument technology, particularly vacuum
pump technology. Advances in scientiﬁc knowledge often depend upon improving the
technology used in the practice of science.

7

(a)

(b)

11–98(cid:13)
8459A3

Entire apparatus called(cid:13)
cathode ray tube.(cid:13)

Glass bulb with the gas(cid:13)
partially pumped out so(cid:13)
that there is low pressure(cid:13)
gas inside.(cid:13)

Anode

Cathode

Central part of tube give off light(cid:13)
and light is said to be caused by(cid:13)
cathode rays going from cathode(cid:13)
to anode.

Negative plate

Glass bulb with the gas(cid:13)
so well pumped out that(cid:13)
there is a vacuum inside.(cid:13)

Anode

Positive plate

Cathode

Electrons

Figure 3: The electron nature of cathode rays. (a) A cathode ray tube with low
gas pressure in which the rays, now known to be electrons, cause the gas to emit
light. (b) The Thomson experiment demonstrating that in a tube with a good vac-
uum the electrons, as they move from the cathode to the anode, are deﬂected by a
perpendicular electric ﬁeld.

So we see a triumphant discovery after decades of research on cathode rays. But we
also see that this was not a straight march to success. About half of the experimenters
held the wrong idea about the nature of cathode rays for several decades. This is an
important lesson about the practice of science: wrong ideas may persist for a long time.
Today, one hundred years later, we have much better experimental equipment, but
we are no smarter. Today there are similar controversies about observed phenomena
ranging from cosmology to biology. Some of these controversies may be settled soon
by discoveries as clear as the discovery of the electron, some may not be settled for
a long time. A major uncertainty in the practice of science is when a particular

8

(cid:13)
(cid:13)
(cid:13)
controversy will be settled. Thomson received the Nobel Prize for settling the cathode
ray controversy.

What we know about the electron.

The process of discovering the electron was interwoven with the process of determining
the basic properties of the electron. By 1911, Millikan [2] had measured the size of
the electric charge of the electron and had shown, within his experimental errors, that
all electrons have the same electric charge. And by the middle 1920’s it was known
that the electron acts as though it is a perpetually rotating top and as though it is a
very small bar magnet. I have written “acts as though” because if the electron has
no size, one cannot picture what is rotating or how it can be a magnet.

The values of the mass and the charge of the electron illustrate how small elemen-
tary particles are compared to the objects used in daily life. The mass of the electron
is about 10−27 grams. By the way, mass is called weight in everyday language. A
standard size aspirin has a mass of about 1/3 of a gram. Thus it would take 1027
electrons to have about the same weight as three aspirins.

The charge of the electron is 1.6 × 10−19 coulombs. In everyday life we don’t use
the coulomb unit of charge. We use a unit, however, for the electric current through
a wire, the ampere, and electric current is simply the ﬂow of electrons through a wire.
A 100 watt light bulb uses about one ampere of current. To the nearest factor of
ten, one ampere means 1019 electrons are ﬂowing through the wire per second. Thus
like the electron mass, the electron charge is very small compared to the electrical
quantities that occur in everyday life.

Limited knowledge: what we don’t know about the electron.

A physicist living in the early twentieth century and doing research on the electron
would probably have believed that we would continue to learn more and more about
the electron as the century progressed. We have indeed learned more and more about
how the electron behaves in metals, semiconductors, and molecules. We have indeed
measured the known properties of the electron with more and more precision: its mass,
charge, and magnetic properties. But we have made no progress in understanding
what sets the mass of the electron. We have made no progress in understanding why
all the known elementary particles with electric charge have charges that are either
equal to plus or minus the charge on the electron or are equal to 1/3 or 2/3 of that
charge. All we know is that no elementary particles with other electric charges have
been found.

Thus a research direction that must have seemed obvious and fruitful in the 1920’s,
research to further uncover the inner nature of the electron, has not progressed. We
keep trying to break up the electron to ﬁnd its inner nature and we keep trying to ﬁnd
an unexpected property of the electron. No one knew what further to do in the 1920’s

9

and no one knows what else to do now. Uncertainty about the future of a direction in
research is a major uncertainty in the practice of science. Will the direction pay oﬀ
or will it be fruitless?

A note about protons, neutrons, and decaying particles.

The second subatomic particle to be found was the proton. Its discovery and the ﬁrst
measurements of its properties occupied about 1900 to 1920. We now know that it
is not an elementary particle; as shown in Figure 2 it is made up of three quarks.
Thus the proton diﬀers from the electron in that the proton has an internal structure,
while the electron, to the best of our knowledge, has no internal structure. There are
two other major diﬀerences between the proton and the electron. First the proton is
almost 2000 times heavier. Second the proton, having a diameter of about 10−13 cm,
is much larger than the electron. On the other hand there is some similarity: the
proton has the same size electric charge as the electron, but the proton is positively
charged while the electron is negatively charged.

Thus by the end of the ﬁrst quarter of the twentieth century, two apparently
fundamental particles of matter were known, the proton and the electron. And from
quantum mechanics it was also known that light could also be considered to be made of
particles, called photons. Thus nature seemed to be presenting us with a beautifully
simple system of three particles composing everything. Unfortunately the world,
even on this simplest level, is a lot more complicated. In the practice of science we
sometimes mistake simplicity for truth; nature may be simple or may be complex.

In the early 1930’s another subatomic particle, the neutron, was discovered. The
neutron, like the proton, is made out of quarks (Fig. 2), but it has zero electric charge.
The neutron is slightly heavier than the proton by about 1/10 of a percent–small
diﬀerence, but enough to cause a decay process that is common among subatomic
particles. A neutron left to itself does not last forever. In an average time of about
15 minutes, a neutron spontaneously breaks up into a proton plus an electron plus
another elementary particle, the extra mass of the neutron being used to produce the
other particles, Figure 4. A shorthand to describe the decay process is

neutron → proton + electron + another particle.

This means that the particle on left side of the arrow disappears, changing to the
particles on the right side of the arrow. Incidentally as far as we know protons and
electrons never decay; left alone, they last forever.

The uncertain road to scientiﬁc certainty: cosmic rays and the
discovery of the muon.

Now it is time for me to return to my main story and describe the discovery of the
next elementary particle, the muon. The discovery story begins in the early 1900’s

10

(a) Neutron before it decays.

Neutron

T(cid:13)
i(cid:13)
m(cid:13)
e

(b)  Proton plus electron plus(cid:13)
other particle produced by decay(cid:13)
of neutron. The other particle(cid:13)
is a neutrino as described later.

Electron

Proton

Other particle(cid:13)
is neutrino

11–98(cid:13)
8459A4

Figure 4: The decay of a neutron. (a) The neutron before it decays, (b) the particles
produced by the decay.

with investigations of a natural phenomenon, cosmic rays, which are not related to
cathode rays. The only connection is linguistic: a ray means something or a group of
things moving through space or material in a more or less straight line. As with the
electron, the muon discovery process was interwoven with the process of determining
properties; and as with the electron many physicists were involved in these processes.
As we now know, but as was not known in the 1920’s, cosmic rays are subatomic
particles that enter the Earth’s atmosphere traveling with high energy, Figure 5. Some
are protons and some are atomic nuclei. Cosmic rays come from outside the solar
system and some may come from outside our galaxy. As cosmic rays pass through our
atmosphere, they collide with the oxygen and nitrogen molecules in the air, breaking
up the molecules and interacting with the oxygen and nitrogen nuclei to form other
particles, mostly pions, Figures 2 and 6.

Returning to the 1910’s and 1920’s, before all this was known, the ﬁrst observed
eﬀect of cosmic rays was the discovery that the atmosphere could slightly conduct
electricity. Observations also showed that the conductivity extended through the
entire depth of the atmosphere, not just at the top of atmosphere.
It was known
from research on electrical conductivity in gases, research by the way closely tied to
cathode ray research, that this conductivity could occur if molecules were broken up.
But what was breaking up the air molecules and breaking them up at all levels of the
atmosphere?

11

Proton(cid:13)
 path

Cosmic ray proton(cid:13)
from outside solar(cid:13)
system hits top of(cid:13)
atmosphere and(cid:13)
interacts with air.

Top of atmosphere

Muon produced through(cid:13)
particle interactions and(cid:13)
decays in air.

Experiments that led(cid:13)
to discovery of muon(cid:13)
carried out on earths(cid:13)
surface. 

Path of muon penetrating(cid:13)
atmosphere, eventually(cid:13)
hitting surface of earth.

surface(cid:13)
of earth

11–98(cid:13)
8459A5

Figure 5: Cosmic rays and the discovery of the muon.

It is natural in scientiﬁc research to try to explain a new observation using estab-
lished knowledge. Well what sort of particles or rays were known? There was the
proton, but other experiments had shown that the protons interact readily with air
through what we now call the strong force; hence they would not be able to penetrate
below the top levels of the atmosphere. What about high-energy light rays, the x-rays
already discovered at the end of the nineteenth century [8]. Millikan, who had won
the Nobel prize for his measurements of the electron charge, liked this hypothesis.
He pushed his hypothesis without mercy, using his power as a dominant American
physicist. But Millikan was wrong. Experiments showed that the particle or ray that
made the air conductive could get through thick pieces of lead, pieces that were known
to stop x-rays. Here is a lovely illustration of another uncertainty in the practice of
science: great researchers can be wrong.

By the early 1930’s it was clear that mysterious particles had the ability to pen-
etrate long distances in air and to pass through thick pieces of lead. Since scientists
name eﬀects even when not understood, the phenomenon was called the penetrating
component in cosmic rays. In the practice of science naming a phenomenon does not
mean that the phenomenon is understood. The famous Oppenheimer even composed

12

Proton

Proton coming from outside atmosphere(cid:13)
collides with oxygen or nitrogen nucleus(cid:13)
in air.

Pions produced in collision.(cid:13)
Other particles not shown(cid:13)
are also produced.

Muons produced by decay(cid:13)
of some pions. Other pions(cid:13)
interact with other nuclei.

Muons penetrate atmosphere(cid:13)
with very little interaction.

11–98(cid:13)
8459A6

Figure 6: The process by which muons are produced in cosmic rays.

13

(a) Muon before it decays.

Muon

T(cid:13)
i(cid:13)
m(cid:13)
e

Electron

Other particle(cid:13)
is neutrino

(b) Electron plus two other(cid:13)
particles produced by decay(cid:13)
of neutron. The other particles(cid:13)
are neutrinos as described later.

Other particle(cid:13)
is neutrino

11–98(cid:13)
8459A7

Figure 7: The decay of a muon. (a) The muon before it decays. (b) The particles
produced by the decay.

a theory explaining that high-energy electrons could penetrate lots of material even
though it was well known that it is diﬃcult for low-energy electrons to penetrate
In the practice of science the very human desire to explain can lead to
material.
premature theories and wrong theories. Yes, Oppenheimer was wrong too.

Finally in 1937 three sets of experiments [9] reported that the penetrating compo-
nent could be explained by the existence of a particle more massive than an electron
but not as massive as a proton, a new particle eventually called the muon! It was
almost another ten years, however, before the full nature of the muon was determined.
A complicated story had to be unraveled. Protons and nuclei hitting the upper levels
of the atmosphere produce other particles, mostly pions, through the strong force,
Figure 6, and the pions in turn decay into muons. The muon does not have the strong
force and so interacts very little in the air or in other matter. Indeed it only interacts
enough to make the air conducting.

So both the muon and the electron lack the strong force. There is another simi-
larity: the muon’s electric charge is exactly the same as the electron’s charge. Hence
the muon acts electrically just like an electron. Well why don’t we have muonics,
muonic motors, muonic computers? The short answer is that the muon is unstable,
it decays in about 10−6 seconds, a millionth of a second; a longer answer comes later.
The muon decays because its mass is about 200 times the mass of the electron, and
the decay process, Figure 7, is

muon → electron + another particle + another particle.

What are these other particles that occur in the decay of the muon and also occurred

14

in the decay of the neutron? This was the question that led to the discovery of the
elementary particle, the neutrino.

Theory in science: the neutrino from theory to ﬁrst discovery.

The motivation that led to the discovery of the neutrino [10, 11] was very diﬀerent
from the motivation that led to the discovery of the electron and the muon. There
was not the need to explain a general phenomenon such as cathode rays or cosmic
rays; the need was to understand the experimental details of the decay process of the
neutron and other nuclear decays. Experiments had shown that the energy balance in
these decays required the production of “other particles” but the experiments could
not detect the “other particles.” The great theoretical physicist Pauli proposed in
the early 1930’s that the other particles, eventually called neutrinos, were particles
with no electric charge, with no strong force, and with very small or no mass. But
such particles had never been detected.

In the 1950’s Reines and Cowan set out to see if the neutrino really existed [10, 11].
They explained that their experiment was designed “...to show that the neutrino has
an independent existence, i.e.
that it can be detected away from the site of its
creation...” Therefore the motivation in the narrow sense was to test an hypothesis.
In a broader sense the motivation was to see if a particle with the strange properties
of the proposed neutrino could exist. This kind of motivation is very diﬀerent from
the phenomenon-driven motivations which led to the electron and muon discoveries.
The task undertaken by Reines and Cowan was to verify the neutron decay hy-

pothesis

neutron → proton + electron + neutrino

by showing that the neutrino existed. But how to do this? If the neutrino had
no electric charge and no strong force it would only occasionally interact in matter
through the aptly named weak force. Their answer had two parts. First they used a
nuclear reactor in which there is a tremendous rate of neutron decay to produce an
intense outﬂow of neutrinos, Figure 8. I should write a hypothetical intense outﬂow of
neutrinos because the existence of the neutrino had not been proven. The second part
of their answer was to use a large amount of matter in the form of liquid scintillator
to detect the occasional neutrino interaction in the scintillator. A scintillator is a
type of material that emits visible light when particles interact with the material.

The experiment worked and the adjective hypothetical was removed, an accom-
plishment for which Reines received the 1995 Nobel Prize in Physics. This is a classic
example of scientiﬁc discovery: puzzling experimental results leading to a bold new
hypothesis, and then conﬁrmation of the new hypothesis by a new and diﬀerent ex-
periment. But this simple sequence ignores the crucial use by Reines and Cowan
of new experimental technology, the nuclear reactor and the large liquid scintillator
detector. Scientiﬁc progress often depends upon the invention of new experimental
technology to verify new hypotheses.

15

Reactor

Apparatus containing scintillator.(cid:13)
Occasionally a neutrino interacts(cid:13)
in the scintillator and produces light.(cid:13)
Photomultiplier tubes change the (cid:13)
light into an electronic signal.

Scintillator

In the reactor, neutrons are continually decaying(cid:13)
into electron neutrinos. The neutrinos pass out of(cid:13)
the reactor in all directions. The dashed arrows(cid:13)
symbolize the paths of the neutrinos.

11–98(cid:13)
8459A8

Figure 8: The experiment of Reines and Cowan that demonstrated the existence of
neutrinos.

Scientiﬁc laws: mass and electric charge in subatomic physics.

In the biological, chemical and mechanical phenomena of our everyday lives the total
mass never changes. If you break a brick in two, the sum of the masses of the two
pieces is equal to the mass of the original brick. In the chemical reaction

sodium atom + chlorine atom → sodium chloride molecule

the mass of the sodium chloride molecule is equal to the sum of the masses of the
sodium atom and the chlorine atom. But in the world of subatomic particles one can
destroy mass, changing mass into energy. Or one can create mass by changing energy
into mass.

An example of destroying mass is muon decay (the “other particles” are neutrinos):

muon → electron + neutrino + neutrino.

The sum of the masses of the electron and the two neutrinos is less than the mass of
the muon. Some of the mass of the muon has been destroyed; it has been changed

16

(a) High energy electrons about to collide,(cid:13)
the arrows show the directions of motion.

Electrons

T(cid:13)
i(cid:13)
m(cid:13)
e

Muons

(b) In the course of the collision the electrons disappear(cid:13)
and two muons are produced. If the electrons had exactly(cid:13)
the amount of energy needed to make the muons, the muons(cid:13)
remain at the collision point.

(c) If the electrons have excess energy, the muons move away(cid:13)
from the collision point. 

11–98(cid:13)
8459A9

Muons

Figure 9: The collision of two electrons leading to the process electron + electron →
muon + muon. (a) Electrons about to collide. (b) Two produced muons if there is
just enough energy to make them. (c) Two produced muons moving away from the
collision point if the electrons had excess energy.

into energy. This process might be written

muon → electron + neutrino + neutrino + energy.

The inverse process, changing energy into mass became important to experimental
subatomic physics in the 1930’s with the inventions and improvements of particle
accelerators, a subject discussed in the next section. An example of changing energy
into mass is the reaction, Figure 9,

electron + electron → muon + muon.

The mass of a muon is about 200 times the mass of an electron. Therefore in this pro-
cess the electrons have to possess large amounts of energy, this energy being changed
into the masses of the muons.

17

I want to be a little more speciﬁc about this elementary particle reaction, changing
a pair of electrons into a pair of muons. Since electrons and muons have electric
charge that can be positive or negative, it is usual to specify the sign of the charge.
For example:

negative electron + positive electron → negative muon + positive muon.

Negative and positive units of electric charge have the same size for all known sub-
atomic particles, therefore on the left side of this process the negative charge exactly
cancels the positive charge and the total charge going into the reaction is zero. The
products of the reaction on the right side also have total charge zero.

The reactions

negative electron + negative electron → negative muon + negative muon

positive electron + positive electron → positive muon + positive muon

also work. In the ﬁrst of these there are two units of negative charge before and after
the reaction; in the second there are two units of positive charge before and after the
reaction. But to the best of our experimental knowledge the reaction

negative electron + positive electron → positive muon + positive muon

where the total amount of charge changes, never occurs. The rule is that the total
amount of charge going into a reaction must be the same as the total amount of
charge coming out of the reaction. This is called the law of the conservation of electric
charge. Again beware of terminology in the practice of science. No one understands
why charge cannot be created or destroyed. Experimental rules are often called laws
whether or not we understand the reason for the rule.

On the other hand we do understand why mass can be created or destroyed in a
reaction. Mass is just another form of energy; with the right apparatus and reaction,
chemical energy can be changed into mechanical energy and mechanical energy can
be changed into mass energy, or one can carry out any other combination of energy
changes.

Accelerators and high-energy physics.

The energy of a particle depends upon its velocity; the greater the velocity the greater
the energy. When we increase the velocity of an automobile or a particle we say we
are accelerating the automobile or the particle; and so the devices that increase the
velocities of particles are called accelerators [12]. The basic idea used in accelerators
is simple: a charged particle will accelerate in an electric ﬁeld because of the electric

18

(a) Basic method for particle acceleration

High energy electrons(cid:13)
leaving accelerator.(cid:13)

Electrons being accelerated(cid:13)
towards positively charged(cid:13)
metal plate.

Low energy electrons(cid:13)
entering accelerator.(cid:13)

Positively charged(cid:13)
metal plate.

Negatively charged(cid:13)
metal plate.

(b) Linear accelerator for protons

Proton being(cid:13)
accelerated(cid:13)
to the left.

7

6

5

4

3

2

1

11–98(cid:13)
8459A10

Figure 10:
(a) The basic method for particle acceleration showing how an electron
gains velocity as it is attracted by the positively charged plate and repelled by the
negatively charged plate. (b) The basic operation of a linear accelerator, here shown
for protons. As the proton moves to the left, the plates 2, 3, 4,...
in succession are
made negative, pulling the proton along and giving it more and more velocity.

force on the particle, Figure 10. But accelerator technology is complicated; I show
two simple, schematic examples in Figure 10.

Most present research in elementary particle physics uses high-energy particles
from accelerators, and so elementary particle physics is also called high-energy physics.
And indeed it can be very high energy. For example a proton can be given so much

19

(cid:13)
(cid:13)
energy that in the collision with another proton dozens of pions can be produced:

proton + proton → proton + proton + dozens of pions.

Two kinds of neutrinos and the lepton family.

A major discovery using a high-energy accelerator was the experimental proof in the
middle 1960’s that there are two kinds of neutrinos [10, 11]. One associated with the
electron called an electron neutrino, the other associated with the muon, called the
muon neutrino. Indeed in the decay of a muon these two kinds of neutrinos appear,
for example:

negative muon → negative electron + muon neutrino + electron neutrino.

I have put in the electric charges in these muon decays to emphasize again that total
charge does not change in a reaction. Of course the electric charge of neutrinos is
zero. I hope elementary particle physics cognoscente will forgive me for not drawing a
distinction here, or in the previous sections, between a neutrino and an antineutrino.
In an experiment for which Lederman, Schwartz, and Steinberger received the
Nobel Prize, a high-energy neutrino beam was produced indirectly by a high-energy
proton accelerator. When these neutrinos interacted with matter only muons were
produced, not electrons, Figure 11. Hence these neutrinos were muon associated. As I
have explained neutrinos rarely interact and so it was not an easy experiment. Other
later experiments have shown that one can use an accelerator to make a diﬀerent kind
of neutrino, neutrinos that produce only electrons when they interact with matter.

Muon neutrinos associated with muons, electron neutrinos associated with elec-
trons, does this sound like a tautology? It is not a tautology but the terminology
promises more than we actually know. We do know that there are these two diﬀerent
kinds of neutrinos, one associated with the electron, one associated with the muon.
But we do not understand the mechanism of that association. For example, is there
something inside the electron that is also inside the electron neutrino? Allowing some
anthropomorphism, how does a neutrino, a particle of perhaps no size, know that it
is associated with an electron, another particle of perhaps no size? The lesson here
about the practice of science is again that terminology may appear to have deeper
meaning than is warranted.

By the middle 1960’s the electron, muon, and the two neutrinos were thought
of as forming a family, the lepton family, Table 2. The identiﬁcation of the lepton
family was based on two considerations. First, these four particles have nothing to do
with the strong force. Second, they had very small masses compared to most other
subatomic particles, less mass than the proton, less mass than the neutron, and less
mass than other subatomic particles such as the pion. The Greek word leptos means
small or ﬁne, the electron, muon and two neutrinos were thought to be the smallest
mass subatomic particles. Again not a profound terminology.

20

Direction of motion(cid:13)
of muon neutrinos

Steel plate

Almost all neutrinos(cid:13)
pass through the plate(cid:13)
without interacting.

a

b

c

Once in a while the muon(cid:13)
neutrino interacts in the plate(cid:13)
making a muon.

But the muon neutrino(cid:13)
never makes an electron(cid:13)
in the plate.

11–98(cid:13)
8459A11

21

Figure 11: The experiment of Lederman, Schwartz, and Steinberger that demon-
strated the existence of two kinds of neutrinos. Most of the muon neutrinos do not
interact in the steel plate as in (a), occasionally a neutrino interacts to make a muon
as in (b), but the muon neutrino never makes an electron as in (c).

Table 2: The properties of the charged leptons and their associated neutrinos. The
electric charge of the charged leptons is 1.6 × 10−19 coulombs. The neutrinos, have
zero electric charge. The masses of the leptons are given in terms of the electron mass,
for example the muon has 207 times the mass of the electron. At present we are sure
of only upper limits on the neutrino masses, but we may be on the verge of knowing
more about neutrino masses, as discussed at the end of the paper. The actual mass
of the electron is about 10−27 grams. For additional information on lepton properties
see [6].

Charged lepton name
Years from ﬁrst research to ﬁ-
nal discovery
Charged lepton symbol
Charged lepton mass in terms
of electron mass
Charged lepton lifetime in sec-
onds
Associated neutrino name
Associated neutrino symbol
Upper limit on mass of associ-
ated neutrino in terms of elec-
tron mass
Upper limit on mass of asso-
ciated neutrino in terms of its
charged lepton mass

Electron
1860 to 1895

Muon
1925 to 1945

Tau
1970 to 1978

e
1

stable

µ
207

τ
3480

2.2 × 10−6

2.9 × 10−13

electron neutrino muon neutrino
νe
less than 1/50,000
of electron mass

νµ
less than 1/3 of
electron mass

less than 1/50,000
of electron mass

less than 1/600
of muon mass

tau neutrino
ντ
than 40
less
times electron
mass
less than 1/90
of tau mass

There is one other particle that also has a very small mass, probably exactly
zero mass. Sometimes light interacts with matter as a particle, not as a light wave,
and this particle is called a photon. I mentioned the photon at the beginning of the
paper as belonging to the third family of elementary particles, particles that carry the
basic forces. In this paper, I cannot give an explanation useful to the reader of the
diﬀerence between the lepton family and this third family. All I can say is that the
photon behaves very diﬀerently from the electron, muon, and neutrinos; to include it
in the lepton family would destroy the meaning of the lepton classiﬁcation.

Applications of basic research: electrons, muons, and neutri-
nos.

The electric telegraph was developed and put into use in the in the ﬁrst half of the
nineteenth century [13] long before the discovery of the electron, even though its
operation depends on the properties of electrons in metals. The same is true of the

22

electric motor, electric generator, telephone, and electric lights; all were invented and
used before the discovery of the electron, although all depend on the properties of the
electron. Even the early days of wireless technology were not based on electron physics
[14]. The invention and use of new technology need not depend on basic research; in
fact for most of history it has not depended on basic research.

With the discovery of the electron and the understanding of its behavior in solids,
gases, and vacuums, however, many more inventions were possible. Radio technology,
until the commercial use of the transistor in the 1950’s, depended upon the vacuum
tube in which the electric current is carried through the vacuum by electrons going
from the cathode to the anode, the old cathode ray idea. Of course the transistor,
the integrated circuit, and the computer all depend upon a thorough understanding
of the behavior of electrons in semiconductor metals such as silicon [15]. And so we
have become very use to the idea that basic research can lead to new technology: the
wonder of the computer, the horror of nuclear weapons.

I wrote earlier that we cannot use muons in electron technology because the muons
are unstable. In addition muons behave very diﬀerently in matter from electrons. New
discoveries sometimes can be used to duplicate or improve old technology, but more
often new discoveries lead to new technology or no technology.

There is a possibility that muons might someday be used in a new energy technol-
ogy. The sun produces energy by the fusion of nuclei. As a simpliﬁed example, if a
proton fuses with a deuteron, a combined nucleus plus energy is produced, Figure 12:

proton + deuteron → combined nucleus + energy.

A proton is the nucleus of the hydrogen atom and a deuteron is the nucleus of the
hydrogen atom found in heavy water. Both exist naturally, but the problem is get-
ting the proton and the deuteron to collide with suﬃcient force to fuse. The high
temperature of the sun and stars produces the required forceful collisions. By the
way, this high temperature requirement is also the reason for the lack of success in
producing energy on Earth through controlled fusion.

But negative muons can produce proton-deuteron fusion at room temperature.
This was demonstrated and understood decades ago. The negative charge of the
muon pulls together the positively charged proton and positively charged deuteron;
no extra temperature is needed, Figure 13. Where then are the muon fusion reactors?
The problem is that muons decay, and so new muons have to be continually created
using an accelerator. With existing accelerator technology the energy required to
produce the muons is greater than the energy from the fusion. No one has yet
designed a suﬃciently eﬃcient accelerator, but it may not be impossible to do so.
Sometimes new discoveries can in principle lead to new technology, but economics or
unfortunate technological problems may prevent practical use.

What about the neutrinos? Do they oﬀer any practical uses? There have been
suggestions that muon neutrino beams could be used for geological research and
prospecting deep in the Earth. The rate of interaction of the neutrinos would be

23

(a) A proton and a deuteron(cid:13)
about to collide. A deuteron(cid:13)
is a nucleus consisting of(cid:13)
a proton plus a neutron.

p

Neutron

n

Proton

p

T(cid:13)
i(cid:13)
m(cid:13)
e

Deuteron

(b) The proton and the deuteron fuse to form a nucleus(cid:13)
with two protons plus one neutron. Energy, indicated(cid:13)
by the outgoing arrows, is also produced. The nucleus(cid:13)
is 3He.(cid:13)

11–98(cid:13)
8459A12

n

p

p

Figure 12:
Simpliﬁed example of energy production by high-temperature nuclear
fusion. In (a) a proton and a deuteron are about to collide because of the velocities
they have acquired via high temperature. In (b) after the collision, the proton and
deuteron fuse into a 3He nucleus and also produce energy. A deuteron is a nucleus
consisting of a proton and a neutron; it is the nucleus of heavy hydrogen. This is a
simpliﬁed example of the fusion reactions that produce energy in our sun, in stars,
and in the fusion (usually called hydrogen) bomb.

24

(cid:13)
(a) A negatively charged muon pulls the proton(cid:13)
and deuteron together. The deuteron is a nucleus(cid:13)
consisting of a proton and a neutron.

p

Proton

Negative(cid:13)
muon

T(cid:13)
i(cid:13)
m(cid:13)
e

n

p

p

n

p

Deuteron

11–98(cid:13)
8459A13

(b) The proton and the deuteron fuse to form a nucleus(cid:13)
with two protons plus one neutron. Energy, indicated(cid:13)
by the outgoing arrows, is also produced. The muon(cid:13)
will eventually decay.(cid:13)

Figure 13: Simpliﬁed example of energy production by muon-induced nuclear fusion.
In (a) a proton and a deuteron are being pulled together by a negatively charged muon.
In (b) after the collision, the proton and deuteron fuse into a 3He nucleus and also
produce energy. The muon eventually decays. This process has been demonstrated
experimentally, but it is not at present commercially feasible because too much energy
is required to produce the muons.

25

(cid:13)
proportional to the density of matter; the interaction rate being measured by the
muons so produced. A grand but futuristic engineering project.

Puzzles in science: the electron-muon problem.

I now come to my research in lepton physics. In 1963 I joined the Stanford Linear
Accelerator Center, SLAC, to do research in high-energy physics. I had been working
with particles that interacted through the strong force, a broad and popular, but
complicated, area. I wanted to work in a simpler area and so my thoughts turned
to the known leptons before 1970: the electron, the muon, and the two neutrinos,
Table 2.
I was particularly intrigued by the connection between the electron and
muon. With respect to the electromagnetic force, and the absence of the strong force,
the muon behaves simply as a heavier electron, 207 times heavier. But why is it 207
times heavier?

Another puzzle was understanding the muon decay

negative muon → negative electron + muon neutrino + electron neutrino.

Why doesn’t the muon decay to the electron through the simpler process

negative muon → negative electron + photon ?

The photon has very small or zero mass just like the neutrinos, and the photon has zero
electric charge so that the charge is the same on both sides of the decay reaction. By
the middle 1960’s these questions and puzzles were called the electron-muon problem.
I thought that SLAC would be an excellent place to work on the electron-muon
problem. A high-energy electron accelerator was being built at SLAC, intense beams
of high-energy electrons were available, and SLAC researchers were starting experi-
ments on the collision of electrons with protons and nuclei. It was also easy to use
the electrons to make beams of high-energy muons. I decided to start high-energy
experiments on the collision of muons with protons and nuclei.

Obsession in science.

I was obsessed with a simple idea. Since the muon is much heavier than the elec-
tron, I speculated that the muon somehow had some of the heavier proton’s nature.
Therefore I thought that the collisions of muons with protons would be diﬀerent from
the collisions of electrons with protons. Don’t try to follow this idea in detail because
after ﬁve years of experiments with muons I realized in the early 1970’s that I should
give up this idea.

My colleagues and I found that there would always be errors of 10 or 15% in com-
parisons of our muon-proton collision measurements with the electron-proton collision
measurements of the other SLAC researchers. We knew of no way to improve the

26

precision of our experiments. And so even though obsessed with the electron-muon
problem I gave up. It is important in the practice of science to know when to be ob-
sessed and when to give up the obsession; it is important to learn the art of scientiﬁc
obsession. A scientist needs obsession to keep going through the ups and downs of
research, but obsession can also lead to years or decades of pointless research. There
should be some comfort in the thought that if an idea is good, scientists will return
to it in future years with better experiments and better theoretical understanding.

To close this part of the story, since the early 1970’s there have been many better
experiments on muon-proton collisions, experiments carried out for other reasons.
These experiments have shown that nothing can be learned about the electron-muon
problem from such experiments. Thus it was lucky that I gave up the obsession.
Of course sometimes one gives up a scientiﬁc obsession, only to ﬁnd that years later
others have made it pay oﬀ.

My attack on the electron-muon problem being thwarted by nature, I turned
to another idea that had been in my mind since the early 1960’s. Perhaps there
was another undiscovered and more massive charged lepton, a heavy relative of the
electron and the muon. As my attack on the electron-muon problem began to go
badly, I became more and more optimistic about ﬁnding a new charged lepton. As
Voltaire wrote in Candide, “Optimism, said Candide, is a mania for maintaining that
all is well when things are going badly.”

Simple ideas in science: my search for a new lepton.

I thought that the electron and the
I became obsessed with another simple idea.
muon might be the smallest mass members of a much larger family of leptons. I drew
for myself the following chart:

We know that there is:
We know that there is:
Perhaps there is:
Perhaps there is:
And so forth

with its associated neutrino.
an electron
with its associated neutrino.
a muon heavier than electron
with its associated neutrino?
a lepton#3 heavier than muon
a lepton#4 heavier than lepton#3 with its associated neutrino?

Thus I dreamed that there were a large number of more and more massive charged
leptons: electron, muon, lepton#3, lepton#4, lepton#5 and so forth; and that each
of these charged leptons had an associated neutrino. Why such a large number?
Because I didn’t see why there should be any upper limit to the mass of a lepton.

I had a hidden motivation in this search for new leptons. No one had solved the
electron-muon problem; there were not enough clues. But if an additional charged
lepton were to be discovered, then we would have the electron-muon-lepton#3 prob-
lem. We would surely have more clues. A basic principle in the practice of science:
if you can’t solve a problem get more data.

27

I decided the best way to look for these additional charged leptons was to copy

the old reaction

negative electron + positive electron → negative muon + positive muon.

We could look for new lepton#3 by using the reaction

negative electron + positive electron → negative lepton#3 + positive lepton#3.

Of course we would be delighted to ﬁnd any new lepton, lepton#3 or lepton#4 or
lepton#5.

It was a very optimistic proposal: these hypothetical leptons had to exist and our
experimental equipment had to work well enough for us to ﬁnd them. An obvious
worry was that the new leptons might exist, but we might not have enough energy
to produce the required masses.

I followed a rule of mine for starting new science ventures. If you get a new idea
for an experiment, don’t spend forever trying to understand every detail of how you
will carry it out, just start. You will learn as you proceed with the experiment. There
is a problem in this rule. Usually one gets ﬁve or ten bad or fruitless ideas for every
good idea. This means that you will spend much time on bad ideas. Unfortunately in
the practice of experimental physics, it usually takes time to identify the good idea.

The discovery of the tau lepton.

Most people in the high-energy physics community of the early 1970’s didn’t know
or didn’t care about this search for new leptons. Of those who did know about the
search, most were skeptical, even among my colleagues. In the practice of science
there is often a choice between working in a popular area that most colleagues feel is
fruitful or working in an unpopular area that most colleagues feel is a waste of time
and research money. Most of the time the popular ﬁeld is the fruitful ﬁeld, but a
discovery in an unpopular area brings more satisfaction and more fame. In the end
it is a question of one’s personality.

About 1970 we were completing at SLAC the construction of an electron collider
called SPEAR. Electron colliders, Figure 14, were a new technology in high-energy
physics; their development began in the 1960’s. Electron colliders provide the means
to collide negative electrons with positive electrons at high energy with great inten-
sity. The work I am about to describe could not have been done without the new
technology of electron colliders. As I have already written, in the practice of science
new technology is often crucial.

In 1973 the SPEAR electron collider began operation and my colleagues and I
began to look for a new lepton. By 1975 we began to ﬁnd evidence for the existence
of a third lepton, a lepton much more massive than the muon, in fact about 17 times

28

Circular Electron Collider

Cluster of(cid:13)
positive(cid:13)
electrons.(cid:13)

Cluster of(cid:13)
negative(cid:13)
electrons.(cid:13)

11–98(cid:13)
8459A14

Figure 14:
Schematic diagram of a circular electron collider. A cluster of high-
energy negative electrons and a cluster of high-energy positive electrons move along
a circular path in opposite directions as shown by the arrows. The clusters meet at
points A and B. When the clusters meet most of the electrons pass by each other, but
sometimes a negative electron collides with a positive electron. Then reactions occur
such as electron + electron → muon + muon and electron + electron → tau + tau.

more massive! My close colleagues and I were excited, delighted, and overjoyed. We
were detecting the reaction

negative electron + positive electron → negative lepton#3 + positive lepton#3.

We knew it was lepton#3 because our experiments and other experiments had shown
there was no other lepton with a mass greater than the muon but less than that of
lepton#3.

But the larger elementary particle physics community remained skeptical, doubt-
ing and criticizing our research. The problem was that while we continued to ﬁnd
more and more evidence for the existence of a new lepton, other experimenters could

A

B

29

(cid:13)
(cid:13)
not verify our results using somewhat similar experimental methods. Furthermore a
few of these experimenters were not eager to ﬁnd veriﬁcation. A somewhat unpleas-
ant consequence of scientiﬁc competition is that once a discovery is claimed, others
can get more credit for disproving the claim than for verifying the claim. It was a
tough few years for me; our evidence kept growing but there was no outside veriﬁca-
tion. Certainty in science comes from veriﬁcation of one’s ﬁndings by others; this is
fundamental scientiﬁc practice. It allows the eventual overcoming of uncertainties in
scientiﬁc practice.

Finally in late 1977 other experimenters began to ﬁnd our new lepton. We gave
lepton#3 the Greek name tau, because tau, written as τ , is the ﬁrst letter of the
Greek word for third. And so the reaction becomes

negative electron + positive electron → negative tau + positive tau.

The road from diﬃcult research to easy research: the tau
lepton.

Our discovery was based upon studying about one hundred examples of this reaction
and the properties of the tau leptons so produced. Today I work with an experiment
at Cornell University where millions of these reactions have been detected and millions
of tau leptons have been studied. An improved electron collider at Cornell, and new
electron colliders at my laboratory SLAC and at the KEK laboratory in Japan, will
enable physicists to study ten million examples per year of

negative electron + positive electron → negative tau + positive tau.

Usually improvements in technology allow obscure and diﬃcult scientiﬁc studies to
become easier and easier. This adds to the certainty of scientiﬁc results. If studies of
a phenomenon never get easier, if the technology for carrying out the studies never
improves, then it is most probably not science that is being practiced. Thus for psychic
phenomena: it is no easier to verify the reality of telepathy than it was ﬁve hundred
years ago.

A few notes on the properties of the tau. Its mass is 3480 times the mass of the
electron, Table 2. It has the same size electric charge as the electron, and like the
electron and muon, it has nothing to do with the strong force. It is indeed a lepton.
With the discovery of the tau, however, the name lepton has lost its original meaning.
The tau is not a light particle it is a heavy particle having about twice the mass of
the proton. There is a neutrino associated with the tau called, of course, the tau
neutrino.

The tau, like the muon, is unstable.

It decays in an average time of roughly
10−13 seconds. There are many ways in which the tau decays, but two of these ways
beautifully demonstrate connections between the electron, the muon, and the tau.

30

Recall that the muon decays through the process

negative muon → negative electron + electron neutrino + muon neutrino.

Two of the ways the tau decays are

negative tau → negative electron + electron neutrino + tau neutrino

negative tau → negative muon + muon neutrino + tau neutrino.

Nature can be cruel: the electron-muon-tau problem.

I had dreamed that once a new lepton was found, the properties of the new lepton
would provide new clues to the inner nature of leptons, indirectly solving the old
electron-muon problem. Now in 1998 we know a tremendous amount about the
properties of the tau lepton. There have been hundreds of physics Ph.D. theses
on the properties of the tau, more than a thousand experimental and theoretical
papers on the tau, and every two years we hold an international conference devoted
solely to the tau. But there are no new clues to the inner nature of the leptons.
If you assume that the tau behaves exactly like a heavier version of the muon, and
if you use knowledge acquired in other parts of subatomic physics, you can predict
quantitatively the behavior of the tau.

From one point of view this is wonderful, it shows that we are developing certain
and consistent understanding of the behavior of elementary particles. But from the
point of view of those who want to push deeper into the world of elementary particles,
who want to push below the bottom of Figure 1, this is disheartening. Nature can be
cruel.

The uncertainty of research directions: are there more lep-
tons?

If you look back a few pages you will see that I dreamed not only of lepton#3, but
also lepton#4 and lepton#5 and so on. Since the discovery of the tau there have
been many, many searches for additional leptons. Yet no more have been found. I
am as surprised as anyone. The powerful method we used to discover the tau

negative electron + positive electron → negative tau + positive tau

has been used at ever-increasing energies to search for the next charged lepton

negative electron + positive electron → negative lepton#4 + positive lepton#4.

As I write this paper these searches have been carried out at the CERN European
laboratory up to energies more than 50 times greater than the energy at which we

31

discovered the tau. No new charged lepton has been found. This means that if
lepton#4 exists, its mass is larger than about 50 times the mass of the tau, about
180,000 times the mass of the electron. In addition by a related method, experimenters
have searched for heavier neutrinos; nothing has been found beyond the three known
neutrinos, those associated with the electron, muon, and tau. The searches at CERN
are not completed; they will extend about 10% higher in energy. Sometimes in the
practice of science, changing one parameter in an experiment can lead to a discovery;
it can be a change in energy or in precision or in the amount of data.

About ten years from now, perhaps a little later, a new kind of electron collider
called a linear collider will go into operation. This new technology accelerator is being
developed at SLAC, in Japan, and in Europe. It will produce ﬁve times more energy
than existing electron colliders.

For the present there are two possibilities. One possibility is that there are no
more leptons beyond the six in Table 2. That’s bad because at present we don’t
understand why the number of lepton types is limited and we may not get any more
clues from studying the leptons themselves. But there are smart young women and
men entering high-energy physics; they may bring us that understanding.

The other possibility is that there are more leptons, and we just don’t know how
to ﬁnd them. Each of the known leptons was discovered using a diﬀerent experimen-
tal technology. The electron was found in the cathode ray phenomenon, the muon
was found in cosmic rays, the electron neutrino was found using a reactor, the dif-
ference between the electron neutrino and the muon neutrino was discovered using
a high-energy proton accelerator, and the tau was found using an electron collider.
Perhaps this was simply because the discoveries stretched over a hundred years and
technologies keep changing; or perhaps leptons are so elusive that a new technology
is required for each discovery.

Perhaps the next charged lepton is so massive that it is beyond the energy reach
of present or near future searches using electron collider technology, even searches
using the projected linear colliders. Thus there is an uncertain future for the hundred
years of research on new leptons. We may have to give up much hope of ﬁnding new
leptons, or we have to ﬁnd a new technology. This is how a research direction can
become uncertain even though it has been fruitful.

Speculative experiments and the practice of science.

But I have not given up; I have been speculating about other possibilities. In fact my
colleagues and I are carrying out experiments based on these speculations. Perhaps
there is a new type of massive, charged lepton that already exists in nature. Suppose
this new type lepton was stable like the electron and had been produced in the
early universe, perhaps in the “big bang.” Then it might be present in old pieces of
matter such as meteorites and ancient rocks. For convenience I am going to call this
hypothetical new lepton the lambda. But if the lambda is massive, why should it be

32

stable, why shouldn’t it decay like the muon and the tau:

negative lambda → negative muon + muon neutrino + lambda neutrino

negative lambda → negative electron + electron neutrino + lambda neutrino ?

These decays would be prevented and the lambda made stable by two kinds of spec-
ulative changes in the usual properties of a charged lepton. One speculation is that
the lambda does not have the usual size of electric charge, but has some fractional
electric charge, say 1/2 of the usual charge or 5/4 of the usual charge. Then the
decays written above would not occur because the electric charge would be diﬀerent
after the decay compared to the electric charge before the decay. And as far as we
know the total electric charge cannot change in a reaction.

The other speculation is based on the observation that the muon and tau need
their associated neutrinos in order to decay. If one assumes that there is no neutrino
associated with the lambda, then its decay might be prevented.

My colleagues and I at SLAC are carrying out experiments searching for massive,
stable leptons. We are not using accelerators; we are using a highly automated and
modernized version of the apparatus used by Millikan ninety years ago to measure the
electron’s charge [16]. If one is going to engage in a speculative experiment, there are
three criteria that should be satisﬁed. One should make sure that the speculation does
not violate established scientiﬁc knowledge. Carrying out the experiment should be
interesting and pleasurable, that may be the only reward. It should be easy for others
to duplicate the experiment so that the veriﬁcation of a speculation can be checked.

Neutrino masses and a surprising return to cosmic rays.

I am about ﬁnished with my recounting of a hundred years of lepton research and
what it teaches us about the practice of science. There is one more episode having to
do with the masses of the neutrinos. It has been very hard to measure these masses;
we only know for certain the upper limits given in Table 2, and there is even the
possibility that neutrinos have zero mass.

For decades it has been suspected, or at least hoped, that neutrinos might change
into each other, a muon neutrino change into an electron neutrino, or the converse, an
electron neutrino change into a muon neutrino, or a muon neutrino change into a tau
neutrino. If such changes could occur, then a general principle of quantum mechanics
predicts that the rate of change depends on the masses of the neutrinos.
In the
last decade there have been many searches for this neutrino-changing phenomenon.
Experimenters have used electron neutrinos from reactors, the same neutrinos that
Reines and Cowan ﬁrst detected. Experimenters have used muon neutrino beams from
high-energy accelerators, the same sort of beam used by Lederman, Schwartz, and
Steinberger to show that there are two kinds of neutrinos. But all these experiments
have been inconclusive at best.

33

Now, as the century ends, the phenomenon of neutrino-changing may have been
ﬁnally detected in of all places, cosmic rays. One eﬀect of cosmic rays is to produce
muon neutrinos, and these muon neutrinos pass through the atmosphere and into
the Earth. We know enough about cosmic rays to predict how many muon neutri-
nos should hit the Earth’s surface per second. A vast new underground apparatus in
Japan, called Super-Kamiokanda, has been used to count the number of muon neutri-
nos, and there seem not to be enough of them [17]. Furthermore, it seems as though
the missing muon neutrinos have changed into tau neutrinos or into some unknown
neutrino, but not into electron neutrinos. This means that the muon neutrino and
perhaps the tau neutrino deﬁnitely have a non-zero mass. But it could be a very
small mass, less than 1/1,000,000 of the electron mass.

These ﬁrst results require veriﬁcation from other experiments looking at cosmic
rays and elucidation from experiments using reactors or accelerators. Still the results
demonstrate the surprises that can occur in science. Surprises are the best part of the
practice of science, but most surprises require the experimenters to do something new
and diﬀerent, such as examining a new phenomenon or applying a new technology to
an old phenomenon.

Looking ahead.

An up-to-date physicist in 1899 would have known about the electron and some of
its properties, but would have not been able to know anything else about the rest
of the world of lepton physics. We are in the analogous state of ignorance in 1999.
Whatever the science–physics, chemistry, biology, psychology–we cannot know what
we will learn in the next hundred years. We only know that the practice of science is
full of uncertainties and that the test of reality is always experiment and observation.
Darwin wrote, “I must begin with a good body of facts and not from a principle (in
which I always suspect some fallacy) and then as much deduction as you like.”

Appendix on very large and very small numbers.

It is tedious to write and hard to decipher a very large number such as 100,000,000,000.
It is better to use the notation 10N where N tells us the amount of zeros in the number.
One thousand = 1,000 = 103
For example:
One million = 1,000,000 = 106
Ten million = 10,000,000 = 107.

A number such as 1.5 × 107 means 1.5 × 10, 000, 000.

An analogous system is used for very small numbers such as 1/100,000. The
number is written 10−N, where the negative sign indicates that the number of zeros
that are in the denominator. Thus

A number such as 1.5 × 10−6 means 1.5/1,000,000.

1/1,000 = 10−3
1/1,000,000 = 10−6.

34

References

Singapore, 1996)

[1] M. L. Perl, Reﬂections on Experimental Science (World Scientiﬁc Publishing,

[2] A. Pais, Inward Bound (Clarendon Press, Oxford, 1986)

[3] P. F. Dahl, Flash of The Cathode Ray (Institute of Physics Publishing, Bristol,

1997)

[4] M. L. Perl in Les Prix Nobel, 1995 (Almqvist and Wirksell, Stockholm, 1996),

Eds. T. Fr¨angsmyr and B. Lundeberg, p. 53

[5] J. Horgan, The End of Science (Addison-Wesley, Reading, 1996)

[6] Two basic books on particle physics for the general reader are: G. Kane, The
Particle Garden (Addison-Wesley, Reading, 1995) and F. Close, M. Marten, and
C. Sutton, The Particle Explosion (Oxford University Press, New York, 1987)

[7] P. C. W. Davies and J. Brown, Superstrings (Cambridge University Press, Cam-

bridge, 1989)

Publishing, Bristol, 1995)

[8] R. F. Mould, A Century of X-rays and Radioactivity in Medicine (Inst. of Physics

[9] The Birth of Particle Physics (Cambridge Univ. Press, Cambridge, 1983)

Eds. L. M. Brown and L. Hoddeson

[10] C. Sutton, Spaceship Neutrino (Cambridge Univ. Press, Cambridge, 1993)

[11] N. Solomey, The Elusive Neutrino (Scientiﬁc American Library, New York, 1997)

[12] I don’t know recent books on accelerators for the for the non-specialist, but there
is much material about accelerators and their use in L. Hoddeson, L. Brown,
M. Riordan, and M. Dresden, The Rise of the Standard Model (Cambridge
Univ. Press, Cambridge, 1997), and in P. Galison, Image & Logic(Univ. Chicago
Press, Chicago, 1997)

[13] P. Dunsheath, A History of Electrical Engineering (Faber and Faber, London,
1962); R. Conot, A Streak of Luck, The Life and Legend of Thomas Alva Edison
(Seaview Books, New York, 1979); D. E. Nye, Electrifying America (MIT Press,
Cambridge, 1991)

[14] T. Lewis, Empire of the Air (HarperCollins, New York, 1991)

[15] M. Riordan and L. Hoddeson, CRYSTAL FIRE: The Birth of the Information

Age (Norton, New York, 1997)

35

[16] M. L. Perl and E. R. Lee, American Journal of Physics, 65, 698 (1997), M. L. Perl,

The Physical Review, 57, 4441 (1998)

[17] Science 280, 1689 (1998)

36

