9
9
9
1
 
r
p
A
 
6
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
t
s
i
h
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
8
5
0
4
0
9
9
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Supersymmetry : A new organizing principle for
the microworld?∗

U. A. Yajnik†
Physics Department, Indian Institute of Technology Bombay,
Mumbai 400 076

Abstract

A glorious achievement of twentieth century Physics is the identiﬁcation of the
building blocks of nature. A related triumph a deep understanding of the forces of
interaction. In particular, it has been possible to understand the four fundamental
forces of nature in an elegant and uniﬁed mathematical framework. The paradigm
for this uniﬁcation has been the principle of gauge symmetry.

A new approach to achieving further uniﬁcation relies on Supersymmetry. This
is a symmetry which relates particles of integer spin with those of half-integral spin
and also dictates the allowed interactions among these particles. However, no data
exist pointing to the presence of this symmetry; it may indeed be of no relevance
to nature.

In this paper the gauge principle and uniﬁcation attempts are brieﬂy reviewed,
and then Supersymmetry is introduced. The notion of “broken” symmetry is dis-
cussed, which may explain why the symmetry is diﬃcult to observe at presently
accessible energies. But a badly broken manifestation seems to remove much of the
original appeal and elegance of the theory. We here propose two alternative views of
the status of Supersymmetry from fundamental standpoint. There is a good reason
why it is indeed a fundamental symmetry, despite badly broken. The alternative is
that it is an organizing principle, somewhat like valence. This makes it valuable as
a signpost to new Physics.

1 Prologue

This paper deals with a topic of current interest in Theoretical Physics and is presented
to the forum of historians and philosophers of science. It assumes familiarity at the pop-
ular level with developments in High Energy Physics and with basic Quantum Physics.

∗Presented at the Seminar on Philosophy of Science, IIT Bombay, February 1998
†e-mail : yajnik@niharika.phy.iitb.ernet.in

1

In rephrasing technical statements, an attempt is made to remain close to the truth,
albeit selectively. Math is used sparingly but some formulae are displayed in the hope
that they will give the reader an opening into more detailed literature. Sections 2 and
3 deal with the paradigm of symmetry as it has come to be understood in this century.
Supersymmetry is an elegant symmetry principle, but seems to not be operating
in nature in its simplest version. Section 4 deals with Supersymmetry; the idea, its
appeal and its failings. Section 5 presents two alternatives for the metaphysical status
of Supersymmetry in case it is indeed discovered.

2 The intangible microworld

The macroscopic world directly impinges on the senses and demands systematizing prin-
ciples. Presenting itself in many diﬀerent contexts, it also provides ample clues for arriv-
ing at such principles. Majority of the phenomena of common experience are correctly
described by Newtonian principles, complemented by laws governing electromagnetism,
hydrodynamics and so on.

The microscopic world is nevertheless present. It is intangible except for a few tan-
gible and powerful clues. The shape and solidity of the world relies on Fermi statistics.
Several phenomenological constants contain Planck’s constant or Avogadro’s number.
The scientist has had to progressively become a detective relying on skimpy evidence
to pursue the trail of an elusive and magniﬁcent if unseeable reality.

Consider an example of clues leading to detection. Valence was wrested from Chem-
ical phenomena, after much confusion and controversy. Mendeleev’s periodic table, at
ﬁrst based on valence, systematized the elements and predicted new ones. The raison
d’etre of the table remained a mystery until the electronic structure of the atom could
be understood. This in turn needed the Pauli exclusion principle for its explanation; in
turn bringing us to the very heart of microscopic phenomena, the fundamental indis-
tinguishability of quanta. The message of Quantum Mechanics is that only the possible
quantum states of a collection of quanta that are distinct, not the quanta themselves.

2.1 The metaphysics of insight

An important paradigm for theoretical progress in this century has been symmetry
principles. This is in contrast to the development of Electromagnetism which occurred
over about two centuries, during which theory and experiment progressed step by step,
aiding each other. The exploration of the microworld beginning with radioactivity did
not enjoy such a luxury of wealth of data, nor of easily constructible and repeatable
experiments.

2

The developments starting during 1880’s and culminating in 1930’s therefore relied
on deep insights guided by certain metaphysical assumptions. Here and in the following,
by metaphysical we shall mean principles external to the discipline of physics itself, but
nevertheless conceived and used by professionals. It is the implicit use of such principles
that is the subject of this paper. Also, being external to the discipline itself, they
appropriately form the subject matter of Philosophy of Science.

There are two simple but deep principles used universally in science. These are,
(1) universal applicability of the concepts, (2) consistency of the epistemy. By the
latter we mean the expectation that existing technical frameworks or formalisms will
apply also to a relatively new domain of phenomena. An example of above principles
at work is provided by the discovery of Bose Statistics. Planck’s explanation of Black
Body radiation relied on assumption of absorption and emission of radiation energy
in quanta. Einstein made this fact into a new concept, that of a photon, and used it
to explain photoelectric eﬀect. This put the photon on a more general footing. The
next step, which took many years in coming, was taken by Bose who assumed that
the thermodynamics of photons must be deducible from a counting of states just as in
classical Statistical Mechanics. This is what we mean by principle (2). There was one
revolutionary new input required however. The counting of states is based on strict
indistinguishability among the photons.

We cite these as examples of insight working in conjunction with above guiding
principles.
In the Quantum domain however, both proved unreliable. Neither the
concepts could be universally applied, nor the epistemy. Mathematically precise entities
and rules were in some sense the only infallible guide. Which concepts would remain
robust and what exactly these rules were took a long time for its understanding. Barring
possible new phenomena such as Hawking radiation, Quantum Mechanics as we know
today is consistent and complete but does not cease to evoke disbelief even in eminent
practitioners.

There was however another metaphysical principle which was emerging as means of
guessing ahead. Very loosely it may be called the principle that the equations must
It was based on this principle
be elegant and must incorporate a certain symmetry.
that Einstein’s theory of Gravitation and Dirac’s theory for the relativistic electron
were accepted by Physics community with awe and excitement even before they could
be completely established. In its highly evolved form today, it has come to be further
formalized as a demand for the existence of precise, mathematically implementable
symmetry principles.

The origins of this metaphysical principle go back to the nineteenth century, when
Maxwell achieved an elegant uniﬁcation of the laws of electromagnetism. He organized
several laws and rules of thumb then known so that the Electric and Magnetic forces
appeared on par with each other displaying an uncanny similarity between the two.

3

The laws were also stated in the form of mathematical equations that permitted easy
geometrical visualization and were yet so far reaching in their import and applicability
that an eminent colleague is reported to have exclaimed, quoting Goethe, “was it a
god who wrote those lines?” With hindsight we know that in fact the symmetry they
displayed went much farther than a nineteenth century esthete could have discerned, for
they were the ﬁrst equations to be known which were covariant under Special Relativistic
transformations.

What we are trying to identify as a principle is actually rather broad and perhaps
contains more logically distinct positions than one. We shall focus here on a much more
restrictive and precise aspect of this principle. Speciﬁcally we refer to the use of symme-
try principles that tend to restrict theories and introduce economy of phenomenological
parameters in it. We shall refer to it broadly as Gauge Symmetry.
It started with
Einstein trying to formulate relativistically consistent laws of Gravitation, and later
also helped to shape the laws of strong and weak interactions. The gauge symmetry
underlying General Relativity on the one hand and Gauge Field Theories of strong and
weak interactions on the other hand have several technical diﬀerences. But as has been
emphasized by Weinberg[1], they have an essential similarity to permit being viewed as
manifestations of the same basic principle. This is the topic of the next section.

3 Gauge Symmetry

The most common example of a mathematically implementable symmetry principle in
Physics is the idea of rotations. 1 We do not expect outcomes of experiments to depend
on the directional orientation of the apparatus. Considered as a set of operations, the
rotations form a mathematical structure called Group. One representation of this group
is in terms of matrices, acting on vectors such as the position vector or the electric ﬁeld
vector.

The Special Relativity principle is a similar principle, in fact a generalized rotation
involving time, such that the ordinary rotations form a subgroup of this bigger group.
But this notion of symmetry was completely revolutionized by Einstein in his subsequent
work, viz., General Relativity. This theory is actually a theory of Gravity, generalized
from its Newtonian version and made consistent with Special Relativistic rotations. The
prescription of General Relativity can be summarized in two parts : (1) The space-time
should be treated as curved, like the surface of a ball. Thus gravitational inﬂuences are
described by a set of space-time dependent functions that specify the distance and angle
measurement prescriptions. In a curved space these replace the Pythagorian distance
1This section is an abridged version of the author’s contribution to the Seminar on Philosophy of

Science, IIT Bombay, 1993.

4

law from point to point. (2) In a curved space one does not choose a rigid, Cartesian
system of coordinates, but any convenient curvilinear coordinates. So the laws of physics
must be such as to remain invariant under arbitrary choices of curvilinear coordinates.
This translates to invariance of the laws under rotations that can be diﬀerent at diﬀerent
points. This two part law was called the Principle of General Covariance.

This theory was a great speculative triumph. At the time of its invention, there
was no evidence for it. No one had suspected that the perihelion precession of Mer-
cury had contributions from Relativistic eﬀects, requiring fundamental reformulation
of Newtonian Gravity. No other experimental evidence existed that demanded such a
generalization.

In the 1930’s the notion of rotational symmetry was extended by Heisenberg in a
very profound way. It is known that the strong nuclear force does not depend separately
on the physical state of the proton or that of the neutron. In Quantum Mechanics, the
physical state of a system is described by a complex wavefunction denoted ψ. Heisen-
berg’s proposal was that instead of using ψp (for proton) and ψn (for neutrons), if we
used

˜ψp = c1ψp + c2ψn

and

˜ψn = c3ψn + c4ψp

(1)

the physics would remain unchanged. Here the c1, c2, c3, c4 are complex numbers sat-
isfying some constraints. The relations above can be thought of as a complex rotation,
an abstract generalization from the case of real vectors. This rotation, called an isospin
rotation is a symmetry (although approximate) of the strong nuclear force.

Several decades later, Yang and Mills proposed Gauge Field Theories. These were
a generalization of isospin symmetry in much the same way as General Relativity gen-
eralized Special Relativity. Both prescribed the form of the interaction, although the
requirement was stated as a geometrical law.

To summarize, precise mathematical principles were used as a strategy to guess at
a theory with insuﬃcient experimental evidence. The theory could well have proved
wrong. This too has happened many times, as for instance with the original Kaluza-
Klein theory. But the success of the cases in which this approach has worked is spec-
tacular.

3.1 Broken symmetry

The curious fact about symmetries is that sometimes they may not be manifest in the
data. This can happen due to two diﬀerent reasons. One reason is that the symmetry
may be only approximate. That is, only by ignoring some of the data or by modifying

5

their values does one see the symmetry principle at work. For this to be true, the
contaminating eﬀects should be small in a quantitative sense. But this case of non-
manifest symmetry is not as interesting as the next one.

It has been found that in some systems, the governing equations possess a certain
symmetry. However, the complexity of the interactions drives the system to solutions
that do not reﬂect the symmetry. This case is called Spontaneous Breakdown of symme-
try. In case of weak nuclear interactions, one seeks a theory that obeys gauge invariance,
somewhat similar to the two-part principle of General Covariance. However, gauge in-
variance implies masslessness of the mediating particles, whereas the mediators of the
weak force are known to be massive. The resolution of this paradox lay in realizing
that there could be additional particles, known as Higgs whose complex dynamics leads
to the ground state of the system not explicitly displaying the gauge symmetry. Un-
der these circumstances, the interaction of the gauge particles with the Higgs particles
makes the former massive.

In the second type of broken symmetry, the symmetry is all the time present, being
made invisible by the particular state in which the system is available to us. In this
case, guessing the governing equations is diﬃcult but symmetry can be used as a guiding
principle.

4 Supersymmetry

This brief history prepares us for a description of the new proposal of Supersymmetry.
The origins of the search for this rather bizarre symmetry to be described lie in two unre-
lated motivations. One was a direct one, asking whether photon and neutrino, the only
two particles known to be massless in 1960’s had anything more in common. Speciﬁcally
whether they were two manifestations of the same particle “species” masquerading as
two. Secondly, it was also a search for the most general type of symmetries allowed
by interactions that respect the basic rotational and Special Relativistic symmetries of
space time. There was also an enigma in the distinction between the gauge symmetry
of Gravity which involved space-time itself and the gauge symmetry of Nuclear forces,
which seemed to operate in an abstract space of wave functions. The General Covariance
of Gravity came to be called an external gauge symmetry and the Gauge symmetry of
the nuclear forces internal symmetries. The possible kinds of internal symmetries were
soon classiﬁed in terms of the mathematical theory of Lie Groups. It is a rich variety of
possible symmetries. The question was, what were the most general kinds of external
symmetry and whether there could be any mixing between external and internal.

The above question was supposedly answered with some degree of ﬁnality by a
It said that all the

so called ”No-go” theorem which appeared in the late sixties.

6

possible symmetries one could possibly have, consistent with Quantum Mechanics were
the ones already known, viz., a variety of internal symmetries like isospin on the one hand
and the already known external symmetries, those of the Special Theory of Relativity
(subsuming the old known symmetry of rotations) on the other hand. There was nothing
new to be added to the category of external.

There was a loop hole however. In order to understand it, let us look at a mathe-
matical statement of internal consistency of several symmetry operations is formulated.
It can be checked by some amount of careful experimentation that a small amount of
x-axis rotation followed by a small amount of y-axis rotation, is not the same as the
y-rotation ﬁrst followed by same x-rotation. This can actually be checked by holding
up a pen. The results of the two operations diﬀer by a small z-axis rotation! This was
ﬁrst put in the form of equations by Hamilton in mid-nineteenth century. In modern
notation one says

LxLy − LyLx = Lz

Here Lx stands for the operation of small x-axis rotation. The product LxLy has to be
read right to left for its factors. The left hand side is called the commutator of the two
operators.

The case when the commutator of two operators vanishes, is when the two operations
are really independent of each other. For example small linear motion in x direction is
completely independent of small linear motion in y direction. So they can be taken up
in any order, giving the same result. This fact is expressed by the equation

(2)

(3)

PxPy − PyPx = 0

In the Quantum Theory, formulated in terms of space-time dependent ﬁelds, there
is a diﬀerent kind of “commutator”. It was known since the 1930’s that to obtain a con-
sistent Quantum theory of particles of spin 1/2, one must require an anti-commutation
relation. The independence of quantum ﬁeld operator at far away points x and y has
to be expressed by

ψ(x)ψ(y) + ψ(y)ψ(x) = 0

(Fermionic)

(4)

What is unusual about this relation is the plus sign where minus should be; and this
indeed expresses independence. The correctness of this rule is amply borne out by the
Pauli Exclusion Principle whereby two spin 1/2 particles can never occupy the same
state.

The other kind of particles, those with integer spin and called Bosons, obey a more

familiar algebra, where independence is expressed by

φ(x)φ(y) − φ(y)φ(x) = 0

(Bosonic)

(5)

7

These algebraic operations were however considered special to the Quantum Fields
representing real particles, not to be confused with operators representing symmetry
operations. The breakthrough against the No-go theorem lay in realizing that perhaps
one could allow “fermionic” algebra even between symmetry operations. Thus consider
a linear displacement along two directions which are independent, and require

θ1θ2 + θ2θ1 = 0

(6)

Here 1 and 2 are some “directions” whose meaning is yet to be clariﬁed, θ the corre-
sponding operators. In what way this can be visualized and in what sense this is an
independence are questions not easy answer. For the moment we take symbols and their
algebra as guides and check for internal consistency of various operations. Miraculously,
it turned out that one could indeed expand the algebra of the Special Relativistic gen-
erators in this way, provided all the new generators were fermionic rather than bosonic.
This was a possibility not considered by the authors of the No-go theorem.

4.1 Superspace

Here we elaborate a little on the technical idea of Supersymmetry. Supersymmetry was
ﬁrst formulated as a set of operations on Quantum Fields. An interpretation closer to
that for usual Special Relativistic symmetries was later formulated, pioneered among
others by Abdus Salam. To every of the four dimensions (t, x, y, z) there corresponds
a superspace dimension, and these are labeled as (θ1, ¯θ1, θ2, ¯θ2). They are supposed to
obey anticommuting algebra. The mathematics of classical (non-Quantum) variables of
this kind was known to the mathematicians as Grassmann algebra. Just as rotations
led to a mixing of the axes, a supersymmetric translation leads to mixing of ordinary
and superspace axes. To give an example, if θ1 is shifted to θ1 + α then the x coordinate
shifts as

2
x −→ x − iα¯θ

(7)

This does not mean anything to us according to usual intuition. But this is how things
proceed in gleaning secrets of the microworld. From abstract operations on ﬁelds, we
proceeded to further compatibility with usual space time picture; the metaphysical
principle (2) of section 3. Perhaps future knowledge of new phenomena will help us
visualize these operations better.

4.2 Predictions and extensions

There are two main results that follow from assuming that there is supersymmetry in
nature. The ﬁrst is that for every fermion of given mass there is a boson of identical

8

mass and vice versa. This means that corresponding to the observed photon, there must
exist a spin half particle which has been named photino. Similarly corresponding to the
electron, there must exist a spin zero particle which has been named selectron (abbre-
viating ‘scalar electron’). This nomenclature pattern is followed for all the hypothetical
supersymmetric partners of known particles.

The problem is, we don’t have a single known pair of species which may be consid-
ered superpartners of each other. It is worth recalling that the original motivation for
searching for supersymmetry was to identify the almost massless neutrino as the super-
partner of the photon. This however cannot be true because other quantum numbers
as required by the symmetry principle do not match.

The second and very powerful implication of supersymmetry is that it subsumes
the usual gauge symmetry principle and predicts all the possible forms of interactions
between the particles. This is a very desirable and attractive. This was the main
beneﬁt of pursuing symmetry principles. They should help us to guess the form of the
interaction. Since we do not see any superpartners yet, the conﬁrmation or otherwise
of this prediction is in the future.

There are many other attractive features of supersymmetry from the theoretical
point of view but are more technical. And the simplest predictions seem to be unviable.
Does this mean supersymmetry is of no use? The experience of searching for gauge
symmetry for the weak interactions tells us that we should keep the possibility open
that this symmetry too is not realized in nature in its simple uncomplicated version,
but perhaps exists in a broken form.

The problem of broken supersymmetry is technically more involved than breaking
of the known gauge symmetries. In some sense this is because the principle is really
very strong.
It is diﬃcult to understand how the symmetry breaks. Developing an
understanding of that is itself a theoretical challenge.

Supersymmetry and its possible manifestations constitutes a subject of extensive sci-
entiﬁc investigation at present. There are several hypothetical models with mechanisms
for breaking supersymmetry and several giant accelerators being constructed to check
these models. In addition, as true with all Elementary Particle Physics, these models
ought also to have left their imprints in the early Universe. Eﬀorts are also therefore on
to validate or invalidate some of these models based on cosmological observations being
carried out today.

5 Philosophical positions

The esthetic appeal of the symmetry paradigm lies in the elegance of the mathematical
structure. It seems to generalize the ordinary notion of the freedom to choose the frame

9

of reference. (See sec. 3). It also permits mixing or “rotating” of distinct particle species
into each other, thus entailing economy in the number of particle types or species. On the
utilitarian side, the uniﬁcation achieved requires fewer coupling constants, since several
are dictated to be identical and others have to be simple multiples of a basic value.
This success however has not been unqualiﬁed. In the Standard Model of elementary
particles for example, although the advertised beneﬁts are present, and the coupling
constants are fewer, there do remain a large number of unknown parameters. These
arise primarily in the form of unknown masses of fermionic and scalar species.

Supersymmetry has merited so much attention due to its elegance. But it does
require introducing a large number of new species or types of particles. Since many of
these are fermionic and scalar, their masses again require a large number of unknown
parameters. The whole picture is further complicated by the need to have the symmetry
broken. The mechanisms that explain this breakdown have to rely on more unknown
physics, thus invoking whole new unknown sectors of the theory. Some of the new
particles are supposed to be unobservable by themselves and their inﬂuences on the
observable world are only through the fact that supersymmetry appears broken. There
is supposed be very little additional observable evidence about them even in principle.
How do we view the situation from outside Physics? I submit that there are two
possibilities. One is that Supersymmetry is indeed a deep new principle. The other is
that it is an expedient necessary to tide us over till further experiments provide more
clues. The third uninteresting possibility of course remains, viz., it shares the fate of
several other profound speculations about nature, beautiful but irrelevant.

5.1 A principle ...

There are several technical reasons advanced to support why it must indeed be a funda-
mental principle of nature. For example it is meant to rationalize some of the mystery
surrounding the Electroweak symmetry breaking. We can not enter into this discussion.
In the spirit of staying close to fundamental facts, we may yet advance a reason for the
same position along the following lines.

There is no known classical analogue to fermions. For several decades in early
Quantum Mechanics they were treated with awe and mystery. Their wavefunction can
distinguish between 360◦ and 720◦ rotations. Pauli referred to this as “non-classical two-
valuedness”. However, later developments have required and guided parallel treatments
for bosons and fermions.
In the path integral approach, fermions could be elegantly
included by inventing rules for integration over fermionic variables. But more impor-
tantly, a set of simple consistent rules are suggested by the formalism itself. This is
the ﬁrst time that one treats classical fermionic variables with impunity and gets the
required answers.

10

This begins to suggest that the bias towards bosons as more natural is perhaps purely
classical. As Dirac[2] emphasizes, the early Quantum Mechanics was developed only for
those systems that have a classical analogue. It was not possible to “quantize” other
systems. But such may nevertheless exist. Over the decades that have elapsed, the only
other kind of system that seems to require quantization is the fermionic one. (Modulo
phenomena we still have no reasonable explanation for). Thus the microworld dictates
that we expand our classical notions to include the Grassmann numbers as well. The
notion of Superspace brings further parity between bosonic and fermionic dimensions.
In fact if the fermionic dimensions did not exist, bosons would still get away with a
special status. What more elegant framework could we have for understanding these
new dimensions than to require that they are partners in a very rigorous sense to the
bosonic dimensions of common experience.

5.2 ... or an expedient?

But if the symmetry is so fundamental, why do we not see it in its pure form? Should
the fact that the ideal principle has already been disproved make us abandon the search
for supersymmetry? This brings us to our second, an inelegant but more pragmatic
view. A usual argument for assuming supersymmetry is as follows. The newer, higher
energy accelerators have to be built with special purposes in mind, i.e. to search speciﬁc
energy ranges, and to detect particles with expected decay products. We need guiding
principles to channel our searches and supersymmetry seems to be only elegant guiding
principle aside from gauge symmetry. But we shall go a little bit beyond this position.
Suppose that supersymmetry is indeed discovered. It may manifest itself in an ugly
and highly disproportionate form. Would it be still worth discovering? The answer
is an aﬃrmative. The caveat is that it may not be due to the pristine principles we
advanced. But supersymmetry may yet act as an “organizing principle”. By this we
mean a rule such as the valence of elements. This concept allows us to understand the
possible compounds the element can form. Empirical study then also reveals for the
same element several possible valence states. But once discovered in one context, that
valence state can be sought for in other contexts as well. Valence is not any kind of
fundamental principle. But it does put strong restrictions on the kind of molecules that
can exist.

An ugly manifestation of supersymmetry would be worth having for the same reason.
It may still place a strong restriction on the kind of fundamental particles that can exist
and the qualitative nature of their interactions. Valence of course is vindicated by
centuries of further developments which make it a direct descendant of indeed a deep
and beautiful principle. Perhaps the same is true of supersymmetry.

11

6 Conclusion

We argued that the need to understand the microworld has demanded greater ingenuity
from the theoretical physicist in the twentieth century. The response to this challenge
has been in the form of educated metaphysical principles evolved by the pioneers of the
subject. A prime one of these in retrospect, has been the principle of symmetry with
speciﬁc mathematical connotations. Its great bounty has been the ability to guess at
a whole theory starting from very scarce evidence. In particular, gauge symmetry has
shaped our understanding of the fundamental forces of nature, beginning with General
Theory of Relativity. Supersymmetry is another such principle, proposed in advance
of any empirical data but with many compulsive reasons for its correctness. However,
even if discovered, the symmetry would have to be found in a badly broken form. This
seems to detract from its original appeal. We have presented a very general reason why
we may expect the symmetry to be fundamental. Yet there is an alternative possibility
In either case it is worth
that it may be an organizing principle similar to valence.
stepping up the eﬀorts to verify its presence or otherwise in nature.

References

(1957)

[1] S. Weinberg, Gravitation and Cosmology John Wiley Pub. (1973)

[2] P. A. M. Dirac, Principles of Quantum Mechanics, 4th ed., Oxford University Press

12

